Volume 13: Alchemical Studies 
000437 Commentary on "The secret of the golden flower." In: Jung, C., Collected Works of C. G. 
Jung, Vol. 13. Princeton University Press, 1967. 444 p. (p. 1-5). 
The text of "The secret of the golden flower," a Taoist text and an alchemical treatise, is cited as the 
major source of the discovery of the connecting link between Gnosis and the collective unconscious, a 
link that had been impossible to establish due to the absence of a history of psychic experience. Certain 
misunderstandings concerning the use of this text are corrected: it is neither a recipe for happiness nor is 
the commentary on it a description of Jungian psychotherapeutic method. Instead, it is stressed that the 
idea of the collective unconscious is an empirical concept to be put alongside the concept of libido. 
000438 Commentary on "The secret of the golden flower." 1. Difficulties encountered by a 
European in trying to understand the East. In: Jung, C., Collected Works of C. G. Jung, Vol. 13. 
Princeton University Press, 1967. 444 p. (p. 6-10). 
Eastern and Western approaches to the understanding of life are compared and contrasted. Without 
disparaging the Western reliance on science and its necessary dependence on intellect, it is 
acknowledged that Eastern knowledge has been grounded in the awareness of psychic processes and the 
experiences of life for thousands of years. In order for the West to advance to a higher state of life, it is 
necessary to balance intellect and psychic knowledge, hence the turning toward the East in search of a 
way in which to achieve this balance. Western man is cautioned not to mistake imitation for true 
understanding and growth. It will be only in combining the insights gained from the East with the highly 
developed intellectual function of the Western psyche that the full understanding of the human psyche 
will be achieved. 
000439 Commentary on "The secret of the golden flower." 2. Modern psychology offers a 
possibility of understanding. In: Jung, C., Collected Works of C. G. Jung, Vol. 13. Princeton 
University Press, 1967. 444 p. (p. 11-19). 
Clinical observations of patients opened a new approach to the concepts of Chinese philosophy, which is 
explained in terms of the theory of the collective unconscious, a common substratum in the human 
psyche transcending all differences in culture and consciousness. The contents of the collective 
unconscious are expressed in archetypes that come into the consciousness in the form of symbols. The 
dependence of conscious ideation and action on these common instincts is explored and attention is 
given to the neuroses that appear whenever the unconscious has been repressed to the point where it is 
completely out of touch with the primordial images. The unconscious appears to be in full revolt against 
the consciousness and the unity of the personality seems to have disappeared. It is at this point that one 
is encouraged to turn to the Chinese philosophy for a way to resolve the conflict. Certain insights 
concerning this conflict gained from clinical observation are discussed and three observations are made: 
1) that patients do not solve the problem but outgrow it, i.e.,arrive at a new level of consciousness; 2) 
that a new potential was discovered stemming either from an outer happening or inner experience; 3) 
that this new potential was uncovered only by letting things happen, i.e.,aHowing the fantansy function 
free reign so that the conscious mind can develop a new attitude towards the activity of the unconscious. 
Western man is again cautioned to avoid denying his own heritage in favor of the Eastern solution or 
turning back to the medievalism of the Christian Church; the search is directed to discovering orib's 
inner integrity. 
000440 Commentary on "The secret of the golden flower." 3. The fundamental concepts. a. Tao. b. 
The circular movement and the center. In: Jung, C., Collected Works of C. G. Jung, Vol. 13. 

Princeton University Press, 1967. 444 p. (p. 20-28). 
The psychological meanings of the concept of Tao and the mandala symbols are discussed. Tao is 
explained as a conscious way of uniting opposites, a reunion of life and consciousness that can only be 
accomplished by realization of the unconscious law of being. This union of opposites is neither rational 
nor relational, but a process of psychic development. Mandala symbols, produced by fantasies, are 
examined, and the frequent recurrence of the symbol of the circle is documented by reference to 
medieval Christian, Buddhist, American Indian and Eastern mandalas, such as the cross, flower and 
wheel. The golden flower, the Taoist mandala that expresses the secret of the Tao, is analyzed as a 
symbol of the beginning of life where everything is as one. In studying the mandala as it appears in the 
drawings of patients it is noted that the very expression of the symbol also produces a unifying effect, 
bringing the patient back to the inner unconsciousness that is the source and goal of the psyche. The 
circular characteristic of the mandala is examined and the texts from the writings of Chivard Maitland 
and Hildegard of Bingen are cited as examples illustrating this characteristic. It is concluded that 
symbols are the key to the unconscious and hence that the individuation process can never be obtained 
without the symbol. 6 references. 
000441 Commentary on "The secret of the golden flower." 4. Phenomena of the way. a. The 
disintegration of consciousness. In: Jung, C., Collected Works of C. G. Jung, Vol. 13. Princeton 
University Press, 1967. 444 p. (p. 29-38). 
The dangers inherent in the meeting between the conscious and the collective unconscious are due to the 
autonomous psychic contents of the latter. It was the recognition of this danger that produced the 
symbolic figure of the protecting circle. At the outset these fragmentary systems are seen as affects; as 
they grow more complicated they assume the character of personalities and are encountered as such in 
cases of psychologic splitting of the personality, in mediumistic phenomena and in the phenomenology 
of religion. Thus it can be said that the activated unconscious psychic contents first appear as projections 
but are gradually assimilated into consciousness reshaped into conscious ideas. The denial of the 
existence of the unconscious is seen as particularly dangerous not only to this individual in whom this 
denial leads to neurosis, but also to nations where the collective delusions take the form of destructive 
mass psychoses. Insanity is defined as possession by an unconscious content that cannot be assimilated 
into consciousness since the very existence of the former is denied. Western man is counseled to 
acknowledge the existence of these dissociative tendencies and to consciously detach himself from their 
power in order to free himself from subservience to them. 1 reference. 
000442 Commentary on "The secret of the golden flower." 4. Phenomena of the way. b. Animus 
and anima. In: Jung, C., Collected Works of C. G. Jung, Vol. 13. Princeton University Press, 1967. 444 
p. (p, 38-43). 
The figures of animus and anima as they appear in the Secret of the Golden Flower are analyzed and 
compared to the present concepts of these terms. Animus (hun) is the masculine principle, (yang) a 
higher breath soul that rises, after death, to the position of spirit or god (shen). Arrima (p'o) is a feminine 
principle (yin) that descends to the earth after death and becomes a demon (kuei). The Chinese 
philosphy recognized these two principles as distinguishable psychic factors united in the one human 
nature. The psychologist recognizes the anima as an autonomous unconscious principle identifiable with 
the affective side of the masculine psyche and the archetype of all the experiences of man with woman. 
The term Logos is preferred to that of animus in defining the clarity of consciousness and rationality of 
the masculine psyche since these characteristics are universal, not personal, and are in sharp contrast to 
the personal anima. In discussing the psychology of women, the term animus is retained to indicate the 
quasi-intellectual factor in the feminine psyche, consisting of inferior judgments or opinions. Animus is 
seen as an inferior Logos just as anima in masculine psychology is best described as an inferior Eros. 

The characteristics of Logos are defined as differentiation, clarification, discrimination and detachment; 
those of Eros as interweaving and relatedness. Aninia is further defined as a personification of the 
unconscious in general, a bridge between the conscious and the unconscious. Eastern and Western views 
of the source of consciousness are contrasted: the former sees consciousness as an effect of anima 
whereas the latter sees the unconscious as a derivative of consciousness. Fantasies a~d their place in 
Eastern and Western thought are also examined; both reject fantasies: the former because they have 
already extracted their essence and condensed it in their teaching; the latter because they have not even 
allowed themselves to experience these fantasies. 3 references. 
000443 Commentary on "The secret of the golden flower." 5. The detachment of consciousness 
from the object. In: Jung, C., Collected Works of C. G. Jung, Vol. 13. Princeton University Press, 
1967. 444 p. (p. 44-48). 
The process of differentiating conscious and unconscious, subject and object, unconscious and world is 
reviewed. The primitive mentality is characterized by nondifferentiation between subject and object, 
referred to by Levy-Bruhl as participation mystique. Civilized man retains his own form of 
nondifferentiation as is evident in an extended identification with parents, affects or prejudices. The 
resolution of this state of nondifferentiation is seen to require a recognition that both the unconscious 
and the conscious are determining factors in one's psyche and that the demands of both must be taken 
into account. The center of gravity of the total personality is then no longer the ego but the self, a 
hypothetical point between, conscious and unconscious. The arrival at this state of consciousness 
detached from the world is viewed as originating in middle life and intending to offer a natural 
preparation for death, seen as the goal of life in the psychological perspective. 
000444 Commentary on "The secret of the golden flower." 6. The fulfilment. In: Jung, C., Collected 
Works of C. G. Jung, Vol. 13. Princeton University Press, 1967. 444 p. (p. 49-54). 
The relationship of psychology to metaphysics and religion is discussed. Eastern philosophers are 
described as symbolical psychologists; metaphysics is criticized for ignoring the validity of the psyche. 
The West neither can nor should deny its religious history in its search for enlightment: there is a vast 
difference in religious experience between Eastern lack of personification and inwardness and the 
Western emphasis on the human incarnation of Christ. It is suggested, however, that the Eastern belief 
that redemption depends on self-realization be applied to the imitation of Christ; rather than aping 
Christ's actions, one should emulate the courage and self-sacrifice with which Christ arrived at his own 
self-realization. This goal, this evaluation of a higher consciousness, is seen to involve a recognition of 
instincts and the unconscious. 1 reference. 
000445 Commentary on "The secret of the golden flower." 7. Conclusion. In: Jung, C., Collected 
Works of C. G. Jung, Vol. 13. Princeton University Press, 1967. 444 p. (p. 55-56). 
The basic agreement of psychic states and religious symbolism of the East and West is emphasized here. 
It is through these analogies that the East can be understood without a denial of the Western history and 
heritage. In exploring the analogies between East and West, conciousness will be broadened and a 
development in our own psyche will occur. This brief conclusion is followed by illustrations of the 
European mandalas. 
000446 The visions of Zosimos. I. The texts. In: Jung, C., Collected Works of C. G. Jung, Vol. 13. 
Princeton University Press, 1967. 444 p. (p. 57-65). 
The strange dreams recorded by the Gnostic alchemist Zosimos are interpreted by the dreamer as clues 

to the alchemical art, the composition of liquids and the art of metals. The images of men being boiled in 
water, dismembered or consumed by flames are interpreted to refer to the casting off of the body in 
order to be transformed into spirit. A philosophical interpretation of the dreams is also cited, indicating 
that the purpose of this vision is to provide the key to the investigation of the arts, wisdom, reason and 
understanding of alchemy. 1 reference. 
000447 The visions of Zosimos. II. Commentary. 1. General remarks on the interpretation. In: 
Jung, C., Collected Works of C. G. Jung, Vol. 13. Princeton University Press, 1967. 444 p. (p. 66-69). 
Zosimos' visions are interpreted as the recording of a single highly significant experience or dream that 
may have occurred during the work and revealed the nature of the psychic processes in the background. 
All the psychic contents that the alchemists projected into the chemical process are present in the vision, 
especially the emphasis on the miraculous water (aqua divina) which was extracted from the lapis 
through the torment of fire. The importance given to these dreams and alchemical texts is explained by 
recalling that the symbolism of alchemy has a great deal to do with the structure of the unconscious and 
the biological compensation produced by dreams. 
000448 The visions of Zosimos. II. Commentary. 2. The sacrifical act. In: Jung, C., Collected Works 
of C. G. Jung, Vol. 13. Princeton University Press, 1967. 444 p. (p. 70-90). 
The numerous symbols, in Zosimos' dream, many of which are details of archetypes, are examined and 
compared with similar symbols in Christian literature as well as in other alchemical texts. The image of 
the sacrificer' who is also the sacrificed relates to the concept of Christ sacrificing himself and to the 
image of the dragon biting his own tail. It is a continuous circle of creation and destruction. The head is 
a symbolical circle housing the soul. It was thought that by scalping or skinning the head the soul could 
be released from the body. The circle consists of two parts: outwardly it is water; inwardly it is the 
arcanum. The head is the symbolic essence of consciousness which must be sacrificed for greater 
consciousness. The images of the hermetic vessel and of the divine water are also explained: the bowl 
shaped altar represents a wonder working vessel in which immersion takes place and transformation into 
a spiritual being is effected, a symbol of renewal or rebirth; the water, commonly associated with spirit 
or soul, is capable of transforming matter. Zosimos' image of the temple built of a single stone is an 
obvious illusion to the lapis, the wholeness to be achieved by integrating the contents of the unconscious 
into consciousness with its corresponding enlightening effect -- an increase in consciousness. It is 
concluded that the alchemists chose the symbolism of metals to express the concept of the inner man 
and his spiritual growth. 56 references. 
000449 The visions of Zosimos. II. Commentary. 3. The personifications. In: Jung, C., Collected 
Works of C. G. Jung, Vol. 13. Princeton University Press, 1967. 444 p. (p. 90-94). 
The portion of the Zosimos' text called the introduction is examined as an example of a conscious 
allegory expressed in alchemical language. The abstracted spirits of the metals are pictured as suffering 
human beings, a remnant of the primitive and archaic psychology that personified lifeless things because 
of an unconscious identity with them. This identification is the result of projection, a process that allows 
the contents of the unconscious to become accessible to consciousness by representing them as qualities 
apparently belonging to the object. The difference between primitive and modem psychology is said to 
be qualitative as well as one of degree: whereas civilized man develops consciousness by the acquisition 
of knowledge and withdrawal of projections recognized as psychic contents to be integrated into the 
psyche, the alchemists personified all of their important ideas. Thus man is represented as a microcosm 
representing the earth and the universe and as a macrocosm of the whole of nature. 8 references. 

000450 The visions of Zosimos. 11. Commentary. 4. The stone symbolism. In: Jung, C., Collected 
Works of C. G. Jung, Vol. 13. Princeton University Press, 1967. 444 p. (p. 94-101). 
The significance of the symbol of the stone and its attributes is explored. The alchemical lapis is seen as 
a complementary image of the Christ figure, a symbol of the inner Christ, of God in man. An overview 
of the stone symbol as it appeared in primitive societies is given. It was as an image of the birthplace of 
the gods, a container of children's souls, a source of fertility and healing. In a myth originating among 
the Navaho Indians, the stone took the form of a matriarchal goddess, an anima figure representing the 
self, particularly the self of a man living in a matriarchal society who is still immersed in his 
unconscious femininity as can be seen even today in cases of masculine mother complexes. The 
connection with immortality is also shown to be very ancient. The stone is a panacea, an alexipharmic, a 
cure for melancholy, a symbol of the Savior and of the Anthropos. I 1 references. 
000451 The visions of Zosimos. 11. Commentary. 5. The water symbolism. In: Jung, C., Collected 
Works of C. G. Jung, Vol. 13. Princeton University Press, 1967. 444 p. (p. 101-104). 
The correlation between historical or ethnological symbols and those spontaneously produced by the 
unconscious is evident in the lapis as symbol of the self. The principle personified in the visions of 
Zosimos, the divine water, is analyzed as a. representation of the death, rebirth cycle. The dialogue 
between Christ and Nicodemus is referred to as a possible parallel with Zosimos' vision. It is concluded 
that the alchemist's symbol of divine water is a reference to the dens absconditus, the god hidden in 
matter. 2 references. 
000452 The visions of Zosimos. 11. Commentary. 6. The origin of the vision. In: Jung, C., Collected 
Works of C. G. Jung, Vol. 13. Princeton University Press, 1967. 444 p. (p. 105-108). 
Zosimos' dream and its predominant symbol of the divine water is seen as reflecting both an alchemical 
preoccupation and a psychological drama. In the image of the divine water one finds the expression of 
the alchemical goal; in the punishment, torment, death and transfiguration motif, one discovers how the 
process of change is manifested to human understanding. It is in the mystical side of alchemy that 
parallels can be drawn to the psychological problem of individuation. In the projections of the 
alchemists is seen a medieval method for allowing the inner factors to come to consciousness. Alchemy 
is described as a philosophy that provides a valuable source for a psychological understanding of 
psychic experience. 1 reference. 
000453 Paracelsus as a spiritual phenomenon., 1. The two sources of knowledge: the light of 
nature and the light of revelation. In: Jung, C., Collected Works of C. G. Jung, Vol. 13. Princeton 
University Press, 1967. 444 p. (p. 109-116). 
The contributions of Paracelsus to medicine and philosophical alchemy are noted and source of his 
knowledge examined. The goal of Paracelsus' life was helping and healing; its driving force was 
compassion. The source of this motivating dynamism is considered to have derived from two feminine 
figures: his mother and Mother Nature. In addition, he remained faithful to Mother Church despite the 
criticisms he levelled against her during the Protestant Reformation. Paracelsus himself expressed the 
conflict he experienced between Nature and Church: one, the source of natural knowledge; the other, of 
divine. Because of his fidelity to the light of nature, he judged his writings to be pagan. He is praised for 
his recognition of the authenticity of one's own expenence of nature, and credited with liberating science 
from the authority of tradition. His writings are seen to reflect the knowledge of the dual nature of man, 
a duality derived from the unity of God. 11 references. 

000454 Paracelsus as a spiritual phenomenon. 1. The two sources of knowledge: the light of nature 
and the light of revelation. a. Magic. In: Jung, C., Collected Works of C. G. Jung, Vol. 13. Princeton 
University Press, 1967. 444 p. (p. 116-122). 
A second duality in the life of Paracelsus, his fidelity to the Church yet his wholehearted devotion to 
magic, is discussed. In many ways, his words can be seen not only as a reflection of the times in which 
he wrote, but also as an expression of a great tension of inner opposites: that of the man who serves God 
and he who commands God. The former side of his nature was revealed in his spirituality; the latter, in 
his use of manticism, magic, amulets, spells and talismans. Although Parcelsus believed that he was at 
one with himself, the analysis of his writings, both in their style and their vocabulary, is seen to reveal 
the unconscious conflict that made him war against his opponents, unaware that the enemy was within. 2 
references. 
000455 Paracelsus as a spiritual phenomenon. 1. The two sources of knowledge: the light of nature 
and the light of revelation. b. Alchemy. In: Jung, C., Collected Works of C. G. Jung, Vol. 13. 
Princeton University Press, 1967. 444 p. (p. 122-124). 
Paracelsus' use of alchemy for the purpose of curing the sick is discussed, and a brief review of the 
major tenets of this secret doctrine is provided. It is obvious from the writings of Paracelsus that he 
understood the Hermetic literature without being aware of the true nature of alchemy. For him, alchemy 
consisted of a knowledge of the materia medica and a chemical procedure for preparing medicine as 
well as a belief in the possibility of making gold and engendering the homunculi. It is concluded that 
Paracelsus was not only familiar with the teachings but was convinced of their rightness as well. 5 
000456 Paracelsus as a spiritual phenomenon. 1. The two sources of knowledge: the light of nature 
and the light of revelation. c. The arcane teaching. In: Jung, C., Collected Works of C. G. Jung, Vol. 
13. Princeton University Press, 1967. 444 p. (p. 124-129). 
The study of Paracelsus' writings is seen to reveal many similarities with alchemical concepts. Greek 
terms in his writings, composed etymologically of the terms for star and matter, allude to the spirit of 
life in classical alchemy; others are embellishments of the alchemical flores. His philosophical concepts, 
such as his doctrine of the astrum, again lead back to established alchemical and astrological traditions. 
It was his belief in the light of nature that links him most closely with the aim of alchemy: to beget this 
light in the shape of the filius philosophorum. This idea of light coincides with the concept of Sapientia 
or Scientia. Although Paracelsus is judged to have been unaware of the ultimate insidiousness of this 
doctrine in which man takes the place of God and.the forces of nature serve man as never before; 
nevertheless, the influence of this doctrine is seen to be evident in his pride and arrogance, a result of his 
feelings of inferiority springing from his unconscious guilt. 8 references. 
000457 Paracelsus as a spiritual phenomenon. 1. The two sources of knowledge: the light of nature 
and the light of revelation. d. The primordial man. In: Jung, C., Collected Works of C. G. Jung, Vol. 
13. Princeton University press, 1967. 444 p. (p. 129-132). 
Paracelsus' idea of primordial man, that he was the son of God manifested in the form of man, and made 
up of four elements, is discussed. Paraculsus, the Theophrastus school, and alchemy in general were 
criticized and accused of Arianism by Conrad Gessner. Although this accusation was unwarTanted, 
other texts of Paracclsus are shown to reveal the use of the Cabala and his belief in the alchemical 
primordial man, the one through whom the God or the word creating principle was made manifest. 
Several other names of the primordial man are given and it is concluded that for Paracelsus, as for the 

Gnostics, this concept was also connected with that of creation and redemption. 9 references. 
000458 Paracelsus as a spiritual phenomenon. 2. "De vita longa": an exposition of the secret 
doctrine. a. The Master. In: Jung, C., Collected Works of C. G. Jung, Vol. 13. Princeton University 
Press, 1967. 444 p. (p. 133-137). 
The conditions for Paracelsus' ideas. on longevity which, he maintained, last up to one thousand years, 
are presented. Life is defined by Paracelsus as nothing more than a certain embalsamed Mumia, 
preserving the body by means of a mixed saline solution. Incorruptibility was attributed to a special 
balsam or elixir that keeps the body alive or, if dead, incorruptible. Several arcane remedies were also 
included in Parascelsus' work on longevity, with special healing powers attached to certain gems. The 
life principle or balsam corresponded to the balsam or the concept of Iliaster; i.e.,that which was 
considered to be higher than the four elements and determines the length of life. The Waster was thought 
to have three forms subordinate to man and sorted by means of a chymical wedding. Since there were 
supposed to be as many Iliastri as there were men, it seems to be a kind of universal formative principle 
and principle of individuation. 2 references. 
000459 Paracelsus as a spiritual phenomenon. 2. "De vita longa": an exposition of the secret 
doctrine. b. The Aquaster. In: Jung, C., Collected Works of C. G. Jung, Vol. 13. Princeton University 
Press, 1967. 444 p. (p. 137-140). 
The Iliaster and the Aquaster are compared, and the latter is described as a spiritual principle whose 
characteristics correspond to the alchemical concept of the water in prima materia. Christ is said to have 
taken his body from the celestial Aquaster; Mary, from the iliastric Aquaster. The Aquaster is 
interpreted as a psychic principle, closely related to the modern concept of the unconscious. In 
Paracelsus' writings, it was personified as the homunculus. Both Iliaster and Aquaster were believed to 
extend upwards and downwards, assuming a spiritual form as well as a quasi-material one; in this 
respect they are seen to resemble the alchemical prima materia. 15 references. 
000460 Paracelsus as a spiritual phenomenon. 2. "De vita longa": an exposition of the secret 
doctrine. c. Ares. In: Jung, C., Collected Works of C. G. Jung, Vol. 13. Princeton University Press, 
1967. 444 p. (p. 140-142). 
The alchemical concept Ares is discussed and compared to the Paracelsan Aquaster. In the alchemic 
view, Ares is presented as the determiner of individual form and species, hence, an intuitive concept for 
a preconscious, creative and formative principle to individual creatures. Paracelsus endowed Ares with a 
watery character, bringing it into relationship to the body. The Paracelsan concept of Ares is seen to be 
scarcely distinguishable from that of Aquaster, a situation not uncommon in alchemy where concepts are 
seen to take the place of one another ad infinitum. 3 references. 
000461 Paracelsus as a spiritual phenomenon. 2. "De vita longa": an exposition of the secret 
doctrine. d. Melusina. In: Jung, C., Collected Works of C. G. Jung, Vol. 13. Princeton University 
Press, 1967. 444 p. (p. 142-144). 
The nature, characteristics and psychological significance of Melusina are presented. Melusina is in the 
same category as the nymphs and sirens who dwell in the "Nymphidida." Melusines, on the other hand, 
dwell in the blood. These fabulous nymph-like, sexless creatures belonged to the watery realm, were 
paradisal creatures with no genitals, who after Adam and Eve's Fall went on living in the human blood 
in their paradisal state. Melurina can be interpreted as a spirit, an anima figure, whose birthplace was the 
unconscious. 3 references. 

000462 Paracelsus as a spiritual phenomenon. 2. "de- vita longa": an exposition of the secret 
doctrine. e. the filius regius as the arcane substance. (Michael Maier). In: Jung, C., Collected Works 
of C. G. Jung, Vol. 13. Princeton University Press, 1967. 444 p. (p. 145-148). 
The concept of filius regius as it appears in several alchemical texts is examined and explained. It is 
pointed out that the longing of the Paracelsan Mclusines for a soul and redemption is similar to the 
alchemical idea of the kingly substance hidden in the sea. This substance, in Michael Maier's work, was 
antimony, a secret transformative substance which had fallen into the darkest depths of matters and was 
awaiting deliverance. Many Biblical passages are cited to show parallels to the idea of an interior being 
longing for a redemption and deliverance, although the alchemical vision of the king who was capable 
of redemption was more positive than that of the Church Fathers, who saw the dark depths as evil itself 
to which the king had been attached by his own sinfulness. 10 references. 
000463 Paracelsus as a spiritual phenomenon. 2. "De vita longa": an exposition of the secret 
doctrine. The production of the one, or center, by distillation. In: Jung, C., Collected Works of C. G. 
Jung, Vol. 13. Princeton University Press, 1967. 444 p. (p. 148-152). 
The process of distillation as a means of extracting the spirit from the body is presented in both 
Paracelsan and alchemical writings and related symbolically to the psychic concept of the self. The 
distillation, which in some way tumed back upon itself after starting from the center, was intended to 
purify the human body so that it would unite with the inner spiritual man and partake of its longevity. 
The emphasis on the center is seen to reflect a fundamental alchemical idea akin to the gold, paradise, 
fire, God. The terms spogyric process, fetus and birth are explained and shown to relate to the creation 
of the inner, eternal man in the shell of the outer, mortal man, the filius philosophorum. The importance 
of fire and balsam in maintaining longevity is explored and it is concluded that the distillation process 
was intended to activate and develop a psychic center, -- in psychological terms, the self. 8 references 
000464 Paracelsus as a spiritual phenomenon. 2. "De vita longa": an exposition of the secret 
doctrine. g. The coniunctio in the spring. In: Jung, C., Collected Works of C. G. Jung, Vol. 13. 
Princeton University Press, 1967. 444 p. (p. 152-156). 
The Paracelsan description of the transformation process is likened to the gathering together of all 
psychic processes for the transformation. It follows the separation of Saturn from Sol, a separation 
produced through the drug Melissa. When the separation has been completed and the body purified, the 
coniunctio can take place within the inner man. From this union comes Enochdianus whose power or 
virtue is called Iloch or Anindus. In the connection between this process and the spring, the renewal of 
life is perceived, and several references to other associations with spring are mentioned: the hierospamos 
of Poliphilo, and the reign of Venus, and the power of the nettles (youthful lust). The Aniada or 
Anachnus (indistinguishable in Paracelsus' work) are said to be extracted at this time in order to enjoy 
longevity. Several photographs and drawings are given as illustrations of some alchemical concepts. 3 
000465 Paracelsus as a spiritual phenomenon. 3. The natural transformation mystery. a. The light 
of the darkness. In: Jung, C., Collected Works of C. G. Jung, Vol. 13. Princeton University Press, 1967. 
444 p. (p. 157-163). 
The importance of Paracclsus' contributions to psychology and the use of symbolic language as a means 
of expressing these psychic experiences are discussed. Although Paracelsus recognized that he wag not 
completely following the doctrinal order that Christianity had set up, he was naive about the substantial 
differences implicit in his views. In reality, he can be considered the forerunner of the new religion of 

nature that was not only chemical and physical but also psychical ' As a physician he is credited with 
recognizing the important role that psychic occurrences play in diseases and in their cures. The goal of 
Paracelsus and of all the philosophical alchemists is seen as an attempt to grasp the nature of the soul, 
interwoven with the world and matter, filled with demonical figures and the source of life shortening 
diseases. Unlike the church with its attempts to exorcise and banish demons, the alchemists sought to 
unite the conscious with the unconscious. This goal reflects the light of nature with its own 
transformation of death and rebirth, unifying the opposites rather than denying the validty of one of 
them. It is considered appropriate that Paracelsus and the alchemists expressed themselves in parables 
and symbols when describing their work. Since they were probing the depths of the psyche, the use of 
symbols and mythologems allowed not only a visualization of the psychic experience, but more 
significantly, a reexperiencing of it. 4 references. 
000466 Paracelsus as a spiritual phenomenon. 3. The natural transformation mystery. b. The 
union of man's two natures. In: Jung, C., Collected Works of C. G. Jung, Vol. 13. Princeton University 
Press, 1967. 444 p. (p. 163-167). 
Man is said to have two life forces: one natural and one aerial, corresponding to the modem terminology 
physiological and psychic. Longevity is perceived by Paracelsus as the result of having led the aerial 
life. The explanation given by Paracelsus is clarified by analysis: psychic means the soul is not only 
prevented from escaping from the body, but also brought back to the center of the heart, where it enjoys 
freedom from bondage of the body and a certain tranquility; in this state the soul can echo the higher 
entities: Aniadus, Adech, and Endochinum -- designation for the inner homo maximus, the deathless 
original man. 7 references. 
000467 Paracelsus as a spiritual phenomenon. 3. The natural transformation mystery. c. The 
quateraity of the homo maximus. In: Jung, C., Collected Works of C. G. Jung, Vol. 13. Princeton 
University Press, 1967. 444 p. (p. 167-170). 
.In discussing the Paracelsan concept of the homo maximus, it is concluded that Paracelsus discovered 
the quaternity symbol in man by introspective intuition rather than by rational conscious thought. The 
union of four seasons, the four gates of heaven and the four elements are viewed as a quaternity 
expressing totality. This is viewed as an archetypal arrangement of the four aspects of consciousness: 
thinking, feeling, sensation and intuition. A comparison is drawn between Ruland's and Dorn's 
perception of this quaternity and that of Paracelsus. The difficulties and dangers that the alchemists 
experienced in their attempt to discover the prima materia are explained by analogy to the difficulties 
encountered whenever an attempt is made to come to terms with the unconscious, the dark or shadow 
side of man. 1 reference. 
000468 Paracelsus as a spiritual phenomenon. 3. The natural transformation mystery. d. The 
rapprochement with the unconscious. In: Jung, C., Collected Works of C. G. Jung, Vol. 13. Princeton 
University Press, 1967. 444 p. (p. 170-172). 
The alchemical opus of Paracelsus and others is viewed as an attempt to come to terms with the 
unconscious, to understand the archetypal world of the psyche and, at the same time, to avoid the sanity 
threatening fascination with the depths, paradoxes and heights of psychic truths. At the point where the 
conscious mind meets the unconscious, an encounter between mortal ego and immortal self, finite 
consciousness and its archaic foundations, is felt. The doctrine of the Anthropos, the collective 
preconscious state from which the individual ego arose, was considered dangerous because it was at 
variance with the teachings of the Church. 1 reference. 

000469 Paracelsus as a spiritual phenomenon. 4. The commentary of Gerard Dorn. a. Melusina 
and the process of individuation. In: Jung, C., Collected Works of C. G. Jung, Vol. 13. Pnnceton 
University Press, 1967. 444 p. (p. 173-180). 
Paracelsus' concluding chapter in the Vita longa is presented and followed by a commentary by Dorn in 
which the obscurities of the former text are explained. Further clarification is provided by an analysis of 
the functions of consciousness (Scaiolae) and the role of the anima (Melusina). The figure of Melusina, 
part fish and part human, is shown to have appeared in many legends and myths, one of which is 
recounted. She appears at the moment of catastrophe, as a vision or dream, to guide the adept out of the 
darkness of not-knowing. Many qualities attributed to her were also characteristic of the alchemical 
mercurial serpent, or the Wise Old Man and Mercurius, It is the inner man guided by the conscious 
functions and in search of the self that gives rise to the fantasy images of Melusina. The adept, however, 
must apply critical judgment to the visions and acts of Melusina (anima) in order to extract wisdom from 
the deceptive phantasms she presents. 6 references. 
000470 Paracelsus as a spiritual phenomenon. 4. The commentary of Gerard Dorn. b. The 
hierosgamos of the everlasting man. In: Jung, C., Collected Works of C. G. Jung, Vol. 13. Princeton 
University Press, 1967. 444 p. (p. 180-183). 
The process of reuniting the conscious and unconscious in order to produce the one man is presented as 
it appears in Paracelsus' writings. Melusina, the anima, must not remain in the projected state but must 
become in'tegrated into the conscious mind of the adept, thus producing the longed after coniunctio of 
conscious and unconscious. This union is defined as an experience that cannot be stated in words but 
that is accompanied by a sense of eternity or timelessness. Allusion is made to the Paracelsan 
description of the characters of Venus, and a comparison is drawn between the union with the feminine 
personification of the unconscious and the sacred marriage of the Lamb and the Virgin found in the 
Apocalypse. The experience of unity is seen to include an awareness of atonement, not only within the 
self, but also with the multiplicity of all being. 
000471 Paracelsus as a spiritual phenomenon. 4. The commentary of Gerard Dorn. c. Spirit and 
nature. In: Jung, C., Collected Works of C. G. Jung, Vol. 13. Princeton University Press, 1967. 444 p. 
(p. 183-185). 
The reasons for Parcelsus' choice of the pagan images of Venus and Mars to describe the union of the 
conscious and the unconscious are discussed. Despite the fact that Paracelsus lived in a Christian age, he 
chose pagan symbols to express his thoughts. It is proposed that in an era that neglected the natural spirit 
and expressed everything in the light of culture or reason, nature was making her own demands. 
Paracelsus is credited with having recognized the light of nature and with raising it to a principle, in 
which the workings of the unconscious can be observed. The importance of attending to the unconscious 
is stressed: it is an autonomous entity capable of extending beyond consciousness and, with its symbols, 
anticipates future consciousness; it is capable also of correcting the biases and aberrations of the 
conscious attitude. 1 reference. 000472 Paracelsus as a spiritual phenomenon. 4. The commentary of 
Gerard Dorn. d. The ecclesiastical sacrament and the opus alchymicum. In: Jung, C., Collected 
Works of C. G. Jung, Vol. 13. Princeton University Press, 1967. 444 p. (p. 185-188). 
Paracelsus' work is assessed in terms of its relation to Christianity. As an alchemist, his language is seen 
to be an expression of renewed archetypal experience, resulting from the projections of his own 
unconscious. Despite the fact that the procedure he was describing was clearly intended to attain 
immortality, his belief in the light of nature enabled him to express himself in terms of Venus and Amor 
rather than in the Christian language of the sacraments of the Church. Nevertheless, though an 
alchemical philosopher, he is judged to be a Christian who saw his art as a means of bringing the divine 

will implanted in nature to perfection. 4 references. 
000473 Paracelsus as a spiritual phenomenon. 5. Epilogue. In: Jung, C., Collected Works of C. G. 
Jung, Vol. 13. Princeton University Press, 1967. 444 p. (p. 189). 
The value of Paracelsus' contributions to modem psychology are assessed. Although the preceding pages 
have neglected Paracelsus the Christian and physician, they have not denied that, in Paracelsus, the 
Christian and primitive pagan lived together to form a conflicting whole. Despite the conflict, Paracelsus 
is seen to have been spared the split between faith and knowledge that was to afflict later generations. In 
the,,person of Paracelsus can be seen the division which would lead to a higher consciousness, a greater 
synthesis. He is considered. then, the forerunner of the modem psychology of the unconscious. 
000474 The spirit Mercurius. Part 1: 1. The spirit in the bottle. In: Jung, C., Collected Works of C. 
G. Jung, Vol. 13. Princeton University Press, 1967. 444 p. (p. 191-198). 
Grimm's fairytale, "The Spirit in the Bottle" is analyzed in terms of its psychological content and its 
relation to the teachings of the alchemists. In the tale, certain spontaneous statements of the unconscious 
about itself are disclosed: the forest is the synonym for the unconscious; the oak, a prototype of the self, 
the still unconscious core of the personality. It is concluded that the hero of the tale is profoundly 
unaware of his self. The key to the personality of the hero is buried and imprisoned against its will. 
Several of the symbols are interpreted as references to the alchemical concepts of the four elements, the 
spiritus vegetativus, the alchemist magician who has imprisoned Mercurius. The fact that Mercurius, 
i.e.,the principle of individuation, has been confined against his will is taken as an indication that this 
principle was considered to be a source of evil, a view held by Schopenhauer and Buddhist philosophy, 
as well as by the Christian doctrine of original sin. However, in that the spirit is only contained not 
banished, it is concluded that the intent was to isolate the spirit from the surrounding medium. Insofar as 
the spirit is called by the alchemic name Mercurius, identical with the German Wotan, it is concluded 
that the tale was of alchemical origin, interpreting the evil spirit as a pagan god forced into the 
underworld by Christianity and morally disqualified. In this sense, identification is established between 
Mercurius of this tale and the devil. 4 references. 
000475 The spirit Mercurius. Part 1: 2. The connection between spirit and tree. In: Jung, C., 
Collected Works of C. G. Jung, Vol. 13. Princeton University Press, 1967. 444 p. (p. 199-201). 
The connection between the mythical symbol of the voice in the oak tree and psychological facts is 
established and analyzed. The evil spirit confined under the oak tree is, in psychological terms, a 
reference to the evil spirit hidden in the roots of the self, in the principle of individuation. Five stages of 
consciousness, progressing from primitive times to the present, are charted. In the primitive the contents 
of the unconscious were projected on the object, making them appear as one; in the second stage a 
differentiation was made between object and unconscious content, achieving an act of enlightenment. At 
the third level, evil was attributed to the psychic content, separated from the object; in the fourth level, 
that of the present day, the objective existence of the spirit is denied. However, it is proposed that, at the 
fifth level, the existence of a phenomenon arising from the unconscious is recognized and real existence 
is granted to the unconscious. This final view requires the acceptance of the spirit as a reality and 
accepts the necessity of examining the problem of good and evil in relation to the unconscious. 
000476 The spirit Mercurius. Part 1: 3. The problem of freeing Mercurius. In: Jung, C., Collected 
Works of C. G. Jung, Vol. 13. Princeton University Press, 1967. 444 p. (p. 202-203). 
In conclusion of the tale of the spirit of Merurius, the freeing of Mercurius, frustrated evil in man, is 

examined in the light of the alchemical process. Although the tale reveals the subsequent good fortune 
of its hero, nothing is said about the consequences of freeing Mercurius by any voluntary alchemical 
process. The experienced alchemist would have wished, at all costs, to retain the elusive Mercurius in 
captivity in order to transform him, so great was the association between Mercuius and the demonic 
arcane substance. It is concluded then that the ending of the talc is to be regarded as alchemicaIly 
incorrect. 1 Reference. 
000477 The spirit Mercurius. Part 11: 1. Introductory. In: Jung, C., Collected Works of C. G. Jung, 
Vol. 13. Princeton University Press, 1967. 444 p. (p. 204-206). 
'Me alchemical spirit Mercurius is studied with the intention of elucidating some of the psychological 
phenomena contained in alchemy. The philologist Reitzenstein is credited with having discovered the 
mythological and Gnostic ideas imbedded in alchemy, particularly the doctrine of the Anthropos with its 
redemptive role. Through practical experience and observation with the projections of patients, it was 
possible to understand the primitive state of identity between subject and object, or, in the case of the 
alchemists, the projections of the collective unconscious on metals. The original sources for this study 
are fourfold: the texts by ancient authors, especially Greek and Arabic texts dating from first to eighth 
centuries and edited by Berthelot; Latin texts, translated from Arabic or Hebrew, dating from the ninth 
to the 13th centuries; later Latin texts, the principal source, ranging from the 14th to 17th centuries; and 
some texts in modern European languages from the 16th to 17th centuries, with a few references to 18th 
century texts. 2 references. 
000478 The spirit Mercurius. Part 11: 2. Mercurius as quicksilver and/or water. In: Jung, C., 
Collected Works of C. G. Jung, Vol. 13. Princeton University Press, 1967. 444 p. (p. 207-208). 
The numerous names given to Mercurius are cited and explained. The first and widely accepted term 
applied to Mercurius was quicksilver, crude or philosophic, the latter being the arcane substance to be 
produced by alchemy. Because of its fluidity, quicksilver was also defined as water, with many 
variations in its description to point to the spiritual nature or golden tincture of this arcane substance. 8 
references. 
000479 The spirit Mercurius. Part. 11: 3. Mercurius as fire. In: Jung, C., Collected Works of C. G. 
Jung, Vol. 13. Princeton University Press, 1967. 444 p. (p. 209-210). 
The alchemical definitions of Mercurius as fire are presented, and the paradoxical nature of this 
designation indicated. As natural or elemental fire, he was considered to be the source of mystical 
knowledge, a kinsman of the ancient Hermes. Although not ungodly by nature, the mercurial fire was 
believed to contain the fires of hell, which was considered to be a component of the deity since God was 
a coincidence of opposites. The locus of this mercurial fire was thought to be the center of the earth 
where the heavenly spiritual powers are rearranged in the chthonic world of matter. Therefore this evil 
hell fire was considered to be identical in substance with its spiritual counterpart. Mercurius, of course, 
could not be destroyed by fire, but because of his fiery nature, he rejoiced in it. 3 references. 
000480 The spirit Mercurius. Part 11: 4. Mercurius as spirit and soul. In: Jung, C., Collected Works 
of C. G. Jung, Vol. 13. Princeton University Press, 1967. 444 p. (p. 211). 
The contradiction between the fiery nature of Mercurius that fire itself does not change and the vaporous 
nature of quicksilver under heat is examined and explained as an indication of the highly specialized 
projection of psychic content. Since the alchemists themselves identified this arcane substance as spirit 
or soul, it is evident that they too recognized its psychic nature. However, because of the ambiguous 

nature of the these concepts, it is necessary to proceed slowly in order to understand the full import of 
these alchemical terms. 
000481 The spirit Mercurius. Part 11: 4. Mercurius as spirit and soul. a. Mercurius as an aerial 
spirit. In: Jung, C., Collected Works of C. G. Jung, Vol. 13. Princeton University Press, 1967. 444 p. (p. 
212-213). 
The aerial aspect of Mercurius, the counterpart of Hermes and the Egyptian Thoth, is discussed. The 
terms -pneuma, spiritus, volans, spiritualis -- applied to the aerial aspect of Mercurius indicate a gaseous 
state of aggregation. Other terms, combining an understanding of Mercurius as visible yet impalpable, 
suggest the contamination of the two separate realms of spirit and matter: he was considered to be the 
spirit of the world embodied in the earth. 5 references. 
000482 The spirit Mercurius. Part 11: 4. Mercurius as spirit and soul. b. Mercurius as soul. In: 
Jung, C., Collected Works of C. G. Jung, Vol. 13. Princeton University Press, 1967. 444 P. (p. 213-214). 
The basic duality of Mercurius is most apparent in the designations of spirit and soul that are discussed. 
In that the basic characteristic of "breath soul" is to animate and be animated, Mercurius can be 
considered a life principle, as the term anima, a feminine being, also suggests. Several other terms 
referring to Mercurius as spirit are given with attention drawn to the identification between Mercurius 
and the anima mundi. In this latter appellation, the alchemists were combining the Platonic concept of 
world/soul and the Christian concept of the Holy Spirit to emphasize the identity of matter and spirit as 
well as the procreative quality of Mercurius. 9 references. 
000483 The spirit Mercurius. Part 11: 4. Mercurius as spirit and soul. c. Mercurius as spirit in the 
incorporeal, metaphysical sense. In: Jung, C., Collected Works of C. G. Jung, Vol. 13. Princeton 
University Press, 1967. 444 p. (p. 215-216). 
'Me specifically spiritual nature of Mercurius is examined, showing that the alchemists did associate him 
with the pure world of spirit -- hyperphysical and incorruptible, incorporeal and of celestial or possibly 
demonic origin. The association of this arcane substance with the goddess of love is also noted. It is 
concluded that the alchemists themselves conceived Mercurius as a psychic phenomenon and never 
ceased drawing attention to the psychic nature of Mercurius. The nomenclature suggests a union of 
opposites; hence, the psychologem Mercurius indicates an essentially antinomian dual nature. 6 
000484 The spirit Mercurius. Part U: 5. The dual nature of Mercurins. In: Jung, C., Collected 
Works of C. G. Jung, Vol. 13. Princeton University Press, 1967. 444 p. (p. 217-220). 
Numerous names indicating the dual nature of Mercurius are listed, among them such opposites as 
waking/sleeping, dry/moist. good/evil, water/fire, malelfemale, husband/wife, lover/beloved. He was 
identified with hermaphroditic first man, the Adam Kadmon, and the Gnostic Anthropos -- a concept 
that coincides with the psychological concept of the self. Mercurius is undoubtedly identified with the 
most extreme opposites. 30 references. 
000485 The spirit Mercurius. Part 11: 6. The unity and trinity of Mercurius. In: Jung, C., Collected 
Works of C. G. Jung, Vol. 13. Princeton University Press, 1967. 444 p. (p. 221-224). 
The symbols and terms referring to the alchemical concept of the unity of Mercurius are examined and 
the relationship between his triadic nature, and the Christian dogma of the Holy Trinity is explored. 

Several references to earlier triads are given of the underworld and of ancestors, which are most often 
associated with attributes of the gods. From all of the alchemical names referring to the threefold nature 
of Mercurius, it is concluded that he corresponds not only to Christ but to the triune divinity as well, a 
parallel most clearly seen in the name Azoth applied to Mercurius in the "Aurelia occulta." In addition, 
he is considered to be the Logos (Christ) become word, an indication of his identification with the 
collective unconscious. Another attribute of Mercurius that relates him to the Godhead is his ability to 
beget himself like the uroboros dragon. This identification with trinity does not exclude his continued 
sharing of the quaternity of the lapis, thus causing him to exemplify the axiom of Maria Prophetissa, the 
dilemma of the three and four. 17 references. 
000486 The spirit Mercurius. Part 11: 7. The relation of Mercurius to astrology and the doctrine 
of the archons. In: Jung, C., Collected Works of C. G. Jung, Vol. 13. Princeton University Press, 1967. 
444 p. (p. 225-229). 
The identification of Mercurius with the planets -- Mercury, Venus and Saturn -- is discussed in terms of 
the attributes he was to have shared with them. The most important astrological relationship was with 
Saturn through associaition of lead, prima materia, with both the planet and Mercurius drawing the 
eternal water and being hermaphroditic in nature. The spirits of Saturn and of Mercurius were also 
linked, particularly in terms of the transformation of the lion. In addition, Saturn was perceived as the 
dwelling place of the devil, a parallel to the alchemical belief that the masculine principle of Mercurius 
was diabolus. Mercurius' nature is described as beginning with evil and ending with good. In the poem 
Verus Hermes, the transformation of Mercurius is described as a projection of the individuation process 
which takes place even without the participation of consciousness, however when consciousness does 
participate in the process, all the emotions associated with a religious revelation are experienced; hence 
the identification of Mercurius with Sapientia or the Holy Ghost. 25 references. 
000487 The spirit Mercurius. Part 11: 8. Mercurius and Hermes. In: Jung, C., Collected Works of 
C. G. Jung, Vol. 13. Princeton University Press, 1967. 444 p. (p. 230-234). 
The similarity between Hermes and Mercurius is discussed by showing the resemblance between the 
values and ideas attributed to both as well as by the numerous names ascribed to Mercurius in the 
alchemical texts. Both are described as pointing the way, revealing divine secrets, and being transformed 
from evil into good. The dark Mercurius, associated with the demiurgic principle and the mother/son 
incest, is interpreted as an allusion to the initial migredo state. His transformation or redemption is 
contrasted with that of Christ: the latter descends from heaven and then ascends; Mercurius is raised 
from earth to heaven and then returns to earth. His nature is circular, like the uroborous, and symbolized 
by the circulus simplex. It is suggested that the union of Hermetic and Aristotlean philosophy may be 
possible in the future but only if a psychological definition of religious and scientific views has been 
completed. 15 references. 
000488 The spirit Mercurius- Part 11: 9. Mercurius as the arcane substance. In: Jung, C., Collected 
Works of C. G. Jung, Vol. 13. Princeton University Press, 1967. 444 p. (p. 235-236). 
The complex nature of Mercurius is illustrated by the identification with the arcane substance, prima 
materia, lapis. He is not only the beginning and end of the alchemical opus but the process in between, 
hence the names Mediator, Servator, Salvator that are applied to him and the parallel drawn to Christ. In 
the macrocosm of nature he holds the position that Christ holds in the world of reason of divine 
revelation. In his capacity for self-generation, selftransformation, self-reproduction and self-destruction, 
he is considered to be a principle coeternal with God. 15 references. 

000489 The spirit Mercurius. Part H: 10. Summary. In: Jung, C., Collected Works of C. G. Jung, 
Vol. 13. Princeton University Press, 1967. 444 p. (p. 237-250). 
A summary of the multiple aspects of Mercurius is provided; a comparison is made between the figure 
of Christ and that of Mercurius; and the psychological significance of this alchemical figure is explored 
at length. Mercurius is presented as a symbol of all conceivable opposites, as a process of 
transformation, as a dual God/devil image, and as a representation of the self, the individuation process 
and the collective unconscious. Both Christ and Mercurius are viewed as archetypes: the former of 
consciousness; the latter, of the unconscious; both are preconscious, autonomous images from which 
knowledge of psychic conditions can be derived. Since the development of the Christ image resulted in a 
strengthening of consciousness and a neglect of the unconscious, the compensatory tendencies of the 
latter created the figure of Mercurius, who stands in compensatory relation to Christ and whose object is 
to bridge the abyss separating the conscious from the unconscious. It is this new knowledge springing 
from the unconscious that must be integrated into consciousness in order to complete the individuation 
process, allow the emergence of the self, and reveal the collective nature of the self. The evil, dark side 
of Mercurius is not to be interpreted as an image of the Christian devil but of the shadow side of the self. 
The alchemists' discoveries in terms of metals is not considered unusual since the concentration on one 
topic or problem causes the psyche to express itself in terms of the material under observation. 6 
000490 The philosophical tree. I. Individual representations of the tree symbol. In: Jung, C., 
Collected Works of C. G. Jung, Vol. 13. Princeton University Press, 1967. 444 p. (251-271). 
Thirty-two descriptions of a series of pictures drawn by patients to express their inner experiences are 
given. The symbol of the tree as it appears in all of the pictures is analyzed in terms of the expression of 
psychic content with references made to the similarities between these spontaneously created symbols 
and alchemical or mythical concepts. Many of the descriptions reveal allusions to psychological 
processes: the union of opposites, the awareness of the value of the unconscia6s, regression, the danger 
of identification with the self, the process of individuation or discrimination between self and ego, the 
personification of animus, and several others. 6 references. 
000491 The philosophical tree. IL On the history and Interpretation of the tree symbol. 1. The tree 
as an archetypal Image. In: Jung, C., Collected Works of C. G. Jung, Vol. 13. Princeton University 
Press, 1967. 444 p. (p. 272-274). 
The history and interpretation of the tree as a symbol are examined. As an archetypal image, the symbol 
of the tree has undergone changes of meaning throughout the centuries. As a whole, however, the tree is 
associated with growth, protection, life, unfolding of form, old age, personality, death and rebirth. 
Despite the amount of material derived from myth, fairytale and poetry, the patients who drew them 
were unaware of the sources of their images. Three explanations for this lack of awareness are given: 
little thought is ever given to dream images or myth motifs; sources have been forgotten; or the sources 
sprang from archetypes and are, therefore, of a collective nature. The collective nature of the image 
makes it difficult to establish its full meaning from the associative material of a single individual. Since 
this awareness is impor tant for therapy, comparative research into symbols is encouraged. Medieval 
natural philosophy, alchemy and Hermetic philosophy are believed to be a reservoir of the most 
important and enduring mythologems of the ancient world. 3 references. 
000492 The philosophical tree. IL On the history and interpretation of the tree symbol. 2. The tree 
in the treatise of Jodocus Greverus. In: Jung, C., Collective Works of C. G. Jung, Vol. 13. Princeton 
University Press, 1967. 444 p. (p. 274-278). 

The central positon of the tree in mythology is illustrated in the work of the 16th centruy writer 
Greverus. His tree stands in a well tended garden grown in soil of the purified Mercurius. Planets form 
the trunk; the moon and sun supply its seeds. The planetary names correspond both to metals and 
temperaments or psychic factors. Greverus sees his work as having a universal purpose, containing the 
secret of the undivided oneness of the holy trinity. The alchemists' insistence that a parallelism existed 
between their ideas and those of religion is noted and interpreted as a recognition that ideas are 
organized by the same psychic laws, the archetypes. In the process of synthesis, the triad of sun, moon 
and Mercurius combines in a fourth, tetrasomia. The four elements then become joined in the union of 
persons. 5 references. 
000493 The philosophical tree. IL On the history and interpretation of the tree symbol. 3. The 
tetrasomia. In: Jung, ., Collected Works of C. G. Jung, Vol. 13. Princeton University Press, 1967. 444 
p. (p. 278-283). 
The historical background of the tetrasomia, the reduction or synthesis of a quaternio to unity, is studied. 
Two dyads one benevolent, the other maleficent make up the quaternion to be synthesized. The fourfold 
Mercurius, the four forms of the Hellenistic Hermes, Ezekiel's vision of four cherubim, the cross, the 
four gospels as pillars of Christ's throne, and the four animals in Daniel's vision are all considered to be 
images of the quaternity. It is shown that the incest motif, which extends into Christian tradition and 
medieval alchemy, had its origins in the Egyptian myth that Horns begat his four sons with his mother 
Isis. The images of quaternity are considered to represent the self or man's wholeness in the symbolism 
of the unconscious. It is concluded that the alchemical tetrasomia and its reduction to unity form an 
archetype of a totality divided into four parts but possessing one central nature. 6 references. 
000494 The philosophical tree. II On the history and interpretation of the tree symbol. 4. The 
image of wholeness. In: Jung, C., Collected Works of C. G. Jung: Vol. 13. Princeton University Press, 
1967. 444 p. (283-285). 
The image of wholeness in mythology and alchemical symbolism is reviewed: water, Mercurius, lapis 
are all totality images with their own wholeness. Zosimos's whole is a microcosm, a reflection of the 
universe. Here, microcosm and macrocosm are identical: the microcosm attracts the macrocosm in a 
restoration of individual elements to the original wholeness. The outline of the associative background 
of the tree is considered a necessary prelude to explaining the place of the tree in alchemy. 5 references. 
000495 The philosophical tree. II. On the history and interpretation of the tree symbol. 5. The 
nature and origin of the philosophical tree. In: Jung, C., Collected Works of C. G. Jung, Vol. 13. 
Princeton University Press, 1967. 444 p. (p. 286-289). 
The nature and origin of the philosophical tree are outlined in the work of the 17th century Platonist, 
Gerard Dorn. He 3 drew a vivid picture of the growth, expansion and death of the tree. He envisaged it 
as a system of blood vessels -- with the branches as veins -- extending throughout the earth. Its blood 
like liquid coagulates into its fruit which dies only to create new life. To Dorn, the archetypal tree was 
projected on the empirical world. His view is totalistic, embracing the whole of organic and inorganic 
nature as well as the spiritual world. The battle between those who advocate objectivity and those who 
support a psychology based on pyschic premises is seen as a parallel to Dorn's opposition to the 
scientific empiricists of his time. 5 references. 
000496The philosophical tree. II. On the history and interpretation of the tree symbol. 6. Dorn's 
interpretation of the tree. In: Jung, C., Collected Works of C. G. Jung, Vol. 13. Princeton University 
Press, 1967. 444 p. (p. 289-292). 

Dorn's description and interpretation of the philosophical tree as a living thing, a metaphorical form of 
hidden substance, is quoted and criticized. His distinction between living things of nature and material 
organisms is not clear. It is suggested that he may be referring to the existence of archetypes in the 
comprehensive Platonic nature which he envisages. 1 reference. 
000497 The philosophical tree. II. On the history and interpretation of the tree symbol. 7. The 
rose-coloured blood and the rose. In: Jung, C., Collected Works of C. G, Jung, Vol. 13. Princeton 
Univefsity Press, 1967. 444 p, (p. 292-297). 
Historical precedents for Dorn's rose-colored blood and the rose are examined. The alchemists 
conceived of a body as composed of the four elements and capable of uniting all opposites. The stone 
was a primordial religious experience to be reconciled with Christian beliefs and hence the parallel 
between it and Christ. It was this lapis/Christ parallel that introduced the mystique of the rose into 
alchemy. To the alchemists, the rose-colored blood of the alchemical redeemer was derived from rose 
mysticism and expressed the healing effect of a certain kind of Eros. This alchemical redeemer (servator 
cosmi) is seen as a representation of the still unconscious idea of the whole man. Christianity's call to 
practice love of neighbor is viewed as a compensation for a corresponding social defect and an attempt 
to educate man to consciousness and responsibility, thereby illuminating the interior world of the 
psyche. 8 references. 
000498 The philosophical tree. II. On the history and interpretation of the tree symbol. 8. The 
alchemical mind. In: Jung, C., Collected Works of C. G. Jung, Vol. 13. Princeton University Press, 
1967. 444 p. (p. 297-302). 
The significance of the alchemists' efforts to discover the stone is discussed. According to Petrus Bonus, 
the alchemical opus anticipated throughout history the sacred myth of the generation, birth and 
resurrection of the Redeemer, although they could not resolve the lapis/Christ parallel, little by little the 
meaning of the stone and its relationship to man himself became clear. Only in later centuries was their 
projection into and from matter abolished with the recognition of the psyche. Dreams, along with 
mythologems and alchemical symbols, are viewed as attempts to translate unconscious thought forms, 
the common property of mankind, into the language of consciousness. This new consciousness is seen as 
threatening and isolating; hence, collective or archetypal images are produced as compensations. 
Religion is seen as one way of linking the individual to the instinctual powers of the unconscious. In the 
absence of religion, compensating primordial images appear in the form of mythologems or dreams. The 
alchemist reduced his symbols to chemical substances, modern man to personal experiences. Freud is 
criticized for reducing everything to the archetype of incest. Instead, it is suggested that the meaning of 
symbols be explored, recognizing that they compensate an unadapted attitude of consciousness. 
Consequently, the analyst is exhorted to give full attention to the symbolic aspects of his patient's 
problems, since healing comes only from what leads the patient beyond himself and beyond his 
entanglement in his own ego. 2 references. 
000499 The philosophical tree. If. On the history and interpretation of the tree symbol. 9. Various 
aspects of the tree. In: Jung, C., Collected Works of C. G. Jung, Vol. 13. Princeton University Press, 
1967. 444 p. (p. 302-308). 
In an effort to determine the meaning of the tree to the alchemists, many sources are compared. The tree 
of paradise, both as an abstraction and as a living plant, the magical tree, and the truncated tree all 
appear in alchemical symbolisms representing the alchemical process, the journey of shaman, and 
transformation. The motif of the dead tree, prefiguring the tree of the forbidden fruit, is not common in 
alchemy but does appear in the Judaco-Christian tradition. Four elements -- the quaternity, the symbol of 
wholeness -- are often associated with the flowering and fruit bearing tree. In alchemical traditon, God 

appears as the fruit of the philosophical tree, the product of the opus whose goal is to liberate the world 
creating spirit of God. 19 references. 
000500 The philosophical tree. H. On the history and interpretation of the tree symbol. 10. The 
habitat of the tree. In: Jung, C., Collected Works of C. G. Jung, Vol. 13. Princeton University Press, 
1967. 444 p. (p. 308-311). 
The various habitats of the philosophical tree, especially the sea and the mountain, are considered. 
Mountain and tree are seen as symbols of personality, of the self, and of Christ. The association of the 
tree and water suggests an allusion to Mercurius, who unites the opposites in himself since he is metal 
and liquid. The symbolism of fire and metal is found in many philosophies. The golden tree is related to 
the seven metals, seen as the seven planets. In such a connection, it becomes a world tree. 
000501 The philosophical tree. Il. On the history and interpretation of the tree symbol. 11. The 
inverted tree. In: Jung, C., Collected Works of C. G. Jung, Vol. 13. Princeton University Press, 1967. 
444 p. (p. 311-315). 
Numerous examples from medieval, Indian and Cabalistic sources are cited as illustrations of the 
inverted tree. Man is perceived as an inverted tree rooted in paradise. Both in East and West, the tree 
symbolizes a living process as weu~u, process of enlightenment. To the alchemists, it representettheir 
opus. It also appears as having various substances, all of which have some moral significance. 13 
references. 
00502 The philosophical tree. If. On the history and interpretation of the tree symbol. 12. Bird and 
snake. In: Jung, C., Collected Works of C. G. Jung, Vol. 13. Princeton University Press, 1967. 444 p. (p. 
315-317). 
The significance of birds and snakes associated with the tree is explored in the context of Biblical, 
alchemical and classical quotations. The stork in alchemical literature stands for the opus and its 
consummation just as the ingrown lea,~es represent the opus contra naturam and introversion. The 
snake, with its obvious reference to the Biblical story of the Fall, is also seen as the mercurial serpent or 
arcane substance, transforming itself and giving life. A quotation from the "Scripturn Alberti" reveals 
analogies to Christ and to the transformation process in the symbols of the dragon and the stork. This 
latter symbol is also viewed as an allegorical representation of piety and of Christ the judge. Just as the 
snake is the chthonic numen of the tree, so that stork is its spiritual principle and a symbol of Anthropos. 
5 references. 
000503 The philosophical tree. H. On the history and interpretation of the tree symbol. 13. The 
feminine tree-numen. In: Jung, C., Collected Works of C. G. Jung, Vol. 13. Princeton University Press, 
1967. 444 p. (p. 317-319). 
The feminine and matemal significance of the tree, as the seat of transformation and renewal, is 
discussed. This symbolism is found in both ancient and biblical tradition as well as in alchemical texts. 
The dual nature of the tree is identified by the alchemists: the division of the tree soul into a masculine 
and feminine figure is said to correspond to the alchemical Mercurius, the hermaphrodite, as life 
principle of the tree. 7 references. 
000504 The philosophical tree. 11. On the history and interpretation of the tree symbol. 14. The 
tree as the lapis. In: Jung, C., Collected Works of C. G. Jung, Vol. 13. Princeton University Press, 
1967. 444 p. (p. 319-322). 

The significance of lapis, the philosophical stone, as both first and last matter, is investigated. The stone, 
as prima materia, is an oily water. Since oil and water do not mix, the oily water represents the double or 
contrary nature of Mercurius. The stone is seen as identical with the tree and both are identified as 
symbols of wholeness or self, as proven by quotations from Arabic and Persian writings. 
Psychologically, the first meeting with the self may be accompanied by all those negative qualities 
which characterize an unexpected encounter with the unconscious. It is concluded that a psychosis could 
result if the conscious mind were unable to assimilate, either intellectually or morally, the contents of the 
unconscious. 7 references. 
000505 The philosophical tree. 11. On the history and interpretation of the tree symbol. 15. The 
dangers of the art. In: Jung, C., Collected Works of C. G. Jung, Vol. 13. Princeton University Press, 
1967. 444 p. (p. 322-326). 
The quotations from several alchemical texts are examined and the dangers of practicing the alchemical 
art arc explored. Death, either physical or spiritual, and demonic agents are cited among the dangers for 
those who lacked spiritual understanding. Since the mystery of the stone pervades alchemy and was 
considered by the alchemists as a miracle, it was consequently associated with a fear of mental 
disturbance. A ,econd century Chinese alchemist's warnings of the dire consequences of making 
mistakes during the opus are described both in their physiological and psychic manifestations. The 
alchemist was involved in the development of his own individuation, in a difficult process of unifying 
consciousness with the shadow and the anima. He was exposed to the dangers of the demands made on 
both his intelligence and moral qualities. 10 references. 
000506 The philosophical tree. II. On the history and interpretation of the tree symbol. 16. 
Understanding as a means of defence. In: Jung, C., Collected Works of C. G. Jung, Vol. 13. Princeton 
University Press, 1967. 444 p. (p. 327-328). 
The need to defend against the power of the philosophical stone was recognized by the alchemists. They 
realized that the stone was stronger than they and sought to try to understand it, By attempting to guess 
the secret name, the alchemists sought to gain power of the dangerous force. This process is seen to have 
its parallel in psychotherapy: neurotic symptoms can often be rendered harmless by conscious 
understanding and experience of their contents. However, it is important to remember the autonomous 
nature of these contents and recognize them as the source of individuation. Just as the alchemists 
attempted to use the symbols produced by the unconscious as spellbinding names, so does modem man 
use intellectual concepts for the purpose of denying the unconscious, hopeful that reason and intellect 
can destroy its reality. 1 Reference. 
000507 The philosophical tree. 11. On the history and interpretation of the tree symbol. 17. The 
motif of torture. In: Jung, C., Collected Works of C. G. Jung, Vol. 13. Princeton University Press, 
1967. 444 p. (p. 328-333). 
The ambiguous meaning of torment in alchemical work is explored. It afflicts both the body and the 
soul, the raw materials and the arcane substance of the alchemists. In their most important discovery, the 
alchemists projected their own psychic processes into chemical substances. Therefore, it is not 
surprising that suffering and sadness should have been associated with the Christ's cross and its 
connection with the tree. Quaternity, the symbol of the cross, also applies to the tree wherein four 
elements are united. The analogies of the sword on the tree and the serpent on the cross in mythological 
and Christian tradition are discussed. The snake represents two apsects of the unconscious: its cold and 
ruthless instinctuality and its quality of natural wisdom. In the snake symbolism, Christ personifies the 
unconscious, hung on the tree in sacrifice, a sacrifice in which the unconscious is overcome. 

000508 The philosophical tree. II. On the history and interpretation of the tree symbol. 18. The 
relation of suffering to the coniunctio. In: Jung, C., Collected Works of C. G. Jung, Vol. 13. Princeton 
University Press, 1967. 444 p. (p. 334-337). 
The relation of suffering to union -- coniunctio -- is examined. According to Gnostic tradition the 
feminine figure of wisdom, not primordial man, was cast out into darkness. The masculine element 
thereby escaped the danger of being swallowed up by the dark powers and from the sufferings of 
wisdom arose the entire created world. This creation myth is interpreted as psychological representation 
of the separation of the female anima from the masculine, spiritually oriented consciousness which is 
seeking the victory of the spirit over the world of the senses. Wisdom's unconscious state, its 
formlessness and darkness characterizes the anima of man who identifies himself absolutely with his 
reason and spirituality. By his separation from the aninia he risks the loss of the compensating powers of 
the unconscious. In such a case, the latter makes itself felt with violent emotions and man loses touch 
with reality. In the language of myth, Christ -- the principle of masculine spirituality -- perceives the 
suffering of Wisdom -the psyche -- and thereby gives her form and existence. She is, however, left to 
suffer. In a parallel with masculine neuroses, a man can perceive psychic suffering but may not become 
conscious of its reasons in the unconscious. Masculine spirituality withdraws into the light and shuts out 
the darkness. Wisdom will not give up her dark emotions with the result that original unity is split into 
irreconcilable halves. In this symbolism, the quaternity of two pairs of opposites again appears. 
000509 The philosophical tree. II. On the history and interpretation of the tree symbol. 19. The 
tree as man. In: Jung, C., Collected Works of C. G. Jung, Vol. 13. Princeton University Press, 1967. 
444 p. (p. 337-341). 
A concern with the conceptual relationship of tree to man has recurred throughout history. The tree is 
seen as an intermediate form of man since, on the one hand, it springs from primordial man and, on the 
other, grows into a man. The feminine tree numen is an accurate symbol of the self for women, but for 
the alchemists it represented a projection of the anima figure. When the anima, (man's femininity) or the 
animus, (woman's masculinity) is not sufficiently differentiated and integrated into consciousness, the 
self is only potentially present. The spontaneous products of the unconscious in modern man depict the 
archetype of the tree and the historical parallels, not the biblical associations. Instead, the tree image 
seems to portray an inner process of development independent of consciousness or will. 7 references. 
000510 The philosophical tree. II. On the history and interpretation of the tree symbol. 20. The 
interpretation and integration of the unconscious. In: Jung, C., Collected Works of C. G. Jung, Vol. 
13. Princeton University Press, 1967. 444 p. (p. 341-349). 
The origins and treatment of psychic disturbances are reviewed. Treatment of such disturbances involves 
the integration of contents which have become dissociated from consciousness. The more negative the 
conscious attitude, the more aggressive the dissociated content becomes. To be effective, the therapy 
must establish communication with the splitoff part. In attempting to interpret a complex dream in 
an eagle reappeared recurrently, it was discovered that the eagle was associated with the patient's 
experiences in a concentration camp and with his basic beliefs. Since neuroses are symptoms of 
maladjustment the neurotic regression into an infantile state can be analyzed by means of the symbols 
produced by the unconscious to compensate this regression. When these symbols are understood 
objectively a change in attitude occurs whereby the dissociation between man as he is and man as he 
ought to be is bridged. The psyche needs to know the meaning of its existence, of the images and ideas 
originating in the unconscious. The conscious psyche is of a personal nature but it is not the whole of the 
psyche. Dream symbols have a reality that reveals unknown factors of the unconscious. When their 
meaning is understood, the unconscious can be integrated and the dissociation overcome. The study of 
the alchemical laboratory experiences, of the theories and the 11 philosophic tree," is considered 

important because of the relevance of these discoveries to the modem psychological study of the 
unconscious.