PSYCHOLOGY OF THE UNCONSCIOUS
By Carl Jung (1916)

The hypothesis of the collective unconscious is, therefore, no more daring than to assume there are instincts. One admits readily that human activity is influenced to a high degree by instincts, quite apart from the rational motivations of the conscious mind. So if the instincts force man into a specifically human mode of existence, then the unconscious must also give him a specifically human mode of understanding, which is just as characteristic of man as his instinctive acts.

The collective unconscious is simply the psychic expression of the identity of brain structure irrespective of all racial differences. This explains the analogy, sometimes even identity, between the various myth-motifs and symbols, and the possibility of human beings making themselves mutually understood at all. The various lines of psychic development start from one common stock whose roots reach back into the most distant past.

Dreams, fantasies, and psychoses bring forth images which cannot be explained by memories of individual experience. These images are characterized by distinct mythological parallels which any student of comparative religion or mythology can verify. The unconscious contains far more than personal, ontogenetic experiences; it also contains phylogenetic experiences, the deposit of ancestral life going back many millions of years.

The archetypes are not inherited ideas, but inherited possibilities of ideas. They are not individual acquisitions but, in the main, common to all, as can be seen from their universal occurrence. One might liken them to the axial system of a crystal, which, as it were, preforms the crystalline structure in the mother liquid, although it has no material existence of its own. The axial system determines merely the stereometric structure, not the concrete form of the individual crystal.

The anima and animus are two of the most important archetypes. The anima is the feminine aspect in man's unconscious, and the animus is the masculine aspect in woman's unconscious. These figures are based on the minority of opposite-sex genes in every person. But they are also archetypes, meaning they are shaped by centuries of collective experience with the opposite sex.

The shadow is another crucial archetype. It is the unknown dark side of the personality, containing all those uncivilized desires and emotions that are incompatible with social standards and our ideal personality. The shadow is that which we refuse to acknowledge about ourselves. Yet we see it constantly in others. Everything that irritates us about others can lead us to an understanding of ourselves.

Individuation is the process by which a person becomes whole, by integrating the conscious and unconscious parts of the psyche. It is not a question of getting rid of the unconscious contents, but rather of integrating them into consciousness. The self is the archetype of wholeness and the regulating center of the psyche. It is the unity of personality as a whole. The self embraces not only the conscious but also the unconscious psyche.

The personal unconscious contains lost memories, painful ideas that are repressed, subliminal perceptions, and countless vague thoughts and feelings. It is the storage place of all personal psychic materials that do not meet with recognition by the conscious mind. The collective unconscious, on the other hand, is not individual but universal. It has contents and modes of behavior that are more or less the same everywhere and in all individuals.

Synchronicity is the occurrence of two or more events which are meaningfully related but not causally connected. When a rare coincidence occurs that has deep personal meaning, it often points to something important in the unconscious trying to make itself known. These meaningful coincidences suggest that there is an acausal connecting principle at work in the universe.

One does not become enlightened by imagining figures of light, but by making the darkness conscious. The latter procedure, however, is disagreeable and therefore not popular. The meeting with oneself is, at first, the meeting with one's own shadow. The shadow is a tight passage, a narrow door, whose painful constriction no one is spared who goes down to the deep well. But one must learn to know oneself in order to know who one is.

The unconscious is not merely evil by nature; it is also the source of the highest good. Not only dark and dangerous, it is also creative and fertile. We should therefore not be surprised when we find that those people who are most afraid of the unconscious are also those who have little creative power.

The individual may believe himself to be the master of his soul. But as long as he cannot control his moods and emotions, or be conscious of the myriad secret ways in which unconscious factors insinuate themselves into his arrangements and decisions, he is subject to unknown powers.