Google 

This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at|http: //books .google .com/I 

% 

U.6' 


V,6' 

i 

; I 

■\ > 

\ l^v '0 

] . 

\ r 'I ^ > ^ • 

CHARLES C. LITTLE AND JAMES BKUWiN. 

185L 

. - h, 

$£< 

li O o T 0 17 
:-T:r. LIJiIIlD E^ ^Hii-RLKT) C LITTLE ik r^Mi. -: BEuVVK 

THE 

WORKS 

OF 

JOHN ADAMS, 

SECOND PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES 

WITH 

A LIFE OF THE AUTHOR, 

NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS, 

BY 

HIS GRANDSON 

CHARLES FRANCIS ADAMS 

VOL. V. 

BOSTON: 

CHARLES C. LITTLE AND JAMES BROWN. 

185 L 

WORKS 

ON 

GOYEENMENT 


DEFENCE 

OF THE 

CONSTITUTIONS OF GOVERNMENT 

OP THE 

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, 

AGAINST THE ATTACK OF M. TURCOT, IN HIS LETTER TO DR. 

PRICE, dIted the twenty-second day of march, 177d, 

BY 

JOHN ADAMS. 

<* As for us Englishmen, thank Heaven, we have a better sense of government, delivered to us 
from our ancestors. We have the notion of a public, and a constitution ; how a legislative, and how 
an executive is moulded. We understand weight and measure in this kind, and can reason justly 
on the balance of power and property. The maxims we draw from hence are as evident as those 
in mathematics. Our increasing knowledge shows us every day more and more what common 
sense is in politics." Shaftksbijby's Cuakact., vol. i. p. lOS. 

" 'T is scarce a oaarter of an age since such a happy balance of power was settled between 
our prince and people, as has firmly secured our hitherto precarious liberties, and removed from 
uii the fear of civil commotions, wars, and violence, either on account of the property of tho 
subject, or the contending titles of the crovni." 

IN THREE VOLUMES. 

VOL. n. 





UNITED STATES OF AMERICA. 

CHAPTER FIRST. 
ITALIAN REPUBLICS OF THE MIDDLE AGE. 

FLORENCE. 

There is no example of a government simply democratical ; 
yet there are many of forms nearly or remotely resembling what 
are understood by "AU Authority in one Centre." There once 
existed a cluster of governments, now generally known by the 
name of the Italian Republics of the Middle Age,* which deserve 
the attention of Americans, and will further illustrate and confirm 
the principles we have endeavored to maintain. If it appears, from 
the history of all the ancient republics of Greece, Italy, and Asia 
Minor, as well as from those that still remain in Switzerland, 
Italy, and elsewhere, that caprice, instability, turbulence, revolu- 
tions, and the alternate prevalence of those two plagues and 

qu'on appelle commun^ment le moyen age commence ii Constantin le 
— Corps biplomaiiquey Barbeyrac's Preface to vol. xxii. p. 6. 

•Ce 
Grand. 

1* 

6 ON GOVERNMENT. 

scourges of mankind, tyranny and anarchy, were the effects of 
governments without three orders and a balance, the same im- 
portant truth will appear, in a still clearer light, in the republics 
of Italy. The sketches to be given of these cannot be introduced 
with more propriety than by the sentiments of a late writer,* 
because they coincide with every thing that has been before 
observed. 

Limited monarchies were the ancient governments ; the jea- 
lousies and errors of the nobles, or the oppressions they suffered, 
stimulated them to render monarchy unpopular, and erect aristo- 
cracies, "Ancient nations were, in one point, very generally 
defective in their constitutions, and that was the incertitude of 
the sovereignty, and, by consequence, the instability of govern- 
ment ; which was, in all the republics of Italy, a perpetual occa- 
sion of infinite confusion. In no part of Italy, however united 
together, was found established an absolute hereditary monarch. 
By many examples, it is manifest, that kings either were created 
by the favor of the multitude, or at least sought their consent, 
and consulted the people in affairs of most importance and 
greatest danger. The government of the grandees, which suc- 
ceeded, was rather a fraudulent or violent usurpation, than a true 
and proper aristocracy established by law, or confirmed by long 
and uncontested possession; and a popular government was 
never so free or so durable as when it was mixed with the 
authority of one supreme head, or of a senate ; so that mixed 
governments were almost always preferred. One of the three 
kinds of governments nevertheless fell, when another arose; and 
all the Italian republics, nearly at one time, by the same grada- 
tions, passed from one form of administration to another. 

" In this particular all the memorials of ancient Italy agree. 
They were, from the beginning, governed by kings. The Tuscans 
had kings; the Sabines had kings; and so had the people of 
Latium ; and as every city and every borough formed an inde- 
pendent government, these kings could not have much magnifi- 
cence. Many states often obeyed the same king ; for he who 
had the lordship of one city, procured himself to be elected the 
head of another. Porsenna, whom Dionysius calls King of Tus- 
cany, because he was followed by many Tuscan nations, was 

* Danina, Rivohizioni d* Italia, vol. i. p. 41. 

FLORENCE. 7 

from the beginning only King of Chiusi. The Kings of Rome, 
by various means, gained the command of the Latin cities, which 
nevertheless, two centuries afterwards, reputed themselves still 
independent of the state of Rome. The King of the Veientes 
had the lordship of Fidena, a free city, and independent of the 
Veientes, in the same manner as the Visconti, Lords of Milan, 
Castruccio, Lord of Lucca, and the Scala, Lords of Verona, (and 
so many other princes and tyrants of the later ages, before the 
exaltation of Charles V.) made such progress in obtaining the 
sovereignty of many cities, which had nothing in common with 
Milan, or Lucca, or Verona. These kingdoms were either sim- 
ply elective, or at least required the express consent of the people, 
howsoever often one relation succeeded to another. Neither 
were royal governments generally displeasing to the people ; but 
the grandees and nobles, who were the most exposed to the 
caprice of the prince, both in their persons and property, studied 
to generate in the minds of the common people a hatred to the 
name of king, and to excite the desire of liberiy. They flattered 
themselves, that if the principality, which often fell into the hands 
of new men and adventurers, such as Tarquin in Rome, and 
Aristodemus in Cuma, were abolished, they should be able to 
live, not only with more security and greater license, but with 
more authority, command, and power. In what nation, and in 
which city, the revolution first began, is not easy to determine ; 
but in the course of the third century of the Roman era, one 
people following the example of another, this by means of one, 
and that of another opportunity, either expelled by violence their 
present kings, or desisted from electing new ones ; and all Italy, 
hoisting as it were a common signal, changed at once its whole 
form of government 

<^ The odium of the royal name, and an enthusiasm for liberty, 
seized so universally, and with such energy, the whole Italian 
nation, that if any city wished either to continue or recover the 
custom of kings, this inclination was scarcely manifested before 
it was pointed out and reviled by the other cities, and upon all 
great occasions abandoned. The Veientes,* either from a disgust 
at the cabals and ambition which arose from the annual creation 
of new magistrates, or the better to provide for war, created afresh 

* Liv. lib. V. c. 1. 

8 ON GOVERNMENT. 

a king; by which resolution they incurred to such a degree 
the hatred and contempt of the other people of Tuscany, that, 
contrary to every rule of policy, duty, and custom, they were left 
alone to sustain that obstinate war with the Romans, which 
ended in their ruin. In the beginning of the fourth century of 
the Roman history, there is seldom or never mention made of 
kings in any of the states of Italy. The whole authority and 
administration of public affairs passed into the hands of the 
nobility, or the senate ; and that body, constituting at first the 
middle order between the king and the people, became the 
supreme head of the government And although the greater 
magistracies were elected by the voices or suffrages of the people, 
nevertheless, all the honors and all the power of the govern- 
ment were collected in the grandees, who easily commanded the 
votes of the electors, and who alone were the elected ; for none 
of the plebeians dared to pretend to offices, civil or military. 
And it is too evident that, in every kind of community, the rich 
and the noble endeavor, eis it were, by their very nature, to exclude 
the poor and the plebeians. Most of the public affairs relative 
to peace or war were treated in a senate composed essentially of 
palxicians and nobles, who, in every thing that regarded the con- 
stitution, inclined more to aristocracy than to popular govern- 
ment No city was so mean or so ill ordered as not to have a 
public council, or a senate. Livy speaks of the senate, not only 
of Naples, Capua, and Cuma, but of Nola, Pipernum, Tusculum, 
Tivoli, the Veientes, and of others, so frequently, that it is clear 
that in all the republics there was an order distinct from the ple- 
beians, who retained in their hands the essence of the govern- 
ment But the plebeians, once become obstinate, at the solicita- 
tion of the nobility, in a hatred of tyranny, had not far to go 
before they opened their eyes upon their own condition, and 
learned that they had done nothing more than exchange one 
master for many; and they began to make every exertion to 
obtain, in fact, the possession of that liberty, of which they had, 
until then, obtained a taste in words, from the order of patricians 
and the senate. As the multitude began to make trial of their 
strength, the sovereign authority was ceded to them by little and 
little, and the nobility, in their turn, were tormented and tyran- 
nized by the plebeians. Livy observes, that, about the time of 
the Carthaginian war, by a kind of epidemical malady spread 

FLORENCE. 9 

through the Italian republics, the plebeians applied themselves 
to persecute the nobility. Nevertheless, the order of the grandees 
always preserved a great part of the power; for the nature of 
popular government being variable, inconstant, and incapable of 
conducting itself, the senate and the nobility, who act with more 
maturity of deliberation, and with interests more united, can 
generally counterpoise the party of the plebeians, and from time 
to time overcome it. From whence it happened, that all the 
cities were exposed to continual revolutions of government, and 
very rarely enjoyed that perfect equality, which is the end of a 
free state; but either the favor of the people, or the necessity 
of the senate, devolved the principal authority on some indivi- 
dual, who, with or without the title of supreme magistrate, was 
always regarded as the head of the government. Thus we find 
a Manilius, head of the Latins ; an Accius TuUius, principal of 
the Volsci ; a Herennius, of the Samnites ; a Calavius, of the 
Campanians; a Valerius, a Camillus, and a Fabius, chiefs of the 
Romans. And, to speak the truth, there was never any great 
and important success in any free state, either at home or 
abroad, except in those times when some one citizen held the 
will of the public in his own power." 

But, waving the rest of these general observations for the 
present, let us descend to particulars, and, quitting the ancient 
republics of Italy, descend to those of the middle age, among 
which Florence is the most illustrious. As the history of that 
noble city and magnanimous people has been written by two 
authors, among a multitude of others, who may be compared to 
any of the historians of Greece or Rome, we have here an ex- 
ample more fully delineated, an experiment more perfectly made 
and more accurately described, than any we have examined 
before. We shall not, therefore, find it tedious to consider mi- 
nutely the affairs of a brave and enlightened people, to whom 
the world is indebted for a Machiavel, a Guicciardini, and an 
Americus Vespucius ; in a great degree for the resurrection of 
letters, and a second civilization of mankind. Next to Athens 
and Rome, there has not existed a more interesting city. The 
history is full of lessons of wisdom, extremely to our purpose. 

We have all along contended, that the predominant passion 
of all men in power, whether kings, nobles, or plebeians, is the 
same; that tyranny will be the effect, whoever are the governors, 

10 ON GOVEROTfENT. 

whether the one, the few, or the many, if uncontrolled by equal 
laws, made by common consent, and supported, protected, and 
enforced by three different orders of men in eqmlibrio. In Flo- 
rence, where the administration was, by turns, in the nobles, the 
grandees, the commons, the plebeians, the mob, the ruling pas- 
sion of each was the same ; and the government of each imme- 
diately degenerated into a tyranny so insupportable as to produce 
a fresh revolution. We have all along contended, that a simple 
government, in a single assembly, whether aristocratical or demo- 
cratical, must of necessity divide into two parties, each of which 
will be headed by some one illustrious family, and will proceed 
from debate and controversy to sedition and war. In Florence, 
the first dissension was among the nobility; the second between 
the nobles and commons ; and the third between the commons 
and plebeians. In each of which contests, as soon as one party 
got uppermost, it split into two ; and executions, confiscations, 
banishments, assassinations, and dispersions of families, were the 
fruit of every division, even with more atrocious aggravations 
than in those of Greece. Having no third order to appeal to for 
decision, no contest could be decided but by the sword. 

It will enable us the better to understand Machiavel, whose 
history will be abridged and commented on, if we premise from 
Nardi,* that " the city of Florence had, like all other cities, its 
people consisting of three genera of inhabitants, that is to say, 
the nobility, the people of property,! and the common peo- 
ple. Although some too diligently divided the nobility into 
three sorts, calling the first, nobles, the second, grandees, and the 
third, families ; meaning to signify, that some of the inhabitants 
had come into the city and become citizens, having been deprived 
of their own proper country by conquest, while they were attempt- 
ing to enlarge and extend their territories ; others, originally of 
this country, had become abundant in riches and powerful in 
dependents, either by their own industry or the favor of fortune; 
and others, having been foreigners, had come in like manner to 
inhabit the city, but, from their primitive condition, they still 
retained the distinctions of lord and vassal, by habit and by fraud, 
both in the city and the country. And all this mixture were 
indifferently called nobles, grandees, and families ; and they were 

* Le Tstorie della Ckth di Firenze, p. 1. 
t II popolo grasso, e il popolo nimuto. 

FLORENCE. 11 

equally hated, contradicted, and opposed, in the government of 
the republic, and in all their other actions, by that party which 
was called the substantial people, il popolo grasso. The lower 
class of people, the plebeians, il popolo minuto, never intervened 
in government at all, excepting on one single occasion, when, 
with violence, they usurped it, as in its proper place will be re- 
lated. Some persons made still another division of the plebeians, 
and not without reason ; for those who possessed real estate in 
the city or country, and were recorded in the public books of 
taxes and tributes of the city, and were called the Enregistered,* 
esteemed themselves, and were considered by their fellow-citizens, 
as holding a middle station. The remainder of the lower class, 
who possessed no kind of property, were held of no account. 
Nevertheless, all this undistinguished aggregate were called the 
people of Florence; and the expression is still in use, as the peo- 
ple of Athens, or the people of Rome, anciently comprehended 
the whole body of the inhabitants of those cities ; to which con- 
fused, and, in its nature, pernicious aggregate, as that of the head 
and tail always is, the body of middling citizens will always 
remain extremely useful, and proportioned to the constitution of 
a perfect republic." 

As Machiavel is the most favorable to a popular government, 
and is even suspected of sometimes disguising the truth to con- 
ceal or mollify its defects, the substance of this sketch will be 
taken from him, referring at the same time to other authors ; so 
that those young Americans who wish to be masters of the sub- 
ject, may be at no loss for information. 

" The most useful erudition for republicans is that ^ which ex- 
poses the causes of discord ; by which they may learn wisdom 
and unanimity from the examples of others. The factions in 
Florence are the most remarkable of any. Most other common- 
wealths have been divided into two ; that city was distracted 
into many. In Rome, the contest between patricians and ple- 
beians, which arose after the expulsion of kings, continued to the 
dissolution of the republic. The same happened in Athens, and 
all the other commonwealths of Greece, Italy, and Asia Minor. 

t Descritti. 

1 Istorie Florentine di Nic. Macchiavelli, Proemio deW Autore, The substance 
of tliis work is here given by the author, who now and then translates a passage 
literally, when he desires to comment on it. 

12 ON GOVERNMENT. 

Such was the patriotism or good fortune of Florence, that she 
seems to have gathered fresh vigor, and risen stronger for her 
factions. Some, who escaped in the struggles, contributed more 
by their courage and constancy to the exaltation of themselves 
and their country, than the malignity of faction had done to 
distress them. And if such orders and balances had been esta- 
blished in their form of government as would have kept the citi- 
zens united after they had shaken off the yoke of the empire, it 
might have equalled any republic, ancient or modern, in military 
power and the arts of peace." 

" The city of Florence^ was begun by the inhabitants of Fie- 
sole, who, situated on the top of a hill, marked out a plot of 
ground upon the plain between the hill and the river Arno, for 
the conveniency of merchants, who first built stores there for their 
goods. When the Romans had secured Italy by the destruction 
of Carthage, this place multiplied exceedingly, and became a city 
by the name of Villa Amina. Sylla was the first, and, after him, 
the three Roman citizens who revenged the death and divided the 
empire of Ceesar, who sent colonies to Fiesole, that settled in the 
plain, not far from the town ahready begun ; and the place be- 
came so full of buildings and inhabitants, and such provisions 
were made for a civil government, that it might well be reckoned 
among the cities of Italy. 

" Whence it took the name of Florence is not so well known. 
Tacitus calls the town Florentia, and the people Florentines. It 
was founded under the Roman empire ; but when that was over- 
run by barbarians, Totila, King of the Ostrogoths, took and de- 
molished it Two hundred and fifty years afterwards, it was 
rebuilt by Charlemagne, from whose time, till 1215, it followed 
the fortune of those who successively ruled in Italy; for, during 
that period, it was governed first by the posterity of Charlemagne, 
then by the Berengarii, and last of all by the German emperors. 
In 1010 the Florentines took and destroyed Fiesole. When the 
popes assumed greater authority in Italy, and the power of the 
German emperors was upon the wane, all the towns of that pro- 
vince began to govern themselves. In 1080 Italy was divided 
between Henry III. and the church. Until 1215, the Florentines 
always submitted to the strongest, having no other ambition 

1 Lib. ii. 

FLORENCE. 18 

than to preserve themselves. But as, in our bodies, the later 
diseases come, the more dangerous they are, so, the longer Flo- 
rence put off taking a part in the troubles of Italy, the more fatal 
these proved. 

" The cause of its first division is well known. The most pow- 
erful families in Florence, in 1215, were the Buondelmonti and 
the Uberti, and next to them the Amidei and Donati. A 
quarrel happened about a lady, and Messer Buondelmontc 
was killed. This murder divided the whole city, ^one part of 
it siding with the Buondelmonti, and the other with the Uberti ; 
and as both of the families were powerful in alliances, castles, 
and adherents, the quarrel continued many years, till the reign 
of the Emperor Frederick XL, who, being likewise King of 
Naples, and desirous to strengthen himself against the church, 
and establish his interest more securely in Tuscany, joined the 
Uberti, who by his assistance drove the Buondelmonti out of 
Florence ; and thus that city became divided, as all the rest of 
Italy was before, into the two factions of Guelphs and Ghibel- 
lines.* The Guelphs, thus driven out of the city, retired into the 
valley, which lies higher up the Arno, where their strong places 
and dependencies lay, and defended themselves as well as they 
could ; but when Frederick died, the neutral people in the city 

* The fonner of which denominated the adherents of the pope, and the latter 
those of the emperor; Guelph being the name of the general of the first army for 
the church in this controversy, and Ghibelline that of the place of birth of the 
general who commanded for the emperor, about 1139. 

Danina, Rivoluzioni d Italia. '* There flourished in Germany two principal 
fiunilies, the one called the Henries of Ghibllinga, and the other the Guelphs of 
Altdorp, which, by the marriage of Azzo d'Este with Cunegund, daughter of 
Guelph m., engrafted itself into the house of Este, called afterwards, for that 
reason, 6uel& Estense, from which are descended the Dukes of Modena, and 
those of Brunswick and Hanover. From the first of which fiunilies, namely, the 
Ghibellines, have arisen many kings and emperors, as the third, fourth, and fiilh 
Henry. Of the other, namely, the Guelphs, there had been for many years 
famous dukes, who, contending for power and for credit with the emperors, had 
very often disturbed the tranquillity of the state. Under the reign of Henry Y . 
these two families happily united in alliance, because Frederic, Duke of Suabia, 
married Judith, daughter of Henry, Duke of Bavaria, and sister of Guelph VI., 
who was at that time the head of the house of Altdorp." 

CoTnmentari ddfaUi civili occorsi dentro Fireme. iScritto dal Senatore Filippo 
de Nerli, p. 2. 

Historia FiorerUina di M. Piero Buoninsegni, Gentilhuomo Fiorentino, p. 85. 

Annali (Fltalia, da Muratori, tcnn. vii. pp. 150, 151, anno 1215. 

htoria civile del Regno di NajMli di Pietro Giannone, torn. iii. p. 83. 

Muratori, Disseriazioniy tom. lii. p. ISO. 

Muratori, ArUichitd Estensij parte prima, c. xxxl. p. 305. 

VOL. V. 2 

14 ON GOVERNMENT. 

endeavored to reunite it, and prevailed upon the Guelphs to 
forget the wrongs they had Buffered, and return, and the Ghibel- 
lines to dismiss their jealousies, and receive them. 

After they were reunited, they divided the city into six parts, 
and chose twelve citizens, two to govern each ward, with the 
title of Anziani, but to be changed every year. To prevent any 
feuds or discontents that might arise from the determination of 
judicial matters, they constituted two judges that were not Flo- 
rentines, one of whom was styled the captain of the people, and 
the other the podesta, to administer justice to the people, in all 
causes civil and criminal; and since laws are but of little authority 
and short duration, where there is not sufficient power to support 
and enforce them, they raised twenty bands or companies in the 
city, and seventy-six more in the rest of their territories, in which 
all the youth were enlisted, and obliged to be ready armed under 
their respective colors, whenever they were required so to be by 
the captain or the anziani. Their standard-bearers were changed 
every year with great formality." 

This is the very short description of their constitution. The 
twelve anziani appear to have had the legislative and executive 
authority, and to have been annually eligible — a form of govern- 
ment as near that of M. Turgot, and Marchmont Nedham, as 
any to be found; — yet the judicial power is here separated, and 
the people could so little trust themselves or the anziani with 
this power, that it was given to foreigners. 

" By such discipline in their civil and military affairs, the Flo- 
rentines laid the foundation of their liberty; and it is hardly to 
be conceived, how much strength and authority they acquired in 
a very short time ; for their city not only became the capital of 
Tuscany, but was reckoned among the principal in Italy; and, 
indeed, there is no degree of grandeur to which it might not have 
attained, if it had not been obstructed by new and frequent 
factions,^^ 

After this pompous preamble, one can scarce read without 
smiling the words that follow : " For the space of ten years tiiey 
lived under this form of government ; " especially when it appears 
that, during all these ten years, they were constantly employed 
in wars abroad, as appears by the following words : " During 
which time they forced the states of Pistoia, Arezzo, and Siena, 
to enter into a confederacy with them ; and in their return with 

FLORENCE. 15 

their army from the last city, they took Voltenra, demolished 
several castles, and brought the inhabitants to Florence." 

The United States of America calculated their governments 
for a duration of more than ten years. There is little doubt to 
be made, that they might have existed under the government of 
state congresses for ten years, while they were constantly at war, 
and all the active and idle were in council or in arms ; but we 
have seen, that a state which could be governed by a provincial 
congress, and, indeed, that could carry on a war without any 
government at all, while danger pressed, has lately, in time of 
profound peace, and mider a good government, broke out in 
seditions.^ 

This democratical government in Florence could last no longer; 
^ For in all these expeditions," says Machiavel, <' the Guelphs had 
the chief direction and command, as they were much more popu- 
lar than the Ghibellines, who had behaved themselves so impe- 
riously in the reign of Frederick, when they had the upper hand, 
that they were become very odious to the people ; and because 
the party of the church was generally thought to favor their 
attempts to preserve their liberty, whilst that of the emperor 
endeavored to deprive them of it. 

" The Ghibellines, in the mean time, finding their authority so 
dwindled, were not a little discontented, and only waited for a 
proper opportunity to seize upon the government again. They 
entered into correspondence with Manfred, the son of Frederick, 
Sling of Naples, in hopes of his assistance ; but, for want of due 
secrecy in these practices, they were discovered by the anziani, 
who thereupon summoned the family of the Uberti to appear 
before them; but, instead of obeying, they took up arms, and 
fortified themselves in their houses ; at which the people were so 
incensed, that they likewise ran to arms, and, by the help of the 
Guelphs, obliged the whole party of the Ghibellines to quit Flo- 
rence, and transport themselves to Siena. There they sued to 
Manfred for aid, who granted it ; and the Guelphs were defeated 
upon the banks of the river Arbia, with such slaughter, by the 
king's forces under the conduct of Farinata de gli Uberti, that 
those who escaped from it, giving up their city for lost, fled 
directly to Lucca. Manfred had given the command of the 

1 This alludes to the state of things existing in Massachusetts in 1 786, and to 
the insurrection of Shays and others. 

16 ON GOVERNMENT. 

auxiliaries, which he sent to the Ghibellines, to Count Giordano, 
a soldier of no small reputation in those times. This Giordano, 
after his victory, immediately advanced with the Ghibellines to 
Florence, and not only forced the city to acknowledge Manfred 
for its sovereign, but deposed the magistrates, and either entirely 
abrogated or altered all laws and customs that might look Uke 
remains of their former liberty ; which being executed with great 
rigor and insolence, inflamed the people to such a degree, that if 
they did not love the Ghibellines beforci they now became their 
inveterate and implacable enemies ; which aversion continually 
increasing, at last proved their utter destruction." 

There is an admirable example of patriotism at this period of 
the Florentine history, in Farinata Uberti, who successfully and 
decidedly opposed a plan of his own party of Ghibellines and 
their allies, for the demolition of the city. He preserved it, how- 
ever, only for his enemies the Guelphs, who, driven out of Lucca, 
went to Parma, and joined their friends the Guelphs in that city, 
drove out the Ghibellines, and had their confiscated estates for 
their reward. They then joined the pope against Manfred, who 
was defeated and slain. 

" In consequence of this victory, the Guelphs of Florence grew 
daily bolder and more vigorous, and the party of the Ghibellines 
weaker and weaker; upon which Count Guido NoveUo, and 
those that were left in commission with him to govern Florence, 
resolved to try, by lenity and gentler treatment, to recover the 
affections of the people, whom they found they had exasperated 
to the last degree by their oppressive and violent manner of pro- 
ceeding. To cajole and ingratiate themselves with the people, 
they chose six-and-thirty citizens out of the people of Florence, 
and two gentlemen of higher rank from among their friends at 
Bologna, to whom they gave a commission to reform the state. 
These delegates divided the city into distinct arts or trades, over 
which they constituted a magistrate, who was to administer jus- 
tice to all who were in his department ; and to every art a sepa- 
rate banner was assigned, under which they might assemble in 
arms, whenever the safety 'of the public required it 

" But Count Guido must have a tax to maintain his soldiers. 
The citizens would not pay it He attempted to take back the 
new privilege of magbtrates to each trade. The people rose in 
arms, chose Giovanni Soldanieri for their leader, fought the Count 

FLORENCE. 17 

and his Ghibellines, and drove them out of the city. The people, 
having thus got the upper hand, resolved to unite the city, if 
possible, and recall all such citizens as had been forced to leave 
their homes, whether Guelphs or Ghibellines. The Guelphs 
returned, after six years' banishment; the late attempt of the 
Ghibellines was pardoned, and they were suffered to come back 
again; but they still continued very odious both to the Guelphs 
and the people, the former not being able to forgive the disgrace 
and hardships of their long exile, nor the latter to forget their 
insolence and tyranny when they had the government in their 
hands ; so that their ancient animosities were not yet entirely 
extinguished, either on one side or the other." 

The wrangle soon came to a crisis, and the Ghibellines jfled 
out of the city, upon the interposition of a foreign force from 
Charles, King of Naples, in favor of the Guelphs. 

"After the departure of the Ghibellines, the Florentines new- 
modelled their government, and chose twelve principal magis- 
trates, who were to continue in authority no longer than two 
months, under the title of buoni homini. Next in power under 
them they appointed a council of eighty citizens, which they 
called the Credenza. After this, a hundred and eighty more 
were elected out of the people, thirty to serve for each sixth, 
who, together with the credenza and the twelve buoni homini, 
were called the General Council. Besides which, they instituted 
another council, consisting of a hundred and twenty members, 
equally chosen out of the nobility, citizens, and commonalty, 
which was to confirm whatsoever had been resolved upon by the 
others, and to act jointly with them in disposing of the public 
honors and offices of the commonwealth." 

The first government of the anziani was as near a simple 
democracy as there is any example of; we found it, accordingly, 
ineffectual. The next, of buoni homini, was no better ; and that 
could not support itself. Now we come to a new plan, which 
discovers, in the authors of it, a sense of the imperfection of 
the former two, and an attempt to obviate its inconveniences 
and dangers; but instead of a judicious plan, founded in the 
natural divisions of the people, it is a jumble which common 
sense would see, at this day, must faU to pieces. The buoni 
homini, the credenza, and the thirty of the hundred and eighty, 
wore an appearance of three orders ; but, instead of being kept 

18 ON GOVERNMENT. 

separate, they are all huddled together in the general council. 
Another council still, of a hundred and twenty, equally chosen 
out of the nobility, citizens, and commonalty, was to confirm 
whatever was resolved on by the others. Here are two branches, 
with each a negative. But the mistake was, that the aristocratical 
and democratical parts of the community were mixed in each of 
them ; which shows, at first blush, that there never could be har- 
mony in either, both being naturally and necessarily split into 
two factions. But a greater defect, if possible, than even this, 
was giving the executive power, the power of disposing of public 
honors and offices, to a joint assemblage of buoni homini, ere* 
denza, and the two other assemblies, aU in one. The consequence 
must be, that although every one of these four orders must be 
divided at once into factions for the loaves and fishes, yet the 
nobility, by their superior influence in elections, would have the 
whole power. 

Unhappy Florence! thou art destined from this moment to 
never-ending factions, seditions, and civil wars! Accordingly, 
we read in the next page, what any one might have foreseen 
from this sketch of their constitution, " that the government of 
Florence was fallen into great disorder and misrule; for the 
Guelph nobility, being the majority, were grown so insolent, and 
stood in so little awe of the magistracy," (and how could they 
stand in awe of magistrates whom they had created, and who 
were ever at their devotion ?) " that though many murders, and 
other violences, were daily committed, yet the criminals generally 
escaped with impunity, through favor of one or other of the 
nobles." 

" In order to restrain these enormities, instead of twelve go- 
vernors, they resolved to have fourteen, seven of each party, who 
should be nominated by the pope, and remain in office one year. 
Under this form of government, in which they had been obliged 
in reality to submit to a foreign master, they continued for two 
years, when the rage of faction again blazed out They rose in 
arms, and put the city under a new regulation. This was in 
1282, when the companies of arts and trades ordained, that 
instead of fourteen citizens, three only should govern, and that 
for two months, who were to be chosen indifferently out of the 
nobility or commons, provided they were merchants, or professed 
any art or occupation ; and these were called priori. Afterwards, 

FLORENCE. 19 

the chief magistracy was vested in six persons, one for each ward, 
under which regulation the city continued till the year 1342." ^ 

But the course of events for these sixty years should be care- 
fully traced, in order to see the operation of such a form of 
government, even in a single city. This institution, as might be 
expected, occasioned the ruin of the nobility, who, upon divers 
provocations, were excluded, and entirely suppressed by the peo- 
ple. The nobility, indeed, were divided among themselves ; and 
by endeavoring to supplant each other, and aspiring to the sole 
government of the conmionwealth, they quite lost all share in it 
The priori were afterwards distinguished by the name of signori. 

<' There remained some sparks of animosity betwixt the nobi- 
lity and commonalty, which are incident to all republics ; for one 
side being naturally jealous of any encroachment upon their 
liberty and legal rights, and the other ambitious to rule and con- 
trol the laws, it is not possible they should ever long agree toge- 
ther. This humor, however, did not show itself in the nobility 
while they were overawed by the Ghibellines; but when the 
latter were depressed, it began to appear, and the people were 
daily injured and abused in such a manner, that neither the laws 
nor the magistracy had authority enough to relieve them; as 
every nobleman supported himself in his insolence by the number 
of his friends and relations, both against the power of the signori 

1 " Ce fut Tan 1282 que les Florentins ^tablirent la forme de gouvernement 
aulls ont conserv^e jusqu'^ la chute de leur r^publiquCf et qui, supprim^e par 
Alexandre de M^dicis, le 27 Avril, 15S2, fut r^tablie par Pierre I^opold, & la fin 
du si^cle pass^, et n*est pas meme abeolument d^truite aujourd'hui. Je veux 
parler des prieurs des arts et de la liberty, dont le college fut appel6 la seignett- 
rie. Depuis la paix int6rieure, conclue par le cardinal Latino, Florence itoit 
gouvemee par quatorze prud'hommes, dont huit Guelfes et six Gibelins ; mais 
r^tat paroissoit soufinr de ce que le pouvoir ex^cutif 6toit confix k un conseil trop 
nombreux pour pouvoir jamais etre unanime ; k un conseil qui, par sa compo- 
sition meme, avoit en soi les principes de la discorde, et oti Tesprit de parti don- ' 
noit une place. La jalousie du peuple contre les grands nuisoit aussi k ce college, 
dont plusieurs membres ^toient gentilshonmies; on ne cessoit de r^p^ter que dans 
une republique marchande, personne ne devoit avoir part k Tadministration si 
lui-m6me il n'etoit marchand. Les Florentins, en effet, au milieu de Juin, 1 282, 
insdtutont une nouvelle magistrature toute d^mocratique ; ils en nommdrent les 
membres, prieurs des arts, comme pour indiquer que Tassembl^e des premiers 
citoyens de chaque metier devoit representor toute la r^publique. A la premiere 
Election, on ne crut pas devoir admettre tous les metiers indifii&remment k la 
prerogative de donner des chefs a I'^tat. On se boma d*abord aux trois arts que 
Ton regarda comme les plus nobles ; mais d^s la seconde Election, c'est-&-dire 
deux mens apr^, on douola le nombre des prieurs, pour qu'il y en edt un de 
chacun des arts majeurs, et en m^me temps de chacun des six quartiers de la 
ville." Sismondi, Hist, des RipuUiqucs Itaiiennes, vol. iv. p. 52. 

20 ON GOVERNMENT. 

and the captain of the people. ^ The heads of the arts, wishing 
to remedy so great an evil, provided that every signory should 
appoint a standard-bearer of justice, out of the people, with a 
thousand men divided into twenty companies, under him, who 
should be always ready with their standard and arms whenever 
ordered by the magistracy. This establishment met little oppo- 
sition, on account of the jealousy and emulation that reigned 
among the nobility, who were not in the least aware that it was 
levelled at them, till they felt the smart of it. Then, indeed, they 
were not a little awed by it for some time ; but in a while they 
returned to the commission of their former outrages; for as some 
of them always found means to insinuate themselves into the 
signory, they had it in their power to prevent the standard-bearer 
from executing his office. Besides, as witnesses were always 
required upon any accusation, the plaintiff could hardly ever find 
any one that durst give evidence against the nobility; so that in 
a short time Florence was involved in its former distractions, and 
the people exposed to violence and oppression ; as justice was 
grown dilatory, and sentence, though passed, seldom or never 
executed. 

" The people not knowing what course to take, Giano della 
Bella, a strenuous patriot, though of a very noble family, encour- 
aged the heads of the arts once more to reform the city. By his 
advice it was enacted, that the gonfalonier should always reside 
with the signori, and have four thousand armed men under his 
command. They also entirely excluded the nobility out of that 
council of the signori, and made a law that all accessaries or 
abettors should be liable to the same punishment with those that 
were principals in any crime, and that common fame should be 
sufficient evidence to convict them. By these laws, which were 
called Li Ordinamenti della Giustizia," ^ (but which were in reality 

1 " Four le maintien de la liberty et de la justice, elle sanctionna la jurispru- 
dence la plus tyrannique et la plus iniuste. Trente-sept families, les plus nooles 
et les plus respectables de Florence, mrent exclues k jamais du priorat, sans qu*il 
leur tat permis de recouvrer les droits de cit6, en se faisant immatriculer dans 
quelque corps de metier, ou en exer^ant quelque profession. Cette exclusion fut 
fondle sur la faveur que les nobles, disoit on, accordoicnt toujours aux autres 
nobles ; c'^toit eux qu'on accusoit d'aToir paralyse la seigneurie, et Ton pr^ten- 
doit c[ue jamais elle n'avoit d^ploy^ de vigueur, lorsque quelque gentilhomme 
si^goit parmi les prieurs. La seigneurie fut de plus autorisee ^ insurer de nou- 
veaux noms dans cette liste d'exclusion, toutes les fois que quelque autre fiunille, 
en marchant sur les traces de la noblesse, m^riteroit d'etre punie comme elle. 
Les membres de ces trente-sept families furent design^s, meme dans les lois, par 

FLORENCE. 21 

as tyrannical as the edicts of any despot could be,) << the people 
regained great weight and authority. But Giano being looked 
upon by the nobility as the author of these laws to bridle their 
power, became very odious, not only to them, but to the richest 
of the commonalty." 

As well he might, for laws more oppressive and destructive of 
liberty could not have been made. Tyrannical as they were, 
however, they were not enough so for the people. " For upon 
the trial of Corso Donati, a nobleman, for a murder, although he 
was acquitted even under these new laws, the people were en- 
raged, and ran to arms, and demolished the magistrate's house, 
instead of applying to the signori. The whole city exceedingly 
resented this outrage upon all law and government ; the blame 
of it was laid upon Giano, and he was accused before the magis- 
trates as an encourager of insurrection. While his cause was 
depending, the people took arms to defend him against the 
signori. Giano went voluntarily into banishment, to appease 
this tumult 

" The nobility then petitioned the signori, that the severity of 
the laws against them might be mitigated. As soon as this 
petition was publicly known, the commons, apprehending the 
signori would comply with it, immediately rose in a tumultuous 
manner; so that ambition on one side, and jealousy on the other, 
at last occasioned an open rupture between them, and both sides 
were prepared for battle ; but by the interposition and mediation 
of some prudent men, whose arguments with both parties were 
very judicious, the people at last consented that no accusation 
should be admitted against a nobleman, without sufficient evi- 
dence to support it. 

'* Both parties laid down their arms, but retained their jealou- 
sies, and began soon to raise forces, and fortify themselves as 
fast as they could. The people thought fit to new-model the 
government, and reduce the number of the signori, as they 
suspected some of that body to be too favorably inclined to the 
nobility. 

"A momentary tranquillity succeeded ; but the sparks of jea- 
lousy and envy still remained betwixt the nobility and people, 

les noma de grands et de magnats ; et pour la premiere fois, on -vit un titre 
d'honneur devenir non-eeulement un fardeau on^reux, mais une punition." Sis- 
mondi, lUpubliques Italiennes, toI. iv. pp. 63, 64. 

22 ON GOVERNMENT. 

which soon broke out, on occasion of a quarrel between two 
families, the Cerchi and Donati, both considerable for their riches, 
nobility, and dependents. The signori were under no small 
apprehensions that the whole city would become engaged in the 
dispute, and hourly expected the two parties would openly attack 
each other, as soon afterwards happened, and a skirmish ensued, 
in which many were wounded on both sides. The whole city, 
commons as well as nobility, divided upon it ; nor did the conta- 
gion confine itse|f to the city alone, but infected all the country. 
So ineffectual was this contemptible government of the signori 
to the suppression of this animosity, that the pope was applied 
to. He sent his nuncio to no purpose, and then put the city 
under an interdict; but this answered no end but to increase the 
confusion; and frequent battles took place, till the whole city 
took arms, neither the power of the magistracy, nor the authority 
of the laws, being able to restrain the fury of the multitude. 
The wisest and best of the citizens were in great terror; and the 
Donati, being the weaker party, not a little doubtful of their 
safety." 

Such is the effect of a government of all authority in one 
centre. Here all was concentrated in the signori, chosen by the 
people frequently enough ; yet although the nobility were arbi- 
trarily excluded from that council, those who were chosen were 
indebted for their elections, probably to those very nobles, and 
chiefly to the Donati and Cerchi. 

" The Donati were the minority, upon the whole, and there- 
fore had great reason to be doubtful of their safety. It was 
agreed, at a meeting betwixt Corso Donati, the heads of the 
Neri family, and the captains of the arts,^ to solicit the pope 

^ This is an error in translation by the author, growing out of a misconception 
of the office referred to. The words in the original are " Capitani di parte/* 
" They were the elective heads of the Guelph party, three in number." Italian 
Republics — Lardner's Cabinet CyclopcRdia^ p. 1S5, note. 

Lord Broi^ham describes them a« llie heads of ** a complete party govern- 
ment within the govemment of the state. The Guelphs chose every two months 
their consuls, called party captains, who had their secret council of fourteen 
members, their ^enend council of sixty, three priors, a treasurer, and a prose- 
cutor of Ghibellmes. There never certainly was an instance of any party feud 
being in any country so disci{)lined and so wielded. The vigorous administra- 
tion, not only of its own affairs, but those of the republic which it governed, 
was the result Had the Jacobin club at Paris been a more regular body, and 
continued to govern in quiet times, it would have formed a second instance of 
the same sort.** Political Philosophy, part 2, p. 346. 

It is not difficult to percpivc the elements of an organization in many respects 

FLOBENCE. 23 

to send some person of royal extraction to reform the city." 
Here nature breaks out, in spite of all attempts to stifle it A 
royal dignity is the most obvious thought, to extinguish animo- 
sities between nobles and commons. In this case, the captains 
of the arts, that is, the people, perceived it, as well as Corso 
and the Neri, the contending nobles. This meeting, and the 
result of it, was notified to the signori by the other party, who 
represented it as a conspiracy against the public liberty. Both 
sides, however, were in arms again, and Dante, who was one of 
the signori, had the courage to advise that sovereign assembly to 
arm the people ; and they, being joined by great numbers out of 
the country, found themselves able to force the chiefs of each party 
to lay down their arms. They assumed an appearance of dig- 
nity, banished Ck)rso and the Neri, and, to show their impar- 
tiality, several of the Bianchi. 

" But this government had no permanent strength ; the Bi- 
anchi, upon plausible pretences, were soon permitted to return. 
Corso, and his associates, obtained the same indulgence ; but, 
instead of being quiet, they went to Rome, to persuade the pope 
to appoint a person of royal extraction, as they had before peti- 
tioned his holiness in their letters. Charles of Valois, brother 
of the King of France, was sent accordingly by the pope. 
Though the Bianchi family, who then had the upper hand in 
Florence, looked upon him with an evil eye; yet as he was 
patron of the Guelphs, and sent by the pope, they durst not 
oppose his coming ; on the contrary, to make him their friend, 
they gave him full power to regulate the city as he thought best. 
He caused his friends to arm themselves. This made the people 
so jealous that he intended to deprive them of what they called 
their liberties, that they took arms. 

'^ The Cerchi, and the heads of the Bianchi, having had the 
chief government of the city some time in their hands, and 
behaved with great arrogance, were become generally odious; 
which encouraged Corso, and others of the Neri who had fled, to 
return upon an assurance that Charles and the captains of the 
party were their friends, and would support them. Accordingly, 
whilst the city was thus alarmed with the apprehensions of 

not unlike this, at some time or other, in the United States, the concentration 
of which has been thus far counteracted only by the increasing territorial surface 
of the countr}'. 

24 ON GOVERXMENT. 

Charles's designs, Corso, with all his associates, and many other 
of their followers, made their entry into it without resistance ; 
and though Veri de Cerchi was called upon to oppose them, he 
declined it, and said, ' The people against whom they came, 
should themselves chastise them, as they were likely to be the 
greatest sufferers by them.' But the contrary happened ; for 
instead of chastising them, they received them with open arms, 
whilst Veri was forced to fly for his safety. Corso having forced 
his entrance at the Porta Pinti, drew up and made a stand near 
his own house ; and being joined by a great number of his 
friends and others, assembled in hopes of a change of govern- 
ment, he released all prisoners, civil and criminal ; divested the 
signori of their authority ; chose new magistrates, all of the party 
of the Neri, out of the people, to supply their places ; and plun- 
dered the houses of the Bianchi. The Cerchi, and the heads of 
their faction, seeing the people, for the most part, their enemies, 
and Charles not their friend, fled out of the city, and in their 
turn implored the interposition of the pope, though they would 
not listen to his exhortations before." 

Such is the series of alternate tragedy, comedy, and farce, 
which was called the liberty of Florence during this "collection 
of all authority into one centre," the signori ; in which no man 
of any party could be one moment secure of his life, property, or 
liberty, amidst continual exaltations and depressions of parties, 
in favor of different noble families. Although those nobles were 
all excluded from the government, the exclusion was but a form. 
Nearly all the power was in their hands, and the signori in 
office were only alternate tools of one noble family or another. 
And thus it must ever be ; exclude the aristocratical part of the 
community by laws as tyrannical as you will, they will still 
govern the state underhand ; the persons elected into oflice will 
be their tools, and, in constant fear of them, will behave like 
mere puppets danced upon their wires. But our humorous 
entertainment is not yet ended. 

" The pope now, at the intercession of the Cerchi, sent a 
legate, Acqua-Sparta, to Florence, who made an accommoda- 
tion betwixt the Cerchi and Donati, and fortified it by several 
intermarriages between them. But this spiritual policy, though 
deep and sound, did not answer his end ; for when he insisted 
that the Bianchi should share in the chief offices of the common- 

FLORENCE. 25 

wealth, that was refased by the Neri, who were in full posses- 
sion of them. Upon this the legate left the city as dissatisfied as 
ever, and excommunicated it a second time for its contumacy. 

" The Neri, however, seeing their old enemies in their bosom 
again, were not a little afraid they would use all means to ruin 
them in order to recover their former authority ; and both par- 
ties were still discontented, and fresh occasions of discord soon 
occurred. Niccolo de Cerchi and Simon, a son of Corso Donati, 
met and fought The battle was so sharp and bloody that 
Niccolo was killed upon the spot, and Simon so desperately 
wounded that he died the same night" 

This accident, as it is called, though an event springing 
necessarily from the form of government and state of parties, 
threw the whole city into an uproar again ; <^ and although the 
Neri were the most in fault, as Simon assaulted Niccolo, yet 
they were screened by the magistracy, and, before judgment 
could be obtained, a conspiracy was discovered betwixt the 
Bianchi and Pietro Ferrante, a nobleman who attended Charles 
of Yalois, with whom they had been tampering, to persuade his 
master to reinstate them in the government The plot was 
detected by some letters from the Cerchi to Pietro; though it 
was the common opinion they were forged by the Donati, to 
wipe off the odium they had incurred by the murder of Niccolo 
de Cerchi. Nevertheless all the family of the Cerchi, with many 
of their followers of the Bianchi party, and among the rest Dante 
the poet,* were immediately sent into banishment, their estates 
confiscated and their houses demolished by the strength of those 
forged letters ; after which, their party, with many of the 
Ghibellines who had joined them, were dispersed in different 
places. 

" The quiet that ensued was very short ; for Corso Donati 
was dissatisfied that he did not enjoy the degree of authority in 
Florence he thought due to his merit, the government being in 
the hands of the people, and conducted by those who were in 
all respects much inferior to him. To varnish over his designs 
and revenge with a fair pretext, he accused several citizens who 
had been entrusted with public money with embezzling it, and 
many were ignorant and credulous enough to believe that Corso 

m 

* 1298. Nerli, p. 9. 
VOL. V. 3 

26 ON GOVERNMENT. 

did this oat of pure concern and affection for his country. The 
persons thus calumniated were in favor with the people, and 
stood upon their justification ; and after many law suits and long 
litigations, these disputes grew to such a height that it became 
absolutely necessary to take up arms. On one side were Corso 
and Lottieri, Bishop of Florence, with many of the nobility and 
some of the commons ; on the other were the signori and the 
greater part of the people ; nothing was to be seen but af&ays 
and skirmishes in every part of the city." 

In such a ^ right constitution " as this, such a government of 
"the people's successive sovereign assemblies," as the signori 
were, the body of the nation never can be unanimous ; all the 
most wealthy, best-born, best-educated, and ablest men, will 
unanimously despise and detest the government, except a few 
artful hypocrites among them, who will belie their judgments 
and feelings for the sake of a present popularity for some private 
ends. Those who thus hate the form of government will have 
numerous connections, relations, and dependents among the 
people, who will follow them ; so that there never can be more 
than a small majority of the people on the side of government 
Hence its constant weakness ; hence it is a mere football con- 
tinually kicked from one side to another by three or four princi- 
pal families. Thus it appeared in this case. 

" The signori, feeling their weakness, and perceiving them- 
selves in great danger, utterly unable to punish crimes, support 
their friends, or curb their enemies, were obliged to send to 
Lucca, a foreign state, for aid, and were fortunate enough to 
find all the people of that city willing to come to their assist- 
ance. The tumults were composed for a time, but the signori 
and people were too feeble to punish the author of the disturb- 
ance." 

This interval of tranquillity was no more durable than former 
ones. 

" The pope again sent his legate, Niccolo da Prato,* who 
ingratiated himself with the people, so that they gave him a 
commission to new-model the city. In order to obtain the 
recall of the Ghibelline faction from banishment, he flattered the 
people by restoring their ancient companies, which added much 

• 1303. Nerli, p. 9. 

FLORENCE. 27 

to their strength and diminished that of the nobility. But the 
project of restoring the exiles was obnoxious to the signori, who 
forced the legate out of the city, which he put under an inter- 
dict at his departure, and left in the utmost confusion. 

" Two factions not being sufficient, the city was now divided 
and subdivided into several ; as those of the people and nobility, 
the Guelphs and Ghibellines, the Bianchi and the Neri; and 
some who wished for the return of the exiles, being disappointed 
in their hopes, now the legate was gone, grew clamorous and 
outrageous, so that the whole city was in an uproar, and many 
skirmishes ensued. Those that were most active in raising this 
clamor were the Medici and Giugni, who had openly sided with 
the legate in favor of the exiles." 

This is the first mention made of that family of Medici, who 
acted so distinguished a part afterwards, finally subverted the 
commonwealth, and changed it into an absolute sovereignty 
under the title of a grand dukedom, a form it still wears. 

Let us look back to 1282, when this government of priori or 
signori, chosen every two months by the people, was established ; 
from thence to 1304 is only twenty-two years, in which we see 
a constant quarrel between the nobility and people, and between 
one party of nobles and another, and the neighboring states of 
Naples, Rome, and Lucca, in turn, called in to aid the different 
factions ; alternate murders, banishments, confiscations, and 
civil wars, as one party and the other prevailed ; and, instead of 
a government and a system of justice and liberty, constant 
anarchy, and the perpetual rolling of a mob. 

In this year, 1304, Florence was visited in this lamentable 
manner with fire and sword. A great fire broke out, and was 
ascribed, as usual in such times, by some to accident, and by 
some to party design. Corso Donati was the only person of 
any distinction who did not take up arms ; he thought that 
when all parties grew tired of fighting he was the more likely to 
be called in arbitrator to decide their differences. They did 
indeed lay down their arms, but more out of weariness of their 
miseries, and that they might have time to take breath, than 
from any real desire of being reunited and living in peace. It 
was only stipulated that the exiles should not be suffered to 
return, which was agreed to by those that favored them, merely 
because they proved to be the weaker side. 

28 ON GOVERNMENT. 

" New disturbances arising, the pope was advised by his 
legate to summon to Rome twelve of the principal malcontents 
of Florence, They readily obeyed the summons, and among 
them was Corso Donati. As soon as they were set out upon their 
journey, the legate acquainted the exiles that now was their 
time to return to Florence, as the city was then clear of the 
only men that had authority enough to oppose their entrance. 
Drawing together what forces they could, they immediately 
marched and entered the city ; but those very citizens, who but 
a little before, when they petitioned in the most humble and 
submissive manner to be admitted, had exerted themselves in the 
most strenuous manner for their return, now they saw them 
approach in a hostile manner, were the first that took up arms 
against them, and joined with the people to drive them back." 

One is, however, astonished at the reflection of Machiavel, — 
" Such was the spirit of patriotism amongst them in those days 
that they cheerfully gave up their private interests for the public 
good," — when every page of his history shows that the public 
good was sacrificed every day by all parties to their private 
interests, friendships, and enmities. 

" After the exiles were repulsed, the citizens relapsed into their 
former distractions ; and after much violence the governors of 
the commonwealth reestablished the companies of the people, 
and restored the colors under which the arts had formerly been 
used to assemble. Their captains were called standard-bearers 
of the companies and colleagues of the signori, and were directed 
not only to assist the signori in times of peace with their coun- 
sel, but to support and defend them by dint of arms in all exi- 
gencies and commotions. To assist the two judges who had 
been constituted in the beginning of their state, they appointed 
an officer called il esecuiore or sheriff, who was to act in con- 
junction with the standard-bearers and see their orders carried 
into execution, whenever the nobility should be guilty of any 
enormity or act of oppression. 

" The pope died, the eleven citizens returned with Corso, 
whose restless ambition occasioned such troubles. In order to 
make himself popular, he constantly opposed the nobility in all 
their schemes, and which way soever he observed the people to 
incline, he turned all his authority to support them in it and gain 
their affection ; so that in all contests and divisions, or when 

FLORENCE. 29 

they had any extraordinary point to carry, they always resorted 
to him and put themselves under his directions." 

Machiavel indeed observes, " that all might now have lived in 
peace, if the restless ambition of Corso had not occasioned fresh 
troubles." But in this Machiavel is mistaken ; if Corso had not 
existed, the people would have found some other leader and con- 
fidant. When the people feel that the government is unable or 
unwilling to protect them against the oppressions of the nobles, 
they always seek out a Cassius, Maelius, Manlius, or Corso, to 
assist the old or to erect a new government that will be able and 
willing to protect them. It is the defect in the government and 
the wants of the people, that excite and inspirit the ambition of 
private men. To be sure, the man of any distinction who 
listens to the complaints of the people in such cases, whether 
from ambition or humanity, always creates for himself much 
hatred and envy among the most considerable citizens. 

'' In this instance, these passions increased to such a degree 
that the faction of the Neri divided and quarrelled among them- 
selves. To alienate the affections of the people from Corso, they 
gave out, as the aristocracy always does in such cases, that he 
secretly designed to seize upon the government and make him- 
self king ; and his magnificent manner of living, and marriage 
into the family of Faggivola, head of the Bianchi and Ghibel- 
lines, made it easily believed. 

^ Encouraged by this, his enemies took up arms against him, 
and the greater part of the people, instead of appearing in his 
defence, forsook him and joined his adversaries. He was 
impeached, refused to obey the summons, and was declared a 
contumacious rebel. Between the accusation and the sentence 
there was not the interval of more than two hours. A civil war 
ensued; many were killed on both sides. After a furious 
defence Corso threw himself from his horse and was killed. 
Such was the unfortunate end * of Corso Donati, to whom his 
country and the Neri owed much both of their good and bad 
fortune, one of the most eminent men that Florence ever pro- 
duced." 

But Machiavel should have laid the blame upon the constitu- 
tion, not upon the restless disposition or turbulent spirit of 

Neidi, p. 9. 

3* 

30 ON GOVERNMENT. 

Corso ; because it is impossible for a man of Corso's genius, 
valor, and activity, in such a government, not to be restless and 
turbulent ; he is never safe himself, and large bodies of people 
are continually flattering and soliciting him, while others are 
threatening and persecuting him. No nation has a right to 
blame such a citizen until it has established a form of govern- 
ment that is capable of protecting him on one side, and the peo- 
ple against him on the other. This flimsy sovereignty of the 
signori was inadequate to either purpose. 

After the death of Corso the exiles from Florence excited 
Henry * the emperor to a war against that city for their restora- 
tion ; the magistrates applied to Robert, King of Naples, and 
gave him the government of the city for five years to defend it 
and protect them. This storm, after raging some time, blew 
over by the death of the emperor.f The Ghibellines then, under 
the command of Faggivola, renewed the war by making them- 
selves masters of Pisa and committing depredations on the 
Florentine territories. The Florentines fought him and were 
totally defeated. They then applied to King Robert J for 
another general ; he sent them the Count di Andria, whose bad 
conduct, " added," says Machiavel, " to the impatient temper of 
the Florentines, which is soon tired with any form of govern- 
ment, and ready to fall into factions upon every accident," occa- 
sioned the city to divide again. MachiavePs severity ought) 
however, to have been applied to the form of government, not to 
the temper of the people, the latter being but the natural and 
necessary effect of the former. In such a government the people 
have no protection or security ; they are continually oppressed, 
vexed, and irritated by one faction or another, one ally or enemy, 
or another, one aspiring citizen or family, or another, against 
whose usurpations, as the constitution affords no redres^s, they 
are obliged to recur to arras and a change of government. 

" The Florentines in this case sought assistance from France 
and Germany, but could obtain none; they were determined, 
however, to carry their point, took arms, drove the Count out of 
the city, and sent for one Lando, of Agobbio, and made him 
their esecutore, or rather dictator or executioner, § with full 

* Nerli, p. 10. f Nerli, p. 10. 

J Nerli, p. 10. Muratori, Annal. torn. viii. p. 40. 

§ Nerli, p. 10. ^^ Bargello^ sheriff or executive officer of the law. Machia- 

FLORENCE. 31 

x)wer over all the citizens. Lando being naturally rapacious 
and cruel went about the city with a gang of armed men at his 
heels, hanging up one man and then another, as those who had 
sent for him gave him directions ; and at last to such a height 
of power did he arrive by the dissensions of the citizens, as to 
coin bad money with the Florentine stamp, which nobody had 
courage enough to oppose. Miserable indeed was the condition 
of the city at that time, which neither the bitter remembrance of 
the evils produced by their former dissensions, nor the dread of 
a foreign enemy at their gates, nor the authority of a king, was 
sufficient to keep united, even though their possessions were 
daily ravaged and plundered abroad by Faggivola, and at home 
by Lando. 

'^ The nobility, most of the considerable commons, and all the 
Guelphs took the king's side, and opposed Lando and those who 
supported him ; and to free themselves from so ignominious a 
yoke they wrote to King Robert privately, and entreated him to 
appoint Count Guido his lieutenant at Florence, which he 
readily complied with ; and the other party, though they had the 
signori on their side, durst not venture to oppose a man of so 
established a reputation. But the Count soon found he had very 
little authority in the city, as the magistracy and the standard- 
bearers of the several companies openly favored Lando and his 
friends* Soon afterwards the citizens were reconciled and 
united under the king by the friendly counsel of his daughter-in- 
law, and Lando, deprived of his authority, was sent back to 
Agobbio satiated with blood and rapine.* The government of 
the King of Naples was continued three years longer ; and, as 
the seven who were then in the signori were all of Lando's 
party, six others were added to them of the king's, and they con- 
tinued thirteen for some time, but were afterwards reduced to 
seven again. 

" About this time Castruccio Castracani f drove out Faggi- 
vola, and succeeded him in the government of Lucca and Pisa. 
The Florentines had enough to do to obstruct the growth of the 
power of this spirited and fortunate youth at the head of the 

vel here introduces a characteristic of popular gOTemmentS) which the author has 
omitted to express : " Ccrcando d'uno per adorarlo," '* seeking after some one to 
worship, they sent," &c. 

♦ NerH, p. 11. f Ihid. 

i 

32 ON GOVERNMENT. 

Ghibelline interest, and to defend themselves against^ him. 
That the signori in this war might proceed with maturer 
deliberation and execute with greater authority, they chose 
twelve citizens whom they called buoni hominij without whose 
advice and consent the signori were not to pass any act of 
importance. But this effort of nature to form a balance to this 
simple government was of short duration ; the dominion of 
King Robert expired, and the government once more reverted to 
the citizens, who set up the same form of magistracy that had 
been formerly instituted. The whole city was soon obliged to 
march against Castruccio to the relief of Prato, and a proclama- 
tion was issued by the signori, that every exile of the Guelph 
p£ui;y who came in to the relief of Prato should afterwards have 
liberty to return home. This policy added four thousand men 
to their army, which before consisted of twenty thousand foot 
and fifteen hundred horse. Castruccio, afraid of so formidable 
a force, retreated to Lucca. Upon this retreat great disputes 
arose in the Florentine camp between the nobility and the peo- 
ple, about pursuing Castruccio ; these disputes were referred to 
the signory, which, consisting at this time of commoners as well 
as of nobility, was also divided in opinion. Upon this the peo- 
ple rose in a tumult and forced the signory to give way to them ; 
but it was now too late to follow Castruccio, and the people 
were so exasperated that they would not suffer the public faith 
to be kept with the exiles. The nobility having some regard 
to their honor, though the people had not, took the part of the 
exiles, which produced another civil war. 

<^ As it generally happens in all commonwealths, that after 
any revolution or remarkable crisis ^ some or other of the old 
laws are abrogated and new ones made in their room, so, though 
the signori at first were changed every two months, yet the magis- 
trates who were now in office, having great power, took upon 
themselves to constitute a signory out of all the most con- 
siderable citizens, to continue forty months. Their names were 
to be put into a bag or purse, which was called imborsation,^ 
and a certain number of them drawn out by lot at the end of 
every second month ; whereas before, when the old magistrates 
went out of office, new ones were always chosen by the council. 

1 " Dopo uno accidente." 9 " Squittino " or polling. 

FLORENCE. 33 

As the' council consisted only of the most considerable citizens, 
the government was before but a self-created or at least self-con- 
tinued aristocracy. Now it was equally so, with this difference 
only, that lot was substituted in the room of choice. As the lot 
was not to be now renewed till after a term of above three years, 
it was thought they had extinguished the causes of all such dis- 
gusts and tumults as used to happen from the frequent return 
of elections and the number of competitors for the magistracy, 
not being aware how little advantage and how many mischiefs 
were likely to flow from it.^ 

In 1325, in a war with Castruccio, the Florentines were 
betrayed by their general, Raymondo. This man saw that the 
Florentines had been so liberal in disposing of themselves, that 
they had sometimes conferred their government upon kings, 
sometimes upon legates, and sometimes upon persons of much 
inferior quality; he thought, if he could reduce them to any 
extremity, they, perhaps, would make him their prince ; he was 
very importunate with them to give him the same command in 
the city, that he had over their army, as he pretended he could 
not otherwise either require or expect that necessary obedience 
which was due to a general. Not being gratified, he trifled and 
delayed, till he was attacked and defeated with great slaughter 
and the loss of his own life ; receiving that punishment from 
the hands of fortune, which his ambition and perfidy had 
merited from the Florentines. 

^ The havoc, the depredations, imprisonments, burnings, and 
every other kind of devastation made by Castruccio upon the 
Florentines after this victory, forced them to offer their govern- 
ment to Charles, Duke of Calabria,* son of King Robert, upon 
condition that he would defend them ; for as that family had 
been used to rule over them, they chose rather to shelter them- 
selves under him as their prince, than to trust him as an ally. 
But Charles, being engaged in the wars of Sicily, sent Gaultier, 
a Frenchman, and Duke of Athens, as his lieutenant, who new- 

3 *' La nouTelle mani^re de proc^der aux Elections, parut plus d^mocratiqae 
qae la pr&c^ente ; dUe ^tabliasoit une plm grande eealit^ entre les candidate, et ^le 
appeloit un plus grand nombre de citoyens aux nonneurs publics. Ce dernier 
avantage fut m^me sans doute celui qui s^duisit le peuple ; il flatta la jalousie 
eeci^te des hommes mMiocres, qui voyoient avec depit un petit nombre de 
sujets distingu^s, toujours d^sign^s par les sufifragefi du public." Sismondi, R6p» 
Itahennes. 

• Nerii, p. 12. 

^ 

34 ON GOVERNMENT. 

modelled the magistracy as he thought fit His behavior at first 
was, in appearance, so modest and temperate, that he gained 
the affections of every one. 

'< Charles then came in person with a thousand horse, and his 
presence gave some check to Castruccio, and prevented him 
from roving and plundering the country as he had done ; but if 
the citizens saved any thing abroad, it was lost again at home ; 
and when their enemies were curbed, they became a prey to the 
insolence and oppression of their friends. As the signori were 
entirely under the influence of the Duke of AthemL he exacted 
four hundred thousand florins from the city in one year, though 
it was expressly stipulated in the agreement made with him, 
that he should not raise above two hundred thousand in the 
whole ; besides which, either Charles or his father was contin- 
ually laying some heavy tax or other upon the citizens. These 
miseries were still increased by new jealousies, ifresh enemies, 
and more extensive wars, in which all the neighboring powers 
were involved, till suddenly Castruccio, and Charles, Duke of 
Calabria and Lord of Florence, both died. The Florentines, 
unexpectedly delivered from the oppression of one, and dread of 
the other, and having once more recovered their liberty, began 
to reform the commonwealth. They abrogated the ordinances 
of all former councils, and created two new ones, one of which 
consisted of three hundred of the commons, and the other of 
two hundred and fifty of both commoners and nobility; the 
former was called the council of the people, and the latter the 
common council." 

After the death of Castruccio, till the year 1340, the Floren- 
tines continued wholly intent upon their affairs and wars abroad. 

" In that year new disturbances arose at home. The governors 
of the city had two ways of maintaining and increasing their 
authority; one was, by managing the imborsations in such a man- 
ner as always to secure the signory either to themselves or their 
creatures ; the other, by getting judges chosen who they knew 
would be favorable to them in their sentences." 

And how is it possible, in any simple government, to prevent 
such management to draw all the legislative, executive, and 
judicial power into one centre, and that centre a junto of aiisto- 
cratics ? But in this case, — 

" Not content with two judges, the governors sometimes con- 

FLORENCE. 35 

stitated a third, whom they called captain of the guards ; with 
which office they now vested Jacopo d'Agobbio, and gave him 
an absolute power over the citizens. This Jacopo, under the 
direction of the governors, behaved with the most shameless 
insolence and partiality, daily injuring or af&onting somebody or 
other. Some, who were nobly born, and men of high spirit, were 
provoked to such a degree, that a stranger should be introduced 
into the city by a few of their fellow-citizens who had the power 
in their hands, on purpose to insult and abuse all the rest, that 
they entered into a conspiracy with many other noble families, 
and some of the commoners, that were disgusted at so tyrannical 
a government, to revenge themselves ; hence a conspiracy, that 
again involved the city in blood. By artifice and force together, 
the signori prevailed, and suppressed the conspiracy, beheading 
some, and proclaiming several other families rebels.* 

" However, it did not satiate the revenge of those in adminis- 
tration, to have conquered and suppressed those families ; but, 
like almost all other men, whose insolence commonly increases 
with their power, they grew more imperious and arbitrary as they 
grew stronger; for though they had only one captain of the 
guards to tyrannize over the city before, they now appointed 
another to reside in the country, and vested him with very great 
authority; so that any one who was in the least obnoxious to 
government could not live quietly, either within the city or with- 
out it. The nobility, in particular, were daily abused and insulted 
by them in such a manner, that they only waited for an opportu- 
nity to revenge themselves at any rate ; and as one soon happened, 
they did not fail to take advantage of it The Florentines had 
purchased Lucca ; but, defeated in securing the possession of it, 
they carried on a war to recover it. After a long struggle, they 
were driven out of it, with much dishonor, and the loss of all 
their purchase-money. This disaster, as it usually happens in 
like cases, threw the people of Florence into such a rage against 
their governors, that they publicly insulted and upbraided them 
with their ill conduct and administration, in all places, and upon 
every opportunity. 

" In the beginning of the war, the management of it had been 
committed to twenty citizens, who appointed Malatesta de Rimini 

* Nerli, p. 14. 

36 ON GOVERNMENT. 

commander-in-chief of their forces in that expedition ; but as be 
executed that charge with little courage and less discretion, they 
solicited Robert, King of Naples, for supplies, which he accord- 
ingly sent them, under the command of Gaultier, Duke of Athens, 
who, as the evil destiny of the city would have it, arrived there 
just when the enterprise against Lucca had miscarried. 

" The Duke arrived at this time ;• and the governors, being in 
great fear of the multitude, made him conservator of the peace 
and commander-in-chief, that he might have both authority 
and power enough to defend them.^ Imagining there was no 
other way left to get the better of the people, who had so long 
domineered over them, than to reduce them into subjection to a 
prince, who, being well acquainted with the worth and generosity 
of the nobility, and the insolence of the commons, might treat 
both parties according to their deserts, the nobility now resolved 
to take their revenge, even though it should occasion the destruc- 
tion of the city. They had many private meetings to persuade 
the Duke to take the government wholly into his hands, and pro- 
mised to support him with all their interest and power. Several 
of the most considerable commoners joined them, particularly the 
families of the Peruzzi, Acciaivoli, Antellesi, and Buonaccorsi. 
Such encouragement, and so fair an opportunity, inflamed the 
Duke, who was naturally ambitious, with a still greater thirst of 
power ; and, in order to ingratiate himself with the lower sort of 
people, by acting like a just and upright magistrate, he ordered a 
process to be conunenced against those that had been entrusted 
with the management of the late war against the Lucchese ; in con* 
sequence of wliich, Giovanni de' Medici and two more were put to 
death, several others banished, and many obliged to pay large sums 
of money for their pardon. This severe manner of proceeding 
alarmed the middle sort of citizens, though it was very grateful 
to the nobility and common people, as the latter generally delight 
in evil, and the former were not a little rejoiced at the fall of 
those by whom they had been so grievously oppressed ; so that, 
whenever the Duke passed through the streets, they resounded 

• Nerli, p. 15. 

^ Some of the historians assign a different motive for this moyement It 
was designed by the governing party to smother, under the appointment of a 
more oppressive ruler, any disposition to scrutinize their own peculations and 
venality. If so, thepr were the first victims to the shrewdness of tneir own policy, 
for he established lumself by exposing and punishing them. 

FLORENCE. 37 

with acclamations and praises of his justice and resolution, while 
every one exhorted him to persevere in his endeavors to detect 
the guilty, and to bring them to condign punishment 

^^Notwithstanding the expostulations of the signori, in an 
assembly of all the people, the government was given to the Duke 
for life, and he was carried about in a chair, amidst the acclama- 
tions of the multitude ; the standard of the city was torn to pieces, 
and the Duke's planted in its stead, at which all the good citizens 
were infinitely grieved and mortified, whilst those who, eith^ out 
of malice or stupidity, had consented to this election, did not a 
little rejoice." 

Machiavel's next task is to give us a detail of the Duke's 
tyrannical behavior, which was as wild, cruel, and mad as all 
other tyrannies have been which were created on the ruins of a 
republic. The Duke perceived the general odium he had incurred, 
but affected to think himself extremely beloved. He was informed 
of a plot against him, in which the family of the Medici, and 
others, were concerned ; but he ordered the informer to be put to 
death. He cut out the tongue of Bettoni for complaining of 
heavy taxes, &c. His outrages were sufiicient to rouse the Flo- 
rentines, " who neither knew how to value their liberty nor to 
endure slavery," says Machiavel. But the truth is, they had no 
liberty to value, and nothing but slavery to endure ; their consti- 
tution was no protection of right; their laws never governed. 
They were slaves to every freak and passion, every party and 
faction, every aspiring or disappointed noble ; sometimes to the 
pope, sometimes to the King of Naples, sometimes to Lando ; 
sometimes to one nobleman, sometimes to another ; sometimes 
to their own signori, and sometimes to their captains of arts. If 
the word republic must be used to signify every government in 
which more than one man has a share, it is true this must be 
called by that name ; but a republic and a free government may 
be different things. 

There were now three conspiracies on foot against the Duke 
at once; but each conspiracy was a new system of tyranny, 
and aimed only at introducing one system instead of another, 
instead of any concert, or reasonable combination, to take down 
a bad government and set up a good one. The three natural 
divisions of society formed three different plots to set up a new 
tyranny, each in its own way : the nobility had one plot, the 

VOL. V. 4 

38 ON GOVERNMENT. 

commons another, and the artificers a third. What ideas of the 
rights of mankind must these people have entertained! The 
commons had been deprived of the government, and they had 
no idea that the nobility or artisans had any rights ; the nobility 
were not restored to the government, which was all they wanted; 
and the artisans had lost their business; but none of these 
orders could communicate with the others. Assassination of 
the Duke seems to have been all the object in view, as if that 
would remedy all the evils. The plots, however, were too freely 
communicated, and at last were told to the Duke. 

In 1343 the city was all in a tumult, and " liberty, liberty ! " 
was the cry. A war was carried on in the city, and each party 
changed sides several times; but, after long distractions, and 
much bloodshed and devastation, the Duke was blocked up in 
the palace, and the citizens assembled to reform the government 

Fourteen persons, one half of them of the nobility, and the 
other commoners, with the archbishop, had full power given 
them to new-model the state. The judicial department was 
committed to six magistrates, who were to administer justice 
till the arrival of the person who should be chosen to fill that 
office. " Greater, certainly," says Machiavel, " and more cruel, 
is the resentment of the people when they have recovered their 
liberty, than when they are acting in defence of it; and an 
instance of brutal ferocity happened here that is a disgrace to 
human nature. The people insisted upon some persons being 
delivered up to them, and among them a father and son ; when 
these were brought out and delivered up to thousands of their 
enemies ; and though the son was not eighteen, yet neither his 
youth or innocence, nor the gracefulness of his person, was 
sufficient to protect him from the rage of the multitude. Many 
who could not get near enough to reach them whilst they were 
alive, thrust their swords into them after they were dead ; and 
not content with this, they tore their carcasses to pieces with 
their nails and teeth, that so all their senses might be glutted 
with revenge ; and after they had feasted their ears with their 
groans, their eyes with their wounds, and their touch with tear- 
ing the flesh off their bones, as if all this was not enough, the 
taste likewise must have its share and be gratified."^ 

1 It is but just to add that this was Guglielmo da Sce^, the most odious of the 

FLORENCE. 39 

This is Machiavel's description of this savage barbarity; and 
his words are here preserved, that it may be seen and considered 
that human nature is the same in a mob as upon a throne, and 
that unbridled passions are at least as brutal and diabolical, and 
unlimited power as tyrannical, in a mob, as in a monarch or 
senate ; they are worse, for there is always a number among 
them who are under less restraints of shame and decency. 

" When the people were thus satiated with blood, the Duke 
and his friends were suffered to withdraw with their effects un- 
molested out of Florence. After some disputes between the 
nobility and people, it was agreed that one third of the signori, 
and one half of the other magistrates and other oflScers of state, 
should consist of the nobility. The city was divided into six 
parts, each of which chose one of the signori ; and though it 
sometimes happened that their number was increased to twelve 
or thirteen, yet they were afterwards again reduced to six. But 
as these six parts were not duly proportioned, and they designed 
to give more power and authority to the nobility, it was neces- 
sary to mak6 a new regulation in this point, and to increase the 
number of signori. They divided the city, therefore, into quar- 
ters, and chose three of the signori out of each. The standard- 
bearer of justice, and those of the several companies, were laid 
aside ; and instead of the twelve buoni homini, they created eight 
counsellors, four of each quality. 

" The commonwealth," says Machiavel, " being settled upon 
this bottom, might have continued quiet and happy, if the 
nobility could have been content to confine themselves within 
the bounds of that moderation which is requisite in all repub- 
lican governments." 

It is impossible to read these grave reflections of Machiavel 
and Nedham, so often repeated, with patience. It would be as 
wise to say, that the nation might be quiet and happy under a 
despot or monarch, if the despot or monarch, and his ministers 
and minions, could be content and moderate ; or that the com- 
monwealth might be happy under an oligarchy or simple aris- 

Duke's instnunents of tyranny, and the judge who had lent himself to all his 
acts of cruelty. The son was scarcely fourteen years old, but he had made him- 
self detested by the interest manifested in the execution of the harsh sentences 
r'nst offenders. The example of the powerful is seldom copied with more 
mess by those whom they oppress, than m the indulgence of tiieir rindictive- 
ness whenever it comes their turn. 

40 OX GOMilRXMENT. 

tocracy, if all concerned in government could be content and 
moderate. When we know human nature to be utterly inca- 
pable of this content, why should we suppose it? Human 
nature is querulous and discontented wherever it appears, and 
almost all the happiness it is capable of arises from this discon- 
tented humor. It is action, not rest, that constitutes our plea- 
sure. All we have to do is to guard and provide against this 
quality ; we cannot eradicate it 

" But the behavior of the nobility was quite the contrary," 
says Machiavel ; " for, as they always disdained the thoughts of 
equality, even when they lived a private life, so, now they were 
in the magistracy, they thought to domineer over the whole city, 
and every day produced fresh instances of their pride and arro- 
gance, which exceedingly galled the people, when they saw they 
had deposed one tyrant, only to make room for a thousand." 

All this, one may safely believe to be exactly true ; but what 
then ? Why, they ought to have separated the nobles from the 
commons, and made each independent on the other. Mixed 
together in equal halves, the nobles will forever tyrannize. The 
insolence of one side, and the indignation and impatience of 
the other, at last increased to such a height, that both sides flew 
to arms, and the people, being most numerous, carried their 
point, and deprived the nobles in the signory of their authority ; 
the four counsellors of their order were also turned out of their 
offices, and the remaining number increased to twelve, which 
consisted of commoners only. Besides which, the eight who 
remained in the signory not only made a new standard-bearer of 
justice, and sixteen other standard-bearers over the companies 
of the people, but modelled all the councils in such a manner, 
that the government was now entirely in the hands of the peo- 
ple ; and we shall soon see how well it operated. 

" There happened a great dearth in Florence, so that there were 
grievous discontents both among the nobility and common peo- 
ple ; the former repining at the loss of their authority, and the 
latter murmuring for want of bread. Andrea Strozzi sold corn 
as cheap as Meelius did in Rome. This drew such numbers to 
his house that he boldly mounted his horse one morning, and 
putting himself at the head of them, called upon all the rest of 
the people to take up arms, by which means he got together 
above four thousand men in less than an hour, and conducting 

FLORENCE. 41 

them to the palace of the signori, demanded the doors to be 
thrown open to him. This attempt was too bold and rash to 
succeed ; yet it gave the nobility fresh hopes of recovering their 
power, now they saw the inferior sort of people so incensed 
against the commons. They resolved to take arms and make use 
of all manner of allies to regain that by force which they con- 
ceived had been taken from them with so much injustice ; and 
to insure success they provided themselves with arms, fortified 
their houses, and sent to their friends in Lombardy for supplies. 
The commons and the signori, on the other hand, were no less 
busy in arming themselves, and sent to the Sienese and Peru- 
gians to desire their assistance ; so that when the auxiliaries on 
each side arrived, the whole city was soon in arms." 

We ought to pause here and remark a combination of parties 
that is perfectly natural, though it has seldom occurred in the 
history of any nation so distinctly as to be descanted on by 
historians or politicians. Here is as distinct a division between 
the commons and the lower class as there ever was between 
nobles and commons. By the commons in this place are meant 
those citizens who in every nation of the world are commonly 
denominated (he middling peoplejVihOy it must be confessed, have 
been in all ages and countries the most industrious and frugal, 
and every way the most virtuous part of the community. In all 
countries they have some influence, in many they have had 
some share in the government ; but no other instance than this 
is at present recollected where they have ever had a sovereignty 
in their hands, exclusive both of the highest and lowest classes of 
citizens. As if it had been the intention of Providence to exhibit 
to mankind a demonstration that power has the same effects 
upon all minds, we find in this instance the Florentine commons 
discovering the same disposition to tyrannize over all above and 
all below them, as clearly as ever kings, nobles, or mobs dis- 
covered it when they had the power. The nobility drew up in 
three divisions. The commons assembled under the standard 
of justice and the colors of their respective companies, and 
under the command of the Medici immediately attacked one of 
the divisions of the nobility. At this time the Medici were only 
commoners; we shall hereafter see that they became nobles 
and sovereigns, and placed sons and daughters on some of the 
thrones of Europe. The action was hot and bloody for three 

4* 

42 ON GOVERNMENT. 

hours, during which they had great stones tumbled down upon 
their heads from the tops of the houses and were terribly galled 
with cross-bows below. All parties behaved with an obstinate 
bravery that would have done honor to any good cause ; but it 
is unnecessary to relate all the attacks and defences and all the 
vicissitudes of fortune in the course of the civil war ; the num- 
bers of the commoners finally prevailed, " upon which," says 
Machiavel, " the people, especially the inferior sort of them, 
naturally rapacious and greedy of spoil, began to plunder the 
houses of the nobility, which they afterwards burnt down to the 
ground, and committed such other outrages as the bitterest 
enemy to the city of Florence would have been ashamed of." 

" The nobility being in this manner entirely subdued, the peo- 
ple took upon them to reform the state ; and as there were three 
degrees of them, it was ordained that the highest rank should 
have the nomination of two of the signori, the middle sort of 
three, and the lowest of three more, and that the standard-bearer 
of justice should be chosen by turns out of all three. The old 
laws were revived and put in execution against the nobility; 
and to reduce them still more effectually many of them were 
incorporated with the other classes.* By these means they were 
brought so low that they became abject and pusillanimous, and 
never durst rise any more against the people; so that being 
deprived of their arms and honors, their spirit and generosity 
likewise seemed to be extinguished. After this depression of 
the nobles, the plague, of which above ninety-six thousand peo- 
ple died in Florence, and a war with the Visconti, kept the city 
in tranquillity for a time. But the war being ended, new fac- 
tions sprung up in the city ; for though the nobility were ruined, 
fortune found other means to raise fresh troubles and dissen- 
sions. 

" The bitter animosities f which generally happen between 
the people and nobility, from an ambition in the one to com- 
mand and a reluctance in the other to obey, are the natural 
sources of those calamities that are incident to commonwealths ; 
for all other evils that usually disturb their peace are both occa- 
sioned and fomented by this contrariety of dispositions. It was 
this that kept Rome so long divided. This also gave birth to 

* Nerli, p. 18. Mold avYiliti si fanno popolani. f Lib. HI. 

FLORENCE. 43 

the factions thai sprung up in Florence, though indeed it pro- 
duced at last veiy different effects in the two cities ; for the 
division that first arose between the nobility and people of 
Rome terminated with disputes ; that at Florence only with the 
sword. In Rome that was effected by a law, which in Florence 
could hardly be done by the banishment and death of numbers 
of its citizens. The quarrels of the Romans still added to their 
spirit and military virtue, while those of the Florentines utterly 
extinguished them. The former destroyed that equality which 
was at first established, and introduced a prodigious disparity 
among the citizens ; the latter, on the contrary, abolished all supe- 
riority or difference of rank, and put every man upon the same 
level. This diversity of effects must certainly have proceeded 
from a difference of views. The people of Rome desired no 
more than to share with the nobility in the administration of 
the commonwealth ; but the people of Florence were not only 
desirous to have the government of the state to themselves, but 
used violent measures and took up arms to exclude their nobles 
from any part in it ; and as the desires of the Roman people 
were more moderate, their demands seemed not unreasonable to 
the nobility, who therefore complied with them ; so that after 
some littie bickerings and without coming to an open rupture, a 
law was made by which the people were satisfied, at least for a 
time, and the nobles continued in their honors and offices. On 
the other hand, the demands of the Florentine people were so 
extravagant and injurious that the nobility took up arms to sup- 
port their privileges, and their quarrels grew to such a height 
that numbers were either banished or slain before they could be 
ended; and the laws afterwards made were calculated rather 
for the advantage of the victors than the common good. 

" The success of the people of Rome made that state more 
powerful; for as they were admitted to govern the common- 
wealth and to command their armies and provinces equally with 
the nobility, they became inspired with the same virtue and 
magnanimity ; and as the city through them grew more public- 
spirited, its power also increased. But in Florence, when the 
people had subdued the nobility, they divested them of all man- 
ner of authority, and left them no possibility of recovering any 
part of it except they would entirely conform to their customs 
and way of living, and not only submit to appear, but to be 

44 ON GOVERNMENT. 

commoners like themselves. And this was the reason that 
induced them to change their arms, and vary their titles and the 
names of their families, which was so frequent in those times 
among the nobility, in order to insinuate themselves into the 
affections of the people ; so that the military spirit and great- 
ness of soul for which the nobility had been held in such venera- 
tion, were utterly extinguished, and not by any means to be 
raised in the people where there were no seeds of it ; by which 
means Florence became every day more abject and pusillani- 
mous. And whereas Rome at last grew so powerful and wan- 
ton by the effect of its virtue that it could not be governed 
otherwise than by one prince, Florence was reduced so low that 
a wise legislator might easily have modelled it and given it 
what form he pleased." 

The factions between the nobility and the commons, which 
ended in the utter ruin of the former, have been already related ; 
but peace was not obtained. All authority was in one centre, 
the commons ; and there were other orders of citizens who were 
not satisfied ; the same contest therefore continued under a new 
form and new names. They now happened between the com- 
mons and plebeians, which were only new names in reality for 
a new nobility and commons ; the commons now took the place 
of the nobility, and the plebeians that of the commons. Machi- 
avel is as clear and full for a mixed government as any writer ; 
but the noble invention of the negative of an executive upon a 
legislature in two branches, which is the only remedy in contests 
between nobles and commons, seems never to have entered his 
thoughts ; and nothing is more entertaining than that mist 
which is perpetually before eyes so piercing, so capable of look- 
ing far through the hearts and deeds of men as his, for want of 
that thought " There seemed to be no seeds of future dissen- 
sions left in Florence." No seeds! Not one seed had been 
eradicated ; all the seeds that ever existed remained in full vigor* 
The seeds were in the human heart, and were as ready to shoot 
in commons and plebeians as they had been in nobles. " But 
the evil destiny of our city and want of good conduct occasioned 
a new emulation between the families of the Albizzi and the 
Bicci,* which produced as fatal divisions as those between the 

* Erano in que' tempi coei &tti gli Albizzi e i Bicci, due famiglie popolane 

FLOBENCE. 45 

Buondelmonti and Uberti, and the other between the Cerchi 
and Donati had done before." 

It was no evil destiny peculiar to Florence ; it is common to 
every city, nation, village, and club. The evil destiny is in 
human nature. And if the plebeians had prevailed over the 
commons as these had done over the nobility, some two ple- 
beian families would have appeared upon the stage with all the 
emulation of the Albizzi and Ricci, to occasion divisions and 
dissensions, seditions and rebellions, confiscations and banish- 
ments, assassinations, conflagrations, and massacres, and all 
other such good things as appear forever to recommend a sim- 
ple government in every form.^ When it is found in experience, 
and appears probable in theory, that so simple an invention as a 
separate executive, with power to defend itself, is a full remedy 
against the fatal eflects of dissensions between nobles and com- 
mons, why should we still finally hope that simple governments, 
or mixtures of two ingredients only, will produce effects which 
they never did and we know never can ? Why should the 
people be still deceived with insinuations that those evils arose 
firom the destiny of a particular city, when we know that destiny 
is common to all mankind ? 

^ Betwixt the two families of Albizzi and Ricci there was a 
mortal hatred, each conspiring the destruction of the other in 
order to engross the sole management of the commonwealth 
with less difficulty.* However, they had not as yet taken up 

intra 1' altre di gran reputazione e di molto seguito, per easer di parentado 
grandissimo, ed erano in ciascheduna di esse uomini grandi e reputati, e che 
aspiravano molto alli primi ^radi del governo, e alia grandezza dello stato lon> ; 
e per6 traendo ad un medeauno segno, era tra loro V odio, e 1' emulazione, ma 
non gik erano venuti a manifesta divisione, n^ all' armi, per inano all' anno 
1353. Nerli, p. 21. 
* £ per6 Uguccione de' Ricci restringendosi, come capo di quella fimuglia, con 

§li subi consorti, e con i primi capi della loro setta, pensarono di poter privar 
el governo gli Albizzi, come discesi anticamente d' Arezzo, e per6 tegnenti del 
Ghibeliino o^i volta, che si ritroyasse una le^ge, per la quale era prohibito a 
qualunque disceso di Ghibeliino di poter esercitare officio, o magistrato alcuno, 
la quel legge era disusata, ne piu s'adoperava, n^ si mettava in atto, o s'osservava 
in modo sucuno. Nerli, p. 21. 

^ ** Similar revolutions broke out at the same time in the other Italian repub- 
lics. In every one the same progress was to be distinguished. The part)- which 
in all had risen to power, as democratic, no sooner felt themselves in possession 
of it than they turned towards aristocracy. The leaders of the rising generation 
presented themselves as hereditary tribunes of the people at the same time that 
they impugned hereditary rights." Lardner's Cabinet Cyclop€cdia — History of 
the ludian Republics, p. 187. 

46 ON GOVERNMENT. 

arms or proceeded to open violence on either side, but only 
thwarted each other in council and the execution of their 
offices." 

A private quarrel happened in the market, and a rumor was 
instantly spread, nobody knew by whom, that the Bicci were 
going to attack the Albizzi ; and by others it was said that the 
Albizzi were preparing to fall upon the Ricci. These stories 
were carried to both parties, and occasioned such an uproar 
throughout the whole city that the magistrates found it very 
difficult to keep the two families and their Mends from coming 
to a battle in earnest, though neither side had intended any such 
thing as was maliciously reported. This disturbance, though 
accidental, inflamed the former animosities, and determined 
both sides to strengthen their parties and be upon their guard ; 
and since the citizens were reduced to such a degree of equality 
by the suppression of the nobility that the magistrates were held 
in greater reverence than ever they had been before, each family 
resolved to avail itself rather of public and ordinary means than 
of private violence." 

The intrigues of these two families to supplant each other are 
very curious ; but as the detail of them is long, we shall leave 
the reader to amuse himself with them at his leisure, and come 
to a speech made to the signori by an eminent citizen, when 
affairs were become so critical and dangerous as to alarm all 
impartial men. « The common disease," says he, « magnificent 
signors, of the other cities in Italy has invaded ours, and is 
continually eating deeper and deeper into its vitals. All our 
towns for want of due restraint have run into extremes, and from 
liberty degenerated into downright licentiousness, making such 
laws and instituting such governments as were rather calculated 
to foment and support factions than maintain freedom. From 
this source are derived all the defects and disorders we labor 
under ; no friendship or union is to be found among the citizens 
except betwixt such as are accomplices in some wicked design 
either against their neighbors or their country. All religion and 
fear of God are utterly extinguished ; promises and oaths are no 
further binding than they serve to promote some private advan- 
tage, and they are resorted to not with any design to observe 
them, but as necessary means to facilitate the perpetration of 
fraud, which is even honored and applauded in proportion to its 

FLORENCE. 47 

success. From hence it comes to pass that the most wicked 
and abandoned wretches are admired as able, enterprising men ; 
while the innocent and conscientious are laughed at and de- 
spised as fools. 

" The young men are indolent and effeminate ; the old, 
lascivious and contemptible; without regard to age or sex 
every place is full of the most licentious brutality, for which the 
laws themselves, though good and wholesome, are yet so par- 
tially executed that they do not afford any remedy. This is the 
real cause of that selfish spirit which now so generaUy prevails, 
and of that ambition, not for true glory, but for places, which 
dishonors the possessors ; hence proceed those fatal animosities, 
those seeds of envy, revenge, and faction, with their usual 
attendants, executions, banishments, depression of good men, 
and exaltation of the wicked. 

" The ringleaders of parties varnish over their pernicious 
designs with some sacred title ; for, being in reality enemies to 
all liberty, they more effectually destroy it by pretending to 
defend the rights, sometimes of the nobility, sometimes of the 
commons ; since the fruit which they expect from a victory is 
not the glory of having delivered their country, but the satisfac- 
tion of having conquered the opposite party and secured the 
government of the state to themselves ; and when once they 
have obtained that., there is no sort of cruelty, injustice, or 
rapine, that they are not guilty of. From thenceforward laws 
are enacted, not for the common good, but for private ends. 
"War and peace are made, and alliances concluded, not for the 
honor of the public, but to gratify the humors of particular men. 
Our laws, our statutes and civil ordinances are made to indulge 
the caprice or serve the ambition of the conqueror, not to pro- 
mote the true interest of a free people ; so that one faction is 
no sooner extinguished than another is lighted up. 

" A city that endeavors to support itself by psirties instead of 
laws can never be at peace ; for when one prevails and is left 
without opposition, it necessarily divides again. When the 
Ghibellines were depressed, every one thought the Guelphs 
would then have lived in peace and security ; and yet it was 
not long before they divided into the factions of the Neri and 
Bianchi. When the Bianchi were reduced, new commotions 
arose, sometimes in favor of the exiles, sometimes betwixt the 

48 ON GOVERNMENT. 

nobility and people ; and to give that away to others, which we 
could not or would not possess quietly ourselves, we first com- 
mitted our liberties into the hands of King Robert, then of his 
brother, next of his son, and last of all to the mercy of the Duke 
of Athens, never settling or reposing under any government, as 
people that could neither be satisfied with being free nor submit 
to live in slavery. Nay, so much was our state inclined to divi- 
sion, that rather than acquiesce under the government of a king, 
it meanly prostituted itself to the tyranny of a vile and pitiful 
Agobbian. The Duke of Athens was no sooner expelled but 
we took up arms again, and fought against each other with more 
rancor and inveteracy than ever, till the ancient nobility were 
entirely subdued, and lay at the mercy of the people. It was 
then the general opinion there would be no more factions or 
troubles in Florence, since those were humbled whose insup- 
portable pride and ambition had been the chief occasion of them ; 
but we now see that pride and ambition, which was thought to 
be utterly extinguished by the fall of the nobility, now springs 
up again among tfie people, who begin to be equally impatient 
for authority, and aspire with the same vehemence to the first 
offices in the commonwealth. 

'' It seems the will of Heaven that certain families should spring 
up in all commonwealths to be the pest and ruin of them. Our 
city owes its miseries and distractions not merely to one or two, 
but to several of those families ; first to the Buondelmonti and 
Uberti, next to the Donati and Cerchi, and now, to our shame 
be it spoken, to the Ricci and Albizzi. Why may not this com- 
monwealth, in spite of former examples to the contrary, not only 
be united, but reformed and improved by new laws and constitu- 
tions ? You must not impute the factions of our ancestors to ike 
nature of the men^ but to tfie iniquity of the times, which being now 
altered, afford this city fair hopes of better fortune ; and our dis- 
orders may be corrected by the institution of wholesome laws, 
by a prudent restraint of ambition, by prohibiting such customs 
as tend to nourish and propagate faction, and by substituting 
others, that may conduce to maintain liberty and good civil 
government." 

This speech, although upon the whole it is excellent, has seve- 
ral essential mistakes. That certain families will spring up in 
every simple government, and in every injudicious mixture of 

FLORENCE. 49 

aiietocracy and democracy, to be the pest and ruin of them, is 
most certain. It is the will of Heaven that the happiness of 
nations, as well as that of individuals, should depend upon the 
use of their reason ; they must therefore provide for themselves 
constitutions which will restrain the ambition of families. With- 
out the restraint, the ambition cannot be prevented ; nature has 
planted it in every human heart. The factions of their ancestors 
ought not to have been imputed to the iniquity of the times, for 
all times and places are so iniquitous. Those factions grew out 
of the nature of men under such forms of government ; and the 
new form ought to have been so contrived as to produce a remedy 
for the evil. This might have been done ; for there is a way of 
making the laws more powerful than any particular persons or 
families. 

"As this advice was conformable to the sentiments of the sig- 
nori, they appointed fifty-six citizens* to provide for the safety 
of the commonwealth ; but as most people are fitter to preserve 
good order than to restore it when lost, these citizens took more 
pains to extinguish the present factions than to provide against 
new ones, which was the reason that they succeeded in neither ; 
for they not only did not take away the occasion of fresh ones, 
but made one of those that were then subsisting so much more 
powerful than the other, that the commonwealth was in great 
danger. 

" They deprived three of the family of Albizzi, and as many of 
the Ricci, of all share in the magistracy for three years, except in 
such branches of it as were particularly appropriated to the 
Guelph party; of which number Piero de gli Albizzi and Uguc- 
cione de' Ricci were two. These provisions bore much harder 
upon the Ricci than the Albizzi ; for, though they were equally 
stigmatized, yet the Ricci were the greatest sufferers. Pietro, 
indeed, was excluded from the palace of the signori, but he had 
free admittance into that of the Guelphs, where bis authority 
was very great ; and though he and his associates were forward 
enough in their 'admonitions'^ before, they became much more 

* Nerli, p. 22. Fece creare una balia de 56 cittadini. 

1 This word " ammoniti" in the original is used as a technical term, and refers 
to a practice adopted in Florence for the purpose of excluding the Ghibellines 
from power. Sismondi explains it thus : 

" Lorsque les capitaines de parti auroient, aux deux tiers des sufiiages, d^clar^ 
Gibelin un citoyen, il leur fut ordonn^ de Vadmonester ou avertir de ne point 

VOL. V. 5 D 

50 ON GOVERNMENT. 

forward after this mark of disgrace, and uew accidents ooctmred, 
which still more inflamed their resentment. 

" Gregory XI. was pope at that time ; and residing, as his late 
predecessors had done, at Avignon, he governed Italy by legates, 
who, being haughty and rapacious, had grievously oppressed 
several of the cities. One of these legates being then at Bologna, 
took advantage of a scarcity, and resolved to make himself mas- 
ter of Tuscany. This occasioned the war with the pope.* The 
Florentines entered into a confederacy with Galeazzo and all 
the other states that were at variance with the church; after 
which they appointed eight citizens for the management of it, 
whom they invested with an absolute power of proceeding, and 
disbursing money without control or account This war gave 
fresh courage to the Ricci, who, in opposition to the Albizzi, had 
upon all occasions favored Galeazzo and appeared against the 
church, and especially because all the eight were enemies to the 
Guelphs; but though they made a vigorous war against the 
pope, they could not defend themselves against the captains and 
their adherents. The envy and indignation with which the 
Guelphs looked upon the eight, made them grow so bold and 
insolent, that they often ai&onted and abused them, as well as 
the rest of the principal citizens. The captains were no less 
arrogant; they were even more dreaded than the signori, and 
men went with greater awe and reverence to their houses than 
to the palace ; so that all the ambassadors who came to Florence 
were instructed to address themselves to them. 

"After the death of the pope, the city had no war abroad, but 
was in great confusion at home ; for, on one hand, the Guelphs 
were become so audacious, that they were no longer supportable; 
and, on the other, there was no visible way to suppress them ; it 
was necessary, therefore, to take up arms, and leave the event to 
fortune. On the side of the Guelphs were all the ancient nobility 
and the greater part of the more powerful citizens ; on the other 
were all the inferior sort of people, headed by the eight, and 
joined by George Scali, Strozzi, the Bicci, the Alberti, and the 

accepter d'emploi, sous peine d'etre poursuivi. De cette mani^re, les homines 
suspects furent ^cartds des places, sans etre soumis k une peine ; mats une claase 
de m^contcns, qu'on appela les ammoniii ou admonestisy fut exclue, en quelque 
sorte, des droits de cit6.'^ HisU des Ripub. ItcUiennes, vol. vL p. 326. 
* Nerli, p. 23. 

FLORENCE. 

Medici. The rest of the multitude, as it abnost alway! 
joined with the discontented party. The power of 
ries seemed to the heads of the Guelphs to be formidt 
their danger great, if at any time a signory that was not on their 
side should attempt to depress them. They found the number 
of persons who had been ^ admonished^ was so great, that they 
had disobliged most of the citizens, and made them their enemies. 
They thought there was no other remedy, now they had deprived 
them of their honors, but to banish them out of the city, seize 
upon the palace of the signori, and put the government of the 
state wholly into the hands of their own creatures, according to 
the example of the Guelphs, their predecessors, whose quiet and 
security were entirely owing to the total expulsion of their 
enemies. 

" But as they differed in opinion about the time of putting 
their project in execution, the eight, aware of the trick intended, 
deferred the imborsation, and Sylvestro, the son of Alamanno de' 
Medici, was appointed gonfalonier.* As he was born of one of 
the most considerable families of the commoners, he could not 
bear to see the people oppressed by a few grandees. With 
Alberti, Strozzi, and Scali, he secretiy prepared a decree, by 
which the laws against the nobility^ were to be revived, the 
authority of the captains retrenched, and those who had been 
admonished admitted into the magistracy. Sylvestro being 
president, and consequentiy prince of the city for a time, caused 
both a college and council to be called the same morning ; but 
his decree was thrown out as an innovation. He went away 
to the council, and pretended to resign his office, and leave the 
people to choose another person, who might either have more 
virtue or better fortune than himself; upon this, such of the 
council as were in the secret, and others who wished for a 


I That is, the Albizzi, representiiig the Guelph, which had become the aristo- 
cratic £»ction. 

It was his turn to act as proposto, which involved the exclusive privilege of 
proposing new laws. Upon this sin^lar feature of the government, the histo- 
rian Sismondi justly remarks, that it was putting fetters upon the legislative 
power of the people's agents, which made necessaiy the frequent rotation of the 
whole, in order to prevent the chance of the authority of one becoming abso- 
lute. Neither was this check sufficient The inability to deal with this rea- 
sonable measure in any other wav than that of direct acceptance or rejection, 
no amendment being admissible, led to the successful appeal to the people, and 
the disorders and revolution that followed. 

52 ON GOVERNMENT. 

change, raised a tumult in 1378,* at which the signori and the 
colleges immediately came together ; seeing their gonfalonier 
retiring, they obliged him, partly by their authority, and partly 
by their entreaties, to return to the council, which was in great 
confusion. Many of the principal citizens were threatened, 
and treated with the utmost insolence ; among the rest, Carlo 
Strozzi was collared by an artificer, and would have been knocked 
on the head, if some of the bystanders had not rescued him. 
But the person who made the greatest disturbance was Bene- 
detto de gli Alberti, who got into one of the windows of the 
palace, and called out to the people to arm ; upon which, the 
piazza was instantly full of armed men, and the colleges were 
obliged to do that by fear, which they would not come into 
when they were petitioned. 

'' But whoever intends to make any alteration in a common- 
wealth, and to effect it by raising the multitude, will find him- 
self deceived, if he thinks he can stop where he will, and 
conduct it as he pleases. The design of Sylvestro was to quiet 
and secure the city, but the thing took a very different turn ; 
for the people were in such a ferment, that the shops were shut 
up, the houses barricaded, and many removed their goods for 
security into churches and convents. All the companies of the 
arts assembled, and each of them appointed a syndic. The 
signori called the colleges together, and were a whole day in 
consultation with the syndics, how to compose the disorders to 
the satisfaction of all parties ; but they could not agree. The 
council, then, to hold out some hopes of satisfaction to the arts 
and the rest of the people, gave a full power^ which the Floren- 
tines called a balia, to the signori, the colleges, the eight, the 
captains of the party, and the syndics of the arts, to reform 
the state. But while they were employed in this, some of the 
inferior companies of the arts, at the instigation of certain 
persons, who wanted to revenge the late injuries they had 
received from the Guelphs, detached themselves from the rest, 
and went to plundering and burning houses. They broke open 
the jails, set the prisoners at liberty, and plundered the monas- 
teries and convents. 

" The next morning the balia proceeded to requalify ihe am* 

* Muratori, AnnaL torn. viii. p. 875. Gino Capponi, del UmuUo di Chmpiy 
torn. ZTiii. Ker. Italic. 

FLORENCE. 53 

moniti, the admonished, though with an injunction not to exer- 
cise any function in the magistracy for three years; they repealed 
such laws as had been made by the Guelphs to the prejudice of 
the other citizens, and proclaimed rebels many who had incurred 
the hatred of the public; after which the names of the new 
signori were published, and Luigi Guicciardini was declared 
their gonfalonier.* If those who were admonished, the ammoniti, 
could have been content, the city was in a fair way of being 
quieted; but they thought it hard to wait three years longer, 
before they could enjoy any share in the magistracy. The arts 
assembled again to obtain satisfaction for them, and demanded 
of the signori, that, for the good and quiet of the city, it should 
be decreed, that no citizen for the future should be admonished 
as a Ghibelline, who had ever been one of the signori, or the 
college, or the captains of the companies, or the consuls or syn- 
dics of any of the arts ; and further, that a new imborsation 
should be made of the Guelph party, and the old one burnt. 
It seldom happens that men who covet the property of others, 
and long for revenge, are satisfied with a bare restitution of 
their own. Accordingly some, who expected to advance their 
fortunes by exciting commotions,! endeavored to persuade the 
artificers, that they could never be safe, except many of their 
enemies were either banished or cut off." 

The city continued in the utmost confusion between the two 
new parties of commons and plebeians. But waving a parti- 
cular detail, the essence of several years' miseries may be col- 
lected from two speeches. One is of Luigi Guicciardini, a 
standard-bearer to the plebeians : — " The more we grant," says 
he, ^Hhe more shameless and arrogant are your demands. If we 
speak thus to you, we do so, not to offend, but to lead you to 
reform ; to which end we are willing that others may say to you 
what will please, whilst our province remains to say that which 
may do you good. Tell us, on your honor, what is there, that 
you can reasonably ask more of us ? You desired to have the 

♦ Nerli, p. 24. 

t Fu facile a Salvestro de' Medici, e a gli altri, levato che fb tumulto, vincer 
la legge ; ma non ^ mk loro cosi facile, n^ poterano a posta loro fermare il tu- 
multo mosao nel popoio, e nella plebe, che a^ra anco soUevata in modo, che da 
questo rmnore ne segui V areione, e il sacco di molte casi. Attese la sfrenata 
moltitudine due, o ire giomi a saccheggiare, e ardere quello potette. Nerli, 
p. 24. 

5* 

J 

54 ON GOVERN^iENT. 

captains of the party deprived of their authority ; they have 
been deprived. You insisted that the old imborsation should 
be burnt, and a new one made ; we consented. You wanted to 
have those reinstated in the magistracy, that had been admo' 
wished; it has been granted. At your intercession we pardoned 
such as had been guilty of burning houses, and robbing churches, 
and we banished many of our principal citizens at your instiga- 
tion. To gratify you, the grandees are bridled with new laws, 
and every thing done that might give you content ; where, then, 
can we expect your demands will stop ; or how long will you 
thus abuse your liberty ? Why will ye suffer your own discords 
to bring the city into slavery ? What else can ye expect from 
your divisions ? what, from the goods ye have already taken, or 
may hereafter take from your fellow-citizens, but servitude and 
poverty? The persons you plunder are those whose fortunes 
and abilities are the defence of the state, and if they fail, how 
must it be supported ? Whatever is got that way cannot last 
long; and then ye have nothing to look for but remediless 
famine and distress." 

" These expostulations made some impression, and they pro- 
mised to be good citizens and obedient; but a fresh tumult soon 
arose, more dangerous than the former. The greater part of the 
late robberies and other mischiefs, had been committed by the 
rabble and dregs of the people; and those of them who had 
been the most audacious apprehended, that when the most 
material differences were composed, they should be called to an 
account for their crimes, and deserted, as it always happens, by 
those very persons at whose instigation they had committed 
them. Besides which, the inferior sort of people had conceived 
a hatred against the richer citizens and principals of the arts, 
upon a pretence that they had not been rewarded for their past 
services in proportion to what they deserved." 

To show how divisions grow wherever human nature is with- 
out a check, it is worth while to be particular here. " When the 
city was first divided into arts, in the time of Charles I., there 
was a proper head or governor appointed over each of them, to 
whose jurisdiction, in civil cases, every person in the several arts 
was to be subject These arts or companies, as we have said, 
were at first but twelve, but afterwards they were increased to 
twenty-one, and arrived at such power and authority, that in a 

FLORENCE. 55 

few years they wholly engrossed the government of the city ; 
and because some were more, and others less honorable among 
them, they came by degrees to be distinguished, and seven of 
them were called the greater arts, and fourteen the less. From 
this division proceeded the arrogance of the captains of the 
party; for the citizens who had formerly been Guelphs, to 
which party those offices were always appropriated, had made 
it a constant rule to favor the greater arts, and to discounte- 
nance the less, and all those who sided with them ; which chiefly 
gave occasion to all the tumults we have hitherto made mention 
of. And as, in the division of the people into arts and corpora- 
tions, there were many trades in which the meaner sort are 
usually occupied, that were not incorporated into any distinct or 
particular company of their own, but admitted into any of the 
others, as they most approached the nature of their craft, it hap- 
pened that when they were not duly satisfied for their labor, or 
any otherwise oppressed by their masters, they had no other 
head to apply to for redress but the magistrate of that company 
to which the person belonged that employed them, who, they 
commonly thought, did not do them justice. Now, of all the 
companies in the city, that of the clothiers had the most of this 
sort of people depending upon it ; and being more opulent and 
powerful than any of the rest, it maintained by far the greater 
part of the multitude. The meaner sort of people, therefore, 
both of this company and the others, were, for the causes as- 
signed, highly enraged ; and being also terrified at the appre- 
hension of being punished for their late outrages, they had 
firequent meetings in the night; where, considering what had 
happened, they represented to each other the danger they were 
in ; and to animate and unite them all, one of the boldest and 
most experienced of them harangued his companions in this 
manner : — 

" ' If it was now to be debated whether we should take arms 
to plunder and bum the houses of our fellow-citizens and rob 
the churches, I should be one of those who would think it wor- 
thy of great consideration, and perhaps be induced to prefer 
secure poverty to hazardous gain. But since arms have been 
already taken up and much mischief done, the first points to be 
considered are, in what manner we may retain them and ward 
off the penalties we have incurred. The whole city is full of 

66 ON GOVERNMENT. 

rage and complaints against us, the citizens are daily in council, 
and the magistrates frequently assembled. Assure yourselves 
they are either preparing snares for us or contriving how to raise 
forces to destroy us. It behoves us, therefore, to have two 
objects chiefly in view at these consultations, — first, how to 
avoid the punishment for our late actions; and, in the next 
place, to devise the means of living in a greater degree of liberty 
and with more satisfaction for the future than we have done 
hitherto. To come off with impunity for our past offences, it is 
necessary to add still more to them, to redouble our outrages, 
our robberies and burnings, and to do our best to associate 
numbers for our protection ; for where many are guilty none are 
chastised. Small crimes are punished, great ones rewarded; 
and where many suffer, few seek revenge ; a general calamity 
being always borne with more patience than a particular one. 
To multiply evils is the surest way to procure us a pardon for 
what has been abready done, and to obtain the liberty we desire. 
Nor is there any difficulty to discourage us. The enterprise is 
easy, and the success not to be doubted. Those who could 
oppose us are opulent indeed, but divided ; their disunion will 
give us the victory, and their riches when we have got them will 
maintain it. Let not the antiquity of their blood, nor the 
meanness of our own, with which they so insolently upbraid us, 
frighten you. All families, having the same original, are of equal 
antiquity, and have been made by nature after one fashion. 
Let both sides be stripped naked, and both will be found alike. 
Clothe yourselves in their robes and them in your rags, and then 
you will appear the nobles and they the plebeians ; for it is 
poverty alone that makes the real difference betwixt us. It fills 
me with just concern, indeed, to hear that some of you repent, 
forsooth, of what you have done, and out of a quedm of con- 
science resolve to proceed no farther ; certainly, if this be true, 
you are not the men I took you for. Neither conscience nor the 
fear of infamy ought to terrify you ; for those who succeed in 
their attempts, let them have used what means soever, are never 
disgraced ; and as for conscience, we have no reason to give our- 
selves any trouble about it. Where the dread of famine and 
dungeons enters, as in our case, what greater terror can or should 
there be in hell ? ' " 

The speech is long, and all in the same strain. It so inflamed 

FLORENCE. 57 

his andience that they detennined to rise, and took an oath to 
stand hy each other. The signori had secret information of the 
plot, but although they took the best measures in their power, 
the government had not sufficient energy to prevent or suppress 
the tumult They burnt many houses and committed all sorts of 
outrages. If any one of the plebeians had been injured or 
af&onted by a particular citizen, he led the mob directly to his 
enemy's house ; nay, it was sufficient barely to mention the per- 
son's name, or to call out " to such a marHs hotise" or " to mch a 
man^s shqpJ^ They glutted themselves with mischief, and then, 
to crown all, they knighted sixty-four citizens, among whom was 
their favorite Sylvestro de' Medici. Their levity was very 
curious, for they conferred the honor of knighthood upon some 
of those very persons whose houses they had burnt down but a 
few hours before. Such is the caprice of the multitude, and so 
soon are their disgusts changed into favor and affection ! 

The behavior of the signori and the council of the people was 
such as might be expected from men conscious of having neither 
dignity nor authority derived from the laws. Before a law 
could be passed, it was necessary it should have the assent of 
the common council as well as of the signori. It was contrary 
to established custom for two councils to be held on the same 
day ; so that when the signori had agreed, it was necessary to 
wait till next day for the common council to deliberate upon the 
demands of the mob. These demands were extremely grievous 
and dishonorable to the government ; one of them in particular, 
that no person that was incorporated into the arts should be 
compelled to pay any debt under the sum of fifty ducats in two 
years, at which time the principal only should be paid to the 
creditor and the interest into the bank. Yet the signori had 
agreed to them, and the common council were the next morning 
deliberating; the multitude, naturally voluble and impatient, 
got together again under the palace. The law passed ; but the 
destruction of the city was not the less expected. The signori 
and counsellors left the palace one by one, and the people 
entered it. 

Hcec natura multitudinis est ; aut servit humiliter^ avi superbe 
dominatur. When the people entered the palace, Michael di 
Lando, a wool-comber, a bare-footed, ragged fellow, carried the 
standard of justice before them. " You see, my friends," said 

58 ON GOVERNMENT. 

Michael, " this palace is yonrs, and the city is in your hands ; 
what would you have done now ? " They unanimously cried 
out that he should be their chief magistrate and govern the city 
as he pleased. Michael, a shrewd fellow, more obliged to nature 
than fortune, accepted the government, with a design, however, 
to compose the city. To amuse the people, he sent them to 
search for one Nuto, the hangman,^ and immediately issued a 
proclamation that nobody should dare to burn or plunder any 
man's house for the future; and to enforce the observance of it, 
he ordered a gibbet to be erected in the great piazza. The mob 
soon brought Master Nuto into the piazza and hung him up by 
one leg upon the gibbet ; and as every one tore away a joint or a 
piece of his flesh, in two or three minutes there was nothing left 
of him but the foot by which he hung. 

" Michael gallantly new-modelled the state, appointed new 
signori, and gave the rents of all the shops upon the Old Bridge 
to Sylvestro de' Medici ; took a good share to himself,^ and was 
very liberal to many other citizens who had befriended the ple- 
beians, not only out of gratitude for past favors, but to engage 
them to support him in future against envy. But the plebeians 
thought Michael had been too partial to some of the principal 
commoners, flew to arms again, appointed eight heads over 
them, with other subordinate officers and magistrates ; so that 
the city had now two tribunals, and was governed by two dis- 
tinct administrations. They took away all honors and emolu- 
ments that had been granted to Sylvestro de' Medici and to 
Michael di Lando." 

But Michael showed himself, in valor, generosity, and pru- 
dence, far superior to any other citizen, and well deserves to be 
reckoned among those few that have been real benefactors to 
their country. If he had been of an ambitious or self-interested 
disposition, the republic must have relapsed into a more intolera- 
ble degree of servitude than it was under the tyranny of the 
Duke of Athens ; but his integrity would not suffer him to 
cherish any design that might be prejudicial to the good of the 
public, and his prudence taught him to conduct himself in such 
a manner as not only gained him the first place and confidence 
of his own party, but enabled him to triumph over that of his 

1 « Bargelloy" sheriff. ^ ''La padesterla (f EmpoUr 

FLORENCE. 59 

enemies. He suppressed this new rebellion against his author- 
ity with great address and spirit ; and those proceedings struck a 
terror into the plebeians and opened the eyes of the better sort 
of people, who could not help wondering at their own stupidity, 
that after they had suppressed the pride of the nobility, they 
could so patiently submit to be insulted by the very dregs and 
refuse of the city. 

" When Michael obtained this complete victory over the ple- 
beians, the new signori were already appointed, two of whom 
were of so base and abject condition, that every one seemed 
desirous to be rid of such infamous magistrates. As they 
entered on the magistracy, there was an uproar in the piazza, 
which was full of armed men, who shouted with one voice, * No 
plebeians * in the signori ! ' The rest of the signori, in order to 
appease the tumult, degraded their two associates and chose two 
others in their room ; they likewise dissolved the plebeian com- 
panies, and deprived all those of their offices who had any con- 
nection with them, except Michael and a few of the best of them. 
They also divided the subordinate magistracy into two separate 
jurisdictions, one of which was to preside over the greater arts, 
and the other over the less. For the signori it was only pro- 
vided in general that five of that body should be drawn out of 
the less companies and four out of the greater, and the standard- 
bearer alternately out of each." 

Sylvestro de' Medici and a few others who had promoted this 
new regulation became in a manner the chief governors of the 
city. These proceedings and this new model of government 
revived the old divisions betwixt the more considerable com- 
moners and the lower sort of mechanics, which had first been 
occasioned by the ambition of the Ricci and Albizzi ; and be- 
cause they afterwards produced terrible consequences, Machia- 
avel henceforward distinguishes these two factions by the names 
of the popular and plebeian. 

'' Though this constitution of government lasted but three 
years, it abounded with executions and banishments; for as 
those who were chiefly concerned in the administration well 
knew there were great numbers of malcontents, both within the 
city and without it, they lived in perpetual fear and alarm. The 

^ ^^ Del popolo minuto.** Macbiav. 

60 ON GOVERNMENT. 

disaffected within the walls either actually did, W were sup- 
posed to cabal daily against the state ; and those without were 
continually raising disturbances abroad by the assistance of 
foreign princes or republics, sometimes in one part, sometimes 
in another. In such a government the laws are insulted by 
every party in turn. Accusations were laid before the magistrates 
against a number of citizens for corresponding with the exiles 
at Bologna, concerning a plot against the city ; the prisoners 
were examined, and nothing criminal could be proved against 
them. The magistrate was going to acquit and discharge them ; 
the people rose in such a ferment of clamor and calumnies that 
the magistrate was forced to pass sentence of death upon them. 

" Their execution occasioned fresh murmurs and discontents 
in the city, so that both those who had got the upper hand, and 
those who were depressed, lived in continual fear and suspicion 
of each other. Dreadful indeed were the consequences which 
flowed from the apprehension of the former, as every little acci- 
dent furnished them with a handle to trample on their fellow- 
citizens, some of whom they daily put to death, or sent into exile. 
They likewise made several new laws to strengthen their hands, 
and keep those down of whom they entertained the least suspi- 
cion. These suspicions growing stronger and stronger every day, 
made them behave with more rigor to the other party; a manner 
of proceeding that only served to multiply their discontents, and 
to increase instead of allaying their own fears, which were not a 
little heightened by the insolence of Georgio Scali and Tomaso 
Strozzi, whose authority was much superior to that of the magis- 
trates ; and therefore they all stood in awe of those two citizens, 
as they knew it was in their power, if they should join the ple- 
beians, to turn them entirely out of the administration. 

" This intemperate and tyrannical manner of governing began 
to grow intolerable, not only to all good citizens, but even to the 
seditious themselves ; and it was not possible that the arrogance 
of Scali in particular could be long supported. By delivering a 
friend and tool of his out of the hands of justice, by a mob, he 
soon furnished his enemies with a fair opportunity not only of 
wreaking their own private revenge upon him, but of delivering 
the commonwealth out of his hands, and the hands of the ple- 
beians, who had so unmercifully tyrannized over it for three 
years. 

FLORENCE. 61 

^ They engaged in this design Benedetto, a man of immense 
fortune, very humane, strict in his moreds and principles, a steady 
friend to the liberties of his country, and sufficiently disgusted at 
the tyrannical proceedings of the government, so that it was no 
difficult matter to engage him in any measures that might con- 
tribute to the downfall of Scali. As the insolence and oppression 
of the principal commoners had made him their enemy, and a 
friend to the plebeians, so, when he saw the latter pursuing the 
very same measures, he quickly detached himself from them. 
Having brought Benedetto and the heads of the arts into their 
design, they seized upon Scali, and the next day he was beheaded ;* 
which struck such a terror into his party, that not one of them 
offered to stir in his favor, though they crowded in great numbers 
to see his execution. When he came to suffer death, in the face 
of that very people who had so lately worshipped him with a 
degree of idolatry, he could not help complaining of the hardness 
of his destiny, and of the wickedness of those citizens who, by 
their oppressions, had forced him to caress a rabble, in which he 
found there was neither honor nor gratitude. He bewailed his 
folly in having trusted to the fidelity of plebeians, which he might 
well have known is ever liable to be shaken and seduced by any 
little suspicion, misrepresentation, or blast of envy. He told 
Benedetto, ' This is the last day of my misfortunes, and the first 
of yours.' After him, some of his chief confidants were put to 
death, and their bodies dragged through the streets by the people. 

" His death threw the whole city into a ferment. As the city 
was full of different humors, every one had a separate view, and 
was eager to accomplish it before he laid down his arms. The 
ancient nobility, now called grandees, could not bear to live any 
longer without some share in the public honors, and exerted their 
utmost eflbrts to recover them ; for which purpose they endea- 
vored to have the captains of the party restored to their former 
authority. The heads of the popular faction, and the greater 
arts, were disgusted that the government of the state was shared 
in common with them by the inferior arts or plebeians ; the infe- 
rior arts, instead of giving up any part of their authority, were 
very desirous to increase it, and the plebeians were afraid of hav- 
ing their new companies dissolved. From these different views 

* Nerli, p. 28. 
VOL. v. 6 

62 ON GOVERNMENT. 

and apprehensions there was nothing to be seen in Florence but 
tumults for a whole year. Sometimes the grandees, sometimes 
the greater, sometimes the lesser arts, and sometimes the ple- 
beians, were in an uproar ; and it often happened that they all 
took arms at the same time in different parts of the city." 

After many mischiefs, dangers, and troubles, and many con- 
sultations and conferences, a new form of government was esta- 
blished.* All were recaUed who had been banished since Syl vestro 
de' Medici was standard-bearer; all offices and appointments 
conferred in 1378 were abolished ; the new companies dissolved, 
and reincorporated in their respective arts ; the inferior arts were 
not to choose any standard-bearer of justice ; instead of enjoying 
one half of the public honors, they were now limited to one third, 
and those too of the lower rank. The popular nobility and the 
Guelphs reassumed their superiority; and the plebeians were ut- 
terly dispossessed of it, after they had held it from 1378 to 1381. 

"But the new administration was no less grievous and oppressive 
than that of the plebeians had been ; several of the popular nobi- 
lity, and many of the heads of the plebeians, were banished, and 
among the rest Michael,f whom the remembrance of his former 
great merit, in restraining the fury of the populace when so licen- 
tiously plundering the city, was not sufficient to protect from the 
resentment of the governing party. From such impolitic pro- 
ceedings in princes and governors of commonwealths, it happens 
that men, naturally growing disgusted with their ill-timed severity 
and ingratitude, often incur their displeasure before they are 
aware of it. 

"As such executions and banishments had ever been disap- 
proved of by Benedetto, he could not help blaming the authors 
of these ; upon which the government began to grow jealous of 
him, as a favorer of the plebeian party, and one that had con- 
sented to the death of Scali, not out of any real disapprobation 
of his conduct, but that he might the more easily get the reins 
of government into his own hands. They kept a strict watch 
over him, and resolved to ruin him. Intrigues were soon laid, 
by which Benedetto was sent into banishment.^ ' You see, my 
dear friends,' said he, when he took leave of them, *in what 

* Nerli, p. 28. f Ibid. p. 29. 

X Pervenne in que' tempi al supremo magistrato Bardo Mancini, uomo molto 
contrario alia setta plebea, e molto nemico per queste, e per altre cagioni di 

FLORENCE. 63 

manner fortune has contrived my ruin, and how she still threat- 
ens you ; at which neither do I wonder nor should you : it is the 
lot of those who endeavor to maintain their integrity among the 
wicked, and who desire to sustain that which more desire to 
destroy. From the same principle of love to my country which 
once induced me to join Sylvestro de' Medici, and afterwards to 
separate myself from Scali, I could not forbear censuring the 
proceedings of those who are now at the helm, who, hamng 
nobody to chastise them, are likewise desirous to get rid of every 
one who dares to reprehend them.' He preserved his character 
for piety and humanity abroad, and there died. His bones were 
brought back to Florence, and interred there with the highest 
honors by those very people who had persecuted him while alive 
with so much rancor and injustice." 

" The family of the Alberti were not the only sufferers in 
these distractions, for many other citizens were either admonished 
or sent into exile. The members of this balia having done what 
they were deputed for, were going to break up, as they thought 
it would have an appearance of modesty; but the people, hearing 
of their resolution, ran to arms in the palace, and insisted that 
they should banish and admonish several others before they 
resigned their authority." 

" Nevertheless, to diminish the authority of the plebeians still 
more, the signori made a decree, that the third part of the honors 
which they before enjoyed should be reduced to a fourth ; and, 
that there might be two at least in the signori, always of approved 
fidelity to the government, they gave the gonfalonier, and four 
other citizens, authority to make a fresh imborsation, and to put 
the names of a select number of citizens into a particular purse, 
out of which two of every new signory should always be drawn." 

" Tranquillity now continued till 1387, when Giovanni Gale- 
azzo Viconti, commonly called the Conte di Virtu, thought to 
make himself King of Italy by arms, as be had made himself 

Messer Benedetto Alberd, e conosciuto Bftrdo la j^elosia, che cittadini del govemo 
avevano di quella casa de sli Alberti, con pardcipazioue de' principali deUa setta 
de nobili) fece creare una oalia per sicurta dello stato, nclla quale intra le prime 
cose a deliber6, che Messer Benedetto fusse confinato, e 11 resto de gli Alberti 
tutd ammoniti ; e furono costretd i signori per gelosia de cap! della setta, che 
molti altri cittadini tanto popolani, che plebei, fusse confinati, o ammoniti, e per 
ridurre pii^ il goTemo a parte nobile, e per piii ayvilire gli avversari artifia e 
popolo minuto, &c. Kerli, p. 29, 80. 

64 ON GOVERNMENT. 

Duke of Milan by treachery; but after making himself master of 
Bologna, Pisa, Perugia, and Siena, and preparing to be crowned 
King of Italy at Florence, he died.* 

" During the war with the Duke, Maso de gli Albizzi was gon- 
falonier, a bitter enemy to the Alberti. He resolved, though 
Benedetto was now dead, to be revenged, before he went out of 
office, on the rest of that family, for Pietro's unfortunate end. 
He accused the two heads of the family of corresponding with 
the exiles, and took them into custody. Upon this the whole 
city was in an uproar. The signori called the people together, 
and appointed a new balia, by which many citizens, besides 
almost all the Alberti, were banished, and many artificers admo- 
nished or put to death, and a fresh imborsation of magistrates 
was made. This tyrannical manner of proceeding so enraged 
the arts and lower sort of people, who now saw their lives and 
honors wantonly taken away, that they rose in arms, some of 
them running to the piazza, and others to the house of Veri de' 
Medici, who, after the death of Sylvester, was become the head 
of that family, and earnestly entreated him to take the govern- 
ment into his hands, and deliver them from the oppression of 
citizens, who were daily endeavoring to destroy the common- 
wealth, and every good man in it" 

Antonio de' Medici was most importunate with him, though 
they had been long at open enmity. All writers agree, that if 
Veri had been as ambitious as he was virtuous, he might have 
made himself lord of the city ; but he put himself at the head 
of the people, marched to the piazza, and there publicly refused 
to do any thing unconstitutional, but prayed the signori to 
redress the grieveinces of the people. 

"They highly commended him, and promised to give all 
satisfaction. Upon these assurances, and a reliance on Veri's 
word, the people returned to their houses. As soon as the 
tumult was composed, the signori, instead of fulfilling their 
promises, fortified the piazza, enrolled two thousand citizens to 
defend them, forbid all others to bear arms, put many citizens 
to death, and banished others, who had been most active in 
the late insurrection. The few Alberti who were left, and 
the Medici, thought themselves and the people deceived, and 

* Nerli, p. 30. 

FLORENCE. 65 

were extremely disgusted by these proceedings; but the first 
who had courage to oppose them was Donato Acciaivoli, one 
of the grandees, rather superior to Maso Albizzi, who, by the 
steps he ha(|f taken while he was gonfalonier, was become in a 
manner the head of the commonwealth. Donato endeavored 
to get those who had been sent into exile recalled, and those 
who had been admonished requalified to hold theh: former 
honors and employments. He first attempted it by persuasion, 
but not succeeding, he threatened to do it by force. For this 
he was cited, convicted, and banished to Barletta. Alamanno, 
and Antonio de' Medici, and all those who were of Alamanno's 
family, with many of the inferior arts, who had any interest 
among the plebeians, were likewise banished. All these things 
happened within two years after Maso de gli Albizzi had assumed 
the government 

In 1397, the exiles at Bologna, spirited young men, among 
whom was Antonio de' Medici, depending upon the people's 
rising in their favor, determined at all events to return to their 
country and assassinate Maso ; but either from a terror of the 
government, or prejudice against the exiles, the people would 
not move ; and the conspirators fled to the church, where they 
were put to death.* This conspiracy was scarcely quashed, 
when another one still more dangerous, of other exiles scattered 
over Lombardy, in concert with the Duke of Milan, was dis- 
covered; but this was defeated, and the authors punished. 
Then a new balia was instituted, with authority to provide 
for the safety of the commonwealth. By this council, six 
of the Bicci, six of the Alberti, two of the Medici, three of 
the Scali, two of the Strozzi, and many others of lower condi- 
tion, were proclaimed rebels ; all the rest of the Alberti, Ricci, 
and Medici, except some very few, were rendered incapable of 
holding any office for ten years. One of the Alberti only was 
spared on account of his quiet character, Antonio ; but the 
government was jealous of him, and soon found a pretence for 
banishing him to a distance of three hundred miles from the 
city ; and to firee the government from the continual apprehen- 
sions they lived under of the Alberti, they banished all that 
family that were above fifteen years of age. These things hap- 
pened in 1400.t 

* Nerli, p. 32. f Id. p. 88. 

£ 

66 ON GOVERNMENT. 

" In 1412, some of the Alberti returned from banishment, and 
another balia was appointed, which made new laws for the 
security of the state, €md inflicted other penalties on the family. 

^< In 1414 ended the war with Ladislaus, Kinig of Naples, 
whose death delivered Florence firom as much danger as that of 
the Conte di Virtu had done." 

The period firom 1371 to 1434, is that which is boasted of by 
Machiavel as the prosperous one, but the prosperity of which he 
attributes to the virtues and abilities of Maso. Pisa, Ck)rtona, 
Arezzo, Leghorn, and Monte Pulciano, were added to the dominion. 

" All republics, especially such as are not well constituted, 
undergo frequent changes in their laws and manner of govern- 
ment. And this is not owing to the nature either of liberty or 
subjection in general, as many think, but to downright oppres- 
sion on one hand, or unbridled licentiousness on the other.^ " 

It is very true that most republics have undergone frequent 
changes in their laws; but this has been merely because very 
few republics have been well constituted. It is very true also, 
that there is nothing in the nature of liberty, or of obedience, 
which tends to produce such changes; on the contrary, real 
liberty and true obedience rather tend to preserve constancy in 
government It is, indeed, oppression and license that occasion 
changes ; but where the constitution is good, the laws govern, 
and prevent oppression as well as license. 

" The name of liberty is often nothing more than a specious 
pretence,* made use of both by the instruments of licentious- 
ness, who for the most part are commoners, and by the promoters 
of slavery, who generally are the nobles, each side being equally 
impatient of restraint and control." 

This is a truth, which is proved as well as illustrated by 
every page of the foregoing history, as well as by the history of 
almost all other republics, ancient and modern; and the next 
paragraph shows that Machiavel had an accurate idea of the evil, 
though a confused one of the remedy. 

^ Lib. iy. Non mediante la liberty e la servitii, come molti credono, ma me- 
diante la aervitfl e la licenza. " Not through liberty and servitude, as many 
think, but through servitude and licentiousness." The idea is somewhat ob- 
scurely expressed, and needs the aid of the following sentence which is found 
translated oelow. 

9 Perch^ della liberty solamente il nome ^ celebrato. '* For the name only 
of liberty is commended by/' &c. 

FLORENCE. 67 

•' When it fortunately happens, which indeed is very seldom, 
that some wise, good, and powerful citizen, has sufficient au- 
thority in the commonwealth to make such laws as may extin- 
guish all jealousies betwixt the nobility and the people, or at 
least, so to moderate and restrain them, that they shall not be 
able to produce any bad effect, then that state may properly 
be called free, and its constitution looked upon as firm and 
permanent; for being once established upon good laws and 
institutions, it has no further occasion, like other states, for the 
virtue of any particular man to support it" 

One would be apt to conjecture from this, that Machiavel 
was about to propose a first magistrate, armed by the constitu- 
tion with sufficient authority to mediate, at aU times, between 
the nobles and commons. Such a magistrate, possessed of the 
whole executive power, with a negative to defend it, has always 
authority to intervene between the nobles and commons, and to 
preserve the energy of the laws to restrain both ; and whether 
this executive magistrate is wise and good or not, if the com- 
mons have the negative upon the purse and the laws, and the 
inquest of grievances, abuses, and state crimes, that executive 
power can hardly be iU used. 

'* On such laws and principles many of those ancient common- 
wealths, which so long subsisted, were formerly constituted." 

Rome and Sparta were, in some degree, constituted upon 
these principles, and in proportion as they conformed to them, 
they were free and happy ; but neither was perfectly conformed 
to them. 

" For want of them, others have often varied their form of 
government from tyranny to license, and from license to ty- 
ranny;" and for want of them, such will ever be the vibra- 
tion. ^' For as each of those states always has powerful ene- 
mies to contend with, it neither is, nor can be possible they 
should be of any long duration;" and while they last, the 
liberty and happiness of the citizens are constantly sacrificed. 
^ AH good and wise men must of necessity be disgusted at 
them." So much so, that if it were not for the chance and 
hope of obtaining a better constitution after all the changes, 
any man of that character would prefer a simple monarchy at 
once. " Since much evil may very easily be done in the former 
and hardly any good in the latter; the insolent having too 

68 ON GOVERNMENT- 

much authority in one, and the ignorant and inexperienced in 
the other." These characters of simple aristocracies and simple 
democracies, which succeed each other so rapidly where the 
third power is not introduced to control and moderate both the 
nobles and people, are very just ; and Machiavel says what is 
near the truth, " both must be upheld by the spirit and fortune 
of one man alone, who yet may either be suddenly taken off by 
death or overpowered by adversity." It is a pity he had not 
said, parties must be upheld together by the constitutional, legal 
authority of one man alone, possessed of the whole executive 
power of the state, and then, if he is taken off by death, another 
will succeed ; if he be overpowered by adversity, the whole state 
must be overpowered with him; and no form of government 
can be devised to warrant states against pestilence, earthquake, 
and famine, the inevitable and irresistible judgments of heaven. 

" I say, therefore, that the model of government which took 
place in Florence after the death of Scali, in 1381, was at first 
solely maintained by the conduct of Maso de gli Albizzi, and 
afterwards by that of Niccolo Uzzano." This is a strong instance 
of the efficiency of one man, so situated as to be able to mediate 
between the aristocratical and democratical ingredients in society, 
and an argument for providing such an officer by the constitu- 
tion, whose duty and business it shall always be to act the same 
part ; nay, who shall be necessitated, from the principle of self- 
preservation and self-defence, to preserve the balance between 
them. 

" The city continued in tranquillity from 1414 to 1422, eight 
years ; Uzzano and six others had the chief authority. Those 
animosities, however, which were at first kindled in the city by 
the quarrel betwixt the Albizzi and the Ricci, and afterwards 
blown up to such height by Sylvestro de' Medici, were never 
extinguished; and although that party which had the largest 
share in the affections of the people continued only three years 
in the administration, and was turned out of it in 1381, yet as 
they were favored and supported by the greater part of the citi- 
zens, they could not be totally suppressed. The frequent admo- 
nitions and continual persecutions that were carried on against 
the heads of it, from 1381 to 1400, had indeed brought them 
very low. The Alberti and the Medici suffered most by these 
proceedings. Several of them had their estates confiscated; 

FLORENCE. 69 

others were banished or put to death; and those who were 
suffered to continue in the city were deprived of all their honors 
and employments, by which their party was much depressed 
and almost reduced to nothing. They retained, however, sharp 
resentments, and determined to take revenge, though under the 
present circumstances they thought proper to dissemble." 

This administration, composed of the most considerable com- 
moners or popular nobility, which had kept the city so long in 
peace, at last were guilty of two errors in point of conduct, 
which proved their ruin. As soon as they thought themselves 
safe from the attempts of the Alberti, they grew insolent and 
they quarrelled among themselves; two faults that have ever 
been committed by every single assembly, whether of nobles or 
commons ; and which ever must be committed by all that are 
to come. 

" Amidst their supineness, oppressions, and divisions, the 
Medici recovered their former authority and power. The first 
of this family that began to lift up his head again was Giovanni,* 
the son of Bicci de' Medici, who being a man of great humanity, 
and grown very rich, was admitted to a share in the government 
of the state, at which there were such extraordinary rejoicings 
among the people, that many of the graver sort of the citizens 
were not a little alarmed when they saw the old humors began 
to show themselves again. Uzzano represented to his col- 
leagues t that he knew Giovanni was a person of much greater 
influence and abilities than ever Sylvestro had been, and that it 
was dangerous to promote a man of so general a reputation to 
such a degree of power ; but the rest of the governors envied 
Uzzano's reputation, and were glad to avail themselves of any 
assistance to ruin him ; so that Giovanni was set up, as it often 
happens, to pull down Uzzano." 

When a popular assembly or a senate have the management 
of the executive power, disputes forever arise concerning every 
step in foreign affairs, and discords and factions have full play. 
Thus it happened in Florence upon occasion of a negotiation 
with Philip Visconti, Lord of Lombardy. Every faction had a 
different opinion. That, however, in favor of a war prevailed. 
Ten superintendents of the war were appointed, soldiers were 

* Nerli, p. 34. f Nerli, p. 34, 85. 

70 ON GOVERNMENT. 

ndaed, and taxes imposed, which occasioned great mnnntas 
in the city. The taxes were stidd to be heavier on the poor than 
the rich; every one exclaimed against the oppression of the 
governors who had wantonly embroiled the state in an expen- 
sive and unnecessary war, only to gratify their own private inter- 
ests and ambition, and to establish themselves in tiieir tyranny. 
The majority of the governors at last judged it necessary to 
declare war, notwithstanding that the resolution still met with 
great opposition, especially from Giovanni de' Medici, who pub- 
licly protested against it, and occasioned a multitude of argu- 
ments pro and con. The war was unfortunate, and a battle 
was lost by the badness of the weather ; this misfortune occa- 
sioned great consternation in Florence, especially among the 
governing party who had been its chief promoters ; they saw the 
enemy powerful and elated, themselves disarmed and without 
allies, and what was worse, hated to the last degree by the peo- 
ple, who insulted them whenever they appeared in the streets, 
complaining of insupportable taxes, and upbraiding them with 
the heavy expenses of an unnecessary war. 

Machiavel enumerates the taunts which fury suggested upon 
this occasion to an enraged and unbridled multitude. The 
signori called a meeting of the principal citizens, and earnestly 
exhorted them to use their good offices to soothe the people and 
appease the general indignation which their clamors had excited. 
Binaldo, the eldest son of the late Maso de gli Albizzi, having 
secretly entertained some hopes of becoming sole governor of 
the republic by the merit of his own services and the reputation 
of his father, made a long speech in justification of the war. 

A commission was given to twenty citizens to raise further 
supplies for the maintenance of the war, who seeing the govern- 
ing party now humbled, took courage and laid the chief burden 
of the taxes upon their shoulders, at which they were not a little 
mortified in their turn. They complained of it as too heavy ; 
but when this came to the ears of the council they took effectual 
care to have it collected ; and, in order to make all impositions 
appear for the future the more grievous and hateful to the people, 
they gave a strict charge to their officers to collect this with the 
utmo^ rigor, and to kill any one that should dare to oppose 
them or refuse to pay it; and so many were murdered or 
wounded that it was apprehended the two parties would come 

FLORENCE. 71 

to blows ; for those who had been so long in power and used to 
be treated with such reverence and distinction could not bear 
the thoughts of being insulted in this manner ; and the other 
side were resolved that every man in his turn should equally 
feel the sting of these oppressions. 

^ The principal citizens had now many private conferences, 
but Giovanni was not there ; either because he was not invited 
as a person in whom they could not thoroughly confide, or 
refused to come because he did not approve of such cabals. 

<< Binaldo de gli Albizzi made an harangue. He represented 
bow the government had again fallen into the hands of the peo- 
ple, from whom their fathers had recovered it in 1381. He 
reminded them of the tyranny of those who were in the admin- 
istration from 1377 till that time, in which interval either the 
father or grandfather, or some near relation, of almost eveiy one 
who was then present had been unjustly put to death. That the 
city was now going to relapse into the same state of confusion 
and oppression, since the multitude had already taken upon them 
to impose taxes ; and if not either curbed by force, or restrained 
by some other expedient, they would certainly in the next place 
proceed to appoint such officers as they thought fit ; edter which 
they would turn the present magistrates out of their seats, to the 
utter destruction of an administration which had governed the 
city with so much glory and reputation for forty-two years ; the 
consequence of which would be that Florence must either be 
blindly governed by the caprice of the multitude, and then one 
party would live in continual danger and apprehension while the 
other rioted in all manner of licentiousness, or it must fall under 
the subjection of some one person who would make himself 
absolute lord, and perhaps tyrant over it. As the audaciousness 
of the multitude was in a great measure owing to the largeness 
of the imborsations, and the little care that was taken in making 
them, which had filled the palace with new and mean men, he 
thought the only remedy for such disorders would be to restore 
the authority of the nobility, and diminish that of the minor arts, 
by reducing them firom fourteen to seven. This would lessen 
the power of the plebeians in the councils, both by retrenching 
their number and by throwing more weight into the scale of the 
grandees, who would, out of revenge for old injuries, be sure to 
use all possible endeavors to depress them. That wise men 

72 ON GOVERNMENT. 

always availed themselves of different sorts of people at differ- 
ent seasons ; and if their fathers had made use of the assistance 
of the plebeians to humble the insolence of the grandees, now 
the latter were brought so low, and the former become so auda- 
cious, it would be no bad expedient to join with the grandees 
to lower them. 

" Uzzano made answer that * it might be done if they could 
draw Giovanni de' Medici into their designs ; for if he concurred 
with them, the multitude being deprived of their head would 
not be able to make any opposition.' Rlnaldo was deputed to 
wait upon Giovanni, and persuade him to join them. Giovanni 
replied to him that he had always thought it the duty of a good 
citizen to endeavor to prevent any change in the established 
laws. By such changes some were turned out and others 
brought in, and the first generally thought themselves more 
aggrieved than the others benefited ; by which few friends and 
many enemies were made, mankind being naturally more prone 
to revenge than gratitude. That the citizens of Florence gene- 
rally dealt basely and perfidiously with each other; that as soon 
as the promoters and advisers of this plan had sufficiently 
depressed the people by the help of his authority, they would 
certainly fall upon him next with the whole force and assistance 
of the plebeians, whose affections he must have lost by such a 
conduct, and then he would be utterly deserted and ruined. He 
could not help remembering the fate of Benedetto, who, at the 
instigation of such as conspired his destruction, consented to the 
severe proceedings against Scali, and soon after was sent into 
exile himself by the very persons who had inveigled him into 
those measures. That for his part he should never agree to have 
any alterations made in the laws or constitution of his country.' 

" These deliberations when known, still added to the reputa- 
tion of Giovanni, and increased the hatred of the people against 
the other citizens. On the contrary, Alamanno de' Medici, his 
relation, and Cosimo, his son, urged Giovanni to take this 
opportunity of humbling his enemies and exalting his friends, 
reproaching him with his coldness, which they said emboldened 
those who wished him ill to form daily conspiracies against him, 
and would one time or other prove the ruin of all his family 
and dependents ; but he was deaf to all their remons|xances and 
prognostications, and determined to pursue his own measures. 

FLORENCE. 73 

The designs of the faction were, however, now plainly discovered, 
and the city began once more to divide itself into factions." 

Under such forms of government there can never be an inde- 
pendent judicial power ; all parties are either courting, or threat- 
ening, or persecuting the judges.^ 

" There were at this time two presiding under the signori in 
the supreme court of justice ; M artino, who was one of them, 
was of Uzzano's party, and Paolo, the other, followed that of the 
Medici. Rinaldo finding Giovanni inflexible, resolved to turn 
Paolo out of his oflice, as he thought that the court would then 
be wholly at his devotion ; but the other side being aware of 
this, were beforehand with him, and contrived matters so well, 
that they got Paolo continued and Martino discharged, to the 
great mortification and prejudice of his party. 

" The war lasted from 1422 to 1427, and the citizens were 
impoverished by taxes ; personal estate was now to be taxed as 
well as real. This was likely to fall heavily upon the rich, upon 
which account, before it passed into a law,* it was vehemently 
opposed by them all, except Giovanni, who publicly expressed 
his approbation of it, so that it was carried against them. This 
tax was regulated by a law made on purpose, and not left to 
the arbitrament of partial or interested persons; so that the 
more powerful citizens were in some measure restrained from 
oppressing the inferior sort and influencing their votes in the 
councils, as they had been used to do, by the threats of taxing 
them according as they gave their suflrages. This tax, therefore, 
was very cheerfully submitted to by the generality, though 
highly disgustful to the rich. But as it is the nature of 
mankind to be ever restless and discontented, and when they 
have gained one advantage to be still grasping at a higher, the 
people, not satisfied with this equality of taxation established 

1 In the last chapter but one of Sismondi's history may be found some indi- 
cious reflections upon the defects of the judiciary' system in the Italian republics. 
Although many ot those pointed out by him have been remedied in the present 
age, the subject is not yet without its difficulties. 

3 As this tax is afterwards alluded to by name, it seems proper to add the 
definition wliich Machiavel gives of it, — " E perchd nel distribuirla s'aggrava- 
vano i beni di ciascuno, il che i Fiorentini dicono accatastare, si chiam6 questa 
gravezza Catasto." 

"And because in apportioning it the property of each one was valued to the 
fiiU, which the Florentmes call accatastare, (anglice, * to lump,') this imposition 
was called catasto" 

VOL. V. 7 

74 ON GOVERNMENT. 

by the law, demanded a retrospect, by which it might appear 
how much less the rich citizens had paid before, than they ought 
to have done by this regulation, and by which every one should 
be made to account for deficiencies." 

This question occasioned very long and ingenious arguments 
on both sides ; but Giovanni represented to the people the bad 
consequences of retrospects, and with many arguments soothed 
them, till they dropped this demand. 

In 1428 peace was concluded, and fresh commotions began in 
the city on the subject of the new plan of taxation. " In this 
juncture Giovanni fell sick, and calling his two sons, Cosimo 
and Lorenzo, to his bedside, he advised them, * If you would live 
with safety and comfort, be content with such a share in the 
government as your fellow-citizens confer upon you, by which 
you will avoid envy and danger; for it is that which a man 
arrogates to himself that makes him odious, and not what is 
voluntarily given him.' He died lamented by the whole city, 
for he was very charitable and compassionate. His universal 
benevolence taught him to love good men and pity the evil. He 
never solicited honors, though he obtained the highest. He died 
possessed of immense riches,* and full of glory and reputation, 
leaving his son Cosimo heir to his fortune and fame ; both which 
he not only maintained, but augmented." 

Ambition soon kindled new wars. " The whole city was 
divided into little meetings and cabals of all ranks of people, the 
generality of whom were for commencing hostilities against the 
Lucchese. Among the more considerable citizens who favored 
this enterprise were all the followers of the Medici family ; those 
who opposed it were Uzzano and his party. It seems almost 
incredible that there should be such a change of opinions in the 
same citizens on this occasion, concerning the expediency of a 
war ; and yet those very persons who, after a peace that had 
lasted ten years, opposed a war against Duke Philip which was 
undertaken in defence of their own liberties, now strenuously 
insisted upon one against Lucca, to invade the rights of others^ 
and at a time too when the city was to the last degree exhausted 
and impoverished by the heavy expenses of the last From 
hence we may observe how much more ready mankind are to 

* Nerli, p. 38. 

FLORENCE. 76 

usurp the property of others than to defend their own, and how 
much stronger the hope of gain is than the fear of loss. The 
signori assembled the common council, where the matter was 
debated by some of the leading men of the republic in the 
presence of four hundred and ninety-eight citizens." 

The debate was conducted by Binaldo on one side and 
Uzzano on the other ; and, upon a ballot, only ninety-eight were 
against the war. The war was commenced and carried on with 
all that rapacious avarice and ambition which had begun it; 
and grievous complaints and accusations were brought against 
Astorre and Binaldo for their behavior in it 

In 1428,* Niccolo da Uzzano died, and Binaldo succeeded as 
head of his family and party. Binaldo returned in a rage 
against the magistrates, and presenting himself before the coun- 
cil of war, he told them " he well knew how difficult and dan- 
gerous a thing it was to serve an unbridled people and a divided 
state; since the one was carried away with every rumor, the 
other put a malicious interpretation upon actions that were 
doubtful, and always punished the evil, but never rewarded the 
good ; so that if a commander succeeded in an expedition, he 
had no praise at all ; if he was guilty of an error, his conduct 
was censured by the generality ; but if he miscarried, he was 
sure to be condemned by every one ; for in the one case his own 
party would envy his success, and in the other his adversaries 
would not fail to insult him." The council endeavored to 
appease his resentment, but gave the command abroad to others. 
The war was conducted afterwards rather unsuccessfully, until 
they came to a battle before the town of Lucca, and were totally 
defeated. 

^* As the expedition had been undertaken almost by general 
consent, the people, in the utmost consternation, and not know- 
ing where else to turn their rage, began to abuse those who had 
conducted the war, since they could not blame those who, by 
their own instigation, had first advised it, and they revived their 
old calumnies against Binaldo ; but the person whom they fell 
upon with the greatest violence was Guicciardini, who they 
said might easUy have put an end to the war if he had not been 
bribed ; nay, they went so far as to charge him with sending a 

* Nerli, p. 89. 

76 ON GOVERmiENT. 

horseload of money to his own house, and particularly men- 
tioned the names both of those that carried and those that 
received it. These clamors and accusations made such a noise, 
that the captain of the people could not help taking cognizance 
of so public a charge ; especially as he was importunately 
called upon so to do by Giovanni's enemies. Having cited him 
therefore to clear himself of this imputation, he made his appear- 
ance, but with much seeming indignation and contempt of their 
malice ; and his relations exerted themselves so strenuously for 
the honor of their family, that the captain was obliged to stop 
all further proceedings against him." 

The insinuation here is very obvious that the judge was 
bribed. 

" In 1433 a general peace was concluded, whereby all towns 
that had been taken by the Florentines, Lucchese and Sienese, 
were mutually restored to their former possessors ; so that the 
expense of this war was all lost. During the course of it the 
factious humors began to ferment again at home ; and Cosimo 
began to act with greater spirit in public affairs, and with more 
openness and zeal for the good of his friends, than ever his 
father had done ; so that those who rejoiced at the death of 
Giovanni were not a little damped at the proceedings of his son. 
Cosimo was a man of very great prudence, of a sedate and 
agreeable countenance, exceedingly liberal and humane, never 
entering into any measures that would be pernicious to the 
state, or even the party that he opposed, but taking all opportu- 
nities of doing good to every one, and of conciliating to himself 
the afTections of his fellow-citizens by his goodness and gene- 
rosity. So noble an example of benevolence greatly increased 
the hatred which the public had already conceived against the 
governing party, and at the same time was the best method he 
thought he could take to enable himself either to live with repu- 
tation and security in Florence, or, by the interest he had with 
the people, and even if necessary by force of arms, to get the 
better of any persecution that the malice of his enemies might 
raise against him. There were two citizens who contributed to 
promote this interest, Averardo de' Medici and Puccio Pucci; 
the one by his boldness and activity, the other by his great wis- 
dom and experience, which added much reputation to his party; 
indeed, the judgment and authority of the latter were so gene- 

FLORENCE. 77 

rally revered, that he gave a name to the party, which was not 
called Cosimo's, but Puccio's party. 

" In this divided state of the city, the expedition against Lucca 
was undertaken, which, instead of extinguishing the rage of fac- 
tion, still added fuel to it ; for, though Puccio's party had pro- 
moted and advised a war, yet those of the other side were chiefly 
employed in conducting it, as they had greater power in the 
government; and since Averardo and his friends could not by 
any means prevent this, they took every opportunity of defaming 
them, and calumniating their actions; so that when they met 
with any misfortune, it was not imputed to the superior strength 
or better management of the enemy, but to the misconduct and 
imprudence of the commissary. This was the occasion why the 
enormities committed by Astorre Gianni, though of themselves 
very great indeed, were still exaggerated. It was this sort of 
treatment that provoked Rinaldo to such a degree, that he left 
his command without permission. This was the true cause of 
Giovanni Guicciardini being cited to appear before the captain 
of the people. From hence proceeded all the charges and com- 
plaints that were exhibited against other magistrates and com- 
missaries ; and whilst those that had any foundation were always 
aggravated, and sometimes supported by downright falsehood, 
the people, out of the hatred they bore to them, greedily swal- 
lowed all, whether true or false. 

"Uzzano, and the other heads of that party, perfectly well 
aware of these base artifices, had had several private meet- 
ings to consider of proper means to prevent the effect of them ; 
yet they could not fix upon any expedient. It was very danger- 
ous, they knew, to connive at them, and not less to proceed to 
open violence ; Uzzano himself was averse to any remedies of 
that kind. Barbadori, seeing they were harassed in this manner, 
with war abroad and faction at home, made a visit to Uzzano, 
whom he found alone and very thoughtful in his study; and as 
he himself wished to see the ruin of Cosimo, he left no method 
untried to prevail upon Uzzano to join with Rinaldo to drive him 
out of the city. Uzzano replied, — 

" ' Common prudence would be sufficient to induce those who 
advise the expulsion of Cosimo to compare their own strength 
with his. Our party, it seems, is now distinguished by the name 
of the Nobility, and the other by that of the Plebeians. Remem- 

78 ON GOVERNMENT. 

ber the fate of tfae ancient nobility of this city, who at last wete 
utterly suppressed in their contests with the plebeians. Our 
party is divided, while that of our adversaries is compact and 
entire. Neri and Nerone^ two of the chief men in the cUy^ have 
not pet declared themselves^ and it is uncertain what side they 
will take. Several families are divided among themselves; and 
many there are that hate us, and favor our adversaries, merely 
out of envy or malice to their own brothers, or some other near 
relations. Among the sons of Maso, Luca, out of hatred to 
Einaldo, is gone over to the other side; in the family of the 
Guicciardini, Pietro, the son of Luigi, is a mortal enemy to his 
brother Giovanni, and joins our adversaries ; Tomaso and Nic- 
colo Soderini openly oppose us, out of pique to their unde Fran- 
cisco ; so that if we consider the quality of those who constitute 
their party, and of whom our own consists, I see no reason why 
one should be called the nobility in preference to the other. If 
it is because they are followed by the whole body of the plebeians, 
that very circumstance makes them so much superior to us, that 
if ever we come to an open trial of our strength, we shall not be 
able to stand before them ; and if we still continue in possession 
of the first places in the commonwealth, it is entirely owing to 
the established credit of an administration which has now sup- 
ported itself for the space of fifty years. But if things should 
come to extremities, and our present weakness be discovered, 
you may depend upon it, we should be forced out of the magis- 
tracy, perhaps to our utter destruction. Cosimo, it is true, freely 
lends money to every one that wants it; not only to private 
people, but to the public, upon any emergency, and to foreigners 
as well as Florentines. He is a friend to such as stand in need 
of protection, and sometimes helps to advance an acquaintance 
to a reputable employment in the commonwealth, by the interest 
which his universal benevolence has gained him among the peo- 
ple. What shall we be able to plead in excuse for endeavoring 
to expel him the city? Shall we accuse him of being charitable, 
friendly, liberal, and beloved by every one ? What law condemns 
charity, Uberality, and beneficence? Indeed, these virtues are 
sometimes counterfeited, to cajole the vulgar, by such as aspire 
to dominion ; but they do not appear in that light at present, nor 
is it in our power to make them. We have lost our reputation 
by our late misconduct; and a people naturally prone to faction, 

FLORENCE. 79 

and corrapted by continual diTiaions, will no longer put any con- 
fidence in us, or give credit to such accusations. If he is banished, 
he will return with more friends, and we shall have more enemies. 
If it is intended to put him to death in a fudicial manner^ that 
can never be efiected ; for, as he is rich, and the magistracy cor- 
rupt, he will be sure to escape all punishment But if he is 
banished or condemned, what will the commonwealth gain by 
that ? No sooner will it be firee from the apprehensions it was 
under from Cosimo, but it will be liable to the same from Kinaldo. 
For my own part, I am one of those who never desire to see one 
citizen exceed another in authority; and if one of these two must 
seize the reins, I know not any reason that should induce me to 
prefer Rinaldo to Cosimo. I pray God to preserve tiiis city from 
ever falling under the dominion of any one man ; but if a time 
should ever come, when our sins shall bring that judgment upon 
us, I pray still more eamestiy, that we may not become subject 
to Rinaldo. Tlie far greater part of the cUizens^ some out of stu- 
pidity^ and others out of malice^ are thoroughly disposed to seU 
their country; amd fortune has been so favorable to them as to 
provide a purchaser. Live quietiy, then ; and as to any invasion 
of our liberties, be assured, you have as much to apprehend from 
our own party as the other.' " 

This speech contains a volume of instruction. The situ- 
ation of such a government, where there are two parties, 
and no third power to balance them, is admirably described. 
Neri, and Nerone, who were yet neuters, are looked up to 
as capable, when they please, of overturning the balance, and 
effecting a revolution. Family quarrels are resorted to and in- 
flamed, in order to make different branches take different sides. 
Though one party is called patrician, and the other plebeian, so 
many individuals of each desert their colors and go over to the 
enemy, that it is impossible to say which party is really the patri- 
cian, and which the plebeian. Timid and irresolute to the last 
degree, the government dares not disoblige nn individual, even 
by punishing a crime ; the government really esteeming its ene- 
mies more than its own members; and opposition approving 
members of government more than their own associates; all 
parties endeavoring to get an injSnence over the judges, as 
essential to their existence; the judicial power unavoidably 
corrupted, — it was easy for Uzzano to say, and perhaps sincerely, 

80 ON GOVERNMENT. 

that he never desired to see one citizen exceed another in influ- 
ence. But, according to Machiavel, the existence of the govem- 
ment had long depended upon the superior authority of Uzzano 
himself. And no better plan of liberty than this deplorable one 
of Florence can ever be preserved, without some one citizen 
legally vested with authority to control each in turn of the con- 
tending parties. 

" Uzzano died in 1428,* and all restraint was at an end. 
Rinaldo now was head of the party, and was continually teaz- 
ing and importuning such citizens as he thought likely to be 
judges, that is, standard-bearers of justice, to take arms, and 
deliver their country out of the hands of Cosimo ; who, taking 
advantage of the stupidity of some, and the malice of others, 
would certainly enslave it. Thus Rinaldo, by endeavoring to 
supplant his adversaries, and they to support themselves, kept 
the whole city in continual alarm and suspicion ;' so that when 
new magistrates were appointed, it was presently known how 
many there were on one side, and how many on the other ; and 
at the imborsations for the signori, there was nothing to be seen 
but tumult and uproar. Every trifling affair that was brought 
before the magistracy created a division; all secrets were di- 
vulged ; they had no regard to justice ; the good and the evil 
were treated alike ; and there was not so much as one magis- 
trate that did his duty. 

" Rinaldo, impatient to lower the authority of Cosimo, in- 
trigued to get Bernardo Guadagni drawn for standard-bearer,* 
and succeeded. He went to congratulate him, and told him 
how much the nobility were rejoiced to see him in possession 
of that dignity; represented to him the danger they were in 
from their divisions ; and that the surest way to restore union 
among them was to rid themselves of Cosimo. Bernardo 
answered, he was fully convinced of the expediency and neces- 
sity of what he had urged, and desired him to prepare their 
friends to take arms. 

" Bernardo then summoned Cosimo to appear before the 
signori. The signori assembled the people, and appointed a 
balia, consisting of two hundred citizens, to reform the state ; 
and the first thing debated was, whether Cosimo should be put 

* Nerli, p. 89. 

FLORENCE. 81 

to death or not. Some argned for it, others thought banishment 
sufficient, and many sat silent. 

" Cosimo was committed prisoner to Federigo Malavolti, in the 
turret of the palace. From this place, he could hear the clamors 
of the armed men, who were below in the piazza, and frequent 
outx^ries for a balia ; which made him apprehend that his life was 
in danger, but much more, that his particular enemies would take 
some extravagant method to despatch him ; for that reason, he 
would eat no meat for the space of four days, except a mouthful 
or two of bread. Federigo, observing this, bid him take cou- 
rage, and eat his meat, and keep himself edive for the good of 
his friends and his country ; < and that you may have no more 
suspicion,' says he, ' I will eat with you.' Cosimo embraced him 
with tears in his eyes, acknowledging his generosity, and 
assuring him he woold amply recompense his kindness, if ever 
fortune should put it in his power to show his gratitude. 

"Federigo invited Farganaccio, a friend of the standard- 
bearer, to sup with him. Cosimo, after many fair words and 
promises, gave his guest a draught upon his banker for eleven 
hundred ducats, desiring him to keep one hundred himself, and 
present the other thousand to the standard-bearer. This he 
willingly undertook to perform, and gave the money to Bernardo, 
who then began to grow cooler and more moderate in the prose- 
cution ; so that, after all, Cosimo was only banished to Padua, 
though Rinaldo used his utmost endeavors to have him put to 
death. Averardo de' Medici, and many others of that family, 
were likewise banished at the same time, and with them, Puccio 
and Giovanni Pucci. 

" Cosimo was brought before the signori, 3 October, 1433, 
who pronounced the sentence of banishment upon him. He 
received the sentence with a cheerful countenance, saying, ' that 
in what part of the world soever he should sojourn, his person 
and fortune should ever be at the service of the republic, the 
people, and the signori.' The standard-bearer told him, he 
would take care that his life should be in no danger ; and having 
conducted him to his own house to sup with him, ordered a 
party of the guards to escort him to the confines of the Flo- 
rentine dominions. 

" Wherever he came, he was received with great honor, and 
publicly visited by the Venetians, who treated him not as an 

F 

82 ON GOVERNMENT. 

exile, but as a person of the first rank and consequence in the 
state. Florence, being thus deprived of so great a man, and so 
universally beloved,* Rinaldo saw a storm arising, and advised 
his friends to collect their strength, and fortify themselves ; that 
so, when their enemies should rise upon them, which was daily 
to be expected, they might be able to clear the city of them by 
dint of force, since, it seemed, they could not do it in a judi- 
cial manner; that they must regain the affections of the grandees, 
by restoring them to their honors and authority. He was an- 
swered, that the insolence and tyranny of the grandees always 
had been, and always would be, insupportable ; and that it 
would be madness to run headlong into a certain and slavish 
subjection to them, when the danger that was apprehended from 
the plebeians might only be imaginary. Rinaldo, seeing his 
advice rejected, could not help lamenting the misfortunes that he 
foresaw were going to fall upon himself and his party ; but 
he modestly imputed them rather to the malevolence of their 
destiny, than to the blindness and perverseness of men." 

But both Rinaldo and Machiavel would have been much 
better advised, if they had imputed all these evils to their true 
cause, an imperfect and unbalanced constitution of government, 
rather than to destiny or the perverseness of men. In such a 
form of government, destiny itself, without a miracle, cannot 
prevent the blindness and perverseness of men. Those who see 
the clearest are forced to shut their eyes, and those who are most 
upright are compeUed to be perverse. 

" Letters were soon intercepted from Agnolo to Cosimo, advis- 
ing him to stir up a war from some quarter or another, and to 
make Neri his friend; as he thought then the people would be in 
want of money to carry it on. Agnolo was banished, which did 
not, however, restrain the ardor of those who favored Cosimo. It 
was now almost a year since Cosimo had been banished At 
the end of August, Niccolo di Cocco was drawn standard-bearer 
for the two next months, and with him eight new signors, all 
Cosimo's friends, at which Rinaldo and his party were alarmed. 
Rinaldo was for taking arms, and obliging the standard-bearer 

♦ Fartissi Cosimo di Firenze 1* Ottobre, 1488, avendo laaciato di se nell uni- 
versale de* meno potenti cittadini grandiasimo desiderio, parendo loro emer rimesi 
in preda di pochi potenti, senza speranza di capo alcuno al quale n potessero 
appoggiare. Nem, p. 40. 

FLORENCE. 83 

to assemble the people in the piazza to appoint another balia 
and depose the new signori ; he would get others drawn, more 
fit for their purpose, by burning the old imborsation, and making 
a fresh one, in which the purses might be filled only with the 
names of their friends. Strozzi, a man of a peaceable and 
humane disposition, and given to study rather than to faction, 
opposed it; and it was resolved to let the new signori enter 
peaceably upon the magistracy. 

" Having been created by Cosimo's party, they no sooner took 
possession of the palace, than the standard-bearer began his 
office by an action which was to give him reputation, and strike 
a damp into such as might think of opposing him. He imme- 
diately committed his predecessor to prison, upon pretence that 
he had embezzled the public money; after which he began to 
sound his associates about Cosimo's return. Finding them well 
disposed to it, he communicated their design to those who were 
reputed heads of the Medici party, who all encouraged him to 
attempt it. He then cited Binaldo and others, the principals of 
the other party, to appear before him, who, instead of obeying 
him, flew to arms. But their party was irresolute, lost its 
opportunity, and gave time to the signori to provide for their 
defence. The signori sent to acquaint Rinaldo, and those who 
were with him, 'that they could not conceive what was the cause 
of such a commotion; that if it was upon Cosimo's account, 
they could assure them they had no thought of recalling him.' 
These promises, however, made but little impression on Rinaldo, 
who said he would take care of himself, by turning them all out 
of tneir offices. 

^^But it seldom happens that a/ny design succeeds^ where the 
avthority of the conductors is equals and their opinions different. 
Ridolfo replied, 'That for his part, he desired nothing more 
than that Cosimo might not be suffered to return.' So that, all 
hope of success being defeated by the delay of Rinaldo, the pusil- 
lanimity of Strozzi, and the desertion of Ridolfo Peruzzi, the 
rest of the party began to lose their spirits and grow cool. Pope 
Eugenius IV., driven out of Rome by the people, was then at 
Florence, and interposed his mediation till he persuaded the 
party to lay down their arms. As soon as the signori saw their 
adversaries disarmed, they began to treat with them, through the 
mediation of the pope; at the same time, they sent privately into 

84 ON GOVERNMENT. 

the mountains of Pistoia for a body of foot-soldiers, which, being 
joined by all the horse they had in the adjacent territories, were 
brought into Florence by night. Having taken f>ossession of all 
the passes and strong places in the city, they called the people 
together in the piazza before the palace, and appointed a new 
balia, which, at their first meeting, recalled Cosimo, and all the 
other citizens who had been banished with him. On the other 
hand, they not only sent Rinaldo, Peruzzi, Barbadori, and Strozzi 
into banishment, but such numbers of others, that most parts of 
Italy, and some other countries, were crowded with them, to the 
great impoverishment of Florence, both in regard to its wealth, 
its inhabitants, its trade, and manufactures. 

" But the pope, seeing that party which, upon his assurances 
and intercession, had consented to lay down their arms, entirely 
ruined and dissipated, was exceedingly enmged, as well as Ri- 
naldo. The latter, however, affected to say, it would give him 
no great regret to be banished a city where private men had 
more authority than the laws. 

" Cosimo, having notice, immediately repaired to Florence. It 
has seldom happened that any commander, though returning in 
triumph from victory, has been received with such acclamations 
and universal joy as Cosimo was by his fellow-citizens, who ran 
in multitudes to meet him, and saluted him, with one voice, the 
benefactor of the people and the father of his country." * 

Machiavel begins his fifth book as if be supposed his reader 
convinced that the commonwealth of Florence had expired, and 
an absolute sovereignty in Cosimo had commenced, by grave 
reflections upon the changes that are incident to all governments : 

'' They often degenerate into anarchy and confusion, and from 
thence emerge again to good order and regularity. For, since it 
is ordained by Providence that tliere should be a continual ebb 
and flow in the things of this world, as soon as they arrive at 
their utmost perfection, and can ascend no higher, they must of 
necessity decline ; and, on the other hand, when they have fallen, 

* ** Ritomb adunqne Cosimo in Fircnze, con tanta repntazione o con si granda 
allegrezza dair esilio, con quanta, mai ritomasse alia patria sua alcun altro citta- 
dlno trionfante, da qual si voglia o possa inimaginare felicisslma impresa vitto- 
riofio ; e bench^ egli si sforzasse in tanta sua felieiti^, e grandezza di mantenere 
sempre quella civile modestia, la quale osserv6 in osni sua azione mentrech^ 
Ywae, ad ogni modo appariva in lui una tal maestii di principc, che meritd per 
pubblico decrcto d* csser chiamato padre della patria, la qu^e da ease fii per 
trenta anni, pacificamente govemata. Ncrii, p. 43. 

FLORENCE. 85 

through any disorder, to the lowest degree that is possible, and 
can sink no lower, they begin to rise again. And thus there is 
a constant succession of prosperity and adversity in all human 
affairs. Virtue is the mother of peace ; peace produces idleness ; 
idleness, contention and misrule ; and from thence proceed ruin 
and confusion. This occasions reformation and better laws; 
good laws make men virtuous ; and pubUc virtue is always 
attended with glory and success. 

"At the return of Cosimo, those citizens who had been his 
chief friends, and some others, who had been injured and op- 
pressed by the late administration, were determined at all events 
to take the government of the state into their own hands. The 
signori, therefore, who were drawn for the two ensuing months 
of November and December, not content with what their prede- 
cessors had already done in favor of their party, prolonged the 
term, changed the residence of several who had been banished, 
and sent numbers of others into exile. And this was done not 
only out of party rage, but likewise on account of their riches, 
alliances, and private connections; so that this proscription, 
except in the article of bloodshed, might in some measure be 
compared to that under Sylla and Octavius. There were, how- 
ever, some executions; for Antonio, the son of Bernardo, was 
beheaded ; and four other citizens, having left the place to which 
they had been banished, and gone to reside at Venice, were se- 
cured by the Venetians, who set a greater value upon Cosimo's 
friendship than their own reputation, and sent prisoners to Flo- 
rence, where they were put to death in an ignominious manner. 

" These examples greatly increased the strength of Cosimo's 
party, and struck a terror into that of his enemies. When they 
had thus cleared the city of their enemies, and such as they 
thought disaffected to their government, they began to strengthen 
their hands by caressing and heaping favors upon others. For 
this purpose they recalled the family of the Alberti, and all the 
rest of the exiles that had been formerly banished ; they reduced 
the grandees, except some very few, to the rank of commoners, 
and divided among themselves the possessions of those whom 
they had banished. After this they fortified themselves with new 
laws and ordinances, and made a fresh imborsation, taking the 
names of all suspected persons out of the purses, and filling 
them up with those of their own friends. They likewise took 

VOL. V. 8 

86 ON GO\^RNMENT. 

care that such magistrates as had the power of life and death 
entrusted to them should always be chosen out of the most emi- 
nent of their party; for which purpose they ordained that the 
syndics, who inspected the imborsations in conjunction with the 
old signori, should have the power of appointing the new. They 
left; the cognizance of capital offences to the eight wardens, and 
enacted that no exile should return, even after the term of his 
banishment was expired, till he had obtained the consent of the 
signori and thirty-four of the colleges, though the whole number 
of them amounted to no more than thirty-seven. All persons 
were prohibited to write or receive any letters from them ; every 
word, or sign, or gesture, that displeased the governors, was 
punished with the utmost severity. And if there was any sus- 
pected person left in Florence, who had not fallen under their 
lash for such offences, they took care to load him severely with 
new taxes and impositions ; so that, one part of their adversaries 
being driven out of the city, and the other depressed and over- 
awed by these means, they in a short time secured the govern- 
ment to themselves; and to support their power with foreign aid, 
and deprive their enemies of all assistance, if they should offer to 
disturb them, they entered into a defensive league with the pope, 
the Venetians, and the Duke of Milan." 

Cosimo is very tenderly treated by Machiavel; yet he has 
imparticdity^enough to record the tragical story of Neri and Bal- 
daccio. 

" Among ^ those who had the chief authority in the government, 
Neri was one, of whose reputation Ck>simo was more jealous 
than of that of any other person ; as he had not only very great 
credit in the city, but was exceedingly beloved by the soldiery, 
whose affections he had gained by his bravery, humanity, and 
good conduct, when he commanded the troops of the republic, 
as' he had done upon several occasions ; besides which, the re- 
membrance of the victories that had been gained by him and his 
father, one of whom had taken Pisa, and the other defeated Hc- 
cinino at the battle of Anghiari, made him respected by many 
and feared by others, who did not desire any more associates in 
the government 

<< But of all their generals, Baldacdo d' Anghiari was certainly 

1 lib. vi. 

FLORENCE. 87 

the most eminent; nor was there any man at that time in Italy, 
who surpassed him either in courage, or military skill, or bodily 
accomplishments ; and having always commanded the infantry, 
they had such an opinion of him, that it was generally believed 
he could influence them to execute any purpose, and that they 
would follow him in any undertaking whatsoever. This Bal- 
daccio was very intimate with Neri, for whom he had the highest 
esteem, on account of his valor and other good qualities, of which 
he had long been a witness; but it was a connection that excited 
infinite jealousy among the rest of the principal citizens, who, 
thinking it dangerous to let him enjoy his liberty, and still more 
so to imprison him, resolved to have him despatched ; in which 
fortune seemed to second their design/' 

It is very provoking to read these continual imputations to 
fortune, made by Machiavel, of events which he knew very well 
were the effects of secret intrigue ; for there is no doubt it had 
been previously concerted to get Bartolomeo Orlandini appointed 
standard-bearer of justice, who, having been sent to defend the 
pass of Marradi, when Piccinino invaded Tuscany, had shame- 
fully deserted it, and abandoned all that country, from the nature 
of its situation of itself almost inaccessible, to the fiiry of the 
enemy. So jSagrant a piece of cowardice provoked Baldaccio to 
such a degree, that he could not help expressing his contempt of 
him, both in public conversation and in letters which he wrote 
to his friends, in terms that not only excited Orlandini's resent- 
ment, but made him thirst for revenge, and flatter himself that 
he should extinguish the infamy of the fact by the death of his 
accuser. To this resolution some other citizens (the Medici) 
were privy; who encouraged him in it, and said, that by so doing 
he would sufficiently revenge the injuries which he had 8ufr<#ed 
himself, and at the same time deliver the government from the 
fear of a man whom it was dangerous to employ, and might be 
their ruin to dismiss. 

^ Orlandini, therefore, being confirmed in his purpose to assas- 
sinate him, shut up several armed men in his apartment ; and 
the next day, when Baldaccio came to attend at the palace, as 
he did most days, to confer with the magistracy concerning the 
pay of his soldiers, he was ordered to wait on the standard-bearer 
immediately, which he did, without suspecting any danger. As 
soon as they met, and had taken a turn or two in the gallery, 

88 ON GOVERNAIENT. 

which is before the chambers of the signori, they began to talk 
about their affairs; and at last, coming near the door of the 
apartment where the armed men were concealed, the standard- 
bearer gave them a signal, upon which they instantly rushed out, 
and, as Baldaccio had neither arms nor attendants, they soon 
despatched him, and threw him out of the palace window, from 
whence he was carried into the piazza ; and after they had cut 
off his head, his body was exposed all day as a spectacle to the 
people. 

" This tragical event gave a considerable check to Neri's inte- 
rest, and diminished the number of his partisans. The governors, 
however, did not stop here ; for, as they had been now ten years 
in the administration, and the authority of the balia was expired, 
many began both to talk and act with much greater freedom 
than they thought was consistent with the security of the state. 
In order, therefore, to establish themselves in power, they judged 
it necessary to revive that court, by which they would have an 
opportunity of strengthening the hands of their friends, and of 
more effectually depressing their enemies. With this view the 
councils instituted a new balia in the year 1444, which con- 
firmed the present magistrates in their respective departments, 
vested the privilege of choosing the signori in a few hands, 
and new-modelled the chancery of reformation, deposing the 
president, Philip Peruzzi, and setting another person at the 
head of it, who, they were well assured, would conform himself 
to their instructions. They likewise prolonged the banishment 
of such as they had before sent into exile, imprisoned Gio- 
vanni, the son of Simone Vespucci, and deprived all those of 
their honors and employments that adhered to their enemies; 
anibngst whom were the sons of Piero Baroncelli, the whole 
family of the Seragli, Bartolomeo Fortini, Francesco CasteUani, 
and many otiiers. By such means they at the same time regained 
their former authority and reputation, quashed all opposition, and 
got entire possession of the government 

Machiavel's introduction to his seventh book, according to his 
custom, is full of grave reflections. 

'^ Those are much mistaken, who think any republican govern- 
ment can continue long united." 

So are they who think that any despotical or monarchical 
government can continue long united; it is as easy to form 

FLORENCE. 89 

and preserve the union of a repubiican as of a monarchical 
government, and more easy. A constitution formed upon the 
nature of man, and providing against his discontented temper, 
instead of trusting to what is not in him (his moderation and 
contentment in power) may preserve union, harmony, and tran- 
quillity, better than any despotism. Republics that trust the 
content of one assembly or two assemblies, are as credulous, 
ignomnt, and servile, as nations that trust the moderation of a 
single man. And it is as true of one as the other, ubi solittidinem 
facitintj pacem appellant. 

'^ Differences and divisions, for the most part, are prejudicial 
to republics ; and yet it is certain there are some that are of 
service to them." 

The same is true of despotisms and monarchies. Divisions 
are hurtful for the most part, yet some are beneficial. 

" Those, indeed, are hurtful that are attended with parties and 
factions ; but when that is not the case, they tend to the benefit 
of the commonwealth. As it is impossible, therefore, for any 
legislator or founder of a republic entirely to prevent feuds and 
animosities in it, it ought to be his chief care to provide against 
their growing up into factions." 

This is easily done, by distinct and independent legislative, 
executive, and judicial powers, and by two councils in the legis- 
lature. Factions may be infinitely better managed in such a 
republic, than in a despotism or monarchy. 

"It must be considered then, that there are two roads to 
popularity in such states, the one through public stations, the 
other through private life. In the former, it is acquired by gain- 
ing some signal victory, by the prudent and careful discharge of 
an embassy, or by giving wise and successful advice in council ; 
in the latter, by beneficence to one's fellow citizens, by screening 
them from the magistrates, by supplying them with money, by 
promoting them to honors and employments even when they do 
not deserve them, by entertaining the people with plays and 
spectacles, and by distributing largesses among them. This 
manner of proceeding procures followers and partisans ; and as 
popularity thus obtained is dangerous to the state, because it is 
commonly applied to serve private and self-interested views ; so 
the reputation that is acquired the other way is of credit and 
advantage to it, when not made a tool to party and faction, 

8* 

90 ON GOVERNMENT. 

because it conduces to the good of the whole. And though 
emulation and envy will always spring up, even among citizens 
of the latter sort, yet, as they have no partisans that follow them 
for their own private ends, they cannot hurt the commonwealth ; 
on the contrary, they must of necessity be of service to it, for 
this very emulation will naturally excite their utmost endeavors 
to excel each other in their merits towards their country, and 
make them keep so strict a watch over one another's actions^ that 
none of them will have it in their power to transgress the bounds 
of good citizens. But the divisions in Florence constantly ended 
in factions, and therefore were always pernicious to the republic ; 
nor did any one of those factions continue united any longer 
than it had subdued the adverse party ; for when once that was 
done, and consequently all fear and restraint were at an end, it 
immediately subdivided, and split itself into others." 

In truth, it is impossible that divisions, in any form of simple 
government, should ever end in the public good, or in any thing 
but faction. The government itself is a faction, and an abso- 
lute power in a party, which, being without fear and restraint, is 
as giddy in one of these forms as in any other. ^^ De V absolu 
pouvoir, vous ignorez P ivresse." It must, therefore, divide, if it 
is not restrained by another faction ; when that is the case, as 
soon as the other faction prevails, they divide, and so on ; but 
when the three natural orders in society, the high, the middle, and 
the low, are all represented in the government, and constitution- 
ally placed to watch each other, and restrain each other mutually 
by the laws, it is then only, that an emulation takes place for the 
public good, and divisions turn to the advantage of the nation. 

" Cosimo's party got the upper hand in Florence in the year 
1434 ; but, as there were still many very powerful men left on 
the side that was depressed, they yet stood in some awe of them, 
and therefore thought proper, not only to continue united, but 
to behave themselves with moderation ; nor were they guilty of 
any misconduct or oppressive act, of consequence enough to 
draw upon them the hatred of the people ; so that whenever they 
had occasion for the suffrages of their fellow-citizens to renew 
their authority, they always found them ready to reestablish the 
chiefs of their party in any office they desired. Accordingly, 
from 1434 to 1455, a period of twenty-one years, they were six 
times appointed by the general council to fill the balia. 

FLORENCE. 91 

" There were in these times two very powerful citizens in 
Florence, Cosimo and Neri ; the latter of whom had acquired 
his reputation in the public way, so that he had many friends, 
but few followers and partisans. Cosimo, on the other hand, 
having gained his authority both by his public and private beha- 
vior, had not only many friends, but partisans and dependents 
alsp ; and these two continuing strictly united, never found any 
difficulty in obtaining whatsoever they asked from the people, as 
their power was founded upon the favor of the public. But 
Neri dying in the year 1455, and the adverse faction being utterly 
suppressed, this administration met with much opposition before 
they recovered their former authority ; and chiefly from Cosimo's 
friends, who being now grown very powerful in the state them- 
selves, and freed from all further apprehensions of their enemies, 
were likewise desirous to lower his popularity. This jealousy 
gave beginning to the troubles that broke out in the year 1446 ; 
for those who were then the leading men advised their fellow- 
citizens, when they were assembled in the general council, to 
take the state of the commonwealth into consideration, not to 
create any more balias, but to resume the imborsations, and to 
choose their magistrates by lot out of the purses that had been 
formerly filled. To cure them of this frenzy, Cosimo had no 
other remedy, but either to seize forcibly upon the government, 
by the assistance of such partisans as still adhered to him, and 
to crush all opposition at once ; or to let things take their course, 
and wait till time should convince his friends that they were 
laboring only to destroy their own power and reputation and not 
his. He chose the latter expedient ; . for he knew he should run 
no risk in that, as the purses were filled with the names of such 
as were well affected to him, and that he might consequently 
take the administration into his hands again whenever he 
pleased. He suffered them therefore to proceed to an imborsa- 
tion ; but when the new magistracy was drawn, and every one 
thought they had now fuUy recovered their former liberties, the 
magistrates began to act in their respective departments, not 
according to the dictates and directions of those leaders, but as 
they thought fit themselves ; so that sometimes the friend of one 
great man, sometimes the creature of another, met with an unex- 
pected rebuff; and those who before used to see their houses 
filled with presents and solicitors, now had neither substance 

92 ON GOVERNMENT. 

sufficient to live upon, nor even common servants to attend 
them. They likewise had the mortification to see themselves 
reduced to a level with such as they had used to look down 
upon with the highest contempt and disdain ; and those who 
before were their equals, now suddenly advanced far above them. 
They had neither honor nor respect shown them by any one ; 
on the contrary, they were insulted and abused wherever they 
went ; and everybody made so free with their private characters 
and public conduct that they soon begun to be aware that it 
was not Cosimo, but themselves that had lost their authority. 

" Cosimo in the mean time took little or no notice of these 
things; but when any thing was deliberated upon that he 
thought would be agreeable to the people, he was the first that 
promoted the execution of it. But what struck the greatest ter- 
ror into these grandees and gave Cosimo a fair opportunity of 
making them repent of their past behavior, was the renewal of 
the catasto, established in 1427,^ by which the taxes were regu- 
lated and proportioned by law, and not levied according to the 
caprice or pleasure of particular men. This law therefore being 
revived, and officers appointed to see it executed, the grandees 
having had a consultation together, went to wait upon Cosimo, 
and entreated him to use his endeavors to deliver both them and 
himself out of the hands of the plebeians, and to new-model the 
government in such a manner that they might retrieve the repu- 
tation which formerly had made him so powerful and them so 
much respected ; to which Cosimo made answer, ' that he would 
do what lay in his power for that purpose with all his heart, 
provided it could be brought about legally and quietly, and with 
the good-will and approbation of the people ; but that he never 
would consent to violent measures or using force of any kind.' 

" They then endeavored to get a law passed in the councils for 
a new balia ; but finding it would not go down, they returned 
to Cosimo, and besought him in the humblest manner that he 
would make use of his interest to get it passed ; but with this 
Cosimo peremptorily refused to comply, being determined to 
make them fully sensible of their error. Upon which Donato 
Cocchi, who was the gonfalonier of justice, resolved to set up a 
balia without his concurrence ; but Cosimo raised such a spirit 

I See p. 73. 

FLORENCE. 93 

among the rest of the magistrates, that they not only opposed 
him with the utmost vehemence, but laughed at him, and treated 
him with so much scorn and derision, that it drove him stark mad, 
and he was carried back to his own house, raging and frantic 

'^ Luca Pitti,* a bold and resolute man, being now made gonfa- 
lonier of justice, Cosimo resolved to leave the management to 
him ; so that if any miscarriage should happen, or any odium be 
incurred, it might be thrown upon the gonfalonier, and not upon 
him. Luca was very importunate with the people to appoint 
a balia ; but perceiving it was to no purpose, he not only treated 
those who were members of the councils with great insolence, 
but threatened them, and soon after put his threats in execution ; 
for having filled the palace with armed men, in 1458 he called 
the people together in the piazza, and there compelled them, by 
force of arms,t to do that which they would not so much as 
hear of before. After they had thus resumed the government, 
they created a balia ; and the new magistrates, at the instiga^ 
tion of a few particular persons, who advised them to support 
an authority with terror which they had usurped by force, began 
their administration with sending Girolamo Machiavelli and 
some others into exile, and depriving many more of their honors 
and employments. But Girolamo, not observing the bounds 
that were prescribed to him in his banishment, was afterwards 
declared a rebel; and, travelling about Italy to excite other 
states to make war upon his own country, he was betrayed 
and apprehended at Lunigiana, by one of the governors of that 
place, who sent him to Florence, where he was put to death in 
prison. 

'' This administration lasted about eight years, and was indeed 
a very tyrannical and insupportable one ; for, Cosimo being now 
grown so old and infirm that he could not attend to public affairs 
with his usual assiduity, the government fell into the hands of a 
few insolent and rapacious men, who knighted Lucca Pitti for 

* Luca Pitd, tenuto uomo animoso, e xnolto piCi audace, che savio, o pru- 
dente. Nerli, p. 48. 

f Per6 ayendo Luca Fitti gi^ consumato il primo mese del suo magistrato, non 
laacio passare molti giomi del secondo, che avendo disposto i 8ig:nori suoi com- 
pagni, et prowisto il palazzo d' arme, e di forze, e Cosimo, e ^li altri deUa parte 
esHendod provveduti, e annad in favore de' signori, feccro chjamare il popolo in 
piazza e si venne al parlamento secondo il costume solito mediante it quale d 
cre6 una nuova bali^, e si ristrinse in quello lo stato, ordinandosi nuove imborsa- 
zioni, &c. Nerli, p. 49. 

94 ON GOVERNMENT. 

the good services he had done the state; he had also rich presents 
made him, not only from Cosimo and the signori, but from all 
the principal citizens, so that he became very rich, and built 
several magnificent palaces, and finished them by very arbitrary 
means, extorting more and greater presents from the chief citi- 
zens, whom he obliged to furnish him with all necessary mate- 
rials, and making the commonalty supply him with workmen 
and artificers. 

" The divisions which arose in Cosimo's party in 1455, were 
for some time happily composed by his moderation and prudence; 
but in the beginning of the year 1464 he fell sick, and soon after 
died,* an event much lamented both by his friends and enemies ; 
for those who did not love him for reasons of state, seeing their 
governors so greedy and ravenous while he was alive, and that 
they were only restrained by the reverence they bore to his person 
from proceeding to open violence, began to fear, now he was 
dead, that they should be utterly ruined and devoured. They 
had but little hopes in his son Piero, who, though a very worthy 
man, had so weakly a constitution, and was yet so raw and 
inexperienced in matters of government, that they thought he 
would be obliged to comply with the measures of the others ; 
and there being no longer any person of sufficient authority left 
to check their career, they would become every day more and 
more oppressive. 

" The loss of Cosimo was therefore universally regretted, and 
with great reason ; for, considering he was no soldier, he was the 
most renowned and illustrious citizen that Florence or any other 
republic in the memory of man had produced. As he surpassed 
all others of his time in riches and authority, so he far exceeded 
every one in prudence, liberality, and magnificence ; which great 
and amiable qualities made him the head of his country. Though 
he showed a truly royal spirit in his great works and actions, and 
was in fact the sovereign of Florence, yet so remarkable were his 
prudence and moderation, that he never transgressed those bounds 
of decency which ought to be observed by a modest republican. 
In his little parties of pleasure, in his conversation, in his alliances, 
and in every respect, he both acted and spoke like any other 
citizen; well knowing that pomp and pageantry, and ost>entatious 

* In 1464, in the seventy-fiflh year of his age. Nerli, p. 49. 

FLORENCE. 95 

parade, are not only of little real service, but excite that envy 
among men which is not incident to such actions as are done 
with an appearance of modesty and humility. No man of his 
time had a more perfect knowledge of mankind in general. In 
all the various revolutions of so fickle and fluctuating a common- 
wealth, he maintained his authority for the space of thirty-one 
years; for, as he was naturally sagacious, he foresaw dangers 
afar off, and therefore took timely care to prevent them. This 
great man was born in 1389. The former part of his life was 
full of troubles and disasters ; but afterwards fortune was so pro- 
pitious to him, that not only all those who adhered to him in the 
public administration of the commonwealth were aggrandized 
and enriched by it, but such as negotiated his private affairs 
abroad (as he had factors in almost every part of Europe) acquired 
great wealth ; so that many families in Florence raised immense 
fortunes under his influence, and several others owed fevery thing 
they had entirely to his advice and assistance. He was conti- 
nually laying out vast sums in churches, public buildings, and 
charities of different kinds. He was likewise a great patron and 
benefactor to learned men, and first brought Argyropulus to Flo- 
rence, a Grecian by birth, and the greatest scholar of his age, to 
instruct the youth of Florence in the Greek tongue, and made 
him preceptor to his son and nephew. This writer dedicated his 
works to the family of Medici; namely, — his translation of Aris- 
totle's Ethics and Physics, his own book De Regno, &c. Cosimo 
was at the expense of maintaining Marcilius Ficinus, the restorer 
of the Platonic philosophy, who translated the works of Plato, 
Plotinus, Jamblichus, Proclus, &c.; and he had so great an esteem 
for him, that he gave him a house and estate near his own seat 
at Careggi, that he might pursue his studies there with more 
convenience, and entertain him with his conversation at leisure 
hours." 

So that he had great merit in the resurrection of letters, and 
perhaps in the formation of Machiavel himself, to whom the 
world is so much indebted for the revival of reason in matters of 
govermnent, and who appears to have been himself so much 
indebted to the writings of Plato and Aristotle. Indeed, if ever 
the rise of any family to absolute sovereignty upon the ruins of 
a republic could be pardonable, this of the Medici, which was by 
real virtues, abilities, and beneficence, must be acknowledged to 

96 ON GOVERNMENT. 

be an instance of it. But it never can be justified, nor ought 
ever to be excused, where there is a possibility of establishing a 
constitution well balanced and really free ; and it may well be 
doubted whether any nation that has once been free can ever 
become so universally or even generally corrupted as not to be 
able to conduct a government of three well-balanced branches. 
He died full of glory, and with the highest reputation. After his 
death, all the states and princes of Christendom sent compliments 
of condolence to his son Hetro ; and he has this inscription en- 
graved on his tomb by a public decree, — "The Father of his 
Country." He appears to have had more merit, as well as more 
art, than Augustus. Machiavel is conscious that he shall be sus- 
pected of writing a panegyric upon Cosimo, rather than an his- 
torical portrait ; and not without reason, for he was a depend- 
ent on the Medici family; and he has evidently hurried over 
some, and glossed over others of Cosimo's acts. 

It is scarcely worth while to pursue this history, and relate the 
conspiracies which were formed against Piero and the Medici, 
or the suppression of them. The name of Medici had become a 
charm in the ears of the Florentines, like that of Hercules among 
the Greeks, Coesar among the Romans, Orange among the Dutch, 
and others without end ; and if absolute power must be esta- 
blished, it was as well in the Medici as the Pazzi. But Leo X 
is not so excusable for not adopting a wiser plan. 

"About the time of the death of Cosimo, Louis XL of France 
was embroiled in a troublesome war, raised against him by his 
barons, at the instigation of Francis, Duke of Bretagne, and 
Charles, Duke of Burgundy, which they called the war for the 
public good.* It lay so heavy upon him, that he could give no 
further assistance to John, Duke of Anjou, in his designs upon 
Genoa and Naples. Hence Ferdinand of Arragon became King 
of Naples, and Count Sforza, Duke of Milan and Lord of Genoa ; 
and these two having contracted family alliances together, began 
to take all proper measures to establish themselves and their 
posterity in their governments. For this purpose it was judged 
necessary that the king should, in the first place, make sure of 
such of the nobility as had taken part with John of Anjou against 
him in the late wars. The king made use of every artifice to 

* Philip de Comines. 

FLORENCE. 97 

reconcile his nobility to him, and at last succeeded ; for they saw 
that if they continued in anns against their sovereign, they must 
inevitably be ruined ; but if they came to an accommodation with 
him, or submitted to his mercy, they might obtain a pardon. 
Accordingly, these noblemen made their submission to him ; but 
they were afterwards, upon one pretence or other, at different 
times all put to death." 

" In 1465, Paul the Second, a Venetian, was elected pope ; ani 
the next year, Sforza, Duke of Milan, died, and was succeeded 
by his son Galeazzo ; an event that not only added fuel to the 
animosities that were rekindling in Florence, but occasioned them 
to burst out into a flame. For, after the death of Cosimo, his son 
Peter, being left heir to his riches and authority, thought proper 
to attach himself to Neroni, a man of very great power and repu- 
tation in the city, and of whom Cosimo had so great an opinion, 
that upon his death-bed he gave Peter a strict charge to consult 
him, and to be guided entirely by his advice in every thing that 
related either to the management of his own estate or the admi- 
nistration of the public. In consequence of this command, Peter 
sent for him, and having told him how great a confidence his 
father had reposed in him, said he hoped he would assist him 
both in conducting his private concerns and in the government 
of the city. Neroni promised to serve him faithfully; but when 
they came to examine Cosimo's books, they found his affairs in 
very great confusion. Neroni, therefore, who was more influenced 
by motives of self-interest and ambition than either by the friend- 
ship he had professed for Peter, or the remembrance of the obli- 
gations he lay under to his father, thinking he had now a fair 
opportunity of ruining that reputation and authority to which 
Cosimo left him heir, gave him a piece of advice, which, to all 
appearance indeed, seemed both equitable and necessary, but 
ultimately tended to his destruction. He represented to him in 
how great disorder his affairs were, and what large sums of money 
he would have immediate occasion for, if he intended to support 
his family interest, and the reputation they had acquired of opu- 
lence and power in the commonwealth ; and that there could be 
no relief or expedient so proper as to call in the debts that were 
owing to him, both from foreigners and his fellow-citizens ; for 
Cosimo, out of his natural generosity, and in order to establish 
an influence at home and gain friends abroad, had always been 

VOL. V. 9 G 

98 ON GOVERNMENT. 

BO ready to open his purse to every one who stood in need of his 
assistance, that those debts arose to a prodigious amount To 
this proposal, which seemed but just and reasonable, Peter con- 
sented, and, like an honest man, resolved to make use of his own 
substance only in that emergency ; but he had hardly called upon 
two or three of his debtors, before the whole city was in an uproar, 
every one upbraiding him with avarice and ingratitude, and load- 
ing him with all manner of reproaches and ignominious names, 
as if he had come to plunder them of their own property, instead 
of demanding payment of a lawful debt 

" Neroni, seeing the general resentment which his own counsel 
had excited against Peter, turned his back upon him, and entered 
into a combination with Luca Pitti, Soderini, and Acciaivoli, 
to deprive him of all power and authority in the state. The end 
. they all had in view was the same ; but their motives to pursue 
it were very different Pitti was ambitious to succeed Cosimo in 
the government of the republic ; and he became so great after his 
death, that he disdained the thoughts of stooping to Peter. Ne- 
roni, who knew that Pitti was not equal to so great a charge, 
thought, that if they could by any means get rid of Peter, the 
chief power must of necessity in a short time devolve upon 
him; Soderini was desirous that the city should enjoy more 
liberty, and be governed by the proper magistrates, as it used to 
be in former times ; Acciaivoli had a particular quarrel with the 
Medici ; thinking Cosimo had not used him well in an award 
between his son and his wife, and not being able to revenge him- 
self upon Cosimo, he was now determined to do it upon Peter. 

"However, they all availed themselves of the same pretext, 
and said, that they neither desired nor aimed at any thing further 
than that the republic might be governed by lawful magistrates, 
and not by a little junto of particular persons. The failure of 
several merchants about that time still increased the clamor that 
was raised against Peter, and gave the people fresh occasion to 
revile him ; for they made no scruple of imputing the blame to 
him, and said, that the sudden and unexpected calling in of his 
money had been the occasion of jJiose bankruptcies, to the great 
loss and discredit of the merchants in particular, and the preju- 
dice of the whole city. Besides all which, as he was going to 
marry Lorenzo, his eldest son, to Clarissa de gli Orsini, everybody 
took occasion from thence to calumniate him; publicly declaring. 

FLORENCE. 99 

that since he could not think any match in Florence good enough 
for his son, it was plain he did not regard them any longer in 
the light of fellow-citizens, but was taking his measures to make 
himself their sovereign. From snch a temper in the people, 
these ringleaders of sedition promised themselves certain suc- 
cess, especially as the greater part of the citizens were so bewitched 
with the name of liberty, which had been made use of to varnish 
over those private designs that they cheerfolly listed mider their 
banners. 

*^ But while these ill humors were fermenting, there were some 
who, out of a real love for their country, and abhorrence of civil 
discord, resolved to try if they could not stay them, for a 
while at least, by turning the attention of the people upon some 
more entertaining object ; considering, that an idle populace is 
generally made use of as a tool to serve the purposes of such as 
attempt innovation. To employ them, therefore, in such a man- 
ner as might best divert their thoughts, and prevent them from 
entering into cabals and conspiracies against the government, 
and at the same time to console them in some measure, after 
their mourning for the loss of Cosimo, who had now been dead 
a year, these citizens thought it would be no bad expedient to 
revive the public spectacles with which the people used to be 
entertained. Tournaments also were instituted, in which Lo- 
renzo carried away the prize from all others. 

" But as soon as these entertainments were over, the citizens 
returned to their former machinations with more ardor than ever; 
from whence arose great troubles and divisions, which were much 
inflamed by the expiration of the balia, and the death of Francis 
Sforza, Duke of Milan. Graleazzo, the new duke, sent ambassa- 
dors to Florence, to confirm the treaty of alliance that had been 
concluded between his father and the republic; one article of 
which was, that the Florentines should pay that prince a certain 
yearly subsidy. The principal of Peter's enemies took the oppor- 
tunity which this demand furnished, of publicly opposing him in 
council, and refused to comply with it" 

We may pass over the long, though entertaining account of 
the commotions, intrigues, and civil war between one party, 
whose object was the ruin of Peter and the Medici family, both 
in their private affairs and in their public influence, and the 
other, who exerted themselves for their preservation. The last 

100 ON GOVERNMENT. 

prevailed, and the other was banished and confiscated. Some 
of these fled to Venice, and harangued the senate of that republic 
into a war against Florence and the Medici ; but this war was 
unsuccessful ; peace was soon made ; and the Florentine exiles, 
deprived of all hopes of ever returning to their country, dispersed 
into different places. Tranquillity abroad succeeded ; but now 
the Florentines were grievously harassed and oppressed at home 
by the tyranny and ambition of their fellow-citizens ; for Peter 
was so disabled by his infirmities, that he had it not in his power 
to curb the insolence of his own partisans, or to provide any re- 
medy; he sent, however, for the principal of them, and sharply re- 
primanded them. It is generally believed that, if he had lived, he 
would have recalled the exiles, to bridle the tyranny and rapacity 
of his own friends ; but death, in the fifty-third year of his age, 
put an end to these good designs. He left two sons, Lorenzo 
and Giuliano, both very promising. 

" Soderini was at tliis time the most considerable among the 
leading men of the state, and for his prudence and authority, 
in great reputation, not only in Florence, but with all the princes 
of Italy ; so that after the death of Peter, he had the highest 
reverence and respect shown him by all the citizens, who daily 
resorted in great numbers to his house ; and several states and 
.princes addressed their letters to him, as head of the com- 
monwealth. But as he was a wise man, and thoroughly 
understood his own fortune, and likewise that of the Medici, he 
modestly declined returning any answer to those letters; and 
gave his fellow-citizens to understand, that it was not to 
him, but the Medici, that they ought to pay their court 
He assembled the heads of all the chief families in the city, 
and presented to them Lorenzo and Giuliano, and said, that 
if they were desirous to live in peace and union at home, 
and secure from foreign invasions, it was necessary to con- 
tinue their observance to the house of Medici, and support 
those young gentlemen in the authority which their ances- 
tors had enjoyed ; that it was but natural to show the same 
regard to the family, which they had so long been used to 
do, and therefore it must rather be a pleasure, than a grievance, 
to them ; for if mankind were apt to be fond of novelties, they 
were, for the most part, as soon disgusted with them ; that it 
had been found much more easy to maintain a power, the envy 

FLORENCE. 101 

against which was, in a manner, extinguished by time, than to 
raise another, which must unavoidably be subject to new emu- 
lations and speedy ruin from many causes and unforeseen acci- 
dents. Lorenzo, too, though very young, made a speech with 
much gravity and modesty. The citizens, before the assembly 
broke up, solemnly engaged to be guardians of their youth, and 
they, on the other hand, as solemnly promised to reverence them 
at all times as their protectors and parents." 

After which, Lorenzo and Giuliano were looked upon as the 
heads of the republic, and putting themselves under the gui- 
dance and direction of Soderini, the state seemed to be perfectly 
composed, neither distracted by intestine discords, nor embroiled 
iu foreign wars. But Bernardo de' Nardi soon found means 
to excite the ruined families, who had been exiled at the fall of 
Luca Pitti, to kindle another war, which was extinguished only 
by the destruction of the town of Prato. After this insurrec- 
tion, which was suddenly raised and soon suppressed, the 
citizens of Florence began to sink into luxury and effeminacy. 
The youth, growing more dissolute than ever they had been 
before, and having nothing else to do, threw away their time 
and estates in dress, in feasting, in gaming, in women, and 
other such dissipations. Their whole study and emulation was 
to surpass each other in fine clothes. 

A new war broke out on occasion of a mine of alum dis- 
covered at Volterra. Soderini thought a "lean peace better 
than a fat war; " but Lorenzo, thinking this a favorable oppor- 
tunity of distinguishing himself, and being supported in his 
opinion by those who envied the authority of Soderini, his 
opinion prevailed, and Volterra was reduced. 

In 1476 happened the assassination of Craleazzo, Duke of 
Milan, and the destruction of the assassins, who, as usual in 
such cases, were left unsupported, both by the nobility and the 
multitude who had at first encouraged them. Such examples 
ought to be warnings to princes, to reign in such a manner as 
to make themselves honored and beloved by their subjects ; and 
to others, against trusting to nobles or the multitude, except in 
a very good cause ; for though these may be discontented to the 
last degree, they will seldom stir a foot to their assistance in 
distress or danger. 

" After the Medici had gained such an ascendant, by the 

102 ON GOVERNMENT. 

defeat of their enemies in 1466,^ they grew so powerful, that 
they in a manner engrossed the government of the republic 
wholly to themselves ; and their power was so great, that such 
as were disaffected to their administration, were either obliged 
to submit to it with patience, or endeavor to shake off the yoke 
by clandestine machinations and conspiracies; which being 
attended with great difficulties and dangers, for the most part 
end in the ruin of the conspirators, and only serve still more to 
aggrandize and strengthen those against whom they are formed. 
Italy was divided into two confederacies ; the pope and the King 
of Naples were on one side ; the Venetians, the Duke of Milan, 
and the Florentines, on the other. When Philip de' Medici, 
Archbishop of Pisa, died, the pope appointed Francesco Salviati, 
an enemy of the family of Medici, to succeed him. The signori re- 
fused to give him possession of the see. The Medici were dis- 
countenanced upon all occasions at the court of Rome, while the 
greatest respect and partiality were shown there to the Peizzi, a 
family, indeed, which at that time was one of the richest and 
most powerful in Florence. Cosimo, considering their opulence 
and quality, had married his granddaughter, Bianca, to Gugliel- 
mo de' Pazzi, in hopes of uniting the two families more strictly, 
and hoping to prevent all jealousies and emulation betwixt 
them by such an alliance. 

^' But so vain and fallacious are all human designs, that the 
event proved quite contrary to his expectation, for some of 
Lorenzo's friends having insinuated to him that it would be dan- 
gerous to him, and a diminution of his own authority, to throw 
any more power into the hands of that family, he would not 
suffer Giacopo, nor any of his brothers or nephews, to enjoy 
such honors and offices as they seemed in the opinion of their 
fellow-citizens to deserve. The Pazzi were so exasperated at 
this usage, that the Medici began to be afraid of them ; and the 
apprehensions of the one seemed to increase in proportion to the 
resentment of the other ; for in all competitions for places of 
honor or profit, the Pazzi, how much soever they might be favored 
by the suffirages of the people, were always sure to be set aside 
and rejected by the magistracy. The Pazzi, therefore, thinking it 
intolerable that people of their rank and fortune should be 

« 

* Lib. viii. 

FLORENCE. 103 

treated in that injurious manner, began to meditate revenge. 
Francesco accordingly concerted a conspiracy with many other 
persons, and attempted to assassinate both the Medici at church. 
Giuliano was murdered with such circumstances of perfidy as 
would disgrace the most infamous cause, much more a cause 
dignified with the name of liberty. Lorenzo defended himself 
with great bravery, and escaped with a slight wound. The 
insurgents rode about the town, and cried. Liberty! liberty! 
and called upon the people to join them. But such was the 
influence of the Medici, and so much were they beloved, on 
account of their liberality and other princely qualities, that the 
rest of their fellow-citizens did not desire to see any change of 
government The whole city was raised, and Lorenzo safely 
conducted by a great number of armed men to his own house. 
The palace was recovered by the people, and all those who had 
seized upon it were either taken or killed ; the streets resounded 
'with shouts of, Long live the Medici! while the limbs of the con- 
spirators who had been killed were either carried upon halberds, 
or dragged round the city ; every one endeavoring to show his 
resentment, both in words and actions, against the Peizzi; for 
they not only plundered their houses, but hurried Francesco out 
of his bed to the palace, and there hung him up, close by the 
archbishop and his associates. So great was the favor and in- 
terest which the family of the Medici had gained among the 
people, by their prudence and liberality, that there was not a 
citizen of any degree whatsoever who did not go to Lorenzo, 
and make him an ofler both of his person and fortune. Blnato 
and Giacopo de' Pazzi were both apprehended, condemned, and 
executed, with so many others, that the streets and highways 
were full of their limbs. None of them were much lamented, 
except Rinato, who had always been esteemed a prudent man, 
and void of that family pride which was ladd to the charge of 
all the rest" 

After the conspiracy was suppressed, and the authors of it 
punished, the funeral of Giuliano was solemnized with great 
pomp, and attended by all the citizens. He left one son, born 
some months after his death, and named Giulio, who was after- 
wards Pope Clement VII. 

" The pope and the King of Naples, disappointed in bringing 
about a change of government in Florence by underhand 

104 ON GOVERNMENT. 

machinations, now resolved to attempt it by open war ; but the 
good fortune of the family, Lorenzo's address, and the steady 
attachment of the Florentines to him, carried them safely 
through this danger too. After the quarrels among the more 
considerable states were composed, in the course of several 
years there happened many other disturbances in Romagna, La 
Marca d' Ancona, and Siena ; they were more frequent in Siena 
than anywhere else, after the departure of the Duke of Calabria, 
in 1488 ; but after many changes and revolutions there, in which 
sometimes the commonalty, and sometimes the nobility pre- 
vailed, the nobility at last effectually suppressing the other 
party, Pandolpho and Giacopo Petrucci, one of whom was in 
the highest repute for his wisdom, and the other for his valor, 
became, in a manner, princes of that city. 

"As for the Florentines, they lived very happily, and in perfect 
tranquillity, from the end of the war till the death of Lorenzo, 
in 1492. For Lorenzo, having established a general peace 
throughout Italy by his great wisdom and prudence, had begun 
to turn his thoughts entirely to the aggrandizement of the 
republic and the care of his own family. In the first place, he 
married his eldest son Peter to Alfonsina, daughter to Cavaliere 
Orsino, and procured a cardinal's hat for Giovanni, his second 
son, who was not quite thirteen years of age when he was pro- 
moted to that dignity, of which there had been no example 
before ; but he ascended by degrees through all the preferments 
of the church, till he was exalted to the pontificate, under the 
name of Leo X. His third son, Giuliano, was but an infant 
He also disposed of his daughters very much to their advantage. 
In his mercantile affairs he was rather unfortunate ; for such was 
the extravagance of his factors, who lived more like princes than 
private men, that they had dissipated the greater part of his 
merchandise.; so that he was often obliged to borrow large sums 
of the public. His chief desire was to promote union among 
the people, and support the nobility in that degree of honor and 
respect that was due to them. He showed great favor to those 
who excelled in any art, and was a very liberal patron to learned 
men. He was passionately fond of poetry, music, and archi- 
tecture. He founded the University of Pisa. Immediately 
after his death, such sparks of discord began to rekindle, as 
shortly broke out into a flame, and preyed upon the vitals of 
Italy." 

FLORENCE. 105 

Peter, the great-grandson of the first Cosimo, having entered 
into a league with Louis XIL of. France, without the consent 
of the signori, was ejected by the Florentines, and retired to 
Venice; so that the Florentines recovered and enjoyed their 
ancient liberties till 1512, when Ferdinand, King of Spain, re- 
stored the family of Medici. It was again expelled in 1529. 
In 1530, Charles V. seized upon Florence, and made Alexander 
de' Medici, great grandson of Lorenzo, and who married his 
natural daughter Margaret, sovereign and duke of Florence. 
Alexander was murdered about seven years after, and having 
left no children, was succeeded by his brother John, whose son 
Cosimo was created Grand-Duke of Tuscany, by Pope Pius V. 
in 1569. . Voltaire says, that the period while Florence was 
under the government of the Medici ought to be called the 
Medicean age, as the polite arts and sciences were then carried 
to the highest degree of perfection ; then it was that those great 
geniuses, Ariosto, Machiavel, Guicciardini, Cardinal Bembo, 
Trissino, Casa, Bernini, Raphael, Michael Angelo, Titian, Paul 
Veronese, and so many others, adorned the age, and rendered 
their names immortal 

i 

106 ON GOVERNMENT. 

CHAPTER SECOND. 

FLORENCE. 

GuicciARDiNi begins his history of the wars in Italy, where 
Machiavel concludes that of Florence, with the death of Lorenzo 
de' Medici in April, 1492, the same year that the sagacity, forti- 
tude, and good fortune of that ever memorable native of Cogu- 
retto, a village near Genoa, Christopher Columbus, of plebeian 
birth, but of noble genius, in the service of Ferdinand and 
Isabella of Spain,* laid the first foundation of the constitutions 
of the United States of America. 

" The death of Lorenzo was a severe misfortune to his coun- 
try, which had flourished under the influence of his prudence, 
reputation, and genius, in all the blessings and embellishments 
of a long and secure peace ; and very inconvenient to all Italy, 
who regarded him as a principal counterbalance to Ferdinand 
of Naples, and Sforza of Milan, princes as ambitious as they 
were powerful. 

" Peter II., the eldest of his three sons, who succeeded him 
without contradiction, was not qualified by experience or abili- 
ties for so important a station. Deviating early from the coun- 
cils of his father, and without consulting the principal citizens, 
he was wholly directed by Orsino, a relation both by his mother 
and his wife, but a dependent of Ferdinand. This new connec- 
tion, so prudently avoided by his father, excited the jealousy of 
Sforza, and was the source of all the ensuing evils." 

Without reciting the particulars of his vanity, rashness, and 
imprudence, especiaUy a foolish treaty with France, which he 
made without consulting the magistrates, it is sufficient to say, 
" that, on the ninth of November, 1494, as he was going into 
the palace, Nerli, a youth of noble birth and great wealth, at 
the head of some others of the magistracy, stood armed at the 
gates,f and forbade him to enter. The populace, as soon as the 

* Muratori, Annali, torn. ix. p. 367, anno 1492. 

Guicciardin, lib. 6. Ameiicus Yespucius, who began bis voyages in 1497, the 
first two of which he made by order of Ferdinand of Castile, and the last two 
by order of Emanuel of Portugal, was a native of Florence. 

f Nerli, p. 62. Muratori, Annal. torn. ix. p. 374, anno 1494. Fu egli dichi- 

FLORENCE. 107 

report of this insurrection spread in the town, instantly took 
arms. Peter, destitute of courage as well as advice, returned to 
his own house, where he was informed that the magistrates had 
declared him a rebel ; upon which he fled with precipitation to 
Bologna, and was followed by his two brothers, Giovanni the 
cardinal, and Giuliano, who were likewise attainted. Thus, 
through the rashness and levity of a thoughtless youth, the 
family of the Medici fell, for the time, from a sovereign power 
which they had exercised for sixty years. From Bologna they 
went to Venice. After some time, the king, their ally, ob- 
tained a reversal of Peter's attainder, and that of his two 
brothers, and a restitution of their effects, on condition that Peter 
should not approach within a hundred miles of the borders of 
the republic. This was designed to prevent him from settling in 
Rome ; his brothers were not to come within a hundred miles 
of the city." 

After the exile of Peter and his brothers, the city of Florence 
attempted once more to reform its government;* "but," says 
Nerli, " the citizens who ought to have reformed the state, fell 
into the same error with all who had preceded them in similar 
enterprises, and founded the new government, as others had done 
whose steps they followed, upon parties and civil factions, as 
may be seen in the whole history of Florence, and for the benefit 
and convenience of the superior party and more powerful factions, 
and not at all for the benefit of the generality, or the universal 
good ; and therefore it was impossible that a pacific and quiet 
republic should succeed, or a durable government be established. 
They created, however, according to the ancient custom of the 
city, and by means of a parliament, always a scene of violence, 
and inconsistent with all civil modesty, twenty Accoppiatori, or 
associates, with authority to imborse the signori from time to 
time, and to create, with other restless disturbers of the public 
peace, the principal magistrates ; and they resolved, that Lorenzo 
di Pierfrancesco de' Medici, who then declared himself one of 
the inhabitants, de' popolani,^ {hough under age, should be one 

aratoco'fratelli ribello, posta taglia contro le loro persone, e poscia messo a sacco 
il ricchissimo loro palagio. 

• Nerli, p. 63. 

^ This translation does not quite eive tbe sense of the original. He had been 
harshly treated by his cousin Wnilst m authority, and returned to Florence under 

108 ON GOVERNMENT. 

of the twenty; and this was accomplished by their extraordinary 
reputation and influence, and thus he was made the head of the 
new government; and this whole revolution changed nothing 
but the head, and not at all the nature of the government" 

It was in this convention, which Nerli calls a parliament, that 
those elegant speeches which Guicciardini* has preserved, or 
composed, one for Soderini and the other for Vespucci, are sup- 
posed to have been made ; but it is surprising to see that neither 
orator, so eloquent and able, nor yet tlie historian who so elegantly 
reports the debate, appears to have once thought of the natural 
and necessary remedy. One is for a government simply popular, 
and the other for a form simply aristocratical ; but neither thinks 
of an equal mixture of the three forms, nor even of the two ; nor 
does an idea occur of separating the legislative from the executive 
power. Soderini admits that, " among all '^^Titers upon govern- 
ment, praises have been more liberally bestowed upon the admi- 
nistration of a single prince, and upon that of a few of the best 
citizens, than upon any popular government;" but he thinks that 
" the desire of liberty is so natural or habitual in that city, and 
the condition of the citizens so proportioned to that equality 
which is the necessary foundation of a popular government, that 
it ought, without any doubt, to be preferred to all others." He 
even thinks a question could not be made of this, "as in all their 
consultations it had ever been determined, with universal consent, 
that the city should be governed in the name and by the authority 
of the people. But the diversity of opinions arose from this, that 
some would cheerfully consent in the regulation of the convention 
to that form of a republic with which the city governed itself 
before her liberty was oppressed by the family of the Medici ; 
others, among whom he reckons himself, judging a government 
so ordered to have, in many things, rather the name than the 
effects of a popular government, and terrified with the accidents 
which frequently result from it, desire a more perfect form, which 
may preserve concord and security to the citizens; blessings 
which, neither from reason nor*experience, can be expected in 
this city, if it is not under a government dependent entirely on 

ihe amnesty to all who had opposed him. In order to avoid the odiom in which 
the family name was held, he caused it to be changed to that of Popolani^ and 
altered his coat of arms. 
* Guicciardini, lib. iL p. 41, Ven. 1574. 

FLORENCE. 109 

the power of the people. This must, however, be well ordered by 
two fandamental regulations. The first of these is, that all the 
magistrates and officers, both in the city and aU its dominions, 
shall be distributed, from time to time, by a universal council of 
all those who, according to our laws, are qualified for a partici- 
pation in government ; without the approbation of which council 
new laws cannot be considered. Hence, it not being in the 
power of private citizens, nor of any particular conspiracy or 
intrigue, to distribute dignities or authority, none wiU be excluded 
from them by the passions or caprice of others, but they shall be 
bestowed according to the virtues and merits of men. By con- 
sequence, every one must endeavor, by his virtues, good manners, 
and by rendering himself agreeable both in pubUc and private 
life, to open his way to honors. Every one must abstain firom 
vices and injuries to others, and, in one word, from all those 
things which are odious in a well-constituted city. It wiU not 
be in the power of any one, nor of a few, by new laws, or by the 
authority of a magistrate, to introduce another government, or to 
pretend to alter this, but by the resolution of the universal 
council. 

"I'he second fundamental regulation is this; that all the most 
important deliberations, as those of peace and war, the examina- 
tion of new laws, and generally all those things which are neces- 
sary to the administration of such a city and dominion, shall be 
treated by magistrates particularly destined to this service, in a 
select council of the most experienced and prudent citizens, who 
shall be deputed by the popular council ; for, as the knowledge 
of these affairs of state is not found in every understanding, pre- 
cautions should be taken that the government may not fall into 
hands incapable of conducting it ; and the celerity and secrecy 
which are often indispensable, cannot be consulted or preserved 
in the deliberations of a multitude. Neither is it necessary for 
the maintenance of liberty, that such things should be treated by 
large numbers ; for Uberty remains secure at all times when the 
distribution of magistracies, and the deliberations on new laws, 
depend on universal consent. 

" These two points being secured, the government will be truly 
popular, the Uberty of the city well founded, and a laudable and 
durable form of a republic established." 

He then compares his project with the plan of Venice, — to 

VOL. V. 10 

110 ON GOVERNMENT. 

which it has not, however, the smallest resemblance,— and pro- 
ceeds : " This city of ours has never enjoyed a government like 
this, and therefore our public affairs have been constantly exposed 
to frequent mutations ; at one time trampled down by the vio- 
lence of tyranny ; at another torn by the ambitious and avaricious 
dissensions of the few; now shaken by the licentious fury of the 
multitude : and although cities are built for no end but the tran- 
quillity, security, and happy life of the inhabitants, the fruits of 
our government, our felicity, our repose, have been the continual 
confiscations of our estates, the banishments and the executions 
on the scaffold, of our miserable citizens." 

This is the substance of Soderini's oration, in which he is fully 
sensible of the tyranny and slavery of alternate factions, and the 
consequent miseries with which the history of Florence is filled; 
but, instead of proposing a rational remedy, he is for aggravating 
the evil. The executive power, the appointment of officers, had 
been the cause of discord. He now only proposes to give those 
appointments to the multitude, instead of a senate ; to the uni- 
versal, instead of the particular council ; the only effect of which 
would be, that more heads would be turned, and more passions 
inflamed. 

The oration of Soderini was answered by Vespucci, a famous 
lawyer, and a man of singular genius and address. " If," says 
he, " a government, instituted in the manner proposed by Sode- 
rini, most excellent citizens, would produce such desirable fruits 
with the same ease that they may be described, he would cer- 
tainly discover a most corrupted character who should wish any 
other for the regulation of our country. He would be a most 
pernicious citizen, who should not love, without reserve, a form 
of republic, in which virtue, merit, and the real value of men, 
should be above all things acknowledged and honored. But I 
confess myself ignorant how it is possible to hope that a govern- 
ment, placed absolutely in the power of the people, can be pro- 
ductive of such mighty blessings.. ^ On the contrary, I well know, 
what reason teaches, experience demonstrates, and the authority 
of the greatest lawgivers confirms, that, in so great a multitude, 
there can never be found such prudence, such experience, and 
«uch order, as may give us room to promise ourselves the 
wise will be preferred to the ignorant, the good to the bad, or 
men of experience to those who have never seen a public trans- 

FLORENCE. Ill 

action. For as, from an incapable and unskilful judge, it is not 
possible to hope for a sagacious sentence, so, from a people im- 
mersed in ignorance and involved in confusion, we cannot expect, 
unless by accident, prudent deliberations or rational elections. 
Can we believe that a multitude, inexpert, unskilful, compounded 
of so great a variety of geniuses, conditions, and customs, and 
whoUy devoted to their private affairs, can possibly distinguish 
and know those intricate interests and duties of the public, which 
men of the most consummate wisdom, who are whoUy inatten- 
tive to any other business, are often with great difficulty able to 
discern? Not to mention, that the unbounded esteem which 
every one entertains of himself, will stimulate them all to become 
ambitious of honors, it will never be satisfactory to men in a 
popular government to enjoy the honest fruits of liberty, but all 
will aspire to the highest rank, and be impatient to intermeddle 
in deUberations upon affairs of the most importance and greatest 
difficulty. For among us there is less than in any other city in 
the world of that modesty which yields the precedence to him 
who has more knowledge or more merit Persuading ourselves, 
as we do, that, in reason and by right, we ought all of us to be 
equal in all things, the places of virtue and merit, if left in the 
disposition of the multitude, will be confounded ; and this ambi- 
tion, being diffused through the majority, will designedly bestow 
the most power on the most ignorant and the least meritorious ; 
because, being by much the most numerous, they will have the 
most influence in a state so constituted that opinions in it are 
numbered and not weighed. What certainty, therefore, can you 
have that, although they may be satisfied with the form that you 
introduce at present, they will not presentiy disarrange the insti- 
tutions the most wisely concerted, by their novel inventions and 
imprudent laws ? And these the wisest citizens wiU not be able 
to resist These things, at all times dangerous in such a govern- 
ment, will be much more so at present, because it is the nature 
of mankind, when they fly from one extreme, in which they have 
been held by violence, to rush* with greater violence, without 
stopping at the mean, to the other extremity. Thus, he who 
escapes from a tyranny, if unrestrained, precipitates himself into 
an unbridled licentiousness, which also may most justiy be called 
a tyranny; for a people is exactly like a tyrant, when they give 
to him who has no merit, and take away from him who has 

112 ON GOVERNMENT. 

much; when they confound all gradations and distinctions of 
persons ; and their tyranny is perhaps so much the more pestife- 
rous, as ignorance, which has no weights, nor measures, nor laws, 
is more dangerous even than malignity, which does govern itself 
by some rule, restrain itself by some bridle, and satisfy itself with 
some end. . . . 

" Has this city ever been mider the absolute government of the 
people, without becoming an instant prey to discord, without 
being shaken to its foundation, and withQut suffering an imme- 
diate revolution in the state ? Why are not our liberties secure 
under the government proposed in this parliament ? All things 
are referred to the disposition of magistrates, who are not perpe- 
tual, but are frequently changed ; who are not elected by a few, 
but, having been approved by many, are appointed, according to 
the ancient usage of the city, by lot How then can they be 
appointed by factions, or by the will of particular citizens? We 
shall have a much greater certainty that affairs of the most im- 
portance will be examined and directed by men of the most wis- 
dom, experience, and gravity, who will govern with more order, 
secrecy, and maturity of judgment, than it is possible for a people, 
who arc incapable of such things, to possess ; a people, who are 
often, when there is little occasion for it, most extravagantly 
' splendid and expensive ; and oftener still, when there is the most 
urgent necessity, so penurious and niggardly, as to rush upon the 
greatest dangers and expenses, for the sake of saving the most 
trifling sums." 

In truth, both these speeches, with all their eloquence, were 
thrown away. Soderini was for collecting "aU authority into 
one centre," the people ; and Vespucci into another, the senate. 
Neither dared propose a separation of the executive from both, 
in a first magistrate ; and without that, and admitting both the 
senate and people to a share, there could be no peace nor harmony 
in Florence. The question, however, was not decided by the 
logic or rhetoric of either. Few of the citizens attended the con- 
vention, and the vote would have been for the aristocracy of 
Vespucci, if another orator had not intervened. 

This was Girolamo Savonarola, the prophet, who declared that 
he had a divine revelation from heaven in favor of a popular 
government, and that Jesus Christ should be chosen King of 

FLORENCE. 113 

Florence,* against his own express declaration, that his kingdom 
was not of this world. The twenty accoppiaioTi, who had no 
head to keep them miited, necessarily fell into a variety of fac- 
tions and divisions among themselves. Perceiving their dissen- 
sions, the other citizens in general, and especially all those of the 
greatest reputation, who, at the election of the twenty, had not 
been chosen of the number, began to take courage, and raise a 
cry against them for the weakness of their government; and 
Savonarola declared, that God had constituted him his ambas- 
sador in Florence, with full power and express orders to declare 
his will, that Christ should be king, and that under him the city 
should be governed only by a single assembly or popular council. 
The multitude believed him, and in 1495 the twenty were all 
obliged to resign, and give place to the greater council and popu- 
lar government ; f and a new palace was built for them, with 
such ardent enthusiasm, that it seemed to be true, what Savona- 
rola declared, that the angels had acted as masons and architects, 
that the work might be the sooner finished. 

But this new government could no better agree than the accop- 
piatorij and for the same reason. The new great council, as well 
as the whole city, soon divided into three parties. The greatest 
and most powerful was that which depended upon Fra Girolamo, 
and was called the party of the Frateschi, and consisted of those 
who most desired, and of nearly all those who were gratified 
with the latitude of the popular government The second party 
were desirous of having the government more restrained, and in 
the hands of a smaller number of the principal citizens ; but they 
were still desirous of liberty, and, as well as the Frateschi, were 
in opposition to the party of the Medici. The third party con- 
sisted of those who wished for the return of the Medici, and the 
restoration of the old government. The views, motives, and 
manoeuvres of these three factions, their jealousies, envies, ambi- 
tion, and various schemes to supplant each other, are particularly 
described by Nerli, and in so natural a manner, that one would 
think his history written expressly to expose the folly of a govern- 
ment in one centre. 

♦ Nerii, pp. 64, 65. 

t H conaiglio maggiore, e il ^vemo popolare. Nerli, p. 66. Che gli angioli 
in quell' opera s' esercitassero in lu6go de muratori, ed operai, perch^ piCi presto 
fiiflse finita. 

10* H 

116 ON GOVERNMENT. 

"But scattering the ashes of this martyr in the Arno did not^' 
says Nerli, "quench the flames of discord, nor heal the divisions 
of the city. The people remained in the same dissensions, every 
one quarrelling for his faction as usual ;• and fresh disputes and 
dissensions arose ; first, between Vitelli and the Count di Mar- 
ciano ; second, by reason of the diffierence between the King of 
France and the Duke of JVf ilan ; and, third, on account of elec- 
tions and the magistracies." 

In 1500, Ceesar Borgia,f having already subjected a great part 
of Romagna, desirous of extending his dominions in Tuscany, 
and having good inteUigence of the disposition and divisions in 
the city of Florence, attempted to restore the Medici, but was 
diverted from the enterprise by an embassy and a round sum of 
money. In 1502, a rebellion, excited in the city of Arezzo, opened 
fresh divisions in Florence, and produced new attempts to reform 
the government, first, by giving a head to the greater council, 
and, second, by constituting a gonfalonier for life. Soderini, 
who had no children, had great qualities, was moderately rich, 
of a family of great reputation, &c., and had rendered important 
services to the state upon many occasions, was accordingly elected. 
But he had no thoughts of changing the popular government 
any further, and was soon found to have too much moderation 
for some of his friends. Rucellai, and Lorenzo di Pierfrancesco 
de' Medici, and some other citizens, broke off from him, would 
not attend his feasts, and grew discontented. 

This year (1502) died the pope Alexander VI. Peter de' Me- 
dici, with some other noblemen, foUowing the French camp after 
their defeat by the Spaniards at Gaeta, entered on board a bark 
laden with artillery, and was drowned at the mouth of the river, 
by the bark's sinking under her burden in a contrary wind. But 
these events, so fortunate in appearance for Florence, could not 
secure her tranquillity. The new gonfalonier for life had many 
parties in fermentation against him ; those who desired a more 
popular government, and that his office should be annual, or only 
for three months; those of his own party, who thought him not 
zealous enough to make the government more aristocratical; aad 
those who wished the restoration of the Medici, and a govem- 

* Nerli, p. 81. Resti6 il popolo nostro nelle medesime dissensioni, e travagUato 
dalle sue solite sette, come si fusae prima. 

f Nerli, p. 88. Muratori, AnnaU, torn. z. p. 1. 

FLORENCE. 117 

ment completely monarchical. All these various classes of citi- 
zens were daily observing his conduct, criticizing his administra- 
tion, exaggerating his errors, and destroying his reputation and 
popularity. 

In 1505, Bartolomeo d' Alviano invaded the country,* with a 
view to assist the Medici ; but he was routed and put to flight. 
From so great a victory the citizens hoped for happiness, quiet, 
and repose ; but the effects of it were quite the contrary, and 
increased the secret opposition to the gonfalonier, and the cabals 
of the discontented citizens. Bentivoglio, ambitious to be made 
captain-general, and Giacomini, to increase his popularity, united 
in the desire of adding the conquest of Pisa to the glory they had 
acquired in the late victory. The project of this enterprise occa- 
sioned great confusions in the city. The wisest and best men 
declared themselves against it; but such numbers were bent 
upon it, that the gonfalonier, either blinded by the same passions, 
arising from success, or wishing to counteract his adversaries, or 
confiding too much in Bentivoglio, fell in with it After tedious 
disputes, angry accusations, and mutual reproaches in the city, 
the enterprise was resolved upon in the great council, with loud 
huzzas of the common people. A great expense was incurred in 
ample preparations, but the end was as unfortunate as the wiser 
citizens had predicted; the two principal oflicers destroyed all 
the credit of their former services, and Soderini, the gonfalonier, 
lost much of his reputation, more of the popular confidence and 
affection ; and, in proportion as these fell, those who had opposed 
the war rose in the public esteem. The enemies of the gonfa- 
lonier increased, and their opposition, headed by the Salviati, 
grew more active and determined, and weakened the government 
to such a degree, that it was alike unable to execute the resolu- 
tions, when taken by so smaU majorities, to command the soldiers, 
to elect the council, the eight commissaries of war, or ambassa- 
dors, or, indeed, to resolve upon any thing. The two parties 

* Nerli, p. 95. Mnratori, Ann<Ui^ torn. x. pp. 25, 26. << Erano i cittadini cpaei 
tutti dichiarati a quale delle due parte pii^ aderissero, o a quella del gonfaloniere, 
o a quella de' Salviati, di maniera che nel fare de parentadi, o nel concedere per 
mezzo de' magistrati grazie, o benefizi, o nel favorir questo, o quell' altro cittadmo, 
che de' magistrati avesse bisogno, si scoprivano le paasioni, e gl' interessi del gon- 
fedoniere, o de' Salviati, ed in sonmia veniva in gzu^, se a dovevano pure nmu- 
tare, o di nuovo eleggere per insino a' tavolaecini del palazzo, e in ogni Tninima 
coea si scopriTano gl' interessi delle sette." Nerli, lib. v. p. 99. 

118 ON GOVERNMENT. 

could agree upon nothing ; and all the citizens were such decided 
partisans, either of the gonfalonier or of the Salviati, that they 
would not intermarry, or even give a vote for any man to any 
office or public favor, who was not of their side. 

In the grand council, and in the city, causes enough of debate 
arose from day to day. In 1()06, an ordinance for regulating the 
militia in the country, and enrolling every man from fifteen to 
fifty years of age under captains and colors, for frequent exercise 
in the military art ; the demand of Alfonsina Orsini, the widow 
of Peter de' Medici, of the restitution of her dower, confiscated 
with the estate of her husband ; the marriage of her daughter 
Clarissa to Philip Strozzi ; the resignation of the Archbishop of 
Florence ; the appointment of a successor ; the war of Pisa ; in 
1508, the creation of commissaries ; the concession of Pisa to the 
King of France, — all occasioned such struggles, as excited at 
last a conspiracy to assassinate the gonfalonier, for the purpose 
of introducing the restoration of the Medici. This plot was dis- 
covered, but the guilty persons had such parties in the city, and 
the gonfalonier was become so unpopular, that only the slightest 
punishment could be inflicted. As, in such a state of parties, 
every measure of government is opposed, another controversy 
arose about the continuance of the truce with Siena, which was 
at last agreed to upon the concession of Monte Pulciano. Various 
new disputes were now occasioned by the new council in Pisa« 
Finally, the city found that, amidst all the great transactions in 
Italy, by the division among the citizens, and their continual 
opposition to each other in every reasonable measure, they had 
not only very ill served their ally, the king, but had given great 
offence to the pope. 

In 1512 was the battle of Ravenna ; and after a long series of 
wars, in which the emperor, the King of France, the King of 
Spain, the Swiss, the pope, the Venetians, and all other states in 
Italy had been concerned, a congress was held at Mantua. 
"Giuliano de' Medici, in his own name and that of the cardinal, 
here solicited an enterprise against the Florentines. A revolution, 
he pretended, might be easily effected in that state, through the 
divisions of the citizens, many of whom wished for the return of 
his family. By private intelligence, which he said he maintained 
with several noble and powerful personages in the city, he thought 
a sudden attack might easily succeed ; and the consequence would 

FLORENCE. 119 

be, the taking the power of Florence out of the hands of one who 
depended on the King of France, and committing it to persons 
who, injured and abused by him, would acknowledge no alliance 
but that of the confederates. He was seconded, in the name of 
the pope, by Bernardo de Bibiena, afterwards cardinal, who had 
been educated in the family of Medici. An offer was secretly 
made to Soderini, a lawyer, and brother of the gonfalonier, who 
w^as then ambassador bom Florence, that if the Florentines would 
comply with the demand of a sum of money, the emperor and 
King of Aragon should take them under their protection. The 
ambassador had no authority to conclude any agreement, and 
could only make his report to the republic. It was believed that, 
if the Florentines had laid aside their niggardly chaffering about 
the price, they might have diverted the storm ; but, either through 
the carelessness or the malignity of men, the cause of that city 
was abandoned; and it was resolved that the Spanish army, 
attended by the cardinal and Giuliano de' Medici, should march 
towards Florence, and that the cardinal, whom the pope in this 
expedition had declared legate of Tuscany, should call to his 
assistance the soldiers of the church, and those of the neighboring 
towns, whom he thought fit for his purpose. The viceroy, at the 
head of the Spanish army, no sooner entered the Florentine 
dominions, than he was met by an ambassador of the republic, 
to know what he required of them. The viceroy demanded, in 
the name of all the confederates, that the gonfalonier should be 
deprived of his ofiice, and that such a form of government should 
be established, as would not give occasion of umbrage to the 
allied powers ; which could not be effected without restoring the 
cardinal and Giuliano de' Medici to their country. 

" The government of Florence was in the greatest consterna- 
tion, from the divisions among the citizens, and the inclination 
of multitudes to a change. A message arrived from the viceroy, 
that it was not the intention of the league to make any altera- 
tion in the government or liberty of the city, but only to remove 
the gonfalonier firom the magistracy, for the security of Italy, 
and to restore the Medici, not as heads of the government, but 
as private persons, to live in all things under subjection to the 
laws and to the magistracy. Various were the opinions in the 
city, according to the difference of men's judgments, passions, 
and fears. The gonfalonier, in a long harangue to the great 

120 ON GOVERNMENT. 

council,* offered either to resign his envied office, or to defend it 
at the hazard of his life, as they should determine. 

" If the Medici," says he, " have an inclination to live as pri- 
vate citizens, in due subjection to the ordinances of the magis- 
trates, and of your laws, their restoration would be laudable. . . . 
But let not any one imagine, that the government of the Medici 
will be exercised in the same manner as before their expulsion. 
The form and foundation of things are changed; educated 
among us, almost like other private citizens, possessed of vast 
estates in proportion to their high dignity, and offended with 
none, they laid the foundation of their greatness in the affections 
of the citizens ; but now, bred up in strange customs', and hav- 
ing little insight into our civil affairs, resenting their exile, very 
indigent, affronted by so many families, conscious that the 
greater part of the people abhor tyranny, constrained by poverty 
and suspicion, they will have no consideration for any citizen, 
but will engross the direction of all affairs to themselves, and 
establish their administration on fear and force, not on love and 
benevolence. The city will become like Bologna under the 
Bentivogli, or like Siena and Perugia." 

"It was, with wonderful unanimity, resolved to consent to 
the return of the Medici as private citizens, but to refuse the 
removal of the gonfalonier, at the hazard of their lives and for- 
tunes ; and all hands were set to work to prepare for war, and 
the defence of Prato." 

The viceroy laid siege to Prato, and took it by assault, which 
was followed by flight, shrieks, violence, rapine, blood, and slaugh- 
ter. This sad disaster produced a vast change in the minds of 
the people at Florence ; the gonfalonier, repenting of his counsel, 
was terrified, and became deprived at once of all esteem and 
authority; others grew audacious; several young noblemen, 
with one of the family of Albizzi at their head, who had been 
in secret correspondence with the Medici, forced the gonfalonier 
out of the pubUc palace, and the magistrates were compelled to 

* " Fece al popolo una orazione bellissima, che a que' tempi, e in quel caso 
era molto a proposito, la quale, essendo io alloar in quel consiglio, udii quando la 
fece, cd d anco molto elegantemente scritta da Messer Francesco Guieciardini 
nella sua storia. Narr6 in quella il gonfaloniere tutte le sue azioni di dieci anni ; 
dipoi offerse se, le faculty, e la propria vita per beneficio della ciu4, e per man- 
tenere quel libero governo, ed alia fine si rimesse tutto in quel popolo, one 1' ave- 
va poBto in quel grado." Nerli, Lib. v. p. 108. 

FLORENCE. 121 

depose him.* He fled to Ragasa. Ambassadors were sent to 
the viceroy, with whom, by means of the Cardinal de' Medici, 
they easily made an accommodation. He insisted only on the 
restoration of his family and their adherents, as private citizens, 
with power to redeem, within a certain time, the confiscated 
estates, indemnifying those to whom they had been transferred 
for the purchase and improvements. The Florentines were 
obliged to enter into the league, pay to the emperor forty thou- 
sand ducats, and to the viceroy eighty thousand for his army, and 
twenty thousand for himself. They made a league besides, with 
the King of Aragon, under reciprocal obligations of assisting 
each other. 

It is astonishing that the Florentines should not yet have been 
able to see the causes of their continual misfortunes, and the 
necessity of different orders, and a balance in their constitution. 
They now applied themselves to reform their government, to 
preserve their liberty, and the popular council, their '< all autho- 
rity in one centre," their right constitution of a commonwealth. 

" To this end they enacted, that the gonfalonier should no 
longer be elected for life, but only for a year ; that to the council 
of eighteen, which was changed every six months, and by 
whose authority . the most weighty affairs were determined, 
should be added, for life, all those who had discharged the great 
offices of state, at home or abroad, that the citizens of greatest 
quality might always assist at their debates. At home, such as 
had been gonfaloniers of justice, or of the number of the ten of 

* Tal fine cbbe il supremo magistrato di Hero Soderini esercitato da esso nore 
anni, e dieci mesi, e se in tale amministrazione, oltre a moltc sue buone opere, 
avesse aggiunto quel, che anche molto piu importava alia cittit, e a lui, Paver tenuto 
pill conto, che non fece, di chi veramente Taveva condotto in quel grado, giovava 
foree piCk asaai, che non fece, alia cittA, a suoi cittadini, a se medeaimo,'ed alia sua 
casa, e sarebbesi quel governo popolare forse anche meslio mantenuto, come si 
mantenne, ne primi otto anni, cne si resse senza capo sucuno dopo il 1494, che 
non fece poi m quei dieci, che lo resse Piero Soderini. £ se quel suo governo 
di nove anni e dieci mesi fu, ed d ancora tanto lodato, nacque da quel buono 
ordine, che si tenne piu nello splendere, e nello stare meglio ordinata la cittA, 
che in quelli primi otto anni non si fece, e dal considerarlo piil da quello, che 
pareva m apparenza, che da quello, che era in fatti, ed in sonnma il gonfaloniere 
non seppe mai esser principe n^ cattivo, n^ buono, e credette troppo coUa pazi- 
enza, godendo, come si dice, il benefizio del tempo, superare tutte le difficult^, 
che se gli opponevano, e non bene avverti, come debbono fare i principi savi, e i 
buoni capi, e eovematori di republica, che sempre, e ad ogni cosa la pazienza non 
giova, e che u tempo a lungo andare pu6 arrecare coei n^e, come bene. Neili, 
pp. 109, 110. 

VOL. V. 11 

122 FLORENCE. 

the balia, a magistracy of great authority in that republic ; abroad, 
all, who by election of the council of eighty had been sent am- 
bassadors to princes, or had been commissaries-general in war. 
In all other points the laws remained without alteration. Ridolfi, 
a noble citizen, was elected gonfalonier for the first year ; the 
people, as usual in troublesome times, not paying so much 
regard to those who were most acceptable to them for popular 
arts, as to a person who, by his great authority in the city, 
especially with the nobility, and by his own extraordinary talents, 
was best capable of establishing the tottering commonwealth. 

" But things were now gone too far, and the enemies of pub- 
lic liberty were become too powerful. A suspected army was 
in the country, and the most audacious youth in the city were 
desirous of oppressing liberty. With them concurred in thought 
and deed, though in word he pretended the contrary, the Cardi- 
nal de' Medici ; for the restoration of his family as private citi- 
zens could not have been thought from the beginning a reward 
worthy of so great fatigues and dangers. But now he con- 
sidered that they must be universally detested by the people, 
from a suspicion that they would be continually exciting con- 
spiracies against their liberty, and from the indignation con- 
ceived against the family for conducting tl^e Spanish army 
against their country, and being the cause of the barbarous 
sackage of Prato. The cardinal was stimulated too by those 
who had before conspired with him, and had no honorable sta- 
tion in the new commonwealth. He therefore obtained the 
consent of the viceroy, unexpectedly entered Florence, and 
repaired to the houses of the Medici with a number of Italian 
officers and soldiers, the magistrates not daring to forbid their 
entrance on account of the neighborhood of the Spanish army. 
The next day a great number of citizens being assembled in 
council in the palace, and Giuliano de' Medici among the rest, 
the soldiers suddenly forced the gate, and rushing up stairs took 
possession of the palace. The gonfalonier and the magistrates 
were forced to submit to the will of a man whose arms were 
more powerful than their unarmed reverence, and at the motion 
of Giuliano, they called, by sound of the bell, an assembly of 
the people in the square of the palace. Here those who met, 
finding themselves surrounded by armed soldiers, and the youth 
of the city in arms for the Medici, consented that fifty citizens, 

FLORENCE. 123 

nominated with the approbation of the Cardinal de' Medici, 
should be invested with the whole sovereign power of the peo- 
ple, which the Florentines call a balia. The government was 
reduced to that form which subsisted before 1494 ; a guard was 
stationed at the palace, and the Medici resumed their former 
grandeur, but governed more imperiously and with more abso- 
lute authority than their father Peter had done. After this 
manner was the liberty of the Florentines oppressed by arms, 
being reduced to this condition by the divisions among the 
citizens." ^ 

" On the first of September, 1512, the new signori, without 
any gonfalonier or supreme magistrate, united with Giuliano de' 
Medici and the principal citizens of Florence, and especially 
with those who, having been in opposition to Soderini, or being 
relations or declared friends of the Medici, were the most in 
their confidence, to give orders for a new reformation of the city. 
It was thereupon ordained, by an intrigue of the signori, that a 
cabal of about twenty citizens should determine among them- 
selves the mode of reformation in the state. But even in this 
junto many contests arose, and various projects were proposed. 
There were among them some who, without considering the 
forcible manner in which the Medici had returned, wished to 
reestablish the popular government, and maintain, by all means, 
the grand council, at least in part, in its authority, and in order 
to give the government a head, would constitute a gonfalonier 
for one year, or two at most ; they further desired, in order to 
give a greater perfection to the government, to make an addition 
of select citizens to the council of eighty, who should be as a 
senate of the best men for life, with a certain authority and full 
power, and with certain particular orders and prescribed forms. 
Of this opinion were the greater part of those citizens who had 
been in opposition to Soderini, not so much firom attachment to 

1 " Telle fut r^troite et honteuse oligarchie qui fut substitute au gouyeme- 
ment libre et constitutionel de la r6publique. Le parlcment sanctionna la revo- 
lution ; car les seuls citoyeos determines ^ tout approuver se rendirent sur la 
place publique, au milieu des soldats qui faisoient violence k leur patrie. La 
nouvelte baiie pronon^a peu de condamnations, mais elle abolit la plupart des 
magistratures protectrices de la liberty ; de plus, elle licencia, dis le 18 Septem- 
bre, Tordonnance ou la milice Florentine, et elle fit desarmer le peuple. Un 
ffouvemement que les Strangers ont etabli par la violence dolt craindre toute 
K)rce nationale ; et pour se maintenir, il doit d^sarmer et a>ilir la nation qui lui 
est soumise." Sismondi, RqD. Italiennesy vol. xiv. p. 268. 

124 ON GOVERNMENT. 

the Medici as for other reasons The Medici and their most 
avowed partisans, and chiefly those who, in their opposition to 
Soderini, had discovered themselves the most averse to the popu- 
lar state, because they did not think they could obtain pardon 
from the people, could scarcely hope to live in freedom, and 
were sure to have no share in the government, would, for their 
greater security, restrain the state to its ancient form and 
remodel it by a convention, not believing that they could 
accomplish it in the ordinary way, as it had been restrained in 
the house of Medici before the year 1494. After many accom- 
modating manoeuvres of Giuliano de' Medici, by his great 
facility and kindness with those who desired a large govern- 
ment, and to preserve the grand council, it was concluded to 
pass a law in this cabal for the reformation of this government, 
and it was accordingly proposed in the grand council, and 
received with great applause. For everybody was so dispirited 
and so terrified with the thoughts of a convention of the people, 
which was much talked of, and greatly desired by those who 
wished to restrain the state into an aristocracy, that this new 
law of reform was highly relished, as it lessened the authority 
both of the people and the grand council. 

" By the new law it was ordained, that, for the future, the 
gonfalonier should be created by the grand council for one year, 
should be disqualified from holding the office for five subsequent 
years, and that all his connections should be excluded during 
his year from holding any of the greater magistracies, such as 
those of the signori, the sixteen gonfaloniers of the companies 
of the people, and the twelve buoni homini. The chief magistrate 
was also prohibited from holding a negotiation or correspond- 
ence with any other prince, republic, or lord, in or out of Italy ; 
from opening any letters addressed to the signori or any other 
magistrate, without the presence of two thirds of the signori his 
companions ; or even any letter addressed to him alone, without 
the presence of two at least of the signori, who, under the pains 
of perjury, were obliged to show such letters to the other signori, 
if they found any thing in them relative to the state or public 
affairs. The ladies, too, and families of the gonfaloniers were 
prohibited from inhabiting the palace, and from sending any let- 
ters or messages to any officer or magistrate abroad or at home ; 
and the gonfalonier was assigned for his whole salary four hun- 

FLORENCE. 125 

dred golden florins a year. As to the mode of electing the 
senate, surplasage, or optimates before mentioned, such disposi- 
tion was made by this new law for the reformation of the 
government, that for the future, at all administrations, delibera^ 
tions, and elections of magistrates, usuaUy made in the council 
of eighty, all the then present signori, and all those citizens who 
at any time had been gonfaloniers of justice, aU those who had 
sat among the ten magistrates for war, and all who at any time 
had been elected ambassadors in the council of eighty to any 
prince or lord in or out of Italy, should assist during their 
lives. And to provide for those families or societies in which 
there were not men of any such description, it was decreed by 
the law that such families might claim as far as two members, 
if they had the number of two, or, if they had not, one, with the 
ordinary qualifications, but no more ; and that such supplement- 
ary additions from the families should not amount to more than 
fifty in the whole, to be elected in the council of eighty, with its 
new addition, giving of these fifty a convenient part to the lesser 
*art8, according to the order at that time in the city. And 
because Giuliano de' Medici and some of his declared friends 
were incapable, either by minority of age, or by having in their 
families two or more who came within the ordinary rules, that 
they might not be excluded, it was provided by the law, that 
by a resolution of the signori alone, eleven more, besides the 
fifty, might be elected, eight of whom might be under the age 
prescribed of forty years. In this manner was the council of 
eighty, with its addition, to be constituted, and in it from time 
to time were to be created the signori, the ten magistrates for 
war, and the eight for the guard, in such manner as those 
magistrates were wont to be elected in the greater council, 
observing the order of elections in the quarters of the arts, and 
all the forms which had been observed in electing such magis- 
trates in the greater council. And to facilitate still further the 
public business, and to take away still more effectually, both 
from the people and the great council, the opportunity and the 
power of disarranging the public councils by withholding sup- 
plies of money, admonished by many past examples, the law 
provided, that such provisions of money and impositions of 
taxes for the public occasions should be passed, in the first place, 
in the council of eighty, by two thirds of the black votes or 

126 ON GOVERN^IENT. 

balls, according to the forms of balloting, and be approved in 
the greater council by a division of one half of the black votes, 
and one more. The law was passed, and the same day, in 
October, 1513, and in the same comicil, they proceeded to the 
election of a new gonfalonier. At the first ballot there was no 
choice, but at the second Giovan Batista Ridolfi was elected, 
and, in the presence of the council, took upoa him, with the 
other signori, the supreme magistracy." * 

This plan of reformation, however, had greatly terrified the 
partisans and most declared friends of the Medici, as it appeared 
to them they should be in great danger, when an accommoda- 
tion should be made with the league, and the Spanish army 
should be marched out of the dominions, of being again banished 
from Florence, to their total ruin, that of the new constitution, 
and the whole house of Medici ; and in this apprehension they 
were well grounded, for although there was in the new plan an 
attempt at three natural branches, yet the executive power and 
the power of the purse were both left in the hands of the aristo- 
cracy, which would have instantly produced a division both* 
among nobles and people, and the destruction of the house of 
Medici, as well as of the feeble popular branch of the constitu- 
tion. Here was the best possible opportunity for introducing 
the most perfect form, by giving the executive power to one of 
the Medici, the power of the purse to the people, and the legis- 

* In questo tempo, per ordine de' vineitori, fu fatto menzione nel libro 
publico, chiamato il priorista, del parlamcnto fatto, e de' Medici restatuid alia 
patria, a piede di quel priorato, ch* era entrato in ufiicio a di primo di Settembre 
1512, essendo gonfaloniere di Giustizia Giovambatista Ridolphi, nel qual prio- 
rista, 81 notano tutti i signori priori, che alia giornata si fanno, et aggiunto a ci6 
come la nobiltA si era vindicata, e ridotta in liberty, e riformato, e stabilito il 
^vcmo della citt^, secondo la volontA de gli ottimati, e patrizii. La quale dis- 
tmzione di nobilt^ ed ignobilta, confesso io ingenuamente non haver mai saputo 
&re, ancorach^ io sia nato, et allevato nella medcsima patria. IVIa la lezzione 
delle present! memorie fai^ cognoscere coUe spesse mutazioni d' animi, e di pen- 
sieri, e delle opere, quale sia stata sempre la diversity, e la contrarieta de ^li 
bumori de' nostri cittadini. Conciosiacosach^ io hebbia veduto i iigliuoli dish 
cordare da padri propril, ed i fratelli da i medcsimi fratelli neir azzioni di questa 
stolta favola del mondo, secondoch^ chiascuno ^ stato vinto, e traportato dall* 
empieto de* proprii appetiti. Nardi, lib. vi. p. 266. 

*' Jamais je n'ai pu comprendre, ce quo c'est que la noblesse. Qu'est-ce 
que c*est que la noblesse ? ** said one of the first duchesses in France. " Ah, 
madame, c*est un droit divin,"' said a gentleman in company*. *^ Oui, tout comme 
la royautfe ; tout de meme, je vous comprend bien," replied the lady, who had 
too much sense to pique herself on her oivinity, or to believe a syllable of the 
matter. 

FLORENCE. 127 

lative power to both, together with the nobility ; but either no 
man understood the subject^ or too much ambition in the 
Medici, too much pride in the nobility, too many prejudices in 
the people, or aU three together, prevented it 

The election too of Bidolfi, who was thought to be, as indeed 
he was, a spirited man, of a celebrated house, most illustrious 
parentage, and of great reputation, increased their terror, espe- 
cially as, in the deliberations on the new reformation, he had 
discovered himself much in favor of a popular life. He had been 
ordinarily conspicuous in the faction of Frateschi, among the 
first of whom he had been incorporated, after Valori, and had, 
in all times, conjunctures, and circumstances, favored that party 
which was ever in opposition to the house of Medici, as is mani- 
fest to any one who has a knowledge of those times. Whereupon 
many of the most open friends of the Medici, and those who 
most dreaded a popular government, entered into close concert 
with the Cardinal de' Medici, for the purpose of correcting the 
errors which Giuliano, his brother, by his too great facility, had 
suffered to slide in. 

<' It was not difficult to dispose the cardinal to this, as they 
found him, since the late reformation, under the same apprehen- 
sions, and in the same disposition with themselves ; neither him- 
self, nor Messer Giulio, prior of Capua, his cousin and a natural 
son remaining of Giuliano who died in 1478 by the conspiracy 
of the Pazzi, judging it possible securely to continue in Florence, 
if the government remained in that manner in the hands of the 
people, and at the free discretion of the citizens. Wherefore the 
cardinal came sometimes into the city, for he had resided in Prato 
when the reformation of the state was made in Florence, and 
took lodgings in St. Antonio del Vescovo, a place near the city, 
where he was visited by a multitude of the citizens, under various 
pretences. There, discoursing with all concerning the condition 
of affairs as they happened, he began with great address to 
represent to some that it was necessary to think of a good 
method for securing the state and his house ; dwelling only upon 
general observations, and not descending to any particulars with 
those whom he believed to be desirous of a popular government; 
but consulting with his more confidential friends, and with those 
whom he knew to be discontented with the new regulation of 
the government. At last, he opened himself to a few, showing 

128 ON GOVERNMENT. 

the necessity, of a convention and a balia to a small number of 
citizens in whom they could confide, who might contract the 
state to the form in which it stood before 1494 in the hands of 
the family of Medici. After these practices held at St Antonio, 
the cardinal came to Florence, resolved to call a convention and 
contract the state ; then those citizens, fitly called the blind, who 
had been so opposed to Soderini, began to see, when it was too 
late and they had no longer power to provide a remedy, that 
danger now at hand, which they had not been able to discern 
when at a distance. 

" On the 16th of September, 1513, the convention was assem- 
bled, the Medici and their friends in arms having seized the 
palace, which had been left without a guard, because Ridolfi, 
when he entered on his office of gonfalonier, either from a want 
of jealousy of the Medici and the viceroy, who was yet with his 
army at Prato, or for some other reason, not only had not armed 
the palace, as, in order to establish the new government, it was 
necessary to do, but had caused it to be disarmed of the few 
guards which had been stationed there by the magistrates after 
the privation and departure of Soderini ; wherefore it was easy 
for the Medici and their partisans to seize it The signori and 
the gonfalonier, and many other citizens, seeing the palace taken, 
and the absolute determination of the Medici and their armed 
followers to contract the state, and that they could no longer 
support the popular government, yielded to Giuliano de' Medici, 
who was in council, and had orders from the cardinal what to 
do. The people were accordingly called together in convention, 
according to the ancient custom of their parliaments, in the 
piazza; the signori mounted the rostrum, and a balia was 
created, that is, full power was given to fifty-jSve citizens for one 
year, with the faculty of prolonging it beyond that period 
according to circumstances, for the convenience and support of 
the state and the government, and with the faculty, moreover, of 
associating to themselves in the balia such other citizens as might 
be thought useful to the state." 

The first thing resolved on was to add eleven members to the 
number, making in the whole sixty-six, whose names Nerli* has 
preserved. The next was to make a treaty with the league, 

» Nerli, pp. 116-118. 

FLORENCE. 129 

and to pay well to obtain the consent of the Spanish army to 
march out of Prato and the Florentine dominions. An ambas- 
sador was sent to accompany the viceroy of Spain, and another, 
the locum tenens of Maximilian the emperor. A strong guard 
was placed in the palace ; Ridolfi renounced his office of gonfa- 
lonier ; all the members of the family of Soderini were taken up 
and dispersed about in different confinements. A plan was esta- 
blished for the appointment of all officers, and the sum total of 
power was lodged in Giuliano de' Medici, who, however, was to 
consult with the cardinal, with Messer Giulio, with Lorenzo their 
nephew, the son who remained of Hero di Lorenzo de' Medici ; 
but when the new distribution of offices took place, fresh divi- 
sions and dissensions arose, and secret plots were discovered, 
whose object was nothing less than the assassination of all the 
Medici. Among the conspirators were many powerful citizens. 
The chiefs of the party were beheaded, and the rest severely 
punished. 

<<At length the pope, Julius II., died, and the cardinals in 
conclave,* on the seventh day, unanimously elected Giovanni, 
Cardinal de' Medici, who assumed the name of Leo X, aged 
thirty-seven. This election gave great satisfaction to all Christ- 
endom ; aU men expecting, from the recoUection of his father's 
great merit, and fi-om the fame of his own UberaUty, benevo- 
lence, charity, and irreproachable morals," (so says the histo- 
rian, but his actions discover an ambition too powerful for 
his virtue,) " that Leo would prove an excellent pontiff, and, 
from the example of his ancestors, a lover of men of genius and 
learning. His first transaction was his coronation, which was 
performed with so pompous an appearance of his family and 
all the prelates and nobles from all parts, and so great a con- 
course of the Roman people, that Rome had never seen so 
proud a day since the inundations of the barbarians ; the stand- 
ard of the church was carried by Alfonzo d' Este ; that of the 
religious order of Rhodes by Giulio de' Medici, all in armor, and 
mounted on a noble courser, for he was by nature inclined to 
arms, though his destiny drew him to the church. Such magni- 
ficence confirmed the vulgar in their expectations of happiness 
from this pontificate, which was likely to abound in liberality 

* Guicciardini, Ub. xi. Nerli, Ub. vi p. 124. 
I 

130 ON GOVERNMENT. 

and splendor, as the expenses of that day amounted to a hun- 
dred thousand ducats; but men of better judgment were of 
opinion that so much pomp neither became a pope, nor was 
suitable to the times, which required more gravity, simplicity, 
and moderation. 

" This exaltation of Giovanni occasioned great rejoicings in 
Florence,* for both the Mends and enemies of the family were 
pleased, though for different reasons ; the former from the hope 
of benefits and advantages, and the latter from the expectation 
of security, and the universal tranquillity of the city, which they 
thought would succeed. There remained, however, as may well 
be imagined, a secret discontent in the hearts of the wise, who 
could foresee at a distance that so much grandeur in one family, 
who for sixty years had held in their hands the supreme autho- 
rity of the government, might in time be the means of their 
return, and enable them to change the state from a republic to 
an absolute principality. 

" Upon this glorious occasion, Valori, Folchi, Nicholas Machi- 
avel, and all the others who, on account of the late conspiracy, 
had been hitherto imprisoned, were liberated from the tower of 
Volterra ; a conspiracy which, if no further attempts had been 
made, and the two who had been beheaded could have been 
re^stored to life, would now have been wholly forgotten. The 
Soderini too were all set at liberty, because the cardinal of that 
family had concurred with his vote in the creation of the pope. 
Cardinal Soderini had been gained over to this election by a 
promise of the liberation of his relations, and that Lorenzo di 
Piero de' Medici should marry his niece, the daughter of his 
brother Giovanvetterio ; but this alliance never took effect, 
because Aifonsina, mother of Lorenzo, would never consent to 
it To compensate for this disappointment, the pope proposed 
that the cardinal's niece should be married to Luigi Bidolfi, his 
nephew by a sister ; and the cardinal at first seemed satisfied 
with the exchange, but it afterwards appeared that he took it 
very ill. 

" A splendid embassy of twelve honorable and noble citizens 
was now sent to the new pope from the city of Florence. In all 
this grandeur of the house, Giuliano, Lorenzo, and Giulio de' 

♦ Ncrii, p. 124. 

FLORENCE. 131 

Medici in a few days appeared at Rome to consult with the 
pope concerning several of their affairs, and the division of their 
greatness among them ; it was finally . resolved that Giuliano 
should remain at Rome with the title of gonfalonier and 
captain of the holy see. By means of an alliance which he 
made with a lady of the blood of Savoy, aunt of the King of 
France, he secured to himself the duchy of Nemours, and thus 
voluntarily gave up all pretensions to the government of Flo- 
rence. Lorenzo contented himself with the state of Florence, 
and soon returned to govern it in the same manner and form as 
his father and his other ancestors had governed. Giulio was 
promoted to the archbishopric of Florence, vacant by the death 
of Cosmo de' Pazzi, with the prospect of being made a cardinal 
at the first subsequent creation which the pope should make. 

^ In this manner, in the beginning of the pontificate of Leo, 
did the Medici divide among themselves the state and their own 
power and emoluments. Lorenzo returned to Florence, and 
consulted with the principal citizens about giving orders for 
refonning the government in all things to the state it was in 
before 1494, according to the intentions of the pope, resolved on 
in Rome. They were very attentive to hasten the general scru- 
tiny, because of the absence of so many citizens, who, for various 
reasons, had gone to Rome, and, after the creation of the pope, 
were not in haste to return. When it was finished, imborsed, 
and begun to be used, a council of seventy was made by 
Lorenzo, for life, in the form and with the authority of that in 
the time of his grandfather, in 1482 ; and orders were also given 
to constitute a council of a hundred, which from six months to 
six months, according to the ancient custom, should be drawn. 
Into this council of a hundred, all who had been gonfaloniers 
of justice might enter at their pleasure ; in it were debated and 
determined all provisions of money, impositions of taxes, and all 
laws and ordinances of most importance which had been pre- 
viously approved in the council of seventy ; and to enlarge their 
system still more, and make it more universally satisfactory, they 
further ordained a drawing by lot from time to time of the ancient 
councils of the people and the commons, which might determine 
on the petitions of private persons, that should be first passed in 
the council of seventy. In all cases which could occur, and for 
the security of the state, although they adopted these ordinary 

132 ON GOVERNMENT. 

councils, they maintained firm the authority of their balia, which 
was kept constantly in being until the revolution in the state, 
that happened in 1527. The scrutiny ended, they created the 
seventy, drew the other councils, and began to make another 
change of the ten for war, for the eight of their new plan, in 
order to return every thing to the state it was in before 1494. 
All these ordinances were thus renewed and perfected in Decem- 
ber, 1513, Pandolfo Corbinelli being then gonfalonier; and the 
seventy were elected for a term only, but with such power of 
confirmation that they might be said to be for life. Notwith- 
standing all these precautions, and the absolute power of the 
balia, divisions among the principal citizens still continued; 
some were for making the government more popular, others 
more aristocratical ; and these divisions, which lasted till 1627,* 
gave much trouble to the Medici. 

" The affairs of the Medici and of the state being thus settled, 
Giuliano began to think he had been mistaken in leaving Flo- 
rence to his nephew ; and Lorenzo, amidst such grandeur in his 
house, began to be discontented at remaining without any 
princely title, and at having no other than a civil rank in Flo- 
rence ; wherefore he shaped his course to Rome, and communi- 
cated his intention to the pope. 

" He returned in 1515, determined to be made captain-general 
of the Florentines ; and this dignity was solemnly assumed by 
him from the hands of the gonfalonier of justice, who was at that 
time Chimenti Sernigi, in the presence of the signori, and of all 
the magistrates, and a great part of the people, assembled in the 
piazza with the staff of command, and the other public ensigns 
usually given to a captain-general, with the greatest demonstra- 
tions of joy and imiversal rejoicings. In this manner Lorenzo 
began to depart from the ancient manners of his family, and to 
lay aside in aU things that mode of proceeding popularly in his 
dress, conversation, and intercourse with the citizens, which had 
ever been observed by his predecessors. Having assumed his 
title and magnificence, he went to Lombardy, to make his court 
to the King of France, who was come to Italy to establish his 
authority in Milan, which he had lately recovered. He became 

* EraBO i cittadini appresso a' Medici molto divisi, e dettero queste divisioni, 
che si mantenero sempre ne' primi cittadini del goyemo, di molte difficult^ a' 
Medici per insino al 1527. Nerli, p. 129. 

FLORENCE. 133 

a great favorite with his majesty, from the desire he had of agree- 
ing with the pope, and because Lorenzo, in all his actions and 
conversation, discovered an attachment to the faction of the 
Guelphs and the politics of France." 

'* Soon afterwards, an accommodation was made between the 
pope and the king, and the pope set out on a journey to Bologna, 
to have an interview with him. Passing through Florence, he 
made his entry into the city* with great pomp. Between the 
pope and the king many things were agreed on, for their mutual 
defence and the maintenance of their power; and Lorenzo, 
because he eagerly wished to increase his importance, and obtain 
the title of duke, solicited the pope, under the auspices of France, 
to undertake an enterprise against Urbino, as it was thought the 
lung could not fail of success, the pope having restored Parma 
and Placentia, two cities which Giulio had added to the state of 
the church when the French lost the state of Milan. But the 
project of an enterprise against Urbino was very disagreeable to 
Giuliano de' Medici, and he warmly opposed it as infamous 
ingratitude, considering the civilities and favors the family had 
received in their exile from that dukedom. 

" The pope was advised to recall the Bentivogli to Bologna, 
and restore Modena and Reggio to the Duke of Ferreura; but 
Giulio de' Medici," says Guicciardini, " cardinal and legate of 
Bologna, whom the pope had sent to be a moderator and coun- 
sellor to the inexperienced youth of Lorenzo, moved at the infamy 
that would be cast on the memory of his legateship if Bologna 
was given up to its old tyrants, and so great a number of the 
nobility, who had openly declared against them in favor of the 
apostolic see, sacrificed to their revenge, dissuaded it 

" Giulio, though of illegitimate birth, had been promoted to 
the cardinalship by Leo, in the first month of his pontificate, by 
means of witnesses, who, preferring the favor of men before the 
truth, deposed, that his mother had obtained of his father Giuli- 
ano a promise of marriage. Giuliano this year came to Flo- 
rence in ill health, and resided sometimes in the city, and some- 
times out of it, in the neighboring cities, not without exciting 
great jealousy in Lorenzo, and Alfonsina, his mother, who 
governed in the absence of her son. The pope was in great 

* Con magnifico apparato, con molta pompa, e con solennitdi grandiMuoui. 
Nerli, p. 129. 

VOL. V. 12 

134 ON GOVERNMENT. 

perplexity, and could not determine whether to undertake the 
enterprise against Urbino, so much resisted by his brother, and 
so ardently desired by his nephew ; and he hesitated the more, 
because he discovered that the King of France had consented 
against his inclination. Giuliano was so ill, that he could not 
censure the project to the pope, excepting by his agents and 
letters, and Lorenzo, by his assiduous solicitations, held the king 
well disposed to his inclinations, and was continually about the 
pope with persuasions to undertake it The interview between 
the pope and the king at Bologna being finished, the former 
returned to Florence, apparently resolved to give satisfaction to 
his nephew ; yet, on account of Giuliano, he proceeded to take 
measures for the enterprise with some circumspection. But 
the disorder of Giuliano increasing, he died in March, 1516, at 
Badia de Fiesole, where he resided for the benefit of better air. 
A few days afterwards the pope left Florence, and returned to 
Rome." 

"Lorenzo now remained, without any contradiction, in all 
things heir of the state, the fortune and the grandeur of the house 
of Medici ; and being now more than ever warm in his desire 
to be made Duke of Urbino,* he was invested by the pope in 
consistory. Lorenzo was put in command of an army, com- 
posed of the soldiers and subjects of the church and the Floren- 
tines; and the pope deprived f Francesco Maria of these do- 
minions by solemn sentence, and gave the investiture of the 
duchy of Urbino, in a consistory, to Lorenzo his nephew, all 
the cardinals setting their hands to the bull. 

" In the year 1517 certain cardinals formed a conspiracy 
against the pope, and the Cardinal Soderini was found among 
tlie guilty ; but upon confession of their error, the pope excused 
them with great humanity.^ But upon this occasion, in order 
to fill up the college, he made a new promotion of cardinals, 
among whom were his two nephews of the Salviati and Ridolfi 
families. At this time the citizens of the state of Florence 

* Nerli, p. 130. f Guicciardin, lib. xii. 

^ It is d^cult to nnderstand this compliment, in the face of the combinatioii 
of fraud, cruelty, and avarice exposed oy most of the historians in telling the 
Btory. The curious reader can gather the particulars in the history of Sismondi, 
vol. xiv. pp. 432-439, with the authorities upon which he relies. This writer 
has done the world great service in bringing tnc conduct of the Medici family to 
the test of an unswerving moral code. 

FLORENCE. 135 

were in secret very discontented, because the Dake Lorenzo, 
desiring to reduce the government to the form of a principality, 
appeared to disdain to consult any longer with the magistrates 
and his fellow-citizens as he used to do, and gave audiences very 
seldom, and with much impatience; he attended less to the busi- 
ness of the city, and caused all public affairs to be managed by 
RIesser Goro da Pistoia, his secretary. This person, either fol- 
lowing the inclination of his own nature, or because the duke 
had given him orders what to do, governed in such a manner, 
and so conducted himself with the citizens, that there appeared 
in him more grandeur, and more of the qualities of a prince, 
and he required more honor, than any one of the house of 
Medici ever had done in the sixty years that had passed between 
1434 and 1494. The citizens, who had borne so much envy 
against Graleotto de' Medici, found, in the example of Goro, 
reason to acknowledge and repent of their error; for Galeotto, 
who held from the Duke Lorenzo the same authority and the 
same employment before Goro, and was besides of the family 
of Medici, did the public business of the palace, and went in 
person to confer with the citizens, and was satisfied with civilly 
serving his patron, and with being more in reality, and less in 
appearance. 

'' Lorenzo now made a journey to France, having made an 
alliance with the king. In 1518 he returned with his lady, and 
the marriage was celebrated with much pomp, rejoicings,* and 
festivity. Many citizens at this time, having discovered the 
inclination of the duke, and that he was determined to reduce 
the state to the form of a principality, would not consent to it. 
Some withdrew themselves from public affairs, despairing of the 
commonwealth ; others confined themselves to their houses, under 
pretence of sickness ; but others, having more courage and better 
support, went to Rome, under the protection of the pope. The 
duke, to make the last effort to dispose the pope to reduce the 
state of Florence to a principality, went to finish his nuptials at 
Rome, and carried with him Vettori and Strozzi, in whom he 
confided, and with whom he often consulted ; and after many 
intrigues with the pope, they returned to Florence, determined to 
reform the state. But in 1519 he died, about ten days after his 

* Si fecero le nozze sontaosissime, con molta pompa, allegrezzn, e festa gran- 
dianma. Nerli, p. 131. 

136 ON GOVERNMENT. 

wife, who, however, had left him a daughter, afterwards Queen 
of France. 

" Goro, and the citizens in his confidence, had secretly ordered 
the piazza to be fortified, and the guards doubled; and had 
caused to be assembled in Florence, from various places of the 
dominion, a good number of their friends and confidential parti- 
sans, to assist, as occasion might happen, in the preservation of 
the public security, and in observing the conduct of those citizens 
who had given any cause of suspicion ; and Antonio di Bettino 
da Ricosoli was imborsed gonfalonier. The Cardinal de' Medici, 
who arrived two days before the death of the duke, being sent 
by the pope to give orders, regulated all things to general satis- 
faction.* After the funeral of the duke, the cardinal entered into 
intimate consultations with the principal citizens, and reesta- 
blished the government, according to the form and order which 
the pope had given to Duke Lorenzo. The cardinal himself 
remained, by order of the pope, in the government, to give fur- 
ther satisfaction to the citizens, whom he knew to be disgusted 
with the proceedings of Goro in the lifetime of the duke, and the 
great authority he had assumed, perhaps greater than the duke 
had given him ; he reduced the business of the magistrates, elec- 
tions, customs of office, and the mode of expenditure of the public 
money, in such a manner, that there appeared a very great and 
universal joy among the citizens ; and no other or greater diffi- 
culties remained to him than the usual divisions among the 
citizens of the state ; some of whom contended for enlarging, and 
others for restraining the elections of magistrates. Wherefore, 
those who wished the state more contracted, at the head of whom 
was Ridolfi, opposed themselves to Salviati, who, by order of the 
pope, was returned to Florence with the cardinal, and he, for 
contrary reasons, was opposed to them ; and because the cardi- 
nal went on, amusing sometimes one and sometimes the other 
party, and supporting both, their divisions were much more 
apparent at this time, and the heads of each conducted them- 
selves with less dissimulation than they had done in the lifetime 
of the duke. Indeed, the dissensions of the citizens arose in all 
important afi&irs which the cardinal had to provide for or to think 
of in his government; whereas, in the other case, in the most 

* Nerli, lib. Til. p. 183. 

FLORENCE. 137 

important affairs they followed withoat any difficulty that which 
was ordered daily by the pope." 

The cardinal seems to have diverted the factions from any 
effectual opposition to his government, by playing them one 
against the other, and fomenting their mutual emimosities ; for 
his government was very successful and frugal, and money was 
saved in it to pay off the public debts. But the war soon fol- 
lowed, of Pope Leo X. and Charles V., who had lately succeeded 
Maximilian in the empire, against the French. The cardinal 
was sent with his army, as apostolical legate, and went into 
Lombardy, leaving in his place, in the government of Florence, 
the Cardinal di Cortona. The affairs of the pope and emperor 
succeeded prosperously against the French, who lost Milan ; but 
the pope, on the last of November, 1521, died, and finished, in 
the midst of so much grandeur, the legitimate succession of the 
house of Medici, and the male line of the first Cosimo, who by 
a public decree was called <Hhe father of his country," and who, 
in 1434, had given rise to the greatness of his family. 

^ After the death of the pope, the cardinal suddenly departed 
from Milan, and returned to Florence, where he found that the 
signori had given good orders for the conservation of the state, 
and that Francesco Vettori, who was gonfalonier of justice, the 
Cardinal di Cortona, and the principal citizens in the government, 
had made every provision and taken every precaution for the 
benefit and safety of the state ; and he found, too, on so great 
an occasion as that of a sudden and unexpected death of the 
pope, a ready inclination in all the principal citizens, and a imi- 
versal desire among the people, to maintain the state in the 
hands of the Cardinal de' Medici; and all this felicity arose 
from his good government, which, since the death of the Duke 
Lorenzo, had been universally agreeable. 

" Consulting now with the principal citizens, orders were given 
for defence in the war which Renzo da Ceri, by the favor of the 
French, had excited in Siena, with a view to change the govern- 
ment in Florence. This war was fomented by the Cardinal 
Soderini, and occasioned a firesh declaration against his family, 
that they were rebels, and involved them in greater calamities 
than they had suffered in 1512. During this war, many citizens 
began to speak without reserve of a greater degree of liberty, 
and a new reform of the government. They reported publicly 

12* 

138 ON GOVERNMENT. 

that the cardinal, for want of relations and a legitimate succes- 
sion in his family, would be willing in a measure to dispose of 
the authority of the balia, and leave the government freely in the 
people, with a certain authority reserved to a senate for life, to 
consist of the best citizens, and to himself a balia for some 
purposes during his life; and when the principal and most 
suspected persons in this way were secured, although an army 
was still in Siena, these discourses continued and increased. 
Many were so eager, and so drawn away by their wishes and 
their love of novelty, that they began too soon to descend to 
particulars concerning the manner of reforming the govern- 
ment, which they believed and said ought to be undertaken; 
and they proposed the mode of electing the gonfalonier of 
justice ; some of them would have him for life, as he had been 
when Soderini was elected in'1502, and others desired he might 
be elected annually, as Bidolfi was in 1512. Such was the zeal 
of many, deceived by their credulity and the ardent passions 
which transported them, that they began to speak more freely of 
the person to be elected, and Acciaioli and Vettori were named, 
and Grondi ; but all agreed at last, the better to conciliate the 
cardinal, to leave the election for the first time wholly to him. 

** These practices went so far, that those citizens began to be 
publicly named and discriminated, who were in favor of the 
reformation of the government, and those who were against it. 
That party of the citizens who had counseUed the cardinal to a 
large and comprehensive distribution of honors, and who had 
ever taken the protection of the generality, appeared, upon these 
conversations of a reform, to give some attention to it ; and that 
party which desired to hold the public offices and honors in few 
families, detested and censured those who talked of any reforma- 
tion at aU. The generality of the citizens stood neutral, expect- 
ing, however, with great desire, that the reform would take place. 
One class of young men, and especially those who had concurred 
in the rise of Rucellai, solicited it, and discovered themselves." 

In this manner the whole city was divided and confounded ; 
the greater part of the citizens agitated, some with hopes, and 
others with fears ; and many ventured so far as to write various 
models for such a reformation, even in the presence of the cardi- 
nal. Among these, Zanobi Buondelmonti and Nicholas Machi- 
avel sufficiently distinguished themselves. Nerli says he saw 

FLORENCE. 139 

these writings, which were communicated to him by the authors 
at the time of these intrigues. They were also communicated 
to the cardinal,^ who pretended to hold them in high esteem.* 
Alexander de' Pazzi composed a most elegant and beautiful ora- 
tion, in the name of the people of Florence, in praise of the car- 
dinal, for the restoration of the commonwealth; which Nerli 
remembers to have heard recited before a large company at a 
supper, where, having obtained a copy, he sent it to Rome to the 
Cardinal Salviati. These speculations proceeded so far, and 
were so freely discoursed on, and in so many ways, that it began 
to appear to the cardinal that he had permitted them to run too 
far, and he thought of means to restrain them ; but things had 
gone so much beyond his intentions, he found some difficulty to 
resist their course. 

"Fortune presented him a convenient opportunity, which was 
this. There had been formed, at the time of the rise of Rucellai, 
a certain school of young men of letters and of elevated genius, 
among whom was Cosimo Rucellai, who died very young, though 
he had excited great expectations among the literati. This 
society was much frequented by Nicholas Machiavel ; and Nerli 
says he was a most intimate friend of Machiavel, and had fre- 
quent conversations in this club. These gentlemen not only 
amused themselves, but made a business and duty of exercising 
themselves in the study of history, and in making observations 
and reflections upon it. At their request Machiavel composed 
his discourses upon Livy, and his treatise of military matters. 
These persons went on, thinking, by an imitation of the ancients, 
to effect something that should be grand and noble, and render 
them illustrious. At length they wrought themselves up to the 
thoughts of a conspiracy against the cardinal, and did not well 
consider what Machiavel in his discourses had written to them 
on the subject of conspiracies. Had they done so, they would 
either not have engaged in the design, or, if they had, would 
have proceeded in it with greater caution. The heads of 
this plot were Zanobi Buondelmonti and Luigi Alamanni. 
Their intention was to assassinate the Cardinal de' Medici, 

* E tutti Buoi scritti andavano in mano del cardinale, che mostrava di teneme 
conto, e di fame capitale grandifBimo. Nerli, lib. vii. p. 137. 

1 The work of [Bdachiavel, stated to have been drawn up at the instance of the 
pope, is analyzed and commented on after the author's manner in the fourth 
chapter of this volume. 

140 ON GOVERNMENT. 

and thus bring back the city to a free government, and restore 
liberty to the people, as they enjoyed it before 1512. After the 
death of Leo X., they sent Batista della Palla, who was in the 
conspiracy with them, to Cardinal Soderini, in order to inform 
him of their indignation against the cardinal, and to persuade 
him, as an exile and an enemy of the Medici, to make, with 
Benzo da Ceri and the family of the Soderini, such provision as 
they should judge proper to conduct their designs, and to obtain 
intelligence of the progress of this war. But the enterprise not 
succeeding with Signor Renzo as was expected, the plot was first 
suspected, and at length, by degrees, discovered by the cardinal ; 
the principal persons engaged in it were obliged to fly, and 
were declared rebels, particularly Buondelmonti, Alamanni, Palla, 
Bruccioli ; and others were apprehended and beheaded ; by which 
means the cardinal was again secured in the enjoyment of his 
government, as well as his life, and an end was put to all the 
vain designs and idle discourses of a free government. 

" In 1522, the cardinal contrived an interview at Leghorn and 
at Florence, with Adrian the pope ; in consequence of which, 
Cardinal Soderini was imprisoned in the castle at Bome, and 
prevented from fomenting further designs against the Medici; 
and the Cardinal de' Medici became a great favorite with the 
pope and the emperor. Having adjusted with the pope all his 
affairs, the cardinal gave orders that Hippolito, a natural son of the 
Duke Giuliano, and Alexander, a natural son of the Duke Lorenzo, 
should be committed to the care of Roso Ridolfi and Giovanni 
Corsi, that he might avail himself of them in time to maintain 
the reputation and authority of the state in the house of Medici, 
in the succession of the first Cosimo, who was called "the father 
of his country," in the best manner that he could, being deter- 
mined to exclude the other branch in the descendants of Ms broi- 
ther Lorenzo. He proceeded, however, in this deliberation with 
much caution and reserve, pretending to doubt of the brains as 
well as heart of Giovanni de' Medici, of whom in truth he was 
jealous ; for, instead of meriting the contempt of the cardinal, he 
had a liberality and a greatness of soul, that enabled him to 
acquire the highest fame in the military art, which he had pur- 
sued from his tender years." In short, according to Nerli, who 
knew him, he was possessed of every virtue and quality of a 
great prince. 

FLORENCE. 141 

^ In September, 1523, Pope Adrian died ; and, after a long 
contest in which the cardinals were two months in the conclave, 
on the nineteenth of November the Cardinal de' Medici was 
created pope, taking the name of Clement YIL, and thus united 
the sovereign authority, which he held in Florence, to the exten- 
sive power of the church ; upon which happy election, as it was 
called, there were great external signs of joy in Florence, in the 
fervor of which an event happened remarkable enough to be 
related : — In the vacancy of the pontificate many wagers had 
been laid concerning the new election ; among many who lost 
was Peter Orlandini, and being too importunately solicited by 
the winner to pay, he answered in great wrath that he would 
not pay until it was determined whether the election had been 
made canonically or not These words were reported to the 
magistrates, and, after the importance of them had been con- 
sidered by the cabal, Peter was summoned by the eight of the 
balia, and upon his appearance was seized and beheaded in a 
few hours. 

" Soon after the creation of the pope, the Soderini were 
restored to their country, because, although at first their cardinal 
in conclave had been zealous against the Medici, his friends, 
and particularly the Cardinal Colonna, had labored to reconcile 
him, and succeeded so far, that his nephews were restored, and 
he remained afterwards in the good graces of his holiness. 
Palla Rucellai, with nine others, were sent ambassadors to ren- 
der the usual homage to the new pope. With these ambassa- 
dors the pope intrigued, as he could no longer govern in Florence, 
to have one of the two young natural sons sent to govern the 
city. Some among the ambassadors and other Florentines then 
at Rome were well inclined ; others were timorous in disclosing 
their opinions ; some having notice of the secret, and of the will 
of the pope, and all well knowing what the pope had determined, 
in order to satisfy him, and constrained by necessity rather than 
swayed by any reason or inclination, requested of his holiness 
one of the young men. The pope sent Hippolito, the son 
of the Duke Giuliano, under the guardianship of the Cardi- 
nal di Cortona, because he was yet too young for so great 
a government; and Ottaviano de' Medici had the care of 
the family affairs and the control of the house and family of 
the Magnificent Hippolito, as he was called, and as his father 

142 ON GOVERNMENT. 

had been entitled at the time of their exile, when he had the 
title of Duke of Nemours. Ottaviano was also to take the 
care of Alexander, the son of the Duke Lorenzo. In this man- 
ner were all things disposed relative to the state of Florence 
and the house of Medici ; and thus they remained for four years, 
until 1527, when a general scrutiny was made, which was very 
extensive, and therefore made with universal satisfaction. 

" In 1524, a civil war broke out in Pistoia between the parties 
called Panciatichi and Cancellieri, and the Panciatichi prevail- 
ing, expelled and banished, as usual, their adversaries, and 
every thing was there soon settied. The pope did not much 
interfere in the war in Lombardy between Charles and Francis, 
which followed the memorable defeat of the French before 
Pavia, when the king was taken prisoner and conducted to 
Spain by the emperor. In this tranquillity of foreign affairs, 
the Cardinal di Cortona had, however, enough to do to cement 
his government, amidst all their discontents and his own ungrate- 
ful manner of treating the citizens. For the best friends, as well 
as others, did not find in the government of the pope that which 
had been promised, nor those conditions and qualities of profit 
and honor which they relished so much in his mode of pro- 
ceeding and government while he was cardinal; nor could 
the Cardinal di Cortona perceive, until in 1527 it became 
very manifestj how much it imported to the benefit of the 
state and the house of Medici, that he should study the charac- 
ter of the citizens and the principles and motives of their divi- 
sions ; especially after the party, the most decided in favor of 
the Medici, and of consequence the most odious to the general- 
ity, had been uncommonly weakened by the death of Alamanni, 
Corbinelli, Serristori, and some others, the most warm in their 
party, and the most jealous of any opposition to the present 
government 

After them too Ridolfi died ; but he, before his death, by an 
intermarriage with the Strozzi, had been somewhat cooled, and 
dreaded a change less than formerly. The other party, on the 
contrary, were much exalted in their hopes and confidence, as 
they had increased in reputation with the Strozzi, Capponi, and 
Guicciardini, who, by their great quality and riches, drew after 
them a strong band of honorable citizens ; with these concurred 
Vettori, being a relation of Capponi, and an intimate friend of 

FLORENCE. 143 

Philip Stroz2d ; and as to the Salviati, although Jacopo was shut 
up in Rome, there remained in Florence Averardo and Piero, 
the sons of Alamanni, the cousins of Capponi, Francesco Guic- 
ciardini, and the relations of Matteo Strozzi. Having accu- 
mulated so much favor, so great abilities, such credit, and so 
many intimate connections, this party began to be as bold as 
they were active and powerful ; and Niccolo Capponi went on 
with the greatest reputation increasing it, as he had discovered 
upon all occasions such popular principles and feelings, and had 
acquired so much popular benevolence, that those who were 
desirous of innovation and a more liberal government, appeared 
to have found a sufficient support, whenever a proper opportunity 
should occur of making a change. 

" These causes, however, produced no effect while the affairs 
of the war between the grand princes stood in suspense and 
imaltered, as they did during the time that the king was prisoner 
to the emperor in Spain. But after he had ransomed him- 
self and recovered his liberty and his kingdom, he was more 
determined than ever to pursue his desire of recovering the state 
of Milan. It appeared to him, though he had left his sons as 
hostages in the hands of the emperor, that the conditions of the 
convention for his liberation were too hard to be observed. 
Not able to compose his mind, determined at all hazards to 
renew the war, and having found the princes of Italy in the 
same disposition, he agreed with the pope and Venetians, in a 
^ league against the emperor, in which the pope would have the 
Florentines named and comprehended. This league commenced 
the war in Lombardy. In the army of the church and for the 
pope, in place of a legate, and with the title of locum tenens of 
the holy see, was Francesco Guicciardini ; the Conte Guido 
Rangoni, then governor of the people of the church, had the 
genera] government of the ecclesiastical state ; and Giovanni de' 
Medici had the command of the infantry of that part abroad 
which was commanded by Conte Guido. There occurred in 
this war many dissensions between Giovanni and Guido ; with 
the king, in his camp, was the Marquis de Saluzzo ; the Duke 
of Urbino was for the Venetians. This war began about the 
year 1526.* 

" The imperial genemls, to divert the pope from the war of 

* Ncrli, lib. vii. p. 144. 

144 ON GOVERNMENT. 

Lombaidy, invaded Rome itself, took the botug of St. Peter, and 
plundered the palace of the pope himself; who, being besieged 
in the castle of St Angelo, was constrained to make a conven- 
tion to his disadvantage, and to send Philip Strozzi to Naples as a 
hostage for the security of the treaty, which, among other condi- 
tions, contained a definite suspension of arms. But all this suc- 
cess of the imperialists could not move the pope from the war. 
The league sent Giovanni de' Medici to the relief of Rome ; but 
he was killed in a skirmish, which relieved the pope from his 
jealousy, though it exposed his capital to ruin. 

" After the death of Giovanni, those citizens of Florence who 
desired an alteration in the government began to take courage 
and discover their intentions. They proceeded to sound all the 
citizens whom they thought proper, encouraging them to the 
enterprise ; and at the same time the younger nobility began to 
desire the same with those citizens who had encouraged ^nd 
counselled them, and to demand arms of the signori and the 
public, coloring their request with the wish by such means to be 
able to serve and defend their country in so great and imminent 
a danger as appeared in the approach of a large hostile army. 
They desired to be armed on no other account, and for no other 
end, than merely for the benefit and defence of the city. Veiled 
under such colors, these youths were countenanced by all that 
party of citizens who desired to enlarge the government, and 
who had taken upon themselves the universal protection of the 
people. But these young men entered principally into an inti- , 
mate connection with Nicholas Capponi, with whom all the 
other citizens who desired to enlarge the government concurred ; 
and, therefore, in the council, in the magistracy, and in all things, 
these youths were the favorites of Capponi, Strozzi, and Louis 
Guicciardini, and they took such courage as to consult with 
them in secret 

" Cardinal di Cortona being, as he commonly was, very slow 
in resolving, was ill qualified to put a stop to this secret intelli- 
gence, especially as he was obliged to wait for instructions firom 
Rome for every measure of his conduct. The divisions among 
the citizens made him still more timid, which was the reason 
that the spirits of these youths grew bolder every day. The 
pope sent Gherardo Corsini to Florence to alter the fortifications 
of the city ; but this measure was very unpopular. The news 

FLORENCE. 145 

of the death of Giovanni de' Medici threw the city into the 
ntmost consternation; and all these circumstances aided the 
young men in their design. The people universally, the citi- 
zens, and the young noblemen, were become very licentious in 
speech, very free and bold in expressing their conceits, and very 
tumultuous and disorderly, going in armed parties in the streets 
in the night, affronting the guards and disturbing the citizens 
with impunity. At this time the pope sent Cardinal Cibo and 
Ridolfi to assist Cardinal Cortona ; but this had little effect 

"In 1527, when the French army turned their march towards 
Tuscany, the suspected in Florence began to increase, and the 
youth became more systematical and ardent than ever in their 
desire to be armed; which they now demanded with greater 
confidence, as Louis Guicciardini was appointed gonfalonier. 
Cortona assembled in council many citizens, to consult upon 
things of such consequence. Nicholas Capponi began with 
great eloquence, and without reserve, to say, that in treating 
of things of this importance, which concerned the safety of all, 
it was reasonable to hold the consultations in the palace, 
among a larger number of the citizens, that every one might 
more freely express his sentiments. Gherardo Corsini spoke in 
opposition to Capponi with spirit in favor of the state ; and 
while the principal citizens were engaged in these altercations, 
the two armies were approaching the city. The cardinal and 
the Magnificent Hippolito intended to ride out to the heads of 
the league, and to Guicciardini, the pope's lieutenant, to concert 
measures for securing the affairs of Florence in thefr present 
critical situation. 

" There were in the piazza many circles of young men, who 
anxiously waited for disturbances ; and in the house of Peter 
Salviati a great rabble was collected of those who, a little time 
before, had been concerned in the nocturnal tumults which had 
been excited with the servants of the guard of the lieutenant 
of police. Within, with the gonfalonier, were those chiefs, who, 
at first, with more order and better council, had always managed 
those intrigues which were called the petitions for arms ; and 
already in the palace were Nicholas Capponi, Mathew Strozzi, 
arid Francis Vettori, to countenance the youths, and contrive 
that whatever might happen should follow in some order. 

" But fortune, which had otherwise determined, caused an idle 

VOL. V. 13 J 

146 ON GOVERNMENT. 

and false report to be spread, that the cardinal and Hippolito 
were gone, and had abandoned the state, as not knowing how to 
maintain it any longer ; as these reports prevailed, there suddenly 
arose in the piazza a confused rumor ; men bawled out the name 
of Liberty ! the People ! the palace on a sudden was filled with 
citizens, youths, arms, and confusion ; many began, as if they 
had already conquered, to lay hands on the signori ; and those 
citizens were threatened who did not say and do as this disor- 
derly multitude desired. The more prudent sort of persons, 
elder and younger, endeavored to preserve some order, and pro- 
posed various judicious plans ; but the uproar was too great, and 
violence had got possession." 

The detail of the errors and disorders is too long to be recited; 
but nothing would content the people short of a declaration that 
the Medici were rebels, and the signori were compelled to this 
measure. Even Niccolo Capponi, and his colleagues, who were 
present amidst such disorders in the palace, repented of the 
deceit they had practised that day, and perceived that states, 
which attempt to change the foundations of their government 
by means of popular tumults, though they may sometimes easily 
effect the alteration, will always find it difficult either to stop or 
to regulate the movements of the people ; of which important 
truth the history of Florence is full of fatal examples. 

'^ The cardinal and Hippolito, receiving intelligence of the 
tumults in Florence, returned with Francis Guicciardini, and 
some other respectable characters, and a military force. They 
entered into an accommodation with the rioters, and restored 
the government of the Medici ; they made a new imborsation 
of the signori, and imborsed as gonfalonier, in 1527, Francesco 
Antonio Nori, changed some of the signori for persons less sus- 
pected, and took every prudent measure to secure the peace of 
the city. But such was the danger, that many absented them- 
selves through fear, not believing that the pope would pardon 
their behavior. The city was in great confusion, suspicion, 
and dissatisfaction. 

" At this time the army turned towards Rome, which, on the 
sixth of May, 1527, was sacked by the French in their turn, and 
the pope was agsdn shut up a prisoner in the castle. Philip 
Strozzi flew to Florence with the news of the ruin of the pope, 
and began to promote a change in the government; and his 

FLORENCE. « 147 

lady, Clarissa,* the daughter of Peter de' Medici, sister of the 
Duke Lorenzo, very gravely and boldly said to the Cardinal Cor- 
tona and Hippolito, that they ought to fly from Florence, and 
leave the city and republic free to the citizens. 

" Upon this return of Strozzi, and in this ruin of the pope, 
Nicholas Capponi, Matthew Strozzi, and Francis Vettori, and all 
that party of citizens who had been humbled by the disorders 
of the twenty-sixth of April, and the other party, who were in the 
confidence and league of the Mediqi, seeing the pope ruined and a 
prisoner, and no hope of assistance, gave way to fortune ; some 
through fear, and others from hopes which were held out to them 
by those citizens who desired a change in the state, and the ruin 
of the MedicL Cardinal Cortona, finding himself in such afflic- 
tion, and without any assignment of money, because Philip 
Strozzi, who was at that time depositary of the signori, sent out 
of Florence Francesco del Nero, his deputy, with all the money 
which had been collected, a movement which was the most art- 
ful check in the whole game, made a certain capitulation be- 
tween the city and the Medici, and went out of Florence with 
Cardinal Cibo and the Magnificent Hippolito, on the seventeenth 
of May, 1527, without being banished, and having the signori still 
in their favor, who stood firm to the government and the house 
of Medici to the last" 

After their departure the capitulation was not observed, and 
Cardinal Ridolfi, who remained in Florence, was constrained to 
depart In a short time a popular government was introduced, 
so large and licentious, that Philip Strozzi, and all those citizens 
who had such an inclination to the change, and who were the 
heads and chiefs of the plan of restoring the state to the people, 
were soon treated in such an injurious manner, and in so many 
ways insulted, that those who incline to weep over the follies 
and vices of their fellow-men, will have incitements enough for 
their tears in reading the story. 

* See her speech at lengtJi in Segni, p. 8. Bisognava prima, che in tali ter- 
mini si fussino condotte le cose, govemarsi co' citta(fini di maniera, che ne' peri- 
colic e nelle strettezze vostre vi si avessono a mantenere amici, e in fede, siccome 
ne* passad tempi si govemarono gli antichi miei, che coUa gentilezza, e colla 
benevolenza piu che coll' asprezza, e col timore, si mantenevano fedeli gli anuni 
de' cittadini Fiorentani, e poi in molti loro avveni teihpi sli ritrovarono costanti ; 
ma voi, che coll' usanze del viver vostro avete, ancora a cni nol sapesse, scoperto 
i vostri natali, e &tto chiaro a tattoil mondo, che non siete del sanffue de' Medici 
(e non pure di voi intendo, ma ancora di Clemente indegnamente Papa* d degna- 
mente prigione) che vi maraTi^liate voi, se sete o^ in questi travagli, ne* quali 
avete tatta qnesta citU contrana alia yostra granctezza ? 

CHAPTER THIRD. 

FLORENCE. 

The history of Segni, which was intended to record the trans- 
actions of the republic or popular state from 1527 to 1550, begins 
with the eighth book of Nerli, and contains a circumstantial 
relation of every particular. This same Segni has written the 
life of his uncle Niccolo Capponi. Varchi too, begins his his- 
tory about the same time ; so that this period is well described 
by a variety of historians. 

"After the resolution taken by the Cardinal di Cortona, and 
the principal citizens in the government, to resign the authority 
of the balia, and to leave the state, by agreement, liberally in the 
hands of the people, the balia assembled on the sixteenth of May, 
1527, and the provision by which liberty was restored to the 
people, and the government wholly conferred upon them, by the 
total annihilation of the balia, was received with great joy. But 
that, in so great a revolution, they might proceed without scan- 
dal, and ordain a government, free, pacific, and quiet, as, perhaps, 
those citizens, who were the principal authors of the change, 
and had been so zealous for it, had flattered themselves they 
might, (although very different effects followed, as generally 
happens to those who place themselves at the head of the peo- 
ple, and are the instruments of changing a government,) they 
began by giving order and form to the government, that is, by tak- 
ing the power into their own hands, instead of giving it up to the 
people. They gave authority to the signori, the colleges, and 
the council of seventy, and to the members of the balia, to make, 
as well as they could, a deputation of thirty citizens for each 
quarter, giving a convenient share to the minor arts, according to 
the classes at that time in the city ; and they ordered that such 
deputation should be made by ballot, among the signori, council, 
magistrates ; and the thirty for the quarters, who were thus bal- 
lotted for by the greatest popular favor, or, in other words, who 
had the most black votes, should be understood to be elected ; 
to which number of one hundred and twenty citizens, together 
with the said magistrates and counsellors, should be given full 

FLORENCE. 149 

authority to elect all officers, meaning such as had been usually 
made by the council of a hundred, until the twentieth of June. 
All other officers were to be drawn from the ordinary purses till 
the same day ; after which, it was determined that the council 
of the people, called the greater* council, should commence its 
authority. This greater council was arranged to have the 
same authority, modes, orders, and forms, which it had before 
1512, but with certain limitations and corrections. The new 
council of siffnori collegi were to be one hundred and twenty, 
the supernumeraries seventy, and the balia of twenty, to whom 
was given authority concerning the mode of making the new 
gonfalonier ; and the council of eighty was revived in the same 
form as before 1512. Then, in the abundance of their gratitude 
to the Medici, for permitting the popular government to be 
revived, they passed an indemnity to them and all their agents, 
and forgave HippoUto, Alexander, and the duchess, daughter of 
Lorenzo, late Duke of Urbino. 

'< At last the old balia was annulled ; but the new government 
had scarcely assembled, before fresh dissensions aroscf Some 
were against observing at all the laws made as now related, 
especially relative to the greater council ; many, without waiting 
for the term prescribed, favored the assembling this council, and 
acting in it ; and some were even for beginning tumultuously, 
and without waiting for any limitations or corrections, and with- 
out regarding this law in any degree. Many others were for 
removing the signori by force before the time, though by the law 
they were to continue the month of June ; and because the pro- 
vision or law made by the balia for peaceably restoring the state 
to the people was not observed, as indeed it was not, and 
because the concession and promise made by the Medici was 
not strictly regarded, it was given out that they were returning 
with force to recover the state which they had voluntarily quitted, 
and which was not taken from them by force, as many had en- 
deavored in vain to do shortly before ; and many false rumors 
were created, propagated, and exaggerated, to terrify and con- 
found the contending parties. These at last divided themselves 

* Consiglio maggiore. 

t Dopo quesd oi^ini cosi dati, cominciarono mold cittadini a dividersi in mold 
modi, e si scopersero molte varie sette, et molte vane sedidoni. Nerii, lib. viii> 
p. 155. 

13* 
150 ON GOVERNMENT. 

into two principal factions ; the Strozzi, Soderini, &c. were the 
heads of one, and Niccolo Capponi of the other. They had a 
long struggle to make the gonfalonier resign, and get posses- 
sion of the palace. The greater council was brought into being 
and action before the time, and many other alterations were 
made about the choice of magistrates ; but a tumult in the 
palace, backed by all the persuasions of Capponi, was at last 
effective to prevail upon the gonfalonier to resign. A new 
gonfalonier was now to be chosen, and new regulations con- 
trived for the election, and among a multitude of candidates, 
Niccolo Capponi was chosen." 

Niccolo Capponi had great qualities ; but these alone were 
not the cause of his elevation ; it was indeed the secret influ- 
ence of the Medici interest which decided the election in his 
favor. This was a very memorable example of electioneering. 
It resembles in so many of its outlines all other elections, which 
enter into the essence of every government in one centre, that it 
is very interesting to every free citizen to consider it attentively. 
Sixty electors were drawn out of the purse of the grand council, 
each of whom was to nominate a citizen of fifty years of age ; 
and among these sixty were to be balloted for, in the greater 
council, six candidates for the office of gonfalonier. The six 
who upon this occasion had the most votes, were Carducci, 
Soderini, A. Strozzi, Nero, Bartolini, and Niccolo Capponi. 
Each of these candidates had his distinct principles, system, 
and party. In favor of Carducci were all that part of the citi- 
zens who most dreaded and hated the Medici, who wished for a 
licentious government, through which they could be revenged, by 
beating down every citizen who, under the government of the 
Medici, had any reputation, influence, or power. In Strozzi 
concurred a part of the same citizens, for the same reasons ; but 
their ardor for him was cooled by the recollection of the part he 
had formerly acted against Savonarola in 1498. In Soderini 
united all those citizens who loved a government both free and 
quiet, such as that which prevailed from 1502 to 1512, when 
Peter Soderini was gonfalonier for life. The party of Medici 
were united to a man against him ; with all other parties he 
was upon tolerable terms. And this is not only natural, but it 
is universally found in experience, that the monarchical party is 
most averse, in such conjunctures, to the aristocratical, and gene- 

PLOKENCE. 151 

rally coalesces with the democratical, as these did upon this 
occasion in the choice of Capponi. The partisans of Nero and 
Bartolini were those only who hated all men who had ever held 
any place in government, and wished for such as were entirely 
new. Amidst so many competitors and such a variety of par- 
ties and views, Capponi was elected, though he had held offices 
of high trust and confidence under the Medici. He had in the 
whole course of his life, public and private, been a wise, liberal, 
and irreproachable citizen ; the reputation of his father and his 
ancestors had early rendered him illustrious ; he had as much 
resolution as he had ambition, and had maintained the charac- 
ter of an honest man with all ; that of a free republican with 
the popular party, and that of a man of honor and fidelity with 
the Medici themselves, who unanimously fell in with his views 
in the election. 

** Katuram expellas fiirc&, tamen usque recurret" 

The dominant party will, in general, in this manner prevail, 
though their leaders are in danishment, and even though 
excluded by law. Capponi had married a daughter of Philip 
Strozzi, and this union of their families, and even the diversity 
of their characters,* had contributed to increase the influence of 
the former. After the election of the gonfalonier, they proceeded 
to the choice of the signori for three months. Thus the party 
of Capponi carried their point, and accomplished all this weighty 
business by the first of June, against the regulation that the old 
signori should continue through the month. 

" One of the first steps taken under the new government, was 
an appointment, by a plurality of votes in the greater council, of 
five citizens, under the title of syndics of the commons, to 
examine the accounts of all those who had handled the public 
money or other property from the year 1512. This was an 
invention of revenge and jealousy, to destroy all the friends and 

* L'integrit^ della vita, la temperanza, la sereritA, la parsimonia in allevar la 
&miglia ferono resplendere Niccol6 sopra d'ogn' altro per dignity, e per un vivo 
eaempio di virti!l : quando in Filippo un modo di vivere sciolto, V incontinenza, la 
piacevolezza, la grazia, la destrezza nel trattenere gli uomini, la liberal! tA, la 
licenza, la conccssione di se stesso fatta ora alia virtCi, ora al vizio, ebbe forza di 
&rlo amar sempre dalla gioventu, riverire dalla nobiltii, e accarezzare dal popolo, 
di tal maniera, che scbbene viveva in privata fortuna, era nondimeno come un 
principe. Varchi, lib. iii. p. 63; Segni, Storiey lib. i. p. 12; Vila di Mccolo 
C<tpp<mi, p. 2. 

152 ON GOVERNMENT. 

instruments of the Medici ; and many other schemes of persecu- 
tion against the party of Medici were contrived without the 
smallest discretion, and in spite of all the endeavors of Capponi 
and Philip Strozzi to prevent them. Among other schemes of 
persecution, the most tyrannical imaginable, which this domi- 
nant party now triumphant, practised against the minor party, 
was, at a time when a sum of money, (thirty thousand crowns,) 
was wanted by the public, to make a law that twenty citizens 
should be elected^ who should be compelled to lend the public 
fifteen thousand crowns each." 

Such is the sense of liberty and the sacred regard to property 
in a government in one centre ! 

^' This popular iyranny was carried to an excess so intolerable, 
that Philip Strozzi, the very father of the revolution, was obliged 
to fly to Naples, though his brother-in-law was gonfalonier ; but 
returning some time after with Buondelmonti, they were both 
imprisoned for four years in the tower of Volterra, for making 
opposition to the new iniquitous taxes and the administration 
of the syndics. AcciaioU too, who was then returned from his 
embassy in France, was imprisoned for being in arrear for part 
of a subsidy which they had imposed upon him, not only with- 
out equity, but beyond his ability. The gonfalonier could 
make no resistance to this popular fury, which had now got the 
ascendant ; the great council and their three months' men, the 
signori, governed without control ; and because they could not 
glut their vengeance upon the persons of the Medici, they took 
the images in wax of the popes Leo X and Clement YIL, and 
scourged and destroyed them ; and the magistrates themselves 
were supposed to have excited the youths who were guilty of 
this outrage, so indecent in a catholic city ; at least no measures 
were taken to suppress or to punish the rioters. An order was 
given by the magistrates, the eight of the balia, that the arms 
and ensigns of the Medici should be taken down in every place 
in the city and country, public and private, even in the private 
houses of the family, even from the monuments over their 
tombs." 

All this was done, and many other invasions of their private 
property committed, in direct contempt of the capitulation made 
with Cardinal Cortona and the Magnificent Hippolito, when 
they resigned the authority of their baliE^ and voluntarily left the 

FLORENCE. 153 

state to the people. It is astonishing that the people themselves 
should not have recollected that this courage had come into 
their hearts only from the present ccdamity of the pope, which 
might soon be at an end, and themselves made to feel the conse- 
quences of their present folly ; but in such a tumult of popular 
passions there is never any reflection, prudence, or foresight. 
All these things happened in the first months of the new govern- 
ment, while the pope was in the power of the imperialists, a 
prisoner in the castle of St Angelo. The plague was now in 
Florence, and it was difficult to assemble the councils, especially 
the greater council ; a law was therefore made, that for the crea- 
tion of officers and the expedition of private petitions, the num- 
ber of the greater council necessary to be present should be only 
four hundred ; but for the creation of the signori, the colleges, 
the ten of war, and the eight of the balia, the number of eight 
hundred must be full, as well as at the passing of new laws and 
the imposition of new taxes. 

<' In December, the pope accommodated his affairs with the 
emperor, obtained his liberty, and retired to Orvieto for his 
greater security. This event increased the number of opponents 
to the present government in Florence, and again brought into 
reputation those who had enjoyed it under the Medici. Two 
factions now broke out in the city. The rivals of Capponi 
began to raise their heads, and endeavored to render unpopular 
not only the friends of the Medici, but Capponi and all those 
who had endeavored to unite all parties for the general tranquil- 
' lity. Carducci, A. Strozzi, and Soderini, now formed a trium- 
virate, at the head of one faction, against Capponi and his 
adherents; and the young men and more active partisans of 
each side armed themselves, both under the pretence of defend- 
ing the palace. This guard, thus composed of two parties, 
could not be united, and gave much trouble to the gonfalonier. 
The pope at this time made Hippolito a cardinal. A satirical 
libel was composed, printed at Siena, and scattered all over 
Florence, in which a picture was drawn of such a gonfalonier as 
would be suitable to the present conjuncture ; but it was in all 
things opposite to the character of Capponi, and very much 
resembled Carducci. This device excited much licentious con- 
versation in the city against Capponi, and many projects of a 
new gonfalonier at the approaching election. 

154 ON GOVERNMENT. 

" These canvassings drove Capponi to a curious expedient to 
obtain his election. He had always maintained a good character 
with the friends of Savonarola the Prophet, and in this time of 
the plague all men were seriously inclined, and the superstitious 
began again to be frantic. Niccolo took an opportunity, in the 
greater council, to make an oration upon the times, in which, by 
the aid of a retentive memory, he repeated, almost word for word, 
one of the most terrible sermons of Savonarola, which predicted 
so many scourges to Italy and to Florence, and, after so much 
destruction, such felicity to the Florentine people; and endea- 
vored to show that the times thus predicted were arrived. In 
the course of his harangue he wrought himself up to a fervor of 
enthusiasm, fell upon his knees before the whole assembly, and 
cried with a loud voice to God Almighty for mercy. His enthu- 
siasm spread like a contagion, and the whole assembly fell upon 
their knees after his example, and cried out, with a voice like 
thunder, * Misericordia!' as they had been used sometimes to do 
when attending some of the most dreadful of Savonarola's lec- 
tures ; and to complete his artifice, or his frenzy, he persuaded 
the people, in commemoration of the tribulations, chastisements, 
and judgments of God, and the better to secure the felicity pro- 
mised by Savonarola, that they ought to elect, for the peculiar 
king of the people of Florence, Jesus the Redeemer; and, as 
Savonarola had said in some of his sermons, that they ought to 
bear the ensigns of Christ, and the glorious name of Jesus, over 
the gates of the palace. The proposition was made in council, 
as soon as the gonfalonier had finished his oration, that Christ 
should be their king, because, according to St. Paul, God had 
constituted him heir of all things ; and Nerli, who says he was 
present among so many hundreds of citizens, declares, that there 
were not more than twenty* white beans, or votes, against the 
proposition, when it was determined by ballot Capponi, by this 
proceeding, made such an impression upon all orders, and gained 
so many partisans, that, notwithstanding all the combinations of 

* Uldmamente fece passare una provisione nel consdglio grande, sopra di tuUe 
r altre notabilissima in aucsto gcncre di piet^, per la quale fu eletto Gesii Cristo 
Signer nostro per Re detla cittS nostra, con tutti i suffragi di quel popolo, eceetto 
che di 26) che tal decreto non approvarono. Era 1 titolo di questa legge scritto 
sopra la porta del palazzo de' signori, in lettere d'oro, che dicevano YHS 
XPS Rex popvUi Flor, SPQF consensu declaratuSy anno^ mense^ die, Varchi, 
p. 122. Segni, Vita di Capponi, p. 10. 

FLORENCE. 155 

the families of his competitors, he earned his election in June, 
1528. 

" In this year the pope's profound projects,* hitherto concealed 
with great art, began to be discovered. An ardent desire* of 
restoring to his family their grandeur in Florence was deeply 
rankling in his mind ; yet, by an hypocrisy too natural to that, 
as well as every other kind of ambition, he endeavored, by public 
declarations, in the most unequivocal terms, to persuade the 
Florentines that nothing was further from his thoughts ; that he 
only desired the republic to acknowledge him as pontiff", as all 
other princes and sovereigns had done, and that they would not 
persecute his connections in their private affairs, nor take away 
the ensigns and ornaments which belonged to his family. With 
a commission to this purpose, he had sent a Florentine prelate 
as his ambassador to Florence ; but as he had not obtained an 
audience, he solicited, through the medium of the King of 
France, that they would send an embassy to him, fiarnestly 
endeavoring to remove all their suspicions, and, by all appear- 
ances of candor, frankness, and familiarity in his dealings with 
them, to dispose them to fall in with his insidious designs. As 
all these devices proved unsuccessful, he exerted himself to per- 
suade Lautrec, that as those who governed in Siena were depend- 
ents on the emperor, it would be useful to his affairs to restore 
Fabio Petrucci to that city; but Lautrec, from the opposition of 
the Florentines, would not engage in it. Failing in this way, he 
labored in secret with Pirro, who complained of grievances against 
the Sienese, that with eight hundred men, and some exiles from 
Chiusi, he should seize upon that territory, and endeavor by that 
means to govern Siena ; but the Florentines insinuating to the 
French ambassador, the Viscount de Turenne, that the pope 
aimed at nothing but disturbing Florence by the means of Siena, 
the ambassador persuaded him to give up the movement to 
Chiusi. 

" Capponi, the gonfalonier, held at this timef a correspondence 
with the pope by means of Jacopo Salviati, by which the pope 
intended, in time and with patience, to overcome all difficulties, 
and obtain the restoration of his family; but the gonfalonier 
intended only to amuse the pope, and prevent liim from under- 

* Guicciardini, lib. xix. Nerli, lib. viii. p. 172. f Nerli^ p. 178. 

156 ON GOVERNMENT. 

taking any enterprise against the city with force. Thus both 
parties hoped to gain the advantage of time. Capponi gave 
hopes to the pope that the city might be disposed to agree with 
him, as they had been used to do with other pontiffs, provided 
his holiness would content himself to leave it in the quiet enjoy- 
ment of its liberty. This correspondence, though conducted with 
secrecy, to avoid suspicion, was communicated, however, to 
several of the first citizens in the government. Jacopo Alamanni, 
though he knew the correspondence was conducted with the 
privity of the government and for the good of the state, was 
excited by the competitors of the gonfalonier to seize with vio- 
lence Serragli, who had been sent by Salviati upon the business, 
and a great clamor was excited against the gonfalonier ; fresh 
libels were published, and old ones reprinted; the young men 
were again excited tumultuously to demand arms, ensigns, and 
officers to be elected by themselves ; and the triumvirate prevailed 
so far as to have a new ordinance for the militia, by which an 
imborsation should be made of the young soldiers, and a number 
drawn from time to time, to keep the guard of the palace. 

" This was no better than making the government prisoners to 
the opposition. Alamanni at length proceeded to such violence, 
tumult, and outrage against the gonfalonier, that the signori, 
who were authorized by the greater council to defend the palace, 
were obliged, in order to suppress this armed sedition, to order 
him to be seized. He attempted to fly, but was made prisoner, 
condemned, and beheaded. This punishment excited fresh cla- 
mors against the gonfalonier, especially among the young soldiers, 
who now reproached their own leaders, the triumvirate, although 
they had secretly stimulated the offence, for having concurred in 
the sentence. Perhaps to remove Carducci and Strozzi out of 
the way of giving farther disturbance to the government, the first 
was appointed ambassador to France, and the second to Venice. 
Both declined the employment; as the laws would not per- 
mit any citizen to renounce an embassy without alleging just 
impediments, to be approved by the signori and colleges, they 
applied to be excused ; but their reasons were not admitted, and 
they fell under the punishment of admonition and other heavy 
penalties. Their arguments before the signori and colleges only 
served still more to divide and distract the public councils. At 
last Carducci went to France, much against his will, but Strozzi 

FLORENCE. 157 

was condemned and admonished ; and this again alienated many 
friends from the gonfalonier, and still farther weakened his party. 

But many grew weary of the endless confusions and anxie- 
ties arising from this government in one centre, and that centre 
the nation. Those who had been in reputation in the time of 
the Medici began to recover credit, and the faction of the trium- 
virate lost ground. " The young men, too, were divided, some 
warmly attached to the gonfalonier, and others as zealous against 
him, especially those who resented the punishment of Alamanni. 
The gonfalonier, trusting to a good conscience and upright inten- 
tions, proceeded in his negotiations with the pope, with the par- 
ticipation of his principal colleagues in government ; and this he 
thought the more necessary, since the ruin of the French army 
near Naples made him suspect that the pope would reconcile 
himself with the emperor; and indeed the pope at this time,* 
under a countenance of exquisite dissimulation, had all his 
thoughts taken up with the recovery of the government of Flo- 
rence, still amusing the French ambassadors and the other con- 
federates with various negotiations, and specious hopes of his 
adhering to the league. Nevertheless, moved partly by the dread 
of the grandeur of the emperor, and the success of his enterprises, 
and partly by the hopes of inducing him more easily than he 
could the King of France to assist him in the restoration of his 
family to Florence, he had a stronger inclination to the emperor 
than to the king. To facilitate this design, he moreover most 
earnestly desired to draw to his devotion the state of Perugia ; 
to which end he was believed to have stimulated Braccio Bag- 
lioni, who constantly attempted new disturbances in that neigh- 
borhood. 

" In this conjuncture, a fresh altercation happened in Florence, 
to the great misfortune of the government,! excited against Cap- 
poni, at the end of the second year of his magistracy, principally 
by the envy of some of the principal citizens, who availed them- 
selves of the jealousies and ignorance of the multitude. The 
gonfalonier, in all his administration, as well as in his correspond- 
ence, had two principal points in view ; to defend against fresh 
attacks of envy or resentment those who had been placed in 
honor by the Medici, and even to communicate to them, in com- 

* Guicciardini, lib. xix. p. 170, edit Venet 1574. Nerli, p. 170. 
t Guicciardini, lib. xix. Nerli, p. 1 79. 

VOL. V. 14 

168 ON GOVERNMENT. 

inon with the other citizens, the honors and councils of the public; 
and, in things of no moment to liberty, not to exasperate the spirit 
of the pope. These points were both of great utility to the re- 
public ; because many of those who had been persecuted as ene- 
mies of the government, finding themselves in safety, would have 
joined heartily with the others to defend it; and because the 
pontiff, though he eagerly desired the return of his family, would, 
if no fresh provocations were given him, have less incitements to 
precipitation, and less grounds for those complaints he was con- 
tinually making to other princes. But the ambition of many 
was opposed to this policy, who, knowing that they should be 
farther from a share in the government, or have less influence in 
it, if the friends of the Medici, men undoubtedly of more expe- 
rience and merit, were in it, minded no other business than that 
of filling the multitude with suspicions of the pope and his party, 
and calumniating the gonfalonier, as not having a sufficient 
hatred against the Medici, that he might not obtain the prolonga- 
tion of his magistracy for the third year. Capponi, unmoved at 
these slanders, and thinking it very necessary that the pope should 
not be provoked, entertained him with letters and private mes- 
sages, as before related ; a practice which was begun and conti- 
nued with the knowledge and approbation of the principal citizens 
in administration, and with no other end than to divert the pope 
from taking some violent measures. 

"As fortune would have it, having dropped by accident and 
incautiously in the council-chamber a letter from Rome, in which 
were some words capable of exciting suspicion in such as were 
uninformed of the original and foundation of the correspondence, , 
it fell into the hands of Jacopo Gherardi, one of those who had 
seats in the supreme council, and were most bitter against the 
gonfalonier; certain seditious young men rose in arms and 
seized the palace, retaining the gonfalonier in custody, and call- 
ing together the magistrates and a multitude of citizens, tumult- 
uously deliberated and resolved that he should be deprived of 
his ofiice ; * which decision was confirmed by the larger council. 
Capponi was rendered incapable ; and it was ordained that the 
gonfalonier should be for the future but for one year, and that 
his salary should be reduced one half. The opposition of the 

* Guicciardini, lib. xix. Nerli, p. 180. 

FLORENCE. 159 

triTimvirate had so turned the brains of the people by their 
intrigues, that a great change was made in the government, and 
Francesco Carducci, a man proved by his past life, by his condi- 
tion, and his depraved views, to be unworthy of so great an 
honor, was chosen in his place. Capponi was brought to his 
trial, and defended himself with such eloquence and ability, and 
showed so clearly that his conduct, instead of being criminal, 
had been dictated by the principal persons in government, and 
merely for the public good, that he was acquitted with honor, 
and accompanied home to his palace by almost all the nobility. 

" Upon the privation of Capponi, the pope no longer enter- 
taining any hopes but from force, sent the Archbishop of Capua 
in great haste to the emperor, and, as Capponi had foreseen, 
agreed to almost any terms that were demanded of him, in con- 
sideration of having his family restored to Florence, and a natu- 
ral daughter of the emperor given in marriage to his nephew 
Alexander de' Medici, the son of Lorenzo, late Duke of Urbino. 
Him the pope intended to invest with the secular grandeur of 
his house, because, some time before, when he was sick and in 
danger of death, he had made Hippolito, the son of Giuliano, a 
cardinal. The emperor stipulated to give twenty thousand 
ducats a year with his daughter, and to reinstate the pope in the 
possession of Cervia, Ravenna, Modena, Reggio, and Rubiera. 
And thus, by their continual factions and divisions, the citizens 
of Florence found they had disgusted both the King of France 
and the emperor. Thus it usually happens, when small repub- 
lics and petty princes intermeddle in the wars of great monarchs ; 
the one in alliance thinks himself ill served, while the other, who 
is in enmity, is most grievously offended, and vows revenge." * 

The particulars of the negotiations at Cambray ; the contra- 
dictory representations of their two ambassadors, Carducci and 
Cavalcanti, who were of different parties ; the propositions of an 
accommodation with the emperor, made by the Prince Doria 
through Louis Alamanni, and the rejection of them by the influ- 
ence of Francesco Carducci, the new gonfalonier, and those citi- 
zens who were most jealous of the Medici and their party, are 
too tedious to relate, though they were rejected, and conse- 
quently the republic ruined, by the confused method of treating 

« Nerli, p. 184. 

160 ON GOVERNMENT. 

of foreign affairs in a numerous and mixed assembly, according 
to the new constitution. 

" The emperor now arrived in person from Spain, and all the 
states of Italy sent ambassadors to pay him their respects, 
except Florence. The triumvirate, with their new gonfalonier, 
were afraid that either some of the old friends of the Medici, or 
some of the friends of Capponi, who was at the head of the 
middle or neutral party, as it was called, would be sent, and by 
this means come again into reputation ; to prevent which they 
not only risked the emperor's resentment, but deprived them- 
selves of the means of obtaining intelligence of any intrigue that 
might be begun between the pope and him. They set on foot, 
however, in order, as it was pretended, to unite the citizens, a 
subscription and an oath, to maintsdn the present popular 
government. But although the subscription was publicly 
opened in a book in the greater council, many respectable 
citizens would not subscribe, as they knew it to be impossible to 
unite the citizens cordially in such a plan. The animosities of 
party grew warmer, and Pazzi, a friend of Capponi, of a very 
respectable character, was accused of uttering seditious words. 
The prosecution occasioned great heat. Pazzi was tried and 
acquitted, and Binieri would have been imprisoned for his false 
accusation, if the gonfalonier and his party had not screened him 
from justice. In this manner did the gonfalonier, to increase his 
authority, and to make himself feared, seek every opportunity, 
and employ every means, to depress his adversaries ; and if he 
had succeeded against Pazzi, he intended to have pursued others 
with still greater animosity. 

"About the middle of August, the emperor arrived in Genoa, 
and all the rest of Italy sending him ambassadors, a fresh effort 
was made in Florence ; and, as it could not now be prevented, 
the gonfalonier conceived another device to defeat it. He pre- 
vailed to have the powers and instructions so confined, especially 
against agreeing with the pope, that they could obtain no other 
answer from the emperor than, ' First accommodate your affairs 
with his holiness.' But this was not all the evil. In such 
governments nothing can be done with any degree of satisfac- 
tion to the public, but by gratifying every party ; if one clamor- 
ous faction is left to excite a cry, all is confusion. Upon this 
occasion four ambassadors had been appointed, Strozzi, Cap- 

FLORENCE. 161 

poni, Soderini, and Girolami, who could no more agree among 
themselves than with the emperor or the pope. They could 
never agree in writing their despatches. Soderini and Girolami, 
to maintain their city in the French interest and in its obstinacy 
not to agree with the pope in any manner, would not concur 
with Strozzi and Capponi in writing clearly and plainly what 
the emperor had said to them. 

" In September, the united armies of the pope and the empe- 
ror resolved on taking possession of Perugia, and the pope 
gave notice to Malatesta Baglioni to depart from that city. 
Malatesta demanded of Florence men and money to defend it. 
In order to give the most pointed offence to the pope, and to 
make their defiance the more conspicuous, they affected to 
extend it not only to his person, but to the pontifical see. 
They resolved to send three thousand men to the aid of Mala- 
testa, to prevent the church from recovering one of its prin- 
cipal territories. But, with all this assistance, Malatesta was 
driven out of Perugia, and marched to Florence, in consequence 
of an order fi'om the gonfalonier, without the knowledge of the 
signori or council of ten, and against their judgments as well 
as the general sense of the citizens, who almost unanimously 
desired an accommodation with the pope. A clamor now arose 
against the gonfalonier and his friends, which obliged them to 
call to council many citizens of the other parties, whom they 
had long neglected, who carried a resolution to send other 
ambassadors to the pope, with more ample powers of accommo- 
dation. But the gonfalonier, by delaying the commission, had 
subtlety enough to defeat this resolution, although it had been 
taken with very general satisfaction ; and he proceeded to take 
measures for the defence of the city against the confederated 
army. Many of the principal citizens, alarmed at these delays, 
harangued freely in council in favor of an accommodation ; but 
these were insulted in the street by the youth of the gonfalonier's 
party, for their freedom of speech in council. This occasioned a 
public complaint and so much general indignation that the gon- 
ifalonier was obliged to give way and despatch the ambassadors 
with full powers ; but he had still the art to delay the delibera- 
tions in council upon the terms of accommodation. The ambas- 
sadors met with some diflSculty to find the pope, and could not 
agree among themselves. Soderini went to Lucca ; Strozzi to 

14* K 

162 ON GOVERNMENT. 

Venice; Capponi resolved to return to Florence, and labor 
openly and decidedly to persuade his fellow-citizens into an 
accommodation, and Girolami returned to oppose him.* Cap- 
poni was taken sick, and died at Grarfagnana ; ^ Girolami there- 
fore had a larger field opened to his f ambition to be gonfalonier, 
to which end he accommodated his discourse variously to differ- 
ent parties of the citizens; from those whom he knew to be 
desirous of peace, he disguised his sentiments, and concealed his 
late conduct; to the neutral party he proposed that the city 
should stand upon its defence and make the best preparations 
for it, but be ready to receive, or even to propose, any reasonable 
terms of accommodation on the first favorable opportunity ; but 
with the faction of the gonfalonier, knowing their resolution to 
be fixed to see the city perish rather than yield to any accommo- 
dation, he opened himself in private without reserve, and declared 
himself devoted to their system." 

It is the general opinion of historians, as well as of Segni, 
'' that the divisions of the citizens into parties under the trium- 
virate, and afterwards of those persons of middle rank, who, by 
means of their discord, came after them into power, as Car- 
ducci, Castiglione, and others, were the true cause of the loss of 
their liberties ; for these persons, though few in number, among 
a people jealous of their liberties, and full of parties and various 
humors, found it easy to agitate their fellow-citizens in so violent 
a manner, as to make them resolve upon sustaining a siege, and 

* Segni, Vita di Nkcolo Capponi, p. 42. 

f Infni lo cagioni atte a rovinare la repubblica, unai e non la manco sono i 
cittadini, che &voriti, e fatdsi capi del popoto, mentrechd ora per ritenere quella 
grandezza, e ora per racquistarla, cercano di fare ogni cosa, one piace alia mold- 
tudine, n^ s' avvegsono, che distruff^ono quella libertsk ; e questo d confermato 
con molti esempi dell' antiche repubBiche della Grecia, e piii modemamente con 
quelH della Romana, dove si vede, a chi considera quelle storie con buono giudi- 
zio, i cittadini po{)olari essere stad pii^ cagione delia sua rovina, che Qucghf che 
&voriyano 1' autoritii del senato. Sienmi di ci6 tesdmonio in prima i Gracchi, di 
poi Mario, e Cesare ultimamente, i quali sebbene con oneste cagioni di sollevare 
il popolo grasso, cercarono di compiacergli, ebbono nondimanco sotto questo pre- 
testo medesimo nascosto il veleno, che esdnse appoco appoco quella republica. 
Non^^ dubbio, che, leggendo questa storia, si potra conchiudere questo medesimo, 
che i capi del popolo,^oderim, Strozzi, Carducci, mcntrcchd opponendosi a Nic- 
col6 Capponi per farsi piii grandi, e venire in piix grazia, indebourono assai quel 
govemo. Segni, Storie, lib. iv. p. 102. 

1 His last words are said to nave referred to the divisions by which the state 
was convulsed : — " Oimd, oimA, dove abbiam noi indotta la patria nostra I " 
Segni. 

FLORENCE. 163 

to render the defence glorious. And although it is not denied 
that the pope gave a provocation to this, and would have tried 
every method to recover Florence, yet the difficulties were so 
great, that it is not doubted he would have been contented with 
reasonable conditions, rather than venture on so atrocious and so 
impious a war." 

We pass over all the marches of armies, and intrigues of ne- 
gotiation between the King of France, the emperor, the pope, 
the Venetians, &c., which occurred before the fifth of October, 
1529, when the Prince of Orange advanced before Florence, and 
laid siege to the city, which was now well fortified, and contained 
a strong garrison. 

" Valori was sent by the pope as his commissary to the army, 
and with him went a large number of Florentine exiles, (of 
whom there was always a multitude scattered and wandering 
about all Italy, and waiting for the motion of troubled waters) 
who now joined the united arfny of the pope and emperor. As 
these had relations and connections in the city, an alarm was 
excited ; and to intimidate every one from the thoughts of an 
accommodation, the signori resolved that five-and-twenty citizens 
should be declared suspected of disaffection to the popular govern- 
ment, and confined in the palace under a strong guard ; and, to 
complete their plan of terror against any one who might speak 
of an accommodation, they cut off the head of Carlo Cocchi, 
for saying that it would be better to restore the Medici than to 
hazard the war, and for talking of a parliament."* 

There is not in the whole history a fact more curious than 
this, as it lets us into the true character of this government 
It was always called the popular government, but it was really 
an aristocracy ; and the members of it dreaded an assembly or 
convention of the people, which they called a parliament, as 
much as they did the Medici ; and soon after, the same sentence 
and execution was passed upon Francesco Rigogolo, for daring 
to speak of an accommodation-! And by these arts and means 

* E per dare piii spavento, e per mettere piii terrore, a chi pur ancora volessc 
ragionare d* accordo, presero certa occasione contro a Carlo Cocchi sopra una 
querela, par la quale era Carlo accusato, ch' egli avesse detto, quando si ragio- 
nava largamente, e molto liberamente neir universale dell accordo, che fusse piu- 
tosto da voter rimettere i Medici, che aspettare la guerra, e conteneva la querela, 
che Carlo in un certo modo avesse in quel suo parlare mescolato anche il nome 
tanto odioso al govemo popolare del parlamerUo, Nerii, lib. ix. p. 199. 

f Onde messono tale spaveuto, e tanto terrore nell' universale per cagione de' 

164 ON GOVERNMENT. 

did this aristocratical tyrant, the gonfalonier, spread such a terror 
among the citizens, that no man dared oppose his will ; and he 
obtained and exercised more power than the magistrates, the 
cabal, (pratiche,) the ordinary council, or the laws ; and he used 
it accordingly in the most arbitrary manner, in raising money by 
various illegal measures, by discarding magistrates and dissolv- 
ing councils at his pleasure, and in doing all other things that an 
unbridled despot could do. It would be tedious, and it is unne- 
cessary to relate aU the particulars of his arbitrary conduct; of 
the assaults and sallies, in one of which the Prince of Orange 
was killed ; the hopes, fears, deliberations, distresses, and famine 
of a siege, which does infinite dishonor to this pope, who had 
no right to subject the city ; and of a defence which was made by 
the obstinacy of an aristocratical junto, for purposes of ambition 
equally reprehensible, though colored with a pretence of a popular 
government, but which was by no means conducted by the spirit 
of liberty, or upon any principle df a free people. On the con- 
trary, it was conducted, from first to last, without regard to any 
law or constitution, and against the sense of a great majority of 
the people. 

" The defence was sustained from October to August, on the 
ninth day of which month, 1530, four ambassadors were deputed 
to treat with Don Fernando da Gonzaga, who, since the death 
of Orange, had the chief command of the army, and the next 
day a convention was concluded. The principal articles were, 
that the city should pay eight thousand ducats for removing the 
army ; that the pope and the city should give authority to the 
emperor to declare, within three months, what should be the 
form of government, * salva nondimeno la liberty,' * with a re- 
servation of liberty; that a pardon should be understood, for 
every one, of all injuries done to the pope, his friends, and 

cittadini sostenuti, e per quelle esecutioni, che s' erano fatte, che pii^ non era ri- 
maso in Firenze chi pure ardisse non solo parlare dell' accordo, o della guerra, 
ma non era anche chi avesse in animo a contrairsi a quelli della setta del gonfa- 
loniere in cosa alcuna. Nerli, p. 199. 

* In primis, che la forma del govemo abbia da ordinard, e stabilirsi dalla Ma- 
estA Cesarea infra quattro mesi proseimi awenire, intendendosi sempre conservata 
la libertd. Nerli, lib. xi. p. 144. Intendendosi sempre, che sia conservata la li- 
berty. Varchi, lib. xi. p. 429. Che la cittik rimanesse libera nel modo ch' ell' 
era, nmettendo solamente i Medici, e tutti gli altri cittadini fatti ribelli da quel 
govemo. Segni, p. 1 25. Nardi, lib. ix. p. 882. Muratori, Annal. torn. x. p. 218, 
anno 1530. Laugier, HuL de Venige, lio. xxxv. torn. ix. p. 885. Guicdardini, 
lib. ' 

FLORENCE. 165 

servants ; and that Malatesta should remain with two thousand 
foot, for the guard of the city, until the emperor's declaration 
should arrive." 

It is made a question, whether the general who commanded 
in Florence was, or was not, a traitor to his cause. Varchi is 
very sanguine in the affirmative, and produces letters in evidence; 
but the citizens and garrison were reduced to such extremities 
for provisions, that they could not have held out three days 
longer. The pope, on his part, was not very anxious to fulfil 
his treaty. While the money was getting ready to pay off the 
army, Valori, the apostolic commissary, in concert with Mala- 
testa, having called together the people in the piazza, according 
to the ancient custom of the city, to make a parliament, the 
magistrates and others, conniving at it through fear, instituted a 
new government contrary to the treaty, giving authority by this 
parliament to twelve citizens, who adhered to the Medici, to 
ordain, in their own manner, the constitution of the city, who 
reduced it to that form which prevailed before the year 1527. 
The army received their money ; the Italian officers defrauded 
their soldiers, whom they dismissed to seek their fortunes with- 
out their pay ; the Spaniards and Germans marched into Siena 
to new-model the government of that city; and Malatesta 
returned to Perugia without any further declaration from the 
emperor, and left the city of Florence at the arbitrary disposi- 
tion of the pontiff. 

Now began the punishments of the citizens ; " for those in 
whose hands the government was left, partly for the security of 
the state, and partly by the hatred conceived against the authors 
of so great calamities, and the resentment of private injuries, 
but principally because such was the intention of the pope, 
brought the principal citizens concerned in the late government 
to a trial, and they were sentenced to death and executed. 
Others were confined, without much regret, sympathy, or pity, 
from any party; for the fiiends of Capponi, and all the real 
friends of liberty, regarded them as the cause of preventing an 
accommodation, and the ruin of their country, while the Medici 
considered them as their bitterest enemies. The pope sent the 
Archbishop of Capua to take care of the government, who, by 
the pope's orders, and to give more general satisfaction to the 
citizens, caused the balia to be increased in number to one hun- 

166 ON GOVERNMENT. 

dred and thirty-six, made a general scrutiny for offices, regtdated 
commerce, made a new imborsation of the six magistrates, 
renewed the purses, and disposed all other things according to 
his inclinations. A quarrel arose between the Cardinal Hippoli- 
to de' Medici and the Duke Alexander, and a contention for the 
sovereignty of Florence ; but the pope and the emperor deter- 
mined it in favor of Alexander " 

In 1531, the ordinance of the emperor arrived, and was form- 
ally accepted. Many of the best citizens, some of whom had 
been always friends of the Medici, with great reluctance gave 
up the idea of a free government ; they still solicited the pope 
not to reduce the republic to an absolute principality, but they 
could not agree among themselves. Some were for a dukedom, 
limited only by councils; others for restoring the state to the 
form it was formerly in under the Medici ; and others for a more 
rational distribution of power. But the pope was determined, 
if he could, to make his family and friends secure. 

In 1532, the pope's intentions were made known, and twelve 
citizens were appointed to reform the state ; the signori and the 
gonfalonier were abolished ; a council of two hundred was cre- 
ated, and a senate of forty-eight The senate of forty-eight was 
to have the whole legislative and executive power, and the coun- 
cil of two hundred were merely to consider private petitions and 
such things as should be referred to them by the senate. Four 
persons, members of the senate, were to be high counsellors of 
the duke, and Alexander and his heirs \^ere made dukes and 
heads of the state. Guicciardini's account is,* that the pope 
interpreted the article in the treaty which had stipulated pardon, 
not according to the sense, but the letter ; not to comprehend 
crimes committed against the state, but only injuries to the pope 
and his friends. Six of the principal delinquents were adjudged 
by the magistrates to be beheaded, others to be imprisoned, and 
a great number banished. By these proceedings the city was 
weakened, and those who had been concerned in the late trou- 
bles reduced to great necessities, and the power of the Medici 
became more free, more absolute, and almost monarchi9al in 
Florence, which remained exhausted of money by so long and 
grievous a war, deprived within and without of many of its 

* Guicciardini, lib. xx. p. 546. 

FLORENCR 167 

inhabitants, its houses and property destroyed abroad, and more 
than ever divided within itself. And this poverty was rendered 
yet more distressing, by the necessity of procuring, for several 
years, provisions from foreign countries, since there had been no 
harvests nor seeds sown. 

" The emperor, in declaring the form of government, neglecting 
the salvo of liberty, pronounced, according to the very instruc- 
tions the pope had sent him, that the city should be governed 
by the same magistrates as in thp times when the Medici ruled 
it, and that Alexander, who was the pope's nephew, and his own 
son-in-law, should be the head of the government, and be suc- 
ceeded by the children, descendants, and nearest relations of the 
same family. He restored to the city all the privileges granted 
by himself or his predecessors, but on condition to be forfeited 
whenever the citizens should make any attempt against the 
grandeur of the family, of Medici; inserting, throughout the 
decree, words which showed it to be founded not only in the 
power conceded to him by the people and the parties, but also 
on the imperial dignity and authority." 

The spirit of families, and the ambition peculiar to it, is, when 
once thoroughly enkindled, a raging flame, extinguishable only 
by death. Every new gratification of it is only a fresh addition 
of fuel to the burnings. The passion of Hercules, CsBsar, and 
Mahomet, had now full possession of Clement YH. ; and the 
domination so perfidiously acquired over that noble city, where 
his ancestors had laid the foundation of their power in a popu- 
larity among the basest dregs of a mob, was not sufficient to 
satiate it. 

'' The pontiff had fixed in his heart an ardent appetite for an 
alliance with France ; his ambition and thirst for this kind of 
glory, which, instead of being a virtue, is a detestable vice, 
stimulated him the more, that, he being only of a private family, 
he had obtained for one natural son a natural daughter of so pow- 
erful an emperor ; he now hoped to procure for his legitimate 
niece a legitimate son of a king of France ; and he was not dis- 
couraged from this pretension by the jealousy that the King of 
France might form claims for his son and daughter-in-law on 
the state of Florence. By various negotiations he at length 
accomplished an interview with the King of France at Mar- 
seilles. The pontiff exerted his usual dissimulation to persuade 

168 ON GOVERNMENT. 

all the world that he went to this interview chiefly to finish the 
peace, to treat of an enterprise against the infidels, to reduce 
Henry VIIL, King of England, to his duty ; in short, with a 
single view to the public good. But he could not conceal his 
real motive, when he sent his niece on board the galleys which 
the King of France had ordered, with the Duke of Albany, her 
uncle, to Nizza. These galleys, after having conducted the lady 
to Nizza, returned to Pisa, and on the fourth of October, 1532, 
took the pope, with many of his cardinals, and landed them in a 
few days at Marseilles. He made his entry in form ; the king 
did the same. They lodged in the same palace, and made 
mutual demonstrations of uncommon affection. The king, desir- 
ous of gaining the pope's heart, requested him to send for his 
niece to Marseilles, which the pope, though he pretended to treat 
first of public affairs, most cordially desired.* As soon as Cathe- 
rine de' Medici arrived, the marriage was celebrated with Henry, 
the son of the King of France, and consummated immediately, 
to the infinite joy of the pope, who, negotiating with the king in 
person, completely gained his confidence and affection. 

" The pope returned from Marseilles, and soon after, in 1534, 
he died. Alexander had taken effectual measures to disarm all 
the citizens of Florence, fi-iends as well as enemies, and thought 
himself now secure. Philip Strozzi, however, was highly dis- 
gusted and provoked, both with the duke and the pope, because 
he had not been able to procure one of his sons to be made a 
cardinal, as his lady Clarissa had often promised him ; and 
because two of his sons had been taken up, with some other 
young gentlemen, in the license of a masquerade, and committed 
to prison by the lieutenant of the police ; and because of some 
quarrel that had arisen between Peter, his eldest son, and Salviati, 
a favorite of Alexander; in this disgust he went with his sons, as 
soon as he could obtain their liberty, to France. After the 
death of the pope, animosities increased between the Duke 
Alexander and the Cardinal Hippolito, and Philip Strozzi went 
from France to Rome ; and as great divisions arose in Florence, 
on account of the difference between the duke and the cardinal, 
and their negotiations with the emperor, as had existed under 
the former government Hippolito, on a journey to meet the 

* Neiii, p. 270. 

FLORENCE. 169 

emperor, though in high health and strength, was taken violently 
ill on the road, and died, not without strong suspicions of poison. 
The death of the cardinal relieved the duke from all apprehen- 
sions of his intrigues ; but Philip Strozzi and the exiles from 
Florence began to think of negotiating with the emperor, and 
went to Naples to meet him. Alexander too went to Naples ; 
and great disputes arose before the emperor about the form 
of government, Strozzi and the exiles endeavoring to obtain 
a restoration of that kind of freedom which had been en- 
joyed formerly under the Medici. But Alexander married the 
Duchess Marguerita, the emperor's daughter, and returned to 
Florence, leaving Strozzi and the exiles disappointed.* 

" Lorenzo di Pierfranco de' Medici had accompanied Alexander 
to this interview with the emperor at Naples, and there had en- 
tered into intimate friendship with Peter Strozzi f and the other 
Florentine exiles, and conceived that design of assassinating his 
Mend and patron, which he afterwards executed with so many 
circumstances of cool deliberation, insidious malice, and execrable 
villany. He was a young nobleman, in greater favor with the 
duke than any other. To him, after their return from Naples to 
Florence, were communicated all the duke's private amours, as 
well as all the most important councils of the state ; and, the 
more effectually to secure his confidence, Lorenzo had acted the 
part of so active an instrument, as to have drawn upon himself 
a universal odium among all parties in Florence, but particularly 
among the grandees and nobles. At the same time he held secret 
intrigues and intelligence with Philip Strozzi | and all the exiles 
abroad ; and at home so artfully affected an aversion to arms 
and public affairs, and to be so wholly devoted to his studies and 
his pleasures, that the duke and his courtiers called him ' The 
Philosopher.' § 

Varchi informs us || that he received his information of this 
horrid action from the only persons who could be capable of 
relating the whole truth, because they were the only witnesses 
of it, and agents in it ; from Lorenzo himself, in the city of Palu- 
ello, eight miles from Padua, and from Scoronconcolo, his confi- 
dant, in the house of the Strozzi in Venice. 

* Nerli, p. 286. Segni, lib. viL p. 199. Adriani, Htst. di sxioi Tempi, p. 9. 

t Varchi, p. 647. t Segni, p. 199. 

§ Segni, p. 200. || Yarclii, lib. xv. p. 687. 

VOL. V. 15 

170 ON GOVERNMENT. 

"Lorenzo was bom in Florence, the twenty-thiid of March, 
1514, the son of Pierfrancesco di Lorenzo de' Medici, grand- 
nephew of Lorenzo, brother of Cosimo, and of Maria, the daughter 
of Tommaso di Paolantonio Soderini, a lady of uncommon pru- 
dence and benevolence, by whom, his father dying early, he was 
educated with the utmost diligence and care ; but he had no sooner 
acquired the knowledge of the classics, in which his genius ena- 
bled him to make a rapid progress, than he was taken from the 
care of his mother and his tutor, and began to discover a restless 
and insatiable disposition to plunge himself into vice ; and soon 
afterwards, in imitation of Philip Strozzi, he began to laugh at 
every thing divine and human, and to associate himself with 
persons of base condition and character, rather than with his 
equals. These, by continual flatteries, and fomenting his pas- 
sions, led him into vice and folly of every kind, particularly into 
all the extravagances of brutal appetite in his amours, respecting 
neither sex, age, condition, nor secrecy. While he sought an 
intercourse with all, he affected to esteem none ; yet he had an 
equally extravagant passion for glory, and left no empirical arti- 
fice unattempted, in his words or actions, by which he thought 
he could acquire a name, either of a gallant man or a shrewd 
one. He was nimble and active, rather thin than otherwise, and 
for this reason he affected to call himself Lorenzino ; he never 
laughed ; at most he only smiled. His air and action were more 
remarkable for grace than elegance, and his countenance was 
dark and melancholy. In the flower of his youth, although he 
was beloved beyond measure by the pope, Clement VH., he had 
formed in his mind a project, as he said himself, after he had 
killed the Duke Alexander, to assassinate his holiness. He cor- 
rupted Francesco di Rafaello de' Medici, the rival of the pope, a 
youth of excellent erudition and the most promising hopes, to 
such a degree of profligacy, that he seemed to be in a manner 
out of his wits ; so that, having become the derision of the whole 
court of Rome, to avoid a greater disgrace, he was sent back as 
a madman to Florence. 

"At this time Lorenzo fell into disgrape with the pope, and 
gave universal disgust to the Roman people, for another reason. 
One morning, in the arch of Constantine, and in other places of 
Rome, many ancient statues were found without their heads. 
The pope was so exasperated, that, not thinking of Lorenzo, he 

FLORENCE. 171 

gave orders that whoever had done the mischief, excepting only 
the Cardinal de' Medici, should, without process, trial, or delay, 
be hanged up by the neck. The cardinal was obliged to go to 
the pope and intercede for Lorenzo, as a young man, and pas- 
sionately fond, like all their ancestors, of such antiquities ; but it 
was with difficulty he could appease the indignation of the pope, 
who called him the infamy and reproach of the house of Medici. 
Lorenzo, however, was obliged to depart from Rome, with two 
public proclamations after him, one forbidding him to remain 
any longer in that city, and the other promising not only impu- 
nity, but rewards, to any one who would kill him ; and Francesco 
Molza, a man of great eloquence, and celebrated for his know- 
ledge of the Grecian, Roman, and Tuscan literature, made a 
public oration against him in the Roman academy, in which he 
covered him with all the reproaches possible. With all this 
infamy he returned to Florence, and began to make his court to 
the Duke Alexander. He understood so well the arts of hypo- 
crisy and flattery, and counterfeited so perfectly an absolute sub- 
mission to him in all things, that he made him believe he was a 
faithful spy upon the exiles abroad, laying at the same time, 
under this simulation, secret plots with these fugitives, and every 
day showing him letters received from one or another of them. 
To remove every suspicion of daring enterprise, he affected the 
character of a coward, and would neither exercise in arms nor 
wear them about him, so that the duke took a pleasure in rally- 
ing him upon his pusillanimity. He affected to be wholly devoted 
to books and studies, walked much alone, and appeared to have 
no ambition for honors, or desire of property, in so remarkable a 
manner, that they called him ' The Philosopher.' He complied 
with the inclinations of the duke in all things, and aided him in 
all occasions of need, especially against Signor Cosimo, his second 
cousin, against whom he bore an unbounded hatred, either be- 
cause they were of different or rather contrary characters by 
nature, or by reason of a lawsuit of very great importance, which 
Cosimo had instituted against him for the inheritance of their 
ancestors. By all these artifices the duke was deluded into a 
confidence in Lorenzo, so perfectly secure, that, not contented 
with employing him as a pimp in his amours with all sorts of 
women, religious as well as secular, virgins, wives, or widows, 
noble or ignoble, young or old, he now demanded of him to pro- 

172 ON GOVERNMENT. 

cure a sister of his own mother on her father's side, a young lady 
of admirable beauty and equal modesty, the wife of Lionardo 
Ginori, who lived not far from the rear entrance of the palace of 
the Medici. 

" Lorenzo, who waited only for a similar opportunity, repre- 
sented to him that the intrigue would be attended with difficulty, 
though not from himself, for, in one word, all women were alike ; 
and upon this occasion the prospect was the better, because 
the husband was at Naples, where he had spent much of his 
fortune in dissipation. Although he had never dared to speak 
to the lady on the subject, he affirmed to the duke that he had, 
and that he had found her very obstinate ; but he promised that 
he would never cease to seduce her, by bribes, flatteries, and 
every species of corruption, until he brought her to condescend 
in all things to their will. In the mean while he was engaging, 
not less by actions than with words, one Michele del Tovalaccino, 
nicknamed Scoronconcolo, for whom he had procured a pardon 
for a murder he had committed, though a reward had by procla- 
mation been set upon his head. To this ruffian he often com- 
plained of a certain intriguing personage at court, who, without 
the smallest provocation, had bantered, slandered, and insulted 
him with his jokes upon all his words and actions, but that, in 

the name of God ; at which words Scoronconcolo, rousing 

to resentment, suddenly cried, * Name him only, and let me alone 
to manage him ; he shall never give you another ill word or look.' 
Here the conversation ended for the present; but Scoronconcolo, 
who found himself every day more and more caressed and loaded 
with favors by Lorenzo, at length pressed him earnestly to name 
his enemy, and not to doubt of his being soon put out of his 
way. Lorenzo answered, * Alas, no ; the person, be he who it may, 
is a great favorite of the duke.' Scoronconcolo replied, in the lan- 
guage of a bully, ' I will assassinate him, if he were Christ him- 
self.' Lorenzo then perceived that his design had succeeded; 
having invited him one day to dinner, as he often did, notwith- 
standing the remonstrances of his mother and the reproaches of 
the world, he said to him, * Courage ! courage ! in that affair, which 
you promised me so bravely, I am sure you will not fail me ; as I 
will never fail you, at any time, in any thing in my power. I am 
satisfied and resolved, but in order that we may do the business 
with security, I will see to getting him to a place where there 
may be no danger to you, and I have no doubt I shall succeed.' 

FLORENCE. 173 

" The same night appeared to him to be the most proper time, 
because Signor Alexander Vitelli was absent upon an excursion 
to the city of Castello ; and he took the opportunity, after supper, 
to whisper in the ear of the duke, and to say to him, that at last, 
by the promise of money, he had disposed his aunt to comply, 
and therefore he must watch his opportunity to come alone, and 
very cautiously, into his chamber, taking particular care, for the 
honor of the lady, that no one should see him either enter or go 
out, and that he himself would go immediately for her. Certain 
it is, that the duke, having put on a robe of satin lined with fur, 
according to the Neapolitan fashion, went out to walk with four 
of his courtiers, whom he soon dismissed, saying, he wished to 
be alone ; shortly after he went to the chamber of Lorenzo, where 
he found a good fire, ungirded his sword, and threw himself down 
on the couch. Lorenzo suddenly seized his sword, and winding 
hastily the belt round the hilt, so that it might not be easily un- 
sheathed, laid it at the head of the duke, behind his pillow, and 
advised him to repose himself; he secured the door, that no one 
might come in, and went away to find Scoronconcolo ; having done 
this, he said to him, in a transport of joy, * My dear brother, now is 
the moment ! I have shut up in my chamber that enemy of mine, 
and he is fast asleep.' ' Let us go thither,' said Scoronconcolo. 
When they were on the landing-place of the stairs to the chamber, 
Lorenzo turned about and said, ' Don't mind whether it be a friend 
of the duke or not, only mind you to secure his hands.' ' I will 
do it,' replied his Mend, ' even though it were the duke himself.' 

* Every thing is so prepared,' said Lorenzo, with a joyful counte- 
nance, ^that he cannot escape fi'om our hands ; let us make haste.' 

* Let us go,' said Scoronconcolo. Lorenzo lifted up the latch and 
let it fall again. At the second attempt he entered, and cried 
out, * Signor, are you asleep?' The uttering these words and 
running him through and through with a short sword was the 
work of the same moment. This stroke alone had been mortal, 
for, passing through the reins, he had perforated the diaphragm 
which divides the upper ventricle, where are the heart and the 
other vital members, fi'om the lower, where are the liver and the 
other members of nutrition and of generation. The duke, who 
either was asleep, or remained with his eyes shut, as if he had 
slept, receiving such a blow, leaped up on the bed, and threw 
himself backwards to fly towards the door, making use of a stool 

174 ON GOVERNMENT. 

which he had seized on for a shield. But Scoronconcolo, seizing 
an opportunity, gave him a stroke with a knife upon the visage, 
which laid open one of his temples, and clove the greatest part 
of his left cheek. Lorenzo, having dragged him upon the bed, 
held him down upon his back, and bore upon him with the whole 
weight of his body; and, that he might not cry out, he attempted 
to stop his mouth with his fingers, saying, 'Signor, fear not' 
Then the duke, assisting himself as well as he could, seized the 
thumb between his teeth, and bit it with such rage, that Lorenzo, 
fallen on his back, and not able to handle his sword, was obliged 
to call out for help to Scoronconcolo, who ran to his aid, and taking 
his aim, sometimes on one side and then on the other, could 
not strike Alexander without first or at the same time striking 
Lorenzo, clasped tightly in his arms. He then attempted to 
thrust at him with the point of his sword between the legs of Lo- 
renzo ; but making no other impression than to bore the bed, he 
laid his hand on a knife, which he had by accident about him, 
and stuck it in the throat of the duke, turning it like a wimble. 
He was already, however, very near dead firom the effects of 
the first blow, by which he had lost so much blood as to have 
flooded almost the whole chamber. 

" It ought not to be forgotten, that through the whole of this 
tragical scene, while Lorenzo held him under, and he saw Sco- 
ronconcolo fumbling about him with his sword and knife to 
murder him, he never once complained, or begged for mercy, or 
let go his hold of that thumb, which he held firmly between 
his teeth. The duke, as soon as he was dead, slid off the bed 
upon the floor; but they took him up, besmeared all over 
with blood, placed him again upon the bed, and covered him 
with the same pavilion with which he had concealed himself 
before he first fell asleep, or made a show of being asleep ; which, 
in the opinion of some, he designedly did, because, knowing him- 
self unskilful in the ceremonies of politeness, and the lady whom 
he expected, a mistress in elegant conversation, he wished in this 
manner to avoid the necessity of exchanging fine speeches with her. 
Lorenzo, after he had disposed of the duke, not so much to see 
whether they had been heard, as to restore himself and recover his 
spirits, much exhausted by fatigue, placed himself at one of the 
windows which overlooked the broad street Some persons in 
the house, particularly Madam Maria, the mother of Cosimo, had 

FLORENCE. 175 

heard a noise, and a trampling of feet ; but no one had stirred, 
because Lorenzo, with this view, had, for some time before, been 
used to bring into this chamber companies of his comrades, 
drinking, rioting, and making a show of quarrelling, crying out, 
'Murder! treason! you have killed me!' and other exclamations 
of that kind. 

"When Lorenzo had restored himself, he made Scoronconcolo 
call one of his footmen, named Freccia, and show him the dead 
body, which he recognized with such astonishment and horror, 
that he was with difficulty restrained from crying out. To what 
purpose he did this he neither explained to the historian, nor was 
he able to conjecture, unless it was upon the same principle, 
that nothing which Lorenzo did, from the moment of the death 
of Alexander to the time of his own death many years after- 
wards in Venice, eyer succeeded, or appeared to be well judged. 
He took from Francis Zeffi, his maitre d'hotel, a small sum of 
money, all that he had by him in cash ; and taking with him the 
key of the chamber, he left the house with Scoronconcolo and 
Freccia, and having previously obtained from the Bishop of 
Marzi a license for post-horses, under color of going to his coun- 
try seat of Cafaggiuolo, to see Giuliano, his younger brother, 
who, as he pretended, had written to him that he waq at the 
point of death with the cholic, went directly to Bologna, where 
he dressed his thumb, which was found marked for life, and there 
related to Silvester Aldobrandini, the judge, the whole transac- 
tion. But the judge, thinking it a romantic fiction, would not 
believe, and very imprudently neglected to take any notice of it, 
until the arrival of the Chevalier Marsili, who, with some others, 
went in pursuit of Lorenzo. 

" The latter, in great haste and fatigue, arrived at Venice on 
the Monday night, and with much ado convinced Philip Strozzi 
that under that key, which he held out to him, he had locked up 
the Duke Alexander, with his throat cut, and dead of many 
wounds. Philip, at last believing him, embraced him, called 
him their Brutus, and promised him that he would marry his 
two sons, Peter and Robert, to his two sisters. Lorenzo excused 
himself for not haviiig assembled the people after the death of 
the duke, for three reasons. One was, that he had been to the 
houses of several of the popular citizens; but some had not 
heard and others had not believed him. Another was, that he 

176 ON GOVERNMENT. 

had left it in commission with ZefFo to open the chamber early 
in the morning, and go in quest of Giuliano Capponi, and other 
citizens, lovers of liberty, and tell them what he had fomid 
there. Thirdly, that Scoronconcolo had not ceased to stimulate 
him to depart, saying to him every minute, ' Let us save our- 
selves ; we have done but too much.' But thus much is certain : 
that as no conspiracy was ever so deliberately meditated, nor 
more completely executed before, so none was ever so stupidly 
and vilely conducted after the fact ; nor was there ever any one 
from whence resulted effects more contrary or more hurtful to 
the perpetrator, and more prosperous and profitable to his ene- 
mies, the first of whom, without all controversy, was the Signer 
Cosimo. 

"I will not dispute," says Varchi, "whether this act was cruel 
or compassionate, commendable or blameworthy, since no man 
can resolve that question, and give a true answer to it, who 
does not know for what reason, and to what end, Lorenzo was 
induced to commit it. If he was urged to so great an enter- 
prise, not simply at the hazeurd of the government of Florence, 
which, upon the death of the duke without legitimate descend- 
ants, would have fallen to him, but also of his own Ufe, in order 
purely to deliver his country from a tyrcmt and restore her liber- 
ty, as he affirmed, I should think that no praises that could be 
given him would be high enough, and no rewards could be 
bestowed upon him which would not be below his merit" 

Is it not astonishing that such a historian should admit of a 
doubt, whether the motives of Lorenzo could be good ones? 
Is it possible to read his own history, and not see that this strug- 
gle was merely between different branches of the same family 
of Medici for the sovereignty, and that there was not a ray of 
public virtue or love of liberty left in any of them? Strozzi, 
the rival family of Medici, had married a Medici, and could not 
bear that Alexander should rule. His character was too vile to 
be redeemed from infamy by his hypocritical affectation of repub- 
lican simplicity, and his renouncing all titles but that of Philip ; 
but he had great family connections, and was countenanced by 
France, and therefore might possibly recover his influence and 
power in Florence. This made it dangerous for the historian to 
mark the conduct of Lorenzo with that decided indignation 
which it merited. 

FLORENCE. 177 

'^ Some were of opinion that he was moved to this action 
merely by the malice of his nature, and the depravity of his own 
heart ; others thought that he ventured on this danger to cancel 
the ignominy of the two Roman proclamations, and the oration 
made against him by Molza ; others thought him agitated solely 
by desire to make his name immortal, an ardent passion, that 
with aU his crimes and vices, had always incredibly tormented 
him." 

The right of a nation to depose a tyrant, and to destroy him 
if he cannot be otherwise deposed, is as clear as any of our 
ideas of right or wrong. In the Roman republic it was made 
an early and a fundamental law, by the aristocratics however, 
that it should be not only lawful, but meritorious and glorious, 
to kill a tyrant ; and Brutus therefore acted the exalted part of 
the best citizen. But if the right of single citizens, when good 
and virtuous, and intending only the public good, to kill a tyrant 
was as clear as that of treading on the head of an adder, or 
hunting down a devouring wolf, it would by no means follow 
that one t}rrant might claim a right to destroy another, merely 
to take his place. 

The people of Florence were now so totally devoted to the 
Medici family, that there was no party among them but what 
was headed by some branch of it; the blood of the Medici must 
in all events govern them ; and the difference between them was 
worth very little. Strozzi and Lorenzo were worse than Alex- 
ander; and the only tolerably good man among them was Co- 
simo, whom they all hated, but whom Providence was pleased 
to call to the government in this awful manner. The silly tales 
of prognostics, the enthusiasm of the disciples of Savonarola, 
and the confusions and terrors among the principal people upon 
the first suspicion and final discovery of the duke's destiny, are 
not worth repeating. 

"The council of forty-eight were assembled, but were not 
agreed in opinion. Canigiani proposed, that in place of the 
deceased duke, Giulio, his natural son, should succeed ; but there 
was no other person present, who did not either smile at his folly 
or express indignation ; for besides that the child was not five 
years old, this was known to be the inclination and secret mo- 
tion of Cardinal Cibo, Lorenzo's brother, who wished to be the 
tutor, and therefore governor of the city. After him, the Signor 

L 

178 ON GOVERNMENT. 

Cosimo de' Medici was proposed, who, knowing nothing of 
what had happened, was at Mugello, fifteen miles from Florence, 
at his country-seat of Trebbio. At this nomination all appeared 
to be struck, and looking at one another, seemed ready to accept 
it, every one knowing that Cosimo was the next heir after Lo- 
renzo, according to the declaration of the emperor; but Palla 
Rucellai, without doubt in favor of Philip Strozzi, to whom he 
was attached, warmly opposed this proposition, and said, that so 
many citizens, and of such consequence, were abroad, that 
nothing of importance, especially so great an affair, ought to be 
determined on; and notwithstanding all that was urged by 
Francesco Guicciardini, and Francesco Vettori, he persisted ob- 
stinately in his objections, and occasioned some confusion in 
council. At another day, however, Cosimo was elected head of 
the commonwealth, accepted the trust, and behaved in it with so 
much wisdom, that those who, from his moderate and composed 
behavior before, believed him to be possessed of but mean abili- 
ties, were constrained to confess, that God had granted him dis- 
cretion with the dakedom." 

Intelligence was scattered throughout all Italy, with incredible 
celerity, of the death of Alexander ; and, by all the Florentine 
exiles, the name of Lorenzo di Pierfrancesco de' Medici was 
exalted in praises to the skies, not only as the parallel of Brutus, 
but greatly surpassing him. Vau'chi wonders that so many citi- 
zens of great prudence, and especially Guicciardini, who con- 
ducted the whole of this election, should have suffered them- 
selves to be so far blinded and transported by their ambition or 
avarice, or both, as not to see what they were about Indeed^ 
no man is ever to be praised, perhaps never to be justified, in 
consenting to the surrender of a free government; and Guic- 
ciardini appears much to blame for not endeavoring to new- 
model the commonwealth upon this occasion. But most proba- 
bly he knew what Varchi himself confesses,* that the Florentines 
were at this time all either avaricious or ambitious, and the 
major part of them proud, envious, and malicious ; and therefore 
that none of them could be trusted by him or by each other. 
He probably believed that delay, or any attempt to restore liberty 
or reform the constitution, would only give an opportunity to 

* Varchi, p. 621. 

FLORENCE. 179 

Strozzi, Lorenzo, and the exiles, to assume the dukedom in real- 
ity, under the alliance of France ; he moreover probably thought 
it impossible, among an ignorant people and so many corrupt 
factions, to amend the constitution, and that a sovereignty in 
one was preferable to their old fluctuating aristocracy, disguised 
under the name only of a popular state. 

The exiles were still restless, and endeavored to excite fresh 
wars against their country ; but Cosimo, by his abilities, address^ 
and activity, defended his authority, and was afterwards con- 
firmed, not only as head of the state, but as duke and sovereign. 
And here ended the shadow of a free government 

Let the reader now run over again in his own mind this whole 
story of Florence, and ask himself whether it does not appear 
like a satire, written with the express and only purpose of expos- 
ing to contempt, ridicule, and indignation, the idea of " a govern- 
ment in one centre," and the " right constitution of a common- 
wealth ? " If he suspect that this mean sketch is in any degree 
varied by prejudice from the truth, let him read over any histo- 
rian of Florence, as Machiavel, Guicciardini, NerU, Nardi, Var- 
chi, Villani, or Ammirato, and then say, whether it is not a libel 
upon Turgot and Nedham. From the beginning to the end, it 
is one continued struggle between monarchy and aristocracy ; a 
continued succession of combinations of two or three parties of 
noble, rich, or conspicuous families, to depress the people on the 
one hand, and prevent an oligarchy or a monarchy from arising 
up among themselves on the other. Neither the first family, nor 
any of the others their rivals, made any account of the people, 
excepting now and then for a moment, for the purposes of vio- 
lence, sedition, and rebellion. 

Instead of devising any regular method for calling the people 
together, with a reasonable notification beforehand of the time, 
place, and subject of deliberation, a little junto of principal citi- 
zens concert a plan in secret among themselves, give notice pre- 
viously to such as they please, their own dependents and parti- 
sans, order the bells to be rung, and a little flock of their own 
creatures assemble in the piazza. There the junto nominate a 
dozen or a score of persons for a balia, to reform the state at 
their pleasure ; no reasonable method of voting for them, no 
instructions given them; the people huzza, and all is over. 

180 ON GOVERNMENT. 

What ideas are here, of the rights of mankind ? what equality is 
here among the citizens ? what principle of national liberty is 
here respected? what method is this to obtain the national 
sense, the public voice ? Can this be called the voice of God ? 

When the balia is appointed, what is the question before 
them ? Is there any inquiry how the government can be made 
a fair, equal, and constant representation of the nation, and a 
sure instrument for collecting the public wisdom ? The imbor- 
sations are made, and eight hundred names are put in the purses. 
These alone are citizens ; all the rest are to have no vote. 
These appoint the signori, a small council, for the ordinary 
administration, and the gonfalonier, who has no more power 
than a doge of Venice, nor so much dignity. The great coun- 
cil is the centre in which all authority is collected, and he who 
had most influence in it governed in reality, whoever were the 
signori or the gonfalonier ; consequently, the council and signori 
too were always divided into parties, at the head of whom were 
always two of the most noted families ; and the only question 
really was, which should be first As the waves and winds 
determined, sometimes one and sometimes another prevailed, 
and took vengeance of their opponents by banishments and con- 
fiscations. The executive power was sometimes managed by 
the signori, and sometimes by the grand council; the judicial 
power was always the tool of the prevailing faction. Was there 
one year, one moment, in the whole history, when the citizens 
could be truly said to enjoy the blessings of liberty, equality, 
safety, and good order ? 

If you fix your eye upon any period, from the beginning to 
the end of the republic, and suppose the gonfalonier possessed 
of the whole executive power, with a negative upon the legisla- 
ture, the signori and grand council made separate and independ- 
ent branches of the legislature, though elected periodically by the 
people, and the judges made during good behavior, would not 
those terrible disorders have been prevented ? The negative to 
the gonfalonier is not proposed, because he is a wiser or a better 
man than others, but merely as a constitutional instrument of 
self-defence ; without it, he cannot defend the legal authority 
which the constitution has given him, but the executive power 
will be pared away, or wrested out of his hands, by the encroach- 
ing disposition of human nature in the two houses. If he wan- 

FLORENCE. 181 

tonly uses his negative for other purposes, a case that can rarely 
happen, a new gonfalonier must be appointed ; but if his minis- 
ters are made responsible for the advice they give him, the two 
houses will always have a remedy. An honest representative 
of the commons will always have another remedy, by withhold- 
ing supplies. * 

As this account of Florence was introduced by some reflec- 
tions of a modern author, it cannot be concluded with more pro- 
priety than by some others from the same able and liberal writer. 
In his Parallel of the Italian Republics of the Middle Ages with 
those of Ancient Italy, he says,* " Whoever shall read in the 
Annals of the Cities of Lombardy and in the Chronicles of Tus- 
cany, how the people passed so frequently, both in external wars 
and in civil factions, from battles to peace, and from domestic 
life to arms and hostilities, and that perpetual succession of 
accords, rebellions, and tumults, will be apt to believe that he 
sees, copied under different names, the wars of the Romans with 
the Latins and the Volsci, the continual quarrels of the ple- 
beians with the patricians, and the animosities of the senate 
against the tribunes ; arid sometimes it will happen to him, that 
in reading, for example, the Florentine History of Scipione 
Ammirato, he will think he has in his hand a translation into his 
own language of Livy. The manner of proclaiming and prose- 
cuting war, and of concluding peace, which was practised by the 
ancient Italians in the time of Camillus and of Pyrrhus, is not 
very diflerent from that which we observe in the age of Frederic 
11. and the M an£reds ; and, in the internal concerns of the cities, 
both in the one and the other period, the cruelty and the pride 
of the nobles towards the plebeians, and the injustice of the peo- 
ple in their demands, as soon as they had discovered their own 
strength, and had begun to lay their hands on the government, 
were equal. The one and the other were animated with the 
same spirit, agitated by the same humors, and subject to the 
same revolutions. That supreme love of their country, which, 
on occasions of public danger, silenced and appeased their pri- 
vate quarrels and enmities, reigned equally at all times in both ; 
the same simplicity of manners, the same severity of life, the 
same patience of poverty and fatigue. To this is to be added, 

« Danina, Rivolimoni <f JtaUaf lib. xii. cap. v. voL iL p. 241. 
VOL. V. 16 

182 ON GOVERNMENT. 

the use and exercise of arms, by which every little nation, if it 
cannot make extensive conquests, at least may preserve its own 
liberty. Finally, he will observe with pleasure, how, after the 
ancient Italians, and those people who in the middle ages arose 
from the ruins of the kingdom of the Lombards and of the second 
western empire, the cities which' appear to have had the narrow- 
est territory and the most modern original, not only maintained 
their freedom for a long time, but increased in power and domi- 
nion ; whereas the most able and the most ancient passed more 
easily under the yoke, either of tyrants of their own, or of foreign 
powers. We shall see, in like manner, a great resemblance in 
the fortune of the tyrants of the ancient Italian cities and those 
of the republics of Tuscany and Lombardy, in the age of Frede- 
ric 11. and the following ; and may very well find reasons to 
compare Ezzelino of Romagna with Tarquin the Proud ; the 
Marquis Oberto Pelavicino, Buoso-da-Doara, and Martino della 
Torre, with Porsenna, King of Chiusi, and with other like 
princes or supreme magistrates of the ancient Tuscans, Latins, 
Campanians, and Samnites. From which we have shown that 
the free and independent cities passed sometimes under the yoke 
of some powerful citizen, who made himself the master, or under 
the dominion of a tyrant of some other neighboring city ; so that 
a signor of Padua, of Milan, or of Verona, obtained the govern- 
ment of many other cities of Lombardy, equally free and inde- 
pendent." 

CHAPTER FOURTH. 
machiavel's plan of a perfect commonwealth. 

Machiavel, from his long experience of the miseries of Flo- 
rence in his own times, and his knowledge of their history, per- 
ceived many of the defects in every plan of a constitution they 
had ever attempted. His sagacity, too, perceived the necessity 
of three powers ; but he did not see an equal necessity for the 
separation of the executive power from the legislative. The 
following project contains excellent observations, but would not 
have remedied the evils. The appointment of officers in the 
council of a thousand would have ruined all the good effects of 
the other divisions of power. There is some doubt about the 
time when it was written; Nerli and Nardi think it was ad- 
dressed to Clement VH., but the English editor supposes it was 
Leo X., and his opinion is here followed. 

About the year 1519, Leo X.,* being informed of the discords 
that were ready to break out in Florence, gave a commission to 
Machiavel to draw up a plan for the reformation of that state. 
He executed this commission with great abilities, and the most 
exquisite subtilty of his genius ; and produced a model, in the 
opinion of some, of a perfect commonwealth. The sovereign 
power is lodged, both of right and in fact, in the citizens them- 
selves. 

" There are three orders of men in every state, and for that 
reason there should be also three ranks or degrees in a republic, 
and no more ; nor can that be said to be a true and durable 
commonwealth, where certain humors and inclinations are not 
gratified, which otherwise must naturally end in its ruin. 

" Those who model a commonwealth, must take such provi- 
sions as may gratify three sorts of men, of which all states are 
composed ; that is, the high, the middle sort, and the low." 

Machiavel by these observations demonstrates, that he was 
fully convinced of this great truth, this eternal principle, without 
the knowledge of which every speculation upon government 
must be imperfect, and every scheme of a commonwealth essen- 

* Discourse upon the proper Ways and Means of reforming the Government of 
Florence, £ng. edit vol. iv. p. 263. 

184 ON GOVERNMENT. 

tially defective. Taking this fundamental principle along with 
us, let us give an abridgment of this valuable discourse. 

" The reason why Florence has so often changed its form of 
government is, because there never was yet either a common- 
wealth or monarchy established there upon tme principles. A 
monarchy cannot be stable, where the business, which should be 
directed by one,^ is submitted to the determination of many; 
nor can a commonwealth be durable where humors are not gra- 
tified, which must otherwise be the ruin of it, Maso moulded 
the republic into a sort of aristocracy,* in which there were so 
many defects, that it did not continue above forty years, nor 
would it have lasted so long, but for wars which kept it united. 
The defects were, that power was continued too long in the 
same persons; that the elections were subject to fraud and 
underhand practices; there was no check upon the grandees, 
to deter them from forming parties and factions, which are the 
destruction of a state. The signori had but little reputation, 
while they had too much authority ; they had a power of taking 
away the life and property of any citizen without appeal, and 
of calling the people together to a conference whenever they 
pleased ; so that instead of being a defence and protection to 
the state, they were rather an instrument of its ruin, when they 
were under the influence of any popular or ambitious man ; raw 
young men of little experience and abject condition, were intro- 
duced into the signori ; but what was of the last consequence 
was, that the people had no share at all in the government. All 
these defects together occasioned infinite disorder and confusion, 
and if wars had not kept the state united, it must have been dis- 
solved long before it was. 

" This form was succeeded by that of Cosimo. Afterwards 
the city endeavored to resume the form of a republic, but the 
measures taken were neither calculated to gratify the humors of all 
the citizens, nor had sufficient force to correct them ; so far from 
being a true and perfect commonwealth, a gonfalonier for 
life, if an able and bad man, might easily have made himself 
absolute lord; if a weak and good man, he might have been 
pulled from his seat, and that establishment overturned. There 

I " Dove le cose si fanno secondo che yuole uno, e si deliberano con il conseiiBO 
di molti.'' 
* Hist, of Florence, b. liL See page 66 of this volume. 

FLOKENCE. 185 

was not strength in that government to support the standard- 
bearer, if a good man, nor to check and control him if a bad one. 
The reforms which were made were not with any view to the 
public good, but to strengthen and support different factions in 
their turns. Even the ends of faction were not answered, be- 
cause there was always a discontented party, which proved a 
very powerful instrument in the hands of those that were desir- 
ous to effect any change or innovation in the state. 

" No form of government can be devised that will be firm and 
lasting, which is not either a true principality, or a true common- 
wealth. All intermediate forms between these two extremes 
will be defective ; for a principality can only be ruined one way, 
and that is, by descending into a commonwealth ; the same may 
be said of a commonwealth also ; for the only way by which it 
can be ruined, is by ascending to a principality. All interme- 
diate forms may be ruined two ways, that is, either by ascend- 
ing to a principality, or descending into a commonwealth ; and 
this is the cause of their instability. 

" Those who model a commonwealth must make such provi- 
sions as may gratify three sorts of men, of which all states are 
composed, that is, the high, the middle sort, and the low ; and 
though there is a great equality among the citizens of Florence, 
yet there are some there who think so highly of themselves, that 
they would expect to have the precedenlce of others ; and these 
people must be gratified in regulating the commonwealth. 
These people then will never be satisfied, if they have not the 
first rank and honors in the commonwealth, which dignity they 
ought to support by their own personal weight and importance. 
It is absolutely necessary to gratify the ambition of all the three 
several ranks of people ; which may be done by electing sixty- 
five citizens, of not less than forty-five years of age, in order to 
give dignity to the government, fifty-three out of the highest 
class, and twelve out of the next, who should continue in the 
administration for life, subject to the following restrictions : — In 
the first place, one of them should be appointed gonfalonier 
of justice for a term of two or three years, if it is not thought 
proper to appoint one for life ; and in the next, the other sixty- 
four citizens, already elected, should be divided into two distinct 
bodies, each consisting of thirty-two ; one of which divisions, in 
conjunction with the standard-bearer, should govern the first 

16* 

186 ON GOVERNMENT. 

year, and the other the next ; so that they would be changed 
alternately every year, and all together should be called the 
signoria. 

"After this, let the thirty-two be divided into four parts, eight 
in each ; every one of which should reside three months in its 
turn with the standard-bearer, in the palace, and not only assume 
the magistracy with the usual forms and ceremonies, but trans- 
act all the business which before passed through the hands of the 
signori, the council of eight, and the other councils, all which 
must be dissolved. This should be the first member, or rather 
the head of the state, and by this provision the dignity of the 
signori will be restored; for as none but men of gravity and 
authority will ever sit there, it will be no longer necessary to 
employ private men in the affairs of state (which is always of 
prejudice to any republic) since the thirty-two who are not in 
office that year may be advised with upon occasion, sent upon 
embassies, and made useful in other functions. 

" Let us now come to the second order in the state. Since 
there are three orders of men in every state, there should also be 
three ranks or degrees in a republic, and no more ; upon which 
account it is necessary to prevent the confusion occasioned of 
late by the multiplicity of councils in our city, which have been 
established, not because they were conducive to good order, but 
merely to create friends and dependents, and to gratify the humor 
and ambition of numbers, in a point which yet was of no service 
to liberty or the public, because they might all be corrupted and 
biased by party. The council of seventy, that of a hundred, and 
that of the people and commonalty, should all be abolished ; and, 
in the room of them, I would appoint a council of two hundred, 
every member of which should be not less than forty years of 
age ; a hundred and sixty of them to be taken out of the middle 
class, and the other forty out of the lowest, but not one out of 
the sixty-five. They should also continue for life, and be called 
the council elect ; which council, in conjunction with the sixty- 
five, should transact all the affairs that used to be transacted by 
the above-mentioned councils, now supposed to be abolished, and 
vested with the same degree of authority, and all the members 
of it appointed by your holiness ; for which purpose, as well as 
to maintain and regulate these provisions, and others that I shall 
mention hereafter, it is necessary that a degree of authority, equal 

FLORENCE. 187 

to that of the whole collective body of the people of Florence, 
should be vested by a balia in youi holiness and the Cardinal de' 
Medici, during the lives of both ; and that the magistracy of the 
eight di guardia, as well as the baUa, should be appointed from 
time to time by your holiness. It is likewise expedient, for the 
support of your authority, that your holiness should divide the 
militia into distinct corps, over which you may appoint two 
commissioners, one for each. 

" By these provisions two out of the three classes may be tho- 
roughly satisfied. It remains now to satisfy the third and lowest 
rank of the citizens, which constitutes the greater part of the 
people. For this purpose it will be necessary also to revive the 
council of a thousand, or at least one of six hundred citizens, 
who should nominate all the magistrates and officers, in the same 
manner they used to do formerly, except the above sixty-five, the 
council of two hundred, the eight di guardia, and the balia. 
Without satisfying the' common people, no republic ever yet 
stood upon a stable foundation. 

" The state being thus modelled, no other provisions would be 
wanting, if your holiness and the cardinal were to live for ever; 
but, as you are subject to mortality, it is necessary, if you would 
have the republic continue firm and strongly supported on every 
side, in such manner that every one may see himself perfectly 
secure, that there should be sixteen standard-bearers appointed 
over the companies of the citizens, which may be done either by 
your own authority, or by leaving the appointment to the great 
council, remembering only to increase the number of the diviertj 
assistants to the gonfalonier and commanding detachments of 
the people under him, that so they may be more spread over the 
city, and that none of the gonfaloniers should be of the sixty-five. 
After their appointment, four proposti should be drawn out of 
them by lot, and continue in office one month ; so that at the 
end of four months they will all have been proposti. Out of 
these four, one should be drawn, to reside for a week only with 
the eight signors and the gonfaloniers in the palace ; by which 
rotation all the four will have kept their residence there at the 
end of the month. Without the presence of this officer, the said 
resident signori should not be allowed to pass any act; nor 
should he himself have any vote there, but only be a witness and 
inspector of their proceedings, to which he may be suffered to 

188 OK GOVEROTEENT. 

put a stop till he has asked the opinion of all the thirty-two toge- 
ther, and had the matter fully discussed by them. But even the 
thirty-two, when all together, should not have power to resolve 
upon any thing, except two of the said proposii were present, 
who should have no further authority than to put a stop to their 
resolutions for a time, and report them to the council elect ; nor 
should that council have a power of resolving upon any thing, 
except six at least of the sixteen gonfaloniers, and two proposti^ 
were there, who should only have the liberty of taking the matter 
out of the hands of that council, and referring it to the great 
council, provided that any three of them should think it necessary 
so to do ; and as to the great council, it should not be allowed 
to meet, unless twelve of the gonfaloniers and three of the prO" 
posti at least were there, who might give their votes in it like the 
other citizens. 

" This order should be observed after the death of your holiness 
and the cardinal, for two reasons : In the first place, that, if the 
signory or other council should either disagree in their resolutions, 
or attempt any thing against the public good, there might be 
somebody vested with a power to take the matter out of their 
hands, and refer it to the people ; for it would be a great defect in 
the constitution^ that any one set of magistrates^ or single council^ 
should have a power to pass a law by its own authority alone, and 
that too without any remedy or appeal; upon which account it is 
highly necessary that the citizens should have some proper officers, 
not only to inspect their proceedings, but even to put a stop to 
them, if they seem to be of pernicious tendency.^ 

" Besides this, in order to give such a degree of stability and 
perfection to the commonwealth, that no part of it may shrink 
or fail after the decease of your holiness and the cardinal, it is 
necessary that a court should be erected upon occasion, consisting 
of the eight di guardia and a balia of thirty citizens, to be chosen 
by lot out of the council of two hundred and that of six hundred 
together ; which court should have a power, in criminal cases, 

1 The otiher reason is omitted, which is singular, as it appears to have some 
beanng on the reasoning of the author. 

" The other reason is, that, in depriving the generality of the citizens, by sup- 
pressing the signory as is now done, of the power to be of the signori, it is neces- 
sary to restore to them a grade which may resemble that of which they are 
deprived ; and the one proposed should be such that it is greater, more useful to 
the republic, and more oonorable than that was." 

FLORENCE. 189 

of summoning the accuser and accused to appear face to face 
before it in a certain time. 

" Such a court is of great use in a commonwealth ; for a few 
citizens are afraid to call great and powerful delinquents to ac- 
count, and therefore it is necessary that many should concur for 
that purpose, that so, when their judgments are concealed, as 
they may be by balloting, every man may give his opinion freely 
and in security. 

"The highest honor that can be attained by any man, is 
that which is voluntarily conferred on him by his countrymen ; 
and the greatest good he can do, as well as the most acceptable 
to God, is that which he does to his country. None are to be 
compared to those who have reformed kingdoms and common- 
wealths by wholesome laws and constitutions ; but as there have 
been but few that have had an opportunity to do this, the "number 
is very small that have done it. This kind of glory has always 
been so much coveted by such as made glory the sole end of 
their labors, that when they have not had power either to found 
or reform a state, they have left models and plans in writing, to 
be executed by others, who should have, in future times; as 
Plato, Aristotle, and many others, who have shown that, if they 
did not found free states themselves, like Solon and Lycurgus, 
it was not owing either to ignorance or want of good-will to 
mankind, but to want of power. Heaven, then, cannot bestow 
a nobler gift upon any man, nor point out a fairer road to true 
glory. 

" If things continue as they are, whenever any commotion or 
insurrection shall happen, either some head will be appointed in 
a sudden and tumultuary manner, who will rescue the state by 
violence and force of arms, or one part of the citizens will 
open the council of a thousand again, and sacrifice the other 
without mercy. In case either of these events should happen, 
your holiness will be pleased to consider how many executions, 
how many banishments and confiscations must of necessity 
ensue; a reflection which must surely shock the most hard-hearted 
man alive, much more a man of that remarkable humanity and 
tenderness which have always distinguished your holiness. The 
only way, then, to prevent these evils, is to establish the several 
classes and ordinances of the commonwealth in such a manner 
that they may support themselves ; and they will always be able 

190 ON GOVERNMENT. 

to do this when each rank has its due share in the administration, 
when every one knows his proper sphere of action, and whom he 
can confide in; and, lastly, when no one has any occasion to 
wish for a change of government, either because his ambition is 
not thoroughly gratified, or that he does not think himself suffi- 
ciently secure under such an administration." 

CHAPTER FIFTH. 

8IENA. 

The antiquity of the city of Siena is proved by the notice of 
Pliny, Tacitus, and Ptolemy, if not by another circumstance 
mentioned by its historian, namely, — the splendor of certain 
families among its citizens,* nobility being only an ancient virtue, 
accompanied with the splendor of riches. The tradition, that it 
was first planted by Remus, can hardly be supported by the single 
circumstance, that the ensigns of the city are a wolf giving suck 
to two infants. 

Siena was built by the ancient Tuscans, whose province was 
anciently inhabited by the Umbrians, who were driven out by 
the Pelasgians from Arcadia, who were afterwards driven out by 
the Lydians from Asia, live hundred and sixty years before Rome 
was built These, from Tirrhenus their king, were called after- 
wards Tirrhenians ; and because they used in their sacrifices great 
quantities of frankincense, thus^ they were called Thuscans, and 
their country Tuscany, by others called Etruria.! Livy repre- 
sents the Etrurians as abounding in wealth, and filling the whole 
length of Italy, from the Alps to the straits of Sicily, with their 
fame; and, in another place, represents the Tuscan empire as 
much more ancient than the Roman. J They inhabited twelve 
cities ; the form of their government was a confederacy, like that 
of the modern Swiss, Dutch, and Americans. 

"The twelve cities, peoples, or divisions of territory rather, 
were called Lucumoni, from the magistrates annually chosen to 
govern the whole province of Tuscany. Twelve annual magis- 
trates were chosen, one by each city, to govern the whole pro- 
vince, called Lartes and Lucumones ; the names of these cities 
were Luna, Pisa, Populonia, Volterra, Roselle, Fiesole, Agillina, 

* Siena dallo splendore delle famiglie s' era nobilitata, — essendo proprio la 
nobiltA una antica yirti^i accompagnata dallo splendore delle ricchezze. Historia 
del Sig, Orlando Malavoltij de* fatti, e Guerre de* Sanesiy cosi esteme, come civUi, 
p. 4. 

t Malavolti, p. 9, 10. 

X Tuscorum ante Romanmn imperium late terra mariqne opes patuere ; mari 
supero inferoque, quibus Italia insulae modo cingitur .... li in utrumque mare 
Tergentes incoluere urbibus duodenis terras. 

ft 

192 ON GOVERNMENT. 

Vulsino, Chiusi, Arezzo, Perugia, and Faleria, the ruins of which 
are near to Viterbo. In the same manner was the republic of 
the Achaians afterwards formed by the Greeks, the twelve cities 
of which are enumerated by Polybius. Not unlike this republic 
of the Tuscans was that of the Latins, who, upon public occa- 
sions, assembled in a certain place under Mount Albanus, called 
the Forest of Ferentina; where, having deliberated in council 
upon their affairs, they gave the charge of the execution of their 
resolutions to two praetors.* It is true that sometimes, at the 
exchange of magistrates, the Tuscans, varying the form of their 
government, by agreement among themselves created a king; 
and each one of the twelve peoples of the twelve principal cities 
concurred to give him a minister, whom the Romans afterwards 
denominated a lictor. And of so much grandeur, and so illus- 
trious an example, were the government, the ceremonies, the reli- 
gion, and the other qualities of the Tuscans, that Romulus, in 
imitation of them, in giving laws to the Romans ordained, be- 
sides the habit of the robe and the cloak, the curule chair, and 
the same number of ministers, determining a corresponding num- 
ber of lictors. This is told us by Livy : ' Et hoc genus ab Etruscis 
finitimis, unde sella curulis, unde toga prsetexta sumpta est, 
numerum quoque ipsum ductum placet, et ita habuisse Etruscos, 
quod ex duodecim populis communiter creato rege, singulos sin- 
guli populi lictores dederint' 

" With this mode of regimen, and this form of government, 
with their union and virtue, the Tuscans augmented their empire 
so greatly, that it extended to the Alps, which separate Italy from 
France, and from one sea to the other ; one of which was named 
from them the Tuscan, and the other the Adriatic, from the city 
Adria, which was their colony, and under their dominion. Having 
acquired all that part of Italy which was jdterwards called Cis- 
alpine Gaul, in order to hold it more securely, and give room to 
their people, by relieving Tuscany of so great a number of inha- 
bitants, they sent into it twelve colonies. In this manner they 
proceeded, augmenting and amplifying their empire on every 
side, for seven hundred and thirty years, until, in the reign of 

* Concilium Latinorum erat ut omnes Latini nominis reram commonium cau8& 
ad Lucum Ferentine, qui erat sub monte Albano, coirent, ibique de sumrna rep. 
oonsttltarent, ac duobus prstoribus rem universam Latinorum committeient 
Sigonius, upon the authority of Dionysius. 

SIENA. 193 

Tarquinlus Priscus, the Gauls took possession of that part of 
Italy, which they called Cisalpine Gaul, one part of which was 
afterwards called Lombardy, and the other Romagna. Then the 
empire of the Tuscans began to decline, because on one side they 
were combated by the Gauls, and on the other by the Romans ; 
and having, by the abundance of wealth, become ambitious and 
avaricious, discord, following the train of those vices, changed the 
form of their government, and destroyed their prosperity; and 
this empire, which, by its union and good order, had grown up, 
and, computing from its beginning to its dissolution, subsisted 
more than a thousand years, easily ruined itself by means of 
contentions, occasioned by habits adverse to the virtues by which 
it had been gained. Dispossessed by the Gauls of all their terri- 
tory beyond the Apennines, and continually molested in Tuscany 
by the Romans, they were no longer united in the defence of 
each other, by reason of the variety creeping into the form of 
government in the separate cities, occasioned by ambition, ava- 
rice, and luxury; vices opposed to each other, but powerful to 
ruin a great empire. When they saw the most manifest danger 
of the ruin of the whole, they exerted all their force, but were no 
longer able to defend themselves. The other Tuscans, from an 
indignation against the Veientes for having separately elected a 
king, looked on with indifference while the Romans subjected 
that people. Livy says, the Veientes, to avoid the tedious con- 
tentions of ambition, which was sometimes the cause of dissen- 
sions, created a king, and thus gave great offence to the other 
peoples of Etruria, not more by their hatred of that form of go- 
vernment, than from their detestation of the man.* 

" Tuscany, after long wars, many victories and defeats, and 
the destruction of a great number of citizens, was finally sub- 
jected to the dominion of the Romans, by Q. Fabius Maximus 
Rutilianus. They, to secure the province against rebellions and 
tumults, sent a colony into it ; and finding Siena in the centre 
of the twelve cities, and the situation strong, they sent thither 
their colony and garrison, under the first consulate of Curius 
Dentatus, two hundred and ninety years before Christ. 

" The Tuscans remained quietly under the government of the 

* Veientes contra, tedio annus ambitionis, qus interdum discordiarum causa 
crat, regem creavere ; ofTendit ea res populorum Etrurise animos, non majore 
odio regni, quam i{)siu8 regis. Livy. 

VOL. V. 17 M 

194 ON GOVEBNMENT. 

Romans,' until the invasion of Italy by Asdnibal, when they were 
accused of having held a secret correspondence, and given assist- 
ance to the Carthaginians. After that great victory of the Romans, 
in which Asdrubal, with fifty-six thousand of his men, was slain, 
Marcus Livius was sent to Tuscany, to inquire which of the 
twelve cities had assisted the Carthaginians, who reported, that 
he found nothing against Siena. Tranquillity, thus restored, 
continued under the Roman government till the social war, when 
the inhabitants of almost all Italy waged war with the Romans 
for the privileges of Roman citizens. This war cost the lives of 
a very great number of men, and ended with the ruin of Arezzo 
and Chiusi, two of the principal cities of Tuscany, from whence 
many families removed to Siena, as a place of more security, 
both on account of its being a Roman colony, and as it had ever 
discovered more fidelity to the Romans than any other Tuscan 
city." 

We may pass over the conversion of Constantine, in a dream 
of a standard, (gonfalone,) with the motto iv toiKf vUa ; his divi- 
sion of the empire, by retiring to Byzantium, into two, the Grecian 
and Roman, or eastern and western ; the decline of the western 
empire ; the capture of Rome by Alaric, King of the Goths, in 
412 ; the sacking of Rome by Odoacer, King of the Herulians and 
Thuringians, in 475, the first of the barbarous kings, who drove 
out Augustulus, annihilated the empire, made himself King of 
Italy, and so established his power, that the western empire re- 
mained vacant for three hundred years, till the time of Charle- 
magne, though Justin, after the victories of Belisarius and Narses 
over the Goths, sent Longinus into Italy, with the title of exarch, 
a kind of first magistracy, which continued one hundred and 
seventy years, through a succession of thirteen. 

" Longinus having found that the several cities had undertaken 
to govern themselves, each one having created its own magis- 
trates, sent a governor, not to rule generally in the province, but 
to each city of any considerable consequence. To these governors 
he gave a new name, that of dukes. The first that he sent to 
Rome was called a president, but those who succeeded him were 
called dukes like the rest. This title of duke, from the name of 
a military office, was reduced to the name of a dignity, which, 
at this day, is the principal one in Europe after the royal dignity. 
And thus, all the time that Narses remained in Rome, after the 

SIENA. 195 

expulsion of the Ostrogoths, the cities of Tuscany governed them- 
selves by their own magistrates, acknowledging no superior, until 
the arrival of Longinus, in 566. He, with his new governors or 
dukes, debilitated the forces, and destroyed the reputation of the 
empire, and the confidence of the people in their own militia, to 
such a degree, that the Lombards, under Albinus their king, 
found it easy to ruin Tuscany, which they conquered, plundered, 
and oppressed, sometimes under the general power of their kings, 
and sometimes under an officer, sent to command in particular 
cities. These Lombards, from their proud hatred of the Romans, 
endeavored everywhere to change the laws, customs, manners, 
and especially the language. In their time the Latin language 
in Italy was corrupted into that speech now called the Italian, 
which is no other than the Latin corrupted by a mixture of 
the barbarous speech of those very Lombards, and some other 
nations, who governed in Italy after them ; as the French and 
Spanish are similar corruptions of the Latin, the iSrst by a mix- 
ture with the language of the Franks, and the last, with that of 
the Visigoths and other barbarians. The Lombards held the 
domination of the major part of Italy more than two hundred 
years, when they were totally subdued. 

" Desiderius, who, from a Duke of Tuscany, had made himself 
King of Italy, was the last Lombard king, and was totally de- 
feated, and sent prisoner to Lyons in France, by Charlemagne, 
in 773. This great monarch having taken Pavia, which was the 
principal city and royal residence of the kings of the Lombards, 
proceeded to many other strong places, which were held by go- 
vernors of castJes and garrisons in the service of the king, or of 
particular lords of these places; those which surrendered, and 
swore obedience, were left under the command of their lords, but 
those which resisted, and were reduced by force, were given by 
Charlemagne to some of his barons or nobles, in reward of the 
services and merits they had shown in the course of the war. 
More of the cities of Tuscany defended themselves than of any 
other parts of Italy, because they were better fortified, and there- 
fore more French noblemen were left here. These married with 
original families in Siena, and from those matches have issued 
the greatest part of the noble families which have been and still 
are in that city. They continued afterwards, many hundreds of 
years, to be lords of the same castles, until, by continual discords. 

196 ON GOVERNIVIENT. 

many families not only lost their estates and commands, but 
became extinct, as will be shown in the sequel 

" Charles, for the greatness of his soul and the multitude of 
his victories, received the surname of Magnus, and was made 
Roman emperor. As Longinus had brought into Italy the title 
of dukes, the Lombards those of marquises and castcddi or bail- 
iffs, the French now imported that of counts. Charlemagne, 
having arranged all things to his mind in Italy, set out on his 
journey to return ; and passing through Siena, and being moved 
with the relation which he heard from those noblemen whom he 
had left there, of the fidelity and other good qualities of that 
people, and being touched also by their petitions, he made them 
free, and determined that they should not be subjected to the 
king or any other power. This is the reason that, in the division 
of Tuscany, afterwards made between Louis the Kous and Pas- 
cal the pope, in which it was declared that Arezzo, Chiusi, Vol- 
terra, Florence, Hstoia, Lucca, Ksa, and Luna, should be reserved 
to the emperor, and Orvieto, Bagnarea, Viterbo, Sovana, Popu- 
lonia, Roselle, Perugia, Sutri, and Nepi, should belong to the 
ecclesiastical state, Siena is not found among the former or the 
latter. Being free and independent, it was left in the enjoyment 
of its liberty; and as the nobles had procured from Charlemagne 
so great a favor, the people, in gratitude to them, and ignorant, 
no doubt, of any better form, left the ggvernment to them, and 
suffered an optimacy ^ to be established. Siena was a long time 
governed by these noblemen ; and, as long as the signori consisted 
of these successors of Charlemagne in Italy and the empire, all 
remained quiet in this city, as well as in the rest of Italy. This 
tranquillity continued to the time of Arnulphus, the last emperor 
of the house of France, who was approved by the pope. At this 
time, ambition, discontent, and ill humor began to arise in Italy, 
from the weakness of the successors of Charlemagne. Berenga- 
rius, Duke of Friuli, and Guido, Duke of Spoleto, aspiring to 
the empire and the kingdom of Italy, took arms against the 
emperor ; Berengarius succeeded, declared himself emperor, and, 
by the favor of the Roman people, was made King of Italy; in 
which dignities he was succeeded by Berengarius II. and III. A 
contest, however, arose between the princes of Italy, France, and 

1 Un regimento d' ottimati, "an aristocracy.** 

SIENA. 197 

Germany, for the empire and the kingdom of Italy, which conti- 
nued sixty years ; and a Saracen invasion having been defeated 
by Albericus, he was declared Duke of Tuscany by the pope, and 
acknowledged no superior in the emperor or others. Contentions 
soon arose between him and the pope ; and the Hungarians, tak- 
ing advantage of them, made inroads into Italy, plundered Tus- 
cany, and ruined Volterra. The Romans, judging this calamity 
to proceed from the discords between the pope and Albericus, 
assaijsinated both. Such was the malignity of these times, and 
Cliristian princes had deviated so far from a virtuous conduct, 
and had become a prey to ambition, avarice, and pleasure, (pow- 
erful ministers to every kind of wickedness,) that they determined, 
through these means, and without scruple, to occupy those dig- 
nities which their ancestors had acquired by religion, charity, and 
every Christian virtue ; they lived in continual discords and bloody 
wars among themselves; and the people, after their example, 
having adopted their follies and vices, and embroiled themselves 
in the same dissensions, found themselves ruined. Having nei- 
ther forces nor courage to defend their country, the Hungarians 
committed, in a short space of time, greater ravages in Tuscany 
than the other barbarous nations had been able to do in three 
hundred years. 

" The Saracens, too, or Moors, broke in and destroyed the sea- 
coast of Siena, and took Jerusalem and Spain, until at last they 
were defeated by Charles Martel in Italy, in 930, and by Ferdinand 
III. in Spain, in 1216. The city of Roselle was ruined by them, 
and its inhabitants fled to Siena, which made it necessary to 
enlarge the bounds of the city, and take in the ancient castle 
Montone, built at the time of the King J^orsenna of Chiusi, 
who, desirous of assisting Tarquin the Proud in his restoration 
to Rome, sent to his aid two hundred infantry and fifty cavalry ; 
the former, taken from the castle Montone, were commanded by 
Bacco Piccolomo ; and the latter, taken from the Old Castle, by 
Perinto Cacciaconte. From these two captains are descended 
the two most ancient families in Siena, those of the Piccolomini, 
and those of the Cacciaconti. 

" Otho, the first emperor of the German nation, but the second 
of that name, expelled the last of the Saracens, and left an officer 
in Tuscany, who governed it in his name, with the title of Vicar 
of the Empire. The successors of Otho followed the same prac- 

17* 

198 ON GOVERNMENT. 

tice ; but Siena, by the indulgence of Otho, maintained its inde- 
pendence under tHe government of its nobles, and its liberty was 
afterwards confirmed, with ample privileges, by Otho IIL of the 
Grerman nation, who had been served in his enterprise by a com- 
pany of gentlemen from Siena, and to it was presented a new 
ensign of the white lion. Both the first and the third Otho left 
many of their gentlemen in Siena, from whom are descended 
several of the noble and powerful families in that city, where 
they continued a long time, behaving virtuously and honorably 
in the service of their country. All the inhabitants of the city 
and territory, living then in union and harmony, were compre- 
hended under the name of the People, which has since, from a 
general denomination, become a particular and peculiar name of 
a faction called Popolo, the citizens being divided into parties. 
Although the body of the city increased on every side, both in 
numbers and riches, it was nevertheless unable to enlarge its 
boundaries or extend its jurisdiction ; for, having on one hand 
the lands of the church, and on the other the territories of the 
emperor, it could not go beyond its own limits. 

"At this time much industry and many artificers were intro- 
duced, by means of an extensive commerce. Besides other noble- 
men, the Count Bandinello de' Bandinelli, having agents and 
correspondents in many parts of the Levant, imported large mer- 
chandises, to his own great profit as well as the public utility, 
employing and maintaining a multitude of people in every kind 
of labor. He was in a great measure the instrument of directing 
this people to merchandise. The same Count Bandinello, more- 
over, being consul, and desirous of displaying the consular dignity 
and authority, gave prders that two commanders, or officers, on 
all occasions of solemnity or ceremony, should go before the con- 
suls, with rods in their hands and fringes at their breasts, after 
the similitude of the lictors, who walked, with their bundles of 
rods and with their axes before the consuls of Rome. He also 
ordered, that to the trumpets should be fixed those streamers of 
white and black taffety, which have been ever since used by all 
the supreme magistrates who have succeeded in the place of the 
consuls ; and that the fifers and trumpeters, with the rest of the 
family and servants of the magistrate, down to modern times, 
in the public palace, should be clothed in blue and green. 

"About the year 1059, contentions arose between the Emperor 

SIENA. 199 

Henry III. and the pope, who decreed him an enemy to the 
church, and interdicted him his empire and kingdom; which 
quarrel was the reason that the cities of Tuscany began to be 
agitated with seditions. Some of them declared in favor of the 
emperor, and others, rebelling against him, adopted republican 
governments, and attached themselves to the pope, by whose 
assistance they hoped to defend themselves against the em- 
peror, who would have oppressed them. From this division 
originated the desire in the minds of the people to increase their 
forces, that they might the more easily resist the emperor, if he 
should invade Tuscany with a design of reducing them to his 
obedience. To this end every city and castle endeavored to 
make itself master of those in its neighborhood, or at least to 
draw them to its alliance, which involved them in frequent wars, 
and was the original of those discords and enmities with which 
many cities of Tuscany were long agitated, and which proved 
the ruin of some, though it augmented the greatness of others. 

" The Italians having long remained under the obedience of 
the German emperors, and having very rarely been employed in 
their wars, either by them or their captains, neglected, in so long 
and inactive a kind of servitude, the regulations of their militia ; 
but now, in danger of oppression from Conrad I., the cities, in 
order to defend themselves, ordered a kind of chariot to be built, 
and called it it carrocio. It was covered with rose-colored cloth, 
with a large pole in the centre, on which was displayed a white 
standard, with two scarlet stripes, in a cross, at the middle of it ; 
and on every side of the carriage stood a man, who held in his 
hand a cord fastened to the top of the pole, that neither the force 
of the wind nor the weight of the standard might incline it one 
way or another. The chariot was drawn by oxen covered with 
white, although they varied the colors according to the prevalence 
of factions in the city. The care and command of this chariot 
was given to one of the most experience and ability in wax, who 
became the captain ; and to him, for the purpose of increasing 
his authority, a shield and a sword were given by the public. But 
in the times which followed after the Emperor Frederick I., this 
was the office of the podesta;* and he was accompanied with 
eight trumpets and one priest. In this manner the cities of 

* The Italian writers in Latin call this office and officer, both, by the name of 

200 ON GOVERNMENT. 

Lombardy, as well as Tuscany, sent out their people to war, 
without entertaining any soldiers in pay; for those who were 
ordered out to war in those times, in Italy, went at their own 
expense, so great was their affection to their country, as in the 
beginning the Romans did. Wherever the triumphal chariot 
was found, there were the head-quarters of the captain, like the 
praetor's among the ancients. With this manner of making war, 
confiding in the power of the faction it followed, and living 
by plunder, each city was ambitious to increase its dominion, 
and declined no opportunity which occurred of opposing itself 
obstinately to the most powerful princes and veteran armies, for 
the defence of its own dignity, and that of the party to which it 
was devoted. 

" Deriving from these motives, and from successful enterprises, 
great courage and ardor, when Henry III., with his antipope, 
besieged Gregory VII. in his castle, and, for fear of Robert Guis- 
card, on his march to succor the pope, retired to Siena, Florence 
took the part of the pope, and Siena that of the emperor; and 
from this principle arose that irreconcilable hatred and enmity 
between these cities, which lasted so long, and produced so much 
war and bloodshed. Upon this occasion a memorable battle was 
fought, and a signal victory obtained by the army of Siena over 
that of Florence. Certain persons in this engagement had been 
the first to begin the action, and behaved themselves so bravely 
in it, that it was adjudged that their conduct had been the prin- 
cipal cause of putting the Florentines to flight. The republic, 
in reward of their merit, and to incite and inflame by this example 
the minds of others to act nobly in the service of their country, 
erected, by a public decree, a very high tower by the sides of 
their houses. The Greeks and Romans, by decreeing statues to 
them, used to honor thbse who performed similar achievements 
in the service of the republic, by this means rendering their me- 
mories immortal ; and they were more or less honored, according 
to the position in which the statue was placed, and the height and 
grandeur of the statue itself; wherefore they made some larger 
and others smaller ; some on horseback, others on the ground ; 
and to make the glory of others still more illustrious, they sought 
the most eminent artists, and placed the statues on columns,* 

* Columnamm ratio crat attolli supra cieteros mortales. Pliny. 

SIENA. 201 

knowing that columns, anciently dedicated to men, were marks 
of honor, and conspicuous tokens of immortal glory. Moved 
by these old examples, they who governed the city of Siena 
having, by the long domination of the barbarians in Italy, lost 
the arts of sculpture and painting, which were held in so high 
estimation by the ancients, as well as by the modern civilized 
nations, and not being able, for want of artists, to make statues 
or columns to honor these brave and virtuous citizens, ordered 
those towers to be built. After which precedent, for similar 
merits and services, many others were afterwards erected ; among 
which that of the Malavolti was built by the public, in memory 
of the virtue of Philip Malavolti, captain of Siena in the Chris- 
tian army of Clement III. This, like many others which had 
been raised before, was habitable ; and although they were erected 
only as memorials of the honor due to greatness of soul, they 
were afterwards employed very often as fortifications for offence 
and defence, by the several parties, in their civil wars ; permis- 
sion was granted by the public, to many gentlemen, to build 
towers at their own expense, as testimonials of the nobility and 
splendor of their famjlies ; and until, long afterwards, they were 
taken down by order of Charles V., and the materials em- 
ployed in a castle which that tyrant built for himself, they were 
so large and so high, as to be seen from a great distance, and 
made a most beautiful appearance. 

In the union of the Christian princes, in 1099, against the 
Saracens, and in the army engaged in the enterprise against 
Jerusalem, the city of Siena had a thousand men, under the 
command of Dominick and Boniface Gricci, noblemen of Si- 
ena. Henry IV., after the death of Henry IIL, coming to 
Rome for the crown, in 1110, renewing the discords with the 
pope Pascal IL, and Gelasius his successor, and marching to 
Rome with his armies, excited afresh the ill humors in Tus- 
cany. But these not having much energy, did not at that 
time produce effects of moment; yet, stirred up from time 
to time by the discord among the great princes, and other 
accidents, though they seemed at times to be quieted, they 
broke out again, and were never wholly extinguished; they 
rather went on increasing, and at last, discovering themselves 
with greater malignity, they grew, from particular disputes be- 
tween one city and another, to the most general and sanguinary 

202 ON GOVERNMENT. 

factions of all, or the greatest part, of the territory of Tuscany, 
and all the rest of Italy, making alliance among one another, of 
those who were of the same faction, against other leagues 
among the factions who were their enemies. One party having 
taken the name of Guelphs, and the otlier of Ghibellines, these 
parties and divisions were not only between one people and 
another, but, to complete the ruin and destruction, they spread 
into the same city, and sometimes into the same family, till 
there was not a spot of earth to be found whose inhabitants 
were not divided, and on which the citizens did not frequently 
meet in arms against each other ; as it happened in 1137, and in 
1147, between the noble houses in Siena, in which private 
interests and party passions had infinitely more energy than the 
interest of the public. Although the nobles had so long governed 
and preserved this republic in peace, they now most imprudently 
suffered themselves to be blindly led on by ambition. This civil 
discord having entered, and been increased and artificially fo- 
mented by the heads of those plebeians who had attached them- 
selves, some to one nobleman and some to another, in the city, 
they began to endeavor in turn to expel one another by violence 
from the city.* 

By this means, coming frequently to blows, and meeting often 
in arms, they gave occasion to the plebeians, who wished nothing 
better, to study the means of taking the government, by little 
and little, out of their hands, in the firm hope of being able to 
obtain it, if n^t entirely, at least in part, to themselves ; for the 
gentlemen being in arms, and each party afraid of being over- 
come by the other, strove to acquire friends and adherents among 
the plebeians, whom they now called by a more decent appel- 
lation of the People. That they might be able with stronger 
forces, to conquer their enemies, or at least secure themselves 
from being conquered by them, neither party was willing, by 
refusing the people a share in the government, to make them 
their enemies. They agreed therefore to give them a third part : 
wherefore, when they first appointed two consuls of noble houses, 
who should annually govern the republic, it was ordained, that 
for the future they should appoint three, two of them to be 
noblemen taken from each faction, and the third from the 

* Flehi est cieteri cires one senatore. De Verb. Signif. 

SIENA. V 203 

people; and sometimes they made the number six, observing 
the same distribution ; and this is the reason why many persons 
have believed that certain families, which at this day are of the 
order of the nine,* finding that their ancestors were made consuls 
in those times, were originally noble, not knowing that the people, 
from whom the order of nine had their original, participated at 
that time, by a third part, in the government, and that from 
some of those popular families, who at that time held the con- 
sulate, are descended those of the nine. The nobles, who at 
this day are denominated in Siena gentiemen, and who ancientiy, 
being very powerful, were sometimes called grandees, are sprung 
from a part of those ancient families, who in the first institution 
and ordination of the republic took upon them the government, 
which, with large additions to the city and its dominions, they 
held till the year 1137, when the plebeians, or more properly the 
people, first began to enter into a share of the government of the 
state and police of the city ; by this means, although those who 
had been in public offices and dignities had acquired nobility to 
their descendants, they had not yet assumed the name of nobles 
or of gentiemen. 

Although in Siena, as in all the other cities of Tuscany, 
the popular faction long prevailed over the nobles, they fol- 
lowed, as the most favorable and least invidious, the name of 
the people ; and thus, leaving uncorrupted the ancient nobility, 
perhaps to avoid the distinction of greater and lesser, like that 
of nobles and patricians among the Romans, they busied them- 
selves in those factions, through which, at different times, they 
began to ennoble themselves; the people in process of time 
divided into three parties, one of which was called the people 
of the smaller number, who were those of the order of the 
nine ; the second, the people of the middle number, who were 
called the order of the twelve; and the third, the people of 
the greater number, called the order of reformers, including all 
the lesser people,f combined with some of the ancient houses, 
under this denomination, were the most numerous, as will be 
largely shown in its proper place. Subsequently to these three 
popular factions, out of those who were afterwards accepted into 
the government and acquired civil rights, together with those 

* DcU' ordine de* nove. f H popolo minuto. 

204 ON go\t:rnment. 

few houses who would not follow the above-named factions, an- 
other order was created, which was called the order of the people; 
and these, however they may since have been ennobled, have 
taken no other name than that of the popular faction. So of old 
in Rome it happened, that the patricians and ancient nobles had 
always the name of nobles, and the plebeians, (so called by the 
Romans,) although they had been consuls and dictators, and had 
enjoyed triumphs, were ever called plebeians, until some fami- 
lies were added to the number of patricians by the emperors, 
Julius CsBsar, Augustus, and Claudius. The greater part of the 
families of nobles, who were denominated by Romulus the 
greater race, and of those who were added by Tarquinius Pris- 
cus, and were afterwards called by Lucius Brutus the lesser 
race, being already extinguished, this distinction was preserved 
in the Roman senate, where the fathers were understood to be 
those who were of patrician houses, and fathers conscript those 
who had been added and recorded in the number of senators ; 
and thus plebeians sometimes, by concessions of princes, ac- 
quired the name of nobles. These orders were in all respects 
contrary to those which were used at this time in the cities of 
Tuscany, which, being governed by the multitude, did not admit 
the nobles to honors, nor to the administration of the republic, 
if they did not, first renouncing their nobility, acquire the privi- 
lege of being of the people ; such was in that age the odium 
against the name of nobles among those who governed the 
republics of Tuscany, from the jealousy and terror that were 
entertained of their greatness; and this we may well suppose 
was the main reason why those first popular characters, and 
the others who followed after them, did not care to acquire the 
name of noblemen or gentlemen ; on the contrary they exerted 
themselves with all diligence, by the laws and by all their 
actions, by extermination and destruction of one family after 
another, totally to destroy the memory of all the noble houses 
of the gentlemen, in such manner that the greatest part of them 
are extinguished. Among the few that remain are the Bis- 
domini, the Tegolei, the Floridi, who were original inhabitants 
of the city, and lived in that third of it which was called 
the Old Castle, with many other noble families enumerated. 
In another third of the city, named the Third of Saint Martin, 
the noble families of Jazzani, Trombetti, Guastelloni, Sanse- 

SIENA. 205 

donii, and others dwelt; in the remaining third, called the 
third of Camnllia, lived the Gallerani, Scricciaoli, Arzochii) 
Mignanelli, &c. There was another distinction of five fami- 
lies, who were counts, and lived indifferently in any part of 
the town, which were called the greater houses, as the Counts 
Ardenghesci, Guiglieschi, Scialenghi, Cacciaconti, and Valcor- 
tese. There were other families who, because very numerous, 
had the privilege of having two members from each family in 
the magistracy, while the rest could have but one, as the Picco- 
lomini, Tolommei, Malavolti, Salimbeni, and Saraceni ; and in 
the same proportion they might have seats in the ^council of a 
hundred gentlemen, to whom, in this reform of the state, fifty 
popular members were added. This council was renewed once 
in two years, and sometimes every year; and was elected by 
the general council, one member fi'om each family, with ample 
authority. In this council, which was to assemble at least once 
a month, they consulted upon all affairs of the most serious 
nature and the greatest importance. 

" Under this form of government Siena continued for some 
time, and, following the imperial party, they had a mind to pos- 
sess themselves of the castle of Radicofani, then held by the 
church, pretending that it had been given to the bishop and peo- 
ple of Siena by the Count Manente de' Visconti di Campiglia, 
before 1138 ; but this expedition failed. In this year the inhabit- 
ants of Siena and the Aretini united with the Conti Guidi, 
whose castle of Monte alia Croce they relieved from a siege of 
the Florentines. The Conti Guidi were lords of many castles 
in Casentino and one part of Valdarno, and had been decorated 
with the title of counts by Otho the emperor, after he had libe- 
rated Italy from the lordship of Berengarius III., when one of 
the family who came with him from Germany, married a lady 
of Florence, from which marriage descended the house of 
Guidi." 

We may pass over the bloody wars and variety of victories 
and defeats between these two cities of Siena and Florence ; 
but when Frederick Barbarossa came into Italy, they made a 
trace, and new laws and confederations were made between the 
people of Tuscany. 

" The Florentines, Lucchese, Pratensians, and lords of Car- 
fagna, entered into one league ; and the inhabitants of Siena, 

VOL. V. 18 

206 ON GOVERNMENT. 

Pisa, Pistoia, Aretina, and the Conti Guidi into another ; and 
because the Sienese had shown themselves, in the dissensions 
which had happened in times past between the popes and the 
emperors, favorable to the empire, the Pope Adrian, attentive to 
the arrival of Frederick, with much solicitude completed the for- 
tress, and part of the walls of the territory, of Radicofani. In 
1154, Frederick was crowned at Rome, after long disputes with 
the Romans, and returned to Germany in 1155. The Sienese, 
by sympathy, being of the same faction, acquired a jurisdic- 
tion over Poggibonzi, an eighth part of which castle had been 
given them by the Count Guido Guerra. This castle was 
afterwards, in 1268, taken by Charles, King of Naples, and 
given to the Florentines, and by them demolished, as always 
friendly or subject to the Sienese, and a receptacle of Ghibellines. 
In 1158, Frederick came a second time into Italy. The Sienese. 
being at variance with the Counts of Orgia, and other lords, 
their neighbors, who held many strong castles very near to 
Siena, some of which were demolished by the Sienese, the lords 
of these castles were desirous of rebuilding them ; but Frederick 
granted to the Sienese the privilege, that neither those counts, 
nor any other lords, nor their successors, should rebuild any 
castle or fortress, within twelve miles of their city." 

As it is a sketch of the laws, their vicissitudes and varia- 
tions, that we are attempting, we have nothing to do with wars 
or disputes between popes and antipopes, the church and the 
empire, nor with the accessions of Staggia or Orgia to Siena. 
In 1167, Frederick returned to Italy, and confirmed all the privi- 
leges and donations which had been before made to Siena. The 
fourth, fifth, and sixth journey to Italy, and all the wars, and 
truces, and peaces, between Florence and Siena, may likewise 
be omitted ; though in the last, which was in 1184, h« found 
enemies in the Sienese, his old friends. According to some 
writers, this strange revolution was in 1186, and the causes of 
it deserve to be examined and explained.* 

Charlemagne, as has been before related, left the government of 
Siena in a single assembly of hereditary nobles, who, no doubt, 
as they had procured the independence of the city by their inte- 

* Malavolti, lib. iv. p. 36. Giovanni Villani, Croniche Fiorentine^ lib. ▼. 
Muratori, Rer, Italic. Scrip, torn. xv. Chronica Sanese^ di Andrea DeL Mura- 
tori, Disseriazionif 50. MuratOTi; Annal. torn. vii. anno 1186, p. 56. 

SIENA. 207 

rest and intercession, thought it their own, and entailed on their 
posterity forever. While the people considered these rulers as 
their benefactors, to whom they owed so much ; while the nobles 
were united, and the city continued with constancy faithful to 
the emperors, all went smoothly on ; at least, no history appears 
to the contrary ; but in a course of time, when the nobles became 
divided into parties, each of which courted the people, not so 
much from humanity, patriotism, or love of liberty and equality, 
as because their bones and sinews were wanted in the civil wars, 
the people, with very good reason, began to demand a share and 
to take a hand in the game. But how? Not in any proportion 
which could give them a control, or a power of self-defence, or 
even much influence ; but by claiming one in three consuls, and 
fifty in one hundred and fifty senators. Absolute power was 
still in the noble hundred, and the people, by their members, only 
became nearer witnesses of their own insignificance, and of the 
arbitrary disposition of their noble masters. This, therefore, of 
course, irritated the people, and gave them able leaders, while it 
increased the motives of the factions in each party of the nobles 
to caress them still more. 

" In consequence of this, the pubUc councils and conduct, in 
1186, began to be unsteady, and a strong faction appeared for 
the pope against the emperor. Philippo Malavolti, Palmerio 
Malagalla, and Guido Maizi, were this year consuls. The 
Guelphs had acquired so much influence as to shut the gates 
against the emperor desirous of passing through the town, and 
even to attack and defeat his army; but as soon as he was 
prepared to punish them for this offence, certain orators were 
sent to him by those in the government, to excuse the fault, and to 
beg his pardon. They said, the resistance to his majesty had been 
occasioned by the fury of the people, who arose in a tumult, very 
much against the will of their governors, who had always been 
faithfully devoted to him. The emperor received them graciously, 
and confirmed their privileges under some severe conditions; 
moved however to this grace, according to the custom of great 
princes, more by his own interest than by any confidence he had in 
their professions ; but as he was now intent upon an enterprise into 
the Levant against the Turks and Saracens, he wished to leave all 
things in tranquillity in Italy. Intending, on his return, to make 
himself master of the kingdom of Sicily and Naples, he was desir- 

208 ON GOVERNMENT. 

ous of preserving peace in the cities of Italy already friendly to 
him ; and by reconciling the others, to acquire more friends and 
followers, who might assist him, and remove all obstacles to his 
enterprise. With this view he sent Henry his son, already 
elected King of the Romans, into Italy, with great pomp and 
authority, who pretended to be favorable to the Sienese, and 
granted them the power, under the imperial authority, to elect 
consuls, as they had been long used to do ; but those who should 
be elected, were obliged to accept the investiture of their consu- 
late, without expense, from the king himself, or the emperor, or 
their successors, if in Italy ; if not, from their legate or vicar in 
Tuscany ; and if there should be no imperial legate in Tuscany, 
the consuls elect were obliged to go ia a body, or a part of them, 
or send an ambassador, to demand the investiture of the empe* 
ror, or whoever should be King of the Romans. 

" In 1187, Jerusalem was besieged by Saladin ; and Siena sent 
five hundred of her young men, under thq command of Philip 
Malavolti, in the Christian army raised for its relief. Henry, on 
his return from this expedition, was declared by the pope empe- 
ror, and invested with the kingdom of Naples and Sicily, upon 
condition that he would recover it from Tancred, the son of 
Roger IV., of the house of Normandy, heir of William, King 
of England, who died in this crusade. .While the pope and the 
emperor were occupied in this enterprise, and all Italy was filled 
with arms and rumors, and so many gentlemen of Siena were 
absent in the wars, the people of Siena thought they had a 
favorable opportunity to endeavor with safety to take the go- 
vernment of the republic out of the hands of the consuls, and, by 
a reformation of the state, introduce a new form of popular 
government. The plebeians, tumultuously rising, with great 
impetuosity flew to arms; but the gentlemen, who had fore- 
seen the insurrection, assembled in the public walks, provided 
with attendants and arms, that they might be able to oppose 
the people, and defend the dignity of the government The 
heads of the popular faction, perceiving that their design could 
not succeed by force, put a stop to the tumult, but stood 
armed in several parts of the city. The most respectable 
citizens of each party, meeting half way between the two 
bodies, effiected a reconciliation so far, that both sides agreed to 
lay down their arms ; and it was agreed, that if any one would 

SIENA. 209 

demand or request that any thing should be coirected or reformed 
for the public service, he should propose it civilly, without the 
din of arms ; and if it should be judged an error or a grievance 
by the council, there should be no difGculty in obtaining its 
amendment or redress ; and with copious reasoning, they demon- 
strated the disorders which must arise from exciting the mob, 
with arms in their hands, to demand new laws, because, always 
naturally desirous of seeing new things, they are never contented 
with what they possess ; and having obtained one object of pur- 
suit, they suddenly look for another, setting neither bounds nor 
laws to their appetites; upon every little accident, which is 
always in the power of any one to excite, they fly, according to 
their present passions, prejudices, necessities, or inclinations, to 
robberies and conflagrations, many examples of which have been 
seen in Siena, as well as other cities ; and no method of sup- 
pressing an unbridled populace has been hitherto invented, with- 
out manifest and universal danger. 

** They moreover took into consideration, that, from the vicinity 
of Florence, in times so agitated, both parties ought to be sensi- 
ble into what ruin they might fall, while they were engaged at 
home in contending with each other ; and had it not been for 
this danger, the nobles were, at that time, so superior in power 
to the plebeians, that they would not have submitted to this 
insolence, nor let escape this opportunity of putting an end to 
such seditions, by chastising the authors of this. They only 
advised the consuls to call together the council the next day. 
When together, they deliberated and debated upon a variety of 
subjects ; but, after many contests, they concluded upon nothing 
but this : in order to satisfy the ambition of two or three per- 
sons who aspired to be consuls, it was determined, that, 
instead of three consuls, there should in future be six, observ- 
ing the same distribution of two thirds noblemen, one third of 
whom were to be of the Ghibelline faction, and one third popu- 
lar members. By this measure they quieted the minds of the 
ambitious and envious for this year. But the year following, at 
the new election of consuls, fresh innovations would have been 
attempted, if, at that time, those Sienese gentlemen, who had 
been to Asia at their own expense, had not returned in triumph, 
to the universal joy of the whole city. This event quieted the 
minds of those who were inclined to civil discord. As the crea* 

18* N 

210 ON GOVERNMENT. 

tion of six consuls had produced no other effect than to increase 
the difficulty of assembling them together, and of concluding 
deliberations by deciding questions, it was now resolved to have 
only three ; and in this way they went on, varying the number 
according to the times and the business." 

In 1194 and 1195, the commerce of the city was much in- 
creased by emigrants from Milan; the manufactures in wool 
were introduced; the great fountain and aqueduct was built, 
as well as the palace. 

" In 1197, the Conti Sdalenghi were made to submit and swear 
allegiance to Siena, for all the lands and castles, as il monte 
Sante Marie, Montebello, Monte Martino, Monte Bernardo, 
Monte Franco, &c., and the Cacciaconti, Cacciaguerra, Tancredi, 
Guido, Banieri, Bernardino, Aldobrandino, Renaldo, Counts of 
Sdalenghi, were admitted citizens of Siena. The inhabitants 
of Asciano also submitted. The Count Napoleone de' Vis- 
conti di Campiglia, the Counts Guiglieschi, and the Counts 
Ardoigheschi, also capitulated. The inhabitants of Montalcino, 
who had frequently excited quarrels between Siena and these 
counts, now discovered much animosity, and preparations were 
made for wax, to bring them to submission ; and, that dvil dis- 
sensions might not interrupt the enterprise, and to quiet the 
minds of many, who desired that military matters should be 
separated from the dvil and political, and that the consuls 
should have nothing to do but attend to affairs of state and 
government of the city, they made an election of a foreign 
nobleman, who, with imperial authority, should have the care of 
all dvil and criminal causes, having judges, assessors, and other 
officers in his family convenient for such an office. 

^'This magistrate they called podesta, from the power and 
authority granted to the cities of Italy to create such an officer 
by the Emperor Frederick L, at the peace of Constance, in 1183, 
and to the Sienese in particular, by Henry VL in 1186, when 
he came into Italy as vicar to his father Frederick. And besides 
the judicial authority, in civil and criminal causes, the podesta 
had the government and command of the army in case of war; 
The first who was elected podesta of Siena was M. Orlando 
Malapresa of Lucca, for one year, and he entered on his office 
the first of January, 1199, according to the order of the dty. 
The Sienese were desirous of an accommodation with the Flo- 

SIENA. 211 

rentines, that they might not be molested by them in the enter- 
prise they meditated against Montalcino." 

The discords among the princes of Germany upon the election 
of an emperor, and the revolution of empire in Constantinople^ 
are not much to our present purpose. • 

" In 1201, a perpetual alliance, offensive and defensive, was 
concluded between Florence and Siena, Philip Malavolti being 
podesta, by which the inhabitants of Montalcino were declared 
enemies of both. In 1202, the army of Siena made themselves 
masters of their fortress and territory. The Counts Ardenghesci 
refused to furnish their quota to this expedition, which excited 
the resentment of the city against them, and at length a war. 
The cities of Tuscany, that lived and were governed as repub- 
lics, remained long without any palace, or other public place in 
which they could assemble their magistrates and councils ; they 
were therefore summoned to meet sometimes in one church, and 
sometimes in another, varying with the changes of the chief 
consul, until the establishment of the office of the nine, at which 
time a palace was built For the first magistrate usually col- 
lected the rest in his own parish church, as the Romans long 
congregated their senate, sometimes in one temple, sometimes 
in another, according to the nature of the business on which 
they were to deliberate. 

" Another quarrel soon arose between Florence and Siena, at 
the conclusion of which the latter were obliged to relinquish 
Poggibonzi, whose inhabitants praised the Florentines very 
highly, while they reproached the Sienese with bitterness. The 
arbitrators, or agents, who settled this dispute, were very ill 
received on their return; and the praises of Florence, which 
they heard repeated, displeased them as much as the reproaches 
of themselves. These excited great heats, resentments, and 
personal altercations, not only among the common people, but 
among all the noble houses which had given their opinions 
against making the cession of Poggibonzi. The disputes upon 
this occasion went so far, that many personal enmities grew out 
of them, and parties frequently came to blows and bloody com- 
bats in arms, by which many factions were generated, who, 
frequently fighting with each other, produced a number of atro- 
cious actions and scandalous crimes. The wisest men, those 

212 ON GOVERNMENT. 

who consider more the end than the beginning of things, a 
character peculiar to prudent men, were hardly able to invent a 
remedy, or by the interposition of the public authority to pre- 
serve the peace. The city remained a long time wonderfuUy 
agitated, the citizens having no confidence in one another, 
standing in continual suspicion, and daily expectation of further 
disorders, tumults, and seditions. These distractions delayed 
the expedition against Monte Pulciano, which however was at 
length, in 1204, undertaken ; when dissensions arose among all 
the cities of Tuscany upon the question, whether Monte Pul- 
ciano was within the dominion or country of Siena. It was 
customary to settle such disputes by a congress or parliament of 
rectors, from all the cities of the league or company of Tuscany; 
and such deputies were now appointed, who, after hearing the 
parties, and examining witnesses, determined in favor of Siena. 
" It was a custom of the emperors to maintain a vicar in Tus- 
cany, who lived and held a court in San Miniato Altedesco, 
who gave an account of the causes where an appeal was had 
to the emperor, and received the rents, taxes, tolls, customs, 
tributes, and other gifts, all which the jurists call by one word, 
regalia; and when it happened that the emperor sent no vicar 
to the province, he sent nuncios to particular cities, and caUed 
them counts of those places to which he sent them, with the 
same authority. This method of collecting together and making 
a congress, which was used in those times by the cities of Tus- 
cany, was generally very useful to the whole province, because 
the rettoriy (so they called the representatives who composed the 
congress,) as soon as they understood that a difference had arisen 
between one city and another, although they were sometimes of 
different and contrary factions, exerted themselves, according to 
the obligations of their magistracy, with extreme diligence, to 
bring them to an accommodation; and if sometimes their en- 
deavors to adjust the difference did not succeed, and the war 
was prosecuted, the congress nevertheless stood firm, and the 
rectors did not fail to do every thing in their power for the uni- 
versal benefit, and at all times appeared together in parliament 
for the public business which occurred, and to make their elec* 
tions, at the stated periods, of new rectors; for they had no 
authority when alone in their respective cities, but only while 

SIENA. 213 

they were assembled in one body. As it was their duty to be 
always attentive to the common interests, if so many people, 
for their private ends, excited by the ambition of dominion, or 
by avarice, two qaalities very unfriendly to peace, had not left 
off this federal order, the ruin of so many republics had not 
perhaps been effected; but as the men of that age were little 
accustomed to reflection, and had less prudence in providing for 
futurity, they were still less solicitous to leave, by the means of 
letters, the memory and history of their times, so that only a 
confused notion of a few particulars remains at this day, not 
only of this confederation, but of an infinite number of other 
great events and institutions. 

" In 1206, the discords followed between Philip of Suabia and 
Otho of Saxony, and their contention for the empire, in which 
Philip was superior; which were followed by wars with the 
Saracens, and between Siena and Florence, in which the army 
of the former was defeated at Montalto. 

" In 1209, the king of the Romans came into Italy, and con- 
firmed the privileges of Siena, particularly those of electing 
consuls, coining money, and administering justice, reserving 
appeals, and other conditions expressed in the grant of Henry; but 
declaring, that neither Jacomo, Aldobrando, and Henry, sons of 
Aldobrandino Giuseppi, and other nobles who held signories in 
the county of Siena, nor their subjects, should be under the 
podest^ of the city. The consuls endeavored to divert the 
minds of the people, now at peace with Florence, by employing 
them in rebuilding the castles, and restoring the strong places 
belonging to the republic ; but they found it impossible to sup- 
press or divert the ambition of the popular multitude, who, 
feeling themselves relieved from foreign wars, would be employed 
in domestic seditions. As they were at Uberty to choose the 
podesta, either from foreigners or from the nobility of Siena, the 
choice was generally made from among the latter. The people 
thought, that the introduction of this office had rather been a 
loss than an acquisition to them ; and that the nobles, by means 
of it, had aggrandized themselves. They insisted that this should 
be corrected in the order of choosing the podesta ; and to remove 
all occasion of dissensions, and maintain the public tranquiUity, 
the gentlemen concurred, in 1211, in a new law, that the podesta 
should, for the future, always be a foreigner." 

214 ON GOVERNMENT. 

It is easy to see that the pride of most of the nobles con- 
curred with, if it did not excite this popular humor; for the 
jealousy and envy of the nobles can never bear to see one of 
themselves elevated much above the rest. Regardless of equality 
among the people, and irreconcilable enemies to any appear- 
ance of it between the people and themselves, they must always 
be peers, or equals among one another; and when a king, or 
any other first magistrate, must be placed over them, they always 
prefer the introduction of a foreigner to the elevation of one of 
their own body. 

'' But it does not always happen in these cases, that by taking 
away the cause, the effect is removed. Those who are grown 
inveterate in the habits of dissension, without having any regard 
to the public good, and without the least cause of complaint, 
will find means of interrupting and disturbing good order. The 
people had obtained whatever they demanded, yet they would 
not lay down their arms ; and the multitude appearing in con- 
tinual insurrections, some terrible catastrophe was apprehended, 
and would have occurred, if the nobles had not likewise resorted 
to arms, and, with a great concourse of those who wished for 
peace and order, had not marched through the city. This 
procession spread a terror among the seditious, who, from feax, 
laid down their arms, and returned to their houses. Upon this 
the government was reassumed, and confirmed by the punish- 
ment of many of those who had been the heads of this commo- 
tion. The first who was created podesta, according to the new 
law, was M. Guido di Ranuccio da Orvieto. 

" In 1221, Frederick II., after his coronation, having granted 
many favors to several lords and cities of the Ghibelline party, 
renewed and enlarged the privileges of Siena, of administering 
justice, of paying the gabeUe or imposts only at the gates of the 
city, of coining money, and of exemption from all customs and 
tributes in the country. These exemptions and privileges per- 
haps occasioned a demand of similar favors which was at this 
time made by the territories tributary to Siena, such as Chiusi, 
Montelatrone, Montepinzuto, Potentino, Luriano, Vico, the lands 
of the abbey of St. Antimo, and other places. But as this 
demand occasioned a civil war, and Siena raised a force both 
of horse and foot, which they were ill provided to resist, they 
capitulated. 

SCENA. 215 

^ In 1222, the Coimt Banieri & TVavale, originaUy of the 
Morea, in the Peloponnesus, was made a citizen of Siena, and 
annexed the lands and castles he had purchased to their dominion. 
From him are descended the Counts of Bid, Montingegnoli, and 
Fuosini. But the city, when it was not at war with Florence, 
nor against the pope, nor engaged in crusades, nor in rebellion 
against the emperor, was almost continually engaged in dis- 
putes and wars with the mountains, castles, and lords in its 
neighborhood, though in alliance with it, or under its dominion ; 
and whenever a moment of perfect peace occurred, seditions 
and tumults broke out With the conquest of Grosetto, and an 
increase of jurisdiction, Siena had excited mnch envy in a part 
of those cities of tlie Guelphs, in Tuscany, Florence, Lucca, 
prvieto, and Perugia, which were in a league against the other 
confederation of the Ghibellines, which were Siena, Pisa, Arezzo, 
and Pistoia. The former took measures to oppose the Sienese 
in their favorite enterprise against Monte Pulciano, and this 
occasioned a series of altercations and wars, not only among 
these cities, but with the lords of the mountains, too long to be 
related; but at last Monte Pulciano was taken, and peace 
concluded. 

<' The cities of Tuscany, now in profound peace, and aU 
apprehensions of its interruption removed by the presence of the 
emperor in Italy with a powerful army, the Sienese thought 
themselves secure from the stratagems as well as invasions of 
their enemies. This sense of security awakened in the minds 
of the multitude in the city of Siena the same desire of mak- 
ing themselves masters of the internal government of the re- 
public, which at former times they had entertained. The princi- 
pal heads of this faction, in their consultations on the project, 
and discoursing on the means of carrying it into execution, 
found among themselves a great variety of opinions, from whence 
arose violent dissensions. From this two circumstances occured, 
which prevented the scandalous disorders that usually happen 
in such cases. The first was a delay of the conclusions and 
resolutions; the second was, that in this interval it was not 
possible to keep the plot so secret and concealed, that no intima- 
tions should be given to the nobility of what was meditated to 
their disadvantage, and the manifest danger of the whole city, 
if to such an end the people should recur to arms. When the 

216 ON GOVERNMENT. 

nobles had discovered and considered the situation and the dan- 
ger they were in, not only from these commotions, but from the 
hatred which, in the wars of so many years with Florence and 
Orvieto, they had provoked in the minds of the inhabitants, 
from such prudent considerations it was determined to treat 
civilly with the popular party, without the din of arms, lest they 
should be involved at once in a war both at home and abroad ; 
and as the popular party, from the same motives, concurred 
with the nobles, that the innovation should be made when in 
their civil robes rather than in armor, it was agreed that the 
council should be assembled. Here they deliberated and debated 
on the mode of reforming the government of the city. As the 
popular party saw no possibility of obtaining to themselves 
the government exclusively, as they had at first projected and 
reasoned among themselves, .they demanded, that, in addition to 
their third part in the council and magistracy, it should be left 
to the discretion of the council themselves to choose the other 
part of the magistrates, and fifty more members at least of the 
council, out of the nobles or people, at their pleasure. To this 
the nobles would not agree, and many of them opposed it with 
such efficacious reasons, as made it appear unreasonable to the 
popular party themselves, and the petition was neither granted 
nor comitenanced by many votes. Tolommei, Malavolti, Buon- 
signori, and Gallerani, were the principal speakers among the 
nobles ; and their eloquence was employed to persuade the popu- 
lar party, that they ought to be contented with the share they 
already enjoyed in the republic, and esteem themselves under 
obligations to the memory of their grandfathers, who had so 
benevolently embraced them, and taken them into their society ; 
and having received so great a favor from the nobility, who had 
received them into an equality with themselves, it would have 
been a more rational and becoming conduct to have demonstrated 
their gratitude, by acknowledging the benefaction, and coope- 
rating harmoniously in the public service, in the imminent dan- 
ger which they saw over the commonwealth, rather than excite 
every day fresh seditions. They might well know that those 
who had held the government hitherto, were not men of so poor 
capacities as to have occasion, in the administration of the 
republic, for the assistance of so great a number of new men, 
for the most part useless, or more properly pernicious, by their 

SIENA- 217 

contracted understandings and small experience; that their 
project was the more alarming, as they proposed to make the 
magistrates so very numerous; because it had been seen, in 
numberless examples, and experience had found it an infallible 
observation, that states had been seldom well governed by the 
multitude, in whose deliberations, besides other imperfections, 
the opinion of the most ignorant and incapable weighs as much 
as that of the most prudent and experienced. Those cities 
which had rashly committed the government to the multitude, 
had, to their misfortune, more frequently experienced revolutions 
in the state, than those which restricted the government to a few ; 
for although, to a superficial view, the equality of the citizens in 
the public deliberations, where the votes are numbered, but nei- 
ther weighed nor measured, might appear a just and reasonable 
thing ; yet to any man who maturely reflected on the subject, 
it must appear in a very different light. 

'^ As to the mode of making the elections of magistrates, if it 
were possible to concede to the people the share they demanded, 
these orators demonstrated that it must prove pernicious to the 
commonwealth. The method proposed was a way to take from 
the council the free power of creating the magistrates, the pro- 
posed law imposing the necessity of creating one third of them 
from one faction exclusively, and taking away the discretionary 
right of electing those who, according to the occasions and times 
of war or of peace, might be the best qualified to discharge the 
duties of their office. It was affirmed, that in a very little time 
it would be seen, that not only the nobles, who had from the 
beginning ruled, and with so much virtue and dignity aggran- 
dized their country, but even that those popular families, which, 
for a space of a hundred years, had honorably governed and 
prospered with them, would by this innovation be thrown out of 
the government. That this invention, as now proposed, it was 
easy to be perceived, had no other end in view than to introduce 
a government of new men, by pulling down those who had 
hitherto maintained it ; because, as the council in the election of 
officers was bound by necessity always to elect a third portion 
from the popular order, it might, and would soon happen, that 
of the other portion, either all, or at least a part, would be popu- 
lar members, new persons, and unexperienced in administration ; 
and the nobles, and those accustomed to government, would be 

VOL. V. 19 

218 ON GOVERNMENT. 

deposed, to the grievous loss and misfortime of the public 
When it was admitted that every citizen, without distinction, 
might be admitted to honors and to government, is it not better 
that the council should have the free faculty of making their 
elections of persons apt for their offices, that men may be excited 
by this motive to habituate themselves to honorable exercises 
and virtuous courses ? That to impose the necessity of electing 
another, who knows that he must be elected at all events, is to 
take away from him every incentive to virtuous behavior. This 
would be precisely the way of bestowing honors on sloth instead 
of virtue, and to give the establishment of magistrates to the 
laws, not the appointment to the council, who will be, for the 
most part, forced to make the election contrary to their judg- 
ments and inclinations ; an indignity too great to be offered to 
that senate. 

" This harangue was answered, on the part of the popular 
faction, by William Oollucci, who said, that the nobles ought 
not to disdain to have the people associated with them in the 
government of the commonwealth, among many other reasons, 
because they very well knew they had it not now in their power 
to say, what had been affirmed by their grandfathers, when in 
the beginning they refused to admit the people to any share, 
that popular men are not fit to exercise magistracies, nor to rule 
in the councils of the city ; for having, since 1135, governed in 
concert with them, participating only in a third part, they had 
given such assistance, that the city was greatly increased in 
dominion, riches, and population, as was evident to all men; so 
that their society might be said to have been of the greatest 
public utility ; and the same benefits, and still greater, might be 
expected in future, when, instead of a limitation to a third part, 
there should be no bounds prescribed. It very rarely had hap- 
pened that any city had arisen to grandeur, if it had not admitted 
the people and the other subjects to the administration of the 
commonwealth, and to the magistracies. * This,' said he, ' was 
the ruin of the Lacedaemonians and the Athenians, who, although 
they were most valieint in arms, would have found their republics 
of little energy and short duration, if they had excluded their 
subjects from the hopes of rising, by their arms and other virtues, 
to honors and public magistracies. What was it that elevated 
Rome to its superlative greatness, more than their having given 

SIENA. 219 

the rights of citizens to |nivileges and honors, to all in Italy who 
submitted to their empire ? What can stimulate your own citi- 
zens to greater alacrity in the service of the public, than the 
hope of arriving, by their good behavior, to the highest honors 
of the republic, and the knowledge, that if in war they place 
themselves in the post of danger, they are sure to do it for their 
own proper utility, as well as for that of others? What interest 
can you believe will make them more ardent, animated, and 
intrepid, in any public enterprise ? We know, moreover, that no 
government can be properly styled a republic, which does not 
comprehend all the people of the city.' By these reasons he 
endeavored to persuade the senate, that is to say, the council, 
that the demand made by the people was as much for the public 
service in general, as their own in particular; and as to that 
which had been said by the grandees against receiving new men 
into the government, he replied, that as all other things, how 
ancient soever they might be, had a beginning, so it was 
with nobility ; * as, for example, we may say, as you know very 
well, that next to the original nobility of our city, with Charle- 
magne, when he delivered Italy from the domination of the Lom- 
bards, the Malavolti and the French gentlemen, who since have 
called themselves Bandinelli,came, who were received, not only 
into the number of the citizens, but into the ranks of the nobles 
and patricians of Siena ; after that, with Otho L, when he ex- 
pelled the Berengarii from Italy, the Salimbeni, the Tolommei, 
came, who in like manner were enumerated among the nobles and 
grandees of this city ; and in times more modern, many others, 
who were lords of several castles of this state, as the Scorcialupi, 
who since have called themselves Squarcialupi, those of Tomano, 
of Valcortese, of Berardenga, Scialengha, and many others, who 
all enjoy the title of nobility. Finally, our grandfathers were 
admitted to the government in 1135 ; and if we, their descend- 
ants, have retained the name of popular, it does not follow that 
we have not acquired nobility. For what reason then, if your 
ancestors have accepted foreigners and ultramontanes, and even 
conquered lords and landholders into their peerage, should not 
you receive your own proper fellow-citizens, those who are born 
free within the same walls with yourselves, and run the same 
fortunes with all others ? You will say, because they are not 
noble. We however say, that all those others in this kind of 

220 ON GOVERNMENT. 

nobility were not more noble than at this hour these are, who, 
by means of public dignities, have acquired nobility, or than 
they will be who shall come into the government after us ; and 
as we shall be an example for them, so will they be to those who 
may come after them ; and the city will be able, by this means, 
to preserve for a longer time the nobility of her citizens ; and, as 
it is natural that whatever has a beginning must have an end, 
new noblemen will succeed from time to time to those who may 
fail, and the land will be better peopled, and more powerful.' 

''A short replication to these arguments was made by Rinaldo 
Alessi, who said, that if the people, since they had participated 
in the government, had remained more quiet, it was possible the 
city might have made some notable acquisition ; but, as every 
one knew, the continual seditions which the popular party had 
excited, had raised their inordinate desires, and disposed them 
more to civil wars than to wars with their hostile neighbors ; and 
that those acquisitions which they had made had been obtained 
rather by the incidents of the times than by any other reason ; 
that the ancient gentlemen who came formerly with Charle- 
magne and the first Otho, when they were invited, many cen- 
turies ago, to inhabit this city, had the signories of many castles 
given them in reward of the illustrious actions which they 
performed for the service of the empire, by Charles and Otho ; 
and that more splendor and nobility had accrued to the repub- 
lic than to them by their coming to inhabit it. And the same 
thing was true of the other lords of this dominion, who, according 
to the accidents which have occurred, have been made gentle- 
men of Siena, the city being aggrandized and ennobled by the 
acquisition of their families, castles, and signories." 

By these speeches we see that neither the aristocratical nor the 
democratical orators aimed at any thing more than a government 
of all authority in one centre ; but the legislative and executive 
power were to be lodged in one assembly. The nobles wished 
to have the whole house to themselves, and the commons wished 
the same thing, though each party temporized and modified their 
language with some regard to the other. The loaves and fishes, 
the honors and emoluments, were what they all sought ; more 
than liberty, safety, or good order ; more than the commerce, arts, 
or peace ; more than the prosperity, grandeur, and glory of their 
country. Not one of them thinks of giving all the executive 

SIENA. 221 

power to the podesta, with a weapon to defend it ; not one thinks 
of dividing the sovereign legislature into two assemblies, giving 
to the nobles and people an equal share; yet, without these 
arrangements, every intelligent reader of their history at this day 
perceives that all the projects of either party for amendment 
would only increase the evil, by inflaming the ill humor. 

^^ After many discourses, made by several persons of both parties, 
the grandees became sensible that, if they should recur to arms, and 
defend the dignity of their stations, they might, in the war which 
they expected with Florence and Orvieto, and from the difficulty 
of obtaining money, put all in danger, by refusing to concede 
something to accommodate their civil discords; they therefore 
concurred in the opinion that prevailed, that the council should 
make the election of thirty citizens, fifteen of each party, who 
should have authority to propose a new form of government, since 
it appeared that the magistrates, called the consuls, after the 
introduction of the office of the podesta, that of the four purvey- 
ors, and the chamberlain of Biccherna, were no longer of any 
authority at all, and that there was a necessity to think of making 
a magistracy of a greater number of men, and of more authority 
concerning the affairs of the state and the administration of the 
republic. The thirty persons who were invested with thb full 
power, or, as the Florentines called it, this balia, having discoursed 
and deliberated some time upon the subject of their commission, 
and wishing to give satisfaction to the public, as well as gratify 
the ambition of many individuals, by constituting a numerous 
magistracy, proposed to the council to institute a magistracy of 
twenty-four, to be elected by the council out of the whole body 
of the people, or the citizens at large, on condition that a greater 
number should not be nominated or voted for from one faction 
than from the other ; and as it was understood that the Emperor 
Frederick was soon to leave Italy, and it was expected the Flo- 
rentines would soon attack them or some of their dependencies, 
the measure soon obtained; the four-and-twenty magistrates 
were immediately created, and they entered on their offices with 
great spirit, by making preparations for war against the Floren- 
tines and the other Guelphs." 

This revolution, if a bare change of the number of first magis- 
trates, without any change in the sovereignty, can be called one, 
was in 1232, while the emperor was at Ravenna. 

19 V 

222 ON GOVERNMENT. 

The Sienese were now involved in constant wars with their 
neighbors till 1238, when the discord between the pope and 
the emperor revived the animosities of the ancient factions of 
Guelphs and Ghibellines in Tuscany, as well as in many other 
parts of Italy, and with greater hatred and animosity than ever ; 
nor was there any people who were not infected with this de- 
structive contagion, by which, without having any other cause 
of quarrel, they fought with each other with mortal enmity ; not 
only one city against another, but the same city, divided into 
these factions, combated itself; each party had not only different 
ensigns, under which they marched out to war, but they distin- 
guished themselves by the color and wearing of their clothes, by 
their gait and air and gestures of the body, and by every other 
the smallest circumstance ; so that, at the first aspect, a Guelph 
might be known by a glance of the eye from a Ohibelline. These 
were not the only divisions among the Sienese, but, since the 
introduction of the magistracy of Twenty-four, a new diversity ' 
arose among the citizens, and a new distinction of party names. 

<< This government did not please all, and those who approved 
it assumed the name of the Twenty-four, and those who were 
dissatisfied took the name of the Twenty-seven. Hatred and 
resentment increased among them to such a degree, that in 1240 
they flew again to arms, with most violent commotions of the 
whole dty, the slaughter of multitudes on each side, with innu- 
merable robberies, burglaries, plunderings, and conflagrations of 
houses and palaces, and other crimes committed by the plebeians. 
But, as the rabble in favor of the Twenty-four appeared to be 
the strongest, this magistracy survived the lawless attempts to 
destroy it, and preserved authority enough to elect M. Aldo- 
brandino di Gtddo Cacciaconti podesta, who, by his prudence 
and the public authority, reduced the city to some degree of 
obedience to the laws." 

The secret was, that the pope and the emperor were to the re- 
publics of Italy, what Sparta and Athens had been to those of the 
Peloponnesus. Each must have a party in every city; if the 
nobles were on one side, the people would be on the other, and 
vice versa; and every art of seduction was employed by one 
power or the other on both. 

The Sienese were now plunged in new wars, which continued, 
almost without interruption, till 1258. " The cities of Tuscany, 

SIENA. 223 

which, in the discord between the pontiffs and emperors, had 
followed the imperial party, and were denominated Ghibellines, 
after the death of Frederick 11. were greatly oppressed by the 
other cities, which, having followed the ecclesiastical party, were 
then superior, and were distinguished by the name of Guelphs ; 
but since Manfred, overcoming the forces of the pope, had made 
himself master of the kingdom of Naples and Sicily, he took the 
Ghibellines in the province of Tuscany into his more immediate 
protection, and placed Siena at the head of that party. As Flo- 
rence was the head of the Guelph party, each city in its turn was 
an asylum for the exiles of the other ; which, in addition to the 
jealousy, envy, emulation, and selfish views, common between 
neighboring nations as well as cities, proved a continual provo- 
cative to war." 

These wars and rebellions of their mountain castles, which it 
would fill volumes to describe, will be passed over. Yet it may 
be proper to mention the rebellion of Monteano and Montemassi, 
when the Count Giordano demanded in the senate that one third 
of the city should be armed and sent out, because a form of their 
constitution is upon this occasion explained. 

^< Although the Sienese were zealously inclined to comply with 
the request of Giordano, and thought the expedition very inte- 
resting to their country, they would not depart from the ancient 
order ; when any expedition was proposed, for the subject to be 
maturely considered, it must have been proposed in the council 
of the credenza, and consulted on, three times, on three several 
days, in the general council, before any thing could be determined. 
Upon this occasion a deputation was appointed to attend the 
army, consisting of the podesta, the captain of the people, the first 
three members of the office of Twenty-four, and twelve good 
men, buani huomini, deputed by the commons. The soldiers and 
officers in these expeditions served without pay, in imitation of 
the Romans, who, for three hundred and forty-nine years, conti- 
nued to go out to war, every one at his own expense." 

This is universally alleged by historians as a proof of their love 
of their country ; but it may as well be considered as a proof of 
their poverty and their ignorance, for there is no example of it 
among rich and well-informed people ; it would be indeed unjust 
and imequal. As the provisions and apparatus were found by 
the public, and plunder was made wherever they went, it is very 

224 ON GOVERNMENT. 

probable that the most of their armies were better fed and more 
profitably employed abroad than at home, as manufactures were 
little known, and commerce and navigation in their infancy. 

" In the year 1259, ambassadors were sent to the King Man- 
fred by the council of the credenzuy who from the council gene- 
ral, or the senate, which signified the same thing, had the 
authority deputed to them to give commissions and instructions 
to ambassadors. The council of credenza was a secret council, 
as its name imports, in which were secretly treated those things 
which were to be proposed to the general council, which, repre- 
senting the whole city, had greater authority ; but no proposition 
could be made, if it had not first obtained in the council of cre^ 
denza, 

" This is very remarkable ; the sovereignty was in one single 
assembly, the general council; the leading members, however, 
had influence enough to get themselves separated from the body 
by its own act, all secret affairs committed to them, and nothing 
permitted to be brought into the general council without their 
previous approbation. This arrangement was afterwards imi- 
tated by the grand dukes. In the council of the people, nothing 
could be treated which had not previously been treated in the 
consistory, and by them proposed. 

"Another council obtained in Siena, which has been men- 
tioned before, called the council of assembly, of fifty members 
for each third, which, at stated periods, was changed by the 
general council, and limited by them in authority." So that the 
whole sovereignty, the whole legislative, judicial, and executive 
authority, was literally in one centre, that of the general council ; 
and all other assemblies, councils, magistrates, and officers, were 
only committees and deputies of that body.* In this council of 
credenza the secret treaty was made with the Count Giordano, 
and ambassadors sent with his to Manfred. 

In the year 1260, the memorable battle of Monte-aperto was 
fought between the Florentines and Sienese, in which the latter 
obtained a complete victory, and reduced Florence to the brink 
of destruction. At this glorious period, when their great rival 
Florence was reduced to such extremities as to be obliged 
to submit to the emperor and the Ghibellines, and make peace 

* Malavolti, lib. i. della Seconda Parte, fol. 7 and 8. Croniche Sanese^ Ap. 
Maratori, Rer, ItaL Script torn. xv. pp. 29, 80, &c. 

SIENA. 225 

with Siena upon her own terms ; when so many other people 
and territories were daily submitting to their jurisdiction, and 
ambassadors of congratulation were arriving from all parts, is it 
not surprising that union and harmony at home should not 
accompany such transports of joy as appeared in every part of 
their dominions ? Yet, in a government so constituted, a dis- 
pute among a few young gentlemen at a bath of Petriuolo was 
sufficient to divide the whole city. 

" In this rencounter one Baroccino di Bencivenne Barocci, a 
youth of the popular order, was killed by M. Robba Renaldini* 
Of this homicide M. Bennucio Salimbeni was also accused, who, 
besides being banished together with M. Robba, and both having 
their palaces demolished by the fury of the people, because Benci- 
venne, father of Baroccino, was of the magistracy of the Twenty- 
four then governing the city, and through the hatred which the 
people bore to the nobles, was condemned in a fine of twelve thou- 
sand pounds, and rigorously held in prison in irons, till his father 
Salimbeni was obliged to pay it So rigid a punishment, trans- 
gressing as they thought all bounds of justice, provoked some 
of the nobles, who would not remain exposed to the discretion 
and insolence of the multitude, daily excited in commotions 
against them ; so they left the city, and retired for safety to Radi- 
cofani, a place by its situation sufficiently strong. Upon this 
the magistrates declared them of the party of the Guelphs, 
which provoked them to overrun, with some troops of horse and 
their followers, the dominions of the republic in the country, and 
plunder the lands of their enemies. For it was by their instiga- 
tion they believed the magistrates had been induced to pass a 
decree so pernicious and prejudicial, not only to them, but to 
the whole city, by the divisions which must arise from it among 
the citizens, reviving the hatred of factions, both of Guelphs and 
Ghibellines, nobles and people, which through the fear of foreign 
wars all parties had united unanimously to bury in oblivion, to 
their infiinite advantage in the late war against their national 
enemies. From this disorder, arising out of that leisure, idleness, 
and insolence, which, after the overthrow of their external enemies 
had taken the place of fear, factions and parties took occasion 
to revive their enmities, and to study to offend, provoke, and injure 
one another. Having learned in Siena the mischief which had 
been done in the country by the fugitives, now become exiles, 

o 

226 ON GOVERNMENT. 

a strong force of Grennan troops, as well as the militia, was sent 
out, botii cavalry and infantry. After an obstinate engagement, 
and many slain on both sides, among whom were several per- 
sons of consequence, the exiles were defeated by superior num- 
bers, and the discipline of the German troops." 

This was in 1262. The history proceeds with accounts of 
rebellions and submissions of one and another of their moun- 
tains, castles, signories, and other little dependencies, and of 
the persecutions of their exiles and the Guelphs ; and all things 
in this period are done in the name of the commons of Siena, 
till the year 1266, when "many ill humors began to appear 
again in the city; and by the accidents which had occur- 
red, so great a change had been produced in the minds of 
the multitude, that it appeared to the major part of those con- 
cerned in the administration, that, for the universal satisfaction, 
it was become necessary to remodel the government in a better 
form. To this end sixty citizens were elected." But by whom ? 
Not by the people, or citizens at large, nor by a convention of 
their deputies, the only legitimate expedient for framing a new 
constitution, but by the general council. " Into this number of 
sixty were elected, indiscriminately, both grandees (for so the 
nobles were now called) and popular men, with authority to 
reform the city by new regulations, by which they were to intro- 
duce universal peace and tranquillity among the citizens. But 
a contrary effect was produced ; for it seeming to the popular 
party as if the sixty, in the many months spent since they as- 
sembled, had been making provisions favorable to the nobles, 
they assumed that these had been made to their prejudice and 
damage, and rose with astonishing noise and tumult ; and rush- 
ing impetuously in arms to the palace of the bishopric, where 
the sixty were congregated, and setting fire to the gate, they 
constrained them to renounce the magistracy ; many of them, 
both of the popular citizens and of the nobles, returning pri- 
vately to their houses, through fear, went out of the city. 
Others, taking arms, endeavored to defend the public honor and 
their own ; among whom were many of the houses of Tolommei, 
Salimbeni, Piccolomini, Accarigi, and other families, who, com- 
bating in a variety of places, after having done and suffered 
much injury, causing the death of many persons of every party, 
and not longer able to resist so great a multitude, were forced 

SIENA. 227 

to depart from Siena, together with M. Inghirano, captain of 
the people, who in this contest had shown himself favorable 
to the magistracy of the Sixty. As soon as they had departed, 
they were declared rebels and enemies of their country, their 
estates were confiscated, and the palace of the Tolommei de- 
molished, as well as another of the Piccolomini, and the tower 
of the sons of SaUmbeni, and the houses of Accarigi. The 
instrument of all this ruin was one Master Lutterio, who is 
named without a surname ; and another, named Ferrudo, was 
sent as a commissary to Campriano, to demolish the palace 
of Ranuccio Tolommei, &c. In this new sedition, excited by 
the multitude against the magistrates of the Sixty, though it was 
not properly a quarrel between Guelphs and Ghibellines, nor 
entirely between the nobles and the people, those who had before 
been driven from the city took it up and united with the exiles 
of the Guelph party, who, incited by the favoring victory of Bang 
Charles, and uniting with the Orvietans and the Counts Aldo- 
brandeschi, did infinite damage in the dominions of Siena, and 
in a few days made themselves masters of the lands of Monte 
Pulciano, of Torrita, Menzeino, Cerreto, and many other places, 
which, rebelling against the city, surrendered to its exiles. The 
greater part of Tuscany, by these and similar divisions, stood in 
constant trouble and danger. Moved by this consideration, the 
citizens of Siena who held the government, desirous of reuniting 
and reconciling their exiles, that they might preserve the state 
from still greater confusions, sent ambassadors of the Ghibelline 
party, one of whom was the bishop of Siena, to Rome, to the 
pope Clement IV., praying his interposition to conclude a peace 
between them and their exiles and confederates. The pope 
accepted the ofiice of mediator, and a peace was concluded 
August 2, 1266, and confirmed by all parties, with promises of 
mutual forgiveness." 

New connections were formed with Charles of Anjou, King 
of Naples, and fresh wars engaged in, which kept the minds of 
the citizens employed, though the Sienese and the Ghibelline 
cause met with defeats and disasters, which reduced it so low, 
that Siena was left alone to support it. This adversity, how- 
ever, had one good effect " On the fifteenth of August, 1270, it 
produced a peace between the Guelphs and Ghibellines in Siena; 
and the twenty-four magistrates, with twelve buoni homini of the 

228 ON GOVERNMENT. 

commons, meeting in one assembly, agreed that in futm^ the 
government should be administered by thirty-six magistrates, 
of nobles and commons in equal portions, with the title of The 
Thirty-six Governors of the City and Community of Siena. 
This was followed by a league with Florence, under the auspices 
of Charles, King of Naples. The party of the Gxielphs was now 
so powerful, and the Ghibellines so depressed, that the Sienese, 
wtio, like all other people under governments so constituted, 
with parties nearly equal in numbers, wealth, and merit, without 
any mediator between them, always stood on the brink of sedi- 
tion, turned the scale rather in favor of the Guelphs ; and these, 
as soon as they felt their power, rose upon the Ghibellines, and 
drove them out of the city. 

^ Understanding that King Charles was at Yiterbo, they sent 
ambassadors to congratulate him on the happy success of affairs 
in Tuscany, who presented him with four thousand five hundred 
golden florins in behalf of the republic, the Guelphs being 
desirous, upon this their first appearance in power, to show their 
gratitude ; and a diet of Guelph ambassadors was soon held in 
the castle of Florence. The Sienese Ghibellines in exile were 
nevertheless troublesome, appearing in many places in arms, and 
ravaging the country, till the Guelphs marched out, fought, and 
routed them. When this was done, they in their turn took 
vengeance, by demolishing the castles and towers of the Ghibel- 
lines, both in the city and country. In 1272, the pope Gregory 
X. again interposed his mediation, and obtained the restoration 
of the Ghibellines both in Siena and Florence ; and the stipula- 
tion, promising them protection, was ratified by the college of 
thirty-six governors of the city and commons of Siena." 

But the minority is never happy; indeed, they are always 
oppressed by the majority, where there is not a separate execu- 
tive and an independent judicial, whose interest as well as duty 
it is to be impartial between them. In a little time the Ghibel- 
lines, who were returned to Siena, found by experience the truth 
of this observation. They found that they had not the same 
privileges* with others, nor the same chance for honors, nor the 
same security of their reputations, as when formerly they had 
shared the government with the Guelphs. Living in little credit, 

* Tanto f^ sempre pin potente il favor, che la Ginstitia nelle cittA partiali, 
com' 6 staAa quaai sempre la citdi di Siena. Malavold, lib. iii. part n. p. 44. 

SIENA. 229 

having small hopes of any change in their favor, and knowing 
that they had no security for their property, liberty, or lives, but 
in the mercy of the major party, they returned into the country 
of Siena, and, joining with the Ghibelline exiles from Bologna, 
renewed the old troubles and the usual party rage. They raised 
forces, excited rebellions, and formed alliances with little territo- 
ries and signories, till they were able to meet a party of the army 
sent out against them in 1277. These they defeated at Pari, 
and took many prisoners, among whom was Bidolfo, the cap- 
tain, whom they beheaded. The news of this skirmish and 
defeat threw the Sienese army into such a sudden panic, that 
they betook themselves to flight, without having seen their 
enemy, and without any military order returned to the city. 
Such an excess of timidity, such an infamous cowardice, 
though it is not unprecedented nor uncommon even among 
the bravest troops, could not fail to occasion great indignation 
in Siena. 

'< When the multitude considered how easily the enemy might, 
if they should have the resolution to follow their advantage, enter 
the city itself, and join their partisans there, they rose in a tumult, 
and ran with great fury to the defence of the gates, and stood in 
arms all the rest of that day and the following night. In the 
morning, finding that the enemy had less ardor to follow than 
their own army to fly, they laid down their arms, but went about 
the streets of the city, discoursing in much ill humor, that the 
divisions of the nobles might very easily prove the ruin of their 
country, if some remedy was not discovered ; and they declared 
that they would no longer be disturbed by exiles, nor com- 
pelled, by the discords among the gentlemen, to be forever in 
war, and in danger of losing their lives and their property. It 
appeared to them that, for the common tranquillity, a peace 
ought to be concluded, as proposed by the pope's legate, who 
had been sent to recommend a reconciliation between the people 
of Tuscany. The Sienese of the Guelph party, who governed 
the city, influenced by these murmurs, tiie legate's exhortations, 
and a weariness of civil war, which held them in continual agi- 
tation and danger, both in their public and private afiairs, agreed 
at last, in 1279, to a peace with their exiles, who, without any 
further noise of arms, and to the universal satisfaction of all par- 
ties, were restored to their country and their honors, under the 

VOL. V. 20 

230 ON GOVERNMENT. 

podesterate, or, as they chose to call it, the signory of Matthew 
de' Maggi of Brescia." 

In the next year, 1280, in the podesterate of Alberigo Signo- 
regi of Bologna, the palaces of the Incontri were burnt and 
demolished by the fury of the people, instigated by the Guelphs ; 
a convulsion which originated in the usual source, the divisions 
and enmities among the gentlemen, and produced the usual 
effect, an idle and useless attempt to reform the government, by 
restraining the power to fewer hands, without dividing and sepa- 
rating it into its natural departments. The thirty-six magistrates 
were now reduced to fifteen, as if the number of members, not 
the nature of their power, had done the mischief; and it was 
ordained that no gentleman could be of the number of fifteen, 
but all must be popular men ; as if noble demagogues and popu- 
lar demagogues were not all equally absurd, ambitious, proud, 
and tyrannical, when they have no necessity to be wise, modest, 
humble, and equitable. This decree was as tyrannical as any 
that can be conceived ; for if it were admitted that a descent 
from a line of benefactors to their country was no merit, nor any 
argument for employing a citizen in public offices, surely it is no 
demerit, nor any argument for excluding him. The reason as- 
signed for it was, that the pride of the nobility increased and 
accumulated by their bearing the public authority, and that they 
ought not to have the power to make their pride and arbitrary 
dispositions more intolerable, nor, by their divisions among them- 
selves, to disturb so frequently the public peace and quiet of the 
other citizens, as they had done in times past ; as if the pride of 
new men were not equally or even more exalted by power, their 
dispositions apt to become more arbitrary, and their divisions 
even more intractable and furious, which is the certain truth 
of fact. 

" These fifteen new magistrates were called the governors and 
defenders of the commons and people of Siena ; but by this arbi- 
trary institution they neither quieted themselves nor reunit-ed to 
them the exasperated minds of the nobles. Without considering 
the damage which, in the divided situation of their principles, 
opinions, and affections, would result not only to themselves, but 
to the whole city, weakened to such a degree by its divisions, 
that malignant humors and irreparable animosities must be 
generated from fresh hatreds and revenge, and without seeing 

SIENA. 231 

that the exaltation of the popular faction, patronized as it was 
by the supreme magistrates, would prove their depression, the 
Guelphs and Ghibellines, in a few months after, again flew to 
arms ; and part of the multitude taking side with the Guelphs, 
many of the faction of Ghibellines were driven out of the city, at 
the head of whom was M. Niccolo Buonsignori, a man of great 
reputation, and in great credit for his valor with the soldiers and 
princes of those times. His fame had procured him many fol- 
lowers of the Ghibelline faction ; and having received information 
that the Ghibellines who, after his departure, had remained in 
Siena, were grievously oppressed by Orsini, the podesta of that 
city, he wished to deliver them from such injustice, and vindicate 
their cause. By the aid of the Counts of Santa Fiore, from whom 
he had no small number of men, he approached one night to the 
gate, to which the Ghibellines in Siena, with whom he had an 
understanding, rushed ; and having suddenly made a breach, he 
entered the city. Guided by several citizens, with their assistance 
he fought all night and the next day ; but was finally driven out 
again. The battle upon this occasibn between the parties was 
general, for the bells of the commons, which were upon the 
tower of Mignanelli, had rung to arms, and the people had 
very generally risen. Danger was affronted on all sides, and 
the struggle was furious. Although the Ghibellines had by 
force of arms made their way to the market, the Guelphs put 
them to flight, massacring some, and making many prisoners, 
leaving among the dead M. Jacomo Forteguerri, who was one 
of the heads of the faction. Niccolo found himself surrounded 
with a host of his enemies; but, although on horseback, he 
retreated, defending himself with that fierce intrepidity that so 
commonly appears in civil wars, and went out of the city 
through the same gate, accompanied by great numbers of the 
nobles of Ghibelline houses, as the Forteguerri, Paliaresi, Salvani, 
Ugurgieri, Ragnoni, and others, who would not remain in the 
power of an enraged enemy, and retired to the territory of Rigo- 
magno. This was on the fifteenth of July, 1281. Matthew 
Orsini, the Roman, being podesta, was afterwards sent by the 
magistrates of Siena, the fifteen governors and defenders of the 
commons and people of Siena, with an army composed of the 
men of the third of San Martino, and other people summoned 
from the other thirds, to attack the Ghibellines in Rigomagno. 

232 ON GOVERNMENT. 

Here the exiles had fortified themselves, and, when attacked, as 
they had expected, defended their strong-hold with great bra- 
very; but at length they were forced to evacuate it, and leave 
the ground to the Guelphs, who having, at the expense of much 
slaughter on both sides, got possession of it, razed the walls, 
and cut off the head of Neri di Belmonte, a captain of the 
Ohibellines, whom they had taken prisoner, in retaliation for a 
similar severity committed by them on Ridolfo della Treguena, 
a few years before, when they defeated the Guelphs at Pari 

^' In 1282, the Count Silvatico de' Conti Guidi was podesta, 
and the Sienese, the other castles of their state being intimidated 
by the examples made at Rigomagno, sent them orders not to 
receive the exiles, nor any other Ghibellines, but to resist them 
in arms, to demolish the walls of Monte Fallonica, those of St 
Agnolo in CoUe, and those of Montidano, in which territories 
M. Niccolo Buonsignoii had attempted to make a stand, and 
from which he made a predatory war upon Siena for some 
months, with several exiles from that city and other places. 
Martin IV., a Frenchman, succeeded to the pontificate, and by 
his favor King Charles regained his former credit in the cities of 
Tuscany, and was restored to the dignity of senator of Rome, to 
the infinite dissatisfaction of the Ghibelline party, who upon this 
occasion were wholly deprived of any share in the government 
by the triumphant Guelphs, both in Siena and in many other 
cities." 

And this is ever the object of a prevalent faction or a decided 
majority, to monopolize the whole government to themselves, by 
the total exclusion of the minority ; and when possessed of the 
whole legislative, executive, and judicial power, they drive into 
exile, confiscate, behead, and oppress in every way, without 
control. 

"The Sicilians broke out in rebellion against Charles; and 
while his forces were employed in attempting to reduce them, 
the Sienese of the Guelph party, who governed the republic, 
to prevent their Ghibelline exiles and rebels firom attempting 
some innovation under favor of the revolution in Sicily against 
King Charles, the head and protector of the Guelphs, sent 
a new army into the country to persecute and plunder the Ghi- 
bellines; and this year the fifteen governors and defenders of 
the people and commons of Siena, the consuls of the merchants. 

SIENA. 233 

the consuls of the manufacturers in wool, the signors of the other 
arts, the signors gonfaloniers of the companies, and the captains 
of the country, were all congregated together with the podest^ in 
the general council, and a treaty made with Ranieri de' Conti 
d' Elci and several other lords. 

"A war continued between Charles and Peter, Kingof Aragon; 
and in 1283 Charles died, which again raised the hopes of the 
Ghibellines, and excited them to arms in Romagna and in the 
territories of Siena, where they did infinite mischief, sometimes 
approaching and entering the city itself. « At last an army was 
raised, and they were put to flight If this vigorous exertion had 
not prevented them, they were in a fair way of regaining the 
ascendency in the dty, where great discontents prevailed; for 
the government, in 1280, having been placed entirely in the 
hands of the popular party, as has been related, the gentlemen 
could not with quiet minds submit to it ; and although, by the 
divisions among them into Guelphs and Ghibellines, they were 
disunited among themselves, it was much feared by the ruling 
party that, when the enemy should approach the city, they would 
endeavor, with the assistance of some of the popular men, (for 
these too were divided,) to make themselves maaters of some 
part of the state with their arms, although they had not been 
able to obtain it by their beans. The Bienese, in determining 
all questions in their councils and among their magistrates, made 
Use of beans as votes, white ones for the affirmative and black 
for the negative. The governing party, knowing that, by the 
death of Charles and the other mishaps which followed it, the 
party of tiie Guelphs was much debilitated, thought it neces- 
sary in this year, 1284, to make many new provisions for the 
security of the state; among which, as they could not confide 
in the multitude, they thought to restrain the government to a 
smaller number of persons, it appearing to them that they could 
more securely confide in a few, whose abilities, being more united^ 
would have greater energy than those of many, and that they 
might more easily agree among themselves, treat with greater 
secrecy, form their resolutions, and decide upon execution for 
the defence of the state. After long and angry controversies, 
they gained the concurrence of the nobles in one opinion, though 
little satisfactory to them, that the fifteen magistrates should 
be reduced to nine ; and this was the original of the order of the 

20* 

234 ON GOVERNMENT. 

Nine in Siena; and, that they might with more convenience 
attend upon the public, without being interrupted by their private 
affairs, it was ordained that they should continue for two months 
continually assembled in the same palace, and live at the expense 
of the republic ; and it was declared that in this office, denomi- 
nated ' The Nine Governors and Defenders of the Commons and 
People of Siena,' although the nobles were to have a part in all 
the other magistracies, no noblemen could be elected. The sta- 
tute says, * De numero dominorum novem, vel ipsius officii offici- 
als non possit aliquis* de aliquo casato civitatis Senensis, nee 
aliquis nobilis de civitate, vel jurisdictione Senensi. Domini 
novem, qui sunt, et esse debent defensores communis et populi 
civitatis Senensis, et districtus, ac jurisdictionis ejusdem, sint et 
esse debeant de mercatoribus, et de numero mercatorum civitatis 
preedictee, vel de media gente.' " 

The nature of the animal is nowhere revealed in stronger 
characters than in this curious record, where a government in 
one centre, and that centre a group of merchants, with unblushing 
heads, exclude not only all the plebeians and lowest class of labor- 
ers, but all the artists, mechanics, and men of the three liberal 
professions, and all the landholders of the country, and monopo- 
lize every thing to themselves, as they would monopolize a mer- 
chandise or forestall a market There appears a ridiculous varia- 
tion of the numbers of this magistracy for many years together, 
as if they thought the faults of the government, which every one 
felt, were owing to this circumstance ; and the same fickleness 
appeared in all the other cities of Italy, particularly Florence, 
where the number of priori was once three, then six, afterwards 
twelve, presently eight* This form of government was as detest- 
able to the plebeians as to the nobles ; and the wars between 
Grenoa and Pisa, and the expeditions against rebellious lords, and 
the death of four princes in this year, 1285, Charles, Philip, Peter, 
and Martin the pope, could not prevent the Ghibellines and the 
common people (il popolo minuto) of Siena from uniting against 
the Nine. 

* Quare qnatuordecim virorum officio, qui mixti ex utroque genere, civitatem 
regebant antiquato, priorcs artium creavere, tres ab initio creatos constat, postea 
sex, inde duodeeim, mox octo; publicis axlibus inclusi, nee aliud quicquam, qiikm 
de republica cogitare jussi sunt, et sumptus ex publico eis pnebiti, tempus autem 
hujus ma^stratus bimestre constitutum est Leonardo Aretino, in Malavolti, lib. 
iii. part ii. p. 51. 

SIENA. 235 

" For, on the succession of Honorius IV. to the papacy in the 
place of Martin, and after the death of Charles, his son being 
a prisoner to the Aragonese, weakness appeared among the 
Guelphs; and the Ghibelline exiles of Siena, assisted by the 
people of Arezzo, were encouraged to take by surprise a Sienese 
castle, named Poggio a Santa Cicilia, which they fortified ; from 
hence, with troops of horse, they made continual incursions and 
depredations, not only upon the country of Siena, but other con- 
federated cities of the Guelph party, until the Sienese, after a 
siege of six months, unable to take it by force, had reduced it by 
famine, in 1286. A great number of prisoners were made, and, 
after demolishing the walls, delivered to the podesta to be 
punished. The people, however, were so oppressed by their 
popular mercantile government, and so much preferred that of 
the nobles, that they took their part, rose in convulsion, joined 
the Ghibellines in arms, with great impetuosity rushed to the 
palace, and compelled the nine governors and defenders of the 
commons and people of Siena, and their podesta, Bartolomeo de' 
Maggi of Brescia, to deliver the prisoners into their hands, to be 
conducted to the house of the bishopric, to save their lives. But 
no sooner had they come out of the palace than the Guelphs, 
who by order of the magistrates had been summoned, and united 
with the soldiers of the guards and garrisons, a kind of standing 
army maintained for the defence of the state, proceeded to oppose 
and affront the Ghibellines, who, with the popolo minuto, had 
excited this sedition ; and finding that these, thinking the prison- 
ers safe, had begun to disperse, they attacked them with great 
fury, slew many, put the rest to flight, recovered the prisoners, 
and cut off their heads, to the number of sixty-five, among whom 
were several principal characters." 

The union of the plebeians, the popolo minuto, with the nobles 
and Ghibellines, against the government of the commons and 
Guelphs, is not less remarkable than the distinction established 
by their very title between the commons and people. Both are 
perfectly natural, for the popolo grasso can never bear to be mixed 
with the popolo minuto, any more than nobles to be confounded 
with commons; and the union of the laborers and mechanics 
with the nobles, against a government of dogmatical merchants, 
by whom they were oppressed, was as natural as that which has 
so often happened, of the people with a monarch, against the 

236 ON GOYEENMENT. 

tyranny of nobles and patricians. The general sense of the city 
upon this occasion appears to have been in favor of the nobles, 
and their opportunity was lost merely by the weakness of the 
human understanding, which seldom knows how to seize with 
promptitude and decision the critical moment that decides so 
many great events. The Qhibellines were not, however, sup- 
pressed ; they continued to assemble in the country, and unite in 
bodies from various cities, and commit frequent depredations, 
laying waste the country both of Florence and Siena. These 
civil wars continued, vdthout interruption, between the cities and 
their exiles, with various fortune, till 1292, when Siena became 
so weak, and the government so tyrannical, as to force the nobles 
to sell their lands, houses, and castles, to bear the expense of 
defending that government from which they were so arbitrarily 
excluded. Prosecuting the war abroad against the Ghibellines, 
and plundering the nobles at home, they suppressed both at last, 
and began to entertain lofty thoughts; at the public expense 
they built magnificent palaces for the signori of the conmions of 
Siena, to give the government more authority, majesty, and 
strength, and the more effectually to trample down the pride of 
the nobility. 

^ To this end, as the ambitious desires of men are insatiable, 
although Siena was at full peace, and without the least suspicion 
or apinehcnsion of the Ghibellines, the nine magistrates, who 
had the absolute power of the city, taking occasion of the many 
private enmities and personal hatreds which had grown up, and 
were habitual and even hereditary between many noble families, 
ordered that four hundred men should always stand in arms in 
each third of the city, on the pretence of obviating any scandal- 
ous rencounter that might suddenly arise between one family and 
another. To these standing guards they gave arms and ensigns, 
with orders that, at the ringing of the bells, they should all march 
to the piazza ; and a complete arrangement of orders was given, 
that at the call of the magistrates they should be ready to quell 
the scandals and quarreb which, to the great danger of the public 
as well as private persons, they said, arose from the discord of 
the gentlemen ; and to prevent the gentlemen in such cases from 
moving on horseback or otherwise, they placed at the head of 
every street, and even at every comer, an enormous iron chain, 
to be drawn upon occasion across the street, and prevent their 

SnSNA. 237 

• 

passage. Under this color of preventing disorders and tnmnlts, 
to be occasioned by the discords among the noble houses, the 
popular party were thus armed without opposition, not so much 
to prevent the pretended disorders, as to secure themselves from 
any attempt of the nobles, if ever they should unite to reinstate 
themselves in their dignities, and obtain a restoration to that 
share in the government which was their undoubted right" 

For the consciences of these mercantile demagogues must 
have taught them, that if the nobles had no more, they had at 
least an equal right with themselves, or any others, to partici- 
pate in government; and thus those public arms, which had 
been provided by their ancestors for the conservation of their 
country and their liberties, were now most insolently converted 
into the weapons of civil war, and turned by the cunning of one 
party against the rights of another; and whether this plague 
of the city of Siena, and all the other republics of Italy, was 
produced by the natural pride of the nobility^ impatiently borne 
by the people, or by the immoderate jealousy and envy of the 
people, or whether by both together, it was not the less fatal 
to fldl the Tuscan republics, by conducting them to that destruc* 
tion, to which all republics have been devoted when subjected 
to any government in one centre, whether that centre be the 
unbridled licentiousness of the multitude, or the ambitious and 
avaricious discords of the few. 

^ The nobles were at this period persecuted, not only in Siena, 
but in all the other cities of Tuscany, and deprived of all share 
in government; and those who were in power held in such 
detestation the very name of nobility, that, thinking the judg- 
ments of others would keep pace with their own passions, they 
ordained by public laws, that such as would formally and 
solemnly renounce their nobility, emd declare that they were no 
gentlemen, should become qualified to be in the government, and 
to be admitted into the supreme magistracy ; in such contempt 
were held, at this time and by these men, those advantages and 
that character, which in otiier places have ever been most ar- 
dently desired and sought, at every hazard of life and fortune, and 
which the sons and descendants of these very merchants have 
with so much avidity since claimed, insisting on being entitled 
to the rank and title of nobles and gentlemen, merely because 
descended from magistrates holding the power of the state. 

238 ON GOVERNMENT. 

^' Having thus excluded all gentlemen from the administration 
of the republic, and extinguished all their hopes of ever recover- 
ing it, these tyrants, the nine magistrates, had the assurance to 
constitute a new regimen, which, under the name of a popular 
government, tended more to give the power to a few, than to 
distribute it generally ; and this restriction to a few, although it 
was injurious and oppressive to some, is said to have been more 
useful to the state, and of longer duration, than if it had been 
relaxed in favor of the many." 

Perhaps it is universally true, that if the whole government 
must reside in a single assembly, it is more safe, peaceful, and 
durable in a few hands than in many, an aristocracy than a 
democracy. 

"Having modelled the government according to their own 
passions, interest, and convenience, they proceeded to subdue 
the rebellious mountains and castles in the country. It was in 
this year, 1299, the house of Austria had its origin, in the 
elevation of Albert to the empire. The wars against the Turks, 
and in Sicily and Flanders, occupied the spirits in some degree 
till 1302, when the many enmities among the noble houses in 
Siena were renewed with as much boldness and violence as 
ever, which occasioned frequent tumults and continual agitation 
in the city ; parties meeting in arms, sometimes upon one incident 
and sometimes on another, and many of all sides falling vic- 
tims to their fury ; and, from the number of clients and adhe- 
rents to these families, all the orders of government for main- 
taining in each third of the city an armed guard were not 
sufficient to preserve the peace ; and the magistrates feared they 
would not long be able to keep the nobles out of the govern- 
ment ; they therefore thought it prudent to try another method. 
When any quarrel broke out, the nine magistrates sent for the 
heads of those families which were engaged in the brawl, and 
endeavored to reconcile them ; and in this way they succeeded, 
in some degree, to reconcile the Malavolti and Salimbeni, the 
Gigli and Squarcialupi, the Piccolomini and Pelacani, the Te- 
golei and Malavolti, and many others. 

" The major part of the Guelph cities of Tuscany, in 1303, 
were delivered from the discords and dangers which they had 
with the Ghibellines, in consequence of the victory obtained 
over them at Campaldino ; but having nobody to fight with, as 

SIENA. 239 

if they were incapable of quiet and impatient of rest, the Guelphs 
divided themselves into two factions, the one called Bianchi, 
and the other Neri. This pernicious distinction had its begin- 
ning in Pistoia, in the family of the Cancellieri, whence, spread- 
ing through many other cities, it infected the whole province of 
Tuscany, and part of Romagna. The city of Siena, though 
naturally inclined to divisions, preserved itself some time from 
this venomous contagion, chiefly by the constant occupation it 
already had in the quarrels between the people and the gentle- 
men, which would not allow time for new contests. This divi- 
sion, however, broke out in Florence, very near them in neigh- 
borhood, where, after many skirmishes in arms, the Bianchi were 
overcome by the Neri, and expelled from the city; and all the 
influence of the pope, with his spiritual armor, could not recon- 
cile them. The Bianchi now in exile, though Guelphs, united 
with the Ghibellines, and, assisted by the Aretines and Bolonese 
of the same faction, made an attempt, in 1304, upon Florence ; 
but some cavalry, sent from Siena, put them to flight" 

The detail of altercations and civil wars, within and without, 
between these complicated and contradictory mixtures of Neri 
and Bianchi, Guelphs and Ghibellines, nobles and commons, 
from this time to 1309, is too minute to be related, although 
there was no pause, no interval of quiet. In this year the 
quarrels between the nobles, particularly the families of Tolom- 
mei and Salimbeni, arising merely from their envy of each other, 
and their emulation in feasting and entertainments, broke out 
anew. Though excluded from government, though plundered in 
property, these families had still admirers, followers, and ad- 
herents among the people, who made them formidable to the 
magistrates, and gave them influence to weaken the government, 
more than they possibly could have had with their whole share 
in a well-constituted state. All the nobles, with their followers, 
who were very numerous, as well as the multitude of people, 
their friends and adherents in the counties or signories in the 
country, became divided by this private quarrel into two parties. 
Wonderful was the jealousy of those in government, and their 
apprehensions for the safety of the state ; and to secure it, as 
they pretended, from all danger that might arise, to repress the 
temerity and pride of the seditious, they ordained, that for every 
company, in town or country, which consisted, in all, of forty-two 

240 ON GOVERNMENT. 

since the nobility were excluded, there shonid be appointed one 
captain and one gonfalonier, as there used to be anciently, when 
the city raised an army for the field ; that this militia, whenever 
any tumult was to be apprehended, and in all other emergencies, 
should hold their men in arms (but none of the nobility were to 
be admitted among them, as they were in former times, when 
the companies were of fifty-nine) and together, under the com- 
mand of the gonfalonier of the Third, should march in all haste 
to the palace with their public ensigns, and there execute the 
orders which should be given them by the magistracy of the Nine. 
For the same purpose they organized three centurions, three com- 
manders of brigades, and eleven vicariates, each of whom had 
his own distinct ensigns and colors. 

" But by this whole system of forty-two armed companies, 
their captains, gonfaloniers, and centurions, formed in appear^ 
ance for the common service, and under color of suppressing the 
feuds of the grandees, the principals of the party who governed 
the city, thought to pursue their own inordinate desire of reduc- 
ing the government to a smaller number of persons, by means 
of the public arms, of which, through this artifice, they made 
themselves masters. They therefore prohibited not only the 
noblemen, but many of those popular persons who had, many 
years before, ennobled themselves, and acquired the name of 
families, to enjoy the benefit of the law which, in the beginning 
of the present form of government had been made, that those 
who would renounce their nobility, and reduce themselves to the 
popular order, should be capable of being magistrates. Taking 
advantage of a little tumult on the twenty-sixth of May, 1310, 
which they themselves excited, they sounded the alarm, and 
called together at the palace their whole military force ; and in- 
stead of proceeding to suppress riots, or punish criminals, it was 
there declared, by those citizens who had arrogated to themselves 
ihe whole government, that those families which were named 
in writing should never be of the number of popular families, 
but they and their descendants, forever, should be understood to 
be grandees, and incapable of serving in the office of the Nine, 
then the supreme magistracy, as all of the Ohibelline party had 
been rendered incapable before ; and this practice was common 
at this period in all the other cities of Tuscany, as well as in 
Siena, whenever the governing party had a mind to exclude any 

SIENA. 241 

man from the magistracy, to make him a grandee, which is the 
same thing as a noble. Ninety families were admonished^ as 
the phrase was, that is, rendered incapable of the magistracy, 
for being noble, or for being made and declared so — a number 
that comprehended all the families of any distinction or con- 
sideration. 

" Having thus reduced the government to a small number, by 
excluding everybody but themselves, they became very assidu- 
ous in* attending the magistracy, in order to make the most of 
it ; and in a short time they acquired so great an authority, so 
much wealth and power, that they became formidable not only 
to the nobles, but to that part of the people which was not 
admitted by them into the government Holding down all others, 
they established their own power in the state so oligarchically, 
that, like other despots, they were obeyed by every one from 
fear. The Ghibelline exiles, however, made frequent inroads 
upon their territories ; and the disqualified families had so many 
friends, that these nine magistrates were kept in continual 
alarms. In 1313, some of the nobles appeared to have so much 
influence, that the government thought it necessary to reenact 
and republish their militia law, and the law of exclusion of all 
the nobles and grandees, depriving them of all the honors, offices, 
and privileges of the commons. They sometimes thought them- 
selves so secure that they might recall their exiles, then would 
suddenly seize and imprison them ; and were generally employed 
in foreign or domestic wars, or in quelling some rebellion, till 
1315, when a fresh quarrel broke out between the Tolommei and 
Salimbeni,two noble families, and produced tumults and battles 
in the streets, in which much blood was shed, and the city thrown 
into such confusion, that the militia, when called out, would not, 
or could not, obey the orders either of the magistrates or their 
own officers. The whole people took arms, and sided with one 
party and another, some for government, some for the Tolommei, 
some for the Salimbeni, till the Nine issued a proclamation, that, 
upon penalty of life and fortune, both parties should appear in 
their presence, before a candle, which they had burning, should 
be consumed. 

"Wars and tumults occupied the citizens till 1318, when, upon 
the disbanding the army at the peace with the city of Massa, 
the troops and the people in general, who expected to have plun- 

VOL. V. 21 P 

242 ON GOVERNMENT. 

dered it, were very discontented, and two classes of tradesmen, 
the smiths and the butchers, began a riot in the city against 
their captain, calling him traitor, and collecting tumultuous 
bodies of the multitude. The captain, finding himself in great 
danger, contrived to escape their fury, in which he was favored 
by some noblemen, who, by entertaining the people with soft 
words, composed their anger ; and, as they had neither any head 
nor guide, they were easily persuaded to go home. Although 
this tumult was quieted in appearance, the minds of the citizens 
were much altered, and there was danger of fresh commotions. 
To avoid greater inconvenience, seeing that the greater part of 
the plebeians stood in arms through *fear, with their shops shut, 
to defend themselves from punishment, the magistrates absolved 
them from all penalties incurred by those who had been in 
arms in the late tumult, and commanded, under grievous pe- 
nalties, that every one laying down his arms should return to 
his business. It would have been a remarkable thing, if, in 
a factious city, like Siena, quieted as it was from foreign 
wars, new seditions and civil wars had not been fomented 
within; but discontents with the government were now uni- 
versal. The nobility, the plebeians, and the middling people, 
being all excluded from the government, excepting the nine, 
were all oppressed and all provoked. The doctors, as they called 
the judges and notaries, were of a rank and character as nearly 
in the middle between the nobles and plebeians as any. These, 
excited as much by the persuasions of the other persons, as 
moved by their own interest, came forward and demanded or 
petitioned the Nine to be admitted into the government of the 
city, and to be declared capable of serving in the supreme 
magistracy of the republic. Reasons the most solid and cogent, 
as they thought, were urged by them, to show that their preten- 
sions were but just and reasonable. It appeared to the nine 
signori, that this petition was impertinent, and an offence that 
merited not only correction, but a severe chastisement ; and hav- 
ing rejected it with much bitterness, they decreed the punish- 
ment of which those should be adjudged worthy, who, from such 
interested motives^ should seek to disturb the civil orders, and 
interrupt the common quiet of the city. The doctors and nota- 
ries they dismissed from their offices, and declared them incapable 
of holding any office in the city or country, 'this high-spfrited 

SIENA. 243 

edict excited the indignation and despair of the doctors and 
notaries, and they entered into a conspiracy with the butchers, 
smiths, and other plebeians, to assassinate the whole nine, with 
all their adherents, take possession of the palace, make them- 
selves masters of the state, and appoint one of the Tolommei, who 
favored the enterprise, podesta, another nobleman captain, a third 
proconsul, and thus to distribute all the offices of state among 
their leaders in the conspiracy. 

"With this intention, on the twenty-sixth of October, 1318, the 
conspirators arose in a tumult, raised a loud cry against the nine, 
and demanded, with arms in their hands, a participation in the 
government ; but they were soon met by a large body of cavalry 
and three hundred infantry, who were then kept in pay, to be 
sent to Genoa in the service of King Robert, and whom the nine 
magistrates, having some intimation of this enterprise, not wil- 
ling to trust their own guards alone, had ordered out, for their secu- 
rity. A furious battle ensued, and much bravery was displayed 
on both sides ; but as the commotion had been excited by the 
plebeians themselves, and was encouraged but faintly by the 
nobility, chiefly with a view to try their strength, the forces of 
government prevailed; yet the plebeians sustained the shock 
with more firmness than was expected ; and if they had been 
judicious enough to wait till the regular troops were gone to 
Grenoa, would have carried their point The greater part of the 
gonfaloniers, centurions, and captains, concurred with the multi- 
tude, in desiring to acquire the benefits of civil life, and the rights 
of citizens ; but the magistrates were favored by one part of the 
gentlemen, who were not well pleased that the government of 
the city should be reduced totally into the hands of the plebeians, 
and thus obtained from Florence some forces, under the command 
of one Bingeri Rucellai, by whose assistance the multitude, 
being first disheartened by the non-appearance of their leaders, 
were finally dispersed. Some of the leaders of the butchers, &c. 
were beheaded, and Rucellai rewarded with the ensign of the 
white lion, the arms of the people of Siena. 

" When the tumult was quieted, and the city purged by the 
punishment of the principal delinquents, the nine sent succors 
to King Robert at Genoa, and to the Guelphs at Brescia, Cre- 
mona, and Perugia ; and thus they became employed in all the 
wars abroad ; but even this was not enough, in 1324, to prevent 

244 ON GOVERNMENT. 

the feuds between the two noble families, the Tolommei and Sa« 
limbeni, whose hatred produced many murders and assassina- 
tions, many other single combats, besides general and more 
sanguinary actions between parties of their followers in the 
streets, both by night and by day. In 1325, the Guelphs were 
defeated by Castruccio Castracani, Signor of Lucca, near the 
castle of Altopascio, where he made a great slaughter, and many 
prisoners, and brought both Florence and Siena into imminent 
danger ; but this was not sufEcient to prevent another tumult, in 
which the podesta took one part, and the captain another; many 
were insulted, some slain, nor was the disorder suppressed with- 
out grievous fines and capital punishments. 

" In 1326, Walter, Duke of Athens, vicar of the Duke of Cala- 
bria in Florence, came to Siena, and demanded the signory of 
that city, in the same manner as he had obtained that of Flo- 
rence. The demand appeared to the citizens very strange, 
though they treated him with great magnificence. They thought 
it proceeded from a very bad principle, and worse intention, con- 
sidering the sincere and affectionate attachment which they and 
their ancestors had ever, with the utmost veneration, demon- 
strated for his house, and the great and many tokens of fidelity, 
which might be known from their actions towards King Robert, 
Kings Chailes I. and II., and towards all their connections on all 
occasions ; and as it appeared to them, that they were outrage- 
ously insulted, and by him from whom they least expected it, they 
suddenly rose in a great tumult in arms, and, drawing the chains 
across the streets, shut up their gates, lest the Florentines should 
send a reinforcement They not only prepared for defence, but, 
their suspicions increasing, also to attack with all their forces, the 
lodgings of the duke himself at the bishop's palace, and give 
battle to his people. Such a commotion and concourse of so 
numerous an armed multitude, under so many standards of their 
companies and vicariates, demonstrating that in this the city was 
united, and not divided, as had been represented to the duke, 
upon the stipposition of which division he had founded his de- 
mand, spread a terror among his followers ; and demanding to 
speak with the magistrates, it was agreed, that the requisition 
of the duke should be referred to a senate. Such an assembly 
was accordingly congregated, to the number of four hundred and 
eighty senators, who, after long debates, having regard both to 

SIENA. 245 

the liberty of the republic and the honor of the duke, determined 
that Charles, Duke of Calabria, should have, for five years, and 
no longer, power to elect the podesta of Siena from the number 
of three, who should be proposed to him by the people of Siena ; 
that he should not, however, be called podesta, but vicar of the 
duke, on condition that every vicar, before he should take upon 
him the office, should take an oath to observe the laws and sta- 
tutes of the city of Siena ; and the citizens well knowing of how 
much detriment to cities are divisions and animosities, the duke 
easily persuaded the Salimbeni and Tolommei to make a truce 
for five years." 

In 1328, the nine magistrates made a census, or description of 
the families of the city, third by third, and there were found ele- 
ven thousand seven hundred and eleven heads of families in the 
whole, nobles, grandees, substantial people, and lesser people 
all together. The calamities of famine and pestilence, as well 
as war and sedition, which happened in 1329 and 1330, though 
the magistracy of nine discovered too much insensibility, and 
too little activity, to relieve the people, we pass over as evils not 
proceeding immediately from the form of government, and too 
afflicting to humanity to be related. 

In 1331, a fresh affiray happened between the two great fami- 
lies of Salimbeni and Tolommei. The inveteracy with which 
ancient and honored families take hold of a nation, and become 
interwoven with each other and the whole people, so that it is 
impossible to get rid of their influence, appears very strongly on 
this occasion. Though excluded and robbed, they could not 
dispute without setting the whole city to disputing. The ren- 
counter between two noblemen, in which one was killed, pro- 
duced the assassination of another, and the whole city took the 
part of the one or the other, and tumults and commotions in 
arms threatened universal ruin, till the government issued a 
proclamation against the two principal actors, offered rewards for 
their lives as assassins, and raised a force to confirm it, which 
obliged them to fly to Ferrara, where they and the other Tolom- 
mei, their descendants, were long afterwards known by the 
nickname of The Assassins. But this could not prevent fresh 
tumults and homicides in Siena, between the same families in 
1332; nor others between the Malavolti and Piccolomini, in 
1333, which were renewed in 1334, notwithstanding the employ- 

21* 

246 ON GOVERNMENT. 

ment the city had, through this whole period, in foreign affairs. 
In 1335, the league was renewed between the Guelph cities, and 
particularly between Siena and Florence. In 1337, an accommo- 
dation was attempted between the quarrelsome nobles, but with- 
out much effect ; but in 1342 their ungovernable passions broke 
out again in homicides and general tumults. 

"In 1343, the Duke of Athens attempted to promote his own 
ambitious views of obtaining the sovereignty of Siena, by pre- 
tending to mediate between the nobles and the nine, and to 
reconcile them with each other ; but his dissimulation was not 
profound enough to deceive either party. In this year there were 
three conspiracies at once against the Duke of Athens at Flo- 
rence, and the government of Siena sent ambassadors to his 
assistance; but the people in their fury had committed great 
disorders and many homicides, and finally besieged the Duke in 
his palace for a time, and then drove him out of the city ; after 
which, by the advice of the Sienese ambassadors, they reformed 
their government, instituting eight priori, four of them noble, 
and four popular ; but this form was soon demolished, and the 
government became as popular as that of Siena itself; the 
nobles were excluded, and tempted to renounce their nobility, in 
the same manner, and with the same whimsical, odious, and 
vicious effects. 

"In 1344, the Counts of Santa Fiore, and the Visconti de 
Campiglia were made citizens of Siena, and subjected their 
lands to the republic." In the year 1346, another memorable 
commotion happened. " Such is the nature of the people, that, 
ever desirous of seeing new things, they frequently hold in con- 
tempt those that are present ; governed more by their wills than 
their prudence, and excited by vain hopes and immoderate 
desires, they are too often easily stimulated to enterprises, which, 
if regarded with an eye of reason, would be found impracticable. 
The government of the nine, by the length of time, by their 
arbitrary exclusions, and by their more arbitrary restriction to so 
small a numbet, were grown so odious, not only to the nobles, 
but to a great part of the multitude, that neither could patiently 
bear that a few popular men should enjoy every thing, and be 
masters of all men, when it appeared to them that others had 
more merit. From conversations and consultations they pro- 
ceeded to action, and many popular men having associated 

SIENA. 247 

Tincler Spinelloccio Tolommei, they rose in a mighty tumult" 
There is no room to doubt that they would have risen long 
before, and not have suffered such a government to stand a 
month, nor indeed to be erected at all, il' the Tolommei and 
Salimbeni, the Malavolti and Piccolomini, could have agreed 
who should be the leader. The divisions of the nobles among 
themselves had alone lost them the government, and pre- 
vented their recovering it The people in those days, and in 
that city, were utterly incapable of planning or executing any 
enterprise whatever. "A noisy uproar of *Down with the 
Nine ! ' * ran through the city ; but the insurgents, not having 
been able to force the palace, and having in vain attempted to 
enter several houses of the nine magistrates, which were well 
guarded, some of them entered the house of Berto di Lotto, 
where there happened to be an entertainment, and found John 
Foscherani, one of the principal men in the government Him, 
with his son, who exerted himself nobly in defence of his father, 
they slew. The perpetrators of this murder, intimidated with the 
apprehension of punishment for what they had done, and per- 
haps made cowards by remorse of conscience, rushed out of the 
house, and committed themselves to flight for safety ; the rest 
retired to the houses of the heads of the conspiracy, thinking to 
assemble a great number of their partisans, and again to try 
their fortune. This attempt, however ill-digested and unsuccess- 
ful, excited a terror in the magistrates, perceiving that a part of 
the nobility had concurred in it, and fearing they had not force 
sufficient to suppress it They found means, however, to defend 
themselves, by a strong guard, in the palace, till they received 
assistance from Florence, and other places in alliance with them, 
which enabled them, by means of the captain of war, to appre- 
hend the conspirators, many of whom were beheaded, and others 
declared rebels ; after which, they entered into a new league with 
the popular government of Florence, for mutual support against 
such insurrections. This convention was concluded between 
the syndics of the commons of Florence, and the syndics of the 
commons of Siena, each party obliging itself to aid, favor, and 
support, with their councils and arms, the other, and in every 
way to operate for the conservation and maintenance of the 

* 

* Muoiaao i Nore. 

248 ON GOVERNMENT. 

peace between them, and the internal tranquillity of each, under 
the office of the signori, priori of the arts, and the gonfalonier of 
justice in Florence, and that of the signori of the nine governors 
and defenders of the commons and people of Siena, declaring 
that whatever conspiracy or insurrection should be made against 
the magistrates or government of either city, should be under- 
stood to be made against the other, and its whole force exerted 
for the destruction of the conspirators. 

" In 1348, another confederation was formed in Siena between 
the cities of Florence, Siena, Arezzo, and Perugia, and a large 
army raised by them; and in 1352, another against the Visconti. 
In 1354, being at peace, and without much apprehension of any 
foreign war, there did not fail to arise in Siena persons who 
spent their time in exciting new discontents as well as foment- 
ing old humors, which they hoped would soon arise to seditions 
and civil war ; for those who, with the authority of the Nine, had 
so long governed the city, had acquired, together with great 
power and immense riches, much envy among their fellow- 
citizens. This envy and resentment had, upon many occasions, 
given birth to conspiracies and various enterprises for wresting 
the authority out of their hands ; and although they had defend- 
ed themselves, and punished the principal delinquents, they had 
never been able to eradicate the seeds of sedition so effectually 
but that many remains of it were left in the minds of their 
adherents, which went on continually increasing by time, till the 
magistrates were seriously apprehensive that the common people 
would attach themselves to Charles, the emperor, and by his as- 
sistance depose them. Desirous of possessing themselves first of 
his favor, and moved by the persuasions of one of the Salimbeni, 
whom, on account of his enmity to many of the noble houses, 
they had taken into their confidence, they sent ambassadors to 
Charles, to offer him the obedience of the city ; and, so ill a 
counsellor is fear, the majority, much against the judgment of 
many of their colleagues, were for submitting freely, without any 
exception, or making any conditions, hoping by his assistance, 
or at least without offence to him, or opposition from him, to 
reestablish their authority ; not considering, that having always 
been Guelphs, and by so many offences provoked the past 
emperors, particularly Henry VII, his grandfather, it would be 
impossible for him to judge whether they submitted from any 

SIENA. 249 

motive other than fear or necessity, or to confide in their fidel- 
ity. But the hour was come when this form of government must 
be changed into another. "Charles having in all appearance 
benignly accepted the offer, dissimulating his intentions, came to 
Siena; and soon after his arrival, the little people, il popolo 
minuto, by Charles's orders, and guided by the Tolommei, Mala- 
volti, Piccolomini, Saraceni, and even some of the Salimbeni, with 
a great and universal commotion of the whole city, rose and drove 
out of the public palace the nine magistrates, not without rob- 
beries and murders committed by the rabble, who burnt the 
caskets and boxes in which were kept the ballots of the nine 
ma^strates, which every two months were drawn, one by each 
magistrate, for two months to come. Charles, by whose consent 
and orders this novelty had been committed, gave a commission 
to twenty citizens, twelve popular and eight noble, to think of a 
new plan of government The twenty elected for this purpose, 
in three days, ordained that a new magistracy should be instituted, 
of twelve popular members, and entitled The Twelve Signori, 
governors and administrators of the commonwealth of Siena, to 
be elected four from each third of the city, and, as the nine had 
done, to reside in the palace at the public expense, and to be 
changed every two months, with full authority in every respect 
to administer the government of the republic, in company, in all 
their deliberations, with twelve noblemen, four for each third, 
who might inhabit the city in their own houses, without being 
obliged to live in the palace, except when they should be sum- 
moned to assemble with the twelve signori for the public service 
and despatch of business, as it should occur ; and this number 
of noblemen were called the College^ without whom the signori 
could not come to any resolution, or enter on any deliberation 
relative to the government of the city. A council, moreover, of 
four hundred citizens was ordained, one hundred and fifty of 
whom were to be nobles, and two hundred and fifty populars, 
(of those, however, who had not been of the office of the nine,) 
who were to be elected and changed every six months, and this 
was called the General Council. The Emperor Charles IV., after 
he had taken the crown, returned from Rome, and remained some 
days at Siena ; where, finding little good understanding between 
the people and the nobility, he took occasion from their discord 
to attempt to make himself master of the city and the state, and 

250 ON GOVERNMENT. 

to invest it in the Patriarch of Aquilea, his natural brother. To 
this end he courted the people, making many demonstrations of 
benevolence, with many favors which he did them in public and 
private ; and he so operated upon them that they were content 
to give him tlie sovereignty, and put him in possession of the 
fortresses ; and the patriarch having in this manner taken the 
government of the city, the twelve signori and the noble college 
finished their office. The emperor, felicitating hhuself that he 
had provided his brother with a beautiful dominion, took leave 
of Siena, and went to Pisa. There, entering into negotiations 
to make himself master, as he had done at Siena, he met with 
some difficulties, which soon multiplied upon him, in consequence 
of the novelties which sprung up in Siena; where one party of 
the citizens, not able to support the sovereignty of the patriarch, 
which trampled down the nobles and first populars, and studiously 
strove to aggrandize the common people and the multitude, upon 
whom he justly thought his greatness depended, arose in arms, 
closed the gates of the city, and demanded that the magistrates 
of the signori of the twelve governors and administrators should 
return and reside in the palace, and, together with the college, 
reassume the government of the republic; and that the chains 
which used to be drawn across the streets, but on the entrance 
of the emperor had been taken away, should be replaced. Three 
days the city stood under arms, before they obtained of the 
patriarch their demand. At length the magistrates were rein- 
stated and the chains replaced. 

A new rumor was then spread in the city about certain 
strangers who had been taken up, because they said that they 
had come for the service of some noblemen. The common 
people, from jealousy, and suspicion of plots and machinations, 
would have had them hanged ; but the nobility, with many of 
the* greater people, defended them. Upon these occasions there 
was no adequate mode of deciding such questions but by arms ; 
to these they accordingly resorted, and the twelve signori sent to 
Pisa to demand aid from the emperor, who was found in great 
perplexity ; and fearing that, by the inconstancy of the people, 
the patriarch might meet with some fatal accident, he answered, 
that, upon condition they would consult his brother's safety, they 

* Molti de' xnaggiori popularL 

SIENA. 251 

might model their government as they should think proper ; that 
he would not take any part, as he had no particular knowledge 
of their disputes. The prisoners were therefore only confined, 
and the patriarch voluntarily renounced the sovereignty to the 
twelve magistrates, who were already returned to the palace, and 
the day following restored the fortresses, and joined the emperor 
in Pisa, leaving the city and state free, and the government, 
which he had held for a few days, ii» the hands of those magis- 
trates from whom he received it 

" In this manner the government of the nine came to an end, 
who had governed with so much boldness from 1283, when this 
form had its beginning, under the protection of the King of 
Naples and the union of the Guelph cities in Tuscany, and, it 
must be owned, aggrandized the republic;^ and those very men 
of the popular side who had been of the nine, were not only 
deprived, with all their descendants, of the capacity of being in 
the government of the twelve, but it was by a law enacted that, 
in the volume of the statutes, the word nine should be erased, 
and the word twelve written in its place; in such abhorrence 
were they now held by all men." These decrees of the new 
government, it is true, were as arbitrary a3 any of the former ; 
but the whole history of this republic is but a series of changes 
from one unbalanced party to another. " The citizens who had 
held the last government were nicknamed the nine; and this 
name descended by inheritance to their posterity, and gave rise 
to the order of the nine, and became the principle of those 
divisions, which went on increasing among the people of this 
city, and became so sanguinary as to make them forget the dis- 
tinctions of Guelphs and Ghibellines, nobles and populars ; for 
after the government of the republic became again entirely vested 
in the hands of the populars, and then again restricted to a few, the 
desire constantly increased in the multitude, first to participate, 
then to monopolize the whole, as happened in the creation of the 
twelve, who became eligible exclusively from the pqpolo minuto. 

^ A Sienne, le gouTemement n'^toit plus dans lea mains du peuple ; une oli- 
garchie roturi^re, sous le nom d'ordre des neuf, s^en ^toit empare. Quelques 
ambitieux avoient profit^ avec artifice du mode d*^lection aux magistratureSf pour 
concentrer en depit des lois et de la constitution, Tautoritjfe entre Ics mains de 
Guatre-vingt-dix citoyens. Dans rint^rieur, ils se maintenoient centre la haine 
des nobles et du peuple, par la corruption et la brigue. Au dehors, ils esp^roient 
s'agrandir par la perfidie. Sismondi, Repvb. Hal, vol. ri. p. 222. 

252 ON GOVERNMENT. 

"The emperor returned to Germany, and the Sienese sooh 
found their new system as defective as the former.^ The whole 
government was still in one assembly ; and though the nobles 
were less than half of it, they appeared to have the whole power, 
as they always will when mixed with the commons. The noble- 
men proceeded in their offices too arbitrarily; the splendor of 
their birth and riches, accompanied with the public authority, 
acquired them too much credit, too imposing an influence ; and, 
in their usual strain, according to the lofty pride of their natures, 
they must needs govern all things. In order to carry into effect 
their desire to reduce them, as well as to establish their own 
authority, the popular party would forthwith have gone to arms, 
had not an unexpected accident compelled them to change their 
purpose. In the expulsion of the nine, the dependencies of the 
state, seeing so great an alteration in the dty, and that those 
who had been used to command were deprived of all power, and 
persecuted with so much cruelty and rancor by the other citizens, 
thought that by such divisions the public must be too much 
weeJsened to defend the city, much less the state. Embracing 
this opportunity, Grosetto, Massa, Montalcino, Monte Pulciano, 
Casole, and other lands in the jurisdiction of Siena, refused obe- 
dience to the magistrates of the city, and to the patriarch, during 
the few days that he held the sovereignty. The new government, 
and especially the nobles, were very zealous to send out forces 
to suppress these rebellions, and succeeded against Massa ; but 
the inhabitants of Monte Pulciano attempted to practise a deceit; 
they sent a false letter to the twelve, promising submission, in 
order to amuse them, while they were in reality carrying on their 
military opemtions. This letter was delivered to the twelve 
signori, who, without calling in the twelve of the coUege,^ as, 
according to the constitution, they ought to have done, opened 
and read it; and perceiving, by many manifest circumstances, 
the imposition, they hanged up in the piazza him who had 
brought the letter. The multitude were collected together by 
this execution, and the nobles were much exasperated that the 

1 Ainai, la rivolutioii avoit change les personnes qui gonTemoient, elle ayoit 
cbang6 leur nombre et leure titres ; mais elle avoit conserve tous les memes piin- 
cipes ; et sur les mines d'une olisarehie roturi^ref elle en avoit ^lev^ une autare 
plus roturidre encore. Sismonch, Ripuh. Ital, vol. vL p. 234. 

s The twelve nobles. See, for the nature of their office, p. 249. 

SDENA. 253 

letter had been opened and such business done without their 
knowledge, and contrary to order. The popular leaders of the 
day took occasion of this commotion to accomplish their own 
desires ; sallied out with a great noise of arms ; put themselves 
at the head of the mob ; went to the houses of many noblemen 
and of the nine, with intention to put all to pillage, and force the 
noblemen to renounce the magistracy of the college ; and would 
have proceeded to infamous lengths, if the gravest and most 
moderate citizens had not appeared, and persuaded the nobles 
to obviate all inconveniences by renouncing the government, in 
which they had discovered the best and sincerest intentions 
towards their country, and not more arbitrary dispositions than 
the popular men. The council next day ordered that three 
noblemen only, one for each third, should be admitted into the 
government, with the title of the Three Defenders ; but these in 
a few days were deposed. That similar tumults might not 
happen every hour, and throw all things into confusion, they 
concluded to give a head to the twelve magistrates and the 
public arms, by whose orders alone the gonfaloniers, captains of 
companies, and centurions were to move. Instead of a captain 
of the people, whom they used to elect among foreigners every 
six months, they ordained that some citizen of Siena should be 
elected every two months; that he should be of the popular 
party, and one of the twelve administrators and governors, at 
whose deliberations he should be present as a member. The 
captain was afterwards commonly elected in addition to the 
number of twelve. The government thus organized, they pro- 
ceeded against the rebels. 

" Before the end of the same year, 1355, the plot of Grano di 
Benedetto Macellaro, and his friends, was discovered. These 
were the principal heads of the plebeians, the Uttle people,-^ that 
very faction that governed the city. Considering that, by the 
inconstancy of their own multitude, it might happen to their 
government of twelve as it had happened to the nine, they 
determined, for greater security and firmness to the state, to 
reduce the government into the hands of one man, who, from 
his wisdom, virtues, and the public authority, might, by crushing 

1 " 11 popolo mintUo" The English words Utile and greai^ constantly used by 
the author, are not free from ambiguity. In modem politics, conservative and 
radical come nearest to the ideas. 

VOL. V. 22 

254 ON GOVERNMENT. 

all seditions, consolidate and maintain it. Signor Meio di M. 
Jacomo Tolommei, who they knew had been always favorable 
to the plebeians, and desirous of making himself powerful by 
this means to defend their liberty, was selected by them as the 
man of the people ; to him they communicated their intentions, 
and found him very well disposed to conform. Other writers 
have said, that the first motion came from Meio, who persuaded 
the heads of the plebeians to confer with their friends ; however 
this might be, they were all seen frequently together in the 
house of Meio, to consult upon measures for the execution of 
their plan. The visits so often made by so many plebeians to 
this house were observed ; and the twelve magistrates conceiving 
a suspicion, gave orders to the conservator, who had been in- 
troduced instead of the captain of war in criminal matters, to 
imprison Grano, and the others, who were heads of the con- 
spiracy. Upon examination they confessed, that it was their 
intention, for the public good, to take the government from the 
twelve, and give it to Meio Tolommei, who might more easily 
preserve the city free from seditions and civil wars. Gano's 
head was struck off; and the others, who enjoyed the favor 
of some grandee, a thing that in ill-constituted cities is eternally 
superior to justice, were confined ; but Meio and many others, 
who had fled from Siena, were declared rebels, and his palace 
was demolished. 

" In the year 1357, the Emperor Charles IV. confirmed all the 
privileges of this popular government, and made the magistrate 
who governed the city of Siena vicar of the emperor. 

" In 1362, Giovanni de' Salimbeni, upon receiving some injury, 
or at least taking some offence at the government, made himself 
the head of a conspiracy of many noblemen and many of those 
popular men who, as of the magistracy of the nine, had been 
admonished, and rendered incapable of office, to take the govern- 
ment out of the hands of the twelve, and restore it to the nine. 
But the secret was revealed to so many, that one at last in- 
formed the government ; the plot was ordered by the twelve to 
be inquired into, and a very great number of considerable people 
were seized, some beheaded, others banished, and others impri- 
soned;" and all this without any regular process of law or 
formality of trial. 

" In 1363, a new magistracy was created, and called the Regu- 

SIENA. 255 

lators, who had the care of revising the accounts of those who 
had the management of the public money, to see that the com- 
mons were not defrauded. 

" In 1365, fresh quarrels arose between the M alavolti and 
Tolomoiei, and a plot was discovered of the Piccolomini against 
the government of the twelve; and these families were subjected 
to heavy fines for their punishment, probably because the govern- 
ment had not strength to inflict a severer chastisement. And 
this timidity appeared to be well founded in another instance 
the same year, when their ambassadors returned from Rome, one 
of whom, being attached to the nobles, had given offence to the 
twelve, by speaking freely against them in his absence ; he was 
cast into prison; but the government were not able to punish 
him with death as they intended, for the noblemen appeared m 
arms to defend him." 

These instances, with many others, show, that however arbi- 
trarily or severely the nobles and most revered families are 
excluded, they will ever have a controlling influence over the 
government, when in one assembly of commons only, sometimes 
by secret practices, at others by open force. Indeed, such fa- 
milies are always in reality the heads of the factions that tear 
the state, though, in appearance, they have no share in it, as 
was seen more plainly the next year, when those twelve who 
had the government in their hands were afllicted beyond measure 
with fears of new animosities and insurrections against them. 

" They found themselves divided into two factions, one called 
the Caneschi, and the other Grasselli, the former the favorites 
of the Salimbeni, and the other of the Tolommei. Knowing that 
the nobility were irritated by the late imprisonment of their 
friend the ambassador, and by the design which the twelve had 
discovered, by means of false testimony, to take his life and 
confiscate his estate, if he had not been defended by the nobles, 
they looked out for foreign aid, and sent to the pope to obtain 
it ; they sent also ambassadors, some noble and some popular, 
to the emperor, to sound his disposition towards the republic. 
Among these was John Salimbeni, a man of prudence, very 
useful to the state, and in high reputation abroad. His death 
at this time was a public calamity ; for the twelve, dreading the 
union of the noble houses, artfully introduced and excited 
among them every provocation to arms, to keep them divided, 

256 ON GOVERNMENT. 

and excite one family against another. The nobles, at last per- 
ceiving the malicious artifice, secretly united among themselves, 
and, simulating a greater hatred to one another than ever, on 
the second of September, 1368, they, with their friends and 
adherents, armed themselves as if they intended to come to a 
decisive battle against each other. They then with one impulse 
turned their arms against the magistracy of the twelve, drove 
them out of the palace, taking possession of the arms, and, 
without putting any to death, made themselves masters of the 
city and the state. 

" At once they new-modelled the government, ordaining a 
magistracy of ten noblemen, and three of those popular men 
who had been of the nine ; took possession of the fortresses, and 
sent ambassadors to the emperor to obtain his confirmation of 
their new authority ; but they found that ambassadors from the 
twelve and those plebeians who still adhered to them, had 
arrived before them, to solicit Charles's aid to recover their 
power ; and had filled the court with slanders to such a degree 
as to move the emperor's compassion in their own favor, and 
his indignation against their antagonists. He therefore amused 
the ambassadors of the latter with false promises, while he sent 
Malatesta di Rimini to reinstate the former ; a design in which, 
by the treachery and ambition of the Salimbeni, he succeeded. 
As soon as it was known in Siena that Malatesta, with his 
forces, was approaching in the neighborhood, the little people, 
in the interest of the twelve, arose suddenly and tumultuously 
in arms, and, with the assistance of the Salimbeni, forced open 
the gates to admit the imperial army, not without an obstinate 
battle, however, which continued the whole day, (September 
24, 1368,) and great slaughter. 

^' The government was thus again taken from the nobles, their 
houses plundered, and themselves driven out of the city to their 
castles in the country. The multitude of plebeians having tasted 
the sweets of public honors, power, and riches, combated fu- 
riously upon this occasion ; and having, by the aid of Malatesta 
and the Salimbeni, been victorious, they reformed the system. 
Excluding the nobles, they instituted a council of one hundred 
and twenty-four popular men, whom they called The Council of 
Reformers, because to them was given authority to reform the 
constitution. Sixty-one of these were of the plebeians, or little 

SIENA. 257 

people ; thirty-five of those popular men who had been in the 
office of the twelve, and twenty-eight of those who had been in 
the office of the nine, or of their descendants or associates. These 
governed with the participation of Malatesta, who was in Siena 
the lieutenant or vicar of the emperor after the expulsion of the 
nobles. This party having held the government of the state and 
inhabited the palace of the signori twenty-two days, reorganized 
the magistracy of the twelve, adding five of the little people, 
and four of the twelve, to three of the nine, who had been in the 
magistracy of the consuls together with ten gentlemen ; and de- 
termined that these should be called The Twelve Lords Defend' 
ers of the People of Siena. They made a new box of magis- 
trates, in which they put fifty-one baUots, in each of which was 
contained a magistracy of twelve citizens, with the distribution 
before mentioned of five, four, and three." By this we see that 
a complete aristocracy was established, and a very narrow one 
too, such as may well be called an oligarchy, by this faction of 
the little people, or plebeians. The choice of magistrates was 
confined to fifty persons only. ^ They created also a general 
council of six hundred and fifty popular men, preserving the 
same proportion of five, four, and three, to continue till January 
next To this council they joined another, called The Council 
of the Companies, to the number of two hundred and forty ; 
and this is the first time that in the public books was written 
and preserved the memory of the divisions among the people ; 
and thus, by creating magistrates expressly and avowedly by 
distributions of factions, of orders, and of mountains, as they 
did afterwards, they made their discords immortal. Animosities, 
kept alive by these records, not only cost the lives of an infinite 
number of individuals in the frequent and bloody innovations 
which followed, but finally proved the destruction of the whole 
commonwealth, and the establishment of the domination of one 
man." 

So says the historian ; but whether these records had existed 
or not, the calamities, and the issue of them, would have been 
the same, provided they had not changed their government from 
one assembly to two, and separated the executive authority from 
both. Scrambling for loaves and fishes, in an assembly of peo- 
ple, or representatives, or nobles, or in a mixture or union of 
both, will forever have the same effects. 

22* Q 

258 ON GOVERNMENT. 

'< These reformers annulled all the deliberations and decrees 
made by the late magistracy of the nobles, except those which 
contained the liberation of the banished and condemned. Wish* 
ing to reward the noble house of Salimbeni for the benefit 
received from them, they gave them, in honor and recompense 
of their perfidy against the other nobles, five castles ; and more- 
over, with privileges proportioned to their merit, they made 
them popular citizens, that they might be capable of being in 
the magistracy. The Salimbeni were the first who followed the 
example of Manlius, the first of the Romans, who from a patri- 
cian made himself a plebeian, and from a similar caprice, re- 
nounced his nobility, that by the aid of the plebeians he might 
make himself master of the liberties of his country." 

So says the historian ; and it is true there is a remarkable 
resemblance between the rivalry of Manlius and Camillus, and 
that of the Salimbeni and Tolommei; and both examples are 
equally demonstrative of the dangers and evils of a sovereignty 
in one assembly. There will ever be two rival families to tear 
the vitals of the state, and one or the other, perhaps both, will 
sacrifice truth, right, honor, and liberty, to obtain the ascendency- 

" The nobles, now chased from the city, met at Cerreto Ciam- 
poli, to consult what they ought to do to regedn their situations 
in the city. The magistrates of the twelve having intelligence 
of this assembly, declared six noblemen of the house of Cerre- 
tani rebels, which obliged them, with the others, to look out for 
some strong place to make the seat of war. As they were to 
be treated as enemies, one part of the Tolommei took possession 
of the castle of Montieri, another that of Traguanda ; the Mala- 
volti occupied Castiglione, the Piccolomini Batignano, and 
others, other castles, from whence they began to make war upon 
all the country of Siena, to intercept the supplies of provisions, 
to demolish the mills, and to carry their depredations to the very 
walls, holding the people in continual alarm and terror, and the 
city in a manner besieged, so that few had the courage to go in 
or out The twelve defenders, in order to disunite the nobles, 
pardoned all the others, and banished only the Tolommei, Mala- 
volti, Piccolomini, Cerretani, Saraceni, and Forteguerri, to the 
distcmce of twenty miles in the country, in lands subject to the 
emperor, upon penalty of life and fortune for disobedience. This 
proclamation was not obeyed, and an army was sent, under com- 

SIENA. 259 

mand of the podesta Simone da Spoleto, selected by Malatesta, 
to recover from the noblemen the lands they held of the com- 
mons of Siena; but they returned without success, to wait a 
better opportunity. 

" It appeared by this time to the order of the twelve, that they 
had been immense losers by the change of government; for 
whereas, prior to their deprivation through the nobles, they had 
enjoyed it all, sharing with no one, at present they only shared 
a third part ; and being stimulated by ambition, which oftener 
measures things by its will than its prudence, they did not 
consider those dangers concealed under their immoderate desires. 
They persuaded the little people, that by joining with them they 
could easily exclude by force the order of the nine from the 
regency. The people, joining them in arms, soon put the plot 
in execution ; but' these, finding success so easy, were incited, 
before laying down the arms in their hands, in their turn to 
think more of their own convenience, profit, pleasure, and utility, 
than of their honor, integrity, or the public good, so that with- 
out ceremony, they deprived the twelve of their share in admin- 
istration ; and burning the gate of the palace, and the major 
part of the public books, with a great noise, and universal con- 
vulsion of the city, they dragged out of the palace the three of 
the nine, and the four of the twelve, who occupied the office 
of the lords defenders of the people of Siena. 

" To avoid more scandalous excesses, and to put an end to 
the tumult of the people, who would not be satisfied nor quieted 
without a new order to reform the government of the city, by 
transferring it to the little people, or (to distinguish them more 
clearly from those other popular men who had been of the party 
of the nine and of the party of the twelve) to those who were 
truly the plebeians and altogether new men, because (as the 
plebeians said in Rome, when, in high wrath against the nobles, 
they created Terentius Varro consul) those plebeians, who had 
already been ennobled by serving in the government, despised 
the lower plebeians {laplebe bassa) more, and showed themselves 
more inimical to them, than the ancient nobility, Malatesta en- 
tered the palace, and selected eighteen of the little people, who, 
together with the five of the same sort who remained in the 
palace of the twelve defenders, and three gonfaloniers of the 
thirds of the city, and four of the house of Salimbeni, were to 

260 ON GOVERNMENT. 

reform anew the government of the republic. These, meeting, 
without loss of time, in the consistory, which is the apartment 
where the signori usually assembled, with Malatesta, adopting 
the advice of M. Reame di M. Notto Salimbeni, made an elec- 
tion of ten of the little people, who, with the five who had 
remained in the palace, were to exercise the office, now aug- 
mented from twelve to fifteen, of defenders of the people of 
Siena, until the beginning of January next, with the same 
authority those had had who exercised the office of the twelve 
governors and administrators of the republic of Siena before the 
second day of September last Thus the new magistrates were 
all made of popular men, who had not been of the nine, or of the 
twelve ; and to the eighteen reformers, and the others ordered by 
Malatesta, they added a certain number, by the distribution of 
the companies, who, with the fifteen lords defenders, made the 
number of one hundred and fifty reformers, all of the lesser 
people, who, with ample authority given them by Malatesta, as 
imperial vicar, were to reform the government 

" The twelve now perceiving their error, and that, by attempting 
to usurp power from others, they had lost their own, sent, with the 
privity of the Salimbeni, to negotiate with the emperor yet remain- 
ing at Rome, to the end that, when passing on his return through 
Siena, he might effect their restoration to their former state. The 
popular men of the greater number, still denominated in the pub- 
lic books The Little People, having information of that effort of 
the twelve, and considering that, if the twelve should unite with 
the nobles and the nine, and be assisted by the arms of Charles, 
they might easily make themselves masters of the city, and 
seize the government, thought it more prudent to yield a part 
by consent, than run the risk of losing the whole by force. 
Moved by this consideration, (such is the inconstancy of the 
multitude!) the reformers ordained that the party which had 
been dragged from the palace should return, and occupy their 
offices with the fifteen defenders till the first of January, at 
which time they were to join in the ballot, and draw, from the 
boxes already made by the other reformers, three popular men, 
of whom the one who should have the most votes in the council 
of the reformers was to be captain of the people. This person 
proved to be Matteino di Ser Ventura Menzani, so that the 
magistracy conabted of the number of fifteen, of whom eight 

SIENA. 261 

were of the little people, four of the twelve, and three of the 
nine. They declared, moreover, that the gonfaloniers of the 
thirds of the city, different from the gonfaloniers of the com- 
panies whom they were to command, should be called Master 
Gonfaloniers, and should always be of the little people, like the 
captain of the people ; and the three counsellors of the same 
captain should be taken, one from each sort of people. This, 
captain, with his counsellors and master gonfaloniers, had full 
authority in fact, though not according to the orders in the 
statutes, and a discretionary power in all criminal cases, but not 
in civil. From this reform, the order of Reformers had its first 
original ; for this name of reformers remained afterwards in 
those popular men who were of the council of the last reformers, 
• and descended to their posterity, as it happened before to the 
nine and the twelve, all of whom had their origin from the 
people. This tripartite division appeared to the reformers to be 
a most powerful cause of divisions and discords, which they 
wished to prevent; therefore they ordered these distinctions to 
be annulled, and the whole people to be united in one body, 
and, when in any writing there should be occasion to mention 
the little people, it should be called the people of the greater 
number ; that the party of the twelve should be called the people 
of the middle number; and the nine, the people of the lesser 
number ; * but although the names of the factions were changed, 
the substance of things was not united." 

As these distinctions arise from that constitution of human 
nature, and course of its passions, which legislation is not yet 
perfect enough to alter or to remedy, but by making the distinc- 
tions themselves legal, and assigning to each its share, whatever 
it may be hereafter, the same discords remained among the 
popular men, and preserved always the same distinctions in the 
public books. 

* This record in very cnrious, and worth insertiiig. " Item considerantes, diet! 
providentes, qnod ex divisione populi, civitates destniuntur, et annihilantur, et 
wmgn^mi diviflionem preebet ordo, ractus per alios reformatores, quo cavetur, quod 
officiales eligantur per quinque de populo parvo, quatuor de gente duodecim, et 
tres de gente novem, eoque ubi debet populus esse unitos, sit tripardtus, et 
ideo provideietur, quod <uctum capitulum et ordinamentum sit cassum, et sit 
totus populus Senensis unicus, et unum corpus censeatur, et, siquando in aliqua 
scripture esset mentio fiicienda de populo parvo, dicatur de populo majoris 
numeri, et n de gente duodecim esset facienda mentio, dicatur de populo medio- 
cris numeri, et si de gente novem, dicatur de populo minoris numeri. 

262 ON GOVERNMENT. 

" They ordained further, that of the officers of merchandise, or 
chamber of commerce, there should be two of the people of the 
greater number, one of those of the middle number, and the other 
of the lesser number, while the nobles should remain out of the 
city ; but in case they should return, instead of one of the two 
of the greater number, a nobleman should be elected ; and this 
rule they followed in after times, electing one nobleman and 
three popular men ; and by this order it became a declared point, 
that the nobles were not comprehended in the people, but were 
distinct from them. They further ordained (correcting the order 
given concerning the mode of electing the three popular mem- 
bers, who were to be joined to the twelve of the ballot to be 
drawn every two months, to make the number of fifteen defend- 
ers) that a hundred for each third should be put into the boxes 
by the council of reformers, and that, in drawing for magistrates, 
eight should be drawn for each third ; and they made many other 
provisions to consolidate, as they said, the popular state, which 
were very displeasing to the twelve, who could not endure that 
the nine should be restored, and the greater part of the govern- 
ment should be taken out of their hands. They could not sit 
easy under this mortification, but, with the favor of the Salim- 
beni, they frequently stirred up fresh tumults, which Malatesta 
with his soldiers had trouble enough to suppress. The twelve, 
with the Salimbeni at their head, still restless, applied to the 
emperor, and made him great offers to assist them in new-model- 
ling the government. The emperor would not agree without the 
consent of the senate or general council, which was sometimes 
upon great occasions called together. Being assembled at this 
time to the number of eight hundred and sixty-nine, they refused 
their consent ; but, by a vote of seven hundred and twenty-one, 
confirmed the present form, imposing grievous penalties upon all 
such as should speak or act any thing against it, or attempt any 
alteration in it. 

« The twelve, perceiving that they could not succeed in this 
way to obtain their unconquerable desire of mastering the govern- 
ment, deliberated upon the means of securing by arms what by 
intrigue and fraud they had not been able to acquire ; they flat- 
tered themselves that, by the interest of the family of Salimbeni, 
they could procure the aid of Csesar's arms. While, through 
the discord thus excited, the public in Siena remained in this 

SIENA. 263 

fluctnating state, the nobles in exile made frequent inroads into 
its territory with their cavalry, plundering and burning at their 
pleasure, and holding the city in a manner besieged. The em- 
peror, taking advantage of this, labored with both parties to lay 
aside their animosities. A truce was agreed on, and arbitrators 
or mediators to settle the pretensions of all parties. The me- 
diators assembled in a church, but the twelve and the Salimbeni 
studied to prevent their determination. The people and the nine 
were willing the nobles should return. The twelve and the 
Salimbeni persuaded the emperor to negotiate with the pope to 
send a legate, because, seeing the people and the nine concur in 
the return of the nobility, it appeared to them they should be too 
inferior in force and influence to their enemies without the aid 
^ of foreign arms. 

^^ Parties remaining in suspense and suspicion of one another, 
neither dared to lay down their arms. At last it appeared to the 
twelve that, by favor of the imperialists and the pope's legate, 
they had acquired enough to be superior, and, not willing to lose 
the opportunity, they made Niccolo Salimbeni their head ; and 
with many foreign troops they began the uproar, with a great 
show and noise of arms, crying, Down with the traitors of the 
nine J who wish to restore the nobles! They ran through the third 
of the city, and having met Scotto di Minuccio, who was captain 
of his company, they killed him, because he had given his opinion 
for confirming the boxes of ballots and the government ; and pro- 
ceeded to the houses of several families of the nine to assassinate 
them. Not finding them, because they had fled for safety, the 
twelve, with their mob, ran through the whole city, plundered 
the houses of the nine, and then marched to the palace ; with 
the connivance of Malatesta, who appeared in the piazza with 
his armed men, they drove out the three of the nine who were 
of the fifteen lords defenders ; and, aspiring at a complete victory, 
they made the emperor move from the house of Salimbeni, where 
he was lodged, by giving him hopes that, if he went in person to 
the palace, he would have the city at his devotion. On the other 
hand, the remaining magistrates, seeing three of their colleagues 
dragged out of the palace, excited to indignation at the insult, 
and at the danger they were in of losing the government, sud- 
denly caused the bell to be rung, sounding to arms ; and so great 
a multitude of people assembled in arms m the piazza, and in 

264 ON GOVERNMENT. 

such a fury, that the captain of the people, taking courage to 
turn with his colleagues upon the twelve, the Salimbeni and 
podesta, drove them out of the palace. 

"The battles which ensued in the city were obstinate and 
bloody ; splendid feats of valor were displayed on all sides ; but 
they are unnecessary to be related. The government was finally 
triumphant ; at least their military commander had all the power 
of a dictator. Negotiations were soon opened between the prin- 
cipal men and the emperor ; and it was concluded that the same 
government should stand, under the emperor as its sovereign 
lord, and the city should be considered as a vicarage of the holy 
empire. But of what avail are treaties, or decrees, or agreements, 
when the government remains in one assembly? The emperor 
was scarcely gone out of the city, before fresh plots and treasons 
of the twelve and the Salimbeni were discovered, and new 
tumults against the nine. The lords defenders, together with 
the council of reformers, to put a stop to these disorders, were 
obliged to create a new office, which they called the Executor ; 
and they gave him great authority in criminal matters, even to 
proceed discretionally, and without observing the orders of the 
statutes. But with glU this there was no security in town or 
country ; and justice was so corrupted, that an infinite number 
of assassinations and robberies were committed with impunity. 

" Certain travellers at last were robbed and murdered in the 
neighborhood of the castle of Monteriggioni ; and several men 
from the castle ran out with their arms, took four of the men 
who had committed the robbery, and, without sending them to 
the city, or waiting for any trial, hanged them on the spot ; and 
as this example was followed by the people in the country, the 
roads began to be more secure ; but in the city the insurrections 
still continued. The executor having caused all the popular men 
who had not been banished or declared rebels to return into the 
city, it happened that one Niccolo di Guelfo, of the order of the 
nine, killed Paolo di Legacci, and wounded two others of the 
order of the twelve, who, happening to be present, attempted to 
defend him. At the rumor of this, a great (fisturbance arose, and 
numbers of people collected and fell into skirmishes, in which 
many were lolled. To quiet this commotion, the lords defenders 
placed guards of soldiers in the palace, in the piazza, at the gates, 
and many other places, confined eight of the principals of the 

SIENA. 265 

order of the nine, and sixteen of the order of the twelve ; and 
the delinquents having fled, the tumult subsided. Propositions 
of an accommodation between the nobles and populars had been 
made by the mediation of the Marquis of Monferrato ; but, as 
little progress was made in it, and the nobles were impatient, 
they took the castle of Batignano, and approached to Monte 
Pulciano, with the exiles irom that territory," (for every village 
had its disputes between the great and the little, and its revolu- 
tions, triumphs, and banishments,) ''who had intelligence with 
the popular party within, by whose aid they entered, and made 
prisoner of Jacomo de' Cavalieri, who had made himself lord 
of the place. Intending to save his life, they threw him into 
prison ; but the plebeians, not satisfied with deposing him and 
plundering his property, and in order to satiate their revenge forv 
the injuries they thought they had received from him, went the 
next day to the prison, and, breaking it open, cut him to bits ; 
and every one took a piece, as is customary with meat at market. 
The nobles were so enraged with the people for this, that they 
fell upon them, killed many, and drove others off the territory. 
When they had done this, they set up another government, and 
that a popular one," (which is remarkable enough,) ''and de- 
parted. 

" The Marquis of Monferrato, who had undertaken the media- 
tion at the request of both parties, but saw that all his pains to 
restore harmony between the nobles and populars would be in 
vain, departed from Siena and went to Florence, whence he 
communicated his award to Malavolti, who represented the 
nobles, and to Guerrieri, who was ambassador for the popular 
men who governed the city. The decree, however, as he had 
foreseen, was accepted by neither party. One article was, that 
the Salimbeni should release to the republic the castles which 
had been given them ; and that they should no longer keep the 
standard with the arms of the people, nor the infantry, which the 
magistrates had given them for the guard of their persons. By 
reason of this, a part of the people, who followed the faction of 
the twelve, made a tumult, declaring that they would not degrade 
the honor nor lessen the grandeur of the SaUmbeni; and several 
persons of consequence were killed in this riot At this time the 
castle and land of Han Castagnaio was taken by the Count di 
Nola, captain of some men of the church ; and it was said that 

VOL. V. 23 

266 ON GOVERNMENT. 

the Salimbeni, contrary to their compact with the commons of 
Siena, when it was given to them, had sold it. This report 
produced tokens of great dissatisfaction among the citizens in 
general, and especially when the same comit, within a few days, 
reduced the lands of San Salvadore to his obedience, and held it 
as if he had been its sovereign. Moved at this loss, the fifteen 
lords defenders sent an ample force and recovered it It now 
appeared to the Salimbeni that the popular men, by the loss of 
Plan Castagnaio, were disgusted with them, and had not the 
same confidence and affection for them ^s they usually had before 
this accident happened ; wherefore, considering what might occur, 
being enemies of the other nobles, and not very acceptable to the 
popular men, they solicited the Florentine ambassadors, who 
were in Siena, to treat of peace between the nobles and those 
who governed the state, and of a reconciliation between them 
and the other nobles; and in a short time both points were 
accomplished, with little satisfaction, however, to those who 
governed the state, though in appearance they pretended the 
contrary. 

"While the Florentines were treating of a peace between the 
nobles and commons of Siena, Odoardo di Mariscotti, thinking 
the proceedings too slow, and desirous to hasten them, began, 
from a castle of his, to infest the roads with his highwaymen, 
robbing and assassinating the merchants and others who tra* 
veiled that way, which incited the magistrates to send out an 
army, and take and demolish his castle, destroying many of his 
people, and bringing him prisoner to Siena. The same army, 
the day after, marched to Campriano, where they subdued 
another band of the nobles, employed in intercepting provisions 
in their way to Siena. Campriano they took by assault, and 
destroyed the fortress, after having slain in the action three of 
the house of Tolommei, three of the Piccolomini, two of the 
Scotti, and one of the Mariscotti, with many others. The castle 
of Cotone was obliged to capitulate; Castiglione fought nine 
hours incessantly, and in the battle lost some of the Tolommei, 
and some of the Malavolti, and many others of the nobles ; but 
the place was taken, plundered, and burnt ; after which the army 
returned to Siena with a great number of prisoners. There did 
not remain many of the nobles united together, capable of doing 
much damage to the dominions of the republic. 

SIENA- 267 

<^ On the other hand, the popular men, the more to consolidate 
their power, having seen the unanimity of the nobles through the 
order of the last reformers, erected a company, whom they called 
the Grand Family of the People, which should endure to perpe- 
tuity among those popular men who should be elected by the 
reformers for the cojiservation of the popular state of the city, 
and of the company itself, into which no nobleman could be 
received. Every member was to take an oath to observe the 
rules ordained for the maintenance of both the state and the 
society; and many exemptions and immunities were granted 
them. Every one whose name was subscribed to the associa- 
tion, was to hold the arms of the people painted upon some 
conspicuous place of his house; from which institution, the 
white lion is seen at this day, over the doors of many houses. 
They had also the privilege of bearing the white lion in their 
own proper arms, and many persons availed themselves of it, as 
is seen in the arms of many families still remaining. All who 
were not of the association of the people were forbid to bear it 
in any manner. These and other regulations being made, desir- 
ous of preventing the incursions, and repairing the damages 
done by the nobles in the country, they collected a numerous 
force, went to their castles, and seized sometimes upon one and 
sometimes upon another, not meeting any power that could 
resist them, till the republic of Florence, to whom, on the thir- 
teenth of May, 1369, the difference between the people and the 
nobles had been referred, made their report, to the great satisfac- 
tion of both parties. 

" This award was dated the last of June, 1369, and, among 
the other articles of the peace, the nobles were to be restored to 
their country, and be made capable of aU the magistracies of 
the commonwealth, except those of lords defenders, gonfaloniers, 
and counsellors ; and this was ratified by the popular men in a 
general council. The nobles in ten days ratified it on their part, 
to the wonderful satisfaction of the city and the state, as they 
hoped to put an end to so many miseries. The reformers after- 
wards, for the maintenance of the peace, as they said, ordained 
grievous penalties for any one of the nobles who should offend 
any of the people, and it was made capital to strike or draw 
blood from any one of the council of refomiers ; and to show 
that affairs which interest many ought to be made known to 

268 ON GOVERNMENT. 

and managed by many, wishing to increase the number of that 
council, which was not at that time more than one hundred and 
fifty, on the twenty-second of August, 1369, they added to it 
those of the little people, who had been of the first reformers 
after the expulsion of the nobles, and those of the same people 
who had been of the lords defenders since January, 1368, or 
should be in future, and the master gonfaloniers whilst this box 
lasted ; and wishing to reform the council of the people, it was 
ordained by the general council, that all the people, of whatever 
number, who shall have been of the lords defenders, or of the 
twelve governors, after the twenty-third September, 1368, should 
be understood to be of the council of the people ; and from this 
the practice began, which continued as long as the republic, that 
those who had been of the signori should be of this council. 

^^ It was likewise ordained, that when any thing should obtain 
in the council of the people, which ought to be proposed to the 
general council, and the bell was ordered to ring for a general 
council, the council of the people being in session, the members 
of the council of the people should be members of the gener^ 
council; and by this order the general council was converted into 
the council of the people, and was no more assembled during 
the commonwealth. The public was very much in debt, and 
had not the means of satisfying its creditors ; it was therefore 
ordained, that all those who had lent money to the commons, 
and ought to be reimbursed, should be arranged in three different 
books, according to the distinction of the thirds of the city, and 
made creditors, each one, in the sum total of his credit, with 
orders that the chamberlain should pay at the rate of ten per 
cent every year to each creditor; and this union or consolidation 
of the public debt was called il monies the mountain, or the 
lump ; and this practice was afterwards repeated upon various 
occasions ; and these were the provisions, which were punctually 
paid off by the chamberlain in the time of the republic, but 
were imitated afterwards, merely to abate the debt of every one, 
who had lent money in the ordinary loans." 

We see by this, that in those days republicans had some 
regard to honesty and the public faith, and the infamy of de- 
frauding creditors was left to the absolute monarchy. 

" The number of the reformers being increased, their authority 
increased every day, and with it the desire of reducing the ofiice 

SIENA. 269 

of lords defenders wholly to the little people, called the people 
of the greater number. To this end, in 1370, they excited cer- 
tain tumults among the journeymen and laborers in the woollen 
mahufacture, inhabiting the coast of Ovile, the very lowest 
of the people, who, meeting frequently together, called them- 
selves the Company del Bruco, because such was the ensign 
of that country;^ many of these, having taken the occasion 
of some quarrels with their masters in the woollen trade, and 
guided by one Dominico, a dealer in old clothes, raised a 
great uproar, beating some and threatening others ; being armed 
and in great numbers, as it was a year of scarcity, they turned 
to the houses which had the reputation of having some grain; 
and, through fear, it was given out to them. This quieted 
them until three of their leaders were taken up by the authority 
of a senator, and upon examination, confessed crimes enough to 
condemn them to death. Upon this all those of the company 
del Bruco, arose again in arms with a very great noise, ran to 
the palace of the senator, and with menaces of burning him in 
his house, insolently demanded the three prisoners. They then 
began furiously to fight with the officers of justice, and to collect 
materials for applying fire to the gate. The captain of the people, 
who was Francesco Naddo, perceiving the danger in which the 
senator was, and that the city was all in arms, took the resolution, 
in order by the public authority to prevent the disorder from in- 
creasing, to go in person and endeavor to suppress it With his 
standard and trumpets before him, he arrived at the palace of 
the senator; but finding it impossible to allay the fury of the 
plebeians otherwise, he made the senator set at liberty the three 
prisoners, and returned to his palace, believing that the company 
would lay down their arms as they had promised. 

^ But having come off conquerors in this warfare, and forced 
justice herself, they acquired so much presumption, that, running 
with great violence to the gate of the palace of the signory, and 
finding it locked, they attempted in several ways to force it; 
they raised a loud clamor, that the four lords of the order of 
the twelve, and the three of the order of the nine, should be 
banished ; but finding them well defended, they ran to the palace 
ot the Salimbeni, to avail themselves of their assistance and 

1 A caterpillar. 
23* 

270 ON GOVERNMENT. 

authority. Having in the way encountered Nannuccio di Fran- 
cesco, who had been a few months before captain of the people, 
because he had upon that occasion favored the order of the 
twelve, they slew him. The Salimbeni would not move nor 
intermeddle in this sedition. They therefore took from them 
the colors with the ensign of the people, which, as associates of 
that faction, they still held at their window, although they had 
made a peace with the other nobles. From the gonfaloniers of 
Camullia and San Martino they likewise took their standards, 
and having given them to others, they returned to make a firesh 
attack upon the palace ; and being repulsed from thence, they 
sent a party towards Camullia to attack the house of the Salim- 
beni, against whom they were bitterly enraged, because they 
would not concur in this revolution. Meeting a company of 
noblemen of the houses of Salimbeni, Malavolti, Tolommei, 
Renaldini, and others, in considerable numbers, who had made 
a great exertion, and taken arms to quell this tumult of the 
plebeians, the parties went to action immediately, the noble- 
men were many of them killed, and the rest routed; and 
although many men were appointed to endeavor to quiet the 
disturbance, they not only found no means of suppressing it, 
but they found it impossible to prevent it from increasing every 
moment in violence ; until one morning, in the month of July, 
the company of the people arose in arms with the company del 
Bruco, and dragged from the palace the four lords who resided 
there, of the order of the twelve, and three of the order of the 
nine, instead of whom seven others of the larger number were 
elected by the people, to reside with the eight who remained in 
the palace, and fill up the number of fifteen signori. 

" But suspecting that, by having thus brought into their own 
hands the whole government of the city, the other citizens 
would be provoked to make an alteration, the council of reform- 
ers, to whom full power had been given by the general council, 
resolved that the names of those of the twelve and the nine, 
who had been pulled out of the palace, should be returned into 
the box of the freemen, so that they might be drawn another 
time to occupy the same office, and enjoy the same privileges, 
as if they had remained in the palace two months entire. The 
order of the twelve, however, not being satisfied with this regu- 
lation, conspired with some of the nine, aided by the captain of 

SIENA. 271 

the people, who, although he was himself of the popular order 
of the greater number, was of an elevated spirit, and could not 
bear, that the state should be reduced, in his time, with such 
indignity into the hands of men of such base condition, entered 
into the conspiracy, sent them the master gonfaloniers, with 
their arms, who united with the conspirators, and on a sudden 
attacked those of the company del Bruco, in their own houses, 
on the coast of Ovile, and, before they had time to get their 
arms and make a stand, slew a great part of them ; and they 
were exasperated into such rage and fury, as to have no con- 
sideration of age or sex, but to murder without distinction all 
who came in their way. 

'' At the same time the company of the people having risen, 
fought in the piazza and in several places of the city, with great 
ferocity, and the twelve, with their conspirators, remained in 
many places superior ; but a stone, cast from the tower of the 
palace, fell upon the gonfalonier of San Martino, who, with 
his company, returned from the coast of Ovile, was fighting in 
the piazza, and struck him to the ground ; and every one, who 
saw him, believed him to be dead. By this accident his party was 
seized with a panic and fled, and gave an opportunity to the 
popular party to gain the superiority, and break and rout the 
conspirators. A part of the principal leaders of the conspiracy 
were taken prisoners, together with Francino, captain of the 
people, and Magio Calzolaio, gonfalonier of the third of the city ; 
and on the first of August, 1371, without letting them finish the 
term of their magistracy, a most miserable and horrible example 
was set, by cutting off their heads publicly in the piazza ; at the 
same time, they beheaded many others ; but the two other gonfa- 
loniers, having saved themselves by flight, were declared rebels, 
with many others, and a new reformation of the state was re- 
solved on. 

" The reformers made a new box of magistrates for five years, 
continuing the oflice of the fifteen defenders, of whom twelve 
were popular men of the greater number, who were afterwards 
called reformers, and three popular men of the smaller number, 
who were those of the order of the nine, and in place of Fran- 
cino, as captain of the people, Landino Fabro was substituted. 
Confirming the usual order, they resolved, that the president of 
the council of reformers, who was changed every third day, 

272 ON GOVERNMENT. 

should act with the lords defenders and with his counsellorSi 
although they had joined in the magistracy four of the little 
people, in place of those whom they took away of the twelve, 
to give a more decisive superiority to their faction. They 
admonished and disqualified all those of the people of the 
middle number who had been of the twelve, and twelve fami- 
lies of the people of the lesser number, who had been of the 
nine, and some of the people of the greater number, who had 
been numbered among the reformers, and had agreed with 
the twelve. Two hundred and twenty-eight were condemned 
in pecuniary penalties ; and all those who were condemned were 
called, without distinction, Fini. A number of men, both horse 
and foot, sent by the Salimbeni for the service of the twelve, 
arrived at Toirenieri, but learning the turn of affairs, returned 
back. Almost all the lesser artificers afterwards joined them- 
selves to the number of the reformers ; and for the security of 
the state they had from Florence a hundred cavalry. The pub- 
lic, by great expenses and little government, being without any 
appropriation of money, that they could avail themselves of, 
the reformers introduced the practice of selling the public reve- 
nue, besides the confiscations and penalties, for three years, 
which did not obtain more than three hundred and eighteen 
thousand golden florins. This commencement of the usage of 
selling the public revenues, which was continued from this time, 
was the reason why the public was always in debt ; selling for 
a sm&Jl price, which was not sufficient for the necessary ex- 
penses, illegal practices were the consequence, and from thence 
new seditions, which finally accomplished the ruin of the repub- 
lic. The twelve did not cease to stir matters to the prejudice of 
the reformers, because the capacity of being in the magistracy 
was now taken from them. For security, their arms were taken 
from them, and placed in the chamber of the commons, and the 
captain of the people seized many of them on suspicion, who 
were in great danger of losing their heads." 

The year following the conduct of the twelve occasioned the 
same suspicions. The nobles themselves were never more im- 
patient of exclusion, nor more eager to try every expedient to 
recover their share in the state. The nobles, indeed, were not 
only injured, but had a right to complain. The twelve were 
injured, but they had only that wrong done to them which 

SIENA. 273 

they had set against the nobles, and they ought to have recol- 
lected, 

" Nee lex est justior ulla 
Quam necifi artifices arte perire sua." 

But if the rule of doing as you would be done by were the rule 
of life, and observed by all men, there would perhaps be no 
need of government at all. 

" The twelve, to be sure, did not think their own case and that 
of the nobles parallel, but were indefatigable in insinuating, 
sometimes into one, and sometimes into another of the little 
people, that it was neither profitable to them, nor honorable to 
the public, to suffer those reformers to tyrcmnize over the city ; 
and they frequently succeeded in drawing over to their side par- 
tisans, with whom they proceeded to consult of the means of 
carrying their intentions, to take the government out of the 
hands of the reformers, into effect They opened themselves 
to ^o many, that at length the machination was discovered, and 
numbers taken up; among whom was Ser Cecco d' Andrea, the 
man of the highest reputation with the twelve, who was be- 
headed ; and of the others, some were imprisoned, others fined, 
and those who had escaped by flight were banished ; and S^r 
Agnolo d' Andrea was condemned, because, having made a 
dinner for some of his friends at his country-house, no reformer 
was invited." Other instances of the grossest prostitution of the 
judicial power were attempted by the vulgar tyrants, who now 
had the s^ay. "Giovanni Calzettaio, who was one of the 
council of reformers, prosecuted one of the twelve for striking 
him. Niccolo Rosso da Terano, the podesta, upon examination 
of the parties face to face, found evidence of the malicious fraud 
^f the reformer, who, to give a color to his false accusation, that 
the other had broke the law, by which it was made capital to 
strike or draw blood of a reformer, had struck and drawn blood 
from himself. He had the integrity to imprison the complainant, 
and finding him to be so abandoned a fellow, and many charges 
l^rought against him of atrocious crimes, he adjudged him to 
have his head cut off under the gallows, since it was not lawful 
to hang him, being one of the reformers." 

Justice, it seems, though attempted, was not yet so prostituted 
but that many others were chastised for enormous crimes ; but 

the most of the criminals being of the people of the greater 

« 

R 

274 ON GOVERNMENT. 

• • 

number, who were the dominant faction, and held the great part 
in the government, tumults were generated in no small numbers 
among the multitude. 

" But when Antonio di Orso and Deo Malavolti were impri- 
soned and beheaded for having carried off a young woman, 
though with her own consent, and half a dozen other noblemen 
executed for other crimes, the plebeians were pacified and 
softened by the blood of so many nobles, and that insurrection, 
which had been raised to save the lives of the condemned ple- 
beians, was quelled. 

" When all were returned to their habitations, and their arms 
laid aside, the senator, Louis della Marca, ordered four of the 
heads of the late sedition to obstruct the course of justice to 
be seized, and sentenced them to be hanged ; others he impri- 
soned, and some were fined. The senator, among so many con- 
troversies, rumors, and tumults, as occurred during his adminis: 
tration, although ex debUo justiiuB he had been obliged to order 
so many executions, ran a great risk of being murdered in those 
popular seditions of multitudes, who were offended by him, and 
both himpelf and his family were under no small apprehensions." 
* In such a state of society the human heart pours forth all its 
turpitude, and all parties appear to be equally abandoned. " The 
signor of Perolla, a castle of the Maremma of Siena, died, and 
left an only daughter heir to the estate and the lordship. 
Andrea Salimbeni, who was a relation, went to visit the young 
lady ; by some fraudulent stratagem, which is not enplained, he 
put her to death, made himself patron or tyrant of the place, 
and, with a gang of people under his command, committing 
robberies on the highways, and all the neighboring places, ren- 
dered it unsafe to pass in that quarter. The report of this was 
soon carried to the Sienese, who sent out a body of men, under 
the command of the senator, and the twenty-third of April, 
1374, took the place, and carried Salimbeni, with twenty-eight 
others, prisoners to the city. Sixteen of these in a few days 
were beheaded by order of the senator ; but either fron) respect 
to the family, or from fear of their power, he did not proceed 
against Salimbeni. Upon this the company del Bruco again 
arose in arms, with the other plebeians, and, running to the 
palace, with threats demanded of the lords defenders that justice 
should be done upon Andrea Salimbeni. The captain of the 

SESNA. 275 

people, the two priori, and their colleagues of the lords defend- 
ers, found themselves so mean in spirit, so infertile in council, so 
unskilful at their own game, that not knowing any better way 
to prevent the evil from increasing, they gave authority to 
Noccio Sellaio to do in that emergency, whatever he should 
judge useful to the commonwealth. Noccio snatching eagerly 
at this opportunity, by which he thought to gain the hearts of 
the plebeians, and by their favor raise himself to power and 
superiority above his fellow-citizens, entered into the palace of 
the senator, and sitting down in the midst of an immense 
crowd, on the bench from whence sentence was usually given, 
condemned Andrea Salimbeni to death, and ordered his head to 
be struck off before the public. Intending to dispatch Pietro da 
Massa in the same manner, he was prohibited by the major part 
of the reformers, who began to perceive his design, and to see 
the error which the lords defenders had committed in giving him 
such an authority ; and although he had at his heels the com- 
pany del Bruco, and the other lowest plebeians, they revoked 
the power that had been given him. This measure excited 
a great tumult in the city ; but the reformers, being united, were 
able to quiet it 

" Niccolo and Cione Salimbeni, with others of the same 
family, and their associates, moved with indignation and grief 
at the outrage which had been committed upon Andrea, took 
from the commons of Siena the castles of Montemassi and Boc- 
cheggiano, and with large companies went about, committing 
depredations in the country. The reformers, to make prepara- 
tions for recovering their lands, and for making head against 
the Salimbeni and their followers, created a new magistracy of 
ten citizens, to superintend the conduct of the war. The first 
provision made by this new council of war was, to imprison 
twenty-six citizens of the order of the twelve, and condemn 
them in twelve thousand golden florins, which were immediately 
paid." Was the robbery of Salimbeni worse than this ? " They 
next sent to demand aid of Florence and Lucca, and obtained 
it; but ambassadors were sent from Florence, Perugia, and 
other places, at the same time, to make peace if possible, knowing 
that their own discontented and distracted factions were ready 
to break out ; but the Salimbeni would not listen to any thing, 
because the ten had sent an army in force to the castle of Boc- 

276 ON GOVERNMENT. 

cheggiano, with instruments for destroying the walls, cranes, 
mortar-pieces, and other things which in those days were used in 
war to fortify estates. On the other hand the Salimbeni, having 
collected together many of their friends and adherents, watched 
a convenient opportunity, sallied out from their lands, and attack- 
ing their enemies without the least expectation, broke their 
order, put them to flight, took many prisoners, plundered their 
camp, and burnt all the frames, bastions, buildings and instru- 
ments they found there. 

"As soon as this defeat was well known in Siena, the relations 
of those many citizens, who remained prisoners, ran in arms to 
the houses of the Salimbeni, and seized aU they could find of 
those families, that they might hold them as hostages to redeem 
their own relations. Neither the plague nor famine, both of 
which raged this year, 1374, could prevent continual plots of 
the Salimbeni and the twelve to recover the government of the 
city, and constant skirmishes and wars between them and the 
reformers and lords defenders throughout aU the teiritories of 
the republic. In the year following, ambassadors were sent 
from several friendly cities, to persuade peace between the re- 
formers and the Salimbeni. The reformers, desirous of lessen- 
ing the number of their enemies, in 1379 restored all the rebels 
who had been denominated Finij and banished in the time of 
those seditions, which were made by the gonfaloniers and the 
twelve. The nobles, however, were employed in forming parties 
in the country, and in negotiations with their friends in the 
neighboring cities, till, in 1384, they were able to meet the 
reformers in the field, and give them a complete overthrow ; and 
if they had pursued their victory, such was the astonishment 
and panic of the reformers in the city, they might have made 
themselves masters; but in this their fortune befriended them. 
Finding they were not pursued by their enemies, they assumed 
some vigor and courage, gave orders to guard the gates and 
suppress the seditions which were moved in the city against them, 
and sent abroad for foreign aid. 

" Florence, Hsa, Bologna, and Perugia, hearing of so great a 
change, and fearing greater civil discords, sent ambassadors to 
Siena, to endeavor to reunite the nobles in exile, and the popu- 
lar men who governed the city ; but, after trying every mode of 
negotiation, and every proposition of accommodation, with both 

SIENA. 277 

parties, they found they could make no impression upon either, 
and returned home. It was the opinion of the reformers, that 
the Florentine ambassadors, from some interest of their republic, 
in their secret negotiations with one party and the other, had 
been the cause that the peace had not been effected, as, from 
both sides appearing to be weary of the war, was generally 
hoped and expected. The time was come when the magistrates, 
the lords defenders for the months of March and April, were to be 
drawn ; and the council being assembled, and the ballots drawn, 
Giovanni Minucci, one of the lords defenders, proved to be cap- 
tain of the people. When the council dissolved, they perceived 
no small tumult made by the citizens of the order of the twelve, 
who said, they did not know for what reason the power of par- 
ticipating in the honors and cares of goveri!ment was taken 
from them, rather than from other popular men, and that they 
no longer would tolerate the abuse ; and although the disturb- 
ance appeared to subside for the present, the twelve, fomented 
by the gentlemen, who were very active, and had made them- 
selves masters of a great part of the dominion, and who pro- 
mised the twelve, in all events, to assist them with men, arms, 
and provisions, to the utmost of their power, for the common 
service against the reformers, did not cease to demand, with 
great animosity and many threats, tliat a place should be given 
them in the magistracy. 

" These motions of the twelve, favored by the nobles, gave 
much molestation to the heads of the government; and there- 
fore, that they might not have to defend themselves against too 
many enemies, on the twenty-third of March, 1384, in the morn- 
ing, they assembled the council, and obtained that the twelve, in 
the new draught, should have a part in that magistracy, by in- 
creasing the number from fifteen to eighteen ; but, as experience 
has ever proved, gratitude shown and remedies applied out of 
season, have little effect? When the council was finished, at noon- 
day, Cestelli, a seditious man of the order of ttie twelve, was 
taken up by the ministers of justice. He refused to obey, and 
calling with a loud voice for assistance, multitudes of the twelve 
and the nine hastened, at his cry, to his relief, and took the 
prisoner by force from the officer, who had already drawn him 
from the hill to the piazza. Upon this riot, Materazza and 
Nerini, accompanied by a great number of reformers, interposed, 

VOL. V. 24 

278 ON GOVEllNMEXT. 

partly by their authority, and partly by their arms, to recover 
the prisoner, "they fell with great impetuosity upon those who 
had rescued him, and denouncing vengeance and death on the 
twelve and the nine, as obstructers of justice, cried, ' Long live 
the Reformers!' At this cry the whole city rose at once in 
arms, and, with those of the twelve and the nine; went to the few 
noblemen who remained in Siena ; having taken the entrance 
of the piazza, they prevented the plebeians from passing in to 
the aid of the reformers, and, from the houses of the Scotti and 
Saraceni, annoyed the multitude of reformers, who were fighting 
in the piazza against their friends. The contest had become general 
in various parts of the city, and it appearing to the nobles, the 
twelve, and the nine (as the major part of the plebeians ran to the 
service of the refbrmers) that they had the disadvantage, they 
began at the instigation of a Jew to cry, * Peace ! Peace I ' At 
the hearing of this word, industriously echoed in various parts of 
the city, a great number of the little people, distinguished from 
the plebeians or the rabble, wearied out with so many seditions, 
and united with the nobles and their adherents, ran with great 
fury to the prisons, broke them open, and set at liberty all the 
prisoners, among whom were M. Uguccione and Niccoluccio 
Malavolti ; these, taking the lead of the multitude, attacked the 
army of reformers, and, urged on by the keen desire of ven- 
geance for the injuries received, combated with such intrepidity 
as to drive them out of the piazza, after having made a great 
carnage, and many prisoners. They instantly entered the palace, 
and, although the people within made a gallant defence, took 
possession of it, and drove out the lords defenders and reformers, 
not only from the palace but the piazza, and took from them the 
administmtion of the republic, both in the city and the country. 
This revolution was followed by the usual train; more than four 
thousand men of the faction of reformers, chiefly artificers, in a 
few days were sent into exile ; and, whatt is worse, when in the 
course of a few years their affairs were accommodated, not the 
tenth part of them returned to their country." 

Thus ended the government of the faction of reformers, and 
this new species of sovereignty in one assembly ; but only to be 
exchanged fpr another, consisting of nobles, tw^elves, and nine. 

" The exiles of all these three parties now returned in great 
numbers from all the neighboring cities, provinces, and countries, 

SIENA. 279 

and brought with them a strong body both of cavabry and 
infantry. We may now expect to see the government shining 
with the splendid names of Salimbeni, Malavolti, Piccolomini, 
Tolommei, sgid all the rest; but we have no reason to expect 
justice, liberty, order, peace, or common decency. 

" The new government was instituted in a new magistracy of 
ten citizens, to be changed every two months, and entitled the 
Lords Priors Governors of the City of Siena, into which num- 
ber were to be admitted four popular men of those who had 
been of the twelve, four of those who had been of the nine, and 
two of the people of the greater number ; of those, however, \^o 
had not been of the council of reformers nor of the lords defenders ; 
and thus the people were divided into four factions, the Nine, the 
Twelve, the Reformers, and the People, and of these discordant 
materials in one assembly, were the legislative, executive, and ju- 
dicial powers to be composed ; and this mode continued till 1387." 

The order passed in a general council, establishing the new 
regimen, in 1385, and the scrutiny for magbtrates was made for 
eight years, and the names put into the boxes, a practice which 
was analogous to that in Florence, which they called imborsation, 
which was putting the names into purses, to be drawn out upon 
occasion. Those who had now the most votes in the general 
council weie assorted together in forty-eight ballots, one of 
which was to be drawn every two months. The first draught 
was now made, and the lot produced a ballot, in which were the 
names of Andrea, Cicerchia, and eight others. These took upon 
them the magistracy of lords priors governors, on the twenty- 
eighth of March, 1385. *' The tumults were quieted, the soldiers 
disbanded, the fortresses of the dominion rendered to public 
commissaries, many remunerated for their services, fireworks 
played off, and many feasts made, and incredible manifestations 
of joy, and ambassadors sent to all confederated cities to inform 
them that the city was delivered from the tyranny of the rabble, 
and the palace cleansed, which had been once thought an 
Augean stable. Twelve of the principals of the conquered 
faction were put to death by the course of justice, and thirty 
sent out to the frontiers, and the major part of those who had 
fled, declared rebels and enemies pro more revolutionum ; and 
by order of the council of petitions, under authority given them 
by the general council, their castles were restored to the Salim- 

280 ON GOVERNMENT. 

beni. But the envy of fortune, according to the historian, and 
the malice of their constitution, according to truth, would not 
suifer this felicity to be enjoyed for one year. The Tolommei 
were now returned, and living in the same city \irith the Sa- 
limbeni ; and this fact alone, under such a plan of government, 
would be enough to give the reader an anticipation of what 
would be the consequences. Conspiracies were formed in the 
country among the fiiends of the exiles, and by companies of 
depredators, who began to be troublesome and to do mischief in 
the dominion. The Florentines, too, began to set up claims upon 
parcels of territory; and while this dispute was in negotiation 
between the ambassadors of the two people, a plot was disco- 
vered, to the great terror of those who governed the city, com- 
menced by a part of the family of Tolommei, who, in concert 
with some popular men, who intended to restore the reformers, 
had drawn towards the city certain foreign troops, in an irregu- 
lar manner, from different places, and entertained them secretly 
in several of their fortresses. These troops, hearing thii their 
destination was discovered, and the plan impossible to be exe- 
cuted, as many citizens were already imprisoned on account of 
it, retreated, and the prisoners confessing the truth, were con- 
demned to death. Yet the lords priors, with the rest of their 
faction, (for the government was never any more than a faction,) 
were in trouble enough, knowing the danger they were in from 
the divided minds of their fellow-citizens, and from the hatred 
and immortal enmity which the Florentines appeared to bear 
them. This storm was averted by submitting the dispute with 
Florence to the mediation of Bologna, and by the cession of 
many lands. 

" One conspiracy was scarcely suppressed, and a foreign war 
declined from fear of themselves, before another was discovered 
of greater moment, and a more pernicious nature than the first, 
excited by M. Spinello Tolommei, and a great number of reform- 
ers and others, who had such intelligence in Siena, that it seemed 
to them easy to effect a revolution, and make themselves masters 
of the state. But, as many examples both ancient and modern 
demonstrate, conspiracies made by a multitude, through the 
variety of interests of those who are comprehended in it, have 
seldom attained their intended end ; and the greater part of con- 
spirators have lost their lives and their fortunes, because the 

SIENA. 381 

design has been revealed by such as had rather be rewarded with 
security, than stand in danger of their lives, when a suspicion 
has gone forth in the public ; so conspiracies of lesser numbers 
have been equally unfortunate, through the want of power to 
carry them into execution. The reformers, excited by Spinello 
Tolommei, were betrayed by one of their associates ; and one of 
their chiefs, Nanni di Dota, was beheaded ; but Tolommei was 
too powerful a man for such a government to dare to make an 
example of; he was therefore admitted to a treaty with the 
magistrates. Soon afterwards the Count Guido di Santa Flora 
submitted to the commonwealth, and after him Monaldo di 
Visconti di Campiglia. 

^< Another conspiracy was discovered in Siena among the 
reformers, under the conduct of the same Spinello Tolommei. 
A spy, whom he sent with a letter to his correspondents in the 
city, was intercepted, threw himself out of a window in despair, 
and was killed in the fall, and a few of the conspirators were 
beheaded. The city, by these continual plots, so often discovered, 
was kept in constant terror, as was every village and castle of 
the whole dominion ; for example, in the castle of Casole a vio- 
lent sedition was awakened; the Casolans were divided into 
two' parties, and coming to arms among themselves, skirmishes 
happened every day, and many were killed and more wounded. 
The same mischievous divisions were suffered too in the city of 
Massa. Monte Pulciano, likewise, was governed by a single 
assembly of signori, who by their divisions occasioned similar 
seditions and civil wars among themselves, and their different 
parties excited a long war between Florence and Siena ; at the 
conclusion of which the Florentines, by their intrigues, laid the 
Sienese under many disadvantages ; and these would have been 
greater, if at this time it had not been known that the Sienese 
were in intimate correspondence with Giovan Galeazzo Visconti, 
Lord of Milan, who, after having taken the city of Verona, had, 
with a great increase of his power, taken the city of Padua, and 
made prisoner of Francesco da Carrara, who was lord of it 

" On the twenty-sixth of November, 1387, to give some satis- 
faction to the people, who began again to show signs of discon- 
tent, it was determined in Siena that to the number of the ten 
lords priors there should be added one of those popular men who 
had been reformers; and it was declared that, when mention 

24* 

282 ON GOVERNMENT. 

should be made of those persons who were of the reformers, and 
who might be admitted to occupy the office of the signori, and 
who called themselves of the people of the larger number, it 
should be understood to apply to their fathers, sons, brothers, by 
the masculine line ; and those who had been admonished between 
1371 and 1384 should be comprehended in the number of the 
other popular men, who had not been of the reformers nor signori ; 
and if any of the monte of the nine (for this was now the name 
of distinction) or of the monte of the twelve had been of the said 
reformers, they might be signori for the monte of the people of 
the greater number ; but he alone should be considered as of the 
reformers, and not any of his ancestors, descendants, or connec* 
tions; as these should all remain in the monte (heap, lump, or 
collection) of which they had been before. They ordained, more- 
over, that of the chamberlains and notaries, who were eleven in 
number, four should be of the nine, four of the twelve, and three 
of the other popular men. And whereas in the other magistracies 
there used to be in each two nobles, one of the twelve and one 
of the nine, there should now be added one' popular man, who 
had not been either of the nine or of the twelve, and thus in each 
of those magistracies there should be two nobles and three popu- 
lars ; that is to say, as it is expressed in the record of the delibe- 
ration of the council, * one of the nine, one of the twelve, and one 
of the other populars;' and of« these other populars, one at one 
time was to be of those who had been reformers and of the 
signori, for the monte of the people of the greater number, and 
one other at another time of those of the same monte, who were 
not of the reformers nor the lords defenders ; and by these provi- 
sions, those who held the government in their hands studied to 
conciliate the friendship of the little people, and take away, in 
some degree, the occasions of conspiracies. And, that they might 
not alienate from their government the minds of the nobles, they 
resolved that all the podestaries and ordinary captainships, such 
as the captainship of Maremma, Montagna, Valdichiana, and 
others, should be given to the nobles, and to no others; and 
when occurrences should oblige them to send abroad extraordi- 
nary captains, they might send part of them from the nobles and 
part from the populars ; and this order in favor of the nobles was 
made perpetual. 

" These and other regulations were not sufficient to satisfy all, 

SIENA. 283 

nor yet the hostile designs of Florence, nor the victory obtained 
by Niccolo Kccolomini over the Brettoni, to divert the people of 
Siena from their discontents ; so that on the eleventh of May, 
1388, another amendment of their constitution was attempted. 
The apprehensions of foreign war as well as domestic broils 
increased; and to facilitate the public deliberations, that they 
might not upon every occasion have to call a general council, 
they introduced a council of substitutes, and called them the 
Simigliantiy with the same forms and the same authority which 
the council formerly had in the times of the twelve and the nine. 
This council comprehended all those who had been of the lords 
priors governors, and those who had their names in the boxes of 
the same magistracy, to whom, that they might not appear to be 
diffident of them, they afterwards added twelve noblemen, elected 
from the nobility in general ; and to gratify and oblige those of 
their citizens who were abroad, and prevent them from joining 
their enemies within and without, they gave a pardon to those 
rebels who had been confined for six months, and had observed 
their limits, and, although their time was not expired, gave them 
leave to return to the city ; those who were confined for a year, 
might return in two months ; and those who were confined for 
more than a year, in six months. 

"At this time, Batista Piccolomini returned from Milan, who 
had been sent as ambassador there ; and with him was sent M. 
Giovanni della Porta, treasurer of the Lord Giovan Galeazzo, 
with orders to raise and take into pay as large a number of sol- 
diers as possible ; and to this end the treasurer sent his paymas- 
ters, with the Count Ugolotti Bianchiardi, who, having been sent 
with the ambassador by Giovan Craleazzo, for the service of the 
city of Siena, went to Marca, and engaged in the pay of Visconti, 
AL Brogliole and Brandoliuo, each with a hundred cavalry, and 
ordered that Boldrino da Panicale should form another company. 

" TBhe Florentines carried on their intrigues with so many fac- 
tions in the state, and discovered a disposition so hostile, and 
designs, or at least desires, of making themselves masters not 
only of Monte Pulciano and the other dependencies, but of Siena 
itself, that the government thought it advisable to hasten their 
deliberations upon a subject they had in contemplation for several 
months, a league and confederation with Giovan Galeazzo Vis- 
conti, Lord of Milan and Conte di Virtu. This prince, since he 

284 ON GOVERNMENT. 

possessed Verona and Padua, had intended to take possession of 
Bologna, which had been sometimes under the dominion of the 
house of Visconti ; and because the Florentines, as confederates 
of the Bolognese, had sent them assistance, and favored them as 
much as they could with their armed men, took upon him the 
protection of the city of Siena, and promised her ambassador to 
assist her, and sent the Signer Paolo Savelli, with three hundred 
lances, upon whose arrival uncommon rejoicings were shown in 
the city. Galeazzo engaged in this warfare, not so much for the 
service of Siena, as to have an opportunity of maintaining the 
war in conjunction with them, upon that side, against the Flo- 
rentines, that they, having employment enough to defend their 
own houses, might not be able to send succor to Bologna ; and 
by this means to endeavor to make himself master of several 
places in Tuscany, from whence he might hope, by maintaining 
the divisions and most ardent hatred, which went on every day 
increasing, on account of Monte Pulciano, and the injuries the 
Florentines and Sienese committed against each other, to make 
himself master of the province, and at length King of Italy, an 
ambition he had long entertained. To this end he entered into 
negotiation with the ambassadors of Siena ; and on the twenty- 
second of September, 1389, the treaty was signed. The articles 
were, that the league should continue ten years ; that common 
cause should be made in a war against .Florence; that Galeazzo 
should maintain during the war, which was to be declared in 
fifteen days, seven hundred lancemen, with three horses to each 
lance, in his pay in Tuscany, for the service of the commons of 
Siena ; and the Sienese were to have three hundred in their pay 
in the same manner, with two hundred cross-bowmen ; that if 
their enemies should send forces from Tuscany into Lombardy, 
it should be lawful for the count to avail himself of these his 
forces, but that Siena should not be obliged to send her forces 
out of Tuscany ; that the count should not be obliged to fnake 
war or defend the Sienese against any other enemies than the Flo- 
rentines ; that any other community of Tuscany might be admit- 
ted into this league; that all the cities, lands,* fortresses, and 
places which by the league might be acquired in this war, should 
belong to the republic of Siena, if it had any previous pretensions 
to the dominion of it ; otherwise, every one should be left to its 
liberty, upon condition of holding the league and their allies for 

SIENA. 285 

friends, and their opposers for enemies, and of giving hospitality, 
passage, and provisions, on paying for them, to the people of the 
league. Graleazzo might make peace, truce, or armistice with 
the people of Florence, including the commons and people of 
Siena, with all their lands, cities, and subjects ; but the Sienese 
could not make either without his consent ; and the ratification 
was to be on both sides exchanged in three months. 

"A war ensued, which lasted till 1389, and was then concluded 
by a peace, and a confederation between many republics and 
princes; the Conte di Virtu, Florence, Bologna, Perugia, the 
Marquis of Ferrara, Siena, the Lord of Mantua, the Lords de' 
Malatesti, Lucca, the Count di Montefeltro, Pisa, &c. This 
confederation, however, was not well observed ; and the inhabit- 
ants of Monte Pulciano, particularly, violated it, as was supposed, 
at the instigation of Florence. This occasioned not only a rati- 
fication of the former treaty, but the formation of a new one 
between the republic of Siena and the Signor Giovan Graleazzo 
Visconti, Conte di Virtu, Lord and Imperial Vicar of Milan. The 
county or earldom of Virtu is a state in France, in the province 
of Champagne, which was given by King John in dower to Isa- 
bella his daughter, married to this Prince Giovan Galeazzo Vis- 
conti, which acquired him the title of Conte di Virtu ; and of 
which marriage was born Madame Valentina, wife of Louis, Duke 
of Orleans, brother of Charles VI., King of Prance, who had in 
dower the same Conte di Virtu, and the city of Asti in Piedmont ; 
of Charles, their first-born, Duke of Orleans, was born the King 
Louis XII ; of Giovanni, their second son. Count of Angouleme, 
was born Charles of Angouleme, father of the King Francis I. 
These successors of Valentina pretended, after the death without 
issue of Giovan Maria and Filippo Maria, their brothers, sons of 
Giovan Galeazzo, that the state of Milan belonged to them ; and 
for this reason the King Louis XII. and the King Francis I. 
afterwards made that celebrated war in Lombardy, and recovered 
and lost several times over the duchy of Milan. 

"To return firom this digression, — on the ninth of November, 
1389, the treaty was ratified and exchanged between Siena and 
the count; yet a fresh conspiracy was discovered in the city, 
excited by Spinello Tolommei in banishment, and the reformers, 
in conjunction with foreigners, and Monte Pulciano again rebelled ; 
but the arms of Siena, aided by the count and his captain, Charles 

286 ON GOVERNMENT. 

Malatesta, were triumphant at home and abroad, and this year 
the first bombardment ever seen in Tuscany was practised. Upon 
some little reverse of fortune, when the count lost the fortress of 
Padua, and when, to the calamities of war, those of pestilence 
and famine were added, in 1390, the noble families of Salimbeni, 
Tolommei, and Malavolti, unable to bear one another, and some 
of them stm less wiUing to submit to a superior, resumed their 
old employment of exciting seditions. Florence wanted peace, 
and th^ pope exhorted it The families of Tolommei and Mala- 
volti, still jealous of the Salimbeni, and their superior influence 
and favor with the count, began to stir up discontents. In their 
opinion, it was neither profitable nor glorious, nor even honorable 
for the republic to waste itself on all sides for the service of the 
Count Galeazzo, who, in the greatest exigency of the war, had, 
by withdrawing his forces, left it a prey to the enemy. From 
this specimen of his conduct, the Sienese could only expect, if 
he had been or should be victorious, a servitude which they 
would find very bitter and irksome. Every one who was not 
blinded by an immeasurable hatred, which the vulgar had con- 
ceived against the Florentines for the injuries they had done the 
republic, must already see the disposition of the count; and 
especially since the arrival from Milan of the Marquis Andreasso 
Cavalcabo, of his privy council, to take upon him the office of 
senator of Siena, to which he had been elected. The marquis 
had demanded, with great ceremony, in the name of his master, 
and on his behalf, that, for the conunon utility, the dominion of 
the city of Siena should be given to him. This embassy caused 
a wonderful change in the minds of all those who desired that 
their country should remain independent and free ; and the more, 
as they knew that the generality of the citizens, without listening 
to any arguments against it, and without any consideration of 
futurity, or of the nature of princes, never content with a middle 
flight, and never long to be depended on, were not only inclined 
to it, but had prepared a petition to the general council, that an 
answer should be given to the count's ambassador in these words: 
'We are content; and, as a singular favor, we supplicate his 
lordship that, from his benignity, he will be pleased to take upon 
him and accept the dominion and government of the city of 
Siena, its country and district, and of us his devoted children and 
servants ; and that he rule and govern us as to his excellency shall 

SIENA. 287 

seem convenient;' and, descending to particulars, they added 
and affirmed, * We are ready to give and confer upon him the 
city of Siena, its country and district, with its simple and mixed 
empire, and to transfer to him liberally the lordship and govern- 
ment of it, so that he may freely dispose of it, in all things, as 
of the city of Milan, or Padua, or any other the most submissive 
to him.' 

" The contents of this petition, although at first prepared in 
secret, had reached the ears of those who endeavored to promote 
peace with Florence and the publfb tranquillity, wonderfully 
irritated their minds, and incited them to show to their fellow- 
citizens the incredible damage to the city which must arise from 
such an unlimited submission ; and to foretell that, in a little 
time, when they should begin to experience the bitterness of 
servitude to such as are born and bred to liberty, they would in 
vain repent of their levity, rashness, and error. They recalled to 
the recollection of the citizens the great virtues of their fathers 
and other ancestors, which had defended their country, preserved 
their liberties, and transmitted both to them; and with how 
much generosity, bravery, and magnanimity, they themselves 
had defended it in arms against Charles IV., when present in 
Siena in 1368 with a powerful army. That they were under 
the most tender obligation to transmit the sacred trust to their 
posterity; and this they might easily do, to the inestimable 
benefit of the city, by a peace, which they had the power and 
opportunity to make. That when they should be delivered from 
tiie calamities of foreign war, and the yoke of tyranny which 
hung over their necks, they should be at leisure to make provi- 
sions of grain against the famine, and to find alleviations of 
their distresses firom the plague. 

" To these reasonings of the Tolommei and Malavolti were 
opposed those of the Salimbeni, who, having been long favorites 
of the Ghibelline party, were mortal enemies of the others, who 
were Guelphs. Moved by the interests of faction more than 
those of the public service, having procured the petition to be 
heard, and the decree passed and proclaimed by the council, in 
order to oppress the opposite party by arms, when they had not 
been able to answer their reasons, they drew over to their side 
M. Giovan Tedesco, head of the Ghibellines in Arezzo, with 
his cavalry, and marched through the city, accompanied with a 

288 ON GOVERNMENT. 

great multitude of people of their faction, and proclaimed the 
name of Giovan Galeazzo Visconti, Conte di Vertii and Lord of 
Milan, protector, and chief of the Ghibelline faction in Lom- 
bardy, and slew in this sedition twenty men of the followers of 
the adverse party, and made many prisoners ; among whom was 
Niccolo Malavolti, who, though he had often honorably acted for 
the service of the republic, was, with many others, beheaded. 

" The other members of the families of Tolommei and Mala- 
volti, with many of their followers, left the city, and retired to 
their castles. The people ot Siena, wearied out of patience by 
being the dupes and tools of two or three ambitious families, 
were easily led by one of them to rejoice in placing a master 
over all. They were now so inclined and disposed to servitude 
to one, in preference to a few, that, blinded with anger, they 
would not see the evident ruin which must come with the 
destruction of public liberty ; and neither themselves nor their 
leaders knowing the true cause of their divisions and mis- 
fortunes, nor any remedy by which union and liberty might be 
reconciled by law, they humbly solicited the subjugation of their 
country, and the privilege — of passive obedience. 

** On the fifteenth day of March, in the same year, the record 
was approved in the general council, and authority was given to 
the lords priors to appoint a syndic, and a deputy of the com- 
mons of Siena, to execute all that was contained in the resolu- 
tion, and to deliver the keys of the city to the commissaries of 
the Count Galeazzo, with its absolute dominion, without pact or 
convention of any kind." 

The example is here complete; and although the tyranny of 
the Visconti was afterwards overturned, various forms of a repub- 
lic attempted, exiles sent out and recalled as usual, yet, as the 
executive power was always left in an assembly, and inveterate 
factions were not legally separated from each other, nor empow- 
ered to control each other, the same divisions, seditions, and civil 
wars were perpetual, till the same weariness induced the people 
again to confer the sovereignty on the Grand-Duke of Etruria, 
where it remains to this time. It is not easy to conceive what 
further experiments can be made of a sovereignty in one assembly, 
or how the consequences to be drawn from them can be more 
decisive. Whether the assembly consists of a larger or a smaller 
number, of nobles or commons, of great people or little, of rich 

SIENA, 289 

or poor, of substantial men or the rabble, the effects are all the 
same, — No order ^ no safety^no liberty^ because no government of law. 
It is often said, that the republics of Greece, Rome, and 
Tuscany, produced in the minds of their citizens great virtues ; 
an ardent love for their country, undaunted bravery, the love of 
poverty, the love of science, &c. But if a little attention is 
bestowed upon the subject, these will be found to be very feeble 
arguments in their favor. It was not the love of their country, 
but of their faction. There were in every city three factions at 
least ; every citizen loved one third of his fellow-citizens, and 
hated the other two thirds. It is true that, in such a state of 
things, affection for friends strengthens in proportion to the fear 
and hatred of enemies ; and the desire of revenge becomes as 
strong a passion, and demands gratification as imperiously as 
friendship, and perhaps even more. How was it possible, when 
men were always in war and danger, that they should not be 
brave? Courage is a quality to be acquired by all men, by 
habit and practice. When scenes of death and carnage are 
every day before his eyes, how is it possible that a man should 
not acquire a contempt of death, from his familiarity with 
it, especially if life is made a burden, by continual exertion 
and mortification? The love of poverty is a fictitious virtue 
that never existed. A preference of merit to wealth has some- 
times existed under all governments; but, most of all, under 
aristocracies. This is wisdom and virtue in all. But can much 
of this be found in the histories of any country, that was not 
poor, and obliged to be so ? Can we see much of it in Florence 
and Siena? The love of science and literature always grows 
where there is much public deliberation and debate ; and in such 
governments, where every faculty as well as passion is always 
on the stretch, great energy of mind appears. But there is a 
form of government which produces a love of law, liberty, and 
country, instead of disorder, irregularity, and a faction ; which 
produces as much and more independence of spirit, and as 
undaunted bravery; as much esteem of merit in preference to 
wealth, and as great simplicity, sincerity, and generosity to all 
the community, as others do to a faction; which produces as 
great a desire of knowledge, and infinitely better faculties to 
pursue it ; which, besides, produces security of property, and the 
desire and opportunities for commerce, which the others obstruct 

VOL. V. 25 s 

290 ON GOVERNMENT. 

Shall any one hesitate then to prefer such a government as this 
to all others? A constitution in which the people reserve to 
themselves the absolute control of their purses, one essential 
branch of the legislature, and the inquest of grievances and state 
crimes, will always produce patriotism, bravery, simplicity, and 
science; and that infinitely better for the order, security, and 
tranquillity they will enjoy, by putting the executive power into 
one hand, which it becomes their interest, as well as that of the 
nobles, to watch and control. 

CHAPTER SIXTH. 

BOLOGNA. 

" The Tuscans were an ancient and original people of Italy, 
whose power was so considerable, that they extended their 
dominion from one sea to the other. These people, some ages 
before the foundation of Rome, built twelve cities, and among 
them Bologna, which was made the capital of the kingdom.* 
Some years afterwards, when Constantine, from his reverence for 
the holy see, had transported the throne of the empure to Byzanti- 
um, and the majesty of the emperors was become, from its dis- 
tance, little respected by the Italians, many cities, and Bologna 
among the rest, in 382, instituted a republic. Claterna, a neigh- 
boring city, at the distance of twelve miles, which had been built 
also by the Tuscans, likewise erected an independent republic ; 
but first an emulation arose, and afterwards a war, in which the 
Claternates were subdued, and they being as discontented with 
their obedience to the citizens of Bologna, as they had formerly 
been with that to their king, they were received, according to 
the custom of the Romans, into the country of the conquerors. 
This city was afterwards ruined by the barbarians so entirely, 
that no vestige of it remains but in history. 

" In 961, Otho,t Emperor of the Germans, came into Italy, 
delivered it from the yoke of the Berengarii, obtained of the 
pope the crown imperial, and, with general applause, the title of 
Otho the Great, This prince, perceiving that the cities of Italy, 
from their natural generosity of sentiment, and their distance 
from the emperor, could not be held in subjection, conceded to 
many of them their liberty, reserving a light tribute. 

" t Bologna obtained, with a sort of preeminence, and with a 
smaller tribute, her usual liberty, with the privilege of electing 

* Bombaci, p. 2. 

t Muratori, Annali^ torn. v. p. 897, anno 961-2. 

X Consecui Bologna con maggiori preeminenze, e minori gravezze la esperi- 
mentata liberta con facoltA d' eleggere i magistrati con mcro, e misto impero, e 
conforme all' instituto di Ottone, con tre sorte di consi^ diede forma alia sua 
republica, con titolo di comune. L' uno fix i\ consigliodi €redenza che era quello 
de' consoli, e de gli altri magistrati ; 1* ailtro fu il particolare che comprendeva i 

292 ON GOVERNMENT. 

her magistrates with a mixed authority ; and, conformably to the 
institution of Otho, gave a form to her republic, with three 
councils, with the title of a community. The one was the 
Council of the Oredenza^ which was that of the consuls and the 
other magistrates; the other was called the Special Council, 
and comprehended the nobility ; the third was called the General 
Council, and was that of the people, which, without the power 
of suffrage, was assembled, in order to be present at the ad- 
ministration of the oaths to the magistrates, and other similar 
public appearances." 

In this constitution there is a shadow, and no more, of three 
brantihes. The people, who ought to constitute an essential 
part, were excluded from all influence, and only called out occa- 
sionally to look at their rulers, and gratify their senses with 
shouts of acclamation. The credenza and the nobility formed 
an aristocracy, in which the magistrates were appointed, and 
the administration conducted. It seems to have been an imita- 
tion of the Roman consuls and senate, without even the poor 
expedient of a tribune to control them. 

In 1153, the cities of Italy began to elect pretors, whom they 
named podesta or bailiffs ; and, excited by their example, the 
citizens of Bologna elected Guido Sassi to that magistracy, and 
invested him publicly with the sceptre and the sword of justice. 
This was a reduction of the divisions of the republic to that 
union which is the effect of the government of a single person, 
against the corruption of which they endeavored to provide by 
the college of consuls, and by the brevity of annual magistrates. 

" Felsinus, King of Tuscany, was the founder of the royal 
city of Bologna, the mother of arts, sciences, and studies, and 
the nurse of laws, and, after his own name, called it Felsina. 
This city, which the Italian authors delight to describe, is situ- 
ated at the foot of the Apennines, in the middle of the Emilian 
Way, in the forty-fourth degree of latitude, between mountains 
and plains equally beautiful and fertile ; in the north a fruitful 
plain in the east the river Savena, in the west the Rhine ; not 
far from the sea, and in the neighborhood of lakes and rivers 

nobili ; il terzo fu il generale, et era quello del popolo, qnale per6 senza podesti 
de' suffrap, si raddunava ad esser presente a* siuiamenti de' magistrati, et ad 
altre somiglianti ap{)areiize. Historic menwrabtU delta CiUd di Bologna ristretfce 
da Gasparo Bombaci, p. 9. 

BOLOGNA. 293 

abounding with fish. The air is temperate, and the country 
plentiful of every thing necessary and useful to human life.* 
This glorious city was made by the kings of Tuscany the me- 
tropolis of their dominion, and the seat of their residence. 
Their empire indeed extended only over the twelve cities, of 
which this was the first ; the others were Veii, Chiusi, Cortona, 
Populonia, Tarquini, Vetulonia, Volterra, Volsena, Roselle, Pe- 
rugia, Arezzo, and Fiesole." 

In the year 1123, the form of the republic of Bologna, the 
state of the city, and the customs of the citizens, were as follows. 
Those who shall read their history, will easily perceive that this 
republic did not, in those ancient and rude times, administer the 
city scientifically, nor conduct skilfully the affairs of war. " They 
elected three councils, a special council, a general council, and a 
council of credenza, in the authority of which, with their magis- 
trates and judges, the supreme government consisted. The spe- 
cial council was elected annually in this manner. In the be- 
ginning of December the special and the general council were 
convoked, either by the consuls or by the pretor, according as 
one or the other of those officers happened to be in the govern- 
ment of the republic, in presence of whom, every one of the 
council, observing the order of his tribe, made his election and 
his drawing by lot For this purpose, there stood before a tribu- 
nal two urns, in one of which were placed to be drawn as many 
tickets as there were men of that tribe present in council, and 
on them their names were written; in the other were as many 
blanks, except ten written upon by the hands of two brothers, 
hermits of St Augustin, deputed by the council for that pur- 
pose. When the drawing was to be made of the first tribe, a 
boy of the age of twelve years, or less, drew a ticket from the 
principal urn, and the person whose name came out presented 
himself at the tribunal ; the boy at the second urn drew another 
ticket, and if by chance it was blank, that person was exclud- 
ed from the election of the council ; but if the ticket was written 
upon, he became an elector; and this method was followed, 
until the ten black or written tickets declared the ten electors of 
that tribe. This being done, the same was repeated by the men of 
the other tribes, one by one, until forty men, that is to say, ten for 

* Ghirardacci, Historia di Bolagna, p. 3. 
25* 

294 ON GOVERNMENT. 

each tribe, were electors. Then the forty electors retired to a secret 
place, and elected six hundred men, that is to say, one hundred 
and fifty for each tribe, excluding, however, the mean and poor 
artisans, occupied in low and base works, and minors of eighteen 
years; neither was any one obliged to accept of this office. And 
these six hundred men then presented themselves as the special 
council. In the same manner and order, in substance, in three 
days, the council of credenza was elected ; but all the doctors of 
laws, without other qualification or appointment, might enter this 
council, and that of the six hundred. After three days more, 
the general council were elected exactly in the same mode ; but 
he who had been an elector in one council could not be an elec- 
tor in another. These councils assembled sometimes all toge- 
ther, and at other times separately, according to the nature of 
their business, and they assembled at the sound of a bell or 
trumpet There were provided by these councils three beUs, the 
lesser, the middle, and the greater ; for the special council the 
smaller bell was rung, for the council of credenza the middle, 
and for the council general the greater. It was forbidden to the 
consul, or the pretor, to convoke the councils, if he had not pre- 
viously ordered the business which was to be treated by the 
chancellor to be written in a book provided for that purpose. 
When the council was collected, the chancellor publicly proposed 
the subject that was to be considered ; and, this done, the ora- 
tors, who were four, and stood near the tribunal of the magis- 
trates, reasoned in public. A like privilege was granted to the 
orators of the magistrates, who were also four ; but this only 
touching the business of the magistrates, and their opinions, in 
answer to the question separately put to them, were written down, 
and called the resolution or division. It was sometimes tolerated, 
when it appeared to be necessary, that private or individual 
magistrates should harangue in council, who, mounted in a pul- 
pit, with a loud voice delivered their opinions; and upon the 
questions proposed by them a division was made, or a resolu- 
tion taken. These divisions were made in various ways. Some- 
times the opinion of every one was taken in secret, and written 
down by a notary, successively ; at other times every one gave 
his vote openly and audibly, and frequently the decision was 
made by white and black beans; now, those of one opinion 
went to one side and those of a different judgment to the other; 

BOLOGNA. 295 

then one party stood up, and another sat down ; and in these 
cases the voices were counted by the ministers publicly. The 
will and resolution of the council being determined, the decree 
was published, and recorded in a book, and another council 
could not be convoked till this decree was made. A number 
of notaries were employed ; some to write the speeches and 
opinions, others to publish the decrees, and others to receive 
the laws. Such were the usages of the councils of this re- 
public, which was honored with the name of commons, or 
community. 

" Of the magistrates, some were ordinary, others extraordinary ; 
the ordinary were created and deputed every year in the repub- 
lic, and were called the magistrates of the court ; the extraordi- 
nary were those who were deputed for some extraordinary busi- 
ness. The principal ordinary magistrates were the consuls of 
the community, or the pretor instead of them; the consuls of 
justice, the judges of the community, the attorney-general, the 
judges of appeals, the judges of new crimes, the judges of the 
office of exiles or outlaws, the judges of new causes, a judge 
who was the executioner of sentences, and the questor ; and they 
all had their soldiers and notaries. The extraordinary were the 
legates, curators, and syndics. 

" The same mode was observed in the choice of consuls as of 
counsellors. The election of pretor was in this manner. In the 
month of September the councils, general and special, were called 
together at the pleasure of the magistrate ; but before they con- 
vened, the day and hour that each tribe was to go out to the 
choice by lot was published ; and, in the manner already described 
in the election of counsellors, the forty men were drawn from one 
and the other council assembled, excluding, however, the magis- 
trates ; these forty suddenly retired to a secret chamber, where 
they were locked up from the consuls of the state and the 
merchants and bankers, that no one might, by word or letter, 
corrupt them; and if, through the whole night and the next 
day, by consent at least of twenty-seven of them they had not 
created a pretor, they lost the authority to elect ; and the next 
day the pretor convoked the general council and the council 
of credenza, and from one and the other were deputed forty 
men, as before ; and if these, to the number of twenty-seven, 
could not agree, the election and deputation of the pretor was 

296 ON GOVERNMENT. 

referred to a suflrage or joint ballot of the general council and 
council of credenza. The pretor might be elected from any 
city, at the pleasure of the council, provided he was not a rela- 
tion of any of the electors as far as the third degree, nor pos- 
sessed a real estate in Bologna or its territory, nor was less than 
six-and-thirty years of age ; and it Was an injunction always to 
elect a man of reputation, virtuous, noble, and wise. Of right, 
according to the statute, a pretor could not be elected from the 
place of the antecedent pretor; yet this was sometimes prac- 
tised ; but he must not be his relation. 

"The election ended and published to the councils, public 
letters were written to the pretor elect, requesting his acceptance 
of the honor that was offered him ; and upon the day when he 
made his entry into the city, he was met and honored by all the 
people. The pretor had the same prerogatives and authorities 
which the consuls had ; and therefore, according to the times, the 
republic was governed sometimes by consuls and sometimes by 
pretors ; and sometimes there were at once both consuls and a 
pretor, as appears by instruments signed both by the consuls and 
a pretor in the years 1177 and 1179. It appears, that instead of 
consuls, the citizens sometimes turned to an election of a foreigner 
for a pretor, to compose the discord which arose between those 
of the citizens who abused their liberty, to the end that they 
might call delinquents to account, and punish with more severity, 
and not fluctuate so easily from love or hatred, fear or favor. But 
because ifor the most part the pretors were not skilled in the laws, 
at first two, and afterwards four judges of the law were called to 
aid them ; and the pretors were decorated with high hats, long 
swords, and a sceptre, to denote their power (potestd) ; and from 
this they were afterwards vulgarly called podest^. Besides the 
consuls or the pretor, in whom resided the sum total of the re- 
public in peace and war, certain other magistrates, as has been 
mentioned, governed, and the mode of electing them was the 
same. Two tribes were called out to the lot one day, and the 
two others the next ; and the deputed electors were prohibited 
to choose a father, son, brother, or any other relation, and more- 
over such as were inept, unskilful, or incapable of such govern- 
ment ; and according as any one was elected, he was proclaimed 
with a loud voice in council. To obviate all frauds which 
might be attempted, the ten written tickets being drawn, all 

BOLOGNA. 297 

the rest were examined in presence of the council, to see that 
there were no more than the law allowed. It was provided by 
law, that no one could elect or proclaim a magistrate, who did 
not pay twenty pence into the purses of the treasury, which were 
exacted by the pretor ; and it was forbidden to any one to accept 
of the office, if he had not been out of it one year. None could 
be elected, but by that tribe in which he had his domicil ; and 
every one who entered on a magistracy, took an oath to exercise 
his office with integrity and fidelity. 

<< Besides the magistrates already mentioned, there were those 
of the soldiery ; the mode of electing whom was the same, but 
the government different The command in chief was given 
to the consuls or to the pretor. The officers of the army 
among the cavalry, in the infantry, of the people, and lastly 
of the carroccio^ were different The officers or prefects of 
the foot, of the horse, and of the people, because they carried a 
standard, {gtrnfalone,) were called gonfaloniers ; and each one in 
his tribe was elected by his fellows, in the manner before de- 
scribed. Moreover, some citizens served on, foot, and some others 
on horseback ; and those who performed the service of their own 
accord, did it more willingly than when deputed by commission 
of the magistrates to that purpose. Wherefore, when any enter- 
prise was undertaken by the military order, every one, whether 
of the foot or the horse, according to the necessity, went out 
under his own standard or ensign ; and if the service required a 
greater appearance, each gonfalonier of the people l^d out his 
own tribe ; and then it was said, that the people were gone out 
It rarely happened that all the tribes went out at once ; but at 
one time, the infantry of one tribe ; at another, the cavalry of 
another ; now one whole tribe, and then another. All the men 
were enrolled in the militia, from eighteen years of age to seventy, 
at which age men were released from all public offices, so as to 
be even rejected firom the council. And if by accident any old 
man, who exceeded that age, inconsiderately entered the council, 
the election was annulled. In every parish, those who kept horses 
for war were described or registered in companies, by deputed 
muster-masters. These companies, some of which were regis- 
tered by tens, and some by twenty-fives, according to the number 

' See page 199. 

298 ON GOVERNMENT. 

of the soldiers described by the muster-masters, at certain periods 
conducted their horses to officers deputed fw the service, to be 
reviewed and approved; and notaries took down their names, 
with their furniture, and the quality of the horses. 

" Military expeditions were of two sorts ; one with squadrons 
or legions of light horse, the other with regular armies; and 
great was the difference between being ordered out upon an ex- 
cursion of troopers, and an expedition with the army. Because 
of the frequent excursions of the cavalry, it was ordained that in 
every tribe there should be public marshals or blacksmiths, and 
every master of a burgh should have ready and in order all the 
instruments for shoeing horses, to the end that the cavalry pass- 
ing that way, and having occasion, might be always served. The 
treasurer paid a certain stipend to every magistrate, and kept an 
account of the public revenues and all expenses. The revenues 
consisted in tributes, gifts, and tolls or customs. The gifts were 
upon the gates, bankers, lands, mills, oxen, &c. ; and if the reve- 
nue was not sufficient for the expenses of the war, a tax was 
imposed, by order of the council, upon polls and estates, accord- 
ing to every man's possessions and incomes. Thus much con- 
cerning the ordinary magistrates. 

" The extraordinary were always elected by the pretor, as the 
ambassadors, directors of public works, and the syndics. No 
magistrate could go upon an embassy; and to any one who 
was sent out of the territory upon an embassy, they assigned 
three horsps, two notaries, and one cook. If the embassy was 
to the pope or the emperor, the expense, attendants, and ser- 
vants, were ordered at the discretion of the council. A com- 
mission was given the ambassador in writing, and the whole 
legation was governed by instructions. It was ordained in 
general terms, that no one should petition or seek to be created 
of the number of magistrates ; and if any one was known to seek 
it, his conduct was publicly related in council, and it was re- 
proached to him as the greatest infamy. The officers of state, 
with the title of podestd, with their judges and notaries, were 
elected partly from the mountains, and partly from the plains or 
low lands. The castles which were subject to the Bolognese 
elected also their own consuls, and, when they were commanded, 
went to war with them, and carried various standards. All the 
burdens and tributes were much heavier upon them than upon 

BOLOGNA. 299 

the citizens, excepting only some persons who, for particular 
merit, had been exempted by the council. 

" There were many colleges or companies in the city, as that 
of the merchants, the goldsmiths, and the artificers. The mer- 
chants and goldsmiths created their own consuls, and the com- 
panies of artificers appointed their own treasurers; and those 
who were able to do it assembled together in associations for 
the promotion of commerce and improvement in the arts. The 
people and the city afterwards increasing, there were elected 
certain colleges of arms, one called that of the Lombards^ another 
della Branca^ and another del Griffone ; and these had the care 
of the arms of the republic, and were decorated by the city with 
many privileges ; and the foreigners who were of these companies 
were made citizens of Bologna, if they had been householders 
in the city ten years, and might be of the council of the commons, 
stewards of companies, and magistrates, equally with other citi- 
zens. The greatest part of the laborers in the country were slaves 
of the nobles, from which servitude, however, they were after- 
wards liberated, the community paying a certain sum of money 
to their masters. 

"All these particulars of their constitution were found in the 
ancient customs, or the privileges granted or confirmed by the 
emperors, or in the decrees of the councils, or in the laws of the 
city; the former were called reformationi, the latter stattUi. 
The decrees were those ordinances which, at the prayer of the 
pretor, were adopted by the councils, or made by him and ap- 
proved by them. The laws were no other than the ordinances 
made by the legislators, who were called statutieri. No ordinary 
magistrate was of these legislators, but they were deputed, accord- 
ing to the wants of the city, from time to time, and, after the 
example of the Athenians, reviewed the old laws, and altered, 
amended, accommodated, and reformed them, according to their 
judgment. The laws which these legislators made were reported 
to the council, by them recited publicly to the people, and written 
in the volumes of civil law, which to this day are called the Sta- 
tuto. This constitution was preserved till after the year 1250. 

" The houses were of wood, without much ornament or skill 
in architecture ; and from this cause they were frequently exposed 
to terrible fires. Among all the buildings, the most noble objects 
were the steeples built upon the churches, and the towers built 

300 ON GOVERNMENT. 

by all the principal citizens. The frequent fires, and the common 
calamities of Italy, the deluges of water, and the frequent exiles 
of the citizens, are supposed to have destroyed many objects, and 
buried in oblivion many facts worthy of eternal remembrance." 

There are greater traces of an artificial and scientific legislation 
in this constitution, than in either that of Florence or Siena; 
nevertheless, all authority, legislative, executive, and judicial, 
was in one council ; for, when the special and general council 
met together, they acted as one, and when one met alone, it 
acted as sovereign; the podesta, and his judges and notaries, 
were only deputies of the council. Although so much pains was 
taken, by mixing lot with choice, by rotations, and other prudent 
precautions, to prevent ambition, faction, and sedition from en- 
tering, all was ineffectual. 

Omitting most of the wars, foreign and domestic, we may 
select a few instances from whence the operation of this form of 
government may be evinced. 

" Henry V., as he was called, but of Germany the Sixth,^ after 
his succession to his father Frederick, passing through Bologna 
with Constantia his wife, in his way to Rome to receive the 
imperial crown, was magnificently received by the people, and 
entertained by Grerardo, Bishop of Bologna, in the bishop's palace ; 
in acknowledgment of his kind reception, he gave to Gerardo the 
title of Prince, which was afterwards retained by the bishops of 
Bologna. Henry was not only crowned as emperor, but with 
much ceremony invested with the kingdom of the two Sicilies, 
as the inheritance of his wife Constantia. 

" In the next year, Gerardo, Bishop of Bologna, by his favor 
with the emperor and the pope, and the privileges he had obtained 
for the city, was grown into such reputation for justice and virtue 
with all men, that he was constituted pretor with great popularity, 
and in the beginning of his dignity he contracted a friendship 
with Albert, the Count of Prato, and made a treaty for mutual 
defence. Grerardo having the first year administered in such a 
manner as to be thought a bright example of a good and mode- 
rate ruler, seemed a little afterwards to be changed in his whole 
nature, began to desire innovation, and openly to favor the ple- 
beians, oppressing the nobles and first men of the city. This 

1 Gihirardacci, lib. iv. p. 101. 

BOLOGNA. 301 

gave occasion to grave disorders and seditions ; for the patricians, 
who had conferred the office upon him, and were accustomed 
and habituated to the command of others, could not easily tole- 
rate this injury and the evident partiality of the pretor ; so they 
assembled in the palace, and created twelve consuls, men of 
great authority in Bologna. 

" Gerardo, hearing of the election of consuls, was m high wrath, 
and began to threaten them with his frown ; but they quickly 
published to the people that he was deposed from the office of 
pretor. Giacomo Orsi, a powerful citizen, and a favorer of Ge- 
rardo, collected a company of armed men, and attempted to 
oppose the resolution of the consuls and patricians ; whereupon 
Specialino GrifToni, not less celebrated in letters than in arms, 
and one who was studious and intent upon maintaining the 
republic, turned round to the nobles, and harangued them as 
follows : * Is it consistent with our duty or our honor, fellow-citi- 
zens, to suffer that authority which for three hundred years and 
more we have enjoyed, of directing this our republic, to be wrested 
from us by a private person, placed by us alone in the govern- 
ment of it, for the general safety of the city ? Shall we submit 
to become likfe the vilest populace, esteemed of no importance or 
authority, and subjected to that Gerardo, to whom we are and 
forever shall be objects of jealousy and terror, so long as our 
republic shall remain safe and sound ? Rouse up your spirits at 
once ; never think of bearing this insupportable tyranny ; and let 
the object itself, and the opportunity of the moment, stir you to 
this enterprise, infinitely more than my words; and accept of me, 
according to your pleasure, either as a soldier or a captain in the 
service to which I am willing to devote my soul and body.' " 

Amidst all this aristocratical thunder, the still voice of reason 
and experience whispers to a candid reader the probability that 
the nobles were more tyrannical than Gerardo ; that the people 
were impatient under it; Gerardo disposed to alleviate their 
burdens ; and the nobles thence alarmed with the apprehension 
of a master over themselves, rather than over the people.^ 

1 Cette premiere indication de leur jalousie, ce premier appel 4 la decision des 
armes, sur les droits des deux ordres rivaux, ^toit ccpendant, pour eux-memes, 
d'un bien dangereux exemple ; car Us n'^toient pas Ics plus forts. Le peuple 
pouvoit a son tour recoirvrer, par les memes moyens, Tinnuence qu'on lui ravis- 
soit, il pouToit les chasser eux-m^mes de la ville. Sismondi, lUp. ItaL. torn. 2, 
p. 285. 

VOL. V. 26 

302 ON GOVERNMENT. 

^ The speech being ended, he seized his arms, and, accompa- 
nied by the consuls and the greater part of the nobles, marched 
to the bishop's palace. Giacomo Orsi, with those devoted to 
him, opposing them in arms, they came to action ; but Giacomo, 
not being able to resist the impetuosity of the assailants, with 
great difficulty saved himself, with Gerardo, by flying from the 
city. The consuls, disappointed by their flight, were the more 
exasperated ; and seeing Orsi out of their power, they declared 
him a rebel against the republic, confiscated all his property, and 
ordered his house and tower to be razed to the ground." 

Such decision delivered the city for the present from this vio- 
lent sedition, and with as much virtue as that which delivered 
the Roman patricians from Mselius or Manlius. i 

<^ But the next year, under new consuls, although it appeared 
that the sedition of Grerardo was quieted, and that no disposition 
remained for innovation, yet all on a sudden, on the first of July, 
some of his abettors proceeded from words to blows with some 
of the adverse party, in which afliray Pietro Scannabecchi lost his 
right hand, and Scannp,becco Ramponi lay mortally wounded, 
among many others both killed and wounded. The day after, 
both parties prepared their arms, and came to battle again in the 
palace of the community ; when Giuseppe Occelletti and Tomaso 
Toschi da i Gieremei, supporters of Gerardo, were slain ; where- 
upon the consuls were again obliged to take arms against Ge- 
rardo, who, having taken possession of a castle called Sorresano, 
had there fortified himself. They sent out Guglielmo Malavolti, 
a consul, with a chosen band of soldiers, who conducted himself 
with so much skill and bravery, that he drove Gerardo from his 
fortress, and burnt his castle. In a short time the Emperor 
Henry, by a decree, liberated the bishop Gerardo, whom he called 
his Prencipe, from the oath of calumny} and permitted him to 
exercise his functions in all his causes, and those of the bishopric, 
by an administrator, or other legitimate person. 

" The next year, 1195, it seems they tried the experiment of a 
pretor again," (that is to say, as we may conjecture the family of 
Gieremei and their party prevailed in the public councils to carry 
this point,) " and Guido Cino was elected. But as he followed, 
in his administration, the steps of Gerardo, after having done 

1 " Henrico per Decreto liber6 Gerardo in tuttc le cause del giuramento della 
calannla." This was an oath prescribed by the civil law. 

BOLOGNA. 303 

intolerable things against many persons, he was dishonorably 
deposed from his office, and accused of an infinite number of 
iniquities ; and, attempting to fly, he was made prisoner by those 
whom he had offended, all his teeth were drawn out of his head 
for his punishment, and then he was set at liberty. In his place, 
Guido da Vilmercato, of Milan, was appointed. 

" In 1202, civil discords arose in the city, by which Bologna 
was not a little troubled and afflicted. The first disorder that 
occurred, arose from an ancient enmity between the Asinelli and 
the Scannabecchi. These two factions meeting in the high street, 
with a sudden and impetuous onset engaged in arms, and many 
were killed and wounded on both sides. This quarrel was 
composed by the interposition of the pretor and the other 
nobles; but another soon arose from some private offence; 
for Giovanni Tettalasini had killed Guido Pepoli. This enmity 
between these two families continued forty years before it was 
pacified. 

"In 1212, upon some public occasion, among a great con- 
course of nobility on horseback, Gieremia Malavolti, falling from 
his horse, was killed, to the grief of the people and the em- 
peror." 

And, probably to the equal joy of the nobility. 

" In the year 1218 there were in the city of Bologna ten thou- 
sand scholars at the academy for the study of the law ; in such 
reputation was that university. 

" 1 The quarrel between Frederick the emperor and Gregory the 
pope, revived in Bologna the party distinctions of Guelphs and 
Ghibellines, drawn from Germany in the time of Henry IV. 
Not only some cities favored the emperor, and others the pontiff, 
but in the city of Bologna the citizens arrived at that degree of 
extreme madness, that, in hatred of each other, they strove to 
deprive each other of their lives and fortunes together. Sons 
became enemies to their fathers, and brothers to brothers ; and, 
as if it was not enough t^ shed their own blood, like mad dogs, 
they proceeded to demolish houses, and to burning the cities, 
the trees, and the corn. This diabolical pestilence produced such 
an aversion to each other, that they studied to distinguish them- 
selves in all things ; in their clothes, in the colors they wore, in 

1 Ghirardacci, lib. v. p. 146. 

304 ON GOVERNMENT. 

their actions, their speech, their walk, their food, their saluta- 
tions, their drink, their manner of cutting bread, in folding their 
napkins, in the cut of their hair, and innumerable other extrava- 
gances equally whimsical. A plague truly horrible, a flame 
wholly inextinguishable, which proved the extinction of many 
noble families, and the ruin of many miserable cities. 

" The next year, under the pretorship of Uberto Visconti, a 
cruel war arose out of a violent sedition. Godfrey, Count of 
Bomagna, favorite of Frederick, took Manzolino, a castle of 
Romagna, and drove out from it the prefect of Bologna. This 
officer's return stimulated the people to a violent revolt, because 
every one lamented that the castle had been lost by the neg- 
lect or misconduct of the pretor, and that of those who governed 
in the city ; and in such manner did this indignation, conceived 
in the hearts of all, increase, that, seizing their arms against the 
will of the republic, they collected together in the piazza, imme- 
diately made one Giuseppe Toschi their leader, a man not only 
bold but rash, and, with the loudest cries, ran tumultuously to 
the palace of the pretor, where Giuseppe demanded the standard 
of the people, and the armed guards of the palace, declaring 
that he would go out and meet the enemy, and prevent his com- 
mitting further depredations on the territory of Bologna. The 
pretor refused his demand; but Giuseppe, consulting only his 
own temerity, broke open the gates of the palace, forced his 
entry into it, ransacked every thing, and burned all the papers of 
the pretor. In order to acquire more favor with the people, 
he turned out all the public tables, rung the bell, contrary to the 
will of the pretor and the guards; and having thus collected 
all the people armed in the piazza, he had the carroccio brought 
out, and ordered all things for a war. He then arranged four 
thousand infantry under Bornio Gieremei, whose tool he proba- 
bly was, eight hundred cavalry under Orso Caccianemici and 
Prendiparte Prendiparti, and four hundred men at arms under 
Alberto Galluzzi and Lodovico Ariosti. 

^' In this curious manner a foundation was laid for a change in 
the commonwealth, and an institution of the People. They 
called by this name. The People, the new republic placed in the 
hands of the people, whose superintendents were the prefect of 
the people, the antiani^ the consuls of the merchants, and the 
masters of colleges. According to Thomas Aquinas, the antiani 

BOLOGNA. 305 

were instituted in the cities of Italy, as the tribunes were in 
Rome, that they might take the part of the plebeians ; but after 
this Giuseppe, whom they created prefect of the people, no 
other prefect is mentioned till 1255. The Florentines and the 
Genoese having ordained a republic of the people about the 
same time, introduced also the prefect of the people and the 
antiani; and this popular government was sustained, with its 
proper councils, to whom the prefect and the antiani were go- 
vernors, the pretors and judges of the pretors remaining as 
they had been before that time ; six antiani were created from 
all the four-and-twenty tribes ; and the use and creation of 
these antiani continued as long as the republic, their number 
only being increased, as well as that of the consuls of merchants 
and masters of colleges. 

** By this change of government the republic became involved 
in two wars at once, with Imola and M odena ; and the people 
of Bologna, finding their affairs not succeed to their wishes, 
rose in a tumult, and killed Rolando Formaglihi, superintendent 
of Humazzo, because his fortress was taken by the enemy, they 
having suspicions that he had betrayed it for money. 

" The animosities of the Guelphs and Ghibellines mixing with 
the disputes between the nobles and commons, produced such 
convulsions in all the cities, especially in those adhering to 
Frederick, that in Modena, Reggio, Parma, Cremona, Bergamo, 
and Pavia, those who favored the church were finally expelled 
by the power of their adversaries, and driven into exile; and 
Bologna still continued to be agitated with seditions, as well as 
with disputes with the bishop and the pope, by whom the people 
were excommunicated. 

" In 1234,^ was settled the controversy with the bishop, but a 
greater tumult than had ever been known arose, on account of 
Alberto Lambertazzi, who being in the piazza, and seeing Cra- 
briel Sanzio his enemy, killed him. This homicide put arms 
into the hands of a multitude of citizens. Although the pretor, 
not having the criminal in his power, declared him an outlaw, 
the relationsand friends of the deceased did not the less greedily 
watch for a severe revenge. As they saw that the party of 
the Lambertazzi were upon their guard, and went about pre- 

i Ghirardacci, lib. vi. p. 156. 
26* T 

306 ON GOVERNMENT. 

pared, with a great retinue of armed men, they consulted upon 
modes of getting into action. Meeting one day with Alphonso, 
the brother of Albert, they came to a rude scuffle together, in 
which much blood was shed, and more mischief would have 
been done, if the interposition of the pretor had not interrupted 
it; but this broil was the beginning of discords and seditions 
which ]asted a long time." 

The hatred between the most considerable families had grown 
so inveterate, — having continued, with few interruptions, for 
forty years, namely, from the death of Guido Pcppoli, — that much 
bloodshed was apprehended; but John of Bologna, a famous 
preacher, coming into the city, preached peace, charity, and 
benevolence, to his immortal honor, with so much success, that 
a kind of reconciliation was made between the families of Del- 
fini and M sdataschi ; Torelli and Andalo; Griffoni, Artenisii, 
and Castel de' Britti ; Gralluzzi and Carbonesi ; Lambertini and 
Scannabecchi ; Pepoli and Tettalasini ; who had been constant 
enemies; and several intermarriages were contracted among 
them. 

" In the year 1244 is found the next mention of the antiani of 
the people, who presided in the instituted republic of the peo- 
ple, and moderated in two councils ; one called the litfle coun- 
cil, which they, with the consuls of the merchants and gold- 
smiths, masters of the arts and of arms, the gonfaloniers of 
the people, and of the collegia and their counsellors, composed ; 
and the other called the grand council, in which they were again 
found, with the other larger number of counsellors ; and all that 
was by these ordained was perpetually to be observed ; so that 
all laws were made, executed, and judged by the majority of 
this single council, or by persons deputed by them." 

The same original and essential fault that had occasioned 
their miseries, and continued to increase them. 

"In 1248, secretly making great preparations for war, and 
calling to their assistance the March, Romagna and Azzo da 
Este, they created eight noblemen to conduct the war against 
the Modenese ; these were Alberto Galluzzi, Lambertazzi, Pren- 
diparti, Samaritani, Scannabecchi, Ariosti, Guido Gieremci, and 
Cattellani. For captain-general they elected the Marquis Azzo 
da Este; but he being infirm, to show his gratitude to the 
senate, sent them three thousand cavalry and two thousand 

BOLOGNA. 307 

foot Gieremei had command of half the men at arms, and 
Lambertazzi of the infantry." 

It appears from this, that though the government was called 
popular and the people, that the people was no more than an 
aristocracy, and that the nobles were not excluded. The two 
families of Gieremei and Lambertazzi were very near the head 
of the republic, and, as we shall soon see, most eagerly contend- 
ing for the foremost station. 

" An obstinate battle was fought, in which great exertions both 
of skill and bravery were shown, and a complete victory ob- 
tained by the Bolognese, and King Hentio^ taken prisoner. In 
1254, the treaties with the Marquis da Este and the commons 
of Ferrara were confirmed in the council general and special of 
the commons of Bologna. The next year the republic adorned 
itself with a new magistrate, Ricardo Villa being made pretor ; 
but because the pretor was the superintendent of the republic of 
nobles, which was called The Commons^ it was now their plea- 
sure that there should be a prefect, or captain of the people, 
who should govern the popular republic called Tlie People. 
This dignity had been laid aside a long time, though it had 
been the original title of the first magistrate, but was now 
revived, and Giordano Lucino was elected to it. Separating the 
functions, it was ordained, that the pretor should have the au- 
thority and jurisdiction of the city, and be superintendent of 
the councils of the commons, and that the captain should ad- 
minister in war abroad ; that within the city the councils of the 
people should govern, and confer in the public business with 
the anlianiP 

" In the year 12o7, a transaction was completed, which alone 
ought to be sufficient to immortalize the republic of Bologna. 
There is, among the records of that city, a book entitled * The 
Paradise of Pleasure,' which contains the decree of the third of 
June, 1257, by which all the slaves and villains were manu- 
mitted, and annually taxed in a certain quantity of corn, which 
was consigned to the care of an officer, already instituted and 
called the pretor of the sack, who was appointed in the same 
manner with the pretors of the castles. This law, at first pre- 
pared by legislators, was recited and approved by the councils 

1 The 9011 of Frederick. 

308 ON GOVERNMENT. 

of the people, assembled, according to the usage, by the ringing 
of bells. The record is in substance, — ' In the beginning God 
Almighty planted a paradise of pleasure, in which he placed 
man whom he had created and clothed with a white robe of 
innocence, giving him a perfect and perpetual liberty ; but the 
wretch, unmindful of his own dignity and the divine munifi- 
cence, tasted of the apple forbidden him by the commandment 
of Heaven, and thereby dragged himself and all his posterity 
down into this valley of misery, poisoned the human race, and 
most miserably bound it in the chains of diabolical servitude ; 
and thus, from incorruptible it was made corruptible ; from im- 
mortal, mortal; subjected to continual vicissitudes and most 
grievous slavery. God, however, beholding that the whole world 
had perished, had compassion on the human race, and sent his 
only begotten son, born of the Virgin Mary, who, cooperating 
with the grace of the Holy Ghost, to the glory of his owa 
dignity, breaking the bonds with which we were held captive, 
restored us to our primitive liberty ; and therefore it is very justly 
questioned, whether men, whom nature from the beginning pro- 
duced and created free, and the law of nations only subjected 
to the yoke of servitude, ought not to be restored to the blessing 
of manumission. 

" * These men have been a shame to the cause of liberty. In 
consideration of which, the noble city of Bologna, which has 
always fought for liberty, recollecting the past and providing for 
the future, in honor of Jesus Christ, our Lord and Redeemer, 
has redeemed, with a price in money, all those who, in the city of 
Bologna and its bishopric, were found confined in a servile con- 
dition, and after a diligent examination, decreed them to be free ; 
ordaining that no one, constrained in any kind of slavery, in the 
city or episcopacy, shall dare to remain or be detained in it, to 
the end that so great a mass of natural liberty, redeemed by a 
price, should not be liable to be corrupted by any remaining mix- 
ture of slavery, as a moderate fermentation corrupts the whole 
mass, and the society of one evil depraves many that are good. 
In the time of that noble man and podesta, D. Accursius of So- 
rixana, whose reputation spreading far and wide, shines like a 
star, and under the examination of D. Jacob Grataceli, his judge 
and assessor, whose skill, wisdom, constancy, and temperance, 
recommend him to all men, the present memorial is made, which 

BOLOGNA. 309 

by its proper name ought justly to be called Paradise, contain- 
ing the names of all the masters and all the slaves, both male 
and female, that it may appear by what servants and maids 
liberty is acquired, and at what price; to wit, ten pounds for 
those of more than fourteen years of age, whether men or 
women, and eight pounds for all under that age, to every master 
for every one whom he holds in servitude. This memorial was 
written by me, Conrad Sclariti, a notary, deputed to the office 
of servants and maids ; and may it remain to posterity a monu- 
ment of this transaction." * 

Amidst the melancholy gloom of factions and licentiousness, 
of injustice and cruelty, of fraud and violence, such a gleam of 
humanity, equity, and magnanimity, is refreshing. It shall be 
left to our own reflections, the first of which will undoubtedly 
be a wish to see a paradise of pleasure in each of the United 
States of America. 

^ " The temporary reconciliation of the nobles had produced 
prosperity and success to the republic ; but as the constitution 
remained the same, and war alone had preserved the benevolent 
impressions of John the preacher, as soon as that was over the 
seditions of the citizens again disturbed all their quiet and feli- 
city. The Galluzzi, Lambertazzi, Artenisi, Britti, Carbonesi, 
Scannabecchi, all noble families and greatly esteemed in Bologna, 
could no longer restrain their passions, and, as the historian very 
justly observes, God knows how they could have restrained 
them so long. 

" The Lambertazzi were the first to set fire to the train of 
jealousy and indignation, hatred and revenge, and to begin the 
ruin of their country. Provoked by some words, reported to 
them by their flatterers, and perhaps invented or exaggerated, 
they took arms, and coming fiercely to action with the Gieremei, 
a great quantity of blood was shed on both sides ; they would 
have proceeded to greater extremities, if Ramponi, a man in 
high esteem, had not dexterously interposed, and by his wisdom 
and courage, brought them to an accommodation ; yet the quar- 
rel continued to break out at times, and prevailed even among 

* Ghirardacci, lib. vi. p. 194. 

In a copy of this work which Thomas Brand Hollis presented to the author, 
he specifies the recording of this act as meriting immortality for it 
1 Ghirardacci, lib. yii. p. 197. 

310 ON GOVERNMENT. 

the scholars. One of the tribunes of the city was dangerously 
wounded, and Raimondo, a Genoese, was beheaded, but this 
did not end the disorder. The Galluzzi and Carbonesi took up 
the dispute, and several horrid murders were committed, and 
several of the dependencies of the republic, taking advantage 
of the opportunity, or excited by partisans, rebelled." 

The disorder lurked, however, in some degree of secrecy till 
1260, when it broke out again, and the parties began to collect 
together companies of idle vagabonds, and on a thousand occa- 
sions endeavored to come to action. 

" Finally, the Gieremei went out in arms against the Lamber- 
tazzi, the Galluzzi against the Carbonesi, the Lambertini against 
the Scannabecchi, and the Artinesi against the Britti. They con- 
tinued engaged a long space of time, each party assisted by the fa- 
milies of its adherents. The pretor, with all his court and forces, 
was obliged to turn out, and partly by his menaces, and partly 
by some small remains of reverence for authority, he put a stop 
to this most sanguinary and horrible rencounter, and obliged 
those who remained alive to return to their houses. 

" In 1264, these intestine broils were renewed, particularly 
between the famiUes of Lambertazzi and Gieremei, and whUe 
many were anxious to make peace between them, and were 
occupied in contriving the means of it, the Lambertazzi, little 
inclined to any accommodation, by exerting all their influence 
and intrigues, on purpose to offend the Gieremei, procured that 
Peter Pagani, a powerful citizen of Imola, should be made lord 
of it, to the end that he might expel from thence all the friends 
of the Gieremei, and demolish all their houses, a commission 
which he fully executed. Imola, thus revolted from the obedi- 
ence of Bologna, drove out Giacopino Prendiparte of Bologna, 
or, as others say, killed him, who was commissary and governor 
in the name of the city of Bologna. This action so displeased 
the senate, that they suddenly sent out a powerful army with 
the carroccioj under the pretor, and obliged the usurper and his 
men to evacuate the post. But before this enterprise was 
finished, another tumult happened against the judges, one of 
whom, Uguccione, was assaulted and killed, and the parties 
were again upon the point of coming to a bloody decision, and 
it required the whole court in arms to disperse the tumult 

*' Before the end of the year, another tumult arose in Imola, 

BOLOGNA- 311 

where the Bricij, principal leaders of that city, favorers of Cujano 
and Saffatello, had secretly introduced many men, and drove 
out of the city the Imindoli, their enemies or rivals. But the 
people were so displeased with this violence, that they rose upon 
the Bricij and their followers, drove them out of the city at the 
point of the sword, and recalled the Imindoli. The senate, on 
the news of this fidelity, bestowed the highest praises on the peo- 
ple, and to reward them, by removing the cause of such incon- 
veniences, ordered that for the future they should have no pretor 
at all, and that all their differences should be brought before the 
pretor of Bologna, to be adjudged with equity and celerity, upon 
condition that they should pay the auditors or judges who should 
hear their controversies five hundred pounds a year. All this 
was cheerfully accepted by the people of Imola," as much pre- 
ferable to continual quarrels in arms, to determine whether the 
Gieremei or Lambertazzi should have the appointment of one of 
their instruments to be a pretor among them. 

" Clement VI. among the fijst acts of his pontificate, invited 
into Italy Charles of Anjou, brother of St. Louis, King of France ; 
and Uberto, Count of Flanders, general of Charles's army, 
passed into Italy with forty thousand men. Bologna, with Milan, 
Bergamo, Verona, Mantua, and Ferrara, joined the church and 
France ; four thousand men, under Guido Antonio Lambertini, 
a noble Bolognese, joined the crusade proclaimed by the pope 
against Manfred. 

" The Lambertini indulging their enmity against the Bocchetti 
laid a plot one day to kill one of them, and thinking to find him 
in a certain place, where their spies had informed them he was, 
they went to seek him, but he was gone. In their return they 
met one of the Scannabecchi ; letting loose their malice against 
him, they killed him and fled. The pretor, informed of their 
crime and flight, issued a proclamation against them, rifled their 
houses, and to intimidate other malefactors, burnt them to the 
ground. Finding by these continual homicides that the govern- 
ment was too weak to restrain the parties, a new magistracy 
was created in the city, of three men, who were to hear and 
prudently examine the difierences among the nobles, and endea- 
vor to appease them. Andalo, Malavolti, and Ramponi, all men 
of great candor and singular prudence, were chosen. Andalo 
was of great authority with the Ghibellines, Malavolti with the 

312 ON GOVERNMENT. 

Guelphs, and so was RamponL These, without respect of per- 
sons, judging with impartiality, had a wonderful effect in the 
city, and by great mUdness composed many discords and long 
enmities, particularly between the Asinelli and Scannabecchi, 
among whom a great deal of blood had been spilled, and who 
had been a long time enemies ; and, in a word, brought the city 
to a degree of tranquillity. 

" It was this year that, hearing of the defeat and death of 
Manfred, the Ghibellines in Florence began to tremble, and the 
Guelphs to triumph. That city chose two pretors from Bologna, 
the same Malavolti and Andalo, and erected their council of 
thirty-six Guelphs and Ghibellines, divided the city into seven 
greater arts, and g^ve every art its gonfalonier ; and tliis year 
Dante the poet was born. 

In 1267, " Charles Calzolaio, finding a young man in Bologna 
in bed with his wife, killed him, to maintain his own honor, but 
was taken into custody, and sentenced to death by the pretor, as 
one who, contrary to the laws, had taken justice iiito his own 
hands. This sentence appeared to be unjust to the other Calzo- 
lai, who tenderly loved their brother Charles, and they united 
together, mutually pledged their faith to each other to rescue 
him, and taking arms, went to the palace of the pretor, and 
forcibly delivered Charles from his prison. This excited in the 
city a mighty tumult, and so intimidated the pretor, that he 
concealed himself in a place of safety. The commotion sub- 
sided by the exertions of the consuls, and the fury of the Cal- 
zolai subsided so far, that the senate ventured to inquire who 
were the authors of the tumult ; but the heads of it were by 
this time escaped from the city, so that the company of the 
Calzolai were only fined in a sum of money. To this uproar 
succeeded another still greater, between the Lambertini and 
Scannabecchi, in which many were left wounded, and many 
slain ; among whom was Bartolomeo Guidozagni, a friend of 
the Lambertini. This tincture of blood enkindled the minds of 
the two parties to vengeance to such a degree, that, like mad 
dogs,* they thought of nothing but persecution, murder, and ex- 
termination ; and they collected their friends, both within and 
without the city, together to this effect. The consuls in office, 

* Come cani arrabbiati. Ghirardacci, p. 212. 

BOLOGNA. 313 

to whom information was given of the danger, publiBhed a 
proclamation, that no man should be introduced or let into the 
city, if he were not previously known to the deputies appointed 
to superintend, who might know by that means the reason of his 
coming, and oblige him to lay down his arms. This prudent 
precaution in a few days quieted the factions, and the consuls, 
thinking the late disorder too light to be very severely punished, 
only made an example or two in each of the families, by con- 
fining one of the Lambertini in Mantua, and one of the Scan- 
nabecchi in Florence ; and because the consuls saw the vio- 
lent enmities which prevailed among many noble families, 
which were in danger of increasing every day to mortal rancor, 
they availed themselves of the resolution and prudence of 
Andalo and Malavolti, lately returned from Florence, by electing 
them to compose the peace of the city, giving them ample 
powers for that end. And this measure succeeded so far, that 
the Lambertini and Scannabecchi, the Gozzadini and Arienti, 
Guidozagni and Orsi, Calamatoni and Sangiorgi, Bianchetti 
and Pizzigotti, and many other noble families, were reconciled, 
in the presence of the consuls in the palace, with much satisfac- 
tion to the whole city. But as no measure of the executive 
could be taken without offence to some part of such a divided 
executive authority, the consuls, by annulling all the condemna- 
tions in the late disturbances, excited the indignation of the 
pretor Dandolo, so that he resigned his office. The consuls, who 
were not sorry for it, appointed Aurelio Rocca dalla Torre, of 
Milan, in his stead." 

In this instance, as in many others, before and after, being 
obliged to appoint a foreigner for their first magistrate, to avoid 
the certain seditions and rebellions that would have been excited 
by the adverse party, if any natural bom citizen, however dis- 
tinguished by merit, had been raised to this eminence, among 
his jealous peers. 

" In 1268, Alberto Caccianemici, for some offensive words of 
his nephew Guido, son of his brother Gruamonte, which were 
reported to him, without examining the truth of the informa- 
tion, in a fit of impatience for vengeance, called his two sons to 
him, and ordered them to go and put their cousin to death. 
His orders were executed with great inhumanity." But, in such 
a state of government and parties, the laws are overborne by 

VOL. V. 27 

314 ON GOVERNMENT. 

popular and powerful individuals, and there is no justice to be 
had against them in a regular prosecution; so thought the 
people in this case, and therefore took upon themselves the 
punishment of so atrocious a cruelty, by rising in arms, and 
demolishing their houses. 

" In 1269, another instance of a similar but more important 
nature happened. The captain of the people governed severely 
in his office, and did not do justice to the people, as they said ; 
and this provoked the wrath of the people so far, that they 
deposed him. The pretor took this deposition in ill part, and 
thought that the principal authors of it ought to be punished, 
at least in some small degree, to discountenance such irregu- 
larity. But this irritated the people so highly, that, perceiving 
his danger he thought it prudent to fly ; and a new pretor, as 
well as captain, were appointed. Thus the discontented nobles, 
although they could not, from their opposition to each other, 
obtain the first offices in the state, had it always in their power, 
by secret machinations with the people, to excite tumults, and 
distress, embarrass, and depose the foreigners who held them. 

" There is an example of generosity in the gentlemen of Bo- 
logna, in the year 1270, too much to their honor, amidst all their 
quarrels, to be omitted. A great scarcity prevailed in all the 
cities of Tuscany and Lombardy, and the people of Bologna 
were reduced to extreme misery by famine. Upon this occa- 
sion all the noblemen, and other rich men of the city, had the 
charity to open their stores, and expose all their corn and grain 
to the people ; and, not satisfied with this, they united together, 
collected all the money they had, or by their credit could borrow, 
and offered it to the senate, that it might be sent to Romagna, 
and other distant provinces, to procure a supply of bread for the 
city. This benevolent effort, however, produced an accidental 
ill effect; it occasioned a rivalry in the markets for grain be- 
tween Bologna and Venice, which produced resentments, re- 
taliating imposts and duties, and at last a war, in which the 
Venetians were conquered. 

" But the city of Bologna could not enjoy its triumphs in 
peace ; malignant spirits in secret scattered reports and calum- 
nies to disturb the public tranquillity, sometimes against one 
illustrious citizen, and sometimes another. These rumors coming 
to the ears of the senate, they exerted all their skill to discover 

BOLOGNA. 315 

whether the crimes alleged had been committed or not; but, 
after all their diligence found no evidence, but idle suspicions. 
Nevertheless the senators and people, taking the hint from these 
endeavors to excite disorders, judged it would be useful to create 
a new magistracy of three men, of the best lives, and most 
wisdom, to preserve the quiet of the city, and to administer 
justice, by rewarding the good, and chastising the insolent dis- 
turbers of the peace of others. To this end ample authority 
was given them to bear arms, and to take with them armed 
men; to imprison delinquents, and accommodate all disputes 
which should arise ; and these were called the Magistrates of 
Peace, The three chiefs divided their people into three military 
classes ; one was called that of the Lombard^ and to this was 
committed the red standard, with the figure of Justice holding a 
drawn sword in her hand ; the second was called the Griffin^ and 
to this was consigned the white standard, with a red griffin ; the 
last was called della Branca^ to which was allotted the white 
standard, with a red lion holding a sword in his right paw. 
These companies were greatly esteemed in the city, and much 
honored by the senate, who granted them signal privileges, regis- 
tering the magistrates as true and noble citizens. 

" While this new magistracy was wholly employed in the 
preservation of the honor and peace of the city, and daily recon- 
ciled the minds of the citizens, the rancor of private animosity 
broke out again in the murder of Philip, called il Bolog^na, one 
of the company delta Branca, by Soldano de' Qalluzzi, who 
fled, which beyond measure displeased the senate ; not having 
the murderer in their power, in order to give complete satisfac- 
tion to the company, they published a capital proclamation 
against him, and demolished to their foundations all the houses 
he had both in town and country. By this exemplary punish- 
ment alone would the irritated minds of the company, who had 
arms in their hands, be pacified." 

The next year it appears by the records, that, besides the 
pretor and captain of the people, four and t^'^enty wise men 
(sapienti) were elected, six for each tribe, out of all the tribes of 
the city, by the antiani, to preserve the companies of the city. 
They elected also four citizens to oversee the plentiful supply of 
the city ; and five and twenty other wise men to superintend the 
fortresses and castles in the country, as well as some things rela- 

316 ON GOVERNMENT. 

tive to the government in the city. All these inventions, dic- 
tated by distress, and the feeling as well as fear of the evils of 
discord, were only aggravations of the evil, as they only divided 
the executive power still more, without dividing the legislative ; 
whereas the direct contrary ought to have been the remedy, 
namely, they ought to have united the executive power, and 
divided the legislative, and by that means have produced that 
trinity in unity, which is neither a contradiction nor a mystery, 
but is alone efficacious to curb the audacity of individuals, and 
the daring turbulence of parties. The judicial power, inde- 
pendent of all, is able to encounter any man or combination of 
men, without recurring to such rigorous measures, inconsistent 
with liberty, as these new magistrates in Bologna were obliged 
to adopt. In order to purge the city of its many popular disor- 
ders, they were obliged to forbid a great number of persons, 
under grievous penalties, to enter the palace; nor was it per- 
mitted them to go about the city, nor to bear arms. All this 
they were obliged to do to prevent collections of people in 
the streets. Afterwards some of the first people of the city 
were banished, and confined to certain places abroad, and, upon 
pain of death, sentenced to depart the city in three hours. It is 
provoking to read the perpetual cant of these historians, such 
as, that, in this year 1273, Bologna, having compelled the Vene- 
tians to peace, and ruling over Imola, Faenza, Forli, and the 
castles of Romagna, in peace, and by fear, might have become 
great and glorious by the valor of its citizens, if civil discords 
had not begun again to commit their cruel ravages. These dis- 
sensions, on the contrary, proved the ruin of the city, and were 
the cause that, by little and little, she lost her ancient authority 
and grandeur, and from a patron she became a client, from a 
mistress a subject ; a miserable fall, which began in this manner. 
" There were in Bologna two most noble families, the Giere- 
mei and the Lambertazzi, between whom, not only the party 
prejudices of Guelphs and Ghibellines, but a rivalry for power 
and preeminence in the state, had long subsisted ; but neither 
party animosities nor family jealousies were able to prevent 
Imelda, a daughter of Orlando Lambertazzi, a most beautiful 
young lady, from entertaining a partiality for Boniface, a son of 
Gieremia de Gieremei, a very handsome young man, who was 
desperately in love with her. This mutual passion thus increas- 

BOLOGNA. 317 

ing in their hearts from day to day, the two lovers at last found 
an opportunity to meet The lady's brothers being engaged in 
some amusement at the house of the Caccianemici, having in- 
formation of this interview, went to their sister's chamber, and 
finding Boniface there, fell upon him with poisoned weapons, 
and in an instant pierced his breast and his heart, their mise- 
rable sister flying in despair from their fury. Having com- 
mitted the murder, they concealed the body in a sink, which 
ran under some apartment in the house, and fled from the city. 
The murderers having departed, Imelda, full of apprehensions and 
terrible presages of what she should discover, ventured to return 
to her chamber, and seeing upon the floor a rivulet of blood, she 
followed its direction, and opening the place where her lover lay 
she threw herself on the delicate body, still warm and bleeding, 
and distracted with tenderness and grief, applied her lips to his 
wounds, and drew in the poison with his blood ; and whilst 
sorrowfully lamenting the loss of her lover, the poison spread 
over her whole frame to her heart, and Imelda fell dead in his 
arms." 

A catastrophe so tragical could not be recited on a stage with- 
out aflecting in the most sensible manner the most unfeeling 
audience. The discovery of it to the public in Bologna could 
not, one would think, but melt the most obdurate heart of fac- 
tion, and soften the savage monster to humanity ; but the effect 
of it was so contrary to this, that it wrought up the hatred be- 
tween the two factions to a mortal contagion, which increased 
and spread till it ruined and enslaved the republic. 

" Whilst the unfortunate fate of Boniface and Imelda depressed 
the spirits of the two noble families, the senate understanding 
that the city of Forli had rebelled, and that the Aigoni, according 
to the stipulation, were not restored to their country, called the 
council together, and the question was proposed. Whether they 
ought first to march against the rebels of Forli, or merely to 
restore the Aigoni to Modena ? The Lambertazzi advised, that 
the first attention should be given to the cause of the Aigoni ; 
and, on the contrary, the Gieremei advised, that they should 
first endeavor to subjugate Forli. The parties, not agreeing in 
opinion, they began to fall into confusion. Finally, the council 
of the Gieremei prevailing, the army was sent out, and laid close 
siege to Forli. 

27* 

318 ON GOVERNMENT. 

'^ The following year, the senate, having much at heart the 
reduction of Forli, resolved, in order to chastise so great a diso« 
bedience, to order out the carroccioy and all their army. The 
pretor entered the senate to take leave for his departure to the 
war, and there found Antonio Lambertazzi laboring to convince 
them that the enterprise against Forli would not succeed. After 
having urged many arguments, he began to speak slightingly of 
the honor of the Gieremei, who had carried this point against 
him. Gieremeo Gieremei, who was present, provoked at his 
insolence, gave him the lie, and by mutual agreement they went 
out of the palace into the piazza, where they drew their swords 
and began to combat. A great crowd of the two factions soon 
gathered about them, and fell to fighting all together, so that 
much blood was shed, and the battle grew more hot, and greater 
numbers collected ; when Gozzadini and Cavaliere, with many 
others interfered, parted the combatants, and the Lambertazzi 
returned to their houses. The pretor, who went with the people 
to the tumult, wishing to put some restraint of fear upon both 
parties, ordered four of the houses of each party to be demo- 
lished ; but this severity had little or no effect ; for having grown 
more bitter than ever against each other, they were almost every 
day in arms and action together. As this revolt was already 
divulged to the circumjacent cities, the companies della Branca^ 
of the griffin^ and of the Lmnbardi^ understanding that the 
Guelphs of Modena, and the Ghibellines of Forli, intended to 
come in to the aid of the two parties, took arms and, together 
with the people, posted themselves to guard the passages of the 
city ; receiving intelligence that the Guelphs of Modena were 
on their march, they went out to meet them, and put them to 
flight at the point of the sword. The Count da Panigo, who 
had armed himself in favor of the Lambertazzi, hearing of this 
defeat of his friends, made his escape from the city; but his 
people were put to the sword by the company della Branca, who 
afterwards razed to the ground all the houses, not only of the 
count, but of his followers. The Gliibellines from Forli, friends 
of the Lambertazzi, hearing of the slaughter of the Modenese 
and the followers of the count, made by the soldiers della BrancOy 
suddenly retreated. These civil wars in Bologna were scarcely 
divulged abroad, when all Romagna, taking advantage of the 
occasion, rebelled ; and for this reason the senate, together with 

BOLOGNA. 319 

the pretor and the companies, posted themselves at all the ways, 
to make peace between these two factions ; in which enterprise 
they fortunately at length succeeded, and, after much reasoning 
and persuasion, they obtained hostages from both sides, and thus 
the city was quieted. 

" While this peace was in treaty, the principal heads of the 
rebellion of Imola, of Faenza, and of Salarolo, dreading the 
resentment of the Bolognese at Forli, saved themselves by flight 
The Bolognese were indeed formidable, for they were collecting 
a powerful army to march into Romagna. When it was embo- 
died, and the pretor of Bologna attempted to go out upon the 
cam'paign, Antonio Lambertazzi, forgetting his plighted faith, 
and disregarding the fate of the hostages delivered, flew out 
again in arms to prevent the carroccio from going out, and re- 
commenced a plentiful eflusion of blood. This sedition was the 
most terrible of any that had ever yet happened ; it lasted forty 
days without intermission ; so that Bologna became a haunt of 
murderers, and the streets ran down with human blood ; the pro- 
perty of all men was subjected to depredation, the edifices were 
ruined, and the grandeur and glory of the city trodden under foot. 

" The Lambertazzi, at last overcome, fled the city, with all 
their accomplices, and went to Faenza, leaving their houses and 
palaces a prey to the people, which, shortly, were all levelled 
with the ground;' and because the pretor and captain of the 
people had always held a good understanding with the Lamber- 
tazzi, they were now deposed from the magistracy, although it is 
universally agreed that the judgment and decrees of the former 
were unexceptionably impartial and upright. .Fifteen thousand 
citizens were banished, whose names are distinctly written in a 
book among the records in the chamber of Bologna. These 
persons, scattered in various places, planted new families, as the 
Guerrini in Forli, the Bazzani and Sacchi in Parma, the Malpi- 
ghi in Lucca, the Carrari in Ravenna, the Buoninsegni in Terni, 
the Maffiei in Rome, the Bagarotti in Placentia and Padua; 
from which families have arisen men famous both in arms and 
letters. The Lambertazzi sought an asylum in Faenza and in 
Forli, and fortified themselves in both those cities ; but the Gie- 
remei, not content with having driven them out of the city, 
endeavored to chase them from the places where they were 
received ; wherefore, that they might not be tal^en by surprise, 

320 ON GOVERNMENT. 

they sent to their friends in every place, particularly to the Count 
di Montefeltro, the Counts of Modiana, and to others of their 
faction, for succor. The banished citizens of Ravenna, being 
united with those of Forli, Ariminum, and other places, went to 
Forli, and from thence to Faenza, and there fortified themselves, 
and a little afterwards drove out the Manfredi ; and passing after- 
wards to Castel San Piero, and from thence to Salarolo, where 
the Manfredi had resorted, and having taken the castle, many of 
their enemies were put to death, and many made prisoners and 
sent to Forli, among whom was Alberico Manfredi. 

"At Bologna, many of the faction of Lambertazzi were impri- 
soned ; and as a report was spread that a powerful succor was 
arrived to the Gieremei, the Lambertazzi, with their wives and 
children, fled to the mountains, and from thence to Faenza, 
where, with the assistance of their friends, they began to collect 
forces. The Gieremei, receiving information that the Lamber- 
tazzi were preparing to return to Bologna, consulted in council 
upon the project of going out first in search of them. The reso- 
lution was taken with great precipitation, and they marched out 
with the carroccio with great spirit to Romagna. The Ghibel- 
lines, who were apprized of their approach, went out suddenly 
to meet them in arms, and the Guelph party were defeated, 
leaving three of the Gieremei dead upon the field, and Alber- 
ghetto Manfredi mortally wounded and a prisoner. This reverse 
of fortune spread a terror in Bologna ; but, dreading a total loss 
of their city, they exerted themselves to the utmost to fortify it, 
and had recourse again to their confederates and friends, and in 
a short time assembled a strong army. It is unnecessary to enu- 
merate all the places and parties from whence each side drew 
its aids ; but the carroccio again went forth, and was again met 
by the Lambertazzi and their allies, when another terrible engage- 
ment ensued, and again the Lambertazzi remained victorious. 
Two thousand men were slain, among whom were a great num- 
ber of the principal nobles. The Lambertazzi pursued their vic- 
tory into the territory of Bologna, where they put every thing to 
fire and sword, destroying vines, trees, com, and houses, and took 
a great number of castles, and, it is supposed, might have made 
themselves masters of the city, such was the panic in it, with- 
out striking another blow ; but, thinking they had done enough 
for the present, they returned to Faenza. 

BOLOGNA. 321 

''The Bolognese, finding their affairs unfortunate, both at 
home and abroad, deliberated on sending to King Charles for 
assistance, and two ambassadors accordingly went, Passaggieri 
and Prendiparti. Many citizens displayed their public spirit in 
defence of the city and senate, and subscribed large sums to 
defend their liberty; Passaggieri, for example, was so attached 
to the Gieremei, that he gave six thousand pounds for the com- 
mon good. The senate by proclamation ordered, that every 
citizen possessed of a horse should have him recorded in a book, 
that they might know what assistance the militia might have m 
case of extremity, and the name of every man who then owned 
a horse is very cs^refuUy preserved as a family distinction. 

" The Lambertazzi,^ after their victory over the Gieremei, did 
not fail to make incursions into the country of Bologna every 
day, disturbing now one place, and then another, in such a 
manner, that there was not a castle, village, or city, of that 
party, that was not infested, or threatened with their arms. 
The Bolognese, apprehensive that the evil might extend itself 
too far, and that the people, wearied with so many calamities, 
might revolt, and having before their eyes what Rodolph the 
emperor had done, they began to meditate a surrender of the 
city to the pope ; ambassadors were appointed, who were court- 
eously received, and their petition attended to, at Viterbo. 
The pope was vastly pleased with the submission of Bologna, 
and she acknowledged the church and the pontiff for her patron. 
The instrument is dated twenty-ninth July, 1278, by which the 
ambassadors, 'in the name of God, and of the podesta, captain, 
council, and commons, recognize the dominion, diction, law, 
jurisdiction, power, and principality of the city, territory, and 
district in St Peter, the keeper of the key of the kingdom of 
heaven, and in Nicolas III., and his successors, Roman pon- 
tiffs, reserving the laws and rights of the city, territory, and 
district' 

"Although the Gieremei discovered an obstinate aversion to 
any kind of peace or reconciliation with the Lambertazzi, the 
pope conceived a great desire of uniting Romagna and Bologna 
in his interest, and, after long negotiations to that purpose, he 
succeeded in persuading both parties to listen to his proposals, 

\ Ghirardaoci, lib. viii. p. 288. 
u 

322 ON GOVERNMENT. 

and submit to his decision. The constitution of the pope Nicolas 
III., <upon the refonnation of the peace of the BoIognese,.to 
wit, the Gieremei and Lambertazzi,' was made, and the pri- 
soners on both sides set at liberty ; and in 1279, the two factions 
of Gieremei and Lambertazzi were assembled once more in the 
piazza of Bologna, in presence of the cardinal legates of the 
pope, appearing in great pomp and splendor. The families of 
the party of the Lambertazzi and of that of the Gieremei were 
9^ recorded by name, and, after long orations made by the car- 
dinals, the instruments were signed, and the oaths of perpetual 
peace and friendship taken by them all." 

The proceedings, as they remain on record, are very volumi- 
nous, and it is not possible a peace should be made with more 
solemnity or less reserve ; but of what avail are pious exhorta- 
tions, charitable resolutions, or solemn oaths, against inveterate 
passions in unbalanced governments ? 

In 1280, "the Lambertazzi, who could not live under the 
operation of the secret venom of their personal hatreds, which 
daily corroded their hearts, making little account of the peace 
made, or the penalties imposed, burning with desire to im- 
brue their hands in the blood of the Gieremei, having taken 
their arms, flew to the piazza, and finding there a great number 
of their enemies, fell upon them with a sudden fury ; after a long 
combat, they pushed the Gieremei out of the piazza, and made 
themselves masters of it, and would have easily possessed the 
palace, if the captain with two thousand men, had not rushed 
into the midst of the danger, and with the Caccianemici, Lam- 
bertini, Ariosti, Prendiparti, and other firiends, opposed them, 
and, at the point of the sword, driven them back, and pur- 
sued them out of the city. The battle on both sides was 
bloody, and many principal men were killed in it, after perform- 
ing prodigies of valor. The Lambertazzi, thus again driven 
from the city with their arms, retired to the mountains with 
great loss, and the Gieremei proceeded to the old work of ruin- 
ing their houses, within and without the city ; and having issued 
a proclamation against a great number, they sent others into 
confinement, according to the usage in such cases in those 
times. Berthold, the count of Romagna, the pope's nephew, 
immediately summoned all parties to app)ear before him, and 
give an account who were the aggressors in the late revolution, 

BOLOGNA. 323 

and prevailed upon the Gieremei and Lambertazzi to give hos- 
tages to perform the award for settling their differences; but 
before the affair could be finished the pope died, and Berthold 
restored the hostages to the Guelphs, but the Lambertazzi not 
acting to his satisfaction, he carried theirs to Rome. 

" Bologna now remaining in the hands of the Gieremei, four 
officers were immediately created, whose duty it was to preserve 
the peace of the city, and to them was given the highest possi- 
ble authority ; and they began their operations with so much 
prudence and firmness, that their proceedings gave great satis- 
faction to the citizens, and with whatever they ordered or de- 
sired the people complied with affection and confidence, except- 
ing some of the followers of the Lambertazzi, who n^t being 
able to bear the sight of the city at peace, while their party 
were driven out of it, began, by slow degrees and secret prac- 
tices, to consult of measures to make themselves masters of 
it, and restore their banished party. For many days they 
discoursed together in secret upon this project, and hoping that 
fortune might for once favor and assist them, they determined 
finally to assault the piazza ; and because all the city was in se- 
curity, and lived in peace, they readily persuaded themselves, that 
by surprise their design would succeed. One day, at the hour 
of dinner, issuing out in arms, and crying with a lively accent, 
The people and the church ! they seized on the two mouths of 
the piazza. The Gieremei, as soon as they were alarmed, ran 
out with the people in general with arms in their hands, and 
coming to a fierce engagement with their enemies, after a plenti- 
ful effusion of blood, drove them out of the city to the moun- 
tains, to go from thence to Faenza and dwell with their friends. 

" The city of Bologna now purified of all tumults, the senate 
attended to the fortification of all the fortresses and castles in 
the country, placed strong garrisons, and, furnished plenty of 
provisions, and all things necessary ; and the commanders placed 
in them, we may well suppose, were all good Guelphs and Gie- 
remeites. The Lambertazzi having taken refuge in Faenza, and 
partly in Forli, those who were in Faenza, following the activity, 
ardor, and boldness of their genius, began to live with so much 
liberty, that it appeared as if Faenza was their own. This con- 
duct was observed, and excited not only much censure, but the 
greatest malevolence in the citizens, and, among others, in Tibal- 

324 ON GOVERNMENT. 

dello Zambrasio, one of the most noble in Faenza. This noble- 
man, seeing himself exposed to the ridicule of the town, on 
account of a pig which the Lambertazzi had made so free as to 
take from him, and because they had threatened his life for 
demanding the restoration of it, grew into such a rage, that he 
swore he would lose his life, or have satisfaction. After talking 
much of various projects, he at last determined upon one 
which he had never talked of at all. He pretended to be 
seized with a melancholy humor; went strangely out of his 
house sometimes, flying the company of his friends and rela- 
tions ; appearing in the streets uncommonly thoughtful ; some- 
times talking to himself of a variety of things, and muttering 
imperfest sentences. Having held this course of life for some 
days, his infirmity became divulged through the whole city. In 
a few days more, without confiding his secret to his father or 
any other, he counterfeited the part of a complete idiot ; and his 
behavior was so wild, whimsical, and extravagant, that he ap- 
peared both to his father and brother to be wholly bereaved of 
his understanding. It threw his family into distress, and the 
whole city into the utmost astonishment, to see a nobleman who 
had ever shown so much prudence as to be held in high esteem, 
fallen suddenly into such misfortune and disgrace, though so 
worthy of compassion. In a few days more he took firom his 
own farm an old mare, wholly worn out, and reduced to a mere 
skeleton ; and having shaved her with a pair of scissors, trans- 
formed her into such an object as excited the laughter of every 
one who saw her. In this condition he led her into the city, 
and there turned her loose. The boys soon collected about the 
animal, and beat and terrified her till she ran, with all the strength 
and spirit that remained in her, throughout the whole city, and 
occasioned a general hubbub wherever she went. 

*'The Lambertazzi, knowing nothing of the notorious fact, 
any more than of the secret motive, were alarmed with suspi- 
cions that their enemies were rising, seized their arms, and ran 
about to every place where they heard the loudest shouts and 
noises. Finding it was only an idle populace insulting Tibal- 
dello's mare, they joined with others in the laugh, and returned 
to their houses. The same pageantry having been repeated 
more than once afterwards, the Ghibellines became so secure^ 
that when they heard a similar cry, they said it was ^ only Tibal- 

BOLOGNA. 326 

dello's mare.' Rising at length to the third stage of counterfeited 
madness, Tibaldello ran about the streets in the night, and cried 
out, ' To arms ! to arms ! ' and taking in his hands the padlocks 
and bars of the city gates, which were sometimes carelessly left, 
he raised a very great multitude and a mighty rumor, so as again 
to alarm the Lambertazzi, and drive them to their armsj but, 
finding it another freak of Tibaldello, they threatened him severely 
if he should make any more such disturbance, and returned. By 
these whimsical movements, frequently repeated, he so effectually 
quieted the suspicions of the Lambertazzi and Ghibellines, that 
upon any such uproar they laughed with the rest, and made 
themselves merry with the crazy whimsies of TibaldeUo. With 
so much art and perseverance was the foUy simulated, that all 
suspicions were quieted, not only in the Ghibellines, but in the 
whole city; and the belief of his irrecoverable folly was universal. 
" Having pursued his plan thus far with success, he opened 
himself in perfect confidence to a very faithful friend, made him 
acquainted with his design, and desired him to prepare with 
secrecy two habits of monks, in a sack, and meet him the next 
day in a forest in the neighborhood of Faenza. This was done ; 
and at the hour prescribed they met, Tibaldello having gone out 
of town with all the appearance of a madman, disguised like a 
falconer, with two dogs attending him, and a hawk in his hand, 
to the high diversion of every one that met him. Arrived at a 
lonely place in the forest, he set his dogs and his hawk at liberty, 
and, with his faithful companion, putting on the habits of friars, 
that they might not be known by any whom they might meet 
on the road, and travelling all night, at the opening of the gates 
in the morning they arrived at Bologna, and took lodgings at 
the house of Alberto Battagliucci. To Guido Ramponi he re- 
lated all that had passed, explained his intentions, and by his 
favor obtained an introduction to the council of secrecy. Here 
he opened his whole design, and the desire he had to chastise 
the Lambertazzi ; and showed them of how much importance it 
was to them to embrace the present opportunity to remove from 
their sight and their apprehensions those enemies of their city 
and people, who were constantly employed in schemes of mis- 
chief against both. This counsel was received with pleasure by 
the whole body, and the business was referred to the four super- 
intendents of peace, under oath to keep it secret. To these 

VOL. V. 28 

326 ON GOVERNMENT. 

Tibaldello methodically communicated his plan, and demanded 
only for himself, and all the family of the Zambrasi, and Ghirar* 
done, his faithful friend, and his family, to be made citizens of 
Bologna; and engaged to send hostages as security for what was 
to be done. The offers of Tibaldello were very satisfactory to the 
pretor, and Guidottino Prendiparte pledged himself for the family 
of Zambrasi. The four superintendents made him relate the 
method and means by which every thing was to be conducted ; 
and the stratagem appearing to be practicable, they again took 
an oath to keep the whole a secret 

" The business concluded on, they dismissed Tibaldello, who 
was to procure the hostages ; so, setting out the same evening, 
he reached Faenza at the opening of the gates, and entered the 
city without being known by any one. Arrived at his house, he 
found his whole family in great affliction. To his aged father 
alone he related in order the progress he had made by means of 
a feigned madness, in his plan against those who had taken little 
account of the honor of his family and blood. The father, with 
joy beyond expression, and a thousand embraces of his son, 
caused to be assembled in his house all their relations, to whom, 
in an eloquent and prudent harangue, TibaldeUo related his 
actions and designs. All with one voice and one heart offered 
to devote themselves to vengeance on the Lambertazzi. Tibal- 
dello, to whom an hour appeared a thousand years, till he 
could see an end of his enterprise, the next day secretly sent his 
three brothers, — namely, Zambraso, Guido, and Fiorino, to Bo- 
logna, conducted by Ghirardone, informing the four superintend- 
ents of what they were to do, and of the hour when their soldiers 
ought to appear at Faenza. The hostages received, the council 
assembled, digested every particular, and secretly gave orders 
that all the passes should be secured, that no one might be able 
to send intelligence of any thing that happened. 

" On the twenty-third of August, 1281, the army of Bologna 
was formed, and marched out of the city in order, with all the 
Guelph party ; by a forced march the whole night, they were 
early in the morning at the gate appointed; finding it open, 
they freely ^tered the city, and were conducted to the place 
intended for action. The Zambrasi had embarrassed and stopped 
up the streets where they thought proper; and TibaldeUo, as usual, 
feigning to make a noise with the padlocks at the gates of the 

BOLOGNA. 327 

houses of the Lambertazzi, in truth fastened many of them within, 
so that they could not go out The whole apparatus being ready, 
he set up a cry of Lang^ live the church! and Down with all the 
traitors! and while he was terrifying the city with this horrid 
outcry, the Bolognese, with the utmost security, made themselves 
masters of the piazza of the city. The Ghibellines, followers of 
the Lambertazzi, hearing the noise of voices and the sound of 
arms, rang the bells, assembled a great number, and hastened to 
the piazza, there to fortify themselves ; but, finding the Guelphs 
already in possession, they began the conflict" 

The particulars of this engagement, the danger of one and 
intrepidity of another individual, are not now material. " The 
action was sharp and bloody ; and after mighty feats of valor on 
both sides, and many killed and wounded, the Lambertazzi were 
defeated, and such as could, obliged to fly into the country ; all 
who could not, were put to the sword. Nine of the principals 
fled to a church or monastery for sanctuary, but were there mise- 
rably put to death. Besides five hundred prisoners, a multitude 
of others wretchedly perished in the sinks and ditches. 

" The Bolognese, having obtained the victory, and by means 
of it the complete dominion of Faenza, pardoned the Faentines, 
but confiscated all the property of the Lambertazzi and their 
adherents, both within and without the city. Finally, they 
appointed a new pretor and a sufficient guard, and triumph- 
antly conducted Tibaldello Zambrasi, his father, and with them 
Zambraso, Guido, and Fiorino, the hostages, and their sister and 
other relations, to Bologna, who were all made by the senate 
not only citizens, but nobles. The same honors and immuni- 
ties were conferred on Ghirardone and his relations, to all of 
whom the senate gave houses and possessions, and they enjoyed 
the most respectable offices in the state. As the victory was the 
twenty-fourth of August, the senate ordained an annual festival 
of St Bartholomew's day, in perpetual comnxemoration of Tibal- 
dello ; in which his pig, his mare, his hawks, dogs, friar's dress, 
and city keys, were all transmitted, in sculpture and marble, to 
the amusement and astonishment of posterity. 

" The nobles of the party of Lambertazzi, who were still re- 
maining in Forli, sent ambassadors to the pope to obtain peace, 
but they could accomplish nothing ; the pope not only refused 
to receive them, but ordered them to return. The Gieremei sent 

828 ON GOVERNMENT. 

ambassadors, and tbey were admitted to an audience, and received 
with dignity ; and by their persuasions the pope sent Giovanni 
Appia, a French gentleman, a counsellor of King Charles, with 
eight hundred cavalry, to recover Forli. The pope made him 
Count of Romagna, and he went with the ambassadors to Bo- 
logna, where he was received with great honor; where he 
remained, however, but a short time; for having in 1282 
despatched what belonged to his office, he took with him two 
of the tribes of the city, and marched into the territory of 
Ravenna. From thence he wrote to the republic of Forli, com- 
manding them to send out of their city the Count Guido da 
Feltrio, and all the foreigners ; but he was not obeyed, because 
neither the Count nor the Lambertcuszi, to whom he wrote at the 
same time, were willing to go." 

Their refusal gave occasion to another long war, and to all the 
fire and sword, stratagems and massacres, as well as carnage in 
battle, that usually attended all their wars. But though these 
evils also originated in the same source, the imperfect constitu- 
tion of Bologna, they may be passed over. 

" It seems there were still some persons left in Bologna of the 
name of Lambertazzi, one of whom, in 1285, came to blows with 
one of the Scannabecchi under the piazza, which occasioned 
another rising of the people in arms. They were both put to 
flight, but overtaken in the country, and beheaded ; and all the 
party of the Lambertazzi were again declared rebels, and all their 
families banished to a certain distance in the city, and confined 
to places assigned them. The wise men {sapienti) afterwards 
made a provision, that all those of the party of the Lambertazzi 
who had taken an oath of fidelity to the church and the party of 
the Gieremei, according to a general regulation made in the 
council of the commons and people of Bologna, should be can- 
celle'd from the book of the exiles, excepting those who, since 
taking the oath, had gone to live in Faenza, Forli, and other 
places, and united themselves with the enemies of the people of 
Bologna ; and with this reservation, that none who had been of 
the party of the Lambertazzi at the time of the first commotion, 
should be of the council, or hold any office. This regulation 
gave great satisfaction to the cityf and a general tranquillity. 

" But the government had not strength to preserve the peace. 
In 1286, a private quarrel, however, happened, probably from the 

BOLOGNA. 329 

general state of parties, in which Gualradi, of the company delta 
Branca^ was kilied. The government was neither able to punish 
the murderer nor to prevent the people from taking it upon them- 
selves in their own way. They took arms for revenge, and ruined 
all the houses, towers, trees, and other property of the persons 
guilty or suspected, both in the city and out of it, and of all their 
relations. But the new government could not long remain quiet 
The council of eight hundred, and the people, having their eyes 
fixed upon the general utility of the city and its district, that all 
things might be governed with consummate prudence, gave 
orders to the sapient! to examine how a new council might be 
established, of two thousand persons, of sufficient wisdom, cha- 
rity, and property to support the weight of the commonwealth. 
The sapienti, elected by the antiani and consuls, having maturely 
deliberated and debated, ordained that the new council of two 
thousand should be elected by ballot in that council ; that is to 
say, that a hundred electors for each tribe should be appointed, 
each of whom should have the election of five members of the 
new council ; that each one should be not less than eighteen nor 
more than seventy years of age, and should be truly of the party 
of the church and of the Gieremei of the city of Bologna, and so 
held and reputed in the time of the first commotion which hap- 
pened in the city ; that he should not be a servant,* a puppet- 
showman, a porter, nor a foreigner, &c., nor a constant inhabitant 
of the country of Bologna, and should have been a constant resi- 
dent in the city for twenty years ; should be rated to the public 
taxes, and have paid his share of the public collections ; should be 
known in the lists of the public factions, but should not be a cler- 
gyman or ecclesiastical person, nor of any other city, castle, or 
land which has favored the Ghibellines or the party of the Lam- 
bertazzi. If there were any one at present in the council, in any 
of the cases enumerated in this order, he could not be chosen by 
any elector whatsoever ; and if he obtained a ticket as an elector, 
he could not vote himself in any manner. No one could be 
elected contrary to the preceding form, under penalty of banish- 
ment and a fine of twenty pounds for every one that should vio- 

* ** Non na servo, bnrrattino, brehtatore, fachino, n^ fumante, o forestiero." 
p. 270, 

The tranalator omits to notice a remarkable qualification which precedes these, 
^< che sia senza macchia d' infamia ^cuna**' 

28* 

330 ON GOVERNMENT. 

late it, and for every offence ; and any one who should be elected 
contrary to this order should not take the oath of a counsellor, 
nor proceed to choose another, under the same penalty. Every 
election made against it should be null, and any one might 
inform secretly or openly of a breach of this law, and obtain the 
penalty. The antiani, consuls, and doctors of laws and their 
notaries should be of this council ez officio^ in addition to the 
number of two thousand ; but no one was to be a member who 
was not a native of the city. The senate then caused to be dis- 
tinctly recorded, in three books, the names of the banished Lam- 
bertazzi, repaired the carroccio and its standard, and painted it 
with the portraits of six saints, and laid out upon it no less than 
thirty pounds and ten pence." 

Many other regulations and precautions were taken by the 
triumphant faction of the Gieremei, to fortify themselves in the 
government, and exclude, in the most decided manner, every 
man who had any tincture of, or connection with, the opposite 
party ; but still there were not wanting many seditious persons, 
insidiously meditating to undermine their tranquillity, and to 
favor those who were held to be rebels against them ; so that the 
senate were frequently alarmed, and full of apprehensions of the 
total ruin of the city. 

They saw that almost the whole country was one continued 
tavern of the banished {banditti) ; and, to put some restraint 
upon their temerity, purge both the city and country of such a 
dangerous plague, and quiet the seditions of the nobles, they 
assembled the antiani, consuls, and all the sapienti, made many 
ordinances against the banished rebels, to the end that no fresh 
revolution might be attempted; and made it a capital crime 
to attempt or propose, or even to speak or reason about their 
restoration or pardon.* 

* There is another anecdote in 1288, which, although it remains in mysterious 
obscurity, may yet be alleged as an instance of those extravagant characters, 
irregular events, and atrocious actions, which always abound in such governments, 
render the protection of the laws precarious, and life and liberty insecure. "Am- 
bassadors had been sent by the republic to Forli, and to the Count of Bomagna ; 
and other ambassadors were sent to the Marquis of Este, to congratulate him 
upon his interposition to promote an acconmiodation between the citizens of 
Reggio, who were truly of the party of the church, and to beg that by his coun- 
sels and mediation he would prevail upon Bettino Galluzzi, elected (^iptain of 
Reggio, to hearken to reason, and restore some merchandises taken at Kubien^ 
from Bolognese merchants. Lamberto Bazzilieri, a Bolognese, had contracted 
friendships with many persons in the court of Obizzo, Alarquis of Este, and 

BOLOGNA. 331 

In the beginning of the year 1289, all their prudence appeared 
to be ineffectual ; for in their own faction, and in the new govern- 
ment, were two parties still, the nobles and plebeians, and a 
tumult arose between them. The senate, the pretor of the pre- 
ceding year, and the people, became involved in the dispute, till 
the pretor thought his life in danger, and secretly went away from 
the city with many of his friends. The want and the necessity 
of representatives of the people was felt at this time ; and whe- 
ther it was to obtain information, or to throw off a burden of 
care and labor, or to gratify some aspiring individuals, or to 
please the people, or to extend their influence, or whether all 
these motives concurred, the antiani, assembled in the chamber 
of the pretor, considered among themselves what ought chiefly 
to be done relative to the war at this time to be carried on in 
conjunction with their confederates ; and they ordained that two 
wise men, of e'iemplary Uves, should be elected from each tribe, 
who should examine, and, in concert with them, the antiani, 
inquire in what state were the stipendiaries of the commons of 
Bologna, and see whether the soldiers had their horses according 
to law, and whether provision was made of money to pay salaries, 
wages, &c. But who was to elect these wise men ? Not the 
people ; not the tribes themselves. This would have made two 
centres ; and all authority must be in one. The antiani them- 
selves therefore elected them ; and in the afternoon the antiani 
and the wise men assembled together, and consulted generally 

frequented familiarly all the courtiers of that prince ; so that he was held to be 
one of that court Finding Obizzo at table one day at dinner, Lamberto, without 
being observed by any one, approached very near the person of the prince, drew 
his dagger, and, with a rapid and malicious force of his arm, gave him an unex- 
pected stroke across the visage. Azzo, the prince's son, and all the other cour- 
tiers and citizens present, laid their hands upon their swords, and rushed upon 
the malefactor to put him to death ; Obizzo, though his face was covered with 
blood, had the presence of mind to command them to desist, but ordered him to 
be put to the torture, to make him confess from what motive, and at whose insti- 
gation, he had made such a desperate attempt Afler a long and cruel examina- 
tion on the rack, he declared that he had not done it by the orders, or at the 
desire, or by the advice of any one, nor excited by any hope, nor in consequence 
of any previous conversation or thoughts, but that he had been urged on by a 
sudden fury. This confession not being credited, he was examined again repeat- 
edly, but, with the same constancy and fortitude, persevered in the same confes- 
sion; nor could all his torment extort fix>m him any other answer. Finally, 
bound to the tails of four asses, he was dragged through all the city of Ferrara, 
and afterwards hanged." This action is an example of that contempt of life, 
that inveteracy of resolution, and that immovable fortitude, which is sometimes 
inspired by the inflamed passions of party ; but his denial is by no means a proof 
that the plan was not concerted. 

332 ON GOVERNMENT. 

about the soldiers ; and it was concluded that the number in pay 
ought not to be diminished, but rather increased ; and that par- 
ticular attention should be given to the collection of the revenue 
upon several articles, as grain, salt, mills, &c., that money might 
be had in season to pay the soldiers their stipends, &c. 

But there is not time nor room to pursue this relation. It 
must be sufficient tx) add, that affairs went on in this curious 
manner to the final catastrophe of all such governments, an esta- 
blishment of absolute power in a single man. There were in 
Italy, in the middle ages, a hundred or two of cities, all independ- 
ent republics, and all constituted nearly in the same manner. 
The history of one is, under different names and various circum- 
stances, the history of all ; and all, excepting two or three that 
are still decided aristocracies, had the same destiny, an exit in 
monarchy. There are extant a multitude of particular histories 
of these cities, full of excellent warning for the people of America.* 
Let me recommend it to you, my young readers, who have time 
enough before you, to make yourselves masters of the Italian 
language, and avail your country of all the instruction contained 
in them, as well as of all the art, science, and literature which 
we owe to Greece, Italy, and Palestine, countries which have 
been and are our masters in all things. 

* By all of them is yerified the observation of a liberal writer, quoted before : 
** These republics were all exposed to almost daily revolutions ; and seldom did 
the system of administration continue a whole year the same." Danina, Revdu^ 
Hons of Literature^ c. t. sect 10. 

DEFENCE 

OF THE 

CONSTITUTIONS OF GOVERNMENT 

OP THE 

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, 

AGAINST THE ATTACK OF M. TURGOT, IN HIS LETTER TO DK. 
PRICE, DATED THE TWENTY-SECOND DAY OF MARCH, 1778. 

BY 

JOHN ADAMS. 

" Some philofloph'era have been foolish enough to imagine, that improvementa might be made 
in the system of the universe, by a different arrangement of the orbs of heaven ; and politicians, 
eqaally ignoraitt, and equally prenumptuous, may easily be led to suppose, that the happiness 
of our world would be promoted by a different tendency of the human mind. 

Johrson's Adtxntdksa, No. 45. 

IN THREE VOLUMES. 

VOL. HL 





UNITED STATES OF AMERICA. 

CHAPTER SEVENTH. 

ITALIAN REPUBLICS. 

PISTOIA. 

"The Roman republic, according to its custom* of putting 
judges in all places under its dominion, sent to Pistoia a pretor, 
who had the whole jurisdiction, civil and criminal, over the city ; 
reserving always, according to the tenor of the Roman laws, 
obedience to the magistrates of that commonwealth. This 
jurisdiction, acquired by the Roman republic over the city of 
Pistoia, passed to the Roman emperors, and from these, into the 
power of the Goths and the Lombards, and successively of those 
who, from time to time, were lords {sig;nore) of Tuscany ; and 
it has continued, down to our times, under the same tie and obli- 
gation of dependence. It is very true, that the province being 

* Memorie Storiche della citti di Pistoia, raccolte da Jacopo Maria Fiora- 
▼and, nobile Fataizio Pistoiese. Edit. Lucca, 1758, cap. ii. p. 15. 

336 ON GOVERNMENT. 

liberated from the government of foreign nations, and its go- 
vernors {dominaiori) having permitted the people to make laws 
and create magistrates, the authority became divided; hence, 
when the concession was made to the Pistoians to create ma- 
gistrates, to take the name of consuls, and to form the general 
council of the people, they were permitted to expedite, by the 
authority of these, many things in their city ; reserving always, 
nevertheless, the sovereignty to their lords. 

" This concession of governing themselves by their own laws, 
obtained by the provinces of Italy, was the pure liberality of 
Charlemagne,* at a time when, having delivered them entirely 
from the government of the barbarians, he placed them under 
the command of one of his royal ministers, with the title of 
marquis, or of duke. Under this system of government Tus- 
cany was comprehended, which had its dukes and marquises, 
who governed it But as it was the custom of Charlemagne, 
and, long after him, of his successors, to send to the cities of 
this province two subaltern ministers, one with the name of 
castaldo, or governor, and the other with that of count, whteh is 
as much as to say, judge of the city, who held his courts of jus- 
tice either alone, or in conjunction with the castaldo, and very 
often with the bishop of the place, as the bishops were assessors 
and ofRcers, deputed as vassals of the king or the emperor ; so 
the city of Pistoia was a long time ruled and governed by this 
order of castaldi and counts. 

*' Otho II., having ascended the imperial throne, and having 
conducted the affairs of Italy with little good fortune, the peo- 
ple began to think it lawful to lose their respect, and to fail 
in their veneration for the imperial commands, and the cities 
advancing in their inclination for liberty, many of them began 
to reassume the title of consuls, which had been extinct under 
the Lombards ; and if these had somewhat of a greater author- 
ity, nevertheless, they were not exempt from the jurisdiction of 
the dukes and marquises, or from the sovereignty of the kings 
and emperors. 

" A greater spirit of independence arising in the minds of the 
Italians, in the time of those great discords between the empire 
and the church, diminished to such a degree the esteem of the 

* Slgonius, De Regno Italicey lib. iv. 

PISTOIA. . 337 

people towards the emperors, solemnly excommunicated by the 
pontiffs, that a great part of the cities of Italy, estranging them- 
selves by little and little from their obedience, began to conduct 
themselves like independent states, in entire freedom. This 
happened in the time of Henry IV. and V. ; and the disobe- 
dience increased still more, when all the German forces were 
engaged to sustain, in Germany, the competition between Lo- 
thario II. and Conrad the Suabian, for the throne of Ceesar. 
Then the cities, taking advantage of the distance of those who 
had power to bridle their arrogance, began to be insolent ; * then 
they began to lift up their heads, and to do whatever seemed 
good in their own eyes ; then they thought it lawful to appro- 
priate to themselves many of the rights of royalty due to their 
sovereign ; and believing themselves able to shake off the yoke 
of superiority, they attended to nothing but to their present 
advantage, and to extend the limits of their usurped liberty. 
But with all this, they were never able to extinguish the*nature 
of their subjection, nor the obligation of dependence ; for Fre- 
derick I. passed over to establish and regulate their privileges, 
in the convention of Constance, and the rights of royalty which 
had been then usurped. And the people were held to an annual 
census,! and obliged to perform certain royal and personal services. 
In the twelfth century, the cities, after the similitude of ancient 
Rome, all reassumed the title of consuls, and began, some 
sooner and others later, to make their proper statutes, and 
establish their popular government Though it is not possible 
to ascertain the precise time when the institution of consuls was 
first made in Pistoia, they are, nevertheless, found named in the 
statutes of 1107 ; and •of the^e there were two, called the Cbu' 
sul of the Soldiers, and the Constd of Justice, taken from the 
nobility of the place, and wfre called the Greater GonstUs, to 
distinguish them from the plebeian consuls of the second class, 
called the Lesser Consuls, or Consuls of the Merchants, taken 
from the common people. Their authority, and sometimes their 
number varied ; but there was ever to be one more of the popular 
than of the greater consuls.^ The election of these magistrates 

* His diebus, propter absentiam regis, Italiae urbibus in insolentiam deceden- 
tibus . . Otho of Frisingen. 

f Sigoniiis, De Regno ItaluXy lib. xiii. 

X Unus plus de popularibas quam de majoribus. 

VOL. v. 29 V 

338 ON GOVERNMENT. 

was made every year by the people, with the intervention of all 
the governors {rettori) of the arts of the city ; and they governed, 
with a council of a hundred of the better sort of citizens, ad- 
ministering justice both to the laity and the ecclesiastics. This 
council, besides its extraordinary assemblies, was obliged to meet 
in the months of March, May, July, and September, after a pre- 
vious intimation, given by the consuls, of the business to be 
done; and for the result of this assembly, all determinations 
upon things of most importance must wait; and all laws, 
resolutions, and deliberations, first proposed and digested in 
the smaller council by the few, must be here confirmed or re- 
jected." 

Here again is a constitution of all authority in one assem- 
bly. The council of a hundred was sovereign. The consuls, 
though they had the command of the army, and the judgment 
of causes, could do nothing in administration by themselves, or 
with aflvice of their littie council. They had no negative upon 
any deliberation or resolution of the great council ; and, on the 
other hand, the people had no negative, not even the poor pro- 
tection of a tribunitian veto. Accordingly we read, in the next 
paragraph, that 

" The power of the people having greatiy increased, by means 
of their usurped liberty,^ the factions had become numerous, and 
so much the more intractable and seditious, as the incentive of 
power was become the greater. In 1155, the emperor Frederick 
I., after having reduced Milan to his obedience, and received the 
oaths of fidelity from all the other cities of Italy, and, among the 
rest, from those of Tuscany, in order to obviate the continual 
tumults which arose, judged it necessary to institute the office 
and dignity of podesta, and to send to the government of those 
cities gentlemen firom among thp foreign nobility, with that 
title. This commission of podesta operated to the damage and 
diminution of the influence of the consuls, because in this ma- 
gistrate was vested the whole judicial power, both in private and 
civil causes, and in those which were public and criminal ; and 
therefore the podesta was the ordinary judge in the city,* with 
full power, dominion, and authority to govern, command, and 

* Con tutta la \Mk, impero, e potest^ di goyemare, comandare, e castigare. 
Fiorayanti, p. 18. 

1 The historian seems to have had litde notion of natural righti. 

PISTOIA. 339 

chastise, granted to him by the emperor, to whom, as their le- 
gitimate sovereign, the people had recourse in cases of appeal, 
and in all denials of justice. 

'< From its subjection to this minister, in the earliest times of 
the institution of his office, the city of Pistoia was again op- 
pressed; and, as the nomination was reserved directly to the 
sovereign, so the officer was changed as often as the times 
seemed to him to require. The discords and dissensions having 
become softened by length of time, Pistoia acquired the right of 
election of this minister, who obliged himself, in many things, 
to follow the various ordinances and resolutions of the consuls. 
This election of the podesta was made by the Pistoians in virtue 
of a municipal law consented to by the sovereign ; the person 
elected remained in office only six months, and was chosen by 
the council of the people, as it was called, that is, the council of 
a hundred, with the intervention of all the rettori of the chapels, 
and of the arts. The podesta was bound to carry with him judges 
skilful in the laws, notaries, two companies of militia, horses, and 
servants, and other followers ; and these officers were obliged in 
all things to render their accounts. It was customary to confer 
this dignity of podesta upon the chief citizens. The consuls or 
the podesta, jointly or severally, had no authority to impose 
taxes, to consent to war, peace, truce, or alliance, without the 
council of the people, which consisted of a hundred citizens, 
elected in the proportion of five and twenty for each of the four 
gates or quarters of the city, with the addition of all the rettori 
of the chapels, and of the arts." 

In other words, the podesta, consuls, council of a hundred, and 
rectors of the chapels and arts, were all collected in one assembly, 
to determine on grants for money, peace, war, truce, alliance, &c., 
and all questions were determined by the vote of the majority, 
which necessarily made that tempestuous and capricious govern- 
ment in one centre, against which we contend. 

^And to the podesta, for his regulation in the exercise of his 
office, were given by the city fourteen counsellors, and two judges; 
one de lege, that is to say, doctor of laws ; the other ex usti or 
de tisu, which they interpreted, a protector of the commons ; and 
two advocates for arguing each cause. With the opinion of all 
these, he decided upon those things which affected the honor or 
utility of the public, as, after having made his election of these 

340 ON GOVERNMENT. 

attendants, he was obliged to stand by their advice.* This 
podesta, in early times, superintended not only the secular, but 
the ecclesiastical government; but in process of time the city 
became governed by three, namely, — the consuls, the podesta, and 
the bishop ; for the bishop had profited of the violent dissensions 
that prevailed in the city, to draw to himself various rights 
and jurisdictions, as has happened in other nations. 

" The lordship of the podesta, therefore, having preponderated 
over the authority of the consuls, these were gone, when the 
office of captain of the people was created. This institution 
happened in Pistoia, when the Guelph party, by an increase of 
their numbers and strength, acquired the superiority of the Glii- 
bellines ; at which time, the lordship was taken from the podesta 
with a great concourse and tumult of the people, and nothing 
was left him but the charge of hearing and determining civil 
causes. Twelve anziani of the people were then instituted, and 
the authority of the consuls was transferred to them. 

'^ The last appearance of the consuls in the records of Pistoia, 
is in 1248, and the first of the captain of the people, in 1267 ; 
when it is said in the statute, that the captain of the people was 
the first ruler of the city, and the primary defender of its rights, 
and that he ought chiefly to watch over the conservation of the 
peace ; that he was the judge of appeals, and of all causes in 
the second instance ; that he had cognizance of crimes ; that he 
governed with supreme authority, united with that of the anziani; 
that he kept a court, of the same kind as that of the podesta, 
but more numerous ; and that the city gave him, for ornament 
and defence, three hundred of the best and ablest men, who, 
taking an oath of fidelity to him, stood continually in his ser- 
vice.! The election of this ruler was to be made by the anziani^ 
in the person of some foreigner, and not of any citizen of Pis- 
toia, notwithstanding, some of the primary citizens did in fact 
obtain this office, as appears by the records. Yet the anziani 
were sworn not to elect any man of Tuscany, or of the city of 
Pistoia, of its district, or other place adjoining to the city or its 

* His oath waS| Et petam a consiliariis toto tempore mei dominii de rebus, 
quae mihi vidcbuntur expectare ad commnnem honorem, et utilitatem nostrse civi- 
tatis Pistorii. Fioravanti, pp. 18, 19. 

f Volumiu quod clisantur trecenti boni homines de populo Fistoriense, de 
melioribus et potentiorious, pro manutentione et defensione Capitanei. RvJbrica 
cento delta Legge del 1274. 

PISTOIA. 341 

bishopric. The words of the law, in the twelfth rabric of 
1267, are, ' Nos anthiani populi Pistoriensis, juramus, sine aliquo 
intellectu nobis dato, vel dando eligi, vel eligi facere nobis, et 
Pist unum bonum et virum prudentem majorem XXX. ann. in 
nostrum eapitaneum populi devotum, et fidelem eeclesise, qui non 
sit de civitate Pistorii, vel distiictu, et qui non sit de Tuscia . . . 
vel de aliqua terra, quae confinet cum civitate, vel episcopatu, 
vel districtu Pistorii.' And this dignity of captain of the peo- 
ple was in such reputation, that, in some places, princes were 
chosen, and sometimes even the pontiffs ; and such personages, 
by means of their vicars, often exercised it. 

" The captain of the people, therefore, being the conservator 
of the peace, and the defender of the rights of the city, the 
Pistoians, to give him a strong arm to bridle those who had un- 
quiet and restiesa brains, thought it necessary to create certain 
companies of armed men, who, at the sound of a bell, should 
be obliged to assemble in the piazza, in order to execute the 
orders which should be given them by this officer and the cmzianij 
without whose permission they were not allowed to depart. 
These companies were called by the name of the Equestrian and 
Pedestrian Orders, because they were composed of both horse 
and footmen. They were afterwards augmented to twelve, in 
the proportion of three for each quarter, which embraced an infi- 
nite number of people ; and every company had two captains, 
one gonfalonier, whose office was to carry the standard of his 
company, and four counsellors ; and it was the duty of the cap- 
tain of the people to procure the election of these officers, as 
is asserted in the statute of 1267, rubric 19 : ' Teneatur capita- 
neus del popolo, primo mense sui regiminis, eligi facere duos 
capitaneos, unum gonfalonerium, et quatuor consiliarios pro qua- 
libet compagnia civit. Pist pro factis ipsius compagnise.' And 
in the additional laws of 1286, eight priors were added to these 
companies, two for each quarter ; and other orders were made 
for the good regulation of this militia. 

• " The twelve a/nziani were created with the same authority 
and full power which the consuls had held ; but the precise year 
cannot be ascertained. The number of members of which the 
new magistrature was composed, appears by a law of 1267 : * Or- 
dinamus quod duodecim anthiani populi dvit Pist sint et esse 
debeant in civitate Pistoria.' These twelve magistrates were 

29* 

342 ON GOVERNMENT. 

renewed eveiy two months; and afterwards, as appears by a 
law of 1277, it was established, that the anzianate should not 
continue longer than one month; and this magistracy of the 
anziani was elected by a council of the people of two hundred, 
by the reitori of the arts and their counsellors, and by the cap- 
tains, gonfaloniers, and counsellors of the companies of the 
people, and by the anziani pro tempore. The head of the anzi- 
ani was, in the primitive times, called prior, and not goftfahnier. 
The prior being the first dignity among the anziani, each member 
enjoyed it in rotation for an equal number of days, (as the presi- 
dent's chair of the States General is filled by all the members in 
turn, for one week, at the Hague.) This prior had great author- 
ity, as appears by a law of 1267, written in the thirty-seventh rubric : 
* Anthiani teneantur facere, et faciant int^r se, unum priorem de ip- 
sis anthianis adjectum ipsis, sicut eis videbitur de tempore, cui cee- 
teri anthiani pareant, et parere debeant, et obedire ; et qui contra- 
fecerit puniatur a priore anthianorum.' Although the name of 
gonfalonier appears in the records of some of these years, yet cer- 
tainly he was not the head of the anziani, but of the arts ; thus, 
in the law of 1283 : < Item capitaneus debeat spendere et assig- 
nare gonfalonem gonfaloneriis electis, vel eligendis, ab unaquaque 
arte et populo . . . . ita quod unaquseque ars suos gonfalonerios 
et officiales habeat' From this it clearly appears, that these 
gonfaloniers were the heads of the arts, and not of the supreme 
magistrature of the anziani; which gonfaloniers were elected by 
the council of the people of two hundred, by the rettori of the 
arts, and their counsellors, and by the captains, gonfaloniers, and 
counsellors of the companies of the people, and by the anziani for 
the time being. These anziani, sitting together with the captain 
of the people, and the general council of the people, promulgated 
laws and statutes, gave execution to all the laws, civil and crimi- 
nal, performed and conducted all the most important affairs 
relating to the government, and restrained the nobles and ple- 
beians with the fear of punishment within the limits of respect 
and obedience." * 

That is to say, all authority, legislative, executive, and judicial, 
was collected together in one single assembly. But how they re- 
strained the nobles and plebeians to obedience, we shall soon see. 

"In the year 1329, these anziani are called in the records 

* Fioravanti) p. 21. 

PISTOIA. 343 

Imperial Counsellors, ( Consiglieri Imperiali,) a remarkable title, 
obtained probably from the Emperor Louis, of Bavaria, when, 
after the death of Castruecio, he placed one of his imperial vicars 
over the custody of the city of Pistoia. The dignity of gonfa- 
lonier of justice was probably instituted in the year 1295, because 
in the next year, 1296, in the acts of council it is recorded, ' De 
consilio et consensu et auctoritate dominorum anthianorum et 
vexilliferi justitiee populi, et auctoritate ducentorum consilia- 
rorum.' 

" The new law of 1330, names a gonfalonier of justice, and 
eight anziani. ^ It is resolved, that the anziani of the commons, 
and people of the city of Pistoia, be, and ought to be, eight 
only, namely, — two for each gate or quarter, and one gonfalonier 

or justice for the whole city The said lords, the anziani^ and 

the gonfalonier of justice, and their notaries, shall be and ought 
to be of the best popular men and artificers of the city, and not 
of any house of the grandees.' * And the authority of the gon- 
falonier of justice was placed upon an equality with that of the 
a/nzianu The law ordained, that, 'wherever, in the statutes of 
the commons and people, mention is made of the anziani, the 
same shall be understood of the gonfalonier of justice, although 
it be not written ; and in all things, and everywhere, he shall 
have the same authority, and full power (balia) as has one of the 
anzianiy besides his proper office.' And to show that the gonfa- 
lonier of justice was not, in the beginning, superior to the anzi- 
ani, it appears that, after the introduction of that office, they 
continued to appoint, in the usual manner, a prior of the anziani, 
with the same authority and preeminence before described. The 
law of 1330 says, 'And the anziani and gonfalonier of justice, 
after they shall be congregated in their palace, and shall have 
taken their usual oaths, shall constitute one prior from among 
themselves, for^such time as they please, to whom all the others 
shall obey, under the penalty, &c. So that each of the anziani 
and gonfaloniers of justice shall be prior, according to the pro- 
portion of time they shall be in office.' 

" The gonfalonier, by the duty of his office, was bound to send 
out, with the consent and participation of the anziani, the stand- 

* Dicti domini anthiani, et vexillifer jusdtiae, et eorum notarii, sint et esse 
debeant de melioribus popularibus et artincibus dictse ciritatis, et non de aliqua 
domo magnata. Fioravanti, p. 21. 

344 ON GOVERNMENT. 

ard of justice, to assemble the armed militia, and go out to exe- 
cute process against any of the grandees {magwUi); 'which 
gonfalonier of justice,' -says the law, 'shall be bound by the obli- 
gation of an oath, and under the penalty of five hundred pounds, 
upon the commission of any homicide, to draw forth the stand- 
ard of justice, and, together with the captain of the people, to 
go to the house of the grandee committing such homicide, or 
causing it to be committed, and to cause his goods to be 
destroyed, and not to suffer the said standard to repose, until all 
the property of such delinquent shall be totally destroyed and 
laid waste, both in the city and the country ; and to cause the 
bell of the people to be rung, if it shall seem expedient to the 
lords, the anzianij and the gonfalonier of justice, or the major 
part of them; and all the shops, stores, and warehouses, shall 
be shut immediately upon the commission of such homicide, 
and shall not be opened till execution shall be done as aforesaid. 
But in all other offences perpetrated against the person of any 
man of the people by any grandee, it shall be in the discretion 
of the said lords, the anziani, and the gonfalonier of justice, or 
the major part of them, to draw out the said standard or not.' 
Such a rigorous kind of justice, as it regarded the grandees, who 
gave themselves a license to commit excessive disorders against 
those of the commonalty, was thought to be best adapted to 
their insolence. And to undeceive those who may imagine that 
in Pistoia, at that time, the titie of grandee was a respectable 
titie, and distinctive of the true nobility of the place, it is neces- 
sary to have recourse to the common municipal law, which says, 
that the magnati (grandees) were all those, of whatever condi- 
tion, who, abandoned to an ill life, offended the commonalty, 
and held the city and country in inquietude ; they for this reason 
were called MagnateSj became separated from public affairs, and 
excluded entirely from all magistracies and offices^ and subjected 
to very rigorous penalties. By the laws of the years 1330 and 1344, 
to be declared a, grandee was rather an infamy than an honor. The 
words of the law are these : ' But if it shall happen that men 
of any race, or noble house, or any one of them from such a 
a noble house or stock, born of the male line, or any others, live 
wickedly and flagitiously against the people, hurt the men of 
the people, and tenify and disturb their peaceful state, or shall 
endeavor to do so by themselves or by others, and this shall be 

PISTOIA. 346 

made known by pnblic fame to the captain of the people and 
the cmzicmi and gonfalonier of justice for the time being ; these 
magistrates, at the petition of any of the people of Pistoia, 
shall be obliged to propose to the council of the people, that such 
a noble house or progeny, such a man or number of men, thus 
defamed, be written and placed in the number of grandees, and 
be accounted as such.' * And as the Pistoians were driven to 
great perplexities to maintain in peace and quiet, their popular 
government, and in order to punish severely all those who should 
take the license to disturb the pacific state of their city, they 
proclaimed this penalty on all delinquents, by a law of the year 
1418, rubric 9. 'But if it shall happen that any one of any 
noble house or race, or any one of any other condition, shall live 
wickedly and profligately, or shall commit or attempt to commit 
any such crime or misdemeanor against the people, and the 
pacific state of the people of the city of Pistoia, they shall be 
recorded in the number of grandees, and accounted as such.' " ^ 

To such extremes of caprice and violence, destructive of all 
liberty and safety, are such governments naturally and necessa- 
rily reduced.! 

*' The city of Pistoia had also in its regimen a syndic. This 
was an officer who was called an Elder, or Syndic-General, 

* Scribantur et ponantur in numero magnatam et potentom, et pro magnati- 
bus et potentibus habeantur. Fioravanti, p. 22. 

f The devices on the standards, seals, and coins of the republic, as well as all 
other antiquities, are not within the design of this essaj ; but there was on one 
of their standards an idea that containea the truest emblem of their government ; 
a lamb pursued by a wolf, with the motto, Pace, richezza, superhia ; guerra^ po- 
verttty umiltH; Peace, riches, and pride ; war, poverty, and humility. 1£ the wolf 
is construed to signify the majority, and the Iamb the minority, as there was nei- 
ther a shepherd nor shepherd's dog to interpose between them, the resemblance 
is perfect. 

i " A peine Tind^pendance des cit^s avoit 6t6 reconnue par Tempereur, que le 
peuplc crut qu'il 6toit temps de se faire rendre compte du pouvoir des gentils- 
hommes, qui jusque alors avoient administr^ ses anaires avec autant de patrio- 
tisme que de bravoure et de talent Cettc defiance nouvelle se dirigeoit contre des 
hommes qui auparavant avoient bien m6rit6 des r^publiques ; toutcfois il ne faut 
point Tattribuer uniquement au d^veloppcment de Tambition et k la vanit^ des 
pl6b6iens, ni les taxer dingratitude. JD^ que le danger qui mena9oit les villes 
avoit ^t^ ^cart6, les int^rets des nobles et ceux du peuple avoient cess^ d etre 
communs. Les premiers, n'ayant plus en vue la defense publique, s'^toient 
livr^s de nouveau ^ leur projets d'agrandissement et k leur ambition de famille. 
Une ind^pendance solitaire leur convenoit mioux encore qu*une liberty partag^e 
avec des bourgeois ; et s*il falloit rechercher la faveur d'une puissance k laquelle 
lis ne vouloient point ob^ir, ils aimdent mieux faire leur cour aux empereurs qu'au 
peuple." Sismondi, Hist, des Rip. Ital torn. 2, p. 236. 

346 ON GOVERNMENT. 

who must be forty years of age, and live forty miles from the 
city. His duty was to look over the accounts of the podesta, 
the captain of the people, the anziani, and all the magistrates 
and officers of the city and its district, when they resigned or 
were dismissed from their charges. There were, moreover, ac- 
cording to the law of 1402, judges of appeals in all causes, civil, 
criminal, and mixed ; and to them belonged the cognizance of all 
disputes and regulations concerning provisions ; they also super- 
intended the sumptuary laws, against all luxurious excesses in 
the dress and ornaments of the ladies ; and they entertained a 
number of notaries, and a numerous family and court, for the 
execution of all services appertaining to their offices. 

<' The city of Pistoia being in this state of government, in 
1355, the Emperor Charles IV. arrived at Pisa, and the citizens 
appeared before his imperial majesty, and gave him the demon- 
strations of vassalage and obedience due to the sovereignty 
which he held over their city. The emperor confirmed to them 
all the privileges granted by his august predecessors ; and desir- 
ous of fixing the reputation and reverence for the dignity of the 
gonfaloniers of justice, he enlarged their authority, as well as 
that of the anzicmi; and wishing to make the Pistoians enjoy, 
quietly, a sort of liberty, he gave them, by a diploma of the 
twenty-sixth of May, the faculty of living and governing them- 
selves, according to their laws and laudable customs, in a fiee, 
popular state, under the regency of the anziani and the gonfalo- 
niers of justice, declaring both the anziani and the gonfaloniers, 
for the affairs of Pistoia and its dominion, his vicars, and vicars 
of the empire, for the whole term of his own life. " The an- 
ziani," says the diploma, "and the gonfalonier of justice of the 
people, and commons of Pistoia, who now are, and for the time 
to come shall be, in office, and no others, we constitute our 
general and irrevocable vicars, for the whole term of our life, 
with the full administration in the city, country, and district of 
Pistoia, and in all its lands, castles, and places. Pistoia main- 
tained itself in this state of a republic as long as Charles IV. 
lived ; and, taking advantage of the distance and negligence of 
his successors, it persevered in the same government until the 
year 1401, when the Emperor Robert, by his charter, declared the 
gonfalonier and priors of the arts of the city of Florence his 
vicars, and vicars of the empire, and gave them the govern- 

PISTOIA. 347 

ment of Arezzo, Volterra, Pistoia, and the other places of Tus- 
cany." 

But in the interval between these periods, the Pistoians were 
never quiet; for, governing themselves in what they called a 
free popular state, they were for reducing all to a level, and 
thought, or pretended, to make all the citizens enjoy equally the 
public honors and offices of their city. 

" In this state of things, the rebellion of Sambuca was fo- 
mented by some of the citizens of Pistoia, at the head of whom 
was Riccardo Cancellieri, who had made himself master of 
several castles in the mountains; from whence he made in- 
roads on the whole territory of Pistoia, and kept the inhabit- 
ants in continual alarms, with the design of delivering his 
country into the hands of John Graleazzo Visconti, Duke of 
Milan. Upon this occasion the imperial vicars in Florence 
sent, for the protection of Pistoia, two thousand infantry, some 
cavalry, and three commissaries, who, calling together the ge- 
neral council, imposed upon the counsellors the necessity of 
doing 'Whatever was required of them, that they might not incur 
still greater miseries. In the first place, they required that every 
resolution and statute of liberty, and every condition, article, and 
confederation, which the city had, should be annulled ; and then, 
by another resolution, that they should subject themselves to the 
people of Florence, with liberal authority to govern Rstoia at 
their discretion. This proposition of the Florentines was ill 
relished by the Pistoians; and while the council was debating 
on it, the soldiery took possession of the piazza and palace of 
the anziani; and having understood that no resolution had 
passed, they b^gan with drawn swords in their hands to ciy, 
" Florence for ever!" ( Viva Firenze !) and to threaten the coun- 
sellors. Thus intimidated, they by an ample resolution sud- 
denly surrendered the liberty of their city to the Florentines, 
from that day, the tenth of September, 1401, to the calends of 
January, 1402, to the end that they might apply a summary 
remedy to the evils with which they were agitated and op- 
pressed. Thus say the books of reformations in Florence ; and 
then were painted the lions, the ensigns of Florence, upon the 
palace of the syndic of the city of Pistoia. 

<< It was not long before these imperial vicars, availing them- 
selves of the authority given them by the emperor, and of that 

348 ON GOVERNMENT. 

given them by the Pistoians themselves, sent to Pistoia four 
commissaries to reform the public offices. These, desirous, as 
they said, of smoothing the passions of the chiefs which had 
disturbed the quiet of the city of Pistoia, proposed that the 
forms and orders of the city of Florence should, as much as 
possible, be imitated ; and that the twelve buoni homini should 
be called the Twelve of the College ; and that the supreme magis* 
tracy of the anziani should be no longer denominated the An- 
ziani of the People, but the Priors of the People; and, not 
making any innovation in the gonfalonier of justice, that he 
should retain the same name. The prior of the anziani was to 
be called Proposto or President of the Priori, according to the 
words of the reform, *And the priors shall have among them- 
selves one president continually, who shall continue three days 
in this manner. After the oaths of office shall be taken, they 
shall cause nine votes, with their names, to be put into a purse 
by a notary, one of which shall be drawn out for a president, 
and so successively during the term of their office.' 

" The Florentines having thus limited and restrained the pri- 
vileges of the Pistoians, or made the election of the anziam, 
and given them the name of priors, they made eight purses, in 
the proportion of two for each gate, and regulated themselves 
according to the plan in 1376 ; in which year, to take away the 
scandalous names of the two factions of Bianchi and Neri, 
"Whites and Blacks, two companies were instituted, one called 
the Company of St. John, and the other of St. Paul, and one 
prior was drawn for the gate of one company, and another for 
the other ; and the gonfalonier of justice was drawn, at one 
time from the company of St John, and at another from that of 
St. Paul. This manner of drawing the magistracy of the priori 
was changed in 1427, when they began to be drawn from two 
different purses, the first and the second. 

" In 1417, the Pistoians, considering that in so great a change 
of affairs they ought to make some advancement of the dignity 
of the gonfalonier of justice, ordained that the first place in 
rank should no longer be held by the president and rector of the 
city, but by the gonfalonier. Thus says the law, ' That the gon- 
falonier of justice shall always hold the more dignified place, 
and after him the president ; and in like manner, in going out, 
with the rector and other officers of the city of Pistoia.' This 

PISTOIA. 349'" 

law was ratified by the law of 1437 ; and from this it followed, 
that in 1463 they began to make for the president, who was to 
continue in that office, a purse by itself ; as it was determined, in 
1471, that for the future two should be drawn from that purse, 
and the oldest man of them should be the first to occupy the 
president's place, unless the younger were a doctor of laws ; 
and this was called the purse of the president ; the first of whom 
had the power of speaking and answering first in all meetings ; 
which power however ceased, in the first president, in the year 
1492, when it was determined, that the right of sitting and 
speaking first should, in all occurrences, be enjoyed by the gon- 
falonier of justice ; and thus this office of gonfalonier of justice, 
rising continually in dignity, began by little and little to be 
desired by the nobles ; and, by common consent and a public 
decree, it became confined to the nobles alone. 

"The supreme magistracy of the priori becoming a little 
civilized, the purse of the president got to be considered as the 
first after that of the gonfalonier of justice, and that of the 
priors which was the first became the second ; but, because four 
subjects were drawn from this, it was called the Purse of Four ; 
and the other, which was called the Second of t*he Priori, be- 
came the third, and was called, from this time, the Common 
Purse, in which all citizens qualified for offices should remain, at 
least for the period of one renewal, although by his condition of 
birth, merit, and age, he might be qualified for a purse of higher 
rank. When it was afterwards established, that the descendants 
by the male line, of men of rank, and of presidents, should no 
longer enter upon the office of prior through that purse, but through 
that of four, the same was called no longer the Common Purse, but 
the Third ; whence, by virtue of this new order of magistrature, we 
read, in 1475, of one gonfalonier of justice, two presidents, four 
of the first, and two of the second purse, and one notary, with 
the preference to the gonfalonier of sitting first, given him by 
the law of 1474, which says, ' The gonfalonier shall obtain the 
first and most dignified place.' 

By the few memorials that remain in the archives of Pistoia 
it appears, that there have been many and various councils of 
citizens, for the regulation of the public affairs of the city, in 
which councils the supreme authority of government resided; 
and before the construction of the public palace, all these coun- 

VOL. V. 30 

350 ON GOVERNMENT. 

oils were assembled in a church, at the election of the head of 
the supreme magistracy of the anziam. The council of the 
people, from the year in which the anziani were instituted, until 
1477, had the privilege to make the renewals of the magistrates 
and public officers of the city ; in which year it was ordained, 
that such renewal should be made by those who had been drawn 
gonfaloniers of justice, and workmen of St James. These 
riformatori began to be called men of rank (gradiuUi) for being 
arrived at the first two grades and honors of the city, which at 
that time were the offices of gonfalonier of justice, and of a 
workman of St. James ; and, for the first time, they are found 
thus named in the reform of 1483; firom which time it was 
established by law, that two of each family should assist, to 
make the renewal of public offices, and that the number of 
thirty-three should be sufficient to make the renewal with va- 
lidity. And this order of the graduati^ or men of distinction, is 
that by which, at this day, the nobility of the city of Kstoia is 
most clearly distinguished. In the year 1521, the assigned num- 
ber of the graduati to make the renewal of the public officers 
failing, there were elected certain citizens, of the other noble and 
popular families, to whom was given the name of Arruoti; and 
it was established as the duty of these to assist in making the 
renewal ; and this lasted till 1580. 

<< In the times of the consuls we read, that there was a council 
of a hundred citizens, who were chosen by four men of good 
fame, twenty-five for each of the four gates of the city ; without 
this council, neither the consuls nor the podesta could determine 
any thing ; and when there arose a question of peace, war, or 
taxes, besides the council of a hundred, all the rettori of the 
chapels and arts assisted." 

And as upon these occasions the consuls, podesta, counsel- 
lors of the hundred, and rectors of chapels and arts, all met in 
one assembly, and determined all things by a majority of votes, 
which, as has been before observed, made it a government in 
one centre (an aristocracy in reality, though a popular state in 
name) and consequently some two or three families must always 
be at the head of it, and constantly contending for the supe- 
riority, this kept the people in perpetual contention. 

" There was another council, as appears by the records, formed 
of fourteen citizens, and of all the doctors and advocates, which 

PISTOIA. 351 

was destined to counsel the podesta; as he himself, after having 
made his election of them, was obliged to regulate himself by 
their advice. Such was his oath ; ' And I will consult my 
counsellors, through the whole time of my government, in things 
which shall appear to me to regard the common honor and 
utility of our city of Pistoia.' " 

As neither the podesta nor this council had any negative on 
the legislative council of a hundred, yet, since the podesta had 
the choice of the members of the smaller body, that was no doubt 
composed of his friends in the council of a hundred, in which 
case it is plain that the same persons and families must have had 
the chief influence and direction of affairs in both ; so that this 
executive council had the same centre with the legislative council. 

" It is further found, that in the first times of the government 
of the twelve anziani^ namely, in 1267, there were two councils, 
one of forty counsellors of the captain of the people and of the 
anzicmi who were required to be of an age above forty years, 
and their office continued six months ; and they resolved upon 
all propositions which were proposed to them by the captain of 
the people and the anziani, provided they were not contrary to 
the laws and regulations of the commons and people. The 
other council was called the Council of Two Rindred Counr 
sellers of the people; and in the assemblies of this council 
assisted all the aforesaid forty, and, moreover, all the captains, 
gonfaloniers, and counsellors of the companies of the people, 
and all the rettori and counsellors of the arts, and all those who 
had been anzianiJ^ 

The fabric of this government, and its spirit, was the same 
with the former, only the name of captain of the people was 
substituted for that of podesta, and a council of forty was sub- 
stituted to that of fourteen, and a council of two hundred to 
that of one. The alteration therefore was not at all for the 
better. 

" After 1330, there was one council, called the General Coun- 
cil ; this was formed of a hundred citizens, namely, fifty popu- 
lar^ men, and fifty grandees (magnali). In this council assisted 
all the members of the council of the people, all the gentry, all 
the doctors of laws, and all the physicians of Pistoia, matricu- 

1 *< Popakari^ the cominon people as distrnguiahed from the nobles. 

352 ON GOVERNMENT. 

lated in the college of physicians. But this council had of itself 
no authority, and could do nothing without the council of the 
people. In like manner, after the same year, 1330, the principal 
council of Pistoia was that of the people, in which assisted all 
the anzianij gonfaloniers of justice, and their notaries, and two 
hundred popular citizens ; and none of the grandees could be of 
this council. They were elected fifty for each gate. The au- 
thority of this council was supreme and sovereign, to make and 
repeal laws, impose and tsike ojff taxes, &c. In more ancient 
times, as appears by the rubric 62, of the law of 1267, the 
council of the people had consisted of six hundred citizens ; but 
because such a multitude generated confusion, it was reduced 
to two hundred in 1270. 

^ But the government of longest duration in Pistoia was that 
of the eight priors of the people, and one gonfalonier of justice ; 
and this body was called the Supreme Magistracy of the City^ and 
was renewed every two months, from the four purses, in the palace 
of its residence. When they proceeded to draw these magistrates, 
with solemn pomp, the box was taken from the treasury of St. 
James, within which were locked up, with four keys, all the 
vot^s of the magistrates of the city, and it was carried in pro- 
cession, accompanied by the magistrates of all the colleges, with 
trumpets sounding, into the public palace. Here the gonfalonier 
of justice was drawn from the first purse, who was the head of 
this magistracy, and not only enjoyed the supreme dignity, and 
the preeminence in place, robes, habitation, and in all other 
respects, but answered in the name of the public ; and although 
in public affairs he could not rule alone, there was always al- 
lowed him a right of freely entering when he would into the 
greater council, and into all other councils and colleges where 
any matters of importance were under deliberation, and there 
give his opinion, his reasons, and his vote. This gonfalonier 
was a man of gravity, from his age; and that he might be 
respectable in all points, it was required that he should be of an 
ancient family;* and he who enjoyed this supreme post enjoyed 
a jewel, held in veneration by the people, and in great esteem 
by the nobility. There were then drawn from the other purse 
two persons, who were called presidents ; and these were some- 

* Si richiede lunga, e continoTata cfaiarezza di sangue. 

PISTOIA. 353 

times of a middle age, and sometimes old men, and for the most 
part, after giving proofs of their wisdom in this station, they 
ascended, either by means of their birth or their merit, to the 
rank of gonfalonier. From the other pm^e, called the purse of 
four, were successively drawn four subjects of the prime nobility, 
or at least of middling condition, who, for the most part, were in 
younger age ; and from this purse, some by their birth, and some 
by their merit and their age, passed up to the more dignified 
purse of the presidents, and sometimes to the rank of grcuhuUij 
or men of distinction. In the last place were drawn two per- 
sons from the third purse, in which were contained the names of 
all the citizens who had not made any advancement in the other 
purses, or had been of families worthy only of the purse of four, 
and among these were found those who exercised civil and 
liberal arts ; and these did not diminish the dignity of the ma- 
gistracy, but rather gave occasion to maintain the union between 
the plebeians and the nobility ; for with this compensation, the 
former remained long quiet, without any insurrection. This 
magistracy had in the service of its ministry a chancellor, who 
was a notary public, and was drawn from a purse destined for 
that purpose. This magistracy began their offices on the morn- 
ing of the first day of the month, in their senatorial robes. 
Each of the priors wore a robe of scarlet lined with red damask, 
vulgarly caUed a gown (lucco), with a hat or bonnet lined with 
a cloth of black silk, with its ribbon and tassel of black crape, 
and upon the left shoulder a large knot of crimson satin, which 
was commonly called becca; and the chancellor wore a gown of 
black cloth, lined with red cloth, without the knot upon the 
shoulder, but with a hat similar to those of the priori, whose 
duty it is to draw up and sign the acts of this magistracy ; but 
the gonfalonier of justice was clothed with a robe of red velvet, 
with a similar shoulder-knot, and his head was covered with a 
broad hat, of a noble appearance, the name of which is tocco.^ 

<< This magistracy, thus clothed and ornamented, after the 
discharge of the old magistracy, took the oaths of office, in the 
public view of the people, in the larger piazza, and under the 
ample covering of it, built in 1332 with the revenues of the ex- 

1 In the original work, the author deems the hat of importance enough to 
justify an engmved repreaentation of ita finm. 

30* w 

354 ON GOVERNMENT. 

cise, or gabeUes^ of the four quarters of the city ; and, after 
having taken the oaths, they went in procession, with the 
standard of justice, to the chapel of St. James the apostle, pro- 
tector of the city, and thence to the palace of their residence, 
which was spacious enough to receive, in the year 1536, the 
Emperor Charles V., in all the forms of majesty. None of 
the component members of that magistracy could go out pri- 
vately; but only when in some determined function was it 
permitted to the whole body of the magistracy to go out of their 
palace with solemn pomp. This magistracy resided with its 
chancellor, night and day, in the palace, to the end that all pub- 
lic business might be despatched wdth the greater vigilance, for 
the good government of the city ; and they drew from the 
commons a sufficient appointment, both for the maintenance of 
their tables, and of six and twenty persons destined to their ser- 
vice, and for the honorable management of the furniture of their 
palace, the linen for their persons and households, and of their 
plate, and all other things necessary for their use in the time of 
the government This magistracy also entertained a chaplain, 
with a handsome salary." 

We may pass over the tedious description of feasts and pub- 
lic processions, and say, — 

" That the gonfalonier of justice was the head, not only of the 
supreme magistracy, but also of all other subaltern magistracies 
which were in the commonwealth, and without him there could 
not be convened any council of the citizens, to engage in any 
public deliberation. This magistrate, while the public residence 
continued, was attended, whenever he went out of the palace, 
by a retinue consisting of one person, who, with the title of fiscal, 
resided in Pistoia, of one assessor, versed in the profession of 
the law, of the captain of infantry, of two architects of the 
palace, of the steward of provisions, of the chancellor del danno 
dato, of the master of the house, and of six and twenty servants; 
and in the performance of religious ceremonies, and in some of 
the principal assemblies, this magistrate had a retinue of magis- 
trates and nobility, which gave him more splendor than a 
crown. 

"The magistrates, upon whom depended the right govern- 
ment of the city of Pistoia, are, besides those already named, all 
these which follow ; some determine upon public affairs, others 

PISTOIA. 356 

preside in judicature, others superintend the common, others 
private interests; these watch over health, those over plenty; 
some attend to the preservation of the peace, and others to 
politics.^ These magistrates are the twelve collegi; six for peti- 
tions ; two for the works in the palace of the supreme magis- 
trates ; the two companions ; the captain of infantry, who in 
ancient times was called by the name of captain of the families 
of the anziani, and who, in primitive times, was called by the 
name of votalarche^ the institution of which office was most 
ancient The six laborers of St James, besides other commis- 
sions,^ held the care of the markets, and were, exclusively of all 
other magistrates and lawgivers of Pistoia, the judges and over- 
seers of all offences touching provisions, and constituted the first 
magistracy of the nobles; because he who is denominated a 
laborer of St James enjoys the noble rank of the gradiuUi, a 
dignity and charge of equal nobility, although of different func- 
tion and command, with that of gonfalonier of justice, as this 
office confers the character and distinction of nobility both upon 
the person and the family. There are also the four officers of 
the pious house of wisdom ; the four operai of the holy virgin of 
humility ; the magistrate over the rivers and roads ; the laborers 
of St John and St Zeno ; the magistracy of btumi homini over the 
prisons ; the ministers of the Monte di Pieta ; the ministers of salt ; 
the ministers of pledges deposited ; the approvers of the excises ; 
the purveyor for the commons; the four over civil suits ; the two 
over the restitution of taxes ; the two over the public schools ; the 
deputies superintending the poor ; the deputies for the assessment 
of taxes; the magistrates of abundance; the magistrates of health; 
the judges of controversies relative to beasts ; the four peace-mak- 
ers ; the ministers of the trumpet ; the eight reformers ; the min- 
isters, of the commons; the ministers of the customhouse; the 
syndics of the rettori ; the deputies over the workhouse of the 
poor ; the auditors ; the college of judges ; the notaries ; the ret- 
tori of the arts ; the tribunal of damages done ; the clerks who 
assist in civil suits ; the magistracy of three judges, who are 
foreigners ; but at present, as the public revenues are farmed out, 
these are suspended, and in their place the treasurer of the city 
is introduced to decide the controversies of the people, with the 

^ ^ alia poUtica," the general policy. 

3fi6 ON GOVERNMENT. 

liberty of appeal to the grand ducal chamber at Florence, in cases 
of denial of justice. The appeal from civil causes, determined 
by these magistrates, is sometimes to the supreme magistracy of 
the priori and the gonfalonier of justice of the city, in the name 
of whom, and under the impression of whose seal, the public 
decrees are despatched. 

'' There is, moreover, a council general of the people, formed 
of sixty citizens, and their office continues six months ; at this 
council the priors of the people, the gonfalonier of justice, the 
twelve collegia and the six for petitions assist This council 
holds the supreme authority of the city, and has jurisdiction over 
all the magistrates who transgress their offices, and has the 
faculty to treat and despatch the most important affairs of the 
state of Pistoia, to make and repeal laws, name ambassadors, 
dispense offices, lay on and take off taxes, and to give all assist^ 
ance to the other magistrates, who have their peculiar duties ; 
and each member may oppose a decision on any question under 
deliberation, that it may be referred to another session, to be 
approved or rejected on mature consideration. 

" For the most weighty business of the government, there is 
a council composed of the old and new council of the people, 
the priors of the people, the gonfalonier of justice, the twelve of 
the college, the six of petitions, all the graduati^ the resident 
officers of the pious house of wisdom, and all the resident 
gonfaloniers, who decide as to the majority appears most useful 
and advantageous for the public good. Here all the most mo- 
mentous affairs and causes most interesting to the public are 
digested. 

" There is also a council of graduate which had its beginning 
in 1483, and is composed of two persons for each family, of 
those persons, however, who actually enjoy the dignity of the 
gradiuUiy which is the first of the honors of the city ; and three 
and thirty members are sufficient to form a valid council, to 
which it belongs to promote persons and families to the citizen- 
ship of Pistoia, and to public offices and honors. Every five 
years, this council, together with the gonfalonier of justice, and 
the eight reformers, put to a secret vote all the persons who 
enjoy the citizenship of Pistoia, and reward or condemn them, 
as justice requires. They renew the imborsations of public 
offices and honors, and give ot take away from all as they please ; 

PISTOIA. 357 

examining well the grades of citizenship, of nobility, of antiquity, 
merits and demerits in all persons and families, over whom they 
keep a watchful eye, in order to prevent all occasion of confu- 
sion, disorder, and disturbance, which might happen through the 
discordant pretensions of the citizens; and thus guarded and 
established, they come from time to time to the distribution of 
those offices for which there is occasion. 

" Kstoia has also its dispenser of laws, (gitisdicente^) the duty 
of whom is to take care of the peace and tranquillity of the citi- 
zens, and to distribute justice, both according to the municipal 
laws, and conformably to the will of the sovereign ; and from 
ancient times his post was occupied by the podesta, introduced 
by the emperors into all the cities of Italy ; and because that, in 
the league that was called the confederation of Tuscany, con- 
cluded in 1197 between many places and cities of that province, 
for their common defence against the rights, or at least claims, 
of the emperor, in order to stretch the limits of their liberty ,i 
Pistoia had her place, and elected, according to the tenor of the 
association, her head, with the title of captain, to whom were 
confided, as the law required, all her affairs and pretensions, 
therefore, in 1200, it is said that Pistoia had for her captain one 
by the name of Gualdaccio ; from which year, until 1529, there 
was always elected by the Pistoians, and by those who had the 
government of Pistoia, a governor, (rettore,) together with the 
podesta, for the good direction of the affairs of that city. 

" Afterwards it happened, that in the great tumults between 
the factions of the Panchiatici and the Cancellieri, there were 
elected by the Florentines thirteen commissaries, to establish the 
peace between them ; and among the multitude of things which 
they did in 1502, they annulled the office of captain, and created 
that of commissary ; and thus in some years the officer was called 
commissa/ry, and in others captain commissary^ and in others they 
returned to the old name of captain. In 1529, the Pistoians, 
finding themselves in great difficulties, doubtful whether they 
should be able to govern themselves, and dreading the devasta- 
tions of the army of the Emperor Charles V., which was near 
their confines, sent ambassadors to Bologna, to supplicate Cle- 
ment VIL, who was then in that city, that he would condescend 

* " per dilatare i limiti della loro usurpata liberti.'* 

358 ON GOVERNMENT. 

to defend their city from the imminent danger, and take it under 
his protection ; and they delivered him the keys of it ; which the 
pontiff, in his own name, and in the name of the emperor, who 
fought for the obedience of the Florentines, and the other cities 
of Tuscany, with great alacrity accepted, and immedia^ly sent 
Alexander di Gerardo Corsini for the government and custody 
of Pistoia, with the title of commissary; and therefore it fol- 
lowed that a podesta or captain was not elected afterwards, with 
the exception of three years, but one magistrate alone, with the 
title of commissary-general, as was ever after the custom. 

" The Emperor Charles V., having, in 1530, reduced the Flo- 
rentines and their confederates, by force, to submission to the 
empire, and restored in Florence the house of Medici, who had 
been banished by their fellow-citizens, consigned to them the 
government and dominion of Tuscany. Pistoia did not hesitate 
a moment in its obedience to the new regent of the province, by 
which ready submission they obtained from him the privilege of 
continuing to govern themselves according to their own laws and 
laudable customs ; and they continued to receive, in place of a 
podesta and captain, a commissary-general for their defender and 
governor ; for all the time that the government of the house of 
Medici lasted, in order to maintain the charge vnth suitable 
dignity, it was their custom always to confer it on some senator 
of Florence. 

" The government of the house of Medici terminating in* the 
year 1737, by failure of the succession, it was conferred, by the 
Emperor Charles VL, on Francis III., Duke of Lorraine and 
Bar. This new lord of Tuscany, pursuing the same system of 
government of the house of Medici, has continued to furnish the 
city of Pistoia with a commissary-general, if not a senator, re- 
.spectable at least for his nobility, who, regulating the government 
by the laws of the city, has always enabled it to enjoy a perfect 
tranquillity. 

" Francis IL, grand duke of Tuscany, in 1749, conceiving a 
good opinion of Pistoia, as a city of merit, and in all things 
respectable, and wishing to raise its dignity and honor, annulled 
the office of commissary-general, and confided the government 
to a minister, with the title of governor." * 

♦ Fioravanti, p. 88. 

nSTOIA. 359 

In a city, where every interest seemed to be guarded by par- 
ticular magistrates, where so many changes were made in their 
form of government in order to find one which would please 
and satisfy the people, one might expect to find happiness, if 
it were possible that it should exist where legislative and execu- 
tive powers were confounded together in one assembly. But if 
we go over again the several periods of the history of Pistoia, 
we shall find that similar causes had the same efiects. 

" At the end of the eleventh and beginning of the twelfth 
century,^ civU discords in Pistoia generated much misery; and 
many families, fearing that they should have still greater evils 
to suffer, determined to abandon their country ; and, as a lesson 
to their mad and cruel fellow-citizens whom they left behind 
them, they caused an inscription to be engraved on the inside, on 
the gates, < Habbi pazienzia,' (have patience,)" a motto that 
ought to be written over the door, and engraven on the heart, 
of every citizen in such a government, "and went to inhabit 
other countries. 

" Italy beginning, in 1112, to be infected with the contagious 
disease of the factions of the Guelphs and Ghibellines, destruct- 
ive insurrections and tumults were raised in Pistoia; and the 
citizens, infected with a spirit of cruelty against each other, 
without fear of human or divine chastisement, attended to 
nothing but party quarrels, and mutual slaughter and murder;" 
and these contests involved the city in continual wars, foreign 
and domestic, till the year 1235, when "the podesta, a wise man 
and a nobleman of high rank, exerted all his prudence, vigilance, 
and solicitude, to repress and compose the tumults of the no- 
bles and popular party, who, on account of the government, 
were grown unusually fierce and insolent ; but not being able to 
reconcile differences so inveterate, nor prevent the cruelties which 
both parties, regardless of his menaces and punishments, daily 
committed, the city was thought to be in evident danger of total 
desolation. As some of the citizens had given assistance to the 
Conte Gkiido de' Conti Guidi, who was become odious to other 
citizens as a supporter of Ghibellines, tumults were multiplied, 
till the city was at length divided in two, and they came to a 
fierce battle. As one party would not mix with or depend upon 

1 Fioravantiy cap. z. p. 164. 

360 ON GOVERNMENT. 

the other, each one elected its podesta and consuls, as if they 
had been separate cities ; and a war was maintained between 
them for years with such fury, as set all laws, human and divine, 
at defiance, till, exhausted and humbled on both sides, they were 
forced to have recourse to Rubaconte, podesta of Florence, under 
whose mediation a peace between them was concluded, with a 
detail of articles, to the performance of which Florence became 
guarantee. In consequence of this mediation and peace, Pistoia 
returned, for a short time, to her flourishing condition ; so that 
not only the greater powers admired her felicity, but the most 
formidable of the other cities stood in awe of her. But, oh 
miserable vicissitudes of ill constituted governments!* to the 
confusion of the citizens of Pistoia, the other cities, by some 
intervals of peace and union, grew powerful. Pistoia alone, 
by the continuance of quarrels, factions, and civil wars, was 
reduced to weakness in command, honor, and fortune." 

It was not long before the old disputes revived, and continued 
till 1251, when the pope was obliged to interpose, and negotiate 
a new peace between the parties in Pistoia. But this peace 
could not be effected till long wars, a great destruction of lives, 
and a general desolation of the lands and cities, by the various 
leagues and alternate confiscations of the rich and the poor, the 
nobles and commons, Guelphs and GhibelUnes, had fatigued 
and exhausted all parties. 

" In 1260, the Ghibellines of Pistoia, Florence, Voltenra, and 
Prato, could no longer bear the insolence and impertinence of 
the contrary faction. They therefore formed a union with their 
friends in the other cities, raised armies, and renewed the wars ; 
and, after many sharp conflicts, and at length the sanguinary 
battle of Monte-aperto, they turned the tide of fortune and the 
torrent of popular passions in their favor, till all Tuscany be- 
came GhibelJine, excepting Lucca and the Florentine exiles. 
At the instigation of the Conte Novello, vicar of King Manfred, 
Pistoia, Florence, Siena, Pisa, Volterra, Saminiato, CoUe, Prato, 
and Poggibonzi, raised a standing army to make war upon 
Lucca, because this city was the asylum of their fugitives." 
This army was maintained only by the imposition of general 
and very heavy taxes, did infinite damage in the country, and at 

* (( Ma oh misere vicende del mondo ! " Fioravanti, p. 219. 

PISTOIA. 361 

last, in 1367, obtained a peace between Pistoia and Lucca, upon 
conditions, one of which was, that each city should pardon the 
other all the injuries, molestations, discords, offences, damages, 
rapines, homicides, devastations, and conflagrations, that had 
been committed. 

" In 1268,^ the Guelphs in Pistoia were much displeased that 
the heads of the Ghibellines, banished and driven out from their 
city, should, under Astancollo Panciatichi, have fortified them- 
selves at Lucciano, a castle under the eyes of Pistoia ; therefore 
they ordered Cialdo Cancellieri, thdir podesta, to go out with an 
armed force and dislodge them. Panciatichi, having penetrated 
the designs of the Guelphs in Pistoia, fearing that he could not 
resist the assault of his enemies, because he was inferior in 
force, and without hopes of succor, abandoned the post, and 
went to Pisa, where he united himself with his confederates ; so 
that Cancellieri, finding the castle empty of inhabitants, plun- 
dered and demolished it, and caused the Panciatichi to be ban- 
ished as the heads of that faction, whose estates were all con- 
fiscated. 

** The party spirit of the citizens of Pistoia having, in 1270, 
in some measure subsided, by means of the government of the 
Universal Pacificator of Tuscany,^ they set about a reformation 
of their magistrates ; and considering that a multitude always 
generate confusion, they reduced to two hundred their general 
council, which had been composed before of six hundred mem- 
bers, and created many new magistrates and jurisdictions, to 
bring into order the affairs of their government But in 1284, 
there arose again most grievous disorders, by reason of the 
ill administration of justice; and the general council elected 
the wisest citizens, to make another reformation and new laws, 
and to bring about a reconciliation among the principal citizens 
who disturbed the public tranquillity. But all their regulations 
were ineffectual; for in the next year, 1285, fresh disturbances 
wete perceived in the city of Pistoia, occasioned by certain 
families, who, by means of copious wealth, and the adherence 
of numerous friends, followers, and relations, aspired to govern 
the city at pleasure ; but as the wisest men exerted themselves, 
that their public affairs should depend only on law and justice, 

1 Fioravanti, c. xv. p. 229. 9 Charles of Anjou, King of Naples. 

VOL. V. 31 

362 ON GOVERNMENT. 

not upon the passions and caprice of individuals, they called 
together the general council. These endeavored to render 
those families odious and unpopular, as well as the title by 
which they were distinguished; and to this end ordered, that 
they should be declared "grandees," (moffnati^) who by their 
influence and power disturbed the public tranquillity ; and to 
be declared a grandee became equivalent to being declared a 
seditious person, impertinent, and separated from the public 
government of the city. 

" The dominant party ruled the Guelphs so arbitrarily, com- 
mitted so many robberies upon them, and burned and destroyed 
so much of their property, that these became desperate, and 
joining the exiles from many cities, raised an army, which 
obliged the Pistoians, and the governors of other cities, to raise 
another to oppose it, at an expense of a general imposition of 
taxes upon all the necessaries of life. The two armies met in 
the plain of Campaldino, and a memorable victory was gained 
by the Guelphs ; and fire and sword were again scattered wide 
in consequence of this. 

" In 1290, another fierce tumult arose in Pistoia, between the 
most illustrious families, occasioned by a sword cut, given by 
Mone Sinibaldi, upon the face of.Gio. Vergiolesi. Upon this 
signal there was a general insurrection ; and it cost all the art 
and resolution of the government, to do justice, to prevent ano- 
ther general battle ; for civil discords were beyond measure in- 
creased, and the people, without any bridle, were in the utmost 
danger of desolating the city, and leaving it empty of inhabit- 
ants. The exiles in the mean time took their stations among 
the mountains, where they fortified themselves, and made incur- 
sions from time to time, robbing, plundering, burning, and mur- 
dering, without control. 

" Another insurrection, in 1296, came very near accomplish- 
ing the final ruin of Pistoia; it ended in a bloody battle, in 
which many persons lost their lives, and the parties remainedf as 
inveterate and cruel after as they had been before it. Insurrec- 
tions and tumults continued so frequent, that the bishop fled for 
fear, the merchants could do no business, and revolutions, inso- 
lence, robberies, asslassinations, daily happened;* and such dis- 

* Le rivoluzioni, le insolenze, le rubberie, li assassinamenti, che giomalmente 
accadevano, &c. Fioravanti, p. 248. 

PISTOIA. 363 

trust was fixed in the minds of all men, that all lived in con- 
tinual fear and suspicion. These apprehensions were carried to 
such a length, that each one shut himself up in his house, 
with the friends he could collect, where he fortified himself; and 
those who had not towers to their habitations erected them.* 
Sixty towers were erected in this single city, some of which 
still remain elevated above the houses, some are now covered 
with roofs, others since included in the buildings as they have 
been enlarged, and others, from time to time, have been ruined 
and destroyed in the subsequent wars. It is to be noted, that, 
by law or by custom, towers might not be erected but by the 
nobility, and these had their measure ; so that, to avoid envy, 
they could not exceed a limited height But at this time the in- 
surrections of the citizens and of the people of the castles in the 
high lands increasing, seditious and perverse people were found 
everywhere, which gave occasion and motives to all the citizens 
to think of their houses; and they began, through the whole 
state, to proceed to exemplary punishments, without regard to 
the age, condition, or sex of the persons, and thus, in a short 
time, they remedied so many evils and tumults ; and besides the 
quiet that resulted to the city, the stimulus had an effect on the 
castles, in the mountains, — namely, Cavinano, Lizzano, Popillio, 
Piteglio, S. Marcello, Mammiano, and others, — to make that 
universal peace which is mentioned in the archives of the city." 

But the disorder was not confined to the common citizens in 
town and country, it originated in the divisions among the men 
of birth, fortune, and abilities, in the government. 

" The contests for superiority among the anziani themselves, 
in 1298, arose to such a degree, that from argument, intrigue, 
and oratory, they proceeded to blows, and, after a rude encoun- 
ter, the weaker party fled to the public archives, and shut and 
secured the door in the faces of their pursuers. Those without, 
finding it impossible to pursue the affray, determined to take 
♦heir vengeance by fire ; accordingly, setting fire to the archives, 
those within remained, together with all the papers, files, and 
records, a prey and a triumph to devouring flames." 

This terrible event, as may well be believed, produced still 
greater tumults and confusions, which were terminated at last 

♦ Fioravanti, p. 244. 

364 ON GOVERNMENT. 

by a calamity of another kind, more terrible, if not more de- 
structive, a continuance of earthquakes for eight days together, 
which shook down houses and towers more effectually than the 
inhabitants were able to do. This event, which was believed by- 
some to be a judgment of Heaven for the animosities of the 
citizens, it was hoped would promote peace and benevolence 
among them; but they soon revived, with more wickedness 
than ever, their ancient dissensions.^ 

The family of Cancellieri, at this time having most influence, 
both by the riches they possessed, and by their great numbers, 
amounting to a hundred men in arms, as brave as they were 
haughty, were become formidable to all the other families in 
Pistoia, to such a degree that all, both in the city and country, 
stood in fear of them. It happened that Carlino di Gualfredi, 
and Dore, or Amadore, the son of William Cancellieri, being 
together in a cellar, where they had drank too .freely, fell into a 
squabble, in which Dore was beaten and insulted with out- 
rageous language, which offended him so highly that he medi- 
tated a cruel revenge. Going out of the wine cellar in this 
temper of mind, Dore went, late as it was at night, and laid 
himself down in a corner of the street by which CarUno was 
used to pass, and there happening to see Vanni, the brother of 
CarUno, on horseback, without thinking of his innocence, gashed 
him in the face by a blow with a target, and by another stroke cut 
off part of his left hand. In this deplorable condition Vanni was 
carried to his father, who, seeing his son thus barbarously treated, 

1 *< A vingt milles de Florence, sur la route de Lucques, au pied des Ap- 
penins qui separent la Toscane d'avec le Mod^nois, est batie la TiUe de Pistoia. 
Malgr^ la fertility de son territoire et sa riante situation, cette cit6 n'a p<Mnt ac- 
quis d'illustration par sa population, sa richesse, son commerce, ou sa puissance ; 
mais en revanche la violence de ses revolutions, et la haine profonde des partis 
qui la divis^rent, r6pandirent un levain de discorde sur le reste.de la Toscane et 
presoue de I'ltalie, et suscit^rent pour une offense priv^e et une querelle de 
faniille, une guerre universelle. Le peuple de Pistoia est peut-etre le peuple 
le plus violent, le plus emport^, le plus factieux dont Thistoire nous ait conserve 
le souvenir. C'est un peuple qui semble avoir eu soif de guerres civiles ; il d# 
fut point desalt^r6 de sang mi^e apr^s avoir r^duit sa patrie a n'avoir qu'un rang 
obscur parmi les villes dltalie ; il ne se reposa point sous le joug du acspodsme 
qui, ^touffant toutes les passions, d^tniisant tous les int^rets, endort presque 
touiours les peuples dans le repos de la mort ; il continua de combattre apr^s que 
la Uberte, le gouvemement, la gloire, ne pouvoient plus exister pour lui ; tel 
qu'un des g^ans de T Arioste, dans la chaleur de ses bataiUes, il oublioit qu'il ^toit 
mort Exemple & jamais memorable de la fureur insens^e que les noms seuls peu- 
vent encore inspirer aux hommes, lorsqu'il ne subsiste plus aucune des causes 
qui avoient excite leur discorde. Sismondi, Rip, Ital. tome iv. p. 94. 

PISTOIA. 366 

was so inflamed with resentment, that, disregarding aU laws divine 
and human, he began to meditate his revenge. At this moment 
the extravagance of his son was reported to William, and 
affected him with such grief and disgust, that he thought of 
averting any unfortunate consequences by an act of submis- 
sion ; and he sent his guilty son to the father and brothers of 
the man he had injured, to ask their pardon in his own name 
and in that of his afflicted father. But all in vain ; for scarcely 
had Gualfredi cast his eyes on Dore, when he seized him, and, 
without regard to the goodness of his father, cut off one of his 
hands upon a horse manger, and gashed him in the face, in the 
same manner as had been done to Vanni his son. By this atro- 
cious deed, done in cool blood and a sober hour, the father and 
brothers of Dore were so exasperated, that in order to obtain 
some signal revenge, they united the force of their friends and 
relations, filled the city with brawls, discord, and murder, and 
divided not only the family of Cancellieri, but the whole city, 
into two parties. 

" The Cancellieri were at that time very numerous, very rich, 
and in near degrees of blood related and allied ; some of them 
were derived from the lady Nera, and others from the lady Bianca, 
both of them wives of M. Cancelliero, the first author of the 
surname of this family ; but now, no longer regarding their con- 
sanguinity, they became so perverse as to attend to nothing but 
the destruction of each other; and reviving the memory of 
the ladies, from whom the ancestors of Carlino and Dore had 
their original, the followers of Carlino took the name of Bianchi, 
and the followers of Dore, that of Neri ; and the people being 
already infected with diabolical passions, the Ghibellines took 
the part of the Bianchi, and the Guelphs that of the Neri ; and 
from this time the two factions of the city began to be called 
Bianchi and Neri, and frequent bloody battles were fought in the 
city between them. 

" • The whole people in the city and country became divided 
into Bianchi and Neri, and the mutual slaughters of men, and 
burnings of houses, came very near to ruin the country. There 
was not a person who was not obliged to assume one of these 

* Feiretos Vicentiniis, lib. iL apud Muratori, torn, ix, Rerum Italicarum 
Seriptores, Muratori Annal. torn. viiL pp. 2, 3. Cod le maledette Sette n ands^ 
vano dilatando per tatta la Toscana. 

31* 

366 ON GOVERNMENT. 

names, and side with one of the parties. Recourse at last was 
had to Florence, to assist the magistrates in controlling these 
parties ; and the heads of the parties were banished, all except 
Bertacca, far advanced in age, and one of the knights of SL 
Mary, an order which had been instituted by Urban IV. to 
pacify the factions. It was confined to the nobility, invested 
with white robes with a red cross, and two red stars in a white 
field ; but with all its pomp and sanctity, had very little influ- 
ence to correct the errors of an imperfect government 

" The Cancellieri took refuge in Florence, those of the Neri in 
the house of the Donati, and those of the Bianchi in that of the 
Cerchi ; and thus infected Florence at last to such a degree, that 
those party distinctions became as common and as mischievous 
in that city as in Pistoia. At this time the Tuscans, holding 
themselves free from all subjection to the empire,^ and regulat- 
ing all things according to the caprice of parties unbalanced in 
their governments, the pestiferous venom of faction spread 
wider every day in the minds of the people. Each side aiming 
at nothing less than the other's total destruction,* had for its ob- 
ject the ambition of domineering without control. "With this 
maxim, which is characteristic of the seditious, these factions 
joined in the city of Florence to trample on the laws ; and the 
Bianchi party succeeded in driving out by force the Neri, and 
assumed the mastery of the city." 

But before the end of the year, another revolution was effected 
both in Florence and Pistoia, and the houses of many of the 
principal people leveUed with the ground. 

1 The Italian author is at least consistent in his views of the nature of popular 
rights. He says, — 

" Esscndo in questo tempo i Toscani usurpatori degl* Imperiali diritti.*' 

3 There was a refinement in the degree of their malignity which deserves 
notice in a history of ill-balanced governments. 

" Un principe odieux naroit avoir M constamment admis k Pistoia ; c'est que, 
pour que la vengeance tut complete, il falloit qu'elle ne tombit pas sur roflen- 
8eur;car 81 elle n'atteignoit que celui-ci, elle n'6toit qu'un chatiment, qui, propor- 
tionn6 k Toflfense, et attendu, ne pouvoit causer une douleur assez profonue k 
ceux dont on vouloit se venger. La premit'-re offense 6toit tomb^e sur un inno- 
cent ; pour que la r^ciprocite fQt complete, il falloit que la scconde atteignit un 
homme ^galement innocent" 

" S*il y avoit dans Tune ou Tautre famille un homme que ses vertus fissent 
respecter et ch^rir de tons, ou mSme que son caract^re paisible eut 61oign^ des 
dissensions civiles, et edt rendu comme inviolable au milieu des fureurs de la 
guerre, c'^toit lui que le parti contraire d^signoit pour sa victime ; et il ne croyoit 
savourer tout le piaisir de sa vengeance, que lorsqu'il avoit brav^ pour commettre 
le crime la sauvegarde des loix, et tout respect divm ou humain." Sismondi, lUp. 
Ital, torn. iv. pp. 98 - 100. *" 

PISTOIA. 367 

" The Florentines, among whom the Neri governed, in 1302, 
suspecting that the Bianchi, now banished from their city, would, 
with the assistance of the Bianchi who ruled in Pistoia, rise 
again with new force, entered into a combination with Lucca 
for the total destruction of Pistoia ; and a war succeeded, which 
lasted many years, and extended to all the cities of Tuscany, 
introducing the distinctions of Neri and Bianchi, and several 
revolutions in all of them " 

But the war against Pistoia was maintained by Florence and 
Lucca in concert, till Pistoia was taken, its country divided, and 
its people persecuted and oppressed, until, finally, they refused to 
receive a podesta from Lucca and Florence. This occasioned 
another army to be sent against them. 

" The ^ Pistoians then called in the mediation of Siena ; by 
whose decision it was ordained, that the podesta and captain of 
the people for Pistoia should not be chosen by the Lucchese and 
Florentines, but by the Pistoians themselves, provided that the 
election should always fall upon some citizen of Florence or 
Lucca. This award was supported by the Tedici, Bicciardi, 
Rossi, Lazzari, and Sinibaldi, and others, their followers, against 
the will of the Taviani, Ughi, and Cancellieri, and their adher- 
ents, both among the grandees and people. This difference of 
opinion occasioned quarrels and dissensions. The three families 
could not bear that the five families should *lord it over the city; 
each of these parties, therefore, striving to drive out the other, 
without regarding the expense or inconvenience, assembled their 
friends and forces, marched through the country, laid waste, 
combated, and assassinated, in defiance of all government But 
in tne end, the Taviani having fallen into an ambuscade in the 
midst of their enemies, near a river, some were killed, others 
made prisoners, and the rest dispersed as fugitives ; and their 
fortress, della Pieve di Montecuccoli, now called Valdibura, and 
the church of St. Simon, where they had been used to retreat, 
were sacked and burnt. 

^ In 1316, the Pistoians conceived a jealousy of the prosperous 
fortune of Uguccione, not only on account of a signal victory he 
had obtained against the Guelphs, but because he had been 
made lord of Pisa and Lucca, and had it in contemplation to 

^ Fioiavanii, c. zyiiL p. 260. * Signoreggiaflsero la citt^ 

368 ON GOVERNMENT. 

reduce Pistoia to his power. But dissimulating their fears^ and 
to make him friendly and benevolent to their city, the Pistoians 
chose him for their podesta. Coming to Pistoia, he restored the 
Cancellieri, the Taviani, the Ughi, and SinibaldL 

" In 1317, the Pistoians, by reason of the turbulence in Tus- 
cany, put themselves under the protection of Robert, King of 
Naples. Castruccio Antelminelli, captain-general of the wars 
of the Lucchese, having conducted to a happy issue many enter- 
prises for that community, thought of reducing to its dominion 
the city of Pistoia, by the means of its Bianchi exiles ; but after 
many skirmishes and mutual ravages of each other's territory, 
a battle fought between him and GiuUone, who commanded the 
Pistoian forces against him, in which a decisive victory was ob- 
tained by the latter, produced a treaty of peace between them, 
one article of which was, that the exiles should be restored ; 
the Neri consenting to this rather than risk a renewal of the war. 

" In 1321, Uberto Cancellieri executed the office of podesta in 
the city of Padua, to the greatest satisfaction of that people. 
And the same year, Matteo Panciatichi gave clear proofs of 
fidelity and courage in the office of commissary of Bomagna, 
under Clement V. and the people of Florence." 

From 1321 to 1330, the history of this republic is filled with 
wars, seditions, and intrigues, all set on foot by the different 
contending parties, in order to elevate some individual, a favor- 
ite, or a tool of their own, for the sovereign of the state. The 
simple heads of the story must suffice. 

" Castruccio commences a destructive war upon the frontiers, 
to obtain the sovereignty of Pistoia for himself. The peopl^ of 
Pitteccio betray their castle into his hands to favor his designs, 
being probably inclined to that party ; the leaders, however, were 
beheaded for treason by the Pistoians. Amidst these calamities, 
Ormanno Tedici conceives the design of making himself the sove- 
reign of Pistoia. The want of rain for eight months, and the 
devastations of war, had occasioned a famine in Pisa, Lucca, and 
Pistoia. Upon this occasion, Tedici, and Vanni Lazzari, both 
rich and powerful, as well as proud and ambitious men, and con- 
sequently jealous of each other as rivals, appear upon the stage ; 
their intrigues are full of all that duplicity and hypocrisy, which 
is universal on such occasions.* Tedici persuades the Pistoians 

* Fioravanti, lib. xiz. 

PISTOIA. 369 

to a truce with Castruccio, and seizes the piazza and palace 
of the anziani with his partisans; is made lord of Pistoia, 
reforms the magistrates of the city, and concludes the truce with 
Castruccio, much against the will of the other party. Having 
gone through all the ceremonies of a revolution, that is to say, 
reversed every thing, recalled exiles, &c., and governed the city 
fourteen months, his nephew, Philip di Fortebraccio Tedici, a 
youth full of ambition, conspired to take away the sovereignty 
from his uncle, and assume it to himself. To this end, he 
b^an by corresponding with the Guelphs in exile, and by infus- 
ing into them a belief that his uncle entertained a secret corres- 
pondence with Castruccio, to deliver Pistoia into his hands. The 
nephew, by other artificial discourses and simulated manners, 
exerted himself with the Guelphs to depose his uncle, and 
restore all the banished and scattered members of the Guelph 
party. His fictions were credited, the resolution was taken with 
alacrity, they united themselves with the impostor, and, the 
better to obtain their desires, communicated their intentions 
to Neruccio Conte de Sarteano, a Guelph gentleman of pru- 
dence and sagacity, and requested his counsel and assistance ; 
who, deceived by the relation of facts, so well invented and 
colored by Philip, acknowledged, that if remedy was not im- 
mediately provided, Pistoia would fall into the hands of Cas- 
truccio ; and offered them his cavalry, and promised to exert all 
his force to obtain the ends they desired. The uncle discovering 
the conspiracy, complained to his nephew, who roundly asserted 
it to be a fiction of malice ; and went immediately to the heads 
of, the plot, told them that the abbe his uncle was informed of 
aU, held a short consultation with thenl, in which it was resolved 
to rise at once, and carry into execution what they had intended. 
The conspirators assembling in the morning, and taking arms in 
season, rushed with Philip to the piazza, scattered the guards, by 
putting to death all who resisted, took the place, ran through the 
city, assaulted the palace of the anziani^ occupied the gates, and 
garnished the walls with their people, and Philip remained lord 
and sovereign of Pistoia. This done, Philip called together the 
council of the people, obtained the title of captain, and taking 
the sovereignty of the city on himself, reformed it with new 
anziani and magistrates, and, governing severely, made himself 
feared by all men. 

370 ON GOVERNMENT. 

" The Abbe Tedid, having lost the lordship of Kstoia, and 
eager to regain the possession of it, machinated with his other 
nephews and adherents to throw out of the window of the pub- 
lic palace his nephew Philip ; and going with his followers to 
the palace, he was introduced alone to a conference with the 
artful Philip, by his express order, who immediately ordered the 
gates to be shut against the other conspirators, and with a very 
few words again imposed on his uncle, and made him prisoner. 
Philip, thus liberated from the snares of his uncle, suddenly 
renewed the truce with Castruccio. He conducted his negotia- 
tions, both with Florence and Castruccio, with so much du- 
plicity, that he deceived both ; there are few examples of deeper 
simulation, more exquisite address, or of selfish knavery of a 
blacker dye, than he practised with his uncle, with the Floren- 
tines, and Castruccio. After obtaining of the Florentines the 
creation of his son a knight of the golden spur, three thousand 
golden florins for himself, and noble matches and rich dowries 
for his two daughters, of the Florentines, he married himself to 
Dialta, the daughter of Castruccio, and delivered Pistoia into 
bis hands. Castruccio immediately informs the Emperor Louis 
of Bavaria of his new acquisition ; and Louis sends to this 
great man, so faithful and ardent in his service, a commission to 
govern Pistoia as his imperial vicar. Florence makes war to 
recover the city ; but is beaten by Castruccio, who receives the 
emperor afterwards in Pistoia, and is made by him duke both of 
Lucca and Pistoia, and soon after dies." 

If he had lived, the example would probably have here been 
complete ; the continual altercations of the principal families 
having completely overturned the constitution, and introduced 
an absolute monarchy. But his death opened a door for still 
further contentions. " M. Vinciguerra di AstancoUo Panciatichi, 
prefect of the royal militia of France, and a general in the wars 
of Normandy, came into the service of the Florentines at this 
time, with the character of general, and rendered himself memo- 
rable to posterity, and most grateful to his family, by building 
in four years, his superb palace in Pistoia, in the parish of St. 
Matthew. The sons of the deceased Castruccio thought,^ by 
the favor of the Vergiolesi, Chiarenti, Tedici, and other powerful 

^ FioiraTanti, chap. xx. p. 286. 

PISTOIA. 371 

families in Pistoia, to get themselves acknowledged as sove- 
reigns of that city ; and to this end procured an armed force to 
take possession of the piazza and palace of the anziani; but the 
imperial vicar, with his four hundred German guards, and by the 
favor of the Muli, Gualfreducci, and Panciatichi, families suffi- 
ciently powerful, gave battle to the sons of Castruccio, and 
drove them out of Pistoia, into the mountains of Lucca. 

" The Florentines, taking advantage of the divisions and con- 
fusions in Pistoia, excited their people suddenly to war, and 
went and laid siege to Carmignano ; and after many fierce bat- 
tles for fifteen days it surrendered, which made the Florentines, 
with the Guelph exiles, very insolent, ravaging the country, pre- 
venting the, farmers from sowing their grounds, and threatening 
even the walls of Pistoia. 

" In this state of things, there arose in Pistoia two potent 
factions ; one originated in the house of Vergiolesi, and the other 
in that of Panciatichi. The Vergiolesi adhering to the govern- 
ment of the imperial vicar, through fear of the four hundred 
Germans who were in Pistoia, induced a good part of the 
people to refuse their consent to a peace with the Florentines 
and Guelphs. The Panciatichi, with their followers, not judging 
the sentiment of the Vergiolesi .good and useful for the city, 
esteemed it more advantageous to make peace, than to main- 
tain the country in subjection to the avidity of the Bavarian 
and his ministers. But the other party determined to interrupt 
the treaty, by exciting the city to an uproar, and by parading 
the streets with their Germans, by whom many of the people 
were assassinated. Finding themselves thus ill-treated, the peo- 
ple, collecting together, fell upon these Germans. A skirmish 
followed, so serious that many were killed, many surrendered 
prisoners, and those who escaped were obliged to fly with their 
vicar to Lucca. In the mean time Bicciardo di Lazzaro Can- 
cellieri, a Guelph exile from Pistoia, secretly assisted by the 
Florentines, and rendered powerful both by the money and the 
bravery of his Guelphs, understanding the disunion in Pistoia, 
marched into the mountains of Pistoia with great terror, to 
acquire possession of some confiscated castles of his party. This 
occasioned great disgust and alarm to all the city, and roused 
Giovanni Panciatichi to go out with his faction to oppose him ; 
who attacking his enemy with great spirit, prevented him from 

372 ON GOVERNMENT. 

making himself the lord of that extensive comitry. The Pan- 
ciatichi, then, the Muli, and the Gualfreducci, pushing the 
advantage they had gained, and suspecting some treason 
from the Vergiolesi applied themselves at once to cut off the 
means to such designs. With all diligence they procured from 
the anziani an assembly of the general council, by whom all the 
sons and relations of Castruccio, Philip Tedici, Charles his son, 
with all their families, were banished and imprisoned out of 
Pistoia, and all their goods and estates confiscated; and to 
make sure of the imprisonment or the death' of the Tedici, a 
reward was offered of five hundred florins of gold. This done, 
they made peace with Florence, and four knights of the golden 
spur were made by the Florentines, two of the family of Pan- 
ciatichi, one of the family of Muli, and one of the Gualfreducci, 
in gratitude for their important services; and both cities sub- 
mitted to the church, and banished the emperor." 

The common people about this time began to be weary of the 
cabals of the principal families, but were too ignorant to con- 
trive any method to restrain them, but that which always ren- 
ders them still more desperate and destructive to the community, 
an attempt to bring all upon a level. 

" The fashion at funerals had become so expensive, that every 
one exceeded his proper abilities in making a show; and the 
Pistoians, not without giving occasion for ridicule, attempted to 
regulate the expense upon such occasions, by decreeing a uni- 
form moderation for alL At the same time, considering the 
blessings and advantages of equal and clear laws, and that the 
people by the means of them are rendered tractable, and less 
haughty and audacious, they prepared certain statutes and pro- 
visions for the good government of their city. And as it ap- 
peared to them, that some of the principal families arrogated an 
undue share in the management of public affairs, and were dis- 
posed by force to oppress the commonalty, they determined that 
all offences against the latter should be severely punished, and 
that the next noble relation of any grandee should be obliged to 
pay any pecuniary mulct which should be inflicted, in case his 
estate was not sufficient to discharge it ; and in case the delin- 
quent was sentenced to a capital punishment, and escaped by 
any means from justice, his next relation among the grandees 
should be held to pay a thousand pounds." 

PISTOIA. 373 

Although nothing can be conceived more inconsistent with 
liberty, equity, or humanity, than these laws, yet the terror of 
them is said to have procured a momentary tranquillity ; espe- 
cially as certain companies of armed militia of the popular 
party were instituted in the four quarters of the city, to force 
them, arbitrary, oppressive, and cruel as they were, into execu- 
tion. But this militia was not long able to control the spirit of 
disorder, and it became necessary to provide a stronger bridle for 
unquiet and seditious spirits, and a new and most rigorous law 
to beat down th^ arrogance and insolence. 

" The plebeians at this time feeling themselves the true and 
real grandees, and at the highest summit of power, ordained by a 
law, that all those, of whatever condition they might be, who 
should give themselves up to an evil life, and give offence to the 
commonalty, and disturb the quiet of the city or country, should 
be, as a punishment for their actions, denominated ^^grandees^^ 
{grandly e magnati,) and excluded from the magistracies, and all 
management of public affairs, and be subjected to more severe 
punishments. It is true that the nobles had still some share in 
the government, because the plebeians, that they might not 
make too many enemies at once, did not seek to exclude all from 
public offices, but selected from the number divers houses of the 
most pacific, and the greatest lovers of justice, and placed them 
among the popular men, to take away their power from the 
others, and secure it to themselves. No nobleman, however, 
adopted by the commonalty was permitted to make any osten- 
tation of his nobility ; so that if any one of the popular men 
was made a knight by any prince or republic, he was suddenly 
deprived of his office ; whence many of the nobles, who wished 
to enjoy all the benefits of the commonalty, were obliged, by a 
simulated respect to the plebeians, to lay aside their arms and 
surnames, to distinguish themselves from their connections re- 
maining among the grandees. Other nobles there were, who 
chose rather to be excluded from all public offices, and live 
exposed to the rigorous laws of the grandees, than to lay aside 
their arms or surnames, jealous of obscuring the ancient heredi- 
tary splendor of their ancestors. In this, however, they were 
deceived, for the principal popular men took care to preserve 
their distinction, by a law, " That if by a statute nobles were 
made plebeian, they do not lose by that their nobility ;" that the 

VOL. V. 32 

374 ON GOVERNMENT. 

advantage of being of the people accrues to them besides ; and 
by another law, declaring many to be magnati, it is subjoined, 
"the rest we understand to be of the people, although bom 
of noble race and progeny." From this it was contended, that 
those were deceived who measured the antiquity and nobility of 
their own or other families by the rule of the enjoyment of the 
principal magistracies. 

" In 1332, several of the most powerful families, arrogating 
too much authority in public affairs," or, in other words, being 
found by the plebeians to have too much infl^pnce for them to 
be able to control, " such dissensions and disturbances arose, that 
it was thought necessary to declare them in the number of the 
grandees ; and accordingly, it appears by the records, that the 
Cancellieri, Gualfreducci, Mull, Ughi, Panciatichi, Taviani, Ric* 
ciardi, Tedici, Sinibaldi, Tebertelli, Vergiolesi, Rossi, Lazzari, 
Forteguerri, Visconti, Foresi, and others, that is, all the principal 
families in the nation, were declared to be magncUiy stigmatized 
with that odious appellation, and excluded from all share in 
public offices. 

" In this year severe sumptuary laws against effeminate luxury 
were made by the council, the solemnities and expenses of wed- 
dings were regulated, and the clothing of men. Extravagant 
fashions in these things had tempted most people to exceed their 
revenues, had multiplied debtors, and rendered dubious and diffi- 
cult the credit of merchants. Certain wise citizens were author- 
ized to prepare regulations of this kind ; and they succeeded in 
making such wise laws, that frauds and abuses became less 
common. 

"Yet the caprice and instability of this government appears 
very remarkable at this time ; for although the Cancellieri were 
the year before recorded for grandees, yet in 1333, Ricciardo Can- 
cellieri was declared a knight by the council of the people of 
Pistoia, and was feasted at the public expense. When any one 
was made a knight by any sovereign, or any city, he became 
suddenly noble, although he had not been so by birth ; for birth, 
at that time, was neither necessary to nobility nor to knighthood. 
The ceremony of arming the knight was made with great solem- 
nity, receiving the military girdle from the other knights." * 

* Fiorayanti, p. 801. 

PISTOIA. 375 

In 1336, the Rstoians lamented the death of their most be- 
loved citizen Cino, their greatest lawyer and judge, the master 
of Bartolo and Petrarch. 

In 1342, Pistoia was obliged to capitulate with the Duke of 
Athens, who held the government of it three years, and ruled it 
as tyrannically as he did Florence. 

In 1344, the government was recovered from the Duke of 
Athens; and, 

" To remedy the infinite tumults which were daily excited by 
the power of the families of the magnates^ who, by their riches 
and adherents made their authority and influence prevail, it was 
ordained, that in time of any tumult or uproar it should not be 
lawful for any man of the people to enter the house of any 
grandee, and if by chance any one should be in such a house 
at such a time, he should immediately quit it, that he might not 
be under the temptation to assist the grandee, upon pain of the 
loss of all public oflices, and confiscation of all his goods. And 
no one of these powerful families, whom they branded with the 
name of grandees^ could go into the service of any prince, city, 
or republic, if he had not first obtained the permission of the 
general council, on pain of being declared a rebel ; and that the 
families of the grandees might be known to all, the following 
description and declaration of them was made and published by 
thority, namely, — 'Omnes de domo Cancellariorum, omnes de 
domo Gualfreducciorum, Tediciorum, Lazarorum, Viscontorum, 
Panciaticorum, Ugorum, Mulorum, Tavianorum, Sinibuldorum, 
Vergiolensium, Rubeorum, Ricciardorum ; ' which grandees, in 
time of any tumult or strife, must not go out of their houses, 
unless called by the captain, or the gonfalonier, and anziani. 

" The Pistoians, informed of the robberies, assassinations, and 
havoc, which were daily committed by certain rebels in the above 
mountain, and of the treasons plotting by those of Serravalle 
against the peace and quiet of the commons of Pistoia, did not 
neglect to use the necessary expedition to chastise the insolence 
of the former, and to divert the malignity of the latter ; against 
the former they sent out a body of soldiers, who put the rebels 
to flight, and pulled down their houses ; against the latter, they 
promulgated severe laws, with a promise of a thousand pounds 
reward to any one who would accuse an accomplice of treason." 

To show the inefficacy of all such democratical despotism, as 

376 ON GOVERNMENT. 

the declarations of grandeeism against the principal families 
in a community, Frederick CanceUieri, surnamed for his great 
valor Barbarossa, had influence enough to obtain so great a dis- 
tinction, and so popular and honorable a post as the command 
of the troops raised and paid by Pistoia, to go upon the expedi- 
tion for the conquest of the Holy Land; Angiolo CanceUieri 
was made a bishop, and rose fast in the church ; and Niccolo 
CanceUieri, as captain of the Florentines, acquired immortal 
glory by besieging in his own palace, and deposing from the 
government of Florence, Walter, Duke of Athens ; and MarceUo 
CanceUieri also made himself Ulustrious as a divine, and obtained 
the place of auditor of the chief court of judicature at Rome." 

So much of the time of the husbandman, the artisan, and the 
people in general, was taken up in war at home and abroad, and 
the fields were so often laid waste, that it was impossible to 
obtain a constant and certain supply of provisions for the peo- 
ple. The consequence of this was famine and the plague, two 
other evils in those days springing, with innumerable others, 
from their imperfect government. 

" The plague and famine, which, in the course of the past 
year, had nearly deprived Pistoia of inhabitants, at length ceas- 
ing, the few that remained were so grieved and astonished at 
such a calamity, that one would have thought their minds too 
much softened and humbled to engage again for some time in 
their nefarious tumults ; but the few surviving citizens found as 
much disunion and animosity among them as ever. Fresh disor- 
ders arose, and there was no possibility of restraining the indigna- 
tion and fury of the two famUies of Panciatichi and CanceUieri, 
who, upon some dissatisfaction arising among them, feU into such 
quarrels, that, as each party had many adherents, many murders 
and much slaughter foUowed; and much greater would have 
ensued, if the people had not gathered to separate the combat- 
ants, and compeUed them to retire to their houses.^ To prevent 
the prevalence and increase of these disorders, the citizens caUed 
together the general councU, by whom it was ordered that dUi- 
gent inquisition should be made after the heads of the tumult, 
and a rigorous prosecution was commenced against Richard 
CanceUieri, and Gio. Panciatichi, the heads of the two famiUes ; 

1 Fioravanti, chap. xxiL p. 814. 

PISTOIA. 377 

who, although they humbled themselves, and asked pardon for 
the error they had committed, and made an entire reconciliation 
with each other, were condemned in a fine of five hundred lire 
each, to be paid to the commons of Pistoia, and were obliged 
to 'ratify by an oath, in full council, the peace they had made 
between them. But notwithstanding all this, neither of the 
families really laid aside their bad temper towards the other ; for 
their principals having, rather from the fear of justice than a 
desire of tranquillity, made the peace between them, they daily 
applied themselves to provide arm's and men, and finally pro- 
claimed themselves openly to be mortal enemies to each other. 
This gave rise to the factions of the Panciatichi and Cancellieri, 
firom whence arose such actions and events as brought final ruin 
on themselves, their relations, their friends, and the city itself. 

" I reflect with astonishment and stupefaction," says Fiora- 
vanti, ^< that the Pistoians, abandoning, without cause or reason, 
their native sagacity, and becoming factionaries, should have 
fomented the passions of these tw^o particular families ; have set 
the boasting of preeminence over one another before the public 
peace ; and have employed all their forces against the tranquil- 
lity of liberty in that city, celebrated through the whole world 
for men illustrious in arms, in letters, in sanctity, and wisdom ; 
prudent in her laws and in her government to such a degree, that 
foreign republics had made a model of her laws. Nevertheless, 
thus it was; giving themselves up a prey to their griefs and 
afflictions, they deprived themselves of all repose, and making 
the passions of a few common to them aU, lost their liberty and 
their government ; blessings, which till this time had been pre- 
served, not without the envy of their rival cities ! " 

This writer needed not, however, have been so much surprised, 
if he had considered the nature of man, and compared it with 
the nature of a government in which all authority is collected 
into one centre. An attentive reader will be surprised at the 
boast of that tranquillity and liberty hitherto enjoyed ; and will 
be at a loss to find one moment in the whole history where there 
could have been any degree of either. 

Arbitrary laws of exclusion and disqualification, and awkward 
attempts to expose to popular odium the principal families, 
made without the least modesty or equity by a popular majority, 
will never have weight enough with the people to answer the 

32* 

378 ON GOVERNMENT. 

design of them. Those families will still retain an influence 
with the people, and have a party at their command very nearly 
equal to that of the majority; and being justly irritated and 
provoked at the injustice done them, will never want a disposi- 
tion to attempt dangerous enterprises. ** 

" The family of the Cancellieri, though stigmatized and dis- 
qualified as grandees, were still held in great esteem, among all 
ranks, for their riches and numerous adherents. Richard, the 
head of the family, stimulated by his own resentment and ambi- 
tion, and no doubt excited by his partisans, had the presumption 
to entertain thoughts of making himself sovereign lord of his 
country. Courting the people to this end by his liberality, affa- 
bility, and courtesy, he waited only for a favorable opportunity 
to acquire it Having filled his house with a large number of 
persons, his countrymen and foreigners, he suddenly marched out 
with these and his relations to assault the pisusza and the palace 
of the anziani; but being met by the captain of the company of 
the anziani^ with his men, and with these many of the grandees, 
and a multitude of the common people, adherents of the Panci- 
atichi, the Cancellieri were repulsed with great spirit, and per- 
ceiving their lives in great danger, they fled and shut themselves 
up in the house of the Bondacchi, their friends. Their faction, 
seeing themselves left without a head, in disorder and defeated, 
fled in despair out of the city by the gate of St. Mark. The 
Panciatichi, having thus conquered Richard, proceeded with 
great violence to burn the houses of the CanceUieri. Richard 
was outrageous at the destruction of his houses and the flight 
of his followers ; but being informed that they were waiting for 
him in the country, he scaled the walls in the night, went out to 
meet them, took the castle of Marliana, and there fortified himself. 

" With the Cancellieri on their flank, and Gio. Visconti, Arch- 
bishop of Milan, and Lord of Bologna and all Lombardy, in 
their neighborhood, both with parties desirous of making them 
lords of Pistoia, the Pistoians were obliged to put themselves 
under the protection of Florence, upon certain conditions. Ri- 
chard Cancellieri, hearing of this, went to Florence, and with 
plausible reasons made it there believed that the Panciatichi 
held a secret correspondence with Visconti, to deliver Pistoia 
into his hands. The Florentines thought they might as well 
govern Pistoia themselves, and have it wholly at their devotion. 

PISTOIA. 379 

and immediately gave Richard the command of horse and foot, 
to go and subdue it The attack was made in the night, and 
would probably have succeeded, if the ensigns of Florence had 
not been imprudently displayed, which so enraged the Pistoians, 
that resolving to die rather than submit, they repulsed their 
invaders." 

The Florentines sent a formidable reinforcement; but the Pi- 
stoians defended themselves with intrepidity till they assem- 
bled their general council ; and although Gio. Fanciatichi was 
infamous as a grcmdeej he was still the soul of the republic, and 
no other man had enough of the confidence of his fellow-citizens 
to be sent ambassador, and entrusted with their salvation. He 
executed his commission, convinced the Florentines that they 
had been deceived by Cancellieri, and made an honorable peace ; 
and in 1352, the Pistoians effectually assisted Florence in defend- 
ing itself against the army of Visconti of Milan. 

" In 1353, the attention of all parties was turned to peace, to 
put an end, once for all, to the troubles of Italy, and it was final- 
ly concluded between all the Guelph cities of Tuscany, namely, 
Florence, Siena, Pistoia, Perugia, Arezzo, city of Castello, and 
others, of one side, and Gio. Visconti on the other, with certain 
pacts and conditions; among which Visconti freely released 
into the hands of Pistoia the castles and fortresses of Piteccio, 
Torri, Treppio, Fossato, Monticelli, and Sambuca ; and on all 
sides all the exiles were released. By virtue of which article, 
the families of the Ammanati, Tedici, Vergiolesi, Gualfreducci, 
and others, were restored to Pistoia, and all their property was 
restored to them. 

" Richard Cancellieri, nevertheless, in 1354, being still obnox- 
ious to the Panciatichi, did not cease to strengthen his party, by 
soliciting the friendship of those who might be useful to his 
views. To this end he formed an intimate friendship with the 
captain of the Florentine guards, of whom he expected to make 
an essential use in all occurrences. But the Panciatichi, jealous 
of this intimacy, complained of it bitterly to the Florentines, 
who, to please them, dismissed their officer, but at the same 
time exhorted the complainants to live quietly, and lay down 
their arms ; for that at all events, and at any expense, as authors 
of the peace between the two families, they were determined to 
maintain it. At this time, some disquiet arose between the dif- 

380 ON GOVERNMENT. 

ferent members of the Cancellieri family, one of whom, Pievano, 
joined the Panciatichi, and brought an accusation before the 
Florentines against Richard, that he meditated some great trea- 
chery against them. A rigorous investigation was instituted, 
Richard being found innocent, the accuser and the heads of the 
insurrection were severely punished, while he was honorably 
acquitted." 

The emperor Charles IV. made a grant to the Pistoians to 
govern themselves by their own laws and laudable customs, in a 
free popular state, under the guidance of the anziani and gonfa- 
lonier of justice, whom he made perpetual vicars of the holy 
Roman empire. That this sketch may not be protracted to an 
immeasurable length, we may pass over the rebellions and wars 
between 1355 and 1376, at which time, 

^ The dissatisfactions among the citizens of Pistoia were so 
increased, by the renewal of officers in 1373, that tumults arose, 
and to such a height were they carried, that the Florentines, who 
desired no more than to become lords of Pistoia, or to see it 
destroyed, because it was rich, noble, and powerful, thought it a 
favorable opportunity to strike in with their meditated designs. 
Under the specious color of peace and quiet, they annulled the 
late renewal ; and by new laws, under pretence of taking away 
the scandalous names of the two factions of the Panciatichi and 
Cancellieri, divided the officers into two orders, calling one the 
company of St. John^ and the other the company of St. Paul; so 
that a moiety of the citizens, exclusively of the grandees, who 
had not enjoyed the benefit of the imborsation, was now imborsed 
in the purse of the company of St John, and the other moiety 
in the purse of the company of St. Paul; and to obtain the 
supreme magistrate four were drawn, one for each quarter, from 
the purse of St. John, and four, in the proportion of one for 
each quarter, from the purse of St Paul ; and the gonfalonier 
was to be drawn alternately, once from one purse, and another 
time from the other. And because the company of St John 
was protected by the Cancellieri, it immediately followed that it 
declared itself of that faction ; and that of St Paul, protected 
by the Panciatichi, declared itself openly of the faction of Pan- 
ciatichi ; and in this manner, instead of extinguishing the fire, it 
increased to such a degree, that it spread not only in the city, but 
through all its territory ; and Pistoia was reduced to a condition 

PISTOIA. 381 

so deplorable, as to be obliged to abandon all domestic society 
and familiarity, every one being suspicious not only of his neigh- 
bors and relations, but of his bosom friends." 

In 1383, all ranks of people exceeded their abilities in expenses 
at funerals, and in other effeminate luxury; sumptuary laws 
were made against extravagant expenses ; but the historian con- 
fesses, that although he thought there was reason for them, yet, 
as he could not read them himself without laughing, he feared 
he should do no good by relating them. 

" The Pistoians having bestowed all their endeavors and stu- 
dies to obtain a peace with Bologna, with whom they had long 
been at war on account of boundaries, now hoped to live hap- 
pily ; but they were again tormented with insurrections, attended 
with rapine, burnings, and murders innumerable. 

" The news arrived in Pistoia, in 1390, that John Galeazzo 
Visconti had sent against the Florentines an army of twenty 
thousand men, under the command of Jacopo del Verme." 

This war lasted several years, and was brought upon the city 
by its divisions. 

" The Pistoians had now been eight and forty years in some 
sense dependent on Florence ; for in 1350, after the great com- 
motions, they had entered into a stipulation, by Richard Can- 
cellieri their fellow-citizen, with the people of Florence, to keep 
forever a purse of six Florentines taken from among the popu- 
lar party, out of which should be drawn their captain of the 
people. In this year, 1398, for the sake of a more intimate 
connection and familiarity with the commons of Florence, it 
was farther stipulated, that for the future the podesta of Pi- 
stoia should be a Florentine." 

Continual animosities had occasioned in the minds of the 
citizens such weariness, grief, and compunction, that it is impos- 
sible to read, without commiseration, their awkward attempt to 
reconcile themselves with one another, and to extirpate the civil 
discords, with which Pistoia was furiously agitated. The whole 
people, of every age, sex, and condition, were persuaded to go in 
procession through the city, clothed in white sacks, to ask mu- 
tually each other's pardon, and to cry ^^ Misericordia e pace!^^ 
(mercy and peace) and there can be no doubt that a momentary 
benevolence, and many acts of Christian charity, must have been 
produced by a pilgrimage so solemn and affecting; but the de- 

382 ON GOVERNMENT. 

fects in the constitation of their government were not amended 
by it, and the troubles of the people soon revived. 

The jealousies of the Cancellieri and Panciatichi^ revived, 
and proceeded to such lengths, that in 1401, Richard Cancellieri, 
to revenge himself, began a secret treaty with Visconti Duke of 
Milan, to deliver the city of Pistoia into his hands, that he 
might govern it with his absolute power, and exterminate the 
faction of the Panciatichi. The plot was discovered, and Richard 
and all his children declared rebels, and their houses reduced to 
ashes. Richard in the country joined with other exiles, and 
burned the houses of Panciatichi. The Pistoians were now so 
alarmed with the danger, from the Visconti and Cancellieri in 
concert, that they were obliged to put themselves into the hands 
of the Florentines. The Cancellieri carried on the war, however^ 
with so much spirit and success, that, although the Duke of 
Milan died in 1402, Richard was able, in 1403, to obtain a peace, 
by which the state of Pistoia was obUged to restore his family 
to all their estates, and make good all their losses. The Pan- 
ciatichi agreed to this, that the consent of all the leaders might 
be obtained to lay this burden on the people, by whom the 
damages done to the Panciatichi too were to be repaired. 

'^ In 1420, it was ordained,^ that in the renewal of magistrates 
and public offices, the families who had been stigmatized with 
the opprobrious name of grandees should be restored to the 
rights of citizens, and share in the management of public affairs. 
But these, beginning with their usual impertinence to labor that 
every thing should be done as they would have it, and all offices 
disposed by their influence, quaitels and dissensions among the 
citizens arose, by which the whole city fell into the greatest 
agitation ; whence it was necessary, for the maintenance of the 
public peace, to exclude them afresh from public affairs. These 
families were the Panciatichi, Rossi, Sinibuldi, Ughi, Taviani, 
Vergiolesi, Lazari, Cancellieri, Ricciardi, Visconti, Gualfreducci, 
and Tedici. 

" The ladies indulged in great expenses in the furniture of their 
houses, and in the superfluous ornaments of their persons and 
families. The general council thought it necessary to interpose, 
and prohibit all clothes to be lined with foreign furs, or to be 

1 FioFavanti, cap. xxiv. p. 342. s Chap. xxv. p. 851. 

PISTOIA. 383 

embroidered with pearls, gold, or silver, or other expensive and 
superfluous decorations; and because all former laws for the 
same piurpose had been found ineffectual, they were now renewed 
with most rigorous penalties." 

In 1455, a civil war broke out in the territory of Pistoia, called 
Alliana, between the Cancellieri and Panciatichi, which spread 
into the city, and went to such furious lengths that the ladies 
themselves took arms, and fought with as much bravery as the 
gentlemen, to revenge the slaughter of their relations ; and be- 
fore this commotion was ended, the slaves, or what they call the 
the vassals or villeins, took arms. And no method to restore 
peace could be devised, till Florence was requested to send four 
commissaries, who compelled the Cancellieri and Panciatichi to 
take an oath to be peaceable. Yet insurrections, tumults, and 
civil wars, continued in 1476, and indeed, with very little inter- 
mission, till 1485. 

"In that year^ Baldinotto Baldinotti, foreseeing that Lorenzo 
de' Medici might possibly arrive at the sovereignty of Pistoia, 
considering the great reputation, influence, and authority, which 
he enjoyed in that city, laid a plot to take him off. As a lover 
of the liberty of his country, he thought it just and honorable to 
go with his own son, and lie in wait in the way between Poggio 
and Cajano, by which he knew Lorenzo was to pass, in his 
journey to Pistoia, to the feast of St James. But the confidants 
of Lorenzo having discovered the design, the conspirators were 
without delay apprehended, carried prisoners to Florence, and 
there punished with death." 

Another civil war between the Cancellieri and Panciatichi, 
attended with its customary cruelty and devastation, occurred, 
and was not composed till the Florentines summoned four of 
each party, and compelled them to give security, that for the 
future no quarrels, murders, burnings, or robberies, should be 
committed in Pistoia. But this answered the end only in part, 
for the parties went out of the limits of the state, and there 
committed all sorts of cruelties on one another; and in 1490, 
the civil war was renewed in the city. 

" On the death of the Emperor Frederick III., Maximilian, his 
son, succeeded to the throne of the empire; but delaying his 

1 Fioravantii p. 367. 

384 ON GOVERNMENT. 

entry into Italy, he gave occasion to Louis Sforza, tutor of the 
Duke of Milan, to invite Charles VIIL, King of France, to come 
to the conquest of Naples. Upon this occasion the Pistoians 
threw off their subjection to Florence, or rather broke off the 
connection. But this acquisition of liberty and independence 
had a short duration ; for the Pistoians knew they could enjoy 
no tranquUUty under their own government, and with their own 
parties ; after two years negotiation, they agreed to a new con- 
vention in 1496. 

" The families of the grandees, or impertinents^ as they were 
called, revived their pretensions to be admitted to the honors 
and public offices of the commonwealth ; but as this was con- 
trary to the popular will, and the passions and interest of their 
leaders, tumults ensued.^ The pretensions of these families 
were countenanced by the Florentines ; but the popular men in 
the plenitude of their power, opposed it with so much resolu- 
tion, that nothing new was effected. 

^ Plague and famine raged in Pistoia to such a degree, that 
some were in hopes the citizens would put an end to discord 
and sedition, and at least endeavor to enjoy peace; but the 
people, trampling under foot all laws, human and divine, began 
to renew, both in the city and the country, their oppositions and 
enmities, which proceeded to such feats of arms and mutual 
slaughter, that they were again obliged to have recourse to the 
Imperial vicars in Florence, to interpose and put an end to those 
strange accidents which threatened the total destruction of the 
country. 

" The dissensions of parties in the city and its territory being 
somewhat abated, the citizens began to flatter themselves with 
the hopes of quiet;* but neglecting to provide a remedy against 
the emulations of private interest, in individuals and families, 

^ The original meaning of Fioravanti seems not to be accurately adhered to 
in this place. 

^ *"*• In tempi si calamitosi, anche le Fami?lie Magnate, o impertinenti come si 
disse, si fecero sentire con la loro pretensione di essere corUro ogni volere di 
popolari ammese agli onori, e ufizi pubblici, e a tale efietto principiando a tu- 
multuare, obbli^arono i Fiorentini a proteggcre la loro pretenzione ; ma i Fisto- 
jesi opponendosi a si impertinente domanda fecero si, che riconoeciute da' Fioren- 
tini per buone le ragiom de' Popolari, non re8t6 per allora innoyata cosa veruna." 
p. 374. 

The historian's opinion of the cause of the evil in this instance is plain enoughs 
The next para^ph explains the other side of the question. 

3 Chap, xxvii. p. 376. 

PISTOIA. 385 

by separating the executive power from the legislative, rivalries 
arose, which produced such ruin, both to the country and the 
contending families, as has been deplored by all subsequent 
generations. The fact was, that by the death of Buonaccorsi, a 
director of a hospital of St. Gregory, it was necessary to pro- 
ceed to the election of a successor. On the tenth of October, 
1499, four subjects or persons, had been balloted for, and ap- 
proved as suitable, by the general council, among whom the one, 
who should be confirmed and approved by the bishop of Pistoia 
according to the law, was to obtain the office. The council 
having discharged their duty in the nomination of the four, the 
ordinary proceeded to reject two of them, one after another, and 
left the competition undecided between Piero Terchio and Ber- 
nardo Nutini, each of whom endeavored to interest his friends 
in his favor. Terchio was protected by the Panciatichi, and 
Nutini by the Cancellieri. The bishop was at Florence, whence 
it happened that Salimbene Panciatichi caused his friend Ter- 
chio, to be confirmed, as director of the hospital, by the Canon 
Jacob Panciatichi, under color of his being the apostolical le- 
gate ; and sending to Florence for the approbation of the bishop, 
the good prelate promised to comply. The Cancellieri hearing 
of this, went also to Florence to supplicate the bishop not to 
approve the election ; but the bishop, who wished to keep his 
word, would not listen to tHem. Seeing that they could not 
move him firom his promise, they applied themselves to obtain 
solicitations of his friends and relations, with such assiduity and 
importunity, that the irresolute ^ prelate was at last induced to 
comply with their request. The Panciatichi, understanding the 
strange resolution of the prelate, had recourse to the priori of 
the people and the gonfalonier of justice of their country, and 
obtained an order, that the possession of the hospital should not 
be given to Nutini, who had the smaller number of votes, but 
to Terchio, who by right ought to have it ; and Terchio, accom- 
panied by some of the Panciatichi, was placed in the govern- 
ment of the hospital. 

The Cancellieri, returning from Florence with the confirma- 
tion of the bishop in the person of Nutini, carried him to the 
hospital to give him possession, but found the place occupied ; 

1 " Dolce," amiabUf frequently rignifying the same with the word used in the 
text 

VOL. V. 33 Y 

386 ON GOVERNMENT. 

whereupon, returning to Florence, they carried their complaint 
to the rettori ; and, after much altercation between the parties, 
it was determined that the affair should be decided in a court of 
justice, and the cause committed to two lawyers. The judges 
determined that Nutini had been elected and canonically con- 
firmed, and he was accordingly put into the office, against all 
that could be said or done by the Panciatichi, who, upon pain 
of being declared rebels, were obliged to abandon the hospital, 
which they had held well guarded, and give way to the execu- 
tion of the sentence. The Cancellieri were made insolent by 
their victory, and, sometimes by words, sometimes by actions, 
assumed a haughty superiority over the contrary party; who, 
considering themselves derided and insulted not only by the 
Cancellieri but by the bishop, went about venting their passions 
among the people ; whence it happened, that hostilities begin- 
ning between these two families, they never ceased till they 
ruined the city of Pistoia. 

^' The Panciatichi could not erase from their minds the many 
and great injuries they had received from the Cancellieri, and 
now meditated a cruel revenge. On the fifth of February, 1500, 
they unexpectedly assaulted, under the greater piazza, Baccino 
Nutini and others, and having mortally wounded Giorgio Tonti, 
they set to running through the whole city, and murdering all 
the Cancellieri, excepting some who had taken refuge in the 
palace of the lords priors. The Cancellieri who survived were 
not at all intimidated, because, having many adherents, it 
was easy for them to rouse the plebeians against the Panciati- 
chi; quick at their instigation, these showed themselves fierce 
persecutors of that faction, for, arming themselves, all shouted 
* Vengeance! vengeance!' and in the tumult a multitude of 
the Panciatichi and their adherents were killed upon the spot 
Matters became so exasperated, that both parties thought of 
nothing but mustering as many followers as they could. In May 
the Panciaticlii assembled a great body of men, and seized 
the piazza, and more than half the city fortified themselves in 
the balconies, steeples, and towers, and devoted their whole time 
and attention to preparations for war. The Cancellieri on their 
part, with followers equally numerous, fortified themselves in the 
other side of the city, and were assisted by such numbers of 
men, who came in from the mountains and plains in the coun- 

PISTOIA. 387 

try, that they composed a large army. In such a scene of 
turbulence, suspicions were so frequent and dangerous, that it 
became necessary for every man to declare himself; for both 
parties adopted the same maxim towards the moderate men 
and neutrals, * If you don't show yourself our friend, we will 
show ourselves your enemy.' ^ There was not a man, finally, 
who did not take a share in all the injuries and insolence of a 
party ; and frequent battles, sometimes in one street, and some- 
times in another, both by night and by day, disturbed the whole 
city so, that there was no time for the people to take any repose. 

" In this state of things there arrived at Pistoia two commis- 
saries, with five hundred men, sent by the Imperial vicars in 
Florence to put a check to the impetuosity of faction, who 
entered by the gate of Caldatica, and, taking possession of the 
most important and advantageous posts, gave orders to all to 
retreat and abandon their arms^ These orders were scarcely 
promulgated, when there unexpectedly appeared a large body 
of armed men to the assistance of the Cancellieri, which had 
been sent by their adherents in Bologna ; and, on the other side, 
a number of men from St. Marcello, and other neighboring 
countries, came to the succor of the Panciatiehi. And neither 
party choosing to give way to the other, they began, in the face 
of the Florentine guai'ds, to strike each other so cruelly, that the 
faster their forces increased, the more were multiplied the insults, 
arsons, murders, and slaughter. 

'< The commissaries seeing all things rushing to destruction, 
ordered the heads of both parties to appear at Florence, and 
that the soldiers, both foreign and domestic^ should leave the city 
upon pain of being declared rebels, and they extended the same 
threat to all who should entertain them in their houses. The 
Panciatiehi were disposed to obey; but the Cancellieri, who 
were favored by one of the commissaries, continued insolent, 
and those who had been summoned made a jest of the orders, 
and refused to move ; whence those ministers, seeing themselves 
little respected, and less obeyed, returned to Florence. The 
soldiers had left the city, and the heads of the factions, seeing 
themselves deprived of their strength, set themselves to enlisting 
the plebeians on their side, and a great body of people eager 

^ ^* Se tu non ti mostri nostro amico, dunque tu sei nostro ncmico. 

rt 

388 ON GOVERNMENT. 

for slaughter stood ready to begin a new affray. As the death 
of Giorgio Tonti had been displeasing to the Cancellieri, they 
could not forget it, nor conquer their desire of a bitter revenge ; 
with this view they occupied, with all their people, the piazza 
delta Sala, and leaving a number to guard it, went with the rest 
to the little square of the Trinity, to pull down the houses of 
the Cellesi, and then that of one of the Panciatichi ; after which 
they laid siege to the palace of Gualtieri Panciatichi, which they 
briskly beat down ; then running through the city, they killed 
Francis Nutini, and plundered his house, with that of Grabriel 
Visconti, Bernard Cellesi, Matthew Cellesi, and setting fire to 
all of them, they ran to attack the house of Astorre Panciatichi, 
from whence those of its faction fled, and this house remained 
in the power of its enemies, who stripped and robbed it They 
then burned the houses of the Centi, those of Gio. di Francesco, 
and Thomas Balducci, and that of Gori, archdeacon of St 
Zeno, and auditor of the bishop Pandoliini. After so many 
pillages, burnings, and demolitions, they returned to the piazza, 
and rifled all the shops and stores of the Panciatichi, with whom 
they engaged in a bitter conflict, and a large number on both sides 
perished. At this instant a powerful reinforcement of men ar- 
rived to the Panciatichi, who without loss of time renewed the 
attack upon the Cancellieri, and both parties fought in the 
parish of Our Lady of the Lily, and in that of St Michael, 
with such desperation, that a great number on both sides were 
killed and wounded, and if a great rain had not parted the com- 
batants, it seemed as if the whole race would have been here 
exterminated. But upon this occasion a truce was concluded. 
The heads of these factions were now summoned to Florence; 
thirty of them went, and were immediately thrown into prison. 
A rigorous prosecution," as it is called, " was commenced against 
them. Some were acquitted without any conditions of peace or 
truce ; others were punished by imprisonment ; some by seques- 
tration of their property, and some were banished." 

" This decbion extinguished no part of the flames of revenge ; 
on the contrary, the rigor practised against some, and the lenity 
to others, gave rise to still greater insolence ; and in the face of 
the Florentines themselves, and in their own city, some of the 
acquitted Cancellieri committed excesses as outrageous as before. 
Introduced by some of the malignant into Florence, secretly, at 

PISTOIA. 389 

the shutting of the gates, they set themselves to search for 
Andrew and Salimbe Panciatichi, to assassinate them; and 
favored by the obscurity of a foggy air, after two o'clock at 
night, they found it easy to put Salimbe to death, though 
Andrew had the good fortune to escape, by hiding himself in a 
joiner's shop. For this atrocious crime seven were outlawed; 
but they having been reinstated in Pistoia, in defiance of justice, 
the factionaries soon came to another rupture ; they confounded 
all things in such a manner, that there no longer remained any • 
who dreaded the divine, much less human justice ; but scattering 
their strife through the plains and mountains, nothing was heard 
of but quarrels, treachery, conflagration, and murder. The two 
factions were at length weary of such inconveniences and fa- 
tigues, and, to prepare themselves to combat with greater vigor, * 
they made for a short time, and with common consent, a truce ; 
each party increased its supply of arms, men, and provisions ; 
and the Panciatichi, desirous of victory, invented several new 
instruments and machines of war, and fortifying themselves 
with these, thought themselves invincible. 

" The Cancellieri, as well as the Panciatichi fortified them- 
selves with forts and bastions of timber, and machines of war, 
and stood well upon their guard in their posts. The Panciati- 
chi, no longer able to restrain themselves, set in order all their 
people, made Palamidesse Panciatichi, and Bartolomeo Cellesi, 
their leaders, and arranged all their posts, officers, and soldiers. 
But while they were occupied in these dispositions, they unex- 
pectedly found the opposite faction ready to meet them; the 
battle was fought, and the Cancellieri obtained a bloody victory, 
because the Panciatichi were abandoned by a large body of 
Lombards, whom they had hired for their defence. They did 
not, however, lose courage, but reassembling their partisans, and 
rallying their soldiers, they appeared again in a short time, with 
greater numbers and ferocity than ever; and the engagement 
being renewed, for the short time that it lasted, was so terrible 
and fatiguing, that both parties, exhausted and faint, were con- 
strained to retire with their wounded men to their posts. 

" The Cancellieri having taken some repose, and, considering 
' that they had the countenance of the new Florentine commissa- 
ries, by whose advice those of their associates had been restored 
to Pistoia, who had been banished from Florence for the murder 

33 • 

390 ON GOVERNMENT. 

of Salimb^ Panciatichi, assumed fresh courage to attempt eyery 
means for the destruction of the Panciatichi. On the ninth of 
August they scoured all the streets and squares of the city, 
and wherever they found a Panciatichi they murdered him. 
They put to death also Bernardino Gai, and mortally wounded 
the Conte di Rigolo Bisconti; but many of the Panciatichi, 
thinking it their duty to avenge themselves, fell with such 
impetuosity upon the rear of the Cancellieri, as obliged them to 
retire. In this state of things the Florentine commissaries cited 
to appear before them ten persons of each party ; who, though 
they made their appearance, were detained in the palace of 
justice, and exhorted to peace, or at least to a temporary 
truce, would not accept of any of these proposals ; therefore the 
' commissaries, not knowing what to do with them, dismissed 
them. Animated rather than terrified by this weakness of au- 
thority and the judicial power, they recalled all their followers 
confined in various places, and providing themselves again with 
arms and assistants, renewed the war. Such was the ardor, 
violence, and force of the Cancellieri and their party, that they 
excited great terror, not only in the country parts, but in all the 
city. Not content to have taken possession of all the councils, 
and assembled them to govern as they pleased, and rendered 
their people disobedient to all law, but they also sent them, 
with the utmost license, through the country, to ravage, plunder, 
and burn the villages and habitations. The men of prudence 
and reflection, seeing such destruction and so much ruin, and 
foreseeing more, exerted themselves to obtain an election of 
eight citizens, to whom were given the whole authority of the 
general council," or, in other words, they were made dictators, 
'Hhat they might find a remedy for so great confusions, and do 
whatever should be necessary or convenient for restoring the 
public tranquillity. 

" In the meanwhile the clergy were aroused, and with uncom- 
mon zeal exhorted the people in private, and fulminated from 
the pulpit against all this ungodliness and unrighteousness of 
men ; but all this apostolical benevolence, added to the unlimited 
power of the eight dictators, were insufficient ; men's ears were 
deaf, and their eyes blind, to every thing but the malignity of their 
own passions, and every one continued to do whatever seemed 
right in his own eyes. They recalled into Pistoia all the ban- 

PISTOIA. 391 

ished men, with numerous troops of their adherents ; these filling 
the city with bad men, and bringing fresh force and vigor to the 
respective parties, they prepared to commit new excesses. The 
Panciatichi, finding themselves at liberty, and loosened from all 
restraint, went, on the thirteenth of August, unexpectedly, to 
batter down the houses of Giuliano Fioravanti, that of Jacob* 
Peri, that of Antonio Popoleschi, and many others, upon which 
occasion many were wounded ; Francis Panciatichi, and John 
Astesi, with many others of inferior condition, were killed. On 
the fifteenth of August they went to batter down the house of 
Biagio Odaldi, but these making a resolute resistance, many 
were wounded, and the rest obliged to retreat; but returning 
the next day, to attack it, they labored to such purpose, that 
partly with force, and partly with fire, they took possession of 
the house. They went next to the palace of Neri and Thomas 
Fioravanti, and finding no resistance they took it and filled it 
with their men. They assaulted too the houses of the Celate, 
Salincomi, and Curradi, and not being able to take them, set 
fire to them, and burnt five warehouses of Antonio Ambrogi ; 
they entered into the house of Lorenzo Gratteschi, but there 
they were obliged to fight a long time, and the engagement 
became general, so that it was impossible to ascertain the num- 
ber of the killed and wounded of the two factions, but there 
was not a street in the city which was not incumbered with 
dead bodies, and polluted with human blood. . 

" Intelligence of the strength of the Panciatichi had been 
communicated by the CanceUieri to their friends, who, on the 
morning of the seventeenth of August, with a hundred cavalry, 
and two hundred infantry, appeared suddenly at the houses of 
the Cellesi, by whom so brave a defence was made, that they 
were repulsed ; but after taking a short repose, they returned to 
the assault, took the house, plundered it, and set it on fire. 
They went next to the houses of Antonio Ambrogi, to the two 
houses of the Cioci, to that of Vincenzo Mati, and burned them, 
with many others, and retook those which had been hitherto 
occupied by the Panciatichi, who finding themselves obliged to 
abandon the houses of Andrea Fioravanti, and Antonio Popo- 
leschi, consigned them, in desperation, to the flames. But while 
the party of the CanceUieri were busy in this mischief, they 
were attacked, in two places at once, by the Panciatichi ; and 

392 ON GOVERNMENT. 

scarcely was the action begun, when, perceiving their disadvan- 
tage, they retreated behind the church of St Anthony, and set 
lire to the house of Nicholas Godemini ; from thenc« they went 
to the Old Grate, and attacked the houses of the Bracciolini in 
the piazza, where, meeting with a bold resistance, they went 
with great anxiety to find the commissaries, and demanded of 
them the possession of the hospital del Ceppo, which was then 
governed by one of the Panciatichi, otherwise they would set 
fire to it The Panciatichi had already two hundred country- 
men of the Plain, under the command of Michelino Jozzeli, and 
that of Lisca, who, posted for the guard of the hospital, were 
determined to perish rather than abandon it The commissaries 
seeing so many people assisting the Panciatichi, would not 
openly espouse the request and attempt of the Cancellieri, but 
pacifying them with soothing words, they gave orders to M. 
Criaco, the captain, who, in behalf of the Florentine Imperial 
vicars, with five hundred soldiers guarded the piazza, in their 
name to take possession of the hospital, under the pretence of 
preserving it from so much fury. The captain, with one hun- 
dred of his soldiers, marched to the hospital, and employed all 
his art to obtain possession of it, but was answered by the Pan- 
ciatichi, that they would not go out of the place alive. Upon 
this the commissaries in person went to the hospital, and ac- 
knowledging that it must require great feats of arms to take it, 
talked so fair to the Panciatichi, that these delivered it up to 
them. It was, however, unexpectedly pillaged by the Cancel- 
lieri, and then placed by the orders of the commissaries, in the 
power of the supreme magistrate of the city, by whom posses- 
sion being taken, regulations were made for the good government 
of it, and the administration given to four prudent citizens. 

" A little afterwards the commissaries and the bishop under- 
took to persuade the party of the Panciatichi not only not to 
seek the control of the hospital, but also to absent theipselves 
some time firom the city, and in that manner to remove the 
cause of so many disorders, and endless evils which threatened 
to succeed. These orders, or this recommendation, were given 
to Bastiano and Vincenzo Bracciolini, of that faction, who 
immediately held a conference with Andrew and Antonio Pan- 
ciatichi, their leaders. These thought fit to obey, first demand- 
ing security for their houses and other property, which was 

PISTOIA. 393 

promised them by the commissaries. They made haste to 
communicate these particulars to all their factionaries, who, 
adhering to the opinions of their principals, collected together 
all their property of value, and carried it towards the church of 
St. Paul, and there filled up the whole street which leads to the 
gate Caldatica, and stood well upon their guard. The Cancel- 
lien were in the contiguous street, with four hundred soldiers 
from Bologna; but fearing to risk a battle, the Panciatichi 
marched out of Pistoia without receiving injury, followed by the 
Cellesi, Rossi, Franchini, Forteguerri, Fabroni, Bisconti, Brac- 
ciolini, Brunozzi, and many others of equal rank and condition. 
The gates were instantly shut, and the walls lined with men by 
the Cancellieri, who from that eminence, scoffed at the retreating 
faction, with impunity and without danger. 

" The Cancellieri remained in Pistoia, and it is not possible to 
relate the abominable iniquities and cruelties committed by them 
in the height of their triumph, insolence, and power ; ranging the 
whole city without control, they attended to no other business 
or amusement but to ruin, burn, plunder, and ravish, whatever 
of the Panciatichi they could find, and he who could commit 
the most atrocious deeds was the most esteemed, admired, and 
applauded. In this manner was the public faith, and the solemn 
promise made to the Panciatichi, fulfilled and performed! To 
the principal palace of the Panciatichi they set fire ; the houses 
of the Brunozzi, Cellesi, and many others contiguous to them, 
were dismantled ; the beautiful habitations of John, Oliver, and 
Virgil Panciatichi, with many other places and houses filled 
with grain, corn, wine, oil, and timber, were burned ; and all the 
summer-houses, shops, and stores, and every other building 
which belonged to the Panciatichi ; in one of which was found 
in bed the Count di Rigolo Bisconti, ill of the wounds he had 
received in some of the late engagements ; the Count was with- 
out ceremony, thrown out of the window into the street," not 
by a common rabble, but by Ceccone Beccano and Gio. Tavi- 
ani, men of distinction and consequence. " They afterwards 
made search in all the steeples and towers, as well as through 
all the churches, for refugees of the other faction, and, wherever 
they found any, they drove them out, robbed them, and sent 
them to their houses ; and so enormous was the evil committed 
by the Cancellieri factionaries, that by the end of the twentieth 

394 ON GOVERNMENT. 

of August they had burned more than two hundred houses and 
stores, and all of the principal sort, contrary to the promises and 
solemn faith passed to the Panciatichi by the commissaries ; and 
thus a beautiful and charming city was become a receptacle of 
assassins, of robbers, of murderers, and of men of every evil 
deed." 

While the faction of the Cancellieri thus tyrannically domi- 
neered in Pistoia, that of the Panciatichi would have done the 
same if they had been in the city, equally without control. " In 
their state of banishment, they still meditated the oppression 
and destruction of their rivals, and to this purpose collected men, 
and fortified themselves on the plains in the country. Not being 
able to obtain the countenance and assistance of the Floren- 
tines, but rather being threatened by them with their displeasure 
and chastisement, they set themselves, with all their forces, to 
maltreat the country with their robberies, arsons, homicides, and 
imprisonments, in such a manner, that making frequent excur- 
sions into the mountains, they soon. reduced all the territory of 
the Pistoians to a miserable and deplorable state. At the same 
time the Cancellieri, no longer knowing what to steal, or whom 
to rob, went on inventing new affronts for the Panciatichi, or 
those whom they suspected to favor that party, who remained 
in Pistoia. As the city was full of malicious people, who could 
not contain themselves, they went frequently out of the gates, 
and stole cattle and other property from the Panciatichi in the 
country, till all the Panciatichi, who were near the bounds of the 
city, were obliged to retreat into the plain, and unite with their 
associates ; here they began to think of checking the power of 
their enemies; and all being eager to return to their houses, 
they thought it a duty by force to put a bridle on the arrogance 
of their adversaries, and reduce them, once for all, to subjection. 
To this purpose they erected a strong bastion near the bridge 
of Bonelle, and another in the neighborhood of the bridge alia 
Pergola, and fortified themselves at St Angiolo, at St Bastiano, 
at the great house of the Forteguerri, at Tenuta, at Magia, at 
St Nuovo, at Tizzana, and made other fortifications, with prepara- 
tions of munitions of arms, provisions, and men, from the 
mountains and from Lucca, who came to lend them assistance ; 
and by these means they held all the country in subjection, and 
all the contrary faction in terror. 

IWWmK. 395 

" The Cancellieri seeing the preparations made by the Pan- 
ciatichi, and apprehending some unexpected assault, without 
delay, made preparations necessary to remove these factionaries 
effectually from the country. Collecting together a body of 
four thousand men, of their own and the Bolognese, they went 
out to attack, at the same time, the two bc^stions near the 
bridges. The Panciatichi were astonished and panic^struck at 
the sight of so many men, and giving themselves up most 
shamefully to flight, the assailants, in less than one hour, had 
complete possession of both bridges, and dismantled both the 
bastions. Proceeding to St. Angiolo, which was guarded by 
Bartolomeo Cellesi, an intrepid officer, and experienced in arms, 
they fought a most bloody battle, in which Cellesi himself was 
killed; for this brave commander falling from his horse, was 
assassinated, and his head, severed from his body, was fixed on 
the bow of a saddle, and carried to Pistoia, there to be exposed 
to mockery and insult; at the sound of the trumpets it was 
placed upon the architrave of the well of the great market, that 
the people might demonstrate their joy and triumph over it, 
and there it was kept three days. This inhuman exultation 
was the beginning of ill fortune to the CancelUeri ; the indigna- 
tion of the Panciatichi was so excited by the scoffs and taunts 
offered to Cellesi, and by the shameful repulse in an assault of 
an enemy's bastion near the river Brana, that, whilst the Can- 
cellieri were shouting * Victory!' and returning without order, 
and with a great booty to Pistoia, the Panciatichi, making a 
commander of Franco di M eo Gori, a man of a very numerous 
family in Terruccia, proud and fearful, but fortunate, and accom- 
panied by four of his brothers, and other relations, in all about a 
hundred persons, followed in the rear of those who thought them- 
selves victorious, to the grove of elms, and there retaking the plun- 
der routed the party. Many were slain, more made prisoners, and 
the rest, scattered in various places, returned late and in disorder 
to Pistoia. The Panciatichi having obtained so signal a victory, 
proceeded, under their captain, Franco, to Tizzana and Magia, 
and there summoned all the people of the party to arms, and 
stood night and day in good order and well guarded. The Can- 
cellieri, seeing the increasing force of the Panciatichi, despaired 
of dispossessing them of the plain, and therefore employed all 
their craft to effect a separation between the Panciatichi in the 

396 ON GOVERNMENT. 

country, and the Panciatichi in the city, in order to weaken the 
faction ; in the course of two months they accomplished their 
design, and a truce was concluded between the Panciatichi in 
the country and the Cancellieri in the country, which occasioned 
great feasts and rejoicings in Pistoia. 

" This truce, however, had but a short duration ; parties began 
again to rage, and mutual slaughters were renewed; and al- 
though the Florentines knew that the territory of the Pistoians 
was no longer manageable, on account of the continual murders 
and assassinations committed in it by night and by day, yet 
they would not, or knew not how to put their hands to any 
effectual remedy; and although they ordered into confinement 
for three years, upon pain of rebellion for returning to Pistoia, 
all the families of Bisconti, Panciatichi, Cellesi (except that of 
Bernardo,) Fabbroni, Matteo Brunozzi, Rossi, Forteguerri, Brac- 
ciolini, Cioci, and Gherardi, and many others specified, to the 
number of two hundred, yet it was not possible that this banish- 
ment should have any effect ; because many Florentines, their 
friends, besides favoring and assisting them with money and 
other effects, obstructed the execution of it, which was the prin- 
cipal cause that the Panciatichi consolidated themselves on the 
plain, with the firm resolution not to depart from it The Pan- 
ciatichi, nevertheless, were not a little anxious, when they knew 
that the commons of Florence were against them; and the 
Cancellieri were not less disturbed with fears when they saw 
their enemies in possession of the dominion of the country ; so 
that they were obliged to consider themselves as besieged in 
Pistoia, rather than as lords of it ; wherefore, reflecting that there 
was no blessing more necessary than peace, it was determined 
by the general council, that they ought to have recourse to the 
Most High with pious and holy works, and to this end orders 
were given to the laborers of St James the apostle, that ade- 
quate alms should be given to all the religious orders, that they 
might by their prayers supplicate Heaven to send peace and 
union among the citizens " 

All this was very commendable and proper; but to depend 
upon these prayers alone, without changing their constitution, 
was as irrational and presumptuous, as for the crew of a sinking 
ship to pray for preser\'ation, without working the pumps or 
stopping the leaks. 

PISTOIA. 397 

Accordingly, in 1501, they were found to have been ineffica- 
cious ; ^ " for the execrable factions, in a still greater effervescence 
of cruelty, made use of every cunning stratagem, and attempted 
every means to destroy themselves and their country. The Cancel- 
lieri, dreading that the Panciatichi might return to Pistoia, deter- 
mined not only to hold them at a distance from the city, but to drive 
them, with all the force they could possibly assemble, quite out of 
the country ; and to this purpose, having taken into their pay three 
thousand foot, drawn from the country, the mountains, from Val- 
dinievole, from Prato, and other places, and fifty cavalry, early in 
the morning of the fifth of February, they sallied out with these 
forces, well armed, from the gate Caldatica, and went, one thou- 
sand men towards Montemagno, and two thousand towards St 
Angiolo. These last arrived at St. Angiolo, entered the church, 
spoiled it of every thing valuable, and set it on fire; and be- 
cause thirty of the Panciatichi, who were posted as guards in the 
steeple, knew it was impossible in any manner to defend it, they 
gave the signal of their being besieged by a flag, as had been 
previously concerted with their friends in the neighborhood. Sud- 
denly three hundred Panciatichi, compacted together in the form 
of a squadron, under the command of their captain. Franco Gori, 
using every artifice to avoid being discovered by the enemy, threw 
themselves by surprise into the middle of the Cancellieri, and in 
a short time broke and defeated to the number of t^'^o thousand 
persons. This victory was so advantageous to the Pahciatich], 
that three of them only were wounded, and one killed, while the 
Cancellieri lost more than three hundred and fifty killed, a pro- 
portionable number wounded, and many were made prisoners ; 
and those few who escaped, threw down their arms, and in small 
numbers and great disorder fled towards Pistoia. This splendid 
victory, with the acquisition of a great booty, obtained by the Pan- 
ciatichi, animated them not to shrink fi'om any inconvenience or 
fatigue to prosecute the abasement of their enemies ; wherefore, 
without loss of time, taking, to deceive their antagonists, a pair 
of colors which had been seized in the last battle, they paraded 
with this on their march, and went to attack the other Cancel- 
lieri, who, at Santo Nuovo, had besieged their associates the 
Panciatichi, then guarding it ; but the Cancellieri, advertised, by 
means of a lady, of the artifice, fled, with the enemy almost at 

1 Chap. xxTiii. p. 385. 
VOL. v. 34 

898 ON GOVERNMENT. 

their heels ; and hastily coasting round the cliffs of Casale, took 
the road towards Collina and Fontana, and in confusion, disband- 
ed, and covered over with mire, reached Pistoia. This retreat 
took up the whole night This flight of the Cancellieri occasioned 
no small damage to the innocent Panciatichi who had remained 
in security in Pistoia ; because, such fugitive Cancellieri as re- 
turned to their country, had no other thoughts than to revenge 
themselves wherever they could, by scouring the city, with arms 
in their hands, and falling upon those unhappy people ; they as- 
sassinated in the piazza a countryman, and Felice di Marco, who 
were of the Panciatic faction, and the others, wounded and 
beaten, by flying into the fortresses and palace of the rettori, 
escaped their fury, and saved their lives. 

" The Panciatichi upon the plain in the country, having been 
informed of the treachery committed upon their companions in 
Pistoia by the Cancellieri, conceived against that faction an in- 
dignation beyond all credibility greater than ordinary ; so that, 
after a little repose from the fatigues lately suffered, they pre- 
pared to persecute their enemies with greater ferocity. Hearing 
that some of them had built a strong bastion in the township of 
Casale, from which fortification they daily made inroads among 
the inhabitants, and committed much mischief, they went, on the 
twenty-fourth of March, and took the bastion, the Cancellieri who 
guarded it shamefully flying. Others of the Cancellieri, in Ca- 
sale itself, taking post in the church and in the belfiy, after a 
sharp conflict, were overcome by Michelino Jozzelli and Charles 
Nicolai, many of them cut to pieces, many others wounded, and 
the rest pursued over the mountains, where they left their arms, 
and fled with precipitation. Others, in the meadows of Vignole 
and of Agliana, were stripped and totally dispersed ; others, at 
the bridge of Bonelle, suffered a perfect defeat, in which many 
were slain, and the rest fled in disorder. The Panciatichi, see- 
ing their affairs succeed so happily, prepared themselves for 
greater enterprises, and calling together all their people, they 
went against the castle of Momigno, took it, and set it on fire. 
They then took Vinacciano, and burnt all the houses of the 
Cancellieri; and the houses of the Panciatichi having been a 
little before burnt by the Cancellieri, this place by the last con- 
flagration became entirely desolate and destroyed. Nor was the 
damage less that was done at Montegastoli, in the country of 

PISTOIA. 399 

Fontana, of Collina, and of Gabbiano. The Panciatichi then 
fortified themselves at Montebuono, and did infinite damage 
firom thence to the party of the Cancellieri, who, taking Giacche- 
rino, built by the families of the Panciatichi, made a stand 
against their enemies, and there followed in this neighborhood 
burnings of houses and murders of people. At length the two 
factions descended towards the long bridge, and came to battle, 
which was continued for some time with obstinacy; but the 
Cancellieri, having the worst of it, at last fled. 

" The few good and wise men who remained, considering the 
miseries and destruction which resulted to the city of Pistoia 
and its territory from the two unbridled factions, exerted them- 
selves to assemble the general council, by whom two citizens 
were elected, to see that all malefactors should be chastised and 
punished. But a provision of this sort could never be sufficient 
to intimidate a number of factionaries so powerful ; it accord- 
ingly only animated them to greater fury ; for the persons elected 
being poorly attended, and provided with little power or force, 
how could they be able to restrain a desperate people, who re- 
quired extraordinary rigor, and much greater energy, to render 
them quiet, pacific, and obedient ? This was so well known to 
those ungovernable people, that it rendered them more fierce, 
proud, and insatiable of revenge, so that the Cancellieri, seeing 
themselves overcome in battle, determined to accumulate a great 
quantity of money, in order to provide men to conquer the force 
of their enemies. To this end, they burthened the city of Pistoia 
with the payment of twenty thousand ducats of gold ; they sold 
the effects of St. James, to the amount of four thousand crowns ; 
they pawned, for eighteen thousand crowns more, at Bologna, 
the chalice of gold of the chapel of St. James, which weighed 
twenty-two pounds ; they sold two angels of silver, a fathom and 
an half in height, and a pair of candlesticks which were worth five 
hundred crowns ; they took a most beautiful basin, and an ewer 
of silver, of the value of four hundred crowns ; moreover, they 
coined into money other silver basins, and an image of the Virgin, 
and another of St John, of pure silver, which were of St. Zeno, 
and all the dishes and basins of silver which were in the palace 
of the supreme magistrate ; they took from the Monte di Pieta six 
thousand ducats, and one thousand five hundred from the House 
of Wisdom, and made up a sum of forty thousand crowns." 

400 ON GOVERNMENT. 

In the age and country where these things were done, this 
robbery of churches, of saints, and angels, this plunder of holy 
relics, was sacrilege and impiety of the deepest dye, enough to 
have shocked and revolted the city in any other circumstances ; 
but the spirit of party made it all lawful to the Cancellieri and 
their followers. 

" They made Mancino of Bologna their captain, one of the 
bravest soldiers of those times, hired fifteen hundred foreigners, 
of infantry and cavalry, and called in all their friends from the 
mountains and country, so that Pistoia was so full of soldiers, 
that all the houses could scarcely hold them. 

" In the mean time, the Panciatichi party neglected nothing 
to procure all the advantages in their power ; encouraged by one 
Pazzaglino, of Serravalle, they attempted to take that castle, in 
which by means of that traitor they succeeded, and they fortified 
themselves in the post which guarded Valdinievole and in the 
steeples of the churches of St. Stephen and St Michael. Both 
parties being in want of provisions, made excursions to the adja- 
cent country, reaped the grain, pillaged cattle, and sometimes burnt 
houses and killed inhabitants, till they reduced the places to a 
most miserable and deplorable state. Having in this manner pro- 
vided themselves on both sides with men, arms, and provisions, the 
Cancellieri were anxious to undertake some enterprise with the 
body which they had hitherto kept in pay at so great an expense 
and with so little effect. After a consultation, part remained as 
a guard in the city, and part went out to the mountain. Six 
hundred infantry and fifty cavalry went out, well armed and in 
good order, and attempted an assault, in two divisions, upon 
Brandeglio and Castellaccio, but were discouraged by a brave 
defence. They then turned towards Cireglio, and making a 
fierce attack, they easily carried it, plundered it of all that was 
valuable, and utterly destroyed it by fire. They then went to 
the church, which, with its steeple, was full of people and of 
property ; they laid siege to it in such a manner, that those who 
guarded it became irresolute about defending it ; but, encouraged 
by the women who had taken refuge there, who, like generous 
amazons, took arms and repulsed the enemy, they placed in 
security the goods, and in a short time regained the post, which 
the men alone would have abandoned. The Cancellieri, filled 
with shame and disgrace, returned to their main body, and 

PISTOIA. 401 

advised their companions to return to Pistoia ; but when they 
began their march, they were so persecuted by the Panciatichi, 
that the killed and wounded exceeded by far those who in confu- 
sion returned to the city. Then it was that the Panciatichi has- 
tened to Berrignardo, Borghetto, and Piazza, and burnt all the 
houses of the Cancellieri ; and such were the damages done that 
day by the factionaries, that more than one hundred and j&fty 
houses oT both parties were burned down. 

" Those of the party Panciatichi, who had entered into the 
castle of Serravalle, thinking themselves in security, stood negli- 
gently on their guard in that post ; intelligence of which being 
sent to the contrary party, they sent, with great haste, six hun- 
dred soldiers upon an enterprise against the place. Two hun- 
dred took post around it, and the four hundred others, introduced 
by some in the place into the castle, began to rush everywhere 
without control, so that the Panciatichi, taken by surprise, retired 
to other strong posts in the neighborhood. Early in the morn- 
ing, the Cancellieri approached the steeple of St. Michael, and 
took it by a vigorous assault. They afterwards battered that of 
the church of St. Stephen ; but perceiving that it was not to be 
carried without some delay, they set fire to the church, from 
whence the flames ascending to the balcony, soon burnt those 
who held it They intended, moreover, to have attempted the 
acquisition of the citadel, in which the greater part of the Panci- 
atichi were shut up ; but a reinforcement of five hundred infantry^ 
and one hundred cavalry, arriving to those in the fort, and rein- 
forced farther with three hundred men from the mountain, and 
two hundred from Lucca, conducted by Michael Jozzelli, who 
had taken the most important posts without the walls, the castle 
was besieged in such a formidable manner, that the Cancellieri 
lost all hopes of expelling the contrary faction from that place 
The Cancellieri in Pistoia, however, hearing the situation of 
their companions in the castle of Serravalle, sent, at the approach 
of evening, three hundred infantry and fifty cavalry, with plenty 
of provisions, to reinforce and refresh them; but scarcely had 
these soldiers met the others at the foot of the mountain, when, 
repulsed and pursued by the Panciatichi as far as the long bridge, 
they were obliged to submit to the loss of twenty persons, many 
arms, and all their provisions. 

^^ In the mean time there came to the assistance of the Panci- 

34* z 

403 ON GOVERNMENT 

atichi, Martino Cinti with two hundred men, the Captain Franco 
Goii with three hundred, and many others, who, uniting with 
those ahready there, amounted to three thousand, who attacked 
that castle on the side of the citadel, in which the companies 
had taken refuge ; but seeing all their attempts were rendered 
vain, one hundred of the most alert approached to the gate with 
such impetuosity, that they made a breach, and let four hmidred 
men into the castle, who attacking the Cancellieri in th% rear, in 
less than an hour killed more than three hundred, and made 
more than one hundred prisoners, and permitting the foreigners 
to escape by a shameful flight, gained a large booty of goods, 
money, arms, and horses. The Panciatichi having obtained this 
noble victory, the citizens of that faction began to think of endea- 
voring to return to Pistoia ; but were dissuaded by their friends 
of the country, who would not consent. They all went there- 
fore together to their usual posts upon the plain, with their pri- 
soners and rich plunder. K they had attempted to return to 
Pistoia, they would not have been opposed, for the factionaiies 
in the city were so impoverished, that many had gone out of the 
place ; and although the bells of the people were rung that day, 
not one person appeared in the piazza. 

" There succeeded many more af&ays and slaughters, burnings 
and depredations, to relate all of which in detail would be end- 
less. Great were the damages done the same day by the Panci- 
atichi in Alliana; but by the treacherous miscoaduct of their 
captain, Martino Francese, they were disgracefully repulsed, had 
many killed and many wounded; and, what was more to be 
dreaded, the Cancellieri carried thirteen of their heads in triumph 
to Pistoia, and by that means revived the courage of their com- 
panions, almost sunk in terror and despair. Great wa^s the 
slaughter of their enemies, and numerous the burnings of houses 
committed by the Panciatichi of Montagnana, the seventh of 
July, at Momigno. The tenth of July, the Panciatichi of Bran- 
deglio collected a large number of men from the plain and the 
mountain, and burnt all the houses of the Cancellieri which were 
at Satornana, and at St Felice, and plundered the property and 
the cattle. The twentieth of July the Cancellieri burnt in Pis- 
toia eight houses and six shops of the Bracciolini, and set fire 
to three houses of Gio. di Franco, and demolished the house of 
Francisco Cellesi, near St. Prospero. The twenty-eighth of July, 

PISTOIA. 408 

the Cancellieri went to Montebuono, a town of the Panciatichi, 
took it by treachery, and bnrnt it, after having made twelve pri- 
soners ; whom they conducted to Pistoia, led into the hall of a 
house inhabited by Giuliano Dragucci, where they strangled 
them, and threw them out of the window. This, which they 
called justice, they compelled a priest to execute, who was in the 
number of the prisoners, and then they put the priest to death 
in the same manner. Much destruction was made by fire on the 
thirtieth of July, in the commons belonging to the house of the 
bishop, and in other places, by the Panciatichi ; but no less were 
the evils committed the same day by fire by the Cancellieri in 
the township of Bonelle ; and in so many other places were such 
excesses committed by the two factions, that they reduced Pistoia 
to be the most unhappy among all the miserable cities of Italy ; 
its whole territory was one scene of burnings, murders, and 
captivity of men, and the citizens themselves were become the 
talk and the scorn of the whole world. The Florentines, who, as 
imperial vicars, had some pretensions to interfere in the govern- 
ment of Pistoia, derived from the Emperor Robert, had neglected 
till they reproached themselves, to attempt any salutary remedy 
to so many evils. 

" In the beginning of August, the Cancellieri, the faction which 
had now the dominion in Pistoia, considering that the Panciati- 
chi were masters of the country, and were well furnished with 
provisions, while the city was in danger of famine, assembled in 
the public palace to deliberate ; and they concluded it would be 
for the advantage of their country, and of both parties, to make 
peace with the Panciatichi. This resolution was soon commu- 
nicated to the Panciatichi, who suddenly consented to treat At 
this time the Florentines offered their mediation, proposed arti- 
cles, and sent troops to keep order, &c." 

The particulars of this negotiation were curious enough, but 
this essay is already too long. The wisest and most prudent 
men in the city held secret communications, sometimes with one 
party, sometimes with the other, and then with the Florentines, 
till at last they prevailed to have a general council called. This 
consisted wholly of Cancellieri, for the Panciatichi were still in 
the country, and consequently the demands of the latter were 
thought too considerable. Such controversies arose, even among 
the Cancellieri, that it was feared nothing would ever be con- 

404 ON GOVERNMENT. 

eluded. Some juggling monkish trick at last succeeded ; a dove, 
white and black, (bianca e nera,) after the similitude of the arms 
of the Panciatiehi family, flew down upon the seat of the su- 
preme magistrate, and gave manifest signs that the Most High 
was in favor of peace ; the hard hearts of the Cancellieri relented, 
and peace was made. The great affair of the appointment of a 
director of the hospital was settled, by giving each party alter- 
nately the appointment. The Panciatiehi were restored to the 
city ; all crimes and atrocities were pardoned, and to be forgot- 
ten. Eight citizens were to reform the government in such a 
manner, that the gonfalonier, and all the other officers, should be 
equally drawn from each faction ; and the families enlisted under 
the Panciatiehi on one side, and under the Cancellieri on the 
other, were all named and recorded. 

" Seditions and tumults had ceased ; the two factions enjoyed 
in Pistoia a tranquillity that they believed would be lasting ; but 
the habits of discord were not eradicated, passions were not ex- 
tinguished, and the parties were not balanced. Accordingly, in 
1502, the symptoms were discovered of a hidden gangrene ; the 
Cancellieri pretended to have been exempted by the general 
council, from accounting for what they had taken from the com- 
mons and from pious places ; and the Panciatiehi demanded to 
be refunded in part, if not in the whole, of the damages done by 
fire to their houses ; but as the general council, and the other 
offices of the city, were composed of an equal number of sub- 
jects of the two factions, one party refused to approve of the 
petition of the other. This exasperated their minds to such a 
degree, that the usual factions arose, and proceeded to blows and 
to arms. They were soon separated by the Florentine troops of 
cavalry and infantry, who were posted as guards in Pistoia, and 
obliged, without laying down their hatred, indignation, and ran- 
cor, to return to their houses ; there they prepared to give a fresh 
scope to their passions ; and the Cancellieri, as the most power- 
ful, causing to be taken out of the hands of the Panciatiehi the 
fortresses they held, began anew to prepare for driving them alto- 
gether out of the state of Pistoia. 

" The Panciatiehi, penetrating the designs of the Cancellieri, 
made no delay in providing men, and each party introducing 
them by night, stood waiting the chance to execute their ill de- 
signs. On the twenty-fourth of February, the Cancellieri, in 

PISTOIA. 405 

three divisions, fortified themselves, with three hundred men at 
the gate of Guidi, with two hundred and fifty on the hill in the 
street of St. John, and with two hundred and fifty in the street 
near St. Dominic. A party of the Panciatichi coming in from the 
country, occasioned the battle to begin ; but the Panciatichi out- 
numbered, and almost surrounded by their enemies, were com- 
pelled again to abandon the town with precipitation and dis- 
order. 

" The Panciatichi, thus expelled a second time from the city, 
dispersed in divers places on the plain; and the Cancellieri 
remaining lords of Pistoia, suddenly shut the gates, and went 
with unbridled rage to plundering, burning, and destroying all 
the remaining houses and substance of the Panciatichi. They 
robbed and burned the houses of the Rossi, Forteguerri, Cellesi, 
Radda, Bambolino, Doffo, Gualfreducci, as well as the Panci- 
atichi, and many others. Meditating still greater cruelties, they 
ran in great fury to the public palace, and all those of the 
magistracy who were of the party of the Panciatichi, whom 
they could find, they most cruelly put to death. In this state of 
things, those who presided over the administration of justice, 
supported by the Florentines, attempted to provide a remedy 
against new combinations, and made the disturbers lay down 
their arms. To make an example, they hanged Puccino Puccini, 
whom they found guilty of the murder of the supreme magis- 
trates; and declared thirteen others outlaws, whom they con- 
demned for high treason, for the contempt shown to the supreme 
authority ; these were driven out of Pistoia, and fled to Montale. 

" This rigor of justice, however, instead of restoring quiet to 
Pistoia, served rather to hasten its ruin ; because the Panciatichi 
fortified themselves with bastions of wood, well furnished with 
arms and men, near the bridge di Bonelle, by means of which 
they controlled the whole city, and kept the minds of the Can- 
cellieri in constant agitation, till the pride and ferocity of the 
two parties suffered not a day to pass in the city or the country 
without rencounters, burnings, and slaughter. 

" The Panciatichi, being thus fortified at Bonelle, and other 
places of the plain, concluded to make an exertion of all their 
possible strength totally to destroy the contrary party; to this 
purpose, early one morning, they separated into several divisions, 
traversed that extensive country by different routes, and after a 

406 ON GOVERNMENT. 

few honrs all met together to assault sixteen houses belonging 
to the Tesi, Mati, and other Cancellieri families; these they 
stripped of the most valuable effects, and burnt to the ground. 
The Cancellieri hastened in great numbers to prevent so great 
a misfortune ; but the fury and the strength of the Panciatichi 
were such, that, after having killed and wounded many, they 
obliged the rest to fly. Their flight animated the Panciatichi to 
set fire without delay to all the houses in that vast plain, and 
produced a conflagration, which the historian could compare to 
nothing better than the opening of one of the mouths of hell* 

" Pistoia, being in this deplorable condition, and deprived of 
all succor and assistance, was filled with people given up to a 
licentious way of living, without fear of divine, and much less 
of human justice, who committed continual insolence and wick- 
edness of every kind. Wherefore many, knowing the great 
damage which resulted to their country, instigated the general 
council to elect one of the wisest and most learned citizens, with 
supreme authority, to administer full and summary justice, m 
order to find a remedy for so great disorders, and extinguish so 
great a fire by punishing every fault, and reducing the people to 
the necessity of embracing peace and tranquillity. The coun- 
cil complied with the petition of the principal citizens of the 
place, and taking all authority from the podesta and captain, 
conferred the title of doge upon Mariotto di Peraccino del Ouida, 
a doctor of laws living at Porta Guidi, and gave him all the 
authority of the council itself, Mariotto assumed the govern- 
ment of the city, acted with so much rectitude, that no man 
could complain of his partiality, and introduced so much tran- 
quillity into the city, as to excite the jealousy of Florence, 
which feared that it might thereby be defeated in the end it was 
aiming at 

" But the Cancellieri, as being those who had been the occa- 
sion of the exaltation of Mariotto, desirous of demonstrating 
their superiority in all matters, soon gave occasion to the genersd 
council to apprehend fresh evils. They therefore appointed for 
the doge three of the wisest and most prudent citizens for his 
counsellors, that, amidst such dangers, he might be animated 
and fissisted to relax nothing in repressing the pride of restless 

* Sembrava essersi aperta in quelle parti, una bocca di infema p. 394. 

PISTOIA. 407 

Bpirits, and that he might be more ardent in reducing the people 
to order and quiet All these endeavors, however, availed little ; 
for Jacopo Savello coming to Pistoia with a hundred men in 
arms, on foot and on horseback, in aid of the Cancellieri, these 
determined to go out to the attack of the Panciatichi. Uniting 
three hundred men to the soldiers of Savello, they issued out of 
the city in two squadrons, one of which went to assault the 
bouses of the Giacomelli, and the other went towards the abbey 
of Pacciana, where, having routed a hundred cavalry of .the 
Panciatichi, they returned to unite with the other division, and 
both went to work to rob the houses of every thing valuable, 
and then to set them on fire, and put the inhabitants to the 
sword. In the mean time the party of the Panciatichi, nume- 
rous in armed men, marching suddenly in front of the enemy, 
thought to revenge themselves for their past defeat, by the total 
extermination of the Cancellieri. jBut, because the river Om- 
brone, which lay between, hindered the two parties from coming 
to a fierce battle, frequent skirmishes ensued on its banks, which 
after a long time appearing about to terminate to the disadvan- 
tage of the Cancellieri, this was the reason that, intimidated 
by the force of the contrary party, they hastily retired, with 
Jacopo Savello, towards Alliana; and in the confusion they 
abandoned the greatest part of their arms. This general depre- 
dation ruined the crops, and the country was afflicted with a 
severe famine, which obliged Savello to leave Pistoia* 

" The Cancellieri of Cavinana, desirous of restoring to Igno 
the Cancellieri, their companions, who had been banished from 
thence, assembled a body of men, who, joining with two hun- 
dred and sixty persons, on horseback and on foot, that came out 
to their assistance from the city, advanced to make trial of their 
strength ; but, meeting with their fellow factionaries from the 
mountain, and making up five hundred foot, and one hundred 
horse, they all directed their march towards Htellio, and en- 
camped near the old parish church, where they waited two days 
the arrival of other forces, to make a united assault upon that 
castle. Not seeing them arrive, and fearing that succor might 
come to the Pitellians from their friends in St. Marcello, they 
laid aside their meditated enterprise, and returned to their 
homes. 

" The Panciatichi of the mountain, finding themselves dis- 

408 ON GOVERNMENT. 

turbed by the Cancellieri, thought it a duty to revenge them- 
selves; and collecting for th&t purpose one hundred and fifty 
men at Cutigliano, began to scour the country and commit 
depredations. They were encountered with a great booty, and a 
sharp engagement ensued, and, after three hours, the Panciatichi 
thought it convenient to leave their prey, and retreat, to save 
their lives, to Lizzano. The Cancellieri, having recovered their 
property, and observing the retreat of the Panciatichi into certain 
houses of Lizzano, marched into it. Then the Panciatichi of 
Lizzano, for fear of the contrary party, who were increased to 
five hundred persons, and thinking to save their property and the 
furniture of their houses, deposited them in the church and its 
steeple, to which also the women and the men retired. The 
Cancellieri arriving in Lizzano, and finding all the houses aban- 
doned, pillaged all that was left in them, and then burnt them. 
They then laid siege to the church and steeple in so close a 
manner, that there was no space left for the Panciatichi to 
escape. The Cancellieri sent notice to their fellows in the 
city, country, and mountains, to send them immediate succor, 
that they might have dead, or prisoners, their confined enemies. 
One thousand five hundred men appeared, and took away from 
the besieged all hope of assistance. In this desperate situation 
there was no proposal of surrender or capitulation. The Can- 
cellieri repeatedly assaulted their enemy ; but they obstinately 
defended themselves, and often wounded the assailants. These 
at length renewed the enterprise by fire, and attacked both the 
church and steeple in that manner. Those in the church could 
no longer endure the raging flames, and all retired into the stee- 
ple. This place not being capacious enough for all, many were 
suffocated with the heat and smoke. The Panciatichi, reduced 
to this state of misery, were by some of the Cancellieri promised 
their lives if they would surrender. Eighteen of the besieged 
took advantage of these fair words ; but scarcely were they in 
the power of their enemies, when they were perfidiously put to 
death ; none of the rest would surrender, but resolved to perish 
in the balcony. The besiegers, seeing this courageous resolution, 
increased the fire under the balcony in such a degree, that the 
flames arising around and above it, many of the poor wretches 
within it, tormented with smoke, and heat, and pain, sunk under 
their misery ; and the more they deafened the square below with 

PISTOIA. 409 

their cries, the more their inhuman enemies exerted themselves 
to distress them. 

" The party of the Panciatichi of the plain, advised of these 
miseries in which their friends of the mountains were involved, 
and not able to endure the horrid excesses which were com- 
mitted, expedited, under the command of Toso, the brother of 
the Captain Franco Gori, at once to Pupillio four hundred in- 
fantry, and one hundred cavalry, who giving notice to all the 
factionaries of the mountains, that they might come to the relief 
of their friends, in a short time had an army of a thousand men 
and more, besides a large number of cavalry. Taking posses- 
sion of proper posts, and making suitable fortifications, Toso, by 
a great shout, gave a signal of the succor arrived to the poor 
victims besieged in the balcony. The Cancellieri, when they 
discovered this reinforcement, sent parties suddenly to repulse 
them, who found them so well fortified, that any attempt against 
them must be ineffectual. Succors firom all parts arriving to the 
Panciatichi, the Cancellieri found it necessary to raise the siege, 
and retire without risking a battle. The besieged who survived 
the pain, hunger, and other miseries, came out of that steeple 
and balcony, where more than one hundred and twenty were 
found dead by the heat, thirst, and hunger ; and their liberators, 
not caring to pursue their fugitive enemies, only set fire to their 
houses, by which new conflagration there was not a house left 
in these two beautiful villages. 

"The Panciatichi having avenged the wrongs done to their 
friends, took the road of St. Marcello, to return to the plain ; but 
one hundred and fifty of them deviating without military order, 
were unexpectedly attacked by the people of Calamecca; and 
not being able to defend themselves, they found it convenient to 
save their lives by taking their flight in the night. This event 
instigated the Panciatichi to increase their forces, to destroy 
entirely the contrary party ; and hiring to this end, troops from 
Ferrara, Modena, and Lucca, they brought together four hun- 
dred infantry, and one hundred cavalry, who, continually in- 
creasing, gave cause to the Cancellieri to prepare for new bat- 
tles; the whole country was so excited, that from the great 
preparations of both parties for war, nothing remained to be 
expected but to see the utter ruin of those places. 

" In this miserable state of things, Louis, King of France, ex- 

VOL. V. 35 

410 ON GOVERNMENT. 

cited the Florentines to interpose. They elected thirteen com- 
missaries, and gave them full power. These prohibited all to 
wear anns, and cited the heads of the factions, both of the Pan- 
ciatichi and Cancellieri, in the city, country, and mountain, to 
appear at Florence on the twentieth of August Of the heads 
of the Panciatic faction who appeared at Florence in obedi- 
ence to the order, were six of the principal men of the Panciati- 
chi family, four of the Cellesi, four of the Bisconti, seven of the 
Brunozzi, three of the Gherardi, and four of the Rossi. Bar- 
tolomeo Panciatichi, M. Goro Ghieri, and Captain Giuliano 
Gherardi, with seven others, refused to come, and incurred the 
penalty of banishment as rebels. Of the heads of the Cancel* 
lieri party, there appeared in Florence in obedience to the cita- 
tion, two of the Cancellieri, three of the Gatteschi, three of the 
Ambrogi, two of Perraccino, three of the Melocchi, three of the 
Tonti, and two of the Odaldi; nine refused to go, and were 
declared rebels. Six of the heads of the Panciatichi on the 
plain appeared, and four of those on the mountain, and an equal 
number of the Cancellieri from each. As soon as they appeared 
in Florence, seven of the Cancellieri, and six of the Panciatichi, 
were committed to prison, and all the rest forbidden to leave 
Florence on pain of banishment as rebels. 

" The Florentine commissaries then took all public offices, and 
the public revenue, out of the hands of the Pistoians, and im- 
posed heavy fines on the leaders for breaking the peace. Upon 
examination it was found, that more than four hundred houses 
had been burnt in the city, and more than sixteen hundred in 
the country." 

The rigor of the Florentines ^ preserved the peace but a short 
time, for in the next year the two factions of the Cancellieri and 
Panciatichi broke out into another civil war, as violent and 
destructive as ever. But let us pass over the particulars, and 
mention only a few circumstances. 

" The Florentines again made peace in Pistoia by their com- 
missaries, imprisonments, fines, and other severities, which the 
Pistoians were too much exhausted to resist. In 1505, the Pi- 
stoians petitioned Florence to be restored to the honors, officeSi 
and revenues of the city ; and it was granted. 

1 Chap. xxix. p. 401. 

PISTOIA. 411 

"The Pistoians were such friends of the house of Medici, 
that they had the address to escape, at the time when the Spa- 
nish army invaded Prato, and committed such cruelties and 
devastations there. 

"John de' Medici was made pope, and assumed the name of 
Leo X., and the Pistoians made such rejoicings upon this occa- 
sion, and sent such congratulations by their ambassadors to the 
pope, and to Julian his brother, and Lorenzo his nephew, as 
recommended them to favor. 

" In 1514, the families of Panciatichi, Cancellieri, Ricciardi, 
Gualfreducci and Vergiolesi, who in 1369, had been forbidden 
to have, obtain, or exercise the offices and dignities of the city 
of Pistoia, its country, or mountains, supplicated, with others, 
to be admitted to public offices and honors. Their petition was 
repeatedly rejected by the councU ; but at length, by the influ- 
ence and intercession of the pope, Leo X., they, their children, 
and descendants, were restored and admitted to all the honors 
demanded." 

Is there in history a more curious fact ? These families were, 
by an obstinate, arbitrary, and stupid law, excluded from all 
offices and share in government ; yet it was impossible to esta- 
blish a government that could control them, and they disposed 
of all offices, and the whole government, divided as they were 
into two parties, struggling for the whole time, and butchering 
each other, that one of them might rule the whole. 

One spark of malignity remained concealed in the minds of 
the factionaries, the Panciatichi and Cancellieri, and in 1515 
broke out in a furious flame, extending into the plain and the 
mountains. From tumults and murders both parties proceeded 
to make preparations of men and arms, to revive the civil wars 
in all their horrors. But the Florentines, that is to say the 
Medici family, interposed with such energy, as restored the pub- 
lic tranquillity ; in order to preserve which they drew off" many 
of the turbulent spirits, by taking them into their service as 
guards, &c. 

"After the death ^ of the Emperor Maximilian, Charles of 
Austria, King of Spain, was elevated to the throne of Caesar, 
and was called Charles V. Upon this event the Pistoians ex- 

^ Chap. zxx. p. 410. 

412 ON GOVERXMENT. 

pected some innovations, but the emperor was prevailed upon 
by Leo X. to make no change in the government of Tuscany ; 
on the contrary the emperor confirmed to the Florentines the 
privileges of the state, authority, and lands, of Which they were 
in possession. 

"Giulio de' Medici was seated on the pontifical throne, and 
called Clement VII. The Pistoians did honor to his elevation 
by great rejoicings, and by an embassy of congratulation ; which 
produced a letter from the pope full of paternal affection for the 
city of Pistoia, and abounding in praises of the citizens who 
composed it" 

The ascendency of the Medici family was not, however, suffi- 
ciently established to prevent a civil war from breaking out 
again in Pistoia between the Cancellieri and Panciatichi. 

" An obstinate battle was fought between them, which lasted 
seven hours, and the Panciatichi were again obliged to leave the 
city, and go into the country to their usual mischief. They 
returned in a short time with additional force, fought the Can- 
cellieri again, and obtained a victory, not without a multitude 
of killed and wounded on both sides. After this new tumult 
many prayers were appointed in Pistoia, to obtain the extirpa- 
tion of civil discord. The insurrection was soon heard of in 
Florence, and Niccolo Capponi, whose prudence was esteemed 
equal to his valor, was sent as commissary, with an army, 
to suppress it With great difficulty, and much severity, he 
succeeded in making a peace, or a truce, between the two 
parties." 

In 1527, the same factions revived their hostilities, but the 
leaders were seized and sent to Florence, and imprisoned, and 
mulcted in fines so severe as intimidated others. Charles, Duke 
of Bourbon, with a large army of Spaniards and Germans, 
approached the Alps of Tuscany, and threw the Pistoians into 
an uncommon agitation ; but a great fall of snow obliged him 
to divert his course from Pistoia to Rome. 

"The Florentines having, in 1527, banished the Medici, and 
taken down, with great impetuosity, the arms of that family 
from every place in the city, Charles V., in 1529, took upon 
himself the obligation of entirely reestablishing that family in 
that city ; and to this end he commissioned Philibert, Prince of 
Orange, to lay siege to Florence with a large army of Italians 

PISTOIA. 413 

and Germans. The Florentines made great preparations for 
defence, not only of their city, but also of Pistoia. They sent 
into it five companies of infantry, and placed each gate of the 
city under a company, and the piazza under the fifth, all under 
commanders in whom they had confidence. But all these exer- 
tions of the Florentines for the security of the city of Pistoia, 
and to maintain it at their devotion, appeared, even to them- 
selves, to be vain and of little moment, if the good-will of the 
two factions of the Panciatichi and Cancellieri could not be 
obtained ; and as the Cancellieri were already naturally inclined 
to their views, they courted and complimented the Panciatichi 
as the most powerful, and as the adherents to the Medici ; and 
to accomplish their purpose they called to Florence some of the 
heads of that party, and, admitting them into their council of 
war, affected a great esteem for their judgments and opinions in 
things of the greatest importance. 

" The Pistoians, however, placed little confidence in those 
who at this time had the sway in Florence; they therefore 
created a new magistrate over all affairs of the war, and gave him 
ample authority to do every thing for the advantage of the city. 
This magistrate esteemed the five companies insufficient for the 
defence of the city, and sent to Florence for more ; but he was 
answered, that the troops of Charles V. were approaching to 
lay siege to Florence, and that the forces of their enemies in- 
creased every day, so that they had enough to think and to do 
for their own defence; that the Pistoians must therefore make 
use of the means they had for their own salvation ; and to this 
end they gave orders to their commissary, who resided in Pistoia 
in behalf of the commons of Florence, that he should release 
freely into the hands of the Pistoians the balia of their city, 
that they might both govern and defend themselves ; and to 
their soldiers, posted as guards, to return with all possible expe- 
dition to Florence. These orders of their principals were sud- 
denly executed by the commissary and podesta. Pistoia re- 
mained free from the yoke of the Imperial vicars, provided itself 
with men, arms, and provisions; but dreading the army of 
Charles V. on one side, and the Panciatichi being known to 
favor the Medici, they sent four ambassadors of that party to 
offer the keys of the city to the pope, and pray his intercession 
with the emperor that his army might not enter their territory. 

35* 

414 ON GOVEKSMEXT. 

Many of the citizens, intimidated by the uncertainty of the 
times, absented themselves. ^ Not being able to foresee fbe 
end of the war, the advising council adopted another measure, 
the appointment of ambassadors to Florence to obtain a recon- 
sideration of their resolntion. This prodaced snch a rage in 
the Panciatichi party, that one of the ambassadors, Tonti, was 
assassinated, and a riot instantly ensued, in which eighteen of 
the Cancellieri lost their lives, and the whole party was driven 
oat of the city, and their houses plundered and burnt, particu- 
larly the celebrated palace of that family near St Luke's. The 
principal actors in this mischief having made a rich booty of 
money and jewels, fled to Bologna, where they were most gra- 
ciously received and pardoned by the pope. 

" At this time the real extinction of the faction of the Cancel- 
lieri followed ; because the Panciatichi, favorites of the pontiS^ 
as adherents of the house of Medici, assumed such vigor, that 
enraged not only against the Cancellieri of the city, but of the 
country, both on the plain and in the mountains, they sacked, 
burnt, and destroyed, tiie greater part of their houses, spreading 
ruin and devastation as they went, in Cavinana, Lanciole, Cu- 
tigliano, Spignano, and all the other castles and possessions of 
the Cancellieri. The people of Serra, followers of the Panciati- 
chi, burnt the castle of Calamecca, which held for the party of 
the Cancellieri ; these were so inflamed with resentment, that, 
with the help of some companies of Lombards, they compelled 
their enemy to fly, some of whom retreating for safety into the 
church of Crespole, were there besieged, and all put to death ; 
others retired to the belfry, and there fortified themselves, so as 
to hope to escape the fury of their persecutors, but in vain, for 
the assailants, disappointed of their vengeance by the sword, 
resolved to obtain it by famine. The Panciatichi being reduced 
to this state, one of their most daring soldiers, named Appol- 
lonio di Dante, to deliver his companions from the hands of 
their enemies, precipitated himself from the tower, and his cloak 
taking the wind, he descended with no other injury than a slight 
hurt in one of his arms. Running first to Serra, and then to 
Pistoia, he roused one of the Cellesi to march, with a good body 
of soldiers, to the relief of the besieged. After this, Pitellio, 
Pupillio, and Mammiano, by turning to the party of the Panci- 
atichi, suflered no other damage than the loss of a multitude of 

PISTOIA. 415 

fheur inhabitants, who were driven from their habitations as 
adherents to the CanceliierL" 

The pope, Clement VIL, accepted the gift of the city, and by 
a letter or charter, directed to his beloved sons, the priors, gonfa- 
lonier, and people of the city of Pistoia, sent his pontifical com- 
missary to take possession. The Panciatichi had now extermi- 
nated the Cancellieri, and obtained the power of governing; but 
it was at the expense of subjecting both themselves and their 
country to a foreign power and another rival family. 

Charles V., the twenty-eighth of October, 1530, constituted 
Alexander de' Medici governor, not only of Florence, but of all 
Tuscany, to the extreme joy and satisfaction of Clement VIL 
Thus pope and emperor, Guelphs and Ghibellines, Bianchi and 
Neri, Panciatichi and Cancellieri, were at last all brought to 
unite, as all such constitutions of government ever have united, 
at last, in a government of all authority in one centre, but that 
centre a worthless, however artful, despot. 

^' The Pistoians were in hopes, that at least under an absolute 
prince they might enjoy a little tranquillity; but in 1631 the 
usual disgusts between the two factions of Panciatichi and Can- 
cellieri began to spring up. Although the former, by the par- 
tiality of the house of Medici, were indulged in all their caprices, 
yet finding themselves now increasing in strength, nothing would 
satisfy them but the total expulsion from the city, and the com- 
plete destruction, of all that belonged to the Cancellieri. Tu- 
mults and slaughter arose, and no man had the knowledge or 
the will to provide a remedy. 

" Alexander de' Medici took possession of his principality in 
Florence ; great rejoicings were made in Pistoia, and four am- 
bassadors sent to present the congratulations of their city, and 
recommend it as having been always faithful lovers of his family. 
The forty-eight senators, instituted in Florence this year under 
Alexander, pacified the two factions of Panciatichi and Cancel- 
lieri, and those persons and families who remained of the latter 
faction returned to the city, to. the joy of aU. 

" Alexander distinguished Pistoia from all other places under 
his dominion, for its great affection and sweet love to his family, 
by giving orders that all the business of Pistoia should be ad- 
dressed immediately to himself in person. 

<' Charles Y., having ascertained the untruth of the accusa- 

416 ON GOVERNMENT. 

lions of tyranny brought against Alexander de' Medici by the 
Florentine exile:*, made a visit to Pistoia, where he was received 
and entertained in the public palace. 

^Alexander took it into his head that commissaries and 
governors were destructive to a state, and therefore abolishing 
the office, he disarmed the inhabitants as inclined to tumults, 
and appointed ten noble Pistoians to govern their city. On the 
sixth of January, 1536, Alexander was assassinated by Lorenzo, 
and Cosimo succeeded. When the news of this assassination 
arrived in Pistoia, the heads of the Panciatichi party assembled, 
and, after mature deliberation, concluded that the present was a 
convenient opportunity for destroying totally all remnants of the 
Cancellieri party. To this purpose they excited an insurrection 
of all their factionaries, under color of maintaining the city of 
Pistoia in its devotion to the house of Medici. They made 
leaders of Gio. Cellesi and some others, and with a great multi- 
tude scoured the city, and in a very short time assassinated 
fifteen. Many others, hoping to secure themselves, took post in 
the fortresses, but, betrayed by the commanders, who let in the 
Panciatichi, they were miserably deprived of their lives. The 
partisans of the Cancellieri, seeing that they could not resist the 
fierce assaults of the contrary faction, went to hide themselves, 
some in the towns, some in the monasteries, and others in sub- 
terraneous places ; others went out of the city, found a leader, 
and hazarded a battle with their enemies, in which many were 
killed, and others afterwards burnt in steeples. Many, who had 
foreseen such an event, had before retired to Montale and Mon- 
temurlo, places of their faction ; so that the Panciatichi remain- 
ing masters without control in Pistoia, sacked, burnt, and 
destroyed all the houses, shops, and stores, which remained of 
the contrary party in the city. 

Cosimo I. had ascended the throne of Tuscany, and ambassa- 
dors were sent from Pistoia to congratulate him. At the same 
time the factionaries of the Cancellieri, who had taken refuge 
in Montale, constituting as their leader the Captain Guidotto 
Pazzaglia, their compatriot, and a head of the Cancellieri fac- 
tion, who, now aged and weakened by many military fatigues, 
had retired to his estate called the House in the Wood,* fortified 

* La Casa al Bosco. 

PISTOIA. 417 

by a thick and high wall, and defended by a high and strong 
tower, entreated him to engage in their defence, and obstruct the 
approaches of the Panciatichi. Pazzaglia took under his com- 
mand all the factionaries of his party, and, by a secret cor- 
respondence which he had with Philip Strozzi, increased his 
numbers to four hundred men, whom he quartered in his own 
habitation. From this post they took the license to go out fre- 
quently to the annoyance of the Panciatichi, and gave them 
much disturbance and many apprehensions. The Panciatichi, 
to make a diversion and a division of the forces of the opposite 
party, which every day increased in power, went and commenced 
a cruel warfare with the Cancellieri of Cavinana. These were 
made uneasy, and retired to their steeples, where they made a 
brave defence. At this time the commissary took the resolution 
of bridling the parties by authority and with rigor; but the Panci- 
atichi, who were more than a thousand men in number, in con- 
tempt of justice, and sparing neither age, nor condition, nor sex, 
executed in a short time a cruel vengeance on their adversaries 
by fire and sword ; and going on every day increasing in ferocity, 
they increased their murders, rapines, and fires, till they reduced 
Cavinana, St. MarceUo, Crespole, Calamecca, Lanciole, Pupillio, 
and other places, to spectacles of desolation. Many of the 
Cancellieri, perceiving that fortune was not favorable to them, 
retired to the parish church of Cutigliano, and there fortified, 
stood upon their defence, without losing their presence of mind, 
waiting from the brave Captain Luca Giacomelli some conve- 
nient succor, by which they might once more attempt an attack 
upon the rear of the Panciatichi, who, to increase their power 
both in numbers and situation, had taken a post very near them. 
These disorders were very displeasing to the Duke Cosimo de' 
Medici, and he took great pains, by means of his commissary, 
to restore quiet to the Cancellieri, to which the Panciatichi at 
length consented. Nevertheless the church was scarcely opened, 
when they burst into such a furious rage, that they fell upon 
every one of the Cancellieri, and cut them to pieces. Cosimo 
was not discouraged, even by this outmge, from using other 
means to restore quiet to Pistoia, and at last reduced some part 
of it to good order. But the faction of the Panciatichi, having 
no longer any of the Cancellieri on whom to vent their rage, 
turned all their hatred and indignation against one another. 

A 2 

418 ON GOVERNMENT. 

The faction became divided into two, which rushed into such 
persecutions of each other, that innumerable quarrels and mur- 
ders succeeded. The example was followed among their con- 
nections in Florence, which gave occasion to the rettori of that 
city, who dreaded greater disorders, to draw the two parties to a 
truce. 

^ At the same time the Duke Cosimo was exactly informed, 
that the Captain Pazzaglia received daily additions to the num- 
bers in his house ; and that by the assistance of Philip Strozzi, 
and the other exiles, many were induced daily to go into his 
service, and the terror had of this great captain was thus in- 
creased. Desirous of providing against every sinister event, 
which he foresaw might occur, not only from the great number 
of men who were assembled at the House in the Wood, but 
from the thousands of men which Pazzaglia at the sound of a 
bell was able to raise, the duke, after having in vain attempted 
to gain him by means of some friends, sent Otto da Montauto, 
with a thousand infantry, to attack the House in the Wood, and 
make prisoners of its garrison. 

Montauto by forced marches sat down before the place, but 
he was early discovered by Pazzaglia, who, always vigilant, saw 
every thing and thought of every danger, and was fiercely re- 
pulsed. Montauto, perceiving the enterprise to be difficult which 
he had thought so easy, sent to his brother Frederick, who com- 
manded the guards in Pistoia, for immediate succor. The 
prompt arrival of this aid alarmed Pazzaglia, who, finding him- 
self besieged by a great number of soldiers, and not hearing 
the bell of Montale, which he had ordered one of his officers to 
ring, to assemble the assistance he expected from that and other 
places, ventured out of his habitation, clothed and armed like 
a soldier, and with a joyful countenance went to meet his be- 
sieger, and demanding safety for himself and his soldiers, put 
himself into his hands. Montauto received Pazzaglia with a 
smiling countenance, and knowing him to be humane, generous, 
and polite, he knew not how to refuse his demand. They both 
entered the House in the Wood, where they refreshed them- 
selves so splendidly, that Montauto, admiring still more the 
greatness of soul of Pazzaglia, could not without tears conduct 
him to the presence of the duke. Cosimo had enough of policy 
as well as generosity to receive him like an intimate and confi- 

PISTOIA. 419 

dential friend. He took him to his most private consultations, 
and decided on no affair of state without his advice. The duke, 
perceiving that the ten noble Pistoians, assigned to govern the 
city, had not fulfilled the obligations enjoined upon them, or 
preserved good order, restored the use of the ancient offices 
of podesta and commissary. He promoted to these offices men 
of moderation as well as of spirit, and thought by their means 
to remedy all disorders ; but there still remained enough of the 
citizens inclined to quarrel, to keep the city in tumults, and to 
degrade all justice. 

"Niccolo Bracciolini had insinuated himself into favor with 
the duke, by having revealed to him a conspiracy of the Salviati, 
Ridolfi, Strozzi, and Valori, and was appointed to the command 
of certain companies of infantry which were in garrison there. 
This officer, recollecting that Francesco Brunozzi had been 
averse to include him in the last truce made between the fac- 
tions by the mediation of the Florentines, conceived the design 
of taking bitter revenge of all the Brunozzi family. For this 
purpose he put himself at the head of his adherents, collected 
a considerable body of armed men, besides those which Gio. 
Cellesi held concealed in his house, ready for any orders, went 
through the city in search of Brunozzi, and having found him, 
deprived him of his life. He proceeded to set fire to his house, 
and all the other houses of the family, but was obliged to 
get possession of them at the point of the sword. The Bru- 
nozzi made a brave defence, but were inferior in numbers, 
and three sons of Francesco were left dead, and the rest fled 
to some obscure place. Not satisfied with this, Bracciolini 
proceeded to the country houses of the family, with a sol- 
diery as tyrannical as himself, and there committed all ima- 
ginable cruelty, burning and destroying every thing. For this 
cruel revenge he was afterwards condemned to pay to the surviving 
Brunozzi only two thousand five hundred ducats for damages. 

"At the same time many exiles from Florence, desirous of 
deposing from the throne of Tuscany the Duke Cosimo de' 
Medici, in order, as they pretended, to set their country at liberty, 
collected together at Mirandola four thousand infantry, and three 
hundred cavalry, and gave the command of them to Piero 
Strozzi, who took for his colleague Baccio Valori, and came 
with one division towards Pistoia, and halting at Montemurlo, 

420 ON GOVERNMENT. 

waited for the rest of the anny. The party of the Cancellieri, who 
there expected them, received them with transports of joy ; and 
having repaired the citadel, and furnished the castle with every 
necessary, they all, being fifteen hundred men in number, thought 
of nothing else but doing infinite mischief to the party of the 
Panciatichi. They burned Satornana, Valdibura, Uzzo, and 
Capo di Strada, carrying off from all a rich booty. Taking no 
account of the government of Florence, the Cancellieri made every 
effort to reenter Pistoia, and the exiles from Florence had no 
other view than to deliver their country from the government of 
the Medici ; so that all were agreed to assemble men, provide 
arms, and collect money, that they might be able by force to 
wrest the command from the Duke Cosimo. That sovereign, 
informed of this, and that those in rebellion against him were 
fortified with much care, every day increased in force, and did 
great damage, ordered Alexander Vitelli, Otto da Montauto, 
and Piero Pipicciano, that they should depart in the night from 
Florence with their troops, three thousand Spaniards, and two 
regiments of Germans, and go to the assault of Montemurlo; 
and that the force of the enemy might be diverted and disunited, 
he ordered the captain Frederick da Montauto, then in Pistoia, to 
unite the force of his companies with those of the party of the 
Panciatichi; and the same night, with cries and fires, spread 
terror in the neighborhood of Montemurlo, that the party of the 
Cancellieri might be necessitated to abandon it The party of 
the Panciatichi, adhering in all things to the will of the duke, 
united with the forces of Frederick da Montauto, and in a dark 
night set in an uproar the country of Alliana, and from thence 
went to burn the houses of the abbey of Pacciana. Setting 
fire to a multitude of ricks of hay and stacks of com belonging 
to the common people, they constrained the Captain Bati Ros- 
pigliosi, the Captain Francesco Gratteschi, the Captain Francesco 
Arferuoli, the Captain Luca Giacomelli, with many others of the 
exiles, to abandon Montemurlo and the neighboring places, to go 
and succor their factionaries of the abbey at Pacciana. A 
severe and obstinate battle ensued, in which, in the end, the 
Panciatichi were superior, with the death of sixty persons of 
both parties, among whom were numbered the Captain Mattana, 
with five soldiers of Cuti^ano, who were enough to put in 
doubt the victory. The head of Mattana was carried to Pistoia, 

PISTOIA. 421 

and, amidst the exultations and rejoicings of his adversariesi 
carried to the piazza as a spectacle to all. This detachment of 
the exiles being at break of day, the first of August, 1537, 
defeated, Vitelli and Montauto, knowing that the principal heads 
of the rebels were in the citadel, went to the attack of Monte- 
murlo, and finding it in all parts ill manned, they animated their 
people, and assaulted the fortress, which, after a resistance of 
five hours, was carried. Pietro Strozzi, attempting to make his 
escape, fell into the hands of the besiegers ; a thousand men of 
both parties were slain, and Philip Strozzi, Baccio Valori, Fran- 
cesco degli Albizzi, and many others, were conducted prisoners 
to Florence, where, as rebels both to the state and the empire, 
they were put to death. This was the establishment and the 
basis of the grandeur of Cosimo I. de' Medici, who afterwards, 
on the thirtieth of September, obtained a most ample diploma 
firom the Emperor Charles V. 

'< Upon this memorable victory the Pistoians congratulated 
the duke with an excess of joy by their ambassadors ; and the 
party of the Panciatichi, who had rendered all possible assist- 
ance, recollecting that the Cancellieri of the House in the Wood 
had taken refuge in the parish church of Cutigliano, when that 
place was sacked by the Captain Vincenzo di Poggio, and the 
proud towers which were there were ruined to the foundation, 
now hastened with such ferocity to the assault of that church, 
that, after a long and good defence, the besieged, without hope 
of succor, sunendered at discretion to their enemies, who, unit- 
ing with those of Valdibura, of Cireglio, and of Uzzo, their ad- 
herents burned more than thirteen hundred houses of the Can- 
cellieri, in the towns of Bigiano, the abbey of Pacciana, Chiaz- 
zano, Satornana, Calamecca, Crespole, and Lanciole. 

^^ The emperor preparing in Lombardy for battle against Fran- 
cis I. King of France, and relying on the valor of Pietro Strozzi, 
general of the Italian infantry, the Pistoians were agitated with 
fears, and made great preparations for defence. 

" The controversy between Pistoia and Lucca, about the bound- 
ary between them near PupiUio, being adjusted, the Duke Co- 
simo was desirous of establishing the peace of the city ; and for 
this object, with menaces and efficacious admonitions, he did not 
cease to press the obstinate citizens to submit to a regular life, 
and reduce their affairs for once to good order and a state of 

VOL. V. 36 

422 ON GOVERNMENT. 

iaranquillity ; but as the Pistoians, in their unbalanced state, had 
no other consolation than to stand immersed in dissensions, 
quarrels, and discords, they paid no attention to the sovereign 
councils, but went on, more and more boisterous, wicked, and se- 
ditious, destroying the good order of government, reducing every 
thing, without control, to the advantage of their private interests 
and the wantonness of their wild caprices* The indignation 
of the duke was at last excited against these obstinate brains, 
whom he thought it his duty to tame, by taking from them all 
the honors, public ojffices, and revenues of the city, as well as 
the institutions of charity, and to shut up the palace, the resi- 
dence of the supreme magistrates. With this view he elected 
four commissaries for the affairs of Pistoia, and gave them full 
authority to fulfil his determination. All this was ordained and 
established at the instigation of certain citizens of Pistoia, and 
all the efforts of the people were made idle ; since, by the tenor 
of the sovereign command, all the magistracies and offices of 
the city were suppressed, and the administration of the entire 
revenues and institutions of charity was consigned to Taddeo 
Guiducci and Christopher Ranieri, with the title of Proveditors 
GenercU^ who received into their possession all the movables 
of the public palace; and the supreme magistrates who had 
resided in it were dismissed. Six citizens were deputed, with 
the title of Proveditors of the Commons^ to whom the palace was 
committed ; these, with the resident commissaries, and not other- 
wise, assembled to treat of the affairs of their city. These hav- 
ing held the office a certain time, it was permitted to the Pisto- 
ians to draw six subjects from a purse destined to that use. 

"But the duke^ apprehending that these new regulations 
would excite insurrections, sent a body of soldiers, only three 
hundred and fifty in number, to disarm the citizens, and rein 
in the seditious and the wicked; amplified the fortifications, 
and furnished them with every necessary. Many of the Pi- 
stoians now considered themselves as slaves, and thought their 
nobility debased by the privation of all the honors, public offices, 
and revenues ; they thought it inconsistent with the dignity of 

* Sempre piCi tumultuanti, e fiicinorosi, e sediziosi, guastando il buon ofrdine 
del governo, riduceyano.quello, senza freno ai vantaggi del propri interessL, e di»- 
ordinad capricci. 

1 Chap, xxxii. p. 432. 

PISTOIA. 423 

their blood to lead a life so obscure and inglorious ; they there- 
fore retired from the city, and went to inhabit in other places ; 
hence the city was in danger of depopulation, became defective 
in many arts of convenience and necessity, and nothing was 
heard but sighs, groans, and lamentations. The few inhabitants 
who remained, knowing the great damage which had resulted to 
their country from this resolution of the duke, were never satis- 
fied with venting their reproaches and curses against those who 
had advised it;'' and they would have attempted more such 
great things as compose the whole history of their country, if 
many had not been disheartened by the rigor of the new govern- 
ment 

^^AH the soldiers in garrison at Pistoia being, in obedience to 
the orders of the sovereign, gone, with all other persons of note, 
to Florence, to make their honors and acclamations on the happy 
marriage of the Duke Cosimo with Leonora, the daughter of 
don Peter of Toledo, Marquis of Villa Franca, and Viceroy of 
Naples, the Cancellieri esteemed the opportunity convenient to 
rise and take vengeance on the Panciatichi. As all the soldiers 
were gone, and everybody was turned to Florence, the Cancel- 
lieri resolved to enter the city in the night, and kill all the Pan- 
ciatichi, without pardoning or sparing one, that there might not 
remain the least memorial of them. They hired people from 
various places, of every quality, and some of the most brave, 
intrepid, and desperate ; and having gained over to their party 
many in the city, that they might, at a critical moment, open the 
gates, they introduced, in small numbers at a time, many of their 
most desperate men, and quartered them, in perfect secrecy, in 
the houses of their adherents and partisans. They elected for 
their Captain Giovanni Tonti, who entered the service in the 
night of the fifteenth of June, put in order more than four hun- 
dred soldiers, and marched with them to the gate of St. Mark, 
at Pistoia, where the walls were lowest, there giving the concert- 
ed signal to those within, that with their knowledge he might 
enter the city unknown to their enemies. At the signal of 
Tonti, those who were upon the walls suddenly let down one 
of their men, with orders to say to those without, that they had 
waited four hours, and because day approached, many had 
retired to their houses for fear of a discovery; and that there- 
fore it would be advisable to delay the enterprise till the next 

424 ON GOVERNMENT. 

night Hearing this, Tonti sent immediately one of his aids to 
desire those upon the walls not to depart, and instantly constdt- 
ing his colleagues, he found but one for waiting till the next 
night. Transported >\ath impatience, Tonti at once cried out to 
his soldiers, ' Follow me ; now is the time to show our courage! * 
and placing a ladder against the wall, mounted to the top, from 
whence, whilst grasping at a stone, in order to climb over the 
wall, he fell with it headlong into the ditch. His people, hear- 
ing the noise of his fall, but not seeing, by reason of the dark- 
ness, what had happened, suspected that they were discovered, 
and that Tonti had been repulsed by the contrary party. Those, 
therefore, who had ascended on other ladders turned back, and 
gave themselves to flight, very few remaining for the defence of 
Tonti; among these, the most spirited and the most faithful 
pressed to see what had happened, and discovered Tonti, with 
one thigh broken, half dead in the ditch; understanding the 
truth from him, they placed him on a ladder, and, with the as- 
sistance of his brother, carried him to a house in the neighbor- 
hood as a place of security. In this state of things, Simon 
Gratteschi, and Philip Ghelardini, persons of great zeal and acti- 
vity, prepared to carry on the enterprise. Confiding much in 
the assistance of those in the city, they hastened early, with 
thirty followers, to the gate of St Mark, and finding it open, 
entered the city, and marched to the piazza. As many of the 
Panciatichi as they found they killed, which raised a great 
uproar in the city, and intimidated the people so much, that 
all retired to their habitations. The heads of the Panciatichi 
observing that the rioters were very few, and that none in the 
city gave them assistance, took courage, and making, by order 
of the commissary, a hasty collection of men, they began with 
these to pursue the others with so much spirit, that some of 
them fled out of the city, went towards Cireglio and Cavinana, 
there made a rich prey, and escaped into Lombardy. Others 
were taken and severely punished, and afterwards all the accom- 
plices of the conspiracy were by a public proclamation declared 
rebels ; thus ended the tumult The commissary afterwards 
ordered many of the Cancellieri party to be arrested, who were 
about fifty in number, held them three months in prison, put 
some of them to the torture, by which he discovered the truth 
of the fact, and then set all at. liberty, without condemning any. 

PISTOIA. 425 

"All contradiction and opposition being suppressed, and the 
harvest being plentiful, the Pistoians thought no felicity superior 
to theirs, and they held it lawful to forget the past by im- 
mersing themselves in a sea of pleasures, by the allurements of 
which they were seduced into a very vicious and expensive life. 

" Cosimo perceiving that the privation of honors and offices 
had decreased the population of the city, and diminished commerce 
and the revenue, esteemed it his interest, as well as that of the 
public, that the city should be restored to its primitive state. 
On the thirtieth of March, 1547, he made a concession forever 
in favor of the Pistoians, of all the honors and public offices, 
and all the privileges, which were established in the year 1496, 
in the convention with the Florentines. The purses were soon 
formed of the usual magistrates, and all the persons worthy of 
that preeminence and those honors had their names imborsed, 
and the individuals were drawn with universal rejoicings. 

" The representation of the faction of Cancellieri, under the 
name of Dormentoni, and that of the Panciatichi, under that 
of Risoluti, made by some, among the sports and shows of the 
Carnival, with habits and ornaments proper to that age, through 
some injurious words thrown out in jest among them, occasioned 
disorders of so serious a nature, that there was great danger of 
reviving the ancient animosities and insurrections ; but the Duke 
Cosimo caused to be arrested the inventors of those masque- 
rades, intimidated their followers, and restored the public tran- 
quillity ; and, to make the greater impression on the people, and 
secure their quiet for the future, he punished the prisoners in an 
exemplary manner. 

" The government continued absolute^ in the family of Medici 
till the year 1737, when, upon the death of John Gaston L, the 
last grand duke of that family, without issue, the family became 
extinct. Don Carlos, King of Naples, in his own name, and 
Philip V. King of Spain, not only in his own name, but also in 
the name of the infant don Philip, and don Louis, and the other 
sons whom he might have by the Queen of Spain, renounced all 
right and pretence, which they or their descendants might have 
to the succession of the grand dukedom of Tuscany, and trans- 
fenred all such rights, actions, or pretences, to Francesco di Leo- 

^ Chap, xxxviii p. 494. 
36* 

426 ON GOVERNMENT. 

poldo, Duke of Lorraine and Bar, his heirs and successors ; and 
Pistoia soon swore allegiance to the new sovereign." 

And here ends another most splendid example of the blessings 
and felicities of a republic without three orders forming a mu- 
tual balance ! It is quite unnecessary to excite the resentment, 
or flatter the vanity, of any individuals or families in America, 
by mentioning their names; but if you begin at New Hamp- 
shire, and proceed through all the States to Georgia, you will at 
once be able to fix your thoughts upon some five or six families 
in each state, some two of whom will, in the course of fifty 
years, perhaps of five (unless they are restrained by an independ- 
ent executive power, three independent branches in the legisla- 
ture, and an independent judicial department,) be able to divide 
the state into two parties, one generally at the head of the gen- 
tlemen, the other of the simplemen, tear one another to pieces, 
and rend the vitals of their country with as ferocious animosity, as 
unrelenting rancor and cruelty, as ever actuated the Cancellieri 
and the Panciatichi in Pistoia. And it will not be the fault of 
these individuals or families ; they will not be able to avoid it, 
let their talents or virtues be what they may ; their friends, con- 
nections, and dependents, will stimulate and urge them forward, 
by every provocation of flattery, ridicule, and menaces, until 
they plunge them into an abyss, out of which they can never 
rise. It will be entirely the fault of the constitution, and of the 
people who will not now adopt a good one ; it will be the mis- 
fortune of those individuals and families as much as of the 
public ; for what consolation can it be to a man, to think that 
his whole life, and that of his son and grandson, must be spent 
in unceasing misery and warfare, for the sake only of a possi- 
bility that his great grandson may become a despot ! ^ 

r 

1 It is scarcely necessary to point out the mistake which has been here commitr 
ted by the author as to the probable course of things in the United States, Nei- 
ther does the escape from the danger here referred to seem to have been so much 
due to the establishment of the form which he advocates, as to that radical equality 
of condition which the law and custom of equal distribution of inheritances every- 
where establishes. Sixty years have passed away, and such a thing as family 
influence has not as yet produced the smallest perceptible effect upon the political 
movements of state or nation. 

A highly plausible, if not entirely sound view of the progress of government, mak- 
ing the regard for &mily one of the intermediate stages of civilization, is given 
by Dr. Arnold in the appendix to the first volume ofnis edition of Thucyaides. 

A further elucidation of the author's views on this point will be found in his letters 
to John Taylor of Caroline, now for the first time published, at the end of this work. 

CHAPTER EIGHTH. 

CREMONA. 

"Cremona^ had persevered under the government of consuls 
until 1180, when she changed the form of her government, 
reducing all the authority of the consuls to one person alone, 
who, from the supreme power which was given him, was de- 
nominated a podesta. The election of consuls had occasioned 
such contests among the principal families (as none could be 
elected to that dignity who were not citizens) that it was now 
ordained by law, that none should be elected to the office of 
podesta who was not a foreigner, and a citizen of some other 
city, as should be agreeable to the council, provided he was not 
related by blood to any of the electors, had no real estate in the 
dty or country, and was arrived at least to thirty-six years of 
age ; and, above all things, they sought for men of prudence 
and most eminent reputation, to whom, as soon as they were 
elected, they sent letters by a public order, praying them to 
accept the dignity offered them; and on the day when they 
made their entry into the city, with a public concourse and 
acclamations, they were solemnly met and received by the whole 
people. They carried in ceremony the ensigns of their authority, 
the furred cap, the long sword, and the rod or sceptre.* And 
because for the most part they were men of military talents, 
rather than skilful in the laws, they conducted with them judges 
expert in the legal science, by whose means they tried all causes 
civil and criminal, and assembled the council when it was 
necessary. After this change of magistracy from consuls to a 
podesta, which, however, was of short duration and little sta- 
bility, as they created sometimes a podesta, sometimes consuls, 
and at other times both together, there occurred in the state and 
republic of Cremona many and very great disturbances. 

" Cremona in 1183, sent her ambassadors to Placentia, where 
all the ambassadors of the other cities of Lombardy, the 

* II capello, e il stocco, e la verga, 6 scettro. 

1 Dell' hiBtoria di Cremona d'i^tomo Campo, CavaHero, pittore,etarchitetto 
CremonenBe. In Milano, 1645. Libro seconao, p. 26. 

428 ON GOVERNMENT. 

March, and of Romagna, were assembled together with the 
ambassadors of the emperor, and King Henry his son, in May. 
At this assembly it was concluded, that all the cities should 
send their ambassadors to the diet of Constance, a principal 
city of Germany, to establish the peace negotiated between the 
emperor and the cities. On the twenty-fifth of Jane, 1183, was 
established, ratified, and confirmed, that peace, so solemn and so 
celebrated, which, from the name of the city where it was made, 
was called the peace of Constance ; a correct copy of which 
treaty is to be found at the end of the fourteenth book of Sigo- 
nius, of the kingdom of Italy.* 

'^Such was the instability of the government, that the city 
returned, in 1190, to the administration of consuls. They in 
the next year elected a podesta again, who led them out to war, 
but was unfortunate, and this made them weary of a podesta; 
and the next year they created consuls, and consuls were annu- 
ally elected until 1195, when they returned to a podesta." 

All this is perfectly natural ; the people were distressed by the 
contest of the principal families when they had consuls, and 
therefore wished to have a foreigner as a podesta to keep them 
in order. The principal families, however, struggled for consuls, 
that they might have the rule; and one party prevailed this 
year, and the other the next 

"The consuls, in 1198, to supply the city with water, dug a 
well, and built a conduit of water, which was afterwards called 
the Murmur, from the complaints of the people against the 
expense of it, which were so great, that they rose in tumults, 
and insisted on choosing a podesta. Cremosino Oldoino was 
accordingly appointed, and governed jointly with the consuls to 
the end of the year." 

Any one may pursue at his leisure the particulars of the 
changes from consuls to podesta, and firom podesti to consuls, 
till the year 1209, when, upon the appointment of consuls, there 
arose discords and civil seditions, which brought the republic to 
the brink of ruin. 

" The city became divided as it were into two, by a rivulet 
that passes through it;^ on one side it was called the New 

* Muratori, Annal. anno 1183. 

1 Lnperoche si come la citt4 ia due parti dal fiumioeilo CremoneUa vien divi- 
sa, cosi si divisero anche i cittadini. 

CKEMONA. 429 

City, and on the other the Old, though all the popular men of 
the old city joined with the new ; in short, the division was be- 
tween the gentlemen and the populars^ at bottom. The new 
city arose in tumults, and were joined by all but the gentlemen 
in the old, made new magistrates and governors, and congre- 
gated together to constitute a new general council at Sant' 
Agata. 

" 1210. The old city and the new, each, made its podesta, and 
many quarrels and civil wars followed ; and the hatred between 
persons and parties increasing, as if they had not been born in 
the same city, but had been most cruel enemies, they soaked the 
bosom of their common mother with blood, and had no mercy 
on her houses or riches, which they consumed by fire. But 
with much pains and intercessions of the bishop a peace was 
made, by which the podesta of the new city submitted to the 
podesta of the old, and swore obedience to him, with this re- 
servation, however, that he was to remain podesta of the 
people. 

"The civil war was renewed in 1211, between the citizens of 
the old and the new city. The two factions proceeded to a 
sharp conflict, and after having killed an infinite number of 
citizens, those of the old city set fire to the houses in the neigh- 
borhood of the scene of action, and consumed every thing in 
them. The year before Otho had been excommunicated by In- 
nocent, the pope, and deprived of the empire, and Frederic 
Roger was elected in his place ; for this reason the Cremonese 
went this year in favor of the Marquis of Este, and drove out of 
Ferrara Uguccione de' Guarnesi, who was podesta there in the 
name of Otho." 

In 1212, civil discords were somewhat appeased, and consuls 
were appointed. The wars between Cremona, and Milan, and 
Placentia, may be read by those who are curious, but are not to 
our purpose. They lasted till 1217, in the beginning of which 
year civil discords €md seditions increased, because the people 
could not agree in creating the magistrates ; and it was not till 
after a long delay, and the interposition of the pope, with apos- 
tolical exhortations by letter, that they were persuaded to lay 
aside their hatreds and discords, so far as to appoint a podesta. 

« 

1 " i popolarL** 

430 ON GOVERNMENT. 

^ In 1221, the most terrible discords and civil wars, between 
the gentlemen^ and the common people in Placentia, were 
accommodated for a time mider the mediation of Sozzo Cog- 
lioni, podesta of Cremona. The substance of the peace, to 
which each party swore, was to lay aside their discords and con- 
tentions, and forgive the injmies, damages, and mischiefs, mu- 
tually committed and received." 

But of what avail are oaths and treaties, which the nature of 
man and the form of the government will not permit to be 
observed ? 

" 1222. This year two noble citizens of Cremona were made, 
one after the other, podestas of Placentia. 

^ In the beginning of the year 1229, the discords among the 
citizens prevailed so far, that they created consuls, and those 
only for six months ; and this year there was a confederacy of 
Verona, Modena, and Parma, against Cremona. 

^< There arose, in 1232, in the city of Cremona, seditions and 
civil wars. 

"1233. The Cremonese united with the popular party in Pla- 
centia, in favor of whom Uberto Pallavicino, from Cremona, 
went with a hundred light-horse to oppose the noble exiles. 

"1234. The Milanese and Brescians, joining the noble exiles 
from Placentia, went with a powerful army against Cremona, 
and deformed the whole country with blood and fire. 

" In the year 1242, there began to take root in Cremona those 
abominable and pernicious factions of Guelphs and Ghibellines, 
and to infect it to such a degree, as occasioned an infinite ex- 
pense of the blood of the citizens, an inestimable destruction of 
wealth, an unspeakable perdition of families, and a most melan- 
choly and miserable ruin of the country." 

The city was, in 1246, divided between the two factions ; but 
the Ghibellines had the majority, and obtained the appointment 
of a podesta. This year the Emperor Frederic was excommu- 
nicated by the pope and council at Lyons, in France, and 
Henry Duke of Thuringia was elected. 

The two factions dsdly increased in violence. The old city, 
that is the gentlemen, were favorers of the Ghibellines, and 
adherents of Frederic, the schismatical emperor; and the new 

* " I popolari e i nobili." 

CREMONA. 431 

city, that is the common people, were partisans of the Guelphs, 
who adhered to the holy see. The bloody wars occasioned by 
this division, between Frederic and Innocent, and their respect- 
ive followers, can be read at leisure, and may cause a laugh at 
the terrible disgrace of Cremona in the loss of their triumphal 
chariot,^ an infamy which none but the gentlemen could obli- 
terate. The Marquis Uberto Pallavicino, a most powerful man, 
and of great reputation, but a zealous Ghibelline and old-city- 
man, was appointed podesta; he fought a memorable battle, 
made two thousand prisoners, retook the carroccio, and returned 
in triumph to Cremona." 

Campo begins his third book in the manner of Machiavel, 
with deep, grave, and formal reflections, as if a diversity of 
sentiments, contradictory principles, inconsistent interests, and 
opposite passions among the citizens, could be reconciled and 
united by declamations against discord and panegyrics upon 
unanimity, without a balance, in a government possessed of 
sufficient force. 

According to him, "disunion of the citizens is, indeed, the 
worst evil in a city ; for what mortal pestilence can bring upon 
them greater damage than discord ? This not only precipitates 
noble and illustrious families to ruin, but exterminates powerful 
and famous cities ; nor is there any principality or kingdom so 
stable or well founded that it may not be torn up by factions." 

If this is true, it is still an argument against constituting a 
city in such a manner that it must necessarily be destroyed by 
factions. 

" All things are maintained and increased by concord, and go 
to ruin by disunion; union brings victory, and discord defeat; 
enemies are easily resisted when you agree among yourselves; 
when members are disunited from the body, the person loses 
both strength and beauty. When Cyrus divided the Euphrates 
into three hundred rivulets, a child might ford the largest of 
them, though his favorite had been drowned in attempting the 
united water. Italy, the lady and the queen of the world, after 
infinite conflagrations, sacks, slaughters, pillages, subversions, 
and ruins, has finally been degraded, by the discord of her sons, 
into a servant and a handmaid." 

* « Carroceio." 

432 ON GOVERNMENT. 

All this may be true ; but how long will republicans be ibe 
dupes of their own simplicity! how long will they depend upon 
sermons, prayers, orations, declamations, in honor of brotherly 
love, and against discords, when they know that, without human 
means, it is but tempting and insulting Providence, to depend 
upon them for the happiness of life, or the liberty of society ! 

" The city of Cremona, to come to the present point, by its 
discord and divisions, suffered intolerable evils, and ultimately 
lost her liberty, falling under the power and domination of 
Uberto Pallavicino ; who, taking the opportunity from the con- 
troversies, which went on every day increasing among citizens, 
disunited and divided into divers factions of new city and old, 
gentlemen and common people, Guelphs and GhibeUines, of 
Capclletti, of Barbarasi, and of Maltraversi, in the year 1251, 
from podesta, made himself absolute lord, patron, and master, 
of the commonwealth, by the assistance of the GhibeUines, who 
in the old city were very numerous and powerful. 

" Sozzo Vistarino, a principal nobleman of the city of Lodi, 
maintained, as a guard of his person, a company of soldiers 
from Cremona ; but the whole family of Vistarino being soon 
afterwards banished and expelled by the people of Lodi, Pope 
Innocent endeavored to negotiate their restoration. But the 
people would accept of no conditions of peace until Milan and 
Cremona made war upon them, and unitedly compelled them 
to receive the Vistarini into their city. At the end of the same 
year the Marquis Pallavicino, at the requisition of the people of 
Placentia to oppose their noble exiles, went, with many of Cre- 
mona, to the siege of Rivergaro, to which those nobles had 
retired. 

" The Cremonians about Rivergaro, in 1252, compelled the 
noble exiles of Placentia to surrender, and that castle was 
destroyed, with some other great places. Pallavicino, not con- 
tent with having made himself master of Cremona, or rather of 
the old city, aspired to the dominion of Placentia, and to this 
end gave trouble enough to the podesta of that city. While 
Pallavicino was master of the old city, his rivals Bosio Doara, 
first, and Azzolino of the same family, were successively made 
lords of the new city. 

" Uberto Pallavicino, in 1253, was created by the Placentians 
podesta of that city ; but as the affairs of Cremona were in a 

CREMONA. 433 

critical and fluctuating posture, he left a vice-podest^ at Pla- 
centia. 

'^ The Marquis Pallavicino, having arranged affairs as he liked 
in Cremona, returned to Placentia in 1254, and, by favor of the 
Ghibellines, was created perpetual governor and lord of that city. 

" 1256. XJberto Pallavicino, with the Ghibellines of Cremona 
and Placentia, went to the assistance of Ezzelino of Romagna, 
the most cruel of tyrants, and confederating with him against 
the Mantuans, consigned the whole territory to fire and sword, 
and laid siege to the city for three weeks, and would have taken 
it, if the Marquis of Este, and the Bolognese, had not come to 
its relief. 

" 1258. A kind of triumvirate was formed between Ezzelino, 
Pallavicino, and Doara, who aspired at the domination of Lom- 
bardy. 1259. The triumvirate disagreed, and a new league was 
formed between Pallavicino, Doara, and Cremona, on the one 
part, with Azzo, Marquis of Este, and Ancona, Louis, Count of 
Verona, and the cities of Ferrara, and Padua, on the other part, 
against Ezzelino." 

The particulars of the war, and the success of Pallavicino 
against Ezzelino, the conquest of Bresca, and the subsequent 
persecutions of the Guelph party in that kingdom, may be omit- 
ted; but in the year 1260, the rage of factions and seditions 
were so distressing to all the cities, that there arose a new spe- 
cies of pilgrimage and penitence, whose object was to restore 
peace among the parties, and obtain the return of the exiles to 
their proper cities. The number of these pious and charitable 
people grew to be prodigious in Tuscany, Bomagna, and Lom- 
bardy, and very austere were their penitences, and very affect- 
ing their cries of " Mercy ! mercy ! " 

" Pallavicino was alarmed, and prohibited, under severe penal- 
ties, these kind of pilgrimages in Cremona and Bresca, because 
he feared they would prove the ruin of those seditions and divi- 
sions by which he maintained the domination of those cities. 
He grew proud and insolent, plundered the bishopric, and drove 
the bishop into exile. 

" 1261. Pallavicino having recovered the city of Placentia by 
means of the Ghibellines, went, with a noble company of Cre- 
monians, and established a government, making podesta Visconti 
Pallavicino, a son of one of his brothers. 

VOL. V. 37 B 2 

434 ON GOVERNMENT. 

^ 1263. Grandione Doara, a noble Cremonese, was, in the name 
of Pallavicino, podesta of Placentia ; but the Guelph exiles mak- 
ing an insurrection, he was driven out with his garrison. Palla- 
vicino began at this time to be uncommonly jealous of Bosio 
Doara. 

"1264. Pallavicino fell into a controversy with Philip della 
Torre, and detained in Cremona all the merchants of Milan, 
with their effects, pretending that Philip was his debtor, for hav- 
ing given him assistance, with his Cremonese soldiers, to reco- 
ver the castle of Arona, occupied by Otho Visconti, archbishop 
of Milan. 

" Pallavicino, in 1266, grew odious, and the factions of the 
Barbarasi, as well as the Ghibellines, had plundered the church, 
BO that the city was laid under an interdict ; and the pope's nun- 
cios had influence enough with the people to produce a revolu- 
tion, a deposition of Pallavicino, and a restoration of all the 
exiles, by the general council. 

" 1267. After the deposition of Pallavicino, Bosio Doara occu- 
pied the government of Cremona, but did not retain it long; 
for, upon the return of Amatino de gli Amati, the proper head 
of the contrary faction, from exile, Doara, with his followers,' 
was driven out of the city ; but he only went to Placentia, and 
there held the dominion, and appointed to the government a 
podesta, Gerardino Doara, a relation. 

'^1269. Uberto Pallavicino having lost the lordship of the 
principal cities of Lombardy, died miserably in Sisaligo, his 
castle, in which he was besieged by the Parmesans and Pla- 
centians. 

" 1270. Bosio Doara, with the Ghibelline exiles from Cremona, 
went in support of Napoleon della Torre, against his enemies at 
Lodi. This year they began in Cremona to create captains of 
the people. 

"1273. Pontio Amato, a citizen of Cremona, being podesta 
of Milan, was killed in a battle between the Torriani, and Otho 
Visconti, Archbishop of Milan. 

" 1278. The Torriani having taken Crema, set fire to it. The 
Cremonese of the Guelph faction gave assistance to those of 
Torre, against Otho and the other Visconti, with whom was 
Bosio Doara of the Ghibelline faction, who prepared employ- 
ment enough to the Torriani. 

CREMONA. 435 

^ 1281. The Cremonese and Parmesans, desirous of effacing 
the memory of the injniies done to each other in times past, 
restored their respective triumphal chariots, which had, in former 
days, been taken. Ghreat joy was discovered upon this occasion, 
and the two cities entered into a strict confederation with the 
Modenese and Reggians, and the Marquis of Este. The princi- 
pal article of this league was, that they should assist the inhabit- 
ants of Lodi, who were molested by the Milanese, who favored 
the party of the Visconti, of which the Marquis of Monferrato 
was captain. Bosio Doara, and Grabrino di Monza, who were 
also of the faction of the Visconti, entered into Crema with four 
hundred soldiers on horseback, and as many on foot, the Guelphs 
having fled. 

" 1282. The Torriani, being exiled from Lodi, took refuge in 
Cremona, and at the same time Bosio Doara, sallying out from 
Crema, took by stratagem Soncino and Romanengo, castles in 
the jurisdiction of Cremona. The Cremonese of the Guelph 
faction, then dominant, fearing that their affairs would grow 
worse, assembled their army, and called a diet of the cities their 
confederates. The ambassadors therefore of Placentia, Reggio, 
Parma, Modena, Brescia, Bologna, and Ferrara, assembled at 
Cremona ; and the Marquis of Este, wrote that he would come 
in person. Florence, and the other cities of Tuscany, offered to 
lend their aid ; the same offer was made by John Appiano, pro- 
curator of Romagna. They sent also a noble embassy to the 
pope, to inform him of the situation of affairs in Lombardy, 
and in how much danger the cities affectionate to his highness 
were. Otho Visconti perceiving these movements, entered into 
a closer league with the Marquis of Monferrato, and they, col- 
lecting as many armed men as they could, marched out with the 
triumphal chariot of Milan, and united with Bosio Doara. The 
Cremonese conducted their army, now very powerful by the 
additions of the confederates, partly to Castellione, and partiy 
to Pademo, castles of Cremona; and while the two armies stood 
fronting each other, they began to treat of peace, which was 
finally concluded, by means of the ambassadors of Placentia 
and Brescia. The conditions of this peace were, that all the 
cities should expel each other's exiles. Otho Visconti easily 
complied with the conditions of this convention, because he had 
already conceived no small jealousy of the Marquis of Monfer- 

436 ON GOVERNMENT. 

rato, and a most violent hatred against Bosio Doara, who, being 
excluded from this confederation and peace, and having too much 
confidence in himself, refused to surrender Soncino and Boma- 
nengo. The Cremonese therefore called another diet, who sent 
an army and expelled him, not only from those two castles, but 
from Crema. William and Ugolino Rossi, noble and most pow- 
erful citizens of Parma, having contracted marriage, the first with 
Donella Carrara, of the signori of Padua, and the other with 
Elena Cavalcabo of the family of the Marquis of Viadana, these 
cities had made peace, and were full of rejoicings on the union. 

"1285. William, Marquis of Monferrato, having made war 
upon Otho Visconti, Archbishop of Milan, the Cremonese sent 
some companies of soldiers to his assistance. At this time the 
triumphal chariot began to be disused, as very inconvenient in 
battle ; they retained only the general standard in white, with a 
red cross, to which Otho, who was the first not to use it, added 
the image of St Ambrose. 

**A peace was concluded, in 1286, between the Visconti, the 
archbishop, and the exiles of Milan. The numerous family of 
Sommi had a confirmation of certain rights, anciently granted 
to the family by the Bishop of Cremona. 

"A new confederation was formed, in 1288, between Otho 
Visconti, Archbishop of Milan, and the cities of Cremona, Pavia, 
Placentia, Brescia, Genoa, and Asto, against the Marquis of Mon- 
ferrato ; but the marquis, having made himself sovereign lord of 
Pavia, a new diet was assembled at Cremona, and another con- 
federation formed. 

" Matthew Visconti, who had been declared imperial vicar of 
the city of Milan, by Adolphus, King of the Romans, called a 
diet in that city, to deliberate on a war against the Torriani. 
The ambassadors of Cremona were there, and promised to send 
their forces to the aid of Visconti ; but the Torriani made no 
movement, and Visconti did not long hesitate to break with 
Cremona and Lodi ; for, impatient to enrich his followers, he 
began to discover an intention to impose taxes on those cities. 
The Torriani, too, began to complain, and were supported by the 
patriarch of Aquileia ; the Torriani came to Cremona, and began 
to prepare war against Matthew Visconti. 

« 1295. The Torriani removed from Cremona to Lodi, where 
they met many of their friends, and soon received the news that 

CREMONA. 437 

Matthew Visconti had taken Castellione from the Cremonese ; 
the Toiriani, with some soldiers from Cremona and Lodi, and a 
gross multitude of Milanese exiles, their adherents, went to meet 
Visconti, but were attacked and routed by him. 

" 1299. The ambassadors of Cremona, of the Marquis of Mon- 
ferrato, of the Marquis d'Este, of Novara, of Casale, of Bergamo, 
and of Vercelli, all congregated at Pavia, and made a league 
against Matthew Visconti. The Cremonese, not long afterwards, 
with the Marquis d'Este, were routed by Visconti. This year, 
however, a peace was concluded between Milan and Cremona, 
in which no mention is made of Visconti. 

"A league was made, in 1302, between Cremona, Placentia, 
and Pavia, and they chose for their captain-general Alberto 
Scotto, then Lord of Placentia ; these having hired a good body 
of soldiers, and united with the Torriani, went under the walls 
of Milan. Matthew Visconti, seeing that he was hated by his 
fellow-citizens, went out of Milan, and renounced all his author- 
ity to Scotto ; and while they were treating of peace, the Torri- 
ani entered Milan, and drove off Matthew and all his partisans. 
After having expelled the Visconti from Milan, a new congress 
met at Placentia, of ambassadors from Cremona, Milan, Pavia, 
Lodi, Como, Novara, Vercelli, Tortona, Crema, Casale, and Ber- 
gamo, and concluded to hire, at the common expense, and for 
the common defence, a thousand horse and a thousand foot. 

^<A tumult in Parma, in 1303, was occasioned by an attempt 
of Giberto di Correggio to restore the Parmesan exiles. Giacopo 
Cavalcabo, Lord of Viadana, Amato, Persico, and Sommo, all 
noble citizens of Cremona, and old friends of Correggio, trans- 
ported themselves to Parma, were elected arbitrators, and soon 
decided the controversy in favor of their friend Correggio. This 
year controversies and enmity arose between the Cremonese, and 
Alberto Scotto, Lord of Placentia. 

<^ There was a diet of confederate cities, in 1304, against Al- 
berto Scotto. A powerful army was collected, and the Marquis 
of Monferrato and the Marquis of Saluzzo were created cap- 
tains ; and having passed the Po, and taken many castles in the 
neighborhood, laid siege to Placentia ; but the Cremonians and 
Lodians, considering the danger they might be exposed to, if 
that noble and powerful city should fall into the hands of the 
Marquis of Monferrato, began to withdraw their troops. They 

37' 

438 ON GOVERNMENT. 

were followed by those of Pavia, and the others, and the army 
was dispersed, and Placentia delivered from the siege. A new 
league was made against Scotto, the head of which was Vis- 
conti Pallavicino; and the next year the Torriani made them- 
selves masters of Placentia. 

^^ 1307. Giacopo Cavalcabo, a most noble citizen of Cremona, 
and Lord of Viadana, a man of ingenuity and an elevated spirit, 
was created podesta of Milan. The Fulgosi, Scotti, and Pala- 
strelli, noble families of Placentia, with the assistance of William 
Cavalcabo and the Cremonians, expelled Lando and Visconti 
Pallavicino from Placentia. 

"1308. Guido della Torre, Lord of Milan, made Persico, a 
noble Cremonian, podesta of that city. This year a controversy 
arising between the Parmesans and Giberto di Correggio, the 
Rossi, the Lupi, and other noble exiles, who had taken refuge in 
Cremona, were summoned by their countrymen to return ; and 
they instantly obeyed, and carried with them the assistance of 
Tignaca Pallavicino, who at that time was podestdi of Cremona, 
and the Cremonian soldiers, and having driven Correggio from 
Parma, Giacobo Cavalcab6 was created podesta of that city. 
A confederation was also made between Guido della Torre, and 
the city of Cremona, to which Lodi, Bergamo, Placentia, and 
Crema acceded. 

" 1309. Giuliano Sommo, a noble Cremonian, was made po- 
desta, and captain of the commons and people of Placentia, for 
months, according to the custom of those times. 

" Henry VII. the Emperor came, at the end of 1310, into Italy 
to be crowned, and he called together all the Ghibellines of Lom- 
bardy, among whom Matthew Visconti held the first place. At 
that time the authority and influence of William Cavalcabo, 
brother of Giacopo, was so great in Cremona, that all public 
affairs were administered according to his will; but as these 
brothers were the heads of the Guelph faction they were little 
friendly to the emperor. 

" Cremona, in 1311, tasted more than ever the bitter fruits of 
faction, civil discord, and unbalanced government, with which, 
however, it had been vexed and distressed for many years ; it 
was now, besides infinite proscriptions of property and slaughter 
of citizens, upon the brink of total ruin from Henry. Fachetto, 
Marquis of Canossa, had been sent vnth the title of imperial 

CREMONA. 439 

vicar, bnt had been refused and expelled by the Guelphs, who 
then had the domination in Cremona. The emperor's indigna- 
tion was excited, and he gave orders to Matthew Yisconti to pass 
the Adda, and assault Cremona with an army of Ghibellines, 
who, collecting together from every quarter, were increased to a 
great number. The emperor himself, with the empress his con- 
sort, departing from Milan, removed to Lodi. Gulielmo Caval- 
cabo, to whom the absolute dominion of Cremona had been 
given by the Guelphs, perceiving such formidable preparations 
for war, knowing his own city to be nearly divided into equal 
parties, and having little confidence in his own faction, quitted 
the city, and went to Viadana, followed by the Picenardi, Sommi, 
and Persichi, with many others, nobles and populars, his adher- 
ents. And the city would have been wholly evacuated and 
abandoned, if the citizens had not been dissuaded by Sopra- 
monte Amato, who went into the middle of the multitude, ex- 
horted them to stay, and throw themselves on the mercy of the 
emperor, whom he painted as pious and clement, and offered 
himself as one of the principal intercessors. The people being 
comforted by his speech, it was ordered that two hundred of the 
principal men should go to meet Henry, who, hearing of the 
flight of Cavalcab6 and his adherents, removed towards Cremona, 
and was already arrived at Paderno, eight miles distant from 
that city ; there he was found by the Cremonians, who had been 
sent with Sopramonte Amato ; and, in miserable habits, with 
their heads uncovered, with naked feet, and cords about their 
necks, when they came before the emperor, they fell upon their 
knees, and cried out, * Mercy ! ' {misericordia ! ) and, with tears 
and lamentations, endeavored to recommend themselves and 
their country to the clemency of the conqueror. Such a specta- 
cle of misery might have moved to compassion the heart of 
cruelty itself ; it had not, however, the force to move in the small- 
est degree to mercy the most inhuman soul of Henry, who, with 
a cruelty more than barb£urous, rolling his eyes another way, that 
he might not see them, commanded, with a voice of ferocity, that 
they should be all sent to prison ; which was instantly executed 
by his ministers, and they were soon after put to death. 

" Henry entered Cremona, assembled the council, and ordered 
that the walls of the city should be thrown down. This order 
was executed. And Henry desired to have the houses de- 

440 ON GOVERNMENT. 

molished ; bat at the prayer of some of his lords and barons, be 
was diverted from this malicious purpose ; but they could not 
hinder many from being burned by Cremonian citizens, who had 
been exiles for being of the Ghibelline faction, and who sought 
every cruel method of revenge for the injuries they had received. 
The city was therefore filled with misery ; the Germans and 
Italians all robbed alike ; and nothing was heard but violence, 
murder, rapine, and extortion. The most rich were sure to be 
declared guilty, and their estates to be confiscated. At last, the 
emperor came to the public palace, and caused a most severe 
sentence to be published, in which he condemned the Cremo- 
uians to pay a hundred thousand golden florins, confiscated the 
public revenue, and ordered that the walls and bulwarks of the 
city should be ruined, and the ditches filled up. These hard 
conditions were accepted, and the fulfilment of them sworn to 
by Frederick Artezaga, syndic of the commons of Cremona, in 
whom was placed the government of the faction of Ghibellines, 
favored and exalted by the emperor, who left one of his vicars 
and departed. The Guelphs, thus ill treated, now concerted 
another confederation, and called in to their aid Robert, King of 
Apulia. Into this league all the cities of Romagna and Tus- 
cany entered. The principal were Florence, Lucca, and Siena ; 
and of those of Lombardy, Bologna, Reggio, and Parma, whose 
sovereign lord was Giberto di Correggio. The Torriani and the 
Cavalcabos, with the rest of the Milanese and Cremonian exiles, 
joined the confederacy ; and all these united, after having made 
themselves masters of the bridge of Dossolo over the P6, took 
also Casalmaggiore, driving out the Ghibellines. 

William Cavalcabo, having learned that John Castiglione, 
Podesta of Cremona, in the name of the emperor, was gone with 
the militia to Pozzobaronzo, a place subject to the Cremonians, 
in which were some Guelphs, taking advantage of this opportu- 
nity, flew with wonderful rapidity to Cremona, and entering the 
city by the gate deUa Mosa^ arrived without opposition to the 
piazza, where he was encountered by Galeazzo Visconti and 
Manfredino Pallavicino ; but these not being able to sustain the 
impetuosity of the soldiers of Cavalcabo, not without a great 
slaughter of Ghibellines, among whom Giacomo Redenasco was 
slain, they betook themselves to flight, and Galeazzo saved him- 
self in Crema. Soon afterwards, as an insurrection was expected 

CREMONA. 441 

in Cremona, Giberto di Reggio went thither from Parma, where 
he was received with tokens of the greatest joy ; and having 
quieted with great prudence the controversies, he established 
Cavalcabo in the lordship of the city, making Quirico Sanvitale, 
his son-in-law, podesta. The inhabitants of Soncino having also 
expelled the imperial governor, surrendered to Cavalcabo, who, 
fearing that the enemy would encamp at that post, suddenly 
went thither with Venturino Benzone, head of the Guelphs of 
Crema, and with Venturino Fondulo, one of the principal men 
of Soncino. The Barbuoi and other families of Soncino, of the 
opposite faction, having conveyed intelligence of this to the 
emperor, he gave Soncino to the Count Guarnero, his general in 
Lombardy, who went and laid siege to the place. There were 
in Soncino, besides the Terrazzani, the Guelphs of Cremona, 
Crema, and Bergamo ; and with the Count Guarnero, besides 
the German troops, were the Ghibellines of Cremonsi, Bergamo, 
and Crema. The inhabitants of Soncino defended themselves 
on the first assault with great activity, encouraged by the valor 
of Cavalcabo, Benzone, and Fondulo; but, seized with a panic, 
upon some advantage gained by Galeazzo Visconti, the soldiers, 
who came to their assistance from Cremona, shamefully aban- 
doned their defence, and retreated into the houses. Cavalcabo, 
seeing such cowardice or treachery, consulted with Benzone to 
get out of that place as soon as possible. Collecting their sol- 
diers in a compact body, they rushed into the midst of the enemy, 
combating with wonderful intrepidity ; but Cavalcabo being 
killed, and Benzone and Venturino Fondulo, with his two sons, 
made prisoners, the Ghibellines remained victorious. Benzone, 
falling into the hands of the Ghibellines of Crema, was misera- 
bly assassinated ; and Fondulo, with his two sons, by the orders 
of Guarnero, was hanged before the gate of Soncino. The 
news of this defeat filled Cremona with terror and confusion. 
But Giberto Correggio, with a company of Parmesans coming 
in, their fears subsided, and the enemy having intelligence of this 
succor, had not the courage to approach the Vails. The Cre- 
monians, to recompense the benefit received firom Correggio, 
gave him the government of the city for five years. The Guelphs 
took Castellione, in which was Manfredino Pallavicino, who was 
made prisoner. And Castelnovo, the mouth of the Adda to the 
Guelphs, was taken by the Ghibellines. 

442 ON GOYEBNMENT. 

"Passarino della Torre had the goyemment of Cremona in 
1313, with the title of Vicar of Robert, King of Apulia. 

'^Giacopo Cavalcabo, Marquis of Viadana, was, in 1315, by 
the common consent of the people, elected to the government of 
Cremona. Ponzino de' Ponzoni, his brother-in-law, whether 
from private envy or republican jealousy, was enraged beyond 
all measure at this, and he stirred up insurrections against Ca- 
valcabo, many other noble families, the Ponzoni, the Guazoni, 
the Amati, and the Picenardi, who went out of Cremona, and 
made a league with the Visconti, and occasioned much mischief 
and ruin to their country, against which they took up arms. 

^ Ponzino Ponzone and all his adherents, having made a 
league with Cane della Scala, Lord of Verona, and with Passa- 
rino Buona-cossi, Lord of Mantua, came to Cremona, and 
laid siege to it ; but by the valor of those within they were 
repulsed ; yet they did much damage in the territory. A peace, 
or the appearance of a peace, between those in the city and the 
exiles, was then made; and, by common consent, Egidiolo Pipe- 
raro was deputed to the government of the city, with the title 
of Abbate of the People ; and then the Ponzoni, with their par- 
tisans, returned to the city. 

" The whole city, in 1317, arose in arms, excited by Giacopo 
and Luigi Cavalcabo, and Gregorio Sommo, and others, their 
partisans of the Guelph faction, with whom were the Brusati, 
Lords of Brescia, with all their followers. These entering the 
great piazza of Cremona, slew Egidiolo Piperaro, who had 
mounted the rostrum to still the tumult Leonard and Bac- 
canino Picenardi, though one of them was a brother-in-law of 
Louis Cavalcabo, were both assassinated; the Pedecani, Ma- 
lombra, Alemanni, and others innumerable, both of the noble 
and popular families of the Ghibelline faction were murdered ; 
and the whole faction was, in fact, driven out of the city, Pon- 
zone taking his flight with some others of the principal citizens 
who fled with him. He was received into Soncino by Philip 
Barbuo, and soon obtained Castellione, and all the Guelphs were 
driven out of both these places. Ponzone, who had first holden 
with the Guelph party, now conjured up another faction, by the 
name of the Maltraversi, of whom he was the head," (for every 
faction had its podest^, litUe council, and great council, its king, 
lords, and commons,) <^ and in a short time made himself master 

CREMONA. 443 

of almost all the Cremonese territories in the country. Finally, 
the Ghibellines and Maltraversi made a coalition, and constitut- 
ing Ponzino their head, entered into close alliance with Cane 
della Scala, Lord of Verona, and Passarino Buonacossi, Lord 
of Mantua, and with Matthew Visconti, Vicar- General of Milan. 
These came, therefore, to the assistance of the Ghibellines and 
Maltraversi, against the Guelphs, in Cremona, Cane, and Passa- 
rino, with their people, and Matthew sent tliem Luchino, his 
son, with the Milanese cavalry and infantry, with whom were 
some companies of Pavians, Placentians, Parmesans, Berga- 
mans, and others, from Coma, Novara, Vercelli, Crema, and 
Monferrato. All these people, uniting together, encamped 
against Cremona. The siege continued twenty-eight days, 
without any event of consequence, excepting their depredations 
upon the territory in the country, and destruction of all the 
estates of the Guelphs. 

" 1318. Ponzone, having made a breach in the wall, entered 
the city with his Ghibellines and Maltraversi, and reached the 
piazza without being discovered. The Guelphs, when they saw 
him, were astonished and fled, and with them Giacopo Caval- 
cabo and Gregorio Sommo. Ponzone was proclaimed Lord of 
Cremona by the Ghibellines and Maltraversi. At the same 
time, the partisans of Cavalcabo took Robecco, and went to 
Olmeneta, eight miles from Cremona, and ruined a certain tower 
of the Zucchelli, in which was Niccol6 Borgo, with some others 
of the faction of Ponzone, who, upon hearing of the destruction 
of his friends, went with a body of soldiers to those places, and 
made much havoc among the people of Cavalcabo. 

<<Giberto Correggio, captain-general of the Guelph league, 
with Cavalcab6, and all those of their faction, broke down the 
walls of the city in 1319, entered, and by force of arms drove 
out the Ghibellines, and Ponzino Ponzone, with his league of 
Guelph Maltraversi. 

" This Ponzone appears to have joined any side, as his circum- 
stances gave him opportunity ; for in 1321, he made a coalition 
with Graleazzo Visconti, son of Matthew, and Lord of Placentia, 
entered, with the Ghibelline faction, by force of arms, into Cre- 
mona, and drove away the Cavalcabos, with all the real Guelphs, 
their partisans. There was afterwards published a proclamation, 
in the name of Galeazzo, that it should be lawful for all, of 

444 ON GOVERNMENT. 

whatever faction, to inhabit the city of Cremona, excepting the 
Cavalcabos, and certain other citizens, suspected of having con- 
certed a plot against Galeazzo and his partisans. 

"1324. Alberto Scotto, of Placentia, head of the Guelphs, 
took the castle of Malamorte, which was on the bank of the Po, 
directly opposite to the city of Cremona, and more than three 
hundred Ghibellines who were within were slain. Raimondo 
Cardona was sent by the pope, John XXIL, with a powerful 
army, to the assistance of the Guelphs, who, assembling all of 
his faction in Lombardy, went against Galeazzo Visconti, and 
shutting him up in Milan, laid siege to it 

"1327. Louis IV., of Bavaria, set up an anti-pope against 
John. 

" 1329. Louis confirmed to the Cremonians all the privileges 
granted to them by his predecessors. 

" 1330. Guido de Camilla, imperial vicar, had the government 
of the city, and a truce was established between the community 
of Cremona and Gregory de' Sommi, by which it appears, that 
Cremona was not at that time subjected to the Visconti. The 
city was governed by Ghibellines, who were the majority, or pre« 
dominant party ; and Gregory Sommo was one of the principal 
heads of the Guelph party. 

" 1335. Azzo Visconti, son of Graleazzo, having made a peace 
with the Cremonians, gave them the dominion of Crema, which, 
after the death of Pope John, had subjected itself to the Vis- 
conti. This year, according to some historians, the lordship of 
Cremona was given by its inhabitants to the same Azzo Vis- 
conti. 

" 1339. Azzo Visconti, Lord of Cremona, died without sons, 
and to him succeeded in the dominion of Milan and of Cre- 
mona, Luchino Visconti, and John his brother, who, from Bishop 
of Novam, was a little afterwards made Archbishop of Milan, 
so that he became in that city lord both in spiritual and temporal 
affairs. Cremona enjoyed a state of tranquillity under the joint 
lordship of Luchino and John the archbishop. 

" Luchino Visconti died in 1348, and for his rare and excel- 
lent qualities very much regretted by the people his subjects. 
He left no son, and therefore the Archbishop obtained the sole 
lordship of Milan and Cremona, and of many other cities ac- 
quired by the virtue of Luchino. John and Luchino had ob- 

CREMONA. 445 

tained firom Benedict XIL, pope, the title of Vicars of the Holy 
Apostolical See. 

<< 1350. Bernabo and Graleazzo, brothers of the Visconti, ne- 
phews of John, the Archbishop and Lord of Milan and Cremona, 
both married ; the first to Regina della Scala, daughter of the 
Lord of Verona and Vicenza; and Galeazzo married a sister 
of the Duke of Savoy, named Bianca. 

" John Visconti, Archbishop and Lord of Milan, after having 
greatly amplified his dominions, died in 1354, leaving as his 
heirs Matthew, Bernabo, and Graleazzo, sons of Stephen his 
brother. The extent of absolute dominion already acquired by 
this family over the ruins of so many commonwealths, ruined by 
their unbalanced factions, appears by the division made upon 
this occasion. To Matthew were assigned Placentia, Lodi, Bo- 
logna, Massa, Lugo, Bobio, Pontremolo, and Borgo San Donino ; 
to Galeazzo, the cities of Como, Novara, VerceUi, Asti, Alba, 
Alessandria, Tortomi, Castelnuovo di Scrivia, Bassignana, Vige- 
vano, St Angelo, Montebuono, and Mairano ; to Bernabo were 
given Cremona, Bergamo, Brescia, Crema, Valcamonica, Lo- 
nato, with all the river dal Lago di Garda, and other places. 
The lordship of Milan and Grenoa remained to them all united. 

" 1355. The Emperor, Charles IV., came into Italy to receive 
the imperial crown, and was crowned with the crown of iron 
at Milan, by Robert Visconti, archbishop of that city, and he 
there created knights, John Graleazzo, a boy of two years old, 
who was afterwards the first Duke of Milan ; and Marco, who 
was not two months old, both sons of Galeazzo Visconti. The 
Emperor gave also the title of Imperial Vicars in Italy to the 
three brothers, Graleazzo, Matthew, and Bernabo. The domi- 
nion of Cremona remained alone in Bernab6. 

"1365. Bernabo married Verde, his daughter, to Lupoldo, 
brother of the Archduke of Austria ; and the wedding was cele- 
brated at Milan, before a congress of ambassadors from Cremona 
and all the other cities subject to him ; and he gave his daughter 
a dower of a hundred thousand florins. 

" 1368. Violante, daughter of Graleazzo, was married to a son 
of the King of England, with another dower of a hundred thou- 
sand florins, and an annual pension of twenty-four thousand 
more, assigned upon some city of Piedmont 

"1372. Isabella, the first wife of John Graleazzo, Conte di 

VOL. V. 38 

446 ON GOVERNMENT. 

Virtu, the first-bom son of Galeazzo Visconti, before mentioned, 
died, and left an only daughter, called Yalentina. At this time 
Bernabo gave great signs of an inhuman and cruel nature. 

"1377, La Verde, daughter of Galeazzo, was married to a 
son of the Marquis of Monferrato, who was assassinated by his 
subjects. She was then married by her father, with a dispensa- 
tion from the pope, to a son of Bernab6. 

" 1378. Graleazzo died, and left two sons, John Galeazzo, Conte 
di Virtu, and Azzo. John Galeazzo, who was the eldest, suc- 
ceeded his father in the dominion of the state. 

" 1380. Catherine Visconti, daughter of Bernabo, was, by her 
father, married to John Galeazzo, Conte di Virtu, her cousin, 
with a dispensation from the pope. 

" 1381. Azzo died, brother of John Graleazzo, to whom alone 
remained the government of their paternal state. 

" 1385. Cremona gave itself voluntarily to John Galeazzo Vis- 
conti, Conte di Virtu, under whose dominioh came all the other 
cities and places subject to Bernabo, his uncle and father-in-law; 
Bernabo having been made a prisoner, with Ludovico and Ro- 
dolfo, his sons, by the same John Graleazzo, who, having learned 
from his wife, the daughter of Bernabo, that her father had seve- 
ral times attempted to put him to death, in order to rule alone, 
resolved to relieve himself from anxiety and suspicion. To this 
end he went to Pavia, and affected a retired life, and pretended 
to go a pilgrimage to St. Mary del Monte. Bernabo, with his two 
sons, went to meet him, and all three were taken by the soldiers 
of John Galeazzo, and confined in the castle of Trezzo, where 
they all died of poison, as it is supposed, sent them by his ne- 
phew and son-in-law. John Galeazzo was immediately accepted 
by the Milanese as their lord ; and the Cremonians spontaneously 
gave themselves up to Giacopo Virino, the captain and counsel- 
lor of the same John Galeazzo, and soon after sent sixteen am- 
bassadors to Milan with a capitulation, which was accepted and 
confirmed by him, article by article, with some limitations. The 
first article was, that the city of Cremona gave itself voluntarily 
and by a common concord of all the people. 

"1388. Bianca, mother of John Galeazzo, died, and Valen- 
tina his daughter, by Isabella, his first wife, was married to Louis 
Duke of Orleans, brother of Charles VI., King of France ; and 
this year was bom John Maria, son of John Galeazzo, by Cathe- 
rine his consort. 

CREMONA. 447 

<* Philip Maria, second son of John Graleazzo, was bora in 
MUan, in 1392. 

" John Graleazzo, CJonte di Virtu, obtained the title of Duke 
of Milan, of Wenceslaus the emperor. He received all the en- 
signs of the ducal dignity, and that with admirable pomp, before 
a congress of the ambassadors from all the cities subject to him, 
among whom were those from Cremona, those from Venice, 
Florence, the Marquis di Ferrato, the Lords of Forli and Urbino, 
and the sons of the Lords of Padua, with a multitude of others. 
He gave to the Emperor an hundred thousand ducats for the 
ducal dignity. In 1399, the Duke obtained the domination of 
the city of Pisa ; in 1400, that of Perugia ; and in 1402, Bo- 
logna. 

'^ 1403. Factions arose again in this province, out of which 
were engendered seditions, civil discords, and rebellions, by which 
John Maria, second Duke of Milan, lost the ample dominion that 
had been left him by his father. Seditions arose in Milan, in which 
they expelled the ducal lieutenant ; which, being understood by 
the other cities, they all arose, driving off the ducal officers. 
John Castiglione, a Milanese, was then in Cremona, with the 
title of Ducal Vicar, but he was now expelled by the fury of the 
people ; and, at the same time, John Ponzone, and Ugolino Ca- 
valcabo. Marquis of Viadana, most noble and powerful citizens, 
and heads of the factions of Guelphs and Maltraversi, drove the 
GhibeUines from the city, and made themselves masters of it. 
There followed, at this time, innumerable homicides and burn- 
ings of houses, both in the city and country, there not being a 
village in which there were not the two parties." 

But passing over the horrid detail of particulars, we may pass 
to the year 1404, when " Ugolino Cavalcabo, having seized the 
dominion of Cremona, conceived suspicions of some of the prin- 
cipal citizens, and caused their heads to be struck off, as guilty 
of plotting against him, and endeavoring to restore the city to 
the duke. Tyranny and cruelty are always the effect of such a 
state of affairs in all parties ; and the Duke John Maria grew 
every day more cruel. He imprisoned his own mother, Cathe- 
rine Visconti, in the castle of Monza, and caused her to be there 
strangled. Ugolino, coming to battle near Brescia with Estore 
Visconti, was taken prisoner with Marsilio and Caesar Caval- 
cabo and many other citizens of their faction. Ugolino was 

448 ON GOVERNMENT. 

conducted to Soncino, and then to Milan, where he remained 
many months in prison; and Cabrino Fondulo, his captain, 
saved himself in that conflict by flight to Cremona. The capti- 
vity of Ugolino being known, Charles Cavalcabo, of the same 
family, seized the government of Cremona. 

" Francesco Gasoni, a knight, and heretofore podesta of Cre- 
mona for Ugolino Cavalcab6, and afterwards made captain- 
general in that city, by Charles his successor, was beheaded for 
being suspected of holding a correspondence and concerting a 
conspiracy with Estore Visconti. A league was published this 
year between Charles Cavalcabo, Pandolfo Malatesta, Vignati, 
Lord of Lodi, and Bartolomeo and Paolo Benzoni, Lords of 
Crema ; and Charles took Piadena, whose citadel was suiren- 
dered to him by William Picenardo. 

" 1406. The Visconti castle was this year fortified by Charles 
Cavalcabo, and Ugolino escaping from prison, went to Mancas- 
torma to find Cabrino Fondulo, who came with him to Cre- 
mona, to enter into the castle, in which was Charles, who had an 
understanding with Fondulo. Ugolino was therefore received 
into the castle, but his foot was scarcely within the gate before 
he was made prisoner; for these people were not much more 
inclined to surrender their power to their own famUies than to 
strangers. A little afterwards Fondulo, having fraudulently 
invited to supper with him, in the castle of Mancastorma, 
Charles and Andreaso Cavalcabo, made them both prisoners, 
and cruelly murdered them. He came soon after to Cremona 
with many armed men, entered the castle and the other for- 
tresses, and made himself master of the city, and of all the lands 
and castles possessed by Cavalcabo, except Viadana, which 
would not submit to him. Cabrino, little grateful to that 
family by whom he had been elevated to an honorable rank, 
defaced all the arms of the Cavalcabos which appeared in public 
places, and miserably murdered Ugolino, by whom he had been 
made captain. 

" Fondulo, in 1407, caused to be beheaded two sons of Pice- 
nardo, in the piazza of Cremona, and cast cruelly from the ruins 
of a tower two of the family of Barbuo. This year Pandolfo, 
the son of Fondulo, was born. A truce, made between the 
Duke of Milan and Cabrino Fondulo, Lord of Cremona, was 
renewed for four months. 

CREMONA. 449 

" 1408. John Maria, Duke of Milan, married, in the city of 
Brescia, Antonia, daughter of Malatesta, Lord of Rimini. Ca- 
brino Fondulo caused to be burned John de' Sesto, for having 
made false money; and buried alive John Lantero, for having 
slandered Cabrino ; he hanged Lorenzo Quazzoni, and beheaded 
Rubertino of the same family, for having been found on the land 
of Gazzo, which had rebelled against him. 

" 1409. Another son was born to Cabrino Fondulo, Lord of 
Cremona. He had taken Grazzo, which had rebelled against 
him, and destroyed it ; and was this year made a knight in the 
city of Milan, by Bucicaldo, Governor of Genoa for the King of 
France. 

" 1411. John da Terso, Lord of Soncino, was taken and assas- 
sinated by the people of Cabrino near Brescia; and Cabrino 
obtained from the inhabitants of Soncino the land and fort. 

" 1412. John Maria Visconti, Duke of Milan, while he was at 
mass, was murdered by Trivulzio, Guerrino, and Banichino, and 
other conspirators of several conspicuous families, and Estore 
Visconti, son of Barnabas, maternal grandfather of John Maria, 
was proclaimed by the conspirators Lord of Milan ; but these 
were driven out by Philip Maria, Lord of Pavia, brother of the 
deceased duke, who entered Milan with the forces of Facino 
Cane, and Estore being fled to Monza, was pursued by Philip, 
besieged, fought, and slain. Whereupon Philip Maria was pro- 
claimed Duke of Milan, and married Beatrice, formerly wife of 
Facino Cane, and availed himself of her dower, and of the sol- 
diers of her late husband, to recover the state from the hands of 
the tyrants who, from the death of his father, had possessed it 
At the end of this year a truce was made between the Duke 
Philip Maria and Cabrino Fondulo. 

" 1416. A confederation was made between Fondulo, Mala- 
testa, the Marquis of Ferrara, and Philip ArceUi, Lord of Pla- 
centia, on one part, and Philip Maria, Duke of Milan, and his 
adherents, on the other. The friends of the duke were Vignati, 
Lord of Lodi, Rusca, Lord of Como, Benzone, Lord of Crema, 
and Orlando, Marquis Pallavicino. This convention lasted not 
long, though it was made for two years. 

** 1417. The Duke Philip Maria, having broken the truce and 
confederation, sent his forces, under Carmagnuola, his captain- 
general, to commit depredations on the Cremonians. Going 

38* C2 

450 ON GOVERNMENT. 

afterwards to Hacentia with part of his people, he was met by 
Cabrino, Lord of Cremona, with a few infantry of Malatesta, 
and defeatf^d. 

^ 141S. Philip ^laria, Doke of Milan, caused to be beheaded 
Beatrice his wife, for no other reason bat because she was grown 
old and he was weary of her, although he propagated against 
her sn^ipicions of adultery. 

" 1419. The Count Carmagnnola returned to the Cremonian 
territory with the ducal army, took Castellione and all the other 
castles, destroyed the vines and com, and laid siege to the city. 
Cabrino Fondulo, seeing that he could not resist the forces of 
the duke, endeavored to sell the city of Cremona to Pandolfo 
Malatesta. But the duke sent Carmagnnola upon the territory 
of Brescia, and soon had all its fortresses in his possession. 
Cabrino, seeing that the assistance of Malatesta would (ail him, 
began, by the means of Carmagnnola, to treat of an agreement 
with Philip MarisL, who, knowing the difficulty of taking the 
city from so powerful and sagacious a man as Fondulo, finally 
agreed with him. 

" 1420. Cabrino agreed with the duke to surrender Cremona 
and all its country, reserving only Castellione, of which he was 
invested in fee, with the title of marquis, by the duke, for which 
he paid forty thousand ducats. 

"1421. The duke recovered Genoa, Albenga, Savona, and 
Brescia. 

" 1424. Fondulo, desirous of regaining the domination, made 
an agreement with the Florentines against the duke. 

" 1425. The duke condemned to death Cabrino Fondulo, and 
beheaded him." 

The rest of this history may be consulted at leisure. It was 
at this time, and had been long, an absolute monarchy. While 
it was a republic it was a continual struggle between the fami- 
lies of PaUavicini and Doara, Cavalcabo and Visconti, Ponzoni 
and Cavalcabo, Visconti and Fondulo. The family of Visconti 
acquired in Lombardy a sovereignty like that of the Medici in 
Tuscany, and by the same means. And both because there was 
no balance in the govemments, and because the executive power 
and judiciary power were elected in the legislative assembly; 
that is, precisely, because aU authority was attempted to be 

CREMONA. 451 

placed in the same centre. Is it worth while, merely for the 
whistling of the name of a republic, to undergo all the miseries 
and horrors, cruelties, tyrannies, and crimes which are the natu- 
ral and inevitable fruits of such a constitution ? 

CHAPTER NINTH. 

PADUA. 

The elements and definitions in most of the arts and sciences 
are understood alike, by men of education, in all the nations of 
Europe ; but in the science of legislation, which is not one of the 
least importance to be understood, there is a confusion of lan- 
guages, as if men were but lately come from Babel. Scarcely 
any two writers, much less nations, agree in using words in the 
same sense. Such a latitude, it is true, allows a scope for poli- 
ticians to speculate, like merchants with false weights, artificial 
credit, or base money, and to deceive the people, by making the 
same word adored by one party, and execrated by another. The 
union of the people, in any principle, rule, or system, is thus ren- 
dered impossible; because superstition, prejudice, habit, and 
passions, are so differently attached to words, that you can 
scarcely make any nation understand itself. The words mo- 
narchy, aristocracy, democracy, king, prince, lords, commons, 
nobles, patricians, plebeians, if carefully attended to, will be 
found to be used in different senses, perpetually, by different 
nations, by different writers in the same nation, and even by the 
same writers in different pages. 

The word king'^ for example. Ask a Frenchman, What is a 
king ? His answer will be, A man with a crown and sceptre, 
throne and footstool, anointed at Rheims, who has the making, 
executing, and interpreting of all laws. Ask an Englishman. 
His idea will comprehend the throne, footstool, crown, sceptre, 
and anointing, with one third of the legislative power and the 
whole of the executive, with an estate in his office to him and 
his heirs. Ask a Pole; and he tells you. It is a magistrate 
chosen for life, with scarcely any power at all. Ask an inhabit- 
ant of Liege ; and he tells you. It is a bishop, and his office is 
only for life. The word prince is another remarkable instance. 
In Venice, it means the senate, and sometimes, by courtesy, the 
doge, whom some of the Italian writers call a mere testa di legno. 
In France, the eldest sons of dukes are princes, as well as the 
descendants of the blood royal ; in Grermany, even the rhingraves 

PADUA. 453 

are princes ; and in Russia, several families, not descended from 
nor allied to royal blood, anciently obtained, by grant of the sove- 
reign, the title of prince, descendible to all their posterity ; the 
consequence of which has been, that the number of princes in 
that country is at this day prodigious ; and the philosopher of 
Geneva, in imitation of the Venetians, professedly calls the exe- 
cutive power, wherever lodged, the Prince. How is it possible 
that whole nations should be made to comprehend the principles 
and rules of government, until they shall learn to understand one 
another's meaning by words ? 

But of all the words in all languages, perhaps there has been 
none so much abused in this way as the words republic^ coniTrum- 
wealth, and popular state. In the JRerum-Publicarum Collection 
of which there are fifty and odd volumes, and many of them 
very incorrect, France, Spain, and Portugal, the four great em- 
pires, the Babylonian, Persian, Greek, and Roman, and even the 
Ottoman, are all denominated republics. If, indeed, a republic 
signifies nothing but public affairs, it is equally applicable to all 
nations ; and every kind of government, despotisms, monarchies, 
aristocracies, democracies, and every possible or imaginable com- 
position of them are all republics. There is, no doubt, a public 
good and evil, a commonwealth and a common impoverishment 
in all of them. Others define a republic to be a government of 
more than one. This will exclude only the despotisms ; for a 
monarchy administered by laws, requires at least magistrates to 
register them, and consequently more than one person in the 
government. Some comprehend under the term only aristocra- 
cies and democracies, and mixtures of these, without any distinct 
executive power. Others, again, more rationally, define a republic 
to signify only a government, in which all men, rich and poor, 
magistrates and subjects, officers and people, masters and ser- 
vants, the first citizen and the last, are equally subject to the 
laws. This, indeed, appears to be the true and only true definition 
of a republic. The word resy every one knows, signified in the 
Roman language wealth, riches, property; the woT^publicuSy quasi 
populicus, and per syncope poplicus, signified public, common, 
belonging to the people; res pybHca^ therefore, was publica res, 
the wealth, riches, or property of the people.* Res populi^ and 

* See any of the common dictionariea, Soranus, StephenB, AxDsworth. 

454 ON GOVEBKMENT. 

the original meaning of the word republic could be no other 
than a government in which the property of the people predomi- 
nated and governed ; and it had more relation to property than 
liberty. It signified a government, in which the property of the 
public, or people, and of every one of them,, was secured and 
protected by law. This idea, indeed, implies liberty; because 
property cannot be secure unless the man be at liberty to acquire, 
use, or part with it, at his discretion, and unless he have his 
personal liberty of life and limb, motion and rest, for that pur- 
pose. It implies, moreover, that the property and liberty of aU 
men, not merely of a majority, should be safe ; for the people, 
or public, comprehends more than a majority, it comprehends 
all and every individual ; and the property of every citizen is a 
part of the public property, as each citizen is a part of the 
public, people, or community. The property, therefore, of every 
man has a share in government, and is more powerful than any 
citizen, or party of citizens; it is governed only by the law. 
There is, however, a peculiar sense in which the words republic^ 
commonwealth, popular state, are used by EngUsh and French 
writers; who mean by them a democracy, or rather a repre- 
sentative democracy; a "government in one centre, and that 
centre the nation ; " that is to say, that centre a single assembly, 
chosen at stated periods by the people, and invested with the 
whole sovereignty ; the whole legislative, executive, and judicial 
power, to be exercised in a body, or by committees, as they shall 
think proper. This is the sense in which it was used by M archa- 
mont Nedham, and in this sense it has been constantly used from 
his time to ours, even by writers of the most mathematical pre- 
cision, the most classical purity, and extensive learning. What 
other authority there may be for this use of those words is not 
known ; none has been found, except in the following observa- 
tions of Portenari, in which there are several other inaccuracies ; 
but they are here inserted, chiefly because they employ the words 
republic, commonwealth, and popular state, in the same sense with 
the English and French writers. 

" We • may say with the philosopher,^ that six things are so 
necessary to a city, that without them it cannot stand. 1. The 

* Delia Felicith di Padova, di Angelo Portenari, Padovano Agostino, libre 
noTe, in Padova perPietro Paolo Tozzi, 1623, p. 115. 
1 Aiistot Polit. b. 7, c. 8. 

PADUA. 455 

first is provisions, without which its inhabitants cannot live. 
2. The second is clothes, habitations, houses, and other things, 
which depend upon the arts, without which civil and political 
life cannot subsist. 3. The third is arms, which are necessary 
to defend the city from its enemies, and to repress the boldness 
of those who rebel against the laws. 4. The fourth is money, 
most necessary to a city in peace and in war. 5. The fifth is 
the care of divine worship. 6. The sixth is the administration 
of justice, and the government of the people. For the first are 
necessary, cultivators of the land ; for the second, artificers ; for 
the third, soldiers ; for the fourth, merchants and capitalists ; for 
the fifth, priests ; for the sixth, judges and magistrates. Seven 
sorts of men, therefore, are necessary to a city: husbandmen, 
artificers, soldiers, merchants, rich men, priests, and judges. 

''But, according to the same philosopher,* as in the body 
natural not all those things, without which it is never found, are 
parts of it, but only instruments subservient to some uses, as in 
animals, the horns, the nails, the hair, so not all those seven sorts 
of men are parts of the city ; but some of them, namely, the 
husbandmen, the artificers, and the merchants, are only instru- 
ments useful to civil life, as is thus demonstrated. A city is 
constituted for felicity, as to its ultimate end ; and human feli- 
city, here below, is reposed, according to the same philosopher, 
in the operations of virtue, and chiefly in the exertions of wis- 
dom and prudence ; those men, therefore, are not parts of a city, 
the operations of whom are not directed to those virtues ; such 
are the husbandmen who are occupied, not in wisdom and pru- 
dence, but in laboring the earth; such are the artisans, who 
fatigue themselves night and day to gain a livelihood for them- 
selves and their poor families ; such, finally, are the merchants, 
who watch and labor continually, not in wisdom and prudence, 
but in the acquisition of gold. It is therefore clear, that neither 
husbandmen, artificers, nor merchants, are parts of a city, nor 
ought to be numbered among the citizens, but only as instru- 
ments which subserve certain uses and conveniences of the 
city." 

We must pause here and admire! The foregoing are not 
only the grave sentiments of Portenari and of Aristotle, but 

* Aiist PoliL lib. viL c. 9. 

4S6 ON GOVEBNMENT. 

form the doctrine almost of the whole earth, and of all mankind; 
not only every despotism, empire, and monarchy, in Asia, Africa, 
and Europe, but every aristocratical republic, has adopted it in 
all its latitude. There are only two or three of the smallest 
cantons in Switzerland, besides England, who allow husband- 
men, artificers, and merchants, to be citizens, or to have any 
voice or share in the government of the state, or in the choice or 
appointment of any who have. There is no doctrine, and no 
fact, which goes so far as this towards forfeiting to the human 
species the character of rational creatures. Is it not amazing, 
that nations should have thus tamely surrendered themselves, 
like so many flocks of sheep, into the hands of shepherds, whose 
great solicitude to devour the lambs, the wool, and the flesh, 
scarcely leave them time to provide water or pasture for the 
animals, or even shelter against the weather and the wolves ? 

It is, indeed, impossible that the several descriptions of men, 
last enumerated, should, in a great nation and extensive territory, 
ever assemble in a body to act in concert; and the ancient 
method of taking the sense of an assembly of citizens in the 
capital, as in Rome for example, for the sense of all the citizens 
of a whole republic, or a large empire, was very imperfect, and 
extremely exposed to corruption; but, since the invention of 
representative assemblies, much of that objection is removed, 
though even that was no sufficient reason for excluding farmers, 
merchants, and artificers, from the rights of citizens. At present 
a husbandman, merchant, or artificer, provided he has any small 
property, by which he may be supposed to have a judgment and 
will of his own, instead of depending for his daily bread on 
some patron or master, is a sufficient judge of the qualifications 
of a person to represent him in the legislature. A representative 
assembly, fairly constituted, and made an integral part of the 
sovereignty, has power forever to control the rich and illustrious 
in another assembly, and a court and king, where there is a king. 
This, too, is the only instrument by which the body of the peo- 
ple can act; the only way in which their opinions can be known 
and collected ; the only means by which their wills can be united, 
and their strength exerted, according to any principle or con- 
tinued system. 

It is sometimes said, that mobs are a good mode of expressing 
the sense, the resentments, and feelings of the people. Whig 

PADUA. 487 

mobs to be sue are meant! But if the principle is once admit- 
ted, liberty and the rights of mankind will infallibly be betrayed; 
for it is giving liberty to tories and courtiers to excite mobs as 
well as to patriots ; and all history and experience shows, that 
mobs are more easily excited by courtiers and princes, than by 
more virtuous men, and more honest friends of liberty. 

It is often said, too, that farmers, merchants, and mechanics, 
are too inattentive to public affairs, and too patient under oppres- 
sion. This is undoubtedly true, and will forever be so; and, 
what is worse, the most sober, industrious, and peaceable of 
them, will forever be the least attentive, and the least disposed 
to exert themselves in hazardous and disagreeable efforts of 
resistance. The only practicable method, therefore, of giving to 
farmers, &c. the equal right of citizens, and their proper weight 
and influence in society, is by elections, frequently repeated, of 
a house of commons, an assembly which shall be an essential 
part of the sovereignty. The meanest understanding is equal to 
the duty of saying who is the man in his neighborhood whom 
he most esteems, and loves best, for his knowledge, integrity, 
and benevolence. The understandings, however, of husband- 
men, merchants, and mechanics, are not always the meanest; 
there arise, in the course of human life, many among them of 
the most splendid geniuses, the most active and benevolent dis- 
positions, and most undaunted bravery. The moral equality 
that nature has unalterably established among men, gives these 
an undoubted right to have every road opened to them for ad- 
vancement in life and in power that is open to any others. These 
are the characters which will be discovered in popular elections, 
and brought forward upon the stage, where they may exert all 
their faculties, and enjoy all the honors, offices, and commands, 
both in peace and war, of which they are capable. The dogma 
of Aristotle, and the practice of the world, is the most unphilo- 
sophical, the most inhuman and cruel that can be conceived. 
Until this wicked position, which is worse than the slavery of 
the ancient republics, or modern West Indies, shall be held up 
to the derision and contempt, the execration and horror, of man- 
kind, it will be to little purpose to talk or write about liberty. 
This doctrine of Aristotle is the more extraordinary, as it seems 
to be inconsistent with his great and common principles,* << that 

* AiiBtot PoL lib. iv. c. 11. 
VOL. V, 89 

468 ON GOVERNMENT. 

a happy life must arise from a course of virtue; that virtue 
consists in a medium; and that the middle life is the happiest. 
" In every city the people are divided into three sorts, the very 
rich, the very poor, and the middle sort If it is admitted that 
the medium is the best, it follows that, even in point of fortune, 
a mediocrity is preferable. The middle state is most compliant 
to reason. Those who are very beautiful, or strong, or noble, qr 
rich, or, on the contrary, those who are very poor, weak, or mean, 
with difficulty obey reason. The former are capricious^ and flagi- 
tious ; the latter, rascally and mean ; the crimes of each arising 
from their different excesses. Those who excel in riches, friends, 
and influence, are not willing to submit to command or law ; 
this begins at home, where they are brought up too delicately, 
when boys, to obey their preceptors. The constant want of 
what the rich enjoy makes the poor too mean ; the poor know 
not how to command, but are in the habit of being commanded, 
too often as slaves. The rich know not how to submit to any 
command ; nor do they know how to rule over freemen, or to 
command others, but despotically. A city composed only of the 
rich and the poor, consists but of masters and slaves, not free- 
men; where one party despise, and the other hate; where there 
is no possibility of friendship, or political community, which 
supposes aflection. It is the genius of a free city to be com- 
posed, as much as possible, of equals ; and equality will be best 
preserved when the greatest part of the inhabitants are in the 
middle state. These will be best assured of safety as well as 
equality ; they will not covet nor steal, as the poor do, what 
belongs to the rich; nor will what they have be coveted or 
stolen ; without plotting against any one, or having any one 
plot against them, they will live free from danger. For which 
reason, Phocylides * wisely wishes for the middle state, as being 
most productive of happiness. It is plain then that the most 
perfect community must be among those who are in the middle 
rank ; and those states are best instituted wherein these are a 
larger and more respectable part, if possible, than both the other; 

♦ JToUd fiiaoiaiv df^iora- fiiaog S^ilm ir n6k€t sIpm, 
Which Dr. Gilliea interprets thus : 

" How happy is the middle walk of life, 
0 1 may it be my portion in the state ! " 
1 ^Qioralj m the ori^nal, " insolent" 

PADUA. 459 

or, if that cannot be, at least than either of them separate ; so 
that, being thrown into the balance, it may prevent either scale 
from preponderating. It is, therefore, the greatest happiness 
which the citizen can enjoy, to possess a moderate and conve- 
nient fortune. When some possess too much, and others no- 
thing at all, the government must either be in the hands of the 
meanest rabble, or else a pure oligarchy. The middle state is 
best, as being least liable to those seditions and insurrections 
which disturb the community ; and for the same reason exten- 
sive governments are least liable to these inconveniences; for 
there those in the middle state are very numerous ; whereas, in 
small ones, it is easy to pass to the two extremes, so as hardly 
to have any medium remaining, but the one half rich, and the 
other poor. We ought to consider, as a proof of this, that the 
best lawgivers were those in the middle rank of life, among 
whom was Solon, as is evident from his poems, and Lycurgus, 
for he was not a king ; and Charondas, and, indeed, most others. 
Hence, so many free states have changed either to democracies 
or oligarchies ; for whenever the number of those in the middle 
state has been too small, those who were the more numerous, 
whether the rich or the poor, always overpowered them, and 
assumed to themselves the administration. When, in conse- 
quence of their disputes and quarrels with each other, either the 
rich get the better of the poor, or the poor of the rich, neither of 
them will establish a free state, but, as a record of their victory, 
will form one which inclines to their own principles, either a 
democracy or an oligarchy. It is, indeed, an established custom 
of cities, not to desire an equality, but either to aspire to govern, 
or, when they are conquered, to submit" 

These are some of the wisest sentiments of Aristotle; but 
can you reconcile them with his other arbitrary doctrine, and 
tyrannical exclusion of husbandmen, merchants, and tradesmen, 
from the rank and rights of citizens ? These, or at least, those 
of them who have acquired property enough to be exempt from 
daily dependence on others, are the real middling people, and 
generally as honest and independent as any ; these, however, it 
must be confessed, are too inattentive to public and national 
affairs, and too apt to submit to oppression. When they have 
been provoked beyond all bearing, they have aimed at demolish- 
ing the government, and when they have done that, they have 

460 ON GOVERNMENT. 

sunk into their usual inattention, and left others to erect a new 
one as rude and ill-modelled as the former. A representative 
assembly, elected by them, is the only way in which they can 
act in concert ; but they have always allowed themselves to be 
cheated by false, imperfect, partial, and inadequate representap 
tions of themselves, and have never had their full and proper 
share of power in a state. But to proceed with Portenari. 

"The other kinds of men," says he, "namely, the rich, the 
soldiers, the priests, and the judges, are parts of the city, and 
properly citizens. The first, because riches are instruments for 
generating and conserving virtue in the citizens. The second, 
because it is necessary that military men, besides the virtue of 
fortitude, should be adorned with prudence, to know the times 
and occasions proper for undertaking an enterprise. The third, 
because the priests ought to be examples of eveiy virtue to the 
people, and give themselves to the contemplation of divine 
things. The fourth, because the judges and rectors of a city, to 
judge and govern rightly, have occasion more than all the others 
for science and prudence, which are the true lights and guides 
of human actions." 

If these are proper arguments for admitting these descriptions 
of men into the order of citizens, instead of being reasons for 
excluding merchants, &c. they are of proportional weight for 
admitting them. 

" As to the form of government, which is the other part of the 
animated city, let us say with those wise men who have written 
of civil dominion and public administration, as Plato,* Aristotle,t 
Polybius,^ Plutarch, § and others, || that the simple forms of 
good government are three, to which are opposed three other 
forms of bad government. The first form of good government 
is monarchy, or kingship, and is the absolute and independent 
dominion of one man alone, who has for the ultimate end of his 
operations the public good, and the best state of the city, and 
who has the same relation to his subjects that the shepherd has 
to his flock, and the father to his children. Such were the mon- 
archies of the Assyrians, Medes, Persians, Macedonians, Scy- 
thians, Egyptians, and Romans, from the beginning of their 

* 4 & SDe Leg. Sf m Civili, seu De Regno. f 8 PoUi-c. 7,8, fr 8 Eth,clO. 
t Lib. vL §De Uniiis in Bepub. Dandn. 

I Sigcm. De AnL Jur. Civ. Rom. lib. L c. 1. 

PADUA. 461 

reign to the creation of the consuls, and, after the extinction of 
the Roman republic, under the empire of many Ceesars. To 
monarchy is opposed* that form of government which is called 
tyranny, in which one lords it alone, who has no thoughts of the 
public good, but whose aim is to depress and exterminate the 
citizens, to whom he shows himself a monster, rapacious after 
their property, and a cruel wild beast after their lives ; such were 
Phalaris in Agrigentum,f Dionysius in Syracuse, J and Nero in 
Rome. § 

" The second form of good government is aristocracy, accord- 
ing to which the dominion is held by those who, above all others, 
are adorned with virtue, prudence, and benevolence ; who direct- 
ing all their actions to the utility and common dignity of the 
city, procure it a happy and blessed state. This species of 
government is called also the regimen of the better sort, (optima' 
teSy) either because the best men of the city bear rule, or because 
they look, in all their operations, to the best and most perfect 
state of the city. This manner of government was used by the 
Spartans. To this form of government is opposed oligarchy, 
which is a principality of the most rich and powerful, who, for 
the most part, are few ; who, by depressing and robbing of their 
property the less rich, and crushing the poor with intolerable 
weight, make a government full of arrogance and of violence, 
and are like wolves among lambs. Such was the dominion of 
the Triumvirs in Rome, who having oppressed the republic, pro- 
scribed and put to death many good citizens, and plundered 
their property ; exalting the seditious and perverse, and abasing 
good men, they distempered Rome with their contagious wick- 
edness ; and of a city, the capital of the world, they made it a 
den of robbers. II 

" The third form of good government, not having a proper 
name, was called by the Greeks politeia^ and by the Latins, reS' 
publicay names common to every species of government. This is 
the dominion of the multitude, namely^-^of the whole body of the 
city, composed of all sorts of citizens, rich and poor, nobles and 

♦ Plutar. Loc. CU, Beros. lib. iv. Diodor. lib. i. 8. 10 Justin, lib. i. 2, 8. Oros. 
lib. L & seq. Herod, lib. i. 2. Liv. et alii script. Rom^ Hist 

JVal. Max. lib. ix. c. 2. Cic. in Verr. 5. 
Cic. 2, De Offic. Plat Epist vii. Diodor. lib. xiv. 
§ Suet in Neron. Tacit 14 Anrml. 
II Appian. 4, De Bel Civ. Plutarch in Ant. 

89* 

462 ON GOVERNilENT. 

plebeians^ wise and foolish^ which is also called a popular govern- 
menL All this body, which contains men, some endowed with 
pradence and wisdom, some inclined to virtue and persuadable 
to all good works, by the conversation and familiarity which 
they have with the prudent and learned, employ all their care, 
labor, and industry, to the end that the city flourish in all those 
things which are necessary and convenient for living well and 
happily, such as was at one time the government of the Athe- 
nians.* To this species of good government is opposed demo- 
cracy ; according to which the most abject plebeians, and the 
vilest vulgar, hold the domination for their own private interest, 
by w^hich they oppress the rich and the noble, and aggrandize and 
enrich the poor and the ignoble, as the two brothers, the Gracchi, 
began to do in Romcf 

" Three, therefore, are the simple forms of good government, 
monarchy, aristocracy, and that which by a common name is 
called a republic ; and from these, mixed together, four others 
may result The first is compounded of all the three, as was 
that of the Laccedemonians, instituted by Lycurgus, J who, 5C- 
lectinff the good from the three former^ composed out of tiiem one 
of the most perfect kind* Such, also, was the Roman republic, § 
in which the power of the consuls was like the regal authority ; 
that of the senate was aristocratical ; and that of the people 
resembled the popular state. The second form of mixed govern- 
ment is composed of monarchy and aristocracy, such as, accord- 
ing to some, is the most serene republic of Venice,|| in which 
the annual podestas have a power similar to a regal authority, 
and the senate are an assembly or collection of the optimates; 
although others contend that it is a perfect aristocracy. The 
third is mixed of a monarchy and a republic ; and the fourth of 
a republic and an aristocracy; of which two species of mixed 
government we have no examples to allege. 

" But to return to the three simple forms ; it is the common 
opinion of the learned,^ that monarchy holds the first rank 

♦ Plut De Unius in Rep. Dominio, Thucyd. lib. ii- in Oral. Peridis, Sig. De 
Repub. Athen. lib. i. c. 5. 

t Appian. 1, De Bel Civ. Plutarch in Gracchis. 
X Polyb. lib. vi. Sigon. De Ant. Jure Civ. Rom. lib. i. c. 1. 
J Bellarm. De Roma. | Boter. Relat. Venet. p. 1. Sabellic. lib. iii. lee 2. 

•f Plat in Civili vel De Reg. Arist 8 Ethic, c. 10. & 8 Polit. c. 10. Phila lib. 
De Conf. Linguar. Senec. 2 De Benef. Herod, lib. iii. Horn. 2 Eiady v. 204. 

PADUA. 468 

above all others, resembling the power of God Almighty, who 
alone governs the world ; resembling the heart, which alone vivi- 
fies all the parts of the animal ; and resembling the sun, which 
alone illuminates the celestial bodies, as well as the lower world. 
It is very true, that to a monarchy ought to be elevated only that 
citizen, according to the philosopher,* who, exceeding others in 
the ordinary course, in riches, wisdom, prudence, and benevolence, 
is like a god upon earth ; such as would be the man who should 
be adorned with heroic virtue, according to which, performing all 
the labors of virtue in the utmost perfection and supreme excel- 
lency, he would appear to be not the son of a mortal, f but of 
God. But it being impossible, or at least most difficult, to find 
a man so rare, it has happened, that, laying aside monarchy, the 
philosophers have disputed which of the other two forms of 
good government is better accommodated, more practicable, and 
more profitable, for the regimen of cities and of peoples. Some 
were of opinion that this praise was due to an aristocracy ; never- 
theless Aristotle confutes them, because in the aristocratical 
government the magistracies and the honors being always in the 
hands of a few, there is great danger that the multitude, perpe- 
tually excluded from public management, should be tumultuous, 
and conspire against the lives of the principal men, to the great 
damage of the whole city; because in these revolts the force and 
violence of the people regard friends no more than enemies ; it 
is mad, and most horribly pillages, murders, and abuses, all that 
comes in its way. It remains, then, that the third species of 
good government, which is the popular government, in which the 
citizens alternately command and obey, must be the most useful, 
and better adjusted to the nature of man, in whose soul the 
Divinity has stamped the desire of ruling ; with such limitations 
and temperaments, however, as, says the same philosopher, that 
the vile plebeians may not have magistrates appointed for their 
ignorance and imprudence, which are the two fountains of all 
civil calamities ; but that the plebeians may not be totally de- 
spised, and that all occasion of insurrections may be taken away, 
power should be given them of joining with the other citizens in 
the election of magistrates, and of calling them to account for 
their administration." 

« Aristotle, 8 PoliL c. 11. t 7 Eih, e. 1. 

464 ON GOVERNMENT. 

^AIl these opinions appear to be not unbecoming; for, al- 
thongfa the plebeians be not qualified of themselves to judge 
who are fit for the administration of the affairs of the city, and 
to know the failings of those who have governed, nevertheless, 
by the conversation and practice which they have in such things 
with the wise men, it is presumed that, from daily intercourse 
with these, and from common fame and public reputation, which 
daily circulates concerning men who are wise and good in gov- 
ernment, they may have so much light, that they may discern 
the apt from the inept, and good behavior from bad. This may 
suffice to have said concerning the different forms of government 
according to the writers before cited, in order to explain the fol- 
lowing account of the fonn of government in Padua, and the 
various changes it passed through* 

^ In the four hundred and fifty-second year of the Christiaii 
era, Padua was miserably destroyed by Attila, King of the 
Huns. The Paduans, who then fled for safety to the islands in the 
Adriatic, could not return for fifty years to rebuild their city, for 
the many armies of barbarians who infested Italy till 493, when 
Theodoric, King of the Ostrogoths, killed Odoacer, King of the 
Heruli, and remained unrivalled in the dominion of Italy. But 
Justinian, the emperor, having, in 535, sent Belisarius, and after- 
wards, in 552, Narses, to drive away the Goths from Italy, Padua, 
in that war, which lasted with alternate victories and defeats of 
the Groths and the Greeks, eighteen years, was subjected some- 
times by one and sometimes by the other. Afterwards, under 
the government of exarchs, till 601, it was a second time burned 
and destroyed by Aginulphus, King of the Lombards. It was 
afterwards restored by the Paduans, assisted by the Venetians, 
and remained under the dominion of the Lombards, tiU they 
were exterminated by Charlemagne, King of France, in 774. 
It became subject to the Kings of France of the race of Charle- 
magne, and after them to the Berengarii, and finally to the em- 
perors of Germany, from Otho I. to Henry the Fourth, according 
to the German, and the Third, according to the Italian historians. 
In a word, Padua lived under foreign law six hundred and twenty- 
nine years, namely, — from 452 to 1081 ; thirty-three years before 
which period, namely, — in 1048, a few rays of liberty began 

Lib. iy. cap. 2, p. 128, 

PADUA. 465 

to dawn, because the Emperor Henry III., (as appears by pub- 
lic instruments preserved in the archives of the cathedral of 
Padua,) granted, for the repose of his soul, and that of Agnese 
his wife, to Bernard Maltravers, Bishop of Padua, the preroga- 
tive of coining money, building fortresses and castles with 
towers and ramparts, erecting mills, and to be, as it were, prince 
of the city. Afterwards, Henry IV., his son, at the solicitation 
of the Queen Bertha, his wife, and on account of the prayers of 
Milo, Bishop of Padua, his relation, gave liberty, in 1081, to the 
Paduans, conceding to them, that, for the future, they might live 
according to their own laws, and have a triumphal chariot, {car- 
roccio,) which was the principal sign of a free city.* This car- 
roccio^ for a perpetual memorial of the benefit received by the 
intercession of Queen Bertha, was called by the Paduans by 
her name. Henry also granted them the faculty of making of 
the body of their nobility a senate, who, for the government of 
the city, createS annually two consuls.f 

" There was, therefore, formed a government mixed of mo- 
narchy and aristocracy, says the historian ; of monarchy, because 
the consuls, according to the manner of kings, had the power 
of life and death ; and of aristocracy, because the senate, exclu- 
sively of the plebeians, was composed only of patricians or 
nobles. These, as the desire of enlarging dominion is insatiable, 
not contented to have the government of the city, procured, 
partly by imperial grants, and partly by other means, jurisdiction 
of blood in their castles situated in the country of Padua, assum- 
ing the titles of proceri, peers or barons, and a little afterwards 
the yet higher ones of marquises, counts, and castellans. Padua 
was ruled by this form of government about eighty years, in 
peace and tranquillity ; but peace being the nurse of riches, and 
riches of ambition, the consular dignity began to be ardently 
desired by all men, and caballed for by every artifice. In the 
progress of these contests, as one would not give way to another, 
and as it all depended on a few of the most powerful, the city 
became divided into factions, which finally, in 1177, came to 
arms, and civil wars ensued, which for some years filled the city 
with slaughter, burnings, revolt, and confusion ; so that the con- 

* See a description and stamp of the Paduan carroccio, in Fortenari, lib. ▼• 
c 5 and 6. 
t Sigonius, De Reg. Ital. lib. ix. an. 1081. 

tn9 

466 ON GOVERNMENT. 

Bulate, becoming feeble, was now intermitted, and then exercised, 
according as the power of different parties prevailed. But finally, 
this magistracy, serving no longer for the maintenance of the 
public good, but merely as an instrument of revenge against 
enemies, and having become most pernicious, not less to the ple- 
beians than to the patricians, was, in 1194, abrogated and totally 
extinguished. 

" The good government,^ composed of monarchy and aristo- 
cracy," as our author calls it, though nobody will agree with him 
in opinion at this day, " being changed, by the malice of men, 
into the bad one of oligarchy, and this by its noxious qualities 
being in a short time annihilated, there arose another species of 
government, mixed of monarchy and a republic, in this form : — 
The Paduans instituted four councils ; the first was of eighteen, 
whom they called the Anziani^ three of whom were drawn by lot 
every three months. They were afterwards reduced to the num- 
ber of sixteen, and then drawn to the number of four every four 
months. The office of these magistrates was, together with the 
podesta, to exert themselves with all their influence and power to 
conciliate and appease all discords and dissensions among the 
citizens, not only in civil affairs, but in criminal prosecutions ; to 
Bee that the decrees of the senate regarding the public utility were 
observed ; that the buildings going to decay should be rebuilt or 
repaired ; that the streets, public roads, and walks should be kept 
in order, free, and unincumbered with obstructions; that in the 
principal quarters of the city instruments should be provided for 
extinguishing or preventing the progress of fire, such as buckets, 
vessels and ropes for drawing water, ladders, hatchets, pickaxes, 
iron bars, &c. ; and, finally, to suggest to the other councils all 
those things which might be of public utility. And that they 
might be enabled to do this, all public letters from foreign princes, 
and from all magistrates within the dominion of Padua, were 
read in their presence. No man was admitted to this council of 
the anziani who was not a Paduan by birth, and an inhabitant 
of the city for at least thirty years without interruption, and who 
had not a foundation of property among his fellow citizens of at 
least two hundred pounds a year. 

The second council was called the lesser^ which at first con- 

1 Cap. xiii. p. 124. 

PADUA. 467 

sisted of forty citizens, partly noble, and partly plebeian, but 
afterwards was increased to the number of sixty. The authority 
of this council was such, that nothing could be treated in the 
greater council if it were not first discussed and agitated here, 
and from hence proposed to the greater council. The mode of 
discussing and consulting upon business was by the way of ora- 
tions or harangues made by the senators, after which they pro- 
ceeded to a vote, and two thirds of the suffrages determined the 
question. This rule was also observed in the greater council. 
This council was changed every four months, and the senators 
who had once been in it must be excluded for eight months. 
Father and son, brothers, and uncle and nephew, were not per- 
mitted to sit together in it. To be of this council, it was neces- 
sary to be a Paduan born, to have a father who was a Paduan 
born, to have inhabited in Padua with a family at least for forty 
years continually, to have an estate of fifty pounds income, and 
to have served in the ordinary charges of the commons of the 
city. 

" The third council was called the Greater Council and Parlia- 
ment. It was at first of three hundred senators, one moiety 
nobles, and the other moiety plebeians; it was aften^^ards 
increased to the number of six hundred, and finally, in 1277, to 
a thousand. The magistrates were chosen, and ail affairs rela- 
tive to peace and war were debated in it. By these two coun- 
cils, the greater and the less, were made, at divers times, various 
municipal laws and statutes, of which, by a determination of 
1263, four copies were made. The first was deposited in the 
monastery of St. Benedict, the second in that of St John, the 
third in that of St. Mary, and the fourth in that of the fathers of 
St Mary di Porciglia. 

The fourth and last council was common to all the people of 
the city, into which, the doors being open, every one might enter. 
But this council was very seldom assembled, and never but for 
things of the utmost importance. The Paduans desirous of pro- 
viding a remedy against the disorders and mischiefs occasioned 
by the consulate, and to extinguish in the citizens all occasions 
of ambition to enjoy the government of the city, invented the 
annual magistrate of the podesta, which was the best medicine 
that could be thought of by them to cure the disorders already 
felt, and prevent the greater that were apprehended. They esta- 

468 ON GOVERNMENT. 

blished, therefore, as ruler of the city, a person who should be a 
foreigner, of noble blood and excellent reputation for virtue, who, 
by the weight and eminence of his authority in cases of life and 
death, and from his superintendence over all the judicial author- 
ity, civil and criminal, from the more absolute obedience paid 
him as the supreme head of all the other magistracies, of the 
patricians, of the plebeians, and of the rustics, and, in a word, 
from his absolute power, as it is called, over the city and its ter- 
ritory, was called, by way of eminence, by the name of Podesta. 

" This manner of government continued happily enough, as it 
is said, till 1237, when the city was subjected by Ezzelino da 
Romano, who most terribly afflicted and most cruelly tormented 
it for the space of nineteen years ; in which time there was no 
sort of torment, inhumanity, or cruelty, which it did not sufier 
from that infernal monster, during whose tyranny that most 
malignant pestilence, the factions of Guelphs and Ghibellines, 
which, under the names of tlie Imperial party and the party of the 
Churchy infected many cities of Italy, among others, distempered 
Pistoia, and did inestimable mischief. 

" Before we pass on, it may be well, for the more complete 
information concerning this magistrate of the podesta, to relate a 
few particulars. The podesta was obliged, tliree months before 
the end of his government, which lasted one year, to assemble 
the greater council, and cause to be elected eight citizens, four 
noble and four plebeian, of more than thirty years of age. These 
elected twelve senators of the same council and of the same age, 
six of the patricians and six plebeians; who, in like manner, 
elected eight others of the same council, age, and condition, the 
office of whom was to elect the new podesta. These were shut 
up together in one apartment, and could not speak to any one, 
or have more than one repast a day, that they might the sooner 
agree in the nomination of three personages, who w^ere after- 
wards carried to the greater council, who proceeded to the elec- 
tion in this manner. All three were separately balloted for, and 
he who had the most suffrages was the new podesta ; he who had 
the next number of votes held the second place ; and he who 
had fewest, the last, in such election. The syndic of the city was 
sent in haste with public letters to him who had been honored 
with most votes, who, if he accepted the charge, was understood 
to be podesta ; but if in four days he did not accept it, the syndic 

PADUA. 469 

was sent to the second ; and if he refused, the third was sent to ; 
and if he declined, a new election was made of other three per- 
sons; and of the acceptance or refusal of these a record was 
made by a notary. 

" This method of electing the podesta was changed in 1257, 
whereby the examination of the subjects fit for the post was com- 
mitted to the lesser council, the election of whom afterwards was 
made by the greater council, with this condition, however, by 
virtue of a statute made in 1236, that the electors of the present 
podeata could not have a vote in the election of the subsequent 
podesta. No man could be elected podesta who had in Padua, 
relations, by consanguinity or affinity within the fourth degree, 
nor who had been banished from his country for forgery or trea- 
son ; and this was also understood of the court or retinue which 
the podesta brought with him, which consisted of four judges or 
assessors, two lieutenants of police, and some other constables. 
The office of the first judge was to assist the podesta in all things 
belonging to the government of the city ; the other three judges 
had the charge of hearing and trying the criminal causes, each 
one for three months, which was ordained to remove all occasion 
of suspicion that the accused, by length of time, might possibly 
corrupt the judges. But these orders were afterwards changed, 
and it was resolved that the first judge, who must be an eminent 
doctor of laws, should be the vicar of the podesta; that the second 
should judge criminal causes ; the third should have the charge 
of the provisions ; and that the fourth should be questor and 
receiver of the public money. The podesta, judges, and lieute- 
nants, could not have with them in Padua their wives, nor other 
ladies their relations, unless for fifteen days, on occasion of sick- 
ness, nor even their brothers, sons, or nephews, above twelve 
years of age, nor servants who were Paduans. The podesta was 
obliged to bring with him his two lieutenants, twelve bailiffs, 
twelve horses, twelve valets and servants, and to maintain all this 
family and these horses at his expense, for the public service of 
the city. His salary was two thousand five hundred lire a year, 
and was afterwards increased to four thousand. The podesta 
was required to come to Padua eight days at least before posses- 
sion was given him of the post, in which time he was obliged to 
take the oath of office, namely, — to swear that he, with his 
judges, would govern without ambition and justly, and that they 

VOL. v. 40 

470 ON GOVERNMENT. 

would give the greatest attention to the affairs of the public, and 
with all their power would conciliate and pacify the controversies 
and discords of the citizens. The podestarate began on the first 
of July ; but in 1280, it was decreed to begin the first of January. 
This magistracy at first continued for a year ; but in 1294, a law^ 
was made that it should endure only six months, and that two 
podest^s should be created each year, one of whom should begin 
his administration with January, the other with July ; which law 
was observed as long as the republic of Padua remained. But 
after Padua became subject, now to the emperor, Henry VIL, 
now to Frederic, Duke of Austria, now to his brother Henry, 
Duke of Carinthia, now to the Scaligeri, Lords of Verona, then 
to the Duke of Milan, and finally to the Carrara family, this 
custom of two podestas went into desuetude. 

" The podesta, when once in possession of his office, was bound 
to execute the following orders : — First, in the space of eight 
days, to cause to be read, and afterwards to cause to be punctu- 
ally observed, the papal constitutions against heretics. Secondly, 
to reside continually in the city, and rule it until the arrival of a 
successor. Thirdly, during the whole time of his administration, 
to hear the causes of all persons indifferently, to which end the 
gates of the palace, except at the hour of dinner, always stood 
open. Fourthly, that, together with the anzianiy he should use 
all his endeavors that the canonicates and the other ecclesiastical 
benefices of the bishopric and diocese of Padua should be con- 
ferred on citizens of Padua or of the district. Fifthly, to elect 
eight citizens, men of prudence and experience, two for each 
quarter, who should make choice of four or five hundred able 
men, who, when they should hear the sound of the palace bell, 
were to come armed, under their standards, to the palace of the 
pretor, and to the Piazza del Vino, for the defence of the podesta. 
Sixthly, to give orders that, at the sound of the great bell of the 
tower of the palace, all the citizens and inhabitants of Padua, 
firom sixteen to sixty years of age, should run armed to the piazza 
to defend the common liberty. Seventhly, to create a captain, 
who, with some soldiers, should have the custody of the city and 
its suburbs. Eighthly, to hold, night and day, guards at the gates 
of the city. Ninthly, to give orders that in the city and in the 
suburbs should be kept crossbows and other weapons to exercise 
\he soldiers. Tenthly, to cause to be enrolled in tlie militia many 

PADUA. 471 

men of the villages, who, according to occurrences, should come 
armed to the city. Eleventhly, in all great tumults, to order into 
the piazza the standard of the community ; in which case, all the 
gastaldi of the arts, at the sound of the bells of the palace, were 
held to go to the Piazza del Vino, with the men under their com- 
mand, armed, ready to obey whatever orders the podesta should 
issue, and there assemble, to be formed into a body, under the 
ensign of the community, which could not depart from the piazza 
without the express command of the podesta himself, for whose 
guard there were always five hundred soldiers chosen, one hun- 
dred from the body of the patricians, and four hundred from the 
plebeians, and distinguished into four squadrons, under four 
standards. Twelfthly, that for eight days before the arrival of a 
successor, the podesta cannot give sentence in civil or criminal 
causes. Thirteenthly, that having finished his podestarate, he, 
his assessors, and court, should remain fourteen days in Padua, 
to render an account before the syndic of their administration, 
which is done in this manner : — For the first three days, it was 
lawful to every one to accuse the podesta, assessors, and court, 
before the syndics, of any wrongs or injuries done them. In the 
eight following days these complaints were determined by the 
votes of the major part of the syndics ; and if, by the multitude 
of complaints, or by differences of opinions among the syndics, 
or through other reasons, the business could not be finished, 
three other days were added, in which the syndics were obliged 
to determine it From the defence against the complaints made 
of the podesta, all his favorites, friends, and relations were ex- 
cluded, and all advocates ; his own judges and assessors were 
alone admitted, and were thought sufficient for his defence. At 
the end of the fourteenth day the podesta might depart with his 
family. He could not be confirmed in the post for the next 
year, nor for the five following years ; neither himself, nor any of 
his relations, could hold any office, dignity, or honors, in the city 
of Padua; and this was understood of the assessors, lieutenants 
of police, and other officers. But this statute was very often not 
observed. As population augmented, and causes and controver- 
sies niultiplied, and, therefore, the podesta and his assessors could 
not determine the whole, certain other judges were instituted, 
and called Judges of the Lower Courts, and were distinguished 
firom each other by the names of animals, for the most part, as 

472 ON GOVERNMENT. 

the bear, the horse, the leopard, and others. For the suits arising 
between relations, two judges were instituted as arbitrators, who, 
in the space of two months, were to give sentence, and terminate 
the controversy. And if they could not agree, they called in ten 
jurors for each party ; and if these disagreed, the podesta him- 
self, in the space of fifteen days, sat in judgment with the rest, 
and decided the cause. 

^"As to the government of the territory, it is to be observed, 
that some of the most rich and powerful citizens of Padua had 
the name of proceres, noblemen or barons, and in some of their 
landed estates and places they exercised the jurisdiction of blood, 
that is, the power of life and death ; and to ennoble their do- 
minions, manors, or lordships, with the magnificence of titles, in 
the year 1196, they distinguished themselves into marquises, 
counts, and castellans. The lords of Este were entitled mar- 
quises ; the lords of Anguillara, Abano, Arqua, Baone, Bibano, 
Borgoricco, Calaone, Rusta and Cerro, Calcinara, Caldenazzo, 
Candiana, Carturo, Castelnuovo, Cortaloro, Fontaniva, Honara, 
Limena, Lozzo, Montebello, Montebuso, Montemerlo and Man- 
dria, Nono, and Piazzola, were called counts ; the lords of Car- 
rara, Camposanpiero, Montagnone, Peraga, Pievedisacco, Pub- 
lica, Revolone, Ronchi de' Campanili, Stra, Selvazzano, Tertula, 
Tribano and Galzignano, Noventa, Treville, and Villa Nova, 
were denominated castellans. But the Castellan of Selvazzano 
having caused the eyes of a certain woman to be put out for theft, 
who afterwards came, deprived of her eyes, to Padua, the cruelty 
of this action displeased the republic so much that, in the year 
1200, a law was made, that under pain of death, no man should, 
for the future, exercise any jurisdiction in the territory of Padua ; 
which law was reenacted and confirmed in 1205. The jurisdic- 
tion of life and death, and all other jurisdiction, being taken away 
from these grandees, (magnati,) the whole territory was governed 
by the Podesta of Padua ; and afterwards, in the course of time, 
the republic of Padua sent a podesta into the following districts 
of land, namely, — Conselve, Lonigo, Montagnana, and twenty- 
four other districts. The custom of sending podestas into those 
districts continued till 1290, when a statute was made, that 
places which were not walled should not have a podesta, but 
that into some of them vicars only should be sent 

1 Cap. V. 

PADUA. 473 

" Such, then, was the government of Padua, from the year 
1194 to the tyranny of Ezzelino, mixed of monarchy and a re- 
public, and this constitution was restored after the delivery of 
the city from that fierce and cruel oppression, and lasted happily 
for fifty years, with a remarkable increase of the city in riches 
and power ; and it would have lasted much longer, if the cursed 
factions of Ghibellines and Guelphs had not disturbed the peace 
of the citizens, which afterwards, by little and little, after the 
fashion of poison, creeping in their hearts, afflicted the city to 
such a degree that, at last, in the year 1318, it took away their 
vital spirits, depriving them of their beloved liberty. 

" The parties of Ghibellines and Guelphs, under the names of 
the Empire and the Church, sown in the hearts of men by the 
enemy of the human race, had poisoned Italy, and distempered 
the city of Padua." 

So says the historian ; and, without denying to the devil his 
sheu-e in the instigation of all such party distinctions and ani- 
mosities, it must be still insisted on, that the essential defect in 
the constitution of every Italian republic was the greatest cause, 
and the instrument with which the infernal agent wrought. The 
parties of rich and poor, of gentlemen and simplemen, unba- 
lanced by some third power, will always look out for foreign aid, 
and never be at a loss for names, pretexts, and distinctions. 
"Whig and Tory, Constitutionalist and Republican, Anglomane 
and Francomane, Athenian and Spartan, will serve the purpose 
as well as Guelph and Ghibelline. The great desideratum in a 
government is a distinct executive power, of sufficient strength 
and weight to compel both these parties, in turn, to submit to 
the laws. 

" The mischiefs of these contagious parties were greatest un- 
der the tyranny of Ezzelino, who, being standard-bearer and 
head of the Imperial or Ghibelline party, exerted all his force to 
extirpate the Guelph party, followed by the people and a great 
part of the patricians. After his death, the Guelph party rose, 
and with all their power persecuted the Ghibellines, driving them 
from the city, and spoiling them of all their goods ; and, as the 
plebeians of Padua were devoted to the Quelph party, whether 
from their natural inclinations, or because the Guelphs had de- 
livered the city from the empire of Ezzelino, upon this occasion 
certain profligate popular men, made through their favor heads 

40* 

474 ON GOVERNMENT. 

of the Guelph faction, became proud, arrogant, and presnmpta- 
ous, desiring that all the affairs of the republic should depend 
upon their will ; but suspecting that some of the principal gen- 
tlemen, to whom, although Guelphs, so much pride had become 
disgusting, would oppose their ambitious enterprises, they gave 
the plebeians to understand, that those gentlemen intended to 
make themselves sole masters of the government So great a com- 
motion was excited, that the plebeians, who, servile in adverse 
fortune, as insolent in prosperity, demanded in a turbulent man- 
ner, and obtained by threats of force, the institution of a magis- 
trate, according to the usage of the Roman republic, like a tri- 
bune of the people, (the Paduans called these magistrates Gas- 
taldi deW Arti,) who should defend the rights of the plebeians, 
and have authority to rescind all those determinations of the 
senate, (as was the custom in Rome,) which could occasion any 
prejudice to the jurisdiction of the plebeians. Wherefore, in 
testimony of the power granted to the tribunes, it was, in 1293, 
ordained by a decree of the senate, that every podesta, in the 
beginning of his administration, should consign to each of the 
gastaldi of the arts the standard of that art ; and this tribunitian 
magistracy advancing every day in power, caused to be made in 
its favor, in the year 1296, a statute, that, on the first Sunday in 
every month, the gastaldi should all assemble in the church of 
the palace of the commons, and treat fully of all things that be- 
longed to the state of the city. 

" The whole government of the city, by this alteration, de- 
volved into the hands of the tribunes ; because, as has been said 
before, they annulled or confirmed at their pleasure, the determi- 
nations of the greater council ; and because they carried up to 
the council whatever they had concluded among themselves, 
with a certainty of obtaining their concurrence, by the depend- 
ence which they haH upon the popular^ senators, and also upon 
the less powerful of the noble senators, whose devotion they had 
secured by electing them to the honors of the city, and by assum- 
ing some of them into the number of the tribunes, from which 
magistracy, as universally from all the greater honors, they always 
most arbitrarily excluded the most powerful. 
" From this disorderly and violent domination of the tribunes, 

1 ^popolari" " of the popular party." 

PADUA. 475 

who had, for the most part, greatly enriched themselves, grew 
intestine hatreds and terrible seditions between the first class of 
persons and the heads of the popular party, with whom the pa- 
tricians of middling power, exalted by the people to honors, 
joined. And, finally, some of the gentlemen and most powerful 
patricians, not being able any longer to bear to be neglected by 
the tribunitian power, took up arms, killed the principal heads 
and defenders of the plebeians, and so far intimidated those pa- 
tricians who adhered to the plebeians, that, after many engage- 
ments, and a profuse effusion of blood, the tribuneship of the 
people was abolished in the year 1314, and the government and 
the public authority were transferred to the patricians, excluding 
totally the plebeians. These, in order to keep down the Ghibel- 
lines, increased the senate (which, from the time of the extinc- 
tion of the house of Honara, had been only of three hundred 
members) to the number of a thousand, incorporating seven 
hundred Guelphs ; and, wishing that all questions and matters 
relative to peace or war should depend wholly on the Guelph 
faction, and the better to establish the superiority of their party, 
they instituted another council, wholly of Guelphs, which had 
authority to approve or reject the decrees of the greater senate. 
From the body of this lesser council were created the four anzianij 
conservators of liberty, and eight secretaries for the care of the 
city. This mode of government continued till the year 1318, 
when Padua began to lose her liberty, which she afterwards 
wholly lost, remaining subject sometimes to the Germans, some- 
times to the Scaligeri, sometimes to the Carrari, until, finally, 
after infinite calamities, she was benignly received into the pious 
bosom of the most serene republic of Venice, in the year 1405."* 
Such, as has been related, were the vicissitudes of the govern- 
ment of the city of Padua after the tyranny of Ezzelino, which 
may be recapitulated thus. According to the historian, at first, 
it was a mixture of monarchy and a republic ; afterwards it was 
changed into a democracy, for such he denominates the tribune- 
ship of the plebeians, in which the people attempted the abase- 
ment and annihilation of the grandees ; and, finally, it termi- 
nated in a government mixed of monarchy and aristocracy, 
having the senate of the optimates, and creating the podesta an- 

* Laugier, vol. v. p. 236. 

476 ON GOVERNMEXT. 

nually ; for the major part of the time, from 1081 to 1318, it was 
governed by one or other of the two best species of mixed go- 
vernment, as our historian thought, which are composed of mo- 
narchy and aristocracy, and of monarchy and a republic* 

This sovereignty of Padua was, for the most part, in one as- 
sembly ; for, although a check was aimed at by the law, that 
nothing should be done in the great council, which had not been 
previously debated in the little council, yet, when any thing was 
proposed by the latter to the former, they sat together and voted 
as one assembly. At some times the sovereignty was clearly in 
one assembly of optimates or patricians ; at another, in one as- 
sembly of plebeians, as that of the tribunes was. At last, tw^o 
assemblies were formed, with each a negative ; but there being 
no third power to mediate between them, no balance could be 
formed or maintained between them. At no time had the mo- 
narchical power, either under the consuls, anziani, or podestas, a 
negative ; for, though the podesta was an office of great dignity 
and splendor, he never had the whole executive power, nor a 
negative on the legislative. The nobles and commons w^ere 
mixed together in both councils ; and the executive pow^er, the 
appointment of officers, &c. was always in one or other of the 
assemblies ; and the consequence was instability to the laws, 
insecurity to life, liberty, and property ; constant rivalry between 
the principal families, particularly the Scaligeri and Carrari, which 
ended in conquest and subjection to Venice. 

From 1103 to 1194, the government of consuls continued; 
from 1195 to 1236, the government of podestas, under the re- 
public of Padua. From 1237 to 1256, the tyranny of Ezzelino 

^ Sismondi traces the vicissitudes of the goTemment directly to the ill-regu- 
lated impulses of the people. 

*' Les Padouans, dans Tcnsemble de leur conduite, m^ritoient souvent tons les 
rcproehes qu'on a faits aux d^moc^aties absolucs. Le s^nat meme ^toit d^mo- 

faisoit ^carter du eouvernement les nobles, qui, par leurs richesses, leurs talens, 
leur courage, et rillustration de leur nom, auroient donn6 du relief ^ Tadmini^- 
tration ; une prevention non moins d^raisonnable lui faisoit confier aveuglement 
une autorit6 dangereuse k une seule de ces families nobles, celle qui, plus qu*au- 
cune autre, auroit m^rit^ sa jalousie, et qui en restoit seule exempte, la maison 
de Carrara, Les plus lagers succ^s inspiroient k ce peuple une pi^^somption in- 
sens^c, et un orgueil ridicule ; les plus lagers revers abattoient son courage, et 
le disposoient k se soumettre aux demi^res humiliations." 

Jiip. Ital.f tome ir. p. 882. 

PADUA. 477 

was supported. From 1257 to 1294, the government of podes- 
t^s, under the republic, was revived and maintained. From 1295 
to 1311, they had two podestas. In 1312, Gerardo de gV Inzola 
da Parma was imperial vicar for the Emperor Henry VI L, to 
whom the Paduans began to yield obedience ; though they re- 
belled again this year against his authority, and the podestas and 
republic were revived and continued till 1318, in which year 
Giacomo Grande da Carrara was made the first Lord of Padua. 
He governed one year and three months, and then renounced 
the dominion, and died in 1324. In 1319, a podesta again for 
one year. In 1320, the city of Padua, to deliver itself from the 
siege of Cane Scaligero, Lord of Verona, gave itself to Frede- 
ric III., Emperor and Duke of Austria, who afterwards gave it 
to his brother Henry, Duke of Carinthia, under whom they were 
governed by podestas, who were, at the same time, imperial 
vicars, till 1328. The podesta of this year was dismissed by 
Marsilio da Carrara, who had been elected by the people Lord 
of Padua, who, however, made Pietro de i Rossi, of Parma, 
podesta ; but he, not being able longer to resist in the war with 
Cane della Scala, married Tadea, daughter of Giacomo Grande 
da Carrara, first Lord of Padua, to Mastino dalla Scala, nephew 
of Cane, giving him Padua in dower. From 1329 to 1337, Pa- 
dua was governed by podestas, under the dominion of the Scali- 
gers. In 1337, Marsilio da Carrara, having expelled the Scali- 
gers, was made the second Lord of Padua, and governed in 1338. 
In 1338, Marsilio da Carrara, second Lord of Padua, died ; and 
to him succeeded Ubertino da Carrara, third Lord of Padua. 
From 1339 to 1345, the government of podestas continued 
under the Princes Carrara. In 1345, Ubertino da Carrara, third 
Lord of Padua, being sick, caused to be elected for his successor 
Marsilietto Papafava da Carrara, who was the fourth Lord of 
Padua, and died ; but the same year, Marsilietto was killed by 
Giacomo da Carrara, who became the fifth Lord of Padua; and 
under him the government of podestas continued till 1350, when 
Giacomo da Carrara, the fifth Lord of Padua, was assassinated 
by William da Carrara, a natural son of Giacomo Grande, the 
first lord ; to whom succeeded Giacobino da Carrara, his brother, 
the sixth lord, and Francesco da Carrara, surnamed the Old, his 
son, and seventh Lord of Padua. Under these, the government 
by podestas continued till 1362, when Francesco da Carrara the 

478 ON GOVERNMENT. 

Old imprisoned his uncle, Giacobino da Carrara, because he had 
conspired his death, and reigned lord alone till 1388, when Fran- 
cesco da Carrara renounced the dominion of this city to his son, 
Francesco da Carrara, called the New, eighth and last Lord of 
Padua. The same year, in November, both the father and the 
son were deprived of the government of this state by John Gra- 
leazzo Visconti, first Duke of Milan, who governed it by podes- 
tas, for the years 1388 and 1389, when Francesco da Carrara, 
called the New, drove out the people of the Duke of Milan, and 
recovered Padua and its district, except Bossano. From 1390 
podestas were continued till 1405, when the Carrara were con- 
quered, and Padua admitted into the republic of Venice, In 
1393, Francesco da Carrara, sumamed the Old, seventh Lord of 
Padua, died in a prison in Monza, to which he had been sent by 
John Galeazzo Visconti, Duke of Milan. 

CHAPTER TENTR 

MANTUA MONTEPULCI ANO. 

Equicola^ qoncurs with Leonardo Aretino and all the other 
Italian writers, in his account of the antiquity, riches, and power 
of the Tuscans, Etruscans, Etrurians, Tyrrhenians, or Dodeca- 
poli, (for by aU these names they were known) ; their original 
emigration from Lydia; their government of Lucumoni; their 
twelve confederated peoples; their subjection, in a course of 
time, to the Romans, Goths, Lombards, and Charlemagne, who, 
for his merit, was, in the year 800, created emperor, with the 
titles of Caesar and Augustus, by the Pope Leo III., who under- 
stood the effect upon the minds of the people of words and titles 
so anciently beloved, as well as dreaded, in Italy. He gave him 
also the title of Great, which had been before given only to three 
princes, Alexander, Pompey, and Constantine. The authority 
which the Roman senate and people had anciently exercised, of 
electing and confirming the emperors, was now by Charlemagne 
transferred to the Roman pontificate ; and, to prevent seditions, 
the power of confirming the pontiff was given to the emperor ; 
a promising alliance ! 

"Afterwards, Gregory V., in 1002, ordained a constitution, 
which continues to this time, that the election of future empe- 
rors should be free in the power of the Germans, and the eccle- 
siastical and temporal electorates were then created.* 

" In 1111, Mantua fell into discords, threw off her subjection to 
Matilda, and assumed an independence ; but being besieged and 
reduced to great distress, was obliged, in 1114, to submit again 
to that princess. 

" Sigebert, an enterprising man, took the opportunity of the 
troubles in Italy to aggrandize himself, and going from Lucca, 
he made himself lord of Parma and Reggio. He was a Lorn- 

♦ Eqnicola, p. 25. 

1 DdC Istona di MarUovOy libri cinque. Scritta in Commentari da Mario 
Eqnicola d'Alveta Quarto. Seconda impresBione, in Mantoua, 1610. 

480 ON GOVEKNMENT. 

bard by descent, and was prefect or lord of the aforesaid city. 
Sigebert had three sons, Sigebert IL, Atto, and Gerardo ; two of 
them died, and Atto alone remained, who, by the change of the 
letters, was afterwards called Azzo. He fortified Canossa, in 
Reggiano, and dwelt there as his principal seat, whence his de- 
scendants were called da Canossa, He had two sons, the first 
of whom was named Tcdaldo, and the other, uniting the names 
of his grandfather and father, was called Sigebertazzo, although 
it was afterwards corruptly called Albertazzo. This person was 
sent into Germany, and recommended himself to Otho the em- 
peror so effectually, as to obtain a grant for his services of Ca- 
laone, Monselice, Montagnana, Arqui, and Esie^ with the title 
of marquis. He married Alda, a natural daughter of the empe- 
ror. From this match there issued two sons, Ugo and Folco; 
the latter remained in Germany with his mother ; Ugo came into 
Italy with his father, and succeeded to the lands above men- 
tioned, and to the marquisate of Este. From this Ugo are 
descended the iUustrious lords of the house of Este, who reigned 
so long in Ferrara ; and from them were descended the family 
that was called tlie Canossi of Verona. 

" There were in Mantua, in 1265, four most powerful families, 
and four others their adherents, of somewhat less influence. The 
Bonacossi and Grossolani inhabited one quarter ; the Arlotti and 
the Poltroni another ; these not long before had driven out the 
Calorosi. In a third quarter were the Casaloldi and those of 
Riva ; and in the fourth, the Zenacalli and the Gaflari." 

The government was, as in all the other cities of Italy, in one 
centre, a general council, who first appointed consuls, then podes- 
tas, then gonfaloniers, captains of the people, &c., which produced 
the usual struggles for power. 

" In the year 1266 the Gaffari entered into a secret conspiracy 
to deliver the city of Mantua into the hands of the Estensi, Lords 
of Ferrara. The treason was discovered ; those who saved their 
lives by flight were banished forever, and the others instantly put 
to death, and the houses of all who were accomplices or privy to 
the crime were burnt and demolished. The power of individual 
citizens increased every day, and parties and factions in conse- 
quence. The podesta, though a foreigner was usually appoint- 
ed to that office, administered its functions according to the will 
and pleasure of a small number of the principal men. Justice 

MANTUA. 481 

was oppressed by power, and equity gave way to violence * In 
such a tumult of the factious, the prudent men called a conven- 
tion, to deliberate on a new form of government. Some were 
for epAorij as in Sparta ; others for cosmi, as in Crete ; others for 
suffetes, as in Carthage ; but the most were for hypati^ as in 
Greece, or rather for two consuls, as in Rome. Two magistrates 
were, therefore, created ; and that they might be sure to guard 
against ambition, they must be chosen in rotation every six 
months, two at a time, from each of the four quarters of the 
city. These were to be called captains of the people^ and were 
to be the protectors of the plebeians, and defenders of their liber- 
ties. Two magistrates, therefore, from the body of the nobility, 
were elected, in the nature of tribunes of the people, and those 
were Pinamonte, of the family of Bonacossi, and Ottonello, of 
that of Zenecalli, in the year 1274. 

'' These had not continued one month in office together, before 
such animosities arose between the two families, that Zenecalli 
was treacherously called in the night into the palace of Bona- 
cossi, under pretence of consulting upon some sudden affair of 
the last importance, and there murdered. The next morning 
Bonacossi called together the principal nobility, and, with ficti- 
tious grief and pharisaical tears, communicated the fact, and ex- 
horted the people to revenge, wishing that every one might believe 
that the deceased magistrate had been assaulted and put to death 
by some private enemy. An inquiry was ordered, which engaged 
so much attention, and took up so much time, that no man spoke 
of any successor, and therefore Pinamonte governed alone." 

The scramble for power was as yet altogether among the gen- 
tlemen. 

^'Benvenuto da Imola, in his Commentaries upon Dante, 
where he discourses of Mantua, writes, that this city had been 
inhabited by gentlemen of Riva, of Mercaria, and of the Casa- 
loldi ; and that Bonacossi had agreed with these houses to expel 
from the city every other nobleman ; and that afterwards, form- 
ing a particular agreement with two of them, he drove out the 
third; and then uniting with the Casaloldi, he banished the 

* Cresceva ogni dl piCl la potenza de' pardcolari, & augumentaTansi le fatdoni 
& parti. B podesti, quale fonudere si soleva creare, ad arbitrio di alcuni pocld 
aBumnistraYa il suo omcio ; la giustitia dalla forza era conculcata, & TequitA ce- 
deva alia violenza. Cammentari Mantouani, di Equicola, pp. 47, 48. 

VOL. v. 41 E^ 

482 ON GOVERNAIENT. 

second; and, finally, driving out the Casaloldi, he remained 
alone, and, by artifice assisted with force, continued without a 
colleague in the magistracy ; and taking for his podesta Alberto 
della Scala, for a stricter union he obtained the place of podesta 
in Verona for Giannino de' Bonacossi, not failing to maintain a 
good intelligence with the Marquis of Este. By all these ar- 
rangements he easily obtained from his followers the prolonga- 
tion of his own power for another six months ; and when he had 
thus laid his foundations sufficiently strong to support any edi- 
fice, he assumed the title of captain-general. These encroach- 
ments were very uneasily supported by the nobles, who perceived 
that from free citizens they were become, by little and little, the 
subjects of a tyrant Whereupon the Arlotti, the Casaloldi, the 
Agnelli, and the Grossolani, conspired together to throw off the 
yoke ; but Pinamonte, being informed of the plot on the very 
day on which it was to have been executed, and being well pre- 
pared, fell unexpectedly on the conspirators separately, a part of 
whom he took prisoners ; others were killed, many wounded, and 
the great multitude saved themselves by flight Many suspected 
persons were sent out of their beloved home, and confined in 
various places. Pinamonte did not cease to persecute his adver- 
saries, until all things in the city appeared to be quieted under 
his dominion. 

" The miserable Mantuans were dispersed in various places, 
and particularly in Gonzaga ; but the tyrant had the art to hold 
out temptations of lands, restitution of property, and restoration 
to their country, to these, till they surrendered to him that Gon- 
zaga, which had often defended itself both against popes and 
emperors. Pinamonte then established a friendship with Venice 
and Padua, but was interrupted in his career, in 1289, by death." 

The family of Bonacossi, with Pinamonte at their head, had, 
by forming a popularity among the vilest plebeians, been able to 
expel the other noble families, and make themselves absolute. 
So complete was their ascendency over the minds of the rabble, 
that, upon the death of Pinamonte, the minority were not able 
to obtain any regular election or rational reform of the govern- 
ment; but, 

'* Bardello Bonacossi was set up by his party for a successor, 
a man universally hated, a monster without virtue, wholly with- 
out capacity, insolent, without judgment or experience ; equally 

MANTUA. 483 

ignorant and arrogant, vile and suspicious, yet credulous, and a 
slave to adulation ; devoted to cruelty and lust This pestife- 
rous tyrant governed in Mantua five years, according to Platina; 
but the plebeians themselves could bear him no longer, and set 
up another of the same family against him. Bottigella Bona- 
cossi with little difficulty was able to expel him, and Tamo, his 
brother, one of whom died miserably at Padua, and the other at 
Ferrara." 

We pass over the actions of Bottigella, and his wars with 
Cremona and with Azzo of Este, &c. In 1308, Bottigella died, 
as well as his enemy Azzo ; to the latter succeeded his son Flisco, 
and to the former Passarino, his brother ; for this plebeian ty- 
ranny was already become hereditary in the family. Although 
the government of Passarino was not remarkable for folly or 
severity, yet Luigi Gonzaga, who had connected himself in 
marriage with the Bonacossi, being a man of abilities, and 
knowing the general discontent of the people, and the universal 
hatred of the nobility against that family, entered into concert 
with some of the neighboring lords, as Cane della Scala, &c, 
found little difficulty to depose and expel Passarino, put him to 
death, and reign in his stead. The family of the Gonzaghi 
were named jfrom the place of their ancient residence, which 
was Gonzaga. A multitude of conjectures and fables, collected 
from various authors, concerning the origin of this family, we 
pass over. Guido Gonzaga, who fought against Manfred, King 
of Naples, had five sons, the first of whom was Luigi, the 
author and founder of the lordship and marquisate of Mantua. 

In 1328, it is said, that " by the consent of the people, accord- 
ing to the laws and good custom, one was elected, after the 
death of Passarino, to whom, and to his successors, the whole 
empire was given for perpetuity, as was usual in the heroic 
times. The Mantuans reasoned in this manner : The mode of 
making a commonwealth perpetual, or of any long duration, is 
by prudence, which disposes and rules with manly energy, as 
well as with wise discernment This can alone be performed in 
a state by means of justice, which distributes to every one his 
deserts ; to the good, rewards and honors; to the wicked, punish- 
ment and infamy. As the virtue of clemency is the daughter of 
magnanimity, and participates of divinity, we always applaud 
it when it extends only to offences committed against ourselves ; 

484 ON GOVERNMENT. 

and it is commended in princes whenever pardon and mercy 
cannot cause an injury to the public, and give insolence to the 
daring to rise against the laws. It should be a pleasure to 
princes to remit private injuries ; but skilful in the healing art, 
they should not be so partially compassionate as to heal one 
wound at the hazard of destroying the whole body. The liberty 
of the people consists in two things, in the laws and the tribu- 
nals ; when these prevail in a city, without favor, respect, or par- 
tiality, that city and its citizens are free. 

Upon these principles the Mantuans, finding that liberty never 
had been enjoyed by them under their uncouth government of a 
republic, strange to relate ! adopted voluntarily an absolute mo- 
narchy. Louis Gonzaga was elected and constituted upon these 
principles and for these reasons, and began his reign by an assi- 
duous attention to the revival of laws which had been trampled 
under foot, and by a diligent solicitude that all the good customs 
should be observed with equality. And this is sufficient for 
another example of the struggles of a few families, in an unba- 
lanced government, for preeminence, and of the final triumph of 
the Oonzaghi over the Bonacossi, in a monarchy erected on the 
ruins of a republic. ^ 

MONTEPULCIANO. 

Chiusi, the country and residence of Porsenna, the ancient 
king to whom Tarquin fied for hospitality, was one of the most 
ancient and powerful cities of Tuscany or Etruria. As Chiusi 
was in a low situation and a bad air, Porsenna chose, for his 
pleasure and his health, a mountain in the neighborhood, where 
was a salubrious atmosphere and an admirable prospect; an 
ample plain, the lake of Thrasimene, and the river of Chiane, 
with hills and valleys loaded with every production of the earth, 
in grapes, grains, and fruits, in the most perfect elegance and 
abundance, were around it* 

" In after ages, upon a civil war in Chiusi between the gentle- 
men and plebeians, in which the former were expelled, they re- 
tired to this mountain, and gave it the name of Mons Politicua, 
which was corrupted afterwards, in the vulgar pronunciation, 
into Monspolitianus, and since into Montepulciano. The plebei- 

^ Storia delta cUt^ di Montepulciano, di Spinello del Capitano Marcello Bend. 
4to. In Fiorenxa. 1641. 

MONTEPULCIANO. 485 

ans of the same city passed the river, took possession of another 
elevated situation, where they built a castle, and called it Cas- 
tram Plebis." 

Though Florence and Siena have, at different times, pretended 
that M ontepulciano was in their dominion ; yet it is certain that, 
for three hundred years at least, it was an independent sovereign 
republic. At an expense of continual wars, it maintained its 
liberty. Its government was by podestas and general councils 
like all the other cities; and its whole history is made up of 
revolutions, from nobles to plebeians, and from plebeians to 
nobles, Florence and Siena taking the parties of opposite fac- 
tions. Even in this little village, there were great families as well 
as little ones, the Guidos, Ugolinos, the Bulgarellos, and Binieri, 
continually struggling for precedence. 

" In the year 1328, the Rinieri, or rather the family del Pecora, 
were accounted noble, because they were rich, and powerful in 
followers, adherents, and relations ; they had increased in repu- 
tation and power to such a degree, that they domineered, at their 
discretion, over all their compatriots. The heads of the house 
were Jacob and Nicholas de' Cavalieri, who governed in concur- 
rence, with prudence and good order, till 1352, when dissensions 
and discords began to arise between them. 

"Jacob concerted with Peter Sacconi, who governed in Arezzo, 
a project to make himself master of Montepulciano ; but Nicho- 
las, his colleague, revealed it to the governor of the people, who 
excited an insurrection, and expelled Jacob, with twenty of his 
followers; and afterwards, with the influence and counsels of 
Nicholas, the government was reformed, and all the friends of 
Jacob were excluded from any share in it,"* according to the 
custom and nature of all majorities, when there is no power but 
a minority to rebuff their pretensions. "Jacob then intrigued 
with Visconti, Archbishop of Milan, and his allies, and, corrupt- 
ing a notary, an officer on guard, broke down a gate in the night, 
entered with all his men, and excited a tumult Nicholas, a 
knight of great spirit, seized his arms, and mounting his horse, 
with a few of his companions, waiting for no further help, at- 
tacked the enemy with such impetuosity that they fled in a 
panic. Jacob, with twenty-five horsemen, escaped ; the others 
were taken, to the number of seventy-five, together with the 

* Matt VilL libw iii. c. 10, f. 146, an. lSd2. 
41* 

486 ON GOVERNMENT. 

notary and the gaaixL The governors of the people hanged 
thirty, and released the rest, having first marked them forever, 
by slitting their noses and cutting off their ears. 

"Jacob then fled to Siena, and there attempted to form con- 
nections and obtain aoxiliaries ; and Nicholas, and the governors 
of the people of Montepnlciano, applied to Pemgia. A war 
was excited between those two cities, which was terminated by 
ambassadors, npon these conditions, that Montepnlciano should 
remain under the government of the people, under the protection 
of the commons of Siena, for twenty years ; Jacob and Nicho- 
las were to be indemnified for the expenses, and their estates 
restored, and the commons of Florence and Perugia were to be 
guarantees. Tommasi adds, that another condition was, the 
restoration of all the refugees.* 

" The next year the peace was broken, and Nicholas sent into 
banishment ; but, collecting his friends without, and concerting 
measures with his partisans within, he found means to enter Mon- 
tepnlciano, with two hundred horse and five hundred foot ; but he 
met with such a resistance from his enemies in the place, and 
their Sienese allies, that he perceived he could not overcome 
them. He therefore took the barbarous resolution to bum the 
town, and retire ; his party set fire to as many houses as possible, 
and, while the people and soldiers were intent upon preventing 
the progress of the flames, he retreated- Nicholas and Jacob, 
at length finding that they gained nothing and lost much by con- 
tinual quarrels, came to an agreement, and solicited the emperor 
to hold the government of Montepnlciano as imperial vicars; 
but the people would not admit them, because the Sienese 
would not receive such vicars. This occasioned a fresh war 
between the commons of Montepulciano and those of SienEi, on 
one side, and the Perugians, in conjunction with the Pecora 
family and their adherents, on the other. In this war a memo- 
rable battle was fought, and the Montepulcians distinguished 
themselves by so much valor, that the Perugians created four of 
them cavaliers, namely, — John, the son of Nicholas, and Ghe- 
rard, the son of Jacob, and two of their nephews, Berthold and 
Corrado, all of the family del Pecora; and the Perugian con- 
querors, with their Montepulcian cavaliers, committed the cus- 
tomary depredations and devastations. 

* Tom. lib. X. fo. 819, an. 1868. 

MONTEPULCIANO. 487 

" The government of the land being in the hands of the peo- 
ple, for the sake of the public tranquillity, Jacob and Nicholas 
del Pecora remained abroad in banishment, inhabiting Yaliano, 
a strong place, and a plentiful situation. The latter, knowing 
the nature of the citizens of Montepulciano, accustomed to hope 
more than they ought, and to tolerate less than was necessary, 
discontented and prone to novelties, vacillating between the 
commons of Siena and those of Perugia through alternate envy, 
jealousy, and resentment, and being never at rest, entered into a 
secret correspondence with them, in order to return to his coun- 
try. His purpose was in time accomplished, and he was joyfuUy 
received by the people, and mutual forgiveness of injuries and 
aflfronts was stipulated. Recollecting that the rupture between 
him and Jacob had been the cause of all the evils, he sent a mes- 
senger to him, and a reconciliation was effected between them for 
the common benefit of their country. All was now joy, friend- 
ship, and festivity, in appearance, but the secret causes of discord 
were still at work, and before the year 1363 produced another 
revolution, and Nicholas and his friends were again exiled. 

" Five years afterwards the exiles from Montepulciano, with 
some assistance from the grandees of Siena, entered and con- 
quered their country, and sent Jacob, who had made himself lord 
and master, to prison. But the plebeians and others, who had 
been oppressed by him, and mortally hated him, could not sati- 
ate their vengeance merely by burning and plundering all his 
property ; they broke open his prison, and tore him into pieces 
so small, that no part of his body could ever be collected for 
sepulture. The grandees were so transported with indignation 
at this infamous barbarity, that they put to death a great part of 
the plebeians, and banished the remainder. They reformed the 
government of the land, however, into a popular state, and ba- 
nished the Cavalieri as rebels." 

Not to pursue this relation to any greater length, it may be 
observed in general, that this little hill maintained its independ- 
ence for three hundred years, by the mutual jealousies of Flo- 
rence, Siena, and Perugia; but it was by uninterrupted wars 
with one or the other of them, all in their turn seeking its alli- 
ance or subjugation, and all in their turn taking its part when in 
danger of being subdued by any one. This occasioned a con- 
tinual vacillation of its friendship and enmity with those cities, 


and constant revolutions of government at home npon every 
change. There was no balance in their government by which 
parties or powerful individuals might be restrained, and a few 
families were continually scrambling for superiority. There were 
no nobles by name, that is, there were no marquises, counts, or 
barons ; but there were gentlemen and common people, and the 
gentlemen were called cavaliers, because they could afford to 
keep a horse, or at most, three horses to each man. The family 
del Pecora was the principal one of these cavaliers, and they 
enslaved their country of course, as the Medici did in Florence. 
Perhaps it may be said, that in America we have no distinc- 
tions of ranks, and therefore shall not be liable to those divisions 
and discords which spring from them ; but have we not laborers, 
yeomen, gentlemen, esquires, honorable gentlemen, and excellent 
gentlemen ? and are not these distinctions established by law ? 
have they not been established by our ancestors from the first 
plantation of the country ? and are not those distinctions as earn* 
estly desired and sought, as titles, garters, and ribbons are in any 
nation of Europe? We may look as wise, and moralize as 
gravely as we will ; we may call this desire of distinction childish 
and silly; but we cannot alter the nature of men; human nature 
is thus childish and silly; and its Author has made it so, undoubt- 
edly for wise purposes ; and it is setting ourselves up to be wiser 
than nature, and more philosophical than Providence, to censure it. 
All that we can say in America is, that legal distinctions, tities, 
powers, and privileges, are not hereditary ; but that the disposi- 
tion to artificial distinctions, to titles, and ribbons, and to the 
hereditary descent of them, is ardent in America, we may see 
by the institution of the Cincinnati. There is not a more re- 
markable phenomenon in universal history, nor in universal hu- 
man nature, than this order. The officers of an army, who had 
voluntarily engaged in a service under the authority of the peo- 
ple, whose creation and preservation was upon the principle that 
the body of the people were the only fountain of power and of 
honor ; officers, too, as enlightened and as virtuous as ever served 
in any army; the moment they had answered the end of their 
creation, instituted titles and ribbons, and hereditary descents, 
by their own authority only, without the consent or knowledge 
of the people, or their representatives or legislatures. If these 
gentiemen had been of opinion that tities and ribbons were ne- 

MONTEPULCIANO. 489 

oessary in society, to have been consistent, they should have taken 
measures for calling conventions of the people, where it should 
have been determined, first, whether any such distinction should 
be introduced ; secondly, how many such orders ; thirdly, what 
number of individuals of each; and, lastly, there should have 
been in convention a general election of noblemen for each of 
the thirteen states. As great injustice may be done by giving 
too much honor to one, and too little to another, as by commit- 
ting trespasses upon property, or slanders upon reputatiftn ; the 
pubUc good requires justice in the distribution of fame as well 
as fortune ; and the public, or some tribunal erected by the pub- 
lic, can be alone competent to the decision.^ 

As there is no instance more parallel than this of Montepul- 
ciano, where the people who owned horses agreed together to 
call themselves cavaUers, and thus created a distinct order in the 
state, this opportunity has been taken to make an observation 
upon an institution, which ought not to be passed over in con- 
sidering the subject of these labors. It is greatly to be wished 
that the ofRcers would voluntarily discontinue their societies, 
and lay aside their eagles, which will do them, as well as the 
community, much more hurt than good ; they have already ex- 
cluded many excellent men from places in civil life, to which 
their merit in other respects entitled them; they have excited 
disputes which are very pernicious; they are founded on no 
principle of morals, true policy, or our own constitution.^ 

1 Of the feeling which was excited throughout the country by the establish- 
ment of the order of the Cincinnati, there is abundant proof in the publications 
of the time. The moderation of Washington in recommending a modification 
of the objectionable features of the institution, and the wisdom of the society in 
yielding at once to public opinion, smoothed all difficulties. Nevertheless it may 
be doubted whether the institution ever had in it the seeds of any mischief, for 
it was not based upon a distinction of property, without which no aristocratic 
class can really continue. The statute of distribution of estates is the most solid 
pillar of a republican edifice. 

9 This volume contains all of that part of the Defence, devoted by the author 
to a review of tiie domestic history of some of the Italian Republics in the Mid- 
dle Ages ; a portion to the perusal of which it is difficult to attach great interest, 
and yet not without its value to those disposed to study faithfully the working of 
popi^ar forms of government M. de Sismondi has since given to the public a 
more extended and perfect sketch of the Italian history for the same period, and 
has endeavored to analyze the causes, as well of the j)rosperity as of the decline 
of the republican states. His hundred and twenty-sixth chapter is devoted to an 
examination of their ideas of liberty, and to a comparison of them with those es- 
tablished at the present day. He considers the former as embraced in three pro- 
ponlaons, which are equally considered as axioms among the people of the Umted 

490 ON GOVERNMENT. 

States. The first is, that all authority exercised over the people emanates from 
the people. Secondly, That the power conferred should return at stated inter- 
vals to Its 80un*e. Thirdly, That the recipient of the power must be responsi- 
ble to the people for its exercise. These axioms M. do Sismondi considers as 
sufficient to account for the great impulse given to the energy and activity of 
those communities at that time. 

But they do not supply the regulating principle which should have prevented 
them from falling into disorders and excess. The truth seems to be, that no well 
defined ideas of numan rights were entertained in any quarter, and consequently 
there were no limitations of the power of majorities over minorities. The histo- 
ries consequently show nothing but a series of struggles for the control of the 
government between factions all equally disposed to abuse their power whenever 
tney succeeded in securing it. In these contentions the safety and happiness of 
the individual citizen were made of no account He rose or fell, with the 
success or defeat of the faction to which he attached himself. With such a state 
of things, continued for any length of time, it could not fail to happen that a 
great number would gradually be led to prefer the more durable authority ema- 
nating fh>m the will of one. It is, therefore, no great cause of surprise to find 
that, in course of time, the people of each separate city voluntarily submitted to 
the unrestrained will of some single person powerful enough to compel the 
maintenance of order for their protection. 

To remedy the dangers attendant upon the arbitrary use of power, checks, 
however multiplied, will scarcely avail without an explicit admission of some 
limitation of the right of the majority to exercise sovereign authority over the 
individual citizen. The modern theory of republicanism rests upon the axioms 
that, in the eye of the state, certain natural rights belong equally to all men ; 
and that these rights cannot be annihilated at the mere pleasure of the greater 
number. Without some such securities, there is no protection from social 
tyranny, whatever may be the form it takes. In popular governments, minorities 
constantly run much greater risk of suffering from arbitrary power than in abso- 
lute monarchies. For the majority which wield the power against the smaller 
number, at the same time create the public sentiment that wiu sustain them, at 
least for the moment, in a despotic act ; whereas, under single rulers, although 
individual cases of oppression are more likely to happen, public opinion will 
yet be lef^ free to censure or correct them. The only cure for this is in the 
recognition of the right of every individual citizen to complete protection, so long 
as he conducts himself like a good citizen. Ilence spring all the safeguards 
so carefully introduced into the constitutions and the declarations of rights in 
America, which are, however, afler all dependent for their force mainly upon 
the establishment of a sound public opinion. The use of checks and balances in 
the forms of government, is to create delays and multiply diversities of interests, 
by wliich the tendency on a sudden to violate them may be counteracted. In 
the cities of Italy, there was no effective barrier between the passions of the 
majority and their object, but physical force. Hence the minority was always 
driven to violence to protect itself. 

It is a little singular that the course of education generally pursued in Ame- 
rica, especially among those destined to make and to expound the laws, should 
be almost exclusively devoted to the consideration of those precedents in history 
in which the ineciuality of ranks is an acknowledged and vital element ; whilst 
very little attention has been paid to the observation of those phenomena which 
the legislation and the social systems, by analogy most nearly approximating our 
own, almost uniformly present It must be conceded that, as yet, philosophical 
generalization upon abstract questions of the highest class is not the character- 
istic of the American mind. But the time may come when it will be pushed to 
a higher point in some departments connected with practical results than has 
yet been anywhere reached. 

APPENDIX. 

POSTSCRIPT. 

The following was appended to the first volume of the original edition of the 
Defence, which made its appearance alone. As it seems to nave no necessary 
connection with that place, it has been transferred to this, where it seems equally 
appropriate, and where it serves more nearly to equalize the size of the volumes. 

The foreign gazettes and journals have announced to the world that the Abb6 
De Mably was applied to by the United States of America for his advice and 
assistance in the formation of a code of laws.^ It is unnecessary to say any thing 
to this, only that it is a part of a million volumes of lies, according to the best 
computation, which are to be imposed upon posterity, relative to American affairs. 
The Abb6 himself, in his observations, has said that I desired his sentiments. 
This is true ; but the manner of the request ought to be known, that those who 
think it of any consequence may understand in what sense it is true. Upon my 
arrival in Paris, in October, 1782, upon the business of the peace, the Abbe de 
Mably's book, upon the manner of writing history, was put into my hands. At 
t^e conclusion of that publication, he declared his intention of writing on the 
American Revolution. Meeting the Abb6 soon afterwards, at dinner, at Mon- 
sieur De Chalut's, the farmer-genera), my friends, the Abbes De Chalut and 
Amoux, who were of the party, informed me that their friend was about writing 
the history of the American Revolution, and would be obliged to me for any facts 
or memorials that might be in my power. The question was asked. What part 
of the revolution he intended to write ? The whole. Where had he obtained 
the materials ? It was supposed they might be obtained from the public papers, 
and inquiry of individuab. In answer to this a few difficulties were started, and 
the conversation spun into length. At last the gentlemen asked to have, in writ- 
ing, what had been then said upon the subject, as, the conversation being in 

1 This statement is made by Baron de Grimm in his Literary Correspondence 
for the month of January, 1 783, and corrected in his review of de Mably's " Ob- 
servations sur le Gouvemement et les Lois des itcUs-Unis cTAmiiique,** in October, 
1784. The story was revived in some of the American newspapers in 1816, 
which drew from the author a note to the editor of the North American Review, 
inclosing a copy in English of the letter to the Abb^ de Mably, and both were 
published in that Magazine for the month of November, 1816, together with two 
notes of acknowledgment, one from the Abb6 himself, and the other from Mar- 
montel, which are now appended. 

492 APPENDIX. 

French it might not have been fully comprehended. Accordingly, in a few days, 
I wrote the Abb6 a letter, the translation of which, by a friend, into French, is 
here inclosed ; the original, in English, not being in my possession. By this it will 
be seen, that the request to the Abb^ to write upon American affairs, was a mere 
civility ; and rather a desire that he would not expose himself, by attempting a 
history that he was altogether unprovided for, than any formal request that he 
should write at all. We ought to be obliged to any gentleman in Europe who 
will favor us with his thoughts ; but, in general, the theory of government is aa 
well understood in America as it is in Europe ; and by great numbers of indi- 
viduals is every thing relating to a free constitution infinitely better compre- 
hended than by the Abb^ De Mably or M. Turgot, amiable, learned, and inge- 
nious as they were.^ 

TO THE ABb£ de MABLT. 

It is with pleamire that I have learned your deagn to write upon the American 
Revolution ; because your other writings, which are much admired by Americana, 
contain principles of legislation, policy, and negotiation, which are perfectly 
analogous to t^eir own; so that you cannot write upon this subject, without 
producing a work instructive to the public, and especially to my fellow-citizena. 

But I hope, sir, you will not accuse me of presumption, of affectation, or of 
singularity, if I venture to express my opinion, that it is yet too soon to under- 
take a complete history of that great event ; and that there is no man, either 
in America or Europe, at this day, capable of performing it, or who is in posses- 
sion of the materials requisite and necessary for that purpose. 

To engage in such a work, the writer ought to divide the history of America 
into several periods. 

1. From the first establishment of the Colonies, in 1600, to the commence- 
ment of their disputes with Great Britain, in 1761. 

2. From the commencement of those disputes in 1761, occasioned by an order 
of the board of trade and plantations in Great Britain, sent to the officers of the 
customs in America, to carry into execution in the strictest manner the acts of 
trade, and to apply to the courts of judicature for writs of assistance for that pur- 
pose, to the commencement of hostilities on the nineteenth of April, 1 775. Dur- 
ing this period of fourteen years, there was little more than a war of the quilL 

3. From the battle of Lexington to the signature of the treaty with France, 
on the sixth of February, 1778. During this period of three years, the war was 
exclusively between Great Britain and the United States. 

4. From the treaty with France to the commencement of hostilities between 
Great Britain and France, in the first place ; afterwards, with Spain ; then to 
the gradual progress of the armed neutrality, and the war of England against 
Holland. Finally, all these scenes have their catastrophe in the negotiations of 
the peace. 

1 In the original edition of this work, the letter was in French ; but as it was 
not so written oy the author, and as an authorized English version has been since 
published, that has been adopted in the present instance. 

APPENDIX. 493 

Without a distinct knowledge of the history of the colonies in the first period, 
a writer will find himself embarrassed, from the beginning to the end of his book, 
to account for events and characters which will present themselves in every step 
o£ his path, as he advances to the second, third, and fourth periods. To acquire 
a sufiicient knowledge of the first period, it will be necessary to read all the char- 
ters granted to the colonies, and the commissions and instructions given to govern- 
ors, all the codes of laws of the different colonies, (and thirteen volumes in folio, 
of dry, disgusting statutes, cannot be read with pleasure, or in a short time,) all 
the records of the legislatures of the several colonies, (which cannot be found 
but in manuscript, and by travelling in person from New Hampshire to Georgia) ; 
the records of the board of tnule and plantations in Great Britain, from its 
institution to its dissolution ; as also the files in t^e offices of some of the Secreta- 
ries of State. 

There is another branch of reading which cannot be neglected, if the former 
might be omitted. I mean those writings which have appeared in America from 
time to time. I pretend not, however, in the place where I am, at a distance 
from all books and writings, to make an exact enumeration. The writings of the 
ancient Grovemors Winthrop and Winslow, Dr. Mather, Mr. Prince, Neal's His- 
tory of New England, Douglas's Summary, the Progressive Amelioration of the 
Lands and the present state of the British Colonies, Hutchinson's History of 
the Massachusetts Bay, Smith's History of New York, Smith's History of New 
Jersey, the Works of William Penn, Dunmier^s Defence of the New England 
Charters, the History of Virginia, and many other public writings. All these 
were anterior to the present quarrel, which began in 1761. 

During the second period, the writings are more numerous, and more difficult to 
be procured. There were then given to the public, works of great importance. In 
the controversies between those who were actors in this scene, as writers, there are 
some who ought to be distinguished. Among them are the Governors under the 
king, Pownall, Bernard, and Hutchinson, Lieutenant-Governor Oliver, Mr. Sewall, 
the Judge of Admiralty for Halifax, Jonathan Mayhew, D. D., James Otis, Oxen- 
bridge Thaeher, Samuel Adams, Josiah Quincy, Joseph Warren ; and perhaps 
the following have not been less important than the foregoing, namely, — the 
writings of Mr. Dickinson, Mr. Wilson, and Dr. Rush, of Philadelphia ; of Mr. 
Livingston, and Mr. McDougall, of New York ; of Colonel Bland and Arthur Lee, 
of Virginia, and of many others. The records of the town of Boston, and espe- 
cially of the Committee of Correspondence, the records of the Board of Commis- 
sioners of the Customs in Boston, the journals of the House of Representatives, 
and of die Council of Massachusetts Bay. Moreover, the gazettes of the town 
of Boston, not forgetting those of New York and Philadelphia, ought to be col- 
lected and examined from the year 1760. All this is necessary in order to write 
with precision, and in detail, the history of the discussions, before hostilities com- 
menced, during the period from the year 1761, to the nineteenth of April, 1775. 

During the third and the fourth periods, the records, pamphlets, and gazettes 
of the thirteen states ought to be collected, as well as the journals of Congress, 
(of which, nevertheless, a great part is still secret,) and the collection of the new 
constitutions of the several states. The Remembrancer, and the Annual Regi- 
ster, periodical papers, published in England. The Affaires de VAngleterre et de 
rAmirigue, and the Mercure de France, published in Paris, and the Politique 

VOL. V. 42 

494 APPENDEC 

HitUandois, printed at Amsterdam. The whole course of the Correspondence of 
General Washington with Congress, from the month of July, 1775, to this day, 
which has not yet been published, and which will not be published till Congress 
shall order or permit it Allow me to say, that until this vast source of information 
shall be opened, it will be scarcely possible for any man to undertake the history 
of the American War. There are still other writings of importance, in the office 
of the Secret Committee of Congress, in the Committee of Foreign Affairs, in 
the Committee on the Treasury, in the Marine or Naval Committee, in the Board 
of War, as long as it existed, and of the Departments of War, of the Navy, the 
Finances, and of Foreign Affairs, from their institution. There are also letters 
of American ministers in France, Spain, Holland, and other parts of Europe. 

The greatest part of the documents and materials being still secret, it is pre- 
mature to undertake a general history of the American Revolution. But too 
much labor and care cannot be employed in making collections of those mate- 
rials. There exist, however, in part, already two or three general histories of the 
American War, and the American Revolution, published in London, and two or 
three others published in Paris. Those in the English language are only mate- 
rials, indigested and conAised, without discernment ; and all these histories, both 
in French and English, are only monuments of the complete ignorance of the 
writers of their subject The whole of a long life, to begin at the age of twenty 
years, will be necessary to assemble from all nations, and from all parts of the 
world in which they are deposited, the documents proper to form a complete 
history of the American Revolution, because it is indeed the history of mankind 
during that epoch. The histories of France, Spain, Holland, England, and the 
neutral powers, must be united with that of America. The materials ought to be 
assembled from all those nations ; and the documents, the most important of all, as 
well as the characters of actors and the secret springs of action, are still concealed 
in cabinets, and enveloped in ciphers. Whether you, sir, undertake to give a 
general history, or only observations and remarks, like those you have published 
concerning the Greeks and Romans, you will produce a work very interesting 
and instructive in morality, policy, and legislation ; and I shall esteem it an honor 
and a pleasure to furnish you with any litUe assistance in my power to facilitate 
vour researches. 

It is impossible for me to say whether the government of France would wish 
to sec any work profoundly written, and by an author of great celebrity, in the 
French language. Principles of government must be laid open, so different from 
those which we find in Europe, especially in France, that such an essay, perhaps, 
would not be seen with indifference ; but of this I am not a competent judge. 

Permit me, sir, before I finish this letter, to point at a key to all this history. 
There is a general analogy in the governments and characters of all the thirteen 
states ; but it was not till the debates and the war began in Massachusetts Bay, 
the principal province of New England, that their primitive institutions produced 
their first effect Four of these institutions ought to be amply investigated and 
maturely considered by any person who wishes to write with correct information 
upon this subject ; for they have produced a decisive effect, not only in the first 
determinations of the controversies in writing, and the first debates in council, 
and the first resolutions to resist in arms, but also by the influence they had on 
the minds of the other colonies, by giving them an example to adopt more or 

APPENDIX. 495 

less the same institutioDs and siinilar measures. The four institutions intended 
are: — 

1. The towns or districts. 8. The schools. 

2. The congregations. 4. The militia. 

The towns are certain extents of country, or districts of territory, into which 
^lassachusettB Bay, Connecticut, New Hampshire, and Rhode Island, are divided. 
These towns contain upon an average, say, six miles or two leagues square. 
The inhabitants who live within these limits are formed by law into corporations, 
or bodies politic, and are invested with certain powers and privileges, as, for ex- 
ample, to repair the great roads or highways, to support the poor, to choose their 
selectmen, constables, collectors of taxes, and above all, their representatives in 
the legislature ; as also, the right to assemble, whenever they are summoned by 
their selectmen, in their town halls, there to deliberate upon the public affairs of 
the town, or to give instructions to their representatives in the legislature. The 
consequences of these institutions have been, that the inhabitants, having ac- 
quired from their infancy the habit of discussing, of deliberating, and of judging 
of public affairs, it was in these assemblies of towns or districts that the senti- 
ments of the people were formed in the first place, and their resolutions were 
taken from the beginning to the end of the disputes and the war with Great 
Britain. 

2. The congregations are religious societies, which comprehend the whole 
people. Every district contains a parish or religious congregation. In general, 
they have but one, though some of them have several Each parish has a tem- 
ple for public worship, and a minister, maintained at the public expense. The 
constitutions of these congregations are extremely popular, and the clergy have 
littie influence or authority beyond that which their own piety, virtues, and 
talents natiually give them. They are chosen by the people of their parishes, 
and receive their ordinations from the neighboring clergy. They are all married, 
have families, and live with their parishioners in an intimate and perfect friend- 
ship. They visit the sick ; they are charitable to the poor ; they solemnize mar- 
riages and funerals, and preach twice every Sunday. The smallest imputation on 
their moral character would destroy their influence, and ruin them forever. They 
are, therefore, wise, virtuous, and pious men ; their sentiments are generally con- 
formable to those of their people, and they are jealous friends of liberty. 

3. There are schools in every town, established by an express law of the 
colony. Every town containing sixty families, is obliged, under a penalty, to 
maintain constanUy a school and a schoolmaster, who shall teach his scholars 
reading, writing, arithmetic, and the rudiments of the Latin and Greek lan- 
guages. All the children of the inhabitants, the rich as well as the poor, have a 
right to go to these public schools. There, are fonned the candidates for admis- 
sion as students into the colleges at Cambridge, New Haven, Princeton, and Dart- 
mouth. In these colleges are educated future masters for these schools, future 
ministers for these congregations, doctors of law and medicine, and magistrates 
and officers for the government of the country. 

4. The mUitia comprehends the whole people. By virtue of the laws of the 
country, every male inhabitant between sixteen and sixty years of age, is en- 
rolled in a company, and a regiment of militia completely oiganized with all its 
officers. He is enjoined to keep always in his house, and at his own expense, a 

496 APPENDIX. 

firelock in good order, a powder liom, ft pound of powder, twelve fiints, foii»uid- 
twenty balls of lead, a cartridge box, and a knapsack ; so that the whole coantrj 
is ready to march for its own defence upon the first signal of alarm. These com- 
panies and regiments are obliged to assemble at certain times in every year, 
under the orders of their officers, for the inspection of their arms and ammuni- 
tion, and to perform their exercises and manoeuvres. 

Behold, sir, a little sketch of the four principal sources of that prudence in 
council and that military valor and ability, which have produced the American 
Revolution, and which I hope will be sacredly preserved as the foundations of 
the liberty, happiness, and prosperity of the people. 

If there are any other particulars, concerning which I can ffve you any infonn- 
ation, be so good as to point them out 

I have the honor to be, 

1782. JoHK Adams. 

This letter was privately conununicated to M. Marmontel, who seema to have 
had some intention of writing on America, as well as the person to whom it was 
addressed, and it drew from both the following acknowledgments. 

L'Abb^ de Mably est bien fach£ de ne s'^tre pas trouv^ chez lui n land Mon- 
sieur Adams lui a fait Thonneur d'y passer. II a celui de lui remett '^critqu^ 
lui a address^. Jamais TAbb^ de Mably ne s'est propose d'^rire PL toire de la 
revolution d'Am^rique ; il seroit mort avant que d'avoir rassembl^ la moiti^ des 
materiaux d*un si important ouvrage. II sera tres oblig^ k Monsieur Adams 8*11 
veut avoir la bont^ de lui faire tirer une copie de la demi^re partie de cet ^crit, 
en y joignant quelques remarques sur le g^nie et les int^rets de quelques-uns 
des premiers confifed^res, et surtout sur T^tat actuel des richesses ou fortunes des 
particuliers, et sur la nature du luxe connu en Am^rique. 

M. Marmontel a I'honneur de fure milles complimens i, Monsieur Adams, et 
de lui renvoyer Texcellente lettre qu'il a eu la bont^ de lui confier. £Ue lui fait 
sentir plus que jamais I'extreme besoin qu'il a de ses secours et de ses lumi^res 
pour etre en ^tat d'^crire passablement I'histoire de la grande revolution, qui fidt 
la gloire de TAm^rique septentrionale et qui assure son bonheur. 

CeSMars, 1788. 

END OF VOLUBfE V. 

/ 

•if 

3 bios Ob 133 mi M 

3 bios Ob 133 H11 H