THE WRITINGS 

OF 

JAMES MADISON 

VOLUME II. 
1783-1787 

OF THIS LETTER-PRESS EDITION 

750 COPIES HA VE BEEN PRINTED FOR SALE 

No..... 

<5Cv^0fe^^^ 

December, 1901 




h 

COMPRISING HIS PUBLIC PAPERS AND HIS PRIVATE COR- 

RESPONDENCE, INCLUDING NUMEROUS LETTERS AND 

DOCUMENTS NOW FOR THE FIRST TIME PRINTED 

EDITED BY 

GAILLARD HUNT 


G. P. PUTNAM'S SONS 

NEW YORK LONDON 

27 WEST TWENTY-THIRD STREET 24 BEDFORD STREET, STRAND 

&|re Knickerbocker flrtss 
Ube Itnfcfcerbocfcer press, View Iflorfc 

CONTENTS OF VOLUME II. 

PAGE 

Chronology xv 

1783. 
To Edmund Randolph, July 8th .... 2 

Impost in the Assembly — Nathan award — Place of sitting of 
Congress. 

To Edmund Randolph, July I5th .... 2 

Attachment of Philadelphia to Federal Government. 

To Edmund Randolph, July 28th .... 3 

Return of Congress to Philadelphia — Seat of Federal Govern 
ment — The definitive treaty of peace. 

To Thomas Jefferson, August nth .... 5 

The definitive treaty — Dana's mission to Russia — Ratification 
of treaty with Sweden — The peace establishment — Fate of the 
budget. 

To Edmund Randolph, August I2th .... 8 

Penurious spirit of Massachusetts — Statue voted for General 
Washington — His counsel sought. 

To Edmund Randolph, August i8th .... 9 

Seat of Government — Letters from Laurens — South Carolina 
agrees to the impost. 

To Edmund Randolph, August 24th 10 

Carleton's evacuation of New York. 

To Edmund Randolph, August 3Oth . . . . n 

British pamphlet on the subject of commercial treaty — Seat of 
Federal Government. 

To James Madison, August 3Oth . . . . 13 

Evacuation of New York — Seat of Federal Government. 

vi CONTENTS OF VOL UME II. 

To James Madison, September 8th .... 14 

His mother's health — His slave Billy. 

To Edmund Randolph, September 8th . . . 15 

The definitive treaty — Seat of Federal Government — Sale of 
land warrants in Virginia. 

To Edmund Randolph, September I3th ... 17 

Prospects of a commercial treaty. 

To Edmund Randolph, September 2Oth . . . 18 

The Virginia cession. 

To Thomas Jefferson, September 2Oth . . . 18 

Territorial cession and seat of Federal Government — Personal 
plans — The peace establishment — Election of a secretary to 
Congress — A tax on department of finance — Investigations of 
mutiny. 

To Edmund Randolph, September 3Oth ... 22 

Reception of the Dutch Minister — Rule concerning prizes. 

To Edmund Randolph, October I3th ... 24 

Permanent seat of Congress — Arrival of Van Berkel. 

-To Thomas Jefferson, December loth ... 27 

Attitude of Mason towards the impost and the territorial ces 
sion — Prospects of a convention for revising the Form of gov 
ernment — Course of reading — Shape of the earth. 

1784. 

To Edmund Randolph, March loth .... 30 

Course of reading — Extradition case of George Hancock. 
-To Thomas Jefferson, March i6th .... 34 

Obligation to ratify a Minister's act — Number of votes neces 
sary to ratify a treaty of peace — Cession of territory — The 
Virginia council of State — Free navigation of the Potomac and 
boundary of Maryland — Negotiations with Maryland proposed 
— Books on government — Pair of spectacles ordered — Extra 
dition with South Carolina. 

To Thomas Jefferson April 25th .... 46 

Movements of Mazzei — Mazzei's opinion of public men — 
Navigation of the Potomac — Subterraneous city in Siberia. 

^ 

CONTENTS OF VOLUME II. vii 

PAGE 

James Madison, May I3th ..... 50 

Jefferson's appointment. 

To Thomas Jefferson, May I5th . . . . 51 

Revisal of State constitution — Election of Speaker. 

To James Madison, June 5th ..... 52 

Tobacco accounts. 

To James Madison, June 24th ..... 53 


Notes of speech on proposed amendment to Virginia 
constitution, June ....... 54, n. 

To Thomas Jefferson, July 3d ..... 56 

Taxation in Virginia — Ports of entry — Agitation for federal 
convention — General assessment for religious purposes pro 
posed — Sale of public lands — Efforts for Thomas Paine — 
Negotiations with Maryland for Potomac — Education of Jeffer 
son's nephew — Confusion in revenue department. 

To George Washington, August I2th ... 63 

Efforts in behalf of Thomas Paine. 

To Thomas Jefferson, August 2Oth .... 64 

Footing of the British debts — Ports of entry — Prices in Vir 
ginia — The damage to crops — Free navigation of the Missis 
sippi — Spain will not persist in her present attitude — Discussion 
of the subject — Jobs for Kentucky lands— Education of Jeffer 
son's nephew. 

To James Madison, September 6th .... 76 

Journey with Lafayette. 

To Thomas Jefferson, September 7th ... 77 

Journey with Lafayette — Opinion of his talents. 

To Thomas Jefferson, October I ith .... 79 

Trip to Ft. Stanwix— Treaty with the Indians. 

To Thomas Jefferson, October I7th .... 82 

Negotiations by Lafayette with Indians. 

To James Monroe, November ..... 87 

Changes in the council. 

Notes of speech against assessments for support of 

religion, November ..... 88 

viii CONTENTS OF VOL UME II. 

To James Monroe, November I4th .... 89 

Proposed treaties with Southern Indians — Surveys of Poto 
mac and James rivers — General assessment. 

To James Monroe, November 2/th .... 91 

New York's negotiations with the Indians — Authority of 

^ Congress and of the States — Insult to Marbois — Bill for re 

ligious assessment. 

To James Madison, November 2/th .... 94 

Bill for confirming surveys. 

To James Madison, December 3d .... 95 

Payment of British debts — Bill for general assessments. 

To James Monroe, December 4th .... 96 

Establishment of circuit courts — Bill to carry out treaty of 
peace — General assessments — Bust of Lafayette. 

To James Monroe, December 24th .... 98 

Rejection of Impost — Act to surrender fugitives from justice 
— Bill for assize courts — General assessment. 

To Richard Henry Lee, December 25th ... 99 

Rejection of impost — Continental convention project. 

Resolutions touching the navigation and jurisdiction 

of the Potomac, December 28th .... 100 

Bill for opening roads ioi,n. 

1785. 
Thomas Jefferson, January 9th . . . .102 

Acts passed by the Assembly — British debts — Difficulty of 
adjourning the House — Rejection of the impost — Changes in 
the Government — Amendment of State constitution — Education 
of Jefferson's nephews. 

To Marquis de Lafayette, March 2oth . . .120 

Free navigation of Mississippi — Settlements of Western 
territory — Discussion of the Mississippi question — Kentucky's 
desire for independent government. 

To James Munroe, March 2ist 127 

Office of Foreign Affairs — Independence of Kentucky. 

CONTENTS OF VOLUME II. 

PAGE 

To James Monroe, April I2th 129 

John Adams's appointment — Maury's station — Asks for news 
about impost — Changes in articles of confederation — General 
assessment — Cypher. 

To Thomas Jefferson April 2/th . . . .132 

Books desired — Tax on transfers of land — Kentucky conven 
tion — Washington's shares in Potomac and James River com 
panies — Meeting of Virginia Potomac Commissioners with 
Maryland Commissioners — General assessment — Opposition to 
Harrison — Mississippi question — Jefferson's nephews — Prices 
of grain, tobacco and fruit. 

To James Monroe, April 28th ..... 142 

Result of elections — Disorders of currency. 

To James Monroe, May 2Qth 143 

The western posts and the Mississippi question — Separation of 
Kentucky — Allotment of land for religious purposes — Gen 
eral assessment. 

To James Monroe, June 2ist 146 

General assessments — Commissioners from Georgia to Gover 
nor of New Orleans — Commercial discontent in Boston — Prices 
of tobacco — The port bill and Arthur Lee. 

To Richard Henry Lee, July /th .... 149 

Separation of Kentucky — Arrival of Gardoqui — Conditions of 
trade. 

To Edmund Randolph, July 26th . . . .152 

General assessment — Negotiations with Maryland — Remon 
strance against general assessments — Desire to live without 
slaves. 

To James Monroe, August 7th 155 

Regulations of trade — Policy of Great Britain. 

To Thomas Jefferson, August 2Oth .... 160 

Machinations of Great Britain with regard to commerce — 
Want of federal spirit — Growth of internal trade— Estimate of 
Lafayette — General assessment — Crops of corn and tobacco. 

To Caleb Wallace, August 23d . . . . .166 

Ideas of constitution. 

CONTENTS OF VOL UME II. 

PAGE 

To Thomas Jefferson, October 3d .... 178 

Federal finances — Requisitions of Congress — Federal author 
ity to regulate trade — Arrival of Franklin — Washington's in 
terest in the Potomac — Rumsey's invention. 

Memorial and remonstrance against religious assess 
ments 183 

\ To George Washington, November nth . . . 191 

Harrison's election — Arthur Lee's election — The revised code 
— Project for general manumission — Assize and port bills. 

To James Madison, November i8th .... 194 

Progress of the revisal — Delegates to Congress for 1786. 
Notes for speech in the Virginia House of Delegates 

on commercial regulations, November . . 194 

To George Washington, December 9th . . . 196 

Discussion of commercial propositions — Harmony in com 
mercial regulations between Maryland and Virginia — Progress 
of the revisal — Assize and port bills — Separation of Kentucky. 

To James Monroe, December 9th .... 201 

Federal power over trade — Convention of Commissioners 
from the States for deliberating on commerce — Progress of the 
revisal — The Memorial of Kentucky. 

To Ambrose Madison, December I5th . . . 203 

Rejection of the assize bill — Repeal of the act permitting 
masters to free their slaves. 

To James Monroe, December I7th .... 204 

Defeat of the assize bill — Progress of the bill for establishing 
religious freedom. 

To James Monroe, December 24th .... 205 

Proceedings of the Assembly — Bill for payment of British 
debts — Bill for reforming the county courts. 

To James Madison, December 24th .... 207 

/> Bill for payment of British debts — Price of tobacco — Bill for 

establishing religious freedom — Personal debts. 

To James Madison, December 27th .... 209 
To James Monroe, December 3Oth .... 210 

Discussion of British debts — Disparagement of the treaty of 
peace — Reform of the county courts. 

CONTENTS OF VOLUME II. xi 

1786. 

PAGE 

Petition against Church Establishment . . . 212 
To Thomas Jefferson, January 22<d . . . .214 

Jefferson's notes on Virginia — Close of the session of the As 
sembly — Review of acts passed. 

To James Monroe, January 22d .... 222 

Close of the session of the Assembly — Amendment of the 
port bill not passed — Failure of navigation system — Appoint 
ment of commissioners to meet commissioners from other States 
to discuss commercial regulations — Requisitions of Congress. 

To Thomas Jefferson, March i8th .... 224 

Plans for Virginia capitol — Review of books received — Com 
mercial convention to meet at Annapolis — Commercial evils — 
Danger of foreign machinations — Prices of tobacco and grain — 
Account for books with Jefferson. 

To James Monroe, March igth 231 

Joint land purchase — Vices of the confederation — Prospects 
of the convention. 

To James Monroe, April Qth 234 

Joint land purchase — Gloomy prospects for continuance of 
Union. 

To Thomas Jefferson, May I2th .... 236 

Jefferson's notes on Virginia — Inscription on Houdon's statue 
of Washington — Results of State election — Mason's attitude — 
Internal situation in Virginia — Indian warfare in Kentucky — 
Discussion of Buffon. 

To James Monroe, May I3th 242 

Prospects of Annapolis convention — Mason's anti-federal 
prejudices. 

To James Monroe, June 4th 244 

Kentucky separation — Indebtedness of the people. 

To Thomas Jefferson, June igth .... 246 

Populousness and means of subsistence — Crop conditions — 
Desires book on chemistry — Comparison of weasel with belette 
and ermine. 

To James Monroe, June 2ist 253 

The Mississippi question. 

xii CONTENTS OF VOLUME II. 

PAGE 

To Thomas Jefferson, August I2th .... 257 

Crop conditions — Improvement of navigation of Potomac — 
General rage for paper money — Convention for amending the 
confederation — Danger from closing the navigation of the Mis 
sissippi — Invites Jefferson to share in land purchases. 

To James Monroe, August I7th 268 


To Ambrose Madison, September 8th . . . 269 

Needs money — The Annapolis meeting. 

To James Monroe, September nth .... 270 

The Mississippi question — Results of the Annapolis meeting. 

To James Monroe, October 5th 272 

The Mississippi question — Joint purchases of land — Requests 
time to repay Monroe's loan. 

To James Monroe, October 3Oth .... 275 

The Mississippi question in the legislature — Candidates for 
Governor of Virginia. 

To James Madison, November 1st . . . 276 

Paper money discussed in Legislature — Danger from Indians 
— The Mississippi question. 

Speech in the Virginia House of Delegates on Paper 

Money . 279 

To George Washington, November 1st . . 282 

Paper money — The Mississippi question. 

To George Washington, November 8th . . . 283 

Agreement to Annapolis recommendation — Elections in Vir 
ginia. 

To Henry Lee, November 9th 284 

Lee's defeat for Congress. 

From Henry Lee, December 2Oth .... 284, n. 
His defeat for Congress. 

To James Madison, November i6th .... 286 

Currency bills. 

To Henry Lee, November 23d 286 

Friendship for Lee — Causes of Lee's defeat. 

CONTENTS OF VOLUME II. xiii 

PAGE 

To James Madison, November 24th .... 289 

Tobacco receivable for taxes. 
To Thomas Jefferson, December 4th .... 289 ^ 

Compliance with recommendation of Annapolis meeting — 
Deputies for Virginia — The Mississippi question — Rejection of 
repudiation scheme — The revised code — Education bill — Re 
form of courts — Treasury empty — Harrison's defeat — Prices. 

To George Washington, December 7th . . . 295 

Washington's selection as a delegate to the federal conven 
tion — The Mississippi question — Henry's anti-federalism — To 
bacco as a commutable. 

To James Madison, December i/th .... 298 

Rates of indents — Personal movements. 

To James Monroe, December 2ist .... 299 

Pays Monroe $100 — No news about federal convention. 

To George Washington, December 24th . . . 300 

Washington's acceptance of service in the federal convention 
— Tobacco as a commutable. 

1787. 

To Edmund Pendleton, January 9th .... 303 

Reform of the courts — The revised code — Rage for high 
duties — Sedition in Massachusetts. 

To Thomas Jefferson, February 1 5th . . . . 307 

Proceedings of legislature since December 4th — Jefferson's 
personal affairs. 

To George Washington, February 2ist . . . 313 

Infractions of treaty of peace — Prospects of federal conven 
tion — Commotion in Massachusetts quelled. 

To Edmund Pendleton, February 24th . . .316 

Conditions in Massachusetts — Prospects of federal convention 
— States which will send delegates — Failure of the requisitions. 

To George Washington, March i8th .... -236- 

Vocabulary of Choctaw and Cherokee Indians for Empress 
of Russia — Delegates to federal convention — Conditions in 
Massachusetts — The Mississippi question. 

xiv CONTENTS OF VOLUME II. 

^ PAGE 

To Thomas Jefferson, March iQth (i8th) ... 324 

Delegates to federal convention — Outlined plan for the new 
system. 

To Thomas Jefferson, March iQth .... 328 

The Spanish treaty and the Mississippi question — Protest of 
Van Berkel against Virginia privileges to France — Lincoln's 
expedition in Massachusetts — The Vermont question — Surveys 
of federal lands — Paper money in Virginia. 

To Edmund Randolph, March 25th .... 333 

Henry's anti-federalism — The Floridas — Jay's report on treaty 
of peace. 

To James Madison, April 1st 334 

Deputies to the approaching convention — The Mississippi 
question. 

To Edmund Randolph, April 8th .... 336 
Discusses plan of constitution. 

To Edmund Randolph, April i5th .... 341 

Washington as a delegate to the convention — Enforcement 
of treaty of peace — Seat of Congress — Spanish treaty. 

To George Washington, April i6th .... 344 

Discusses plan of constitution — Proceedings of Congress. 

To James Monroe, April iQth 352 

Seat of Congress. 
To Edmund Pendleton, April 22d .... 353 

Spirit of Massachusetts — Prospects of the convention — En 
forcement of treaty of peace — Disposal of Western lands — 
Copper coinage agreed upon — Affairs with Spain. 

To Thomas Jefferson, April 23d .... 357 

Jay's report agreed to — Review of proceedings of Congress — 
Prospects of the convention. 

Vices of the political system of the United States, 361 

On Ancient and Modern Confederacies . . . 369 

t-~-Qrigin of the Constitutional Convention . . . 391 

CHRONOLOGY OF JAMES MADISON. 

1783-1787. 

1783. 

July to jn attendance on Congress. 
Dec. 

Back in Orange. 

Leaves Orange for Richmond. 

1784. 

May 13. *n the House of Delegates. 

1784. Makes a Speech in favor of amending the State 

June. constitution. 

1784. Madison's bill for joint commissioners with Maryland 

June 28. to regulate navigation of the Potomac passed. 

1784. Madison appointed a commissioner for Virginia. 

July r. Assembly adjourns. 


^ At home in Orange. 

1784. Makes journey from Baltimore with Marquis de 

Sept. i. Lafayette. 


Sept 4. Arrives in Philadelphia. 

Se t « ^n Journey to Indian treaty at Fort Schuyler with 

to Oct Marquis de Lafayette. 

y 4* Arrives in New York on his way to Virginia. 
Oct. n. 

i7»4. In Philadelphia. 

xvi CHRONOLOGY OF 

Attends session of the Assembly in Richmond. 

_J Makes speech against assessments for religious pur 
poses. 

Madison's resolutions giving Potomac commissioners 

Dec '28 authority to ask co-operation of Pennsylvania in trade 
regulations passed. 

- g Assembly adjourns. 

1785- 

Mar. to At Home in Orange. 

Sept. 

I785- Outlines plan of constitution for Kentucky to Caleb 

Aug. 25. Wallace. 

1785. 

Sept. Goes to Philadelphia. 

1785. Writes the "Memorial and Remonstrance against Re- 

Oct. ligious Assessments." 

1785. Attends session of Assembly in Richmond. 
Nov. Speaks on commercial regulations. 

1786. Writes remonstrance against incorporation of Episco- 
Jan. pal church. 

Madison's bill for federal convention to consider 

Jan 21 commercial regulations passed and Madison named 

as a delegate. 
1786. 

Feb. to Assembly adjourns. 
Aug. 


Aug. At home in Orange. 

T*7$lA 

Sept' 5 Goes to Philadelphia. 


Sept ii Arrives in Annapolis. 


Oct - Convention meets. 

1786. In Philadelphia in interest of projected federal con- 

Oct. 30. vention. 

1786. Returns to Richmond. 

Nov. Speaks in House of Delegates against paper money. 

JAMES MADISON. xvii 

1786. Appointed delegate to serve in Congress till the first 

Nov. 7. Monday in November, 1787. 

1786. Introduces in Assembly resolutions for appointment 

of delegates to federal convention. 
y7 ' Named as a delegate to the convention. 

Tan iq ^ets out from Richmond for New York. 

Feb In New York attending Congress. 

Mar IQ Outlines plan of constitution to Jefferson. 

A r'i 8 Outlines plan of constitution to Edmund Randolph. 

Outlines plan of constitution to Washington. 
April 16. 

2 Leaves New York for Philadelphia. 

THE WRITINGS OF 

JAMES MADISON. 

TO EDMUND RANDOLPH. MAD. MSS. 

^, July 8, 1783. 

MY DEAR FRIEND, — Yours of the 28 of June like 
the preceding one found me at this place, where my 
preparations for leaving Cong? will keep me much of 
the remainder of my time. The footing on which 
the Impost is placed by the Assembly is not an eligi 
ble one, but preferable to a total rejection. It is to 
be regretted that immediate use was not made of the 
impression of the letter from Gen! W. The interval 
preceding the next Session will give full scope to 
malignant insinuations. The reversal of the award 
in the case of Nathan may possibly be just in itself ; 
but it will require all your eloquence I fear to shield 
the honor of the State from its effects. The Agency 
which the Delegation had in the affair will impart no* 
small share of the mortification to them. I suppose 
the feelings of Mr Jefferson & Mr Harrison also will 
not be much delighted by it. 

Gen! How is here with a corps of N. England 

VOL. II — I 

2 THE WRITINGS OF [1783 

troops detached by G! W. for the purpose of quelling 
the Mutiny. His only employment will now be to 
detect & punish the promoters of it. Cong? remain 
at Princeton. Their removal from that place will 
soon become an interesting question. Not a few 
maintain strenuously the policy of returning to this 
City in order to obviate suspicions abroad of any 
disaffection in the mass of so important a State to the 
federal Gov' and to restore mutual confidence with a 
State which has of late been so firm in adhering to 
federal measures. It is supposed too that a freer 
choice might have been made am? the permanent 
seats offered by the States, than at a place where the 
necessity of a speedy removal w? give undue advan 
tage to an offer which happened to be in greatest 
readiness for immediate use. The Citizens here in 
general regret the departure of Cong?, disavow the 
idea that they were unwilling to take arms in defence 
of Cong?, and will probably enter into some declara 
tion tending to invite their return. 

We hear nothing from our Ministers in Europe. 
The evacuation of N. York, as to the time seems as 
problematical as ever. The sending off the negroes 
continues to take place under the eyes & remon 
strances of the Inspectors of Embarkations. 

TO EDMUND RANDOLPH. MAD. Mss. 

PHILAD*, July 15, 1783. 

MY DEAR SIR, — Yesterday's post brought me no 
letter from you. The contents of the inclosed paper 

1783] JAMES MADISON. 3 

make up every thing of consequence which I have 
for a subject at present. The enquiry into the Mu 
tiny has not advanced far enough to bring forth any 
discoveries. An address is circulating & will be 
generally signed by the Citizens here reciting to Con 
gress the proofs they have heretofore given of attach- 
me to the foederal Gov' professing a continuance of 
that attaching and declaring their readiness to support 
the dignity & privileges of Cong?, in case the con- 
veniency of this place for transacting the public affairs 
s? give it a preference to others untill a final residence 
shall be fixed. 

Mr Lee arrived here the day before yesterday and 
goes to Princeton to-day. Mf Mercer's indisposition 
carries him to the Sea board of N. Jersey. My ab 
sence not producing any chasm in the representation 
and some private business requiring my stay here, I 
shall not return to Princeton for 7 or 8 days. 


[July 28, 1783.] 

MY DEAR SIR, — Yesterday's mail brought me no 
letter from you. The Address from the Citizens of 
P? came before Cong? on thursday and was referred 
to a commf of 5 members. The answer will probably 
be a very civil one, but will leave open the question 
touching the return of Cong? This question if de 
cided at all in the affirmative, must be preceded by 
despair of some of the competitors for the permanent 
residence, almost all of whom now make a common 

4 THE WRITINGS OF [1783 

cause ag5.1 Philada It is not improbable that when 
the urgency of the scanty accommodations at Prince 
ton comes to be more fully felt, with the difficulty of 
selecting a final seat among the numerous offers, N. 
Y. in case of its evacuation may be brought into rival- 
ship with Philada for the temporary residence of Con 
gress. My own opinion is that it would be less 
eligible as removing every thing connected with Cong? , 
not only farther from the South but farther from the 
Center, and making a removal to a Southern position 
finally more difficult than it would be from Philada. 
Williamsb? seems to have a very slender chance as far 
as I can discover. Annapolis I apprehend w? have a 
greater number of advocates. But the best chance 
both for Maryland & Virga, will be to unite in offer 
ing a double jurisdiction on the Potowmack. The 
only dangerous rival in that case will be a like offer 
from N. J. & Pa on the Delaware ; unless indeed 
Cong? s? be carried to N. York before a final choice 
be made in which case it would be difficult to get 
them out of the State. 

In order to prepare the way to their permanent 
residence Cong? have app? a Com? to define the juris 
diction proper for them to be invested with. 
Williamsb? has asked an explanation on this point. 
The nearer the subject is viewed the less easy it is 
found to mark the just boundary between the 
authority of Cong? & that of the State on one 
side & on the other between the former & the privi 
leges of the inhabitants. May it not also be made a 
question whether in constitutional strictness the gift 

1783] JAMES MADISON. 5 

of any State, without the Concurrence of all the rest, 
can authorize Cong? to exercise any power not dele 
gated by the Confederation 1 As Cong? it would 
seem are incompetent to every act not warranted by 
that instrument or some other flowing from the same 
source. I wish you could spare a little attention to 
this subject & transmit your ideas on it. Contrary 
to my intention I shall be detained here several weeks 
yet, by a disappointing in some circumstances which 
must precede my setting out for Virgf. 

There is considerable ground to believe that 
Carleton is possessed of the definitive Treaty. He 
has lately sent Cong? several depositions relative to 
forgeries of Mr. Morris' Notes, the authors of which 
he has confined in N. York, & has requested that 
persons may be sent in to attend the examination. 

The Court Martial is still proceeding in the 
investigation of the Mutiny, but have disclosed no 
result. 

TO THOMAS JEFFERSON. 

PHILAD*, Aug. n* 1783. 

MY DEAR SIR, — At the date of my letter in April 
I expected to have had the pleasure by this time of 
being with you in Virginia. My disappointment has 
proceeded from several dilatory circumstances on 
which I had not calculated. My journey to Virg* 
tho' still somewhat contingent in point of time can 
not now be very long postponed. I need not I trust 
renew my assurance that it will not finally stop on this 
side of Monticello. 

6 THE WRITINGS OF [1783 

The reserve of our foreign Ministers still leaves us 
the sport of misinformations concerning the def: 
Treaty. We all thought a little time ago that it had 
certainly arrived at N. York. This opinion however 
has become extinct, and we are thrown back on the 
newspaper evidence which as usual is full of contra 
dictions. The probability seems to be that the delay 
arises from discussions with the Dutch. Mr. Dana 
has been sorely disappointed in the event of his 
announcing himself to the Court of Russia. His 
written communications obtain verbal answers only & 
these hold up the Mediation to which the Empress, 
with the Emperor of G[erman]y have been invited as 
a bar to any overt transaction with the U. S. and 
even suggest the necessity of new powers from the 
latter of a date subsequent to the acknowledgment of 
their Sovereignty by G. B. Having not seen the 
letters from Mr. Dana myself, I give this idea of them 
at second hand, remarking at the same time that it 
has been taken from such passages only as were not 
in Cypher ; the latter being not yet translated. 
Cong? remain at Princeton utterly undecided both as 
to their ultimate seat and their intermediate residence. 
Very little business of moment has been yet done 
at the new Metropolis, except a ratification of the 
Treaty with Sweden. In particular nothing has been 
done as to a foreign establishment. With regard to 
an internal peace establishment, though it has been 
treated with less inattention, it has undergone little 
discussion. The Commander-in-Chief has been in 
vited to Princeton with a view to obtain his advice 

1783] JAMES MADISON. 7 

and sanction to the military branches of it, and is 
every day expected there. The Budget of Congf is 
likely to have the fate of many of their other pro 
positions to the States. Delaware is the only one 
among those which have bestowed a consideration on 
it that has acceded in toto. Several Legislatures have 
adjourned without giving even that mark of their 
condescension. In the Southern States a jealousy of 
Congressional usurpations is likely to be the bane of 
the system : in the Eastern an aversion to the half- 
pay provided for by it. New Jersey & Maryland have 
adopted the impost, the other funds recommended 
being passed for one year only by one of these States, 
and postponed by the other. P* has hitherto been 
friendly to liberal and fcederal ideas and will continue 
so, unless the late jar with Cong? sd give a wrong 
bias of which there is some danger. Mass1.5 has in the 
election of Delegates for the ensuing year stigmatized 
the concurrence of those now in place, in the provision 
for half-pay, by substituting a new representation ; 
and has sent a Memorial to Cong5 which I am told is 
pregnant with the most penurious ideas not only on 
that subject but on several others which concern the 
national honor & dignity. This picture of our affairs 
is not a flattering one ; but we have been witnesses of 
so many cases in which evils & errors have been the 
parents of their own remedy, that we cannot but view 
it with consolations of hope. Remind Miss Patsy of 
my affection for her & be assured that I am Dy Sir 
Yf Sincere friend 

8 THE WRITINGS OF [1783 

TO EDMUND RANDOLPH. 

PHILAD*, Aug: 12, 1783. 

DEAR SIR, — The arrival of yesterday's mail has not 
enabled me to acknowledge the red of a favor. Per 
haps the post office may be again in fault. 

Our late belief of the arrival of the Defin: Treaty at 
N. York has become utterly extinct. From the tenor 
of the Newspapers the delay seems to be the effect of 
discussions with the Dutch. The inclosed letter from 
our friend Hawkins provides for the article of Russian 
intelligence. I understand from Mr. Mercer who is 
here on business as well as myself that Mr. Dana's 
despatches were in part undecyphered when Mr. 
Hawkins' transcript was made. The Legislature of 
Mats have sent a memorial to Congress wearing a 
very unpropitious aspect on the grant of \ to the 
army and in other respects breathing a penurious 
spirit which if indulged will be fatal to every establish 
ment that requires expence. They profess great 
poverty, and have declined any decision on the 
Revenue propositions of Cong8. Rhode Island did 
not even bestow a consideration on them. Mr. 
H[owel]l from the latter State after being informed of 
the course taken by V* said that her backwardness 
very much emboldened the States that were disin 
clined to a Gen! Revenue. Cong? have voted Gen1 
W. an elegant Bronze Statue. He has been invited to 
Princeton as well to relieve him from the tedium 
which he surfers on the North River as to make use 
of his Counsel in digesting a peace Establishm1. We 
shall probably be reinforced by Mr. Jones in a few 

1783] JAMES MADISON. g 

days. I shall give you notice when my departure 
will make it proper for your correspondence to be 
discontinued. 

TO EDMUND RANDOLPH. MAD. MSS. 

PHILAD* Aug 18, 1783. 

DEAR SIR, — I have not this week any more than 
the last the pleasure of acknowledging a favor from 
you. Perhaps I may find one at Princeton when I 
get there. On thursday a question for returning to 
Philada was put and decided in the Negative by a 
large majority. The friends of the measure fore 
seeing its fate, and supposing that a negative declara 
tion cd. answer no good purpose and might an ill one, 
withdrew it. The more moderate opponents con 
curred in the inexpediency of proclaiming unneces 
sarily an aversion in Cong8 to Philada. But some of 
this class were so keen in their hostility, that a 
motion was made by two of them to return, who on 
the question voted agst their own motion. The public 
will not I believe fix on this proceeding as one of the 
brightest pages of the Journals? The abuses to 
which such an artifice may be extended are palpable. 
The merit of it in this application belongs to Mr. 
Howel of R. I. and Mr. B[lan]d of V. The motion 
was first made by Mr. L[ee] but in the course of the 
transaction devolved on Mr. Howel. I know of none 
that will read with pleasure this affair unless it be the 
Executive of Pa and those who wish to refer the 
removal of Cong5 to other motives than the national 
dignity & welfare. 

io THE WRITINGS OF [1783 

Cong5 have letters from Mr. Laurens of the i7th 
June but they decide nothing as to the definitive 
Treaty. We have no reason, hower, to impute the 
delay to any cause which renders the event suspicious. 
It is said that the British Councils grow more & more 
wary on the subject of a Coiner1 Treaty with the U. 
S. and that the spirit of the Navigation act is likely 
to prevail over a more liberal system. 

S. Carolina we learn has agreed to the Impost on 
condition only that the revenue be collected by her 
own officers, & be credited to her own quota. It is 
supposed that she will agree to exchange the valua 
tion of land for the proposed rule of numbers. But 
on this point R. I. was more inflexible than on that of 
the Impost. I pity from my heart the officers of the 
Eastern line who are threatened by these prospects 
with disappointments which the Southern officers have 
no Idea of. From much conversation which I have 
lately had with some of the former, and from other 
information, there appears great reason to believe 
that if no continental provision be made for them they 
will not only be docked of their half-pay, but will run 
great hazard of being put off with regard to a great 
share of their other pay on the pretence of their 
States that they have already advanced beyond their 
proportion. 

I expect Mr. Jones every moment. 


PHILAD* Aug 24, 1783. 

MY DEAR SIR, — Mr. Jones who arrived the begin 
ning of the week acquainted me with your abortive 

1783] JAMES MADISON. 1 1 

mission to Maryland which I had not before heard of. 
To this absence from Richmond I impute your silence 
by the late mails. I hope for the pleasure of a line 
by the mail now on its way, which will not however 
be acknowledged till the ensuing week as I am about 
returning to Princeton when it will find me too late 
for the post of this week. All that I have now to tell 
you is that Sr G. Carleton has notified to Cong5 his 
having received orders for the evacuation of N. York 
but he specifies no time fixed either by the orders or 
by his own plans. He repeats his lamentations 
touching the Loyalists and insinuates that the pro 
ceedings of the people agst them are a proof that little 
or no gov1 exists in the U. States. 

With great affection I am yr frd & Svt 

TO EDMUND RANDOLPH. MAD. MSS. 

PRINCETON, Aug 30, 1783. 

MY DEAR SIR, — We hear nothing from Europe that 
can be depended on relative to the definitive Treaty, 
nor any thing from N. York as to the time it will be 
evacuated. A Pamphlet has lately come over from 
G. Britain which appears to be well adapted to retard 
if not prevent a commercial Treaty, & which is said 
to be much attended to. It urges an adherence to 
the principle of the Navigation Act by which Ameri 
can Vessels will be excluded from the trade between 
the separate parts of the Empire, and from all inter 
course with the dependent territories. It undertakes 
to shew from an enumeration of the produce of the U. 
S. & the manufactures consumed by them, that those 

12 THE WRITINGS OF [1783 

of G. B. recommended by the superior credit which 
her Merchants can give, will be sufficiently sure of a 
preference in the American Market. And lastly it 
maintains that the interests of the States are so 
opposite in matters of Commerce, & the authority of 
Cong5 so feeble that no defensive precautions need be 
feared on the part of the U.S. and threatens that in case 
they should refuse to let British Vessels exclusively 
carry on a Commerce between the U. S. and the W. 
Indies as far as the interest of the Islands may require, 
the vessels of one State shall not be permitted to carry 
the product of another to any British Port. The 
Whole tenor of the reasoning supposes that France 
will not permit Vessels of the U. S. to trade with their 
Islands in which there is good reason to believe they 
are not mistaken. The object of the French Admin 
istration is said to be to allow a direct trade between 
the U. S. & their W. India possessions, but to confine 
it to French Bottoms. 

The Legislature of Penna have unanimously adopted 
the RecoiTiendations of Cong5 both as to Revenue & a 
change of the federal rule for apportioning the com 
mon burdens. They will also present an invitation to 
Cong5 we understand, to resume their Sessions at 
Philada, if that place be judged most fit for the de 
spatch of public business, untill a permanent seat be 
chosen & prepared ; giving at the same time explicit 
assurances of support in case it should on any occa 
sion be needed. What effect this conciliatory propo 
sition may have on the temper of Cong5 is precarious. 
With some the complaisance shewn to the late recom- 

1783] JAMES MADISON. 13 

mendations of Cong? will be far from softening the 
dislike. With others Philada will ever be obnoxious 
while it contains and respects an obnoxious Character. 
Annapolis has seized the present occasion to forward 
her views with respect to Cong?, and has courted their 
presence in the most flattering terms. During this 
contest among the rival seats, we are kept in the most 
awkward situation that can be imagined ; and it is the 
more so as we every moment expect the Dutch Am 
bassador. We are crowded too much either to be 
comfortable ourselves or to be able to carry on the 
business with advantage. Mr. Jones & myself on our 
arrival were extremely put to it to get any quarters at 
all, and are at length put into one bed in a room not 
more than 10 feet square. 

TO JAMES MADISON. MAD. MSS. 

PRINCETON Aug : 30, 1783. 

HOND SIR, — I rec? great pleasure from your's reed, 
by the last post which removed the apprehensions ex 
cited by your preceding one regarding the state of my 
mother's health. I hope this will find her still fur 
ther recovered. The time of my setting out for 
Virg? is still somewhat precarious : several matters 
being before Cong? which I wish to see first decided. 
An answer to this if not delayed will probably find me 
here. 

The definitive Treaty is not yet come over. ST G. 
Carlton has notified to Cong? his receipt of final or 
ders for the evacuation of N. York, but fixes no time 

i4 THE WRITINGS OF [1783 

at which they are to be carried into execution. Gen! 
Washington has been here some days at the invitation 
of Cong! & will be consulted on the provision neces 
sary in time of peace for the security of this country. 
I inclose you one of the latest papers containing the 
address of the Preside to the assembly of Pen? The 
latter have unanimously acceded to the late recofh- 
endations of Cong! with respect to revenue, and a 
change of the rule for apportioning the common bur 
dens. It is said they are also about to address Cong! 
on the event which occasioned their removal, & to 
provide expressly for the protection of Cong! in case 
they s? deem Philad? the fittest place for the tran 
saction of business untill a final residence shall be 
chosen. What effect this may have is uncertain. We 
are exceedingly crowded in this place ; too much so 
both for our own comfort & for the despatch of busi 
ness. M' Jones & myself are in one room scarcely 
ten feet square & in one bed. With the best regards 
for all the family 

I am yr. dutiful son 


PHiLADf Sepr 8. 1783. 

HOND SIR, — Mr Jones & myself being here trans 
acting some private business which brought us from 
Princeton the end of last week, I here receive your 
letter of the 22? ult. The favorable turn of my 
mother's state of health is a source of great satisfac 
tion to me, and will render any delay in my setting 
out for Virg* the less irksome to me. I shall return 

1783] JAMES MADISON. 15 

to Princeton tomorrow ; m}' final leaving of which 
will depend on events, but can not now be at any very 
great distance. On a view of all circumstances I have 
judged it most prudent not to force Billey back to 
V? even if [it] could be done ; and have accordingly 
taken measures for his final separation from me. I 
am persuaded his mind is too thoroughly tainted to 
be a fit companion for fellow slaves in Virgf The 
laws here do not admit of his being sold for more than 
7 years. I do not expect to get near the worth of 
him ; but cannot think of punishing him by transpor 
tation merely for coveting that liberty for which we 
have paid the price of so much blood, and have pro 
claimed so often to be the right, & worthy the pur 
suit, of every human being. 

We have no later advices from Europe than when 
I wrote by Merry Walker. 

TO EDMUND RANDOLPH. MAD. MSS. 

PHILAD* Sep* 8 1783. 

MY DEAR SIR, — Mr Jones & myself having come 
down to this city the end of the past week for the 
purpose of negociating some pecuniary matters I 
am here to date my acknowledgment of your favor 
of the 30^ ulto. We return again tomorrow. 

The delay of the definitive Treaty although not 
fully explained to Congress, excites less disquietude 
here than I find it does in Virginia. Our latest 
official advices were from Mr. Laurens, of the [seven 
teenth] of June. The Conduct of the British adminis 
tration was far from explicit, according to his state 

1 6 THE WRITINGS OF [1783 

of it, but probably proceeded more from the discor 
dant materials of which it is composed & doubts as to 
the commercial footing on which America ought to be 
placed, than from any insidious views. Why indeed 
a Commercial Treaty should be made to clog the 
Treaty of peace is left to conjecture. Perhaps the 
fact may not be true & the delay of the latter may be 
owing still to the old cause, to wit, a discussion of the 
intricate points with the Dutch. The situation of G. 
B. is such that nothing but some signal change in the 
aspect of things in this hemisphere can inspire a fresh 
disposition for war ; notwithstanding the menacing 
tone of Sr G. Carleton. 

The Legislature of P* have taken every possible 
step to expiate the default of the Executive short of 
an impeachment of its members, which the rigor of 
some members of Cong? included among the terms 
of reconciliation with the State. They have expressly 
invited Cong? back, assured them of honorable pro 
tection, and given up the State-House with the 
appendages for their temporary use. They have also 
made German Town a competitor for the permanent 
abode of Congress. 

The opposition in the N. England States to the 
grant of half-pay instead of subsiding has increased 
to such a degree as to produce almost a general 
anarchy. In what shape it will issue is altogether 
uncertain. Those who are interested in the event 
look forward with very poignant apprehensions. 
Nothing but some continental provision can obtain 
for them this part of their reward. * * * 

1783] JAMES MADISON. 17 

Why did not the Assembly stop the sale of land 
warrants ? They bring no profit to the public Treas 
ury, are a source of constant speculation on the 
ignorant, and will finally arm numbers of Citizens of 
other States & even foreigners with claims & clamors 
against the faith of Virginia. Immense quantities 
have from time to time been vended in this place at 
immense profit, and in no small proportion to the 
subjects of our Ally. The credulity here being 
exhausted I am told the land Jobbers are going on 
with their commodity to Boston & other places. 


PRINCETON, Sep* 13, 1783. 

MY DEAR SIR, — Our Ministers in Europe have 
made some amends for ye long silence by volum 
inous despatches brought down to 27* July. They 
were reel yesterday by Congress. No definitive 
treaty had then been signed by any of the parties, 
though all had been ready except Holland & America. 
The former is said to have settled her difficulties. 
The American Ministers have been endeavouring to 
incorporate some important commercial stipulations, 
but in vain ; and in case of emergency must come for 
ward with the provisional articles to be signed as y* 
definitive Treaty. The conduct of G. B. in the nego- 
ciation with America has shewn great unsteadiness if 
not insidiousness on the subject of commerce ; and 
the inclosed proclamation of the 2d. of July is a proof 
that some experiment is intended on the wisdom firm- 

1 8 THE WRITINGS OF [1783 

ness & union of the States before they will enter into 
a Treaty in derogation of her Navigation Act. Con 
gress will probably recomend some defensive plan to 
the States. If it s^ meet with the fate of former 
recommendations, it will not probably be owing to 
Rhode Island whose staple interest more than that of 
any others lies in carrying between the U. S. & the 
West Indies. If it fails at all it will prove such an 
inefficacy in the Union as will extinguish all respect 
for it & reliance on it. My situation here for writing 
is so incommodious that you must excuse my brevity. 


PRINCETON, Sepr 20, 1783. 

DEAR SIR, — I have nothing to add to my last on the 
subject of foreign affairs, further than that the Court 
of France has fixed on L'Orient as a free port for the 
U. S. The Virga Cession underwent a decision of 
Cong5 a day or two after my last. The form which 
they have given it may be seen in the hands of the 
Executive. I sincerely hope it may meet the 
ultimatum of Virga. The circumstances which pro 
duced brevity in my last as strongly recommended it 
at present. Adieu. 

TO THOMAS JEFFERSON. MAD. MSS. 


DEAR SIR, — Your favor of the 31 ult: came to hand 
yesterday. As the reason which chiefly urged my 
departure for Virga has ceased I have been led to 
protract my attendance on Congress by the interest I 

1783] JAMES MADISON. 19 

felt in some measures on foot, and the particular in 
terest which my Constituents have in them. Two of 
these were the territorial Cession and the permanent 
seat of Congress. The former was a few days ago 
put into a form which I hope will meet the ultimatum 
of Virginia. The first monday in next month is fixed 
for a decision of the latter ; after which it may still be 
necessary to choose a temporary residence until the 
permanent one can be made ready. I am utterly un 
able to foretell how either of these points will be de 
termined. It is not impossible that an effective vote 
may be found attainable on neither ; in which case the 
Winter must be spent in this village where the public 
business can neither be conveniently done, the mem 
bers of Congress be decently provided for, nor those 
connected with Congress provided for at all. I shall 
lose no time in looking out for quarters for you & en 
tering into provisional engagements in your favor. 
Your other request relative to Miss Patsy shall be 
equally attended to as soon as I go to Philada, which 
will probably be towards the end of the present week. 
It will give me real concern if we should miss one 
another altogether in the journies before us ; and yet 
I foresee the danger of it. Mr. Jones & myself will 
probably be on the road by the middle of next month 
or a few days later. This is the time about which 
you expect to commence your journey. Unless there 
fore we travel the same road a disappointment of 
more [than] an interview will be unavoidable. At 
present our plan is to proceed thro' Baltimore & Alex 
andria & Fredericksbg and we may possibly be at the 

20 THE WRITINGS OF [1783 

races of the second place. I am at a loss by what 
regulation I can obey your wishes with regard to the 
notes I have on hand ; having not yet made any 
copy of them, having no time now for that purpose, 
and being unwilling for several reasons to leave them 
all behind me. A disappointment however will be 
of the less consequence as they have been much 
briefer & more interrupted since the period at which 
you run them over, and have been altogether discon 
tinued since the arrival of Cong5 here. 

My plan of spending this winter in Philad* in close 
reading was not entirely abandoned untill Congress 
left that City and shewed an utter disinclination to 
return to it. The prospect of agreeable and even in 
structive society was an original consideration with 
me ; and the subsequent one having yours added to 
it would have confirmed my intention after the 
abortive issue of another plan,1 had not the solicitude 
of a tender & infirm parent exacted a visit to Virga 
and an uncertainty of returning been thereby in 
curred. Even at present if Cong? s? make Philat 
their seat this winter & I can decline a visit to Virg? 
or speedily get away from it, my anxiety on the sub 
ject will be renewed. 

Our last information from Europe is dated the 2;th 
July. France & Spain were then ready for the 
definitive signing of the Peace. Holland was on the 
point of being so. The American Plenipo5 had done 
nothing on the subject and in case of emergency 

1 The allusion is to his rejection the month before by Miss Floyd, a daughter 
of William Floyd, of New York. 

1783] JAMES MADISON. 21 

could only sign the provisional Treaty as final. Their 
negotiations had been spent chiefly on commercial 
stipulations from which G. B. after very different 
professions & appearances, altogether drew back. 
The ready admission she found into our commerce 
without paying any price for it has suggested the 
policy of aiming at the entire benefit of it, and at 
the same time saving the carriage of the W. India 
trade the price she at first bid for it. The supposed 
contrariety of interests among the States and the 
impotence of the fcederal Gov', are urged by the 
ministerial pamphleteers as a safeguard ags.1 retalia 
tion. The other nations of Europe seem to have 
more honorable views towards our commerce, sundry 
advances having been made to our Ministers on that 
subject. 

Congress have come to no decision even as yet on 
any of the great branches of the peace establishment. 
The military branch is supported and quickened by 
the presence of the Commander in Chief, but without 
any prospect of a hasty issue. The department of 
foreign Affairs both internal & external remains as it 
has long done. The election of a Sec? has been an 
order of the day for many months without a vote 
being taken. The importance of the marine depart 
ment has been diminished by the sale of almost all 
the Vessels belonging to the U. S. The department 
of Finance is an object of almost daily attack and 
will be reduced to its crisis on the final resignation of 
Mr. M., which will take place in a few months. 
The War Office is connected with the Military estab- 

22 THE WRITINGS OF [1783 

lishment & will be regulated I suppose in conformity 
to what that may be. Among other subjects which 
divide Congress, their Constitutional authority touch 
ing such an establishment in time of peace is one. 
Another still more puzzling is the precise jurisdiction 
proper for Congress within the limitsof their permanent 
seat. As these points may possibly remain undecided 
till Novr, I mention them particularly that your aid 
may be prepared. The investigation of the Mutiny 
ended in the condemnation of several Sergeants who 
were stimulated to the measure without being apprized 
of the object by the two officers who escaped. They 
have all red a pardon from Congress. The real plan 
& object of the mutiny lies in profound darkness. I 
have written this in hopes that it may get to Monti- 
cello before you leave it. It might have been made 
more interesting if I had brought the Cypher from 
Philad% tho' my present situation required a great 
effort to accomplish as much as I have. I am obliged 
to write in a position that scarcely admits the use of 
any of my limbs, Mr. Jones & myself being lodged 
in a room not 10 feet square and without a single 
accommodation for writing. 

I am Dear Sir your sincere friend & Ob1 Serv' 

TO EDMUND RANDOLPH. MAD. MSS. 

PHILADA Septr 30, 1783. 

MY DEAR SIR, — Your favor introducing Mr. Corbin 
and that by the last week's post have both been re- 
ceivd. The former did not get to Princeton before Mr. 

1783] JAMES MADISON. 23 

C. had left it, nor did I get to this place before he was 
so near leaving it that I had no opportunity of man 
ifesting my respect for your recommendations other 
wise than by verbal civilities to him. Yesterday's post 
brought me no letter from you. In answer to your 
comment in the preceding one on the reception of a 
Minister from the (Economical Republic to which we 
are allied, it will suffice to inform you, that in pursu 
ance of a commission from him six elegant horses are 
provided for his coach, as was to have been one of the 
best houses in the most fashionable part of the City. 
Wherever Commerce prevails there will be an in 
equality of wealth, and wherever the latter does a 
simplicity of manners must decline. 

Our foreign intelligence remains as at the date of 
my last. I forget whether I mentioned to you that 
our Ministers unanimously express surprise at the 
doubt started in America as to the epoch which ter 
minated hostilities on our Coast. They affirm that 
one month from the date of the instrument was 
meant & suppose that that exposition will not be con 
tested. Pray can your researches inform me Is.1, 
Whether prizes made by & from parties not subject 
to the power before whose maritime courts they are 
carried, are provisionally or finally tried? — 2d. How 
far the rules established by the Sovereign of the 
Captor & those by the Sovereign of the Courts pre 
vail in such trials? 3dly, What difference is made in 
cases where both the parties concerned in the capture 
are subject to the same power and where they are 
subject to different powers ? 

1783] JAMES MADISON. 25 

a Sovereign authority agst a part of its Constituents 
which had fully expiated any offence which they might 
have committed ; and at the same time to convert 
their penitential and affectionate temper into the bit 
terest hatred. To enforce this idea some of the pro 
ceedings of Cong5 expressive of resentment ag5' 
Philada were made use of. Great stress was also laid 
on the tendency of removing to any small or distant 
place, to prevent or delay business which the honor 
& interest of the U. S. require sd be despatched as 
soon as possible. On the other side objections were 
drawn from those sources which have produced dis 
likes to Philada, and wch will be easily conjectured by 
you. On the question N. Y, Pa, Delaware, Virga, & 
N. Carolina were ay ; Massts, Con1, R. I., N. Jersey, 
no ; and Maryland & S. Carolina, divided. If either 
of the divided States had been in the affirmative it 
was the purpose of N. Jersey to add a seventh vote in 
favor of Philada. The division of S. Carolina was ow 
ing to the absence of Mr. Rutledge & Mr. Izard both 
of whom would have voted for Phila. The State was 
represented by two members only. The division of 
Maryland represented by Mr Carroll & Mr McHenry 
was occasioned by the negative of the latter, whose 
zeal for Annapolis determined him to sacrifice every 
consideration to an experiment in its favor, before he 
would accede to the vote for Philada. The aversion 
of the Eastern States was the ground of his coalition 
with them. The arguments in favor of Annapolis 
consisted of objections agst Philada. Those agst it 
were chiefly the same which had been urged in favor 

26 THE WRITINGS OF [1783 

of Philada. On the question the States were Massts, 
Con1, R. I., Delaware, Maryland & N. C., ay, N. Y., 
N. J. Pa Virga, no. S. C. divided. Virga was repre 
sented by Mr. Lee Mr. Mercer & Mr. M. The first 
was in the affirmative. Mr. Jones & Mr. Bland were 
in Philada. The vote of the latter wd have been in 
favor of Annapolis of the former in favor of Philada. 
The opinion of Mr. L & Mr. B in favr of Annapolis 
resulted from a dislike to Philada, & the idea that the 
views of Va would be promoted by it. That of 
their colleagues from a belief that the reasons drawn 
in favr of Philada, from National considerations reqd 
a concession of local views, and even that a recision 
of the permanent vote for Trenton in favor of George 
Town, the object of Va, would be promoted by 
placing the Eastern States in Philada. They also sup 
posed that the concurrence of the Eastern States in a 
temporary vote for Annapolis to take effect some 
weeks hence, was little to be confided in, since the ar 
rival of a colleague to the Delegate from N. Hamp 
shire would with the accession of Pena, who wd prefer 
Trenton to Annapolis & be moreover stimulated by 
resentment, would make up seven States to reverse 
the removal to Annapolis. Add to the whole that 
experience has verified the opinion that in any small 
place Cong5 are too dependent on courtesy & favor to 
be exempt either in their purses or their sensibility 
from degrading impositions. Upon the whole it is 
most probable that Philada will be [the] abode of Cong8 
during the Winter. I must refer to Mr Jones for ex 
planations on all these points, he will be in Richmond 

1783] JAMES MADISON. 27 

early in the Session. For myself I have engaged to 
return to Princeton to attend some interesting points 
before Cong5. Having not yet settled my arrange 
ments for the Winter I must for the present be silent 
as to my [torn out] situation. Mr. Van Berkel ar 
rived a few days [torn out]. Cong8 are in a charming 
situation to receive him, being in an obscure village 
undetermined where they will spend the Winter, and 
without a Minister of F. A. After the rece of this 
you will stop your correspondence, and probably not 
hear further from me. I set off tomorrow morning at 
3 oClock in the Flying Machine for Princeton, and it 
is now advancing towards the hour of sleep. In haste 
adieu My dear friend and be assured that I am Yrs 
Sincerely. 

TO THOMAS JEFFERSON. MAD. MSS. 

ORANGE Decemr ioth> 1783. 

DEAR SIR, — My journey from Annapolis was so 
retarded by rains and their effect on the water courses 
that I did not complete it till the ninth day after I left 
you. I took1 Col. Mason in my way & had an 
evening's conversation with him. I found him much 
less opposed to the general impost than I expected. 
Indeed he disclaimed all opposition to the measure it 
self but had taken up a vague apprehension that if 
adopted at this crisis it might embarrass the defence 
of our trade agst British machinations, he seemed 
upon the whole to acquiesce in the territorial cession, 

1 Cypher represented by italics. 

28 THE WRITINGS OF [1783 

but dwelt much on the expediency of the guaranty. 
On the article of a convention for revising our form 
of Government he was sound and ripe and I think 
would not decline a participation in the work. His 
heterodoxy lay chiefly in being too little impressed with 
either the necessity or the proper means of preserving 
the confederacy. 

The situation of the commerce of this country as 
far as I can learn is even more deplorable than I had 
conceived. It cannot pay less to Philad? & Baltimore 
if one may judge from a comparison of prices here & 
in Europe, than 30 or 40 Per O on all the exports & 
imports, a tribute which if paid into the treasury of 
the State would yield a surplus above all its wants. 
If the Assembly should take any steps towards its 
emancipation you will no doubt be apprized of them 
as well as their other proceedings from Richmond. 

I am not yet settled in the course of law reading 
with which I have tasked myself and find it will be 
impossible to guard it against frequent interruptions. 
I deputed one of my brothers to Monticello with 
the draught on your library, but Capt. Key was 
down at Richmond. As soon as he returns I propose to 
send again. My Trunk with Buffon &c. has come 
safe to Fred? so that I shall be well furnished with 
materials for collateral reading. In conversing on 
this author's Theory of central heat I recollect that 
we touched upon as the best means for trying its 
validity,1 the comparative distances from the earths 

1 See letter of Feby. 17, [1784], shewing Buffon who had been read to have 
been misconceived. Note in MSS. 

1783] JAMES MADISON. 29 

center of the summits of the highest mountains and 
their bases or the level of the sea. Does not the 
oblate figure of the earth present a much more ex 
tensive and perhaps adequate field for experiments ? 
According to the calculations of Martin grounded on 
the data of Manpertius &c. 

The Equatorial diameter of the Earth is... 7942.2 Eng. Miles 
The polar diam: 7852.4 E.M. 

difference between eq : & pol. diameter. ... 89.8. E.M. 

The difference then of the semidiameters is 44.9, E. 
miles, that is -gy^ of the mean semidiameter calling 
this difference in round numbers 45 miles, and disre 
garding the small variations produced by the elliptical 
form of the Earth, the radii will be shortened ^ of a 
mile by each degree from the equator to the poles. 
It would seem therefore that the difference of dis 
tance from the center at the Equator & at the highest 
latitude that may [be] visited must be sufficient to prod 
uce a discoverable difference in the degrees of any heat 
emitted equally in every direction from the center : 
and the experiment might be sufficiently diversified 
to guard against illusion from any difference which 
might be supposed in the intermediate density of 
different parts of the Earth. The distance even be 
tween the Equator & the polar circle produces a 
difference of no less than 33^- miles i.e. y^ of the 
mean distance from the center ; so that if the curiosity 
of two setts of French Philosophers employed in 
ascertaining the figure of the earth, had been directed 
to this question, a very little additional trouble & 

30 THE WRITINGS OF [1784 

expence might perhaps have finally solved it. Nay 
the extent of the U.S. computing from the 31° of 
lat: to the 45° only makes a difference of 7 miles in 
the distance from the center of the Earth ; a greater 
difference I suppose than is afforded by the highest 
mountains or the deepest mines or both put together. 
On my delivering you the draught on M.r Ambler I 
remember you put into my hands a note which I 
never looked into supposing it to relate to that cir 
cumstance In examining my papers I perceive that 
I have lost it and mention it to put you on your 
guard in case the note s? fall into bad hands & be 
capable of being abused. Present my respects to 
Mf Mercer & the other gentlemen of the Delegation 
& be assured that I am yrs sincerely 

You will be so good as to give the inclosed a safe 
conveyance to Mrs. House. 

TO EDMUND RANDOLPH. MAD. MSS. 

ORANGE, March lo11?, 1784. 

MY DEAR FRIEND, — Your favor of the 27^ Jany. was 
safely delivered to me about a fortnight ago, and was 
rec? with the greater pleasure, as it promises a con 
tinuance of your friendly attention. I am sorry that 
my situation enables me to stipulate no other return 
than sincere & thankful acknowledgments. — On my 
arrival here which happened early in Dec!" I entered 
as soon as the necessary attentions to my friends ad 
mitted, on the course of reading which I have long 

1784] JAMES MADISON. 31 

meditated. Co : Litt : in consequence & a few others 
from the same shelf have been my chief society dur 
ing the Winter. My progress, which in so short a 
period could not have been great under the most 
favorable circumstances, has been much retarded by 
the want of some important books, and still more by 
that of some living oracle for occasional consultation. 
But what will be most noxious to my project, I am to 
incur the interruptions wc.h will result from attendance 
in the Legislature, if the suffrage of my County should 
destine me for that service, which I am made to ex 
pect will be the case. Among the circumstances 
which reconcile me to this destination, you need not 
be assured that the opportunity of being in your 
neighborhood has its full influence. 

I have perused with both pleasure and edification 
your observations on the demand made by the Exe 
cutive of S. C. of a citizen of this State.1 If I were 
to hazard an opinion after yours, it would be that the 
respect due to the chief magistracy of a confederate 
State, enforced as it is by the articles of Union, re 
quires an admission of the fact as it has been repre 
sented. If the representation be judged incomplete 
or ambiguous, explanations may certainly be called 

1 George Hancock, a citizen of Virginia, assaulted Jonas Beard, a justice of 
the peace and member of the legislature of South Carolina. The Governor of 
South Carolina demanded Hancock's surrender from the Governor of Virginia, 
under the fourth article of the confederation, charging the assault as a high 
misdemeanor. Randolph, as Attorney General of Virginia, thought that Vir 
ginia had a right to insist upon proof of Hancock's guilt before taking action, 
but that South Carolina's definition of a misdemeanor must be admitted by Vir 
ginia, and that flight ought not to secure one from punishment. Randolph to 
Jefferson, January 30, 1784, Conway's Randolph, 51. 

32 THE WRITINGS OF [1784 

for, and if on a final view of the charge, Virginia 
should hold it to be not a casus foederis, she will be at 
liberty to [withhold her citizen, (at least upon that 
ground,) as S. C. will be to appeal to the Tribunal 
provided for all controversies among the States. 
Should the Law of S. C. happen to vary from the 
British Law, the most difficult point of discussion I 
apprehend will be, whether the terms " Treason &c." 
are to be referred to those determinate offences so 
denominated in the latter code, or to all those to which 
the policy of the several States may annex the same 
titles and penalties. Much may be urged I think 
both in favor of and ag5.1 each of these expositions. 
The two first of those terms coupled with " breach of 
the peace " are used in the 5 Art : of the Confedera 
tion, but in a way that does not clear the ambiguity. 
The truth perhaps in this as in many other instances, 
is, that if the compilers of the text had severally de 
clared their meanings, these would have been as 
diverse as the comments which will be made upon it. 
Waving the doctrine of the confederation, my pres 
ent view of the subject would admit few exceptions 
to the propriety of surrendering fugitive offenders. 
My reasons are these, i. By the express terms of 
the Union the citizens of every State are naturalized 
within all the others, and being entitled to the same 
privileges, may with the more justice be subjected to 
the same penalties. This circumstance materially dis 
tinguishes the citizens of the U. S. from the subjects 
of other nations not so incorporated. 2. The analogy 
of the laws throughout the States, and particularly the 

1784] JAMES MADISON. 33 

uniformity of trial by Juries of the vicinage, seem to 
obviate the capital objections ag5.1 removal to the State 
where the offence is charged. In the instance of con 
tiguous States a removal of the party accused from 
one to the other must often be a less grievance, than 
what happens within the same State when the place 
of residence & the place where the offence is laid are 
at distant extremities. The transportation to G. B. 
seems to have been reprobated on very different 
grounds : it would have deprived the accused of the 
privilege of trial by jury of the vicinage as well as of the 
use of his witnesses, and have exposed him to trial in 
a place where he was not even alledged to have ever 
made himself obnoxious to it ; not to mention the 
danger of unfairness arising from the circumstances 
which produced the regulation. 3. Unless citizens of 
one State transgressing within the pale of another be 
given up to be punished by the latter, they cannot be 
punished at all ; and it seems to be a common interest 
of the States that a few hours or at most a few days 
should not be sufficient to gain a sanctuary for the 
authors of the numerous offences below " high misde- 
mesnors." In a word, experience will shew if I mis 
take not that the relative situation of the U. S. calls 
for a " Droit Public " much more minute than that 
comprized in the fcederal articles, and which presup 
poses much greater mutual confidence and amity 
among the societies which are to obey it, than the law 
which has grown out of the transactions & intercourse 
of jealous & hostile nations. 

Present my respectful compliments to your amiable 

VOL. II. — 3 

34 THE WRITINGS OF [1784 

lady & accept the sincerest wishes for your joint 
happiness of 

Your affr friend & ob* serv'. 

P. S. By my brother who is charged with this I 
send Chastellaux's work, de la Felicite public which 
you may perhaps find leisure to run through before 
May — also a notable work of one of the Representa 
tives of the U. S. in Europe. 

TO THOMAS JEFFERSON. MAD. MSS. 

ORANGE, March 16, 1784. 

DEAR SIR, — Your favour of the 20. ult. came duly 
to hand a few days ago. I cannot apprehend that any 
difficulties can ensue in Europe from the involuntary 
& immaterial delay of the ratification of the peace, or 
if there should that any imputations can be devised 
which will not be repelled by the collective force of 
the reasons in the intended protest ; some of which 
singly taken are unanswerable. As you no doubt 
had recourse to authorities which I have no opportun 
ity of consulting, I probably err in supposing the right 
of the Sovereign to reject the act of his plenipoten 
tiary to be more circumscribed than you lay it down. 
I recollect well that an implied condition is annexed 
by the usage of nations to a Plenipotentiary Coiriis- 
sion, but should not have extended the implication 
beyond cases where some palpable & material default 
in the Minister could be alledged by the Sovereign. 
Waving some such plea, the language both of the 
Comission and of reason seems to fix on the latter 

1784] JAMES MADISON. 35 

as clear an engagement to fulfil his promise to ratify 
a treaty, as to fulfil the promises of a treaty which he 
has ratified. In both cases one would pronounce the 
obligation equally personal to the Sovereign, and a 
failure on his part without some absolving circum 
stance equally a breach of faith. The project of 
affixing the Seal of the U. S. by 7 States to an act 
which had been just admitted to require nine, must 
have stood self-condemned ; and tho' it might have 
produced a temporary deceptidin abroad, must have 
been immediately detected at home, and have finally 
dishonored the federal counsels everywhere. The 
competency of 7 States to a Treaty of Peace has 
often been a subject of debate in Congress and has 
sometimes been admitted into their practice, at least 
so far as to issue fresh instructions. The reasoning 
employed in defence of the doctrine has been " that 
the cases which require 9 States, being exceptions to 
the general authority of 7 States ought to be taken 
strictly ; that in the enumeration of the powers of 
Congress in the first clause of art : 9 of the Confeder 
ation, the power of entering into treaties and alliances 
is contradistinguished from that of determining on 
peace & war & even separated by the intervening 
power of sending & receiving ambassadors ; that the 
excepting clause therefore in which ' Treaties & al 
liances ' ought to be taken in the same confined sense, 
and in which the power of determing on peace is 
omitted, cannot be extended by construction to the 
latter power ; that under such a construction 5 States 
might continue a war which it required nine to com- 

36 THE WRITINGS OF [1784 

mence, though where the object of the war has been 
obtained, a continuance must in every view be equip 
ollent to a commencement of it ; and that the very 
means provided for preserving a state of peace might 
thus become the means of preventing its restoration." 
The answer to these arguments has been that the 
construction of the fcederal articles which they main 
tain is a nicety which reason disclaims, and that if it 
be dangerous on one side to leave it in the breast of 
5 States to protract a war, it is equally necessary on 
the other to restrain 7 States from saddling the Union 
with any stipulations which they may please to inter 
weave with a Treaty of peace. I was once led by this 
question to search the files of Cong? for such lights 
as the history of the Confederation might furnish, and 
on a review now of my papers I find the evidence 
from that source to consist of the following circum 
stances : In Doctr Franklin's " Sketch of Articles of 
Confederation" laid before Cong* on 21 day of July 
1775, no number beyond a majority is required in any 
cases. In the plan reported to Congress by the Com 
mittee appointed n. June 1776, the general enumer 
ation of the powers of Congf in art. 18. is expressed 
in a similar manner with the first clause in the present 
9^ art., as are the exceptions in a subsequent clause 
of the 1 8 art. of the report, with the excepting clause 
as it now stands : and yet in the margin of the Report 
and I believe in the same hand writing, there is a 
" Qu.: If so large a majority is necessary in conclud 
ing a Treaty of peace." There are sundry other mar 
ginal queries in the report from the same pen. Hence 

1784] JAMES MADISON. 37 

it would seem that notwithstanding the preceding dis 
crimination between the powers of " determining on 
peace " and " entering into Treaties," the latter was 
meant by the Com? to comprise the former. The 
next form in which the articles appear, is a printed 
copy of the Report as it had been previously amended, 
with sundry amendments, erasures, & notes on the 
printed copy itself in the hand of Mr Thomson. In 
the printed text of this paper art : 14 the phraseology 
which defines the general powers of Congress is the 
same with that in art: 18 of the manuscript report. 
In the subsequent clause requiring nine States, the 
text as printed ran thus : " The United States in 
Cong" assembled shall never engage in a war nor 
grant letters of marque & reprisal in time of peace, 
nor enter into any Treaties or alliances except for 
peace," the words except for peace being erased, but 
sufficiently legible through the erasure. The fair in 
ference from this passage seems to be i. that without 
those words 9 States were held to be required for 
concluding peace. 2. that an attempt had been made 
to render 7 States competent to such an act, which 
attempt must have succeeded either on a preceding 
discussion in Congress or in a Com*: of the whole, or 
a special com*:. 3. that on fuller deliberation the 
power of making Treaties of peace was meant to be 
left on the same footing with that of making all other 
Treaties. The remaining papers on the files have no 
reference to this question. Another question which 
several times during my service in Cong* exercised 
their deliberations was whether 7 States could revoke 

38 THE WRITINGS OF [1784 

a Commission for a Treaty issued by nine States, at 
any time before the faith of the Confederacy should 
be pledged under it. In the instance of a proposition 
in 1781 to revoke a Commission which had been 
granted under peculiar circumstances in 1779 to 
Adams1 to form a treaty of commerce witk G. B., the 
competency of 7 States was resolved on (by 7 States 
indeed) and a revocation took place accordingly. It 
was however effected with much difficulty, and some 
members of the minority even contested the validity 
of the proceeding. My own opinion then was and 
still is that the proceeding was equally valid & expe 
dient. The circumstances which had given birth to 
the comission had given place to others totally dif 
ferent ; not a single step had been taken under the 
commission which could affect the honour or faith of 
the U. S. and it surely can never be said that either 
the letter or spirit of the Confederation, requires the 
same majority to decline as to engage in foreign 
treaties. The safest method of guarding ag5.' the ex 
ecution of those great powers after the circumstances 
which dictated them have changed, is to limit their 
duration, trusting to renewals as they expire, if the 
original reasons continue. My experience of the un 
certainty of getting an affirmative vote even of 7 
States had determined me before I left Congress, al 
ways to contend for such limitations. 

I thought the sense of the term " appropriation " 
had been settled by the latter practice of Cong? to be 
the same as you take it to be. I always understood 

1 Italics for cypher. 

1784] JAMES MADISON. 39 

that to be the true, the parliamentary and the only 
rational sense. If no distinction be admitted between 
the " appropriation of money to general uses " and 
" expenditures in detail " the Secretary of Cong? 
could not buy quills or wafers without a vote of nine 
States entered on record, and the Secretary to the 
Come of the States could not do it at all. In short 
unless one vote of appropriation can extend to a class 
of objects, there must be a physical impossibility of 
providing for them ; & the extent & generality of 
such classes can only be determined by discretion & 
conveniency. It is observable that in the specification 
of the powers which require 9 States, the single tech 
nical word "appropriate" is retained. In the general 
recital which precedes, the word " apply " as well as 
" appropriate " is used. — You were not mistaken in 
supposing I had in conversation restrained the author 
ity of the fcederal Court to territorial disputes, but I 
was egregiously so in the opinion I had formed. 
Whence I got it I am utterly at a loss to account. It 
could not be from the Confederation itself, for words 
could not be more explicit. I detected the error a 
few days ago in consulting the articles on another 
subject, & had noted it for my next letter to you.— 
I am not sure that I comprehend your idea of a ces 
sion of the territory beyond the Kenhaway and on 
this side of the Ohio. As all the soil of value has 
been granted out to individuals a cession in that view 
would be improper, and a cession of the jurisdiction 
to Cong? can be proper only where the Country is 
vacant of settlers. I presume your meaning therefore 

40 THE WRITINGS OF [1784 

to be no more than a separation of that country from 
this and an incorporation of it into yf Union ; a work 
to which all three must be parties. I have no reason 
to believe there will be any repugnance on the part of 
Virg* — The effort of Pen? for the Western commerce 
does credit to her public councils. The commercial 
genius of this State is too much in its infancy I fear to 
rival the example. Were this less the case, the con 
fusion of its affairs must stifle all enterprize. I shall 
be better able however to judge of the practicability 
of your hint when I know more of them. — The de 
clension of George Town does not surprise me tho' it 
gives me regret. If the competition should lie be 
tween Trenton & Philad* & depend on the vote of 
New York 1 it is not difficult to foresee into which 
scale it will be thrown, nor the probable effect of such 
decision on our Southern hopes. — I have long re 
garded the council as a grave of useful talents, as well 
as objectionable in point of expence, yet I see not 
how such a reform as you suggest can be brought 
about. The Constitution, tho' readily overleaped by 
the Legislature on the spur of an occasion, would 
probably be made a bar to such an innovation. It 
directs that 8 members be kept up, and requires the 
sanction of 4 to almost every act of the Governor. 
Is it not to be feared too, that these little meliora 
tions of the Government may turn the edge of some 
of the arguments which ought to be laid to its root ? 
I grow every day more & more solicitous to see this 
essential work begun. Every days delay settles the 

1 Cypher. 

1784] JAMES MADISON. 41 

Gov' deeper into the habits of the people, and 
strengthens the prop which their acquiescence gives it. 
My field of observation is too small to warrant any 
conjecture of the public disposition towards the meas 
ure ; but all with whom I converse lend a ready ear 
to it. Much will depend on the politics of Mr. 
Henry, wc!* are wholly unknown to me. Should they 
be adverse, and G. Mason not in the Assembly haz 
ardous as delay is, the experiment must be put off to 
a more auspicious conjuncture. 

The charter granted in 1732 to Lord Baltimore 
makes, if I mistake not, the Southern shore of the Po- 
towmac, the boundary of Maryland on that side. The 
constitution of Virginia cedes to that State " all the ter 
ritories contained within its charter with all the rights 
of property, jurisdiction and Government and all other 
rights whatsoever, which might at any time have been 
claimed by Virginia, excepting only the free naviga 
tion & use of the Rivers Potowmac and Pohomoque, 
&c." Is it not to be apprehended that this language 
will be construed into an entire relinquishment of the 
Jurisdiction of these rivers, and will not such a con 
struction be fatal to our port regulations on that side, 
& otherwise highly inconvenient ? I was told on 
my journey along the Potowmac of several flagrant 
evasions which had been practiced with impunity & 
success, by foreign vessels which had loaded at Alex 
andria. The jurisdiction of half the rivers ought to 
have been expressly reserved. The terms of the sur 
render are the more extraordinary, as the patents of 

1 See the letter of July 3d to Jefferson. 

42 THE WRITINGS OF [1784 

the N. neck place the whole river potowmac within 
the Government of Virginia ; so that we were armed 
with a title both of prior & posterior date, to that of 
Maryland. What will be the best course to repair 
the error? — to extend our laws upon the River, 
making Maryland the plaintiff if she chooses to con 
test their authority — to state the case to her at once 
and propose a settlement by negociation — or to pro 
pose a mutual appointment of Comissioners for the 
general purpose of preserving a harmony and efficacy 
in the regulations on both sides ? The last mode 
squares best with my present ideas. It can give no 
irritation to Maryl? ; it can weaken no plea of Virg* ; 
it will give Maryland an opportunity of stirring the 
question if she chooses, and will not be fruitless if 
Maryland should admit our jurisdiction. If I see the 
subject in its true light no time should be lost in fix 
ing the interest of Virginia. The good humour into 
which the cession of the back lands must have put 
Maryland, forms an apt crisis for any negociations 
which may be necessary. You will be able probably 
to look into her charter & her laws, and to collect the 
leading sentiments relative to the matter. 

The winter has been so severe that I have never 
renewed my call on the library of Monticello, and the 
time is now drawing so near when I may pass for a 
while into a different scene, that I shall await at least 
the return to my studies. Mr. L. Grymes told me a 
few days ago that a few of your Books which had 
been borrowed by Mr. W. Maury, and ordered by 
him to be sent to his brother's, the clergyman, 

1784] JAMES MADISON. 43 

on their way to Monticello, were still at the place 
which Mr. M. removed from. I desired Mr. Grymes 
to send them to me instead of the Parson, supposing, 
as the distance is less, the books will probably be 
sooner out of danger from accidents, and that a con 
veyance from hence will not be less convenient. I 
calculated also on the use of such of them as may fall 
within my plan. I lately got home the Trunk which 
contained my Buffon, but have barely entered upon 
him. My time begins already to be much less my 
own than during the winter blockade. I must leave 
to your discretion the occasional .purchase of rare and 
valuable books, disregarding the risk of duplicates, 
you know tolerably well the objects of my curiosity. 
I will only particularize my wish of whatever may 
throw light on the general constitution & droit pub 
lic of the several confederacies which have existed. 
I observe in Boinaud's catalogue several pieces on 
the Duch, the German, & the Helvetic. The opera 
tions of our own must render all such lights of conse 
quence. Books on the Law of N. & N. fall within a 
similar remark. The tracts of Bynkershoek, which 
you mention I must trouble you to get for me & in 
french if to be had rather than in latin. Should the 
body of his works come nearly as cheap as these 
select publications, perhaps it may [be] worth consider 
ing whether the whole would not be preferable. Is 
not Wolfius also worth having ? I recollect to have 
seen at Pritchard's a copy of Hawkin's abridge' of Co: 
Litt: I would willingly take it if it be still there & 
you have an opportunity. A copy of Deane's letters 

44 THE WRITINGS OF [1784 

which were printed in New York & which I failed to 
get before I left Phil? I should also be glad of. I 
use this freedom in confidence that you will be equally 
free in consulting your own conveniency whenever I 
encroach upon it. I hope you will do so particularly 
in the request I have to add. One of my parents 
would be considerably gratified with a pair of good 
Spectacles which are not to be got here. The par 
ticular readiness of Dudley to serve you inclines me to 
think that an order from you would be well executed. 
Will you therefore be so good as to get from him 
one of his best pebble & double jointed pair, for 
the age of fifty-five or thereabouts, with a good case ; 
and forward them by the first safe conveyance to me 
in Orange or at Richmond as the case may be. If 
I had thought of this matter before Mi" Maury set 
out, I might have lessened your trouble. It is not 
material whether I be repayed at the bank of Philad* or 
the Treas^ of Virginia, but I beg it may be at neither 
till you are made secure by public remittances. It 
will be necessary at any rate for £20 or 30 to be 
left in your hands or in the bank for little expendi 
tures which your kindness is likely to bring upon 
you. 

The Executive of S. Carolina, as I am informed by 
the Attorney have demanded of Virginia the surren 
der of a citizen of Virga charged on the affidavit of 
Jonas Beard Esqf whom the Executive of S. C. rep 
resent to be a " Justice of the peace, a member of 
the Legislature, and a valuable, good man," as follows : 
that " three days before the 25* day of Octr 1783 he 

1784] JAMES MADISON. 45 

(Mr. Beard) was violently assaulted by G. H. during 
the sitting of the Court of General Sessions, without 
any provocation thereto given, who beat him (Mr. B.) 
with his fist & switch over the face head and mouth, 
from which beating he was obliged to keep his room 
until the said 25* day of Octf 1783, and call in the 
assistance of a physician." Such is the case as col 
lected by Mr. Randolph from the letter of the Execu 
tive of S. C. The questions which arise upon it are 

1. whether it be a charge of high misdemesnor 
within the meaning of the 4 art : of Confederation. 

2. whether in expounding the terms high misdemes 
nor, the law of S. Carolina, or the British law as in 
force in the U. S. before the Revolution ought to be 
the standard. 3. if it be not a casus fcederis what 
the law of nations exacts of Virginia ? 4. if the law 
of nations contains no adequate provision for such 
occurrences, whether the intimacy of the Union 
among the States, the relative position of some, and 
the common interest of all of them in guarding against 
impunity for offences which can be punished only by 
the jurisdiction within which they are committed, do 
not call for some supplemental regulations on this 
subject ? M' R. thinks Virginia not bound to surren 
der the fugitive untill she be convinced of the facts, 
by more substantial information, & of its amount 
ing to a high misdemesnor, by inspection of the law 
of S. C. which & not the British law ought to 
be the criterion. His reasons are too long to be 
rehearsed. 

I know not my dear sir what to reply to the affec- 

46 THE WRITINGS OF [1784 

tionate invitation which closes your letter.1 I sub 
scribe to the justness of your general reflections I feel 
the attractions of the particular situation you point 
out to me. I cannot altogether renounce the pros 
pect : still less can I as yet embrace it. It is very far 
from being improbable that a few years more may 
prepare me for giving such a destiny to my future 
life ; in which case the same or some equally conven 
ient spot may be commanded by a little augmentation 
of price. But wherever my final lot may fix me be 
assured that I shall ever remain, with the sincerest 
affection & esteem, 

Y5 friend and servant. 

TO THOMAS JEFFERSON. MAD. MSS. 

ORANGE April 25th 1784. 

DEAR SIR, — Your favor of the 16^ of March came 
to hand a few days2 before Mazzei called on me. His 
plan was to have proceeded hence directly to Annapo 
lis. My conversation led him to premise a visit to Mr. 
Henry, from whence he proposed to repair to Rich- 

1 " Monroe is buying land almost adjoining me. Short will do the same. 
What would I not give [if] you could fall into the circle. . . . There is 
a little farm of 140 a* adjoining me, & within two miles, all of good land, tho' 
old, with a small indifferent house on it, the whole not worth more than ^250. 
Such a one might be a farm of experiment & support a little table and house 
hold. It is on the road to Orange & so much nearer than I am. It is conven 
ient enough for supplementary supplies from thence. Once more think of it, 
and adieu." — Jefferson to Madison, Feb. 20, 1784. Writings of Jefferson, iii., 
406. Madison's personal plans were given a definite shape the following sum 
mer, Aug. 19, 1784, when his father presented him with a farm of 560 acres, a 
part of the Montpelier tract. — Orange County MSS. Records. 

2 Italics for cypher. 

1 7 84] JA MES MADISON. 47 

mond, and close his affairs with the Executive. Con- 
trary to my expectation he returned hither on 
thursday last, proposing to continue his circuit 
through Gloucester, York, and Williamsburg, recom 
mended by Mr. Henry, for obtaining from the former 
members of the Council certain facts relating to his 
appointment, of which the vouchers have been lost. 
This delay, with the expectation of your adjournment, 
will probably prevent his visit to Congress. Your let 
ter gave me the first information both of his views 
towards a Consulate and of his enmity towards Frank 
lin. The first was not betrayed to me by any conver 
sation either before or after I made known to him the 
determination of Congress to confine such appoint 
ments to natives of America. As to the second he 
was unreserved alledging at the same time that the 
exquisite cunning of the old fox has so enveloped his 
iniquity, that its reality cannot be proved by those 
who are thoroughly satisfied of it. It is evident, from 
several circumstances stated by himself that his en 
mity has been embittered if not wholly occasioned by 
incidents of a personal nature. Mr. Adams is the 
only public man whom he thinks favourably of, or 
seems to have associated with, a circumstance which 
their mutual characters may perhaps account for. 
Notwithstanding these sentiments towards Franklin 
& Adams his hatred of England remains unabated, 
& does not exceed his partiality to France, which 
with many other considerations which need not be 
pointed out, persuade me that however dreadful an 
actual visit from him might be to you in a personal 

48 THE WRITINGS OF [1784 

view, it would not produce the public mischiefs yo^i, 
apprehend from it. By his interview with Mr. 
Henry, I learn that the present politics of the latter 
comprehend very friendly views towards the confeder 
acy, a wish tempered with much caution for an 
amendment of our constitution, a patronage of the 
payment of British debts, and of a scheme of general 
assessment. 

The want of both a Thermometer & Barof had de 
termined me to defer a meteorological diary till I could 
procure these instruments. Since the red of your 
letter I have attended to the other columns. 

I hope the letter which had not reached you at the 
date of your last, did not altogether miscarry. On 
the 1 6 of March I wrote you fully on sundry points. 
Among others I suggested to your attention the case 
of the Potowmac, having in my eye the river below 
the head of navigation. It will be well I think to 
sound the ideas of Maryland also, as to the upper 
parts of the N. branch of it. ^^ policy of Baltimore 
will probably thwart as far as possible, the opening of 
it ; & without a very favorable construction of the 
right of Virginia, and even the privilege of using the 
Maryland Bank, it would seem that the necessary 
works could not be accomplished. 

Will it not be good policy to suspend further Trea 
ties of Commerce, till measures shall have taken place 
in America which may correct the idea in Europe of 
impotency in the fcederal Gov' in matters of Com 
merce ? Has Virginia been seconded by any other 
State in her proposition for arming Congress with 

1 7 84] JAMES MADISON. 49 

power to frustrate the unfriendly regulations of G. B. 
with regard to her W. India islands? It is reported 
here that the late change of her ministers has revived 
the former liberality which seemed to prevail on that 
subject. Is the Impost gaining or losing ground 
among the States ? Do any considerable payments 
come into the Contin! Treasury ? Does the settle 
ment of the public accV5 make any comfortable pro 
gress ? Has any resolution been taken by Congress 
touching the old Cont! currency? Has Maryland 
foreborne to take any steps in favour of George Town ? 
Can you tell me whether any question in the Court of 
Appeals, has yet determined whether the war ceased 
on our coast on the 3d of March or the 3d of April ? 
The books which I was told were still at the place left 
by Mr W. Maury, had been sent away at [the] time 
Mr. L. Grymes informed of them. 

Mr Mazzei tells me that a subterraneous city has 
been discovered in Siberia, which appears to have 
been once populous & magnificent. Among other 
curiosities it contains an equestrian Statue around the 
neck of which was a golden chain 200 feet in length, 
so exquisitely wrought that Buffon inferred from a 
specimen of 6 feet sent him by the Empress of Russia, 
that no artist in Paris could equal the workmanship. 
Mr. Mazzei saw the specimen in the hands of Buffon 
& heard him give this opinion of it. He heard read 
at the same time a letter from the Empress to Buffon 
in which she desired the present to be considered as a 
tribute to the man to whom Nat: Hist : was so much 
indebted. Monsf Faujas de S' Fond thought the city 

50 THE WRITINGS OF [1784 

was between 72 & 74 ° N. L. the son of Buffon be 
tween 62 & 64 ° Mr M. being on the point of depart 
ure had no opportunity of ascertaining the fact. If you 
should have had no better account of the discovery 
this will not be unacceptable to you & will lead you to 
obtain one. 

I propose to set off for Richmond towards the end 
of this week. The election in this County was on 
Thursday last. My colleague is Mr Charles Porter 

I am, &c. 

TO JAMES MADISON. MAD. MSS. 

RICHMOND May 13, 1784. 

HON? SIR, — The Spectacles herewith inclosed came 
to my hands yesterday with information that the pf first 
sent were forwarded by mistake. It will however give 
my mother a double chance of suiting herself. I wish 
the p^ which may not be preferred to be sent down to 
me by the earliest opportunity unless they should suit 
yourself & you choose to keep them, as I am desired 
by the maker to return them in case they sh? not be 
wanted. We did not make a House till Wednesday 
& of course are but just beginning the business of the 
Session. Mr Jefferson has been app? an associate 
with Df F. & M" Adams in forming comercial Treaties 
and will proceed immediately to Europe. He takes 
the place of M' Jay who is returning to America & 
who is to be the Secretary of F. affairs if he will ac 
cept the office. I do not find that S. Jones is as yet 

1784] JAMES MADISON. 51 

here, & I suspend the sale of the Tob? with a hope of 
its further rise. 387. I believe may now be got, but 
4<D/. is generally expected. I am your 

dutiful son 

TO THOMAS JEFFERSON. MAD. MSS. 

RICHMOND, May 15, 1784. 

DEAR SIR, — Your favor of the 7* inst. with another 
pf of spectacles inclosed came safe to hand on thurs- 
day last. I shall have the person for whose use they 
were intended take choice of the most suitable & 
will return the other pf to Mr Dudley by the first 
conveyance, unless I meet with a purchaser which I do 
not expect. The arrangement which is to carry you to 
Europe has been made known to me by Mr. Short 
who tells me he means to accompany or follow you. 
With the many reasons which make this event agree 
able, I cannot but mix some regret that your aid to 
wards a revisal of our State Constitution will be 
removed. I hope however for your licence to make 
use of the ideas you were so good as to confide to 
me, so far as they may be necessary to forward the 
object. Whether any experiment will be made this 
session is uncertain. Several members with whom I 
have casually conversed give me more encouragem' 
than I had indulged. As Col : Mason remains in pri 
vate life, the expediency of starting the idea will de 
pend much on the part to be expected from R. H. L. 
& P. H. The former is not yet come to this place, 

52 THE WRITINGS OF [1784 

nor can I determine any thing as to his politics on this 
point. The latter arrived yesterday, & from a short 
conversation I find him strenuous for invigorating the 
federal Gov1 though without any precise plan, but 
have got no explanations from him as to our internal 
Gov1. The general train of his thoughts seemed to 
suggest favorable expectations. We did not make a 
house till Wednesday last, & have done nothing yet 
but arrange ye committees & receive petitions. The 
former Speaker was re-elected without opposition. 
If you will either before or after your leaving America 
point out the channel of communication with you in 
Europe, I will take the pleasure of supplying you from 
time [to time] with our internal transactions, as far as 
they may deserve your attention, & expect that you 
will command every other service during yr absence 
which it may be in my power to render. Wishing you 
every success & happiness, I am, Dr sir, 

Your affecl.e friend 


RICHMOND June sf.h 1784, 

HOND SIR, — I have disposed of the tobacco entrusted 
to me for 40 / per c' but receive in hand no more than 
will be delivered by Mf Craig. The residue will be 
paid before I leave this place. I inclose a draught on 
S. J. from Col. Harvey, for ^200 for which I have 
credited Mr Anderson on his bond. Ml" Anderson 
could not pay the balance now, but expects to do it 
shortly. The draught & the remittance, will I hope 

1784] JAMES MADISON. 53 

with such addition as you will be able to make, redeem 
your bond out of the hands of My Jones. I have ap 
plied to Gen! Wood for Majr Kite's warrant. He 
promises to get it if possible, before Mf Craig sets 
out. If he does it will be forwarded. I have laid 
Maj? Lee's case before the House, and it has been re 
ferred to the committee of propositions. The mass 
of business before this Committee & my avocations 
from it to other Committees have delayed it hitherto. 
Having but a moment to write this I must refer to 
Mr Craig for the news of the session. The House of 
Delegates have agreed to postpone the June tax till 
Jan^. It is not improbable that the Senate may require 
\ to be collected at an earlier period. Mf Winslow 
will probably be glad to be apprized of these circum 
stances. Remember me affect? to the family & accept 
of the dutiful respects of your son 

TO JAMES MADISON. MAD. MSS. 

RICHMOND June 24, 84 

HOND SIR, — Your letter by Capt : Cowherd with 
that of my brother's have been just put into my hand. 
I shall leave to him the sale of the Tob° belonging to 
Capt. Conway & Ambrose ; not being at leisure my 
self to do it before he proposes to set out. I 
think it will be well to accept of Mi" Lawson's offer of 
the Madeira. I shall do the best I can towards satis 
fying the Treasury on ace' of M? Winslow. Maj' 
Lee's warrant has been ordered by the assembly, but 
Ml" Harvey being a little puzzled by the peculiarity 

54 THE WRITINGS OF [1784 

of the case, could not make it out immediately on my 
first application, & I have not time now to repeat it. 
I hope the delay will not be inconvenient to Majr 
Lee. Much time has been lately spent by the assem 
bly in abortive efforts for amendment of the constitu 
tion,1 and fulfilling the Treaty of peace in the article 

1 Notes of Speech on Proposed Amendment to the Constitution of Virginia. 
June, 1784 : 

' ' Virg? Legislature 

" For Amending Constitution of V? in 1784. 

" Nature of a Constitution exam<?see Mass1.5 p. 7. 8. 15. 16. N. Y. p. 63. — 
Pen? p. 85. 86. Del. p. 106 N. C. p. 146-150. S. C. p. 188. Geo p. 
175. 186. 

" Convention of 1776. without due power from people. 

" i. passed the ordinance for Const? on recommendation of Cong? of May 15. 
1776. prior to decln of independence : as was done in N. H. p. I & N. J. p. 
78-84. 

" 2. Passed it from impulse of necessity. — See last clause of the preamble 

3. before independence declared by Cong* 

" 4. power from people no where pretended. 

"5. other ordinances of same Session deemed alterable as relative to Sen 
ators — oaths — Sal t . 

" 6. provisions for care of West Augusta in its nature temporary. 

" 7. Convention make themselves branch of the Legislature. 

" Constitution, if so to be called defective 

" i. in a Union of powers which is tyranny Montesq. 

"2. Executive dependent on Legislature, i. for salary. 2. for character in 
the trefiial expulsion. — 3. expensive — 4. may be for life contrary to Art : 5 
of Declaration of Rights. — 

"3. Judiciary dependent for am! of salary 

" 4. Privileges & wages of members of Legislature unlimited & undefined. 

" 5. Senate badly constituted & improperly barred of the originating of laws. 

" 6. equality of representation not provided for see N. Y. p. 65. S. C. p. 165 

" 7. Impeachm1.5 of great moment & on bad footing. 

" 8. County Courts seem to be fixed p. 143. 144. also General Court. 

"9. Habeas Corpus omitted. 

" 10. no mode of expounding constitution & and of course no check to Gen1. 
Assembly 

"IT. Right of suffrage not well fixed — quere if popish recusants &c. are not 
disfranchised ? Const? rests on acquiescence, a bad basis 

" Revision during war improper — on peace decency requires surrender of 
power to people. 

1784] JAMES MADISON. 55 

of British debts.1 The residue of the business will 
not be completed till next week. If my brother W. 
is at leisure as before, I beg him to bring down the 
chair for me to be here by Wednesday next. 
I am your dutiful son. 

44 No danger in referring to the people who already exercise an equivalent 
power. 

44 If no change be made in the Constitution, it is advisable to have it ratified 
and secured ag^ the doubts and imputations under which it now labours." — 
Mad. MSS. 

2 4l J. M.'s proposition to the Gen. Assembly [June — 1784]. See Journal 
Whereas by the 44.h article of the Definitive Treaty of Peace ratified and pro 
claimed by the United States in Congress assembled on the I4l.h day of Jany 
last 4 it is agreed that Creditors on either side shall meet with no lawful im 
pediment to the recovery of the full value in sterling money, of all bona fide 
debts heretofore contracted ' : and whereas it is the duty and determination of 
this Commonwealth, with a becoming reverence for the faith of Treaties, truly 
and honestly, to give to the said article, all the effect, inasmuch as the debts 
due from the good people of this commonwealth to the subjects of G. Britain 
were contracted under the prospect of gradual payments, and are justly com 
puted to exceed the possibility of full payment at once, more especially, under 
the diminution of their property resulting from the devastations of the late war : 
and it is therefore conceived that the interest of the British creditors them 
selves will be favored by fixing certain reasonable periods, at which divided 
payments shall be made : 

44 Resolved, that it is the opinion of this Committee, that the laws now in 
force relative to British debts, ought to be so varied & amended as to make the 
same recoverable in the proportions & at the periods following : that is to say, 
part thereof with interest of 5 per O. from the date of the definitive Treaty 
of peace, on the day of and the remaining on the day of 
And whereas it is further stipulated by art : 7l.h of the said Treaty, among other 
things, that 4 his Britannic Majesty shall with all convenient speed, and without 
causing any destruction, or carrying away any negroes or other property of the 
American inhabitants, withdraw all his armies, garrisons and fleets from the 
said United States ; and from every post place and harbour within the same, 
leaving in all fortifications the American artillery that may be therein, and 
shall also order and cause all archives, records, deeds & papers, belonging to 
any of the said States, or their citizens, which in the course of the war, may 
have fallen into the hands of his officers, to be forthwith restored and delivered 
to the proper States and persons to whom they belong,' which stipulation was in 
the same words contained in the Provisional articles signed at Paris on the 30^ 

56 THE WRITINGS OF [1784 

TO THOMAS JEFFERSON. MAD. MSS. 

RICHMOND, July 3d, 1784. 

DEAR SIR, — The Assembly adjourned the day be 
fore yesterday. I have been obliged to remain here 
since on private business for my Countrymen with 
the Auditor's and other departments. I had allotted 
towards the close of the Session to undertake a narra 
tion for you of the proceedings, but the hurry on 
which I did not sufficiently calculate, rendered it im 
possible, and I now find myself so abridged in time that 
I cannot fulfil my intentions. It will however be the 
less material, as Mr. Short by whom this goes, will be 
possessed of almost every thing I could say. I inclose 

day of November 1782 by the commissioners empowered on each part : and 
whereas posterior to the date of the said provisional articles, Sundry negroes 
the property of citizens of this commonwealth were carried away from the city 
of New York whilst in possession of the British forces, and no restitution or 
satisfaction on that head, has been made, either before or since the Definitive 
Treaty of peace ; And whereas the good people of this commonwealth have a 
clear right to expect that whilst, on one side, they are called upon by the U. S. 
in Congress assembled to them by fcederal Constitution the powers of war 
& peace are exclusively delegated, to carry into effect the stipulations in favour 
of British subjects, an equal observance of the stipulations in their own favor, 
should, on the other side, be duly secured to them under the authority of the 
Confederacy. 

" Resolved, that it is the opinion of this Committee ; that the Delegates repre 
senting this State in Congress ought to be instructed to urge in Congress 
peremptory measures for obtaining from G. Britain satisfaction for the infringe 
ment of the article aforesaid ; and in case of refusal or unreasonable delay of 
such satisfaction, to urge that the sanction of Congress be given to the just 
policy of retaining so much of the debts due from citizens of this common 
wealth, to British subjects, as will fully repair the losses sustained from such 
infringement : and that to enable the said Delegates, to proceed herein with the 
greater precision & effect, the Executive ought to be requested to take imme 
diate measures for obtaining & transmitting to them, all just claims of the 
citizens of this Commonwealth under the 7*h art : as aforesaid." — Mad. MSS. 

1784] JAMES MADISON. 57 

you a list of the acts passed excepting a few which had 
not received the last Solemnity when the list went to 
press. Among the latter is an Act under which i per 
Ct. of the land tax will be collected this fall and will 
be for Congress. This with the \\ per Ct. added to 
the impost on trade, will be all that Congress will ob 
tain on their last requisition for this year. It will be 
much short of what they need, & of what might be 
expected from the declarations with which we intro 
duced the business of the Session. These declara 
tions will be seen in the Journal, copy of which I take 
for granted will be carried by Mr. Short. Another 
act not on the list lays duties on law proceedings, on 
alienations of land, on probats of Wills, administra 
tion & some other transactions which pass through 
official hands. This tax may be considered as the 
basis of a stamp-tax; it will probably yield ^15 or 
20,000 at present, which is set apart for the foreign 
Creditors of this State. 

We made a warm struggle for the establishing of 
Norfolk & Alexandria as our only ports ; but were 
obliged to add York, Tappahannock & Bermuda hun 
dred, in order to gain any thing & to restrain to these 
ports foreigners only. The footing on which British 
debts are put will appear from the Journal noting only 
that a law is now in force which forbids suits for them. 
The minority in the Senate have protested on the 
subject. Having not seen the protest I must refer to 
Mr. Short who will no doubt charge himself with it. 

A trial was made for a Convention, but in a form 
not the most lucky. The adverse temper of the 

58 THE WRITINGS OF [1784 

House & particularly of Mr. Henry had determined 
me to be silent on the subject. But a Petition from 
Augusta having among other things touched on a 
Reform of the Gov' and R. H . L. arriving with fav 
orable sentiments, we thought it might not be amiss 
to stir the matter. Mr. Stuart from Augusta accord 
ingly proposed to the Comittee of propositions the 
Resolutions reported to the House as per Journal. 
Unluckily R. H. L. was obliged by sickness to leave 
us the day before the question came on in Comittee 
of the whole, and Mr. Henry shewed a more violent 
opposition than we expected. The consequence was 
that after two days Debate the Report was negatived, 
and the majority not content with stopping the 
measure for the present availed themselves of their 
strength to put a supposed bar on the Journal against 
a future possibility of carrying it. The members for 
a Convention with full powers, was not considerable 
for number, but included most of the young men of 
education & talents. A great many would have con 
curred in a Convention for specified amendments, but 
they were not disposed to be active even for such a 
qualified plan. 

Several Petitions came forward in behalf of a gen1 
Assessm1 which was reported by the Come of Religion 
to be reasonable.1 The friends of the measure did 

'At this session a concerted effort was made by the various churches for State 
recognition. There was a committee of the legislature charged " with all mat 
ters relating to religion and morality," Petitions were presented from the 
Baptists and Presbyterians asking for a removal of all remaining distinctions in 
favor of the Episcopal Church, in order that " religious freedom be established 
upon the broad basis of perfect political equality." The bill for the Episcopal 
Church was debated two days. — Rives, i., 560, et seq. John B. Smith, president 

1784] JAMES MADISON. 59 

not chuse to try their strength in the House. The 
Episcopal Clergy introduced a notable project for re 
establishing their independence of the laity. The 
foundation of it was that the whole body should be 
legally incorporated, invested with the present prop 
erty of the Church, made capable of acquiring indefin 
itely — empowered to make canons & bye-laws not 
contrary to the laws of the land, and incumbents when 
once chosen by vestries, to be immovable otherwise 
than by sentence of the Convocation. Extraordinary 
as such a project was, it was preserved from a dishon 
orable death by the talents of Mr. Henry. It lies 
over for another Session. 

The public lands at Richmond not wanted for pub 
lic use are ordered to be sold & the money, aided by 
subscriptions, to be applied to the erection of buildings 
on the Hill as formerly planned. This fixes the Gove, 
which was near being made as vagrant as that of the 
U. S., by a coalition between the friends of Will- 
iamsbs & Stanton. The point was carried by a small 
majority only. 

The lands about Williamsbg are given to the Uni 
versity, and are worth, Mr. Tazewell thinks ^10,000 
to it. For the encouragement of Mr. Maury's School, 
licence is granted for a lottery to raise not more than 
^2000. 

of Hampden-Sydney College, wrote to Madison, June 21, 1784, that the bill 
was insulting to non-Episcopalians, and any measure to enable the Episcopal 
clergy to regulate all spiritual concerns of that church was an express attempt 
" to draw the State into an elicit connection and commerce with them," and 
to put the legislature in the position of being at the head of the church. He 
was sorry that Christian ministers should virtually declare their church to be a 
mere political machine. — Smith to Madison, Mad. MSS. 

60 THE WRITINGS OF [1784 

The revisal is ordered to be printed. A frivolous 
ceconomy restrained the n? of copies to 500. I 
shall secure the n° you want & forward them by the 
first opportunity. The three Revisors' labour was 
recollected on this occasion, and ,£500 voted for each. 
I have taken out your warrant in five parts, that it 
may be the more easily converted to use. It is to be 
paid out of the first unappropriated money in the 
Treasury, which renders its value very precarious un 
less the Treasurer sd be willing to endorse it " receiva- 
ble-in-taxes," which he is not obliged to do. I shall 
await your orders as to the disposition of it. 

An effort was made for Paine & the prospect once 
flattering. But a sudden opposition was brewed up 
which put a negative on every form which could be 
given to the proposed remuneration. Mr. Short will 
give you particulars. 

Col : Mason the Attorney Mr. Henderson & myself 
are to negociate with Maryland if she will app' Com- 
issrs to establish regulations for the Potowmac.1 

1 The boundary between Virginia and Maryland was the Potomac, and the 
charter of Lord Baltimore had defined the Southern shore as the line. This 
Virginia confirmed in the Constitution of 1776, reserving, however, the free navi- 
igation and use of the river. Madison feared that this general confirmation 
would be construed by Maryland into a total surrender of all jurisdiction over 
the river. Having accertained through Jefferson that Maryland would appoint 
commissioners to form regulations if Virginia did so, Madison introduced a bill 
to that effect, which was passed June 3Oth. See Rives, i,, 535, et seq. Through a 
blunder in the notifications Madison and Randolph did not attend the meeting 
with the Maryland Commissioners, which took place at Mount Vernon, but the 
Maryland Commissioners having journeyed some distance, Mason and Hender 
son decided to proceed with the conference. — Mason to Madison, August 9, 
1785. — Mad. MSS. The Maryland members were T. Stone, Daniel of St. 
Thomas Jenifer and Samuel Chase. Together with Mason and Henderson 
they signed the report which was dated Mount Vernon, March 28, 1785, and 

1784] JAMES MADISON. 61 

Since the receipt of yours of May 8, I have made 
diligent enquiry concerning the several schools most 
likely to answer for the education of your Nephews.1 
My information has determined me finally to prefer 
that of Mr. W. Maury as least exceptionable. I have 
accordingly recommended it to Mrf Carr, & on re 
ceiving her answer shall write to Mr Maury pointing 
out your wishes as to the course of study proper for 
Master Carr. I have not yet made up any opinion as 
to the disposition of your younger nephew but shall 
continue my enquiries till I can do so. I find a greater 
deficiency of proper schools than I could have sup 
posed, low as my expectations were on the subject. 
All that I can assure [you] of is that I shall pursue 
your wishes with equal pleasure & faithfulness. 

transmitted to the General Assembly as " Result of the Deliberations of the 
Commissioners of Virginia & Maryland, appointed to settle the navigation & 
Jurisdiction of that Part of the Chesapeake Bay within the Limits of Virginia, 
& of the Rivers Potomack and Pokomoke." The Commissioners also united in 
a joint letter to the President of the Executive Council of Pennsylvania, rec 
ommending the cooperation of that State. — Mad. MSS. There is no reason for 
supposing that Madison's bill had any deeper purpose than the simple one that 
appeared on the surface, but when it appeared that regulations between Vir 
ginia and Maryland would be useless unless Pennsylvania were included, it be 
came equally evident that New York, New Jersey, and Delaware could render 
ineffective any agreement Pennsylvania might make. A general convention of 
all the States to bring about what was at first projected for two States only was 
the logical suggestion. It resulted in the call for the Annapolis meeting, which 
in turn led to the Philadelphia convention. The proceedings of the Virginia 
and Maryland Commissioners are traced in Kate Mason Rowland's George 
Mason, ii., 12, et seq. For Madison's resolutions extending the Commissioners' 
powers, szz post. 

1 4t Mrs. Carr was informed by M? Jefferson, previous to his departure to 
Europe, that he had requested the favor of you, to direct the Studies of her 
two Sons Peter & Dabney in his absence. Should it be convenient for you to 
comply with M* Jeffersons request, M^s Carr will be much obliged to you to 
inform her, when, and in what manner you would wish them disposed of." — 
W. O. Collis to Madison, August 9, 1784.— Mad. MSS. 

62 THE WRITINGS OF [1784 

Your hint for appropriating the slave tax to Con 
gress fell in precisely with the opinion I had formed 
and suggested to those who are mpst attentive to our 
finances. The existing appropriation of half of it 
however to the Military debt was deemed a bar to 
such a measure. I wished for it because the slave 
holders are Tob° makers, and will generally have hard 
money wch alone will serve for Congress. Nothing 
can exceed the confusion which reigns throughout our 
Revenue department. We attempted but in vain to 
ascertain the amount of our debts, and of our re 
sources, as a basis for something like a system. Per 
haps by the next Session the information may be 
prepared. This confusion indeed runs through all 
our public affairs, and must continue as long as the 
present mode of legislating continues. If we cannot 
amend the constitution, we must at least call in the 
aid of accurate penmen for extending Resolutions 
into bills, which at present are drawn in [a] manner 
that must soon bring our laws and our Legislature 
into contempt among all orders of Citizens. 

I have communicated your request from Philad* 
May 25, to Mr. Lane. He writes by Mr. Short & 
tells me he is possessed of the observations which he 
promised you. I found no opportunity of broaching 
a scheme for opening the navigation of the Potowmac 
under the auspices of Gen1 Washington, or of provid 
ing for such occurrences as the case of Marbois. With 
the aid of ye Attorney perhaps something may be done 
on the latter point next Session. 

Adieu My dear friend. 

1 7 84] JAMES MADISON. 63 

TO GENERAL WASHINGTON. WASH. MSS. 

ORANGE Augst 12, 1784 

DEAR SIR, — I had the honor of receiving your favor 
of the 12^ of June during my attendance on the Le 
gislature, and of answering it a few days, before I left 
Richmond. Since my return home I have been in 
formed that the gentleman into whose hands the 
answer was put has mislaid or lost it, and that I can 
not rely on its ever finding its way to you. I have 
therefore to repeat, Sir, that the sanction which your 
judgment gave to the propriety of rewarding the lit 
erary services of Mr Payne,1 led to an attempt in the 
House of Delegates for that purpose. The proposi 
tion first made was, that he should be invested with a 
moity of a tract of public land known by the name of 
the Secretary's lying on the Eastern Shore. The kind 
reception given to this proposition induced some gen 
tlemen to urge that the whole tract containing about 
500 acres might be included in the donation, as more 
becoming the dignity of the State, and not exceeding 
the merits of the object. The proposition thus en 
larged passed through two readings without apprehen 
sion on the part of its friends. — On the third, a 
sudden attack grounded on considerations of econ 
omy and suggestions unfavourable to Mr Payne threw 
the Bill out of the house. The next idea proposed 

1 Madison wrote to Washington on this subject July 2d less fully than in this 
letter. For Washington's suggestion that something should be done for " poor 
Paine," see his letter of June 12, 1784, to Madison, Writings of Washington, x., 
393, and for Jefferson's opinion of the action of the Assembly, Jefferson to 
Madison, Decembers, 1784, Writings of Jefferson, iv., 17. 

64 THE WRITINGS OF [1784 

was that the land in question should be sold and 
^2000 of the proceeds allotted to Mf Payne to be laid 
out in the purchase of a farm if he should think fit. 
This was lost by a single vote. Whether a succeed 
ing Session may resume the matter, and view it in a 
different light, is not for me to say. Should exertions 
of genius which have been everywhere admired, and 
in America unanimously acknowledged, not save the 
author from indigence & distress, the loss of na 
tional character will hardly be balanced by the 
savings at the Treasury. 

With the highest respect &c. 

TO THOMAS JEFFERSON. MAD. MSS. 

ORANGE Aug 20, 1784. 

DEAR SIR, — Your favor of the Is.1 July written on 
the eve of your embarcation from Boston was safely 
delivered by your servant Bob about the 20^ of the 
same month. Along with it I red the pamphlet on 
the W. India trade, and a copy of Deane's letters. 
My last was written from Richmond on the adjourn 
ment of the Gen! Assembly & put into the hands of 
Mr. Short. It contained a cursory view of legislative 
proceedings, referring to the bearer for a more cir- 
cumstancial one. Since the adjournment I have been 
so little abroad that I am unable to say with certainty 
how far those proceedings harmonize with the vox 
populi. The opinion of some who have better means 
of information is that a large majority of the people 

1784] JAMES MADISON. 65 

either from a sense of private justice or of national faith, 
dislike the footing on which British debts are placed. 
The proceedings relative to an amendment of the State 
Constitution seem to interest the public much less 
than a friend to the scheme would wish. The act 
which produces most agitation and discussion is that 
which restrains foreign trade to enumerated ports. 
Those who meditate a renewal of the old plan of 
British Monopoly & diffusive credit, or whose mer 
cantile arrangements might be disturbed by the inno 
vation, with those whose local situations give them, 
or are thought to give them an advantage in large 
vessels coming up the rivers to their usual stations, 
are busy in decoying the people into a belief that 
trade ought in all cases to be left to regulate itself, 
that to confine it to particular ports is to renounce 
the boon with which Nature has favored our country, 
and if one sett of men are to be importers & export 
ers, another set to be carryers between the mouths 
& heads of the rivers & a third retailers, trade, as 
it must pass through so many hands all taking a profit, 
must in the end come dearer to the people than if the 
simple plan should be continued which unites these 
several branches in the same heads. These & other 
objections, tho' unsound, are not altogether unplausi- 
ble, and being propagated with more zeal and pains 
by those who have a particular interest to serve than 
proper answers are by those who regard the general 
interest only, make it very probable that the measure 
may be rescinded before it is to take effect. Should 
it escape such a fate, it will be owing to a few striking 

VOL. II.— 5. 

66 THE WRITINGS OF [1784 

and undeniable facts, namely, that goods are much 
dearer in Virginia, than in the States where trade is 
drawn to a general mart, that even goods brought 
from Philad* and Baltimore to Winchester & other 
W. & S. W. parts of Virginia are retailed cheaper 
than those imported directly from Europe are sold on 
tide water ; that generous as the present price of our 
Tob° appears, the same article has currently sold 15 
or 20 per G at least higher in Philad* where being as 
far from the ultimate market it cannot be intrinsically 
worth more ; that scarce a single vessel from any part 
of Europe, other than the British Dominions, comes 
into our ports, whilst vessels from so many other 
parts of Europe, resort to other ports of America, 
almost all of them too in pursuit of the Staple of Vir 
ginia. The exemption of our own citizens from the 
restriction is another circumstance that helps to parry 
attacks on the policy of it. The warmest friends to 
the law were averse to this discrimination which not 
only departs from its principle, but gives it an illiberal 
aspect to foreigners, but it was a necessary concession 
to prevailing sentiments. The like discrimination 
between our own citizens & those of other States 
contrary to the fcederal articles is an erratum which 
was omitted to be rectified, but will no doubt be so. 
Notwithstanding the languor of our direct trade with 
Europe, this Country has indirectly tasted some of 
the fruits of Independence. The price of our last 
crop of Tob° has been on James River from 35/ to 
42/6 per G & has brought more specie into the 
Country than it ever before contained at one time. 

1784] JAMES MADISON. 67 

The price of hemp however has been reduced as 
much by the peace as that of Tob° has been raised, 
being sold I am told as low as 2O/ per Q beyond the 
mountains. Our crops of wheat have been rather 
scanty, owing partly to the rigors of the winter, partly 
to an insect,1 which in many places has destroyed 
whole fields of that grain. The same insect has since 
the harvest fallen upon the Corn with considerable 
damage ; but without some very unusual disaster to 
that article the crop will be exuberant, & will afford 
plentiful supplies for the W. India Islands if their 
European Masters will no longer deny themselves 
the benefit of such a trade with us. The crop of the 
Tobacco now on the ground will if the weather con 
tinues favorable be tolerably good, though much 
shortened on the whole by the want of early seasons 
for transplanting & an uncommon number of the 
insects which prey upon it in its different stages. It 
will be politic I think for the people here to push the 
culture of this article whilst the price keeps up, it be 
coming more apparent every day that the richness of 
soil & fitness of climate on the Western waters will 
in a few years, both reduce the price & engross the 
culture of it. This event begins to be generally fore 
seen & increases the demand greatly for land on the 
Ohio. What think you of a guinea an acre being 
already the price for choice tracts with sure titles ? 

Nothing can delay such a revolution with regard to 
our staple, but an impolitic & perverse attempt in Spain 

1 Chinch-bug. Note in MS. 

68 THE WRITINGS OF [1784 

to shut the mouth of the Mississippi against the inhab 
itants above. I say delay, because she can no more 
finally stop the current of trade down the river than she 
can that of the river itself. The importance of this mat 
ter is in almost every mouth. I am frequently asked 
what progress has been made towards a treaty with 
Spain & what may be expected from her liberality on 
this point, the querists all counting on an early ability 
in the western settlements to apply to other motives if 
necessary.1 My answers have both from ignorance 
& prudence been evasive. I have not thought fit 
however to cherish unfavorable impressions, being 
more & more led by revolving the subject, to conclude 
that Spain will never be so mad as to persist in her 
present ideas. For want of better matter for corres 
pondence, I will state the grounds on which I build 
my expectation^. 

First. ^Apt as the policy of nations is to disregard 
justice and the general rights of mankind I deem it no 
small advantage that these considerations are in our 
favour. They must be felt in some degree by the 
most corrupt councils on a question whether the interest 
of millions shall be sacrificed to views concerning a 
distant and paltry settlement ; they are every day ac 
quiring weight from the progress of philosophy and 
civilization and they must operate on those nations of 
Europe who have given us a title to their friendly 
offices or who may wish to gain a title to ours. 

Secondly. May not something be hoped from the 

1 Italics for cyphers. 

1784] JAMES MADISON. 69 

respect which Spain may feel for consistency of char 
acter on an appeal to the doctrine maintained}^ herself 
in the year 1609, touching the scheld, or at least from 
the use which may be made of that fact by the powers 
disposed to favor our views. 

Thirdly. The interest of Spain at least ought to 
claim her attention, (i) A. free trade down the Missis 
sippi would make new Orleans oneoi the most flourish 
ing emporiums in the world and deriving its happiness 
from the benevolence of Spain would feel a firm 
loyalty to her government. At present it is an expen 
sive establishment settled chiefly by French, who hate 
the government which oppresses them, who already 
covet a trade with the upper coimtry, will become every 
day more sensible of the rigor which denies it to them 
and vfi\\join in any attempt which may be made against 
their master. (2) A generous policy on the part of 
Spain towards the U. S. will be the cement of friend 
ship & lasting peace with them. A contrary one will 
produce immediate heart burnings and sow the seeds of 
inevitable hostility. The U. S. are already a power 
not to be despised by Spain the time cannot be distant 
when, in spite of al precautions the safety of her pos 
sessions in this quarter of the globe must depend more 
on our peaceableness than her own power. (3) In 
another view it is against the interest of Spain to 
throw obstacles in the way of our Western settlements. 
The part she took during the late war shews that she 
apprehended less from the power growing up in her 
neighborhood in a state of independence than as an in 
strument in the hands of Great Britain. If in this she 

70 THE WRITINGS OF [1784 

calculated on the impotence 0/the U. S. when dismem 
bered from the British empire she saw but little way into 
futurity ; if on \hepacific temper of republics unjust 
irritations on her part will soon prove to her that 
these have like passions with other governments. — her 
permanent security seems to lie in the complexity of 
our federal government and the diversity of interests 
among the members of it which render offensive meas 
ures improbable in council and difficult in execution. 
If such be the case when thirteen States compose the 
system ought she not to wish to see the number enlarged 
to three and twenty f A source of temporary security 
to her is our want of naval strength ; ought she not, 
then, to favor those emigrations to the Western land 
which, as long as they continue will leave no super 
numerary hands for the sea. 

Fourthly. Should none of these circumstances affect 
her councils she cannot surely so far disregard the 
usage of nations as to contend that her possessions at 
the mouth tf/the Mississippi justify a total denial <si 
the use of it to the inhabitants above when possessions 
much less ^'^proportionate at the mouth of other rivers 
have been admitted only as a title to a moderate toll. 
The case of the Rhine the Maese & the Scheld, as 
of Elbe and Oder are if / mistake not in point here. 
How far other rivers may afford parallel cases I can 
not say. That of the Mississippi is probably the 
strongest in the world. 

Fifthly. Must not the general interest of Europe in 
all cases influence the determinations of any particular 
nation in Europe and does not that interest in the 

1784] JAMES MADISON. 71 

present case clearly lie on our side, (i) All the prin 
cipal powers have, in &. general view more to gain than 
to lose by denying a right of those who hold the mouths 
of rivers to intercept a communication with those above. 
France Gr Brit and Sweden have no opportunity of 
exerting such a right, and must wish a free passage for 
their merchandize in every country Spain /ierse\i has 
no such opportunity and has besides three of her prin 
cipal rivers one of them the seat of her metropolis run 
ning thro' Portugal. Russia can have nothing to lose 
by denying this pretension and is bound to do so in favor 
of her great rivers the Neiper, the Niester and the Don 
which mouth in the black sea, and of fas. passage thrd 
the Dardanelles which she extorted from the T^lrks. 
The Emperor in common with the inland States of 
Germany and moreover by his possessions on the 
Maese and the Scheld, has a similar interest, ^^pos 
sessions of the King of Prussia on the Rhine, the Elbe, 
and the Oder, are pledges for his orthodoxy. The U. 
P\ hold it is true, the mouths of the Maese the Rhine 
and the Scheld but a general freedom of trade is so 
much their policy and they now carry on so much of it 
through the channel of rivers flowing thro different do 
minions that their weight can hardly be thrown into the 
wrong scale. The only powers that can have an inter 
est in opposing the American doctrine are the Ottoman 
which has already given up the point to Russia, Den 
mark which is suffered to retain the entrance of the 
Baltic Portugal whose principal rivers head in Spain, 
Venice which holds the mouth of the Po ; and Dantzick 
which commands that of the Vistula if it is yet to be 

72 THE WRITINGS OF [1784 

considered as a sovereign City. The prevailing disposi 
tion of Europe on this point once /Titrated an attempt 
of Denmark to exact a toll at the mouth of the Elbe by 
means of &fort on the holstein side, which commands 
it. The fact is mentioned in Salmons gazetteer, un 
der the head of Cluestadt. I have no opportunity of 
ascertain/;^ the circumstances of the case, or #/ discov 
ering like cases. (2) In a more important view, the 
settlement of the Western country which will much de 
pend on the free use of the Mississippi, will be beneficial 
to all nations who either directly or indirectly trade 
with the U. S. By a free expansion of our people the 
establishment of internal manufactures will not only 
be long delayed but the consumption of foreign manu 
factures long continue increasing ; and at the same 
time, all the productions of the American soil required 
by Europe in return for her manufactures, will propor 
tionally increase. The vacant land of the United 
States lying on the waters of the Mississippi is perhaps 
equal in extent to the land actually settled. If no check 
be given to emigrations from the latter to the former, 
they will probably keep pace at least with the zVzrrease 
of our people, till faz. population of both becomes nearly 
equal. For twenty or twenty-five years we shall conse 
quently have as few internal manufactures in propor 
tion to our numbers as at present and at the end of that 
period our imported manufactures will be doubled. It 
may be observed too, that as the market for these 
manufactures will first increase, and the provision for 
supplying it ~w\\\ follow fas, price of supplies will natur 
ally rise \\\ favor of those who manufacture them. On 

1784] JAMES MADISON. 73 

the other hand as the demand for the tobacco indigo 
rice corn &c produced by America for exportation will 
neither precede nor keep pace with their increase the 
price must naturally sink in favor also of those who 
consume them. Reverse the case by supposing the use 
of the Mississippi denied to us and the consequence is 
that many of our supernumerary hands who in the 
former case would be husbandmen on the waters of the 
Mississippi, will on the latter supposition be manufac 
turers on those of the Atlantic and even those who 
may not be discouraged from seating the vacant lands 
will be obliged by the want of vent for ti\e produce of 
the soil and of the means of purchasing foreign manu 
factures to manufacture in a great measure for them 
selves. Should Spain yield the point of the navigation 
of the Mississippi, but at the same time refiise us the 
use of her shores, the benefit will be ideal only. I have 
conversed with several persons who have a practical 
knowledge of the subject, all of whom assure me that 
not only the right of fastening to the Spanish shore, but 
that of holding an entrepot in our own, or of using 
New Orleans as a free port, is essential to a trade 
thro that channel. It has been said that sea vessels 
can get up as high as latitude thirty-two to meet the river 
craft, but it will be with so much difficulty and dis- 
advantage as to amount to a prohibition. The idea has 
also been suggested of large magazines constructed for 
floating ; but if this expedient were otherwise admissi 
ble the hurricanes which in that quarter frequently de 
molish edifices on land forbid the least confidence in 
those which would have no foundation but water. 

74 THE WRITINGS OF [1784 

Some territorial privileges therefore seem to be as in 
dispensable to the use of the river as this is to the 
prosperity of the western country. A place called 
" The Englishman's turn'' on the island of about six 
leagues below the town of New O. , is I am told the fittest 
for our purpose, & that the lower side of the peninsula 
is the best. Batonrouge is also mentioned as a conven 
ient station and point coupe as the highest to which 
vessels can ascend with tolerable ease. Information 
however of this from men who judge from a general and 
superficial view only can never be received as accurate. 
If Spain be sincerely disposed to gratify us, I hope she 
will be sensible it cannot be done effectually without 
allowing a previous survey and deliberate choice. 
Should it be impossible to obtain from her a portion of 
ground by other means, would it be unadvisable to at 
tempt it by purchase The price demanded could not 
well exceed the benefit to be obtained, and a reimburse 
ment 0/"the public advance might easily be provided 
for by the sale to individuals, and the conditions which 
might be annexed to their tenures. Such a spot could 
not fail in a little time to equal in value the same ex 
tent in London or Amsterdam. The most intelligent 
of those with whom I have conversed think that on 
whatever footing our trade may be allowed very judic- 
\Q\\S provision will be necessary for a fair adjustment of 
disputes between the Spaniards and the Americans dis 
putes which must be not only noxious to trade but tend 
to embroil the two nations. Perhaps a joint tribunal, 
under some modification or other might answer the 
purpose. There is a precedent I see for such an 

1784] JAMES MADISON'. 75 

establishment in the twenty-first article of the treaty of 
Munster in 1 648, between Spain and the U. N. I am 
informed that, sometime after New O. passed into the 
hands of Spain her Governor forbid all British vessels 
navigating under the treaty of Paris to fasten to the 
shore and caused such as did so to be cut loose. In con 
sequence of this practice a British frigate went up 
near the town fastened to the shore and set out guards 
to fire on any who might attempt to cut her loose. The 
Governor after trying in vain to remove the frigate by 
menaces acquiesced after which British vessels indiscrim 
inately used the shore and even the residence of British 
Merchants in the town of New O., trading clandestinely 
with the Spaniards as well as openly with their awn 
people, [was] winked at. The treaty 0/1763 stipulated 
to British subjects as well as / recollect no more than 
the right of navigating the river and if that of using 
was admitted under that stipulation, the latter right 
must have been admitted to be included in the former. 
When you were about leaving America as a 
Comissr for peace you intimated to me that a report 
was in circulation &l your being a party to jobs for Ken 
tucky lands and authorized me to contradict the re 
port. I have some reason to believe that the credit 
of your name has been made use of by some who are 
making purchases or locations in that quarter. If they 
have done it without sanction it may not be amiss to 
renew my authority. 1 

1 " I can with truth therefore declare to you, and wish you to repeat it on 
every proper occasion, that no person on earth is authorized to place my name 
in any adventure for lands on the western waters." Jefferson to Madison, 
November u, 1784. — Writings of Jefferson, iv., 3. 

76 THE WRITINGS OF [1784 

In consequence of my letter to Mrs. Carr I have 
been called on by your elder Nephew, who is well sat 
isfied with the choice made of Williamsbg for his fu 
ture studies. I have furnished him with letters to my 
acquaintance there & with a draught on your Steward 
for ;£i2. He will be down by the opening of Mr. 
Maury's school at the close of the vacation, which 
lasts from the beginning of Augst to the end of Septr. 
I have the greater hopes that the preference of this 
School will turn out a proper one, as it has reel the 
approbation of the literary gentlemen of Williamsbg 
& will be periodically examined by Mr. Wythe & 
others. Your younger Nephew is with Majr Callis, 
who will keep [school ?] some time longer, I am at 
a loss as yet where to fix him, but will guard as much 
as possible agst any idle interval. I am, very affectly, 
dear Sir, y friend and serv1, 

TO JAMES MADISON. MAD. MSS. 

HON'D SIR, — I arrived at this place the night before 
last only, having declined starting from Fredg. at the 
time I proposed when I parted with you, & having 
staid at Baltimore one day, at the latter place I fell 
in with the Marquis & had his company thus far. He 
is proceeding Northw? as far as Boston from whence 
he goes to the Moran Treaty at Fort Stanwix and 
from thence returns to Virg* about the same time that 
I must be there. He presses me much to fall into 
his plan, and I am not sure that I shall decline it. It 

1784] JAMES MADISON. 77 

will carry me farther than I had proposed, but I shall 
be rewarded by the pleasure of his company and the 
further opportunity of gratifying my curiosity. I 
have nothing to add at present but that I am your 
affec son 

TO THOMAS JEFFERSON. MAD. MSS. 

PHILAD^- Sep1; 7th, 1784. 

DEAR SIR, — Some business, the need of exercise 
after a very sedentary period, and the view of extending 
my ramble into the Eastern States which I have long 
had a curiosity to see have brought me to this place. 
The letter herewith enclosed was written before I left 
Virginia, & brought with me for the sake of a con 
veyance hence. Since the date of it I have learned 
that Mr Short who was to be the bearer of the letter 
to which it refers has not yet left Richmond. The 
causes of his delay are unknown to me. At Baltimore 
I fell in with the Marquis de la Fayette returning 
from a visit to Mount Vernon. Wherever he passes 
he receives the most flattering tokens of sincere affec 
tion from all ranks. He did not propose to have left 
Virginia so soon but Gen1 Washington was about 
setting out on a trip to the Ohio, and cod not then 
accompany him on some visits as he wished to do. 
The present plan of the Marquis is to proceed im 
mediately to New York, thence by Rhode Island 
to Boston, thence thro' Albany to Fort Stanwix, 
where a treaty with the Indians is to be held the latter 
end of this month, thence to Virginia so as to meet 
the Legislature at Richmond. I have some thoughts 

78 THE WRITINGS OF [1784 

of making this tour with him, but suspend my final 
resolution till I get to N. Y. whither I shall follow 
him in a day or two. 

The relation in1 which the Marquis stands to France 
and America has induced me to enter into a free con- 
versan with him on the subject of the Mississippi. I 
have endeavored emphatically to impress on him that 
the ideas of America and of Spain irreconcileably 
clash that unless the mediation of France be effectually 
exerted, an actual rupture is near at hand that in 
such an event the connection between France and Spain 
will give the enemies of the former in America the 
fairest opportunity of involving her in our resentm^ 
against the latter, and of introducing Great Brit, as a 
party with us as against both that America cannot 
possibly be diverted from her object, and therefore 
France is bound to set every engine at work to divert 
Spain from hers ; and that France has besides a great 
interest in a trade with the western country thro the 
Mississippi. I thought it not amiss also to suggest to 
him some of the considerations which seem to appeal 
to the produce of Spain. He admitted the force of 
everything I said told rne he would write in the most 
[favorable] terms to the Coitnt de Vergennes by the 
packet which will probably carry this and let me see 
his letter at N. York before he sends it. He thinks that 
Spain is bent on excluding us from the Mississippi 
and mentioned several anecdotes which happened while 
he was at Madrid in proof of it. 

The Committee of the States have dispersed. 

1 Italics for cypher. 

1784] JAMES MADISON. 79 

Several of the Eastern members havg by quitting it 
reduced the number below a quorum, the impotent 
remnant thought it needless to keep together. It is 
not probable they will be reassembled before Novr, 
so that there will be an entire interregnum of the 
foederal Government for some time, against the inten 
tion of Cong5 I apprehend, as well as against every 
rule of decorum. 

The Marquis this moment stepped into my room & 
seeing my cyphers before me dropped some questions 
which obliged me in order to avoid reserve to let him 
know that / was writing to you. I said nothing on the 
subject but he will probably infer from our conversatn 
that the Mississippi is most in my thoughts. 

Mrs. House charges me with a thousand compli 
ments & kind wishes for you and Miss Patsy. We 
hear nothing of Mrs. Trist since her arrival at the 
Falls of the Ohio, on her way to N. Orleans. There 
is no doubt that she proceeded down the river thence, 
unapprized of her loss. When & how she will be 
able to get back since the Spaniards have shut all 
their ports agst the U. S., is uncertain & gives much 
anxiety to her friends. Browze has a windfall from 
his grand mother of ^"1000 sterling. Present my 
regards to Miss Patsy and to Mr. Short if he should 
be with you, and accept yourself Dear Sir, the 
sincerest affection of your friend & servant. 

TO THOMAS JEFFERSON. 

N. YORK, Octr n, 1784. 

DEAR SIR, — My last dated from this place on the 
14 [15] ult : informed you of my projected trip to Fort 

8o THE WRITINGS OF [1784 

Schuyler. I am this moment arrived so far on my re 
turn to Virginia. My past delay requires so much 
hurry now that I can only drop a few lines for the 
packet which is to sail on the i5th inst. The Mar 
quis & myself were overtaken at Albany by Mr. de 
Marbois, on the same errand with ourselves. We 
reached Fort S. on the 29, & on the next day paid a 
visit to the Oneida Nation 1 8 miles distant. The CorTi- 
issrs did not get up till the Saturday following. We 
found a small portion only of the six nations assem 
bled ; nor was the number much increased when we 
quitted the scene of business. Accts however had 
come of deputies from more distant tribes being on 
the way. The Marquis was recd by the Indians with 
equal proofs of attachment as have been shewn him 
elsewhere in America. This personal attachment with 
their supposed predilection for his nation, and the 
reports propagated among them that the Alliance be 
tween F. & U. S. was transient only, led him with 
the sanction of the Comissrs to deliver a Speech to 
the Indian Chiefs coinciding with the object of the 
Treaty. The answers were very favorable in their 
general tenor. Copies of both will be sent to Mons. 
de Vergennes & the [n] M. de Castries by Mr. Mar 
bois & be within the reach of your curiosity. The 
originals were so much appropriated to this use during 
my stay with the Marquis that I had no opportunity 
of providing copies for you. What the upshot of the 
Treaty will be is uncertain. The possession of the 
posts of Niagara &c by the British is a very inauspici 
ous circumstance. Another is that we are not likely 

1784] JAMES MADISON. 81 

to make a figure otherwise that will impress a high 
idea of our power or opulence. These obstacles will 
be rendered much more embarrassing by the instruc 
tions to the Comissrs which I am told leave no space 
for negociation or concession, & will consequently 
oblige them in case of refusal in the Indians to yield 
the ultimate hopes of Congress to break up the Treaty. 
But what will be the consequence of such an emer 
gency ? Can they grant a peace without cessions of 
territory — or if they do must not some other price here 
after purchase them. A Truce has never I believe 
been introduced with the Savages nor do I suppose 
that any provision has been made by Congress for 
such a contingency. The perseverance of the British 
in retaining the posts1 produces various conjectures. 
Some suppose it is meant to enforce a fulfilment of 
the Treaty of peace on our part. This interpretation 
is said to have been thrown out on the other side. 
Others that it is a salve for the wound given the 
Savages who are made to believe the posts will not 
be given up till good terms shall be granted them by 
Congress. Others that it is the effect merely of 
omission by the B. Gov'to send orders. Others that 
it is meant to fix the fur trade in the B. channel & it 
is even said that the Govt of Canada has a personal 

1 ..." That one reason assign'd for detaining the Western posts from 
the United States was, because Virginia had not repealed her laws that impede 
the recovery of British debts. It is sincerely to be lamented that our State 
should be so charged, and it is much to be wished that the Advocates for re 
taining those laws wd no longer insist upon furnishing pretext for detaining from 
the U. S. possessions of such capital importance to the Union as these posts 
are." — Richard Henry Lee to Madison, November 20, 1784. Mad. MSS. 

82 THE WRITINGS OF [1784 

interest in securing a monopoly of at least the crop of 
this Season. I am informed by a person just from 
Michilimackinac that this will be greater than it has 
been for several seasons past, or perhaps any preced 
ing season, & that no part of it is allowed by the 
British Commanders to be brought thro' the U. S. 
From the same quarter I learn that the posts have 
been lately well provisioned for the winter, & that 
reliefs if not reinforcements of the garrisons will take 
place. Col : Monroe had passed Oswego when last 
heard of & was likely to execute his plan. If I have 
time & opportunity I will write again from Philad* 
for which I set out immediately ; if not from Rich 
mond. The Marqs proceeded from Albany to Boston 
from whence he will go via R. Island, to Virg*, and 
be at the Assembly. Thence he returns into the N. 
States to embark for Europe. 
I am Yrs affect 

TO THOMAS JEFFERSON. MAD- MSS- 

PHILADA. Octr. 17 1784. 

DEAR SIR, — On my arrival here I found that Mr. 
Short had passed through on his way to N. York & 
was there at the date of my last. I regret much that 
I missed the pleasure of seeing him. The inclosed 
was put into my hands by Mrs. House, who reed*? it 
after he left Philad* My two last, neither of which 
were in cypher, were written as will be all future ones 
in the same situation, 1 in expectation of their being 
read by postmasters. I am well assured that this is 

1 Italics for cypher. 

1784] JAMES MADISON. 83 

\hefate of all letters at least to and from public persons 
not only in France but all the other Countries of 
Europe. Having now the use of my cypher I can write 
without restraint. In my last I gave you a sketch of 
what passed at Fort Schuyler during my stay there, 
mentioning in particular that the Marquis had made 
a speech to the Indians with the sanction of the Corn- 
miss^ Wolcott, Lee, Butler? The question will prob 
ably occur how a foreigner and a private one, could 
appear on the theatre of a public treaty between the 
U. S. & the Indian nations and how the Commis 
sioners could lend a sanction to it. Instead of 
offering an opinion of the measure I will state the man 
ner in which it was brought about. It seems that most 
of the Indian tribes particularly those of the Iroquois 
retain a strong predilection for the French and most of 
the latter an enthusiastic idea of the Marquis. This 
idea has resulted from his being a Frenchman the 
figure he has made during the war and the arrival of 
several important events which he foretold to them 
soon after he came to this country. Before he went to 
fort Schuyler it had been suggested, either in compli 
ment or sincerity that his presence & influence might 
be of material service to the treaty. At albany the 
same thing had been said to him by general Wolcot. 
On his arrival at FortS. Mr. Kirkland recommended 
an exertion of his influence as of essential conseqcf to the 
treaty, painting in the strongest colours the attach 
ment of the Indians to his person, which seemed indeed 
to be verified by their caresses and the artifices em- 

1 Oliver Wolcott, Richard Butler, and Arthur Lee. 

84 THE WRITINGS OF [1784 

ployed by the British partisans to frustrate the objects 
of the treaty among which was a pretext that the 
alliance between the U. S. and France was insincere 
and transitory and consequently the respect of the In 
dians for the latter ought to be no motive for their res 
pecting the former. Upon these circumstances the M. 
grounded a written message to the Commissrs. before 
they got up intimating his disposition to render the U. 
S. any service his small influence over the Indians 
might put in his power and desiring to know what the 
Commissioners would chuse him to say. The answer 
in Mr. Lees hand consisted of polite acknowledgments 
and information that the Commissrs. would be happy 
in affording him an opportunity of saying whatever he 
might wish forbearing to advise or suggest w* it would 
be best for him to say. the M. perceived the ca^Uion 
but imputed it to Lee alone. As his stay was to be 
very short it was necessary for him to take provisional 
measures before the arrival of the Commissrs and 
particularly for calling in the Oneida Chiefs who were 
at their town. It fell to my lot to be consulted in his 
dilemma. My advice was that he should invite the 
chief in such a way as would give him an opportunity 
of addressing them publicly, if on a personal interview 
with the Commissioners it should be judged expedient ; 
or of satisfying their expectations with a friendly 
entertainment in return for the civilities his visit to 
their town had met with. This advice was approved ; 
but the Indians brought with them such ideas of his 
importance as no private reception would probably have 
been equal to. When the Commissioners arrived the 

1784] JAMES MADISON. 85 

M. consulted them in person. They were reserved, he 
was embarrassed. Finally they changed their plan and 
concurred explicitly in his making a Speech in form. 
He accordingly prepared one communicated it to the 
Commrs. and publicly pronounced it the Commrs. 
premising such an one as was thought proper to intro 
duce his. The answer of the sachems, as well as the 
circumstances of the audience denoted the highest rev 
erence for the orator. The chief of the Oneidas said 
that the word which he had spoken to them early in 
the war had prevented them from being misled to the 
wrong side of it. During this scene and even during 
the whole stay of the M. he was the only conspicuous 
figure. The Commissioners were eclipsed All of 
them probably felt it. Lee complained to me of the 
immoderate stress laid on the influence of the M., and 
evidently promoted his departure. The M. was not 
insensible of it, but consoled himself with the service 
which he thought the Indian Speech would witness 
that he had rendered to the U. S. I am persuaded 
that the transaction is also pleasing to him in 
another view as it will form a bright column in the 
Gazettes of Europe. As it is blended with the pro 
ceed^ of the Commrf, it will probably not be published 
in America very soon. The time I have lately passed 
with the M. has given me a pretty thorough insight 
into his character. With great natural frankness of 
temper he unites much address and very considerable 
talents. In his politics he says his three hobby-horses 
are the alliance between France and the U. S., the 
union of the latter and the manumission of the slaves. 

86 THE WRITINGS OF [1784 

The two former are the dearer to him, as they are con 
nected with his personal glory. The last does him real 
honor, as it is a proof of his humanity. In a word, 
I take him to be as amiable a man as can be imagined 
and as sincere an American as any Frenchman can be ; 
one whose past services gratitude obliges us to acknow 
ledge and whose futitre friendship prudence requires 
us to cultivate. 

The Committee of the States have never reassem 
bled. The case of Longchamps has been left both 
by the Legislature & Executive of this State to its 
Judiciary course. He is sentenced to a fine of 100 
Crowns, to 2 years' imprisonment, and Security for 
good behaviour for 7 years. On teusday morning 
I set off for Richmond, where I ought to be to 
morrow, but some delays have put it out of my 
power. The ramble I have taken has rather inflamed 
than extinguished my curiosity to see the Northern 
and N. W. Country. If circumstances be favorable 
I may probably resume it next Summer. Present my 
compliments to Miss Patsy, for whom as well as your 
self Mrs. House charges me with hers. She has lately 
rec? a letter from poor Mrs. Trist, every syllable of 
which is the language of affection itself. She had 
arrived safe at the habitation of her decd Husband, 
but will not be able to leave that Country till the 
Spring at the nearest. The only happiness she says 
she is capable of there, is to receive proofs that her 
friends have not forgotten her. I do not learn what 
is likely to be the amount of the effects left by Mr. T. 
former accounts varied from 6 to 10,000 dollars. 
I am my Dear Sir, Yrs very affect. 

1784] JAMES MADISON, 87 

TO JAMES MONROE. MAD. MSS. 

RICHMOND, Nov. — , 1784. 

DEAR SIR, — Your favor without date was brought 
by thursday's post. It inclosed a Cypher for which I 
thank you & which I shall make use of as occasion 
may require, though from the nature of our respective 
situations, its chief value will be derived from your 
use of it. Ge1 Washington arrived here on Sunday 
last, and the Marquis on thursday. The latter came 
from Boston in a French frigate. They have both 
been addressed & entertained in the best manner that 
circumstances would admit. These attentions and the 
balloting for public offices have consumed the greatest 
part of the past week. Mr. Jones is put into the 
place of Mr. Short, Mr. Roane and Mr. M. Selden 
are to go into those of Mr. M. Smith & Col. Chris 
tian who are the victims to that part of the Constitu 
tion which directs a triennial purgation of the Council. 
The vote is not to take effect till the Spring, but was 
made now in consequence of the discontinuance of the 
Spring Session. The rejected Candidates were Col. 
Bland, Cys Griffin, G. Webb, W. C. Nicholas, Mr. 
Breckenridge, Col. Carrington. The latter was within 
one vote of Mr. Selden, Col. B. Mr. N., & Mr. B., 
had as nearly as I recollect between 20 & 30 votes, 
Mr. G. & Mr. W. very few. Mr. H. Innes late Judge 
of the Kentucky Court is to succeed W[alker] 
D[aniel], late Attorney General in that District. His 
competitor was Mr. Stewart who was about 15 votes 
behind. 

I am Dr Sir Yrs sincerely. 

88 THE WRITINGS OF [1784 

NOTES OF SPEECH AGAINST ASSESSMENTS FOR SUPPORT OF 
RELIGION. NOVEMBER - - 1784. MAD. MSS. 

I. Rel. not within purview of civil authority.1 

Tendency of estab? Xnty — i. to project of Uniformity. 2. to 
penal laws for support2 it. 

Progress of Gen. Asses* proves this tendency. 
Difference between estab? and tolerating errour. 
" True question — not Is Rel. necessy, — but 

II. are Relig* Estabts necesy for Religion ? No. 

1. propensity of man to Religion. 

2. Experience shews Relig. corrupted by Estabts' 

3. Downfall of States mentioned by Mr. H. — happened where 
there was estab'- 

4. Experience gives no model of Gen1 Asst- 

5. Case of Pa. explained — not solitary. N. J. See const, of 
it. R. I. N. Y. D. factions greater in S. C. 

6. Case of primitive Xnty. 

of Reformation. 

of Dissenters formerly. 

7. Progress of Religious liberty. 

III. Policy- 

1. promote emigrations from State. 

2. prevent immig. into it, as asylum. 

IV. Necessity of Estab1 inferred from state of coy' 
True causes of disease. 

1. war | common to other States & produce same com- 

2. bad laws ) plts in N. E. 

3. pretext from taxes. 

4. state of administration of Justice. 

5. transition from old to new plan. 

6. policy and hopes of friends to G. Asst- 

True remedies not Estabt- — but, being out of war, 
i. laws to cherish virtue. 

*A paraphrase of this speech may be found in Rives i., 604. The speech is 
written in a microscopic hand on the back of a letter. 

1784] JAMES MADISON. 89 

2. administration of justice. 

3. personal example — associations for R. 

4. By present vote, cut off hope of G. asst- 

5. Education of youth. 
V. Probable defects of Bill, 

1. limited. 

2. in particular. 

3. What is Xnty ? Courts of law to Judge. 

4. What edition: Hebrew, Septuagint, or Vulgate? What copy 
what translation ? 

5. What books canonical, what apocryphal? the papists hold 
ing to be the former what protestants the latter, the Lutherans 
the latter what the protestants & papists ye former. 

6. In what light are they to be viewed, as dictated every letter 
by inspiration, or the essential parts only ? Or the matter in 
general not the words ? 

7. What sense the true one for if some doctrines be essential 
to Xnty those who reject these, whatever name they take are no 
Xn Society ? 

8. Is it Trinitarianism, Arianism, Socinianism ? Is it salvation 
by faith or works also, by free grace or by will, &c., &c. 

9. What clue is to guide [a] Judge thro' this labyrinth when 
ye question comes before them whether any particular society is 
a Xn society ? 

10. Ends in what is orthodoxy, what heresy. 
Dishonors Christianity. 

panegyric on it, on our side. 
Decl. Rights." 

TO JAMES MONROE. MAD. MSS. 

RICHMOND, Nov^ i4th, 1784. 

DEAR SiR,1 — * * The Indians begin to 

be unquiet we hear both on the N. W. & S. E. sides 

1 The opening of the letter relates to Monroe's journey over the same ground 
substantially that Madison had just travelled. 

9o THE WRITINGS OF [1784 

of the Ohio. The Spaniards are charged with spur 
ring on the latter. As means of obviating the dangers, 
the H. of D. have resolved to authorize the Executive 
to Suspend the surveying of land within the un- 
purchased limits, & to instruct the Delegation to 
urge in Congf Treaties with the Southern Indians 
and negociations with Spain touching the Mississip1. 
They also propose to set on foot surveys of Potowmac 
& James Rivers from their falls to their sources. 
But their principal attention has been & is still occu 
pied with a scheme proposed for a Gen1 Asse1; 47 have 
carried it agst 32. l In its present form it excludes 
all but Xn Sects. The Presbyterian Clergy have 
remonstrated agst any narrow principles, but indirectly 
favor a more comprehensive establish'. I think the 
bottom will be enlarged & that a trial will be made 
of the practicability of the project. The Successor 
to Mr. H[arrison] is not yet appointed or nominated. 
It is in the option of Mr. H[enry], and I fancy he will 
not decline the service. There will be three vacancies 
in the Council, for which no nominations have been 
made. Mr. C. Griffith will probably be named, & 
Mr. W. Nicholas. Mr. Roane is also spoken of. 
I am, Dr Sir, Yrs sincerely. 

1 The resolution was brought in by Henry. It declared that " the people of 
the commonwealth, according to their respective abilities, ought to pay a 
moderate tax or contribution for the support of the Christian religion, or of 
some Christian church, denomination, or communion of Christians, or of some 
form of Christian worship." Only one petition appeared against the measure. 
A special committee with Henry at the head was appointed to prepare the bill. 
See Rives i., 599, et seq. 

1784] JAMES MADISON. 91 

TO JAMES MONROE. MAD- MSS- 

RICHMOND, Novr 27, 1784. 

DEAR SIR, — Your favor of the I5th inst : came to 
hand by thursday's post. Mine by the last post ac 
knowledged your preceding one. The umbrage given 
to the Comsrs of the U. S. by the negociations of 
N. Y. with the Indians was not altogether unknown 
to me, though I am less acquainted with the circum 
stances of it than your letter supposes. The Idea 
which I at present have of the affair leads me to say 
that as far as N. Y. may claim a right of treating with 
Indians for the purchase of lands within her limits, 
she has the confederation on her side ; as far as she 
may have exerted that right in contravention of the 
Gen1 Treaty, or even unconfidentially with the 
Comsrs of Cong5, she has violated both duty & de 
corum. The fcederal articles give Cong5 the ex 
clusive right of managing all affairs with the Indians 
not members of any State, under a proviso, that the 
Legislative authority of the State within its own limits 
be not violated. By Indians not members of a State, 
must be meant those, I conceive who do not live 
within the body of the Society, or whose Persons or 
property form no objects of its laws. In the case of 
Indians of this description the only restraint on Con 
gress is imposed by the Legislative authority of the 
State. 

If this proviso be taken in its full latitude, it must 
destroy the authority of Congress altogether, since 
no act of Cong5 within the limits of a State can be 
conceived which will not in some way or other 

9 2 THE WRITINGS OF [1784 

encroach upon the authority [of the] State. In order 
then to give some meaning to both parts of the sen 
tence as a known rule of interpretation requires, we 
must restrain this proviso to some particular view of 
the parties. What was this view ? My answer is 
that it was to save to the States their right of pre 
emption of lands from the Indians. My reasons are. 
i. That this was the principal right formerly exerted 
by the Colonies with regard to the Indians, 2. that 
it was a right asserted by the laws as well as the pro 
ceedings of all of them, and therefore being most 
familiar, wd be most likely to be in contemplation of 
the parties. 3. that being of most consequence to the 
States individually, and least inconsistent with the 
general powers of Congress, it was most likely to 
be made a ground of Compromise. 4. it has been 
always said that the proviso came from the Virga 
Delegates, who wd naturally be most vigilant over 
the territorial rights of their Constituents. But what 
ever may be the true boundary between the authority 
of Cong8 & that of N. Y., or however indiscreet 
the latter may have been I join entirely with you in 
thinking that temperance on the part of the former 
will be the wisest policy. I concur with you equally 
with regard to the ignominious secession at Anna 
polis. As Congs are too impotent to punish such 
offences, the task must finally be left to the States 
and experience has shewn in the case of Howel that 
the interposition of Cong? agst an offender instead 
of promoting his chastisement, may give him a signi- 
ficancy wch he otherwise wd never arrive at and may 

1784] JAMES MADISON. 93 

induce a State to patronize an act which of their own 
accord they would have punished. I am sorry to find 

the affair of Mr. de Marb s. taking so serious a 

face. As the insult was committed within the juris 
diction of Pena, I think you are right in supposing the 
offender could not be transferred to another jurisdic 
tion for punishment. The proper questions therefore 
are i. whether the existing law was fully put in force 
agst him by Pa? 2. whether due provision has been 
made by that State agst like contingencies ? Nothing 
seems to be more difficult under our new Govern 
ments than to impress on the attention of our Legis 
latures a due sense of those duties which spring from 
our relations to foreign nations. Several of us have 
been labouring much of late in the G. Assembly here 
to provide for a case with which we are every day 
threaten'd by the eagerness of our disorderly Citizens 
for Spanish plunder & Spanish blood. It has been 
proposed to authorize Cong8 Whenever satisfactory 
proof shall be given to them by a foreign power of 
such a crime being committed by our Citizens within 
its jurisdiction as by the law of Nations call for a sur 
render of the Offender, & the foreign power shall 
actually make the demand, that the Executive may at 
the instance of Cong5 apprehend & deliver up the 
offender. That there are offences of that class is 
clearly stated by Vattel in particular, & that the busi 
ness ought to pass through Cong5, is equally clear. 
The proposition was a few days ago rejected in 
Comittee of the whole. To-day on the report of the 
Corn6 it has been agreed to by a small majority. This 

94 THE WRITINGS OF [1784 

is the most material question that has agitated us 
during the week past. The Bill for a Religious 
Asses1 has not been yet brought in. Mr. Henry the 
father of the scheme is gone up to his Seat for his 
family & will no more sit in the H. of Delegates a 
circumstance very inauspicious to his offspring. An 
attempt will be made for circuit Courts, & Mr. Jones 
has it in contemplation to try whether any change 
has taken place in the sentiments of the H. of D. on 
the subject of the Treaty. He will write to you by 
this post & I refer to him for what I may have 
omitted. 

With sincere regard & esteem I am Dr Sir 
Yr friend & serv1. 

TO JAMES MADISON. MAD- MSS- 

RICHD- Novr 27, 1784. 

HOND SIR, — Having a moment's time to drop you 
a line I inform you that the Bill for confirming sur 
veys agst subsequent entries has been negatived by a 
large majority, rather on the principle that it was un 
necessary & retrospective, than that it was unjust in 
itself. On the contrary all the principal gentlemen 
were of opinion that it was just, but already provided 
for by the law. Mr. Innes the late Judge of the 
Kentucky Court, in particular told me he thought 
such surveys could not be overset. You will have 
heard of the vote in favor of the Gen1. Assess* The 
bill is not yet brought in & I question whether it 
will, or if so whether it will pass. This day a vote 

1784] JAMES MADISON. 95 

passed without a dissent for Circuit Courts. What 
opposition may be made to its passage I know not. 
I have not yet found time to do your business at the 
Land Office. I expected before this to have seen 
my brother A. & Majf Moore. I have been a little 
indisposed for a few days with a bad cold which still 
continues, otherwise I am well. Mr Joseph will tell 
you the price of Tob? I think it will rise. 
With regards to the family 

I am Dr Sir Your Affecte son. 

TO JAMES MADISON. MAD. MSS. 

RICHMOND, Dec1; 3, 1784. 

HON'D SIR, — My last informed you that a vote 
had passed in favor of Circuit Courts. A bill has since 
been brought in and will shortly be considered. The 
difficulty of suiting it to every palate, & the many 
latent objections of a selfish & private nature which 
will shelter themselves under some plausible objec 
tions of a public nature to which every innovation is 
liable render the event extremely uncertain. In the 
Course of this week The H. of D. have agreed to pay 
the British debts by annual portions for 7 years dis 
allowing interest between the 19^ of Ap! 1775 & 
3? of March 1783, the period of hostilities. It is not 
unlikely that the same observations above made on 
the Circuit Court bill may be applicable to this case. 
The bill for Gen1.- Ass' was brought in yesterday. Its 
fate is equally uncertain. I inclose a copy of Treaty 
at Fort Stanwix which I rec*? by yesterdays post. 

96 THE WRITINGS OF [1784 

The Comiss?5 were proceeding to Fort Pitt to hold 
another Treaty : No Cong? had been formed on the 
2O^h of Nov- nor much prospect of a speedy one. The 
British hold the N. Western Post yet & assign in 
justification the breach of Peace in Virg? & N. York. 
I am much better than at ye date of my last & 
with affec^ respect to family remain 

Yr Dutiful Son. 

TO JAMES MONROE. MAD. MSS, 

RICHMOND, Decr. 4. i 784 

DEAR SIR, — On Saturday last a proposition was 
agreed to for establishing Circuit Courts throughout 
this Commonwealth, and yesterday a bill for that pur 
pose was reported. On Wednesday next it will un 
dergo a discussion of the Com6 of the Whole. The 
circumstances under which it has passed thus far seem 
to promise a favorable issue, but the dangers which it 
is yet to go thro' are formidable. They proceed from 
latent & interested objections which have on several 
former occasions proved fatal to similar attempts. The 
plan is pretty analogous to the Nisi prius establishing in 
England. On Tuesday sundry propositions were 
made by Mr. Jones in favor of the 4 art : of the 
Treaty of peace. They passed by a large majority 
with blanks as to the length of time to be given for 
the payment of the principal and for disallowing the 
interest. The former was filled up with seven years, 
in preference to 10, 8, 6, & 5 which were contended 
for on different sides. The latter with the period be 
tween Ap1 19, 1775, & March 3, 1783, in preference 

1784] JAMES MADISON. 97 

to the period between the first date & May 1784, 
the date of the exchange of Ratifications. The bill 
will probably pass but not I fear without some im 
proper ingredients, & particularly some conditions 
relative to the N. W. Posts, or the Negroes which lye 
without our province. The bill for the Religious 
Ass' was reported yesterday and will be taken up in a 
Com? of the whole next week. Its friends are much 
disheartened at the loss of Mr. Henry. Its fate is I 
think very uncertain. Another Act of the H. of D. 
during the presf week is a direction to the Executive 
to carry into effect the vote of a Bust to the Marquis 
de la fayette, to be presented to the City of Paris, & 
to cause another to be procured to be set up in this 
Country. These resolutions are so contrived as to 
hide as much as possible the circumstance in the orig 
inal vote of the bust being to be presented to the 
Marquis himself. I find by a Letter from G1 Washing 
ton that he was on the 28th Ult : just setting out to 
accompany the Marquis to Annapolis & thence to 
Baltimore. The latter may therefore soon be expected 
at Trenton. He has been much caressed here as 
well as everywhere else in his Tour, and I make no 
doubt he will leave Cong* with equal reason to be 
pleased with his visit. I meant to have sent you a 
copy of the Resolutions touching the Busts, but have 
been disappointed in getting one. They were offered 
by Mr. Jones & agreed to unanimously, as they no 
doubt will also be in the Senate. Wishing you all hap 
piness, I am 

D^Sir 

Yrs. sincerely 

VOL. II. — 7. 

98 THE WRITINGS OF [1784 

TO JAMES MONROE. MAD. MSS. 

RICHMOND, Decr- 24th, 1784. 

DEAR SIR, — Your favor of the 1 4th instant came to 
hand on thursday. A proposition was' made a few 
days ago for this State to empower Cong? to carry 
into effect the imposts as soon as 12 States should 
make themselves parties to it. It was rejected on 
the following grounds i. that it would present a 
disagreeable aspect of our affairs to Foreign nations. 
2. that it might lead to other combinations of lesser 
numbers of the States. 3. that it would render R.I. an 
inlet for clandestine trade. 4. that it would sour her 
temper still further at a crisis when her concurrence 
in some general & radical amendment of the Confed 
eration may be invited by Congress. 5. that the 
chance is almost infinitely ags.1 a Union of i 2 States 
on such new ground, and consequently the experi 
ment would be only a fresh display of the jarring 
policy of the States, and afford a fresh triumph & 
irritation to R. Island. The Act empowering Cong? 
to surrender Citizens of this State to the Sovereign 
demanding them for certain crimes committed within 
his jurisdiction has passed. Congress are to Judge 
whether the crimes be such as according to the Law 
of nations warrant such demand, as well as whether 
the fact be duly proven. Concurrent provision is 
made for punishing such offences by our own laws in 
case no such demand be made to or be not admitted by 
Cong?, and legal proof can be had. The latter law 
extends to offences agst the Indians. As these tribes 
do not observe the law of Nations it was supposed 

1784] JAMES MADISON. 99 

neither necessary nor proper to give up Citizens to 
them. The Act is not suspended on the concurrence 
of any other State, it being judged favorable to the 
interest of this tho' no other should follow the exam 
ple, and a fit branch of the federal prerogative. The 
Bill for Assize Courts has passed the Senate without 
any material amendment, is enrolled, and waits only 
to be examined by the Coinitte & signed by the 
Speakers. The Gen! Assess' on the question for en 
grossing it, was yesterday carried by 44 ag8.1 42. To 
day its third reading was put off till Nov^ next, by 45 
ag^ 37 or thereabouts, and it is to be printed for con 
sideration of the people. Much business is still on 
the table but we shall probably rise about New Years 
day. I am, Df Sir with sincere regard Yf friend & 
serv* 

TO RICHARD HENRY LEE. MAD. MSS. 

Extract from a letter from J. M. to Rich? H. Lee, Deer 25, 1784. 

In the course of the last week a proposition was made to im- 
power Congress to collect the Impost within this State (Virginia) 
as soon as 12 States shd. unite in the scheme. The argum1.5 which 
prevailed ags.1 it were the unfavorable aspect it wd. present to for 
eigners, the tendency of the example to inferior combinations — 
the field it w? open for contraband trade — its probable effect on 
the temper of R. Isl? which might thwart other necessary meas 
ures of requiring the unanimity of the States — the improbability 
of the union of 12 States on this new ground, a failure of which 
w? increase the appearance of discord in their policy ; and give 
fresh triumph & irritation to Rh. Is? 

I have not yet found leisure to scan the project of a Con 
tinental Convention with so close an eye as to have made up any 
observations worthy of being mentioned to you. In general I 

ioo THE WRITINGS OF [1784 

hold it for a maxim that the Union of the States is essential to 
their safety ag5.* foreign danger, & internal contention; and that 
the perpetuity and efficacy of the present system cannot be con 
fided in. The question therefore is, in what mode, & at what 
moment the experiment for supplying the defects ought to be 
made. The answer to this question can not be given without a 
knowledge greater than I possess of the temper & views of the 
different States. Virginia seems I think to have excellent dis 
positions towards the confederacy, but her assent or dissent to 
such a proposition w? probably depend on the chance of its hav 
ing no opponent capable of rousing the prejudices & jealousies of 
the Assembly ag5* innovations, particularly such as will derogate 
from their own power & importance. Should a view of the other 
States present no objections ag5* the experiment, individually I 
w? wish none to be presupposed here. 

RESOLUTIONS TOUCHING THE NAVIGATION AND JURIS 
DICTION OF THE POTt)MAC. MAD. MSS. 

December 28* 1784. 

Resolved that the Commissioners or any two of them appointed 
on the 28^ day of June last to concert with commissioners on the 
part of Maryland, regulations touching the navigation and juris 
diction of the Potowmac, be further authorized with the said 
commissioners in representing to the State of Pennsylvania, that 
it is in contemplation of the two States to promote the clearing 
and extending the navigation of Potowmac from tide-water up 
wards as far as the same may be found practicable ; to open a 
convenient road from the head of such navigation to the waters 
running into the Ohio ; and to render these waters navigable as 
far as may be necessary and proper : that said work will require 
great expense which may not be repaid, unless a free use be se 
cured to the said States & their citizens, of the waters of the Ohio 
and its branches, so far as the same lie within the limits of Penn 
sylvania : that as essential advantages will accrue from such works 
to a considerable portion of the said State, it is thought reason 
able that the Legislature thereof should by some previous act 

1784] JAMES MADISON. 101 

engage that for the encouragement of the said works all articles of 
produce or merchandize which may be conveyed to or from either 
of the said two states, through either of the said rivers within the 
limits of Pennsylvania, to or from any place without the said limits, 
shall pass throughout free from all duties or tolls whatsoever, 
other than such tolls as may be established and be necessary for 
reimbursing expenses incurred by the State or its Citizens in clear 
ing, or for defraying the expense of preserving the navigation of 
the said rivers : and that no articles imported into the State of 
Pennsylvania through the channel or channels or any part thereof 
to be opened as aforesaid and vended or used within the said 
State, shall be subject to any duties or imposts other than such 
articles would be subject to if imported into the said State thro' 
any other channel whatsoever : and it is further resolved that in 
case a joint representation in behalf of this State and of Maryland 
shall be rendered by circumstances unattainable, the said Com- 
missiors or any two of them may of themselves make such repre 
sentations on the subject as will in such event become proper ; 
and that in either event they report their proceedings to the next 
General assembly. 

Resolved that a copy of the above Resolutions be transmitted 
forthwith by the Executive to the State of Maryland.1 

1 Madison also had a scheme for improving the roads of the State, and pre 
pared resolutions in the winter of 1784-85 to be introduced at this session of the 
Legislature, but the time being inopportune he allowed the matter to drop. 

' ' Whereas the opening & keeping in repair of direct roads from the differ 
ent parts of this Common'th to the several market Towns, and from one market 
Town to another would greatly encourage agriculture by cheapening the trans 
portation of its productions to the places of consumption & exportation, and 
would in other respects contribute to the improvement of the Country by facilitat 
ing intercourse between the different parts thereof, and it is considered by the 
present general assembly, that altho' the various necessary burdens which now 
press on the people render a general plan for the aforesaid purpose unadvisable 
at this moment, yet that such a beginning ought to be made in the work as will 
not only produce immediate advantage to the community ; but will lead to a 
more diffusive & complete execution thereof : and it is the more necessary that 
the principal roads should be so straightened before the value of the ground to 
be obtained from individuals increases) Be it therefore enacted that the gov- 
ernour with the advice of the Council of State shall be £ he hereby is author 
ized to cause surveys to be made in order to determine the best courses for 

102 THE WRITINGS OF [1785 

TO THOMAS JEFFERSON. MAD. MSS. 

RICHMOND, Janr gth, 1785. 

DEAR SIR, — My last was dated in Philada, Oct1: 1 7. 
I reached this place on the 14^ day after that fixed for 
the meeting of the Assembly and was in time for the 
commencement of business. Yesterday put an end 
to the tedious Session. According to my promise I 
subjoin a brief review of its most material proceed 
ings. 
An Act for This act was carried through the House 

the establisht. *• T-^ i • -i 

of courts of of Delegates against much secret repug- 
Assize. nance, but without any direct and open 

opposition. It luckily happened that the latent op 
position wanted both a mouth and a head. lMr. 
Henry had been previously elected Governor and was 
gone for his family. From his conversation since I 
surmise that his presence might have been fatal. The 
Act is formed precisely on the English pattern, and 
is nearly a transcript from the bill originally penned 
in 1776 by Mr. Pendleton except that writs sent blank 
from the Cll" of Gen! G are to issue in the district, 
but ret4? to G! G. In the Senate it became a con 
sideration whether the Assize Courts ought not to be 
turned into so many Courts of independent and com 
plete jurisdiction, and admitting an appeal only to 

roads, (having regard to the nature of the ground as well as to distance) from 
& to the following places to wit ; from and for executing such surveys the 

Governor with the advice aforesaid is further authorized to appoint a proper 
person for each of such surveys who shall be allowed a sum not exceeding 
per day during his actual employment in the service, and who may take with 
him so many assistants & such daily wages as the Executive shall approve, the 
said Surveyors shall make to the Governour the — Mad. MSS. 

1 Cypher represented by italics. 

1785] JAMES MADISON. 103 

the Court of Appeals. If the fear of endangering 
the bill had not checked the experiment, such a prop 
osition would probably have been sent down to the 
House of Delegates, where it would have been better 
relished by many than the Assize plan. The ob 
jections made to the latter were that as it required the 
issues to be made up and the judgments to be 
awarded in the General Court it was but a partial re 
lief to suitors, and might render the service of double 
setts of Lawyers necessary. The friends of the plan 
thought these inconveniences as far as they were real, 
outweighed by the superior wisdom & uniformity of 
decisions incident to the plan ; not to mention the 
difference in the frequency of appeals incident to the 
different plans. In order to leave as few handles as 
possible for cavil the bill omitted all the little regula 
tions which would follow of course, and will therefore 
need a supplement. To give time for this pro 
vision as well as by way of collecting the mind of the 
public, the commencement of the law is made pos 
terior to the next Session of Assembly. The places 
fixed for the Assize Courts are Northumberland Court 
House, Williamsbs, Accomack Q House, Suffolk, 
Richmond, Petersburg, Brunswick O House, King & 
Queen Q House, Prince Edw* G H., Bedford G H., 
Montgomery & Washington G Hs alternately, Staun- 
ton, Charlottesville, Fredericksbg, Dumfries, Win 
chester, and Monongalia G H. Besides the judicial 
advantages hoped from this innovation, we consider 
it as a means of reconciling to our Gov' the discon 
tented extremities of the State. 

io4 THE WRITINGS OF [1785 

An Act for The subject of clearing these great rivers 
opening and was brought forward early in the Ses- 

extending the J 

navigation of siOn under the auspices of General Wash- 

Potowmac . . 

river. ington, who had written an interesting 

do*" do* of private letter on it to Govr. Harrison 
james river. wnich the latter communicated to the 
Gen! Assembly. The conversation of the Gen! during 
a visit paid to Richmond in the course of the Session, 
still further impressed the magnitude of the object on 
sundry members. Shortly after his departure, a joint 
memorial from a number of Citizens of Va & Mary 
land, interested in the Potowmac, was presented to 
the Assembly, stating the practicability and importance 
of the work, & praying for an act of incorpora 
tion, and grant of perpetual toll to the Under 
takers of it. A bill had been prepared at the same 
meeting which produced the Memorial, and was 
transmitted to Richmond at the same time. A like 
memorial & bill went to Annapolis where the Legis 
lature of Maryland were sitting. The Assembly here 
lent a ready ear to the project, but a difficulty arose 
from the height of the tolls proposed, the danger of 
destroying the uniformity essential in the proceedings 
of the two States, by altering them, — and the scarcity 
of time for negociating with Maryland a bill satis 
factory to both States. Short as the time was how 
ever, the attempt was decided on, and the negociation 
committed to Gen! Washington himself. Gen! Gates 
who happened to be in the way and Col. Blackburn 
were associated with him. The latter did not act, the 
two former pushed immediately to Annapolis, where 

1785] JAMES MADISON. 105 

the sickness of Gen! Gates threw the whole agency 
on Gen! Washington. By his exertions in concert 
with Committees of the two branches of the Legis 
lature, an amendment of the plan was digested in a 
few days, passed thro' both houses in one day with 
nine dissenting voices only, and despatched for Rich 
mond, where it arrived just in time for the close of 
the Session. A corresponding Act was immediately in 
troduced, and passed without opposition. The scheme 
declares that the subscribers shall be an incorporated 
body, that there shall be 500 Shares, amounting to 
about 220,000 dollars, of which the States of Va & 
Maryd are each to take 50 shares, that the tolls shall 
be collected in three portions, at the three principal 
falls, and with the works vest as real estate in the 
members of the Company, and that the works shall 
be begun within one year, and finished within ten 
years, under the penalty of entire forfeiture. 

Previous to the receipt of the Act from Annapolis 
a bill on a different plan had been brought in and pro 
ceeded on for clearing James River. It proposed 
that subscriptions should be taken by Trustees and 
under their management solemnly appropriated to the 
object in view, that they should be regarded as a loan 
to the State, should bear an interest of 10 per d, and 
should entitle the subscriber to the double of the 
principal remaining undischarged at the end of a 
moderate period ; and that the tolls to be collected 
should stand inviolably pledged for both principal & 
interest. It was thought better for the public to pre 
sent this exuberant harvest to the subscribers than to 

io6 THE WRITINGS OF [1785 

grant them a perpetuity in the tolls. In the case of 
the Potowmac which depended on another authority 
as well as our own, we were less at liberty to consider 
what wd be best in itself. Exuberant however as the 
harvest appeared, it was pronounced by good judges 
an inadequate bait for subscriptions even from those 
otherwise interested in the work, and on the arrival 
and acceptance of the Potowmac plan, it was found 
advisable to pass a similar one in favor of James 
River. The circumstantial variations in the latter 
are i. the sum to be aimed at in the first instance is 
100,000 Dollars only. 2. the shares which are the 
same in number with those of Potowmac, are reduced 
to 200 dollrs each and the number of public shares 
raised to 100. 3. the tolls are reduced to \ of the 
aggregate of the Potowmac tolls. 4. in case the falls 
at this place where alone tolls are to be paid, shall be 
first opened, the Company are permitted to receive 
the tolls immediately, and continue to do so till the 
lapse of ten years, within which the whole river is to 
be made navigable. 5. a right of pre-emption is re 
served to the public on all transfers of shares. These 
acts are very lengthy, and having passed in all the pre 
cipitancy which marks the concluding stages of a 
Session, abound I fear with inaccuracies. 

In addition to these acts joint resolutions have 
passed the Legislatures of Maryd & Va for clearing a 
road from the head of the Potowmac navigation to 

o 

Cheat river or if necessary to Monongalia, & 3333^ 
Dollars are voted for the work by each State. Penn- 
sylva is also to be applied to by the Governors of the 

1785] JAMES MADISON. 107 

two States for leave to clear a road thro' her jurisdic 
tion if it should be found necessary, from Potowmac 
to Yohogania ; to which the Assembly here have 
added a proposition to unite with Maryland in repre 
senting to Pena the advantages which will accrue to 
a part of her citizens from opening the proposed com 
munication with the Sea, and the reasonableness of 
her securing to those who are to be at the expence, 
the use of her waters, as a thoroughfare to & from 
the Country beyond her limits, free from all imposts 
& restrictions whatever, and as a channel of trade 
with her citizens free from greater imposts than may 
be levied on any other channel of importation. This 
Resolution did not pass till it was too late to refer it 
to Gen1 Washington's negociations with Maryland. 
It now makes a part of the task allotted to the 
Coiriissrs who are to settle with Maryd the jurisdic 
tion & navigation of Potowmac below tide water. By 
another Resolution of this State, persons are to be 
forthwith appd by the Executive to survey the upper 
parts of Jas river, the country thro' which a road must 
pass to the navigable waters of New River, and these 
waters down to the Ohio. I am told by a member of 
the Assembly, who seems to be well acquainted both 
with the intermediate ground and with the Western 
waters in question, that a road of 25 or 30 miles in 
length will link these waters with Js river, and will 
strike a branch of the former which yields a fine nav 
igation, and falls into the main stream of the Ken- 
hawa below the only obstructions lying in this river 
down to the Ohio. If these be facts James River 

io8 THE WRITINGS OF [1785 

will have a great superiority over Potowmac, the road 
from which to Cheat river is indeed computed by 
Gen1 Washington at 20 miles only, but he thinks the 
expence of making the latter navigable will require a 
continuation of the road to Monongalia, which will 
lengthen it to 40 miles. The road to Yohogania is 
computed by the Gen1 at 30 miles. 

By another resolution, Comissr.s are to be app^ to 
survey the ground for a canal between the waters of 
Elizabeth river and those of N. Carolina, and in 
case the best course for such a canal shall require the 
concurrence of that State, to concert a joint plan and 
report the same to the next Session of Assembly. 
Besides the trade which will flow thro' this channel 
from North Carolina to Norfolk the large district of 
Virginia watered by the Roanoak will be doubled in 
its value by it. 

The Treasurer is by this act directed to 
ing iCnveG~ subscribe 50 shares in the Potowmac & 
100 shares in the James River Companies 
in the which shall vest in Gen! Washington & 

Companies for jj- 

openingjames his heirs. 1 his mode of adding some 
river^. ° substantial to the many honorary rewards 

bestowed on him was deemed least in 
jurious to his delicacy, as well as least dangerous as a 
precedent. It was substituted in place of a direct 
pension urged on the House by the indiscreet zeal of 
some of his friends. Though it will not be an 
equivalent succour in all respects it will save the 
General from subscriptions which would have op 
pressed his finances ; and if the schemes be executed 

1785] JAMES MADISON. 109 

within the period fixed, may yield a revenue for some 
years before the term of his [sic]. At all events it 
will demonstrate the grateful wishes of his Country 
and will promote the object which he has so much at 
heart. The earnestness with which he espouses the 
undertaking is hardly to be described, and shews that 
a mind like his, capable of great views & which has 
long been occupied with them, cannot bear a vacancy ; 
and surely he could not have chosen an occupation 
more worthy of succeeding to that of establishing 
the political rights of his Country, than the patron 
age of works for the extensive & lasting improve 
ment of its natural advantages ; works which will 
double the value of half the lands within the Com 
monwealth, will extend its commerce, link with its in 
terests those of the Western States, and lessen the 
emigration of its Citizens by enhancing the profit 
ableness of situations which they now desert in search 
of better. 

An Act to Our successive postponements had 
discharge the thrown the whole tax of 1 784 on the year 

people of this . -n 

common- 1 785. The remission therefore still leaves 
one naif ortho three halves to be collected. The plenti- 

°f 

and the price of the latter which is vi 
brating on this river between 367. & 4O/. seem to en 
able the Country to bear the burden. A few more 
plentiful years with steadiness in our Councils will 
put our credit on a decent footing. The payments 
from this State to the Continental treasury between 
Ap!, 83, and Novf, 84, amount to ,£123,202 us. i^-, 

no THE WRITINGS OF [1785 

V* Curry. The printed report herewith inclosed will 
give you a rude idea of our finances. 

T. Rumsey by a memorial to the last 

An Act giv- J . , i 111- 

ing james Session represented that he had invented 
a mechanism, by which a boat might be 
worked with little labour at the rate of 

navigating frOm 2$ to Ao miles a day, against a 

certain boats . ^ r -1 

for a limited stream running at the rate of 10 miles an 
hour, and prayed that the disclosure of 
his invention might be purchased by the public. The 
apparent extravagance of his pretensions brought a 
ridicule upon them, and nothing was done. In the 
recess of the Assembly, he exemplified his machinery 
to General Washington and a few other gentlemen, 
who gave a certificate of the reality & importance of 
the invention, which opened the ears of the Assembly 
to a second memorial. The Act gives a monopoly 
for ten years, reserving a right to abolish it at any 
time by paying ;£ 10,000. The inventor is soliciting 
similar Acts from other States, and will not I suppose 
publish the secret till he either obtains or despairs of 
them. 

This act authorises ye surrender of a 

An act for * 

punishing cer- Citizen to 3, foreign Sovereign within 

tain offences .. i i i • • i • * •• 

injurioustothe whose acknowledged jurisdiction the citi- 
thaisqcommon-f z™ shall commit a crime, of wc.h satisfac- 
weaith. tory proof shall be exhibited to Congress, 

and for which in the judgment of Congress the law 
of nations exacts such surrender. This measure was 
suggested by the danger of our being speedily em 
broiled with the nations contiguous to the U. States, 

1785] JAMES MADISON. in 

particularly the Spaniards, by the licentious & pre 
datory spirit of some of our Western people. In 
several instances gross outrages are said to have been 
already practiced. The measure was warmly patron 
ized by Mr. Henry and most of the forensic members, 
and no less warmly opposed by the Speaker and 
some others. The opponents contended that such 
surrenders were unknown to the law of nations, and 
were interdicted by our declaration of Rights. 
Vattel however is express as to the case of Robbers, 
murderers and incendiaries. Grotius quotes various 
instances in which great offenders have been given 
up by their proper Sovereigns to be punished by 
the offended Sovereigns. Puffendorf only refers to 
Grotius. I have had no opportunity of consulting 
other authorities. With regard to the bill of rights, 
it was alleged to be no more or rather less violated 
by considering crimes committed ag5.1 other laws as 
not falling under the notice of our own, and sending 
our Citizens to be tried where the cause of trial arose, 
than to try them under our own laws without a jury 
of the vicinage, and without being confronted with 
their accusers or witnesses ; as must be the case, if 
they be tried at all for such offences under our own 
laws. And to say that such offenders could neither 
be given up for punishment, nor be punished within 
their own Country, would amount to a licence for 
every aggression, and would sacrifice the peace of 
the whole community to the impunity of the worst 
members of it. The necessity of a qualified interpre 
tation of the bill of rights was also inferred from the 

ii2 THE WRITINGS OF [1785 

law of the Confederacy which requires the surrender 
of our Citizens to the laws of other States, in cases 
of treason, felony or other high misdemesnors. The 
Act provides however for a domestic trial in cases 
where a surrender may not be justified or insisted 
upon, and in cases of aggressions on the Indians. 

This act declares the Ministers & ves- 

An act for in 
corporating tries who are to be triennially chosen in 

the Protestant . 1 

Episcopal each parish a body corporate, enables 
them to hold property not exceeding the 
value of ^800 per annum, and gives sanction to a 
Convention which is to be composed of the Clergy 
and a lay deputy from each parish, and is to regulate 
the affairs of the Church. It was understood by the 
House of Delegates that the Convention was to con 
sist of two laymen for each clergyman, and an amend 
ment was received for that express purpose. It so 
happened that the insertion of the amendment did 
not produce that effect, and the mistake was never 
discovered till the bill had passed and was in print. 
Another circumstance still more singular is that the 
act is so construed as to deprive the Vestries of the 
uncontrouled right of electing Clergymen, unless it 
be referred to them by the canons of the Convention, 
and that this usurpation actually escaped the eye both 
of the friends and adversaries of the measure, both 
parties taking the contrary for granted throughout 
the whole progress of it. The former as well as the 
latter appear now to be dissatisfied with what has 
been done, and will probably concur in a revision if 
not a repeal of the law. Independently of these 

1 7 85 ] JAMES MADISON. 1 1 3 

oversights the law is in various points of view excep 
tionable. But the necessity of some sort of incorpor 
ation for the purpose of holding & managing the 
property of the Church could not well be denied, nor 
a more harmless modification of it now obtained. A 
negative of the bill too would have doubled the 
eagerness and the pretexts for a much greater evil, 
a general Assessment, which, there is good ground 
to believe was parried by this partial gratification of 
its warmest votaries. A Resolution for a legal pro 
vision for the " teachers of the Christian Religion" 
had early in the Session been proposed by Mr. 
Henry, and in spite of all the opposition that could 
be mustered, carried by 47 agst 32 votes. Many 
Petitions from below the blue ridge had prayed for 
such a law ; and though several from the presbyterian 
laity beyond it were in a contrary stile, the Clergy of 
that Sect favored it. The other Sects seemed to be 
passive. The Resolution lay some weeks before a 
bill was brought in, and the bill some weeks before 
it was called for, after the passage of the incorporating 
act it was taken up, and on the third reading, ordered 
by a small majority to be printed for consideration. 
The bill, in its present dress proposes a tax of blank 
per O on all taxable property for support of Teachers 
of the Christian Religion. Each person when he 
pays his tax is to name the society to which he dedi 
cates it, and in case of refusal to do so, the tax is to 
be applied to the maintenance of a school in the 
County. As the bill stood for some time, the applica 
tion in such cases was to be made by the Legislature 

VOL. II.— 8. 

ii4 THE WRITINGS OF [1785 

to pious uses. In a committee of the whole it 
was determined by a majority of 7 or 8 that the word 
" Xi1 " should be exchanged for the word " Religious." 
On the report to the House the Apathetic zeal of the 
late Governor Harrison gained a like majority for 
reinstating discrimination. Should the bill pass into 
a law in its present form it may & will be easily 
eluded. It is chiefly obnoxious on account of its dis 
honorable principle and dangerous tendency. 

The subject of the British debts underwent a re 
consideration on the motion of Mr. Jones. Though 
no answer had been rec? from Congress to the Reso 
lutions passed at the last Session, a material change 
had evidently taken place in the mind of the Assem 
bly, proceeding in part from a more dispassionate 
view of the question, in part from the intervening ex 
change of the ratifications of the Treaty. * Mr. Henry 
was out of the way. His previous conversation I 
have been told, favored the reconsideration; the 
Speaker, the other champion at the last Session 
against the Treaty, was at least half a prose light. 
The proposition rejected interest during the period 
of blank and left the periods of payment blank. In 
this form it was recd. with little opposition and by a 
very great majority. After much discussion & sev 
eral nice divisions the first blank was filled up with 
the period between the 19 of Ap!, 1775, and the 3 
of March 1783, the commencement and cessation 
of hostilities ; and the second with seven annual 

1 Cypher represented by italics. 

1785] JAMES MADISON. 115 

payments. Whilst the bill was depending, some pro 
ceedings of the Glasgow merchants were submitted 
to the H. of D. in which they signified their readiness 
to receive their debts in four annual payments, with 
immediate security and summary recoveries at the 
successive periods and were silent as to the point of in 
terest. Shortly after were presented memorials from 
the Merchants of this Town & Petersburg represent 
ing the advantage which a compliance with the Glas 
gow overtures would give the foreign over the 
domestic creditors. Very little attention seemed to 
be paid by the House to the overtures, tho', as the 
Treaty was not to be literally pursued, the shadow 
of assent from the other party was worthy of being 
attended to. In the Senate the bill met with a di 
versity of opinions. By a majority of one voice only 
an attempt to put all our domestic debts on the same 
footing with British debts was lost. Whether this 
was sincere or a side blow at the bill I am unable to 
say. An attempt was next made to put on the same 
footing all those who left this Country and joined the 
other side, or who remained within the British territo 
ries for one year at any time since the 19 Ap!, 1 775, or 
who refused a tender of paper money before Jan?", 1 779. 
These discriminations were almost unanimously dis 
agreed to by the H. of D. The Senate insisted. 
The former proposed a conference. The Senate 
concurred. The Conference produced a proposition 
from the H. of D. to which the Senate assented ; 
but before the assent was notified an incident happened 
which has left the bill in a very singular situation. 

n6 THE WRITINGS OF [1785 

The delays attending this measure had spun it out to 
the day preceding the one prefixed for a final adjourn 
ment. Several of the members went over to Man 
chester in the evening, with an intention it is to be 
presumed of returning the next morning. The sever 
ity of the night rendered their passage back the next 
morning impossible. Without them there was no 
house. The impatience of the members was such as 
might be supposed. Some were for stigmatizing the 
absentees and adjourning. The rest were some for 
one thing, some for another. At length it was 
agreed to wait until the next day. The next day pre 
sented the same obstructions in the river. A canoe 
was sent over for enquiry by the Manchester party, 
but they did not chuse to venture themselves. The 
impatience increased, warm resolutions were agitated. 
They ended however in an agreement to wait one day 
more. On the morning of the third day the prospect 
remained the same. Patience could hold out no longer 
and an adjournment to the last day of March ensued. 
The question to be decided is whether a bill which has 
passed the House of Delegates, and been assented to 
by the Senate; but not sent down to the H. of D., 
nor enrolled, nor examined, nor signed by the two 
Speakers and consequently not of record, is or is not 
a law ? A bill for the better regulation of the cus 
toms is in the same situation. 

After the passage of the Bill for British debts 
through the H. of D. a bill was introduced for liquid 
ating the depreciated payments into the Treasury, 
and making the debtors liable for the deficiency. A 

1785] JAMES MADISON. 117 

foresight of this consequential step had shewn itself in 
every stage of the first bill. It was opposed by l Gov 
ernor Harrison principally and laid asleep by the 
refusal of interested members to vote on the question, 
and the want of a quorum without them. 

Among the abortive measures may be mentioned 
also a proposition to authorise the collection of the 
impost by Congress as soon as the concurrence of 
twelve States should be obtained. Connecticut had 
set the example in this project. The proposition 
was made by the Speaker & supported by the late 
Governor. It was disagreed to by a very large ma 
jority on the following grounds i the appearance of a 
schism in the Confederacy which it would present to 
foreign eyes. 2. its tendency to combinations of 
smaller majorities of the States. 3. the channel it 
would open for smuggling ; goods imported into 
Rhode Island in such case might not only be spread 
by land through the adjacent States, but if slipped 
into any neighbouring port might thence be carried 
duty-free to any part of the associated States. 4. the 
greater improbability of a union of twelve States on 
such new ground, than of the conversion of Rhode 
Island to the old one. 5 the want of harmony among 
the other States which would be betrayed by the mis 
carriage of such an experiment, and the fresh triumph 
& obstinacy which Rhode Island would derive from it. 

The French vice Consul in this State has com 
plained to the Assembly that the want of legal power 

1 Italics for cypher. 

u8 THE WRITINGS OF [1785 

over our Sheriffs, Coalers & prisons, both renders 
his decrees nugatory, and exposes his person to in 
sults from dissatisfied litigants. The Assembly have 
taken no step whatever on the subject being at a loss 
to know what ought to be done, in compliance either 
with general usage or that of France in particular. I 
have often wondered that the proposed Convention 
between France and the U. S. for regulating the con 
sular functions has never been executed. The delay 
may prove unfriendly both to their mutual harmony 
& their commerce. 

Mr. Henry was elected successor to Mr. Harrison 
without competition or opposition. The victims to 
the article requiring a triennial removal of two Coun 
sellors were Merrywether Smith & General Christian. 
Young Mr. Roane and Mr. Miles Selden take their 
places. Mr. Short's place is filled by Mr. Joseph 
Jones. 

Nothing has passed during the session concerning 
an amendment of the State Constitution. The friends 
of the undertaking seem to be multiplying rather 
than decreasing. Several Petitions from the West 
ern side of the Blue ridge appeared in favor of it ; as 
did some from the Western side of the Alleghany 
praying for a separate Government. The latter may 
be considered all of them as the children of A. Cs 
ambition. The Assize Courts and the opening of 
our Rivers are the best answers to them. 

The Revisal has but just issued from the press. It 
consists of near 100 folio pages in a small type. I 
shall send you six copies by the first opportunity. 

1785] JAMES MADISON, 119 

^"500 was voted at the Spring Session to each of the 
Acting members of the Committee, but no fund 
having been provided for payment, no use could be 
made of the warrants. I drew yours however & 
carried them up to Orange, where they now lye. A 
vote of this Session has provided a fund which 
gives them immediate value. As soon as I get home 
I shall send the dead warrants to M' Nichs Lewis, who 
may exchange them for others, and draw the money 
from the Treasury. Mr. Peter Carr is I hear now in 
Williamsburg, he did not get there so soon as I ex 
pected, but I have not heard the circumstances which 
delayed him. On the best enquiries I could make for 
a stand for his younger brother I could hear of none 
preferable to the Academy in Prince Edward, and 
accordingly recommended that in a letter to Mrs. 
Carr. I have rec'd no answer, but am told by Mr. 
Underwood her neighbour that he is at school with a 
very proper man who has lately opened a school very 
convenient to Mrs. Carr. If this is the case it will be 
improper to remove him. 

I have not yet had the pleasure of a line from you 
since you left Boston, nor do I know when I shall 
next find a subject for another to you. As soon as I 
do you may be assured that you shall hear from me 
& that I am in the meantime with sincerest friendship 

Yrs J. MADISON JR. 

Present my respects to Miss Patsy & Mr. Short. 

120 THE WRITINGS OF [1785 

TO MARQUIS DE LAFAYETTE. MAD. MSS. 

ORANGE, March 2oth, 1785. 

MY DEAR SIR, — -Your favour of the i5th, continued 
on the 1 7th of December came very slowly but finally 
safe to hand. The warm expressions of regard which 
it contains are extremely flattering to me ; and the 
more so as they so entirely correspond with my own 
wishes for everything which may enter into your 
happiness. 

You have not erred in supposing me out of the 
number of those who have relaxed their anxiety con 
cerning the navigation of the Mississippi. If there 
be any who really look on the use of that river, as an 
object not to be sought or desired by the United 
States I cannot but think they frame their policy on 
both very narrow and very delusive foundations. It 
is true, if the States which are to be established on 
the waters of the Mississippi, were to be viewed in the 
same relation to the Atlantic States, as exists between 
the heterogeneous and hostile Societies of Europe, it 
might not appear strange that a distinction or even an 
opposition of interests should be set up. But is it 
true that they can be viewed in such a relation ? Will 
the settlements which are beginning to take place on 
the branches of the Mississippi be so many distinct 
societies, or only an expansion of the same society? 
so many new bodies or merely the growth of the old 
one ? Will they consist of a hostile or a foreign 
people, or will they not be bone of our bones and flesh 
of our flesh ? Besides the confederal band, within 

1785] JAMES MADISON. 121 

which they will be comprehended, how much will the 
connection be strengthened by the ties of friendship, 
of marriage and consanguinity ? ties which it may be 
remarked, will be even more numerous between the 
ultramontane and the Atlantic States than between 
any two of the latter. But viewing this subject 
through the medium least favorable to my ideas, it still 
presents to the U, States sufficient inducements to in 
sist on the navigation of the Mississippi. Upon this 
navigation depends essentially the value of that vast 
field of territory which is to be sold for the benefit of 
the common Treasury ; and upon the value of this 
territory when settled will depend the portion of the 
public burdens of which the old States will be re 
lieved by the new. Add to this the stake which a 
considerable proportion of those who remain in the 
old States will acquire in the new by adventures in 
land either on their own immediate account or that of 
their descendants. 

Nature has given the use of the Mississippi to those 
who may settle on its waters, as she gave to the United 
States their independence. The impolicy of Spain 
may retard the former as that of G. Britain did the 
latter. But as G. B. could not defeat the latter, 
neither will Spain the former. Nature seems on all 
sides to be reasserting those rights which have so long 
been trampled on by tyranny & bigotry. Philosophy 
& Commerce are the auxiliaries to whom she is in 
debted for her triumphs. Will it be presumptuous to 
say that those nations will shew most wisdom as well 
as acquire most glory, who instead of forcing her 

122 THE WRITINGS OF [1785 

current into artificial channels, endeavour to ascertain 
its tendency and to anticipate its effects. If the United 
States were to become parties to the occlusion of the 
Mississippi they would be guilty of treason against 
the very laws under which they obtained & hold their 
national existence. 

The repugnance of Spain to an amicable regu 
lation of the Use of the Mississippi, is the natural 
offspring of a System, which everybody but herself 
has long seen to be as destructive to her interest as 
it is dishonorable to her character. An extensive 
desart seems to have greater charms in her eye than 
a flourishing but limited empire, nay than an exten 
sive flourishing empire. Humanity cannot suppress 
the wish that some of those gifts which she abuses 
were placed by just means in hands that would turn 
them to a wiser account. What a metamorphosis wd 
the liberal policy of France work in a little time on 
the Island of N. Orleans? It would to her be a fund 
of as much real wealth as Potosi has been of im 
aginary wealth to Spain. It would become the Grand 
Cairo of the new World. 

The folly of Spain is not less displayed in the 
means she employs than in the ends she prefers. She 
is afraid of the growth and neighbourhood of the U. 
States, because it may endanger the tranquility of her 
American possessions ; and to obviate this danger 
she proposes to shut up the Mississippi. If her pru 
dence bore any proportion to her jealousy she would 
see, that if the experiment were to succeed, it would 
only double the power of the U. States to disturb her, 

1785] JAMES MADISON. 123 

at the same time that it provoked a disposition to ex 
ert it ; she would see that the only offensive weapon 
which can render the U. States truly formidable to 
her is a navy, and that if she could keep their in 
habitants from crossing the Appalachian ridge, she 
would only drive to the Sea most of those swarms 
which would otherwise direct their course to the 
Western Wilderness. She should reflect too that as 
it was impossible for her to destroy the power which 
she dreads, she ought only to consult the means of 
preventing a future exertion of it. What are those 
means ? Two & two only. The first is a speedy 
concurrence in such a treaty with the U. S. as will 
produce a harmony, & remove all pretexts for inter 
rupting it. The second, which would in fact result 
from the first, consists in favouring the extension of 
their settlements. As these become extended the 
members of the Confederacy must be multiplied, and 
along with them the Wills which are to direct the 
machine. And as the wills multiply, so will the 
chances against a dangerous union of them. We ex 
perience every day the difficulty of drawing thirteen 
States into the same plans. Let the number be 
doubled & so will the difficulty. In the multitude of 
our Counsellors, Spain may be told, lies her safety. 

If the temper of Spain be unfriendly to the views 
of the U. States, they may certainly calculate on the 
favorable sentiments of the other powers of Europe, 
at least of all such of them as favored our Indepen 
dence. The chief advantages expected in Europe 
from that event center in the revolution it was to 

i24 THE WRITINGS OF [1785 

produce in the commerce between the new & the old 
World. The commerce of the U. S. is advantageous 
to Europe in two respects, first by the unmanufactured 
produce which they export ; secondly by the manu 
factured imports which they consume. Shut up the 
Mississippi and discourage the settlements on its 
waters, and what will be the consequence ? First, a 
greater quantity of subsistence must be raised within 
the ancient settlements, the culture of tobacco indigo 
& other articles for exportation, be proportionably 
diminished, and their price proportionably raised on 
the European consumer. Secondly the hands with 
out land at home being discouraged from seeking it 
where alone it could be found, must be turned in a 
great degree to manufacturing, our imports proportion- 
ably diminished, and a proportional loss fall on the 
European Manufacturer. Establish the freedom of 
the Mississippi, and let our emigrations have free 
course, and how favorably for Europe will the conse 
quence be reversed. First the culture of every article 
for exportation will be extended, and the price re 
duced in favor of her consumers. Secondly, Our 
people will increase without an increase of our Manu 
facturers, and in the same proportion will be increased 
the employment & profit of hers. 

These consequences would affect France in com 
mon with the other commercial nations of Europe ; 
but there are additional motives which promise the 
U. States her friendly wishes and offices. Not to 
dwell on the philanthropy which reigns in the heart 
of her Monarch and which has already adorned his 

1785] JAMES MADISON. 125 

head with a crown of laurels, he cannot be inattentive 
to the situation into which a controversy between his 
antient and new Allies would throw him, nor to the 
use which would be made of it by his watchful ad 
versary. Will not all his councils then be employed 
to prevent this Controversy ? will it not be seen that 
as the pretensions of the parties directly interfere, it 
can be prevented only by a dissuasive interposition on 
one side or the other, that on the side of the U. S. 
such an interposition must, from the nature of things 
be unavailing ; or if their pretensions for a moment 
be lulled they w? but awake with fresh energy, and 
consequently that the mediating influence of France 
ought to be turned wholly on the side of Spain. The 
influence of the French Court over that of Spain 
is known to be great. In America it is supposed to 
be greater than perhaps it really is. The same may 
be said of the intimacy of the union between the two 
nations. If this influence should not be exerted, this 
intimacy may appear to be the cause. The United 
States consider Spain as the only favorite of' their 
Ally of whom they have ground to be jealous, and 
whilst France continues to hold the first place in their 
affections they must at least be mortified at any ap 
pearance that the predilection may not be reciprocal. 
The Mississippi has drawn me into such length that 
I fear you will have little patience left for anything 
else. I will spare it as much as possible. I hear 
nothing from Congress except that Mr. Jay has ac 
cepted his app* and that no success!" has yet been 
chosen to Df Franklyn. Our Legislature made a 

126 THE WRITINGS OF [1785 

decent provision for remittances due for 1785 from 
Virginia to the Treas? of the U. S. and very extensive 
provision for opening our inland navigation. 
Whether they passed an act for paying British debts 
or not they do not know themselves. Before the bill 
for that purpose had got through the last usual forms, 
the want of members broke up the House. It remains 
therefore in a situation which has no precedent, & 
without a precedent lawyers & legislators are as much 
at a loss as a mariner without his compass. 

The subjects in which you interested yourself were 
all referred to the Executive with power to do what 
I hope they will do better than the Assembly. I 
understood before I left Richm? that you w? receive 
officially from the Govf a copy of the Resolutions 
which I sent you. I recd a letter a few days ago from 
Mr. Mercer, written in the bosom of wedlock at Mr. 
Sprigg's ; another at the same time from Monroe, 
who was well at New York. I have nothing to say 
of myself but that I have exchanged Richmond for 
Orange, as you will have seen by the above date ; 
that I enjoy a satisfactory share of health ; that I 
spend the chief of my time in reading, & the chief of 
my reading, on Law ; that I shall hear with the 
greatest pleasure of your being far better employed ; 
& that I am, with most affed 

Yf Obed^ friend & Serv^ 

1 This passage briefly recounts the acts passed by the Legislature. 

1785] JAMES MADISON. 127 

TO JAMES MONROE. MAD. MSS. 

ORANGE March 21, 1785. 

DEAR SIR, — Your favor of the is.£ of Feb3^ did not 
come to hand till a day or two ago, having travelled 
on to Richmond, remained there during the absence 
of Mr. Jones & on his return, been sent to me by way 
of Fred*. Before I left Richmond I wrote you 
that the Assembly had adjourned and requested 
that your subsequent letters might be addressed 
to Orange, and if I do not forget to care of Mr 
Maury at Frederickbg. This letter ought to have 
reached you before the date of yours. I hope it has 
since got to hand. I also forwarded from Richmond 
to your care a letter for Mr Jefferson which I hope 
has not miscarried. It contained a rehersal of * our 
last legislative politics & proceedings, which I find by 
his letters to me are a material object of his curiosity. 
I shall be glad to know by your next whether you 
have ever rec? it, that in case of miscarriage I may 
endeavor to supply the loss. 

I do not wonder at the paragraph which you have 
copied from Mr. Jay's letter to Congress. His feel 
ings are such as every one must possess who is worthy 
of the station which he holds. If the Office of foreign 
Affairs be a proper one & properly filled, a reference 
of all foreign despatches to it in the first instance, is 
so obvious a course, that any other disposition of 
them by Congress seems to condemn their own es 
tablishment, to affront the Minister in office, and to 
put on him a label of caution ag5.' that respect & con 
fidence of the Ministers of foreign powers, which are 

128 THE WRITINGS OF [1785 

essential to his usefulness. I have always conceived 
the several ministerial departments of Congress, to 
be provisions for aiding their Counsels as well as ex 
ecuting their resolutions, & that consequently whilst 
they retain the right of rejecting the advice which 
may come from either of them, they ought not to re 
nounce the opportunity of make-g use of it. The for 
eign department is I am sensible, in several respects 
the most difficult to be regulated, but I cannot think 
the question arising on Mr. Jay's letter is to be num 
bered among the difficulties. The practice of Con 
gress during the administration of his predecessor was 
never fixed, & frequently improper, and I always 
suspected that his indifference to the place resulted 
in part at least from the mortifications to which this 
unsteadiness subjected him. 

You will not be disappointed at the barrenness 
which is hence to mark the correspondence on my 
part. In the recess of the Legislature, few occurrences 
happen which can be interesting, and in my retired 
situation, few even of these fall within my knowledge. 
The situation of Mr. Jones will probably make his 
correspondence a more productive one. He has prob 
ably already mentioned to you the advances which 
Kentucky was said to be making towards an inde 
pendent Gov-. It is certain that a Convention has 
been held, which might have been set on foot with an 
eye to such an event ; but I learn from an intelligent 
person lately from that district, that its deliberations 
turned altogether on the pressure of certain acts of 
the General Assembly, & terminated in a vote of 

1785] JAMES MADISON. 129 

application for redress. He supposes however that the 
late extension of the tax on patents will give a suc 
cessful handle to those who wish to accelerate a sepa 
ration. This tax as it stood before was in the first 
class of their grievances. 

You will I expect receive this from the hands of 
Mr. Burnley, a young gentleman of my neighborhood, 
who has passed with reputation through Mr. Wythe's 
School & has since taken out his forensic diploma. 
Your civilities to him will be well placed & will con 
fer an obligation on me. If Col. Grayson has re 
covered from the gout which I hear arrested him in 
the moment of his intended departure, and is with 
you, be so kind as to make my best respects to him. 

I am Dear Sir with sincere regard & esteem 
Your obed1 friend & servant, 

JAMES MONROE MAD- Mss- 

ORANGE April 12 1785. 

DEAR SIR, — I wrote you not long since by a young 
gentleman who proposed to go as far as N. Y. ac 
knowledging the red of your favor of Feby i5.1 I have 
since recd that of March which I meant to have ac 
knowledged through the same hands. But finding 
that ye delays which have hitherto kept back the 
bearer above referred to, are of uncertain continuance, 
& having no certain conveyance to Fred? I embrace 
an opportunity of sending this to Richmond, whence 
it will be forwarded by Mr. Jones in the mail. 

The appointment of Mr. A. to the Court of G. B. 

VOL. II. — 9. 

i3o THE WRITINGS OF [1785 

is a circumstance which does not contradict my expec 
tations ; nor can I say that it displeases me. Upon 
Geographical considerations N. E. will always have 
one of the principal appointmts, and I know of no 
individual from that quarter, who possesses more of 
their confidence, or would possess more of that 
of the other States ; nor do I think him so well fitted 
for any Court of equal rank, as that of London, I 
hope it has removed all obstacles to the establishment 
of Mr. Jefferson at the Court of France. Will not 
Congress soon take up the subject of Consular ar 
rangements ? I should suppose them at least of equal 
moment at present with some of ye higher appointmts 
which are likely to occupy them. Our friend Mr. 
Maury is waiting with a very inconvenient suspension 
of his other plans, the event of the offer he has made 
of his services.1 I find he considers Ireland as the 
Station next to be desired after that of England. He 
conceives & I believe very justly that the commercial 
intercourse between that Country & this will be very 
considerable, and merits our particular cultivation. I 
suppose from your silence on the subject, that the 
Western posts are still in the hands of G. B. Has the 
subject of the vacant lands to be disposed of, been 
revived ? what other measures are on foot or in con 
templation for paying off the public debts ? What 
paymts have been made of late into the public Treas 
ury ? It is said here that Massts is taking measures 
for urging R. I into the Impost, or rendering the 

Barnes Maury. He was appointed Consul at Liverpool, where he acted as 
Madison's agent in selling his tobacco for many years. 

1785] JAMES MADISON. 131 

Scheme practicable without her concurrence. Is it so ? 
How many of the States have agreed to change the 
8l.h Art of ye Confederation ? The Legislature of 
this State passed a law for complying with the pro 
visional act of Cong5 for executing that article as it 
now stands, the operation of which confirms the ne 
cessity of changing the article. The law requires as 
the Act of Cong5 does among other things a list of the 
Houses. If ye list does not discriminate the several 
kinds of Houses, how can Cong5 collect from it ye 
value of the improvements, how do justice to all 
their constituents ? And how can a discrimination be 
made in this country, where the variety is so infinite 
& so unsusceptible of description? If Cong5 govern 
themselves by number alone, this Country will cer 
tainly appeal to a more accurate mode of carrying the 
present rule of the confederation into practice. The 
average value of the improvements in Virga is not •£• 
perhaps not y1^- of that of ye improvements in Pena or 
N. Engd. Compare this difference with ye proportion 
between the value of Improvemts & that of the Soil, & 
what an immense loss shall we be taxed with ? The 
number of buildings will not be a less unjust rule 
than the number of acres, for estimating the respec 
tive abilities of the States. 

The only proceeding of the late Session of Assem 
bly which makes a noise thro' the Country is that 
which relates to a Gen1 Assessm1. The Episcopal 
people are generally for it, tho' I think the zeal of 
some of them has cooled. The laity of the other sects 
are equally unanimous on the other side. So are all 

132 THE WRITINGS OF [1785 

the Clergy except the Presbyterian who seem as ready 
to set up an establishm' which is to take them in as 
they were to pull down that which shut them out. I 
do not know a more shameful contrast than might be 
found between their memorials on the latter & former 
occasion. 

In one of your letters recd before I left Richmond 
you expressed a wish for a better Cypher. Since my 
return to Orange I have been able to get one made 
out which will answer every purpose. I will either 
enclose it herewith or send it by the Gentleman who 
is already charged with a letter for you. I wish much 
to throw our correspondence into a more regular 
course. I would write regularly every week if I had 
a regular conveyance to Freds. As it is I will write 
as often as I can find conveyances. The business of 
this neighborhood which used to go to Fredericks- 
burg is in a great measure turned towards Richmd, 
which is too circuitous a channel. Opportunities in 
every direction however will be henceforward multi 
plied by the advance of the Season. If you are not 
afraid of too much loading the mail I could wish you 
to enclose in your letters the last N. Y. or Phila paper. 

I am Dr Sir Yrs most sincerely. 

TO THOMAS JEFFERSON. MAD. MSS. 

ORANGE April 27 1785. 

DEAR SIR, — I have recd. your two favors of Novr 1 1 
& Decr 8. Along with the former I recd. the two 
pamphlets on animal magnetism & the last aeronautic 

1785] JAMES MADISON. 133 

expedition, together with the phosphoretic matches. 
These articles were a great treat to my curiosity. As 
I had left Richmd before they were brought thither by 
Col. le Maire, I had no opportunity of attending my 
self to your wishes with regard to him ; but I wrote 
immediately to Mr. Jones & desired him to watch 
over the necessities of le Maire. He wrote me for 
answer that the Executive tho' without regular proof 
of his claims were so well satisfied from circum 
stances of the justice of them, that they had voted 
him ^150 for his relief till the Assembly could take 
the whole into consideration. This information has 
made me easy on the subject though I have not with 
drawn from the hands of Mr. Jones the provisional 
resource. I thank you much for your attention to 
my literary wants. All the purchases you have made 
for me, are such as I should have made for myself 
with the same opportunities. You will oblige me by 
adding to them the Dictionary in 13 vol. 4° by Felice 
& others, also de Thou in French. If the utility of 
Moreri be not superseded by some better work I 
should be glad to have him too. I am afraid if I 
were to attempt a catalogue of my wants I should not 
only trouble you beyond measure, but exceed the 
limits which other considerations ought to prescribe 
to me. I cannot however abridge the Commission 
you were so kind as to take on yourself in a former 
letter, of procuring me from time to time such books 
as may be either " old & curious or new & useful." 
Under this description will fall those particularized in 
my former letters, to wit : treatises on the ancient or 

i34 THE WRITINGS OF [1785 

modern federal republics — on the law of Nations— 
and the history natural & political of the New 
World ; to which I will add such of the Greek & 
Roman authors where they can be got very cheap, as 
are worth having and are not on the common list 
of School classics. Other books which particularly 
occur are the translation (French) of the Historians 
of the Roman Empire during its decline, by • 
Pascal's Provincial letters — Don Ulloa in the Origi 
nal — Linnaeus best edition Ordinances Marines- 
Collection of Tracts in french on the Oeconomics of 
different nations, I forget the full title. It is much 
referred to by Smith on the wealth of Nations. I am 
told a Monsr Amelot has lately published his travels 
into China, which if they have any merit must be 
very entertaining. Of Buffon I have his original 
work of 31 vol. 10 vol. of Supplem1, and 16 vol. on 
birds. I shall be glad of the continuation as it may 
from time to time be published. I am so pleased 
with the new invented lamp that I shall not grudge 
two guineas for one of them. I have seen a pocket 
compass of somewhat larger diameter than a watch & 
which may be carried in the same way. It has a 
spring for stopping the vibration of the needle when 
not in use. One of these would be very convenient 
in case of a ramble into the Western country. In 
my walks for exercise or amusements, objects fre 
quently present themselves, which it might be matter 
of curiosity to inspect, but which it is difficult or im 
possible to approach. A portable Glass would conse 
quently be a source of many little gratifications. I 

1 785] JAMES MADISON. 1 35 

have fancied that such an one might be fitted into 
a cane without making it too heavy. On the outside 
of the tube might be engraved a scale of inches 
&c. If such a project could be executed for a few 
Guineas, I should be willing to submit to the price ; 
if not, the best substitute I suppose, will be a pocket 
telescope, composed of several tubes so constructed as 
to slide the lesser into the greater. I should feel 
great remorse at troubling you with so many re 
quests, if your kind & repeated offers did not stifle it 
in some measure. Your proposal for my replacing 
here advances for me without regard to the exchange 
is liable to no objection except that it will probably 
be too unequal in my favour. I beg that you will en 
able me as much as you can to keep these little mat 
ters balanced. The papers from Le Grand were sent 
as soon as I got them to Mr. Jones with a request 
that he would make the use of them which you wished 
me to do. 

Your remarks on the tax on transfers of land in a 
general view appear to me to be just but there were 
two circumstances which gave a peculiarity to the 
case in which our law adopted it. One was that the 
tax will fall much on those who are evading their 
quotas of other taxes by removing to Georgia & 
Kentucky ; the other that as such transfers are more 
frequent among those who do not remove, in the 
Western than the Eastern part of the Country, it will 
fall heaviest where direct taxes are least collected. 
With regard to the tax in general on law proceedings, 
it cannot perhaps be justified if tried by the strict rule 

136 THE WRITINGS OF [1785 

which proportions the quota of every man to his abil 
ity, time however will gradually in some measure 
equalize it, & if it be applied to ye support of the 
Judiciary establishment, as was the ultimate view of 
the periods of the tax, it seems to square very well 
with the Theory of taxation. 

The people of Kentucky had lately a Convention 
which it was expected would be the mother of a sep 
aration. I am informed they proceeded no farther 
than to concert an Address to the Legislature on 
some points in which they think the laws bear un 
equally upon them, they will be ripe for that event at 
least as soon as their interest calls for it. There is 
no danger of a concert between them & the Counties 
West of the Alleghany which we mean to retain. If 
the latter embark in a scheme for independence it will 
be on their own bottom. They are more disunited in 
every respect from Kentucky than from Virginia. 

I have not learnt with certainty whether Gen1 
Washington will accept or decline the shares voted 
him by the Assembly in the Companies for opening 
our rivers. If he does not chuse to take to himself 
any benefit from the donation, he has I think a fine 
opportunity at once of testifying his disinterested 
purposes, of shewing his respect for the Assembly, 
and of rendering a service to his Country. He may 
accept the gift so far as to apply it to the scheme 
of opening the rivers & may then appropriate the 
revenue which it is hereafter to produce to some 
patriotic establishment. I lately dropped a hint of 
this sort to one of his friends & was told that such 

1785] JAMES MADISON. 137 

an idea had been suggested to him. The private 
subscriptions for Potowmac I hear amount to ;£io,- 
ooo Sterling. I cannot discover that those for James 
River deserve mention, or that the undertaking is 
pushed with any spirit. If those who are most inter 
ested in it let slip the present opportunity, their folly 
will probably be severely punished for the want of 
such another. It is said the undertaking on the Sus- 
quehannah by Maryland goes on with great spirit & 
expectations. I have heard nothing of Rumsey or 
his boats since he went into the Northern States. If 
his machinary for stemming ye current operates on 
the water alone, as is given out, may it not supply 
the great desiratum for perfecting the Balloons ? 

I understand that Chase & Jenifer on the part of 
Maryland, Mason & Henderson on the part of Vir 
ginia have had a meeting on the proposition of Virga 
for settling the navigation & jurisdiction of Potowmac 
below the falls, & have agreed to report to the two 
Assemblies, the establishment of a concurrent jurisdic 
tion on that river & Chesapeak. The most amicable 
spirit is said to have governed the negociation. 

The Bill for a Gen1 Assess1 has produced some 
fermentation below the Mountains & a violent one 
beyond them. The contest at the next Session on 
this question will be a warm & precarious one. The 
Port bill will also undergo a fiery trial. I wish the As 
size Courts may not partake of the danger. The 
elections as far as they have come to my knowledge 
are likely to produce a great proportion of new Mem 
bers. In Albemarle young Mr. Fry has turned out 

138 THE WRITINGS OF [1785 

Mr. Carter. The late Governor Harrison I hear 
has been baffled in his own County, but meant to be 
a Candidate in Surry & in case of a rebuff there to 
throw another die for the borough of Norfolk. I do 
not know how he construes the doctrine of residence. 
llt is surmised that the machinations of tyler who fears 
a rivalship for the chair are at the bottom of his diffi 
culties. ArtJir. Lee is elected in prince William he is 
said to have paved the way by promises to overset the 
port bill which is obnoxioiis to dumfries and to prevent 
the removal of the Assize Court from this town to 
Alexandria. 

I reed, a letter from the marquis fayette, dated on 
the eve of his embarcation which has the following 
paragraph I have much conferred with the General 
upon the Potowmac system many people think the 
navigation of the Mississippi is not an advantage but 
it may be the excess of a very good thing, viz the open 
ing of your rivers. I fancy it has not changed your 
opinion but beg you will write me on the subject in 
the meanwhile I hope Congress will act coolly and pru 
dently by Spain who is such a fool that allowances 
must be made. It is unlucky that he should have left 
America with such an idea as to the Missipi. It may 
be of the worst conseqiice as it is not wholly imaginary 
the prospect of extending the commerce of the atlantic 
states to the western waters having given birth to it. 
I can not believe that many minds arc tainted with so 
illiberal and short-sighted a policy. I have thought 
it not amiss to write the marquis according to the 

1 Italics for cypher. 

1785] JAMES MADISON. 139 

req^{,est of his letter and have stated to him the motives 
and obligations which must render the U. S. inflexi 
ble on the subject of the Missipi, the folly of Spain in 
contesting it and our expectations from the known 
influence of France over Spain and her friendly dis 
positions toward U. S. It is \s^\. justice to the marquis 
to observe that in all our conversations on the Missipi 
he expressed with every mark of sincerity a zeal for 
our claims and a pointed dfolike to the national char 
acter and policy of Spain and that if his zeal should be 
foiind to abate I should construe it to be the effect of 
a supposed revolution in the sentiments of America. 

This would have been of somewhat earlier date but 
I postponed it that I might be able to include some 
information relative to your Nephews. My last in 
formed you that your eldest was then with Mr. Maury. 
I was so assured by Mr. Underwood from his neigh 
borhood, who I supposed could not be mistaken. I 
afterwards discovered that he was so, but could get 
no precise information till within a few days. One 
of my brothers being called into that part of Country 
by business, I wrote to Mrs. Carr and got him to wait 
on her. The answer with which I have been favored 
imports that " her eldest son was taken last fall with 
a fever which with repeated relapses kept him ex 
tremely weak & low till about the first of Jany from 
which time he was detained at home by delays in 
equipping him for Williamsbg till the ist of April, 
when he set out with promises to make up his lost 
time — that her youngest son had also been detained at 
home by ill health till very lately, but that he would 

1 40 THE WRITINGS OF [1785 

certainly go on to the academy as soon as a vacation 
on hand was over, that his time had not been entirely 
lost as his brother was capable of instructing him 
whenever his health would admit." Mr. Maury's 
School is said to be very flourishing. Mr. Wythe & 
the other gentlemen of the University have examined 
it from time to time & published their approbation of 
of its management. I cannot speak with the same 
authority as to the Academy in Prince Edward. The 
information which I have recd has been favorable to 
it. In the recommendation of these Seminaries I was 
much governed by the probable permanency of them ; 
nothing being more ruinous to education than the 
frequent interruptions & change of masters & methods 
incident to the private schools of this Country. 

Our winter has been full of vicissitudes, but on the 
whole far from being a severe one, the spring has 
been uncommonly cold & wet, and vegetation, of 
course, very backward ; till within a few days during 
which it has been accelerated by very uncommon heat. 
A pocket Thermometer which stands on the second 
floor & the N. W. side of the House was on the 24 
inst. at 4 O'Clock, at 77°, on the 25, at 78, on the 26, 
at 8i£; to-day, 27, at 82, the Weather during this 
period has been fair & the wind S, the atmosphere 
thick N. W. Our Wheat in the ground is very un 
promising throughout the Country, the price of that 
article on tide-water is about 6s. Corn sells in this 
part of the country at los. & under, below at 15^. and 
where the insect prevailed as high as 2os. It is said 
to have been raised by a demand for exportation. 

1785] JAMES MADISON. 141 

Tob° is selling on Rappahannock at 32^. & Richmd at 
37^ 6. It is generally expected that it will at least 
get up to 4Ctf. Some of our peaches are killed & 
most of our Cherries. Our Apples are as yet safe. 
I can not say how it is with the fruit in other parts of 
the Country. The mischief to the Cherries &c was done 
on the night of the 20 when we had a severe black frost. 
I can not take my leave of you without making my 
acknowledgemts for the very friendly invitation con 
tained in your last. If I should ever visit Europe I 
should wish to do it less stinted in time than your 
plan proposes. This crisis too would be particularly 
inconvenient as it would break in upon a course of 
reading which if I neglect now I shall probably never 
resume. I have some reason also to suspect that 
crossing the Sea would be unfriendly to a singular 
disease of my constitution. The other part of your 
invitation has the strongest bias of my mind on its 
side, but my situation is as yet too dependent on cir 
cumstances to permit my embracing it absolutely. It 
gives me great satisfaction to find that you are look 
ing forward to the moment which is to restore you 
to your native Country, though considerations of a 
public nature check my wishes that such an event 
may be expedited. Present my best respects to Mr. 
Short & Miss Patsy, & accept of the affectionate 
regards of Dear Sir your sincere friend. 

What has become of the subterraneous City dis 
covered in Siberia ? 

Deaths. Thompson Mason Bartholomew Dand- 
ridge Ryland Randolph Joseph Reed of PhiladeK 

i42 THE WRITINGS OF [1785 

TO JAMES MONROE. MAD- MSS- 

ORANGE Ap1 28, 1785. 

DEAR SIR, — I have written several letters within a 
little time past which were sent to you partly by the 
post partly by Mr. Burnley, a young Gentleman of 
this County. In one of the letters I inclosed a 
cypher, wch will serve all the purposes of our future 
correspondence. This covers a letter from Mr. Jef 
ferson which you will be so good as to forw? by the 
first packet or other equally eligible conveyance. 
Our Elections as far as I hear are likely to produce a 
great proportion of new members. In some coun 
ties they are influenced by the Bill for a Gen1 Assess1. 
In Culpeper Mr. Pendleton a worthy man & accept 
able in his general character to the people was laid 
aside in consequence of his vote for the Bill, in favor 
of an Adversary to it. The Delegates for Albemarle 
are your friend Mr. W. C. Nicholas & Mr. Fry. Mr. 
Carter stood a poll but fell into the rear. The late 
Govr Harrison I am told has been baffled in his own 
County, meant to be a candidate for Surey & in case 
of a rebuff there to throw another die for the Borough 
of Norfolk. I do not know how he proposes to 
satisfy the doctrine of residence. 

I hear frequent complaints of the disorders of our 
coin & the want of uniformity in the denominations 
of the States. Do not Congress think of a remedy 
for these evils ? The regulation of weights & meas 
ure seem also to call for their attention. Every day 
will add to the difficulty of executing these works. 
If a mint be not established & a recoinage effected 

1785] JAMES MADISON. 143 

while the federal debts carry the money thro' the 
hands of Congress I question much whether their 
limited powers will ever be able to render this branch 
of their prerogative effectual. With regard to the 
regulation of weights & measures, wd it not be highly 
expedient as well as honorable to the fcederal admin 
istration, to pursue the hint which has been suggested 
by ingenious & philosophical men, to wit, that the 
standard of measure sd be first fixed by the length of 
a pendulum vibrating seconds at the Equator or any 
given latitude — & that the standard of weights sd be a 
Cubical piece of Gold or other homogeneous body, 
of dimensions fixed by the standard of measure. Such 
a scheme appears to be easily reducible to practice ; 
& as it is founded on the division of time which is the 
same at all times & in all places & proceeds on other 
data which are equally so, it would not only secure a 
perpetual uniformity throughout the U. S. but might 
lead to Universal standards in these matters among 
nations. Next to the inconveniency of speaking dif 
ferent languages, is that of using different & arbitrary 
weights & measures. 

I am Dr Sir Yr affece friend. 


ORANGE May 29 1785. 

DEAR SIR, — Your favor of May — came to hand a 
few days ago. It is fortunate that the variant ideas 
have been so easily accomodated touching the mode 
of surveying & selling the territorial fund. It will be 
THE WRITINGS OF [1785 

equally so I think if you can dispossess the British of 
the Western posts before the land office is opened. 
On this event and the navigation of the Mississippi 
will much depend the fiscal importance of the back 
Country to the U. States. The amount of the pro 
posed requisition will I fear startle those to whom it 
will be addressed. The use of certificates as a me 
dium for discharging the interest of the home debt is 
a great evil, though I suppose a necessary one. The 
advantage it gives to Sharpers & Collectors, can 
scarcely be described, and what is more noxious, it 
provokes violations of public faith, more than the 
weight of the Burden itself. The 1,000,000 Drs to be 
paid in specie, and the greatest part of it to be sent 
abroad, will equally try the virtue of the States. If 
they do not flinch however they will have the satis 
faction of coming out of the trial with more honour 
though with less money. 

I have lately heard that the Kentucky Delegates 
will be instructed to propose to the next Session the 
separation of that Country from this, and its being 
handed over to Congress for admission into the Con 
federacy. If they pursue their object through this 
channel, they will not only accomplish it without 
difficulty, but set a useful example to other Western 
settlemts which may chuse to be lopped off from other 
States. My information as to this matter is not au 
thentic, but such as I am inclined to believe true. I 
hear also that a State is actually set up in the back 
Country of N. C. that it is organized, named, and 
has deputed representatives to Congress. 

1785] JAMES MADISON. 145 

It gives me much pleasure to observe by 2 printed 
reports sent me by Col. Grayson that, in the latter 
Cong5 had expunged a clause contained in the first for 
setting apart a district of land in each Township for 
supporting the Religion of the majority of inhabi 
tants. How a regulation so unjust in itself, so foreign 
to the Authority of Cong5, so hurtful to the sale of 
the public land, and smelling so strongly of an anti 
quated Bigotry, could have received the countenance 
of a Comtee is truly matter of astonishment. In one 
view it might have been no disadvantage to this State 
in case the Gen1 Assess1 should take place, as it would 
have given a repellent quality to the new Country in 
the estimation of those whom our own encroachments 
on Religious Liberty would be calculated to banish to it. 
But the adversaries to the assess* begin to think the 
prospect here flattering to their wishes. The printed 
Bill has excited great discussion and is likely to prove 
the sense of the Comunity to be in favor of the 
liberty now enjoyed. I have heard of several Coun 
ties where the late representatives have been laid aside 
for voting for the Bill, and not of a single one where 
the reverse has happened. The Presbyterian Clergy 
too who were in general friends to the scheme, are 
already in another tone, either compelled by the laity 
of that sect, or alarmed at the probability of further 
interferences of the Legislature, if they once begin 
to dictate in matters of Religion. 
I am, Dr Sir, Yrs affecly. 

The letter herewith inclosed is from Mrs. Can- 
sister of Mr. Jefferson. 

VOL. II. — 10. 

i46 THE WRITINGS OF [1785 

TO JAMES MONROE. MAD. MSS. 

ORANGE 21 June 1785. 

DEAR SIR, — Finding from a letter of Mr. Mazzei 
that you have never been furnished with a copy of 
the Bill for establishing the Christian Religion in this 
State, I now inclose one, regretting that I had taken 
it for granted that you must have been supplied thro' 
some other channel. A very warm opposition will be 
made to this innovation by the people of the middle 
and back Counties, particularly the latter. They do 
not scruple to declare it an alarming usurpation on 
their fundamental rights and that tho' the Gen1 As 
sembly should give it the form, they will not give it 
the validity of a law. If there be any limitation to 
the power of the Legislature, particularly if this limi 
tation is to be sought in our Declaration of Rights or 
Form of Government, I own the Bill appears to me to 
warrant this language of the people. 

A gentleman of credit lately from Kentucky tells 
me that he fell in with two persons on the Ohio, who 
were going down the River in the character of 
Comissrs from Georgia, authorized to demand from 
the Spanish Govr of N. Orleans, the posts within the 
limits of that State, and a settlement of the boundary 
in general between it and the Spanish possessions. 
The Gentleman did not see their commission, but 
entertains no doubt of their having one. He was in 
formed that two others were joined in it who had 
taken a different route. Should there be no mistake 
in this case, you will no doubt be able to get a full 
account of the Embassy. I would willingly suppose 

1785] JAMES MADISON. 147 

that no State could be guilty either of so flagrant an 
outrage on the federal Constitution, or of so impru 
dent a mode of pursuing their claims against a for 
eign Nation. 

I observe in a late Newspaper that the comercial 
discontents of Boston are spreading to New York 
and Philada. Whether they will reach Virginia or 
not I am unable to say. If they should, they must 
proceed from a different interest ; from that of the 
planters, not that of the Merchants. The present 
system here is as favorable to the latter as it is ruin 
ous to the former. Our trade was never more com- 
pleatly monopolized by G. B., when it was under the 
direction of the British Parliament than it is at this 
moment. But as our Merchants are almost all con 
nected with that country & that only, and as we 
have neither ships nor seamen of our own, nor likely 
to have any in the present course of things, no mer 
cantile complaints are heard. The planters are dis 
satisfied, and with reason, but they enter little into 
the science of commerce, and rarely of themselves 
combine in defence of their interests. If any thing 
could rouse them to a proper view of their situation 
one might expect it from the contrast of the market 
here with that of other States. Our staple has of late 
been as low as a guinea per d on Rappahannock, and 
not above 32 or 33^. on James River. The current 
prices in Philada during the same period have been 
44^. of this currency for tobacco of the latter inspec 
tions and in like proportion for that of the former. 
The prices of imports of every kind in those two 

148 THE WRITINGS OF [1785 

Markets furnish a contrast equally mortifying to us. 
I have not had the same information from other States 
northward of us, but I have little doubt that it would 
teach us the same lesson. Our planters cannot suffer 
a loss of less that 50 per d on the staple of the Coun 
try, if to the direct loss in the price of the staple be 
added their indirect loss in the price of what they 
purchase with their staple. It is difficult notwith 
standing to make them sensible of the utility of 
establishing a Philada or1 a Baltimore among our 
selves, as one indispensable step towards relief, and 
the difficulty is not a little increased by the pains taken 
by the Merchants to prevent such a reformation, and 
by the opposition arising from local views. I have 
been told that Arthur Lee 2 paved the way to his 
election in Prince William by promising that, among 
other things he would overset the Port Bill. Mr. Jef 
ferson writes me that the Port Bill has been published 
in all the Gazettes in Europe, with the highest ap 
probation everywhere except in G. B. It would in 
deed be as surprising if she should be in favor of it 
as it is that any among ourselves should be against it. 
I see no possibility of engaging other nations in a 
rivalship with her without some such regulation of 
our commerce. 

I am Dr Sir Yrs affecly 

1 By concentrating our Commerce at Alexandria and Norfolk the object of 
the Port-Bill. [Note in MS.] 

2 Italics for cypher. 

1785] JAMES MADISON. 149 

TO R. H. LEE. MAD- MSS- 

ORANGE July 7th, 1785. 

DEAR SIR, — Your favor of the 30* of May came to 
hand yesterday only, having lain some time in Fredg 
and finally came to Orange via Albemarle. I agree 
perfectly with you in thinking it the interest of this 
Country to embrace the first decent opportunity of 
parting with Kentucky, and to refuse with firmness 
to part with any more of our settlements beyond the 
Allegheny.1 It seems necessary however that this 
first instance of a voluntary dismemberment of a 
State should be conducted in such a manner as to 
form a salutary precedent. As it is an event which 
will indirectly affect the whole Confederacy, Congress 
ought clearly to be made a party to it, either ifne- 
diately, or by a proviso that the partition act shall not 
take effect, till the actual admission of the new State 
into the Union. No interval whatever should be suf 
fered between the release of our hold on that Country 
and its taking on itself the obligations of a member 
of the federal body. Should it be made a separate 
State without this precaution, it might possibly be 

1 " You may be surprised to hear that a late Convention have unanimously 
agreed to petition the assembly to have this District established into a State. I 
cannot explain the prevailing Sentiments better, than by telling you We con 
ceive the people of this District do not at present enjoy a greater portion of 
Liberty than an American Colony might have done a few years ago had she 
been allowed a Representation in the British Parliament. . . . Until lately I 
have myself thought it would be more eligible to continue as we are a while 
longer ; but finding that our Situation is too remote to enjoy the advantages of 
Government with Virginia in any tolerable degree, I have fallen in with the 
opinion that it is better to part in peace than to remain together in a state of 
Jealousy and Discontent." Caleb Wallace to Madison, Lincoln Co., July 12, 
1785. Mad. MSS. 

150 THE WRITINGS OF [1785 

tempted to remain so, as well with regard to the U. S. 
as to Virginia, by two considerations : i. the evasion 
of its share of the general debt. 2. the allurement 
which an exemption from taxes, would prove to the 
Citizens of States groaning under them. It is very 
possible that such a policy might in the end prove a 
disadvantageous one, but the charms of ambition and 
of present interest, too often prevail against the cool 
remonstrances of true policy. May we not also with 
justice require that a reasonable portion of the par 
ticular debt of Virga should be assumed by that part 
of Virginia which is to set up for itself ? 

The arrival of Mr. Gardoqui will turn out I hope 
an auspicious step towards conciliating explanations 
& overtures with regard to the Mississippi. Besides 
the general motives for expediting an adjustment of 
this matter the prodigious effect of it on the sale of 
the back lands, makes it of peculiar importance. The 
same consideration presses for such arrangements 
with G. B. as will give us speedy possession of the 
Western posts. As to the commercial arrangements 
which we wish from her, I own my expectations are 
far from being sanguine. In fact what could she get 
from us by concessions which she is unwilling to make, 
which she does not now enjoy ? I cannot speak with 
certainty as to all the States, but sure I am that the 
trade of this was never more compleatly monopolized 
by her when it was under the direction of her own 
laws than it is at this moment. Our present situation 
therefore precisely verifies the doctrine held out in 
Deanes' intercepted letters. The revolution has 

1785] JAMES MADISON. 15i 

robbed us of our trade with the West Indies the only 
one which yielded us a favorable balance, without 
opening any other channels to compensate for it. 
What makes the British monopoly the more morti 
fying is the abuse which they make of it. Not only 
the private planters who have resumed the practice of 
shipping their own Tob°, but many of the Merchants 
particularly the natives of the Country who have no 
connections with G. B. have recd accts of sales this sea 
son, which carry the most visible & shameful frauds 
in every article. In every point of view indeed the 
trade of this Country is in a deplorable Condition. A 
comparison of current prices here with those in the 
Northern States, either at this time or at any time 
since the peace, will shew that the loss direct on our 
produce & indirect on our imports is not less than 50 
per ct. Till very lately the price of our Staple has been 
down at 32 & 33^. on James River & 28^. on Rappa- 
hannock. During the same period the former was 
selling in Philada, & I suppose in other Northern 
ports, at 44^. of this Currency, and the latter in pro 
portion ; tho' it cannot be denied that Tob° in the 
Northern ports is intrinsically worth less than it is 
here, being at the same distance from its ultimate 
market, & burdened with the freight from this to the 
other States. The price of merchandize here is at 
least as much above as that of Tob° is below the 
Northern standard. 

We have had throughout the month of June & 
until this time, very hot and very wet weather. The 
effect of it on upland corn has been favorable but 

152 THE WRITINGS OF [1785 

much the reverse on that of the flats. It has given 
full opportunity to the planters to pitch their crops 
of Tob°, but tho' many of them have repeated this 
operation several times the grasshoppers & other 
noxious insects have been so uncommonly trouble 
some that in many places the prospect is likely to be 
much abridged. Should this not be the case, the 
efforts of the Country must produce the greatest 
crop that has been seen since the peace. Our Wheat 
in this part of the Country is very indifferent. How 
it may be in others I cannot say, but believe the 
complaints are pretty general. With the highest 
esteem & regard I remain Df Sir, 

Your obP & very humble serv' 

TO EDMUND RANDOLPH. MAD. MSS. 

ORANGE July 26, 1785. 

MY DEAR FRIEND, --Your favour of the i;th inst : 
inclosing a letter from Mr. Jones and a copy of the 
ecclesiastical Journal, came safe to hand. If I do not 
dislike the contents of the latter, it is because they 
furnish as I conceive fresh and forcible arguments 
against the Gen1 Assessment. It may be of little 
consequence, what tribunal is to judge of Clerical mis- 
demesnors or how firmly the incumbent may be fast 
ened on the parish, whilst the Vestry & people may 
hear & pay him or not as they like. But should a 
legal salary be annexed to the title, this phantom of 
power would be substantiated into a real monster of 

1785] JAMES MADISON. 153 

oppression. Indeed it appears to be so at present as 
far as the Glebes & donations extend. I had seen 
some parcels of these proceedings before I recd your 
letter, and had remarked the sprinklings of liberality 
to which you allude. My conjectures, I believe, did 
not err as to the quarter from which they came. 

The urgency of Gen! W. in the late negociation with 
Maryland makes it probable I think that he will feel 
some chagrin at the inattention to that with Penna, 
which has a much nearer connection with his favor 
ite object and was moreover suggested by himself. 
Shortly after the date of my last, I dropped a few 
lines to Col: Mason, reminding him that some report 
will be expected from the Commissioners by the As 
sembly, as well as of the real importance of the busi 
ness. I have not yet recd any answer ; and begin to 
suspect that my letter may have miscarried. Your 
information leads me to doubt whether he has ever 
been furnished with a copy of the Resolution under 
which he is to proceed. I will write to him again and 
inclose one which Mr, Jones sent me. 

I have a letter from the Marquis, but dated as far 
back as March. It was accompanied with a Copy of 
a French Memorial to the Emperor which seems to 
have stifled the War in its birth ; and an Extract 
from a late work of Mr. Neckar which has made him 
the idol of one party in France and the execration of 
the other. To avoid the trouble of transcribing, I 
send them as they came to me. You can peruse & 
return them by my brother who is the bearer of this, 
or by any future opportunity. The M. says he is 

154 THE WRITINGS OF [1785 

doing all he can to forward our claim to the Missis 
sippi ; that the French Ministry understand the mat 
ter & are well disposed ; but that they are apprehensive 
" Spain knows not how to give up what she once has." 

I had heard of the strictures on the incorporating 
Act, but without being able to pick up any of the 
papers in which they are published. I have desired 
my brother to search them out if he can. Perhaps 
you can refer him to the proper press & numbers. 

At the instance of Col. N-l-s1 of A-b-le, I under 
took the draught of the inclosed remonstrance agst- the 
Gen1 Ass'. Subscriptions to it are on foot I believe 
in sundry Counties, and will be extended to others. 
My choice is that my name may not be associated 
with it. I am not sure that I know precisely your 
ideas on this subject ; but were they more variant 
from mine than I take them to be I should not be 
restrained from a confidential communication. 

I keep up my attention as far as I can command 
my time, to the course of reading which I have of late 
pursued & shall continue to do so. I am however far 
from being determined ever to make a professional 
use of it. My wish is if possible to provide a decent 
& independent subsistence, without encountering the 
difficulties which I foresee in that line. Another of 
my wishes is to depend as little as possible on the 
labour of slaves. The difficulty of reconciling these 
views, has brought into my thoughts several projects 
from which advantage seemed attainable. I have in 

o 

concert with a friend here, one at present on the 

1 Nicholas, of Albemarle. 

1785] JAMES MADISON. 155 

Anvil which we think cannot fail to yield a decent 
reward for our trouble. Should we persist in it, it 
will cost me a ride to Philada, after which it will go 
on without my being ostensibly concerned. I forbear 
to particularize till I can do it ore tenus. Should I 
take this ride I may possibly continue it into the 
Eastern States ; Col Monroe having given me an in 
vitation to take a ramble of curiosity this fall, which 
I have half a mind to accept, and among otther routes 
named this. I recollect that you talked yourself of a 
trip last Spring as far as Lancaster. Have you laid 
it aside totally ? Or will your domestic endearments 
forbid even the trip to Bath, from which I promised 
myself the happiness of taking you by the hand in 
Orange ? Give my warmest respects to Mrs. R, and 
be assured that I remain, with sincere affection your 
friend. 

Was the Royal assent ever given to the act of 1 769, 
entitled " An Act to amend an Act entitled, an Act 
declaring the law concerning Extions & for relief of 
insolvent Debtors." 

TO JAMES MONROE. MAD. MSS. 

ORANGE Aug: 7* 1785. 

DEAR SIR, — I received the day before yesterday 
your favour of the 26th July. I had previously recd 
the Report on the proposed change of the 9^ art. of 
the Confederation, transmitted by Col: G ray son ; and 
in my answer to him offered such ideas on the subject 

156 THE WRITINGS OF [1785 

as then occurred. I still think the probability of suc 
cess or failure ought to weigh much with Congress 
in every recommendation to the States ; of which 
probability Congress, in whom information from 
every State centers can alone properly judge. View 
ing in the abstract the question whether the power 
of regulating trade, to a certain degree at least, 
ought to be vested in Congress, it appears to me 
not to admit of a doubt, but that it should be de 
cided in the affirmative. If it be necessary to reg 
ulate trade at all, it surely is necessary to lodge the 
power where trade can be regulated with effect ; and 
experience has confirmed what reason foresaw, that 
it can never be so regulated by the States acting 
in their separate capacities. TJhey can no more ex 
ercise this power separately than they could separ 
ately carry on war, or separately form treaties of 
alliance or commerce. The nature of the thing 
therefore proves the former power, no less than the 
latter, to be within the reason of the fcederal Con 
stitution. Much indeed is it to be wished, as I con 
ceive, that no regulations of trade, that is to say, 
no restrictions on imposts whatever, were necessary. 
A perfect freedom is the System which would be 
my choice. But before such a System will be eligi 
ble perhaps for the U. S. they must be out of debt ; 
before it will be attainable, all other nations must 
concur in it. Whilst any one of these imposes on 
our Vessels seamen &c. in their ports, clogs from 
which they exempt their own, we must either retort 
the distinction, or renounce not merely a just profit, 

1785] JAMES MADISON. 157 

but our only defence against the danger which may 
most easily beset us. Are we not at this moment 
under this very alternative ? The policy of G. B. 
(to say nothing of other nations) has shut against us 
the channels without which our trade with her must 
be a losing one ; and she has consequently the tri 
umph, as we have the chagrin, of seeing accomplished 
her prophetic threats, that our independence should 
forfeit commercial advantages for which it would not 
recompence us with any new channels of trade. What 
is to be done? Must we remain passive victims to 
foreign politics, or shall we exert the lawful means 
which our independence has put into our hands of 
extorting redress ? The very question would be an 
affront to every Citizen who loves his Country. 
What, then, are these means ? Retaliating regula 
tions of trade only. How are these to be effectu 
ated ? only by harmony in the measures of the States. 
How is this harmony to be obtained ? only by an 
acquiescence of all the States in the opinion of a 
reasonable majority. If Congress as they are now 
constituted, can not be trusted with the power of di 
gesting and enforcing this opinion, let them be other 
wise constituted : let their numbers be encreased, let 
them be chosen oftener, and let their period of service 
be shortened ; or if any better medium than Congress 
can be proposed by which the wills of the States may 
be concentered, let it be substituted ; or lastly let no reg 
ulation of trade adopted by Congress be in force until 
it shall have been ratified by a certain proportion of 
the States. But let us not sacrifice the end to the 

158 THE WRITINGS OF [1785 

means: let us not rush on certain ruin in order to avoid 
a possible danger. I conceive it to be of great impor 
tance that the defects of the federal system should 
be amended, not only because such amendments will 
make it better answer the purpose for which it was 
instituted, but because I apprehend danger to its 
very existence from a continuance of defects which 
expose a part if not the whole of the empire to severe 
distress. The suffering part, even when the minor 
part, can not long respect a Government which is too 
feeble to protect their interests : But when the suffer 
ing part comes to be the major part, and they despair 
of seeing a protecting energy given to the General 
Government, from what motives is their allegiance to 
be any longer expected. Should G. B. persist in the 
machinations which distress us ; and seven or eight of 
the States be hindered by the others from obtaining 
relief by federal means, I own, I tremble at the anti- 
federal expedients into which the former may be 
tempted. 

As to the objection against entrusting Congress 
with a power over trade, drawn from the diversity of 
interests in the States, it may be answered, i. that if 
this objection had been listened to, no confederation 
could have ever taken place among the States, 2. 
that if it ought now to be listened to, the power held 
by Congress of forming cofriercial treaties, by which 
9 States may indirectly dispose of the Commerce of 
the residue, ought to be immediately revoked, 3 
that the fact is that a case can scarcely be imagined 
in which it would be the interest of any 2/3ds of the 

1785] JAMES MADISON. 1 5 9 

States to oppress the remaining i/3d. 4. that the true 
question is whether the commercial interests of the 
States do not meet in more points than they differ. 
To me it is clear that they do ; and if they do there 
are so many more reasons for, than against, submit 
ting the commercial interest of each State to the 
direction and care of the Majority. Put the West 
India trade alone, in which the interest of every State 
is involved, into the scale against all the inequalities 
which may result from any probable regulation by 
nine States, and who will say that the latter ought to 
preponderate ? I have heard the different interest 
which the Eastern States have as Carriers pointed 
out as a ground of caution to the Southern States 
who have no bottoms of their own agst their concur 
ring hastily in retaliations on G. B. But will the 
present system of G. B. ever give the Southern States 
bottoms, and if they are not their own Carriers I sd 
suppose it no mark either of folly or incivility to give 
our custom to our brethren, rather than to those who 
have not yet entitled themselves to the name of 
friends. 

In detailing these sentiments, I have nothing more 
in view than to prove the readiness with which I obey 
your requests. As far as they are just they must 
have been often suggested in the discussions of Con 
gress on the subject. I can not even give them weight 
by saying that I have reason to believe they would 
be relished in the public Councils of this State. From 
the trials of which I have been a witness I augur that 
great difficulties will be encountered in every attempt 

160 THE WRITINGS OF [1785 

to prevail on the Legislature to part with power. 
The thing itself is not only unpalatable, but the argu 
ments which plead for it have not their full force on 
minds unaccustomed to consider the interests of the 
State as they are interwoven with those of the Con 
federacy much less as they may be affected by foreign 
politics, whilst those wch plead agst it are not only 
specious, but in their nature popular ; and for that 
reason sure of finding patrons. Add to all this that 
the Mercantile interest which has taken the lead in 
rousing the public attention of other States, is in this 
so exclusively occupied in British Commerce that 
what little weight they have will be most likely to 
fall into the opposite scale. The only circumstance 
which promises a favorable hearing to the meditated 
proposition of Cong5 is that the power which it asks 
is to be exerted agst G. B. and the proposition will 
consequently be seconded by the animosities which 
still prevail in a strong degree agst her. 
I am, My dear Sir very sincerely, 

Yi" friend & servf 

TO THOMAS JEFFERSON. MAD. MSS. 

ORANGE Aug. 2O1!1 1785. 

DEAR SIR, — Yours of the i8th of March never 
reached me till the 4th inst. It came by post from 
N. York, which it did not leave till the 21 of July. 
My last was dated in April, & went by Mr. Mazzei, 
who picked it up at N. York and promised to deliver 
it with his own hand. 

1785] JAMES MADISON. 161 

The machinations of G. B. with regard to Com 
merce have produced much distress and noise in the 
Northern States, particularly in Boston, from whence 
the alarm has spread to New York & Philda. Your 
correspondence with Cong5 will no doubt have fur 
nished you with full information on this head. I only 
know the general fact, and that the sufferers are every 
where calling for such augmentation of the power of 
Congress as may effect relief. How far the Southern 
States & Virginia in particular will join in this propo 
sition cannot be foreseen. It is easy to foresee that 
the circumstances .which in a confined view distin 
guish our situation from that of our brethren, will 
be laid hold of by the partizans of G. B, by those 
who are or affect to be jealous of Congress, and 
those who are interested in the present course of 
business, to give a wrong bias to our Councils. If 
anything should reconcile Virga to the idea of giv 
ing Congress a power over her trade, it will be that 
this power is likely to annoy G. B. against whom 
the animosities of our Citizens are still strong. They 
seem to have less sensibility to their commercial inter 
ests; which they very little understand, and which 
the mercantile class here have not the same motives 
if they had the same capacity to lay open to the pub 
lic, as that class have in the States North of us. The 
price of our Staple since the peace is another cause of 
inattention in the planters to the dark side of our 
commercial affairs. Should these or any other causes 
prevail in frustrating the scheme of the Eastern & 
Middle States of a general retaliation on G. B. I 

VOL. II.— II. 

162 THE WRITINGS OF [1785 

1 tremble for the event. A majority of the States de 
prived of a regular remedy for their distresses by the 
want of a federal spirit in the minority must feel 
the strongest motives to some irregular experiments. 
The danger of such a crisis makes me surmise that the 
policy of G. B. results as much from the hope of effect 
ing a breach in o^t,r Confederacy as of monopolizing our 
trade. 

Our internal trade is taking an arrangement from 
which I hope good consequences. Retail Stores are 
spreadg all over the country, many of them carried on 
by native adventurers, some of them branched out 
from the principal Stores at the heads of navigation. 
The distribution of the business, however into the 
importing & the retail departments has not yet taken 
place. Should the port bill be established it will I 
think quickly add this amendment which indeed must 
in a little time follow of itself. It is the more to be 
wished for as it is the only radical cure for credit to 
the consumer which continues to be given to a degree 
which if not checked will turn the diffusive retail of 
merchandize into a nuisance. When the Shop keeper 
buys his goods of the wholesale merchant, he must 
buy at so short a credit, that he can venture to give 
none at all. 

You ask me to unriddle the dissolution of the 
Commee of the States at Annapolis. I am not sure 
that I am myself possessed fully of the causes different 
members of Congress having differed in their ac 
counts of the matter. My conception of it is that the 

1 Italics for cypher. 

1785] JAMES MADISON. 163 

abrupt departure of some of the Eastern delegates, 
which destroyed the quorum & which Dana is said to 
have been at the bottom of proceeded partly from irri 
tations among the commee partly from dislike to the 
place of their session, and partly from an impatience 
to get home, which prevailed over their regard tor their 
private characters, as well as for their public duty. 

Subsequent to the date of mine in which I gave my 
idea of fayette I had further opportunities of penetrat 
ing his character. Though his foibles did not disap 
pear all the favorable traits presented themselves in a 
stronger light on closer inspection. He certainly pos 
sesses talents which might figure in any line. If he is 
ambitious it is rather of the praise which virtue dedi 
cates to merit than of the homage which fear renders to 
power his disposition is naturally warm & affectionate, 
and his attachment to the U. S. unquestionable. Un 
less I am grossly deceived, you willyf^ his zeal sincere 
and useful, whenever it can be employ 'ed'm behalf of the 
U. S. with \puf\ opposition to the essential interests of 
France. 

The opposition to the general assessment gains 
ground. At the instance of some of its adversaries I 
drew up the remonstrance herewith inclosed. It has 
been sent thro' the medium of confidential persons in a 
number of the tipper Counties, and I am told will be 
pretty extensively signed. The presbyterian clergy, 
have at length espoused the side of the opposition, 
being moved either by a fear of their laity or a jeal 
ousy of the episcopalians. The mutual hatred of 
these sects has been much inflamed by the late Act 

164 THE WRITINGS OF [1785 

incorporating the latter. I am far from being sorry 
for it, as a coalition between them could alone endanger 
our religious rights, and a tendency to such an event 
had been suspected. The fate of the Circuit Courts is 
uncertain. They are threatened with no small danger 
from the diversity of opinions entertained among the 
friends of some reform in that department. But the 
greatest danger is to be feared from those who mask 
a secret aversion to any reform under a zeal for such 
a one as they know will be rejected. The Potowmack 
Company are going on with very flattering prospects. 
Their subscriptions some time ago amounted to up 
wards of four-fifths of the whole sum. I have the 
pleasure also to find by an advertisement from the 
managers for James River that more than half 
the sum is subscribed for that undertaking, and that 
the subscribers are to meet shortly for the purpose of 
organizing themselves & going to work. I despair of 
seeing the Revisal taken up at the ensuing Session. 
The number of copies struck are so deficient (there 
being not above three for each County) and there has 
been such delay in distributing them (none of the 
Counties having recd them till very lately & some 
probably not yet, tho' they were ready long ago,) that 
the principal end of their being printed has been 
frustrated. Our fields promise very short crops both 
of Corn & Tob°. The latter was much injured by the 
grass hopper & other insects; the former, somewhat by 
the bug in the Southern parts of the State, but both 
have suffered most from dry weather which prevails 
at present in this part of the Country, and has 

1785] JAMES MADISON. 165 

generally prevailed I understand in most other parts. 
It seems certain that no future weather can make a 
great crop of either particularly of Tob°, so great a 
proportion of the hills being without plants in them & 
so many more with plants in them which must come 
to nothing. Notwithstanding this prospect, its price 
has fallen from 36^. to 32 & 30^. on James River & 
2%s. on Rappahannock. The scarcity of cash is one 
cause. ^Harrison late Gov. was elected in Surry, 
whither he previoiisly removed with his family a con 
test for the chair will no doubt ensue should he fail he 
will be for Congress. I have not yet recd any of the 
books which you have been so kind as to pick up 
for me, but expect their arrival daily, as you were 
probably soon after the date of your last apprised that 
I was withdrawn from the nomination which led you 
to suspend the forwarding them. I am invited by 
Col : Monroe to an option of rambles this fall, one of 
which is into the Eastern States. I wish much to 
accept so favorable an opportunity of executing the 
plan from which I was diverted last fall ; but cannot 
decide with certainty whether it will be practicable or 
not. I have in conjunction with a friend here a pro 
ject of interest on the anvil, which will carry me at 
least as far as Phila or New York where I shall be 
able to take my final resolution. 

Adieu. Yrs sincerely. 


1 66 THE WRITINGS OF [1785 

TO CALEB WALLACE. 

1 MAD. MSS. 

ORANGE, Aug1 23d, 1785. 

DR SIR, — Your favour of the i2th of July was safely 
delivered to me by Mr. Craig. I accept with pleas 
ure your proposed exchange of Western for Eastern 
intelligence and though I am a stranger to parental 
ties can sufficiently conceive the happiness of which 
they are a source to congratulate you on your posses 
sion of two fine sons & a Daughter. I do not smile 
at the Idea of transplanting myself into your wilder 
ness. Such a change of my abode is not indeed prob 
able yet I have no Local partialities which can keep 
me from any place which promises the greatest real 
advantages, but if such a removal was not even possi 
ble I should nevertheless be ready to communicate as 
you desire my Ideas towards a constitution of Gov 
ernment for the State in embryo. I pass over the 
general policy of the measure which calls for such a 
provision. It has been unanimously embraced by 
those who being most interested in it must have best 
considered it, & will I dare say be with equal unan 
imity acceded to by the other party which is to be 
consulted. I will first offer some general remarks on 
the Subject, & then answer your several queries. 

1 Several of Madison's friends in Kentucky wrote to him asking his assistance 
in the framing of a new government. January 6, 1785, George Muter trans 
mitted questions which Caleb Wallace wished answered, which were the same 
as those answered above. In the MSS. this letter is not addressed, and is 
marked as having been sent to "John Brown, Kentucky," but Sept. 24, 1785, 
Caleb Wallace replied to it as a letter to him, which doubtless it was. — Mad. 
MSS. 

1785] JAMES MADISON. 167 

i . The Legislative Department ought by all means, 
as I think to include a Senate constituted on such 
principles as will give wisdom and steadiness jo legis 
lation. The want of these qualities is the grievance 
complained of in all our republics. The want of 
fidelity in the administration of power having been 
the grievance felt under most Governments, and by 
the American States themselves under the British 
Government, it was natural for them to give too ex 
clusive an attention to this primary attribute. The 
Senate of Maryland with a few amendments is a 
good model. Trial has I am told verified the ex 
pectations from it. A Similar one made a part of 
our constitution as it was originally proposed but the 
inexperience & jealousy of our then Councils, re 
jected it in favor of our present Senate a worse could 
hardly have been substituted & yet, bad as it is, it is 
often a useful bit in the mouth of the house of Del 
egates. Not a single Session passes without instances 
of sudden resolutions by the latter of which they re 
pent in time to intercede privately with the Senate 
for their Negative. For the other branch models 
enough may be found care ought however to be taken 
against its becoming too numerous, by fixing the 
number which it is never to exceed. The quorum, 
wages, and privileges of both branches ought also to 
be fixed. A majority seems to be the natural quorum. 
The wages of the members may be made payable 
for - - years to come in the medium value of wheat 
for years preceding as the same shall from period to 
period be rated by a respectable Jury appointed for 

1 68 THE WRITINGS OF [1785 

that purpose by the Supreme Court. The privileges 
of the members ought not in my opinion to extend 
beyond an exemption of their persons and equipage 
from arrests during the time of their actual service. 
If it were possible it would be well to define the 
extent of the Legislative power but the nature of it 
seems in many respects to be indefinite. It is very 
practicable however to enumerate the essential ex 
ceptions. The Constitution may expressly restrain 
them from medling with religion — from abolishing 
Juries — from taking away the Habeas corpus — from 
forcing a citizen to give evidence against himself - 
from controuling the press — from enacting retro 
spective laws at least in criminal cases, from abrid 
ging the right of suffrage, from taking private prop 
erty for public use without paying its full Value from 
licensing the importation of Slaves, from infringing 
the confederation, &c &c. 

As a further security against fluctuating & in 
digested laws the Constitution of New York has pro 
vided a Council of Revision. I approve much of 
such an institution & believe it is considered by the 
most intelligent citizens of that State as a valuable 
safeguard both to public interests & to private rights. 
Another provision has been suggested for preserving 
System in Legislative proceedings which to some may 
appear still better. It is that a standing committee 
composed of a few select & skilful individuals should 
be appointed to prepare bills on all subjects which 
they may judge proper to be submitted to the Legis 
lature at their meetings & to draw bills for them 

1785] JAMES MADISON. 169 

during their Sessions. As an antidote both to the 
jealousy & danger of their acquiring an improper 
influence they might be made incapable of holding 
any other Office Legislative, Executive, or Judiciary. 
I like this Suggestion so much that I have had 
thoughts of proposing it to our Assembly, who give 
almost as many proofs as they pass laws of their 
need of some such Assistance. 

2 The Executive Department. Though it claims 
the 2d place is not in my estimation entitled to it by its 
importance all the great powers which are properly ex 
ecutive being transferred to the fcederal Government. 
I have made up no final opinion whether the first Magis 
trate should be chosen by the Legislature or the peo 
ple at large or whether the power should be vested in 
one man assisted by a council or in a council of which 
the President shall be only primus inter pares. There 
are examples of each in the U. States and probably 
advantages & disadvantages attending each. It is 
material I think that the number of members should 
be small & that their Salaries should be either unal 
terable by the Legislature or alterable only in such 
manner as will not affect any individual in place. 
Our Executive is the worst part of a bad Constitu 
tion. The Members of it are dependent on the Legis 
lature not only for their wages but for their reputation 
and therefore are not likely to withstand usurpations 
of that branch ; they are besides too numerous and 
expensive, their organization vague & perplexed & to 
crown the absurdity some of the members may with 
out any new appointment continue in Office for life 

170 THE WRITINGS OF [1785 

contrary to one of the Articles of the Declaration of 
Rights. 

3d The Judiciary Department merits every care 
Its efficacy is Demonstrated in G. Brittain where it 
maintains private Right against all the corruptions of 
the two other departments & gives a reputation to 
the whole Government which it is not in itself entitled 
to. The main points to be attended to are i. that 
the Judges should hold their places during good be 
havior 2. that their Salaries should be either fixed like 
the wages of the Representatives or not be alterable 
so as to affect the Individuals in office. 3 that their 
Salaries be liberal The first point is obvious ; with 
out the second the independence aimed at by the first 
will be ideal only ; without the 3d the bar will be 
superior to the bench which destroys all security for a 
Systematick administration of Justice, after securing 
these essential points, I should think it unadvisable 
to descend so far into detail as to bar any future 
Modification of this department which experience 
may recommend An enumeration of the Principal 
courts with Power to the Legislature to Institute 
inferior Courts may suffice. The Admiralty business 
can never be extensive in your situation and may be 
referred to one of the other Courts. With regard to 
a Court of Chancery as distinct from a Court of Law, 
the reasons of Lord Bacon on the affirmative side 
outweigh in my Judgment those of Lord Kaims on. 
the other side. Yet I should think it best to leave 
this important question to be decided by future lights 
without tying the hands of the Legislature one way 

1785] JAMES MADISON. 171 

or the other. I consider our county courts as on a 
bad footing and would never myself consent to copy 
them into another constitution. 

All the States seem to have seen the necessity of 
providing for Impeachments but none of them to 
have hit on an unexceptionable Tribunal. In some 
the trial is referred to the Senate in others to the 
Executive, in others to the Judiciary department it 
has been suggested that a tribunal composed of mem 
bers from each Department would be better than 
either and I entirely concur in that opinion. I pro 
ceed next to your queries. 

i. " Whether is a representation according to num- 
" bers, or property, or in a joint proportion to both, 
" the most Safe ? or is a representation by counties 
" preferable to a more equitable mode that will be diffi- 
" cult to adjust?" Under this question may be con 
sidered i. the right of Suffrage. 2 the mode of 
suffrage. 3 the Plan of representation As to the 
i. I think the extent which ought to be given to this 
right a matter of great delicacy and of critical im 
portance. To restrain it to the land holders will in 
time exclude too great a proportion of citizens ; to 
extend it to all citizens without regard to property, or 
even to all who possess a pittance may throw too 
much power into hands which will either abuse it 
themselves or sell it to the rich who will abuse it. I 
have thought it might be a good middle course to 
narrow this right in the choice of the least popular, 
& to enlarge it in that of the more popular branch 
of the Legislature. There is an example of this 

i72 THE WRITINGS OF [1785 

Distinction in N. Carolina if in none of the other States. 
How it operates or is relished by the people I cannot 
say. It would not be surprising if in the outset at 
least it should offend the sense of equality which 
reigns in a free Country. In a general view I see 
no reason why the rights of property which chiefly 
bears the burden of Government & is so much an 
object of Legislation should riot be respected as well 
as personal rights in the choice of Rulers. It must 
be owned indeed that property will give influence to 
the holder though it should give him no legal privi 
leges and will in general be safe on that as well as on 
other Accounts especially if the business of legislation 
be guarded with the provisions hinted at 2 As to 
the mode of suffrage I lean strongly to that of the bal 
lot, notwithstanding the objections which lie against 
it It appears to me to be the only radical cure for 
those arts of Electioneering which poison the very 
fountain of Liberty The States in which the Ballott 
has been the Standing mode are the only instances in 
which elections are tolerably chaste and those arts in 
disgrace. If it should be thought improper to fix 
this mode by the constitution I should think it at 
least necessary to avoid any constitutional bar to a 
future adoption of it 1 3 By the Plan of representa 
tion I mean i. the classing of the Electors 2 the 
proportioning of the representatives to each class. 
The first cannot be otherwise done than by geograph 
ical description as by Counties. The second may 

1 The Constitution of N. York directs an experiment on this Subject. [Note 
in MS.] 

1785] JAMES MADISON. 173 

easily be done in the first instance either by compris 
ing within each county an equal number of electors ; 
or by proportioning the number of representatives of 
each county to its number of electors The difficulty 
arises from the disproportionate increase of electors 
in different Counties. There seem to be two methods 
only by which the representation can be equalized 
from time to time. The i is to change the bounds 
of the counties ; the 2? to change the number of re 
presentatives allotted to them respectively, as the 
former would not only be most troublesome & ex 
pensive but would involve a variety of other adjust 
ments the latter method is evidently the best. Ex 
amples of a Constitutional provision for it exists in 
several of the States. In some it is to be executed 
periodically in others, pro re nata. The latter seems 
most accurate and very practicable I have already 
intimated the propriety of fixing the number of repre 
sentatives, which ought never to be exceeded I should 
suppose 150 or even 100, might safely be made the 
ne plus ultra for Kentucky 

2. " Which is to be preferred an Annual, Triennial, 
"or Septennial Succession to Offices or frequent elec- 
" tions without limitations in choice or that officers 
"when chosen should continue quamdiu se bene ges- 

" serint?" The rule ought no doubt to J>e different 

I 
in the different Departments of power. \£x>r one part 

of the Legislature Annual Elections will I suppose 
be held indispensably though some of the ablest 
Statesmen & soundest Republicans in the U. States 
are in favor of triennial. The great Danger in 

174 THE WRITINGS OF [1785 

departing from annual elections in this case lies in the 
want of some other natural term to limit the' depar 
ture. For the other branch 4 or 5 years may be the 
period. For neither branch does it seem necessary 
or proper to prohibit an indefinite re-eligibility. With 
regard to the Executive if the elections be frequent 
& particularly if made as to any member of it by 
the people at large a re-eligibility cannot I think be 
objected to, if they be unfrequent, a temporary or 
perpetual incapacitation according to the degree of 
unfrequency at least in the case of the first Magis 
trate may not be amiss. As to the Judiciary depart 
ment enough has been said & as to the Subordinate 
officers civil & Military nothing need be said more 
than that a regulation of their appointments may 
under a few restrictions be safely trusted to the 
Legislature. 

3 " How far may the same person with propriety 
" be employed in the different departments of Gov- 
" ernment in an infant country where the counsel of 
" every individual may be needed?" Temporary de 
viations from fundamental principles are always more 
or less dangerous. When the first pretext fails, those 
who become interested in prolonging the evil will 
rarely be at a loss for other pretexts. The first 
precedent too familiarises the people to the irregular 
ity, lessens their veneration for those fundamental 
principles, & makes them a more easy prey to am 
bition & self Interest. Hence it is that abuses of 
every kind when once established have been so often 
found to perpetuate themselves. In this caution 

1785] JAMES MADISON. 1 7 5 

I refer chiefly to an improper mixture of the three 
great Departments within the State. A Delegation 
to Congress is I conceive compatible with either. 

4 " Should there be a periodical review of the 
Constitution ? " Nothing appears more elegible in 
theory nor has sufficient trial perhaps been yet 
made to condemn it in practice. Pennsylvania has 
alone adopted the expedient. Her citizens are much 
divided on the subject of their Constitution in gen 
eral & probably on this part of it in particular. I am 
inclined to think though am far from being certain, 
that it is not a favorite part even with those who 
are fondest of their Constitution. another plan 
has been thought of which might perhaps Succeed 
better and would at the same time be a safeguard to 
the equilibrium of the constituent Departments of 
Government. This is that a Majority of any two 
of the three departments should have authority to 
call a plenipotentiary convention whenever they may 
think their constitutional powers have been Violated 
by the other Department or that any material part 
of the Constitution needs amendment In your situ- 
^tion I should think it both imprudent & indecent not 
to leave a door open for at least one revision of your 
first Establishment, imprudent because you have 
neither the same resources for supporting nor the 
same lights for framing a good establishment now 
as you will have 15 or 20 Years hence, indecent 
because an handful of early settlers ought not to pre 
clude a populous Country from a choice of the Govern 
ment under which they & their posterity are to live. 

176 THE WRITINGS OF [1785 

Should your first Constitution be made thus temporary 
the objections against an intermediate union of offices 
will be proportionably lessened. Should a revision 
of it not be made thus necessary & certain there 
will be little probability of its being ever revised. 
Faulty as our Constitution is as well with regard to 
the Authority which formed it as to the manner in 
which it is formed the Issue of an experiment has 
taught us the difficulty of amending it : & although 
the issue might have proceeded from the unseason- 
ableness of the time yet it may be questioned whether 
at any future time the greater depth to which it will 
have stricken its roots will not counterbalance any 
more auspicious circumstances for overturning it. 

5 & 6 "Or will it be better unalterably to fix 
" some leading Principles in Government and make 
" it consistant for the Legislature to introduce such 
" changes in lesser matters as may become expedi- 
"ent? can censors be provided that will impartially 
" point out deficiencies in the Constitution & the 
" Violations that may happen " 

Answers on these points may be gathered from 
what has been already said. 

I have been led to offer my sentiments in this 
loose form rather than to attempt a delineation of 
such a Plan of government as would please myself 
not only by my Ignorance of many local circum 
stances & opinions which must be consulted in such 
a work but also by the want of sufficient time for it. 
At the receipt of your letter I had other employment 
and what I now write is in the midst of preparations 

1785] JAMES MADISON. 177 

for a Journey of business which will carry me as far 
as Philadelphia at least & on which I shall set out in 
a day or two. 

I am sorry that it is not in my power to give you 
some satisfactory information concerning the Missis 
sippi. A Minister from Spain has been with Con 
gress for some time & is authorised as I under 
stand to treat on whatever subjects may concern the 
two nations. If any explanations or propositions 
have passed between him & the Minister of Con 
gress, they are as yet in the list of Cabinet Secrets, 
as soon as any such shall be made Public & come to 
my knowledge, I shall take the first opportunity of 
transmitting them. Wishing you & your family all 
happiness, 

I am, Dr Sir, 

Your friend & servant. 

The Constitutions of the several States were printed 
in a small Volume a year or two ago by order of 
Cong5 a perusal of them need not be recommended 
to you. Having but a single copy I cannot supply you 
It is not improbable that you may be already pos 
sessed of one. The revisal of our laws by Jefferson, 
Wythe & Pendleton beside their Value in improving 
the legal code may suggest something worthy of being 
attended to in framing a Constitution. 

VOL. II.— 12. 

1 78 THE WRITINGS OF [1785 

TO THOMAS JEFFERSON. MAD. MSS. 

PHILADA Octr 3d, 1785. 

DEAR SIR, — In pursuance of the plan intimated in 
my last I came to this city about three weeks ago, 
from which I continued my trip to New York. I re 
turned last night and in a day or two shall start for 
Virginia. Col. Monroe had left Philad* a few days 
before I reached it, on his way to a treaty to be held 
with the Indians about the end of this month on the 
Wabash. If a visit to the Eastern States had been 
his choice, short as the time would have proved, I 
should have made an effort to attend him. As it is 
I must postpone that gratification, with a purpose 
however of embracing it on the first convenient op 
portunity. Your favour of the 1 1 May by Mons^ 
Doradour inclosing your Cypher arrived in Virg* 
after I left it, and was sent after me to this place. 
Your notes which accompanied it, remained behind, 
and consequently I can only now say on that subject, 
that I shall obey your request on my return, which 
my call to Richmond will give me an early oppor 
tunity of doing. During my stay at New York I had 
several conversations with the Virg? Delegates, but 
with few others, on the affairs of the confederacy. I 
find with much regret that these are as yet little re 
deemed from the confusion which has so long mor 
tified the friends to our national honor and prosperity. 
Congress have kept the Vessel from sinking, but it 
has been by standing constantly at the pump, not by 
stopping the leaks which have endangered her. All 
their efforts for the latter purpose have been frus- 

1785] JAMES MADISON. 179 

trated by the selfishness or perverseness of some part 
or other of their constituents. The desiderata most 
strongly urged by our past experience & our present 
situation are i. a final discrimination between such 
of the unauthorised expences of the States as ought 
to be added to the common debt, and such as ought 
not. 2. a constitutional apportionment of the com 
mon debt, either by a valuation of the land, or a 
change of the article wch requires it. 3. a recogni 
tion by the States of the authority of Congress to en 
force payment of their respective quotas. 4.' a grant 
to Congress of an adequate power over trade. It is 
evident to me that the first object will never be ef 
fected in Congress, because it requires in those who 
are to decide it the spirit of impartial judges, whilst 
the spirit of those who compose Congress is rather 
that of advocates for the respective interests of their 
constituents. If this business were referred to a 
Commission filled by a member chosen by Congress 
out of each State, and sworn to impartiality, I should 
have hopes of seeing an end of it. The 2? object af 
fords less ground of hope. The execution of the 8th 
art of Confederation is generally held impracticable, 
and R. Island, if no other State, has put its veto on 
the proposed alteration of it. Until the 3? object can 
be obtained the Requisitions of Congress will con 
tinue to be mere calls for voluntary contributions, 
which every State will be tempted to evade, by the 
uniform experience that those States have come off 
best which have done so most. The present plan 
of federal Government reverses the first principle of 

i8o THE WRITINGS OF [1785 

all Government. It punishes not the evil-doers, but 
those that do well. It may be considered I think as 
a fortunate circumstance for the U. S. that the use of 
coercion, or such provision as would render the use 
of it unnecessary, might be made at little expence and 
perfect safety. A single frigate under the orders of 
Congress could make it the interest of any one of the 
Atlantic States to pay its just Quota. With regard 
to such of the Ultramontane States as depend on the 
trade of the Mississippi, as small a force would have 
the same effect ; whilst the residue trading thro' the 
Atlantic States might be wrought upon by means 
more indirect indeed but perhaps sufficiently effectual. 
The fate of the 4th object is still suspended. The 
Recomendations of Cong? on this subject past be 
fore your departure, have been positively complied 
with by few of the States I believe ; but I do not learn 
that they have been rejected by any. A proposition 
has been agitated in Congress, and will I am told be 
revived, asking from the States a general & perma 
nent authority to regulate trade, with a proviso that 
it shall in no case be exercised without the assent of 
eleven States in Congress. The Middle States favor 
the measure, the Eastern are zealous for it, the 
Southern are divided, ^ythe Virginia delegation the 
president* is an inflexible adversary, Gray son un 
friendly and Monroe & Hardy warm on the opposite 
side. If the proposition should pass Cong? its fate 
will depend much on the reception it may find in 

1 Italics for cypher. 2 R. H. Lee. 

1785] JAMES MADISON. 181 

Virgf and this will depend much on the part which 
may be taken by a few members of the Legislature. 
The prospect of its being levelled agst. G. Britain will 
be most likely to give it popularity. In this suspence 
of a general provision for our commercial interests, 
the more suffering States are seeking relief from par 
tial efforts which are less likely to obtain it than to 
drive their trade into other channels, and to kindle 
heart-burnings on all sides. Massachusetts made the 
beginning, Penna has followed with a catalogue of 
duties on foreign goods & tonnage, which could 
scarcely be enforced against the smuggler, if N. Jersey, 
Delaware, & Maryland were to co-operate with her. 
The avowed object of these duties is to encourage 
domestic manufactures, and prevent the exportation 
of coin to pay for foreign. The Legislature had 
previously repealed the incorporation of the bank, as 
the cause of the latter & a great many other evils. 
S. Carolina I am told is deliberating on the distresses 
of her commerce and will probably concur in some 
general plan ; with a proviso, no doubt against any 
restraint from importing slaves, of which they have 
received from Africa since the peace about twelve 
thousand. She is also deliberating on the emission 
of paper money, & it is expected she will legalize a 
suspension of Judicial proceedings which has been al 
ready effected by popular combinations. The pretext 
for these measures is the want of specie occasioned by 
the unfavorable balance of trade. Your introduction 
of Mr. T. Franklin has been presented to me. The 
arrival of his Grandfather has produced an emulation 

i82 THE WRITINGS OF [1785 

among the different parties here in doing homage to 
his character. He will be unanimously chosen 
president of the State and will either restore to it an 
unexpected quiet or lose his own. It appears from 
his answer to some applications that he will not decline 
the appointment. On my journey I called at Mount 
Vernon & had the pleasure of finding the Gen1, in 
perfect health. He had just returned from a trip up 
the Potowmac. He grows more & more sanguine as 
he examines further into the practicability of opening 
its navigation. The subscriptions are compleated 
within a few shares, and the work is already begun at 
some of the lesser obstructions. It is overlooked by 
Rhumsey, the inventor of the boats which I have in 
former letters mentioned to you : He has not yet 
disclosed his secret. He had of late nearly finished a 
boat of proper size, wc-h he meant to have exhibited, 
but the house which contained it & materials for others 
was consumed by fire. He assured the Gen! that the 
enlargement of his machinery did not lessen the 
prospect of utility afforded by the miniature experi 
ments. The Gen! declines the shares voted him by 
the Assembly, but does not mean to withdraw the 
money from the object which it is to aid, and will 
even appropriate the future tolls I believe to some 
useful public establishment if any such can be devised 
that will both please himself & be likely to please 
the State. This is accompanied by a letter from our 
amiable friend Mrs. Trist to Miss Patsy. She got 
back safe to her friends in Aug -st & is as well as she 
has generally been, but her cheerfulness seems to be 

1785] JAMES MADISON. 183 

rendered less uniform than it once was by the scenes 
of adversity through which fortune has led her. Mrs. 
House is well & charges me not to omit her respect 
ful & affect6 compliments to you. 

I remain Dr Sir, Yrs &c 

MEMORIAL AND REMONSTRANCE AGAINST RELIGIOUS 

ASSESSMENTS.1 

To THE HONORABLE THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY 

OF 

THE COMMONWEALTH OF VIRGINIA. 
A MEMORIAL AND REMONSTRANCE. 

We, the subscribers, citizens of the said Commonwealth, having 
taken into serious consideration, a Bill printed by order of the 
last Session of General Assembly, entitled " A Bill establishing a 
provision for Teachers of the Christian Religion," and conceiving 

1 By a vote of ayes 48, noes 38, the third reading of the engrossed bill to 
establish a provision for the teachers of the Christian religion was postponed 
December 24, 1784, to the fourth Thursday in the next November. Among 
those voting against the postponement were Benjamin Harrison, Joseph Jones, 
John Marshall, Philip Barbour, Richard Bland Lee, Richard Henry Lee, and 
Henry Tazewell. Washington also favorecTtne bill. It was printed for distri 
bution among the voters in order that their sentiments towards it might be ascer 
tained. Among its opponents were Wilson Gary Nicholas and George Nicholas. 
A copy of the bill is found among the Washington MSS. The copy of the Re 
monstrance used here is one of the broadsides printed by the Phenix Press of 
Alexandria, now in the Virginia Historical Society, with a number of signatures 
appended to it. It has been collated with the notes in Madison's hand found 
among the Madison MSS. 

" My brother informs me that he conversed with you on the propriety of 
remonstrating against certain measures of the last session of Assembly and that 
you seemed to think it would be best that the counties opposed to the measure 
should be silent. I fear this would be construed into an assent especially to the 
law for establishing a certain provision for the clergy : for as the Assembly only 
postponed the passing of it that they might know whether it was disagreeable 
to the people I think they may justly conclude that all are for it who do not say 
to the contrary. A majority of the counties are in favor of the measure but 

184 THE WRITINGS OF [1785 

that the same, if finally armed with the sanctions of a law, will 
be a dangerous abuse of power, are bound as faithful members of 
a free State, to remonstrate against it, and to declare the reasons 
by which we are determined. We remonstrate against the said 
Bill, 

i. Because we hold it fora fundamental and undeniable truth, 
" that Religion or the duty which we owe to our Creator and the 
Manner of discharging it, can be directed only by reason and 
conviction, not by force or violence."1 The Religion then of 
every man must be left to the conviction and conscience of 
every man ; and it is the right of every man to exercise it as these 
may dictate. This right is in its nature an unalienable right. It 
is unalienable ; because the opinions of men, depending only on 
the evidence contemplated by their own minds, cannot follow the 
dictates of other men : It is unalienable also ; because what is 
here a right towards men, is a duty towards the Creator. It is the 
duty of every man to render to the Creator such homage, and such 
only, as he believes to be acceptable to him. This duty is prece 
dent both in order of time and degree of obligation, to the claims 

undecipherable] a great majority of the people against it, but if this majority 
should not appear by petition the fact will be denied. Another reason why all 
should petition is that some will certainly do it and those who support the bills 
will insist that those who petition are all the opposition. Would it not add 
greatly to the weight of the petition if they all hold the same language? by 
discovering an exact uniformity of sentiment in a majority of the country it 
would certainly deter the majority of the assembly from proceeding. All my 
expectations are from their fears, and not their justice. ... If you think 
with me that it will be proper to say something to the Assembly, will you 
commit it to paper. I risk this because I know you are most capable of doing 
it properly and because it will be most likely to be generally adopted. I can 
get it sent to Amherst Buckingham Albemarle, Fluvanna, Augusta, Botetourt, 
Rock Bridge and Rockingham and have no doubt that Bedford and the counties 
Southward of it will readily join in the measure. I will also send it to Frederick 
and Berkeley and if it goes from your county to Farquieur Culpeper and 
Loudoun it will be adopted by the most populous part of the country." — 
George Nicholas to Madison, Charlottesville, April 22nd 1785, Mad. MSS. 

"I found that no alteration could be made to the remonstrance without 
injury and immediately had it copied and sent to the counties I mentioned in a 
former letter." — Nicholas to Madison, Sweet Springs, July 24, 1785, Mad. 
MSS. ' Decl. Rights, Art: 16. [Note in the original.] 

1785] JAMES MADISON. 185 

of Civil Society. Before any man can be considered as a member of 
Civil Society, he must be considered as a subject of the Governor X' 
of the Universe : And if a member of Civil Society, who enters 
into any subordinate Association, must always do it with a re 
servation of his duty to the general authority ; much more must 
every man who becomes a member of any particular Civil Society, 
do it with a saving of his allegiance to the Universal Sovereign. *X 
We maintain therefore that in matters of Religion, no man's 
right is abridged by the institution of Civil Society, and that 
Religion is wholly exempt from its cognizance. True it is, that 
no other rule exists, by which any question which may divide a 
Society, can be ultimately determined, but the will of the majority ; 
but it is also true, that the majority may trespass on the rights of 
the minority. 

2. Because if religion be exempt from the authority of the 
Society at large, still less can it be subject to that of the Legisla 
tive Body. The latter are but the creatures and vicegerents of 
the former. Their jurisdiction is both derivative and limited : it is 
limited with regard to the co-ordinate departments, more neces 
sarily is it limited with regard to the constituents. The preser 
vation of a free government requires not merely, that the metes 
and bounds which separate each department of power may be 
invariably maintained ; but more especially, that neither of them 
be suffered to overleap the great Barrier which defends the rights 
of the people. The Rulers who are guilty of such an encroach 
ment, exceed the commission from which they derive their 
authority, and are Tyrants. The People who submit to it are 
governed by laws made neither by themselves, nor by an authority 
derived from them, and are slaves. 

3. Because, it is proper to take alarm at the first experiment 
on our liberties. We hold this prudent jealousy to be the first 
duty of citizens, and one of [the] noblest characteristics of the 
late Revolution. The freemen of America did not wait till 
usurped power had strengthened itself by exercise, and entangled 
the question in precedents. They saw all the consequences in 
the principle, and they avoided the consequences by denying the 

1 86 THE WRITINGS OF [1785 

principle. We revere this lesson too much, soon to forget it. 
Who does not see that the same authority which can establish 
Christianity, in exclusion of all other Religions, may establish 
with the same ease any particular sect of Christians, in exclusion 
of all other Sects ? That the same authority which can force a 
citizen to contribute three pence only of his property for the 
support of any one establishment, may force him to conform to 
any other establishment in all cases whatsoever ? 

4. Because, the bill violates that equality which ought to be 
the basis of every law, and which is more indispensible, in pro 
portion as the validity or expediency of any law is more liable to 
be impeached. If " all men are by nature equally free and inde 
pendent," * all men are to be considered as entering into Society 
on equal conditions ; as relinquishing no more, and therefore 
retaining no less, one than another, of their natural rights. Above 
all are they to be considered as retaining an " equal title to the free 
exercise of Religion according to the dictates of conscience " 2 

/Whilst we assert for ourselves a freedom to embrace, to profess 
and to observe the Religion which we believe to be of divine 
origin, we cannot deny an equal freedom to those whose minds 
have not yet yielded to the evidence which has convinced us. If 
this freedom be abused, it is an offence against God, not against 
man : To God, therefore, not to men, must an account of it be ren- 

\^dered. As the Bill violates equality by subjecting some to peculiar 
burdens ; so it violates the same principle, by granting to others 
peculiar exemptions. Are the Quakers and Menonists the only 
sects who think a compulsive support of their religions unneces 
sary and unwarantable ? Can their piety alone be intrusted with 
the care of public worship ? Ought their Religions to be en 
dowed above all others, with extraordinary privileges, by which 
proselytes may be enticed from all others ? We think too favor 
ably of the justice and good sense of these denominations, to 
believe that they either covet pre-eminencies over their fellow 
citizens, or that they will be seduced by them, from the common 
opposition to the measure. 

1 Decl. Rights, Art. I. [Note in the original.] 

2 Art : 16. [Note in the original.] 

1785] JAMES MADISON. 187 

5. Because the bill implies either that the Civil Magistrate is a 
competent Judge of Religious truth ; or that he may employ Re 
ligion as an engine of Civil policy. The first is an arrogant 
pretension falsified by the contradictory opinions of Rulers in all 
ages, and throughout the world : The second an unhallowed 
perversion of the means of salvation. 

6. Because the establishment proposed by the Bill is not re 
quisite for the support of the Christian Religion. To say that it 
is, is a contradiction to the Christian Religion itself ; for every page 
of it disavows a dependence on the powers of this world : it is a 
contradiction to fact ; for it is known that this Religion both ex 
isted and flourished, not only without the support of human laws, 
but in spite of every opposition from them ; and not only during 
the period of miraculous aid, but long after it had been left to its 
own evidence, and the ordinary care of Providence : Nay, it is 
a contradiction in terms ; for a Religion not invented by human 
policy, must have pre-existed and been supported, before it was 
established by human policy. It is moreover to weaken in those 
who profess this Religion a pious confidence in its innate excel 
lence, and the patronage of its Author ; and to foster in those who 
still reject it, a suspicion that its friends are too conscious of its 
fallacies, to trust it to its own merits. 

7. Because experience witnesseth that ecclesiastical establish 
ments, instead of maintaining the purity and efficacy of Religion, 
have had a contrary operation. During almost fifteen centuries^ 
has the legal establishment of Christianity been on trial. What 
have been its fruits ? More or less in all places, pride and indolence 
in the Clergy ; ignorance and servility in the laity ; in both, 
superstition, bigotry and persecution. Enquire of the Teachers 
of Christianity for the ages in which it appeared in its greatest 
lustre ; those of every sect, point to the ages prior to its incorpora- / 
tion with Civil policy. Propose a restoration of this primitive 
state in which its Teachers depended on the voluntary rewards of 
their flocks ; many of them predict its downfall. On which side 
ought their testimony to have greatest weight, when for or when 
against their interest ? 

1 88 THE WRITINGS OF [1785 

8. Because the establishment in question is not necessary for 
the support of Civil Government. If it be urged as necessary for 
the support of Civil Government only as it is a means of support 
ing Religion, and it be not necessary for the latter purpose, it 
cannot be necessary for the former. If Religion be not within 
[the] cognizance of Civil Government, how can its legal establish 
ment be said to be necessary to civil Government ? /What in 
fluence in fact have ecclesiastical establishments had on Civil 
Society ? In some instances they have been seen to erect a 
spiritual tyranny on the ruins of Civil authority ; in many instan 
ces they have been seen upholding the thrones of political tyr 
anny ; in no instance have they been seen the guardians of the 
liberties of the people. Rulers who wished to subvert the public 
liberty, may have found an established clergy convenient auxiliar 
ies. A just government, instituted to secure & perpetuate it, needs 
them not. Such a government will be best supported by protect 
ing every citizen in the enjoyment of his Religion with the same 
equal hand which protects his person and his property ; by 
neither invading the equal rights of any Sect, nor suffering any 
Sect to invade those of another. 

9. Because the proposed establishment is a departure from 
that generous policy, which, offering an asylum to the persecuted 
and oppressed of every Nation and Religion, promised a lustre to 
our country, and an accession to the number of its citizens. 
What a melancholy mark is the Bill of sudden degeneracy ? In 
stead of holding forth an asylum to the persecuted, it is itself a 
signal of persecution. It degrades from the equal rank of Citizens 
all those whose opinions in Religion do not bend to those of the 
Legislative authority. Distant as it may be, in its present form, 
from the Inquisition it differs from it only in degree. The one is 
the first step, the other the last in the career of intolerance. The 
magnanimous sufferer under this cruel scourge in foreign Regions, 
must view the Bill as a Beacon on our Coast, warning him to seek 
some other haven, where liberty and philanthrophy in their due 
extent may offer a more certain repose from his troubles. 

10. Because, it will have a like tendency to banish our 
Citizens. The allurements presented by other situations are 

1785] JAMES MADISON. 189 

every day thinning their number. To superadd a fresh motive to 
emigration, by revoking the liberty which they now enjoy, would 
be the same species of folly which has dishonoured and depopu 
lated flourishing kingdoms. 

11. Because, it will destroy that moderation and harmony which 
the forbearance of our laws to intermeddle with Religion, has 
produced amongst its several sects. Torrents of blood have been 
spilt in the old world, by vain attempts of the secular arm to 
extinguish Religious discord, by proscribing all difference in Re 
ligious opinions. Time has at length revealed the true remedy. 
Every relaxation of narrow and rigorous policy, wherever it has 
been tried, has been found to assuage the disease. The American 
Theatre has exhibited proofs, that equal and compleat liberty, ifx 
it does not wholly eradicate it, sufficiently destroys its malignant 
influence on the health and prosperity of the State. If with the 
salutary effects of this system under our own eyes, we begin to 
contract the bonds of Religious freedom, we know no name that 
will too severely reproach our folly. At least let warning be 
taken at the first fruits of the threatened innovation. The very 
appearance of the Bill has transformed that " Christian forbear 
ance, 1 love and charity," which of late mutually prevailed, into 
animosities and jealousies, which may not soon be appeased. 
What mischiefs may not be dreaded should this enemy to the 
public quiet be armed with the force of a law ? 

12. Because, the policy of the bill is adverse to the diffusion 
of the light of Christianity. The first wish of those who enjoy 
this precious gift, ought to be that it may be imparted to the 
whole race of mankind. Compare the number of those who have 
as yet received it with the number still remaining under the 
dominion of false Religions ; and how small is the former ! 
Does the policy of the Bill tend to lessen the disproportion ? 
No; it at once discourages those who are strangers to the 
light of [revelation] from coming into the Region of it ; and 
countenances, by example the nations who continue in darkness, 
in shutting out those who might convey it to them. Instead of 

1 Art. 16. [Note in the original.] 

1 9o THE WRITINGS OF [1785 

levelling as far as possible, every obstacle to the victorious prog 
ress of truth, the Bill with an ignoble and unchristian timidity 
would circumscribe it, with a wall of defence, against the encroach 
ments of error. 

13. Because attempts to enforce by legal sanctions, acts obnox 
ious to so great a proportion of Citizens, tend to enervate the 
laws in general, and to slacken the bands of Society. If it be 
difficult to execute any law which is not generally deemed neces 
sary or salutary, what must be the case where it is deemed invalid 
and dangerous ? and what may be the effect of so striking an 
example of impotency in the Government, on its general authority. 

14. Because a measure of such singular magnitude and delicacy 
ought not to be imposed, without the clearest evidence that it is 
called for by a majority of citizens : and no satisfactory method 
is yet proposed by which the voice of the majority in this case 
may be determined, or its influence secured. " The people of the 
respective counties are indeed requested to signify their opinion 
respecting the adoption of the Bill to the next Session of Assem 
bly." But the representation must be made equal, before the 
voice either of the Representatives or of the Counties, will be 
that of the people. Our hope is that neither of the former will, 
after due consideration, espouse the dangerous principle of the 
Bill. Should the event disappoint us, it will still leave us in full 
confidence, that a fair appeal to the latter will reverse the sentence 
against our liberties. 

15. Because, finally, " the equal right of every citizen to the 
free exercise of his Religion according to the dictates of con 
science " is held by the same tenure with all our other rights. If 
we recur to its origin, it is equally the gift of nature ; if we weigh 
its importance, it cannot be less dear to us ; if we consult the 
Declaration of those rights which pertain to the good people of 
Virginia, as the " basis and foundation of Government," 1 it is 
enumerated with equal solemnity, or rather studied emphasis. 
Either then, we must say, that the will of the Legislature is the 
only measure of their authority ; and that in the plenitude of this 

1 Decl. Rights-title. [Note in the original.] 

1785] JAMES MADISON. 191 

authority, they may sweep away all our fundamental rights ; or, 
that they are bound to leave this particular right untouched and 
sacred : Either we must say, that they may controul the freedom 
of the press, may abolish the trial by jury, may swallow up the 
Executive and Judiciary Powers of the State ; nay that they may 
despoil us of our very right of suffrage, and erect themselves into 
an independant and hereditary assembly : or we must say, that 
they have no authority to enact into law the Bill under considera 
tion. We the subscribers say, that the General Assembly of this 
Commonwealth have no such authority : And that no effort may 
be omitted on our part against so dangerous an usurpation, we 
oppose to it, this remonstrance ; earnestly praying, as we are in 
duty bound, that the Supreme Lawgiver of the Universe, by 
illuminating those to whom it is addressed, may on the one hand, 
turn their councils from every act which would affront his holy 
prerogative, or violate the trust committed to them : and on the 
other, guide them into every measure which may be worthy of his 
[blessing, may re]dound to their own praise, and may establish 
more firmly the liberties, the prosperity, and the Happiness of 
the Commonwealth. 

TO GENERAL WASHINGTON. WASH. MSS. 

RICHMOND Novr n, 1785. 

DEAR SIR, — I recd. your favor of the 29^ Ult : on 
thursday. That by Col. Lee had been previously 
delivered. Your letter for the Assembly was laid 
before them yesterday. I have reason to believe that 
it was received with every sentiment which could 
correspond with yours. Nothing passed from which 
any conjecture could be formed as to the objects 
which would be most pleasing for the appropriation 
of the fund. The disposition is I am persuaded much 
stronger to acquiesce in your choice whatever it may 

192 THE WRITINGS OF [1785 

be than to lead or anticipate it ; and I see no incon- 
veniency in your taking time for a choice that will 
please yourself. The letter was referred to a com 
mittee which will no doubt make such a report as will 
give effect to your wishes. 

Our Session commenced very inauspiciously with a 
contest for the chair, which was followed by a rigid 
scrutiny into Mr. Harrison's election in his county. 
He gained the chair by a majority of 6 votes and re 
tained his seat by a majority of still fewer. His resi 
dence was the point on which the latter question 
turned. Doct Lee's election was questioned on a 
similar point, and was also established ; but it was 
held to be vacated by his acceptance of a lucrative 
post under the United States. The House have en 
gaged with some alacrity in the consideration of the 
Revised Code prepared by Mr. Jefferson Mr. Pendle- 
ton & Mr. Wythe. The present temper promises an 
adoption of it in substance. The greatest danger 
arises from its length compared with the patience of 
the members. If it is persisted in it must exclude 
several matters which are of moment, but I hope only 
for the present Assembly. The pulse of the H. of D. 
was felt on thursday with regard to a general manu 
mission, by a petition presented on that subject. It 
was rejected without dissent, but not without an 
avowed patronage of its principle by sundry respect 
able members. A motion was made to throw it under 
the table, which was treated with as much indignation 
on one side as the petition itself was on the other. 
There are several petitions before the House against 

1785] JAMES MADISON. 193 

any step towards freeing the Slaves, and even praying 
for a repeal of the law which licences particular manu 
missions. The Merchants of several of our Towns 
have made representations on the distress of our com 
merce, which have raised the question whether relief 
shall be attempted by a reference to Cong?, or by 
measures within our own compass. On a pretty full 
discussion it was determined by a large majority that 
the power over trade ought to be vested in Congress, 
under certain qualifications. If the qualifications 
suggested & no others should be annexed, I think 
they will not be subversive of the principle tho' they 
will, no doubt, lessen its utility. The Speaker, Mr. 
M. Smith & Mr. Braxton, are the champions against 
Congress. Mr. Thurston & Mr. White have since 
come in, and I fancy I may set down both as 
auxiliaries. They are, however not a little puzzled 
by the difficulty of substituting any practicable regu 
lations within ourselves. Mr. Braxton proposed two 
that did not much aid his side of the question : the 
i was that all British vessels from the W. Indies 
should be excluded from our ports ; the 2. that no 
Merchant should carry on trade here until he sd have 
been a resident— -years. Unless some plan free 
from objection can be devised for this State, its 
patrons will be reduced clearly to the dilemma of 
acceding to a general one, or leaving our trade under 
all its present embarrassments. There was some little 
skirmishing on the ground of public faith, which leads 
me to hope that its friends have less to fear than was 
surmised. The Assize & Port Bills have not yet been 

VOL. II. — 13. 

i94 THE WRITINGS OF [1785 

awakened. The Senate will make a House to-day for 
the first time. 

With the greatest respect & regard I have 
the honor to be Dr Sir 

Yr Obed1 & very Kble Serv1 

TO JAMES MADISON. MAD. MSS. 

RICH? Nov' 18. 1785. 

HonD Sir, — I rcd yrs by Capt. Barbour who I hope 
will enquire as to Turpin in the land office. I wish you 
rather to confide such business to friends coming here 
who can be relied on than to refer it to me. I am so 
little master of my time and the office is removed so 
far out of the way that I cannot be relied on. I will 
endeavor to get the Journals for you soon. The 
price of Tob° forbids the sale of your Hhd. The As 
sembly have made some progress in the Revisal, 
and I hope will go thro' it. Public cred* seems to 
have more friends and paper money more adversaries 
than I had expected. — Delegates to Cong5 for 1786. 
R. H. Lee, Wra Grayson J* Monroe, H. Lee Jr. 
^ Carrington Councilor Carter Bratton. 

Yr afTe son 

J. MADISON JR. 

NOTES FOR SPEECH IN THE VIRGINIA HOUSE OF DELEGATES 

NOVEMBER, 1785. l 

COMMERCIAL REGULATIONS. 

MAD. MSS. 

Gen! reg! necessary whether the object be to 
i. counteract foreign plans 

1 This skeleton of a speech is written, as other speeches are, upon a slip of 

1785] JAMES MADISON. 195 

2. encourage ships & seamen 
3. manufactures 

4. Revenue 

5. frugality, [articles of luxury most easily run from Stateto State] 

6. Embargo's in war — case of Delaware in late war.1 
necessary to prevent contention ams States. 

1. Case of French provinces, Neckar says 23,000 patrols em- 
ployd. ags- internal contraband.2 

2. Case of Mass'? & Con* 

3. Case of N. Y. & N. J. 

4. P.a & Delaware 

5. V? & Mary*? late regulation 

6. Irish propositions 
necessary to Justice & true Policy 

1. Con1 & N Hamp : 

2. N. J. 

3. N. C. 

4. Western Country. 

Necessary as a system convenient & intelligible to foreigners 
trading to U. S. Necessary as within reason of federal constitu 
tion, the regulation of trade being as imposable by states as 
peace, war, ambrs &c. 

Treaties of comerce ineffectual without it 
Safe with reg? to the liberties of the States. 

1. Cong? may be trusted with trade as well as war &c 

2. power of Treaties involve the danger if any — 

3. Controul of States over Cong3. 

4. example of amphyctionic league, achean do. Switzerld-, Hol 
land, Germany. 

paper in a hand so small that parts of it can hardly be deciphered with the 
naked eye. An effect of the speech was the adoption by the House of a reso 
lution, that "an act ought to pass to authorize the delegates of this State in 
Congress to give the assent of the State to a general regulation of the Commerce 
of the United States, under certain qualifications." 

1 The non-importation agreements of the colonies before the Revolution were 
not entered into by Delaware until some time after the other colonies. See 
Life of George Read, 81. 

2 4< De V Administration des Finances de la France"" had made its appearance 
the year before this speech was delivered. 

196 THE WRITINGS OF [1785 

5. peculiar situation of U. S. increase the repellant power of the 
States. Essential to preserve fed1- Constitution 

1. declension of fed1- Gov*. 

2. inadequacy to end, must lead states to substitute some other 
policy no institution remaining long when it ceases to be useful, &c. 

3. policy of G. B. to weaken union. 

Consequences of dissolution of confederacy, i. Appeal to sword 
in every petty squabble. 2. Standing armies beginning with weak 
& jealous states. 3. perpetual taxes. 4. sport of foreign politics. 
5, 6. blast glory of Revolution. 

TO GENERAL WASHINGTON. 

WASH. MSS, 

RICHMOND Dec1: 9, 1785. 

DEAR SIR, — Your favor of the 30 Novl" was re 
ceived a few days ago. This would have followed 
much earlier the one which yours acknowledges had 
I not wished it to contain some final information re 
lative to the commercial propositions. The discussion 
of them has consumed much time and though the 

o 

absolute necessity of some such general system pre 
vailed over all the efforts of its adversaries in the 
first instance, the stratagem of limiting its duration 
to a short term has ultimately disappointed our hopes. 
I think it better to trust to further experience and 
even distress, for an adequate remedy, than to try a 
temporary measure which may stand in the way of a 
permanent one, and confirm that transatlantic policy 
which is founded on our supposed distrust of Congress 
and of one another. Those whose opposition in this 
case did not spring from illiberal animosities towards 
the Northern States, seem to have been frightened 
on one side at the idea of a perpetual and irrevocable 

1785] JAMES MADISON. 197 

grant of power, and on the other flattered with a 
hope that a temporary grant might be renewed from 
time to time, if its utility should be confirmed by the 
experiment. But we have already granted perpetual 
and irrevocable powers of a more extensive nature 
than those now proposed and for reasons not stronger 
than the reasons which urge the latter. And as to 
the hope of renewal it is the most visionary one that 
perhaps ever deluded men of sense. Nothing but 
the peculiarity of our circumstances could ever have 
produced those sacrifices of sovereignty on which the 
federal Government now rests. If they had been 
temporary, and the expiration of the term required a 
renewal at this crisis, pressing as the crisis is, and re 
cent as is our experience of the value of the confed 
eracy, sure I am that it would be impossible to revive 
it. What room have we then to hope that the expira 
tion of temporary grants of commercial powers would 
always find a unanimous disposition in the States to 
follow their own example. It ought to be remembered 
too that besides the caprice, jealousy, and diversity of 
situations, which will be certain obstacles in our way, 
the policy of foreign nations may hereafter imitate 
that of the Macedonian Prince who effected his 
purposes against the Grecian confederacy by gaining 
over a few of the leading men in the smaller members 
of it. Add to the whole, that the difficulty now found 
in obtaining a unanimous concurrence of the States 
in any measure whatever must continually increase 
with every increase of their number, and perhaps in a 
greater ratio, as the Ultramontane States may either 

198 THE WRITINGS OF [1785 

have or suppose they have a less similitude of inter 
ests to the Atlantic States than these have to one 
another. — The propositions however have not yet re 
ceived the final vote of the House, having lain on the 
table for some time as a report from the Com6 of the 
whole. The question was suspended in order to con 
sider a proposition which had for its object a meeting 
of Politico-commercial Comissrs from all the States 
for the purpose of digesting and reporting the re 
quisite augmentation of the power of Congress over 
trade. What the event will be cannot be foreseen. 
The friends of the original propositions are I am 
told rather increasing, but I despair of a majority, in 
any event for a longer term than 25 years for their 
duration. The other scheme will have fewer enemies 
and may perhaps be carried. It seems naturally to 
grow out of the proposed appointment of Cofrisrs 
for Virg? & Mary? concerted at Mount Vernon, for 
keeping up harmony in the commercial regulations of 
the two States. Maryd has ratified the report, but 
has invited into the plan Delaware & Pena, who will 
naturally pay the same compliment to their neigh 
bours &c. &c. Besides the general propositions on 
the subject of trade, it has been proposed that some 
intermediate measures should be taken by ourselves, 
and a sort of navigation Act will I am apprehensive 
be attempted. It is backed by the mercantile inter 
est of most of our towns except Alexandria, which 
alone seems to have liberality or light on the subject. 
It was refused even to suspend the measure on the 
concurrence of Mary? or N. Carolina. This folly 

1785] JAMES MADISON. 199 

however cannot one would think brave the ruin which 
it threatens to our Merchts, as well as people at large, 
when a final vote comes to be given. 

We have got thro' a great part of the revisal, and 
might by this time have been at the end of it had the 
time wasted in disputing whether it could be finished 
at this Session been spent in forwarding the work. 
As it is we must content ourselves with passing a few 
more of the important bills, leaving the residue for 
our Successors of the next year. As none of the bills 
passed are to be in force till Jan?, 1787, and the resi 
due unpassed will probably be least disputable in 
their nature, this expedient, though little eligible, is 
not inadmissible. Our public credit has had a severe 
attack and a narrow escape. As a compromise it has 
been necessary to set forward the half tax till March ; 
and the whole tax of Sep1^ next till Nov* ensuing. 
The latter postponement was meant to give the 
planters more time to deal with the Merch' in the sale 
of their Tob°, and is made a permanent regulation. 
The Assize bill is now depending. It has many 
enemies and its fate is precarious. My hopes how 
ever prevail over my apprehensions. The fate of the 
Port bill is more precarious. The failure of an inter 
view between our Comssrs and Comssrs on the part 
of N. Carolina has embarrassed the projected Canal 
between the waters of the two States. If N. C. were 
entirely well disposed the passing an Act suspended 
on & referred to her legislature would be sufficient, 
and this course must I suppose be tried, though pre 
vious negociation would have promised more certain 

200 THE WRITINGS OF [1785 

success. — Kentucky has made a formal application for 
independence. Her memorial has been considered 
and the terms of separation fixed by a Com? of the 
whole. The substance of them is that all private 
rights & interests derived from the laws of Virginia 
shall be secured that the unlocated lands shall be ap 
plied to the objects to which the laws of V* have ap 
propriated them — that nonresidents shall be subjected 
to no higher taxes than residents — that the Ohio shall 
be a co™ on highway for Citizens of the U. S. and the 
jurisdiction of Kentucky & Virga, as far as the re 
maining territory of the latter will lie thereon, be 
concurrent only with the new States on the opposite 
Shore — that the proposed State shall take its due 
share of our State debts — and that the separation 
shall not take place unless these terms shall be 
approved by a Convention to be held to decide the 
question, nor untill Cong? shall assent thereto, and 
fix the terms of their admission into the Union. The 
limits of the proposed State are to be the same with 
the present limits of the district. The apparent 
coolness of the Representatives of Kentucky as to 
a separation since these terms have been defined 
indicates that they had some views which will not be 
favored by them. They disliked much to be hung 
up on the will of Congress. 

I am Df Sir with the highest esteem and 
unfeigned regard Yf Obed< & hble Serv! 

1785] JAMES MADISON. 201 

TO JAMES MONROE. MAD. MSS. 

RICHD, Dec1: 9, 1785. 

DEAR SIR, — Supposing that you will be at New 
York by the time this reaches it I drop a few lines 
for the post of to-day. Mr Jones tells me he in 
formed you that a substitute had been brought for 
ward to the commercial propositions which you left 
on the carpet. The subject has not since been called 
up. If any change has taken place in the mind of 
the House, it has not been unfavorable to the idea 
of confiding to Congress a power over trade. I am 
far from thinking however that a perpetual power can 
be made palatable at this time. It is more probable 
that the other idea of a Convention of Commiss" from 
the States for deliberating on the state of commerce 
and the degree of power which ought to be lodged in 
Congress, will be attempted. Should it fail in the 
House, it is possible that a revival of the printed pro 
positions with an extension of their term to twentyfive 
years, will be thought on by those who contend that 
something of a general nature ought to be done. My 
own opinion is unaltered. The propositions for a 
State effort have passed and a bill is ordered in, but 
the passage of the bill will be a work of difficulty & 
uncertainty ; many having acquiesced in the prelimi 
nary stages who will strenuously oppose the measure 
in its last stages. No decisive vote has been yet 
taken on the Assize bill. I conceive it to be in some 
danger, but that the chance is in its favour. The 
case of the British debts will be introduced in a 
day or two. We have got through more than half 

202 THE WRITINGS OF [1785 

of the Revisal. The Criminal bill has been assailed 
on all sides. Mr Mercer has proclaimed unceasing 
hostility against it. Some alterations have been 
made & others probably will be made, but I think the 
main principle of it will finally triumph overall oppo 
sition. I had hoped that this Session wd have 
finished the code, but a vote ags.f postponing the 
further consideration of it till the next, was carried 
by so small a Majority that I perceive it will be ne 
cessary to contend for nothing more than a few of 
the more important bills leaving the residue of them 
for another year. My proposed amendment to the 
report on the Memorial of Kentucky, was agreed to in 
a Comittee of the whole without alteration, and with 
very few dissents. It lies on the table for the ratifica 
tion of the House. The members from that district 
have become extremely cold on the subject of an im 
mediate separation. The half tax is postponed till 
March & the Septf tax till Nov1: next. Not a word 
has passed in the House as to a paper emission. I 
wish to hear from you on your arrival at N. Y. and to 
receive in particular whatever you may be at liberty to 
disclose with regard to the Treaty of peace, &c with 
G. B. Mr Jones wishes you to accept this as on his 
acd as well as mine, he sent C. Griffins order on the 
bank by the last post and hopes you rec? it at Fred? 
Col. Grayson will no doubt have left you. I have 
omitted for some time writing to him on a supposition 
that I should be too late. 

I am D? Sir 

Yr^ affe1? 

1785] JAMES MADISON. 203 

TO AMBROSE MADISON.1 

RICHMOND, Dec1: 15, 1785 

D? BROR-' — I wrote to my father a day or two ago 
by Col : Burnley to which I refer. The principal step 
since taken by the H. of Delegates has been the 
rejection of a bill on which the assize scheme de 
pended. The majority consisted of 63 ags.1 49. Yester 
day the vote of the Speaker decided in the affirmative 
a resolution to repeal the act which permits masters 
to free their slaves.2 I hope the bill which must 
follow on the subject may be less successful. Many 
who concurred in the Resolution will probably be 
content finally with some amendment of the law in 

1 From the New York Public Library (Lenox) MSS. A copy of the letter 
was printed in the Nation July 19, 1894. 

2 The act was passed at the May session, 1782, of the General Assembly : 
" Whereas application hath been made to this present general assembly, that 
those persons who are disposed to emancipate their slaves may be empowered so 
to do, and the same hath been judged expedient under certain restrictions : Be 
it therefore enacted, That it shall hereafter be lawful for any person, by his or 
her last will and testament, or by any other instrument in writing, under his or 
her hand and seal, attested and proved in the county court by two witnesses, 
. . . to emancipate and set free, his or her slaves, or any of them, who shall 
thereupon be entirely and freely discharged from the performance of any con 
tract entered into during servitude, and enjoy as full freedom as if they had been 
particularly named and freed by this act." — Hening's Statutes at Large, xi, 39. 

Jacob Read, of South Carolina, wrote to Madison from Congress August 29, 
1785: "An opinion prevails in South Carolina that the principal holders of 
Slaves in your State wish to divest themselves of that kind of property and that 
tolerable good purchases might be made on good Security being given for pay 
ments by installments with a regular discharge of the Interest. 

" Under the Impression of this opinion the Hon!e M^ J. Rutledge of S? 
Carolina has addressed a Letter to me wishing to become engaged in any pur 
chase I may be able to make, & to make a joint concern. . . . My present 
application to you is to request you to inform me if you know of any such per 
sons as may wish to sell a gang of Hands & the Terms on which they might be 
had. . . . We want ! Greatly want ! ! the assistance of your abilities & 
Experience in Congress." — Mad. MSS. 

204 THE WRITINGS OF [1785 

favor of creditors. Should it prove otherwise this 
retrograde step with regard to an emancipation will 
not only dishonor us extremely but hasten the event 
which is dreaded by stimulating the efforts of the 
friends to it. The residue of the Revisal from No. 
65 will be put off, except the Religious Bill and a few 
others. Leave was given yesterday for a bill in favor 
of British Creditors, but not without proofs that it 
will be opposed in every stage of its progress thro' 
the House. The price of Tob° is not much, if at all 
changed. 

TO JAMES MONROE. MAD. MSS. 

RICHMOND, Dec^ 17, 1785 

DEAR SIR, — Since my last by the preceding post 
the fate of the assize laws has been determined by a 
negative in the H. of Delegates on the Bill on which 
its execution depended. The majority consisted of 
63 agst 49. A reform of the County Courts is the 
substitute proposed by the adversaries of the Assize, 
and if it can be put into any rational shape will be re 
ceived by the other side as auxiliary to the Assize 
plan which may be resumed at another Session. It 
is surmised that the Senate will not part? with this 
plan in any event, and as the law passecNh the last 
Session, unless repealed or suspended, stops the pro 
ceedings of the Gen1 Court after the Is.1 day of Jan? 
A bill must be sent to the Senate which will give 
them an opportunity of proposing some amendment 
which may revive the question at the present Session. 

1785] JAMES MADISON. 205 

Our progress in the Revisal has been stopped by the 
waste of time produced by the inveterate and prolix 
opposition of its adversaries, & the approach of 
Christmas. The Bill proportioning crimes & punish 
ments was the one at which we stuck after wading 
thro' the most difficult parts of it. A few subsequent 
bills however were excepted from the postponement. 
Among these was the Bill for establishing Religious 
freedom, which has got thro' the H. of Delegates 
without alteration, though not without warm op 
position. Mr. Mercer & Mr. Corbin were the prin 
cipal Combatants against it. Mr. Jones is well. With 
sincerity, I am 

Y^ aff? friend. 


RICHMOND, Dec! 24, 1785. 

DEAR SIR, — The proceedings of the Assembly 
since my last, dated this day week have related i. to 
the Bill for establishing Religious freedom in the Re 
visal. 2. a Bill concerning British debts. 3. a Bill 
concerning the Proprietary interest in the Northern 
Neck. 4. for reforming the County Courts. The 
first employed the H. of Delegates several days ; The 
preamble being the principal subject of contention. 
It at length passed without alteration. The Senate I 
am told have exchanged after equal altercation, the 
preamble of the revisal for the last clause in the Dec 
laration of Rights ; an exchange we1? was proposed 
in the H. of D. and negatived by a considerable 

2c6 THE WRITINGS OF [1785 

majority. I do not learn that they have made or 
will make any other alteration. The Bill for the pay 
ment of British debts is nearly a transcript of that 
which went thro' the two Houses last year, except 
that it leaves the periods of instalment blank, and 
gives the Creditor an opportunity of taking imme 
diate execution for the whole debt, if the debtor 
refuses to give security for complying with the instal 
ments. The Bill was near being put off to the next 
Session on the second reading. A majority were for 
it, but having got inadvertently into a hobble, from 
the manner in which the question was put, the result 
was that Monday next should be appointed for its 
consideration. The arrival & sentiments of Col: 
Grayson will be favorable to some provision on the 
subject. A clause is annexed to the Bill, authoris 
ing the Executive to suspend its operation, in case 
Cong? shall signify the policy of so doing. The 
general cry is that the Treaty ought not to be ex 
ecuted here until the posts are surrendered, and an 
attempt will be made to suspend the operation of the 
Bill on that event or at least on the event of a posi 
tive declaration from Cong? that it ought to be 
put in force. The last mode will probably be fixed 
on, notwithstanding its departure from the regular 
course of proceeding, and the embarrassment in 
which it may place Congress. 

The bill for reforming the County Courts proposes 
to select five Justices, who are to sit quarterly, be 
paid scantily, and to possess the Civil Jurisdiction of 
the County Courts, and the Criminal jurisdiction of 

1785] JAMES MADISON. 207 

the Gen1. Court under certain restrictions. It is 
meant as a substitute for the Assize system, to all 
the objections against which it is liable, without pos 
sessing its advantages. It is uncertain whether it 
will pass at all or what form it will finally take. I 
am inclined to think it will be thrown out. The Bill 
relating to the N. Neck passed the H. of D. yester 
day. It removes the records into the Land office here, 
assimilates locations of surplus land to the general 
plan, and abolishes the Quitrent. It was suggested 
that the latter point was of a judiciary nature, that it 
involved questions of fact, of law, and of the Treaty 
of peace, and that the Representatives of the late 
proprietor ought at least to be previously heard ac 
cording to the request of their Agent. Very little 
attention was paid to these considerations, and the 
bill passed almost unanimously. With sincere affection 
I am your friend & serv' 

TO JAMES MADISON. MAD. MSS. 

RICHMOND Dec1: 24. 1785. 

My last informed you of the miscarriage of the 
Assize scheme. It has been followed with an at 
tempt to reform the County Courts, which will prob 
ably end in the appointment of four months in which 
the Courts shall be confined to Docket business & 
compelled to dispatch it. A Bill is depending for 
the payment of British debts, nearly on the model of 
that which fell thro' last year. It is extremely grat 
ing and will be rejected unless the prospect of an 

208 THE WRITINGS OF [1785 

accomodation with G. B. on the subject of the posts 
& the negroes, or the apprehensions of being saddled 
with worse terms by delay, should overcome the dis 
inclination. The port bill has not been yet taken 
up. It will be severely attacked. We have a variety 
of orders of the day which will consume time, and 
other bills are to be brought in. Of course the end 
of the Session is remote, unless impatience should 
produce the same effect as a conclusion of the busi 
ness. The petition of the little fork has been justly 
rejected, by a general vote. I have not yet disposed 
of your Tob? The price has not latterly exceeded I 
believe four dollars, and I am told to day that 20/1, is 
talked of. I have never yet had it in my power to 
make the enquiries at the land office, or to get out 
your patents. Capt. Barbour tells me he has been 
there and could not get the information relative to 
Turpin without a knowledge of some dates which 
you have not mentioned to him or to me. If you 
have any unliquidated claims ag-' the U. S. that can 
be settled by the Comiss- before the i? day of Jan? 
or loan office certificates issued from the Con' officer 
here the interest up to Dec- 1782 will be paid at the 
Treas^ in specie. Let this circumstance be known if 
you please, tho' I suppose it will be too late. It may 
be of the less consequence, as such warrants for inter 
est will in future be receivable in taxes. The Quitrents 
for the Northern Neck are abolished by a bill which 
is gone up to the Senate. The Bill for establish 
ing Religious freedom passed the H. of Delegates 
as it stands in the Revised Code. The Senate have 

1785] JAMES MADISON. 209 

disagreed to the preamble and substituted the last 
Article of the Declaration of Rights. Which house 
is to recede, is uncertain. Both are much attached to 
their respective ideas. Capt : Barbour tells me Payne 
has engaged his brother J- B. to pay the money due 
to you. I wish you could let Maj- Moore have about 
£ 1 8 of it, the amount of his interest on the certifi 
cate obtained from Dunscomb by M' Hubbard Tay 
lor, & left with me. Let me know whether such an 
arrangement will be practicable. Be kind eno' also to 
let Capt. Walker & my brother F. know that I am 
called on for their balances to the Steward of H amp- 
den Sidney by a man here who has an order on me 
for them, present my regards to the family and 
believe me to be your Affec" son— 


RICHMOND Deer 27, 1785 

HOND SIR, — Mr Js Davis has just handed your 
favor of the 24. inst. It is too late to revise the pro 
ceedings relative to the Trustees of Beverley. The 
Act authorizes the Comssrs who are to settle your 
accounts to make a reasonable allowance for your 
trouble. I cannot get a copy of the act without pay 
ing the £10. Capt. P. Barbour will inform you of 
Dean's answer to his application. He carried a letter 
from me giving you an acct. of the latest proceedings 
of the Assembly. Nothing of consequence has been 
done since. It is uncertain when we shall rise. If 
an opportunity should offer, I shall be glad of the 
fresh butter at all events. 

I am with best regards to ye family yr ar? son. 

VOL. II.— 14. 

210 THE WRITINGS OF [1785 

TO JAMES MONROE. MAD. MSS. 

RICHMOND Dec1: 30, 1785. 

DEAR SIR, — The past week has been rendered im 
portant by nothing but some discussions on the sub 
ject of British debts. The bill brought in varied 
from that which miscarried last year i. by adding 
provision in favor of the Creditors for securing pay 
ment at the dates of the instalments 2. by annexing 
a clause empowering the Executive to suspend the 
operation of the Act in case Congress should notify 
their wish to that effect. Great difficulty was found 
in drawing the House into Comte on the subject. It 
was at length effected on Wednesday. The changes 
made in the Bill by the Comittee are i. striking out 
the clause saving the Creditors from the act of limita 
tion which makes the whole a scene of Mockery — 2. 
striking out the provision for securities — 3. Converting 
the clause authorizing Cong- to direct a suspension 
of the Act into a clause suspending it, untill Cong" 
should notify to the Executive thatG. B. had complyed 
with the Treaty on her part, or that they were satis 
fied with the steps taken by her for evacuating the 
posts, paying for Negroes and for a full compliance 
with the Treaty. The sentence underlined was pro 
posed as an amendment to the amendment and 
admitted by a very small majority only. 4. exoner 
ating the public from responsibility for the payments 
into the Treasury by British debtors beyond the real 
value of the liquidated paper. Since these proceed 
ings of the Committee of the whole, the subject has 

1 7 85] JAMES MADISON. 2 1 1 

slept on the table, no one having called for the re 
port. Being convinced myself that nothing can be now 
done that will not extremely dishonor us, and em 
barrass Cong'!, my wish is that the report may not be 
called for at all. 

In the course of the debates no pains were spared 
to disparage the Treaty by insinuations ag-f Cong!, 
the Eastern States, and the negociators of the Treaty, 
particularly J. Adams. These insinuations & artifices 
explain perhaps one of the motives from which the 
augmention of the federal powers & respectability 
has been opposed. The Reform of the County Courts 
has dwindled into directions for going thro' the 
docket quarterly, under the same penalties as now 
oblige them to do their business monthly. The ex 
periment has demonstrated the impracticability of 
rendering these courts fit instruments of Justice ; and 
if it had preceded the Assize Question would I think 
have ensured its success. Some wish to renew this 
question in a varied form, or at least under a varied 
title ; but the Session is too near its period for such 
an attempt. When it will end I know not. The 
business depending w? employ the House till March. 
A system of navigation and commercial regulations 
for this State alone is before us and comprises matter 
for a month's debate. The Compact with Mary? has 
been ratified.1 It was proposed to submit it to 

1 Aug. 9, 1785, George Mason wrote from Gunston Hall to Madison, enclos 
ing for his inspection a copy of his and Henderson's report to the Legislature 
and of the joint letter to the government of Pennsylvania of the Virginia and 
Maryland commissioners. 

January 13, 1786, the Virginia General Assembly agreed that duties on ex- 

2i2 THE WRITINGS OF [1786 

Cong" for their sanction, as being within the word 
Treaty used in the Confederation. This was oppd- 
It was then attempted to transmit it to our Dele 
gates to be by them simply laid before Cong' Even 
this was negatived by a large Majority. I can add no 
more without risking the opportunity by the post 
except that I remain Yr affe? friend 

CHURCH ESTABLISHMENT. MAD. MSS. 

TO THE HONBLE THE SPEAKER & GENTLEMEN THE GENERAL 
ASSEMBLY OF VIRGINIA. (1786. )J 

We the subscribers members of the protestant episcopal Church 
claim the attention of your honourable Body to our objections to 
the law passed at the last Session of Assembly for incorporating 
the protestant Episcopal church ; and we remonstrate against the 
said law — 

ports and imports should be the same in Virginia and Maryland, and that com 
missioners from the two States should meet annually to arrange the schedules — 
Journal of the Hotise of Delegates. 

1 The petition is in Madison's handwriting. 

June 3, 1784, a memorial from the Protestant Episcopal Church in Virginia 
was presented in the House of Delegates stating that the church labored under 
disadvantages because of several laws directing the modes of worship, and 
requesting the repeal of such acts ; " that an act may pass, to incorporate the 
Protestant Episcopal Church in Virginia, to enable them to regulate all the 
spiritual concerns of that Church, alter its form of worship, and constitute such 
canons, by-laws and rules for the government and good order thereof, as are 
suited to their religious principles ; and in general that the Legislature will aid 
and patronize the Christian religion." This was referred to the Committee on 
Religion, of which Madison was himself a member ; but he was opposed to 
the views of the majority of his colleagues. On June 8 Carey reported that 
the memorial seemed to the committee to be reasonable. The bill for the 
incorporation of the Protestant Episcopal Church was read the second time 
June 1 6, and after modification to a less objectionable form passed at the next 
session of the Assembly. (See Journal of the House of Delegates.} Madison 
himself voted for it, as a strategic movement, to ward off action on the more im 
portant bill for religious assessments. The act contained twelve sections, pro 
viding that the "Minister and vestry of the Protestant Episcopal Church" 

1786] JAMES MADISON. 213 

Because the law admits the power of the Legislative Body to 
interfere in matters of Religion which we think is not included in 
their jurisdiction. 

Because the law was passed on the petition of some of the 
Clergy of the Protestant Episcopal Church without any applica 
tion from the other members of that Church on whom the law is 

should, under that name, constitute a body politic and corporate in the respec 
tive parishes, and should forever enjoy all glebe lands already purchased, 
churches, burying-grounds, etc., belonging to them, " and every other thing the 
property of the late established church." In the proceedings of the ministers 
and vestries all matters were to be decided by a majority vote. They had full 
power and authority to purchase and enjoy lands, etc. In whatever parishes 
ministers and vestrymen wished to form a body corporate under the act, it was 
lawful for any two members of the church to call together the other members in 
the parish and elect twelve church members, to form a vestry and with the 
minister of the church were authorized to regulate all its religious concerns, 
doctrine, discipline and worship. (Hening's Statutes at Large, 11,532). 

Beginning with the session of the Assembly in the Autumn of 1786 petitions 
to repeal the act began to pour in, and also a smaller number against the repeal 
(Journal of the House of Delegates, Oct. j/, Nov. i, Nov. 6, Nov. 9, Nov. 10, 
Nov. 17, Nov. 24, Dec. 4, Dec. 3, Dec. 7.) The act of repeal was finally 
passed Jan. 10, 1787. (Hening's Stats, at Large, 12,266.) 

Rev D* John B. Smith, of Hampden-Sidney College, a Presbyterian, wrote 
to Madison under date June 21, 1784 : 

" Since my arrival at home, I have seen a part of your Journals, & by them 
have learned the objects of the Petition from the Episcopal Clergy, which in 
one or two instances, appear to me very exceptionable. The first part of their 
prayer is necessary & proper ; & the whole of it might pass without much 
animadversion to its disadvantage, 'till you hear them requesting that ' they, 
the Clergy, may be incorporated by law ' ; & then an attentive mind must revolt 
against it as very unjustifiable, & very insulting to the members of their com 
munion in general. Had they requested that an incorporating act should pass, 
in favour of that Church as a party of Christians, whereby the people might have 
had a share in the direction of ecclesiastical regulations, £ the appointment of 
Church officers for that purpose, it would have been extremely proper. But as 
the matter now stands, the clergy seem desirous to exclude them from any share 
in such a privilege & willing to oblige the members of their Churches to sit 
down patiently, under such regulations as an incorporated body of Clergymen, 
who wish to be peculiarly considered as ministers in the view of the law, shall 
chuse to make, without a legal right to interpose in any manner, but such as 
these spiritual leaders may think fit to allow. * * * * * * 

" But that part of the petition, which concerns me most as well as every non- 
Episcopalian in the state, is, where these Clergymen pray for an act of the 

2i4 THE WRITINGS OF [1786 

to operate, and we conceive it to be highly improper that the 
Legislature should regard as the sense of the whole Church the 
opinion of a few interested members who were in most instances 
originally imposed on the people without their consent & who 
were not authorized by even the smallest part of this community 
to make such a proposition. 

Because the law constitutes the Clergy members of a convention 
who are to legislate for the laity contrary to their fundamental 
right of chusing their own Legislators. 

Because by that law the most obnoxious & unworthy Clergyman 
cannot be removed from a parish except by the determination of 
a body, one half of whom the people have no confidence in & who 
will always have the same interest with the minister whose con 
duct they are to judge of. 

Because — by that law power is given to the convention to regu 
late matters of faith & the obsequious vestries are to engage to 
change their opinions as often as the convention shall alter 
theirs. 

Because a system so absurd and servile will drive the members 
of the Episcopal Church over to the Sects where there will be 
more consistency & liberty. 

We therefore hope that the wisdom & impartiality of the present 
assembly will incline them to repeal a law so pregnant with mis 
chief & injustice. 

TO THOMAS JEFFERSON. MAD. MSS. 

RICHMOND, Jan. 220!, 1786. 

DEAR SIR, — My last dated Novr I5th, from this place answered yours of 
May nth, on the subject of your printed notes.1 I have since had opportuni 
ties of consulting other friends on the plan you propose, who concur in the result 

Assembly to ENABLE, them to regulate all the spiritual concerns of that Church 
&c. This is an express attempt to draw the State into an illicit connexion & 
commerce with them, which is already the ground of that uneasiness which at 
present prevails thro' a great part of the State. According to the spirit of that 
prayer, the Legislature is to consider itself as the head of that Party, & con 
sequently they as members are to be fostered with particular care." 

Mad. MSS. 
" On my return to Orange I found the copy of your Notes brought along 

1 7 86] JAMES MADISON. 215 

of the consultations which I transmitted you. Mr. Wythe's idea seems to 
be generally approved, that the copies destined for the University should be 
dealt out by the discretion of the Professors, rather than indiscriminately and at 
once put into the hands of the students, which, other objections apart, would at 
once exhaust the Stock. A vessel from Havre de Grace brought me a few 
days ago two Trunks of Books, but without letter or catalogue attending them. 
I have forwarded them to Orange without examining much into the contents, 
lest I should miss a conveyance which is very precarious at this season, and be 
deprived of the amusement they promise me for the residue of the winter. 

Our Assembly last night closed a Session of 97 days, during the whole of 
which except the first seven, I have shared in the confinement. It opened 
with a very warm struggle for the chair between M* Harrison & M^ Tyler 
which ended in the victory of the former by a majority of 6 votes. This vic 
tory was shortly afterwards nearly frustrated by an impeachment of his election 
in the County of Surry. Having failed in his native County of Charles City, 
he abdicated his residence there, removed into the County of Surry where he 
had an estate, took every step which the interval would admit, to constitute 
himself an inhabitant, and was in consequence elected a representative. A 
charge of non-residence was nevertheless brought against him, decided ag^ him 
in the comittee of privileges by the casting vote of the Chairman, and reversed 
in the House by a very small majority. The election of Doc1; Lee was attacked 
on two grounds. Ist, of non-residence, 2d]y , of holding a lucrative office under 
Cong5, on the Ist he was acquitted, on the 2d, expelled, by a large majority. 
The revised Code was brought forward pretty early in the Session. It was first 
referred to Come of Cts of Justice, to report such of the bills as were not of a 
temporary nature, and on their report comitted to comtee of the whole. 
Some difficulties were raised as to the proper mode of proceeding, and some 
opposition made to the work itself. These however being surmounted, and 
three days in each week appropriated to the task, we went on slowly but suc 
cessfully, till we arrived at the bill concerning crimes and punishments. Here 
the adversaries of the Code exerted their whole force, which being abetted by 
the impatience of its friends in an advanced stage of the Session, so far pre 
vailed that the farther prosecution of the work was postponed till the next Ses 
sion. The operation of the bills passed is suspended until the beginning of 
1787 so that if the Code sd be resumed by the next Assembly and finished early 

with it by Mr. Doradour. I have looked them over carefully myself & con 
sulted several judicious friends in confidence. We are all sensible that the 
freedom of your strictures on some particular measures and opinions will dis 
please their respective abettors. But we equally concur in thinking that this 
consideration ought not to be weighed against the utility of your plan. We 
think both the facts and remarks which you have assembled too valuable not to 
be made known, at least to those for whom you destine them, and speak of 
them to one another in terms ^vhich I must not repeat to you.1' — Madison to 
Jefferson, November 15, 1785. Mad. MSS. 

216 THE WRITINGS OF [1786 

in the Session, the whole system may commence at once. I found it more 
popular in the Assembly than I had formed any idea of, and though it was 
considered by paragraphs and carried through all the customary forms, it might 
have been finished at one Session with great ease, if the time spent on motions 
to put it off and other dilatory artifices had been employed on its merits. 
The adversaries were the Speaker, Thruston, and Mercer, who came late in the 
Session into a vacancy left by the death of Col. Brent, of Stafford, and contrib 
uted principally to the mischief.1 The titles in the enclosed list will point out 
to you such of the bills as were adopted from the Revisal. The alterations 
which they underwent are too numerous to be specified, but have not materially 
vitiated the work. The bills passed over were either temporary ones, such as 
being not essential as parts of the system may be adopted at any time and were 
likely to impede it at this, or such as have been rendered unnecessary by Acts 
passed since the epoch at which the revisal was prepared. After the comple 
tion of the work at this Session was despaired of it was proposed arid decided 
that a few of the bills following the bill concerning crimes and punishments 
should be taken up as of peculiar importance. The only one of these which 1 
was pursued into an Act is the Bill concerning Religious freedom. The steps / 
taken throughout the Country to defeat the Gen1 Assessment had produced all 
the effect that could have been wished. The table was loaded with petitions 
and remonstrances from all parts against the interposition of the Legislature in 
matters of Religion. A general convention of the Presbyterian church prayed 
expressly that the bill in the Revisal might be passed into a law, as the best 
safeguard short of a Constitutional one, for their religious rights. The bill was 
carried thro' the H. of Delegates, without alteration. The Senate objected to 

; the preamble, and sent down a proposed substitution of the i6^h art : of the 
Declaration of Rights. The H. of D. disagreed. The Senate insisted, and 
asked a Conference. Their objections were frivolous indeed. In order to re- 

: move them as they were understood by the Managers of the H. of D. The pre 
amble was sent up again from the H. of D. with one or two verbal alterations. 
As an amendment to these the Senate sent down a few others, which as they 
did not affect the substance though they somewhat defaced the composition, it 
was thought better to agree to than to run further risks, especially as it was get 
ting late in the Session and the House growing thin. The enacting clauses 
past without a single alteration, and I flatter myself have in this country extin- ! 
guished forever the ambitious hope of making laws for the human mind. 

Acts not included in the Revisal. 

For the na- This was brought forward by Col: Henry Lee Jr., and passed 

ura ization o wjtjlout opposition. It recites his merits towards this Country, 
the Marquis 
de la fayette anc^ constitutes him a Citizen of it. 

To amend the The donation presented to Gen1 W embarrassed him much, on 
act vesting in One side, he disliked the appearance of slighting the bounty of his 
1 The portions of the letter printed in italics are in cypher in the original. 

1786] JAMES MADISON. 217 

Country and of an ostentatious disinterestedness, on the other, Geni. Wash- 
an acceptance of reward in any shape was irreconcileable with "" ' 

the law he had imposed on himself. His answer to the Assem- River Com- 
bly declined in the most affectionate terms the emolument alloted panics. 

to himself, but intimated his willingness to accept it so far as to dedicate it to 
some public and patriotic use. This Act recites the original act & his answer, 
and appropriates the future revenue from the shares to such public objects as 
he shall appoint. He has been pleased \.Q ask my ideas with regard to the most 
proper objects. I suggest ', in general only, a partition of the fund between some 
institution which would please the philosophical world, and some other which 
may be of a popular cast. If your knowledge of the several institutions in 
France or elsewhere should suggest models or hints, I could wish for your 
ideas on the case, which no less concern the good of the Commonwealth than the 
character of its most illustrious citizen. 

Some of the malefactors consigned by the Executive to labour, An act em- 

brought the legality of such pardons before the late Court of P°werin& the 

Governor & 
Appeals who adjudged them to be void. This Act gives the Ex- Council to 

ecutive a power in such cases for one year. It passed before the grant condi- 
bill in the revisal on this subject was taken up, and was urged tional pardons 
against the necessity of passing it at this Session. The expiration in certain 
of this act at the next Session will become an argument on the 
other side. 

This Act empowers the Executive to confine or send away sus- An act giv- 
picious aliens, on notice from Cong5 that their sovereigns have ing P°wers to 
declared or commenced hostilities agst the U. S., or that ye latter and c^u'ncil 
have declared War agst such sovereigns. It was occasioned by in certain 
the arrival of two or three Algerines here, who, having no appar- cases. 

ent object, were suspected of an unfriendly one. The Executive caused them 
to be brought before them, but found themselves unarmed with power to pro 
ceed. These adventurers have since gone off. 

Abolishes the quitrent, and removes the papers to the Regis- Act for safe 
ter's office. keeping land 

papers of the 
Northern Neck. 

Requires them to clear their dockets quarterly. It amounts to Act for re- 
nothing and is chiefly the result of efforts to render Courts of forming 

Assize unnecessary. County 

The latter act passed at the last Session required sundry sup 
plemental regulations to fit it for operation, an attempt to provide Ac* to sus" 
these which involved the merits of the innovation drew forth the edition of the 
united exertions of its adversaries. On the question on the sup- Actestablish- 
plemental bill they prevailed by 63 votes ag^ 49. The best that ing Courts of 
could be done in this situation was to suspend instead of repealing Assize. 

the original act, which will give another chance to our successors for introdu 
cing the proposed reform. The various interests opposed to it, will never be 
conquered without considerable difficulty. 

2i8 THE WRITINGS OF [1786 

Resolution The necessity of harmony in the cofnercial regulations of the 
proposing a States has been rendered every day more apparent. The local 
general meet- efjorts to counteract the policy of G. B., instead of succeeding, 

have in everv instance recoiled more or less on the States which 
from the 

States to con- ventured on the trial. Notwithstanding these lessons, the Mer- 
sider and rec- chts of this State, except those of Alexandria and a few of the 
omend a rnore intelligent individuals elsewhere, were so far carried away 

by their jealousies of the Northern Marine as to wish for a naviga- 
for regulating •> 

coerce, and ti°n Act confined to this State alone. In opposition to those nar- 
appointg as row ideas the printed proposition herewith inclosed was made. 
ComsTs from As printed, it went into a Comme of the whole. The alterations 
a' c a " of the pen shew the state in which it came out. Its object was to 
Madison Jr §^ve Cong5 such direct power only as would not alarm, but to 
Walter Jones, limit that of the States in such manner as wd indirectly require a 
St G. Tucker, conformity of the plans of Cong5. The renunciation of the right 
nith, G. Q£ iaying duties on imports from other States, would amount to a 
David Ross prohibition of duties on imports from foreign Countries, unless 
who are to similar duties existed in other States. This idea was favored by 
comunicate the discord produced between several States by rival and adverse 
the proposal regulations. The evil had proceeded so far between Connecticut 
timers lace an(^ Massts that the former laid heavier duties on imports from 
of meeting. the latter than from G. B., of which the latter sent a letter of 
complaint to the Executive here and I suppose to the other 
Executives. Without some such self-denying compact it will, 
I conceive be impossible to preserve harmony among the contiguous States. 
In the Comittee of the whole the proposition was combated at first on its gen 
eral merits. This ground was however soon changed for that of its perpetual 
duration, which was reduced first to 25 years, then to 13 years. Its adversaries 
were the Speaker, Thruston, and Corbin ; they were bitter and illiberal against 
Congress & the Northern States beyond example Thrustoti considered it as 
problematical, whether it would not be better to encourage the British than the 
Eastern marine Braxton and Smith were in the same sentiments, but absent at 
this crisis of the question. The limitation of the plan to 13 years so far destroyed 
its value in the judgment of its friends that they chose rather, to do nothing 
than to adopt it in that form. The report accordingly remained on the table 
uncalled for to the end of the Session. And on the last day the resolution 
above quoted was substituted. It had been proposed by Mr. Tyler imme 
diately after the miscarriage of the printed proposition, but was left on the 
table till it was found that Several propositions for regulating our trade without 
regard to other States produced nothing. In this extremity The resolution was 
generally acceded to, not with the opposition of Corbin & Smith. The Comssr- 
Jirst named were the Attorney, Dr Jones, and myself. In the House of D., 
Tucker and Smith were added, and in the Senate, Mason, Ross, and Ronald. 
The last does not undertake. 

1 7 86] JAMES MADISON. 219 

The port bill was attacked and nearly defeated, an amendatory bill was 
passed with difficulty thro' the H. of D., and rejected in the Senate. The orig 
inal one will take effect before the next Session, but will probably be repealed 
then. It would have been repealed at this, if its adversaries had known their 
strength in time and exerted it with Judgment. 

A Bill was brought in for paying British debts but was rendered so inadequate 
to its object by alterations inserted by a Comitte of the whole that the patrons 
of it thought it best to let it sleep. 

Several petitions (from Methodists chiefly) appeared in favor of a gradual 
abolition of slavery, and several from another quarter for a repeal of the law 
which licences private manumissions. The former were not thrown under the 
table, but were treated with all the indignity short of it. A proposition for 
bringing in a Bill conformably to the latter, was decided in the affirmative by 
the casting voice of the Speaker ; but the bill was thrown out on the first read 
ing by a considerable majority. 

A considerable itch for paper money discovered itself, though no overt 
attempt was made. The partisans of the measure, among whom Mr. M. S J may 
be considered as the most zealous, flatter themselves, and / fear upon too good 
ground, that it will be among the measures of the next session. The unfavora 
ble balance of trade and the substitution of facilities in the taxes will have dis 
missed the little specie remaining among us and strengthened the common 
argument for a paper meditim. 

This tax was to have been collected in Sep^ last, and had been 
in part actually collected in specie. Notwithstanding this and postponing 
the distress of public credit, an effort was made to remit the tax the tax of the 
altogether. The party was headed by Braxton, who was courting present year 
an appointment into the council. On the question for a third 
reading, the affirmative was carried by 52 ag^ 42. On the final -n payment 
question, a vigorous effort on the negative side with a reinforce 
ment of a few new members, threw the bill out. The victory however was not 
obtained, without subscribing to a postponement instead of remission, and the 
admission of facilities instead of Specie. The postponement too extends not 
only to the tax which was under collection, and which will not now come in till 
May, but to the tax of Sepr next which will not now be in the Treasury till the 
beginning of next year. The wisdom of seven Sessions will be unable to 
repair the mischiefs of this single act. 

This was prayed for by a memorial from a Convention held 
in Kentucky, and passed without opposition. It contains stipula- .c c°"~ 

tions in favor of territorial rights held under the laws of Vira, and erection of 
suspends the actual separation on the decision of a Convention Kentucky 
authorized to meet for that purpose, and on the assent of Con- into an inde- 
gress. The boundary of the proposed State is to remain the 
same as the present boundary of the district. 

1 Meriwether Smith. 

220 THE WRITINGS OF [1786 

At the last Session of 1784 and act passed displacing all the 

ct to militia officers, and providing for the appointm*. of experienced 

amend the 

Militia law men« In most counties it was carried into execution, and gener 
ally much to the advantage of ye militia. In consequence of a 
few petitions ag3.' the law as a breach of the Constitution, this act reverses all 
the proceedings under it, and reinstates the old officers. 

From the peculiar situation of that district the Escheat law was 
tend the no^- originally extended to it. Its extension at this time was occa- 

operation of sioned by a bill brought in by Mr. Mercer for seizing and selling 
the Escheat the deeded land of the late lord Fairfax on the ground of its being 
law to the devised to aliens, leaving them at liberty indeed to assert their 
Neck pretensions before the Court of Appeals. As the bill however 

stated the law & the fact, and excluded the ordinary inquest, in the 
face of pretensions set up even by a Citizen, (Martin,) to whom it is said the re 
version is given by the will, it was opposed as exerting at least a Legislative in 
terference in and improper influence on the Judiciary question. It was proposed 
to substitute the present act as an amendm* to the bill in a Committee of the 
whole which was disagreed to. The bill being of a popular cast went thro' the 
H. of D. by a great majority. In the Senate it was rejected by a greater one, 
if not unanimously. The extension of the escheat law was, in consequence, 
taken up and passed. 

"Act for to wit, attempts to dismember the State without the consent of 

cerniining the LeSislature- Xt is pointed agst the faction headed by A. 
offences " C[ampbell], in the County of Washington. 

Act for Complies with the requisition of Cong! for the present year, to 

amending wit : 1786. It directs 512,000 dollars, the quota of this State, to 
the appropri- be paid before May next the time fixed by Congress, altho it is 
atmg Act. known that the postponement of the taxes renders the payment of a 
shilling impossible. Our payments last year gained us a little reputation. Our 
conduct this must stamp us with ignominy. 

Act for Reduces that of the Govrr- from ^"1,000 to ^"800, & the others 

rfg" a.tm some at a greater and some at a less proportion. 

of the Civil 
list. 

Act for Meant chiefly to affect vacant land in the Northern Neck, 

disposing of erroneously conceived to be in great quantity and of great value, 
waste an s r^^e prjce js fixed at £2$ per Hundred acres, at which not an acre 
on Eastern 
waters. Wl11 be sold- 

An act im- Amounting in the whole to 5 s. per ton. 
posing addl 
tonnage on 
British 
vessels. 

1786] JAMES MADISON. 221 

Nothing has been yet done with N. C. towards opening a Canal thro the 
Dismal. The powers given to Commsfs on our part are renewed, and some 
negociation will be brought about if possible. A certain interest in that State 
is suspected of being disinclined to promote the object, notwithstanding its 
manifest importance to the community at large. On Potowmack they have 
been at work some time. On this river they have about eighty hands ready 
to break ground, and have engaged a man to plan for them. I fear there 
is a want of skill for the undertaking that threatens a waste of labour and 
a discouragement to the enterprize. I do not learn that any measures have been 
taken to procure from Europe the aid which ought to be purchased at any price, 
and which might I should suppose be purchased at a moderate one. 

I had an opportunity a few days ago of knowing that M^s Carr and her fam 
ily, as well as your little daughter, were well. I am apprehensive that some im 
pediments still detain your younger nephew from his destination. Peter has 
been in Williamsburg, and I am told by Mr. Maury that his progress is satisfac 
tory. He has read, under him, Horace, some of Cicero's Orations, Greek 
testament, ^Esop's fables in Greek, ten books of Homer's Iliad, & is now 
beginning Xenophon, Juvenal, & Livy. He has also given some attention to 
French. 

I have paid le Maire ten guineas. He will set out in about three weeks I am 
told for France.. Mr. Jones has promised to collect & forward by him all such 
papers as are in print and will explain the situation of our affairs to you. 
Among these will be the most important acts of the Session, & the Journal 
as far as it will be printed. 

M* W™ Hays in sinking a well on the declivity of the Hill above the pro 
posed seat of the Capitol and nearly in a line from the Capitol to Belvidere, 
found about seventy feet below the surface, several large bones, apparently be 
long to a fish not less than the Shark, and what is more singular, several frag 
ments of potter's ware in the stile of the Indians. Before he reached these 
curiosities he passed thro' about fifty feet of soft blue clay. I have not seen the 
articles, having but just heard of them, & been too closely engaged ; but have 
my information from the most unexceptionable witnesses who have. I am told 
by Gen1 Russel of Washington County, that in sinking a Salt well in that 
County he fell in with the hip bone of the incognitum, the socket of which was 
about 8 inches diameter. It was very soft in the subterraneous State, but 
seemed to undergo a petrefaction on being exposed to the air. 

Adieu. Affec^. 

Promotions. — Edward Carrington & H. Lee, Jr., added to R. H. Lee, J? 
Monroe, and W™ Grayson, in the delegation to Congress. 
Carter Braxton to the Council. 

J1?0 Tyler to court of admiralty, in room of B. Waller, res? 
prices current. — Tob°, 23^. on James River, and proportially elsewhere. 
Wheat, 55 to 6s. per Bushel. 
Corn, i8s to 2os. per Barrel. 
Pork 28s to 30J pr Ct. 

222 THE WRITINGS OF [1786 

TO JAMES MONROE. MAD. MSS. 

RICHMOND, Jany. 22?, 1786. 

DEAR SIR, — Your favors of the 19th Decr and 7th 
Jany came both to hand by yesterdays mail. The 
Assembly adjourned last night after a Session of 97 
days. If its importance were to be measured by a 
list of the laws which it has produced, all preceding 
Legislative merit would be eclipsed, the number in 
this instance amounting to 114 or 115. If we recur 
to the proper criterion no Session has perhaps afforded 
less ground for applause. Not a single member 
seems to be pleased with a review of what has passed. 
I was too hasty in informing you that an amendment 
of the Port bill had passed. I was led into the error 
by the mistake of some who told me it had passed 
the Senate when it had only been agreed to in a 
Comittee of the Senate. Instead of passing it they sent 
down a repeal of the old port bill by way of amend 
ment. This was disagreed to by the H. of D. as in 
directly originating. The Senate adhered & the bill 
was lost. An attempt was then made by the adver 
saries of the port measure to suspend its operation 
till the end of the next Session. This also was nega 
tived so that the old bill is left as it stood without al 
teration. Defective as it is particularly in putting 
citizens of other States on the footing of foreigners, 
and destitute as it is of proper concomitant pro 
visions, it was judged best to hold it fast and trust to 
a succeeding Assembly for amendments. The navi 
gation System for the State after having been 
prepared at great length by Mr G. Baker was pro- 

1786] JAMES MADISON. 223 

crastinated in a very singular manner, and finally 
died away of itself, without anything being done, ex 
cept a short act passed yesterday in great hurry im 
posing a tonnage of 55. on the vessels of foreigners 
not having treated with the U. S. This failure of 
local measures in the comercial line, instead of re 
viving the original propositions for a general plan, 
revived that of Mf Tyler for the appointment of 
Comsrs to meet Comsrs from other States on the sub 
ject of general regulations. It went through by a 
very great majority, being opposed only by Mr M. 
Smith and Mr. Corbin. The expedient is no doubt 
liable to objections and will probably miscarry. I 
think however it is better than nothing, and as a 
recommendation of additional powers to Congress 
is within the purview of the Comission it may pos 
sibly lead to better consequences than at first occur. 
The Comsrs first named were the attorney, Doctr W. 
Jones of the Senate and myself. The importunity of 
Mr. Page procured the addition of S* George Tucker 
who is sensible, fcederal, and skilled in comerce, to 
whom was added on the motion of I know not whom 
M- M. Smith, who is at least exceptionable in the 
second quality having made unceasing war during 
the Session agst the idea of bracing the federal 
system. In the Senate a further addition was made 
of Col. Mason Mr. D. Ross and Mr. Ronald. The 
name of the latter was struck out at his desire. The 
others stand. It is not unlikely that this multitude 
of associates will stifle the thing in its birth. By 
some it was probably meant to do so. I am glad to 

224 THE WRITINGS OF [1786 

find that Virginia has merit where you are and should 
be more so if I saw greater reason for it. The bill 
which is considered at N. Y. as a compliance with the 
requisitions of Cong5, is more so in appearance than 
reality. It will bring no specie into the Treasy and 
but little Continental paper. Another act has since 
passed which professes to comply more regularly with 
the demand of Cong? but this will fail as to specie and 
as to punctuality. It will probably procure the indents 
called for, and fulfils the views of Cong5 in making 
those of other States receivable into our Treasy. 
Among the acts passed since my last I must not omit 
an economical revision of the Civil list. The saving 
will amount to 5 or 6000 pounds. The Govr was 
reduced by the H. of D. to ,£800, to which the 
Senate objected. Which receded I really forget. 
The Council to ^2000, the Attorney to ^"200, Regis 
ter from ,£1,100 to ,£800, Auditors & Solicitor from 
^4 to 300, Speaker of H. of D. to 40^. per day in 
cluding daily pay as a member & of Senate to 2os, 
&c. ; Delegates to Cong5 to 6 dollars per day. The 
act however is not to commence till November next. 
I mentioned in my last the propriety of addressing 
your future letters to Orange. 

TO THOMAS JEFFERSON. MAD. MSS. 

Virga ORANGE, March i8th, 1786. 

DEAR SIR, — Your two favours of the i & 20 Sepr, 
under the same cover by Mr Fitzhugh did not come 
to hand till the 24th ult; and of course till it was too 

1786] JAMES MADISON. 225 

late for any Legislative interposition with regard to 
the Capitol. I have written to the Attorney on the 
subject. A letter which I have from him dated prior 
to his receipt of mine takes notice of the plan you had 
promised and makes no doubt that it will arrive in 
time for the purpose of the Commissioners. I do not 
gather from his expressions however that he was 
aware of the change which will become necessary in 
the foundation already laid ; a change which will not 
be submitted to without reluctance for two reasons, 
i. the appearance of caprice to which it may expose 
the Commissioners. 2. which is the material one, 
the danger of retarding the work till the next Session 
of Assembly can interpose a vote for its suspension, 
and possibly for a removal to Williamsburg. This 
danger is not altogether imaginary. Not a Session 
has passed since I became a member without one or 
other or both of these attempts. At the late Session 
a suspension was moved by the Williamsburg In 
terest, which was within a few votes of being agreed 
to. It is a great object therefore with the Richmond 
Interest to get the building so far advanced before 
the fall as to put an end to such experiments. The 
circumstances which will weigh in the other scale, and 
which it is to be hoped will preponderate, are, the 
fear of being reproached with sacrificing public con 
siderations to a local policy, and a hope that the 
substitution of a more economical plan, may bet 
ter reconcile the Assembly to a prosecution of the 
Undertaking. 

Since I have been at home I have had leisure to 

VOL. II.— 14. 

226 THE WRITINGS OF 1786] 

review the literary cargo for which I am so much in 
debted to your friendship. The collection is perfectly 
to my mind. I must trouble you only to get two little 
mistakes rectified. The number of Vol. in the En 
cyclopedic corresponds with your list, but a duplicate 
has been packed up of Tom. iere partie of Histoire 
Naturelle, Quadrupedes, premiere livraison, and there 
is left out the 2d part of the same Tom. which as ap 
pears by the Avis to the ist livraison makes the Ist 
Tome of Histoire des oiseaux, as well as by the His 
toire des oiseaux sent, which begins with Tom. II ire 
partie, and with the letter F from the Avis to the 
sixth livraison I infer that the vol. omitted made 
part of the 5me livraison. The duplicate vol. seems 
to have been a good deal handled and possibly be 
longs to your own sett. Shall I keep it in my hands, 
or send it back ? The other mistake is an omission 
of the 4th vol. of D'Albon sur Finteret de plusieurs 
nations, &c. The binding of the three vols which are 
come is distinguished from that of most of the other 
books by the circumstance of the figure on the back 
numbering the vols being on a black instead of a red 
ground. The author's name above is on a red ground. 
I mention these circumstances that the binder may 
supply the omitted volume in proper uniform. I 
annex a state of our account balanced. I had an 
opportunity a few days after your letters were recd of 
remitting the balance to the hands of Mr.s Carr with 
a request that it might be made use of as you direct 
to prevent a loss of time to her sons from occasional 
disappointments in the stated funds. I have not yet 

1786] JAMES MADISON. 227 

heard from the Mr Fitzhughs on the subject of your 
advance to them. The advance to Le Maire had been 
made a considerable time before I received your 
countermanding instructions. I have no copying 
press, but must postpone that conveniency to other 
wants which will absorb my little resources. I am 
fully apprized of the value of this machine and mean 
to get one when I can better afford it, and may have 
more use for it. I am led to think it wd be a very 
economical acquisition to all our public offices which 
are obliged to furnish copies of papers belonging to 
them. 

A Quorum of the deputies appointed by the Assem 
bly for a commercial convention had a meeting at Rich 
mond shortly after I left it, and the Attorney tells me, 
it has been agreed to propose Annapolis, for the place, 
and the first monday in Sepr for the time of holding 
the Convention. It was thought prudent to avoid the 
neighborhood of Congress, and the large Comercial 
towns, in order to disarm the adversaries to the object, 
of insinuations of influence from either of these quar 
ters. I have not heard what opinion is entertained 
of this project at New York, nor what reception it 
has found in any of the States. If it should come to 
nothing, it will, I fear confirm G. B. and all the world 
in the belief that we are not to be respected, nor ap 
prehended as a nation in matters of commerce. The 
States are every day giving proofs that separate regu 
lations are more likely to set them by the ears, than 
to attain the common object. When Massts set on 
foot a retaliation of the policy of G. B. Connecticut 

228 THE WRITINGS OF [1786 

declared her ports free. N. Jersey served N. York 
in the same way. And Delaware I am told has lately 
followed the example, in opposition to the commercial 
plans of Penna. A miscarriage of this attempt to 
unite the States in some effectual plan, will have an 
other effect of a serious nature. It will dissipate 
every prospect of drawing a steady revenue from our 
imposts either directly into the federal treasury, or 
indirectly thro' the treasuries of the Commercial 
States, and of consequence the former must depend 
for supplies solely on annual requisitions, and the 
latter on direct taxes drawn from the property of the 
Country. That these dependencies are in an alarm 
ing degree fallacious is put by experience out of all 
question. The payments from the States under the 
calls of Congress have in no year borne any propor 
tion to the public wants. During the last year, that 
is from Novr, 1784, to Novr 1785, the aggregate pay 
ments, as stated to the late Assembly fell short of 
400,000 dollrs, a sum neither equal to the interest due 
on the foreign debts, nor even to the current expences 
of the federal Government. The greatest part of 
this sum too went from Virga, which will not supply 
a single shilling the present year. Another unhappy 
effect of a continuance of the present anarchy of our 
commerces will be a continuance of the unfavorable 
balance on it, which by draining us of our metals 
furnishes pretexts for the pernicious substitution of 
paper money, for indulgences to debtors, for postpone 
ments of taxes. In fact most of our political evils 
may be traced up to our commercial ones, as most of 

1786] JAMES MADISON. 229 

our moral may to our political. The lessons which 
the mercantile interests of Europe have received from 
late experience will probably check their propensity 
to credit us beyond our resources, and so far the evil 
of an unfavorable balance will correct itself. / But the 
Merchants of G. B. if no others will continue to credit 
us at least as far as our remittances can be strained, 
and that is far enough to perpetuate our difficulties 
unless the luxurious propensity of our own people can 
be otherwise checked. This view of our situation 
presents the proposed Convention as a remedial ex 
periment which ought to command every assent ; but 
if it be a just view it is one which assuredly will not 
be taken by all even of those whose intentions are 
good. I consider the event therefore as extremely 
uncertain, or rather, considering that the States must 
first agree to the proposition for sending deputies, 
that these must agree in a plan to be sent back to the 
States, and that these again must agree unanimously 
in a ratification of it. I almost despair of success. It 
is necessary however that something should be tried 
& if this be not the best possible expedient, it is the 
best that could possibly be carried thro' the Legis 
lature here. And if the present crisis cannot effect 
unanimity, from what future concurrence of circum 
stances is it to be expected ? Two considerations 
particularly remonstrate against delay. One is the 
danger of having the same 1 game played on our Con 
federacy by which Philip managed that of the Grecians. 
I saw end during the late Assembly of the influence 

1 Cypher for italics. 

23o THE WRITINGS OF [1786 

of the desperate circumstances of individuals on their 
pttblic conduct to admonish me of the possibility of 
finding in the council of some one of the States Jit instrii- 
ments of foreign machinations. The other consider 
ation is the probability of an early increase of the 
confederated States, which more than proportionally 
impede measures which require unanimity, as the new 
members, may bring sentiments and interests less con 
genial with those tf/the Atlantic States than those of 
the latter are one with another. 

The price of our staple is down at 22s. at Richmond. 
One argument for putting off the taxes was that it 
would relieve the planters from the necessity of sell 
ing, & would enable them to make a better bargain 
with the purchasers. The price has notwithstanding 
been falling ever since. How far the event may have 
proceeded from a change in the Market of Europe I 
know not. That it has in part proceeded from the 
practice of remitting and postponing the taxes may 
I think be fairly deduced. The scarcity of money 
must of necessity sink the price of every article, and 
the relaxation in collecting the taxes, increases this 
scarcity by diverting the money from the public 
Treasury to the shops of Merchandize. In the former 
case it would return into circulation. In the latter it 
goes out of the Country to balance the increased con 
sumption. A vigorous and steady collection of taxes 
would make the money necessary here and would 
therefore be a mean of keeping it here. In our situa 
tion it would have the salutary operation of a sumpt 
uary law. The price of Indian Corn in this part of 

1786] JAMES MADISON. 231 

the Country which produced the best crops is not 
higher than 2 dollrs per barr1. It would have been 
much higher but for the peculiar mildness of the win 
ter. December and Jany scarcely reminded us that it 
was winter. February, though temperate, was less 
unseasonable. Our deepest snow (about 7 inches) 
was in the present month. I observe the tops of the 
blue ridge still marked with its remains. My last was 
dated January 22, and contained a narrative of the 
proceedings of the Assembly. I shall write you again 
as soon as the subject & opportunity occur, remain 
ing in the mean time 

Yr affecte friend 

Dr to T. J. livs sols Crecf 

1785 Sep! i To am' of books, &c 1164 — 3 drs livs sols 

By balance Stated by T. J. 77! 407—15 

By advance to lemaire 10 Guns 234 

drs 
By d° for 6 Copies Revisal at 2^ 81 

722—15 
*By ^25 Va Cy remitted to Mrs C. . .441— 8 

1 1 64—3 

* ^25 I discover exceeds the sum extended a few 
livres which may be carried into the next Ace* if it 
be thought worth while. 

TO JAMES MONROE. MAD. MSS. 

ORANGE igth March 1786 

DEAR SIR, — I am just favored with yours of the 1 1 
& 1 6 of Feby. A newspaper since the date of the 

232 THE WRITINGS OF [1786 

latter has verified to me your inauguration into the 
mysteries of Wedlock, of which you dropped a pre 
vious hint in the former.1 You will accept my sin- 
cerest congratulations on this event, with every wish 
for the happiness it promises. I join you cheerfully 
in the purchase from Taylor, as preferably to taking 
it wholly to myself. The only circumstance I regret 
is that the first payment will rest with you alone, 
if the conveyance should be accelerated. A few 
months will elapse inevitably before I shall be able 
to place on the spot my half of the sum but the day 
shall be shortened as much as possible. I accede also 
fully to your idea of extending the purchase in that 
quarter. Perhaps we may be able to go beyond the 
thousand acres you have taken into view. But ought 
we not to explore the ground before we venture too 
far?* proximity of situation is but presumptive evi 
dence of the quality of soil. The value of land de 
pends on a variety of little circumstances which can 
v only be judged of from inspection, and a knowledge 
of which gives a seller an undue advantage over an 
uninformed buyer. Can we not about the last of 
May or June take a turn into that district, I am in a 
manner determined on it myself. It will separate 
you but for a moment from New York, and may give 
us lights of great consequence. I have a project in 
my head which if it hits your idea and can be effected 

1 " If you visit this place shortly I will present you to a young lady who will 
be adopted a citizen of Virg? in the course of this week." Monroe to Madison, 
February n, 1786. — Writings of Monroe, i., 123. 

2 Madison and Monroe bought lands in the Mohawk Valley on a speculation. 
They desired Jefferson to join in the enterprise but he did not accept. 
Apparently no money was made in the transaction. 

1786] JAMES MADISON. 233 

may render such an excursion of decisive value to us. 
I reserve it for oral communication. 

" The Question of policy," you say, " is whether it 
will be better to correct the vices of the Confedera 
tion by recommendation gradually as it moves along, 
or by a Convention. If the latter should be determined 
on, the powers of the Virga Comsrs are inadequate." 
If all on whom the correction of these vices depends 
were well informed and well disposed, the mode 
would be of little moment. But as we have both 
ignorance and iniquity to combat, we must defeat the 
designs of the latter by humouring the prejudices of 
the former. The efforts for bringing about a correc 
tion thro' the medium of Congress have miscarried. 
Let a Convention then, be tried. If it succeeds in the 
first instance, it can be repeated as other defects force 
themselves on the public attention, and as the public 
mind becomes prepared for further remedies. The 
Assembly here would refer nothing to Congress. 
They would have revolted equally against a plenipo 
tentiary commission to their deputies for the Conven 
tion. The option therefore lay between doing what 
was done and doing nothing. Whether a right choice 
was made time only can prove. I am not in general 
an advocate for temporizing or partial remedies. But 
a rigor in this respect, if pushed too far may hazard 
everything. If the present paroxysm of our affairs be 
totally neglected our case may become desperate. If 
anything comes of the Convention it will probably be 
of a permanent not a temporary nature, which I think 
will be a great point. The mind feels a peculiar 

234 THE WRITINGS OF [1786 

complacency in seeing a good thing done when it is not 
subject to the trouble & uncertainty of doing it over 
again. The commission is to be sure not filled to 
every man's mind. The History of it may be a sub 
ject of some future tete a tete. You will be kind 
enough to forward the letter to Mr Jefferson and to 
be assured that I am with the sincerest affection 

yf friend & serv' 

TO JAMES MONORE. MAD. MSS. 

ORANGE April gth, 1786. 

DEAR SIR, — I am favoured with yours of the i8th of 
March. My last answered your preceding one re 
lating to your territorial speculation. I hope it has 
been recd. I forgot to intimate to you, though I pre 
sume it would have been superfluous, that it will be 
well in every purchase to ascertain by information as 
far as possible, the proportion of land which lies on the 
river and comes within the description of low grounds. 
The value of every tract depends much on this pro 
portion. The contiguous upland is I believe generally 
of good soil, but there must be both degrees & excep 
tions to its quality. The low grounds are in a manner 
uniformly & universally good. The step taken by N. 
Jersey was certainly a rash one, and will furnish fresh 
pretexts to unwilling States for withholdg their contri 
butions.1 In one point of view however it furnishes a 

1 "Jersey having taken into consideration the late requisition, the house of dele 
gates resolv'd that having enter'd into the confederation upon terms highly dis- 
advantagous to that state, from the necessity of public Aff!fs at the time, and a 
confidence that those points in which they were aggriev'd wo*? be remedied and 

1786] JAMES MADISON, 235 

salutary lesson. Is it possible with such an example be 
fore our eyes of impotency in the federal system, to re 
main sceptical with regard to the necessity of infusing 
more energy into it?/ A Government cannot long stand 
which is obliged in the ordinary course of its adminis 
tration to court a compliance with its constitutional 
acts, from a member not of the most powerful order, 
situated within the immediate verge of authority, and 
apprised of every circumstance which should remon 
strate against disobedience. The question whether it 
be possible and worth while to preserve the Union of 
the States must be speedily decided some way or 
other. Those who are indifferent to its preservation 
would do well to look forward to the consequences of 
its extinction. The prospect to my eye is a gloomy 
one indeed. I am glad to hear that the opposition to 
the impost is likely to be overcome. It is an encourage 
ment to persevere in good measures. I am afraid 
at the same time that like other auxiliary resources it 
will be overrated by the States, and slacken the 
regular efforts of taxation. It is also materially short 
of the power which Congress ought to have with re 
gard to Trade. It leaves the door unshut agst acom- 
ercial warfare among the States, our trade exposed 
to foreign machinations, and the distresses of an un 
favorable balance very little checked. The experi 
ence of European Merchts who have speculated in 
our trade will probably check in a great measure, our 

finding this was not the case and a compact founded in such unequal principles 
likely, by their acquiescence to be fetter'd on them, they wo1? not therefore com 
ply with the same until their grievances were redress'd." — Monroe to Madison, 
March 19, 1786. — Writings of Monroe, i., 124. 

236 THE WRITINGS OF [1786 

opportunities of consuming beyond our resources ; but 
they will continue to credit us as far as our coin in addi 
tion to our productions will extend, and our experience 
here teaches us that our people will extend their con 
sumption as far as credit can be obtained. / 

TO THOMAS JEFFERSON. MAD. MSS. 

ORANGE May i2th, 1786. 

DEAR SIR, — My last was of March 18, since which I have been 
favored with yours of the 8 and 9th of Feby. Bancroft's applica 
tion in favour of Paridise inclosed in the latter shall be attended 
to as far as the case will admit ; though I see not how any relief 
can be obtained. If Mr. P stands on the list of foreign creditors 
his agent here may probably convert his Securities into money with 
out any very great loss, as they rest on good funds, and the principal 
is in a course of payment. If he stands on the domestic list as I 
presume he does, the interest only is provided for, and since the 
postponement of the taxes even that cannot be negociated without 
a discount of 10 per C-, at least. The principal cannot be turned 
into cash without sinking j of its amount. 

Your notes ' having got into print in France will inevitably be 
translated back & published in that form, not only in England but 
in America, unless you give out the original. I think therefore you 
owe it not only to yourself, but to the place you occupy & the sub 
jects you have handled, to take this precaution. To say nothing 
of the injury which will certainly result to the diction from a trans 
lation first into French & then back into English, the ideas 
themselves may possibly be so perverted as to lose their propriety. 
The books which you have been so good as to ford to me are so 
well assorted to my wishes that no suggestions are necessary as to 
your future purchases. A copy of the old edition of the Encyclo 
pedia is desirable for ye reasons you mention, but as I should 
gratify my desire in this particular at the expense of something else 

1 On Virginia. 

1786] JAMES MADISON. 237 

which I can less dispense with, I must content myself with the new 
Edition for the present. The watch I bought in Philada, though 
a pretty good one, is probably so far inferior to those of which you 
have a sample, that I cannot refuse your kind offer to procure me. 
one of the same sort ; and I am fancying to myself so many little 
gratifications from the pedometer that I cannot forego that addition. 
The inscription for the Statue is liable to Houdon's criticism, 
and is in every respect inferior to the substitute which you have 
copied into your letter.1 I am apprehensive notwithstanding that 
no change can be effected. The Assembly will want some proper 
ground for resuming the matter. The devices for the other side 
of the pedestal are well chosen, and might I should suppose be ap 
plied without scruple as decorations of the artist. I counted my 
self on the addition of proper ornaments, and am persuaded that 
such a liberty could give offence nowhere. The execution of your 
hints with regard to the z Marquis & Rochambeau would be no less 
pleasing to me than to you. I think with you also that the setting 
up the busts of our own worthies would not be doing more honour 
to them than to ourselves. I foresee however the difficulty of over 
coming the popular objection against every measure which involves 
expence, particularly where the importance of the measure will be 
felt by a few only ; and an unsuccessful attempt would be worse 
than no attempt. I have heard nothing as to the Capitol. I men 
tioned to you in my last that I had written to the Attorney on the 
subject. I shall have an opportunity shortly of touching on it 
again to him. 

A great many changes have taken place in the late elections. 
The principal acquisitions are Col. G. Mason who I am told was 
pressed into the service at the instigation of Gen1 Washington, 

1 " ' Behold, Reader, the form of George Washington. For his worth, ask 
History ; that will tell it, when this stone shall have yielded to the decays of 
time. His cuntry erects this monument : Houdon makes it.' This for one 
side. On the 2d represent the evacuation of Boston with the motto ' Hostibus 
primum fugatis.' On the 3d the capture of the Hessians with ' Hostibus 
iterum devictis.' On the 4*h the surrender of York, with ' Hostibus ultimum 
deballatis.'"— Jefferson to Madison, February 8,1786. — Writings of Jefferson, 
iv. , 195. Fortunately the unpretentious inscription required by Virginia was 
adhered to. 

2 Italics for cypher. 

238 THE WRITINGS OF [1786 

Gen1 Nelson, Mann Page. In Albemarle both the old ones de 
clined the task. Their successors are George & Jno Nicholas. 
Col. Carter was again an unsuccessful candidate. I have not heard 
how Mr. Harrison has shaped his course. It was expected that 
he would stand in a very awkward relation both to Charles City & 
to Surrey, and would probably succeed in neither. Monroe lost 
his election in King George by 6 votes. Mercer did his by the 
same number in Stafford. Neither of them were present, or they 
would no doubt have both been elected. Col. Bland is also to be 
among us. Among the many good things which may be expected 
from Col. Mason we may reckon perhaps an effort to review our 
Constitution. The loss of the Port bill will certainly be one con 
dition on which we are to receive his valuable assistance. I am 
not without fears also concerning his federal ideas. The last time 
I saw him he seemed to have come about a good deal towards the 
policy of giving Cong5 the management of Trade. But he has been 
led so far out of the right way, that a thorough return can scarcely 
be hoped for. On all the other great points, the Revised Code, the 
Assize bill, taxation, paper money, &c., his abilities will be ines 
timable. Most if not all the States except Maryld, have appointed 
deputies for the proposed Convention at Annapolis. The refusal 
of Maryland to appoint proceeded as I am informed by Mr. Dan 
Carroll, from a mistaken notion, that the measure would derogate 
from the authority of Congress, and interfere with the Revenue 
system of April 1783, which they have lately recomended anew 
to the States. There is certainly no such interference, and instead 
of lessening the authority of Congress, the object of the Conven 
tion is to extend it over commerce. I have no doubt that on a 
reconsideration of the matter it will be viewed in a different light. 
The internal situation of this State is growing worse & worse. Our 
specie has vanished. The people are again plunged in debt to the 
Merchants, and these circumstances added to the fall of Tob° 
in Europe & a probable combination among its chief purchasers 
here, have reduced that article to 2os. The price of Corn is in 
many parts of the Country, at 2os. and upwards per barr1. In this 
part it is not more that i$s. Our Spring has been a cool & latterly 
a dry one, of course it is a backward one. The first day of april 
was the most remarkable ever experienced in this climate. It 

1786] JAMES MADISON. 239 

snowed & hailed the whole day in a storm from N. E., and the. 
Thermr stood at 4 o'C. P. M. at 26°. If the snow had fallen in the 
usual way it would have been 8 or 10 inches deep at least, but con 
sisting of small hard globules mixed with small hail, & lying on 
the ground so compact & firm as to bear a man, it was less than 
half of that depth. We hear from Kentucky that the inhabitants 
are still at variance with their savage neighbours. In a late skir 
mish several were lost on both sides. On that of the whites Col. 
W. Christian is mentioned. It is said the scheme of independence 
is growing unpopular since the Act of our Assembly has brought 
the question fully before them. Your Nephew, D Carr, has been 
some time at the Academy in Prince Edward. The President, 
Mr. Smith, speaks favorably of him. 

With the sincerest affection, I remain, Dr Sir your friend & 
servant. 

P. S. I have taken measures for securing the Paccan nuts & 
the seed of the Sugar Tree. Are there no other things here 
which would be acceptable on a like account ? You will withhold 
from me a real pleasure if you do not favor me with your com 
mands freely. Perhaps some of our animal curiosities would enable 
you to gratify particular characters of merit. I can without diffi 
culty get the skins of all our comon and of some of our rarer quad 
rupeds, and can have them stuffed if desired. It is possible, also, 
that I may be able to send some of them alive. I lately had on 
hand a female opossum with 7 young ones, which I intended to 
have reared for the purpose partly of experiments myself and 
partly of being able to forward some of them to you in case of an 
opporty, and your desiring it. Unfortunately they have all died. 
But I find they can be got at any time almost in the Spring of the 
year, and if the season be too far advanced now, they may cer 
tainly be had earlier in the next Spring. I observe that in your 
notes you number the fallow & Roe-deer among the native quad 
rupeds of America. As Buffon had admitted the fact, it was 
whether true or erroneous, a good argument no doubt against him. 
But I am persuaded they are not natives of the new continent. 
Buffon mentions the Chevruil in particular as abounding in 
Louisiana. I have enquired of several credible persons who have 

24o THE WRITINGS OF [1786 

traversed the Western woods extensively and quite down to New 
Orleans, all of whom affirm that no other than our common deer 
are any where seen. Nor can I find any written evidence to the 
contrary that deserves notice. You have I believe justly con 
sidered our Monax as the Marmotte of Europe. I have lately 
had an opportunity of examining a female one with some atten 
tion. Its weight, after it had lost a good deal of blood, was 5 |- Ibs. 
Its dimensions, shape, teeth, and structure within as far as I could 
judge corresponded in substance with the description given by 
D'Aubenton. In sundry minute circumstances a precise corre 
spondence was also observable. The principal variations were i, 
in the face, which was shorter in the Monax than in the propor 
tions of the Marmotte, and was less arched about the root of the 
nose. 2, in the feet, each of the forefeet having a fifth nail, about 
\ of an inch long growing out of the inward side of the heel, with 
out any visible toe. From this particular it would seem to be the 
Marmotte of Poland, called the Bobac, rather than the Alpine 
Marmotte. 3, in the teats, which were 8 only. The marmottein 
Buffon had 10. 4th, in several circumstances of its robe ; particu 
larly of that of the belly, which consisted of a short coarse thin 
hair, whereas this part of Buffon's marmotte was covered with a 
thicker fur than the back, &c. A very material circumstance in 
the comparison remains to be ascertained. The European Mar 
motte is in the class of those which are dormant during the winter. 
No person here of whom I have enquired can decide whether this 
be a quality of the Monax. I infer that it is of the dormant class 
not only from its similitude to the Marmotte in other respects, but 
from the sensible coldness of the Monax I examined, compared 
with the human body, altho the vital heat of quadrupeds is said in 
general to be greater than that of man. This inferiority of heat 
being a characteristic of animals which become torpid from cold, 
I should consider it as deciding the quality of y? Monax in this 
respect, were it not that the subject of my examination, tho it re 
mained alive several days in my hands was so crippled and appar 
ently dying the whole time that its actual heat could not fairly be 
taken for the degree of its natural heat. If it had recovered I had 
intended to have made a trial with the Thermometer. I now pro 
pose to have if 1 can one of their habitations discovered during 

1 7 86] JAMES MADISON. 241 

the summer, and to open it on some cold day next winter. This 
will fix the matter. There is another circumstance which belongs 
to a full comparison of the two animals. The Marmotte of Europe 
is said to be an inhabitant of the upper region of mountains only. 
Whether our Monax be confined to mountainous situations or not 
I have not yet learnt. If it be not found as a permanent inhabi 
tant of the level Country, it certainly descends occasionally into 
the plains which are in the neighborhood of mountains. I also 
compared a few days ago one of our moles (male) with the male 
one described in Buffon. It weighed 2OZ n pents. Its length the 
end of its snout to the root of the tail was 5 inch 3 lines, English 
measure. That described in Buffon was not weighed I believe. 
Its length was 5 inch french measure. The external and inter 
nal correspondence seemed to be too exact for distinct species. 
There was a difference nevertheless in two circumstances, one of 
which is not unworthy of notice, and the other of material con 
sequence in the comparison. The first difference was in the tail, 
that of the mole here being ioj- English lines only in the length, 
and naked, whereas that of Buffon's mole was 14 French lines in 
length and covered with hair. If the hair was included in the 
latter measure, the difference in the length ought scarcely to be 
noted. The second difference lay in the teeth. The mole in Buf 
fon had 44. That which I examined had but 33. One of those 
on the left side of the upper Jaw, and next to the principal cutters, 
was so small as to be scarcely visible to the natural eye, and had 
no corresponding tooth on the opposite side. Supposing this de 
fect of a corresponding tooth to be accidental, a difference of ten 
teeth still remains. If these circumstances should not be thought 
to invalidate the identity of species, the mole will stand as an ex 
ception to the Theory which supposes no animal to be common to 
the two Continents, which cannot bear the cold of the region 
where they join ; since according to Buffon this species of mole is 
not found " dans les climats froids ou la terre est gelee pendant 
la plus grande partie de 1'annee," and it cannot be suspected of 
such a Journey during a short summer as would head the sea which 
separates the two Continents. I suspect that several of our quad 
rupeds which are not peculiar to the new Continent will be found 
to be exceptions to this Theory, if the mole should not. The 

VOL. II.— 16. 

242 THE WRITINGS OF [1786 

Marmotte itself, is not an animal taken notice of very far to the North, 
and as it moves slowly, and is deprived of its locomotive powers 
altogether by cold cannot be supposed to have travelled the road 
which leads from the old to the New World. It is perhaps ques 
tionable whether any of the dormant animals, if any such be really 
comon to Europe & America, can have emigrated from one to the 
other. I have thought that the cuts of the Quadrupeds in Buffon, 
if arranged in frames, would make both an agreeable and instruc 
tive piece of wall furniture. What would be about the cost of them 
in such a form ? I suppose they are not to be had coloured to the 
life, and would besides be too costly. What is the price of Buf- 
fon's birds, colored ? 

Your letter of 28 October has never come to hand. 

TO JAMES MONROE. MAD. MSS. 

ORANGE May 13*, 1786 

DEAR SIR, — I was favored a few days ago with 
yours of the 28th ult. I am under great obligations 
for your kindness in the affair with Taylor. My late 
letters will have informed you of my washes that you 
may fully partake of the bargain entered into already, 
as well as every future adventure in that quarter. 
The encouragement you give me to expect your 
company has in a manner determined me to encounter 
a journey as soon as I can conveniently make pre 
paration for it. I am the rather induced to do it as I 
shall be the more able by that means to accelerate a 
repayment of your kind advances, having some little 
resources in Philad? of wc.h I must avail myself for 
that purpose. My next will probably tell you when I 
shall be able to set out. 

I think, with you, that it would have an odd ap- 

i786] JAMES MADISON. 243 

pearance for two Conventions to be sitting at the same 
time, with powers in part concurrent. The reasons 
you give seem also to be valid against augmenting 
the powers of that which is to meet at Annapolis. I 
am not surprized therefore at the embarrassment of 
Congress in the present conjuncture. Will it not be 
best on the whole to suspend measures for a more 
thorough cure of our federal system, till the partial 
experiment shall have been made. If the spirit of the 
Conventioners should be friendly to the Union, and 
their proceedings well conducted, their return into the 
Councils of their respective States will greatly facili 
tate any subsequent measures which may be set on 
foot by Congress, or by any of the States. 

Great changes have taken place in the late elec 
tions. I regret much that we are not to have your 
aid. It will be greatly needed I am sure. Mercer it 
seems lost his election by the same number of votes 
as left you out. He was absent at the time or he 
would no doubt have been elected. Have you seen 
his pamphlet ? You will have heard of the election 
of Col. Mason, Gen1 Nelson, Mann Page, G. Nicholas, 
Jn° Nicholas, & Col. Bland. Col. Mason will be an 
inestimable acquisition on most of the great points. 
On the port bill he is to be equally dreaded. In 
fact I consider that measure as lost almost at any 
rate. There was a majority agf1 it last session if 
it had been skilfully made use of. To force the 
trade to Norfolk & Alexandria, without preparations 
for it at those places, will be considered as injurious. 
And so little ground is there for confidence in the 

244 THE WRITINGS OF [1786 

stability of the Legislature that no preparations will 
ever be made in consequence of a preceding law. 
The transition must of necessity therefore be at any 
time abrupt and inconvenient. I am somewhat ap 
prehensive, likewise, that Col. Mason may not be 
fully cured of his anti-federal prejudices. 

We hear from Kentucky that the Savages continue 
to disquiet them. Col. W. Christian it is said lately 
lost his life in pursuing a few who had made an inroad 
on the settlement. We are told too that the proposed 
separation is growing very unpopular among them. 

I am Dr Sir with great affection 
Yr friend & Servt 

Pray forward the herewith inclosed to Mr J. I 
sent one for him about the last of March which I hope 
you recd & put into the proper channel 

TO JAMES MONROE. MAD. MSSi 

ORANGE June 4th, 1786. 

DEAR SIR, — At the date of my last I expected I 
should by this time have been on the journey which 
promises the pleasure of taking you by the hand in 
New York. Several circumstances have produced a 
delay in my setting out which I did not calculate 
upon, and which are like to continue it for eight or 
ten days to come. My journey will also be rendered 
tedious by the route which I shall pursue. I have 
some business which makes it expedient for me to take 
Winchester & Lancaster in my way, and some duties of 
consanguinity which will detain me some days in the 

1786] JAMES MADISON. 245 

neighborhood of the former. If I have an oppor 
tunity I will write you again before I set out and if I 
should not I will do it : immediately on my reaching 
Philada. You will not write after the receipt of this. 
I imagine you get from Mr. Jones better infor 
mation as to the back country as well as concerning 
our more immediate affairs than I can give you. The 
death of Christian seems to be confirmed. The dis 
inclination of Kentucky to a separation is also repeated 
with strong circumstances of probability. Our staple 
continues low. The people have got in debt to the 
merchts, who set their own price of course. There 
are perhaps other causes also besides the fall of the 
market in Europe which of itself does not explain the 
matter. One of them may be the scarcity of money 
which is really great. The advocates for paper 
money are making the most of this handle. I begin 
to fear exceedingly that no efforts will be sufficient 
to parry this evil. The election of Col. Mason is the 
main counterpoise for my hopes against the popular 
cry. Mann Page & Gen1 Nelson will also I flatter 
myself be valuable fellow labourers. Our situation is 
truly embarrassing. It cannot perhaps be affirmed 
that there is gold & silver eno' in the Country to pay 
the next tax. What then is to be done ? Is there 
any other alternative but to emit paper or to postpone 
the collection ? These are ye questions which will 
be rung in our ears by the very men whose past 
measures have plunged us into our difficulties. But 
I will not plague you with our difficulties here. You 
have enough of them, I am sure where you are. 

246 THE WRITINGS OF [1786 

Present my best respects to Col. Grayson & your other 
colleagues & believe me to be, your's affectionately. 

TO THOMAS JEFFERSON. MAD. MSS. 

ORANGE June ig11? 1786 

DEAR SIR, — Since my last which was of the 18* of May I have 
rec? your very agreeable favor of the 28th of Octobr. I began to 
fear it had miscarried. Your reflections on the idle poor of 
Europe,1 form a valuable lesson to the Legislators of every 

1 " FONTAINEBLEAU Oct. 2S. 1785. 

********* 

" as soon as I had got clear of the town I fell in with a poor woman walk 
ing at same rate with myself & going the same course, wishing to know the 
condition of the labouring poor I entered into conversation with her, which I 
began by enquiries for the path which would lead me into the mountain : & 
thence proceeded to enquiries into her vocation, condition & circumstance, she 
told me she was a daylabourer, at 8 sous or 4"? sterling the day : that she had 
two children to maintain, & to pay a rent of 30 livres for her home, (which 
would consume the hire of 75 days) that often she could get no emploiment, 
and of course was without bread, as we had walked together near a mile & she 
had so far served me as a guide, I gave her, on parting, 24 sous, she burst into 
tears of a gratitude which I could perceive was unfeigned, because she was un 
able to utter a word, she had probably never before received so great an aid. 
this little attendrissement, with the solitude of my walk led me into a train of 
reflections on that unequal division of property which occasions the numberless 
instances of wretchedness which I had observed in this country & is to be ob 
served all over Europe, the property of this country is absolutely concentered 
in a very few hands, having revenues of from half a million of guineas a year 
downwards, these employ the flower of the country as servants, some of them 
having as many as 200 domestics, not labouring, they employ also a great 
number of manufacturers, & tradesmen, & lastly the class of labouring hus 
bandmen, but after all these comes the most numerous of all the classes, that 
is, the poor who cannot find work. I asked myself what could be the reason 
that so many should be permitted to beg who are willing to work, in a country 
where there is a very considerable proportion of uncultivated lands? these 
lands are kept idle mostly for the sake of game, it should seem then that it 
must be because of the enormous wealth of the proprietors which places them 
above attention to the increase of their revenues by permitting these lands to 

1786] JAMES MADISON. 247 

Country, and particularly of a new one. I hope you will enable 
yourself before you return to America to compare with this 
description of people in France the condition of the indigent 
part of other communities in EuroDgLJarhere the like causes of 
wretchedness exist in a less degree./ I have no doubt but that 
the misery of the lower classes will be found to abate wherever 
the Government assumes a freer aspect, & the laws favor a sub 
division of property, yet I suspect that the difference will not 
fully account for the comparative comfort of the mass of people 
in the United States. Our limited population has probably as 
large a share in producing this effect as the political advantages 
which distinguish us. A certain degree of misery seems insepar 
able from a high degree of populousness. If the lands in Europe 
which are now dedicated to the amusement of the idle rich, were 
parcelled out among the idle poor, I readily conceive the happy 
revolution which would be experienced by a certain proportion 
of the latter. But still would there not remain a great proportion 
unrelieved? No problem in political ceconomy has appeared to 
me more puzzling than that which relates to the most proper 

be laboured.' I am conscious that an equal division of property is impracti 
cable, but the consequences of this enormous inequality producing so much 
misery to the bulk of mankind, legislators cannot invent too many devices for 
sub-dividing property, only taking care to let their sub divisions go hand in 
hand with the natural affections of the human mind, the descent of property of 
every kind therefore to all the children, or to all the brothers & sisters, or 
other relations in equal degree is a politic measure, and a practicable one. 
another means of silently lessening the unequality of property is to exempt all 
from taxation below a certain point, & to tax the higher portions of property in 
geometrical progression as they rise. Whenever there is in any country, un 
cultivated lands and unemployed poor, it is clear that the laws of property have 
been so far extended as to violate natural right, the earth is given as a common 
stock to man to labour & live on. if, for the encouragement of industry we 
allow it to be appropriated, we must take care that other employment be per 
mitted to those excluded from the appropriation, if we do not the fundamental 
right to labour the earth returns to the unemployed, it is too soon yet in our 
country to say that every man who cannot find employment but who can find 
uncultivated land, shall be at liberty to cultivate it, paying a moderate rent, 
but it is not too soon to provide by every possible means that as few as possible 
shall be without a little portion of land, the small land holders are the most 
precious part of a state." — Jefferson to Madison, Mad. MSS. / 

248 THE WRITINGS OF [1786 

distribution of the inhabitants of a country fully peopled.1 Let the 
lands be shared among them ever so wisely, & let them be sup 
plied with labourers ever so plentifully ; as there must be a great 
surplus of subsistence, there will also remain a great surplus of 
inhabitants, a greater by far than will be employed in cloathing 
both themselves & those who feed them, and in administering to 
both, every other necessary & even comfort of life. What is to 
be done with this surplus ? Hitherto we have seen them dis 
tributed into manufactures of superfluities, idle proprietors of 
productive lands, domestics, soldiers, merchants, mariners, and a 
few other less numerous classes. All these classes notwithstand 
ing have been found insufficient to absorb the redundant mem 
bers of a populous society ; and yet a reduction of most of those 
classes enters into the very reform which appears so necessary & 
desirable. From a more equal partition of property, must result 
a greater simplicity of manners, consequently a less consumption 
of manufactured superfluities, and a less proportion of idle pro 
prietors & domestics. / From a juster Government must result less 
need of soldiers either for defence ags- dangers from without, or 
disturbances from within. The number of merchants must be 
inconsiderable under any modification of Society ; and that of 
mariners will depend more on geographical position, than on the 
plan of legislation. But I forget that I am writing a letter not a 
dissertation. 

Things have undergone little change here since my last. The 
scarcity of money the low price of Tob° & the high price of bread 
continue to be the topics of complaint. The last evil is likely to 
be much increased by a sudden vicissitude in the prospects of 
wheat. At the date of my last we were praying for rain. Shortly 
after we had a deluge of it. From the 19th of May to the 4* of 
June, we scarcely saw the sun, had almost incessant rains, and 
sometimes showers, or rather torrents that threatened to sweep 
away every thing. The planters pretty generally availed them 
selves of the Season for getting their Tobacco into the hills. But 
the farmers have nearly lost their crops of wheat. A great pro 
portion of the heads in this part of the country are blasted, and 

1 Malthus' first edition of his Essay on the Principle of Population was not 
published till 170.8. 

1 7 86] JAMES MADISON. 249 

in many parts it is said the fields will not be worth cutting. Our 
crops of apples also whicu in common with all other fruits seemed 
to be abundant appear to have suffered much from the wet. We 
are now again suffering f-om the opposite extreme. We have 
had no rain since the cessation of the long spell, that is since the 
3d instant, and the earth is as dry and as hard as a brick. 

In an answer from the attorney to a late letter, he says "that 
after great anxiety we have rec? the plan of a capitol from Mr J. 
and with some difficulty the directors have assented to conform 
the bricks already laid to that model." 

I have a little itch to gain a smattering in chymistry. Will you 
be kind eno' to pick up some good elementary treatise for me, 
with a good dictionary of moderate size, unless the chymical 
volume in the encyclopedic should be judged a competent pro 
vision. Morveau's Elements I observe are quoted with great 
respect by Buffon. I wish also to get his two Boxes, called Le 
necessaire chemique. They are described in the Bibliotheque 
physico-economique for 1784. p. 134. where the maker in Paris is 
also referred to. I project this last indulgence on the supposition 
that the whole apparatus, including the contents of the Bottles 
will not cost more than a couple of Louis. 

I observe that in your analysis of the Revisal p. 251 of your 
notes, a Bill is mentioned for consigning our roads to undertakers 
instead of the present vicious plan of repairing them. No such 
provision is comprized in the Road bill reported & printed. If it 
be any where in existence, I wish you could put me on the means 
of getting a sight of it. I conceive such a reform to be essential 
& that the Legislature would adopt it, if presented in a well 
digested form. 

I lately sent you some particulars relating to our mole.1 For 
want of something better to fill the remainder of my paper, I will 
now add the result of my examination two days ago of another of 
our minor quadrupeds, I mean, a Weasel. It was a female & 
came to my hands dead. Its colour corresponded with the de 
scription given by D'Aubenton of the Belette & Roselet or Hermine 

1 in enumerating the distinctions between our mole & the comon one of Eu 
rope, I find I omitted the difference of colour. You know the colour of ours, 
which is pretty remote from black, tho' somewhat darkish. [Note in MS.] 
THE WRITINGS OF 

[1786 

in its summer dress, excepting only that the belly &c. which in 
the European animal was white, was in ';urs of a lightish yellow, 
save only the part under the lower jaws which was white for about 
yz an inch back from the under lip. The little brown spots near 
the corners of the mouth mentioned by D'Aubenton were peninsu 
lar. The tail was of the color of the back &c. all but the end 
which was black. The ears were extremely thin, had a fold or 
duplication on the lower part of the conque about 2 lines deep, 
and at the margin all around were covered with a very fine 
short hair or fur of the colour nearly of the back. The rest of 
the ear was in a manner naked, and of a lightish color. The fore 
feet were tipped & spotted with white. The hind feet were also 
tipped with white, and one of them a little spotted. It had five 
toes on each foot, the fifth on each being very short and at some 
distance from the end of the foot. Its smell was a sort of rankish 
musk, but not so strong as to be very offensive. It had no visible 
teats. Its weight dimensions &c. compared with those of Buffon's 
Belette & Hermine were as follows. 

Weight 

Weasel 
oz pw* gn! 
2 17 13 

Belette 
oz 

2* 

Hermine 

oz pw* 
7 10 — 

Length from muzzle to root of tail 

Inch lines 

7 9 
3 6 
i ii 

2 6 
4i 
41 

Inch 
i 
I 

lines 
3 
6 
5 

»* 
9 
ii 

Inch lines 

9 6 
3 10 

2 8 

7 

3* 
i 
i 4 

of the Trunk of the Tail 

Height before 

behind. 

distance from muzzle to lower corner of 
the eye. . 
from upper corner of eye to the 
ear. . 
from one corner to the other of 
length of the ear perpendicularly 

width of ear horizontally 
io| 

I II 

distance between the ears at bottom 
Length of the neck 

* The belette of this weight was but 6 in. 5 lines in length. 
The weight & measure of the Weasel are English those of the Belette & 
Roselet — french. 

1786] 

JAMES MADISON. 
circumference of neck 

Weasel 

Belette 

Hermine 

Inch lines 
2 5 

2 10 

3 3 
2 9 
ioi 

2 3 
2 2 
2 6 
7 
ii 
2 
short i 

5i 
3 
i 3 

2£ 
Inch lines 
3 4 
3 3 

I 2 

i i 

I 10 

si 
6 
of body behind forelegs. . . . 
before hindlegs. . . . 
of head between eyes & ears 
Length of foreleg from knee to heel 
from heel to the nails 

of hindleg from knee to heel 

i 4 
li 

Width of forefoot 

^ 

Length of nails of forefoot . . 
of hindfoot ... 

1 1 

of hair on the body 
at end of tail 

6i 

distance between anus and vulva 

q 

Spleen length of 

i 3 
qi 

width of in middle 

Kidneys long . . 
wide 
thick 

•7 

Heart long . . 
round. 

u? 
i 41 

ql 

Tongue long from end to the filet 


2* 

Teeth 

number 
14 
6 

n° 
14 or 15 
IQ 
Ribbs 

Vertebrae of tail ... . . . 

Palate furrows of ... 

The gall bladder was empty, the membrane of the Bladder very 
thin, and the two last furrows of the palate broken in the middle, 
in the Weasel as noted in the Belette, and the contrary not noted 
in the Hermine. 

The spleen was of the same color on both sides in the Weasel. 
In the Hermine it was of a reddish brown as in the weasel, on one 
side, and of a very pale hue on the other. Nothing is said as to 
this circumstance in the description of the Belette. 

The right kidney in the Weasel was advanced a little only before 
the left, as in the Belette, and not its whole length as in the 
Hermine. 

252 THE WRITINGS OF [1786 

The attempt to examine whether the number of false ribbs in 
the Weasel was 4 as in the Belette or 3 as in the Hermine, was 
frustrated. 

On a review of the differential characters of the Belette and the 
Hermine, and a comparison of the weasel with both, it appears, i. 
that the weasel stands between the two in point of size, but much 
less removed from the former than the latter, unless the individ 
ual here examined was much under the ordinary size. Its having 
no visible teats seems to be an indication that it was young. An 
other probable indication was the smallness of the hindmost teeth 
both in the upper & lower Jaws, those in the lower being not big 
ger than the head of a small pin ; & those in the upper dispropor 
tionate to the contiguous tooth. 2. that it resembles the Hermine in 
the length of the trunk of the tail, and in the blackness of its end, 
— but the Belette in the number of vertebrae in the Trunk, and in 
the shortness of the hair at the end of the tail. 3. That it resem 
bles the Hermine in the colour of its feet, and the Belette in that 
of the margin of the ears. 4. that it resembles the Belette & not 
the Hermine in the Relative position of the Kidneys. 5. that it 
differs from the Hermine in being an inhabitant of warm climates. 
Wheather it resembles the Belette in not being an inhabitant of 
cold climates remains for enquiry. 6. that it differs from both 
in never becoming white during the winter, if this change be well 
founded with regard to the Belette. Buffon asserts that there 
are instances of it, but it may be questioned whether they were 
not mere albinos of the species. 

The figure of the head of the Weasel when reduced to 
the naked bone resembled rather that of the Belette than that 
of the Hermine in the skeletons represented in Buffon. In 
its entire state it resembled most the head in the cut of the Her 
mine given by Buffon. Indeed the entire cut of the Hermine 
was a much stronger likeness of the weasel, than the cut of the 
Belette. 

The result of the comparison seems to be that notwithstanding 
the blackness of the end of the tail & whiteness of the feet, which 
are regarded as characteristics of the Hermine contradistinguish 
ing it from the belette, our weasel cannot be of the former spe 
cies, and is nothing more than a variety of the latter. This 

1 7 86] JAMES MADISON. 253 

conclusion is the stronger, as the manners of our weasel corre 
spond more nearly with those of the Belette, than with those of 
the Hermine. And if it be a just conclusion, it may possibly 
make one exception to Buffon's position that no animal is com 
mon to the two continents that cannot bear the climate where they 
join ; as it certainly contradicts his assertion that of the animals 
common to the two continents, those of the new are in every in 
stance smaller than those of the old. — But he seems to have given 
up this point himself. Supplem' torn. 8, p. 329. " L'imperfection 
de nature qu'el [M. P. 1'auteur des recherches sur les Americains] 
reproche gratuitement a 1'Amerique en general, ne doit porter que 
sur les animaux de la partie meridionale de ce continent, les- 
quels &c." — 

My next will probably be dated in Philad* or rather in N. York 
to which I am called by some business of a private nature in 
which I am concerned jointly with Col. Monroe. In the mean 
time I remain Yr.s very affectionately 

TO JAMES MONROE. MAD. MSS. 

ORANGE June 2ist, 1786. 

DEAR SIR, — Your favor of the 3 1 st ult. did not come 
to hand till two days ago. As I expect to see you in 
a short time, I will suspend the full communication of 
my ideas on the subject of it till I have that pleasure. 
I cannot however forbear in the mean time expressing 
my amazement that a thought should be entertained 
of * surrendering the Mississippi, and of guaranteing 
the possessions of Spain in America. In the first 
place has not Virgf, have not Cong5 themselves, and the 
Ministers of Cong?, by their orders asserted the right 
of those who live on the waters of the Mississippi to 

1 Italics for cypher. 

254 THE WRITINGS OF [1786 

use it as the high road given by nature to the sea f 
This being the case, have Congs any more authority 
to say that the Western citizens of Virga. shall not pass 
through the capes of Mississippi than to say that her 
Eastern citizens shall notfiass through the capes Henry 
& Charles. It should be remembered that the United 
States are not now extricating themselves from war, 
a crisis which often knows no law but that of necessity. 
The measure in question would be a voluntary barter 
in time of proj cound peace of the rights of one part of 
the empire to the interests of another part. What 
would Massachusetts say to a proposition for ceding to 
Britain her right of fishery as the price of some stipu 
lations in favor of Tobacco. 

Again can there be a more short-sighted or dishon 
orable policy than to concur with Spn in frustrat 
ing 'the benevolent views of nature to sell the affections 
of our ultra-montane brethren to depreciate the richest 
fund we possess to distrust an ally whom we know to 
be able to befriend us and to have an interest in doing 
it against the only nation whose enmity we can dread, 
and at the same time to court by the most precious 
sacrifices the alliance of a nation whose impotency is 
notorious, who has given no proof of regard for us and 
the genius of whose Government religion & manners 
unfit them of all the nations in Christendom for a coali 
tion with this country. Can anything too, as you well 
observe, be more unequal than a stipulation which is 
to open all our ports to her and some only and those 
the least valuable of hers to us ; and which places the 
commercial freedom of our ports agst the fettered reg- 

1786] JAMES MADISON. 255 

illations of those in Spain. I always thought the stip 
ulation with france & Holld of the privileges of the 
most favoured nation as unequal, and only to be justi 
fied by the influence which the treaties could not fail 
to have on the event of the war. A stipulation putting 
Spanish subjects on the same footing with our own 
citizens is carrying the evil still farther without the 
same pretext for it ; and is the more to be dreaded, as 
by making her the most favored nation it would let in 
the other nations with whom we are now connected to 
the same privileges, whenever they may find it their 
interest to make the same compensation for them 
whilst we have not a reciprocal right to force them 
into such an arrangement in case our interest should 
dictate it. A guaranty is if possible still more objec 
tionable. If it be insidious we plunge ourselves into 
infamy. If sincere, into obligations the extent of 
which cannot easily be determined. In either case we 
get farther into the labyrinth of european politics from 
which we ought religiously to keep ourselves as free 
as possible. And what is to be gained by ruch a rash 
step ? Will any man in his senses pretend that our 
territory needs such a safeguard, or that if it were 
in danger, it is the arm of Spain that is to save 
it. Viewing the matter in this light I cannot but 
flatter myself, that if the attempt you apprehend 
should be made it will be rejected with becoming indig 
nation. I am less sanguine as to the issue of the other 
matter contained in your letter.1 I know the mutual 

1 The claims of the State against the General Government. See Monroe's 
letter. Writings, i., 135. 

\ 

256 THE WRITINGS OF [1786 

prejudices which impede every overture towards a 
just & final settlement of claims & accts. I persist 
in the opinion that a proper & speedy adjustment is 
unattainable from any assembly constituted as Cong5 
is, and acting under the impulse which they must. I 
need not repeat to you the plan which has always ap 
peared to me most likely to answer the purpose. In 
the mean time, it is mortifying to see the other States, 
or rather their Representatives, pursuing a course 
which will make the case more & more difficult, & 
putting arms into the hands of the Enemies to every 
Amendment of our federal system. God knows that 
they are formidable enough in this State without such 
an advantage. With it, their triumph will be certain 
& easy. But I have been led much farther already 
than I proposed, and will only that 

I am with the sincerest affection, your friend & 
serv' 

The inclosed Tickets belong to a very worthy 
friend who knows not how to obtain a small prize 
which they have drawn without giving you the trouble 
of applying for it. He is apprehensive that the door 
may be already shut agst the demand. If it should 
not you will kind eno' to call on the proper office and 
get the proper certificate. There are but 2 of the 
Tickets I believe which are entitled to prizes, but as 
they cannot be distinguished here, it must be done by 
the Register in the office. 

1 786] JAMES MADISON. 257 

TO THOMAS JEFFERSON. 

PHILADA, Aug: 12th, 1786. 

DEAR SIR, — My last of the igth of June intimated 
that my next would be from N, York or this place. 
I expected it would rather have been from the former 
which I left a few days ago, but my time was so taken 
up there with my friends and some business that I 
thought it best to postpone it till my return here. 
My ride through Virga, Maryd, and Pena, was in the 
midst of harvest. I found the crops of wheat in the 
upper parts of the two former considerably injured by 
the wet weather which my last described as so de 
structive in the lower parts of those States. The 
computed loss where I passed was about one third. 
The loss in the Rye was much greater. It was ad 
mitted however that the crops of both would have 
been unusually large but for this casualty. Through 
out Pena the wheat was unhurt, and the Rye very 
little affected. As I came by the way of Winchester 
& crossed the Potowmac at Harper's I had an oppor 
tunity of viewing the magnificent scene which nature 
here presents. I viewed it however under great dis 
advantages. The air was so thick that distant objects 
were not visible at all, and near ones not distinctly so. 
We ascended the mountain also at a wrong place, 
fatigued ourselves much in traversing it before we 
gained the right position, were threatened during the 
whole time with a thunder storm, and finally over 
taken by it. Had the weather been favorable the 
prospect would have appeared to peculiar advantage, 
being enriched with the harvest in its full maturity, 

VOL. II. — 17. 

258 THE WRITINGS OF [1786 

which filled every vale as far as the eye could reach. 
I had the additional pleasure here of seeing the 
progress of the works on the Potowmac. About 50 
hands were employed at these falls or rather rapids, 
who seemed to have overcome the greatest difficul 
ties. Their plan is to slope the fall by opening the 
bed of the river, in such a manner as to render a lock 
unnecessary, and, by means of ropes fastened to the 
rocks, to pull up & ease down the boats where the 
current is most rapid. At the principal falls 150 
hands I was told were at work, and that the length of 
the canal will be reduced to less than a mile, and 
carried through a vale which does not require it to 
be deep. Locks will here be unavoidable. The 
undertakers are very sanguine. Some of them who 
are most so talk of having the entire work finished in 
three years.1 I can give no particular account of the 
progress on James River, but am told it is very flat 
tering. I am still less informed of what is doing in 
North Carolina towards a Canal between her & our 
waters. The undertaking on the Susquehannah is 
said to be in such forwardness as to leave no doubt of 
its success. A negociation is set on foot between 
Pen?, Maryd, & Delaware, for a canal from the head 
of Chesapeak to the Delaware. Maryd as I under 
stand heretofore opposed the undertaking, and Pena 
means now to make her consent to it a condition on 
which the opening of the Susquehannah within the 

1 The MSS. records of the Chesapeake and Ohio Canal Company in the 
office of the Company in Washington show the work referred to here of the Po 
tomac Company. 

1786] JAMES MADISON. 259 

limits of Pena will depend. Unless this is permitted 
the opening undertaken within the limits of Maryland 
will be of little account. It is lucky that both parties 
are so dependent on each other as to be thus mutually 
forced into measures of general utility. I am told 
that Pent has complied with the joint request of Virga 
and Maryland fora Road between the head of Potow- 
mac and the waters of the Ohio and the secure & free 
use of the latter through her jurisdiction. These fruits 
of the Revolution do great honour to it. I wish all 
our proceedings merited the same character. Un 
happily there are but too many belonging to the op 
posite side of the acce. At the head of these is to be 
put the general rage for paper money. Pen? & N. 
Carolina took the lead in this folly. In the former 
the sum emitted was not considerable, the funds for 
sinking it were good, and it was not made a legal 
tender. It issued into circulation partly by way of 
loan to individuals on landed security, partly by way 
of payment to the public creditors. Its present de 
preciation is about 10 or 12 per cf. In N. Carolina 
the sums issued at different times has been of greater 
amount, and it has constantly been a tender. It 
issued partly in payments to military creditors and 
latterly, in purchases of Tob? on public account. The 
Agent I am informed was authorised to give nearly 
the double of the current price, and as the paper was 
a tender, debtors ran to him with their Tob?, and the 
creditors paid the expence of the farce. The depre 
ciation is said to be 25 or 30 per C*. in that State. S. 
Carolina was the next in order. Her emission was in 

260 THE WRITINGS OF [1786 

the way of loans to individuals, and is not a legal 
tender. But land is there made a tender in case of 
suits which shuts the Courts of Justice, and is perhaps 
as great an evil. The friends of the emission say that 
it has not yet depreciated, but they admit that the 
price of commodities has risen, which is evidently the 
form in which depreciation will first shew itself. New 
Jersey has just issued £"30,000 (dollars at js 6) in 
loans to her citizens. It is a legal tender. An ad 
dition of ,£100,000 is shortly to follow on the same 
principles. The terror of popular associations stifles 
as yet an overt discrimination between it & specie ; 
but as this does not operate in Philada & N. York 
where all the trade of N. J. is carried on, its depreci 
ation has already commenced in those places & must 
soon communicate itself to N. J. New York is strik 
ing ,£200,000 (dollr at 8^.) on the plan of loans to her 
citizens. It is made a legal tender in case of suits 
only. As it is but just issuing from the press, its de 
preciation exists only in the foresight of those who 
reason without prejudice on the subject. In Rhode 
Island, £"100,000 (dolr at 6^.) has lately been issued 
in loans to individuals. It is not only made a tender, 
but severe penalties annexed to the least attempt 
direct or indirect to give a preference to specie. Pre 
cautions dictated by distrust in the rulers soon pro 
duced it in the people. Supplies were withheld from 
the Market, the Shops were shut, popular meetings en 
sued, and the State remains in a sort of convulsion. 

The Legislature of Mass1.5 at their last Session re 
jected a paper emission by a large majority. Con- 

1786] JAMES MADISON. 261 

necticut & N. Hampshire also have as yet forborne, 
but symptoms of danger it is said begin to appear in, 
the latter. The Senate of Maryd has hitherto been 
a bar to paper in that State. The clamor for it is 
now universal, and as the periodical election of the 
Senate happens at this crisis, and the whole body is 
unluckily by their Constitution to be chosen at once, 
it is probable that a paper emission will be the result. 
If, in spite of the zeal exerted agst the old Senate a 
majority of them should be re-elected, it will require 
all their firmness to withstand the popular torrent. 
Of the affairs of Georga I know as little as of those 
of Kamskatska. Whether Virga is to remain exempt 
from the epidemic malady will depend on the ensuing 
Assembly. My hopes rest chiefly on the exertions of 
Col. Mason and the failure of the experiments else 
where. That these must fail is morally certain ; for 
besides the proofs of it already visible in some States, 
and the intrinsic defect of the paper in all, this fic 
titious money will rather feed than cure the spirit of 
extravagance which sends away the coin to pay the 
unfavorable balance, and will therefore soon be carried 
to market to buy up coin for that purpose. From 
that moment depreciation is inevitable. The value of 
money consists in the uses it will serve. Specie will 
serve all the uses of paper, paper will not serve one 
of the essential uses of specie. The paper therefore 
will be less valuable than specie. Among the numer 
ous ills with which this practice is pregnant, one I 
find is that it is producing the same warfare & retalia 
tion among the States as were produced by the State 

262 THE WRITINGS OF [1786 

regulations of commerce.; Massts & Connecticut have 
passed laws enabling their Citizens who are debtors 
to Citizens of States having paper money, to pay 
their debts in the same manner as their Citizens who 
are creditors to Citizens of the latter States are liable 
to be paid their debts. The States which have ap 
pointed deputies to Annapolis are N. Hampshire, 
Massts, R. Island, N. Y., N. J., Pena, Delaware, & 
Virga. Connecticut declined not from a dislike to 
the object, but to the idea of a Convention, which it 
seems has been rendered obnoxious by some internal 
Conventions, which embarrassed the Legislative Au 
thority. Mary1!, or rather her Senate negatived an 
appointment because they supposed the measure 
might interfere with the plans or prerogatives of 
Cong5. N. Carolina has had no Legislative meeting 
since the proposition was communicated. S. Caro 
lina supposed she had sufficiently signified her concur 
rence in a general regulation of trade by vesting the 
power in Congress for 15 years. Georgia- — . 

Many Gentlemen both within & without Cong5, wish 
to make this Meeting subservient to a plenipotentiary 
Convention for amending the Confederation. Tho' 
my wishes are in favor of such an event, yet I despair 
so much of its accomplishment at the present crisis 
that I do not extend my views beyond a commercial 
Reform. To speak the truth / almost despair even of 
this} You will find the cause in a measiire now be 
fore Congress of which you will receive the detail from 
Col. Monroe. I content myself with hinting that it is 

1 The portions of the letter in cypher are represented by italics. 

1786] JAMES MADISON. 263 

a proposed treaty with Spain one article of which 
shuts up the Mississippi twenty-Jive or thirty years, 
passing by the other Southern States, figure to your 
self the effect of such a stipulation on the Assembly of 
Virginia, already jealous of Northern politics and 
which will be composed of about thirty members from 
the Western waters, of a majority of others attached 
to the Western Country from interests of their own, 
of their friend or their constituent, and of many 
others who though indifferent to Mississippi, will 
zealously play off the disgust of its friends against 
federal measures. Figure to yourself its effect on the 
people at large on the western waters, who are im 
patiently waiting for a favorable result to the negotia 
tion with Gardoqui, & who will consider themselves 
as sold by their Atlantic brethren. Will it be an 
unnatural consequence if they consider themselves 
absolved from every federal tie and court some protec 
tion for their betrayed rights. This protection will 
appear more attainable from the maritime power of 
Britain than from any other quarter ; and Britain 
will be more ready than any other nation to seize an 
opportunity of embroiling our affairs. What may be 
the motive with Spain to satisfy herself with a tem 
porary occlusion of the Mississippi at the same time 
jthat she holds forth our claim to it as absolutely inad 
missible is matter for conjecture only. The patrons 
of the measure in Congress contend that the Minister, 
who at present governs the Spanish councils means 
only to disembarrass himself at the expence of the 
successors. I should rather suppose he means to work 

264 THE WRITINGS OF [1786 

a total separation of interest and affection between 
western & eastern settlements and to foment the jeal 
ousy between the Eastern & Southern States. By the 
former the population of the Western Country it may 
be expected, will be checked and the Mississippi so far 
secured ; and by both the general security of Spanish 
America be promoted. As far as I can learn the 
assent of nine States in Congress will not at this time be 
got to the projected treaty but an unsuccessful attempt 
by six or seven will favor the views of Spain and be 
fatal I fear to an augmentation of the federal author 
ity if not to the little now existing. My personal 
situation is rendered by this business particularly 
mortifying. Ever since I have been out of Congress 
I have been inculcating on our Assembly a confidence 
in the equal attention of Congress to the rights and 
interests of every part of the republic and on the 
Western members in particular, the necessity of mak 
ing the Union respectable by new powers to Congress 
if they wished Congress to negociate with effect for the 
Mississippi. I leave to Col. Monroe the giving you 
a particular account of the Impost. The Acts of 
Penna, Delaware & N. York must be revised & 
amended in material points before it can be put in 
force, and even then the fetters put on the collection 
by some other States will make it a very awkward 
business. Your favor of 25^ of April from London 
found me here. My letter from Richmd at the close of 
the Assembly will have informed you of the situation 
in which British debts stand in Virga. Unless Cons 
say something on the subject I do not think anything 

1786] JAMES MADISON. 265 

will be done by the next Session. The expectations 
of the British Merchants coincide with the informa 
tion I had recd, as your opinion of the steps proper to 
be taken by the Assembly do with those for which 
I have ineffectually contended. The merits of Mr. 
P[aradise] will ensure every attention from me to his 
claim as far as general principles will admit. I am 
afraid that these will insuperably bar his wishes. 
The Catalogues sent by Mr. Skipwith I do not ex 
pect to receive till I get back to Virga. If you meet 
with " Grcecorum Respublicae ab Ubbone Emmio de- 
scriptae," Sugd. Batavorum, 1632, pray get it for me. 
My trip to N. Y. was occasioned chiefly by a plan 
concerted between Col. Monroe 1 & myself for a pur 
chase of land on the Mohawk. Both of us have 
visited that district and were equally charmed with it. 
The soil is perhaps scarcely inferior to that of Ken 
tucky, it lies within the body of the Atlantic States & 
at a safe distance from every frontier, it it contiguous 
to a branch of Hudson's River which is navigable with 
trifling portages which will be temporary, to tide-water, 
and is not more than ten 15 or 20 miles from popul 
ous settlements, where land sells at £8 to ^10 per acre. 
In talking of this Country sometime ago with General 
Washington he considered it in the same light with 
Monroe and myself, intimating that if he had money 
to spare and was disposed to deal in land, this is the 

1 Monroe left the White House hopelessly broken in fortune and spent the 
latter part of his life in absolute poverty. Madison and Jefferson left behind 
them estates overburdened with debt. No one of the three possessed the talent 
of either making or saving money. It was this land speculation, however, 
which Madison believed would make him moderately wealthy. 

266 THE WRITINGS OF [1786 

very Spot which his fancy had selected of all the U. 
S. We have made a small purchase, and nothing but 
the difficulty of raising a sufficient sum restrained us 
from making a large one. In searching for the means 
of overcoming this difficiilty one has occurred which 
we have agreed that I should mention to you, and which 
\iyou should think as we do is recommended by the 
prospect of advantage to yourself as well as to ^ls. We 
mention it freely because we trust that if it does not 
meet with your sanction — — you will as freely tell 
us so^ It is that the aid of your credit \nyourprivate 
capacity be used for borrowing say four or Jive thou 
sand louis more or less, on the obligation of Monroe and 
myself with your suretyship to be laid out by Monroe 
and my self {Q? our triple emolument on interest not ex 
ceeding six p. cent to be paid annually and the prin 
ciple within a term not less than eight or ten years. 
To guard ag8' accidents a private instrument might 
be executed among ourselves such writing specifying 
all necessary covenants. We have not taken the reso 
lution of this plan without well examining the expedi 
ency of your becoming a party to it as well as the 
prospect of its succeeding. There can certainly be no 
impropriety inyoiir taking just means of better ing your 
fortune, nor can we discover in yoiir doing this 
on \heMokawk more than on james River. For the 
prospect of gain by rise of the land beyond the inter 
est of the money we calculate on the present difference 
of pri\c-e~\ between the settled & vacant land far 
beyond any possible difference in the real value. The 

1 August 15 Madison sent the substance of this part of the letter to Monroe. 
Mad. MSS. 

1786] JAMES MADISON. 267 

former as has been noted sells for eight or ten pounds 
per acre. The latter distinguished only by its being a 
little higher 2tp the River & its being uninhabited was 
bought by us for one dollar & a half and there is little 
doubt that by taking itp a large quantity, still better 
bargains may be got. This comparative cheapness pro 
ceeds from causes which are accidental & temporary. 
The lands in question are chiefly in the hands of men 
who hold large quantities and who are either in debtor 
live in the city at an expence for which they have no 
other resource or are engaged in transactions that re 
quire money. The scarcity of specie which enters 
much into the cheapness is probably but temporary also. 
As it is the child of extravagance it will become the 
parent of economy, which will regain us our due share 
of the universal medium. The same vicissitude which 
can only be retarded by our short-lived substitutes of 
paper will be attended also by such &fall in the rate 
of exchange that money drawn by bills from Europe now 
and repaid a few years hence will probably save one 
years interest at least. I will only add that scarce an 
instance has happened in which purchases of new lands 
of good quality and in good situations have not well 
rewarded the adventurers. With these remarks which 
determine our judgments we submit to your better one 
\ki& project to which they relate. Wishing you every 
possible happiness I remain Dr Sir your affectionate 
friend & Serv' 

Mr.s House and Mr.s Trist desire to be particularly 
remembered to yourself and Miss Patsy. I left with 
Col Monroe letters for you both from Mr.s T. which 
will probably go by the same packet with this. 

268 THE WRITINGS OF [1786 

TO JAMES MONROE.1 

PHILADELPHIA, August lyth, 1786. 

DR SIR, — I have your favor of the 1/j.th inst. The 
expedient of which you ask my opinion has received, 
as it deserved, all the consideration which the time 
and other circumstances would allow me to give. I 
think that, in the present state of things, such an 
arrangement would be beneficial, and even pleasing 
to those most concerned in it ; and yet I doubt 
extremely the policy of your proposing it to Con 
gress.2 The objections which occur to me are: i. 
That if the temper and views of Congress be such as 
you apprehend, it is morally certain they would not 
enter into the accommodation. Nothing, therefore, 
would be gained, and you would have to combat under 
the disadvantage of having forsaken your first ground. 
2. If Congress should adopt your expedient as a 
ground of negociation with Guardoqui, and the views 
of Spain be such as they must be apprehended to be, 
it is still more certain that it would be rejected on that 
side, especially under the flattering hopes which the 
spirit of concession in Congress must have raised. 
In this event, the patrons of the measure now before 

1 From the Works of Madison. 

2 " It has occurr'd to G[rayson] & myself to propose to Congress that negotia 
tions be carried on with Sp? upon the following principles : i. That exports be 
admitted thro' the Mississippi to some free port — perhaps N. Orleans, to pay 
there a toll to Sp? of abl. 3 pr. cent™ ad valorem & to be carried thence under 
the regulations of Congress. 2. That imports shall pass into the Western coun 
try thro' the ports of the U. S. only. 3. That this sacrifice be given up to 
obtain in other respects a beneficial treaty. I beg of you to give me yr. opinion 
on it." — Monroe to Madison, August 14, 1786, Writings of Monroe, i., 151, 
152. 

1786] JAMES MADISON. 269 

Congress would return to it with a greater eagerness 
and with fresh arguments, drawn from the impossi 
bility of making better terms, and from the relaxation 
into which their opponents will have been betrayed. 
It is even possible that a foresight of this event might 
induce a politic concurrence in the experiment. 

Your knowledge of all circumstances will make you 
a better judge of the solidity or fallacy of these reflec 
tions than I can be. I do not extend them because 
it would be superfluous, as well as because it might 
lead to details which could not prudently be com 
mitted to the mail without the guard of a cypher. 
Not foreseeing that any confidential communication 
on paper would happen between us during my absence 
from Virginia, I did not bring mine with me. 

TO AMBROSE MADISON. 1 

ASJAPOLis, Sep*. 8th, 1786. 

DR BRO?, — I came to this place a day or two ago, 
where I found two comsrs only. A few more have 
since come in, but the prospect of a sufficient n? to 
make the meeting respectable is not flattering. I was 
sorry to find in Philadf that the unpunctuality of some 
of the purchasers of the Tob? had put it out of the 
power of Mf H. to supply me with all the money be 
come due under the contracts. This unpunctuality 
owing partly to causes which are felt everywhere, 
partly to the abolition of the bank, has extended 
itself to men who have scarcely before afforded room 

1 New York Public Library (Lenox) MSS. 

270 THE WRITINGS OF [1786 

for complaint. The disappointment reduced me to 
the dilemma of either not executing the commissions 
for the family & failing in some of my engagements 
particularly in N. Y. or of leaving you still longer to 
parry your creditors. Disagreeable as the latter 
option was I could not but consider it as the lesser 
inconvenience. Mr H. has promised to spare no efforts 
to get in the remaining payments as fast as possible, 
& to send or even bring them to Annapolis in case 
the session here should be prolonged till a sum worth 
while shall be collected. If the Session here should 
be so far shortened as to leave me time I propose to 
ride back to Philad? & be the bearer of it from thence 
myself. I shall probably write again to you from 
this place. I do not write now to my father because 
I have nothing worth the postage. You will let him 
know that most of the Articles on his list will prob 
ably soon be at Fredgl" perhaps sooner than this 
reaches you. The West Ind* articles were dear & 
for that reason some of them are abridged in quan 
tity. The other articles were cheap in general, which 
led me to add several beyond my commission, being 
well assured that if not wanted they may be either 
disposed of or exchanged with advantage. 

TO JAMES MONROE. MAD. MSS. 

ANNAPOLIS, Sepr n, 1786 

DEAR SIR, — I have two letters from you not yet ac 
knowledged, one of the i5-' the other of the 3*? inst : 
nothing could be more distressing than the issue of 

1786] JAMES MADISON. 271 

the business stated in the latter.1 If the affirmative 
vote of 7 States si be pursued it will add the in 
sult of trick to the injury of the thing itself. Our 
prospect here makes no amends for what is done with 
you. Delaware N. J. & V* alone are on the ground, 
two Commissrs attend from N. Y. & one from Pa. Un 
less the sudden attendance of a much more respecta 
ble number takes place it is proposed to break up the 
Meeting, with a recomendation of another time & 
place, & an intimation of the expediency of extending 
the plan to other defects of the Confederation. In 
case of a speedy dispersion I shall find it requisite to 
ride back as far as Philad* before I proceed to Virg* 
from which place, if not from this, I will let you know 
the upshot here. I have heard that Col. Grayson 
was stopped at Trenton by indisposition on his way 
to the Assembly of Pena. I hope he is well again, & 
wd write to him but know not whither to address a 
letter to him.2 

Adieu. Yrs affy. 

1 The instructions to Jay on the subject of the Mississippi negotiations hav 
ing been in part repealed, the plan of the friends of the free navigation to order 
the transfer of negotiations to Madrid was blocked by a newly-adopted rule of 
Congress " that we shall not move in form or substance any proposition which 
has been set aside by the previous question, unless the same number of States 
are present." — Monroe to Madison, Writings of Monroe, t., 759, 160. 

2 The following bill is of interest as showing what Madison's expenses were 
while he was attending the Annapolis convention : 

"COLONEL MADISON'S BILL 1786 

" Sept! 5 Lodging & Breakfast 3/9 Dinner 3/9 £, o. 7. o 

wine 3/9 punch 2/6 porter 2/6 o. 8. 9 

punch i/ serv*. Board I2/ o. 13. o 

6 Lodging & Breakfast 3/9 wine 2/6 o. 6. 3 

porter 2/6 Dinner 3/9. Servl Grog i/ o. 7. 3 

Board for Serv*. 6/ o. 6. o 

272 THE WRITINGS OF [1786 


PHILAD^, Octr 5*, 1786. 

DEAR SIR, — I rec^ yesterday your favor of the 2d. 
inst : which makes the third for which my acknowledg 
ments are due. The progression which a certain 
measure l seems to be making is an alarming proof of 
the predominance of temporary and partial interests 
over those just & extended maxims of policy, which 
have been so much boasted of among us and which 
alone can effectuate the durable prosperity of the 
Union. Should the measure triumph under the 
patronage of 9 States or even of the whole thirteen, 
I shall never be convinced that it is expedient, be- 

" Sept! 7 

Lodging and Breakfast 3/9 Tea i/io £ 

o. 

5- 
Serv1. Board 6/ 

0. 

6. 
8 

Lodging and Breakfast 3/9 Serv1. Board 6/ 

" 

9- 
9 

Lodging and Breakfast 3/9 Punch 1/3 



o 

Dinner and Club 8/9 Tea i/io Serv* Board 6/ . . 


16. 
10 

Lodging and Breakfast 3/9 Tea i/io Serv* 

board 6/ 


II. 
ii 

Lodging & Breakfast 3/9 Dinner 3/9 Club 5/. . . 


12. 
Tea i/io Serv! Board 6/ 

' ' 

7- 
12 

Lodging & Breakfast 3/9 Dinner & Club 8/9. . . 

" 

Tea i/io Serv1. Board 6/ 

'* 

13 

Lodging & Breakfast 3/9 Serv* Board 6/ 

«• 

9- 
Stabling & hay 45/ Oats 56 Gallons @ iod 4&/8/ 

4- 

11. 
Omited the 4th Punch 2/6 Supper 3/ serv1 d? 2/ 


7- 
Hay and Oats 6/8 . 

" 

6. 
14 

Lodging & Breakfast 3/9 Dinner & Club 10/9. . 

0. 

14. 
Servts Board 6/ Hay & Oats n. 8 

o. 

ii. 
£1 

5. 
15 

Lodging i/ Servt. 6/ 

I. 
£14- 7- 2 
Contents Received in full 

Geo Mann." Mad. MSS. 
The prospective treaty with Spain closing the navigation of the Mississippi. 

1786] JAMES MADISON. . 273 

cause I cannot conceive it to be just. There is no 
maxim in my opinion which is more liable to be mis 
applied, and which therefore more needs elucidation 
than the current one that the interest of the majority 
is the political standard of right and wrong. Taking 
the word "interest" as synonymous with " ultimate 
happiness, " in which sense it is qualified with every 
necessary moral ingredient, the proposition is no doubt 
true. But taking it in the popular sense, as referring 
to immediate augmentation of property and wealth, 
nothing can be more false. In the latter sense it 
would be the interest of the majority in every com 
munity to despoil & enslave the minority of indi 
viduals ; and in a federal community to make a similar 
sacrifice of the minority of the component States. In 
fact it is only re-establishing under another name and 
a more specious form, force as the measure of right ; 
and in this light the Western settlements will infallibly 
view it. 

I have considered with attention the paragraph in 
your last which relates to the further offer of Taylor. 
It seems to be an inviting one & probably would turn 
out a good one, yet there are strong objections ags.1 
purchasing in the dark or on a vague knowledge of 
the situation. There would be hazard in the experi 
ment if both parties were on a level, but there would 
perhaps be rashness in it where one of them proceeds 
on full information. Circumspection seems also more 
necessary in proportion to the indulgences proposed in 
the payments, as they suggest other motives for sell 
ing than mere pecuniary difficulties. These objections 

VOL. ii. — it 

274 THE WRITINGS OF [1786 

may indeed be lessened by taking information at 
second hand and by supposing the partial payment in 
hand as the ruling motive of the seller. But still they 
have considerable weight ; and when added to two 
others are decisive with me ags.' an immediate con 
tract. I draw the first of these from the numerous 
disappointments to which I find pecuniary matters in 
the present state of things are liable, and the mortifi 
cations which they involve. The second I draw from 
a reflection that if we should at the date of future 
payments have in our hands the means of discharging 
them, they will as ready money then command as 
good bargains as can now be made on credit. These 
remarks you will observe lye agst further speculations 
at present. The expediency of them under favorable 
circumstances I view in as strong a light as ever I did, 
and am happy to find your attention kept up to the 
subject, and you are gathering information relative 
to it. 

I fear I shall be obliged to accept of your very 
friendly procrastination of the repayment which ought 
long ago to have been made. The disappointments 
which have prevented it, contribute to my delay here 
at this time, and will together with a vicarious busi 
ness which I have undertaken for a particular friend, 
probably spin it out a few days longer. If anything 
occurs before I set out or on the road I shall not fail 
to write. Col. Grayson is still here. For a week he has 
been nearly well, his symptoms of yesterday prove 
that he has remains of his disorder which require his 
attention. 

1786] JAMES MADISON. 275 

Martin did not make his report from Milligan as to 
the lottery tickets, pray send me the information in 
your next. Complts to yr family Adieu 

Seal & present the inclosed 
if you please. 

TO JAMES MONROE. MAD. MSS. 

RICHM?, Octr. 30, 1786 

DEAR SIR, — I drop you a few lines rather as a ful 
filment of my promise than for the purpose of infor 
mation, since they go by M* Jones who is much 
better acquainted with the politics here than myself. 
I find with pleasure that the navigation of the 
Miss?1 will be defended by the Legislature with as 
much zeal as could be wished.1 Indeed the only dan 
ger is that too much resentment may be indulged by 
many ags.e the federal councils. Paper money has 
not yet been tried even in any indirect mode that 
could bring forth the mind of the Legislature. Ap 
pearances on the subject however are rather flattering. 
Mr. H [enry] has declined a reappointf to the office he 

1 The House of Delegates received a memorial from the delegates represent 
ing the counties of the district of Kentucky, setting forth that a report prevailed 
in that district that Congress proposed to cede to Spain the exclusive navigation 
of the Mississippi for twenty-five or thirty years, in consideration of some com 
mercial advantages, that they conceived it their duty to represent that the 
prosperity of the Western country was absolutely dependent on the free naviga 
tion of that river, as without it they could not carry their produce to market ; 
that Congress could not, without a flagrant violation of the confederation, de 
prive them of an advantage which nature had thus given them, and for the 
secure enjoyment of which the federal government was formed. Resolutions 
and instructions to the delegates in Congress in the sense of the memorial were 
passed by the House, November 29, 1786. — Journal of House of Delegates. 

276 THE WRITINGS OF [1786 

holds, and M^ Randolph1 is in nomination for his 
successor, and will pretty certainly be elected. R. H. 
L [ee] has been talked of, but is not yet proposed. 
The appt8 to Cong8 are a subject of conversation & 
will be made as soon as a Senate is made. Mr. 
Jones will be included in the New Delegation. Your 
presence & communications on the point of the 
Missippi are exceedingly wished for and would in 
several respects be extremely useful. If Mr. Jones 
does not return in a day or two come without him I 
beseech you. I am consulted frequently on matters 
concerning which I cannot or ought not to speak, 
and refer to you as the proper source of information 
as far as you may be at liberty. Hasten your trip I 
again beseech you. I hope Mrs. Monroe continues 
well. My sincerest respects wait on her. In haste 

Adieu. Yrs. 

TO JAMES MADISON. MAD. MSS. 

RICHMOND Nov? i. 1786. 

HON'D SIR, — Jn.° Tucker & Joe got down this fore 
noon, with articles sent. I shall execute your in 
structions as to the advertizements, and the Revised 
laws, if I can get at the latter time eno' in the morn 
ing. I will do the same as to the French Dicty for 
Mr Taylor if I can effect it in time ; if not I will make 
use of the first succeeding opportunity. I can give 
you no account of the Key of the Trunk. I suppose 
it must have been dropped or taken off & not re- 

1 Edmund Randolph was elected. 

1786] JAMES MADISON. 277 

placed, for keys in such cases are usually fastened to the 
Trunks. I omitted in my letter from Fred? to men 
tion that I had directed 2 bolts of Oznabergs to be 
sent along with the other articles from Philada. but as I 
did it on the like condition of price & quality being 
approved by Mr H. it is uncertain whether any of 
the articles will come. I intended it merely as an 
experiment. 

Paper money was the subject of discussion this day, 
and was voted by a majority of 84 vs 17, to be 
" unjust, impolitic, destructive of public & private 
confidence, and 1 of that virtue which is the basis of 
Republican Government." Our Revenue matters 
have also been on the anvil, several changes in our 
taxes are proposed, and it is not unlikely that some 
will take place. Duties on imports will be urged as 
far as they can be guarded agst smuggling by land, as 
well as by water. Govr Henry declines a reappoint6, 
but does not come into the Assembly. The Attorney 
or R. H. Lee, probably the former, will supply his 
place. We learn that great commotions are prevail 
ing in Massts. An appeal to the Sword is exceedingly 
dreaded. The discontented it is said are as numer 
ous as the friends of Gov' and more decided in their 

1 The vote appears in the Journals of the House of Delegates as 85 to 17. 
The resolution was: " Resolved, that it is the opinion of this committee, [of 
the whole] that the petition of sundry inhabitants of the counties of Brunswick 
and Campbell, praying for an emission of paper money, are unreasonable and 
ought to be rejected ; and that, in the opinion of this committee, an emission 
of paper money would be unjust, impolitic and destructive of public and private 
confidence, and of that virtue which is the basis of republican government." 
Nevertheless, petitions praying for an emission of paper money were received 
by the House December 7. 

278 THE WRITINGS OF [1786 

measures. Should they get uppermost, it is uncer 
tain what may be the effect. They profess to aim 
only at a reform of their Constitution and of certain 
abuses in the public administration, but an abolition 
of debts public & private, and a new division of 
property are strongly suspected to be in contempla 
tion. We also learn that a general combination of 
the Indians threatens the frontier of the U. S. Cong5 
are planning measures for warding off the blow, one 
of which is an augmentation of the federal troops to 
upwards of 2000 men. In addition to these ills, it is 
pretty certain that a formidable party in Cong5 are 
bent on surrendering the Missis1?1 to Spain for the 
sake of some commercial stipulations. The project 
has already excited much heat within that Assembly 
& if pursued will not fail to alienate the Western 
Country & confirm the animosity & jealousy already 
subsisting between the Atlantic States. I fear that, 
altho' it should be frustrated, the effects already pro 
duced will be a great bar to our amendment of the 
Confederacy which I consider as essential to its con 
tinuance. I have letters from Kentucky which inform 
me that the expedition ag5t the Indians has prevented 
the meeting which was to decide the question of their 
Independence. It is probable the news relative to 
the surrender of the Miss?1 will lessen the disposition 
to separate. If the bacon left behind by Jn.° should 
not have been sent it need not be sent at all. Fresh 
butter will from time to time, continue to be very 
acceptable. My best regards to my mother and the 
family. 

Your affec' & dutiful son. 

1786] JAMES MADISON. 279 

SPEECH IN THE VIRGINIA HOUSE OF DELEGATES, NOVEM 
BER, 1786, AGAINST PAPER MONEY.1 MAD. MSS. 

Unequal to Specie, i. being redemble at future day 
and not bearing interest. 2. illustrated by 
[obliterated] of Bank notes — Stock in funds— 

1 Notes on the back of a letter to Madison from Robt. Johnson, dated 23d 
September, 1786 : 

Paper Emissions 

67>zequal to specie. Bank notes. Stock. 
Object? navy bills, tallies 

Spanish paper 6foless 
£/«just either to Cred1.3 or debtrs 

1. alloy 

2. Weights & measures 

3. brass made for silver by Romn? 

4. Case of debtrs to other States 
^constitutional, i. property dec1? by bill of Rights 

Antifedl 2. trial by Jury 

Unnecessary. i. produce will bring specie 

2. paper in Tob? notes Warr4.5 &c 

Hurtful i. by luxury increase, not cure the evil of scarcity of specie 

2. destroy confidence public & private 

3. source of dissension between States see Confed? as to 

regulation of coin 

4. enrich collectors, speculators & — 

5. vitiate morals 

6. reverse the end of Gov*. by punishing good Citizens & 

rewarding bad. 

7. discourage foreign commerce &c 

8. dishonor our Repub [illegible] the eyes of mankind 
Examples of other States & during war 

Object? paper good formerly 

Answer. i. Not true in N. E. V* Mary? 12 to 20 Per G 

2. Confidence then 

3. principles of money not then understood 
Such w? not then nor now do in Europe 

Advantages from reject? paper 

1. Distinguish the State & its credit 

2. draw comerce & specie 

3. Not honorable [example] to other states. 

—Mad. MSS. 

28o THE WRITINGS OF [1786 

paper of Spain issued during late war [see 
Neckar on finance]. Navy bills — tallies. 3. 
being of less use than specie which answers 
externally as well as internally — must be of 
value which depends on the use. 

Unjust, i. to creditors if a legal tender. 2 to 
debtors if not legal tender, by increasing diffi 
culty of getting specie. This it does by increas 
ing extravagance & unfavourable balance of 
trade — & by destroying that confidence be 
tween man & man, by which resources of one 
may be comanded by another. Illustrated 
i by raising denomination of coin 2. increas 
ing alloy of d? brass made as silver by the 
Romans according to Sallust.1 3 by changing 
weights & measures. 4. by case of creditors 
within who are debtors without the State. 

Unconstitutional i. Affects rights of property as 
much as taking away equal value in land ; 
illustr? by case of land p? for down & to be con 
vey? in future, & of a law permitting convey 
ance to be satisfied by conveying a part only— 
or other land of inferior quality — 2. affects 
property without trial by Jury. 

1 Shortly after Cicero's first great speech against Catiline, Catiline's friend, 
Caius Manlius, despatched deputies to the Roman general, Quintus Marcius 
Rex, with instructions to say, among other things : ' ' Often have your fore 
fathers, taking compassion on the Roman people, relieved their poverty by their 
decrees ; and very recently, within our memory, silver was paid with brass, 
owing to the pressure of debt, with the approval of all good citizens." — Sallust's 
Conspiracy of Catiline, ch. 33. The payments were in pursuance of a law pro 
posed by L. Valerius Flaccus, Consul, A. U. C. 667. Only the fourth part 
was paid, an as for a sestertius, and a sestertius for a denarius. 

1786] JAMES MADISON. 281 

Antifederal. Right of regulating coin given to 
Cong? for two reasons, i. for sake of uni 
formity. 2. to prevent fraud in States towards 
each other or foreigners. Both these reasons 
hold equally as to paper money. 

U necessary, i. produce of country will bring in 
specie, if not laid out in superfluities. 2. Of 
paper, if necessary, eno' already in Tob? notes, 
& public securities — 3. the true mode of giv 
ing value to these, and bringing in specie is to 
enforce Justice & taxes. 

Pernicious, i. by fostering luxury, extends instead 
of curing scarcity of specie — 2. by disabling 
compliance with requisition of Cong? 3. serv 
ing dissentions between States. 4. destroy? 
confidence between individuals. 5. discour 
aging comerce — 6 enrich? collectors & sharp 
ers — 7. vitiating morals. 8. reversing end of 
Gov' which is to reward best & punish worst. 
9. conspiring with other States to disgrace 
Republican Gov'.5 in the eyes of mankind. 

Objection, paper money good before the War. 

Answ* i. not true in N. Eng? nor in V* where ex 
change rose to 60 per d nor in Mary? see 
Franklyn on paper money 2. confidence then 
not now. 3. principles of paper credit not 
then understood. Such w? not then nor now 
succeed in Great Britain &c. 

282 THE WRITINGS OF [1786 

TO GEORGE WASHINGTON. WASH. MSS. 

RICHMOND, NovT i, 1786. 

DEAR SIR, — I have been here too short a time as yet 
to have collected fully the politics of the Session. In 
general appearances are favorable. On the question 
of a paper emission the measure was this day rejected 
in emphatic terms by a majority of 84 vs. 17. The 
Affair of the Mississippi is but imperfectly known. I 
find that its influence on the federal spirit will not be 
less than was apprehended. The Western members 
will not be long silent on the subject. I inculcate a 
hope that the views of Congress may yet be changed 
and that it would be rash to suffer the alarm to inter 
fere with the policy of amending the Confederacy. 
The sense of the House has not yet been tried on 
the latter point. The Report from the Deputies to 
Annapolis lies on the Table, and I hope will be called 
for before the business of the Mississippi begins to 
ferment. Mr. Henry has signified his wish not to be 
reelected, but will not be in the Assembly. The 
Attorney & R. H. Lee are in nomination for his suc 
cessor. The former will probably be appointed, in 
which case the contest for that vacancy will lie be 
tween Col. Innes & Mr. Marshal. The nominations 
for Cong? are as usual numerous. There being no 
Senate yet it is uncertain when any of these appoint 
ments will take place. 

With the sincerest affection & the highest esteem 
I am Dear Sir 

Yf Obed< & humble ServF 

i y86] JAMES MADISON. 283 


RICHM?, Novr 8l.h, 1786. 

DEAR SIR, — I am just honoured with your favor of 
the 5^ inst : The intelligence from Gen! Knox J is 
gloomy indeed, but is less so than the colours in which 
I had it thro' another channel. If the lessons which it 
inculcates should not work the proper impressions on 
the American public, it will be a proof that our case 
is desperate. Judging from the present temper and 
apparent views of our Assembly, I have some ground 
for leaning to the side of Hope. The vote against 
paper money has been followed by two others of great 
importance. By .one of them petitions for applying a 
scale of depreciation to the Military certificates was 
unanimously rejected. By the other the expediency 
of complying with the Recommendation from Anna 
polis in favour of a general revision of the federal 
system was unanimously agreed to. A bill for the 
purpose is now depending and in a form which attests 
the most federal spirit. As no opposition has been 
yet made and it is ready for the third reading, I ex 
pect it will soon be before the public. It has been 
thought advisable to give this subject a very solemn 
dress, and all the weight that could be derived from a 
single State. This idea will be pursued in the selec 
tion of characters to represent Virg* in the federal 
convention. You will infer our earnestness on this 
point from the liberty which will be used of placing 
your name at the head of them. How far this liberty 

1 Respecting Shay's Rebellion. 

284 THE WRITINGS OF [1786 

may correspond with the ideas by which you ought to 
be governed will be best decided when it must ulti 
mately be decided. In every event it will assist 
powerfully in marking the zeal of our Legislature, 
and its opinion of the magnitude of the occasion. 
Mr. Randolph has been elected successor to Mr. 
Henry. He had 73 votes, Col. Bland 28, & R. H. 
Lee 22. The delegation to Congress drops Col. H. 
Lee, a circumstance which gives much pain to those 
who attend to the mortification in which it involves a 
man of sensibility. I am yet to learn the ground of 
the extensive disapprobation which has shewn itself. 
I am Dear Sir most respectfully & affectly 

Yr Obe# & hble Serv< 

TO HENRY LEE.1 MAD. MSS. 

(Copy.) 

RICHMOND Nov. gth 1786. 

DEAR SIR, — The last mail went out at a time when 

I was so engaged that I could not drop a line to you 

—the task of first conveying to you the result of the 

elections for Congress here has therefore probably 

1 " ALEX? 20* Dec: 86 

" MY DEAR SIR, — After the notification of my disgrace which reached me 
about the 2ol.h Nov. I hastened from N York & pressed forward to my home. 
Every difficulty of weather and roads opposed my progress and retarded me ef 
fectually, for it took us three weeks to reach this place which I had reckoned 
on accomplishing in twelve days. At length we arrived on the banks of pato- 
mac, and thro our avidity to embrace our friends, were on the point of destruc 
tion for some hours, by rashly adventuring to cross in the night, thro' bodies of 
floating ice. But providence, kinder to me than my beloved country rescued 
my family & myself, with some detriment of sense but no injury to my reputa 
tion — striking difference to be sure, and a theme for unceasing admiration of 
the Supreme benevolence on my part. This subject always disturbs me & excites 

1786] JAMES MADISON. 285 

been performed by some of your other friends — The 
superiority which your reflection and firmness will 
maintain over the vicissitudes incident to public life, 
forbids any suggestions which may be calculated to 
abate a sensibility with regard to them — I will only 
assure you that the indelicacy of the situation in which 
your country has placed you is severely felt by those 
whose esteem you would most value. 

The enclosed paper contains all the Legislative 
information worth giving you — Present my respectful 
compliments to Mr.s Lee, and assure yourself of my 
sincerest wishes for your happiness— 

Yrs Affy 

Js. MADISON J? 
To the 

Honble Henry Lee 
New York 

my resentment. But cruel & ungrateful as I estimate the treatment I have re 
ceived from the assembly, I am frank to declare to you that the opinion I had 
formed of your dereliction of the friendship which existed between us rendered 
my affection doubly severe. In all nations precedents are to be found demon 
strative of the caprice & indelicacy of public bodys, therefore being not alone I 
could have procured repose to my feelings that all who knew me, would attrib 
ute my dismission to the proper cause. 

" Your abandonment of a man who loved your character to excess & who es 
teemed your friendship among the first blessings of his life connected with the 
circumstance of your election to the office from which he was dismissed, to 
gether with many other considerations which are unnecessary to repeat wounded 
me deeply, & has given me many melancholy hours. Your letter of the iil.h af 
fords me some relief, & as it explains your intentions which before were subject 
to conjecture, strengthens my hope that you regard me as I have esteemed you, 
& that no difference in political sentiments ever has or ever can cool the affec 
tion which commenced in our youth, and till very lately has existed in full vigor. 
It is my wish that we may ever be united, & I believe you cannot question my 
sentiments, especially, when it relates to you." — Henry Lee to Madison, Mad. 
MSS. Lee was soon restored to favor in the State. Madison wrote to him 
again November 23"? . 

286 THE WRITINGS OF [1786 

TO JAMES MADISON. MAD. MSS. 

RICHM?, NovT 16, 1786. 

HON? SIR, — Mr. Anderson in answer to your en 
quiries tells me that you shall have goods at 87^ per 
G and that he will take Tob? for his brother if it be 
ready by the ioth of next month. 

The H. of Delegates have done little since my last, 
and what was then done is still ineffectual for want of 
a Senate. A proposition for stopping the receipt of 
indents was made, and met with so little countenance 
that it was withdrawn. They will continue to be re 
ceivable as far as the law now permits, and those who 
have them not would do well to provide them. A bill 
is depending which makes Tob? receivable in lieu of 
the specie part of the current tax, according to its 
value at the different Warehouses. Whether it will 
pass or not is uncertain. I think it most probable 
that it will pass. Nothing has yet been done as to 
the certificate tax. I have sent Mr. R. Taylor his 
French Diet? by Mr Pannel, its price was 4^. With 
best regards to the family I remain 

Yr dutiful Son 

I have a letter from Mr. J. Smith giving me the 
first information that J. W. & J. M. are not to return 
to the Academy, and asking for the balance. I hope 
my brother F. has taken steps for remitting his. 

TO HENRY LEE. 
(Copy) 

RICHMOND, Nov. 23"? 1786. 

DEAR SIR, — I have received your favor of the nth 
Instant. — Having never felt an intermission of my 

1 7 86] JAMES MADISON. 287 

regard for you I cannot be insensible either to the 
friendship which it speaks on your part or the failure 
of it, which it supposes on mine — That the latter sen 
timent should have resulted from a communication 
which could have no motive but one that ought to 
have prevented such a consequence, may well fill me 
with surprise — To the former, as well as to my own 
feelings, I owe an explanation which might perhaps be 
put into a more striking dress, if I were less unused 
to that mode of justifying my friendships — I observe 
in the first place, that I was not fully aware of the ex 
tent to which the event shewed that prejudices had 
been diffused against you — and that my intimations 
on that head were meant only to break the force of a 
disappointment which might fall upon you — This mis 
calculation of danger was also more natural as I had 
taken it for granted that one of the gentlemen elected 
would have been withheld or withdrawn from the 
nomination — 2d. that my own nomination was not 
suffered to be a bar to any steps in your behalf, which 
the occasion seemed to call for, and propriety seemed 
to admit — That it was properly a bar to some steps 
which in other circumstances might have been taken 
will be felt by every man who shuns the imputation 
of arrogantly presuming on his own appointment— 
and still more arrogantly seeking to annex to it, that 
of others with whom he chuses to be associated— 
Whenever indeed an assent to my own nomination to 
office, shall proceed from no other motive but that of 
" supporting the temporary wishes of myself," a pos 
sibility only of its interference with the consideration 

288 THE WRITINGS OF [1786 

of private friendship, shall not fail to recall it — As long 
as I continue to be carried into public service by 
motives more consonant to my professions, a presiwnp- 
tion at least of such an interference will be held a 
necessary apology to myself for yielding to that con 
sideration — What share the affair of the Mississippi 
had in the prejudices raised against you I am not able 
to say exactly — As far as I could learn the subject was 
little talked of previous to the election, and I believe 
your opinions known to but few — As I perceive your 
suspicions strongly connect this cause with the injury 
you have sustained, I feel a satisfaction in declaring 
that in the instances which came within my knowledge, 
I made it a point to urge the fact that you had invari 
ably obeyed your instructions — that any further in 
structions therefore might be safely confided to you, 
and that it would be cruel to sacrifice to possible 
dangers the feelings of a public servant, who was 
charged with no breach of duty whatever, and who in 
other respects had gained distinguished honor to him 
self and to his country— 

In stating these facts I discharge a debt due to truth, 
to candour, and to the friendship which has subsisted 
between us — The full approbation which my own 
mind gives to the part taken by me, leaves nothing to 
be added, but a return of my wishes for your health 
and happiness- 
Adieu, sincerely yrs 

Y MADISON JR 
Henry Lee Jun. Esq. 
Alexandria 

1786] JAMES MADISON. 289 

TO JAMES MADISON. MAD. MSS. 

Nov. 24. 1786. 

HOND SIR, — The H. of D. have just past a bill 
making Tob? receivable in the tax at the market price 
at the several Warehouses to be fixt by the Executive. 
There is a proviso that the highest price shall not ex 
ceed 28^. An equality of price throughout was con 
tended for which I disapproved i. because I think it 
would have been unjust. 2 because the bill could 
not have been carried in that form. I was not anxious 
for its success in any form, but acquiesced in it as it 
stands as the people may consider it in the light of an 
easement, and as it may prevent some worse project in 
the Assembly. I have in my hands about 300 doll" in 
indents the property of a friend in Philad* which may 
be applied to your taxes at the market value if you 
chuse to take them. A call of the House stops me. 

TO THOMAS JEFFERSON. MAD. MSS. 

RICHM? Decr 4, 1786. 

DEAR SIR, — Your last favor which was of the 25* 
of April, has already been acknowledged. My last 
inclosing a letter from Mr.s Carr, was dated a few 
days ago only. It was put into the hands of Mos^ 
Chevalier who has gone to N. York, whither I shall 
forward this to his care. He is to embark in the 
packet which will sail on the i5-h inst : The recom 
mendation from the meeting at Annapolis of a pleni 
potentiary Convention in Philad* in May next has 
been well rece? by the Assembly here. Indeed 

VOL. II. — IQ 

29o THE WRITINGS OF [1786 

the evidence of dangerous defects in the confedera 
tion has at length proselyted the most obstinate ad 
versaries to a reform. The unanimous sanction 
given by the Assembly to the inclosed compliance 1 
with the Recommendation marks sufficiently the rev 
olution of sentiment which the experience of one year 
has effected in this Country. The deputies are not 
yet appointed. It is expected that Gen! Washington, 
the present Govf E. Randolph, Esqr & the late one 
M! Henry, will be of the number.2 

The project for bartering the Missipi to Spain was 
brought before the Assembly after the preceding 
measure had been adopted. The report of it having 
reached the ears of the Western Representatives, as 
many of them as were on the spot, backed by a num 
ber of the late officers, presented a memorial, full of 
consternation & complaint ; in consequence of which 
some very pointed resolutions by way of instruction 
to the Delegates in Cong5 were unanimously entered 
into by the House of Delegates. They are now be- 

1 " Resolved unanimously, That an act ought to pass, in conformity to the re 
port of the Commissioners assembled at Annapolis on the I4th of September 
last, for appointing Commissioners on the part of this State, to meet Commis 
sioners on the part of the other States, in Convention at Philadelphia, on the 
second Monday in May next, with powers to devise such further provision as 
shall appear to them necessary to render the constitution of the federal govern 
ment adequate to the exigencies of the Union ; and to report such an act for 
that purpose to the United States in Congress assembled, as when agreed to by 
them, and afterwards confirmed by the Legislature of every State, will effect 
ually provide for the same." 

The resolution was written by Madison. The copy enclosed was contained 
in a newspaper clipping. 

2 Henry refused to serve. The full Virginia delegation consisted of Madison, 
Wythe, Randolph, Mason, Blair and McClurg. 

1786] JAMES MADISON. 291 

fore the Senate who will no doubt be also unanimous 
in their Concurrence. 

The question of paper money was among the first 
with which the Session opened. It was introduced 
by petitions from two Counties. The discussion was 
faintly supported by a few obscure patrons of the 
measure, and on the vote it was thrown out by 85 
vs 1 7. A petition for paying off the public securities 
according to a scale of their current prices, was unani- 
mously rejected. 

The consideration of the Revised Code has been 
resumed & prosecuted pretty far towards its conclu 
sion. I find however that it will be impossible as 
well as unsafe to give an ultimate fiat to the System 
at this session. The expedient I have in view is to 
provide for a supplemental revision by a comtee 
who shall accommodate the bills skipped over, and 
the subsequent laws, to such part of the code as has 
been adopted, suspending the operation of the latter 
for one year longer. Such a work is rendered indis 
pensable by the alterations made in some of the bills 
in their passage, by the change of circumstances 
which call for corresponding changes in sundry bills 
which have been laid by, and by the incoherence be 
tween the whole code & the laws in force of poste 
rior date to the code. This business has consumed 
a great deal of the time of two Sessions, and has 
given infinite trouble to some of us. We have never 
been without opponents who contest at least every 
innovation inch by inch. The bill proportioning 
crimes & punishments on which we were wrecked 

292 THE WRITINGS OF [1786 

last year, has after undergoing a number of altera 
tions, got thro' a Committee of the whole ; but it has 
not yet been reported to the House, where it will 
meet with the most vigorous attack. I think the 
chance is rather against its final passage in that 
branch of the Assembly, and if it should not miscarry 
there, it will have another gauntlet to run through the 
Senate. 

The bill on the subject of Education which could 
not safely be brought into discussion at all last year, 
has undergone a pretty indulgent consideration this. 
In order to obviate the objection from the inability of 
the Country to bear the expence, it was proposed that 
it should be passed into a law, but its operation 
suspended for three or four years. Even in this 
form however there would be hazard in pushing it 
to a final question, and I begin to think it will be 
best to let it lie over for the supplemental Re- 
visors, who may perhaps be able to put it into 
some shape that will lessen the objection of ex- 
pence. I should have no hesitation at this policy 
if I saw a chance of getting a Committee equal to 
the work of compleating the Revision. Mf Pen- 
dleton is too far gone to take any part in it. Mr. 
Wythe I suppose will not decline any duty which 
may be imposed on him, but it seems almost cruel 
to tax his patriotic zeal any farther. Mr Blair is 
the only remaining character in which full confi 
dence could be placed. 

The delay in the administration of Justice from the 
accumulation of business in the Gen1 Court, and de- 

1786] JAMES MADISON. 293 

spair of obtaining a reform according to the Assize 
plan, have led me to give up this plan in favor of 
district Courts ; which differ from the former in being 
clothed with all the powers of the Gen! Court within 
their respective districts. The bill on the latter plan 
will be reported in a few days and will probably tho' 
not certainly be adopted. 

The fruits of the impolitic measures taken at the 
last Session with regard to taxes are bitterly tasted 
now. Our Treasury is empty, no supplies have gone 
to the federal treasury, and our internal embarrass 
ments torment us exceedingly. The present Assembly 
have good dispositions on the subject, but some time 
will elapse before any of their arrangements can be 
productive. In one instance only the general prin 
ciples of finance have been departed from. The 
specie part of the tax under collection is made payable 
in Tob° This indulgence to the people as it is called 
& considered was so warmly wished for out of doors, 
and so strenuously pressed within that it could not be 
rejected without danger of exciting some worse pro 
ject of a popular cast. As Tob° alone is made corn- 
mutable, there is reason to hope the public treasury 
will suffer little if at all. It may possibly gain. 

The Repeal of the port bill has not yet been at 
tempted. Col. Mason has been waited for as the hero 
of the attack. As it is become uncertain whether he 
will be down at all, the question will probably be 
brought forward in a few days. The repeal were he 
present would be morally certain. Under the disad 
vantage of his absence it is more than probable. The 

294 THE WRITINGS OF [1786 

question of British debts has also awaited his patron 
age. I am unable to say what the present temper is on 
that subject, nothing having passed that could make 
trial of it. The repeated disappointments I have sus 
tained in efforts in favor of the Treaty make me ex 
tremely averse to take the lead in the business again. 
The public appointm1.5 have been disposed of as fol 
lows : The contest for the chair lay between Col. 
Bland & M5 Prentis. The latter prevailed by a 
majority of near 20 votes. Mr Harrison the late 
Speaker lost his election in Surry which he repre 
sented last year ; and since has been equally unsuc 
cessful in his pristine County Charles City where he 
made a second experiment. In the choice of a Gov 
ernor Mf E. Randolph had a considerable majority 
of the whole on the first ballot. His competitors 
were Col. Bland & R. H. Lee, each of whom had be 
tween 20 & 30 votes. The delegation to Cong? con 
tained under the first choice Grayson, Carrington, R. 
H. Lee, Mr. Jones & myself. Col. H. Lee of the 
last delegation was dropt. The causes were differ 
ent I believe & not very accurately known to me. 
One of them is said to have been his supposed heter 
odoxy touching the Missipp.' Mr Jones has since 
declined his appointing & Col. Lee has been rein 
stated by an almost unanimous vote. A vacancy in 
the Council produced by the Resignation of Mr. 
Roane is filled by Mr. Boiling Starke. Cyrus Griffin 
was a candidate but was left considerably in the rear. 
The Attorney Generalship has been conferred on Col. 
Innes. Mi" Marshall had a handsome vote. 

1786] JAMES MADISON. 295 

Our summer & fall have been wet beyond all im 
agination in some places, and much so everywhere. 
The crops of corn are in general plentiful. The price 
up the country will not exceed Ss or IDS. In this 
district it is scarcest & dearest, being already as high 
as 1 2s or 15^. The crop of Tob° will fall short con 
siderably it is calculated of the last year's. The 
highest & lowest prices in the Country of the new 
crop are 25^ & 2os. A rise is confidently expected. 

My next will be from N. Y. whither I shall set out 
as soon as the principal business of the Session is 
over. Till my arrival there I postpone communica 
tions relative to our national affairs, which I shall 
then be able to make on better grounds, as well as 
some circumstances relative to the affairs of this State, 
which the hurry of the present opportunity restrains 
me from entering into. 

Adieu. 

TO GENERAL WASHINGTON. MAD. MSS. 

RICHMOND, DecT 7, 1786 

DEAR SIR, — Notwithstanding the communications 
in your favor of the i8th Ult°, which has remained till 
now unacknowledged, it was the opinion of every 
judicious friend whom I consulted, that your name 
could not be spared from the Deputation to the Meet 
ing in May at Philadelphia. It was supposed in the 
first place, that the peculiarity of the Mission, and its 
acknowledged pre-eminence over every other public 
object, may possibly reconcile your undertaking it, 

296 THE WRITINGS OF [1786 

with the respect which is justly due, & which you wish 
to pay, to the late officers of the Army ; and in the 
second place, that although you should find that or 
any other consideration an obstacle to your attend 
ance on the service, the advantage of having your 
name in the front of the appointment, as a mark of 
the earnestness of Virga, and an invitation to the most 
select characters from every part of the Confederacy, 
ought at all events to be made use of. In these senti 
ments I own I fully concurred, and flatter myself that 
they will at least apologize for my departure from 
those held out in your letter. I even flatter myself 
that they will merit a serious consideration with your 
self, whether the difficulties which you enumerate 
ought not to give way to them. 

The affair of the Mississippi which was brought 
before the Assembly in a long Memorial from the 
Western members and some of the Officers, has 
undergone a full consideration of both Houses. The 
Resolutions printed in the papers were agreed to 
unanimously in the House of Delegates. In the 
Senate, I am told, the language was objected to by 
some members, as too pointed. They certainly ex 
press in substance the decided sense of the country 
at this time on the subject, and were offered in the 
place of some which went much farther, and which 
were in other respects exceptionable. I am entirely 
convinced, from what I observe here, that unless the 
project of Congress (for ceding to Spain the Missis 
sippi for 25 years) can be reversed, the hopes of 
carrying this State into a proper federal system will 

1786] JAMES MADISON. 297 

be demolished. Many of our most federal leading 
men are extremely soured with what has already 
passed. Mr. Henry, who has been hitherto the 
Champion of the federal cause has become a cold 
advocate, and in the event of an actual sacrifice of 
the Mississippi by Congress, will unquestionably go 
over to the opposite side. I have a letter from Col. 
Grayson of late date which tells me that nothing 
further has been done in Congress, and one from M* 
A. Clarke of New Jersey, which informs me that he 
expected every day, instructions from his Legislature 
for reversing the vote given by the Delegates of that 
State in favor of the project. 

The temper of the Assembly at the beginning of 
the Session augured an escape from every measure 
this year not consonant to the proper principles of 
Legislation. I fear now that the conclusion will con 
tradict the promising outset. In admitting Tobacco 
for a commutable, we perhaps swerved a little from 
the line in which we set out. I acquiesced in the 
measure myself as a prudential compliance with the 
clamours within doors & without, and as a probable 
means of obviating more hurtful experiments. I find 
however now, that it either had no such tendency, or 
that schemes were in embryo which I was not aware 
of. A bill for establishing District Courts, has been 
clogged with a plan for installing all debts now due, 
so as to make them payable in three annual portions. 
What the fate of the experiment will be I know not. 
It seems pretty certain, that if it fails, the bill will fail 
with it. It is urged in support of the measure that it 

298 THE WRITINGS OF [1786 

will be favorable to debtors and creditors both, and 
that, without it the bill for accelerating justice would 
ruin the former, and endanger the public repose. The 
objections are so numerous, and of such a nature, that 
I shall myself give up the bill rather than pay such a 
price for it. 

With unfeigned affection, &c. 

TO JAMES MADISON. MAD. MSS. 

RICHM? Dec1: i7'h 1786 

HOND SIR, — Yours by Mr Porter has been handed 
to me. I have not had an opp? of enquir? of Mr 
Anderson concerning the person who is to receive 
Tob? for his brother. I mentioned before that the 
rate of indents here was about a dollar in the pound. 
Whether I can get the certificates for your taxes I 
cannot say, nor do I know the rate at which they 
pass. Mr Jones has returned hither & declines his 
app' to Cong5 Fresh butter will be very acceptable, 
the supply sent being already out. No other article 
of provisions is wanted, as we dine at a Tavern. I 
propose to go from Fred? to N. York in the Stage, & 
shall consequently take no horses with me. When I 
shall set out I can not decide, but expect to leave this 
before Xmas sometime. The representation of the 
State in Cong" during the winter will be so precarious 
that I shall be able to stay a day or two only in 
Orange.1 I have other reasons also of a public nature 

1 " The truth is, we have not a government to wield and correct. . . . We 
have only four States now on the floor." — Carrington to Madison, from Con 
gress, December 18, 1786. Mad. MSS. 

1 786] JAMES MADISON. 299, 

for wishing to hasten my journey, and a private one 
arising from the probable increase of the cold in case 
of delay. Tell my brother Ambrose, I wish him to 
sound Mf Cowherd as to the possibility of his making 
a payment before the first of Jan? instead of the time 
fixed. I will abate a reasonable interest, and be 
obliged to him into the bargain. My affections to the 
family. Y? dutiful son 

Y MADISON Jr. 

I wish my cloathes so far as they may require little 
amendm*5 to be put in order before I get to Orange, 
that I may not be detained on that score. 

TO JAMES MONROE. MAD. MSS. 

RICHMD, Dec1. 2ist, 1786. 

DEAR SIR, — Your favor of the i Gainst: came to 
hand too late the evening before last to be then an 
swered. The payment of the 100 d^s here was perfectly 
convenient, and I have put that sum into the hands of 
Mr Jones to be applied to the use which you have 
directed. This payment added to the 100 d's paid in 
Philad? leaves still a balance of 137^ according to my 
memoranda which is subject to your further orders. 
We hear nothing from any of the other States on the 
subject of the federal Convention. The ice seems to 
have intercepted totally the Northern communication 
for a considerable time past. The Assembly have 
been much occupied of late with the bill for district 
Courts. On the final question there was a majority 
of one ag5' it in fact, though on the count a mistake 

3oo THE WRITINGS OF [1786 

made the division equal & it fell to the Chair to 
decide who passed the bill. The real majority how 
ever were sensible of the mistake & refused to agree 
to the title, threatening a secession at the same time. 
The result was a compromise that the question sd be 
decided anew the next morning, when the bill was 
lost in a full house by a single voice. It is now pro 
posed to extend the Session of the Gen! Court so as 
to accelerate the business depending there. We hear 
that Maryland is much agitated on the score of paper 
money the H. of Delegates having decided in favour 
of an emission. Adieu. Yr.s Aff? 

TO GEORGE WASHINGTON. MAD. MSS. 

RICHMOND, Decr 24, 1786. 

DEAR SIR, — Your favor of the i6th instant came 
to hand too late on thursday evening to be answered 
by the last mail. I have considered well the circum 
stances which it confidentially discloses, as well as 
those contained in your preceding favor.1 The diffi 
culties which they oppose to an acceptance of the 
appointment in which you are included can as little 
be denied, as they can fail to be regretted. But I 

1 Washington declined re-election to the presidency of the Society of the 
Cincinnati, chiefly because he did not wish to participate in a contest over a 
proposed change in the plan of the society, which was to be discussed at 
the meeting to be held at Philadelphia in May. He gave, as his reasons for 
not attending, his occupations, his precarious health, and that he desired to live 
in retirement. To serve in the federal convention when the Cincinnati were 
in session might put him in a false position. He finally yielded, however, to 
the pleadings of his friends. Washington to Madison, December 16, 1786, 
Ford's Writings of Washington, II, q2, ct seq. 

1786] JAMES MADISON. 301 

still am inclined to think that the posture of our 
affairs, if it should continue, would prevent every 
criticism on the situation which the contemporary 
meetings would place you in ; and that at least a 
door could be kept open for your acceptance here 
after, in case the gathering clouds became so dark & 
menacing as to supersede every consideration but 
that of our national existence & safety. A suspence 
of your ultimate determination would be nowise in 
convenient in a public view, as the Executive are 
authorised to fill vacancies ; and can fill them at any 
time ; and, in any event, three out of seven deputies 
are authorized to represent the State. How far it 
may be admissible in another view, will depend per 
haps in some measure on the chance of your finally 
undertaking the service ; but principally on the corre 
spondence which is now passing on the subject between 
yourself and the Governor. 

Your observations on Tobacco as a commutable in 
the taxes are certainly just & unanswerable. My ac 
quiescence in the measure was against every general 
principle which I have embraced, and was extorted 
by a fear that some greater evil under the name of 
relief to the people would be substituted. I am far 
from being sure however that I did right. The other 
evils contended for have indeed been as yet parried, 
but it is very questionable whether the concession in 
the affair of the Tob? had much hand in it. The 
original object was paper money. Petitions for gradu 
ating certificates succeeded. Next came instalments. 
And lastly a project for making property a tender for 

302 THE WRITINGS OF [1786 

debts at j- of its value. All these have been happily 
got rid of by very large majorities. But the positive 
efforts in favor of Justice have been less successful. 
A plan for reforming the administration in this branch 
accommodated more to the general opinion than the 
Assize plan got as far as the third reading, and was 
then lost by a single vote. The Senate would have 
passed it readily, and would have even added amend 
ments of the right complexion. I fear it will be some 
time before this necessary reform will again have a 
fair chance. Besides some other grounds of appre 
hension, it may well be supposed that the Bill which 
is to be printed for consideration of the public, will, 
instead of calling forth the sanction of the wise & 
virtuous, be a signal to interested men to redouble 
their efforts to get into the Legislature. The Revenue 
business is still unfinished. The present rage seems 
to be to draw all our income from trade. From the 
sample given of the temper of the House of Delegates 
on this subject, it is much to be feared that the duties 
will be augmented with so daring a hand, that we 
shall drive away our trade instead of making it tribu 
tary to our treasury. The only hope that can be in 
dulged is that of moderating the fury. The Port bill 
was defended against a repeal by about 70 votes 
against about 40. The revised code is not quite 
finished and must receive the last hand from a suc 
ceeding assembly. Several bills of consequence be 
ing rendered unfit to be passed in their present form 
by a change of circumstances since they were pre 
pared, necessarily require revision. Others as the 

1787] JAMES MADISON. 303 

Education bill &c are thought to be adapted only 
to a further degree of wealth and population. Others, 
as the Execution bill which subjects lands to debts, 
do not find yet an adequate patronage. Several bills 
also, and particularly the bill relating to crimes & 
punishments, have been rejected, and require recon 
sideration from another assembly. This last bill 
after being purged of its objectionable peculiarities, 
was thrown out on the third reading by a single vote. 
It will little elevate your idea of our Senate to be 
told that they negatived the bill defining the privileges 
of ambassadors, on the principle, as I am told, that 
an alien ought not to be put on better ground than 
a citizen. British debts have not yet been men 
tioned, and probably will not, unless Congress say 
something on the matter before the adjournment. 
With every sentiment of esteem &c &c. 

TO EDMUND PENDLETON. Mad. Mss. 

RICHMOND, Jan? gth, 1787. 

MY DEAR SIR, — Your favor of the 9^ ult, has been 
so long on hand unanswered that I can not now ac 
knowledge it without observing in the apology for the 
delay that I waited for some measures of which I 
wished to communicate the event. The district bill 
of which I formerly made mention, was finally thrown 
into a very curious situation, and lost by a single voice. 
I refer you for its history to Col. Pendleton, who was 
here at the time and is now with you. An attempt 
has been since made to render the General Court more 

3o4 THE WRITINGS OF [1787 

efficient by lengthening its terms, and transferring the 
criminal business to the Judges of the Admiralty. As 
most of the little motives which co-operated with a dis 
like to Justice, in defeating the District Bill happened 
to be in favour of the subsequent attempt, it went 
through the House of Delegates by a large Majority. 
The Senate have disappointed the majority infinitely 
in putting a negative on it, as we just learn that they 
have done, by a single voice. An amendment of the 
County Courts has also been lost, through a disagree 
ment of the two Houses on the subject. Our merit 
on the score of Justice has been entirely of the nega 
tive kind. It has been sufficient to reject violations 
of this cardinal virtue, but not to make any positive 
provisions in its behalf. 

The revised code has not been so thoroughly passed 
as I hoped at the date of my last. The advance of 
the Session, the coldness of a great many, and the dis 
like of some to the subject, required that it should be 
pressed more gently than could be reconciled with a 
prosecution of the work to the end. I had long fore 
seen that a supplemental revision as well of some of 
the articles of the Code, as of the laws passed since it 
was digested, would become necessary, and had settled 
a plan for the purpose with myself. This plan was 
to suspend the laws adopted from the code, until the 
supplement could be prepared, and then to put the 
whole in force at once. Several circumstances satis 
fied me of late that if the work was put within the 
reach of the next assembly, there would be danger 
not only of its being left in a mutilated state, but of 

1787] JAMES MADISON. 305 

its being lost altogether. The observations in your 
favor above acknowledged, encouraged me to propose 
that the parts of the code adopted should take effect 
without waiting for the last hand to it. This idea has 
been pursued, and the bills passed at the last Session 
are to comence as then determined, those passed at 
the present being suspended until July next. I would 
myself have preferred a suspension of the former also 
till July, for the sake of a more thorough promulga 
tion, and of a cotemporary introduction of the laws 
many of which are connected together ; but the Senate 
thought otherwise, and in a ticklish stage of the Ses 
sion, the friends of the code in the H. of D. joined 
me in opinion that it would be well to create no un 
necessary delays or disagreements. I have strong 
apprehensions that the work may never be systemati 
cally perfected for the reasons which you deduce from 
our form of Government. Should a disposition how 
ever continue in the Legislature as favorable as it has 
been in some stages of the business, I think a succes 
sion of revisions, each growing shorter than the pre 
ceding, might ultimately bring a completion within 
the compass of a single Session. At all events, the 
invaluable acquisition of important bills prepared at 
leisure by skilful hands, is so sensibly impressed on 
thinking people by the crudeness and tedious discus 
sion of such as are generally introduced, that the ex- 
pence of a continued revision will be thought by all 
such to be judiciously laid out for this purpose alone. 
The great objection which I personally feel arises from 
the necessity we are under of imposing the weight of 

VOL. II. — 20 

306 THE WRITINGS OF [1787 

these projects on those whose past services have so 
justly purchased an exemption from future labours. 
In your case the additional consideration of ill health, 
became almost an affair of Conscience, and I have 
been no otherwise able to stifle the remorse of having 
nominated you along with Mr Wythe and Mr Blair 
for reviewing the subject left unfinished, than by re 
flecting that your colleagues will feel every disposition 
to abridge your share of the burden, and in case of 
such an increase of your infirmity as to oblige you to 
renounce all share, that they are authorised to ap 
point to, I will not say toyf//, the vacancy. I flatter 
myself that you will be at least able to assist in gen 
eral consultations on the subject, and to adjust the 
bills unpassed to the changes which have taken place 
since they were prepared. On the most unfortunate 
suppositions my intentions will be sure to find in your 
benevolence a pardon for my error. 

The Senate have saved our commerce from a 
dreadful blow which it would have sustained from a 
bill passed in the H. of D. imposing enormous duties, 
without waiting for the concurrence of the other States 
or even of Maryland. There is a rage at present for 
high duties, partly for the purpose of revenue, partly 
of forcing manufactures, which it is difficult to resist. 
It seems to be forgotten in the first case that in the 
arithmetic of the customs as Dean Swift observes 2 
& 2 do not make four ; and in the second that man 
ufactures will come of themselves when we are ripe 
for them. A prevailing argument among others on 
the subject is that we ought not to be dependent on 

1787] JAMES MADISON. 307 

foreign nations for useful articles, as the event of a 
war may cut off all external supplies. This argument 
certainly loses its force when it is considered that in 
case of a war hereafter, we should stand on a very 
different ground from what we lately did. Neutral 
Nations, whose rights are becoming every day more 
& more extensive, would not now suffer themselves 
to be shut out from our ports, nor would the hostile 
Nation presume to attempt it. As far as relates to 
implements of war which are contraband, the argu 
ment for our fabrication of them is certainly good. 

Our latest information from the Eastwl has not re 
moved our apprehensions of ominous events in that 
quarter. It is pretty certain that the seditious party 
has become formidable in the Gov^ and that they have 
opened a comunication with the viceroy of Canada. 
I am not enough acquainted with the proceedings of 
Congress to judge of some of the points, which you 
advert to. The regulations of their land office have 
appeared to me nearly in the light in which they do 
to you. I expect to set out in a few days for N. 
York, when I shall revive my claim to a correspond 
ence which formerly gave me so much pleasure and 
which will enable me perhaps to answer your queries. 
The end of my paper will excuse an abrupt but 
affect6 Adieu. 

TO THOMAS JEFFERSON. MAD. MSS. 

NEW YORK, Febv isth, 1787. 

DEAR SIR, My last was from Richmond, of the 4l.h 
of December, and contained a sketch of our legislative 

3o8 THE WRITINGS OF [1787 

proceedings prior to that date. The principal pro 
ceedings of subsequent date relate as nearly as I can 
recollect Ist, to a rejection of the Bill on crimes & 
punishments, which after being altered so as to re 
move most of the objections as was thought, was lost 
by a single vote. The rage agst Horse stealers had a 
great influence on the fate of the bill. Our old bloody 
code is by this event fully restored, the prerogative of 
conditional pardon having been taken from the Ex 
ecutive by a judging of the Court of Appeals, and the 
temporary law granting it to them having expired and 
been left unrevived. I am not without hope that the 
rejected bill will find a more favorable disposition in 
the next Assembly. 2dly. To the bill for diffusing 
knowledge, it went through two readings by a small 
majority and was not pushed to a third one. The 
necessity of a systematic provision on the subject was 
admitted on all hands. The objections agst that par 
ticular provision were i. the expence, wch was alledged 
to exceed the ability of the people 2. the difficulty of 
executing it in the present sparse settlement of the 
Country. 3. the inequality of the districts as con 
tended by the Western members. The last objection 
is of little weight and might have been easily removed 
if it had been urged in an early stage of the discus 
sion. The bill now rests on the same footing with 
the other unpassed bills in the Revisal. 3dly. To the 
Revisal at large. It was found impossible to get 
thro' the system of the late Session, for several rea 
sons, i. the changes which have taken place since 
its compilement, in our affairs and our laws ; particu- 

1787] JAMES MADISON. 309 

larly those relating to our Courts, called for changes 
in some of the bills which could not be made with 
safety by the Legislature. 2. The pressure of other 
business which tho' of less importance in itself, yet 
was more interesting for the moment. 3. the alarm 
excited by an approach toward the Execution Bill, 
which subjects land to the payment of debts. This 
bill could not have been carried, was too important to 
be lost, and even too difficult to be amended without 
destroying its texture. 4. the danger of passing the 
Repealing Bill at the end of the Code, before the op 
eration of the various amendments, &c., made by the 
Assembly could be leisurely examined by competent 
Judges. Under these circumstances it was thought 
best to hand over the residue of the work to our suc 
cessors, and in order to have it made compleat, Mr. 
Pendleton, Mr. Wythe, & Blair, were app<! a Com 
mittee to amend the unpassed bills & also to prepare 
a supplemental revision of the laws which have been 
passed since the original work was executed. It be 
came a critical question with the friends of the Re- 
visal whether the parts of the Revisal actually passed 
shd be suspended in the mean time, or left to take 
their operation. The first plan was strongly recom 
mended by the advantage of giving effect to the sys 
tem at once, and by the inconveniency arising from 
the latter of leaving the old laws to a constructive re 
peal only. The latter notwithstanding was preferred 
as putting the adopted bills out of the reach of a suc 
ceeding Assembly, which might possibly be unfriendly 
to the system altogether. There was good reason to 

3io THE WRITINGS OF [1787 

suspect Mr. Henry who will certainly be then a mem 
ber. By suffering the bills which have passed to take 
effect in the mean time it will be extremely difficult 
to get rid of them. 4thly. Religion. The Act incor 
porating the protestant Episcopal Church excited the 
most pointed opposition from the other Sects. They 
even pushed their attacks ags.1 the reservation of the 
Glebes &c., to the church exclusively. The latter cir 
cumstance involved the Legislature in some embar 
rassment. The result was a repeal of the Act, with 
a saving of the property. 5th. The district Courts. 
After a great struggle they were lost in the House of 
Delegates by a single voice. 6thly. taxes ; the at 
tempts to reduce former taxes were baffled, and sundry 
new taxes added, on lawyers, ^ of their fees, on Clks 
of Courts, \ of do., on doctr.s a small tax, a tax on 
houses in towns so as to level their burden with that 
of real estate in the country, very heavy taxes on 
riding carriages, &c. Besides these an additional 
duty of 2 per Cr. ad valorem on all merchandizes im 
ported in vessels of nations not in treaty with the U. 
S. an add! duty of 4? on every gallon of wine except 
French wines and of 2? on every gallon of distilled 
Spirits except French brandies which are made duty 
free. The exceptions in favor of France were the 
effect of the sentiments & regulations communicated 
to you by MT Calonne. A printed copy of the com 
munication was recd the last day of the session in a 
newspaper from N. York, and made a warm impres 
sion on the Assembly. Some of the taxes are liable 
to objections, and were much complained of. With 

1787] JAMES MADISON. 311 

the additional duties on trade they will considerably 
enhance our revenue. I should have mentioned a 
duty of 6s. per Hh? on Tob° for complying with a 
special requisition of Cong5 for supporting the corps 
of men raised for the public security. 7th. the Mis 
sissippi. At the date of my last the House of 
Delegates only had entered into Resolutions ags* a 
surrender of the right of navigating it. The Senate 
shortly after concurred. The States South of Virgf 
still adhere as far as I can learn to the same ideas as 
have governed Virginia. N. Jersey one of the States 
in Congress which was on the opposite side has now 
instructed her Delegates ag5t surrendering to Spain 
the navigation of the River even for a limited time. 
And Pen? it is expected will do the same. I am told 
that Mr. Jay has not ventured to proceed in his project^ 
and I suppose will not now do it1. 8th. the Conven 
tion for amending the federal Constitution. At the 
date of my last Virg? had passed an Act for appoint 
ing deputies. The deputation consists of Gen! Wash 
ington Mi" Henry, late Govr, Mf Randolph present 
Gov^ Mf Blair M? Wythe Col. Mason & Js M. N. 
Carol? has also made an app*, including her present & 
late Gov*. S. C. it is expected by her delegates in 
Cong5, will not fail to follow these examples. Mary 
land has determined I just hear to app* but has not 
yet agreed on her deputies. Delaware, Penna, & N. 
Jy, have made respectable appointmts. N. York has not 
yet decided on the point. Her Assembly has just re 
jected the impost which has an unpropitious aspect. 

1 Cypher. 

312 THE WRITINGS OF [1787 

It is not clear however that she may not yet accede 
to the other measure. Connecticut has a great aver 
sion to Conventions, and is otherwise habitually dis 
inclined to abridge her State prerogatives. Her 
concurrence nevertheless is not despaired of. Mass*.5 
it is said will concur, though hitherto not well in 
clined. N. Hampshire will probably do as she does. 
Rhode Island can be relied on for nothing that is 
good. On all great points she must sooner or later 
bend to Mass'.8 and Connecticut. 

Having but just come to this place I do not under 
take to give you any general view of American affairs, 
or of the particular State of things in Massts. The 
omission is probably of little consequence as informa 
tion of this sort must fall within your correspondence 
with the office of foreign affairs. I shall not however 
plead this consideration in a future letter, when I hope 
to be more able to write fully. 

M* Fitzhugh has paid into my hands for your 
use ,£58-6-8 Virga Currency in discharge of 1000 
livres advanced to him in France. He was anxious 
to have settled it according to the actual exchange 
instead of the legal one of 33! on the British stand 
ard, and even proposed the addition of Interest. I 
did not hesitate to conclude that I should fulfill your 
intentions by rejecting both. I have sent to Mrs 
Carr ^25 for the use of your nephews as you directed. 
The balance is in my hands subject to your orders 
tho' I shall venture to apply it in the same way if I 
sh? be apprised of its being necessary to prevent in 
terruption to the studies of the Young gentlemen. 

1787] JAMES MADISON. 313 

My last informed you of the progress &c. of Master 
Peter. I have since rec*? from the preset of Hampden 
Sydny a letter containing the following paragraph 
" Dabney Carr is a boy of very promising genius & 
very diligent application. He conducts himself with 
a good deal of prudence, & I hope will answer the ex 
pectations of his friends. I was afraid at first that he 
was dull or indolent from his appearance, but I find 
myself agreeably disappointed. His principal study 
at present is the Latin language, but he is also obliged 
to pay some attention to his native tongue. 
I remain Df Sir Yr AfTecte friend 

TO GEORGE WASHINGTON. WASH. MSS. 

NEW YORK Feby 21, 1787. 

DEAR SIR, — Some little time before my arrival here 
a quorum of the States was made up and Gen! Sinclair 
put in the Chair. We have at present nine States on the 
ground, but shall lose South Carolina to-day. Other 
States are daily expected. What business of moment 
may be done by the present or a fuller meeting is un 
certain.1 The objects now depending and most im 
mediately in prospect are i. The Treaty of peace. 
The Secretary of foreign Affairs has very ably re 
ported a view of the infractions on both sides, his 

1 " Mr. James Madison, a delegate from Virginia, produced his credentials, 
by which it appears, that on the 7th of November last, he was appointed a dele 
gate to serve in Congress until the first Monday in November, 1787." — Jour 
nals of Congress, February 12, 1787, vol. xii., p. 9. (Ed. 1801.) 

3i4 THE WRITINGS OF [1787 

exposition of the contested articles, and the steps pro 
per to be taken by Congress. I find what I was not be 
fore apprized of that more than one infraction on our 
part, preceded even the violation on the other side in 
the instance of the Negroes. Some of the reasoning 
on the subject of the debts would be rather grating 
to Virginia. A full compliance with the Treaty ac 
cording to judicial constructions, and as a ground for 
insisting on a reciprocal compliance, is the proposi 
tion in which the Report terminates. 2. a Recom 
mendation of the proposed Convention in May. 
Cong- have been much divided and embarrassed on 
the question whether their taking an interest in the 
measure would impede or promote it. On one side 
it has been urged that some of the backward States 
have scruples ag5.' acceding to it without some consti 
tutional sanction ; on the other that other States will 
consider any interference of Cong* as proceeding 
from the same views which have hitherto excited 
their jealousies. A vote of the Legislature here en 
tered into yesterday will give some relief in the case. 
They have instructed their delegates in Cong5 to 
move for the recomendation in question. The vote 
was carried by a majority of one only in the Senate, 
and there is room to suspect that the minority were 
actuated by a dislike to the substance rather than by 

' any objections ags.c the form of the business. A large 
Majority in the other branch a few days ago put a 
definitive veto on the Impost. It -would seem as if 
the politics of this State are directed by individual 
interests and plans, which might be incommoded by 

I 

1787] JAMES MADISON. 315 

the controul of an efficient federal Government. The 
four States North of it are still to make their decision 
on 'the subject of the Convention. I am told by one 
of the Mass5.1 delegates that the Legislature of that 
State which is now sitting, will certainly accede and 
appoint deputies if Cong? declare their approbation 
of the measure. I have similar information that Con 
necticut will probably come in, though it is said that 
the interference of Congress will rather have a con 
trary tendency there. It is expected that S. Carolina 
will not fail to adopt the plan, and that Georgia is 
equally well disposed. All the intermediate States 
between the former and N. York have already ap 
pointed deputies, except Maryland which it is said 
means to do it, and has entered into some vote which 
declares as much. Nothing has yet been done by 
the New Cong5, with regard to the Mississippi. Our 
latest information from Mass1.5 gives hopes that the 
meeting or as the Legislature there now style it, the 
Rebellion is nearly extinct. If the measures however 
on foot for disarming and disfranchising those con 
cerned in it should be carried into effect, a new crisis 
may be brought on. I have not been here long 
enough to gather the general sentiments of leading 
characters touching our affairs & prospects. I am 
inclined to hope that they will gradually be concen 
tered in the plan of a thorough reform of the existing 
system. Those who may lean towards a Monarchial 
Gov', and who I suspect are swayed by very indi 
gested ideas, will of course abandon an unattainable 
object whenever a prospect opens of rendering the 

316 THE WRITINGS OF [1787 

Republican form competent to its purposes. Those 
who remain attached to the latter form must soon 
perceive that it cannot be preserved at all under any 
modification which does not redress the ills experi 
enced from our present establishments. Virginia is 
the only State which has made any provision for the 
late moderate but essential requisition of Cong!, and 
her provision is a partial one only. 

This would have been of earlier date, but I have 
waited for more interesting subjects for it. I shall 
do myself the pleasure of repeating the liberty of 
dropping you a few lines as often as proper occasions 
arise, on no other condition however than your waiv 
ing the trouble of regular answers or acknowledge 
ments on your part. 

With the greatest respect and Affection I am 
DrSir 

Y1: Obed1 friend & Serv'. 

TO EDMUND PENDLETON. MAD. MSS. 

NEW YORK, Feby 24, 1787 

DEAR SIR, — If the contents of the Newspapers of 
this place find their way into the gazettes of Rich 
mond you will have learnt that the expedition of 
Gen! Lincoln against the insurgents has effectually dis 
persed the main body of them. It appears however 
that there are still some detachments which remain to 
be subdued, & that the Government of Massts con 
sider very strong precautions as necessary agst farther 
eruptions. The principal incendiaries have unluckily 

1787] JAMES MADISON. 317 

made off. By some it is said that they are gone to 
Canada ; by others that they have taken shelter in 
Vermont, and by some that they are opening a com 
munication with the upper parts of this State. The 
latter suggestion has probably some color, as the Gov 
ernor here has thought proper to offer rewards for 
them after the example of Govr Bowdoin. We have 
no interesting information from Europe. 

The only step of moment taken by Cong?, since my 
arrival has been a recommendation of the proposed 
meeting in May for revising the federal articles. 
Some of the States, considering this measure as an ex 
tra-constitutional one, had scruples ags.c concurring in 
it without some regular sanction. By others it was 
thought best that Cong? should remain neutral in the 
business, as the best antidote for the jealousy of an 
ambitious desire in them to get more power into their 
hands. This suspense was at length removed by an 
instruction from this State to its delegates to urge a 
Recommendatory Resolution in Congress which ac 
cordingly passed a few days ago.1 Notwithstanding 
this instruction from N. York, there is room to sus 
pect her disposition not to be very federal, a large 
majority of her House of delegates having very lately 
entered into a definite refusal of the impost, and the 

1 February 21, " Congress having had under consideration the letter of John 
Dickinson, Esq ; chairman of the commissioners, who assembled at Annapolis, 
during the last year ; also the proceedings of the said commissioners, and en 
tirely coinciding with them, as to the inefficiency of the federal government, 
and the necessity of devising such farther provisions as shall render the same 
adequate to the exigencies of the union, do strongly recommend to the different 
legislatures to send forward delegates, to meet the proposed convention, on the 
second Monday in May next, at the city of Philadelphia." On motion of the 

3i8 THE WRITINGS OF [1787 

instruction itself having passed in the Senate by a cast 
ing vote only. In consequence of the sanction given 
by Cong5, Mass1.5 it is said will send deputies to the 
Convention, and her example will have great weight 
with the other N. England States. The States from 
N. Ca. to N. Jersey inclusive have made their appoint 
ments, except Mary?, who has as yet only determined 
that she will make them. The gentlemen here from 
S. C* & Georgia, expect that those States will follow 
the general example. Upon the whole therefore it 
seems probable that a meeting will take place, and that 
it will be a pretty full one. What the issue of it will 
be is among the other arcana of futurity and nearly as 
inscrutable as any of them. In general I find men 
of reflection much less sanguine as to the new than 
despondent as to the present System. Indeed the 
Present System neither has nor deserves advocates ; 
and if some very strong props are not applied, will 
quickly tumble to the ground. No money is paid into 
the public Treasury ; no respect is paid to the federal 
authority. Not a single State complies with the re 
quisitions ; several pass them over in silence, and some 
positively reject them. The payments ever since the 
peace have been decreasing, and of late fall short even 

Massachusetts delegates the following was substituted : ' ' Resolved, That in the 
opinion of Congress, it is expedient, that on the second Monday in May next, a 
convention of delegates, who shall have been appointed by the several states, 
be held at Philadelphia, for the sole and express purpose of revising the articles 
of confederation, and reporting to Congress and the several legislatures, such al 
terations and provisions therein, as shall, when agreed to in Congress, and con 
firmed by the States, render the federal constitution adequate to the exigencies 
of Government, and the preservation of the Union." — Journals of Congress, 
xii., 13, 14. (Ed. 1801.) 

1787] JAMES MADISON. 319 

of the pittance necessary for the Civil list of the Con 
federacy. It is not possible that a government can 
last long under these circumstances. If the approach 
ing convention should not agree on some remedy, I 
am persuaded that some very different arrangement 
will ensue. The late turbulent scenes in Mass1.8 & in 
famous ones in Rhode Island, have done inexpressible 
injury to the republican character in that part of the 
U. States ; and a propensity towards Monarchy is said 
to have been produced by it in some leading minds.1 
The bulk of the people will probably prefer the lesser 
evil of a partition of the Union into three more prac 
ticable and energetic Governments. The latter idea I 
find after long confinement to individual speculations 
& private circles, is beginning to shew itself in the 
Newspapers. But tho' it is a lesser evil, it is so 
great a one that I hope the danger of it will rouse all 

1 " Extract of a letter from a Gentleman in Boston of the 4^ March 1787 to 
R. King 

" has come back from Virginia with news that the commissioners on the 

part of New York alarmed the Virginia Delegates, with an account that the 
Commissioners on the part of Massachusetts were for a monarchy ; that those 
Delegates wrote their Legislature of it, who shut their Galeries and made a 
most serious Business of the matter — pray let me know by the next post what 
you hear of this, and what has been said — 

"The Commissioners alluded to, are those who settled the late Territorial 
Controversy between Massachusetts & New York — 

" Mr. King presents his compliments to Col. Grayson & M* Madison, and for 
the satisfaction of his friend, who wrote the Letter, from which the above is an 
Extract, begs to be informed whether they have any knowledge of a letter 
written by the Delegates of Virginia or any of them, containing the information 
suggested in the Extract, or of any proceedings of the Virginia Legislature of 
the nature alleged. 

" Monday morn? 

" ii Mar. 1787." Mad. MSS. 

320 THE WRITINGS OF [1787 

the real friends of the Revolution to exert themselves 
in favor of such an organization of the confederacy 
as will perpetuate the Union, and redeem the honor of 
the Republican name. 

I shall follow this introductory letter with a few 
lines from time to time as a proper subject for them 
occurs. The only stipulation I expect on your part is 
that you will not consider them as claiming either 
answers or acknowledgements ; and that you will be 
lieve me to be, with sincerest wishes for your health 
and every other happiness, 

Y5 affect6 friend & serv! 

TO GEORGE WASHINGTON. WASH. MSS. 

NEW YORK March 18* 1787. 

DEAR SIR, — Recollecting to have heard you men 
tion a plan formed by the Empress of Russia for a 
comparative view of the aborigines of the New Conti 
nent, and of the N. E. parts of the old, through the 
medium of their respective tongues, and that her 
wishes had been conveyed to you for your aid in ob 
taining the American vocabularies, I have availed my 
self of an opportunity offered by the kindness of Mi" 
Hawkins, of taking a copy of such a sample of the 
Cherokee & Choctaw dialects as his late commission 
to treat with them enabled him to obtain, and do my 
self the honor now of inclosing it. I do not know 
how far the list of words made use of by Mr Hawkins 
may correspond with the standard of the Empress, 
nor how far nations so remote as the Cherokees & 

1787] , JAMES MADISON. 321 

Choctaws from the N. W. shores of America, may fall 
within the scheme of comparison. I presume how 
ever that a great proportion at least of the words will 
answer, and that the laudable curiosity which sug 
gests investigations of this sort will be pleased with 
every enlargement of the field for indulging it. Not 
finding it convenient to retain a copy of the inclosed 
as I wished to do for myself, I must ask the favor of 
your amanuensis to perform that task for me. 

The appointments for the Convention go on very 
successfully. Since the date of my last, Georgia, S. 
Carolina, N. York, Massts, & N. Hampshire have 
come into the measure. Georgia & N. Hampshire 
have constituted their Delegates in Cong? their rep 
resentatives in Convention. S. Carolina has appointed 
Mr J. Rutledge, Gen! Pinkney, Mr Laurens, Major 
Butler and Mr Cha? Pinkney, late member of Cong?. 
The deputies of Mass'.5 are Mr Dana, Mr King, Mf 
Ghoram, Mr Gerry, Mr Strong. I am told that a 
Resolution of the Legislature of this State which 
originated with their Senate lays its deputies under 
the fetter of not departing from the 5*.h of the present 
articles of Confederation. As this Resolution passed 
before the Recommendatory act of Congress was 
known, it is conjectured that it may be rescinded ; 
but its having passed at all denotes a much great[er] 
prevalence of political jealousy in that quarter than 
had been imagined. The deputation of N. York con 
sists of Col. Hamilton, Judge Yates, and a Mr Lan 
sing. The two last are said to be pretty much linked 
to the anti federal party here, and are likely of course 

VOL. II. — 21. 

322 THE WRITINGS OF [1787 

to be a clog on their colleague. It is not doubted now 
that Connecticut & R. Island will avoid the singularity 
of being unrepresented in the Convention. 

The thinness of Cong5 has been an obstacle to all 
the important business before them. At present there 
are nine States on the ground but this number, though 
adequate to every object when unanimous, makes a 
slow progress in business that requires seven States 
only. And I see little prospect of the number being 
increased. 

By our latest and most authentic information from 
Mass1.5, it would seem that a calm has been restored by 
the expedition of Gen! Lincoln. The precautions 
taking by the State however betray a great distrust of 
its continuance. Besides their act disqualifying the 
malcontents from voting in the election of members 

o 

for the Legislature &c. another has been passed for 
raising a corps of 1000 or 1500 men, and appropriat 
ing the choicest revenues of the Country to its support. 
It is said that at least half of the insurgents decline 
accepting the terms annexed to the amnesty, and that 
this defiance of the law ag5t Treason, is countenanced 
not only by the impunity with which they shew them 
selves on public occasions, even with insolent badges 
of their character, but by marks of popular favor con 
ferred on them in various instances in the election to 
local offices. 

A proposition has been introduced & discussed in 
the Legislature of this State for relinquishing its claim 
to Vermont, and urging the admission of it into the 
Confederacy. As far as I can learn difficulties will 

1787] JAMES MADISON. 323 

arise only in settling the form, the substance of the 
measures being not disliked by any of the parties. It 
is wished by those who are not interested in claims to 
lands within that district to guard ags.e any responsi 
bility in the State for compensation. On the other 
side it will at least be insisted that they shall not be 
barred of the privilege of carrying their claims before 
a federal Court, in case Vermont shall become a party 
to the Union. I think it probable if she should not 
decline becoming such altogether, that she will make 
two conditions if not more : i. that neither her boun 
daries nor the rights of her citizens shall be impeach- 
able under the 9th art: of Confederation. 2. that no 
share of the public debt already contracted shall be 
allotted to her. 

I have a letter from Col. Jn? Campbel,1 dated at 
Pittsburg, from wc!* I gather that the people of that 
quarter are thrown into great agitation by the reported 
intention of Congf concerning the Mississippi, and 
that measures are on foot, for uniting the minds of all 
the different settlements which have a common inter 
est at stake. Should this policy take effect I think 

1 " On my way to this place I met a man from the Settlement on Cumberland 
River in North Carolina who had just come by the way of Kentucky. He in 
forms me that the minds of all the Western People are agitated on account of 
the proposed cession of the Mississippi navigation to Spain every person talks 
of it with indignation and reprobates it as a measure of the greatest Injustice 
and Despotism declaring that if it takes place they will look upon themselves 
released from all Federal Obligations and fully at Liberty to seek alliances & 
connections wherever they can find them and that the British Officers at Detroit 
have already been tampering with them. I am apprehensive that these matters 
will hasten the separation of the District of Kentucky prematurely from the 
other part of the State. * * * " John Campbell to Madison, Pittsburgh, 
February 21, 1787. Mad. MSS. 

324 THE WRITINGS OF [1787 

there is much ground to apprehend that the ambition 
of individuals will quickly mix itself with the first im 
pulses of resentment and interest, that by degrees the 
people may be led to set up for themselves, that they 
will slide like Vermont insensibly into a communica 
tion and latent connection with their British Neigh 
bours, and, in pursuance of the same example, make 
such a disposition of the Western territory as will 
entice into it most effectually emigrants from all parts 
of the Union. If these apprehensions be not imagin 
ary they suggest many observations extremely inter 
esting to Spain as well as to the United States. 

I hear from Richmond with much concern that Mf 
Henry has positively declined his mission to Philad*. 
Besides the loss of his services on that theatre, there 
is danger I fear that this step has proceeded from a 
wish to leave his conduct unfettered on another theatre 
where the result of the Convention will receive its 
destiny from his omnipotence. 

With every sentiment of esteem & affection I 
remain 

Dear Sir, your Obed' and very hble Serv' 

TO THOMAS JEFFERSON.1 

NEW YORK, March igth [iSth], 1787. 

DEAR SIR, — My last was of the iith of February, 
and went by the packet. This will go to England in 

1 From Madison's Works. The correct date of the letter is doubtless March 
i8th, as Jefferson acknowledged on June 2Oth the receipt of two letters, dated 
respectively March iSth and igth. and this letter evidently preceded the other 
letter to Jefferson dated March igth. The letter should be taken in connection 

1787] JAMES MADISON. 325 

the care of a French gentleman, who will consign it 
to the care of Mr. Adams. 

The appointments for the Convention go on 
auspiciously. Since my last, Georgia, South Carolina, 
New York, Massachusetts, and New Hampshire, 
have come into the measure. The first and the last 
of these States have commissioned their delegates to 
Congress as their representatives in Convention. 
The deputation of Massachusetts consists of Mess". 
Gorham, Dana, King, Gerry, and Strong. That of 
New York, Messrs. Hamilton, Yates, and Lansing. 
That of South Carolina, Messrs. J. Rutledge, Laur- 
ens, Pinckney, (General,) Butler, and Charles Pinck- 
ney, lately member of Congress. The States which 
have not yet appointed are Rhode Island, Connecti 
cut, and Maryland. The last has taken measures 
which prove her intention to appoint, and the two 
former it is not doubted will follow the example of 
their neighbours. I just learn from the Governor of 
Virginia that Mr. Henry has resigned his place in the 
deputation from that State, and that General Nelson 
is put into it by the Executive, who were authorised 
to fill vacancies. The Governor, Mr. Wythe, and 
Mr. Blair, will attend, and some hopes are entertained 
of Col. Mason's attendance. General Washington 
has prudently authorised no expectations of his at 
tendance, but has not either precluded himself abso 
lutely from stepping into the field if the crisis should 
demand it. 

with that of April 8th to Randolph and April i6th to Washington as developing 
Madison's plan of government. See also the letter on the subject of the Ken 
tucky constitution, January 6, 1785, to George Muter. 

326 THE WRITINGS OF [1787 

What may be the result of this political experiment 
cannot be foreseen. The difficulties which present 
themselves are, on one side, almost sufficient to 
dismay the most sanguine, whilst on the other side 
the most timid are compelled to encounter them by 
the mortal diseases of the existing Constitution. 
These diseases need not be pointed out to you, who 
so well understand them. Suffice it to say, that they 
are at present marked by symptoms which are truly 
alarming, which have tainted the faith of the most 
orthodox republicans, and which challenge from the 
votaries of liberty every concession in favor of stable 
Government not infringing fundamental principles, 
as the only security against an opposite extreme of 
our present situation. 

I think myself that it will be expedient, in the first 
place, to lay the foundation of the new system in 
such a ratification by the people themselves of the 
several States as will render it clearly paramount to 
their Legislative authorities. 2dly. Over and above 
the positive power of regulating trade and sundry 
other matters in which uniformity is proper, to arm the 
federal head with a negative in all cases ^whatsoever 
on the local Legislatures. Without this defensive 
power, experience and reflection have satisfied me 
that, however ample the federal powers may be made, 
or however clearly their boundaries may be deline 
ated on paper, they will be easily and continually- 
baffled by the Legislative sovereignties of the States. 
The effects of this provision would be not only to 
guard the national rights and interests against in- 

1787] JAMES MADISON. 327 

vasion, but also to restrain the States from thwarting 
and molesting each other ; and even from oppressing 
the minority within themselves by paper money and 
other unrighteous measures which favor the interest 
of the majority. In order to render the exercise of 
such a negative prerogative convenient, an emanation 
of it must be vested in some set of men within the 
several States, so far as to enable them to give a 
temporary sanction to laws of immediate necessity. 
3dly. To change the principle of Representation in 
the federal system. Whilst the execution of the acts 
of Congress depends on the several Legislatures, the 
equality of votes does not destroy the inequality of 
importance and influence in the States. But in case 
of such an augmentation of the federal power as will 
render it efficient without the intervention of the 
Legislatures, a vote in the general Councils from 
Delaware would be of equal value with one from 
Massachusetts or Virginia. This change, therefore, 
is just. I think, also, it will be practicable. A ma 
jority of the States conceive that they will be gainers 
by it. It is recommended to the Eastern States by 
the actual superiority of their populousness7 and to 
the Southern by their expected superiority ; and if a 
majority of the larger States concur, the fewer and 
smaller States must finally bend to them. This point 
being gained, many of the objections now urged in 
the leading States against renunciations of power 
will vanish. 4thly. To organize the federal powers in 
such a manner as not to blend together those which 
ought to be exercised by separate departments. 

328 THE WRITINGS OF [1787 

The limited powers now vested in Congress are fre 
quently mismanaged from the want of such a distri 
bution of them. What would be the case under an 
enlargement not only of the powers, but the number 
of the federal Representatives ? These are some of 
the leading ideas which have occurred to me, but 
which may appear to others as improper as they 
appear to me necessary. 


NEW YORK, March 19, 1787. 

DEAR SIR, — Congress have continued so thin as to 
be incompetent to the dispatch of the more important 
business before them. We have at present nine 
States, and it is not improbable that something may 
now be done. The report of Mr. Jay on the mutual 
violations of the treaty of peace will be among the 
first subjects of deliberation. He favors the British 
claim of interest, but refers the question to the court. 
The amount of the report, which is an able one, is, 
that the treaty should be put in force as a law, and 
the exposition of it left, like that of other laws, to the 
ordinary tribunals. 

The Spanish project sleeps. A perusal of the 
attempt of seven States to make a new treaty, by 
repealing an essential condition of the old, satisfied 
me that Mr. Jay's caution would revolt at so irregular 
a sanction. A late accidental conversation with 
Guardoqui proved to me that the negotiation is 

1 From the Madison Papers (1840). 

1787] JAMES MADISON. 329 

arrested. It may appear strange that a member of 
Congress should be indebted to a foreign Minister 
for such information, yet such is the footing on which 
the intemperance of party has put the matter, that it 
rests wholly with Mr. Jay how far he will communi 
cate with Congress, as well as how far he will negoti 
ate with Guardoqui. But although it appears that 
the intended sacrifice of the Mississippi will not be 
made, the consequences of the intention and the 
attempt are likely to be very serious. I have already 
made known to you the light in which the subject 
was taken up by Virginia. Mr. Henry's disgust 
exceeds all measure, and I am not singular in ascrib 
ing his refusal to attend the Convention to the policy 
of keeping himself free to combat or espouse the 
result of it according to the result of the Mississippi 
business, among other circumstances. North Caro 
lina also has given pointed instructions to her Dele 
gates ; so has New Jersey. A proposition for the 
like purpose was a few days ago made in the Legis 
lature of Pennsylvania, but went off without a de 
cision on its merits. Her Delegates in Congress are 
equally divided on the subject. The tendency of 
this project to foment distrust among the Atlantic 
States, at a crisis when harmony and confidence ought 
to have been studiously cherished, has not been more 
verified than its predicted effect on the ultramontane 
settlements. I have credible information that the 
people living on the Western waters are already in 
great agitation, and are taking measures for uniting 
their consultations. The ambition of individuals will 

330 THE WRITINGS OF [1787 

quickly mix itself with the original motives of resent 
ment and interest. Communication will gradually 
take place with their British neighbours. They will 
be led to set up for themselves, to seize on the vacant 
lands, to entice emigrants by bounties and an exemp 
tion from Federal burthens, and in all respects play 
the part of Vermont on a large theatre. It is hinted 
to me that British partizans are already feeling the 
pulse of some of the Western settlements. Should 
these apprehensions not be imaginary, Spain may 
have equal reason with the United States to rue the 
unnatural attempt to shut the Mississippi. Guardoqui 
has been admonished of the danger, and, I believe, is 
not insensible to it, though he affects to be otherwise, 
and talks as if the dependence of Britain on the com 
mercial favors of his Court would induce her to play 
into the hands of Spain. The eye of France also 
cannot fail to watch over the western prospects. I 
learn from those who confer here with Otto and De 
la Forest, that they favor the opening of the Missis 
sippi, disclaiming at the same time any authority to 
speak the sentiments of their Court. I find that the 
Virginia Delegates, during the Mississippi discussions 
last fall, entered into very confidential interviews 
with these gentlemen. In one of them the idea was 
communicated to Otto of opening the Mississippi for 
exports but not for imports, and of giving to France 
and Spain some exclusive privileges in the trade. 
He promised to transmit it to Vergennes, to obtain 
his sentiments on the whole matter, and to com 
municate them to the Delegates. Not long since 

1787] JAMES MADISON. 331 

Grayson called on him, and revived the subject. He 
assured Grayson that he had received no answer from 
France, and signified his wish that you might pump 
the Count de Vergennes, observing that he would 
deny to you his having received any information from 
America. I discover, through several channels, that 
it would be very grateful to the French politicians 
here to see our negotiations with Spain shifted into 
your hands, and carried on under the mediating 
auspices of their Court. 

Van Berkel has remonstrated against the late acts 
of Virginia, giving privileges to French wines and 
brandies in French bottoms, contending that the 
Dutch are entitled by their treaty to equal exemp 
tions with the most favored nation, without being 
subject to a compensation for them. Mr. Jay has 
reported against this construction, but considers the 
act of Virginia as violating the treaty ; — first, as it 
appears to be gratuitous, not compensatory, on the 
face of it ; secondly, because the States have no right 
to form tacit compacts with foreign nations. No 
decision of Congress has yet taken place on the 
subject. 

The expedition of General Lincoln against the in 
surgents has effectually succeeded in dispersing them. 
Whether the calm which he has restored will be 
durable or not, is uncertain. From the precautions 
taking by the Government of Massachusetts, it would 
seem as if their apprehensions were not extinguished. 
Besides disarming and disfranchising, for a limited 
time, those who have been in arms, as a condition of 

332 THE WRITINGS OF [1787 

their pardon, a military corps is to be raised to the 
amount of one thousand or fifteen hundred men, and 
to be stationed in the most suspected districts. It is 
said that, notwithstanding these specimens of the 
temper of the Government, a great proportion of the 
offenders choose rather to risk the consequences of 
their treason, than submit to the conditions annexed 
to the amnesty ; that they not only appear openly on 
public occasions, but distinguish themselves by badges 
of their character ; and that this insolence is in many 
instances countenanced by no less decisive marks of 
popular favor than elections to local offices of trust 
and authority. 

A proposition is before the Legislature of this 
State, now sitting, for renouncing its pretensions to 
Vermont, and urging the admission of it into the 
Confederacy. The different parties are not agreed 
as to the form in which the renunciation should be 
made, but are likely to agree as to the substance. 
Should the offer be made, and should Vermont not 
reject it altogether, I think they will insist on two 
stipulations at least ; — first, that t.heir becoming par 
ties to the Confederation shall not subject their 
boundaries, or the rights of their citizens, to be ques 
tioned under the ninth Article ; secondly, that they 
shall not be subject to any part of the public debts 
already contracted. 

The Geographer and his assistants have returned 
surveys on the Federal lands to the amount of about 
eight hundred thousand acres, which it is supposed 
would sell pretty readily for public securities, and 

1787] JAMES MADISON. 333 

some of it, lying on the Ohio, even for specie. It 
will be difficult, however, to get proper steps taken 
by Congress, so many of the States having lands of 
their own at market. It is supposed that this consid 
eration had some share in the zeal for shutting the 
Mississippi. New Jersey, and some others having 
no Western lands, which favored this measure, begin 
now to penetrate the secret. 

A letter from the Governor of Virginia informs 
me, that the project of paper-money is beginning to 
recover from the blow given it at the last session of 
the Legislature. If Mr. Henry espouses it, of which 
there is little doubt, I think an emission will take 
place. 

TO EDMUND RANDOLPH.1 

NEW YORK, March 25, 1787. 

DEAR SIR, — I have had the pleasure of your two 
favors of the first and seventh instant. The refusal 
of Mr. Henry to join in the task of revising the Con 
federation is ominous ; and the more so, I fear, if he 
means to be governed by the event which you con 
jecture. There seems to be little hope, at present, 
of being able to quash the proceedings relative to 
the affair which is so obnoxious to him,2 though on 
the other hand, there is reason to believe that they 
will never reach the object at which they aimed. 

Congress have not changed the day for meeting at 
Philadelphia as you imagine. The act of Virginia, 

1 From the Madison Papers (1840). * The Jay project for a treaty with Spain. 

334 THE WRITINGS OF [1787 

I find, has done so in substituting second day for 
the second Monday in May, the time recommended 
from Annapolis. 

I cannot suppose that Mr. Otto has equivocated 
in his explanation to the public touching the Flori- 
das. Nothing of that subject has been mentioned 
here, as far as I know. Supposing the exchange in 
question to have really been intended, I do not see 
the inference to be unfavorable to France. Her 
views, as they occur to me, would most probably be 
to conciliate the Western people, in common with 
the Atlantic States, and to extend her commerce, by 
reversing the Spanish policy. I have always wished 
to see the Mississippi in the hands of France, or of 
any nation which would be more liberally disposed 
than the present holders of it. 

Mr. Jay's report on the treaty of peace has at 
length been decided on. It resolves and declares, 
that the treaty, having been constitutionally formed, 
is the law of the land, and urges a repeal of all laws 
contravening it, as well to stop the complaints of 
their existing as legal impediments, as to avoid need 
less questions touching their validity. Mr. Jay is 
preparing a circular address to accompany the Reso 
lutions, and the latter will not be forwarded till the 
former is ready. 

TO JAMES MADISON. MAD. MSS. 

N. YORK April i, 1787 

HOND SIR, — I have received your favor of the 
17^ Feb^ and have made enquiry as to the Andover 

1787] JAMES MADISON. 335 

Works, not indeed thro' the channel you suggested, 
but through one still more direct & authentic. I 
find that the works are not pursued with such alacrity 
at present as to promise the supply you wish, that 
it is uncertain whether it would be delivered at 
Philada at all, and that the price is at present unfixed. 
I shall have an opportunity of seeing in Trenton on 
my way to the Convention, the man who is con 
nected with these works and will collect any further 
information he may be able to give. 

Congress has remained very thin ever since my 
arrival, and have done but little business of impor 
tance. The general attention is now directed towards 
the approaching Convention. All the States have 
appointed deputies to it except Connecticut, Mary 
land, and Rho. Island. The first, it is not doubted 
will appoint, and the second has already resolved on 
the expediency of the measure. Rho. Island alone 
has refused her concurrence. A majority of more 
than twenty in the Legislature of that State has re 
fused to follow the general example. Being conscious 
of the wickedness of the measures they are pursuing 
they are afraid of everything that may become a con- 
troul on them. Notwithstanding this prospect of a 
very full and respectable meeting, no very sanguine 
expectations can well be indulged. The probable 
diversity of opinions and prejudices, and of supposed 
or real interests among the States, renders the issue 
totally uncertain. The existing embarrassments and 
mortal diseases of the Confederacy form the only 
ground of hope, that a spirit of concession on all 

336 THE WRITINGS OF [1787 

sides may be produced by the general chaos, or at 
least partitions of the Union, which offers itself as 
the alternative. 

N. Carolina and N Jersey have followed the ex 
ample of Virginia in giving instructions in favor of 
the Missippi. Penn* has not done so as was expected, 
but she has appointed a Delegation which thinks dif 
ferently from her last on the subject. 

I am anxious to hear from my brother A. on the 
subject of the Tobacco. It will at furthest I hope 
arrive within the current month in Philad? With 
affecte regards to my mother & the family 
I remain yr dutiful son 

TO EDMUND RANDOLPH.1 

NEW YORK, April 8, 1787. 

DEAR SIR, — Your two favors of the twenty-second 
and twenty-seventh of March, have been received 
since my last. In a preceding one you ask, what 
tribunal is to take cognizance of Clark's offence? If 
our own laws will not reach it, I see no possibility of 
punishing it. But will it not come within the act of 
the last session concerning treasons and other offences 
committed without the commonwealth? I have had 
no opportunity yet of consulting Mr. Otto on the 
allegation of Oster touching the marriage of French 
subjects in America. What is the conspicuous prose 
cution which you suspect will shortly display a notable 
instance of perjury ? 

1 From the Madison Papers (1840). 

1787] JAMES MADISON. 337 

I am glad to find that you are turning your 
thoughts towards the business of May next. My 
despair of your finding the necessary leisure, as sig 
nified in one of your letters, with the probability that 
some leading propositions at least would be expected 
from Virginia, had engaged me in a closer attention 
to the subject than I should otherwise have given. I 
will just hint the ideas that have occurred, leaving 
explanations for our interview. 

I think with you, that it will be well to retain as 
much as possible of the old Confederation, though I 
doubt whether it may not be best to work the valu 
able articles into the new system, instead of engraft 
ing the latter on the former. I am also perfectly of 
your opinion, that, in framing a system, no material 
sacrifices ought to be made to local or temporary 
prejudices. An explanatory address must of necessity 
accompany the result of the Convention on the main 
object. I am not sure that it will be practicable to 
present the several parts of the reform in so detached 
a manner to the States, as that a partial adoption 
will be binding. Particular States may view different 
articles as conditions of each other, and would only 
ratify them as such. Others might ratify them as 
independent propositions. The consequence would 
be that the ratifications of both would go for nothing. 
I have not, however, examined this point thoroughly. 
In truth, my ideas of a reform strike so deeply at the 
old Confederation, and lead to such a systematic 
change, that they scarcely admit of the expedient. 

I hold it for a fundamental point, that an individual 

VOL. II. — 22 

338 THE WRITINGS OF [1787 

independence of the States is utterly irreconci 
lable with the idea of an aggregate sovereignty. I 
think, at the same time, that a consolidation of the 
States into one simple republic is not less unattain 
able than it would be inexpedient. Let it be tried, 
then, whether any middle ground can be taken, 
which will at once support a due supremacy of the 
national authority, and leave in force the local au 
thorities so far as they can be subordinately useful. 

The first step to be taken is, I think, a change in 
the principle of representation. According to the 
present form of the Union, an equality of suffrage, 
if not just towards the larger members of it, is at 
least safe to them, as the liberty they exercise of 
rejecting or executing the acts of Congress, is uncon 
trollable by the nominal sovereignty of Congress. 
Under a system which would operate without 
the intervention of the States, the case would be 
materially altered. A vote from Delaware would 
have the same effect as one from Massachusetts or 
Virginia. 

Let the national Government be armed with a 
positive and complete authority in all cases where 
uniform measures are necessary, as in trade, &c., 
&c. Let it also retain the powers which it now 
possesses. 

Let it have a negative, in all cases whatsoever, on 
the Legislative acts of the States, as the King of 
Great Britain heretofore had. This I conceive to be 
essential and the least possible abridgement of the 
State sovereignties. Without such a defensive power, 

1787] JAMES MADISON. 339 

every positive power that can be given on paper will 
be unavailing. It will also give internal stability to 
the States. There has been no moment since the 
peace at which the Federal assent would have been 
given to paper-money, &c., &c. 

Let this national supremacy be extended also to 
the Judiciary department. If the Judges in the last 
resort depend on the States, and are bound by their 
oaths to them and not to the Union, the intention 
of the law and the interests of the nation may be 
defeated by the obsequiousness of the tribunals to the 
policy or prejudices of the States. It seems at least 
essential that an appeal should lie to some national 
tribunals in all cases which concern foreigners, or 
inhabitants of other States. The admiralty juris 
diction may be fully submitted to the National 
Government. 

A Government formed of such extensive powers 
ought to be well organized. The Legislative depart 
ment may be divided into two branches. One of 
them to be chosen every years by the Legisla 
tures or the people at large ; the other to consist of a 
more select number, holding their appointments for 
a longer term, and going out in rotation. Perhaps 
the negative on the State laws may be most conven 
iently lodged in this branch. A Council of Revision 
may be superadded, including the great ministerial 
officers. 

A national Executive will also be necessary. I 
have scarcely ventured to form my own opinion yet, 
either of the manner in which it ought to be 

340 THE WRITINGS OF [1787 

constituted, or of the authorities with which it ought 
to be clothed. 

An article ought to be inserted expressly guaran 
teeing the tranquillity of the States against internal 
as well as external dangers. 

To give the new system its proper energy, it will 
be desirable to have it ratified by the authority of 
the people, and not merely by that of the Legisla 
tures. 

I am afraid you will think this project, if not ex 
travagant, absolutely unattainable and unworthy of 
being attempted. Conceiving it myself to go no 
further than is essential, the objections drawn from 
this source are to be laid aside. I flatter myself, 
however, that they may be less formidable on trial 
than in contemplation. The change in the principle 
of representation will be relished by a majority of 
the States, and those too of most influence. The 
northern States will be reconciled to it by the actual 
superiority of their populousness ; the Southern by 
their expected superiority on this point. This prin 
ciple established, the repugnance of the large States 
to part with power will in a great degree subside, and 
the smaller States must ultimately yield to the pre 
dominant will. It is also already seen by many, and 
must by degrees be seen by all, that, unless the 
Union be organized efficiently on republican princi 
ples, innovations of a much more objectionable form 
may be obtruded, or, in the most favorable event, 
the partition of the Empire, into rival and hostile 
confederacies will ensue. 

1787] JAMES MADISON. 341 

TO EDMUND RANDOLPH.1 

NEW YORK, April 15, 1787. 

DEAR SIR, — Your favor of the fourth of April has 
been received since my last. The probability of 
General Washington's coming to Philadelphia is, 
in one point of view, flattering. Would it not, 
however, be well for him to postpone his actual 
attendance, until some judgment can be formed of 
the result of the meeting? It ought not to be 
wished by any of his friends that he should partici 
pate in any abortive undertaking. It may occur, 
perhaps, that the delay would deprive the Conven 
tion of his presiding auspices, and subject him, on 
his arrival, to a less conspicuous point of view than 
he ought on all occasions to stand in. Against this 
difficulty must be weighed the consideration above 
mentioned, to which may be added the opportunity 
which Pennsylvania, by the appointment of Doctor 
Franklin, has afforded of putting sufficient dignity 
into the Chair. 

The effect of the interposition of Congress in 
favor of the treaty at this crisis, was foreseen by us.2 

1 From the Madison Papers (1840). 

2 March 21, 1787, Congress unanimously resolved that the Legislatures of 
the several States could not, of right, pass acts for interpreting or construing a 
treaty, nor in any manner retard its operation, and that all State acts repug 
nant to the treaty of peace with Great Britain ought to be repealed, and 
the State Legislatures were requested to repeal them. Journals of Congress 
(Ed. 1801), xii., 23, 24. On April I3th, the Secretary for Foreign Affairs 
(Jay) reported a letter to the States, which was agreed to, to accompany the 
resolutions of March 2ist. It regretted that in some of the States too little 
attention had been paid to the public faith pledged by the treaty, and urged 
the binding nature of a treaty upon each member of the Confederacy. Id. 22, 
et seq. 

342 THE WRITINGS OF [1787 

I would myself have preferred a little procrastina 
tion on the subject. But the manifest and undeni 
able propriety of the thing itself, with the chance 
that the Legislature here, which will adjourn in a 
little time until next winter, and which is one of 
the principal transgressors, may set an immediate 
example of reformation, overruled the argument for 
delay. The difficulties which, as you suggest, may 
be left behind by a mere repeal of all existing im 
pediments, will be probably found of a very serious 
nature to British creditors. If no other advantage 
should be taken of them by the State, than the 
making the assent of the creditors to the plan of 
instalments, a condition of such further provisions 
as may not come within the treaty, I do not know 
that the existence of these difficulties ought to be 
matter of regret. In every view Congress seem to 
have taken the most proper course for maintaining 
the national character ; and if any deviations in 
particular States should be required by peculiar 
circumstances, it will be better that they should be 
chargeable on such States than on the United 
States. 

The Maryland Assembly met on the second in 
stant, being convened by proclamation. The ex 
pected delay, therefore, in her appointments for the 
Convention, cannot be admitted among the consid 
erations which are to decide the time of your setting 
out. I am sorry that punctuality on your part will 
oblige you to travel without the company of Mrs. 
Randolph. But the sacrifice seems to be the more 

1787] JAMES MADISON. 343 

necessary, as Virginia ought not only to be on the 
ground in due time, but to be prepared with some 
materials for the work of the Convention. In this 
view, I could wish that you might be able to reach 
Philadelphia some days before the second Monday 
in May. 

This city has been thrown into no small agitation 
by a motion, made a few days ago, for a short 
adjournment of Congress, and the appointment of 
Philadelphia as the place of its reassembling. No 
final question was taken, but some preliminary ques 
tions shewed that six States were in favor of it ; 
Rhode Island, the seventh State, was at first in 
the affirmative, but one of its Delegates was over 
come by the exertions made to convert him. As 
neither Maryland nor South Carolina was present, 
the vote is strong evidence of the precarious tenure 
by which New York enjoys her metropolitan ad 
vantages. The motives which led to this attempt 
were probably with some of a local nature. With 
others they certainly were of a general nature. 

Mr. Jay was a few days ago instructed to com 
municate to Congress the State of the Spanish nego 
tiation. An unwilling but silent assent was given 
by Massachusetts and Connecticut. The Report 
shews that Jay viewed the act of seven States as 
valid, and has even adjusted with Guardoqui an 
article for suspending our use of the Mississippi 
during the term of the treaty. A subsequent report, 
on a reference of Western information from Virginia 
and North Carolina denotes little confidence in the 

344 THE WRITINGS OF [1787 

event of the negotiation, and considerable perplexity 
as to the steps proper to be taken by Congress. 
Wednesday is fixed for the consideration of these 
reports. We mean to propose that Jefferson be 
sent, under a special commission, to plead the cause 
of the Mississippi at Madrid. 

TO GEORGE WASHINGTON. WASH. MSS. 

NEW YORK April 16 1787. 

DEAR SIR, — I have been honored with your letter 
of the 31 March, and find with much pleasure that 
your views of the reform which ought to be pursued 
by the Convention, give a sanction to those which I 
have entertained. Temporising applications will dis 
honor the Councils which propose them, and may 
foment the internal malignity of the disease, at the 
same time that they produce an ostensible palliation 
of it. Radical attempts although unsuccessful will 
at least justify the authors of them. 

Having been lately led to revolve the subject 
which is to undergo the discussion of the Convention, 
and formed some outlines of a new system, I take 
the liberty of submitting them without apology to 
your eye. 

Conceiving that an individual independence of the 
States is utterly irreconcileable with their aggregate 
sovereignty, and that a consolidation of the whole 
into one simple republic would be as inexpedient as 
it is unattainable, I have sought for middle ground, 
which may at once support a due supremacy of the 

1787] JAMES MADISON. 345 

national authority, and not exclude the local authori 
ties wherever they can be subordinately useful. 

I would propose as the ground-work that a change 
be made in the principle of representation. Accord 
ing to the present form of the Union in which the 
intervention of the States is in all great cases neces 
sary to effectuate the measures of Congress, an 
equality of suffrage, does not destroy the inequality of 
importance in the several members. No one will 
deny that Virginia and Mass*3 have more weight and 
influence both within & without Congress than 
Delaware or Rho. Island. Under a system which 
would operate in many essential points without the 
intervention of the State Legislatures, the case would 
be materially altered. A vote in the national Coun 
cils from Delaware, would then have the same effect 
and value as one from the largest State in the Union. 
I am ready to believe that such a change would not 
be attended with much difficulty. A majority of the 
States, and those of greatest influence, will regard it 
as favorable to them. To the Northern States it 
will be recommended by their present populousness ; 
to the Southern by their expected advantage in this 
respect. The lesser States must in every event yield 
to the predominant will. But the consideration 
which particularly urges a change in the representa 
tion is that it will obviate the principal objections of 
the larger States to the necessary concessions of 
power. 

I would propose next that in addition to the present 
federal powers, the national Government should be 

346 THE WRITINGS OF [1787 

armed with positive and compleat authority in all 
cases which require uniformity; such as the regula 
tion of trade, including- the right of taxing both ex 
ports & imports, the fixing the terms and forms of 
naturalization, &c &c. 

Over and above this positive power, a negative in 
all cases whatsoever on the legislative acts of the 
States, as heretofore exercised by the Kingly prerog 
ative, appears to me to be absolutely necessary, and 
to be the least possible encroachment on the State 
jurisdictions. Without this defensive power, every 
positive power that can be given on paper will be 
evaded & defeated. The States will continue to in 
vade the National jurisdiction, to violate treaties and 
the law of nations & to harass each other with rival 
and spiteful measures dictated by mistaken vi-ews of 
interest. Another happy effect of this prerogative 
would be its controul on the internal vicissitudes of 
State policy, and the aggressions of interested majori 
ties on the rights of minorities and of individuals. 
The great desideratum which has not yet been found 
for Republican Governments seems to be some disin 
terested & dispassionate umpire in disputes between 
different passions & interests in the State. The ma 
jority who alone have the right of decision, have 
frequently an interest, real or supposed in abusing it. 
In Monarchies the sovereign is more neutral to the 
interests and views of different parties ; but, unfor- 
tunely he too often forms interests of his own repug 
nant to those of the whole. Might not the national 
prerogative here suggested be found sufficiently dis- 

1787] JAMES MADISON. 347 

interested for the decision of local questions of policy, 
whilst it would itself be sufficiently restrained from 
the pursuit of interests adverse to those of the whole 
Society. There has not been any moment since the 
peace at which the representatives of the Union 
would have given an assent to paper money or any 
other measure of a kindred nature. 

The national supremacy ought also to be extended 
as I conceive to the Judiciary departments. If those 
who are to expound & apply the laws, are connected 
by their interests & their oaths with the particular 
States wholly, and not with the Union, the participa 
tion of the Union in the making of the laws may be 
possibly rendered unavailing. It seems at least ne 
cessary that the oaths of the Judges should include a 
fidelity to the general as well as local constitution, 
and that an appeal should lie to some National tribu 
nals in all cases to which foreigners or inhabitants of 
other States may be parties. The admiralty juris 
diction seems to fall entirely within the purview of 
the national Government. 

The National supremacy in the Executive depart 
ments is liable to some difficulty, unless the officers 
administering them could be made appointable by 
the supreme Government. The Militia ought cer 
tainly to be placed in some form or other under the 
authority which is entrusted with the general protec 
tion and defence. 

A Government composed of such extensive powers 
should be well organized and balanced. The legisla 
tive department might be divided into two branches ; 

348 THE WRITINGS OF [1787 

one of them chosen every years by the people at 
large, or by the Legislatures ; the other to consist of 
fewer members, to hold their places fora longer term, 
and to go out in such a rotation as always to leave in 
office a large majority of old members. Perhaps the 
negative on the laws might be most conveniently ex 
ercised by this branch. As a further check, a coun 
cil of revision including the great ministerial officers 
might be superadded. 

A National Executive must also be provided. I 
have scarcely ventured as yet to form my own opinion 
either of the manner in which it ought to be consti 
tuted or of the authorities with which it ought to be 
cloathed. 

An article should be inserted expressly guarantying 
the tranquillity of the States against internal as well 
as external dangers. 

In like manner the right of coercion should be ex 
pressly declared. With the resources of Commerce 
in hand, the National administration might always 
find means of exerting it either by sea or land ; But 
the difficulty & awkwardness of operating by force on 
the collective will of a State, render it particularly 
desirable that the necessity of it might be precluded. 
Perhaps the negative on the laws might create such 
a mutuality of dependence between the General and 
particular authorities, as to answer this purpose or 
perhaps some defined objects of taxation might 
be submitted along with commerce, to the general 
authority. 

To give a new System its proper validity and en- 

1787] JAMES MADISON. 349 

ergy, a ratification must be obtained from the people, 
and not merely from the ordinary authority of the 
Legislatures. This will be the more essential as in 
roads on the existing Constitutions of the States will 
be unavoidable. 

The inclosed address to the States on the subject 
of the Treaty of peace has been agreed to by Con 
gress, & forwarded to the several Executives. We 
foresee the irritation which it will excite in many of 
our Countrymen ; but could not withhold our appro 
bation of the measure. Both the resolutions and the 
address, passed without a dissenting voice. 

Congress continue to be thin, and of course do 
little business of importance. The settlement of the 
public accounts, — the disposition of the public lands, 
and arrangements with Spain, are subjects which 
claim their particular attention. As a step towards 
the first, the treasury board are charged with the task 
of reporting a plan by which the final decision on the 
claims of the States will be handed over from Con 
gress to a select sett of men bound by the oaths, and 
cloathed with the powers of Chancellors. As to the 
Second article, Congress have it themselves under 
consideration. Between 6 & 700 thousand acres 
have been surveyed and are ready for sale. The 
mode of sale however will probably be a source of 
different opinions ; as will the mode of disposing of 
the unsurveyed residue. The Eastern gentlemen re 
main attached to the scheme of townships. Many 
others are equally strenuous for indiscriminate loca 
tions. The States which have lands of their own for 

350 THE WRITINGS OF [1787 

sale are suspected of not being hearty in bringing the 
federal lands to market. The business with Spain is 
becoming extremely delicate, and the information 
from the Western settlements truly alarming. 

A motion was made some days ago for an adjourn 
ment of Congress for a short period, and an ap 
pointment of Philad* for their reassembling. The 
eccentricity of this place as well with regard to E. 
and West as to N. & South has I find been for a con 
siderable time a thorn in the minds of many of the 
Southern members. Suspicion too has charged some 
important votes on the weight thrown by the present 
position of Congress into the Eastern Scale, and pre 
dicts that the Eastern members will never concur in 
any substantial provision or movement for a proper 
permanent seat for the National Government whilst 
they remain so much gratified in its temporary resi 
dence. These seem to have been the operative mo 
tives with those on one side who were not locally 
interested in the removal. On the other side the 
motives are obvious. Those of real weight were 
drawn from the apparent caprice with which Con 
gress might be reproached, and particularly from the 
peculiarity of the existing moment. I own that I 
think so much regard due to these considerations, 
that notwithstanding the powerful ones on the other 
side, I should have assented with great repugnance 
to the motion, and would even have voted against it 
if any probability had existed that by waiting for a 
proper time, a proper measure might not be lost for 
a very long time. The plan which I shrl have judged 

1787] JAMES MADISON. 351 

most eligible would have been to fix on the removal 
whenever a vote could be obtained but so as that it 
should not take effect until the commencement of the 
ensuing federal year. And if an immediate removal 
had been resolved on, I had intended to propose such 
a change in the plan. No final question was taken 
in the case. Some preliminary questions shewed that 
six States were in favor of the motion. Rho. Island 
the 7l.h was at first on the same side, and Mr. Var- 
num, one of the delegates continues so. His col 
league was overcome by the solicitations of his 
Eastern brethren. As neither Maryland nor South 
Carolina were on the floor, it seems pretty evident 
that N. York has a very precarious tenure of the 
advantages derived from the abode of Congress. 

We understand that the discontents in Massts, 
which lately produced an appeal to the sword, are 
now producing a trial of strength in the field of elec 
tioneering. The Governor will be displaced. The 
Senate is said to be already of a popular complexion, 
and it is expected that the other branch will be still 
more so. Paper money it is surmised will be the en 
gine to be played off agV creditors both public and 
private. As the event of the elections however is 
not yet decided, this information must be too much 
blended with conjecture to be regarded as a matter 
of certainty. 

I do not learn that the proposed Act relating to 
Vermont has yet gone through all the stages of legis 
lation here ; nor can I say whether it will finally pass 
or not. In truth, it having not been a subject of 

352 THE WRITINGS OF [1787 

conversation for some time, I am unable to say what 
has been done or is likely to be done with it. With 
the sincerest affection & the highest esteem I have the 
honor to be, Dear Sir your devoted Serv* 

TO JAMES MONROE. MAD. MSS. 

NEW YORK, April 19, 1787 

DEAR SIR, — No definite steps are yet taken for the 
transportation of your furniture. I fear we shall be 
obliged to make use of a conveyance to Norfolk as 
soon as one shall offer. I have examined the work 
manship of the man in Chappel street. The face of 
it is certainly superior to that of your workman. 
Whether it may prove much so for substantial pur 
poses, I do not undertake to say. Should M-s 
Monroe not be pleased with the articles, I w^ recom 
mend that you dispose of them, which may be done 
probably without loss, and send us a commission to 
replace them. I think we could please you both ; 
and on terms not dearer than that of your purchase. 
We learn nothing yet of a remittance from S. 
Carolina. 

The business of the Mississippi will I think come 
to a point in a few days. You shall know the result 
in due time. 

A motion was lately made to remove shortly to 
Philad* six States would have been for it. Rh. 
Island was so at first and would have been a seventh* 
One of the delegation was overpowered by exertions 
of his Eastern brethren. I need not rehearse to you 

1787] JAMES MADISON. 353 

the considerations which operated on both sides. 
Your conjectures will not mistake them. My own 
opinion is that there are strong objections ags.e the 
movement, objections which nothing would supersede 
but the difficulty of bringing the sense of the Union 
to an efficient vote in Congress, and the danger of 
losing altogether a proper measure by waiting for a 
proper time. A middle way would have been my 
choice ; that is, to fix Philad* for the meeting of the 
ensuing Cong- , & to remain here in the mean time. 
This would have given time for all preliminary ar 
rangements, would have steered clear of the Conven 
tion, and, by selecting a natural period for the event, 
and transferring the operation of it to our successors 
in office, all insinuations of suddenness, and of per 
sonal views, would have been repelled. 

I hear with great pleasure that you are to aid the 
deliberations of the next Assembly, and with much 
concern that paper money will probably be among 
the bad measures which you will have to battle. 
Wishing you success in this and all your other 
labours for the public and for yourself, I remain, with 

best 

respects to Mrf Monroe, yours affely. 

TO EDMUND PENDLETON. MAD. MSS. 

NEW YORK April 22 1787 

MY DEAR SIR, — The period since my last has 
afforded such scanty materials for a letter that I have 
postponed it, till I have now to thank you for yours 

VOL. II. 23. 

354 THE WRITINGS OF [1787 

of the 7'.h inst : which came to hand two days ago. 
I always feel pleasure in hearing from you, but par 
ticularly when my concern for your doubtful health is 
relieved by such an evidence in its favor. At the 
same time I must repeat my wishes to forego this 
pleasure whenever it may interfere with the attention 
which you owe to your ease, your business, or your 
other friends. 

I do not learn that any symptoms yet appear of a 
return of the insurgent spirit in Massts. On the 
contrary it is said that the malcontents are trying 
their strength in a more regular form. This is the 
crisis of their elections, and if they can muster suffi 
cient numbers, their wicked measures are to be shel 
tered under the forms of the Constitution. How 
far their influence may predominate in the current 
appointments is uncertain, but it is pretty certain 
that a great change in the rulers of that State is 
taking place, and that a paper emission, if nothing 
worse, is strongly apprehended. Governor Bowdoin is 
already displaced in favor of M" Hancock, whose 
acknowledged merits are not a little tainted by a dis 
honorable obsequiousness to popular follies. A great 
change has also taken place in the Senate, and a still 
greater is prognosticated in the other branch of the 
Legislature. 

We are flattered with the prospect of a pretty full 
and very respectable meeting in next month. All 
the States have made appointments except Connecti 
cut Maryland, & Rh. Island. The last has refused. 
Maryland will certainly concur. The temper of 

1787] JAMES MADISON. 355 

Connecticut is equivocal. The turn of her elections 
which are now going on, is said to be rather unpro- 
pitious. The absence of one or two States however 
will not materially affect the deliberations of the 
Convention. Disagreement in opinion among those 
present is much more likely to embarrass us. The 
nearer the crisis approaches, the more I tremble for 
the issue. The necessity of gaining the concurrence 
of the Convention in some system that will answer 
the purpose, the subsequent approbation of Congress, 
and the final sanction of the States, presents a series 
of chances, which would inspire despair in any case 
where the alternative was less formidable. The 
difficulty too is not a little increased by the neces 
sity which will be produced by encroachments on 
the State Constitutions, of obtaining not merely the 
assent of the Legislatures, but the ratification of the 
people themselves. Indeed if such encroachments 
could be avoided, a higher sanction than the Legisla 
tive authority would be necessary to render the laws 
of the Confederacy paramount to the acts of its 
members. 

I enclose a late Act of Congress, which will shew 
you the light in which they view and inculcate a 
compliance with the Treaty of peace. We were not 
unaware of the bitterness of the pill to many of our 
countrymen, but national considerations overruled 
that objection. An investigation of the subject had 
proved that the violations on our part were not only 
most numerous and important, but were of earliest 
date. And the assurances on the other part are 

356 THE WRITINGS OF [1787 

explicit that a reparation of our wrongful measures 
shall be followed by an immediate and faithful execu 
tion of the Treaty by Great Britain. 

Congress are at present deliberating on the most 
proper plan for disposing of ye Western lands, and 
providing a criminal and civil administration for the 
Western settlements beyond the Ohio. The latter 
subject involves great difficulties. On the former 
also opinions are various. Between 6 & 7,00,000 
Acres have been surveyed in Townships & are to be 
sold as soon as they shall be duly advertised. The 
sale was at first to have been distributed throughout 
the States. This plan is now exchanged for the 
opposite extreme. The sale is to be made where 
Cong5 sits. Unquestionably reference ought to have 
been had in fixing on the place, either to the Center 
of the Union or to the proximity of the premises. 
In providing for the unsurveyed lands, the difficulty 
arises from the Eastern attachm* to townships & the 
Southern to indiscriminate locations. A Copper 
coinage was agreed on yesterday to the amount of 
upwards of two hundred thousand dollars, 15 per 
C- is to be drawn into the federal Treasury from this 
operation. 

Our affair with Spain is on a very delicate footing. 
It is not easy to say what precise steps would be 
most proper to be taken on our side, and extremely 
difficult to say what will be actually taken. Many 
circumstances threaten an Indian war, but the cer 
tainty of it is not established. A British officer was 
lately here from Canada, as has been propagated, but 

1787] JAMES MADISON. 357 

not on a mission to Congress. His business was 
unknown, if he had any that was important. 

I am extremely concerned, though not much sur 
prised at the danger of a paper emission in Virginia. 
If Mr. H. sh? erect the standard he will certainly be 
joined by sufficient force to accomplish it. Remorse 
and shame are but too feeble restraints on interested 
individuals agst unjust measures, and are rarely felt 
at all by interested multitudes. 

Wishing you all happiness I remain Dear Sir 
Your affect6 humble servant 

TO THOMAS JEFFERSON.1 

NEW YORK, April 23, 1787. 

DEAR SIR, — Congress have agreed to Mr. Jay's 
report on the treaty of peace, and to an address 
which accompanies it. Copies of both will no doubt 
be sent you from his Department. The Legislature 
of this State, which was sitting at the time, and on 
whose account the acts of Congress were hurried 
through, has adjourned till January next, without 
deciding on them. This is an ominous example to 
the other States, and must weaken much the claim 
on Great Britain of an execution of the treaty on her 
part, as promised in case of proper steps being taken 
on ours. Virginia, we foresee, will be among the 
foremost in seizing pretexts for evading the injunc 
tions of Congress. South Carolina is not less infected 
with the same spirit. The present deliberations of 

1 From the Madison Papers (1840). 

358 THE WRITINGS OF [1787 

Congress turn on, first, the sale of the Western lands ; 
secondly, the government of the Western settlements 
within the Federal domain ; thirdly, the final settle 
ment of the accounts between the Union and its 
members ; fourthly, the treaty with Spain. 

1. Between six and seven hundred thousand acres 
have been surveyed in townships, under the land 
ordinance, and are to be sold forthwith. The place 
where Congress sit is fixed for the sale. Its eccen 
tricity, and remoteness from the premises, will, I 
apprehend, give disgust. On the most eligible plan 
of selling the unsurveyed residue, Congress are much 
divided ; the Eastern States being strongly attached 
to that of townships, notwithstanding the expense 
incident to it ; the Southern being equally biassed in 
favor of indiscriminate locations, notwithstanding the 
many objections against that mode. The dispute 
will probably terminate in some kind of compromise, 
if one can be hit upon. 

2. The government of the settlements on the Illi 
nois and Wabash is a subject very perplexing in 
itself, and rendered more so by our ignorance of 
many circumstances on which a right judgment de 
pends. The inhabitants at those places claim pro 
tection against the savages, and some provision for 
both criminal and civil justice. It appears also that 
land-jobbers are among them, who are likely to 
multiply litigations among individuals, and, by col 
lusive purchases of spurious titles, to defraud the 
United States. 

3. The settlement of the public accounts has long 

1787] JAMES MADISON. 359 

been pursued in varied shapes, and with little pros 
pect of success. The idea which has long been 
urged by some of us, seems now to be seriously em 
braced, of establishing a plenipotentiary tribunal for 
the final adjustment of the mutual claims, on the 
great and simple principle of equity. An ordinance 
for this purpose has been reported by the Treasury 
Board, and has made some progress through Con 
gress. It is likely to be much retarded by the thin 
ness of Congress, as indeed is almost every other 
matter of importance. 

4. The Spanish negotiation is in a very ticklish 
situation. You have been already apprized of the 
vote of seven States last fall for ceding the Missis 
sippi for a term of years. From sundry circum 
stances it was inferred that Jay was proceeding 
under this usurped authority. A late instruction to 
him to lay the state of the negotiation before Con 
gress has discovered that he has adjusted with 
Guardoqui an article for suspending the use of the 
Mississippi by the citizens of the United States. 
The report, however, leaves it somewhat doubtful 
how far the United States are committed by this 
step, and a subsequent report of the Secretary on 
the seizure of Spanish property in the Western 
country, and on information of discontents touching 
the occlusion of the Mississippi, shews that the 
probable consequences of the measure perplex him 
extremely. It was nevertheless conceived by the 
instructed delegations to be their duty to press a 
revocation of the step taken, in some form which 

360 THE WRITINGS OF [1787 

would least offend Spain, and least irritate the patrons 
of the vote of seven States. Accordingly a motion 
was made to the following effect — that the present 
state of the negotiation with Spain, and of the affairs 
of the United States, rendered it expedient that you 
should proceed, under a special commission, to Ma 
drid, for the purpose of making such representations 
as might at once impress on that Court our friendly 
disposition and induce it to relax on the contested 
points ; and that the proper communications and 
explanations should be made to Guardoqui relative 
to this change in the mode of conducting the nego 
tiation. This motion was referred to Mr. Jay, whose 
report disapproves of it. In this state the matter 
lies. Eight States only being present, no effective 
vote is to be expected. It may, notwithstanding, be 
incumbent on us to try some question which will at 
least mark the paucity of States who abet the obnox 
ious project. Massachusetts and New York alone, of 
the present States, are under that description ; and 
Connecticut and New Hampshire alone of the absent. 
Maryland and South Carolina have hitherto been on 
the right side. Their future conduct is somewhat 
problematical. The opinion of New Hampshire is 
only conjectured. The conversion of Rhode "Island 
countenances a hope that she too may, in this instance, 
desert the New England standard. 

The prospect of a full and respectable Convention 
grows stronger every day. Rhode Island alone has 
refused to send Deputies. Maryland has probably 
appointed by this time. Of Connecticut alone doubts 
are entertained. The anti-federal party in that State 

1787] JAMES MADISON. 361 

is numerous and persevering. It is said that the 
elections which are now going on are rather dis 
couraging to the advocates of the Convention. 
Pennsylvania has added Dr. Franklin to her deputa 
tion. There is some ground to calculate on the 
attendance of General Washington. Our Governor, 
Mr. Wythe, Mr. Blair, and Col. Mason will pretty 
certainly attend. The last, I am informed, is renoun 
cing his errors on the subject of the Confederation, 
and means to take an active part in the amendment 
of it. Mr. Henry pretty soon resigned the under 
taking. General Nelson was put into his place, who 
has also declined. He was succeeded by Mr. R. H. 
Lee, who followed his example. Doctor M'Clurg 
has been since appointed, and as he was on the spot 
must have been previously consulted. 

MAD. MSS. 

A -i „ Vices of the 
April, 1707. 

Political sys- 

Observations by J. M. (A copy taken by permission by Dan1. tem of the u- 

Carroll & sent to Ch* Carroll of Carrollton.) States. 

1. This evil has been so fully experienced both K Faiiure Of 
during the war and since the peace, results so nat- the states to 

... . . comply with 

urally from the number and independent authority the constitu- 

of the States and has been so uniformly exemplified *ional requisi- 
in every similar Confederacy, that it may be con 
sidered as not less radically and permanently inherent in than it 
is fatal to the object of the present system. 

2. Examples of this are numerous and repetitions 2. Encroach- 
may be foreseen in almost every case where any ™ents by the 

1 t < States on the 

favorite object of a State shall present a temptation, federal author- 

Among these examples are the wars and treaties of ity- 
Georgia with the Indians. The unlicensed compacts between 

362 THE WRITINGS OF [1787 

Virginia and Maryland, and between Pen* & N. Jersey — the troops 
raised and to be kept up by Massts. 

violations 3* ^rom tne number of Legislatures, the sphere of 
of the law of life from which most of their members are taken, 
nations and of and the circumstances under which their legislative 

treaties. 

business is carried on, irregularities of this kind 
must frequently happen. Accordingly not a year has passed with 
out instances of them in some one or other of the States. The 
Treaty of Peace — the treaty with France — the treaty with Holland 
have each been violated. [See the complaints to Congress on these 
subjects.] The causes of these irregularities must necessarily pro 
duce frequent violations of the law of nations in other respects. 

As yet foreign powers have not been rigorous in animadverting 
on us. This moderation, however cannot be mistaken for a per 
manent partiality to our faults, or a permanent security ag3t those 
disputes with other nations, which being among the greatest of 
public calamities, it ought to be least in the power of any part of 
the community to bring on the whole. 

Tres asses 4' These are alarming symptoms, and may be daily 
of the states apprehended as we are admonished by daily experi- 

ofelch "the!-8 encc' See the law of virginia restricting foreign ves 
sels to certain ports — of Maryland in favor of vessels 
belonging to her own citizens — of N. York in favor of the same — 
Paper money, instalments of debts, occlusion of Courts, making 
property a legal tender, may likewise be deemed aggressions on 
the rights of other States. As the Citizens of every State aggre 
gately taken stand more or less in the relation of Creditors or 
debtors, to the Citizens of every other State, Acts of the debtor 
State in favor of debtors, affect the Creditor State, in the same 
manner as they do its own citizens who are relatively creditors 
towards other citizens. This remark may be extended to foreign 
nations. If the exclusive regulation of the value and alloy of 
coin was properly delegated to the federal authority, the policy of 
it equally requires a controul on the States in the cases above 
mentioned. It must have been meant i. to preserve uniformity 
in the circulating medium throughout the nation. 2. to prevent 
those frauds on the citizens of other States, and the subjects of 
foreign powers, which might disturb the tranquillity at home, or 
involve the Union in foreign contests. 

1787] JAMES MADISON. 363 

The practice of many States in restricting the commercial inter 
course with other States, and putting their productions and manu 
factures on the same footing with those of foreign nations, though 
not contrary to the federal articles, is certainly adverse to the 
spirit of the Union, and tends to beget retaliating regulations, not 
less expensive and vexatious in themselves than they are destruc 
tive of the general harmony. 

5. This defect is strongly illustrated in the state 5. want of 
of our commercial affairs. How much has the ^"wh^re 
national dignity, interest, and revenue, suffered common inter- 
from this cause ? Instances of inferior moment are 

the want of uniformity in the laws concerning naturalization & 
literary property; of provision for national seminaries, for grants 
of incorporation for national purposes, for canals and other 
works of general utility, wch may at present be defeated by the 
perverseness of particular States whose concurrence is necessary. 

6. The confederation is silent on this point and 6 Want of 
therefore by the second article the hands of the Guaranty to 
federal authority are tied. According to Repub- thLc'onstitlf 
lican Theory, Right and power being both vested in tions & laws 
the majority, are held to be synonimous. Accord- aeainst inter- 

nal violence. 

ing to fact and experience a minority may in an 
appeal to force, be an overmatch for the majority, i. if the 
minority happen to include all such as possess the skill and habits 
of military life, & such as possess the great pecuniary resources, 
one-third only may conquer the remaining two-thirds. 2. one- 
third of those who participate in the choice of the rulers, may be 
rendered a majority by the accession of those whose poverty 
excludes them from a right of suffrage, and who for obvious 
reasons will be more likely to join the standard of sedition than 
that of the established Government. 3. where slavery exists the 
republican Theory becomes still more fallacious. 

7. A sanction is essential to the idea of law, as y want of 
coercion is to that of Government. The federal sanction to the 
system being destitute of both, wants the great vital J^"^"* ^ 
principles of a Political Constution. Under the Government of 
form of such a constitution, it is in fact nothing the Confeder- 

e acy. 

more than a treaty of amity of commerce and of 

alliance, between independent and Sovereign States. From what 

364 THE WRITINGS OF [1787 

cause could so fatal an omission have happened in the articles of 
Confederation ? from a mistaken confidence that the justice, the 
good faith, the honor, the sound policy, of the several legislative 
assemblies would render superfluous any appeal to the ordinary 
motives by which the laws secure the obedience of individuals : a 
confidence which does honor to the enthusiastic virtue of the 
compilers, as much as the inexperience of the crisis apologizes for 
their errors. The time which has since elapsed has had the 
double effect, of increasing the light and tempering the warmth, 
with which the arduous work may be revised. It is no longer 
doubted that a unanimous and punctual obedience of 13 inde 
pendent bodies, to the acts of the federal Government ought 
not to be calculated on. Even during the war, when external 
danger supplied in some degree the defect of legal & coercive 
sanctions, how imperfectly did the States fulfil their obligations 
to the Union ? In time of peace, we see already what is to be 
expected. How indeed could it be otherwise ? In the first place, 
Every general act of the Union must necessarily bear unequally 
hard on some particular member or members of it, secondly the 
partiality of the members to their own interests and rights, a par 
tiality which will be fostered by the courtiers of popularity, will 
naturally exaggerate the inequality where it exists, and even sus 
pect it where it has no existence, thirdly a distrust of the volun 
tary compliance of each other may prevent the compliance of 
any, although it should be the latent disposition of all. Here are 
causes & pretexts which will never fail to render federal meas 
ures abortive. If the laws of the States were merely recommend 
atory to their citizens, or if they were to be rejudged by County 
authorities, what security, what probability would exist, that they 
would be carried into execution ? Is the security or probability 
greater in favor of the acts of Cong* which depending for their 
execution on the will of the State legislatures, wch are tho' nomin 
ally authoritative, in fact recommendatory only ? 

s. want of 8. In some of the States the Confederation is 
thefipeoP7e ^f recognized by, and forms a part of the Constitu- 
the articles of tion. In others however it has received no other 
confederation. sanction than that of the legislative authority. 

From this defect two evils result : i. Whenever a law of a State 

1787] JAMES MADISON. 365 

happens to be repugnant to an act of Congress, particularly when 
the latter [former] is of posterior date to the former, [latter] it 
will be at least questionable whether the latter [former] must not 
prevail ; and as the question must be decided by the Tribunals of 
the State, they will be most likely to lean on the side of the State. 
2. As far as the union of the States is to be regarded as a league 
of sovereign powers, and not as a political Constitution by virtue 
of which they are become one sovereign power, so far it seems to 
follow from the doctrine of compacts, that a breach of any of the 
articles of the Confederation by any of the parties to it, absolves 
the other parties from their respective Obligations, and gives them 
a right if they chuse to exert it, of dissolving the Union altogether. 

9. In developing the evils which viciate the Mult. H 
political system of the U S., it is proper to include city of laws in 
those which are found within the States individu- the several 
ally, as well as those which directly affect the 

States collectively, since the former class have an indirect influ 
ence on the general malady and must not be overlooked in form 
ing a compleat remedy. Among the evils then of our situation 
may well be ranked the multiplicity of laws from which no State 
is exempt. As far as laws are necessary to mark with precision 
the duties of those who are to obey them, and to take from those 
who are to administer them a discretion which might be abused, 
their number is the price of liberty. As far as laws exceed this 
limit, they are a nuisance ; a nuisance of the most pestilent 
kind. Try the Codes of the several States by this test, and what a 
luxuriancy of legislation do they present. The short period of in 
dependency has filled as many pages as the century which preceded 
it. Every year, almost every session, adds a new volume. This 
may be the effect in part, but it can only be in part, of the situa 
tion in which the revolution has placed us. A review of the several 
Codes will shew that every necessary and useful part of the least 
voluminous of them might be compressed into one tenth of the 
compass, and at the same time be rendered ten fold as perspicuous. 

10. This evil is intimately connected with the 10. mutabii- 
former yet deserves a distinct notice, as it emphati- ity of the laws 

.... ' ., of the States. 

cally denotes a vicious legislation. We daily see 

laws repealed or superseded, before any trial can have been made 

366 THE WRITINGS OF [1787 

of their merits, and even before a knowledge of them can have 
reached the remoter districts within which they were to operate. 
In the regulations of trade this instability becomes a snare not 
only to our citizens, but to foreigners also. 

ii. injustice n. If the multiplicity and mutability of laws 
of the laws of prove a want of wisdom, their injustice betrays a 

the States. 

defect still more alarming : more alarming not 
merely because it is a greater evil in itself ; but because it brings 
more into question the fundamental principle of republican Gov 
ernment, that the majority who rule in such governments are the 
safest Guardians both of public Good and private rights. To 
what causes is this evil to be ascribed ? 

These causes lie i. in the Representative bodies. 2. in the 
people,,, themselves. 

ii. Representative appointments are sought from 3 motives, 
i. Ambition. 2. personal interest. 3. public good. Unhappily 
the two first are proved by experience to be most prevalent. 
Hence the candidates who feel them, particularly, the second, are 
most industrious, and most successful in pursuing their object : 
and forming often a majority in the legislative Councils, with 
interested views, contrary to the interest and views of their con 
stituents, join in a perfidious sacrifice of the latter to the former. 
A succeeding election it might be supposed, would displace the 
offenders, and repair the mischief. But how easily are base and 
selfish measures, masked by pretexts of public good and apparent 
expediency ? How frequently will a repetition of the same arts 
and industry which succeeded in the first instance, again prevail 
on the unwary to misplace their confidence ? 

How frequently too will the honest but unenlightened repre 
sentative be the dupe of a favorite leader, veiling his selfish views 
under the professions of public good, and varnishing his sophisti 
cal arguments with the glowing colours of popular eloquence ? 

2. A still more fatal if not more frequent cause, lies among the 
people themselves. All civilized societies are divided into differ 
ent interests and factions, as they happen to be creditors or debt 
ors — rich or poor — husbandmen, merchants or manufacturers — 
members of different religious sects — followers of different politi 
cal leaders — inhabitants of different districts — owners of different 

1787] JAMES MADISON. 367 

kinds of property &c &c. In republican Government the majority 
however composed, ultimately give the law. Whenever there 
fore an apparent interest or common passion unites a majority 
what is to restrain them from unjust violations of the rights and 
interests of the minority, or of individuals ? Three motives only 
i. a prudent regard to their own good as involved in the general 
and permanent good of the community. This consideration 
although of decisive weight in itself, is found by experience to be 
too often unheeded. It is too often forgotten, by nations as well 
as by individuals, that honesty is the best policy. 2dly. respect 
for character. However strong this motive may be in individuals, 
it is considered as very insufficient to restrain them from injustice. 
In a multitude its efficacy is diminished in proportion to the 
number which is to share the praise or the blame. Besides, as it 
has reference to public opinion, which within a particular Society, 
is the opinion of the majority, the standard is fixed by those 
whose conduct is to be measured by it. The public opinion 
without the Society will be little respected by the people at large 
of any Country. Individuals of extended views, and of national 
pride, may bring the public proceedings to this standard, but the 
example will never be followed by the multitude. Is it to be 
imagined that an ordinary citizen or even Assemblyman of R. 
Island in estimating the policy of paper money, ever considered 
or cared, in what light the measure would be viewed in France or 
Holland ; or even in Massts or Connec1 ? It was a sufficient temp 
tation to both that it was for their interest; it was a sufficient sanc 
tion to the latter that it was popular in the State ; to the former, 
that it was so in the neighbourhood. 3dly. will Religion the only 
remaining motive be a sufficient restraint? It is not pretended 
to be such on men individually considered. Will its effect be 
greater on them considered in an aggregate view ? quite the 
reverse. The conduct of every popular assembly acting on oath, 
the strongest of religious ties, proves that individuals join without 
remorse in acts, against which their consciences would revolt if 
proposed to them under the like sanction, separately in their 
closets. When indeed Religion is kindled into enthusiasm, its 
force like that of other passions, is increased by the sympathy of 
a multitude. But enthusiasm is only a temporary state of religion, 

368 THE WRITINGS OF [1787 

and while it lasts will hardly be seen with pleasure at the helm of 
Government. Besides as religion in its coolest state is not infalli 
ble, it may become a motive to oppression as well as a restraint 
from injustice. Place three individuals in a situation wherein 
the interest of each depends on the voice of the others ; and give 
to two of them an interest opposed to the rights of the third ? 
Will the latter be secure? The prudence of every man would 
shun the danger. The rules & forms of justice suppose & guard 
against it. Will two thousand in a like situation be less likely to 
encroach on the rights of one thousand ? The contrary is wit 
nessed by the notorious factions & oppressions which take place 
in corporate towns limited as the opportunities are, and in little 
republics when uncontrouled by apprehensions of external danger. 
If an enlargement of the sphere is found to lessen the insecurity 
of private rights, it is not because the impulse of a common 
interest or passion is less predominant in this case with the 
majority ; but because a common interest or passion is less apt to 
be felt and the requisite combinations less easy to be formed by a 
great than by a small number. The Society becomes broken into 
a greater variety of interests, of pursuits of passions, which check 
each other, whilst those who may feel a common sentiment have 
less opportunity of communication and concert. It may be in 
ferred that the inconveniences of popular States contrary to the 
prevailing Theory, are in proportion not to the extent, but to the 
..narrowness of their limits. 

The great desideratum in Government is such a modification 
of the sovereignty as will render it sufficiently neutral between 
the different interests and factions, to controul one part of the 
society from invading the rights of another, and at the same 
time sufficiently controuled itself, from setting up an interest 
adverse to that of the whole Society. In absolute Monarchies 
the prince is sufficiently, neutral towards his subjects, but fre 
quently sacrifices their happiness to his ambition or his avarice. 
In small Republics, the sovereign will is sufficiently controuled 
from such a sacrifice of the entire Society, but is not sufficiently 
neutral towards the parts composing it. As a limited monarchy 
tempers the evils of an absolute one ; so an extensive Republic 
meliorates the administration of a small Republic. 

1787] JAMES MADISON. 369 

An auxiliary desideratum for the melioration of the Repub 
lican form is such a process of elections as will most certainly 
extract from the mass of the society the purest and noblest 
characters which it contains ; such as will at once feel most 
strongly the proper motives to pursue the end of their appoint 
ment, and be most capable to devise the proper means of attain 
ing it. 

OF ANCIENT & MODERN CONFEDERACIES.1 MAD. MSS. 

Lycian Confederacy. 

In this confederacy the number of votes allotted to each 
member was proportioned to its pecuniary contributions. The 
Judges and Town magistrates were elected by the general 
authority in like proportion. 

See Montesquieu11 who prefers this mode. 

The name of a federal republic may be refused to Lycia 
which Montesquieu cites as an example in which the importance 
of the members determined the proportion of their votes in the 
general Councils. The Gryson 3 League is a juster example. 
Code de 1'Hum.4 Confederation. 

Lyciorum quoque avo^iav celebrat Strabo : de qua pauca 
libet heic subjungere. Fuere eorum urbes XXIII, distinctse in 
classes tres pro modo virium. In prima classe censebantur 
maximae sex, in altera mediae, numero nobis incerto, in tertia 
reliquse omnes, quarum fortuna minima. Et singulae quidem 
urbes hae domi res suas curabant, magistratus suos, ordinemque 
civilem suum habebant : universae tamen in unum coeuntes unam 
communem rempublicam constituebant, concilioque utebantur 
uno, velut, senatu majore. In eo de bello, de pace, de foederibus, 
denique de rerum Lyciacarum summa deliberabant et statue- 
bant. Coibant vero in concilium hoc ex singulis urbibus missi 

1 This memorandum is written on small sheets of paper, which, put together, 
formed a compact little book, suited to be carried in the pocket. There are 
39 pages, and it would seem Madison intended extending it, for an extra page 
is headed " Gryson Confederacy," 

2 L Esprit des Lois (1748). 

3 Canton of Grisons, Switzerland. 

4 Code de V Humanite" on la Legislation, by Felice in 13 vols. 

370 THE WRITINGS OF [1787 

cum potestate ferendi suffragii : utebanturque ea in re jure 
aequissimo. Nam quselibet urbs primes classis habebat jus suffra- 
giorum trium, secundae duorum, tertiae unius. Eademque pro- 
portione tributa quoque conferebant, et munia alia obibant. 
Quemadmodum enim ratio ipsa dictat, et poscit aequitas, ut 
plura qui possident, et caeteris ditiores sunt, plura etiam in 
usus communes, et reipublicae subsidia conferant, sic quoque 
eadem aequitatits regula postulat, ut in statuendo de re communi 
iidem illi plus aliis possint : praesertim cum eorundem magis 
intersit rempublicam esse salvam quam tenuiorum. Locum 
concilii hujus non habebant nxum & certum, sed, ex omnibus 
urbem deligebant, quae videbatur pro tern pore commodissima. 
Concilio coacto primum designabant Lyciarcham principem 
totius Reipublicae, dein magistratus alios creabant partes rei- 
publicae administraturos demum judicia publica constituebant. 
Atque hsec omnia faciebant servata proportione eadem, ut nulla 
omnino urbs prseteriretur munerumve aut honorum horum non 
fieret particeps. Et hoc jus illibatum mansit Lyciis ad id usque 
tempus, quo Romani assumpto Asiae imperio magna ex parte sui 
arbitrii id fecerunt. — Ubbo Emmius de Republica Lyciorum in 
Asia. [Apud Grovonii Thes., iv, 597.] l 

1 Translation : Strabo [Lib. xiv, cap. iii], moreover, mentions the lack of 
laws of the Lycians : concerning which we will add a little to what he says. — 
There were twenty-three cities, divided into three classes, according to their 
power. To the first class belonged the six largest, to the second those of 
intermediate rank, the number of which is uncertain, to the third all the rest, 
whose importance was very small. And each of these cities took care of 
its affairs at home, and had its own magistrates and its own system of civil 
government, but all, uniting, formed one joint republic, and had one delibera 
tive assembly, a greater senate, as it were. In that assembly they deliberated 
and decided concerning war, peace and treaties, and, in a word, concerning 
all the affairs of Lycia. Persons sent from each city with the right to vote 
met in this assembly ; and, in that matter, they were governed by a most 
equitable law. For any city of the first class had the right to cast three votes, 
of the second two, of the third one. In the same proportion they also paid 
taxes, and performed other duties. For as reason itself dictates, and as equity 
demands that those who possess more and are richer than others, should 
contribute more to the public service and the support of the State, thus also 
the same rule of equity requires that, in deciding with regard to the common 
interest, those same persons should have greater influence than others ; espe- 

1787] JAMES MADISON. 371 

Amphyctionic Confederacy 

Instituted by Amphyction son of Deucalion King of Athens 
1522 years Ant.: Christ.: Code De 1'Humanite. 

Seated first at Thermopylae, then at Delphos, afterwards at 
these places alternately. It met half yearly to wit in the Spring 
& Fall, besides extraordinary occasions. Id. In the latter 
meetings, all such of the Greeks as happened to be at Delphos 
on a religious errand were admitted to deliberate, but not to 
vote. Encyclopedic. * 

The number and names of the confederated Cities differently 
reported. The Union seems to have consisted originally of the 
Delphians and their neighbors only, and by degrees to have 
comprehended all Greece. 10, n, 12, are the different numbers 
of original members mentioned by different Authors. Code de 
1'Humanite. 

Each city sent two deputies one to attend particularly to 
Religious matters — the other to civil and criminal matters 
affecting individuals — both to decide on matters of a general 
nature. Id. Sometimes more than two were sent, but they 
had two votes only. Encyclop. 

The Amphyctions took an oath mutually to defend and protect 
the united Cities — to inflict vengeance on those who should sacri 
legiously despoil the temple of Delphos — to punish the violators 
of this oath — and never to divert the water courses of any of the 
Amphyctionic Cities either in peace or in war. Code de 1'Hum. 
^Eschines orat : vs. Ctesip. 

The Amphyctionic Council was instituted by way of defence 
and terror ag^ the Barbarians. Dicf.e de Treviux. 

daily since they are more interested in the welfare of the State than are 
the poor. They had no fixed place for this assembly, but they selected, 
from the entire number, the city that seemed best suited to the occasion. 
The assembly having convened, they first designated a Lyciarch as head of 
the whole State ; they next chose other magistrates to govern the component 
parts of the State, and finally, they established courts of justice. And they 
did all these things maintaining the same proportion, so that no city was 
neglected, or was excluded from participation in these functions and honors. 
And this state of things remained unchanged until the time when the Romans, 
having become masters of Asia, brought it also under their control. 

1 Encyclopedic, published under the direction of Diderot and d'Alembert. 

372 THE WRITINGS OF [1787 

Foedral Authority. 

The Amphyctions had full power to propose and resolve what 
ever they judged useful to Greece. Encycop Pol. GEcon. 

1. They judged in the last resort all differences between the 
Amphyctionic cities. Code de 1'Hum. 

2. mulcted the aggressors. Id. 

3. employed whole force of Greece ag5.' such as refused to 
execute its decrees. Id. & Plutarch, Cimon. 

4. guarded the immense Riches of the Temple of Delphos, and 
decided controversies between the inhabitants and those who 
came to consult the Oracle. Encyclop. 

5. superintended the Pythian games. Code de 1'Hum. 

6. exercised right of admitting new members. See decree 
admitting Philip, in Demosthenes on Crown. 

7. Appointed General of the federal troops with full powers to 
carry their decrees into execution. Ibid. 

8. Declared & carried on war. Code de 1'Human. 

Strabo says that the Council of the Amphyctions was dissolved 
in the time of Augustus ; but Pausanias, who lived in the time of 
Antoninus Pius says it remained entire then, and that the number 
of Amphyctions was thirty. Potter's Gre. Ant : Vol. i, p. 90.' 

The institution declined on the admission of Phil and in the 
time of the Roman Emperors, the functions of the Council were 
reduced to the administration & police of the Temple. This 
limited authority expired only with the Pagan Religion. Code de 
1'Human. 

Vices of the Constitution. 

It happened but too often that the Deputies of the strongest 
Cities awed and corrupted those of the weaker, and that Judg 
ment went in favor of the most powerful party. Id. see also 
Plutarch's Themistocles. 

Greece was the victim of Philip. If her Confederation had 
been stricter, & been persevered in, she would never have yielded 
to Macedon, and might have proved a Barrier to the vast projects 
of Rome. Code de 1'Hum. 

Philip had two votes in the Council. Rawleigh Hist : World, 
lib. 4, c. i, Sec. 7 _____ 

1 John Potter's Archeologia Grceca, two volumes, Oxford, (1688-9). 

1787] JAMES MADISON. 373 

The execution of the Amphyctionic powers was very different 
from the Theory. Id. — It did not restrain the parties from war 
ring ags.1 each other. Athens & Sparta were members during 
their conflicts. Quer. whether Thucidides or Xenophon in their 
Histories ever allude to the Amphyctionic authority which ought 
to have kept the peace ? 

See Gillies' Hist. Greece, particularly Vol. II. p. 345. 
Achaean Confederacy 

In 124 olymp? the Patrians & Dymaeans joined first in this 
league. Polyb. lib. 2, c. 3.1 

This League consisted at first of three small Cities. Aratus 
added Sicyon, and drew in many other Cities of Achaia & 
Peloponnesus. Of these he formed a Republic of a peculiar sort. 
Code de 1'Human. 

It consisted of twelve cities, and was produced by the necessity 
of such a defence agst the Etolians. Encyclo. PoL OE. & Polyb. 
lib. 2. 

The members enjoyed a perfect equality, each of them sending 
the number of deputies to the Senate. Id. 

The Senate assembled in the Spring & Fall, and was also con 
vened on extraordinary occasions by two Pretors charged with 
the administration during the recess, but who could execute 
nothing with* the consent of the Inspectors. Id. 
Foederal Authority 

1. The Senate composed of the deputies made war & peace. 
D'Albon I page 270 

2. Appointed a Captain General annually. Co. d'Hum. 

3. Transferred the power of deciding to ten Citizens taken 
from the deputies, the rest retaining a right of consultation only. 
Id. 

4. Sent and received Ambassadors. D'Albon. Ibid. 
5 appointed a prime Minister. D'Albon. Ibid. 

6. Contracted foreign Alliances. Code de 1'Hum. 

7. Confederated Cities in a manner forced to receive the same 
laws & customs weights & measures : Id. & Polyb. lib. 2 cap. 3, 
yet considered as having each their independent police & Magis 
trates. Encyclop. Pol. CEcon. 

1 Polybe's General History (probably the Paris edition of 1609). 

374 THE WRITINGS OF [1787 

8. Penes hoc concilium erat summum rerum arbitrium, ex cujus 
decreto bella suscipiebantur, & finiebantur, pax conveniebat, fce- 
dera feriebantur & solvebantur, leges fiebant ratce aut irritce. Hujus 
etiam erat Magistratus toti Societati communes eligere, legationes 
decernere &c. Regebant concilium praetor praecipue, si praesens 
esset, et magistratus alii, quos Achaei Srjpiovpyovz nuncupabant. 
Ubbo Emmius. 

Hi numero X erant suffragiis legitimi concilii, quod verno tem- 
pore habebatur, electi ex universa societate prudentia praecipui, 
quorum concilio potissimum praetor ex lege utebatur. Horum 
potestas & dignitas maxima erat post ipsum Praetorem, quos 
idcirco Livius, Polybium sequens, summum Achaeorum magistra- 
tum appellabat. Cum his igitur de negociis gravioribus in concilio 
agitandis Praetor praeconsultabat, nee de iis, nisi in id pars major 
consentiret, licebat ad consilium referre. Id. 

Ista vero imprimis memorabilis lex est, vinculum societatis 
Achaicae maxime" stringens, et concordiam muniens, qua inter- 
dictum fuit, ne cui civitati Societatis hujus participi fas esset, 
seorsim ad exteros ullos mittere legatos, non ad Romanos, non 
ad alios. Et hoc expressim inserta fuit pactis conventis Achaeo 
rum cum populo Romano. . . . Omnium autem lauda- 
tissima lex apud eos viguit &c., qua vetitum, ne quis omnino, 
sive privatae conditionis, sen magistratum gerens, ullam ob causam, 
quaecunque etiam sit, dona a Rege aliquo caperet.1 Id. 

1 Translation : This assembly was invested with the supreme authority, 
and in pursuance of its decisions wars were begun and ended, and laws became 
valid and were abrogated. It was also within its province to choose magistrates 
common to the whole community, to decide upon sending embassies, etc. . . . 
The praetor, especially, presided over the assembly, if he was present, and 
also other magistrates, whom the Achsei called drjjiiiovtyoi. These were ten in 
number, and were elected from the entire community by a vote of the legitimate 
assembly (which was held in the spring) as being eminent for wisdom, and their 
advice was mainly followed by the praetor, according to law. Their power 
and dignity were next to those of the praetor and therefore Livy, following 
Polybius(II, 38 seq.}, calls them the chief magistracy of the Achaeans. With 
these therefore the praetor consulted beforehand concerning the transaction of 
the more important business in the assembly, nor was it allowable, unless the 
majority concurred, to lay it before the assembly. 

That was indeed a specially memorable law, drawing very close the bond of 
the Achaean league, and strengthening harmony ; by it any city forming part 

1787] JAMES MADISON. 375 

Vices of the Constitution. 

The defect of subjection in the members to the general au 
thority ruined the whole Body. The Romans seduced the members 
from the League by representing that it violated their sovereignty. 

After the death of Alexander, this Union was dissolved by 
various dissentions, raised chiefly thro' the acts of the Kings of 
Macedon. Every City was now engaged in a separate interest 
& no longer acted in concert. Polyb. lib. 2, cap. 3. After in 142 
Olympd, they saw their error & began to think of returning to their 
former State. This was the time when Pyrhus invaded Italy. Ibid. 
Helvetic Confederacy. 

Commenced in 1308 by the temporary, and in 1315 by the 
perpetual Union of Uri, Switz & Underwald, for the defence 
of their liberties ag5.' the invasions of the House of Austria. In 
1315 the Confederacy included 8 Cantons, and 1513 the number of 
13 was compleated by the accession of Appenzel. Code de 1'Hum. 

The General Diet representing the United Cantons is composed 
of two deputies from each. Some of their allies as the Abbi S*. 
Gall &c., are allowed by long usage to attend by their deputies. Id. 

All general Diets are held at such time & place as Zurich, 
which is first in rank & the depository of the common archives, 
shall name in a circular summons. But the occasion of annual 
conferences for the administration of their dependent bailages 
has fixed the same time, to wit the feast of St. John, for the Gen 
eral Diet. And the city of Frauenfeld in Turgovia is now the 
place of Meeting. Formerly it was the City of Baden. Id. 

The Diet is opened by a Complimentary Address of the first 
Deputy of each Canton by turns, called the Helvetic salutation. 
It consists in a congratulatory review of circumstances & events 
favorable to their common interest — and exhortations to Union 
and patriotism. 

of this league was forbidden to send, independently, ambassadors to any foreign 
nation ; they were not to send them to the Romans, and not to others. And 
this was expressly inserted in the treaties of the Achaeans with the Roman 
people. . . . The most excellent law of all was in force among them 
. . . whereby any one, whether a private individual or a magistrate, was 
forbidden to accept gifts from any King on any account whatever. 

376 THE WRITINGS OF [1787 

The deputies of the first canton Zurich propose the matters to 
be discussed. Questions are decided by plurality of voices. In 
case of division, the Bailiff of Turgovia has the casting one. The 
Session of the Diet continues about a month. Id. 

After the objects of universal concern are despatched, such 
of the deputies whose Constituents have no share in the depend 
ent bailages, withdraw, and the Diet then becomes a representa 
tion of the Cantons to whom these bailages belong, and proceeds 
to the consideration of the business relating thereto. Id. 

•Extraordinary Diets for incidental business or giving audience 
to foreign ministers may be called at any time by any one of the 
Cantons or by any foreign minister who will defray the expense 
of meeting. Seldom a year without an extraordinary Diet. 
Stanyan's Switzerland 

There is an annual Diet of 12 Cantons by one deputy from 
each for the affairs of the Ultramontane bailages. Code de 
1'Human. 

Particular Cantons also have their diets for their particular 
affairs, the time & place for whose meeting are settled by their 
particular Treaties. 

All public affairs are now treated not in Gen! Diet, but in the 
particular Assemblies of Protestant & Catholic Cantons. D'Albon. 
Foederal Authority 

The title of Republic and Sovereign State improperly given 
to this Confederacy, which has no concentered authority the Diets 
being only a Congress of Delegates from some or all of the Can 
tons, and having no fixt objects that are national. Dictionaire 
de Suisse. 

The 13 Cantons do not make one Commonwealth like the 
United Provinces, but are so many independent Comonwealths 
in strict alliance. There is not so much as any common instru 
ment by which they are all reciprocally bound together ; The 3 
primitive Cantons alone being each directly allied to the other 
twelve. The others in many instances are connected l indirectly 
only, as allies of allies. In this mode any one Canton may draw 

1 Note in Madison's writings : By ye Convention of Stantz, any member 
attacked has a direct claim on the succour of the whole confederacy. Coxe, p. 
343. William Coxe's Voyages. 

1787] JAMES MADISON. 377 

in all the others to make a common cause in its defence. Stanyan. 

The confederacy has no common Treasury — no common 
troops — no common Coin — no common Judicatory — nor any 
other common mark of sovereignty. Id. 

The General Diet cannot terminate any interesting affair with 
out special instructions, & powers, & the deputies accordingly 
take most matters proposed ad referendum. Code de 1'Hum. 

The Cantons individually exercise the right of sending & re 
ceiving ambassadors — making Treaties — coining money — pro 
scribing the money of one another — prohibiting the importation 
and exportation of merchandise — furnishing troops to foreign 
States, and doing everything else which does not wound the liberty 
of any other Canton. Excepting a few cases specified in the 
Alliances and which directly concern the object of the league, 
no Canton is subject to the Resolutions of the plurality. Id. 

The only establishment truly national is that of a federal army, 
as regulated in 1668, and which is no more than an eventual plan 
of defence adopted among so many allied States. Id. 

1. The League consists in a perpetual defensive engagement 
ag5.' external attacks and internal troubles. It may be regarded 
as an axiom in the public Law of the confederacy, that the federal 
engagements are precedent to all other political engagements of 
the Cantons. Id. 

2. Another axiom is that there are no particular or common 
possessions of the Cantons for the defence of which the others are 
not bound as Guarantees or auxiliaries of Guarantees. Id. 

3. All disputes are to be submitted to Neutral Cantons, who 
may employ force if necessary in execution of their decrees. Id. 
Each party to choose 4 Judges who may in case of disagree 
ment chuse umpire, and these under oath of impartiality to 
pronounce definitive sentence, which all Cantons to enforce. — 
D'Albon. & Stan. 

4. No Canton ought to form new alliances without the consent 
of the others [this was stipulated in consequence of an improper 
alliance in 1442 by Zurich with the House of Austria.] Id. 

5. It is an essential Object of the league to preserve interior 
tranquillity by the reciprocal protection of the form of Governm' 
established in each Canton, so that each is armed with the force 

378 THE WRITINGS OF [1787 

of the whole Corps for the suppression of rebellions & Revolts, 
and the History of Switzerland affords frequent instances of 
mutual succors for these purposes. Dictr? de Suisse. 

6. The Cantons are bound not to give shelter to fugitives from 
Justice, in consequence of which each Canton can at this day 
banish malefactors from all the territories of the League. Id. 

7. Tho' each Canton may prohibit the exportation & importa 
tion of merchandize, it must allow it to pass thro' from one neigh 
boring Canton to another without any augmentation of the tolls. 
Code de 1'Hum. 

8. In claiming succors agst foreign powers, the 8 Elder Cantons 
have a more extensive right than the 5 Junior ones. The former 
may demand them of one another without explaining the motives 
of the quarrel. The latter cannot intermeddle but as mediators 
or auxiliaries ; nor can they commence hostilities without the 
sanction of the Confederates ; and if cited by their adversaries) 
cannot refuse to accept the other Cantons for arbiters or Judges. 
Dictr.e de Suisse. 

9. In general each Canton is to pay its own forces without 
compensation from the whole or the succoured party. But in 
case a siege is to be formed for the benefit of a particular Canton, 
this is to defray the expence of it, and if for the common benefit, 
each is to pay its just proportion. D'Albon. On no pretext is a 
Canton to be forced to march its troops out of the limits of 
Switzerland. Stanyan. 

10. Foreign Ministers from different Nations reside in different 
Cantons. Such of them as have letters of credence for the whole 
Confederacy address them to Zurich the chief Canton. The Am 
bassador of France, who has most to do with the Confederacy is 
complimented at his Quarters by deputies from the whole body. 

Vices of the Constitution 

1. disparity in size of Cantons 

2. different principles of Governm* in diff* Cantons 

3. intolerance in Religion 

4. weakness of the Union. The comon bailages w0!1 served as 
a cement, sometimes become occasions of quarrels. Dictr.e de 
Suisse. 

In a treaty in 1683 with Victor Amadceus of Savoy, it is stip- 

1787] JAMES MADISON. 379 

ulated that he shall interpose as Mediator in disputes between the 
Cantons, and if necessary use force ags.1 the party refusing to sub 
mit to the sentence. Dictr.e de Suisse. — a striking proof of the 
want of authority in the whole over its parts. 
Belgic Confederacy 

established in 1679 by the Treaty called the Union of Utrecht. 
Code de 1'Humanite. 

The provinces came into this Union slowly. Guelderland the 
smallest of them made many difficulties. Even some of the Cities 
& towns pretended to annex conditions to their acceding. Id. 

When the Union was originally established a committee com 
posed of deputies from each province was appointed to regulate 
affairs, and to convoke the provinces according to art. XIX of the 
Treaty. Out of this Committee grew the States General Id. — 
who strictly speaking are only the Representatives of the States 
General who amount to 800 members. Temple, p. 112. * 

The number of Deputies to the States General from each prov 
ince not limited, but have only a single voice. They amount 
commonly, all together to 40 or 50. They hold their seats, some 
for life, some for 6 3 & i years, & those of Groninguen & 
Overyssel during pleasure. They are paid, but very moderately, 
by their respective constituents, and are amenable to their Trib 
unals only. Code de 1'Hum. No military man is deputable to 
the States Gen! Id. 

Ambass" of Republic have session & deliberation but no suf 
frage in States Gen!. Id. The grand pensioner of Holland as 
ordinary deputy from Holland, attends always in the States Gen1, 
& makes the propositions of that Province to States G1. Id. 

They sit constantly at the Hague since 1593, and every day in 
the week except Saturday & Sunday. The States of Holland in 
granting this residence, reserve by way of protestation, the 
rights, the honors & prerogatives belonging to them as sovereigns 
of the Province ; yielding the States Gen! only a rank in certain 
public ceremonies. Id. 

The eldest deputy from each province presides for a week by 
turns. The president receives letters &c. from the Ministers of 
the Republic at foreign Courts, and of foreign Ministers residing 
1 Sir William Temple's Remarks on the United Provinces (1674). 

380 THE WRITINGS OF [1787 

at the Hague, as well as of all petitions presented to theAssembly ; 
all which he causes to be read by the Secretary. Id. 

The Secretary besides correcting & recording the Resolutions 
prepares & despatches instructions to Ministers abroad— & letters 
to foreign powers. He assists also at conferences held with 
foreign Ministers 6° there gives his voice. He has a deputy when 
there is not a second Secretary. The Agent of the States Gen1 is 
charged with the Archives and is also employed on occasions of 
receiving foreign Ministers or sending Messages to them. Id. 
Federal Authority. 

The avowed objects of the Treaty of Union, i. to fortify the 
Union — 2. to repel the common enemy. Id 

The Union is to be perpetual in the same manner as if the 
Confederates formed one province only, without prejudice how 
ever to the privileges & rights of each province & City. Id. 

Differences between provinces & between Cities are to be set 
tled by the ordinary Judges — by arbitration — by amicable agree 
ment, without the interference of other provinces otherwise than 
by way of accommodation. The Stadtholder is to decide such 
differences in the last resort. Id. 

No change to be made in the articles of Union, without unani 
mous consent of the parties & everything done contrary to them 
to be null & void. Id 

States General, i. execute, without consulting their con 
stituents, treaties & alliances already formed. Id. 

2. take oaths from Generals & Govern", and appoint Field 
Deputies 

3. The collection of duties on imports & exports and the expe 
dition of Safe Conducts are in their name & by their officers. Id. 

4. they superintend & examine accounts of the E. India Com 
pany. Id 

5. inspect the Mint — appoint les Maitres de la Monnoye — fix la 
tattle & la valeur of the Coin, having always regard to the regular 
rights of the provinces within their own Territories. Id. 

6. Appoint a Treasurer General & Receiver General of the 
Quotas furnished by the Provinces. Id. 

7. elect out of a double nomination, the fiscal & other officers 
within the departments of the admiralties, except that the High 

1787] JAMES MADISON. 381 

officers of the fleet are appointed by the Admiral General, to 
whom the maritime provinces have ceded this right. Id. — The 
Navy supported by duties on foreign trade, appropriated 
thereto by the maritime provinces, for the benefit of the whole 
Republic. Id. 

8. They govern as sovereigns, the dependent territories, accord 
ing to the several capitulations. Id. 

9. they form Committees of their own body of a member from 
each deputation, for foreign affairs — finances marine — & other 
matters. At all these conferences the Grand Pensioner of Hol 
land & the Secretary of the States Gen! attend and have a 
deciding voice. Id. 

10. App* & receive Ambassrs— negociate w1!1 foreign powers — 
deliberate on war — peace — alliances — the raising forces — care of 
fortifications — military affairs to a certain degree — the equipment 
of fleets — building of ships — directions concerning money. Id. 
But they can neither make peace — nor war — nor truces — nor 
treaties — nor raise troops — nor impose taxes, nor do other acts 
requiring unanimity without consulting & obtaining the sanction 
of the Provinces. Id. Coining money also requires unanimity & 
express sanction of provinces. Temple, repealing an old law 
on same footing. Burrish. Batav. illustrata. In points not enu 
merated in this article plurality of voices decides. Code de 
I'Hum. 

11. composition & publication of edicts & proclamations rela 
tive both to the objects expressed in the articles of Union and to 
the measures taken for the cofhon good, are in the name of the 
States, and altho' they are addressed to the States of th'e Pro 
vinces who announce them with their sanction, still it is in the 
name of the States Gen! that obedience is required of all the 
inhabitants of the provinces. Code de 1'Hum. 

The Provinces have reserved to themselves 

1. their sovereignty within their own limits in general. Code 
de I'Hum. 

2. the right of coining money, as essential to Sovereignty, but 
agreed at the same time that the money which s^ be current 
throughout the Republic sd. have the same intrinsic value : To 
give effect to which regulation a mint is established at the Hague 

382 THE WRITINGS OF [1787 

under a chamber which has the inspection of all money 
struck either in name of States Gen- or particular provinces, as 
also of foreign coin. Id. — Coining money not in provinces or 
Cities, but in the generality of Union by comon agreement. 
Temple. 

3. Every province raises what money & by what means it 
pleases, and sends its quota to Receiver General Temple. 

The quotas were not settled without great difficulty. Id. 

4. the naming to GoverV5 of Towns within themselves — keeping 
keys & giving word to Magistrates — a power over troops in all 
things not military — conferring Col* Comissions & inferior posts 
in such Regiments as are paid by the provinces respectively 
— taking oath of fidelity — concerning a revocation of all which 
the States Gen1 are not permitted to deliberate. Id. 

The Provinces are restricted 

1. from entering into any foreign Treaties without consent of 
the rest. Code de Hum. 

2. from establishing imposts prejudicial to others without gen 
eral consent. Id. 

3. from charging their neighbours with higher duties than their 
own subjects. Id. 

Council of State. — composed of deputies from the provinces in 
different proportions. 3 of them are for life, the rest generally 
for 3 years : they vote per capita. Temple. 

They are subordinate to the States General, who frequently 
however consult with them. In matters of war which require 
secrecy they act of themselves. Military & fiscal matters are the 
objects of their administration. They vote 

They execute the resolutions of the States Gen!, propose requi 
sitions of men & money & superintend the fortifications &c., & 
the affairs of revenues & Govl.s, of the conquered possessions. 

Chamber of Accounts, was erected for the ease of the Council 
of State. It is subordinate to the States Gen1, is composed of two 
deputies from each province, who are changed triennially. They 
examine and state all accts of the several Receivers — controul and 
register orders of Council of State disposing of the finances. Id. 

College of Admiralty established by the States Gen1 1597 is 

1787] JAMES MADISON. 383 

subdivided into five of w°^ three are in Holland — one in Zealand 
— one in Friezland, each composed of 7 deputies, 4 appl by the 
province where the admiralty resides & 3 by the other provinces. 
The vice-Admiral presides in all of them when he is present. 

They take final cognizance of all crimes & prizes at sea ; 

of all frauds in customs provide quota of 

fleets resolved on by States Gen! app* Capt* & superior officers of 
each squadron take final cognizance also of Civil matters within 
600 florins — an appeal lying to States Gen1 for matters beyond 
that sum. Code de 1'Hum. & Temple. 

The authority of States Gen! in Admiralty Depmart* is much 
limited by the influence & privileges of maritime provinces, & the 
jurisdiction herein is full of confusion & contradiction. Code de 
rhumanite. 

Stadtholder who is now hereditary in his political capacity is au 
thorized i. to settle differences between provinces, provisionally 
till other methods can be agreed on, which having never been this 
prerogative may be deemed a permanent one. Code de 1'Hum. 

2. Assists at deliberations of States Gen! & their particular 
conferences, recommends & influences appointm' of Ambassa 
dors. Id. 

3. has seat & suffrage in Council of State. Id. 

4. presiding in the provincial Courts of Justice where his name 
is prefixed to all public acts. Id. 

5 supreme Curator of most of the Universities. Id. 

6. As Stadtholder of the provinces has considerable rights par 
taking of the sovereignty, as appointing town magistrates on pres 
entation made to him of a certain number. Executing provincial 
decrees &c Id. & Mably, Etud. de 1'hist. 

7. gives audiences to Ambassadors & may have Agents with 
their Sovereigns for his private affairs. Mab. Ibid1 

8. exercises power of pardon. Temple. 
In his Military capacity as Cap* Gen! 

1. commands forces — directs marches — provides for garrisons — 
& in general regulates military affairs. Code de 1'Hum. 

2. disposes of all appointm^, from Ensigns to Cols. The 

1 Gabriel Bonnot de Mably (1709-1785). 

384 THE WRITINGS OF [1787 

Council of State hav? surrendered to him the appointm'? within 
their disposal Id. & the States Gen! app1 the higher grades on 
his recomendation. Id 

3. disposes of the Gov*5 &c. of the fortified towns tho' the 
comissions issue from the States Gen! Id. 

In his Marine capacity as Admiral General i. superintends 
& directs everything relative to naval forces & other affairs within 
Admiralty. Id 

2 presides in the Admiralties in person or by proxy. Id 

3 Appoints Lieuts. Admirals & officers under them. Id. 

4. establishes Councils of war, whose sentences are in the 
name of the States Gen! & his Highness and are not executed till 
he approves. Id. 

The Stadtholder has a general & secret influence on the great 
machine which cannot be defined. Id. 

His Revenue from appointm1.5 amount to 300,000 florins, to 
which is to be added his extensive patrimonies. Id. 

The standing army of the Republic, 40,000 men. 
Vices of the Constitution 

The Union of Utrecht imports an authority in the States Gen! 
seemingly sufficient to secure harmony ; but the Jealousy in each 
province of its sovereignty renders the practice very different 
from the Theory. Code de 1'Hum. 

It is clear that the delay occasioned by recurring to seven inde 
pendent provinces including about 52 voting Cities &c. is a vice 
in the Belgic Republic which exposes it to the most fatal incon 
veniences. Accordingly the fathers of their country have en 
deavored to remedy it in the extraordinary Assemblies of the 
States Gen! in (1584) in 1651, 1716, 1717, but unhappily without 
effect. This vice is notwithstanding deplorable. Id. — Among 
other evils it gives foreign ministers the means of arresting the 
most important deliberations by gaining a single province or city. 
This was done by France in 1726, when the Treaty of Hanover 
was delayed a whole year. In 1688 the States concluded a Treaty 
of themselves but at the risk of their heads. Id. It is the practice 
also in matters of contribution or subsidy to pass over this article 
of the Union, for where delay wc! be dangerous the consenting 
provinces furnish their quotas without waiting for the others, but 

1787] JAMES MADISON. 385 

by such means the Union is weakened and if often repeated must 
be dissolved — Id. 

Foreign Ministers elude matters taken ad referendum by tam 
pering with the provinces & Cities. Temple p. 116. 

Treaty of Union obliges each Province to levy certain contri 
butions. But this article never could probably never will be 
executed because the inland provinces who have little commerce 
cannot pay an equal Quota. Burrish, Bat. illustrat : 

Deputations from agreeing to disagreeing provinces frequent. 
Temple. 

It is certain that so many independent Corps & interests could 
not be kept together without such a center of Union as the Stadt- 
holdership, as has been allowed & repeated in so many solemn 
Acts. Code de Hum. 

In the intermission of the Stadtholdership Holland by her 
Riches & Authority which drew the others into a sort of depend 
ence, supplied the place. Temple. 

With such a Governm' the Union never cd. have subsisted, if 
in effect the provinces had not within themselves a spring capable 
of quick — ing their tardiness, and impelling them to the same way 
of thinking. This Spring is the Stadtholder. His prerogatives are 
immense — i, &c. &c. — A strange effect of human contradictions. 
Men too jealous to confide their liberty to their representatives 
who are their equals, abandoned it to a prince who might the 
more easily abuse it as the affairs of the Republic were important 
& had not them fixed themselves. Mably Etude d'Hist., 205. 6. 

Grotius has s^ that the hatred of his countrymen ags.1 the H of 
Austria kept them from being destroyed by the vices of their 
Constitution. Ibid. 

The difficulty of procuring unanimity has produced a breach of 
fundamentals in several instances — Treaty of Westphalia was 
concluded without consent of Zealand &c D'Albon & Temple 
-These tend to alter the constitution D'Albon. 

It appears by several articles of the Union that the confeder 
ates had formed the design of establishing a Gen1 tax, [Impot,] ta 
be administered by the States Gen! . But this design so proper 
for bracing this happy Union has not been executed. Code de 
1'Hum. 

386 THE WRITINGS OF [1787 

Germanic Confederacy — took its present form in the year • . 

—Code de 1'Hum. 

The Diet is to be convoked by the Emperor, or on his failure, 
by the Archbishop of Mentz, with consent of Electors once in 
ten years at least from the last adjournment, and six months 
before the time of meeting. Ratisbon is the seat of the Diet 
since 1663. 

The members amount to 285, and compose three Colleges, to 
wit, that of the Electors — of Princes — of Imperial Cities. The 
voices amount to 159, of which 153 are individual & 6 collective. 
The latter are particular to the College of princes and are formed 
out of 39 prelates &c. and 93 Counts &c. The individual voices 
are common to the three Colleges, and are given by 9 Electors — 
94 princes, 33 of the ecclesiastical & 61 of the secular Bench — & 
50 Imperial Cities, 13 of the Rhenish, & 37 of the Suabian Bench. 
The K. of Prussia has nine voices in as many different capaci 
ties. Id 

The three Colleges assemble in the same House but in differ 
ent apartments Id 

The Emperor as head of the Germanic body is presid.1 of the 
Diet. He & others are represented by proxies at present. Id 

The deliberations are ground'? on propositions from Emperor & 
commerce in the College of Electors, from whence they pass to 
that of the princes, & thence to that of the Imperial Cities. They 
are not resolutions till they have been passed in each. When the 
Electors & Princes cannot agree, they confer ; but do not confer 
with the Imperial Cities, plurality of voices decide in each Col 
lege, except in matters of Religion & a few reserved cases, in 
which according to the Treaty of Westphalia, and the Imperial 
Capitulations the Empire is divided into the Catholic & Evan 
gelic Corps. Id. 

After the Resolutions have passed the three Colleges, they are 
presented to the Representative of the Emperor, without whose 
ratification they are null. Id they are called placita after pass 
ing the three Colleges — conclusa after ratification by Emperor. Id. 

The Collection of Acts of one Diet is called the Recess, which 
cannot be made up & have the force of law, till the Close of the 
Diet, the subsisting diet has not been closed for more than a 

1787] JAMES MADISON. 387 

hundred years, of course it has furnished no effective Resolution, 
though a great number of Interesting ones have passed. This 
delay proceeds from the Imperial Court who refuse to grant a 
Recess, notwithstanding the frequent and pressing applications 
made for one. Id 

Foederal Authority. 

The powers as well as the organization of the Diet have varied 
at different times. Antiently it elected as a corps the Emperors 
and judged of their Conduct. The Golden Bull gives this right 
to the Electors alone. Antiently it regulated tolls — at present 
the Electors alone do this. Id 

The Treaty of Westphalia & the capitulations of the Emperors 
from Charles V downwards, define the present powers of the Diet. 
These concern — i. Legislation of the Empire — 2. War & peace & 
alliances — 3. raising troops — 4. contributions — 5 construction of 
fortresses— 6 Money — 7 Ban of the Empire. 8 Admission of 
new princes — 9. the Supreme tribunals — 10. disposition of Grand 
fiefs & grand Charges — In all these points the Emperor & Diet 
must concur. Id 

The Ban of the Empire is a sort of proscription by which the 
disturbers of the public peace are punished. The offenders life 
& goods are at the mercy of every one, formerly the Emperors 
themselves pronounced the ban ag" those who offended them. It 
has been since regulated that no one shall be exposed to the Ban 
without the examination & consent of the Diet. Encyclop. 

By the Ban the party is outlawed, degraded from all his fed 
eral rights — his subjects absolved from their allegiance — and his 
possessions forfeited. Code de 1'Hum. 

The Ban is incurred when the Emperor or one of the supreme 
Tribunals address an order to any one, on pain in case of dis 
obedience, of being proscribed ipso facto. Id. 

The Circles formerly were in number 6 only. There are now 
ten. They were instituted for the more effectual preservation of 
the public peace, and the execution of decrees of Diet & supreme 
Tribunals against contumacious members, for which purposes 
they have their particular diets, with the chief prince of the 
Circle at their head, have particular officers for commanding the 
forces of the Circle, levy contributions, see that Justice is duly 

388 THE WRITINGS OF [1787 

administered — that the coin is not debased — that the customs are 
not unduly raised. — Savage vol. 2 p. 35. 

If a Circle fail to send its due succours, it is to pay damages 
suffered therefrom to its neighbours. If a member of the circle 
refuse, the Col. of the Circle is to admonish, & if this be insuf 
ficient, the delinquent party is to be compelled under a sentence 
from the Imperial Chamber. Id. 

Aulic Council [established by Diet in 1512. Encyclop.,] com 
posed of members appointed by the Emperor. Code de 
1'Hum. 

Its cognizance is restrained to matters above 2,000 Crowns ; is 
concurrent with the jurisdiction of the Imperial Chamber in con 
troversies between the States — also in those of subjects of the 
Empire by way of appeal from subaltern Tribunals of the Empire, 
and from sovereign tribunals of princes. Id. — Arms are to be 
used for carrying its decrees into execution, as was done in 1718 
by the troops of the Circle of upper Rhine in a controversy be 
tween Landgrave of Hesse Cassel & Prince of Hesse of Rhin- 
fitz. Id. 

Imperial Chamber, established in 1495 by the Diet as a means 
of public peace, by deciding controversies between members of 
the Empire. Code de 1'Hum. 

This is the first Tribunal of the Empire. It has an appellate 
jurisdiction in all Civil, and fiscal causes or where the public 
peace may be concerned. It has a concurrent jurisdiction with 
the Aulic Council; and causes cannot be removed from one to 
the other. Id. 

The Judges of this Tribunal are appointed partly by the Em 
peror — partly by Electors — partly by circles — are supported by 
all the States of the Empire, excepting the Emperor. They are 
badly paid, though great salaries are annexed to their offices. Id. 

In every action, real or personal — The Diet— Imperial Chamber 
and Aulic Council are so many supreme Courts to which none of 
the States can demur. The jurisprudence, by which they govern 
themselves, are according to the subject matter — i. the provincial 
laws of Germany 2. the Scripture — 3 the law of nature — 4 law 
of Nations — 5 the Roman law — 6 the canon law — 7 the foedal 
law of the Lombards. Id. 

1787] JAMES MADISON. 389 

Members of Diet as such are subject in all public affairs to be 
judged by Emperor & Diet, — as individuals in private capacity 
are subject to Aulic Council & Imperial Chamber. Id. 

The members have reserved to themselves the right i. to enter 
into war & peace with foreign powers 2 to enter into alliances 
with foreign powers and with one another, not prejudicial to their 
engagements to the Empire Code de 'Hum. — 3 to make laws, 
levy taxes, raise troops, to determine on life & death. Savage. 

4 Coin money. Id. 5. exert territorial sovereignty within their 
limits in their own name. Code de 1'Hum. 6. to grant pardons. 
Savage, p. 44. 7. to furnish their quotas of troops, equipped 
mounted & armed & to provide for sustenance of them, as if they 
served at home. Code de I'Hum. 

Members of Empire restricted 

1. from entering into Confederacies prejudicial to the Empire. 

2. from laying tolls or customs upon bridges, rivers, or pas 
sages to which strangers are subject, without consent of the 
Emperor in full Diet. 

3. cannot give any other value to money, nor make any other 
kind of money, than what is allowed by the Empire. Savage vol. 

2, p. 45- 

4. (by edict of 1548, particularly) from taking arms one ag5' 
another, from doing themselves justice — from affording retreat, 
much more, assistance to infractors of the public peace ; the ban 
of the Empire being denounced ag5' the transgressors of these 
prohibitions, besides a fine of 2000 marks of gold and loss of 
regalities. — Code d'Hum. 

Emperor. — has the prerogative i. of exclusively making 
propositions to the Diet — 2 presiding in all Assemblies & Tri 
bunals of the Empire when he chuses — 3 of giving suffrage in 
all affairs treated in the diet — 4 of negativing their resolutions — 

5 of issuing them in his own name — 6 of watching over the safety 
of the Empire — 7 of naming Ambassadors to negociate within 
the Empire as well as at foreign Courts — affairs concerning the 
Germanic Corps. 8. of re-establishing in good fame persons dis 
honored by Council of war & civil Tribunals. Code d'Hum. — 
9 of giving investiture of the principal immediate fiefs of the 
Empire, wch is not indeed of much consequence — 10 of con- 

390 THE WRITINGS OF [1787 

ferring vacant electorates — n of preventing subjects from being 
withdrawn from the jurisdiction of their proper Judge — 12. Of 
conferring charges of the Empire. 13 of conferring dignities & 
titles as of Kings &c. — 14 of instituting military orders — 15 of 
granting the dernier resort — 16. of judging differences & contro 
versies touching tolls — 17. of deciding contests between Catholic 
& Protestant States touching precedence &c. — Id. — 18. of found 
ing Universities within the lands of the States, so far as to make 
the person endowed with Academic honors therein be regarded 
as such throughout Germany. — 19 of granting all sorts of privi 
leges not injurious to the States of the Empire — 20 of establish 
ing great fairs — 21 of receiving the droit des Postes generates — 
22 of striking money, but without augumenting or diminishing its 
value. 23 of permitting strangers to enlist soldiers, conformably 
to Recess of 1654. Id. 24. Of receiving and applying Revenues 
of Empire. — Savage, p. . He cannot make war or peace, nor 
laws, nor levy taxes nor alter the denomination of money nor 
weights or measures. — Savage, v. 2, p. 35. The Emperor as such 
does not properly possess any territory within the Empire, nor 
derive any revenue for his support. Code de 'Hum. 
Vices of the Constitution. 

1. The Quotas are complained of & supplied very irregularly 
& defectively Code de 'Hum. provision is made by decree of 
diet for enforcing them, but it is a delicate matter to execute it 
ags* the powerful members. Id. 

2. The establishing of Imperial Chamber has not been found an 
efficacious remedy ags.1 civil wars. It has committed faults. The 
Ressortissans have not always been docile. Id. 

3. Altho' the establishing of Imperial Chambers &c give a more 
regular form to the police of the fiefs, it is not to be supposed 
they are capable of giving a certain force to the laws and main 
taining the peace of the Empire if the House of Austria had not 
acquired power eno' to maintain itself on the imperial Throne, 
to make itself respected, to give orders which it might be 
imprudent to despise, as the laws were therefore despised. Mabley 
Etude d' hist., p. 180 

[Jealousy of the Imperial authority seems to have been a great 
cement of the Confederacy.] 

1835] JAMES MADISON. 391 

ORIGIN OF THE CONSTITUTIONAL CONVENTION. MAD. MSS. 
A SKETCH NEVER FINISHED NOR APPLIED.1 

As the weakness and wants of man naturally lead to an asso 
ciation of individuals under a Common Authority, whereby each 
may have the protection of the whole against danger from without, 
and enjoy in safety within, the advantages of social intercourse, 
and an exchange of the necessaries & comforts of life ; in like 
manner feeble communities, independent of each other, have re 
sorted to a Union, less intimate, but with common Councils, for 
the common safety ag5- powerful neighbors, and for the preserva 
tion of justice and peace among themselves. Ancient history 
furnishes examples of these confederal 2 associations, tho' with a 
very imperfect account, of their structure, and of the attributes 
and functions of the presiding Authority. There are examples of 
modern date also, some of them still existing, the modifications 
and transactions s of which are sufficiently known. 

It remained for the British Colonies, now United States, of 
North America, to add to those examples, one of a more interest 
ing character than any of them 4 which led to a system without an 
example b ancient or modern, a system founded on popular rights, 
and so combining a federal form with the forms of individual 
Republics, as may enable each to supply the defects of the other 
and obtain that advantage of both. 

Whilst the Colonies enjoyed the protection of the parent 
Country as it was called, against foreign danger ; and were secured 

1 From the context it would appear that this sketch was written about the 
year 1835, when Madison was preparing for posthumous publication his journal 
of the corTstitutional convention. It is an exceedingly rough draft, written 
upon separate slips of paper, and some of these slips have been lost since Gilpin 
used the sketch in his edition of Madison's Works (1840). The Bulletin of the 
Bureau of Rolls and Library, Department of State, No. 9, October, 1897, 
contained about a fifth part of the sketch, but since then all of it has been 
found, except the last four paragraphs which are reprinted here from the Gilpin 
edition. 

2 The word " confederacies " also appears here parallel with " confederal." 

3 The word " operations" also appears here. 

4 " and leading to another " also appears. 

5 The word " precedent " also appears. 

392 THE WRITINGS OF [1835 

by its superintending controul, against conflicts among themselves, 
they continued independent of each other, under a common, tho' 
limited dependence, on the Parental Authority. When however 
the growth of the offspring in strength and in wealth, awakened 
the jealousy and tempted the avidity of the parent, into schemes 
of usurpation & exaction,1 the obligation was felt by the former 
of uniting their Counsels and efforts, to avert the impending 
calamity. 

As early as the year 1754, indications having been given of a 
design * in the British government to levy contributions on the 
Colonies, without their consent ; a meeting of Colonial deputies 
took place at Albany, which attempted to introduce a compromis 
ing substitute, that might at once satisfy the British requisitions, 
and save their own rights from violation. The attempt had no 
other effect, than by bringing these rights into a more conspicuous 
view, to invigorate the attachment to them, on the one side ; and 
to nourish the haughty & encroaching spirit on the other. 

In 1774. The progress made by G. B. in the open assertion of 
her pretensions, and the apprehended purpose of otherwise main 
taining them by Legislative enactments and declarations, had been 
such that the Colonies did not hesitate to assemble, by their 
deputies, in a formal Congress, authorized to oppose to the British 
innovations whatever measures might be found best adapted to 
the occasion ; without however losing sight of an eventual recon 
ciliation. 

The dissuasive 3 measures of that Congress, being without 
effect, another Congress was held4 in 1775, whose pacific 
efforts to bring about a change in the views of the other 
party, being equally unavailing, and the commencement of 
actual hostilities having at length put an end to all hope of recon 
ciliation ; the Congress finding moreover that the popular voice 
began to call for an entire & perpetual dissolution of the political 
ties which had connected them with G. B., proceeded on the 
memorable 4th of July, 1776 to declare the 13 Colonies Indepen 
dent States. 

1 " extortion" also appears. " "plan" also appears. 

3 " experimental " also appears. 4 " met " also appears. 

1835] JAMES MADISON. 393 

During the discussions of this solemn Act, a Committee con 
sisting of member from each colony had been appointed, to pre 
pare & digest a form of Confederation, for the future management 
of the Common interests, which had hitherto been left to the dis 
cretion of Congress, guided by the exigencies of the contest, and 
by the known intentions or occasional instructions of the Colonial 
Legislatures. 

It appears that as early as the 2istof July 1775, A plan entitled 
"Articles of Confederation & perpetual Union of the Colonies," 
had been sketched by Doc' Franklin, The plan being on that day 
submitted by him to Congress; and tho' not copied into. their 
Journals remaining on their files in his handwriting. But not 
withstanding the term "perpetual" observed in the title, the 
articles provided expressly for the event of a return of the Colo 
nies to a connection with G. Britain. 

This sketch became a basis for the plan reported by the Com? 
on the 12* of July, now also remaining on the files of Congress, in 
the handwriting of Mr. Dickinson. The plan, tho' dated after 
the Declaration of Independence, was probably drawn up before 
that event ; since the name of Colonies, not States is used through 
out the draught. The plan reported, was debated and amended 
from time to time, till the 17* of November 1777, when it was 
agreed to by Congress, and proposed to the Legislatures of the 
States, with an explanatory and recommendatory letter. The 
ratifications of these by their Delegates in Cong5, duly authorized 
took place at successive dates, but were not compleated till 
March i, 1781, when'Maryland who had made it a prerequisite1 
that the vacant lands acquired from the British Crown should be 
a common fund, yielded to the persuasion that a final & formal 
establishment of the federal Union & Gov* would make a favor 
able impression not only on other foreign Nations, but on G. B. 
herself. 

The great difficulty experienced in so framing the fed? system 
as to obtain the unanimity required for its due sanction, may be 
inferred from the long interval, and recurring discussions, between 
the commencement and completion of the work ; from the changes 

1 " preliminary" also appears. 

394 THE WRITINGS OF [1835 

made during its progress ; from the language of Cong? when pro 
posing it to the States, wch dwelt on the impracticability of devis 
ing a system acceptable to all of them ; from the reluctant assent 
given by some ; and the various alterations proposed by others ; 
and by tardiness in others again which produced a special address 
to them from Cong", enforcing the duty of sacrificing local con 
siderations and favorite opinions to the public safety, and the 
necessary harmony : Nor was the assent of some of the States 
finally yielded without strong protests against particular articles, 
and a reliance on future amendments removing their objections. 

It is to be recollected, no doubt, that these delays might be 
occasioned in some degree, by an occupation of the Public 
Councils both general & local, with the deliberations and meas 
ures, essential to a Revolutionary struggle ; But there must have 
been a balance for these causes, in the obvious motives to hasten 
the establishment of a regular and efficient Gov1 ; and in the ten 
dency of the crisis to repress opinions and pretensions,1 which 
might be inflexible in another state of things. 

The principal difficulties which embarrassed the progress, and 
retarded the completion of the plan of Confederation, may be 
traced to i. the natural repugnance2 of the parties to a relin- 
quishment of Power ; 2 a natural jealousy of its abuse in other 
hands than their own ; 3 the rule of suffrage among parties un 
equal in size, but equal in sovereignty ; 4 the ratio of Contribu 
tions in money and in troops, among parties, whose inequality in 
size did not correspond with that of their wealth, or of their mili 
tary or free population ; 5, the selection and definition of the 
powers, at once necessary to the federal head, and safe to the 
several members. 

To these sources of difficulty, incident to the formation of all 
such Confederacies, were added two others one of a temporary, 
the other of a permanent nature. The first was the case of the 
Crown lands, so called because they had been held by the British 
Crown, and being ungranted to individuals when its authority 
ceased, were considered by the States within whose charters or 

" that would not be abandoned " also appears. 
2 " reluctance " also appears. 

1835] JAMES MADISON. 395 

asserted limits they lay, as devolving on them ; whilst it was con 
tended by the others, that being wrested from the dethroned 
Authority, by the equal exertions of all, they resulted of right and 
in equity to the benefit of all. The lands being of vast extent and 
of growing value, were 1 the occasion of much discussion & heart 
burning ; & proved the most obstinate of the impediments to an 
earlier consummation of the plan of federal Gov*. The State of 
Maryland the last that acceded to it held out as already noticed, 
till the i. March 1781 and then yielded only to the hope that by 
giving a stable & authoritative character to the Confederation, 
a successful termination of the Contest might be accelerated. 
The dispute was happily compromised by successive surrenders 
of portions of the territory by the States having exclusive claims 
to it, and acceptances of them by Congress. 

The other source of dissatisfaction was the peculiar situation of 
some of the States, which having no convenient- ports for foreign 
commerce, were subject to be taxed by their neighbors, thro' whose 
ports, their commerce was carried on. New Jersey placed between 
Phila & N. York, was likened to a cask tapped at both ends ; And 
N. Carolina, between Virga & S. Carolina to a patient bleeding at 
both Arms. The Articles of Confederation provided no remedy2 
for the complaint ; which produced a strong protest on the part of 
N. Jersey ; and never ceased to be a source of dissatisfaction & 
discord, until the new Constitution superseded the old. 

But the radical infirmity of the " Art? of Confederation " was 
the dependence of Cong? on the voluntary and simultaneous com 
pliance with its Requisitions, by so many independent Communities, 
each consulting more or less its particular interests & convenience 
and distrusting the compliance of the others. Whilst the paper 
emissions of Cong? continued to circulate they were employed as 
a sinew of war, like gold & silver. When that ceased to be the 
case, and the fatal defect of the political System was felt in its 
alarming force, the war was merely kept alive and brought to a 
successful conclusion by such foreign aids and temporary expedi 
ents as could be applied ; a hope prevailing with many, and a wish 
with all, that a state of peace, and the sources of prosperity opened 

1 " was" also appears. 2 " relief " also appears. 

396 THE WRITINGS OF [1835 

by it, would give to the Confederacy in practice, the efficiency 
which had been inferred from its theory. 

The close of the war however brought no cure for the public 
embarrassments. The States relieved from the pressure of foreign 
danger, and flushed with the enjoyment of independent and sover 
eign power ; (instead of a diminished disposition to part with it), 
persevered in omissions and in measures incompatible with their 
relations to the Federal Govt and with those among themselves. 

Having served as a member of Cong? through the period between 
Mar. 1780 & the arrival of peace in 1783, 1 had become intimately 
acquainted with the public distresses and the causes of them. I 
had observed the successful opposition to every attempt to procure 
a remedy by new grants of power to Cong5 I had found moreover 
that despair of success hung over the compromising provision of 
April 1783, for the Public necessities, which had been so elabo 
rately planned and so impressively recommended to the States.1 
Sympathizing, under this aspect of affairs, in the alarm of the 
friends of free Gov* at the threatened danger of an abortive result 
to the great & perhaps last experiment in its favour, I could not 
be insensible to the obligation to co-operate as far as I could in 
averting the calamity. With this view I acceded to the desire of 
my fellow Citizens of the County that I should be one of its rep 
resentatives in the Legislature, hoping that I might there best 
contribute to inculcate the critical posture to which the Revolu 
tionary cause was reduced, and the merit of a leading agency of 
the State in bringing about a rescue of the Union, and the bless 
ings 2 of liberty staked on it, from an impending catastrophe. 

It required but little time after taking my seat in the House of 
Delegates in May 1784, to discover that however favorable the 
general disposition of the State might be towards 3 the Confederacy 
the Legislature retained the aversion of its predecessors to trans 
fers of power from the State to the Gov! of the Union ; notwith 
standing the urgent demands of the Federal Treasury ; the glaring 
inadequacy of the authorized mode of supplying it, the rapid 

1 See address of Congress. Note in MS. It may be found in Vol. I, p. 454, 
n., of this edition. 

2 " cause " also appears. 3 " to " also appears. 

1835] JAMES MADISON. 397 

growth of anarchy in the Fed1 System, and the animosity kindled 
among the States l by their conflicting regulations. 

The temper of the Legislature & the wayward course of its pro 
ceedings may be gathered from the Journals of its Sessions in the 
years 1784 & 1785. 

The failure however of the varied propositions in the Legisla 
ture, for enlarging the powers of Congress, the continued failure 
of the efforts of Congr to obtain from them the means of providing 
for the debts of the Revolution; and of countervailing the commer 
cial laws of G. B., a source of much irritation & ag5.' which the 
separate efforts of the States were found worse than abortive ; these 
Considerations with the lights thrown on the whole subject, by the 
free & full discussion it had undergone led to a general acquies 
cence in the Resell1 passed on the 21. of Jany 1786, which proposed 
& invited a meeting of Deputies from all the States to — insert the 
Resol. (See Journal.)2 

The resolution had been brought forward some weeks before 
on the failure of a proposed grant of power to Congress to collect 
a revenue from commerce, which had been abandoned by its 
friends in consequence of material alterations made in the grant 
by a Committee of the whole. The Resolution Tho introduced 
by Mr. Tyler an influential member, who having never served in 
Congress, had more the ear of the House than those whose services 
there exposed them to an imputable bias, was so little acceptable 
that it was not then persisted in. Being now revived by him, on 
the last day of the Session, and being the alternative of adjourning 
without any effort for the crisis in the affairs of the Union, it ob- 

1 " its members " also appear. 

2 " Resolved, that Edmund Randolph, James Madison, Jr., Walter Jones, St. 
George Tucker, and Meriwether Smith, Esquires, be appointed Commissioners, 
who, or any three of whom, shall meet such Commissioners as may be appointed 
in the other States of the Union, at a time and place to be agreed on, to take 
into consideration the trade of the United States ; to examine the relative situa 
tions and trade of said States ; to consider how far a uniform system in their 
commercial regulations may be necessary to their common interest and their 
permanent harmony ; and to report to the several States such an act, relative to 
this great object, as, when unanimously ratified by them, will enable the United 
States in Congress effectually to provide for the same." See Madison's letter 
of Jany. 22, 1786, to Jefferson. 

398 THE WRITINGS OF [1835 

tained a general vote ; less however with some of its friends from 
a confidence in the success of the experiment than from a hope 
that it might prove a step to a more comprehensive & adequate 
provision for the wants of the Confederacy. 

It happened also that Commissioners appointed by Virga & 
Maryd to settle the jurisdiction on waters dividing the two States 
had, apart from their official reports, recomended a uniformity in 
the regulations of the 2 States on several subjects & particularly 
on those having relation to foreign trade. It appeared at the time 
that Mary? had deemed a concurrence of her neighbors, Pena & 
Delaware, indispensable in such a case, who for like reasons would 
require that of their neighbors. So apt and forcible an illustra 
tion of the necessity of a uniformity throughout all the States 
could not but favour the passage of a Resolution which proposed 
a Convention having that for its object. 

The comissioners appointed by the Legisl : & who attended the 
Convention were E. Randolph the attorney of the state St. Geo: 
Tucker & J. M. The designation of the time & place to be pro 
posed for its meeting, and communicated to the states having been 
left to the Comr? they named for the time early September and for 
the place the City of Annapolis avoiding the residences of Cong5 
and large Comercial Cities as liable to suspicions of an extraneous 
influence. 

Altho' the invited Meeting appeared to be generally favored, 
five states only assembled ; some failing to make appointments, and 
some of the individuals appointed not hastening their attendance, 
the result in both cases being ascribed mainly, to a belief that the 
time had not arrived for such a political reform, as might be ex 
pected from a further experience of its necessity. 

But in the interval between the proposal of the Convention, and 
the time of its meeting such had been the advance of public 
opinion in the desired direction, stimulated as it had been by the 
effect of the contemplated object, of the meeting, in turning the 
general attention to the Critical State of things, and in calling 
forth the sentiments and exertions of the most enlightened & influ 
ential patriots, that the Convention thin as it was did not scruple 
to decline the limited task assigned to it and to recommend to the 
States a Convention with powers adequate to the occasion. Nor 

1835] JAMES MADISON. 399 

was it unnoticed that the commission of the N. Jersey Deputation 
had extended its object to a general provision for the exigencies of 
the Union A recommendation for this enlarged purpose was ac 
cordingly reported by a Corn6 to whom the subject had been 
referred. It was drafted by Col : H., and finally agreed to unanim 
ously in the following form. Insert it.1 

1 The adoption of the address was the only thing done by the Annapolis meet 
ing. The draft was submitted by Hamilton at a conference and some of the 
more radical features were toned down at the insistence of Randolph. Madison 
said to Hamilton : " You had better yield to this man, for otherwise all Virginia 
will be against you." — Morse's Hamilton, I, 167. The address was as follows : 

* * * " Deeply impressed, however, with the magnitude and importance 
of the object confided to them on this occasion, your Commissioners cannot for 
bear to indulge an expression of their earnest and unanimous wish, that speedy 
measures may be taken to effect a general meeting of the States in a future 
Convention, for the same and such other purposes, as the situation of public af 
fairs may be found to require. 

" If, in expressing this wish, or in intimating any other sentiment, your Com 
missioners should seem to exceed the strict bounds of their appointment, they 
entertain a full confidence, that a conduct dictated by an anxiety for the welfare 
of the United States will not fail to receive an indulgent construction. 

" In this persuasion, your Commissioners submit an opinion, that the idea of 
extending the powers of their Deputies to other objects than those of commerce, 
which has been adopted by the State of New Jersey, was an improvement on 
the original plan, and will deserve to be incorporated into that of a future Con 
vention. They are the more naturally led to this conclusion, as, in the course 
of their reflections on the subject, they have been induced to think that the 
power of regulating trade is of such comprehensive extent, and will enter so far 
into the general system of the Federal Government, that to give it efficacy, and 
to obviate questions and doubts concerning its precise nature and limits, may 
require a correspondent adjustment of other parts of the Federal System. 

" That there are important defects in the system of the Federal Government, 
is acknowledged by the acts of all those States which have concurred in the 
present meeting. That the defects, upon a closer examination, may be found 
greater and more numerous than even these acts imply, is at least so far prob 
able, from the embarrassments which characterize the present state of our na 
tional affairs, foreign and domestic, as may reasonably be supposed to merit a 
deliberate and candid discussion, in some mode which will unite the sentiments 
and councils of all the States. In the choice of the mode, your Commissioners 
are of opinion, that a Convention of deputies from the different States, for the 
special and sole purpose of entering into this investigation, and digesting a 
plan for supplying such defects as may be discovered to exist, will be entitled 

400 THE WRITINGS OF [1835 

The recommendation was well rec? by the Legislature of Virga, 
which happened to be the first that acted on it, the example of her 
compliance was made as conciliatory and impressive as possible. 
The Legislature were unanimous or very nearly so on the occa 
sion, and as a proof of the magnitude & solemnity attached to it, 
they placed Gen! W. at the head of the Deputation from the 
State; and as a proof of the deep interest he felt in the case he 
overstepped the obstacles to his acceptance of the appointment.1 

The law2 complying with the recommendation3 from Annapolis 
was in the terms following : 4 

to a preference, from considerations which will occur without being par 
ticularized. 

"Your Commissioners decline an enumeration of those national circumstances 
on which their opinion, respecting the propriety of a future Convention with 
more enlarged powers, is founded ; as it would be an useless intrusion of facts 
and observations, most of which have been frequently the subject of public dis 
cussion, and none of which can have escaped the penetration of those to whom 
they would in this instance be addressed. They are, however, of a nature so 
serious, as, in the view of your Commissioners, to render the situation of the 
United States delicate and critical, calling for an exertion of the united virtue 
and wisdom of all the members of the Confederacy. 

" Under this impression, your Commissioners, with the most respectful def 
erence, beg leave to suggest their unanimous conviction, that it may essentially 
tend to advance the interests of the Union, if the States by whom they have 
been respectively delegated would themselves concur, and use their endeavors 
to procure the concurrence of the other States, in the appointment of Commis 
sioners, to meet at Philadelphia on the second Monday in May next, to take 
into consideration the situation of the United States ; to devise such further pro 
visions as shall appear to them necessary to render the constitution of the Fe 
deral Government adequate to the exigencies of the Union ; and to report such 
an act for that purpose, to the United States in Congress assembled, as, when 
agreed to by them, and afterwards confirmed by the Legislatures of every State, 
will effectually provide for the same. 

" Though your Commissioners could not with propriety address these obser 
vations and sentiments to any but the States they have the honor to represent, 
they have nevertheless concluded, from motives of respect, to transmit copies 
of this Report to the United States in Congress assembled, and to the Execu 
tives of the other States." ! " Trust " also appears. 

2 " Bill " and " act " also appear. 3 " Bill " also appears. 

4 It was written by Madison : 

" Whereas, the Commissioners who assembled at Annapolis, on the fourteenth 
day of September last, for the purpose of devising and reporting the means of 

1835] JAMES MADISON. 401 

A resort to a General Convention to remodel the Confederacy, 
was not a new idea. It had entered at an early date into the con 
versations and speculations of the most reflecting & foreseeing 

enabling Congress to provide effectually for the commercial interests of the 
United States, have represented the necessity of extending the revision of the 
Federal system to all its defects ; and have recommended that deputies for 
that purpose be appointed by the several Legislatures, to meet in Convention 
in the City of Philadelphia, on the second Monday of May next, — a provision 
which seems preferable to a discussion of the subject in Congress, where it 
might be too much interrupted by the ordinary business before them, and 
where it would, besides, be deprived of the valuable counsels of sundry in 
dividuals who are disqualified by the constitutions or laws of particular States, 
or restrained by peculiar circumstances from a seat in that Assembly : 

" And whereas, the General Assembly of this Commonwealth, taking into 
view the actual situation of the Confederacy, as well as reflecting on the 
alarming representations made from time to time, by the United States in Con 
gress, particularly in their act of the fifteenth day of February last, can no 
longer doubt that the crisis is arrived at which the good people of America are 
to decide the solemn question, whether they will, by wise and magnanimous 
efforts, reap the just fruits of that independence which they have so gloriously 
acquired, and of that union which they have cemented with so much of their 
common blood ; or whether, by giving way to unmanly jealousies and preju 
dices, or to partial and transitory interests, they will renounce the auspicious 
blessings prepared for them by the Revolution, and furnish to its enemies 
an eventual triumph over those, by whose virtue and valour, it has been 
accomplished : 

" And whereas, the same noble and extended policy, and the same fraternal 
and affectionate sentiments, which originally determined the citizens of this 
Commonwealth to unite with their brethren of the other States, in establishing 
a federal government, cannot but be felt with equal force now, as motives to 
lay aside every inferior consideration, and to concur in such farther concessions 
and provisions, as may be necessary to secure the great objects for which that 
government was instituted, and to render the United States as happy in 
peace, as they have been glorious in war. 

" Be it, therefore, enacted, by the General Assembly of the Commonwealth 
of Virginia, That seven Commissioners be appointed by joint ballot of both 
Houses of Assembly, who, or any three of them, are hereby authorized as 
Deputies of this Commonwealth, to meet such Deputies as may be appointed 
and authorized by other States, to assemble in Convention at Philadelphia, as 
above recommended, and to join with them in devising and discussing all such 
alterations and farther provisions, as may be necessary to render the Federal 
Constitution adequate to the exigencies of the Union; and in reporting such an act 
for that purpose, to the United States in Congress, as when agreed to by them, 

VOL. II. — 26 

402 THE WRITINGS OF [1835 

observers of the inadequacy of the powers allowed to Congress.1 
In a pamphlet published in May 81 at the seat of Cong? Pelatiah 
Webster an able tho' not conspicuous Citizen, after discussing the 
fiscal system of the U. States, and suggesting among other re 
medial provisions including national Bank remarks that " the 
Authority of Cong5, at present is very inadequate to the perform 
ance of their duties ; and this indicates the necessity of their 
calling a Continental Convention for the express purpose of ascer 
taining, defining, enlarging and limiting, the duties & powers of 
their Constitution." 

On the i. day of Ap!, 1783, Col: Hamilton, in a debate in Cong* 
observed that 2 

He alluded probably to (see life of Schuyler in Longacre 3 — ) 

It does not appear however that his expectation had been 
fulfilled. 

In a letter to J. M. from R. H. Lee then President of Cong? 
dated Novr 26, 1784 He says : 4 

The answer of J. M. remarks a 

and duly confirmed by the several States, will effectually provide for the same. 
" And be it further enacted, That in case of the death of any of the said 
deputies, or of their declining their appointments, the Executive are hereby 
authorized to supply such vacancies; and the Governor is requested to transmit 
forthwith a copy of this act to the United States in Congress, and to the Exec 
utives of each of the States in the Union." 

1 See Alexander Hamilton to James Duane, Sept. 3, 1780. Works of Hamil 
ton (Lodge), i., 203. 

2 — he wished to see a general convention with the object of strengthening 
the federal constitution instead of several conventions of representatives of the 
several sections of the country. Vol. i., 439, of this edition. 

3 The reference is incorrect, and should be to the sketch of Hamilton in 
Longacre, Vol. ii. : " The same legislature [of 1782] that appointed him 
[Hamilton] unanimously passed resolutions, introduced into the senate by 
General Schuyler, declaring that the confederation was defective in not giving 
congress power to provide revenue for itself, or in not investing them with 
funds from established and productive sources ; and that it would be advisable 
to revise and amend the confederation." 

4 — that a general convention to revise the articles of confederation is being 
talked about in congress. 

5 — that he favors the project, but doubts if it is favored in Virginia. See 
his letter to Lee, December 24, 1784, ante. 

1835] JAMES MADISON. 403 

In 1785, Noah Webster whose pol & other valuable writings 
had made him known to the Public, in one of his publications, 
of American policy brought into view the same resort for supply 
ing the defects Fed1 System (see his life in Longacre) J 

The proposed & expected Convention at Annapolis the first of 
a general character that appears to have been realized, & the 
state of the public mind awakened by it, had attracted the par 
ticular attention of Cong5 and favored the idea there of a Con 
vention with fuller powers for amending the Confederacy, to J. 
M. letters of Monroe of Grayson.2 

1 "Sketches of American Policy," published in the winter of 1784-85. 
Longacre Vol. ii. 

2 Cf. the letters of Monroe to Madison, December 26, 1785, February n and 
March 19, 1786. Writings of Monroe, i., 109, 122, 123. The letter of Gray- 
son is dated New York, March 22, 1786 : 

******** 
" There has been a great contest in Jersey for the Argent papier ; but though 
it went triumphantly through the lower house, it was lost in the Council, 8 to 5, 
— some of the Members who were adverse to it, have been burnt in effigy, in 
particular Col? Ogden at or near Elizabeth town: the old Governor was drawn 
up to the Stake but pardoned, on account of his having been the first magis 
trate: This same Jersey bill was one of the most iniquitous things I ever saw 
in my life ; the money was a tender ; if it was refused, the debt was suspended 
for 12 years, in the mean time the act of limitation ran of course, which in effect 
destroyed it. — Jersey has not been singular in her attempts at cheating : in this 
place a bill is depending, of the same purport as that of Jersey, & which it is 
probable will pass, although it is violently opposed by the upright & respectable 
part of the CommY . The Antients were surely men of more candor than We 
are ; they contended openly for an abolition of debts in so many words, while 
we strive as hard for the same thing under the decent & specious pretense of 
a circulating medium. Montesquieu was not wrong when he said the demo- 
cratical might be as tyranical as the despotic, for where is there a greater act of 
despotism than that of issuing paper to depreciate for the purpose of paying 
debts, on easy terms; If Lord Effingham is right that an act ag* the Constitu 
tion is void, surely paper money with a tender annexed to it is void for is it not 
an attack upon property, the security of which is made a fundamental in every 
State in the Union : — There has been some serious thoughts in the minds of 
some of the Members of Congress to recommend to the States the meeting of a 
general Convention, to consider, of an alteration of the Confederation & there 
is a motion to this effect now under Consideration : it is contended that the', 
present Confederation is utterly inefficient, and that if it remains much longer 
in its present State of imbecillity we shall be one of the most contemptible 

4o4 THE WRITINGS OF [1835 

It does not appear that in any of these cases, the reform system 
was to be otherwise sanctioned than by the Legislative authy of 
the States ; nor whether nor how far a change was to be made in 
the structure of the Depository of the Federal powers. 

The act of Virga providing for the Convention at Philada, was 
succeeded by appointments from the other states as their Legisla 
tures were assembled, the appointments being selections from the 
most experienced & highest 1 standing Citizens. Rh. Is. was the 
only exception to a compliance with the recommendation from 
Annapolis, well known to have been swayed by an obdurate adher 
ence to an advantage which her position gave her of taxing her 
neighbors thro' their consumption of imported supplies, an ad 
vantage which it was forseen would be taken from her by a revisal 
of the " articles of Confederation." 

As the pub. mind had been ripened for a salutary Reform of 
the pol. System, in the interval between the proposal & the meet 
ing of the Corn" at Annapolis, the interval between the last event, 
and the meeting of Deps at Phila had continued to develope more 
& more the necessity & the extent of a systematic provision for 
the preservation and Gov* of the Union. Among the ripening 
incidents was the Insurrection of Shays, in Mass*5, against her 
Gov*; which was with difficulty suppressed, notwithstanding the 
influence on the insurgents of an apprehended interposition of the 
Fed? troops. 

At the date of the Convention, the aspect & retrospect of the 
pol. condition of the U. S. could not but fill the pub. mind with a 
gloom which was relieved only by a hope that so select a Body 
would devise an adequate remedy for the existing and prospective 
evils so impressively demanding it. 

It was seen that the public debt rendered so sacred by the 

Nations on the face of the Earth: — for my own part I have not yet made up my 
mind on the subject: I am doubtful whether it is not better to bear those ills 
we have than fly to others that we know not of: I am however in no doubt 
about the weakness of the foederal Government: if it was weaker notwithstand 
ing, it would answer if the States had power as in the United Netherlands the 
foederal Government is weak but the Individual States are strong — It is no 
wonder our Government should not work well, being formed on the Dutch 
model where circumstances are so materially different: — * * * . " 
1 " High " also appears. 

1835] JAMES MADISON. 405 

cause in which it had been incurred remained without any pro 
vision for its payment. The reiterated and elaborate efforts of 
Cong, to procure from the States a more adequate power to raise 
the means of payment had failed. The effect of the ordinary 
requisitions of Congress had only displayed the inefficiency of 
the authy making them; none of the States having duly complied 
with them, some having failed altogether or nearly so; and in one 
instance, that of N. Jersey, a compliance was expressly refused ; 
nor was more yielded to the expostulations of members of Cong5 
deputed to her Legislature, than a mere repeal of the law, without 
a compliance (see letter of Grayson to J. M.). 

The want of Authy in Cong? to regulate Commerce had pro 
duced in Foreign nations particularly G. B., a monopolizing policy 
injurious to the trade of the U. S., and destructive to their navi 
gation; the imbecility and anticipated dissolution of the Confed 
eracy extinguish81 all apprehensions of a Countervailing policy on 
the part of the U. States. 

The same want of a general power over Commerce led to an 
exercise of the power separately, by the States, wc.h not only 
proved abortive, but engendered rival, conflicting and angry regu 
lations. Besides the vain attempts to supply their respective 
treasuries by imposts, which turned their commerce into the 
neighbouring ports, and to coerce a relaxation of the British mon 
opoly of the W. Ind* navigation, which was attempted by Virginia,1 
(see Journal of ) the States having ports for foreign com 

merce, taxed & irritated the adjoining States, trading thro' them, 
as N. Y., Pen*, Virga & S. Carolina. Some of the States, as Con 
necticut, taxed imports as from Massts, higher than imports even 
from G. B. of wch Mass1.5 complained to Virg* and doubtless to 
other States (see letter of J. M.). In sundry instances as of N. Y., 
N. J., Pa & Maryld, (see ). The navigation laws treated the 

Citizens of other States as aliens. 

In certain cases the Authy of the Confederacy was disregarded, 
as in violation not only of the Treaty of peace ; but of Treaties 
with France & Holland, which were complained of to Cong8. 

1 The allusion is to the act of the Virginia Assembly passed January 21, 
1786, imposing a tonnage tax of 5.f. on vessels of foreigners, described in 
Madison's letter to Monroe of January 22, 1786, ante 

406 THE WRITINGS OF [1835 

In other cases the Fed1 Authy was violated by Treaties & 
wars with Indians, as by Geo.; by troops raised & kept up with' 
the consent of Cong5, as by Mass'.5; by compacts with* the consent 
of Cong*, as between Pen* and N. Jersey, and between Virga & 
Mary]d. From the Legisl: Journals of Virga it appears, that a 
vote refusing to apply for a sanction of Cong3 was followed by a 
vote agst the communication of the Compact to Cong3. 

In the internal administration of the States a violation of Con 
tracts had become familiar in the form of depreciated paper made 
a legal tender, of property substituted for money, of Instalment 
laws, and of the occlusions of the Courts of Justice; although 
evident that all such interferences affected the rights of other 
States, Relatively creditor, as well as Citizens Creditors within 
the State. 

Among the defects which had been severely felt was that of a 
uniformity in cases requiring it, as laws of naturalization and 
bankruptcy, a Coercive authority operating on individuals and a 
guaranty of the internal tranquillity of the States. 

As a natural consequence of this distracted and disheartening 
condition 1 of the union, the Fed1 Authy had ceased to be re 
spected abroad, and dispositions were shewn there, particularly 
in G. B., to take advantage of its imbecility, and to speculate on 
its approaching downfall : At home it had lost all confidence & 
credit ; the unstable and unjust career of the States had also for 
feited the respect & confidence essential to order and good Govt* 
involving a general decay of confidence between Man & man. 
It was found moreover that those least partial to popular Gov', or 
most distrustful of its efficacy were yielding to anticipations, that 
from an increase of the confusion a Gov' might result more con 
genial with their taste or their opinions. Whilst those most de 
voted to the principles and forms of Republics, were alarmed for 
the cause of liberty itself, at stake in the American Experiment, 
and anxious for a system that w? avoid the inefficacy of a mere 
confederacy without passing into the opposite extreme of a con 
solidated gov* It was known that there were individuals who had 
betrayed a bias towards Monarchy (see Knox to G. W. and him 

1 "appearances" also appears. 

1835] JAMES MADISON. 407 

to Jay,) (Marshall's life l) and there had always been some not 
unfavorable to a partition of the Union into several Con 
federacies ; either from a better chance of figuring on a Sectional 
Theatre, or that the Sections would require stronger Govts, or by 
their hostile conflicts lead to a monarchical consolidation. The 
idea of a dismemberment had recently made its appearance in 
the Newspapers. 

Such were the defects, the deformities, the diseases and the 

1 June 27, 1786, Jay wrote to Washington : " What I most fear is, that the 
better kind of people (by which I mean the people who are orderly and indus 
trious, who are content with their situations, and not uneasy in their circum 
stances) will be led by the insecurity of property, the loss of confidence in their 
rulers, and the want of public faith and rectitude, to consider the charms of 
liberty as imaginary and delusive. A state of uncertainty and fluctuation must 
disgust and alarm such men, and prepare their minds for almost any change 
that may promise them quiet and security." In the course of his reply Wash 
ington said : " What astonishing changes a few years are capable of producing ! 
I am told that even respectable characters speak of a monarchical form of gov 
ernment without horror. From thinking, proceeds speaking, thence to acting 
is often but a single step. But how irrevocable and tremendous ! what a 
triumph for our enemies to verify their predictions ! — what a triumph for the 
advocates of despotism to find that we are incapable of governing ourselves, and 
that systems founded on the basis of equal liberty are merely ideal and fal 
lacious ! Would to God that wise measures may be taken in time to avert the 
consequences we have but too much reason to apprehend." — Marshall's Wash 
ington (2<? Ed.), ii., 107, 109. 

From New York, October 28, 1786, Knox wrote to Washington as follows : 

". . . Our political machine constituted of thirteen independent sovereign 
ties, have [sic] been constantly operating against each other, and against the 
federal head, ever since the peace. The powers of Congress are utterly inade 
quate to preserve the balance between the respective States, and oblige them 
to do those things which are essential to their own welfare, and for the general 
good. The human mind in the local legislatures seems to be exerted, to pre 
vent the federal constitution from having any beneficial effects. The machine 
works inversely to the public good in all its parts. Not only is State against 
State, and all against the federal head, but the States within themselves possess 
the name only, without having the essential concomitant of government, the 
power of preserving the peace, the protection of the liberties and property of 
the citizens. 

" On the first impression of Faction and licentiousness the fine theoretic gov 
ernment of Massachusetts has given way, and its laws arrested and trampled 
under foot. Men at a distance, who have admired our systems of government, 

4o8 THE WRITINGS OF [1835 

ominous prospects, for which the Convention were to provide a 
remedy, and which ought never to be overlooked in expounding 
& appreciating the Constitutional Charter, the remedy that was 
provided. 

As a sketch on paper, the earliest perhaps wc.h of a Constitu 
tional Gov1 for the Union (organized into the regular Departments 
with physical means operating on individuals) to be sanctioned 

unfounded in nature, are apt to accuse the rulers, and say that taxes have been 
assessed too high and collected too rigidly. This is a deception equal to any 
that has hitherto been entertained. It is indeed a fact, that high taxes are the 
ostensible cause of the commotions, but that they are the real cause is as far 
remote from truth as light from darkness. The people who are the insurgents 
have never paid any, or but very little taxes. But they see the weakness of 
government ; They feel at once their own poverty, compared with the opulent, 
and their own force, and they are determined to make use of the latter, in order 
to remedy the former. Their creed is ' That the property of the United States 
has been protected from the confiscation of Great Britain by the joint exertions 
of all, and therefore ought to be the common property of all. And he that at 
tempts opposition to this creed is an enemy to equity and justice, and ought to 
be swept from off the face of the earth.' In a word they are determined to 
annihilate all debts public and private and have agrarian Laws, which are 
easily affected by the means of unfortunate paper money which shall be a ten 
der in all cases whatever. 

" The numbers of these people amount in Massachusetts to about one fifth 
part of several populous counties, and to them may be collected, people of 
similar sentiments, from the States of Rhode Island, Connecticut and New 
Hampshire so as to constitute a body of 12 or 15000 desperate & unprincipled 
men. They are chiefly of the young and active part of the community, more 
easily collected than perhaps kept together afterwards. But they will probably 
commit overt acts of treason, which will compell them to embody for their own 
safety — once embodied they will be constrained to submit to discipline for the 
same reason. Having proceeded to this length for which they are now ripe, 
we shall have a formidable rebellion against reason, the principles of all gov 
ernment, and the very name of liberty. This dreadful situation has alarmed 
every man of principle and property in New England. They start as from a 
dream, and ask what has been the cause of our delusion? what is to afford us 
security against the violence of lawless men ? Our government must be braced, 
changed, or altered to secure our lives and property. We imagined that the 
mildness of our government and the virtue of the people were so correspondent, 
that we were not as other nations requiring brutal force to support the laws. But 
we find that we are men, actual men, possessing all the turbulent passions be 
longing to that animal and that we must have government proper and adequate 

1835] JAMES MADISON. 409 

by the people of the States, acting in their original & sovereign 
character, was contained in a letter from J. M. of Apl 8 1787 to 
Govr Randolph, a copy of the latter is here inserted. 

The feature in the letter which vested in the general Authy a 
negative on the laws of the States, was suggested by the negative 
in the head of the British Empire, which prevented collisions be 
tween the parts & the whole, and between the parts themselves. 
It was supposed that the substitution, of an elective and responsi 
ble authority for an hereditary and irresponsible one, would avoid 
the appearance even of a departure from the principle of Repub 
licanism. But altho' the subject was so viewed in the Conven 
tion, and the votes on it were more than once equally divided, it 
was finally & justly abandoned, as apart from other objections 
it was not practicable among so many states increasing in num 
ber and enacting each of them so many laws. Instead of the 
proposed negative, the objects of it were left as finally provided 
for in the Constitution. 

On the arrival of the Virginia Deputies at Philada, it occurred v 
to them that from the early and prominent part taken by that 
State in bringing about the Convention some initiative step might 
be expected from them. The Resolutions introduced by Gov 
ernor Randolph were the result of a Consultation on the subject ; 
with an understanding that they left all the Deputies entirely open 

for him. The people of Massachusetts for instance, are far advanced in this doc 
trine, and the men of reflection, & principle, are determined to endeavor to estab 
lish a government which shall have the power to protect them in their lawful 
pursuits, and which will be efficient in all cases of internal commotions or for 
eign invasions. They mean that liberty shall be the basis, a liberty resulting 
from the equal and firm administration of the laws. They wish for a general 
government of unity as they see the local legislatures, must naturally and neces 
sarily tend to retard and frustrate all general government. 

1 ' We have arrived at that point of time in which we are forced to see our 
national humiliation, and that a progression in this line, cannot be productive 
of happiness either public or private. Something is wanting and something must 
be done or we shall be involved in all the horror of faction and civil war with 
out a prospect of its termination. Every tried friend to the liberties of his country 
is bound to reflect, and to step forward to prevent the dreadful consequences 
which will result from a government of events. Unless this is done we shall be 
liable to be ruled by an arbitrary and capricious armed tyranny, whose word 
and will must be law. ." — Wash. MSS. 

4io THE WRITINGS OF [1835 

to the lights of discussion, and free to concur in any alterations 
or modifications which their reflections and judgments might ap 
prove. The Resolutions as the Journals shew became the basis 
on which the proceedings of the Convention commenced, and to 
the developments, variations and modifications of which the plan 
of Gov' proposed by the Convention may be traced. 

The curiosity I had felt during my researches into the History 
of the most distinguished Confederacies, particularly those of 
antiquity, and the deficiency I found in the means of satisfying it 
more especially in what related to the process, the principles, the 
reasons, & the anticipations, which prevailed in the formation of 
them, determined me to preserve as far as I could an exact 
account of what might pass in the Convention whilst executing its 
trust, with the magnitude of which I was duly impressed, as I was 
with the gratification promised to future curiosity by an authentic 
exhibition of the objects, the opinions, & the reasonings from 
which the new System of Gov' was to receive its peculiar structure 
& organization. Nor was I unaware of the value of such a con 
tribution to the fund of materials for the History of a Constitu 
tion on which would be Staked the happiness of a people great 
even in its infancy, and possibly 1 the cause of liberty throughout 
the world. 

In pursuance of the task I had assumed I chose a seat in front 
of the presiding member, with the other members on my right & 
left hands. In this favorable position for hearing all that passed, 
I noted in terms legible & in abbreviations & marks intelligible to 
myself what was read from the Chair or spoken by the members ; 
and losing not a moment unnecessarily between the adjournment 
& reassembling of the Convention I was enabled to write out my 
daily notes during the session or within a few finishing days after 
its close, in the extent and form preserved in my own hand on my 
files. 

In the labor and correctness of this I was not a little aided by 
practice, and by a familiarity with the style and the train of ob 
servation and reasoning which characterized the principal speak 
ers. It happened, also, that I was not absent a single day, nor 

" perhaps " also appears. 

1835] JAMES MADISON. 411 

more than a casual fraction of an hour in any day, so that I could 
not have lost a single speech unless a very short one. 

It may be proper to remark, that, with a very few exceptions) i/ 
the speeches were neither furnished, nor revised, nor sanctioned, 
by the speakers, but written out from my notes, aided by the 
freshness of my recollections. A further remark may be proper, 
that views of the subject might occasionally be presented, in the 
speeches and proceedings, with a latent reference to a compro 
mise on some middle ground, by mutual concessions. The ex 
ceptions alluded to were,— first, the sketch furnished by Mr. 
Randolph of his speech on the introduction of his propositions, 
on the twenty-ninth day of May ; secondly, the speech of Mr. 
Hamilton, who happened to call on me when putting the last hand 
to it, and who acknowledged its fidelity, without suggesting more 
than a very few verbal alterations which were made ; thirdly, the 
speech of Gouverneur Morris on the second day of May, which 
was communicated to him on a like occasion, and who acquiesced 
in it without even a verbal change. The correctness of his lan 
guage and the distinctness of his enunciation were particularly 
favorable to a reporter. The speeches of Doctor Franklin, ex 
cepting a few brief ones, were copied from the written ones read 
to the Convention by his colleague, Mr. Wilson, it being incon 
venient to the Doctor to remain long on his feet. 

Of the ability and intelligence of those who composed the Con- / 
vention the debates and proceedings may be a test ; as the char 
acter of the work which was the offspring of their deliberations 
must be tested by the experience of the future, added to that of 
nearly half a century which has passed. 

But whatever may be the judgment pronounced on the ^ 
competency of the architects of the Constitution, or what 
ever may be the destiny of the edifice prepared by them, I 
feel it a duty to express my profound and solemn conviction, de 
rived from my intimate opportunity of observing and appreciat 
ing the views of the Convention, collectively and individually, 
that there never I was an assembly of men, charged with a great 
and arduous trust, who were more pure in their motives, or more 
exclusively or anxiously devoted to the object committed to them, 
than were the members of the Federal Convention of 1787, to the 

4i2 THE WRITINGS OF JAMES MADISON. [1835] 

object of devising and proposing a constitutional system which 
should best supply the defects of that which it was to replace, and 
best secure the permanent liberty and happiness of their country. / 

END OF VOLUME II. 

__ 
LOAN PERIOD 1 

HOME USE 

DEPARTMENT 

Libran 

ALL BOOKS MAY BE RECALLED AFTER 7 DAYS 

1-month loans ire.y P2 ">--v?'*?ci by c-iilir,g 542-340S 

1-year loans may ot i^rh^rjj.j uV o-:/ g nj tr:« t>o.)ks to ^e Circulation Desk 

flenewali; and reciiar^as moy uo .r.ads 4 days p.ior to due data 

DUEASSTAMPED 

LIBR EOIMLY I 

^T&SSF"" 

GENERAL LIBRARY - U.C. BERKELEY 

mm 

'