PUBLIC PARKS AND THE ENLARGEMENT OF TOWNS
By Frederick Law Olmsted
(Address delivered at the American Social Science Association, 1870)

We want a ground to which people may easily go after their day's work is done, and where they may stroll for an hour, seeing, hearing, and feeling nothing of the bustle and jar of the streets, where they shall, in effect, find the city put far away from them. We want the greatest possible contrast with the streets and the shops and the rooms of the town which will be consistent with convenience and the preservation of good order and neatness. We want, especially, the greatest possible contrast with the restraining and confining conditions of the town, those conditions which compel us to walk circumspectly, watchfully, jealously, which compel us to look closely upon others without sympathy. Practically, what we most want is a simple, broad, open space of clean greensward, with sufficient play of surface and a sufficient number of trees about it to supply a variety of light and shade. This we want as a central feature. We want depth of wood enough about it not only for comfort in hot weather, but to completely shut out the city from our landscapes.

The character of the benefits thus far described as arising from public parks is one in which the whole community is interested, but especially those who are most taxed for their support, those who have most to do with the management of the public property, and least to enjoy the mere sensation of escaping from the jar and worry of the city. It is those who have the most to do with the city's business who most need the refreshment and recuperation which a park provides. If parks are valuable in promoting the health and vigor of the body of the people, it is necessary that they should be so planned and prepared as to be used in the way which will best secure their peculiar advantages, and in a way which will be suitable to a considerable variety of uses by different persons, and to a considerable variety of needs in the same persons at different times.

The park should, as far as possible, complement the town. Openness is the one thing you cannot get in buildings. Picturesque beauty is another. Consequently, the beauty of the park should be the beauty of the fields, the meadow, the prairie, of the green pastures, and the still waters. What we want to gain is tranquility and rest to the mind. Mountains suggest effort. But besides the possibly sublimity of the mountains, there is a more gentle and more domestic kind of beauty, which in the forms, colors, and disposition of vegetation, affects us by grateful and pleasing suggestions, and which, in any landscape, will be found by the cultivated eye to be the richest, most constant, most varied, most readily available, and most cheaply available form of beauty.

It is upon the meadow, the green, the brook, or the pond that we instinctively fix our eyes when we enter a pleasure ground. Pastoral beauty alone cannot have those charms which

 are to be derived from variety of wood and water, and verdure. Large open spaces are always desirable if only as affording the freest opportunity for people to come together, and the freest opportunity for people to move about, without being annoyed by the presence or distracted by the movements of others around them.

No one who has closely observed the conduct of the people who visit the Park, can doubt that it exercises a distinctly harmonizing and refining influence upon the most unfortunate and most lawless classes of the city — an influence favorable to courtesy, self-control, and temperance.

Throughout the country a manifest evil to be combated in forming new parks is a tendency to regard the public demand from a commercial and not from an artistic point of view. That is to say, the object that is looked at is not how to secure the greatest advantage to the people who are to use the park, but the greatest pecuniary advantage to the property in the vicinity, or to the town itself.

The establishment of parks on a large scale would multiply the facilities for walking, riding, and driving, increase the general cheerfulness and cleanliness of the town and generally add to the inducements for living in it. It would make its attractiveness nearly independent of its wealth. A poor man's habitation would be in all respects, save that of size, as much a villa as a rich man's, if it were situated where the scenery of both would be equally good.

The development of parks, it is hardly necessary to say, does not mean the setting aside of ground for the ornamentation of squares or circles where citizens may pleasantly lounge or pass a leisure hour, but the laying out and improvement of large tracts, in which the objects immediately before the eye may be, as the common phrase is, "purely rural."

We want depth of wood enough about it not only for comfort in hot weather, but to completely shut out the city from our landscapes. The question of the number of parks wanted, and the area that should be occupied by them, depends upon the growth and needs of a community. But however the park area is divided, the park system should be a connected, continuous, system, accessible from all parts of the city. This can best be secured by taking advantage of natural features in the topography of the neighborhood, and connecting them by means of parkways.

We have reason to believe that in selecting ground for a park, or parkway, economy will generally be promoted by avoiding places of fashionable resort, and especially those parts which are in the line of what are called "improvements." The more broken and picturesque the ground is, the better. If it rolls well, has ledges and hollows, thickets and open ground, steep banks, and above all, rich valleys, it will be all the more valuable. It is a common error to seek a smooth site. A site that may require great outlay for grading often costs infinitely less money to bring into requisite condition than a smooth site which looks level, but isn't perfectly so.

The purposes of a public park should be strictly subordinated to providing the best practicable means of healthful recreation for the inhabitants of a city. Considering how much money must be spent to secure good air in crowded parts of a city — for sanitary purposes alone — it can never be uneconomical to provide abundant breathing space.