1 


Up  ' 

i 


YMJ/teJ. 


r     (OS    ■ 

;,  ADAMS    \*\>\$ 


■  .1 


\ 


'okn  A  dam  5 


AN 


INQ.UIRY 


INTO 


THE    PRINCIPLES    AND    POLICY 


OF    THE 


GOVERNMENT 


OT 


THE  UNITED  STATES 


Comprising  nine  Sections,  under  the  following;  heads  : — 


I.  ARJSTOCHACT. 

II.  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  THE  POLICY 
OF  THE  UNITE!)  STATES,  AND  OF  THE 
ENGLISH  TOLICT. 

III.  THE  EVIL  MORAL  PRINCIPLES 
OF  THE  GOVERNMENT  OF  THE  UNITED 
STATES. 

IV.  FUNDING. 

V.  BANKING. 


VI.  THE  GOOD  MORAL  PR1NCIK.ES 
OF  THE  GUVETINMENT  OF  THE  UNITES 
STATES. 

VII.  AUTHORITY. 

VIII.  THE  MODE  OF  TNFUSINO  AIlIS- 
TOCRACY  INTO  THE  POLICY  OF  THE 
UNITED  STATES. 

IN.     THE     1  EGAJ,     rOLICl     OF         ; 
UNITED  STATES. 


"•xWBBb 


BY  JOHN  TAYLOIl, 

OF  CAROLINE  COUNTY,    VIRGINIA. 


FREDERICKSBURG : 

PUBLISHED    BT    GREEN    AND    CAD*. 
1814. 

C,    ' 


DISTRICT  OF  VIRGINIA,  To  wit : 

Bfi  IT  REMEMBERED,  That  on  the  fifteenth  day  of  November,  in  the 
thirty-eighth  year  of  the  Independence  of  the  United  States  of  America, 
JOHN  TAYLOR,  of  the  said  District,  hath  deposited  in  this  Office,  the 
Title  of  a  Book,  the  right  whereof  he  claims  as  Author,  in  the  words  fol- 
lowing, to  wit:.... 

"  An  Inquiry  into  the  Principles  and  Policy  of  the  Government  of  the 

"  United  States,  comprising  nine  sections,  under  the  following  heads: 

"  I.  Aristocracy.  II.  The  Principles  of  the  Policy  of  the  United  States, 
«'  and  of  the  English  Policy.  III.  The  Evil  Moral  Principles  of  the  Govern- 
"rnent  of  the  United  States.  IV.  Funding.  V.  Banking.  VI.  The  Good 
"  Moral  Principles  of  the  Government  of  the  United  States.  VII.  Autho- 
*'  rity.  VIII.  The  Mode  of  infusing-  Aristocracy  into  the  Policy  of  the  Uni- 
« ted  States.  IX.  The  Legal  Policy  of  the  United  States.  By  JOHN  TAY- 
"  LOR,  of  Caroline  county,  Virginia." 

In  conformity  to  the  Act  of  the  Congress  of  the  United  States,  entituled 
"  An  Act  for  the  encouragement  of  Learning,  by  securing  the  copies  of 
Maps,  Charts,  and  Books,  to  the  Authors  and  Proprietors  of  such  copies 
during  the  times  therein  mentioned  ;"  and  also  to  an  Act,  entituled  "An 
act  supplementary  to  an  Act,  entituled,  « An  Act  for  the  encouragement  of 
Learning,  by  securing  the  copies  of  Maps,  Charts,  and  Books,  to  the  Au- 
thors and  Proprietors  of  such  copies,  during  the  times  therein  mentioned  ;' 
and  extending  the  benefits  thereof  to  the  arts  of  Designing,  Engraving,  and 
Etching  historical  and  other  prints." 

WILLIAM  MARSHALL, 

£SEAL.* 

****»***#  Clerk  of  the  District  of  'N  irgmiu 


TO  THE  PUBLIC*. 


T. 


HIS  book  being  written  for  your  use,  and  subject  to  yout 
judgement,  the  means,  motives  and  habits  of  the  author  ought  to 
be  disclosed,  lest  its  imperfections  should  be  ascribed  to  his 
cause,  instead  of  his  bias  or  inability. 

Having  arrived  at  manhood  just  before  the  commencement  of 
the  revolutionary  war,  the  ardour  of  that  controversy,  a  consider- 
able intercourse  with  many  of  the  chiefs  who  managed  it,  a  ser- 
vice of  three  years  in  the  continental  army<  of  twelve  in  legisla- 
tive bodies,  and  an  experience  of  our  policy  both  in  poverty  and 
affluence,  inspired  him  with  the  opinions  he  has  endeavoured  to 
sustain.  At  the  age  of  forty,  his  circumstances,  which  had  been 
ruined  by  military  expenses  and  the  depreciation  of  paper  money, 
having  been  repaired  by  the  practice  of  the  law,  a  desire  of  being- 
more  useful,  induced  him  to  devote  the  residue  of  his  life  in  a 
private  station,  to  the  advancement  of  academical,  agricultural, 
and  political  knowledge.  These  essays  contain  the  result  of  his 
endeavours  as  to  the  last;  and  whatever  may  be  their  fate,  he  is 
not  conscious  of  having  written  a  single  sentence  from  a  bad 
motive. 

Upon  the  appearance  of  Mr.  Adams's  defence  of  the  Ameri- 
can constitutions,  and  of  the  essays  signed  Publius,  but  entitled 
the  Federalist,  he  imbibed  an  opinion,  that  both  had  paid  too 
much  respect  to  political  skeletons,  constructed  with  fragments 
torn  from  monarchy,  aristocracy  and  democracy,  called,  in  these 
essays,  the  numerical  analysis  ;  and  too  little  to  the  ethereal  moral 
principles,  alone  able  to  bind  governments  to  the  interest  of  na- 
tions. Subsequent  occurrences  induced  him  to  conclude,  that  a 
confidence  in  that  analysis,  inspired  by  these  books,  had  deadened 
the  public  attention  to  the  only  means  for  preserving  a  free  and 
moderate  government.  Arid  the  following  essays  (in  which  the 
reader  will  not  find  Mr.  Adams's  erudition,  nor  the  elegant  style 
of  Publius,  because  the  author  was  not  master  of  them")  are  the 


[     vi     ] 

contemporaneous  suggestions  of  these  occurrences  or  of  expe- 
rience, designed  to  portray  human  nature  in  a  political  state,  and 
to  explain  the  moral  principles  capable  of  foretelling  its  actions, 
and  controlling  its  vices. 

Monarchy,  aristocracy  and  democracy,  appeared  to  the  author 
to  be  inartificial,  rude,  and  almost  savage  political  fabricks  ;  and 
the  idea  of  building  a  new  one  with  the  materials  they  could 
afford,  seemed  like  that  of  erecting  a  palace  with  materials  drawn 
from  Indian  cabins.  He  thought  that  these  respectable  commen- 
tators, in  making  the  attempt,  had  allowed  little  or  nothing  new 
or  pre-eminent  to  the  policy  of  the  United  States  ;  had  overlook- 
ed both  the  foundation  and  the  beautiful  entablature  of  its  pillars  : 
and  had  left  mankind  still  enchanted  within  the  magick  circle  of 
the  numerical  analysis. 

Believing  that  the  true  value  and  real  superiority  of  our  policy 
consisted  in  its  good, moral  piiwciples  ;  that  these  principles  v»ere 
the  only  worthy  object  of  national  affection,  and  the  only  just  so- 
lution of  the  ill  success  of  other  governments  and  of  the  wonder- 
ful prosperity  of  our  own  ;  that  by  transplanting  it  upon  the 
British  substratum,  maxims  and  measures  destructive  to  ours, 
however  calculated  for  their  political  system,  would  be  introdu- 
ced; that  the  dangerof  this  approximation  was  greatly  augmented, 
by  the  respect  which  the  English  form  of  government  attracts  as 
the  work  of  our  gallant  ancestors,  the  source  of  our  affection  for 
liberty,  and  the  solitary  rival  of  our  own;  that  the  belief  of  such 
an  affinity,  would  enable  legislation  to  draw  the  confines  of  the  two 
forms  of  government  so  near  together,  that  a  step  or  even  a  stum- 
ble might  pass  from  one  to  the  other  ;  and  that  a  disclosure  of 
the  contrariety  in  their  principles,  might  become  a  beacon  against 
tin  exchange  of  good  and  lasting  moral  principles,  for  cobweb 
and  fluctuating  numerical  balances  ;  the  author  of  these  essays 
concluded,  that  the  next  age  ought  not  to  be  deluded,  by  the  si- 
lence of  its  predecessor,  into  a  belief  that  this  affinity  was  gene- 
rally allowed. 

Although  the  elevation  of  the  British  form  of  government, 
produced  by  a  fetv  moral  principles,  violently  and  of  course  clum- 
sily thrust  under  it  at  different  times,  constituted  the  American 
observatory  at  the  epoch  of  the  revolution  ;  from  whence,  through 
the  telescope,  necessity,  new  principles  were  discovered,  now 
confirmed  by  the  distinct  experience  of  each  state  for  periods, 


t  v"  1 

exceeding,  when  united,  the  duration  of  any  one  of  the  modifi- 
cations of  the  British  government :  yet  the  non-existence  of  the 
supposed  affinity  is  at  once  disclosed  by  the  few  words  "  balance 
"  of  orders  and  judicial  independence."  The  first,  indigenously 
implying  a  sovereignty  of  orders  of  men,  and  the  second  a  judicial 
dependence  upon  that  sovereignty  ;  transplanted,  balance  is  ap- 
plied to  powers  without  sovereignty,  and  independence  to  confer 
a  judicial  power  never  thought  of  in  England. 

By  the  British  policy,  the  nation  and  the  government  is  con- 
sidered as  one,  and  the  passive  obedience  denied  to  the  king  con- 
ceded to  the  government,  whence  it  alters  its  form  and  its  prin- 
ciples, without  any  other  concurrence  than  that  of  its  parts  ; 
whereas,  by  ours,  the  nation  and  the  government  are  considered  as 
distinct,  and  a  claim  of  passive  obedience  by  the  latter,  would  of 
course  be  equivalent  to  the  same  claim  by  a  British  king. 

Instead  of  an  affinity,  a  deep  rooted  contrariety  appeared  to 
the  author  of  these  essays  to  exist,  in  the  reliance  of  one  policy 
upon  political  law  and  national  opinion,  and  of  the  other  upon 
official  power,  for  the  control  of  official  power.  It  seemed  to  him 
as  unphilosophical  to  suppose  that  official  power  could  be  mixed 
with  human  nature  without  changing  its  qualities,  as  that  alcohol 
would  not  change  the  qualities  of  water;  and  that  to  moderate 
official  power  by  official  power,  was  something  like  weakening- 
alcohol  with  alcohol.  On  the  other  hand,  he  could  not  discern 
how  publick  opinion  could  perform  the  office  expected  of  it,  un- 
less it  was  well  instructed  in  those  good  moral  principles,  capable 
of  distinguishing  between  laws  or  measures  consonant  to  the 
nature  of  our  policy,  and  those  flowing  from  avarice,  party  zeal, 
ambition,  or  the  errour  of  its  supposed  affinity  to  the  British. 

The  human  mind,  buoyed  up  to  the  zenith  of  hope  upon  the 
billows  of  the  French  revolution,  sunk  with  its  wreck  into  the 
gloom  of  despair;  and  philosophers  seem  inclined  to  abandon  a 
successful  experiment,  because  they  have  been  obliged  to  dis- 
gorge extravagant  theories.  It  is  necessary  for  the  happiness 
and  safety  of  the  people  of  the  United  States,  to  revive  political 
discussion,  both  to  enable  them  to  defeat  the  frauds  of  factions, 
and  lest  it  be  inferred  from  the  despotism  of  France,  that  the  go- 
vernment of  their  rival  is  the  last  refuge  from  oppression.  The 
great  danger  of  artisans  and  agriculturists  lies  in  the  legal  depre- 
dations of  the  various  parties  actuated  by  exclusive   interests. 


[    via    } 

natural  to  the  British  policy,  such  as  a  court  interest,  a  military- 
interest,  a  stock  interest,  and  various  other  separate  interests, 
whose  business  it  is  to  get  what  they  can  from  the  rest  of  the 
nation.  Like  the  armies  of  Bonaparte,  all  such  parties  subsist 
upon  contributions,  and  repay  them  with  arrogance  and  contempt. 
By  such  parties,  or  by  enlisting  under  some  statesman  or  general, 
agriculture  and  arts  have  been  universally  degraded  from  political 
influence,  and  subjected  to  a  tutelage  formed  to  plunder  them. 

A  few  texts  arc  selected  from  Mr.  Adams's  defence  of  the 
constitutions  of  the  United  States,  because  its  candour  furnished 
the  best  materials  for  a  distinct  exhibition  of  certain  subjects  ; 
and  the  inviolable  obligation  of  freely  examining  his  doctrines, 
was  not  inconsistent  with  a  high  opinion  of  his  virtue  and  talents. 

The  author  has  only  to  add,  that  he  has  nothing  to  plead  in  ex- 
cuse of  the  imperfections  of  these  essays,  but  his  incapacity,  and 
that  a  common  sentinel  may  awaken  an  army.  He  has  devoted 
to  them  the  occasional  spare  time  of  a  busy  life,  during  twenty 
years.  Their  revision  and  publication  was  deferred,  until  age  had 
abated  temporal  interests  and  diminished  youthful  prejudices  ;  so 
that  they  are  almost  letters  from  the  dead.  And  he  offers  them 
near  the  end  of  his  life,  as  an  oblation  to  those  political  principles, 
for  which  he  was  indebted  for  much  happiness  in  his  passage 
through  it. 

It  is  necessary  to  inform  the  publick  that  these  essays  were 
written  before  the  17th  day  of  November,  1811,  when  the  con- 
tract was  made  for  printing  them  ;  to  disclose  the  reason,  why 
no  use  has  been  made  of  any  subsequent  event. 

THE  AUTHOR. 


SECTION  THE  FIRST. 


.IRISTOCKACr. 


M. 


Lr.  Adams's  political  system,  deduces  government  from 
a  natural  fate ;  the  policy  of  the  United  States  deduces  it 
from  moral  liberty.  Every  event  proceeding  from  a  mo- 
tive, may,  in  a  moral  sense,  be  termed  natural.  Asd  in 
this  view,  "  natural"  is  a  term,  which  will  coverall  human 
qualities.  Lest,  therefore,  the  terms  f<  natural  and  moral? 
may  not  suggest  a  correct  idea  of  the  opposite  principles, 
which  have  produced  rival  political  systems,  it  is  a  primary 
object  to  ascertain  the  sense  in  which  they  arc  here  used. 

Man,  we  suppose  to  be  compounded  of  two  qualities,  dis- 
tinguishable from  each  other;  matter  and  mind.  By  mind, 
we  analyze  the  powers  of  matter ;  by  matter  we  cannot 
analyze  the  powers  of  mind.  Matter  being  an  agent  of  infe- 
rior power  to  mind,  its  powers  may  be  ascertained  by  mind; 
but  mind  being  an  agent  of  sovereign  power,  there  is  no 
power  able  to  limit  its  capacity.  The  subject  cannot  be  an 
adequate  menstruum  for  its  own  solution.  Therefore,  as 
we  cannot  analyze  mind,  it  is  generally  allowed  to  be  a 
supernatural  quality. 

To  the  human  agencies,  arising  from  the  mind's  power 
of  abstraction,  Ave  apply  the  term  "moral;*'  to  such  as  are 
the  direct  and  immediate  effect  of  matter,  independent  of 
abstraction,  the  terms  «  natural  or  physical."  Should  Mr. 
Adams  disallow  the  application  of  this  distinction  to  hh 
theory,  by  saying,  that  when  he  speaks  of  natural  political 
systems,  lie  refers  both  to  man's  mental  and  jphysieaJ  powers. 


AllIsTGCliACr. 


and  includes  whatever  the  term  "moral"  can  reach  ;  I  an- 
swer, that  it  is  incorrect  to  confound  in  one  mass  the  pow- 
ers of  mind  and  body,  in  order  to  circumscribe  those  of 
mind,  by  applying  to  the  compound,  the  term  "  natural,"  if 
it  is  impossible  for  mind  to  limit  and  ascertain  its  own 
powers. 

Whether  the  human  mind  is  able  to  circumscribe  its  own 
powers,  is  a  question,  between  the  two  modern  political  par- 
lies. One  (of  which  Mr.  Adams  is  a  disciple)  asserts  that 
man  can  ascertain  his  own  moral  capacity,  deduces  conse- 
quences from  this  postulate,  and  erects  thereon  schemes  of 
government — right,  say  they,  because  natural.  The  other, 
observing  that  those  who  affirm  the  doctrine,  have  never 
been  able  to  agree  upon  this  natural  form  of  government: 
and  that  human  nature  has  been  perpetually  escaping  from 
all  forms ;  considers  government  as  capable  of  unascertained 
modification  and  improvement,  from  moral  causes. 

To  illustrate  the  question ;  let  us  confront  Mr.  Adams's 
opinion  "that  aristocracy  is  natural,  and  therefore  unavoid- 
able," with  one  "that  it  is  artificial  or  factitious,  and  there- 
fore avoidable."  He  seems  to  use  the  term  "  natural"  to 
convey  an  idea  distinct  from  mora!,  by  coupling  it  with  the 
idea  of  fatality.  But  moral  causes,  being  capable  of  human 
modification,  events  flowing  from  them,  possess  the  quality 
of  freedom  or  evitation.  As  the  moral  efforts,  by  which 
ignorance  or  knowledge  are  produced,  are  subjects  them- 
selves of  election,  so  ignorance  and  knowledge,  the  effects  of 
these  moral  efforts,  are  also  subjects  of  election  ;  and  igno- 
rance and  knowledge  are  powerful  moral  causes.  If,  there- 
fore, by  the  term  "natural"  Mr.  Adams  intended  to  include 
"  moral,"  the  idea  of  "  fatality"  is  inaccurately  coupled 
with  it;  and  if  he  resigns  this  idea,  the  infallibility  of  his 
system,  as  being  natural,  must  also  be  resigned. 

That  he  must  resign  his  political  predestination,  and  all 
its  consequences,  I  shall  attempt  to  prove,  by  shewing,  that 
aristocracies,  both  ancient  and  modern,  have  been  variable 
and  artificial ;  that  they  have  all  proceeded  from  moral,  not 


ARISTOCRACY. 


from  naiural  causes ;  and  that  they  are  evitable  and  not 
inevitable. 

An  opinion  "that  nature  makes  kings  or  nobles"  has  been 
the  creed  of  political  fatalists,  from  the  commencement  of 
the  sect ;  and  confronts  its  rival  creed  "  that  liberty  and 
slavery  are  regulated  by  political  law."  However  lightly 
Mr.  Adams  may  speak  of  Filmer,  it  is  an  opinion  in  which 
they  are  associated,  and  it  is  selected  for  discussion,  because 
by  its  truth  or  falsehood,  the  folly  or  wisdom  of  the  policy 
of  the  United  States  is  determined. 

In  the  prosecution  of  these  objects,  frequent  use  will  be 
made  of  the  word  «  aristocracy,"  because  the  ideas  at  pre- 
sent attached  to  it,  make  it  more  significant  than  any  other. 

Mr.  Adams  rears  his  system  upon  two  assertions :  "That 
"  there  are  only  three  generieal  forms  of  government ; 
**  monarchy,  aristocracy  and  democracy,  of  which  all  other 
«  forms  are  mixtures  :  and  that  every  society  naturally  pro- 
"  duces  an  order  of  men,  which  it  is  impossible  to  confine 
"  to  an  equality  of  rights."  Political  power  in  one  man, 
without  division  or  responsibility,  is  monarchy;  the  same 
power  in  a  few,  is  aristocracy;  and  the  same  power  in 
the  whole  nation,  is  democracy.  And  the.  resemblance  of 
our  system  of  government  to  either  of  these  forms,  depend* 
upon  the  resemblance  of  a  president  or  a  governor  to  a 
monarch;  of  an  American  senate,  to  an  hereditary  order: 
and  of  a  house  of  representatives,  to  a  legislating  nation. 

Upon  this -threefold  resemblance  Mr.  Adams  has  seized, 
to  bring  the  political  system  of  America  within  the  pale  of 
the  English  system  of  checks  and  balances,  by  following 
the  analysis  of  antiquity ;  and  in  obedience  to  that  authori- 
ty* by  modifying  our  temporary,  elective,  responsible  go\  - 
emors,  into  monarch s ;  our  senates  into  aristocratical  or- 
ders; and  our  representatives,  into  a  nation  personally 
exercising  the  functions  of  government. 

"Whether  the  terms  «  monarchy,  aristocracy  and  demo- 
cracy,"  or  the  one,  the  few,  and  the  many,  are  only  nume- 
rical; or  characteristic,  like  the  calyx,  petal  and  staniims 


'J.  AlilSTGCKACY. 

«»f  plants ;  or  Complicated,  with  the  idea  of  a  balance ;  they 
have  neve:*  yet  singly  or  collectively  been  used  to  describe 
a  government," deihieed  from  good  moral  principle?. 

If  we  are  unable  to  discover  in  our  Form  of  government, 
any  resemblance  of  monarchy,  aristocracy  or  democraey, 
sis  defthed  by  ancient  writers,  and  by  Mr.  Adams  himself, 
Vt  cannot  be  compounded  of  all,  but  must  be  rooted  in  some 
other  political  element;  whence  it  follows,  that,  the  opinion 
which  supposes  monarchy,  aristocracy  and  democracy,  or 
mixtures  of  then;,  to  constitute  all  the  elements  of  govern- 
ment, is  an  error,  which  has  produced  a  numerical  or  exte- 
rior classification,  instead  of  one  founded  in  moral  princi- 
ples. 

By  this  error,  the  moral  efforts  of  mankind,  towards  poli- 
tical improvement,  have  been  restrained  and  disappointed. 
Under  cyery  modification  of  circumstances,  these  three 
gerierical  principles  of  government,  or  a  mixture  of  them, 
2iave  been  universally  allowed  to  comprise  the  whole  extent 
of  political  volition;  and  whilst  the  liberty  enjoyed  by  the 
©3 her  sciences,  has  produced  a  series  of  wonderful  discove- 
ries ;  politics,  circumscribed  by  an  universal  opinion  (as 
astronomy  was  for  centuries)  remained  stationary  from  the 
earliest  ages,  to  the  American  revolution. 

It  will  bean  effort  of  this  essay  to  prove,  that  the  United 
States  have  refuted  the  ancient  axiom,  "  that  monarchy, 
aristocracy  and  democracy,  are  the  only  elements  of  gov- 
ernment," by  plaiting  theirs  in  mOral  principles,  without 
any  reference  to  those  elements  ;  and  that  by  demolishing 
the  barrier  hitherto  obstructing  the  progress  of  political 
science,  they  have  cleared  the  way  for  improvement. 

Mr.  Adams's  system  promises  nothing.  It  tells  us  that 
human  nature  is  always  the  same  :  that  the  art  of  govern- 
ment can  never  change;  that  it  Is  contracted  into  three 
simple  principles;  and  that  mankind  must  either  suffer  the 
«-vils  of  one  of  these  simple  principles  ;  as  at  Athens, 
Venice,  or  Constantinople;  or  those  of  the  same  principles 
eompoanded,  as  at  London,  Koine,  or  Laeedemon.     And  it 


ARISTOCRACY,  O 

gravely  counts  up  several  victims  of,  democratic  rage,  as 
proofs,  that  democracy  is  more  pernicious  than  monarchy 
or  aristocracy.  Such  a  computation  is  a  spectre,  calculated 
to  arrest  our  efforts,  and  appal  our  hope?,  in  pursuit  of  po- 
litical good.  If  it  be  correct,  what  motives  of  preforms 
between  forms  of  government  remain  ?  On  one  hand,  Mn* 
Adams  calls  our  attention  to  hundreds  of  wise  and  virtuous 
patricians,  mangled  and  bleeding  victims  of  popular  fury ; 
on  the  other,  he  might  have  exhibiteJ  millions  of  plebeians, 
sacrificed  to  the  pride,  folly  and  ambition  of  monarchy  ami 
aristocracy;  and,  to  complete  the  picture,  he  ought  to  have 
placed  right  before  us,  the  effects  of  these  three  principles 
commixed,  in  the  wars,  rebellions,,  persecutions  am!  oppres- 
sions of  the  English  form,  celebrated  by  Mr.  Adams  as  the 
most  perfect  of  the  mixed  class  of  governments.  Is  it  pos- 
sible to  convince  us,  that  we  are  compelled  to  elect  one  of 
these  evils?  After  having  discovered  principles  of  govern- 
ment, distinct  from  monarchy,  aristocracy  or  democracy, 
in  the  experience  of  their  eflicacy,  and  the  enjoyment  of 
their  benefits ;  can  we  be  persuaded  to  renounce  the  dis- 
covery, to  restore  the  old  principles  of  political  navigation, 
and  to  steer  the  commonwealth  into  the  disasters,  against 
which  all  past  ages  have  pathetically  warned  us?  It  is  ad- 
mitted, (hat  man,  physically,  is  "always  the  same;"  but 
denied  that  he  is  so,  morally.  Unon  the  truth  or  error  of 
this  distinction,  the  truth  or  error  of  Mr.  Adams's  mode  of 
reasoning  and  of  this  essay,  will  somewhat  depend.  If  it 
is  untrue,  then  the  cloud  of  authorities  collected  by  hini 
from  all  ages,  are  irrefutable  evidence*  to  establish  the 
fact,  that  political  misery  is  unavoidable ;  because  roan  is 
always  the  same.  Rut  if  the  mora!  qualities  of  human 
nature  are  not  always  the  same,  but  are  different  both  in 
nations  and  individuals ;  and  if  government  ought  to  bo 
constructed  in  relation  to  these  moral  qualities,  and  not  ia 
relation  to  factitious  orders  ;  thfte  authorities  do  not  pro- 
duce a  conclusion  so  deplorable.  The  variety  in  the  kinds 
and  degrees  of< political  misery,  is  alone  conclusive  evidence 


b  ARISTOCRACY. 

of  distinct  degrees  of  moral  character,  capable  of  unknown 
moral  efforts. 

Supposing  that  none  of  Mr.  Adams's  quotations  had  been 
taken  from  poetical  and  fabulous  authors  j  that  no  doubt 
could  exist  of  the  truth  of  those  furnished  by  ancient  his- 
torians i  and  that  they  hail  not  been  dexterously  selected  to 
fit  an  hypothesis  j  yet  their  whole  weight  would  have  de- 
pended upon  the  similarity  of  moral  circumstances,  be- 
tween the  people  of  America,  and  those  of  Greece,  Italy, 
Switzerland,  England,  and  a  multitude  oi'  countries,  col* 
leeted  from  all  ages  into  our  modern  theatre. 

Do  the  Americans  recognize  themselves  in  a  group  of 
Goths,  Vandals,  Italians,  Turks  and  Chinese?  If  not,  mar? 
is  not  always  morally  the  same.  If  man  is  not  always  mo- 
rally  the  same,  it  is  not  true  that  he  requires  the  same  poli- 
tical regimen.  And  thence  a  conclusion  of  considerable 
weight  follows,  to  overthrow  the  ground-work  of  Mr. 
Adams's  system ;  for  by  proving,  if  he  had  proved  it,  that 
his  system  was  proper  for  those  men,  and  those  times,  re- 
sorted to  by  him  for  its  illustration,  he  proves  that  it  is 
not  proper  for  men  and  times  of  dissimilar  moral  charac- 
ters and  circumstances. 

The  traces  of  intellectual  originality  and  diversity  ;  the 
shades  and  novelties  of  the  human  character,  between  the 
philosopher  and  the  savage ;  between  different  countries, 
different  governments,  and  different  eras ;  exhibit  a  com- 
plexity, which  the  politician  and  philologist  have  never 
been  able  to  unravel.  Out  of  this  intellectual  variety, 
arises  the  impossibility  of  contriving  one  form  of  govern- 
ment, suitable  for  every  nation  ;  and  also  the  fact,  that 
human  nature,  instead  of  begetting  one  form  constantly, 
demonstrates  its  moral  capacity,  in  the  vast  variety  of  its 
political  productions. 

Having  apprized  the  reader,  by  these  general  remarks,  of 
the  political  principles  tfl  be  vindicated  or  assailed  in  this 
essay;  and  that  an  effort  will  be  made  to  prove,  that  the 
policy  of  the  United  States  is  rooted  in  moral  or  intellec- 


ARISTOCRACY.  7 

tual  principles,  and  not  in  orders,  clans  or  casts,  natural  or 
factitious;  this  effort  must  be  postponed,  until  the  way  is 
opemd  to  it,  by  a  more  particular  review  of  Mr.  Adams's 
system.     To  this,  therefore,  I  return. 

He  supposes  •'  that  every  society  must  naturally  produce 
an  aristocratic al  order  of  men,  which  it  will  be  impossible 
to  confine  to  an  equality  of  rights  with  other  men."  To 
determine  the  truth  of  this  position,  an  inquiry  must  be 
made  into  the  mode  by  which  the?c  ciders  have  been  pro- 
duced in  those  countries,  placed  before  us  by  Mr.  Adams, 
as  objects  of  terror  or  imitation. 

In  order  to  understand  the  question  correctly,  it  is  pro- 
per to  hear  Mr.  Adams  state  it  himself.  Throughout  his 
book,  it  is  constantly  appearing,  as  constituting  the  great 
principle  upon  which  his  system  is  founded ;  but  here  it 
can  only  appear  in  a  quotation,  selected  as  concise,  explicit 
and  unequivocal. 

*  "  These  sources  of  inequality,"  says  he,  *<  which  are 
«  common  to  every  people,  and  can  never  be  altered  by 
"  any,  because  they  are  founded  in  the  constitution  of  na- 
"  ture;  this  natural  aristocracy  among  mankind,  has  been 
«  dilated  on,  because  it  is  a  fact  essential  to  be  considered 
"  in  the  constitution  of  a  government.  It  is  a  body  of  men 
«  which  contains  the  greatest  collection  of  virtues  and  abi- 
iS  lilies  in  a  free  government  5  the  brightest  ornament  and 
"  glory  of  a  nation  ;  and  may  always  be  made  the  greatest 
•*'  blessing  of  society,  if  it  be  judiciously  managed  in  tin 
u  constitution.  But  if  it  is  not,  it  is  always  the  most  dan- 
<«  gerous;  nay,  it  maybe  added,  it  never  fails  to  be  the  de- 
«  struction  of  the  commonwealth.  What  shall  be  done  to 
"  guard  against  it  ?  There  is  hut  one  expedient  yet  diseo- 
"  vercd,  to  avail  t!ie  society  of  all  the  benefits  from  this 
'«  body  of  men,  which  they  are  capable  of  affording,  and  at 
"  the  same  time  prevent  tliem  from  undermining  or  inva- 
'•'  ding  the  public  liberty;  and  thai  is  to  throw  them  all,  or 
«•'  at  foist  the  most  remarkable  of  them,  into  cm  assembly 

*  Adams's  Dcf.  p.  116— lir — vol.  i.  31  rhihdcl-Lh  edition. 


8  AHISTCCIUCT. 

**  together,  in  the  legislature;  to  keep  all  the  executive 
«'  power  entirely  out  of  their  hands,  as  a  body ;  to  erect  a 
*<  ^irst  magistrate  over  them,  invested  with  the  ichole  execa- 
««  the  authority ;  to  make  them  dependant  on  that  execu- 
«  tivc  magistrate  for  all  public  executive  employ tnents ;  to 
«'  give  that  magistrate  a  negative  on  the  legislature,  by 
"  which  he  may  defend  both  himself  and  the  people  from 
«•  all  their  cr  t .-rprises  in  t!ie  legislature  ;  and  to  erect  on 
"  the  other  side  of  them,  an  impregnable  barrier  against 
f«  them,  in  ft  house  of  commons  fairly,  fully,  and  adequate- 
«  ly  representing  the  ■people,  who  shall  have  the  power  of 
*t  negativing  all  their  attempts  at  encroachments  in  the  le- 
'«  gtslature,  and  of  withholding  both  from  them  and  the 
«<  crown  all  supplies,  by  which  they  may  be  paid  for  their 
«  services  in  executive  offices,  or  even  the  public  service 
«  carried  on  to  the  detriment  of  the  nation." 

This  is  the  text  on  which  it  is  proposed  to  comment ;  in- 
cidentally considering  several  of  the  arguments,  by  which 
its  doctrine  is  defended,  without  the  formality  of  frequent 
quotations.  It  contains  the  substance  of  Mr.  Adams's  sys- 
tem, and  is  evidently  the  English  form  of  government,  ex- 
cepting an  cqial  representation  of  the  people,  in  the  pro- 
posed house  of  commons. 

The  position  first  presenting  itself  is,  "  that  an  aristo- 
cracy is  the  work  of  nature."  A  position  equivalent  to  the 
antiquated  doctrine,  "  that  a  king  is  the  work  of  God."  A 
particular  attention  will  be  now  paid  to  this  point,  because 
Mr.  Adams's  theory  is  entirely  founded  upon  it. 

Superior  abilities  constitutes  one  among  the  enumerated 
causes  of  a  natural  aristocracy.  This  cause  is  evidently 
as  fluctuating  as  knowledge  and  ignorance ;  and  its  eapaei- 
ty  to  produce  aristocracy,  must  depend  upon  this  fluctua- 
tion. The  aristocracy  of  superior  abilities  will  be  regu- 
lated by  the  extent  of  the  space,  between  knowledge  and 
ignorance.  As  the  space  contracts  or  widens,  it  will  be 
il  minished  or  increased  ;  and  if  aristocracy  may  be  thus 
diminished,  it  follows  that  it  may  be  thus  destroyed. 


ARISTOCRACV.  11 

No  certain  state  of  knowledge,  is  a  natural  or  unavoid- 
able quality  of  man.  As  an  intellectual  or  moral  quality, 
it  may  be  created,  destroyed  and  modified  by  human  power. 
Can  that  which  may  be  created,  destroyed  and  modified  by 
human  power,  be  a  natural  and  inevitable  cause  of  aristo- 
cracy ? 

It  lias  been  modified  in  an  extent,  which  Mr.  Adams  docs 
not  even  compute,  by  the  art  of  printing,  discovered  sub- 
sequently to  almost  the  whole  of  the  authorities  which 
have  convinced  Mr.  Adams,  that  knowledge,  or  as  he  nughi 
have  more  correctly  asserted,  ignorance,  was  a  cause  of 
aristocracy. 

The  peerage  of  knowledge  or  abilities,  in  consequence 
of  its  enlargement  by  the  effects  of  printing,  can  no  longer 
be  collected  and  controlled  in  the  shape  of  a  noble  order  or 
a  legislative  department.  The  great  body  of  this  peerage 
must  remain  scattered  throughout  every  nation,  by  the  en- 
joyment of  the  benefit  of  the  press.  By  endowing  a  small 
portion  of  it  with  exclusive  rights  and  privileges,  the  in 
dignation  of  this  main  body  is  excited.  If  this  endowment 
should  enable  a  nation  to  watch  and  control  an  inconsider- 
able number  of  that  species  of  peerage  produced  by  know- 
ledge, it  would  also  purchase  the  dissatisfaction  of  its 
numberless  members  unjustly  excluded ;  and  would  be  a 
system  for  defending  a  nation  against  imbecility,  and  in- 
viting aggression  from  strength,  equivalent  to  a  project  for 
defeating  an  army,  by  feasting  its  vanguard. 

If  this  reasoning  is  correct,  the  collection  of  that  species 
of  natural  aristocracy  (as  Mr.  Adams  calls  it)  produced  hy 
superior  abilities,  into  a  legislative  department,  for  the  pur- 
pose of  watching  and  controlling  it,  is  now  rendered  im- 
practicable, however  useful  it  might  have  been,  at  an  era 
when  the  proportion  between  knowledge  and  ignorance  was 
essentially  different;  and  this  impracticability  is  a  strong 
indication  of  the  radical  inaccuracy  of  considering  aristo- 
cracy as  an  inevitable,  natural  law.  The  wisdom  of  uniting 
exclusive  knowledge,  by  exclusive  privileges,  that  it  may  bo 


It  AMSTGCRACY. 

controlled  by  disunited  ignorance,  is  not  considered  as  being 
an  hypothetical  question,  since  this  aristoeratical  knowledge 
cannot  now  exist. 

Similar  reasoning  applies  still  more  forcibly  to  the  idea 
of  nature?s  constituting  aristocracy,  by  means  of  exclusive 
virtue.  Knowledge  and  virtue  both  fluctuate.  A  steady 
affect,  from  fluctuating  causes,  is  morally  and  physically 
impossible.  And  yet  Mr.  Adams  infers  a  natural  aristo- 
cracy, from  the  error,  that  virtue  and  knowledge  are  in 
an  uniform  relation  to  vice  and  ignorance  ;  sweeps  away  by 
it  every  human  faculty,  for  the  attainment  of  temporal  or 
eternal  happiness ;  and  overturns  the  efficacy  of  law,  to 
produce  private  or  public  moral  rectitude. 

Had  it  been  true,  that  knowledge  and  virtue  were  natu- 
ral causes  of  aristocracy,  no  fact  could  more  elearly  have 
exploded  Mr.  Adams's  system,  or  more  unequivocally  have 
dissented  from  the  eidogy  he  bestows  on  the  English  form 
of  government.  Until  knowledge  and  virtue  shall  become 
genealogical,  they  cannot  be  the  causes  of  inheritable  aris- 
tocracy; and  its  existence,  without  the  aid  of  superior 
knowledge  and  virtue,  is  a  positive  refutation  of  the  idea, 
that  nature  creates  aristocracy  with  these  tools. 

Mr.  Adams  has  omitted  a  cause  of  aristocracy  in  the 
quotation,  which  he  forgets  not  to  urge  in  other  places  j 
namely,  exclusive  wealth.  This,  by  much  the  most  formi- 
dable with  which  mankind  have  to  contend,  is  necessarily 
omitted,  whilst  he  is  ascribing  aristocracy  to  nature  |  and 
being  both  artificial  and  efficacious,  it  contributes  to  sus- 
tain the  opinion,  «♦'  that  as  aristocracy  is  thus*  artificially 
created,  it  may  also  foe  artificially  destroyed/' 

Alienation  is  the  remedy  for  an  aristocracy  founded  oa 
landed  wealth ;  inhibitions  upon  monopoly  at>d  incorpora- 
tion, for  ene  founded  en  paper  wealth.  Knowledge,  enlist- 
ed by  Mr.  Adams  wilder  i*ie  banner  of  aristocracy,  deserts 
ed  her  assa$5$ie  by  the  invention  of  alienation,  and  became 
Hs  natural  ew.&rr.v.  Discovering  it's  hostility  to  human  hap- 
piness, Iifee  IJ?  fetus,  sbe-:has  applied  the  axe  to  ihv  &ee& 


ARISTOCRACY.  li 

what  Mr.  Adams  calls  her  progeny  ;  and  instead  of  main- 
taining the  exclusiveness  of  wealth,  contributes  to  its  divi- 
sion by  inciting  competition,  and  assailing  perpetuities. 
How  successfully,  let  England  illustrate.  She,  no  longei 
relying  upon  nature  for  an  aristocracy,  is  perpetually 
obliged  to  repair  the  devastations  it  sustains  from  aliena- 
tion ;  the  weapon  invented  by  knowledge ;  by  resorting  to 
the  funds  of  paper  systems,  pillage,  patronage  and  hierar- 
chy, for  fresh  supplies. 

The  reader  will  be  pleased  to  recollect  the  question  in 
debate.  Mr.  Adams  asserts,  that  an  aristocratical  body  of 
men  is  necessary,  as  being  natural.  Having  thus  gotten  it, 
he  admits  that  it  will  be  ambitious  and  dangerous  to  liberty. 
Being  ambitious  and  dangerous,  he  infers,  that  it  ought  to 
be  controlled.  And  this,  he  says,  can  only  be  effected  by 
a  king  over  it,  and  a  house  of  commons  under  it ;  thus 
placing  it  between  two  fires,  on' account  of  its  strength, 
danger  and  ambition. 

The  entire  hypothesis  rests  upon  a  single  foundation, 
"that  aristocracy  is  natural  and  inevitable;"  and  therefore 
this  ground-work  ought  to  be  well  examined. 

The  contrivance  for  erecting  a  system,  by  asserting  n,nd 
setting  out  from  the  will  of  God,  or  from  nature,  is  not 
new.  Most  of  those  systems  of  government,  to  which  Mr. 
Adams  refers  us  for  instruction,  resorted  to  it ;  and  there- 
fore the  propriety  of  reviving  the  principle,  upon  which 
these  ancient  systems  were  generally  or  universally  found- 
ed, to  revive  its  effects,  must  be  admitted.  "  It  is  the  will 
of  Jupiter,"  exclaimed  some  artful  combination  of  men. 
fi  The  will  of  Jupiter  is  inevitable,"  responded  the  same 
combination  to  itself;  and  ignorance  submitted  to  a  fate,, 
manufactured  by  human  fraud. 

Whenever  it  is  impossible  to  prove  a  principle,  which  is 
necessary  to  support  a  system,  a  reference  to  an  inevitable 
power,  calling  it  God  or  nature,  is  preferable  to  reasoning  : 
because  every  such  principle  is  more  likely  to  be  exploded, 
than  established  by  reasoning.    For  instance ;  it  would  W 


12  ARISTOCRACY. 

difficult  to  convince  us,  that  we  ought  to  erect  an  aristocra- 
cy spontaneously ;  the  folly  of  which,  Mr.  Adams  unwarily 
admits,  by  insisting  upon  the  great  danger  to  be  appre- 
hended from  it,  to  enhance  the  merit  of  his  system,  in  meet- 
ing this  danger  with  a  king  and  a  house  of  commons.  And 
therefore  the  short  and  safe  expedient  is,  to  tell  us  that  na- 
ture has  settled  the  question,  by  declaring  that  we  shall 
have  an  aristocracy  ;  being  induced  to  believe  and  concede 
this,  the  difficulty  is  over  ;  and  the  whole  system,  bottomed 
upon  the  concession,  becomes  irrefutable. 

Hence  have  been  derived,  the  sanctity  of  oracles,  the 
divinity  of  kings,  and  the  holiness  of  priests  ;  and  now  that 
these  bubbles  have  become  the  scoff  of  common  sense,  ex- 
periment is  to  decide,  whether  there  remains  in  America  a 
stock  of  superstition,  upon  which  can  be  ingrafted,  "  an 
aristocracy  from  nature." 

Should  it  grow  upon  this  stem,  Mr.  Adams  is  not  entitled 
vo  the  reputation  of  an  inventor.  He  states  the  origin  of 
the  thought,  in  speaking  of  the  aristocracies  of  Greece. 
These,  he  says,  had  the  address  to  persuade  the  people,  that 
(hey  deduced  their  genealogies  from  the  Gods ;  of  course 
(heir  titles  to  aristocratical  pre-eminences  were  of  divine 
origin,  and  inheritable  quality.  But  Mr.  Adams's  system, 
it  must  be  admitted,  improves  upon  the  idea,  in  relying 
upon  some  perpetual  operation  of  nature,  as  a  less  fortuit- 
ous resource  for  an  aristocracy,  than  the  amorous  adven- 
tures of  heathen  deities. 

Jn  old  times,  kings  as  well  as  nobles  were  believed  to  be 
heaven-born.  But  Mr.  Adams  confines  the  procreative 
power  of  nature  to  an  aristocracy,  and  thus  makes  room 
for  the  human  invention  of  a  king  and  a  house  of  com- 
mons, to  cheek  and  discipline  nature's  unkindness.  So 
Filmer  might  have  acquired  political  fame,  by  proposing  a 
house  of  lords  and  a  house  oT  commons,  as  cheeks  upon  his 
divine  or  natural  king. 

A  short  review  of  a  few  of  the  aristocracies  quoted  by 
Mr.  Adams,  will  exhibit  the  affinity  between  the  ancient 


Alt  I S  TOC  R  AC  Y .  1  -» 

idea  of  a  divine,  and  Mr.  Adams's,  of  a  natural  aristo- 
cracy. 

In  speaking  of  the  aristocracies  of  Greece,  he  observes, 
that  they  derived  themselves  from  some  of  the  heathen 
deities,  taking  great  care  to  retain  the  priesthood  and  reli- 
gious mysteries  in  their  own  hands  ;  and  that  these  precau- 
tions had  great  influence  towards  restraining  democratica! 
jnnovations,  by  inspiring  the  lower  orders  with  fear  and 
veneration  for  their  superiors. 

Here  then  is  the  origin  of  a  Grecian  aristocracy.     Wa- 
it founded  in  fraud,  or  begotten  by  the  Gods,  as  it  asserted: 
A  divine  origin  is  not  contended  for  by  Mr.  Adams ;  he 
deduces  it  from  a  deception ;  yet  if  Jupiter  and  his  asso 
ciates  had  maintained  their  influence  to  this  day,  aristocra- 
cy would  not  have  renounced  its  parentage  ;  but  the  degra 
dation  or  modern  chastity  of  the  heathen  deities,  compelled 
it  to  adopt  another  ancestor  more  analogous  to  modern 
theology,  and  whose  progeny  was  not  likely  to  fail.     The 
election  has  fallen  on  nature:  and  the  new  question,  «  whe- 
ther aristocracy  is  fraudulent  or  natural,"  has,  from  this 
circumstance,  become  the  substitute  of  the  old,  "  whether 
it  was  fraudulent  or  divine." 

The  Grecian  commonalty  were  never  easy,  even  under 
this  heaven-born  aristocracy.  Bound  in  the  chains  of  su- 
perstition, and  blinded  by  the  mist  of  ignorance,  something 
was  still  telling  them  that  it  was  not  right :  something  was 
still  urging  them  to  correct  an  evil  of  which  they  were 
sensible.  It  was  thy  inspiration.  Oh  !  divine  nature ! 
Thou  didst  unfold  to  man  glimmerings  of  truth,  even  in 
ages  of  superstition  and  ignorance  !  And  yet  thou  art  ar- 
raigned as  the  author  of  aristocracy,  winch  thou  art  for 
ever  inciting  thy  children  to  destroy ! 

The  struggle  between  aristocracy  and  democracy  in 
Greece,  is  repeatedly  urged  by  Mr.  Adams,  to  prove  the 
advantage  of  balancing  them  against  each  other  in  om 
legislatures.  But  it  was  previously  incumbent  upon  him 
to  have  proved,  both  that  the  Grecian  aristocracy  was 


i.%  ASisTocii-icr. 

natural  and  unavoidable,  and  also  thai  our  state  of  maimers, 
and  knowledge  is  so  exactly  theirs,  that  we  cannot  avoid  a 
similar  aristocracj  ;  namely,  one  of  divine  blood ;  before 
these  precedents,  any  more  than  magna  charta,  could  be 
made  useful  in  his  mode,  to  modern  liberty.  He  was  un- 
able to  do  this.  We  know  that  man,  yoked  to  obedience  bj 
superstition,  and  half  bereft  of  his  faculties  by  ignorance., 
was  yet  impatient  under  aristocracy :  though  he  believed  it 
to  be  the  offspring  of  the  Gods  :  the  inference  which  pre- 
sents itself  is,  that,  enlightened  by  the  effects  of  printing., 
he  will  not  easily  be  subjected  by  one,  which  he  knows  to  be 
the  offspring  of  men. 

An  opposition  to  aristocratical  power  seems  to  have  been 
constantly  coeval  with  an  advance  of  national  information. 
It  began  in  Greece,  appeared  at  Rome,  and  has  continued 
the  companion  of  mental  improvement,  down  to  the  present 
day.  As  knowledge  advanced  in  England,  this  opposition 
gained  ground,  and  at  length  a  victory,  before  that  wise  and 
natural  aristocracy  discovered  its  danger. 

By  the  natural  coalition  between  knowledge  and  an  en- 
mity to  aristocracy,  that  of  England  was  substantially  an- 
nihilated, whilst  its  forms  remained.  The  nobility  have 
teased  to  be  feared,  because  they  have  ceased  to  be  power- 
ful ;  and  the  prohibition  of  ennobled  orders  in  America,  is 
ihe  formal  effect  of  their  previous  substantial  destruction, 
by  the  progress  of  knowledge  in  England. 

Knowledge  and  commerce,  by  a  division  of  virtue,  of 
talents,  and  of  weallh  among  multitudes,  have  annihilated 
that  order  of  men ,  w3io  in  past  ages  constituted  "  a  natu- 
ral aristocracy,"  (as  Mr.  Adams  thinks)  by  exclusive  vir- 
tue, talents  and  wealth.  This  ancient  object  of  terror  has 
shrunk  into  a  cypher;  whilst  a  single  executive,  proposed 
by  Mr.  Adams  as  its  cheek,  has  become,  by  the  aid  of 
patronage  and  paper,  a  political  figure,  at  the  head  of  a 
iong  row  of  decimals. 

From  the  tyranny  of  aristocracy,  Mr.  Adams  takes  rc- 
iugje  under  the  protection  of  a  king,  and  considers 'him  as 


so  essentially  the  ally  and  protector  of  the  people,  as  posi- 
tively to  declare,  that,  "*  instead  of  the  trite  saying,  *  nc 
«<  bishop,  no  king,'  it  would  be  a  much  more  exact  and  iiii- 
<s  portant  truth  to  say,  no  people,  no  king,  and  no  king,  nc 
"  people ;  meaning,  by  the  word  king,  a  first  magistrate, 
«  possessed  exclusively  of  executive  power." 

Throughout  his  system,  Mr.  Adams  infers  a  necessity 
for  a  king,  or  (what  is  the  same  thing)  of  a  "  first  magis- 
trate, possessed  exclusively  of  executive  power,*'  from  the 
certainty  of  a  natural  aristocracy,  But  if  aristocracy  is 
artificial  and  not  natural,  it  may  be  prevented,  by  detecting 
the  artifice ;  and  by  preventing  aristocracy  (the  only  cause 
for  a  king)  the  king  himself  becomes  useless.  His  utility, 
according  to  Mr.  Adams's  system,  consists  in  checking  aris- 
tocratical  power  ;  but  if  no  such  power  naturally  exists,  it 
would  evidently  be  absurd  to  create  a  scourge  (as  Mr.  Adams 
allows  it  to  be)  merely  as  a  cause  for  a  king. 

In  order  to  illustrate  the  opinion,  that  the  aristocracy 
exhibited  to  us  by  Mr.  Adams,  as  creating  a  necessity  for 
his  system,  is  only  a  ghost,  let  us  turn  our  eyes  for  a  mo- 
ment towards  its  successor. 

As  the  aristocracies  of  priestcraft  and  conquest  decayed, 
that  of  patronage  and  paper  stock  grew ;  not  the  rival,  but 
the  instrument  of  a  king ;  without  rank  or  title  •  regard- 
less of  honor;  of  insatiable  avarice;  and  neither  conspi- 
cuous for  virtue  and  knowledge,  or  capable  of  being  collec- 
ted into  a  legislative  chamber.  Differing  in  all  its  qualities 
from  Mr.  Adams's  natural  aristocracy,  and  defying  his  re- 
medy, it  is  condensed  and  combined  by  an  interest,  exclu- 
sive, and  inimical  to  public  good. 

"Why  has  Mr.  Adams  written  volumes  to  instruct  us  how 
to  manage  an  order  of  nobles,  sons  of  the  Gods,  of  exclusive 
•  irtue,  talents  and  wealth,  i;nd  attended  by  the  pomp  and 
fraud  of  superstition  ;  or  one  of  feudal  barons,  holding 
great  districts  of  uualiennble  country,  warlike,  high  spirit- 
ed, turbulent  and  dangerous  j  n«w  that  these  orders  are  no 

'   h  dams's  Def.  vol.  i,  p.  87". 


16  ARISTOCRACY. 

more  ?  Whilst  he  passes  over  in  silence  the  aristocracy  of 
paper  and  patronage,  more  numerous,  more  burdensome, 
unexposed  to  public  jealousy  by  the  badge  of  title,  and  not 
too  honorable  or  high  spirited  to  use  and  serve  executive 
power,  for  the  sake  of  pillaging  the  people.  Are  these  odi- 
ous vices,  to  be  concealed  under  apprehensions  of  ancient 
aristocracies,  which,  however  natural,  are  supplanted  by 
this  modern  one  ? 

This  subject  will  hereafter  be  resumed,  as  possessing  in 
every  view,  a  degree  of  importance,  beyond  any  political 
question  at  this  era  affecting  the  happiness  of  mankind. 
Then  having  previously  attempted  to  prove,  that  even  the 
titled  aristocracy  of  England,  is  no  longer  an  order,  requi- 
ring the  combined  efforts  of  a  king  and  a  people  to  curb  ;  I 
shall  proceed  to  shew,  that  a  new  political  feature  has  ap- 
peared among  men,  for  which  Mr.  Adams's  system  does  not 
provide  ;  and  that  England  itself  cannot  now  furnish  mate- 
rials for  a  government  conformable  to  her  theory,  because 
her  theory  was  calculated  for  a  nation  less  advanced  in  the 
division  of  knowledge  and  land,  and  in  the  arts  of  patronage 
and  paper.  Now  we  will  return  to  the  subject  of  a  natural 
aristocracy. 

Mr.  Adams,  with  particular  approbation,  uses  the  Spar- 
tan government,  as  an  illustration  of  his  hypothesis.  The 
wisdom  of  Lycurgus,  he  observes,  was  evinced  by  a  mix- 
ture of  monarchical,  aristocratical,  and  democratical  prin- 
ciples ;  and  the  prudent  manner  in  which  he  adjusted  them, 
appeared  by  its  continuance  for  eight  hundred  years.  Con- 
ceding the  Spartan  experiment  to  be  a  correct  emblem  of 
the  system  it  is  used  to  exemplify,  it  is  only  important  to  be 
understood,  for  the  sake  of  beholding  in  fact,  the  results' to 
be  expected  from  this  system  itself. 

The  kings  of  Sparta  held  a  relation  ia  the  Spartans  or 

nobles,  somewhat  similar  to  that  existing  between  the  king. 

and  what  is  called  «  the  moused  interest"  in  England.     No 

vestige  of  a  democratical  balance  was  discernible  during 

operation  of  this  Admired  mixture.     On  the  enntrarv. 


ARISTOCRACY. 


Sparta  was  the  constant  patron  of  the  aristoeratical  factious 
throughout  Greece,  and  finally  ruined  it,  by  a  treacherous 
league  with  the  Persians,  entered  into  under  the  pretence 
of  freeing  tributary  cities,  but  with  the  design  of  advancing 
the  interest  of  aristoeratical  factions  in  neighbouring  states. 
Does  this  form  of  government  earn  the  eulogy,  of  being  the 
best  in  Greece,  because  it  produced  its  ruin,  by  leaguing 
itself  with  absolute  monarchy  ? 

Lycurgus,  by  the  influence  of  a  bought  and  lying  oracle, 
placed  the  government  in  the  hands  of  a  minority,  excused 
this  minority  from  labour  and  taxes,  and  supported  it  by 
the  labour  of  the  majority.  The  Helots,  who  were  the 
slaves  of  the  government  but  not  of  individuals,  filled  the 
place  of  every  majority,  however  denominated,  subjected  to 
the  will  of  an  aristocracy.  All  the  difference  is,  that  the 
Spartan  aristocracy  obtained  of  its  Helots,  subsistence  and 
leisure  for  itself,  by  the  goad  and  the  lash  ;  and  the  aristo- 
cracy of  paper  and  patronage,  obtains  of  theirs,  wealth  and 
luxury,  by  war,  sinecure  and  taxation.  This  emblem  of 
Mr.  Adams's  system,  commenced  in  fraud  :  flourished,  a  ty- 
rant ;  and  died,  a  traitor  ;  and  although  Lycurgus  divided 
the  Spartan  aristocracy  into  several  bodies  :  distributed  it 
into  different  chambers  ;  and  placed  at  its  head,  dependant 
chiefs  ;  impartiality  will  only  behold  an  organization  of  an 
aristoeratical  minority  for  self  security,  however  an  eager- 
ness to  establish  a  system,  may  transform  it  into  the  effigy 
of  an  entire  nation. 

How  exactly  emblematical  this  precedent  is  of  the  En- 
glish government !  A  minority  organized,  not  to  preserve, 
but  to  suppress,  popular  influence.  Such  is  the  effect  of 
aristoeratical  orders,  according  to  the  examples  adduced  in 
their  defence. 

More  intricate  sections  of  an  aristoeratical  interest  exist- 
ed at  Venice,  than  at  Sparta  or  London.  Were  these  also 
contrived  to  check  that  interest,  for  the  sake  of  advancing 
the  democratic  interest,  or  for  its  own  i»aiety  ? 

It  does  not  appear,  whether  Lycurgus  left  the  nuaibi       ' 

4 


IS  ARISTOCRACY. 

his  aristocracy,  to  be  regulated  by  the  efforts  of  the  Hea- 
then Gods  or  of  nature  ;  but  neither  the  oracle,  the  Gods, 
or  nature  could  keep  it  alive.  It  became  naturally  extinct 
before  the  artificial  cords  of  superstition,  which  bound  its 
victims  to  obedience,  were  broken. 

Nor  is  duration,  evidence  of  political  perfection.  Such 
an  argument  includes  with  equal  complacency,  the  despo- 
tisms of  the  Roman  Empire,  of  China,  of  France  and  of 
Turkey  ;  the  aristocracy  of  Venice,  and  the  hierarchies  of 
Judeaand  modern  Rome. 

The  aristocracy  of  Sparta  owed  its  origin  to  an  oraele, 
that  of  Rome,  to  a  king.  Whilst  we  see  Lycurgus,  of  the 
royal  family  and  near  the  throne,  and  Romulus,  himself  a 
king,  creating  an  aristocracy  in  antient  times  ;  and  modern 
kings,  almost  universally  doing  the  same  tiling  ;  it  suggests 
a  doubt,  whether  kings  and  noble  orders,  are  really  the  ene- 
mies and  rivals  of  each  other  ;  and  it  is  a  doubt  of  impor- 
tance, because  the  single  effect  beneficial  to  a  nation,  expect- 
ed by  Mr.  Adams  himself  from  his  system,  is,  that  its  king 
will  defend  the  people  against  its  nobility. 

It  is  admitted  that  patricians  and  barons  have  destroyed 
kings,  and  disclosed  an  enmity  to  royalty.  It  is  equally 
true,  that  aristocratical  orders  are  at  this  day  their  friends 
and  instruments.  A  correct  theory  could  only  be  formed 
apon  an  estimate  of  both  facts ;  Mr.  Adams  endeavours  to 
establish  his  upon  one.  Armies  have  frequently  exhi- 
bited an  enmity  to  generals  and  king  ;  ought  armies  there- 
fore to  be  considered  as  checks  upon  their  ambition,  and 
balances  of  their  power  ? 

By  comparing  the  causes  of  the  antient  enmity  with  those 
of  the  modern  affection  ef  noble  orders  for  royalty,  we  ob- 
tain a  result,  accounting  for  these  phenomena,  fatal  to  Mr, 
Adams's  theory. 

Clientage,  cfanship,  and  feudality,  have  sown  various 
"Countries  with  petty  kings,  under  various  titles,  and  these 
have  beca  inspired  with  enmity  to  a  great  king,  and  a  gre*^ 
king  with  an  enmity  to  these,  by  a  mutual  interest  to  annoy 


ARISTOCRACY.  19 

each  other  ;  but  now  that  clanship  is  melted  down  into  one 
mass  of  civilization,  and  baronies  into  private  estates,  petty 
kingship  is  annihilated,  and  noble  orders  are  completely 
sensible,  that  ribbon,  livery  and  escutcheon,  are  not  means 
for  assaulting  kings,  equivalent  to  subjects,  castles  and  prin- 
cipalities. 

Admitting  monarchy  to  be  an  evil,  the  ratio  of  the  evil 
must  be  increased  or  diminished  by  its  quantity,  and  it  was 
evidently  the  comparative  interest  of  the  people  to  diminish 
the  number  of  kings,  for  the  sake  of  contracting  the  oppres- 
sions of  monarchy.  In  England,  one  king,  would  be  less 
mischievous  than  one  hundred.  This  motive  actuated  the 
people  to  assist  the  great  king  to  destroy  the  little  kings  ; 
and  ambition,  not  the  popular  interest,  induced  the  great 
king  to  avail  himself  of  this  assistance.  But  when  the  pet- 
ty monarchies,  which  had  excited  the  jealousy,  and  produ- 
ced the  coalition,  of  one  king  and  the  people,  were  destroy- 
ed, this  jealousy  transferred  itself  to  the  allies.  Having  ac- 
quired a  complete  victory,  they  became  objects  of  danger  to 
each  other  and  resorted  to  mutual  precautions.  Represen- 
tation, invented  by  the  crown  to  destroy  the  barons,  was 
used  by  the  people  against  the  crown  ;  and  is  now  used  by 
the  crown  against  the  people.  The  conquered  nobility,  re- 
duced from  sovereigns  to  subjects,  became  the  chief  disci- 
ples of  royal  patronage  ;  and  having  lost  the  power  of  an- 
noying the  king,  revenged  itself  upon  the  people,  by  uniting 
with  the  king  to  annoy  them. 

The  result  we  obtain  from  this  short  history,  is,  that  no- 
ble orders,  divested  of  royalties,  and  reduced  to  the  degree 
of  subjects,  are  the  instruments  of  kings  ;  but  that  such  or- 
ders, chiefs  of  elans,  and  possessed  of  dominions,  are  inimi- 
cal to  a  monarchy,  sufficiently  powerful  to  suppress  their 
own.  Thus  these  phenomena  are  reconciled,  and  the  alli- 
ance between  kings  and  nobles  in  some  cases,  and  their  en- 
mity in  others  accounted  for.  When  tiie  reasons  inducing 
kings  to  destroy  barons  and  to  create  lords  are  understood, 
the  interest  of  the  people  to  aid  them  in  the  first  work,  and 


?i>  ARISTOCRACY. 

oppose  them  in  the  second,  will  be  discerned  j  and  Mr. 
Adams's  system  must  sustain  the  shock  of  admitting,  that  a 
king  cannot  be  a  good  remedy  against  the  evils  of  any  spe- 
cies of  aristocracy,  created  by  himself  for  an  instrument, 
not  for  a  check  of  monarchical  power. 

Hie  aristocratical  varieties  just  described,  evince  a  facti- 
tious origin  ;  and  the  frauds  practised  by  the  Roman  aris- 
tocracy for  self-preservation,  in  common  with  its  Grecian 
predecessor,  acknowledge  a  similar  ancestry.  It  usurped 
the  dignities  of  government,  monopolized  public  property, 
enriched  itself  by  conquest  and  by  forcing  the  people  to  bor- 
row at  exorbitant  usury  of  itself,  to  supply  the  loss  of  labour 
whilst  lighting  for  the  lands  it  monopolized,  assumed  the 
priesthood,  practised  upon  the  vulgar  superstition,  and  im- 
pressed an  idea  that  its  progeny  was  well  born,  by  prohibit- 
ing the  connubial  intercourse  between  itself  and  inferior 
orders.  Nature  needed  not  these  arbitrary  and  fraudulent 
helps,  in  manufacturing  aristocracy,  had  she  been  its  parent. 

And  what  was  the  fate  of  this  Roman  aristocracy,  thus 
entrenched  behind  law,  religion  and  robbery?  It  was  modi- 
fied occasionally  by  popular  lucid  intervals,  until  the  people, 
wearied  with  its  injuries  and  frauds,  took  refuge  from  the 
oppression  of  five  hundred  tyrants  under  that  of  one.  Then 
this  ancient  aristocracy  merged  in  a  despotism,  and  for  cen- 
i  uries  remained  in  a  state  of  abeyance.  Why  may  not  a 
modern  aristocracy  merge  in  the  principle  of  representa- 
tion ?  The  peerage  of  England,  like  the  conscript  fathers 
under  an  Emperor,  being  in  this  state  of  abeyance,  so  little 
requires  Mr.  Adams's  king  and  commons  to  control  it,  that 
it  would  naturally  become  extinct,  except  for  the  nourish- 
ment of  royal  patronage. 

Mr.  Adams's  hypothesis,  being  evidently  borrowed  from 
the  English  model,  we  will  view  that  model  with  more 
Attention  than  will  be  devoted  to  other  forms  of  government. 

For  the  sake  of  perspicuity,  I  shall  call  the  ancient  aris- 
tocracy, chiefly  created  and  supported  by  superstition,  "  the 
»  is  toe racy  ©f  the  first  age j"  that  produced  by  conquest, 


ARISTOCRACY,  Si 

known  by  the  title  of  the  feudal  system,  ' i  the  aristocracy 
of  the  second  age 5"  and  that  erected  by  paper  and  patron- 
age, "  the  aristocracy  of  the  third  or  present  age/51  If  aris- 
tocracy is  the  work  of  nature,  by  deserting  her  accustomed 
constancy,  and  slily  changing  the  shape  of  her  work,  she  has 
cunningly  perplexed  our  defensive  operations  :  to  create  the 
aristocracy  of  the  first  age,  she  used  Jupiter  ;  of  the  se- 
cond, Mars ;  and  of  the  third,  Mercury.  Jupiter  is  de- 
throned by  knowledge  ;  the  usurpations  of  Mars  are  scat- 
tered by  commerce  and  alienation  ;  and  it  only  remains  to 
detect  the  impostures  of  Mercury. 

And  in  order  to  avoid  the  confusion,  arising  from  a  com- 
plication of  ideas,  it  is  necessary  to  remind  the  reader,  that 
Mr.  Adams  does  not  use  the  terms  «*  natural  aristocracy'* 
in  relation  to  a  fluctuating  superiority  in  mind  or  body  ? 
but  in  relation  to  a  superiority,  capable  of  being  collected 
into  a  legislative  chamber,  and  permanently  transmitted  by 
descent.  To  this  latter  idea  he  limits  his  meaning,  by  il- 
lustrating it  with  the  British  system.  Therefore  superiori- 
ties in  mind  or  body,  must  be  excluded  from  a  correct  sur- 
vey of  Mr.  Adams's  natural  aristocracy  ;  for  these  would 
still  adhere  to  the  wisest  or  tallest  individual;  and  not  to 
the  issue  of  an  hereditary  nobility. 

England  furnishes  a  perfect  view  of  the  aristocracies  of 
the  second  and  third  age  ;  and  it  is  probable  that  a  modifi- 
cation of  the  aristocracy  of  the  first  age,  existed  there  also 
in  the  times  of  the  Druids  ;  but  we  shall  only  use  the  exam- 
ple of  England  for  the  illustration  of  the  two  ethers. 

In  France,  the  aristocracy  of  the  second  age,  had  become 
so  feeble,  that  it  fell,  almost  without  a  struggle  ;  and  being 
more  numerous  and  wealthy  than  the  same  species  of  aris- 
tocracy in  England,  its  imbecility  furnishes  a  suspicion,  that 
its  English  correlative  does  not  substantially  exist. 

A  real  aristocracy  is  allowed  to  be  formidable  and  dan- 
gerous ;  but  the  qualities,  necessary  to  create  an  aristocra- 
cy according  to  Mr.  Adams,  should  appear  in  the  English 
peerage,  to  defend  the  precaution  of  monarchy  ;  just  as  a 


22  ARISTOCRACY. 


/ 


danger  of  war,  could  only  defend  the  bitter  precaution  of  a 
standing  army. 

Reader,  pause,  and  recollect  several  of  the  ingredients 
compounding  aristocracy,  in  the  opinion  of  Mr.  Adams* 
Do  you  behold  them  in  the  English  peerage  ?  Do  you  be- 
hold an  exclusive  mass  of  virtue,  almost  inducing  you  to  ex- 
claim " these  are  the  sons  of  the  Gods  ?"  Do  you  behold  an 
exclusive  mass  of  talents,  compelling  you  to  acknowledge 
'*  that  these  are  sages  qualified  to  govern  I"  Do  you  behold 
an  exclusive  mass  of  wealth,  purchasing  and  converting  in- 
to armies,  clients  and  followers  ?  Or  do  you  behold  a  band 
of  warriors  inured  to  hardships,  skilled  in  war,  and  inspi- 
ring  fear  and  love  ?  Truth  compels  you  to  acknowledge, 
that  you  cannot  discern  a  solitary  particle  of  these  quali- 
ties, so  essential  to  aristoeraey  according  to  Mr.  Adams. 
And  will  you,  against  an  acknowledgment  Which  you  can- 
not withhold,  concur  with  Mr.  Adams  in  believing,  that 
such  a  body  of  men  as  the  English  nobility,  ought  to  be  pla- 
ced in  a  legislative  branch,  that  it  may  be  guarded  by  a 
king  and  a  house  of  commons  ? 

Place  the  democracy  of  England  on  one  side,  and  the  no- 
bility on  the  other  ;  engage  them  m  hostilities,  and  view  the 
combat.  Let  the  warfare  be  moral  or  physical.  Still  the 
combat  would  be  like  that  between  the  universe  and  an 
atom.  The  king,  without  his  aristocracy  of  the  third  age, 
would  be  but  a  feather  on  either  side.  This  fact  was  ex- 
perimentally settled  in  France.  The  French  nobility  civil 
and  hierarchical,  were  more  numerous,  and  exceeded  the 
English  in  every  aristocratieal  ingredient  mentioned  by  Mr- 
Adams  ;  \et  with  the  king  at  its  head,  it  was  hardly  felt  as 
a  power  by  the  democracy,  and  would  not  have  been  felt, 
except  for  the  combination  of  kingdoms  by  which  it  was  aid- 
ed. Is  there  then  any  real  cause  of  apprehension  in  the 
fallen  peerage  of  England  ? 

Suppose  the  people  of  England  should  attempt  to  abolish 
monarchy.  Both  the  aristocracy  of  the  present  age,  and 
the    nobility  would    arrange  themselves    in    its  defence. 


AE13T0CRAC1%  £5 

Which  would  be  most  formidable  ?  The  remnant  or  hiero- 
glyphick  of  the  feudal  system,  would  indeed  display  a  ridi- 
culous pomp,  and  imbecile  importance  5  it  would  appear 
armed  with  title,  ribbon  and  symbol,  and  evince  its  weak- 
ness by  tottering  under  shadows.  But  the  real  aristocracy 
of  the  present  age  ;  neither  begotten  by  the  Gods,  the  eurs© 
of  conquest,  nor  the  offspring  of  nature  ;  the  aristocracy  of 
patronage  and  paper  would  draw  out  its  fleets,  armies,  pub- 
lic debt,  corporate  bodies  and  civil  offices.  Which  species  of 
aristocracy,  I  ask  again,  would  be  the  strongest  auxiliary 
for  despotism,  and  tiie  most  dangerous  enemy  to  the  nation  ? 
And  yet  Mr.  Adams  has  written  three  volumes,  to  excite 
our  jealousy  against  the  aristocracy  of  motto  and  blazon, 
without  disclosing  the  danger  from  the  aristocracy  of  pa- 
per and  patronage  ;  that  political  hydra  of  modern  inven- 
tion, whose  arms  embrace  a  whole  nation,  whose  ears  hear 
every  sound,  whose  eyes  see  all  objects,  and  whose  hands- 
can  reach  every  purse  and  every  throat. 

The  faint  traces  discernible  in  England,  of  the  aristocra- 
cy of  the  second  age,  evidently  disclose  a  revolution  in  its 
qualities,  which  must  have  been  produced  by  a  cause  ;  and 
when  we  perceive,  that  the  present  nobility  no  longer  awa- 
ken the  jealousy  of  the  king,  or  attract  the  attention  of  the 
people,  it  behoves  us  to  ascertain  this  cause,  in  order  to  un- 
derstand what  aristocracy  is  ;  and  to  distinguish  between 
that  which  is  nominal  and  that  which  is  real  ;  between  a 
Chilperie,  and  a  Charles  Marteh 

The  circumstances  which  constituted  the  cause  of  this  re- 
volution, disclose  the  wounds  which  destroyed  the  aristo- 
cracy of  the  second  age,  and  the  impossibility  of  its  exist- 
ence, whilst  these  circumstances  remain.  Its  essence  con- 
sisted of  chivalry,  principality,  sovereignty,  splendor,  mu- 
nificence and  vassalage  ;  its  shadow,  of  title.  Of  all  these 
constituents,  except  the  last,  it  has  been  stript  by  subject- 
ing it  to  a  competition  with  talents,  and  exposing  it  to  the 
effects  of  commerce  and  alienation.     Plebeians  are  now  the 


24  ARISTOCRACY. 

compeers  of  these  titled  patricians  in  wealth,  and  they,  the 
compeers  of  Plebeians  in  subjection  to  law  ;  and  the  equali- 
sing spirit  of  knowledge  has  exalted  one  class,  and  reduced 
the  other,  to  the  common  standard  of  mortal  men. 

An  endeavour  to  record  the  magnanimity,  ambition  and 
consequence,  exhibited  by  the  British  peerage,  would  con- 
duct us  precisely  to  the  era  of  the  change,  at  which  the  his- 
tory would  stop  of  itself,  in  defiance  of  the  historian  ;  it 
would  terminate  where  the  history  of  patronage  and  paper 
begins,  because  one  form  of  aristocracy  supplants  another  : 
and  it  would  pass  on  from  the  dead  to  the  living,  as  in  the 
ease  of  any  other  succession.  Thence  forward,  the  English 
peerage  gradually  sunk  into  the  aristocracy  of  the  third 
age  ;  it  became  the  creature  of  patronage,  and  the  subject 
of  paper  ;  and  although  it  is  seen  on  account  of  a  legislative 
formulary,  it  is  as  little  regarded  by  the  nation,  as  a  butter- 
fly by  a  man  in  agony.  Its  number  is  recruited  from  the 
corps  raised  and  disciplined  by  the  system  of  patronage  and 
paper  ;  and  the  claims  it  once  possessed  to  superior  know- 
ledge, virtue,  wealth  and  independence,  have  been  long 
since  immolated  at  the  shrines  of  printing,  alienation  and 
executive  power. 

Nor  does  Great  Britain  possess  the  materials  for  revi- 
ving the  aristocracy  of  the  first  or  second  age,  or  erecting 
one  in  any  respect  correspondent  to  that  contemplated  by 
Mr.  Adams's  political  scheme.  If  this  assertion  is  esta- 
blished, his  hypothesis  is  destroyed.  It  is  therefore  allow- 
able to  bring  it  again  into  view,  that  an  argument  so  im- 
portant, may  be  better  understood. 

Every  society,  in  Mr.  Adams's  opinion,  will  naturally 
produce  a  class  of  men  minor  in  number,  hut  superior  to  the 
major  class  in  virtue,  abilities  and  wealth  ;  and  hence,  im- 
portant, dangerous  and  ambitious.  That  they  may  be 
watched  and  controlled,  they  must  be  thrown  into  a  separate 
legislative  body,  and  balanced  by  a  king  on  one  side,  and  a 
house  of  Commons  on  the  other  :  otherwise  they  will  usurp 
the  govrnmp.nt. 


ARISTOCRACY.  "Zb 

This  assertion  depends  upon  a  plain  compulation.  Can 
a  class  of  men,  capable  of  being  condensed  in  a  legislative 
chamber,  under  the  eye  of  the  king  and  the  Common*,  be 
found  in  Great  Britain,  possessing  more  -virtue,  wisdom  aun 
wealth,  than  the  rest  of  the  nation  ;  or  even  a  portion  suffi- 
ciently exclusive,  to  render  it  important,  dangerous  ai 
ambitious  ?  And  if  such  a  class  could  have  been  found, 
would  not  its  importance  and  ambition  presently  become 
victims  to  printing,  alienation  and  commerce  ? 

If  it  be  admitted,  that  the  mass  of  virtue,  wisdom  and 
wealth,  remaining  with  the  people  of  Great  Britain,  infi- 
nitely exceeds  that  collected  into  the  present  house  of  lords, 
Mr.  Adams's  system  contains  the  palpable  error,  of  pro- 
viding against  the  importance,  danger  and  ambition  of  a 
diminutive  portion  of  the  virtue,  wisdom  and  wealth  ot 
a  nation,  and  of  not  providing  against  the  importance,  dan- 
ger and  ambition  of  the  great  mass  of  these  qualities.  This 
great  mass,  it  may  be  answered,  will  be  prevented  from  do- 
ing harm  to  the  nation,  by  the  representative  principle  to 
be  found  in  the  house  of  commons.  If  that  principle  is  ca- 
pable of  managing  the  great  mass  of  virtue,  wisdom  and 
wealth,  it  is  also  capable  of  managing  an  inconsiderable 
portion  of  this  mass  ;  and  hence  results  the  propriety  of  an 
elective,  and  the  impropriety  of  an  hereditary  senate,  upoi? 
Mr.  Adams's  own  principles. 

In  this  argument,  Mr.  Adams's  definition  of  aristocracy 
is  adhered  to  ;  he  makes  it  to  consist  in  a  dangerous  share 
of  virtue,  wisdom  and  wealth,  held  by  a  number  of  indivi- 
duals, so  few,  as  to  be  capable  of  constituting  a  legislative 
branch.  The  difference  between  us  is,  that  his  computa- 
tion to  make  out  a  fact  analagous  to  his  system,  must  refer 
to  the  period  of  feudal  aristocracy ;  mine  takes  the  fact 
now  existing,  as  the  best  foundation  for  political  inferences, 
to  be  now  applied. 

But  his  definition  undoubtedly  possesses  a  considerable 
share  of  truth,  and  suggests  an  observation  extremely  plain. 
pliie  possession  by  a  few,  of  the  major  part  of  the  whole 


i6  AKI«TOCRACY. 

stock  of  renown,  talents  or  wealth,  within  ihe  compass  of  a 
society,  was  the  moral  cause  which  supported  the  aristocra- 
cies of  the  first  and  second  ages  ;  when  the  cause  ceased, 
the  effects  ceased  also  $  and  the  aristocracies  of  supersti- 
tion and  the  feudal  system  disappeared.  But  this  effect 
may  be  revived  by  reviving  its  cause.  A  monopoly  by  a  few, 
of  renown,  talents  or  wealth,  may  he  reproduced,  by  su- 
perstition, conquest  or  fraud  ;  and  the  question  is,  whether 
this  would  be  advisable,  for  the  sake  of  trying  the  efficacy  of 
Ms  system. 

We  must  turn  our  eyes  once  more  towards  England,  in 
order  to  illustrate  the  necessity  for  this  reproduction,  as  the 
only  means  of  erecting  an  aristocracy.  We  see  there  a 
chamber  of  nobility.  But  where  is  its  exclusive  renown  ? 
Vanished  with  superstition  and  entails.  Where  are  its  ex- 
clusive talents  ?  Buried  by  the  art  of  printing  in  the  same 
grave  with  ignorance.  Where  is  its  exclusive  wealth  ? 
Pouring  through  the  sluices  of  dissipation,  opened  by  alien- 
ation and  commerce.  And  where  is  its  heroism  ?  Conse- 
crated in  the  temple  of  luxury.  These  elements  of  aristo- 
cracy are  gone,  and  the  spectre  only  remains,  to  assail  our 
fears  in  behalf  of  the  system  I  am  contesting.  But  the  sys- 
tem of  patronage  and  paper  has  reproduced  a  monopoly  of 
wealth.  What  !  have  Pylades  and  Orestes  at  length  quai> 
relied,  and  does  one  adhere  to  the  English  peerage,  whilst 
the  other  deserts  to  this  English  system  ? 

This  apparition  of  aristocracy  is  not  however  devoid  of 
malignity,  arising  from  its  privilege  ©f  uttering  legislative 
incantations.  As  to  that  kind  of  ambition  which  impels  he- 
roes to  the  perpetration  of  crimes  j  as  to  those  enterprises 
which  disturb  nations,  and  excite  the  jealousy  of  kings-; 
the  innocence  of  the  English  nobility  is  incontestable 
Therefore  these  nobles  are  no  longer  jealous  of  the  king,  nor 
the  king  of  them.  And  however  speciously  the  system  of 
king,  lords  and  cojrmnons,  is  attempted  to  be  filtered  by  the 
supposition?  of  a  mutual  jealousy  ;  however  correctly  ip> 
fact  mTt*lithaT8v;;f-rrn!Ti(^.r!'  p,r.i.eh»  l  r  ^position*  wjien  Encash 


ARISTOCRACY- 

lords  were  feudal  barons  ,•  now  that  they  are  only  thHo 
courtiers,  mutual  harmony,  the  probable  effect,  is  equally 
warranted  by  the  actual  Tact.  King,  lords  and  commas-.  - 
are  melted  up  together  by  the  aristocracy  of  the  third  age, 
retaining,  like  Cerberus,  three  mouths,  and  jet  possessing 
ail  the  defects  of  political  power  collected  into  one  body,  so 
ably  demonstrated  by  Mr.  Adams  ;  and  the  unhappy  En- 
glish are  exposed  to  all  the  oppressions  of  a  substantial  aris- 
tocracy existing  in  the  monopolies  of  paper  and  patronage, 
and  to  all  the  evils  of  a  legislative  power  in  the  ghost  of  an 
unsubstantial  one. 

We  are  ready  to  acknowledge  that  extraordinary  virtue, 
talents  and  wealth  united,  will  govern,  and  ought  to  gover 
and  yet  it  is  denied  that  this  concession  is  reconcileable  with 
the  system  of  king,  lords  and  commons.  If  a  body  of  me?i 
which  possesses  the  virtue,  talents  and  wealth  of  a  nation 
ought  to  govern  ;  it  follows,  that  a  body  of  men,  which  doe? 
not  possess  these  attributes,  ought  not  to  govern. 

The  aristocracy  of  Home  for  instance,  did,  at  certain  pt 
Hods,  possess  a  greater  proportion  of  virtue,  talents  and 
wealth,  than  can  be  found  in  anv  east  or  order  of  men  at 
present,  among  commercial  nations  j  which,  and  i~,ot  the 
house  of  lords  in  England,  Mr.  Adams  must  have  had  in  Ms 
eye,  when  in  speaking  of  an  aristocracy,  he  utters  the  fol- 
lowing expressions,  "  it  is  the  brightest  ornament  and  glo- 
"  ry  of  a  nation,  and  may  always  be  made  the  greatest  hles- 
"  sing  of  society,  if  it  he  judiciously  managed  in  the  consti- 
"  tution  ;"  unless  he  can  shew  us,  that  the  English  house  of 
lords  merits  this  eulogy. 

Plebeian  ignorance  was  both  the  cause  and  justification 
of  the  Roman  aristocracy.  That  might  have  been  a  worse 
magistrate,  than  patrician  knowledge  ,•  and  the  magic  eir 
ele  drawn  by  superstition  around  the  conscript  fathers, 
might  have  been  necessary  to  re sf rata  the  excesses  of  a 
rude  nation  inclosed  within  a  single  cky.  But  this1  supplies 
no  argument  in  favor  of  an  arfstocraer,  m  societies  not  of 
national  aggregation,  but  of  national  dispersion;  not 


x  ■  ARISTOCRACY. 

national  i^srorairce,  but  of  national  intelligence;  not  sustain- 
ed by  superstition,  but  by  a  common  interest. 

Similar  causes  produced  the  feudal  aristocracy.  The 
conquering  tribes  were  moving  cities  and  colonising  armies ; 
and  hereditary  privileges  were  preferred  to  national  annihi- 
lation. The  feudal  commanders,  compared  with  their  ig- 
norant vassals,  possessed  that  superiority  in  renown,  talents 
and  wealth,  which  might  have  produced  the  feudal  system, 
as  the  moral  effect  of  these  moral  causes.  Such  a  form  of 
govermnfent  might  have  been  the  best  which  these  moving 
cities,  these  tribes  or  these  armies  could  bear,  and  yet  exe- 
rable  for  a  nation,  not  in  the  same  moral  state. 

Having  thus  conceded  to  Mr.  Adams,  that  wherever  a 
few  possess  the  mass  of  the  renown,  virtue,  talents  and 
wealth  of  a  nation,  that  they  will  become  an  aristocracy, 
and  probably  ought  to  do  so ;  it  would  be  a  concession,  strict- 
ly reciprocal,  to  admit,  that  wherever  no  such  body  is  to  be 
found,  an  aristocracy  ought  not  to  be  created  by  legal  as- 
signments of  wealth  and  poverty.  As  the  iirst  species  of 
minority  will  govern,  because  of  the  power  arising  from 
such  monopolies  only,  so  no  other  species  can,  without  these 
sourees  of  power.  Where  its  sources  are,  power  will  be 
found  i  and  hence  the  great  mass  of  wealth,  created  by  the 
system  of  paper  and  patronage,  has  annihilated  the  power 
of  the  didactick  and  titled  peerage  of  England  ;  because  it 
has  not  a  sufficient  mass  of  virtue,  renown,  talents  or 
wealth,  to  oppose  against  stock  and  patronage. 

The  aristocracies  of  the  first  and  second  ages  were  in- 
debted for  their  power  to  ignorance,  fraud  and  superstition; 
now  reason,  sincerity  and  truth,  are  demanded  by  the  hu- 
man mind.  It  disdains  to  worship  a  pageant  or  fear  a 
phantom,  and  is  only  to  be  guided  by  views  of  interest  or 
faapfriness.  This  change  in  the  human  character  indicates 
an  impossibility  of  reviving  the  principles  which  sustained 
the  aristocracies  of  the  first  and  second  age,  when  mankind 
believed  in  the  Gods  of  a  pantheon,  and  in  the  prophetic 
powers  of  convulsed  women. 


ARISTOCRACY.  M 

Talents  and  virtue  are  now  so  widely  distributed,  as  to 
have  rendered  a  monopoly  of  either,  equivalent  to  that  of 
antiquity,  impracticable  ;  and  if  an  aristocracy  ought  to 
have  existed,  whilst  it  possessed  such  a  monopoly,  it  ought, 
not  also  to  exist,  because  Hub  monopoly  is  irretrievably  lost. 
The  distribution  of  wealth  produced  by  commerce  and 
alienation,  is  equal  to  that  of  knowledge  and  virtue,  produ- 
ced by  printing  ,•  but  as  the  first  distribution  might  be  arti^ 
ficially  counteracted,  with  a  better  prospect  of  success  than 
the  latter,  aristocracy  has  abandoned  a  reliance  on  a  mono- 
poly  of  virtue,  renown  and  abilities,  and  resorted  wholly  to 
a  monopoly  of  wealth,  by  the  system  of  paper  and  patro- 
nage. Modern  taxes  and  frauds  to  collect  money,  and  not 
ancient  authors,  will  therefore  afford  the  best  evidence  of 
its  present  character. 

A  distribution  of  knowledge,  virtue  and  wealth,  produced 
public  opinion,  which  ought  now  to  govern  for  the  reason 
urged  by  Mr.  Adams  in  favour  of  aristocracy.  It  is  the  de- 
claration of  the  mass  of  national  wealth,  virtue  and  talents. 
Power,  in  Mr.  Adams's  opinion,  ought  to  follow  this  mass 
in  the  hands  of  a  few,  because  it  is  the  ornament  of  society 
It  is  unimportant  whether  an  aristocracy  is  a  natural,  phy^ 
sical  or  moral  effect,  if  its  cause,  by  means,  natural,  physi- 
cal or  moral,  may  be  lost  or  transferred.  Whenever  the 
mass  of  wealth,  virtue  and  talents,  is  lost  by  a  few  and 
transferred  to  a  great  portion  of  a  nation,  an  aristocracy  no 
longer  retains  the  only  sanctions  of  its  claim  ;  and  wherever 
these  sanctions  deposit  themselves,  they  carry  the  interwo- 
ven power.  By  spreading  themselves  so  generally  through- 
out a  nation,  as  to  be  no  longer  compressible  into  a  legisla- 
tive chamber,  or  inheritable  by  the  aid  of  perpetuity  and 
superstition,  these  antient  sanctions  of  aristocracy,  become 
the  modern  sanctions  of  public  opinion.  And  as  its  will 
(now  the  rightful  sovereign  upon  the  self-same  principle* 
urged  in  favor  of  the  best  founded  aristocracy)  can  no 
longer  be  obtained  through  the  medium  of  an  hereditary 
order,  the  American  invention  of  applying  the  doctrine  ©£ 


SO  ARISTOCRACY. 

responsibility  to  magistrates,  is  the  only  one  yet  discovered 
for  effecting  the  same  object,  which  was  effected  by  an  aris^ 
tccracy,  holding  the  mass  of  national  virtue,  talents  and 
ivealth.  This  mass  governed  through  such  an  aristocracy. 
This  mass  cannot  now  govern  through  any  aristocracy. 
This  mass  has  searched  for  a  new  organ,  as  a  medium  for 
exercising  the  sovereignty,  to  which  it  is  on  all  sides  allow- 
ed to  be  entitled  ;  and  this  medium  is  representation. 

When  the  principles  and  practice  of  the  American  policy 
aome  to  be  considered,  one  subject  of  inquiry  will  be,  whe- 
ther public  opinion,  or  the  declaration  of  the  mass  of  na- 
tional virtue,  talents  and  wealth,  will  be  able  to  exercise 
this  its  just  sovereignty,  in  union  with  the  system  of  paper 
ind  patronage.  If  not,  it  is  very  remarkable,  that  this  sys- 
tem, denominated  the  aristocracy  of  the  third  age,  is  equal- 
ly inimical  to  Mr.  Adams's  principles  and  to  mine.  We 
both  assign  political  power  to  the  mass  of  virtue,  talents  and 
wealth  in  a  nation.  He  only  contends  for  an  aristocracy 
from  a  supposition  that  it  must  possess  this  mass,  and  be  the 
jnly  organ  of  its  will  ;  I  acknowledge  the  sovereignty  of 
these  qualities,  deny  their  residence  in  a  minority  compres- 
sible into  an  aristocracy,  and  contend  for  a  different  organ. 
In  order  to  discover  whether  the  aristocracy  of  paper  and 
patronage,  is  a  good  organ  for  expressing  the  will  of  the 
sovereign  we  have  agreed  upon,  let  us  return  to  England, 
sum)  consider,  whether  the  revolution,  which  finally  destroy- 
ed the  aristocracy  of  the  second  age,  and  established  that 
jf  the  third,  has  placed  the  government  in  the  hands  of  the 
wealth,  virtue  and  talents  of  the  nation,  or  subjected  it  to 
the  influence  of  public  opinion. 

If  you  had  seen  the  vulture  preying  upon  the  entrails  of 
the  agonized  Prometheus,  would  you  have  believed,  though 
Pluto  himself  had  sworn  it,  that  the  vulture  was  under  the 
control  of  Prometheus  ?  If  you  could  not  have  believed  this, 
neither  can  you  believe,  that  the  concubinage  between  a 
government,  and  the  system  of  paper  and  patronage,  is  an 
j  "--an  of  national  opinion,  or  of  the  wealth,  virtue  an<?  *a- 


ARISTOCRACY.  31 

tents  of  the  nation,  and  not  a  conspiracy  between  avarice 
and  ambition .$  because,  it  is  as  impossible  that  a  nation 
should  derive  pleasure  from  a  government  founded  in  the 
principle  of  voraciousness,  as  the  man  from  the  laceration 
ef  his  bowels. 

It  has  been  said,  that  paper  and  office  are  property  :  and 
as  by  their  means,  a  minority  may  bring  into  its  coffers,  the 
whole  profit  of  national  labour,  so  it  ought  to  be  considered 
as  the  nation.  Had  Prometheus  fattened  by  being  fed  upon 
by  the  vulture,  it  would  have  given  some  colour  to  this  in- 
genious deception. 

Again  it  has  been  said,  that  the  system  of  paper  and  pat- 
ronage encourages  commerce,  agriculture,  manufactures 
and  conquest ;  it  aggravated  the  misery  of  Prometheus, 
that  his  liver  was  made  to  grow  for  the  gratification  of  a 
harpy,  without  appeasing  its  voracity. 

The  difficulty  of  producing  a  correct  opinion  of  the  cause 
and  consequences  of  the  new-born  aristocracy  of  paper  and 
patronage,  surpasses  the  same  difficulty  in  relation  to  the 
aristocracies  of  the  first  and  second  ages,  as  far  as  its  supe- 
rior importance.  The  two  last  being  substantially  dead, 
their  bodies  may  be  cut  up,  the  articulation  of  their  bones 
exposed,  and  the  convolution  of  their  fibres  unravelled  ; 
hut  whenever  the  intricate  structure  of  the  system  of  paper 
and  patronage  is  attempted  to  be  dissected,  we  moderns 
surrender  our  intellects  to  yells  uttered  by  the  living  mon- 
ster, similar  to  those  with  which  its  predecessors  astonish- 
ed, deluded,  and  oppressed  the  world  for  three  thousand 
years.  The  aristocracy  of  superstition  defended  itself  by 
exclaiming,  the  Gods!  the  temples !  the  sacred  oracles! 
divine  vengeance  !  and  Elysian  fields  ! — and  that  of  paper 
and  patronage  exclaims,  national  faith !  sacred  charters ! 
disorganization  !  and  security  of  property  • 

Let  us  moderns  cease  to  boast  of  our  victory  over  super- 
stition and  the  feudal  system,  and  our  advancement  jn  know- 
ledge. Let  us  neither  pity,  ridicule  or  despise  the  ancients, 
as  dupes  of  frauds  and  tricks,  which   we  can   so  easily 


32  ARISTOCRACY. 

discern ;  lest  some  ancient  sage  should  rise  from  his  grave, 
and  answer,  "  You  moderns  are  duped  by  arts  more  obvi- 
"  ousiy  fraudulent,  than  those  which  deceived  us.  The 
"'  agency  of  tine  Gods  was  less  diseernable,  than  the  effects 
*•  of  payer  and  patronage.  We  could  not  see,  that  the  tem- 
"  poral  and  eternal  pains  and  pleasures,  threatened  and 
«  promised  by  our  aristocracy,  could  not  be  inflicted  or  be- 
"  stowed  by  it ;  you  see  throughout  Europe  the  effects  of 
"  your  aristocracy.  Without  your  light,  oracles  were 
«  necessary  to  deceive  us  ;  with  the  help  of  printing,  and 
"  two  detections,  you  are  deceived  by  aristocracy  in  a  third 
"  form,  although  it  pretends  neither  to  the  divinity  nor  he- 
"  roism  claimed  by  its  two  first  forms.  And  under  these 
"  disadvantages,  the  impositions  of  our  aristocracy  were 
«'  restrained  within  narrower  bounds  than  those  of  yours. 
"  Did  any  aristocracy  of  the  first  age,  extend  its  annual 
e<  spoliation  from  one  to  thirty-five  millions  of  pounds  ster- 
"  ling,  in  less  than  a  century  2" 

Whenever  one  fraud  is  detected,  ambition  and  avarice 
have  hitherto  invented  another.  The  aristocracy  of  the 
second  age,  being  weakened  in  England,  by  the  wars  be- 
tween the  houses  of  York  and  Lancaster,  Henry  the  seventh 
seized  the  opportunity  of  breaking  its  power.  The  four 
succeeding  kings,  (excluding  Edward)  uncontrolled  by  the 
remaining  aristocracy,  though  more  warlike  and  wealthy 
than  the  present, ;  or  by  the  degree  of  knowledge,  virtue  and 
wealth  among  the  people ;  were  so  completely  despotic,  as 
lo  be  even  able  to  modify  religion,  according  to  the  sugges- 
tions of  their  amours,  their  bigotry,  or  their  minions.  The 
barons  were  conquered,  and  knowledge,  virtue  and  wealth, 
had  not  been  sufficiently  dispersed  to  create  the  sovereignty 
of  public  opinion.  So  that  during  these  four  reigns,  society 
remained  in  an  anomalous  state,  between  the  suppression 
of  an  aristocracy,  and  the  acquisition  of  knowledge,  virtue 
and  wealth  by  the  people,  from  printing  and  commerce. 
Charles  the  first  lost  his  life,  because  he  either  did  not  mark 
the  progress  ©£  this  acquisition,  or  had  not  liberality  enough 


ARISTOCRACY.  33 

to  yield  to  it.  His  son,  less  magnanimous  than  his  father, 
escaped  a  similar  fate  hy  the  national  weariness  of  bigotry, 
fraud  and  tyranny  united;  and  by  practising  in  some  degree 
the  system  of  corruption.  William  of  Orange  farther  ad- 
vanced this  baleful  system ;  and  Sir  Robert  Walpole  com- 
pletely organized  the  aristocracy  of  the  present  age,  for 
the  purpose  of  corrupting  those,  whom  the  progress  of 
knowledge  had  enlightened. 

From  Henry  the  eighth  to  that  time,  the  nobility  had 
been  but  slightly  felt  as  a  political  power ;  and  Walpole's 
project  for  the  modern  aristocracy,  substantially  annihi- 
lated them.  During  this  interval,  superstition,  ignorance 
and  feudal  power  Avere  declining.  By  their  aid,  minorities 
had  oppressed  nations.  By  their  aid,  minorities  had  erect- 
ed themselves  into  the  aristocracies  of  the  first  and  second 
ages ;  and  patronage  and  paper  became  the  substitute  for 
these  forms  of  aristocracy,  because  avarice  and  ambition, 
having  discovered  that  man  could  no  longer  be  made  sub- 
servient to  their  designs  by  means  of  his  ignorance,  saw  the 
necessity  of  obtaining  the  same  subserviency  by  means  of  his 
avarice. 

We  discern  but  two  kinds  of  aristoeracy ;  that  which  is 
the  tyrant  itself,  and  that  which  is  the  instrument  of  the 
tyrant.  The  ancient  feudal  and  hierarchical  aristocracies 
of  England  were  tyrants  themselves.  The  modern  nobles 
and  bishops  ;  the  patronage  and  stock  interests  ;  the  gene- 
rals and  titulars  of  Bonaparte,  and  the  mandarins  of  China, 
are  instruments  of  tyranny.  The  same  reasons  induc- 
ing the  people  to  unite  with  kings  against  aristocracies, 
which  were  themselves  tyrants,  ought  to  determine  them  to 
assail  such  as  are  the  instruments  of  kings.  Independent 
of  kings,  they  are  universally  the  first  kind  of  evil;  depend- 
ent on  them,  the  second.  But  mankind  are  distracted  by  an 
host  of  political  doctors,  who  utter  prejudices  imbibed  from 
obsolete  cases  or  existing  interests.  The  whole  college 
agree  that  the  British  policy  is  afflicted  with  some  invete 
rate  distemper,  but  each  doctor  asserts  his  farorite  limb  tc 

6 


3*  ARISTOCRACY. 

be  sound ;  and  whilst  the  aggregate  by  one  opinion  pro- 
nounces it  to  be  in  the  agonies  of  death,  the  same  aggregate 
by  many  opinions  pronounces  it  to  be  in  perfect  health., 
Funding,  banking,  patronage,  charter,  mercenary  armies 
and  partial  bounties,  are  each  admired  as  a  panacea  by  some 
one ;  even  corruption  is  defended  as  a  happy  expedient  for 
managing  the  house  of  commons  ;  and  doctor  Balance,  ve- 
nerable with  the  rust  of  antiquity,  excites  universal  asto- 
nishment by  declaring  with  unaffected  gravity,  that  a  nobi- 
lity endowed  with  enormous  wealth,  virtue  and  talents,  is 
only  wanting  to  renovate  it  throughout.  Such  doctors  are 
labouring  to  patch  up  a  policy  for  the  United  States,  out  of 
the  self-same  limbs,  with  an  animal  thus  compounded, 
lying  in  convulsions  before  their  eyes. 

The  advantage  of  studying  the  anatomy  of  a  dead  body, 
is  the  knowledge  of  a  living  one.  In  like  manner,  the  use- 
fulness of  our  observations  in  relation  to  the  aristocracies 
of  the  first  and  second  ages,  consists  in  opening  our  way 
towards  that  of  the  third.  A  knowledge  of  this  last,  is  ca- 
pable of  a  beneficial  application  j  whereas  a  knowledge  of 
the  aristocracies  of  superstition  and  the  feudal  system,  ab- 
stracted from  the  light  they  may  reflect  on  that  of  paper 
and  patronage,  is  only  a  steril  amusement. 

And  it  was  also  necessary  to  lay  the  ghost  of  the  feudal 
aristocracy,  now  conjured  up  only  as  a  decoy  to  draw  the 
publick  attention,  from  its  regenerated  body,  to  come  fairly 
to  the  objects  of  this  essay ;  among  which,  an  investigation  of 
the  system  of  paper  and  patronage  occupies  a  chief  place* 

Preparatory  to  this,  a  political  analysis  is  offered  to  the 
reader,  as  a  key  to  the  system  of  reasoning,  subsequently 
to  be  pursued. 

It  has  already  been  observed,  that  government  is  found- 
ed in  moral,  and  not  in  natural  or  physical  causes.  Now 
the  moral  qualitie?  of  man,  being  only  good  and  evil,  every 
form  of  government  must  be  founded  in  that  principle  of 
the  two,  which  prevails,  like  every  other  human  action 
of  a  moral  nature.    This  analysis  is  anterior  to  that    of 


ARISTOCRACY. 

jaonarchy,  aristocracy  and  democracy,  and  is  capable  of 
displaying  the  true  character  of  every  government,  of  each 
of  its  sections,  and  of  all  its  measures  ,•  objects  to  which 
the  numerical  analysis  is  utterly  incompetent. 

For  instance  :  A  government,  a  section  of  it,  or  a  mea- 
sure, founded  in  an  evil  moral  principle,  such  as  fraud,  am- 
bition, avarice  or  superstition,  must  produce  correspondent 
effects,  and  defeat  the  end  of  government  ;  but  resting  up- 
on a  good  moral  principle,  such  as  honesty,  self-government, 
justice  and  knowledge,  its  effects  will  also  be  good,  and 
conformable  to  the  duty  and  office  of  government.    Where- 
as the  numerical  analysis  cannot  with  certainty  enable  us 
to  foresee  the  character  of  a  government,  because  it  has  no 
reference  to  moral  causes  or  effects,  good  or  evil.     An  ab- 
solute monarch,  guided  by  the  good  moral  qualities  of  man, 
may  produce  national  happiness  ;  and  so  any  other  anoma- 
lous ease  under  the  numerical  analysis,  may  serve  to  per- 
plex the  science  of  politicks  ;  because  the  publick  happiness 
ensuing  from  it,   instead  of  being  attributed   to  the  acci- 
dental preponderance  of  the  good  class  of  moral  qualities, 
in  the  monarch,  the  aristocracy,  or  the  democracy,  is  too 
often  attributed  to  numerical  classification.     By  exploding 
this  analysis,  and  substituting  that  of  governments,  bottom 
ed  upon  good  or  evil  moral  principles,  human  happiness  will 
less  frequently  fluctuate  with  fhe  characters  of  individuals. 

The  reader  will  be  often  reminded  of  these  principles, 
which  are  now  to  be  applied  to  the  aristocracy  of  paper 
and  patronage. 

This  being  suggested  by,  or  founded  in,  the  evil  mora) 
qualities  of  avarice  and  ambition,  must  inevitably  produce 
evil  effects  ;  because  a  system  is  merely  a  moral  being,  and 
a  moral  demon  cannot  be  a  saint.  Under  either  member 
of  the  numerical  classification,  a  nation  has  a  chance  for 
happiness,  however  inconsiderable,  because  men  may  be 
guided  by  good  moral  principles:  but  none  under  the  vicious 
system  of  paper  and  patronage,  because  an  evil  moral  prin- 
ciple cannot  produce  good  moral  effect?.    That  a  system, 


36  ARISTOCRACY. 

founded  like  this,  upon  evil  moral  principles,  is  incapable  of 
amelioration  from  the  personal  virtues  of  magistrates,  is* 
proved  by  its  steady  unfluctuating  course  of  effects  in  Eng- 
land, where  its  rigorous  consistency,  and  growing  severity, 
is  neither  interrupted  nor  softened  in  the  smallest  degree  by 
the  virtues  of  individuals.  Martial  law  and  stock  law,  are 
naturally  and  necessarily  tyrants,  but  a  man  may  be  a  tyrant 
or  a  patriot.  If  a  political  system,  founded  in  evil  moral 
principles,  proceeds  consistently  and  certainly  in  the  dis- 
pensation of  evil  to  nations,  without  sustaining  impediments 
from  the  virtues  even  of  its  administrators  ,•  is  it  not  con- 
ceivable, that  one  founded  in  good  moral  principles,  is  dis- 
coverable, capable  of  dispensing  good,  independently  also 
of  the  vices  of  its  administrators  ?  One  as  free  from  evil 
qualities,  as  that  of  paper  and  patronage  is  from  good,  would 
probably  effect  so  desirable  an  object. 

An  enumeration  of  the  effects  of  the  system  of  paper 
and  patronage,  will  disclose  the  consistency,  between  causes 
and  effects  in  the  moral  world,  the  vast  political  influence 
of  this  system,  and  its  operation  upon  human  happiness. 
The  first,  is  that  of  its  enabling  a  minor  interest,  to  guide 
and  subsist  upon  a  major  interest. 

It  is  not  the  mode  by  which  this  is  effected,  but  the 
effect,  which  causes  oppression.  It  is  the  same  thing  to  a 
nation  whether  it  is  subjected  to  the  will  of  a  minority, 
by  superstition,  conquest,  or  patronage  and  paper.  Whe- 
ther this  end  is  generated  by  errour,  by  force,  or  by  fraud, 
the  interest  of  the  nation  is  invariably  sacrificed  to  the  in- 
terest of  the  minority. 

If  the  oppressions  of  the  aristocracies  of  the  first  and 
second  ages,  arose  from  the  power  obtained  by  minorities, 
how  has  it  happened,  that  a  nation  which  has  rejoiced  in 
their  downfal,  should  be  joyfully  gliding  back  into  the  same- 
policy  ?  How  happens  it,  that  whilst  religious  frauds  are 
no  longer  rendered  sacred,  hy  calling  them  oracles,  politic 
-!  fraud  should  be  sanctified,  by  calling  it  national  credit 


ARISTOCRACY.  37 

Experience,  it  is  agreed,  has  exploded  the  promises  of  ora- 
cles ;  does  it  not  testify  also  to  those  of  paper  stock  ? 

Paper  stock  always  promises  to  defend  a  nation,  ant's 
always  flees  from  danger.  America  and  France  saved 
themselves  by  physical  power,  after  danger  had  driven  pa- 
per credit  out  of  the  field.  In  America,  so  soon  as  the 
danger  disappeared,  paper  credit  loudly  boasted  of  its  capa- 
city to  defend  nations,  and  though  a  deserter,  artfully  reap- 
ed the  rewards  due  to  the  conqueror.  In  France,  it  trans- 
ferred to  fraud  and  avarice  the  domains  which  ought  to 
have  aided  in  defending  the  nation,  or  to  have  been  restored 
to  the  former  owners. 

Paper  credit  is  a  disciple  of  the  doctrine,  that  truth  is 
best  ascertained  by  the  sword.  The  utmost  exertion  it  ha? 
ever  made  to  enlighten  the  mind,  was  by  this  instrument. 
And  the  crusade  against  France,  in  preference  to  leaving  to 
the  arbitrament  of  man's  intellectual  powers,  an  estimate  of 
fair  experience,  is  a  proof  that  it  only  counts  its  own  inte 
rest,  and  forgets  the  evils  it  inflicts.  Otherwise,  could  pa 
per  credit  have  inflicted  upon  Britain  all  the  calamities  of 
a  war,  to  be  closed  by  her  ruin,  or  by  a  debt  of  several 
hundred  millions  of  pounds  sterling,  merely  to  prevent  tlu 
French  from  forming  a  government  for  France  ? 

Had  there  existed  in  England,  a  single  chaste  orga; 
for  expressing  and  enforcing  the  public  interest,  this  ens 
sade  to  guide  opinion,  would  have  been  escaped  by  England, 
as  it  was  by  America  ;  and  if  no  such  organ  did  exist,  to 
what  but  the  system  of  patronage  and  paper  was  it  owing  I 
It  is  therefore  a  menstruum,  capable  of  dissolving  the  seve- 
ral sections  of  a  government,  however  divided,  into  one 
interest  or  centre  ;  and  of  infusing  tlw  most  unprincipled 
avarice  and  ambition  into  (lie  mass. 

Sinecure,  armies,  navies,  offices,  war,  anticipation  am 
taxes,  make  up  an  outline  of  that  vast  political  eomhinati 
concentrated  under  the  denomination  of  paper  and  patron- 
age.    These,  and  its  other  means,  completely  enable  it  to 
takje  from  the  nation  as  much  power  and  as  much  weaH 


S$  ARISTOCRACY, 

as  its  conscience  or  its  no  conscience  will  allow  it  to  re« 
*cive;  and  lest  the  capacity  of  public  loaning  to  transfer 
private  property  should  be  overlooked,  it  has  proceeded  in 
England  to  the  indirect  sale  of  private  real  property.  If  a 
land  tax  is  sold  for  a  term  amounting  to  the  value  of  the 
land,  a  proprietor  is  to  buy  his  own  land  at  its  value,  or  ad- 
mit of  a  co-proprietor,  to  whom  he  must  pay  that  value  by 
instalments  ;  and  thus  a  paper  system  ean  sell  all  the  land? 
&£  a  nation.  If  national  danger  should  occur  after  this  sale, 
it  ean  only  be  met  by  the  people ;  and  the  purchaser  from  a 
paper  system,  of  an  exemption  from  the  land  tax  to-day, 
must  be  again  taxed  or  fight  for  his  land  to-morrow.  The 
case  of  this  individual  is  precisely  that  of  every  nation, 
made  use  of  directly  or  indirectly  to  enrich  a  paper  system  j 
it  is  perpetually  at  auction,  and  never  receives  any  thing  for 
itself;  because,  however  ingeniously  a  paper  system  can 
manage  artificial  danger  for  its  own  emolument,  it  is  neither 
able  nor  willing  to  meet  real  danger  ,•  and  however  rich  it 
is  made  by  a  nation,  the  nation  must  still  defend  itself,  or 
perish. 

This  catastrophe  has  already  arrived  in  Britain.  Swin- 
dled out  of  endless  wealth,  by  the  vauntings  of  paper  credit, 
©fits  will  and  ability  to  defend  liberty  and  property;  that 
hapless  nation  sees  itself  taxed  and  impressed,  to  increase 
the  penalty  of  its  own  credulity,  and  to  protect  that  which 
promised  to  yield  protection  ;  its  annual  taxes  beget  annual 
additions  to  permanent  debt,  and  its  endless  war  with 
France  was  commenced  by  the  fears  of  its  paper  system* 
laowever  this  war  may  have  gradually  changed  its  ground. 

The  effect  of  opposite  interests,  one  enriched  by  and  go- 
verning the  other,  correctly  follows  its  cause.  One  interest 
is  a  tyrant,  the  other  its  slave.  In  Britain,  one  of  these 
interests  owes  to  the  other  above  ten  hundred  millions  of 
pounds  sterling,  which  would  require  twelve  millions  of 
slaves  to  discharge,  at  eighty  pounds  sterling  each.  If  the 
fiebior  interest  amounts  to  ten  millions  of  souls,  and  would 
"be  worth  forty  pounds  sterling  round;  sold  for  slaves,  it  pay? 


ARISTOCRACY.  3# 

twelve  and  an  half  per  centum  on  its  capitation  value,  to 
the  creditor  interest,  for  the  exclusive  items  of  debt  and 
bank  stock.  This  profit  for  their  masters,  made  by  those 
who  are  called  freemen,  greatly  exceeds  what  is  generally 
made  by  those  who  are  called  slaves.  But  as  nothing  is 
calculated  except  two  items,  by  including  the  payments  foi- 
useless  offices,  excessive  salaries,  and  fat  sinecures,  it  is 
evident  that  one  interest  makes  out  of  the  other,  a  far 
greater  profit  than  if  it  had  sold  this  other,  and  placed  the 
money  in  the  most  productive  state  of  usance. 

Such  is  the  freeman  of  paper  and  patronage.  Had  Di' 
ogenes  lived  until  this  day,  he  would  have  unfledged  a  cock 
once  more,  and  exhibited  him  as  an  emblem,  not  of  Plato's 
man,  but  of  a  freeborn  Englishman.  Had  Sancho  knowc 
of  a  paper  stock  system,  he  would  not  have  wished  for  the 
government  of  an  island  inhabited  by  negroes.  Has  Pro- 
vidence used  this  system  to  avenge  the  Africans,  upon  the 
Europeans  and  Americans  ? 

Whatever  destroys  an  unity  of  interest  between  a  go 
vernment  and  a  nation,  infallibly  produces  oppression  ami 
hatred.  Human  conception  is  unable  to  invent  a  scheme,, 
more  capable  of  afflicting  mankind  with  these  evils,  than 
that  of  paper  and  patronage.  It  divides  a  nation  into  two 
groups,  creditors  and  debtors  ;  the  first  supplying  its  want 
of  physical  strength,  by  alliances  with  fleets  and  armies,  and 
practising  the  most  unblushing  corruption.  A  consciousness 
of  inflicting  or  suffering  injuries,  fills  each  with  malignity 
towards  the  other.  This  malignity  first  begets  a  multitude 
of  penalties,  punishments  and  executions,  and  then  ven- 
geance. 

A  legislature,  in  a  nation  where  the  system  of  paper 
and  patronage  prevails,  will  be  governed  by  that  interest, 
and  legislate  in  its  favour.  It  is  impossible  to  do  this,  with- 
out legislating  to  the  injury  of  the  other  interest,  that  \a, 
the  great  mass  of  the  nation.  Such  a  legislature  will  cre- 
ate unnecessary  offices,  that  themselves  or  their  relatione 
may  bs  endowed  with  them.    They  will  lavish  the  revenue, 


U)  ARISTOCRACY. 

io  enrich  themselves.  They  will  borrow  for  the  nation, 
(hat  they  may  lend.  They  will  offer  lenders  great  profits, 
"hat  they  may  share  in  them.  As  grievances  gradually  ex- 
"ite  national  discontent,  they  will  fix  the  yoke  more  secure- 
ly, by  making  it  gradually  heavier.  And  they  will  finally 
avow  and  maintain  their  corruption,  by  establishing  an  irre- 
sistible standing  army,  not  to  defend  the  nation,  but  to  de- 
Tend  a  system  for  plundering  the  nation. 

An  uniform  deception  resorted  to  by  a  funding  system, 
through  legislative  bodies,  unites  with  experience  in  testi- 
fying to  its  uniform  corruption  of  legislatures.  It  professes 
that  its  object  is  to  pay  debts.  A  government  must  either 
Ite  the  fraudulent  instrument  of  the  system,  or  the  system  a 
fraudulent  instrument  of  a  government ;  or  it  would  not 
utter  this  falsehood  to  deceive  the  people. 

This  promise  is  similar  to  that  of  protecting  property. 
It  promises  to  diminish,  and  accumulates ;  it  promises  to 
protect,  and  invades.  All  political  oppressors  deceive,  in 
order  to  succeed.  When  did  an  aristocracy  avow  its  pur- 
pose ?  Sincerity  demanded  of  that  of  the  third  age,  the 
following  confession  :  "Our  purpose  is  to  settle  wealth  and 
"  power  upon  a  minority.  It  will  be  accomplished  by  na- 
"  tional  debt,  paper  corporations,  and  offices,  civil  and  mili- 
"  tary.  These  will  condense  king,  lords  and  commons,  a 
"  moused  faction,  and  an  armed  faction,  in  one  interest. 
*•  This  interest  must  subsist  upon  another,  or  perish.  The 
«  other  interest  is  national,  to  govern  and  pilfer  which,  is 
"  our  object ;  and  its  accomplishment  consists  in  getting 
"  the  utmost  a  nation  can  pay.  Such  a  state  of  success  can 
"  only  be  maintained  by  armies,  to  be  paid  by  the  nation, 
"  and  commanded  by  this  minority  ;  by  corrupting  talents 
"  and  courage  ;  by  terrifying  timidity  j  by  inflicting  penal- 
"  ties  on  the  weak  and  friendless,  and  by  distracting  the 
"  majority  with  deceitful  professions.  That  with  which  our 
"  project  commences,  is  invariably  a  promise  to  s;et  a  nation 
<f  out  of  debt ;  but  the  invariable  effect  of  it  is,  to  plunge  it 
".irretrievably  into  debt." 


ARISTOCRACY.  M 

The  English  system  of  paper  and  patronage,  has  made 
these  confessions  by  the  whole  current  of  its  actions  for  a 
century,  and  laboured  to  hide  them  by  its  words.  That 
guilt  should  eternally  endeavour  to  beguile,  is  natural.  Is 
it  also  natural,  that  innocence  should  eternally  be  its  dupe  I 
Is  it  the  character  of  virtue,  in  spite  of  common  sense,  to 
shut  her  eyes  upon  truth,  and  open  her  ears  to  falsehood  ? 

A  nation  exposed  to  a  paroxysm  of  conquering  rage,  has 
infinitely  the  advantage  of  one,  subjected  to  this  aristocrat 
tical  system.  One  is  local  and  temporary  ;  the  other  i? 
spread  by  law  and  perpetual.  One  is  an  open  robber,  who 
warns  you  to  defend  yourself;  the  other  a  sly  thief,  who 
empties  your  pockets  under  a  pretence  of  paying  your  debts. 
One  is  a  pestilence,  which  will  end  of  itself ;  the  other  a 
climate  deadly  to  liberty. 

After  an  invasion,  suspended  rights  may  be  resumed, 
ruined  cities  rebuilt,  and  past  cruelties  forgotten  ;  but  in 
the  oppressions  of  the  aristocracy  of  paper  and  patronage., 
there  can  be  no  respite  ;  so  long  as  there  is  any  thing  to 
get,  it  cannot  be  glutted  with  wealth  ;  so  long  as  there  is 
any  thing  to  fear,  it  cannot  be  glutted  with  power  ;  other 
tyrants  die  ',  this  is  immortal. 

A  conqueror  may  have  clemency  ;  he  may  be  generous  ; 
at  least  he  is  vain,  and  may  be  softened  by  flattery.  But  a 
system  founded  in  evil  moral  qualities,  is  insensible  to  hu- 
man virtues  and  passions,  incapable  of  remorse,  guided  con- 
stantly by  the  principles  which  created  it,  and  acts  by  the 
iron  instruments,  law,  armies  and  tax  gatherers.  With 
what  prospect  of  success,  reader,  could  you  address  the  cle- 
mency, generosity  or  vanity  of  the  system  of  paper  and  pa- 
tronage ?  Wherefore  has  no  one  tried  this  hopeless  experi- 
ment ?  Because  clemency,  generosity  and  vanity,  are  not 
among  the  moral  qualities  which  constitute  the  character 
of  an  evil  moral  system. 

The  only  two  modes  extant  of  enslaving  nations,  are 
those  of  armies  and  the  system  of  paper  and  patronage.  The 
European  nations  are  subjected  by  both,  so  that  their  chains 

7 


4;2  AHISTOCKACV. 

■;  doubly  riveted.  The  Americans  devoted  their  effectu- 
al precautions  to  the  obsolete  modes  of  title  and  hierarchy , 
erected  several  barriers  against  the  army  mode,  and  utter- 
ly disregarded  the  mGde  of  paper  and  patronage.  The  ar- 
my mode  was  thought  so  formidable',  that  military  men  are 
excluded  from  legislatures,  and  limited  to  charters  or  com- 
missions at  will  ;  and  the  paper  mode  so  harmless,  that  it  is 
allowed  to  break  the  principle  of  keeping  legislative,  execu- 
tive and  judicative  powers  separate  and  distinct,  to  infuse 
itself  into  all  these  departments,  to  unite  them  in  one  con- 
spiracy, and  to  obtain  charters  or  commissions  for  unre- 
stricted terms,  entrenched  behind  publick  faith,  and  out  of 
the  reach,  it  is  said,  of  national  will  ;  which  it  may  assail, 
wound  and  destroy  with  impunity.  This  jealousy  of  ar- 
mies, and  coniidenee  in  paper  systems,  can  only  be  justified, 
if  the  following  argument  in  its  defence  is  correct. 

'«  An  army  of  soldiers  have  a  separate  interest  from  the 
"  nation,  because  they  draw  their  subsistence  from  it,  and 
"  therefore  they  will  combine  for  their  own  interest  against 
«  the  national  interest  ;  but  an  army  of  stockjobbers  have 
"  no  such  separate  interest,  and  will  not  combine.  Soldiers 
«'  admitted  into  the  legislature,  would  legislate  in  favour  of 
<*  soldiers  ;  but  stockjobbers  will  not  legislate  in  favour  of 
"  stockjobbers.  Soldiers  may  use  our  arms  to  take  our 
<*  money  ;  but  stock jobbers  cannot  use  our  money  to  take 
"  our  arms.  Soldiers  may  adhere  to  a  chief  in  preference 
"  to  the  naiion,  as  an  instrument  for  gratifying  their  ava- 
"  rice  and  ambition  upon  the  nation:  but  stockjobbers  have 
"  no  avarice  nor  ambition  to  be  gratified,  and  will  not  there- 
"  fore  adhere  to  a  chief  for  that  purpose.  Soldiers  are 
"  dangerous,  because  they  assail  the  liberty  of  a  nation  by 
&  open  force  ;  stockjobbers  harmless,  because  they  do  it  by 
"  secret  fraud.  All  are  jealous  of  soldiers,  and  therefore 
(;  they  will  not  be  watched  j  few  are  jealous  of  stockjofe- 
"  bers,  and  therefore  they  will  be  watched.  Many  instan- 
iS  ces  have  oceured  of  the  oppressions  by  the  army  system  ; 

one  instance  wily  of  a  perfect  capacity  in  the  paper  syst  >_> 


••*'  for  oppression  can  be  adduced ;  and  as  that  lias  lasted 
«  only  a  single  century,  it  would  be  precipitate  to  detect  and 
"  destroy  the  aristocracy  of  paper  and  patronage,  in  less 
«  time  than  was  requisite  to  detect  and  destroy  those  of  sju- 
«  perstition  and  the  feudal  system." 

Alas  !  is  it  ti'iie,  (hat  ages  are  necessary  (o  understand, 
whilst  a  moment  will  suffice  to  invent,  an  imposture  ?  Is  it 
true,  that  the  example  of  their  venerable  ancestor,  groan- 
ing for  a  century  under  the  oppressions  of  this  modern  sys- 
tem  of  aristocracy,  is  incapable  of  awakening  the  Ameri- 
cans; and  that  tliey  themselves  must  also  become  a  beacon 
for  the  benefit  of  a  more  enlightened  era?  Csesar  profited 
by  the  failure  of  Marias,  in  the  art  of  enslaving  his  country  ; 
will  no  nation  ever  profit  by  the  failure  of  another  in  the 
art  of  preserving  its  liberty  ? 

Let  us  drop  the  subject  for  a  moment,  and  consider  whe- 
ther we  ought  to  reject  truth,  because  it  is  plainly  told  ?  Be- 
cause Marcus  Aurelius  was  despotick,  should  we  therefore 
speak  tenderly  of  despotism  ?  Because  Washington  was  a 
soldier,  should  we  therefore  speak  tenderly  of  standing  ar- 
mies ?  And  because  we  see  around  us  stockjobbers  whom 
we  love,  ought  we  therefore  to  speak  tenderly  of  paper  sys- 
tems? A  despot  may  condemn  tyranny  ;  a  soldier  may  con- 
demn standing  armies  ;  and  a  stockjobber  may  condemn  pa- 
per systems.  In  reasoning  boldly  against  the  system  of  pa- 
per and  patronage,  no  private  reputation  is  attacked,  more 
than  that  of  Marcus  Aurelius  would  be,  by  reasoning 
against  despotism  ;  or  Washington's,  by  reasoning  against 
standing  armies.  To  insinuate  truth  only,  is  to  betray  it. 
Yeraeity  in  terms  cannot  be  censurable,  if  veracity  in  mat- 
ter is  entitled  to  approbation.  The  discharge  of  a  duly, 
cannot  require  an  apology,  and  without  making  one,  1  will 
proceed. 

A  paper  system  proposes  to  fulfil  its  promise  of  defend 
ing  a  nation,  by  giving  it  credit ;  from  which  credit,  it  in- 
ters an  increase  of  national  strength.      Let  us  ascertain 
^hat  national  strength  is,  before  we  hastily  conclude,  thai 


44  ARISTOCRACY. 

it  can  be  created  by  a  stock  system.  It  consists  of  people 
and  revenue.  If*  by  any  means  a  nation  was  deprived  of 
half  its  people,  would  this  add  to  its  strength  ?  If  by  a  pa- 
per system,  it  is  deprived  of  half  its  revenue,  can  this  ei- 
ther add  to  its  strength  ?  Revenue,  like  people,  is  subject  to 
numerical  limits.  Suppose  the  people  of  Britain  are  able 
to  pay  a  revenue  of  forty  millions  sterling,  but  that  thirty  are 
appropriated  to  the  use  of  the  system  of  paper  and  patron- 
age :  Are  not  three  fourths  of  their  strength  gone,  so  far 
as  it  consists  of  revenue  ?  But  Great  Britain  with  her  ten 
millions  of  free  revenue  can  borrow  two  hundred  millions. 
If  strength  is  to  be  measured  by  the  power  of  borrowing, 
she  could  have  borrowed  four  times  as  much,  had  her  whole 
revenue  been  free,  and  consequently  would  have  been  four 
times  as  strong. 

Strength  arising  from  revenue,  is  relative.  If  the  free 
revenue  of  Great  Britain  is  ten  millions,  and  the  whole  re- 
venue of  a  rival  nation  fifteen,  all  of  which  is  free,  then  the 
rival  nation  would  possess  more  money  and  more  credit,  ca- 
pable of  being  applied  to  national  use,  than  Great  Britain 
with  an  actual  revenue  of  forty  millions,  thirty  whereof 
were  enslaved. 

Hence  it  is  obvious,  that  debt,  so  far  from  being  either 
strength  or  credit,  is  a  diminution  of  both  ;  and  that  free- 
dom from  debt,  is  the  only  genuine  source  of  national 
strength  depending  on  revenue. 

England  and  France  are  rival  nations.  If  England  was 
bound  to  pay  to  France  the  whole  amount  of  the  annual  in- 
terest of  her  debt,  it  would  obviously  increase  the  strength 
and  credit  of  France,  and  diminish  those  of  England.  This 
proves,  that  it  is  the  receiver  and  not  the  payer,  who  obtains 
an  addition  of  strength  and  credit.  And  it  also  furnishes 
a  complete  illustration  of  the  effect  of  the  system  of  paper 
and  patronage,  upon  the  real  productive  interests  of  society. 
The  unproductive  but  subsisting  interests  of  this  system, 
and  the  productive  and  taxed  interests  of  society,  may  be 
called  natur?!  enemies,  with  more  justice  than  France  nm\ 


ARISTOCRACY..  45 

England.  If  the  payment  by  England  of  thirty  millions 
annually  to  France  would  subject  England  to  France,  will 
not  the  payment  by  the  productive  and  taxed  interests,  of 
the  same  sum  to  their  natural  enemy,  the  unproductive  in- 
terest, subject  them  also  to  their  natural  enemy  ?  This  de- 
monstrates, that  strength  is  gained  by  the  receiver,  and  not 
by  the  payer  ;  and  displays  the  certainty  with  which  the 
system  of  paper  and  patronage  will  subject  a  nation,  under 
pretence  of  enabling  it  to  defend  itself. 

Hereafter,  the  doctrine  of  anticipation  will  be  consi- 
dered :  but  this  machine  cannot  shake  onr  arguments  to 
prove  that  a  nation  is  weakened,  and  consequently  enslaved 
by  debt,  unless  the  power  of  anticipation  is  infinite  like  debt* 
and  increases  with  it ;  which  will  hardly  be  asserted. 

But  if  this  anticipating  resource,  did  naturally  swell 
with  debt,  still  an  indebted  nation,  would  be  in  a  state  of 
subjection.  New  anticipations  are  exclusively  governed  by 
old  anticipations ;  to  borrow,  recource  must  be  had  to  the 
monied  interest,  and  the  funds  or  old  anticipations,  united 
with  paper  corporations,  constitute  that  interest.  A  nation 
therefore  which  depends  upon  anticipation,  must  be  govern- 
ed by  that  interest  which  governs  anticipation  ;  so  that  it 
cannot  will  and  judge  for  itself,  like  a  poorer  nation,  which 
is  independent  of  anticipation. 

Thus  whilst  a  paper  system  pretends  to  make  a  nation 
rich  and  potent,  it  only  makes  a  minority  of  that  nation  rich 
and  potent,  at  the  expense  of  the  majority,  which  it  makes 
poor  and  impotent.  Wealth  makes  a  nation,  a  faction  or 
an  individual,  powerful ;  and  therefore  if  paper  systems 
extracted  the  wealth  they  accumulate  from  the  winds,  and 
not  from  property  and  labour,  they  would  still  he  inimical 
to  the  principles  of  every  constitution,  founded  in  the  idea 
of  national  will ;  because  the  subjection  of  a  nation  to  the 
will  of  individuals  or  factions,  is  an  invariable  effect  of  great 
accumulation  of  wealth ;  but  when  the  accumulation  of  a 
minority,  impoverishes  a  majority,  a  double  operation? 
doubly  rivets  this  subjection, 


*6  ARISTOCRACY. 

The  delusion  of  all  paper  projects  is  at  once  detected  by 
turning  upon  them  their  own  doetrine.  All  boast  of  doing 
good  to  a  nation.  Suppose  a  nation  was  to  decline  this  be- 
neficence, and  propose  to  reward  it,  by  doing  good  to  paper 
projects,  exactly  in  the  same  way  they  propose  to  benefit 
the  nation  ;  that  is,  by  taking  from  the  owners  of  stock, 
their  income,  and  consigning  over  to  them  the  taxes  and 
the  credit  attached  to  the  debtor,  with  the  blessing  of  a  pa- 
per circulation  ;  the  credulity  which  believes,  that  these 
institutions  do  really  impose  upon  nations  debt  and  taxes, 
direct  and  indirect,  from  motives  of  public  good,  would  be 
presently  cured  by  the  faltering  tongues,  the  wan  faces,  and 
the  distressing  lamentations,  which  a  proposition  for  this 
exchange  would  produce.  These  paper  projects  which  pre- 
tend to  be  blessings  to  nations,  would  be  depreeated  as 
ourses  by  themselves,  if  the  case  was  thus  altered. 

It  is  said  that  paper  systems  being  open  to  all,  are  not 
monopolies.  He  who  has  money,  may  buy  stock.  All  then 
is  fair,  as  every  man  (meaning  however  only  every  inonied 
man)  may  share  in  the  plunder. 

Every  man  may  enlist  in  an  army,  yet  an  army  may  en- 
clave a  nation.  A  monopoly  may  be  open  to  a  great  num- 
ber, yet  those  who  do  engage  in  it,  may  imbibe  the  spirit  of 
faction  ;  but  it  cannot  be  open  to  all,  because  no  interest, 
which  must  subsist  upon  a  nation,  can  consist  of  thai  nation; 
as  I  cannot  fatten  myself  by  eating  myself.  If  every  citi- 
zen should  go  into  an  army,  it  would  transform  that  array 
mto  the  nation  itself,  and  its  pay  and  subsistence  would 
cease ;  in  like  manner  the  profits  of  paper,  were  they  gene- 
rally or  universally  distributed,  would  cease  ;  because  each 
citizen  would  be  his  own  paymaster.  Had  the  objection 
been  as  true  in  practice  as  it  is  plausible  in  theory,  these 
answers  suffice  to  prove,  that  it  would  have  converted  pa- 
per aristocracies  into  paper  democracies. 

The  reason,  however,  for  this  apparent  common  power 
of  becoming  a  stockjobber,  consists  in  the  constant  necessity 
felt  for  recruits   by  every  species   of  aristocracy.    The 


AJftI9T0CRACY.  47 

Mamalukes  of  Egypt  have  sufficient  penetration  to  discover 
this.  No  individual,  nor  an  inconsiderable  number  of  indi- 
viduals, can  enslave  a  nation.  A  despot  raises  soldiers  bj 
bounties.  This  system  is  also  recruited  by  bounties.  The 
soldier  sometimes  deserts,  or  takes  part  with  the  nation, 
after  his  bounty  is  spent;  but  the  bounty  of  paper  systems 
is  so  contrived,  that  it  is  perpetually  going  on,  and  annually 
repeated  ;  so  that  the  aristocracy  of  an  oppressive  system, 
never  deserts  or  takes  part  with  the  nation,  as  the  army  of 
an  oppressive  prince  has  sometimes  done. 

Where  avarice  and  ambition  heat  up  for  recruits,  too 
many  are  prone  to  enlist.  Kings,  ministers,  lords  and  com- 
mons will  be  obliged  to  command  the  army,  and  share  in 
the  plunder,  or  submit  to  be  cashiered.  The  makers  and 
managers  of  aristocracy,  gamble  with  a  certainty  of  win- 
ning, for  a  stake  extorted  and  increased  by  themselves.  If 
they  deposit  their  penny,  they  draw  a  pound,  and  augment 
their  power.  The  system  of  paper  and  patronage,  freights 
annual  gallions  for  a  government  and  a  faction,  at  a  na- 
tional mine  called  industry ;  and  bestows  on  the  people  such 
blessings,  as  those  enjoy  who  dig  up  the  ores  of  Peru  and 
Mexico.  The  receivers  of  the  profit  drawn  from  this  mine, 
reap  wealth  and.  power ;  the  earners  reap  armies,  wars, 
taxes,  monopolies,  faction,  poverty  and  ten  hundred  millions 
of  debt.  This  is  au  English  picture.  America  hopes  that 
her  governors  and  citizens  are  neither  ambitious  nor  avari- 
cious, and  upon  this  solid  hope,  is  committing  the  custody 
of  her  liberty  to  the  same  system.  Oh !  America,  America, 
thou  art  the  truly  begotten  of  John  Bull !  It  is  not  proposed 
to  follow  this  system  throughout  its  deleterious  effects  upon 

morals  of  private  citizens.  But  if  it  is  capable  of  cor- 
rupting pubiick  officers,  or  government  itself,  a  remark  to 
exhibit  its  superior  malignity  over  the  aristocracies  of  the 
iirsi  and  second  ages,  cannot  be  suppressed.  The  manners 
and  principles  of  government,  are  objects  of  imitation,  and 
influence  national  character.    The  aristocracy  of  the  first 

\  exhibited  sanctity,  veneration  for  the  Gods,  and  moral 


48  AR1S  TOCRA.C  X\ 

virtues,  to  the  publiek  view;  not  unuseful  in  their  operation, 
and  particularly  so  in  times  of  ignorance;  that  of  the  se- 
cond, the  virtues  of  generosity,  honour  and  bravery,  not 
unuseful  in  softening  barbarism  into  civilization,  by  the 
magnanimity  and  even  the  folly  of  chivalry  :  but  w  hat  vir- 
tues for  imitation  appear  in  the  aristocracy  of  the  present 
age  ?  Avarice  and  ambition  being  its  whole  soul,  what  pri- 
vate morals  will  it  infuse,  and  what  national  character 
will  it  create?  It  subsists  by  usurpation,  deceit  and  oppres- 
sion. A  consciousness  of  fraud,  impels  it  towards  perpetra- 
tion. By  ever  affecting,  and  never  practising  sincerity,  it 
teaches  a  perpetual  fear  of  treachery,  and  a  perpetual  effort 
to  insnare.  Its  end  is  distrust  and  fraud,  which  convert  the 
earth  into  a  scene  of  ambuscade,  man  against  man.  Its 
acquisitions  inflict  misery,  without  bestovi  'ng  happiness  ; 
because  they  can  only  feed  a  rapacity  which  can  never  he 
satisfied,  and  a  luxury  which  cannot  suppress  remorse. 
In  relation  to  private  people,  this  system  may  only  encour- 
age idleness,  teach  swindling,  ruin  individuals,  and  destroy 
morals ;  but  allied  to  a  government,  it  presents  a  policy  of 
such  unrivalled  malignity,  as  only  to  be  expressed  by  say- 
ing, "  the  government  is  a  speculator  upon  the  liberty  and 
property  of  the  nation." 

A  pamphlet  written  by  Doctor  Johnson,  to  disprove  the 
principles  which  produced  the  independence  of  America, 
eomprises  in  its  title,  "taxation  no  slavery,"  the  whole  ar- 
gument to  which  the  system  of  paper  and  patronage,  finally 
flees  for  refuge.  Taxation  is  not  liberty.  But  the  distinc- 
tion is  obvious.  It  lies  plainly  between  taxes  imposed  for 
the  benefit  of  a  nation,  or  for  the  benefit  of  a  minority ;  be- 
tween those  designed  to  defend,  or  to  enslave.  Taxation  to 
enrich  a  minority  or  aristocracy,  is  robbery ;  to  endow  it 
gradually  with  power,  treason. 

It  is  strange,  that  it  is  so  difficult  to  distinguish  befweeu 
honest  and  fraudulent  taxes,  imposed  hy  a  minor  interest  on 
the  publiek  interest,  and  so  easy  to  discern  the  real  desigsj 
r>f  tax**s  imposed  by  one  nation  upon  another.   In  the  latter 


ease,  monopoly  is  clearly  understood  to  be  an  indirect  mode 
of  taxation.  The  United  States  know,  that  the  monopoly 
of  their  commerce  by  the  English,  was  a  tribute  ;  but  they 
refuse  to  know,  that  the  monopoly  of  a  circulating  medium 
by  banking,  is  also  a  tribute.  Useless  offices,  established 
here  by  the  English  government,  were  clearly  perceived  to 
be  a  tribute  :  but  useless  offices  established  by  our  own  go- 
vernment are  denied  to  be  so.  Pretexts  for  taxation  invent- 
ed by  England,  were  detected  by  dullness  herself ;  but  pre- 
texts invented  at  home,  seem  to  deceive  the  keenest  pene- 
tration. 

And  xet  correct  reasoning  must  conclude,  that  if  one 
nation,  by  means  of  a  monopoly,  can  impoverish  another ; 
a  combination  or  corporate  body,  may  also  impoverish  the 
rest  of  a  nation,  by  the  same  means.  That  a  monopoly 
which  enriches,  will  correspondently  impoverish,  unless  it 
produces  or  creates ;  that  if  Britain  possessed  the  privilege 
of  furnishing  America  with  bank  paper,  at  the  annual  profit 
of  eight  per  centum,  it  would  have  constituted  a  tax,  en- 
riching Britain  and  impoverishing  America — co-extensively 
with  her  former  commercial  monopoly  ;  that  if  this  privi- 
lege would  have  enriched  the  English  at  our  expense,  it 
must  also  equally  enrich  stockholders,  at  the  expense  of 
those  who  are  not  stockholders  ;  that  if  national  indigence 
is  gradually  produced  by  a  subjection  to  a  foreign  monopoly, 
the  indigence  of  the  mass  of  a  nation,  will  be  produced  by  a 
domestick  monopoly,  profitable,  but  unproductive ;  and  that 
if  a  nation  has  a  moral  right  to  liberate  itself  from  an  indi- 
rect tribute  to  another  nation,  it  has  also  a  moral  right  to 
liberate  itself  from  a  similar  tribute  to  a  domestick  combi- 
nation ,•  unless  it  is  a  moral  duty  heroically  to  withstand 
evils  imposed  by  foreigners,  for  the  purpose  of  penitentially 
embracing  them  when  imposed  by  natives.  If  these  effects 
of  the  contemplated  monopoly  are  true,  they  terminate 
inevitably  in  the  aristocracy  of  the  third  age. 

Doctor  Johnson's  maxim  could  never  convince  us,  that 
taxation  by  banking,  funding  systems.,  protecting  duties  or 

8 


fiO  ARISTOCRACY, 

p-atronage,  was  no  slavery,  if  the  profits  arising  from  such 
institutions  were  received  by  English  capitalists  :  does  the 
substitution  of  a  different  receiver,  alter  the  case  ?  If  not? 
"  taxation"  is  "  slavery,"  however  moderate  the  tax  may 
be,  when  the  object  of  the  tax  is  not  the  publick  benefit,  but 
to  enrich  and  impoverish  individuals,  and  thereby  under- 
mine the  principles  necessary  to  preserve  national  liberty. 

As  to  oppressive  taxation,  there  are  few  cases  capable 
of  justifying  it ;  and  none,  those  excepted,  wherein  it  repels 
a  greater  evil  than  itself.  Admit  that  it  expels  tyranny  ; 
it  is  itself  a  tyrant.  Admit  that  tyranny  will  obliterate  mo- 
ral virtues*  and  replenish  the  mind  with  vices  ;  oppressive 
taxation  will  do  it  also.  A  nation  oppressed  by  taxes,  can 
never  be  generous,  benevolent  or  enlightened.  If  the  lion 
was  burdened  like  the  ass,  he  would  presently  become  cow- 
ardly, and  stupid.  But  oppressive  taxation,  by  law  and 
monopoly,  direct  and  indirect,  to  create  or  sustain  the  sys- 
tem of  paper  and  patronage,  proposes  nothing  retributory 
for  reducing  a  people  to  the  condition  of  asses,  except  an 
aristocracy  to  provide  for  them  a  succession  of  burdens. 

Hereditary  aristocracy,  supported  by  perpetuities,  is 
preferable  to  a  paper  and  patronage  aristocracy,  because 
its  taxation  would  be  less  oppressive,  since  its  landed  estate 
would  furnish  it  with  opulence  and  power ;  whereas  eternal 
and  oppressive  taxation  is  necessary  to  supply  the  aristo- 
cracy of  paper  and  patronage,  with  these  vital  qualities. 

As  a  government  is  melted  by  law,  into  the  aristocracy 
of  the  third  age,  the  ligaments  which  united  it  with  the  na- 
tion, are  gradually  broken ;  and  a  consciousness  of  ttfis, 
gradually  drives  the  government,  for  defending  itself  against 
the  people,  into  war,  armies,  corruption,  debt,  charters, 
bounties,  and  every  species  of  patronage  for  which  a  pre- 
text can  be  invented ;  and  a  sinking  fund  cloaks  its  drift,  a? 
proclamation* 'did  that  of  Lewis  the  fourteenth,  declaring- 
-vtously  toll's  inundating  Europe  with  Christian  Woc«l 
his  anxiety  to  invent  its  eJfusion. 


AKISTOUHACY.    ,  oi 

When  this  process  is  managed  by  a  government,  it 
proves  that  the  government  is  welded  to  that  interest  which 
the  process  advances  ;  it  substantially  destroys  the  English 
theory ;  divides  a  nation  into  two  interests,  and  cooks  one 
in  the  modes  most  delicious  to  the  appetite  of  the  other 
Such  is  the  essential  evil  of  every  species  of  bad  govern- 
ment,  by  whatever  name  distinguished.  A  particular  inte- 
rest  thus  quartered  upon  the  general  interest,  has  never 
failed  to  harrass  a  nation  :  a  government  is  good,  when  it 
is  coupled  to  the  general  interest ;  and  bad,  when  it  is  cou- 
pled to  a  particular  interest  of  any  kind,  whether  military, 
hierarchical,  feudal,  or  stock. 

It  is  admitted  by  Mr.  Adams,  that  an  order  of  men  hav- 
ing great  wealth,  will  acquire  a  correspondent  degree  of 
power-  If  this  wealth  consists  of  land,  it  may  be  measured 
and  balanced.  Suppose  a  nation  should  establish  a  landed 
nobility,  and  should  conclude  that  the  possession  of  one 
third  of  the  lands,  would  confer  a  share  of  wealth  on  this 
order  so  unequal,  as  to  make  it  unmanageable,  and  of  course 
despotick  ;  this  nation  might  restrict  their  landed  order  to 
one  fourth  of  all  the  lands  in  the  state,  concluding  that  the 
three  fourths  divided  among  all  other  orders,  might  suffice 
to  check  the  power  arising  from  condensing  one  fourth  in 
one  interest.  This  is  what  Lord  Shaftsbury  means  by  iC  a 
balance  of  property."  But  if  an  order  of  paper  and  patron 
age  is  erected,  (remember  that  nothing  makes  an  order  but 
one  interest,)  in  what  manner  is  its  power  to  be  checked  by 
a  balance  of  property  ?  The  wealth  of  paper  and  patronage 
is  daily  growing,  wherefore  it  cannot  be  measured  or  limit 
ed  ;  it  is  therefore  impossible  to  balance  it ;  and  yet  without 
this  balance  of  property,  the  power  which  clings  to  wealth, 
will  destroy  liberty,  even  in  the  opinion  of  the  English  the- 
orists. According  to  Mr.  Adams's  principles,  this  syllo- 
gism presents  itself.  Exorbitant  wealth  will  obtain  a  degree 
of  power  dangerous  to  society,  if  not  cheeked  or  balanced  ; 
paper  systems  will  bestow  exorbitant  wealth,  to  check 


62  ARISTOCRACY. 

balance  which,  no  means  have  been  invented;  therefore, 
paper  systems  are  dangerous  to  society. 

Not  land,  but  its  profit,  constitutes  wealth  and  power. 
By  taxation,  the  profit  arising  from  land  may  be  apportion- 
ed between  the  possession,  and  the  system  of  paper  and 
patronage ;  or  it  may  be  wholly  transferred  to  the  system. 
If  then  an  order,  such  as  the  late  nobility  and  clergy  of 
France,  by  an  income  consisting  of  the  profit  of  one  third  of 
the  lands  of  France,  attracted  a  degree  of  power  oppressive 
to  the  nation ;  does  it  not  evidently  follow,  whenever  the 
system  of  paper  and  patronage,  has  acquired  one  third  of 
the  profit  produced  by  all  the  lands  of  a  nation,  that  it  will 
also  acquire  the  oppressive  degree  of  power,  interwoven 
with  that  degree  of  wealth  ? 

Although  I  am  considering  this  system  in  relation  to 
Britain,  an  ignorance  of  any  rule  by  which  to  compute  the 
profit  of  all  the  land  of  that  island,  compels  me  to  refer  to 
America  for  an  illustration  of  the  last  observation. 

All  the  exports  from  the  United  States,  may  probably 
amount  to  the  whole  profit  yielded  by  land,  allowing  subsist- 
ence to  the  possessors,  which  forms  no  part  of  rent  or  pro- 
fit. This  amount  has  never  extended  to  sixty  millions  of 
dollars  annually,  yet  for  the  purpose  of  including  the  whole, 
we  will  estimate  the  annual  profit  of  land  at  that  sum.  If 
the  interest  of  paper  and  patronage  received  twelve  milli- 
ons annually  from  direct  taxation,  and  eight  millions  annu- 
ally from  indirect,  by  bounties  and  the  circulation  of  bank 
paper,  then  this  system  would  possess  that  degree  of  wealth, 
which  rendered  the  former  civil  and  religious  nobility  of 
France,  dangerous  and  oppressive  ;  and  it  would  be  obvioue, 
that  a  system,  which  had  so  rapidly  absorbed  one  third  of 
the  profit  of  the  land  in  the  United  States,  possessed  a  capa- 
city of  extending  that  third  to  a  moiety,  or  even  beyond  a 
moiety,  as  in  England  ;  and  that  as  no  mode  of  collecting  a 
dansrerous  decree  of  wealth  into  one  interest,  with  equal 
rapidity,  had  ever  yet  appeared,  there  is  none  so  alarming 
to  a  nation,  or  which  so  loudly  demanded  the  application  of 


ABI9T0CRACY.  5S 

Mr.  Adams's  or  Lord  Shaftsbury's  idea  of  a  balance  of 
property. 

To  display  the  celerity  with  which  this  system  collects 
wealth,  and  changes  forms  of  government,  it  is  only  neces- 
sary to  recollect,  that  the  mode  of  monopolizing  wealth  by 
conquest,  required  above  sis  hundred  years  to  destroy  the 
Roman  Republick ;  whereas  the  system  of  paper  and  patron- 
age, by  changing  the  nature  of  the  English  government  m 
less  than  a  century,  has  verified  the  savage  opinion,  that 
certain  conjurers  by  hieroglyphical  representations,  could 
take  away  life  ;  it  transfers  property  and  kills  governments 
by  a  like  graphical  art.  It  paints  as  many  pounds  or  dol- 
lars upon  paper  as  it  pleases,  which  transfers  money  and 
power  from  the  holders  of  land  and  industry,  to  the  holders 
of  the  paper.  Let  casuists  decide  between  the  morality  of 
taking  away  life  in  the  mode  of  the  Indian  conjurer,  and  ta- 
king away  property  and  liberty  in  the  mode  of  the  papei 
conjurer. 

Is  it  on  account  of  this  sorcery,  that  the  aristocracy  of 
the  third  age  considers  painting  as  one  of  the  line  aits,  and 
devotes  its  whole  philosophy  to  a  taste  for  this  species  of  it  i 
The  aristocracies  of  superstition  and  ennobled  orders,  by 
cultivating  the  circle  of  the  sciences,  checked  their  passions, 
and  humanized  their  rule  ;  this  cultivates  a  science  to  take 
away  the  property  of  its  friends,  like  that  used  by  a  savage 
to  take  away  the  life  of  his  foe.  The  savage  passion  of 
vengeance  is  however  appeased,  by  the  death  of  the  father, 
and  thirsts  not  for  the  blood  of  the  son ;  but  the  passion 
which  seeks  property  by  hieroglyphical  representation,  i? 
never  appeased,  and  what  it  takes  from  one  generation,  on 
ly  whets  its  malignity  towards  the  next.  Is  this  sorcery  re- 
ally preferable  to  the  ancient  modes  of  aristocracy  ? 

It  is  universally  agreed  that  power  is  attracted  by  wealth. 
Ten  hundred  millions  of  pounds  sterling,  being  a  great  sum 
of  wealth,  must  therefore  attract  some  share  of  power  to 
the  paper  interest  of  England.  Whatever  it  attracts  was 
not  bestowed  by  the  English  form  of  government,  and  is  of 


£fe  ARISTOCRACY. 

course  an  unconstitutional  and  revolutionary  acquisition. 
This  must  be  admitted,  or  it  must  be  proved,  tbat  great 
wealth  acquired  by  a  particular  interest,  does  not  attract 
power.  If  the  system  of  paper  and  patronage,  will  destroy 
the  principles  of  limited  monarchy  without  changing  its 
forms,  either  by  amalgamating  king,  lords  and  commons, 
or  by  creating  a  new  power,  may  it  not  also  destroy  the 
principles  of  a  republican  government,  and  leave  its  form 
stiso  standing  ? 

United  interests,  or  an  aggregation  of  wealth  by  one  in- 
terest, are  equally  at  enmity  with  Mr.  Adams's  system  of  a 
balance  of  power  and  property  ;  and  if  the  system  of  paper 
md  patronage  produces  both  or  either,  his  cannot  exist  a 
moment  in  communion  with  that.     An  unconquerable  enmi- 
ty in  theory  and  principle,  would  crown  an  attempt  to  fos 
cer  both  these  systems,  with  several  ludicrous  inconsisten- 
cies.    Mr.  Adams's  system  requires  an  illustrious,  high- 
spirited,  enlightened,  virtuous  and  wealthy  house  of  Lords; 
and  the  system  of  paper  and  patronage  would  fill  it  with  the 
spawn  of  stockjobbing  and  corruption.      How  long  will  it 
require  to  purge  off  the  contaminations  of  the  father  before 
the  son  will  be  well  born  ?  Or  will  not  the  system  of  paper 
and  patronage   recontaminate  faster,  than  the  generative 
process  can  purify,   so  as  to  prevent  Mr.  Adams  from  ever 
collecting  the  neeessary  qualities  in  his  noble  senate  ?  With- 
out superior  qualities,   his  system  does  not  contend  for  su- 
perior distinction ;  but  it  is  notorious  that  the  system  of  pa- 
per and  patronage  peoples  the  two  houses  of  parliament  in 
England,  and  so  completely  moulds  their  character,  that  all 
sorts  of  men,  make  the  same  sort  of  lords  and  commons. 

We  may  conceive  the  manner  in  which  the  aristocracy 
of  the  third  age  is  consolidated  with  a  government,  by  sup- 
posing the  territory  to  be  represented  by  a  multitude  of  land- 
scapes, which  the  government  could  transfer  with  the  lands 
they  represented,  just  as  it  transfers  wealth  by  pictures  of 
money.  Would  not  the  individuals  who  administered  the 
government,  take  to  themselves  some  of  these  landscapes  ? 


V 

tttlSTOCRACY.  o. 


Would  they  not  purchase  accomplices  and  protectors  w  itta 
others  ?  and  would  not  this  unjust  mode  of  taking  awav 
lands,  presently  generate  a  centre  of  pov/er  and  interest,  in- 
finitely more  oppressive  than  Turgot's  centre,  so  justly  cen- 
sured by  Mr.  Adams  ? 

If  the  system  of  paper  and  patronage  has  made  any  im- 
pression  upon  the  English  theory,  it  behoved  Mr,  Adams 
accurately  to  have  explained  this  impression,  before  he  made 
use  of  that  theory  in  his  defence  of  the  American  constitu- 
tions- Without  this  explanation,  we  are  at  a  loss  to  know 
whether  the  object  of  his  reference  and  admiration  is  the 
ancient  theory  or  modern  practice  :  Whether  it  is  the  king, 
lords  and  commons  of  the  fourteenth  or  of  the  eighteenth 
century. 

Had  this  explanation  appeared,  his  arguments  would 
have  been  better  understood,  and  the  practicability  of  his 
system  more  easily  estimated  ;  nor  could  he  possibly  have 
escaped  some  coincidence  of  opinion  with  the  principles  of 
this  essay,  except  by  proving  that  the  system  of  paper  and 
patronage  had  made  no  impression  on  the  English  theory. 
Otherwise,  by  applauding  the  old  theory,  he  must  have  co- 
incided in  a  disapprobation  of  the  new  system  of  paper  and 
patronage,  because  it  corrupts  this  old  theory  $  or  if  lie  ap- 
plauded the  new  system,  he  must  have  condemned  the  old 
theory  destroyed  by  it.  He  could  not  have  justified  the  new 
system  of  paper  and  patronage,  without  surrendering  his 
idea  of  checks  and  balances,  or  discovering  checks  and  ba- 
lances in  this  new  system. 

The  checks  and  balances  of  the  old  English  theory  and 
the  new  English  system,  seem  to  have  little  or  no  relation 
to  each  other.  The  former  consisted  of  king,  lords  and 
commons.  The  two  first  were  weights,  hy  reason  of  do- 
mains, manors,  prerogatives  and  tenures ;  the  last,  from  the 
confidence  of  the  people  attracted  by  responsibility.  These 
weights  or  checks  and  balances,  no  longer  exist.  Bidders 
for  loans  and  dealers  in  omnium,  constitute  the  most  pon- 
derous weight  next  to  the  king,  and  the  vibrations  of  stocfc 


i),0  AK13T0CRACY. 

possess  ten  fold  the  power  of  the  house  of  lords.  The 
nearest  approach  towards  the  idea  of  cheeks  and  halances 
made  by  the  invention  of  paper  and  patronage,  is  by  divi- 
ding a  nation  into  two  weights,  one  consisting  of  the  gov- 
ernment, stockjobbers  and  office  holders  j  the  other  of  the 
people.  It  places  pecuniary  voraciousness  in  one  scale,  and 
Promethean  patience  in  the  other  ;  and  with  these  weights, 
produces  a  political  system,  as  wide  from  one  founded  in  a 
balance  among  kings,  lords  and  commons,  according  to  Mr. 
Adams's  explanation  of  it,  as  can  be  imagined. 

Without  discriminating  between  the  English  theory, 
unattended  by  the  system  of  paper  and  patronage,  or  influ- 
enced by  it,  Mr.  Adams  arranges  the  Roman,  Lacedemo- 
nian, and  other  governments,  in  the  class  of  mixed  forms, 
together  with  the  English  j  as  being  of  a  similar  nature, 
and  yielding  similar  inferences.  If  from  this  alliance,  we 
are  compelled  for  the  sake  of  maintaining  the  consistency 
of  Mr.  Adams's  arguments,  to  consider  him  as  referring  to 
the  old  English  theory,  the  old  practice,  and  the  old  balances, 
it  follows,  that  his  whole  political  system  is  built  with  ma- 
terials which  have  vanished  ;  and  that  it  is  as  imaginary 
and  romantick  gravely  to  talk  of  patricians,  plebeians,  and 
feudal,  barons  at  this  day,  as  it  would  be  to  propose  the 
restoration  of  oracles,  or  the  revival  of  chivalry. 

To  bring  this  argument  within  the  full  view  of  the  rea- 
der, was  one  design  for  devoting  so  much  time  to  the  ex- 
planation of  the  new  English  system  of  paper  and  patronage ; 
because,  if  it  is  proved,  that  this  has  made  a  material  im- 
pression upon  the  balances  of  the  old  theory,  it  follows,  that 
the  English  form  of  government  lias  undergone  a  revolu- 
tion ;  that  the  new  system  of  paper  and  patronage,  corrupts 
and  destroys  the  old  system  of  cheeks  and  balances  ;  that  it 
the  American  forms  of  government  are,  as  Mr.  Adams 
asserts,  founded  in  the  old  theory  of  cheeks  and  balances, 
they  are  exposed  to  destruction  by  this  new  foe,  which  has 
evinced  its  power  over  that  old  theory,  by  undermining  u 
in  England:    that  Mr.  Adams":,  argument  is  eminei< 


ARISTOCRACY.  57 

defective,  in  having  overlooked  the  destroyer  of  his  favour- 
ite theory  of  checks  and  balances ;  and  that  this  new  enemy 
to  human  liberty  must  be  met  by  some  other  form  of  govern- 
ment ;  that  composed  of  checks  and  balances  modified 
according  to  the  old  theory,  having  become  its  victim,  after 
a  feeble  resistance. 

To  prove  that  the  new  English  practice  is  inconsistent 
with  the  old  English  theory,  let  us  consider  the  declaration 
of  Mr.  Adams,  "  that  among  the  ancient  forms  of  govern- 
ment, the  Lacedemonian  approached  nearest  to  the  Eng- 
lish," wherefore  he  bestows  on  it  particular  commenda- 
tions. Our  evidence  results  from  a  comparison  between 
the  present  English  form  of  government  and  the  Lacede 
monian. 

By  one,  money  was  despised;  of  the  other,  it  is  the  God. 
One  inspired  heroism  ;  the  other  avarice.  One  taught  no- 
bles to  fight  for  their  country  ;  the  other,  to  become  the 
sycophants  of  a  king.  In  one,  the  legislature  controlled 
two  kings ;  in  the  other,  one  king  corrupts  two  legislative 
bodies.  One  inspired  a  love  of  country  ;  the  other,  a  deri- 
sion of  patriotism.  One  taught  frugality  and  temperance  ; 
the  other,  profusion  and  luxury.  In  short,  one  disclosed 
the  few  virtues  natural  to  the  aristocracies  of  the  first  and 
second  ages ;  the  other,  all  the  vices  natural  to  the  arisLo- 
cracy  of  the  third. 

That  forms  of  government  mould  manners,  will  not  be 
denied;  and  as  the  manners  of  the  Spartans  and  tlie  modern 
English,  bear  no  similarity  to  eaeh  other,  it  follows  that 
the  principles  of  their  governments  were  also  essentially  dif- 
ferent. To  assert,  that  the  principles  were  the  same,  but 
the  elfects  different,  would  destroy  the  only  solid  ground  of 
reasoning,  namely,  that  similar  causes  will  produce  similar 
effects  ;  and  deprive  us  of  the  entire  motive  for  a  prefer- 
ence between  forms  of  government. 

If  this  difference  exists,  between  the  principles  and  man- 
ners of  the  Spartans  and  the  modern  English,  the  resem- 
blance betweenthe  English  and  Spartan  governments  seen 

9 


at  ARISTOCRACY. 

by  Mr.  Adams,  must  have  arisen  from  a  comparison  of  the 
Spartan,  not  with  the  present  English  government,  because 
between  these  there  is  no  resemblance,  hut  with  that  which 
Was  compounded  of  an  hierarchy  rendered  powerful  by  su- 
perstition, of  an  honest  legislature,  and  of  a  frugal,  warlike 
and  hardy  nobility,  able  to  control  and  punish  kings. 

By  classing  the  English  with  the  Spartan,  and  other 
mixed  forms  of  government,  it  is  obvious  that  Mr.  Adam's, 
throughout  his  book,  has  only  considered  that  era  of  the 
English  government,  in  which  its  form  had  some  resem- 
Uanee  to  the  ancient  governments  with  which  he  compares 
it ;  and  that  he  has  wholly  omitted  to  consider  the  present 
English  aristocracy  of  paper  and  patronage,  or  the  present 
English  government;  since  that,  neither  in  its  causes  or 
effects,  has  any  resemblance  to  a  single  ancient  form  of 
government,  from  which  Mr.  Adams  has  drawn  his  illus- 
trations. 

Throughout  his  system,  Mr.  Adams  deduces  his  aristo- 
cracy from  oracles,  a  supposed  descent  from  the  Gods,  or 
a  superiority  of  virtue  and  talents;  and  his  essential  effort 
is  to  ascertain  the  best  mode  of  checking  it.  These  are  the 
aristocracies  of  the  first  and  second  ages;  and  if  his  mode 
of  checking  them  is  well  contrived,  it  might  have  been  use- 
ful to  Lycurgus  and  Solon,  to  the  Italian  republicks,  and  to 
nations  of  the  ancient  and  middle  ages.  But  would  it  there- 
fore follow,  that  the  same  check  or  balance  will  secure  the 
liberty  of  nations  against  the  modern  mode  of  invading  it. 
"Will  his  system  check  corruption,  restrain  patronage,  con- 
trol armies,  and  limit  the  draughts  of  avarice  upon  national 
wealth  and  labour  ?  Behold  England,  if  his  system  exists 
there,  and  answer  the  question.  If  it  does  not  exist  there, 
it  follows,  that  Mr.  Adams's  system  is  irrelative  to  the 
existing  case,  or  to  the  subject  which  he  professed  to  consi- 
der, and  which  I  profess  to  consider  ;  namely,  the  nature 
of  the  existing  American  and  English  forms  of  government, 
In  drawing  his  comparison,  Mr.  Adams  refers  to  a  landed 
aristocracy;  I  refer  to  an  aristocracy  of  paper  and  patron- 


ARISTOCRACY.  6& 

age.     Let  us  endeavour  to  discover  which  of  us  is  fencing 
with  a  shadow. 

Perhaps  the  discovery  may  be  made  by  the  following 
questions.  Would  a  dissertation  upon  the  system  of  paper 
and  patronage,  have  explained  Mr.  Adams's  system  of 
checks  and  balances  to  the  people  of  Greece  ?  If  not,  can  a 
dissertation  upon  checks  and  balances,  explain  the  effects 
of  a  system  of  paper  and  patronage  to  the  present  age  I 
Suppose  an  author  in  the  fifteenth  century,  had  proved  the 
system  of  paper  and  patronage  to  be  right,  and  inferred, 
that  the  feudal  aristocracy,  or  the  then  existing  English 
government,  was  therefore  the  best  in  the  world  ;  would  it 
not  have  been  precisely  analogous  to  an  inference,  that  the 
now  existing  English  government,  under  the  system  of  pa- 
per and  patronage,  is  also  proved  to  be  the  best  form  in  the 
world,  by  proving  the  feudal  system  of  the  fifteenth  centu- 
ry to  have  been  so?  In  fact,  we  all  see  a  distinction  between 
the  English  governments  of  the  fifteenth  and  the  eighteenth 
centuries  :  where  does  it  lie,  except  between  the  systems  of 
ohecks  and  balances,  and  of  paper  and  patronage  ?  One  is 
the  feudal,  the  other  the  monied  aristocracy.  For  which 
does  Mr.  Adams  contend  ?  It  would  be  a  whimsical  event, 
if  the  landed  interest  of  the  United  States,  should  be  induc- 
ed by  Mr.  Adams's  compliments  to  the  landed  aristocracy 
of  the  second  age,  to  erect  the  paper  aristocracy  of  the 
third.  That  by  being  convinced  of  its  own  natural  right  to 
be  a  master,  it  should  be  induced  to  become  a  slave.  And 
that  the  praises  bestowed  on  its  own  virtues,  should  make 
it  blind  to  the  vices  of  corruption  and  avarice*  nourished  by 
the  aristocracy  of  paper  and  patronage.  Will  it  be  just  t© 
punish  a  wish  to  erect  a  landed  aristocracy,  by  making  the 
landed  interest  a  dupe  and  a  victim  ?  If  so,  Mr.  Adams's 
dissertation  may  have  the  merit  of  an  avenger.  For  it  will 
hereafter  be  shewn,  that  the  English  system,  though  it  ifc 
able  to  introduce  into  the  United  States,  the  aristocracy  of 
paper  and  patronage,  is  unable  to  introduce  a  landed  aristo- 
cracy; and  that  the  lauded  interest  has  no  alternative, 


60  ARISTOCRACY. 

under  our  circumstances,  but  that  of  supporting  an  equal, 
free  government,  or  becoming  a  slave  to  the  system  of  paper 
and  patronage.  Where  indeed  could  we  find  an  interest, 
for  the  landed  interest  of  the  United  States  to  mount  in  the 
form  of  an  aristocracy  ? 

Not  less  whimsical  would  it  be,  if  the  system  of  paper 
and  patronage,  which  has  substantially  destroyed  a  landed 
aristocracy  in  England,  should  create  one  here ;  particu- 
larly if  our  form  of  government  (as  Mr.  Adams  believes)  is 
similar  to  the  English,  which  has  proved  either  a  feeble 
foe  or  a  convenient  instrument  to  a  monied  aristocracv. 

Hereafter,  when  our  constitution  is  considered,  the  com- 
petency of  its  security  against  the  aristocracy  of  paper  and 
patronage,  or  that  of  the  present  age,  will  be  computed  ; 
and  then  it  is  not  meant  to  shrink  from  the  consideration  of 
this  species  of  aristocracy,  in  reference  to  the  United 
States ;  on  the  contrary,  an  effort  will  be  made  to  place  it  in 
several  points  of  view,  inadmissible,  whilst  considering  it 
in  relation  to  England. 

At  present,  supposing  that  the  paper  and  patronage 
system  of  England,  is  a  modern  political  power  of  vast 
force  ;  that  it  has  corrupted  or  supplanted  the  old  English 
form  of  government  j  that  its  oppressions  overspread  the 
land  -,  that  its  principles  arc  vicious,  and  its  designs  fraudu- 
lent; we  will  proceed  to  inquire  what  ought  to  be  done. 

Superstition  and  noble  orders  were  defended  by  the 
strongest  sanctions  within  the  scope  of  human  invention. 
Penalties,  temporal  and  eternal ;  splendour,  pomp  and  ho- 
nour j  united  to  terrify,  to  dazzle,  to  awe  and  to  flatter  the 
human  mind  :  and  the  real  or  external  virtues  of  charity 
and  meekness,  hospitality  and  nobleness  of  mind,  induced 
some  to  love  that,  which  most  hated,  and  all  feared.  Yet 
the  intellect  of  the  last  age  pierced  through  the  delusions, 
behind  which  the  oppressions  of  hierarchy  and  nobility  had 
taken  shelter. 

We  pity  the  ancients  for  their  dullness  in  discovering 
oppressions.,  so  clearly  seen  by  ourselves  mow  that  they  are 


ARISTOCRACY.  61 

exploded.  We  moderns  ;  we  enlightened  Americans ;  we 
who  have  abolished  hierarchy  and  title ;  and  we  who  are 
submitting  to  be  taxed  and  enslaved  by  patronage  and  paper, 
without  being  deluded  or  terrified  by  the  promise  of  heaven, 
the  denunciation  of  hell,  the  penalties  of  law,  the- brilliancy 
and  generosity  of  nobility,  or  the  pageantry  and  charity  of 
superstition. 

A  spell  is  put  upon  our  understandings  by  the  words 
*(  publick  faith  and  national  credit,"  which  fascinates  us 
into  an  opinion,  that  fraud,  corruption  and  oppression,  con- 
stitute national  credit ;  and  debt  and  slavery,  publick  faith, 
This  delusion  of  the  aristocracy  of  the  present  age,  is  not 
less  apparent,  than  the  ancient  divinity  of  kings,  and  jet  it 
required  the  labours  of  Locke  and  Sidney  to  detect  that 
ridiculous  imposture. 

Publick  faith  is  made  with  great  solemnity  to  mount 
the  rostrum,  and  to  pronounce  the  following  lecture  : 

"  Law  enacted  for  the  benefit  of  a  nation,  is  repealable  ; 
"  but  law  enacted  for  the  benefit  of  individuals,  though  op- 
*•  pressive  to  a  nation,  is  a  charter,  and  irrepealable.  The 
«  existing  generation  is  under  the  tutelage  of  all  past  gene- 
"  rations,  and  must  rely  upon  the  responsibility  of  the  grave 
«  for  the  preservation  of  its  liberty.  Posterity,  being  bound 
"  by  the  contracts  of  its  ancestry,  in  every  case  which  di- 
"  minishes  its  rights,  man  is  daily  growing  less  free  hj  a 
"  doctrine  which  never  increases  them,  A  government 
"  intrusted  with  the  administration  of  publick  affairs  for 
"  the  good  of  a  nation,  has  a  right  to  deed  away  that  nation 
"  for  the  good  of  itself  or  its  partisans,  by  law  charter?,  for 
"  monopolies  or  sinecures ;  and  posterity  is  bound  by  these 
"  deeds.  But  although  an  existing -•generation  can  rcvver 
«*  reassume  the  liberty  or  property  held  by  its  ancestor,  it 
"  may  recompence  itself  by  abridging  or  abolishing  the 
"  rights  of  its  descendant/' 

Such  is  the  doctrine  which  has  prevented  the  eye  of  in- 
vestigation from  penetrating  the  recesses  of  the  aristocracy 
of  the  present  age.     It  simply  offers  the   consolation  of 


S2  ARISTOCRACY. 

softening  injuries  to  ourselves  by  adding  to  the  wretched- 
ness of  our  descendants.  By  this  artifice,  (the  offspring  of 
interest  and  cunning,)  whenever  men  cut  off  their  shackles 
with  the  sword,  they  are  riveted  on  again  by  the  pen.  A 
successful  war,  to  avenge  a  small  and  temporary  injury,  is 
made  to  gain  a  great  and  lasting  calamity.  Victory  over 
enemies  is  followed  by  defeat  from  friends.  And  an  enemy 
destroyed  abroad,  is  only  the  head  of  an  hydra,  which  pro- 
duces two  at  home.  This  is  not  exaggeration,  if  the  idea 
of  the  aristocracy  of  paper  and  patronage  is  not  chimerical. 
And  thence  occur  these  curious  questions  :  Can  the  United 
States  kill  one  Englishman  or  Frenchman,  without  convert- 
ing two  at  least  of  their  own  citizens,  into  members  of  this 
aristocracy  ?  Which  would  be  most  dangerous  and  burden- 
some to  the  union,  one  of  these  foreigners  abroad,  or  two  of 
these  aristocrats  at  home  ? 

The  best  argument  in  favour  of  the  mortgage  of  a  nation 
to  a  faction,  is,  that  it  is  a  purchase  ;  an  argument  howe- 
ver, which  does  not  extend  to  the  family  of  law  charters  in 
general.  A  few  of  a  nation,  have  bought  the  nation.  Csesar 
hy  plunder  and  rapine,  amassed  the  means  of  buying  or 
corrupting  the  Roman  government ;  was  his  title  to  despo- 
tism over  the  Roman  people  therefore  sound  ?  If  Jugnrtha 
had  been  rich  enough  to  buy  Rome,  ought  the  nation  to 
have  submitted  to  the  sale,  because  the  bargain  was  made 
with  the  government  ?  If  a  freeman  has  no  right  to  enslave 
his  child  by  selling  him,  can  one  generation  sell  another? 
And  if  one  generation  has  no  right  to  sell  another,  can  a 
government  which  exercises  the  double  character  of  seller 
and  buyer,  in  erecting  the  aristocracy  of  the  present  age, 
transform  the  most  atrocious  iniquity  into  political  or  moral 
rectitude,  by  writing  in  its  forehead  «  publiek  faith  ?"  Then 
let  us  acquit  every  thief,  who  assumes  for  his  motto  the 
words  "  honest  man." 

This  kind  of  faith  and  honesty,  have  invented  the  opi- 
nion "that  policy  and  justice  require  a  law,  beneficial  to 
"  individuals  at  the  expense  of  a  nation,  to  exist  for  the 


AKISTOCKACY.  6S 

t{  period  prescribed  ;"  to  sustain  which,  it  is  necessary  to 
reverse  the  elemental  political  maxim  •«  that  the  good  of 
«•'  the  whole,  ought  to  be  preferred  to  the  good  of  a  few." 
Government  is  erected  for  the  purpose  of  carrying  this 
maxim  into  execution,  by  passing  laws  for  the  benefit  ef  a 
nation  ;  and  shall  a  violation  of  the  purpose  of  its  institib 
tion,  by  passing  laws  injurious  to  a  nation,  in  creating  01 
fostering  the  aristocracy  of  paper  and  patronage,  be  cleans* 
ed  of  its  guiltiness,  because  individuals  have  become  the 
accomplices  of  the  government  ? 

A  law  or  a  contract,  prescribing  an  immoral  action,  is 
void.  No  sanction  can  justify  murder,  perjury  or  theft. 
Yet  the  murder  of  national  liberty,  the  perjury  of  a  traitor- 
ous government,  and  the  theft  of  national  wealth,  by  the 
gradual  introduction  of  the  aristocracy  of  the  third  age,  are 
varnished  into  a  gloss  by  a  cunning  dogma,  capable  even  of 
dazzling  men,  so  excessively  honest  as  to  put  other  men  to 
death  for  petty  thefts,  committed  to  appease  hunger  or  cover 
nakedness. 

The  same  mouth  will  solemnly  assert,  that  the  princi- 
ples of  equity  annul  every  contract,  which  defrauds  an  indi- 
vidual;  and  that  justice  or  policy  requires  a  catalogue  of 
law  charters  which  defraud  a  nation,  to  exist  and  have  their 
effect. 

This  is  owing  to  the  artful  conversion  of  good  words, 
into  knavish  dogmas.  It  is  not  new,  to  see  errour  take  re- 
fuge under  the  garb  of  truth.  Superstition  has  in  all  ages 
called  itself  religion.  Thus  law  charters,  with  the  faith- 
less design  of  enslaving  a  nation  by  the  introduction  of  the 
aristocracy  of  the  present  age,  crouch  behind  the  good  and 
honest  words  "  publick  faith  and  national  credit,"  to  pre- 
vent a  nation  from  destroying  that,  which  is  destroying  it. 
And  they  succeed  ;  because  we  are  as  unsuspicious  that  a 
ialse  and  fraudulent  dogma,  is  hidden  under  fair  language, 
as  that  a  well  dressed  gentleman  indicates  a  thief. 

To  come  at  truth,  we  ought  not  to  stop  at  a  verbal  in- 
f^isrotion.   We  must  consider  whether  the  effects  of  or«rv 


•34  ARISTOCRACY. 

law  and  every  measure,  by  whatever  names  the  law  Ov 
measure  are  called,  are  on  the  side  of  virtue  or  vice. 

An  irrepeafable  law  charter  is  a  standing  temptation  to 
governments  to  do  evil,  and  an  invitation  to  individuals  to 
become  their  accessaries  ;  by  its  help,  a  predominant  party 
may  use  temporary  power,  to  enact  corporate  or  individual 
emoluments  for  itself,  at  the  national  expense.  Successive 
parties  will  repeat  the  same  iniquity ;  and  even  the  outs  or 
opposition  will  be  corrupted,  to  do  obeisance  at  the  shrine 
of  the  dogma,  that  they  also  may  reap  oi"  the  fruit  it  be- 
stows, when  a  nation  shall  fail  into  their  hands  j  which  up- 
on every  change  of  administration,  will  have  its  hopes  of 
reform  gratified,  by  new  pillages  under  the  sanctions  of 
publick  faith  and  national  credit. 

This  modern  system  of  law  charters,  is  founded  in  the 
same  design,  with  the  ancient  system  of  a  social  eompaet. 
Under  the  sanction  of  social  compact,  governments  have 
formerly  tyrannised  over  nations.  Under  the  sanction  of 
law  charters,  governments  now  buy  a  faction,  rob  nations 
of  enormous  wealth,  and  soar  beyond  responsibility.  The 
inviolability  of  a  social  compact  was  the  old  dogma ;  the 
inviolability  of  law  charters  is  the  new  ;  for  effecting  the 
same  end.  The  last  is  however  an  engine  in  the  hands  of 
avarice  and  ambition,  of  power  far  superior  to  the  first. 
It  is  able  to  corrupt  and  pillage  a  nation  without  limit.  The 
first  was  an  opinion  unable  to  purchase  partisans  ;  the  last 
offers  every  thing  to  its  disciples,  which  can  gratify  perni- 
cious passions,  and  meets  arguments  with  bribes.  Thus  a 
nation,  which  won  self-government  by  exploding  the  doc- 
trine of  the  antiquated  compact  dogma,  may  lose  it  again  in 
the  modern  law  charter  dogma  ;  and  thus  a  nation,  which 
thought  it  morally  wrong  to  suffer  slavery  from  troops  hired 
by  clothes,  pay  and  rations,  may  be  persuaded  that  it  is 
morally  right  to  suffer  slavery  from  troops  hired  by  divi- 
dend?, interest  upon  stock,  and  protecting  duty  bounties. 

As  the  English  began  to  emerge  from  Gothic  igno- 
rance, the  idea  of  liberty  by  compact,  and  not  of  natural 


ARISTOCRACY.  66 

right,  led  theni  to  extort  charters  from  their  princes  ;  but 
wofully  is  the  doctrine  of  deriving  a  right  to  liberty  from 
charters,  tamed  upon  this  gallant  nation.  By  allowing 
them  to  bestow,  it  was  discovered  that  they  could  destroy. 
Such  as  diminish,  and  not  those  which  enlarge  national 
freedom,  have  become  the  sacred  charters,  The  errour  of 
parchment  liberty,  has  made  liberty  the  creature  of  parch- 
ment. A  government,  good  or  bad,  can  easily  take  away 
that  liberty  by  charters,  which  was  created  by  charters. 
Before  the  idea  of  deriving  liberty  from  charter  or  compact 
became  fashionable,  the  evils  produeed  by  bad  govern- 
ments were  temporary;  now,  slavery,  as  liberty  condescend- 
ed  to  be,  is  created  by  charters,  so  as  to  perpetuate  these 
evils,  and  to  hem  in  the  efforts  of  patriotism  so  narrowly,  as 
to  destroy  the  effect  of  virtue  in  office. 

By  admitting  that  donations  of  publiek  property  by  a 
government  to  individuals,  should  irrevocably  transform  it 
into  private  property,  it  is  obvious  that  the  stock  of  publiek 
rights  will  be  continually  whittled  away.  Tyranny  is  only 
a  partial  disposition  of  publiek  rights,  in  favour  of  one  or  a 
few.  The  system  of  paper  and  patronage,  bottomed  upon 
charters  and  commissions,  enables  avarice  and  ambition  to 
draw  more  extensively  upon  the  national  stock,  than  any 
system  hitherto  invented.  It  can  convert  publiek  property 
into  private,  with  unexampled  rapidity,  or  transfer  wealth 
and  power  from  the  mass  of  a  nation  to  a  few.  Its  guilt  is 
made  its  sanction.  Neither  "private  nor  publiek  property" 
is  allowed  to  be  a  sanction  against  the  frauds  and  invasions 
of  paper  and  patronage,  until  the  fraud  or  invasion  is  com- 
mitted ;  and  then  "  private  property"  (good  words,  as  are 
'<  publiek  faith  and  national  credit")  is  converted  into  a 
dogma  for  the  protection  of  this  fraud  and  invasion.  Titles, 
tythes,  feudal  services,  monasteries,  South  Sea  and  Missis- 
sippi projects,  funding  and  banking  systems,  sinecure  offices, 
and  every  species  of  fraud,  monopoly  and  usurpation,  call 
the  pillages  of  private  property,  private  property,  and  gene- 
rally contrive  to  make  it  so  bylaws  or  armies. 

10 


06  ARISTOCRACY. 

But  in  the  eye  of  justice,  property,  publick  or  private, 
cannot  be  transferred  by  fraud.  A  nation  erects  a  govern- 
ment for  the  publick  benefit,  and  does  not  empower  it  to 
bring  about  the  aggrandisement  of  itself,  and  its  faction,  to 
the  publick  detriment.  If  this  is  effected  by  a  transfer  of 
property,  publick  or  private,  the  transfer  is  fraudulent,  and 
void ;  because  the  nation  never  empowered  the  government, 
by  that  or  any  other  mode,  to  injure  its  liberty  or  happiness. 
The  principles  of  moral  rectitude,  do  not  forbid  a  nation  to 
resume  power,  usurped  by  a  government ;  nor  property, 
chartered  away  to  individuals,  by  fraudulent  laws  ;  because 
otherwise  they  could  not  resume  just  rights,  since  power  and 
law  are  the  vehicles  in  which  these  rights  are  constantly 
taken  away. 

The  ideas  annexed  to  the  words  "  publick  faith,  nation- 
al credit  and  private  property"  in  England,  may  be  correct 
in  reference  to  the  English  civil  policy,  and  erroneous  in 
relation  to  the  civil  policy  of  the  United  States.  Monopoly 
is  the  leading  principle  of  their  political,  religious,  and  mer- 
cantile systems  ;  every  thing  the  reverse  of  monopoly,  con- 
stitutes our  political,  religious  and  mercantile  systems.  The 
king,  with  his  annual  million,  his  prerogatives,  and  his  pat- 
ronage, made  up  of  fleets,  armies,  offices,  and  corruption; 
a  house  of  inheritable  legislation,  without  responsibility, 
entrenched  behind  the  crown,  and  flanked  with  privileges ;  a 
house  of  commons,  purchasers  of  diplomas  bestowing  an 
exclusive  power  to  tax  and  to  receive ;  a  hierarchy,  tythe 
gatherers  and  test  makers  j  mercantile  corporations,  mas- 
ters of  kingdoms  and  islands  ;  a  bank  of  England,  which 
ean  make  it  unlawful  to  pay  its  own  debts ;  a  funding  sys- 
tem, mortgaging  the  nation  for  more  money  than  the  world 
possesses ;  a  multitude  of  places  obsolete,  except  as  to  fees 
and  salaries ;  and  a  variety  of  rights  and  privileges,  exer- 
cised by  corporations,  trades,  companies  and  districts— form 
a  vast  mass  of  monopoly,  which  in  a  multitude  of  ways  in- 
corporates with  itself  the  talents  and  power  of  the  nation, 
and  has  therefore  annexed  ideas  to  the  words  « publick 


ARISTOCRACY,  61 

faith,  national  credit  and  private  property"   adapted  to 
nourish  and  not  destroy  itself. 

If  the  English  ideas  of  these  expressions,  have  been  in- 
culcated by  the  most  complicated  and  wide  spreading  system 
of  monopoly  which  has  ever  existed ;  and  if  this  system 
would  not  have  inculcated  such  ideas,  had  they  been  un- 
friendly to  its  ambition  and  avarice ;  it  follows,  that  their 
•construction  of  these  expressions  being  suggested  by  and 
friendly  to  a  system  of  monopoly  and  aristocracy,  must  be 
unfriendly  to  a  system,  at  enmity  with  monopoly  and  aris- 
tocracy. 

Fraud  and  ambition  can  never  succeed,  except  by  sub- 
tilty.  Hence  tiiey  seize  upon  our  virtues  by  plausible  phra- 
ses, and  manage  nations  by  prejudices  they  themselves 
plant.  By  these  phrases  and  prejudices  they  rear  and  nur- 
ture a  multitude  of  opinions,  which  concur  in  advancing: 
their  designs  and  interest.  Could  fraud  and  ambition  be 
compelled  to  substitute  sincerity  in  the  place  of  this  subtil- 
ty,  they  would  acknowledge  that  the  invariable  result  of 
their  doctrines,  is,  the  sacrifice  of  a  nation  to  the  ambition 
and  avarice  of  a  few  ;  but  an  acknowledgment  of  this  end, 
would  explode  all  their  arguments,  however  specious  ;  and 
repeal  all  their  Jaws,  however  sanctioned.  It  is  the  felicity 
of  the  United  States,  to  commence  a  government  at  a  period, 
when  the  aristocracies  of  the  first,  the  second,  and  the  third 
ages,  have  all  sincerely  and  unequivocally  displayed  their 
end  and  purpose,  by  effects.  The  purpose  of  the  ideas  an- 
nexed in  England,  to  the  words  "publiek  faith,"  "national 
credit*'  and  "  charter"  is  displayed  in  the  state  of  the  peo- 
ple ;  this,  and  not  the  brilliancy  of  the  government  or  the 
splendour  of  individuals,  is  the  object  which  an  honest  poli- 
tician will  contemplate.  The  wealth  found  by  Khouli  Khar, 
in  Delhi,  and  the  riches  collected  by  Nabobs,  were  no  prooft 
of  the  happiness  of  Hindostan,  or  the  goodness  of  its  govern 
xnent. 

Nations,  by  false  dogmas,  have  been  restrained  from  de- 
fending their  liberties,  and  armies  have  paid  their  lives  for 


38  ARISTOCRACY, 

their  prejudices.  The  saered  nature  of  law  charters,  is  the 
sword  of  their  enemies  at  the  throats  of  the  bigotted  Israel- 
ites on  their  sabbath  day.  They  are  extended  to  periods, 
within  which  the  grantees  may  acquire  so  much  wealth,  and 
corrupt  such  a  proportion  of  talents,  as  to  secure  a  continu- 
ance. The  question  is,  shall  the  nation  destroy  charters, 
or  charters  destroy  the  nation  ?  The  dogma  declares  char- 
ters to  be  sacred,  and  forbids  the  nation  to  resist  until  they 
have  acquired  an  irresistible  maturity.  Even  the  Jews,  ob- 
stinate as  they  were,  at  length  discovered  fighting  on  the 
sabbath  day  to  be  preferable  to  death  ;  but  the  enlightened 
nations  of  Europe,  who  laugh  at  their  sabbatism,  piously 
believe,  that  there  is  a  charm  in  the  words  charter,  credit 
and  publick  faith ;  making  slavery  preferable  to  a  fair  and 
free  government. 

A  gradual  monopoly  of  lands  and  wealth,  overturned  the 
Roman  Republick.  By  assailing  it  in  time,  it  might  have 
been  suppressed.  The  murder  of  the  Gracchi  is  a  proof, 
that  usurpation  can  only  be  corrected  in  its  infancy,  and 
that  fraudulent  acquisitions  will  perpetrate  any  crime  for 
self-defenee.  But  this  system  of  monopoly  was  suffered  to 
proceed  to  maturity,  and  the  commonwealth  was  poisoned 
by  the  miasma  it  diffused.  It  was  a  consequence  of  the  Ro- 
man conquests  which  avenged  the  injured  nations  ;  but  do 
the  Americans  equally  merit  the  vengeance  of  the  English 
system  of  paper  and  patronage,  for  having  vindicated  their 
liberty  against  it  ? 

The  idea  annexed  by  this  system  of  monopoly  to  private 
property,  requires  a  nation  to  sacrifice  itself  for  the  benefit 
of  an  individual.  This  is  a  new  principle  of  moral  recti- 
tude, which  fraud  only  could  suggest,  and  folly  alone  adopt. 
Heretofore,  individuals  who  sacrificed  themselves  for  a  na- 
tion, have  been  celebrated  as  performing  an  act  of  hcroick 
virtue.  Heretofore,  a  suppression  of  personal  appetites, 
for  the  sake  of  advancing  public  good,  has  been  thought  a 
species  of  morality,  highly  meritorious;  and  a  destruction 
of  publick  good,  to  gratify  person?.!  appetites,. a  species  of 


ARISTOCBAGY,  irfc 

immorality,  highly  vicious.  Place  in  one  scale  publiek  li- 
berty and  happiness  j  in  the  other,  the  gratifications  of  indi- 
viduals by  the  system  of  paper  and  patronage,  with  the  la- 
bel **  private  property"  fixed  upon  these  gratifications :  mo- 
rality, it  is  agreed,  ought  only  to  determine  which  scale 
should  preponderate.  Will  she  too  be  the  dupe  of  a  frau- 
dulent dogma,  and  a  treacherous  badge  ?  Will  she  too  de- 
vote a  nation  to  oppression  and  misery,  to  feed  the  lusts  of 
individuals,  under  the  influence  of  a  superstitious  sanction  ? 
A  crocodile  has  been  worshipped,  and  its  priesthood  have  as- 
serted, that  morality  required  the  people  to  suffer  them- 
selves to  be  eaten  by  the  crocodile  ;  to  encourage  them,  the 
people  might  also  have  been  told,  that  the  crocodile  would 
die  in  time,  and  that  then,  they  would  be  no  longer  eaten. 
In  this  species  of  morality  the  people  believed,  and  whene- 
ver the  old  crocodile  was  about  to  expire,  a  young  one  was 
put  in  his  place,  and  the  people  continued  to  be  eateo„  Lav 
charters  are  a  family  of  those  crocodiles. 

Publiek  faith  is  the  moral  principle,  called  upon  to  de- 
fend monopoly  and  law  charter,  under  the  name  of  private 
property.  Let  us  consider  what  this  sanction  is  in  a  free 
government.  If  the  government  should  solemnly,  by  law, 
enter  into  a  contract  with  a  number  of  individuals,  the  ob- 
ject of  which  was  to  diminish  the  liberty  and  wealth  of  the 
people,  by  increasing  the  power  and  wealth  of  the  govern- 
ment and  these  individuals,  dots  publiek  faith  require  from 
the  nation  a  fulfilment  of  this  contract  ?  If  the  question  is 
answered  in  the  negative,  a  correct  definition  of  publiek 
faith,  must  comprise  both  a  faithfulness  to  the  publiek  good, 
and  also  a  faithfulness  in  contracts  with  individuals ;  nor 
can  tiiese  two  duties  be  made  inconsistent  with  each  other 
by  publiek  faith,  without  admitting  it  to  be  a  principle  of  a 
double  character,  sometimes  good  and  sometimes  bad.  Be- 
cause, if  it  compels  the  performance  of  one  duty,  by  the 
breach  of  another;  and  if  the  duty  required  to  be  fulfilled,, 
is  trivial,  compared  with  that  required  to  he  infringed ;  it 
would  bestow  on  publiek  faith  a  mixed  character,  ami  even 


70  ARISTOCRACY. 

a  prevalence  of  evil.  Publick  faith  then,  considered  as  a 
good  moral  principle,  must  either  include  and  reconcile,  a 
loyalty  both  to  the  publick  good  and  to  contracts  with  indi- 
viduals ;  or  if  the  former  is  not  a  duty  imposed  by  publick 
faith,  it  must  be  a  duty  of  superior  and  superseding  obli- 
gation. 

The  construction  of  publick  faith  by  monopoly,  avarice 

and  ambition,  is  precisely  the  reverse  of  this.   They  confine 
it  to  a  fulfilment  of  every  species  of  contract  made  by  a 
government  with   individuals,  especially  if  entered  into  for 
the  purpose  of  gratifying  themselves  at  the  expense  of  a 
nation ;  and  thus  limited,  consider  it  as  the  most  sacred  of 
all  duties.     And  so  far  are  these  glossographers,  from  con 
sidering  publick  faith  as  a  good  moral  principle,  that  they 
make  it  enforce  contracts,  entered  into  for  every  conceiva- 
ble vicious    purpose;    from  those  of  betraying   nations, 
armies,  cities  and  forts,  down  to  those  of  perjury,  theft  and 
assassination.     Under  this  construction,  whenever  the  pub- 
lick good  and  a  contract  with  an  individual  come  in  conflict, 
publick  faith  is  made  to  decide,  that  the  contract  shall  pre- 
vail ;  and  thus  its  definition  will  come  out,  ««  national  duty 
"  to  suffer  oppression,  and  lose  its  liberty,  by  laws,  charters 
*<  or  contracts,  made  by  a   government  for  that  purpose, 
*J  provided  they  convey  an  interest  to   individuals."      So 
soon  as  it  is  thus  changed  from  a  good  to  a  vicious  princi- 
ple, its  effects  change  also.     From  being  a  pledge  of  pub- 
lick good,  it  becomes  the  protector  of  politieal  fraud  :  it 
compels  a  nation  to  be  an  accomplice  in  its  own  ruin ;  it  takes 
from  it  the  right  of  self-preservation  ;  and  it  becomes  the 
modern  subterfuge  of  the  modern  aristocracy. 

Hitherto,  in  comparing  the  duty  of  a  government  to  a 
tuition,  and  to  a  law  charter,  the  comparison  has  been  ex- 
hibited in  the  most  favourable  light  for  the  latter,  by  for- 
bearing to  insist  upon  any  degree  of  criminality  in  a  faction, 
which  accepts  of  a  charter  from  a  government,  injurious  to 
a  nation.  It  is,  however,  questionable,  whether  the  priest- 
hood were  innocent,  which  executed  the  evil  of  hierarchy ; 


ARIST6CBACY.  7t 

or  the  barons,  who  sustained  that  of  the  feudal  aristocracy  ; 
or  the  solicitors  and  holders  of  sinecure  offices  $  or  those 
who  pilfer  a  nation  by  means  of  a  law  charter.  If  their 
accomplices  are  not  guilty,  tyrants  themselves  must  be 
innocent. 

Individuals  may  be  aiders  and  abettors  in  projects  re- 
plete with  publiek  evil,  without  discerning  their  tendency  ; 
but  the  rarity  of  this  case  is  evinced,  by  the  tacit  compact 
and  union  produced  by  such  projects.  This  compact  and 
union,  disclose  a  thorough  knowledge  of  the  interest  on  one 
side,  and  the  injury  on  the  other,  because  it  is  the  plain 
effect  of  profit ;  and  a  fear  of  losing  profit  can  only  be  in- 
spired by  a  conviction  of  committing  an  injury  in  its  acqui- 
sition. This  fear  makes  every  individual  who  is  conscious 
of  drawing  wealth  from  a  nation  unjustly,  the  friend  and 
encomiast  of  the  strongest  power  he  can  find ;  because 
power  is  the  only  protector  of  injustice.  And  if  he  cannot 
find  a  power  strong  enough  to  protect  injustice,  he  will  ex- 
ert himself  to  erect  one.  When  such  a  power  exists,  the 
more  unfaithful  it  is  to  the  publiek  good,  the  more  its  pub- 
lick  faith  will  be  celebrated  by  those  who  receive  the  bene- 
fit of  its  unfaithfulness.  Lewis  the  fourteenth,  an  ignorant, 
fanatical  and  tyrannical  prince,  was  celebrated  even  by  phi- 
losophers, because  he  robbed  the  French  nation,  to  give 
them  pensions. 

Individuals,  who  do  not  derive  their  acquisitions  from 
projects  replete  with  publiek  evil,  are  never  formed  into  a 
tacit  compact  or  union,  because,  being  unconscious  of  draw- 
ing gain  from  a  nation  unjustly,  they  have  nothing  to  fear. 
Being  unconscious  of  injustice,  they  are  not  naturally  the 
friends  and  encomiasts  of  a  power,  strong  enough  to  protect 
injustice.  And  deriving  no  benefit  from  the  unfaithfulness 
of  a  government  to  the  publiek  good,  they  will  not  celebrate 
a  government  for  it.  In  order  to  see  the  force  of  this  com- 
parison,  it  is  only  necessary  to  conceive  a  society  consisting 
of  two  classes,  one  made  up  of  agriculturists,  professions, 
trades    and    commerce,    all  unconnected  with   hauLing.. 


73  A1UST0CRACY. 

funding  and  patronage  5  the  other,  of  a  funding  system,  bank 
charters,  pensions  and  patronage.  Which  class  would  be 
the  disciple  and  parasite  of  despotism  ?  If  this  is  discerni- 
ble, the  consequence  of  erecting  this  modern  species  of 
aristocracy  is  also  discernible  , 

The  exact  similarity  in  nature  and  principle,  between 
laws  or  charters  establishing  funding  systems,  banks,  or  si- 
necure profit  of  any  kind  ;  and  laws  or  charters  establish- 
in0*  privileged  orders  or  endowed  hierarchies  ;  appears  in 
their  common  union  with,  and  devotion  to,  a  power  capable 
of  protecting  injustice. 

It  is  still  objected  "  that  unless  laws,  beneficial  to  indi- 
<«  viduals,  though  injurious  to  a  nation,  are  supported,  con- 
«  fidenee  in  government  will  be  destroyed,  and  national 
«  credit,  lost."  The  doctrine  amounts  to  this  ;  «  that  it  is 
*ood  policy  in  a  nation,  to  make  a  few  individuals  its  mas- 
ters or  owners,  to  excite  an  inclination  in  these  few  indivi- 
duals to  lend  it  money,  for  a  handsome  premium  and  high 
interest."  And  this  policy  is  literally  pursued,  by  esta- 
blishing a  certain  number  of  paper  systems  and  charters,  for 
drawing  money  from  the  nation  directly  or  indirectly,  in 
order  to  enable  a  few  to  lead  a  part  of  this  money  to  the 

nation. 

To  this  item  of  the  value  of  a  confidence  «  that  laws 
and  charters,  injurious  to  a  nation,  but  beneficial  to  indivi- 
duals, will  be  maintained,"  must  be  added  a  corruption  of 
manners,  arising  from  the  traffick  between  a  government 
and  a  faction,  for  the  objects  of  gratifying  the  ambition  of 
one  dealer,  and  the  avarice  of  the  other ;  and  the  customary 
violent  and  wretched  parties,  between  the  commencement 
of  this  confidence  and  its  catastrophe. 

On  the  other  hand,  a  confidence  that  laws  and  charters 
injurious  to  a  nation,  will  be  repealed,  whenever  their  per- 
nicious tendency  is  discovered,  will  prevent  the  destructive 
evils  generated  hy  a  contrary  opinion ;  will  enable  honest 
r»ovornmersts  to  correct  the  frauds  of  knavish;  and  will 
cheek  or  exen  cure  the  malevolence  of  factions.    And  one 


AKIrfTOCUACY.  7S 

effect  of  inestimable  value  flowing  from  this  latter  confi- 
dence, would  be  the  detection  and  overthrow  of  an  insidious 
sanction,  under  cover  of  which  the  modern  aristocracy  of 
paper  and  patronage,  is  fast  fettering  modern  nations. 

The  analysis  of  aristocracy,  by  the  first,  the  second,  and 
tiie  third  ages,  has  been  used  for  the  purpose  of  a  distinct 
arrangement  of  the  arguments  adduced  to  explain  the  su- 
perstitious, feudal,  and  fiscal  modes  of  enslaving  nations,  by 
placing  the  powers  in  the  hands  of  a  minority  ;  an  effect, 
however  produced,  denominated  aristocracy  throughout  this 
essay.  But  it  is  not  intended  to  insinuate,  that  the  causes 
of  aristocracy  have  generally  acted  singly ;  on  the  contrary, 
ihey  more  frequently  unite. 

It  was  necessary  thoroughly  to  understand  the  most 
prominent  causes  of  aristocracy,  before  we  proceeded  to  a 
closer  examination  of  our  civil  policy,  and  Mr.  Adams's 
principles  :  in  order  to  keep  in  mind  that  Ave  have  never 
seen  a  venerated  aud  wealthy  hierarchy,  an  army  stronger 
than  the  nation,  an  endowed,  titled  and  privileged  order  oi 
men,  or  an  incorporated,  enriched  or  united  faction,  with- 
out having  at  the  same  time  seen  the  aristocracy  of  the 
first,  the  second,  or  the  third  age.  By  recollecting  this 
testimony,  derived  from  universal  experience,  an  infe- 
rence, equivalent  to  mathematical  certainty,  "  that  such 
ends  will  eternally  flow  from  such  means,'*  will  unavoidably 
present  itself. 

Few  would  deny  these  premises  or  the  inference,  if  it 
was  proposed  to  revive  oracles  or  feudal  services.  These 
causes  of  aristocracy  are  distinctly  seen,  because  they  do 
not  exist.  They  have  no  counsel  in  court.  They  are, 
therefore,  better  understood  than  when  they  flourished. 
But  both  the  premises  and  the  inference  are  denied,  when 
they  implicate  the  aristocracy  of  paper  and  patronage. 
This  eause  of  aristocracy  is  not  seen,  because  it  does  exist ; 
and  the  more  oppressive  it  shall  become,  the  greater  will 
be  the  difficulty  of  discovering  its  existence.    The  two  first 

11 


7*  ARISTOCRACY. 

are  exposed  naked  to  our  view  :  and  the  third,  disguised  in 
the  garb  of  republicanism,  and  uttering  patriotick  words, 
joins  the  mob  in  kicking  them  about,  by  way  of  diverting 
the  publick  attention  from  itself.  An  opinion  that  aristo- 
cracy can  only  exist  in  the  form  of  a  hereditary  order,  or 
a  hierarchy,  is  equivalent  to  an  opinion,  that  the  science  ef 
geometry  can  only  be  illustrated  by  a  square  or  a  triangle. 


[     75     ] 


SECTION  THE  SECOND. 


THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  THE  POLICY  OF  THE  UNITED 
STATES,  AND   OF  THE  ENGLISH  POLICY. 


JDefore  we  proceed  to  the  consideration  of  the  policy  oF 
the  United  States,  it  is  necessary  to  discover  a  political 
analysis,  founded  in  some  moral  principle  ;  because  govern 
ment  is  as  strictly  subject  to  the  moral,  as  a  physical  being 
is  to  the  physical  laws  of  nature.  Persons  are  not  princi- 
ples; and  hence  the  operations  of  monarchy,  aristocracy 
and  democracy  (governments  founded  in  persons)  are  fluc- 
tuating ;  generally  evil,  but  sometimes  good  ;  whereas  the 
effects  of  a  moral  principle  are  ever  the  same.  Mr.  Adams, 
however,  adopts  the  ancient  analysis  of  governments,  asserts 
that  it  comprises  all  their  generical  forms,  and  adds  "  that 
every  society  naturally  produces  an  order  of  men,  which  it 
is  impossible  to  confine  to  an  equality  of  rights;"  and  ht 
erects  his  system  upon  the  foundations  of  this  ancient  ana- 
lysis^ and  of  a  natural  or  unavoidable  aristocracy.  If  soci- 
ety cannot  exist  without  aristocracy,  (as  it  cannot,  if  aris- 
tocracy is  natural  to  society,)  then  democracy  and  monarchy 
cannot  be  generical  forms  of  government,  unless  they  can 
exist  without  society  or  with  aristocracy.  This  disagree 
ment  between  the  ancient  analysis,  and  a  system  bottomed 
upon  it,  at  the  threshold  of  their  association ;  and  Mr. 
Adams's  idea  that  one  of  his  generical  forms  of  government 
was  a  natural  consequence  of  society,  without  contending 
that  the  others  were,  excited  .doubts  of  the  correctness  of 
that  analysis.  If  monarchy,  aristocracy  and  democracy 
are  all  natural  or  generical  forms  of  government,  nature 
has  determined  on  Mr.  Adams's  mixed  government,  and  hi* 
labours  in   favour  of  her  will,  were  superfluous  :  bv- 


76         PRINCIPLES  OF  TIIE  POLICY  OP  THE  V.  STATES, 

either  of  these  forms  is  artificial,  it  could  not  be  natural  or 
generical,  and  an  invention  of  one  form  by  the  human  intel- 
lect, is  no  proof  that  it  is  unable  to  invent  another.  The  terms 
monarchy,  aristocracy  and  democracy,  convey  adequate 
ideas  of  particular  forms  of  government,  but  they  are  insuf- 
ficient for  the  purpose  of  disclosing  a  government  which 
will  certainly  be  free  and  moderate,  since  the  effects  of  each 
depend  on  the  administration  of  wise  and  good,  or  of  weak 
and  wicked  men  :  and  all  are  therefore  founded  in  the  same 
principle,  however  differing  inform.  This  both  suggests  a 
doubt  of  the  soundness  of  the  ancient  analysis,  and  a  solu- 
tion of  the  phenomenon  "  that  all  these  natural  or  generieal 
forms  of  government  should  produce  bad  effects."  The 
effects  of  these  three  forms  are  bad,  because  they  are  all 
founded.on  one  principle,  namely,  an  irresponsible  undivided 
power ;' and  that  principle  is  bad.  We  want  an  analysis, 
distinguishing  governments  in  point  of  substance,  and  not 
limited  to  form. 

The  moral  qualities  of  human  nature  arc  good  and  evil. 
An  analysis  founded  in  this  truth,  however  general,  can 
alone  ascertain  the  true  character,  and  foretell  the  effects  of 
any  form  of  government,  or  of  any  social  measure.  Every 
such  form  and  measure  must  have  a  tendency  to  excite  the 
good  or  the  evil  moral  qualities  of  man  ;  and  according  to 
its  source,  so  will  be  its  tendency  with  moral  certainty. 

The  strongest  moral  propensity  of  man,  is  to  do  good  to 
himself.  This  begets  a  propensity  to  do  evil  to  others,  for 
the  sake  of  doing  good  to  himself.  A  sovereignty  of  the 
people,  or  self-government,  is  suggested  by  the  first  moral 
propensity;  responsibility,  division,  and  an  exclusion  of 
monarchy  and  aristocracy,  by  the  second. 

Self  love,  being  the  strongest  motive  to  do  evil  to 
others,  as  well  as  good  to  ourselves,  will  operate  as  forcibly 
to  excite  an  individual  or  a  faction  to  injure  a  nation  for 
advancing  self  good,  as  to  e::eite  a  nation  to  preserve  its 
own  happiness.  Therefore,  whilst  national  self  govern- 
ment) is  founded  in  the  strongest  moral  qualify  for  pro- 


AND  OF  THE  E5T6XISH  iT6X.lClT,  77 

ducing  national  good;  every  other  species  of  government, 
is  founded  in  the  strongest  moral  quality  for  producing 
national  evil. 

The  objection  to  this  analysis  is,  that  nations  may  op- 
press individuals  or  minorities.  An  imperfection  does  not 
destroy  comparative  superiority  :  and  should  one  be  found 
in  a  form  of  government  bottomed  upon  the  quality  of  a  na- 
tion's love  for  itself,  it  will  not  diminish  the  defects  of  forms, 
bottomed  upon  the  self  love  of  individuals  or  minorities,  if 
these  are  as  likely  to  oppress  majorities,  as  majorities  are 
to  oppress  these. 

The  quality,  self  love,  stimulates  in  proportion  to  the 
good  or  gratification  in  view.  This  prospect  to  an  indivi- 
dual  or  minority,  having  power  to  extract  good  or  gratifi- 
cation from  a  nation,  must  be  infinitely  more  alluring,  than 
to  a  nation,  having  power  to  extract  good  or  gratification 
from  an  individual  or  a  minority ;  and  as  the  excitement  to 
injure  others,  for  gratifying  ourselves,  will  be  in  proportion 
to  the  extent  of  the  gratification,  it  follows,  that  an  indivi- 
dual or  minority  will  be  infinitely  more  likely  to  oppress  a 
nation  for  self  gratification,  than  a  nation,  for  the  same  end, 
to  oppress  an  individual  or  minority. 

The  certainty  with  which  moral  inferences  flow  from  mo- 
ral causes,  is  illustrated  by  a  computation  of  the  cases,  in 
which  the  quality  of  self  love,  has  induced  nations  to  op- 
press individuals,  or  individuals  to  oppress  nations.  The 
anomaly  of  a  nation's  becoming  a  tyrant  over  an  individual, 
would  be  nearer  to  the  character  of  prodigy,  than  even  that 
of  monarchy  or  aristocracy,  preferring  national  good  or 
gratification,  to  its  own. 

It  is  from  the  want  of  some  test,  to  determine  whether  a 
form  of  government,  or  law,  is  founded  in  the  good  or  evil 
qualities  of  man,  that  the  disciples  of  monarchy,  aristocra- 
cy and  democracy,  have  entered  into  the  field  of  controver- 
sy,, with  so  much  zeal.  Each,  though  blinded  to  th,e  de- 
fects of  the  system  he  defends,  from  education,  habit,  or  :; 
supposed  necessity  of  enlisting  under  one,  clearly  discerns 


78         PRINCIPLES  OP  THE  POLICY  OT  THE  U.  STATES, 

the  defects  of  the  system  espoused  by  his  adversary :  and 
despises  him  for  a  blindness,  similar  to  his  own.  That  mo- 
narchy, aristocracy  and  democracy  will  all  make  men  mise- 
rable, is  universally  assented  to,  by  two  out  of  the  three 
members  of  this  analysis  itself;  and  a  contrary  effect  from 
either,  is  allowed  by  two  to  one  to  be  out  of  the  common 
course  of  events.  A  violation  of  the  relation  between  cause 
and  effect,  awakens  the  admiration  of  mankind,  whenever  a 
good  moral  effect  proceeds  from  a  government  founded  in 
evil  moral  qualities. 

It  is  not  enough  for  the  illustration  of  otir  analysis,  that 
a  good  effect  from  either  monarchy,  aristocracy  or  demo- 
cracy, is  by  this  majority  considered  as  a  phenomenon ;  a 
few  reasons,  accounting  for  it  according  to  the  principles  of 
that  analysis,  will  be  added. 

Monarchy  and  aristocracy,  have  the  strongest  tendency 
of  any  conceivable  human  situation,  to  excite  the  evil  moral 
quality,  cr  propensity,  of  injuring  others  for  our  own  bene- 
fit, both  by  the  magnitude  of  the  temptation,  and  the  power 
<»f  peaching  it.  A  long  catalogue  of  evil  moral  qualities. 
are  included  in  this.  These  forms  of  government  are  there- 
tore  founded  in  the  evil  moral  qualities  of  man,  and  it  is  un- 
natural that  evil  moral  qualities,  should  produce  good  mo- 
ral effects. 

Mr.  Adams  allows  that  evil  consequences  unavoidably 
arise  from  monarchy  and  aristocracy,  by  endeavouring  to 
provide  against  them.  The  probable  success  of  his  endea- 
vour will  appear,  by  concisely  reciting  their  cause.  It  con- 
sists in  a  degree  of  power  capable  of  exciting  evil  moral 
qualities,  craving  self  gratification  at  the  expense  of  others. 
Nothing  can  prevent  this  excitement,  but  a  removal  of  the 
power;  and  if  the  power  is  removed,  the  principle  of  monar- 
chy or  aristocracy  is  destroyed,  though  the  name  should  re- 
main. Mr.  Adams's  remedy  can  only  remove  the  cause  or 
leave  the  cause.  If  it  remains,  the  effects  follow.  Our 
?tate  governours  would  not  be  monarehs  or  despots,  if  fhry 
■were  called  kings ;  because  they  want  tlie  degree  of  powei 


AND  OF  THE    ENGLISH   fOLICI.  ?f 

necessary  to  excite  and  bring  into  action,  the  evil  moral  qua- 
lities of  monarchs  or  despots.  Henry  the  eighth  would 
have  been  a  monarch  or  despot,  though  he  had  been  called 
governour,  because  he  possessed  that  degree  of  power.  His 
species  of  government  was  founded  in  evil,  and  that  of  the 
States  in  good  moral  qualities. 

Democracy  is  not  less  calculated  to  excite  evil  moral 
qualities  of  one  kind,  than  monarchy  and  aristocracy  of  ano- 
ther. By  democracy  is  meant,  a  nation  exercising  person- 
ally the  functions  of  government.  Turbulence,  instability, 
injustice,  suspicion,  ingratitude,  and  excess  of  gratitude, 
are  among  the  evil  moral  qualities,  which  this  form  of  gov- 
ernment has  a  tendency  to  excite.  Democracy,  therefore., 
is  a  form  of  government  founded  in  evil  moral  qualities. 

All  these  forms  of  government  were  intended  to  be  de- 
stroyed in  America,  and  a  government,  founded  in  the  gow« 
moral  qualities  of  man  to  be  erected ;  that  is,  one  which 
would  cautiously  avoid  to  excite  his  evil  qualities,  and  care- 
fully attempt  to  suppress  them  if  they  should  appear. 

Democracy  was  destroyed  by  election  j  and  one  errour 
of  Mr.  Adams  consists  in  proposing  to  bring  into  the  field 
monarchy  and  aristocracy,  after  their  plebeian  foe  no  long- 
er exists.  As  election  has  destroyed  democracy,  election, 
responsibility  and  division  of  power,  were  intended  also  to 
destroy  monarchy  and  aristocracy.  And  if  democracy  may 
be  destroyed,  or  at  least  filtered  of  its  evil  moral  qualities 
by  election,  why  may  not  monarchy  and  aristocracy  be  de- 
stroyed or  filtered  of  their  evil  qualities  likewise  by  elec- 
tion, responsibility  and  a  division  of  power  ?  Or  if  for  the 
sake  of  a  balance  of  orders,  it  would  be  adviseable  to  revive 
monarchy  and  aristocracy  in  their  natural  malignancy, 
ought  not  democracy  to  be  also  revived  in  its  natural  ma- 
lignancy, to  make  out  a  complete  system  of  checks  and 
balances,  in  conformity  to  the  ideas  of  Aristotle,  who  i$ 
quoted  by  Mr.  Adams  ? 

Aristotle,  and  all  the  ancient  authors,  by  the  tam 
*  democracy,"  intended  to  describe  a  nation,  legislating. 


3(j         FKINCIPLfiS  02  TEE  POLICY  OF  TflL  tT.  STATES, 

judging  and  some  times  even  executing  in  person.  Such  is 
the  form  of  government  to  which  is  ascribed  all  the  evils 
jf  democracy,  and  which  has  in  reality  produced  those  evils. 
And  Mr.  Adams  has  transplanted  all  these  evils  from  this 
ancient  democracy  into  his  book,  as  charges  against  the 
elective  and  responsible  system  of  America;  v.ith  what 
degree  of  justice,  will  depend  upon  a  resemblance  between 
our  system,  and  a  nation  exercising  political  and  civil 
power  within  the  walls  of  Athens  or  Home.  The  democra- 
cy of  Athens,  and  our  policy,  were  founded  in  principles 
exactly  opposite  io  eaeh  other.  One  was  calculated  to  ex- 
cite a  multitude  of  evil  moral  qualities,  which  the  other 
will  suppress,  by  representation,  responsibility  and  division, 
An  imperfect  representation  in  England,  suppressed  the 
evil  effects  attached  to  the  Athenian  democracy,  and  though 
imperfect,  evinced  the  excellence  of  the  principle  of  repre- 
sentation, by  moderating  the  malignancy  of  monarchy  and 
aristocracy.  Had  democracy,  monarchy  and  aristocracy, 
according  to  the  ancient  ideas  annexed  to  these  terms,  been 
mingled  and  balanced,  a  government  would  have  been  pro- 
duced, which  may  be  contemplated,  by  placing  an  English 
king  at  the  head  of  the  democracy  and  aristocracy  of  Koine. 
By  t\ia  addition  of  one  good  principle  to  two  bad  ones,  the 
paroxysms  of  good,  and  the  predominance  of  evil,  under  the 
English  form,  are  accounted  for.  And  by  removing  the 
evil  principles,  monarchy  and  aristocracy,  to  make  room  for 
division  and  responsibility  ;  as  the  evil  principle,  democracy, 
has  been  removed  by  representation  ;  mankind  will  proba- 
bly escape  the  calamities  inflicted  by  these  evil  principles,, 
on  the  English  nation. 

The  inherent  evil  nature  of  monarchy,  aristocracy  and 
democracy,  can  only  furnish  a  solution  of  the  fact,  testified 
by  all  history,  "that  each  separately,  any  two,  and  the  tlipee 
however  mingled,  have  uniformly  produced  evil  effects, 
which  have  driven  mankind  into  a  multitude  of  exchanges 
and  modifications."  From  aif,  disappointment  has  issued, 
beeau&Q   good   effects  cenld  not    be   extracted  from   evil 


AX1»  01?  THE  ENGLISH  POLICY.  Si 

principles.  At  length,  all  philosophers,  politicians  and 
learned  men  have  been  taught  by  experience  to  unite  in  one 
opinion.  They  universally  agree,  that  monarchy,  aristo- 
cracy and  democracy,  acting  separately,  will  produce  evil 
to  nations  ;  they  agree,  that  any  two  will  operate  oppress- 
ively ;  and  they  also  agree  that  the  three,  however  blended, 
excluding  the  modern  idea  of  representation,  will  also  ope- 
rate oppressively.  Is  it  then  possible,  that  the  ancient  ana- 
lysis of  political  systems,  which  separately  or  combined, 
presented  only  a  form  of  government  now  universally  ac- 
knowledged to  be  bad,  could  have  been  correct  ? 

From  a  belief  that  a  political  analysis  does  exist,  capa- 
ble of  arranging  all  forms  of  government  into  two  classes  ; 
one  rooted  in  good,  and  the  other  in  evil  moral  qualities ; 
and  that  monarchy,  aristocracy  and  democracy,  singly  or 
united,  belong  to  the  latter  class  :  the  idea  has  been  brought 
before  the  reader  preparatory  to  arguments  designed  to 
prove,  that  the  civil  policy  of  the  United  States  must  be 
assigned  to  the  first  class  ;  that  it  is  of  course  at  enmity 
with  Mr.  Adams's  mixture  of  monarchy,  aristocracy  and 
representation  ;  but  that  certain  of  its  details  and  laws,  are 
at  enmity  with  its  essential  principles,  for  want  of  some 
distinct  analysis  as  a  test  to  ascertain  their  nature  and 
effects.  A  position  contended  for  is,  "  that  political  tempt- 
ations, which  propel  to  vice,  are  founded  in  evil  moral 
principles." 

The  reader  is  solicited  for  the  last  time,  to  keep  in  mind, 
that  in  this  essay,  the  term  "  democracy"  means  "  a  gov- 
ernment administered  by  the  people,"  and  not  «  the  right 
of  the  people  to  institute  a  government,  nor  the  responsibili- 
ty of  magistrates  to  the  people."  The  contrast  of  the  an- 
cient analysis  between  its  three  forms  of  government,  is  im- 
perfect unless  democracy  is  thus  understood,  since  the  two 
terms  opposed  to  it,  are  used  to  specify  governments,  as  nu- 
merically administered.  Monarchy  and  aristocracy  mean. 
governments  administered  by  one  or  a  few.  and  not  a  right 
in  one  or  a  few  to  institute  a  government,  and  make  it 

12 


82         PRINCIPLES  OF  THE  POLICY  OP  THE  U.  STATES, 

responsible  to  the  instilutor.  Democracy  also  meant,  a 
government  administered  by  the  people  personally.  The 
extinction  is  considered  as  useful,  for  relieving  the  mind 
from  an  association,  between  the  sovereignty  of  the  people, 
and  the  evils  produced  by  a  nation's  exercising  the  functions 
of  government. 

Let  us  now  take  up  the  thread  of  this  essay.  I  have 
endeavoured  to  prove  that  aristocracy  is  artificial  and  not 
natural ;  that  the  aristocracies  of  superstition  and  landed 
wealth,  have  been  destroyed  by  knowledge,  commerce  and 
alienation ;  that  a  new  aristocracy  has  arisen  during  the 
last  century  from  paper  and  patronage,  of  a  character  so 
different  from  titled  orders,  as  not  to  be  compressible  with- 
in Mr.  Adams's  system ;  and  that  his  system  is  evidently 
defective,  in  having  silently  past  over  this  powerful  aristo- 
cracy, now  existing  in  England. 

By  the  civil  policy  of  the  United  States,  I  mean  the 
general  and  state  constitutions,  as  forming  one  system. 
Most  of  the  state  constitutions  existed  when  Mr.  Adams 
wrote,  and  no  new  principles  have  been  introduced  by  those 
since  created.  The  differences  among*  them  all,  eonsist  onlv 
in  modifications  of  the  same  principles.  As  immaterial  is 
the  anachronism  of  applying  Mr.  Adams's  reasoning  to  the 
general  constitution,  because  if  his  system  is  inimical  to 
that,  it  must  have  been  more  so  to  the  state  constitutions  he 
professed  to  defend  ;  as  in  that,  the  executive  and  senato- 
rial lines  are  drawn  with  a  stronger  pencil  than  in  those.* 

Mr.  Adams's  system  simply  is,  «  thai  nature  will  cre- 
ate an  aristocracy,  and  that  policy  ought  to  create  a  king, 
or  a  single,  independent  executive  power,  and  a  house  of 
popular  representatives,  to  balance  it." 

Let  one  of  the  state  constitutions  speak  for  the  rest. 
That  of  Massachusetts  declares,  that  "  all  men  are  born 
«  free  and  equal."  That  «  no  man,  or  corporation,  or  asso- 
••  ciation  of  men,  have  any  other  title  to  obtain  advantages. 
••  or  particular  and  exclusive  privileges,  distinct  from  those 

*  kda'ms's  I>f  8  v,  T?~  fc  A  > 


AND  OF  THE  ENGLISH  l'OH«. 

«  of  the  community,  than  what  arises  from  the  eetisidera- 
«  tion  of  services,  rendered  to  the  publiek.  And  this  title 
"  being,  in  nature,  neither  hereditary,  nor  transmissible  to 
"  children,  or  descendants,,  or  relations  by  blood,  the  idea 
"  of  a  man  born  a  magistrate,  lawgiver  or  judge,  is  absurd 
"  and  unnatural."  «  That  the  people  have  tiie  sole  and  ex- 
•'*  elusive  right  of  governing  themselves."  That  "govern- 
"  ment  is  instituted  for  the  common  good,  for  the  proteo- 
ii  tion,  safety,  prosperity,  and  happiness  of  the  people  ;  and 
"  not  for  the  profit,  honour,  or  private  interest  of  ally  one 
••  man,  family,  or  class  of  men."  And  that  "in  order  to 
«  prevent  those,  who  are  vested  with  authority,  from  bceoia 
"  i;ig  oppressors,  the  people  have  a  right,  at  such  periods, 
"  and  in  such  manner,  as  they  shall  establish  by  their  frame 
"  of  government,  to  cause  their  publick  officers  to  return 
«  to  private  life  ;  and  to  fill  up  vacant  places,  by  certain 
"and  regular  elections  and  appointments."  Two  pri'id 
pies  are  clearly  expressed  by  them  all ;  one,  that  every 
person  in  authority  is  responsible  and  removable ;  the 
other,  that  talents,  virtue,  and  political  power,  are  not 
inheritable. 

These  principles  are  precisely  levelled  at  the  opinions, 
that  monarchy  is  divine,  and  nobility  natural  ',  the  first  as- 
serted by  Filmer,  the  last  by  Mr.  Adams.  And  they  treat 
the  idea  of  hereditary  power,  contended  for  by  Mr,  Adams, 
as  "  absurd  and  unnatural"* 

The  constitutions  build  their  policy  upon  the  basis  of 
human  equality — «  all  men  are  born  free  and  equal ;"  and 
erect  the  artificial  inequalities  of  civil  government,  with  ;s 
view  of  preserving  and  defending  the  natural  equality  o! 
individuals.  Mr.  Adams  builds  his  policy  upon  the  basis  of 
human  inequality  by  nature — **  aristocracy  is  natural  f  and 
proposes  to  produce  an  artificial  level  or  equality,  not  of 
individuals,  but  of  orders,  composed  of  individuals  naturally 
unequal.  Yet  the  disciples  of  the  balance,  accuse  the  re- 
publicans of  levelism. 

*  Mr.   Adams  calls  miner's  notions  "absurd  and   srrr-nsxmot's "~~ 
Vol.  1.  7- 


84         PRINCIPLES  OP  THE  POLICY  OF  THE  IT.  STATES. 

It  is  necessary  to  affix  a  correct  idea  to  the  term 
"  equality,"  contended  for  by  the  constitutions,  and  denied 
by  Mr.  Adams.  They  do  not  mean  an  equality  of  stature, 
strength  or  understanding,  but  an  equality  of  moral  rights 
and  duties.  The  constitutions  admit  of  no  inequality  in  these 
moral  rights  and  duties,  excepting  that  produced  by  tem- 
porary and  responsible  power,  conferred  «  for  the  common 
good."  Mr.  Adams  contends  for  a  natural  inequality  of 
moral  rights  and  duties,  in  contending  for  a  natural  aristo- 
cracy. The  constitutions  establish  the  inequalities  of  tem- 
porary and  responsible  power,  with  a  view  of  maintaining 
an  equality  of  moral  rights  and  duties  among  the  individuals 
of  society ;  and  Mr.  Adams  proposes  orders,  with  a  view 
of  maintaining  his  natural  inequality  among  men,  by 
balancing  or  equalising  the  rights  of  orders. 

The  constitutions  consider  a  nation  as  made  of  indivi- 
duals ;  Mr.  Adams's  system,  as  made  of  orders.  Nature, 
by  the  constitutions,  is  considered  as  the  creator  of  men  ; 
by  the  system,  of  orders.  The  first  idea  suggests  the  sove- 
reignty of  the  people,  and  the  second  refutes  it ;  because,  if 
nature  creates  the  ranks  of  the  one,  the  few  and  the  many, 
the  nation  must  be  compounded  of  these  ranks  ;  and  one 
rank,  politically,  is  the  third  part  of  a  nation.  These  ranks 
composing  the  nation,  have  of  course  a  power  to  alter  the 
form  oi'  government  at  any  time,  without  consulting  the 
people,  because  the  people  do  not  constitute  the  nation.  An 
illustration  of  this  idea  lias  several  times  occurred  in  the 
English  practice  of  Mr.  Adams's  system. 

By  most  of  the  constitutions,  a  plural  executive  is  cre- 
ated j  by  a  few,  a  qualified  negative  upon  laws  is  given  to 
the  executive  power  ;  but  in  all,  that  power  is  made  subor- 
dinate to  the  legislative  power.  Sir.  Adams  declares,  that 
a  single  executive,  having  an  unqualified  negative  upon 
the  laws,  and  power  sufficient  to  defend  himself  against 
the  other  two  branches  of  the  legislature,  is  essential  to  his 
system. 


AN1?  OF  THE   ENGLISH  POLICY.  85 

In  short,  Mr.  Adams's  system  is  bottomed  upon  a  classi- 
fication of  men;  our  constitutions,  upon  an  application  of 
moral  principles  to  human  nature.  He  arranges  men  into 
the  one,  the  few  and  the  many,  and  bestows  on  the  one  and 
the  few,  more  power  than  he  gives  to  the  many,  to  counter- 
balance numerical  or  physical  strength  ;  our  constitutions 
divide  power  with  a  view  to  the  responsibility  of  the  agent, 
and  jealous  of  the  danger  of  accumulating  great  power  in 
the  hands  of  one  or  a  few,  because  all  history  proves  that 
this  species  of  condensation  begets  tyranny,  bestow  most 
power  on  their  most  numerous  functionary. 

Mr.  Godwin,  in  his  "Political  Justice,"  v.  2.  p.  180,  as- 
septs  that  "  scarcely  any  plausible  argument  can  be  adduced 
in  favour  of  what  has  been  denominated  by  political  writer? 
a  division  of  power."  This  authoritative  decision  seems  to 
have  been  made,  without  any  consideration  of  the  ground 
upon  which  a  division  of  power  is  justified  in  this  essay. 
Mr.  Adams  confines  a  division  of  power,  to  a  division  of  or- 
ders of  men ;  Mr.  Godwin  extends  it  to  a  division  of  orders 
of  power,  such  as  legislative,  executive  and  judicative;  but 
this  essay,  considering  a  classification  of  power  into  orders, 
as  little  less  erroneous  than  a  classification  of  men,  extends 
the  idea  of  its  division  to  the  counteraction  of  monopoly  in 
any  form,  by  a  man,  an  order  or  a  government,  in  a  degree 
sufficient  to  excite  ambition,  avarice  or  despotism.  This 
idea  of  a  division  of  power  is  consonant  to  the  policy  of  (he 
United  States,  as  is  evinced  by  the  responsibility  of  the  exe- 
cutive, the  allotments  of  power  to  the  state  and  the  general 
governments,  and  the  reservations  from  the  powers  of  both, 
retained  by  the  people;  and  is  distinct  from  the  ideas  both 
of  Mr.  Adams  and  Mr.  Godwin.  The  latter  gentleman's 
opinions  in  favour  of  a  division  of  property,  and  against  a 
division  of  power,  are  inconsistent,  if  a  monopoly  of  either, 
will  beget  a  monopoly  of  both  ;  if  wealth  attracts  power,  and 
power  wealth.  The  same  principles  dictate  a  distribution 
of  both  ;  and  the  same  effects  flow  from  an  accumulation  of. 
either.     A  law  of  primogeniture  in   respect  to  power,  is 


SO         PRINCIPLES  01'  THE  POLICY  OP  THE  U.  STATES, 

similar  to  a  law  of  primogeniture  in  respect  to  property. 
The  objection  to  both  is  comprised  in  their  enmity  to  the 
principle  of  division.  This  subject  will  oeeur  again  in  a 
subsequent  part  of  this  essay. 

Let  us  pause,  and  take  a  glance  at  the  title  of  Mr. 
Adams's  treatise.  Why  was  it  called  "  a  defence  of  the 
constitutions  of  government  of  the  United  States  of  Ameri- 
ca ?"  It  assails  the  principle,  upon  which  these  constitutions 
are  founded ;  it  asserts  doctrines  which  they  condemn  ;  and 
it  justifies  a  system  of  government  which  would  be  a  revo- 
lution of  them  all.  If  this  unsuitable  title,  arose  from  an 
incapacity  to  distinguish  between  the  principles  of  our  poli- 
cy, and  those  of  a  system  of  balanced  orders,  the  errour  is 
pardonable,  and  only  destroys  the  authority  of  the  treatise ; 
but  if  it  was  an  artifice,  to  mask  under  a  pretended  affection 
for  our  principles  of  government,  an  attack  upon  them,  the 
erudition  of  the  treatise  will  not  be  able  to  conceal,  nor  the 
freedom  of  political  disquisition  to  justify,  the  insincerity  of 
such  an  intention. 

To  prove  the  correctness  of  this  criticism,  it  isnecessa 
ry  to  return  more  particularly  to  Mr.  Adams's  trealise,  foi 
the  purpose  of  elucidating  its  drift  beyond  the  possibility  of 
misapprehension.  Thus  also  Ave  shall  advance  in  a  know- 
ledge of  the  policy  of  the  United  Slates,  and  of  that  of  En- 
gland ;  which  are  important  objects  of  this  essay. 

The  pretext  for  Mr.  Adams's  treatise,  appears  in  the 
first  page  of  the  first  volume,  in  the  following  extract  of  a 
letter  from  Mr.  Turgot,  to  Doctor  Price  :  "  that  he  is  "not 
••'  satisfied  with  the  constitutions  which  have  hitherto  beea 
"  formed  for  the  different  States  of  America.  That  by 
«*  most  of  them  the  customs  of  England  are  imitated,  with- 
"  out  any  particular  motive.  Instead  of  collecting  all  au- 
••'  thority  into  one  centre,  that  of  the  nation,  they  have  os- 
*<  tablished  different  bodies,  a  body  of  representatives,  a 
"  council,  and  a  governour,  because  there  is  in  England  a 
*'  house  of  commons,  a  house  of  lords,  and  a  king.  They 
"•  endeavour   to  balance  these  different  powers,  as  if  thi* 


A>D  Of  TUK    ENGLISH   POLICY.  H7 

«•  equilibrium,  which  in  England  may  be  a  necessary  check 
,*•  to  the  enormous  influence  of  royalty,  could  be  of  any  use 
« in  republicks  founded  upon  the  equality  of  all  the  eiti- 
«  zens,  and  as  if  establishing  different  orders  of  men  was 
"  not  a  source  of  divisions  and  disputes.1" 

Against  this  charge,  Mr.  Adams  exhibits  a  defence  for 
the  constitutions  in  a  mode  entirely  new.  He  labours  to 
prove  that  every  word  of  it  is  tiue,  and  that  the  balance  of 
power,  and  orders  of  men,  spoken  of  by  Mr.  Turgot,  have 
been  borrowed  by  us  from  England,  and  do  in  fact  const i- 
tute  the  only  good  form  of  government. 

The  task  of  proving  the  charge  untrue,  would  have  been 
much  easier.  I  will  concisely  endeavour  to  do  so,  before  I 
proceed  in  the  examination  of  the  use  Mr.  Adams  has  made 
of  it. 

A  celebrated  author  has  pronounced  in  a  tone  of  great 
authority,  that ««  government  is  in  all  cases  an  evil."*  This 
assertion,  and  Mr.  Turgot's  misconception,  are  founded  in 
the  same  errour  ;  that  of  contemplating  monarchy,  aristo- 
cracy and  democracy,  as  an  analysis  comprising  every  form 
of  government.  These  being  all  founded  in  evil  moral 
principles,  would  produce  evil  effects,  and  Mr.  Godwiti  be- 
holding this  fact,  pronounces  "  that  government  is  in  all  ca- 
ses an  evil,"  because  he  had  not  conceived  any  other  ele- 
ments of  governments,  except  those  of  monarchy,  aristocra- 
cy and  democracy ;  and  these  producing  much  evil,  his  re- 
medy is  to  destroy  government  itself.  But  had  he  consider 
ed,  that  government  could  not  be  an  evil,  if  it  was  founded 
in  principles  which  would  excite  the  good  moral  qualities 
of  human  nature,  he  would  have  searched  for  some  such 
form,  capable  of  excluding  monarchy,  aristocracy  and  de- 
mocracy, all  of  which  produce  evil,  because  of  their  tenden- 
cy to  excite  man's  evil  qualities. 

The  same  analysis  led  Mr.  Turgot.  into  a  misconception 
of  the  principles  of  our  policy.  Supposing  us  to  be  tied 
•iown  to  a  form  compounded  of  Uiq  whole  analysis,  or  of 

*  Godwin  on  Pol.  Jus  :  r.  2.  211 


SS         PRINCIPLE*  ©F  THE  POLICY  OF  THE  f.  STATES, 

one  or  two  members  of  it,  and  preferring  democracy  to  a 
mixed  government,  he  concluded  that  our  governments  were 
compounded  of  the  whole  analysis,  because  he  could  not  dis- 
cern the  object  of  his  preference ;  and  in  not  being  able  to 
discern  democracy  among-  our  state  constitutions,  Mr.  Tur- 
got  justifies  the  idea,  which  supposes  that  the  evil  "  demo- 
cracy" is  as  capable  of  remedy,  as  the  evils  "  monarchy  and 
aristocracy,"  and  that  it  is  actually  removed  by  our  system 
of  government. 

Mr.  Turgot,  not  seeing  the  object  of  his  preference,  has- 
tily concluded  our  policy  to  have  copied  the  English  ;  and 
founds  his  conclusion  in  an  opinion,  that  it  makes  state  go- 
vernours  kings,  balances  powers,  and  establishes  orders  of 
men.  All  this  is  obviously  erroneous.  We  have  less  of 
monarchy  and  aristocracy  in  our  policy,  both  of  which  he 
pretends  to  see,  than  of  democracy,  which  he  could  not  see. 
Instead  of  balancing  power,  we  divide  it  and  make  it  respon- 
sible, to  prevent  the  evils  of  its  accumulation  in  the  hands  of 
one  interest.  And  such  is  the  force  of  this*  principle  of  di- 
viding power,  to  excite  the  good,  and  suppress  the  evil  qua- 
lities of  man,  that  among  several  hundred  state  governours 
who  have  already  existed,  not  one  instance  has  appeared  of 
kingly  qualities,  of  usurpation,  or  of  war  between  neigh- 
bouring states.  Why  have  the  state  governments  escaped 
the  evils  of  monarchy  ?  For  the  same  reason  that  i  hey  have 
escaped  those  of  aristocracy  and  democracy.  This  exam- 
ple of  the  good  moral  conduct  of  their  governours,  testifies 
to  the  correctness  of  our  analysis.  Instead  of  monarchy, 
which  excites  evil  qualities,  our  division  (not  a  balance)  of 
power,  renders  it  responsible,  and  brings  good  qualities  out 
of  governours ;  and  instead  of  a  tumultuary  nation,  election* 
by  division  also,  is  filtered  of  its  worst  vice,  and  brings  good 
qualities  out  of  the  mass  of  the  people.  Whereas  a  balance 
of  power  or  a  balance  of  orders  (for  it  will  amount  to  the 
same  thing)  has  constantly  produced  a  spirit  as  bitter  as  tls« 
animosity  between  rival  clans,  and  caused  distraction  and 
misery,  until  the  latter  becomes  permanent  in  a  despotism, 


AND  OF  THE  ENGLISH  FOXIGY.  89 

begotten  by  the  predominance  of  one  order  or  of  one  power. 
Mr.  Turgot's  errour  in  supposing  our  constitutions  to 
have  been  formed  by  the  English  model,  and  his  condemna- 
tion of  such  an  imitation,  afforded  an  opportunity  precisely 
fitted  for  Mr.  Adams's  purpose.  He  assumes  our  defence 
against  the  condemnation,  and  assails  Mr.  Turgot's  prefe- 
rence for  collecting  all  authority  into  one  centre.  In  justi- 
fying us  against  Turgot's  condemnation  for  having  copied 
the  English  system,  it  was  incumbent  on  Mr.  Adams  to 
prove  that  system  to  be  the  most  perfect  model  of  civil  po- 
licy ;  in  endeavouring  to  effect  this,  he  was  enabled  to  make 
some  U3e  of  our  prepossessions,  by  scattering  in  his  first  vo- 
lume a  few  compliments  to  our  constitutions ;  these  howe- 
ver are  bestowed  upon  them  as  copies,  but  like  copies,  they 
are  presently  forgotten  in  the  admiration  excited  by  the  ori- 
ginal. 

Turgot  condemns  a  balance  of  power,  and  different  or 
ders  of  men,  and  approves  of  collecting  all  authority  into 
one  centre,  the  nation.  Mr.  Adams  tacitly  admits  our  con- 
stitutions to  be  artificers  of  this  balance  and  these  orders, 
converts  Turgot's  centre  into  a  single  chamber  of  represen- 
tatives, engages  these  phantoms  in  hostility,  and  astounds 
us  with  history,  anecdote,  poetry  and  fable,  to  prove — what? 
That  Mr.  Turgot  was  mistaken  in  supposing  that  these 
were  political  orders  created  by  our  constitutions  ?  No.  To 
prove  that  such  orders  naturally  existed,  and  that  no  good 
government  could  be  formed,  except  by  balancing  power 
among  such  orders. 

"Whether  Mr.  Turgot  approves  or  not.  of  concentrating 
all  power  in  a  single  house  of  reprt ;st  ntaiives,  is  immate- 
rial; except  that  Mr.  Adams,  by  supposing  him  lo  do  so,  has 
very  artificially  interwoven,  an  assault  upon  that  idea,  a 
vindication  of  a  nujxed  or  limited  monarchy,  and  a  few  slight 
compliments  to  our  constitutions.  He  uses  the  constitu- 
tions as  a  weak  ally  in  carrying  on  the  war  against  Turgot's 
nire  of  power,  places  the  system  of  limited  monarchy  in 

13 


90 


PRINCIPLES  OF  THE  POLICY  OF  THE  U.  STATES, 


the  van  of  the  battle,  and  gives  it  all  the  credit  of  conscious 
victory. 

Turgot's  idea  of  «  collecting  all  authority  into  one  cen- 
tre," "  that  of  the  nation,"  might  possibly  have  extended  to 
national  sovereignty  only,  without  condemning  a  distribution 
of  power  among  publick  functionaries  by  a  moderate  scale ; 
but  Mr.  Adams,  by  making  that  centre  to  consist  of  one 
house  of  representatives,  seized  upon  the  i-trongest  ground 
for  exhibiting  representative  government  in  distortion.  To 
render  monarchy  most  hateful,  all  power  ought  to  be  exhi- 
bited in  the  hands  of  a  single  man ;  so  to  render  representa- 
tion hateful,  the  best  exhibition,  is  all  power  in  the  hands 
of  a  single  house.  We  caricature  what  we  wish  to  make 
odious,  and  adorn  what  we  wish  to  recommend.  Thus 
Mr.  Adams  contrasts  republicanism  in  its  most  hideous, 
with  monarchy,  in  its  most  becoming  dress.  One  he  adorns 
with  his  checks  and  balances,  his  jealousy  among  orders, 
and  his  patrician  virtues  ;  and  tells  no  tale  of  woe  produced 
by  its  vices  :  the  other  he  places  in  a  centre  of  monopoly, 
from  whence  she  is  made  to  hurl  legislative,  executive  and 
judicial  destruction  on  friends  and  enemies.  It  is  admitted 
that  the  object  of  his  embellishment,  might  possibly  be  some 
relief  against  the  monster  disfigured  for  its  foil. 

But  the  question  so  important  to  America,  is  not  to  be 
thus  eluded.  Jlceause  Mr.  Turgot  has  charged  us  with  ha- 
ving established  governments,  bottomed  upon  the  English 
system  of  balancing  classes  of  power,  and  creating  orders 
of  men  ;  and  because  Mr.  Adams  has  defended  our  govern- 
ments  against  this  charge,  not  by  denying  it,  but  by  endea- 
vouring to  prove  that  system  to  be  the  best ;  it  does  not  fol- 
low that  our  political  policy  is  really  that  of  the  English. 
It  only  results  from  the  charge  and  defence,  that  Mr.  Tur- 
got condemned  and  Mr.  Adams  approved  of  the  English 
policy.  And  although  Mr.  Adams  has  been  pleased  to  en- 
gage that  policy  in  hostilities  with  Turgot's  phantasm,  of 
concentrating  all  power  in  one  chamber  of  representatives, 
(if  such  an  opinion  is   justly  ascribed  to  him)  a  victory  on 


AND  OF  THE  ENGLISH  POLICY.  31 

cither  side  can  furnish  no  conclusion  or  inference  applicable 
to  the  civil  policy  of  the  United  States.  That  consists  nei- 
ther of  Mr.  Adams's  orders  and  balance,  nor  of  Turgot's 
chamber.  It  stands  aloof,  and  like  a  giant  looks  down 
without  interest  on  this  pigmy  war.  Shall  one  of  the  pig- 
mies, because  he  has  beaten  the  other,  be  considered  as  hav- 
ing also  obtained  a  victory  over  the  giant  ? 

The  question  is  not  to  be  eluded.  Whether  Mr.  Tur- 
got's chamber,  or  Mr.  Adams's  orders  and  balances,  consti- 
tute the  best  form  of  government,  is  not  a  question  with 
which  the  United  States  have  any  concern  5  and  that  is  *he 
question  discussed  by  Mr.  Adams.  If  he  has  gained  a  vic- 
tory over  Turgot,  it  is  not  a  victory  also  over  the  policy  ol* 
the  United  States,  unless  that  policy  is  Turgot's,  though 
disclaimed  by  him  ;  nor  is  our  policy  entitled  to  any  share 
of  his  laurels,  unless  it  is,  as  Turgot  asserted,  the  English 
policy. 

However  disguised,  the  true  question  is  discernible. 
It  simply  is,  whether  the  existing  form  of  government  of 
the  United  States,  or  the  English  limited  monarchy  is  pre- 
ferable. It  is  in  this  question  that  we  are  interested.  This 
question  has  not  been  discussed  by  Mr.  Adams,  in  mauling 
Turgot's  chamber  with  his  balances.  But  we  ought  to  ac- 
quire a  thorough  knowledge  of  the  English  system  and  its 
principles,  and  of  our  own  system  and  its  principles,  to  disco- 
ver wherein  they  differ,  and  to  bestow  with  justice  the  contes- 
ted preference.  Much  of  our  labour  has  already  been  appro- 
priated towards  this  important  object ;  more  is  yet  neces- 
sary. At  present  we  will  proceed  in  our  endeavours  to 
ascertain  with  preciseness  the  opinion  of  the  author  upon 
whose  work  we  are  commenting. 

Mr.  Adams's  second  volume  commences  with  the  follow- 
ing motto  :  "  As  for  us  Englishmen,  thank  heaven  we  have 
«  a  better  sense  of  government  delivered  to  us  from  our 
**  ancestors.  We  have  the  notion  of  a  publick,  and  a  consti- 
•*  tution  ;  how  a  legislature,  and  how  an  executive  is  mould- 
«  ed ;  we  understand  weight  and  measure  in  this  kind,  and 


93         PRINCIPLES  OF  THE  POLICY  OF  THE  U.  STATES, 

"  can  reason  justly  on  the  balance  of  power  and  pro\)erty. 
i(  The  maxims  we  draw  from  hence,  are  as  evident  as  those 
"  of  malhemalicks.  Our  increasing  knowledge,  shows  every 
"  day  what  common  sense  is  in  politicks."* 

In  a  motto,  an  author  condenses  his  opinion  and  his  sub- 
ject, to  the  utmost  of  his  power.  This  combines  a  strong 
idea  of  the  English  system,  with  a  stronger  approbation  of 
it.  No  preference  can  be  stronger  than  one  founded  in 
mathematical  evidence ;  and  no  room  remains  for  farther 
political  discovery,  after  mathematical  demonstration.  If 
the  English  system  possesses  this  degree  of  perfection,  it 
excels  ours  by  the  confession  of  our  constitutions,  in  provi- 
sions for  their  own  improvement. 

Shaftsbury  wrote  this  sentence,  about  a  eentury  past, 
when  the  system  of  paper  and  patronage  was  neither  under- 
stood nor  felt  in  England,  and  when  a  portion  of  the  landed 
wealth  of  the  nobility  remained,  sufficient  to  bestow  some 
importance  upon  that  order.  What  does  he  say  produced 
these  mathematical  political  maxims  of  the  English  sys 
tern  ?  '**  A  balance  of  power  and  property  :"  power  and  pro- 
perty are  the  indissoluble  companions  by  which  the  system 
was  regulated.  If  property  and  nobility  became  divided, 
would  power  and  nobility  continue  united  ?  Neither  the  ac 
tual  nor  comparative  wealth  of  the  English  nobility  is  now 
What  it  was  a  century  past.  Paper  systems,  patronage  and 
commerce,  have  overturned  the  balance  which  furnish**! 
Shaftsbury's  mathematical  political  maxims.  And  as  accor- 
ding to  these  maxims,  power  with  mathematical  certainty 
will  follow  property,  so  the  existence  of  the  aristocracy  of 
paper  and  patronage,  contended  for  by  this  essay,  is  esta- 
blished upon  Lord  Shaftsbury's  principles,  and  by  Mr. 
Adams's  motto. 

When  Lord  Shaftsbury  wrote,  the  balance  of  property 
in  England  was  created  on  the  part  of  the  king,  by  the  do- 
mains annexed  to  his  office,  by  certain  pecuniary  acquisition* 

*  In  the  edition  of  1757,  the  words  are  "  us  Britons."— Extracted  from 
Shaftsfaury's  Charact   v.  1,  part  3d.  sec.  1.  p.  83. 


AND  OF  THE    ENGLISH   POLICY.  f£ 

derived  from  prerogative,  by  some  patronage,  and  by  an 
annuity  for  life  ;  and  on  the  part  of  the  nobility,  by  the  ex 
tent  and  value  of  their  manors.  Now,  the  last  weight,  is  nc 
longer  in  the  scale  j  and  the  first,  has  become  ponderous, 
Is  the  balance  between  these  two  ©infers,  even  without  tak 
ing  into  the  account  the  new  weight  created  by  paper  and 
patronage,  what  it  was  a  century  past  ?  If  not,  will  different 
weights,  a  new  or  a  broken  balance,  supply  Mr.  Adams 
with  the  same  mathematical  maxims  of  government,  which 
Shaftsbury,  mathematically  also,  extracted  from  a  differ- 
ent balance  ? 

Both  these  authors  unequivocally  affirm  the  necessity  of 
a  balance  of  property,  whereon  to  establish  the  balance  of 
power  constituting  the  English  system.  Let  us  apply  this 
awful  acknowledgement  to  the  situation  of  the  United 
States,  without  suffering  political  prejudice  to  suspend  our 
judgments.  Does  this  balance  of  property,  indispensable  to 
the  British  and  Mr.  Adams's  system,  in  the  opinion  of 
Shaftsbury  and  Mr.  Adams,  exist  here  ?  If  not,  with  what 
propriety  has  Mr.  Adams  contended  that  his  system,  was 
the  system  of  the  United  States  ?  Of  his,  this  balance  of 
property  is  the  essence  ;  of  theirs,  it  forms  no  part. 

The  admitted  necessity  of  a  balance  of  property,  for  the 
existence  of  Mr.  Adams's  system,  unfolds  visibly  to  e^ 
politician,  however  superficial,  that  his  system  cannot  ej 
without  it  ,•  and  the  mode  of  introducing  a  balance  of  pro- 
perty here,  is  then  to  be  considered. 

By  two  ways  only,  has  it  ever  been  effected  in  England. 
First,  by  royal  domains  and  feudal  baronies.  Secondly,  by 
a  million  annuity,  executive  patronage,  and  the  paper  sys- 
tem. To  effect  this  balance  of  property  here  iu  the  first 
mode,  it  would  be  necessary  to  strip  a  sufficient  number  of 
landholders  of  their  property,  for  the  purpose  of  creating  a 
landed  king,  and  a  landed  aristocracy  :  but  as  this  mode  of 
making  a  balance  of  property  among  orders,  would  be  too 
direct  to  be  safe,  the  observation  onlv  furnishes  a  conclusive 


9$         PRINCIPLES  OP  THE  POLICY  OP  THE  TJ.  STATES, 

proof,  that  a  landed  aristocracy  can  never  be  created  in  the 
United  States,  as  a  member  of  Mr.  Adams's  system. 

The  other  mode  of  coming  at  this  balance,  is  to  trans- 
fer property  to  the  system  of  paper  and  patronage.  And 
this  being  the  only  practicable  mode,  those  Avho  calculate 
that  the  system  of  balancing  power  and  property,  will  be- 
stow on  them  an  unequal  share  of  both,  will  use  it  as  the 
only  means  of  advancing  that  system.  This  would  create 
a  monopoly  of  property,  not  by  taking  the  lands  from  the 
owners  directly,  but  by  taking  their  profits  indirectly,  with 
charters  of  profit,  stock  and  patronage.  By  this  mode,  the 
president  must  be  endowed  with  the  patronage  and  the  an- 
nual million  of  the  king  of  England,  to  bestow  on  him  the 
wealth  necessary  to  form  one  order,  and  a  monied  aristo- 
,  eracy  must  be  raised  by  such  pretexts  as  may  occur,  to  cre- 
ate another. 

The  motto  therefore  proposes  two  questions  for  the  rea- 
der's consideration.  One,  whether  this  English  system  of 
balancing  power  and  property,  as  existing  when  Shaftsbu- 
ry  wrote,  or  at  this  time,  is  the  system  of  the  United  States  ; 
The  other,  whether  it  would  be  wise  or  just  in  the  United 
States,  to  exchange  their  system  for  it. 

To  determine  the  first  question,  the  fact  will  suffice. 
That,  as  stated  by  Lord  Shaftsbury,  and  contended  for  by 
Mr.  Adams,  simply  is,  that  an  allotment  of  property  and 
power  is  necessary  among  the  one,  the  few  and  the  many, 
to  sustain  or  create,  the  English  or  Mr.  Adams's  system  of 
government.  And  it  is  explicitly  declared,  that  this  allot- 
ment must  amount  to  a  balance  or  an  equality.  Hence,  it 
is  obvious,  that  the  orders  consisting  of  the  one  and  the  few, 
must  each  be  endowed  with  a  portion  of  power  and  proper- 
ty equal  to  that,  bestowed  on  the  order  consisting  of  the  ma- 
ny. Therefore  the  system  can  neither  subsist  or  be  intro- 
duced without  a  vast  accumulation  of  power  and  property 
in  the  individual  and  the  minor  order.  Such  is  the  fact  on 
one  side.  Oil  the  other,  it  is  a  fact  equally  undeniable,  that 
it  is  the  policy  of  the  United  States  to  divide,  and  not  to 


AND  0¥  THE  ENGLISH  POLICY.  [t$ 

Accumulate  power  and  property.  It  follows  that  the  system 
of  balancing  power  and  property  in  the  hands  of  orders,  is 
not  the  system  of  the  United  States. 

To  determine  the  second  question,  the  argument  of  this 
essay  must  be  estimated.     Here  it  is  only  necessary  to  re- 
mark, that  the  wisdom  of  an  exchange  of  our  system  for 
Mr.  Adams's,  will  often  be  affirmed  or  denied  by  the  dic- 
tates of  self  interest.     Requiring  as  it  does,  that  two  thirds 
of  the  power  and  property  of  the  nation,  should  be  transfer- 
al to  the  one,  and  the  few,  it  is  probable  that  those  who 
expect  a  share  of  this  acquisition,  so  wonderfully  adapted  to 
solicit  the  exertions  of  ambition  and  avarice,  will  attempt  to 
persuade  us,  that  the  exchange  would  be  wise ;  on  the  con- 
trary, as  the  order  of  the  many,   must  furnish  nearly  the 
whole  of  the  power  and  property  necessary  to  bring  up  the 
two  other  orders  to  a  balance  with  itself,  it  is  as  probable, 
that  no  individual,  who  understands  the  subject,  and  believes 
that  he  will  be  a  member  of  the  order  to  be  despoiled,  will 
approve  of  the  exchange.     He  will  see,  that  to  make  orders 
equal  in  power  and  property,  is  to  make  individuals  une- 
qual ;  and  that  it  would  be  simply  a  case  of  dividing  twelve 
millions  of  children  belonging  to  one  man,  into  three  or- 
ders, of  one,  of  about  one  hundred  and  fifty,  and  of  eleven 
millions  nine  hundred  and  ninety  nine  thousand,  eight  hun- 
dred and  forty  nine  ;  and  of  bestowing  one  third  of  the  inhe- 
ritance upon  each  order.      It  is  very  conceivable  that  the 
individuals  who  composed  the  two  first  orders,  might  be  ve- 
ry well  pleased  v\  itli  the  system  of  such  a  balance  of  power 
and  property,  and  that  those  belonging  to  the  third,  would 
have  no  great  cause  to  rejoice.     Nor  would  a  child  of  the 
multitude,  be  easily  convinced  of  the  justice  and  wisdom  of 
the  system  of  balancing  power  and  property,  by  a  difference 
in  the  mode  of  effecting  it;  whether  this  was  done  by  the 
force  of  the  feudal  system,  or  the  fraud  of  paper  and  patro- 
nage, would  make  no  difference  in  the  consequences  to  him. 
He  would  therefore  prefer  the  inequalities  produced  by  ta- 
lents and  industry,  to  the  system  of  levelling  orders. 


J-ivlNCIPI.ES  OF  THE  PoMCY  8¥  THE  U.  STATES, 

We  will  now  proceed  with  our  quotations,  to  exhibit  a 
few  of  the  wmpiific&tiofts  of  this  motto  to  be  found  through- 
out Mr.  Adams's  second  and  third  volumes,  his  unqualified 
Appfobatien  of  its  doctrine,   ami  his  unsuccessful  efforts  to 
the  policy  of  the  United  States  within  its  tenour. 

"  When  it  is  found  in  experience,  and  appears  probable 
«  in  theory,  that  so  simple  an  invention  as  a  separate  exe- 
**  eu#v©,  with  power  to  defend  itself,  as  a  ft! 31  remedy 
<*  against  the  fatal  effects  of  dissentions  between  nobles  and 
"•  commons,  why  should  we  still  finally  hope  that  simple 
"  governments,  or  mixtures  of  two  ingredients  only,  will 
»•  produce  effects  which  they  never  did,  and  we  know  never 
••  can  ?  Why  should  the  people  be  still  deceived  with  insi- 
"  nuations,  that  these  evils  arose  from  the  destiny  of  a  par- 
«  tieular  city,  when  we  know  that  destiny  common  to  all 
**  mankind  ?"* 

it  is  obvious  that  Mr.  Adams  is  here  contemplating  mo- 
narchy, aristocracy  and  democracy,  and  not  moral  princi- 
ples, as  the  only  ingredients  of  government ;  and  that  in  his 
division  of  power,  he  thinks  it  necessary  to  assign  to  the  ex- 
ecutive order  (which  he  in  other  places  limits  to  a  single 
person)  a  quota,  sufficient  to  enable  him  to  defend  himself 
against  the  plebeian  order.  In  the  United  States,  the  exe- 
cutive power  is  dependent  on  the  people.  The  quota  of 
power  cannot  by  his  system  be  given,  without  a  correspond- 
ent balance  of  wealth.  The  wealth  tlien  of  Mr.  Adams's 
executive  order,  must  also  balance  the  wealth  of  the  ple- 
beian order. 

The  assertion,  that  neither  one  nor  two  of  these  ingredi- 
ents, can  produce  effeets  correspondent  to  our  hopes,  though 
exactly  as  true,  as  that  a  mixture  of  all  three  will  equally 
disappoint  us,  positively  affirms  the  necessity  of  tliis  mix 
lure  ;  and  when  coupled  with  the  deception  into  which  such 
hopes  Jiave  seduced  tlie  people,  acknowledges,  both  that  the 
policy  of  the  United  States  did  not  embrace  this  mixture. 

*  Adams's  Def.  v.  2,  p.  53     The  third  Philadelphia  edition  is  que  1 
throughout  this  essay 


AND  OF  THE    ENGLISH  POLICY.  U7 

and  that  it  was  an  experiment  unpromising  in  theory,  and 
forbidden  by  experience.  The  treatise  is  addressed  to  the 
people  of  the  United  States ;  no  other  people  who  conM 
come  to  a  knowledge  of  it,  entertained  an  enmity  in  1786, 
against  kings  and  nobles;  the  deprecated  deception  and  the 
political  errour,  alleged  in  the  extract,  to  exist,  must  there- 
fore exclusively  refer  to  the  publick  opinion  of  the  people  of 
the  United  States,  and  to  the  texture  of  their  governments, 
And  thus  are  justified  by  the  admission  of  Mr.  Adams,  the 
opinions  asserted  in  this  essay ;  that  our  policy  is  not  the 
English  ;  and  that  Mr.  Adams,  instead  of  defending  it,  as  he 
proposed,  has,  under  colour  of  refuting  Turgot's  project  of 
a  single  centre  of  power,  laboured  to  establish  its  inferior! 
iy  to  the  English  system. 

"  Here  was  the  best  possible  opportunity  for  introducing 
"  the  most  perfect  form,  by  giving  the  executive  power  to 
**  one  of  the  Medici,  the  power  of  the  purse  to  the  people, 
«  and  the  legislative  power  to  both,  together  with  the  noli 
« lity."* 

The  best  possible  opportunity  in  this  extract  spoken  of, 
was  a  conjuncture  in  the  history  of  Florence,  at  which  the 
people  expelled  an  usurper  or  a  monarch  of  the  Medicean 
family,  and  attempted  to  establish  a  popular  government. 
That  conjuncture  was  analogous  to  our  expulsion  of  a  mo- 
narch of  the  Guelph  family.  The  Florentine  conjuncture, 
says  Mr.  Adams,  afforded  the  best  possible  opportunity  for 
introducing  the  most  perfect  form  of  government,  namely 
that  of  king,  lords  and  commons.  And  the  king  was  to  be 
taken  from  the  usurping  and  expelled  family. 

The  last  extract  consisted  of  a  positive  declaration,  that 
limited  monarchy  was  the  most  perfect  form  of  government, 
and  a  positive  opinion  as  to  the  best  conjuncture  for  intro- 
ducing it.     The  following  is  of  a  similar  character. 

«  The  sovereign  or  rather  the  first  magistrate  of  this 
9*  monarchical  republick,  is  the  king  of  Prussia.  Without 
.«  descending  to  a  particular  account,  of  this  princely  vepub- 

*  XcUms's  Def.  v.  2: 163 

1-i 


J$         PRINCIPLES  OF  THE  POLICY  OF  THE  V.  9TATES, 

u  jick,  let  me  refer  you  to  the  Dietionaire  de  la  Martiniere, 
*<  and  to  Faber,  printed  at  the  end  of  the  sixth  volume  of  it, 
"  and  to  Coxe's  sketches,  and  to  conclude  with  hinting  at  a 
"  few  features  of  this  excellent  constitution.  None  but  na^ 
<•  tives  are  capable  of  holding  any  office,  civil  or  military, 
"  excepting  that  of  governour.  The  three  estates  shall  be 
**  assembled  every  year.  The  magistrates  and  officers  of 
"justice  shall  hold  their  employments  during  good  beha- 
"  viour  ;  nor  is  the  king  the  judge  of  ill  behaviour.  The 
<s  Mng  at  his  accession  takes  an  oath  to  maintain  all  rights, 
'<  liberties,  franchises,  and  customs,  written  or  unwritten. 
fi  The  king  is  considered  as  resident  only  at  Neuehattel, 
*•  and  therefore  when  absent  can  only  address  the  citizens 
"  through  his  governour  and  the  council  of  state.  No  eiti- 
i(  zen  can  be  tried  out  of  the  country  or  otherwise  than  by 
v*  the  judges.  The  prince  confers  nobility,  and  nominates 
S(  to  the  principal  offices  of  state,  civil  and  military.  The 
a  Prince  \n  ]t'lS  absence  is  represented  by  a  governor  of  his 
'<  own  appointing.     He  convokes  the  three  estates."* 

It  is  not  intended  to  insult  the  reader  by  pointing  out 
the  several  eulogies  upon  monarchy  and  orders  in  this  ex- 
tract, nor  is  it  hardly  necessary  to  draw  his  attention  to  a 
repetition  of  an  idea  similar  to  that  furnished  by  the  prece- 
ding. In  that,  the  reward  of  an  usurping  family,  by  placing 
one  of  it  on  a  throne,  would,  it  was  said,  have  been  good  po- 
licy ',  and  that  the  era  of  its  expulsion,  was  the  best  possible 
opportunity  for  this  experiment.  In  this,  a  government  of 
orders,  in  which  the  king  is  absent,  is  said  to  be  an  "  ex- 
cellent constitution."  Added  to  the  absence  of  the  king, 
the  exclusion  from  office  of  all  except  natives,  three  estate? 
assembled  annually,  a  coronation  oath,  a  fiction  to  acquire 
the  presence  of  the  king,  trial  within  the  country,  a  right 
in  the  Prince  to  confer  nobility  and  appoint  officers,  and  f* 
locum  tenens  king  called  governor,  comprise  every  feature 
of  the  Neuchattel  constitution,  urged  to  convince  us  of  i'K 
excellence. 

•  Adams's  Defence,  v.  2.  446  &  44?. 


AND  0¥  THIS  EIUMLIBH  PdXICY.  »'•* 

I  remember  to  have  seen  a  book  nearly  contemporary 
with  Mr.  Adams's  defence,  written  by  a  Sir  John  Dalrynv- 
pie,  an  Englishman,  containing  a  proposition  for  a  reunion 
between  England  and  the  United  States,  upon  terms  nearly 
similar  to  the  constitution  of  Neuchattel,  celebrated  by  Mr. 
Adams.  And  had  these  two  gentlemen  been  appointed  ple- 
nipotentiaries to  treat  of  this  proposal,  the  only  point  for 
discussion  which  seems  to  have  been  left  unsettled  by  the 
extract  and  Dalrymple's  book,  would  have  been,  whether 
Neuchattel,  in  Switzerland,  as  divided  from  Prussia  by 
land,  was  more  commodiously  situated  for  a  Prussian,  thart 
the  United  States,  for  an  English  king. 

As  to  the  preferable  form  of  government,  no  disagree- 
ment could  have  happened  between  the  negotiators,  unless 
the  following  quotations  are  really  eulogies  upon  our  own 
policy. 

"  But  there  is  a  form  of  government  which  produces  a 
«  love  of  law,  liberty  and  country,  instead  of  disorder,  irre- 
"  gularity  and  a  faction  :  which  produces  as  much  and  more 
"  independence  of  spirit,  and  as  much  undaunted  bravery ; 
"  as  much  esteem  of  merit  in  preference  to  wealth,  and  as 
«  great  simplicity,  sincerity  and  generosity  to  all  the  eoin- 
«  muni ty,  as  others  do  to  a  faction  ;  which  produces  as  great 
"  a  desire  of  knowledge,  and  infinitely  better  faculties  to 
"pursue  it;  which  besides  produces  security  of  property* 
i(  and  the  desire  and  opportunities  for  commerce,  which  the 
u  others  obstruct.  Shall  any  one  hesitate  then  to  prefer 
«  such  a  government  to  all  others  ?  A  constitution  in  which 
6i  the  people  reserve  to  themselves  the  absolute  control  of 
i(  their  purses,  one  essential  branch  of  the  legislature,  and 
"  the  inquest  of  grievances  and  state  crimes,  will  always 
"  produce  patriotism,  bravery,  simplicity  and  science  ;  and 
w  that  infinitely  better  for  the  order,  security,  and  tranquil- 
<*  lity  they  will  enjoy,  by  putting  the  executive  power  in  one 
"  hand,  which  it  becomes  their  interest,  as  well  as  that  of 
«  the  nobles,  to  watch  and  control."* 

*  Adams's  Def.-  v.  2.  387  &  388. 


100      PRINCIPI^KS  OF  THE  POLICY  OP  THE  IT.  STATES, 

This  quotation  contains  the  precise  opinion,  which  it  is 
ihe  design  of  this  essay  to  controvert.  Dismissing  Turgors 
phantom  of  a  single  house  of  representatives,  Mr.  Adams 
considers  the  people  as  an  order,  electing  only  one  branch 
of  the  legislature,  having  no  control  over  a  single  execu- 
tive, and  aided  by  nobles  to  watch  and  control  this  monarch ; 
for  when  the  people  have  made  a  king  to  check  nobles, 
these  nobles  are  to  join  the  people  in  checking  the  king. 
And  the  approbation  of  such  a  form  of  government  is  as 
unbounded,  as  the  censure  of  every  other  is  unequivocal. 
That,  he  asserts,  will  produce  a  long  string  of  blessings ; 
ithers,  specified  calamities  of  great  magnitude.  Not  a  sin- 
gle defect  is  ascribed  to  the  object  of  the  eulogy,  nor  a 
single  perfection  to  any  other  form.  The  words  cannot  be 
tortured  to  bring  our  policy  within  the  sphere  of  the  eulo* 
gy,  nor  to  exclude  it  from  that  of  the  censure.  And  the 
English  system  is  unequivocally  preferred  without  limita- 
tion to  all  others. 

A  single  remark  only  will  be  made  upon  this  encomium. 
The  system  of  orders  is  said  to  produce  security  of  proper 
ty.  But  the  system  requires  that  property  must  be  balanced 
among  the  three  orders,  or  no  balance  of  power  can  remain 
«  Wealth/*  says  Mr.  Adams,  "  is  the  machine  for  govern- 
ing the  world.'*  How  can  this  balance  of  property  be  in- 
troduced or  maintained,  without  invading  property,  for  the 
indispensable  purpose  of  enriching  a  king  and  some  other 
interest,  to  make  two  orders .?  It  must  be  invaded  by  force  or 
fraud.  The  frauds  of  superstition  first  collected  the  wealth, 
which  created  and  fed  an  aristocratical  interest ;  then  it 
was  acquired  by  the  force  of  the  feudal  system ;  and  now  it 
is  drawn  from  the  people  by  the  frauds  of  paper  and  patron- 
age. Can  any  one  hesitate  to  prefer  the  security  of  pro- 
perty under  the  system  of  the  United  States,  to  such  secu 
rity  as  this  ? 

**  A  science  certainly  comprehends  all  the  principles  ia 
<f  nature  which  belong  to  the  subject.  The  principles  in 
s6  nature  wMi:h  relate  to  government  camiot  all  be  known. 


ANi)  O*  THJB  UtfGXISH  JPOXICy,  10  i 

<•'  without  a  knowledge  of  the  history  of  mankind.  The 
*<  English  constitution  is  the  only  one  which  has  considered 
P  and  provided  for  all  cases  that  are  known  to  have  gtne- 
**  rally,  indeed  to  have  always  happened  in  the  progress  of 
t(  every  nation  ;  it  is  therefore  the  only  scientijical  govern- 
"  ment"* 

"  Whenever  the  people  have  had  any  share  in  the  exc- 
*«  cutive,  or  more  than  one  third  part  of  the  legislative, 
"  they  have  always  abused  it,  and  rendered  property  inse- 
«  cure."f 

«  But  a  mixed  government  produces  and  necessitates 
«  constancy  in  all  its  parts  j  the  king  must  be  constant  to 
««  preserve  his  prerogatives;  the  senate  must  be  constant  to 
"  preserve  their  share ;  and  the  house  theirs."^: 

"  It  is  therefore  the  true  policy  of  the  common  people 
il  to  place  the  whole  executive  power  in  one  man,  to  make 
"  him  a  distinct  order  in  the  state,  from  whence  arises  an 
«  inevitable  jealousy  between  him  and  the  gentlemen."^ 

Mr.  Adams's  third  volume !l  contains  a  reference  to  the 
parties  under  our  present  general  government,  by  the  teems 
«  constitutionalist  and  republican  j"  and  in  the  same  vo- 
lume^ it  is  said,  "  that  Lewis  the  16th  had  the  unrivalled 
glory  of  admitting  the  people  to  a  share  in  the  government  f* 
an  observation  for  which  no  ground  existed,  previously  to 
the  establishment  of  the  present  general  constitution.  This 
volume  must  therefore  have  been  written  or  revised  after 
the  existence  of  that  constitution ;  of  course,  that  instru- 
ment is  entitled  to  share  with  the  constitutions  proposed  by 
the  title  page  to  be  defended,  in  the  censures  of  these  seve- 
ral quotations. 

One  of  these  is  an  adjudication  assigning  literally  to  the 
**  English  constitution"  the  utmost  conceivable  political 
perfection ;  and  to  every  other,  a  specified  comparative 
inferiority,  with  a  considerable  portion  of  actual  wortbless- 
ness.    «  The  English  constitution  is  the  only  one  which  hm 

*  Adams's  def.  v.  3.  363.        *  Adams's  def.  v.  3.  453.        ||  p.  18/. 
t        do.  v.  3,391.        5       dc.  v.  3.  460.        fp.428. 


id%      PRINCIPLES  OP  THE  POLICY  OP  THE  V.  STATES, 

. «  considered  and  provided  for  all  eages  known  to  have 
**  always  happened  in  the  progress  of  every  nation."  Com* 
parative  preference  could  not  have  been  more  strongly  ex* 
pressed.  «  It  is  the  only  scientifieal  government."  A 
stronger  expression  of  contempt  for  other  forms  of  govern- 
ment could  not  have  been  used  by  a  philosopher. 

The  confinement  of  the  people  to  an  influence  over  a 
third  part  of  the  legislature,  the  monarchical  executive, 
and  the  independent  senate,  having  the  prerogatives  of  an 
order,  are  vital  principles  of  the  English  system,  and  ap- 
plauded ;  and  that  applause  is  an  express  censure  of  those 
vital  principles  of  our  policy,  which  extend  the  influence  of 
Che  people  far  beyond  the  English  limit,  erect  responsible 
executives  short  of  monarchical  power,  and  exclude  the  idea 
*>f  prerogatived  senatorial  orders. 

The  meaning  of  the  term  «•  mixed,"  frequently  used  in 
Mr.  Adams's  treatise,  is  defined  by  the  third  quotation  so 
preeisely,  that  the  loosest  imagination  will  be  unable  to  mis 
construe  the  author  as  intending  by  that  expression  to 
include  the  policy  of  the  United  States.  He  limits  it  to  a 
mixture  of  ranks  or  orders,  made  up  of  king,  lords  and 
commons.  A  division  of  powers  without  an  establishment 
of  orders,  is  not  then  an  object  of  Mr.  Adams's  contempla- 
tion, when  he  uses  this  term. 

Jealousy  is  often  mentioned  by  Mr.  Adam3  as  the  best 
effect  of.his  system  of  balancing  orders.  In  the  last  quota- 
tion, the  jealousy  of  the  common  people  against  gentlemen, 
js  used  as  a  motive  to  propel  them  towards  a  king,  for  the 
purpose  of  acquiring  this  cardinal  effect  of  the  balances  ; 
namely,  jealousy  between  the  king  and  the  gentlemen. 

It  has  been  stated,  that  a  mixture  of  orders  belonged  to 
the  class  of  governments  founded  in  the  evil  qualities  of 
man  ;  and  it  is  repeatedly  asserted  by  Mr.  Adams,  that  its 
fruit  is  jealousy.  This  is  a  tender  term  to  convey  an  idea 
of  the  distrust,  hatred  and  implacability,  which  have  ever 
guided  orders,  possessed  of  the  share  of  power  and  wealth 
required  by  Mr  Adams's  system.  The  calamities  he  details 


ANM  61'  THE  ENGLISH  POLICY*  10£ 

are  collected  from  experiments  of  mixed  orders,  and  display 
the  consequences  of  the  evil  quality  of  jealousy,  and  the 
prospect  of  its  becoming  the  fountain  of  good.  This  jea- 
lousy is  graduated  by  the  approach  towards  the  object,  on 
the  attainment  of  which  the  perfection  of  Mr.  Adams's  sys- 
tem depends ;  and  the  exact  adjustment  of  a  balance  of 
power  and  wealth  between  political  orders,  begets  the  ut- 
most degree  of  its  malignity  ;  it  becomes  deadly,  like  thai, 
between  two  pretenders  to  the  throne.  It  produces  effects, 
like  those  produced  in  England,  by  a  balance  of  wealth  ami 
power  between  the  crown  and  the  nobility.  As  equality  in 
wealth  and  power,  or  a  perfect  political  balance,  is  the  ut- 
most excitement  of  jealousy,  so  it  is  stifled  by  subordination ; 
and  the  farther  a  form  of  government  recedes  from  Mr. 
Adams's  point  of  perfection,  the  less  it  is  exposed  to  the 
discord  of  a  rivalry  for  dominion.  As  the  violent  struggles 
between  the  crown  and  nobles  in  England,  demonstrate  the 
consequences  of  an  attainment  of  Mr.  Adams's  political 
balance  5  so  their  long  intermission  demonstrates  the  con- 
sequences of  a  recession  from  his  point  of  perfection.  It  is 
simply  the  question  whether  two  or  three  kings  arc  better 
than  one,  on  account  of  the  jealousy  with  which  the  one  case 
will  be  blessed,  and  its  absence  from  the  second.  The  poli- 
«y  of  the  United  States,  by  acknowledging  the  sovereignty 
of  the  people  without  a  balance  or  a  rival  power,  and  by 
establishing  a  subordination  to  their  opinion,  has  rejected 
the  quality  of  jealousy,  contended  for  by  its  defender. 

Mr.  Adams's  book  abounds  with  the  evils  inflicted  on 
mankind  by  the  contention  of  orders,  but  it  omits  to  dis- 
play the  evils  of  their  union  in  England  ;  it  opposes  to  its 
own  facts  a  theory  for  their  management,  but  omits  to  add 
that  it  has  never  succeeded  ,•  and  it  allows  to  nations  a  capa- 
city for  instituting  and  keeping  in  repair,  an  intricate  equi- 
librium of  power  and  wealth  among  orders,  but  denies  that 
they  are  capable  of  self  government. 

The  quotations  demonstrate  the  enmity  between  tlie  po- 
licy of  the  United  States,  and  Mr.  Adams's  svstem  ;  an*',  » 


104a      PRINCIPLES  OF  THE  POLICY  OF  TS£  9.  Q'PATESf 

view  of  the  general  structure  of  his  treatise,  will  establish 
its  strict  concurrence  with  the  tenor  of  the  quotations.  Re- 
publicks,  or  governments  without  a  monarch,  are  represent- 
ed as  detestable  ;  and  the  more  popular  they  are,  the  more 
detestable  are  they  represented.  Our  policy  is  slightly 
mentioned  in  the  first  volume,  thrown  into  the  back  ground 
throughout  the  second,  and  spoken  of  in  the  third  as  an  ex- 
periment unlikely  to  succeed.  As  Turgot's  project  of  a 
single  body  of  men  exercising  all  power,  is  made  the  pre- 
text for  a  collateral  attack  upon  our  policy  in  the  first  vo- 
lume, Nedham's  "  Excellency  of  a  free  state,  or  the  right 
constitution  of  a  commonwealth,"  is  resorted  to  for  opening 
a  direct  attack  upon  it  in  the  third.  Turgot  was  unfriendly 
to  orders,  and  Nedham  wrote  to  keep  out  a  dethroned  king  r 
Mr.  Adams  assails  them  both. 

Marchamont  Nedham  wrote  about  one  hundred  and  fifty 
years  past.  Political  science  at  that  time  depended  upon 
ancient  experiments,  and  the  disciples  of  democracy,  aris- 
tocracy or  monarchy,  would  of  course  be  now  exposed  to 
many  just  criticisms,  furnished  by  the  defects  of  each  form, 
as  then  understood  and  practised.  But  Nedham's  treatise, 
and  the  American  revolution,  united  in  assailing  the  same 
limited  monarchy,  in  the  destruction  of  which,  one  failed 
and  the  other  succeeded ;  and  Mr.  Adams  selects  the  un- 
successful combatant  against  the  same  foe,  takes  the  side  of 
the  victorious  enemy,  and  fights  the  battle  over  again.  Li- 
mited monarchy  is  made  to  insult  over  Nedham's  common- 
wealth, after  having  subdued  it ;  and  the  commonwealth  of 
the  United  States,  is  not  allowed  to  take  the  field  against 
limited  monarchy  which  that  has  subdued.  Monarchy 
shrinks  from  an  avowed  controversy  with  an  erect  enemy, 
and  is  by  Mr.  Adams  decreed  a  new  triumph  over  a  fallen 
one.  However  it  may  accord  with  the  rules  of  war,  to  un- 
dermine the  main  fortress  by  getting  possession  of  a  weak 
outwork,  it  is  questionable  whether  this  military  mode  of 
reasoning,  will  be  considered  as  the  right  road  to  trim; 


AND  OF  THE  KKGLISH  P01IC1.  105 

The  policy  of  the  United  States  ought  not  to  he  forced 
into  an  alliance  with  either  Turgot's  or  Nedham's  project. 
It  is  itself  the  Champion,  ready  to  engage  the  English  sys- 
tem, fairly  and  openly,  hand  to  hand  ;  nor  ought  the  ghosts 
of  these  speculations,  the  one  forgotten  and  the  other  un- 
known, to  have  been  conjured  up,  for  the  purpose  of  trans- 
fixing that  policy,  under  pretence  of  striking  at  shadows, 
and  claiming  for  monarchy  a  victory  whilst  it  flees  from 
the  contest. 

The  war  is  carried  on  with  shadows  ;  and  by  the  help 
of  definition,  an  attempt  is  made  even  to  transfer  the  arms 
of  these  shadows  to  their  adversary.  If  this  can  he  effect- 
ed, the  chief  weapon,  the  distinguishing  superiority  of  our 
policy,  is  also  lost.     Let  us  return  to  Mr.  Adams. 

"  In  the  science  of  legislation,  there  is  a  confusion  o( 
•'  languages,  as  if  men  were  but  lately  come  from  Babel. 
«•  Scarcely  any  two  writers,  much  less  nations,  agree  in 
•'<  using  words  in  the  same  sense.  Such  a  latitude,  it  is 
-'  true,  allows  a  scope  for  politicians  to  speculate,  like  mer- 
ff  chants  with  false  weights,  by  making  the  .same  word 
"  adored  by  one  party  and  execrated  by  another."* 

Two  extracts  will  be  selected,  to  show  how  far  Mr. 
Adams  has  fulfilled  the  confidence  which  this  just  observa 
tion  is  calculated  to  inspire  :  one,  containing  a  definition  of 
a  republick,  the  other  of  representation.  Definition  is,  in- 
deed a  false  or  a  true  weight.  It  discloses  truth,  or  hides 
errour.  It  is  a  criminal,  varnishing  over  law,  to  conceal 
Ms  crime;  or  an  unprejudiced  judge,  seeking  for  a  true 
construction.  It  is  a  torture  of  words  to  suit  a  system,  and 
deceive  the  superficial ;  or  a  mode  of  removing  the  mistakes 
arising  from  words,  and  extending  our  ideas  to  tilings.  And 
it  is  as  likely  to  complain  of  the  unintelligible  jargon  pro- 
duced by  a  want  of  precision  in  terms,  when  it  purposes  to 
deceive  by  this  jargon*  as  a  Jew  is  to  complain  of  false 
weights,  when  he  offers  his  sweated  coin. 

*  Adams's  def.  v.  3,  157  158. 

15 


106      PRINCIPLES  OF  THE  POLICY  OF  THE  TJ.  STATES, 

"  Others  again,  more  rationally,  define  a  republic!;  to 
"  signify  only  a  government,  in  which  all  men,  rich  and 
"  poor,  magistrates  and  subjects,  officers  and  people,  mas- 
«  tersand  servants,  the  first  citizen  and  the  last,  are  equally 
"  subject  to  the  laws.  This  indeed  appears  to  he  the  true, 
"  and  only  true  definition  of  a  republick"* 

'«  An  uncertainty  of  law"  is  a  **  glorious"  object  to  ava- 
ricious lawyers.  "  An  uncertainty  of  republicanism,"  would 
be  an  object,  not  less  desirable  to  ambitious  politicians.  A 
definition,  which  produces  uncertainty  as  to  what  republi- 
canism is,  will  excite  and  aid  the  views  of  ambition,  just 
as  an  uncertainty  of  law  excites  and  aids  the  views  of  ava- 
rice. It  is  therefore  highly  important  to  consider  this  de- 
finition of  Mr.  Adams. 

The  analysis  contended  for  in  this  essay,  divides  govern- 
ments into  two  classes,  distinguished  by  the  moral  elements, 
good  and  evil.  And  the  terms  <•  republiek  and  common- 
wealth," have  been  used  to  convey  an  idea  of  a  government, 
which,  being  founded  in  good  moral  principles,  or  princi- 
ples both  exciting  good  and  restraining  evil  qualities,  will 
produce  publick,  common,  or  national  benefit.  But  if  "  the 
subjection  of  all  to  law"  constitutes  a  republiek,  this  idea  of 
the  term  must  be  surrendered,  and  we  must  look  out  for 
some  other,  by  which  to  make  the  reader  comprehend  the 
idea,  of  a  form  of  government  founded  in  good  moral  prin- 
ciples, and  producing  publick,  common  or  national  benefit. 

A  code  of  laws  may  be  good  or  bad  ;  and  if  bad,  it  is 
morally  impossible  that  a  subjection  to  such  a  code,  can 
constitute  a  government  founded  in  good  moral  principles. 
But  according  to  Mr.  Adams,  equal  subjection  to  any  code 
of  laws,  constitutes  a  definition  of  a  republiek  :  if  so,  it  fol- 
lows, that  this  term  gives  us  no  idea  of  the  principles  or 
operation,  of  any  government ;  and  is  equally  pertinent  to 
describe  those  calculated  to  dispense  evil  to  the  publick. 
as  those  calculated  to  dispense  good. 

Adams's  def.  v.  3.  159. 


AND  OF  THE    ENGLISH    POLICY.  107 

Law  may  be  enacted  by  a  faction,  to  strip  a  nation,  awl 
enrich  itself ;  and  the  faction  may  find  an  interest  in  sub- 
jecting  to  law,  the  individuals  composing  itself,  equally 
With  other  citizens.  The  Doge  and  nobility  of  Venice,  the 
East-India  company  and  stock  faction  of  England,  are  evi- 
dences of  this  assertion. 

A  code  of  laws  may  operate  partially,  in  such  modes,  as 
the  establishment  of  privileged  orders  or  hierarchies  ;  or 
by  frittering  away  publiek  rights  by  law  charters,  to  indi- 
viduals or  corporations,  so  as  to  reduce  the  majority  of  the 
nation  to  misery  and  wretchedness.  Yet  the  bishop  would 
be  subject  to  law  in  receiving  his  benefice  and  his  tythes, 
the  labourer,  in  paying  them  ;  a  nobility  is  subject  to  law 
in  exercising  its  privileges  ;  a  corporation,  in  growing  rich 
by  the  aid  of  its  charter  ;  a  bank,  in  collecting  from  a  na- 
tion, usury  upon  nominal  money  ;  and  a  king,  in  receiving 
a  million,  and  expending  thirty  millions  annually  in  corrup- 
tion and  patronage,  at  the  national  expense.  Here  are 
kings,  bishops,  nobility  and  corporations,  all  subject  to  law  $ 
but  the  laws  are  partial,  unjust  and  oppressive. 

There  is  no  difficulty  in  framing  laws,  so  as  to  oppress 
one  portion  of  a  community  for  the  benefit  of  another ;  and 
yet  every  citizen  may  be  subject  to  the  laws,  whilst  the  sub- 
jection of  some  will  consist  of  acquisition  or  benefit,  and  of 
others,  of  loss  or  injury ;  and  thus  property  to  a  vast  amount 
may  be  annually  transferred.  Some  may  be  combined  in  a 
priesthood,  to  aid  a  government  in  oppressing  others  ;  pri- 
vileges may  be  conferred  on  some,  to  the  injury  and  degra- 
dation of  others  ;  some  may  by  law  be  excused  from  pub- 
lick  duties,  so  as  to  increase  them  upon  others,  as  in  the 
exemption  of  the  nobility  and  clergy  under  the  French  mo- 
narchy from  certain  taxes  ;  and  some  may  by  laws  be  ena- 
bled even  to  corrupt  the  government  at  the  cost  and  charges 
of  the  people,  as  the  paper  and  the  executive  orders  of 
England. 

In  all  these  cases,  and  in  a  multitude  of  others  which 
will  occur  to  the  reader,  an  equal  subjection  to  the  law. 


108      PRINCIPLES  OF  THE  POLICY  0E  THE  V.  STATES, 

constitutes  the  only  true  and  genuine  republick,  according 
to  Mr.  Adams ;  a  definition  equivalent  to  an  assertion,  that 
it  is  not  the  justice  or  partiality,  the  moderation  or  oppres- 
siveness of  laws,  which  furnish  an  idea  of  liberty  or  slavery, 
of  a  republick  or  a  tyranny,  but  merely  the  execution  of 
laAV,  bad  or  good,  just  or  unjust. 

According  to  this  definition,  all  forms  of  government, 
which  produce  a  particular  effect  of  government,  that  is, 
"  an  equal  subjection  to  the  laws,"  instantly  become  repub- 
licks,  how  widely  soever  they  may  differ  in  structure  or 
principles ;  and  the  same  form,  may  sometimes  be  a  repub- 
v  lick,  and  sometimes  not,  as  llactuations  in  the  equal  execu- 
tion of  law  are  produced,  by  the  passions  of  individuals,  or 
the  arts  of  factions,  without  any  change  in  the  structure  of 
the  government.  So  soon  as  it  is  settled,  that  effects  are  to 
alter  the  names  of  causes,  without  altering  their  nature  or 
form,  the  term  "  republick"  can  no  longer  convey  an  idea 
of  a  government,  unless  it  is  in  operation  ;  because,  as  the 
title  of  every  form  to  that  epithet,  would  depend  upon  its 
effect  in  producing  "  an  equal  subjection  to  law,"  so  until 
this  effect  appears  in  the  operation  of  a  government,  it  could 
never  be  known,  whether  it  was  a  republick,  an  aristocracy 
or  a  monarchy.  Politicians,  to  the  inquiry  *•  what  kind  of 
government  are  you  erecting  ?"  must  answer  like  the  paint 
er  spoken  of  by  Cervantes,  who  being  asked  what  he  was 
painting,  replied  ?  "  a  cock  or  a  fox,  just  as  it  happens." 

A  partial  execution  of  law  by  one  party  or  faction  upon 
another,  would  produce  an  unequal  subjection  to  law,  which 
must  be  detected  and  destroyed,  to  bring  back  such  an 
erring  government  within  the  terms  of  the  definition.  Tt 
deprives  us  of  the  vernacular  idea  annexed  to  the  phrases 
"  republick  and  monarchy,"  and  for  the  question  "  3s  this  a 
republick  or  a  monarchy?"  substitutes  an  inquiry,  "whether 
all  the  citizens  are  equally  subject  to  the  laws  ?" 

Without  having  seen  the  definition,  an  Englishman  be 
ing  asked,  under  what  form  of  government  he  lived,  would 
'have,  answered,  "  a  monarchy  ;"  and  to  the  same  question, 


AND  ©¥  THfc  EWG1ISH  *OLTC/V.  |#fe 

an  American  would  have  answered  **  a  republick."  But 
this  new  dialect  may  make  such  answers  improper.  In 
England,  the  government  party  say  w  the  laws  govern." 
According  to  the  definition,  these  monarchists  must  allow 
that  their  government  is  republican,  and  themselves  repub- 
licans ;  in  America,  the  party  which  called  itself  republican, 
believed  that  the  sedition  law  was  partially  executed,  so  as 
to  produce  an  unequal  subjection  to  law  ;  by  the  definition, 
this  party  must  then  have  denied  that  our  form  of  govern- 
ment was  republican,  whilst  they  were  avowing  an  affection 
foi*  it  because  it  was  so.  We  cannot  therefore  discern,  bow 
this  definition  is  calculated  to  diminish  the  confusion  of  po- 
litical dialect,  or  to  establish  an  accurate  idea  of  the  term 
«  republick,"  capable  of  becoming  a  fixed  standard  against 
the  fraudulent  use  of  it  by  ambition  and  deceit.  Let  us 
examine  if  more  certainty  and  perspicuity  is  displayed  in 
the  following  quotation. 

"  An  hereditary  liiiiited  monarch  is  the  representative  of 
"  the  whole  nation,  for  the  management  of  the  executive 
"  power,  as  much  as  an  house  of  representatives,  as  one 
"  branch  of  the  legislature,  and  as  guardian  of  the  publiek 
«  purse ;  and  a  house  of  lords  too,  or  a  standing  senate,  re- 
«  presents  the  nation  for  other  purposes,  viz  :  as  a  watch 
«<  set  upon  both  the  representatives  and  the  executive  pow~ 
"  er.  The  people  are  the  fountain  and  original  of  the  pow~ 
"  er  of  kings  and  lords,  govemours  and  senates,  as  well  as 
"  the  house  of  commons,  or  assembly  of  representatives :  and 
*  if  the  people  are  sufficiently  enlightened  to  see  all  the  dan- 
"  gers  that  surround  them,  they  will  always  be  represented 
"  by  a  distinct  personage  to  manage  the  whole  executive 
"  power ;  a  distinct  senate  to  be  guardians  of  property 
"  against  levellers  for  the  purposes  of  plunder,  to  be  a  re- 
'*  positary  of  the  national  tradition  of  publiek  maxims,  cui- 
«'  toms  and  manners,  and  to  be  controllers  in  turn  both  of 
"  Kings  and  their  ministers  on  one  side,  and  the  representa- 
'« lives  of  the  people  on  the  other,  when  either  discover  a  die* 
"  position  to  do  wrong;  and  a  distinct  house  of  represe'ita- 


310      PRINCIPLES  0*  THE  POLICY  OF  THE  U.  STATES^ 

"  tives,  to  be  the  guardians  of  the  publick  purse,  and  to  pro- 
« tect  the  people  in  their  turn,  against  both  kings  and  no- 
«  bits."* 

Having  sunk  republicanism  in  subjection  to  law,  Mr. 
Adams  here  sinks  representation  in  hereditary  orders.  By 
the  definition  of  "  republick"  any  form  of  government  may 
constitute  it;  and  by  this  definition  of  representation,  here- 
ditary power  in  every  shape,  is  as  much  a  representative 
power,  as  that  elected  by  the  people.  Let  us  consider  whe- 
ther this  definition  tends  to  introduce  an  unambiguous  poli- 
tical dialect,  and  to  secure  the  people  against  deception. 

It  was  said,  that  Mr.  Adams  had  attempted,  by  defini- 
tion, to  rob  of  their  arms  the  shadows  of  his  enmity,  and  to 
transfer  these  arms  to  their  adversary ;  and  that  if  this 
could  be  effected,  the  chief  weapons  and  distinguishing  supe- 
riorities of  our  policy  would  be  also  lost.  These  shadows, 
are  Turgot's  chamber  and  Nedham's  commonwealth  ;  the 
reality  upon  which  this  attempt  will  bear,  is  the  policy  of 
the  United  States. 

The  distinguishing  superiorities  of  our  policy,  are,  the 
sovereignty  of  the  people  ;  a  republican  government,  or  a 
government  producing  publick  or  national  good  ;  and  a  tho- 
rough system  of  responsible  representation.  All  these,  Mr. 
Adams  transplants  into  his  system  of  monarchy  and  privi- 
leged orders,  from  the  policy  of  the  United  States,  as  Ma- 
homet transplanted  several  of  the  best  principles  of  Christi- 
anity into  his  system  of  religion.  "  The  people,"  says  he, 
ai  are  the  fountain  and  original  of  the  power  of  kings?  lords, 
governours  and  senates,  as  well  as  the  house  of  commons,  or 
assembly  of  representatives."  Thus  he  seizes  upon  our 
principle  of  "  the  sovereignty  of  the  people"  and  appropri- 
ates it  to  the  use  of  his  system  of  kings  and  lords.  He  as- 
serts that,  an  hereditary  limited  monarch  and  a  house  of 
lords  are  as  much  the  representatives  of  the  nation  as  an 
house  of  representatives  elected  by  the  people.  Thus  he  seiz- 
es upon   our  principle  of  responsible  representation,  and 

*  Adams's  Defence,  v.  3.  367. 


AND  OF  THK  ENGLISH  FOLIC X.  Hi 

bestows  that  also  upon  Iris  system  of  kings  and  lords.  And 
not  contented  with  depriving  our  policy  of  these  defences-, 
and  bestowing  them  upon  a  rival  policy,  to  which  they  do 
not  belong,  lie  even  robs  it  of  its  name,  by  defining  a  repub- 
lick  to  be  only  "  an  equal  subjection  to  law,"  and  transfers 
that  also  to  monarchy: — Leaving  the  policy  of  the  United 
States,  without  principles,  and  without  a  name,  by  which  it 
may  be  spoken  of,  or  distinguished  from  the  English  sys- 
tem. Is  this  "  a  language  of  Babel,"  or  one  calculated  to 
be  understood  ?  Is  it  calculated  to  furnish  ambitious  politi- 
cians «  with  false  weights,"  or  to  come  at  truth  ? 

In  his  effort  to  humour  the  publick  opinion  of  the  United 
States,  in  favour  of  "  national  sovereignty  and  representa- 
tion," Mr.  Adams  lost  sight  of  that,  to  prove  the  existence 
of  "  a  natural  aristocracy."  One  of  these  doctrines  asserts 
«  that  the  people  are  sovereign,"  or  in  Mr.  Adams's  words, 
i(  the  fountain  and  original  of  the  power  of  kings  and  lords  j" 
the  other,  "  that  nature  creates  an  order  above  and  inde- 
pendently of  the  people."  And  to  complete  the  confusion 
arising  from  thus  confounding  contradictory  principles,  Mr. 
Adams  in  the  last  quotation,  has  arranged  kings  and  goYer- 
norus,  lords  and  senators,  in  the  class  of  representatives,  and 
thus  after  taking  from  us  words,  takes  away  objects  also,  by 
which  we  may  know  our  system  of  government,  from  that 
of  king,  lords  and  commons. 

If  the  system  of  balancing  power  and  property,  contend- 
ed for  by  Mr.  Adams,  would  not  be  exploded  by  a  disinge- 
nuous defence  ;  an  effort  to  convince  the  people  of  the  Uni- 
ted States,  that  their  policy  is  the  English  system,  ought  to 
have  no  more  influence  upon  the  question,  than  an  effort  to 
convince  the  English  nation,  that  their  system  was  the  policy 
of  the  United  States.  Considering  such  attempts  as  rather 
designed  to  ridicule,  than  mislead  ignorance  or  preposses- 
sion, I  will  exhibit  the  essential  difference  between  the  two 
forms  of  government,  in  a  view,  heretofore  transiently  no- 
ticed, and  hereafter  to  be  impressed,  as  occasions  oecur. 


£42      PRINCIPLES  OF  THE  POLICY  OF  THE  U.  STATES, 

In  the  last  quotation,  Mr.  Adani9  recommends  his  noble, 
distinct  or  permanent  Senate,  "  as  guardians  of  property 
against  levellers;"  and  in  a  previous  quotation  he  observes, 
that  "  whenever  the  people  have  had  any  share  in  the  exe- 
cutive, or  more  than  one  third  part  of  the  legislative,  they 
have  always  abused  it,  and  rendered  property  insecure  ;"— 
Thus  excluding  the  people  from  any  share  in  the  executive, 
and  any  influence  over  the  Senate,  (although  the  king  and 
the  nobility  are,  as  he  says,  their  representatives.)  as  the 
only  means  of  protecting  property  or  checking  levellers. 

The  love  of  property  possesses  almost  an  unbounded  in- 
fluence over  the  human  mind.  Jt  is  therefore  an  engine  to 
which  avarice  and  ambition  w ill  forever  resort  to  effect  their 
purposes  :  and  every  institution  designed  to  make  the  mass 
of  a  nation  poorer  by  enriching  itself,  will  invariably  avow 
a  contrary  intention,  for  the  purpose  of  inducing  (he  nation 
to  fall  into  the  snare.  This  is  sometimes  baited,  with  a  pre- 
tence, that  the  people  will  be  abundantly  reimbursed  in  hea- 
ven, for  the  money  drawn  from  them  to  enrich  a  hierarchy ; 
at  others,  with  the  delusion,  that  they  are  reimbursed  for 
the  wealth  drawn  from  them  to  enrich  paper  corporations, 
by  an  enhanced  price  for  their  labour ;  even  for  such  pro- 
ducts as  are  priced  by  a  foreign  demand. 

The  fear  of  losing  property,  is  as  strong  as  the  hope  of 
obtaining  it.  For  this  reason,  the  grossest  abuses  artfully 
ally  themselves  with  real  and  honest  property  ,•  and  endea- 
vour to  excite  its  apprehension,  when  attempts  are  made  to 
correct  them,  by  exclaiming  against  the  invasion  of  proper- 
ty and  against  levelism,  and  by  deceiving  the  publick  with 
fraudulent  epithets. 

These,  we  shall  endeavour  to  prove,  are  precisely  the 
grounds  taken  by  Mr.  Adams,  when  he  boldly  charges  all 
nations,  having  any  share  in  their  own  government  beyond 
a  third  part  of  the  legislative  power,  with  "rendering 
property  insecure j"  when  he  proposes  a  noble  senate  as 
"  guardians  of  property ;"  and  when  he  endeavours  to  draw 
upon  those  who  approve  of  extending  the  power  of  the 


Aim  or  THE  ENGLISH  POLICY.  liS 

people  beyond  his  limitation,  the  odium  attached  to  the 
epithet  '•  levellers."  And  we  shall  endeavour  to  prove,  that 
the  charges  of  levelism,  and  rendering  property  insecure,  so 
repeatedly  and  profusely  urged  against  republican  princi- 
ples throughout  his  book,  do  really  recoil  upon  himself, 
and  adhere  to  his  own  system. 

The  *•  safety  of  property"  is  the  very  point,  by  which  it 
is  allowed  that  the  reader  ought  to  be  determined,  in  bes- 
towing a  preference  upon  our  policy  or  the  English  system. 
Our  manners  do  not  thirst  for  blood  ;  it  is  the  thirst  of 
avarice  and  ambition  for  wealth  and  power,  that  we  have  to 
withstand. 

To  understand  the  question,  we  ought  previously  to  set- 
tle a  satisfactory  idea  of  property.  Here  it  is  probable  that 
a  disagreement  will  occur,  between  the  disciples  of  corpora- 
tion, monopoly  and  orders,  and  myself.  It  is  acknowledged, 
that  I  do  not  include  under  the  idea  of  property,  any  artifi- 
cial establishment,  which  subsists  by  taking  away  property  ; 
such  as  hierarchical,  kingly,  noble,  official  and  corporate 
possesions-,  incomes  and  privileges  ;  and  that  I  considei 
those  possessions  as  property,  which  arc  fairly  gained  by 
talents  and  industry,  or  are  eapabie  of  subsisting,  without 
taking  property  from  others  by  law. 

If  this  definition  is  correct,  an  invasion  of  property  con- 
stitute tin;  essential  quality  of  Mr.  Adams's  system.  A 
king,  a  nobility  and  a  hierarchy,  cannot  subsist  without  pro- 
perty, and  this  property  must  be  taken  away  in  some  mode 
from  others.  The  system  requires  a  balance  of  property, 
as  the  only  mode  of  balancing  power ;  or,  to  use  the  epithet 
applied  by  Mr.  Adams  to  those  who  differ  from  him,  pro- 
perty and  power  must  be  levelled  among  three  orders,  and 
this- level  must  be  kept  up,  or  the  system  falls  into  ruin. 
Therefore  the  supposed  two  orders  cannot  preserve  a  politi- 
cal existence,  without  constantly  receiving  the  profits  of  two 
thirds  of  the  property  in  a  nation.  This  requires  a  regular 
system  for  invading  private  property  to  sustain  a  govern- 
ment consisting  of  balanced  orders.    A  nation  must  toil  like 

10 


Ufa      PRINCIPLES  OF  TflU  POLICY  OF  THE  U.  STATES, 

Sisyphus,  whilst  an  invisible  power  must  eternally  defeat 
(heir  labours,  to  keep  this  indispensable  balance  steady. 

Nobility,  separate  interests  or  orders,  have  in  all  ages 
Taken  root  and  flourished,  in  an  invasion  of  property.  Some 
mode  by  which  this  is  effected,  will  oceuras  an  indissoluble 
adjunct  to  every  such  order  op  interest ;  as  in  the  fraudu- 
lent division  of  conquered  lands,  which  reared  and  fed  the 
Roman  patricians  and  feudal  barons  ;  in  the  sale  of  indul- 
gences and  other  frauds  of  superstition,  which  reared  and 
fed  the  popish  hierarchy:  and  in  the  system  of  paper  and 
patronage,  which  reared  and  feeds  the  English  mouied 
interest,  and  allies  it  with  the  crown,  from  a  consciousness 
of  delinquency  in  its  perpetual  invasion  of  property. 

Supposing  the  charge  exhibited  against  governments, 
under  the  national  control,  to  be  true;  and  admitting  that 
thev  do  tend  towards  levelism  :  it  would  then  become  ne- 
eessaryto  compute,  which  species  of  levelism,  that  of  divi- 
ding property  between  three  orders  according  to  Mr.  A- 
damsV  system,  or  that  of  dividing  property  among  all  the 
individuals  of  a  nation  according  to  the  supposed  tendency, 
would  produce  the  most  injustice  or  misery.  The  first  kind 
of  levelism,  requires  a  perpetual  balance,  only  to  be  obtain- 
ed and  supported,  by  an  artificial  transfer  (either  fraudulent 
or  forcible)  of  two  thirds  of  the  national  income,  to  two 
orders  consisting  of  very  few  persons.  This  involves  a  per- 
petual invasion  of  the  property  of  the  order,  comprising 
almost  the  whole  nation,  to  the  extent  of  two  thirds.  And 
an  impoverishment  of  individuals,  with  all  its  calamities  up- 
on mind  and  body,  follows  such  an  invasion,  to  a  vast  ex- 
tent; suffered,  not  for  the  purpose  of  supplying  the  wants 
of  the  two  orders,  or  doing  them  any  good,  but  merely  for 
the  political  object  of  establishing  a  balance  of  power  upon 
this  balance  of  property. 

The  guardianship  of  property  derived  from  the  system 
of  orders,  must  be  paid  for  according  to  its  essential  princi- 
ples, by  two  thirds  of  the  property  of  the  people ;  a  price, 
one  would  think,  which  ought  *o  secure  fidelity  in  discharg 


AXD  OF  THE  ENGLISH  POLICY.  1J3 

ing  the  trust.  Instead  of  this,  the  system  does  not  admit  of 
the  remaining  third  being  rendered  more  valuable  by  indus- 
try. For  should  the  third  left  in  the  hands  of  the  people, 
be  improved  up  to  the  value  of  the  two  thirds,  transferred 
to  the  other  two  orders,  it  would  destroy  the  balance  of 
power.  Hence  the  system  requires  the  acquisitions  of  in- 
dustry to  be  taken  away  and  transferred,  as  they  appear,  to 
keep  up  its  vital  principle  of  "  a  balance  of  property." 

This  is  effected  in  England  by  the  aid  of  paper  and  pat- 
ronage. The  portion  of  property  held  by  the  people,  began 
to  grow  as  soon  as  perpetuities  were  abolished,  and  excited 
the  efforts  of  avarice  and  ambition,  to  transfer  to  them- 
selves the  acquisitions  of  industry  ;  to  effect  this  object,  re- 
course was  had  to  the  fraud  of  paper  and  patronage,  so  well 
calculated  to  goad  on  industry,  and  to  pillage  her  gains.  The 
levelism  of  property  among  three  orders,  created  by  perpe- 
tuities, domains,  prerogatives,  and  tenures  (which  constitu- 
ted the  essence  of  the  feudal  system),  had  been  destroyed  by 
the  acquisitions  of  the  popular  order,  and  in  its  place  was 
invented  what  may  be  called  "  the  perpetual  level  of  pro- 
perty," by  the  perpetual  motion  of  paper  patronage  and 
taxation.  It  was  a  discovery  of  the  political  longitude  for 
hereditary  and  stock  navigators.  This  perpetual  motion, 
being  regulated  by  these  navigators,  they  can  accelerate  Or 
retard  its  velocity,  so  as  to  maintain  a  perpetual  level,  by 
a  regular  transfer  of  the  profit  of  labour  and  industry,  from 
the  mass  of  a  nation,  to  themselves,  an  inconsiderable  se6- 
tion  of  it.  Thus,  in  fact,  reducing  Mr.  Adams's  orders  to 
two  only,  those  who  lose  property  and  those  who  receive  it ; 
and  producing  the  tyranny  which  he  justly  contends  will 
result  from  one  order  governing  another. 

This  attempt  to  level  or  balance  property  among  orders, 
has  been  concealed  in  all  ages,  by  charging  those  who  op- 
pose it  with  an  intention  of  equalising,  levelling  or  balane 
ing  property  among  individuals;  a  species  of  levelism  which 
has  seldom  appeared  in  any  shape,  would  be  temporary  if 
attempted,  and  is  impracticable. 


116    Principles  or  the  policy  of  the  r.  states, 

If  levelisrn,  balancing  or  equality  was  practicable,  (for 
the  words  are  the  same,  however,  as  Mr.  Adams  observes, 
they  may  be  made  to  be  adored  by  one  party  and  execrated 
by  another,*)  the  merits  of  the  different  modes  would  appear 
by  extending  an  idea  already  stated.  By  the  system  for 
equalising  property  among  orders,  one  child  gets  a  third  of 
the  whole,  one  hundred  and  fifty  another  third,  and  eleven 
millions  nine  hundred  and  ninety  nine  thousand,  eight  hun- 
dred and  forty  nine  children,  the  remaining  third  ;  by  that 
for  equalising  property  among  individuals,  each  child  would 
receive  an  equal  share.  The  first  system  of  equality,  by  a 
distribution  excessively  oppressive  upon  individuals,  excites 
ambition,  avarice,  and  universal  malignity,  and  all  the  train 
of  evil  moral  qualities  annexed  to  luxury  and  poverty  ;  the 
second  system  of  equality,  would  produce  all  the  evils  of 
sloth  and  ignorance. 

It  is  admitted  that  a  greater  portion  of  a  nation  will  re- 
ceive a  share,  by  the  paper  and  patronage  system  for  level- 
ling property,  on  account  of  the  necessity  of  extending  cor- 
ruption to  defend  a  fraud,  relatively  to  the  extension  oi 
knowledge ;  and  that  this  multiplication  of  chances  for  a 
share,  operates  as  a  spur  to  labour  and  industry,  as  the 
efforts  of  twelve  millions  of  persons  would  he  more  vigour- 
ously  excited  by  the  enrichment  of  fifty  thousand  than  of* 
one  hundred  and  fifty  individuals.  But  the  more  avarice  is 
thus  excited,  the  more  oppression  beeomes  necessary  to  ob- 
tain the  means  of  its  gratification  ;  an  idea  furnishing  the 
ground  for  a  comparison  between  the  feudal  and  the  paper 
aristocracy. 

Whether  the  reader  shall  hold  in  most  detestation  the 
system  of  levelling  property  among  orders  or  among  indi 
viduals,  is  unimportant  to  the  question  proposed  for  his  con- 
sideration. And  the  subject  is  only  submitted  to  him  that 
he  may  diicern  the  ingenuity  of  the  first  species  of  iniquity, 
in  endeavouring  to  crouch  from  his  eye  behind  the  second. 
Conscious  that  it  is  the  policy  of  the  United  States  to  pro 
tcct  property  against  both  the  so  modes  of  invading  it,  the 


AxVD  OF  THE   JENG1ISH   POMCT-  117 

mode  of  balancing  it  among  orders,  artfully  endeavours  ta 
excite  an  odium  against  that  policy,  by  charging  it  with  a 
tendency  towards  the  mode  of  balancing  it  among  indivi- 
duals, hoping  that  a  recoil  of  publick  opinion  from  one 
species  of  iniquity,  may  throw  the  nation  into  the  other. 

The  source  of  the  charge  excites  distrust.  It  is  brought 
forward  by  the  system  of  levelling  property  among  orders. 
The  accusers  are  the  witnesses.  And  if  these  accusers  and 
witnesses  succeed,  their  reward  is  a  real  two  thirds  of  the 
wealth  and  power  of  the  United  States,  for  defeating  an 
ideal  balance  of  property  among  individuals.  The  people 
are  gravely  advised  by  Mr.  Adams,  to  transfer  two  thirds 
of  their  property  to  two  orders,  and  to  keep  themselves  by 
perpetual  taxation,  under  a  perpetual  incapacity  of  recover- 
ing it,  for  the  preservation  of  the  balance  of  power  among 
orders,  lest  they  themselves  should  adopt  the  visionary  pro- 
ject of  balancing  property  among  individuals.  A  perpetual 
balance  of  property  among  orders,  is  the  remedy  proposed 
against  a  transitory  project  for  balancing  it  among  individu- 
als. The  temptations  exciting  a  division  of  property  among 
individuals,  are  feeble ;  hence  it  has  no  advocates,  and  hence 
in  our  present  circumstances,  it  never  will  have  advocates. 
Those  exciting  its  division  among  orders,  are  powerful ; 
hence  it  has  advocates,  and  hence  the  danger  of  property 
lurks  behind  that  project. 

Property,  like  liberty,  is  only  to  be  secured  upon  the 
broad  basis  of  publick  will.  When  hereditary  orders  or  se~ 
perate  interests,  tell  a  nation  that  it  is  an  enemy  to  its  own 
liberty,  but  that  liberty  will  be  safe  in  their  care,  it  is  done 
with  a  design  to  rob  the  nation  of  liberty  ;  and  when  these 
hereditary  orders  or  separate  interests  tell  a  nation,  that 
property  can  only  be  made  secure  by  investing  them  with 
two  thirds  of  it,  it  is  done  to  rob  the  nation  of  property. 

A  specifick  balance  of  property  among  orders,  or  sepa- 
rate interests,  in  the  present  state  of  commerce  and  man- 
ners, cannot  be  effected,  by  assigning  to  each  order  or  inte- 
rest a  third  part  of  the  land  held  by  a  nation  5  and  hence  it 


Hi      PRINCIPLES  6P  THE  POLICY  OP  THE  V.  STATES, 

is  obvious,  that  a  landed  order,  or  aristocracy,  CatinOt  be 
established.     As  land  itself  cannot  be  thus  balanced,  the 
only  remaining  mode  of  effecting  this  indispensable  object 
to  the  system  of  orders,  is  taxation.     Those  who  receive 
the  transfers  of  wealth  made  by  taxation,  and  not  those  who 
supply  them,  must  constitute  the  order  or  separate  interest. 
«!  cannot  be  made  a  nobleman  by  giving  property  to  B.  Ma- 
ny conclusions  ensue.     The  objects  of  paper  and  patronage 
in  England,  receive  the  benefit  of  the  balance  of  property, 
produced  by  taxation — the  modern  mode  of  managing  this 
balance ;  therefore  those  objects,  and  not  the  titled  nobility, 
constitute  the  real  order  or  separate  interest  in  England. 
Property  is  balanced  by  taxing  land  and  labour,  not  by  a  di- 
vision of  land ;  and  therefore  land  cannot  be  the  basis  of  an 
aristocracy.  Like  all  other  property,  it  loses  by  the  balance 
of  property  maintained  by  taxation  ;  and  it  is  the  order 
which  gains,  and  not  that  which  loses,  which  invariably  con- 
stitutes the  aristocracy.     An  aristocracy,  therefore,  by  the 
modern  mode  of  creating  it,  cannot  consist  of  a  landed  inte- 
rest* a  manufacturing  interest,  a  professional  interest,  or  of 
any  species  of  interest,  that  excepted  which  receives  the 
property  annually  collected  by  taxation,  charters  and  privi- 
legesi     It  is  the  share  of  property  received,  which  conveys 
the  share  of  power,  and  produces  the  balance  of  both.  Cor- 
ruption, charters,  patronage,  pensions  and  paper  systems, 
are  the  channels  through  which  the  property  annually  ba- 
lanced by  taxation,  is  distributed.     Therefrom  the  distribu- 
tees derive  a  power,  enabling  them  to  do  what  a  tided  order 
Would  in  vain  attempt ;  to  defend  themselves  and  their  king 
cT  factor,  against  all  other  interests  and  orders. 

Let  us  now  proceed  to  consider  the  examples  in  relation 
to  his  system,  drawn  by  Mr.  Adams  from  the  governments 
of  the  middle  age. 

Mr.  Adams  aftects  to  despise  theory,  and  to  prove  all 
his  conclusions  by  experience.  Without  estimating  the  dif- 
ference between  the  savage  and  the  civilized  ;  the  supersti- 
tious and  the  enlightened ;  a  city  and  a  great  country ;  he 


ANB  OF  THE  ENGLISH  POLICY.  110 

reasons  as  ii'  every  situation  ami  all  circumstances,  moral 
and  physical,  demanded  the  same  political  regimen.  The 
manners,  the  colour,  and  the  social  qualities,  of  the  brute 
creation,  are  changed  by  education ;  is  reason  condemned 
to  persist  in.  errours,  from  which  instinct  Las  in  seme  degree 
escaped  ?  His  examples  are  extracted  in  the  second  and 
third  volumes,  at  great  length,  from  the  Italian  republicks. 
To  be  guided  by  these,  Ave  must  shut  our  eyes  upon  the  day 
light  shining  around,  and  dive  after  our  character  and  ca- 
pacity into  the  caverns  of  antiquity.  Can  any  ingenuity  in- 
duce us  to  believe,  that  a  picture  of  human  depravity  and 
ignorance,  during  the  middle  age,  is  our  picture?  In  consi- 
dering this  rosary  of  causes,  it  will  hardly  be  overlooked, 
that  Mr.  Adams  has  been  as  evidently  a  theorist,  as  in  as- 
signing power  to  title,  and  forgetting  to  assign  it  to  wealth. 

These  cases  are  confined  to  the  thirteenth,  fourteenth 
and  fifteenth  centuries.  We  relinquish  the  use  of  the  deep 
ignorance  with  which  these  centuries  had  been  overspread 
by  the  recent  irruptions  and  conquests  of  barbarians,  and 
will  endeavour  to  reason  in  a  mode  more  conclusive. 

Mr.  Adams  considers  Florence,  as  affording  an  experi- 
ment of  the  most  weight.  He  enumerates  sundry  evils  en- 
dured by  that  city,  and  infers  that  his  system  would  have 
prevented  them.  The  inference  is  drawn,  not  from  a  com- 
parison between  the  government  of  Florence,  and  other 
tonus  existing  at  the  same  period,  which  might  have  fur- 
nished probable  conclusions  ;  but  from  a  comparison  be- 
tween governments  which  existed  at  periods  extremely  dis- 
tant from  each  other.  Parallels  between  contemporaries, 
will  be  allowed  to  furnish  a  sounder  inference.  His  histo- 
ry of  Florence  commences  in  the  year  1?15.  The  parlia- 
ment of  England  received  the  shape  of  king,  lords  and  com- 
mons, as  far  back  as  that  year  ;  indeed,  an  act  of  parliament 
appears  to  have  been  pleaded,  made  in  the  reign  of  William 
the  conqueror.  From  hence  to  the  end  of  the  fifteenth  cen- 
tury, when  Mr.  Adams's  history  of  Italian  miseries  ends^ 
'he  balance  of  power  and  property  im.  E£glau4. JUttftng. 


120      PHlKCIPEES  OF  THE  ¥Ol.lL\  OF  THE  V.  STA^TES, 

orders,  was  more  consonant  to  his  theory  than  at  present. 
The  representation  of  the  plebeian  order,  was  more  equal 
at  that  time  than  now  ;  because  inhabited  and  not  depopula- 
ted boroughs  were  represented.  Property  was  placed  by 
perpetuities  in  a  settled  state  of  division  and  balance  among 
orders  ;  this  division  and  balance  is  now  superseded  by  its 
division  through  commerce  and  alienation  among  individu- 
als, and  by  the  balance  of  taxation  between  payers  and  re- 
ceivers. The  titled  order  then  held  a  real  share  of  power, 
attracted  by  their  share  of  property ;  now,  power  is  attract- 
ed from  title  by  a  rieher  order  or  interest. 

Here  was  strong  ground  for  a  sober  inquirer  after  truth. 
The  contemporary  evils  generated  by  the  king,  lords  and 
commons  of  England,  and  by  the  Italian  republieks,  ought 
10  have  been  minutely  detailed  and  compared.  Then  the 
preponderating  mass  might  have  been  discovered  ;  and  then 
similar  evils  might  have  been  referred   to  some  common 

cause. 

The  feuds  and  wars  among  the  barons,  between  these 
and  the  kings,  between  the  kings  and  the  people,  between 
pretenders  to  the  crown,  between  the  nation  and  its  neigh- 
bours ;  catalogues  of  executions,  murders,  confiscations,  ba- 
nishments ;  seizures  of  church  lands  and  monasteries  :  chan- 
ges of  religion  and  persecutions,  begotten  by  amours,  or 
bigotry ;  and  all  the  eifects  of  prerogative,  privilege  and 
feudal  tenure,  ought  to  have  been  made  to  face  the  calami- 
ties of  the  Italian  republieks,  to  enable  us  to  determine 
which  were  most  hideous. 

These  calamities  brought  face  to  faee,  would  have  exhi- 
bited a  resemblance  not  to  be  obliterated.  And  the  chief 
distinction  between  them,  would  have  consisted  of  more  art* 
civilization  and  knowledge,  among  the  Italians  than  among 
the1  English,  infused  by  their  greater  portion  of  republican- 
ism. From  the  resemblance,  however,  would  have  resulted 
an  illustration  of  an  analysis  which  supposes,  thai  evil 
moral  effects  are  produced  by  monarchy,  aristocracy  or 
doinoeracv,  cither  simple  or  mix«d     The  demoeraoies, 


AND  OF  THE  ENGLISH  POLICY,  121 

aristocracies,  monarchies  and  mixtures,  botli  of  England 
and  Italy,  produced  evil  effects.     In  both  countries  ranks  or 
orders  existed  during  the  three  centuries  to  which  Mr 
Adams  confines  himself. 

Admitting  an  exchange  of  forms  of  government  to  have 
taken  place,  between  England  and  Italy,  an  exchange  of 
contemporary  evils  or  effects  might  have  also  followed  ;  and 
it  is  not  improbable  but  that  Italy  would  have  made  the 
worst  of  the  bargain.  Her  little  republicks,  would  have 
been  converted  into  little  kingdoms;  and  the  rivalry  and  am- 
bition of  neighbouring  commonwealths,  would  have  been 
exchanged  for  the  rivalry  and  ambition  of  neighbouring 
kings.  The  little  commonwealths  existed  more  centuries, 
than  the  kingdoms  would  have  done  years  ;  if  we  may  judge 
by  the  invariable  fate  of  a  cluster  of  small  kings.  Is  not 
this  a  proof  of  the  superior  excellence  or  moderation,  of 
the  republican,  to  the  monarchical  principle  ? 

The  numerous  disunited  territorial  divisions  of  Italy, 
was  the  substratum  for  her  republican  experiment;  a  terri- 
torial union,  of  the  English  experiment  for  balancing  pro- 
perty and  orders.  Italy  was  distracted  by  the  mutual  an- 
noyance of  jealous  neighbours,  and  the  intrigues  of  the 
Pope  and  the  Emperour.  England  was  strong  in  its  ex- 
tent, fortified  by  nature,  and  less  exposed  to  foreign  influ- 
ence. Under  these  disadvantages,  during  the  three  centu- 
ries We  are  estimating,  Italy  outstript  England  in  arts, 
knowledge  and  wealth ;  and  probably  saved  the  science  and 
civilization  of  the  world,  from  being  lost  in  those  ages  of 
darkness.  Her  evils  were  inferior  to  those  of  England,  un- 
der the  pressure  of  greater  local  difficulties  ;  and  her  pros- 
perity greater,  with  fewer  local  advantages.  But  the  tinc- 
ture of  republicanism  was  infinitely  stronger  in  the  Italian 
forms  of  government,  than  in  the  English. 

There  existed  however,  it  must  be  admitted,  a  strong  re- 
semblance  between  the  evils  suffered  by  both,  which  excites 
a  reasonable  suspicion,  that  these  evils  flowed  from  some 
cause,  also  common  to  both.     The  structure  of  Use  goverti- 

17 


123      PRINCIPLES  OF  THE  POLICY  OF  THE  U.  STATES, 

inents  was  dissimilar,  therefore  this  structure  could  not 
have  been  the  cause.  But  a  similarity  existed  between  En- 
gland and  Italy,  in  two  material  circumstances  during  these 
centuries ;  ignorance  and  nobility.  England  and  Italy  were 
both  in  a  state  of  turbulence  and  misery  during  the  con- 
templated period.  The  balances  of  England,  would  there- 
fore have  been  an  ineffectual  experiment  to  cure  the  cala- 
mities of  Italy  ',  and  the  mixed  republicanism  of  Italy,  as 
ineffectual  to  cure  the  calamities  of  England.  The  evil 
moral  causes,  ignorance  and  nobility,  being  common  to  both 
countries,  would  still  have  produced  evil  effects,  had  they 
been  transposed. 

From  the  termination  of  the  fifteenth  century,  the  two 
chief  calamities  which  had  previously  afrlicted  Europe, 
diminished  in  malignancy.  Printing  gradually  mitigated 
the  effects  of  ignorance ;  and  commerce  and  alienation,  gra- 
dually destroyed  the  balance  of  property  and  power  among 
orders.  To  defend  noble  or  privileged  orders  by  a  compa- 
rison between  Italy,  before  the  discovery  of  printing  and 
under  a  feudal  monopoly  of  land,  and  England,  enlightened 
by  that  art,  and  relieved  from  this  monopoly,  is  reasoning 
thus  :  As  England,  after  the  power  and  influence  of  her 
nobility  were  destroyed  by  alienation  and  the  diffusion  of 
knowledge,  became  happier  than  Italy,  whilst  afflicted  with 
powerful  noble  orders,  therefore  noble  orders  are  blessings* 
The  amelioration  of  the  human  condition,  though  gene- 
ral to  Europe,  was  not  precisely  the  same  in  each  country. 
It  seems  in  a  great  measure  to  have  been  graduated  by  the 
thermometer  of  nobility,  and  to  have  proceeded  with  cele- 
rity or  tardiness,  in  proportion  to  the  imbecility  or  strength 
of  noble  orders. 

In  Russia  and  Poland,  the  nobility  long  retained  proper- 
ty and  power,  and  the  people,  oppression  and  misery.  lit 
France  and  Germany,  the  nobility  retained  more  of  its  pro- 
perty and  power,  than  in  England,  and  the  people  were 
more  oppressed.  In  England,  nobility  received  the  iirst  and 
hardest   blow,  and   she   suddenly  overtook  and  surpassed 


AND  OF  THE  ENGLISH  POLICY.  12S 

several  countries  in  prosperity,  which  were  previously  ahead 
of  her.  And  in  the  revolution  of  France,  the  abolition  of 
nobility,  made  room  for  a  wonderful  national  energy  and 
superiority,  which  will  not  be  forgotten  by  politicians. 

The  history  of  England  supports  these  ideas.  The 
reign  of  king  John  ended  in  1216,  and  that  of  Henry  the  se- 
venth in  1509,  so  that  the  collection  of  Italian  troubles  made 
by  Mr.  Adams,  is  contemporary  with  the  troubles  of  En- 
gland during  the  reigns  of  John,  Henry  3d,  Edward  ist, 
Edw.  2d,  Edw.  3d,  Richard  2d,  Henry  4th,  5th  and  6th, 
Edw.  4th,  Rich.  3d,  and  Henry  7th. 

During  these  reigns,  the  nobility  were  rich  and  power- 
ful, and  the  troubles  of  England,  dreadful  and  unremitting. 
Henry  the  seventh  began  to  break  their  power  by  diminish- 
ing their  property,  and  the  situation  of  the  nation  began  to 
mend.  As  commerce  and  alienation  proceeded  in  this  work, 
the  situation  of  the  nation  grew  bettor  ;  and  since  the  new 
project  of  annually  balancing  property  by  taxation,  has  been 
substituted  for  the  old  project  of  a  speeifiek  lauded  balance, 
the  parish  poor  and  the  publick  debt,  the  poverty  and  the 
luxury,  the  vices  and  the  wretchedness  of  the  nation  have 
all  increased. 

Powerful  and  wealthy  orders,  in  no  country  under  any 
form  of  government,  have  existed  in  union  with  national 
happiness;  a  system  therefore,  which  proposes  so  to  balance 
them,  as  to  compel  them  to  be  subservient  to  it,  is  not  ex 
perimental,  and  only  a  theory.  Let  us  consider,  whether 
it  is  entitled  even  to  the  weight  of  naked  theory. 

If  Mr.  Adams's  theory  existed  in  England  at  any  period, 
before  the  sixteenth  century,  it  did  not  produce  effects  which 
can  invite  us  to  adopt  it :  and  afterwards,  the  political  pro- 
gress of  England  received  its  direction  from  the  assaults 
made  upon  the  power  and  property  of  the  nobility  by  Ilenry 
the  seventh,  and  by  alienation,  commerce,  paper  and  patron 
age.  The  system  therefore  is  made  worse  than  naked  theory, 
by  inimical  experience.  The  miseries  of  the  first  period, 
were  suddenly  diminished,  and  the  effects  of  the  second  gra- 


12i      PRINCIPLES  OF  THE  POLICY  OF  THE  U.  STATES, 

dually  produced,  by  successful  combatants  against  nobility, 
the  corner  stone  of  his  system. 

The  animation  of  defending  it,  by  the  experience  of  the 
Italian  republicks,  is  still  more  remarkable  than  the  use 
made  of  the  experience  of  England.  The  history  of  Flo- 
rence, says  Mr.  Adams,  is  the  history  of  them  all.  This  is 
only  a  detail  of  the  treasons  and  oppressions  of  a  turbulent 
nobility.  We  hear  constantly  of  the  Boundelmonti,  Uberti, 
Amadei,  Donati,  Cherchi,  Neri,  Biarchi,  Medecei,  Albigi, 
and  others,  with  their  castles ;  of  publick  calamities  ori- 
ginating in  the  ambition,  wickedness  or  folly  of  a  nobleman ; 
of  confederations  between  orders,  and  between  noble  fami- 
lies ;  and  of  efforts  and  concessions  on  the  part  of  the  people 
to  restrain  these  disorders.  Whilst  these  disorders  are 
ascribed  to  the  nobility,  Mr.  Adams  imputes  them  to  the 
people  ;  merely  because  they  did  not  try  exactly,  as  he 
thinks,  his  balance  of  orders  ;  and  felicitating  his  country 
in  having  discovered  a  remedy  for  these  disorders,  he  is 
willing  to  rebuild  castles  for  nobles,  or  to  erect  the  more 
impregnable  fortress  of  paper  and  patronage  for  aristocracy, 
to  evince  the  dexterity  with  which  the  calamities  endured 
by  Florence  from  nobility,  may  be  averted  from  the  United 
States.  Nobility  was  the  source  of  evil  to  Florence  ;  Flo- 
rence therefore  furnishes  no  experiment,  shewing  nobility 
to  have  been  a  source  of  good.  A  system  to  convert  nobility 
into  a  blessing,  is  worse  than  theory,  if  experience  exhibit* 
it  as  a  curse.  A  few  other  quotations  from  the  book  of  ex» 
perience  are  necessary  to  fix  its  character. 

'*  Machiavel,"  says  Mr.  Adams,  "  informs  him,  that 
**  the  government  of  Florence  was  fallen  into  great  disorder 
"  and  misrule ;  for  the  Guelph  nobility,  being  the  majority, 
««  were  grown  so  insolent,  and  stood  in  so  little  awe  of  the 
«  magistracy,  that  though  many  murders  and  other  vio- 
«  lences  were  daily  committed,  yet  the  criminals  daily 
"  escaped  with  impunity,  through  favour  of  one  or  the  other 
'«  of  the  nobles."* 

*  Adams's  Dcf.  v.  2,  18. 


And  of  the  English  policy.  125 

«  But  the  behaviour  of  the  nobility  was  quite  the  con- 
«  trary,"  says  Machiavel,  "  for  as  they  always  disdained 
"the  thoughts  of  equality,  even  when  they  lived  a  private 
"  life,  so  now  they  were  in  the  magistracy,  they  thought  to 
*•'  domineer  over  the  whole  city,  and  every  day  produced 
ff  fresh  instances  of  their  pride  and  arrogance  ;  which  ex- 
«  eeedingly  galled  the  people,  when  they  saw  they  had  de- 
"  posed  one  tyrant  to  make  room  for  a  thousand.3' 

«  All  this,"  says  Mr.  Adams,  "  one  may  safely  believe 
"  to  be  exactly  true,  but  what  then  ?  Why,  they  ought  to 
"  have  separated  the  nobles  from  the  commons,  and  made 
«*  each  independent  of  the  other."* 

These  nobles  were  tried  "  in  private  life  and  in  the  ma- 
gistracy," in  both  they  retained  the  vicious  qualities  of  the 
vicious  principle,  nobility.  True,  says  Mr.  Adams,  but 
they  were  not  tried  according  to  my  theory.  Many  at- 
tempts in  various  modes,  some  approaching  to  his  theory, 
were  unsuccessfully  made  in  Italy  to  gratify  or  purify  the 
principle,  nobility;  all  failed;  it  continued  to  exhibit  vicious 
qualities.  At  this  period,  the  nobles  in  England  were  sepa- 
rated from  and  independent  of  the  house  of  commons,  and 
that  house  of  the  nobles  ;  yet  the  vicious  qualities  of  nobi- 
lity caused  a  multitude  of  disorders.  Mr.  Adams  admits 
the  insolence  of  nobility,  and  the  disorders  it  produces;  his 
remedy  to  cure  insolence  and  ambition,  is  power  and  wealth, 

The  nobles  of  Poland,  were  rich  and  powerful ;  they 
ruined  their  country,  rather  than  soften  the  condition  of  the 
people.  Those  of  Russia  receive  districts  with  the  inhabit- 
ants as  donations  from  an  empcrour.  But,  says  Mr.  Adams, 
¥  hereditary  kings  and  nobles  are  as  much  representatives 
of  the  people  as  those  they  elect."  In  Russia  they  represent 
them  as  part  of  their  estates.  Thus  the  feudal  English  ba~ 
rons  represented  the  people,  whilst  possessed  of  their  baron- 
ies ;  now,  by  selling  them  to  the  crown.  We  see  in  all 
instances,  that  nobility,  with  great  wealth  and  power,  is  a 
tyrant ;  with  little,  a  traitor :  and  that  orders  or  interests, 

*  Adams's  Def.  v.  2,  46. 


126      PRINCIPLES  OF  THE  POLICY  OF  THE  TJ.  STATES, 

subsisting  on  the  people,  invariably  oppress  or  sell  them  j 
for  how  can  they  otherwise  subsist  I 

Mr.  Adams  allows  wealth  to  be  the  great  machine  for 
governing  the  world,  and  yet  he  makes  no  distinction  be- 
tween a  rich  order  or  interest,  and  a  poor  one.  He  has  seen 
a  rich  nobility  in  Poland  overbalance  both  a  king  and  a 
people.  He  has  seen  a  rich  nobility,  clergy  and  king  in  the 
late  monarchy  of  France,  overbalancing  the  people.  He  has 
seen  rich  barons  dethroning  poor  kings,  and  poor  ones  the 
creatures  of  rich  kings.  It  is  in  Yain  to  say  that  these  poor 
nobles  have  a  share  in  the  legislature,  if  they  have  neither 
property  nor  influence,  to  restrain  or  balance  the  wealth 
and  influence  of  the  king,  with  his  army,  and  his  patronage. 
A  constitution,  which  divides  rights  among  orders,  giving  to 
one  a  share,  but  no  power  to  defend  it ;  and  to  another  a 
share,  witli  power  to  encroach,  to  menace  and  to  corrupt, 
"will  be  as  defective,  as  one  which  should  bestow  all  power 
upon  an  individual,  or  a  single  assembly,  with  an  injunction 
not  to  abuse  it. 

These  arguments  tend  to  show,  that  a  balance  of  orders 
cannot  exist  without  a  balance  of  property  among  these 
orders,  as  Lord  Shaftsbury  and  Mr.  Adams  unite  in  assert- 
ing. Concurring  with  these  authors,  two  inferences  of  im- 
portance present  themselves. 

One,  that  as  a  balance  or  equality  of  landed  property 
cannot  subsist  in  community  with  the  present  state  of 
knowledge,  commerce  and  alienation  ;  and  as  a  balance  or 
equality  of  power,  cannot  subsist  without  a  balance  of  pro- 
perty, so  the  system  of  equalising  power  and  property 
between  a  confederation  of  orders,  if  established,  could  only 
sustain  its  perfection  during  the  moment  of  transit  over  the 
true  balance,  which  might  occur  in  the  flight  of  property 
on  the  wings  of  commerce,  alienation  and  knowledge,  from 
the  minor  to  the  numerous  order.  The  same  effects  could 
not  possibly  result  from  the  gas  of  a  balance  of  property,  as 
from  a  real  balance  itself. 


AND  OF  THE    ENGLISH   POLICY.  127 

The  other  is  still  more  important.  As  no  balance  of 
speeifick  property  among  confederated  orders,  ean  exist  iu 
communion  with  the  present  state  of  knowledge,  commerce 
and  alienation,  taxation  becomes  the  only  engine  for  distri- 
buting and  balancing  property  ;  and  must  arrange  society 
into  the  two  orders  of  payers  and  receivers.  The  latter  be- 
ing the  enriched,  must  govern  the  impoverished  order;  and 
being  a  minority,  is  by  nature  an  aristocracy.  Though  a 
king,  a  titled  and  a  plebeian  order  may  continue  to  exist, 
the  three  nominal  orders,  are  absorbed  by  the  two  real, 
and  the  evils  follow,  allowed  by  Mr.  Adams  to  be  invaria- 
ble consequences  of  two  orders. 

The  history  of  England  demonstrates  these  remarks. 
The  nobility  were  oppressive,  whilst  they  held  an  over  pro- 
portion  of  property,  by  laws  for  perpetuating  inheritances  : 
and  the  monied  aristocracy  has  become  more  oppressive  by 
laws  for  transferring  to  it  an  over  proportion  of  property, 
not  through  manors,  but  through  taxation.  The  poison  of 
perpetuities  is  lodged  in  the  property  secured  to  a  separate 
interest,  not  in  the  mode  of  securing  it ;  nor  can  it  be  ren- 
dered innoxious,  by  the  title  of  noble,  clerical  or  stoek. 
Had  the  feudal  barons  exchanged  their  perpetual  inheritan- 
ces, for  the  perpetual  income  of  stock  and  patronage,  their 
power  would  never  have  been  broken,  whilst  this  new  spe- 
cies of  perpetuity  lasted. 

This  view  of  the  subject  accounts  for  the  former  and 
present  conduct  of  the  English  nobility.  Whilst  their  pro- 
perty gave  them  power,  they  despised  the  system  of  taxa- 
tion and  patronage,  civil  commotion  was  the  fruit  of  their 
arrogance  and  ambition,  and  feudal  tenures  and  services 
fed  their  avarice.  But  when  their  property  was  diminish- 
ed, and  the  king  became  the  annual  dispenser  of  a  treasury 
perpetually  replenished  by  loaning  and  taxation,  then  this 
nobility  were  converted  into  the  courtiers  of  the  crown,  and 
the  satellites  of  its  usurpations.  They  fell  under  an  influ- 
ence, equivalent  to  an  annual  distribution  by  the  king,  of 
ancient  baronies,  among  the  partisans  of  monarchy.    Yet 


/ 
128      PRINCIPLES  OP  THE  POLICY  OF  THE  U.  &TATES* 

the  United  States  have  pointed  their  constitutional  artillery 
against  the  aristocracies  of  superstition  and  the  feudal  sys- 
tem, after  reason  had  destroyed  the  first,  and  knowledge, 
commerce  and  alienation,  the  second.  Did  they  fear  or 
love  the  living  foe,  the  aristocracy  of  paper  and  patronage 
bottomed  upon  perpetual  taxation  ?  or  were  they  deceived 
at  the  formation  of  their  constitutions,  because  it  joined  in 
trampling  upon  the  dead  bodies  of  its  predecessors  ?  They 
will  no  longer  hesitate  in  discerning,  that  the  project  of 
equalising  property  among  titled  orders,  is  as  impracticable 
in  communion  with  knowledge,  commerce  and  alienation, 
or  with  the  system  of  paper  and  patronage,  as  is  the  project 
of  equalising  it  among  individuals,  in  communion  wilh  hu- 
man mortality  ;  that  both  must  remain  speculative  theories, 
rebutted  by  experience,  until  perpetuities  are  re-establish- 
ed, or  immortality  without  fecundity  is  bestowed  on  man- 
kind ;  and  that,  excluding  the  idea  of  either,  the  election  of 
the  United  States  is  confined  to  a  distribution  of  property 
by  industry  and  talents,  or  according  to  the  avarice  of  a  se- 
parate and  minor  portion  of  the  society,  by  perpetual  taxa- 
tion, paper  currencies  and  the  arts  of  patronage.  The  feu- 
dal perpetuities  cost  the  nation  nothing  ,•  stock  perpetuities 
are  erected  wholly  at  their  expense.  Is  it  better  to  entail 
stock  on  the  nation  to  make  an  aristocracy,  or  to  allow  fa- 
thers to  entail  their  lands  on  their  sons  for  the  same  pur- 
pose ? 

Mr.  Adams  frequently  endeavours  to  apply  historical 

facts  to  his  theory  or  the  English  system ;  these  applica- 
tions could  not  be  past  over,  nor  could  the  justifications  of 
the  American  policy  which  his  own  facts  furnished,  be  omit- 
ted. Our  business  proceeds  either  by  shewing  the  insuffi- 
ciency of  the  evidence,  in  favour  of  balancing  property  and 
power  among  confederated  orders  ;  the  impossibility  of  in- 
troducing and  supporting  such  a  balance  now,  if  it  ever  did 
exist ;  or  the  preference  of  our  policy  to  that.  We  are  not 
deviating  therefore  from  the  subject,  in  deviating  somewhat 
from  Mir  quotations-.     To  ihes<?  let  us  return. 


AXD  OF  THE  ENGLISH  FOLIC!".  129 

The  evidence  of  Machiavel,  "  that  the  nobles  were  the 
cause  of  the  publick  calamities  which  afflicted  Italv"  is  ad- 
milted  by  Mr.  Adams  to  be  true.  It  is  then  admitted,  that 
nobility  distracted  Italy  for  three  centuries  ;  that  it  caused 
innumerable  publick  calamities;  and  that  ultimately  it 
usurped  tyrannical  power,  almost  over  every  Kalian  repub- 
lick.  This  is  the  evidence.  It  was  said  that  the  evi- 
dence adduced  in  favour  of  nobility  by  Mr.  Adams,  was 
against  it. 

But  this  is  only  the  evidence  acknowledged  by  Mr, 
Adams  to  be  true.  He  omitted  to  acknowledge,  that  under 
the  operation  of  the  system  of  king,  lords  and  commons  in 
England,  nobility  were  turbulent  and  tyrannical,  as  long  as 
their  property  was  nailed  to  them  by  entails,  and  that  they 
gradually  sunk  into  parasites  of  royalty,  after  the  nail  was 
drawn.  Nobility,  whenever  it  has  appeared,  has  proved  it- 
self to  be  an  evil  moral  principle  by  its  effects.  Experience 
is  in  full  opposition  to  Mr.  Adams's  theory.  And  the  ques- 
tion is,  whether  the  United  States  will  overlook  experi- 
ence, to  make  one  more  attempt  to  convert  nobility  into  a 
good  moral  principle,  for  the  sake  of  satisfying  Mr.  Adams's 
ardour. 

Mr.  Adams's  collection  of  Italian  calamities,  comes 
down  but  a  few  years  lower  than  1495.  We  have  ascribed 
them  partly  to  ignorance,  believing  that  ignorance  is  an  evil 
principle,  which  enables  nobility  to  afflict  human  nature 
with  additional  misery.  But  Mr.  Adams,  without  consi- 
dering the  different  degrees  of  knowledge  and  ignorance,  ex- 
isting six  centuries  past  and  at  this  time,  uniformly  consi- 
ders his  theory  as  a  complete  panacea  for  every  political 
body,  whatever  may  be  its  malady. 

And  yet  he  says  that  «  in  1495  a  man  appeared  in  Flo* 
«  rence,  who  declared  that  God  had  constituted  him  his 
«  ambassador  to  Florence,  with  full  power  and  express  or- 
«  ders  to  declare  his  will ;  and  this  egregious  impostor  re- 
"  gulated  the  government."* 

*  Adams's  Def.  v.  2.  144. 

18 


130      PRINCIPLES  OF  THE  POLICY  OF  THE  U.  STATES, 

3Ir.  A(lam9  believes  that  his  theory  was  calculated  to 
regulate  the  government  of  a  society,  in  a  state  of  manners 
and  ignorance,  adapted  for  the  practices  of  an  egregious 
impostor.     Supposing  him  right  in  this  opinion,  some  rea- 
son ought  to  have  been  given,  why  a  system,  suitable  to  a 
national  inclination  for  imposition  and  fraud,  would  also  he 
suitable  for  an  enlightened  people.     Until  this  is  done,  it  is 
evident,  that  if  the  experiments  of  the  Italian  republicks, 
prove,  as  Mr.  Adams  asserts,  that  his  theory  Avould  have 
been  suitable  to  a  state  of  ignorance  and  manners,  similar 
to  the  Florentine ;  it  is  by  no  means  a  consequence,  that  it 
is  suitable  also  for  a  state  of  knowledge  and  manners  simi- 
lar to  the  American,     Degrees  of  infatuation  may  exist,  for 
which  imposition  is  the  only  remedy ;  and  it  does  not  follow, 
that  by  proving  a  thing  to  be  a  remedy  for  infatuation,  that 
it  would  be  useful  where  there  is  no  infatuation.     Without 
illustrating  the  ignorance  and  infatuation  of  Italy  by  a  his- 
tory of  the  crusades,  we  will  pass  on  to  the  following  quo- 
tation. 

(i  The  quarrel  between  Frederick  the  emperour.  and 
«  Gregory  the  Pope,  revived  in  Bologna  the  party  distine- 
"  tions  of  Guelphs  and  Ghibellines,  drawn  from  Germany 
«  in  the  time  of  Henry  the  fourth.  Not  only  some  cities 
«  favoured  the  emperour,  and  others  the  pontiff,  but  in  the 
t(  city  of  Bologna,  the  citizens  arrived  to  that  degree  of  ex- 
«  treme  madness,  that,  in  hatred  of  each  other,  they  strove 
«  to  deprive  each  other  of  their  lives  and  fortunes  together, 
"  Sons  became  enemies  to  their  fathers,  and  brothers  to 
*•'  brothers ;  and,  as  if  it  was  not  enough  to  shed  their  own 
«  blood,  like  mad  dogs,  they  proceeded  to  demolish  houses, 
(i  and  to  burning  the  cities,  the  trees  and  the  corn.  This 
*<  diabolical  pestilence  produced  such  an  aversion  to  each 
«  other,  that  they  studied  to  distinguish  themselves  in  all 
«  things  :  in  their  clothes,  in  the  colours  they  wore,  in  their 
*<  actions,  their  speech,  their  walk,  their  food,  their  salu- 
« tations,  their  drink,  their  manner  of  cutting  bread,  in 
(i  folding  their  napkin*,  In  the  cut  of  their  hair,  and  innn 


AND  OF  THE  ENGLISH  POLICY.  134 

«  merable  other  extravagances  equally  whimsical.  A 
«  plague  truly  horrible,  a  flame  wholly  inextinguishable, 
"  which  proved  the  extinction  of  so  many  noble  families, 
«  and  the  ruin  of  so  many  miserable  cities."* 

This  picture  of  the  effects  of  orders,  is  urged  by  Mr. 
Adams  in  favour  of  orders.  He  ascribes  the  calamities  of 
Italy  to  the  popular  forms  of  their  governments,  and  tells 
us  at  the  same  time,  that  they  were  owing  to  an  Emperour, 
a  Pope,  and  a  nobility.  Here  then  are  all  his  orders,  and 
one  more  than  he  contends  for ;  but  one  which  will  always 
be  resorted  to  as  an  engine,  in  a  rivalship  between  two 
others.  A  hierarchy  is  an  engine  which  hereditary  orders 
play  upon  each  other,  or  upon  the  people.  We  find  that, 
the  experiments  of  Italy  were  made  with  the  one,  the  few, 
the  many,  and  an  established  church.  It  was  said,  thai 
they  bore  a  strong  resemblance  to  Mr.  Adams's  theory,  and 
the  English  system. 

Let  us  suppose  that  Mr.  Adams  had  written  against 
orders,  and  in  favour  of  the  policy  of  the  United  States. 
Would  he  have  considered  the  calamities  in  which  the  Ita- 
lian republicks  were  involved  by  an  Emperour,  a  Pope  and 
a  nobility,  as  justifying  or  condemning  our  policy  in  exclud- 
ing a  king,  a  metropolitan,  and  hereditary  orders  ?  Would 
the  effects  stated  in  the  extract,  of  a  jealousy  among  such 
orders,  have  been  urged  by  him  to  prove,  that  they  were  a 
curse,  or  a  blessing  ?  Would  he  have  advised  the  United 
States,  after  recapitulating  the  human  miseries  begotten  by 
a  jealousy  of  orders,  in  every  instance  of  their  existence,  to 
surrender  their  peace  and  happiness,  merely  to  try  Whether 
this  evil  principle,  from  which  honours  innumerable  have 
proceeded,  might  be  made  to  produce  good  ?  No,  he  Would 
have  demonstrated,  that  no  politician,  no  theorist,  no  moral 
alchymist,  has  skill  able  to  change  the  nature  of  good  and 
evil,  and  to  reverse  the  moral  laws  of  the  Deity.  And  he 
would  have  warned  us  pathetically  against  suffering  our  go- 
vernments to  be  modelled  upon   such  a  calculation,   even 

*  Adams's  Def.  v.  2,  405.  406.  t 


132      PRINCIPLES  OF  THE  POLICY  OP  THE  U.  STATES, 

though  the  projector  should  declare  himself  to  he  an  am- 
bassaador  from  God. 

Nothing  can  more  evidently  display  an  imagination 
heated  beyond  the  temperature  of  impartial  reason,  than  a 
resort  to  contradiction  in  supporting  a  project. 

Mr.  Adams  tells  us  that  "  there  were  in  Italy,  in  the 
middle  age,  one  hundred  or  two  of  cities,  all  independent 
republieks,  and  all  constituted  in  the  same  manner.  The 
history  of  one  is,  under  different  names  and  various  circum- 
stances, the  history  of  all."  He  addresses  two  volumes  of 
examples,  drawn  from  republieks  consisting  of  single  cities, 
as  evidence  to  extensive  countries ;  and,  rejecting  even  the 
idea,  that  extensive  territory,  national  strength,  and  national 
safety,  would  alone  have  obviated  many  misfortunes  to  which 
these  little  republieks  were  liable,  he  positively  assures  us, 
that  human  nature  is  always  the  same,  and  that  therefore 
governments  consisting  of  single  cities,  furnish  correct  pre- 
cedents for  the  direction  of  numerous  nations  and  extensive 
countries.  Only  premising,  that  the  same  argument  would 
prove  the  propriety  of  teaching  a  great  and  free  people  how 
to  govern  themselves,  by  examples  drawn  from  armies, 
crowded  in  dangerous  garrisons,  under  their  general,  officers 
and  chaplains,  we  will  proceed  directly  to  the  alleged  incon- 
sistency. 

Nedham,  in  his  "right  constitution  of  a  common- 
wealth," had  drawn  arguments  from  the  democratical  can- 
tons of  Switzerland,  which  Mr.  Adams  thus  disposes  of. 

«  There  is  not  even  a  colour  in  his  favour  in  the  demo- 
«  cratical  cantons  of  Switzerland — narrow  spots  or  barren 
«  mountains,  where  the  people  live  on  milk  ;  nor  in  St.  Ma- 
«  rino  or  Ragusa  :  no  precedents,  surely,  for  England  or 
«  American  States,  where  the  people  are  numerous  and 
«  rich,  the  territory  capacious,  and  commerce  extensive."* 

All  Mr.  Adams's  evidence,  in  his  two  last  volumes,  is 
drawn  (Nieuchattel  excepted,  a  narrow  principality  in  Swit- 
zerland itself,)  out  of  little  republieks,  composed  of  single 

*  Adams's  Def.  v.  3-  355. 


AND  OF  THE  ENGLISH  FOXICT.  135 

©hies,  less  than  many  cantons  of  Switzerland,  in  times  of 
ignorance  and  superstition,  and  when  the  state  of  poverty 
was  such,  that  it  was  a  great  distinction  to  own  a  horse. 
p  No  precedents,  surely,  for  England  or  American  States, 
(e  where  the  people  are  numerous  and  rich,  the  territory 
*  capacious,  and  the  commerce  extensive."  And  thus  he 
very  correctly  overturns,  and  disallows  the  whole  evidence 
upon  which  his  two  last  volumes  are  built. 

He  does  more  ;  he  acknowledges  an  erroneous  mode  of 
reasoning  in  defence  of  his  theory,  in  having  wholly  omitted 
to  estimate  the  influence  of  physical  or  moral  circumstances 
upon  political  experiments,  and  in  hastily  concluding  human 
nature  under  all  to  be  the  same  ;  by  admitting  the  decisive 
force  of  such  circumstances. 

In  the  quotation,  extent  of  territory,  population,  wealth 
and  commerce,  are  expressly  stated  as  affecting  forms  of 
government,  and  such  an  influence  is  even  insinuated  as 
likely  to  ensue  from  a  milk  diet.  Still  strohger  differences 
ought  to  have  occurred  to  Mr.  Adams,  between  his  Italian 
cities  and  American  states.  Their  relative  situation  as  to 
knowledge  and  ignorance,  superstition  and  religion,  privi- 
leged orders  and  equality,  are  differences,  infinitely  stronger 
than  those,  admitted  of  themselves  sufficiently  strong  to  de- 
stroy evidence  similar  to  his  own. 

To  contend  both  for  the  propriety  and  absurdity  of  the 
same  evidence,  by  arguments  urged  for  one  object,  and  re- 
futed for  another,  discloses  an  impetuosity  in  speculation, 
which  ought  at  least  to  awaken  an  apprehension,  that  he- 
reditary orders  are  more  likely  to  repeat  the  crimes  which 
Mr.  Adams  allows  them  to  have  committed,  than  to  be  con- 
verted into  blessings  by  a  balance  of  property  and  power. 

Had  not  Mr.  Adams's  evidence  been  inapplicable  both  to 
the  moral  and  physical  situation  of  the  United  States,  it  is 
brought  forward  in  a  mode  better  calculated  to  excite  pas- 
sion and  prejudice,  than  reason  and  reflection.  A  mass  of 
errour,  rage  and  ambition  ;  of  tragical  catastrophe,  solicit- 
ing sympathy  by  naming  the  persons  of  the  drama  :  and  of 


134      PRINCIPLES  OF  THE  POLICY  OF  THE  U.  STATES, 

demolished  castles,  mangled  limbs,  and  putrid  carcasses,  is 
exhibited.  But  truth  can  only  be  discovered  by  considering 
the  evidence  on  both  sides.  Another  mass  of  these  disgust- 
ing materials,  labelled  u  Behold  the  effects  of  monarchy  and 
aristocracy,"  might  have  saved  the  United  States  the  humi- 
liation of  having  their  credulity  experimentally  removed, 
Or  was  it  necessary  to  excite  an  abhorrence  of  republican 
governments,  to  prepare  the  mind  for  a  patient  contempla- 
tion even  of  the  modest  monarchy,  called  limited. 

A  search  among  the  relicks  of  antiquity,  for  principles 
of  which  to  form  a  modern  government,  requires  a  contem- 
poraneous estimate.  The  superiority  of  the  republican  po- 
licy of  the  United  States  over  the  ancient  monarchies  of 
Persia  and  Macedonia,  is  an  argument  precisely  as  strong  in 
favour  of  popular  governments,  as  would  have  been  the  su- 
periority of  the  present  monarchy  of  Britain,  over  the  re- 
publicks  of  Athens,  Rome,  Carthage  and  of  Italy,  in  favour 
of  monarchy,  supposing  Mr.  Adams  to  have  established  it. 
In  both  eases  the  argument  would  be  inconclusive.  But  al- 
though results  of  inconclusive  authority  only  can  arise  from 
a  comparison  between  ancient  and  modern  governments ; 
yet  a  comparison  of  ancient  governments  with  each  other, 
will  furnish  strong  indications  of  preference  and  superiority 
between  political  principles. 

These  indications  uniformly  appear  on  the  side  of  the 
popular  principle  ;  and  the  nearer  the  forms  of  government 
approached  to  the  policy  of  the  United  States,  the  stronger 
are  the  indications  of  superiority.  As  rivals  of  Rome  and 
Carthage,  the  contemporary  monarchies  arc  almost  imper- 
ceptible ;  and  above  an  hundred  generations,  almost  forget- 
ting what  the  rest  of  the  world  did  at  that  time,  have  trans- 
mitted to  us  an  admiration  of  the  little  Athenian  democracy, 
which  we  shall  hand  down  to  a  fathomless  posterity. 

But  let  us  come  to  the  world  we  live  in  ;  to  a  world, 
not  guided  by  superstition  but  by  religion.  Instead  of  diving 
after  wisdom  into  the  gloom  of  antiquity,  when  men  made 
gods,  let  us  leave  Mr.  Adams  in  possession  of  his  opinion, 


AMI  OF  THE  ENGLISH  POLICY.  135 

that  under  truth  or  superstition,  under  the  Deity  or  Jupi- 
ter, the  human  character  is  the  same.  And  leaving  divines 
also  to  felicitate  themselves  on  the  inutility  of  their  labours, 
which  this  doctrine  admits,  let  us  bring  into  comparison  the 
existing  competitors  for  pre-eminence.  These  are  the  first 
among  republicks,  and  the  first  among  monarchies. 

If  the  comparison  commences  from  the  first  settlement 
of  the  United  States,  several  centuries  of  prosperity  ami 
good  order  present  themselves  under  the  colonial  form  of 
government.  How  can  this  prosperity  and  good  order  be 
accounted  for?  By  the  absence  of  jealous  and  rival  orders  j 
by  the  absence  of  the  system  of  balancing  power  and  pro- 
perty between  such  orders  ;  by  the  absence  of  the  system  of 
paper  and  patronage,  for  perpetuating  property  to  one  inte- 
rest at  the  expense  of  another  ;  and  by  the  absence  of  a  no- 
minal king.  The  errours  in  the  form  of  the  colonial  go- 
vernment slept,  because  these  evils  were  not  present  to  awa- 
ken them ;  and  the  solitary  good  principle  it  possessed,  ope- 
rated under  a  sufferance,  arising  from  the  inattention  of  the 
evil  principles  united  with  it.  Election  sufficed  to  produce 
colonial  prosperity  and  good  order,  and  silently  formed  the 
national  character  and  love  of  liberty,  which  sustained  a  fu- 
rious war  almost  devoid  of  any  other  resource. 

At  length  monarchy,  aristocracy,  and  taxation,  awaken* 
ed.  Mr.  Adams's  hereditary  representation  and  our  elee* 
tive  representation,  appeared  to  be  principles  exactly  oppo- 
site, in  producing  opposite  effects.  His  hereditary  orders, 
and  the  system  of  paper  and  patronage,  took  one  side,  and 
the  elective  principle  the  other.  Hereditary  orders  and  the 
people,  here,  as  in  Rome  and  Italy,  quarrelled.  Had  a  por- 
tion of  these  orders,  and  the  projects  of  banking  and  fund- 
ing, been  mingled  with  the  elective  system  at  the  com- 
mencement of  these  hostilities,  they  would  have  destroyed 
its  efficacy,  in  like  manner  as  nobility  has  uniformly  de- 
stroyed the  efficacy  of  the  elective  principle,  wherever  it 
has  been  mingled  with  it ;  and  as  a  paper  influence  has  de- 
stroyed its  efficacy  in  England.     And  as  election  has  never 


136      PRINCIPLES  OF  THE  POLICY  OF  THE  V.  STATES, 

produced  equal  beneficial  effects,  in  communion  with  nobility 
or  with  paper  and  patronage,  as  when  disunited  from  them 
in  the  instance  of  the  United  States,  it  probably  never  will. 

In  addition  to  the  colonial  prosperity,  under  the  sub- 
stantial auspices  of  the  elective  principle,  that  which  we 
have  experienced  subsequently  to  the  revolution  is  no  theo- 
ry, no  hypothesis  ;  it  is  plain  matter  of  fact,  of  above  thirty 
years  standing.  In  every  modification  of  their  govern- 
ments, the  United  States  have  adhered  to  it.  When  have 
we  seen  the  people  perpetrating  the  atrocious  crimes  char- 
ged to  popular  governments,  plundering  property,  banishing 
merit,  or  tearing  asunder  the  limbs  of  innocence  ?  Where 
are  wars,  tumults,  oppression,  prosecutions  and  corruption, 
proceeding  from  the  people  ?  If  these  calamities  have  not 
appeared  under  our  policy,  we  ought  to  conclude  that  they 
proceeded  in  former  times  from  the  causes  which  we  lave 
excluded  ;  or  that  the  human  character  has  undergone  a  mo- 
ral change,  which  secures  a  nation,  if  it  will  govern  itself, 
against  any  danger  from  itself. 

From  the  facts  established  by  the  experience  of  the  Uni- 
ted States,  turn  to  the  contemplation  of  those  established 
by  the  experience  of  the  English  system  of  hereditary  or- 
ders, paper  and  patronage,  during  the  same  period.  Esti- 
mate the  wars,  entered  into  for  the  purpose  of  instructing 
Europe  in  political  metaphysicks,  or  for  the  sake  of  these 
orders.  Estimate  the  taxes,  the  tythes,  the  poor  houses, 
the  prisons,  the  fleets,  the  armies,  the  banishments  to  colo- 
nise a  wilderness  under  martial  law,  the  bastiles  of  state 
criminals,  the  well  tenanted  gibbets,  the  national  debt,  and 
the  patronage  and  corruption  which  guides  and  poisons  eve- 
ry publick  measure. 

If  it  be  urged,  that  commotions  have  appeared  under 
our  system;  without  stopping  to  inquire,  whether  they 
ought  to  be  ascribed  to  that,  or  to  the  arls  of  its  rival  svs- 
tern,  it  suffices  to  exhibit  as  a  counterpoise  to  our  bloodless 
wars,  and  comical  excursions,  the  commotions  in  Ireland, 
marked  by  devastation  and  slaughter. 


AND  OF  THE    ENGLISH   POLICY.  137 

It  cannot  be  omitted,  that  Connecticut  underwent  no 
change  of  government  by  the  revolution.  Here,  more  power 
has  been  condensed  for  centuries  in  representatives  frequent- 
ly elected,  than  is  enjoyed  by  representatives  in  any  other 
state  of  the  Union.  The  happiness  and  good  order  of  Con- 
necticut, during  the  long  operation  of  her  popular  form  of 
government,  infinitely  exceeds  the  happiness  and  good  or- 
der of  England  dining  the  same,  or  any  other  period.  Pri- 
vileged orders  had  no  influence  in  Connecticut,  and  whate- 
ver happiness  and  prosperity  she  enjoyed,  was  owing  to  the 
elective  principle.  The  continued  efficacy  of  ejection  for 
two  centuries  in  this  instance,  unconnected  with  privilege*! 
orders,  accounts  for  its  ineilicacy  in  their  presence.  This 
remark  is  farther  warranted,  by  the  contemporary  appear- 
ance of  party  malevolence  and  a  paper  system  in  the  United! 
States.  So  soon  as  an  imitation  of  the  English  policy  for 
dividing  the  nation  into  the  two  orders  of  payers  and  receiv- 
ers, began  to  operate,  the  rivalry  of  orders,  and  the  avarice 
of  interest,  began  to  make  their  accustomed  efforts,  to  des- 
troy the  good  effects  of  election. 

Of  the  disgust  against  it,  which  they  excite  themselves, 
these  vicious  principles  will  be  the  first  to  take  advantage. 
Mr.  Adams  has  already  seriously  informed  us,  that  heredi- 
tary kings  and  nobles  are  as  much  the  representatives  of 
the  nation,  as  those  they  elect ;  and  the  following  quotation 
will  enforce  the  argument,  accounting  for  the  ineffieacy  of 
election  in  communion  with  privileged  or  seperate  interests  ; 
because  it  displays  the  intemperate  enmity  entertained  by 
their  disciples  to  the  elective  principle. 

"  If  the  elections  are  in  a  large  country  like  England, 
*'  for  example,  or  one  of  the  United  States  of  America, 
*\  where  various  cities,  towns,  boroughs,  and  corporations 
"  are  to  be  represented,  each  scene  of  election  will  have  two 
<{  or  more  candidates,  and  two  or  more  parties,  each  of 
"  which  will  study  its  sleights  and  projects,  disguise  its  de- 
"  signs,  draw  in  tools,  and  worm  out  enemies.  We  must 
'  remember,  that  every  party,  and  every  individual,  is  now 

19 


138      PRINCIPLES  OF  THE  POLICY  OF  THE  U,  STATES, 

*'•'  struggling  for  a  share  in  the  executive  and  judicial  power 
"  as  well  as  legislative,  for  a  share  in  the  distribution  of  all 
"  honours,  offices,  rewards  and  profits.  Every  passion  and 
'•  prejudice  of  every  voter  will  he  applied  to  ;  every  flattery 
11  and  menace,  every  trick  and  bribe  that  can  he  bestowed, 
«  and  will  be  accepted,  will  be  used ;  and  what  is  horrible 
"  to  think  of,  that  candidate  or  that  agent  who  hits  feivest 
"  scruples;  who  will  propagate  lies  and  slanders  with  most 
"  confidence  and  secrecy  -,  who  will  wheedle,  flatter  and  ca- 
«  jole  ;  who  will  debauch  i lie  people  by  treats,  feasts  and  di- 
"  versions  with  the  least  Hesitation,  and  bribe  with  the  most 
<s  impudent  front,  which  can  consist  with  hypocritical  con- 
"  ccalujent,  will  draw  in  tools  and  worm  out  enemies  the 
'*  fastest ;  unsullied  honour,  sterling  integrity,  real  virtue, 
"  will  stand  a  very  unequal  chance.  When  vice,  folly,  im* 
{i  pudencc  and  knavery,  have  carried  the  election  one  year, 
«  they  will  acquire,  in  the  course  of  it,  fresh  influence  and 
*k  poner  to  succeed  the  next.  In  the  course  of  the  year,  the 
"  delegate  in  an  assembly  that  disposes  of  all  commissions, 
*»'  contracts  and  pensions,  has  many  opportunities  to  reward 
♦«  his  friends  among  his  constituents,  and  punish  his  ene- 
"  mies.  The  son  or  other  relation  of  one  friend  has  a  com- 
**  mission  given  him  in  the  army,  another  in  the  navy,  a 
"  third  a  benefice  in  the  church,  a  fourth  in  the  customs,  a 
«  fifth  in  the  excise  ;  shares  in  loans  and  contracts  are  dis- 
"  tributed  among  his  friends,  by  which  they  are  enabled  to 
«*  increase  their  own  and  his  dependents  and  partisans,  or, 
"  in  other  words,  to  draw  in  more  instruments  and  parties, 
"  and  warm  out  their  opposites,  All  this  is  so  easy  to  com- 
*;  prebend,  so  obvious  to  sight,  and  so  certainly  known  in 
"  universal  experience,  tlmt  it  is  astonishing  that  our  au- 
**  thor  should  have  ventured  io  assert,  that  such  a  govern- 
<•  ment.  kills  the  canker-worm  faction."* 

The  reader  will  be  pleased  to  remark,  that  Mr.  Adams 
has  had  his  eye  fixed  upon  the  operation  of  election  in  Eng- 
land, whilst  he  is  giving   its  character.      The  enumerated 

*  Adams's  Def.  v.  3,  275. 


AND  01'  THE  ENGLISH  TOIJCIT.  139 

modes  of  corruption,  were  most  of  tliem  exclusively  prac« 
tised  in  England  when  he  wrote  this  extract  5  and  the  means 
of  practising  the  greater  part,  did  not  even  exist  in  .the 
United  States.  Presently,  we  shall  exhihit  extracts,  where- 
in Mr.  Adams  recommends,  hereditary  orders  as  the  refuge 
from  the  vices  of  election.  He  is  obliged  to  bend  bis  eye 
towards  England,  to  get  the  contour  of  a  detestable  picture 
of  election,  and  places  it  before  our  eyes,  to  induce  us  to  in- 
troduce the  policy  of  England.  He  will  not  see,  that  our 
elective  system  is  more  perfect  than  the  English,  because 
it  is  less  corrupted  by  the  very  policy,  which  has  furnished 
the  ideas  for  his  invective  :  but  the  United  States  w  ill  ne- 
ver be  charmed  to  fly  down  the  gaping  throat  of  a  dreadful 
monster,  in  order  to  escape  its  malignancy.  They  will  be- 
hold this  character  of  election  when  united  with  hereditary 
orders,  or  seperate  interests,  as  a  confession  of  the  enmity 
and  inconsistency  of  the  two  principles,  and  of  the  certain 
corruption  of  the  first,  by  an  alliance  with  the  second. 

It  will  not  be  denied,  that  the  elective  system  of  the  Unit- 
ed  States,   is  chargeable  with  several  of  the  vices  imputed 
to  election  by  Mr.  Adams  ;  but  it  does  not  follow,  that  we 
ought  to  surrender  it  for  a  system  exposed  to  them  all.  The 
use,  which  republicanism  ought  to  make  of  the  charge,  is, 
to  awaken  her  sons  to  the  necessity  of  removing  these  vices. 
Their  danger  is  imminent,  when  they  are  already  made  the 
ground  of  a  treatise  in  recommendation  of  hereditary  or- 
dcrs,  as  preferable  to  the  vices  of  election.     Nor  docs  the 
difficulty  of  rendering  the  elective  system  more  perfect  in 
America,  seem  to  be  insurmountable,  when  it  is  recollect- 
ed, that  the  whole  catalogue  of  vices  ascribed  to  it  by  Mr. 
Adams,  arises  from  a  capacity  in  the  delegate  to  acquire  or 
dispose  of  money  and  offices.     The  effects  of  this  capacity 
prove  it  to  be  an  evil  political  principle,    exciting  the  evil 
moral  qualities  of  human  nature.     It  is  capable  of  removal 
from  legislative  delegates,  and  if  it  produces  the  effects  as- 
cribed to  it  by  Mr.  Adams,  it  ought  to  be  removed.     But. 
this  subject  belongs  to  the  defects  of  the  constitution  of  the 
United  States. 


140      PRINCIPLES  OF  TUE  POLICY  OF  THE  U.  STATES, 

Let  us,  therefore,  return  to  a  contemplation  of  Mr. 
Adams's  invective  against  election.  It  is  a  mode  of  attack, 
precisely  similar  to  that  used  against  popular  governments. 
To  discredit  the  one,  a  vast  collection  of  evils  is  made,  aris- 
ing under  a  vast  variety  of  governments,  whether  produced 
by  the  form  of  the  government,  or  by  other  causes.  To  dis- 
credit the  other,  a  picture  is  drawn  of  all  the  vices  of  elec- 
tion, acting  with  orders.  «  It  is  horrible  to  think  of,"  says 
Mr.  Adams.  His  horrour  might  have  been  considerably  aug- 
mented, by  collecting  into  a  mass  all  the  vices  of  human  na- 
ture, which  would  have  completely  rounded  up  the  doctrine 
«  that  republicanism  was  a  hell,  election  its  turbulence,  and 
men  its  devils." 

Human  reason  must  turn  on  preference,  not  on  perfec- 
tion. If  election  is  exploded,  shall  wc  be  requited  for  its  loss 
by  the  virtual  representation  of  kings  and  nobles  j  or  by 
surrendering  our  government  to  paper  ami  patronage? 
These  are  the  objects,  with  which  wc  must  compare  election, 
before  we  are  seduced  to  give  it  up  for  a  system  more  defec- 
tive, because  Mr.  Adams  contends,  that,  like  every  thing 
human,  it  is  imperfect.  Admitting  if  to  be  so,  it  is  unne- 
cessary in  imitation  of  Mr.  Adams's  mode  of  reasoning,  to 
enrajje  our  readers  with  a  collection  of  the  follies,  oppres- 
sions  and  cruelties,  committed  by  the  fools,  tyrants  and  mad- 
men, to  which  hereditary  representation  has  exposed  the 
world  ;  to  prove  that  hereditary  representation  is  more  de- 
fective than  actual  election. 

America  has  experienced  both.  Hereditary  representa- 
tion assailed  her  liberty  and  happiness  ;  elected  representa- 
tion defended  them.  She  has  seen  hereditary  representati- 
on destroying  the  existence  of  the  Irish  nation  ;  whilst  elect- 
ed representation,  though  unequal  and  corrupted,  made 
some  stand  for  it.  There,  hereditary  representation  dis- 
closed that  kind  of  responsibility,  which  Congress  would 
disclose  by  a  law  for  uniting  these  States  with  England  ;  and 
had  hereditary  representation  existed  at  the  peace,  a  king 
like  that  enjoyed  by  Ireland,  of  the  Neuchattel  species, 
would  probably  have  been  one  of  its  fruits. 


AND  Or  THE  EXGTilSH  POLICY*  141 

Our  quotation  must  be  recollected  to  understand  the  re- 
marks it  suggests.  It  may  be  thus  condensed.  "  In  such 
'«  countries  as  England  and  America,  election  will  produce 
«  every  species  of  villainy ;  the  greatest  rascals  will  sue- 
f*  ceed  ;  and  being  once  elected,  will  retain  their  power." 

Mr.  Adams  does  not  perceive,  that  his  eagerness  for  he- 
reditary orders,  has  here  again  entangled  him  in  an  incon- 
sistency. For  their  sake  he  labours  to  inculcate  an  abhorrence 
of  election,  without  recollecting,  that  he  relies  upon  it  for 
one  branch  of  his  own  theory.  Will  he  say,  that  election? 
united  with  hereditary  orders,  will  be  purged  of  its  bad 
qualities  ?  That  it  is  abominable,  applied  to  a  senate,  gover- 
nour  or  president ;  but  admirable,  applied  to  a  house  of  com- 
mons ?  And  will  he,  by  escaping  from  the  inconsistency 
through  these  assertions,  pass  final  sentence  upon  our  policy 
in  the  opprobrious  epithets  of  the  extract  ? 

But  Mr.  Adams  cannot  be  permitted  to  avail  himself  of 
these  assertions  ;  and  therefore  his  disapprobation  of  elec- 
tion, must  stand,  unqualified  and  unequivocal.  It  cannot 
be  conceded  as  true,  that  election  in  England  exhibits  few- 
er vices,  than  in  the  United  States  ;  or  that  the  elected  or- 
der of  that  country,  are  less  corrupt  than  the  elected  func- 
tionaries of  this.  If,  therefore,  he  explodes  the  whole  of  our 
policy  by  discrediting  election,  he  also  explodes  so  much  of 
his  as  depends  upon  the  same  principle,  and  leaves  to  his  own 
theory,  nothing  that  he  commends,  hereditary  representa- 
tion excepted. 

It  is  not  by  inconsistent  railings  and  unbounded  applaus- 
es, that  we  are  edified.  It  is  not  by  magnifying  the  defects 
of  election,  and  concealing  its  benefits,  that  we  can  estimate 
its  value.  Had  a  fair  comparison  been  drawn  between  the 
state  of  election,  in  the  United  States  and  in  England,  a 
vast  superiority  in  point  of  purity,  would  have  appeared  on 
the  side  of  the  United  States.  If  so,  frequency  and  purity 
of  election,  are  in  concord  ;  and  iiobility  and  purity  of  elec- 
tion, in  discord. 


U2      PRINCIPLES  OF  THE. POLICY. OP  THE   V.  STATES, 

The  idea  and  origin  of  election,  have  been  generally,  if 
not  universally,  defective,  until  the  American  revolution.  In 
England,  it  is  to  this  day  a  remnant  of  feudality,  planted  by 
prerogative.  It  is  derived,  not  from  the  inherent  natural 
right  of  self  government,  but  from  the  gratuitous  donation 
of  a  feudal  monarch. 

Ambition  and  avarice  have  been  perpetually  forming  com- 
binations, and  practising  devices  for  depriving  men  of  their 
rights.  Hence  ensue  struggles  for  redress ;  in  the  pro- 
gress of  which,  if  the  usurpers  find  it  prudent  to  relax,  they 
artfully,  deal  out  these  relaxations,  not  as  rights  indepen- 
dent of  their  pleasure,  but  as  meritorious  acts  of  grace  and 
favour. 

Accordingly,  election  or  self  government  being  a  light 
fatal  to  usurpation,  whenever  some  portion  of  it  could  no 
longer  be  withheld  from  the  people,  usurpers  have  laboured 
to  defeat  it,  first,  by  restricting  it  to  the  idea  of  an  indul- 
gence ;  and,  secondly,  by  contaminating  it  with  destructive 
.  modifications. 

The  struggles  between  the  people  and  nobles  of  Rome  ; 
the  indulgence  and  modification  of  suffrage;  the  mode  of 
voting,  so  as  to  bestow  the  decision  on  wealth  or  poverty  • 
the  inveterate  parties  created  by  this  division  :  and  the  vast 
indefinite  powers  retained  by  the  senate ;  were  artifices  of 
hereditary  orders  to  contaminate  election  and  defeat  its 
.effects. 

By  stratagem,  also,  has  election  been  managed  in  Eng- 
land. It  was  an  indulgence  of  the  kings.  It  was  bestowed 
without  rule,  according  to  the  suggestions  of  royal  interest 
or  ambition.  And  it  is  retained  in  its  present  corrupt  state, 
to  destroy  its  efficacy.  It  discloses  no  principle  of  right  or 
justice,  in  origin,  modification  or  practice. 

Why  then  has  Mr.  Adams  estimated  the  elective  princi- 
ple by  the  examples  of  Home  and  England,  where  it  was 
bottomed  upon  notorious  ft  aud  ?  Jn  America,  the  principle 
is  better  understood;  it  feels  the  dignity  of  aright;  we 
have  no  hereditary  orders  (its  natural  enem^ )  to  poison  it  ? 


AND  07  THE  ENGLISH  POLICY".  145 

and  it  enjoys  the  power  of  exercising  its  will.  The  differ* 
e'nc'e  in  parentage  between  truth  and  errour ;  and  in  nur- 
ture, between  fraud  and  honesty,  are  both  so  essential,  as  to 
justify  expectations  from  the  elective  principle,  which  that 
principle,  modelled  by  patrician  craft,  monarchical  despo- 
tism, or  paper  frauds,  does  not  inspire. 

Much  contention  and  ingenuity  has  arisen  out  of  the  questi- 
on, whether  society  is  natural  or  fictitious.     If  society  is 
natural,  then  natural  rights  may  exist  in,  and  be  improved 
and  secured  by  a  state  of  society.     Payne  contends  for  the 
natural  rights  of  man ;  Adams  for  the   natural  rights  of 
aristocracy.     If  society  is  factitious,   those  who  make  it, 
can  regulate  rights.     Society  must  be  composed  of,  or  cre- 
ated by  individuals,  without  whom,  it  can  neither  exist  nor 
act.     Society  exclusively  of  individuals,  is  an  ideal  being,  as 
metaphysical  as  the  idea  of  a  triangle.     If  a  number  of  peo- 
ple should  inclose  themselves  within  a  triangle,  they  would 
hear  with  great  astonishment,  that  they  had  lost  the  power 
of  ehan°'insr  the  form  of  the  inclosure :  and  that  the  dead 
figure  of  the  triangle  governed  living  beings,  instead  of  liv- 
ing beings  who  created  that  figure,  governing  it.     So  by 
the  maaick  of  avarice  and  ambition,  the  word  society  is  se- 
vered  from  a  nation,  and   converted  into  a  metaphysical 
spectre,  auspicious  only  to  the  tyrants  of  society.     But  the 
United  States  have  detected  the  crafty  absurdity  j  and  Mr. 
Adams  has  expressly  conceded  to  nations,  a  natural  right  to 
modify  their  governments.      It  is  true  he  attempts  to  satis- 
fy this  right  by  the  idea  of  hereditary  representatives  ;  al^ 
lowing  the  existence  of  the  right  of  self  government,  but  at- 
tempting to  evade  its  effect. 

Thus  the  doctrine  of  distinguishing  society  from  the  in- 
dividuals composing  it,  is  ingeniously  concealed  under  the 
notion  of  hereditary  representation,  so  as  to  render  the  con- 
cession, that  all  societies  have  a  right  to  modify  their  go- 
vernments, nominal  and  ineffectual.  As  we  have  seen  tha 
principle  of  election  artfully  destroyed,  by  the  hereditary 
orders  of  Rome  and  England  :  so  here,  the  principle  ©f  so« 


144      PRINCIPLES  OF  THE  POLICY  OP  THE  V,  STATES, 

ciety,  namely,  the  right  of  self  government,  whilst  it  is  allow- 
ed, is  also  annihilated  by  the  idea  of  a  representation  of  society 
by  these  same  hereditary  orders.  For  no  sooner  are  these 
orders  created,  than  they  become  the  magick  representatives 
of  the  people,  according  to  Mr.  Adams,  and  use  the  term 
society  as  an  incantation,  with  which  to  transfer  the  rights 
of  associated  man,  to  associated  orders.  Upon  the  'doc- 
trines, that  man  has  no  natural  rights,  but  that  aristocrati- 
cal  orders,  as  the  progeny  of  nature,  have,  is  suspended  the 
controversy  between  the  political  systems  which  divide 
mankind. 

Mr.  Adams,  by  allowing  that  all  societies  have  a  natural 
right  to  modify  their  governments,  admits  that  some  can- 
not possess  more  of  this  right  than  others  5  and  that  one  ge- 
neration cannot  possess  a  natural  right  to  violate  the  same 
natural  right  of  another,  by  substituting  rights  of  orders  for 
the  rights  of  society.  Whenever  this  violation  is  submitted 
to,  the  natural  right  of  a  society  to  modify  its  government, 
acknowledged  by  Mr.  Adams,  merges  in  a  factitious  right 
of  orders  to  do  so  ;  and  thus  this  right  is  defeated,  just  as 
election  was  defeated  at  Rome  and  in  England. 

For  Mr.  Adams's  concession  of  the  right  of  self  govern- 
ment to  all  societies,  attended  by  his  system  of  orders,  is 
only  the  admission  of  a  right  so  momentary  anil  evanescent, 
as  to  be  lost  in  the  instant  of  its  exercise,  and  as  to  subject 
all  generations  to  the  will  of  one. 

Between  election,  and  the  conceded  right  of  self  govern- 
ment, the  connection  must  be  indissoluble,  or  the  concession 
will  be  nugatory  and  deceptious  ;  and,  therefore,  it  is  by  no 
means  wonderful,  that  artificial  orders,  which  constitute 
the  most  successful  mode  of  destroying  the  right  of  self  go- 
vernment, should  employ  every  artifice  to  frustrate  the  only 
means  of  maintaining  it ;  or  that  Mr.  Adams,  the  champion 
of  these  orders,  should  treat  election  with  a  severity,  on- 
ly equalled  by  the  severity  with  which  he  has  treated  repub- 
lican governments ;  extracting  his  character  of  both  from 
corruptions  caused  by  bis  own  orders.    Election  does  not 


AND  OE  THE  ENGLISH  EOLICV.  lk'o 

yet  engage  two  orders  of  rich  and  poor  in  perpetual  hostili- 
ties in  the  United  States ;  but  all  ranks  vote  individually, 
interwoven  and  commixed  ;  nor  is  it  yet  corrupted  by  com- 
missions in  armies,  navies  or  churches,  by  loans  or  contracts, 
or  by  unequal  representation  and  purchase.  These  are  the 
corruptions,  invented  by  political  orders  to  destroy  the  effi- 
cacy of  election,  and  these  orders  are  the  remedies  proposed 
by  Mr.  Adams,  for  the  evils  of  their  own  invention. 

As  in  England,  the  national  right  of  self  government,  is 
ever  seized  by  orders  ;  accordingly  Judge  Blackstor.e  declares 
that  '•  the  parliament  may  change  the  nature  of  the  go- 
vernment, without  consulting  the  people;"  because  the  or- 
ders composing  it,  consider  themselves  as  composing  the  so- 
ciety, and  the  people  as  no  longer  entitled  to  the  right  of 
modifying  liieir  government,  allowed  by  Mr.  Adams  to  eve- 
ry  sociel  v.  (if  this  allowance,  the  futility  in  communion 
with  orders,  is  thus  demonstrated  by  the  practice  and  prin- 
ciples of  Mr.  Adams's  theory,  in  the  instance  of  England, 

By  deducing  eleetion  from  the  grace  and  favour  of  he- 
reditary chiefs,  and  by  the  artifice  of -compounding  society 
of  orders,  and  not  of  individuals,  the  usurpation  of  a  right  to 
modify  the  government  without  consisting  a  nation,  is  also 
produced  ;  it  is  this  usurpation,  which  enslaves  societies, 
under  the  sanction  of  society;  thus  the  orders  of  Denmark 
abolished  election,  and  made  the  monarch  despotick  j  pre- 
tending to  constitute  the  society,  they  Usurped  the  power  of 
modifying  the  government,  and  enslaved  the  society.  So 
acted  the  orders  of  Ireland.  So  acted  the  orders  of  Ener- 
land,  in  changing  the  succession  of  the  crown  ;  and  in  ap- 
pointing representatives  for  the  people  for  four  years,  by  a 
law  extending  the  time  of  service  from  three  to  seven. 

It  was  one  effort  of  the  iirst  part  of  this  essay,  to  prove 
that  aristocracy  in  every  form,  was  artificial ;  but  if  a  rea- 
der can  be  found  who  dissents  from  that  opinion,  none  will 
deny  that  hereditary  orders  are  so.  They  are  an  effect  of 
society,  as  much  as  hereditary  estates  in  land.  Both  arise 
from  laws.     Society  is  paramount  to   law  ;  law,  therefore, 


1*0'      PRIKCIPJLES  OF  THE  POLICY  OF  THE  U.  STATES, 

cannot  transfer  social  op  national  rights  from  its  creator, 
society,  to  its  creature,  hereditary  orders.  An  exclusive 
right  to  form  or  altera  government  is  annexed  to  society, 
in  every  moment  of  its  existence  :  and  therefore  a  direct  or 
indirect  exercise  of  it  by  a  government,  a  combination  or  an 
individual,  is  a  badge  of  usurpation,  and  a  harbinger  of  des- 
potism. 

This  doctrine  is  admitted  by  the  acknowledgment  of  Mr. 
Adams,  that  hereditary  orders  are  the  representatives  of 
the  nation  ;  an  acknowledgment,  however,  artfully  bottom- 
ed  upon  the  theory,  that  all  governments,  are  the  represen- 
tatives of  nations  ;  and  defeated  by  betraying  in  practice  na- 
tional rights  to  these  theoretical  representatives. 

It  appeal's  that  hereditary  orders  have  uniformly  destroy- 
ed the  doctrine  of  representation,  by  originating  election 
from  erroneous  principles ;  by  corrupting  it  with  treache- 
rous modifications ;  and  by  fraudulently  constituting  them- 
selves into  the  society ;  a  power  above  responsibility.  Of 
nil  the  mischiefs  produced  by  them,  experience  testifies  to 
none  with  more  constancy,  than  their  successful  operations 
to  destroy  the  efficacy  of  election.  Mr.  Adams  depends  up- 
on this  efficacy  to  control  hereditary  orders,  whilst  experi- 
ence tells  him,  that  these  orders  have  invariably  destroyed 
the  efficacy  itself.  Yet  he  builds  his  theory  upon  experi- 
ence. He  himself  testifies  to  the  vices  of  election  ;  yet  he 
relies  upon  its  virtue  to  correct  the  vices  of  hereditary  or- 
din's  ;  he  sees  the  vices  of  election  produced  by  these  orders 
themselves,  and  he  proposes  a  remedy,  in  the  continuance  of 
the  cause.  Experience  uniformly  tells  him,  that  heredita- 
rv  orders,  and  a  fair  representation  or  a  neaji  responsibility, 
have  never  subsisted  together  ;  and  tie  subjoins  to  his  theo- 
ry the  novel  and  mystical  idea,  that  hereditary  orders  are 
representatives  of  the  nation,  which  they  have  never  ad- 
mitted themselves,  to  reinstate  a  representation  instead  of 
that  arising  from  election,  which  they  corrupt  and  destroy. 
The  admonitions  of  experience  cannot  be  iiiiaiaken  by 
deliberation  a  ;■'!  pi;u  'once.     They  consist  on  the  one  baud. 


A7fD  OP  THE  ENOLTRH  TOXICY.  147 

In  the  uniform  corruption  or  destruction  of  election  awl  re- 
presentation by  hereditary  orders  :  on  tire  other,  in  a  long 
course  of  beneficial  effects  in  the  United  States  from  rice- 
tion  and  representation,  where  there  are  no  such  orders. 
Mr.  Adams  has  viewed  (he  elective  system  through  the  first 
perspective,  and  shuts  his  eyes  upon  the  second.  From  the 
first  he  collects  its  character,  and  disgusted  with  vices,  re- 
fleeted  from  the  English  system  itself,  he  proposes  by  intro- 
ducing that  system,  to  remedy  the  elective  system  of  tin- 
United  States. 

Nedhant  had  said  «<  that  the  people,  by  representative- 
«•  successively  chosen,  were  the  best  guardians  of  their,  own 
«  liberties."*  And  that,  H  the  life  of  liberty,  and  the  only 
"  remedy  against  self  interest,  lies  in  succession  of  powers 
<•  ami  persons."!  In  answer  to  whieh,  Mr.  Adams  observes, 
«  If  this  is  so,  the  United  States  of  America  have  taken  the 
ei  most  effect  ual  measures  to  secure  t  Is  at  life  and  that  remedy, 
•■  in  establishing  annual  elections  of  their  governours.  sena- 
'•  tors  and  representatives.  This  will  probably  be  allowed  i  o  be 
«  as  perfect  an  establishment,  of  a  succession  of  powers  and 
*' persons,  as  human  laws  can  make:  but  in  what  manner 
"  annual  elections  of  governoursand  senators  will  operate, 
"  remains  to  be  ascertained.  It  should  always  be  remeni- 
'.«  bered,  that  this  is  not  the  first  experiment  that  was  ever 
<s  made  in  the  world  of  elections  to  great  offices  of  stale  : 
"  how  they  have  operated  in  every  great  nation,  and  what 
"  has  been  their  end,  is  very  well  known.  Mankind  have 
"  univei»ally  discovered  that  chance  was  preferable  to  a  cor- 
"  ru.pt  choice,  and  have  trusted  Providence  rather  than 
"  themselves.  First  magistrates  and  senators  had  better  be 
••  made  hereditary  at  once,  than  that  the  people  should  be 
{i  universally  debauched  and  bribed,  go  to  ioggerluads,  and 
**  Jly  to  arms  regularly  every  yenr.  Thank  heaven  !  Ameri 
"  cans  understand  calling  conventions;  and  if  the  time 
ii  should  come,  as  it  is  very  possible  it  may,  when  hereditary 
«  descent  shall  become  a  less  evil  than  annual  fraud  and 

*  Adams's  Def.  v.  3,  213.        f  Adams's  Def.  v.  3,  282.     ■ 


1*8       PRINCIPLES  OF  THE  POLICY  OF  THE  U.  STATES, 

"  violence,  such  a  convention  may  still  prevent  the  first  ma- 
"  gistrate  from  becoming  absolute,  as  well  as  hereditary."* 
Nedham  had  also  said  "  that  it  is  but  reason  that  the 
"  people  should  see  that  none  be  interested  in  the  supreme 
'.f  authority,  bit  persons  of  their  own  election,  and  such  as 
"  must  in  a  short  time,  return  again  into  the  same  condition 
"  with  themselves."  In  answer  to  which,  Mr.  Adams  ob- 
serves, that  "  the  Americans  have  agreed  with  this  writer 
'.*  in  this  sentiment.  This  hazardous  experiment  they  have 
"  tried,  and  if  elections  are  soberly  made,  it  may  answer 
"  very  well ;  but  if  parties,  factions,  drunkenness*  bribes, 
**'  armies  and  delirium,  come  in.  as  they  always  hare  dove 
«*  sooner  ov  later,  to  embroil  and  decide  every  thing,  the 
«  people  must  again  have  recourse  to  conventions,  and  find 
te  a  remedy.  Neither  philosophy  nor  policy  has  vet  discover* 
«•'  ed  any  other  cure,  than  by  prolonging  the  duration  of  the 
**  first  magistrate  and  senators.  The  evil  may  be  lessened 
*■*  and  postponed,  by  elections  for  longer  periods  of  years, 
"  till  they  come  for  life  ;  and  if  tins  is  not  found  an  ade- 
**  quate  remedy,  there  will  remain  no  other  but  to  make 
"  them  hereditary.  The  delicacy  or  the  dread  of  iinpopu- 
"  larity,  tliat  should  induce  any  man  to  conceal  this  import- 
•k  ant  truth  from  the  full  view  and  contemplation  of  the 
"  people,  would  be  a  weakness,  if  not  a  vice/'f 

The  reader  now  perceives  the  necessity  of  considering 
election,  as  operating  independently,  or  under  the  iuiluenee 
of  hereditary  orders ;  because  if  it  is  more  vicious  in  the 
latter  situation  than  in  the  former,  Mr.  Adams's  proposal  to 
amend  a  less  vicious  elective  system,  by  substituting  for  it 
one  more  so,  is  undoubtedly  precipitate  and  erroneous. 
Election  has  been  universally  in  the  supposed  vicious  stale, 
previously  to  the  experiment  of  the  United  Stales,  and  from 
this  vicious  state  Mr.  Adams  has  drawn  his  inferences.  At 
this  moment  it  exists  in  the  United  States  unconnected,  and 
in  England,  connected,  with  hereditary  orders;  in  the  two 
■Situations  between  which  a  distinction  has  been  attempted. 

*  Adams's  Def  v.  3,  282,  283.        f  Adams's  Bef.  v.  5,  296 


AND  OF  THE  ENGLISH  POLICT.  149 

The  utmost  pitch  of  his  remedy  is  to  exchange  our  elective 
and  representative  vices,  for  those  of  England.  Election  in 
England,  being  derived  from  an  erroneous  source,  and  cor- 
rupted by  the  artifices  of  hereditary  power,  is  of  course, 
more  vicious  and  less  efficient  than  in  America  ;  and  being 
an  object  of  contempt  on  account  of  its  vices,  it  attracts  but 
a  small  share  of  national  confidence,  and  forms  but  an  in- 
considerable obstacle  to  the  tyranny  and  oppression  of  mo* 
narehy  and  aristocracy  ;  in  fact  we  shall  hereafier  endea- 
vour to  prove,  that  it  is  modified  into  an  instrument  for  their 
use. 

If  it  was  true,  therefore,  as  Mr.  Adams  asserts,  "  that 
(*  the  manner  in  which  annual  elections  of  governours  and 
f<  senators  will  operate  in  the  United  States  remained  to  be 
"  ascertained,"  yet,  as  the  utter  corruption  of  election  by 
hereditary  power,  does  not  remain  to  be  ascertained,  nei- 
ther philosophy  nor  policy  have  yet  discovered,  that  a  cer- 
tain and  malignant  evil,  was  preferable  to  a  possible  good. 

Philosophy,  unbiassed  by  affections  superseding  a  love  of 
wisdom,  has  seldom  or  never  given  her  suffrage  in  favour  of 
hereditary  power,  nor  will  she  shut  her  eyes  upon  the  elec- 
tive experiment  of  the  United  States,  although  Mr.  Adams 
in  policy  is  pleased  to  assert,  that  it  remains  to  be  made. 
It  has  been  made  upon  some  hundreds  of  governours,  and 
thousands  of  senators.  Is  nothing  ascertained?  Will  an 
equal  number  of  kings  and  lords  act  upon  the  political  thea- 
tre, without  ascertaining  also  the  value  of  the  hereditary 
principle? 

The  quotations  place  "  corrupt  choice*'  in  contrast 
with  •'•'  chance  ;"  and  "  debauchery,  bribery  and  annual 
civil  war,*'  with  "  hereditary  government."  The  treatise,  as- 
cribes to  aristocracy  "  virtue,  wisdom  and  usefulness."  and 
one  of  the  extracts  ascribes  to  election,  the  utmost  degree 
of  proiligacy.  Such  a  mode  of  reasoning  is  ficticious,  be- 
cause it  suppresses  all  the  shade  of  the  hereditary  principle, 
and  all  the  light  of  the  elective;  and  presenting  a  picture 
of  each,  which  excludes  the  most  striking  features  of  both, 


150      TRIXCIPLES  OF  THE  POLICY  OF  THE  tT.  STATES,, 

6 y  deform ing  one  and  cmbcllishifig  the  other,  it  excessively 
obstructs  our  efforts  to  draw  a  correct  comparison  between 
them.  Yet  these  fictions  really  terrified  Mr.  Adams  to  such 
a  degree,  as  to  draw  from  him  an  ejaculation  for  the  disco- 
very of  conventions,  which  Mould  enable  the  Americans  to 
take  refuge  from  the  "  annual  fraud  and  violence"  of  elec- 
tion, under  "  hereditary  descent; "  and  invigorated  his  mind 
against  the  "  dread  of  unpopularity/'  to  announce  "  the  im- 
portant truth,"  that  «  hereditary  first  magistrates  and  sena- 
tors" wore  the  final  "remedy"  against,  the  vices  of  the 
elective  system. 

Mr.  Adams  frequently  strikes  with  such  incautious  fury 
at  his  adversary,  as  to  wound  himself.  It  was  before  re- 
marked, that  the  profligacy  he  ascribes  to  election,  Mould 
corrupt  his  own  theory,  as  well  as  ours,  had  it  merited  his 
censures;  and  now  it  is  very  remarkable,  that  he  flies  to  a 
*«  convention"  as  a  remedy  against  **  election."  Differing 
with  ?ll  other  politicians,  he  makes  virtue  the  principle  of 
hereditary  power;  vice,  of  elective  power;  and  yet  this 
rice  is  his  resource,  for  the  creation  of  this  virtue. 

Again.  Mr.  Adatns  considers  a  concentration  of  power 
il  a  single  body  of  representatives,  as  a  political  errour  of 
ifficquaMed  magnitude:  yet  he  proposes  to  collect  this  very 
tsodv,  bv  the  resource  so  eorrunt  in  his  oninion,  and  confides 
lit  it  to  introduce  his  theory,  which  he  is  fascinated  to  be- 
lieve, would  be  an  act  of  the  highest  publiek  benefit.  A  sin- 
gle body  of  representatives,  says  he,  is  a  political  monster. 
yet  it  Las  already  done  great  good  in  America;  <•  iliank 
P'darcn,  Americans  Understand  calling  conventions  ;"  and  it 
mar,  therefore,  do  one  trood  tfoifti*  more,  that  is,  destroy  all 
the  good  things  it  has  hitherto  done,  and  establish  ••  heredi- 
tary descent."  Thus  allowing  to  the  elective  principle  the 
utmost  perfection,  after  having  sunk  all  its  useful  faculties 
id  an  invective.  But  hoth  the  one  and  the  other  is  done  for 
the  sake  of  an  hypothesis. 

The  ease  of  convent:o!is  will  furnish  the  strongest  argu- 
ments in  favour  of  election,  and  many  hints  in  relation  to 


AN II  OF  THE    ENGLISH   F0LNJ1T.  Ibi 

the  organization  of  legislative  bodies,  of  which  it  is  proba- 
ble, a  very  beneficial  use  will  at  some  future  period  be 
made. 

Conventions  are  creatures  of  election  •  of  election,  made 
upon  the  widest  scale ;  they  have  been  so  successfully  prac- 
tised in  America,  as  t?>  awaken  Mr.  Adams's  piety :  they 
have  probably  prevented,  and  have  never  excited  civil  war  ; 
they  have  justiiied  none,  of  the  charges  exhibited  against 
election,  and  have  begotten  all  the  political  happiness  enjoy- 
ed in  the  United  States,  for  nearly  the  last  thirty  years. 
Tbis  is  an  operation  of  election,  through  the  organ  of  a 
single  chamber. 

Why  has  this  operation  been  so  completely  consistent, 
both  in  war  and  peace,  in  danger  and  safety,  in  producing 
order  and  happiness?  On  the  contrary,  why  has  the  same 
principle,  election,  as  Mr.  Adams  proves  by  a  multitude  of 
examples,  produced  in  most  cases  (excepting  tbe  United 
States)  confusion,  civil  war,  riot  and  crimes  ?  Mr.  Adams 
in  commemorating  the  discovery  of  conventions,  ought  to 
have  remarked  and  explained  the  reason  of  these  different 
effects  from  the  same  principle. 

Tbe  solution  of  the  difficulty  justifies  one  ground  taken 
in  defence  of  our  elective  system.  Election,  as  heretofore 
practise;!,  was  of  spurious  hi?  th.  and  corrupted  by  rivals. 
Here,  privilege*!  orders  and  hierarchies  did  not  exist  to  cor- 
rupt it,  and  it  drew  its  origin  from  a  society  composed  of 
people,  and  not  of  orders.  Heretofore  election  was  the 
martyr  of  arts  and  obloquies  invented  and  practised  by  its 
enemies,*  and  it  only  remains  tor  us  to  determine,  whether 
we  will  become  the  bubbles  of  examples, produced  by  Frauds, 
of  which  the  atveients  were  tbe  victims. 

The  wonderful  virtue  and  chastity  oi'election  and  repre- 
sentation in  the  case  of  conventions,  may  be  owing  in  a  de- 
gree, to  something  different  in  the  constitution  of  lhat  spe- 
cies of  power,  from  the  constitution  of  an  ordinary  legisia- 
luve.  The  chief  dhfereuces  usually  existing  are,  that  mem- 
bers of  conventions  aru  chosen  by  a  gmuier  ditmlvr  ofelec- 


162      PRINCIPLES  OJ  THE  POLICY  GV  THE  TT.  STATES, 

tots,  for  a  shorter  space,  and  have  no  opportunities  of  ac- 
quiring or  bestowing  pubiick  money  or  publick  offices.  To 
opposite  causes,  Mr.  Adams  ascribes  the  evils  incident  to  a 
Single  chamber  of  representatives ;  these  evils  do  not  ap- 
pear in  conventions,  because  the  causes  are  absent ;  a  fact 
presenting  a  new  illustration  of  our  political  analysis.  As 
hi  the  case  of  our  governours,  power  is  bestowed,  so  as  to 
awaken  the  good  and  suppress  the  evil  qualities  of  human 
nature;  so  the  case  of  conventions  proves  the  safety  and 
utility  of  a  single  house  of  representatives,  organized  so  as 
to  suppress,  and  not  to  solicit,  avarice  and  ambition. 

An  elective  system,  therefore,  will  be  either  good  or  bad, 
as  it  is  calculated  to  suppress  or  excite  the  good  or  evil 
qualities  of  mankind  :  and  its  nature  may  be  ascertained  by 
applying  to  it  the  political  analysis  contended  for  in  this  es- 
say. Election  by  irritated  and  inimical  clans,  arranged  in- 
to factions,  as  at  Rome  ;  which  places  a  nation  in  the  hands 
of  a  minority,  or  exposes  it  to  sale,  as  in  England  ;  or  which 
exalts  representation  above  responsibility,  and  enables  it  to 
invade  or  abridge  the  publick  liberty,  as  in  France  ;  is  found- 
ed in  an  evil  principle,  and  will  excite  evil  qualities.  The 
eases  of  Caesar,  Cromwell,  Bonaparte,  and  numberless 
others,  are  illustrations.  Election,  whieh  enables  a  legisla- 
ture to  convey  office  or  wealth  to  themselves,  directly  or 
indirectly,  will  also  convey  evil  qualities  into  the  bosom  of 
representation.  And  election,  subjected  to  the  arts  of  an 
interest  distinct  from  and  inimical  to  the  nation,  will  gene- 
rate the  evils  of  lying,  cheating,  bribery,  and  several  others 
enumerated  by  Mr.  Adams.  But  election  founded  in  goad 
moral  principles,  will  produce  good  effects.  The  c-.ises  of 
conventions  and  governours  are  eminent  proofs  of  the  cor- 
rectness of  this  idea.  Conventions  have  frequently  disclos- 
ed virtuous  sentiments,  and  seldom  or  never  vicious.  lUit 
they  were  not  elected  by  inimical  orders  or  interests,  by  mi- 
norities, or  by  bargain  and  sale  ;  the  representative  was  not 
placed  beyond  responsibility,  or  enabled  to  usurp  despotic  i 
authority ;  nor  was  his  avarice  or  ambition  awakened,  by 


AND  OF  THE  ENGLISH  POLICY.  153 

making  his  election  and  representation  the  channel,  for 
bringing  office  or  money  to  himself.  This  subject  so  radi- 
cally important  to  the  United  States,  will  demand  a  further 
consideration. 

Here,  I  shall  only  add,  that  the  experiment  proposed  by 
Mr.  Adams,  is  extremely  hazardous ;  it  is  not  to  correct, 
but  to  destroy  two  thirds  of  our  elective  system,  and  to  cor- 
rupt the  remaining  third  by  hereditary  orders.  This  is 
proposed  to  be  effected  by  election  itself,  on  its  widest 
ground.  If  the  elective  and  representative  system,  should 
be  persuaded  to  destroy  two  thirds  of  itself,  is  it  not  ques- 
tionable, whether  the  substituted  hereditary  principle,  will 
be  equally  ready  to  submit  to  annihilation,  should  the  expe- 
riment be  unfortunate  ?  "Will  a  privileged  order,  once  in- 
vested with  power,  follow  the  example  of  election  and  re- 
presentation, by  becoming  a  felo  de  se  ?  The  national  re- 
pentance which,  succeeds  the  establishment  of  orders  or  mo- 
nopolies, gains  only  derision,  and  an  aggravation  of  the 
evil ;  none  of  the  instruments  of  oppression  are  ever  relin- 
quished without  civil  war;  and  should  they  be  introduced 
into  the  United  States,  we  may  certainly  pronounce,  that  no 
other  politician  will  have  an  opportunity  of  again  congratu- 
lating tiiis  country  on  the  discovery  of  conventions,  until  he 
has  seen  it  drenched  in  blood.  An  attempt  to  persuade  the 
elective  system  to  yield  to  the  hereditary.  is  an  acknowledg- 
ment Of  its  virtue  ;  and  the  constant  refusal  of  the  heredita- 
ry to  hear  or  suffer  reasoning  against  itself,  manifests  its 
vice.  Goodness,  and  not  wickedness,  is  attempted  to  be 
made  the  victim  of  scepticism. 

The  recourse1  to  conventions  for  the  introduction  of  a 
government,  bottomed  upon  the  idea,  that  aristocracy  is  na- 
tural, surrenders  the  foundation  of  the  whole  theory.  Is 
that  natural  which  may  or  may  not  be  created  by  a  mode 
both  novel  and  artificial  ?  This  mode  consists  of  an  expres- 
sion of  national  will,  by  representation,  and  admits  the  right 
jf  national  self  government  to  be  natural.  Is  aristocracy, 
o  obviously  inconsistent  with  this  right,  aho  natural?  The 

21 


15-i      PRINCIPLES  OF  TilE  POLICY  OP  TSIE  I/.  STATES, 

deference  to  election  and  representation  for  obtaining  na- 
tional will,  in  the  momentous  affair  of  changing  the  form  of 
government,  concedes,  that  it  can  be  obtained  in  no  other 
way.  If  election  and  representation  exclusively  merit  na- 
tional confidence,  when  the  consignment  of  power  is  great- 
est, why  are  they  to  he  distrusted  in  iuferiour  agencies  ? 

In  1789,  the  admiration  of  Mr.  Adams  in  contemplating 
the  effects  of  our  policy,  broke  forth  with  fervour  and  so- 
lemnity, in  an  inaugural  address  to  the  creatures  of  that  po- 
licy ;  and  therefore  it  is  probable,  that  he  had  relinquished 
his  wish  to  destroy  it  by  a  convention  previously  expressed. 
The  following  extract  from  that  address  is  not  printed  at 
the  end  of  his  treatise. 

"  I  should  be  destitute  of  sensibility,  if  upon  my  arrival 
'•«  in  this  city,  and  presentation  to  this  legislature,  and  es- 
"  peeiaUy  to  this  senate,  I  could  see,  without  emotion,  so 
k(  many  of  those  characters,  of  whose  virtuous  exertions  I 
»'  have  so  often  been  a  witness— from  whose  countenances 
u  and  examples  I  have  ever  derived  encouragement  and  ani- 
"  mation — whose  disinterested  friendship  has  supported 
*'  me  in  many  intricate  conjunctures  of  publick  affairs,  at 
4»  home  and  abroad :  Those  celebrated  defenders  of  the 
«  liberties  of  this  country,  whom  menaces  could  not  iniimi- 
-'  date,  corruption  seduce,  nor  flattery  allure.  Those  in- 
(<  trepid  asssrtors  of  the  rights  of  mankind,  whose  philoso- 
"  phy  and  policy  have  enlightened  the  world,  in  twenty  years, 
et  more  than  il  mm  ever  before  enlightened  in  many  centu- 
"  ries,  by  ancient  schools,  or  modern  universities." 

This  eulogy  is  bestowed  on  our  policy,  as  it  had  operat- 
ed previously  to  Die  existence  of  the  present  general  govern- 
ment, under  the  auspices  of  election  and  representation.  It 
would  be  quite  unphilogophical  to  assert,  that  Americans 
were  insensible  to  the  influence  of  intimidation,  corruption 
and  flattery  ;  and  therefore  it  must  have  been  owing  to  our 
system  of  govern  ment,  that  its  agents  were  uninfluenced  by 
these  vices.  This  is  conceivable,  by  recollecting  that  our 
principle  of  division  presented  an  accumulation  of  power, 


AND  OF  THE    ENGLISH    POLICY.  155 

aapable  of  intimidating;  that  the  system  of  paper  and  pa- 
tronage did  not  exist  to  corrupt ;  and  that  we  had  no  mo- 
narchy or  aristocracy,  to  corrupt  election  and  buy  despotism 
with  publick  money,  it  does  not  weaken  the  force  of  these 
observations  to  urge,  that  Mr.  Adams  chieiiy  refers  in  this 
part  of  the  extract,  to  the  arts  and  practices  of  the  English 
system,  in  assailing  ours.  For  he  thereby  debases  that, 
and  exalts  ours,  by  allowing  one  to  be  a  system,  fitted  for 
these  vicious  practices,  and  the  other,  fitted  to  resist  them  ; 
and  he  also  admits  that  efiects  ensued,  in  the  absence  ef 
causes  propelling  to  these  vices,  differing  from  those  which 
their  presence  produces ;  of  course  such  causes  were  not  in- 
terwoven with  our  government. 

Our  own  governments,  however,  were  exclusively  the  evi- 
dence of  the  following  declaration  ;  "those  intrepid  asser- 
"  tors  of  the  rights  of  mankind,  whose  philosophy  and  po- 
"  licy  have  enlightened  the  world,  in  twenty  years,  more 
**  than  it  was  ever  before  enlightened  in  many  centuries,  by 
<•'  ancient  school  >  or  modern  universities."  In  what  did  this 
modern  light,  or  the  previous  darkness  consist  ?  Will  a 
mixture  of  the  ignorance  of  many  centuries,  with  this  en- 
lightened policy,  so  recently  invented,  obscure,  or  render  it 
more  splendid  ?  In  short,  why  has  Mr.  Adams,  neglecting 
the  wonderful  discoveries  of  this  modern  philosophy  in  fa- 
vour of  human  rights,  arrayed  against  it  a  cloud  of  quota- 
tions, chiefly  collected  from  the  deepest  tints  of  ancient  ob- 
scurity? Was  it  to  explain,  impress  and  accelerate  a  phi- 
losophy and  policy,  which  had  advanced  more  rapidly  in 
twenty  years  than  the  philosophy  and  policy  comprising  his 
references  had  in  twenty  centuries  ? 

The  old  school  of  monarchy,  aristocracy  and  democracy 
is  at  issue  with  the  new  school,  of  modifying  government 
with  an  aspect  to  moral  qualities,  and  not  to  numerical  or- 
ders. Mr.  Adams's  efforts  and  praises  appear  on  the  side 
of  the  new  school ;  his  treatise,  and  his  proposal  to  extin- 
guish the  light  of  our  policy,  so  dazzling  in  1789,  on  the  side 
<rf  the  old  ;  like  the  strokes  of  father  and  son  taking  differ- 


155    ptjincipx/es  or  the  policy  op  the  it.  states, 

ent  sides  in  a  civil  war  to  save  the  estate,  though  felt  by  the 
parties,  they  balance  each  other  in  the  controversy. 

It  is  necessary  to  understand  thoroughly  the  ground  of 
the  controversy  between  "  the  philosophy  and  policy"  of 
the  United    States,  and  of  «  ancient  schools   and  modern 
universities,"  to  discover  wherein  the  darkness  of  the  one, 
and  the  light  of  the  other,   called  the  old,   and  the  new 
school,  consisted.     For  this  purpose,  let  us  divest  our  minds 
of  all  perplexing  modifications  of  the  one,   the  few  and  the 
many;  of  political  terms  tortured  by  construction  ;  and  of 
every  analysis  hitherto  suggested,  and  endeavour  to  enlight- 
en the  controversy  by  considering,   whether  a  government 
must  not  he  founded  in  one  or  more  simple  elements,  capable 
of  ascertaining  its  nature,  with  great  exactness. 

These  consist,  we  believe,  of  fraud,  force  and  reason ; 
the  term  reason,  being  considered  as  conveying  an  idea  of  a 
nation  governed  by  its  own  will,  or  of  self  government.  The 
element  of  the  Roman  government  was  first  fraud,  and  then 
force.  The  fraud  consisted  of  the  use  made  of  superstition, 
and  of  the  privileges,  pillage  and  usurpations  of  the  nobility. 
The  indignation  excited  by  this  element,  was  art  fully  ma- 
naged by  Julius  and  Augustus,  to  substitute  the  element 
of  force  for  that  of  fraud.  The  government  was  called  a 
republick,  both  before  and  after  its  elemental  principle  had 
changed  ;  and  yet  neither  of  its  elemental  principles  resem- 
bled the  element  of  reason,  national  will  or  self  government. 
The  catalogue  of  Italian  republicks  exhibits  but  one  ease 
resembling  the  Roman,  which  these  little  governments  were 
frequently  attempting  to  imitate.  A  variety  exists  in  occa- 
sional acquisitions  of  superiority  by  the  people  ;  but  these 
left  the  government  upon  its  old  element,  because  noble  or- 
ders still  existed  ;  or  because  the  division  of  election  was 
wanting  to  prevent  tumult  and  violence  ;  or  because  elec- 
tion conveyed  so  much  power  as  to  induce  the  officer  to 
practice  fraud  or  force.  So  long  as  feudal  tenure,  supersti- 
tion and  ignorance  flourished  in  England,  the  element  of  its 
government  was  a  mixture  of  fraud  and  force.     And  here  is 


AND  OF  THE  ENGLISH  POLICY.  157 

an  instance,  similar  to  which,  many  might  be  quoted,  of  a 
change  in  the  form,  without  any  in  the  element  of  the  go- 
vernment. Executive  power,  armies  and  patronage  have 
beaten  feudality  out  of  the  field,  and  the  fraud  of  supersti- 
tion is  superseded  by  the  fraud  of  paper  stock ;  yet  the  ele- 
ments of  the  government  are  unchanged. 

Now  if  the  elements  of  these  governments,  are  not  the 
elements  of  ours,  then  it  is  inferred,  that  the  element  of 
ours  is  not  that  of  any  government  ancient  or  modern  ;  be- 
cause none  can  be  adduced,  not  deeply  participating  of  the 
same  elements,  with  the  governments  quoted. 

This  brings  us  to  the  principles  of  the  old  and  the  new 
school ;  one  founds  government  in  the  elements  of  force  and 
fraud,  by  always  bestowing  power,  so  as  to  induce  it  to  rest 
on  those  elements  ;  the  other  bestows  power,  so  as  to  secure 
its  dependence,  on  national  will,  and  compels  it  to  consult 
national  reason.  The  essential  difference  of  the  principles 
of  these  two  schools,  causes  the  terms  and  phrases  of  the 
old  to  perplex  rather  than  edify,  the  disciples  of  the  new  ; 
because,  when  governments  are  founded  on  different  ele- 
ments, it  is  incorrect  to  reason  upon  their  theory  or  effects, 
as  if  there  was  a  similitude  between  them.  A  similitude 
exists  between  force  and  fraud,  as  being  both  vicious  ;  these 
arc  proper  subjects  for  comparison ;  but  between  force  or 
fraud,  and  reason  or  self  government,  no  similitude  exists; 
because  they  possess  no  common  quality.  The  \er\  system 
of  reasoning,  therefore,  pursued  by  Mr.  Adams  throughout 
his  treatise,  is  erroneous,  as  being  founded  in  comparison 
instead  of  contrast.  No  inference,  which  is  the  result  of  a 
comparison  between  dissimilar  objects,  can  be  relied  on ; 
whereas,  the  more  dissimilar  objects  are,  the  more  forcible 
will  every  argument  be,  which  results  from  contrast. 

Contrast  alone  is  capable  of  producing  the  old  and  the 
new  political  schools,  in  fair  competition  ;  comparison,  on 
the  other  hand,  is  the  most  dangerous  weapon,  with  which 
the  old  can  avenge  its  malevolence  upon  the  new,  for  being 
"  an  intrepid  assertcr  of  the  rights  of  man."    For  what  can 


158      PRINCIPLES  OF  THE  POLICY  O*  THIS  IT.  STATES., 

so  completely  blast  the  laurels  with  which  Mr.  Adams  has 
himself  exultingly  crowned  the  American  patriots,  as  the 
doctrine,  that  our  new  principles  of  policy,  are  similar  to 
the  old  ? 

Let  us  apply  the  test  of  contrast  to  a  few  details,  and  if 
they  will  bear  it,  we  may  conclude  with  confidence,  that  no 
aueh  ill  boding  similitude  exists. 

Upon  our  policy  superstition  has  no  influence  ",  upon  the 
ancient,  its  impression  was  powerful.  In  the  first,  there  are 
no  hereditary  or  privileged  orders  5  in  the  second,  they 
abounded.  By  the  first,  power  is  made  responsible  by  divi- 
sion ;  in  the  second,  either  the  use  of  division  was  unknown, 
or  it  was  ineffectually  applied.  The  first  is  enabled  by  the 
art  of  printing,  to  use  the  knowledge  of  a  nation  ;  the  se- 
cond used  its  ignorance.  Formerly,  the  oracles  of  the 
Pythia,  the  flight  of  birds,  the  pecking  of  ehickens,  and  the 
driving  of  nails  into  the  capilol,  were  the  arguments  offered 
by  governments  to  nations  ;  now,  reasoning,  and  not  mira- 
cle, is  used  to  beget  opinion.  Then,  democracy  being  galled 
by  the  injuries  of  orders,  upon  casually  breaking  her  fet- 
ters, disclosed  the  fury  which  oppression  inspires ;  now,  the 
democracy  of  the  United  States,  if  it  is  one,  seeing  only 
compeers,  and  suffering  only  the  gentle  chastening  inflicted 
by  herself,  has  for  many  years  displayed  rather  the  docility 
of  an  elephant,  than  the  ferocity  of  a  tiger. 

Reasoning  from  contrast,  and  not  from  comparison, 
would  also  have  disclosed  with  greater  perspicuity,  the  dif- 
ferences between  existing  governments.  Thus  it  would 
have  unavoidably  appeared,  that  in  Europe,  the  elements  of 
government  continue  to  be  force  and  fraud.  The  fraud  and 
force  of  superstition,  were  overthrown  by  being  discovered  ; 
wherefore  it  was  necessary  to  invent  a  fraud,  wider  in  its 
influence,  and  a  force,  physically  stronger  5  this  was  done 
by  paper  and  patronage  and  by  standing  armies. 

The  policy  of  the  United  States  has  laboured  to  prevent 
the  introduction  of  force  by  armies,  and  of  fraud  by  corrup- 
tion ;  and  to  seeure  an  allegiance  of  the  government  to  the 


AND  OF  THE  ENGLISH  POLICY.  1&9 

understandings  of  the  people,  and  not  an  allegiance  of  the 
people  by  force  or  fraud,  to  the  will  of  the  government. 
Evincing  that  reason,  and  not  fraud  or  force,  is  its  element. 

Governments,  whose  elements  are  fraud  or  force,  will 
naturally  excite  the  evil  qualities  of  human  nature  ;  and 
those  whose  element  is  reason,  ean  only  excite  its  good. 
And  if  every  government  must  rely  for  continuance,  either 
on  force  or  fraud,  or  on  reason ;  it  follows  that  every  go- 
vernment must  be  founded  in  good  or  in  evil  moral  princi- 
ples. 

To  defend  the  elements  of  force  and  fraud,  it  has  been 
said,  "  that  man  is  naturally  vicious,  and  his  own  worst 
«  enemy  ,•  and  that  this  self-malignity  disqualifies  him  for 
"  self  government,  and  ean  only  be  restrained  by  force  or- 
«'<  fraud." 

The  analysis  contended  for,  admits  that  human  nature 
is  compounded  of  good  and  evil  qualities,  and  hence  it  is  not 
merely  allowed,  but  strenuously  contended  throughout  this 
essay,  that  government  ought  to  be  modelled  with  a  view  t© 
the  preservation  of  the  good  and  the  control  of  the  evil. 
All  nations  have  published  their  concurrence  in  this  opinion, 
by  establishing  and  enforcing  municipal  law,  for  the  purpose 
of  restraining  private  vices  ;  and  all  (the  United  States  ex- 
cepted) have  hitherto  failed  to  discover  a  code  of  political 
law,  calculated  to  restrain  publiek  vices.  Jly  publick  vices 
and  political  law,  I  mean,  injuries  committed  by  govern- 
ments against  nations,  and  regulations  to  prevent  or  punish 
them. 

As  the  vices,  the  virtues,  the  passhms  and  the  interest? 
of  mankind  are  multiplied  by  civilization,  the  necessity  for 
multiplying  both  kinds  of  law,  gradually  increases.  In  an 
indigent  or  savage  state,  few  laws,  municipal  or  political* 
suffice  ;  because  few  interests  exist  to  awaken  our  evil  pro- 
pensities. Therefore  simple  and  unlimited  forms  of  go- 
vernment, and  few  municipal  laws,  universally  accompany 
such  a  state  of  society.  But  whenever  society  advances  in 
the  arts  of  civilization,  and  tho  interests  of  men  are  multi 


160      PMXCIPLES  OF  THE  POLICY  OF  THE  U.  STATES, 

plied  by  wealth  and  commerce,  the  number  and  complexity 
of  municipal  laws  must  be  increased,  to  meet  the  case  of  a 
new  moral  character.  It  is  equally  necessary  to  suppress 
the  simple  forms  of  government,  which  required  no  res- 
traints, where  there  were  no  temptations;  and  to  invent 
new  political  laws,  analogous  also  to  this  new  moral  charac- 
ter, in  order  to  counteract  the  force  of  these  new  tempta- 
tions. 

In  every  state  of  society,  the  vices  of  the  individuals  who 
administer  the  government,  will,  in  relation  to  publick  duties, 
be  as  great,  and  probably  much  greater,  than  will  be  the 
vices  of  those  who  do  not  administer  it,  in  relation  to  private 
duties.  Solicitations  and  excitements  to  avarice  and  ambi- 
tion, will  be  offered  to  publick  officers  by  the  view  of  a  rich 
nation,  constituting  temptations  to  vice,  superior  to  any 
which  can  occur  in  private  life.  Therefore,  political  law 
should  not  only  keep  pace  with  municipal  law,  to  provide 
for  tiiis  new  state  of  society  ;  but  the  former  ought  to  out- 
strip the  latter  in  energy,  in  the  same  proportion  as  the  vi- 
olation's of  publick  duties  are  likely  to  outstrip  those  of  pri 
vate,  by  reason  of  the  superiority  of  the  temptation. 

The  effects  of  this  temptation,  are  seen  in  the  history  of 
most  nations,  to  be  exactly  graduated  by  their  cause.  In  a 
poor  nation,  the  temptation  being  small,  publick  duties  are 
seldom  violated  ;  and  such  violations  are  more  frequent  and 
more  wicked,  as  a  nation  increases  in  opulence  :  proving 
that  the  appetite  of  the  individuals  who  exercise  a  govern- 
ment, for  gratifications  arising  from  a  breach  of  duty,  is 
within  the  power  of  a  poor  nation,  and  beyond  the  power  of 
a  rich  one,  to  satisfy. 

The  political  elements,  force  and  fraud,  are  begotten  by 
national  opulence,  because  nations  have  only  provided  new 
municipal  laws  to  control  the  private  vices  produced  also 
by  this  opulence  ;  and  have  neglected  to  provide  new  politi- 
cal laws  against  the  more  injurious  publick  vices  arising 
from  the  same  cause.  For  private  vices,  they  have  provid- 
ed the  prison  and  the  gallows ;  for  publick  vices,  wealth  ana 


AND  OF  THE  ENGLISH  YOLTCX.  Vi% 

power.    Can  these  contradictory  remedies  for  similar  evils 
be  both  effectual? 

The  United  States,  beholding  this  as  an  erroneous  po- 
licy ;  and  despairing  of  producing  good  manners,  or  a  re- 
gard  for  private  duties,  by  infusing  into  government  the 
strongest  solicitations  to  disregard  publick  duties ;  endea- 
vour to  secure  the  morality  of  government,  as  the  best  se- 
curity against  the  licentiousness  of  the  people.  They  for- 
bear to  excite  ambition  and  avarice  by  hereditary  orders,  or 
seoerate  interests ;  and  provide  against  both,  by  election, 
responsibility  and  division  of  power.  They  exclude  the  vi- 
cious moral  qualities,  fear  and  superstition,  as  elements  ei" 
government  ,•  and  select  for  its  basis,  the  most  perfect  mo- 
ral qualify  of  human  nature. 

It  is  as  true,  that  a  government  may  be  vicious,  as  that 
a  people  may  be  vicious.  By  all  hereditary  systems,  the 
people  are  placed  extremely  within  the  power  of  the  go- 
vernment, and. the  government  extremely  without  the  pow- 
er of  the  people  ;  and  a  dereliction  of  the  idea  of  political 
law,  is  considered  as  necessary  to  the  existence  of  strong  or 
rigorous  municipal  law.  The  utmost  proposed  by  such 
systems  is,  to  submit  in  despair  to  the  effects  of  a  vicious 
government,  for  the  sake  of  curbing  the  vices  of  the  people. 

But  the  United*  States  have  aimed  at  a  policy,  possessing 
a  capacity  for  regulating  publick,  as  well  as  private  duties  ; 
considering  that  government  as  weak,  which  can  only  regu- 
late the  latter;  and  that  as  strong,  which  is  able  to  regu^ 
late  both.  For  this  purpose,  they  are  cautions  to  bestow 
on  each  officer  and  department  of  government,  only  that 
portion  of  power,  necessary  to  fulfil  the  annexed  functions; 
to  make  these  officers  and  departments,  all  dependent  upon 
the  nation  or  a  section  of  it ;  and  to  enable  the  government 
to  enforce  the  laws  upon  the  individuals  of  the  society.  A 
policy  by  which  the  nation  is  considered  as  the  executive  of 
political  law,  and  the  avenger  of  violations  of  publick  duties; 
and  the  government  as  the  executive  of  municipal  law.  and 
the  avenger  of  violations  of  private  duties. 

0    > 


162      PRINCIPLES  OP  THE  POLICY  OF  THE  V.  STATES, 

The  contrast  between  this  policy  and  the  English,  both 
in  energy  and  perfection,  is  evident  and  forcible.  One  is 
able  to  prevent  or  punish  the  crimes  which  governments 
meditate  or  commit  against  nations,  and  also  those  commit- 
ted by  individuals  ;  the  other  is  unable  to  prevent  or  punish 
the  first  class  of  crimes,  and  even  to  punish  the  second,  ex- 
cept by  exciting  the  first.  If  the  element  of  a  government 
is  force  or  fraud,  it  is  obvious  that  the  most  pernicious  class 
of  crimes,  namely,  those  perpetrated  against  nations  by  go- 
vernments, are  excited  and  not  prevented  or  punished. 
But  our  policy  provides  both  against  the  great  injuries  to 
which  nations  are  liable  from  governments,  and  the  small 
injuries  which  individuals  may  suffer  from  each  other ; 
conceiving  a  government  to  be  weak  and  defective,  however 
it  may  defend  individuals  against  robbery  and  murder, 
which  is  unable  to  defend  nations  against  oppression  and 
despotism  ;  and  one  to  be  stronger  and  more  perfect,  which, 
instead  of  exciting  great  crimes,  for  the  purpose  of  punish- 
ing small,  provides  against  both.  A  code  of  political  law, 
too  feeble  to  enforce  publick  duties,  or  to  restrain  publick  of- 
fences, wit?  form  an  ambitious  and  avaricious  government; 
and  the  vicious  moral  qualities  of  such  a  government,  will 
corrupt  the  manners  of  the  people  ;  but  an  energetick  code 
of  political  law,  by  producing  political  morality,  will  re-act 
wholesomely  upon  private  manners  by  the  channels  of  in- 
fluence and  imitation.  A  policy  which  fosters  publick,  in 
order  to  control  private  vices,  is  in  contrast  with  one, 
which  enforces  publick  duties,  as  an  inducement  to  general 
good  manners.  One  submits  to  the  justice  it  dispenses,  the 
other  punishes  the  crimes  it  creates. 

The  indissoluble  ligament  between  cause  and  effect,  is 
evidently  on  the  side  of  the  possibility  of  training  a  govern- 
ment by  moral  principles.  That  moral  causes  are  able  to 
control  the  moral  nature  of  man,  and  that  in  the  form  of 
government,  they  have  universally  controlled  it,  are  the 
sources  from  whence  the  reasoning  of  this  essay  is  deduced. 
If  the  surprising  regularity  with  which  the  characters  of 


AND  OF  THE  ENGLISH  POLICY.  16S 

governments  hare  been  graduated  by  their  principles,  and 
the  astonishing  force  of  these  principles  in  corrupting  or 
purifying  the  characters  of  magistrates,  had  only  been  de- 
monstrated in  the  persons  of  American  governours  and  he- 
reditary monarchs,  it  ought  to  invigorate  the  human  mind 
to  keep  possession  of  the  ground  it  has  already  gained,  and 
to  push  its  discoveries  still  farther  into  the  political  terra 
incognita. 


V 

[     164     ] 

SECTION  THE  THIRD. 


THE    EVIL  MORAL   PRINCIPLES    OF    THE  GOVERN- 
MENT OF  THE  UNITED  STATES. 


JLiET  us  venture  to  explore  this  country.  Moral  princi- 
ples constitute  the  criterion  for  estimating  the  nature  of  a 
form  of  government.  The  number  or  arrangement  of  its 
administrators  are  such  evidences  of  its  ature,  as  the  num- 
ber and  arrangement  of  a  parterre  of  flowers,  are  of  their 
botanical  characters.  Each  species  of  the  ancient  analysis 
is  bad.  An  analysis,  which  neither  discloses  the  best,  or 
even  a  good  form  of  government,  is  suspicious,  and  excites 
a  doubt,  whether  one  of  its  evils,  or  a  mixture  of  all  three, 
is  the  true  remedy  against  another.  If  the  numerical  ana- 
lysis of  government  was  superseded  by  one  composed  of 
principles,  our  attention  would  be  attracted  towards  those 
principles.  Mankind  would  estimate  them,  and  discover 
which  would  infuse  good,  and  which  bad  qualities.  This 
classification  of  principles,  would  enable  them  to  class  go- 
vernments, with  equal  precision  ;  and  the  oscillation  be 
tween  forms,  all  bad,  would  cease. 

The  first  part  of  this  essay  was  appropriated  to  tlie  es 
tablishment  of  a  correct  idea  of  aristocracy,  and  to  unfold- 
ing the  principles  of  the  most  eminent  forms  of  government, 
ancient  and  modern,  quoted  by  Mr.  Adams  ;  and  the  second, 
to  an  exhibition  of  the  wide  and  substantial  difference  be- 
tween these  principles,  and  those  of  our  policy  ;  of  Mr. 
Adams's  inaccuracy  in  coercing  the  policy  of  the  United 
States  within  the  pale  of  the  English  balances,  by  the  help 
of  the  old  numerical  analysis  ;  and  of  the  influence  of  moral 
principles  upon  the  nature  of  governments.  3f  such  an  in- 
fluence exists,  nothing  can  be  more  important  to  a  nation 
than  to  understand  it 


THE  EVIL  MOHAL  7RIKCIFHBS,   &C.  165 

As  the  progress  in  political  knowledge  cannot  be  conti- 
nued, except  by  an  unremitting  vigilance  to  discover  inter- 
polations of  bad  political  principles  among  good,  several 
sections  will  be  appropriated  to  that  object ;  reserving  the 
pleasure  of  commemorating  the  beauties  of  our  policy,  as  a 
compensation  for  discharging  this  irksome  duty. 

A  dissection  of  our  operating  policy,  however  unplea- 
sant, must  be  useful.  TV  e  are  indebted  to  the  knife  of  the 
anatomist  for  a  knowledge  of  the  human  body;  this  know- 
ledge would  have  been  infinitely  more  necessary,  had  men 
made  men  ;  without  it,  all  human  constitutions  would  have 
been  rendered  unsound,  by  mismatching  their  parts.  Men 
do  make  governments,  and  have  universally  created  un- 
sound political  bodies,  by  patching  together  hereditary  or- 
ders and  election,  or  seperate  interests  and  election  ;  not 
perceiving,  that  one  of  these  qualities  has  never  failed  to 
poison  or  maim  the  other. 

But  before  we  proceed  to  the  proposed  criticism,  the  test 
for  detecting  the  nonconformity  of  any  part  to  the  element 
of  our  policy,  must  be  again  brought  before  the  reader.  It 
must  be  thoroughly  understood  to  estimate  our  remarks. 
This  consists  of  apolitical  analysis  built  upon  the  moral 
foundation,  that  men  are  naturally  both  virtuous  and  vici- 
ous ;  and  that  they  possess  a  power  of  regulating  motives, 
or  electing  principles,  which  will  cultivate  either  virtue  or 
vice.  Upon  this  ground,  government  is  concluded  to  be  a 
moral  agent,  which  will  be  actuated  by  good  or  evil  moral 
qualities;  and  that  its  qualities  will  certainly  correspond 
with  the  principles  by  which  it  is  created. 

An  eminent  author,  contends  for  a  moral  necessity,  and 
a  passive  obedience  to  motives,  uncontrollable  by  the  agent. 
This  essay  proceeds  upon  an  opinion,  that  man  can  regulate 
motives,  and  enjoys  a  volition,  adequate  to  the  election  of 
virtue,  and  the  rejection  of  vice.  Mr.  Godwin  allows  man 
to  owe  duties.  He  ought,  says  that  author,  to  deliver  truth 
"  with  a  spirit  of  universal  kindness,  with  no  narrow  resent* 


1GQ  THE  EVIL  MORAX  PRINCIPLE9  OP  THE 

«  meiits  or  angry  invectives."*  If  lie  is  the  passive  instru- 
ment of  motives  beyond  his  control,  and  deprived  of  volition, 
is  it  not  unreasonable  to  require  of  him  duties  which  he  has 
no  power  to  fulfil  ? 

He  farther  observes,  "  that  man  is  not  originally  vici- 
ous."! What  then  made  him  so  ?  His  motives  impelled 
him  to  commit  evil.  Whence  came  these  motives  ?  If 
they  followed  man  naturally,  the  assertion  is  untenable ;  if 
not,  they  must  be  artificial  or  ficticious,  voluntary  and  sub- 
ject to  election.  Again.  "  Ambition  is  common  to  all 
men."|:  Is  this  vice,  both  universal,  and  also  not  natural  or 
original  ?  If  it  is  factitious  or  voluntary,  why  may  not  the 
factitious  principle  of  dividing  power,  so  confidently  con- 
demned by  Mr.  Godwin,  control  it  ?  But  whether  it  is  vo- 
luntary or  involuntary,  it  may  be  inflamed,  regulated  or 
suppressed  by  motives.  If  a  man  is  merely  the  automaton 
of  motives,  a  nation  may  operate  upon  the  individuals  who 
are  publick  agents,  by  a  set  of  motives  calculated  to  impel  to 
virtue  or  vice.  Division  and  responsibility  will  impel  to 
virtue  ;  aggregated  or  undivided  power  will  impel  to  vice. 
And  if  the  doctrine  of  necessity  and  a  passive  obedience  to 
motives  is  true,  mankind  only  have  to  expose  their  govern- 
ours  to  such  as  excite  to  good,  and  to  shield  them  against 
those  which  excite  to  evil. 

It  is  certainly  true,  that  man  is  invariably  guided  by 
motives ;  and  though  it  may  be  questioned,  whether  an  indi- 
vidual has  a  power  of  creating  or  controlling  his  own  mo- 
tives, yet  it  cannot  be  denied,  that  others  are  able  to  influ- 
ence him  by  motives  which  they  can  regulate.  Those  who 
compose  governments  or  laws,  may  infuse  into  them  mo- 
tives to  excite  avarice  and  ambition,  or  liberality  and  patri- 
otism. 

But  however  metaphysicians  may  amuse  the  learned, 
by  arguments  in  relation  to  fate  and  free  will,  politicians 
ought  to  be  guided  by  the  obvious  and  active  qualities  of 
human  nature.     In  supposing  moral  events  to  be  capable  of 

•  God.  Po.  Jus.  v.  1,  245.        f  v.  2,  203.        i  v.  1,  328- 


GOVERNMENT  OF  THE  V.  STATES,  167 

regulation  by  causes  which  men  can  govern,  such  as  know- 
ledge, division  of  wealth  and  power,  and  responsibility  ;  and 
in  supposing  the  moral  qualities  of  man  to  be  good  and  evil, 
and  that  either  one  or  the  other  may  be  excited  ;  there  is 
no  deviation  from  the  ostensible  phenomena  of  human  na- 
ture. And  as  government  is  exercised  by  man,  all  its  vir- 
tues and  vices  must  be  human  ;  wherefore,  there  does  not 
seem  more  difficulty  in  ascertaining  the  principles  or  quali- 
ties which  will  constitute  a  good  or  a  bad  government,  than 
in  ascertaining  those  which  will  constitute  a  good  or  a  bad 
man  ;  nor  more  impropriety  in  reducing  all  governments  to 
the  two  classes,  of  those  founded  in  good,  and  those  found- 
ed in  evil  moral  principles,  than  in  reducing  all  men  to  the 
two  classes  of  good  and  bad.  Bad  or  good  principles  may 
be  infused  into  governments  by  constitutions,  with  more  cer- 
tainty than  into  men  by  education  ;  and  therefore  a  govern- 
ment corrupted  by  an  infusion  of  bad  principles,  can  more 
justly  complain  of  the  nation  for  making  it  wicked,  than  the 
nation  can  complain  of  the  government  for  making  it 
miserable. 

It  was  not  the  policy  nor  intention  of  the  United  States 
to  excite  the  evil  qualities  of  ambition  or  avarice,  but  to 
suppress  them  ;  nor  to  form  a  government  compounded  of 
parts,  some  of  Avhich  would  be  calculated  to  excite  these 
qualities,  so  as  to  produce  a  perpetual  spirit  of  discord  and 
uneasiness,  similar  to  what  passes  in  that  man's  mind,  whose 
virtues  and  vices  arc  in  a  state  of  warfare  with  each  other. 

Yet,  it  would  have  been  wonderful,  in  the  first  experi- 
ment to  erect  a  government  upon  good  moral  principles  and 
the  right  of  self-rule,  if  no  oversight  had  happened,  It 
would  have  been  more  wonderful,  if  no  impression  had  been 
made  by  a  depreciated  debt,  which  from  pebbles  in  the 
ocean  of  society,  might,  by  a  species  01  political  diving,  be 
made  pearls  in  the  hands  of  individuals.  It  might  have 
been  known,  that  patronage  and  power  in  a.  president,  to  a, 
certain  extent,  would  destroy  division  and  responsibility  7 
^>ut  the  extent  to  which  it  could  be  carried  under  the?  eon- 


iiiS  THE  EVIL  MORAL  PRINCIPLES  OP  THE 

stitation,  might  not  have  been  foreseen.  It  might  have 
been  known,  that  an  accumulation  of  vast  wealth  in  few 
hands,  by  any  means  whatever,  would  create  a  faction  or 
aristocracy*  which  would  absorb  power  correspondent  to 
that  wealth,  and  gradually  exchange  the  principles  of  our 
government  for  force  and  fraud;  but  such  an  accumulation 
might  not  have  been  intended. 

That  part  of  our  policy  called  «  the  constitution  of  the 
United  States,"  was  suggested  by  the  considerations  of  union 
and  peace,  of  uniformity  in  commercial  regulations,  and  of 
a  revenue  for  general  purposes.  To  alter  or  destroy  our 
political  morality  or  self  government,  and  to  substitute  for 
it  the  principle  of  force  or  fraud,  was  not  a  motive  for  cre- 
ating the  constitution  of  the  United  States,  expressed  by 
any  state  convention,  avowed  by  any  individual,  or  conceiv- 
ed by  the  people. 

On  the  contrary,  apprehensions,  lest  some  parts  of  the 
general  constitution  might  on  trial  be  found  to  incline  from 
our  good  political  elements  towards  those  of  force  and  fraud, 
were  assuaged  by  special  amendments  to  prevent  it  ;  and  by 
a  multitude  of  arguments  to  prove,  that  as  titled  orders 
were  forbidden,  legislative  appropriations  of  money  requir- 
ed, armies  subjected  to  a  duennial  provision,  and  religion 
and  the  liberty  of  the  press  secured,  self  government  and 
these  elements  were  placed  upon  impregnable  ground. 

If,  on  trial,  it  is  discovered,  that  the  slightest  inclination 
does  exist,  in  any  of  its  parts,  towards  the  elements  of  force 
or  fraud,  these  parts  violate  the  national  intention,  and 
ought  to  be  revised  ;  because  a  tendency  towards  a  political 
point,  If  unobstructed,  will  arrive  at  that  point.  Accumu- 
lation and  permanence  of  power  or  wealth,  arouse  and  ex- 
cite certain  evil  moral  qualities,  which  perpetually  strive 
to  govern  by  the  principles  of  force  and  fraud  ;  and  so  far 
from  being  instruments  calculated  to  maintain  governments 
founded  in  good  moral  principles  and  self  government,  they 
are  instruments  calculated  for  their  destruction. 


tfOVEKJSMENT  OF  THE  V.  STATES.  16S* 

The  executive  power  of  the  United  States  is  infected,  as 
we  shall  endeavour  to  shew,  with  a  degree  of  accumulation 
and  permanence  of  power,  sufficient  to  excite  evil  moral 
qualities.  The  form  of  an  executive  power  constituted  no 
motive  for  the  general  government,  nor  will  an  alteration  in 
that  form,  defeat  or  counteract  the  ends  intended  to  be  ob- 
tained. Amendments,  which  Avill  secure  the  fundamental 
principles  of  our  policy,  and  the  essential  objects  of  the  ge- 
neral constitution  itself,  may  be  resorted  to  with  safety,  tint 
are  the  best  resources  against  their  loss. 

To  prove  that  the  form  of  executive  power  was  not  a 
recommendation  of  the  general  constitution,  it  need  only  be 
observed,  that  it  is  not  copied  by  a  single  6tate.  The 
governoursof  nine  states,  comprising  a  majority  of  the  peo- 
ple, are  annually  chosen,  and  are  ineligible  after  certain 
terms ;  those  of  the  other  states  are  chosen  for  two  and 
three  years,  one  excepted ;  and  a  multitude  of  other  im- 
portant differences  exist,  between  the  modification  of  exe- 
cutive power,  under  the  general  and  the  state  constitutions. 

The  continuance  of  these  differences,  proves,  that  the 
form  of  executive  power  under  the  general  constitution* 
was  suffered  for  the  sake  of  acquiring  those  of  its  objects, 
which  the  nation  had  in  view;  and  that  this  form,  had  it 
been  proposed  alone  and  unconnected  with  other  principles, 
would  have  been  rejected  by  every  state  in  the  union. 

It  is  therefore  proper  to  consider,  whether  the  executive 
power  of  the  United  States  is  so  moulded,  as  to  be  calculat- 
ed for  awakening  man's  evil  moral  qualities,  and  for  pro- 
pelling us  towards  the  political  elements  of  force  and  fraud  j 
because  the  principles  of  our  policy  ought  not  to  be  contami- 
nated and  destroyed  hx  its  details. 

Experience  having  ascertained,  that  executive  power  in 
most  slate  forms,  does  not  awaken  individual  ambition  and 
avarice  for  the  annoyance  of  society  ;  and  executive  power 
in  the  general  farm,  having  been  created  by  the  merit  of 
other  articles  of  the  general  constitution,  it  is  time  to  con- 
stder,  whether  we  shall  persevere  ia  applying  the  principles 


l70  THE  EVIL  MOHAX  PRINCIPLES  OF  THE 

of  division,  responsibility  an'?  rotation,  to  state  executives, 
commanding  little  patronage,  little  military  power,  and  lit- 
tle territory,  and  continue  to  relax  from  them  in  the  case  of 
the  general  executive,  guiding  a  patronage,  a  military  force 
and  a  territory  of  great  extent.  Whether  we  shall  adhere 
to  the  inconsistency  of  sustaining  innumerable  fortresses  to 
defend  our  liberty  in  a  quarter  where  it  cannot  be  assault- 
ed ;  and  of  levelling  most  of  them  with  the  ground,  in  that, 
whence  danger  is  imminent. 

Election  is  almost  the  only  barrier  opposed  to  executive 
ambition  in  the  United  States.  Alone,  it  has  universally 
been  insufficient.  Marius,  Sylla,  Pompey,  Csesar,  Crom- 
well and  Bonaparte  were  elected.  The  English  House  of 
Commons,  and  the  French  legislatures  under  several  forms, 
were  elected.  Election  furnished  in  all  these  cases,  the 
means  for  introducing  or  exercising  tyranny.  By  convey- 
ing too  much  power,  or  consolidating  within  a  narrow  com- 
pass, the  power  it  did  convey,  it  awakened  or  excited  ambi- 
tion and  avarice.  The  terrors  of  impeachment,  attainder, 
banishment  or  death,  were  added  to  election  in  these  instan- 
ces ;  and  these  threats  only  accelerated  the  transition  from 
patriotism  to  power,  as  the  fortress  for  guilt.  Monarchs 
elect  their  civil  and  military  officers,  but  seldom  trust  to 
their  power  of  election,  though  strengthened  by  a  perpetual 
power  of  removal,  for  safety.  They  are  cautious  not  to 
accumulate  power,  or  to  continue  great  power  for  a  long 
time  in  the  same  hands.  They  divide  it.  They  disconti- 
nue and  exchange  the  most  dangerous  officers.  If  they  ne- 
glect these  precautions,  they  are  dethroned.  The  people 
have  fewer  means  of  detecting  ambitious  designs  than 
monarchs  ;  national  sovereignty  must  therefore  be  dethron- 
ed, if  it  relaxes  from  precautions,  necessary  to  preserve  the 
sovereignty  of  monarchs. 

It  is  the  insufficiency  of  election,  exclusively,  to  secure, 
political  liberty,  which  has  suggested  to  mankind  a  multi- 
tude of  other  expedients  ;  and  Mr.  Adams,  concurring  with 
experience  as  to  this  insufficiency,  proposes  the  theory  of 


OOVEKMMENT  OF  THE  U.  STATBS.  i7i 

orders,  and  the  practice  of  a  division  of  power  among  shese 
orders,  as  an  additional  security. 

The  necessity  of  applying  the  principle  of  division  to 
power,  to  keep  it  responsible,  is  thus  acknowledged  5  and  the 
mode  of  this  application  only  remains  to  be  considered. 
This  ought  to  be  accommodated  to  the  policy  of  the  country. 
It  is  the  policy  of  England  to  consider  the  government  as 
invested  with  all  political  power  j  hence  the  principle  of 
division  could  reach  no  farther,  than  a  distribution  of  power 
among  the  departments  of  government.  It  is  our  policy  to 
consider  the  people  as  retaining  a  vast  share  of  political 
power,  and  as  only  investing  their  government  with  so  much 
as  they  deem  necessary  for  their  own  benefit.  Admitting, 
therefore,  that  it  may  be  consistent  with  the  English  poli- 
cy to  mould  executive  power,  by  a  computation  of  the  por- 
tion of  power  possessed  by  the  Lords  and  Commons ;  it 
would  be  inconsistent  with  our  policy  to  mould  it  by  any 
similar  computation.  We  do  not  balance  power  against 
power.  It  is  our  policy  to  reduce  it  by  division,  in  order  to 
preserve  the  political  power  of  the  people,  by  forbearing  to 
excite  the  ambition  and  avarice  of  individuals. 

This  new  application  of  division,  to  an  allotment  of  po- 
litical power  between  a  nation  and  its  government,  was  sug- 
gested to  us,  by  its  inefiicacy  if  confined  to  an  allotment 
among  departments  of  government;  it  was  seen,  that  om- 
nipotent political  power  in  a  government,  however  theoreti- 
cally divided,  would  become  practically  consolidated.  The 
people,  after  this  species  of  division  of  power,  retain  the 
importance  and  sovereignty  of  Lear,  after  he  had  divided 
his  kingdom  among  his  three  daughters. 

To  preserve  our  unexampled  division  of  power  between 
the  nation  and  the  government,  a  multitude  of  other  divi- 
sions became  necessary,  and  these  were  intended  to  be  made, 
not  for  the  purpose  of  a  balance  of  power  between  depart- 
ments, but  by  preventing  such  an  accumulation  as  to  awaken 
ambition,  to  defend  the  sovereignty  of  the  people  against  alL 


172  THE  EVIL  MORAX  PRINCIPLES  OF  THE 

The  insufficiency  of  election  to  prevent  great  power 
from  awakening  evil  qualities,  has  induced  the  people  in 
their  state  governments  to  superadd  many  auxiliaries  drawn 
from  the  principle  of  division.  Rotation,  plural  executives, 
frequency  of  election,  and  a  limited  patronage,  are  among 
them.  The  efficacy  of  these  auxiliaries,  having  been  evinc- 
ed by  more  than  thirteen  states  for  thirty  years,  is  equiva- 
lent to  an  experience  of  one  nation  for  four  hundred  years, 
liefore  an  experience  of  twelve  years  had  passed  over,  in 
the  case  of  the  executive  power  of  the  union,  under  a  relax- 
ation of  our  principle  of  division,  a  majority  of  the  United 
States  have  agreed  in  perceiving  in  it,  an  inclination  to- 
wards principles  inimical  to  our  policy.  It  follows,  that 
the  state  mode  of  forming  an  executive  power,  will  uniform- 
ly bring  into  publick  use  man's  good  moral  qualities  for  at 
least  four  hundred  years  :  and  (hat  the  mode  adopted  by  the 
general  constitution,  will  awaken  his  evil,  in  twelve.  Divi- 
sion of  power,  is  the  cause  of  one  effect,  and  its  accumula- 
tion of  the  other. 

History  or  fact  corroborates  this  estimate.  Compare 
two  hundred  successive  emperours  or  kings,  with  the  two 
hundred  state  governours  who  have  probably  existed  since 
the  revolution.  Fewer  tyrants  will  be  found  among  the 
governours,  than  patriots  among  the  monarehs.  If  a  soli 
tary  royal  patriot  should  occur,  not  a  single  tyrannical 
governour  exists  to  contrast  him.  The  principle  of  a  divi- 
sion of  power  has  been  applied  to  the  governours,  and  ne- 
glected in  the  ease  of  the  kings.  Do  these  facts  prove  the 
wisdom  of  deviating  from  the  precedent  of  American  gov- 
ernours, and  inelining  towards  that  of  English  kings,  in 
moulding  executive  power,  or  demonstrate  lt«  consequences  ? 

The  extent  of  this  inclination  in  the  executive  power  of 
the  United  States,  will  result  from  a  comparison  between  a 
king  of  England  and  a  president.  This  king  cannot  create 
offices,  inflict  taxes,  pass  laws,  or  raise  armies ;  neither  can 
the  president.  This  lung  can  appoint  officers,  disburse  tax 
t?r  recommend  laws,  and  command  armies  ;  so  can  the  pre- 


GOVERNMENT  03?  THE  IT.  STATED.  J7fc 

sident.  This  king  can  make  treaties  under  the  check  of  two 
legislative  branches ;  the  president  can  make  treaties  under 
the  cheek  of  one.  This  king  can  appoint  the  members  of 
the  legislature  to  lucrative  offices ;  so  can  the  president  • 
and  in  both  cases  an  appointment  vacates  the  seat.  This 
king  appoints  the  judges,  and  the  officers  who  appoint  the 
juries ;  so  does  the  president.  Executive  power  in  the 
English  form,  has  sufficed  to  introduce  and  establish  the 
political  elements  of  fraud  and  force.  But  the  king  of  Eng- 
land is  not  elective.  The  inefficacy  of  election,  to  prevent 
the  abuse  of  accumulated  power,  has  been  shewn;  we  see 
its  inefficacy  in  the  House  of  Commons,  to  shield  thepeaple 
against  the  oppressions  of  the  English  executive  power. 
But  the  king  of  England,  in  the  exercise  of  his  patronage 
is  not  checked  by  a  senate.  The  corruption  of  two  wealthy 
and  numerous  legislative  bodies  in  England,  is  no  proof, 
that  a  small  and  poor  one  in  America,  can  repel  the  addres- 
ses of  an  executive,  glittering  with  prerogatives  similar  to 
those  which  have  dazzled  all  the  English  patriots  for  a  cen- 
tury past. 

Both  the  English  king  and  our  president  are  the  exclu- 
sive managers  of  negociation  ;  and  secrecy  is  their  common 
maxim.  By  negociation,  foreign  governments  may  be  pro- 
voked ;  by  secrecy,  a  government  may  delude  and  knead  a 
people  into  a  rage  for  war  ;  and  war  is  a  powerful  instru- 
ment for  expelling  the  clement  of  self  government,  and  in- 
troducing that  of  force.  This  has  been  recently  demon- 
strated in  France.  By  negociation,  secrecy  and  war,  trai 
tors  convert  a  national  detestation  of  tyranny  into  a  tool  for 
making  tyrants. 

The  assembly  of  Virginia,  in  their  resolutions  of  Decem- 
ber 1798,  after  stating  "  that  a  spirit  has  in  sundry  instances 
«  been  manifested  by  the  federal  government,  to  enlarge  its 
"  powers,"  concludes  «  so  as  to  consolidate  the  states  bv 
«  degrees,  into  one  sovereignty,  the  obvious  tendency  and 
"  inevitable  result  of  which  would  be,  to  transform  the  pre 
u  sent  republican  system  of  the  United  States,  into  an  absc- 


17A  THE  EVIL  MORAL  PRINCIPLES  OP  THE 

«  lute,  or  at  best  a  mixed  monarchy."  The  resolutions  of 
the  Kentucky  legislature  of  November  1798,  after  stating  a 
similar  spirit  in  the  federal  government,  observe  "  that 
M  these,  and  successive  acts  of  the  same  character,  unless 
«  arrested  at  the  threshold,  may  tend  to  drive  these  states 
"  into  revolution  and  blood,  and  will  furnish  new  calumnies 
w  against  republican  governments,  and  new  pretexts  for 
«  those  who  wish  it  to  be  believed,  that  man  cannot  be  gov- 
"  erned  but  by  a  rod  of  iron.*9* 

The  spirit  which  produced  these  tendencies  towards 
monarchy,  revolution,  and  an  iroa  government,  could  only 
have  been  infused  into  the  federal  government  by  some  prin- 
ciple of  the  general  constitution.  It  was  an  evil  moral 
spirit,  and  must  therefore  have  proceeded  from  an  evil 
moral  cause.  The  concurrence  of  Congress  in  the  mea- 
sures charged  with  this  spirit,  is  a  proof  of  the  great  ad- 
vances  already  made  by  executive  influence,  and  the  confi- 
dence of  monarchists  in  executive  power.  And  as  a  spirit 
propelling  us  towards  monarchy,  revolution  and  an  iron 
government,  appeared  only  after  the  great  accumulation  of 
executive  power  by  the  general  constitution,  the  magician 
who  raised  it  cannot  be  mistaken. 

We  have  endeavoured  to  prove,  that  the  elements  of 
every  government  consisted  of  good  or  evil  moral  princi- 
ples;  and  that  the  shock  received  by  superstition  from 
knowledge,  and  by  feudality  from  alienation,  has  reduced 
the  political  competitors  for  human  preference  to  the  sys- 
tem of  division  and  responsibility,  or  to  that  of  paper  and 
patronage  ;  the  first  suggested  by  self  government,  the  se- 
cond bv  the  elements  of  fraud  and  force. 

The  measures  arising  from  the  spirit  early  infused  into 
executive  power  by  its  American  form,  were,  armies,  war, 
penal  laws,  and  an  increase  of  executive  power  by  law, 
loans,  banks,  patronage  and  profusion.  These  are  English 
effects,  and  evil  effects.     Do  they   proceed  from  no  moral 

*  The  Virginia  resolutions  were  drawn  by  Mr.  Madison  ;  the  Kentucky 
resolutions,  by  Mr.  Jefferson. 


GOVERNMENT  OF  THE  U.  STATES.  175 

cause,  or  is  that  cause  unlike  the  cause  of  the  same  English 
effects  ?  or,  is  it  good,  though  its  effects  are  evil  ? 

They  are  the  genuine  issue  of  the  elements  of  force  and 
fraud,  hut  infinitely  exceeding  in  malignity  the  ancient  ef- 
fects of  these  elements ;  because  the  modern  struggles  of 
reason  and  self  government  compels  tyranny  to  drive  her 
screws  deeper  into  the  bowels  of  society,  for  the  purpose  of 
retaining  it  in  bondage.  If  knowledge  has  taught  tyranny 
new  devices,  without  suggesting  to  liberty  new  defences, 
mankind  will  have  to  regret  the  loss  of  an  ignorance,  which 
cheapened  the  price  and  diminished  the  weight  of  their 
chains.  It  is  infinitely  less  excruciating  to  be  governed  by 
imposture,  than  by  armies,  taxes,  patronage  and  paper. 

The  new  defences,  suggested  by  knowledge,  against 
these  modern  devices  of  tyranny,  were  zealously  enforced 
by  the  United  States  in  their  sepcrate  governments,  and  in 
their  first  general  government.  The  old  Congress  held  the 
executive  power  of  the  Union,  It  was  a  plural  executive, 
annually  appointed,  liable  to  recall,  ineligible  afier  three 
years,  incapable  of  holding  any  other  office,  of  little  civil 
patronage,  and  extremely  limited  in  military  patronage; 
the  states  being  invested  with  the  appointment  of  all  the  of- 
ficers of  an  army,  except  generals  ;  and  it  successfully  sur- 
mounted a  period  of  Mar,  longer,  and  attended  with  more 
difficulties,  than  is  recollected  to  have  occurred  to  any  mo- 
narchical executive.  All  these  defences,  suggested  by  divi- 
sion and  responsibility,  were  surrendered  in  the  formation 
of  the  new  executive,  and  many  new  powers  were  conferred 
upon  that  branch  of  government.  They  were  overlooked, 
because  we  were  dazzled  by  the  prospect  of  permanent 
union.  The  sponsors  for  liberty,  were  forgotten  in  the 
general  joy ;  and  a  president  of  the  United  States  was  in' 
vested  with  far  greater  powers  than  sufficed  to  Ca;sar  for 
enslaving  his  country.  Patronage,  negociation,  a  negative 
upon  laws,  and  a  paper  system,  render  some  of  those  talents 
which  Caisar  possessed,  unnecessary  to  enable  a  president 
to  perform  what  Cajsar  effected. 


176  THE  EVIL  MORA.L  PRINCIPLES  OF  THE 

The  sufficiency  of  the  means,  at  the  disposal  of  execu- 
tive power,  to  produce  a  revolution,  will  induce  people  to 
look  out  sharply  for  the  event ;  many  will  hasten  to  aban- 
don old  principles,  and  court  the  favour  of  new;  and  a 
monarchy  may  suddenly  start  into  existence,  even  by  the 
acclamation  of  a  multitude,  who  will  sacrifice  their  princi- 
ples to  their  hopes  or  their  fears.  By  weakening  these 
means,  republicanism  and  loyalty  to  our  political  principles 
will  be  invigorated. 

Election,  instead  of  being  any  security  against  accumu- 
lated power,  derives  its  efficacy  from  an  union  with  division 
of  power.  Certain  metals,  compounded  in  due  proportions, 
produce  by  fusion  a  more  impenetrable  mass,  than  either 
seperateiy ;  so  election  and  division  of  power,  politically 
mingled,  are  mutually  rendered  more  effectual.  An  accu- 
mulation of  executive  power  is  precisely  the  contrary  prin- 
ciple to  that,  which  alone  bestows  efficacy  upon  election. 
The  influence  of  this  accumulation  is  already  so  visible,  that 
candidates  canvass,  not  upon  the  ground  of  knowledge,  vir- 
tue and  independence,  but  of  devotedness  to  a  president. 

Election  and  constitutional  precept,  are  both  a  species  of 
didactick  sanction,  only  to  be  enforced  by  a  division  of  pow- 
er j  not  by  its  division  or  balance  among  orders,  but  by  pre- 
venting such  an  accumulation  in  the  hands  of  an  individual, 
an  order,  or  a  department,  as  will  awaken  man's  vicious 
qualities,  and  through  them  cause  election  to  be  converted 
into  an  instrument  of  fraud  and  oppression.  The  division 
of  power  among  three  orders,  has  failed  in  every  instance 
to  bestow  efficacy  upon  election  :  first,  because,  by  that  sys- 
tem, a  government  is  invested  with  every  conceivable  politi- 
aal  power;  and  secondly,  because  in  a  division  of  this  end- 
less and  enormous  mass  into  three  parts,  the  portion  assign- 
ed to  eaeh  order,  must  unavoidably  suffice  to  awaken  ambi- 
tion and  avarice  both  in  the  order  itself,  and  in  those  who 
seek  its  favours.  If,  therefore,  in  assigning  power  to  the 
president,  the  general  constitution  has  deviated  in  any  de~ 
gree'  frtm  the  idea  of  dividing  power,  for  the  purposes  of 


(saiKHNMEHrr  of  the  v.  states.  177 

keeping  it  manageable  by  the  publiek  will,  and  of  preventing 
an  accumulation,  sufficient  to  excite  man's  evil  qualities ; 
or  if  it  has  inclined  in  any  degree  towards  the  idea  of  divid- 
ing it  by  the  scheme  of  a  balance  among  orders  of  men,  or 
orders  of  power ;  experience  proves  that  the  efficacy  of 
election  will  be  correspondent^  weakened.  The  English 
example  proves,  that  election,  united  with  a  division  of  poAV- 
er,  according  to  the  balancing  sehems,  is  even  capable  of 
being  converted  into  the  most  powerful  instrument  for  ty- 
ranny. It  is  our  poliey  so  to  divide  power,  as  to  place  eve- 
ry publiek  officer,  isolated  in  the  midst  of  the  publiek  will  ; 
and  not  to  provide  for  him  the  support  of  corruption,  of  an 
order,  or  of  a  faction,  to  weaken  the  utility  of  election, 

An  army  and  patronage  enables  a  president  to  provide  a 
faction.  An  army  is  the  strongest  of  all  factions,  and  com- 
pletely the  instrument  of  a  leader,  skilful  enough  to  enlist 
its  sympathies,  and  inflame  its  passions.  It  is  given  to  a 
president,  and  election  is  the  only  surety  that  he  will  not  use 
it,  as  armies  have  ever  been  used.  The  precept,  «  that 
money  should  not  be  appropriated  for  the  use  of  an  army, 
for  a  longer  term  than  two  years,"  is  like  that  which  for- 
bid C&sar  to  open  the  treasury. 

The  other  precept,  «  that  the  military  shall  be  subject 
to  the  civil  power,"  would  have  superseded  the  principle  of 
division,  if  armies  could  have  been  controlled  by  precept, 
or  if  precept  could  have  been  enforced  by  election  ;  and  if 
precepts  had  sufficed  to  restrain  an  ability  to  violate  them, 
it  would  have  superseded  a  necessity  for  civil  government. 
The  army  is  the  creature  of  law.  So  were  the  armies  of 
Csesar,  Cromwell  and  Bonaparte  ;  and  so,  at  this  moment, 
are  the  armies  of  all  existing  governments,  of  which  force 
is  an  element.  The  banner  of  usurpation  and  tyranny  is 
usually  hoisted  by  a  legal  army;  a  legal  army  is  the  in- 
strument for  giving  permanency  to  the  evil  political  princi- 
ples, fraud  and  force ;  and  at  no  time,  has  a  standing  mer- 
cenary army  been  the  steady  auxiliary  of  national  self  gov- 
ernment, or  obedient  to  election.     It  obeys  its  leader. 

2<* 


If 8-  THE  EVIL  MORAL  PRINCIPLES  OF  THE 

An  army  constitutes  a  mass  of  power,  which  has  fre- 
quently proved  too  hard  fop  the  whole  residuary  power  of 
2k  government.  Military  power,  is  at  least  as  able  to  en- 
slave a  nation  as  civil  power,  To  civil  power  our  policy 
has  copiously  applied  the  principle  of  division  ;  to  military, 
two  precepts.  Civil  power  is  distributed  into  a  multitude 
jf  hands j  military  i3  condensed  ami  accumulated  in  one. 
The  patronage  of  civil  offices  is  divided  among  the  people, 
the  general  and  state  governments,  and  many  sections  of 
these  governments  ;  the  entire  patronage  of  military  offices 
is  bestowed  on  the  president.  To  civil  power  we  have  ap- 
plied the  principle  of  division,  to  military  that  of  accu- 
mulation. 

A  distribution  of  military  patronage,  would  be  some  im- 
pediment to  executive  usurpation ;  but  the  only  effectual 
mode  of  rendering  military  power  subordinate  to  national 
will,  is  precisely  analogous  to  that  used  for  rendering  civil 
power  subordinate  to  national  will.  The  latter  is  effected 
by  dividing  political  power  between  the  nation  and  the  gov- 
ernment, so  as  to  invest  the  nation  with  a  portion  sufficient 
to  control  the  government :  and  the  former  can  enly  he  ef- 
fected, by  dividing  military  power,  so  as  to  invest  the  na- 
tion with  a  portion,  completely  adequate  to  the  coercion  of 
an  army.  A  nation,  unable  to  control  either  its  government 
or  its  army,  is  not  free,  nor  is  self  government  the  element 
of  its  policy. 

Arms  can  only  be  controlled  by  arms.  An  armed  nation 
only  can  keep  up  an  army,  and  also  maintain  its  liberty. 
The  constitution  of  the  United  States,  overlooking  this  un- 
deniable truth,  has  placed  both  the  rai&mg  an  army,  and 
the  arming  of  the  militia,  among  the  potential  attributes  of 
the  general  government ;  whereas  the  first  belonged  to  the 
principle  of  accumulation,  and  the  latter  to  the  principle  of 
division.  One,  therefore,  is  a  power,  and  the  other  a  check 
upon  that  power.  One  is  a  foe,  the  other  a  friend  to  liberty. 
One  strengthens  the  government,  the  other  the  nation.  And 
a  sound  militia  makes  a  government  dependent  on  the  nation; 


GOVERNMENT  0¥  TUZU*  STATES.  £72 

a  bad  one,  a  nation  dependent  on  a  government.  An  armed 
militia  divides  the  power  to  raise  mercenary  armies;  where- 
fore governments,  w'lieh  can  raise  armies,  will  seldom  be 
inclined  to  arm  the  militia:  and  the  general  government  has 
expended  its  praises  on  a  militia,  and  the  publiek  moni'-y  on 
an  army,  to  an  amount,  sufficient  to  create  the  strongest 
militia,  and  the  weakest  army  in  the  world.  What  stronger 
proof  can  exist  of  an  affection  for  power  and  a  dislike  to  du- 
ty in  human  nature,  than  a  preference  of  the  weakest  ar- 
my to  the  strongest  militia  ?  The  president  is  a  secret  ne- 
gociator with  foreign  nations;  his  monopoly  of  military 
patronage,  impels  him  towards  war,  because  war  extends 
his  patronage,  and  patronage  is  power.  A  strong  solicita- 
tion, addressed  to  the  passions  of  avarice  or  ambition,  is  an 
evil  principle.  He  who  could  gratify  ambition,  by  involv- 
ing a  nation  in  war,  may  be  confided  in  as  a  negociator,  pre- 
cisely in  the  same  degree,  as  he  who  could  gratify  avarice 
by  conveying  taxes  into  his  own  pocket,  may  be  confided  in 
to  impose  them.  Sy  removing  from  the  pubiick  negociator, 
the  excitement  of  military  patronage  towards  war,  integrity 
of  negociation  would  be  obtained,  and  fraudulent  pretexts 
■for  war  avoided. 

The  imbecility  of  the  precautions  against  military  pow- 
er, is  a  chasm  in  our  policy,  which  jeopardises  every  precau- 
tion we  have  invented  to  prevent  usurpation  and  tyranny: 
Military  power  awakens  and  excites  man's  evil  qualities, 
more  than  any  other  species  of  power,  because  it  is  less  re- 
sistible ;  hence  its  malignity  to  good  moral  principles  and 
the  element  of  self  government. 

The  regulation  of  religion,  and  the  establishment  of  no- 
bility, are  among  the  powers  prohibited  ;  the  military  pow 
er  is  not  even  divided,  and  is  only  subjected  in  a  state  of 
complete  accumulation,  to  the  suffrages  of  an  unarmed  peo- 
ple. Religion  and  nobility,  as  state  engines,  might  have 
been  more  safely  left  to  the  restriction  of  election,  than  an 
army,  because  they  are  thoroughly  at  enmity  with  pnblick 
opinion,  and  unpossessed  of  physical  force.     By  resting  i'o?- 


180  THE  EVIL  MOKAL  PRINCIPLES  OE  THE 

security  against  military  power,  upon  the  naked  force  of 
eleetion,  all  powers,  (including  the  cases  of  religion  and  no- 
bility) whether  prohibited  or  limited,  are  in  fact  deposited 
under  the  same  naked  security.  Military  power  being  ca- 
pable of  destroying  constitutional  precepts,  the  security  of 
all  such  precepts  depends  upon  the  precautions  used  to  se- 
cure the  responsibility  of  military  power. 

Had  the  constitution  secured  the  responsibility  of  an  ar- 
my to  the  national  will,  by  requiring  the  duty  of  arming  the 
nation  to  be  fulfilled,  before  the  power  of  raising  an  army 
was  exercised ;  the  freedom  of  the  press  and  of  religion, 
would  have  been  safer  without  a  prohibitory  clause,  than 
with  one,  accompanied  by  an  undivided  military  power.  By 
rendering  an  army  responsible,  election  is  free ;  and  whilst 
election  is  free,  no  security  for  religion  and  the  press  can  be 
better  than  election  ;  but  it  is  no  security  against  the  will 
of  an  army,  fettered  with  precepts,  and  unfettered  by  arms. 
The  constitution  even  neglects  the  least  precaution,  for  pre- 
venting an  army  from  being  used  against  the  government ; 
a  case  entirely  beyond  the  compass  to  which  the  most  en- 
thusiastick  theory  can  extend  the  force  of  election. 

An  armed  nation  only  can  protect  its  government  against 
an  army.  Unarmed,  and  without  an  army,  a  nation  invites 
invasion.  Unarmed,  and  with  an  army,  it  invites  usurpa- 
tion. All  nations  lose  their  liberties  by  invasion  or  usurpa- 
tion. The  elective  franchise  of  an  unarmed  nation,  lies  be- 
tween these  alternatives.  How  mercenary  armies  protect 
liberty,  has  been  recently  demonstrated  in  France  ;  and  how 
they  defend  nations,  all  over  Europe. 

Division  can  only  be  brought  to  bear  upon  military 
power,  by  a  compulsory  constitutional  mandate  for  arming 
the  nation,  and  by  scattering  military  patronage.  For  the 
latter,  the  former  confederation  affords  one  precedent,  and 
another  appears  in  the  prudence  even  of  the  phlegmatic!* 
Dutch,  who  had  foresight  enough,  in  the  early  dawning*  of 
civil  liberty,  to  withhold  from  their  stadthotder  the  appoint- 
ment of  generals. 


GOVERNMENT  OF  THE  U.  STATES,  181 

The  military  power  and  patronage  of  the  president,  is 
formidable  ;  united  with  his  treaty  power,  it  becomes  more 
formidable;  but  to  determine  whether  the  principle  of  di- 
vision or  accumulation  prevails  in  the  structure  of  our  gene- 
ral executive,  it  must  also  be  recollected,  that  the  president 
appoints  judges,  ambassadors,  and  a  multitude  of  other  civil 
officers,  grants  pardons,  governs  the  treasury,  convenes  con- 
gress, recommends  and  negatives  laws.  Let  it  be  also  kept 
in  mind,  that  a  division  of  power  chastens,  and  that  its  ac- 
cumulation exeites  our  evil  moral  qualities. 

Having  attempted  to  shew  that  tins  accumulation  of  ex- 
ecutive power  ought  to  be  diminished,  by  a  division  of  the 
military  article,  it  willfurtherbe  contended,  that  the  publick 
good  dispenses  wi*h  the  president's  judicial  power. 

It  has  been  a  favourite  maxim  with  the  Americans,  that 
legislative,  executive  and  judicial  power  should  be  lodged  in 
seperate  hands.  And  though  it  must  be  confessed,  that  no 
very  visible  lines  have  been  drawn  between  these  powers, 
yet  the  maxim  is  evidence  of  national  attachment  to  the 
principle  of  division. 

This  maxim  is  violated,  under  any  construction,  by  bes- 
towing on  executive  power  the  appointment  of  judicial  pow- 
er; precisely  as  it  would  have  been,  had  judicial  power  ap- 
pointed executive.  Had  judicial  power  appointed  presidents 
for  life,  would  the  duration  of  the  office,  and  its  inde 
pendenee  of  the  government  and  sovereignty,  have  secured 
executive  integrity  ?  Or  would  it  have  been  secured  by  an 
additional  power  in  the  judiciary  to  bestow  more  lucrative 
offices  dependent  on  its  will,  upon  presidents  ?  The  execu- 
tive power  appoints  judges,  and  by  two  precedents  it  is  de- 
clared, that  it  may  bestow  other  lucrative  offices  upon 
them.  The  subject  is  farther  illustrated,  by  supposing  ex- 
ecutive power  invested  with  a  similar  right  of  appointing 
legislative. 

Many  truths  are  interspersed  among  Mr.  Adams's  re- 
marks, from  which  we  draw  conclusions  verv  different  from 
Lie.     For  instance,  he  observes  that  "  these  principles  may 


182  THE  EVIL  MORAL  PRINCIPLES  OF  THE 

4  say,  with  as  much  arrogance  and  as  much  truth,  as  it  was 
*<  ever  said  by  Charles  or  James,  *  as  long  as  we  have 
m  the  power  of  making  what  judges  and  bishops  we  please, 
"  we  are  sure  to  have  no  law  nor  gospel  but  what  shall 
•<  please  us."**  Again,  "  our  author  forgets,  that  he  who 
"  makes  bishops  and  judges,  may  have  what  gospel  and  law 
Ci  he  pleases ;  and  he  who  makes  admirals  and  generals, 
«  may  command  their  fleets  and  armics."f 

The  president  makes  judges  and  generals.  This  power 
awakened  and  put  in  motion  the  evil  qualities  of  Charles 
and  James  ;  the  effects  of  the  cause  in  these  cases,  and  in- 
deed in  a  thousand  others,  prove  that  the  cause  will  produce 
<3vil  effects. 

So  certaiu  and  inevitable  v/as  this,,  that  Mr.  Adams 
states  it  as  not  requiring  proof.  He  considers  it  as  sufficient 
barely  to  bring  to  our  recollection,  that  he  who  appoints 
judges,  has  what  law  he  pleases  ;  and  that  he  who  appoints 
commanders,  determines  the  conduct  of  fleets  and  armies. 

Is  this  compatible  with  our  maxhn  in  relation  to  legisla- 
tive, executive  and  judicial  power  ?  is  it  compatible  with 
the  system  of  a  division  of  power  ?  in  short,  is  it  compatible 
with  the  principle  of  self  government  ?  Such  an  accumu- 
lation of  power,  is  as  strictly  the  attribute  of  monarchy,  as 
it  is  obviously  the  bane  of  self  government.  Weak  and  vi- 
cious presidents  will  play  the  small  arms  of  judicial  and 
military  power  upon  individuals  and  factions  ;  but  an  enter- 
prising and  ambitious  president,  will  play  the  artillery  of 
both  upon  the  nation. 

"  He  who  appoints  the  judges  may  have  what  law  he 
«*  pleases."  Wherefore  then  elect  a  legislature  ?  Th* 
right  of  suffrage  and  the  efficacy  of  election,  arc  destroyed  or 
hazarded  by  an  executive  power  to  make  law  through  judg- 
es. Innumerable  instances  might  be  collected,  to  prove  that 
Judicial  power  is  an  instrument  with  which  law  can  be 
made;   in   England,  the  judges  made  a  law  for  docking 

•  Adams's  Def.  v.  3,  358.        f  Adams's  Def.  v.  3,  38?, 


GOVERNMENT  OP  THE  U.  STATES.  iSS 

estates  tail,  under  the  influence  of  the  crown,  in  order  to  weak- 
en the  power  of  the  very  order,  designed  to  balance  the 
power  of  the  crown  j  in  America,  it  has  been  said  that  the 
judges  have  made  a  whole  code  of  laws,  by  declaring  the 
common  law  of  England  in  force  ;  and  also  constitution,  by 
declaring  the  sedition  law  constitutional. 

It  is  inconceivable,  that  an  appointment  of  a  legislature 
during  good  behaviour  by  executive  power,  will  produce  bad 
laws,  and  that  snch  an  appointment  of  a  judiciary  will  pro- 
duce good  ;  that  the  same  means  will  both  purify  ami  cor- 
rupt the  same  beiugs.  So  flat  a  contradiction  justly  ex- 
cites a  suspicion,  that  its  origin  is  to  be  formed  in  habit  or 
errour,  and  not  in  principle  or  reason. 

The  influence  of  executive  power  over  legislative,  was 
considered  as  an  evil,  because  it  violated  the  English  theory, 
and  had  excited  the  animadversions  of  many  able  writers  , 
but  the  influence  of  executive  over  judicial  power,  was  over- 
looked as  an  evil,  because  it  was  a  principle  of  the  English 
theory,  and  had  failed  to  attract  the  animadversions  of  po- 
litical writers,  under  its  present  form.  Had  the  people 
elected  the  judiciary  in  England,  and  the  crown  appointed 
the  legislature,  we  should  have  contended  for  the  frequent 
election  and  responsibility  of  judicial,  and  the  independence 
oriegislative  power.  It  would  have  been  said,  that  the 
tenure  of  good  behaviour  was  essentially  necessary  to  pro- 
duce pure  laws;  and  that  as  the  judicial  power  was  to  give 
what  construction  and  eflTect  to  the  laws  and  constitution  it 
pleased,  it  was  more  necessary  to  make  it  elective  and  res- 
ponsible than  legislative  power,  which  could  neither  con- 
strue nor  enforce  them. 

The  habit,  opinion  or  prejudice,  which  obtained  for  ex- 
ecutive power  the  patronage  of  judicial,  in  the  constitution 
of  the  United  States,  appears  however  to  have  been  rather 
forensick  than  national ;  and  our  executive  seems  to  have 
been  enriched  with  it,  rather  in  consequenee  of  the  publick 
decision  upon  the  constitution,  in  one  ma&s,  than  from  av» 
approbation  of  this  particular  detail. 


-iSi  Tii'E  EVIL  MORAL  PRINCIPLES  OF  THE 

Nine  states  continue  to  appoint  their  judges  by  the  le- 
gislature ;  the  rest,  New  York  excepted,  remove  then:  by 
the  will  of  two  thirds  of  the  legislature ;  and  New  York 
appoints  them  by  a  council  annually  choseirby  the  legisla- 
ture. Not  a  single  state  has  copied  the  general  constitution 
in  moulding  judicial  power,  and  every  state  has  laboured  to 
place  it  beyond  the  influence  of  executive  power. 

In  forming  state  constitutions,  publick  opinion  decided 
upon  each  detail  seperately  ;  in  adopting  the  general  con- 
stitution, it  was  compelled  to  decide  upon  a  mass  of  various 
details.  To  this  cause  it  is  owing,  that  violations  of  several 
essential  principles  adhered  to  by  all  the  state  constitutions, 
have  been  suffered,  rather  than  adopted  in  the  federal  con- 
stitution. Every  such  contrariety  is  an  irrefragable  argu- 
ment to  prove,  that  one  end  of  the  oppugnaney  ought  to  be 
suppressed  by  a  constitutional  amendment. 

A  degree  of  military  power  is  conferred  upon  a  presi- 
dent, which,  when  augmented  and  ripened  by  pretext,  con- 
juncture or  audacity,  has  alone  sufficed,  in  every  instance,  to 
destroy  national  self  government.  To  this  instrument  of 
destruction  is  subjoined  a  mass  of  civil  power.  The  last 
refuge  of  self  government  is  the  legislature;  in  the  purity 
of  which  resides  its  solitary  hope  of  existence. 

The  executive  power  possesses  the  prerogative  of  eon- 
fering  lucrative  offices  upon  members  of  congress  ;  the  sena- 
tors not  excepted,  though  relied  on  as  a  check  upon  execu- 
tive power.  In  England,  this  prerogative  has  utterly  dis- 
qualified the  House  of  Commons,  as  the  organ  or  guardian 
•f  the  principle  of  self  government,  for  the  democratieal 
order.  It  will  operate  in  America  as  it  has  done  in  Eng- 
land. Is  a  legislature,  courting  the  patronage  of  a  man 
who  commands  an  army,  a  pledge  or  residence  for  the  prin- 
ciple of  self  government  ?  Is  this  secured  by  enabling  a 
man  who  commands  an  army,  to  corrupt  the  legislature  by 
perpetual  and  brilliant  hopes  ?  Was  Swift  inspired  in  des- 
cribing the  difference  between  the  eorruption  of  hope  and  of 
prompt  payment  ?— 


GOVERNMENT  OE  THE  V.  STATES,  18 

«,  Sid's  rod  was  slender,  white  and  tall, 
Which  oft  he  used  to  fish  withal  ; 
A  Plaice  was  fastened  to  the  hook, 
And  many  score  of  Gudgeons  took; 
Yet  stili  so  happy  was  his  fate, 
lie  caught  his  Jiah  and  saved  his  Bait." 

Is  not  a  president,  thus  enabled  to  influence  the  legislature . 
exactly  a  Lord  Bute  hidden  behind  the  throne  ? 

Mr.  Adams  converts  the  American  maxim,  "  that  legis- 
"  lative,  executive  and  judicial  power  should  be  seperate 
«  and  distinct,"  into  the  idea  ♦»  of  independent  orders  of 
men  and  of  powers."  And  his  theory,  though  destructive 
of  nationaV  self  government,  acknowledges  the  fatal  conse= 
qu'ences  to  be  expected,  if  one  order  or  one  power,  should 
become  dependent  on  another.  Will  our  policy  admit  of  an 
influence,  which  will  corrupt  his  ? 

His  theory  is  contrived  to  preserve  certain  factitioug 
rights  of  these  orders  ;  this  is  only  to  be  effected  by  their 
independence  of  each  other;  because,  if  two  should  be  influ- 
enced by  the  power  or  patronage  of  one,  that  one  will  in- 
vade, abolish  or  modify  these  factitious  rightSo  Our  policy 
is  intended  to  preserve  the  natural  right  of  national  self 
government;  for  this  purpose  ve  create  three  chief  organs 
of  national  will  ;  now  if  we  enable  either  of  these,  by  force 
or  fraud,  by  armies  or  patronage,  to  influence  the  others, 
the  natural  right  of  national  self  government  is  lost,  with  as 
much  certainty,  as  the  factitious  rights  of  orders  are,  by  one 
order  thus  influencing  two  others,  or  their  representatives. 

The  effort  of  the  general  constitution,  to  say  the  least, 
is  greater  to  secure  the  independence  of  executive?  than  of 
legislative  or  judicial  power;  neither  of  these  can  appoint 
a  president  or  enrich  him  by  office.  Neither,  nor  both,  can 
select  a  president  of  political  opinions  similar  to  their  own5 
or  mould  his  tenets  by  patronage  into  such  conformity.  Was 
it  believed,  that  numerous  bodies  would  be  more  likely  to 
corrupt  one  man,  than  one  man  would  be  to  corrupt  nume- 
rous bodies  ?  Or  was  it  believed,  that  a  single  executive 
was  a  sai'er  depositary  of  self  government,  than  a  legislative 

25 


136  THE  Ef  It.  MORAt  FRlttCIPLES  OF  THE 

assembly  ?  That  he  should  be  enabled  to  influence  them, 
and  that  they  should  be  cautiously  prohibited  from  influenc- 
ing him  ? 

In  that  part  of  our  policy  called  the  state  constitutions, 
principles,  the  reverse  of  these,  prevail.  Executive  power 
is  made  dependent  on  legislative  in  some  way,  and  vast  care 
is  taken  to  keep  legislative  and  judicial  power  beyond  the 
influence  of  executive.  In  fact,  it  was  and  still  is  the  gene- 
ral opinion,  that  the  independence  of  legislative  and  judicial 
power,  of  the  influence  of  one  man,  constitutes  an  indispen- 
sable requisite  for  the  preservation  of  national  self  govern- 
ment; and  that  an  influence  of  one  man  over  the  legisla- 
ture, constitutes  a  substantial  monarchy,,  and  is  the  harbin- 
ger of  its  form.  If  then  executive  influence  over  legislative 
and  judicial  power,  is  a  monarchical  principle,  the  presi- 
dent's appointment  of  one,  and  his  patronage  over  both, 
ought  to  be  removed,  or  we  violate  the  principles  by  the  de= 
tails  of  our  constitution.  It  is  a  principle,  that  the.  legisla- 
ture should  utter  the  wHl  of  the  nation  ;  the  detail,  exposing 
it  to  executive  influence,  may  cause  it  to  utter  the  will  of  3 
president.  The  principle  and  the  detail  admit  of  no  recon- 
ciliation, and  therefore  the  only  question  is,  which  ought  to 
be  abolished,  the  influence  of  the  people,  or  the  influence 
of  the  president  over  the  legislature  ? 

The  elective  quality  of  the  presidency,  aggravates  the 
errour.  It  procures  a  confidence  which  has  no  foundation, 
because  election  is  no  security  against  great  power  conferred 
by  it  on  one  man ;  and  this  confidence,  by  lulling  publick  sus- 
picion, will  mask  the  progress  of  executive  influence.  A 
suspicion,  both  of  its  progress  and  the  cause  of  its  progress, 
is  suggested  by  the  facts,  that  in  those  states  where  gov- 
ernours  have  no  patronage,  no  state  factions  have  appeared ; 
and  that  upon  the  erection  of  a  general  executive,  having  a 
patronage  previously  unknown,  national  factions,  previously 
unknown  also,  suddenly  started  up. 

As  civil  and  military  patronage,  the  command  of  fleets 
and  armies,  the  direction  of  a  treasury,  treaty-making,  and 
a  negative  upon  laws,   condensed  in  one  man,  constitute  a 


UOVEKNMENT  OF  THE  U.  STATES.  187 

power  evidently  monarchical,  it  is  important  betimes  to  con- 
sider how  the  elective  principle,  and  the  monarchical  pow- 
er  are  like  to  work  upon  the  same  person  j  the  nature  of 
one,  being  to  draw  him  within  the  pale  of  responsibility,  and 
of  the  oilier,  to  excite  him  to  overleap  it. 

We  ought  not  to  shut  our  eyes  upon  the  history  of  elec- 
tive monarchy,  but  to  discern  and  avoid  the  cause  of  its  in- 
variable  catastrophe.  Orders  have  never  been  able  to  work 
well  with  electiou,  nor  election  with  them.  If  a  good  gov- 
ernment cannot  be  made  of  orders,  by  the  help  of  election, 
.still  more  discouraging  is  the  experiment  of  making  a  good 
government  of  monarchy,  one  order  only,  by  its  help.  This 
project  requires  one  man  to  constitute  or  represent  two  or- 
v'eis.  He  must  be  a  monarch  in  power,  but  a  plebeian  in 
temper.  No  instance  occurs  in  which  monarchical  power, 
responsible  and  periodical;  has  not  struggled  for  insubordi- 
nation  and  permanence  ;  and  no  remedy  for  this  evil  has 
eve.'  appeared  ;  but  the  experiment  in  the  case  of  state  gov- 
ernours  proves,  that  the  evil  may  be  avoided,  by  bestowing 
and  dividing  executive  power  so  judiciously,  as  that  projects 
to  acquire  independent  and  permanent  power,  may  be  made 
inconsistent  with  common  sense.  Power  in  certain  masses, 
is  a  moral  cause  which  naturally  produces  certain  effects. 
Kingly  power,  though  conferred  by  election,  constitutes  the 
cause,  and  consequently  produces  the  effects;  even  exces- 
sively aggravated  by  the  natural  indisposition  to  part 
with  it. 

If  it  is  true  that  aristocratical  power,  hereditary  or  not, 
will  suffice  to  destroy  election,  responsibility  and  self  gov- 
ernment, can  it  be  false,  that  monarchical  power,  hereditary 
or  not,  will  suffice  for  the  same  end  ?  No  instance  occurs 
in  which  either  aristocratical  or  monarchical  powers  have 
been  peaceably  and  regularly  managed  by  ejection  or  na- 
tional will,  or  in  which  they  have  not  destroyed  the  princi- 
ple of  self  government.  Names  constitute  nothing.  Mo- 
narchical powers  constitute  monarchy,  and  though  monar- 
chy is  elcctivet  it  is  still  monarchy.       If  monarchy  and 


188  THE  EVIL  MORAE  PRINCIPLES  OF  THE 

aristocracy  are  moral  principles  productive  of  evil  effects* 
election  cannot  change  their  nature,  and  force  them  to  pro- 
duce good  effects.  As  we  have  a  multitude  of  elective  pub- 
lick  officers,  without  aristocratical  powers,  we  may  also  have 
an  elective  chief  officer,  without  monarchical  powers.  But 
if  by  law,  avarice  and  guile,  the  aristocracy  of  paper  and 
patronage  is  created ;  and  if  the  mass  of  monarchical  pow? 
ers?  held  by  the  president,  remains  undivided  ;  this  real  aris- 
tocracy will  have  a  real  monarch  at  their  head,  who  upon 
the  first  conjuncture,  which  enables  him  to  raise  an  army, 
will  step  upon  a  throne.  A  system  of  paper  and  patronage, 
and  our  executive  powers,  bear  an  astonishing  resemblance 
to  sundry  principles  of  the  operating  English  pojiey.  The 
detachments  of  barbarians  voluntarily  introduced  into  the 
Roman  empire,  was  the  cause  of  its  destruction. 

Mr.  Adams  abounds  in  citations  to  prove,  that  election 
is  not  a  sufficient  security  against  great  power.  We  accord 
with  him,  and  deduce  from  this  acknowledged  fact  the  fore- 
going observations.  His  remedy  is  to  make  monarchical 
and  aristocratical  powers  hereditary ;  ours,  to  divide  them, 
until  they  are  brought  within  the  coercion  of  the  elective 
principle  fairly  exercised,  which  is  the  exact  test,  of  their 
ceasing  to  be  monarchical  or  aristocratical.  He  deduces 
his  remedy  from  the  experience  of  dark  ages,  in  which  he 
says  it  was  never  tried ;  we  deduce  ours  from  the  experi- 
ence of  the  present  enlightened  age,  in  which  it  is  tried  be- 
fore our  eyes.  Governours  are  completely  manageable  by 
the  elective  system,  because  they  do  not  possess  monarchi- 
cal powers.  From  the  same  cause,  state  legislatures  elect 
them  without  disorder  or  difficulty.  At  some  future  day. 
on  an  election  of  a  president,  it  will  be 'found  that  the  hopes 
and  fears  inspired  by  monarchical  powers,  w  ail  light  up  the 
brand  of  civil  discord,  and  visit  us  with  an  experimental 
knowledge  of  the  effects  of  these  powers,  first  as  elective, 
and  then  as  hereditary. 

The  question  is,  whether  the  experience  of  all  ages,  that 
:<rreat  power  cannot  be  controlled  by  election,  shall  induce 


GOVERNMENT  OF  THE  V.  STATES.  A&$ 

tlic  Americans  to  accumulate  power  ;  or  whether  our  own 
existing  experience,  that  divided  power  may  he  controlled  by 
election,  shall  induce  us  to  divide  the  mass  collected  in  the 
national  executive. 

The  evidence  on  both  sides  yields  exactly  the  same  con- 
clusion. All  ancient  experiments,  to  control  undivided  or 
great  masses  of  power  by  national  will,  failed;  our  modern 
experiments,  to  control  power  in  a  state  of  considerable  di- 
vision, have  succeeded ;  the  first  demonstrated  the  evil,  the 
second  demonstrates  the  remedy. 

This  conclusion  cannot  be  weakened  by  urging  the  effi- 
cacy of  the  elective  system  hitherto,  to  manage  the  executive 
power  of  the  United  States,  if  its  early  inclination  towards 
monarchy  existed.  The  nation  testified  to  the  fact.  Will 
they  not  believe  themselves,  until  it  is  too  late  ?  A  blow 
cannot  be  avoided,  which  is  not  foreseen.  On  the  very  first 
presidential  election,  which  crossed  the  progress  and  pro- 
jects of  monarchy,  patronage  and  paper,  a  disloyalty  to  elec- 
tion or  national  will,  was  distinctly  seen.  A  disloyalty,  dis- 
closed by  a  power  in  its  infancy,  will  be  carried  into  effect, 
when  that  power  is  matured  by  war,  fleets,  armies,  stock 
and  patronage.  Perhaps  the  corruption  of  another  indi- 
vidual at  the  juncture  alluded  to,  would  have  demonstrated 
the  argument. 

Abbreviation  of  the  time  of  service,  and  rotation  in  office, 
are  auxiliaries  in  unmonarchising  executive  power,  called 
forth  by  the  state  constitutions,  and  abandoned  or  relaxed  by 
the  general  constitution.  Our  policy  will  not  be  made  to 
flourish  by  inconsistent  principles.  Its  two  parts  can  only 
act  with  effect  by  acting  in  concert.  The  temptation  to 
form  factions  and  perpetrate  usurpation,  is  graduated  by  the 
chance  of  reaping  the  contemplated  fruit.  A  lo.ig  time  of 
service,  connected  with  rotation,  is  an  inducement  to  obtain 
influence  by  corruption,  in  order  to  destroy  rotation  ;  and  a 
short  time  without  rotation,  is  an  inducement  to  use  the 
same  means  to  secure  a  re-election.  Rotation,  and  the  an- 
nual power  of  the  Roman  consuls,  united,  prevented  consu- 


19&  THE  EVIL  MORAL  PRINCIPLES  OF  THE 

lar  usurpation  for  centuries ;  annual  appointment  of  pro- 
consuls,  without  a  strict  rotation*  produced  proconsular 
usurpation  in  a  few  years. 

All  mankind  do  in  fact  believe,  that  a  short  duration  of 
delegated  power,  is  the  best  security  for  its  continuing  a 
delegation.  In  every  delegation  made  by  an  indi\idual  for 
feimself,  he  adheres  closely  to  this  opinion.  And  though 
universal  experience  concurs  with  universal  opinion,  both 
are  violated  by  nations.  It  is  because  governments  are  al- 
ways formed  by  those  who  expect  delegations. 

Not  so  will  one  of  these  politicians  act,  should  the  lot  of 
empire  fall  on  himself.  He  would  frequently  change  his 
generals  and  governours.  The  more  powerful  the  office, 
and  the  more  meritorious  the  officer,  the  more  uniformly 
would  the  security  of  a  short  term  and  rotation  be  resorted 
to.  What  nation  is  enslaved  by  a  fool  ?  Oh  people !  do  not 
be  deluded  to  pay  away  your  liberty  for  talents  and  merit. 
By  rewarding  them  with  great  power,  or  great  wealth,  or 
long  duration  in  office,  you  will  lose  the  power  of  rewarding 
them  at  all ;  and  these  rewards,  by  destroying  your  liberty, 
will  destroy  publick  merit  and  talents,  and  put  an  end  to  the 
objects  of  your  bounty.  It  is  only  by  withholding  rewards, 
destructive  both  of  the  power  and  the  objects  of  reward, 
that  nations  will  be  able  to  evince  their  gratitude  to  bene- 
factors. A  tyrant  would  only  have  kept  Caesar  proconsul 
in  Gaul  for  one  year,  and  would  have  thus  secured  his  ty- 
ranny; the  people  continued  him  for  seven,  and  by  that 
means  lost  their  liberty.  Their  bounty  to  one  man,  closed 
its  stream  for  ever,  and  annihilated  the  race  of  heroes. 

Equally  unanimous  are  men  of  all  principles,  whenever 
the  delegation  relates  to  their  own  exclusive  interest,  that 
it  is  dangerous  to  delegate  so  much  power,  as  to  place  them 
at  the  mercy  of  the  delegate.  Here  too  every  despot  dis- 
closes his  subtlety,  and  his  conviction  of  the  necessity  of 
division  to  defend  his  despotism.  He  carefully  divides  his 
provinces,  his  armies,  and  his  powers,  so  that  no  one  divi- 
dend should  be  strong  enough  to  dethrone  him.    if  he  is  so 


GOVERNMENT  OF  THE  17.  STATE*.  191 

imprudent  as  to  place  his  army  and  his  treasury  under  one 
man  ;  and  irrevocably  to  invest  him  with  the  command  of 
them  for  four  years,  with  a  power  of  appointing  and  remov- 
ing all  officers  civil  and  military,  he  is  dethroned  by  his 
first  able,  artful  and  ambitious  general.  He  places  his 
sovereignty  in  the  situation  of  an  unarmed  sovereignty  of 
the  people,  and  his  general  in  that  of  the  president. 

All  despots,  monarchical  and  aristocratical,  uniformly 
and  strictly  practice  the  principles  of  division  and  rotation, 
as  <he  best  means  to  defend  their  monarchy  and  aristocracy  5 
and  as  uniformly  assure  the  people,  that  these  same  princi- 
ples arc  the  worst  means  to  secure  liberty  or  self  govern- 
ment. It  is  simply  because  they  are  friends  to  their  own 
sovereignty,  and  enemies  to  the  sovereignty  of  the  people. 
As  countries  are  divided  into  provinces  to  secure  kings, 
power  ought  to  be  divided  into  provinces  to  secure  nations  5 
and  as  each  geographical  division  is  subject  to  the  monarch, 
each  potential  division  should  be  subject  to  the  people ; 
great  provinces  in  both  cases  produce  the  same  consequence. 
Even  rival  orders  nerer  fail  to  use  innumerable  arts  to  di- 
vide each  other's  power.  At  one  period  in  England,  the 
other  two  orders  united  to  weaken  the  aristocracy,  by 
enabling  it  to  break  entails ;  at  another,  the  nobility  and 
commons  united  to  weaken  the  power  of  the  crown,  by  de- 
priving it  of  the  prerogative  of  removing  judges  at  will,  and 
fixing  that  right  in  all  three  ;  at  a  third,  the  crown  and  no- 
bility contrived  to  weaken  the  power  of  the  people,  by  join^ 
ing  with  the  commons  to  extend  their  time  of  service. 

Power  changes  moral  character,  and  private  life  re 
generates  it.  The  children  of  hereditary  power  are  not  ty- 
rants from  a  proereative  cause.  They  are  made  such  by 
the  contemplation  of  the  power  to  which  they  are  destined. 
If  the  prospect  corrupts,  will  the  possession  cleanse  ?  It 
is  not  in  a  natural,  but  a  moral  birth,  that  the  defect  of  the 
hereditary  principle  lies.  Great  power,  or  a  long  possession 
of  power,  changes  a  man's  moral  nature,  whether  it  is  de- 
rived from  inheritance  or  election.    Patriots,  as  well  a? 


Xd%  THE  EVIL  M0KAL  PRINCIPLES  OP  TftE 

princes,  become  tyrants  from  being  steeped  in  the  same 
menstruum,  and  yet  nations  are  still  to  learn,  that  itsistox-' 
Seating  qualities  are  the  same  upon  both.  They  consider 
its  effect  as  natural  in  one  case,  and  monstrous  in  the  other  : 
as  if  both  princes  and  patriots  Mere  not  men.  Revolution 
fails,  because  its  usual  remedy  is  only  to  draw  the  men- 
struum from  election  instead  of  inheritance,  into  which  to 
plunge  the  moral  qualities  of  human  nature.  Even  a  hope 
of  office  corrupts  eloquence.  It  eeases  to  be  the  animated 
auxiliary  of  truth,  and  becomes  the  mercenary  ally  of  inte- 
rest. Honesty  is  exchanged  for  art.  An  artificial  charac- 
ter is  formed-  by  a  possibility  of  continuing  considerable 
power.  It  assumes  different  principles  with  different  per- 
sons. It  gilds  its  baits  with  pat  ranage,  contract  and  char- 
ter, at  the  publick  expense.  And  the  varnish  it  assumes  is 
to  conceal  the  foulness  of  the  stuff  it  hides.  Whereas  a 
portion  of  power,  insufficient  to  arm  treachery,  and  limited 
to  an  unalterable  period,  being  chastened  of  the  excitements 
to  fraud  and  force,  leaves  the  mind  open  to  virtue,  and  the 
certainty  of  returning  to  a  private  station,  settles  its  bias. 

From  the  foundation  of  Rome  to  the  accession  of  Augus- 
tus, was  above  seven  centuries ;  and  f  c*oni  thence  to  the  ter- 
mination of  its  empire,  less  than  five.  The  first  was  a  term 
of  growth,  the  second  of  decline*  The  first  of  progressive 
prosperity  ;  the  second  of  oscillations  depending  upon  the 
change  of  character.  The  first  was  a  term  of  rotation,  the 
second  of  permanent  or  hereditary  power.  The  corruption 
or  errour  of  electing  the  same  man  a  second  time  to  the  con- 
sular  office,  Avas  a  symptom  and  became  an  instrument  of 
the  destruction  of  the  republick,  except  for  which,  Ave-  can  on- 
ly compute  the  probability  of  its  duration,  by  an  inference 
from  the  long  term  of  its  existence  under  the  auspices  of  the 
annual  rotation  of  executive  magistrates,  and  a  division  of 
power. 

The  same  period  demonstrates  the  errour  of  the  objection., 
that  rotation  causes  a  loss  of  talents  to  the  publiek.  It 
would  have  been  mo4  likely  to  produce  this  loss,  in  military 


GOVERNMENT  OF  THE  If.  STATES.  ±i)3 

affairs.  For  seven  centuries  Rome  applied  the  principle  of 
rotation  to  her  generals,  and  conquered  ;  for  five,  she  trust- 
ed to  experience,  and  was  suhdued.  The  rotary  generals 
and  statesmen  of  the  little  Athenian  republick,  destined  it 
to  live  for  ever  in  the  annals  of  fame,  and  most  of  its  con- 
temporary governments  are  for  ever  dead.  As  to  civil  af- 
fairs, the  claim  of  experience  would  probably  be  answered 
by  the  old  adage,  but  the  burst  of  talents  in  both  cases 
which  blazes  forth  whenever  the  monopoly  of  experience  is 
destroyed  by  rotation,  is  accounted  for  by  the  fall  of  the  mo- 
nopoly. The  trade  being  laid  open,  the  wares  increase, 
and  are  made  better  by  competition.  Talents,  civil  and 
military,  are  created  by  the  prospect  of  employment,  and 
smothered  by  the  monopoly  of  experience. 

A  strong  and  independent  executive  power,  has  only 
been  contended  for  by  Mr.  Adams  and  political  writers,  as 
a  counterpoising  weight  in  the  system  of  balancing  orders. 
There  being  no  orders  in  the  system  of  the  United  States, 
the  only  reason  for  a  strong  executive,  does  not  exist ;  and 
a  conformity  in  that  department  to  the  theory  of  a  sove- 
reignty of  orders,  unquestionably  proved  by  Mr.  Adams, 
unquestionably  also  discloses  its  nonconformity,  to  the  the- 
ory of  a  sovereignty  of  the  people.  A  strong  executive  is 
the  more  dangerous,  where  there  is  no  political  order  to 
balance  it.  By  creating  an  executive  with  monarchical 
powers,  without  the  check  of  an  aristocratical  order,  this 
monarchical  order,  is  either  enabled  to  assail  the  liberties 
of  the  nation,  or  the  nation  are  driven  to  erect  an  aristocrat- 
ical order  to  balance  it.  The  proof  of  this  remark  exists, 
in  the  case  with  which  an  elective  executive  in  France, 
with  monarchical  powers,  unchecked  by  an  aristocratical 
order,,  has  made  itself  despofick.  And  Mr.  Adams  both 
strenuously  urges  the  necessity  of  an  aristocratical  order  to 
balance  monarchical  powers,  and  plainly  intimates  that  we 
shall  be  speedily  compelled,  first  to  extend  the  term  of  dele- 
gation, and  then  to  adopt  the  hereditary  principle.  It  iw 
admitted,  li/at  the  existence  of  one  order,  furnishes  a  reason 

26 


1*)*  THE  EVIL  MORAL  PIUWCIPLES  OF  THE 

for  another.  Monarchical  powers  can  only  be  assuaged  by 
an  aristoeratieal  order.  Were  ihe  former  given  to  the 
president,  ito  create  a  cause  for  the  latter?  The  alter  rut- 
live  for  the  United  States  is  obvious;  it  is,  either  to  pare 
away  executive  power,  below  monarchy,  to  a  standard  not 
requiring  an  aristoeratieal  order  to  check  it,  or  to  adopt 
Mr.  Adams's  system  of  orders.  Monarchical  executive 
powers  being  monarchy  in  substance,  will  beget  aristocracy* 
just  as  a  system  of  paper  and  patronage,  being  aristocracy 
in  substance,  will  beget  monarchy.  According  to  Mr. 
Adams's  system,  monarchy  ought  to  produce  aristocracy, 
and  aristocracy  monarchy;  The  presidency,  gilded  with 
kingly  powers,  has  been  tossed  into  the  constitution,  against 
the  publick  sentiment,  and  gravely  bound  in  didactick  fet- 
ters, like  those  which  in  England  and  France  have  become 
political  old  junk.  Hetween  these,  and  our  principle  of 
self  government,  there  can  neither  be  friendship  nor  com- 
promise. Either  our  kingly  powers,  or  the  sovereignty  of 
the  people,  are  by  the  laws  of  nature  destined  to  perish  in 
their  warfare.  The  first  will  be  suppressed  by  amendments 
to  the  constitution,  or  the  hist,  lulled  by  the  narcotick.  cor- 
ruption, will  he  murdered  in  its  sleep. 

The  people  and  the  legislative  bodies  of  the  United 
States  shrink  from  this  honest  confession,  whilst  thev  are 
making*  it  in  their  actions.  Thev  will  not  see  the  monarch  v 
they  court,  and  expect  safety  whilst  feeding  an  enemy,  from 
denying  his  existence  :  whilst  even  the  European  habit,  of 
referring  eve:*y  thing  to  executive  power,  prevails.  Epochs 
and  measures  arc  ascribed  to  presidents.  Legislative  pow- 
er solicit*  it  state  ol  degradation,  by  descending  to  the  indig- 
nity  of  pleading  a  subserviency  to  them,  as  a  passport  to 
popular  favour,  and  condescending  to  become  the  satellite 
of  one  man.  State  legislatures,  parties  and  individuals, 
enlist  under  candidates  for  the  presidency,  as  they  do  in 
England  under  candidates  for  the  ministry;  and  the  nation 
itself,  forgetting  their  representatives,  contemplates  tin 
dazzling  executive  power  of  their  own   creation.       The 


GOVERNMENT  OF  THE  T.  STATES.  19* 

phenomena  attending  it  is  the' same  here  as  in  England,  and 
this  coincidence  demonstrates  an  identity  in  the  causes  ;  but 
-\ve  fall  into  the  errour,  of  contemplating  the  same  thing  as  a 
mighty  substance  and  an  empty  shadow,  without  retlccting 
that  the  danger  lies,   not  in  the  feeble  body  of  an  ignorant 
man,  but  in  an  accumulation  and  concentration  of  active 
powers.     For  a  century  past,  executive  power  in  England, 
has  had  the  address  to  change  its  ministers  as  they  became 
odious,  and  to  replace  them  by  popular  adversaries  ;  retain- 
ing the  encroachments   upon   the  rights  and  purses  of  the 
people,  which  produced  the  odium,  and  using  the  populari- 
ty of  its  new  ministers,  to  make  new  encroachments:  who, 
having  lost   it   in  performing  this  work,  make   room  for 
others.  Thus  executive  pow  er, working  with  popular  agents, 
and  armed  with  gold  and  iron,  has  long  gained  ground  with 
undeviating   regularity  in  England.     It  pursues  the  same 
system  here.     Our  presidents  are  its  ministers,  suffered  only 
to  remain  in  office   whilst  popular ;  encroaching  in  favour 
of  executive  power  whilst  this  popularity  lasts  ;  bearing  the 
oilium  of  mischiefs  which  ought  to  light  upon  our  accumu- 
lation and  concentration  of  powers;  leaving  encroachments 
behind  them  for  the   benefit  of  exeeutive  power,  to  be  ex- 
tended by  popular  successors ;  and   organizing  a  body  of 
outs  and  ins,  alternately  demagogues  and  tools.       These 
outs  and  ins  are  equally  proper  to  delude  a  nation,  and  to 
exalt  executive    power,  which   sits  in    proud   superiority, 
looking  down  upon   the  fraud   and  oppressions  caused  by 
itself;  whilst  the  people  dare  not  look  up  to  it  as  their 
cause,  but  will  be  taught  the  forlorn  hope  of  redress  from  a 
change  of  ministry,  as  in  England.    Hence,  both  in  England 
and  America,  executive  power  obscures  legislative  to  such  a 
degree,  that  even  popular  favour  is   only  obtained  by  an 
avowal  of  subserviency  or  hostility  to  its  prime   uiinister  : 
and  we  compel  our  popular  representatives  gratuitously  to 
become  the  tools  of  the  same  principle,  to  which  li.e  t:. em- 
bers of  the  British  House  of  Commons  sell  their  seme* 


196  THE  EVIL  MORAL  PRINCIPLES  OF  THE 

»  A  nation  which  requires  its  representatives  to  become 
the  avowed  advocates  or  accusers  of  the  prime  minister  of 
religious  or  civil  power,  whether  he  is  called  a  pope  or  a 
president,  has  an  equal  prospect  for  civil  and  religious  liber- 
ty. Civil  and  religious  preachers  and  reformers,  mar- 
shalled into  opposite  parties,  in  all  times  and  countries,  are 
the  same  sorts  of  patriots.  Representation,  limited  to  the 
alternative  of  enlisting  under  one  of  these  parties,  ceases  to 
be  an  instrument  of  national  self  government,  and  dwindles 
into  an  instrument  of  oppression  for  the  prime  minister  or 
his  antagonist.  We  see  and  despise  the  old  whig  and  tory 
farce,  or  the  new  farce  of  ins  and  outs  in  England  ;  we  hold 
in  detestation  the  corruption  which  enlists  the  representa- 
tives of  a  rich  and  wise  nation  under  the  minister  of  execu- 
tive power,  or  his  expected  successor;  we  deplore  the  con- 
tempt for  publick  characters,  the  apathy  towards  puhlick  in- 
terest, and  the  surrender  of  the  mind  to  selfishness,  which  this 
foolish  imposition  generates;  and  yet  we  insist  that  our 
representatives  shall  sacrifice  their  honesty  and  indepen- 
dence at  the  same  shrine,  and  make  themselves  knaves  in 
order  to  make  us  dupes. 

The  struggle  for  our  presidency,  like  the  struggle  for 
(he  English  administration,  is  the  concurrent  verdict  of  the 
contending  parties,  that  executive  power  has  already  obtain- 
ed the  ascendency.  When  it  depended  on  a  Dionysiiis  or  a 
Timoleon,  whether  monarchy  or  republicanism  should  reign 
at  Syracuse,  monarchy  was  established.  It  is  a  government 
according  to  the  will  of  one  man,  not  the  mode  in  which 
that  will  operates.  If  it  operates  by  means  of  a  patronage 
able  to  influence  popular  representatives,  or  by  a  national 
humour  compelling  its  representatives  to  enlist  themselves 
for  or  against  one  man's  will,  it  is  as  much  monarchy  as  if 
it  operated  in  a  different  mode.  No  writer  describes  a  re- 
publick.  guided  by  the  will  of  one  of  its  officers,  aud  depend- 
ing on  the  chance  of  that  officer's  possessing  republican  or 
monarchical  principles. 


GOVERNMENT  OP  THE  U.  STATES.  197 

"We  see  that  an  administration  majority,  will  attend  suc- 
cessive presidents,  as  it  attends  successive  premiers  in 
England.  Whether  it  is  called  whig  or  tory,  federal  or  re- 
publican, high  church  or  low  chinch,  causes  no  difference 
in  the  operation  of  the  fact.  The  discovery  we  are  in  pur- 
suit of,  is  the  cause  of  this  fact.  Wherefore  is  it,  that  in 
both  countries,  factions  or  parties  are  seen,  having  execu- 
tive power  for  its  object,  and  none  paying  court  to  or  conde- 
scending to  be  the  blind  partisans  either  of  legislative  or  ju- 
dicial power  ?  It  is  because  one  man  in  both  represents  the 
intire  undivided  mass  of  executive  power,  and  many  men 
represent  legislative  and  judicial.  The  two  latter  powers, 
being  considerably  divided,  cannot  feed  mercenary  factions'; 
and  the  former  is  able  to  feed  them,  out  of  the  abundant 
granary  of  its  monopoly.  The  same  remedy  which  prevents 
legislative  or  judicial  power  from  begetting  factions  able  to 
make  either  despotick,  will  have  the  same  effect  on  execu- 
tive. The  ability  of  state  governours  to  create  executive 
factions,  is  graduated  in  the  United  States,  by  the  portions  of 
power  which  they  represent.  If  a  single  individual  repre- 
sented the  intire  mass  either  of  legislative  or  judicial  power 
in  tbe  United  States,  it  would  become  a  power  capable  of 
creating  factions  and  undermining  the  rights  of  the  people. 
Suppose  that  one  man  possessed  the  legislative  power,  and 
that  what  we  call  executive  power  was  divided  by  represen- 
tation, equally  with  legislative  at  present;  would  not 
usurpation  invariably  proceed  from  legislative,  as  it  now 
does  from  executive  power?  If  a  division  of  legislative 
power,  prevents  it  from  becoming  an  usurper  and  a  tyrant, 
will  not  division  have  tbe  same  effect  on  executive  I  llepub- 
licanism,  like  a  mercantile  company,  perishes,  whenever 
one  man  by  any  means  whatever  has  obtained  the  direction 
of  the  common  interest.  It  is  not  her  motto  that  *•  safety 
lies  in  the  counsel  of  one  man." 

The  people  of  the  United  States  and  of  Great  Britain, 
have  been  frequently  censured  for  a  corrupt  or  absurd  exer- 
cise of  the  right  of  suffrage;  and  their  want  of  virtue  or 


198  THE  EVIL  MORAL  PRINCIPLE*  OF  THE 

understanding  in  the  discharge  of  this  function,  has  been 
forcibly  urged  against  the  right  itself.  An  accumulation 
of  power  in  the  hands  of  one  man,  bears  a  strong  similitude 
to  its  accumulation  in  a  single  chamber.  The  latter,  says 
Mr.  Adams,  will  diffuse  \ice  and  folly  throughout  a  nation, 
and  corrupt  election.  Will  the  same  cause  purify  it  ?  It 
is  true  that  the  ruin  of  election  proceeds  from  this  cause, 
and  not  from  an  innate  disposition  in  the  people  to  do  them- 
selves an  injury.  An  accumulation  of  power  and  patronage 
in  the  hands  of  one  man,  causes  candidates  for  popular  fa- 
vour to  corrupt  the  people,  in  order  to  bring  themselves 
within  the  notice  of  this  dispenser  of  wealth  ;  and  candi- 
dates for  executive  favour  to  infuse  into  them  the  fatal  idea, 
that  they  ought  to  demand  of  their  representatives  an  ac- 
cordance with  executive  will.  If  such  effects  do  flow  from 
this  cause,  the  people  are  unjustly  accused  of  a  deficiency 
either  in  virtue  or  understanding;  and  the  just  conclusion 
only  is,  that  they  are  not  able  to  control  the  moral  law  of 
nature,  which  has  irrevocably  pronounced,  that  evil  moral 
effects  will  flow  from  evil  moral  eauses.  Had  we  emigrat- 
ed from  Turkey,  we  might  have  been  wedded  to  the  opi- 
nions, that  legislative  power  could  be  safely  represented  by 
one  man,  because  it  possessed  btit  few  of  the  means  of  usur- 
pation ;  but  that  executive  power  ought  to  be  very  much  di- 
vided, because  it  possessed  many  of  those  means.  And  if 
ambition  is  more  likely  to  be  excited  by  a  considerable  than 
by  a  slender  capacity  to  gratify  itself,  the  idea,  though 
brought  >Yom  Turkev,  would  not  have  been  so  unfavorable 
io  civil  liberty,  as  its  converse,  which  has  constituted  execu- 
tive power,  the  general  or  universal  usurper  of  the  rights  of 
mankind.^ 

Lord  Bolingbroke  oWrxcs,  in  his  Patriot  King,  that  the 
management  of  parliament  by  undertakers,  was  one  of  the 
most  pernicious  violations  of  the  whig  portion  of  the  Eng- 
lish form  of  government.     It  converts  representation  into 

*  The  president  of  t  lie  United  States  is  considered  as  afi  elective  jnonarcn 

.      ■  ■  I   !-'>.  .1'  •■•.   v.  '">,  77 


GOVERNMENT  GV  THE  V.  STATES.  190 

vassalage  to  Hie  leaders  of  parties,  disciplined,  not  by  the 
comparatively  honourable  infliction  of  the  lash,  but  by  the 
base  and  wicked  sophism,  that  it  is  honourable  to  stick  to  a 
party,  and  treacherous  to  adhere  to  conscience.  The  disci- 
ples of  this  infamous  doctrine  are  forged  into  tools  for  am- 
bition and  tyranny  by  praises  and  rewards,  whilst  honesty  is 
discouraged  by  base  epithets,  as  a  foil  to  the  varnish  with 
which  the  decoys  are  painted,  designed  to  deceive  and  en- 
slave the  multitude. 

The  pendulum  of  power  long  vacillated  in  England  be- 
tween whig  and  tory  undertakers,  and  a  gallant  nation  is 
the  victim  of  an  evil  principle.  Walpole,  a  whig  undertak- 
er, erected  the  tory  stock  system,  and  wafted  power  on  the 
pinions  of  Jaw,  from  fruitful  land  to  the  voracious  paper 
kite.  And  to  this  hideous  principle  of  gaining  honour  and 
profit  by  slavery  to  leaders  or  undertakers  in  parliament,  it 
is  owing,  that  the  fluctuations  of  parties  have  produced 
more  harm  than  good  to  the  English  nation. 

The  principle  is  derived  from  executive  power,  which 
infuses  and  rewards  the  base  subserviency,  founded  in 
nourishing  hopes  capable  of  being  gratified,  either  by  the 
possessor  of  that  power,  or  by  some  leader  of  an  opposition, 
when  he  shall  attain  it.  And  the  rewards  are  paid  at  the 
{niblick  expense  for  betraying  the  publiek  good. 

A  reformation  of  the  executive  power  of  the  general 
government,  sufficient  to  prevent  the  custom  ©f  managing 
congress  by  undertakers  from  creeping  into  our  policy, 
would  probably  contribute  more  to  the  safety,  prosperity 
and  happiness  of  the  United  States,  than  any  other  amend- 
ment of  the  constitution,  a  reformation  excepted,  capable  of 
producing  a  real  militia.  Only  two  modes  of  effecting  it 
suggest  themselves  ;  one  to  reduce  the  'patronage  cf  a  presi- 
dent beneath  a  capacity  lor  creating  these  undertakers  ;  the 
other,  to  shorten  the  time  of  his  service,  and  make  him  for 
ever  ineligible  to  the  same  office,  to  diminish  his  motives  for 
doing  it.  This  latter  mode  v.  ould  rapidly  provide  an  exec! 
lent  fund  for  members  of  congress  in  v.  body  of  ex-presi- 


200  THE  EVIL  MORAL  PRINCIPLES  OF  THE 

dents,  under  no  temptation  to  become  undertakers  them- 
selves, able  from  their  experience  to  detect  other  undertak- 
ers, and  shedding  upon  congress  the  knowledge,  integrity 
and  independence,  derived  from  its  consular  members  by 
the  Roman  Senate,  which,  whilst  the  rotation  of  the  consular 
office  lasted,  was  able  to  render  even  an  aristocracy  illus- 
trious. 

Executive  secrecy  is  one  of  the  monarchical  customs, 
plausibly  defended,  and  certainly  fatal  to  republican  gov- 
ernment, either  in  an  aristocrat ical  or  democratical  form. 
Had  the  senate  of  Rome  suffered  their  consuls  to  hide  the 
foreign  negociations  under  secrecy,  or  legislated  upon  the 
credit  of  their  recommendation,  without  thorough  informa- 
tion, even  aristocratical  wisdom  would  sooner  have  fallen 
under  executive  prowess.  The  essential  principle  of  our 
policy  being  the  division  of  power,  whatever  shall  convert 
one  primary  division  of  power  into  an  instrument  of  another, 
unites  and  consolidates  the  means  of  usurpation  in  exact  vi- 
olation of  it,  and  substitutes  the  evil  moral  principle  of  an 
accumulation  of  power,  for  its  division.  The  president, 
who  shall  be  able  to  bring  congress  into  the  practice  of 
legislating  upon  a  confidence  in  his  recommendations,  with- 
out a  thorough  knowledge  of  the  subject,  will  extend  the 
custom  of  managing  congress  by  undertakers,  exercise  by 
their  aid  the  legislative  power,  and  gradually  provide  the 
most  ample  funds  for  rewarding  their  services;  a  British 
end,  to  which  executive  secrecy  inevitably  leads.  How  can 
national  self  government  exist  without  a  knowledge  of  na- 
tional affairs  ?  or  how  can  legislatures  be  wise  or  indepen- 
dent, who  legislate  in  the  dark  upon  the  recommendation  of 
one  man  ? 

Executive  secrecy  furnishes  double  means  for  corrupt- 
ing, nor  are  the  offerings  to  vanity  less  greedily  accepted, 
than  those  to  avarice.  Intoxicated  bv  the  incense  of  the 
one,  men  arc  prepared  for  the  seduction  of  the  other  ;  nor 
will  they  hesitate  to  extend  executive  patronage  at  the  na- 
tional expense,  when  they  consider  the  wisdom  and  disc vi mi- 


GOVERNMENT  OF  THE  tf.  STATES.  iSGt 

nation  in  the  disposition  of  secrets,  as  a  pledge  for  the  same 
degree  of  wisdom  in  the  disposition  of  money. 

It  is  in  vain  to  expect  civil  liberty  from  the  principle 
which  has  universally  destroyed  religious.  Benefices  are 
the  cause  of  political  as  well  as  of  religious  factions  and  par- 
ties, and  if  one  man  distributes  them,  he  becomes  a  pope  or  a 
monarch.  These  plunge  hereticks  into  flames,  and  patri- 
ots into  prisons  ;  these  beget  the  persecutions  of  sectarism 
and  the  intolerance  of  ftiction  ;  and  both  the  holders  and 
seekers  of  these  universally  resort  to  reason  or  sophistry, 
to  truth  or  falsehood,  not  to  advance  the  publick  good,  but 
for  selfish  ends  and  private  emolument.  If  a  handful  of 
guineas  thrown  among  a  mob,  or  a  mountain  of  dollars  ex- 
posed to  be  scrambled  for  by  a  nation,  would  produce  good 
order  and  secure  a  respect  for  the  rights  of  others,  then 
happiness  and  liberty  may  be  reasonably  expected  from  a 
mountain  of  executive  patronage.  Divide  this  mountain, 
and  it  becomes  a  wholesome  circulating  medium,  doing  good 
like  a  divided  priesthood  ;  undivided,  like  an  accumulation 
of  the  whole  national  coin  by  one  man,  it  falls  upon  ann 
crushes  popular  rights. 

I  have  not  entered  into  a  discrimination  between  cxeeu 
tive  and  legislative  powers,  because  I  know  of  none  such, 
nor  any  reason  why  war,  peace,  appoint meats  to  office,  or 
the  dispensation  of  publick  money,  should  have  been  counted 
in  the  catalogue  of  the  former,  except  the  efiicaey  of  these 
powers  in  one  man,  for  begetting  tyranny ;  or  except  an 
imitation  of  the  English  government  derived  from  former 
habitual  opinions.  In  Europe  we  find  executive  power,  at 
all  places  and  periods,  legislating  by  proclamations  ;  in  the 
government  of  the  United  States  the  European  allotment  is 
frequently  departed  from,  and  in  many  of  the  states  entire- 
ly disregarded.  The  remark  is  made  merely  to  suggest  to 
the  reader,  that  it  is  not  an  element  like  water,  naturally 
returning  by  fluidity  or  evaporation  to  a  homogeneous  mass, 
but  capable  of  being  divided  and  assigned  in  such  managea- 
ble allotments,  as  society  may  determine  to  be  best  for  its 


202  THE  EVIL  MORAL  PRINCIPLES  OF  THE 

liberty  and  happiness.  Filmer's  divine  origin  of  kings,  Mr. 
Adams's  natural  origin  of  noble  orders,  and  the  doctrine  of 
judicial  independency  (on  God  and  conscience  excepted)  are 
equally  pious,  equally  wise,  equally  in  concord  with  the 
qualities  of  human  nature,  and  equally  calculated  to  secure 
human  liberty.  Each  goes  as  far  as  possible  towards  mak- 
ing Gods  of  men. 

A  period  existed  in  the  progress  of  the  English  govern- 
ment, during  which  an  effort  was  made  to  diminish  the  pow- 
er of  the  king.  Judicial  power  was  in  the  list  of  feudal 
usurpations.  The  king,  having  the  right  of  judging,  exer- 
cised it  by  a  deputy,  dependent  on  his  will.  But  the  other 
orders  stript  the  king  of  this  branch  of  feudal  power,  and 
succeeded  in  transferring  the  dependence  of  the  judges  from 
one  order  to  three. 

The  term  "  independence,"  as  applied  to  judges  in  Eng- 
land, cannot  refer  to  the  sovereign  power,  because  they  are 
dependent  on  the  will  of  the  parliament.  The  doctrine  it 
inculcates,  therefore,  does  not  extend  beyond  the  idea  of 
their  independence  of  any  power  inferior  to  the  sovereignty. 
The  sovereignty  in  the  scheme  of  balanced  orders,  as  in 
England,  does  not  rest  in  one  order,  but  in  three  ;  the  judg- 
es were  considered  as  dependent,  whilst  they  were  exclu- 
sively subjected  to  the  will  of  one  order,  the  king ;  and  as 
independent,  when  subjected  to  the  will  of  the  parliament, 
the  sovereignty  itself;  because  an  exclusive  subjection  to 
the  will  of  the  sovereign,  is  the  highest  state  of  indepen- 
dence, of  which  a  subject  or  agent  is  capable.  In  an  equiv- 
alent sense  the  term  is  used  by  our  policy.  The  legislature 
and  executive  shall  be  independent,  not  of  the  sovereignty, 
but  of  any  other  agent  of  the  sovereign's. 

To  effect  the  English  judicial  independence,  the  judges, 
though  named  by  the  king,  are  removable  at  the  pleasure 
of  the  parliament ;  and  our  imitation  of  this  policy,  destroys 
the  subordination  of  judicial  power  to  the  sovereignty,  and 
bestows  a  considerable  influence  over  it  on  an  agent  or  sub- 
ject of  the  sovereignty.     The  president  creates  judges,  an^ 


GOVERNMENT  OF  THE  U.  STATES.  20S 

may  corrupt  them  by  additional  offices ;  and  the  sovereign- 
ty cannot  displace  them. 

Several  political  caricatures  arise  out  of  these  facts. 
Responsibility  is  an  essential  principle  of  representative 
government ;  the  English  monarchy  enforces  it  on  judicial 
power,  and  the  representative  policy  of  the  United  States 
dispenses  with  it. 

Division  of  power  is  a  republican,  and  not  a  monarchi- 
cal principle.  The  English  policy  divides  and  diminishes 
the  power  of  the  king  to  appoint  judges,  by  investing  the 
parliament  with  a  right  to  remove  them ;  our  constitution 
magnifies  the  power  of  appointment,  by  withholding  any 
correspondent  mode  of  removal. 

Self  government,  by  responsible  representation,  is  the 
essence  of  our  policy ;  the  sovereignty  of  orders  in  Eng- 
land, preserves  its  self  government,  by  the  responsibility  of 
its  judicial  organ  ;  our  national  sovereignty  renounces  self 
government  by  renouncing  a  similar  responsibility.  It  re- 
nounces sovereignty  itself,  which  cannot  exist  in  association 
with  a  superior  or  an  equal.  Ancient  hierarchy  and  aris- 
tocracy, never  claimed  the  privilege  of  independence  of  the 
sovereignty,  except  under  the  sanction  of  a  commerce  with 
Heaven,  and  a  descent  from  the  Gods.  Are  the  integrity 
and  wisdom  of  judges  also  of  divine  right,  and  entitled  to 
exaltation  above  nations  ?  Or,  are  they  subject  to  frailty, 
and  liable  to  prejudice  and  errour  ?  Political  offences  have> 
I  believe,  been  generally  decided  conformably  to  the  politic 
eal  complexion  of  the  bench. 

The  people  were  supposed  to  be  the  only  source  for  al- 
tering the  constitution,  according  to  our  policy  ;  but  it  is  ex* 
posed  to  a  power  of  construction,  not  responsible  to  the 
people. 

Legislative,  executive  and  judicial  powers  shall  be  sepa- 
rate and  distinct ;  yet  the  judges  can  abolish  or  make  law 
by  precedent. 

The  president  has  a  negative  ;  it  shall  however  be  con- 
trolled by  two  thirds  of  congress  :  but  the.  negative  of  tb« 


204  THE  EVIL  MORAL  PRINCIPLES  OF  THE 

*  president  maybe  revived  by  a  control  of  the  judges  over 
the  control  of  two  thirds. 

"  AH  legislative  powers"  are  given  to  certain  function- 
aries ;  the  extent  of  this  power,  has  suggested  the  propriety 
of  making  them  responsible ;  yet  the  judicial  power,  in  its 
capacity  to  disallow  or  repeal  the  acts  of  the  legislature,  is 
made  a  greater  legislative  power :  has  the  extent  of  this 
power  also  suggested  the  propriety  of  making  judges  irres- 
ponsible ? 

*'  Congress  may  from  time  to  time"  establish  new  courts  t 
can  the  old  supreme  court  abolish  them,  by  declaring  the 
law  to  be  unconstitutional  ? 

Enforcement  of  law  is  the  judicial  province  ;  every  new 
law  is  an  accumulation  of  duty  ;  refinements  of  the  new  in- 
vented idea  of  judicial  independence,  demand  protection  co- 
extensively  against  an  accumulation  of  duty,  as  against  a 
diminution  of  salary  ;  it  is  a  principle,  therefore,  capable  of 
putting  a  sudden  stop  to  legislation,  unless  new  courts  are 
regularly  created,  to  encounter  the  burden  of  enforcing  new 
laws. 

But  if  judicial  power  may  assail  legislative,  by  disallow- 
ing laws  ;  legislative  power  may  revenge  itself  upon  judicial, 
bv  impeachments  and  convictions ;  and  the  station  of  ex 
ecutive  power  between  these  combatants,  contains  an  ability 
to  keep  up  the  war,  until  both  are  worried  and  discredited, 
so  as  to  thrive  upon  their  ruins. 

Under  the  English  monarchy,  this  speeies  of  responsi- 
bility, impeachment,  also  exists;  but  a  joint  parliamentary 
vote  contains  another  species  of  responsibility,  infinitely 
more  valuable  ;  yet  both  have  been  unable  in  England  to 
shield  judicial  against  the  influence  of  executive  power, 
arising  from  its  patronage  in  appointing  and  promoting 
judges.  Here,  the  same  patronage  is  created,  and  the 
strongest  of  these  securities  against  its  effects,  abolished. 

Had  the  responsibility  arising  from  impeachment  been 
formed  sufficient  in  England,  the  tenure  of  royal  pleasure 
\?ould  simply  have  been  exchanged  for  ti  at  <>f  good  beha 


GOVERNMENT  01?  THE  V.  STATES.  2\>S 

viour;  but  its  insufficiency,  suggested  an  exchange  of  a 
complete  dependency  upon  the  Avill  of  the  king,  for  a  com- 
plete dependency  upon  the  will  of  the  sovereignty. 

The  reason  is  obvious.  The  functionaries  in  every  con- 
siderable branch  of  government,  may  innocently  injure  a  na- 
tion. Erroneous  opinion  is  not  less  injurious  because  it  is 
honest.  Impeachment  is  a  remedy  for  crime  :  the  will  of 
the  sovereignty,  for  errour.  The  English  sovereignly  has 
a  resource  both  against  crime  and  errour ;  the  sovereignty 
of  the  United  States  is  content  with  a  bad  remedy  against 
crime,  and  no  remedy  against  errour. 

A  defect  of  talents  disclosed  by  trial ;  imbecility  of 
mind  or  body  produced  by  age  or  malady  ;  a  construction  of 
the  constitution  favourable  to  a  gradual  revolution  ;  might 
each  produce  great  evils  :  but  impeachment  could  not  re- 
move them.  If  an  indefinite  adoption  of  the  common  law  of 
England  should  contain  a  magazine  of  tools,  for  working 
gradually  towards  the  English  policy,  impeachment  is  in- 
sufficient to  countermine  the  work.  For  although  the  judg- 
es should  deem  it  criminal  in  private  citizens,  to  express 
houest  apprehensions  of  a  tendency  towards  monarchy  ;  yet 
the  injustice  and  impolicy  of  considering  honest  judicial 
opinion  as  criminal,  although  infected  by  that  tendency, 
might  still  be  demonstrated. 

Opinion,  which  makes,  disallows  or  construes  law,  in 
pronouncing  judgements,  maybe  excessively  injurious  to  na- 
tions and  individuals,  and  perfectly  innocent;  or  it  may 
conceal  criminal  designs  under  an  appearance  of  innocence, 
beyond  the  possibility  of  detection  and  punishment. 

Is  a  national  subjection  to  opinions,  innocent  but  mis- 
chievous, or  criminal  but  apparently  honest,  consistent  with 
national  sovereignty  or  self  government  ?  If  so,  self  gov- 
ernment must  hereafter  be  defined  "  a  submission  to  frau- 
dulent or  erroneous  opinions.'*  A  subjection  to  one  of  these 
classes,  is  a  subjection  to  both,  because  there  is  no  test  for 
separating  them. 


306  THE  EVIL  MORAL  PRINCIPLES  OP  THE 

Legislative  and  executive  opinions,  neither  claim  or  pos- 
sess this  pre-eminent  state  of  insubordination.  Though  in- 
nocent and  honest,  though  delivered  on  oath,  they  are  con- 
trolled by  national  will.  But  the  instant  an  individual  is 
removed  from  the  legislative  or  executive  departments  into 
the  judicial,  his  nature  is  supposed  to  have  been  regenerated, 
his  errours  are  sanctified,  his  intrigues  are  overlooked,  and 
his  responsibility  commuted  for  the  universal  refuge  of  im- 
posture, «<  God  and  his  own  conscience." 

And  yet  history  abounds  with  the  political  intrigues  and 
oppressions  of  judicial  power,  in  favour  of  revolution,  usur- 
pation and  tyranny.  These  display  the  insufficiency  of  im- 
peachment for  the  correction  of  crimes,  to  be  almost  equiv- 
alent to  its  incompetency  for  the  correction  of  errour.  Ju- 
dicial power  is  placed  beyond  the  reach  of  prosecution  from 
an  individual.  It  can  ally  itself  with  a  branch  of  govern- 
ment. And  impeachment  is  in  practice  more  frequently  a 
weapon  with  which  factions  assail  each  other,  than  the 
avenger  of  crimes. 

Law  is  nearer  to  the  sovereign  will,  than  the  construc- 
tion of  law,  and  is  therefore  more  likely  to  correspond  with 
it ;  but  admitting  that  a  power  of  construing  is  nearly  equiv- 
alent to  a  power  of  legislating ;  why  should  construction  of 
law  be  quite  independent  of  sovereign  will,  when  law  itself 
is  made  completely  subservient  to  it?  In  England,  if  judi- 
cial power  opposes  the  will  of  sovereign  power,  by  its  pow- 
er of  construing  laws,  the  sovereign  power  can  change  its 
organs.  In  America,  judicial  power  is  increased,  and  its 
responsibility,  compared  with  a  monarchical  standard,  di- 
minished. Our  constitutions  and  sovereignty  as  well  as 
laws,  may  be  moulded  or  undermined  by  an  immoveable 
power  of  construction.  Here  the  power  of  construction  is 
a  supremacy  over  the  legislature  and  the  sovereign  ;  in 
England,  the  power  of  removing  judges  by  the  parliament, 
is  a  supremacy  of  the  sovereign  and  the  legislature  over  the 
power  of  construction.  A  right  to  legislate,  subject  to  an 
insubordinate  right  to  construe  and  apply,  inverts  responsi- 


GOVERNMENT  OF  THE  U.  STATES.  207 

bility,  by  creating  an  allegiance  of  law  to  judgement,  in  place 
of  an  allegiance  of  judgement  to  law. 

But  judicial  power,  being  in  its  nature  didactick  and 
imbecile,  is  incapable  of  constituting  a  sovereign  ;  and  is 
uniformly  induced  by  a  consciousness  of  this  incapacity,  to 
ally  itself  with  some  other  power.  The  executive,  which 
appoints,  promotes,  and  patronises  judicial  power;  which 
wields  the  sword,  and  keeps  the  key  of  the  treasury,  is  un- 
exceptionably  that  ally.  The  necessity  for  this  alliance  is 
demonstrated  in  the  consideration,  that  legislative  power 
must  be  in  collision  with  judicial,  because  its  territories  only 
can  be  invaded  by  construction.  An  alliance  is  not  formed 
with  a  natural  enemy.  In  alliances,  the  weak  party,  sub- 
mits to  the  strong  one ;  whatever  share  of  power  an  insu- 
bordinate judiciary  may  acquire,  will  therefore  become  sub- 
servient to  executive  designs. 

Judicial  power  has  universally  been  considered  as  be- 
longing to  municipal,  and  not  to  political  law.  Its  func- 
tions relate  to  individuals,  and  not  to  nations.  In  the  prin- 
ciples of  governments,  it  is  not  assigned  a  place.  Mr. 
Adams  compounds  his  political  system  of  the  principles  of 
monarchy,  aristocracy  and  democracy  ;  and  perfects,  as  he 
imagines,  his  checks  and  balances,  without  making  the  least 
use  of  judicial  power.  And  that  this  idea  is  correct,  its 
subordination  to  law,  and  its  being  invariably  the  instru- 
ment of  political  power,  held  by  a  nation,  a  government,  a 
faction,  or  an  individual,  are  strong  illustrations.  In  revo- 
lutions it  follows,  but  never  leads. 

It  is  questionable,  therefore,  whether  it  was  the  intention 
of  the  general,  or  any  state  government,  to  erect  judicial 
power  into  a  political  department,  by  inferences  to  be  inge- 
niously drawn  from  the  ideas  of  its  independence,  and  the 
dependence  of  legislatures  upon  constitutions.  The  lines 
of  a  power  to  mould  laws  and  constitutions  without  respon- 
sibility, into  the  endless  forms  within  the  reach  of  construc- 
tion, would  have  been  distinctly  expressed,  and  not  left  to 
be  traced  from  a  single  word  of  hieroglyphical  obscurity. 


208  THE  EVIL  MORAL  PRINCIPLES  OF  THE 

But  judicial  power  has  seized  upon  a  quality  peculiar  to 
the  American  policy?  to  transform  itself  into  a  political  de- 
partment, and  to  extend  its  claims  far  beyond  precedent. 
All  our  governments  are  limited  agencies  ;  others  are  uni- 
versally or  generally  unlimited  sovereignties.  Legislation, 
under  our  policy,  is  subject  to  constitutional  restrictions ; 
according  to  the  policy  of  other  nations,  it  is  the  expression 
of  the  sovereign's  will.  In  one  case,  legislation,  which  ex- 
ceeds its  agency  or  violates  constitutional  limits,  is  void  ;  in 
the  other,  such  an  excess  cannot  happen.  Being  void,  no 
publick  functionary  or  private  citizen  ought  to  execute  it; 
therefore  judges,  jurymen  or  officers  of  any  other  descrip- 
tion, are  bound  to  determine  whether  the  instrument  ex- 
hibited to  them  as  law,  be  law.*  But  all  these  descrip- 
tions of  persons  are  bound  by  the  laws  of  sovereign  govern- 
ments, and  have  no  power,  direct  or  indirect,  to  determine 
upon  the  validity  of  a  law.  None  of  them,  therefore,  can  be- 
come a  political  department.  Whereas,  if  the  judges  of  the 
United  States  can  acquire  the  exclusive  right  of  declaring  a 
law  void,  without  any  responsibility  or  mode  of  defeating 
the  declaration,  they  must  become  a  political  department  of 
great  importance.  An  intention  of  creating  judicial  power 
into  a  political  department,  as  a  barrier  against  legislative 
usurpation,  is  the  inference  drawn  by  itself,  from  its  right 
to  refuse  to  execute  unconstitutional  laws;  but  this  right 
belongs  to  juries,  to  officers,  and  to  every  citizen.  It  flows 
from  the  limited  nature  of  our  governments,  contrived,  not 
to  increase  the  power  of  judges  or  juries,  but  to  secure  the 
sovereignty  of  the  people.  This  would  not  be  secured,  by 
inferring  from  the  limitation  of  legislative  power  elected  by 
the  people,  an  unlimited  judicial  power  not  elected  by  the 
people.  To  distrust  and  limit  responsible  and  removable 
agents,  and  trust  without  limit  irresponsible  and  immovea- 
ble, could  never  have  been  intended. 

*  If. this  reasoning1  is  correct,  the  courts  erred  in  forbidding' juries  to  con- 
sider the  constitutionality  of  the  sedilion  law.  It  was  not  a  question  as  to 
+he  construction  of  the  law,  but  whether  it  was  really  law  or  not. 


GOVERNMENT  OF  THE  V.  STATES,         20? 

In  the  states,  judicial  power  is  secured  against  executive' 
influence  in  several  modes.  In  two  only,  can  a  single  will 
appoint  judges  ;  in  these,  they  are  removable  by  an  address 
of  two  thirds  of  the  legislature,  and  the  governour  is  elect- 
ed  only  for  two  years  immediately  by  the  people :  in  the 
others,  judges  are  appointed  by  numerous  and  popular 
bodies,  which  can  plant  republican  principles  on  the  bench, 
and  invigorate  them  after  they  are  planted.  This  fact,  both 
demonstrates  the  publiek  disapprobation  of  the  judicial  sys- 
tem of  the  general  government,  and  discloses  a  remedy 
against  its  becoming  an  executive  implement. 

And  this  remedy  is  sufficient,  if  we  exclude  the  idea  of 
tonverting  judicial  power  into  a  political  department.  This 
is  only  attainable  by  bestowing  publiek  confidence  upon  ju- 
dicial power,  and  publiek  confidence  can  never  be  purchased, 
except  by  actual  responsibility.      We  here  detect  the  false 
construction  of  the  term  "  independence."     The  indepew* 
dence,  dignity  or  power  of  an  agent,  is  reflected  from  the 
confidence  and  power  of  his  principal.      By  depriving  the 
agent  of  this  confidence,  you  rob  him  of  his  independence. 
No  sovereign  will  confide  in  agents,  not  responsible  to  him  ; 
and  therefore  judicial  independence  of  sovereign  power,  is' 
the  destruction  of  genuine  judicial  independence. 

In  England,  the  independence  of  judicial  power  was  pro- 
duced, by  delivering  it  from  the  influence  of  executive  pow- 
er, and   exalting  it   to  a  dependence  upon  the  will  of  the 
sovereign  ;  in   the  United  States,  the  independence  of  ju- 
dicial power  is  destroyed,  by  delivering  it  from  the  will  of 
the  sovereign,  and  degrading  it   nearly  to   the   level  from 
whence  it  was  raised  in  England  ;  it  will  therefore  become 
the  implement  of  executive  power,   for  want  of  the   confi- 
dence and  support,  begotten  by  a  dependence  on  the  sove- 
reign, as  it  was  in  England  on  account  of  the  same  defect. 
Thus  we  are  conducted  to    the  only  mode  of  exalting 
judicial  power  into  a  political  department,  which  would  be 
eon  Corn  -able  to  our  principle  of  division,     It  can  only  be 
effected  by  bestowing  upon  it   the  publiek  confidence,  and 
that  can  only  be  bestowed  by  responsibility  to  the  publiek. 

28 


$10  THE  EVIL  MOKJLL  PRINCIPLES  OF  THE 

Disunited  from  the  sovereign  power,  by  the  appointment 
and  patronage  of  one  of  its  creatures,  it  will  reap  the  dis- 
trust and  contempt  of  the  nation,  who  will  never  transfer 
to  judicial  power,  thus  degraded  or  corrupted,  any  portion 
of  their  confidence,  from  a  legislature,  elective  and  respon- 
sible ;  just  as  the  Lords  and  Commons  of  England  suspected 
and  despised  the  judges,  so  long  as  they  were  under  the  in- 
fluence of  the  king. 

Dependence  upon  the  sovereign  power,  is  the  only  spe- 
cies of  independence,  of  which  judicial  power  is  capable. 
If  it  is  deprived  of  this  species  of  independence,  it  invariably 
becomes  a  dependant  or  instrument  of  some  other  power. 
Deprived,  under  our  policy,  of  a  dependence  on  the  nation, 
judicial  power  has  no  other  alternative,  but  to  become  a 
dependant  of  legislative  or  executive  power.  It  is  too  weak 
to  set  up  for  itself.  In  the  states,  it  has  been  subjected  to 
legislative  power ;  under  the  general  constitution,  to  execu- 
tive ;  and  if  ever  a  president  should  attempt  to  acquire  mo- 
narchical authority,  judicial  power  must  therefore  second 
his  designs. 

The  independence  and  strength  of  power,  in  every  sec- 
tion of  our  policy,  is  in  proportion  to  their  dependence  on 
the  people.  This  term,  being  applied  indiscriminately,  to 
legislative,  executive  and  judicial  power,  does  not  admit  of 
a  contradictory  construction  in  relation  to  either,  so  as  to 
have  the  double  effect,  of  admitting  the  dependence  of  two 
departments  or  two  objects  of  the  same  word,  on  the  sove- 
reignty, and  denying  it  as  to  the  third. 

Out  of  the  principles  of  division  and  responsibility  to  the 
nation,  has  arisen  the  idea  of  one  political  agent  being  in- 
dependent of  another.  Dependence  of  one  agent  on  another, 
would  be  an  accumulation,  not  a  division  of  power,  and  pow- 
er is  not  made,  responsible,  by  its  accumulation.  Indepen- 
dence of  the  nation,  is  at  least  equally  inconsistent  with  the 
principles  of  division  and  responsibility.  It  is  the  same 
raft  which  once  defended  judicial  dependence  on  a  king^ 
which  now  defends  judicial  independence  of  the    nation* 


GOVERNMENT  01?  THE  V.  STATES.  211 

The  end  ot'both  doctrines  is  to  destroy  the  best  pledges  for 
civil  liberty,  namely,  division  of  power,  and  responsibility  to 
nations. 

Independence  of  one  agent  of  another,  was  not  invented 
to  strengthen,  and  so  render  power  insubordinate  to  the 
national  will;  but  to  weaken  it,  for  the  exact  contrary  pur- 
pose. To  glide  the  judicial  power,  under  a  misapprehension 
of  this  single  word,  into  a  state  of  insubordination  topublick 
will,  into  a  sovereign  power  over  law  and  constitution  ;  and 
into  a  dependence  on  executive  power,  contrary  to  the  poli- 
cy the  word  has  been  used  to  impress,  is  one  of  those  er- 
rours,  overlooked  on  account  of  its  excessive  visibility. 

A  sovereignty  over  the  constitution,  objectionable  as  it 
would  still  be,  would  be  safer  in  the  legislature,  than  in  the 
judiciary,  because  of  its  duennial  responsibility;  and  be- 
cause it  would  not  naturally  devolve  from  the  legislature 
upon  the  president ;  but  an  excessive  power  in  weak  hand;*, 
inevitably  becomes  vicarious. 

But  if  judicial  power  can  be  erected  into  a  political  de- 
partment, capable  of  restraining  deviations  from  the  con- 
stitution by  the  legislature,  it  would  probably  contribute  to- 
wards the  preservation  of  our  policy.  Publick  opinion  h 
now  the  only  legitimate  guardian  of  obedience  to  the  consti* 
tution ;  its  sloth  and  inattention,  invites  and  overlook* 
aberrations  from  it, amounting  to  a  tendency,  which  a  watch- 
ful political  judiciary  would  detect  and  control  :  whilst  pub- 
lick  opinion  would  still  retain  its  sovereignty  unimpaired, 
and  act  as  forcibly  as  at  present.  And  a  division  of  the 
national  confidence  between  the  legislature  and  judiciary, 
would  carry  a  degree  farther  the  principle  of  dividing  pow- 
er ;  but  this  can  never  happen,  so  long  as  one  is  subordinate, 
and  the  other  insubordinate  to  national  will. 

There  is  a  manifest  distinction  between  a  political  ami 
municipal  department ;  and  judicial  power,  to  constitute  ei- 
ther, must  have  its  attributes.  An  origin  from  the  sove- 
reignty and  independence  of  any  other  department,  are  at- 
tributes of  a  political  department  ;  hut  a  municipal  depart- 


M%  THE  EVIL  MOIIA.L  PRINCIPLE9  OF  THE 

inent,  is  a  snere  detail  of  law  ;  and  a  strict  submission  to 
law,  its  inseparable  quality.  The  attribute  of  a  political 
department  is  destroyed,  by  an  origin  from  or  an  influence 
by  another  department ;  and  the  quality  of  a  municipal  de- 
partment is  destroyed  by  an  independence  of  the  legislature 
and  sovereignty  :  a  judiciary  thus  situated,  is  a  non-descript 
legal  or  political  being.  The  independence  of  a  political 
department,  cannot  exist  in  an  executive  creature  ;  nor  can  a 
genuine  and  useful  enforcement  of  law,  flow  from  an  inde- 
pendence of  the  sovereign  power. 

Let  us  illustrate  the  idea  by  a  supposition.  The  Eng- 
lish sovereignty  is  lodged  in  the  parliament.  The  sove- 
reignty and  the  legislature  is  the  satne.  Judicial  power  is 
considered  as  a  mere  municipal  detail.  It  is  therefore  sub- 
ject to  the  will  of  this  sovereign  legislature,  and  has  no  pow- 
er to  disallow  a  law,  or  change  the  constitution.  Here  is 
consistency.  But  suppose  this  sovereignty  and  legislature 
could  neither  appoint  nor  remove  judges;  that  they  were 
approved  and  tried  by  the  House  of  Commons,  being  nomi- 
nated by  their  speaker,-  and  that  they  could  repeal  or  make 
law  and  constitution  by  precedents  :  are  not  the  conse- 
quences appareut  ?  The  English  parliamentary  sovereign 
would  lose  the  power  of  self  government ;  the  judges  would 
cling  to  the  commons,  they  would  undermine  the  sovereign- 
ty of  orders,  and  would  gradually  convert  it  into  a  repre- 
sentative democracy.      Such  is  our  case.      Neither  national 

mi 

sovereignty,  nor  legislative  power,  nor  popular  represen- 
tation, appoints,  has  a  power  over,  or  influences  the  judges. 
They  are  under  no  responsibility  to  act  according  to  the 
will  of  our  sovereignty,  or  of  our  legislature.  They  are 
nominated  by  the  president,  and  approved  and  tried  by  the 
senate ;  and  they  make  or  repeal  law  and  constitution  by 
precedents.  Therefore  they  are  under  the  same  influence 
to  undermine  the  popular  sovereignty,  as  the  supposed  judg- 
es would  be  to  undermine  a  monarchical  sovereignty,  or  a 
sovereignty  of  orders.  Can  a  judicial  independency  of  the 
Imeriean  sovereignty,  prevent  the  introduction  of  monar- 


GOVERNMENT  OF  THE  U.  STATES.  21S 

ehical  principles,  because  a  judicial  dependency  upon  the 
English  sovereignty,  prevents  the  introduction  of  repub- 
lican ? 

Judicial  power  has  never  appeared  in  any  political  sys- 
tem, completely  independent  of  the  sovereign  power,  ex- 
cept under  the  constitution  of  the  United  States.  Some- 
times it  is  dependent  on  a  monarch,  at  others,  on  a  govern- 
ment or  on  the  people  ;  in  England,  it  is  controllable  with- 
out delay  or  trial  by  the  sovereign  will.  In  our  state  gov- 
ernments its  tenure  is  various ;  but  these  varieties  unite  in 
the  common  end,  of  some  species  of  responsibility  to  the 
sovereign.  In  Connecticut,  judges  have  been  elected  by 
the  legislature  for  very  short  periods  during  two  centuries, 
and  their  integrity  or  responsibility  has  never  produced 
mischief.  And  a  spacious  field  of  comparison  has  appeared 
between  judges  appointed  by  a  single  will,  and  those  chosen 
by  popular  bodies.  The  latter  are  not  thrown  into  the  bach 
ground,  in  point  of  talents,  integrity  or  republicanism. 

A  single  will,  is  more  likely  to  be  seduced  by  dogma  or 
ambition,  and  to  overlook  virtue  in  search  of  engines  to  ad* 
vance  selfish  designs,  than  the  people  or  their  representa- 
tives. If  this  is  not  true,  why  do  we  erect  republican  gov- 
ernments? if  it  is  true,  why  is  it  not  applicable  to  judicial 
appointments  ? 

Where  is  the  difference  in  the  application  of  republican 
principles,  between  legislative  and  judicial  power? 

If  the  office  and  powers  of  a  judge  are  important,  so  are 
those  of  a  legislator.  If  one  may  injure  the  publick,  by 
crime,  incapacity  or  errour,  so  may  the  other.  If  time  and 
trial  may  disclose  defects  in  a  legislator,  so  may  they  in  a 
judge.  If  there  is  a  hardship  in  dismissing  one  without 
trial :  the  same  hardship  readies  the  other.  If  the  tenure 
of  good  behaviour,  or  a  right  to  persevere  for  life  in  con- 
scientious errour,  would  destroy  the  responsibility  6f  a 
legislator,  it  will  destroy  that  of  a  judge.  And  if  legisla- 
tive integrity  and  virtue  are  only  to  be  obtained  by  election 
feftd  responsibility,  judicial  integrity  and  virtue  can  never  be 


214b  THE  EVIL  MORAL  PRINCIPLES  OF  THE 

expected  from  an  insubordinate  power  for  life.  The  power 
of  construing  the  constitution  and  disallowing  law,  possessed 
by  our  judiciary,  being  functions  of  unexampled  judicial 
power,  and  approaching  nearer  to  sovereign  and  legislative, 
power,  than  in  any  former  instance ;  are  considerations 
which  bestow  great  weight  upon  this  parallel. 

Judicial  responsibility  «  to  God  and  conscience,"  is  a 
counterpart  of  the  "  divine  right,"  cheat,  resorted  to  by  in- 
numerable kings,  nobles  and  priests,  to  delude  and  oppress 
mankind.  Our  system  renounces  this  species  of  responsi- 
bility, and  is  founded  upon  the  principle  of  responsibility  to 
the  nation.  Is  this  political  principle  to  be  lost,  and  the 
hostile  principle  of  superstition  substituted  for  it,  by  the  cob- 
webs of  inference  and  construction  ?  Responsibility  to  God 
is  the  sanction  of  religion  ;  what  would  be  the  influence  of 
religious  precept,  if  this  sanction  was  dissolved  ?  Such  as 
will  be  the  influence  of  political  precept  unattended  with 
responsibility  to  the  sovereign. 

Practice,  as  well  as  theory,  sheds  light  upon  tikis  sub- 
ject.    It  affords  endless  materials  to  prove  the  usefulness  of 
judicial  responsibility,  and  to  display  the  force  of  habitual 
prejudices ;  but  we  will  compress  an  idea  of  this  fruitful 
argument  into  the  following  paragraph. 

In  England  and  America,  the  permanency,  of  some  judg- 
es, and  the  fluctuation  of  others;  and  the  appointment  of 
some  by  the  people  or  the  legislature,  and  of  others  by  the 
executive  ;  are  positions  contended  for  by  the  same  persons, 
and  the  same  societies  ;  aad  habit  and  prejudice  can  supply 
the  firmness  with  which  these  contradictions  are  defended. 
"  Judicial  independency"  and  •'  chartered  rights"  are  the 
sounds  which  induce  us  to  fall  into  them.  Corporation 
judges  are  elected  by  the  people  and  periodically  changed  ; 
pat  ion  al  judges  are  appointed  by  the  king,  and  hold  at  the 
will  of  the  parliament.  Charles  the  second  destroyed  char- 
ters, for  the  purpose  of  transferring  from  corporations  to 
himself  the  appointment  of  judges  and  other  officers,  as  a 
prelude  to  despotism.  The  judges  of  the  union  are  appointed 


GOVERNMENT  OF  THE  17.  STATES,         Zlb 

as  Charles  designed  to  appoint  corporation  judges.  His 
mode  for  assailing  liberty,  is  ours  for  defending  it.  As  a 
monarch,  he  wished  to  destroy  the  republican  corporation 
mode  of  appointments  ;  as  a  republick,  we  adopt  the  mode, 
which  Charles  conceived  to  be  monarchical.  A  million  of 
souls  in  London,  and  possibly  nearly  half  that  number  in  our 
towns,  consider  their  elective  judges  as  the  best  guardians 
of  liberty  and  property:  and  the  dismay  of  corporations,  if 
deprived  of  this  chartered  right,  would  be  equal  to  that  of 
the  friends  to  monarchy,  if  national  judges  were  made  elec- 
tive and  responsible.  A  furious  zeal  will  often  exist  in  the 
same  state  and  in  the  same  person  for  elective,  or  periodi- 
cal, or  responsible  state  or  corporation  judges,  and  for  exe- 
cutive, permanent  and  insubordinate  federal  judges.  The 
oase  occurs  among  the  states  of  elective  and  periodical  chan- 
cery judges ;  the  habit  and  prejudice  of  England  and  of  such 
states,  are  both  portrayed  in  this  imitation  ;  property  is  as 
deeply  affected  by  chancery  judges  as  by  law  judges ;  and 
their  power  is  uncontrolled  by  juries.  To  such  habits  and 
prejudices,  and  not  to  reason,  a  few  of  the  states  have  sur- 
rendered our  foundation  principle  of  responsibility,  in  con- 
stituting state  judicial  power,  and  all  of  them  in  the  case  ot 
federal  judicial  power.  Reason  is  an  umpire  feetween  con- 
tradictions, but  she  cannot  reconcile  them. 

Names  cannot  change  man's  nature,  and  cure  him  of  his 
passions  and  vices  ;  if  they  could,  this  discovery  would  have 
superseded  the  necessity  of  all  our  inventions  for  curbing  the 
passions  and  vices  of  publiek  officers,  by  calling  them  judges. 
An  experiment  somewhat  like  this  was  tried  by  the  Jews, 
but  they  gave  it  up  for  monarchy. 

It  is  objected,  that  a  responsible  judge  may  be  intimi- 
dated or  seduced  by  a  faction.  Why  is  not  the  same  objec- 
tion advanced  against  a  responsible  legislature  or  executive  ? 
Because  the  confidence  begotten  by  responsibility,  protects 
these  characters.  Impeachment,  it  is  said,  will  restrain 
the  judge;  will  it  also  protect  him,  and  purchase  naiiona] 
confidence  ?     A  faction  must  rule  the  government,  before  it 


210  THE  EVIL  MORAL  PRINCIPLES  OP  THE 

oan  intimidate  or  corrupt  a  judge  ;  and  will  judges  appoint 
ed  by  it,  patronised  by  it,  and  tried  by  it,  be  safe  against  its 
iniiaence  ?     They  are  placed  within  the  power  of  alternate 
factions,  lest  they  should   be  influenced   by  factions  ;  and 
without  the  power  of  the  nation,  lest  they  should  be  influ- 
enced by  the  nation.     They  fear  party  vengeance,  and  can- 
not expect  national  confidence  or  protection.     If  they  were 
responsible  to  the  sovereignty,   they  would  expect  its  pro- 
tection against  demagogues  and  factions ;  but  if  they  are 
independent  of  the  sovereignty,   they    must    depend  on  the 
faction  which  can  try  and  condemn  them.     A  paper,  theo- 
retic^ didactick  independence  cannot  shield  judges  against 
the  influence  or  corruption  of  a  man  or  a  faction,  possessing 
an  intimidating  or  corrupting  degree  of  power  or  patron- 
age.    If  the  cause  of  the  terror   or  treachery  exists,   the 
terror  or  treachery  naturally  and  inevitably  ensues.     Which 
is  the  best  remedy   against  the  evil ;  to   create  ihe  cause, 
and   to  underwrite   the  «  judges  shall  be  independent  of 
this  cause  of  terror  or  corruption,"  or  to  forbear  to  create 
it?     If  the  national  confidence  and  protection  through  the 
medium  of  responsibility  is  added  to  this  forbearance,  it  is 
probable,  that  judicial  integrity,  the  object  in  quest,  will  be 
well  secured.     If  a  liability  to  impeachment  is  a  security 
for  this  integrity,  why  is  it  not  exclusively  relied  on  to  pro- 
duce legislative  integrity?     If  a  responsibility  to  the  sove- 
reign power,  exposes  integrity  to  the  influence  of  an  indi- 
vidual or  a  faction,  why  is  the  legislature  thus  exposed  ? 

A  deviation  from  one  principle  is  the  road  leading  to 
another.  Being  taught  that  the  insubordination  of  judicial 
power,  will  wash  away  human  vices  and  passions,  and  that 
national  opinion  will  corrupt  it;  we  shall  no  longer  consider 
this  opinion  as  the  most  incorruptible  species  of  political 
jury,  and  the  ouly  safe  guardian  of  liberty  and  property. 
And  our  respect  for  the  basis  of  our  policy  being  once  weak- 
ened, it  will  be  gradually  undermined,  by  diminishing  the 
responsibility  of  legislative  and  executive  power,  until  we 


GOVERNMENT  OF  THE  V.  STATES.  217 

come  to  Mr.  Adams's  republick,  composed  of  a  hereditary 
executive  and  senate,  and  of  septennial  election. 

The  absence  of  responsibility  is  an  evil  moral  principle, 
from  which  it  is  impossible  that  good  moral  effects  can  flow. 
And  the  consequences  to  be  expected  from  an  insubordinate 
power,  able  to  knead  and  mould  a  constitution  by  construc- 
tion, disallow  indigenous  law,  introduce  foreign  law,  fine, 
imprison  and  hang ;  and  which  in  the  struggles  of  avarice 
or  ambition  for  wealth  and  power,  must  become  their  in- 
strument ;  forcibly  illustrate  tbe  correctness  of  our  politi- 
cal analysis. 

If,  by  the  intervention  of  electors,  or  in  any  other  mode, 
judicial  power  could  be  made  responsible  to  national  sove- 
reignty, as  are  all  our  political  departments,  it  is  highly 
probable  that  it  might  be  raised  to  the  quality  of  such  a 
department,  with  powers  defined  and  limited  ;  and  that  its 
elevation  might  become  an  important  improvement  of  the 
principle  of  division.  But  a  judicial  sovereignty  over  con 
stitution  and  law,  without  responsibility  to,  the  national 
sovereignty,  is  an  unprincipled  and  novel  anomaly,  unknown 
to  any  political  theory,  and  fitted  to  become  an  instrument 
of  usurpation.  If  judicial  power  was  intended  to  be  advanc- 
ed from  municipal  to  political  quality,  responsibility  ought 
to  have  followed  the  advancement  according  to  the  elements 
of  our  policy;  if  not,  its  quality  is  merely  municipal,  and 
its  claims  of  politieal  rights,  usurpations  drawn  from  the 
limited  nature  of  our  governments,  by  which  judicial  power 
has  constituted  itself  the  guardian  of  all  the  rights  retained 
by  the  people. 

It  resembles  a  legislature  compounded  of  two  branches, 
chambers  or  benches.  The  upper  bench  can  pass  no  judge- 
ment, unless  it  has  been  previously  passed  by  the  lower; 
nor  can  it  alter  the  judgement ■  or  verdict  as  past  by  the  lower; 
like  the  case  of  money  bills  in  England  and  Virginia.  Their 
separate  functions  bear  a  close  analogy  to  the  mode  of" 
legislating  in  England  about  the  thirteenth  century,  wfcen 
the  parliament  prepared  the  abstract  and  the  judges  dilated 

29 


218  TJIE  EVIL  MORAL  PRINCIPLES  OF  THE 

it  into  technical  form.  If  the  matter  of  the  parliament  way 
of  more  importance  than  the  form  given  to  it  by  the  judges, 
juries  are  not  the  least  important  judicial  bench.  By  ad- 
hering repeatedly  to  the  same  verdict,  they  can  force  the 
upper  bench  to  pass  judgements  against  their  opinions ;  they 
can  impose  both  law  and  fact  on  the  upper  bench,  which 
can  impose  no  fact  or  law  upon  them  ;  and  they  judge  really 
and  substantially  in  every  case,  whereas  the  judgement  of  the 
■super  bench  is  in  most  eases  a  mere  formulary  prescribed 
by  their  verdict.  What  better  title  has  one  judicial  bench 
or  chamber,  and  that  the  least  powerful  too,  to  the  epithet 
"judicial,"  than  the  House  of  Lords  in  England,  or  the 
Senate  of  the  United  States,  to  the  epithet  *f  legislative  Vf 
Was  it  intended  to  erect  less  than  a  moiety  of  judicial  power 
into  a  political  department,  and  even  to  endow  this  fragment 
with  an  irresponsible  supremacy  over  the  entire  legislative 
and  executive  departments,  by  giving  it  an  exclusive  power 
to  construe  the  constitution  and  annul  laws  ? 

Our  aukward  imitation  of  English  policy,  and  miscon- 
ception of  its  phrase,  "judicial  independence,"  is  displayed 
in  our  lower  judicial  bench,  as  well  as  in  the  upper.  We 
have  made  one  dependent  on  a  creature  of  our  sovereignty, 
to  avoid  the  old  English  crrour  of  its  dependence  on  a  por- 
tion of  theirs ;  and  the  other  on  the  president  through  his 
marshal,  in  imitation  of  its  English  dependence  through  th<- 
sherifts.  In  striving  to  exalt,  we  have  degraded  the  judicial 
character,  if  it  is  snore  honourable  to  be  dependent  on  the 
third  part  than  on  no  part  of  a  sovereignty.  This  degradation 
as  to  juries  arises  from  our  having  overlooked  them  as  com- 
posing a  portion  of  judicial  iwwer,  because  the  English  over- 
looked a:»d  left  them  under  the  influence  of  the  crown,  when 
they  placed  the  judges  under  the  influence  of  tl.e  sovereignty. 
We  contend,  that  adequate  salaries,  not  to  be  diminished  : 
a  tenure  Vav  life,  only  to  be  lost  by  crime  or  death,  and  not 
by  folly,  ignorance,  incapacity,  lunacy  or  idiocy;  and  a 
complete  exemption  from  the  influence  of  the  sovereign,  are 
all  necessary  to  secure  the  independence  of  judges,  and  we 
expect    the  independence  of  juries,  from   no    salary,   an 


GOVERNMENT  OF  TUB  U.  STATES.  21W 

ephemeral  tenure,  and  the  culling  of  an  administration  party 
spirit  for  each  particular  case. 

It  is  evidently  of  equal  or  superior  importance  to  life, 
liberty  and  properly,  that  juries  should  he  independent  of 
kings,  presidents,  factions,  and  demagogues,  as  that  judges 
should  be  so.  The  verdicts  under  the  sedition  law  were  the 
ground  work  of  the  judgements.  Judges  were  made  inde- 
pendent of  the  crown  iu  England,  because  judgements  were 
made  instruments  of  tyranny.  Verdicts  of  juries  may  be- 
come such  instruments.  A  president  can  select  juries  of 
his  own  faction,  by  his  officer,  the  marshal,  and  infallibly 
mould  political  verdicts. 

The  king  of  England  often  influences  verdicts  by  means 
of  a  sheriff,  less  dependent  on  him,  than  a  marshal  on  the 
president.  The  office  of  sheriff  is  both  less  lucrative  than 
the  office  of  marshal;  one  is  rotary,  and  the  other  capable 
of  continuance  by  the  will  of  the  president.  The  continu- 
ance of  a  great  income  tempts  ;  and  the  certainty  of  return- 
ing speedily  into  private  life,  does  not  deter,  in  the  case  of 
the  marshal.  Accordingly  we  meet  with  many  acquittals  in 
England,  and  with  lew  or  none  in  the  United  States,  m 
prosecutions  under  sedition  laws. 

The  dependence  of  one  judicial  branch  on  the  sovereign- 
ty of  the  country,  is  some  security  against  the  dependence  of 
the  other  on  the  crown;  for  in  England  we  find  judges, 
sometimes  deciding  contrary  to  the  will  of  executive  power, 
.tince  their  dependence  on  the  sovereignty  of  the  country. 

Here,  a  security  against  executive  influence  over  juries, 
is  rendered  more  necessary,  by  the  irresponsibility  of  Uil, 
judges  to  the  sovereignty,  and  none  is  provided.  The  de- 
pendence of  judges  on  the  sovereignty  (the  security  against 
packed  juries,  and  the  source  of  all  those  acts  for  which 
English  judges  have  been  celebrated)  is  both  relinquished 
in  the  United  States,  and  a  provision  i3  also  made  force. 
rupting  or  influencing  them  by  an  additional  office  from  e 
flcutive  power,  in  1km  of  the  parliamentary  vote. 


220  THE  EVIL  MORAL  PRINCIPLES  OF  THE 

By  using- English  words,  and  subverting  English  princi- 
ples, we  have  made  a  judicial  power  independent  of  the 
sovereignty*  and  almost  entirely  dependent  on  executive  will. 
The  jury  branch  is  unequivocally  so  ;  and  the  upper  branch 
is  rendered  more  so  than  in  England,  by  its  independence  of 
the  sovereignty,  and  capacity  to  receive  executive  patron- 
age. And  if  executive  influence  in  England  over  judicial 
power,  sheds  the  blood  of  patriots,  it  is  improbable  that  in 
America  it  will  turn  its  fury  against  traitors  to  patriotism. 
In  shewing  that  by  some  strange  fatality,  the  constitution 
of  the  United  States  had  abandoned  the  precedent  it  intend- 
ed to  copy,  and  violated  the  principle  it  intended  to  estab- 
lish, namely,  "  that  judicial  power  ought  to  be  independent 
of  and  unbiassed  by  executive  power,"  no  use  has  been  made 
of  the  remedy  by  impeachment,  because  it  is  nearly  equiva- 
lent in  both  countries,  but  somewhat  worse  in  the  United 
States.  Neither  the  Senate  nor  the  House  of  Lords  constitutes 
the  sovereignty;  one  represents  a  factitious  being,  called 
states,  the  other  is  itself  a  factitious  being,  called  a  privi- 
leged order.  The  Senate  of  the  United  States  is  a  branch 
of  executive  power,  which  is  not  the  ease  with  the  House  of 
Lords.  It  is  a  party  in  the  appointment  of  the  judges,  it 
has  the  exclusive  privilege  of  trying,  which  is  not  the  case 
with  the  House  of  Lords.  Judicial  responsibility  to  the 
House  of  Lords  was  not  a  sufficient  security  for  the  national 
interest,  because  it  was  only  a  portion  of  the  sovereignty ; 
and  therefore  a  responsibility  to  the  entire  sovereignty  is  pro- 
vided. The  objections  apply  with  five-fold  force  to  the 
Senate  of  the  United  States.  1st.  The  whole  body  is  an 
executive  order,  participating  in  all  important  executive 
functions.  2dly.  The  whole  body  is  an  order  as  represent- 
ing the  factitious  portion  of  tiie  sovereignty  of  the  United 
States,  called  states,  which  from  its  nature  can  only  act  by 
representation,  and  not  in  person,  like  the  factitious  portion 
of  She  English  sovereignty,  called  nobility.  Sdiy.  One  sec- 
tion of  the  Senate  is  composed  of  an  order  or  separate  inte- 
rest, representing  large  states,     itbly.  The  other  sections  of 


UOVEK'.-tfENT  OE  THE  U.  STATES.  321 

an  interest  representing  small  states  ;  and  lastly,  the  Senate, 
constitutes  no  portion  of  the  sovereignty  of  the  United 
States.  As  the  House  of  Lords  would  be  partial  to  judges 
who  had  sacrifieed  the  publick  interest,  to  the  interest  of 
the  noble  order  ;  so  the  Senate  would  be  partial  to  those  who 
had  sacrificed  the  popular  interest,  to  the  interest  of  the 
state  governments.  So  far  the  insufficiency  of  impeach- 
ment to  secure  responsibility  to  the  publick  interest,  is 
equal ;  but  the  four  other  objections  to  the  Senate,  render 
the  insufficiency  of  judicial  responsibility  by  impeachment, 
greater  in  the  United  States  than  in  England,  where  expe- 
rience disclosed  the  necessity  of  an  additional  responsibility 
to  the  whole  sovereignty.  There  is  very  little  difference 
bctAveen  making  judges  responsible  to  the  functionary  who 
nominates  or  who  approves.  They  form  in  union  the  executive 
power  which  appoints.  They  never  thought  in  England  of 
trusting  to  an  impeachment  before  the  king,  for  judicial 
independence  and  integrity.  In  England,  the  effort  has 
been  to  prevent  judges  from  being  responsible  to  the  power 
appointing  them  ;  here,  to  make  them  so.  Against  execu- 
tive influence  over  the  upper  judicial  branch,  we  have  only 
the  security  of  impeachment  before  a  section  of  executive 
power ;  and  against  the  same  influence  over  the  lower 
judicial  branch,  we  have  no  security  at  all.  The  expres- 
sion, "  reserved  to  the  states  or  to  the  people,"  implies  the 
dual  nature  of  the  general  government,  and  each  portion 
ought  to  possess  some  security  over  judicial  power  for  the 
preservation  of  its  reservations.  The  latter  has  none.  The 
former,  one  mingled  with  executive  influence,  party  spirit, 
and  a  remediless  contumacy  of  individuals  for  six  vears. 

The  ineflicacy  of  impeachment  from  its  own  nature,  to 
produce  the  contemplated  responsibility,  has  not  been  stated. 
In  all  political  cases,  it  is  guided  by  party,  faction,  revenge 
or  prejudice.  Sentences  flowing  from  these  sources,  arc 
neither  sustained  by  publick  respect,  nor  calculated  to  pro- 
duce judicial  integrity.  Judges,  to  escape  the  vengeance  of 
impeachment,  must  appease  the  passions  which  inflict  it,  in 
i 


522  THE  EVIL  MORAL  PRINCIPLES  OF  THE 

place  of  consulting  the  publick  good.  As  integrity  is  n«. 
protection,  and  guilt  no  prognostick  of  conviction,  this  ven- 
geance excites  commiseration,  and  procures  respect.  And 
ret,  at  an  epoch  when  the  impeachment  of  judges  has  fallen 
iinto  disgrace  and  disuse  in  England,  where  it  was  invented  ; 
His  exclusively  relied  on  in  the  United1  States,  as  the  reme- 
dy against  the  influence  of  executive  over  judicial  power. 
A  remedy,  in  which  conviction  will  seldom  be  thought  a 
proof  of  guilt. 

It  is  a  policy  founded  in  an  obvious  contradiction.  The 
judges  for  trying  ordinary  and  private  cases,  are  instituted 
for  life,  and  absolved  from  a  subjection  to  the  silent  suffrage 
of  the  whole  sovereignty,  which  might  send  them  quietly 
into  retirement,  without  throwing  the  firebrand  of  impeach- 
ment amidst  the  worst  passions  with  which  society  is  af- 
flicted. But  the  judges  of  the  highest  officers  of  govern- 
ment, and  the  most  important  publick  cases,  are  instituted 
for  only  six  years,  and  subject  to  dismission  by  a  silent  vote 
of  representatives  of  sections  of  the  sovereignty.  If  a  res- 
ponsibility to  one  of  these  sections  by  election,  will  secure 
judicial  integrity  and  independence  in  these  major  cases* 
where  it  is  most  likely  to  fail ;  a  responsibility  to  the  whole 
sovereignty  or  its  representatives,  will  secure  it  in  the  minor 
eases,  where  it  is  less  likely  to  fail.  And  if  the  independ 
and  integrity  of  the  senatorial  judges  is  not  secured 
under  their  periodical  election  by  state  legislatures,  then 
smpeachment  before  judges  without  independence  and  in- 
tegrity, is  no  security  for  the  independence  and  integrity  of 
the  judges  to  be  impeached. 

To  determine  the  propriety  of  leaving  in  the  hands  of 
executive  power,  its  influence  over  judicial,  it  is  necessary 
to  comprehend  what  is  meant  by  judicial  independence.  If 
it  means  that  judicial  power  ought  to  be  independent  of  the 
sovereignty  and  the  government,  and  constituted  into  ap 
umpire  between  these  parties,  to  administer  the  constitution 
to  both  ^  then  the  price  paid  for  it  would  be  the  dependence 
Of  the-uation and  the  government,  upon  judicial  power.  But 


GOVERNMENT  OF  THE  V.  STATES,  225 

Shis  construction  is  violated  by  making  it  responsible  to  a 
section  of  one.  If  it  means,  that  the  judicial  section  of  gov- 
ernment ought  to  be  independent  of  any  other  section,  a 
responsibility  to  the  sovereignty  is  consistent,  and  a  respon- 
sibility to  a  section  of  the  government  inconsistent  Avith  this 
meaning.  To  one  of  these  interpretations,  the  idea  of 
judicial  independence  must  be  confined.  By  the  first,  ju- 
dicial power  Avouid  be  made  despotick ;  by  the  second,  a 
responsibility  to  a  section  of  the  government  is  forbidden, 
because  it  makes  judicial  power  dependent  on  that  section, 
if  a  responsibility  to  the  sovereignty  would  make  it  depend- 
ent on  the  sovereignty.  No  mode  exists  to  avoid  the  di- 
lemma of  one  of  these  constructions,  but  that  of  making 
judges  responsible  to  the  sovereignty  or  its  representative, 
but  independent  of  every  section  of  the  government. 

Legislative  power  could  not  be  independent,  if  legislators 
were  liable  to  impeachment  before  a  court  for  legislative 
acts  ;  yet  it  would  be  equally  so  with  judicial  power,  liable 
to  impeachment  for  judicial  acts  before  the  senate;  and 
legislative  power  is  considered  as  independent,  though  it  is 
dependent  on  the  sovereignty;  demonstrating  that  the  term 
only  implies,  an  independence  of  other  branches  of  the  gov- 
ernment. The  independence  of  judicial  power  is  intended 
to  prevent  its  being  made  an  instrument  of  tyranny  by 
another  branch,  not  to  make  it  a  tyranny  itself.  If  it  is  plac- 
ed beyond  the  coercion  of  sovereignty,  and  made  responsible 
to  another  branch  of  a  sfovernment,  it  is  forced  exactlv  into 
the  instrument  intended  to  be  avoided.  Its  responsibility  to 
the  English  king,  and  independence  of  the  parliament  or 
sovereignty  of  the  country,  made  it  such  an  instrument. 
Had  this  responsibility  been  transferred  from  the  king  to  the 
House  of  Lords,  it  would  have  remained  such  an  instru- 
ment. 

It  has  been  heretofore  denied  that  the  judicial  power 
possessed  an  exclusive  privilege  to  determine  the  constitu- 
tionality of  a  law  ;  and  asserted,  that  juries  and  private  in- 
dividuals participate  in  this  right,  upun  the  grourtd  ef  the 


22-i  THE  EVJL  MORAL  PRINCIPLES  OF  THE 

nullity  of  every  act  by  a  delegated  authority,  not  warranted 
fry  the  delegation.  In  support  of  these  opinions,  we  must 
again  recollect,  that  judges  constitute  but  one  judicial  bench 
or  branch,  and  that  a  verdict  must  be  sent  to  them  bv  the 
jury  bench  before  they  can  make  a  judgement ;  just  as  a  bill 
must  be  sent  by  one  legislative  branch  to  another,  before  it 
can  be  made  a  law.  Are  the  jury  bound  to  draw  and  pass 
this  verdict  without  even  considering  its  constitutionality  ? 
What  would  be  the  complexion  of  a  legislature,  with  one 
branch  under  such  an  obligation  ?  Suppose  the  constitution 
had  expressly  invested  the  court  and  jury  with  a  power  to 
disallow  a  law  by  proclamation  as  void,  and  that  the  court 
had  proclaimed  to  that  effect,  but  the  jury  oppositely.  Even 
if  an  individual  is  tried  for  violating  a  law,  because  he  judg- 
ed it  to  be  unconstitutional,  he  is  acquitted  if  he  judged 
right ;  proving  that,  he  had  a  right  to  judge. 

Hut  although  judicial  power  has  no  right  to  enact  or  re- 
peal law.  yet  it  can  effect  both  erids  to  great  extent  by  its 
judgements  in  private  cases  ;  and  it  has  often  done  so  for  the 
purpose  of  making  political  or  revolutionary  law.  The 
English  judges  destroyed  the  law  of  intails,  to  weaken  the 
power  of  the  nobility,  and  strengthen  the  power  of  the  king. 
The  same  judges  affirmed  a  law  for  extending  the  power  of 
the  House  of  Commons  from  three  years  to  seven,  and  thus 
made  the  only  fragment  of  the  government,  over  which  the 
people  had  a  feeble  power,  independent  of  them.  And  the 
judges  of  the  United  States  have  declared  an  entire  code  of 
laws,  passed  in  a  foreign  nation  some  centuries  before  the  . 
union,  to  be  laws  of  the  union  ;  although  the  constitution  is 
literally  prospective  both  as  to  legislation  and  the  organs  of 
legislation.  Had  our  judges  decided  differently,  their  de- 
cision would  have  repealed  the  common  law  code.  Without 
inquiring  whether  their  decision  is  right  or  wrong,  it  suffi- 
ces for  our  argument  to  shew,  that  such  is  the  connexion 
between  legislating  and  judging,  that  one  may  be  easily  run 
into  the  other;  and  that  it  is  impossible  to  keep  these  pow- 
ers sepera'e  and  distinct,  as  our  theory  requires.     If  this  U 


GOVERNMENT  OF  THE  U.  STATE*.  325 

true,  where  is  the  consistency  of  concluding  that  one  species 
of  legislation  ought  to  he  independent  of  the  sovereignty 
and  another  responsible  to  it  ?  If  congress  had  by  law  de- 
clared the  common  law  of  England  to  be  in  force,  the  peo- 
ple could  by  election  have  enforced  a  repeal  of  this  law,  but 
a  similar  law  is  passed  by  judges  whom  the  people  cannot 
compel  to  repeal  it. 

The  treaty  making  power  is  purely  executive,  or  at  least 
the  entire  natural  sovereignty  of  the  country,  is  excluded 
from  sharing  in  it.  By  "  natural,"  I  mean  the  people. 
State  governments  are  artificial  beings,  and  nearly  the 
whole  treaty  making  power  is  the  creature  of  these  artifi- 
cial beings.  It  is  not  meant  to  discuss  the  propriety  of 
making  law  by  treaties,  without  the  assent  of  the  natural 
sovereignty  or  its  representative,  and  by  a  moiety  of  a  legis- 
lature, but  this  mode  of  legislation  is  exhibited  to  illustrate 
the  defectiveness  of  judicial  responsibility  to  the  sovereign- 
ty. In  this  mode,  the  sections  of  the  government  which 
appoint  and  try  judicial  power  can  make  laws.  These  laws 
may  have  great  political  influence  and  gradually  change  our 
policy;  and  yet  the  sections  of  the  government  which  make 
them,  are  only  responsible  to  their  own  creatures  and  de- 
pendents. Had  judges  and  juries  been  responsible  to  the 
sovereignty,  it  might  more  safely  have  established  a  specie? 
of  legislation,  in  which  it  does  not  participate.  Treaties 
may  more  easily  and  plausibly  extend  executive  and  sena- 
torial power,  than  the  time  of  service  of  the  English  House 
of  Commons  was  extended;  and  judicial  power  might  be 
the  instrument  for  enforcing  such  laws  and  subverting  our 
policy.  It  is  as  easy  to  pack  laws  by  means  of  treaties,  as 
to  pack  juries  by  a  different  executive  engine.  The  ques- 
tion is,  whether  a  judicial  power,  responsible  to  the  executive 
Brandies,  which  branches  have  an  exclusive  right  to  legis- 
late through  treaties,  is  a  sound  cheek  upon  the  constitu- 
tionality of  this  species  of  legislation?  Executive  power 
is  the  universal  destroyer  of  every  sovereignty  like  ours,  and 
$wr  sovereignty  invests  its  natural  enemy  with  an  exclusive! 

30 


226  TIIE  EVIL  MORA!  PRINCIPLES  Of  THE 

power  of  legislating.,  empanelling  juries,  and  appointing  anti 
trying  judges. 

Our  first  critieism  of  the  legislative  principles  of  the 
United  States,  is  directed  of  course  to  the  sexennial  elec- 
tion of  senators.  The  degree  in  which  an  independency  of 
publick  opinion  for  six  years,  is  ahle  to  efface  legislative  in- 
tegrity, and  excite  disloyalty  and  avarice,  beyond  an  annual 
responsibility,  by  figures  and  theory,  is  as  six  to  one.  By 
experience,  it  is  nearly  demonstrated  in  the  British  House 
of  Commons.  The  maxim  "  that  tyranny  begins  where 
annual  election  ends,"  subscribed  to  by  Mr.  Adams  in  the 
prime  of  life,  and  copiously  applied  by  the  people  of  the 
United  States,  is  deserted  and  reversed  in  the  cases  to  which 
politicians  have  thought  it  most  applicable  ;  where  the  pow- 
er delegated  was  most  dangerous.  And  the  reversal  of  this 
maxim  in  the  tenure  of  the  president  and  senators  of  the 
United  States,  may  possibly  be  as  mortal  to  our  policy,  as 
t]ie  desertion  of  that  so  nearly  allied  to  it,  which  dictated 
consular  rotation,  was  to  the  policy  of  Rome. 

The  long  official  tenure  of  the  Senate  of  the  United 
States  has  been  unwarily  suffered,  from  mistaking  it  for 
an  aristocratical  balance,  whereas  it  is  a  body  organized  up- 
on democratical  principles,  to  equalise  the  rights  of  states, 
great  and  small,  rich  or  poor;  and  to  prevent  aristocratical 
privileges  or  powers  from  being  usurped  by  superior 
strength  or  wealth.  The  United  States,  far  from  intending 
to  introduce  an  aristocratical  principle  by  the  senate,  sub- 
mitted to  this  equalising  democratical  regulation,  for  the 
same  reasons  that  rich  and  strong  men  submit  to  an  equali- 
ty of  rights  with  the  poor  and  weak.  In  considering  there- 
fore the  Senate's  time  of  service,  we  ought  to  be  guided, 
not  by  a  false,  but  by  the  true  motive  for  its  form  ,•  and  to 
discern  that  the  question  is  not  whether  a  long  or  a  short 
official  tenure  is  best  to  sustain  an  aristocratical  balance, 
but  which  is  best  to  sustain  a  democratical  equality  between 
unequal  states.  Which  is  best  to  sustain  a  democratical 
equality   of  rights   between   men   unequal    in   wealth   or 


GOVERNMENT  OF  THE  U.  STATES.  '     227 

strength,  is  exactly  the  same  question.  A  long  official 
tenure  will  produce  in  both  cases  the  same  effects.  If  an 
independence  of  the  will  of  constituents,  for  a  period  almost 
amounting  to  the  probable  duration  of  the  incumbent's  life, 
would  instil  aristocratical  principles  into  the  functionaries 
substituted  to  preserve  democratical  rights  between  indi- 
viduals, the  same  cause  will  instil  the  same  principles  into 
those  constituted  to  preserve  the  same  rights  between  states. 
The  infusion  must  be  healthy  or  poisonous  as  to  botb  ob- 
jects, or  as  to  neither;  and  the  question  simply  is,  whether 
it  is  good  or  bad ;  and  not  whether  it  is  of  the  singular 
quality,  to  cure,  drank  out  of  one  cup.  but  to  kill  from 
another ;  just  as  the  same  popish  relict  will  draw  down  bles- 
sings upon  the  orthodox,  and  curses  upon  the  heretical. 

But  the  exposure  of  legislative  power  to  executive  in- 
fluence, is  unquestionably  the  heel  of  Achilles,  omitted  to  b« 
immortalized  by  an  ablution  in  good  n;oral  principles,  and 
left  exposed  to  the  poisoned  shafts  of  corruption. 

The  division  ami  responsibility  of  power,  and  the  inde- 
pendence of  political  departments  of  each  other,  are  the 
vital  principles  of  our  policy. 

The  legislature,  as  the  most  powerful  political  depart- 
ment, ought  not  to  be  influenced  by  one  less  powerful,  be 
eause  a  weaker  power  ahle  to  make  a  stronger  subservient  to 
its  views,  acquires  an  unconstitutional  force.  What  can  ex- 
ceed the  absurdity,  of  considering  the  principle  of  separating 
departments,  and  delegating  different  powers  to  each,  as  es- 
sential to  a  free  government  $  and  yet  providing  an  influ- 
ence for  executive  over  legislative  power,  which  enables  it 
really  to  legislate,  contrary  both  to  the  theory  and  letter  of 
the  constitution  ?  The  king  of -England  would  be  a  weaker 
power,  than  an  independent  Mouse  of  Commons  fairly  elect- 
ed ;  yet,  the  influence  which  annexes  their  power  to  his, 
makes  him  irresistable.  Congress,  as  constituting  a  com- 
plete legislature,  was  intended  to  be  placed  in  a  state  of  far 
greater  independence  of  the  president,  than  the  Ion5;;  an<t 
commons  were  of  the  king. 


J.2H  THE  EVIL  MORAL  PRINCIPLES  OP  THE 

He  who  can  apply  fear  or  hope  to  the  human  mind,  ob- 
tains subserviency  to  his  designs.  A  president  may  bestow 
offices  and  contracts  upon  members  of  congress,  which  ex- 
cite the  fears  and  hopes  of  all  men  ;  therefore  he  may  ob- 
tain an  influence  over  their  minds,  and  destroy  or  lessen  the 
independence  of  the  legislature.  His  gradual  progress  in 
this  work,  and  not  the  constitution,  will  become  the  ther- 
mometer of  his  power,  in  which  the  mercury  may  rise  and 
fall,  until  Avar  and  debt  shall  fix  it  at  the  English  stand- 
ard. And  the  lines  drawn  by  the  principle  of  a  division  of 
power  may  be  gradually  effaced,  by  a  commerce  betweexa 
the  departments  of  government,  without  the  concurrence  of 
the  sovereign  power.  These  lines  were  intended  to  be  fixed 
bv  the  constitution  ;  and  their  fluctuation  is  as  inconsistent 
with  common  honesty,  as  with  any  definite  form  of  govern- 
ment. 

The  effect  of  executive  influence,  interwoven  by  law  with 
a  form  of  government,  although  it  is  disowned  as  one  of  its 
principles,  is  before  our  eyes  in  England  ;  its  effect  in  the 
United  States  may  be  estimated,  by  comparing  the  means 
by  which  it  is  worked  there,  with  the  means  by  which  it 
may  be  worked  here. 

The  chief  circumstances  in  which  the  cases  disagree,  are 
the  elective  and  hereditary  qualities  of  the  two  executives  : 
the  influence  of  a  senate  over  the  president  in  the  exercise  of 
his  patronage,  and  of  a  council  or  ministry  over  the  king  : 
and  the  ineligibility  to  the  legislature  of  all  officers  appoint- 
ed by  the  president,  whilst  a  part  of  the  officers  appointed 
by  the  king  are  re-eligible.  They  agree  in  a  common  ca- 
pacity for  directing  the  artillery  of  executive  patronage, 
against  legislative  integrity  ;  both  bestow  offices  created  and 
continued,  and  both  dispense  money  raised  by  law. 

We  have  shewn  that  an  annual  power,  by  means  of  the 
disbursement  of  a  nation's  money  and  offices,  lias  often  en-  ' 
slaved  it.     The  uncertainty  of  its  tenure,  whets  its  inclina- 
tion to  use  the  opportunity  of  acquiring  one  more  perma- 
nent.    And  therefore  it  is  more  dangerous  to  entrust  peri- 


GOVERNMENT  OF  THE  U.  STATES,  %%9 

odical  than  hereditary  power  with  the  means  of  acquiring 
undue  influence.  It  has  less  to  lose  and  more  to  gain.  A 
king,  though  limited  by  orders  as  in  England,  would  have 
weaker  motives  to  impel  him  towards  usurpation,  than  a 
president,  liable  to  become  a  private  citizen  at  the  end  of 
four  years.  Yet  this  king  has  been  induced  to  corrupt  the 
legislature  for  the  sake  of  getting  more  power.  When  w« 
entrust  the  same  means  to  stronger  motives  for  using  them, 
the  moral  consequence  is,  that  they  will  be  used. 

The  ineligibility  of  an  officer  appointed  by  the  president, 
is  an  addition  to  his  influence.  Pictures  of  an  office,  eo 
loured  by  the  imagination,  will  be  contemplated  and  admir- 
ed by  many  members ;  and  whilst  one  office  in  England  cau 
only  corrupt  one  member,  because  it  is  to  be  paid  for  after 
it  is  received  ;  here  it  may  corrupt  several,  because  it  must 
be  paid  for  before  it  is  received. 

These  trivial  varieties  constitute  all  the  additional  secu- 
rity for  legislative  independence  here,  whilst  the  plain  coin- 
cidence in  the  decisive  fact,  of  an  ability  in  both  executives 
to  bestow  office  and  money  upon  members  of  the  legislature, 
demonstrates  the  certainty  of  a  concurrence  in  effect.  From 
the  period  in  which  Philip  destroyed  the  liberties  of  Greece, 
by  corrupting  her  orators,  down  to  the  present  moment,  at 
which  we  are  hearing  the  groans  of  England,  produced  by 
the  corruption  of  her  orators  ;  there  is  no  instance  of  nation- 
al safety  or  happiness,  having  been  produced  by  a  power  in 
one  man  to  corrupt  eminent  legislative  talents, 

It  is  better  for  a  nation  to  have  no  elective  legislature, 
than  one  which  can  furnish  an  individual  wilh  money  and 
offices,  and  receive  them  from  him  ;  because  this  commerce 
requires  more  money  and  offices,  than  executive  power 
would  need  without  a  legislature  ;  and  because  Vnc  abuse 
would  be  more  clearly  seen,  if  the  executive  power  created 
the  national  oppressions,  whieh  it  dispensed  in  patronage. 
The  English  patronage  produces  heavier  burdens  to  the 
nation,  than  it  would  do,  if  there  was  no  House  of  Com- 
mons*    A  poor  effort  to  meet  this  enormous  evil,  is  made  by 


230  THE  "EVIL  MORAL  FRINCIPLE9  OF  THfc 

our  constitution,  in  an  inhibition  on  the  legislature  to  take 
new  offices  created  by  itself.  It  acknowledges  the  evil  by 
an  insufficient  attempt  to  prevent  it.  The  remedy  does  not 
pretend  to  provide  for  the  case  of  money,  to  be  gotten  by 
contracts  ;  insuffices  for  the  case  of  old  offices  unnecessarily 
retained ;  and  may  be  wholly  evaded  by  transplanting  offi- 
cers. 

Suppose  the  constitution  had  contained  the  following  ar- 
ticle :  "  The  legislative,  executive  and  judicial  powers 
«  shall  be  distinct  ami  independent  of  each  other ;  that  is 
ii  to  say,  the  president  may  influence  the  judges,  by  appoint- 
"  ing  and  preferring  them  5  and  he  may  influence  the  legis- 
<*  lature  by  means  of  offices  and  money,  created,  and  raised 
*'  by  the  legislature."  Would  this  plain  language  have  ob- 
tained the  publick  approbation  ? 

It  is  admitted  by  Mr.  Adams  and  all  who  defend  the  sys 
tern  of  limited  monarchy,  that  the  safety  of  the  plebeian  or- 
der, rests  upon  the  independence  of  its  representatives  of 
the  other  two  orders.  If  either  of  these  orders  can  influ- 
ence these  representatives,  the  limitation  is  abolished,  and 
the  plebeian  order  is  enslaved.  Integrity  and  fraud  will 
share  equally  in  the  suspicions  excited  by  a  power  to  cor- 
rupt ;  and  a  want  of  confidence  in  popular  represeHtathes, 
will  work  in  concert  with  bribery  and  corruption,  to  destroy 
the  liberty  which  these  representatives  were  instituted  to 
defend. 

An  opinion,  that  the  confidence  of  the  people  is  lost,  or 
a  convictiou  that  it  is  not  merited,  will  eradicate  from  the 
mind  of  tbe  representative  a  reliance  upon  the  people,  and 
plant  fear  and  hatred  in  its  place.  This  fear  and  hatred, 
combining  with  the  influence  of  office  and  money,  will  pro 
duce  an  alliance  against  the  people,  between  their  own 
agents,  and  the  power  these  agents  were  designed  to  con- 
trol. If  this  reasoning  is  justified  by  the  test  of  moral 
cause  and  effect ;  it  is  also  justified  by  the  experience  of 
England.  Theoretically  and  practically  it  results,  that  a 
flower  in  one  man  to  bestow  offices  and  money  upon  a 


«ttVEltNMEKTT  OF  THE  V.  STATES.  Jiil 

national  legislature,  is  an  evil  principle ;  that  it  is  an  evil 
principle,  so  malignant  as  to  eat  out  the  best  qualities  of 
limited  monarchy,  and  strengthen  the  worst;  and  that  being 
homogeneous  with  the  worst  qualities  of  limited  monarchy, 
it  cannot  be  so,  with  the  best  qualities  of  republican  govern- 
ment. 

The  system  of  a  balance  of  orders,  is  bottomed  upon  the 
idea  of  some  natural  or  political  enmity,  between  the  one, 
the  few  and  the  many.  A  power  in  the  one,  to  corrupt  the 
representatives  of  the  many,  is  a  mode  of  protecting  the 
many  against  his  enmity,  inconsistent  with  the  understand- 
ings of  all  mankind.  No  people  can  confide  in  representa- 
tives whom  a  king  can  influence  ;  no  king  will  confide  in 
ministers  whom  the  people  can  influence;  and  no  individual 
would  trust  his  liberty  and  property  to  an  arbitrator,  who 
expected  from  his  antagonist  a  geod  office.  As  an  executive 
power,  to  bestow  offices  on  the  representatives  of  the  ple- 
beian order,  overturns  all  the  principles  of  the  system  of 
balances ;  so  executive  power  to  bestow  offices  upon  the 
representatives  of  a  nation,  will  overturn  all  the  principles 
of  national  self  government;  because  there  is  so  little  dif- 
ference between  a  plebeian  order,  and  an  entire  nation,  thai 
the  representative  corruption,  capable  of  subjugating  the 
one,  may  be  safely  considered  as  capable  of  subjugating  the 
other. 

If  the  principle  of  executive  patronage  over  the  legisla 
hire,  under  the  constitution  of  the  United  States,  is  calcu- 
lated to  produce  all  the  evils  which  the  same  principle  pro 
duces  in  England,  and  an  additional  number,  springing  from 
our  policy,  to  which  the  English  policy  is  not  exposed; 
nothing  can  more  justly  merit  constitutional  extermination. 
An  additional  malignancy  flows  from  the  temporary  an«'; 
elective  qualities  of  our  executive  power. 

A  president  will  be  reduced  to  the  alternative  of  using- 
his  patronage  to  corrupt  the  legislature,  or  of  losing  his  office, 
By  withholding  from  leading  members,  what  they  desire 
and  he  can  give,  a  president  purchases  their  enmity  ;  if  they 


232  the  Evil  moral  principles  of  the 

could  receive  nothing  from  him,  there  would  exist  no  cause 
for  this  enmity.  With  this  legislative  patronage,  reputa- 
tion and  re-election  will  depend  upon  a  crafty  management 
of  money  and  office  $  without  it,  both  would  depend  on  merit. 
In  the  first  case,  legislative  testimony  will  be  nothing  but 
the  tricks  and  artifices  of  rapacity  and  ambition  ;  and  sedi- 
tion laws  for  locking  up  botli  truth  and  calumny,  would  be 
preferable  to  these  tricks  and  artifices  ;  under  an  exclusion 
of  executive  patronage,  legislative  testimony  as  to  the  con- 
duct and  character  of  a  president,  would  be  unsuborned. 

A  president,  with  a  patronage  over  the  legislature, 
must  have  a  sort  of  praetorian  cohorts.  They  will  appear, 
and  force  themselves  into  employment,  wherever  an  indivi- 
dual exists  who  can  pay  them.  If  a  president  disappoints 
the  expectations  of  these  legislative  cohorts,  he  dies  to  the 
presidency  ;  they  can  more  safely  attempt  the  political  life 
of  a  .good  president,  than  disappointed  military  cohorts 
could  the  natural  life  of  a  good  emperour.  The  motives  are 
the  satoe  in  both  cases,  and  exactly  those  which  draw  forth 
from  men  their  worst  vices.  Nor  is  there  any  difference 
between  the  largesses  from  quaternial  presidents,  and  succes- 
sive emperours  under  the  Roman  system  of  military  mur- 
der and  election,  with  respect  to  a  nation,  exoept  the  result 
of  a  calculation,  whether  quaternial  election,  or  irregular 
periodical  murder,  will  have  most  effect,  in  exciting  and 
spreading  the  corruption  of  executive  patronage. 

It  is  so  vicious,  as  to  deprive  the  patron  of  the  power  of 
remaining  virtuous.  Henee  good  men  were  suddenly  chang- 
ed into  wicked  emperours.  An  ability  in  elected  einper- 
ttttrs  to  corrupt  an  electing  army,  destroyed  their  virtues. 
An  elective  president  will  be  himself  corrupted  by  an  ability 
to  currupt  a  legislature.  Importunity  will  assail  him.  Op- 
position will  excite  him.  Ambition  will  entice  him.  Ava- 
rice will  harden  him.  Driven  on  by  his  faction,  and  his  pas 
sions,  his  virtue  will  seldom  make  any  resistance  ;  its  strug- 
gles will  be  speedily  suppressed  by  the  host  of  foes,  wit  it 
which  his  power  of  patronage  over  the  legislature,  will  cause 
ft  ta  be  assailed. 


GOVERNMENT  OF  THE  V.  STATES.  ^33 

I 

It  is  a  political  drum  beating  for  recruits,  notifying 
where  the  bounty  for  taking  the  field  against  virtue,  is  to 
be  had  ;  and  as  the  way  to  this  bounty  lies  through  the  le- 
gislature, it  draws  the  most  impure  qualities  of  human  na- 
ture into  the  field  of  election,  where  the  purest  are  necessa- 
ry to  sustain  republican  government.  By  invigorating  and 
exciting  the  activity  of  our  worst  qualities  to  obtain  popular 
favour,  Mr.  Adams's  charge  against  election,  of  an  insuffi- 
ciency to  select  virtue  and  talents,  maybe  made  true.  These 
evil  qualities  will  not  in  the  legislature  forget  the  motives 
which  drew  them  thither;  they  will  not  forget  that  legis- 
lative hands  can  reach  the  richest  coffers  of  executive  pa- 
tronage. But  they  will  forget  that  it  is  the  duty  of  legisla- 
tors to  advance  the  publick  good,  and  their  worst  vice  to 
sacrifice  it  to  their  own  avarice  or  ambition. 

It  is  essential  to  the  purity  of  our  policy,  that  the  legis- 
lature should  be  unable  to  translate  or  prefer  executive  and 
judicial  agents  to  more  desirable  offices  ;  upon  what  ground 
is  the  translation  or  preferment  of  legislative  agents  to 
more  desirable  offices,  by  executive  or  judicial  power,  unes- 
sential to  its  purity  ?  Is  it  less  dangerous  to  society,  that 
the  legislature  should  be  corrupted  or  influenced  by  the  ex- 
ecutive or  judiciary,  than  that  these  departments  should  be 
corrupted  or  influenced  by  the  legislature  ? 

A  prohibition  upon  the  legislature  to  influence  members 
of  the  executive  and  judicial  departments  by  office,  proves 
that  this  identical  species  of  influence  was  considered  as 
destructive  of  the  principle  of  division  of  power.  An  allow- 
ance to  these  departments  to  influence  the  legislature  by 
office,  will  destroy  the  principle  of  division,  or  what  some 
may  call,  the  independence  between  departments,  precisely 
in  the  same  mode,  as  it  would  have  been  destroyed,  by  al- 
lowing the  legislature  thus  to  influence  them.  The  whole 
difference  is  in  the  effect.  The  prohibited  legislative  patron- 
age, might  have  worked  slowly  towards  aristocracy  ;  the  al- 
lowed  executive  patronage,  will  work  rapidly  towards  mon- 
archy. 

31 


£3$  THE  EVIL  MORAL  PRINCIPLES  OP  THE 

Stronger  reasons  exist  for  shielding  legislative  poweF 
against  tiie  influence  of  executive  and  judicial  patronage, 
than  for  shielding  these  departments  against  legislative  pa- 
tronage ;  the  legislature  can  supply  them  with  money  and 
offices,  which  they  may  give  back  to  the  members  of  the 
legislature  ;  whereas  they  cannot  furnish  the  legislature 
with  either,  to  be  given  back  to  themselves.  Offices  and 
money,  created  or  sustained,  and  taxed  by  the  legislature, 
are  distributed  by  the  executive  ;  and  the  bankrupt  law  en- 
dowed judicial  power  with  considerable  patronage;  so  that 
the  legislature  can  extend,  sustain,  diminish,  or  cause  to 
fluctuate,  executive  and  judicial  patronage,  as  it  is  pleased  or 
displeased  with  the  returns  to  itself, 

It  would  even  have  been  better,  that  the  legislature 
should  have  been  allowed  to  distribute  among  its  members, 
a  portion  of  the  offices  and  money,  produced  by  its  laws, 
than  to  take  them  back  from  executive  power;  because 
thus  it  would  have  been  shielded  against  executive  or  mo- 
narchical influence,  and  a  power  so  direct  to  patronise 
itself,  would  have  awakened  the  publick jealousy;  which  an 
indirect  mode  of  effecting  the  same  end,  is  calculated  to 
lull.  Then  the  evil  would  have  been  seen;  now,  the  inter- 
lude between  law  and  appointment  (the  puppets  of  legisla- 
tive corruption  and  executive  patronage)  may  hide  the  evil. 
Both  modes  of  patronage  are  seeds  of  moral  and  political 
evil;  oqe  is  cultivated  openly  and  directly;  it  is  therefore 
infinitely  less  pernicious,  as  is  evinced  in  the  instance  of 
state  legislative  patronage  ;  the  other  is  cultivated  secretly 
and  indirectly,  and  is  therefore  infinitely  more  pernicious, 
as  is  evinced  in  she  case  of  England. 

The  arguments  against  shielding  the  legislature  from 
executive  patronage,  are,  that  it  may  deprive  patriots  of 
merited  reward,  and  the  community  of  valuable  services- 
Rewards  to  be  bestowed  by  executive  or  monarchical  am- 
bition, and  services  to  be  guided  by  executive  or  monarchi- 
cal designs. 


GOVERNMENT  OF  THE  U.  STATES.  ±35 

Political  merit,  consists  in  preferring  the  service  of  a  na- 
tion to  the  service  of  an  individual ;  individuals  consider 
that  quality  as  merit,  which  is  subservient  to  their  interest 
or  designs  j  hence  monarchs,  instead  of  allowing  merit  to 
patriots,  persecute  them  as  traitors.  A  nation  endeavours 
to  select  the  genuine  species  of  merit,  an  individual,  the 
spurious  \  one  seeks  for  the  means  of  producing  puhlick 
good;  the  other,  for  the  means  of -advancing  selfish  designs- 
National  patronage  is  applied  with  a  view  to  national  self 
government;  individual  patronage  buys  talents,  or  pacifies 
enmity,  for  the  purpose  of  destroying  national  self  govern- 
ment. Therefore  popular  patronage  strives  to  reward  such 
merit  and  to  procure  such  services,  as  will  advance  republi- 
can principles  ;  and  individual  patronage,  strives  to  reward 
merit  and  procure  services,  for  advancing  individual  in- 
terest. 

The  English  example  and  universal  experience  prove, 
diat  the  patronage  of  an  individual  corrupts  what  nations 
consider  as  merit  and  patriotism.  To  bestow  on  one  man 
a  great  patronage,  from  a  hope  that  it  will  reward  the  vir- 
tues which  it  destroys,  is  founded  upon  a  probability,  that  a 
moral  cause  will  produce  a  different  effect  here,  from  that 
which  it  has  constantly  produced  elsewhere,  and  is  now  pro- 
ducing in  England. 

By  detaching  the  patronage  of  one  man,  into  elective  le- 
gislatures, to  select  talents  for  puhlick  service,  the  nation 
will  reap  a  harvest  of  services,  as  abundant  as  the  harvest 
of  rewards,  which  virtue  and  patriotism  will  reap.  When 
one  man  dispenses  the  rewards  to  merit,  merit  will  consist 
in  our  attachment  to  the  interest  of  one  man.  When  the 
legislature  is  converted  into  a  school  for  those  intrigues  and 
artifices,  begotten  and  nurtured  by  the  admission  of  execu- 
tive patronage  within  its  walls,  the  antipathy  of  the  mind 
against  fraud  and  deceit  will  be  gradually  erased  ;  politicks 
will  be  converted  into  a  science,  too  mysterious  and  compli- 
cated for  popular  comprehension  ;  and  tiie  diploma  of  profi- 
ciency will  constitute  the  worst  evidence  of  a  title  to  na- 
tional rewards,  but  the  best,  to  executive. 


236  THE  EVIL  MORAX  PRINCIPLES  OF  THE 

If  the  publick  good   requires,  that  members  of  the  le- 
gislature should  be  incapable  of  receiving  offices  and  con- 
tracts,  from  executive  power,   it  would  be  immoral  and 
wicked  to  betray  it,  for  the  sake  of  gratifying  individuals, 
To  elude  this  truth,  the  necessity  of  recurring  to  the  talents 
assembled  in  legislative  bodies,  adequately  to  fill  other  offi- 
ces, is  suggested.     If  this  argument  has  weight,  national 
self  government  cannot  exist.      It  is  simply  Mr.  Adams's 
idea  of  a  natural  aristocracy  in  a  new  form.     Men  are  un- 
happily inclined  to  be  disrespectful  to  themselves,  by  ad- 
mitting the  idea  of  a  monopoly  and  rareness  of  talents  ;  and 
although  the  delusion  is  known  to  vanish,  whenever  it  is 
examined,  yet  it  continues  to  govern  half  the  world,  who 
only  believe  the  fact,  because  they  have  never  looked  into 
the  evidence.      Thus  thev  arc  willing  to  suffer  the  evil  of 
executive  patronage  over  the  legislature,  to  gain  for  society 
the  benefit  of  these  unseen  talents  :  as  men  have   been  wil- 
ling to  suffer  the  evil  of  a  corrupt  priesthood,  to  gain  for 
society  the  beneiit  of  unfulfilled  oracles.    Whilst  philosophy 
t)oa»ts  of  having  exploded  one  species  of  idolatry,  she  falls 
herself  into  another ;  and  having  delivered  mankind  from 
the  invisible  agency  of  false  gods,   she  subjects  them  to  the 
invisible  talents  of  false  patriots. 

Above  two  thousand  years  past,  the  Romans  annually 
found  new  talents  in  new  consuls,  capable  of  conducting  pub- 
lick  affairs,  with  unexampled  prosperity.  The  French  revo- 
lution has  proved,  that  even  military  talents  are  scattered 
every  where  among  men.  All  civilized  nations,  must  have 
abundantly  more  men  fit  for  office  than  offices  to  give  them. 
No  nation  can  support  any  form  of  popular  government,  where 
this  isnotthecase.  If  then  the  United  States  have  sent  execu- 
tive patronage  into  their  legislature  for  officers,  from  a  sup- 
posed deficiency  of* talents  without  its  pale,  it  is  done  upon  a 
calculation  which  acknowledges  their  unfitness  for  any  spe- 
cies of  popular  government. 

Had  nature  been  accustomed  to  produce  occasionally 
rare  and  extraordinary  talents,  it  is  highly  questionable 


GOVERNMENT  OF  THE  IT.  STATES.  237 

"whether  they  would  have  been  beneficial  to  mankind*  Shall 
we  believe  erroneously  thai  she  visits  us  with  one  calamity, 
in  order  to  Ax  upon  ourselves  another?  Shall  we  corrupt 
the  legislature,  to  come  at  rare  talents  which  do  not  exist, 
and  v\ Inch  would,  if  found,  be  a  calamity ;  or  be  contented 
with  such  talents  as  nature  does  create,  and  with  legislative 
integrity  in  the  bargain  ?  If  such  men  as  Alexander,  Csesnr 
or  Cromwell  are  examples  of  this  vast  superiority  of  talents, 
it  would  be  better  to  let  them  remain  unknown,  than  to 
awaken  them  by  executive  patronage  over  legislative  power. 

The  truth  is.  that  rare  talents,  like  a  natural  aristocra- 
cy, are  created  by  ignorance,  and  that  cunning  takes  advan- 
tage of  the  opinion  to  scourge  mankind.  Ignorance  is  the 
source  of  slavery,  and  knowledge  of  liberty,  because  the 
first  begets,  and  the  other  explodes  the  errour,  «  that  some 
men  are  endowed  with  faculties,  far  exceeding  the  general 
standard."  In  thinking  it  necessary  to  send  executive  pa- 
tronage into  legislative  bodies  to  fill  offices,  lest  the  publick 
should  lose  the  benefit  of  these  imaginary  faculties,  we  have 
adhered  to  one  preceptor,  who  teaches  nothing  but  slavery  j 
and  rejected  the  admonitions  of  another,  who  alone  teaches 
liberty. 

It  will  be  admitted  that  virtue  and  talents  are  as  neces- 
sary for  legislative,  as  for  any  other  kind  of  publick  ser- 
vants;  and  that  these  qualities,  transplanted  by  executive 
patronage  into  other  departments,  ought  to  be  replaced  by  a 
full  equivalent.  If  this  reimbursement  can  be  made,  the 
pretext  that  a  dearth  of  qualification  for  office,  makes  it  ne- 
cessary to  corrupt  legislatures,  in  order  to  obtain  incorrupt 
officers,  is  false  ;  if  it  cannot,  the  exchange  must  be  injuri- 
ous to  the  nation.  In  England,  this  argument  would  be  less 
conclusive,  on  account  of  the  eligibility  of  most  of  the  «reat 
executive  officers  to  the  House  of  Commons,  and  the  session 
of  all  in  the  House  of  Lords.  There  the  idea  o?  a  dearth  of 
qualification  for  office,  is  countenanced  by  heaping  offices, 
civil,  military,  legislative,  executive  and  judicial,  upon  one 
man.     Here,  we  admit  its  truth  bv  exposing  tiie  legislature 


238  THE  EVIL  MORAL  PRINCIPLES  OP  THE 

to  executive  patronage,  in  imitation  of  the  English  precc* 
dent ;  and  assert  its  falsehood,  by  prohibiting  accumulations 
of  offices.     And  though  the  president  remains  isolated  be- 
tween our  affirmative  and  negative,  we  have  copied  it  in  a 
mode  excessively  increasing  its  malignity,  first  by  the  ineli- 
gibility  which  loses  the  purchase  the  instant  it  is  paid  for ; 
secondly,  by  the  necessity  for  fresh  means  to  corrupt  or  in- 
fluence such  talents,  as  may  appear  after  the  best  are  trans- 
planted; and  thirdly,  by  the  removal  of  the  highest  virtue 
and  the  best  talents  from  the  department,   upon  which  the 
liberty  and  prosperity  of  nations  must  for  ever  depend.  Inge- 
niously  providing  both  a  constant  drain  for  publick  treasure, 
and  a  constant  drain  of  talents  and  virtue  from  legislatures  ,• 
and  managing  to  extract  from  the  evil  principle  of  exposing 
them  to  the  patronage  of  one  man,  the  evil  effects  both  of 
stupifying  and  demoralizing  them,  one  of  which  has  sufficed 
for  the  nation  we  have  imitated. 

Let  us  consider  the  following  extract  from  a  late  Eng- 
lish author.  "  But  the  history  of  this  reign,"  that  of  Hen- 
ry the  Sth,  "  yields  other  lessons  than  those  of  a  specula- 
«'  tive  morality ;  lessons  which  come  home  to  the  breast  of 
"  every  Englishman,  and  which  he  ought  to  remember  eve- 
<•'  ry  moment  of  his  existence.  It  teaches  us  the  most 
««  alarming  of  all  political  truths.  That  absolute  despotism 
*<  may  prevail  in  a  stale,  and  yet  the  farm  of  a  free  consti- 
«  tation  remain.  Nay,  it  even  leads  us  to  a  conjecture 
*«  still  more  interesting  to  Britons,  that  in  this  country  an 
"  ambitious  prince  may  most  successfully  exercise  his  i\  • 
"  raunies  under  the  shelter  of  those  harriers,  which  the  con- 
"  stitution  has  placed  as  the  security  of  national  freedom. 
"  Henry  changed  the  national  religion,  and,  in  a  great  mea- 
*•'  sure,  the  spirit  of  the  laws  of  England.  He  perpetrated 
»»  the  most  enormous  violences  against  the  first  men  in  tht 
"  kingdom  ;  he  loaded  Ike  people  with  oppressive  taxes,  and 
"  lie  pillaged  them  by  loans,  which  it  was  known  he  never 
"  meant  to  pay ;  but  he  never  attempted  to  abolish  the  parli- 
**  amtnt,  or  even  to  retrench  any  of  its  doubtful  privileges. 


WOVEKNMKNT  OF  THE  U.  STATES.  £$& 

**  Tiie  parliament  xvas  the  prime  minister  of  his  tyrannical 
iS  administration.  It  authorised  his  oppressive  taxes,  it 
**  gave  its  sanction  to  his  most  despotick  and  oppressive  mea- 
**  sures  ;  to  measures,  which  of  himself  he  durst  not  have 
"  carried  into  execution  ;  or  which,  if  supposed  to  he  merely 
«  the  result  of  his  own  arbitrary  will,  would  have  roused 
"  the  spirit  of  the  nation  to  assert  the  rights  of  humanity, 
**  and  the  privileges  of  a  free  people.  Our  admirable  con- 
"  stitution  is  but  a  gay  curtain  to  conceal  our  shame,  and 
**  the  iniquity  of  our  oppressors,  unless  our  senators  are  ani- 
«  mated  by  the  same  spirit  which  gave  it  birth.  If  they 
u  can  be  overawed  by  threats,  seduced  from  their  duty 
<*  by  bribes,  or  allured  by  promises,  another  Henry  may 
H  rule  over  us  with  a  rod  of  iron,  and  drench  once  more 
«  the  scaffold  with  the  best  blood  of  the  nation.  The  par- 
"  liament  will  be  the  humble  and  secure  instrument  of  his 
**  tyrannies.'**  Henry's  influence  made  «  the  parliament 
the  prime  minister  of  executive  tyranny,  and  an  instrument 
of  the  most  despotick  measures." 

Compare  this  influence  of  Henry's,  with  the  present  in- 
fluence of  the  crown  in  England,  and  consider,  which  pos- 
sesses in  the  highest  degree,  the  properties  of  bribery,  al- 
luring by  promises,  permanency,  and  capacity  to  convert  a 
parliament  "  into  the  humble  and  secure  instrument  of  ex- 
ecutive tyranny."  Were  Henry's  parliaments  more  subser- 
vient to  the  crown  in  money  matters,  than  those  subjected 
to  the  modern  species  of  influence  ?  Were  his  pecuniary 
oppressions  more  intolerable,  than  those  which  modern  par- 
liaments sanction  without  difficulty?  Or  was  his  influence 
more  systematick  and  regular,  than  that  of  the  crown  for 
the  last  century  ?  If  not,  the  modern  system  by  which  ex- 
ecutive power  influences  legislative  bodies,  is  more  danger- 
ous than  Henry's  ;  and  his  sufficed  to  make  him  a  tyrant. 

Executive  patronage  over  legislative  bodies,  is  the  es- 
sential quality  of  this  modern  system,  and  the  only  quality 
by  which  «'  parliaments  can  be  made  the  prime  ministers  of 

*  Modern  Europe,  v.  2,  294  &  5. 


S40  THE  EVIL  MORAL  PRINCIPLES  OP  THE 

tyrannical  administrations."  Bv  its  means  only,  can  «  ab« 
solute  despotism  be  introduced  whilst  tiiefbrm  of  a  free  con- 
stitution remains."  This  alone  is  able  to  convert  the  only 
barrier  against  the  usurpations  of  executive  power,  into  a 
shelter  for  its  intrigues,  a  sanction  for  its  oppressions,  a 
"  secure  instrument"  for  its  ambition,  and  a  vehicle  for  re- 
volution to  be  effected  "  by  changing  the  spirit  of  laws." 

Had  our  constitution  been  formed  exactly  upon  the 
English  model,  that  experiment  would  have  been  a  map, 
upon  which  the  progress  of  a  government,  guided  bv  the  vi- 
cious principle  of  executive  patronage  over  legislative  pow- 
er, could  have  been  exactly  traced.  Is  a  principle,  too  vi- 
cious and  corrupt  for  limited  monarchy,  sufficiently  pure 
for  a  republican  government?  Will  limited  monarchy  ex- 
ist only  in  form,  and  be  converted  in  fact  by  this  principle 
into  a  despotism  ;  and  will  republican  freedom  exist  in 
fact,  exposed  to  the  same  legislative  corruption,  which  has 
reduced  limitations  on  monarchy  to  form  ? 

Why  should  we  conceal  from  ourselves  the  plain  truth  ? 
Representation  is  either  the  best  security  for  a  free  govern- 
ment, or  the  best  instrument  for  the  most  oppressive.  In- 
fluenced by  one  man,  it  is  an  instrument ;  uninfluenced,  a  se- 
curity. Need  we  reason  upon  the  question  ?  Has  not  Eng- 
land a  House  of  Commons,  and  France  a  tribunate  ? 

In  England,  executive  patronage  has  left  the  entire  form 
of  the  constitution  standing,  and  annihilated  two  thirds  of  its 
substance;  it  is  formed  of  orders,  and  two  of  the  three  are 
reduced  to  cyphers  or  instruments.  Here,  though  our  con- 
stitution is  not  formed  of  king,  lords  and  commons,  or  of 
any  classification  of  men,  but  of  the  principles  of  division, 
responsibility,  and  national  self  government,  yet  executive 
influence  over  judicial  and  legislative  power,  can  also  des- 
troy its  substance  and  leave  its  form  standing,  by  converting 
the  sentinels  of  the  people  into  the  instruments  of  ambition.* 
and  demolishing  the  efficacy  of  division  by  a  corrupt  unani- 
mity. 


GOVERNMENT  OP  THE  U.  STATES.         £il 

It  may  fall  upon  the  house  of  representatives  to  elect 
a  president,  and  each  candidate  may  promise,  and  if  lie  is 
elected,  bestow  an  office  upon  every  elector.  The  same  ef- 
fects will  follow,  as  if  the  parliament  was  to  elect  a  king. 
Executive  patronage,  in  the  real  and  supposed  case,  consti- 
tutes the  utmost  temptation  to  be  treacherous  to  a  nation, 
exactly  where  the  publick  good  requires  the  utmost  in- 
tegrity. .  It  is  impossible  to  contrive  a  better  scheme  than 
this  for  exeiting  the  virulence  of  faction,  by  the  goatlings  of 
ambition,  avarice,  self  interest,  and  all  the  most  violent  pas- 
sions ;  or  to  take  a  better  chance  for  producing  a  civil  war. 

Since  oracles  were  exploded,  no  mode  has  been  discov- 
ered for  deceiving  and  oppressing  nations,  equally  treacher- 
ous and  successful  with  that  of  corrupting  their  representa- 
tives. Confidence,  inspired  by  religion  in  the  first  ease,  and 
by  election  in  the  second,  is  the  mantle  for  fraud  in  both. 
The  influence  of  one  man  over  a  nation,  fraudulently  or 
forcibly  exercised,  is  the  essential  principle  of  monarchy  ; 
as  a  monopoly  of  wealth  by  an  exclusive  interest  at  the  pub- 
liek  expense,  is  of  aristocracy.  In  a  former  part  of  this 
essay,  an  attempt  was  made  to  prove,  that  a  mixture  of  mo- 
narchical and  aristocratieal  ingredients  in  democratical  sys- 
tems, caused  those  disorders,  ascribed  bv  Mr.  Adams  to  in- 
accuracy  in  balancing  them  ;  and  that  however  commixed, 
their  natural  enmity  would  continue  to  produce  pernicious 
effects,  as  in  all  former  experiments.  If  executive  influ- 
ence over  legislative  bodies,  is  a  monarchical  ingredient  j; 
and  if  a  paper  system  is  an  aristocratieal  ingredient ;  all  the 
horrours  of  a  warfare  among  orders  must  ensne,  either  on 
Mr.  Adams's  principles  or  ours  5  because,  according  to  him, 
it  cannot  be  prevented,  except  by  an  accurate  balance  of  or- 
ders ■;  according  to  us,  it  cannot  be  prevented  on  account  of 
their  natural  enmity  to  each  other. 

The  prospect  of  victory  is  on  the  side  of  executive  pow- 
er. The  code  of  its  political  tactieks,  lies  open  in  the  ex- 
ample of  England.  That  example  may  accelerate  its  suc- 
cess, by  causing  it  to  be  expected.       A  president,  by  the 


2A2  THE  EVIL  MORAL  TKINCIPLES  OF  THE 

legislative  instrument,  may  provoke  war,  introduce  funding 
and  banking,  raise  armies,  increase  taxes,  multiply  offices, 
anil  com  nil  the  freedom  of  the  press  to  the  custody  of  pe- 
nal laws,  with  as  much  certainty  and  system  as  a  British 
king ;  and  add  to  his  own  power,  by  throwing  the  odium  of 
his  ambitious  practices  upon  Congress ;  although,  to  bor- 
row the  words  oftlie  last  quotation,  "  he  durst  not  of  him- 
"  self  have  carried  such  measures  into  execution  ;  or  which, 
«<  if  supposed  to  be  merely  the  result  of  his  own  arbitrary 
"  will,  would  have  roused  the  spirit  of  the  nation  to  assert 
i(  the  rights  of  humanity,  and  the  privileges  of  a  free 
"  people." 

If  a  president  should,  by  an  army,  be  rendered  insubor- 
dinate to  the  legislature,  and  aide  to  terrify  them  into  his 
measures,  all  would  agree  that  neither  free  or  republican 
government  could  possibly  continue  ;  yet  its  manifest  atro- 
eiousness  would  be  some  cheek  upon  the  deed.  If  a  presi- 
dent is  not  enabled  to  terrify,  but  only  to  bribe  or  influence 
a  legislature  into  his  measures,  what  would  be  the  differ- 
ence? That  between  having  one's  wife  ravished  or  seduced. 
Are  not  men  safer  against  the  first  evil,  and  more  frequent- 
ly rendered  miserable  by  the  second  ? 

These  criticisms  neither  impeach  the  general  structure 
of  the  government,  nor  impinge  upon  any  local  interest. 
No  doctrine  is  advanced,  not  adhered  to  by  state  constitu- 
tions, and  none  condemned,  to  which  the  people  have  sepa- 
rately assented.  Had  they  approved  of  bestowing  monar- 
chical powers  upon  an  elective  magistrate;  of  a  judicial 
power  insubordinate  to  the  sovereignty,  superior  to  the  le- 
gislature, and  subject  to  executive  influence;  or  of  adopt- 
ing corruption  into  the  legislature  by  some  crooked  path; 
aa  adherence  to  contrary  principles  would  not  have  remain- 
ed visible  in  these  constitutions. 

To  bring  the  general  and  state  governments  under  simi- 
lar principles,  would  contribute  to  the  security  of  the  union* 
Hostile  elements  will  ultimately  go  to  war.  Hence  the  ex- 
periments of  orders   in   all   forms  have    failed.      Their 


GOVERNMENT  OF  THE  U.  STATES,  &hZ 

adverse  principles  have  never  been  able  to  subsist  peacea- 
bly together  for  any  considerable  time.  Influence  and  in- 
subordination are  tbe  contraries  of  division  and  responsibili- 
ty; and  the  same  effects  are  produced  by  compounding  a 
government  of  opposite  and  hostile  orders  of  principles,  as 
of  hostile  orders  of  men;  because  a  contrariety  in  princi- 
ples causes  the  hostility  among  orders. 

This  contrariety  is  the  test  to  establish  the  sufficiency 
of  our  analysis  for  defining  governments  by  moral  princi- 
ples, and  enabling  us  to  foresee  effects.  We  have,  for  in- 
stance, considered  division  of  power,  responsibility  and 
legislative  purity  (one  side  of  a  contrariety)  as  good, 
and  as  producing  good  effects;  and  monopoly,  insubordi- 
nation and  corruption  (the  other  side)  as  evil,  and  as  pro- 
ducing evil  effects;  and  deduced  from  these  considerations 
the  reasoning  of  this  part  of  our  essay.  The  mode  of  ap- 
plying our  definition  to  particular  cases  consists  merely  in 
stating  plain  questions.  For  an  instance^  Is  the  power  of 
the  president  to  influence  the  popular  representatives,  or  tbe 
power  of  the  government  to  neglect  the  militia,  and  use 
standing  armies,  good  or  evil,  monarchical  or  republican,  or 
congenial  with  the  policy  of  the  United  States  or  of  Eng- 
land, or  of  both  ?  Is  the  policy  of  these  countries  the 
same? 


£    s^*    1 


SECTION  THE  FOURTH. 


FUNDING. 


1st  a  former  part  of  fids  essay,  a  promise  was  made  to  con- 
sider Hie  effects  of  funding  and  banking,  in  relation  (o  the 
principles  and  policy  of  tlie  United  States;  that  promise 
shall  now  he  complied  with. 

No  form  of  civil  government  can  be  more  fraudulent, 
expensive  and  complicated,  than  one  which  distributes 
wealth  and  consequently  power,  by  the  act  of  the  govern- 
ment itself.  A  few  men  wish  to  gratify  their  own  avarice  and 
ambition.  They  cannot  effect  this  without  accomplices, 
and  they  gain  them  by  corrupting  the  legislature.  Still 
the  faction  is  too  feeble  to  oppress  a  nation.  Vice  looks 
for  defence,  because  it  expects  punishment.  The  legisla- 
ture must  corrupt  a  party  in  the  nation,  and  this  is  effected 
by  the  modern  invention  called  a  paper  system,  with  a  de- 
gree of  plausibility  and  dispatch,  infinitely  exceeding  any 
ancient  contrivance.  Executive  patronage  corrupts  indi- 
viduals ;  legislative,  factions ;  the  first  by  office  and  sala- 
ry ;  the  second  by  law  charter  and  seperate  interest.  Fear 
and  avarice  combine  to  secure  implicit  obedience  from  these 
purchased  engines  of  power,  and  an  inexorable  fulfilment  of 
the  corrupter's  purpose.  Accordingly,  a  paper  system  will 
cling  to  a  government,  as  closely  as  an  army  to  a  general, 
or  a  hierarchy  to  a  pope. 

An  executive  power  to  bestow  offices  and  contracts  up- 
on members  of  a  legislature,  resembles  the  idea  of  procur- 
ing talents,  and  rewarding  merit ;  but  a  legislative  power 
to  buv  a  faction  bv  loans  and  charters,  cannot  crouch  behind 
this  subterfuge  ',  it  literally  displays,  and  openly  practises 


JT1VDTNG.  Jt^B 

the  same  snecies  of  corruption,  which  executive  patronage 
endeavours  to  hide. 

A  paper  system  belongs  to  the  species  of  patronage 
"Which  we  have  called  legislative.  It  is  introduced  upon 
various  pretexts;  hut  its  true  ends  are  simple.  These  are 
to  enrich  individuals,  and  at  the  national  expense,  to  cor- 
rupt a  faction,  which  will  adhere  to  a  government  against  a 
nation.  Such  a  system  may  subsist  in  union  with  election, 
but  (ne  ri  1  'i()les  of  our  policy  cu.iuot  subsist  in  union  with 
such  a  system. 

Its  practicability  in  union  with  election  is  ascertained  in 
England,  and  by  widening  the  distance  between  individuals 
in  wealth,  it  has  detached  the  mass  of  talents  from  the  ser- 
vice of  the  publick,  to  the  service  of  a  faction;  and  chang- 
ed election  from  a  shield  for  liberty,  into  a  keen  and  polish- 
ed instrument  f«r  her  destruction.  This  abuse  is  a  refine- 
ment upon  a  late  quotation  emphatically  proving,  that  the 
system  of  balancing  or  checking  monarchy  in  England,  is 
capable  of  producing  more  tyranny  and  oppression,  than 
simple  or  pure  monarchy  would  dare  to  attempt.  A  mo- 
narch, suicided  by  a  corrupt  parliament,  may  adventure  up- 
on measures,  which  he  would  otherwise  shrink  from.  And 
a  legislature,  shielded  by  a  paper  faction,  may  adventure 
upon  measures  which  they  would  otherwise  shrink  from. 
Election  is  made  the  instrument  of  legislative  patronage, 
and  a  nation  seems  to  be  the  author  of  its  own  ruin,  whilst 
that  ruin  proceeds  from  the  operation  of  a  paper  system, 
corrupting  talents,  enriching  a  faction,  and  impoverishing 
the  mass  of  the  nation  ;  vet  the  people  will  be  kept  patient 
by  election  itself,  from  an  erroneous  opinion,  that  the  gov- 
ernment is  administered  according  to  their  will.  Against 
this  species  of  tyranny  there  is  no  remedy,  except  that  of 
preventing  its  cause,  as  the  people  have  no  mode  of  discov- 
ering i  he  individuals  corrupted  by  legislative  patronage; 
other  forms  of  tyranny  are  seen  in  the  persons  of  kings,  no- 
bles and  priests;  executive  sinecure  and  patronage,  are 
visible  ;  and  a  visible  enemy  may  be.  subdued  ;  but  an  in- 
visible enemy  cannot  ever  be  assailed. 


3*6  .FUNDING. 

The  possibility  of  that  species  of  tyranny,  arising  from 
an  union  between  an  elective  legislature,  and  an  interest 
different  from  the  national  interest,  was  contemplated  by 
all  our  constitutions ;  and  the  whole  fund  of  foresight  then 
existing  brought  to  bear  against  it.  For  this  precise  end, 
innumerable  precautions  were  used,  to  subject  law-makers 
to  the  national  will;  to  prevent  them  from  getting  wealth 
from  the  nation  by  their  own  laws;  and  to  expose  them 
equally  with  other  citizens,  to  oppressive  laws.  But  all 
these  precautions  are  destroyed  by  the  legal  inventions  of 
funding,  banking  and  charter,  more  effectually  than  the 
liberty  of  the  press  was  destroyed  by  a  sedition  law.  The 
reader  will  not  require  a  catalogue  of  eases,  to  prove  how 
deeply  laws  can  wound  constitutions,  after  this  reference 
has  awakened  his  recollection. 

Admitting  that  the  power  of  creating  debt,  must  neces- 
*arily  reside  in  a  government,  yet,  next  to  the  power  of 
raisins:  armies,  it  is  the  most  dangerous  with  which  it  can 
be  invested.  Mankind  may  be  governed  by  money  or  arms. 
Both  these  powers  admit  of  checks,  and  required  them,  as 
being  more  dangerous  than  any  others.  An  armed  nation 
would  have  been  a  check  upon  the  one ;  and  an  effectual 
exclusion  from  the  legislature,  of  any  participation  in  the 
profits  of  debt,  created  by  funding  or  banking,  would  have 
been  a  check  upon  the  other. 

But  a  borrowing  power  itself  is  rendered  questionable, 
by  considering  its  origin  and  effects.  We  possess  a  cor- 
rect history  of  two  paper  systems  only;  those  of  England 
and  America.  The  first  was  produced  by  the  personal  ha- 
tred of  William  of  Orange  for  Lewis  the  litb,  the  rapacity 
of  Marlborough  and  Eugene,  and  the  need  of  a  disputed  ti- 
tle to  a  crown,  for  partisans.  The  second  also  followed  a 
revolution,  without  having  contributed  towards  it ;  compen- 
sated publiek  services  by  the  tax  of  appreciation,  after  they 
had  paid  that  of  depreciation  ;  and  transferred  much  of  the 
reward  for  which  an  army  bled  in  defence  of  their  country. 
*o  those  Who  had  shed  that  blood.     To  gratify  a  king'? 


FUNDING.  247 


hatred,  enrich  rapacious  generals,  and  transfer  a  crown 
from  one  family  to  another,  were  ends  of  the  English  fund- 
ing system,  not  much  more  just  or  useful,  than  those  expe- 
rienced here.  This  system  or  policy,  therefore,  has  very  lit-- 
tle  to  boast  of  for  its  exploits  in  these  two  eminent  cases. 

But  there  is  a  theory  in  favour  of  funding  systems,  art- 
fully  suggested  to  cover  their  practical  evils.  Nations  are 
persuaded  that  they  can  anticipate  the  riches  of  posterity 
and  bequeath  it  their  misfortunes  ;  seduced  by  this  glitter- 
ing temptation,  they  have  forborne  to  look  through  its  gild- 
ing, in  order  to  discover  what  it  conceals. 

Could  one  generation  thus  have  plundered  wealth  and 
leisure  from  another,  each  would  have  preferred  certain  "\ic- 
tories  costing  neither  blood  nor  money,  to  murderous,  pre- 
carious, and  expensive  wars  :  and  though  the  wisdom  and 
justice  of  the  Deity  might  have  been  rendered  questiona- 
ble, by  the  subjection  of  unborn  innocence  to  the  tyranny  of 
existing  vice,  yet  the  crime  would  have  been  perpetrated  in 
security,  and  the  magnitude  of  the  acquisition  would  have 
varnished  over  its  flagitiousness,  in  the  eyes  of  the  perpe- 
trators. 

The  propensity  of  nations  to  molest  their  contempora- 
ries for  the  sake  of  wealth,  is  recorded  in  innumerable  ex- 
amples ;  and  as  the  same  passion  would  with  additional 
strengtli  have  incited  them  to  invade  the  rights  of  the  un- 
born,  an  existing  generation  would  have  wanted  motives  for 
self-molestation,  if  these  motives  could  have  been  appeased 
by  calling  forM aid  into  their  own  pockets  the  inexhaustible 
wealth  of  time  to  come*  It  is  therefore  probable  that  such 
an  operation  is  physically  impossible,  because  the  treasures 
of  anticipation  have  not  suspended  for  a  moment  the  dispo- 
sition of  existing  nations  to  plunder  and  oppress  each  other, 
or  of  existing  governments  to  plunder  and  oppress  the  people. 

But  an  opinion  that  it  is  possible,  for  the  present  gene- 
ration to  seize  and  use  the  property  of  future  generations.. 
has  produced  to  both  the  parties  concerned,  effects  of  tiie 
same  complexion  with  the  usual  fruits  of  sattannl  errouc 


2i3  FFNTH^ft. 

Thepresentage  5«  caf#l«d  to  tax  and  enslave  itself,  by  the 
errour  ©f  believing  that  it  taxes  anil  enslwvt  s  future  ages  to 
enrich  itself;  and  future  age's  submit  to  taxation  -and  slave- 
ry, by  being  seduced  into  an  erroneous  opinion,  that  the  pre- 
sent age  have  a  right  to  inflict  upon  them  these  calamities* 

It  is  to  sue':!  national  erroursi  that  mankind  have  been 
indebted  ^'w  most  of  their  miseries,  and  for  having  fallen  a 
prey  to  avarice  and  ambition  in  all  ages  of  the  world,  Idol- 
atry was  concealed  behind  an  ed'wtoeous  veneration  for  those 
who  fed  upon  its  victims.  Monarchy  and  aristocracy  are 
skilful! v  fenced  round  by  the  insidious  and  erroneous  arsm- 
merits  of  the  mass  of  talents,  interested  in  their  cause.  Cru- 
sades.  in  the  opinion  of  several  generations,  led  the  wav  to 
Heaven,  whilst  the  monks  iiSed  them  to 'acquire  wealth. 
And  toe  errour  of  an  opinion,  that  one  age  fan  seize  upon 
the  wealth  of  another  by  anticipation,  is  no  less  ruinous  to 
nations,  an  i  enriching  to  individuals  and  orders  or  seperatc 
interests,  than  the  en-ones  which  have  supported  idolatry, 
monarchy,  aristocracy  artd  crusades; 

It  is  however  the  most  recent,  the  most  plausible,  the 
moc;f  seducing,  and  the  most  dangerous  invention,  to  which 
self  interest  and  cunning  <bas  ever  resorted,  for  moulding 
niai  into  coin  ;  and  will  probably  keen  its  ground,  until 
such  calamities  as  have  exploded  other  erroiirs,  shall  dis- 
close to  an  existing  generation  that  it  was  horn  free.  A 
truth,  which  they  will  then  clearly  discerU  to  have  been  re- 
vealed to  man,  in  withholding  from  the  dead  a  power  to  gov- 
ern the  living,  and  from  the  living,  a  power  to  govern  the 
dead.  It  will  then  be  seen,  that  moral  rectitude  does  not 
impose  upon  a  living  nation  the  duty  of  submitting  to  tyran- 
nv  and  oppression,  because  a  nation,  which  is  dead,  chose  to 
gratify  the  hatred  of  one  king  against  another,  or  the  ra* 
pacity  of  generals :  or  to  corrupt  a  party  to  support  or 
produced  revolution  in  the  government;  Evils,  controlled 
fey  such  an  opinion,  and  encouraged  by  one,  that  posterity 
ought  to.  suffer  their  cifecis,  rather  than  the  generation 
which  caused  them. 


It  would  be  superfluous  to  prove  th at  unborn  generations 
are  injured  by  anticipation  ;  it  is  taxation,  by  persons,  not 
elected  by  the  payers,  nor  participating  in  the  tax,  but  en- 
riched by  it.  If  the  laws  of  nature  are  so  partial  and  un- 
just, as  to  allow  one  generation  to  rob  another  with  impuni- 
ty, the  crime  will  be  perpetrated.  It  will  only  be  prevent- 
ed by  a  conviction  that  punishment  follows  vice,  in  this  as 
in  other  cases;  and  that  the  malice  of  the  attempt  regular- 
ly receives  its  due  vengeance,  without  a  possibility  of  ob- 
taining a  benefit;  or  by  the  same  disregard  of  the  living  to 
the  mandates  of  the  dead,  as  to  the  happiness  and  liberty 
of  the  unborn. 

Let  us  consider  how  anticipation  bestows  wealth.  It 
does  not  conjure  into  real  existence,  the  commercial,  agri- 
cultural or  manufactural  products  of  futurity.  It  does  not 
add  to  the  corn  or  to  the  coin.  It  only  conjures  the  wealth  of 
existing  people  out  of  some  hands  into  others  ;  and  the  cre- 
dit with  which  to  buy  property  of  the  living  given  by  the 
certificate,  constitutes  all  the  solid  wealth  gained  by  antici- 
pation. It  is  a  pretext  for  taxation,  and  a  mode  of  chang- 
ing property  among  individuals,  but  produces  nothing  for 
nations. 

■  War  is  among  the  most  plausib'e  means  used  to  delude 
a  nation  into  the  errour  of  anticipation.  Yet  it  cannot  bring 
up  from  futurity  a  gun,  a  soldier,  a  ration,  or  a  cartridge. 
The  present  generation  suffers  every  hardship  and  cost  of 
war,  although  anticipation  pretends  that  it  is  suffered  by 
future  generations.  And  this  delusion  is  used  to  involve  na- 
tions in  wars,  which  they  would  never  commence,  if  they 
knew  that  all  the  expense  would  fall  upon  themselves.  It 
is  twice  suffered;  by  the  living,  who  supply  all  the  ex- 
penses of  war;  and  by  the  unborn,  who  supply  an  equiva- 
lent sum,  to  take  up  certificates  of  the  expenses  paid  by  the 
living. 

No  item  of  the  expense  of  war  is  more  transferable  from 
the  living  to  the  unborn,  than  the  blood  it  sheds.  Money 
buy?  this  Mood  and  every  other  expense  rrf^ar  :  but  it  is" 

S3 


250  FUNDING. 

neither  blood  nor  bread,   and  only  a   collector  of  them* 
These  realities,  not  the  signs  or  tokens,  supply  the  war; 
and  after  they  are  expended,   their  shadows  are  made  by 
anticipation,  to  consume  the  same  amount  of  realities  which 
the  war  devoured,  even  that  of  human  life,  if  death  by  op- 
pression is  equivalent  to  death   by  the   sword.      Thus  one 
war  is  converted  into  two,  and  every  period  of  natural,  be- 
gets an  equal  period  of  artificial  war.     The  same  ingenious 
contrivance,  by  the  help  of  compound  anticipation,  converts 
about  fourteen  years  of  war,  into  a  perpetual  war.      If  a 
million  annually  comprises  or  represents  the  utmost  efforts 
in  realities,  which  a  nation  can  make  in  war;  and  the  re- 
alities represented  are  expended  annually,  leaving  behind 
them  annually   the  million  of  stock  or  certificates  at  com- 
pound interest,  produced  by  the  anticipating  mode  of  calling 
these  realities  into  use  ;  then  a  war  of  about  fourteen  years 
continuance,  places  the  nation  in  a  state  equivalent  to  per- 
petual war  ;  because  the  stock  or  certificates  will  devour  in 
peace,  precisely  the  same  amount  of  the  realities  represent- 
ed bv  money,  which  the  war  did.      Nor  can  this  nation  be 
ever  relieved   from  a   staJe  equivalent  to   perpetual  war, 
whilst  the  stock  preserves  its  value,  and  the  national  re 
sources  are  the  same.      If  there  are  fourteen  intervals  be- 
tween the  fourteen  years  of  war,   the  same  result  will  ulti- 
mately  occur ;  whence  it  has  happened,  that  peace  has  been 
seldom  able   to   repair  the  errour  in   a  mode   of  making 
war,  so  calamitous  as  to  double  the  duration  of  short  ones, 
and  to   produce   a   perpetuity  of  its  evils  in   the   space  of 
fourteen  years.     A  maniac,  whose  income  in  kind  is  just 
sufficient  to  support  Slim,  takes  it  into  his  head  to  give  bis 
bonds  to  sundry  people  annually  for  its  value,    whilst  he  is 
consuming  it.      At  the  end  of  fourteen  years  his  whole  in-  - 
come  is    gone,   though  he   has   only   expended    its   annual 
amount.       Such  is  anticipation  to  nations.      l*,nt  those  who 
iise  H  to  deceive,   plunder  and  enslave  them,  artfully  liken 
it  to  the  cases  of  a   man  who  buys  an  estate  on  credit,   or 
who  gives  bonds  to  himself.     One  would  think  that   the 


FUNDING.  ^51 

impossibility  of  finding  any  such  estate  thus  obtained  by  na- 
tions ;  and  the  possibility  of  finding  the  taxes,  the  poverty, 
the  splendour,  and  the  political  innovations  it  produce  s, 
would  detect  the  falsehood  of  these  pretended  resemblances  ; 
and  sufficiently  convince  nations  that  they  are  not  one  homo- 
geneous mass  of  matter,  but  capable  of  a  thorough  divisi- 
bility into  individuals,  and  into  a  multitude  of  separate  in- 
terests (such  as  payers  and  receivers,  masters  and  slaves, 
impostors  and  dupes)  to  disclose  to  them  the  folly  of  trans- 
forming themselves  into  the  resemblance  of  the  maniac. 

But  the  fact  is,  that  nations  are  seldom  allowed  to  look 
at  their  interest  except  as  it  is  reflected  by  living  political 
mirrors,  such  as  kings,  ministers,  demagogues  or  stockjob- 
bers, so  contrived  as  to  make  deformity  exhibit  beauty,  and 
poverty  wealth,  to  the  infatuated  people,  for  the  sake  of  ad 
vancing  their  own  views  and  projects.     Had  the  represen- 
tations of  these  false  mirrors  been   true,  all  nations  would 
have  enjoyed  the  highest  prosperity.      The  linked  States 
are  tempted    to   plunge  into   anticipation   by   the  funds  of 
back  lands  and  growing  population  ;  the  first  pronounced  by 
twenty  years  experience,  to  be  insufficient  for  the    suste- 
nance of  a  single  Baring  ;*  and   the  second  unable  to  pro- 
tect the  existing  generation  for  a  single  year,  against  the 
drafts  from  their  liberty  and  property  which  the  system  in- 
evitably produces.     If  we  are  thus  seduced  into  the  snare, 
in  which  the  ambitious  and  mercenary  of  the  present  age 
.involve  their  prey,  our  population  and  lands,  arc  destined  to 
feed  the  two  most  insatiable  and   worst  passions  which  af- 
flict mankind,  and  our  vacant  territory  will  only  be  a  fund 
for  enslaving  our  children. 

Anticipation  is  at  best  a  mode  of  putting  the  energies  of 
present  time  in  motion,  without  any  powers  of  calling  up  a. 
single  energy  of  future  time.  Other  modes  have  operated 
more  powerfully,  without  being  considered  as  blessings  to 
the  age  which  felt  them.  Those  by  which  Xerxes,  Alex- 
ander, Cfflsar,  Peter  the  hermit,  Tamerlane,  Cromwell  and 

*  A  rich  English  stockjobber 


£b%  FUNDING. 

Bonaparte  were  enabled  to  lead  millions  to  victory  or  de- 
feat, were  more  successful  in  arousing  the  military  ener- 
gies of  the  present  time,  than  the  anticipating  mode. 

Nothing  exposed  the  American  and  French  revolutions 
to  greater  danger,  than  the  attempts  to  use  this  delusion. 
Anticipation  was  tried,  it  taxed  the  existing  generations  by 
depreciation,  it  superseded  the  cultivation  of  other  modes  of 
putting  existing  energies  in  motion,  it  failed,  the  failure  al- 
most obliterated  the  memory  and  suspended  the  use,  of  the 
leal  means  of  war,  and  a  dangerous  crisis  in  both  cases  was 
produced.  The  errour  in  these  instances  was  surmounted! 
by  the  good  sense  which  necessity  so  often  teaches. 

Political  and  religious  opinion,  and  a  love  of  country, 
are  stronger  excitements  of  existing  warlike  energies,  than 
anticipation.  They  cannot  be  stolen  or  hoarded  ;  but  war 
carried  on  by  paper,  is  starved  by  peculation,  and  produces 
the  utmost  degree  of  puhlick  expense,  with  the  least  degree 
of  publick  spirit.  An  excitement  of  the  militia  of  the 
United  States  by  arms,  training,  equipments  and  eulogy, 
would  probably  have  created  a  stronger  military  force,  at 
an  inferior  expense,  than  all  the  efforts  of  anticipation  have 
been  able  to  produce.  Can  the  most  expensive,  the  least 
successful,  and  the  most  corrupt  mode  of  exciting  the  ener- 
gies of  war,  be  the  best  ? 

If  anticipation  cannot  create,  but  only  excite,  it  follows, 
that  there  is  a  deception  in  the  idea,  that  it  can  postpone  the 
expense  of  war  to  a  future  time.  The  expense  of  war  real- 
ly consists  of  men,  food,  raiment,  arms  and  ammunition,  and 
not  in  a  juggle  of  signs  ;  anticipation  therefore  is  a  phan- 
tom, incapable  of  alleviating  the  miseries  of  war,  whilst  it 
is  a  harpy,  able  to  devour  the  blessings  of  peace. 

The  Romans  carried  on  long  and  expensive  wars  with- 
out the  aid  of  anticipation,  and  it  failed  before  the  end  of 
our  short  and  cheap  revolutionary  war.  Yet  the  whole  of 
the  paper  money  was  paid,  or  sunk  by  depreciation  whilst 
ilie  war  was  going  on  ;  a  mode  of  taxation  so  excessively 
unequal,  as  to  ascertain,   both  the  ability  and  necessity  of 


FUNDING.  2BS 

every  existing  nation  to  bear  the  expense  of  its  own  war? 
for  if  war  could  be  maintained  by  a  tax  excessively  unequal, 
it  follows,  that  the  energies  of  war,  are  within  the  reach  of 
an  equal  tax. 

After  this  unequal  tax  was  paid  by  the  United  States, 
and  the  war  hud  hern  finished  successfully  by  patriotism 
and  bravery,  anticipation,  which  had  fled  disgracefully  from 
the  contest,  returned  to  reap  the  hest  fruits  of  the  victory ; 
and  though  a  traitor,  found  means  to  supplant  and  plunder 
the  heroes  who  had  won  it.  This  success  was  more  won- 
derful, from  the  reason  which  caused  it,  than  in  itself.  That 
a  few  people  should  he  willing  to  enrich  themselves  at  the 
expense  of  a  multitude,  is  far  less  wonderful,  than  that 
they  should  succeed  by  persuading  this  multitude,  that  an- 
ticipation, which  had  recently  deserted  them,  was  a  better 
defender  of  nations,  than  patriotism  and  bravery,  which  had 
recently  saved  them. 

National  defence,  was  never  the  true  cause  of  any  fund- 
ing system  ;  and  no  funding  system  ever  defended  a  nation. 
It  was  invented  in  England  to  prop  a  revolution  hy  corrup- 
tion ;  extensively  used  to  sacrifice  the  nation  to  German  in- 
terests; and  it  has  been, continued  to  feed  avarice,  and  si- 
lently to  revolutionize  the  revolution.  It  was  introduced 
into  America,  after  the  nation  had  been  defended,  to  enrich 
a  few  individuals,  and  also  to  revolutionize  the  revolution. 

In  England,  the  advancement  of  the  Hanoverian  familv 
to  the  throne,  was  disagreeable  to  the  landed  interest,  of 
which  the  tory  party  at  that  time  chiefly  consisted.  This 
compelled  George  the  first  to  use  the  whig  party.  And 
Sir  Robert  Wal pole,  who  belonged  to  it,  pushed  a  paper 
system  to  enrich  his  partisans,  and  to  balance  the  superior 
wealth  of  their  political  opponents.  The  artifice  complete- 
ly succeeded  ;  the  rich  tories  were  iinnoverished  :  avast 
change  of  wealth  took  place;*  an  irresistible  whig  party 

*  There  is  only  one  title  in  England  which  pocs  with  the  lands  ;  that  of 
Arundel.     Did  Henry  the  7th  or  Walpole's  paper  system,  operate  most    I 
.  "■   -z'illv  towards  this  circumstance  ? 


•&$.%  i'UNBING. 

was  formed,  and  gradually  transformed  by  the  same  paper 
system  into  tories.  Asa  whig  party  it  placed  a  family  on 
the  throne,  and  then  convened  itself  to  toryism  with  zeal 
and  rapidity,  by  fraudulent  laws  to  enrich  itself. 

In  America  also,  a  paper  system  followed  the  revolution 
produced  by  the  present  form  of  our  general  government, 
and  operated  upon  the  landed  whigs  here,  exactly  as  it  had 
done  on  the  lauded  tories  in  England.  It  taxes  them,  en- 
riches a  credit  or  paper  faction  ;  changes  property ;  forms 
a  party;  and  transforms  its  principles  as  in  England.  But 
the  American  whigs  are  blind  to  the  ruin  which  the  English 
tories  saw. 

Henry  the  7th  broke  the  power  of  the  barons  to  strength- 
en the  monarchy;  Sir  Robert  Walpole  destroyed  the  power 
of  the  landed  interest,  and  compelled  it  to  contribute  to  the 
formation  of  a  inonicd  interest,  to  establish  a  disputed  title 
to  the  throne.  The  capacity  of  the  latter  invention  has  pro- 
bably exceeded  what  was  foreseen.  It  is  found  able  to 
seize  and  to  hold  the  reins  of  government.  It  is  found  able 
to  erect  a  stupendous  fabrickof  factitious  wealth,  and  to  com- 
pel land  and  labour  or  real  wealth,  to  become  its  humble 
and  obedient  subject. 

The  importance  of  these  truths  is  not  diminished,  be- 
cause the  monied  interest  in  England  happened  to  start  as 
whigs,  and  the  landed  as  tories.  They  shew  that  a  paper 
system  was  not  introduced  for  national  defence,  and  that  it 
can  transfer  property,  transform  parties,  and  change  the 
nature  of  governments.  Avarice,  and  a  conviction  of  its 
power  as  a  political  engine,  suggested  its  introduction  ;  and 
events  have  proved  that  this  conviction  was  correct.  It  is 
an  engine  which  is  able  to  usurp  and  held  a  government ; 
therefore  it  will  contend  for  dominion.  As  it  will  contend, 
it  must  experience  defeat  or  victory.  It  is  also  an  engine 
having  no  resemblance  in  interest  to  land,  labour  or  talents; 
therefore  it  cannot  be  a  friend  to  either. 

It  was  necessary  to  premise  a  short  history  of  these  twu 
paper  systems,    to  introduce  the  fallowing  argument,  as  to 


JfLNDINtt.  ^iSii 

the  reality  or  delusion  of  an  idea  usually  annexed  to  antici- 
pation. If  it  did  not  powerfully  and  instantaneously  enrich 
and  impoverish  existing  people,  how  could  Walpole  so  sud- 
denly and  effectually  have  debased  a  landed,  and  exalted  a 
monied  faction,  by  its  means?  The  capacity  of  anticipa- 
tion to  act  suddenly  upon  an  existing  age,  manifests  both 
the  delusion  of  considering  it  as  an  engine  for  drawing  up 
wealth  from  futurity,  and  also,  that  as  an  engine  for  pro- 
ducing an  oppressive  government,  it  is  no  delusion.  All 
paper  systems,  are  in  fact,  indirect  laws  of  confiscation,  used 
for  the  purposes  which  induced  the  French  revolutionists 
to  transfer  more  direetly,  a  great  mass  of  landed  property 
from  their  antagonists  to  themselves.  These  purposes  sim- 
ply were  to  enrich  themselves  and  establish  their  power.  It 
was  to  enrich,  and  establish  the  power  of  the  whigs,  at  the 
expense  of  the  tories,  that  Walpole  used  a  paper  system.  In 
America,  a  paper  confiscation  system,  conferred  wealth  and 
power  on  a  monarchical  party  at  the  expense  of  the  whigs. 
In  both  countries,  those  who  furnished  the  riches,  lost 
much  of  their  power  and  property;  and  those  who  received 
them,  gained  it.  The  French  confiscations  went  boldly  to 
their  object,  like  a  direct  tax.  The  English  and  American 
confiscations,  secretly  and  circuitously  effected  their  design, 
by  the  complication  of  a  paper  system  ;  like  an  indirect  tax. 
Oiie  seized  and  transferred  the  land  itself.  The  others, 
mortgaged  it ;  artfully  leaving  to  the  owner  an  appearance 
of  property,  whilst  he  is  only  a  receiver  of  the  profits  for 
the  benefit  of  the  mortgagee.  Is  one  mode  of  confiscation 
reprobated,  because  it  is  an  open  robber,  which  quickly  enJ-: 
the  pain  of  its  victim  ;  and  the  other  suffered,  because  it 
lies  bidden  under  deceit  and  complexity,  and  inflicts  slow  and 
lasting  tortures  ?  Oris  one  reprobated,  like  a  small  crimi- 
nal who  robs  an  individual ;  and  the  other  flattered,  like  a 
great  one  who  plunders  a  nation  ?  Can  violations  of  pri- 
vate property  be  rendered  just  or  unjust  by  their  modes  ? 
Between  the  modes  we  have  been  comparing,  there  is  one 
difference.      Direct  confiscation   is  always  pretended  to    •< 


296  aVNBiNu. 

a  punishment  of  guilt  ;  indirect,  by  paper  systems,  is  only 
used  to  punish  innocence.  And  yet  these  indirect  confisca- 
tions talk  finely  about  forfeitures,  and  private  property ; 
they  pretend  to  protect  that  which  their  only  effect  is  to 
transfer;  they  pretend  to  reprobate  that  which  is  their 
own  quality;  just  as  a  tyrant,  id  the  midst  of  spoil  and  car- 
nage, will  boast  of  his  justice  and  clemency. 

The  appearance  of  anticipating  the  resources  of  future 
ages,  is  artfully  extracted  from  the  simple  idea  of  borrow- 
ing upon  interest,  to  raise  up  for  paper  systems  a  sufficient 
degree  of  popularity  to  support  the  craft.  If  the  interest, 
which  is  the  price  paid  for  a  loan,  is  adequate  to  the  value 
of  its  use,  that  use  is  sold  and  bought,  and  not  loaned.  And 
such  must  be  the  case,  as  the  interest  or  price  is  taken  or 
refused  at  the  option  of  the  lender.  A  nominal  borrower  is 
therefore  a  real  purchaser  of  this  use  at  value,  which  value 
he  must  pay  as  long  as  he  holds  the  purchase  ;  nor  does  he 
by  the  purchase  of  money  for  interest,  differ  from  a  tenant 
who  purchases  land  for  rent,  in  point  of  being  able  to  an- 
ticipate the  wealth  of  futurity.  A  new  tenant  or  a  new 
generation  may  succeed  the  old,  and  each  may  continue  to 
pay  the  same  rent  for  the  land  or  money,  but  their  predeces- 
sors paid  it  also,  without  getting  any  thing  out  of  time  to 
come.  This  observation  applies  with  still  more  particular 
accuracy  to  funding  systems,  in  that  branch  of  their  policy, 
never  to  redeem  the  principal,  but  to  receive  a  perpetual 
rent  for  it. 

An  individual  who  borrows  monev,  like  one  who  rents 
land,  does  not  bring  forward  for  his  own  use,  the  least  por- 
tion of  the  wealth  of  time  to  come.  Could  he  do  this,  bor- 
rowing would  make  an  existing  individual  wealthier ;  but  as 
it  generally  makes  him  poorer,  it  seems  evident,  that  he 
pays  himself  the  value  of  the  use  of  the  money  he  borrows. 
If  A,  having  land  worth  ten  thousand  pounds,  borrows  that 
sum  of  B,  A  does  not  become  worth  twenty  thousand  pound? 
at  the  expense  of  his  posterity.  He  has  only  sold  his  land 
tb  B,  aird  turned  his  fortune  into  money ;  but  B  indulges  A 


FUNDING.  257 

• 

with  cultivating  the  land,  and  paying  its  rent  wider  the  name 
of  interest.  So  if  a  nation,  whose  lands  are  worth  one  hun- 
dred millions,  borrows  and  funds  that  sum,  it  has  only  sold 
or  mortgaged  its  lauds  to  stockholders  up  to  their  value, 
who  receive  the  rent  in  the  name  also  of  interest  or  divi- 
dends. It  has  not  added  to  its  wealth,  or  drawn  any  thing 
from  futurity,  hut  only  turned  its  land  into  money.  And 
between  the  nation  and  a  private  debtor  is  this  difference  ; 
that  an  individual  who  sells  his  estate,  receives  and  uses  the 
purchase  money  ;  but  a  nation  which  turns  its  estate  or  any 
portion  of  it  into  money  b^  borrowing,  loses  both  the  money 
and  estate. 

But  the  evil  is  not  terminated  with  this  loss.      If  an  age 
is  supposed  to  consist  of  twenty  years,  and  it  borrows  at  live 
per  centum,  it  loses  the  principal,   first  by  its  perversion 
from  publiek  use  to  the  gratification  of  private  avarice  or 
ambition  ;  secondly,  by  its  entire  repayment  during  the  bor- 
rowing age;  and  moreover  all  individuals  who  exist  above 
twenty  years,  pay  their  proportion  of  the  principal  borrow- 
ed for  each  evcle  of  additional  existence.      JUanv  will   pay 
three  hundred  per  centum  for  anticipation  in  this  way  only, 
but  few  will  receive  any  thing  from  it,  and  all  subject  then 
descendants  for  ever  to  a  repayment  of  the  whole  principal 
for  CAcvy  revolution  of  the  stockjobbing  orb,  without  a  pos- 
sibility of  their  deriving  any  benefit  from  it.     To  these  re- 
quitals of  an  existing  generation,  for  attempting  the  impos- 
sibility of  enriching  itself  at  the  expense  of  its  posterity,  a 
long  catalogue  of  the  same   complexion    might  be  added  ; 
such  as  the  number  and  expense  of  new  offices,  produced  by 
hprro wing,  not  only  to  expend  the  principal,   hut   to  collect 
and  pay  the  interest;  and  the  oppression  inevitably  result- 
ing from  dividing  a  nation  into  inimical  interests.      These 
arguments  are  bottomed  upon  the  concession  of  a  similitude 
between  venting  land  and   borrowing  money,   whereas  the 
true  similitude  from  which  we  ought   to  draw  our  conclu- 
sions itt  regard  to  funding  systems,   would  be  one  between 

3i 


338  FUNDING. 

paying  pent  for  the  picture  of  land,  and  interest  for  the  pic- 
ture of  money. 

If  the  borrowing  age,  far  from  enriching  itself,  is  a  suf- 
ferer ;  a  system,  by  which  each  succeeding  age,  undergoes 
the  same  or  greater  evils,  must  be  vitally  malignant  to  hu- 
man happiness. 

We  have  been  unable  to  deduce  any  paper  system,  from 
the  origin  of  honest  intention  or  national  defence ;  but  as 
such  an  origin,  would  not  alter  its  effects  upon  human  hap- 
piness or  liberty,  or  upon  the  civil  policy  of  the  United 
Siates,  it  is  fair  to  conclude,  that  as  the  effects  of  funding 
or  anticipation  will  be  evil,  though  the  motives  which  gave 
rise  to  it  should  be  honest,  so  the  system  is  incurably  er- 
roneous, even  under  its  most  upright  application. 

OF  our  civil  policy,  division  and  responsibility,  are  the 
chief  pillars.  An  accumulation  of  wealth  by  law,  is  the 
eo  i  iter  principle  to  that  of  division.  And  out  of  this  ac- 
cumulation will  grow  an  influence  over  the  legislature, 
■which  will  secretly  deprive  the  people  of  their  influence 
over  it. 

This  principle  of  division  has  been  applied  to  the  laws  of 
inheritance  in  every  state  in  the  union  ;  to  divide  land  and 
accumulate  stock,  exhibits  a  political  phenomenon,  worthy 
of  an  attentive  consideration  ;  because  its  consequences 
must  be  new  and  curious.  If  an  accumulation  of  landed 
wealth,  bv  the  narrow  and  limited  efforts  of  talents  and  in- 
dustry,  is  an  object  of  jealousy  to  our  policy  :  an  accumu- 
lation of  paper  wealth  by  the  extensive  power  of  law,  can- 
not he  an  object  of  its  approbation.  Land  is  in  some  degree 
a  representative  of  every  man's  interest,  as  being  the  source 
of  human  subsistence,  and  a  landed  interest  cannot  tax  with- 
out taxing  itself.  Out  of  paper  stock  nothing  grows.  It 
only  represents  the  interest  of  its  holder,  and  it  can  tax, 
without  taxing  itself.  It  must  do  this,  because  it  can  only 
subsist  upon  the  subsistence  it  can  draw  from  land  and  la- 
hour  ;  and  as  an  imposer  of  taxes  it  is  strictly  analogous  to 
a  legislature  of  officers  receiving  legal  salaries.  If  a  landed 


FUNDING.  25$ 

interest,  tliongh  naturally  friendly  to  man,  may  be  cor- 
rupted by  moulding  it  into  a  separate  order  ,*  and  rendered 
malignant  and  oppressive  in  a  considerable  degree  ;  it  is  ex- 
tremely improbable,  that  a  paper,  stock,  or  taxation  inte- 
rest, can  be  changed  from  a  foe  into  a  friend,  by  the  means 
which  convert  a  friend  into  a  foe.  The  English  have  paid 
some  regard  to  their  principles  of  checks  and  balances,  by 
leaving  primogeniture,  or  an  hereditary  landed  political  or- 
der or  faction,  standing,  as  an  offset  against  their  monied 
faction;  the  American  legislatures  have  paid  no  regard  to 
their  principles  of  division  and  responsibility,  and  mure  en- 
tirely partial  to  a  monied  faction,  af  their  own  architecture, 
have  destroyed  this  offset,  alone  capable  of  holding  a  monied 
faction  in  some  state  of  responsibility  5  and  secured  agri- 
cultural subjection  to  their  offspring,  by  charters  for  accu- 
mulating one,  and  laws  for  dividing  the  other. 

It  is  a  plausible  consideration  against  this  conclusion, 
that  the  laws  of  distribution  reach  and  scatter  paper  wealth, 
as  laws  of  inheritance  do  landed.  The  following  fact,  set- 
tled by  experience,  is  a  conclusive  answer  to  the  objection. 
The  English  laws  of  distribution,  by  which  paper  wealth  ie 
divided  upon  principles  similar  to  our  laws  of  distribution, 
have  been  unable  to  prevent  the  existence  of  a  separate, 
stock,  paper,  or  taxation  interest,  or  the  ruinous  effects  of 
that  existence. 

Such  is  the  fact ;  let  us  search  for  its  cause.  ft  pre- 
sents itself  in  the  consideration,  that  corporations,  or  fa"*i~ 
tious  separate  interests,  neither  live  nor  die  natural!;  j  they 
only  live  or  die  by  law.  An  established  church  for  instance, 
is  a  factitious  separate  interest,  not  of  natural,  but  of  le^al 
origin,  and  by  law  only  can  its  existence  be  terminated. 
By  increasing  the  number  of  priests,  and  dividing  the  in- 
come of  this  separate  interest  among  more  members,  the 
interest  itself  is  not  divided:  and  instead  of  being;  weaken- 
ed,  it  is  strengthened.  So  iu  a  separate,  stock,  paper  or 
taxation  interest  of  any  kind  established  by  law.  It  is  an 
interest  on©  and  indivisible;  and  though  the  laws  of  distri- 


266  rUNDIJFG. 

bution  may  occasionally  add  to  the  numbers  benefitted  by  it, 
these  additions  are  recruits  similar  to  new  levies  added  to 
an  army,  or  new  priests  added  to  an  established  church.  In 
all  three,  of  these  cases,  an  interest,  created  by  law,  and  sub- 
sisting upon  a  nation,  becomes  stronger,  by  multiplying  the 
individuals  united  to  it  with  a  participation  in  its  income  ; 
and  weaker,  by  diminishing  the  number  of  these  individuals. 
Such  interests  are  incapable,  as  will  presently  be  proved,  of 
including  the  majority  of  a  nation,  or  of  a  general  division 
among  its  members  ;  the  cement  of  fear,  excited  by  a  per- 
petual danger  of  the  stroke  of  death,  from  their  creator, 
law;  and  a  consciousness  of  physical  imbecility,  distinguish 
them  from  the  object  of  their  apprehensions. 

None  of  these  causes  will  prevent  a  landed  interest  from 
being  weakened  by  a  division  of  lands.  Land  is  not  created 
by  law:  therefore  it  is  under  no  apprehension  of  its  death 
stroke  from  law.  It  does  not  subsist  upon  other  interests; 
therefore  it  is  not  beset  by  an  host  of  enemies,  whose  ven- 
geance it  is  conscious  of  deserving.  By  the  operation  of 
laws  adverse  to  its  monopoly,  it  quickly  adjusts  itself  to  tlie 
interest  of  a  majority  of  a  nation  ;  thenceforward  it  is  in- 
capable of  the  avarice  and  injustice  of  a  factitious  legal  in- 
terest, because  no  temptation  to  seduce  it  into  either,  ex- 
ists. To  this  point  of  improvement,  a  landed  interest  will 
invariably  be  brought,  by  laws  for  dividirrg  lands  ;  nor  can 
it  be  corrupted,  except  by  laws  which  confine  lands  to  a 
minority.  Then  it  becomes  in  a  degree  a  factitious  legal 
monopoly,  capable  of  being  favoured  by  law.  and  infected 
with  a  portion  of  that  malignity,  which  constitutes  the  entire 
essence  of  a  minor  separate  interest  purely  factitious: 

A  paper,  a  military,  or  an  established  church  interest, 
cannot,  it  has  been  asserted,  include  a  majority  of  a  nation, 
as  may  a  landed ;  because  a  majority  cannot  live  upon  a 
minority,  but  a  majority  may  live  upon  Sand.  Let  us  take 
a  paper  interest  of  any  kind  to  illustrate  this  assertion.  It 
is  simply  debt,  in  al!  its  forms.  If  I  give  a  bond  to  myself, 
it  does  not  add  to  my  wealth,  or  create  a  new  interest.      If 


i'UNDING.  26i 

a  nation  should  create  any  portion  of  debt,  and  sustain  it  in 
a  state  of  equal  distribution  among  all  its  members*  no  sc~ 
parate  interest  would  t hence  arise.  Creditor  and  debtor 
are  characters  essential  to  the  existence  of  a  paper  property 
or  interest ;  if  these  characters  are  united,  the  quality  of 
value  flees  from  paper.  Imagine  a  nation  consisting  of  one 
million,  having  paper  stock  of  one  million,  each  person  hold- 
ing one  share,  and  equally  taxed  to  redeem  this  stock.  The 
principle  of  division  obviously  annihilates  in  this  stock,  the 
quality  of  value  or  property.  But  give  ten  shares  each,  to 
one  hundred  thousand  of  the  same  nation,  and  these  quali- 
ties arc  instantly  annexed  to  the  stock.  But  land  neither 
loses  its  value  by  division,  nor  is  that  value  enhanced  by  ac- 
cumulation. It  is  therefore  capable  of  escaping  the  infec- 
tion of  monopoly,  whilst  a  paper  interest  cannot  exist  with- 
out it ;  of  this  interest,  monopoly  being  the  vital  principle, 
the  laws  of  distribution  cannot  destroy  it,  without  putting  an 
end  to  the  system  itself. 

The  gradual  progress  of  the  laws  of  distribution,  must 
aggravate  the  evil  of  a  paper  monopoly,  until  the  very  mo- 
ment at  which  they  might  be  made  to  produce  its  destruc- 
tion. As  a  paper  interest  draws  its  subsistence  from  the  re- 
sidue of  a  nation,  an  increase  of  the  number  to  be  subsisted, 
will  add  to  the  burden  of  furnishing  this  subsistence;  jutt 
as  an  increase  of  soldiers  or  priests,  will  add  to  the  burdens 
of  the  nation  which  maintains  them.  So  long  as  the  in- 
crease of  an  army  or  priesthood  is  attended  with  national 
ability  to  maintain  them,  the  effect  of  bringing  more  sol- 
diers or  more  priests  to  share  in  a  religious  or  military  mo- 
nopoly, is  an  aggravation  of  national  oppression ;  but  the 
very  instant  a  distribution  of  a  religious  or  military  monopo- 
ly is  extended  to  a  majority  of  the  nation,  by  making  theni 
soldiers  or  priests  (as  in  the  case  of  a  national  militia)  the 
ability  in  the  residue  to  maintain  it  would  cease,  and  with  it, 
the  oppression  would  cease  also.  In  like  manner,  the  laws 
of  distribution  are  only  capable  of  affecting  a  paper  interest 
in  two  modes.      By  aggravating  its  mischief,   or  producing 


362  FUNDING. 

its  destruction.  And  they  must  of  necessity  operate  in  the 
first  way,  until  they  terminate  in  the  second.  Their  first 
effect  is  certain,  and  must  continue  for  a  Jong  space,  to  pro- 
duce a  chance  for  the  second  ;  and  it  is  after  all  highly  im- 
probable, that  the  second  will  ever  happen. 

The  laws  of  distribution  therefore  aggravate  the  evils  of 
a  paper  monopoly,  whereas  those  for  dividing  lands  diminish 
the  evils  of  a  landed  monopoly.  The  fact  in  England  and 
the  United  States,  exactly  corresponds  with  these  argu- 
ments. The  distribution  of  a  paper  interest  to  greater 
numbers,  has  strengthened  the  paper  monopoly  in  both 
countries.  A  landed  monopoly  in  England,  though  sup- 
ported by  the  law  of  primogeniture  and  a  legislative  order* 
is  hardly  felt  as  a  political  principle.  There,  the  mere 
right  of  alienation  has  produced  a  division  of  lands,  suffi- 
cient to  destroy  a  landed  aristocracy,  and  enfeeble  a  landed 
interest ;  and  laws  for  dividing  or  distributing  paper  stock, 
have  created  and  strengthened  a  paper  aristocracy.  The 
latter  have  the  same  effect  as  laws  for  multiplying  offices, 
in  order  to  cure  the  ill  effects  of  patronage  ;  or  for  increas- 
ing a  nobility  or  clergy  for  the  purpose  of  abolishing  an  or 
der. 

Having  proved  that  laws  of  division  or  distribution,  will 
counteract  landed  and  aid  paper  combinations  for  usurping 
a  government ;  wc  will  proceed  to  subjoin  a  few  of  the  ef- 
fects which  will  result  from  the  destruction  of  a  landed, 
and  the  creation  of  a  paper  monopoly. 

As  landed  possessions  are  divided,  the  leisure  and  in- 
come of  the  proprietors  will  be  diminished ;  and  as  paper 
property  is  accumulated,  the  leisure  and  income  of  the 
holders  will  be  increased.  The  weight  of  talents  will  fol- 
low leisure  and  wealth  ;  and  these  will  gradually  acquire  a 
locality,  corresponding  to  the  abodes  of  the  receivers  of 
stock  taxation.  This  superiority  of  talents  and  wealth  will 
invest  individuals,  and  the  cities  in  which  they  will  chiefly 
reside,  with  an  influence,  well  calculated  to  acquire  an  as- 
cendant over  the  landed  interest,  gradually  impoverished  by 


/ 

FUNDING.  ^fiS 


division.  And  though  this  landed  interest  may  not  sudden- 
ly sink  into  an  ignorant,  scattered,  disunited  peasantry, 
taxed  hy  paper  operations,  to  enrich,  instruct  and  elevate  a 
new  species  of  feudal  capitalists,  yet  the  tendency  of  the 
system  is  exactly  to  that  point,  and  the  arrival  of  an  unob- 
structed tendency,  is  inevitable. 

If  the  division  of  landed  property  has  a  tendency  to  in- 
crease the  ignorance  of  the  numerous  and  valuable  portion 
of  societv  which  cultivate  it,  a  defect  of  the  American  po- 
Iicy  in  not  providing  some  remedy  to  meet  this  evil,  is  dis- 
closed. From  preventing  an  accumulation  of  landed  wealth, 
and  providing  for  a  monied  or  stock  monopoly  of  know- 
ledge, a  reason  arises  for  placing  the  best  educations  within 
the  reach  of  that  great  mass  of  people,  called  the  landed  in- 
terest ;  instead  of  which  its  inability  to  purchase  knowledge 
is  studiously  increased,  by  a  division  of  inheritances,  and  by 
the  annual  draughts  upon  it  for  the  interest  and  dividends  of 
debt  and  bank  stock.  The  ignorance  of  land  holders  will 
thus  in  time  be  brought  to  a  standard  exactly  sufficient  to 
render  them  tame,  and  subservient  to  the  interest  of  a  stock 
aristocracy ;  an  event  which  may  even  be  accelerated,  by 
taxing  them  for  the  purpose  of  diffusing  a  knowledge  of  the 
Vulgar  tongue,  and  vulgar  arithmetiek.  These  laws  for  di 
viding  landed  property,  and  levelling  landed  knowledge, 
form  a  striking  contrast  with  those  for  accumulating  stock 
wealth,  and  of  course  stock  knowledge.  Are  both  consist- 
ent with  the  principles  of  our  governments  ?  If  I  wished  to 
level  a  field,  merely  preserving  that  degree  of  inequality, 
necessary  to  prevent  the  effects  of  stagnation,  ought  I  to  rear 
a  mountain  in  the  midst  of  It  ?  Is  an  accumulation  of 
wealth  and  knowledge  by  law  in  a  few  hands,  to  be  found  in 
any  recipe  for  making  a  free  republick  ? 

The  errour  of  landed  wealth,  in  favouring  a  paper  aris- 
tocracy, because  it  is  friendly  to  a  landed  one,  rises  into 
view  at  this  moment.  It  does  not  perceive  that  even  iu 
England,  a  landed  aristocracy  has  been  vanquished  and  is 
governed  by  a  paper  or  stock  aristocracy.     It  does  not  per 


36i  FUNDING. 

ceive  that  a  landed  aristocracy  cannot  exist,  under  our  laws, 
the  extent  of  our  country,  and  the  multitude  of  proprietors  ; 
majority  is  not  a  quality  of  aristocracy.  And  it  will  not 
perceive  that  the  landed  interest  is  under  our  circumstances, 
irretrievably  repuhliean.  Being  so,  the  preservation  of 
principles  adapted  to  its  nature,  or  a  sale  or  mortgage  of 
itself  for  the  maintenance  of  a  stock  aristocracy,  is  evi- 
dently its  solitary  alternative.  Our  landed  interest  is  inca- 
paid  e  of  forming  the  aristocracy  required  hy  Mr.  Adams's 
system  of  limited  monarchy,  in  England,  the  aristocrat*, 
cal  power  which  now  props  the  throne,  is  compounded  of 
arms,  paper  and  patronage  :  not  of  the  landed  interest. 
Will  a  paper  system,  which  lias  destroyed  the  power  of  a 
landed  interest  in  England,  revive  it  here  ?  Has  a  landed 
aristocracy  existed,  or  can  it  exist,  in  community  with 
alienations,  commerce,  the  division  of  inheritances,  and  the 
absence  of  perpetuities  ? 

Perhaps  an  imaginary  apprehension  may  have  suggested 
the  idea,  that  the  mode  by  which  Walpole  fixed  a  tottering 
throne,  was  necessary  for  the  establishment  of  our  union. 
But  such  an  idea  is  a  traitor  to  that  union.  Principles  can 
never  he  established  by  their  contraries.  Monarchy  may 
corrupt  a  faction  to  support  itself,  consistently  with  its.prin- 
ciples ;  but  national  will  cannot  corrupt  a  faction  to  guide 
national  will,  without  perishing  at  the  instant  of  success. 
Had  the  proposal  been  made,  it  would  have  been  reprobated 
by  every  individual  friendly  to  the  union.  Is  the  attempt 
less  to  be  reprobated,  than  the  proposal  ? 

The  English  have  been  made  to  pay  hundreds  of  mil- 
lions for  the  Hanover  family  ;  but  why  should  the  Ameri- 
cans buy  the  union  at  the  same  price,  of  any  party,  whether 
whig  or  tory?  No  one  has  a  claim  to  it,  as  Stuait  had  to 
the  throne  of  England,  therefore  we  can  keep  it  as  our  own 
undisputed  right.  It  may  be  retained  by  virtue,  moderate 
government,  and  easy  taxes  ;  but  it  dies  under  the  influence 
of  pa4>er  stock.  And  out  of  this  dissolution  the  resurrection 
of  Mr  Adams's  theory  of  three  orders  cannot  arise.     There 


FUNDING*  Z65 

can  be  but  two  under  the  system  of  paper,  namely,  ereditor 
and  debtor,  patricians  and  plebeians,  or  masters  and  slaves. 
We  agree  with  Mr.  Adams  that  two  orders  will  render  a 
nation  miserable,  though  we  have  denied  that  three,  or  even 
a  number  equal  to  the  casts  of  India,  will  restore  it  to  hap- 
piness. 

The  orders  of  creditor  and  debtor,  make  the  system  of 
Spartans  and  Helots.  One  will  live  in  idleness  upon  the 
labour  of  the  other.  But  the  luxury  of  the  present  age,  and 
the  effeminacy  of  modern  Spartans,  doubly  aggravate  the 
malignity  of  the  theory  in  our  imitation.  Infinitely  more 
income  is  required  for  the  paper  Spartans,  and  labour  from 
the  free  Helots,  without  the  retribution  of  national  defence. 
But  if  our  modern  Spartans  are  not  heroes,  they  have  dis- 
closed an  inimitable  portion  of  dexterity,  in  prevailing  upon 
the  order  of  Helots  to  buy  heroes  to  knock  their  fetters  on 
and  not  off,-  and  to  defend,  not  the  nation,  but  the  income 
of  the  Spartan  order. 

It  is  believed  by  the  intelligent  writer  of  the  life  of 
General  Washington,  that  the  United  States  were  divided 
into  two  parties  and  brought  to  the  brink  of  ruin,  soon  after 
the  peace  with  England,  by  the  struggles  of  creditors  and 
debtors.  If  he  is  right,  it  cannot  be  just  or  wise  to  create 
by  legal  artifice  the  two  characters  to  an  extent,  beyond 
that  which  then  threatened  them  with  ruin.  Paper  stock 
forces  every  individual  into  one  of  these  parties,  without 
leaving  in  the  nation  a  single  disinterested  umpire,  to  as- 
suage the  passions  inspired  by  a  belief,  that  we  have  a  right 
to  receive  what  the  law  gives,  and  a  right  to  withhold  what 
it  unjustly  transfers.  These  will  not  be  the  parties  of  pri- 
vate contract,  restrained  by  the  voice  of  conscience,  and 
moderated  by  the  decrees  of  impartiality  ;  but  of  fluctuating 
interested  faction,  legislating  to  get  or  to  keep  wealth,  and 
looking  only  into  its  own  law  for  justice  and  judgement. 

Paper  stock,  patronage,  and  sinecure,  profess  an  affec- 
tion for  commerce,  because  she  is  a  convenient  cord  or 
fickle,  to  draw  ©ut  of  land  and  labour,    the  money  which 

35 


3G6       .  FUNDING. 

bestows  on  them  wealth  and  power.  For  this  purpose  has 
English  commerce  been  used,  by  paper  stock,  patronage  and 
sinecure,  and  the  maritime  force  necessary  10  sustain,  is  an 
evidence  of  their  latent  hostility  towards  it. 

Dazzled  by  the  splendour  of  English  commerce;  shall 
we  forget  that  we  cannot  conquer  and  keep  both  the  Indies, 
nor  compel  the  world  to  obey  a  navigation  act  for  laying  it 
under'  contribution,  by  the  prowess  of  stock?  Force,  eon- 
quest,  and  colonization,  furnish  the  food  to  English  com- 
merce, which  it  disgorges  to  be  again  swallowed  by  paper 
stock.  Should  our  commerce  mistake  this  devourer  for 
nourishment,  unpossessed  of  the  power  of  forcing  its  liver  to 
grow  as  it  is  eaten,  it  will  soon  cease  to  excite  the  jealousy 
of  English  commerce.  The  prosperity  which  has  awak- 
ened that  jealousy,  was  produced  by  its  freedom;  and  the 
vigorous  health  hence  derived,  will  speedily  be  exchanged 
for  the  hypochondriacal,  and  convulsive  fluctuations  of  law, 
war,  and  stockjobbing,  if  it  is  placed  under  the  patronage 
of  paper  stock. 

Charter,  monopoly  and  aristocracy  in  their  several  forms 
(those  of  funding  and  banking  excepted)  have  been  consid- 
ered by  commerce  as  her  foes.  She  will  not  even  own  for 
her  friends,  monopolies  bestowed  on  merchants;  and  al- 
though, under  the  delusion  of  containing  within  herself 
qualities  for  constituting  separate  orders  or  interests,  she 
has  sometimes  obtained  them,  yet  she  has  universally  upon 
trial  found  them  unnatural  to  her  constitution. 

Adverse  to  this  idea  is  the  paradoxical  opinion,  that 
commerce  may  be  made  to  flourish,  by  a  paper  capital,  lo- 
cal, fictitious,  and  oppressive  to  land  and  labour.  An  opinion, 
contradicted  by  the  commerce  of  Carthage,  under  a  defec- 
tive navigation  ;  and  by  the  inability  of  English  commerce 
to  meet  ks  rivals  with  the  advantages  of  the  greatest  stock 
eapital  in  the  world,  a  superiority  of  manufactures,  geo- 
graphical advantages,  and  an  irresistible  navy.  She  doffs 
the  habiliments  of  a  peaceable  trader,  cases  herself  in 
armour,  and  kills, or.  maims  her  relations,  to  support  that 


IfUNDIN*.  26"  r 

life  and  rivalry  with  foreign  nations,  to  which  her  stock 
regimen  renders  her  unequal. 

If  these  reasons  are  insufficient  to  prove,  that  paper 
stock  is  inimical  to  commerce,  the  next  question  is,  whether 
it  is  able  to  bestow  upon  her  benefits,  which  wiil  counter- 
poise the  advantages  she  derives  fVom  a  free  government  ? 
Upon  this  question  she  will  still  find  her  interest  united  to 
her  old  friends,  land  and  labour.  If  paper  stock  will  des- 
troy the  sound  principles  of  governments,  by  corrupting 
their  administrators,  will  it  compensate  land,  labour  and 
commerce;  for  enslaving  all  three  ?  Agriculture,  manufac- 
tures and  commerce,  are  indigenous,  as  it  were,  to  human 
comfort  and  happiness ;  paper  slock  is  a  foreign  invader, 
whose  object  is  to  subdue  these  close  friends  and  natural  al- 
lies, by  instilling  an  opinion,  that  one  of  them  will  be  bene- 
fitted by  deserting  to  the  common  enemy. 

An  association  of  casualties,  frequently  begets  very 
whimsical  associations  of  ideas.  The  rare  casualty  of  des- 
potism and  national  prosperity,  existing  together,  has  begot- 
ten an  opinion,  that  despotism  would  make  a  nation  pros- 
per. And  the  commerce  ef  England,  made  up  of  a  compli- 
cation o(' uircumstances,  has  begotten  an  opinion,  that  the 
system  of  paper  stack  was  favourable  to  commerce.  That 
the  opinion  flows  from  this  source,  is  undeniable,  and  that 
it  is  a  source  producing  only  a  medley  of  errour,  is  equally 
so.  It  would  be  as  correct,  to  pick  out -of  this  complication, 
any  other  circumstance,  and  to  ascribe  to  it  the  state  of  the 
British  commerce,  as  to  paper  stock  ;  and  many  might  pie- 
tend  to  such  a  distinction  with  far  greater  plausibility. 

Commerce,  monarchy,  paper  stock,  legislative  corrup- 
tion, privileged  orders,  charters  of  exclusive  commerce,  and 
hierarchy,  exist  together  in  England.  Is  there  an  affinity 
also  between  paper  stock  and  monarchy,  legislative  cor- 
ruption, privileged  orders,  exclusive  charters  for  commerce, 
and  hierarchy,  because  all  exist  with  it ;  the  reason  sup- 
posed to  prove  the  affinity  between  this  stock  and  com 
merce  ;  or  is  the  simultaneous  reason  sound  in  one  case  and 


36*  FUNDING. 

unsound  in  all  the  others  ?  Or  if  the  eomhination  of  paper 
Stock  with  eo  nmerce,  monarchy,  legislative  corruption,  ex- 
clusive charters  ami  hierarchy,  proves  its  affinity  to  all, 
would  it  be  best  to  take  all  for  the  sake  of  commerce,  or  it 
reject  all  for  the  sake  oi'liberty  ? 

The  dilemma  is  avoided,  by  exploding  the  errour  of  con- 
sidering paper  stock  as  favourable  to  commerce,  because 
they  exist  together  in  England.  That  one  is  the  bane  of  the 
other,  we  have  already  inferred  from  the  necessity  of  Eng- 
land to  resort  to  war  and  conquest  to  cultivate  her  com- 
merce. That  one  could  acquire  opulence  without  the 
other,  is  proved  in  the  experience  of  Carthage.  And  the 
early  dismay  with  which  England  beheld  a  commercial 
competition  with  America  before  her  introduction  of  paper 
stoek,  is  a  modern  concurrenc  e  with  ancient  experience. 

The   commerce  of  the  United    States   commenced  its 
operations  unconnected  with   paper  money,    and  advanced 
for    many  years    without  acknowledging   its   aid:  it  was 
obliged  to  travel  from  one  hemisphere  to  another,  before  it 
could  enter  into  competition  with  its  rivals,*  it  Avas  unpro- 
tected by  fleets  ;  it  traded  on  the  funds  of  four  millions  only 
of  people,  cultivating  a  soil,  poor  in  comparison  with  many 
countries  to  be  rivalled  ;  and  it  possessed  no  foreign  domin- 
ions to  fleece.     Yet  it  suddenly  aroused  the  jealousy  of  the 
most  extensive  commerce  in  the  world,  by  outstripping  all 
others.     These  eflTects  appeared  either  before  it  was  possi- 
ble for  it  to  owe  any  obligations  to  paper  money,   or  whilst 
such  obligations  must  have  been  inconsiderable.      But  our 
commerce  was  free.      Will  it  not  act  precipitately  m  de- 
serting a  career  so  happily  commenced  under  the  auspices 
of  freedom,  to  enlist  under  those  of  paper  stock,  from  an 
opinion  that  its  rival  derived  opulence  from  that   source  ? 
It  may  by  the  experiment  enslave  itself  without  enslaving 
India;  it  may  oppress  its  land  and  labour  associates  by  a 
fleet,  without  acquiring  the  empire  of  the  sea;  it  may  guide 
crouds  of  people   by  monopoly,   into   a   willingness  to  ex- 
dsange  a  moderate  climate  and  fertile  soil,  for  torrid  and 


FUNDING.  2269 

frigid  zones  ;  and  to  snap  all  the  ties  of  the  human  heart, 
in  an  eagerness  to  flee  from  the  direct  and  indirect  taxation 
of  paper  stock  ;  without  possessing  a  Botany  Bay  to  hide 
the  crimes,  which  oppression  will  beget;  and  having  at 
length  lost  its  original  vital  [  rinciple,  it  may  in  its  last  ago- 
nies deplore  the  infatuation,  which  dazzled  it  with  the  unat- 
tainable and  transitory  expedients  of  English  force  and 
monopoly. 

Paoer  money  is  precisely  as  unable  to  draw  up  out  of 
futurity,  the  commodities  of  commerce,  as  the  energies  of 
war.  The  stock  in  trade  of  an  individual  may  consist  of 
signs  or  representatives,  but  the  stock  of  commerce  consists 
of  the  things  themselves  ;  namely,  the  products  of  the  earth, 
and  manufactures.  Specie  cannot  draw  forward  any  of 
these  things  from  the  next  century  into  the  present ;  it  can 
only  draw  them  from  one  country  into  another;  even  this 
cannot  be  effected  by  local  paper  money;  its  office  is  to 
transfer  real  wealth  from  man  to  man,  not  by  commerce, 
but  by  a  juggle  in  legal  and  local  signs  of  property.  This 
is  effected  by  monopolies  for  uttering,  and  regulating  the 
quantity  of  paper  money.  It  has  been  a  general  opinion 
that  monopoly  was  a  principle,  unfavourable  to  commercial 
prosperity.  Commerce  struggled  to  destroy  perpetuities, 
and  monopoly  to  prevent  alienations.  In  the  distribution  of 
wealth,  commerce  is  active,  unwearied  and  useful ;  devoted 
to  its  monopoly,  she  becomes  speculative,  voluptuous  and 
pernicious  ;  under  the  latter  employment  she  sickens ;  un- 
natural as  it  is  to  her,  it  is  the  essential  quality  of  paper 
systems.  Whilst  the  office  of  one  is  to  distribute  and  of  (he 
other  to  monopolize,  a  natural  enmity  is  strongly  to  be  ap- 
prehended. 

That  paper  stock  will  have  the  effect  of  accumulating 
wealth  in  the  hands  of  individuals,  is  admitted  by  its  friends 
and  foes,  and  confirmed  by  experience.  This  effect  is  the 
exact  reason  felt  in  its  defence.  It  can  only  be  produced  by 
thievishly  taking  from  some  to  enrich  others ;  or  by  mi- 
raculously (hawing  up  out  of  futurity  the  commodities  of 


370  FUNDING.  «w 

commerce,  as  it  pretends  to  do  the  energies  of  war;  or  by 
propelling  and  exciting  human  industry:  it  remains  to  con- 
sider, whether,  in  this  last  character,  it  acts  as  a  goad  or  a 
reward ;  and  whether  any  more  eiFectu.il,  permanent,  and 
upright  mode  of  excitement  is  practicable. 

Several  ideas  occurring  here,  will  be  postponed  until  the 
subject  of  banking  is  considered.  At  present,  however, 
it  is  necessary  to  remark,  that  stock,  created  for  war  or 
commerce,  will  equally  excite  either  as  a  goad  or  a  reward, 
and  that  if  it  acts  as  a  goad,  it  behooves  us  to  consider  whe- 
ther industry,  like  bravery,  may  not  be  excited  in  some  bet- 
ter mode.  , 

Any  species  of  paper  stock,  which  is  a  debt  upon  national 
industry,  is  taxation.  Taxation  is  not  a  reward.  It  be- 
longs to  the  tyrannical  class  of  excitements.  If  such  ex- 
citements have  a  stronger  influence  over  the  human  mind, 
than  those  arising  from  the  principles  of  social  liberty,  the 
governments  of  the  United  States  are  founded  in  an  errone- 
ous policy.  They  have  all  conceived  that  industry  would 
be  better  excited  by  justice,  than  by  taxation ;  that  com- 
merce to  flourish,  needed  only  to  be  free ;  and  that  by  free- 
dom, the  supplies  of  land  and  labour  would  be  increased. 
By  free  and  moderate  government,  our  constitutions  have 
expected  to  excite  a  military  spirit  to  defend,  an  industrious 
spirit  to  improve,  and  a  commercial  spirit  to  enrich  our 
country.  Neither  the  monopolies  of  standing  armies,  he- 
reditary perpetuities,  or  chartered  currencies,  were  con- 
sidered as  the  best  excitements  for  defending,  cultivating, 
or  enriching  it. 

A  feudal  or  landed  monopoly  starved  commerce,  because 
it  tended  to  discourage  industry,  by  which  commerce  issup^ 
plied.  This  effect  flowed  from  the  injustice  of  enriching  by 
iega'  monopoly  without  industry.  A  monopoly  for  the  re- 
gjulation  of  a  paper  currency,  far  more  unexceptionable,  en- 
ri  *hes  by  law  without  industry  ;  and  in  producing  the  same 
effect,  discloses  that  it  is  the  same  principle.  Tf  this  mo- 
nopoly was  guided  by  a. noble  order,  unconnected  with  com- 


FUNDING.  2571 

uaeree,  she  would  exclaim  against  it ;  and  guided  by  her, 
she  is  able  to  use  it  to  oppress  agriculture  and  labour,  just 
as  the  feudal  monopoly  was  used  to  oppress  labour  and  com- 
merce. That  she  would  diminish  her  own  prosperity, 
is  an  insufficient  security  against  the  abuse  of  such  a  mo- 
nopoly. The  landed  interest  diminished  its  own  prosperity, 
by  the  oppression  of  commerce  and  labour.  By  justice,  as 
to  all  three,  a  nation  will  prosper ;  by  enabling  either  to 
draw  wealth  from  the  other  two,  by  law,  without  industry, 
the:  common  good  or  general  interest  is  invariably  wounded. 

Equally  remediless  is  the  evil  of  corporate  bodies  for  re- 
gulating commercial  currency,  by  the  expedient  of  forming 
them  with  land  holders,  merchants,  and  manufacturers. 
That  a  land  holder  will  not  oppress  a  landed  interest,  is  a 
stale  and  exploded  idea.  If  he  receives  the  tax  or  the  office 
in  which  the  oppression  consists,  although  he  contributes 
towards  it  from  his  land,  the  security  vanishes.  The  whole 
eatalogue  of  tyrants  have  been  land  holders.  If  a  bank  cur- 
rency is  a  tax  upon  land  labour,  and  commerce,  as  will  here- 
after be  demonstrated,  stock  holders,  even  composed  of  land 
holders,  merchants  and  manufacturers,  will  for  ever  remain 
willing  to  receive  the  whole  tax,  though  they  may  contri- 
bute a  proportion  of  it.  Nor  will  it  follow,  that  bank  or  fund- 
ed stock  is  beneficial  to  the  landed,  commercial  or  manufac- 
turing interest,  because  we  see  several  land  holders,  mer- 
chants and  manufacturers  enriched  by  it ;  any  more  than 
that  sinecure  offices  would  be  beneficial  to  these  interests, 
were  we  to  see  several  land  holders,  merchants  and  manu- 
facturers enriched  by  them.  It  is  the  income  drawn  from 
land  and  labour,  and  not  any  benefit  rendered  to  commerce 
by  stock,  which  causes  its  wealth.  And  this  fact  is  the 
true  reason,  why  stock  transplants  men  from  the  natural 
interests  of  society,  into  the  artificial  interest  of  paper  and 
patronage. 

To  buy  cheap,  and  to  sell  dear,  is  admitted  to  be  the  ob- 
ject of  commerce.  The  English  mode  of  effecting  these 
objects,  is  to  compel  labour  to  sell,  and  foreign  nations  to 


0,7%  PCNDING. 

buy,  at  the  prices  which  paper  monopoly  shall  settK  If 
the  eode  of  pillage  contains  a  law,  allowing  one  nation  t» 
pilfer  another,  that  of  social  justice contains  none,  by  which 
the  idea,  of  enabling  an  artificial  interest,  directly  or  indi- 
rectly, to  force  down  or  regulate  the  prices  of  the  natural 
interests  in  the  same  community,  can  he  defended. 

No  benefit  arises  to  a  naiiun  from  such  an  operation.  It 
merely  creates  a  rich  order,  by  creating  a  poor  order.  The 
wealth  obtained  from  the  foreign  nation  by  the  reductions 
imposed  upon  the  price  of  labour  at  home,  is  only  taken  by 
force  or  fraud  fioni  that  labour,  and  given  to  stock  capital- 
ists.  This  is  precisely  the  species  of  excitement  produced 
by  the  English,  and  all  other  paper  systems.  National, 
social  and  moral  law  unite  in  pronouncing  it  to  be  unjust. 
And  however  it  may  enrich  a  few,  it  impoverishes  and 
oppresses  a  multitude,  and  changes  commerce  into  a  na- 
tional curse.  It  becomes  a  blessing,  whenever  one  nation 
can  undersell  another ;  not  when  an  order  or  several  mer- 
chants, are  enabled  to  undersell  foreign  merchants,  at  the 
expense  of  fellow-citizen  manufacturers.  It  is  no  benefit 
to  the  plundered,  that  the  robber  can  undersell  a  fair  pur* 
chaser. 

The  rival  modes  for  enabling  one  nation  to  undersell 
another,  are,  the  English,  composed  of  force,  fraud  and 
paper,  and  calculated  to  render  labour  subservient  to  ava- 
rice, by  bestowing  on  the  latter  the  power  of  regulating 
wages  j  and  that,  which  acquires  the  same  advantage  from 
the  moderation,  freedom  and  cheapness  of  the  government. 
By  this  system  the  United  States  have  successfully  rivalled 
Europe,  and  obtained  a  degree  of  prosperity  not  embittered 
by  the  reflection  of  having  killed  and  plundered  foreign  na- 
tions, and  oppressed  fellow-citizens,  for  the  sake  of  com- 
merce. 

If  paper  systems  are  in  their  nature  suitable  to  legisla- 
tive corruption,  aristocracy  and  monarchy  ;  and  if  the  mo- 
mentum they  bestow  upon  commerce,  will  enrich  a  few  and 
impoverish  a  multitude  of  the  same  nation  ;  yet,  it  is  still 


said,  thnt  paper  stock  or  national  debt  is  an  augmentation 
of  national  property,  in  addition  to  its  retributing  a  naticm 
for  the  taxes  it  inflicts,  by  tlie  industry  it  excites. 

The  5th  chapter  of  Sterne's  posthumous  works,  gives  an 
account  of  a  pamphlet  written  by  himself  in  defence  of  Sir 
Robert  Walpole,  and  contains  the  origin  of  this  doctrine. 
He  proved,  says  he,  "  that  the  accumulation  of  taxes,  like 
i(  the  rising  of  rents,  was  the  surest  token  of  a  nation's 
fi  thriving;  that  thedearness  of  markets,  with  these  new  im- 
"  posts  of  government,  necessarily  doubled  industry ;  and 
'*  that  an  increase  of  this  natural  kind  of  manufacture,  was 
"  adding  to  the  capital  stock  of  the  common  wealth.'5  He 
subjoins,  "  that  his  book  had  been  the  codex,  or  ars  politiea 
"  of  all  the  ministerial  sycophants  ever  since  titat  sera ;  and 
"  that  he  had  scarcely  met  with  a  paragraph  in  any  of  the 
"  state  hireling  writers,  for  many  years  past,  that  he  could 
**  not  trace  fairly  back  to  his  own  code." 

If  American  commerce,  dazzled  with  the  glare  of  the 
English,  produced  by  consuming  great  masses  of  domestiek 
and  foreign  happiness,  is*  insensible  to  the  prophelick  satire  of 
Sterne,  and  the  catastrophe  hovering  over  her  rival,  we 
must  intreai  her  to  have  recourse  to  her  own  skill  in  calcu- 
lation, and  to  estimate  political  consequences,  with  only  half 
the  attention  she  would  devote  to  a  trading  vovaarc. 

Mr.  Adams  has  told  hev,  that  three  orders,  two  of  them 
hereditary,  are  necessary  to  create  a  limited  monarchy,  a 
monarchical  republick,  or  the  English  form  of  government. 
"We  remind  her,  that  orders  appear  in  every  monarchy, 
limited  ordespotick.  The  nobility  of  Germany,  France  and 
Spain,  the  Mandarins  of  China,  the  Nabobs  of  India,  the 
Bashaws  of  Turkey,  and  the  military  order  in  every  form, 
are  proofs,  that  monarchy,  mixed  or  pure,  can  only  be  sup- 
ported by  orders. 

If  we  have  proved,  that  paper  systems  lead  to  the  estab- 
lishment of  orders  ;  and  if  those  which  are  guilty  of  oppres- 
sion, or  those  which  suifer  it,  are  naturally  driven  to  mo- 
narchy for  defense  or  protection;  orders  or  separate  and 

3fi 


274  FUNDIXG. 

inimical  interests,  are  universally  to  be  considered  as  the 
prelude  to  monarchy.  And  whether  they  will  terminate  in 
a  limited  01*  absolute  monarchy  are  the  events  to  be  calcu- 
lated. The  probability  of  either  is  only  to  be  inferred  from 
experience.  And  the  evidence  of  experience  is  found,  by 
counting;  the  cases  wherein  orders  or  separate  legal  inter- 
ests, have  resulted  in  absolute  despotism  or  limited  monar- 
chy. The  catalogue  of  the  first  class,  is  almost  coequal 
with  the  number  of  governments,  which  have  ever  existed  ; 
and  one  ease  exists,  or  in  its  purity  has  existed,  according 
to  Mr.  Adams,  of  the  other. 

This  is  the  adventure,  upon  which  American  commerce 
is  embarking  her  freedom  and  prosperity.  By  favouring 
the  English  paper  system,  she  endeavours  to  introduce  se- 
parate and  inimical  interests;  these  will  beget  monarchy; 
there  is  a  thousand  to  one,  that  this  monarchy  will  be  abso- 
lute, even  supposing  that  one  case  does  exist,  wherein  or- 
ders have  protected  liberty  by  checking  monarchy.  If  no 
such  case  exists,  she  exchanges  her  freedom  and  prosperity 
for  slavery ;  if  it  does,  she  takes  the  chance  of  one  against 
a  thousand,  of  exchanging  it  for  limited  monarchy,  in  pre- 
ference to  a  free  republick. 

But  commerce  will  exclaim  that  she  is  an  enemy  to  or- 
ders or  separate  interests,  that  she  is  a  republican,  and  in 
favour  of  equal  rights  and  privileges.  We  shall  believe  her 
if  she  unites  in  the  expulsion  of  a  separate  interest ;  but  if 
she  craftily  turns  her  eyes  from  the  quarter,  on  which  it  Is 
advancing,  however  vociferously  she  may  call  our  attention 
to  a  feint,  she  will  be  suspected  of  a  confederacy  with  the 
enemy. 

Nobilitv  and  hierarchy  are  not  the  only  modes  of  consti- 
tttting  orders,  proper  for  fomenting  national  discontent,  and 
introducing  monarchy,  if  it  is  true,  as  Mr.  Adams  asserts, 
and  as  all  mankind  allow.  «  that  wealth,  is  the  great  ma- 
chine for  governing  the  world."  Hence  wealth,  like  suf- 
frage, must  be  considerably  distributed,  to  sustain  a  demo- 
crat iek  republick  |  and  hence,  whatever  draws  a  eenside- 


FUNDING.  275 

rable  proportion  of  either  into  a  few  hands,  will  destroy  it. 
As  power  follows  wealth,  the  majority  must  have  wealth  or 
lose  power.  If  wealth  is  accumulated  in  the  hands  of  a  few, 
either  by  a  feudal  or  a  stock  monopoly,  it  carries  the  pow- 
er also  ;  and  a  government  becomes  as  certainly  aristocrat- 
ical,  by  a  monopoly  of  wealth,  as  by  a  monopoly  of  arms. 
A  minority,  obtaining  a  majority  of  wealth  or  arms  in  any 
mode,  becomes  the  government. 

Nobility  and  hierarchy  cannot  acquire  in  the  United 
States  the  article  of  wealth,  necessary  to  constitute  a  sepa- 
rate order  or  interest,  and  therefore  they  can  only  be  used 
as  feints  to  cover  the  real  attack.  It  cannot  be  forgotten, 
that  aristocracy  is  a  Proteus,  capable  of  assuming  various 
forms,  and  that  to  make  these  forms  appear  in  that  natural 
hideousncss  common  to  the  features  of  the  family,  it  is  neces- 
sary to  touch  it  with  some  test,  an  accumulation  of  wealth 
by  law  without  industry,  is  this  test.  In  our  situation  and 
temper  it  can  only  be  effected  by  patronage  and  paper, 
which  now  bestow  monarchy  and  groans  upon  England. 
Title  without  wealth  is  the  shadow;  an  accumulation  of 
wealth  by  law,  is  the  substance.  We  have  only  to  deter- 
mine which  is  the  feint,  and  which  is  the  foe. 

We  hear  indeed  of  the  aristocracy  of  the  first  and  second 
ages,  from  the  repinings  not  the  efforts  of  hierarchy  and  ti- 
tle :  whilst  paper  systems  a-id  patronage,  the  aristocracy  of 
the  third,  are  using  force, faith  and  credit,  as  the  two  others 
did  religion  and  feudality ;  and  ihese  new  artifices  cloak 
themselves  under  the  smoke  produced  by  the  explosion  of 
the  old. 

Against  one  shadow  of  aristocracy,  the  general  consti- 
tution provides  in  these  words,  "  no  title  of  nobility  shall  be 
granted  by  the  United  States."  Suppose,  as  a  provision 
against  the  other,  some  member  of  the  convention  had  pro 
posed,  "  that  the  reinstatement  of  Jupiter,  and  the  convo- 
cation of  Olympus  should  be  prohibited :;'  Ought  he  not  to 
have  been  seconded  by  the  inventor  of  the  security  against 
aristocracy,  contained  in  the  prohibition  of  titles?      Thr 


Z7G  FUNDING. 

people  of  England  were  taught  to  believe,  that  they  had 
nothing  to  fear  except  from  the  pope  and  the  pretender,  by 
the  ministers  who  mortgaged  them  irredeemably  to  op- 
pression. 

Imaginary  Gods  and  empty  titles,  are   in  the  United 
States  equally  to  be  dreaded,  and  are  equally  able  to  erect 
the  aristocracies  of  superstition  or  feudality.     A  pecuniary 
interest,  quartered  on  nations  by  law,  is  here  the  engine  of 
power  and  oppression.    Unnecessary  office,  sinecure  income, 
•loekjobbing  by  the  lawmaker,  a  legislative  patronage    of 
separate  interests  or  factions,  and  a  concentrated  power  to 
tax,  to  incorporate,  to  borrow  and  to  receive,  make  up  the 
convolutions  of  a  serpent,   which  is  silently  and  insidiously 
entwining  liberty  ;  and  to  divert  our  attention  from  tSie  ope 
ration-,  we  are  terrified  by  the  dead  skeletons  of  the  two  an 
client  aristocratical  mamoths. 

Superstition  has  received  its  death  blow  from  know- 
ledge ;  a  landed  aristocracy,  from  commerce,  alienation  and 
the  division  of  inheritances.  Against  the  dead,  liberty  is 
safe ;  from  the  living  aristocracy  of  paper  and  patronage 
alone,  she  can  receive  a  deadly  wound. 

A  man,  being  informed  that  three  assassins  had  deter- 
mined upon  his  death,  but  that  two  of  them  had  suffered  the 
punishment  due  to  other  crimes,  solemnly  anathematizes 
the  dead  bodies,  and  takes  into  his  bosom  the  living  mur- 
derer. Liberty  is  the  man  ;  superstition  and  title  her  dead 
enemies;  and  the  system  of  paper  and  patronage  her  living 
foe. 

But  we  are  blinded  bv  names.  Hierarchy  concealed  its 
malignity,  by  usurping  the  name  of  religion.  The  new  sys- 
tem of  oppression  conceals  itself,  by  calling  patronage,  ne- 
cessary office ;  a  funding  system,  faith  and  credit ;  and  a 
banking  system,  an  encouragement  of  commerce.  Mankind 
have  discovered  the  difference  between  religion  and  hierar- 
chy ;  they  must  also  discover  that  between  useful  and  per 
nicioiis  offices,  between  genuine  and  spurious  faith  and  cre- 
dit, and  between  commerce  and  monopoly,  before  they  f-w.n 
maintain  moderate  and  free  governments. 


FITNI1ING.  27? 

The  system  of  paper  monopoly  deceives  no  less  by  re- 
jecting, than  by  assuming  names.  It  renounces  titles,  that 
it  may  be  thought  to  have  renounced  aristocracy.  And  it 
renounces  disorderly  government,  that  it  may  be  thought  to 
have  a  regard  for  private  property.  But  tides  are  incon- 
sistent with  its  species  of  aristocracy,  and  property  is  more 
Securely  and  permanently  invaded  and  transferred^  by  a  re- 
gular and  orderly  system,  than  by  occasional  and  disorderly 
Tiolations. 

This  love  of  property  is  artfully  seized  by  the  system  of 
paper  and  patronage,  as  a  handle  with  which  to  guide  hu- 
man nature.  Whilst  superstition  was  its  strongest  passion, 
that  was  the  handle  used  For  the  same  purpose.  But  this 
system,  discovering  that  a  love  of  superstition  has  given 
place  to  a  love  of  property,  and  concluding  that  mankind  are 
fated  for  ever  to  be  traitors  to  their  reason  and  dupes  to 
their  passions,  moulds  them  to  its  purposes  by  the  same 
means  which  superstition  used  successfully  for  ages. 

Had  the  system  of  paper  and  patronage,  proposed  to 
give  property  in  Heaven  for  property  on  earth,  the  count- 
less profit  of  the  exchange  might  have  reasonably  attracted 
the  passion  of  avarice,  and  in  some  measure  varnished  over 
the  imposture  ;  but  when  it  imposes  on  a  love  of  property, 
by  pretending  to  revere  and  protect,  that  which  its  only  em- 
ployment is  to  violate  and  transfer,  we  cannot  forbear  to  ex- 
claim, that  avarice  is  a  greater  fool  than  superstition  ;  we 
are  dismayed  at  discovering  that  a  stronger  engine  for  ma- 
nufacturing tyranny  exists,  than  superstition  itself;  the 
mind  startles  at  its  own  imbecility,  and  shudders  at  its  visi- 
ble love  of  imposture. 

A  love  of  property,  under  which  the  system  of  paper  and 
patronage  crouches,  is  the  very  passion  by  which  it  ought 
to  be  assailed.  All  frauds  pretend  to  be  founded  upon  the 
principles,  which  apply  most  forcibly  against  them;  just 
as  superstition  pretended  to  be  religion.  So  this  system 
uses  the  passion  of  avarice  in  others,  to  gratify  its  own.  By 

•lading  to  protect  property,   it  acquires  property.     It 


2TH  FUNDING. 

ingeniously  persuades  us,  that  it  can  effect  the  first  object, 
■without  possessing  a  single  quality  adequate  to  it ;  and  that 
it  does  not  effect  the  other,  with  qualities  competent  to  no 
other  end.  And  it  gravely  and  loudly  proclaims  its  love  of 
good  order,  but  conceals  that  its  motive  for  such  apparent 
integrity,  is  the  perpetuation  and  security  of  its  own  unjust 
acquisitions. 

A  love  of  good  order,  is  a  publick  virtue.  It  is  more 
useful  the  wider  it  is  diffused.  Is  it  good  policy  to  bribe  a 
minority  into  a  profession  of  this  virtue,  by  suffering  it  to 
pillage  a  majority  ?  Is  good  order  secured  by  rendering  the 
mass  of  a  nation  discontented,  to  content  a  few  ?  Let  us 
inquire  whether  such  a  policy  is  wise.  No  one  will  assert 
that  it  is  just. 

The  love  of  property  is  now  the  second  basis  of  civil 
government.  The  question  is,  how  a  wise  statesman  should 
avail  himself  of  this  passion.  If  he  forcibly  or  fraudulent- 
ly  takes  wealth  from  a  multitude,  and  gives  it  to  a  few, 
these  few,  it  is  confessed,  will  support  all  his  projects,  bad 
or  good  ;  and  call  his  government  orderly,  and  a  protector 
of  private  property.  But  if  he  forbears  to  take  directly  or 
indirectly  from  the  multitude,  in  order  to  corrupt  a  faction, 
he  acquires  the  affection  and  support  of  this  multitude.  The 
difference  between  the  acquisitions  is  this.  The  corrupted 
faction  will  adhere  to  the  vicious  as  well  as  just  measures  of 
our  statesman  ;  the  majority,  treated  justly,  will  condemn 
his  vices,  and  only  applaud  his  virtues.  That  government 
or  party  therefore  which  designs  to  do  wrong,  will  resort  to 
one  policy ;  and  that  which  designs  to  do  right,  to  the 
other. 

It  is  a  falsehood,  that  the  policy  of  enriching  a  minority 
at  the  publick  expense,  is  ever  resorted  to,  for  the  purpose 
of  protecting  property  ;  or  that  it  is  capable  of  any  such  ef- 
fect. The  idea  of  hiring  a  minority  in  civil  government,  to 
protect  the  property  of  a  majority,  is  visibly  absurd.  Both 
from  its  physical  inability,  and  also  because  ail  minor  inte- 
rests invested,  with  political  power,  have  universally  violated 


property.    That  they  shall  necessarily  do  so,  is  therefore  a 
settled  moral  law. 

Our  policy  and  constitutions  rigidly  distinguish  between 
good  and  evil  moral  principles,  upon  this  subject.  The  love 
and  protection  of  property  was  one  of  those  good  mora! 
principles  which  caused  the  war  with  England.  In  a  gov- 
ernment, it  is  only  a  virtue,  so  long  as  this  love  and  pro- 
tection shall  be  impartially  extended  to  every  member  of 
the  society.  Of  this  virtue,  avarice  is  the  correspondent 
vice.  It  loves  and  pilfers  the  property  of  others,  and  pro- 
tects what  it  gets.  Does  the  system  of  paper  and  patronage 
correspond  with  the  virtue1  or  the  vice  ? 

The  force  of  this  reasoning  is  sometimes  eluded,  by 
charging  it  with  assailing  the  propriety  of  taxing,  for  the 
support  of  civil  government.  This  is  an  artifice  to  hide  the 
iniquity  of  taxing  for  the  benefit  of  the  aristocracy  of  paper 
and  patronage,  under  the  justice  of  taxing  for  the  common 
good.  To  infer  that  we  are  inimical  to  needful  taxes,  from 
our  endeavouring  to  display  the  principles  and  effects  of  the 
aristocracy  of  the  third  age,  is  only  a  repetition  of  the  arti- 
fice, which  induced  the  aristocracy  of  the  first  age,  to  ac- 
cuse a  man  of  irreligion,  whenever  he  reasoned  against  su- 
perstition. 

Despotick  power  strives  to  blend  itself  with  legitimate 
government,  as  paper  stock  does  with  private  property; 
both  endeavouring  to  sanction  the  evils  they  dispense,  by  the 
blessings  which  flow  from  the  resemblances  they  falsely  as- 
sume ;  and  private  property,  the  earning  of  labour,  the 
reward  of  merit,  the  almoner  of  age,  and  Use  soul  of  chili- 
zation,  is  transformed  by  stock  into  a  political  monster,  us 
hideous  as  government  transformed  by  tyranny.  It  becomes 
the  right  of  fraud,  the  scourge  of  industry,  and  the  instru- 
ment of  despotism.  Stock  private  property,  can  condemn 
the  seventh  part  of  the  most  industrious  and  ingenious  na- 
tion in  the  world,  to  poverty  and  vice,  or  to  hospitals  and 
prisons.  When  freedom  and  tyranny  are  both  called  gov- 
ernment, and  rightful  acquisitions  aud   paper  stock  both 


280  nmiiiNfc. 

called  private  property,  it  can  only  bo,  to  say  the  most  for, 
such  denominations,  as  Gabriel  and  the  Devil  are  both  cal- 
led angels. 

Mankind  have  suffered  nearly  as  much  from  confound- 
ing natural  with  fictitious  property,  as  from  confounding 
legitimate  with  spurious  power.  If  the  acquisitions  of  use- 
ful qualities  are  genuine  private  property,  can  the  crafty 
pilferings  from  useful  qualities  under  fraudulent  laws,  to 
gratify  bad  qualities,  be  genuine  private  property  also?  If 
the  fruit  of  labour  is  private  properly,  can  stealing  this 
fruit  from  labour,  also  make  private  property  ? 

Hy  calling  the  artillery  property,  which  is  placing  on 
property,  the  battery  is  masked.  Tythes  and  stock,  invent- 
ed to  take  away  private  property,  are  as  correctly  called 
private  property,  as  a  guillotine  could  be  called  a  head. 
The  system  of  Mr.  Adams  and  Lord  S*iaftsbury,  is  founded 
upon  the  principle  of' applying  the  guillotine  of  law,  to  pro- 
perty instead  of  heads,  to  keep  wealth,  to  which  they  both 
correctly  annex  power,  balanced  among  three  orders  ;  the 
stock  system  is  founded  in  the  same  principle,  with  this 
difference,  that  it  takes  away  the  entire  property  or  its  pro- 
fit from  majorities,  whereas  the  system  of  orders  is  content 
with  two  thirds  of  it. 

There  are  two  modes  of  invading  private  property ;  the 
first,  by  which  the  poor  plunder  the  rich,  is  sudden  and  vio- 
lent ;  the  second,  by  which  the  rich  plunder  the  poor,  slow 
and  legal.  One  begets  ferocity  and  barbarism,  the  other 
vice  and  penury,  and  both  impair  the  national  prosperity 
and  happiness,  inevitably  flowing  from  the  correct  and 
honest  principle  of  private  property. 

When  it  is  proposed  to  tax  stock  or  tythes  for  the  sup- 
port of  civil  government,  they  claim  the  stipendiary  charac- 
ter to  procure  an  exemption  front  taxation  ;  but  when  it  is 
proposed  to  abolish  them,  because  the  services  under  which 
this  stipendiary  character  its  claimed,  have  become  useless  or 
pernicious,  they  as  loudly  claim  the  character  and  the  rights 
of  private  property.    Feudality,  hierarchy,  and  paper  stock* 


FUNDING.  2SI 

have  each  successfully  resorted  to  these  subterfuges  to  keep 
justice  at  bay;  and  had  the  English  House  of  Commons  been 
open  to  the  clergy,  as  all  the  departments  of  the  American 
government  are  to  stockjobbers,  the  former  would  probably 
have  still  maintained  the  same  invaluable  exclusive  privi- 
lege, which  the  latter  now  enjoy. 

The  American  constitutions  are  equally  opposed  to  inva^ 
sions  of  property  by  fraudulent  and  swindling  laws;  or  by 
impracticable,  dishonest  and  ruinous  equalising  reveries  of 
political  enthusiasts.  They  pursue  the  idea  of  securing  to 
talents  and  industry  their  earnings,  and  not  of  transferring 
these  earnings  to  others.  Therefore  they  have  rejected  an 
equality  of  property,  standing  armies,  hierarchies  and  pri- 
vileged orders  ;  and  had  they  foreseen,  that  their  principle 
in  relation  to  property,  was  capable  of  being  undermined  by 
paper  magiek,  that  also  would  have  been  specifically  guarded 
against. 

Accumulations  and  divisions  of  property  by  law,  simple 
or  complicated,  are  equally  adverse  to  our  policy,  and  to 
moral  rectitude.  Both  will  excite  hatred,  discourage  indus- 
try, and  infuse  knavery  into  the  national  character,  by  di- 
viding it  into  factions,  perpetually  striving  to  pillage  each 
other.  Whether  the  law  shall  gradually  transfer  the  pro- 
perty of  the  many  to  the  few,  or  insurrection  shall  rapidly 
divide  the  property  of  the  few  among  the  many,  it  is  equally 
an  invasion  of  private  property,  and  equally  contrary  to  our 
constitutions. 

If  equalising  and  accumulating  laws  are  the  same  in 
principle,  it  is  inconceivable  how  the  same  mind  should  be 
able  to  detest  the  one,  and  approve  the  other.  Integrity  is 
compel  led  to  reject  both,  and  spurning  at  doctrines,  calcu- 
lated to  incite  the  few  to  plunder  the  many,  or  the  many  to 
plunder  the  few,  leaves  every  man  under  the  strongest  ex- 
citement to  labour  for  his  own  and  the  national  prosperity, 
from  a  conviction,  that  the  laws  are  a  mantle  of  justice,  and 
got  an  intricate  net  to  fish  for  his  earnings, 


•J582  FUNDING. 

Our  policy  is  founded  upon  the  idea,  that  it  is  both  wise 
and  just,  to  leave  the  distribution  of  property  to  industry 
and  talents ;  that  what  they  acquire  is  all  their  own,  except 
what  they  owe  to  society  5  that  they  owe  nothing  to  society 
Except  a  contribution  equivalent  to  the  necessities  of  gov- 
ernment ',  that  they  owe  nothing  to  monopoly  or  exclusive  pri- 
vilege in  any  form ;  and  that  whether  they  are  despoiled 
by  the  rage  of  a  mob,  or  the  laws  of  a  separate  interest,  the 
genuine  sanction  of  private  property  is  equally  violated. 
Are  tSiese  the  principles  of  our  policy  ?  Do  paper  systems 
correspond  with  these  principles? 

If  legislative  patronage  enriches  a  portion  of  society, 
that  portion  is  necessarily  converted  into  an  order,  posses- 
sing the  qualities  of  an  aristocracy.  It  is  placed  between 
the  government  ami  the  nation.  It  receives  wealth  from  the 
one,  and  takes  it  from  the  other.  Tliis  4ies  it  to  the  gov- 
ernment by  the  passion  of  avarice,  and  separates  it  from  the 
nation  by  the  passion  of  fear.  And  these  two  passions,  an- 
nexed to  any  separate  interest,  have  unexceptionably  con- 
verted it  into  a  political  order,  and  forced  it  into  the  ranks 
of  despotism. 

War,  in  former  times,  enriched  and  aggrandized  by  eon- 
quest  t  in  modern,  by  loaning.  Titled  orders,  in  the  first 
0#se,  usurped  and  monopolized  what  the  nations  they  be* 
Songed  to,  conquered  from  their  enemies  j  and  by  means  of 
this  usurped  wealth,  enslaved  the  eonquerors.  Paper  or- 
ders acquire  wealth  in  modern  wars  by  loaning,  although 
nothing  is  obtained  by  conquest.  Now,  a  nation,  by  war 
without  conquest,  is  made  to  furnish  the  means  for  its  own 
subjection,,  The  enemies  of  the  Roman  people,  supplied  the 
means  for  enslaving  the  Roman  people.  The  English  pay 
for  their  slavery  themselves.  An  interest  enriched  by  war, 
successful  or  unfortunate,  must  be  separate  and  aristo- 
crat k*  a  L 

Rations  have  eSleeted  an  improvement  in  universal  law* 
or  the  law  of  nations,  without  deriving  from  it  the  greatest 
advantage  it  is  calculated  to  produ.ee.      Conquest  respects 


FUNDING-,  28S 

private  property  ;  hence  a  nation  can  no  longer  conquer  for 
itself.  Formerly,  every  individual  of  a  conquering  army, 
got  some  share  of  the  plunder;  if  his  officer  obtained  a 
palace,  the  soldier  got  a  cottage  ;  if  his  officer  obtained  an 
house,  the  soldier  cot  a  eow.  Then,  one  nation  might  be 
said  to  conquer  another,  although  the  spoil  was  unequally 
divided.  But  now  the  expression  has  become  inaccurate, 
because  there  is  precisely  that  degree  of  protection  allowed 
by  conquest  to  private  property,  necessary  to  the  interest  of 
the  modern  aristocracy  of  paper  and  patronage.  As  there- 
fore, under  the  modern  law  of  nations,  no  nation  can  gain 
any  share  of  the  booty,  or  conquer  another  nation,  it  is 
strange  that  nations  should  still  go  to  war,  when  they  can 
only  conquer  themselves  ;  and  that  this  propensity  appa- 
rently increases. 

In  the  solution  of  this  enigma  lies  a  proof,  that  paper 
stock  is  a  separate  aristoeratical  interest.  Titled  orders 
fomented  war,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Roman  patricians,  be- 
cause they  obtained  the  best  share  of  the  spoil.  The  no- 
bility in  England  no  longer  foment  war,  because  they  are 
loi  aggrandized  by  it.  And  war  has  been  still  more  ar- 
dentiy  fomented  in  that  country  than  ever,  because  their 
system  of  paper  and  patronage  gain  spoil  by  it  in  any  event. 
Conquest  furnishes  it  with  funds  on  which  to  bottom  more 
stock,  and  the  war  which  made  the  conquest,  with  a  pretext 
for  quartering  more  patronage  and  paper  on  its  own  nation. 
Is  not  that  a  separate  aristoeratical  interest  which  gains 
more  by  war  and  conquest,  than  orders  of  titled  nobility 
formerly  did  ?     Those  got  most,  this  gets  all. 

The  Roman  aristocracy  engaged  the  nation  in  war  to 
aggrandize  itself;  but  it  entertained  the  people  with  shows, 
feasts  and  triumphs,  and  allowed  them  some  small  share  of 
the  booty.  The  English  aristocracy  of  paper  and  patron- 
age, engages  the  nation  in  war  for  the  same  purpose  ;  and 
entertains  the  people  with  heavy  taxes,  hard  labour,  penal 
laws  and  Botany  Bay, 


f&'t,  FUNDING. 

Ancient  and  modern  wars  between  civilized  nations, 
have  chiefly  originated  in  the  avarice  and  ambition  of  indi- 
viduals, orders,  or  factions.  A  propensity  for  war,  is  evi- 
dently a  separate  interest  inimical  to  a  nation  ;  and  if  this 
interest  is  contrived  to  derive  vast  accessions  of  wealth  and 
power  from  every  war,  fortunate  or  unfortunate,  from  vic- 
tory or  defeat,  it  must  be  driven  into  a  propensity  for  war, 
by  an  influence,  exceeding  in  power,  that  which  was  suffi- 
cient to  drive  feudal  barons  into  war,  for  their  own  advan- 
tage, and  the  oppression  of  mankind. 

These  barons  Avere  in  some  measure  cheeked  by  the  fear 
of  danger.  Their  lives  were  risked  in  battle,  and  their 
possessions  lost  by  defeat.  But  bank  or  debt  stock  shed  no 
blood  in  war.  To  them  it  is  a  sure  game.  Hazarding 
nothing,  a  chance  for  winning  of  their  foes,  and  a  certainty 
of  winning  of  their  friends,  must  inspire  them  with  princi- 
ples more  inimical  to  friends  and  foes,  than  even  those  of 
the  separate  feudal  interest. 

This  system  exhibits  a  new  mode  of  enslaving  nations  in- 
finitely more  powerful  than  any  heretofore   invented.      It 
can  conquer  a  nation,  whilst  that  nation  is  in  a  career  of 
victory.     Marlborough's  victories  created  more  debt,  and  of 
course  destroyed  more  liberty  in  England,  than  any  previ- 
ous war.     It   places  governments  beyond  (he   influence  or 
scrutiny  of  the  people.     Two  governments  may  engage  in 
war  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  power  and  wealth,  each 
from  its  own  nation.     The  cause  of  quarrel,  the  battles,  the 
sieges  and  the  peace,  might  be  all  amicably  arranged  be  lore 
the  declaration  of  war ;  and    a  complete   victory  infallibly 
secured  to  both  the  governments,  without  the  transfer  of  an 
acre  of  territory.      The   system  of  paper   and   patronage 
would  be  the  key  to  such  a  war,  as  it  is  to  the  history  of 
England  for  the  last  century. 

This  evident  propensity  for  war,  arising  from  the  strong- 
est conceivable  excitement,  of  itself  suffices  unquestionably 
to  establish  the  enmity  of  paper  systems  to  our  policy,  if 
o.ur  policy  is  friendly  to  liberty.     To  that,  every  species  ev 


FUNDING.  285 

Wftr  is  dangerous ;  and  one,  led  by  paper  systems,  fatal. 
The  princes  leagued  against  France,  though  beaten  in  the 
field,  obtained  a  victory  at  home  by  paper  and  patronage, 
and  by  the  effects  of  war,  destroyed  republican  opinions  in 
France.  War,  in  this  one  operation,  has,  before  our  eyes, 
diminished  the  liberty  of  about  twenty  European  nations. 

Not  the  titles  of  orders,  but  a  separate  interest  from  the 
rest  of  a  community,  has  induced  them  to  harrass  the  human 
race  with  war.  Are  the  privileged  titles  of  England,  able 
to  govern  or  control  its  system  of  paper  and  patronage  ?  If 
not,  these  titles  have  long  ceased  to  be  the  cause  of  her 
wars.  They  have  neither  motive  nor  power  to  produce 
them.  But  the  system  of  paper  and  patronage  has  power 
to  produce  war  or  peace,  and  war  is  produced.  This  hun- 
gry calculator  does  not  go  to  war  out  of  chivalry,  but  from 
interest.  Its  propensity  is  proved  in  this  evidence  ;  its 
enmity  to  all  majorities  in  society  is  a  consequence  of  this 
propensity;  and  its  aristoeratical  spirit,  of  that  enmity. 

A  perpetual  increase  of  taxes,  is  a  constant  effect  of  pa- 
per systems.  Being  essential  to  their  existence,  the  conse- 
quences only  are  to' be  considered.  Mankind  have  talked 
and  written  for  ages  about  liberty,  and  yet  the  world  is  as 
far  from  agreeing  in  a  definition  of  it,  as  Europe  is  from 
settling  a  balance  of  power.  It  is  because  liberty  is  made 
to  consist  in  metaphysical  dogma.  As  a  thing  of  real  sub- 
stance and  use,  taxation,  unmetaphysical  taxation,  is  able  to 
supply  us  with  a  correct  idea  of  it.  Heavy  taxes  in  peace 
are  unexceptionably  political  slavery.  Liberty  and  slavery 
are  contrary  principles,  and  therefore  liberty  does  not  pro- 
duce heavy  taxes.  Suppose,  however,  a  conjuncture  can 
be  conceived,  of  liberty  and  heavy  taxes  in  union  :  vet  a 
free  form  of  government  cannot  last,  if  heavy  taxes  continue 
until  the  poverty  of  the  payers,  and  the  wealth  of  the  re- 
ceivers, have  separated  the  nation  into  two  orders  far  apart. 
Heavy  taxes  are  botii  an  effect  and  a  cause  of  tyranny,  and 
cannot  therefore  be  admitted  in  a  substantial  definition  of 
liberty;  being  an  inevitable  consequence  of  paper  system?- 


t&ii  FUNDING. 

these  also  must  be  substantially  inimical  to  liberty,  however 
consistent  they  may  be  with  her  metaphysical  definitions. 

Taxation,  direct  or  indirect,  produced  by  a  paper  syslem 
in  any  form,  will  rob  a  nation  of  property,  without  giving  it 
liberty :  and  by  creating  and  enriching  a  separate  interest, 
will  rob  it  of  its  liberty,  without  giving  it  property.  Taxa- 
tion, for  the  maintenance  of  civil  government  or  national  de- 
fence, will  also  take  away  property  ;  but  then  it  may  bestow 
liberty.  The  slave,  who  receives  subsistence  from  a  mas- 
ter, may  advantageously  compare  situations  with  the  vassal 
of  the  first  species  of  taxation  ;  he  gets  something  for  his 
liberty  and  property  ;  he  gets  subsistence  without  care  :  his 
compeer  loses  his  liberty  and  property,  and  only  gains  ap 
augmentation  of  the  anxieties  of  life.  To  the  second  spe- 
cies of  taxation,  mankind  are  indebted  for  social  libertv. 
How  have  these  opposite  principles  been  blended  and  con 
founded  with  each  other?  Merely  by  the  avarice  and  am- 
bition of  orders,  separate  interests  or  aristocracy.  How 
cautious  and  circumspect  ought  nations  to  be,  when  the? 
discover,  that  the  most  inimical  moral  principles  are  hidden 
in  one  term  ?  One  species  of  taxation  destroys  ;  the  other, 
preserves  their  liberty. 

Barbarism  thirsts  for  blood  ;  civilization  for  wealth.  To 
defend  men  against  these  propensities  is  the  legitimate  end 
of  civil  government.  A  government,  administered  so  as  to 
expose  property  but  protect  life  in  a  civilized  nation,  is 
equivalent  to  a  government,  contrived  to  protect  property 
but  to  expose  life  in  a  savage  one  j  and  the  barbarian,  whose 
property  was  safe,  whilst  his  life  was  defenceless  against 
the  passion  of  blood-thirstiness,  might  as  justly  boast  of 
his  freedom,  as  the  civilized  man,  whose  life  was  safe, 
whilst  his  property  was  exposed  to  appease  the  moaey- 
thirstiness  of  paper  and  patronage. 

If  that  species  of  protection  to  property,  afforded  by  pa- 
per systems,  operated  in  an  invasion  of  the  principal  instead 
of  the  profit,  it  would  be  universally  assailed  as  a  robber, 
How  thin  is  the  veil  by  which  we  aire  deceived  ?     We  are 


FUNDING  -lb7 

t ontent  to  lose  the  profit  for  the  suke  ot  the  occupation. 
We  forget  that  the  safety  of  property  consists  in  the  enjoy- 
ment of  its  profits  ;  and  that  the  utmost  permanent  violation 
of  which  it  is  capable,  is  eone-'stent  with  occupation  and  sub- 
sistence. 

The  history  of  Villanage  illustrates  this  idea.  Villains 
were  nominally  emancipated  for  the  interest  of  the  masters* 
not  of  the  slaves.  With  subsistence  and  the  occupation  of 
property  as  tenants,  they  were  more  profitable  to  the  barons 
than  in  a  state  of  direct  slavery.  Paper  systems,  taking 
the  hint  from  this  history,  have  artfully  placed  themselves 
in  the  predicament  of  the  feudal  lords  ;  and  nations,  in  that 
of  emancipated  villains.  The  profits  are  taken,  the  occupa- 
tion left,  and  this  is  called  freedom  or  protection  of  property. 

These  systems,  being  simply  compounded  of  debt  and 
taxation,  must  divide  a  nation  into  annuitants  and  labour- 
ers, engender  want  and  luxury,  reduce  each  individual  .to 
the  alternative  of  oppressing  or  being  oppressed,  and  culti- 
vate avarice  and  rapaciousness  both  by  the  gain  they  hes- 
tow,  and  the  loss  they  inflict.  Divines  and  philosophers 
may  possibly  have  erred  in  omitting  hitherto  to  recommend 
such  principles,  as  promoters  of  virtue,  religion  and  national 
happiness.  Whether  politicians  have  found  out,  that  .a 
power  in  legislators  to  enrich  themselves  by  stock  of  ihcit 
own  creation,  will  perfect  the  system  of  election  tied  repre- 
sentation, is  hereafter  to  be  considered. 

A  nation  is  never  conquered  by  an  army,  or  enslaved  hy 
a  faction,  so  long  as  it  is  willing  to  defend  itself.  The  con- 
centration of  wealth  in  a  few  hands,  obliterates  this  dispo- 
sition. The  disciplined  Romans  were  subdued  by  raw  bar 
barians,  when  the  lands  of  Italy  were  held  by  less  than  three 
thousand  proprietors.  The  feudal  n;uio»i  were  treak, 
whilst  a  few  nobles  held  the  property  of  the  nation ;  i.urt 
their  petty  wars  wore  rendered  less  destructive  by  this  ».a 
tional  imbecility.  The  same  consequence  resulted  from  fjae 
possession  of  one  third  of  the  property  of  a  nation  by  <he 
priesthood.       And  stock  in  England,   which  « o-  v-    "j** 


transfers  property  to  its  amount,  is  so  well  convinced  that 
the  motive  exciting  nations  to  self  defence  is  thereby  impair- 
ed, as  to  resort  to  the  alternative  of  a  standing  army,  and  to 
stake  the  national  existence  upon  a  battle,  to  be  fought  by 
mercenaries.  The  people  and  armies  of  the  Roman  empire 
frequently  preferred  a  coalition  with  Scythian  invaders,  t« 
the  danger  of  resistance,  or  the  calamity  of  victory  ;  and 
twelve  millions  of  people  are  apprehending  or  invoking  eon- 
quest,  on  account  of  an  unanimous  opinion,  that  paper  stock 
has  incapacitated  a  great  nation  for  defending  itself  against 
a  single  army. 

Oppressive  taxation  is  the  effect  of  standing  armies,  no- 
ble orders,  hierarchies  or  paper  stock.  A  similarity  in  mo- 
ral effects,  demonstrates  a  similarity  in  moral  causes.  All 
of  these  have  pretended  to  defend  nations  at  different  periods. 
England  possesses  all  these  defenders.  The  first  and  the 
last  are  the  modern  champions  of  nations  ;  if  she  had  pos- 
sessed neither,  she  never  would  have  gained  sundry  victo- 
ries, but  she  would  have  possessed  a  gallantry  which  bur- 
thensome  taxes  never  inspired.  And  what  conqueror  can 
be  more  oppressive  than  two  mercenary  armies,  one  of  sol- 
diers, and  another  of  stockjobbers  ?  Besides,  funding  never 
fights  for  a  nation  in  imminent  danger;  its  wars  are  guided 
by  other  calculations,  than  those  of  publick  safety  ;  and  the 
moment  of  peril  is  the  moment  of  its  flight. 

If  posterity  could  pass  a  law,  for  imposing  heavy  taxe* 
on  the  present  generation,  the  entire  universe  of  existing 
progenitors  would  exclaim,  <«  if  you  can  rob  us  of  property, 
«  we  can  rob  you  of  life.  It  is  better  that  you  should  never 
ft  exist,  than  that  we  who  do  exist,  should  be  the  prey  of 
«  your  avarice  ;  than  that  a  series  of  generations  should  be 
«  sacrificed  to  one  unborn  and  unsympathising."  In  the 
character  of  sufferers,  the  parties  concur.  Progenitors 
would  destroy  posterity,  and  posterity  would  destroy  pro- 
genitors, rather  than  submit  to  unlimited,  unfeeling  and  un- 
consented to  taxation.  » 


BUNDING. 


2S9 


Funding,  by  growing  too  rapidly  in  the  Mississippi  and 
South  Sea  cases,  inconsiderately  disclosed  its  real  charac- 
ter ;  it  has  since  distended  itself  to  a  degree  of  magnitude  and 
mischief  in  England  infinitely  exceeding  those  detestable 
frauds.  An  ugly  cur,  suddenly  bursting  upon  a  company 
of  children,  inspires  them  with  horrour ;  and  they  get  a 
young  tiger,  caress,  feed  and  rear  it,  without  a  suspicion  of 
its  furious  and  bloody  nature,  until  it  devours  them.  But 
it  is  not  the  office  of  truth,  in  distinguishing  between  good 
and  evil  moral  principles,  however  the  deluded  may  believe 
that  there  is  no  generieal  affinity  between  a  pug  and  a  mas- 
tiff, to  represent  the  same  thing  as  a  rice  or  a  virtue  ac- 
cording to  its  dimension  ;  and  therefore  it  seems  impossible 
to  transplant  funding  of  any  size  or  age  from  tbe  place  in 
the  moral  world  assigned  to  it  by  its  own  nature,  or  to  ex- 
pect good  moral  effects,  from  a  moral  cause,  fruitful  of  evil 
beyond  most  of  its  kindred. 

Between  the  two  items  of  paper  stock,  the  similitude  is 
such,  that,  though  this  section  is  here  concluded,  the  reader 
will  discern  in  the  next,  many  observations  applicable  to 
its  doctrine. 


[     390     ] 


SECTION  THE  FIFTH, 

I 


BANKING, 


JL  shall  now  proceed  to  the  examination  of  banking,  i„ 
the  face  of  a  prepossession,  which  has  seized,  like  a  panick, 
upon  the  puhlick  mind.  If  it  is  a  limb  of  the  aristocracy 
of  the  third  age,  it  cannot  be  attached  to  the  body  of  our 
policy  without  some  dismemberment  to  make  room  for  it. 
We  know  that  banking  made  no  part  of  this  policy,  state  cr 
continental,  originally;  and  that  now,  like  the  tail  of  a 
Cape  sheep,  it  constitutes  its  most  conspicuous  member. 

Priests  have  at  all  times  performed  acts,  which  enrich 
themselves,  and  are  by  the  laity  believed  to  be  miracles. 
Had  it  been  your  lot,  reader,  to  address  an  audience  com- 
posed of  these  priests  and  their  laity,  to  prove  that  such 
acts  were  not  miracles,  what  would  you  have  considered  as 
the  most  stubborn  obstacles  against  success  ?  You  answer, 
the  interest  of  one  party  and  the  superstition  of  the  other. 
And  yet  neither  this  interest  nor  superstition,  furnish  fact 
or  argument  as  to  the  truth  or  falsehood  of  these  miracles, 
or  the  justice  of  the  tax  they  inflict.  Ought  either  then 
to  suffocate  inquiry  and  truth  ;  and  would  you  not  pity  the 
unhappy  blindness  or  vice  capable  of  fostering  aa  crrour  so 
gross  ? 

Reader,  I  only  ask  you  not  to  become  yourself  this  ob- 
ject of  commiseration.  Neither  prejudice  nor  avarice  will 
conduct  you  to  truth.  Refute  the  arguments  which  are 
refutable  ;  but  yield  your  conviction  to  those  which  you 
cannot  refute. 

Premising,  that  a?!  the  objections  against  debt  stock  or 
paper  systems,  apply  with  equal,  and  often  with  accumulated 


BANKING.  391 

force  against  banking  ;  and  that  the  latter  subject  is  con- 
sidered separately,  not  as  being  of  a  very  different  nature., 
but  for  the  sake  of  perspicuity ;  we  will  enter  directly 
upon  it. 

Had  banking  been  called  "  a  paper  feudal  system,"  and 
had  the  barons  proposed  to  take  it  by  that  denomination  as 
a  reimbursement  for  their  abolished  tenures,  it  might  have 
been  fairly  weighed  against  the  landed  feudal  system,  to 
estimate  the  effects  of  the  exchange.  In  that  event,  it 
would  have  been  clearly  seen  by  the  people,  that  the  money 
to  be  collected  by  '«  a  paper  feudal  system"  for  their  lords, 
was  the  representative  of  the  services  rendered  under  the 
landed  feudal  system  ;  and  that  whatever  convenience  they 
might  derive  from  altering  tlie  mode  of  payment,  the  pay- 
ment itself  would  remain.  Money,  or  a  circulating  medium 
of  any  kind,  in  its  quality  of  representing  property  and  la- 
bour, conveys  property  and  labour  to  its  possessor;  and  if 
A,  entitled  to  the  menial  services  of  B,  contracts  to  receive 
of  B  their  value  in  money,  though  B  may  prefer  this  mode 
of  payment,  he  must  still  perform  the  same  value  in  labour 
to  acquire  the  money  it  is  commuted  for.  Such  bargains 
were  often  made  between  the  kings  and  the  people  of  Eng- 
land, in  the  sale  and  purchase  of  vexatious  prerogatives.  If 
then  a  nation  bestows  a  pecuniary  income  on  an  order  of 
nobles  or  of  bankers,  it  conveys  so  much  of  its  services  to 
this  order  as  the  money  represents  ;  nor  is  there  any  differ 
ence  between  rendering  the  services  in  kind,  and  in  the  pe- 
cuniary commutation,  except  in  the  superior  convenience 
of  the  latter  mode ;  since  the  services  must  be  still  perform- 
ed. If  a  great  nation  owed  its  personal  labours  to  one 
thousand  individuals,  so  much  excepted  as  might  afford  a 
bare  subsistence,  it  would  mend  its  condition  in  a  small  de- 
gree, by  purchasing  them  out  for  an  annuity  in  money  ;  but 
not  in  a  great  one,  if  it  paid  to  t\m  order  the  full  value  of 
them.  As  money  is  a  vehicle  for  retaining,  it  is  also  one 
for  conveying  the  most  oppressive  usurpations,  and  posses- 
ses a  complete  capacity  for  re-enslaving  nations  indirectly- 


l$Z  UASTKlNti. 

after  an  accession  of  knowledge  or  a  division  of  property, 
has  liberated  them  from  the  direct  feudal  slavery.  This 
treacherous  quality  of  money  was  perceived  by  the  Spartan 
legislator,  without  discerning  any  remedy  for  it,  but  that  of 
destroying  its  inestimable  benefits.  It  is  cleat*  that  nations, 
by  giviig  any  species  of  currency  to  an  order  or  interest, 
will  give  it  a  title  to  exery  species  of  service  from  the  mul- 
titude ;  that  the  revival  by  law  of  a  title  to  such  services 
through  t  e  intervention  of  a  currency,  is  a  substantial  re- 
vival of  the  feudal  system  ;  that  a  legal  currency  possesses 
a  power  of  destroying,  with  wonderful  rapidity,  the  division 
of  property  which  destroyed  that  system  :  and  that  without 
a  very  considerable  division  of  property,  a  free  government 
cannot  exist.  The  remedy  for  these  evils,  which  Lycurgus 
did  not  discern,  is  to  prohibit  legal  distributions  of  money 
or  currency,  those  excepted  rendered  unavoidable  by  gov- 
ernment, and  to  leave  their  distribution  to  industry. 

Even  the  precious  metals  have  furnished  to  the  contriv- 
ers of  pillage  and  oppression  a  medium  for  extracting  indi- 
rectly from  nations,  a  far  greater  proportion  of  their  labour, 
than  they  could  ever  be  made  to  pay  directly  by  the  feudal 
or  any  other  regimen  :  but  the  impossibility  of  multiplying 
these  metals  at  pleasure,  inflicted  a  considerable  check  upon 
this  fraudulent  perversion  of  so  useful  a  representative  of 
property.  An  artificial  currency  is  subject  to  no  such  check, 
and  possesses  an  unlimited  power  of  enslaving  nations,  if 
slavery  consists  in  binding  a  great  number  to  labour  for  a 
few.  Employed,  not  for  the  useful  purpose  of  exchanging, 
but  for  the  fraudulent  one  of  transferring  property,  currency 
is  converted  into  a  thief  and  a  traitor,  and  begets,  like  an 
abuse  of  many  other  good  things,  miser}  instead  of  hap* 
pincss. 

Mankind  soon  discovered  that  money  was  easily  convert- 
ed into  a  medium  for  oppression  as  well  as  for  commerce, 
Awl  hence  arose  nearly  as  strong  a  dislike  to  heavy  taxes  in 
money  as  in  kind;  it   being  clearly  seen   that  labour  and 
ronerty  were   transferred  by  money.         his   plain   truth. 


BANKING.  29A 

awakened  the  exertions  of  avarice  and  ambition,  to  deceive 
the  vigilance  of  labour  and  industry  ;  the  objects  of  pillage. 
The  first  intricacy  with  which  they  endeavoured  to  hide 
their  design,  was  woven  of  indirect  taxes  travelling  in 
mazes;  the  second,  of  loaning  obscured  by  the  mist  of  futu- 
rity; and  the  third,  of  an  artificial  currency  or  banking, 
complicated  by  the  crookedness  of  its  operation,  flattering 
to  industry*  and  restrained  bv  no  natural  check,  as  a  medi- 
urn  of  fraud  and  tyranny.  The  defence  of  banking,  "  that. 
««  its  enormous  annual  acquisitions  travel  to  it  from  some 
«  terra  incognita,  and  are  not  drawn  from  the  labour  and 
<•'  property  of  a  nation,"  shall  he  first  considered. 

The  common  nature  of  bank  debt  and  funded  debt,  ha? 
attracted  the  common  appellation,  stock.  Existing  toge- 
ther, their  price  will  fluctuate  in  relation  to  national  adven- 
tures, because  the  national  ability  to  pay,  is  coextensive] y 
the  sponsor  for  each.  Peace  and  prosperity,  cause  bank 
and  funded  stock  to  rise  in  price  :  war  and  adversity,  cause 
both  to  fall.  Both  are  heroes  and  patriots  in  safety,  and 
cowards  and  traitors  in  danger.  As  the  state  of  the  nation 
affects  both  in  the  same  way,  both  must  affect  the  state  of 
the  nation  in  the  same  way.  If  stock  did  not  act  upon  the 
labour  and  property  of  nations.  tSieir  adventures  or  wealth 
could  not  react  upon  stock.  The  reaction  is  the  same  as  to 
both  funded  and  bank  stock. 

If  national  adventures  or  measures  can  raise  or  dimi- 
nish the  value  of  bank  stock,  it  is  under  the  same  induce- 
ment as  debt  stock,  to  influence  a  government.  Therefore 
one  hundred  millions  of  bank  stock,  will  acquire  as  much  of 
this  influence,  created  by  laws  and  not  by  constitutions,  as 
one  hundred  millions  of  debt  stock.  Its  sole  object  is  to  in- 
duce a  government  to  enable  it  to  tax  the  nation,  in  an  indi- 
rect and  complicated  mode,  to  enrich  itself;  whereas  the 
chief  design  of  our  constitutional  policy,  is  to  subject  the 
government  to  the  national  influence  to  prevent  this  wicked 
deed.  Had  there  been  no  debt  stock  in  England,  but  an 
equal  value  of  bank  stock,  thatalon*  would  have  influenced 


J94  BANKING. 

ihe  government  to  govern  in  the  same  mode,  as  bank  and 
debt  stock  united  induce  or  compel  it  to  do.  The  same  in 
terests  which  now  exist,  would  have  existed  in  that  ease., 
namely,  the  stock  interest,  the  government  interest,  and  the 
national  interest ;  and  the  same  union  between  the  two  first, 
would  have  produced  the  same  effect  to  the  last. 

Debt  stock  could  not  permanently  receive  its  interest, 
where  there  was  no  labour ;  if  bank  stock  could  not  perma- 
nently receive  its  dividends,  in  the  same  case,  those  divi- 
dends, however  indirectly  collected,  must  also  be  paid  by 
labour.  As  the  fund  necessary  for  the  subsistence  of  the 
one,  is  necessary  for  the  subsistence  of  the  other,  it  follows 
that  they  are  of  the  same  nature,  and  must  subsist  by  the 
same  means ;  and  that  neither  debt  stock  nor  bank  stock 
can  be  fed,  except  by  taxation,  direct  or  indirect,  simple  01 
complicated. 

The  degree  of  taxation  produced  by  these  engines,  is 
oapable  of  being  ascertained  with  considerable  correctness. 
Debt  stock  gives  to  a  nation  or  its  government,  one  hundred 
pound?  of  money,  for  an  annuity  of  five  or  six  pounds. 
13ank  stock  receives  an  annuity  often  or  twelve  pounds,  in- 
cluding dividends,  expenses  and  perquisites  of  directors,  for 
keeping  its  hundred  pounds.  Which  is  the  highest  tax  upon 
a  nation — live  millions  annually  for  one  hundred  millions 
received  5  or  ten  millions  annually  on  one  hundred  millions 
of  bank  stock,  for  nothing  received  ?  Can  the  latter  tax  be 
concealed  by  its  enormity,  as  a  high  mountain  is  hidden  by 
clouds  ? 

The  custom  of  buying  the  privilege  of  banking,  is  an 
evidence  of  its  nature.  Unless  it  had  been  a  tax,  it  could 
not  be  bought,  nor  could  it  be  sold.  The  title  by  which  a 
government  sells,  is  that  of  national  agent,  selling  national 
property  ;  and  the  purchaser  is  enabled  to  buy,  by  a  reim- 
bursement of  his  purchase  money  with  a  profit.  Sale  and 
profit  imply  property ;  how  is  it  reached  in  this  ease,  ex- 
cept by  taxation  ? 


bankins.  295 

The  ingenuity  of  beguiling  a  nation,  by  bribing  it  with  a 
part  of  its  own,  strengthens  this  observation.  Suppose  a 
thousand  stockjobbers,  with  the  munificence  and  patriotism 
of  stockjobbers,  should  say,  "Society,  create  ten  millions 
"  of  stock  ;  you  may  keep  one  fifth  of  it,  as  payment  for  four 
"  fifths  which  you  shall  give  us."  The  property  of  stock 
being  to  tax,  the  proposition  simply  is,  "  Society,  if  jou  will 
permit  us  to  tax  you  at  eight  hundred  thousand  dollars  a 
year,  (computing  bank  dividends  at  ten  per  centum,)  you 
may  tax  yourselves  at  two  hundred  thousand.**  As  bank 
stock  holders  retain  their  stock,  they  do  not  lend  it  to  a  na- 
tion as  a  compensation  for  taxing  it  by  means  of  that  stock. 
These  two  hundred  thousand  dollars,  are  ingeniously  used 
to  dazzle  the  multitude,  so  as  to  conceal  from  them,  that 
they  pay  eight  hundred  thousand  to  individuals,  for  the  pri- 
vilege of  taking  two  hundred  thousand  from  themselves,  and 
bestowing  it  on  the  government.  To  be  gulled  by  false 
prophecy  or  pretended  miracle,  is  known  to  be  within  the 
capacity  of  human  ignorance ;  but  a  national  inability  to 
count  is  a  real  miracle.  Corporate  rights  to  tax  the  nation 
in  a  great  sum,  for  the  sake  of  that  nation's  exercising  the 
right  of  taxing  itself  in  a  smail  one,  are  like  bribes  to  a 
government  for  permission  to  plunder  the  people,  as  prac- 
tised under  the  Turkish  policy. 

The  fact  "  that  bank  stock  is  a  tax  gatherer,"  is  only 
controverted  by  the  assertion,  that  its  dividends  arise  from 
the  voluntary  acts  of  individuals.  "Voluntary  and  indivi- 
duals." Precisely  the  terms  invariably  resorted  to,  when- 
ever the  object  is  to  varnish  over  tyranny,  pecuniary  or  per- 
sonal. Innocent  men  are  imprisoned  for  life  by  tyranny, 
and  a  nation  is  fleeced  by  monopoly  and  indirect  taxation  $ 
ought  the  indignation  of  justice  to  be  quelled  by  being  told, 
that  these  calamities  only  fall  on  individuals  ? 

Most  taxes,  by  which  nations  have  been  enslaved,  are 
voluntary.     By  forbearing  to  drink  liquors  of  any  kind,  or 
to  make  a  deed,  will,  bond  or  hill  of  exchange,  several  tax 
es  in  England  mny  be  avoided  ;  strictly  then,  their   pa^- 


29t»  BANKING. 

ment  may  be  called  voluntary ;  yet  by  ihese  and  similar 
taxes,  England  is  made  the  property  of  a  monied  aristo- 
cracy;  and  such  taxes  were  felt  in  the  United  States  as  a 
regular  progression  towards  the  same  system.  Did  neither 
of  these  countries  sustain  an  injury,  because  the  injury  was 
inflicted  through  the  medium  of  voluntary  taxation?  Is  the 
sale  of  church  paper,  for  enriching  a  clergy  in  this  world, 
under  pretence  of  excusing  the  sins  of  th<-  buyer  in  the  next, 
innoxious  to  mankind,  because  the  traffiek  is  voluntary? 

Whether  the  ignorance  of  the  payer  that  he  is  taxed,  so 
as  to  diminish  or  destroy  the  responsibility  of  a  government 
to  a  nation,  is  a  good  or  a  bad  argument  in  favour  of  indirect 
or  voluntary  taxes ;  it  does  not  at  least  justify  the  impo- 
sition of  such  taxes  for  the  sake  of  the  argument :  it  does 
not  prove,  supposing  it  is  a  good  stratagem  to  keep  the  people 
ignorant  of  the  amount  paid,  that  this  amount  ought  to  be 
given  to  corporations  or  private  individuals  ;  it  does  not  jus- 
tify the  establishment  of  chambers  of  taxation,  entrenched 
in  impenetrable  secrecy,  with  power  to  commission  and 
scatter  tax  gatherers  wherever  they  please.  Whatever 
therefore  can  be  urged  in  defence  of  indirect  taxation  for 
the  benefit  of  a  nation,  leaves  the  collections  made  by  bank- 
ing for  the  benefit  of  a  chartered  company,  as  defenceless  as 
before. 

Admitting  then,  that  the  tax  paid  to  banking,  arises  from 
the  voluntary  acts  of  individuals,  it  is  by  no  means  an  argu- 
ment in  its  favour,  stronger  than  the  voluntary  purchases 
of  church  paper  or  indulgences,  in  favour  of  that  practice. 
The  question  would  still  remain,  whether  it  is  wise  or  just 
to  suffer  the  passions  of  individuals  to  be  used  as  channels, 
for  drawing  the  wealth  of  a  nation  into  a  few  hands. 

But  it  is  denied  that  the  profit  of  banking  belongs  to  the 
voluntary  class  of  taxes  ;  and  in  the  course  of  the  following 
observations,  we  shall  urge  sundry  reasons  to  shew,  not  only 
that  it  is  a  tax,  but  an  inevitable  tax. 

A,  whom  we  will  consider  as  representing  the  whole 
class  of  borrowers  from  a  bank,  must  acquire  a  profit  upon 


BANKING.  297 

the  use  of  the  paper,  equivalent  to  the  interest  he  pays  ; 
otherwise  he  could  not  borrow.  From  his  continuing 
to  borrow,  it  is  evident  that  he  only  advances  the  tax,  ant! 
that  it  is  reimbursed.  This  regular  result  is  of  the  nature 
of  fate  or  necessity,  and  not  of  free  will  or  discretion.  The 
residue  of  a  nation  composes  the  class,  throughout  which, 
A,  the  borrowing  class,  circulates  the  paper,  and  it  is  una- 
ble to  exercise  any  volition,  adequate  to  the  avoidance  of 
his  reimbursement. 

Excluding  the  idea  of  the  class  of  borrowers,  the  cer- 
tainty and  simplicity  with  which  a  bank  inflicts  and  collect?, 
its  profit,  becomes  still  more  visible.  The  operation  is  car- 
ried on  between  a  nation  and  a  banking  corporation.  The 
nation,  through  the  channel  of  its  members,  exchanges  a. 
thing  called  credit,  reduced  to  the  form  of  bonds  or  notes 
for  the  payment  of  money,  with  the  corporation,  giving  a 
boot,  profit  or  difference,  of  about  eight  per  centum  per  an- 
num, which  the  bank  bond,  note  or  credit,  is  arbitrarily 
made  by  law  to  be  worth,  beyond  the  national  bond,  note  or 
credit.  This  effect  is  produced  by  subjecting  the  members  of 
the  nation  to  the  payment  of  a  compound  interest  to  the  cor- 
poration on  their  bonds,  notes  or  credit,  and  absolving  the 
corporation  from  the  payment  of  any  interest  to  the  mem- 
bers of  the  nation,  on  its  bonds,  notes  or  credit  5  and  exhi- 
bits both  the  inevitability  of  the  tax,  and  a  mode  of  its  col- 
lection. 

It  is  asked,  whether  the  borrowing  class,  may  not  for- 
bear to  borrow,  and  whether  this  power  of  forbearance,  is 
not  an  evidence,  that  the  profit  or  income  collected  by  bank- 
ing, proceeds  from  the  voluntary  act  of  individuals.  Should 
bread  and  water  be  placed  in  abundance,  before  a  hungry 
and  thirsty  multitude,  could  their  eating  and  drinking  be 
fairly  said  to  be  merely  voluntary  ?  Currency  is  the  medi- 
um for  exchanging  necessaries.  If  gold  and  silver,  the  uni- 
versal medium,  are  legislated  out  of  sight,  all  human  wants 
unite  to  compel  men  to  receive  the  tax  collecting  substi- 
tute.     This  is  banking.      By  the  help  of  law  it  creates  a 

39 


Z98  BANKING. 

necessity  for  its  own  currency ;  and  this  extreme  hunger  is 
misnamed  volition. 

The  coin  currency  being  expelled  or  drawn  out  of  cir- 
culation, to  an  extent  sufficient  to  create  a  necessity  for  some 
substitute,  the  power  possessing the  right  of  supplying  and 
regulating  that  substitute,  can  inevitably  so  manage  it,  as 
to  enrich  ijtself  by  means  of  that  necessity.  It  can  supply 
the  needed  currency  upon  the  terms,  and  In  the  quantities  it 
pleases.  And  if  fluctuations  in  currency,  produced  and 
managed  by  chartered  monopolies,  can  affect  price  or  va- 
lue, it  fallows,  that  through  his  income,  his  money,  and 
his  property,  an  individual  is  reached  by  the  tax  of  this  cur- 
rency, although  he  never  borrowed  or  used  it  Such  suf- 
ferers do  not  exercise  the  least  formality  of  volition. 

That  the  profit  of  banking  is  both  a  tax  and  an  inevita- 
ble tax,  is  asserted  by  stockholders  themselves,  and  the  le- 
gislatures which  grant  charters.  The  wealth  collected 
from  a  state  by  bank  paper  issued  without  it,  is  called  a  tri- 
bute ;  and  the  remedy  resorted  to  is  to  establish  the  tribute 
at  home.  Tyranny,  and  especially  pecuniary  oppression, 
has  been  generally  most  tolerable,  the  farther  off.  It  is 
certainly  true  as  bankers  assert,  that  a  banking  corporation 
in  Maryland  can  tax  Virginia  by  circulating  its  paper  with- 
in that  state,  and  of  course  it  is  also  true,  that  a  banking 
corporation  in  Virginia,  can  tax  Virginia  by  the  same, 
means  ;  the  questions  are,  which  can  carry  the  oppression 
to  the  greatest  extent ;  the  domestick  or  foreign  corpora- 
tion ;  and  if  the  former,  whether  a  greater,  will  remedy  a 
less  evil  ? 

The  argument  in  favour  of  repulsive  banks,  coincides  in 
other  points  with  the  ideas  we  have  expressed.  Few  or 
none  of  the  notes  coining  from  distant  banks,  admitted  to 
have  collected  a  tax  in  Virginia,  were  borrowed  by  the  citi- 
zens of  that  state.  Therefore,  not  the  borrower,  but  the 
nation  in  which  the  notes  circulate,  pays  the  tax.  If  the 
borrower  does  not  pay  the  tax,  his  will  or  pleasure  that  it 
shall  be  paid  by  others,  does  not  make  it  a  voluntary  tax; 


BASKING. 

nor  entitle  it  even  to  that  unsubstantial  defence.  As  the 
circulator  of  the  paper,  he  inflicts  and  enhances  the  tax  for 
his  own  benefit.  And  the  payer,  not  being-  the  borrower, 
has  no  check  over,  or  volition  in  relation  to  the  tax.  It 
will  even  be  collected  from  individuals  whom  the  paper 
never  readies,  by  its  capacity  to  cause  the  value  of  proper- 
ty and  even  of  coin  itself,  to  fluctuate. 

Those  who  create  new  banks,  to  protect  one  sti 
against  the  calamity  of  bank  paper,  coming  from  another, 
also  assert  that  bank  paper  is  a  blessing.  Bold  contradic- 
tions sometimes  hide  truth,  as  vehemency  does  cowardice. 
"Will  climate,  or  the  names  of  stockholders  have  the  effect 
of-making  bank  paper  sometimes  a  curse,  at  others  a  isles- 
sing?  Then  a  tribute;  now  a  mine  of  wealth  ?  Sincerity, 
as  a  citizen  of  Virginia,  wishing  to  introduce  banks,  after 
having  truly  urged  that  Virginia  paid  a  tax  to  stock  hold- 
ers in  other  states,  would  have  simply  requested  that  the 
same  individual  tax  might  be  transferred  to  Virginians, 
This  would  have  brought  the  question  fairly  before  the 
publick.  Shall  a  tax  be  created  for  the  sake  of  its  expendi- 
ture at  home  ?  Shall  we  foster  separate  sinecure  interests 
at  home,  because  a  contribution  towards  their  support 
abroad,  is  an  evil  ?  And  even  these  questions  would  ha*  " 
resulted  in  a  very  simple  numerical  calculation ;  namely, 
whether  it  would  be  wise  to  extract  a  revenue  from  the 
state,  payable  by  all  its  citizens  except  about  one  thousan  I 
who  should  receive  it ;  in  order  to  save  half  the  sum,  col- 
lected'by  citizens  of  other  states,  towards  the  payment  of 
which  these  thousand  also  contributed  ?  This  degree  of 
sincerity  might  reasonably  have  been  expected  of  stock  it- 
self; but  disinterestedness  would  have  added,  that  the  idea 
of  one  fax  driving  out  the  other,  that  is,  of  domestick  bank 
paper,  driving  out  bank  paper  issued  without  the  authority 
of  the  state,  was  delusive.  The  extraneous  paper,  being; 
possessed  of  the  quality  which  collects  the  tax  (currency  or 
circulation)  would  continue  to  circulate  and  tax;  and  the 
remedy  would  therefore  simply  amount  to  an  addition  of  a 


300  BANKING, 

new  tax  to  the  old.  Such  will  continue  to  be  the  effect  of 
this  remedy  of  opposing  state  paper  to  extraneous  paper, 
until  a  state  is  saturated  with  the  tax.  A  country  is  satu- 
rated with  debt  stock,  when  it  can  no  longer  pay  its  inte- 
rest, and  with  bank  paper,  when  it  can  no  longer  pay  its 
dividends.  Whilst  Virginia  is  able  to  pay  the  dividends  of 
her  domestiek  stock,  and  the  same  contribution  heretofore 
collected  from  her  by  extraneous  paper,  one  payment  will 
not  abolish  the  other,  but  both  will  be  made ;  and  the  crea- 
tion of  a  bank  tax  to  expel  a  bunk  tax,  only  amounts  to  the 
ingenious  idea,  that  one  lash  will  cure  the  smart  of  another. 
The  real  remedy  against  strange  bank  paper  is  as  visi- 
ble as  light ;  but  it  would  lead  to  discussions,  which  native 
stock  feared  to  encounter.  If  bank  paper  is  a  tax  gatherer, 
one  state  may  prohibit  the  circulation  of  another's  paper, 
with  as  much  propriety,  as  it  could  expel  tax  gatherers  in 
the  shape  of  men,  commissioned  by  another.  No  disguise, 
change  of  shape,  or  new  dress,  can  bestow  a  right  to  tax, 
where  no  such  right  exists.  But  native  stock  felt  its  dilem- 
ma ;  an  expulsion  of  strange  paper  by  law,  because  it  was  a 
tax,  would  have  told  the  people  by  law,  that  native  paper 
was  also  a  tax*  It  preferred  therefore  the  delusion  of  an 
opinion,  that  one  tax  would  diminish  another,  as  the  basis  of 
its  own  existence,  to  an  inquiry,  which  might  have  termi- 
nated in  the  conclusion,  that  no  legislature  in  the  United 
States  have  a  better  right  to  tax  their  constituents  for  the 
benefit  of  banking  corporations,  than  one  state  has  to  tax 
another  state  for  the  same  purpose. 

Into  this  inquiry,  let  us  proceed  ;  beginning  with  the  right 
of  Congress  to  tax  the  Union  for  the  benefit  of  a  bank  cor- 
poration. Our  arguments  will  be  founded  upon  an  opinion, 
that  hank  paper  collects  a  revenue.  Supposing  its  payment 
to  be  unavoidable,  an  apportionment  by  the  census  is  requir- 
ed by  our  constitutional  policy ;  allotting  it  to  any  other 
description  of  tax,  a  bank  in  each  state,  or  some  distribu- 
tion of  stock,  is  equally  required  by  the  mandate  of  unifor- 
pity ;  and  both  these  constitutional  principles  are  gross)) 


BAN1CING.  ^01 

violated,  by  a  bank  so  located,  as  to  enrich  one  state,  and  tax 
another.  Considered  as  a  non-deseript  species  of  revenue, 
no  power  to  inflict  it  on  the  priblick,  or  to  bestow  it  on  pri- 
vate people,  is  given  to  Congress. 

In  the  appropriation,  as  in  the  apportionment  or  iittifor- 
roity  of  revenue,  will  be  found  a  limitation  of  the  power 
of  Congress.  An  unconstitutional  mode  of  taxing,  may  in- 
flict tial  injuries  upon  particular  states,  but  an  uncon- 
stitutional lation  of  revenue,  may  be  ruinous  to  all.  It 
is  inconceivable  that  the  constitution,  v,hilst  so  cautiously 
providing  against  the  first  evil,  should  have  overlooked  the 
second.  The  loosest  security  against  it.  is  deposited  in  a 
li  nitation  of  the  revenue  collected,  to  the  *'  common  de- 
fence and  general  welfare  of  the  United  States  ;"  and  the 
right  of  Congress  to  appropriate  a  revenue  collected  by  bank 
paper,  for  the  defence  or  welfare  of  a  corporation,  is  visibly 
beyond  this  wide  definition. 

Under  the  idea  "  of  carrying  the  powers  given  into  ex- 
ecution," could  Congress  have  invested  the  parliament  of 
England,  with  the  privileges  granted  to  the  bank  of  the 
United  States  ?  Such  a  charter  would  have  bestowed  on 
England  the  object  of  her  war  upon  us,  revenue.  In  what 
part  of  the  constitution  is  to  be  found  a  prohibition  upon 
Congress  to  bestow  a  revenue  upon  the  British  parliament, 
or  a  power  to  bestow  one  on  chartered  companies  ?  A  con- 
struction necessary  to  invest  Congress  with  one  power  must 
include  the  other. 

Testimony  applicable  to  the  question  exists  without  and 
within  the  constitution.  A  rejection  of  a  proposal  for  em- 
powering Congress  to  establish  a  bank  by  the  convention,  is 
the  evidence  without  the  constitution  ;  and  a  special  power 
to  grant  charters  "  to  authors  and  inventors,"  is  the  < 
dence  within  it,  uniting  in  a  condemnation  of  the  construc- 
tion, which  claims  for  Congress  an  unlimited  power  of  bes- 
towing  revenue  upon  corporations,  and  literally  forbidding 
that  mode  of  doing  it  called  banking.  A  special  and  limit- 
ed power  excludes  the  idea  of  a  general  and  unlimited  pow- 
er, which  includes  the  special  one. 


S02  BANKING. 

In  most  or  ail  of  the  state  constitutions,  diploma,  char- 
ier and  corporation,  are  condemned  as  inimical  to  liberty, 
and  as  usurpations  upon  man's  natural  rights.  In  none,  is 
a  power  given  to  the  legislature,  to  bestow  a  revenue  of  any 
kind  at  the  national  expense  upon  corporations. 

The  constitution  of  Massachusetts  declares,  that  "  no 
li  man,  or  corporation,  or  association  of  men  have  any  other 
«  title  to  obtain  advantages  or  particular  and  exclusive  pri- 
(i  vileges  distinct  from  those  of  the  community,  than  what 
«  arises  from  the  consideration  of  services  rendered  the 
cs  publick  ;"  and  that  of  Virginia,  "  that  no  man  or  set  of 
"  men,  are  entitled  to  exclusive  or  separate  emoluments  or 
«  privileges  from  the  community,  but  in  consideration  of 
<f  publick  services.'' 

The  words  "  common  defence  and  general  welfare,'" 
twice  used  in  the  constitution  of  the  United  States,  contain 
the  principle  advanced  in  the  two  last  quotations.  They  arc 
the  exact  contraries  to  "  particular,  exclusive  or  separate 
privileges  or  welfare." 

The  constitutions  quoted,  literally  enrolling  "  exclu- 
sive privileges  and  emoluments"  in  the  list  of  tyrannies, 
proceed  to  expound  the  words  "  publick  services."  These 
only  are  admitted  to  possess  a  legitimate  title  "  to  exclusive 
privileges  and  emoluments."  Had  legislatures  been  left  at 
liberty  to  extend  these  words  to  whatever  they  should  deem 
to  be  publick  service,  they  might  have  created  and  endow- 
ed with  exclusive  privileges  and  emoluments,  a  corporation 
for  introducing  monarchy,  as  well  as  for  introducing  the 
aristocracy  of  paper  stock,  under  the  idea,  that  it  would 
serve  the  publick. 

But  their  constitutional  exposition  is  unequivocal.  The 
privileges  and  emoluments  allowed  to  publick  services,  are 
neither  "  inheritable  or  transmissible  to  children,  descend- 
ants or  relations,"  because  "  publick  services"  being  "  in 
nature"  neither  hereditary  or  transmissible,  so  exclusive 
transmissible  privileges  or  emoluments  were  incompatible 
■with  the  principles  of  liberty.     This  construction  of  the 


fcAtfKINQ.  o0.> 

ferrns,  by  the  instrument  in  which  (hey  are  used,  restricts 
legislative  power  by  a  definition,  far  shor-t  of  an  unfettered 
imagination,  licensed  to  pronounce  whatever  comports  with 
its  fancy*  its  interest  or  its  plots,  to  be  serviceable  to  the 
publick.  It  unequivocally  dissevers  the  privileges  or  emo- 
luments allowed  to  publick  services,  from  whatever  may  be 
sold,  or  transmitted  to  relations,  like  bank  stock.  And  ex- 
pounds these  terms,  as  well  as  their  equivalents,  «  general 
welfare,"  according  to  their  original  unsophisticated  inten- 
tion. 

The  governments  of  the  union,  Massachusetts  and  Vir- 
ginia, have  granted  banking  charters,  conveying  saleable, 
transferable  and  descendible  exclusive  privileges  and  emo- 
luments :  and  have  thus  opened  by  precedent  a  way  to  every 
conceivable  power,  by  usurping  the  mother  of  all  powers,  that 
of  distributing  wealth.  This  maybe  given  to  foreigners, 
whether  plebeians,  nobles  or  kings,  and  held  both  in  peace 
and  in  war,  as  rewards  "  for  publick  services"  or  «  for 
«  common  defence  and  general  welfare,"  by  bank  "  exelu- 
"  sive  privileges  and  emoluments."  The  word  "  common," 
requires  a  membership  with  the  community,  and  the  king, 
nobility,  clergy  and  paper  aristocracy  of  England,  holding 
bank  stock  in  America,  in  a  war  between  England  and  the 
United  States,  must  therefore  be  considered,  as  rendering 
publick  services,  and  advancing  our  defence  and  welfare,  to 
bring  the  appropriation  of  money  to  their  use  by  the  bank 
law,  within  the  meaning  of  this  expression.  If  such  fictions 
are  able  to  overturn  constitutional  principles,  the  idea  of  a 
constitution  capable  of  restraining  legislatures,  is  itself  a 
fiction. 

It  is  admitted  that  this  part  of  our  reasoning  is  oflittle 
weight.  If  banking  is  a  publick  benefit,  constitutional  pro- 
hibitions ought  not  to  deprive  the  publick  of  that  benefit  ; 
only  the  constitutions  ought  to  be  amended  to  come  at  it 
Banking  ought  therefore  to  be  considered,  as  it  affects  na- 
tions morally  and  politically,  and  not  by  any  verbal  test. 
But  it  cannoi  be  overlooked;,  that  although  banking 


30fc  BANKING. 

rejected  and  excluded  by  the  framers  of  the  genera!  consti- 
tution 5  and  although  many  eminent  and  learned  men  long 
denied  to  congress  a  power  to  incorporate  banks  \  yet  it  has 
neVer  been  judicially  questioned;  and  ail  the  state  legisla- 
tures have  found  it  in  the  words  ««  pubhek  sci'vaces/^  after 
congress  discovered  it  lurking  under  the  expression  "  gene- 
ral welfare.*'  Individuals  and  entire  parties,  to  a  vast  ex- 
tent, have  loudly  reprobated,  and  calmly  defended  this  pow- 
er j  and  the  foily  or  knavery  of  those  who  first  represented 
it  as  an  usurpation  dangerous  to  free  government,  and  af- 
terwards seized  upon  it,  ought  to  be  a  memorial  to  nations 
against  reposing  an  excessive  degree  of  confidence  in  parties 
or  individuals  ;  in  judges  or  legislatures  j  in  governments  or 
patriots. 

The  history  of  man  proves  that  all  will  often  avail  them- 
selves of  the  precedents  established  by  their  predecessors, 
and  reprobated  by  themselves.     Every  precedent,  huwever 
clearly  demonstrated  to  be  unconstitutional  and   tending 
«  towards  monarchy  and  an  iron  government"  by  a  parly 
out  of  power,  will  be  held  sacred  by  the  same  party  in  it ; 
and  those  who  clearly  discerned  the  injustice  and  impolicy 
of  enriching   and  strengthening  federalists  by  bank  or  debt 
stock,  at  the  publick  expense,  will  seldom  refuse  to  receive 
a  similar  sinecure.     In   short,  a  power  in  the   individuals 
who  compose  legislatures,   to  fish  up  wealth  from  the  peo- 
ple, by  nets  of  their  own  weaving,  whatever  be  the  names 
of  such  nets,  will  corrupt   legislative,  executive  and  judi- 
cial publick  servants,  by  whatever  systems  constituted  ;  and 
convert  patriots  from  the  best  friends,   into  the  most  dan- 
gerous foes  of  free,  equal  and  just  principles  of  civil  liberty. 
Let  us  return  more  particularly  to  our  subject.     It  will 
be  remembered,  that  we  have  endeavoured  to  prove,  that  a 
revenue  is  collected  from  nations  by  banking.      Our  know- 
ledge of  that  currency,  called  paper  money,  will  suggest  new 
arguments  to  this  point.     Long  experience  has  demonstrat- 
ed to  America,  that  a  paper  currency  will  never  retain  its 
value,  unless  it  is  attended  by  a  tax  adequate  to  its  redemp 


banking.  305 

tiqn.  We  will  suppose,  however  untrue  it  may  be,  that 
every  bank  contains  coin  to  the  amount  of  its  capital.  1i  ex 
ihis  is  a  sum,  inferior  to  the  aggregate  of  its  stock,  its  notes, 
and  its  dividends.  If  the  coin  is  only  mortgaged  for  the 
two  last  items,  yet  these  greatly  exceed  its  amount,  and 
litis  excess  forms  a  mass  of  paper  currency,  for  Which  the 
coin  is  no  security.  Without  a  security  adequate  to  its  re- 
demption, we  know  it  to  be  a  law  of  paper  currencies  to 
depreciate  ;  and  as  this  surplus  of  hank  paper  beyond  the 
ability  of  the  deposited  coin  to  redeem,  does  not  depreciate, 
its  credit  must  be  supported  by  some  other  security  ;  that 
security  is  the  tax,  which  banking  collects  ;  a  tax,  not  only 
sufficing  for  the  redemption  and  credit  of  this  species  of  pa- 
per currency,  but  supplying  a  redundancy,  sufficient  in  some 
cases  to  add  one  half  of  its  numerical  value  to  the  coin  de- 
posited as  stock. 

Of  the  correctness  of  this  reasoning,  and  of  the  nature  of 
iking,  an  ancient  practice  in  Pennsylvania,  furnishes  ade- 
monstration.  That  state,  whilst  a  province,  became  a 
banker.  It  made  and  loaned  a  paper  currency,  at  a  mode- 
rate interest.  The  interest  paid  for  it  to  the  state,  was  a 
fax,  applied  to  publiek  use.  This  is  banking,  strip*  of  its 
ambiguity.  Simply  an  indirect  mode  of  taxation,  success- 
fully u.^ed  to  raise  national  revenue.  The  idea  that  it  was 
not  a  tax,  because  individuals  borrowed  the  money,  and  col- 
lected and  paid  the  tax,  would  be  an  assertion  in  every  view 
less  tenable,  than  that  an  impost  upon  ordinary  licences  was 
not  a  tax,  because  such  licences  were  voluntarily  taken  and 
confined  to  a  few  persons;  the  reimbursement  derived  from 
the  privilege  in  both  cases,  transfers  the  tax  from  the  indi- 
viduals to  the  publiek. 

The  differences  between  ihc  Pennsylvania]1,  and  the  pre- 
sent mode  of  banking,  are,  that  then  the  tax  was  paid  by 
individuals  to  the  publiek ;  now  it  is  paid  by  the  publiek  to 
individuals.  Then  it  was  paid  to  assist  industry,  and  defray 
publiek  expenses ;  now  to  enrich  idleness,  and  supply  the 
sneans  yf  luxury  to  a  separate  interest.      Then  the  publiek 

•iO 


&06  BANKING. 

required  a  knowledge  of  the  amount  paid,  from  its  own  re- 
presentatives :  now  it  pays  an  amount  unknown,  to  corpora- 
tions in  which  it  is  not  represented.  Then  the  publick  re- 
ceived five  or  six  per  centum  of  individuals  for  paper  cur- 
rency ;  now  it  pays  ten  or  twelve  per  centum  to  individuals 
for  the  same  currency.  That  species  of  paper  currency 
could  not  corrupt  legislatures  or  nurture  aristocracy  ;  this 
must  do  both.  That  being  dealt  out  by  the  publick  interest, 
and  not  by  the  interest  of  monopoly,  circulated  through  a 
nation  like  coin,  liable  to  no  artificial  fluctuation,  and  besrat 
fair,  useful  and  honest  competition;  this  being  regulated  by 
a  separate  interest,  is  made  to  cause  prices  to  fluctuate 
with  a  view  to  personal  and  local  emolument.  That  did  not 
monopolise  and  expel  specie  ;  this  commences  with  the  first 
measure,  and  .terminates  with  the  second,  so  as  to  make  it- 
self indispensably  necessary, 

But  it  is  said  that  the  Pennsyivanian  species  of  bank  cur- 
rency will  fail  in  its  credit.  It  is  never  to  be  forgotten, 
that  credit  is  an  ally  of  safety  and  factions,  and  not  of  peril 
and  nations.  That  it  is  bold  and  flourishing  in  security, 
and  fearful  and  withering  in  danger,  A  small  degree  ol 
danger  being  about  to  assail  the  credit  of  the  bank  of  Eng- 
land, the  corporation  influenced  government  to  protect  it 
against  the  payment  of  its  debts  to  the  nation  ;  a  protection, 
which  would  not  withstand  the  shock  of  war,  invasion,  su- 
perior force  and  disaster,  as  long  as  did  the  currency  of  na- 
tional credit  in  France  and  America, 

National  credit  includes  the  credit  of  every  individual  ; 
a  part  cannot  be  more  solid  than  the  w  hole :  and  if  the  whole 
is  lost,  the  parts  must  also  be  lost.  A  calamity  which 
threatens  to  overwhelm  a  nation,  destroys  confidence  among 
individuals.  Bank  credit  depends  upon  bonds  given  by  in 
dividuals.  Pennsjlvanian  credit  was  supported  by  the  same 
pledge,  and  by  she  additional  guarantees  of  landed  security 
and  national,  faith.  A  calamity,  capable  of  destroying  the 
bonds,  mortgages  and  national  faith,  three  sponsors  for 
Pennsylvania!*  bank  currency,  will  destroy  tiie  single  sp 


BANKING,  307 

sor  for  chartered  bank  currency.  And  a  nation  will  defend' 
its  own  credit  with  more  animation,  whilst  it  diminishes 
their  taxes,  by  bringing  them  revenue ;  than  it  will  bank 
credit,  which  increases  their  taxes,  without  bringing  them 
revenue.  National  credit  would  arouse  bravery,  interest 
and  patriotism,  like  other  property  j  but  bank  and  fund- 
ing credit,  cannot  inspire  a  nation  with  patriotism,  because 
it  is  a  tax  gatherer,  which  zealously  engages  in  the  wars 
of  ambition,  avarice  anil  orders,  and  flees  from  imminent 
national  danger.  A  rapacious  coward  cannot  make  a  ra- 
tion brave. 

If  the  credit  of  a  whole  nation  is  perfidious,  it  only  ag- 
gravates the  absurdity  of  purchasing  a  portion  of  its  own 
perfidious  credit,  at  an  enormous  price  ;  and  of  expecting 
to  cure  the  perfidy  of  the  whole,  by  attaching  to  a  part,  the 
additional  excitements  towards  treachery,  arising  from  ex 
elusive  privilege  and  separate  interest.  These  never  had 
any  business  in  society,  but  to  corrupt  governments  and 
plunder  nations.  They  are  exactly  the  remedy,  universal- 
ly proposed  by  the"  enemies  cf  the  principle  of  self-govern- 
ment, for  ibis  imaginary  evil  of  national  perfidy  to  itself. 
'  National  credit,  say  they,  is  perfidious.  Resort  therefore 
to  corporation,  Vendible,  monopolized  and  suceessional  cre- 
dit, as  a  much  better  shield  for  liberty,  Equally  perfidious, 
in  their  opinion,  is  national  wisdom,  and  therefore  they  re- 
commend titled,  hereditary  and  suceessional  wisdom,  as  al= 
so  a  better  shield  for  liberty.  Such  opinions  are  consistent 
But  how  can  those  be  reconciled,  which  assert,  that  treach- 
ery to  liberty  forever  lurks  in  hereditary,  suceessional  and 
monopolized  wisdoni,  and  that  her  safety  consists  in  vendfe 
ble,  suceessional  and  monopolized  credit  ? 

Pennsylvanun  credit,  produces  the  benefit  of  a  reveuue, 
as  national  wisdom  does  that  of  freedom  ;  and  corporation 
credit  produces  taxation,  as  hereditary  wisdom  does  tyran- 
ny. As  credit  can  produce  revenue,  it  is  property,  and  it 
will  he  considered,  whether  as  such,  it  can  under  our  pi 
cy  be  thrown  into  a  state  of  monop  :;-'  o  i  disposed  of  by  ex-" 


308  BANKI.VG. 

elusive  charter,  as  districts  and  inhabitants  are  in  Russia* 
or  branches  of  commerce  in  England.  IPa  monopoly  of  the 
wine  trade,  cannot  be  chartered  to  a  corporation,  "will  cre- 
dit, which  covers  every  branch  of  commerce,  admit  of  a 
state  of  monopoly  ? 

The  value  of  credit,  as  property*  appears  evidently  in  the 
price  it  sells  for.  A  nation,  by  giving  away  its  credit,  loses 
what  Pennsylvania  sold  at  six  per  centum.  By  erecting 
corporations  to  monopolize  or  expel  its  specie,  to  make 
room  for  their  credit,  it  loses  the  use  of  this  specie  worth 
six  per  centum  more.  And  necessity  then  compels  it  to  buy 
of  these  corporations  the  credit  it  gave  to  them,  at  the  price 
of  ten  or  twelve  per  centum  upon  their  stock.  These  items 
shew  that  credit  is  either  property,  or  a  machine  for  trans- 
ferring property,  more  effectual  than  that  marie  of  here- 
ditary and  exclusive  wisdom.  Both  machines  have  been 
invented  for  this  purpose.  The  hereditary  magnifies  the 
defects  incident  to  human  government  in  its  best  form,  to 
hide  its  own  greater  vices.  The  credit  machine,  in  strict 
imitation  of  this  example,  seizes  upon  the  errours  of  paper 
money,  a«  reproaches  against  national  credit ;  and  hides  un- 
der them  its  own  greater  aptitude  to  shrink  from  danger, 
and  also  its  capacities  for  corrupting  governments  and  plun- 
dering nation?,  Of  the  bad  features  in  the  face  of  paper 
money,  corporation  credit  makes  two  masks,  one  to  hide  its 
own  hideousness,  the  other  to  hide  the  benefits  of  national 
credit. 

If  all  the  banks  in  the  United  States  circulate  fifty  mil- 
tions  of  paper  dollars,  five  millions  of  real  property  will 
thereby  be  collected.  And  if  national  credit,  instead  of 
corporation  credit,  had  issued  the  same  sum  in  the  mode 
successfully  practised  in  Pennsylvania,  a  revenue  of  five 
millions  would  have  been  received  instead  of  being  paid, 
making  a  difference  of  ten  millions  annually  to  the  nation. 
Are  these  great  sums  of  wealth  no  property  ?  If  they  are 
property,  to  whom  do  they  belong?  If  they  belong  to  any 
body,  can  they  be  transferred  by  laws  and  charters,  under  a 
policy,  which  considers  property  as  sacred  ? 


Sacking.  SOS? 

This  plain  fact  enables  us  to  compare  accurately,  our  sys- 
tem of  monopolized  and  transmissible  credit,  with  a  system 
of  monopolized  and  transmissible  wisdom.  By  this  compari- 
son it  will  be  divulged,  that  the  pecuniary  oppression  of  pri- 
vileged credit,  is  far  greater  than  that  of  privileged  wisdom  ; 
and  hence  it  is  a  just  inference,  that  its  avarice  is  also  great- 
er. Avarice  breeds  the  treacheries  of  privilege  against  li- 
berty. Unprivileged  or  national  wisdom  is  its' friend,  be- 
cause such  wisdom  can  see  no  object  to  betray,  for  the  gra- 
tification of  avarice  or  ambition  ;  privileged  or  corporation, 
wisdom  is  its  foe,  because  this  species  of  wisdom  can  see 
such  an  object.  We  will  select  an  expensive  system  of  mo- 
nopolized wisdom,  to  illustrate  these  ideas.  The  king  of 
England  receives  for  his  wisdom,  one  million  of  pounds  ster- 
ling, equivalent  to  the  annual  labour  of  fifty  thousand  men. 
The  labour  of  fifty  thousand  men,  is  equivalent  to  the  sub- 
sistence of  two  hundred  thousand  people.  For  the  subsist- 
ence of  two  hundred  thousand  people,  this  man  renders  the 
"  publiek  service"  of  a  king,  and  pays  also  the  salaries  of 
sundry  other  publiek  servants.  His  exclusive  emolument 
therefore,  however  exorbitant,  is  within  the  principle  of  the 
constitutions  lately  quoted.  The  banks  in  the  United  States 
receive  for  their  credit,  at  least  five  millions  of  dollars  an- 
nually, equal  to  one  million  one  hundred  and  twenty-five 
thousand  pounds  sterling  ;  to  tho  annual  labour  of  fifty-six 
thousand  five  hundred  working  men  ;  and  to  the  subsistence 
of  two  hundred  and  twenty-five  thousand  people.  Tbey  are 
neither  publiek  servants,  nor  do  they  pay  the  salaries  of  pub - 
lick  servants.  Confining  the  payers  for  the  king's  wisdom 
to  Britain,  the  expense  is  divided  among  twelve  millions, 
and  extending  the  computation  to  all  his  dominions,  it  may 
possibly  reach  to  twenty.  Therefore  the  proportion  of  sub- 
sistence drawn  by  the  king's  privileged  and  monopolized 
wisdom  from  labour  in  England,  is  less  than  that  drawr 
from  labour  by  privileged  and  monopolized  credit  in  Ame- 
rica. 


ii0 


SAP<Ki:-,t.. 


When  we  behold  an  honest  indignation  against  thg  ?ys(era' 
of  privileged  and  monopolized  wisdom,  and  an  honest  ap- 
probation of  the  system  of  privileged  and  monopolized  cre- 
dit, existing  in  the  same  ramd5  why  should  we  fee  proud  of 
the  human  intellect  ? 

The  pecuniary  sufferings  of  nations  from  banking  may  be 
exhibited  with  some  accuracy  by  figures,  and  though  figures 
cannot  exhibit  its  drafts  upon  their  political  principles,  we 
may  conclude  with  almost  equal  certainty,  that  a  separate 
factitious  interest,  will  not  pie  serve  a  free  government  in 
America,  because  it  has  never  done  so  in  any  other  country. 
Monopoly,  like  other  evils,  takes  refuge  under  some  good. 
It  attempts  to  include  within  its  scope,  the  acquisitions  of 
talents  and  industry,  and  to  confound  them  with  those  of 
legal  t  fraud  ;  and  to  consider  private  property,  roads  and 
canals,  whence  arise  good  effects,  as  of  the  same  nature 
with  hierarchy*  nobility,  banks,  or  any  species  of  legal  se- 
parate interest,  though  productive  only  of  political  opprf 
sioa  or  pecuniary  fraud. 

Admitting  private  prbjVeriy,  however  incorrectly,  to  be 
a  species  of  monopoly,  its  effects,  such  as  subsistence,  com- 
fort, and  a  multitude  of  physical  benefits,  draw  a  distinct  line 
between  it  and  the  fraud  or  force  of  hierarchical  and  feudal 
usurpations.  These,  instead  of  possessing  a  common  nature 
with  private  property,  diminish  or  defeat  its  benefits. 

Govern  mant,  considered  as  a  monopoly,  has  also  been  cal- 
led a  necessary  evil,  because  it  has  been  almost  universally 
planted  in  its  e^il  and  not  in  its  good  qualities.  A  mo- 
nopoly is  erected,  calculated  to  awaken  the  avarice  and 
ambition  of  its  members  ;  these  evil  qualities  arc  according- 
ly awakened  ;  they  resort  to  force  and  fraud  for  their  own 
gratification;  and  such  monopolies  beget  the  civil  tyranny, 
denominated  a  necessary  evil. 

But  as  private  property  may  be  planted  in  the  good  or 
in  the  evil  qualities  of  monopoly,  so  may  a  government; 
by  banishing  fraud  or  force,  as  means  of  acquiring  private 
property,  its  protection  begets  beneficial  effect    i    and  by 


BANKING. 

forbearing  to  excite  avarice  and  ambition  by  fraudulent 
laws  and  separate  interests,  government  will  produce  hu- 
man happiness  and  comfort,  and  be  considered  as  a  necessa- 
ry good. 

It  has  been  our  policy,  so  to  divide  power,  and  diminish 
the  excitements  of  avarice  and  ambition,  as  to  wring  out  of 
its  soul  the  poisons  arising  from  toe  evil  qualities  of  mono- 
poly ;  laws  to  foster  these  qualities,  labour  to  revive  what 
tiiat  policy  labours  to  destroy. 

If  monopoly  is  made  up  of  good  and  evil  qualities  ;  and 
if  our  policy  has  planted  our  government  in  its  good  quali- 
ties, a  revolution  is  effected  by  transplanting  it  into  its  evil 
qualities.  The  constitutional  corporation  is  endeavoured 
to  be  cleansed  of  avarice  and  ambition,  the  scourges  cf 
mankind  j  and  legal  corporations,  having  the  Crst,  which 
begets  the  other,  breathed  into  them,  as  their  vital  prin- 
ciple, cannot  constitute  the  same  species  of  govern- 
ment, 

These  inimical  principles  cannot  in  nature  subsist  to- 
gether ;  one"itfust  subdue,  reform  or  contaminate  the  other. 
In  England  a  paper  system  has  contaminated  the  govern- 
ment ;  here,  the  only  argument  which  enn  be  urged  against 
the  same  process  and  result,  is,  that  the  pure  principles  of 
our  constitutional  corporations,  will  reform  the  vicious 
principles  of  our  legal  corporations,  created  by  them- 
selves,, • 

Towards  this  experiment,  the  constitutional  and  legal 
corporations  are  mixed  up  together.  The  constitutions  and 
laws  then  beginfto  solicit  the  suffrages  of  this  compound. 
*•  Adhere  to  us."  say  the  constitutions,  «  and  we  will  take 
"  caije  that  neither  your  ambition  nor  avarice  shall  be  gra- 
"  tified."  «  Come  over  to  us,"  say  the  laws,  "  and  we  will 
"  gratify  both,"  Will  the  audience  make  a  separate  in- 
terest, which  bestows  on  it  exclusive  wealth  and  power, 
pubservient  to  the  general  interest,  which  rigidly  refuses  to 

!  it  with  either, 


312  BANKING. 

If  it  is  a  moral  truth,  that  mankind  prefer  themselves  to 
others,  then  it  is  a  moral  certainty,  that  members,  both  of 
the  government  and  of  the  corporation,  will  prefer  the  in- 
terest of  the  corporation  to  the  interest  of  the  nation.  As 
a  member  of  the  government,  I  am  met  constantly  by  divi- 
sion and  responsibility  ;  the  money  I  collect  from  the  peo- 
ple, must  be  accounted  for  and  applied  to  their  use  ;  and 
both  my  power  and  compensation  is  dependent  on  their  will. 
As  a  member  of  the  separate  interest,  I  tax  without  limita- 
tion ;  I  receive  without  account ;  1  apply  to  my  own  use ; 
I  am  dependent  ouly  on  my  own  pleasure  :  and  1  acquire 
the  power  following  wealth,  unsubjeeted  to  the  publiek  suf- 
frage. By  taking  the  side  of  my  own  interest,  I  influence 
the  government  in  my  own  favour.  By  taking  the  side  of 
the  national  interest,  I  sacrifice  my  own.  As  all  separate 
interests  prefer  themselves,  and  bend  governments  into  a 
subserviency  to  their  designs  5  so  one  neither  responsible, 
sior  weakened  by  division,  nor  made  up  of  distinct  indepen- 
dent interests,  by  means  of  different  departments  and  un- 
connected offices;  will  act  with  a  degree  of  concert  and 
force,  for  its  own  aggrandizement,  which  would  be  im- 
practicable to  the  several  governments  in  America.  The 
banking  power  is  therefore  a  stronger,  as  well  as  a  richer 
power,  than  the  civil.  The  holders  of  both  will  use  the  lat- 
ter as  an  ally  of  the  former;  the  two  powers  will  unite  in 
one,  and  all  the  checks  invented  to  control  the  civil  power, 
will  be  silently  lost  in  the  illimitable  influence  of  the  stock 
power.  A  power  of  regulating  property  is  engendered,  of 
sc  capacity  to  enslave  nations  surpassing  a  power  to  regulate 
the  press,  as  far  as  an  influence  over  a  whole  nation,  or 
great  factions,  exceeds  one  over  a  poor  author. 

There  is  no  occasion  that  one  should  be  a  political  Lin- 
mcus,  to  discover  the  class  of  political  systems,  to  which  or- 
ders or  separate  interests  belong.  When  such  influence  a 
government,  publiek  opinion  cannot  also  influence  it.  They 
do  not  belong  to  that  class  of  political  systems,  which  they 
destroy.    Their  essence  is  minority,  and  their  principles 


JiANKING.  313 

must  participate  of  their  essence  ;  and  if  it  is  good  govern- 
ment to  consult  the  national  interest,  they  must  unifoi  mly 
be  opposed  to  good  government,  because  they  constantly 
consult  their  own  interest. 

Without  closely  estimating  the  political  influence  of  the 
species  of  separate  interest  called  banking,  we  can  at  a 
glance  discover,  that  a  power  to  give  and  receive  charters, 
to  draw  wealth  from  the  people,  and  to  share  in  it,  and  to 
obtain  adherents  at  the  publick  expense,  is  a  great  power. 
It  is  that  which  I  have  called  legislative  patronage. 

This  excessive  power,  like  all  others,  will  act  upon  the 
mora!  qualities  of  human  nature.  Its  pecuniary  seductive- 
ness, is  exactly  opposed  to  the  policy,  supposed  by  all  our 
constitutions  to  be  most  likely  to  awaken  the  good  moral 
qualities  of  human  nature  ;  and  exactly  such,  as  have  con- 
stantly awakened  its  evil.  Nations,  resorting  to  elective 
and  representative  forms  of  government,  consider  a  strict 
similitude  between  the  interest  of  the  legislature  and  of  the 
people,  as  the  chief  security  for  fidelity.  They  have  never 
divided  these  interests,  by  establishing  a  difference,  to  the 
extent  of  five  millions  annually,  to  be  paid  by  the  one,  and 
received  in  money  or  power  by  the  other :  no  free  con- 
stitution has  ever  declared,  that  a  legislator  might  legislate 
wealth  lu  himself,  and  taxes  to  the  people;  and  no  man  in  his 
senses  ever  thinks  of  securing  the  honesty  of  an  agent,  by  a 
powerful  temptation  to  betray  him.  Even  the  king  of  Eng- 
land cannot  himself  pass  a  law,  to  inflict  the  million  he  re- 
ceives ;  whilst  the  legislators  of  these  states  might  receive 
the  five  millions  they  inflict  by  banking,  and  do  h  ceive  a 
considerable  portion  of  it.  On  the  contrary,  all  our  consti- 
tutions consider  it  as  a  sacred  principle,  that  legislators 
should  really,  and  not  nominally,  be  affected  bj  the  good  or 
evil  dispensed  by  law.  as  the  nation  is  effected.  Asa  ma 
jority  of  a  nation  cannot  be  hankers,  the  opening  of  a  sub- 
scription to  all  is  a  formality,  the  futility  of  which  is  de-> 
monst cable  in  the  certain  and  necessary  result  o  Ibis  for- 
mality.     That,    invariably  places  the  legislator-stockholder 

it 


£%&  BANKIXG. 

in  a  minority.  And  of  course  he  must  be  affected  by  eve- 
ry law  which  may  affect  stock;  not  as  the  nation  are  affect- 
ed, but  as  this  minority  is  affected.  Executive  patronage 
would  become  similar  to  legislative,  if  the  president  could 
both  create  offices,  and  bestow  them  on  himself  or  his 
creatures,  as  the  latter  bestows  charters. 

Whenever  legislatures,  or  men  in  power  of  any  denomi- 
nation, can  receive  charters,  exclusive  privileges  or  emolu- 
ments which  they  create,  they  will  incline  to  make  them 
good  gifts.  Accordingly,  bank  stock  is  so  manufactured  as 
to  sell  at  an  advance,  often  as  high  as  fifty  per  centum. 
Thus  a  legislator  who  creates,  subscribes  for  and  sells  stock, 
converts  by  his  own  legal  magick,  every  dollar  he  can  raise, 
into  nine  shillings.  This  is  undoubtedly  a  good  thing  for 
himself;  if  a  miracle  can  be  performed,  and  if  laws  for 
enriching  orders,  without  labour  or  industry  of  any  kind, 
will  enrich  the  rest  of  the  people,  then  it  may  be  a  good 
thing  also  for  his  constituents. 

If  it  is,  let  nations  rejoice,  and  look  for  the  speedy  ac- 
complishment of  their  hitherto  frustrated  hopes,  that  op- 
pression would  cease.  It  will  bo  both  useless  and  absurd;, 
that  avarice  should  any  longer  pursue  its  tyrannical  mea- 
sures, after  a  mode  is  discovered  of  gratifying  its  lust,  with- 
out putting  the  rest  of  a  nation  to  any  expense.  Still  more 
wonderful  is  this  discovery;  better  than  costless;  it  is  said 
to  enrich  a  nation,  by  enriching  a  paper  interest.  Oh  hap- 
piness unlocked  for !  No  longer  remains  then  a  motive  for 
that  mass  of  patronage  and  taxation,  by  which  nations  are 
enslaved.  This  beautiful  system  of  banking  enriches  stock- 
holders by  dividends  and  the  people  by  bank  notes.  Patron- 
age is  received  and  returned  with  mutual  civility  and  profit. 
And  avarice  is  at  length  converted  into  a  blessing  for  in- 
dustry. 

Every  word  of  this  reverie  must  be  credited,  to  justify 
banking.  Hut  although  we  may  wish  that  it  was  as  true 
as  it  is  pleasant,  yet  it  requires  a  very  strong  faith  indeed 
to  believe,   that  this  political  alehymy  is  less  fraudulent 


/  BANKING.  315 

■ 

than  the  ehymical.  One  proposes  to  make  gold  out  of  some- 
thing :  the  otliei*  out  of  nothing. 

If  England  held  ali  the  bank  stock  of  the  union,  the  fur- 
nace of  litis  now  species  of  afcnymy  would  burst,  "  as  if  a 
bolt  of  thunder  had  been  driven  through"  the  states,  and 
all  its  promises  would  vanish,  "  in  fumo,"  not  before  the  re- 
fined satire  of  Ben  Johnson,  but  before  common  sense.  It 
would  be  instantly  seen,  that  England,  the  stockholder,  was 
enriched  by  the  dividends,  and  America  taxed  and  impover- 
ished by  the  notes.  By  filling  the  place  of  England  with 
three  or  four  thousand  native  and  foreign  stockholders,  the 
place  of  the  people  is  not  altered.  Such  of  them  as  are  le- 
gislators, will  vote  upon  political  questions,  exactly  as  Eng- 
land would,  if  she  held  our  stock  and  could  legislate  for  us. 
The  ground  which  sustains  this  argument,  is  that  upon 
which  banking  has  spread  from  state  to  state  ;  namely,  that 
taxes,  and  not  gold  for  publick  benefit,  are  forged  in  the  fur- 
nace of  this  new  alchymy.  Whether  taxes  are  repealed 
by  transferring  their  appropriation  from  A  to  B,  from  a 
foreign  country  to  a  native  legislator,  is  left  to  the  sagacity 
of  the  reader. 

Patronage  is  an  instrument  by  which  governments  cor- 
rupt a  faction  to  take  part  with  them  against  nations,  and 
thus  gradually  acquire  more  power  than  the  people  ever 
give.  If  this  instrument  is  obtained  by  foreign  conquest,  a« 
in  the  acquisition  of  India  by  England,  the  people  still  suf- 
fer by  the  unconstitutional  power  it  confers  ,*  it  is  infi- 
nitely more  calamitous  to  a  nation,  when  gotten  by  do- 
mestiek  operations. 

Had  the  governments  of  the  United  States,  bestowed  up- 
on themselves  and  their  partisans,  offices  to  the  value  of  five 
millions  annually,  the  patronage  would  have  been  the  same 
>vith  that  created  by  banking  ;  which  welds  the  corporation 
to  the  government,  and  the  government  to  the  corporation, 
against  the  people,  like  sinecure  offices  to  the  same  amount. 
For  this  vast  and  boundless  mode  of  acquiring  power,  there 
is  no  allowance  m  any  constitution.     It  is  a  great  weight. 


Slt>  BANKING. 

which  was  never  thrown  into  the  scales,  by  those  who  made 
them  ;  can  it  be  thrown  in  by  law,  and  leave  the  division  of 
power  between  a  nation  and  its  government,  unaltered  ? 

In  another  view,  the  patronage  created  by  banking 
spreads  out  in  the  United  States,  far  beyond  any  influence 
capable  of  being  produced,  by  creating  offices  of  the  value 
just  mentioned.  The  general  government  may  influence 
the  whole  fabrick,  by  means  of  a  power  to  regulate  the 
places  of  deposite  of  the  general  taxes,  and  by  regulations 
as  to  the  paper  which  may  be  received  in  payment.  This 
influence  may  reach  state  legislatures  as  stockholders,  and 
convert  the  best  barrier  devised  by  the  principle  of  division, 
against  usurpation  and  consolidation,  into  an  insidious 
and  secret  instrument,  for  the  ends  it  was  intended  to  ob- 
struct. 

A  slight  interest  is  a  bad  mirror  for  reflecting  justice, 
but  a  great  one  is  a  camera  obseura  inverting  right  and 
wrong.  Through  this  medium,  stockholding  legislators 
will  discover,  that  it  is  just  to  retain  their  annuities,  by  any 
compliances  for  which  the  people,  not  themselves,  suffer  ; 
and  a  silent  revolution,  which  will  secure  or  increase  these 
annuities,  will  appear  to  them  to  be  necessary  for  the  pub- 
lick  good. 

Against  this  obvious  danger,  we  are  consoled  hy  being 
told,  that  the  separate  banking  interest,  is  not  a  titled  or- 
der ;  that  if  titles  were  added  to  its  wealth,  our  constitu- 
tions, like  the  walls  of  Jericho,  would  be  overset  by  the 
noise  ;  but  that  unless  the  aristocracy  shall  discover  its  pro- 
gress by  its  shputs,  they  are  safe. 

On  the  contrary,  a  separate  interest  is  more  dangerous,, 
jf  it  can  create,  sustain  and  enrich  itself  without  being  de- 
signated, than  if  it  cannot ;  if  it  assails  by  mine  and  sap, 
than  if  it  assails  by  the  sound  of  drums.  ]f  Lords  could 
create  and  enrich  Lords  by  law.  the  government  would  soon 
become  a  feudal  aristocracy.  If  bishops  could  create  and 
emir  bishops  by  law.  the  government  would  presentlv  bo- 
come  an  hierarchical  aristocracy.     So  if  stockholders  f  a» 


Banking.  $±f 

hy  law  make  and  enrich  stockholders,  the  government  of 
course  becomes  a  paper  aristocracy.  It  was  the  tide  or 
badge  of  the  hierarchical  and  feudal  orders  in  England, 
which  by  designating  the  members,  afforded  the  means  of 
limiting  their  progress  ;  and  if  either  of  these  aristocracies 
could  have  possessed  itself,  unseen  of  legislative  power,  it 
would  have  legislated  itself  into  permanent  ty  ranny.  If  our 
constitutions  required  that  every  stockholder  should  be 
clothed  in  a  surplice,  that  he  might  be  known  am!  excluded 
from  legislative  power,  or  only  allowed  a  portion  of  it,  as 
belonging  to  a  separate  aristocratieal  interest,  he  would,  like 
th-j  lord  or  the  bishop,  be  thereby  rendered  less  dangerous. 
Thus  checked  or  balanced,  these  orders  are  considered  by 
F€  iblicans  as  a  had  political  system  j  unchecked  or  unba- 
lanced, even  monarchists  allow  them  to  be  execrable  :  they 
admit  of  no  control  without  a  title  or  badge  ;  and  the  paper 
interest  is  designated  by  neither. 

That  a  separate  untitled  interest  is  more  powerful  and 
dangerous  than  a  separate  titled  interest,  is  a  fact  so  notori 
ous  as  to  supersede  an  occasion  for  argument.   The  untitled 
paper   interest  in    England,   has  made  prisoners  of  the  two 
titled  orders,  uses  them  sometimes  as  clerks  in  his  count'., 
house,  at  others  as  jackals  to  hunt  its  prey,  and  at  all  limei 
to  pronounce  its  will  for  law ;  this  it  has  gradually  ejHecfc 
bee:  use  it  could  act  secretly  :    it  is  a  warriour  invisible 
hi >  adversary,  or  a  conjurer  invisible  to  the  crowd  he  de- 
frauds. 

In  the  history  oPour forefathers,  we  recognise  three  po- 
litical beasts,  feeding  at  different  periods  upon  their  lives,  li- 
berties and  properties.     Those  called  hierarchical  and  feu- 
dal aristocracy,  to  say  the  worst  of  them,  are  now  the  in- 
struments of  the  third.      Protect  us,  Heaven  !  we  exclaim 
against  these  monsters,   inert,  subdued  and  far  away  fi 
us!     Oh  what  a  beautiful  creature  is  here  !   we  add  ;  up« 
beholding  a  whelp  of  the  third,  so  strong  as  to  have  sw 
into  our  country  across  the  Atlantic;  and  the  infatuath 
concludes  with   a  sineere  commiseration  of  the  people 


318  BANKING, 

England,  on  account  of  the  misery  with  which  they  are 
loaded  hy  the  mother  of  this  identical  whelp.  Our  mistake 
in  estimating  titled  nobility  and  paper  stock,  is  exactly  that 
of  the  mouse,  terrified  with  the  cock  and  charmed  with  the 
cat. 

Representation  ceases  to  be  an  effect  of  election,  whene- 
ver a  representative  can  draw  wealth  from  his  own  laws,  bj 
means  either  of  office,  sinecure  or  monopoly.  His  income 
under  the  law,  being  greater  than  his  expense,  his  interest 
is  adverse  to  the  interest  of  the  people,  who  pay  the  tax  or 
income  which  he  receives.  A  power  to  take  from  a  nation 
and  give  to  itself,  is  a  strict  definition  of  civilized  tyranny. 
A  legislator  cannot  be  guided  by  the  interest,  both  of  the 
minority  and  majority  :  of  the  exclusive  and  general  inter- 
est ;  of  the  receiver  and  payer  of  the  tax.  He  will  be  guided 
by  the  interest  to  which  he  belongs  ;  if  he  is  a  receiver  of 
the  tax,  he  will  tax. 

Established  banks  exclaim  that  others  would  be  perni- 
cious ;  just  as  one  established  or  chartered  religion  ex- 
claims against  chartering  another ;  or  as  patricians  disap- 
proved of  ennobling  plebeians.  But  though  the  established 
bank  contends  that  others  would  be  pernicious,  an  applica- 
tion for  a  new  bank,  as  loudly  insists  that  the  old  one  is  a 
hateful  monopoly,  which  a  new  one  w  ill  destroy.  Destroy- 
in  the  same  manner,  as  a  noble  order  of  fifty  members 
would  be  destroyed,  by  creating  fifty  more,  and  as  the  op- 
pression resulting  from  one  titled  sect,  would  be  destroyed 
by  titling  another. 

This  falling  out  is  managed  with  mutual  embarrass- 
ment ;  the  parties  are  obliged  to  conceal  the  true  cause  of 
quarrel,  and  to  put  it  upon  the  ground  of  partialities  to  in- 
dividuals in  loans  of  bank  currency.  As  if  the  new  bank 
was  not  as  capable  of  partiality  as  the  old.  The  evil  of 
bestowing  on  the  quality,  partiality,  the  distribution  of  na- 
tional currency,  is  proposed  to  be  remedied,  by  extending 
the  power  of  partiality.  Not  this  partiality,  but  the  divi- 
dends or  tax,  is  the  real  object  of  dispute.     The  old  bank 


JJAN&INb.  319 

knows  that  its  paper  is  a  tax,  subject,  like  other  taxes,  to  the 
limitation  of  national  ability,  and  it  wishes  to  exhaust  this 
ability  itself;  but  the  proposed  bank  wishes  to  come  in 
for  a  share  of  it ;  yet  neither,  even  when  under  the  obliga- 
tion of  legislative  responsibility,  is  ever  heard  to  make  to 
the  people  these  honest  confessions. 

This  true  ground  of  quarrel  between  established  and 
proposed  banks,  confesses  the  correctness  of  the  opinion, 
which  supposes  that  funded  stock  and  bank  stock,  are  both 
national  debt ;  and  that  interest  and  dividends  are  both  paid 
by  taxing  the  nation.  By  new  stock,  the  evil  in  both  cases 
is  cured  in  the  same  way.  So  long  as  national  ability 
lo  pay  interest  or  dividends  suffices  to  meet  the  new  stock, 
it  is  an  additional  tax  upon  that  ability  ;  whenever  either 
species  of  stock  exceeds  this  ability,  either  will  depreciate. 
Both,  therefore,  equally  imply  a  debtor  and  creditor.  But 
in  a  legislature  made  up  of  old  stockholders,  and  intended 
stockholders,  such  an  idea  of  the  subject  will  be  suppressed, 
and  a  compromise  effected  between  the  parties  upon  self- 
ish grounds,  not  upon  principles  of  national  interest. 

It  is  easy  to  comprehend  the  possibility  of  a  form  of  go- 
vernment, capable  of  being  correctly  denominated,  an  elec- 
tive aristocracy  ;  and  to  predict,  without  much  foresight, 
that  the  decay  of  the  principles  of  our  policy,  will  commence 
with  that  form.  It  is  produced  by  whatever  will  defeat  an 
honest  and  faithful  sympathy  between  a  nation  and  its  re- 
presentatives. Such  a  case  is  illustrated  by  the  house  of 
commons  of  England.  That  house  gains  a  power  by  its  pa- 
per system,  which  is  able  to  proclaim  its  corruption,  and 
to  defy  reform.  Such  a  case  is  the  natural  offspring  of  an 
union  between  an  elective  legislature  and  a  separate  inter- 
est. Can  a  stronger  cement  for  this  union  than  banking  be 
discovered  ?  It  gratifies  the  avarice  and  ambition  of  the 
confederates,  without  expelling  from  the  senate  house,  dis- 
closing acquisitions,  or  attracting  punishment. 

The  division  of  powers  is  an  essential  quality  of  our 
policy  and  constitutions.     That  between  the  people  and  the 


5^t)  BANK1XU. 

government  is  destroyed,  by  a  power  in  the  government  to 
increase  its  share,  by  its  own  Jaws;  as  is  that  "also  between 
the  general  and  state  governments,  if  either  distributee  can 
increase  its  quota  of  power  ht>  law.  By  banks,  governments 
may  create  factions,  which  will  adhere  to  them  against  the 
people,  or  to  one  section  of  our  policy,  against  another. 
With  these  instruments,  the  general  or  state  governments 
might  disorder  the  distribution  of  power  between  themselves 
and  the  people,  and  between  each  other.  To  both,  enlist- 
ments by  lucrative  charters  will  furnish  mercenary  troops, 
and  mercenary  troops,  wielding  either  stock  or  swords 
were  never  considered  as  good  guardians  of  liberty.  Char- 
ters and  banks  will  become  the  chief  objects  of  state  legis- 
lation, and  if  twenty  legislatures  can  outstrip  one  in  this  ma- 
nufacture, the  general  government  may  lose  its  power,  and 
the  calamities  of  a  dissolved  union  will  follow.  These  will 
ravage  the  states,until  they  ripen  the  publjck  mind  for  the  in- 
troduction of  a  steady  tyranny  by  some  military  adventurer; 
and  the  catastrophe  of  the  drama  will  be  the  effect  of  ex- 
changing our  system  of  genuine  representation,  cautious 
division,  and  effectual  responsibility,  for  the  monopoly  and 
corruption  of  a  system  of  hanking,  charters  and  paper. 

There  is  utility  in  these  baleful  auguries.  They  may 
induce  the  nation  to  examine  omens,  and  en  aide  it  to  defeat 
fulfilment.  They  deserve  in  this  view,  all  the  indulgence 
of  honest  intention. 

States  may  see  an  advantage  in  excluding  the  currency 
of  banks  created  by  Congress.  Large  states  may  exclude 
that  of  small.  Exclusions  of  this  kind  will  enhance  the  va- 
lue of  state  stock.  This  will  be  just,  because  no  equality 
in  the  profit  made  by  bank  paper,  can  exist  between  states 
of  an  unequal  size,  with  an  equal  and  unlimited  right  to  send 
out  this  tax-gatherer.  The  collect:  uns  under  the  laws  of 
each  state,  ought  at  least  to  correspond  with  the  domes- 
tick  fields  for  circulation.  The  same  reason  which  induces 
a  large  state  to  emit  rival  paper,  may  indiu  e  ;i  to  expel  ri- 
valry from  its  own  dominion.     It  would  be  evidently  unjust 


BAintiy©.  S3i 

that  Delaware  should  be  enriched  by  taxing'the  union  with 
a  mass  of  bank  paper  ;  therefore  it  will  be  prevented.  The 
bank  tax  of  Virginia,  has  the  same  motive  for  driving  away 
any  interloping  bank  tax,  as  for  introducing  itself;  money 
will  be  made  by  it.  Cannot  you  diseern,  reader,  stuff 
for  weaving  a  tissue  of  avarice,  ambition,  rivalry  and  ha- 
tred, which  has  no  ingredient  for  allaying  human  passions, 
restraining  human  vices  or  preventing  human  slaughter  ? 
View  it  steadily,  and  you  will  behold  our  inestimable  state 
governments,  shrinking  into  charter  traders  ;  and  contriv- 
ing paper  navigation  acts  to  plunder  or  repel  plunder,  by 
means  of  paper  currency,  with  the  same  spirit  and  intention 
in  regard  to  other  states,  which  the  trade  navigation  act  of 
England  breathes,  in  regard  to  other  countries. 

To  avoid  these  calamities,  our  hope  rests  upon  the  ma- 
deration  of  charter  and  monopoly.  The  extent  of  this  mo- 
deration, is  equivalent  to  that  exhibited  by  the  invocation, 
required  of  their  subjects  by  Persian  monarchs.  Charters 
oommand  their  subjects  to  exclaim,  "  Oh  monopoly!  live  as 
long  as  the  law  pleases."  If  the  law  can  bestow  existence 
for  one  year,  it  may  for  a  million.  It  may  give  perpetual 
life  to  whatever  metaphysical  being  it  can  create;  and  char- 
ter is  so  moderate,  as  to  claim  a  right  to  live  out  the  whole 
life  allowed  by  law.  Once  created,  it  pretends  to  indepen-. 
dence  of  its  God,  law;  to  independence  of  law's  God,  con- 
stitution; and  to  independence  of  constitution's  God,  the. 
nation. 

These  pretensions  are  not  extravagant ;  for  if  a  govern- 
ment is  so  contrived,  as  that  its  members  can  take  the 
charters  which  they  make,  these  charters  will  live  as  long 
as  the  government  lives.  A  maker  of  laws,  to  enrich  him- 
self, which  cannot  be  repealed,  is  a  far  greater  power  than 
a  maker  of  constitutions.  Constitutions  are  tenants  at  will ; 
the  tenure  of  charters  is  not  even  limited  by  good  behaviour, 
or  liable  to  be  annulled  by  impeachment  and  conviction  of 
treason.  A  legislature,  by  charters  here,  and  charters 
<Jtere,  can  so  wedge  up  present  or  future  ages,  that  the  long 


J"ZZ  HANKING. 

possession  of  these  tenants  for  years  will  become  a  set- 
tled right,  and  the  remainder-man  will  forget  his  rever- 
sion. 

A  power  to  make  irrepealable  law  charters,  is  above  res- 
ponsibility, and  independent  of  its  constituent.  The  cor- 
rection of  a  corrupt  or  ruinous  measure,  comprises  all  the 
essence  and  benefit  of  responsibility.  A  change  of  repre- 
sentatives, without  this  correction,  is  a  barren  formality. 
It  is  even  impoliticly,  unless  followed  by  a  correction  of  the 
mischief  which  suggested  the  change.  New  representatives 
will  be  incited  by  the  preservation  of  a  pecuniary  abuses, 
to  repeat  it  for  their  own  emolument ;  if  they  are  not  per- 
mitted to  destroy  it,  they  will  think  it  right  to  reimburse 
themselves  by  a  new  charter,  for  their  sufferings  under  the 
old. 

The  infatuation  opposed  to  the  reasoning,  which  disclos- 
es the  destruction  of  responsibility  and  legislative  integrity, 
lurking  in  the  system  of  charter  and  banking,  is  an  unexam- 
ined idea,  that  our  constitutions  contain  some  charm,  some 
magical  influence,  which  will  preserve  liberty,  by  the  agency 
of  avaricious  charter-making  and  charter-taking  repre- 
sentatives. History  produces  no  instance  of  national  hap- 
piness, under  a  legislature,  corrupted  by  the  most  sordid 
passion,  of  which  human  nature  is  susceptible.  Legisla- 
tive purity  might  preserve  liberty  and  happiness,  under  con- 
stitutions otherwise  defective  :  but  the  most  perfect  consti- 
tutions otherwise,  could  not  preserve  liberty  and  happiness, 
with  legislative  corruption. 

In  all  ages  legal  beings  have  been  invented,  which  eon- 
tend  that  man  was  made  for  them,  and  not  they  for  him. 
Having  both  escaped  from  his  service,  and  converted  him 
into  their  servant,  theyjnvcst  themselves  with  a  drapery  of 
glittering  fictions,  to  dazzle  him  into  submission.  Hierar- 
chy, though  always  defended  by  whatever  could  inspire  re- 
verence, and  often  dressed  in  the  robes  of  religion,  has  at 
length  fallen  before  the  solid  principle,  "  that  civil  institu- 
tions belong  to  nations  and  that  nations    do  not  belong  tk 


UANKIKG.  T>25 

oivil  institutions ;"  whilst  avarice  presumes  to  assert  the  re- 
verse of  this  doctrine,  which  religion  was  unable  to  defend. 
It  pretends  that  man  was  created  for  law  charters,  tho'  not 
for  law  churches  ;  and  that  it  is  equally  a  sacrilege  to  dis- 
continue the  former,  as  to  revive  the  latter.  Thus  parties 
and  factions  measure  their  principles  by  their  interest,  and 
assert  or  deny  the  same  proposition,  like  lawyers  for  fees. 
Hence  they  censure  their  predecessors  for  obtaining  wealth, 
in  modes  which  they  use  themselves,  aud  pretend  to  be 
guided  by  different  prinoip'es,  whilst  they  worship  at  the 
same  shrine.  Jnst  as  a  Pope,  had  the  conversion  of  Rome 
to  Christianity  failed,  would  have  become  the  high  priest  of 
Jupiter,  and  practised  the  idolatry  he  had  loudly  condemned, 
to  increase  his  revenue,  splendour  and  power.  Or  does 
this  charter  doctrine  advance  the  designs  of  the  leaders  of 
opposite  parties,  as  a  good  revenue  might  have  done  those 
of  the  leaders  of  opposite  religions. 

The  ability  of  a  corrupt  legislature  to  make  a  form  of 
government  or  constitution  worse,  and  finally  to  overturn  it, 
is  illustrated,  not  only  in  England,  but  in  the  history  of 
Rome.  Two  of  the  means  used  by  the  patricians  to  effect 
this  end,  were  usury  aud  an  usurpation  of  national  con- 
quests. Compound  usury  and  an  usurpation  of  national  cre- 
dit, are  two  of  the  means  used  by  the  system  of  banking. 
The  dexterity  of  the  present  age,  has  sharpened  the  edges 
of  these  patrician  weapons,  and  varnished  and  lengthened 
their  blades,  so  as  to  dazzle  and  to  strike  a  whole  nation, 
The  patricians  enslaved  individuals  with  usury  ;  banking, 
nations.  The  patricians  usurped  and  drew  wealth  from  fo- 
reign conquests  :  banking  usurps  national  credit,  and  draws 
wealth  from  domestick  territory.  The  patricians  by  their 
means,  gained  wealth  so  slowly,  that  it  required  an  opera- 
tion of  several  centuries  to  corrupt  and  destroy  the  govern- 
ment ;  stock  can  collect  wealth  by  credit  so  rapidly,  as  to 
shorten  the  process  to  a  few  years. 

Five  millions  drawn  annually  from  a  nation  itself  by  a 
separate  interest,  will    with    more  certainty  enervate  and 


324  BAITKlNfc. 

enlave  it,  than  if  the  same  sum  was  drawn  from  their  con- 
quered enemies  ;  because  toiling  for  others,  and  receiving 
the  earnings  of  others  without  toil,  is  a  double  momentum 
towards  these  results  ;  whereas  a  tribute  paid  by  foreigners, 
as  debasing  only  by  luxury,  and  not  by  tyranny  also,  is  a 
single  one.  Profit  without  labour,  will  be  preferred  to  la- 
bour with  loss.  The  effort  of  the  best  informed  will  be  to 
get  out  of  the  nation  into  the  separate  interest,  to  avoid  the 
labour  with  loss,  and  to  gain  the  profit  without  labour. 

Nations  have  for  three  thousand  years  been  doomed  to 
oppression,  by  an  opinion  that  they  had  not  capacity  to  go- 
vern themselves  ;  are  they  doomed  to  suffer  it  for  another 
three  thousand  years,  from  an  opinion  that  they  are  unable 
to  give  themselves  a  paper  currency,  if  it  should  be  useful  ? 
In  the  first  case,  the  nation  is  persuaded  that  it  is  a  fool,  but 
that  a  few  individuals  are  wise  ;  in  the  second,  that  it  is  a 
pauper,  but  that  a  few  individuals  are  rich.  The  last  idea 
is  even  ludicrous,  as  the  sole  object  of  banking  is  to  tax  a 
rich  nation  to  enrich  poor  individuals. 

After  a  patient  trial  of  charter  privilege  and  monopo- 
ly for  three  thousand  years,  almost  ai  the  moment  they  are 
rejected  as  poison  to  civil  and  religious  liberty,  we  are  told 
that  they  are  wholesome  aliment  for  commerce.  It  is  not 
surprising  that  self-interest  should  tell  us  this  ;  but  it  is, 
that  self-interest  should  believe  it,  and  recommence  the  fair- 
est, most  patiettt,  and  most  expensive  experiment  which  was 
ever  made.  After  another  tedious  term  of  rueful  experi- 
ence, monopoly  will  again  exclaim,  that  it  confesses  itself  to 
be  pernicious,  when  applied  to  commerce  and  credit,  just  a» 
it  now  confesses  the  same  thing,  in  relation  to  religion  and 
civiLpower,  but  that  in  some  new  form  it  is  a  blessing  ;  and 
the  experiment  ought  then,  with  as  much  reason  as  now,  to 
be  recommenced. 

It  is  to  elude  the  discovery  of  its  enmity  to  civil  and  re- 
ligious  liberty,  that  monopoly  confesses  the  change  in  its  old 
forms,  hoping  under  the  candour  of  this  confession,  to  get 
Into  operation  in  a  new  form*    Admitted  in  the  stupendous 


BANKING.  ^25 

form  of  a  paper  currency,  it  Itccomes  instantly  connected 
with  civil  government,  and  civil  anil  religious  liberty  is  set- 
tled by  experience,  to  be  uniformly  the  victim  of  a  con- 
nexion between  a  lucrative  monopoly,  and  government 
in  any  form.  It  is  not  a  new  experiment,  therefore,  which 
we  are  trying.  It  is  only  charter  and  state  instead  of  church 
and  state.  Even  supposing  the  principle  of  monopoly  eau 
be  introduced  by  banking,  without  its  infecting  the  civil  go- 
vernment ;  the  wisdom  of  planting  some  parts  of  our  poli- 
cy in  a  monopoly  of  civil  rights,  and  others  in  their  free- 
dom, is  still  questionable.  These  principles  are  irreconcila- 
ble enemies.  Mr.  Adams's  history  of  orders  abundantly 
proves,  that  they  are  never  formed  in  the  same  community, 
but  in  a  state  of  war ;  and  that  the  war  never  terminates, 
but  in  a  victory  on  the  side  of  one  of  the  combatants. 

If  it  would  be  dangerous  to  republican  government,  for 
the  President  to  make  oiiieers  of  monarchists,  is  it  safe  loi 
legislatures  to  make  monarchists  of  citizens  by  debt  and 
bank  stock,  or  by  any  species  of  monopoly  ?  Republican^, 
turned  into  kings,  bishops,  lords  or  stockholders,  arc  no 
longer  republicans.  Neither  bishops  nor  bankers  are  ex- 
empted from  the  physiological  qualities  of  man.  Less  than 
a  million  annually  received  by  the  officers  of  government,  U 
supposed  to  expose  them  to  the  effect  of  these  qualities,  and 
excludes  them  from  legislatures ;  live  times  a&  much 
received  by  bankers,  is  supposed  to  exempt  them  from 
the  effect  of  the  same  qualities,  and  conducts  them 
into  legislatures,  where  they  shield  themselves  from, 
taxation  ;  and  from  one  exclusive  privilege,  extract  ano- 
ther. Yet  banking  creates  treasuries  for  usurpation  ;  u 
division  of  wealth  is  a  necessary  auxiliary  to  a  divi- 
sion of  power  ;  and  an  accumulation  of  the  former,  a  stride 
towards  rendering  the  latter  useless.  That  it  can  ul*o 
create  treasuries  for  national  defence,  is  the  countervail  urg- 
ed in  answer  to  this  argument.  And  this  countervail  itseif 
encourages  the  dissipation  of  governments  ;  endows  them 
with  a  dangerous  degree  of  pecuniary  independence  of  the 


S26  HANKING, 

nation  ;  stakes  the  national  safety  upon  the  capriciousness 
and  selfish  views  of  every  predominant  party  j  involves  the 
necessity  of  nurturing  at  the  general  expense  a  minor  inte- 
rest, and  terminates  in  the  state  of  England,  The  quackery 
of  defending  nations  by  banking,  is  a  mine  of  wealth  to  an 
order  of  bankers,  as  the  quackery  of  defending  them  by  feu- 
dal tenures,  was  to  the  order  of  nobles.  Give  us  all  the 
land,  said  the  feudal  barons,  and  we  will  defend  you.  Give 
us  all  the  money  and  credit,  say  the  bankers,  and  we  will  do 
it.  In  both  eases,  nations  pay  the  hire,  and  do  the  work 
themselves.  Just  as  the  quackery  of  salvation  was  a  mine 
of  wealth  to  the  priesthood,  and  purchased  nothing  for  the 
laity.  What  mystery  can  be  more  absurd,  than  the  doctrine 
that  an  entire  nation  cannot  defend  itself,  but  that  it  can  be 
defended,  by  the  device  of  converting  a  few  of  its  members 
into  bankers  ? 

Mr.  Adams  asserts,  and  republicans  admit,  that  a  poli- 
cy which  confers  civil  power  on  one  separate  interest,  is 
more  imperfect  than  one  which  divides  it  among  three.  It 
is  better  to  have  no  predominant  separate  interest,  or  more 
than  one.  None  is  freedom,  one  is  tyranny,  and  several 
may  be  a  mixture  of  both.  If  the  king  and  the  house  of 
commons,  were  eut  out  of  the  English  government,  the  no- 
bility would  be  tyrants.  By  aggrandizing  the  nobility  with 
a  certain  degree  of  wealth,  lite  king  and  the  house  of  com- 
mons would  be  nearly  or  entirely  expunged  from  the  Eng- 
lish form  of  government.  By  aggrandizing  a  banking  inte- 
rest co-extensively,  the  same  result  ensues.  The  history  of 
feudal  barons  and  religious  titularies  proves,  that  wealth, 
and  not  title,  conveys  power. 

Election  advances  and  rivets  the  power  of  a  wealthy  or- 
der. In  England,  election,  so  far  from  producing  an  order 
or  interest  to  counterpoise  the  stock  order  or  interest,  pro- 
duces the  most  effective  instrument  for  advancing  its  wealth 
at  the  expense  of  the  nation.  Could  any  better  means  have 
been  devised  for  increasing  the  income  of  the  stock  order, 
than  a  house  of  commons  1    If  the  eligibility  of  the  king  or- 


BANKING.  32?' 

the  nobles  to  the  house  of  commons,  would  have  destroyed 
the  theory  of  ehecks  and  balances,  although  these  interests 
might  be  avoided  by  the  people  in  elections  ;  we  cannot  fail 
to  discern  the  reason,  why  the  eligibility  of  the  stock  interest 
to  that  house,  (which  cannot  be  avoided  by  the  people)  con- 
verts it  into  an  instrument  for  effecting,  what  it  was  intended 
to  prevent ;  namely,  the  predominance  of  a  separate  inter- 
est over  the  national  interest.  Is  a  corruption,  poison 
ous  to  the  British  theory,  salutary  to  the  American  ? 

Though  an  order  or  distinct  interest  is  compounded  ot 
many  members,  it  constitutes  only  one  body,  guided  by  self- 
interest.  Whenever  in  a  combat  between  two  men,  a  leg 
or  an  arm  of  one  shall  desert  to  the  other,  then  a  member  of 
the  stoek  interest  may  be  expected  to  desert  to  the  national 
interest.  Add  to  the  cement  of  wealth  a  mass  of  political 
power,  gotten  by  election,  and  a  Colossus  rises  up,  animat- 
ed by  one  mind,  who  easily  makes  the  havoek  of  the  national 
interest  required  by  his  own,  because  its  members  are  never 
united  by  one  mind,  and  lie  about,  so  scattered  and  disjoint- 
ed, that  he  picks  up  and  uses  them  as  weapons  for  assailing 
the  body  they  belong  to.  The  capacity  of  a  paper  interest 
in  England,  to  make  instruments  of  orators,  kings,  lord? 
and  commons,  evinces  its  gsgantick  power. 

What !  exclaims  both  the  friend  and  the  foe,  to  publick 
good ;  shall  we  have  no  corporations,  no  colleges,  no 
turnpikes,  no  canals,  because  they  are  separate  inter- 
ests ?  Do  not  charter  and  privilege  strew  the  face  of  a 
country  with  palaces  and  plenty?  Yes,  and  with  huts  and 
penury. 

With  equal  propriety  it  might  be  asked,  if  we  can  have 
no  magistrates,  unless  these  magistrates  are  kings  or  no- 
bles ?  The  assertion  that  these  beget  liberty,  made  by  the 
admirers  of  monarchy,  is  equivalent  to  the  assertion,  that 
paper  orders  beget  national  prosperity,  made  hy  the  lover? 
of  stoek.  As  the  first  is  asserted  of  the  most  inveterate  ene- 
mies to  liberty,  the  other  is  asserted  of  an  inveterate 
•enemy  to  property.     Magistrates  may  be  so  moulded  as  to 


328  BANKING. 

turn  out  despots  :  charters,  as  to  turn  out  thieves  3  oppres» 
sion,  under  pretence  of  protecting  ;  and  fraud,  under  pre- 
tence of  enriching,  are  not  novelties.  Magistrates  and  se- 
parate interests,  moulded  to  advance  the  publick  good, 
are  blessings;  but  for  gratifying  ambition  or  avarice,  arc 
curses. 

Although  the  king  of  England  has  but  few  domains,  yet 
the  English  civil  power,  is  that  generated  by  a  rich  govern- 
ment and  a  poor  people  ;  whilst  the  reverse    is  superficially 
the  ease.     The  phenomenon  is  resolved  by  considering  the 
power  carried  by  wealth  to  the  paper,  patronage  and  church 
separate  interests,  as  given  by  the  government  to  itself,  at 
the  expense  of  the  people  ;  and  demonstrates  by  experiment 
a  mode  of  usurpation.     Walpole  strengthened  the  English 
government  by  stock  and  taxes.     Five  millions  annual  in- 
come to  bank  stockolders,  create  a  more  alarming  degree  of 
power,  than  if  the  five  millions  had  been  given  to  one  man ; 
it  makes  a  multitude  ardent  in  the  cause  of  fraud  and  op- 
pression, instead  of  one  ;  therefore  Walpoje,  to  strengthen  a 
king,    made  a  faction  by  stock,  in  preference  to  enriching 
the  king  himself.     If  our  government  (including  the  state 
sections  of  it)  had  given  five  or  six  millions  annually  to  it- 
self, every  man  would  have  perceived  its  accession  of  power ; 
but  when  it  dispenses  the  same  sum  in  the  mode  thought  by 
Walpole  to  obtain  the  most  power,  the  accession  is  hard- 
ly seen    by  any,   and  is  utterly   imperceptible  to  the  re- 
ceivers. 

It  being  unquestionably  true,  that  an  organization  of 
property  by  law,  is  equivalent  to  an  organization  of  power 
by  law.  as  Mr.  Adams  and  Lord  Shaftsbury  assert,  it  fol- 
lows, either  that  the  governments  of  the  United  States  have 
not  a  right  to  exercise  the  first,  or  that  they  have  a  right  to 
exercise  the  second.  If  it  is  not  our  policy  that  a  govern- 
ment can  increase  its  own  power  by  its  own  will,  and  if  laws 
for  enriching  factitious  interests  will  increase  its  pow- 
er, by  bribing  partisans,  such  laws  are  subversive  of  o?rp 
policy. 


BANKING.  *S29 

This  indirect  mode  of  stealing  power  from  nations,  com- 
pensates them  with  vices  for  the  wealth  it  purloins.  It  cor- 
rupts a  passion  to  which  mankind  are  indebted  for  the  most 
perfect  state  of  society,  and  its  blessings,  namely,  a  love  of 
property.  In  either  extreme,  like  many  other  passions  ne- 
cessary to  our  happiness,  it  becomes  pernicious.  Enthusias- 
tick  philosophers,  falling  into  one,  by  attempting  toeradicate 
a  love  of  property,  have  laid  the  axe  to  the  root  of  society. 
Such  attempts,  though  always  unsuccessful,  are  always 
mischievous.  By  covering  a  love  of  property  with  odium, 
it  unfits  inexperienced  young  men  for  an  association,  of 
which  this  lore  is  the  chief  ligament.  By  depreciating  the 
motive  of  the  sanction,  the  sanction  itself  is  weakened.  'Ac- 
cordingly, having  rooted  out  a  love  of  property  from  the 
mind,  law  and  contracts  lose  their  influence,  and  a  commu- 
nity of  goods,  unsuccessfully  attempted  even  by  religious 
zeal,  terminates  philosophical  fanaticism.  Before  iiie  ca- 
tastrophe arrives,  pecuniary  distress,  begotten  by  a  contempt 
of  property,  prevents  men  from  being  good,  and  is  active  in 
forming  bad  citizens  ;  and  not  unfrequently  converts  a  me- 
taphysical saint,  into  a  practical  devil.  He  arraigns  justice 
of  avarice  ;  he  adjudges  it  to  be  sordid  and  base  in  a  creditor 
to  demand  payment^  he  breaks  contracts,  because  they  are 
to  be  fulfilled  by  money;  and  as  most  civil  rights  are  mea- 
sured by  money,  he  tramples  upon  most.  His  theory  being 
repugnant  to  the  principles  of  society,  he  vjolates  them  at 
e\erj  step  j  he  cannot  live  by  rules  he  hates  and  breaks  : 
and  he  is  gradually  moulded  by  the  bitter  expiations  to 
which  he  has  condemned  himself  by  a  contempt  of  property, 
into  a  malignant  misanthrope,  an  abandoned  scoundrel,  or 
an  unprincipled  and  ferocious  demagogue.  He  who  dissi- 
pates his  property,  dissipates  also  his  virtue  and  honour. 

Tills  extreme  however  is  so  far  outstript  by  its  opposite, 
in  generating  human  misery,  that  language  recoils  from 
the  horrour  of  a  just  description.  Separate  interests,  goaded 
on  by  au  avarice,  awakened  by  unjust  laws,  and  rendered  un- 
conscious of  guilt,  by  the  sanction  of  the  statute  bonk,  have 


3®0  BANKING, 


filled  the  old  world  with  crimes,  and  perverted  the  primitive 
end  of  society  to  secure  property,  by  making  it  the  instru- 
ment for  its  invasion.  Is  the  new  world  destined  to  copy 
this  old  process,  and  suffer  its  dispensations  ? 

This  essay  has  heen  written  for  the  purpose  of  inquir- 
ing hy  what  interest  mankind  ought  to  be  governed,  natural 
and  general,  or  artificial  and  particular.  It  considers  in- 
dustry, effort  and  talents,  as  constituting  the  first  class,  and 
law  and  charters,  for  enriching  individuals  or  factions,  as  con- 
stituting the  second.  Without  pursuing  the  details  to  which 
the  subject  would  lead,  it  has  selected  a  few  of  the  latter,  to 
illustrate  its  reasoning,  but  not  as  containing  a  history  or 
exhibition  of  the  whole  class  of  artificial  and  particular  inte- 
rests, by  which  mankind  have  been  oppressed.  In  this  se- 
lection, feudal,  hierarchical  and  stock,  are  the  particular 
interests,  of  whose  history  most  use  has  been  made,  as  they 
have  succeeded  each  other  in  England.  The  stock  tyrant, 
the  present  metropolitan  of  the  benefice  called  Britain,  is 
said  to  be  fair  and  just,  because  those  who  chose  to  do  so, 
might  subscribe  to  banks  or  loans.  To  the  arguments  used 
in  another  place  for  detecting  this  fallacy,  the  following  are 
added.  The  mode  by  which  a  tyrant  succeeds  to  his  tyran- 
ny, cannot  convert  oppression  into  justice.  If  offices,  pro- 
ductive of  mischief  to  a  nation,  were  like  bank  shares  ex- 
posed to  sale,  could  the  purchasers  justify  the  mischief,  by 
urging,  that  any  one  who  had  money,  might  have  purchas- 
ed ?  Several  Romans  purchased  ihe  empire.  Could 
they  justify  a  right  to  tyrannize,  because  any  other  per- 
son, rich  enough,  might  have  also  purchased  ?  Could 
a  lottery  for  distributing  the  titles  and  privileges  of  an  aris- 
toeratick  nobility  be  fair,  because  all  those  of  anation  able 
to  pay  for  them,  might  buy  tickets  ?  Did  the  neighing  of 
Darius's  horse  make  his  government  legitimate,  because  se- 
ven persons  possessed  tickets  in  the  lottery,  or  would  it  have 
been  legitimate,  if  seven  thousand  had  shared  in  the 
chance  ? 


BANKING,  33.1 

Among  the  instruments  of  oppression,  the  heredita- 
ry are  most  excusable  and  least  oppressive,  and  those  bought 
the  least  excusable  and  most  oppressive.  The  former  are 
thrust  by  birth  into  tyranny  ;  the  latter  purchase  it  with  a 
deliberate  malice  against  justice  and  liberty.  The  mis- 
chiefs of  the  hereditary  tyrant  are  limited  by  his  physical 
imbecilities ;  those  of  a  bought  separate  interest,  are  ex- 
tended by  a  boundless  moral  energy.  Jf  a  title  by  birth, 
by  lot  or  by  purchase,  would  not  have  justified  or  softened 
the  tyranny  of  a  Tiberius,  a  Caligula,  or  a  Nero,  how  can  a 
title  by  either  justify  or  soften  the  tyranny  of  the  more  last- 
ing and  extended  feudal,  hierarchical  or  stock  tyranny  ? 

One  tyrant  may  thank  God  that  he  is  not  another  ty- 
rant. Banking  may  say  that  it  is  not  a  hierarchy  or  noble 
order.  It  will  admit  that  charters  for  establishing  such  or- 
ders are  criminal,  and  contend  for  the  innocence  of  its  own  ; 
just  as  the  nobility  and  bishops  of  Fiance,  once  held  mercan- 
tile charters  in  the  highest  contempt,  and  their  own  in  the 
highest  respect.  When  Europe  was  torn  to  pieces  by  the 
principle  of  bestowing  exclusive  wealth  and  privileges  on 
religious  sects,  each  seel  contended  that  the  remedy  for  the 
evil,  lay  in  its  own  possession  of  this  wealth  and  these  pri- 
vileges. It  was  found  however  by  tiie  United  States,  to  lie 
in  the  abrogation  of  them  all.  Mr.  Adams's  book,  by  chang- 
ing a  few  names:,  might  be  easily  converted  from  a  system 
for  balancing  civil  orders  against  each  other,  into  one  for 
balancing  religions  sects  in  the  same  way ;  and  when  the 
most  powerful  of  these  sects,  were  intriguing,  lighting  and 
negociating  to  find  out  this  balance  of  wealth  and  power 
among  themselves,  those  who  expected  to  gain  by  the  doc- 
trine, would  allow  it  to  be  classical.  The  balance  of  religi- 
ous sects,  however,  could  never  be  found,  and  the  privileges 
bestowed  upon  them  by  law,  charter  or  treaty,  were  only  ap- 
ples of  discord  thrown  into  society.  Such  apples  are  the 
privileges  of  civil  sects;.  These  inflame  the  zeal  for  wealth, 
as  those  did  tiie  zeal  for  religion.     The  former  zeal  burns 


332  banking. 

now,  as  did  the  latter  some  centimes  past ;  and  civil  privi- 
leged sects  will  regard  the  publick  happiness,  as  religious  did 
then.  The  principle,  universally  agreed  in  the  United 
States  to  be  inconsistent  with  religious  happiness,  cannot  ad- 
vance civil.  On  the  contrary,  civil  privileges  are  likely  to 
produce  religious  misery,  as  religious  privileges  have  pro- 
duced civil  misery,  and  we  must  probably  have  both  privileg- 
ed, civil  and  religious  sects,  or  neither. 

Wealth,  religion  and  truth,  as  by  law  established,  com- 
pound a  political  system,  of  strict  Atlianasian  orthodoxy  ;  it 
does  not  contain  three  principles,  but  only  one.  And  wealth, 
religion  and  truth,  established  by  industry,  conscience  and 
free  inquiry,  is  the  opposite  system,  founded  also  in  one 
principle. 

"Wealth,  established  by  law,  violates  the  principle, 
which  induced  the  American  states  to  wage  war  with  Bri- 
tain. It  separates  the  imposer  from  the  payer  of  taxes.  Na 
nation  would  tax  itself  to  enrich  an  order  or  separate  inter- 
est. When  therefore  a  nation  is  so  taxed,  it  must  proceed 
from  the  power  of  the  order  itself,  which  is  invariably  the 
iniposer  and  receiver  of  the  tax  ;  whilst  the  rest  of  the  na- 
tion is  the  payer. 

No  interest,  whose  acquisitions  are  the  effect  of  law,  and 
not  of  labour,  can  pay  any  portion  of  a  tax.  Publick  offi- 
cers, who  receive  salaries,  pay  no  taxes,  and  therefore  are 
not  allowed  to  impose  them.  If  one  half  of  these  salaries 
were  taken  from  them  by  the  name  of  a  tax,  they  would 
neither  be  taxed,  nor  entitled  upon  that  ground  to  partici- 
pate in  the  imposition  of  taxes  ;  because  the  law  only  re- 
sumes what  it  gave,  and  takes  nothing  which  it  did  not  give  ,• 
it  would  only  be  a  diminution  of  salary  for  services.  In 
like  manner,  bankers  ought  not  to  inflict  the  payment  of  th« 
wealth  they  extract,  and  if  this  wealth  given  by  law,  was 
resumed  by  law,  it  would  only  be  a  cessation  of  a  naked  be- 
nevolence }  and  a  worse  ground  for  claiming  a  right  to  im- 
pose taxes,  than  a  diminution  of  a  friary  for  services, 


BANKING.  3Lk 

Mankind  arc  united  by  the  necessity  for  subsistence  in  as 
common  interest.     Those  who  furnish  tiie  subsistence,  pay 
all  the  taxes.    As  subsistence  flows  from  the  earth,  that  may 
be  called  the  mother  of  men,  liable  to  make  all  the  disburse 
ments  they  need.     Hence,  all,   or  nearly  all  taxes,  must  be 
ultimately  paid  by  agriculture,  and  ought  of  course  tojje  in- 
flicted by  her,  if  the  doctrine  is  true,  that  the  payer  is  the 
only  just  imposer  of  taxes.      Agriculture  cannot  be  partial? 
because  she  cannot  shift  the  tax  irons  her  own  shoulders. 
From  her  other  interests  diverge,    like  rays   from  the  sun; 
but  she  is  the  centre  of  them  all.  If  one  of  these  ravs usurps 
from  the  parent  sun,  the  distribution  of  his  light,  it  may  be 
induced  to  darken  another,  for  the  purpose  of  increasing  the 
splendour  of  its  own  •    as  a  child  who  makes  the  will  of  a 
parent,  disinherits  his  brethren  for  his  own  advantage.    And 
so  legislation  flowing  from,  or  influenced  by  any  particular 
interest,  in  whatever  form,  has  never  failed  to  rob  other  in- 
terests. 

Perhaps  no  separate  interest  would  constitute  a  less 
exceptionable  legislator,  than  commerce,  on  account  of  its 
close  connexion  with  agriculture  and  manufactures  •  and 
yet,  without  considering  the  complicated  means  she  could 
practise,  to  make  other  interests,  and  even  that  of  agrici 
turc.  subservient  to  hers,*  a  simple  power  of  converting  all 
other  interests  into  insurers  of  her  adventures,  giving  them 
the  losses,  and  keeping  herself  the  profits,  would  be  Sifflt- 
ciently  tyrannical. 

If  commerce  would  be  the  least  exceptionable  separat-.- 
interest,  as  a  legislator,  or  as  influencing  legislation,  be- 
cause of  her  connexion  with  agriculture  and  manufactures, 
paper  stock  must  be  the  most  exceptionable,  because  it  ha 
no  connexion  with  either.  It  is  not  one  of  those  rays  di- 
verging from  the  sun,  or  one  of  those  interests  arising  from 
the  earth,  capable  of  being  softened  by  the  affinities  of  a 
common  ancestor.  Belonging  to  the  family of  cunning 
is  inexorable  to  the  family  of  the  earth,  and  favorable  to  its 
o>wn  relations.    These  two  families,  in  all  their  branches, 


33*  BANKING. 

are  natural  enemies.     Whenever  any  member  of  the  family 
of  artificial  interests  gets  into  the  camp  of  the  other  family* 
it  lets   in  its  comrades,  and  plunders  to   the  uttermost. 
Among  them,  paper  stock  has   been  most  conspicuous  for 
such  feats.   In  England,  it  has  allied  itself  with  its  kindred, 
gotten  into  the  camp,  and  plundered  the  nation  in  the  last 
century  beyond  the  magnifying  conception  of  lunacy  itself. 
Above  ten  hundred  millions  of  pounds  sterling  are  now  sup- 
posed to  be  due  to  loan  and  bank  stock,  to  which  the  pay- 
ments made  during  a  century  must  be  added,   to  find  the 
amount  of  which  the  family  of  the  earth,  has  been  stript  by 
the  family  of  law.     In  the  United  States,  speculation,  as  it 
was  called,  bought  of  the  family  of  the  earth  an  hundred 
millions  at  one  shilling  in  the  pound,  and  then  compelled  it 
to  re-purchase  it  at  twenty.   This  family  of  the  law  soon  dis- 
closed its  affection  for  its  relations,  monarchy  and  aristocracy. 
Here  too  bank  stock  is  already  annually  extracting  from 
the  family  of  the  earth,  of  labour  and  of  property,  five  times 
as  much  as  the  civil  government  of  the  United  States  costs. 
Already,  like  the  ancient  hierarchy,  it  pretends  that  to  tax 
it  would  be  sacrilege.     And  already,   like  a  tyrant  prepar- 
ing punishment  for  treason,  it  has  proposed  to  inflict  death 
upon  forgery,  where  the  system  of  mildness  has  been  car- 
ried so  far,  as  to  subject  murder  in  the  second  degree  to  im- 
prisonment only.     Fear   for  its   wealth   will   induce  this 
branch,  like  all  of  the  same  race,  to  let  in  its  kindled. 

The  revival  of  the  charter  of  the  bank  of  the  United 
States,  was  denied  upon  the  ground  of  the  political  power 
conveyed  by  bank  stock  to  the  subjects  of  England  ;  and  the 
highest  authority  declared  in  this  denial,  that  less  than  ten 
millions  of  it  would  invest  foreigners  with  a  pernicious  por- 
tion of  such  power.  Natives  will  derive  still  more  power 
from  stock,  because  their  whole  mass  of  social  rights  are 
enlisted  as  its  ally  and  partisan.  There  is  no  provision  in 
our  constitutions,  for  a  legislative  conveyance  of  power  by 
bank  stock,  either  to  citizens  or  foreigners.  This  decision, 
and  the  talents  which  produced  it,  proclaimed,  that  bank 


BANKING.  335 

stock  eonveys  political  power.  It  proclaimed,  that  less 
than  ten  millions  of  it  made  a  few  foreigners,  under  all  the 
disadvantages  of  that  character,  dangerous  ;  hut  the  same 
authority  is  silent  as  to  the  danger  to  be  apprehended  from 
an  hundred  millions  of  bank  stock,  in  the  hands  of  people  to 
whom  every  branch  of  the  government  is  open.  The  Unit- 
ed States  bank  stock  held  by  the  English  possessed  the  usual 
transferable  quality,  but  no  one  contended  that  this  quality- 
was  any  security  against  the  pernicious  political  power  an- 
nexed to  bank  stock.  If  the  United  States  had  originally 
created  a  government  of  bank  stock,  and  annexed  the  entire 
political  power  to  an  hundred  millions  or  any  other  amount 
of  it,  a  transferable  quality  in  this  stock,  would  not  have  ex- 
punged the  aristocratical  qualities  of  such  a  government. 
Had  A  assigned  a  share  of  this  stock  to  B,  the  latter  would 
have  occupied  the  place  of  the  former  in  this  government, 
just  as  a  feudal  son  did  that  of  his  dead  father.  Nor  is  a 
transfer  of  the  power  annexed  to  bank  stock,  from  one  citi- 
zen to  another,  a  better  security  against  that  power,  than  was 
a  transfer  of  the  stock  of  the  United  States'  bank,  from  one 
Englishman  to  another,  against  the  political  power  deriv- 
ed from  stock  by  Englishmen. 

The  similitude  between  a  stock  and  a  feudal  aristocracy 
is  perfect.  Money  is  made  the  basis  of  political  power  in 
one  ;  land,  in  the  other.  The  power  is  not  annexed  to  mo- 
ney in  general,  but  to  a  portion  of  it,  moulded  by  law  into 
stock  ,*  as  in  the  feudal  form  it  is  not  annexed  to  land  in  ge- 
neral, but  to  a  portion  of  it,  moulded  by  law  into  lordships. 
Those  having  money  but  no  stock,  are  excluded  from  politi- 
cal power  in  a  stock  aristocracy  ;  as  those  are,  having  land 
but  no  seigniory,  in  a  feudal  one.  In  both,  though  money 
and  land  possess  the  same  intrinsiek  value  by  whomsoever 
held,  portions  of  each  are  by  the  artifice  of  law,  made  more 
valuable  than  other  portions  naturally  of  the  same  value  ; 
and  of  course  more  powerful.  This  identical  essence  of  mo- 
nopoly, and  sole  cause  of  aristocracy,  is  the  same  in  both 
eases.     If  there  are  two  portions  of  people,  eacl-i  possessing 


^S6  BANKING* 

a  million  of  dollars,  and  one  has  its  money  converted  by 
charier  into  stoek,  whilst  the  same  favour  is  refused  to 
the  other:  (he  difference  between  them  as  to  social  in- 
fluence, power  or  rights,  though  less  visible,  is  really  the 
same,  as  between  the  same  portions  possessing  an  equal 
quantity  of  land,  after  the  lands  of  one  portion  are  moulded 
by  law  into  lordships,  whilst  no  favour  is  granted  to  those 
of  the  other.  However  such  monopolies  may  be  decorated 
by  the  trappings  of  ingenuity,  the  artifices  of  fraud,  or  the 
oblations  of  folly,  both  exhibit  the  simple  case  of  endowing 
by  law  a  selected  portion  of  property,  either  money  or  land, 
With  a  better  income  and  more  social  power,  than  is  de- 
rived by  its  holders  from  a  far  greater  portion  of  both,  not 
so  endowed. 

This  argument  suffers  no  injury  from  the  consideration, 
that  our  constitutions  have  not  expressly  annexed  political 
power  to  bank  stock ;  because,  if  it  naturally  imbibes  poli- 
tical power,  such  indirect  acquisitions  derived  from  ordinary 
and  not  conventional  legislation,  however  tortured,  can  never 
be  reconciled  with  the  policy  of  the  United  States,  if  it  is 
t'uiinded  in  good,  just  and  equal  moral  or  political  princi- 
ples ;  as  to  that,  the  difference  between  the  treason  of 
the  sword  or  of  the  pen  by  which  it  is  destroyed,  will  mere- 
ly consist  in  the  degrees  of  pain  inflicted  by  the  respective 
operations.  Banking  has  only  appeared  to  any  extent  in 
Genoa,  Venice,  Holland  and  England.  Does  it  bring  its  let- 
ters of  recommendation  from  these  monarchies  or  aristocra- 
cies, because  it  has  homogeniously  coalesced  with  them  ? 
Yes,  these  experiments,  by  disclosing  the  fatal  truth,  that 
banking  could  enrich  an  order,  awakened  an  order  here  to 
be  enriched.  It  advertised  itself  as  a  talisman  against  po- 
verty, and  obtained  proselytes  both  of  clergy  and  laity,  or 
of  those  to  whom  its  promises  were  truths,  and  of  those  to 
whom  they  were  falsehoods.  Fraud  ever  promises  riches 
in  heaven  or  upon  earth,  and  hence  it  has  been  necessary  in 
this  essay  to  (race  it  through  (lie  chief  forms  it  has  assumed. 
in  the  first,  the  second  and  third  uses,   to  shew  the  innate 


BANKING.  387 

similitude  of  these  forms  to  each  other,  and  the  inconsistency 
of  all,  with  the  civil  policy  of  the  United  States.  The  sub- 
ject ought  to  be  fairly  explained,  that  the  nation  may  judge 
whether  monopoly  shall  destroy  its  constitutional  principles, 
or  these  principles,  monopoly.  If  circumstances  propelled 
the  United  States,  like  France,  into  a  form  of  government 
too  free  or  too  honest  for  the  national  character ;  or  if  the 
wages  of  banking,  like  the  pay  of  armies,  have  already 
moulded  our  legislatures  into  mercenary  troops,  it  may  be 
lost  to  avoid  an  unavailing  contest  by  a  tacit  submission  ; 
but  if  a  publick  exists  in  the  United  States,  able  to  sustain 
a  publick  interest,  a  greater  quantity  of  human  happiness 
will  be  produced,  by  preferring  that  interest,  to  a  monopoly 
in  the  hands  of  a  very  few. 

This  essay  does  not  aspire  to  the  honour  of  proposing  a 
new  political  system.  It  only  endeavours  to  ascertain  the 
principles  of  old  ones,  and  to  shew  that  the  publick  will 
and  publick  interest,  and  an  exclusive  will  and  an  artificial 
interest,  cannot  possibly  constitute  a  governing  power,  in 
union.  That  these  moral  beings,  are  the  only  natural  poli- 
tical enemies  capable  of  existing,  and  are  doomed  by  the  au- 
thor of  human  nature  to  eternal  warfare.  That  no  artifi- 
cial balance  can  appease  this  eternal  hostility,  any  more 
than  it  could  reconcile  good  and  evil.  That  hence,  and  not 
from  a  defective  balance,  Mr.  Adams  has  never  beeN  able  to 
find  these  opposite  principles  quietly  poising  each  other. 
And  that  the  United  States,  by  creating  a  pecuniary  sepa- 
rate interest,  capable  of  entering  the  list  witli  publick  inter- 
est, have  proclaimed  a  warfare  precisely  of  that  nature, 
which  has  demolished  human  liberty  universally.  In  this 
age  of  avarice,  a  nation  which  creates  paper  stock  and  mo- 
nied  monopoly,  but  guards  itself  against  feudal  tenures,  se 
cures  its  liberty  as  wisely,  as  one  would  have  done  in  the 
fourteenth  century,  by  creating  feudal  tenures,  and  guard- 
ing itself  against  paper  stock. 

The  gross  and   humiliating  delusion  by  which  banking 
mes,  »£t  "  that,  the  family  of  industry,  are  enriched  by  the 


338  UANKIXG. 

idle  family  of  artifice."  England  displays  the  profound 
wisdom  of  land  and  labour  in  outwitting  stock,  in  this  trial 
of  skill.  Stock  now  receives  from  them  nearly  double  the 
amount  of  the  whole  price  of  all  the  exported  labour  of  the 
nation  ;  that  is  about  Corty  millions,  for  enhancing  the  va- 
lue of  its  exported  labour,  which  sells  for  twenty.  The 
United  States  will  not  yet  supply  us  with  this  perfect  demon- 
stration, but  the  progress  towards  the  same  point  has  been  as 
rapid  as  was  the  progress  of  England,  from  the  commence- 
ment of  her  stock  career.  In  debt  and  bank  stock  we  only 
pay  about  ten  millions  of  dollars  annually,  to  obtain  the  en- 
hancement of  price  or  value,  which  we  are  taught  to  ex- 
pect from  stock,  on  about  forty  millions  worth  of  exported 
labour.  If  stock  benefits  land  and  labour,  then  it  is  a  mis- 
fortune to  us  only  to  pay  it  twenty-five  per  centum  on  our 
exports,  and  wc  ought  immediately  to  create  a  sufficient 
quantity  to  acquire  the  English  blessing  of  paying  it  two 
hundred.  An  exact  statistical  knowledge  of  the  enemy's 
country,  being  disclosed  by  the  unerring  medium  of  figures, 
we  must  resort  to  fate  to  account  for  the  blindness  of  man- 
kind. 

All  separate  factitious  interests  pretend  that  they  bene- 
fit nations  in  some  mode,  too  intricate  to  be  investigated  by 
the  mass  of  mankind.  Thus  hierarchies  and  noble  orders 
yet  retain  a  spacious  existence.  Of  all  such  pretences,  bank- 
ing  resorts  to  the  least  intricate.  It  gravely  tells  nations 
that  it  enriches  them  by  taking  their  money  ;  that  by  emp- 
tying a  quart  bottle  of  half  its  contents,  the  residue  will  be- 
come three  pints.  If  a  nation  possessed  a  certain  quantity 
of  bread,  would  it  be  increased  by  depositing  it  in  the 
hands  of  a  corporation,  and  paying  ten  per  centum  for  re- 
ceiving the  residue  on  the  credit  of  the  corporation  bread 
notes  ?  Would  an  annual  deduction  of  one  tenth  part  of  the 
bread,  increase  the  quantity,  and  make  the  nation  more  se- 
cure against  famine  ?  Will  an  annual  appropriation  ol 
one  tenth  of  its  money  to  the  use  of  a  similar  corporation, 
m#ease  its  wealth  and  seoyrc  a  nation  against  poverty  ? 


3SANTQtf«.  33H 

The  first  species  of  fraud  would  be  reprobated  with  univer- 
sal indignation  ;  the  second  is  deliberately  practised.  Is 
the  belly  wiser  than  the  head  ?  A  monopoly  of  money 
reaches  all  human  wants,  comforts,  luxuries  and  passions 
Every  oppressive  government  is  produced  by  some  of  the 
progeny  of  monopoly.  If  an  individual  of  this  family,  has 
too  often  enabled  tyrants  to  oppress  nations,  can  the  genus, 
covering,  corrupting  and  commanding  the  whole  species,  en. 
rich  them  ? 

If  the  monopoly  of  banking  will  rob  a  nation  of  its  liber- 
ty, by  corrupting  or  usurping  the  government,  it  is  almost 
superfluous  to  prove,  that  it  will  rob  it  of  its  property  also  ; 
because  every  separate  interest  acquiring  one,  has  uniform- 
ly gotten  the  other.  To  the  latter  inquiry  we  shall  howe- 
ver more  particularly  advert,  since  tlie  pecuniary  effects  of 
banking  will  admit  of  reasoning  sjp  nearly  connected  with 
figures,  as  to  exhibit  mathematical  certainty.  The  truth 
or  errour  of  the  assertion,  **  thai  banks  add  to  the  price  01 
value  of  the  product  of  labour,"  is  capable  of  being  exhibit- 
ed to  the  eye. 

The  reader  ■nil!  recollect  the  difference  between  price 
and  value.     Local  price  will  settle  its  own  level,  in  relation 
to  local  currency.     If  the  price  of  agricultural  products, 
consumed  at  home,  had  been  increased  bv  banking,  home 
manufactures  so  consumed,   would  have  experienced  a  pro 
portioual  increase.     No  species  of  labour,  will  suffer  itself 
to  be  sacrificed  by  bank  curreaey,  for  the  benefit  of  another 
Each  will  compensate  itself,  by  enhancing  its  price  up  to  its 
natural  level.     If  therefore  bank  paper  could  produce  local 
disorders,  in  the  balance  of  labour  against  labour,  the  effect 
could  not  be  permanent  j  and  a  re-adjustment  of  the  level  of 
price,  would  place  the  several  departments  of  labour  in  tht 
same  relative  situation?  as  to  value,   even  if  the  price  of 
each  had  been  doubled.      To  disarrange  the  natural  rela- 
tion between  the  value  of  labour,   ascertained  by  fair  com- 
petition, would  wickedly  oppress,  unfairly  to  enrich  \    and 
damp  the  spirit  of  industry.     k\v\  aij  advancement  of  the 


340  HANKING. 

price  of  labour9  pari  passu,  would  produce  neither  gain  nor 
loss.  It  follows,  that  if  bank  paper  did  advance  prices, 
nothing  would  be  gained  by  a  nation,  in  regard  to  its  do- 
mestick  commerce  ',  and  of  course,  that  it  can  gain  nothing 
by  banking,  except  through  the  medium  of  its  exported 
labour. 

All  the  ground  therefore  upon  which  banking  can  ope- 
rate,  as  to  an  increase  of  value,  lies  between  the  domestick 
and  foreign  price  of  exported  labour.  If  wheat  is  worth 
eight  shillings  here,  and  ten  shillings  in  the  foreign  market, 
the  influence  of  bank  currency  upon  the  price  of  wheat, 
would  be  limited  to  two  shillings.  Beyond  these  confines, 
its  power  to  enhance  price  by  exciting  competition,  cannot 
extend ;  and  therefore  an  enhancement  within  this  narrow 
restriction,  comprises  the  entire  retribution  within  the  pow- 
er of  banking  to  make,  for  the  revenue  it  extracts. 

Supposing  there  exist  banks  in  the  United  States,  ope 
rating  upon  a  capital,  real  or  imaginary,  of  fifty  millions  of 
dollars,  and  receiving  a  revenue,  including  dividends,  per- 
quisites and  expenses,  of  ten  per  centum,  or  five  millions  an- 
nually ;  this  live  millions  is  the  sum  paid  by  the  United 
States,  for  the  supposed  benefit  of  having  the  price  of  ex- 
portable labour  enhanced  within  the  limitations  just  stated. 
We  have  before  proved  that  an  evil  and  not  a  benefit,  is  con- 
ferred on  a  country,  by  disordering  or  raising  the  prices  of 
labour  consumed  at  home. 

Supposing  the  exportable  labour  of  the  United  States., 
to  be  forty  millions  annually,  then  they  pay  five  millions  or 
twelve  and  an  half  per  centum  to  banks,  upon  the  total  of 
the  subject,  the  real  value  of  which  can  possibly  be  effected 
by  banking  ;  and  if  the  difference  between  the  value  of  this 
subject,  here  and  abroad,  should  not  amount  to  twelve  and 
an  half  per  centum,  as  is  generally  the  case,  it  is  evi- 
dent, that  a  pecuniary  loss  results  to  a  nation  by  bank- 
ing, because  the  price  paid  for  it,  exceeds  any  possible  en- 
hancement of  value  within  its  power. 


BANKING.  3'il 

Out  of  the  same  fund,  that  is,  the  difference  in  a  specie 
value,  between  the  price  of  exported  labour  here  and 
abroad,  the  whole  amount  of  mercantile  profit  is  to  be  ta- 
ken ;  because  competition  cannot  be  so  excited  by  hanking, 
as  to  destroy  this  profit,  without  destroying  commerce ;  nor 
is  it  conceivable  that  mercantile  calculation  could  be  so  de- 
ceived, as  ardently  to  patronise  a  system  productive  of  such 
a  consequence.  If  this  mercantile  profit  amounts  also  to 
twelve  and  an  half  per  centum  on  exported  labour,  it  raises 
the  deduction  under  a  bank  currency,  upon  forty  millions  of 
this  subject,  to  twenty-five  per  centum,  or  ten  millions  an- 
nually. From  this  expense,  there  is  no  deduction  pretend- 
ed, except  the  enhancement  of  value  by  exciting  mercantile 
competition.  To  reimburse  it,  banking,  through  (his  boast- 
ed competition,  must  save  to  the  nation  five  millions  an- 
nually, out  of  a  mercantile  profit  of  five.  At  whatever  rati' 
mercantile  profit  is  computed,  the  advantage  of  mercantile 
competition  must  come  out  of  this  fund.  Would  an  able 
calculator  give  six  per  centum  for  bank  paper,  if  it  was 
true  that  it  deprived  him  of  one,  two,  three,  four  or  five 
millions  annually,  and  bestowed  it  on  labour  ? 

The  difference  between  the  home  and  foreign  price,  ue 
the  ground  for  banking  to  operate  on,  is  yet  farther  nar- 
rowed, by  the  deductions  of  freight,  commission  and  insur- 
ance.  These  cannot  be  destroyed  by  any  competition  it 
may  excite;  on  the  contrary,  if  banking  did  increase  the 
price  of  labour  consumed  at  home,  it  would  increase  this  de- 
duction, and  narrow  still  more  the  ground  for  its  operation 
©n  exported  labour. 

In  fact,  banking,  instead  of  exciting  competition,  muof, 
like  duties,  fall  on  the  commodity,  and  fail  to  les=en  mer 
eantile  profit.  The  merchant  advances  the  price  paid 
its  currency,  as  he  advances  duties.  He  must  not  oiiJy  b< 
reimbursed  the  one,  in  the  price  of  the  commodities  he  buys 
as  he  is  reimbursed  the  other,  in  the  price  of  the  comniod; 
ties  he  sells,  but  he  must  also  gain  a  profit  on  both  his  ad 
vaneements,   otherwise  h«  would  be  as  inimical  as  he  i.a 


$4,2  BANKING. 

friendly,  to  imposts  and  banking.    Duties  add  to  nominal 
price ;  do  they  also  enrich  nations  ? 

The  inefficacy  of  banking  for  enhancing  the  value  of  the 
products  of  labour,  was  demonstrated  in  the  United  States 
by  an  embargo.  The  exportable,  instantly  lost  two-thirds 
of  its  price,  without  any  change  in  the  bank  currency.  And 
the  price  of  the  consumable,  was  instantly  regulated  by  the 
home  demand,  just  as  the  demand  of  foreign  markets,  when 
these  markets  are  open,  regulates  the  price  of  export- 
able labour.  Could  banking  have  regulated  value  or 
even  price,  the  exact  regulation  of  both,  by  need, 
would  not  have  appeared  in  this  complete  experiment,  of  an 
intercourse  between  its  currency  and  the  products  of  labour, 
upon  a  theatre,  isolated  by  this  embargo  against  every  spe- 
cies of  foreign  influence. 

Its  impotence  for  enhancing  value,  between  the  people  of 
the  same  country,  is  not  however  conclusive  evidence  of  its 
effects  between  distinct  nations.  Seeing  that  price  and  va- 
lue are  regulated  at  home  by  the  market  or  need,  we  may 
certainly  conclude  that  products  consumed  abroad,  will  be 
regulated  by  the  same  standard,  and  therefore  the  only  ques- 
tion is,  in  what  mode  banking  affects  these  regulators. 
This  is  done  by  increasing  or  diminishing  the  labour  of  a 
country,  employed  in  providing  for  human  wants.  If  it  in- 
creases this  labour,  it  diminishes  ;  if  it  diminishes  this  la- 
bour, it  increases  the  price  of  its  products.  It  is  certain 
that  banking  produces  the  latter  effect,  to  the  extent  of  the 
labour  employed  in  its  operations,  and  of  that  enabled  to  live 
in  idleness  upon  the  income  of  its  stock.  So  far  as  it  thus 
enhances  the  price  or  value  of  labour  at  home,  it  is  a  mode 
of  doing  it,  precisely  equivalent  to  effecting  the  same  end 
by  neutralising  an  equal  portion  of  labour,  with  useless 
offices,  endowed  with  unearned  income.  But  so  far  as  it 
thus  enhances  price  abroad,  it  is  a  solid  enhancement  of  va- 
lue in  favour  of  the  nation  which  has  the  understanding  to 
avail  itself  of  the  circumstance.  The  enhancement  of  the 
price  of  wheat  in  England,  for  instance,  so  long  as  />s  bank 


BANKING.  34? 

stock  maintained  its  equality  with  specie,  was  a  real  en- 
hancement of  the  value  of  labour  in  the  United  States,  but 
not  in  England,  by  reason  of  the  equalising  powers  of  na- 
tive labour  ;  and  the  whole  effect  of  our  own  bank  paper, 
was  to  render  some  part  of  this  real  benefit  merely  no- 
minal. 

We  i  w  arrive  to  a  conclusion  of  a  formidable  aspect. 
If  bank  currency  cannot  benefit  a  nation,  through  the  me- 
dium of  domestick  commerce ;  because  every  species  of  la- 
bour consumed  at  home,  will  equalise  its  price  in  relation 
to  a  local  currency ;  and  if  it  cannot  destroy  or  even  dimin- 
ish mercantile  profit  upon  exported  labour  ;  it  follows,  that 
it  does  not  reimburse  a  nation  for  the  tax  it  collects  ,*  and  at 
best  only  raises  prices  and  excites  industry,  like  taxes  and 
useless  offices. 

A  bank  currency  may  therefore,  in  its  domestick  opera 
tion,  both  increase  price  and  diminish  value.  The  first  by 
neutralising  a  portion  of  labour  j  the  second,  by  burdening 
the  same  country  with  its  maintenance,  against  any  reim- 
bursement for  which  the  equalising  nature  of  native  prices, 
is  an  effectual  obstacle. 

But  specie  rather  excites  than  neutralises  labour,  and 
draws  little  or  no  tax  from  a  nation.  The  possessor  can 
part  with  it  at  a  small  profit,  or  even  at  none,  without  ruin, 
because  he  pays  no  interest  for  it ;  and  it  is  his  interest  to 
take  any  profit  in  preference  to  its  lying  inactive.  But  the 
borrower  of  bank  paper,  cannot  part  with  it,  without  mak- 
ing a  profit  equal  to  its  cost.  He  cannot  afford  to  take  a 
profit  even  of  five  per  centum,  as  a  buyer  with  his  own  mo- 
ney may.  He  must  consider  himself  in  the  lights  of  both 
borrower  and  merchant,  and  feel  a  necessity  of  making  pro- 
fit in  both  eiiaracters.  The  owner  of  specie  considers  him- 
self as  a  merchant  only.  The  first  is  under  a  necessity  of 
uniting  in  a  tacit  combination,  compounded  of  bankers  and 
borrowers,  to  depress  prices,  that  one  may  get  interest,  and 
the  other  profit ;  these  ends  must  be  effected,  or  borrowing 
and  lending  bank  paper  wotild  cease  j  they  ore  only  to  be 


5i*  BANKING. 

effected  by  a  depression  of  price.  And  thus  a  field  of  com- 
petition to  the  vast  amount  of  six  per  centum,  is  shut  against 
bunk  currency,  and  open  to  coin  ;  of  course  coin  will  pro- 
duce better  prices  than  bank  currency,  unexceptionably  ac- 
cording to  the  criterion  of  value,  and  generally  according 
to  a  nominal  computation.  Whenever  it  has  hoarded  or  ba- 
nished specie,  it  has  gained  the  exclusive  regulation  of  pri- 
ces, as  there  does  not  exist  a  specie  currency  able  to  rival 
corporate  currency ;  and  then  it  becomes  so  powerful  a  re- 
gulator of  prices,  as  to  produce  most  of  the  effects  of  an  ex- 
clusive privilege. 

After  the  banishment  or  incarceration  of  fifty  millions 
of  specie,  and  the  substitution  of  one  hundred  millions  of 
bank  currency,  the  latter  would  render  all  the  commercial 
duties,  previously  rendered  by  the  former  ;  but  as  it  could 
not  render  more  than  all,  so  it  cannot  perform  more  duty 
than  the  prtiieding  sum  of  specie ;  if  it  was  miraculously 
turned  into  specie,  half  of  it  would  fly  a>vay  into  other  parts 
of  the  commercial  world,  because  half  could  perform  the 
whole  duty.  Still  the  hundred  millions,  though  half  of  it  is 
useless,  cannot  afford  to  give  as  good  prices  as  the  fifty,  be- 
cause the  hundred  millions  is  burdened  with  the  payment  of 
eight  on  ten  millions  annually  to  the  bankers  and  their  offi- 
cers, whereas  the  fifty,  like  an  owner  of  land  in  fee,  has  no 
such  rent  to  pay.  Whence  it  happens  that  the  price  and  va- 
lue of  the  products  of  labour  is  higher  in  South  America, 
than  in  England  and  North  America,  although  the  latter 
countries  have  a  greater  quantity  of  circulating  currency  in 
proportion  to  population ;  but  then  the  former  has  more 
specie  currency. 

Bank  currency,  being  in  its  nature  a  monopoly,  must 
inevitably  be  governed  by  the  innate  law  of  monopoly.  This  is 
to  enhance  its  own  value,  by  diminishing  value  in  some  other 
quarter.  It  cannot  otherwise  subsist.  If  bank  currency  gave 
a  better  price  than  coin,  the  coin  would  be  drawn  from  the 
bank  for  the  purpose  of  buying  cheaper,  and  the  moment 
it  performs  its  promise  of  outbidding  coin,  it  perishes  by  de- 
preciation. > 


BANKING.  345 

So  long  as  it  operates  as  specie,  an  influx  of  bank  paper 
into  this  country,  produces  an  efflux  of  specie,  which  de- 
parts to  raise  the  real  value  of  foreign  labour,  whilst  the 
remaining  local  currency,  can  at  most  bestow  only  a  nomi- 
nal increase  upon  domestick.  Bank  currency,  passing  as 
specie,  is  embodied  with  the  general  business  of  commerce, 
and  like  specie,  is  governed  by  the  principles  of  commerce. 
These  have  declared,  that  even  a  redundancy  of  specie  itself, 
cannot  be  made  to  render  permanent  local  benefits.  If 
bank  currency  is  inextricably  interwoven  with  and  influen- 
ced by  the  principles  of  commerce,  it  is  simply  a  redundan- 
cy of  specie,  under  a  prohibition  against  exportation.  It 
will  enhance  the  value  of  the  commodities,  bought  by  the 
banking  nation  of  another,  periodically,  by  producing  a  re- 
dundancy of  specie  ;  and  permanently,  by  a  diminution  of 
labour.  Whilst  a  country  can  give  high  prices  in  specie, 
for  foreign  manufactures,  on  account  of  a  redundancy  of 
money  caused  by  bank  currency,  foreigners  will  prefer  them 
to  high-priced  commodities.  After  the  specie  is  gone,  the 
price  of  the  same  commodities,  as  to  foreigners,  will  be  fix- 
ed by  the  markets  abroad,  and  not  by  the  paper  at  home. 

But  reasoning  upon  the  question,  whether  bank  curren- 
cy will  enhance  or  depress  prices,  is  superseded  by  expe- 
rience. The  philosophers  no  longer  debated  whether  a 
monster  was  in  the  sun,  after  they  saw  the  fly  in  the  teles- 
cope. Through  the  experience  of  England,  we  are  pre 
sented  with  the  disputed  fact.  England  has  the  most  pa- 
per currency  of  any  country  of  the  commercial  world,  and 
the  price  of  her  manufactures  is  the  lowest. 

In  contemplating  the  example  of  England,  we  must  dis 
eern  compulsion  at  the  beginning,  as  well  as  at  the  end  o£ 
her  commerce.     Her  labour  is  compelled  to  sell  low  to  her 
mercantile  interest,  and  foreign  nations  or  her  colonies  are 
compelled  to  purchase  high  of  the  same  interest.     Her  ma 
ritime  power  is  the  instrument  of  the  latter  compulsion,  and 
her  bank  currency  of  the  former.     This  bank  currency  can 
ooCforcc  up  fUe  pviees  in  foreign  nations,  as  her  fleet  doe* 

'■;- 


by  vexing  and  crippling  competition  ;  but  it  can  force  down 
the  prices  of  labour  at  home.  By  taxing  labour  to  maintain 
tliis  fleet,  that  commerce  is  enabled  to  sell  high  abroad  ; 
and  by  a  monopolized  currency,  regulating  the  prices  of 
domestick  labour,  she  buys  low  at  home.  She  draws 
wealth  and  opulence  from  two  sources,  knavery  and  vio- 
lence. To  maintain  the  oppression  over  foreign  nations 
and  colonies,  she  frequently  involves  herself  in  war j  to 
maintain  the  oppression  over  home  labour,  she  is  forced  to 
use  the  penalties,  corruptions,  and  mercenary  armies,  form- 
ing the  eode  of  all  despotisms.  But  she  is  enriched,  because 
labour  is  her  slave,  goaded  by  a  paper  system,  and  she  makes 
competition  shrink  by  a  fleet. 

Lord  Sheffield  lately  observed  in  debate,  that  "  money 
was  the  medium  of  commerce  in  France,  and  credit  its  me- 
dium in  England."  And  he  supposed,  that  hence  arose  the 
advantage  possessed  by  English  commerce  over  French.  It 
is  true,  that  this  cause  does  constitute  a  portion  of  that  ad- 
vantage. Specie,  the  national  currency  in  France,  allows 
labour  a  competition  with  commerce,  in  fixing  prices ;  but 
paper  currency  or  credit,  guided  by  the  spirit  of  monopoly 
in  England,  enables  commerce  to  settle  the  prices  of  labour. 
Commerce  and  productive  labour  are  dealers  ;  with  a  na- 
tional currency  they  bargain  on  equal  terms  ;  with  a  cor- 
poration currency,  governed  by  commerce,  on  unequal. 
Hence  the  price  of  labour  being  higher  in  France  than  in 
England,  France  shuts  her  ports  against  English  manufac- 
tures. Yet  English  credit  or  paper,  far  exceeds  French 
coin  ;  therefore  less  coin  gives  better  prices,  than  more 
credit  or  paper,  If  France  and  England  should  exchange 
situation^  the  prices  of  home  labour  would  be  raised  in 
England  by  a  less  amount  of  national  currency ;  because 
it  would  consist  of  specie,  and  force  commerce  to  deal  with 
labour  on  equal  terms,-  and  in  France,  these  prices  would 
be  depressed,  by  a  greater  amount  of  national  currency,  be- 
cause it  would  consist  of  corporation  paper,  and  enable 
monopoly  to  regulate  the  prices  between  labour  and  com* 
mcrce. 


BANKING.  *17 

A  circulating  medium,  measured  out  to  a  nation  by  cor- 
porations, or  even  by  the  commercial  interest,will  certainly 
enrich  and  strengthen  the  measuring  interest,  but  is  there  a 
single  circumstance  tending  towards  publick  happiness  or  vir- 
tue, in  this  effect  ?  The  acute  bishop  Tillolson  has  said,  «« If 
the  appearance  of  any  thing  be  good  for  any  thing,  the  reali- 
ty must  be  better."  The  appearance  of  virtue  may  be  use- 
ful to  the  guilty :  but  it  is  less  useful  than  virtue  itself,  and 
is  frequently  a  snare  to  others.  The  appearance  of  money 
may  be  used  to  tranfer  property,  like  the  appearance  of  vir- 
tue ;  and  to  an  interest  which  monopolizes  this  appearance, 
it  may  be,  according  to  Lord  Sheffield,  more  beneiiciul  in  a 
pecuniary  view,  than  the  reality  ;  but  to  a  nation,  the  mo- 
ney itself,  or  a  national  currency,  will,  in  conformity  to 
Tillotson's  maxim,  be  better  than  creditor  an  appearance  of 
money. 

The  design  and  nature  of  mom  v  or  currency,  confirms 
the  superiority  of  coin  to  credit.     Money  is  not  intended  to 
create  wealth,  or  the  objects  of  commerce  ;  nor  is  it  able  to 
do  either.  Its  office  is  to  represent  and  exchange  them.  Such 
being  the  limited  power  of  specie,  paper,  its  shadow,  cannot 
do  more.     Specie  can  transfer  wealth  from  one  country  to 
another,     If  the  United  States  could  at  pleasure  create  spe- 
cie, they  might,  by  a  prudent  use  of  such  a  monopoly,  enrieh 
themselves  considerably  at  the  expense  of  the  world,     It  is 
not  the  office  of  paper  currency  to  transfer  wealth  from  one 
nation  to  another,  because  of  its  locality;    but  to  transfer 
wealth  from  man  to  man,  or  from  a  nation  to  a  corporation. 
Its  design  is  to  enable  individuals  to  imitate  nations,  in  the 
science  of  overreaching.     So  long  as  it  represents  wealth, 
corporations,  able  to  create  it,   can  more  effectually  draw 
wealth  from  the  rest  of  a  nation,  by  its  means,  than  one  na- 
tion could  from  others,  by  a  power  to  create  specie  j    be- 
cause it   can   transfer  land  from  man  to   man,  whereae 
specie  can  only  transfer  moveable  wealth  from  nation   to 
nation.      Paper  money  or  credit,   within  the  sphere  of  its 
currency,  is  more  able  to  transfer  property,    than  specie, 


HiS  BANKING. 

within  the  sphere  of  commerce.  A  chartered  power  of  creat- 
ing it  will  therefore  be  used,  as  would  be  an  exclusive  na- 
tional power  of  creating  coin. 

If  a  paper  currency  increased  the  price  of  exports,  Eng- 
land could  not  export.      This  idea  is  repeated  for  the  sake 
of  examining  a  difficulty  which  it  suggests.     Although  the 
price  of  English  exportable  labour  is  kept  lower  than  the 
exportable  labour  of  other  countries,  by  the  means  to  which 
the  United  States  have  resorted,  to  raise  the  price  of  their 
exportable  labour;    how  happens  it  that  England  must 
moreover  resort  to  war  and  fleets  to  force  her  commerce, 
and  that  she  shrunk  from  a  competition  with  the  U.  States, 
even  when  our  currency   was  specie,  and  the  price  of  our 
labour  higher?  The  fact  shews,  that  a  nation,  after  having 
submitted  to  the  evil  and  injustice  of  diminishing  the  price 
of  its  own  labour,  by  a  paper  currency,  was  yet  unable  to 
rival  a  country  without  a  paper  currency,  and  where   the 
price  of  labour  was  higher  ;    and  therefore  that  its  com- 
merce was  in  some  way  injured  by  the  monopoly  prescribed 
for  its  benefit.  The  solution  of  this  enigma  requires  a  know- 
ledge of  English  commerce,  the  want  of  which  confines  me  to 
surmise.     Foreign  nations  and  colonies,   would  as  probably 
take  advantage  of  the  low  price  of  labour  in  England,  as  her 
capitalist  or  commercial  interest  does,  if  they  could  enter  into 
n  competition  with  that  interest.   This  is  prevented  by  a  na- 
vigation act,  contrived  to  secure  the  benefit  of  the  low  price 
of  labour,  to  an  order  of  citizens  ;    and  to  exclude  foreign 
participation.      And  the  spirit  of  monopoly,    which  levelled 
this  instrument  against  home  labour,  levels  it  also  against 
the  world,   to  enhance  the  value  of  exportable  commodities, 
after  they  have  passed  from  the  workman  to  the  capitalist 

or  merchant. 

But  the  fact,  without  any  explanation,  suffices  for  our  ar- 
gument. It  proves,  that  bank  currency  will  have  the  effect 
;>f  diminishing  the  price  of  exportable  labour  to  the  work- 
man, and  that  it  must  be  raised  in  favour  of  the  merchant. 
by  the  means  used  in  England,  namely,  war,  fleets  and  na  ■ 
igation  laws. 


BANKING.  o<'h9 

It  is  as  a  general  position  true,  that  the  interest  of  com- 
merce and  agriculture  are  the  same  ;  and  we  are  seduced 
by  the  truth  of  this  maxim,  to  neglect  an  examination  of 
our  subject ;  concluding,  from  the  great  opulence  evidently 
drawn  fpom  corporation  currency  by  commercial  individuals, 
that  agriculture  must  be  correspondency  enriched.  The 
real  opulence  bestowed  by  banking  on  one  interest  or  one 
place,  we  see  with  the  eye  of  the  body  ;  the  supposed  opu- 
lence bestowed  on  the  other,  we  imagine  is  to  be  seen  by  the 
eye  of  the  mind,    through  the  minor  of  a  general  maxim. 

The  maxim  might  be  greatly  extended.  All  human  in- 
terests are  the  same.  Nothing  which  is  vicious  or  wrong; 
can  be  really  beneficial  to  any.  The  interest  of  govern- 
ments and  nations  is  the  same.  Yet  tyranny,  mischievous 
as  it  is  to  both,  is  common.  False  and  factitious  interests, 
are  eternally  seducing  men  from  true  and  natural  interests  ; 
and  alliances,  intended  by  nature,  are  often  broken  by  law. 
A  monopoly  of  commerce,  or  of  a  branch  of  commerce, 
would  enrich  the  monopolist,  but  injure  the  agriculture  or 
manufacture,  which  supplied  the  commodity.  A  monopoly 
of  commerce  before  the  revolution,  enriched  Britain;  the 
merchant  of  America  ;  but  it  was  injurious  to  our  agricul- 
ture. To  bestow  opulence  upon  an  American  city  by  a  com- 
mercial or  paper  monopoly,  would  he  nearly  as  oppressive 
to  agriculture,  as  to  bestow  it  by  the  same  means  on  (alas- 
gow.  Washington  might  be  enriched  by  settling  there  a 
vast  stock  income,  or  sinecure  offices  to  an  equal  amount ; 
but  would  this  enrich  the  nation  ?  And  if  commerce  an« 
agriculture  may  commit  hostilities  against  each  other,  it 
would  be  still  more  erroneous  to  cover  a  monopoly  of  na 
tional  currency,  by  a  maxim,  which  only  supposes  that  cod 
merce  and  agriculture  have  the  same  interest,  whilst  the 
pursue  their  true  interest. 

Agriculture,  formed  into  an  arisloaraev  by  the   fetuh 
system,  being  guided  by  a  false  interest,  became  infinitely 
less  beneficial  to  commerce,  than  it  would  have  been,  linii 
feieneed  by  the  .spirit  of  monopoly  ;  and  commerce 


S5©  BANKING. 

into  a  paper  aristocracy,  will  thence  also  become  less  be. 
neficial  to  agriculture,  because  it  will  be  influenced  by  the 
same  spirit.  That  it  ean  breathe  its  pernicious  errours  into 
the  one,  wide  as  it  is  spread,  is  evinced  by  its  capacity  to 
corrupt  the  other,  which  spreads  wider;  unless  the  mono- 
poly of  national  currency,  is  an  organ  of  political  respiration, 
less  powerful  than  feudal  monopoly.  A  close  affinity  is  per- 
ceivable between  the  operations  of  a  feudal  and  paper  aristo- 
cracy ;  and  if  commerce  could  justly  complain  of  the  one, 
agriculture  must  suffer  by  the  other.  Labour  needs  land  to 
produce,  and  money  to  transfer  agricultural  products.  A 
monopoly  of  the  necessity,  land,  or  a  monopoly  of  the  ne- 
cessity, money,  are  equivalent  modes  of  extorting  from  la- 
bour, A  vassalage,  inflicted  by  means  of  the  necessity,  mo- 
ney is  not  more  voluntary  than  a  vassalage  inflicted  by  means 
of  the  necessity,  land.  Borrowing  is  as  unavoidable,  as 
leasing  for  rent  or  services.  The  collection  of  the  interest 
or  dividends  by  a  stock  aristocracy,  is  as  certain  as  the  col- 
lection of  rents  and  services  by  a  feudal:  and  the  superiori- 
ty of  one  over  the  other,  for  effecting  the  end  of  every 
aristocracy,  rests  upon  the  superiority  of  the  sum  collected, 
This  estimate  is  left  to  the  reader. 

We  will  proceed  to  another.  As  we  all  know  that  a  re 
galar  influx  of  wealth,  from  a  majority  to  a  minority,  is 
a  regular  influx  of  power,  the  United  States  ought  to  esti- 
mate the  quantity  of  each,  they  are  pouring  into  a  bank- 
ing interest.  If  no  new  banks  should  be  created  after  180S, 
nor  the  acquisitions  of  the  old  increased,  the  five  millions 
annually  collected  by  the  existing  banks,  at  compound  inte- 
rest, carry  from  the  publick  to  the  corporations,  in  twenty 
years,  above  one  hundred  and  eighty-four  millions  of  dol- 
lars. Here  is  already  a  vast  current  of  money  and  power 
running  one  way ;  will  those  check  it  in  whose  favour  the 
current  sets  ?  Are  the  receivers,  as  regulators  of  power  and 
wealth,  of  undoubted  confluence  ? 

In  the  same  twenty  years,  the  United  States  lose  the  use 
of  fifty  millions  of  specie,  or  national  currency,  expelled  or 


BANKING.  331 

locked  upas  bank  stock,  to  create  a  demand  for  bank  paper* 
At  compound  interest,  (specie  being  equal  in  value  to  bank 
paper)  this  use  is  worth  above  one  hundred  and  ten  mil- 
lions, exclusive  of  the  sum  exported.  Thus,  by  being  de- 
prived of  its  specie,  for  which  it  paid  nothing,  and  supplied 
with  paper  at  the  price  it  costs,  the  difference  to  the  nations 
in  the  present  state  of  things,  will  amount  in  the  next  twen- 
ty years,  to  near  three  hundred  millions  of  dollars. 

If  stock  should  cease  to  accumulate,  such  will  be  its  ope- 
ration ;  but  as  history,  both  here  and  in  England,  ascertains 
its  fertility  in  devices  for  it9  own  increase,  our  calculation  is 
probably  too  low.  Let  us  however  fix  the  amount  at  three 
hundred  millions.  The  reader  will  recollect,  that  in  treating 
of  debt  stock,  we  endeavoured  to  shew,  that  its  interest  was 
equivalent  to  the  rent  of  land,  and  that  to  borrow  was 
to  sell.  In  that  case,  the  nation  is  supposed  to  receive  a 
price  for  itself  or  its  land  ;  in  this,  it  pays  the  rent,  inte- 
rest or  dividend,  but  receives  no  price.  And  it  enhances  the 
price  of  bank  stock,  for  which  it  receives  nothing,  by  sub- 
jecting itself  to  pay  double  the  interest  paid  for  debt  stock. 

That  a  banking  system  does  amount  in  several  views  to  a 
national  sale  of  itself,  the  history  of  its  infancy  here,  furnish- 
es strong  apprehensions.  Church  stock,  and  feudal  stock, 
formed  parties,  which  trafficked  in  publick  rights  j  and  par- 
ties have  grown  up  with  paper  stock  here.  It  has  been  said 
in  the  publick  prints,  that  banks  have  already  become  in- 
struments for  influencing  election,  and  that  the  Manhattan 
bank  could  have  defeated  Mr.  Jefferson's.  If  one  bank 
could  deprive  the  publick  of  any  degree  of  patriotism  and  ta- 
lents, the  whole  system  couM  expose  it  to  any  degree  of  vice 
and  ignorance.  Whilst  I  am  writing,  prices  are  offered  to  le- 
gislators for  charters.  What  can  be  sold  for  these  prices,  ex- 
cept the  people  ?  What  else  have  legislators  to  sell  ?  It  is 
admitted,  however,  that  it  is  as  well  to  sell  them,  as  to  bes- 
tow them  gratuitously. 

In  Rhode-Island,  bank  stock,  to  the  amount  of  four  mil- 
lions, is  said  to  have  been  created.      She  has  near  seventy 


352  BANKING. 

thousand  people.  Allowing  her  eighteen  thousand  actual la- 
bourers,  arid  her  stock  to  collect  in  expenses,  perquisites 
and  dividends^ten  per  centum,  her  labour  pays  a  capitation 
tax  of  above  twenty  two  dollars  annually  to  banks.  If  the 
union  contains  six  millions  of  people,  it  can  bear,  by  the 
ratio  of  Rhode-Island,  four  hundred  and  twenty  millions  of 
bank  stock,  which  would  inflict  upon  the  people  an  annual 
tax  of  forty-two  millions.  There  is  nothing  extravagant  in 
this  calculation  ;  England  has  far  outstrip!  it  in  stock  ac- 
cumulation ;  Rhode-Island  has  already  realized  it. 

If  the  stock  interest  in  Rhode-Island,  draws  more  nett 
profit  from  banking,  than  the  Virginia  masters  do  from 
eighteen  thousand  Negro  slaves,  banking  approaches  in  sub- 
stance to  a  mode  of  selling  freemen.  Arthur  Young  calcu 
lates  the  profit  of  English  West-India  slaves,  at  five  pounds 
each.  The  banking  mode  of  converting  the  labour  of  one 
to  the  use  of  another,   is  more  profitable  than  this  personal 

slavery. 

We  cannot  omit  here  to  remark  a  difference  between  the 
pecuniary  interest  of  wealthy  classes.  Where  monicd  capi- 
tal or  stock  constitutes  wealth,  its  interest  points  to  land  and 
labour,  as  the  only  objects  able  to  satisfy  its  purpose  and 
trade  ;  but  where  land  and  labour  constitute  it,  income  and 
accumulation  can  only  be  drawn  out  of  itself  by  the  crea- 
tions of  industry  ;  for  the  utmost  oppression  of  real  over 
factitious  wealth,  is  limited  to  a  forbearance  of  its  own 
bounty.  This  suggests  a  question  of  worldly  wisdom.  It 
is  left  to  the  reader  to  decide  which  is  the  dupe.  The  stock 
interest,  in  supposing  that  it  enriches  itself  by  banking,  at 
the  expense  of  land  and  labour;  or  the  land  and  labour  in- 
terest, in  supposing  that  banking  will  enrich  that.  One  is  in- 
evitably mistaken. 

The  efficacy  of  stock,  as  a  mode  by  which  governments 
sell  or  give  nations  to  minorities,  of  which  they  may  consti- 
tute a  portion  themselves,  is  capable  of  arithmetical  certain- 
ty. A  debt  of  four  hundred  and  twenty  millions  sterling, 
covers  twelve  millions  of  people  at  thirty-five  pounds  ster- 


BANKING,  353 

Sing  a  head.  This  is  about  the  average  value  of  all  the  peo- 
ple in  Britain,  including  every  age  and  sex,  considered  as 
personal  slaves.  Britain  owes  several  hundred  millions  of 
debt  stock,  beyond  this  sum,  and  nearly  as  much  more  to 
banks  of  all  descriptions,  besides  her  East-India  debt.  Ire- 
land has  an  equivalent  debt  of  her  own.  This  valuation  is 
regulated  by  the  value  of  the  West-India  slaves  ;  but  as  the 
people  of  Britain  supply  a  double  capitation  income  to  stock- 
holders, a  better  mode  is  disclosed  of  making  some  men  pro- 
fitable to  others,  than  the  West-Indian.  This  enormous 
mass  of  stock  for  transferring  the  profit  of  labour  to  idle- 
ness, has  been  compiled  with  about  twenty  millions  of  specie; 
evincing,  that  governments  can  make  stock  out  of  stock, 
and  that  debt  stock,  like  bank  stock,  is  capable  of  being  inde- 
finitely multiplied  without  money.  It  has  been  often  said, 
that  poor  labouring  people  in  Europe,  encounter  more  pen- 
ury and  distress  than  the  Negro  slaves  in  the  United  States. 
The  profit  extorted  from  the  Negro  slave  is  moderated  by 
the  immediate  interest  of  his  master  in  his  existence.  It 
is  moderated  by  the  master's  benevolence,  and  by  his  res- 
pect for  his  own  reputation.  But  the  slave  of  stock  en- 
joys none  of  these  ameliorations  ;  and  therefore  it  is  not  sur- 
prising that  he  should  be  more  miserable  than  the  personal 
slave.  The  several  descriptions  of  stock  in  Britain  alrea- 
dy require  a  far  greater  profit  from  the  people,  than  cam 
be  paid  by  twelve  millions  of  personal  slaves.  The  pay- 
ing  class,  is  also  diminished  by  the  receiving  and  unproduc- 
tive classes.  Excessive  labour,  poor-houses,  penury,  pri- 
sons, famine,  crimes,  must  follow.  Let  not  the  advocate  for 
enslaving  freemen  by  means  of  stock,  venture  to  compare 
his  system  with  personal  slavery.  It  will  be  found  that  indi- 
rect slavery,  like  indirect  taxation,  is  capable  of  being  car- 
ried to  greater  excess  than  direct. 

It  is  proper  to  examine  arithmetically  also,  the  progress 
of  stock  in  America.  Our  supposed  fifty  millions  of  bank 
stock,  being  a  sum  beyond  the  deposited  and  existing  coin, 
fixes  the  capacity  of  our  stock  like  the  English  ;   to  multi- 

4(5 


15*  HANKING. 

ply  itself  without  specie.  It  circulates,  we  will  suppose, 
eighty  millions  of  paper,  costing  the  country  above  six  per 
centum ;  adding  these  eighty  millions  to  as  much  debt  stock 
supposed  to  exist,  and  the  grapples  of  stock  to  about  thirty- 
two  dollars  a  head,  appear  already  to  be  thrown  over  us. 
Shall  we  disentangle  ourselves  from  them  whilst  we  have  it 
in  our  power,  or  defer  the  effort,  until  we  are  irretrievably 
entangled  in  the  intricacies  of  indirect  slavery?  A  slavery, 
In  which  the  sufferer  is  ignorant  of  his  tyrant,  and  the 
tyrant  is  remorseless,  because  he  is  unconscious  of  hie 
crime. 

By  bank  stock,  unless  all  our  reasonings  are  erroneous, 
and  our  examples  inapplicable,  a  government  may  subject  a 
nation  to  the  payment  of  a  capitation  profit,  to  those  to  whom 
it  shall  be  conveyed  by  charter,  exceeding  any  profit  extract- 
ed from  personal  slaves  ;  and  political  principles  may  be 
corrupted.  Are  there  any  greater  temporal  calamities  ? 
Are  there  any  temporal  blessings  capable  of  balancing 
them?  Weigh  the  terrifiek  duumvirate,  oppressive  taxa- 
tion and  a  corrupt  government,  against  the  benefit  proposed 
by  banking.  All  it  proposes,  its  total  advantage,  lies  in  the 
simple  space  of  substituting  some  millions  of  bask  currency, 
for  some  millions  of  specie  currency. 

We  have  endeavoured  already  to  prove,  that  the  substi- 
tution is  an  evil,  supposing  it  to  eost  the  nation  neither  mo- 
ney nor  principles ;  if  we  have  failed,  it  may  yet  be  an  evil, 
on  account  of  the  loss  of  money  and  principles  it  requires. 
We  will  add  several  observations  upon  these  points. 

The  freedom  of  our  commerce,  and  the  tendency  of  mo- 
ney to  find  a  level  in  the  commercial  world,  furnishes  a  well 
founded  belief,  that  specie  had  arrived,  or  was  hastening 
from  all  parts  of  the  commercial  world,  to  render  us  all  the 
commercial  services  capable  of  being  rendered  by  money, 
when  banking  cheeked  its  career. 

The  sudden  diminution  of  specie  upon  this  event,  is  an 
evidence  that  we  had  enough  for  our  wants.     Hao.  we  need 
m!  more  currency,  spe?"?  would  have  continued  in  circulation 


BANKING.  3$fitB 

with  bank  currency.  But  that  currency,  by  producing  a 
redundancy  of  circulating  medium,  became  an  ostracism 
against  the  innocent  and  patriotick  specie. 

It  follows  that  bank  paper  is  an  operative  agent  in  the 
adjustment  of  the  level  of  specie,  throughout  the  commer- 
cial world,  though  local  itself;  because  the  specie  it  banish- 
es from  one  country,  goes  off  to  another.  Hence  a  country, 
by  confining  her  currency  to  specie;  will  receive  remittan- 
ces in  coin  from  all  others  resorting  to  bank  currency;  by 
resorting  to  it,  the  same  country  sends  such  remittances  to 
other  countries  in  coin  also.  Banking  therefore  effects  two 
ends  completely  :  it  enriches  other  countries  by  the  expul- 
sion of  specie ;  and  it  enriches  stockholders  by  the  price 
paid  for  their  paper,  to  supply  the  place  of  the  expelled 
specie.  Do  we  incur  the  first  misfortune,  for  the  sake  of 
the    second  ? 

The  disappearance  of  specie,  ascertains  that  its  quantity 
sufficed  to  render  every  commercial  service  which  curren- 
cy can  render*  and  no  amount  can  render  more  service  than 
•i  sufficient  amount.  But  though  no  amount  of  currency, 
can  perform  services  for  a  nation,  beyond  the  national  de- 
mand for  such  services,  yet  an  artificial  bank  currency  may 
be  thrown  into  circulation,  capable  of  taxing,  but  incapable 
of  serving  a  nation.  Supposing  that  fifty  millions  of  specie 
have  been  taken  out  of  circulation  by  banking,  and  that  this 
sum  sufficed  to  meet  all  our  demands  for  a  currency,  we  now 
give  five  millions  annually  to  get  too  much  of  that,  of  which 
we  had  enough  for  nothing;  and  with  which  we  were  re 
gularly  supplied,  by  the  equalising  nature  of  universal  cur- 
rency ;  just  as  Virginia,  by  an  utter  exclusion  of  paper, 
would  have  hecn  supplied  with  specie.  The  single  quality 
of  universal  currency,  possessed  by  bank  paper,  consists  of 
a  detrimental  capacity  to  expel  specie,  whilst  it  is  unable  to 
go  abroad  itself,  to  remove  the  evils  arising  from  a  redun- 
dant currency.  Of  these  qualities,  a  state  of  the  Union,  or 
the  whole  Union,  may  avaiHtself,  as  a  means  of  turning  the 
paper  systems  of  other  states,  or  *f  the  commercial  world* 


356  BANKING* 

to  advantage.  Tlieir  influence  in  adjusting  the  distribution 
of  money,  would  insure  to  the  forbearing  country  its  allot- 
ineit  in  specie,  whilst  the  inability  of  paper  currency  to  fly 
abroad,  condemns  the  banking  country  to  the  two  evils  of  a 
redundancy  of  currency,  and  of  receiving  its  allotment  in  lo- 
cal paper  purchased  by  an  annual  tax. 

It  would  be  endless  to  enumerate  all  the  effects  of 
this  condemnation  ;  a  few,  serving  to  illustrate  the  scope 
of  our  reasoning,  and  t!ie  imbecility  of  all  attempts  to  pre- 
vent the  natural  flux  and  rcllux  of  specie,  cannot  be 
omitted. 

There  is  certainly  a  measure,  beyond  which  a  nation, 
cannot  be  benefitted  by  money.  Its  redundancy  being  an 
evil,  the  political  or  commercial  body  instinctively  labours 
to  expel  it,  as  the  natural  body  does  a  disease.  But  if  a  na- 
tion entrusts  to  a  college  of  political  doctors,  the  power  of 
dosing  it  with  money,  whilst  they  are  enriched  in  proportion 
to  the  physick  they  administer,  their  fees  will  be  their  guide* 
and  not  the  health  of  the  patient.  A  redundancy  of  local 
currency,  produced  by  doctors  hired  to  keep  it  up,  can 
not  be  disgorged  by  the  efforts  of  nature  struggling  for 
health. 

Money  (like  prices,  trades  ami  manufactures)  regulate? 
itself  better  than  it  can  be  regulated  by  the  doctors,  despot- 
ism, monopoly  or  banking.  A  regulation  of  money,  is  al- 
ways a  regulation  of  prices,  and  an  interposition  by  law,  in 
the  economy  oF  individuals.  It  covers  effort  and  competi- 
tion in  every  shape,  and  combines  in  a  mass  the  several  evils 
which  would  flow  from  distinct  legal  prices,  for  each  sepa- 
rate object  of  human  industry.  Such  an  interposition  with 
a  single  article  of  industry,  has  invariably  terminated  in 
mischief-  it  is  therefore  probable,  that  the  power  of  mea- 
suring out  currency,  placed  in  corporations,  which  is  an  in- 
terposition with  all  prices,  and  all  objects  of  human  indus- 
try, will  not  produce  good. 

A  providential  scarcity  of  the  metals,  devoted  to  become 
the  medium  of  commerce,  prevents  the  evils  of  pecuniar}' 


BANKING.  SB7 

redundancy*  and  this  utility  is  destroyed  by  an  unlimited' 
power  of  multiplying  paper  currency^  Overflowing  mines 
of  these  precious  metals,  wouhl  destroy  their  utility  as  a 
medium  of  exchange  ;  and  confined  to  one  nation,  would  di- 
minish rather  than  increase  its  happiness.  Paper  money 
enables  avarice  to  inflict  the.  misery  of  this  redundancy* 
Whilst  not  even  the  refuge  of  forging  it  into  "doughs  ha  res  is 
left  to  the  nation.  Corporations  are  solicited  by  the  most 
fascinating  orator  to  deluge  a  nation  with  a  flood  of  curren- 
cy, no  part  of  which  is  subject  to  be  drained  off  by  the  ebb 
natural  to  specie.  Is  that  commerce  fiee,  the  currency  of 
which  is  regulated  by  a  corporation  ? 

It  is  because  no  single  government  is  able  to  regulate 
universal  currency,  that  it  cannot  raise  the  value  of  exporta- 
ble by  local  currency.  It  is,  however,  able  to  diminish  the 
profit  of  this  labour,  by  quartering  upon  it  the  dividends  of 
this  local  currency,  as  «e  have  endeavoured  to  prove.  Sup- 
posing that  it  may  also  produce  the  effect,  insisted  on  for  its 
defence,  namely,  that  of  enhancing  local  prices  or  home 
subsistence  ;  it  then  combines  the  two  operations,  of  dimi- 
nishing the  value  of  exportable  labour  to  the  labourer,  and 
of  entrancing  his  expenses. 

An  effect,  extremely  similar  to  this,  is  produced  in 
England  by  paper  currency  and  excises.  The  first  keeps 
down  in  a  degree  the  prices  of  exportable  labour  or  ma- 
nufactures, and  the  second  enhances  the  expenses  of  sub- 
sistence. A  redundancy  of  bank  paper  here,  which  shall 
enhance  expenses,  operates  as  excises  do  in  England,  except 
that  the  excise  there  goes  to  the  government,  and  here  to 
corpocationsb 

And  a  consequence  of  placing  the  exportable  labour  of 
that  country,  under  the  regimen  of  a  currency  regulated  by 
a  corporation,  illustrates  both  the  mischief  of  such  a  power, 
and  our  whole  scope  of  reasoning,  by  a  very  striking  fact. 
It  is  by  this  means  deprived  of  a  share  in  the  government. 
The  manufacturers  are  subject  to  capitalists,  and  regulat- 
ed for  their  benefit.      We  have  endeavoured  to  prove,  that 


368  BANKING. 

the  paper  system  would  impoverish  the  agricultural  interest, 
■which  produces  our  exportable  labour,  worm  it  out  of  the 
government,  and  reduce  it  to  subjection.  Let  the  fate  of 
the  English  manufacturers,  from  a  paper  regimen,  point  to 
our  agricultural  fate,  under  a  similar  regimen.  Let  their 
fate  also  display  the  ju3tiee  dispensed  by  a  power  to  regu- 
late currency.  It  is  the  justice  invariably  dispensed  under 
the  seduction  of  avarice.  But  seduction  is  unnecessary  to 
produce  an  adherence  to  one's  own  interest.  A  power  tc 
regulate  currency  for  the  agricultural,  or  manufactural  in- 
terest, and  to  enrich  itself  thereby,  will  rapidly  acquire  the 
weapon  which  governs  i\ic  world.  In  pursuance  of  its  se- 
parate interest,  it  has  usurped  the  government  in  England, 
under  the  name  of  the  monied  interest :  reader,  which  is  the 
preferable  substitute  for  our  constitutional  policy,  the  Em- 
perour  of  Fiance,  or  the  monied  interest  of  England  ? 

The  power  of  substituting  a  factitious  local  currency, 
for  one  naturally  universal,  is  a  handle,  stronger  than  that 
of  superstition,  with  which  to  manage  nations.  Allegiance 
to  the  faction,  is  secured  by  the  fear  oflosing  this  artificial 
money.  Specie  is  independent  of  a  faction,  and  able  to  be- 
come a  patriot,  It  can  attend  us  in  our  flight  from  tyranny, 
and  travel  over  the  world,  to  feed,  clothe  and  arm  patriots  j 
hut  paper  chains  to  the  sod,  and  remains  at  home  to  tax  for 
party  or  corporation  benefit,  and  not  to  cherish  liberty-  But 
let  us  leave  the  goddess  to  take  care  of  herself,  and  look  a 
little  farther  after  our  money.  Although  we  have  seen  sepa- 
rate interests  enslaving  nations  from  the  beginning  of  the 
world,  it  is  still  a  very  difficult  thing  to  make  mankind  be- 
lieve, that  corporations  for  gathering  money,  do  really  take 
that  which  they  were  instituted  to  take.  They  are  now  con- 
vinced, that  the  separate  interests  of  superstition  and  title, 
had  their  money  in  view,  under  other  pretences  5  and  to  save 
it,  have  expelled  them.  But  they  will  not  believe,  that  a 
pecuniary  order,  which  avows  the  design,  denied  by  these 
detected  orders,  is  in  earnest.  No,  this  order,  unlike  others, 
intends  to  enrich  nations,  not  itself.  Let  us  count  these 
riehes  in  other  modes. 


BANKING.  „       359 


Supposing  about  fifty  millions  of  stock  to  exist  in  the 
United  States,  and  that  about  eighty  millions  of  bank  cur- 
rency are  circulated,  it  follows,  as  before  observed,  that  the 
nation  pays  at  least  five  millions  annually  for  the  bank  cur- 
rency, and  loses  the  use  of  fifty  millions  specie,  worth  an- 
nually three  millions  more. 

These  eight  millions  are  annually  paid  by  the  nation,  to 
gain  thirty  millions  currency,  more  than  it  set  out  with. 
The  price  paid  for  this  additional  currency  amounts  to  about 
twenty-seven  per  centum  per  annum.  Which  is  the  better 
policy  ;  to  give  eight  per  centum  for  money,  for  the  purpose 
of  attacking  France  or  England ;  or  twenty-seven,  to  raise 
up  a  separate  interest  to  attack  our  form  of  government  ? 

But  if  the  fifty  millions  specie  performed  more  useful 
services  than  the  eighty  millions  bank  currency,  the  compu- 
tation settles  in  the  fact,  that  we  pay  a  difference  of  five  mil- 
lions annually  in  favour  of  an  evil.  This  is  an  errour  still 
more  egregious.  It  is  taking  up  sorrow  upon  interest.  A 
nation  which  can  count,  will  see  that  direct  pecuniary  or- 
ders operate  as  their  indirect  predecessors  have  done. 

Our  calculation  goes  upon  the  favorable  ground  for 
banking,  that  the  stock  is  in  specie,  ready  to  meet  the  notes* 
or  to  come  forth  upon  a  national  emergency  ;  but  if  this 
stock  was  never  real,  or  if  the  specie  is  banished  by  a  re- 
dancy  of  currency,  so  as  gradually  to  reduce  the  supposed 
specie  stock  to  paper  credit  ,•  the  total  loss  of  so  much  coin, 
and  the  possible  misfortunes  which  may  arise  from  an  ina- 
bility to  meet  the  debts  of  banking  by  real  money,  would 
constitute  no  inconsiderable  items  of  additional  evil  bought 
by  the  nation. 

The  evils  bought  with  debt  stock,  have  been  often  com- 
pared to  those  obtained  by  banking.  Compare  also  the 
riches  they  bestow  on  a  nation.  One  does  not  expel  specie, 
the  other  does.  One  collects  five  or  six  per  centum  interest, 
the  other  ten  or  twelve  per  centum  charges  and  dividends. 
Ah  !  but  these  dividends  costs  nobody  a  farthing.  Well ! 
let  us  call  the  interest  of  national  debt  a  dividend;  and  the 
debt  is  no  more. 


460  MANTLING. 

Their  political  and  physical  similitude,  breaks  in  upon 
us  at  every  step,  abstractedly  or  experimentally  considered. 
Funded  stock,  when  proposed  for  national  consideration, 
was  announced  as  a  blessing  ;  this  blessing  was  said  to  be 
comprised  in  its  increase  of  capital  and  industry.  The  same 
mantle,  stript  by  publick  sagacity,  from  funded  stock,  has 
been  with  wonderful  ingenuity,  thrown  over  bank  stock. 
That  also  is  gravely  announced  by  its  inventors  as  a  publick 
blessing  ;  and  why  ?  It  will  increase  capital  and  industry. 
The  United  States  detected  the  shallow  artifice  under  which 
the  designs  of  funded  stock  were  hidden,  because  it  was 
moreover  defended  by  pretexts,  said  to  be  necessities  ;  they 
cannot  see  the  same  artifice  spread  over  the  designs  of  bank 
stock,  because  it  has  no  auxiliary ;  or  because  we  some- 
times search  in  vain  for  that  which,  lies  directly  before  our 
eves. 

mi 

This  common  and  solitary  refuge  of  our  twin  namesakes, 
is  simply  that  of  all  orders  enriched  by  law  and  oppression. 
"It is  their  opulence,"  say  they,  "  which  gives  employment 
to  labour  and  excites  industry."  Thus  have  all  such  or- 
ders concealed  the  wealth  they  extract,  and  the  poverty  they 
mflict.  As  a  justification  of  banking  also,  this  old  mode  of 
concealment  requires  attention. 

Does  banking  increase  capital  ?  It  does,  if  real  capital  is 
increased,  by  increasing  paper  currency  ;  but  if  paper  cur- 
rency can  at  most  be  considered  as  capital,  when  balanced 
by  property  and  labour,  an  additional  quantity  can  no  more 
increase  capital,  than  blowing  up  poor  mutton  can  increase 
meat.  A  redundancy  of  specie  would  not  forma  stationary 
capital.  As  birds  of  passage  travel  in  search  of  food, 
specie  travels  in  s  arch  of  the  real  capital  it  represents  ;  and 
if  the  food  or  employment  is  insufficient  for  cither  concourse, 
the  overplus  flies  away.  If  specie  could  create  capital,  it 
would  find  stationary  employment  every  where  From  these 
facts  we  infer,  that  money  is  not  capital,  but  the  representa- 
tive of  capital ;  and  that  it  is  inverting  the  true  and  genuine 
relation  between  capital  and  money,  to  suppose  that  money 


BACKING.  S0£ 

produces  national  capital,  instead  of  national  capital  produc* 
ing   money.      The  value  of  labour  is    real  capital.      If 
a  nation  had  an  hundred  millions  of  money,  hut  did  not  la- 
bour, it  would  presently  be  without  capital ;    but  if  its  la- 
bour was  worth  five  millions  annually,  though  it  had  no  mo- 
ney, it  would  have  an  hundred  millions  of  capital,   which 
would  soon  attract  money.      The  introduction  of  bank  pa- 
per i9  uniformly  the  epoch  from  which  the  diminution  of 
specie  is  dated.     If  specie  therefore  is  capital,  bank  paper 
diminishes  capital ;  if  not,  neither  can  its  representative  be 
capital.    Jt  is  by  real  capital,  that  specie  is  equalised  among 
commercial  nations.     As  a  representative,  it  is  subordinate 
and  responsible  to  its  principal.      Bank  paper  cannot  pos- 
sess an  intrinsick  value,  if  the  value  of  specie  is  representa- 
tive ;    therefore  it  cannot  increase  capital  ;  and  a  surplus, 
beyond  a  necessary  currency,  far  from  falling  within  any 
idea  of  the  term  capital,  can  only  exist  by  feeding  on  capi- 
tal, the  principal  of  currency.     If  bank  paper  was  new  capi- 
tal,  so  far  from  expelling  the  representative  of  the  old,  it 
would  require  more  representation,  and  attract  specie.    Ov 
if,  like  specie,  it  was  the  responsible  representative  of  capi- 
tal or  property,  it  would  be  subordinate  to  its  principal.  On 
the  contrary,  it  is  made  bylaw,  an  irresponsible  representa- 
tive of  capital  or  property  ;    and  a  currency  converted  from 
the  servant  into  the  master  of  property,  necessarily  becomes 
a  tyrant,  to  secure  its  power, 

The  advocates  of  banking  admit  this  doctrine,  by  con- 
tending that  it  is  beneficial  to  a  nation  to  expel  specie  by 
paper ;  as  it  causes  an  exchange  of  the  representative  of  ca- 
pital, for  the  thing  itself.  If  the  capital,  thus  gotten  from 
foreign  nations,  by  the  expelled  specie,  would  produce  a 
permanent  profit,  superior  to  the  annual  cost  of  the  sub- 
stituted paper,  this  would  be  true;  but  the  difficulty  of  dis- 
covering any  9iich  profit,  and  the  visibility  of  the  cost,  arc 
strong  evidences  that  it  is  false.  This  stratagem  for  en* 
riching  a  nation  can  be  practised  but  once,  whereas  the 
cosl  of  bank  p.iper  substituted  for  expelled   specie  is  an- 

47 


Sti-Z  banking. 

nually  repeated.  Besides,  a  redundancy  of  specie  for  ex- 
portation, produced  by  the  creation  of  bank  paper  for  home 
use,  diminishes  the  value  of  that  specie;  and  this  deprecia- 
tion both  causes  its  flight,  and  constitutes  an  actual  loss  to 
the  stockjobbing  nation.  Again.  If  an  increase  of  currency, 
was  an  increase  of  capital  and  industry,  the  stratagem  of 
sending  abroad  the  specie  or  universal  currency  by  the 
stockjobbing  nation,  defeats  the  end  proposed  ;  both  by 
the  amount  of  the  money  exported,  and  also  by  increasing 
the  capital  and  stimulating  the  industry  of  rival  nations,  to 
whom  the  specie  is  exported. 

When  we  see  gold  and  silver  fly  away  from  a  country, 
because  it  is  unable  to  create  capital,  and  because  capital  can 
only  retain  a  competent  representation  in  currency ;  an 
opinion,  that  bank  currency  will  create  it,  undoubtedly  con- 
tains  more  of  credulity,  than  one,  that  any  other  metal  can 
create  gold.  It  affords  matter  for  another  alchymist.  The 
drama  might  again  exhibit  cunning  preying  upon  the  ava- 
riee  it  pretends  to  feed.  But  a  stage  would  be  too  smaO 
to  contain  the  two  orders  of  character;  that  of  Epicure, 
Mammon,  Ananias  and  Tribulation  on  one  hand,  and  of 
Subtle  and  Taee  on  the  other. 

Bank  paper,  not  being  capital,  or  able  to  create  capital, 
it  is  to  be  further  examined,  whether  it  encourages  and 
creates  labour  and  industry,  as  it  also  pretends.  If  it  did, 
the  new  created  industry,  would  retain  the  specie  it  expHs. 
This  inquiry  lies  in  a  comparison,  between  a  legal  institu- 
tion for  acquiring  wealth  to  an  enormous  extent,  without  ta- 
lents or  Industry  ;  and  leaving  its  acquisition  to  the  regula- 
tion of  talents  and  industry.  Wealth  in  both  eases  is  suppos- 
ed to  be  the  spur  to  exertion.  By  a  laborious  cultivation  of 
my  talents  and  persevering  industry,  I  acquire  a  moderate 
degree  of  wealth  ;  by  banking  I  acquire  infinitely  more,  with- 
out labour  or  talents.  Why  should  I  subject  myself  to  the 
fatigue  of  becoming  learned  and  useful,  to  become  the  seoff 
of  a  rich,  idle  and  voluptuous  order  I  Their  abundance,  to 
which  I  must  contribute,   v  ill  diminish  jny  competence,  in 


BANKING'.  3ff$ 

the  eye  of  comparison,  almost  to  nothing;  and  of  course  in 
my  own  eyes.  No,  I  will  go  into  the  lottery  where  there 
are  no  blanks;  where  every  ticket  draws  annual  prizes  $ 
and  where,  as  a  stockjobber,  I  may  be  as  rich,  as  idle,  as 
ignorant,  and  as  useless,  as  a  bishop,  nobleman  or  king. 
What  will  the  world  say  of  our  experiment  to  establish  a 
free  government,  if  an  epithet,  universally  considered  as 
far  more  humiliating  than  those  of  bishop,  nobleman  or 
king,  should  become  the  title  of  a  separate  order  or  inte- 
rest in  the  United  States  ? 

This  mode  of  encouraging  industry,  by  creating  rich  and 
wile  orders  to  give  it  employment,  has  been  practised  in  va- 
rious forms,  but  all  contain  the  same  principle*.  Heredita- 
ry and  hierarchical  orders,  encourage  industry  in  the  same 
way  as  stock  orders  do  :  by  taxing  it  to  maintain  themselves 
in  idleness  and  affluence.  The  lash  is  applied  to  slaves,  and 
taxation  to  freemen,  to  eneourage  industry.  Masters  and  or- 
ders praise  the  effect  of  both  causes,  to  gain  weaStli  and  lei- 
sure for  themselves.  If  one  evil  has  been  imposed  by  a  fo- 
reign nation  on  this  country,  should  it  therefore  impose  the 
oilier  on  itself? 

When  debt  stock  boasts  that  it  is  an  encourager  of  industry, 
it  refers  to  the  stimulus  of  taxation  ;  yet  it  attempts  by  every 
artifice,  to  conceal  from  the  people  the  cause  of  this  vaunt- 
ed effect.     Bank  stock  also  boasts  of  the  same  merit,  but  it 
pretends  that  an  abundance  of  money,    and  not  i\w  goad  of 
taxation,  is  its  cause.     The  first,  by  hiding  the  cause  of  the 
effect  it  claims,   confesses  its  treachery   not  more  conspi- 
cuously than   the  second,  by  pretending  that  it  encourages 
industry  by  a  superfluity  of  money.     Are  extortion  and  do- 
nation, a  robber  and  a  prodigal,   equally  enconragers  of  in- 
dustry?   I,  savs  debt  stock,  eneourage  industry,    bv  taking 
awav  your  money ;  and  I,  savs  bank  stock,  bv  pouring  mo 
ney  into  your  pockets.     When,  by  theory  or  experience,  has 
it  ever  been  said,  that  either  the  redundancy  of  money,  or 
the  loss  of  earnings,    was  an  encouragement  to  industry  ? 
If  the  calculation  of  a  false  opinion,  that  industry  enjoys  her 


36*  BANKING. 

own  earnings,  is  the  best  mode  to  which  all  orders,  titled  or 
stock,  can  resort  for  her  encouragement,  it  is  evident  that 
the  mode  would  be  improved,  by  making  the  opinion  true. 
Fulfilment  would  be  a  stronger  excitement  to  industry,  than 
disappointed  hope. 

The  true  sanction  of  private  property,  consists  in  its  ef- 
fect to  stimulate  men  to  industry,  and  the  improvement  of 
the  understanding  ;  from  the  consideration  that  they  will 
enjoy  whatever  their  knowledge  and  industry  may  gain.  Ex- 
actly the  reverse  of  this  sanction*  and  this  effect,  is  the  doc- 
trine, that  knowledge  or  industry  will  be  excited  and  in- 
creased, by  transferring  a  portion  of  their  gains  from  them- 
selves, to  orders,  hereditary,  titled,  hierarchical  or  stock. 
Although  all  such  orders  profess  themselves  to  be  encou 
ragers  of  knowledge  and  industry,  and  friends  to  private 
property,  it  is  hence  evident,  that  they  either  deceive  them 
selves,  or  attempt  to  deceive  others. 

An  idea,  heretofore  suggested,  seems  of  sufficient  im- 
portance to  be  again  brought  to  mind,  for  the  sake  of  argu- 
ments, which  have  since  occurred.  It  is  that  which  sup- 
poses the  credit  of  nations  to  be  property,  of  a  species,  as 
far  beyond  the  power  of  a  government  to  give  away  to  cor- 
porations, as  any  other  species. 

Currency  and  credit  are  social  rights,  in  a  state  of  ap 
propriation,  and  not  a  species  of  wild  game,  to  be  seized  and 
bestowed  by  governments,  any  more  than  other  social  rights. 
To  save,  not  to  sell  ov  give  away  such  rights,  constitutes  the 
utmost  power  of  free  governments.  To  bestow  on  corpora- 
tions, by  charters,  an  exclusive  right  of  uttering  currency,  is 
more  exceptionable,  than  to  give  or  sell  to  them  an  exclusive 
right  of  uttering  new  patents  for  land,  because  every  indivi- 
dual owns  a  share  of  the  national  credit,  which  is  not  the 
case  as  to  land.  Or  considering  the  nation's  land,  in  a  ter- 
ritorial view,  as  equivalent  to  the  nation's  credit,  the  dis- 
memberment of  one,  would  be  a  question  equivalent  to  the 
dismemberment  of  the  other- 


BANKING,  365 

The  term  "  national,"  applied  to  currency  and  credit, 
furnishes  an  argument  in  favour  of  their  positions.  The 
use  of  a  term  descriptive  of  appropriation,  proves  that  cur- 
rency and  credit  are  appropriated.  All  property  is  under 
the  sanction  of  a  twofold  species  of  appropriation  in  so- 
ciety. It  is  appropriated  to  the  use  of  the  nation,  for  pub- 
liek  defence,  and  the  administration  of  tlse  government. 
After  this  object  is  satisfied,  it  is  appropriated  to  the  use 
of  the  individuals  composing  the  nation.  But  there  is  not  in 
free  countries  any  appi  opriation,  to  the  use  of  a  government, 
called  party  pr  administration  territory,  commerce  or  cre- 
dit, to  he  chartered  by  it  to  individuals  or  factions.  On  the 
contrary,  this  third  kind  of  appropriation,  constitutes  a  vio- 
lation of  publick  and  private  property,  and  the  difference  be- 
tween free  and  despotick  governments. 

The  right  and  property  of  national  credit,  territory  and 
commerce,  are  of  the  same  nature  ;  and  it  equally  violates  a 
policy,  founded  in  the  principles  of  liberty,  for  a  govern- 
ment to  charter  away  portions  of  one,  as  portions  of  ano- 
ther. Those  minor  appropriations  of  credit,  laud  or  com- 
merce, produced  by  the  talents,  labour  and  industry  of  indi- 
viduals, or  by  the  municipal  law  which  embraces  every  mem- 
ber of  a  society,  are  of  the  second  species  of  appropriation, 
and  distinct  from  the  third. 

The  principles  of  political  morality  admit  only  of  the  ap- 
propriation of  property,  in  the  two  first  modes,  and  reject 
the  third,  as  unnecessary  for  a  government,  inconsistent  with 
the  ends  of  its  institution,  and  the  ground  work  of  civilized 
tyranny. 

A  transfer  of  private  or  publick  property,  or  both,  from 
individuals  or  nations,  to  orders,  corporations  or  to  other  in- 
dividuals, is  the  evil  moral  principle,  in  which  ail  heredi- 
tary and  hierarchical  orders  have  been  founded,  and  of 
course,  in  plain  hostility  with  any  principles,  capable  of  be- 
ing assigned  as  the  ground  work  of  the  government  of  the 
United  States. 


866  BANKING* 

That  government  could  not  by  its  laws  or  its  power,  en- 
rich corporations  at  the  publick  expense,  nor  touch  proper- 
ty, except  for  publick  use,  was  so  well  understood  as  a  prin- 
ciple, essential  to  liberty,  as  to  have  been  unequivocally  ex* 
pressed  in  most  of'our  constitutions,  by  inhibitions  of  "  exclu- 
sive emoluments,"  except  for  such  publick  services  as  were 
not  transmissible.  Our  governments  are  not  allowed  to  in- 
vade that  appropriation  of  property  called  private,  by  bes- 
towing emoluments  which  some  portion  of  it  must  pay,  up- 
on any  occasion,  except  such  as  is  covered  by  that  appro- 
priation called  publick.  They  are  therefore  prohibited  by 
the  written  rule,  as  well  as  by  the  moral  principle,  essential 
to  free  forms  of  government,  from  invading  or  transferring 
property  for  private  or  corporation  emolument.  And  lest 
a  government  might  call  a  violation  of  private  property,  a 
publick  benefit,  as  it  has  uniformly  done  in  every  species  of 
monopoly,  the  constitutions  quoted  have  provided  against 
this  evasion,  by  limiting  a  power  in  the  governments  to  bes- 
tow emoluments,  for  the  compensation  of  personal  and  un- 
alienable publick  services. 

That  credit  and  currency  are,  in  society,  property,  both 
publick  and  private,  is  demonstrable  from  other  considera- 
tions. Talents  and  industry  will  divide  and  distribute  ere- 
dit  and  currency,  as  they  do  land.  A  species  of  wealth 
which  talents  and  industry  can  distribute,  is  property. 
What  is  the  distinction,  allowing  our  governments  to  take 
away  the  whole,  or  any  portion  of  this  species  of  pro- 
perty, and  to  give  it  to  corporations,  which  must  not  ad- 
mit a  power  of  chartering  away  the  lands  of  individuals, 
and  the  national  territory  ?  If  both  land  and  credit,  or 
currency  are  distributable  by  talents  and  industry,  then, 
to  distribute  either  by  law,  is  fraudulent  and  oppressive. 

If  it  be  said,  that  credit  and  currency  mnnot  be  consi- 
dered as  property,  publick  or  private,  because  they  cannot 
be  divided  by  metes  and  bounds,  like  land  ;  it  is  answered, 
that  an  incapacity  for  a  similar  division  is  common  to  sun- 
dry social  right?,  such  as  the  freedom  of  religion  and  of  the 


BANKING.  367 

press  ;  and  that  the  sanction  of  the  right,  not  the  marks  of 
the  division,  being  the  basis  of  property,  this  sanction  must 
be  equally  strong  in  relation  to  land  and  credit  or  currency,  if 
it  can  reach  both,  and  must  be  equally  violated  by  distribut- 
ing either  by  law. 

Commerce  is  called  national,  like  credit  and  currency.  It 
is  less  capable  of  a  division  among  the  people  than  credit, 
or  currency.  Is  it  not  a  9pecies  of  property,  both  publick 
and  private?  As  publick,  it  is  an  object  of  taxation.  As 
private  and  publick,  our  government  cannot  charter  it  en- 
tirely or  in  portions  to  corporations,  because  in  our  society, 
there  exists  only  two  appropriations  of  property,  publick 
and  private  ;  the  first  as  payment  for  publick  services,  to  be 
made  by  law  ,:  the  second,  the  acquisition  of  private  people, 
which  no  law  can  transfer  to  other  private  people. 

There  is  no  distinguishing  between  commerce,  credit 
and  currency,  as  objects  of  social  property.  This  indelible 
similarity  admits  only  of  two  inferences  j  either  that  our 
constitutions  have  surrendered  both  to  be  appropriated  to  in- 
dividuals or  corporations,  by  the  charters  of  our  govern 
ments,  or  that  thev  have  surrendered  neither. 

Knowledge,  at  first  view,  seems  to  possess  less  of  the 
nature  of  property,  than  lands,  commerce,  credit  or  curren- 
cy ;  yet.  a  legal  monopoly  of  knowledge,  is  inconsistent  with 
our  principles.  The  compulsion  to  buy  corporation  curren- 
cy, produced  by  banishing  national  currency,  greatly  resem- 
bles the  compulsion  to  buy  hereditary  knowledge,  by  banish- 
ing national  knowledge.  To  buy  corporation  currency  to 
carry  on  trade,  seems  as  absurd  as  to  buy  hereditary  know- 
ledge to  carry  on  government.  The  Chinese  monopoly  of 
knowledge,  is  an  illustration  still  stronger  than  the  heredi- 
tary. Au  order,  by  prohibiting  the  use  of  an  alphabet  (the 
coin  of  knowledge)  produces  national  ignorance,  and  thence 
draws  with  its  exclusive  knowledge,  exclusive  wealth  and 
power.  By  the  banishment  of  specie  (the  coin  of  fair  and 
free  commerce)  ajnd  the  substitution  of  hiei  oghphichs  con- 
tincd  to  a  species  of  mandarin,   the   privileged  individuals, 


.308  BANKING. 


w ill  also,  like  mandarins,  draw  exclusive  wealth  and  power. 
If  this  Chinese  monopoly  of  knowledge,  sensibly  affects  pri- 
vate  property,  is  it  inconceivable  that  a  monopoly  of  credit 
or  currency  will  also  sensibly  affect  it? 

Credit  or  currency,  is  unquestionably  of  the  nature  of 
private  property,  so  far  as  it  is  able  to  transfer  it.  If  a  go- 
vernnrent  should  allege  against  a  charge  of  having  invaded 
private  property,  that  it  only  furnished  the  instrument  for 
taking  i*  away,  the  charge  would  be  acknowledged.  There 
east  be  no  ho  icst  difference  between  transferring  property 
from  private  people,  to  a  corporation,  directly  or  indirectly. 
The  moal  and  constitutional  principles,  which  condemn  the 
one,  condemn  the  other.  Not  the  process,  but  the  injury, 
constitutes  the  violation  of  these  principles.  Will  it  be  said, 
that  although  our  governments  cannot  directly  take  away 
pubiick  or  private  property,  and  give  it  to  corporations,  that 
they  may  give  them  the  power  of  expelling  specie,  and  of 
transferring  property  indirectly  by  corporation  currency? 
Any  portion  of  bank  paper,  thrown  into  circulation,  repre- 
sents and  transfers  some  portion  of  private  property,  from 
individuals  to  corporations  or  to  other  individuals.  If  it  be- 
comes the  only  currency,  its  effect  in  this  operation  is  con- 
stant and  great.  And  the  limitation  of  this  transfer,  de- 
pends on  the  will  of  the  corporation.  Although  we  have 
avoided  the  details  of  banking  as  much  as  possible,  it  cannot 
be  overlooked,  that  the  liability  of  the  stock  only,  the  unli- 
mited power  (o  issue  notes,  and  the  capacity  of  those  notes 
to  transfer  property,  constitute  temptations,  which  human  ' 
nature  has  never  been  a  match  for.  The  nation  possessed 
a  national  currency;  after  the  complete  introduction  of  a 
corporation  currency,  it  no  longer  possesses  this  species  of 
property.  If  the  national  territory  was  as  effectually  thrown 
Into  the  form  of  a  feudal  monopoly,  as  its  currency  is  thrown 
into  that  of  a  banking  monopoly,  the  national  territory 
would  he  covered  by  the  term  "  seigniory,"  as  the  national 
currency  is  now  covered  by  the  terms  "  bank  notes,"  and 
the  suppression  of  the  term  "  national,"  in  both  eases,  is  an 


BANKING.  Sfl& 

aqual  evidence  that  an  order  had  obtained,  what  was  previr 
ously  the  publick  property. 

Let  us  suppose  that  a  legislature  had  in  the  publick 
treasury  half  a  million  of  dollars.  Could  it  make  a  bank 
by  charter,  and  give  it  this  money  ?  Why  not  ?  The  money 
belongs  to  the  nation  ;  and  it  would  be  a  transfer  from  the 
nation  to  a  corporation,  of  so  much  publick  property,  for  n,c 
publick  object. 

If  national  currency  is  suppressed,  and  corporation  cur- 
rency interpolated,  it  will  have  the  effect  of  transferring 
from  the  nation  to  the  corporation,  a  much  larger  portion 
of  private  property,  than  this  unjust  and  unconstitutional 
donation  of  half  a  million  of  the  publick  money.  Is  a 
small  transfer  of  publick  and  private  property  to  a  corpo- 
ration, contrary  to  our  policy,  but  a  great  one  consistent 

with  it? 

This  argument  cannot  be  eluded  by  the  fact,  that  bank 
corporations  supply  their  own  stock  or  capital.  It  is  not 
the  property  covered  by  that  capital,  supposing  it  to  be  spe- 
cie, which  is  transferred  by  governments  from  nations  to 
banks.  That  capital  covers  as  much  of  the  property  of 
other  people,  without  the  help  of  law,  as  it  ought  to  co» 
ver  ;  and  can  only  transfer  the  amount  it  represents.  To 
this  amount,  and  to  no  more  of  the  property  of  others,  are 
the  holders  of  this  specie  capital,  justly  or  constitutionally 
entitled. 

But  the  law  steps  in,  unites  these  holders  into  a  banks 
and  empowers  this  bank  to  issue  twice  as  much  currency  as 
its  capital,  actually  retained  to  meet  its  notes.  T  bus  the  ef- 
fect of  transferring  property  from  the  people  at  large  to  the. 
hank  must  inevitably  follow,  by  deranging  so  egregiously 
the  fair  and  equitable  value  or  level  of  national  curreney, 
as  to  make  a  portion  of  it  in  the  hands  of  corporations,  of 
double  value  to  that  which  remains  in  the  hands  of  the  na- 
tion. And  this  enormous  and  exclusive  appreciation  of 
the  value  of  specie  or  national  currency,  is  gained  by 
t!i  i   privileged  w*ct  ;     whilst  the  money  held  by  all  no.t  of 

48 


••he  corporation,  n  in  fact  depreciated  by  the  fraudulent  d<*, 
nation. 

Lot  us  throw  this  argument  into  figures,   as  the  only 
mode  of  Making  it  perfectly  plain.     Half  a  million,  in  a  fair 
and  just  state  of  the  partnership,  called  society,  represents 
fend  entitles  the  holders  to  only  half  a  million's  worth  of  pro- 
perty;   and  those  who  hold  the  property  of  this  partner- 
ship,    owe  to  its  holders,  and  must  relinquish  so  much  of 
their  property  as  the  currency  represents,  and  no  more.  But 
a  few  individuals  of  this  partnership  or  society,  have  pre 
vailed  upon  the  government  to  grant  them  an  exclusive  char 
ter,  to  issue  a  whole  million  of  currency,  upon  the  credit  or 
opinion  that  they  possess  half  a  one.     Is  it  not  evident,  that 
these  members  of  the  society  have  gained  an  advantage  over 
those  not  sharing  in  the  privilege;  and  that  so  much  of  thb 
property  of  the  rest  of  society,  as  the  whole  million  of  hank 
currency  will  cover,   beyond  the  half  million  of  specie,  ia 
thereby  inevitably  taken  from   the  partnership  called  Hsl- 
tional  or  social,  and    trawsferrcd   to  the  minor  partnership, 
called  corporate  or  banking  ?  If  so,  the  principle  of  an  equa- 
lity of  rights  is  violated)   by  making  the  money  of  a  few 
men,  more  valuable  than  the  money  of  the  people  at  large  , 
and  by  the  indirect,  but  certain  mode  thence   arising,  of 
transferring  the  property  of  those  who  have  the  least  valu- 
able money,  to  those  possessing  the  most  valuable.     Nor  caii 
5*  species  of  exclusive   privilege  be  conceived,  capable   of 
producing  greater  pecuniary  loss  and  gain.     Accordingly, 
hanking,  i;i  gathering  wealth.,  [ravels  with  a  rapidity  unat- 
tempted  by  the  mast  able  hierarchical  collector. 

We  have  supposed,  merely  to  simplify  the  argument, 
that  specie  stock  emits  deuhle  its  amount  in  bank  currency. 
This  is  precarious  and  fluctuating  ;  and  therefore  the  rea- 
der is  reminded,  that  although  a  precise  sum  is  mentioned 
for  the  sake  of  perspicuity,  yet  that  the  argument  applies  to 
the  surplus  of  baiik  currency  issued,  whatever  it  be,  beyond 
the- actual  specie  deposited- in  the  bank.  The  portion  of 
iocifcty  privileged  t^  issu?  two»  three  or  four  dollars  for  one, 


BANKING . 


* 


tieccmes-  one  order,  and  the  unprivileged,  anjfrfifir-  The  &<>Y 
W  which  can  multiply  itself,  is  more  puissant,  thwu  1'h  ■. 
dollar  which  cannot.  One  is  a  patrician,  the  other  a  plebeiar... 
These  dollars  will  represent  their  owners,  or  th<  pwne*? 
their  dollars. 

But  to  prevent  any  mistake,  it  is  necessary  p)»r«j  parfi- 
oularly  to  explain  the   mode  or  process,  by  which  the  en 
hancement  of  the  value  of  an  incorporated  dollar,  beyond 
an  unincorporated  one,  is  effected.      It  consists  ehiei'y  of 
two  items.     First,  the  surplus  of  notes  circulated,    beyond 
the  amount  of  the  stock  or  capital,  produces  a  surplus  of  in- 
terest, beyond  what  the  stock  or  capital  could  produce  ;   the 
whole  of  which  is  an  addition  to  the  value  of! 'incorporated, 
beyond  that  of  unincorporated  specie  j  and  will  transfer   a 
correspondent  surplus  of  property.     For  instance,  if  a  capi- 
tal of  half  a  million  stock,  can  circulate  two  millions  of  pa- 
per at  sis  per  centum  only,   one-fourth  of  the  paper  produ- 
ces the  whole  interest  which  unincorporated  specie  can  pro- 
dace  :  therefore  the  other  three-fourths  are  additional  va- 
lue given  to  the  incorporated  specie  by  an  exclusive  privi- 
lege, destroying  an  equality  of  rights  in  the  national  pecu- 
niary partnership,  and  transferring  unjustly  all  the  proper 
ty  covered  by  such  additional  value.     The  second  important 
item  of  this  process  of  appreciation,  consists  of  the.  artifice 
>C  taking  oat  a  portion  of  the  stock  or  capital,  and  acquir- 
ing with  it   the  whole  property  it  represents,  and  ought  in 
Justice  to  transfer;  and  of  circulating  paper  currency,  upon 
the  credit  of  an  opinion,  that  the  stock  thus  used  remains 
deposited.     It  is  obvious,  that  the  interest  of  the  whole  of 
the  paper,   circulated  upon  the  basis  of  ideal   stock,   is  an 
Addition  to  the  value  of  the  specie,  which  has  in  person  trans 
ferred  all  the  property  it  ought  to  transfer  ;   and  that  thia 
unjust  enhancement  arises  from  the  exclusive  privilege.      If 
itt  is  recollected  that  there  are  about  fifty   millions  of  bar.]: 
stock  in  the  United  States,  and  that  even  a  moiety  of  it  eooJkl 
not  possibly  have  been  deposited  in  specie",  the  great  effecjt 
of  artificial  stock,  in  transferrin}?  property  mU  at  a  glance 
he  conspicuous. 


The  example  of  a  commercial  partnership,  consisting  oi' 
one  thousand  persons,  supplying  different  quotas  of  stock, 
will  still  illustrate  the  argument.  We  will  suppose  that, 
ihe  stock  of  the  wealthiest  individual  of  the  partnership, 
amounted  to  one  thousand  dollars,  and  of  the  poorest,  to  one  \ 
-and  that  :he  intermediate  space,  was  occupied  by  a  great  va- 
riety of  sums,  constituting  the  stock  ?>J'  the  other  partners. 
The  profits  are  the  property  of  the  partnership,  and  ought 
to  be  proportioned  according  to  the  stock  of  each  individual. 
The  partner  entitled  to  one  thousand  dollars,  ought  to  have 
one  thousand  times  more  than  the  partner  entitled  to  one 
dollar  of  the  stock.  But  if  you  give  him  t«o,  three  or  lour 
thousand  times  more,  than  you  give  to  the  partner  having 
one  dollar  stock,  you  rob  this  poor  partner,  and  all  the  in- 
termediate partners,  of  a  portion  of  their  property,  and  give 
it  to  the  rich  partner.  By  suffering  the  rids  partner  to 
v.ike  his  thousand  dollars  out  of  the  partnership,  and  leave 
only  his  credit  behind,  lie  acquires  its  value  in  property,  be 
sides  retaining  the  double  interest  to  acquire  more  proper- 
ty. Society  is  this  partnership  ;  bankers,  the  partners  who 
draw  more  property  than  their  money  or  that  of  other's  re- 
presents j  cunning  and  rich  bankers,  those  v.  ho  take  away 
their  stock,  or  a  portion  of  It,  and  continue  to  draw*this 
overplus  of  property  ;  and  the  poor  partner  represents 
ihose,  not  bankers,  and  limited  to  draw  property  in  strict 
proportion  to  the  value  of  their  money. 

National  currency  is  the  stock  representing  national  pi:>- 
-terty,  as  mercantile  capital  represents  partnership  profit. 
This  stock  is  unequally  divided,  but  it  is  entitled  to  a  pro- 
portional value  in  property,  as  mercantile  capital  is  in  pro- 
fit. Banking  enables  about  one  in  a  thousand  of  a  nation 
to  draw  out  of  the  national  stock  of  property,  considera- 
bly more  than  his  share  of  national  Currency  entitled  hiirt 
to,  which  unjust  overplus  is  a  deduction  from  the  property 
of  the  other  members  of  the  society;  just  as  any  mode,  di- 
rect or  indirect.  By  which  one  partner  could  get  more  than 
his  proportional  share  of  mercantile  profit,  transfers  to  him 


BANKING.  S7H 

{he  property  of  others.  And  as  the  acquisitions  of  banking, 
from  the  nature  of  the  iusti'uiion,  must  settle  in  the  hands 
of  the  wealthy  class,  it  is  ofjeourse  a  mode  of  adding  to  tie 
■wealth  of  thai  class,  by  taking  from  all  others  ;  si&rilar  to 
nie  enrichment?  of  the  rich  mercantile  partner;  an>" 
go  us  in  its  effects  to  every  exclusive  order,  which  here- 
tofore deluded  and  enslaved  nations. 

Tiie  injustice  of  appreciating  partially  and  exclusively 
the  money  of  a  minor  order,  or  of  any  portion  of  society,  is 
yet  farther  illustrated,  by  recollecting,  that  appreciation  is 
necessarily  attended  by  its  correlative,  depreciation  :    and 
(hat  the  effects  of  the  one  in  moral  jjeometrv,  are         exact 
mensuration  of  the  effects  of  the  other.     Value  is  relative. 
Ifthenioney  or  properly  of  ore  pe  tion   of  tin-  soetety,   is 
made  bv  law  to  bewortldetfs,  the  monev  or  property  o*"  those 
not  thus  oppressed,  will  consequently  he  worth  more  :  if  the 
law  adds  partially  to  the  value  of  the  money  or  property  of 
some,  it  correspendentlv  diminishes  their  value  as  to  others. 
The  funding   system  illustrates  both  positions.      First,    by 
funding  without  providing  for  the  interest,    the  certificates 
were  depreciated,  and  other  money  or  property  appreciated, 
because  two  shillings  of  it  would  buy  twenty  shillings  of  the 
Certificate.     Secondly,  by  providing  for  the  payment  of  the 
nit  >rest  after  the  depreciated  property,  had  been  purchased 
by  Ihc  appreciated  property,  an  appreciation  of  certificates 
took  place,  which  lessened  the  value  of  all  property  subject- 
ed to  make  the  appreciation  good,  even  of  those  who  had 
suffered  the  depreciation.     This  appreciation  of  certificates 
tenfold  beyond  their  current  value,  is  (he  literal  case  ofap 
predating  specie  by  banking  beyond  its  current  value  ;  ex 
cept  that  the  appreciation  of  specie  does  not  visibly  appear 
to  be  so  exorbitant.     Although,  if  banks  have   resorted  tt- 
jpaper  to  make  up  capital,  as  is  unquestionable,   the  dilfe 
rence  between  the  legal  appreciation  of  monopolized  cert  ill 
cates,  and  of  bank  stock,  in  point  of  exorbitancy,  will  he  in 
considerable.     Whatever  it  is,  the  moral  injustice  of  mak- 
ing a  currency,  worth  only  twenty  shillings  in  the  pound,    V 


$7b  BANKING* 

the  value  of  eighty  or  forty  shillings,  in  favour  of  a  few  cor 
porations,   is  founded  in  the  same  prineiples  of  monopoly, 
partiality  and  violation  of  property,  in  which  the  deprecia- 
tion and  appreciation  of  the  certificates  was  founded  ;  ex 
cept  that  for  this,  no  pretext  or  nominal  reason  existed.     It 
is  a  plain  continuation  of  that  system.     The  depreciation  of 
jertificates,  enabled  a  few  to  get  them  at  one-tenth  of  their 
nominal  amount.     Their  appreciation  invested  the  holders 
with  an  enormous  pecuniary  advantage.     Banking  appre- 
ciates money  ineomputably,  especially  where  bank  paper 
has  made  bank  stock.     It  is  the  second  great  movement  of 
an  enormous  and  crushing  monopoly. 

To  dispiay  and  compare  with  our  policy  and  constitu- 
tions, the  abuses  which  have  successively  destroyed  liberty 
and  happiness,  it  was  necessary  to  prove  the  distinction  be- 
tween these  abuses  and  our  political  principles,  and  their  ir- 
reeoncileable  enmity  to  each  other.  This  part  of  the  es- 
say, is  devoted  to  the  consideration  of  a  system  of  partiality 
and  monopoly,  introduced  by  law,  because  we  conceive  it  to 
he  as  inimical  to  our  policy  and  constitutions,  and  more 
dangerous  than  Mr.  Adams's  system  of  orders  ;  or  than  the 
aristocracies  of  nobility  or  hierarchy. 

Aristocracy  is  forever  adapting  itself  to  the  temper  of 
the  times.  In  those  of  ignorance  and  superstition,  it  pre- 
tended to  be  the  sanctified  herald  of  the  gods.  In  warlike 
times,  it  glittered  in  armour,  and  boasted  its  prowess.  And 
now,  it  dazzles  avarice  with  such  riches  as  we  see  in 
dreams,  whilst  it  is  building  up  fop  itself  a  tower  with  cent 
per  cent,  from  whence  it  can  scale  and  conquer  our  consti- 
tutions. 

Against  that  portion  of  the  system  of  paper  and  patron- 
age, called  funding  or  anticipation,  none  of  the  American 
constitutions  have  provided  a  check.  If  borrowing  and 
funding  can  enslave  nations,  our  governments  possess  a  de3- 
potick  poAver,  without  any  control,  that  of  election  excepted. 
It  ought  therefore,  if  it  can  be  effected,  to  be  placed  in  ft 
state  of-divi^or,,  between  the  general  and  state  gover.nmer1  . 


<o  prevent  either  from  destroying  the  other  by  this  instru- 
ment ;  or  to  be  subjected  to  some  other  check.  Armies 
will  enslave  their  country,  after  they  have  bled  for  it ;  there- 
fore they  must  be  checked  by  an  armed  nation  ;  funding 
systems  bleed  their  country,  and  unless  they  are  more 
patriotick  than  armie9,  they  seem  to  be  an  object  of  equal 
danger. 

The  army  mode  of  enslaving  the  nation,  is  not  left  to 
the  exclusive  control  of  election.  Military  men  are  exclud- 
ed from  legislatures,  and  whilst  the  general  government 
may  raise  an  army,  the  states  may  arm,  officer  and  disci- 
pline the  militia. 

If  banking  is  inconsistent  with  the  positive  rules  of  our 
constitutions,  or  adverse  to  their  general  principles,  the 
laws  upon  the  subject  arc  void.  But  supposing  it  only  trans 
fers  property  unfairly,  and  to  be  as  dangerous  to  liberty  as 
funding,  it  cannot  plead  national  necessity  as  a  subterfuge 
against  annihilation  ;  and  what  friend  to  free  government 
would  hesitate  to  annihilate  the  power  of  borrowing,  if 
there  was  a  certainty  that  the  national  defence  would  never 
render  it  necessary  ?  But  it  can  plead  charters  ;  the  Lord 
-deliver  us  from  charters  j  Admit  that  the  banking  system 
ought  not  to  have  existed,  yet  these  sanctions  for  evil  say 
that  it  shall  continue  to  exist. 

A  history  of  charters  would  afford  vast  amusement  and 
instruction  to  nations;  it  would  terminate  in  ascertaining, 
that  orders  have  practised  as  insidiously  behind  these,  as  be- 
hind altars.  Such  as  are  improvidently  granted  by  nations, 
or  corruptly  by  governments,  are  said,  like  the  oracles,  to 
be  sacred  ;  but  those  obtained  by  nations  or  individuals 
from  orders,  are  disregarded  or  destroyed,  as  interest  or 
ambition  dictates.  English  municipal  law,  applies  to  the 
charters  to  be  revoked  in  favour  of  orders,  the  term  obrep- 
titious,  implying,  that  they  were  obtained  by  surprise,  or  by 
a  concealment  of  their  effects  ;  in  which  eases  they  are  to 
be  vacated.  But  it  has  no  term  or  process,  recognising  a 
Ifight  in  nation?  to  resume  Jmprovidsct  grants,  or  to  ana  .:, 


.',-;;  ]}\Mtr:<i;. 

those  made  by  the  go«eiJiyncnt,  contrary  to  national  rights 
or  publiek  good.  Admitting,  however,  that  the  people  of 
our  Union  have  no  righJt  to  save  their  liberties  against  an 
host  of  charters,  unless  a  precedent  to  justify  it  can  lit) 
found  (a  doctrine  as  correct,  as  that  they  have  no  right 
to  the  Union  or  their  policy,  because  they  are  unjustified 
I  ecedent)  this  English  law  furnishes  such  a  prece- 
dent. 

Orders  in  England  constitute  the  sovereignty  j  the  peo- 
ple, iithe  United  States.  The  sovereignty  of  orders  annul? 
charters  for  sundry  causes  ;  the  sovereignty  of  the  people 
may  therefore,  even  according  to  precedent,  annul  them  for 
the  same  causes.  No  cause  could  he  more  completely 
withh  the  reason  and  scope  of  the  English  doctrine,  than 
one,  which  would  tend  to  the  destruction  of  the  sovereign- 
ty of  orders  in  that  country  ;  whatever  tends  to  the  des- 
truction of  the  sovereignty  of  the  people  here,  is  equal- 
ly within  its  scope  and  meaning.  And  the  right  of  the  so- 
vereignty here  to  annul  obreptitious  charters,  is  stronger 
than  it  is  in  England,  because,  there  the  charter  may  be  the 
act  of  the  sovereignty  itself;  here  it  can  only  be  the  act  of 
the  agents  of  the  sovereignty,  responsible,  of  limited  powers, 
and  haying  no  power  directly  or  indirectly  to  change  the  na- 
ture  of  the  government  by  obreptitious  charters. 

Bank  charters,  in  a  vast  variety  of  views,  falj  within 
ibis  English  law  doctrine,  unless  the  reasonings  of  this  es- 
say are  incorrect,  Who,  for  instance,  Mas  aware  that  this 
was  a  mode  of  indirect  taxation  ?  And  who  believed,  that  at 
this  moment  the  Untied  States  were  paying  five  millions 
worth  of  their  property,  annually,  to  a  small  portion  of  their 
people,  for  a  fictitious  currency  ? 

These  law  charters,  however  sanctioned  by  legal  forms, 
are  never  genuine  national  law.  National  will,  in  free  go- 
vernments, is  the  only  genuine  sanction  of  law.  The  will 
f  the  legislature,  is  the  instrument  for  proclaiming  thi- 
sanction.  If  a  legislature  should  pass  a  law  charter,  for  ad 
pancing  the  exclusive  interest  of  the  legislative  body,  or  • 


BANKING  37'7 

some  other  combination  of  men,  at  the  expense  of  the  na* 
tional  interest,  both  moral  and  pecuniary,  it  obviously 
mat..  -  a  false  proclamation,  and  the  question  is,  whether 
the  genuine  sanction  of  law,  or  this  false  proclamation, 
ought  to  be  most  sacred.  Without  leaving  our  subject  to 
consider  the  device  of  consecrating  these  spurious  laws,  be- 
yond the  genuine,  and  even  beyond  constitutional  law  itself, 
it  falls  within  it  to  consider  the  character  of  a  separate  or 
exclusive  interest,  which  invariably  dictates  them. 

It  is  happily  hit  o(F  unintentionally  by  Mr.  Addison  in  his 
third  Spectator,  where  he  personifies  publick  credit,  by  a 
virgin,  enthroned  on  gold  in  the  hall  of  the  bank  of  Eng- 
land ;  surrounded  by  funding  laws  ;  delighted  with  contem- 
plating (hem  ;  timorous;  a  valetudinarian  ;  suddenly  with- 
ering; suddenly  reviving  ;  converting  whatever  s he  touch- 
ed into  gold,  which  would  as  suddenly  vanish  o  ome 
tallies,  if  she  was  affrighted;  fainting  and  <  at  the 
■si sht  of  a  commonwealth  ;  and  revived  by  mortar 

By  mistaking  (he  exclusive  interest  called  fui;  i  .  for 
publick  credit,  Mr.  Addison  has  described  the  character  of 
paper  stock.  Gold,  and  not  virtue,  is  the  terrestrial  deify 
of  this  allegorical  being,  so  improperly  represented  as  a  vie= 
gin.  She  admits  promiscuous  and  loathsome  embraces  to 
acquire  it.  Wealth  rises  as  if  by  magick  around  her,  as 
around  fraud  and  theft.  It  disappears  upon  the  least  rust- 
ling of  danger  ;  as  a  robber  hides  his  booty.  -She  is  timo- 
rous from  conscious  guilt.  She  is  a  sickly  moral  being,  be- 
cause she  is  formed  of  bad  moral  principles.  She  faints  and 
dies  under  a  commonwealth,  because  she  cannot  live  within 
the  pale  of  common  interest,  and  can  only  subsist  on  its 
destruction  ;  and  she  is  revived  by  monarchy,  a  congenial 
being,  which  aids  this  fearful,  sickly,  fainting,  reviving,  ma- 
gical and  wicked  being,  by  surrounding  her  with  consecrat- 
ed law  charters. 

Contrast  genuine  and  honest  publick  credit,  with  this 
thievish  spectre,   and  assign  the  privilege  of  consecrating 


§;|  BANKING. 

law,  to  general  or  exclusive  interest,  as  the  result  shall  ra- 
dicate which  of  the  two  is  the  mirest  legislator. 

Genuine  publick  credit  is  enthroned,  not  upon  gold  ga- 
thered by  law  into  a  bank,  but  upon  property  distributed 
by  industry.  It  is  greatest,  where  national  debt  is  least.  It 
flows  from  national  wealth  and  prosperity,  not  from  the 
wealth  of  corporations  enriched  by  exclusive  privileges.  It 
creates  gold  by  industry,  not  by  magick  ;  and  saves  it  by 
valour, not  by  hiding;  it  is  a  healthy  moral  being,  because 
it  is  for  Tied  of  good  moral  principles  ;  and  bold,  because  it 
as  honest.  It  flourishes  under  a  commonwealth,  and  dies1 
under  a  monarchy.  Hostile  principles  cannot  live  in  union 
and  friendship.  National  credit  and  corporation  credit 
must  consort  each  with  its  ttfce*  They  are  respectively  kill- 
ed and  revived  by  monarchy  and  a  commonwealth,  because 
a  government  founded  on  the  principle  of  minority  accords 
with  one,  and  that  founded  on  the  principle  of  majority*  with 
the  other.  Corporation  credit,  artificially  created  by  law 
and  orders,  unite  and  coheie.  from  an  identity  of  origin  and 
nature.  National  credit,  arising  from  fair  industry  and  na 
iionul  wealth,  can  only  unite  with  a  free  and  equal  govern- 
ment. 

All  partial  interests,  capable  of  procuring  or  sustaining  a- 
law,  belong  to  the  family  of  this  virgin  described  by  Mr.  Ad- 
dison. Of  the  two  sisters  of  this  family  which  have  appear- 
ed in  the  United  States,  funding  and  banking,  one  only  is 
now  heaping  up  gold  by  magick,  and  figuring  in  legislatures. 
She  is  adored  as  a  beauty,  and  the  other  execrated  as  a  hag  ; 
although  the  family  likeness  is  so  strong,  that  they  pass  for 
twins.  As  the  fate  of  the  general  interest,  depends  upon 
this  ameur  between  the  government  and  the  twin  sifter  of 
Mr.  Addison's  virgin,  the  consequences  of  endowing  her 
with  the  privilege  of  passing  consecrated  laws  or  law  char- 
ters, as  her  1  nglish  sister  has  been  endowed,  are  referred  to 
the  reader's  consideration.  Liberty  was  nearlv  smothered 
in  the  embraced  bctw  een  our  government  and  Mr.  AddisouV 
irginj    the  amour  going  01   with  her  sister  will  hardly  rc« 


BANK.I?**..  t> 

vive  it.     But  let  us  return  from  the  political  features  of  the 
subject,  to  calculation.     The  annual  exports  of  the  products 
«f  the  United  States,  have  been  supposed  to  amount  to  about 
forty  millions  of  dollars,    and  the  bank  capital  to  about  hi 
ty ;  and  we  have  endeavoured  to  prove,  that  the  five  millions 
paid  annually  for  bank  paper,  cannot  be  reimbursed  l>\  an£ 
additional   price  bestowed  by    it  on  our    exports,      ilii 
glimpse  of  the  manner  Hi  which  banking,  in  its  infancy,  eis 
riches  agriculture  and  manufacturer:    in  its  maturity,  be- 
comes  a  clear  light.     By  (he  return  oi'18G3  to  the   British 
parliament,  the  effieiat  ralile  of  British  manufactures  or  ex- 
ports, was  loss  than  twenty  foui   millions  sterlings  but  their 
real  value  v,as  estimated  by  il-e  minister  at  forty  millions. 
Suppose  the  quantity  of  bank  paper,  publick  and  private, 
circulating  in  England,   to  be  about  R\?  hundred  millions. 
It  receives  between  twenty  and  thirty  millions  fcr  etiricti 
ing  those,  who  export  forty  millions  wort!;.     The  agricul- 
ture and  manufactures  of  England,  are  enriched  also  in  the 
*ame  mode,  by  the  sister  of  banking,  so  recently  eulogised 
in  this  country  for  possessing  these  qualities.     Above  five 
hundred  millions  of  debt  stock,  receives  annually  more  than 
bank  stock.     Of  what  is  paid  to  two  other  members  of  the 
same  family,  named  patronage  and  hierarchy,  we  have  no 
account ;    but  exclusive  of  the  sum  paid  to  hierarchy  ar.<i 
banking,  by  manufactures  and  agriculture,  to  get  rich  In 
the  bounty  of  this  generous  family,  the  supplies  of  the  same 
year  exceeded  seventy  millions  sterling  ;  so  that  the  scheme 
'if  paper  and  patronage,  when  matured,  takes  from  a  nation 
about  one  hundred  millions  sterling,   to  enrich  agriculture 
and  manufactures,  by  enhancing  the  price  of  forty  million- 
worth  of  their  commodities. 

And  after  paying  all  this  money,   it  remains  a  question, 
whether  bank  currency  does  not  moreover  diminish  prices, 
to  enrich  capitalists,  at  the  expense  of  agriculture  and  manu 
factures.     In  1803,  the  United  States  contained   somethi  .. 
more  than  one-third  of  the  people  of  Britain,  and  cxporte.i 
much  more  than  a  third  nf  her  official  exports  and'nearlv 


,J8Q  tfAMtlSU. 

that  proportion  of  her  estimated  exports.     The  exports  of 
Gnat  B>  itain  were  swelled  by  the  estimate  of  the  ministers 
very  Tar  beyond  f  lie  official  returns  ;  and  those  of  the  United 
States.  av<-  rigidly  confined  to  them  ;    therefore  it  is  highly 
probable,  that  the  value  of  exports,  from  the  two  countries, 
in  relation  to  the  number  of  people,  did  not  fall  short  on  the 
part  of  the  TJ.  States.  Britain  then,  with  a  vastly  greater  pro- 
portion  of  this  stimulating  and  enriching  stock,  exported 
the  same  or  a  less  value  of  commodities,  in  relation  to  the 
nunV>cr  of  people,  than  the  United  States.     This   is  only  to 
be  accounted  for,  hy  balancing  the  exclusive  advantages  she 
possesses  in  fertility  of  soil,  in  manufaetural  perfection,   in 
machinery  and  in  rich  provinces  ;    with    a  drawback,  aris- 
inr  from  paper   currency      Except  for  some  drawback, 
these  immense  advantages,    ought  to  have  been  accounted 
for  in  the  comparison,  hy  an  immense  superiority  of  exports 
in  relation   to  the  numbers  of  people  in  the  two  countries. 
As  they  are  lost,  it  affords  the  strongest  evidence  against  the 
assertion,  that  paper   currency  willcxein  industry,  eniiefe 
manufactures  of  agriculture,  or  even  benefit  eommercfc. 

IIow  can  it  do  either,  when  paper  stock  draws  from  the 
national  labour,  more  than  the  whole  value  of  what  it  ex- 
ports ?  IIow  can  it  fail  to  be  the  most  oppressive  tax  gath- 
erer, when  it  is  able  to  take  from  a  nation  more  than  it  sells  £ 
If  it  is  admitted  to  be  a  tax  when  it  takes  all,  does  it  cease  to 
be  a  tax,  when  it  takes  a  part?  The  ten  hundred  millions 
of  hank  and  debt  stock,  has  made  every  soul  in  England 
worth  to  paper  alone,  eighty  pounds  sterling.  Adding  to 
the  drafts  of  paper,*  those  of  patronage,  civil,  military  and 
religious,  the  value  of  each  soul  to  the  system  of  paper  and 
patronage,  is  about  one  hundred  and  fifty  pounds  sterling. 
The  American  and  West- India  slave  owners  are  not  task- 
masters, if  this  system,  which  has  made  freeborn  English 
men  of  threefold  value  to  itself  beyond  African  slaves,  to 
their  masters,  is  not  a  task-master. 

This  stupendous  mass  of  paper  has  been  raised  from  a 
foundation  as  imaginary,  as  that  of  the  earth  in    ]ndi:-fln 


iBASKlsm  3$ 


* 


cosmography,  A  man,  by  becoming  a  law-maker,  contrives 
to  in  ike  the  reputation  of  wealth  more  profitable  to  hini 
tfcatf  wealth  its'eff.  If  la  tviiv  opinion  as  to  6rie's  wealth. 
akgbt  hot  (<  nation,  the  righis  (»t falsehood  are 

thus  made  greater  than  the  rights  of  truth.  The  means 
tiled  hv  the  credit  men  in  Ev'-i. aid,  to  lay  industry  under 
contribution,  are  used  by  the  men  of  actual  property  in  the 
United  States,  to  lay  themselves  under  contribution.  The 
richest  interest  in  the  United  States,  is  the  agricultural.  It 
does  not  hold  by  the  tenure  of  its  land,  a  shilling  of  the  cre- 
dit which  sustains  banking;  and  the  small  portion  of  bank 
stock  it  possesses,  beats  no  proportion  to  its  landed  proper- 
ty. Yet  it  first  mortgaged  itself  to  enrich  a  poor  speculat- 
ing interest  by  tlie  funding  system,  under  the  delusion  of 
supporting  a  false  national  credit  ;  and  it  again  mortgages 
itself  to  enrich  a  banking  interest,  under  the  delusion,  that  it 
receives,  and  does  not  pay  the  profits  of  appreciating  paper 
in  the  last,  as  in  the  first  form. 

In  other  countries,  if  the  rich  arc  knaves,  they  are  not 
iiiind  to  their  own  interest.  They  inflict  taxes,  direct,  indi- 
rect and  intricate,  of  which  they  pay  a  part ;  but  they  take 
care  to  receive  most  or  all.  If  these  taxes  are  paid  to  ar- 
mies, churches,  navies,  pensions  or  sinecures,  they  are  iu> 
ceived  by  the  rich  or  their  children.  The  paper  inte- 
rest in  England,  is  willing  to  pay  a  small  part  of  the  enor 
&EOUS  tax,  drawn  from  the  nation  by  paper  stock,  because  it 
receives  all  ;  and  the  landed  interest  of  the  United  Stales* 
is  willing  to  introduce  this  fathomless  mode  of  tax;* 
tion  here,  because/it  pays  uearly  all,  and  receives  a  small 
part. 

In  the  United  States,  the  civil  offices  cost  but  little,  am! 
do  not  exceed  the  legitimate  necessities  of  civil  government. 
We  have  no  armies,  churches,  navies,  pensions  or  sinecures, 
Contrived  for  the  purpose  of  conveying  to  the  richest  ch» 
bf  citizens,  the  money  drawn  directly  or  indirectly  from  the 
nation.  Stock,  bank  and  funded,  are  the  only  modes  hither- 
to used  for  drawing  money  from  the  many  for  the  few  ;  arid 


382  BANKING. 

tho  rich  agrarian  law-makers  have  most  unskilfully  suffer- 
ed the  money  thus  drawn  to  pass  into  the  pockets  of  falla- 
cies w  ;. r.'-'i.  It  is  nearly  true,  that  the  rich  class  in  Eng- 
land pay  some  and  receive  all  j  and  that  the  rich  class  in 
the  United. States  pay  all  and  receive  some.  The  first, 
fleece  labour  and  industry  for  themselves  ;  the  other,  fleece 
themselves  for  paper  craft.  Had  the  landed  interest  of  (he 
Unite.i  states,  laid  out  the  nine  millions  a  year,  which  it 
gives  to  hankers  and  certificate  buyers,  in  a  church,  an  ar- 
my a  id  a  navy,  it  would  have  made  a  provision  for  its  youn- 
ger sons,  like  the  rich  classes  of  other  countr.  s,  according 
to  the  wisdom  of  this  world  5  all  other  rich  classes  en  thine 
their  own  interest  and  prosperity  with  high  taxes  ;  but  to 
combine  its  own  decay  and  ruin  with  taxation,  by  pacing 
to  paper  stock  nine  millions  a  year,  of  which  it  receives 
but  a  trivial  proportion,  is  a  species  ofaeutenessin  the  land- 
ed interest  of  the  United  States,  according  to  the  wisdom  of 
no  world  that  I  know  of. 

It  is  true,  that  if  the  landed  interest,  in  creating  this 
annuity,  had  kept  it  for  itself,  corruption,  oppression  and 
party  spirit  would  have  been  die  consequence ;  such 
being  the  unavoidable  effect  of  giving  away  by  law,  a  sum 
of  money  annually,  eighteen  times  more  valuable  than 
the  Yazoo  speculation  ;  but  as  the  landed  interest  pays 
the  chief  part  of  this  annuity,  it  had  the  best  right 
to  receive  it ;  and  its  sons,  crowned  with  mitres  or 
with  laurel,  might  have  cultivated  virtues  which  adorn  of 
benefit  society.  In  how  many  revolutions  of  Mercury, 
would  stock  beget  subjects  for  a  Plutarch  ? 

Had  the  nine  millions  been  laid  out  in  official  patronage, 
instead  of  stock  patronage,  the  amount  paid  by  the  nation 
might  have  terminated  there.  But  banking,  besides  its  divi- 
dends, possesses  a  power  of  causing  the  quantity,  and  of 
course  the  value  of  currency  to  fluctuate,  by  which  it  may 
impoverish  and  enrich,  or  tax  and  patronise,  to  a  vast  amouni 
beyond  its  dividends ;  of  this  the  nation  can  get  no  account- 
It  is  a  power  equivalent  to  incessant  adulterations  and  pur> 


BANKING.  3&Z 

fixations  of  specie,  by  an  absolute  monarcb.  Coin  adulte- 
rated, or  paper  multiplied,  buys  less.  Coin  purified,  or  pa- 
per liminished,  buys  more.  It  would  ht  dangerous  for  the 
strongest  despotism  to  gather  wealth,  by  causing  gold  to 
fluctuate,  between  twelve  and  twenty  four  carats,  several 
times  a  year.  If  t-iis  despotism  was  a  merchant,  it  could 
by  such  a  power,  buy  and  sell  the  commodities  ox' its  sub- 
jects at  what  gain  it  pleased.  The  carat  of  paper  money, 
fluctuates  with  its  quantity,  and  this  fluctuation  is  at  all 
times  within  the  power  of  banking,  and  frequently  produced. 
Being  capable  of  greater  repetition,  it  can  enrich  and  impo 
verish,  beyond  any  practicable  alternate  adulteration  and 
purification  of  coin,  for  the  benefit  of  a  corporation  or  a  des- 
potism. Paper  currency  can  be  made  better  and  worse 
more  frequently  by  the  magick  of  a  bank,  than  specie  by 
the  furnace  of  a  monarch ;  but  although  the  banking  adul- 
terations can  do  so  much  more  work,  yet  we  do  not  believe 
it  because  we  do  not  see  the  process,  and  only  see  the  effect, 
in  their  amassing  wealth  with  a  rapidity  and  duration,  far 
beyond  adulterations  of  coin  in  any  mode  hitherto  discover- 
ed. If  a  king  of  England  should  call  in  forty  millions  of 
specie,  and  pay  it  back  in  adulterated  money,  so  as  to  rob 
the  nation  of  twenty  ;  that  freeborn  people  would  probably 
cut  offhis  head ';  and  the  same  wise-born  people,  are  quite 
contented  to  be  robbed  of  a  larger  sum  annually,  by  the  same 
principle. 

To  illustrate  the  facility  with  which  this  may  be  done 
with  paper,  in  a  stockjobbing  way,  better  than  with  specie, 
in  a  despotiek  way  (as  a  chymical  process,  in  the  moist  and 
dry  way,  can  produce  the  same  result)  let  us  suppose  the 
managers  of  banking  to  be  buyers  of  the  staple  of  a  coun- 
try ;  wheat  for  instance.  When  the  crop  comes  in,  the  price 
will  be  kept  down,  by  appreciating  op  purifying  paper  cur- 
rency, by  lessening  the  quantity.  Under  this  influence, 
those  who  work  the  furnace,  buy.  The  loss,  like  adultera- 
tions of  specie,  falls  upon  ignorance  and  industry.  It  is  a 
law  of  maximum,  or  for  fixing  prices,  except  that  an  in- 
terested party  regulates  them,  instead  of  a  goYernr^rrt, 


t 

This  incessant  fluctuation,  in  the  intrinsiek  value  of  t»anfc 
urrepcy,  is  at  least  more  likely  to  favour  cunning,  knavish, 
ialculating  speculation,  than  simple,  honest,  thoughtless 
industry.  Those  who  settle  the  carat  of  this  currency,  are 
buyers  ;  upon  what  principle  to  he  found  in  human  nature 
hy  the  grossest  credulity,  can  they  he  possibly  induced  to 
use  this  mwer,  for  the  purpose  of  enhancing  the  value  of 
Bommodities  they  huy  ? 

K  the  government  of  the  fluctuation  or  carat  of  hank 
currency,  was  in  the  hands  of  a  native  mercantile  interest, 
an  interest  would  undoubtedly  endeavour  to  gratify  the 
!o  .>"  <»ain,  by  using  it  to  huy  as  cheap,  and  to  sell  as  dear 
as  I  ■  >  lid  ;  and  it  would  he  to  a  considerable  extent  suc- 
cessful ;  but  although  it  would  appropriate  to  its  own  use, 
the  whole  mass  of  gain  transferred  by  this  fluctuation  front 
the  other  interests  of  society,  yet  the  n  vould  possess 

the  consolation  of  reflecting,  that  its  loss  remained  at  home, 
and  would  return  to  it,  (he  species  of  retribution,)  arising 
from  individu  :ndour,  munificonc;c  and  luxury.  I>utifa 

foreign  eapital  should  acquire  an  influence  over  the  quanti- 
ty, fluctuation  or  carat  of  bank  paper,  the  wealth,  collect 
cd  by  it  will  be  drawn  to  a  foreign  country.  This  is  not 
all  the  calamity.  If  such  a  foreign  capital  or  interest, 
should  be  iha  buyer  of  our  exports,  a  power  over  the  quan- 
tity pr  carat  of  bank  paper,  will  enable  it  to  diminish  the 
exportation  price,  for  the  hencflt  of  itself,  and  its  own  coun- 
try. The  degree  of  influence  held  by  British  capital  over 
American  banks,  cannot  be  estimated.  Whatev:  r  it  is,  a 
correspondent  degree  of  effect  must  follow.  It  can  dimin- 
ish the  prices  of  our  exports  both  here  and  in  Britain,  and 
increase  the  English  profit  on  re-exportation.  The  whole 
diminution  it  can  cause,  in  the  price  of  any  article,  is  its 
gain  and  our  loss.  If  in  the  article  of  tobacco,  for  instance, 
this  gain  is  made  on  re-exportation  to  other  countries;  if  on 
that  of  cotton,  on  its  return,  in  a  manufactured  state,  in  a 
large  amount,  to  this. 


BANKING.  SS  5 

A  variation  in  the  value  or  carat  of  monev,  defeats  its 
genuine  end,  and  usefulness.  It  is  the  measure  of  all  pro- 
perty, as  the  bushel  is  a  measure  of  grain.  Permanency 
makes  measures  the  vehicles  of  justice  ;  fluctuation,  of 
fraud.  If  a  fixed  measure  for  some  articles  of  property, 
will  dispense  justice  and  discourage  fraud ;  a  fluctuating 
measure  for  all  articles  of  property,  must  dispense  fraud 
and  discourage  justice.  False  weights  and  measures  will 
corrupt  morals,  and  a  corruption  of  morals,  will  overturn 
governments  founded  in  good  principles.  If  such  is  the  ef- 
fect of  a  fraudulent  mode  of  weighing  and  measuring  pro- 
perty, by  scales  and  measures,  capable  of  being  examined 
by  the  senses,  and  easy  of  detection  ;  what  will  be  the  ef- 
fect of  measuring  property,  by  a  fraudulent  mode,  beyond 
the  reach  of  the  eye,  and  only  to  be  detected  by  patient  and 
deep  investigation  ?  Fluctuating  money  makes  all  weights 
and  measures  false.  By  extending  and  diminishing  price 
alternately,  the  utmost  evil  of  false  weights  and  measures  \%> 
produced.  A  few  men,  whose  interest  it  is  to  do  se,  can 
cause  the  carat  of  bank  currency,  to  fluctuate  without  con- 
trol, account  or  punishment.  When  it  diminishes  the  price 
of  property  (wheat  for  instance)  twenty-five  per  centum, 
the  effect  to  the  seller  is  the  same,  as  if  the  buyer  had  se- 
cretly added  one  fourth  to  the  capacity  of  the  bushel :  when 
it  increases  the  price  co-extensively,  the  effect  to  this  buyer, 
now  the  seller,  is  like  cutting  off  one  fourth  of  the  same  ca- 
pacity. And  the  managers  of  the  fluctuation,  or  carat  of 
the  measure,  may  thus  gain  twenty-five  per  centum,  unjust- 
ly, by  each  operation. 

A  fluctuation  between  the  two  steadiest  measures  of  pro- 
perty, gold  and  silver,  has  at  some  periods  trenched  consi- 
derably upon  fair  dealing,  ami  produced  oppressive  conse- 
quences ;  adulterations  of  coin,  are  partial  and  temporary 
aggravations  of  these  consequences,  which  are  nev;er  long 
enduted,  because  the  process  is  physical,  and  easy  to  de- 
tect ;  and  fluctuations  of  bank  paper,  from  which  the  same 
effects  in   their  utmost  malignancy  and  permanency  mwst 

SO 


58b  HANKING. 

follow,  are  endured,  because  the  process  of  detection  is  me- 
taphysical. 

If  the  senses  cannot  perceive,  that  the  same  moral  cause 
will  produce  similar  effects  ;  and  that  if  a  fluctuation  in  the 
measure  of  property,  by  the  two  first  modes,  brings  oppres- 
sion, its  fluctuation  by  the  third  will  also  bring  it;  let 
the  mind  reflect  upon  the  following  supposition,  congenial 
with  this  third  mode.  Suppose  a  corporation,  exclusively 
possessed  of  the  knowledge  of  assaying  metals,  to  be  endow- 
ed also  with  the  right  of  coinage,  without  cheek  or  control, 
or  any  knowledge  in  the  nation,  as  to  the  quantity  of  money 
made,  or  what  it  was  made  of.  This  corporation  would  re- 
semble banking  in  all  its  aspects  but  one.  A  banking  coin- 
age, by  managing  fluctuation,  or  frequently  changing  the 
measure  of  property,  may  sell  dear  and  buy  cheap  ;  it  can 
throw  alloy  into  paper,  by  the  medium  of  quantity,  and 
take  it  out  by  the  medium  of  scarcity,  at  the  national  ex- 
ptBise ;  but  the  coining  corporation  have  no  means  of  ex- 
tracting the  alloy  thrown  into  gold  or  silver,  without  suffer- 
ing themselves.  Herein  the  cases  differ.  The  coining  cor- 
poration, can  only  fleece  the  nation  by  putting  in  the  alloy, 
but  the  paper  corporation  tan  fleece  it  by  taking  out  as  well 
as  by  putting  in  the  alloy.  This  power  is  an  invisible  agent, 
who  pares,  clips  or  sweats  property  at  e\Qry  contract,  by 
making  its  measure  contract  or  dilate  according  to  his  inte- 
rest. 

A  nation  must  have  permanent  standards  for  measuring 
power  and  property,  and  perfectly  understand  their  capacity, 
or  cease  to  be  free.  If  a  legislature,  though  annually  elect- 
ed, can  invent  a  measure,  for  transferring  either  to  them- 
selves or  their  faction,  they  will  make  it  as  capacious  as 
they  please.  The  office  of  our  constitutions,  is  to  Jake  this 
identical  power  from  our  legislatures.  A  bushel  of  money 
absorbs  power,  or  a  bushel  of  power,  money,  as  a  bushel  of 
sand  does  water. 

By  fraudulent  modes  of  measuring  property,  nations  arc 
afciversaUv  enslaved,      Thus   the  feudal  system  enslaved 


«  AN  KING.  387 

The  fraud  consisted  in  accumulating  land  in  the  hands  of  a 
few,  under  pretence  of  compensating  these  few  for  de- 
fending a  multitude.  The  papal  hierarchy  became  a  tyran- 
ny from  a  fraudulent  mode  of  measuring  property  on 
earth,  hy  the  artifice  of  selling  heaven.  Patronage  gene- 
rates despotism,  simply  from  heing  a  frnudulent  mode  of 
measuring  property;  it  is  not  an  empty  of-Iiec,  butt-he 
wealth  which  it  transfers  or  measures  out  from  the  many 
to  the  few,  in  which  its  tyranny  consists.  All  these  are 
modes  of  oppression,  only  because  t!iey  are  fraudulent  modes 
of  measuring  property.  They  are  indirect,  hut  money  i§ 
the  direct  mode  of  this  mensuration.  Though  money  is  li- 
mited to  specie,  and  should  possess  the  steady  value  of  a 
known  and  fixed  carat,  vet  these  indirect  modes  enslave  na- 
tions  by  measuring  out  property  unfairly.  But  if  money, 
the  direct  mode  of  measuring  all  property,  can  he  made  to 
fluctuate  in  value  or  capacity,  by  a  few  corporations,  t he- 
operation  in  transferring  and  accumulating  property,  must 
be  infinitely  more  rapid,  than  the  operation  of  any  indi- 
rect mode  :  and  the  effect  infinitely  more  certain.  It  is  this 
operation  which  terminates  in  tyranny,  whether  it  is  pro- 
duced, directly  or  indirectly,  by  fraud,  accident  or  pretend- 
ed necessity.  By  ending  in  accumulation,  sufficient  to  be- 
get a  separate  interest,  the  tyranny  follows  of  course. 
Whether  hanking  therefore  is  founded  in  fraud  or  honesty* 
in  deception  or  sincerity,  is  unimportant  to  the  inquiry. 
So  long  as  it  is  a  mode  of  measuring  property  unequally  by 
law,  and  not  by  industry,  capable  of  begetting  a  separate  in- 
terest in  a  nation,  it  must  produce  the  effect  produced  by 
the  feudal,  hierarchical  and  patronage  systems  ;  because 
the  effect  of  all  three  flowed  from  their  being  modes  of  mea- 
suring out  property  unequally  by  law,  so  as  to  beget  a  sepa- 
rate interest  in  a  nation.  Throughout  the  history  of  the  ci- 
vilized world,  the  admeasurement  of  property  by  industry, 
has  bred  patriots  ;  by  law,  traitors  to  the  liberty  and  hap- 
piness of  nations.  Will  the  form  of  a  caliber,  render  a  ball 
propelled  by  the  same  force,  harmless?  Principle  is  th*» 


'3#8  BANKING 

powder  which  produces  the  effects  of  moral  artillery.  The 
powder  of  banking  is  precisely  the  same,  with  that  used  by 
the  feudal  system,  hierarchy  and  patronage,  to  batter  hu- 
man liberty  ;  namely,  a  distribution  of  property,  not  by  in- 
dustry, but  by  law.  Wherein  consists  the  oppression  of  mo- 
narchy and  aristocracy,  except  in  being  such  modes  of  mea 
suring  property  ?  Wherein  consists  the  fraud  of  these 
modes,  except  in  making  this  distribution,  by  the  unjust 
measures,  law,  and  fluctuating  adulterated  money,  instead 
of  leaving  it  to  be  made  by  the  just  measures,  industry,  and 
money  of  a  steady  and  known  carat  ? 

We  have  supposed  the  case  of  one  state,  erected  by  con- 
gress into  a  corporation,  with  the  exclusive  power  of  sup- 
plying the  others  with  bank  currency.  Let  us  subjoin  to 
ihe  supposition,  the  idea  of  the  incorporated  state  being 
mercantile,  and  the  others,  agricultural.  How  forcibly 
are  the  effects  illustrated,  of  a  power  in  one  dealer,  to 
regulate  the  value  of  the  currency,  or  the  capacity  of  the 
measure,  by  which  the  price  of  property  is  regulated  for 
both.  The  whole  agricultural  interest,  unadulterated  by 
any  commixture  with  the  banking  interest,  occupies  the 
precise  place  of  the  unprivileged  states.  In  the  case  sup- 
posed, the  oppression  would  not  be  borne  for  a  nwment ; 
because  the  suffering  being  would  be  equal  in  union,  saga- 
city and  power,  to  the  inflicting  being.  It  is  borne  in  the 
case  existing,  because  the  suffering  beings,  are  unequal  in 
union,  sagacity  and  power,  to  the  inflicting  beings.  Indivi- 
dual ignorance,  passion  and  folly,  is  no  match  for  corporate 
knowledge,  calmness  and  cunning.  To  let  loose  upon  a 
nation,  a  faction,  enlisted  and  disciplined  by  charters  and 
avarice,  for  the  purpose  of  gathering  money  of  individuals, 
is  a  project,  equivalent  to  that  of  letting  loose  a  veteran 
army  upon  an  undisciplined  militia. 

Banking  exclaims,  let  individuals  shift  for  themselves. 
A  band  of  conjurers  or  robbers,  requires  only  that  indivi- 
duals should  be  left  to  shift  for  themselves.  Individuals  can 
never  defend  themselves  against  associations.     Tlie  design 


BANKING.  38i* 

of  government,  is  to  protect  individuals  against  these  very 
associations.  The  tyranny  of  fraud  is  not  less  oppressive, 
than  that  of  force.  All  national  grievances  act  upon  indi- 
viduals. A  redundancy  of  circulating  paper  stock,  collect- 
ing an  enormous  tax,  must  act  upon  individuals,  like  other 
national  grievances.  If  the  ten  hundred  millions  of  such 
stock  in  England,  was  suddenly  converted  into  specie,  what- 
ever  would  fly  away  to  other  countries*  would  be  the  por- 
tion of  currency,  useless,  and  therefore  oppressive  to  the  ex- 
tent of  the  tax  it  gathered,  The  specie  expelled  hy  hank 
paper  from  the  United  States,  was  made  by  that  paper  a 
redundancy  of  currency,  i:seless,  or  it  would  have  remained  j 
the  tax  paid  for  a  paper  redundancy,  which  cannot  follow 
the  specie,  is  an  oppression  similar  to  the  English.  We 
see  in  the  example  of  England,  the  errour  of  an  opinion, 
that  the  quantity  of  a  paper  currency  will  he  regulated  hy 
national  wants ;  we  see  in  America,  that  hank  currency 
soon  expels  as  redundant,  a  sum  of  specie  currency,  and 
takes  its  place  to  a  far  greater  amount ;  we  see  that  this 
redundancy,  though  unnecessary  and  pernicious,  can  gather 
wealth  for  a  separate  interest  j  to  what  amount,  England 
has  laboured  in  vain  to  discover,  for  a  whole  century. 
What  expedient  can  individuals  use  to  avoid  these  calami- 
ties ? 

Let  individuals  shift  for  themselves.  What  is  this,  but  to 
exclude  them  from  the  benefits  of  government  and  socie- 
ty ?  Unassociated,  the  bitter  beverage,  prescribed  by  the 
paper  capitalists  to  the  English  manufacturers,  must  replen- 
ish their  cups.  There,  capital  thrives,  and  labour  starves. 
Here,  industry  has  hitherto  regularly  gained  from  capital 
possessed  by  idleness.  This  wholesome  operation  will  be 
reversed,  as  in  England,  by  factitious  capital,  able  to  tax 
and  out-thrive  industry.  It  can  as  easily  become  the  mas- 
ter of  the  industry  applied  to  the  earth,  as  of  that  applied 
to  the  products  of  the  earth.  The  portion  of  a  nation  sub- 
ject to.  supply  the  income  of  a  paper  capital,  is  not  in  fact  in 
a  state  of  society.     Union,  or  association  implies  equality. 


£-90  BANKING. 

But  what  equality  exists  between  infliction  and  suffering,  be- 
tween extortion  and  payment  (  Can  a  society  or  association 
be  formed  ot'a  party  of  masters  and  a  party  of  slaves  ?  Those 
associated  by  law,  cry  out,  "  let  those  out  of  this  legal  society 
shift  for  themselves."  Gentlemen,  our  policy  intended  to 
give  an  equal  chance  to  us  all  in  shifting  for  ourselves. 
Throw  away  the  law  charter  tubes,  contrived  for  sucking 
subsistence  from  those  at  work,  as  the  vampire  sucks  blood 
from  those  asleep.  However  insensible  we  are  of  the  ope- 
ration, as  \ou  distend  we  contract,  and  must  dwindle  into 
your  slaves,  if  the  process  continues.  If  it  is  right  that  in- 
dividuals should  be  left  by  government  to  shift  for  them- 
selves, why  is  the  enchanted  mantle  of  law  charter  drawn 
over  you,  which  makes  those  under  its  cover  flourish.  and 
withers  all  »vitimi  thy  peach  of  its  shadow  ? 

When  Wdlpole  and  the  whigs  invented  the  paper  system 
of  England,  the  increase  of  nominal  price  it  promised,  pleas- 
ed the  nation,  and  established  the  party.  Inquire  now  of 
the  nation,  what  pleasure  the  system  gives  them,  and  you 
are  answered  with  groans.  A  party,  called  federal,  in  the 
United  States,  repeated  Walpole's  experiment  with  some 
success,  by  exhibiting  to  the  nation  the  phantom  of  addition- 
al price,  and  giving  to  stockholders  real  weak])  and  power* 
at  the  national  expense.  And  a  party,  called  republican, 
incited  by  the  pecuniary  and  political  success  of  these  pro- 
genitors, are  repeating  the  same  experiment,  to  gain  the 
same  substances,  by  an  exhibition  of  the  same  phantom. 
Yet  it  is  notorious,  that  it  is  the  circulator,  and  not  the  re- 
ceiver of  bank  notes,  who  grows  rich.  No  corporation  ever 
asked  a  legislature,  for  the  privilege  of  receiving  paper. 
The  British  nation  belong  to  paper  stock,  and  not  paper 
stock  to  the  British  nation.  The  whole  juggle  is  managed 
aecording  to  the  arithmetick  ofLaputa.  Suppose  a  nation 
raises  a  certain  quantity  of  exportable  commodities,  mea- 
sured by  the  universal  standard,  gold  or  silver,  bank  projec- 
tors pretend  to  increase  the  quantity  to  what  extent  they 
please,  by  substituting  a  paper  rocasHre.     And  if  they  can 


fiANKING.  «jyi 

increase  them  a  jot,  by  altering  the  mode  of  measuring 
them,  it  is  confessed  that  they  can  increase  them  without 
limitation.  For  this  project,  the  nation  at  first  pays  the 
projectors  live  millions  worth  of  the  commodities  measured 
by  the  old  standard.  Thus  the  nation  lose,  and  the  projec- 
tors gain  already  an  eighth  part  of  these  commodities.  As 
the  paper  is  increased,  the  opulence  of  the  projectors  ami 
the  impoverishment  of  the  nation,  correspondency  follow. 
When  the  projectors  gain  twenty  millions  annually,  the  na- 
tion loses  half  its  exportable  substance,  for  a  numerical 
phantom,  by  which  to  measure  the  other  half.  England 
gives  the  whole  substance  for  this  phantom.  It  is  Wood's 
project  in  a  worse  form,  as  his  half-pence  contained  some 
eopper. 

The  engines  of  Archimedes  destroyed  the  Romans, 
whilst  they  could  not  see  from  whence  their  fate  proceeded. 
Moral  engines  are  for  the  same  reason  concealed  from  those 
on  whom  they  play.  And  these  moral  engineers,  more  skil- 
ful than  Archimedes,  often  persuade  their  victims,  joyfully 
to  stretch  out  their  necks  to  the  stroke,  like  Turkish  fana- 
ticks,  under  a  persuasion  that  it  will  waft  them  to  paradise. 

Taxation  is  a  power,  infinitely  dangerous,  and  liable  to 
abuse  in  the  hands  of  a  separate  interest.  In  England,  the 
noble  interest  cannot  even  propose  a  money  bill.  In  Ame- 
rica, the  banking  interest  taxes,  raises  or  diminishes  these 
taxes,  and  publickly  divides  its  collections,  of  about  five  mil- 
lions annually,  under  charters  for  long  terms,  without  the 
knowledge  or  control  of  the  people,  or  their  representatives. 
Patriotism  is  even  more  fusible  than  conscience,  in  money. 
We  know  that  those  who  rob  nations,  do  reallv  feel  as  if 
they  were  virtuous  and  honorable  men,  and  would  scorn  to 
steal  a  shilling.  Hence  the  danger  of  exposing  ourselves  to 
be  taxed,  directly  or  indirectly,  by  an  individual  or  a  corpo- 
ration. Feudal  barons  were  liberal,  and  hierarchical  dig 
nitaries,  charitable.  Yet  they  oppressed  nations  by  their  pri- 
vileges, with  a  good  conscience.  This  is  the  best  morality 
to  whirh  banking  can  aspire,     Our  policy  has  exploded  \t 


by  considering  the  criminality  of  injuring  a  nation,  as  ampli- 
fied beyond  that  of  injuring  an  individual,  by  the  whole  ad- 
ditional extent  of  the  mischief. 

Between  accumulation  by  banking,   and  division  by  ex- 
cluding perpetuities  and  primogeniture  ;  between  exclusive 
chartered  interest  and  general  social  interest ;    between 
publick  and  corporate,  or  party  influence  over  legislatures  ; 
no  resemblance  in  principle,  no  sympathy  exists.     They  are 
all  contraries  and  antipathies.  A  republican  w  ill  deride  Mr. 
\dafcns's  idea,  of  forming  a  quiet,  permanent  and  happy  go- 
vernment, with  contrary   and  unfriendly  principles ;    and 
attempt  himself  to  reconcile  enmities,  inspired  by  clashing 
pecuniary  interests,  at  least  as  malevolent  as  those  inspired 
by  orders.     Exclusive  privileges,  for  gathering  money,  pro- 
duce parties  more  hostile  to  each  other,  and  consequently  to 
human  happiness,  than  exclusive  honorary  titles.     From 
the.  spirit  of  discord  and  injustice,  infused  into  nations  by 
titles,  arise  the  objections  to  Mr.  Adams's  system.     Is  this 
spirit  most  malignant  whetted  upon  the  warm  and  flexible 
bosom  of  honour,   or  upon  the  cold  and  hard  liver  of  ava- 
rice ?  In  what  unexplored  depths  of  intellect,  is  to  be  found 
the  patriotism  and  consistency  of  zeal,  against  and  for  the 
same  evil  principle,  selecting  its  most  aggravated  forms, 
both  for  reprobation  and  eulogy  ? 

"Wealth,  it  was  observed,  absorbed  power,  as  sand  docs 
water.  Another  figure  may  place  the  idea  in  a  stronger 
light.  It  attracts,  contains  and  discharges  power,  as 
clouds  do  the  electrical  fire.  Nothing  can  withstand  its 
bolts.  Wealth  accumulated  by  legal  means  is  here  spo- 
ken of;  that  within  the  reach  of  human  industry,  heing 
like  genial  clouds,  as  incapable  of  attracting  a  dangerous 
surcharge  of  the  moral,  as  such  clouds  of  the  subtile  phy- 
sical fluid.  Can  Congress  and  the  state  legislatures,  con- 
sistently with  our  policy,  create  bylaw,  this  electrical  ma- 
chine, able  to  shock  or  destroy  our  constitutions  ? 

Words  hold  principles,  as  sieves  do  water.  In  the  words 
therefore,  and  not  in  the  principles  of  our  constitutions 


HANKING.  $93 

parties  seek  tor  the  chartering  power.  There,  although  a 
power  in  Congress,  to  hestow  an  exclusive  banking  charter 
on  all  the  citizens  of  one  state,  could  not  possibly  be  found, 
all  parties  have  found  a  power  to  bestow  it  on  a  few  of  them* 
or  on  a  few  aliens.  And  under  this  construction  of  the 
words  of  constitutions,  not  containing  a  single  word  relat- 
ing to  banking,  people  are  fined,  hanged  and  imprisoned 
with  the  common  consent  of  judges,  juries  and  lawyers,  out 
of  imitation  to  the  English  stockjobbing  system.  If  legisla- 
tures can  destroy  political  law  or  constitutions,  by  any  mode 
not  verbally  prohibited,  the  exclusive  right  of  the  people  to 
pronounce  this  law,  or  to  establish  constitutions,  is  a  sha- 
dow ;  as  a  specification  of  every  mode  for  destroying  con- 
stitutions by  law,  is  impossible.  In  this  right  consists  their 
sovereignty.  The  people  may  call  as  many  conventions  as 
they  please  for  fixing  the  principles  of  their  government, 
but  these  principles  can  never  be  fixed,  if  legislatures  can 
destroy  them  in  any  mode  not  verbally  prohibited.  All  our 
constitutions,  recognise  and  labour  to  fortify  this  right  of 
the  people;  therefore  an  indirect  legislative  mode  of  des- 
troying it,  must  be  equally  unconstitutional,  with  a  positive 
law  for  that  purpose. 

If  banking  charters,  like  all  other  modes  for  measuring 
wealth  by  law,  will  change  the  nature  and  principles  of  go- 
vernments, they  arc  as  unconstitutional,  and  as  subversive  oi" 
the  sovereignty  of  the  people,  as  a  law  for  creating  a  king 
or  an  order  of  nobles.  The  five  millions  at  this  time  taken 
annually  from  the  people  by  these  instruments,  have  alrea- 
dy begotten  a  political  power  able  to  influence  governments. 
This  magnet  for  attracting  power,  grows  daily.  Anticipate 
its  effects,  by  contrasting  the  accumulation  it  may  end  in, 
with  an  equal  division  of  property.  Would  the  political  ef- 
fects of  the  two  measures  be  the  same  ?  Would  these  contra 
ries  generate  contrary  forms  of  government?  If  they  would, 
then  both  are  in  substance,  political  or  constitutional  law, 
and  legislatures  have  as  little  right  to  pass  basking  laws, 

SI 


39i  BAA  KING. 

for  the  accumulation',  as  agrarian  laws,  for  the  division  of 
property. 

If  it  is  contended,  that  the  state  and  general  legisla- 
tures, cannot  pass  laws  for  dividing  property,  but  that  they 
may  pass  laws  for  its  accumulation  in  the  hands  of  a  char- 
tered interest  ;  or  that  laws  either  for  the  division  or  accu- 
mulation of  property,  are  of  an  honest  and  genuine  munici- 
pal nature,  without  possessing  a  capacity  to  model  power, 
and  change  governments ;  and  if  these  assertions  can  be 
proved,  we  must  proceed  to  the  following  argument. 

The  formation  of  society,  and  the  alteration  of  its  con 
stituent  rules,  are  ad.nitted  by  our  policy  to  be  rights  exclu- 
sively lodged  in  the  people,  in  which  rights  the  government 
they  establish  have  no  share.     It  is  also  admitted,  that  the 
rights  subsisting  previous  to  the  compacts  called  constitu- 
tions, all  remain,  except  those  relinquished  for  the  sake  of 
forming  the  government.  Banking  diminishes  these  remain 
ing  rights,   by  transferring  a  portion  of  them  to  a  new  so- 
ciety, not  formed  by  the  people.     But  the  government  has 
no  power  to  touch  rights,  not  surrendered  by  the  people  foi 
its  formation.     It  was  lately  stated,  that  if  a  legislature  can 
hy  law  form  a  new  society,  to  draw  money  artificially  from 
the  rest  of  a  nation,  that  the  residue  of  the  old  society  was 
no   longer  in   a  social  state.     By  the   association  of  the 
people,    the   principle  of  an   equality  of  rights   may   be 
asserted  and  established.      By  the  association  of  the  go- 
vernment, the  contrary  and  artificial  principle  of  exclusive 
privilege,  may  be  asserted  and  established.     Property,  by 
the  association  of  the  people,  may  be  placed  under  the  pro- 
tection of  the  first  principle  ;  by  the  association  of  the  go- 
vernment, it  may  be  exposed  to  Urn  depredations  of  the  se 
cond.     The  first  association  makes  an  entire  nation  ;    the 
second  divides  that  nation  into  two,    privileged  and  unprivi- 
leged.    The  object  of  one,  may  be  the  general  good  ;  of  the 
other,  to  make  the  general  good  subservient  to  private  ava- 
rice.     Both  their  principles  and  ends  may  be  precisely  op 
positc.     Suppose   this  new- formed  little  nation,   had  been 


U.iNKING.  31)6 

invested  by  government  with  a  power  of  waging  war,  against 
the  lives  of  the  associates  under  the  old  compact  ,•  would  it 
not  have  violated  the  rights  never  surrendered  by  the  peo- 
ple to  the  government  ?  Do  charters  to  a  few,  for  waging 
war  against  the  lives  or  against  the  property  of  the  rest, 
differ  in  principle?  Do  not  both  equally  violate  the  rights 
never  surrendered  by  the  people  of  the  United  States  in 
forming  governments?  Where  is  the  difference  between 
taking  away  the  arms  or  the  wealth  of  the  great  nation,  and 
giving  them  to  the  little  nation  ?  Is  it  not  obvious,  that  a 
new  association,  by  which  either  is  affected,  however  called, 
overturns  the  old  association  ?  From  that  moment,  no  asso- 
ciation but  the  new  exists  ;  because  its  operation  makes  the 
old  association  inoperative.  The  government  which  con- 
trives, will  adhere  to  the  new  compact,  against  the  old,  con- 
trived by  the  nation.  Those  without  the  new  society,  to 
which  the  government  has  deserted,  belong  to  no  society  ; 
and  those  within  it,  belong  not  to  the  old  society  formed 
by  the  constitution,  but  to  the  new  one,  into  which  they  are 
formed  bv  law. 

To  illustrate  the  case  with  which  the  principles  of  the 
society,  established  by  the  people,  may  be  destroyed  by  a 
hanking  fabrick,  reared  by  law,  let  us  suppose  Congress  to 
create  a  bank,  in  which  the  state  governments  should  re- 
ceive allotments  of  stock,  equal  or  superior  to  the  state  ex- 
penses. As  it  would  be  easy,  by  such  an  institution,  to 
suppress  all  other  banks,  the  capacity  of  this  engine  to  pro- 
duce an  income  adequate  to  the  end,  is  unquestionable. 
Would  it  not  commute  the  constitutional  policy  established 
by  the  people,  for  a  new  policy  growing  out  of  such  a  law  ? 
A.11  the  old  cheeks  and  divisions  of  power  would  be  o>er- 
thrown.  The  pecuniary  dependence  of  the  state  govern- 
ments upon  the  people,  would  cease.  The  independence  in 
their  allotted  spheres  of  the  state,  on  the  general  govern 
ment,  would  also  cease.  The  state  governments  would  be* 
come  wholly  dependent  on  Congress  for  money,  by  the  disuse 
of  the  people  to  their  taxes,  which  like  poison  administered 


396  BANKING. 

in  honey,  would  be  too  pleasant  for  ignorance  to  resist. 
Congress  would  see  and  use  the  influence  thence  arising, 
and  the  state  governments  would  be  such  checks  upon  the 
general  government,  as  those  receiving  salaries  at  his  will, 
are  upon  a  king.  A  charter  of  the  general  government 
would  give  money  to  the  state  governments,  to  gain  a 
power  inconsistent  with  the  charters  by  which  both  were 
created.  The  political  consequences  of  a  proposal  to  sub- 
ject the  state  governments  to  a  pecuniary  dependence  upon 
the  government  of  England,  would  be  at  once  perceived.  Is 
there  more  danger  that  they  will  merge  into  the  English 
government,  than  into  the  general  government  ?  Would 
political  or  constitutional  changes  grow  out  of  the  remote 
cause,  and  none  out  of  the  near  one  ?  Let  us  suppose  that 
the  general  government  should  be  made  dependent  for  reve- 
nue upon  bank  stock  under  state  law  charters,  and  the  peo- 
ple to  be  thereby  trained  into  the  habit  of  paying  nothing 
towards  its  support.  Would  it  have  an  influence  upon  our 
constitutional  policy  and  endanger  that  government  ?  If 
such  would  be  the  effect  of  placing  the  general  government 
under  a  pecuniary  dependence  upon  state  charters,  the  effect 
of  the  converse  of  the  proposition  is  certain. 

If  a  foreign  government  should  acquire  such  a  pecu- 
niary influence  over  the  state  governments,  the  considera- 
tions, that  no  political  or  pecuniary  connexion  existed 
between  it.  and  our  people,  and  that  it  did  not  procure  mo- 
ney for  the  state  governments  at  their  expense,  by  spread- 
ing a  corrupted  faction  among  them  ;  would  present  a  fee- 
Me  resistance  to  its  destructive  effects  upon  our  policy  ;  but 
no  considerations  equally  consolatory  occur  in  the  case  of  a 
similar  influence,  possessed  by  the  general  government. 
The  state  governments  being  bribed  to  favour  the  minority 
nation  created  by  the  general  government,  a  triple  combi- 
nation necessarily  becomes  the  real  government,  and  repre- 
sentation would  be  used  as  its  instrument,  just  as  it  is  used 
m  England.  Corruption  would  settle  down  from  the  head 
to  the  foot  of  the  nation. 


BANKING.  397 

If  banking  would  change  our  form  of  government  in  the 
supposed  mode,  it  demonstrates  the  capacity  of  law  for  that 
end.  Ifit  could  thus  influence  legislatures,  it  demonstrates 
its  capacity  to  form  individuals  into  corrupt  factions.  And 
if  it  would  he  dangerous  to  any  society,  should  a  foreign  na- 
tion create  a  corrupt  faction  by  a  pecuniary  influence  within 
its  bowels,  it  is  more  dangerous  to  it  that  its  own  govern- 
ment should  do  so,  for  the  reasons  by  which  the  danger  of 
an  influence,  foreign  or  domestick,  over  the  state  govern- 
ments, is  graduated. 

The  course  of  reasoning  pursued  by  this  essay,  results 
in  the  definition,  that  a  transfer  of  property  by  law,  is 
aristocracy,  and  that  aristocracy  is  a  transfer  of  •proper- 
ty by  laiv.  Mr.  Adams's  book  is  eminently  instructive,  by 
proving  that  aristocracy  has  every  where  generated  cala- 
mitous struggles  between  these  who  gained,  and  those  who 
lost  property.  Besides  the  unavoidable  atrocities  of  en- 
riched and  impoverished  factions,  Mr.  Adams  proves  by  a 
multitude  of  examples,  that  the  same  aristocratical  policy, 
will  induce  one  or  the  other  of  these  factions  to  destroy  eve- 
ry vestige  of  free  government ;  the  enriched,  to  fortify  their 
fraudulent  wealth  and  power  ;  the  impoverished,  to  flee  for 
refuge  against  many  tyrants,  under  one.  It  is  true  that  the 
banking  mode  of  introducing  these  mischiefs,  like  the  ba- 
lancing, will  ascribe  them  to  an  inartificial  texture  of  the 
machine,  but  it  will  not  gain  the  long  credit  of  other  aristo- 
cratical principles,  because  its  superior  rapacity  will  haster? 
it  on  towards  the  usual  catastrophe  of  political  fraud. 


[      S98     J 


SECTION  THE  SIXTH 


THE    GOOD     MORAL     PRINCIPLES     OF      THE      GO- 
VERNMENT    OF    THE    UNITED    STATES, 


JLSy  understanding  the  defects  of  our  policy,  we  are  ena- 
ble! to  correct. them  j  by  understanding  its  beauties,  we 
shall  scorn  the  delusive  attractions  of  its  ostentatious  rivals. 
Its  actual  dispensation  of  moro  happiness  than  any  existing 
competitor,  demonstrates  its  superiority  to  the  existing 
world  ;  and  testimony  gathered  from  tombs,  by  title,  or- 
ders and  exclusive  interest,  or  fashioned  for  the  purpose 
which  induced  priests  to  fashion  oracles,  is  not  equally  cre- 
dible. The  Augustan  age  itself,  invoked  by  monarchy  to 
confront  with  republican  government,  is  like  the  golden 
one,  a  fiction.  It  was  moulded  by  those  who  received,  not 
by  those  who  supplied,  the  exactions  of  monarchy.  A  des 
potick  and  artful  man,  did  not  corrupt  the  talents  of  one 
age,  to  buy  truth  for  the  use  of  another.  Truth  is  never 
disclosed,  except  by  talents  which  are  independent,  and  in- 
quirics  which  arc  free.  Augustus  was  the  monarch  of  the 
whole  learned  world  ;  Lewis  XIV  was  the  monarch  of 
France.  Had  France  contained  the  learning  of  the  world, 
the  age  of  Lewis,  would  have  furnished  the  same  evidence 
in  favour  of  monarchy,  as  is  furnished  by  the  age  of  Angus 
tus.  We  only  know  that  the  reign  of  Lewis  exhausted  the 
adulation,  the  purses  and  the  liberty  of  his  subjects,  be- 
cause it  is  described  by  persons,  neither  his  sycophants  nor 
slaves.  Of  the  Augustan  age  we  now  judge  from  such  ma- 
terials, as  posterity  would  have  done  of  the  reign  of  Lewis* 
upon  the  exclusive  evidence  of  his  vj»nal  panegyrists  or  dis- 
mayed dependants. 


THE    GOOD    MORAL    PRINCIPLES    OF    &C.  39b 

It  is  by  travelling  from  the  court  to  the  cottage,  that  the 
effects  of  political  principles  upon  human  happiness,  can  be 
computed.  Hence,  existing  nations,  can  only  confide  in  ex- 
isting cases.  The  cottager  has  no  historian  to  commemo- 
rate his  misery,  and  the  historian  of  the  prince  is  bribed  to 
hide  it. 

Soldiers  and  statesmen  think  the  French  and  English 
forms  of  government  the  most  perfect,  because  they  are  the 
most  partial  to  their  own  professions  ;  and  strive  to  bend  all 
freer  forms  towards  these  models  best  contrived  for  their 
own  gratification,  because  that  effect  is  the  logician  which 
defines  their  patriotism.  The  policy  of  the  United  States 
was  contrived  for  advancing  the  prosperity  of  an  entire  so- 
ciety ;  but  it  cannot  be  preserved  against  the  «  ower  and  arts 
of  soldiers,  statesmen,  or  separate  interests  of  any  kind,  ex- 
cept by  discerning  the  principles  of  government  calculated 
to  dispense  general  good,  with  the  same  aeuteness  by  which 
the  creatures  of  legislative  partiality,  discern  whatever  will 
transfer  wealth  and  power  from  nations  to  themselves. 

The  moral,  like  the  physical  world,  is  subject  to  system 
and  regularity.  It  is  not  left  by  Omnipotence  in  a  state  so 
chaotick,  as  that  the  same  moral  cause,  should  now  produce 
good,  and  then  evil.  Men  do  not  entrust  their  sheep  to 
wolves,  because  it  is  fabled  that  once  wolves  were  not  carni- 
verous.  The  description  of  monarchical  governments,  by  the 
minions  of  its  frauds,  or  the  candidates  for  its  treasures,  is 
entitled  to  the  same  credit  as  the  description  of  the  wolf  in 
the  fictions  of  poetry. 

The  fact  we  have  assumed,  lies  before  the  senses  of  the 
reader.  Let  him  look  at  the  monarchies  of  the  present  agey 
and  then  at  the  United  States.  Let  him  listen  to  the  groans 
of  other  regions,  and  the  exultations  of  America.  Let  all 
his  senses  go  in  quest  of  comfort  and  wretchedness.  Each 
on  its  return  will  testify  "  that  the  effects  of  our  policy  are 
infinitely  better,  than  those  of  any  other."  The  comparison 
at  this  time  spreads  over  a  vast  variety  of  governments, 
founded  ia  force  or  fraud,   but  exhibited  Irs  sundry  modiii- 


JbOO  THE    GOOD    MORAL    PRINCIPLES    0¥    THE 

cations  of  factitious  orders  ;  it  therefore  brings  the  whole 
group  to  the  test  of  one,  founder!  in  a  selection  of  good,  and 
an  exclusion  of  bad  moral  principles.  The  success  of  our 
experiment,  confronted  with  an  host  of  miscarriages,  bes- 
tows upon  its  title  to  pre-eminence,  the  utmost  degree  of  de- 
monstration, of  which  the  case  is  capable. 

The  grateful  task  of  ascertaining  the  principles,  which 
have  produced  effects  incomparably  beneficial  to  the  United 
States,  is  left  by  Mr.  Adams  to  be  discharged.  Instead  of 
their  vindication,  promised  by  the  title  of  three  volumes, 
he  casts  a  glance  towards  the  contour  of  our  governments  in 
one  volume,  leaves  them  in  repose  throughout  two,  and 
defends  contrary  principles  in  all.  Compelled  directly  or 
indirectly  to  assail  the  principles  of  our  policy,  because  they 
lay  in  the  way  of  his  system,  a  caricature  or  travesty  ap- 
peared, when  we  expected  a  defence. 

Mr.  Adams  considers  our  division  of  power,  as  the  same 
principle  with  his  balance  of  orders.  We  consider  these 
principles  as  opposite  and  inimical.  Power  is  divided  by 
our  policy,  that  the  people  may  maintain  their  sovereignty; 
by  the  system  of  orders,  to  destroy  the  sovereignty  of  the 
people.  Our  principle  of  division  is  used,  to  reduce  power 
to  that  degree  of  temperature,  which  may  make  it  a  bles- 
sing and  not  a  curse  ;  its  nature  resembling  fire  ;  which,  un- 
controlled, consumes  :  in  moderation,  warms.  The  princi- 
ple of  its  division  among  orders,  is  to  erect  an  omnipotent 
power,  able,  like  an  irresistible  conflagration,  to  consume 
every  thing  in  iis  way. 

This  radical  errour  forced  Mr.  Adams  to  overlook  the 
prime  division  of  power,  between  the  people  and  the  govern- 
ment ;  the  federal  division  of  power  between  the  general 
and  state  governments  ;  and  that  beautiful  division  of  eke 
tion,  by  which  an  ochlocracy  or  mob  government  is  prevent- 
ed ;  and  to  convert  the  subordinate  divisions  of  power,  which 
are  only  details  Of  these  superior  principles,  into  sovereign 
orders  and  virtual  representation. 


GOVERNMENT    OF   THE    V.    STATES^  401 

Without  either  stating  or  discussing  the  principles  of 
our  policy,  Mr.  Adams  concludes,  that  they  ought  to  be 
changed,  because  commotions  and  revolutions  perpetually  at- 
tend factitious  orders  or  ranks.  To  ascertain  this  fact,  he 
cites  all  the  memorable  forms  of  government,  comprising 
the  principle  of  factitious  orders,  furnished  by  the  history  of 
mankind  ;  and  having  indubitably  proved  it,  he  infers  that 
our  policy  is  bad,  because  it  has  rejected  that  principle. 

The  surprise  which  such  an  inference  would  naturally 
excite,  is  assuaged  by  the  address  of  substituting  a  theory 
of  the  British  system  of  government,  for  its  real  operation. 
The  sophistry  of  reasoning  from  a  comparison  between 
theory  and  practice,  is  obvious.  The  most  perfect  operat- 
ing government,  may  be  made  to  look  defective,  compared 
with  a  fabrick,  reared  by  the  imagination.  And  by  calling 
this  imaginary  fabrick,  the  British  government,  all  the  old 
prejudices  in  its  favour  are  ingeniously  ensnared,  by  the 
Aristotelian  artifice  of  hypothetical  systematizing.  The 
mind  can  only  be  freed  from  these  fetters  by  comparing 
realities. 

The  history  of  ancient  times  is  hardly  more  weighty, 
•pposed  to  living  evidence,  than  the  wanderings  of  fancy  ; 
it  is  invariably  treacherous  in  some  degree,  and  comes,  like 
oracle,  from  a  place  into  which  light  cannot  penetrate. 
We  are  to  determine,  whether  we  will  be  intimidated  by  ap- 
paritions of  departed  time,  frightfully  accoutred  for  that  pur- 
pose, to  shut  our  eyes,  lest  we  should  see  the  superiority  of 
our  policy  displayed,  not  in  theory,  but  in  practice  ;  not  in 
history,  but  in  sight. 

Mr.  Adams  reasons  from  hypothesis  and  theory,  in  his 
defence  of  factitious  orders.  He  establishes  by  complete 
testimony,  the  fact,  that  political  evil  has  been  universally 
their  associate  ;  but  instead  of  suffering  this  effect,  to  lead 
him  to  such  orders  as  its  cause,  he  attributes  it  to  their  inar- 
tificial adjustment.  Such  reasoning  is  the  errour  of  an- 
cient philosophy,  exploded  by  Bacon.  Rejecting  hypothe- 
sis and  theory,  he  travels  by  effects   to  causes,  and  from 


±04  THE    GOOli   MOUAI.   PUINCIPHiS   0¥  THE 

causes  to  effects.  To  the  use  of  this  correct  mode  of  rea* 
soiling  it  is  owing,  that  other  sciences  have  advanced  so  ra- 
pidly since  the  time  of  Lord  Bacon  ;  whilst  political  philo- 
sophy remained  unimproved  until  the  American  revolution, 
because  it  assumed  ancient  theories  for  settled  facts. 

The  basis  of  our  policy,  like  the  basis  of  modern  philoso- 
phy, is  the  constancy  of  nature,  in  her  moral,  as  well  as  in 
her  physical  operations.     A  frequent  or  long  concomitancy 
between  cause  and  effect,   establishes  a   particular  fact, 
from  which  we  are  enabled  to  infer  a  general  law.     A  con- 
comitancy between  hereditary  orders  or  exclusive  factitious 
interests,   and   political   misery,  has  constantly  appeared 
throughout  the  annals  of  human  nature  ;  and  a  concomitan- 
cy between  political  equalily  and  political  happiness,  has  en- 
dured in  America  for  the  space  of  thirty-five  years  in  above 
thirteen  separate  governments,  making  an  experience  equal 
to  four  hundred  years,  to  which  ought  to  be  added  near  two 
centuries  previous  to  the  revolution,  not  in  theory,  but  in  fact. 
Hence  necessarily  results  a  general  law,  unless  nature,  in 
her  moral  operations,  pursues  principles   the  reverse  of 
those,  to  which  she  strictly  adheres  in  her  physical ;  and  is 
eapricious,  arbitrary  and  inconsistent.     If  the  fact  we  con- 
tend for  is  ascertained,  and  if  from  this  fact  a  general  law 
is  discovered,   it  then  becomes  as  certain  and  inevitable, 
that  political  misery,  will  be  an  effect  of  hereditary  orders 
or  factitious  interests,  as  that  light  will  be  the  effect  of  the 
rising  of  the  sun.     Let  the  intellectual,   like  the  material 
philosopher,  reason  from  facts,  and  the  phenomena  of  mind 
will  become  as  well  understood  for  temporal  purposes,  as 
those  of  body. 

A  law  of  nature  constitutes  truth.  This  would  suffice 
for  human  use,  if  we  were  unable  to  discover  how  it  became 
a  law,  as  is  frequently  the  case.  If  these  orders  or  interests 
tend  to  excite,  not  the  good,  but  the  evil  qualities  of  man  ; 
the  moral  power  which  enacts  the  law,  and  the  impossibility 
of  its  abrogation,  both  become  manifest.  It  is  as  unnatural 
to  expect,  by  artificial  means,,  to  cause  such  orders  or  inte- 


G0VJ5RNMJENT    OF   THE    TJ.    STATES.  j(*.lJ 

■;sto  produce  peace.,  justice  ajul  happiness,  as  that  any 
artificial  arrangement  of  a  society  composed  of  lions, 
wolves  and  bears,  would  prevent  the  effects  of  their  natural 
qualities  ;  because  the  natural  qualities  of  moral  beings  (if 
the  expression  is  allowable)  such  as  hereditary  orders  and 
Separate  factitious  interests,  are  not  less  certain  and  un- 
changeable, than  those  of  these  beasts. 

The  inability  of  mere  form  or  artificial  arrangement,  to 
defeat  a  natural  law,  even  of  the  moral  kind,  is  demonstrat- 
ed in  the  experience  of  the  United  States,  These  forms  or 
arrangements  have  been  frequently  changed,  and  are  diffe- 
rent among  the  states.  But  the  irresistible  power  of  the 
moral  principles  common  to  all,  compels  every  modification 
to  be'  subservient  to  its  will.  And  the  good  effects  under 
different  forms,  produced  by  the  good  moral  principles  of  all, 
are  an  evidence,  that  evil  moral  principles  cannot  be  made 
to  produce  good  moral  effects  by  the  force  of  form  or  artifi- 
cial arrangement ;  it  would  be  as  possible,  that  a  less  me- 
chanical power  should  control  a  greater. 

A  theory  or  hypothesis,  cannot  pretend  even  to  plausi- 
bility, unless  it  is  deduced  from  some  general  law  of  nature. 
One  which  sets  out  upon  the  foundation  of  hereditary  orders 
or  alienable  exclusive  privileges,  violates  the  law,  which  has 
determined  that  talents  shall  not  be  inheritable,  nor  merit 
transferable.  Let  us  endeavour  further  to  apply  this  ob- 
servation to  Mr.  Adams's  system,  by  comparing  it  with  the 
agrarian  theory. 

The  idea  of  Lord  Shaftsbury,  adopted  by  Mr.  Adams,  is, 
w  that  the  political  balance  of  orders  cannot  be  adjusted  or 
maintained,  without  a  balance  of  property."  The  perpetual 
changes  among  the  holders  of  land,  the  most  permanent 
and  unchangeable  species  of  property,  renders  this  ingre- 
dient unattainable.  And  yet  its  attainment  is  obstructed  by 
fewer  difficulties,  than  a  permanent  and  equal  distribution  of 
power  and  mental  capacity,  necessary  to  perfect  the  sys- 
tem of  orders.  As  the  system  proposes  to  produce  good 
effects,   upon  no  other  condition  than  that  of  violating  and 


404*  THE    GOOTI    MORAL   PRINCIPLES    OF   THE 

controlling  several  irresistible  laws  of  nature,  it  is  invaria- 
bly unsuccessful. 

Apolitical  equality  of  rights  among  men,  on  the  other 
hand,  is  founded  in  a  general  law  of  nature  ;  and  yet  even 
this  simple  and  natural  system  is  declared  to  be  unattainable, 
by  those  who  contend  for  the  possibility  of  a  political  equality 
of  rights  among  orders.  That  which  shey  assert  cannot  be 
effected  between  two  individuals,  though  it  naturally  exists, 
is  proposed  to  be  accomplished  between  orders,  composed  of 
multitudes. 

The  ingredients  of  Mr.  Adams's  theory,  consist  of  an 
equality  or  balance  of  property,  power  and  understanding, 
between  orders  comprising  a  nation.  And  yet  all  the  disci- 
pies  of  the  theory,  will  exclaim  against  the  mischief,  folly 
and  impossibility,  of  levelling  or  balancing  property  among 
individuals. 

I  agree  with  them  in  a  disapprobation  of  levelling  pro 
perty  by  law ;  but  the  difference  between  us  is,  that  I  ob- 
ject to  the  levelling  principle  itself,  whilst  they  approve  of 
its  application  to  effect  their  theory.  I  contend  that  the  fol 
ly  and  mischief  of  enriching  orders,  such  as  the  feudal  and 
the  paper,  at  the  expense  of  a  nation,  is  at  least  equal  to 
that  of  levelling  property  among  individuals  j  and  that  the 
impossibility  of  maintaining  the  equality  the}'  approve,  is 
as  great  as  that  of  maintaining  the  equality  they  condemn. 

Now  if  Mr.  Adams's  theory  of  a  balance  or  equality 
among  orders,  consists  of  three  ingredients,  neither  of 
'which  is  attainable,  according  to  the  laws  of  nature,  it  is 
itself  a  phantom  of  the  imagination  ;  and  yet  the  imagina- 
tion which  fosters  it,  asserts  that  the  system  of  an  equality  of 
rights,  naturally  existing,  and  actually  operating,  is  im- 
practicable. The  hypothesis  of  orders,  to  exist  itself,  re- 
sorts to  one  fiction,  ««  a  king  cannot  die  ;"  and  to  destroy  a 
successful  rival,  to  another,  «  an  equality  of  civil  rights 
cannot  live."  But  several  complete  experiments,  as  effec- 
tually overturn  the  latter  fiction,  as  a  multitude  have  the 
Dormer. 


GOVERNMENT    OF   THE    U.    STATES.  40 B 

The  excellencies  of  our  civil  policy,  and  the  defects  of 
all  others,  cannot  be  estimated,  unless  the  language  used  to 
explain  them  is  well  understood.  To  the  efforts  already 
made  for  impressing  a  correct  perception  of  the  principles 
on  which  the  reasoning  of  this  essay  is  founded,  we  will 
therefore  add  another.  To  understand,  we  have  analyzed 
the  intellectual  world  into  two  classes,  good  and  evil  ;  and 
to  discover  the  members  of  each  class,  we  fix  their  quali- 
ties, not  by  the  hypothetiek,  but  the  practical  mode  of  rea- 
soning. If  the  fact  appears  by  a  satisfactory  experiment, 
that  the  political  moral  being,  called  hereditary  order,  or 
that  called  exclusive  privilege,  begets  the  evil  effects  of 
avarice,  ambition,  faction,  commotion,  tyranny,  or  any 
others,  we  assign  them  to  the  evil  class.  And  if  by  the  ex- 
perience of  America,  the  fact  appears,  that  an  equality  of  ci- 
vil rights,  produces  moderate  government,  or  any  other  na- 
tional benefit,  we  assign  this  moral  being  to  the  good  class. 
Having  discovered  by  their  phenomena  the  classes  to  which 
these  beings  belong,  we  conclude,  that  no  human  ingenuity 
can  change  the  class  or  the  nature  of  any  individual,  any 
more  than  it  could  change  the  nature  of  a  physical  being. 
And  that  it  is  as  obviously  erroneous  to  assert,  that  heredi- 
tary order,  or  exclusive  privilege,  will  bless  mankind,  as 
that  water  will  burn  them. 

The  possibility  of  effecting  a  classification  of  the  beings 
or  individuals  of  the  moral  world,  and  of  assigning  each  to 
his  proper  class,  by  an  impartial  and  careful  investigation 
of  phenomena,  with  a  degree  of  accuracy,  exceeding  even 
the  classification  of  the  vegetable  kingdom,  is  not  incompre- 
hensible. And  its  importance  seems  to  have  been  sug- 
gested by  divine  intelligence,  in  having  implanted  in  every 
breast,  an  auxiliary  for  the  head  in  the  prosecution  of  this 
science,  of  acute  discernment,  and  instinctive  integrity. 

Such  a  work,  however,  was  neither  within  my  powers 
nor  design.  To  arrange  a  few  of  those  moral  beings,  called 
political,  by  the  test  of  facts ;  and  particularly  those  of 
which  the  American  policy  and  Mr.  Adams's  system  are 


4>06  THE    GOOD    MORAL   PRINCIPLES   OF   THE 

compounded ;  to  ascertain  the  difference  and  tbe  preference  | 
and  to  detect  any  fugitives  from  one  class  to  the  other,  is 
the  utmost  I  propose. 

Besides  hereditary  order,  and  exclusive  privilege,  plac- 
ed at  the  head  of  one  class,  we  have  swelled  it  by  the  moral 
beings,  called  legal  religion,  legal  freedom  of  inquiry, 
accumulation  of  power,  patronage  or  corruption,  igno- 
rance, virtual  representation,  judicial  uncontrol,  funding* 
and  political  families,  or  an  oligarchy  of  banks. 

In  the  opposite  class  of  moral  beings,  we  have  placed  an 
equality  of  civil  rights,  freedom  of  religion,  and  of  inquiry, 
division  of  power,  national  influence  or  sovereignty,  know- 
ledge, uncorrupted  representation,  and  actual  responsibility. 
This  enumeration  of  a  few  individuals  is  used  to  explain  our 
reasoning,  and  not  as  including  entire  classes. 

We  have  attempted  to  prove,  that  the  evil  class,  cannot 
be  made  to  produce  good  effects,  nor  the  good  class,  evil  i, 
and  the  superiority  we  contend  for,  on  behalf  of  the  policy 
of  the  United  States,  consists  in  this,  that  it  is  compounded 
chiefly  of  the  good,  whilst  all  other  governments  have  been 
compounded  chiefly  of  the  evil  class;  so  as  to  account  for  the 
blessings  of  the  one,  and  the  mischiefs  of  the  others  ;  and 
to  produce  both  a  shining  pattern  and  a  shining  beacon. 

The  same  mode  of  reasoning  appeared  calculated  also  to 
awaken  publick  vigilance,  against,  the  most  dangerous 
means  of  changing  the  nature  of  a  government.  It  may 
have  been  compounded  of  moral  beings,  selected  with  integ*- 
rityand  wisdom,  from  the  good  class  ;  but  by  transplant- 
ing into  it  by  law,  individuals  from  the  evil  class,  these  ex- 
oticks  must  change  its  nature.  For  instance  ;  let  us  look 
at  our  own  policy,  as  it  stood  immediately  after  the  adop- 
tion of  the  present  genera!  government,  and  contemplate  the 
features  or  moral  beings,  to  be  seen  in  the  faces  of  the  se- 
veral constitutions,  of  which  it  was  compounded.  Trans- 
plant into  it  a  sufficient  portion  of  executive  patronage  to  in- 
fluence Congress ;  a  banking  oligarchy  without  a  distin- 
guishing badge,  influencing  election  ;  judicial  irresponsible 


GOVERNMENT    OF  THE    ¥.    STATES.  107 

lity ;  religion,  printing  and  speaking,  regulated  by  law  ;  an 
unarmed  militia  and  a  standing  army  ;  or  any  system  of  le- 
gislation congenial  with  monarchy  or  aristocracy  j  and  say 
if  our  policy  would  be  unaltered  ?  The  change  would  be 
tttting  to  an  interpolation  of  political  moral  beings  into  it, 
taken  from  a  class  opposite  to  that  which  furnished  its  ori- 
ginal materials. 

It  is  necessary  to  keep  in  sight  our  policy,  Mr.  Adams's 
system,  and  the  actual  English  government,  to  illustrate  or 
explain  the  principles  contended  for.  In  all  Mr.  Adams's 
authorities,  we  find  orders,  titles  or  exclusive  privileges  in 
some  shape ;  but  in  none,  the  exact  and  permanent  balance, 
without  which  Mr.  Adams's  admits  them  to  be  a  curse.  Vi- 
cissitude, and  not  permanency,  is  their  essence,  as  deter- 
mined by  experience,  and  a  constant  succession  of  revolu- 
lutions  is  the  dispensation  they  yield.  The  alternation  was 
rapid  among  the  Italian  republicks.  The  aristocratick 
scale,  whilst  loaded  with  wealth,  talents,  perpetuities,  and 
superstition,  preponderated  against  the  demoeratick,  light- 
ened with  ignorance.  In  England  the  first  being  unladed  by 
alienations,  and  the  second  rendered  more  weighty  by 
wealth  and  knowledge,  an  approach  towards  a  balance  be- 
gat evils,  which  drove  that  country  for  refuge  into  the  aris- 
tocracy of  the  third  age,  composed  of  paper,  patronage  and 
armies.  Experience  declares,  and  Mr.  Adams  acknowledges, 
that  the  theory  of  balancing  orders,  has  never  generated 
the  effects,  which  Mr.  Adams  thinks  it  capable  of  generat- 
ing ;  whilst  the  theory  of  a  division  of  power,  for  the  ex- 
press purpose  of  subjecting  governments  to  nations,  has  un- 
exceptionably  succeeded  in  the  practice  of  each  of  the 
states,  and  of  the  United  States.  This  double  experience 
defines  the  nature  of  the  moral  elements,  both  of  the  Ame- 
rican and  Mr.  Adams's  policy.  Ours,  by  suppressing  the. 
evil  principle  of  privileged  orders,  begets  none  of  those  ca- 
lamities, swarming  about  every  experiment  founded  in  his, 
His,  taking  the  balancing  principle  for  its  basis,  has  labour- 
ed in  vain  to  draw  good  out  of  it,   by  the  artifice  of  measur 


108  THE    GOOD    MORAL   PRINCIPLES    OF   THE 

in<*  out  power,  or  the  excitement  to  tyranny,  equally  between 
orders.  Ours  does  not  trust  to  evil  for  good  ;  his  admits 
eacli  order,  separately  existing,  to  be  a  political  devil ;  but 
asserts,  that  three  devils,  may  by  the  menstruum  of  mu- 
tual jealousy,  be  turned  into  one  God.  Ours  conceive*  that 
a  political  deity  ought  to  be  made  of  eternal  moral  virtues, 
and  not  of  fluctuating  human   vices. 

The  only  use  which  the  theory  of  ranks  or  orders  has 
been  pleased  to  make  of  the  laws  of  nature,  is  drawn  from 
the  existing  inequality  among  the  talents  and  qualities  of 
men.  Enough  has  been  heretofore  said  upon  this  subject ; 
and  it  is  only  mentioned  to  suggest,  that  the  degrees  of  this 
inequality,  are  compressed  by  this  theory  into  three,  not  by 
the  suggestion  of  nature,  which  with  the  intervention  of 
education,  displays  them  at  this  day,  as  numberless,  but 
by  the  arbitrary  will  of  hypothesis.  The  magick  contained 
in  the  number  three,  is  the  magick  of  habit,  not  of  nature. 
Human  qualities  are  infinitely  more  divisible.  In  England, 
a  triple  natural  division  is  said  to  exist.  There  they  have 
a  king,  lords,  commons,  judiciary,  army,  paper  system  and 
hierarchy.  In  India,  titles  and  tribes  are  endless.  In  Rome, 
the  first  theory  consisted  of  a  king,  patricians,  knighls  and 
plebeians.  In  America,  we  see  power,  legislative,  execu- 
tive and  judicial ;  but  these  are  so  far  from  comprising  the 
mass  of  political  power,  created  by  our  system,  as  to  be 
themselves  subordinate  to  a  division  of  power,  between  the 
people  and  the  government :  to  a  division  of  power  between 
the  general  and  state  governments ;  and  to  the  sovereignty 
of  the  people.  Hence  this  number  is  no  less  arbitrary  and 
unconnected  with  any  principle  in  nature,  when  applied  to 
power,  than  when  applied  to  orders; 

The  more  power  is  condensed,  the  more  pernicious  it  be- 
comes. Divided  only  into  three  departments,  such  as  king, 
lords  and  commons,  it  can  easily  coalesce,  plunder  and  op- 
press. The  more  it  is  divided,  the  farther  it  recedes  from 
the  class  of  evil  moral  beings.  By  a  vast  number  of  divi- 
sions, applied  to  that  portion  of  power,  bestowed  on  their 


GOVERNMENT    OF   THE    V.    STATES.  409 

governments  by  the  people  of  the  United  States;  anil  by  re- 
taining in  their  own  hands  a  great  portion  unbestowed,  with 
a  power  of  controlling  the  portion  given  ;  the  coalescence 
of  political  power,  always  fatal  to  civil  liberty,  is  obstructed. 
Soiall  dividends  are  not  as  liable  to  ambition  and  avarice,  as 
great  dividends.  Self  interest  can  only  be  controlled  by 
keeping  out  of  its  hands  the  arms  with  which  it  has  univer- 
sally enslaved  the  general  interest.  But  it  universally  gets 
these  arms  by  persuading  mankind,  that  the  danger  is  ima- 
ginary, and  the  remedy  useless ;  and  hierarchy,  feuda- 
lity, hereditary  orders,  mercenary  armies,  funding  and 
banking,  have  successively  inflicted  upon  them,  the  expia- 
tions of  an  opinion  so  absurd. 

Nature,  says  Mr  Adams,  suggests,  nay  dictates,  the  sys- 
tem of  three  orders.  As  to  the  United  States,  he  satisfies 
this  natural  law,  by  legislative,  executive  and  judicial  or- 
ders ;  as  to  England,  by  king,  lords  and  commons  ;  mak- 
ing judicial  power  a  natural  order  here,  but  not  in  England. 
The  natural  right  of  self  government  and  natural  orders, 
cannot  associate.  Our  policy  is  erected  upon  one  principle  ; 
Mr.  Adams's  upon  the  other  ;  and  a  defence  of  his,  cannot 
be  a  defence  of  the  policy  of  the  United  States. 

By  contrasting  the  division  of  power  resorted  to  by  our 
policy,  with  Mr.  Adams's  idea  of  a  triple  division  by  nature, 
a  wide  difference  will  appear.  By  our  policy,  power  is  first 
divided  between  the  government  and  the  people,  reserving 
to  the  people,  the  control  of  the  dividend  allotted  to  the  go- 
vernment. The  dividend  allotted  to  the  government,  is 
subdivided  between  its  two  branches,  federal  and  state.  The 
portion  of  this  subdivision,  assigned  to  the  federal  govern- 
ment, is  again  subdivided  between  two  legislative  branches, 
two  executive  branches,  and  two  judicial  branches;  judges 
and  juries;  all  enjoying  specified  powers  independent  of  each 
other.  The  portion  assigned  to  the  state  governments,  is 
distributed  in  quotas  still  more  minute,  many  of  which  will 
be  omitted,  because  of  ihe  various  modes  pursued  towards 
this  end,  by   different   states.      We    find    two    legislative 


itU  THE    GOOD    MOHA.L   PRINCIPLES    OF   THE 

branches,  two  executive,  and  two  judicial.  A  power  of  such 
magnitude,  as  to  be  relied  on  for  national  defence,  iimme* 
diately  dependent  on  the  people,  and  generally  removed  far 
from  a  subserviency  to  any  other  division  ;  this  is  the  mili- 
tia, officered  by  the  people,  or  by  the  county  courts  ;  try- 
ing offenders  by  its  own  courts,  or  holding  commissions  du- 
ring good  behaviour.  Patronage,  a  formidable  power,  is 
divided  in  a  multitude  of  ways,  the  chief  of  which  consists 
of  portions  exercised  by  the  people,  by  legislative  bodies, 
and  by  a  variety  of  inferior  courts.  Ineligibility  is  a  spe- 
cies of  division  of  power  often  resorted  to.  And  throughout 
the  whole  distribution,  our  policy,  as  if  on  purpose  to  sub- 
vert the  hypothesis  of  a  triple  natural  division  of  power,  has 
in  a  multitude  of  instances,  invested  the  same  organs  with 
different  powers  j  such  as  legislative  branches,  with  judicial 
and  executive  powers. 

As  the  government  is  divested  by  a  multitude  of  divisions, 
of  the  ability  and  inclination  to  tyrannize  ;  so  by  the  multi- 
tude and  variety  of  its  elections,  our  policy  cleanses  the 
sovereignty  of  the  people  of  those  defects  incident  to  its  ag- 
gregate exercise  ;  concluding  that  power,  untempered  by 
division,  exercised  by  nations  or  their  governments,  is  inva- 
riably the  scourge  of  human  happiness. 

What  do  we  diseern  in  this  system  of  division  to  justify 
the  hypothesis  of  three  natural  orders,  or  three  natural  clas- 
ses of  powers?  To  which  of  these  classes  can  the  division 
of  election  be  assigned  ?  But  if  a  doubt  should  remain, 
let  the  reader  reflect  upon  the  inconsistency  between  na- 
tural powers  or  orders,  and  their  responsibility.  In  pro- 
viding for  the  responsibility  of  political  power  of  every 
complexion,  our  policy  denies  the  truth  of  the  position, 
which  asserts,  that  political  power  is  created  by  nature. 

It  establishes,  with  unexampled  ingenuity,  a  double  res- 
ponsibility ;  of  the  people  to  the  government,  avid  of  the  go- 
vernment to  the  people  ;  the  division  of  election,  is  the  ba- 
sis of  the  one,  and  the  division  of  the  powers  of  govern- 
ment, of  the  other  ;    by  the  first,  the  danger  of  a  physical 


"government  of  the  u.  states.  Ill 

accumulation  of  power,  and  by  the  second,  the  danger  of  its 
moral  accumulation,  is  obstructed  ;  to  prevent  the  people 
from  acting  in  mass  against  the  government,  under  the  im- 
pulse of  passion  :  and  the  government  from  acting  in  mass 
against  the  people,  under  the  impulse  of  avarice  and  ambi- 
tion. The  division  of  election  renders  it  difficult  to  turn 
the  people  into  an  ochlocracy;  and  the  division  of  the  pow- 
ers of  government,  renders  it  difficult  to  turn  the  publick  of- 
fleer's  into  an  aristocracy. 

Political  errour  contains  two  extremes,  both  of  which 
are  happily  guarded  against  by  the  principle  of  division; 
and  it  would  make  but  little  difference  to  the  nation  whether 
it  was  plunged  into  one,  by  abolishing  the  responsibility  of 
the  people  to  government ;  or  into  the  other,  by  abolish- 
ing the  responsibility  of  the  government  to  the  people.  Just 
as  (he  devastation  of  a  furious  torrent,  and  the  exsiccation 
ofa  vertical  sun, are  both  destructive,  and  both  prevented  by 
the  divisions  ofa  stream,  according  to  the  ingenious  system 
of  irrigation. 

It  is  important  to  inquire,  whether  the  right  of  instruc- 
tion is  attached  to  the  right  of  election.  Neither  the  moral 
right  of  any  species  of  principal  to  employ  agents,  nor  the 
moral  ihity  of  agents  to  conform  to  the  instructions  of  prin- 
cipals in  discharging  agencies,  is  denied.  Obedience  to 
monarchical,  aristocratical,  military,  legislative,  judicial, 
and  all  individual  instructions,  from  principals  to  agents,  is 
universally  enforced  by  dismission,  sentence,  fine,  imprison- 
ment and  death;  and  disobedience  is  considered  as  illegal, 
immoral  and  void.  It  is  also  agreed,  that  the  duties  of  agen- 
cy, implied  or  expressed,  allowed  to  kings,  to  conquerors 
and  to  beggars,  and  enforced  by  the  axe,  the  musket  and  the 
forum,  belong  also  to  the  species  of  sovereignty  existing  in 
the  United  States. 

A  constitutional  declaration,  that  duty  was  an  adjunct 
of  agency,  would  have  been  as  absurd,  as  that  heat  was  an 
adjunct  of  fire.  The  qualities  by  Which  a  thing  is  defined, 
must  be  included  in  that  thing ;    and  an  assertion,   that  an 


-itS  THE    GOOD    MORAL,   PRINCIPLES    OF   THE 

insurance  against  fire,  ditl  not  include  an  insurance  against 
heat,  would  be  equivalent  to  an  assertion,  that  an  agency  did 
not  imply  an  obligation  to  fulfil  its  duties  ;  or  a  right  to 
raise  armies,  a  right  to  arm  them.  Political  law  could  not 
have  deprived  agency  of  its  attributes,  without  extinguish- 
ing it;  because,  stript  of  its  duty  to  its  principal,  its  nature 
is  as  completely  changed,  as  the  nature  of  despotism,  stript 
of  its  power. 

The  sovereignty  of  the  people  arises,  and  representa* 
tion  flows,  out  of  each  man's  right  to  govern  himself*  With 
this  individual  right,  political  structures  are  built.  Indivi- 
duals, in  forming  a  society,  may  arrange  their  lights  in 
such  forms  as  they  please.  They  may,  like  the  Greeks, 
lodge  legislation  in  the  society  collectively  ;  and  they  may, 
iii  that  case,  allow  a  representative  to  an  absent  individual. 
Would  this  representative  be  the  agent  of  the  individual 
who  deputed  him,  or  of  the  rest  of  the  society?  Would  those 
personally  present  enjoy  their  shares  of  the  legislative  pow- 
er, and  absorb  as,  a  majority  the  shares  of  those  represent- 
ed ;  or  would  each  legislator  be  the  agent  of  the  majority  of 
the  society  ?  Neither  of  these  intentions  could,  consistently 
with  the  supposed  policy,  exist,  because  the  majority  could 
not  be  ascertained,  except  by  counting  the  individuals  of 
the  society.  The  English  house  of  lords,  with  the  right  to 
vote  by  proxy,  is  such  a  nation.  The  proxy  m  subject  to 
the  instructions  of  his  principal,  and  owes  no  duty  to  the 
majority. 

Or  suppose  a  society  constituted  in  imitation  of  the  Ro- 
man model,  with  legislation  condensed  into  centuries,  each 
entitled  to  vote  personally,  or  by  its  representative.  Would 
the  representative  of  a  century,  be  the  agent  of  the  majori- 
ty of  centuries,  by  which  he  w  as  not  deputed,  or  of  the  cen- 
tury by  which  he  was ;  and  how  could  this  majority  be 
known,  except  by  ascertaining  the  opinion  of  each  century  ? 
If  no  century  could  vote  by  representation,  each  century  in 
voting  would  he  exercising  not  a  trust  but  a  right ;  nor 
nould  it  be  the  agent  of  a  majority,   because  in  every  ques- 


GOVERNMENT   0¥   THE    TJ.    STATES.  *13 

tion  the  majority  could  only  be  ascertained  by  the  votes  of 
the  centuries  ;  and  an  agent  cannot  exist  before  a  principal. 
If  all  the  centuries  legislate,  not  in  person,  hut  by  repre- 
sentatives, the  representative  could  not  owe  the  duties  of 
agency  to  the  majority  of  centuries,  both  because  his  prin- 
cipal did  not,  and  also  because  it  is  as  impossible  to  ascertain 
this  majority,  as  in  the  last  case  ;  this  can  only  be  effected 
by  counting  the  votes  of  the  centuries,  personally,  or  by  re- 
presentation. Thus  a  duty  to  obey  the  instruction  of  an 
ideal  majority,  would  divest  the  representative  of  the  cha- 
racter of  agent,  and  transform  him  into  a  despot,  at  liberty 
to  pursue  his  own  ambition,  interest,  caprice  or  vanity, 
without  regard  to  any  principal ;  and  under  pretence  of 
loyalty  to  a  nonentity,  convert  representatives  into  a  suc- 
cession of  despots  over  real  majorities. 

Societies  may  give  legislation  whatever  form  they  pre- 
fer. Titey  may  legislate  by  the  majority  of  individuals. 
They  may  allot  themselves  into  centuries  or  districts,  and  le- 
gislate by  a  majority  of  sections.  Or  they  may  legislate  by 
representatives  deputed  aggregately  or  by  sections.  If  they 
legislate  in  person,  aggregately  or  in  sections,  this  real  na- 
tion cannot,  be  considered  as  the  minister  of  an  ideal  nation.. 
If  they  legislate  by  representatives,  chosen  aggregately  Gr- 
in sections,  the  members  of  the  society,  are  as  much  prin- 
cipals, whilst  acting  as  electors,  as  they  would  have  been 
acting  as  legislators,  had  they  not  resorted  to  representation. 
The  idea  that  the  whole  society,  acting  aggregately  or  hi 
sections,  exercises  only  a  ministerial  authority,  and  not  an 
inherent  right,  is  not  sustainable  ;  because  self  government 
cannot  be  the  donation  of  the  society  which  it  creates  ;  and 
if  election  is  a  resource  for  exercising  a  natural  right,  and 
not  the  author  of  that  right,  this  resource  for  preserving, 
could  never  have  been  intended  to  destroy  the  right,  whe- 
ther it  was  exercised  individually  or  in  sections.  Voting 
in  sections  is  as  compleat  an  exercise  of  the  natural  rigbt, 
as  voting  individually.  Election  by  sections,  is  equivalent 
to  aggregate  election.  And  by  dividing  election  into  sections, 


414  THE    GOOD    MORAL   PRINCIPLES    OF   THE 

the  rights  and  duties  of  principals  and  agents  are  also  di- 
vided, because  there  is  no  other  social  principal  to  depute 
or  to  instruct.     Laws  made  hy  centuries  or  districts,  each 
having  a  vote,  or  hy  the  agents  of  each,  are  hinding,  hecause 
the  society  has  adopted  such  modes  of  ascertaining  the  so- 
cial majority  ;    and  the  adoption  of  one  mode,    proves  that 
no  other  exists*     A  division  of  the  mode  of  exercising  the 
natural  right  of  self  government,  is  extremely  different! 
from  a  division  of  the  right  itself.     The  first  is  indispensi- 
hle  in  a  large  territory,  from  the  impossibility  of  assem- 
bling the  nation  at  one  place,  for   the  preservation   of  the 
right.     But  to  out  tiie  right  itself  asunder,  and  to  lodge  on- 
ly half,  or  less  than  half,  with  the  divisional  mode  for  exer- 
cising and  saving  it,  would  certainly  kill  the  whole.     Jt  is 
compounded   of  the  powers  of  naming  ami  instructing  its 
agents.     The  instructing  moiety  is  better  than  the  naming 
moiety,  as  the  right  of  naming  an  agent  is  no  seenrily  if  we 
cannot  influence  him  ;  nor  is  it  of  much  consequence  who 
names  him,  if  we  ean.     If  the  divisional  mode  of  exercising 
the  right  of  self  government,  can  only  contain  its  form,  but 
not  its  substance  ;  and  the  aggregate  mode  has  been  deter- 
mined by  experience,  to  be  unsuccessful  in  small,  and  im- 
practicable in  large  countries,  the  conclusion  is,    that  the 
right  itself  must  die.      It  ean  be  held    but    not  exercised 
aggregately,  and  it  can  be  exercised  but  not  held  division- 
ally.  * 

The  objection  to  the  district  right  of  instruction,  is 
founded  upon  the  idea,  that  a  nation,  though  it  divides  elec- 
tion, retains  aggregately  the  right  of  instruction.  But  all 
natural  rights  are  individual,  and  this  individuality  is  the 
substratum  of  our  policy.  It  has  not  moulded  this  indivi- 
duality into  an  aggregate  right  of  instruction,  hut  it  has 
moulded  it  into  a  right  of  district  election,  without  com- 
mitting the  errour  of  withholding  the  natural  appurtenance 
of  election,  and  breaking  up  the  relation  between  principal 
and  agent,  to  bestow  on  itself  the  following  hideous  aspect. 
If  the  electing,  punishing  audi  rewarding  district,  and  this 


GOVERNMENT    OF  THK    U.    STATES.  41 6 

national  majority,  under  which  rebellious  agency  pretends 
to  take  sanctuary,   should  give  contrary  instructions,   the 
chastening  provision  of  our  policy,   according  to  the  idea  of 
an  aggregate  right  of  instruction,  would  have  been  an  alter- 
native between  committing  a  crime   with  impunity,  or  suf- 
fering a  punishment  for  patriotism.     The  aggregate  majo- 
rity would  hold  a  right  without  the  remedy,    and  the  dis- 
trict the  remedy  without  a  right.     But  it  is  overlooked  that 
majorities  and  their  rights  are  creatures  of  social  compact, 
and  not  endowed  by  nature  with  political  power.     They  are 
compounded  of  men.  excluding  women;    of  adults,  exclud- 
ing minors  ;   of  landholders,  excluding  those  who  have  no 
land;    and  in  a  multitude  of  ways.     However  compounded, 
they  are  a  social  being,  and  no  social  duly  can  accrue  to  any 
majority,  but  to  one  established  by  social  compact,  because 
no  other  majority  exists  possessed  of  any  political  rights. 
Admitting  then  the  right  of  the  majority  to  instruct,  the 
right  accrues  to  the  social  majority,  and  wherever  that  ex- 
ists in  the  form  of  sections  or  districts,  the  mode  by  which 
it  can  exercise  its  power,  must  be  through    the  form  in 
which  it  exists.     Thus  only  can  it  elect,  and  thus  only  in- 
struct.    Any  other  species  of  instruction,  instead  of  a  so- 
cial, would  be  revolutionary  or  rebellious.  An  appeal  by  the 
representative  from  the  organized  majority,  to  an  ideal  dis- 
organized majority,  is  therefore  a  violation  of  the  duties  of 
agency.     And  instruction  from  such  a  source,  would  be  con- 
trary to  the  social  compact ;  inconsistent  with  the  moral  re- 
lation between  agency  and  duty,  and  between  crime  and  pu- 
nishment,* and  as  impracticable  as  aggregate  election.  It  is, 
however,  necessary  to  consider,  whether  a  right  in  the  social 
majority  to  instruct  its  agents  through  its  moral,  covenanted 
and  practicable  channels,  is  necessary  to  preserve  the  sove- 
reignty of  the  people,  or  of  a  republican  form  of  government. 
Out  of  the  natural  right  of  self  preservation,  sovereign- 
ties of  all  forms  have  collected  the  same  right,  as  inherent 
without   the    formality   of  a   positive   stipulation.     There 
never  has  occurred  the  least  occasion  to  convince  an  aristo 


fciO  THE    GOOD    MORAL    PRINCIPLES    OF   THE 

eratical  or  monarchical  sovereignty,  that  periodical  agents, 
above  their  intermediate  control,  would  speedily  subvert 
their  sovereignties.  Who  ever  thought  of  preserving  life, 
by  a  perpetual  obligation  to  swallow  all  the  drugs  adminis- 
tered by  a  periodical  succession  of  doctors  ?  Would  not  free 
nations  soon  die  of  their  doctors,  when  the  highest  fees  are 
gained  by  the  most  poisonous  prescriptions  ?  And  to  what 
purpose  would  the  epoch  of  election  return,  after  freedom 
was  dead  ?  It  is  a  question  of  fact  precluding  argument.  His- 
tory abounds  with  the  treasons  of  agents  towards  nations. 
Denmark  recently,  and  France  before  our  ejes,  were  be- 
trayed to  tyranny  by  elected  legislative  agents. 

Without  denying  to  our  species  of  sovereignty  the  right 
of  self  preservation,  we  are  perplexed  as  to  the  modes  of  ex- 
ercising this  right  by  blending  sovereignty  with  agency  ; 
and  the  demonstration  of  the  integral  sovereignty  of  dis- 
tricts, as  to  legislation,  is  somewhat  obscured  by  the  idea  of 
degrading  them  into  agents,  without  discerning  that  it 
would  exalt  lower  agents  into  sovereigns.  Like  the  electors 
of  the  president  and  Maryland  senators,  once  accoutred  in  the 
garb  of  agency,  districts  become  subordinate,  and  evanes- 
cent ;  and  our  sovereignty  is  dissolved,  or  embalmed  by  ver- 
bal syrup  into  a  mummy,  retaining  only  a  periodical  nomi- 
nation of  sovereigns.  No  species  of  sovereignty  can  sub- 
sist, without  subsisting  attributes  equal  to  its  preservation. 
I  am  speaking  of  social  sovereignty,  and  not  of  the  natural 
right  to  resist  oppression  ;  of  organical,  not  of  irregular  re- 
medies. The  natural  right  appears  throughout  history,  to 
be  the  least  successful  guardian  of  liberty,  and  as  frequent- 
ly the  author  as  the  destroyer  of  tyranny. 

An  independency  of  district  instruction,  is  assumed  upon 
Mr.  Adams's  doctrine  of  virtual  representation.  That  doc- 
trine recognises  hereditary  usurpers,  as  national  represen- 
tatives ;  the  British  parliament  as  representatives  of  Ame- 
rica, and  each  district  agent  as  the  representative  of  an  en- 
tire nation.  Virtual  representation  and  a  balance  of  orders 
or  powers,  are  twin  labourers  for  transforming  our  division 


8CYBRNMENT  OF  THE   V.    STATES  41? 

of  election  and  of  power,  into  instruments  for  working  ends 
contrary  to  those  they  were  intended  to  produce.  In  search 
of  power,  it  destroys  subordination  and  social  order.  Eve- 
ry civil  functionary,  starts  up  into  a  representative  of  the 
entire  nation,  none  owes  obedience  to  any  other  superior, 
and  the  general  and  constable,  have  an  equal  right  with  the 
district  member,  to  assume  the  independence  it  bestows. 

An  incapacity  of  political  law  for  producing  the  subor- 
dination of  its  agents  to  the  sovereign  power,  would  produce 
the  same  effects,  as  an  incapacity  of  civil  law,  for  produc- 
ing the  subordination  of  individuals  to  the  government. 
Murder,  rapine  or  theft,  would  be  but  badly  restrained,  by 
an  advertisement  to  culprits,  that  they  might  wallow  in  wick* 
edness  for  four  or  five  years  with  impunity,  after  which  the 
power  of  committing  further  crimes  should  be  taken  from 
them.  Kings,  though  not  among  the  wisest  of  sovereigns, 
never  thought  of  this  species  of  civility  to  deputies  as  a  se- 
curity for  sovereignty.  A  chain  of  subordination  from  sove^ 
reign  power  downwards,  is  necessary  for  its  preservation; 
and  instead  of  snapping  asunder  the  link  between  sovereign- 
ty and  its  highest  agency,  it  ought  to  be  the  strongest,  be- 
cause that  agency  is  uniformly  its  destroyer,  whenever  a 
new  sovereignty  is  erected  upon  the  ruins  of  the  old. 
Otherwise  the  sovereignty  in  its  interval  of  torpidness,  must 
submit  to  behold  its  agents,  like  Persian  satraps,  go  to  war 
with  each  other  for  itself.  What,  for  instance,  can  pre- 
serve the  rights  and  duties  attached  to  the  presidential 
agency,  against  Congress,  but  the  sovereign  of  both  ?  If  the 
sovereign  is  unable  to  protect  some  agents  against  the 
usurpations  of  others,  the  powers  of  all  will  gradually  fall 
under  the  regulation  of  force  and  corruption,  and  ambition 
or  casualty  will  supplant  compact.  Even  mutual  corrup- 
tion might  cement  legislative  and  executive  power,  in  a 
league  to  destroy  the  popular  sovereignty  ©f  our  system,  if 
it  cannot  act  constitutionally  at  all  times  for  its  own  preser- 
vation 

6% 


M8  THE    GOOD    MORAL   PRINCIPLES    OP    THE 

Publick  opinion  is  felt  even  by  despotism.  The  best  eu- 
logy of  printing,  is  its  facility  for  applying  it.  Election  by 
districts  is  selected  by  our  policy  as  the  cleanest  channel  for 
conveying  it.  If  party  gazettes  were  more  chaste  vehicles 
of  publick  opinion,  why  were  they  not  entrusted  with  the 
selection  of  legislative  agents?  If  they  are  less  so,  why  is 
election  to  he  striptof  the  appurtenant  right  of  instruction, 
except  to  contaminate  and  discredit  publick  opinion,  and  to 
convert  representation  into  a  despot  ?  The  best  channel  for 
electing  publick  opinion,  must  also  be  the  best  for  instruct- 
ing publick  opinion.  And  if  popular  sovereignty  is  even  li- 
mited to  that  definition,  the  best  mode  of  destroying  it,  would 
be  to  destroy,  one  after  the  other,  the  best  channels  by  which 
it  can  be  conveyed. 

If  state  legislatures  are  to  be  considered  as  holding  each 
a  dividend  of  an  aggregate  state  sovereignty,  their  right  to 
instruct  their  senators  in  Congress,  would  be  equal  to  the 
right  of  a  district  to  instruct  its  representative.  But  if  each 
state  constitutes  a  distinct  sovereignty,  its  right  of  instruc- 
tion is  equal  to  that  of  an  entire  society.  It  being  admitted, 
as  its  form  demonstrates,  that  this  senate  was  created  for  the 
purpose  of  preserving  state  sovereignty. 

Oaths  of  agents  are  prescribed  to  enforce,  not  to  destroy 
the  duties  of  agency.  If  a  popular  sovereignty,  and  its  ap- 
purtenance, instruction,  exists  in  our  policy  ;  and  if  no  such 
sovereignty  can  be  found  in  it,  except  in  the  district  form, 
the  fidelity  required  by  oaths  must  be  due  to  that  form  of 
sovereignty,  and  not  to  one  which  only  exists  in  the  imagi- 
nation of  the  swearer.  Because,  if  the  swearer  could  fash- 
ion the  oath  to  his  own  conscience  or  judgement,  under  the 
pretext  of  its  binding  him  to  pursue  the  publick  good,  as 
indicated  by  these  guides,  instead  of  conforming  his  con- 
science and  judgement  to  the  established  policy,  the  oath 
would  not  perfect,  but  dissolve  the  obligations  of  agency, 
and  leave  him  at  liberty,  if  he  supposes  it  will  benefit  the  na- 
tion, either  to  disregard  instructions,  or  to  legislate  for  the 
introduction  of  monarchy.     If  the  oath  is  only  a  pledge  of 


GOVERNMENT    OF    THE    V.    STATES.  ilfi 

loyalty  to  pre-existing  duties,  these  duties  thus  confessed 
by  the  oath  are  evidence  of  principal  aud  agent,  insisted  up 
on  hy  the  imposer,  and  admitted  hy  the  taker,  which  suffi 
ces  to  refute  the  idea  harrowed  from  monareiiT,  that  our 
government  is  our  sovereignty ;  and  also  to  demonstrate 
that  our  sovereignty  resides  elsewhere.  The  punishment 
of  rejection  on  a  new  election,  is  an  additional  proof  that 
our  policy  hy  the  oaths  of  fealty,  so  far  from  contemplating 
the  idea  of  a,  lovakv  of  the  swearer  to  himself,  recognises  a 
superior  invested  with  power  to  apply  a  remedy  for  the  in- 
sufficiency of  the  oath.  And  though  the  insufficiency  of  this 
remedy  itself  to  compel  obedience  to  instructions,  is  urged 
as  an  argument  against  their  force,  \et  it  is  of  (he  same 
weight  with  the  assertion,  that  these  oaths  also  are  without 
obligation,  because  the  mode  of  compelling  obedience  to 
them,  is  as  imperfect  as  the  mode  of  compelling  obedience 
to  instructions.  The  imperfection  of  a  remedy,  is  no  argu- 
ment against  the  right.  The  Saxon  weregild,  of  fifty  shil- 
lings, was  a  better  security  for  the  right  of  living,  than  an 
empty  periodical  election  would  be  for  the  right  of  living 
free  ;  yet  the  ability  to  pay  the  fine,  so  far  from  justifying 
the  right  to  murder,  suggested  the  necessity  of  a  better  re- 
medy. A  moral  code,  can  only  be  perfected,  by  providing 
new  remedies  against  crimes,  when  old  ones  become  insuffi- 
cient. The  right  to  life  is  not  destroyed,  by  an  imperfect 
remedy  for  its  preservation  ;  and  if  the  oath  of  loyalty  to 
our  sovereignty,  with  the  punishment  of  rejection  on  a  new 
election,  are  imperfect  remedies  for  preserving  the  sove 
reign  right  of  instruction,  new  remedies,  and  not  an  aban 
donment  of  the  right,  can  only  preserve  our  moral  code, 
called  political  law. 

As  representation  was  intended  to  express,  not  to  sub- 
vert publick  opinion,  our  policy  resorts  to  sundry  expedients 
for  making  representatives  the  genuine  orgaus  of  certain 
districts,  and  for  preventing  them  from  degenerating  into 
Representatives  of  themselves,  or  of  their  own  consciences, 
▼ices  or  follies.      This  degeneracy  is  a  subversion  of  th* 


'120  THE    GOOD   MORAL   PRINCIPLES   OI<    THE 

republican  maxim,  that  the  right  of  national  self  govern- 
ment rests  in  the  majority ;  and  transfers  that  right  to  a 
very  small  number  of  individuals,  by  using  the  maxim  itself 
as  the  instrument  for  its  own  destruction.  Representation 
by  districts,  being  the  only  social  mode  of  ascertaining  the 
will  of  the  majority,  and  each  district  exclusively  possess- 
ing the  means  of  infusing  its  will  into  its  own  representa- 
tive ;  an  end  which  our  policy  every  where  labours  to  at- 
tain ;  the  will  of  a  majority  can  never  be  constitutionally 
ascertained,  except  through  the  regular  organized  chan- 
nel for  that  \ery  purpose  ;  for  if  instruction  by  districts,  is 
not  a  pure  indication  of  the  publick  will,  neither  can  elee 
tion  by  districts  be  so ;  and  no  genuine  mode  of  ascertain- 
ing it  exists. 

Let  us  now  compare  our  beautiful  system  of  dividing 
election,  agency  and  power,  with  the  multitude  of  forms  of 
government  quoted  by  Mr,  Adams.  Where  do  we  see  in  it 
the  aristocrat! ek  and  plebeian  easts  of  Rome  or  Florence, 
arrayed  against  each  other  by  trivial  accidents,  by  the 
vile  arts  of  factitious  demagogues,  or  by  the  viler  dishones- 
ty of  separate  interests  or  exclusive  privileges  ?  It  is  in  vain 
that  Mr.  Adams  is  forever  quoting  the  mischiefs  produced 
by  any  system  of  government,  having  factitious  orders,  arm- 
ed with  the  motives  and  passions  which  murder  and  burn; 
or  separate  privileges,  armed  with  statutes  to  plunder  and 
tax ;  or  national  mobs,  under  the  lightning  of  an  orator's 
eye,  within  the  melody  of  his  voice,  and  drawn  into  ruin  by 
all  the  chords  of  sympathy ;  unless  he  can  make  us  discern 
these  orders,  privileges  or  mobs,  in  our  policy.  These  must 
be  created,  before  his  cases  or  his  inferences  will  apply. 
Shall  we  create  orders  and  exclusive  privileges,  to  disco- 
ver the  accuracy  with  which  Mr.  Adams  has  described  their 
effects  ? 

It  is  the  absence  of  these  political  causes,  and  an  igno- 
rance of  their  effects,  which  has  constituted  a  degree  of  po- 
litical happiness,  throughout  seventeen  nations,  unexam- 
pled in  history,  and  unequalled  in  duration  ;  adding  together 


GOVERNMENT   OF  THE    U.    STATES.  «|g«j 

the  space  of  eaeh  experiment.  So  that  Mr.  Adams's  very 
language  is  new  and  strange  to  us.  He  talks  perpetually 
of  the  aristocratick  and  democratick  interest.  An  use  for 
this  computation  will  be  the  era  of  those  calamities,  which 
have  constantly  attended  it ;  and  of  the  application  of  Mr. 
Adams's  precedents. 

To  the  regularity  of  the  phenomena,  reducing  these  con- 
elusions  to  moral  certainties,  for  the  sake  of  those  who 
love  authority,  we  will  subjoin  one  of  an  eminent  English 
author.  Russell,  in  his  Modern  Europe,  observes,  «  But  an 
"equal  counterpoise  of  power,  which  among  foreign  na- 
fi  tions  is  the  source  of  tranquility,  proves  always  the  cause 
"  of  quarrel  among  domestick  factions."*  This  counter- 
poise of  power,  among  three  domestick  factions,  is  the  only 
basis  of  Mr.  Adams's  hopes;  if  he  should  succeed,  it  is,  says 
Russell,  a  constant  prelude  to  a  warfare  between  these 
counterpoised  factions ;  if  he  fails,  Mr.  Adams  acknow- 
ledges, that  the  predominant  faction  becomes  a  tyrant. 
Was  it  the  accomplishment  of  the  counterpoise  in  Mr. 
Adams's  numerous  cases,  which  regularly  produced  Russell's 
consequence  ? 

Had  a  balance  of  power,  among  orders  or  factions,  caus- 
ed tranquillity,  its  absence  would  have  caused  broils  and  tu- 
mult. Tranquillity  is  one  of  the  phenomena,  arising  from 
the  unbalanced  sovereignty  of  a  single  order ;  and  broil 
and  tumult  are  phenomena,  which  have  ever  attended  a 
division  of  power  among  orders.  Democracy  was  quiet  un- 
der the  feudal  aristocracy,  the  church  estates  under  the 
popes,  the  plebeians  under  the  late  government  of  Venice, 
and  the  peers  of  England  are  quiet  under  patronage,  pa- 
per and  armies.  But  whenever  an  equipoise  of  power,  or 
an  approach  towards  it  has  existed,  as  among  the  Grecian 
states,  at  Rome,  among  the  Italian  republieks,  and  former- 
ly in  England  between  the  king  and  the  nobility,  civil  war 
and  bloodshed  ensued. 


■  Modern  Europe,  vol,  2,  p.  410 


422  THE    GOOD    MORAL   PRINCIPLES    OP    THE 

It  is  impossible,  that  a  balance  of  power  among  orders, 
should  produce  the  same  effects,  as  the  preponderance  of 
one.  As  the  causes  are  widely  different,  so  will  be  their 
consequences.  And  it  is  unphilosopbical  to  conclude,  that 
the  moral  beings,  ambition,  avarice,  rivalry  and  hatred, 
breathed  into  orders,  by  an  equipoise,  will,  like  the  fear 
breathed  into  the  people  by  despotism,  beget  political  tran- 
quillity. 

Between  the  noxious  alternatives,  a  warfare  of  orders 
and  the  quietism  of  tyranny,  antiquity  could  discover  no 
resource.  The  oscillations,  both  of  political  philosophy 
and  vulgar  prejudice,  have  been  perpetual  from  one  to  the 
other,  because  miseries  which  have  passed  away,  are  gra- 
dually forgotten  by  miseries  which  are  endured.  And 
science,  in  this  case,  has  been  welded  to  ignorance,  by  the 
anguish  of  a  common  feeling,  without  searching  for  a  reme- 
dy in  the  resources  of  intellect. 

The  new  idea  of  rejecting  both  alternatives,  was  reserv- 
ed for  the  new  world.  Instead  of  being  a  pendulum  swing- 
ing between  two  curses,  and  capable  of  no  enjoyment,  ex- 
cept that  which  a  change  of  pain  may  afford,  the  United 
States  have  rejected  both  the  calm  despotism  of  one  order, 
and  the  turbulent  counterpoise  of  several.  Oppression,  ri- 
valry, civil  war,  ambition,  and  the  whole  tribe  of  moral  ef- 
fects, incident  to  these  alternatives,  will  either  disappear 
with  their  causes,  or  tinctures  of  such  effects  will  be  so  ma- 
ny intellectual  beacons,  notifying  to  the  nation  of  good  mo- 
ral beings,  that  their  natural  enemies  are  about  to  invade 
them. 

It  was  reserved  for  the  United  States  to  discover,  that 
by  balancing  man  with  man,  and  by  avoiding  the  artificial 
combinations  of  exclusive  privileges,  no  individual  of  these 
equipoised  millions,  would  be  incited  by  a  probability  of  sue. 
cess,  to  assail  the  rest;  and  that  thus  the  concussions  of  pow- 
erful combinations,  and  the  subversion  of  liberty  and  happi- 
•3CS9,  following  a  victory  on  the  part  of  one,  would  be  avoided. 


GOVERNMENT  OF  THE    V.    STATES.  42S 

How  fortunate  it  is,  that  the  two  systems  are  so  visibly 
marked  by  distinct  principles,  that  wilfulness  only  will  be 
able  to  view  encomiums  on  one,  in  any  other  light  than  as 
censures  of  the  other. 

It  must  however  be  admitted,  that  in  our  constitutions 
and  political  disquisitions,  a  struggle  between  the  light  of 
•ur  revolution,  and  the  clouds  of  previous  habits,  is  also  dis- 
cernible. The  numerical  analysis,  a  balance  of  orders  or 
of  powers,  and  a  social  compact  between  nations  and  their 
governments,  often  bewilder  us,  so  as  to  exhibit  reason 
and  prejudice,  striving  for  a  reconciliation.  Our  policy, 
says  one,  abhors  and  rejects  orders  of  men  ;  but,  replies  the 
other,  it  loves  and  creates  orders  of  power ;  as  if  power 
could  exist  abstractedly  of  men.  The  didactick,  dependent, 
subservient  judicial  power,  is  blown  up  to  occupy  a  niche, 
in  imitation  of  the  English  balance,  as  children  imitate  can- 
non, by  the  help  of  bladders  ;  and  Lepidus  is  associated  with 
Augustus  and  Anthony,  for  the  sake  of  a  triumvirate  of 
orders  of  power,  though  he  never  can  become  a  candidate 
for  empire.  Thus  judicial  power  may  be  debauched  with- 
out tasting  the  pleasure  of  sin  ;  and  the  nation  is  seduced 
into  a  reliance  upon  one  balance  against  oppression,  as 
heavy  as  the  thunder  of  the  Vatican  and  the  terrors  of 
excommunication,  opposed  to  the  power  of  Bonaparte.  And 
for  the  imaginary  social  compact  between  the  king  and 
the  people,  one  as  imaginary,  is  also  conjured  up,  to 
shoot  other  old  errours  into  our  new  system  of  policy,  by 
the  shuttles  of  old  phrases. 

The  balancing  system  arose  out  of  the  ancient  opinion, 
that  the  power  of  a  government  was  unlimited.  The  Ame- 
rican revolution,  in  exploding  that  opinion,  subverted  its 
consequences.  The  discovery  of  limitations  upon  the  pow- 
er of  government  then  made,  was  improved  to  great  extent 
in  the  establishment  of  the  general  government,  and  demon- 
strates, that  the  two  modes  for  preserving  a  free  govern- 
ment, are  distinct  and  incompatible.  Unlimited  power 
could  never  be  estimated  or  balanced,  because  the  human 


12-2.  IHE    GOOD   M011AL  FitlNCIPXtLS    OP   THE 

mind  cannot  embrace  that  which  has.  no  limits  :  but  speci- 
fied and  limited  power,  can  easily  bedivided,  and  its  effects 
foreseen.  A  nation,  possessed  of  a  mountain  of  gold, 
which  should  bestow  the  whole  upon  three  ministers,  trust- 
ing to  their  broils  for  its  liberty,  would  pursue  the  old  poli- 
cy •  by  keeping  the  mass  of  its  mountain,  and  entrusting 
agents  with  occasional  sums,  to  be  employed  for  its  use, 
the  new.  The  property  in  power,  claimed  by  orders,  caus- 
es their  efforts  for  its  increase  ;  and  these  efforts  constantly 
produce  the  incurable  defeet  of  that  system,  by  proving  the 
point  upon  which  it  rests  its  value  to  be  unattainable. 
Agents,  pretending  to  no  such  property,  are  not  exposed  to 
the  same  temptation  ;  nor  can  their  frauds  and  usurpations 
avail  themselves  of  specious  but  spurious  pretensions.  The 
abases  of  the  old  policy  will  therefore  often  find  refuge  in 
honest  opinion  ;  the  inexorable  and  patriotick  adversary  of 
those  committed  under  the  new.  Every  deduction  of  power 
from  a  compact  between  a  nation  audits  government,  is  in- 
compatible with  the  right  of  self  government ;  nor  can  a 
policy  which  admits  the  first,  be  founded  in  the  same  princi- 
ples with  that  which  asserts  the  second.  No  contractor, 
with  the  right  of  self  government,  can  exist.  A  social  com- 
pact, which  is  only  an  union  of  individuals,  for  the  end  of 
creating  a  government,  ceases  on  the  accomplishment  of 
this  end.  The  political  society  created  by  a  constitution,  is 
the  only  existing  society,  and  the  government  is  its  agent; 
but  under  the  natural  individual  right  of  self  government, 
this  political  society  itself  may  be  dissolved.  Until  dissolv- 
ed, it  is  the  master  of  the  government,  or  the  real  political 
sovereignty;  bat  the  natural  right  of  self  government,  is  su- 
perior to  any  political  sovereignty.  The  ancient  notion  of 
a  social  compact  between  nations  and  their  governments  or 
monarchs,  alone  sufficed  to  corrupt  them.  A  right  of  con- 
struction being  involved  in  the  character  of  a  party  to  this 
imaginary  social  compact,  it  might  easily  be  modelled  into 
an  inexhaustible  treasury  of  power,  by  the  party  always  ac- 
tive and  able  to  mould  it  into  any  form  ;  whilst  the  party 


GOVERNMENT   OF   THE    V.    STATES  425 

always  sluggish,  could  never  find  it  a  powerful  champion 
for  liberty.  For  this  ancient  speeies  of  compact,  our  poli- 
cy has  substituted  a  chain  of  subordination,  suspended  from 
its  principle  of  the  right  of  self  government.  Our  political 
sovereignty  is  the  first  link,  and  our  government  the  se» 
cond.  The  original  right  exercised  its  superiority  over  the 
social  sovereignty  previously  existing,  and  over  the  whole 
herd  of  fictitious  compacts  between  the  people  and  the  go- 
vernment, or  between  the  states,  or  the  states  and  the 
Union,  at  the  last  establishment  of  a  general  government  -3 
none  of  these  governments  had  any  agency  in  their  own 
creation,  or  in  that  work.  The  state  governments  did  not 
surrender,  but  the  people  transferred  a  portion  of  power, 
without  their  consent,  from  them  to  the  general  govern- 
ment, from  the  plenitude  of  the  right  of  self  government. 
Had  any  social  compact  existed,  to  which  government  was 
a  party,  it  would  by  this  transfer,  have  been  violated.  If 
these  governments  should  frame  compacts  between  them- 
selves, even  for  self  preservation,  it  would  violate  our  poli- 
cy, because  it  would  impugn  the  sovereignty  of  the  existing 
political  society,  and  also  detract  from  the  national  right  of 
self  government.  Our  political  legislation  depends  upon 
the  same  plain  sanction  with  civil  legislation  ;  superiority 
and  subordination.  Uncorrupted  by  imaginary  compacts, 
the  right  of  the  general  or  state  governments  to  break  the 
Union,  though  by  mutual  consent,  disappears  ;  nor  can  the 
interpolations  of  these  imaginary  compacts  or  balances  into 
our  policy,  whilst  the  national  supervision  of  its  governments 
and  armies,  by  election  and  a  "  well  regulated  militia'*  re- 
mains, have  any  effect  but  to  countenance  the  errour,  that 
the  government  of  the  Umted  States  is  a  mouarchy  in  dis- 
guise. 

Religion,  like  politicks,  has  been  inclosed  within  cer- 
tain dogmas,  out  of  which  the  human  mind  was  long  unable 
to  push  its  operations.  The  coutest  between  the  grossest 
errours  and  the  plainest  truths,  was  long  and  doubtful,  after 
its  first  a'lanrcs-    Guile  and  treachery;  'which  constitute  tb>< 


*26  THE    GOOD    MORAL   PRINCIPLES    OF    THE 

philosophy  of  errour,  caused  an  EnglMi  archbishop  to  re 
sort  to  mimickry,  relicks  and  ostentation,  under  pretence  of 
perFeeti  ng  a  religious  reformation,  just  as  tlie  political  re- 
formation of  the  United  States  will  be  perfected*  by  the  doc- 
trines we  have  been  contesting.  Doctrines,  which  would 
conduct  our  civil  reformation  almost  back  to  the  errour  it 
destroyed,  as  happened  in  the  case  of  tlie  English  hierarchy. 
A  comparison  between  these  revolutions  would  Furnish  to  our 
subject  many  illustrations,  bat  we  must  content  ourselves 
with  that  between  our  policy  and  Mr.  Adams's  theory. 

One  commences  its  justification  in  the  language  of  para- 
dox, by  asserting  "  that  separate  interests  beget  an  union  of 
interest."  The  other  uses  that  of  common  sense,  «  a  com- 
mon interest  is  union."  One  boasts  oF  an  ingenuity,  capable 
of  equalising  political  weapons  among  orders,  with  such 
dexterity,  as  to  tempt  them  into  hostilities,  without  end  and 
without  object.  The  other  thinks  it  better  to  exclude  the 
combatants  themselves,  because  their  battles  add  nothing  te 
human  happiness ;  and  because  the  boasted  skill  in  measur- 
ing the  weapons,  has  in  no  instance  produced  (he  miracle 
(like  the  suspension  of  Mahomet's  coffin)  of  a  perpetual  bat- 
tle and  never  a  victory. 

Contrast  and  superiority,  were  so  visible  in  a  compari- 
son between  these  ultimate  principles,  as  not  to  escape  Mr. 
Adams's  penetration.  Foreseeing  that  an  opinion  might 
prevail,  unfavourable  to  the  idea  of  producing  a  common  in- 
terest by  dividing  a  nation  into  sects,  or  a  good  sailing  ship, 
by  cutting  her  into  three  pieces  j  and  to  the  project  of  per- 
petual hostilities  between  factions  without  mischief  or  victo- 
ry ;  he  assails  our  policy  at  its  root,  for  the  purpose  of  prov- 
ing it  defective,  at  the  same  place  where  he  sees  an  incura- 
ble defect  in  his  own. 

Nedham's  doctrine  "  that  the  people  were  (lie  best  guar- 
dians of  (heir  own  liberly,"  presented  Mr.  Adams  with  an 
opportunity  to  try  this  experiment.  He  therefore  replies, 
u  that  the  people  are  the  worst  enemies  to  themselves." 
Hence,  though  warring  or  conquering  orders,  should  ap- 


uOVUKNMENT    OF   THE    IT.    STATES.  V27 

pfear-  to  have  been  enemies  to  the  people  in  a!i  ages,  still 
they  might  be  an  alleviation  of  the  superlative  enmity. 

This  idea  of  justifying  a  system  upon  the  argument  of  a 
natural  self  enmity  in  man,  is  as  strange  as  that  of  produc- 
ing unity  of  interest  by  division.  The  surprise  it  excites, 
is  not  diminished,  by  supposing  that  the  enmity  meant  by 
Mr.  Adams,  was  the  result  of  errour  or  ignorance.  In  the 
present  state  of  mankind,  no  arrangement  of  orders,  could 
produce  a  freedom  from  errour,  or  an  cxclusivcuess  of 
knowledge.  The  aristocraliek  order,  therefore,  whether 
this  enmity  is  deduced  from  a  supposed  self  ha^'r-'d  inhu- 
man nature,  from  errour  or  from  ignorance,  would  as  pro- 
bably constitute  "  the  worst  enemies  to  themselves,"  as  the 
popular;  and  hence  tuis  argument  against  one  order,  applies 
with  equal  force  against  another.  The  application  theore- 
tically is  equal,  but  practically  unequal.  If  the  calamities 
aristocracy  has  drawn  upon  itself  in  all  ages,  by  crimes  and 
vices,  have  been  more  voluntary  than  the  sufferings  of  the 
people,  this  order  is  more  justly  chargeable  with  self 
enmity. 

The  mode  by  which  Mr.  Adams  provides  against  this 
self  enmity  in  the  people,  is  no  less  pleasant  and  paradoxi- 
cal than  the  enmity  itself,  or  the  idea  of  uniting  a  nation  by 
dividing  it  into  orders.  Having  contended  for  a  natural 
Uristocraey,  as  strenuously  as  old  Filmer  (whose  notions 
Mr.  Adams  calls  superstitious  and  absurd)  did  for  natural 
or  divine  kings,  but  being  unable  to  say  "  lo  !  it  is  here,  or 
lo !  it  is  there,"  he  is  at  length  obliged  to  have  recourse  to 
a  convention,  to  come,  artificially,  at  a  natural  aristocracy. 
He  draws  a  vail  over  the  self  hatred,  folly  or  ignorance  of 
the  people,  (whichever  he  means)  and  allows  them  self  love 
and  wisdom  for  one  occasion  only,  provided  that  occasion  be 
an  establishment  of  his  system  of  orders.  After  which, 
self  love,  wisdom  and  capacity  to  take  care  of  themselves 
are,  like  the  bones  of  Lycurgus,  to  be  considered  as  lost 
for  ever  :  and  as  nature  has  decreed  that  the\  cannot  be 
recovered,  the  system  of  orders  is  ingeniously  furnished 


4-28  THE    GOOD   MORAL   PRINCIPLES   OF    THE 

with  a  sanction  for  its  perpetuity,  infinitely  stronger  than 
the  Spartan  oath.    Does  reason  or  zeal  dictate  this  project  ? 

Our  policy  does  not  conceive  that  nature  will  sometimes 
create  an  aristocracy,  and  at  others,  by  refusing  to  do  so, 
leave  its  creation  to  the  people.  It  does  not  believe  that  she 
deprives  mankind  of  the  qualities  necessary  for  self  preser- 
vation, and  yet  enables  them  to  judge  correctly  of  Mr. 
Adams's  intricate  theory.  Nor  that  she  qualifies  nations  to 
erect  governments  for  the  purpose  of  establishing  their 
liberty,  and  then  disqualifies  them  for  keeping  these  govern 
nients  to  their  duty.  The  idea,  that  the  people  may  be 
once  friends,  but  ever  after  enemies  to  themselves,  is  as 
remote  from  our  policy,  as  from  nature. 

The  reader  is  warned  not  to  misunderstand  the  applica- 
tion of  the  principle  of  division,  as  used  by  our  policy  and 
Mr.  Adams's  theory.  Our  policy  divides  power,  and  unites 
the  nation  in  one  interest  ;  Mr.  Adams's  divides  a  nation 
into  several  interests,  and  unites  power.  By  our  policy, 
power  having  been  first  sparingly  bestowed  on  the  govern- 
ment, is  next  minutely  divided,  and  then  bound  in  the  chains 
of  responsibility.  This  discloses  ils  opinion,  that  each  part 
>f  political  power  is  dangerous  to  liberty  ;  and  because  the 
vrh©le  is  of  the  nature  of  its  parts,  the  entire  government  is 
subjected  to  the  right,  asserted  by  our  policy,  and  admitted 
by  Mr.  Adams  to  be  capable  of  once  deing  good  ;  the  right 
of  the  nation  to  influence  or  change  its  government. 

Our  policy  does  not  confide  the  powers  withheld  by  the 
constitution,  to  the  protection  of  any  theory  of  balances. 
The  government  is  not  made  amenable  to  itself.  If  it  usurp? 
a  power  withheld,  by  whom  is  it  to  be  restrained  I  "  Not  by 
the  people,  (says  Mr.  Adams)  they  are  no  keepers  at  all  of 
their  own  liberties."  And  upon  the  credit  of  such  an  asser- 
tion, he  contends  for  a  government  of  orders,  as  if  power  / 
would  be  a  safe  ceutinel  over  power,  or  the  devil  over  Luci- 
fer. But  our  policy  considers  the  physical  force  of  an  armed 
nation,  and  the  moral  force  of  election  and  division,  as  bet- 
ter centinels.    Both  arms,  and  the  right  of  suffrage,  ou£;H 


'        GOVERNMENT   OF  THE    U.    STATES.  429 

however  to  he  taken  from  the  people,  ii*  tliey  are  their  own 
worst  enemies.  The  hypothesis  which  rejects  the  idea  of  a 
moral  gravitation,  and  asserts  that  parts  of  the  same  entity 
naturally  repel  each  other,  is  thought  hy  our  policy  to  he 
unphilosophieal.  Hence  it  infers,  that  it  would  be  as  wise 
and  prudent  to  entrust  national  liberty  to  the  exclusive  care 
of  three  guardians,  all  composed  of  political  power,  as  a  bag 
of  money  to  three  thieves.  According  to  Mr.  Adams's  sys- 
tem, three  thieves  can  never  carry  off  the  bag  of  money, 
because  they  ean  never  agree  about  its  division.  Parts  of 
powrer  and  of  knavery,  attract  each  other  and  coalesce  like 
drops  of  water  :  drops,  however,  may  be  kept  asunder,  but 
rivers  will  soon  form  a  sea. 

To  excuse  this  striking  defect  in  the  system  of  orders, 
Mr,  Adams  produces  their  virtual  responsibility.  This  ac- 
knowledges the  defect.  The  question  therefore  is,  wheiher 
the  remedy  is  sufficient.  Virtual  responsibility  (as  it  was 
termed  by  the  British  parliament)  can  only  be  enforced  by 
civil  war  j  whilst  actual  responsibility  may  be  enforced 
without  it.  Their  difference  is  demonstrated  in  the  eases  of 
Lewis  XV J,  and  the  second  President  of  the  United  States  ; 
and  the  preference,  in  relation  both  to  the  nation  and  the 
magistrate,  is  obvious. 

Against  the  oppressions  of  Mr.  Adams's  hereditary  rep- 
resentatives, nations  have  no  remedy  but  physical  strength  ; 
against  those  of  temporary  representative?,  the  moral  force 
of  opinion  suffices.  The  first  remedy  can  never  be  legally 
exerted,  because  no  government  will  make  laws  to  punish 
itself  ;  to  avoid  which,  these  hereditary  representatives  in- 
variably disarm  the  people,  and  so  make  the  remedy  for  the 
coertion  of  this  virtual  representation  quite  nominal.  lis 
use  is  moreover  prohibited  by  the  dreadful  avenger  of  re- 
bellion. Restrained  by  the  dangers  which  beset  it,  the 
physical  strength  of  a  nation  moves  only  in  the  paroxysm 
inspired  by  long  suffering  or  extreme  peril  :  and  it  is  to  the 
overthrow  of  reason,  by  this  paroxysm,  that  the  frequent 
disappointments  of  national  exertion,  io  enforce  virtual 
responsibility,  are  to  be  ascribed. 


430  THE    GOOD    MORAL   PRINCIPLE 9    OF   THE 

By  our  policy,  actual  responsibility  is  preferred  to  vir- 
tual, or  to  speak  correctly,  nominal.  Conscious  of  the  dan- 
ger arising  from  the  physical  force  of  mercenary  troops,  it 
insists  upon  the  necessity  of  securing  to  the  nation  the  only 
safe  protector  of  moral  or  political  power,  in  an  armed 
militia;  to  prevent  responsibility  from  rebelling  against 
nations,  by  the  same  means  used  by  monarchs  and  orders, 
to  prevent  nations  from  rebelling  against  them.  Under  the 
protection  of  the  physical  power  of  a  militia,  the  moral  or 
political  power  reserved  by  our  policy  to  the  people,  acts 
legally  and  peaceably,  by  opinion  and  election  ',  and  the  rea- 
son of  the  nation  can  hare  recourse  to  a  degree  of  reflection 
and  deliberation,  unattainable  during  the  confusion,  the 
dangers,  and  the  crimes  of  eivil  war.  Without  a  sound  mi- 
litia, all  popular  rights,  including  election  itself,  must  be- 
come tenants  at  will,  of  monarchical  or  aristocratical  land- 
lords. 

Of  the  nature  both  of  virtual  and  actual  responsibility, 
no  nation  ever  experienced  evidence  equally  complete  with 
ours.  The  multitude  of  cases,  in  which  the  states  have  en- 
forced the  latter,  has  given  them  infinitely  less  trouble,  than 
any  single  enforcement  of  the  former.  When  it  shall  require 
as  much  blood,  treasure  and  misery,  to  remove  a  bad  presi- 
dent or  a  bad  governour,  as  to  remove  a  bad  king,  we  shall 
have  exchanged  our  actual,  for  Mr.  Adams's  virtual  or  be 
reditary  responsibility. 

The  doctrines  of  Mr.  Adams,  which  have  suggested  se' 
veral  of  the  preceding  remarks,  are  exhibited  in  the  follow- 
ing quotations,  that  the  reader  may  determine  whether  their 
construction  is  correct. 

"  It  is  agreed,"  says  he,  "  that  the  people  are  the  best 
"  keepers  of  their  own  liberties,  and  the  only  keepers  who 
«*  can  be  always  trusted ;  and  therefore  the  people's  fair 
«  full  and  honest  consent  to  every  law ,  by  their  representa- 
«<  tives,  must  be  made  an  essential  part  of  the  constitution  : 
<«  but  it  is  denied  that  they  are  the  lest  keepers,  or  any  keep- 
(i  ers  at  all  of  their  own  liberties,  when  they  hold  callee- 


GOVERNMEKTT   OF  THE    C.    STATES,  431 

"  tively  or  by  representation,  the  executive  and  judicial 
«  power,  or  the  whole  uncontrolled  legislature"* 

"  An  hereditary  monarch  is  the  representative  of  the 
*<  whole  nation,  for  the  management  of  the  executive  power, 
«  as  much  as  a  house  of  representatives  is,  as  one  branch  of 
'*  the  legislature,  and  as  guardian  of  the  publick  purse  ; 
«  and  a  house  of  lords  too,  or  a  standing  senate,  represents 
«  the  nation  for  other  purposes."! 

It  is  impossible  to  utter  a  more  positive  censure  of  the 
policy  of  the  United  States  than  the  first  quotation.  It  as- 
sails the  doctrine  of  conventions,  which  invests  the  people, 
by  representation,  with  unlimited  power.  It  assails  all  our 
constitutions,  under  which  the  people,  by  representation, 
possess  an  uncontrolled  legislative  and  executive  power. 
And  instead  of  the  sovereignty  fully,  fairly  and  honestly  al- 
lowed to  the  people  by  our  policy,  it  limits  their  rights  to 
the  subordinate  privilege  of  consenting  to  law.  A  law  is 
irrepealable  by  eonsent,  and  one,  obtained  by  surprise,  ma- 
nacles a  nation  forever.  This  forlorn  privilege  of  consent, 
accords  with  the  English  system,  and  beyond  it  all  ought  to 
he  passiveness  on  the  part  of  the  people,  according  to  Mr. 
Adams  ;  if  the  polite  concession  of  a  nominal  responsibility 
to  them,  does  not  in  reality  soften  the  assault  upon  the  so- 
vereignty of  the  people,  as  being  only  a  naked  compliment 
of  a  right  without  a  remedy. 

That  Mr.  Adams  meant  no  more,  results  from  a  slight 
comparison  of  the  two  quotations.  By  one,  it  is  said,  "  the 
"  people  are  no  keepers  at  all  of  their  own  liberties  when  they 
"hold  by  representation  the  executive  and  judicial  power, 
"  or  the  whole  uncontrolled  legislative."  By  the  other, 
*f  that  hereditary  monarchs  and  a  house  of  lords,  are  in 
««  their  functions,  representatives  of  the  nation.'*  It  is  ex- 
tremely difficult  to  discern  a  valuable  representative  quality 
in  a  king  and  house  of  lords,  which  the  people  cannot  hold, 
without  losing  themselves  the  quality  of  being  "  keepers  of 

*  Adams'*  Defence,  vol.  3.  293,        f  Vol.  3.  367- 


*32  THE    GOOD    MORAL   PRINCIPLES    OF   THE 

their  own  liberties.*'  And  yet  the  whole  drift  of  Mr.Adams's 
reasonino-  goes  to  prove,  that  this  aerial  responsibility, 
which  is  so  thin  as  not  to  be  discernible  between  the  as- 
sertions of  the  two  quotations,  is  preferable  to  solid  and 
real  responsibility. 

But  the  theory  of  orders  neither  promises  nor  owes  any 
species  of  responsibility  to  the  nation.  It  literally  claims 
an  uncontrolled  executive  power.  This  is  a  manifest  diffe- 
rence between  that  theory,  and  our  policy.  Ours  proposes 
an  union  of  interests  among  equal  citizens,  and  subjects  the 
government  to  the  will  of  such  an  union;  that,  a  disunion 
of  interests  among  equal  orders,  and  subjects  the  nation  to 
the  will  of  this  disunion.  One  looks  for  freedom  and  hap- 
piness, by  making  it  the  interest  of  the  controlling  power 
to  be  free  and  happy  ;  the  other  expects  freedom  and  hap- 
piness, from  a  controlling  power,  compounded  of  ambition, 
jealousy  and  hatred,  the  gratification  of  which  is  the  inter- 
est and  aim  of  each  part  of  the  composition. 

This  moral  being,  jealousy,  is  magnified  by  the  theory  of 
orders,  into  an  excellent  and  safe  political  principle,  for  its 
own  use;  and  reprobated  with  equal  zeal,  whenever  it  is 
used  by  a  nation.  Nothing1  more  strongly  marks  the  cha- 
racter of  the  system  than  such  language.  Conscious  that 
it  owes  no  responsibility,  it  forbids  the  nation  to  be  jealous 
of  the  government,  and  requires  it  to  confide  in  the  jealousy 
of  the  government  of  itself. 

The  jealousies  of  nations  and  factions  are  however  dif- 
ferent passions.  The  first  is  inspired  by  a  love  of  liberty  ; 
the  other  by  ambition  and  avarice.  The  first  is  extinguish- 
ed by  the  virtues  of  justice  and  moderation,  and  returns 
love  and  respect ;  tiie  other  can  only  be  gratified  by  power 
and  pillage,  never  can  be  extinguished,  and  returns  hatred 
and  contempt.  The  first  is  demonstrated  in  the  existing 
relation,  between  the  united  nations  of  these  states,  and 
their  governments;  the  other,  by  the  eternal  discord 
among  orders.  That  discord  breeds  malignant,  treache- 
rous, and  violent  tempers  to  fill  the  magistracy.     Are  men, 


GOVERNMENT    OF   THE    V.    STATES.  ±33 

i"«ndered  miserable,  by  such  evil  moral  qualities,  tbe  best 
agents  for  rendering  a  nation  virtuous  and  hi-ppy  ?  Is  the 
school  of  dissimulation,  the  school  of  liberty? 

The  history  of  England  itself,  is  as  fruitful  in  the 
effects  of  a  jealousy  among  orders,  as  any  other  example 
quoted  by  Mr.  Adams.  It  exhibits  a  series  of  efforts  on  the 
part  of  the  nobles,  to  become  independent  of  the  crown; 
on  the  part  of  the  crown,  to  become  despotick  ;  and  on  the 
part  of  the  commons,  to  subdue  the  king  and  nobility.  And 
we  sae  that  gallant  nation,  after  toiling  for  centuries  in  the 
cause  of  liberty,  take  refuge  from  a  system,  founded  in  a 
jealousy  of  orders,  to  one,  founded  in  the  corruption  of  its 
representatives.  The  most  perfect  experiment,  hitherto 
made,  (as  Mr.  Adams  believes)  of  balanced  orders,  is 
deserted  for  a  system  of  force  and  fraud,  as  an  ameliora- 
tion of  its  malignity.  And  the  issue  of  the  system  of 
orders  in  this  celebrated  experiment,  simply  is,  that 
whilst  these  orders  are  guided  by  jealousy,  the  nation  is 
distracted,  and  when  united  by  paper  and  patronage,  it  is 
plundered. 

The  constant  termination  of  the  system  of  orders  else- 
where, and  its  catastrophe  in  England,  proves  that  a 
balance  of  power  among  them,  is  an  unnatural  speculation  ; 
it  is  invariably  disordered  by  a  tendency  towards  some  one 
simple  principle  of  government.  The  question  with  the 
United  States,  was,  whether  they  would  try  the  mixed  sys- 
tem of  orders,  and  be  conducted  by  this  medium  to  one 
of  these  simple  forms  ;  or  whether,  instead  of  committing 
their  fate  to  accident,  they  should  plant  it  in  good  moral 
principles. 

They  saw  that  the  mixtures  of  orders,  without  any  ex- 
ception, after  suffering  the  most  agonizing  throes,  had 
brought  forth  monarchy,  the  ancient  aristocracy,  ochlocra- 
cy, or  the  modern  aristocracy  of  paper  and  patronage  ;  and 
that  it  had  in  no  instance  produced  national  self  govern- 
ment. They  preferred  that  simple  principle,  which  the 
<y*t**m  of  orders  has  never  produced,    And  our  computation 

56 


-bcrl  THE    G001J    MORA!.   PRINCIPLES    01?   THE 

lies  between  the  preservation  of  this  principle,  and  a  paia- 
fill  travail,  through  the  organ  of  orders,  to  one  of  the  prin- 
ciples it  generates. 

Because  certain  publick  functionaries,  convene  in  diffe- 
rent chambers,  or  are  invested  wilh  different  powers,  for 
the  purpose  of  preserving  the  principle  of  national  self  go- 
vernment, Mr.  Adams  concludes  that  Ave  originally  adopted 
a  very  different  one.  An  errour,  which  forcibly  displays  the 
power  of  opinion  over  maxim  and  precept.  Self  govern- 
ment, a  maxim  of  nature,  and  a  precept  of  our  constitu- 
tions, has  seen  opinion,  under  her  banner,  bringing  up  the 
troops  of  contrary  principles,  to  effect  her  destruction  ; 
whilst  she  was  told  to  her  face,  that  she  did  not  exist,  and 
could  only  be  created  by  a  balance  of  power  among  three 
orders.  When  she  sees  an  ambitious  and  mercenary 
army,  possessing  the  exclusive  military  power  of  a  nation, 
converted  into  patriots  by  metaphysical  lines,  for  dividing 
it  into  three  detachments;  then  let  her  believe,  that 
three  orders,  exclusively  possessing  civil  power,  may  also 
become  subordinate  to  national  will. 

Unity,  harmony  and  proportion,  are  as  necessary  in  po- 
liticks, as  in  the  drama,  musick  or  architecture.  A  tragi- 
comical government,  a  Corinthian  capital  over  a  Dorick 
column,  jarring  dissonances  mingled  with  soft  notes,  an 
aristocratick  democracy  or  a  monarchick  aristocracy,  des- 
troy sympathies,  proportions  and  melody.  It  is  consistency 
which  produces  perfection  in  arts  and  sciences.  Let  us  pro- 
ceed to  inquire,  whether  it  is  to  be  found  in  either  of  the 
two  rival  systems  we  have  frequently  compared.  And  first, 
we  will  look  into  that  composed  of  orders. 

It  charges  human  nature  with  an  insubordinate  mass  of 
evil  propensities;  thence  it  infers  a  necessity  for  vast  power 
to  curb  them  ;  and  it  bestows  tins  vast  power  upon  human 
nature.  Great  power  often  corrupts  virtue  ;  it  invariably 
venders  vice  more  malignant.  Is  human  nature  made 
worse,  a  good  corrector  of  human  nature  ?  Is  vice  cured  by 
the  strongest  temptations  ?    History  e\ery  where  contri- 


GOVERNMENT    OF   THE    V.    STATES.  4&5 

butes  evidence,  distinctly  replying  to  these  questions.  In 
proportion  as  the  powers  of  governments  increase,  both  its 
own  character  and  that  of  the  people  becomes  worse. 

Our  system  does  not  attempt  to  restrain  vice  by  prove 
eatives  to  vice.  In  destroy  ing  the  evil  principle,  inordinate 
power,  it  has  destroyed  a  cause  of  more  vice,  than  human 
nature  has  ever  perpetrated  from  any  other  cause.  Having 
cut  off  the  most  copious  source  of  vice,  by  disabling  a  go- 
vernment from  committing  more  iniquity  than  it  can  pre- 
vent, it  finds  no  difficulty  in  curbing  the  petty  class  of  mu- 
nicipal offences.  It.  has  not  been  induced  by  the  fact,  that 
one  individual  will  sometimes  injure  another,  to  establish 
the  cause  of  all  those  dreadful  atrocities,  which  sweep 
away  the  liberty,  the  property,  the  Virtue  and  the  existence 
of  nations. 

The  project  of  hereditary  systems,  is  to  destroy  the 
morals  of  one  part  of  a  community  by  power,  in  order  to 
preserve  the  morals  of  the  rest,  by  despotism.  Hence  it  is 
compelled  to  multiply  punishments  for  crimes  which  it 
causes  ;  and  to  defend  itself  against  punishment,  for  having 
caused  the  crimes  which  it  punishes.  It  corrupts  the 
morals  of  the  few,  under  pretence  of  restraining  the  vices  of 
the  many  ;  and  this  corruption  is  a  source  of  more  vice  than 
it  restrains. 

Our  policy  takes  a  wider  range.  It  is  not  so  miserably 
defective,  as  to  make  one  part  of  a  nation  worse,  for  the 
sake  of  making  another  better.  It  considers  government 
as  intended  to  improve  the  manners  and  happiness  of  the 
whole  nation  ;  and  instead  of  leaving  half  its  work  undone, 
proposes  to  finish  it,  by  providing  for  the  manners  and  happi- 
ness of  those  who  govern,  as  well  as  of  those  who  are  govern 
ed.  It  applies  the  reason  for  civil  government,  not  par- 
tially, hut  generally ;  not  to  particular  orders,  but  to  na- 
tions ;  not  to  individuals,  but  to  totals.  This  reason  sim- 
ply is,  that  the  restraint  of  accountableness,  improves  the 
manners  and  happiness  of  mankind.  Unable  to  see  a  dis- 
tinction in  nature,  between  man  and  man,  our  systetn  ha« 


iS6  THE    GOOD   MORAL   PRINCIPLES   OP   THIS 

made  that  happy  discovery,  by  which  the  salutary  restraint 
of  accountableness,  may  be  extended  to  every  individual  of 
a  nation.  Instead  of  leaving  some  men  to  the  guidance  of 
an  uncontrolled  will  or  in  a  state  of  nature,  it  subjects  all  to 
law  ;  and  instead  of  sublimating  the  evil  qualities  of  human 
nature,  to  their  highest  degree  of  acrimony,  by  power 
unrestrained,  it  subjects  it  in  as  well  as  out  of  office  to  go- 
vernment. It  does  not  attempt  to  prevent  a  viper  from 
biting  by  irritation. 

Whether  man  is  naturally  virtuous  or  vicious,  is  a  ques- 
tion, furnishing,  however  determined,  no  just  argument  in  fa- 
vour of  hereditary  systems.  If  the  most  transcendent  virtue 
is  hardly  proof  against  the  seduction  of  exorbitant  power, 
these  systems,  in  their  own  defence,  ought  to  prove,  that 
mankind  are  bv  nature  virtuous.  If  he  is  vicious,  his 
restraints  ought  to  be  multiplied  in  proportion  to  his  power 
to  do  mischief;  if  virtuous,  it  strengthens  the  reasons  de 
rived  from  self  love,  for  leaving  moral  power,  where  na 
lure  has  placed  physical. 

Estimated  by  its  sympathies,  human  nature  discloses  a 
vast  preponderance  of  virtuous  sensations.  It  sponta- 
neously shrinks  from  an  expression  of  rage,  and  is  drawn 
towards  one  of  joy  ;  whilst  ignorant  of  the  cause  of  either  y 
because  one  is  an  emblem  of  vice,  and  the  other  of  virtue. 

Horrible  or  impious,  as  the  atomical  philosophy  may  be, 
it  cannot  be  more  so,  than  the  idea  of  a  natural  depravity  in 
man,  rendering  him  unfit  for  self  government.  One  doc- 
trine assails  the  existence  of  a  God  ;  the  other,  his  power  or 
goodness.  If  man,  the  noblest  creature  of  this  world  ;  if 
mind,  the  noblest  attribute  of  this  creature  ;  are  both  incor- 
rigibly imperfect;  the  inference  that  the  world  itself  is  a 
bad  work,  is  unavoidable.  Man's  case  is  hopeless.  If  he 
as  the  creature  of  malignity  or  imbecility,  and  doomed  to  be, 
governed  by  fiends,  naturally  as  bad,  and  artificially  made 
worse  than  himself,  where  is  his  refuge  ?  Shall  he  fly  to  the 
hereditary  system,  which  teaches  him  to  despair ;  or  ad- 
here to  one,   which  inspires  him  with  hope  ?  The  heredi- 


GOVERNMENT   OF  THE    U,    STATES  437 

tary  system!  which  having  almost  exclusively  exercised  the 
office  of  forming  the  human  character  since  the  creation  of 
the  world,  very  gravely  urges  as  a  reason  in  favor  of  its 
regimen,  that  its  work  is  detestable. 

Upon  this  wretch,  man,  however  wicked  he  may  be,  na~ 
ture  has  unequivocally  bestowed  one  boon.  This  blessing,  the 
hereditary  system  proposes  to  deprive  him  of;  our  policy 
uses  it  as  the  principle  of  civil  government ;  it  is  the  right  of 
self  preservation.  No  other  government,  ancient  or  modern, 
has  fairly  provided  for  the  safety  of  this  right.  In  all  others, 
it  is  fettered  by  compounds  of  orders  er  separate  interests  ; 
by  force  or  by  fraud.  Between  governments  which  leave  to 
nations  the  right  of  self  preservation,  and  those  which  des- 
troy it,  we  must  take  our  stand,  to  determine  on  which  side 
the  preference  lies.  A  coincident  view  of  happiness  and 
misery,  will  presently  transform  this  line,  into  a  wide  gulf, 
on  the  farther  side  of  which,  we  shall  behold  the  governed 
of  all  other  nations,  expressing  their  agonies.  Shall  we  go 
to  them,  because  they  cannot  come  to  us  ? 

The  restraint  of  governours,  or  the  laws  impressed  on 
them  by  the  nation,  termed  political,  in  this  essay,  consti- 
tutes the  essential  distinction  between  the  policy  of  the 
United  States,  and  of  other  countries.  Machiavel,  in  de- 
ciding that  a  «*  free  government  cannot  he  maintained, 
when  the  people  have  grown  corrupt ;"  and  in  admitting 
monarchy,  "  to  be  the  proper  corrective  of  a  corrupt  peo- 
ple," has  reasoned  from  false  principles,  to  false  conclu 
sions,  because  he  had  not  discerned  this  distinction.  He 
supposes  orders  proper  to  maintain  liberty,  whilst  the  peo- 
ple are  virtuous ;  and  that  they  are  hurtful,  when  the  peo- 
ple become  corrupt ;  and  taking  it  for  granted,  that  liberty 
cannot  exist  without  virtue,  nor  without  orders,  he  dooms 
all  nations  to  orders  or  to  monarchy.  If  virtuous,  he  sad- 
dles them  with  political  orders  ;  if  vicious,  with  an  avenger 
instead  of  a  reformer.  History  has  neither  related,  nor 
fable  feigned,  that  monarchs  or  demons  reform  the  wicked 
committed  to  their  durance*      His  erreur  lay  in  an  titter 


438  TIM    GOOD    MORAL   PRINCIPLES    OTF   THE 

ignorance  of  restraining  governments.  He  never  consider- 
ed whether  a  corrupt  nation  might  not  establish  a  free 
political  system,  as  avaricious  mercantile  partners  establish 
just  articles  of  partnership  ;  and  that  it  would  be  the  inte- 
rest of  the  majority  to  do  so,  because  slavish  political  sys- 
tems, inevitably  prey  upon  majorities;  nor  whether  this 
interest,  united  with  common  sense,  would  not  induce  majo- 
rities, since  they  cannot  be  lasting  tyrants  themselves,  to 
absolve  themselves  from  tyranny.  Orders  and  national 
virtue  united,  says  Maehiavel,  produce  liberty  ;  but  if  vir- 
tue disappears,  liberty  ceases.  Others,  split  up  this  dogma. 
Virtue,  say  they,  will  produce  liberty  ;  and  without  ity 
liberty  cannot  exist.  Orders,  says  Mr.  Adams,  will  pro- 
duce liberty.  If  in  the  case  of  the  compound  dogma  of 
Maehiavel,  virtue  and  liberty  disappear,  whilst  orders  re- 
main, the  orders  were  not  the  cause  of  the  liberty.  If  the 
Virtue  and  liberty  remain,  after  orders  disappear,  as  in 
America,  the  orders  caused  neither  the  virtue  nor  the 
liberty.  And  if  orders  will  produce  liberty,  according  to 
Mr.  Adams,  the  necessity  for  virtue  to  preserve  liberty  does 
not  exist. 

This  confusion  arises  from  the  substitution  of  moral 
artifice,  which  may  be  good  or  bad,  for  good  moral  princi- 
ples. Virtue,  or  moral  goodness,  may  overpower  an  evil 
moral  artifice,  and  for  a  short  space  preserve  national  liber- 
ty, against  the  assaults  of  a  bad  form  of  government.  Na- 
tional virtue,  pervading  both  the  governours  and  people, 
like  individual  virtue,  is  a  sponsor  for  happiness;  and  whilst 
political  writers  tell  us  that  an  assembly  of  good  moral 
principles,  embraced  by  the  term  virtue,  will  produce  their 
natural  effects,  they  say  nothing  in  favour  of  evil  moral  ar- 
tifices. The  general  acknowledgement  of  the  capacity  of 
good  moral  principles  to  correct  a  bad  form  of  government? 
is  a  vast  encouragement  to  expect  from  them  a  capacity  to 
correct  bad  governours ;  and  hence  our  policy  has  resorted 
to  the  good  and  virtuous  moral  principle  of  responsibility, 
or  a  strong  code   of  political  law,  which  can   exist  and 


GOVERNMENT   OV  THE    V.    STATES.  43y 

operate  upon  governours,  if  the  nation  understands  its  inte- 
rest, at  whatever  degree  of  virtue  or  corruption  it  may  be 
stationed,  in  fact  or  in  theory. 

If  orders  (a  moral  artifice)  should  become  corrupt,  they 
are  then,  says  Machiavel,  hurtful  to  liberty ;  and  he  recom- 
mends one  of  these  corrupt  orders,  a  king,  as  a  cure  for  the 
hurt.      Bolingbroke   observes,     *»  Instead   of  wondering 
«'  that  so  many  kings,  unfit  and  unworthy  to  be  trusted  with 
"the  government  of  mankind,   appear  in  the  world,  I  have 
"been  tempted  to  wonder  that  there  are  any  tolerable ;" 
and  «  a  patriot  king  is  a  kind  of  miracle."f    If  the  moral 
artifice,  "  orders,5'   should   become  corrupt,  MachiavePs 
remedy    is    Bolingbroke's  miracle.      These   are  ranked 
among  the  first  class  of  political  writers.     «  Nothing  can 
restrain  the  propensity  of  orders  to  hurt  liberty,  but  virtue," 
says  Machiavel.     «  Good  kings  are  not  to  be  expected  hj 
the  laws  of  nature,"     says  Bolingbroke.     Yet  they  concur 
in  favour  of  orders.     Each  decides  against  his  own  reason- 
ing, because  both  being  enslaved  to  the  old  tenet  of  the  one, 
the  few  and  the  many,  neither  contemplated  the  abolition 
of  orders  or  monarchy,  nor  the  invention  of  a  sound  restraint 
upon  the  vices  of  governments,   now  practically  illustrated 
in  every  state  of  the  Union      In  fact,  neither  of  them  saw 
the  difference  between  a  moral  artifice,  and  a  moral  princi- 
ple.    Bolingbroke's  alternative,  of  an  elective  or  hereditary 
monarch,  is  unnecessary,  because  both  are  evil  moral  arti- 
fices,  which  may   be   superseded   by  a   political    system, 
founded  in  good   moral  principles.     If  inconveniences  ap- 
pear in  the  United  States  on  the  election  of  presidents,  it 
will  only  demonstrate  that  we  have  approached  too  near  to 
the  moral  artifice,  called  an  elective  monarch),  and  that  we 
ought  to  recede  from  this  bad  moral  artifiee,  nearer  to  the 
good  moral  principle  of  a  division  of  power.     Neither  of 
these  writers  entertained  the  least  idea  of  a  policy  founded 
in  fixed  and  good  moral  principles,  and  have  only  labour* 

*  Patriot  King-.  88         f  UT. 


HO  THE    GOOD    MOttAX   PfilNCIPLES    Ol*    IHS 

like  Bayes,  in  his  dance  of  the  sun,  the  moon  and  the  earth, 
£o invent  new  postures  for  the  triumvirate  of  the  old  politi- 
cal analvsisc 

Boiingbroke  says,  «'  that  absolute  stability,  is  not  to  be 
gi,  expected  in  any  thing  human  ;  all  that  can  be  done,  there- 
»  fore,  to  prolong  tlie  duration  of  a  good  government,  is  to 
"  draw  it  back,  on  every  favorable  occasion,  to  the  Jirst 
«  good  principles  on  which  it  was  founded."  Does  he 
mean  by  carrying  a  government  back  to  good  principles,  to 
carry  it  back  to  monarchy,  aristocracy,  democracy,  or  to 
some  mixture  of  them  ?  Such  was  not  his  meaning,  because 
these  human  contrivances  are  not  principles  themselves,  but 
founded  in,  or  deduced  from  principles.  And  whether 
either,  or  any  mixture  of  two  or  all,  is  founded  in  good  or 
bad  moral  principles,  is  the  immemorial  subject  of  political 
controversy.  If  he  did  not  mean  that  a  decaying  govern- 
ment should  seek  for  regeneration  in  some  one  of  these 
human  contrivances,  the  moral  nature  of  which  remained 
to  be  tried  by  the  test  of  principles ;  or  that  the  test  was  its 
own  subject ;  he  has  explicitly  admitted  the  existence  of  a 
political  analysis,  both  the  ancestor  and  judge  of  the  ancient 
analysis  of  governments,  and  also  of  every  conceivable  form 
which  can  be  invented.  Upon  this  anterior  analysis,  the  po- 
licy of  the  United  States  is  founded.  "We  resort  to  it  as 
the  test  by  which  to  discover  whether  either  member  of  the 
old  forms  of  goverment,  or  any  mixture  of  them,  is  good  or 
bad.  It  is  not  a  fluctuating,  but  permanent  tribunal.  Its 
authority  is  divine,  and  its  distinctions  perspicuous.  And  if 
it  shall  supersede  the  erroneous  idea,  that  mankind  are  ma- 
nacled down  to  monarchy,  aristocracy  or  democracy,  as  the 
only  principles  of  government,  the  effect  of  diminishing  the 
Instability  of  human  affairs,  by  a  resort  to  unchangeable 
principles,  may  be  fairly  anticipated. 

Without  considering"  good  principles,"  as  distinct  from 
forms  of  government,  a  return  to  them,  for  political  rege- 
neration, could  not  convey  a  single  idea.  A  government 
may  commence  in  monarchy,  aristocracy  or  democracy,  and 


GOVERNMENT    OF    THE    U.    STATES.  141 

degenerate  from  either  to  another.  Ree essions  to  and  from 
all  forms  of  government  may  take  place,  and  therefore 
these  forms  could  not  be  intended  by  •»  good  principles," 
because  these  fluctuating  recessions  would,  under  that  idea, 
make  all  forms  good,  and  all  had. 

The  inability  of  the  old  analysis  to  define  a  good  form 
of  government,  and  its  destitution  of  some  beacon  by  wLich 
to  steer  back  to  the  harbour  of  safety,  from  an  ocean  of  cor- 
ruption, is  thus  apparent.  It  only  tells  mankind,  when  un- 
happy under  monarchy,  aristocracy  or  democracy,  to  go 
back  from  one  to  another,  or  to  some  mixture  of  them* 
Whereas  the  analysis  of  this  essay,  by  arranging  govern- 
ments according  to  the  principles  in  which  they  are  founded, 
discloses  the  mode  of  their  preservation  in  a  state  of  purity, 
and  also  the  way  to  restore  that  purity  whenever  it  is  im- 
paired. 

Although  the  idea  of  going  back  to  first  good  princi- 
ples has  been  repeated  info  a  maxim,  it  is  seldom  honestly 
explained  or  applied  ;  nor  has  it  ever  been  confessed,  that 
the  phrase  explodes  the  old,  and  suggests  a  more  correct 
analysis  of  governments.  Its  correctness  and  power  is  illus- 
trated, by  supposing  that  sedition  laws,  or  a  chartered 
stock  aristocracy,  are  deviations  from  our  jirst  good 
"principles.  How  is  the  deviation  to  be  discovered  ?  By 
launching  into  the  ocean  of  the  old  analysis  and  its  mix- 
tures ?  No.  By  bringing  it  to  the  test  of  the  new  ana- 
lysis, founded  in  moral  principles.  If  it  is  thus  dis- 
covered, how  are  nations  to  return  to  their  first  good  prin- 
ciples? By  taking  refuge  in  monarchy,  aristocracy,  demo- 
cracy, or  a  mixture  of  them  ?  No.  By  repealing  laws  de 
viating  from  its  Jirst  good  principles.  One  of  these  illus- 
trations will  also  serve  to  display  the  errour  and  fraud  of 
the  artifice,  by  which  mankind  have  been  persuaded  to  sub- 
scribe to  the  following  syllogism — "Man  cannot  possess  free 
government,  unless  he  is  virtuous  ;  but  he  is  vicious  t 
therefore  he  cannot  possess  free  government"— so  inge- 
liouslv  invented,   and  so  comfortably  repommendtd  in  all 


M2  THIS    GOOD    MOltAI   FEINtl&tiEB    05?    THE 

agtes,  by  patriotiek  kings,  ministers  and  nobles.  Now  if  the 
banking  system  is  a  mode,  however  ingenious,  of  oppress  • 
ing  a  majority,  that  majority,  however  corrupt,  may  remove 
the  oppression.  And  if  the  corruption  itself,  shall  have  been 
chiefly  produced  by  the  oppressing  system,  as  is  generally 
the  case,  then  the  removal  of  the  oppression,  is  the  true  re 
medy  for  the  corruption.  Not  so,  say  Machiavel  and 
Montesquieu  ,•  virtue  being  gone,  freodom  has  fled  beyond 
the  reach  of  a  nation,  and  oppression  or  monarchy  is  the 
remedy. 

The  interest  of  a  vicious  majority  to  remove  oppression 
from  itself,  is  as  strong  as  if  it  was  virtuous  j  and  the  coin- 
cidence between  its  interest  and  reformation,  is  a  foundation 
for  an  honest  politician  to  build  on.  If  avarice  and  fraud 
are  propagated  by  laws  for  amassing  wealth  at  the  expense 
of  a  majority,  the  pecuniary  interest  of  this  majority  to 
destroy  these  laws,  is  the  strongest  ground  for  effecting  a 
reformation  of  the  corrupt  manners  they  have  produced. 
And  the  just  laws  of  a  vicious  majority,  in  self  defence,  will 
have  a  wide  influence  in  the,  re-establishment  of  virtue ; 
whereas  no  corrupt  minority  whatever,  composed  either  of 
orders  or  separate  interests,  can  be  actuated  by  self  interest 
to  enact  just  laws,  the  best  restorers  of  good  manners. 

There  are  two  considerations  which  sustain  this  reason- 
ing. First,  that  man  is  more  prone  to  reason  than  to  er- 
rour.  Secoudly,  that  he  is  more  prone  to  self  love  than  to 
self  enmity.  Notwithstanding  the  first  propensity,  every 
man,  however  wise,  is  liable  to  err  ;  and  an  occasional  er- 
rour  of  a  wise  man  may  ruin  a  nation.  The  general  pro- 
pensity of  the  whole  species,  Mill  usually  impress  its  owb 
character,  upon  a  general  opinion,  and  is  undoubtedly  less 
liable  to  errour,  than  the  conclusions  of  an  individual.  It 
is  safer  to  confide  in  this  propensity,  than  in  individual  in- 
fallibility. One  exists,  the  other  does  not.  One  is  ever 
honest,  the  other  often  knavish.  The  force  of  self  love,  is 
as  strong  in  majorities,  as  in  an  individual,  but  its  effect  in 
precisely    contrary,      Ft    excites   one    man  to  do  wrong". 


GOVERNMENT    OF    THE    t.    STATES  4i!> 

because  he  is  surrounded  with  objects  of  oppression  ;  and 
majorities  to  do  right,  because  they  can  find  none.  Their 
errours  of  judgement  are  abandoned,  so  soon  as  they  arc 
?een,  whilst  the  despotism  of  one  man  is  more  strongly  for- 
tified  for  being  discovered.  The  old  analysis  intrusts  great 
power  to  individuals  and  minorities ;  and  provides  no  mode 
of  controlling  their  natural  vicious  propensities.  Our  poli- 
cy deals  out  to  them  flower  more  sparingly,  and  superadds 
a  sovereign,  whose  propensity  is  towards  reason,  and  whose 
self  interest  is  an  excitement  to  justice.  Such  is  the  com 
petitorof  the  sovereign  of  the  old  analysis,  of  which  oven  it? 
advocate,  Rolingbroke,  admits,  that  a  good  one  would  be  n 
tfiiraclc.  To  avoid  reasons,  so  strong  in  favour  of  our  spe 
cies  of  sovereignty,  kings,  nobles,  and  even  mobs,  hav<- 
claimed  a  divine  right  to  govern,  because  there  existed  nc 
ground  between  the  right  of  self  government  and  authority 
front  God.  It  was  obvious,  that  a  nation,  like  an  individual. 
could  never  become  a  tyrant  over  itself,  and  therefore  all 
abuses  of  good  moral  principles,  whether  in  the  form 
of  the  ancient  analysis,  or  of  the  modern  aristocracy  ol 
paper  and  patronage,  find  means  to  control  and  defeat 
national  self  government,  either  by  the  impiety  of  fathering 
tyranny  upon  God,  or  by  the  fraud  of  admitting  but  evading 
its  pretensions.  And  though  it  is  at  length  confessed,  that 
nations  have  a  right  to  destrov  tvrants.  the  difficulty  "of 
finding  a  tyrant  willing  to  be  destroyed,  remains.  Monar 
my,  aristocracy,  hierarchy,  patronage,  and  ambition,  still 
urge  every  plea,  however  false,  which  transient  circumstan 
ces  may  render  plausible ;  even  the  paper  aristocracy  o\ 
the  United  States,  though  constructed  of  republicans,  would 
surrender  the  sanctity  of  tyrannical  kings,  to  secure  a  sancti 
tyfor  tyrannical  cliarters  ;  and  whilst  it  strives  to  find  re- 
fuge for  the  latter,  under  some  good  word,  joins  in  drag 
ging  the  former  from  under  the  throne  of  God  himself. 

Although  there  is  no  middle  ground  between  nations; 
and  divine  civil  government,  Montesquieu'-  position,  «  thai 
virtue  is  necessary  for  the  preservation  of  liberty,"  ha*  lonjr 


*i44  THE    GOOD   MORAL   PRINCIPLES    OY    IHE 

deluded  thf  world  into  a,  state  of  indecision,     If  it  means 
that  the  members  of  a  society  cannot  form  equal  and  just 
laws  for  self  government,   unless  these  members  are  -vir 
Inous,  it  is  false  j  hut  if  it  means  that  liberty  cannot  be  pre- 
served without  virtuous  laws,  it  is  true.     That  vicious  men 
can  constitute  themselves  into  a  society  by  laws,  free,  just 
and  virtuous,  respecting  themselws,  is  prcvul  by  the  a 
ciations  of  nobles,  priests,  merchant!*,  stockjobbers  and  rob- 
bers, which  are  eontrived,  whether  the  members  are  vir- 
tuous or  not,  to  preserve  individual  social  rights.     And  that 
virtuous  men  cannot  eonsti trite  themselves  into  a  fri'^  so 
eiety,  by  oppressive,    unjust  and  vicious  law?,    is   obvioifcrj 
true.     As  fraudulent  laws  enslave  a  virtuous  nation,  just- 
laws  will  preset  ye  the  liberty  of  a  vicious  one.     It  is1  in  the 
governing  principles,  and  not  in  the  subject  to  be  governed, 
that  the  virtue  or  vice  resides,  which  causes  the  freedom  m 
oppression.     But    l?ings,  nobles,  priests  and  stockjobbers, 
have  transposed  this  idea,  and  insisted  upon  the  necessity  of 
virtue  in  the  subject  to  be  governed,  to  create  pretences  for 
vicious  laws  to  feed  their  own  appetites. 

A  nation  cut  up  into  orders  or  separate  interests,  cannot 
exert  national  self  government,  because  the  national  self  no 
more  exists,  than  a  polypus,  after  being  cut  into  four  or  five 
jweees,  which  forage  in  different  directions  or  upon  each 
other.     Suppose  it  dissected  into  four,  the  ennobled,   niili 
tary.  hierarchical  and  stock ;    which  of  these  could   pro 
Hounce  any  other  opinion  than  its  own  ?     Each  would  con- 
stitute a  distinct  moral  self,  and  could  only  entertain  opi- 
nions,  naturally  flowing  from   its  own  moral  nature  ;  the 
ennobled,  military,  hierarchical  and  stock  selves,    must  as 
necessarily  have  opinions,  distinct  from  each  other,  as  the 
English,  French,  Spanish  and  German  nations.     And  these 
opinions  would  be  more  Frequently  contradictory,  than  the 
opinions  of  those  nations,  because  the  interests  6f  dbmestfcjk 
factions  would  more  frequently  clash. 

The  experiments  for   balancing  power  among  the  na- 
tions of  Europe,   produce   effects*  anaiagous  to  those  for 


^GOVERNMENT    OF   THE    V.    STATES.  445 

balancing  power  among  orders.  Europe  cannot  be  formed 
into  one  quiet  government,  because  the  different  nations* 
having  different  interests,  cannot  form  one  political  being. 
The  supposed  project  of  Henry  IV.  of  France,  for  mould- 
ing Europe  into  such  a  being,  was  therefore  chimerical. 
Political  orders,  are  as  distinct  and  as  inimical  nations,  as 
those  of  Europe.  Of  course  they  have  never  been  com 
pressed  into  one  nation,  having  one  interest,  one  will,  and 
one  self,  all  indispensible  to  self  government ;  but  like  the 
scheme  of  balancing  power  among  the  European  nations. 
that  of  balancing  it  among  privileged  orders,  produces  plots 
or  wars  without  end,  until  they  end  in  a  conquest  and  tyran- 
ny by  one. 

A  nation  cut  up  into  separate  factitious  moral  beings,  is 
compelled  to  use  the  means  for  enforcing  municipal  law, 
iteed  by  France  ami  England  to  enforce  European  law. 
The   contest  for  predominance    among  privileged  orders, 
can  only  be  restrained  by   standing  armies,  and  these  at 
length  determine  it,  by  declaring  for   one.     Constitutions 
are   only  treaties  between  orders,   where  they  exist;    and 
these  treaties,  like  those  between  nations,  are  broken  or 
evaded,  whenever  it  is  the  interest  of  any  party  to  break  o? 
evade    them.      Accordingly,  the  history   given    by    Mr 
Adams,  and  by   all  others,  of  these  orders  or  artificial 
nations,  proves,  that  they  are  constantly  making  and  break- 
ing treaties,  and  that  they  have  universally  been  more  trea- 
cherous, cruel  and  malicious  towards  each  other,  than  natu 
ral  nations. 

-  Mechanical  or  habitual  applause,  cannot  preserve  the 
policy  of  the  United  States.  It  can  only  be  saved  by  tho 
roughly  understanding  wherein  its  excellency  consists.  Ii 
it  does  not  consist  of  a  common  interest,  let  any  other  eulo- 
gist point  out  its  distinction  from  the  policy  under  which 
men  have  hitherto  groaned.  If  it  does,  and  if  its  capacity 
for  preserving  free  and  national  self  government,  is  thcrioe 
derived,  it  follows,  that  laws  for  cutting  up  the  nation  into 
district  interests,  will  essentially  destroy*  wi<hnn<  ?bangin£ 


&46"  THE    GOOD    MORAL  PEUSXIP1ES   ©¥   THE 

a  letter  of  our  constitutions,  or  a  shadow  of  our  forms  of 
government. 

But  having  discovered,  that  the  superiority  of  our  poli- 
cy consists  of  an  exclusion  of  separate  interests,  able  to 
create  factions ;  that  the  good  or  the  detriment  of  the  com- 
munity, may  be  the  subject  of  inquiry  in  the  several  depart- 
ments of  governments;  it  will  be  easy  to  detect  laws,  ap 
pearing  in  (he  questionable  shape  of  deserters  from  the  re- 
gion of  evil  moral  principles,  and  fraught  with  separate  in~ 
tcrests,  or  contrivances  for  distributing  wealth. 

Of  this  nature,  we  have  considered  banking  laws.    Tltey 
create  an  order,  having  above  fifty  millions  capital;  most  of 
it  consisting  of  nominal  stock,  railed  credit ;    a  privilege  of. 
emitting  national  money;  and  the  powers  of  banishing  na- 
tional coin,  of  governing  commerce,   and  of  deciding  the 
fate  of  mercantile  individuals;    it  draws  five  millions  an- 
nuallv  from  national  labour  :    and  is  able  to  influence  elee 
tions,  and  to  corrupt  legislatures.     Is  it  for  the  good  or  the 
detriment  of  banker*,  borrowers,  creditors  or  debtors  ?    arc 
questions,  which  pilfer  nations,  and  stain  the  statute  book; 
whereas  it  is  our  policy  to  keep  it  clean,  because  upon  its 
purity  depends  the  national  freedom  and  happiness. 

The  history  of  Laecdemon  exhibits  a  correct  idea  of  a 
distinct  order:  that  of  England,  of  a  distinct  interest.  The 
order  of  nobles,  was  the  master  of  the  order  of  Helots  ;  not 
individually,  but  as  an  order.  From  one  order,  the  other 
drew  its  subsistence  directly,  because  if  was  ignorant  of  the 
ingenious  paper  mode  of  taxation.  The  paper  interest  of 
England,  is  also  the  master  of  property  and  labour,  not  in- 
dividually, but  as  an  order  ;  from  these  it  draws  its  sub- 
sistence, not  directly,  like  their  Spartan  prototype,  but  indi- 
rectly. Both  end  in  the  same  results;  each  bestows  lei- 
sure and  plenty  on  one  order  or  interest,  and  labour  and 
penury  on  another.  But  the  latter  operates  the  most  pow- 
erful effects,  It  outstrips  its  compeer.  In  a.  former  part 
of  this  essay,  a  calculation  was  made  of  the  hold  it  had  got- 
ten unon  the  people  of  England,  which  is  left  behind  whilst 


GOVERNMENT   OF  THE   U.    STATES.  447 

J  urn  writing.  The  growing  taxes,  sinecures  and  dividends, 
will  probably  make  each  free  born  Englishman,  worth 
three  or  four  times  as  much  to  the  stoek  order,  as  each  bi.se 
born  Helot  was  to  the  Spartan,  by  the  time  this  essay  shall 
be  read,  if  it  ever  is  read. 

I*et  us  return  from  this  digression,  if  it  be  one,  to  the 
comparison  we  have  undertaken.  Mr.  Adams's  system 
is  incapable  of  a  division  of  rights  between  a  nation  and 
a  government.  This  idea  is  incompatible  with  hereditary, 
but  conformable  to  responsible  power.  It  is  incompatible 
with  natural  orders,  but  conformable  to  natural  rights. 
And  it  is  incompatible  with  the  opinion,  that  the  people  are 
no  guardians,  hut  conformable  to  the  opinion,  that  they  are 
the  best  guardians  of  their  own  liberty.  Therefore  his  sys- 
tem annihilates  that  sacred  effort  of  our  policy,  to  withhold 
powers  useless  or  pernicious  ',  and  to  secure  rights  necessa- 
ry for  the  preservation  of  liberty,  or  without  the  office 
of  governments.  Among  these,  the  rights  of  bearing  arms, 
of  religion,  and  of  discussion,  constitute  of  themselves  a 
measureless  superiority  in  our  policy,  over  any  other,  una- 
ble, by  reason  of  different  principles,  to  place  them  beyond 
the  reach  of  government;  as  we  shall  presently  endeavour 
to  prove. 

If  a  nation  surrenders  all  its  rights  to  a  government,  i 
cannot  be  free.  Freedom  consists  in  having  rights,  beyond 
the  reach  and  independent  of  the  will  of  another  ;  slavery,  in 
having  none.  The  form  of  the  master,  or  his  having  three 
heads  or  one  head,  does  not  create  the  slave.  It  is  on  ac- 
count of  the  opinions  ;  that  nations  might  be  made  free  bv 
the  form  of  the  master,  and  that  the  powers  of  a  govern- 
ment are  ineapable  of  limitation,-  that  they  have  been  so 
universally  enslaved.  From  this  point,  a  glance  discerns 
ihe  wide  difference  between  our  political  system*  and  tiu 
British  or  Mr,  Adams's.  The  parliament,  or  orders,  are 
theoretically  and  practically  omnipotent.  Such  is  the  doc- 
trine of  the  British  government  and  of  the  British  lawyers 
The  government  possesses  unlimited  power,  and  the  natior 


THE    GOOD    MORAL    PRJNC1RLES    v£    THE 

has  no  rights  independent  of  the  government,     The  re 
verse  is  the  principle  adopted  by  our  policy.     It  contends!, 
that  the  power  of   a    government  may  be   limited,    and 
that  the  people  may  have  rights  independent  of  the  govern 
ment. 

To  assert,  without  enforcing  this  doctrine,  would  be  equi- 
valent to  its  relinquishment.  Even  Mr.  Adams  is  willing 
nominally  to  admit  it,  in  his  virtual  representative  quality 
of  hereditary  orders.  This  idea  is  an  admission  of  national 
rights  independent  of  governments  :  but  it  confides  them  to 
the  custody  of  the  idea  only.  How  far  they  have  been  ac- 
tually secured  by  hereditary  power,  in  discharge  of  its  sup- 
posed  representative  duties,  depends  upon  a  fact,  to  which  all 
history  testifies. 

Our  policy,  dissatisfied  with  an  unfruitful  intellectual 
acknowledgment  of  the  theoretical  truth  of  this  doctrine, 
has  sought  for  the  means  of  making  it  practically  useful. 
It  does  not  rely  upon  the  most  positive  verbal  renunciations 
of  absolute  power,  or  acknowledgments  of  national  rights, 
without  means  in  the  hands  of  the  nation,  adequate  to  their 
enforcement. 

Here  the  attention  of  the  reader  is  requested.  We  be- 
lieve that  one  mode  only  of  limiting  the  power  of  govern- 
ments, and  securing  the  rights  of  nations,  within  the  reach 
of  human  nature,  exists.  To  this,  our  policy,  and  no  other, 
has  resorted.  Its  abandonment,  would  be  a  surrender  of  the 
doctrine,  and  the  erection  of  a  despotism,  however  the 
government  is  formed;  if  a  nation  without  rights,  and 
a  government  without  restriction,  constitute  a  despotism. 
Therefore,  the  only  existing  mode  of  preventing  it,  de- 
serves a  more  attentive  consideration  than  any  other  human 
invention. 

It  consists  simply  in  uniting  the  sovereign,  physical  and 
political  power  in  one  national  interest.  If  any  uncontrolla- 
ble political  power  is  held  by  a  government;  it  will  instantly 
sei^e  upon  an  equal  physical  power  by  means  of  mercenary 
armies.      J\nt  by  combining  the  supreme  political  power 


GOVERNMENT    OF   THE    U.    STATES.  449 

with  the  natural  physical  power  of  a  nation,  seasonable  ex- 
ertions of  the  first,  will  peaceably  prevent  the  ruin  of  the 
other.  This  union  is  effected,  by  a  sound  militia  and  elec- 
tive systems.  The  sovereign,  physical  and  political  power, 
beiug  thereby  inseparably  united,  national  self  government 
is  perfectly  secured.  If  one  half  of  this  sovereignty  is 
tranferred  to  mercenary  armies,  and  the  other  half  to  ba- 
lanced orders  or  separate  interests  of  any  kind,  they  unite 
for  mutual  safety  against  the  nation,  from  which  both  moie- 
ties are  taken.  Election,  without  her  ally,  a  national  mili- 
tia, and  united  with  standing  armies,  hereditary  orders,  or 
separate  interests,  such  as  banking,  becomes  an  instrument 
to  inflict  their  will.  Equally  unavailing  to  preserve  liberty, 
is  a  militia,  made  subject  to  a  political  power  beyond  its  in- 
fluence, because  such  a  power  can  disarm,  neglect,  and  sub- 
ject it  to  an  army  of  its  own. 

A  nation  is  both  a  natural  and  a  moral  being.  Its  natu- 
ral powers  we  call  physical,  its  moral,  metaphysical  or  poli- 
tical. If  it  is  deprived  of  its  physical  power,  it  is  like  a  man 
possessed  of  reason,  bound  ;  if  of  its  intellectual  only,  it  is 
like  a  maniac,  unbound.  If  a  nation  is  allowed  the  unin- 
terrupted possession  of  either,  it  will  get  the  other.  Yet  if  it 
loses  one,  it  will  lose  both  ;  because  usurpation  is  never  safe 
with  one  only.  Therefore  an  attempt  to  deprive  it  of  either, 
confesses  an  intention  to  deprive  it  of  both.  If  the  attempt 
begins  with  an  army,  it  ends  with  destroying  the  political 
power  of  a  nation  :  if  it  begins  by  assailing  its  political  pow- 
er, with  orders,  separate  interests  or  corruption  of  any  kind, 
it  ends  with  an  army.  A  man  who  surrenders  his  reason 
or  his  hody  to  another,  is  soon  farced  to  mike  both  con- 
formable to  that  other's  will.  To  prevent  mental  slavery, 
our  policy  reserves  to  the  nation  intellectual  rights,  or  the 
use  of  its  reason;  and  to  prevent  physical  slavery,  it  re- 
serves to  the  nation,  the  military  power,  in  an  armed  and 
organized  militia ;  knowing  that  it  must  retain  both  or 
neither.  By  retaining  both,  a  nation  is  a  physical  and  in- 
telleefual  being.     By  losing  one,  it  becomes  a  being  quite 

58 


i50  THE    GOOD    MOKAL  PRINCIPLES   OF   THE 

anomalous  to  human  nature ;  physical,  and  not  intellectual, 
like  a  corps ;  or  intellectual,  and  not  physical,  like  a  ghost. 
By  losing  both,  it  is  annihilated,  as  having  neither  a  physi- 
cal nor  intellectual  power. 

Wo  cannot  condescend  to  enter  the  lists  with  the  wicked 
artifice  of  destroying  nations,  by  a  fraudulent  use  of  words 
and  phrases ;  such  as  licentiousness,  sedition,  privilege, 
charter  and  conventicle  ;  because  a  nation,  eapable  of  being 
subdued  by  these  feeble  instruments,  is  incapable  of  liberty, 
as  a  man  is  of  long  life,  who  can  be  persuaded  to  hold  out 
his  throat  to  the  knife  of  an  assassin,  lest  he  should  cut  it 
himself. 

It  would  swell  this  essay  beyond  the  contemplated  size, 
to  enumerate  and  explain  all  tk~  rights  held  by  the  people 
of  the  United  States  independently  of  their  government- 
Such  a  work  would  however  be  extremely  useful,  for  in- 
structing us  in  the  principles  of  our  policy,  and  for  demon  * 
atrating  that  these  rights  are  so  linked  together,  that  not  a 
single  link  can  be  removed,  without  materially  impairing 
the  strength  of  the  chain. 

But  the  dexterity  of  the  artifice,  which  inculcates  an 
opinion,  already  contested,  that  if  the  link  of  election  re- 
mains, it  will  alone  constitute  a  security  for  liberty,  as  strong 
as  the  entire  chain  of  these  rights,  induces  me  to  select 
the  rights  of  a  real  national  militia,  aud  of  a  freedom  of  reli- 
gion,  of  speech  and  of  the  press,  both  to  display  the  vast  su- 
periority of  our  policy  over  any  other,  in  their  recognition ; 
and  also  to  prove  that  the  strength  and  efficacy  of  the  right 
of  election,  is  itself  dependent  on  the  real  operation  of  other 
rights. 

It  is  a  principle  of  our  policy,  that  the  military  should 
be  subordinate  to  the  civil  power.  Why  was  this  subordi- 
nation required,  and  how  is  it  to  be  enforced  ?  It  was  re- 
quired on  account  of  the  universal  insubordination  of  mer- 
cenary armies,  to  every  species  of  civil  power,  not  their  ac- 
complice in  oppression.  Not  that  soldiers  are  more  cruel, 
ivaricious  or    tyrannical   than   priests,    stockjobbers    or 


GOVERNMENT   OB   THE    V.    STATES  4H 

nobles,  for  the  contrary  is  the  fact ;  but  because  a  military 
is  a  separate  interest,  subsisting  on  the  nation.  The  militia 
being  nearly  the  nation  itself,  is  the  solitary  appendage  of 
civil  power  by  which  this  principle  of  our  policy  can  be  en- 
forced. If  it  is  rendered  incompetent  to  this  end,  election, 
a  mere  moral  power,  has  no  remaining  utiy  able  to  save  it, 
and  hence  almost  every  composition,  constituting  the  code 
of  our  policy,  has  asserted  the  indispensible  necessity  of  a 
well  regulated  militia. 

The  supremacy  of  civil  power  over  military,  is  a  stipu- 
lation in  vindication  of  national  s»tlf  government,  or  a  sove- 
reignty of  the  people.  We  know  that  from  the  beginning 
of  the  world  to  this  day,  the  military  sovereign  has  univer- 
sally been  the  civil  sovereign,  and  therefore  our  policy  ne= 
ver  intended  to  sever  civil  and  military  power,  so  as  to  in 
vest  the  people  with  the  first,  and  to  divest  them  of  the  se- 
cond moiety  of  sovereignty. 

Let  us  suppose  a  nation  to  have  held  both  a  civi}  and 
military  sovereignty,  one  by  election,  and  the  other  by  an 
armed  and  trained  mililia  ;  and  that  the  latter  was  at  length 
transplanted  into  the  hands  of  its  government,  by  disarm- 
ing and  disorganizing  the  militia,  and  raising  a  standing 
army,  under  any  pretence  whatsoever.  The  people  retain 
the  civil,  and  the  government  has  gotten  the  military  sove- 
reignty. Is  election  without  its  ally,  what  it  was  with  it  i 
A  nation  voting  under  the  protection  of  an  army  raised  by 
its  own  government,  is  not  a  new  spectacle.  We  see  it  in 
France.  A  protector  is  unexoeptionably  a  master.  A  nak- 
ed permisssion  to  keep  and  bear  arms,  is  an  insufficient  ally 
of  election  or  civil  sovereignty.  Doctor  Franklin  indeed 
used  it  as  a  resource  for  evading  the  religious  scruples  of  a 
Pennsylvania  assembly,  but  found  it  an  inadequate  defence 
against  the  feeble  incursions  of  ignorant  savages ;  and  it 
would  be  infinitely  less  adequate  to  restrain  the  daring 
usurpations  of  an  artful  government.  Without  a  ««  well 
regulated  militia,"  the  military  sovereignty  of  a  nation,  ex 
actly  resembles  its  ciril  sovereignty  under  n  government  of 


452  J  RE    GOOD    MORAL   PRINCIPLES    OF    THE 

hereditary  orders.  Hereditary  kings  and  nobles,  says  Mr. 
Adams,  are  civil  representatives  oi'nations  z,  well,  let  stand- 
ing armies  become  their  military  representatives,  and  both 
their  military  and  civil  sovereignty  will  stand  on  the  same 
ground,  and  reap  the  fruits  of  the  same  species  of  repre- 
sentation. 

Neither  the  British  nor  Mr.  Adams's  system  provides 
for  any  species  of  military  sovereignty  in  the  people.  The 
English  orders  disarm  the  people.  Mr.  Adams  acknowled- 
ges their  sovereignty,  is  silent  as  to  a  militia,  and  gives  them 
hereditary  representatives.  Our  policy  endeavours  to  com- 
bine a  real  militia  with  an  elected  temporary  representa- 
tion. It  is  whimsical  to  hear  the  British  system  talk  of 
xhe  sovereignty  of  the  people.  A  luuatick  only,  can  lie  per- 
suaded that  he  is  a  king,  bv  a  crown  of  straw. 

It  is  remarkable,  that  almost  all  governments,  having 
a  power  to  raise  and  pay  standing  armies,  have  neglected  :' 
militia.  A  power  of  resorting  to  the  first  mode  of  self  de- 
fence, has  created  insurmountable  objections  to  the  second; 
Congress  has  power  "  to  raise  and  support  armies,"  and 
(l  to  organise,  arm  and  discipline  the  militia.''  Like  other 
governments  possessing  the  first,  it  has  been  nnable  to  dis- 
cover any  mode  of  executimr  the  second.  The  profound 
wisdom  and  admirable  foresight  of  our  policy,  in  providing 
a  remedy  for  this  indisposition  to  create  a  sound  militia,  me- 
rits  an  encomium,  in  which  none  other,  ancient  or  modern, 
can  pretend  to  any  share.  Other  systems  of  government, 
in  bestowing  a  power  to  raise  mercenary  armies,  have  bes 
towed  an  indisposition  to  cultivate  a  militia  ;  ours  has  left 
with  the  state  governments  a  power  to  cultivate  a  militia, 
and  withheld  from  them  that  of  raising  mercenary  armies. 
As  no  governments  can  exist  without  military  protection, 
and  as  a  militia  constitutes  that,  to  which  alone  the  state 
governments  can  resort,  they  must  make  it  adequate  to  the 
end  or  perish.  Viewed  as  rivals,  the  genera!  government 
seems  to  hive  possessed  a  distinct,  and  the  states  an  obscure 
idea  on  this  subject,    By  protecting  them  with  a  ihereeAary 


•GOVERNMENT    OF   THE    V.    STATES.  4<53 

army,  and  neglecting  the  establishment  of  a  sound  militia, 
the  general  government  would  inevitably  become  the  judge 
and  jury  of  the  state  governments  ;  because  they  have  no 
mode  of  effecting  a  subordination  of  the  military  to  their 
civil  power,  except  by  a  well  regulated  militia.  The  histo- 
ry of  the  world  exhibits  but  a  single  nation  which  has 
maintained  its  independence  against  conquerors.  It  was  in- 
ferior to  its  enemies  in  number,  possessed  a  worse  country, 
and  is  imprisoned  by  the  ocean.  But  being  unable  to  main- 
tain mercenary  armies,  and  forced  to  resort  to  national  self 
defence,  the  twin  brother  of  national  self  government,  its 
militia  won  the  crown  of  bravery  by  a  long  course  of  splen- 
did actions,  and  the  nation,  the  exclusive  honour  of  never 
having  been  subdued. 

The  ability  of  our  policy,  to  leave  to  men  a  perfect  right 
to  conscience,  is  an  advantage  which  the  system  of  orders 
has  never  been  able  to  reach  ;  and  when  we  see  that  system 
unable  to  secure  this  right,  so  extremely  foreign  to  the  of- 
fice  of  governments,  and  so  extremely  valuable  to  the  hap- 
piness of  men  ;  the  conclusion,  that  the  theory  itself  is  un- 
able in  its  nature  and  principles,  to  Secure  to  nations  or  in- 
dividuals any  rights  whatsoever,  which  the  government 
cannot  invade  and  destroy,  is  unavoidable. 

By  our  policy,  mankind  possess  the  right  of  worshipping 
the  Creator  of  the  universe  ;  by  the  English,  they  are  com- 
pellable to  worship  the  God  by  law  established.  By  one, 
revelation  is  assigned  to  the  paraphrase  of  the  head  and  the 
heart ;  by  the  other,  to  that  of  pains  and  penalties.  J'y 
one.  an  expectation  of  individual  retribution,  is  considered 
as  a  good  reason  for  leaving  each  man  to  work  out  his  own 
salvation  :  the  project  of  the  other,  is  to  take  a  chance  for 
national  salvation,  by  compressing  a  whole  people  within  the 
pale  of  one  faith.  It  is  unaccountable,  that  the  same  sys- 
tem, should  with  equal  zeal  exert  itself  against  the  division 
of  national  interest,  as  to  eternal  concerns,  and  against  its 
union  as  to  temporal.  If  a  common  interest  in  the  next 
world  is  so  desirable,  why  is  a  nation  to  be  cut  up  in  tins, 
into  orders  and  exclusive  privileges  ? 


*ai<  TUB   G00~*    M0KA1  FRINCITXES    OF   TIIE 

An  idol  of  metal  or  stone,  differs  from  an  idol  of  the 
imagination,  in  being  more  permanent  and  comprehensible  ', 
and  its  worshipper  possesses  an  inestimable  advantage  over 
the  worshipper  of  an  i$#l  of  the  imagination,  in  being  able 
to  convert  it  into  an  emblem  of  any  object  of  adoration  he 
pleases.  Dogma,  more  cunning  than  wooden  gods,  deprives 
the  conscience  of  this  resource.  The  Pagan  mythology 
was  ingeniously  rendered  a  complete  liberty  of  conscience, 
by  considering  each  idol  as  emblematical  of  some  divine  at- 
tribute ;  and  he  who  worshipped  all,  only  paid  his  adorations 
"o  all  these  attributes.  Neptune  was  an  emblem  of  the 
Deity's  power  over  the  ocean  ;  Minerva,  of  his  justice ;  Ce- 
res, of  his  bounty. 

Hence  arose  the  difference  in  temporal  consequences, 
produced  by  solid  and  imaginary  images;  namely, festivity 
awl  mildness  ;  bloodshed  and  persecution.  The  fancy  is 
unable  to  adorn  hideous  tenets,  with  the  agreeable  illusion? 
inspired  by  the  Venus  of  Praxiteles,  nor  can  the  mind  evade 
their  recognitions  by  mental  substitutions.  We  can  substi- 
tute a  supernatural  being  for  a  solid  image,  but  we  cannot 
substitute  an  abstract  proposition,  for  a  different  abstract 
proposition  ;  therefore  the  moderns  have  endured  death  in 
every  form,  rather  than  render  homage  to  the  idols  of  the 
imagination ;  whilst  the  ancients  yielded  to  the  illusions  of 
art ;  or  exercised  the  resource  of  converting  the  idols  of  the 
hand,  into  types  of  whatever  supernatural  beings  they  chose. 
Hence  the  ancient  solid  images  or  idols,  were  easily  admit 
ted  and  adopted,  without  embroiling  nations  or  exciting  ma- 
levolence among  individuals ;  whilst  metaphysical  image* 
or  idols,  engender  remorseless  hatreds,  incessant  persecu- 
tions, and  sprinkle  the  earth  with  human  blood. 

Ancient  atheism,  or  God  as  by  law  established,  requir- 
ed only  an  external  or  ceremonious  worship  of  a  visible 
idol ;  modern  atheism,  or  God  as  by  law  established,  re- 
quires an  internal  or  conscientious  worship  of  an  invisible 
idol.  W  Bend  your  body,"  said  one  tyrant ;  "  bend  your 
"nind,"  says  the  other.    (S  I  will  punish  you,"  said  one, "  if 


GOVERNMENT  OF  THE  IJ.   STATES.  455> 

you  do  not  perform  certain  gestures  which  you  can  per- 
form." "  I  will  punish  you,"  says  the  other,  "  if  you  do  not 
believe  certain  dogmas,  which  you  cannot  believe."  One 
said,  "  I  have  with  my  hands  made  a  God,  you  shall  see 
him,  an'J  externally  worship  him."  The  other,  "  I  have 
with  my  fancy  made  a  God,  whom  you  cannot  see,  or  a 
tenet  wh:.eh  you  cannot  believe,  which  you  shall  worship  in- 
ternally." Modern  atheism  is  incomparably  the  most  ty- 
rannical, and  has  accordingly  provoked  incomparably  most 
resistance.  It  requires  of  man  to  mould  his  mind  and  an- 
nul his  convictions. 

It  can  also  manufacture  instruments  for  effecting  its  ends, 
infinitely  more  destructive  than  the  ancient.  Zeal  is  whet- 
ted by  the  imagination  iuto  the  utmost  keenness.  Praxi- 
teles would  more  easily  he  persuaded,  that  his  statue  of 
Venus  was  not  a  goddess ;  than  Origen,  that  his  dogmas  of 
the  pre-existence  of  souls,  and  th  it  Christ  was  to  be  again 
crucified  to  save  the  devils,  were  errotirs.  The  stuff  of 
which  physical  idols  are  made,  may  be  analysed  and  com- 
prehended ;  but  that  which  is  the  basis  of  metaphysical 
idols,  is  always  beyond  human  understanding,  whilst  it  is 
still  liable  to  greater  agitation  by  the  idea  of  a  ghost,  than 
from  a  real  stump. 

The  art  of  governing  the  deity  is  cultivated  for  the  sake 
of  governing  men.  If  a  government  or  a  church  should  by 
its  mandates  directly  regulate  the  temporal  and  spiritual 
dispensations  of  the  Almighty,  the  burst  of  derision  would  be 
universal ;  but  laws,  establishing  tenets,  tones,  gesticula- 
tions and  ceremonies,  for  the  purpose  of  indirectly  regulat- 
ing these  temporal  and  spiritual  dispensations?  are  slyly  re- 
sorted to,  because  they  gratify  man's  lust  of  power,  and 
flatter  his  aversion  to  a  reliance  on  a  life  of  moral  rectitude 
for  salvation.  Laws,  dictating  the  mode  of  influencing  the 
deity,  are  declarations,  that  the  deity  shall  be  influenced  by 
law.  And  the  conspiracy  between  the  priest  and  the  prose- 
lyte, is  founded  in  the  compact,  that  the  priest  will  learn 
the  prcselytf  to  govern  the  deity,  if  the  proselyte  will 


156  THE    U00l>    MO'KAli    rKlNCIFl.ES    OF    THE 

suffer  the  priest  to  govern  him.  Besides,  true  religion  will 
not  do  the  work  of  tyranny,  like  an  heated  and  beguiled 
imagination.  Tyranny  wants  persecutors,  not  advocates  of 
truth  and  virtue;  to  gain  these,  it  makes  gods  and  religions. 
Is  tyranny  able  by  its  laws  to  bring  the  King  of  Heaven 
down  to  earth,  and  convert  him  into  its  instrument  ?  If  ty- 
ranny cannot  coerce  the  true  God,  into  an  instrument  of  its 
vices,  then  the  gods  it  uses  must  be  false. 

The  same  governments  and  hierarchies,  which  eulogize 
Daniel  in  their  prayers,  imitate  Nebuchadnezzar  in  their  ac- 
tions ;  they  set  up  dogma  for  his  image  ;  and  pains,  penal- 
ties or  tythes  for  his  furnace.  The  Spaniard  who  reads  of 
this  furnace  with  honour,  dances  at  an  auto  de  fe  with 
transport.  And  the  governments  which  erect  the  modern 
furnace,  contrived  to  consume  without  fire,  believe  the  dog- 
ma, for  the  sake  of  which  they  harrass  and  torture  man- 
kind, as  faithfully  as  the  Babylonian  did  the  divinity  of  his 
image. 

Although  the  atheism  of  images,  has  been  less  mischiev- 
ous than  the  atheism  of  dogma,  the  additional  malignity  of 
the  latter,  is  only  an  exacerbation  of  the  same  principle.  It 
is  as  presumptuous  in  you,  to  require  me  to  worship  the 
manufacture  of  your  head  as  of  your  hands  ;  your  imagina- 
ry or  solid  idol ;  and  it  would  be  wicked  in  me  to  do  cither. 
But  there  is  less  tyranny  and  impiety  in  worshipping  the 
solkl  image,  because  the  mind  has  a  refuge  in  its  emblema- 
tical nature.  Had  Henry,  Mary  and  Elizabeth,  set  up 
solid  images,  by  a  Babylonical  proclamation,  containing  a 
disclosure  of  the  power  of  mental  substitution,  many  mar- 
tyrs to  polemical  dogma,  would  have  escaped  the  flames. 

When  a  government  usurps  a  power  of  legislating  be- 
tween God  and  man,  it  proves  itself  to  be  an  atheist.  If  it 
believed  there  was  any  God,  it  would  be  conscious  of  the 
vice  and  folly  of  making  one  ;  if  it  believed  there  was  any 
revelation,  it  would  see  the  vice  and  folly  of  construing  it 
bv  laws,  which  are  not  revelation :  if  it  is  believed  that  God 
m.i>Ie  man,  it  would  acknowledge  that  man  could  not  make 
God, 


GOVERNMENT  ©T  THE   V.    STATES.  45? 

Religion  is  God's  legislation.  He  alone  dispenses  its 
sanctions,  and  these  sanctions  are  mostly  of  another  world. 
Were  the  governments  of  this  earth,  to  legislate  for  the  in- 
habitants of  the  moon,  the  absurdity  and  inefficacy  of  such 
laws  would  be  less,  than  laws  for  taking  care  of  human 
souls,  by  settling  the  rights  of  God,  and  the  religious  du- 
ties of  man.  If  man,  by  his  laws,  can  regulate  his  duties 
to  God,  he  can  increase,  diminish  or  expunge  them  ;  and 
has  more  power  over  the  deity,  than  Canute  had  over  the 
ocean. 

This  aggravated  species  of  sacrilege  is  perpetrated  by 
governments  to  gratify  ambition  or  avarice  ;  but  they  en- 
deavour to  hide  their  true  design,  under  the  pretence  that 
it  is  good  policy  to  make  a  vulgar,  that  is,  a  false  religion 
by  law.  It  is  but  a  vulgar  kind  of  veneration  for  the  deity, 
which  supposes,  that  the  bulk  of  mankind  can  be  better  go- 
verned by  man's  frauds,  than  by  his  truths.  The  idea,  that 
God  made  a  true  religion  only  for  a  few  learned  men,  and 
gave  them  a  commission  to  make  false  religions  for  the  vul- 
gar, from  time  to  time,  supposes  that  the  deity  was  unable 
to  legislate  for  the  great  mass  of  his  creatures.  By  reserv- 
ing truth  for  the  learned,  and  cheating  the  ignorant  into 
virtue,  religion  is  considered  as  necessary  for  the  first  class, 
and  superstition  as  sufficient  for  the  second,  without  any 
divine  authority  for  the  discrimination.  But  governments 
do  not  perceive  the  high  encomium  they  thus  pass  upon  the 
people,  by  admitting,  that  the  light  of  religion  is  necessary 
to  check  the  propensity  of  the  wise  for  vice,  and  that  the 
blindness  of  superstition  is  unable  to  corrupt  the  propensity 
of  the  vulgar  for  virtue.  And  thus  discover  that  they  fos- 
ter a  delusion  incapable  of  making  men  better  in  this 
world,  or  happier  in  the  next,  from  their  own  secret  avarice, 
ambition  and  atheism. 

Governments  and  hierarchies  have  annexed  a  sanctity 
to  the  utensils  of  religion,  which  they  will  not  allow  to  reli- 
gion itself.  To  protect  these  utensils,  artfully  blended  with 
their  usurpations,  they  have  invented  the  term,  "sacrilege." 

59 


4o3  THE    GOOD    MORAL    PRINCIPLES    OF    THE 

They  are  too  holy  and  sacred  to  be  altered,  taken  away  or 
applied  to  any  temporal  purpose.  Less  delicate  with  reli- 
gion, they  form  and  transform  it,  for  wicked  temporal 
ends  ;  and  the  only  good  one  they  pretend  to  expect  from 
the  trade  of  religion-making,  is,  that  the  vail  of  a  treache- 
rous or  deluded  concurrence,  drawn  by  law  over  a  nation, 
will  produce  good  order  and  morality.  Arc  deceit,  purchas- 
ed by  office,  or  imposed  by  fear,  and  ignorance  produced  by 
fraud,  good  nourishers  of  moral  virtues  ?  "Will  habitual  in- 
sincerity to  God,  habituate  us  to  sincerity  in  our  commerce 
with  men  ? 

A  new  species  of  political  atheism  or  polytheism  is 
making  its  appearance,  and  gradually  gaining  ground 
among  mankind,  more  specious,  insidious  and  dangerous 
than  the  old.  It  is  that  of  making  government  the  patron 
of  the  whole  tribe  of  tenets  or  metaphysical  idols,  existing, 
or  capable  of  being  invented.  "We  will  suppose  only  an 
hundred  of  these  in  a  nation,  each  pronouncing  the  rest  to 
be  damnable  errours.  You  shall  adventure  your  soul,  says 
a  government,  upon  a  lottery,  wherein  the  chances  are  an 
hundred  to  one  against  you.  Why  are  men  driven  by  law 
into  this  injudicious  species  of  gambling  ?  Because  govern- 
ments believe  in  neither  of  these  metaphysical  idols,  and 
gain  power  by  patronising  all.  Had  they  believed  any  one 
to  be  the  herald  of  salvation,  they  would  have  exhibited 
some  preference  for  truth,  or  at  least  have  forborne  to 
coerce  men  by  penalty  into  an  election,  deterringly  for 
tuitous. 

A  polytheism  of  tenets  would  probably  have  appeared 
as  ridiculous  to  the  ancients,  as  their  polytheism  of  woodea 
idols  does  to  us.  Without  settling  the  point  of  plurality, 
between  physical  and  metaphysical  polytheism,  they  might 
have  considered  it  as  more  likely  that  all  their  gods  existed, 
than  that  all  our  contradictory  tenets  were  true  5  and 
they  might  have  urged  the  emblematical  nature  of  their 
system,  to  shew  that  it  was  less  polytheistical,  than  a  politi- 
cal patronage  of  a  pantheon  of  tenets.  A  government  wbieb 


GOVERNMENT   OF   THE    U.    STATICS,  *6S 

assumes  this  patronage,  is  less  theocratical,  and  more 
atheistical,  than  one  which  assumes  the  patronage  of  a  poly« 
theism,  composed  of  solid  images  of  various  divine  attri- 
butes.    Its  object  must  therefore  be  power  and  not  truth. 

This  new  species  of  atheism  or  polytheism  (for  the  pa- 
tron of  many  contradictory  tenets  or  religions,  must  either 
believe  that  there  are  many  gods  or  no  god)  under  the  garb 
of  toleration  or  liberality,  conceals  a  political  instrument  of 
tenfold  malignity  to  human  happiness,  beyond  the  ancient. 
Ancient  governments,  by  the  aid  of  one  superstition  and  one 
priesthood,  were  able  to  destroy  civil  liberty ;  what 
then  will  not  modern  governments  effect,  by  the  aid  of  ma- 
ny contrary  tenets,  and  many  priesthoods  ?  By  the  ancient 
polytheism,  the  people  were  united,  by  the  modern,  they  are 
divided.  Under  the  ancient,  governments  destroyed  civil 
liberty,  by  corrupting  one  priesthood ;  under  the  modern, 
a  patronage  of  many  priesthoods  will  produce  the  same  ef- 
fect. The  power  of  governments,  arising  from  the  cor- 
ruption and  influence  of  many  priesthoods,  produced  by  its 
patronage  of  a  polytheism  of  metaphysical  deities,  will  in- 
finitely surpass  any  power,  arising  from  a  polytheism  of 
physical  deities  ;  because  of  the  rivalry  among  these 
tenets  and  their  priests.  This  will  render  each  separate 
priesthood  more  influential  over  its  sect,  and  more  subser- 
vient to  the  pleasure  of  the  government.  Whereas  Jupi- 
ter, Mercury,  Diana,  and  the  rest  of  the  heathen  deities,  in 
the  shape  of  images,  to  the  learned  were  emblems,  and  to  the 
vulgar  appeared  as  friends;  exalted  by  the  imagination  in- 
to intellectual  beings,  united  in  convocation,  and  arranged  in 
subordination,  whose  little  disputes  or  amorous  adventures 
never  destroyed  the  peace  or  good  humour  of  mankind. 

The  union  of  the  priesthood  under  ancient  superstitions, 
formed  a  powerful,  and  occasionally,  an  useful  cheek  upon 
the  government ;  and  although  like  any  other  order,  it  was 
prone  to  coalesce  itself  with  it,  to  deceive  and  oppress  the 
people ;  yet  an  ancient  priesthood  constituted  a  balance 
conformable  in  principle  to  Mr.  Adams's  system*  and  pro- 
ductive  of  similar  effects. 


460  TJiK    GOOD     MOKAL   PKINCIPLES    OF    THE 

All  the  controversies  between  hierarchies  and  govern- 
ments and  their  several  fluctuations  of  power,  are  witnesses 
to  the  truth  of  this  observation.  A  balance  of  power  be- 
tween a  government  and  a  hierarchy,  produced  with  criti- 
cal exactness,  the  same  effects  as  its  balance  between  other 
orders.  The  two  orders  were  constantly  in  a  state  of  wary 
for  the  purpose  of  subjecting  each  other  5  or  united,  for  the 
purpose  of  oppressing  the  people  ;  and  their  warfare  pro 
duced  occasional  ameliorations  of  the  hard  and  regular  ty- 
ranny arising  from  their  union. 

No  such  amelioration  can  occur,  from  a  priesthood  and  a 
nation,  cut  up  into  jealous  and  inveterate  religious  orders  or 
casts,  by  a  multitude  of  tenets ;  when  patronised  and  managed 
by  agovernment.  These  divisions  would  in  time  constitute  so 
many  casts  of  China  or  Indostan,  over  which,  western,  like 
eastern  governments,  would  preside  with  absolute  power  $ 
because  they  will  be  made  to  deprive  a  nation  of  its  unity  or 
self,  and  destroy  the  idea  of  a  common  or  publiek  good,  as 
effectually,  as  its  division  into  civil  orders  or  easts..  Such  a 
divided  priesthood,  instead  of  a  check  upon  tyranny,  would 
become  its  instrument.  And  under  pretence  of  impartiali- 
ty between  God  and  Baal,  the  government  would  draw  inex- 
haustible recruits  from  both. 

The  oppression  resulting  from  a  mass  of  legal  pecuniary 
religious  rights,  orders  or  privileges,  will  ultimately  become 
the  same,  as  that  which  would  result  from  a  mass  of  legal 
pecuniary  civil  rights,  orders  or  privileges.  Mercenary  ar- 
mies, and  most  corporate  bodies,  belong  to  the  latter  species 
tof  moral  beings ;  and  a  patronage  of  government  over  the 
whole  priesthood  of  a  nation,  composing  one  church,  or  ma- 
ny churches,  to  the  former;  but  both  are  of  the  same  moral 
aature,  and  will  operate  the  same  moral  effects. 

The  denunciation  of  exclusive  privileges,  titles,  and  an 
interposition  with  religion,  by  the  policy  of  the  United 
States,  was  suggested  by  the  consideration,  that  such  rights 
ar  powers,  commence  or  terminate  in  despotism.  One  of 
t hQ  reprobated  powers  is  exercised  by  charters,  and  another 


oOVERNMENT    OF   THE    U.    STATES  46i 

is  advocated  by  the  doctrine,  that  government  ought  to  pa- 
tronise all  metaphysical  idols.  But  neither  the  perpetrated 
nor  intended  violation  i<  chargeable  to  our  constitutional  po- 
licy ;  that  labours  to  leave  wealth  to  be  distributed  by  in- 
dustry, and  salvation  by  God  ;  and  abstains  throughout 
from  the  idea  of  a  power  in  government  to  regulate  either 
by  law.  By  leaving  to  every  one  a  fair  chance  to  work  out 
his  temporal  and  eternal  welfare,  it  excites  merits  called 
forth  by  no  motive,  when  governments  assume  the  dispensa- 
tion of  both. 

The  constitutions  of  the  United  States,  have  renounced 
"the  practice  of  creating  by  law,  moral  duties,  temporal  or 
eternal',  in  the  shape  of  exclusive  privileges  or  religion*  te- 
nets, because  they  deemed  it  equally  oppressive  to  enrich 
the  priesthood  of  fraud  as  the  priesthood  of  superstition. 
Had  they  been  formed  by  atheism,  they  would  have  seen 
no  objection  to  one  species  of  manufacture ;  nor  to  the 
other,  had  they  been  formed  by  paper  systems,  patronage 
or  orders. 

From  an  opinion,  that  there  is  really  a  God,  our  policy 
has  inferred,  that  he  has  established  some  mode  of  inculcat- 
ing virtue,  preferable  to  human  frauds  ;  that  there  is  ho 
occasion  to  kill  or  persecute  one  another  on  the  score  of  re- 
ligion, because  God  needs  no  champion  to  assert  his  honoui 
or  to  avenge  his  quarrels  ;  that  at  this  time  of  day,  martyr- 
dom would  be  lunacy,  and  saintship,  under  the  banner  of  a 
dogma,  intolerance  ;  and  that  it  is  a  profanation  of  religion, 
to  make  it  an  instrument,  to  gratify  avarice  or  ambition. 

Governments  have  almost  universally  inculcated  opinions 
contrary  to  these,  and  irreligion  and  insincerity  have  been 
the  fruits  of  their  policy.  If  we  see  governments  making 
gods  of  wood  or  of  dogma,  or  settling  revelation  by  law:  ii 
the  people  see  them  coming  religion  into  power  and  money, 
under  pretence  of  coining  it  into  good  morals  ;  it  will  teach 
iliem  also  atheism  and  deceit.  As  a  cunning  government 
uses  religion  to  cheat  a  nation,  a  cunning  man  will  use  it  to 
cheat  his  neighbour  ;  and  in  place  of  its  being  a  bond  of  low. 


462  THE    GOOD   MORAIi  PRINCIPLES    OP   THE 

a  preceptor  of  virtue,  and  the  refuge  of  hope,  religion 
would  he  thus  made  an  engine  of  publick  oppression  and 
private  fraud. 

Atheism  forbids  men  to  look  into  the  hook  of  nature  for 
God,  and  asserts  its  fluctuating  fables  to  he  better  evidence 
of  his  existence,  thaa  his  own  permanent  creation.  And  it 
forces  men  to  see  God,  not  in  the  sun's  light,  but  in  some 
dark  tenet,  adapted  to  a  temporary  market. 

It  is  to  this  hour  unknown,  whether  established  or  legal 
religions  have  ever  carried  a  single  soul  into  heaven  5  hut 
there  is  no  doubt  of  their  having  carried  millions  out  of  this 
world.  Yet  it  is  under  pretence  of  making  men  extremely 
happy,  after  they  are  dead,  that  these  religions  make  them 
extremely  mis  rahle,  whilst  they  are  alive  ;  and  the  com- 
pensation for  the  promised  happiness,  is  always  estimated 
upon  the  supposition  of  its  being  as  certain,  as  the  suffered 
misery.  Can  honesty  or  virtue  have  contrived  a  lottery, 
from  which  men  draw  oppression  in  this  world,  and  blanks 
in  the  next ;  or  can  impiety  exceed  the  presumption  of  sell- 
ing or  bestowing  heaven  r  The  polytheism  of  tenets,  or  a 
political  patronage  of  the  whole  tribe  of  fanatical  follies,  en- 
tangles men  more  inextricably  in  this  lottery,  than  the  estab- 
lishment of  a  single  religion  j  one  may  be  true ;  many,  con- 
trary to  each  other,  must  all  be  false  except  one.  To  be 
oppressed  by  the  whole  tribe,  to  pay  the  whole  tribe,  and 
to  strengthen  a  government  against  a  nation,  by  recruiting 
its  power  with  the  patronage  of  the  whole  tribe,  merely  to 
take  the  chance  of  being  jostled  into  that,  which  really  bes- 
tows what  they  all  promise,  is  the  speculation  proposed  by  a 
polytheism  of  tenets. 

Warhurton  is  the  only  bishop  who  has  disclosed  a  reli- 
gious candour,  equal  to  Mr.  Adams's  political  honesty.  In 
the  first  volume  of  his  Divine  Legation,  he  defines  an  estab- 
lished religion  to  be  "  a  league  between  a  civil  and  reli- 
"  gious  society  for  mutual  defence  and  support ;  to  secure 
"  the  obedience  of  the  people  to  the  government,  in  which 
iS  it  is  so  efficacious  as  to  gain  reverence  and  respects  for 


GOVERNMENT   OF  THE   XT.    STATES.  46S 

'» tyrants ;    for  giving  to  a  church  a  coactive  power  to  pu- 
»  nish  intentions  by  spiritual  courts,  and  thus  supply  a  de- 
"  feet  in  civil  society,  which  can  only  punish  acts  ;   as  an 
"  engine  bound  to  render  its  utmost  services  to  the  govern- 
"  ment  for  its  wages  ;  as  a  means  to  prevent  the  rivalry  of 
«  sects,  by  admitting  one  only  to  a  share  of  power  and  emol- 
«  uments ;  as  a  compact  founded  in  reason  and  nature,  equal- 
"  ly  with  the  original  compact  between  the  government  and 
t(  the  people  ;  as  one  to  be  made  between  the  government 
w  and  the  largest  religious  sect  in  society  ;  as  entitled  to  a 
"  test  law  for  its  security  against  the  tolerated  sects,  now 
"  inflamed  by  the  advantages  of  the  established  sect ;    as 
"  giving  ao  cause  of  umbrage  to  other  sects   by  its  exelu- 
«  sive  privileges  and  emoluments,  because  rewards  are  not 
"  sanctions  of  civil  law,  wherefore  a  member  of  society  has 
"  a  right  only  to  protection,   and  magistrates  an  arbitrary 
tc  power  to  dispose  of  all  places  of  honour  or  profit :  as  pre- 
«  venting  the  persecutions,  rebellions,  revolutions  and  loss 
'<  of  liberty,  caused  by  the  intestine  struggles  of  religious 
*<  sects."     And  he  concludes,  "  in  a  word,  an  established 
"  religion,  with  a  test  law,  is  the  universal  voice  of  nature." 
Nature,  according  to  the  bishop,  dictates  an  establish- 
ment of  one  religious  sect ;    according  to  Mr.  Adams,  of 
three  civil  sects ;    and  according  to  both,  for  the  purpose  of 
preventing  persecutions,  rebellions,  revolutions  and  loss  of 
liberty.     She  dictates,  according  to  one  author,  that  no  re- 
gard is  to  be  paid  to  truth  in  the  selection  of  the  establish- 
ed religion  ;  according  to  the  other,  that  no  regard  is  to  be 
paid  to  talents,  in  selecting  kings  or  nobles  ;   preferring  the 
size  of  the  sect  to  the  one,  and  lineage  to  the  other.     War- 
burton  utters  the  religious  policy  of  the  system  of  orders, 
and  that  system  adheres  to  the  religious  policy  of  Warbur- 
ton.     A  complete  parallel  would  disclose  an  indissoluble 
affinity,   but  as  the  reader  knows,  that  though  God  has 
made  a  diversity  of  opinion  a  quality  of  human  nature,  the 
bishop  says,  that  nature  dictates  the  establishment  of  one 
religion,  or  a  repeal  by  man  of  this  diversity  -,    and  that 


*6*  THE    U0OD    MORAL    PRINCIPLES    OP   TITE 

though  nature  appears  to  take  very  great  care,  not  to  signa- 
lize particular  families  with  royal  or  noble  marks,  Mr- 
Adams  ^avs  she  dictates  an  establishment  of  orders :  he 
will  need  no  assistance  in  discovering  the  indissoluble  union 
between  a  political  system,  comprising  orders,  and  a  reli- 
gious system,  comprising  an  established  seetj  nor  in  esti- 
mating the  value  of  the  policy  of  the  United  States,  from 
its  not  requiring  any  association  with  political  atheism. 

The  world  is  indebted  to  Mr  Jefferson  for  an  argument, 
c  V  leased  into  a  law,  and  recorded  for  the  use  of  posterity 
in  the  statute  book  of  Virginia,  which  political  atheism  has 
never  yet  adventured  to  face.  Like  the  serpent,  uncovered 
in  its  lurking  place,  it  indeed  hisses  at  the  hand  which  re 
moved  the  concealment.  But  the  long  acquiescence  in  the 
principles  of  this  law,  may  be  fairly  considered  as  having 
ripened  them  into  maxims,  asserted  by  our  policy,  and  es- 
tablished by  experience. 

The  religious  policy  of  orders  considers  man  as  a 
perishing  physical  being  ;  and  treats  him  vhl  errours  and 
idols,  as  a  savage  is  amused  with  beads  and  trinkets  ;  that 
of  the  United  States,  considers  him  as  a  moral  being  ;  and 
inspired  with  a  hope  that  his  attainments  are  not  concluded 
in  this  world,  encourages  him  to  look  towards  truth  and 
God.  The  old  theory  believing  there  is  no  God,  usurps  the 
regulation  of  the  intercourse  between  its  phantoms,  soul  and 
deity,  by  laws  operating  upon  body ;  because  it  discerns  no 
danger  in  using  religion  to  bribe,  deceive  and  oppress  ;  the 
new,  believing  that  tnere  is  a  God,  shrinks  from  the  impiety 
of  thrusting  laws  between  God  and  spirit,  which  neither 
can  be  made  to  obey  ;  because  it  expects  retribution  in  ano- 
ther world,  for  its  doings  in  this.  Such  laws,  by  the  old  sys- 
tem, are  called  pious,  by  the  new,  impious  frauds.  The  old 
system  pretends  to  govern  God  and  spirit ;  the  new  humbly 
subordinates  itself  to  God  ;  the  old,  because  it  believes  in 
neither  ;  the  new,  because  it  believes  in  both.  In  short; 
tlte  deity  of  the  old  political  theories  is  admitted  by  them 
selves  to  be  "  a  pious  idol  f  whereas  the  deity  of  the  polr 
cy  of  the  United  States  is  the  eternal  God 


GOVERNMENT   OF  THE   U.    STATES.  ±Qff 

And  yet  this  old  atheist,  the  universal  advocate  of  an 
opinion  that  a  pious  fraud  is  a  deputy  for  God,  capable  of 
managing  men  better  than  God  himself,  exclaims,  that  a 
new  atheist  has  risen  up  in  the  new  political  theory;  just 
as  exclusive  privileges  accuse  equal  rights  of  an  enmity  to 
private  property.  The  priests  of  the  idol  and  the  privilege 
are  equally  clamorous  to  transfer  their  own  guilt  to  inno- 
cent avengers,  for  the  same  reason  ;  atheists  and  invaders 
of  private  property  themselves,  they  endeavour  to  repel 
truth  by  odium.  Savages  deify  the  author  of  evil ;  but 
they  do  notdemonize  the  author  of  good.  If  neither  of  the 
combatants  should  be  furnished  with  an  army  of  mercenary 
troops,  we  may  certainly  foresee  on  which  side  victory  will 
fall ;  but  if  we  seduce  from  their  principles,  the  honest  pro- 
selytes of  our  policy,  by  offering  them  bribes  to  enlist  under 
the  banner  of  the  old  atheist,  one  other  demonstration  will 
be  added  to  the  fate  of  Socrates,  of  the  insecurity  of  virtue 
and  innocence  exposed  to  fraud  or  folly. 

A  belief  in  a  deity  and  in  the  existence  of  the  soul,  Is 
consistent  with  the  religious  policy  of  the  United  States  j 
and  a  disbelief  in  both,  with  the  religious  policy  of  almost 
all  other  governments.  The  reader  will  recollect,  that  we 
arranged  governments  into  two  classes ;  as  being  universal- 
ly founded  in,  or  drawn  from  good  or  evil  moral  principles. 
Theocracy  must  be  the  creed  of  one  class,  and  atheism  ot 
the  second.  The  advocates  of  good  moral  principles,  such 
as  truth,  freedom  of  religion,  knowledge,  limitation  of  pow- 
er and  equal  rights,  cannot  be  atheists  ;  and  the  advocates 
of  evil  moral  principles,  such  as  fraud,  force,  ignorance, 
despotism  and  exclusive  privileges,  cannot  be  believers.  By 
their  fruits  ye  shall  know  them. 

The  infidelity,  in  which  the  old  political  theories  are  all 
founded,  is  visible  both  in  their  formation  and  practice. 
They  commence  with  forming  religion,  in  a  mould  construct- 
ed by  politicians.  And  they  practice  fraud  and  force,  be- 
cause politicians  never  believe  religions  constructed  by 
themselves.     Freed  from    responsibility  by  atheism,  op- 

60 


i6&  THE    GOOD     MORAL   PRINCIPLES    OF   THE 

pression  and  blood  arc  ordinary  items  of  their  operations  j 
and  they  use  religion  as  a  cold  tyrant  to  inflict  the  one,  or 
a  fanatical  butcher  to  shed  the  other. 

Not  less  visible  is  the  Faith  of  the  political  theory  of  the 
United  States.  It  was  that  faith  which  placed  religion 
above  the  reach  of  the  politician,  that  it  might  not  by  his 
arts  be  transformed  from  a  consolation  into  a  scourge.  By 
the  same  faith,  was  our  theory  guided  to  associate  itself 
with  a  catalogue  of  moral  principles,  precisely  contrary  to 
those  used  as  accomplices  by  the  old  theories.  It  would 
be  doubly  inconsistent  to  allow  faith  to  political  theories, 
which  make  religion  a  pander  for  avarice,  ambition  and  ty- 
ranny ;  and  to  deny  it  to  one,  which  rescues  it  from  this 
shameful  servility.  False  religion,  like  false  honour,  is  ea- 
sily detected  by  discovering  its  source  in  prejudice,  passion 
or  fraud,  and  not  in  moral  rectitude.  Both,  goaded  on  by 
an  ignorant  infatuation,  or  a  wicked  pride,  expect  heaven 
and  fame  for  inflicting  evils  on  mankind  or  on  themselves. 
Both  profess,  boast,  destroy  and  dissemble.  The  fanatick 
and  the  duellist  are  the  same  characters  ;  devotees  of  vice 
or  errour,  and  contemners  of  morality  and  truth  ;  who  per- 
vert honour  and  religion  into  caballistical  terms,  to  bewitch, 
deceive,  and  torment  themselves  and  others.  How  wonder- 
fully astonished  must  these  characters  be,  after  a  life  of  mu- 
tual contempt  and  execration,  to  discover  their  exact  iden- 
tity ? 

Mr.  Adams  has  omitted  to  contrast  the  American  and 
English  systems,  in  relation  to  religion  ;  and  to  acknow- 
ledge, that  the  freedom  it  enjoyed  under  the  one,  was  in- 
compatible with  the  principles  of  the  other.  The  English, 
is  one  of  those  old  theories,  which  makes  gods  or  religions 
by  law  ;  and  it  is  essential  to  this,  as  well  as  to  all  govern 
ments  composed  of  orders,  to  coerce  the  mind  into  one  opi 
nion,  religious  and  political ;  these  orders  being  equivalent 
to  a  set  of  anatomists,  for  carving  the  faces  of  all  mankind 
into  one  shape ;  exeept  that  the  instruments  which  cut  the 
mind,  inflict  more  pain  than  those  which  cut  the  flesh  ;  and 


GOVERNMENT    OF  THE   U.    STATES.  46? 

that  it  is  easier  to  mould  matter  than  spirit.  The  necessity 
of  a  system  of  orders  for  the  mind-carving  policy,  is  as  de- 
monstrable from  their  nature  as  from  experience.  Such 
systems  can  only  operate  according  to  the  minds  of  their 
component  orders.  The  operation  of  these  three  artificial 
minds,  must  control  the  minds  of  individuals,  or  these  or- 
ders would  cease  to  govern,  and  the  system  terminate.  Its 
essence  consists  in  substituting  three  artificial  minds  or  in- 
terests, for  a  natural  mind  or  interest.  If  a  government  is 
founded  iu  the  first,  it  destroys  the  latter ;  if  in  the  latter, 
it  destroys  the  first.  The  natural  miud  and  interest  must 
of  course  be  carved  into  a  shape,  suitable  to  the  artificial 
mind  and  interest.  The  necessity  of  this  substitution  to 
the  system  of  orders,  for  the  sake  of  existence,  is  the  true 
parent  of  its  double-faced  idols,  called  church  and  state. 
Aud  hence  religion  in  England  is  contrived  for  the  temporal 
salvation  of  three  artificial  minds,  neither  of  them  existing 
after  death,  instead  of  the  eternal  salvation  of  the  souls  of 
men. 

Orders  seldom  admit  that  their  powers  are  deduced 
from  the  people;  they  deduce  them  from  inheritance,  un- 
written compact,  or  time  immemorial.  The  lights  of  man 
being  thus  lost  in  the  rights  of  orders,  it  is  obvious  that  an 
individual  cannot  retain  any  species  of  right,  not  even 
the  right  of  conscience,  because  it  is  the  principle  of  or- 
ders, that  nature  gives  man  no  rights  at  all  ;  and  that  all 
his  rights  are  conventional  or  legal.  Such  being  the  case, 
if  it  is  the  will  of  a  government  of  orders,  that  the  con- 
science of  an  individual  should  be  cut  into  any  shape  what- 
soever, it  would  be  preposterous  for  him  to  assert  that  it 
ought  not  to  be  done,  and  that  he  ought  not  to  be  punished 
for  having  a  conscience  which  he  was  obliged  to  take  from 
an  almighty  power.  He  would  be  silenced  by  learning, 
that  under  the  theory  of  orders,  there  are  no  natural  rights 

Religious  freedom,  or  the  right  of  keeping  our  conscien- 
ces, is  compatible  with  the  policy  of  the  United  States,  be- 
cause the  natural  mind  or  will  of  man  is  not.  controlled  by 


4t3S  :uL    GOOD    MORAL   PRINCIPI.ES    O*    THE 

the  artificial  mind  or  will  of  orders  ;  and  because  it  admit? 
man  to  have  derived  rights  from  nature,  as  well  as  from 
law.  Having  rights,  men,  when  forming  governments,  may 
relinquish  or  retain  such  as  they  please  ;  and  by  so  forming 
a  government  that  the  natural  mind  of  man,  shall  not  be 
controlled  by  the  artificial  mind  of  orders,  this  natural  mind 
wi|l  be  able  to  preserve  the  natural  rights  connected  with  it ; 
whereas  if  this  natural  mind  is  controlled  by  the  artificial 
mind  or  will  of  orders,  no  natural  right  whatsoever  can 
remain,  because  there  cannot  exist  together,  a  natural  and 
an  artificial  sovereign. 

It  is  important  to  discover  the  reason,  why  the  system 
of  orders,  in  every  form,  has  invariably  moulded  religion 
into  an  engine  for  its  own  purposes,  lest  it  should  be  imagin- 
ed that  this  feature  of  that  policy,  might  be  obliterated  by 
Mr.  Adams's  new  idea  of  the  responsibility  of  orders,  as 
hereditary  representatives. 

A  nation  is  no  more  a  nation,  after  it  has  lost  its  unity, 
than  a  man  would  be  a  man,  cut  up  into  pieces.  Divided 
into  orders  and  interests,  it  is  turned  into  several  nations, 
separated,  not  by  geographical  boundaries,  but  by  legal 
lines  drawn  between  different  privileges,  or  between  privi- 
lege and  degradation.  The  nations  residing  on  each  side  of 
these  legal  boundaries,  will  hate  each  other  far  beyond  any 
degree  of  animosity,  which  can  exist  between  nations  geo- 
graphically divided  ;  because  the  legal  boundaries  mnst 
benefit  and  injure  ;  whereas  the  geographical  may  do  nei- 
ther. The  former  create  in  some  proportion  the  relation 
between  master  and  slave,  and  excite  correspondent  pas- 
sions ;  the  latter  arc  perfectly  consistent  with  the  relation 
between  equal  friends.  Accordingly,  nations  or  individual* 
living  on  different  ?;idc3  of  geographical  lines,  may  some- 

is  love  each  other,  whilst  orders  on  different  sides  of 
legal  line3,  always  hate  each  other* 

How  then  can  Mr.  Adams's  idea  of  the  responsibility  of 
orders,  save  for  a  nation  the  freedom  of  conscience  ?  I'here 
is  no  gnoral  being,  after  it  is  divided  into  several  mora! 


liOVERXMENT   OF  THE    V.    STATEg.  469 

beings  of  distinct  interests,  to  enforce  this  responsibility. 
The  natural  mind,  acting  by  election,  is  superseded  by  a  legal 
mind,  guided  by  the  interest  of  orders. 

Suppose  he  intends  that  the  rights  and  privileges  of 
these  orders  shall  be  settled  by  a  constitution.  This  is  no 
more  than  a  treaty  between  these  artificial  and  legal  na- 
tions. And  if  such  nations  hate  each  other  more  sincerelv 
and  constantly  than  natural  nations,  treaties  between  them 
will  be  more  frequently  violated.  In  fact,  orders  never 
make  such  treaties,  without  instantlv  commencing;  their  vio- 
latioa  ;  and  it  is  owing  to  the  impossibility  of  forming  a  trea- 
ty which  they  will  observe,  that  Mr.  Adams  throughout  his 
erudite  researches  into  their  history,  has  found  them  con- 
stantly at  war.  It  is  not  unnatural  that  he  should  be  in- 
flamed by  the  ill  success  of  all  others,  to  evince  his  diplo- 
matiek  skill  in  forming  a  new  treaty  ;  but  a  nation  is  under 
no  such  emulative  impulse  to  become  the  subject  of  the  ex- 
periment. 

If  orders  cannot  be  kept  from  hostilities,  secret  or  open, 
liy  didatick  stipulations,  can  it  be  expected  that  they  will 
forbear  to  use  the  most  powerful  political  weapons  ?  They 
are  political  beings  themselves,  and  no  political  being,  hav- 
ing a  power  to  use  religion  as  an  instrument,  has  ever  fail- 
ed to  exert  it.  The  only  security  consists  in  withholding 
this  power  from  political  beings  j  but  this  cannot  be  resort- 
ed to  in  the  case  of  orders,  because  they  are  sovereign  them- 
selves, and  disclaim  the  idea  of  allegiance  to  any  superior. 

There  being  several  nations  intermingled  together,  under 
a  treaty  for  securing  to,  and  excluding  privileges  from  each, 
*he  defence  and  enlargement  of  these  privileges  will  be  their 
first  interest ;  every  means  will  be  resorted  to  for  these 
eoda  ;  and  the  more  absurd  and  oppressive  the  privileges 
are,  the  more  violent  and  wicked  will  these  means  become* 
A  noble  nation  and  a  plebeian  nation,  or  a  banking  nation 
and  an  unprivileged  nation,  will  necessarily  terminate  in 
an  oppressing  and  an  oppressed  nation.  These  legal  nations 
bate  each  other  as  mortally  as  white  and  black  nations 


470  THE    GOOD    M«RAL   PRINCIPLES    OF   THE 

mingled  together.  One  of  them  will  constantly  endea- 
vour to  olunder  another.  Robbery  is  the  invariable  de- 
sign of  a  confederacy  of  legal  privileges,  and  the  retaliation 
it  finally  provokes  is  still  more  heinous.  The  wars  between 
the  whites  and  blacks  of  St.  Domingo,  being  transitory, 
were  inconsiderable  in  point  of  mischief  or  horrour,  compar- 
ed with  those  between  legal  nations,  called  orders, detailed  by 
Mr.  Adams.  To  make  inimical  interests  friendly  to  each 
other,  by  the  theory  of  balances,  is  more  difficult  than  to 
establish  harmony  between  different  colours,  because  men 
will  contend  more  malignantly  for  substance  than  for 
shadow. 

Under  the  policy  of  the  United  States,  the  moral  indivi- 
duality of  the  nation  being  preserved  by  the  elective  mode  of 
giving  effiet  to  its  will,  by  an  unity  of  rights,  by  its  sove- 
reignty over  the  government,  and  by  the  militia  system, 
such  a  moral  being  may  retain  for  the  members  which  con- 
stitute itself,  the  liberty  of  conscience  ;  but  this  becomes 
impossible  after  separate  interests  are  substituted  for  unit- 
ed ;  after  the  government  becomes  the  sovereign  of  the 
people  ;  or  after  a  mercenary  army  becomes  the  sovereign 
of  the  militia. 

Freedom  of  religious  opinion,  is  another  link  of  the 
chain  of  rights,  necessary  to  preserve  election.  If  a  go- 
vernment is  invested  with  a  power  to  inflict  on  the  mind  re- 
ligious coercion,  it  will  add  political.  And  if  it  can  mould 
opinion  by  force  to  suit  its  interests  or  designs  in  one  case, 
it  will  do  it  in  the  other.  The  freedom  of  opinion  is  an  in- 
divisible right.  If  a  government  can  split  it  at  all,  it  may 
by  frequent  divisions  destroy  its  strength.  And  as  this  free- 
dom is  the  essence  of  election,  whenever  it  is  impaired  in 
the  case  of  religion,  election  itself  receives  a  wound  i  which 
again  illustrates  its  dependence  for  efficacy,  on  the  preser- 
vation of  other  rights.  Good  and  evil  principles  attract  or 
gravitate  towards  each  other,  and  are  as  incapable  of  ex- 
changing places  as  matter  and  spirit.  Political  orders 
are  therefore   naturally  unable    to   associate    with  reli 


GOVERNMENT  OF  THE  XT.  STATES.        471 

gious  liberty,  because  this  instills  brotherly  love  ;  those, 
brotherly  hatred.  Indians  imagine  that  a  Deity  and  a  devil 
unite  in  the  government  of  the  universe.  And  a  union  be- 
tween the  good  principle  of  religious  liberty,  and  the  evil 
principle  of  sovereign  orders,  in  the  government  of  a  nation, 
would  exemplify  this  savage  philosophy. 

Upon  none  of  this  important  ground  has  Mr.  Adams  ven- 
tured to  tread.  As  to  the  freedom  of  conscience,  the  dear- 
est right  of  human  nature,  he  is  silent.  Silence  was  less 
injurious  to  his  theory,  than  a  confession,  that  religious  li- 
berty could  only  exist  with  the  principle  of  national  self 
government ;  because  a  sovereignty  of  orders  annihilates  a 
real  national  mind,  and  substitutes  for  it  three  artificial 
minds. 

Before  this  subject  is  concluded,  it  is  suggested  to  the 
reader,  that  rights  retained  by  nations,  as  unnecessary  for 
governments,  constitute  our  most  useful  division  of  power. 
The  rights  of  conscience  and  of  the  press,  deprive  goverra- 
jnents  of  much  power,  to  be  otherwise  drawn  from  supersti- 
tion and  ignorance.  Besides  these,  the  people  of  America 
have  endeavoured  to  keep  in  their  hands  a  great  extent  of 
political  ground,  forbidden  to  government.  All  this  terri- 
tory is  lost  at  once  by  introducing  the  sovereignty  of  orders. 
It  will  also  be  lost  by  laws  gradually  encroaching  upon  it  ; 
such  as  laws  for  cutting  off  the  provinces  of  free  inquiry 
and  militia  defence  ;  by  regulating  the  press,  and  by  stand- 
ing armies.  The  first  mode  of  getting  rid  of  the  whole  cat- 
alogue of  human  rights,  is  not  less  certain  than  the  se- 
cond ;  it  drives  men  gradually  towards  slavery,  by  law, 
as  the  Indians  are  driven  towards  the  ocean,  by  encroach- 
ment. 

From  among  the  rights  retained  by  our  policy,  we  have 
selected  those  of  self  defence  or  bearing  arms,  of  con- 
science,  and  of  free  inquiry,  for  two  purposes ;  one,  to 
shew  the  vast  superiority  of  our  policy,  in  being  able  to 
keep  natural  rights  necessary  for  liberty  and  happiness, 
out  of  the  hands  of  governments  ;    the  other,  to  shew  that 


47  2  THE    GOOD    MORAL   PRINCIPLES    OP   T±*E 

this  ability  is  the  effect  of  its  principles,  and  beyond  the 
reach  of  Mr.  Adams's  system,  or  of  any  other,  unable  to  re- 
serve to  the  people,  and  to  withhold  from  governments,  a 
variety  of  rights.  Of  the  three  selected  as  illustrations, 
iijo  ri«*ht  of  free  inquiry  remains  to  be  considered. 

Caligula's  appointment  of  his  horse  to  the  consulship* 
is  both  an  illustration  and  a  mockery  of  the  idea  of  national 
sovereignty,  without  the  freedom  of  utterance ;  and  a  na- 
tion, the  members  of  which  can  only  speak,  and  write  as 
government  pleases,  is  exactly  this  consular  sovereign. 

lint  although  the  rights  of  the  horse  and  the  nation  may 
be  equal,  their  happiness  will  bo  unequal.  The  thought? 
of  the  horse  being  under  no  legal  control,  he  retains  this  na= 
tural  source  of  pleasure.  Man's  thoughts,  suffered  to  flow, 
furnish  the  purest  streams  of  human  happiness.  Dam'd 
up  by  law,  they  stagnate,  putrify  and  poison.  To  his  eha* 
racteristick  qualities  of  speaking  and  writing,  all  man's  so- 
cial discoveries  and  improvements  are  owing.  Qualities 
which  distinguish  him  from  the  brute  creation,  must  be  na- 
tural rights  ;  and  (hose  which  are  the  parents  of  social  or- 
der, must  be  useful  and  beneficial.  Why  should  govern 
ments  declare  war  against  them. 

Expression  is  the  respiration  of  mind.  Deprived 
of  respiration,  the  mind  sickens,  languishes  and  dies,  like 
t  he  body:  It  flourished  in  the  climates  of  Greece  and  Italy, 
whilst  it  could  breathe  freely;  it  has  decayed  in  the  same 
climates,  according  to  the  degrees  of  suppression  it  has  suf- 
fered. Wherever  it  can  breathe  freely,  mind  seems  to  be- 
gin to  live;  swells,  as  if  by  enchantment,  to  a  sublime 
magnitude  ;  and  suddenly  acquires  wonderful  powers. 

The  objection  against  a  free  respiration  of  mind,  is,  that 
it  may  occasionally  emit  from  its  lungs  (according  to  our 
metaphorical  license)  noxious  vapours.  The  same  reason 
is  infinitely  stronger  for  smothering  body;  its  lungs  con- 
stantly emit  noxious  vapours.  If  we  deprive  mind  of 
heaUh  or  life,  because  its  breath  is  sometimes  noxious,  let 
fcs  adhere  to  the  principle  and  finish  the  work,  by  smothering 


GOVERNMENT  OP  THE   V.   STATE 8.  47* 

body  also.  Had  they  so  existed,  as  to  be  capable  of  sepa* 
rate  destruction,  which  species  of  murder  would  have  been 
entitled  to  the  first  degree  of  guilt  ?  Estimate  mind  with- 
out body,  and  body  without  mind.  Behold  an  ideot !  Let 
not  those  pretend  to  religion,  who  would  poison  or  murder 
mind,  but  not  poison  or  murder  the  body  of  an  ideot.  Do 
they  perpetrate  the  first  crime,  to  prove  that  they  will  ab- 
stain from  the  second  ? 

The  long  stationary  state  of  political  science,  previous 
to  the  American  revolution,  must  have  been  owing  to  some 
peculiar  cause,  which  enabled  other  sciences  to  outstrip  it, 
And  there  is  no  cause  so  peculiar  to  political  science,  as  a 
legal  prohibition  of  discussion.  Mind,  as  to  this  science, 
was  fettered  j  as  to  others,  free.  The  commencement  of 
the  American  revolution,  knocked  off  these  fetters,  politi- 
cal science  bounded  forward,  and  a  government  was  formedj 
which  is  at  this  moment  the  solitary  political  object  of  unit 
versal  commendation.  Few  prefer  even  the  government 
under  which  they  live,  to  ours  \  none,  any  other. 

The  opinions  in  several  state  constitutions?  in  favour  of 
stfental  emancipation,  being  so  construed  as  to  expose  mind 
to  legislative  fetters,  the  good  sense  of  mankind  had  in  this* 
as  in  many  other  instances,  preceded  precept  in  exploding 
errour.  Political  prosecutions  for  opinion  had  become  as 
obsolete  as  those  for  witchcraft,  before  the  general  consti- 
tution obeyed  publick  opinion,  by  declaring  their  inconsis- 
tency with  free  government ;  and  before  the  sedition  law 
endeavoured  to  drive  political  science  into  a  retrocession  of 
centuries,  for  the  sake  of  reviving  them. 

The  third  section  of  the  third  article  of  the  general  con- 
stitution, had  been  deeply  rooted  in  the  natural  right  of 
free  utterance,  before  the  publick  solicitude  required  its 
farther  security,  by  the  third  amendment.  The  utterance 
of  any  opinions  could  not  constitute  treason.  Irreverence 
expressed  for  our  constitution  and  government ;  falsehood 
or  reasoning  to  bring  into  contempt  and  overturn  them ; 
were  not  thought  politically  criminal.    Instead  of  being 

61 


474.  THE    G08B    MG3AL   FRINCIPLK9   OF    THE 

condemned  to  punishment,  they  are  shielded  against  prose* 
eution.  What  could  the  constitution  do  move,  for  the  vin- 
dication of  an  unlimited  freedom  of  utterance,  than  expose 
itself  to  this  license?  Could  it  have  intended  to  defend  one 
officer  of  the  government  by  criminal  prosecutions,  against 
the  freedom  of  opinion,  after  having  subjected  the  whole 
government  to  its  inspection  ?  We  should,  under  an  igno- 
rance^ of  its  source,  have  attributed  the  constitution  to 
beings  more  inconsistent  and  romantiek,  than  those  whose 
erroiirs  were  limited  by  human  folly,  had  it  exposed  its  own 
life  to  preserve  an  indispensible  principle,  and  relinquished 
the  same  principle,  to  preserve  the  reputation  of  an  indivi- 
dual. If  such  is  the  text  of  the  constitution,  three  volumes 
Written  by  a  president,  for  the  purpose  of  destroying  our 
policy  by  hereditary  orders,  and  laws  for  prosecuting  sar- 
casms against  the  same  president,  may  both  be  justified  by 
its  construction. 

The  criminality  of  bringing  a  president  into  contempt, 
consists  of  its  indirect  tendency  to  destroy  the  government  j 
a  direct  attempt  to  destroy  the  same  government  cannot  be 
less  criminal.  If  an  indirect  attempt  by  writing  or  speak- 
ing was  punishable,  a  direct  attempt  of  the  same  kind 
would  not  have  been  shielded  against  punishment.  He  who 
reads  Mr„  Adams's  sarcasms  upon  election,  and  eulogies 
upon  hereditary  orders,  will  confess,  that  they  are  as  well 
calculated  to  bring  a  government,  founded  in  one  principle 
and  reprobating  the  other,  into  contempt,  as  those  uttered 
against  one  of  its  temporary  officers. 

Reverence  for  a  magistrate,  is  frequently  contempt  for 
a  constitution.  The  contempt  of  the  English  nation  for 
James  II.  arose  from  a  reverence  for  their  form  of  govern- 
ment. A  contempt  for  principles,  and  a  reverence  for  men, 
conducted  the  French  nation  to  the  issue  of  that  revolution. 
It  is  the  policy  of  all  despotick  governments,  enforced  by 
sedition  laws.  In  Turkey  this  policy  is  perfect.  In  Eng- 
land, where  this  policy  is  less  pure  than  in  Turkey,  to  assert 
that  the  king,  by  corrupting  two  branches  of  the  legislature, 


GOVEliNMENT   OF   THE   V,    STATES.  4,75 

•was  destroying  the  principles  of  the  government,  would  be 
morally  true  and  legally  false  ;  and  to  assert  that  each  or- 
der maintained  a  constitutional  independence  of  the  others, 
would  be  morally  false  and  legally  true.  Legal  truth,  by 
the  sedition  law  policy,  is  moral  falsehood  ;  the  alternative 
lies  between  betraying  the  principles  of  a  good  government, 
or  submitting  to  be  considered  as  libellous,  seditious  and 
traitorous.  It  proposes  to  us  to  wound  our  consciences,  by 
becoming  traitors  to  our  constitutions;  or  to  be  rewarded 
with  bodily  punishment  for  constitutional  loyalty.  Truth 
and  falsehood  under  such  laws,  unexceptionably  mean  praise 
and  censure  of  men  in  power. 

These  murderers  of  discussion,  knowledge  and  patriot- 
ism, engrave  upon  their  tomb,  "  that  private  citizens  have 
neither  the  right  nor  capacity  to  canvass  the  measures  of 
government."  Men  arc  advised  to  institute  government? 
to  secure  their  rights,  not  to  destroy  them  ;  fortius  purpose, 
they  are  allowed  to  possess  all  the  rights  and  talents  of  hu- 
man nature  :  and  the  ministry  who  preach  this  doctrine,  no 
sooner  climb  by  it  into  power,  but  tliey  very  gravely  tell 
the  same  men,  that  they  have  neither  talents  nor  rights ; 
that  they  cannot  dislinguish  between  pleasure  and  pain ; 
and  therefore  that  there  is  no  occasion  for  them  to  write  or 
speak  either  truth  or  falsehood,  upon  a  subject  which  em- 
braces all  their  rights,  and  regulates  most  of  their  plea- 
sures. 

Such  is  the  language  of  orders  and  privilege  in  every 
form.  Into  such  politicians,  orders  and  privileges  trans- 
form patriots.  They  assail  truth  and  knowledge,  because 
truth  and  knowledge  assail  them.  They  stigmatize  dis 
eussion,  because  it  leads  to  discovery.  They  foster  igno  • 
ranee,  because  it  is  blind. 

Every  attempt  by  a  government  to  control  free  discus 
sion,  indicates  fear  and  jealousy.     Jealousy  by  a  govern 
ment  of  a  nation,  is  always  criminal,    because  a  natior, 
cannot  usurp  its  own  rights  ;    but  jealousy  by  a  nation 
of  a  government,   is  always  laudable,  because  a  govern- 
ment may  usurp  the  rights  of  the  nation 


4.76  Tlld    G00l>    lvlCitAi   PBIN€lFi,E6   O*  #kfc 

f 

Critieks,  to  good  writers,  are  friends  |  to  bad,  foes.  Bad 
Writers  call  them  malicious  demons  ;  good,  court  their  ex- 
amination, because  they  consider  the  praise  of  ignorance 
as  ridicule.  Good  and  bad  governments,  regard  free  dis- 
cussion, as  good  and  bad  writers  do  criticks  ;  being  the  only 
impartial  judge  of  governments  which  can  exist,  one  kind 
preserves,  the  other  destroys  it,  for  the  same  quality. 

Some  governments  which  do  not  avow  despotism,  are 
not  so  hardy  as  to  deny  the  right  of  free  discussion  ;  they 
only  defeat  it.  They  allow  or  punish  criticisms  upon  them- 
selves by  their  own  will  and  pleasure.  A  criminal  who 
makes  the  law,  selects  the  jury,  settles  the  evidence,  and 
pronounces  the  judgement,  may  safely  come  to  trial.  A 
subordinate  member  of  a  government,  cannot  be  made  an 
impartial  judge  of  his  superior's  merits.  A  king  of 
England  boasted,  that  he  could  have  what  law  or  gospel  he 
pleased,  because  he  could  appoint,  promote  and  translate 
fudges  and  bishops.  Would  these  judges  and  bishops  im- 
partially try  such  kings? 

A  jildgte  of  the  United  States,  possessed  of  an  embas- 
sage, or  capable  of  receiving  one,  would  be  an  English 
bishop  holding  in  commendam,  or  expecting  translation. 
An  instance  of  such  a  bishop,  uninfluenced  by  the  govern- 
ment, is  regarded  with  admiration.  Sedition  laws  subject 
^nbliek  discussion  to  this  species  of  holiness  ;  are  its  deci- 
sions infallible,  because  they  may  be  always  foretold  ? 

It  is  obvious  that  nations  are  the  only  juries  qualified 
to  try  governments.  Can  they  decide  justly  without  discus- 
sion, and  without  facts,  except  those  admitted  by  the  culprit? 
"Will  the  ambition  and  avarice  of  factions  be  recited  in  their 
own  laws?  or  will  these  factions  enact  their  frauds  into 
justice,  aB  they  do  idols  into  gods  ?  When  laws  pretend  to 
make  gods  or  truth,  we  may  certainly  expect  idols  and  false- 
hood. Factions  will  never  make  truth  by  law,  for  tiie 
sake  of  detecting  or  punishing  themselves.  The  instant  a 
government  is  guided  by  avarice  or  ambition,  it  degenerates 
is  to  a  faction,  which  makes  laws  to  punish  the  opinions  of 


GOVERNMENT  OF  THE    U.    sTATES.  477 

others,  and  to  hide  its  own  crimes.     Vice  is  even  less  lil 
thanerrour,  to  subject  itself  to  punishment. 

The  chains  which  bind  nations  to  the  1  look    f  slavery, 
hr      been  forged  of  such  strengtl 
fcr  without  ealanii 

tW  ise  chains  and  such  calamities  wilt  eonti 

t  action  of  mankind,  unless  a  force  sufficing  to  break  the 
former  is  discovered,  capable  of  effect  without  begetting  the 
evil  of  civil  war.  No  such  force  has  occurred  to  the  mind 
of  man,  except  the  freedom  of  discussion.  If  power  shall 
seize  on  the  press  also,  what  will  men  gain  by  the  art 
of  printing?  This  noble  art  itself,  will  rivet  and  not 
break  the  bonds  of  despotism.  Under  the  direction  of  a  go- 
vernment, it  will  operate  upon  civil  liberty,  as  oracles  did 
upon  religious.  The  press  will  lie  like  the  oracle,  when  a 
government  directs  its  responses  ;  and  the  success  of  false 
hood,  protected  against  investigation,  is  illustrated  by  the  in 
fluence  of  oracles  for  centuries* 

The  preservation  and  use  of  language,  are  the  benefits 
gained  by  mankind  from  the  art  of  printing.  Refined  and 
fixed,  religion  and  science  need  no  longer  he  stored  under 
locks,  liable  to  rust,  and  keys  perpetually  changing  their 
9hape.  Hieroglyphic^  shanserit  and  corrupted  latin,  the 
only  previous  depositaries  of  both,  have  been  superseded  b\ 
printing  ;  and  rivers  of  truth  and  reason  began  instantly  to 
clear  away  the  dust  and  cobwebs  in  which  they  were  in*- 
yolved.  Religion,  as  most  important,  preceded  the  sciences 
in  extracting  truth  and  reformation  from  the  art  of  print  - 
ing  i  and  when  we  see  her  no  longer  like  a  blood  stained 
fury,  we  almost  lament  that  this  soul  and  body  saving  disco 
very,  had  not  been  revealed  with  the  gospel.  Why  should 
the  science  of  government  be  retained  in  the  bondage, 
which  for  ages  could  demonize  religion,  and  obstruct  knovi 
ledge  ?  and  are  not  the  fetters  of  sedition  laws,  as  strong  as 
those  of  latin,  shanserit  or  hieroglyphiek. 

An  argument  used  against  free  discussion  by  govern 
ments,   was   i\r?i   used  by  the   Pone  of  Rome,     it  would 


Jb78  THE   GOOD    MORAL   PBINCIFLE3   OF  TBC 

excite  sedition  and  civil  war.  A  world  of  experiments 
have  ascertained,  that  the  propensity  of  mankind  is  infinite- 
ly stronger  to  bear  bad  governments  than  to  subvert  good. 
This  propensity  for  political  obedience,  is  strengthened  by 
free  discussion,  on  behalf  of  good  governments,  by  the  in* 
fluence  of  the  merit  it  discloses;  and  weakened  under  bad» 
by  disclosing  their  vices.  On  behalf  of  which  will  its  sup- 
pression operate  ? 

Suppose,  both  that  the  people  are  inclined  to  turbulence* 
and  governments  to  tyranny.  Yet,  for  one  evil  inflicted  by 
turbulence  upon  governments,  one  thousand  have  been  in« 
flicted  by  tyranny  upon  nations.  To  suppress  free  discus- 
sion from  an  apprehension  of  an  evil,  rare  and  temporary  ; 
for  the  sake  of  fostering  one,  frequent  and  durable ;  would 
be  obviously  unwise.  But  when  we  find  religion  cured  of 
its  fury  by  free  discussion,  may  we  not  confidently  consider 
it  as  a  cure  also  for  political  rage  $  and  the  true  panacea 
both  for  the  tyranny  of  governments  and  the  turbulence  of 
the  people  ;  and  that  to  surrender  its  benefits  for  fear  of  its 
evils,  would  be  like  surrendering  the  benefits  of  the  sun,  be- 
cause of  its  noxious  exhalations  ? 

Such  a  surrender  would  be  a  substitution  of  the  correla- 
tive vice  for  the  opposite  virtue.  Resistance  and  submis- 
sion to  tyranny  are  relatively  contraries.  Resistance  is  a 
generous  and  active  principle,  inspired  by  a  love  of  man- 
kind, which  makes  all  the  efforts  designed  to  advance  the 
the  publick  good  ;  it  is  the  sole  defender  of  human  liberty, 
and  reasoning  is  its  best  and  safest  weapon.  Ought  the 
patriot,  resistance,  to  be  disarmed,  and  metamorphosed  into 
the  slave,  submission  ?  This  patriot  never  draws  a  sword, 
unless  he  is  robbed  by  law  of  free  discussion.  Compare 
the  erect,  open  and  manly  countenance  of  one  princi' 
pie,  with  the  downcast,  gloomy  and  fearful  visage  of 
the  other  ;  and  use  the  limner,  free  discussion  or  sedi- 
tion law,  to  paint  your  own  face,  according  to  your 
ewn  ideas  of  beauty- 


GOVEB?TMENT  OP  THE    U.    STATES.  479 

Free  discussion  will  instruct  the  publiek  mind,  in  what 
is  just  or  excellent  in  government,  as  it  refines  the  taste  and 
judgement  of  mankind  in  relation  to  other  sciences.  And 
publiek  officers  will  be  compelled  to  conform  their  charac- 
ters, as  authors  do  books,  to  this  refinement.  The  license 
of  the  press,  like  the  license  of  the  stage,  will  be  corre- red  f 
and  even  the  frauds  and  tyranny  of  newspapers,  will  at 
length  be  resisted  by  this  correct,  trusty  and  inexorable 
tribunitial  power  ;  which  will  learn  to  pronounce  its  veto 
against  deviations  from  the  principles  of  free  government, 
With  the  same  skill  it  discloses  in  detecting  deviations  from 
the  principles  of  other  sciences.  Without  it,  the  best  prin- 
ciples may  slide  into  the  worst ;  the  liberty  of  the  press  it- 
self might  be  perverted  ;  and  printers  might  become  ty- 
rants under  the  cap  of  liberty.  This  might  be  effected  by 
extracting  from  the  liberty  of  the  press,  the  right  of  pro- 
ducing condemnation,  by  withholding  the  means  of  defence, 
or  of  killing  unheard.  But  this  species  of  tyranny  too  enor- 
mous for  governments  to  claim,  would  be  soon  detected  by 
free  discussion,  as  a  fraud  upon  principle,  to  which  it  would 
at  length  bring  back  culprits,  by  opening  to  defence  the 
channel  of  accusation. 

God  has  not  by  sedition  laws,  prohibited  to  man  the  free 
examination  of  his  works ;  but  man  "  cloathed  in  a  brief 
authority,"  arrogantly  extorts  a  species  of  reverence,  which 
the  deity  disclaims.  "  Consider  my  works;  I  have  given 
you  reason  and  left  it  free.*'  Such  is  the  law  of  the  creator. 
"  Reverence  my  qualities ;  presume  not  to  consider  my 
works  ;  use  your  reason  according  to  my  will."  Such  is 
the  law  of  a  creature.  It  is  a  law  which  idols  in  every 
shape  enact,  because  free  inquiry  would  never  mistake 
them  for  gods.  Governments  resort  to  sedition  laws,  for 
the  same  reasons  which  induce  many  dealers  in  newspapers 
to  obstruct  free  inquiry  ;  to  hide  their  frauds,  and  make 
themselves  idols. 

When  a  fraud  commences  its  operations,  it  is  annoyed  by 
truth  and  knowledge,    To  meet  these  enemies  in  the  open 


ISO  THE    GOOD   MORAL   3rRINClI\L£3    01'   TUB 

field  of  fair  discussion,  would  be  its  ruin.  It  therefore 
avoids  this  species  of  combat,  by  calling  it  sedition.  This 
misnomer  parries  detection,  by  persuading  mankind  that 
the  only  mode,  of  making  it,  is  a  greater  evil  than  the  fraud, 
itself.  And  by  ingeniously  drawing  the  alternative  between 
thv  fury  of  sedition  and  the  good  temper  of  knavery,  the  lat- 
ter is  placed  in  the  most  favourable  light,  Whereas,  had 
fraud  confessed,  that  knowledge  could  never  abound  with- 
out free  inquiry,  and  that  ignorance  invited  imposition  and  ty- 
ranny with  inevitable  success  ;  it  would  have  been  obvious, 
supposing  that  free  inquiry  tended  to  beget  both  knowledge 
and  sedition,  that  a  good  and  an  evil  were  preferable  to  two 
evils,  ignoranee  and  tyranny,  the  fruits  of  its  suppression- 
Fraud  strives  to  hide  the  long  chain  of  moral  effects  attach- 
ed to  each  of  the  principles  ;  knowledge  and  ignorance  ;  be- 
cause it  would  find  sedition  an  appendage  of  the  latter- 
During  above  thirty  years,  since  their  independence,  less 
mischief  has  been  done  in  the  United  States  by  sedition, 
than  frequently  in  Turkey,  during  the  same  period,  in 
one  dav. 

Free  inquiry,  national  interest,  and  national  power? 
united,  can  seldom  produce  sedition,  because  it  can  have  no 
object.  Power,  united  with  these  associates,  never  thinks 
of  entrenching  itself  behind  sedition  laws,  whilst  united 
with  orders  or  exclusive  privileges,  it  flees  to  them  for  re~ 
ftigo.  Therefore  the  policy  of  the  United  States  both  per- 
mits and  requires  free  inquiry,  by  which  knowledge  is  ad- 
vanced, whilst  the  system  of  orders  permits  and  requires 
sedition  laws,  by  which  knowledge  is  suppressed. 

If  free  inquiry  or  discussion  may  be  abused,  so  may  reli- 
gion and  the  power  of  speech.  Ought  religion  and  speaking 
to  be  suppressed,  because  an  abuse  of  one,  produces  idolatry, 
and  of  the  other,  lying?  Every  good  has  an  alloy  of  evil.  It 
is  the  case  with  life  itself.  Shall  we  destroy  social  freedom, 
for  the  sake  of  destroying  its  alloy,  calumny?  We  can  des- 
troy this  and  all  other  temporal  evils  by  death  ;  and  Ave  can 
increase  them  hy  an  enslaved  pre*?..     What  is  the  wisdom 


GOVERNMENT   OJ?   THE    U.    STATES.  481 

ef  that  policy,  which  brings  upon  men  an   host   of  foes,  in 
order  to  destroy  one? 

The  only  abuse  pretended  to  be  checked  by  sedition  laws, 
is  the  promulgation  of  falsehood.  Their  efficacy  for  at- 
taining this  solitary  end,  is  questionable.  An  exclusive  pri- 
vilege of  lying  in  a  predominant  party,  is  a  premium  for 
its  encouragement ;  and  an  equality  in  the  right  between  ri- 
val parties,  may  produce  a  reciprocal  check. 

Detraction  and  flattery  also  afford  some  correction  to 
each  other,  and  diminish  the  mischiefs  produced  by  the  ex- 
clusive agency  of  either.  The  zeal  of  governments  against 
detraction,  has  caused  them  to  overlook  the  malignity  of 
flattery  without  its  check.  The  falsehood  of  one,  deducts 
from  the  falsehood  of  the  other.  Leave  flattery  without 
the  subtracter,  detraction,  and  the  quantity  of  falsehood  is 
increased,  both  by  the  natural  disposition  of  flattery,  and 
also  by  an  artiiiciai  excitement  of  that  disposition.  Thus 
also  sedition  laws  create  more  falsehood  than  they  destroy, 
and  of  a  more  pernicious  nature.  If  they  destroy  the  spe- 
cies of  falsehood,  which  calumniates  individuals,  they 
create  that  called  adulation  to  governments  ;  and  to  des- 
troy a  small  evil,  foster  a  great  one.  The  delirium  provoked 
by  the  sweet  poison,  flattery,  is  often  assuaged  and  even  cur- 
ed by  the  bitter  antidote,  detraction.  The  medicine,  how- 
ever acrimonious,  may  not  be  invariably  useless  to  indivi- 
duals j  and  it  invariably,  as  to  governments,  produces  the 
wholesome  effect  of  causing  them  to  turn  their  eyes  upon 
themselves  ;  a  spectacle  which  the  mirror  of  flattery  never 
justly  reflects. 

Sedition  laws  are  as  often  suggested  by  a  love  of  truth, 
as  religious  laws,  by  a  love  of  God.  The  former  enlighten 
men  politically,  as  the  latter  do  religiously.  Civil  liberty 
flows  from  one  policy,  in  streams  as  copious,  as  religiout 
does  from  the  other.  A  restraint  of  religious  discussion  by 
law,  is  exploded  in  the  United  States,  because  idolatry, 
fraud  and  oppression,  are  the  fruits  of  this  restraint.  Will 
a  restraint  of  political  discussion,  produce  knowledge,  truth 


*82  THE    GOOli    MORAT.   TRJNCIPI/ES.  OF-  THi< 

and  liberty  ?    Have  we  torn  this  mantle  of"  imposture  iroK* 
false  gods,  wherewith  to  enrobe  false  patriots  ? 

Having  submitted  to  the  consideration  of  the  reader  a 
few  general  arguments  to  prove,  that  for  the- preservation 
ef  civil  liberty,  sound  policy  dictates  an  unlimited  freedom 
of  discussion,  concerning  magistrates  and  their  measures  ; 
and  that  if  the  magistracy  can  restrain  discussion,  human 
reason,  instead  of  being  a  cheek,  will  be  made  an  accom- 
plice of  usurpation  ;  it  behoves  us  now  to  view  the  question 
nnder  the  particular  policy  of  the  United  States. 

Without  stopping  to  explain  the  consequences  of  a  com- 
mon power  in  the  general  and  state  governments  to  make 
and  modify  sedition  :  to  declare  the  same  words  to  be  false 
and  penal  there,  and  true  and  meritorious  here  ;  and  with- 
out anticipating  the  mutual  reprisals  to  be  expected,  from 
these  pretended  cruisers  after  truth,  detached  by  aggressionr 
or  defence  into  their  respective  territories  ;  let  us  come  at 
once  to  the  fundamental  principle  of  our  policy  and  constitu- 
tions, and  consider4  whether  it  can  be  sustained,  under  a  go- 
vernment regulating  publiek  opinion,  by  law,  judges  and 
juries. 

A  nation,  to  retain  rights,  or  exercise  self  government, 
must  be  an  intellectual  and  political  being.  Thinking  is  as 
necessary  to  a  body  politick,  to  enable  it  to  shun  evil  and 
obtain  good,  as  to  any  other  reasonable  being.  If  a  monarch, 
an  aristocracy,  or  a  parliament,  possess  the  sovereignty  of 
a  country,  a  doctrine  that  these  sovereignties  should  not 
think,  speak  or  discuss,  except  according  to  such  rules 
as  should  be  prescribed  to  the  in  by  the  people,  would  be 
equivalent  to  the  doctrine,  that  a  nation  possessing  the  sove- 
reignty, should  not  think,  speak  or  discuss,  except  according 
to  such  rules  as  should  be  prescribed  to  them  by  a  monarch, 
an  aristocracy  or  a  parliament.  In  both  cases  the  sove- 
reignty would  be  transferred  from  the  automatical  to  the 
prescribing  power. 

Suppose  an  aristocracy  to  hold  the  sovereignty,  and  the 
rest,  of  a  nation  to  assemble  and  prescribe  to  it  rules  for 
thinking,  speaking  or  discussing,  enforced  by  punishment? 


llOVEitNMENT    OF  THE    V.    STATESo  iHb 

to  be  inflicted  by  judges  of  national  appointment  ;  if  such 
a  regimen  would  transfer  the  sovereignty  from  an  aristocra- 
cy to  the  people,  it  follows  that  the  same,  only  reversing 
the  case,  will  transfer  it  from  the  people  to  any  political  pow- 
er, however  composed,  which  can  thus  prescribe  and  en- 
force, as  to  them. 

This  demonstration  is  ingeniously  evaded,  by  resort- 
ing to  the  representative  quality  of  our  policy,  and  thence 
inferring,  that  such  rules  or  laws  are  to  be  considered  as  the 
act  of  the  people,  or  of  the  sovereignty  itself,  by  its  repre- 
sentatives ;  or  as  restraints  imposed  by  one's  own  will,  up- 
on one's  self. 

Under  this  decoy,  every  measure  of  the  government,  in- 
tended directly  or  indirectly  to  transfer  the  sovereignty  from 
the  nation  to  itself,  might  be  hidden.  There  can  hardly  ex- 
ist a  degree  of  sagacity,  unequal  io  its  detection. 

Election  and  representation  may  be  united  with  a  sove- 
reiffhtv  of  orders  :  it  cannot  therefore  of  itself  constitute  a 
sovereignty  of  the  people.  Election  and  orders  act  together 
under  the  English  policy  ;  there,  election  disavows  the  ex- 
istence of  a  sovereignty  of  the  people;  here,  to  cover  as- 
saults upon  this  sovereignty,  it  is  said  to  be  constituted  by 
election,  and  exercised  by  representation.  In  England,  say 
the  disciples  of  the  same  political  system,  representation 
helps  to  take  sovereignty  from  the  people,  and  bestows  it 
upon  the  government;  but  in  America,  representation  takes  it 
from  the  government,  and  bestows  it  upon  the  people.  In 
England,  suffrage  and  sovereignty  arc  considered  as  distinct, 
and  suffrage  is  allowed  no  portion  of  sovereignty  ;  here  they 
are  considered  as  one  and  the  same,  by  those  who  are  for  giv- 
ing the  sovereign  power  to  the  government,  merely  to  amuse 
the  people  with  its  shadow. 

By  allowing  to  the  people  that  species  of  sovereignty, 
which  can  be  found  in  suffrage  and  representation,  and  no 
other,  it  results,  that  the  people  may  be  deprived  of  free 
discussion  without  injuring  their  sovereignty  ;  according  to 
the  liacetious  corallary ;   that  if  I  choose  a  sovereign,  1  aa. 


4S4*  THE    GOOD    MORAL   PRINCIPLES    OE   THE 

myself  a  sovereign.  But,  rejecting  this  mode  of  reasoning, 
and  allowing  to  nations  a  right  of  self  government  or  a  na- 
tional sovereignty,  anterior  to  suffrage  j  the  primitive  of 
suffrage  itself  and  the  antecedent  of  law;  it  realizes  a  na- 
tional free  right  of  discussion,  as  radical  as  the  right  of  self 
government  itself,  because  the  one  cannot  exist  without  the 
other. 

Illustrations  of  this  reasoning  may  be  drawn  from  the 
English  parliament.     Though  the  house  of  commons  is  the 
creature  of  suffrage,  this  very  house  denies  to  its  eleetor, 
any  portion  of  sovereignty,  and  constitutes,  with  the  other 
orders,  the  sovereign  power.     In  its  character  of  sovereign- 
ty, it  exercises  the  right  of  free  discussion,   because  this 
right  is  essentia!  to  sovereignty.     Deprived  of  it,  the  house 
of  commons  would  constitute  no  portion  of  a  sovereignty. 
Deprived  of  the  same  right,  the  people  can  constitute  no- 
portion  of  a  sovereignty.     The  people   have   suffrage  and. 
representation  in  England,  but  not  free  discussion  ;  and  the 
parliament  without  the  two  first,  and  witli  the  last,  possesses 
the  sovereignty.     It  is  thence  evident,  that  the  sovereignty 
of  the  parliament  arises  from  the  right  office  discussion, 
tind  the  want  of  sovereignty  in  the  people,  from  the  loss  of 
that  right.     Parliamentary  will,  opinion  and  sovereignty,  i& 
of  course   substituted  for  national.      The  parliament  res- 
trains individuals  S>y  sedition  laws,  upon  the  same  principle 
that  the  people  of  the  United  States  restrain  governments, 
political  departments  and  pubiick  officers,  by  constitutions. 
The  English  nation  suffer,  what  the  American  people  iiv 
flict :    namely,  political  restraints  ;    because  that  nation  is 
the  subject  of  parliamentary  sovereignty,  and  our  govern- 
ment is  the  subject  of  national  sovereignty.     Sovereignty 
only  is  competent  to  inflict,  and  subjection  to  suffer,  politi- 
cal regulations  and   restraints.     Monarchy  never  think  of 
imposing  these  regulations  and  restraints  upon  themselves, 
by  constitutions  or  sedition  laws,  because  sovereignty  is  u lia- 
ble to  restrain  sovereignty.     My  will  to  day,   cannot  bind 
•p.y  will  to-morrow.     If  the  prior  will  should  resolve  to 


GOVERNMENT    OE   THE    T\    STATES.  485 

punish  the  posterior,  the  resolution  would  be  abrogated  by 
the  posterior  will,  whenever  the  period  of  punishment 
should  arrive.  If  an  absolute  monarch  should  by  election 
constitute  a  power,  and  invest  it  with  a  right  of  inflicting 
upon  his  intellects,  whatever  political  restraints  and  regula- 
tions this  elective  power  pleased,  the  destruction  of  his  sove- 
reignty would  follow.  The  fallacious  idea,  that  election 
will  secure  sovereignty,  has  cheated  many  nations  of  liber- 
ty,  but  not  a  single  monarch  of  despotism. 

"We  must  stop  for  a  moment  to  explain  to  the  reader  what 
is  meant  by  "  political  rules  and  regulations."  If  he  should 
recollect  a  distinction  formerly  stated,  between  political  and 
municipal  law,  he  would  presently  discern  the  force  of  our 
reasoning.  By  one,  it  was  said,  governments  are  regulat- 
ed ;  by  the  other,  individuals.  The  latter  species  of  law, 
comprises  the  whole  scope  of  legislation,  which  a  free  na- 
tion can  part  with  ;  the  former,  it  must  forever  retain  and 
pronounce,  or  cease  to  be  free.  The  treacherous  art  of 
Mending  these  objects  is  exercised  by  sedition  laws.  They 
profess  to  regulate  individuals,  but  design  to  regulate  the 
form  of  govern  incut.  They  are  nominally  municipal,  and 
operatively  political  law.  The  dictator  over  discussion, 
is  a  dictator  over  decision.  Volumes  of  cases  might 
be  cited,  in  which  nations  have  gradually  lost  their  li- 
berty, by  an  insidious  introduction  of  a  political  regimen, 
under  a  municipal  title  ;  and  these  cases  forcibly  recom- 
mend to  the  United  States  a  wakeful  memory  of  the  solemn 
truth,  that  every  government  which  can  innovate  hy  civil 
upon  political  law,  is  despotick. 

The  opinions  under  discussion,  are,  that  the  elective  po- 
licy transfers  sovereignty  from  the  electors  to  the  elected  ; 
that  every  act  oi"a  representative  government  is  an  act  of  th 
nation;  and  that  the  nation  possesses  only  that  imperfect 
and  evanescent  species  of  sovereignty,  the  right  of  suf- 
frage. 

If  representation  destroys  that  which  it  implies,  namely, 
Subordination,  then  it  "in  annul  or  alter  constitutions  $  and 


&86  THE    GOOD    MORAL   PRINCIPLES    OF   THE 

if  the  act  of  their  representatives  is  the  act  of  the  peopk, 
representation  constitutes  a  sovereignty  iucapahle  of  limita- 
tion. Necessity  compels  us  to  consider  our  policy  or  con- 
stitutions upon  a  supposition,  that  these  opinions  are  true 
or  false.  If  they  are  true,  these  constitutions  are  subject 
to  the  sovereign  representation.  If  they  are  false,  then 
the  existence  of  a  sovereignty  over  representation,  is  de- 
monstrated. 

The  imperative  style  of  our  political  decalogues  called 
constitutions,  implies  the  existence  of  some  superior  power, 
whose  organs  they  are  ;  whilst  the  doctrine,  that  this  pow- 
er, by  having  thought  and  spoken  once,  had  lost  the  right 
of  thinking  and  speaking  forever,  is  equivalent  to  an  asser- 
tion, that  the  Deity,  by  prescribing  the  Mosaick  dispensa- 
tion, had  forfeited  the  right  of  prescribing  the  Christian. 

If  a  sovereign  power,  by  one  declaration  of  its  will,  does 
not  lose  its  sovereignty,  it  must  retain  also  an  unlimited 
freedom,  in  whatsoever  is  necessary  towards  any  future  de 
clarationof  its  will ;  otherwise  its  first  will,  must  be  its  last 

■will. 

An  intellectual  political  being,  differs  essentially  from 
an  intellectual  physical  being.  The  first  can  only  think  by 
speaking  and  writing,  as  it  is  compounded  of  many  indivi- 
duals. If  it  is  not  allowed  to  think  freely,  it  can  never  de- 
cide or  act  according  to  its  own  will,  since  its  will  can  only 
be  discovered  by  freedom  of  expression.  This  position  is 
demonstrated  by  considering  the  process,  necessary  to  form 
the  opinions  of  a  body  politick  and  oi*  an  individual.  A 
comparison  of  ideas  is  necessary  in  both  cases.  The  body 
politick  being  composed  of  many  distinct  minds,  cannot  com 
pare  its  ideas,  except  by  collecting  them  through  the  exter- 
nal mediums  of  speaking  and  writing,  or  by  free  discussion  3 
whereas  an  individual  can  compare  his  ideas,  by  the  inter- 
nal operation  of  thought.  An  individual  may  therefore  de- 
cide, or  discover  his  opinion,  because  no  human  law  can 
prevent  him  from  thinking  or  comparing  his  ideas  ;  but  a 
body  politick  may  be  prevented  from  knowing  or  exercising' 


GOVERNMENT    OF   THE    U.    STATES*  48? 

its  opinions,  because  human  laws  can  prevent  it  from 
thinking,  by  free  discussion,  either  to  fix  or  to  discover 
them. 

Sovereignty  is  an  intellectual  political  being.  In 
Britain,  it  is  parliamentary  ;  in  America,  national.  Pub- 
lick  opinion, ought  to  rule,  according  to  our  policy;  parlia* 
mentary,  according  to  her's.  Had  the  English  king  pos- 
sessed a  power,  to  regulate  by  penalties,  the  discussions  in 
the  house  of  commons,  its  freedom  of  opinion  would  have 
been  equivalent  to  the  freedom  of  national  opinion  here,  un- 
der such  a  power  in  the  government.  If  each  individual  of 
the  parliament,  was  confined  separately  in  a  dungeon,  and 
brought  out  once  a  year  to  give  a  silent  vote,  parliamentary 
opinion  and  sovereignty  would  be,  what  national  opinion  and 
sovereignty  becomes,  under  an  inhibition  of  free  discussion. 
Conferences  by  stealth,  would  be  modes  for  discovering  pub- 
lick  opinion  in  a  wide  territory,  even  less  effectual,  than  the 
echo  of  those  groans,  which  would  resound  among  the  cells 
of  these  incarcerated  parliamentary  sovereigns. 

The  argument  for  depriving  nations  of  the  right  of 
thinking,  by  speaking  and  writing,  i3,  that  a  nation  may 
have  bad  thoughts.  An  individual  may  also  have  bad 
thoughts,  and  the  same  argument  would,  if  it  could,  put 
an  end  to  his  thinking.  Members  of  the  British  sove- 
reignty, may  also  have  bad  thoughts,  but  they  are  supposed 
to  be  overbalanced  by  the  good.  Imperfect  man's  best 
prospects,  mast  be  confided  to  a  preponderance  of  good 
thoughts,  in  respect  to  sovereignties,  governments  and  in- 
dividuals ;  and  to  deprive  either  of  thinking,  lest  the 
thoughts  should  be  bad,  would  cut  off  the  prospect  of  deriv- 
ing any  good  from  the  subject  of  this  deprivation.  It  is 
moreover  an  ineffectual  remedy  for  the  evil,  because  no  pre- 
scribing power  ean  be  found,  which  may  not  itself  have  bad 
thoughts.  Governments  must  have  iwfinitelv  more  bad 
thoughts  than  nations,  because  they  can  acquire  wealth  and 
power  by  their  bad  thoughts  ;  whereas  nations,  by  theirs, 
can  only  gain  misfortune  os»  despotism.     Nations  err  urc- 


488  THE    GOOD    >loRAL    PRINCIPLES    Oi?   THE 

designedly.  Governments  are  liable  to  the  same  source  of 
errour,  and  it  also  pours  in  upou  them  through  the  sluices 
opened  by  ambition,  avarice,  and  a  great  variety  of  human 
vices,  which  sleep  least  under  the  strongest  incitements  to 
awake.  To  cure  the  propensity  of  human  nature  for 
vicious  projects,  by  constituting  a  dictatorial  power  over 
the  rights  of  thiukiug  and  discussing,  in  which  the  same 
propensity  exists,  in  its  most  aggravated  state,  is  plung- 
ing into  the  ocean,  for  fear  of  being  drowned  in  a  bucket  of 
water. 

,  We  have  been  endeavouring  to  illustrate  the  defect  of 
Mr.  Adams's  system,  and  of  all  others  constituted  of  orders, 
by  shewing  the  inefficaey  and  ambiguity  of  the  sense  annex- 
ed by  them,  to  the  expressions,  »*  national  rights  and  nation- 
al opinion  ;"  rights,  supposed  to  be  secured  by  an  incapa- 
city of  acting  from  intellectual  conviction;  and  opinion  to 
be  formed  without  thinking  by  a  free  comparison  of  ideas. 

National  rights  and  opinions,  held  or  moulded  at  the 
pleasure  of  governments,  are  tbe  creatures  of  a  species  of 
political  transubstantiation,  which  declares  it  to  be  heresy, 
not  to  believe,  that  the  opinion  and  will  of  a  government,  is 
the  opinion  and  will  of  a  nation.  That  bread  and  wine,  are 
indeed  flesh  and  blood. 

National  rights  and  national  opinion,  cannot  really  exist, 
without  powers  for  defending  the  one,  and  organs  for  ex- 
pressing the  other.  Tbe  svstem  of  orders  must  shew  these 
or  confess  that  they  have  provided  for  neither,  and  that  it 
uses  the  terms  as  decoy  phantoms  to  delude  nations  within 
its  grasp.  The  policy  of  the  United  Stales,  exhibits  its  mi- 
litia, its  right  of  bearing  arms,  its  rights  retained,  its  right 
of  instruction,  and  its  inclusive  right  of  abolishing  the  en- 
tire government. 

Our  policy,  considering  a  nation  as  possessing  rights 
it  cannot  alienate,  secures  its  will  and  ability  to  protect 
them,  by  moral  and  physical  means.  It  provides  election, 
attempered  by  free  discussion,  as  a  moral  mode  of  subject- 
ing governments  to  the    sovereignty  of  the  nation,  and  not 


GOVERNMENT   OF   THE    IT.    STATES.  4S9 

to  subject  the  nation  to  a  sovereignty  of  the  government* 
And  it  provides  a  militia*  as  the  physical  mode  for  securing 
obedience  to  the  moral  means  by  which  the  will  of  the  na- 
tion is  disclosed.  Like  twins  growing  to  each  other,  either 
of  these  guardians  of  national  sovereignty  perishes,  if  ti.e 
other  ceases  to  exist.  Sedition  laws  destroy  one,  and  stand- 
ing armies  the  o'her.  Either,  therefore,  terminate  in  des- 
potism ;  a  militia  deprived  of  its  intellectual  associate,  pre- 
sently becomes  a  maniack,  who  must  be  disarmed  and 
guarded  by  a  mercenary  army,  which  confines  him  to  a  bed 
of  straw,  and  feeds  him  upon  bread  and  water.  And  intel- 
lectual freedom,  severed  from  its  physical  friend,  is  John 
the  Baptist  preaching  to  a  wilderness.  United,  they  are  the 
body  and  soul  of  popular  government,  just  as  free  will  and 
a  standing  army,  are  the  body  and  soul  of  monarchy.  Des- 
troy the  body  or  soul  of  cither,  and  the  whole  being  dies. 

If  these  reasonings  are  correct,  the  inconsistency  be' 
tween  a  sovereignty  of  the  people,  and  a  power  in  govern- 
ment to  regulate  the  thoughts  or  discussions  of  this  sove- 
reignty, is  such,  as  to  render  it  impossible  that  both  qualities 
can  subsist  in  one  government. 

One  of  them  must  be  unequivocally  surrendered  by  a 
candid  politician,  unless  he  can  devise  a  species  of  dual  sove- 
reignty, upon  the  principles  of  the  Athanasian  creed.  Even 
then  his  political  creed  would  fall  short  of  the  perspicuity  of 
its  model,  if  he  allowed  the  sovereignty  of  government,  to 
regulate  by  sedition  laws  the  sovereignty  of  the  people.  He 
would  have  to  prove  that  a  political  almighty,  could  beget 
a  more  potent  almighty. 

The  existence  of  national  sovereignty  is  asserted  every 
where  by  the  policy  of  the  United  States,  and  under  its  au?« 
pice  the  general  constitution  sought  for  a  sanction  by  the 
terms,  «•  We  the  people."  Rob  it  of  this  sanction,  and  what 
is  its  obligation  ?  Or  suppose  the  people  had  as  unequivocal- 
ly relinquished,  as  they  have  exercised  their  sovereignty  by 
that  instrument,  still  the  question  would  have  turned  upoft 


490  TUE    GOOD     MORAL   PRINCIPLES    OF    THE 

the  power  of  one  generation,  to  surrender  a  natural  right  of 
another. 

Admitting  this  power  to  exist,  and  admitting  also  that  the 
establishment  of  a  government  is  a  virtual  sin  render  on  the 
p.uJ  rif  the  people,  of  their  sovereignly,  according  to  the 
ideas  of  Mr.  Adams, and  of  all  those  who  assert,  that  on  this 
event,  sovereignty  deserts  its  old  habitation,  and  transfuses 
itself iuto  a  new  one  ;  just  as  some  conjurers  can  shoot  their 
souls  out  of  one  body  into  another.     Allowing  these  conces- 
sions to  be  true,  a  new  dilemma  aris?s  from  an  idea  here- 
tofore suggested.     The  people  had  established  governments 
previously  to  the  erection  of  the  general  government  ;  and  if 
this  act  causes  a  transmigration  of  the  soul  of  sovereignty 
from  a  nation,    the   people   had  no   remaining  sovereignty 
to  transfuse  into  the  general  government.     This  doctrine 
would  make  the  state  governments  sovereigns,  over  which 
the  people  could  not  more  rightfully  place  a  sovereign,  than 
they  now  can  over  the  general   government.     Thus  the 
only  sanction  of  the  federal  government,  consists  in  the  doc- 
trine of  popular   sovereignty ;    or  that  governments   are 
agents,  and  not  masters.    Deprive  it  of  this,  and  it  becomes 
a  rebel  against  the  sovereignty  of  state  governments.     Mr. 
Adams  both  laboured  to  plant  state  policy  in  British  prin- 
ciples, which  deny  any  species  of  sovereignty  to  the  people  ; 
and  testified  in  favour  of  the  sovereignty  of  the  people, 
by  allowing  the  federal  to  be  a  legitimate  government. 

As  the  federal  government  cannot  legitimately  exist,  ex- 
cept by  admitting  that  the  people  are  the  sovereigns  of  go- 
vernment" ;  so  the  system  of  orders,  or  checks  and  balances, 
cannot  exist,  except  by  admitting  it  to  be  the  sovereign  of 
the  people.  National  sovereignty  would  throw  into  confu- 
sion all  the  weights,  and  unhinge  the  whole  architecture  of 
the  checks  and  balances.  Accordingly,  no  instance  has  oc- 
ourred  of  orders,  admitting  themselves  to  be  bound  by  popu- 
lar conventions,  as  did  the  state  governments  in  the  case  of 
the  federal  constitution.  Thus  we  discern,  that  sedition 
laws  are  consistent  with  the  system  of  orders,  for  the  same 


GOVERNMENT   OF   THE    V.    STATES,  4*1 

reason  which  makes  them  inconsistent  with  the  policy  of  the 
United  States.  The  sovereignty  of  orders  being  maintain- 
able, only  by  reserving  to  itself  free  discussion,  and  impos- 
ing restraints  upon  the  people,  it  follows,  that  national  so- 
vereignty is  only  maintainable,  by  reserving  free  discussion 
to  the  people,  and  imposing  restraints  upon  the  government. 
The  rapture  with  which  we  contemplate  the  exclusive  abili- 
ty of  our  policy  to  subject  government  to  limitations,  would 
excite  ridicule,  united  with  the  doctrine,  "  that  the  power 
*•  upon  which  the  enforcement  of  these  limitations  depend- 
«  ed,  could  be  bound  in  legal  chains,  by  the  power  upon 
««  which  they  were  to  operate."  These  beacons,  erected 
in  our  political  territory,  to  warn  us  of  an  enemy's  approach, 
would  be  dead  lights,  if  law  should  prohibit  the  only  mode 
by  which  they  can  be  kindled. 

If  our  constitutions  admit  the  sovereignty  of  the  peo- 
ple j  if  the  federal  government  is  erected  on  that  founda- 
tion ;  and  if  no  species  of  sovereignty  can  exist  without 
freedom  of  will  and  of  discussion  j  it  follows,  that  laws  for 
restraining  or  regulating  discussion,  are  axes  which  cut  up 
our  policy  at  its  root. 

Hud  national  sovereignty  been  a  splendid  phantasm,  as 
its  enemies  contend,  it  could  neither  have  been  seen,  assailed 
or  defended.  Without  adverting  to  its  works  in  the  United 
States,  it  is  sufficient  to  inquire,  why  its  grave  and  learned 
enemies,  have  engaged  so  earnestly  in  a  warfare  with  an 
unsubstantial  spectre.  The  renowned  knight  of  La  Man- 
aha  himself,  was  unable  to  make  giants  out  of  nothing.  A 
dream  of  infatuation,  does  not  possess  the  power  of  crea- 
tion, nor  can  a  shadow  overturn  a  tree. 

Many  political  writers,  including  Mr.  Adams,  assail  the 
principle  of  national  sovereignty,  by  paying  it  obeisance,  not 
for  the  purpose  of  yielding  to  that,  but  to  induce  that  to 
yield  to  their  systems.  As  a  phantasm,  a  dream  or  a  shadow, 
they  do  it  homage ;  they  only  object  to  it,  as  a  being  of  sub- 
stance, efficacy  and  activity.  It  is  said,  thatpubliek  opinion 
will  have  its  weight  even  in  despotick  governments,  merely 
to  ore  vail  on.  it  to  submit  to  them. 


!#&  THB    GOOD    MOK.4X   PttlNCIPLKS   OF    THE 

0 

The  slow  and  whispered  admonitions  of  publick  opinio?, 
to  tyranny,  are  struggles  of  nature  for  her  rights,  excited 
by  acquisitions  of  knowledge  ;  like  the  efforts  and  uneasi* 
ness  of  a  strong  man,  long  confined  in  darkness,  excited  by 
a  ray  of  light.  Upon  every  appearance  of  these  struggles* 
orders  and  exclusive  privileges  cry  out,  that  kings,  aristo- 
crats, priests  and  privileges  ought  to  unite,  and  confine  her 
lit  stronger  bonds.  What  is  thus  feared,  flattered  and  fet- 
tered, cannot  be  a  shadow.  Had  it  been  a  shadow.it  would 
uot  have  been  regarded  and  treated  like  a  strong  man  in 
pursuit  of  his  rights,  by  those  who  withhold  them. 

If  national  sovereignty  may  be  assailed,  it  may  be  de-» 
fended.  Said  an  American  general  to  his  men,  "  you  see 
those  fellows  yonder,  if  you  don't  kill  them,  they  will  kill 
■vou."  JBvthe  same  terms,  the  attention  of  national  sovereign- 
ty  or  publick  opinion,  would  be  correctly  and  emphatically 
directed  to  orders  and  exclusive  privileges.  This  would  be 
incorrect,  says  Mr.  Adams's  system  ;  orders  and  exclusive 
privileges  do  not  kill  publick  opinion,  they  only  gag  her 
with  law,  and  point  at  her  breast  the  bayonets  of  a  standing 
army,  lest  she  should  use  force  to  free  her  intellects.  Still 
this  system  asserts,  that  publick  opinion  will  have  an  in- 
fluence over  despotism  itself.  Stephano  gags  Trinculo,lest 
he  should  speak;  cuts  off  his  fingers,  lest  he  should  write  j 
and  imprisons  him  for  groaning;  yet  Trinculo  retains  an 
influence  over  Stephano,  arising  from  an  apprehension  of 
his  escape.  Bui  an  image,  sometimes  worshipped  and  some- 
times whipt,  by  its  savage  subjects,  is  a  less  miserable  sove- 
reign than  Trinculo. 

The  effects  of  a  sovereignty  of  law  over  discussion  and 
opinion  are  multifarious ;  all  of  them  are  sappers  of  the 
principle  of  national  self  government,  A  few  more  will 
be  adduced. 

It  begins,  by  making  it  criminal  to  calumniate  a  form  oi 
government;  it  proceeds,  to  make  it  criminal  to  calumniate 
those  individuals  invested  with  most  power,  and  most  sub- 
ject to  the  crime  of  usurpation ;    and  it  end?  by  m&Hflg 


ttOVEUKMENT   OT  THE    U.    STATES.  4,95 

every  species  of  writing  and  speaking  criminal,  tending  to 
obstruct  the  avarice  or  ambition  of  the  power  which  legis- 
lates, or  which  can  influence  legislation.  Tims  govern* 
mt  nts  make  of  calumny  a  spunge,  to  expunge  their  own 
crimes.  They  affect  to  take  the  side  of  truth  to  hide  false- 
hood, as  they  do  the  side  of  religion,  to  hide  the  frauds  of 
hierarchy.  An  attempt  to  aid  by  penalties  the  cause  of  re- 
ligion and  truth,  is  a  proclamation  of  imposture.  These 
champions  have  ever  fouud  them  their  enemies.  The  pen- 
alties which  extorted  Galileo's  renunciation  of  his  dispove- 
ries,  attempted  to  fix  and  flatten  this  earth  for  truth's  sake* 
Laws  for  regulating  truth  and  religion,  like  Sampson's  hair, 
strengthen  as  they  grow  5  and  governments  not  being  blind^ 
are  at  length  enabled  by  them  to  pull  down  the  fabrieksj 
election  and  militia  ;  and  instead  of  being  buried  in  their 
ruins,  to  convert  them  into  castles  for  oppression. 

Suppose  such  laws  should  make  it  criminal  to  calum- 
niate some  officers  and  not  others;  will  not  those  unprotect- 
ed by  the  law,  be  more  responsible  to  publiek  opinion,  thau 
those  it  covers  ?  Will  not  election  operate  more  forcibly  as 
to  those  whose  qualities  it  can  sift  by  free  discussion,  than 
as  to  those  whose  qualities  cannot  be  canvassed  with  equal 
safety?  It  might  be  made  as  dangerous  to  speak  irreverent 
ly  of  a  president's  posteriors,  as  it  was  of  old  to  look  upon 
the  jEgis  of  Minerva.*  Every  one  can  correctly  estimate 
the  value  of  a  right  of  discussion,  free  in  relation  to  a  con- 
stable, but  restricted  in  relation  to  a  president. 

The  pleasure  of  the  government  may  leave  those  oiil- 
cers  exposed  to  free  discussion,  or  amenable  to  the  soy 
reignty  of  the  people,  who  can  do  no  mischief;  and  cove^ 
those  against  it,  who  can  overturn  our  policy.  This  plea 
sure  may  allow  this  sovereignty,  more  freedom  of  discus- 
sion as  to  the  same  officers  in  one  year  than  in  another,  iu 
imitation  of  the  suspensions  of  the  habeas  corpus  act  in 

*  The  case  of  Baldwin  in  New  Jersey,  here  alluded  to,  ought  to  be  pre 
served  as  a  monument,  to  remind  the  United  States,  of  the  short  v. ir*  of 
Sedition  laws,  in  destroying  the  freedom  of  speech. 


494  THE    GOOD    MORAL   PRINCIPLES    OF   T1CE 

England.  In  short,  this  pleasure  may  diminish  or  increase 
the  information  and  power  of  ;his  sovereignty,  according  to 
its  own  views  ;  and  if  there  should  be  factions,  it  may  easi- 
ly allow  more  freedom  to  one  faction  or  portion  of  this 
sovereignty,  than  to  another. 

Such  a  subject  sovereignty  or  counterfeit  republicanisms 
is  precisely  that  held  by  the  people  of  England,  France  and 
Turkey  ;  and  that  conceded  to  all  nations  by  the  theory  of 
orders.  Wherever  such  a  theory  becomes  a  government, 
the  sovereignty  of  the  people  becomes  a  theory.  Whether 
national  sovereignty  or  self  government  is  converted  into 
theory  by  parliaments,  judges,  juries,  prisons  and  Jiotany 
bay;  or  by  national  assemblies,  soldiers  and  Cayenne  :  or  by 
the  korau  and  the  sabre  ;  all  are  equally  the  instruments 
of  usurpation  and  tyranny  used  to  repel  the  lashes  of  pub- 
lick  opinion  in  proportion  us  they  are  merited.  The  Eng- 
lish government  can  inilict  perpetual  imprisonment,  in  de- 
fiance of  their  boasted  habeas  corpus,  without  trial,  upon 
any  member  of  Mr.  Adams's  theoretical  national  sovereign- 
ty it  pleases,  should  he  endeavour  to  exercise  his  sove- 
reign function,  by  proving,  that  the  government  was  op- 
pressive and  ought  to  be  changed  ;  whilst  his  species  of  the 
sovereignty  of  the  people,  and  their  species  of  habeas  cor- 
pus provision,  would  lie  in  his  book,  and  among  their  sta- 
tutes, as  pictures  of  lifeless  and  forgotten  rights. 

Usurpation,  perpetrated  or  designed,,  invariably  resorts 
to  sedition  laws,  because  by  suppressing  discussion,  it  de- 
fends itself  against  suppression.  What!  Are  these  laws 
also  defenders  of  national  sovereignty  or  self  govern- 
ment ?  Will  they,  like  Swiss  soldiers,  light  equally  well 
for  spurious  or  for  legitimate  sovereignty  ?  Will  a  suppres- 
sion of  discussion,  be  equally  serviceable  to  a  sovereignty 
which  lives  upon  free  discussion,  and  to  one  which  can- 
not live,  until  free  discussion  is  dead  ?  Can  an  usurp- 
er and  a  nation  secure  sovereignty  by  the  same  code  ? 

The  friends  of  sedition  laws  will  not  be  able  to  answer 
these  questions*  without  first  proving   that    freedom    af 


GOVERNMENT   OF   THE    V.    STATES.  4-95 

"/riting  and  speaking  is  unfriendly  to  every  species  of  sove- 
reignty, whether  oi  the  people  or  of  orders,  whether  spu- 
rious or  legitimate  ;  and  its  suppression  co-extensively  fa* 
vourablc  to  all,  however  dissimilar  in  principle.  It  will  be 
impossible  to  do  this,  so  long  as  the  relation  between  cause 
and  effect  shall  subsist  in  the  moral  world. 

Sedition  laws  have  been  used  in  all  i>ges  to  defend  go- 
vernments, because  the  idea  of  the  sovereignty  of  the  peo- 
ple, or  of  national  self  government,  was  never  well  under- 
stood, unequivocally  asserted,  or  successfully  practised,  ex- 
cept in  the  United  States  of  America.  This  old  way  of 
maintaining  forms  of  government,  would  be  more  likely  to 
renovate  them,  than  to  invigorate  our  new  policy.  By 
transfusing  it  into  their  body  politick,  the  United  States 
will  practice  the  Medean  method  of  changing  their  age,  in- 
geniously reversed  ;  they  may  suddenly  transform  their  po- 
litical youth,  health  and  vigour,  into  the  old  age,  infirmity 
and  decrepitude  of  some  ancient  policy. 

The  idea  of  a  sovereign  subject  to  law  ;  the  idea  of  a 
responsibility,  which  can  impose  penalties  on  an  investiga- 
tion of  its  acts  ;  and  the  idea  of  a  publick  opinion,  whilst 
every  member  of  the  publick  is  liable  to  be  committed  to 
prison  for  expressing  an  opinion  ;  a  publick  opinion  buried 
in  the  grave  of  siienee  ;  these  ideas  must  be  found  in  our 
constitutions,  to  empower  our  governments  to  govern  the 
right  of  free  discussion,  by  armies  or  laws;  by  generals  or 
judges.  That  the  people  never  entertained  them,  is  demon- 
strated by  dissolving  and  creating  constitutions,  with  a  deli- 
beration enlightened  by  discussion,  for  the  purpose  of  dis- 
covering publick  opinion. 

These  conspicuous  proofs  of  national  capacity  to  ex- 
press an  opinion,  and  the  supreme  authority  of  that  opinion, 
undeniably  demonstrate  that  our  policy  is  founded  in  the 
idea,  that  national  sovereignty  is  either  a  natural  or  social 
principle,  and  our  constitutions  unequivocally  assert  alle- 
giance to  be  due  to  it,  both  from  their  creatures,  govern- 
ments ;  ami  even  from  themselves,  the  creators  of  govern- 


•i!?6  THE    GOOD    MORAL   PRINCIPLES    OT   THfc 

ments.  It  follows,  that  the  amendment  to  the  general  eon* 
stitution.  respecting  the  freedom  of  religion,  speaking  and. 
writing,  or  any  other  part  of  it.  cannot  be  so  construed,  as 
to  bestow  upon  government  a  power  inconsistent  with  its  ele 
ch'entary  principle.  Such  a  mode  of  reasoning,  would  only  he 
a  repetition  of  the  idea  of  cutting  off  a  king's  head,  by  vir- 
tue of  his  authority ;  and  if  a  stagnation  of  free  discussion 
will  as  effectually  kill  the  moral  being,  national  sovereign- 
ty, as  a  stagnation  of  blood  would  the  physical  being  called 
a  king,  then  sedition  laws  are  as  favourable  to  national 
sovereignty,  as  the  decapitation  of  kings  to  monarchy.  The 
circulation  of  rational  ideas  by  free  discussion,  is  as  much 
a  vital  principle  of  the  one,  as  the  circulation  of  the  blood  of 
kings  is  of  the  other. 

There  is  a  strong  resemblance  in  some  measures  taken 
against  each  other,  by  contrary  political  principles.  The 
head  of  Charles  was  assailed  by  the  axe,  under  his  authori- 
ty, under  protestations  of  loyalty  to  monarchy,  and  under 
the  pretext  of  reforming  abuses.  National  sovereignty,  the 
head  of  our  policy,  has  also  been  assailed  even  by  opposite 
parties,  acting  under  its  authority,  under  protestations  of 
loyalty  to  this  sovereignty,  and  under  the  pretext  of  pre* 
venting  sedition.  It  is  wiser  to  strike  at  the  head  than  at  an 
inferior  member,  when  a  revolution  is  contemplated.  A 
proposition  to  put  out  one  of  Charles's  eyes,  or  to  change 
the  ratio  of  representation  here,  would  probably  have  excit- 
ed greater  opposition  than  more  deadly  measures.  By 
striking  at  a  vital  part,  success  ends  the  war.  As  republi. 
canisin  aimed  at  the  vital  part  of  monarchy  when  she  struck 
Charles's  head,  monarchy  aims  at  the  vital  part  of  republi- 
canism, by  striking  at  free  discussion.  Deadly  enemies 
strike  at  mortal  parts. 

If  the  third  amendment  to  the    federal    constitution, 
was  not  intended  to  destroy   the  elementary  principle  of 
our  policy,  an  effort  to  place  that  policy  beyond  the  reach 
of  the  imperfection  of  language,  and  the  sophisms  of  con- 
struction, is  the  only  remaining  intention,  "Wfefch  can  with 


GOVERNMENT   OF   THE    U.    STATES,  497* 

any  colour  be  ascribed  to  it.  Religion,  speaking  and  writs- 
ing,  were  placed  beyon<i  the  power  of  law,  because  the  fi  st 
appertained  to  the  sovereignty  of  the  deity,  and  the  two  last 
to  the  sovereignty  of  the  people.  Why  does  not  the  consti- 
tution reserve  a  right  to  think  ?  because  that  faculty 
could  not  be  taken  away,  and  it  was  reserving  a  na* 
tional  and  political  faculty,  which  could  be  taken  away 5 
being  that,  by  which  alone  nations  can  supervise  gov* 
ernments,  retain  sovereignty,  or  perform  political  func- 
tions. 

A  political  national  mind,  required  a  protection  against 
the  usurpation  of  governments.  The  mind  of  an  individual 
was  beyond  its  reach  j  but  a  congeries  of  expressions  con- 
stituting national  mind,  was  within  it.  If  the  latter  spe- 
cies of  mind  docs  not  exist,  how  inconsistent  are  those,  who 
talk  of  national  opinion.  Where  does  it  reside  ?  It  is  not 
the  opinion  of  an  individual.  It  is  not  the  opinions  of  any 
number  of  separate  and  solitary  individuals.  If  it  can  ex- 
ist without  discussion,  it  cannot  without  disclosure  ;  aud 
the  freedom  of  speech  and  of  the  press,  is  as  necessary  for 
>the  latter  purpose,  as  for  the  former. 

An  objection  is  urged  against  the  idea  of  national  sove- 
reignty, with  a  degree  of  plausibility,  unable  to  avoid  the 
detection  of  a  degree  of  consideration.  Are  not  the  people, 
it  is  said,  subject  to  lawj  and  is  not  their  sovereignty  incon- 
sistent with  this  subjection  ? 

The  repetition  necessary  to  answer  this  objection,  is  not 
painful,  because  it  will  impress  a  principle  of  the  last  im- 
portance to  the  policy  of  the  United  States. 

The  people,  by  our  policy,  are  considered  as  possessing 
two  capacities,  political  and  civil.  Under  one,  they  are  sus- 
ceptible of  the  rights  which  nations  can  exercise  j  such  al 
those  of  forming,  reforming  and  supervising  governments. 
Under  the  other,  they  are  susceptible,  individually,  of  such 
rights  and  duties,  as  an  individual  may  hold  or  owe.  As 
an  individual  cannot  hold  or  exercise  the  first  class  of 
rights,  a  nation  must  be  considered  in  the  light  of  an  asso- 


£*S  THE    GOOD    MORAX   PRINCIPLES    CI?   Tim 

siated,  political  and  moral  being,   or  these  rights   ran  peiv 
ther  exist,  be  held,  or  exercised. 

The  first  species  of  capacity  we  assign  to  th^  people,  ope- 
rates brtwecn  them  and  governments  ;  the  second,  bctw^n 
governments  and  individuals,  and  between  citizens.  It  is 
our  policy  to  subject  the  whole  field  of  this  second  capacity 
to  legislation,  and  to  exclude  it  from  the  whole  field  of  the 
"first.  Law  is  allowed  to  regulate  right  and  wrong  in  the  lat* 
ter  cases,  but  not  between  the  nation  and  its  government.  It 
cannot  form  a  new  government.  The  right  to  do  this  being 
beld  by  nations,  and  not  by  governments  or  individuals,  is 
evidence  that,  nations  hold  rights  in  a  moral  and  social  capa- 
city, not  subject  to  law.  A  form  of  government  being  an- 
terior to  law,  cannot  be  created  by  it;  and  the  social  rights 
of  nations,  cannot  he  destroyed  by  political  laws,  concealed 
under  municipal  titles,  if  law  cannot  create  a  form  of  go- 
vernment. 

An  unsubjected  sovereignty,  composed  of  subjected  in- 
dividuals, is  the  supposed  inconsistency  upon  which  the  ob- 
jection rests. 

And  yet  the  same  inconsistency,  if  it  be  one,  exists  in  the 
system  of  government,  chiefly  admired  by  the  objectors  them- 
selves. The  British  sovereignty  is  unsubjected,  and  is  com- 
posed of  subjected  individuals.  Every  member  of  the  par- 
liament of  which  this  sovereignty  is  composed,  including 
the  king  himself,  is  subject  to  municipal  law.  Where  then 
is  the  absurdity,  inconsistency  or  impolicy,  of  composing  a 
sovereignty  of  subjects?  It  is,  in  fact,  the  common  and 
plain  case,  of  an  individual,  holding  corporate  rights,  and 
owing  corporate  duties ;  or  of  a  corporation,  which  governs 
its  members,  and  yet  is  governed  by  them. 

The  idea,  that  a  nation  must  necessarily  be  divided  be- 
tween sovereignty  and  subjection,  to  form  a  government, 
allotting  one  or  a  few  to  the  first  principle,  and  the  mass  of 
the  people  to  the  second,  is  precisely  the  barbarous  opinion, 
which  has  always  made  tyrants  and  slaves.  The  whole  me- 
rit of  the  British  system,  consists  in  ajmriia!  refutation  of 


GOVEKJfMiihT   OjP   THE    V.    STaTKS.  4$# 

this  opinion.  That  this  refutation  did  not  go  as  far, 
Whilst  it  acknowledged  the  principle  of  ours,  arose  mere- 
ly from  the  orders  and  separate  interests  in  which  the  na- 
tiou  wa.3  split,  some  of  whom  used  it  to  gain  the  substance  of 
liberty  for  themselves,  and  to  amuse  the  people  with  it* 
shadow. 

The  English  system  captivated  the  nation,  in  disclosing 
the  borders  of  republican  principles,  by  lodging  sovereignty 
in  orders  ;  ours  has  only  passed  these  borders,  and  gotten 
into  the  country  itself,  by  lodging  it  in  the  nation,  in- 
stead of  orders.  Both  orders  and  nations  are  composed 
of  subjects. 

The  repetition  whh  which  we  threatened  the  reader, 
consists  of  the  illustration  furnished  by  this  reasoning,  to  the 
distinction  formerly  taken  between  political  anil  municipal 
law.  The  power  possessed  by  its  members  over  a  corpora- 
tion, represents  one;  that  possessed  by  a  corporation  over 
its  members,  the  other»  If  a  minority  of  this  corporation, 
invested  with  limited  powers  to  transact  certain  special  af- 
fairs for  the  whole,  should  restrict  or  destroy  the  right  of 
the  majority  to  discuss  and  censure  their  conduct,  it  would 
be  exactly  a  sedition  law  under  our  policy,  and  from 
that  moment  the  nature  of  the  corporation,  would  be 
changed. 

The  chief  beauty  of  the  English  system,  is  said  to  consis/! 
in  the  restraints  of  orders  upon  each  other,  by  mutual  jea- 
lousy ;  but  the  animosity  inspired  by  it,  has  disfigured  the 
national  good  by  many  a  scar.  The  chief  beauty  of  our  po- 
licy, consists  of  a  mutual  power  in  the  people  and  govern- 
ment, to  restrain  each  other,  by  political  law  on  one  hand, 
and  municipal  on  the  other ;  these  powers  do  not  clash ;  the 
first  is  influenced  by  national  good,  and  the  second  by  pri- 
vate justice  ;  and  neither  by  the  ambition,  jealousy  or  ha- 
tred of  orders.  These  two  systems  are  clear  mirrors  re- 
flecting their  effects  ;  it  is  only  necessary  to  look  into  them, 
to  decide  the  preference. 


ffOO  THE    GOOD    MORAL   PRINCIPLES    OF   THE 

The  affinity  between  the  freedom  of  religion  and  of  dte* 
cussion,  or  between  the  right  of  an  individual,  to  provide  for 
his  eternal,  and  of  a  nation,  to  provide  for  its  temporal  wel- 
fare, has  coupled  them  in  one  sentence,  and  confided  both 
to  one  security ;  so  that  the  government  possesses  an  equal 
right  to  regulate  religious  and  political  discussion,  by  tine 
and  imprisonment.  Glance  your  eye,  reader,  at  courts  and 
juries,  composed  of  opinion,  religious  or  political,  to  try 
opinion.  Do  you  not  see  hierarchy  or  faction,  ambition  or 
avarice,  superstition  or  tyranny,  invariably  pronouncing 
sentence?  A  trial  of  opinion  can  never  be  fair  or  just. 
Whoever  is  of  my  opinion,  acquits,  of  an  adverse,  condemns 
me.  Where  nature  disables  us  from  judging  impartially, 
it  forbids  us  to  judge  at  all.  The  right  of  A  to  condemn 
B,  is  no  better  than  the  right  of  B  to  condemn  A  j  and  a 
clashing  right  cannot  be  a  right  in  either.  Monarchy,  aris- 
tocracy, democracy,  and  sects,  religious  and  political, 
judge  of  each  other's  opinions,  as  the  Pope  judged  Calvin  ; 
Calvin,  SerVetus  ;  the  independents,  Charles  ;  and  Crom- 
well, the  independents  ;  the  precise  species  of  judging  at 
which  the  sacred  prohibition  discloses  itself  to  be  levelled, 
by  its  reference  to  the  probability  of  retaliation— "Judge 
not,  lest  ye  be  judged." 

Whether  any  consanguinity  originally  exists  or  not,  be* 
tween  the  freedom  of  religion  and  of  discussion,  the  siusila 
rity  between  the  moral  effects  of  such  freedom  in  relation  io 
both,  is  evident. 

Wherever  churches  regulate  religioife  opinion,  and  go 
vernments,  political,  persecution  rages,  pecuniary  burdens 
multiply,  blood  flows  and  wretches  burn.  An  abandonment 
of  the  regulation  of  religious  opinion,  discloses  the  effects  of 
a  similar  policy  with  regard  to  political.  Both  species  of 
regulation  are  exterminated  by  our  policy,  and  we  happily 
know  only  from  books,  that  boih  prefer  flattery  to  truths 
persecution  to  liberty,  and  the  money  of  the  people  to  their 
happiness? 


GOVERNMENT   OJ?   THE    U.    STATES.  &01 

In  the  execution  of  religious  sedition  laws,  each  sect, 
ivhen  in  power,  appeals  to  its  own  party  to  determine,  whe- 
ther the  complaints  of  their  opponents  are  not  excessively 
unreasonable,  <*  They  are  allowed,"  says  the  law-maker, 
**  to  preach  freely,  provided  they  will  preach  truth,  and 
u  they  ought  not  to  preach  falsehood."  "  Nothing  can  be 
'*  more  reasonable,"  is  the  response  of  the  law-maker'fc- 
jinvly  to  the  law- maker's  appeal. 

If  the  abolition  of  religious  sedition  laws  has  abolished 
religious  wars,  why  may  not  the  abolition  of  civil  sedition 
laws,  abolish  civil  wars  ?  Admitting  a  similarity  in  their 
nature  and  consequence*,  a  discovery  by  which  the  tongue 
and  the  pen  are  made  to  fight  all  the  battles  of  religion,  will 
probably  be  able  to  uontinc  political  combatants  to  the  same 
"weapons. 

The  experience  of  the  United  States  furnishes  a  mul 
titude  of  precedents  in  favour  of  this  opinion.  Constitutions 
and  governments  have  been  frequently  made  and  lestroved, 
without  war,  commotion  or  inconvenience.  But  it  was  done 
tn  the  abseuce  of  sedition  lav,  s,  standing  armies  and  net 
monopolies. 

These  moral  beings  are  generally  contemporaries; 
either  is  soon  followed  by  the  others,  The  climax  of  their 
appearance  in  the  United  States  has  preserved  its  uniformi- 
ty. A  funding  system,  a  sedition  law,  an  army.  So  un- 
founded is  the  idea,  that  authors  of  sedition  laws  desisrr 
them  to  preserve  publiek  tranquillity,  that  they  never  fail  tc 
provide  armies  to  quell  theXjommoti-^ms,  which  they  foresee 
zhat  these  laws  will  excite. 

Ifit  is  true,  as  we  have  hitherto  contended,  that  free 
discussion  is  the  creator,  the  preceptor  and  the  organ  of 
publiek  opinion ;  the  guardian  of  national  sovereignty  an.'J 
of  religious  freedom;  the  seedsman  of  polkical  knowledge, 
and  the  guarantee  of  moderate  government ;  this  pre- 
cious jewel  in  our  policy  is  rendered  inestimable,  as  another 
link  in  our  chain  of  national  rights,  necessary  to  bestow 
efficacy  upon  election.     Our  policy  and  experience,  mu&t 


SOZ  THE    GOOD    MORAL   FEINCIPLES   OF    THE 

either  overturn  Mr.  Adams's  system,  op  be  overturned  by  It. 
To  iiis  svstem,  armies,  patronage,  paper  and  sedition  laws 
are  congenial,  beeause  sovereignty  is  lodged  in  ordersf 
Taese,  consisting  of  a  minority,  and  possessing  only  a  facti- 
tious and  fraudulent  sovereignty,  need  such  auxiliaries. 
They  must  of  necessity  resort  to  armies,  patronage,  privi- 
leges, corruption  and  sedition  laws,  or  surrender  the  sove- 
reignty. These  are  suitable  to  a  sovereignty  of  orders,  be- 
cause they  impair  or  destroy  the  sovereignty  of  the  people. 
But  our  system  renders  armies,  patronage,  privileges,  cor- 
ruption and  sedition  laws  unnecessary,  by  placing  sovereign- 
ty in  a  majority,  whieh  needs  no  auxiliary,  can  hnd  none, 
is  ab  e  to  defend  itself,  and  attracts  nu  enmity  from  a  better 
title.  A  transition  from  the  sovereignty  of  the  people  to 
the  sovereignty  of  a  government,  is  a  revolution  only  to  be 
cil'e.'tedby  artificial  a  cumulations  of  power  or  wealth,  by 
armies,  patronage,  privileges,  paper  or  sedition  laws  ;  of 
course  these  instruments  are  mortal  enemies  to  our 
policy. 

We  will  take  leave  of  this  subject  with  the  following  ob- 
servation. The  design  of  substituting  political  for  religious 
heresy,  is  visible  in  the  visage  of  sedition  laws.  A  civiJ 
priesthood  or  government,  hunting  after  political  heresy,  is 
an  bumble  imitator  of  the  inquisition,  which  fines,  impri- 
sons, tortures  and  murders,  sometimes  mind,  at  others,  body,. 
Jt  affects  the  same  piety,  feigned  by  priestcraft  at  the  burn- 
ing of  an  heretick;  and  its  party  supplies  such  exultations, 
as  those  exhibited  at  an  auto  de  fee,  by  a  populace  j  and  the 
same  passions  and  interest  which  furnish  cruelly  to  fraud 
and  superstition,  banish  commiseration  from  avarice  and 
ambition,  towards  those  guilty  of  the  unpardonable  heresy  of 
opposing  their  designs. 

It  is  remarkable  that  the  individual,  so  instrumental  ia 
disclosing  the  wickedness  and  folly  of  the  notion,  thai  the  re- 
putation of  the  deity  needed  the  protection  of  heretical 
laws,  became  also  an  example  to  prove,  that  the  reputa- 
tion of  govcruraenti  and  publkk  officers,  did  not  &eed  the 


GOVEllNMEKT  OF  THE   r.   6  TATE  S.  50S 

protection  of  sedition  laws.  Whilst  we  see  the  shafts  of  ca- 
lumny falling  harmless  around  human  integrity,  we  con- 
clude, both  that  they  can  never  reach  celestial  perfection, 
and  also,  that  human  virtue  ought  to  recoil  from  an  ally, 
whose  resemblance  to  the  ugliest  foe  of  religion  and  piety,  is 
so  exact. 

We  now  proceed  to  the  consideration  of  two  features  of 
the  federal  constitution,  which  have  been  claimed  by  the 
theory  of  orders,  and  even  renounced  by  that  of  self  govern- 
ment. If  either  of  these  opinions  are  correct,  then  this 
essay  ineorrectly  maintains,  that  the  will  of  a  majority  is 
our  elementary  principle.  It  is  said,  that  the  form  of  the 
senate,  and  the  rule,  that  three-fourths  of  the  states  should 
concur  in  amending  the  constitution,  are  violations  of  that 
principle;  and  that  aristocracy  is  interwoven  with  our  poli- 
cy, in  the  power  of  a  minority  through  the  states  or  the 
senate,  to  arrest  amendments  and  to  pass  laws.  Had  this 
assertion  been  true,  our  system  of  reasoning  would  have 
required  the  arrangement  of  these  features  among  the 
defects  of  the  general  constitution  ;  on  the  contrary,  we 
shall  arrange  them  among  its  beauties,  and  endeavour  to 
prove  their  strict  conformity  with  the  policy  of  the 
United  States. 

Let  us  first  consider,  whether  the  senate  is  in  fact  de- 
formed,  as  some  think,  or  embellished,  according  to  others, 
with  aristocratical  qualities. 

The  federal  government  is  the  creature  of  two  kinds 
of  beings,  which  I  will  call  physical  and  moral.  Mean- 
ing by  physical  beings,  the  individuals  of  the  United 
States  ;  and  by  moral,  the  state  governments.  Our  ele- 
mentary principle  in  forming  a  government  compounded 
of  botlt,  was  equivalently  used  as  the  best  resource  for 
preserving  the  rights  of  both.  Accordingly,  both  popular 
majority  and  state  majority  are  resorted  to  by  the  consti- 
tution of  the  United  States,  upon  similar  principles  and  for 
similar  ends 


fcOfc  THE    GOOB    MORAL   PRINCIPLES   OF    THC 

The  principle  of  equality  was  applied  to  strong  ani 
weak  states,  as  it  was  to  strong  and  weak  men,  because 
each  was  free ;  and  that  freedom  brought  all  to  a  level  in 
treating  or  confederating,  just  as  freedom  levels  indivi- 
duals of  unequal  size,  in  associating.  But  its  beneficial 
effects  outstrip  those  produced  by  its  application  to  indivi- 
duals, because  of  the  wider  range  of  social  happiness  arising 
from  a  society  of  nations,  than  from  a  society  of  individuals* 
And  this  principle  has  effected  the  supposed  project  of  a 
French  king  to  unite  or  associate  Europe,  as  to  more  na- 
tions, and  over  a  wider  space,  without  war,  expense  or  force  f 
although  a  love  of  the  union  and  a  hatred  of  political 
equality  often  meet  in  the  same  breast,  because  it  Is  not 
perceived  that  the  object  of  our  affection  was  begotten  and 
subsists  by  the  object  of  our  abhorrence. 

Without  a  federal  will,  to  be  ascertained  by  a  majority* 
peace  could  not  be  preserved  among  the  confederates,  no 
separate  existence  of  states  could  have  been  retained,  and 
our  new  and  efficacious  division  of  power,  between  the  ge- 
neral and  state  governments,  must  have  been  abandoned. 
And  without  a  popular  will,  to  be  ascertained  in  the  same 
mode,  the  natural  right  of  self  government  would  have  been 
lost. 

The  senate  being  formed  for  tlie  first  end,  its  demccra- 
tiek  complexion  is  equivalent  to  that  of  the  house  of  repre- 
sentatives, constituted  for  the  second.  Both  the  wills  pro- 
vided by  the  constitution  to  operate  upon  the  general  gov- 
ernment, arc  intended  to  produce  the  government  of  a  ma- 
jority, to  be  determined  by  the  principle  of  equality  ;  and 
the  state  governments  being  of  unequal  strength,  demoera- 
tical  and  popular,  it  could  not  have  been  intended,  because 
it  was  not  possible,  that  they  should  infuse  aristoeratical 
opinions  into  the  senate.  Just  as  an  assent  of  the  people  to 
constitutions  by  conventions,  cannot  be  considered  as  flow- 
ing from  an  aristoeratical  source,  although  given  by  a  few 
persons.  A  nation  has  been  considered  as  a  moral  or  poli- 
tical being,  capable  of  opinion,  will  and  sovereignty.  States, 


GOVERNMENT  OF  THE  17.  STATES*        50£ 

are  nations.  When  several  of  these  are  associated  fop 
gome  ends,  and  unassociated  for  others,  distinct  orders 
of  political  beings  exist,  created  by  distinct  associations* 
Our  policy  provides  organs  to  bestow  efficacy  on  the  opi- 
nions of  both,  because  their  existence  itself  can  only  be 
known  or  preserved  by  their  opinions  ;  and  the  senate  was 
made  the  organ  of  those  moral  beings  called  states,  to 
prevent  the  separate  social  existence  of  each,  from  being 
swallowed  up  by  a  society  of  all.  The  people  have  consti- 
tuted themselves  into  two  associations;  of  states,  and  of 
their  union.  As  these  moral  or  political  beings,  infuse  in- 
to our  government  its  spirit,  one  for  some  purposes,  the 
rest  for  others  ;  and  as  all  of  them  are  composed  of  the 
same  intellectual  beings ;  a  construction  which  supposes, 
that  our  policy  expected  both  democratical  and  aristocra- 
ileal  influence  to  proceed  from  the  same  intellectual  source, 
is  as  unphilosophical,  as  to  expect  hot  and  cold  breath  at 
the  same  time,  from  the  same  nostril.  Separate  interests 
only,  and  not  national  opinion,  can  furnish  a  government 
rvith  opposite  and  contending  impulses.  If  the  states  are 
not  aristocrat  ical  beings,  how  can  they  produce  an  aristo- 
cratical  being  ? 

It  is  as  foreign  to  the  intention  of  our  policy,  to  create 
a  monarch  as  an  aristocracy.  The  president  is  the  com- 
pound creature  of  the  equality  of  states  and  the  equality 
of  man,  both  of  which  are  infused  into  the  mode  of  his  elec- 
tion, for  the  purpose  of  preserving  both  ;  and  in  his  legisla- 
tive capacity,  he  is  equally  exposed  to  the  control  of  the 
popular  and  state  representatives.  Thus  doubly  subjected 
to  the  principle  of  equality,  by  which  both  these  bodies  are 
constituted,  it  would  be  doubly  inconsistent  with  our  policy, 
should  he  imagine  himself  to  be  a  king. 

This  idea  is  in  some  degree  violated,  by  the  practices  of 
district  or  legislative  electors  ;  the  latter  of  which  makes 
state  will,  and  the  former,  general  will,  the  electors  of  a 
president ;  and  it  is  observed  with  great  accuracy,  by  that 
•£  choosing  electors  by  the  people  of  a  state,  in  the  mode  of 


61  6  TUB    GOOD    MURAL    PKINCIPLES    OV    TH8 

a  general  ticket.  This  mode  compounds  and  blends  both 
the  will  of  the  people  and  the  will  of  the  states,  and  contVrs 
an  influence  in  the  election  of  an  officer,  who  has  most  'pow- 
er to  assail  or  defend  both,  upon  the  principle  of  equality  as 
applying  both  to  the  states  and  to  the  people.  Whereas  this 
union  of  influence  between  state  equality  and  human  equali- 
ty is  defeated,  by  state  electors  which  exclude  tbe  one,  and 
by  district  electors  which  exclude  the  other,  from  a  share 
in  the  election  of  the  president;  and  the  exclusion  of  either 
from  an  influence  over  the  officer  by  whom  it  is  most  en- 
dangered, will  weaken  its  means  for  self  preservation,  and 
create  means  for  severing  the  union  between  friends, 
neither  of  whom  can  probably  exist  without  the  oilier. 

But  the  district  mode  of  election,  is  far  more  inconsist- 
ent with  the  principles  of  our  Union,  than  that  by  state 
legislatures;  because,  in  that  mode,  state  will,  though  one 
of  the  parties  to  the  union,  loses  its  whole  influence;  where- 
as, in  an  election  by  state  legislatures,  popular  will  retains 
an  influence  upon  the  election  of  a  president,  equivalent  to 
its  influence  over  these  legislatures.  And  as  a  state  influ- 
ence in  this  election,  is  a  great  security  to  the  division  of 
power  between  the  states  and  the  general  government,  the 
loss  of  it  would  endanger  all  the  securities  for  a  free  gov- 
ernment, arising  from  that  division. 

The  importance  of  this  subject  will  justify  an  effort  to 
explain  our  meaning  by  different  language.  It  has  been 
invariably  contended,  that  the  people  are  the  source  of  all 
the  sections  of  our  government.  Thev  have  formed  them- 
selves  into  two  societies,  state  and  general.  In  establishing 
a  general  government,  they  have  defended  both  these  asso- 
ciations of  their  own,  by  constituting  that  government  vf 
three  organs  ;  one  appointed  by  themselves  in  their  popular 
capacity  ;  another  appointed  by  themselves,  by  representa- 
tion, in  their  state  capacity ;  and  the  third,  appointed  by 
themselves,  partly  in  their  popular  and  partly  in  their  state 
capacity.  If  the  responsibility  of  the  third  organ  to  the  na- 
tion, in  each  of  its  social  characters,  is  equal,  the  end  of  our 


GOVERNMENT   OF    THE    U.    STATES.  5t!7 

•jwliey  is  perfectly  attained  ,•  if  unequal,  it  is  in  a  degree  de- 
eated.  By  legislative  elections  of  electors,  tlie  state  ass:> 
ciation,  by  district,  the  general  popular  association,  ae 
quires  an  unequal  share  of  influence  over  a  president.  Ef- 
ther  is  a  tendency  adverse  to  our  policy  ;  the  first,  towards 
disunion,  the  second,  towards  consolidation.  An  election  hy 
a  general  ticket,  blends,  unites  and  reconciles  these  two  ca- 
pacities or  associations,  more  completely  than  either  of  the 
other  modes. 

If  it  is  proved,  by  the  division  of  the  legislature  between 
general  and  state  will,  and  by  imparting  to  each  species  of 
will  an  influence  over  executive  power,  that  the  intention 
of  our  policy  was  to  preserve  and  defend  both  the  state  and 
general  associations  ;  how  can  the  opinion,  that  the  senate 
was  modelled  upon  aristocratical  principles,  be  maintained, 
except  by  shewing,  that  an  aristocracy  is  calculated  to  pre* 
serve  the  democratieal  state  associations  ? 

The  ingenuity  with  which  state  and  general  will  is  blend- 
ed in  the  construction  of  the  general  government,  displays 
an  intention  of  preventing  the  evil  of  a  rivalry  between  the 
two  orders  of  governments  ;  would  the  introduction  of  an 
aristocratical  order  into  one,  have  been  consistent  with  that 
object  ? 

A  short  comparison  between  the  aristocracies  of  the 
first,  the  second  and  the  third  ages,  and  the  senate  of  the 
United  States,  will  convince  us,  that  as  the  senate  possesses 
no  quality  common  to  these  aristocracies,  so  a  common  epi- 
thet cannot  be  applied  to  both.  Superstition,  title  and  pa- 
per ;  consecration,  inheritance  and  fraud  ;  sacrilege,  irres- 
ponsibility and  stockjobbing:  and  a  corporate  or  party 
interest  feeding  upon  the  people  ;  constitute  the  characters 
of  these  successive  aristocracies.  It  cannot  be  imagined 
that  the  constitution  discloses  an  intention  of  copying 
some  one  of  those  originals  by  neglecting  to  preserve  a  single 
feature  of  either  in  the  formation  of  the  senate.  With  less 
foundation  still,  has  Mr.  Adams  maintained  the  existence  ©f 
the  aristocratical  principle,  in  state  senators. 


508  THE    GOOE   MOKAI.  PRINCIPLES   OF   THE 

If  it  is  proved  that  the  senate  of  the  United  States,  nei» 
theris  nor  was  intended  to  be,  an  aristocratical  body,  but 
the  representative  of  the  political  beings  called  states,  as 
parties  to  the  general  government,  upon  demoeratical,  equal 
or  self  governing  principles;  it  follows,  that  it  is  organized 
upon  the  self  same  principles  of  equality,  democracy,  repre- 
sentation or  self  government,  which  pervade  our  whole  po- 
licy. It  is  the  representative  of  the  moral  or  political  beings 
called  slates,  as  the  other  branch  of  the  legislature  is,  of  the 
people  ;  and  it  votes  by  the  rule  of  majority.  It  is  the  band 
of  the  union  by  preserving  equal  rights  to  great  and  small 
states,  as  a  fair  government  does  to  rich  and  poor  men  j  and 
it  so  far  receives  our  eulogy. 

But  so  far  from  intending  to  weaken  the  objection  against 
the  long  period  for  which  its  members  are  chosen,  (he  con- 
siderations which  entitle  the  senate  to  our  approbation,  shed 
new  force  upon  it. 

If  the  senate  is  the  representative  of  the  beings  called 
states,  why  should  it  not  b  at  least  as  amenable  to  the  will 
1  of  its  constituents,  as  the  representatives  of  the  people  2 
The  publick  good  is  as  deeply  involved  in  the  rights  of 
3tates,  as  in  the  rights  of  individuals.  The  states  have 
been  made  parties  to  thv  Union  by  the  people  ;  and  powers 
necessary  to  preserve  the  rights  with  which  they  are  intrust- 
ed for  the  publick  good,  could  not  have  been  designedly 
withheld. 

Those  most  strenuous  for  the  aristocratical  complexion 
of  the  senate,  are  most  deeply  impressed  with  the  fear  of 
frequent  elections  ;  and  yet  they  are  willing  to  allow  to  the 
people  a  frequency  of  election,  which  they  deny  to  the  state 
governments.  What !  do  they  confess  that  governments 
are  worse  electors  than  the  people  ?  Or  if  they  deduce  the 
supposed  aristocratical  spirit  of  the  senate,  from  a  supposed 
aristocratical  spirit  in  its  electors,  is  the  danger  three 
times  greater  from  aristocratical,  than  from  popular  elec- 
tors? If  to  the  simple  computation  of  time,  we  add  the  dif- 
ference of  responsibility,  between  a  gradual  and  an  entire 


GOVERNMENT    OF   THE    U.    STATES,.  509 

ohange  of  a  representative  body,  the  rates  of  confidence  in 
the  people,  and  diffidence  in  the  state  governments,  as  elec- 
tors, are  still  farther  increased.  It  will  be  also  seen  from 
such  a  computation,  that  it  is  infinitely  easier  for  the  repre- 
sentatives of  the  states,  than  for  those  of  the  people,  to 
betray  their  constituents  to  a  consolidating  principle  ;  and 
that  the  responsibility  of  the  senate  to  the  states,  though 
the  chord  by  which  the  union  itself  is  intended  to  be  secured, 
is  too  feeble  to  inllict  any  considerable  degree  of  stricture 
upon  human  conduct. 

A  still  stronger  view  of  this  subject  exists.  The  popu- 
lar and  the  federal,  are  the  principles  of  the  general  gov- 
ernment. The  federal  principle  is  not  allowed  the  intellec- 
tual or  moral  means  for  self  preservation,  of  frequent  elec- 
tion, or  of  recalling  its  deputies,  or  of  an  entire  change  of 
them  at  one  period.  "By  weakening  the  means  of  confede- 
ration to  defend  itself,  this  chief  principle  in  the  struetun 
of  the  general  government,  is  particularly  exposed  to  the 
frauds  of  its  natural  enemy,  consolidation ;  because  it?- 
means  of  defence  are  merely  moral,  and  ought  of  course 
to  have  been  at  least  equal  to  the  moral  means  of  ks 
co-principle,  supported  by  the  physical  force  of  the 
people. 

As  the  responsibility  of  their  agents,  is  the  only 
means  whereby  the  federal  parties  to  the  government  can 
enforce  their  will,  or  defend  their  rights,  there  is  no  dan- 
ger in  making  it  effectual.  An  intellectual  control  over 
federal  deputies,  may  be  safely  entrusted  to  state  govern- 
ments, unarmed  and  influenced  by  the  people,  as  the  best 
mode  of  counteracting  designs  to  destroy  the  union  ;  de- 
signs, which  these  governments  will  most  effectually  detect 
and  defeat. 

We  may  take  stronger  ground  yet.  Hitherto  we  have 
chiefly  exhibited  the  states  and  the  people  in  a  kind  of  con- 
trast, in  order  to  make  our  reasoning  understood  ;  but  by 
forbearing  the  distinction,  the  argument  becomes  more  for- 
- ;Lie„    The  general  government  is  the  creature  of  the  people 


510  THE    GOOD    MOliAl   PRINCIPLES    OF   THE 

only,  established  to  preserve  their  rights  in  their  double 
capacity,  as  the  state  and  federal  sovereign.  Responsibility 
is  therefore  equally  due  to  them  in  both  these  capacities. 
If  it  is  less  in  one  case  than  the  other,  one  class  of  rights 
are  safer  than  the  other.  And  if  one  is  left  to  depend  on 
the  qualities  of  individuals,  whilst  the  other  is  secured  by 
placing  these  qualities  under  the  discipline  of  the  sovereign 
power,  then  one  is  hazarded  upon  the  old  principles  of  gov 
eminent,  and  the  other  secured  by  the  new.  Is  it  the  inte- 
rest of  the  people  to  lose  either  the  state  or  the  general 
government ;  or  do  opposite  principles  produce  an  equal  de- 
gree of  security  ? 

The  more  a  nation  depends  for  its  liberty  on  the  quali- 
ties of  individuals,  the  less  likely  it  is  to  retain  it.  By  ex 
pecting  publick  good  from  private  virtue,  we  expose  our- 
selves to  publick  evil  from  private  vices.  This  miserable 
tenure  which  has  scourged  the  world,  has  been  exchanged 
by  the  United  States  for  the  restraints  oT  political  law, 
among  which  an  effectual  responsibility  is  the  strongest.  Is 
not  this  as  necessary  for  men  in  power,  called  senators,  as 
for  men  called  representatives?  The  world  has  been  en- 
slaved by  depending  for  liberty  on  the  uncontrolled  pafcsimis 
of  individuals;  wc  have  enjoyed  freedom,  by  controlling 
these  passions.  Every  body  makes  good  state  govettiours 
where  executive  power  is  most  restricted.  Will  the  state 
rights  of  the  people  be  best  secured,  by  committing  thvn>  to 
the  custody  of  the  passions  of  such  individuals,  as  may 
form  the  senate,  or  to  an  effectual  responsibility  to  the 
guardians  of  the  rights  themselves  ?  To  the  ancient  sys 
tem  of  confiding  in  human  vices,  or  to  the  modern.  Of 
confiding  in  strong  political  law  to  control  these  vices  ? 

If  the  moral  principle  of  equality,  was  intended  to  exist 
among  the  states,  an  effectual  mode  of  securing  it,  accords 
with  this  intention.  Whether  a  seven  years'  independency 
of  electors,  secures  the  faithfulness  of  representatives  to 
good,  or  exposes  them  to  evil  moral  principles,  is  demon 
strated  in  a  branch  of  the  British  government.     Are  the 


GOVERNMENT    OF   THE   V.    STATES.  5il 

people  of  that  country  made  free  and  happy  hy  representa- 
tives, as  responsible  as  those  the  states  elect  here  ?  The 
effects  to  be  engendered  here  by  a  moral  cause,  such  as 
exists  there  are  there  demonstrated  If  the  degrees 
of  responsibility  arc  the  same,  the  effects  must  also  he  the 
same  ;  and  supposing  a  septennial  power  to  change  an  en- 
tire chamber  of  representatives  at  one  period,  to  be  one 
year  more  valuable  in  point  of  responsibleness,  than  a  sex- 
ennial power  of  changing  it  at  three  equidistant  periods, 
these  degrees  are  the  same. 

The  opinion,  «*  that  the  mode  prescribed  for  amending 
"  the  constitution  of  the  United  States,  does  not  pursue  the 
"  principles  of  democracy,  self  government  or  majority,"  is 
met  and  contested  by  the  arguments  used  to  explode  a  simi- 
lar objection  to  the  structure  of  the  senate.  States  being 
considered  as  entitled  to  equal  rights,  and  the  people  of  the 
United  States  having  rights  also  independent  of  state  gov- 
ernments, it  was  necessary  to  obtain  the  consent  of  all  these 
rights  to  amendments,  in  pursuance  of  the  principles  said 
to  be  violated  by  the  mode  adopted.  Amendments,  inflict- 
ed by  a  majority  of  the  people  and  a  minority  of  states, 
or  by  a  majority  of  states  and  a  minority  of  people,  would 
have  violated  the  natural  or  political  equality,  either  of  in- 
dividuals as  members  of  the  general  national  society,  or  of 
the  same  individuals,  as  members  of  the  state  national  socie- 
ties. To  violate  neither  was  the  object  of  the  constitution, 
and  therefore  a  mode  of  amendment,  sanctified  by  the  con- 
sent of  a  majority  of  both  of  these  free,  equal  and  indepen- 
judp  parties  to  the  union,  was  adopted. 

The  people  of  the  states,  treated  and  united  as  indepen- 
dent of  eaeh  other,  surrendered  a  portion  of  their  indepen- 
dent rights,  into  a  common  treasury,  and  retained  another 
portion.  The  contract  derives  its  force,  not  from  the  con- 
sent of  a  majority  of  states,  but  from  the  separate  consent 
of  eaeh.  If  the  moment  the  contract  was  signed  by  these 
independent  parties,  it  had  been  subject  to  modification  by 
a  majority  of  states,  the  common  treasury  of  rights,  might 


fcl2  THE    GOOD   MORAL   PRINCIPLES   OP    THIi 

have  been  plundered  ;  if  by  a  majority  of  people,  the  state 
rights  retained,  might  have  been  invaded.  The  first  would 
have  erected  an  aristocracy,  by  making  a.  majority  of  states 
and  a  minority  of  people,  masters  of  the  majority  of  the  peo- 
ple of  the  United  States.  The  second  would  be  the  case  of 
a  minority  of  the  strongest  men  joining  together  after 
forming  a  society,  to  compel  a  majority  of  weaker  men,  to 
submit  to  such  alterations  as  they  chose  to  make.  The 
destruction  of  popular  government,  was  not  the  motive  for 
the  confederation.  The  federal  and  popular  expressions 
abounding  in  the  constitution,  prove  it  to  be  a  compact,  both 
federal  and  popular,  requiring  the  happy  expedient  of  secur- 
ing a  concurrence  both  of  the  federal  and  popular  will,  to 
amendments  for  self  preservation  ;  had  popular  will  dictat- 
ed these  amendments,  state  self  government,  the  federal  in- 
gredient of  the  constitution,  would  have  been  destroyed  ;  and 
had  federal  will  dictated  them,  national  self  government* 
the  popular  ingredient  of  the  constitution,  would  have  hex 
also  destroyed. 

But  if  the  senate  are  not  responsible  to  the  publiek  will 
through  the  medium  of  the  states,  they  may  defeat  by  less 
than  a  majority,  the  united  will  of  three-fourths  of  the 
states,  and  a  majority  of  the  people,  to  amend  the  constitu- 
tion ;  and  drive  thera  to  the  resource  of  calling  a  conven- 
tion ;  the  result  of  which  any  one  state  may  refuse  to  con- 
cur in,  because  then  each  stale  will  resume  its  original 
right  to  refuse  or  consent,  as  being  independent  of  each  other 
in  negociating  the  terms  of  a  new  union.  The  concession 
by  each  state  of  this  independency  to  three-fourths,  suffices 
to  shew,  that  a  majority  of  states  had  no  claim  over  the 
rights  of  each  state,  except  from  concession  $  and  that  each 
state  might  annex  such  terms  to  its  concession,  as  it  pleased, 
A  power  over  the  independence  of  each,  is  by  each  conced- 
ed to  three-fourths.  A  quadruple  alliance  might,  upon 
the  same  principles,  be  made  amendable  by  three  of  tin 
parties 


GOVERNMENT   OF  THE   U.    STATES,  Hi 

To  the  exclusive  power  of  the  senate  over  the  president, 
to  its  being  a  sublimated  medium  of  popular  will*    and  to 
its  being  the  guarantee  of  state  rights,  is  to  be  added  its 
power  over  the  concession  of  each  state's  independency  to 
three-fourths  of  the  states,  as  a  new  and  weighty  reason  for 
its  being  more  responsible  than  a  British  house  of  commons, 
If  an  abbreviation  of  representative  tenure,  would  be  a  whole- 
some emendation  under  a  monarchical  policy,   a  republican 
policy,  seconded  by  considerations  arising  from  the  peculiar 
structure  and  powers  of  our  senate,  must  loudly  demand  it, 
By  frequent  election  or  a  power  of  recal,  publick  opinion 
will  be  breathed  into  the  senate,  through  the  lungs  of  state 
societies ;    and  then  publick  opinion,  and  not  the  private 
opinion  of  thirty  or  forty  individuals,   will  constitute  as  it 
ought  and  alone  can,  the  restraint  of  executive  power,  the 
protector  of  state  rights,  and  the  judge  of  amendments  to 
the  constitution.     These  are  funetions  belonging  to  nations, 
and  to  the  discharge  of  which,  individuals  are  incompetent, 
having  a  capacity  only  to  convey  the  publick  opinion,  which 
is  itself  the  real  power.     A  body  of  men,  upon  which  pub- 
lick opinion  cannot  effectually  stamp  its  impress,  never  fail 
to  pass  off  the  false  political  coin  of  private  opinion,  under 
tlie  forged  name  of  publick.     The  forgery  is  discovered,, 
and  the  counterfeiters  are  compelled  to  use  armies,  super- 
stition, penal  laws,  and  paper  corruption,  to  make  the  base 
coin  pass.     The  publick  can  only  become  the  tutelary  guar- 
dian of  the  senate,  and  the  senate  the  genuine  orgau  of  the 
publick,  by  means  of  the  power  and  confidence  which  an  ef- 
fectual responsibility  to  the  nation,  through  its  state  ie$ 
tions,  will  create. 


SECTION  THE  SEVENTH. 


AUTHORITY. 


Ijoivfidence  is  a  substitution  of  the  understanding  an(ft 
honesty  of  others  for  our  own  ;  authority,  the  understand- 
ing and  honesty  so  substituted.  Whether  this  substitution 
belongs  to  the  good  or  to  the  evil  elass  of  moral  principles, 
is  the  same  question  in  another  shape,  with  the  controversy 
for  preference  between  the  poliey  of  the  United  States,  and 
that  of  every  other  country.  Monarchy,  aristoeaey,  hierar- 
chy, privileged  orders,  and  all  parties  and  factions,  political 
or  religious,  being  founded  upon  the  substitution  of  the  un- 
derstanding and  honesty  of  others  for  our  own  ;  and  the 
policy  of  the  United  States,  upon  the  use  of  one's  own  un- 
derstanding and  honesty. 

From  the  fact,  that  the  inducements  of  nations  to  de- 
fraud or  enslave  individuals,  are  infinitely  fewer  than  those 
of  individuals  to  defraud  or  enslave  nations,  our  policy  has 
inferred,  that  the  judgement  and  honesty  of  a  nation,  ig 
more  likely  to  produce  its  own  liberty  and  happiness,  than 
any  other  judgement  or  honesty  which  can  be  substituted 
for  it,  either  of  a  king,  an  order,  a  patriot,  a  party,  a  dema^ 
gogue  or  a  faction.     Authority  asserts  the  contrary. 

Authority  is  subject  to  fraud  and  errour;  national 
judgement,  to  errour  only.  Nations  have  no  motive  for  de* 
ceiving  or  injuring  themselves  ;  authority,  so  many  for  de- 
ceiving or  injuring  nations,  that  it  seldom  or  never  fails  to 
do  both.  A  nation  never  knowingly  adopts  or  adheres  to  an 
oppressive  measure ;  authority  is  so  entirely  addicted  to 
this  vice,  that  it  is  constantly  its  original  design,  or  final  ef- 
fort ;  and  the  first  pretension  to  the  dictatorship  it  usurps* 


AVTHOBITY.  61  $ 

>s  an  advertisement  that  it  is  already  a  knave,  or  will  finally 
become  a  tyrant. 

If  authority  should  miraculously  possess  integrity,  it  ig 
more  liable  to  capricious  errours  and  absurd  prejudices, 
than  national  judgement.  The  wisest  man  is  never  free 
from  these  humiliations  of  human  vanity,  but  he  can  never 
convince  the  majority  of  a  nation,  that  his  humours  are 
wise.  National  opinion  shields  mankind  against  the  afflic- 
tions arising  from  individual  caprice  and  prejudice,  to 
which  authority  exposes  them  ;  and  therefore  it  is  a  wiser, 
besides  being  an  honester  standard  of  truth. 

"We  may  without  much  difficulty  discover  our  own  opi- 
nion, but  not  one  in  a  thousand  can  possibly  know  the  opinion 
of  the  authority  in  which  he  confides.  Like  a  river,  it 
commences  in  a  diminutive  rill,  which  is  swelled  in  its 
course  by  innumerable  turbid  and  nauseous  additions,  until 
not  a  drop  of  the  original  fountain,  can  be  obtained  ;  whilst 
confidence  must  still  swallow  the  contaminating  compounds, 
and  allow  its  impurities  to  be  transubstantiated  into  holy 
water.  The  supposed  fountain  is  even  often  quite  dry  ; 
and  a  river  wholly  deceptions  is  formed,  without  containing 
a  single  drop  from  the  source  it  claims,  to  raise  an  artificial 
current,  for  conveying,  not  the  nation,  but  demagogues  or 
knaves,  into  a  good  harbour.  It  is  not  therefore  matter  of 
any  astonishment,  that  most  publick  measures  derived  from 
authority,  end  in  repentance. 

Whereve*  authority  guides  a  nation  or  a  political  party, 
there  cannot  be  a  national  or  party  principle,  opinion  or 
measure.  It  converts  nations  into  the  engines  of  an  aspir- 
ing individual  or  a  faction,  for  enslaving  themselves  ;  and 
parties  into  beasts,  to  be  ridden  by  a  few  artful  men  into 
office.  To  this  surrender  of  national  and  party  principles 
and  opinions  to  authority,  is  to  be  superadded,  the  stupi- 
dity of  corrupting  the  object  of  confidence  itself,  by  assur- 
ing it  of  indiscriminate  support.  Propelled  by  this  pre- 
posterous admonition  towards  its  natural  bent,  authority 
very  soon  abolishes  the  distinction?  between  principles,  !»ar* 


Bll 


ATTTHOTflTT 


ties  arc  converted  into  mere  ladders  to  power,  and  election 
U  restricted  to  ilie  barren  right  of  saying  which  ladder  shaft 
be  mounted  ;  so  as  to  produce,  not  a  cheek,  but  an  excite- 
ment of  the  authority  to  make  the  most  of  present  power. 
Authority  moulds  men  into  the  same  kind  of  moral  beings, 
whether  it  is  bestowed  by  a  free  or  an  oppressed  nation,  by 
a  patriofick  or  a  slavish  party,  because  the  same  moral 
sfieets  proceed  from  the  same  moral  causes :  and  hence, 
however  derived,  its  apprehensions  of  the  alternation  to 
which  it  is  exposed  by  election,  produce  to  confiding  nations 
the  same  misfortunes. 

All  the  truth  in  the  opinion  "  that  knowledge  is  the 
best  security  for  liberty/'  lies  within  its  capacity  to  detect 
the  fraud  of  authority,  and  to  retain  the  contrary  principle, 
self  government.  Our  policy  draws  the  liberty  we  enjoy 
from  one  principle  ;  authority  is  the  source  of  the  present 
state  of  other  countries.  The  comparison  would  at  once 
awaken  the  credulity,  by  which  nations  are  induced  quietly 
to  put  on  the  yoke  of  authority,  were  they  not  perplexed  by 
its  false  and  constant  claims  to  national  gratitude.  Would 
to  God  some  standard  could  be  established  to  detect  the 
fraud  of  magnifying  publick  services,  up  to  the  value  of  na- 
tional liberty.  When  were  those  rendered  by  George 
"Washington  exceeded  by  any  individual  ?  Yet  if  the  publick 
services  of  all  other  citizens  during  the  same  period,  were 
poised  against  his,  the  disparity  would  satisfy  every  future 
patriot,  that  he  ought  to  submit  to  an  example,*  which  gra- 
duates the  highest  publick  services,  by  a  scale,  far  short 
of  justifying  bad  precedents  and  sacrifices  injurious  to  ca- 
tions; 

Authority  is  similar  to  monarchy  or  aristocracy,  in  pre- 
ferring the  abilities  and  interest  of  one  or  a  few,  to  the  abi- 
lities and  interest  of  all,  as  the  ground  work  of  government, 
St  is  similar  to  an  elective  monarchy  or  aristocracy,  in  being 
the  creature  ©f  national  or  party  confidence.  But  it  is 
more  pernicious  to  good  government  than  elective  monar*' 
o&y  or  aristocracy,  in  being  more  mortal  ;  it  cannot  outlive 


ATTTHORITT.  016 

fhe  man  to  whom  it  is  attached*  and  may  die  before  him. 
The  struggle  to  depose  and  transfer  it  is  so  perpetual,  that 
an  interval  of  repose  can  seldom  occur;  and  the  permanent 
state  of  a  nation  guided  by  it,  resembles  the  temporary  state 
of  an  elective  monarchy  at  the  epoch  of  election.  Succes- 
sions of  authority,  like  the  waves  of  a  troubled  ocean,  perpe- 
tually roll  along  over  each  other,  and  the  instant  one  is  bu- 
ried, another  rushes  into  its  place,  and  speedily  follows  on 
to  the  grave.  The  excessive  mortality  of  authority  demon- 
strates its  incompetency  for  the  government  of  a  being, . 
which  seldom  or  never  dies.  The  longevity  of  a  principle, 
ought  to  be  equal  to  whatever  is  entrusted  to  its  eare.  Can 
a  living  nation  secure  its  liberty  and  prosperity  by  confiding 
it  to  a  perishing  authority  ?  The  vital  defect  of  hereditary 
monarchy,  is  the  mortality  which  exposes  nations  to  the 
fluctuations  in  the  characters  of  men,  and  deprives  them  of 
the  benefit  of  unchangeable  principles,*  and  the  vital  reme- 
dy for  this  defect,  is  still  more  adverse  to  the  greater  degree 
of  fluctuation  in  the  principle  of  successional  authori- 
ty. It  lies  in  fixed  good  moral  principles,  and  genuine 
self  government,  capable  of  living  as  long  as  the  nation, 
and  wisely  confiding  for  happiness  in  that  which  can  live 
as  long  as  itself. 

The  whole  moral  world  cannot  afford  so  perfect  a  coin- 
cidence of  phenomena,  for  ascertaining  the  true  value  of 
any  moral  principle,  as  in  the  rase  of  authority.  Gsesar, 
Cromwell  and  Bonaparte  obtained  degrees  of  democratick 
authority,  never  reached  by  others.  The  parties  which 
bestowed  them,  by  substituting  confidence  for  judgement 
and  conscience,  were  of  the  highest  democratick  orders, 
and  proved  to  be  the  completpst  instruments  for  tyranny. 
The  whig  and  tory  parties  of  England  in  possession  ol" 
authority,  uniformly  pursue  the  same  measures;  and  un- 
possessed of  it,  uniformly  avow  patriotick  opinions,  for  the 
sake  of  obtaining  an  opportunity  to  violate  theni.  The  re- 
publican and  federal  parties  of  the  United  States,  are  evi* 
deftly  clambering  towards   the  system  for  consigning  a 


616  AUTHourr*- 

nation  to  the  constant  spoliation  of  a  successive  authority, 
more  aggravating  to  vicious  passions,  because  more  unset-T 
tied  than  monarchy  itself. 

Far  from  correcting  the  abuses  with  which  they  charge 
each  other,  their  leaders,  trusting  to  the  pernicious  doc- 
trine of  confidence  and  authority,  will  convert  their  mutual 
abuses  into  mutual  precedents.  Neither  parties  nor  indi- 
viduals will  voluntarily  diminish  power  in  their  own  hands, 
however  pernicious  they  have  declared  it  to  be  in  the  hands 
of  others,  because  if  they  are  vicious,  they  are  willing  to 
abuse  it,  if  virtuous,  they  presumptuously  confide  in  their 
own  moderation ;  therefore  abuses  can  never  be  corrected, 
where  confidence  and  authority  have  subverted  national 
principles. 

As  authority  generates  the  same  effects  upon  all  men* 
the  men  are  not  blameable,  because  it  is  obvious  from  the 
constancy  of  the  effects,  that  the  force  of  authority  is  irre- 
sistible by  human  nature.  If  a  physician  mingles  poison 
with  wholesome  food,  not  he  who  is  poisoned,  but  the  physi- 
cian who  poisons  him,  deserves  punishment.  If  a  nation 
poisons  parties  or  individuals,  or  its  own  government,  with 
confidence  and  authority,  the  nation  which  applies  the  poi- 
son, and  not  those  who  cannot  avoid  its  effects,  is  blameable, 
and  therefore  the  moral  law  is  strictly  just,  which  recom- 
penses with  arbitrary  sway,  those  poisoned  by  confidence, 
and  punishes  the  poisoners  themselves  with  slavery.  The 
game  inexorable  moral  law  brings  similar  private  guilt  or 
folly  to  due  expiation.  Individuals,  like  nations,  who  substi 
tute  in  the  management  of  their  servants,  confidence  and  au- 
thority for  an  inquisitive  scrutiny  and  a  strict  responsibility, 
are  exposed  to  pillages,  which  justly  transfer  their  estates 
to  those  whom  they  have  thus  corrupted. 

As  the  guilt  of  nations  in  betraying  posterity  to  oppres- 
sion by  yielding  to  authority,  S3  inevitably  punished  by  their 
own  subjugation,  the  severity  of  this  punishment  constitutes 
a  proof  of  the  badness  of  the  principle,  satisfactory  to  alb 
•who  believe  m  a  superintending  providence.    Parties  who 


AUTHORITY*  M? 

corrupt  their  leaders  and  subject  themselves  by  the  same 
evil  principle,  are  punished  with  still  greater  severity.  Like 
herds  of  swine,  they  are  fed  with  grain  or  garbage,  until 
they  are  fit  for  slaughter ;  this  is  never  deferred  a  moment 
after  the  conjuncture  is  ripe,  lest  they  should  escape  ;  and 
without  remorse,  they  are  always  put  to  death  by|the  tyrants 
of  their  own  creation.  Thus  the  great  democratick  leaders, 
Cscsar,  Cromwell  and  Bonaparte,  dispensed  justice  to  their 
stupid  parties.  Ceesar,  a  courtier,  originally  raised  them 
for  their  end.  Cromwell,  a  fanatick,  was  stubbornly  honest, 
but  authority  melted  that  honesty,  because  human  nature 
cannot  resist  the  moral  law  which  imposes  new  opinions 
with  new  circumstances  ;  and  he  served  the  party  he  ador- 
ed, as  Ciesar  served  the  party  he  despised.  Bonaparte,  ori- 
ginally neither  a  statesman  nor  a  fanatick,  happening  to 
float  upon  accident  up  to  a  momentary  authority,  demon- 
strated by  the  use  he  made  of  an  unpromising  conjuncture* 
how  fatal  a  heedless  though  trivial  confidence  may  be,  to  the 
nations  and  parties  by  whom  it  is  bestowed. 

It  is  wonderful  that  the  human  mind  should  have  been 
able  to  detect  the  impostures  founded  in  the  authority  of 
Gods,  and  remain  blind  to  those  founded  in  the  authority 
of  men ;  that  it  should  despise  oracles  pretending  to  inspira- 
tion, and  surrender  its  judgement  and  conscience  to  autho- 
rity pretending  to  none ;  and  that  it  should  worship  dying 
men,  after  having  ceased  to  worship  living  spirits.  An  hun- 
dred volumes  might  be  filled  with  the  fatal  effects  to  nations 
and  parties,  in  ancient  and  modern  times,  from  sacrificing 
their  own  principles,  consciences,  judgements  and  interests, 
to  authority  ;  but  leaving  them  to  the  recollection  of  the 
reader,  we  will  proceed  to  quote  a  few  cases  to  shew  the  in- 
fluence of  circumstances  upon  the  soundest  heads  and  the 
purest  hearts  ;  those  best  grounds  for  any  pretensions  which 
authority  can  advance. 

Almost  every  eminent  man  who  has  appeared  in  gov- 
ernments tinctured  with  liberty,  might  be  quoted  as  an  au 
thority  against  the  opinions  by  which  he  was  raised;  but  the 


mJtiS  AUTHORITY. 

habit  of  setting  out  with  free  and  proceeding  to  slavish 
print- iples,  is  so  common,  that  a  contrary  case,  rare,  if  not 
singular,  is  first  exhibited  to  the  reader.  Dean  Swift,  in 
-his  prime,  was  a  tory,  a  statesman,  a  priest  of  the  high 
.-cliufcU  party,  and  a  violent  opponent  of  the  whig  principled. 
Id  his  retirement,  uninfluenced  by  ambition,  this  profound 
politician  sent  to  his  friend  an  abstract  of  his  political  opi- 
nions, to  be  found  in  Pope's  works,  vol.  6.  p.  120,  which  it 
transcribed  as  an  evidence,  both  of  the  force  of  passions  and 
circumstances  upon  our  current  opinions,  and  of  a  concur- 
rence between  this  able  man  when  uninfluenced  by  these 
passions  and  circumstances,  and  several  important  doctrines 
of  these  essays. 

♦•  I  had/'  says  Swift, "  a  mortal  antipathy  against  stand- 
<«  ing  armies  in  times  of  peace;  because  I  always  took  stand- 
«*  ing  armies  to  he  only  servants  hired  by  the  master  of  the  fa- 
«*  mily  for  keeping  his  own  children  in  slavery;  and  because  I 
*'•  conceived  that  a  prince  who  would  not  think  himself  secure 
«<  without  mercenary  troops,  must  needs  have  a  separate 
"  hitertot  from  that  of  his  subjects.  Although  I  am  not  ig. 
««  norant  of  those  arbitrary  necessities  which  a  corrupted 
*•  ministry  can  create,  for  keeping  forces  ta  support  a  fae? 
*<■  tion  against  the  publick  interest." 

»•  As  to  parliaments,  I  adored  the  wisdom  of  that  Go- 
.*«  thick  institution,  which  made  them  annual;  and  I  was  con- 
*}  iident  our  liberty  could  never  be  placed  upon  a  firm  foun- 
"  dation  until  that  ancient  law  was  restored  among  us.  For 
'■'  who  sees  not,  that  when  such  assemblies  are  permitted 
••  to  have  a  longer  duration,  there  grows  up  a  commerce 
«<  of  corruption  between  the  ministry  and  the  deputies, 
-'  wherein  they  both  find  their  accounts,  or  to  the  inanv- 
4»  fest  danger  of  liberty  ?  Which  traffick  would  neither 
"  answer  the  design  nor  expense,  if  parliaments  met 
•»  once  a  year." 

♦k  I  ever  abominated  that  scheme  of  politicks  (now 
<*  about  thirty  years  old)  of  setting  up  a  monied  interestja 
'«  opposition  to  the  landed.    For  I  conceived,  there  could 


'; 


": 


AUTHORITY,  fliS 

««  not  be  a  truer  maxim  in  our  government  tban  this,  that 
s<  the  possessors  of  the  soil  are  the  best  judges  of  what  is  for 
«  the  advantage  of  the  kingdom.  If  others  had  thought  the 
**  same  way,  funds  of  credit  and  South  Sea  projects  would 
"  neither  have  been  felt  nor  heard  of." 

Further  to  illustrate  the  force  of  passions  and  circum- 
stances upon  current  opinions,  and  to  recommend  the  work 
of  an  author  of  no  fame,  by  exhibiting  its  concurrence  with 
one  other  of  high  reputation,  the  following  dissertation,  the 
original  of  which  is  now  before  me,  written  by  Mr.  John 
Adams  during  the  revolutionary  war,  is  exhibited  to  the 
reader.  As  correct  extracts  not  taken  from  this  copy  have 
occasionally  appeared  in  the  news  papers,  its  diffusion  as  a 
model  for  government,  is  a  proof  both  of  care  in  the  compo- 
sition, and  of  its  great  credit  with  the  author  and  the  pa- 
triots of  those  times.  . 

**  If  I  was  possessed  of  abilities  equal  to  the  great  task  y#r>.  Hlb 
i(  you  have  imposed  upon  me,  which  is  to  sketch  out  the 
-'  outlines  of  a  constitution  for  a  colony,  I  should  think  my- 
i(  self  the  happiest  of  men,  in  complying  with  your  desire  : 
"  because,  a9  politicks  is  the  art  of  securing  human  happi- 
«  ness,  and  the  prosperity  of  societies  depends  upon  the  con- 
"  stitution  of  government  under  which  they  live  $  there 
«  cannot  be  a  more  agreeable  employment  to  a  benevo- 
♦«  lent  mind  than  the  study  of  the  best  kinds  of  govern- 
'«  ment. 

"  It  has  been  the  will  of  heaven,  that  we  should  be  throw  a 
"  into  existence  at  a  period,  when  the  greatest  philosophers 
"  and  lawgivers  of  antiquity  would  have  wished  to  have  liv- 
««  ed  ;  a  period,  when  a  coincidence  of  circumstances,  with 
14  out  example,  has  afforded  to  thirteen  colonies  at  once  at. 
"  opportunity  of  beginning  government  anew  from  the 
<5  foundation,  and  building  as  they  choose.  How  few  of  the 
"  human  race  have  ever  had  any  opportunity  of  choosing 
«  a  system  of  government  for  themselves  and  their  children? 
"  How  few  havecver  had  any  thing  more  of  choice  higovei*n~ 
"  meni  than  ?n  olirmte  ?  These  eo!onie<:  Star©  irirw  .'    ir  ■'  Jh 

S7 


520  AUTHORITY. 

**  tion,  and  it  is  much  to  be  wished  that  it  may  not  prove  to 
"  be  like  a  prize  iu  the  hands  of  a  man  who  has  no  heart 
•  to  i m prove  it." 

*;  In  order  to  determine  which  is  the  best  form  of  gov- 
ernment, it  is  necessary  to  determine  what  is  the  end  of 
«.<  government.  And  I  suppose  tiiat  in  this  enlightened  agvf 
"  there  will  be  no  dispute,  in  speculation,  that  the  happi- 
--'  nesa  of  the  people,  the  great  end  of  man,  is  the  end 
:l  of  government,  and  therefore  that  form  of  government 
'  which  will  produce  the  greatest  quantity  of  happiness  is 
«  beat." 

#  All  sober  inquirers  after  truth,  ancient  and  modern, 
'<  divines,  moralists  and  philosophers,  have  agreed  that  the 
*'  happiness  of  mankind,  as  well  as  the  real  dignity  of  human 
"  nature,  consists  in  virtue  ;  if  there  is  a  form  of  govcrn- 
"  ment  whose  principle  and  foundation  is  virtue,  will  not 
**  exevy  wise  man  acknowledge  it  more  likely  to  promote 
'<  the  general  happiness  than  any  other  ?;> 

«♦  Fear,  v  hich  is  said  by  Montesquieu  and  other  politi- 

*'  cal  writers,  to  be  the  foundation  of  some  governments, 

'*  is  so   sordid  and  brutal  a  passion,  that  it  cannot  pro- 

"  perly  be  called  a  principle,  and  will  hardly  be  thought  in 

4  America  a  proper  basis  of  government." 

u,  Honour,  is  a  principle  which  ought  to  be  sacred  :  But 
'<  the  Grecians  and  Romans,  pagan  as  well  as  christian,  will 
«  inform  us,  that  honour  at  most  is  but  a  part  of  virtue,  and 
"  therefore  a  feeble  basis  of  government." 

"  A  man  must  be  indifferent  to  sneer  and  ridicule,  in 
u  some  companies,  to  mention  the  names  of  Sidney,  Har- 
4<  rington,  Locke,  Milton,  Nedham,  Neville,  Burnet,  Hoad- 
"  ly;  for  the  lines  of  John  Milton,  in  one  of  his  sonnets,  will 
«f  bear  an  application,  even  in  this  country,  upon  some 
■  occasions. 

*•  I  did  but  teach  the  age  to  quit  their  cloggs, 
"  By  the  plain  rules  of  ancient  liberty, 
"  When  lo !  a  barbarous  noise  surrounded  me 
"  Oi'owls  and  cuckoos,  asses,  apes  and  dogs-. 


w  These  gnat  writers,  however,  will  convince  any  man  who 
**  has  the  fortitude  lo  read  them,  thai  all  good  government  is 
"  republican;  that  the  only  valuable  part  of  the  British  con- 
««  stitulioii  is  so  :  for  the  true  idea  of  a  republiek  is,  an  em- 
**  pi  re  of  laws,  and  not  of  men  ;  and  therefore  as  a  republiek 
•*  is  the  best  of  governments,  so  that  particular  combination 
N  of  power,  which  is  best  contrived  for  a  faithful  exe- 
**  cation  of  the  laws,  is  the  best  of  republieks." 

"  There  is  a  great  variety  of  republicks,  because  the 
*  arrangements  of  the  powers  of  society  are  capable  of  ma- 
*<  nv  variations." 

**  As  a  good  government  is  an  empire  of  laws,  the  first 
M  question  is,  how  shall  the  laVs  be  made  ?" 

««  In  a  community  consisting  of  lai\ge  numbers,  inhabit- 
*<  ing  an  extensive  country,  it  is  not  possible  that  the  whole 
N  should  assemble,  to  make  laws.     The  most  natural  snhsri- 
<(  tutcfor  an  assembly  of  the  whole,  is  a  delegation  of  pov 
**  from  the  many,  to  a  few  of  the  most  wise  and  virtuous. 
**  In  the  first  place  then  establish  rules  for  the  choice  of 
"  representatives  :    agree  upon  the  number  of  persons  who 
f*  shall  have  the  privilege  of  choosing  one,     As  the  repre- 
«  senlative  assembly  should  be  an  eetdcA portrait,  in  vrinia 
"  ture,  of  the  people  at  large,  as  it  should  think,  feel,  reason 
«  and  act  like  them,  great  care  should  be  taken  in  the  for 
46  mation  of  it,  to  prevent  unfair,  partial  and  corrupt  elee 
<f  tions.     That  it  may  he  the  interest  of  this  assembly  to  do 
*»'  equal   right  and  strict  justice,    upon  all   occasion*.    ir 
H  should  be    an  equal,    representation   of   their    constitu- 
"  ents,  or  in  other  words  equal  interests  among  the  peo 
v<  pie,   should  have  equal  interests  in    the  representative 
f*  body." 

"That  the  representatives  may  often  mix  with  their 
"  constituents,  and  frequently  render  them  an  account  of 
'« their  stewardship,  elections  ought  to  be  frequent." 

"  Like  bubbles  on  the  sea  of  matter  borne 
*'  They  rise,  they  break  and  to  tb^*.  sea  rcl 


&%Q  jiV  THORITE  V 

w  These  elections  may  be  septennial  or  triennial,  but  for 
*<  my  own  part  I  think  they  ought  to  be  annual,  for  then 
«  is  not  in  all  science  a  maxim  more  infallible  than  thisf 
*<  where  annual  elections  end,  there  slavery  begins.'* 

«  But  all  necessary  regulations  tor  the  method  of  consti- 
P  tuting  this  assembly,  may  be  better  made  in  times  of  more 
«<  quiet  than  the  present,  and  they  will  suggest  themselves 
"  naturally,  when  the  powers  of  government  shall  be  in  the 
«  hands  of  the  people's  fritnds.  For  the  present  it  will  be 
«  safest  to  go  on  in  the  usual  way." 

«  But  we  have  as  yet  advanced  only  one  step  in  the  for- 
"  mation  of  a  government.  Having  obtained  a  representa- 
tive assembly,  what  is  to  be  done  next?  Shall  we 
"  leave  all  the  powers  of  government  to  this  assembly  ? 
**  Shall  they  make  and  execute,  and  interpret  laws  too  I 
«  I  answer  no ;  a  people  cannot  be  long  free,  and  never 
*'  can  be  happy  whose  laws  are  made,  executed  and  in- 
"  terpreted  by  one  assembly.  My  reasons  for  this  opi- 
*«  nion  are  these,''' 

"  d  single  assembly  is  liable  to  all  the  vices,  follies  and 
<*  frailties  of  an  individual.  Subject  to  fits  of  humour, 
"transports  of  passion,  partialities  of prejudice j  and  from 
"  these  and  other  causes,  apt  to  make  hasty  results  and 
*<  absurd  judgements  :  all  which  errours  ought  to  be  cor- 
*f  rected,  and  inconveniencies  guarded  against  by  some  con- 
'« trolling  power." 

"  A  single  assembly  is  apt  to  grow  avaricious,  and  in 
"  time  would  not  scruple  to  exempt  itself  from  burdens 
«  which  it  would  lay  upon  its  constituents,  without  sym- 
*f  pathy." 

"  A  single  assembly  will  become  ambitious,  and  after 
f*  some  time  will  vote  itself  perpetual.  This  was  found  in 
<s  the  case  of  the  long  parliament :  but  more  remarkably 
"  in  the  case  of  Holland,  whose  assembly  first  voted  that 
'  they  should  hold  their  seats  for  seven  years,  then  for  life, 
<«  and  after  some  time,  that  they  would  till  up  vacancies  as 
"  they  should  happen,  without  applying  to  their  constituent? 
t*  at  all" 


'    .AUTHORITY,  :H\L 

**  The  executive  power  cannot  be  well  managed  by  are^ 

*  presentative  assembly,  for  want  of  two  essential  qualities, 
H  secrecy  and  dispatch." 

**■  Such  an  assembly  is  still  less  qualified  to  exercise  the 
**  judicial  power,  because  it  is  too  numerous,  too  slow,  and 
4i  generally  too  little  skilled  in  the  laws.** 

"  But  shall  the  whole  legislative  power  be  left  in  the 
**  hands  of  such  an  assembly  ?  The  three  first  at  least  of  the 
**  foregoing  reasons,  will  shew  that  the  legislative  power 
**  ought  not  to  be  wholly  intrusted  to  one  assembly." 

"  Let  the  representative  body  then  elect,  from  amonp» 
tf  themselves  or  their  constituents,  op  both,  a  distinct 
«  assembly,  which  we  will  call  a  council.  It  may  consist 
•*  of  any  number  you  please,  say  twenty  or  thirty.  To 
"  this  assembly  should  be  given  a  free  and  independent 
««  exercise  of  its  judgement,  upon  all  acts  of  legislation, 
**  that  it  may  be  able  to  check  and  correct  the  errours  of 

*  the  other." 

"  15ut  there  ought  to  be  a  third  branch  of  the  legisla 
•«  ture  :    and  wherever  the  executive  power  of  the  state  i? 
4i  placed,  there  the  third  branch  of  the  legislature  ought  to 
**  be  found." 

"  Let  the  two  houses  then  by  joint  ballot  choose  a  gover- 
"  nour.  Let  Mm  be  chosen  annually.  Direst  him  of  most  of 
« those  badges  of  slavery  called  prerogatives.  And  give 
•"  him  a  negative  upon  the  legislature,  This  I  know  is  lia- 
"  bie  to  some  objections,  to  obviate  which,  you  may  make 
*'  him  in  a  legislative  capacity  only  president  of  the  council, 
M  But  if  he  is  annually  elective,  you  need  not  scruple  to  give- 
"  him  a  free  and  independent  exercise  of  his  judgement,  for 

*  he  will  have  so  great  an  affection  for  the  people,  the  re- 
««  presentatives  and  council,  that  he  would  seldom  exer- 
"  cise  this  right,  except  in  cases,  the  publick  utility  of 
"  which  would  soon  be  manifest,  and  some  such  cases  would 
(i  happen." 

"  In  the  present  exigency  of  American  affairs,  when  by 

*  an  act  of  parliament  we  are  put  out  o£the  royal  protection, 


$£&  ATTTnOuITT., 

*<  and  consequently  discharged  from  all  obligations  of  alle* 
"  giance  j  and  when  it  has  become  necessary  to  assume  go- 
"  vernments  for  immediate  security,  the  governour,  lieute- 
"  nant-governour,  secretary,  treasurer  and  attorney  gene- 
««  ral  should  be  chosen  by  joint  ballot  of  both  houses." 

"  The  governour,  by  and  with  and  not  without  the  advice. 
ft  and  consent  of  council,  should  appoint  all  judges,  justices 
«  and  all  other  officers,  civil  and  military,  who  should  have 
"  commissions  signed  by  the  governour  and  under  the  seal  o* 
u  the  colony.5' 

"  Sheriffs  should  be  chosen  hy  the  freeholders  of  the 
'«  counties.  If  you  choose  to  have  a  government  more  po- 
*<  pular,  ail  officers  may  be  chosen  by  one  house  of  assembly 
"subject  to  the  negative  of  the  other/' 

"  The  stability  of  government,  in  all  its  brandies,  the 
*(  morals  of  the  people,  and  every  other  blessing  of  society, 
"  and  social  institutions,  depend  so  much  upon  an  able  anc\ 
«  impartial  administration  of  justice,  that  ike  judicial  power*, 
«  should  be  separated  from  the  legislative  and  executive,  and 
(t  independent  wponboth;  the  judges  should  be  men  of  ex- 
<"?  peiience  in  the  laws,  of  exemplary  morals,  invincible  pa- 
"  tience,  unruffled  calmness,  and  indefatigable  application  ; 
"  their  minds  should  not  be  distracted  with  complicated 
'•y.trring  interests ;  they  should  not  be  dependent  on  any 
"  man  or  body  of  men  :  they  should  lean  to  none,  be  subser- 
t(  vient  to  none,  nor  more  complaisant  to  one  than  another* 
*<  To  this  end  they  should  hold  estates  for  life  in  their  offices, 
**  or  in  other  words  their  commissions  should  be  during  good 
*(  behaviour,  and  their  salaries  ascertained  and  established 
f*  by  law." 

"  If  accused  of  misbehaviour  by  the  representative  ho 
*f  dy,  before  the  governour  and  council,  and  if  found  guilty 
"  after   having    an    opportunity    to   make    their  defence, 
"  they    should    be    removed   from    their  offices  and  sub 
ejected    to  such  other  punishment  as  their  offences  <?*>• 
€*  serve." 


**'*&  rottttitm  of  offices  laths  legislative  and  executive 
4«  departments  has  many  advocates,  and,  if  practicable, 
"  might  have  many  good  effects*  A  law  may  be  made  that  no 
»«  man  shall  be  governour,  lieutenant-governour,  secretary, 
"  treasurer,  counsellor,  or  representative,  more  than  three 
»<  years  at  a  time,  nor  be  again  eligible  until  after  an  inter* 
**  val  of  three  years." 

'*  A  constitution  like  this,  of  which  the  foregoing  is  a 
<*  very  imperfect  plan,  naturally  introduces  general  know- 
u  ledge  into  the  community,  and  inspires  the  people  with  a 
"•  conscious  dignity  becoming  freemen.  A  general  desire  of 
"  reputation  and  importance  among  their  neighbours,  which 
"  cannot  be  obtained  without  some  government  of  their  pas- 
**  sions,  some  good  humour,  good  manners  and  good  mor- 
n  als,  takes  place  in  the  minds  of  men,  and  naturally  causes 
«  general  virtue  and  civility.  That  pride  which  is  intrc- 
«'«  duced  by  such  a  government  among  the  people,  makes 
*i  them  brave  and  enterprizing.  That  ambition  which  is  in- 
**  troduced  into  every  rank,  makes  them  sober,  industrious 
'•and  frugal.  You  will  find  among  them  some  elegance, 
»'•  but  more  solidity,  a  little  politeness,  but  a  great  deal  of 
o  civility,  some  pleasure,  but  much  business." 

«  Let  commissions  run  thus,  *  Colony  of  North  CaroK- 
*'•'  na,  to  A.  B.  greeting,  &c.'  and  be  tested  by  the  gov- 
"  em  our." 

«  Let  writs  run  <  The  Colony  of  &c.  to  the  sheriff  &c." 

¥  Let  indictments  conclude  *  against  the  peace  of  the 
"  Colony  of  North  Carolina,  and  the  dignity  of  the  same* 
**  or  if  you  please  *  against  the  peac<»  of  the  thirteen  united 
«  colonies." 

"  We  have  heard  much  of  a  continental  constitution,  I 
u  see  no  occasion  for  any  but  a  Congress.  Let  that  be  made 
"an  equal  and  fair  representative  of  the  colonies,  and  let 
«« its  authority  be  confined  to  three  cases,  war,  trade  and  con- 
"  trovei'sies  between  colony  and  colony.  If  a  confederation 
"  was  formed,  agreed  on  in  Congress,  and  ratified  by  the  as- 
il  semblics;    these  colonics,  under  such  fanns  of  gova 


•41  At  nioHiTi'c 

«'  mml  and  such  a  confederation,  would  be  unconquerable  by 
*i  all  the  monarchies  of  Europe." 

**  This  plan  of  a  government  for  a  colony,  you  see  is  in- 
«« tended  a^  a  temporary  expedient  under  the  present  pres- 
4*  sure  of  affairs,  The  government  once  formed,  and  having 
**  settled  its  authority,  will  have  leisure  enough  to  make  any 
w  alterations  that  time  and  experience,  and  more  mature 
-«<  deliberation,  may  dictate.  Particularly,  a  plan  may  be 
**  devised,  perhaps,  and  be  thought  expedient,  for  giving 
"  the  choice  of  the  govcrnour  to  the  people  at  large,  and  of 
"  the  counsellors  to  the  freeholders  of  the  counties.  But  he 
*  these  things  as  they  may,  two  things  are  indispensably 
*'  to  be  adhered  to;  one,  is  some  regulation  for  securing  for- 
**  ever  an  equitable  choice  of  representatives  ;  another, 
•*  is  the  education  of  youth  both  in  literature  and  morals." 

«*  I  wish,  my  dear  sir,  that  I  had  time  to  think  of  these 
"  things  more  at  leisure,  and  to  write  more  correctly.  But 
«  you  must  take  these  hints  rough  as  they  run.  Your  owe 
*<  reflections,  assisted  by  the  patriots  of  North  Carolina,  will 
*'  improve  upon  every  part  of  them." 

**  As  you  brought  upon  yourself  the  trouble  of  read- 
'*  ing  these  crude  thoughts,  you  can't  blame  your  friend." 

Principles  and  convictions  arc  expressed  in  this  disser 
tation,  in  ideas  and  language,  as  strong,  as  plain,  and  un- 
doubtedly as  honest,  as  in  the  hook  of  the  same  author  upon 
the  same  subject ;  his  mind  must  have  attained  to  its  matu- 
rity at  the  time  of  the  first  composition  ;  and  the  force  of 
the  difference  between  a  struggle  for  liberty,  and  an  enjoy- 
ment of  a  rich  executive  office,  only  remains  to  account  for 
the  different  appearance  of  the  same  principles  and  the  same 
words  to  the  same  mind,  at  different  times.  4r  ^ew  remarks 
will  sufficiently  display  this  difference. 

In  the  dissertation,  the  sovereignty  of  the  people  is  une 
quivoeally  asserted,  as  the  basis  of  society  and  civil  power. 
Representation  is  made  its  substitute,  from  the  impossibi- 
lity of  holding  national  assemblies.     And  being  drawn  from 
this  origin,,  its  perfection  is  made  to  consist  in  thinking. 


AXJTHOSItfY.  527 

jetting,  reasoning  and  acting  like,  and  being  an  exact  por- 
trait in  miniature,  of  the  people  at  large. 

Mr.  Adams's  later  system  is  bottomed  upon  orders,  two 
of  them  hereditary,  incapable  of  thinking,  feeling,  reason- 
ing or  acting  like  the  people  at  large ;  and  yet  exercising  a 
complete  sovereignty,  as  in  England. 

The  dissertation  contends  for  the  frequency  of  election, 
its  application  even  to  executive  power,  for  securing  its 
responsibility  ;  and  the  infallible  truth  of  the  maxim,  that 
"where  annual  elections  end,  there  slavery  begins." 

The  system  renounces  two  thirds  of  the  principle  of 
election  for  hereditary  orders,  and  advocates  the  idea  of  nn- 
elected  virtual  representatives,  never  to  mix  with  theveopUy. 
account  for  their  steivardship,  or  be, 

"  Like  bubbles  on  the  sea  of  matter  borne, 
"  To  rise,  to  break,  and  to  that  sea  return." 

And  asserts  that  elections  ought  to  be  rare  ',  that  they 
produce  every  vice  ;  and  that  they  bring  the  worst  men  in- 
to power. 

Both  in  the  dissertation  and  the  system,  the  impolicy  of 
accumulating  all  civil  power  in  one  assembly  is  justly  insist- 
ed on.  In  the  first,  election  is  considered  as  sufficient  to 
produce  a  division  of  power  ;  and  the  people,  as  being  able 
to  split  their  agencies,  and  not  compelled  to  consolidate 
the ui  into  one  mass.  In  the  second,  hereditary  orders  are 
eulogized  as  the  only  remedy  for  such  a  political  evil.  The 
argument  used  against  a  single  assembly  as,  that  "  it  is  lia- 
ble to  all  the  vices,  follies  and  frailties  of  an  individual." 
Or,  in  other  words,  like  a  king.  Then  a  king  or  an  indivi- 
dual must  be  liable  to  all  the  «  vices,  follies  and  frailties"  of 
a  single  assembly.  Mr.  Adams  was  forced  to  use  one  of 
these  political  beings,  as  a  mirror  to  reflect  the  defor- 
mity of  the  other.  But  forgetting  their  similitude,  he 
becomes  in  his  system  the  admirer  of  that,  selected  in 
his  dissertation  to  exhibit  a  single  assembly  in  an  exe- 
crable light . 


588  authokity. 

The  dissertation  urges  an  annual  election  of  an  exeets 
live  or  governoiir,  as  the  means  of  securing  his  #  affection 
for  the  people,  the  representatives  and  the  council.'*  The 
system  recommends  an  hereditary  executive  or  a  king,  ae 
the  means  far  securing  his  affection  for  the  people.  One  re- 
commends a  rotation  in  offices  ;  the  other  that  they  should 
be  for  life  and  inheritable. 

The  dissertation  asserts,  that  the  constitution  itproposes# 
would  introduce  knowledge,  inspire  the  people  with  dignity, 
good  humour,  good  morals,  good  manners,  virtue  and  civili- 
ty ;  that  it  would  make  them  brave  and  enterprising,  sober, 
industrious  and  frugal ;  and  that  if  a  confederation  was 
formed  only  for  the  eases  of  war,  trade  and  controver- 
sies between  the  colonies,  they  would,  under  such  forms 
of  government,  be  unconquerable  by  all  the  monarchies  of 
Europe. 

The  system  transfers  these  eulogies  to  the  English  form 
of  government ;  and  recommends  that  monarchy,  as  parti- 
cularly well  contrived  for  war,  although  it  was  one  of  the 
European  group  of  monarchies,  defied  by  the  dissertation, 
with  an  unarmed  American  democracy,  not  containing  one- 
twentieth  of  their  number. 

In  advocating  the  doctrine  of  compounding  a  govern- 
ment with  orders,  Mr.  Adams  has  omitted  to  consider  the 
moral  principles  of  such  forms.  Except  that  he  insists  up- 
on the  evil  principle,  jealousy,  as  an  effect  of  these  forms, 
likely  to  produce  harmony  and  peace.  The  moral  princi- 
ples, fear  and  corruption,  arc  not  more  sordid,  base  and 
brutal,  than  jealousy  between  political  orders.  Fear,  cor- 
ruption and  jealousy,  are  essential  principles  of  every  here- 
ditary system,  past  and  present.  In  his  dissertation,  Mr. 
idams  indignantly  rejects  the  idea  of  founding  a  govern- 
ment in  a  principle,  sordid,  base  and  brutal,  and  considers 
virtue  as  the  "  principle  and  foundation  of  government  most 
likely  to  promote  general  happiness/' 

Two  ideas  are  suggested  by  his  considering  virtue  as  u 
principle  of  government.      One,   as  requiring  a  virtues. 


AUTHORITY,  S3§ 

nation  ;  the  other,  as  only  requiring  a  virtuous  government, 
or  oac  founded  in  good  moral  principles.  The  former  ideu 
is  most  common ;  the  latter,  most  correct.  The  principles 
of  a  society  may  be  virtuous,  though  the  individuals  compos 
ing  it  arc  vicious.  Vicious  beings  may  severally  wish  for 
security  against  vicious  beings,  and  this  can  only  be  obtained 
by  good  moral  principles.  The  moral  being  called  gov- 
ernment, is  instituted  to  restrain  the  vices  of  man,  as  a 
moral  being  also.  Its  morals  must  be  more  perfect  than 
the  morals  oi*  man,  or  it  can  never  make  him  better.  And 
although  man  is  its  author,  yet  an  author  can  compose 
a  better  system  of  morality,  than  his  own  example  ex- 
hibits. 

At  this  era  of  the  world,  avarice  is  man's  predominant 
vice.  It  can  only  be  gratified  at  the  cost  of  man,  and  of  the 
major  number  of  men.  These  majorities  have  an  interest. 
ami  a  power  to  defend  themselves  against  it,  by  virtuous,  just 
ur  equal  principles  of  government;  and  societies  composed 
of  avaricious  members  must  be  founded  iu  these  principles, 
to  afford  the  utmost  gratification  to  the  avarice  of  the  ma 
jority,  because  it  cannot  gain  so  much  by  unjust  laws  for 
pillaging  a  minority,  as  by  just  laws  for  suppressing  pillage. 
In  ail  partnerships  for  gain,  banking  or  commercial,  care 
2s  taken  to  prevent  one  or  a  few  of  the  members,  from  grati- 
fying their  avarice  at  the  expense  of  the  rest.  Avarice  pro- 
pels the  partners  towards  this  precaution.  The  same  prin- 
ciple, the  same  interest,  and  the  same  motive,  propels  na- 
tions to  save  their  liberty  and  property  from  ambition  and 
avarice.  By  tiie  cases  quoted,  we  sec  that  an  avaricious 
society  can  form  a  government  able  to  defend  itself  against 
the  avarice  of  its  members.  It  requires  such  a  government 
more  than  a  benevolent  society.  Thus  men  can  form  a  gov- 
ernment, able  to  restrain  the  vices  of  man.  The  more  vici- 
ous he  is,  the  more  he  needs  a  virtuous  government.  Cities 
being  more  vicious  than  the  country,  require  a  more  virtu 
gus  form  of  government.  Accordingly,  they  are  generally 
obliged  to  ask,  and  monarchy  to  grant,  charter*  for  civil 


&5V  aVTHOEITP. 

government,  founded  in  republican  principles  ;  because  tlus 
necessity  for  a  good  government,  becomes  more  urgent  as  the 
people  become  more  vicious ;  just  as  the  worse  the  partners,. 
the  hotter  must  be  the  articles. 

It  is  a  consolation  to  observe,  as  a  vicious  majority  can 
only  defend  itself  against  vicious  minorities,  by  founding 
society  or  government  in  good,  just  and  equal  moral  princi- 
ples, that  the  interest  of  vice  is  enlisted  on  the  side  of  vir- 
tue; and  suggests  the  establishment  of  such  forms  of  gov- 
ernment's will  produce  a  benign  influence  on  private  mo- 
rals. It  would  be  as  foolish  in  a  national  majority,  to  ena- 
ble one  or  a  few  of  the  members  to  defraud  or  oppress  the 
others,  as  in  a  banking  or  commercial  majority. 

Mr.  Adams,  in  the  dissertation  we  have  copied,  by  eon 
trasting  virtue  and  fear,  ass  principles  of  the  moral  heing 
called  government,  discloses  a  correspondence  with  the  doc- 
trine of  this  essay  ;  which  is,  that  a  government  and  its 
laws,  ought  to  be  founded  in  good  moral  principles,  to  ad 
vance the  interest  of  avast  majority  of  mankind,  however 
vicious  they  may  be. 

If  virtue,  as  a  basis  of  government,  be  understood  to 
mean,  not  that  the  principles  of  the  government,  but  that 
the  individuals  composing  the  nation  must  he  virtuous,  then 
republicks  would  be  founded  in  the  selfsame  principle  with 
monarchies,  namely,  the  evanescent  qualities  of  individuals 
But  interest  is  a  better  and  more  permanent  basis.  Its  won- 
derful  capacity  for  concretion  bestows  on  nohle  orders,  hie- 
rarchies and  stockjobbers,  power  for  oppression,  and  loy- 
alty to  each  other  in  defrauding  ;  and  why  may  it  not  also 
secure  the  fidelity  of  nations  to  themselves,  though  composed 
of  people  equally  as  vicious  ?  Mankind  being  now  too  wise 
to  suffer  governments,  founded  in  superstition  or  fraud,  to 
go  on  undetected,  must  either  submit  to  an  armed  force  able 
to  defy  knowledge  and  protect  guilt,  and  become  less  free 
as  they  grow  more  wise ;  or  use  their  knowledge,  to  disco 
ver  and  secure  their  interest.  Because  the  speculations  of 
errour,  and  the  tongue  of  flattery,  have  assigned  to  repub 


AUTHORITY,  i»$l 

licks,  the  virtue  of  the  people,  and  to  monarchies,  honour, 
as  necessary  principles ;  are  we  to  believe  that  tyranny 
causes  the  human  mind  to  sparkle  with  more  brilliant  ho- 
nour than  freedom;  and  that  freedom  teaches  the  catalogue 
©f  humble  and  meek  virtues  resulting  from  oppression,  bet- 
ter than  tyranny  ?  Or  surmounting  an  authority,  overturned 
by  every  day's  experience,  conclude,  that  bad  men  may  take 
care  of  their  interest  as  well  as  good  men,  make  as  good 
social  bargains,  and  as  successfully  apply  virtuous  principles 
*o  forms  of goverment. 

Mr.  Adams's  expression  is,  «  that  virtue  must  be  the 
principle  of  a  republican  government."  Of  the  government, 
not  of  those  who  live  under  the  government.  He  mean." 
that  the  government  must  be  constituted  upon  virtuous  or 
Sust  principles,  and  not  upon  fraudulent  or  unjust.  In  con- 
formity with  this  idea,  in  his  dissertation,  he  calls  executive 
prerogatives  *<  badges  of  slavery  5"  and  yet  by  his  system 
he  considers  them  as  bulwarks  to  defend  the  people. 

In  his  dissertation,  Mr.  Adams  utters  a  penegyriek  upon 
several  authors,  who  had  written  against  the  English  mo- 
narchy. He  pronounces  with  asperity  the  full  competency 
of  those  writers  to  convince  any  man,  "  that  all  good  gov- 
ernment is  republican  ;"  and  he  removes  every  doubt,  as  to 
the  sense  in  which  he  uses  the  term,  by  observing,  «<  that 
the  only  good  part  of  the  British  constitution  is  republican/' 
And  yet  a  great  portion  of  one  volume  of  Mr.  Adams's 
work,  is  dedicated  to  the  refutation  of  Nedham,  one  of  the 
eulogized  authors,  in  language  nearly  as  rough,  as  that  ap- 
plied in  the  dissertation,  to  those  who  would  not  be  made  re 
publicans  by  Ncdham's  arguments.  In  defence  of  his  dis- 
sertation, Mr.  Adams  relies  upon  Nedham  ;  in  defence  of 
his  later  system,  he  endeavours  to  confute  him.  In  his  dis- 
sertation, he  deduces  a  form  of  government  from  N^dbam'* 
position  <«  that  the  people  were  the  best  guardians  of  their 
•vvu  liberties  5"  in  his  book,  from  the  position,  "  that  the 
people  are  their  own  worst  enemies." 


53tf  AUTUOHITX'. 

Mr.  Adams's  idea  of  judicial  power,  as  expressed  in  the 
dissertation,  accords  with  the  principles  of  this  essay.  The 
judges,  says  he,  «*  should  not  be  dependent  oa  any  man  or 
body  of  men  ,•  they  should  lean  to  none,  be  subservient  to 
none."  For  this  end,  he  proposes  to  give  them  commits 
sions  during  good  behaviour,  and  to  subject  them  to  the 
judgement  of  one  branch  of  the  legislature,  on  the  accusa- 
tion of  another. 

We  agree  in  the  utility  of  judicial  independence  and  impar- 
tiality. The  independence  meant  by  Mr.  Adams,  and  by  all 
other  politicians,  in  speaking  of  judicial  departments,  never 
refers  to  a  sovereign  power,  but  to  a  man  or  body  of  men, 
clothed  with  some  political  function.  The  end  of  judicial 
independence,  is  to  shield  the  judges  against  the  influence 
of  the  creatures  of  the  sovereignty,  and  the  sovereignty 
against  the  evils  of  this  influence,  and  not  to  supersede  the 
sovereignty  itself  by  one  of  its  creatures.  JNot  partiality  to 
a  nation,  but  to  a  faction  or  an  individual,  is  the  evil  to  be 
prevented  by  judicial  independence. 

As  partiality  to  a  nation,  on  the  part  of  judges,  is  not 
the  evil ;  independence  of  the  nation,  is  not  the  remedy. 
The  evil,  partiality,  and  the  remedy,  independence,  both  re- 
fer to  delegated  power,  and  not  to  national  sovereignty  j  and 
are  converted,  by  transferring  their  allusion  to  wrong  ob- 
jects, into  a  political  caricature.  Judges,  independent  of 
nations,  lest  they  should  be  partial  to  delegated  power  ;  and 
subject  to  the  appointment,  patronage  and  removal  of  dele 
gated  power,  lest  they  should  betray  nations  ! 

Upon  this  ground,  it  has  been  urged,  that  judicial  inde- 
pendence of  a  nation,  will  not  shield  judges  against  partial- 
ity for  a  man  or  body  of  men  in  power,  or  against  -becom- 
ing instruments  of  usurpation  in  the  hands  of  governments  ; 
and  that  trial  by  impeachment,  was  not  calculated  to  sup- 
press the  passions  of  men,  to  ensure  an  impartial  judge- 
ment, or  to  allay  in  the  minds  of  judges  every  apprehension 
of  %  man  or  body  of  men. 


AUTHORITY.  535 

On  the  contrary,  it  was  contended  that  a  judicial  respon- 
sibility to  the  nation,  could  only  obtain  forjudges,  indepen- 
dence of  a  man  or  body  of  men  clothed  with  power.  And 
that  the  want  of  publiek  confidence,  naturally  attending 
an  absence  of  responsibility,  with  executive  appointment, 
promotion  and  patronage,  and  legislative  accusation  and 
trial,  would  produce  the  dependence  and  partiality,  depre- 
cated by  Mr.  Adams,  and  too  often  displayed  by  expe- 
rience. It  is  in  the  mode  only  of  obtaining  the  same  end, 
that  the  dissertation  differs  from  this  essay. 

After  all  it  is  admitted,  that  Mr.  Adams's  change  of 
opinion,  can  have  no  influence  upon  the  argument,  except  to 
remove  the  obstacle  of  his  authority,  against  an  impartial 
consideration  of  the  question.  It  was  a  weight  too  her.vy 
for  a  subordinate  rate  of  talents  to  bear,  and  therefore  re- 
course was  had  to  a  powerful  auxiliary. 

But  facts  are  not  altered  by  a  change  of  political  opi- 
nion. They  continue  immutable.  Those  asserted  in  his  dis- 
sertation by  Mr.  Adams,  are  as  true  now  as  they  were  then 5 
and  they  were  then  true,  or  he  would  not  have  asserted  them, 
As  they  cannot  be  retracted,  one,  subversive  of  the  ground 
work  of  his  reasoning  in  favour  of  orders,  is  a  fair  and  pow- 
erful argument. 

"  How  few  (says  he)  of  the  human  race,  have  ever 
l(  had  any  thing  more  of  choice  in  government  than  m 
**  climate." 

If  this  forcible  exclamation  is  true,  as  it  undoubtedly  is, 
it  follows,  that  few  governments,  if  any,  except  those  of  ihe 
United  States,  have  been  the  result  of  national  will  and  intel- 
lect $  and  that  his  mountain  of  quotation  cannot  be  applz 
sable  to  our  governments,  which  were  produced  by  nations,! 
will  or  intellect. 

A  transition  by  the  United  States,  from  force,  fraud  0? 
accident,  to  human  will  and  intellect,  as  the  source  of  gov- 
ernment, was  the  event  which  justified  Mr.  Adams  in  ap- 
plying the  terms  <k  enlightened  age"  to  the  era  of  our  revo- 
lution i  and  isx  felicitating  himeelf  upon  existing,  at   the 


bbb  *UTH0R1.TJF. 

period  "  when7  the  greatest  philosophers  and  lawgivers  of  at:  • 
tiquity  would  have  wished  to  have  lived."  Had  they  riseu 
from  their  graves  at  that  time,  they  would  have  joined  tlieir 
labours  to  his,  in  drawing  government  from  this  new  soupee ; 
at  least  it  was  this  unprecedented  event  which  caused  Mr. 
Adams  to  think,  that  the  sages  of  antiquity  would,  if  they 
could,  have  lived  altogether  in  the  United  States,  at  the  era 
of  the  revolution. 

But  if  they  could  now  rise  from  their  graves,  how  sore- 
ly would  they  feel  the  mortification  of  finding,  that  Mr. 
Adams  himself  had  given  up  national  opinion  as  a  source  of 
government ;  and  had  gone  back  in  search  of  political  im- 
provement to  forms,  with  which  it  had  as  Utile  to  do,  as  with 
climate  ? 

The  discovery,  that  the  moral  effects  of  accident,  fraud 
and  foree,  were  better  than  the  moral  effects  of  man's  free 
intellectual  powers,  would  either  have  exceedingly  humiliat- 
ed these  sages,  or  they  would  have  denied  the  fact,  and  have 
placed  before  the  United  States  a  picture  of  all  the  govern- 
ments, not  the  result  of  free  intellect,  to  compare  with  the 
only  government  which  is  so. 

Orders  would  he  the  most  prominent  feature  in  the  whole 
•if  these  arbitrary  or  accidental  governments;  and  no  in 
itance  would  appear  of  their  having  ever  been  created  by  fro  o 
national  intellect.  Mankind  have  beea  scourged  for  ages 
by  these  self  created  beings  ;  the  United  States  have  prefer- 
red free  will  and  intellect  to  this  scourge ;  and  the  question 
?s,  whether  they  will  revolt  from  their  own  understandings, 
for  the  sake  of  having  as  little  choice  in  their  government 
as  in  their  climate. 

If  the  circle  of  ages  has  exhibited  all  polished  nations, 
except  one,  without  choice  as  to  their  forms  of  government  ; 
and  if  most,  or  all  of  these  disinherited  nations,  contained  no 
hie  or  separate  orders;  can  time  make  stronger  the  evi 
dence,  to  prove,  that  these  orders  were  in  reality  the  usurp 
crs  of  the  birthright  belonging  to  nations,  and  that  the  soli 
tary  uation,  so  fortunate  as  to  preserve  it,  owes  its  prospa 
rity  to  their  absence  ? 


AUTH01UTY.  $$$ 

ll  thence  follows  with  a  degree  of  certainty,  seldom  at* 
tainable  in  argument,  that  the  United  States,  onee  seduced 
into  the  establishment  of  a  limited  monarchy,  or  a  monar- 
chical republick ;  or  suffering  a  paper  order  or  interest 
to  acquire  an  iniluence  over  their  governments  ;  would, 
thereafter,  like  other  nations,  find  government  as  impe- 
rious as  climate,  and  never  more  exercise  a  rig  lit  of 
choice. 

Although  Mr.  Adams's  dissertation  is  replete  with  sen- 
timents adverse  to  his  system  of  orders,  and  concurring 
•with  the  principles  of  this  essay,  one  more  only  will  he  par- 
ticularly quoted. 

America,  says  he,  has  been  favoured  by  heaven  with 
the  power  of  choosing,  changing  and  building  government 
from  the  foundation;  and  in  this  enlightened  age  the  hap- 
piness of  the  people  is  allowed  to  he  the  end  of  gov- 
ernment. 

If  this  power  is  really  a  favour  from  heaven,  it  would 
be  no  proof  of  the  wisdom  or  piety  of  the  present  age  to  re- 
turn it  to  the  state  of  abeyance,  in  which  it  resided,  until 
the  United  States  obtained  the  possession  and  benefit  of  it, 
A  successful  vindication  of  the  right  to  draw  government 
from  the  sources  of'intelleet  anil  will,  is  the  proof  adduced 
by  Mr.  Adams  of  the  Sight  of  the  present  age;  remnants 
of  feudal  darkness  will  obscure  this  light ;  because  it  is  im- 
possible for  a  nation  divided  and  distracted  by  orders, 
peaceably  and  deliberately  to  make,  mend,  destroy  and  re- 
new forms  of  government,  as  intellect  and  will  may  dictate. 
And  if  Mr.  Adams's  rapture  and  adoration  were  proper,  in 
contemplating  the  blessing  of  *elf  government,  so  new  and 
wonderful  that  he  ascribes  it  to  the  immediate  interposition 
of  heaven,  ought  the  present  generation  to  conclude  their 
thanksgiving,  by  requesting  the  deity  to  resume  his  bene- 
faction ? 

The  next  instance  of  the  force  of  circumstances  on  the 
human  mind,  to  which  we  will  advert,  for  the  sake  of  ascer- 
taining the  value  of  authority  and  the  folly  of  confidence, 

6e 


a  I  6  AUTHORITY, 

results  from  a  short  urtmparison  between  an  address  to  the 
people,  gratuitously  proposed  by  Mr.  Jay  whilst  president 
of  Congress,  on  the  13th  of  September,  1779,  and  una- 
nimously adopted  by  that  body,  with  a  passage  in  the 
Federalist  or  Publiusj,  a  hook  partly  ascribed  to  this  gen- 
tleman. 

The  indignation  agahut  the  British  form  of  government, 
and  the  ardent  affection  for  ours,  which  the  first  breathes, 
are  not  considered  as  of  much  weight,  except  to  prove  that 
their  principles  were  different ;  because,  although  Mr. 
Jay's  conviction  at  the  time  is  evinced  by  his  resorting  to 
the  deity  as  a  witness  of  it,  yet  conviction  may  be  certainly 
raised  and  lowered  by  zeal,  as  well  as  by  circumstances. 

Without  availing  ourselves  therefore  of  Mr.  Jay's  elo- 
quence, we  shall  only  draw  out  of  it  a  few  cool  opinions 
and  simple  facts.  He  considers  «  equal  liberty  as  our  prin- 
"  ciple  of  government,  our  rulers  as  the  servants  and  not 
Si  the  masters  of  the  people,  and  our  governments  as  founded 
M  in  freedom  ;  the  British  monarchy  as  crumbling  into 
*<  pieces,  the  parliament  as  venal,  the  country  as  oppressed, 
"  the  people  as  destitute  of  publick  virtue,  and  the  govern- 
fl  ment  as  violating  the  rights  of  mankind."  And  after 
contrasting  the  English  and  American  forms  of  gevernment, 
in  his  forcible  style,  he  emphatically  concludes,  that  one  is 
the  tyrant,  the  other,  the  servant  of  the  people.  It  was  the 
object  of  the  address,  to  inspire  the  United  States,  by  this 
fact,  with  perseverance  in  the  prosecution  of  the  war. 
Therefore,  both  Mr.  Jay  and  the  Congress  must  have  disa- 
greed with  Mr.  Adams,  in  the  similiarity  between  (lie  two 
forms,  for  which  he  so  laboriously  contends  ;  or  in  bis 
opinion,  that  the  people  addressed  were  enlightened. 

The  Federalist  contains  an  eulogy  of  the  English  form 
of  government,  infinitely  transcending  the  compliment  paid 
to  it  by  Mr.  Adams,  and  incapable  of  augmentation.  Mr. 
Adams's  similitude  between  ship-building  or  navigation,  and 
this  complicated  moral  machine,  allowed  to  it  only  a  com- 
parative degree  of  excellence,    which   miglvt  have,  beer 


axtended  by  substituting  a  watch,  or  at  least  a  spinning 
machine  moved  by  fire,  as  the  object  of  comparison.  But 
the  Federalist,  by  an  ingenious  use  of  Montesquieu,  exalts 
it  to  the  station  among  governments  which  Homer  occupies 
among  poets. 

If  the  invective  in  Mr.  Jay's  address,  and  the  eulogy  in 
the  Federalist,  flowed  from  the  same  pen,  the  subjection  of 
the  human  mind,  in  its  highest  perfection,  and  utmost 
maturity,  to  circumstances,  is  here  again  demonstrated  j 
and  in  this  demonstration,  is  exhibited  the  folly  of  expect- 
ing  to  find  a  steady  patriot  in  a  slave  to  uncontrollable 
events. 

The  same  book  has  furnished  us  with  the  finest  defini- 
tion of  that  species  of  patriotism,  imbibed  or  bestowed  by 
confidence  and  authority.  The  allegiance  of  its  supposed 
authors  to  its  tenets  was  destroyed  by  circumstances,  upon 
the  very  heels  of  promulgation  ;  and  they  arranged  them- 
selves  in  political  opposition,  whilst  their  tenet*,  through  the 
blind  submission  of  confidence,  and  the  despotic^  power  of 
authority,  acquired  the  singular  felicity  of  maintaining  an 
orthodoxy  with  hostile  parties ;  each  of  which  assailed  their 
antagonists  from  the  same  quiver,  and  as  ardently  believed 
in  their  own  patriotism,  as  inimical  fanaticks  who  are  the 
dupes  of  leaders,  do  in  their  own  sanctity. 

Though  integrity,  talents  and  elegance  of  style,  were 
unable  for  a  moment  to  retain,  against  the  force  of  new  cir- 
cumstances, the  adherence  of  only  three  political  doctors 
to  their  own  prescription;  yet  fidelity  to  our  constitution 
was  mutually  allowed  by  opposite  parties  to  this  fortunate 
composition ;  each  only  claiming  for  itself  an  adherence 
to  the  constitution  and  its  paraphrase,  and  charging  its 
antagonist  with  a  violation  of  both.  Either  this  fidelity  or 
one  of  these  accusations  are  necessarily  unfounded  ;  yet 
Confidence  has  hitherto  been  unable  to  discern  its  errour. 

To  me,  this  authority  for  opposite  principles,  appears  to 
be  planted  in  the  ancient  analysis  of  governments,  to  be 
neatly  cultivated  with  the  English  doctrine  of  checks  and 


538  AUTHOTMTX. 

balances,  and  to  he  highly  adorned  with  all  the  comely  thee- 
ries  of  limited  monarchy,  invented  between  the  accession  of 
Charles  f.  and  the  death  of  William  of  Orange  j  but 
liever  actually  practised  ;  theories,  indebted  to  the  corrup- 
tion bv  which  thev  are  defeated,  foe  the  false  evidence  of 
their  supposed  operation,  Like  a  foreign  silk,  embroidered 
With  tlowers  of  gold  and  silver,  its  splendour  on  one  side 
conceals  the  defects  of  its  workmanship  ;  and  its  insufficien- 
cy for  use  and  comfort,  as  well  as  its  hidden  deformities, 
can  onlj  be  discovered  by  adverting  to  the  other.  The  Eng- 
lish writers  during  the  specified  period,  contain  whatever  is 
to  be  fo.md  in  the  Federalist ;  but  all  their  theories  sunk,  as 
soon  as  they  were  promulgated,  in  a  vortex  of  corruption  j 
and  the  nation  has  drawn  from  them  an  overwhelming  addi- 
tion to  its  burdens.  What  is -to  keep  the  same  doctrines 
from  the  same  fate,  or  shield  the  United  States  under  their 
guidance,  from  the  same  effects  ?  Our  genuine  native  policy, 
being  woven  with  strong  homespun  threads  of  plai  i  princi- 
ples, undarned  by  a  fragile  foreign  glossy  manufacture,  more 
likely  to  ruin  than  to  improve  its  texture,  exposes  us  to  none 
of  those  calamities  drawn  by  England  from  a  system,  resort- 
ed to  by  the  Federalist  for  the  explanation  of  this  policy.  By 
its  capacity  of  operating  without  the  help  of  bribery  awl  cor 
ruption,  it  discloses  its  radical  difference  from  a  system,  so 
universally  allowed  to  require  such  assistance,  as  to  have 
inspired  its  votaries  with  a  notion,  that  this  bribery  and 
corruption  constituted  its  chief  excellence  ;  in  truth,  there 
lies  no  medium  between  this  opinion  and  a  surrender  of  the 
system  itself.  To  avoid  a  dilemma  so  unpromising,  the  wide 
difference  between  a  derivation  from  fixed  moral  principles* 
or  from  fluctuating  mixtures  of  monarchical,  aris  toe  rati  cal 
and  democratical  orders  or  powers,  is  contended  for  through- 
out this  essay. 

The  truths,  with  which  the  hook  we  are  speaking  of 
abounds,  have  probably  so  far  covered  the  errour  of  deriving 
the' general  constitution,  from  the  idea  of  the  old  analysis, 
commingled  in  imitation  of  the  English  system,  ait  to  liar? 


AVTHORIT  O 

infused  some  drops  of  this  foreign  poison  into  the  laws  of  the 
United  Stales.  It  considers  a  constitution  us  defectives 
where  the  whole  power  is  lodged  in  the  hands  Or  the  people 
or  their  representatives.*  It  represents  the  British  stand- 
ing army  as  harmless.f  It  ealls  a  distinction  hetvveen  a  con- 
federacv  and  a  consolidation  of  the  states  •«  more  subtle 
than  accurate.*'^  It  asserts  that  English  liberty  by  the  re- 
volution of  lr.8s  was  ••  completely  triumphant.'^  It  inge- 
niously defends  mercenary  armies,**  and  it  declares  "  that 
in  the  usual  progress  of  things,  the  necessities  of  a  nation 
in  every  stage  of  its  existence,  will  be  found  at  least  equal  t>> 
its  resonrces."ff  These,  and  a  multitude  of  similar  doctrines, 
swallowed  by  both  the  parties  which  have  divided  the  na- 
tion between  them,  in  the  sweet  but  poisonous  pill  of  confi- 
dence, must  necessarily  have  bestowed  upon  legislation,  ;. 
tone  not  perfectly  in  unison  with  the  genuine  policy  of  the 
United  States.  What,  for  instance,  could  a  nation  suffer,  or 
tyranny  extort,  between  an  eternal  payment  and  dispensa 
tion  of  resources  equal  to  its  ability  ? 

It  was  unfortunate  that  so  great  a  mass  of  zeal,  integ 
rity  and  talents,  should  have  been  expended  at  the  juncture 
of  a  controversy,  calculated  rather  to  inspire  the  ingenuity 
necessary  to  win  a  victory,  than  the  cool  inquiries  neces- 
sary to  discover  truth  ;  and  that  party  collisions  should  sub- 
sequently have  deprived  it  of  the  liberty  of  applying  to  this 
controversial  composition,  the  test  of  a  candid  revision.  I 
believe  that  one  of  the  supposed  authors  at  least  does  not  ap 
prove  of  all  its  doctrines:  and  the  occasion  which  produced 
them  having  passed,  neither  tiie  feelings  of  its  authors,  nor 
the  gratitude  and  applause  of  the  publick,  ought  to  undergo 
any  change,  from  an  effort  to  preserve  the  policy  of  the 
United  States,  which  this  book  so  eminently  contributed  to 
introduce  ;  suggested  by  a  conviction,  that  however  it  may 
abound,  like  Mr.  Adams's,  with  republican  principles,  these, 

*  No.  8,  p.  43.  !  No.  9,  p.  51.  *  No.  11,  p.  65,  67.— No.  24,  p.  154 
$  No.  29,  p,  187.  **  No.  47,  p.  93.  ft  Vol.  2,  No.  41,  p.  40.  Tie 
bout's  edition,  1799. 


bM  AUTHORITY. 

mingled  up  with  the  principles  of  the  British  form  of  gov- 
ernment, constitute  such  a  picture  of  our  policy,  as  Chris- 
tian precepts  mingled  with  the  fictions  of  Mahomet,  do  of 
Christianity. 

The  safest  repository  of  the  authority  created  hy  politi- 
cal confidence,  would  be  a  philosopher,  abstracted  from  the 
influence  of  station,  of  party,  of  avarice,  and  of  ambition. 
But  even  this  rare  character,  seduced  "by  genius,  excited  by 
a  love  of  literary  fame,  or  inebriated  by  hypothesis,  is  often 
the  author'  of  splendid  errours,  destined,  however  they  may 
he  admired  by  a  taste  for  elegant  composition,  to  be  detect- 
ed by  common  sense.  If  the  scrutiny  and  wisdom  of  pub- 
lick  opinion  is  necessary  to  restrain  the  honest  flights  of 
imagination,  can  its  application  to  the  corrupt  artifices  of 
self  interest,  and  the  stubborn  prejudices  of  station  mid  pow* 
er,  be  safely  dispensed  with  ?  If  the  general  good  sense,  is 
necessary  to  correct  disinterested  individual  capriciousuess,' 
can  this  unhappy  quality  be  sanctilicd  by  an  union  with  irre- 
sistible temptations  ? 

Godwin  and  Malthus,  philosophers  of  talents,  accom- 
plishments and  integrity,  unsurpassed  by  any  of  their  eon- 
temporaries,  supply  us  with  illustrations  of  this  best  title  to 
political  confidence  and  authority. 

Godwin,  by  equalising  both  knowledge  and  property, 
proposes  to  remove  every  obstruction  to  population;  and 
Malthus  demonstrates  that  this  effect  would  destroy  the  de- 
sign of  Godwin's  system.  And  from  this  demonstration  he 
draws  the  conclusion,  that  population  can  only  be  kept  within 
the  capacity  of  the  earth  to  feed  it,  by  positive  laws  or  by 
misery.  These  are  probably  among  tbe  best  written  books 
which  have  ever  appeared,  and  both  authors  retain  the  fair? 
est  reputations  ;  yet  one  is  a  te\t  book  for  mobs,  and  the 
other  for  tyrants.  Both  the  systems  of  these  adversaries, 
are  built  upon  fragments  of  human  nature.  Godwin's,  on 
its  good  moral  qualities,  exclusive  of  its  evil  ;  Malthus's,  on 
a  single  animal  quality,  exclusive  both  of  its  other  animal 
•qualities,  and  of  all  its  moral  qualities. 


AUTHORITY.  5ii 

The  arguments  used  by  Malthus  to  destroy  Godwin  often 
recoil  upon  himself.  Your  moral  system,  as  we  both  con- 
fess, says  Malthus,  will  place  human  nature  in  a  state  ex- 
tremely favourable  to  population.  Wherefore?  Because  po- 
pulation is  regulated,  as  Godwin  contends,  by  moral  causes- 
If  this  unqualified  admission  destroys  Godwin,  it  must  also 
destroy  a  system  built,  upon  the  contrary  idea,  that  human 
population  is  regulated  by  food.  By  your  division  of  pro- 
perty and  knowledge,  says  Malthus,  you  will  remove  want 
and  misery,  the  cheeks  upon  population,  which  must  of 
course  become  redundant,  because  these  checks  are  removed. 
But  I  propose  to  remove  want  and  misery  by  a  law  to  pre- 
vent procreation.  Well,  does  not  the  redundant  population 
as  certainly  follow,  whether  want  and  misery  are  removed 
in  the  mode,  of  Godwin  or  of  Malthus  ? 

It  is  true  that  Malthus,  aware  of  the  objection,  whilst 
he  allows  to  man's  moral  nature  a  great  influence  upon 
population  to  destroy  Godwin,  so  blends  this  admission  with 
the  entire  dependence  of  population  on  food,  as  to  support 
the  latter  idea  throughout  his  book.  And  as  one  system 
considers  mind  as  the  despot  of  matter,  the  other  considers 
matter  as  trie  despot  of  mind  Whereas  the  fact  is,  that 
with  or  without  civil  government,  population  has  never  been 
able  to  overtake  the  capacity  of  the  earth  to  yield  subsist- 
ence ;  and  therefore  it  is  probable,  that  all  the  operations  of 
food  and  population,  or  of  mind  and  matter,  upon  each  other, 
are  regulated  by  some  unalterable  natural  law.  At  both 
extremities  of  man's  moral  state,  the  virban  and  the  savage, 
we  find  its  traces.  Rather  an  excess  Khan  a  want  of  food, 
is  generally  met  with  in  cities  5  and  whe^e  a  want  of  food  is 
produced  by  a  savage  state,  it  is  never  owing  to  an  incapaci- 
ty of  the  country  to  produce  it.  The  checks  upon  popula- 
tion in  both  states  are  therefore  moral.  Countries,  in 
which  a  few  savages  starve  for  want  of  food,  afford  abun- 
dance for  an  hundred  fold  population,  of  a  different  moral 
character,  as  has  been  demonstrated  in  North  Apnerica. 


$13  AUTHORITY. 

The  cases  offt  vapid  population  after  plagues,  are  weaker 
than  those  of  a  rapid  population,  after  the  expulsion  of  sa- 
vages, by  all  the  difference  between  gaining  the  posses* 
siou  of  an  improved  and  an  unimproved  country.  Both  eases 
are  regulated  by  the  different  moral  impressions  of  wealth 
and  poverty  upon  human  nature.  A.  colony  from  London, 
settling  in  America  on  its  first  discovery,  and  the  remnant 
of  a  plague,  would  both  lose  and  acquire  many  moral  quali- 
ties deeply  affecting  population  ;  and  in  both  ca.se s  the  moral 
character  which  excites  the  population,  flows  from  a  multi- 
tude of  causes  independent  of  food.  Sf  there  are  human  si- 
tuations liich  suspend  the  moral  qualities  calculated  to  im- 
pede population,  and  others  which  awaken  them  :  and  if  a 
certain  degree  of  populousness  never  fails  to  awaken  them; 
then  population  being  graduated  by  a  natural  moral  law, 
there  is  no  need  of  .the  artificial  laws  proposed  by  Mai  thus 
to  check  it  :  nor  any  grounds  for  an  apprehension  that  God- 
win's system  could  have  overturned  this  oak;.. i.  law.  It 
could   onl  at  ,i    by  affecting   several   impossibilities; 

hut  Maltl  alarmed,  brings  into  the  field  a  new  impossi- 
bility to  a  foe  who  can  never  appear.  Godwin  pro- 
pones to  e  j.ialise  wealth  and  knowledge  among  all  men  : 
Malthas  to  equalise  food  and  procreation  almost  as  exten- 
sively: and  Mr.  Adams  to  equalise  wealth  and  power  be- 
tween three  political  orders.  Thus  we  see  at  one  view  three 
great  authorities,  agreeing  in  principle,  at  war  in  fact,  and 
each  proposing  to  effect  similar  impossibilities.  One  offers 
to  root  out   self  love  and  all   evil  human  qualities,   and  to 

• 

plant  equal  and  universal  knowledge  and  benevolence  where 
where  they  grow*  Another  offers  to  control  the  least  gcov- 
ernahle  human  passion  at  the  most,  inauspicious  epoch  ; 
and  the  third  offers  to  maintain  an  equality  of  wealth  and 
power  between  jealous  rival  parties.  It  is  as  practicable 
for  mankind  to  change,  as  to  suspend  their  nature  for  twen- 
ty years.  The  human  qualities  proposed  by  Malthas  to  be 
subdued,  are  undoubtedly  as  unconquerable,  as  those  pro- 
posed hy  Godwin  to  be  subdued,     indeed,  these  author? 


AUTHORITY.  54S 

seem  to  agree  that  they  are  more  so.  Godwin,  by  reiving 
on  reason  for  suppressing  selfishness  ;  Multhus,  by  resorting 
to  law  for  suppressing;  love. 

It  is  more  likely  that  man's  errours  should  overlook  na- 
iure's  powers,  than  that  his  wisdom  should  outstrip  her 
foresight.  All  her  resources  are  not  explored,  and  it  as- 
sails a  sound  maxim,  to  expect  the  invention  before  the  ne- 
cessity. The  recent  use  of  cotton,  improves  Hpon  wool 
in  economy,  far  beyond  the  improvement  of  wool  upon 
skins.  And  until  we  see  the  improvements  of  agriculture 
exhausted  by  population,  a  system  of  inexorable  oppression 
to  prevent  men  from  starving,  will  by  its  elegance,  only 
more  forcibly  display  the  insecurity  of  resting  upon  au- 
thority. 

This  authority  bursts  upon  the  poor  of  England  with  a 
new  oppression.  To  the  system  for  distributing  wealth  and 
poverty  by  law,  an  exclusion  of  those  to  whom  the  latter 
is  assigned,  from  the  pleasures  of  relationship,  friendship 
and  love,  lest  they  should  be  starved  by  this  artificial  po- 
verty, is  an  admonition,  both  of  the  end  to  which  that  sys- 
tem leads,  and  of  the  coldness  with  which  even  philosophy 
can  look  upon  such  an  end.  The  more  eminent  a  political 
authority  becomes,  the  more  awfully  it  operates  as  an  ad- 
monition. Malthas  teaches  us,  that  the  English  system  of 
distributing  wealth  and  properly,  in  modes  which  the 
United  States  have  began  to  imitate,  instead  of  leaving 
that  distribution  to  industry,  will  devote  one  part  of  a  com- 
munity to  death  by  famine,  or  to  the  necessity  of  living 
above  half  their  lives,  without  affections  and  without 
mind. 

The  creation  of  a  poor  class  by  law,  and  a  refusal 
of  alms  from  law,  to  prevent  a  redundant  population, 
would  very  forcibly  illustrate  the  diff  rence  in  point  of 
benevolence,  between  indirect  slavery  to  a  separate  inte- 
rest, and  direct  slavery  to  an  absolute  master. 

The  terror  of  a  plethora  of  population,  and  the  hope  of 
obtaining  weakh  by  a  plethora  of  paper  stock',  concur  \ti 

70 


defrauding  man  of  his  liberty  and  propel  :y.  By  the.  first, 
lie  is  represented  as  sailing  in  an  ocean  of  atmosphere,  villi 
a  limited  stock  of  food  on  board,  and  he  is  told  that  not- 
ing can  save  him  from  famine,  but  a  power  in  a  few  of 
the  crew,  to  regulate  tiie  births  and  deaths.  The  second 
asserts,  that  the  same  minority,  by  modifications  of  nigs 
and  ink,  can  multiply  wealth  or  the  means  of  supplying 
his  wants,  without  limitation.  It  happens,  not  unfre- 
queutty,  that  the  same  individual  believes,  both  (hut  the 
earth  is  inadequate  to  the  production  of  bread  sufficient 
to  meet  population,  and  that  paper  can  produce  endless 
wealth.  As  if  nature  had  forgotten  to  provide  subsist- 
ence for  her  creature,  man  ;  and  remembered  to  provide  it 
for  his  creature  paper  sioch.  Nature !  who  like  the 
fates,  is  ever  spinning  and  cutting,  whose  business  is  pro- 
duction and  destruction,  and  who  Las  worked  equally 
hitherto,  with  both  her  hands. 

The  iirst  of  these  chimerical  systems,  by  infusing 
a  feverish  zeal  for  educating  a  whole  nation,  has  rather 
checked  than  encouraged  the  progress  of  knowledge. 
Projects  for  turning  all  men  into  philosophers,  advance 
knowledge,  as  those  for  turning  ail  metals  into  gold,  ad- 
vance wealth.  Godwin's  system  is  an  enchantress  ;  Mal- 
thus's,  a  gorgoii.  But  it  is  equal  to  mankind,  whether 
they  are  enticed  into  ignorance  and  slavery  by  the  cap- 
tivating imagination  of  equalising  knowledge  and  pro- 
perty, or  terrified  into  it,  by  the  dread  of  a  redundant 
population. 

A  theory  built  upon  the  whole,  and  not  upon  a  part 
only,  of  man's  moral  character,  can  constitute  a  ica. 
foundation  for  a  government ;  ju»t  as  earth,  not  vapour, 
must  be  a  foundation  for  a  house.  Mr.  (Godwin  deserts 
the  practicable  remedies  of  division  of  power  and  respon- 
sibility, by  which  the  evil  portion  of  man's  nature  *i>ay  bo 
controlled,  for  the  impracticable  idea  p,f  rendering  this 
control  unnecessary,  by  changing  tkat  portion  of  his  na- 
ture.    Mr.  Adams  insist,  ••♦.it  (his  nertion  of  the  human 


ArTHorti.f !  I>4:; 

character  frill  forever  adhere  1o  man  :  but  rejecting,  witfi 
Mr.  Godwin.  the  use  of  a  (1: vision  of  power  and  respon- 
sibility for  it?  control.  Ije  proposes  a  balance  of  wealth 
and  power,  among  inflamed  order?.  And  Mr.  Malthus 
founds  hi*  moral  theory  upon  a  pintle  physical  qualify, 
to  regulate  which,  a  stronger  goverumern;  would  he  ne- 
cessary, than  any  which  has  yet  appeared.  He  proposes 
to  introduce  the  papistical  system  of  celibacy,  without 
the  wealth  or  the  concubinage,  by  which  it  was  made 
practicable. 

Mr.  Godwin's  and  Mr.  Adams's  svslems  have  Tct  a 
further  resemblance  to  eaeh  other.  The  firsi  author  pro- 
poses to  render  responsibility  f-»r  restraining  the  evil  por- 
tion of  human  nature  unnecessary,  by  curing  selfishness 
with  a  balance  of  knowledge  and  property  among  men. 
The  second,  to  render  it  unnecessary,  by  curing  selfishness 
with  a  balance  of  wealth  and  power  among  orders.  One 
nostrum,  is  a  cure  for  all  mankind  :  the  other,  for  the 
few  composing  governments.  The  only  difference  be- 
tween fhem  is-,  that  one  balance  has  never  succeeded,  and 
the  other  lias  never  been  tried.  Our  policy,  differing  from 
the  projects  of  curing  all  men  of  the  evil  qualities  of  hu- 
man nature,  by  a  balance  of  property  and  knowledge,  ac- 
cording to  one  phHosopher;  or  of  curing  only  governing 
m^n  of  these  evil  qualities,  by  a  balance  of  wealth  and  pow- 
er amonjg1  orders,  according  to  the  other,  proposes  to 
subject  ihis  had  portion  of  human  nature  to  a  strict  dis'ci- 
pline,  by  civil  and  political  Jaw  ;  or  a  cede  of  laws,  able  to 
reach  the  delinquencies  of  those  imperfect  beings  who  gov- 
ern, as  well  as  the  delinquencies  of  those  who  are  go'v- 
erned.  Godwin's  system  proposes  to  render  aceounfahle- 
ness  unnecessary,  Mr.  Adams's  applies  it  partially,  ours  uni- 
versally. They  resemble  religious  systems,  declaring  that 
all  men,  a  few,  or  none,  ought,  to  he  exempted  from  the 
sanctions  of  religion.  Our  policy  is  bottomed  upon  the  old 
idea  that  men  bad  two  souls,  one  good  V,\"  other  bad.  Mr. 
Adams's,  upon  the  idea  of  forming  a  government  of  tlirel 


£46  AUTHORITY, 

souls,  all  bad,  as  being  inspired  with  jealousy  and  hatred 
against  each  other.  If  one  good  and  one  bad  soul  make 
a  being,  requiring  all  the  varieties  oflegal  and  political  res* 
ponsibility,  what  is  to  be  expected  of  a  being  compounded 
of  three  bad  soul  j,  without  any  responsibility  ?  Or  how 
can  the  favourers  of  the  system  of  balances  justly  ridicule 
Godwin,  on  account  of  his  project  for  casting  out  man's 
bad  soul  by  reason,  when  they  propose  to  neutralise  or 
destroy  the  good  one  by  hereditary  power  and  jealous 
orders  ? 

Mr.  Adams,  in  availing  himself  of  the  authority  of 
Aristotle,  as  being  "  full  of  the  balances,"  furnishes  us 
with  another  illustration  of  the  subject  we  are  discussing. 

That  ancient  philosopher  assigned  the  legislative  power 
to  the  people  at  large  ;  the  executive,  to  the  magistrates; 
and  the  judicative,  to  the  tribunals  of  justice.  These 
magistrates  and  judges  were  to  be  appointed  by  the 
people.  This  species  of  inixt  government,  he  supposes 
to  be  adapted  for  one  city  ;  and  he  adds,  that  the  gov- 
ernment of  an  agricultural  people,  ought  on  the  other 
feand  to  be  popular. 

The  inconelusiveness  of  these  ideas  is  obvious.     They 
propose    that    magistrates   should   be    magistrates  :    unii 
judges,  judges.      They  suppose  a  more  popular  govern 
ment,  than  one  vfhereiij  the  whole  people  legislate  and  ;■ 
point  all    publick  officers  ;    and  they  are  destitute  of  any 
artificial  arrangement  of  power,  either  by  balancing  co-or- 
dinate bodies  of  men,  subjecting  all  publick  officers  to  na 
tional  control  and  sovereignty,  or  dividing  it  into  manage- 
able sections. 

The  idea  of  a  political  trinity,  coequal,  could  never  have 
entered  into  the  head  of  Aristotle,  because  his  magistrates) 
being  elective,  were  not  co-eternal  with  the  people ;  and 
ei  ng  artificial,  the  architect  might  demolish  as  well  as 
build.  He  would  as  soon  have  imagined,  when  a  statuary 
had  finished  three  statues,  that  these  statues  natural!; 
swallowed  up  the  statuary,  as  when  a,  nation  had  created 


AUTHORITY.  8*2 

ihree  orders  of  power,  that  these  orders  naturally  swallow-, 
ed  up  the  nation,     i 

Aristotle,  being  ignorant  of  Mr.  Adams's  idea  of  mak- 
ing a  government  out  of  three  repel  Ian  t  principles,  or  com- 
pressing three  such  principles  into  an  unity  (a  doctrine 
infinitely  more  miraculous  than  an  unity  among  three  hop 
mogeneous  principles.)  literally  states  the  sovereignty  of 
the  people,  as  the  source,  creator  and  master  of  ever; 
species  of  check  and  balance,  capable  of  being  extracted 
from  his  garbled  sentences  by  amplifying  construction. 

The  gravity  with  which  this  authority  is  urged  by  :\ 
gentleman  of  Mr.  Adams's  erudition,  shews  the  rashness 
of  confidence,  and  the  following  quotation  will  fix  its  value. 
Aristotle's  Rhetorick  contains  this  passage.  *,«  Minerva 
M  preferred  Ulysses;  Theseus,  Helena;  Alexander  was  pre- 
"  ferred  by  the  Goddesses,  and  Achilles  by  Homer.  if 
"  Theseus  did  no  injury,  neither  Alexander.  And  if  the 
"  Tyndaiidce,  neither  Alexander.  And  if  Hector  equalled 
"  Patroelus,  Alexander  equalled  Achilles.  There  are  per- 
sons against  whom  no  judgement  is  to  be  given,  as  prin- 
««  ces."  The  Goddesses  were  the  virtues,  supposed  by  the 
mythology  of  the  times,  to  be  the  makers  of  Gods. 

Authority  is  frequently  corrupted  by  a  subjection  to  au- 
thority, and  the  influence  of  Alexander  must  have  operated 
as  strongly  upon  Aristotle  in  favour  of  monarchy,  as  that 
of  a  wealthy  and  powerful  banking  aristocracy  all  around 
him,  undoubtedly  did  upon  Adam  Smith.  These  ingenious 
men.  in  labouring  hoik  to  satisfy  the  mandates  of  authority, 
and  to  save  their  own  opinions,  have  spread  obscurity  and 
indecision  over  the  latter,  as  the  plainest  declaration  of  w-ar, 
upon  which  a  philosopher  could  adventure,  against  the  l  i'.i- 
tary  conqueror  of  ignorant  nations,  or  the  paper  conquer- 
or of  an  enlightened  people.  Could  influence  re-absorb 
what  it  has  infused  into  the  writings  of  these  great  men, 
one  would  probably  appear  to  be  an  enemy  to  monarchy 
and  the  other  to  aristocratical  establishments,  in  all  their 
forms.    Aristotle  himself  says,  "those  who  are  constrained, 


£48  AtrilOKlTI. 

speak  far  more  untruths  than  truths."     And  lie  counteract 
ces  our  conjecture,  by  a  definition  of  law,  in  which,  cllstin- 
guisimig  between  common  law  and  prescribed  law  ;  mean- 
ing by  the  first  natural  justice,  and  by  the  other  human  in- 
stitution ;    he  defines  the  latter  to  he  "  the  common  con- 
sent of  a  city,"  instead  of  referring  to    monarchy,   or  a 
sovereignty  of  balanced  orders,  as  its  source.     And  (agree- 
ing with  Mr.  Adams  in  the  dissertation  we  haye  transcrib- 
ed) he  says,  "  For  thus  the  people  being  able  to  confer  ho- 
"  nour  on  whom  they  please,  will  not,  envy  these  who  re- 
««  ceive  it ;  and  eminent  men  will  exercise  probity  and  sin- 
«  cerity,  to  gain  the  esteem  of  the  people."    The  people,  not 
privileged  orders,   are  to  draw  eminent  qualities  from  emi- 
nent men.     How  ?    By  election  and  responsibility,   or  by 
rejecting  the  government  of  authority,  and  exercising  self 
government.     A  monarchv  made  out  of  Aristotle,  as  girls 
make  a  peacock  by  patching  together  shreds  of  silk,  in  the 
face  of  his  unequivocal  preference  of  a  popular  government 
for  an  agricultural  people,    would  be  a  perfect  emblem  of 

authority. 

Religion  or  patriotism  by  deputy,  is  the  cause  of  the  er 
roursand  mischiefs  of  both  ;  and  parties  or  individuals,  pre 
tending  to  be  pious  or  patriotick,  because  they  believe 
another  to  be  so,  are  universally  knaves  or  fools.  The  most 
ignorant,  unenslaved  by  authority,  discerns  goodness  hy  the 
light  of  his  conscience,  and  distinguishes  between  an  easy 
and  a  hard  government,  by  the  light  of  his  senses.  But  au- 
thority, by  depriving  us  of  conscience  and  sensation  in  reli- 
gion and  government,  causes  such  calamities  as  are  encoun- 
tered by  a  blind  man  who  is  a  lunatic k.  It  assures  us  that 
human  reason  can  neither  select  a  religion  nor  a  govern- 
ment, for  the  sake  of  making  a  tyrant  of  this  very  reason. 
It  confines  us  to  revelation  and  to  nature,  as  the  authors  of 
its  dogmas,  but  refuses  to  our  human  reason  a  capacity  to 
construe  either,  that  it  may  construe  both  by  its  human 
reason,  to  enslave  and  defraud  ours.  And  being  in  its.  own 
essence  a  tyrant,  i.s  followers,  whether  prompted  by  knav- 


AUTHORITY.  5V9 

ish  zeal  or  pious  folly,  are  as  really  the  slaves   and  instru- 
ments of  tyranny,  and  will  as  certainly  degenerate  i *  1 1 <>  the 

vices  and  baseness  of  slavery,  as  the  followers  of  Peter  the 
hermit,  or  of  Bonaparte  the  conqueror.  Parties  are  un- 
warily admitted  to  be  natural  and  wholesome  to  republicks, 
though  republicks  are  constantly  destroyed  by  parties. 
Without  the  debasements  of  confidence,  and  the  frauds  of 
authority,  their  existence  would  be  seldom  fell,  and  the 
slavery  they  draw  upon  nations,  would  be  never  suffered. 

If  men  will  plant  liberty  in  individual  imperfection  and 
mutability,  instead  of  planting  it  in  the  permanency  and 
perfection  of  principles,  it  must  perish.  The  tools  of 
patriots  frequently  become  the  authors  of  more  evils,  than 
the  slaves  of  tyrants.  A  republican  government  cannot 
live  upon  monarchical  diet.  Free  governments  are  des- 
troyed by  confidence  and  authority.  Can  a  more  dan- 
gerous habit  befal  the  people'  or  parties  of  the  United 
States,  than  one  which  is  the  constant  prelude  of  slavery  2 

We  have  suffered  authority  to  call  forth  in  self  de- 
fence her  stoutest  champions.  She  has  summoned  to  her 
assistance,  an  orator,  a  saint  and  a  hero  ;  the  English  and 
American  parties  of  whig  and  tory,  federalist  and  republi- 
can ;  and  six  philosophers  of  unsurpassed  integrity  and  tal- 
ents. Yet  these  formidable  auxiliaries  only  serve  to  rivet 
die  conclusion,  that  the  common  sense  and  common  ho- 
nesty of  a  nation,  is  both  a  wiser  and  houestcr  source  cf 
government  than  the  authority  of  sahils,  kings,  philoso- 
phers, heroes,  orators,  parties,  factions  or  separate  inte- 
rests in  any  form.  Nor  do  I  know  a  maxim,  the  belief 
of  which  would  be  a  better  security  for  liberty,  than  that 
iu  notion  can  long  preserve  a  free  government,  if  it  it 
guided  b\j  the  caprices  or  frauds  rf  authority  in  the 
enumerated  shapes  or  in  any  others  ;  nor  can  it  be  en- 
slaved, except  b>j  commuting  national  understanding 
and  honesty  for  a  dependence  upon  Uiis  humoursomct 
fickle,  selfish,  ambitious,  and  dishonest  moral  being. 


•      *«0     \ 


SECTION  THE  EIGHTH. 


TltB      MODS      OF      INFUSING     ARISTOCRACY    INT€ 

THE    POLICY    OF    THE    UNITED    STATES. 


Amo??6  civilized  people,  no  species  of  tyranny  can  exist, 
without  the  help  of  aristocracy  ;  because  intricacy  must 
keep  pace  with  knowledge,  to  conceal  or  defend  oppression, 
to  Which  no  nation  ever  submits  knowingly  and  willingly. 
The  weakness  of  simple  monarchy  is  so  extremely  visible, 
that  upon  the  first  emergence  of  a  nation  from  profound  ig 
noranee,  it  is  compelled  to  call  in  the  help  of  aristocracy. 
It  has  never  been  able  to  find  any  other  ally,  because  it  can 
have  no  common  social  interest;  and  being  therefore  forced 
to  purchase  allies  with  property  and  privileges  taken  from 
the  rest  of  a  nation,  these  allies  must  of  course  be  aristo- 
cracies in  fact,  under  whatever  form  they  are  reared.  Aris- 
tocracy existed  without  monarchy,  in  Greece,  Rome  and  Ve- 
nice, by  the  help  of  superstition,  bravery  and  a  complication 
of  contrivances ;  but  at  present,  it  appears  every  where, 
though  in  different  shapes,  as  the  engine  of  monarchy,  be- 
cause of  certain  changes  in  man's  moral  character.  Tn 
France  and  Turkey  it  is  military  ;  in  Spain  it  is  made  of  a 
superstition  so  powerful,  as  to  have  exposed  the  nation  to 
the  loss  of  its  independence,  for  the  shadow  of  monarchy  ; 
in  China,  it  is  made  of  superstition,  civil  privileges  and  mi- 
litary power ;  and  in  England  of  paper  stock,  military  pow- 
iv  and  patronage.  Aristocracy  is  no  where  agrarian.  And 
wherever  it  has  taken  deep  root  in  any  form,  an  agricultu- 
ral interest  has  ceased  to  be  known  or  even  spoken  of,  as 
having  any  influence  in  the  government 


THE    MODE    OF    INFUSING   ARISTOCRACY,  &C.         $0$ 

Whenever  the  lands  of  a  country  are  so  divided,  as  that 
the  weight  of  a  few  landholders  is  not  perceivable  in  the 
government ;  or  so  that  the  majority  of  the  nation  belong 
to  the  agrarian  interest ;  no  species  of  aristocracy,  partak- 
ing in  the  least  degree  of  a  landed  interest,  can  possibly  be 
in  (rod  need. 

Minority  is  an  ingredient,  without  which  no  aristocracy 
can  exist.  A  feudal  king  and  his  barons,  possessed  of  nearly 
all  ihe  lands  of  a  country,  were  a  minority,  constituting  a 
landed  aristocracy,  living  upon  the  rest  of  a  nation.  But 
tub  species  of  aristocracy  being  destroyed  in  England  by  a 
division  of  lands  (though  individual  landed  fortunes  there, 
sfili  greatly  exceed  any  here)  a  new  species  of  aristocracy 
became  necessary  to  sustain  monarchy  in  that  Country,  in 
which  a  landed  interest  has  been  so  far  from  keeping  an  as- 
cendancy, that  it  has  been  unable  to  get  a  just  share  of  repre- 
sentation. 

The  crown,  aided  by  the  remnant  of  the  feudal  aristo- 
craey,  after  contending  against  the  principles  of  civil  liber- 
ty, introduced  by  the  Puritans  into  the  English  policy, 
being  defeated,  abandoned  this  prop  of  monarchy  in  that 
form ;  and  revived  it  in  the  form  of  paper  stock  and  corrup- 
tion, so  as  to  have  undermined  all  the  fortresses  erected 
against  its  power,  and  made  itself  stronger  than  it  was  before 
it  was  reduced. 

A  minority  capable  of  subsisting  upon  a  majority,  being 
an  essential  quality  of  aristocracy,  the  landed  interest  of  the 
United  States,  so  far  from  being  susceptible  of  any  portion 
of  aristocratick  power,  is  precisely  that  interest  which  must 
inevitably  furnish  subsistence  and  privileges  for  an  aristo- 
cracy here  in  any  form ;  because  it  is  a  majority,  and  incapa- 
ble of  subsisting  upon  any  other  interest. 

The  fcetus  of  aristocracy  here,  can  therefore  only  con- 
sist of  the  same  qualities,  which  have  grown  up  into  a  giant 
in  Britain.  These  are  paper  stock,  armies  and  patronage. 
The  question  is,  whether  the  landed  interest  of  the  Unite*? 
States,  os  it  cannot  constitute  an  aristoeratiek  order  between 

71 

t 


bbZ  *  THE    MODE    OF    INFUSING   ARISTOCRACY 

a  king  and  the  people,  had  not  better  unite  with  the  other 
popular  interests,  to  strangle  in  its  cradle  any  infant  visibly 
resembling  this  terrible  giant  ? 

The  modern  species  oF  aristocracy  neither  wants  nor 
fears  titles.     In   their  absence  or  presence,  in  France  and 
in  England,  its  operation  on  the  side  of  executive  power,  is 
the  same.     It  can  operate  in  the  United  States,  as  it  does  in 
France,  without  titled  orders  ;  and  Mr.  Adams's  project  of 
the  balances  is  unable  to  prevent  it  from  operating,  as  it 
does  in  England  with  them.  A  dsdaetiek  aristocratical  body, 
is  no  check,  without  solid  power.     If  the  power  is  derived 
from  representation  and  responsibility,  it  is  not  aristocrati- 
cal;   if  from  corruption  and  patronage,  it  is  the  tool  of  a 
monarch.     And  a  naked  constitutional  precept  would  be  as 
strong  a  cheek  upon  actual  power,  as  a  naked  didactick  aris- 
tocracy.    A  French  senate,  an  English  house  of  lords,  and 
the  conscript  fathers  under  the  Roman  emperors,  are  exam- 
ples of  these  assertions.     These  examples  display  the  just- 
ness  of  Lord    Shaftsbury's    and    Mr.    Adams's   opinion, 
as  to  the  necessity  of  a  balance  of  property  among  orders, 
to  enable  one  order  to  balance  another  in  power.     The  no- 
bility in  England  can  no  longer  balance  the  crown,  because 
its  property  is  lost.     The  senate  in  France  cannot  balance 
the  emperor,    for  want  of  wealth.     The  Roman  emperors 
succeeded  the  conscript  fathers  as  plunderers  of  die  provin- 
ces.    U  results,  that  a  noble  order  here,  could  not  balance 
executive  power  or  the  people,   unless  endowed  with  the 
same  ingredient.     Money  and  arms  are  the  instruments  of 
power.     Mr.  Adams's  system,  without  its  means,  or  princi- 
ples, could  never  work  according  to  his  hopes.     Us  essen- 
t'a   principle  or  means  is,  that  the  noble  order  must  be  en- 
dowed  with  wealth.      Mr.   Adams  ought  to  have  told  us 
from  whom  this  wealth  is  to  be  taken,  and  of  what  it  is  to 
consist. 

Let  us  suppose  that  it  is  to  consist  ofland,  for  the  sake 
of  flattering  the  errour  of  some  landholders  in  the  United 
states,  who  conceive  that,  their  interest  Jeans  towards  an 


INTO    THE    POLlf'l    01     I  HE    U.    STATES.  555 

aristocracy.  It  will  require  one  third  of  the  lands  of  the 
Union,  to  give  a  landed  aristocracy  weight  or  power  suffi- 
cient to  answer  its  purpose.  Suppose  also,  that  the  zeal  of 
landed  men  in  favour  of  a  landed  aristocracy,  should  iutli 
them  to  part  willingly  with  one-third  of  their  lands  to  ob- 
tain it,  and  consider  what  retribution  would  be  made  far  the 
sacrifice. 

The  late  aristocratieal  order  of  France  was  a  landed 
one.  It  derived  its  power  from  possessing  a  third  of  the 
lands.  And  it  used  this  power  to  shelter  its  own  lands  from 
taxation,  and  to  shift  the  publick  burdens  from  its  own 
shoulders,  upon  those  of  the  rest  of  the  people.  Even  a 
landed  aristocracy  must  possess  the  essential  quality  of  feed- 
ing upon  all  except  itself.  Besides,  every  landholder,  in 
nurturing  the  errour  that  his  interest  leans  towards  a  land- 
ed aristocracy,  has  many  computations  to  make;  such  as, 
whether  it  is  likely  that  all  considerable  landholders  will  be 
made  lords;  or  in  case  of  a  selection  of  two  or  three  hundred 
individuals  to  constitute  a  noble  landed  order,  whether  it  is 
likely  that  he  will  be  one.  Whether  such  a  body  can  be 
any  thing  but  the  infamous  instrument  of  a  tyrant,  unless  it 
is  endowed  with  sufficient  property  to  give  it  weight  ;  and 
whether  he  is  willing  to  give  up  one-third  of  his  lands  for 
that  purpose. 

'  If  it  would  be  improvident  in  the  landed  interest  Of  the 
United  States,    to  part  with  one-third  only  of  its  lands,  to 
gain  the  benefit  of  an  aristocracy  capable  of  some  agrarian 
sympathy,   what   must   be  the  foresight  of  mortgaging  the 
wTiole,  to  rear  up  an  aristocracy  of  stock  corruption  and  pa- 
tronage, capable  of  none  ?    England  answers  ihe  question 
But  undeterred  by  her  cries  to  forbear,  the  lauded  interest 
of  the  United  States,  with  exclusive  skill  or  felly,  is  mould 
ing  heavy  ordnance  to  play  upon  itself,   and  whittling  down 
its  own  arms  into  pocket  pistols.     Perpetuity  and  primoge- 
niture are  its   heaviest  artillery  against  stock  monopoly. 
With  these,  the  English  landed  interest  has  fallen  before  it ; 
and  the  American,  without  either,  provokes  the  combat. 


55  i  THE    MODE    OF   INFUSING    A1USTOC1UCY 

The  landed  interest  of  England  foresaw  its  disaster,  and  fell 
against  its  will.  The  singular  management  has  been  re- 
served for  the  lauded  interest  of  America,  of  cherishing 
contrary  principles,  both  tending  towards  its  own  subjuga- 
tion ;  one,  a  division  of  lands  ;  the  other,  an  increase  of 
stock,  armies  and  patronage.  And  whilst  it  would  grudge 
one-third  of  its  lands  to  create  a  sympathizing  aristocracy,  it 
subjects  the  whole  to  he  for  ever  fleeced  by  law,  without 
stint,  to  ceate  an  inexorable  one. 

The  favourers  of  monarchy,  are  so  entirely  convinced 
of  the  ineffieacy  of  a  didaetick  king  or  nobility,  that  they 
will  never  attempt  to  introduce  either.  T hev  will  make 
these  orders  with  solid  am!  not  with  imaginary  materials. 
"With  wealth,  armies  and  patronage.  These  arc  the  trees, 
which,  when  planted  and  suffered  to  grow,  will  produce  the 
fruit  of  course.  They  are  exceedingly  difficult  to  eradi- 
cate, after  they  begin  to  bear.  And  when  mature,  upon 
touching  the  bud,  the  fruit  bursts  forth  in  its  highest 
flavour. 

The  policy  of  the  United  States  must  see,  and  not  wink 
upon  this  reasoning,  if  it  expects  to  hist.  The  landed  inte- 
rest being  incapable  of  becoming  an  aristocracy  itself,  must 
unite  with  the  other  natural  interests  of  society  in  main- 
taining a  republican  government,  or  submit  to  an  aristocra- 
tical  monarchy  of  which  it  cannot  constitute  a  part.  It  can 
possess  no  essential  weight  or  power,  except  under  a  form 
of  government  which  shall  exclude  orders,  because  it  can- 
not become  an  order  itself;  and  because  it  must  pay  and 
not  receive  the  corruption,  found  by  experience  in  Eng- 
land, necessary  to  keep  a  government  of  orders  togethei. 
it  is  yet  able  to  make  a  master  for  itself  in  any  shape  it 
may  fancy  ;  or  to  pluck  the  mask  from  the  Proteus,  aris- 
tocracy, whether  it  lurks  under  a  coronet,  a  mitre  or  paper 
stock. 

It  is  hidden  so  artfully  under  ihe  last,  that  it  is  hard  to 
exhibit  it  in  bodily  shape.  No  escutcheon  is  hung  out.  No 
^nsiirns  are  unfurled  to  mark  its  march  and  its  victory.  And 


INTO    THE,    1'OLICY    OF   THE    U.    STATES.  bo5 

we  must  resort  to  Mr.  Adams's  book  to  find  a  budge,  designa- 
ting stock  aristocracy  with  as  much  correctness,  as  a  crown 
designates  a  king. 

Tbis  badge  be  affixes  to  it  in  the  following  maxim  : 
•*  Money,  which  all  people  now  desire,  and  which  makes  the 
"  essential  instrument  tor  governing  the  world."*  By 
bestowing  on  a  banking  interest  ••  tiie  essential  instrument 
for  governing  tbe  world,"  you  enable  it  to  govern.  Every 
separate  interest,  able  to  govern,  does  govern.  And  every 
separate  governing  interest,  being  a  minority,  must  also  be 
an  aristocracy. 

Let  the  landed  interest  compare  Mr.  Adams's  maxim 
and  bis  system  with  each  other,  and  it  will  see  tbe  force  of 
tbis  reasoning,   and  bis   inconsistency  in  proposing  to  make 
orders  by  conventions,  in  tbe  face  of  bis  own  maxim.  What 
could  these  orders  effect  without  "  the  essential  instrument 
for  governing  the  world  ?"    Would  the  landed  interest  sup- 
ply op  receive  this  essential  instrument  I    and  will  not  this 
instrument  make  governoars  of  a  stock  order,  as  it  does  of 
jthers  ?    Suppose  two  orders,  one,  poor  and  dldaetick,  tin 
other  possessing  tbe  instrument  for  governing ;   where  we  I 
the  power  settle?  The  system  of  dividing  lands  and  amass- 
ing a  paper  interest,  creates  these  orders.     Titles  and  su- 
perstition have  ceased  to  constitute  aristocracy,  among  com 
mercial  and  enlightened  nations.     Are  we  not  in  this  class 
Shall  we  then  expose  our  policy  and  freedom,  to  the  only 
instrument  which   creates  aristocracy,   among  enlightened 
nations,   and  be  content  with  defending  them  against  title 
and  superstition,  which  are  no  longer  instruments  of  ty- 
ranny ? 

The  lauded  interest  of  the  United  States,  being  indisso- 
lubly  betrothed  to  commerce,  has  been  considered  as  so 
completely  covering  tbe  interests  of  the  society,  that  it  is 
used  in  several  states  as  a  substratum  of  civil  government, 
recognised  as  republican,  by  the  guarantee  in  the  federal 

*  Vol!  3.  p.  S6Q. 


b5Q  THE  MODE  OF  INFUSING  AKIST0CRACY 

constitution.  And  where  the  range  oF  suffrage  is  wider, 
but  attended  either  by  a  greater  portion  of  bank  stoek 
or  executive  patronage,  the  tendency  towards  monarchy  or 
aristocracy  is  more  risible,  than  where  suffrage  has  been  in 
some  degree  limited  to  land,  but  attended  with  less  stock 
or  patron&gfe". 

Popular  governments  and  popular  principles  could  not 
thus  How  from  the  landed  interest,  if  it  possessed  aristoera- 
tieal  qualities.  Majorities  only  sustain  such  principles  and 
governments.  By  sustaining  them,  the  landed  interest 
appears  to  cover  a  majority.  Because  it  covers  a  majority, 
it  does  sustain  them  ;  it  being  Impossible  for  a  majority 
to  maintain  itself  by  oppressing  a  minority.  Even  the. 
Goths  and  Vandals  sought  for  plunder  among  great  na- 
tions, not  among  little  clans  less  wealthy  than  themselves. 

The  extent  of  our  country  would  alone  suffice  to  prove, 
that  our  landed  interest  cannot  be  an  aristocracy  or  a  mo- 
narch. Had  the  whole  earth  formed  one  nation,  with  the 
lands  divided  as  they  are  in  one  portion  of  it,  such  a  landed 
interest  would  have  been  as  capable  of  constituting  an  aris- 
tocracy, as  the  landed  interest  of  the  United  States,  It 
would  have  been  the  world  itself:  where  would  there  have 
been  other  worlds,  to  bear  its  oppression  or  obey  its  power? 
Here  it  is  the  nation  :  where  could  it  iind  subjects  upon 
which  to  exercise  an  aristoeralical  spirit?  If  any  species 
of  master  interest  should  be  interpolated  upon  our  policy, 
it  cannot therefore  be  the  landed  ;  the  alternative  of  which 
is  limited  by  the  laws  of  nature,  to  equal  rights  in  a  free 
government,  or  passive  obedience  under  an  arbitrary  one. 

We  lose  truth  in  names  and  phrases,  as  children  lose 
themselves  in  a  wood,  for  want  of  geographical  knowledge. 
Because  titles  have  been  frequently  annexed  to  aristocracy, 
it  is  erroneously  imagined  to  be  made  by  titles  ;  and  the 
thing  dreaded  can  creep  in,  under  an  imagination,  which 
cheats  us  into  a  belief,  that  its  road  lies  through  titles 
only.  Lords  without  wealth,  are  an  aristocracy,  exem- 
plified  by  the  hierarchical  power  of  American   bishops. 


INTO    THE    FOLICY    OF   THE    U.    STATES.  557 

individual  wealth,  not  derived  from  an  exclusive  interest,  is 
so  far  from  participating  in  the  spirit  of  aristocracy,  that 
its  contributions  must  at  least  be  equivalent  to  its  ability, 
and  its  interest  is  therefore  repugnant  to  every  pecuniary 
oppression. 

Even  its  disbursements  through  the  medium  of  tenant, 
would  operate  as  diminutions  of  rent,  and  form  deductions 
from  its  income.  And  this  species  of  individual  wealth* 
constitutes  the  whole  mass  of  power  and  talents,  by  which 
the  poor  and  uninformed  are  secured  in  their  right-  and  li- 
berties, under  the  bond  which  unites  all  persons  having  tiic 
same  interest.  The  prejudices  arising  from  words,  darken 
the  mind  so  generally  against  a  perception  of  real  qualities 
and  principles,  as  to  justify  us  in  recalling  to  the  reader's 
recollection,  a  few  cases  to  expose  the  frailty  of  such  pre- 
cipitate conclusions. 

The  Lacedemonians  had  two  kings;  but  the  govern- 
ment was  aristocratick.  The  Athenians  had  a  king  arehon  : 
but  the  government  was  democratick.  The  Roman  gov- 
ernment was  called  indiscriminately  a  commonwealth  or  re- 
publick,  whether  its  complexion  Avas  aristocratick,  demo- 
cratick or  monarchical.  In  all  its  stages,  the  English  gov- 
ernment has  been  called  a  limited  monarchy,  whether  the 
barons  were  masters  of  the  king  and  people,  the  king  of 
the  people  and  barons,  or  a  paper  fahrick  of  the  rest  of  the 
nation.  The  words  "  king  or  republiek,"  do  not  make  a 
monarch  or  a  free  government.  Nor  do  the  words  •*  duke, 
marquis,  bishop,"  make  an  aristocracy.  It  is  made  by- 
principles  and  qualities.  A  separate  interest  in  a  minority, 
is  one  principle  or  quality,  which  makes  an  aristocracy  ;  ami 
a  mode  of  extracting  wealth  by  law  from  the  rest  of  the. 
nation,  another.  Neither  riches  without  a  separate  inlerrst. 
nor  a  separate  interest  without  riches,  can  in  the  present 
state  of  things  make  an  aristocracy. 

Mr.  Adams  has  cautioned  us  against  the  abuse  of  politi- 
cal phrases,  whilst  he  reiterates  the  expressions  "  a  mixed 
government;  checks  and  balances;  middle  orders."  without 


558  THE    MODE    OF    INFUSING    ARISTOCRACY 

explaining  Use  qualities  or  principles  necessary  to  make 
those  checks,  balances  or  middle  orders  ;  or  considering  the 
influence  upon  this  theory,  from  armies,  patronage*  cor- 
ruption, the  poverty  of  a  nominal  middle  order,  or  the  enor- 
mous wealth  of  a  separate  interest.  Had  Tacitus  underta- 
ken to  recommend  the  government  of  the  Emperors  to  the 
Romans,  he  would  in  like  manner  have  used  the  terms  con- 
sul, senate,  patrician,  plehcian  ;  and  by  suppressing  the 
qualities  of  these  orders,  he  might  have  easily  proved, 
iuai  a  limited  monarchy  existed  under  the  Roman  empe- 
)•:••«.  as  Well  checked,  balanced  and  provided  with  mid- 
dle orders*  as  that  existing  under  the  corrupt  system  of 
England. 

As  governments  change,  names  represent  different  thing! 
but  are  often  retained  to  gull  prejudice  and  varnish  tyranny. 
For  this  end,  the  names  of  senate,  consul  and  patrician 
remained  in  Rome.  For  this  end,  the  name  "  parliament" 
remains  in  England.  In  neither  ease,  was  "  free  and  mode- 
rate government"  preserved;  and  in  both,  oppression  was 
the  effect  of  real  changes  under  old  names. 

Mr.  Adams  has  even  called  the  English  form  of  govern- 
ment "  republican  ;•"  but  it"  the  United  States  should  slide 
into  it  for  that  reason,  they  would  act  as  the  Athenians 
would  have  acted*  by  giving  to  Clitomaehns  (who  had  been 
branded  with  Infamy)  the  command  of  an  army,  because  his 
mime  signified  u  illustrious  warrior." 

The  hooks  of  fraud  and  tyranny,  arc  universally  baited 
with  melodious  words,  "  Passive  obedience"  was  a  bait 
sacrilegiously  drawn  from  scripture.  «  Church  and  state," 
from  a  fear  of  popery.  "  Checks  and  balances,  and  pub- 
lick  faith  and  credit,"  arc  still  more  musical  baits,  and 
however  harshly  "  patronage,  corruption,  paper  stock 
and  standing  armies,"  may  at  lirst  sound,  even  these  words 
are  at  length  thought  by  some  to  contain  much  secret; 
harmony. 

Fine  words  are  used  to  decoy,  and  ugly  words  to  affright. 
s(  Security  to  private  property"  is  attractive.     "  Invasfftn 


INTO    TUB    POLICY    OF   THE    V.    STATES.  559 

of  private  property"  deterring.  The  invader  of  course  de- 
voutly uses  the  first  phrase,  and  indignantly  applies  the 
second  to  those  who  oppose  him.  Where  is  there  an  in- 
stance of  an  invasion  of  private  property*  equal  to  that 
effected  by  the  pamper  system  of  England?  As  its  greatest 
invader,  it  has  of  eourse  been  the  loudest  advocate  for  its 
safety. 

st  Energetiek  government"  is  a  phrase  happily  chosen  to 
please  honest  men,  and  to  beguile  nations  of  unmanageable 
power.  Under  the  agreeable  jingle  in  the  antithesis,  be- 
tween "  protection  and  allegiance"  was  long  hidden  a  large 
reservoir  of  arbitrary  power.  Of  the  same  family  is  the 
ancient  idea  of  "  a  contract  between  the  king  and  the  peo- 
ple." Implying  equality,  either  party  might  construe  this 
contract,  and  the  active  power  of  construction  being  in 
the  hands  of  kings,  they  made  all  their  own  actions,  ful- 
filments, and  such  actions  of  the  people  as  they  pleased, 
breaches. 

There  is  edification  and  safety  in  challenging  political 
■words  and  phrases  as  traitors,  and  trying  them  rigorously 
by  principles,  before  we  allow  them  the  smallest  degree  of 
confidence.  As  the  servants  of  principles,  they  gain  admis- 
sion into  the  family,  and  thus  acquire  the  best  opportunities 
of  assassinating  their  masters,  should  they  become  trea- 
cherous. That  useful  and  major  part  of  mankind,  compri- 
sed within  natural  interests  (by  which  I  mean  agricultural, 
commercial,  mechanical,  and  scientifick  ;  iu  opposition  to 
legal  and  artificial,  such  as  hierarchical,  patrician,  and 
banking)  is  exclusively  the  object  of  imposition,  whenever 
words  are  converted  into  traitors  to  principles. 

The  good  words  "  order,  a  sacred  regard  for  private  pro- 
perly, national  credit,"  have  made  the  British  government 
bad  ;  and  the  good  word  «  truth"  makes  sedition  laws.  The 
same  words,  faithful  to  principles,  v/ould  protect  private 
property  against  stock,  keep  a  nation  out  of  debt,  destroy 
sedition  law,  and,  in  short,  be  the  allies  of  honest  and  mode- 
rate government. 

72 


&60  THE    MODE    OF    INFUSING    ARISTOCRACY 

Thus  the  word  "  energy"  may  be  an  ally  of  freedom  or 
despotism.  The  energy  of  monarchy  is  distinct  in  its 
qualities  and  end  from  the  energy  of  republicanism.  One 
is  made  of  orders,  stock,  patronage  and  armies,  to  maintain 
the  power  of  a  government  over  a  nation  ;  the  other  of  equal 
rights,  taxation  for  national  use,  division  of  power,  publick 
opinion  and  a  national  militia,  to  maintain  the  power  of  a 
nation  over  a  government.  Monarchical  energy,  is  a  Delilah, 
knowing  that  the  great  strength  of  free  government  lies  in 
republican  energy,  and  omitting  no  opportunity  of  shaving  it 
away,  to  make  room  for  itself.  When  it  has  once  bound  or 
blinded  the  popular  Sampson,  however  he  may  chance  to 
take  vengeance  of  bis  enemies,  lie  is  generally  crushed  in 
their  fall. 

Between  the  introduction  of  aristocratical,  and  the  expul- 
sion of  republican  energy,  there  is  an  interregnum  of  prin- 
ciple, which  requires  great  acuteness  for  the  preservation 
of  property.  Aristocratical  principles  favour  artificial  pro- 
perty, such  as  paper  stock,  office,  and  corporate  privileges  ; 
republican,  substantial  property  obtained  by  industry 
and  talents,  and  not  by  law  and  sinecure.  One  species  of 
this  property  preys  upon  the  other.  And  it  requires  some 
judgement  to  change  property,  as  the  nature  of  its  protection 
changes  ;  to  escape  from  the  drudgery  of  industry  and  tal- 
ents, and  to  share  in  the  luxury  of  stock,  office  and  privilege. 

Principles,  congenial  to  aristocracy  (among  which  mono- 
polies of  wealth  by  law  have  been  universally  esteemed)  are 
huntsmen  in  pursuit  of  republicanism,  to  strip  her  of  her 
plumage.  Will  she  turn  and  defend  herself,  or  like  a  foolish 
bird,  expect  to  escape  by  shutting  her  eyes  upon  her  enemy  ? 

It  is  extremely  important  that  private  property  should  be 
clearly  ascertained,  to  withstand  the  assaults  botli  of  those 
who  would  abolish  it  by  mobs,  and  of  those  who  would  de- 
fraud it  by  law  to  create  an  aristocracy.  Civilized  society  is 
dissolved  by  the  enthusiasm  of  one  party,  or  corrupted  by  the 
knavery  of  the  other;  and  it  is  the  policy  of  our  system  to 
guard  against  both.    To  apply  this  policy  to  the  preservation 


INTO    THE    POLICY    OF   THE    if-    STATES.  501 

of  the  ligament  upon  which  its  own  preservation  depends,  the 
nature  of  that  ligament  ought  to  be  thoroughly  understood. 

The  fruit  of  labour  or  industry,  is  an  unequivocal  species 
of  private  property  ;  is  that  also  an  unequivocal  species, 
which  takes  away  this  fruit  ?  If  a  law,  which  enables  A  to 
transfer  to  himself  U's  unequivocal  private  property,  may 
boast  of  the  protection  it  gives  to  property,  by  securing  B's 
to  A,  oppression  and  fraud  may  upon  the  same  ground  jus- 
tify their  most  atrocious  actions.  And  if  laws  for  bestowing 
wealth,  may  be  permanent,  rigid  and  insatiable  extortion- 
ers, they  cannot  be  also  guardians  and  protectors  of  private 
property. 

Such  laws  succeed,  by  seizing  upon  the  passion  of  avarice, 
and  .bewildering  computation.  Although  a  vast  majority 
of  mankind  universally  lose  property  by  these  laws,  each 
individual  is  at  a  loss  how  to  class  himself.  Deluded  by 
(he  hope  of  gain,  he  submits  to  an  immoral  mode  of  enrich- 
ing some,  at  the  expense  of  others  ;  and  yet  by  considering 
whether  he  is  a  member  of  general  and  natural,  or  of  exclu- 
sive and  factitious  interests,  the  difficulty  would  vanish.  It 
is  easy  to  determine,  whether  we  subsist  by  labour,  industry 
or  talents  ;  or  by  patronage,  privilege,  sinecure  or  stock. 
True  private  property,  is  a  political  being  permanently  guid- 
ed by  good  moral  principles,  because  its  interest  is  to  do 
right  ;  spurious,  one  as  permanently  guided  by  evil,  because 
its  interest  is  to  do  wrong.  The  enmity  between  them  is 
exactly  that  between  religion  and  idolatry.  Laws  may  be 
either  the  accomplices  of  spurious,  or  the  protectors  of  le- 
gitimate private  property.  And  the  principle  by  which 
they  are  stampt  with  one  or  the  other  of  these  characters, 
ascertains  what  private  property  is.  Laws  to  enable  men 
to  keep  their  property,  stand  exactly  opposed  to  laws  for 
transferring  it  to  other  men.  Governments  are  instituted 
for  the  first  object,  but  they  strive  to  acquire  the  second. 
And  no  government  of  any  form  did  ever  acquire  this  second 
power,  without  using  it  to  impoverish  a  nation  and  enrich 
an  aristocray,  title,  hierarchical  or  stock. 


562      THE  MODE  OF  INFUSING  ARISTOCRACY 

A  has  inherited  or  earned  a  sum  of  money  ;  B,  be'ng 
more  cunning  than  A,  obtains  a  law  enabling  him  to  get 
A's  money,  directly  or  indirectly ;  and  after  he  has  gotten 
it,  the  law  guarantees  it  to  B.  Was  this  mon^y  private 
property  in  the  hands  of  A  ?  Is  the  social  sanction  which 
secured  it  in  his  hands,  less  sacred  or  just,  than  the  legal 
sanction  which  transferred  it  to  B  ? 

If  property  is  admitted  to  be  a  social  right,  it  docs  not 
follow  that  society  gives  an  absolute  power  over  it  to  go- 
vernments. Upon  this  ground  however,  sovereigns  ingeni- 
ously invented  forfeitures  for  offences,  and  applied  them  to 
their  own  use.  By  this  feudal  fraud,  privileged  orders 
were  nurtured.  Our  policy  detected  and  abolished  this 
fraud.  An  invention  for  the  benefit  of  society,  ought  not 
to  be  used  to  its  injury.  It  followed  the  same  principle  in  a 
denunciation  of  the  whole  tribe  of  exclusive  privileges, 
Avhich  like  forfeitures,  would  all  serve  to  feed  some  order 
or  faction.  And  having  thus  disposed  of  forfeitures,  and 
privileges,  it  never  could  have  intended  to  invest  law  with  a 
power  to  apply  private  property,  to  a  use,  to  which  it  refu- 
ses to  condemn  fines  for  crimes. 

All  societies  have  exercised  the  right  of  abolishing  privi- 
leged, stipendiary  or  factitious  property,  whenever  they  be- 
came detrimental  to  them  ;  nor  have  kings,  churches  or 
aristocracies  ever  hesitated  to  do  the  same  thing,  for  the 
same  reason.  The  king  of  England  joined  the  people  and 
judges,  in  abolishing  the  tenures  and  perpetuities  of  the 
nobles  ;  the  king  and  nobles  united  in  abolishing  the  pro- 
perty of  the  popish  clergy  ;  the  consistory  of  Rome  sup 
pressed  the  order  of  Jesuits  and  disposed  of  its  property  : 
and  several  of  these  states,  have  abolished  intails.  tithes  and 
hierarchical  establishments.  AVhat  stronger  ground  can  be 
occupied  by  any  species  of  law-begotten  wealth,  than  by 
these  ? 

Poverty  is  justly  exasperated  against  the  wealth  which 
caused  it  ;  but  it  temperately  contemplates  wealth,  flowing 
from  industrv  and  talents,  and  not  from  fraudulent  Jaws. 


INTO    THE    POLICY    OF   THE    U.    STATES.  563 

It  knows  that  as  one  man's  industry,  cannot  make  another 
man  poorer ;  so  wealth  gotten  by  legal  means,  without  in- 
dustry, must.  And  if  aristocracy  is  introduced  into  the 
United  States  by  legal  modes  of  dividing  property,  violent 
animosities  between  the  rich  and  poor  will  attend  it,  to  a 
greater  extent  than  in  other  countries,  because  the  means 
for  controlling  them  are  less. 

From  the  legal  frauds  by  which  property  is  transferred 
and  amassed,  human  nature  has  derived  most  of  its  envy. 
malice,  and  hatred.  And  if  the  acquisitions  of  hierarchy, 
privilege,  patronage,  sinecure,  bribery,  charter  and  paper 
stock,  have  been  but  seldom  able  to  inspire  it  with  a  sutn 
cient  share  of  these  passions,  to  assail  fraudulent  kinds  ol 
property;  what  danger  can  be  apprehended  by  genuine  pri- 
vate property,  defended  by  all  the  sanctions  which  defend 
the  spurious,  with  the  addition  of  justice  ? 

The  onlv  danger  of  innocent,  arises  from  an  alliane«" 
with  guilty  property.  Such  an  alliance  is  assiduously 
sought  for,  and  artfully  supported,  by  its  pretended  friend 
and  real  foe.  A  knave  will  strive  to  associate  himself  with 
an  honest  man,  and  the  latter  must  dissolve  the  connexion 
or  risk  his  reputation.  Thus  honest  property  is  exposed  to 
danger  by  an  association  with  fraudulent  property  ;  and  its 
safety  is  ensured,  by  dissolving  the  connexion.  Honest 
property,  disunited  from  a  system  which  deeds  away  a  nation 
to  individuals  or  factions,  by  offices,  privileges,  charters, 
loans,  banks,  and  all  the  variety  of  incorporations,  will  have 
nothing  to  fear,  whenever  publick  indignation  and  justice 
awake.  It  will  both  escape  and  inflict  the  fate  of  its  natu- 
ral enemies,  by  disdaining  to  serve  under  their  banners,  or 
to  become  the  dupe  of  their  frauds. 

To  the  indignation  inspired  by  the  fraudulent  legal 
modes  for  acquiring  wealth,  mankind  are  indebted  for  the 
pernicious  and  impracticable  idea  of  equalising  property  by 
law.  This  speculation  has  been  considered  by  philosophers, 
in  contrast  with  its  opposite.  It  seemed  to  them  more  rea- 
sonable and  just,  that  property  should  be  made  equal,  than 


5&k  THE    MODE    OF    INFUSING   ARISTOCRACY 

unequal,  by  law.  Destroy  the  alternative,  by  assailing  both 
its  branches  with  the  hem  fits  arising  from  leaving  property 
to  be  distributed  by  industry,  and  the  argument  would 
assume  a. new  aspect.  It  would  be  discovered,  that  arts  and 
sciences,  peace  and  plenty,  have  never  Iwen  found,  disunited 
from  metes  and  bounds.  And  that  hence  mankind  have 
preferred  that  branch  of  the  alternative  which  required,  to 
that  which  rejected  them  ;  considering  a  system  of  property, 
compounded  of  honesty  and  fraud,  as  preferable  to  its 
abolition. 

By  artfully  drawing  the  question  to  this  point,  legal, 
factitious  or  fraudulent  property  ;  comprising  every  species 
r  ,u  -'iiiting  from  direct  and  indirect  modes  of  Accumulation  by 
laW,  at  the  expense  of  ethers  ;  has  been  able  in  all  civilized 
countries,  to  unite  itself  with  substantial,  real  or  honest  pro- 
perty ;  comprising  accumulations  arising  from  fair  and 
useful  industry  and  talents.  The  equalising  speculation, 
by  proposing  to  destroy  both,  united  these  two  opposite 
moral  beings  in  a  defensive  war ;  just  as  a  good  and  a  bad 
man  would  unite  against  an  assassin,  indifferently  determin- 
ed to  murder  them  both.  Had  philosophers  wisely  avoided 
this  snare,  and  confined  the  discussion  to  a  discrimination 
between  the  useful  ami  pernicious  kinds  of  property,  they 
would  never  have  given  to  the  latter  the  benefit  of  an  alli- 
ance by  which  it  is  sustained  ;  and  might  have  long  since 
settled  some  definition  of  private  property,  sufficiently  per- 
spicuous, to  defend  mankind  against  the  pecuniary  oppres- 
sions they  are  forever  suffering  for  want  of  it.  Instead  of 
associating  honest  and  fraudulent  property  in  one  interest, 
by  the  chimerical  and  impracticable  equalising  project,  they 
would  have  established  a  rational  and  practicable  distinc- 
tion, between  that  species  of  private  property  founded  only 
iri  law*  $  such  as  is  gained  by  privilege,  hierarchy,  paper, 
charter,  and  sinecure ;  and  that  founded  also  in  nature  ; 
arising  from  industry,  arts  and  sciences.  And  they  would 
have  proved,  that  the  two  species  constituted  two  principles 
in  the  world  of  property,  as  strictly  opposed  to  each  other,  as 


INTO    THE    POLICY    OF   THE    T7.     STATES.  565 

the  two  principles  in  the  moral  world,  one  of  which  is  wor- 
shipped and  the  other  execrated.  Blended,  they  make  up 
a  system  of  property,  similar  to  a  system  of  religion,  coin- 
pounded  of  theocracy  and  demonoeracy. 

Nothing  is  more  remarkable  in  their  contrariety,  than 
that  fictitious  property  is  founded  in  the  principle  of  agra- 
rian laws,  which  it  reprobates.  The  simple  objection  to 
these  is,  that  they  take  away  a  portion  of  one  man's  proper- 
ty, and  give  it  to  another.  How  otherwise  can  the  balance 
of  property  between  orders  be  effected,  as  contended  for  by 
Mr.  Adams  and  Lord  Shaftsbury  ?  Does  it  alter  the  princi- 
ple, to  transfer  the  property  by  means,  avowed  and  direct, 
or  insidious  and  indirect  ?  However  indirect,  yet  privilege, 
hierarchy,  office,  paper,  charter,  and  sinecure,  are  means, 
by  which  the  property  of  some  is  taken  away,  and  given  to 
others.  All  the  difference  is,  that  in  agrarian  laws,  or  laws 
for  an  equal  division  of  land,  the  principle  is  applied  between 
individuals  ;  and  in  laws  for  nurturing  separate  interests, 
between  orders. 

A  single  effect,  observable  wherever  Mr.  Adams's  and 
Lord  Shaftsbury's  system  exists,  of  a  balance  of  property 
between  orders,  is  quoted  to  illustrate  this  reasoning.  It  is 
attended  by  a  multitude  of  poor  rates,  work  houses  and  hos- 
pitals. Why  ?  Because  many  individuals  of  the  most  nu- 
merous order,  being  excessively  impoverished  by  dividing 
or  distributing  property  among  orders,  would  perish,  unless 
provided  for  by  those  legally  enriched.  The  right  of  the 
poor  to  require  subsistence  from  those  who  have  made  them 
poor,  is  so  strong  as  to  be  admitted  by  the  authors  of  their 
impoverishment.  An  agrarian  law,  or  an  equal  division  of 
property,  would  not  be  equally  attended  by  poor  rates,  work 
houses  and  hospitals,  because  it  would  not  equally  impover- 
ish individuals.  Will  it  be  contended,  that  laws  which  im- 
poverish a  great  number  of  individuals,  are  less  atrocious 
violators  of  justice  and  private  property,  than  laws  which 
impoverish  none  ?  We  must  now  discern,  that  the  principle 
of  distributing  property  by  law,  is  more  malignant,  when 


S66  T1IE    MODE    OF    INFUSING    ARISTOCRACY 

applied  to  equalise  wealth  between  orders,  than  when  appli- 
ed to  equalise  wealth  between  individuals.  A  principle* 
more  malignant  against  social  happiness,  than  a  general 
agrarian  division,  cannot  be  the  genuine  principle  which 
causes  society  to  guard  private  property.  Thence  we  are 
necessarily  driven  in  search  of  some  other  principle,  and  if 
we  are  right  in  considering  industry,  arts  and  sciences,  as 
its  true  sources,  a  correct  definition  of  private  property, 
must  exclude  all  the  legal  modes  invented  for  its  division. 
Lord  Shaftsbury  and  Mr.  Adams  strenuously  contend, 
that  a  balance  of  property  among  orders,  is  necessary  to 
preserve  their  freedom.  Jo  like  manner,  a  balance  of  pro- 
perty among  individuals,  is  necessary  to  preserve  theirs. 
Thp  first  species  of  balance,  destroys  the  second.  The  legal 
distribution  of  wealth,  necessary  to  preserve  the  balance  of 
property,  and  its  dependant,  the  freedom  of  orders,  destroys 
its  distribution  by  industry  and  talents, equally  necessary  to 
preserve  the  second  species  of  balance,  and  its  dependant, 
the  freedom  of  men.  Thus  the  attainable  object  of  a  free 
government,  is  destroyed  by  the  forlorn  attempt  to  keep 
three  orders  free,  by  balancing  wealth  and  power  among 
them.  By  transferring,  an  agrarian  law,  invades  property. 
All  laws  for  this  purpose,  direct  or  indirect,  are  equally  its 
invaders.  Those  for  dividing  lands,  and  for  making  sine- 
cures, useless  armies  and  offices,  bank  stock  and  hierarchies, 
transfer  the  property  of  some  to  others,  and  therefore  all 
belong  to  the  same  class.  If  an  end  of  a  government  is  to 
protect  property,  it  cannot  be  an  end  of  the  same  govern- 
ment to  make  these  laws,  because  the  two  ends  are  contrary 
to  each  other.  It  would  have  as  good  a  right,  under  a  pow- 
er to  protect  property,  to  make  an  equal  division  of  it  by  a 
direct  law,  as  an  unequal  division  of  it,  by  indirect  laws. 
Our  policy  labours  to  prevent  necessary  laws  from  degene- 
rating into  the  latter  usurpation,  by  cautiously  guarding 
against  excessive  expenditures  even  for  publick  uses  ;  and  it 
excludes  a  right  of  legislation,  for  the  purpose  of  transfer- 
ring private  property  from  some  toothers,  or  for  the  sake  of 


TNTO    THE    TOIJCY    OF   THE    U,    STATES.  567 

creating  or  balancing  orders  or  separate  interests,  civil  or 
religious.  Laws  for  maintaining  a  balance  of  property 
among  orders,  necessary  to  sustain  an  aristocracy,  how- 
ever disguised,  defeat  every  such  principle  of  our  policy. 

By  suffering  industry  to  distribute  property,  industry 
will  be  created.  It  teaches  no  viee.  It  bestows  healdi  and 
content.  It  is  a  pledge  of  virtue.  It  double  our  happiness 
by  enabling  us  to  blend  with  it  the  happiness  of  others.  Its 
benefits  reiterate  and  spread  like  the  undulations  of  t!ie 
waves.  Yet  tlie  hags,  feudality,  hierarchy,  privilege  and 
slock,  'nave  successively  been  preferred  as  regulators  of  pri- 
vate property,  to  this  charming  goddess.  The  distribution 
of  property  by  law,  first  introduces  into  a  government  what 
1  shall  call  an  aristocracy  of  parties  ;  and  an  appearance  of 
this  species  of  aristocracy,  is  a  proof  that  its  pabulum  exists. 
The  few  who  contend  for  prizes,  arrange  a  nation  into  par- 
ties, who  zealously  plead  for  and  against  each  set  of  distri- 
butees, both  having  in  view  the  goods  and  chattels  of  the 
infatuated  advocates. 

The  similitude  between  party  and  aristocracy,  is  explain- 
ed by  Mr.  Hume's  distinction  between  an  aristocracy  of  in- 
dividuals, and  one  consisting  of  a  separate  interest ;  exem- 
plifying the  first  by  the  Polish,  and  the  second  by  the  Vene- 
tian nobility.  An  aristocracy  or  party  of  individuals,  con- 
sists of  a  few  Polish  noblemen,  at  the  head  of  an  ignorant 
and  obedient  mass  of  followers.  An  aristocracy  or  party 
of  interest,  consists  of  a  conclave  of  individuals,  united  for 
the,  end  of  defrauding  others  to  enrich  themselves.  In  the 
same  essay  Mr.  Hume  has  said,  that  free  governments  are 
most  happy  for  those  who  partake  of  their  freedom,  but 
most  ruinous  and  oppressive  to  their  provinces.  They  dis- 
pense ruin  and  oppression  to  provinces,  as  the  inevitable 
effect  of  a  separate  interest.  The  certainty  of  this  moral 
law,  is  nearly  demonstrated  in  the  relation  between  England 
and  Ireland,  and  quite  so  in  India.  If  a  free  government  is 
converted  by  a  power  of  distributing  wealth  by  law,  into  an 
oppressive  aristocracy  of  its  provinces,  every  species  of  aris- 


•r>tfS  I' HE    MODE    OF    INFUSING    All!  S  TO  I :i<  AC  ¥ 

'oeraey  or  separate  interest,  must  be  guided  by  the  satire 
moral  law. 

The  United  States  exhibit  four  parties,  the  republican* 
monarchical,  stock,  and  patronage.  The  two  parties  of 
principle,  unsophisticated  by  the  parties  of  separate  inte- 
rest, would  discuss  with  moderation,  and  decide  with  integ- 
rity ;  hut  the  two  last,  accepted  on  both  sides  as  recruits,  by 
a;i  ardour  for  victory,  though  known  to  be  allies  who  serve 
for  plunder,  empoison  them  by  all  the  contaminations  of  an 
interest,  distinct  from  the  publick:  and  by  all  the  animosities, 
aristocracies  of  interest  inspire.  Aristocracy  or  separate 
interest  in  our  case,  at  present  takes  refuge  under  one  and 
then  under  the  other  of  our  parties,  because  it  is  not  yet 
able  to  stand  alone  ;  but  whilst  it  is  fondling  first  one  and 
then  the  other  of  its  nurses,  it  is  sucking  both  into  a  con- 
sumption, and  itself  towards  maturity. 

It  is  thus  that  patronage  transforms  any  party  into  an 
aristocracy  of  interest.  The  money  dispensed  by  the  exe- 
cutive power  of  England,  creates  a  powerful  aristocracy  of 
interest,  unfriendly  to  the  national  interest.  The  patron- 
age of  the  President  of  the  United  States,  is  aggravated  by 
the  temptation  to  employ  it  for  his  re-election.  This  aris- 
tocracy of  patronage,  arises  from  a  division  of  property  by 
law,  and  the  only  modes  of  reconciling  it  with  republican 
government,  are.  to  settle  salaries  by  a  standard,  too  low  to 
create  a  party  of  interest ;  or  to  divide  patronage  so  widely, 
as  to  prevent  it  from  becoming  the  property  of  one  man,  or 
of  one  body  of  men.  People  will  then  cease  to  enlist  under 
some  banner  to  gain  an  o?nce,  to  elect  partisans,  and  to  raise 
by  thiir  own  suffrages  a  mercenary  civil  army  for  the  de- 
struction of  their  own  liberties.  The  effect  of  the  inconsi- 
derable sum  laid  out  by  patronage  upon  Congress,  reflects 
with  fidelity,  the  fatal  aristocracy  of  interest  to  be  expected 
from  the  vast  sum,  distributed  by  banking  among  the  people. 

The  enlightened  author  of  the  life  of  General  Washing- 
ton, ascribes  the  parties  in  the  United  States,  to  the  intrigues 
of  Mr.  Jefferson,  to  French  influence,  and  to  other  transi- 


INTO    THE    POLICY    OF   THE    U.    STATES.  568 

Kovy  and  fluctuating  causes.  If  his  opinion  had  been  correct, 
these  parties  would  have  disappeared  with  the  supposed 
causes.  But  being  in  truth  produced  by  the  mass  of  pro- 
perty transferred  by  funding,  banking  and  patronage,  crea- 
ting (to  borrow  Mr.  Hume's  phrase)  an  aristocracy  of  inte- 
rest, they  yet  exist,  because  these  laws  divided  the  nation 
into  a  minority  enriched,  and  a  majority  furnishing  the 
riches  ;  and  two  parties,  seekers  and  defender?  of  wealth, 
are  an  unavoidable  consequence.  All  parties,  however  loy- 
al to  principles  at  first,  degenerate  into  aristocracies  of  in- 
terest at  last  ;  and  unless  a  nation  is  capable  of  discerning 
the  point  where  integrity  ends  and  fraud  begins,  popular 
parties  are  among  the  surest  modes  of  introducing  an  aris- 
tocracy. The  policy  of  protecting  duties  to  force  manu- 
facturing, is  of  the  same  nature,  and  will  produce  the  same 
consequences  as  that  of  enriching  a  noble  interest,  a  church 
interest,  or  a  paper  interest ;  because  bounties  to  capital  are 
taxes  upon  industry,  and  a  distribution  of  property  by  law. 
And  it  is  the  worst  mode  of  encouraging  aristocracy)  be- 
cause, to  the  evil  of  distributing  wealth  at  home  by  law,  is 
to  be  added  the  national  loss  arising  from  foreign  retaliation 
upon  our  own  exports.  An  exclusion  by  us  of  foreign  ar- 
ticles of  commerce,  will  beget  an  exclusion  by  foreigners  of 
our  articles  of  commerce,  or  at  least  corresponding  duties  ; 
and  the  wealth  of  the  majority  will  be  as  certainly  dimin- 
ished to  enrich  capital,  as  if  it  should  be  obliged  to  export  a 
million  of  guineas  to  bring  back  a  million  of  dollars,  or  to 
bestow  a  portion  of  its  guineas  upon  this  separate  interest. 
As  a  separate  or  aristocratieal  interest,  is  the  cause 
of  party  in  countries  where  avarice  or  reason  prevails  over 
superstition  and  fanaticism,  it  follows,  that  instead  of 
party  spirit  being  natural  to  free  governments,  it  is 
only  natural  to  those,  where  aristocracies  or  parlies  of 
interest  are  artificially  created  and  combined  by  law ; 
and  that  by  unereating  these  causes,  such  aristocracies 
and  parties  naturally  die.  Ambition  itself,  in  the  pre- 
sent state   of  manners,   despairs  of  gratification,  except 


670  TUB    MODE    OP   INFUSING    ARISTOCIIVCY 

by  the  help  of  a  party  founded  in  interest,  which  it  can 
create  hy  no  mode,  exeept  by  that  of  invading  property  by 
law  or  force  It  must  hire  an  army  or  a  legislature,  or 
both,  to  gain  posver.  It  cannot  hire  either  without  money, 
and  it  cannot  obtain  money,  without  associates.  If  ambi- 
tion is  unable  to  form  an  aristocracy  or  party,  exeept  by 
violating  and  transferring  property,  it  follows,  that  no  other 
means  exist  for  its  formation  ;  and  of  course,  that  its  ap- 
pearance is  a  proof  that  property  is  violated  and  transfer- 
red. It  follows  also,  that  free  and  fair  governments  cannot 
be  subject  to  party,  but  such  only  as  have  ceased  to  be  fseo 
and  fair  by  the  creation  of  aristocracy,  or  a  party  founded 
in  interest.  If  this  reasoning  is  true,  there  is  neither  wis- 
dom nor  policy,  in  providing  constitutional  precepts  requir- 
ing ambition  and  avarice  to  be  quiet  ;  and  yet  to  nourish 
them  by  law.  It  makes  the  constitution  a  blind,  from  be- 
hind which  legal  parties  or  aristocracies  strike  nations. 

Orders  enslave  nations,  by  making  parties  ;  and  they  are 
enabled  to  make  them,  by  laws  for  tranferring  property. 
If  such  laws  make  parties,  and  if  the  part}  spirit  of  or- 
ders, is  the  cause  of  their  oppression  ;  then,  though  titles 
are  excluded,  yet  wherever  party  spirit  is  created,  the  op- 
pression produced  by  orders  is  secured.  Patrician  and 
feudal  parties  were  made  by  conquered  lauds  ;  church  par- 
ties by  tythes,  offerings  and  endowments  :  military  parties, 
by  wages;  patronage  parties,  by  offices,  bribes  and  sinecures  ; 
and  paper  parties,  by  stock,  interest  and  dividends.  All 
were  made  by  laws  for  transferring  or  invading  private  pro- 
perty, all  are  parties  or  aristocracies  of  interest,  and  all 
are  avoided  by  forbearing  to  make  the  laws  which  make 
them,  and  in  no  other  way. 

Two  causes  are  adduced  to  shew,  that  property  and  not 
title,  creates  the  parties  or  aristocracies  which  enslave  na- 
tions. The  whig  party  was  made  strong  in  England,  by  the 
paper  stock  with  which  it  was  enriched  and  united.  In  spite 
of  its  principles,  it  was  forced  by  the  regimen  of  this  legal 
wealth  to  enslave  the  nation,  by  poisoning  the  principles  it 


INTO   THE   POLICY   OF  THE    U.    STATES.  571 

professed  to  nurture.  Hence  a  modern  whig  may  believe, 
that  it  would  have  been  better  foe  the  English  nation,  had 
success  followed  .the  landed  tories,  who  would  have  stran- 
gled the  paper  system  of  the  whigs  in  its  infancy.  If  <hc 
stock  system  of  the  United  States  proceeds  as  it  has  done 
for  fifty  years  more,  it  will  give  occasion  for  a  similar  com- 
putation. This  case  proves,  that  the  present  state  of  En- 
gland, was  caused  by  a  party,  formed  by  a  legal  and  artificial 
mode  of  distributing  property,  and  not  by  a  titled  order  ; 
and  that  paper  stock  was  this  mode.  Paper  stock  can 
therefore  make  aristocracies  or  parties,  able  to  overthrow 
political  principles. 

The  Cincinnati  of  the  United  States  could  never  form  a 
faction  or  party;  because  title,  without  fraudulent  laws  to 
transfer  property,  is  incompetent  to  such  an  end  ;  but  Hie 
funding  and  banking  system  could  ;  because  such  laws  with- 
out title,  possess  this  competency.  Eveu  at  home  we  have 
already  learnt,  that  titles  cannot  make  parties  ;  that  laws 
for  distributing  property  can  ;  and  that  such  laws  operate 
under  our  political  system  as  they  do  under  all  others. 

The  precise  principle  we  are  contending  for,  is  resorted 
to  by  the  constitution  of  the  United  States,  to  prevent  party 
and  faction.  But  it  is  applied  only  to  states,  and  not  to  in- 
dividuals. Partialities  by  law,  for  increasing  or  diminishing 
the  taxes  of  a  state,  and  every  species  of  exclusive  privi- 
lege, or  exclusive  burden,  between  states,  is  carefully  guard- 
ed against.  This  is  done,  because  laws  of  either  complexion, 
would  unexceptionably  transfer  property  from  the  unfa- 
voured to  the  favoured  states ;  and  would  unexceptionably 
also  create  the  former  into  an  exasperated,  and  the  latter, 
into  a  fraudulent  party,  or  an  aristocracy.  This  fraudulent 
party,  could  not  for  a  moment  deceive  states  into  an  opinion, 
that  laws  for  bestowing  exclusive  privileges  and  wealth  up- 
on other  states,  or  exclusive  burdens  upon  themselves, 
would  add  to  their  wealth  or  happiness.  A  state  makes 
but  one  moral  being  ;  its  capacity  is  equal  to  the  moral  be- 
ings who  would  practise  this  deception  ;  it  contains  no  ini- 


572  THE    MODE    OF    INFUSING   ARISTOCRACY 

inical  ingredients,  willing  to  sacrifice  it  to  another  state, 
because  ef  its  unity  as  a  moral  being  j  nor  has  its  legislature 
any  interest,  to  make  and  hide  this  sacrifice  from  the  people. 
It  would  therefore  instantly  decide,  that  all  laws  for  en- 
riching particular  states,  directly  or  indirectly,  were  fraudu- 
lent and  oppressive. 

Da  wot  such  laws  operate  between  individuals,  precisely 
as  they  operate  between  states  ?  Being  fraudulent  and  op- 
pressive in  relation  to  individuals,  as  they  are  in  relation  to 
states,  they  will  also  generate  party,  faction  or  aristocracy. 
It  is  less  violent  than  a  party  of  states  would  be,  because 
the  deceptions  used  to  defend  the  imposition,  have  some 
success  among  individuals,  from  their  ignorance,  and  from 
the  arts  of  those  interested.  These  causes  of  deception  do 
not  apply  to  factitious  modes  of  transferring  property  be- 
tween states,  and  therefore  a  state  is  never  deceived,  and 
indignantly  resists  such  laws  in  every  shape. 

Suppose,  for  instance,  that  congress  had  invested  parti- 
cular states,  with  the  exclusive  privilege  of  supplying  the 
Union  with  paper  currency  by  banks,  and  had  prohibited 
the  issuing  of  any  other.  Could  the  states,  unpossessed  of 
a  share  in  the  privilege,  have  been  persuaded  that  it  would 
add  to  their  wealth,  happiness  or  prosperity  ?  They  would, 
"in  the  supposed  ease,  have  occupied  the  place  with  all  its 
consequences,  of  that  entire  mass  of  individuals,  unpossessed 
of  bank  stock.  Yet  in  an  eternity,  no  civilized  stale  could 
have  been  made  to  believe  itself  benefitted,  by  having  the 
bank  paper  of  the  privileged  states  circulated  within  it. 
An  exclusive  privilege  of  furnishing  the  United  States  with 
manufactures  would  have  an  equivalent  effect. 

By  excluding  partial  modes  of  transferring  property  by 
law  between  slates,  the  constitution  designs  to  deprive  am- 
bition and  avarice  of  a  handle,  by  which  to  work  up  and 
manage  geographical  passions  and  parties,  fur  their  own 
selfish  ends.  How  can  it  be  just  and  wise,  to  offer  a  like 
handle  to  ambition  and  avarice,  in  a  social  union  of  indivi- 
duals, by  permitting  them  to  transfer  and  accumulate  pro- 


INTO    THE    POLICY    OF   THE    U.    STATES.  57S 

perty  by  law,  if  it  is  unjust  and  unwise  to  admit  of  its 
existence,  in  the  union  between  the  states  ?  If  its  exclusion 
in  one  case,  is  calculated  to  counteract  parties,  factions  or 
aristocracies,  formed  of  states,  its  excision  in  the  other, 
would  prevent  parties,  factions  or  aristocracies,  formed  of 
citizens.  By  excluding  it  in  both,  the  only  too!  with  which 
ambition  and  avarice  can  undermine  and  destroy  a  free 
government,  can  no  longer  be  forged. 

If  there  exists  no  mode  under  the  constitution  of  the 
United  States,  by  which  the  government,  or  some  section 
of  it  can  exercise  partialities  between  states  in  relation  to 
property,  they  will  probably  escape  the  evil  of  geographical 
aristocracy.  Should  a  statesman,  an  orator,  a  hero,  or  a 
patriot,  begin  to  draw  lines  of  separate  or  exclusive  interest 
from  north  to  south,  from  east  to  west,  along  a  chain  of  hills, 
or  from  the  source  of  a  river  to  the  ocean  ;  like  all  legal 
frauds  for  distributing  property  j  they  will  be  merely  design- 
ed to  enrich  some  party  of  interest,  at  the  expense  of  those 
whose  benefit  is  pretended  ,•  and  as  these  lines  drawn  by 
civil  law,  invariably  mean  fraud  and  avarice,  they  only  ac- 
quire the  additional  attributes  of  ambition  and  treason, 
when  attempted  for  political  revolution.  But  if  the  pretext 
for  such  an  experiment  was  ever  so  preposterous,  yet  if  it 
was  connected  with  a  partial  distribution  of  property  by  law 
between  the  states,  it  would  create  a  geographical  party,  as 
was  in  some  degree  illustrated  by  the  effects  of  the  funding 
system,  and  may  be  illustrated  by  the  influence  of  executive 
patronage.  The  richer  it  becomes,  the  more  zealous  Mill 
districts  be,  led  by  the  exertions  of  fraud  which  hopes  of 
office  or  contracts  will  excite,  to  gain  the  presidency. 

The  artifice  of  enemies,  and  the  credulity  of  friends,  in 
fostering  an  opinion,  that  party  spirit  was  natural  to  honest 
and  free  government,  prevents  us  from  discovering  that  it 
is  invariably  produced  by  dishonest  or  ambitious  designs, 
and  unexceptionably  indicates  the  existence  of  an  aristo- 
cracy of  interest.  Mr.  Adams  allows  that  party  spirit  is 
a  regular  fruit  of  order",  without  deducing  it  from  arjstf>- 


674  the  modi;  of  infusing  aristocracy 


i' 


crafical  laws  for  distributing  property,  allowed  also  by  him 
to  be  necessary  to  the  existence  of  those  orders  If  then 
parly  spirit,  orders,  or  aristocracy,  flow  from  the  same 
cause,  whatever  will  prevent  either,  will  prevent  all,  and 
whatever  will  produce  one,  will  produce  the  rest.  As  a 
distribution  of  property  by  law  is  the  common  cause,  an  ex- 
clusion of  such  laws,  is  the  common  remedy  ;  and  as  accor- 
ding to  our  idea  of  a  republican  government,  it  cannot 
exist  in  union  with  these  partial  laws,  the  parties  they  pro- 
duce are  chargeable  to  a  different  form  of  government,  par- 
tial to  a  separate  interest,  and  in  principle,  aristocratical. 
Mr.  Godwin  has  said  "  that  all  government  is  founded  in 
opinion,  and  that  publick  institutions  will  fluctuate  with  the 
fluctuations  of  opinion."  This  position  assigns  the  pubiiek 
approbation  to  all  governments,  which  have  existed  or  can 
exist.  It  besto"  s  upon  an  aristocracy  or  party,  whose  power 
is  planted  in  self  interest,  the  sanction  of  pubiiek  opinion  ; 
and  raises  the  influence  of  authority  to  the  highest  pitch. 
With  equal  justice,  he  might  have  assigned  the  same  sanc- 
tion to  the  power  of  a  disciplined  army,  over  an  undiscipli- 
ned nation.  It  is  never  the  opinion  of  nations  that  slavery 
is  good  ;  yet  they  are  enslaved.  Nor  is  it  the  opinion  of 
nations  that  an  aristocracy  or  party  of  interest  is  good,  but 
they  suffer  it,  because  the  individuals  of  a  general  interest 
cannot  be  cemented  in  the  same  way  with  those  of  a  sepa- 
rate one,  as  there  is  none  to  supply  the  glue. 

Opinion  may  in  one  sense  be  correctly  considered  as  the 
foundation  of  all  governments.  They  are  all  derived  from 
general  or  partial  opinion  ;  from  the  opinion  of  the  nation, 
or  of  some  party  of  interest ;  but  as  general  and  party  opin- 
ion, are  opposite  and  contradictory  sources  of  government, 
one  must  be  bad.  As  moral  enemies,  they  cannot  unite. 
Mingled;  commotion  or  death  ensues, as  in  the  case  of  poison 
mingled  with  wholesome  drugs.  Milton  could  not  bring 
back  Satan  to  heaven  by  the  benignity  of  the  Almighty, 
because  good  and  evil  arc  incapable  of  associating.  Even 
the  license  of  poetry  does  not  extend  to  a  fable  contrary  to 


INTO    THE    POLICY   OP   THE    U.    STATES.  575 

nature.     Mr.  Adams  contends  for  tliis  mixture,  in  the  very 
act  of  proving  that  it  has  Universally  failed. 

General,  and  not  party  opinion,  is  the  principle  of  our 
policy.  All  onr  constitutions  contain  efforts  in  favour  of 
one,  and  no  eJf  >rts  in  f. ivour  of  the  other.  Laws  which 
have  the  effect  of  mixing  party  opinion  with  general  opi- 
nion, correspond  with  Mr.  Adams's  policy,  and  have  ever 
been  fatal  to  such  a  policy  as  ours.  They  introduce  party 
interest  into  the  departments  of  government,  and  create 
intrigues  against  the  general  interest ;  exactly  as  Mr.  Adams 
proves  orders  to  have  universally  done.  A  stock  or  patro- 
nage interest  will  he  as  selfish,  as  a  nohle  or  religious  inte- 
rest. The  publick  interest  and  the  party  interest,  commence 
hostilities  and  continue  the  war,  until  one  of  them  is  van- 
quished ;  and  as  defeat  has  hitherto  pursued  the  puhlick 
interest,  it  is  unaccountable  that  it  should  he  persuaded  to 
create  a  foe,  before  whose  prowess  it  is  destined  to  fall. 

A  separate  interest,  drawing  wealth  from  a  nation,  and 
able  to  gain  an  influence  in  a  government,  cannot  be  a  re- 
publican, any  more  than  an  individual  nobleman  in  the 
same  situation.  To  the  term  "  republican,"  the  Americans 
have  annexed  the  modern  meaning  of  general  good.  The 
opinion,  that  parties  were  natural  to  republieks  is  the  crea- 
ture of  the  old  idea,  that  republieks  could  be  constituted  of 
orders  or  parties.  Parties  are  indeed  natural  to  govern- 
ments made  of  parties.  But  if  we  reject  this  old  construc- 
tion of  the  term,  which  makes  it  to  mean  any  thing  or  noth- 
ing ;  we  ought  also  to  reject  the  old  errour,  that  parties 
were  natural  to  republieks,  as  arising  from  the  errour,  which 
considered  governments  formed  of  parties  or  orders  as 
republieks. 

The  antipathy  of  party  spirit  to  publick  spirit,  sophisti- 
cated terms,  for  the  purpose  of  deceiving  nations,  so  that 
old  as  tiie  world  is,  we  still  want  apolitical  word,  to  express 
the  idea  of  national  self  government,  unadulterated  bv  orders 
or  parties  of  interest.  If  republicanism  is  allowed  to  con- 
vey the  idea  of  a  government  guided  by  publick  opinion  and 

7  k 


576"  T1IK    MODE    OF    INFUSING    ARISTOCRACY 

operating  for  publick  good,  then  wherever  a  legislature  13 
guided  or  influenced  by  the  opinion  of  a  banking  party,  the 
government  has  ceased  to  be  a  republick,  as  completely  as 
if  it  was  influenced  by  a  king. 

Despotisms  are  more  lasting  than  free  governments,  be- 
cause, as  they  do  not  suffer  an  order  or  a  party  possessed 
of  exclusive  power  and  privileges  to  exist,  they  are  not  sub- 
ject to  party  spirit.  By  making  free  governments  as  little 
subject  to  party  spirit,  they  will  probably  become  more  per- 
manent than  despotisms.  It  is  excluded  from  despotisms, 
by  excluding  separate  interests,  calculated  to  plunder,  and 
then  dethrone  the  monarch  with  his  own  wealth  ;  and  it 
will  be  excluded  from  free  governments,  by  forbearing  to 
create  these  separate  interests,  still  more  dangerous  to  na- 
tional wealth  and  sovereignty. 

The  appearance  of  parties  of  interest  under  a  despotick 
government,  is  a  proof  that  a  new  power  has  crept  in,  aspi- 
ring to  the  control  of  the  despotism.  A  conflict  of  course 
commences,  which  ends  in  the  destruction  of  one  of  the 
combatants.  The  appearance  of  such  an  aristocracy,  under 
a  free  government,  or  one  founded  on  common  interest, 
indicates  also  the  existence  of  a  new  power,  and  a  similar 
conflict  is  unavoidable.  Despotism  will  seldom  create  and 
nurture  its  own  foe  ;  free  government  is  frequently  seduced 
to  do  so.  A  despotick  sovereignty  keeps  patronage  in  its 
own  hands,  and  never  confers  privileges  independent  of  its 
own  will.  A  national  sovereignty  surrenders  patronage  to 
an  individual,  and  charters  away  exclusive  rights  and  emo- 
luments. The  consequences  which  would  result  to  a  des- 
potick sovereignty  from  such  a  policy,  do  result  to  a  national 
sovereignty.  Reasoning  is  at  an  end,  if  the  same  moral 
causes,  are  not  allowed  to  produce  the  same  effects.  If  par- 
ties under  despotisms  are  in  collision  with  despotick  sove- 
reignty ;  parties  under  free  governments  must  be  in  collision 
with  national.  And  if  the  suppression  of  a  party  interest, 
is  necessary  to  save  a  despotism,  it  must  be  necessary  to 
save  a  frc«  government.  The  appearance  of  party  is  a  beacon 


INTO    THE    POLICY    OF   THE    U.    STATES.  577 

proclaiming  a  tendency,  which  instantly  alarms  despotism  : 
and  it  brings  back  the  government  to  its  principle  by  sup- 
pressing the  inimical  tendency.  Free  government  has  only 
to  be  equally  vigilant  against  these  inimical  tendencies,  to 
live  longer  than  despotism  ;  for  as  party  interest  is  unnatu- 
ral to  one  in  a  state  of  purity,  so  is  it  to  the  other. 

Instances  without  number  might  be  adduced,  to  shew, 
that  separate  interest  is  a  thermometer  accurately  disclosing 
the  progress  of  a  revolution,  both  in  property  and  princi- 
ples ;  and  that  the  latter  are  modelled  by  fraudulent  dispo- 
sitions of  the  first.  In  England,  though  titles  remain, 
patrician  and  plebeian  parties  have  yielded  to  a  party  or 
aristocracy  of  interest.  Whigs  and  torics  are  melted  into 
one  mass,  by  the  same  crucible.  This  crucible  is  made  of 
paper  stock  and  patronage.  The  property  it  invades,  plun- 
ders, and  distributes,  has  begotten  new  parties,  and  abo- 
lished old  principles.  In  the  United  States.no  parties  of 
importance  have  ever  appeared,  except  such  as  arose  from 
paper  stock  and  patronage  ;  and  by  this  transfer  of  property, 
old  principles,  as  in  England,  Mill  unquestionably  be  altered 
or  destroyed. 

If  the  term  "  patronage"  was  limited  to  wages  for  pub- 
lick  service,  legislative,  executive  or  judicial,  yet  should 
those  wages  be  made  so  high  as  to  produce  detriment  to  the 
publick,  the  surplus  beyond  the  sum  required  by  puhliek 
good  is  fraudulently  transferred  by  law.  In  computing  them, 
every  consideration  in  relation  to  the  receiver  of  the  wages, 
ouarht  to  be  excluded,  because  thev  are  bestowed  to  benefit, 
not  him,  but  the  nation.  Even  legislative  wages,  capable 
of  protracting  sessions  for  the  sake  of  transfer!  ing  a  greater 
mass  of  property,  from  the  payer  to  the  receiver,  or  of  ex- 
citing election  frauds  may  form  a  secret  and  mischievous 
party  of  interest,  under  its  own  patronage. 

The  argument,  by  which  plentiful  wages  are  defended. 
is,  the  tendency  of  low  to  expel  merit  and  talents  from 
legislatures,  and  to  throw  government  into  the  hands  of  a 
wealthy  order.     This  argument  can  only  be  of  force  in 


578  THE    MODE    OF   INFUSING   ARISTOCRACY 

countries,  "where  legal  means  are  used  to  create  wealthy 
separate  interests.  Where  wealth  is  distributed  bj  indus- 
try and  talents,  and  not  by  law,  it  will  nearly  cover  the 
merit  and  talents  of  a  country,  and  no  wealthy  order  can 
usurp  the  legislative  power,  because  none  will  exist.  And 
high  wages,  far  from  enabling  merit  and  virtue  to  curb  a 
wealthy  separate  interest,  are  only  another  motive,  and 
new  means,  for  enabling  them  to  gain  possession  of  legisla- 
tures, by  corrupting  election. 

It  is  said  that  Doctor  Franklin,  convinced  that  the  evils 
of  patronage  outweighed  the  benefits  of  wages  io  puhlick 
officers,  would  not  receive  any  as  chief  magistrate  of  Penn- 
sylvania. Nations  require  civil  and  military  services. 
Militia  services  are  rendered  to  great  extent  without  wages, 
and  those  paid  for  them  in  war,  are  regulated  by  the  idea 
of  publick  benefit,  and  no(  of  adequate  compensation.  Par- 
simony, applied  to  civil  duties,  would  not  fall  heavier  on  the 
rich,  than  it  does  on  the  poor,  when  applied  to  military 
duties.  If  the  chief  burden  of  military  service  is  inflicted 
on  one  class,  as  a  duty,  because  it  is  most  capable  from 
its  number  of  discharging  it  ;  ought  not  the  chief  burden 
of  civil  service  to  be  inflicted  on  the  other,  as  a  duty  also, 
because  it  chiefly  possesses  the  talents  for  discharging  that  ? 
A  standing  army  of  mercenary  civil  officers,  being  as  fatal 
to  free  government,  as  an  army  of  soldiers,  the  militia 
principle  may  be  as  useful  and  necessary  in  the  one  case, 
as  in  the  other. 

Wages  sufficiently  high  to  protract  legislative  sessions, 
are  a  sinecure  paid  by  the  publick  to  corrupt  the  department 
of  government,  which  ought  to  be  the  purest.  They  excite 
official  fraud  and  artifice,  and  subject  members  to  executive 
influence  for  the  sake  of  re-election  :  and  tend  in  this  way 
towards  an  aristocracy  of  interest,  of  the  species  most  ma- 
lignant to  free  and  fair  government  ;  namely,  that  com- 
pounded of  legislative  corruption  and  executive  influence. 

We  ought  fully  to  comprehend  the  distinction  between 
a  personal  aristocracy,  and  an  aristocracy  of  interest,  lest 


INTO    THE    POLICY    OF   THE    TJ.    STATES.'  579 

we  should  be  surprised  by  the  one,  whilst  we  are  watching 
the  other.  Hume's  illustration  of  the  latter  by  the  Spartan 
aristocracy,  would  have  been  as  apt,  had  that  aristocracy 
extracted  its  subsistence  from  the  mechanicks  and  cultiva- 
tors, or  Helots,  by  paper  stock,  as  by  the  mode  it  pursued. 
It  had  no  titles,  and  was  one  interest  living  on  another. 
The  impossibility  of  providing  a  balance  of  property  in  the 
United  States,  for  a  personal  aristocracy,  was  explained,  to 
shew  that  an  aristocratical  principle  cannot  be  introduced 
in  that  mode,  and  if  not  in  that,  it  can  only  be  introduced 
in  the  mode  of  an  aristocracy  of  interest.  Through 
principles,  and  not  names,  this  species  of  political  pow- 
er, becomes  real  and  oppressive.  Was  uny  person  ever 
weak  enough  to  discern  hierarchy,  aristocracy,  or  mon- 
archy, in  Scotch  bishops,  the  American  Cincinnati,  or 
Theodore  king  of  Corsica  ?  Wealth  is  indispensable  to  sus- 
tain both  a  personal  aristocracy,  and  an  aristocracy  of  inte- 
rest. The  first  can  never  obtain  this  indispensable  princi- 
ple in  the  United  States,  except  they  should  be  subdued  by 
an  invading  or  a  native  army,  and  divided  among  its  chief- 
tains. The  second  may  obtain  it,  by  means  of  patronage, 
corruption,  privilege,  and  paper  stock.  It  may  steal  into 
sovereignly  with  great  rapidity,  by  selling  its  influence  in 
society  to  the  personal  or  disinterested  parties  alternately. 
Every  aristocracy  of  interest  is  ardent  in  this  traffick,  and 
a  love  of  power  unhappily  induces  all  political  parties  (un- 
less they  are  controlled  by  nations)  to  bestow  wealth  and 
credit  upon  this  species  of  aristocracy,  until  their  own  prin- 
ciples are  lost  in  the  corruption  they  have  countenanced  to 
preserve  them,  and  they  themselves  sink  into  a  state  of  sub- 
jection to  their  own  instruments. 


E     *»8Q     ] 


SECTION  THE  NINTH, 


THE  LEGAL  POLICY   OF   THE   UNITED   STATES. 


Mc 


-ONTEsquiEu's  analysis  of  forms  of  government,  is 
neither  moral  nor  numerical.  He  divides  them  into  "  re- 
publican, monarchical,  and  despotick,"  and  the  presence  or 
absence  of  l;.w  constitutes  his  criterion  of  liberty  and  des- 
potism. But  having  by  these  deiinitions  disclosed  a  par- 
tiality for  his  country,  he  proceeds  to  truth,  by  proving; 
that  civil  laws  are  the  instruments  for  fostering  or  destroy- 
ing both  free  and  despotick  governments,  and  that  neither 
can  be  preserved,  except  by  an  analogy  of  legal  to  consti- 
tutional principles.  V*  hatever  analysis  of  governments  we 
adopt,  must  also  be  an  analysis  for  legislation.  If  we 
adopt  the  numerical,  the  same  laws  cannot  be  congenial 
with  the  three,  nor  with  any  two  of  its  forms  ;  if  the  moral, 
it  is  still  more  difficult  to  reconcile  the  same  lavs,  with 
both  good  and  bad  principles.  The  necessity  of  civil  law, 
to  foster  or  impair  every  form  of  government,  makes  it 
equally  indispensable  to  a  free  nation  and  a  monarch,  to  be 
able  to  distinguish  its  character  and  effects,  for  the  preser- 
vation of  liberty  or  despotism.  A  conviction  that  republi- 
can forms  beget  the  first,  and  monarchical  the  second,  united 
with  an  ignorance  of  the  laws  adapted  to  the  preservation 
or  introduction  of  either,  excites  the  fermentation  of  mobs, 
and  ends  in  the  tranquillity  of  tyranny. 

An  incapacity  to  discern  the  difference  between  a  power 
to  divide  and  to  protect  property,  or  between  a  national 
militia  and  a  mercenary  army,  is  an  incapacity  for  the  pre- 
servation of  a  free  government.  As  the  first  member  of 
each  contrast  corrupts  or  enervates  nations,  they  belong  to 


THE   LEGAL  POLICY   OF   TUB    U.    STATES.  531 

the  evil  class  of  moral  principles.  Individuals,  parties  or 
governments  use  all  the  means  placed  in  their  hands  to  ob- 
tain their  ends  ;  and  a  dependence  for  defence  upon  a  mer- 
cenary army,  renders  a  nation  unable  to  defend  itself.  The 
Jesuitical  maxim  "  that  every  thing  is  lawful  to  effect  good 
ends,"  makes  every  thing  lawful  in  the  eyes  of  governments 
and  parties,  which  is  necessary  to  effect  their  own  ends ; 
because  self  love  convinces  all  men  that  their  ends  are  good. 
Every  principle,  bad  or  good,  drawn  from  the  moral  quali- 
ties of  an  individual,  applies  to  a  multitude.  A  power  ma- 
king one  man  a  despot,  will  make  despots  of  a  party  of  men ; 
the  only  difference  being,  that  one  species  of  despotism  re- 
sembles a  scorching  fire  ;  the  other,  a  consuming  confla- 
gration. Parties  clothed  with  evil  or  despotick  powers, 
destroy  free  governments  with  a  rage  and  rapidity  far  out- 
stripping the  capacity  of  individual  tyrants,  because  many 
men  can  do  more  mischief  than  one.  This  fact  demonstrates 
the  incapacity  of  the  numerical  analysis  for  informing  us 
whether  a  government  is  free  or  despotick,  and  explodes 
the  hideous  doctrine  "  that  the  will  of  a  majority  can  do 
no  wrong,"  under  which  parties,  in  imitation  of  kings,  often 
endeavour  to  hide  atrocious  legal  violations  of  good  moral 
principles.  Many  men  can  even  do  more  wrong  to  one  or 
a  few,  than  one  or  a  few  can  do  to  many.  This  analysis  is 
still  more  defective  as  a  criterion  of  good  or  bad  laws,  be- 
cause those  of  its  best  form  are  not  necessarily  good,  and 
no  commixture  of  its  several  forms  can  make  arbitrary  or 
fraudulent  laws,  free  or  just. 

The  principle  "  that  a  government  and  its  laws  must  be 
of  the  same  moral  nature  to  subsist  together,"  furnishes 
the  only  existing  security  for  the  preservation  both  of  a  free 
and  an  arbitrary  form  of  government.  Monarchy  cannot 
subsist  upon  republican  laws,  nor  a  republick  upon  monar- 
chical. The  numerical  analysis  can  inform  us.  whether  we 
are  governed  by  one,  a  few,  or  many  persons,  but  its  whole 
stock  of  knowledge  is  expended  in  the  performance  of  ibis 
paltry  office,  and  it  is  utterly  unable  to  give  us  any  instrue- 


533  THE    LEGAL   POLICY    OF    THE    IT.    STATES. 

lion  as  to  the  mode  of  preserving  the  selected  form  of  go- 
vern merit.  But  an  analysis  founded  in  moral  principles, 
furnishes  nations  will*  constitutional  restraints  upon  go- 
vernments, and  with  perpetual  sentinels  faithfully  warn- 
ing them  of  the  approach  of  their  worst  foes  ;  had  laws.  It 
transfers  popular  attention  from  the  persons  composing  the 
numerical  analysis,  to  the  principles  by  which  it  is  iisclf 
composed  ;  and  settles  a  wise  veneration  or  a  just  hatred 
upon  the  good  and  had  divisions  of  these  principles,  instead 
of  that  ridiculous  veneration  for  a  president  and  a  congress, 
a  king  and  a  parliament,  or  an  emperor  and  a  senate,  which 
never  discloses  the  approach  of  a  single  foe  to  liberty.  A 
moral  analysis  alone  can  teach  nations  the  only  mode  of 
sustaining  a  free  government.  It  can  detect  attempts  to 
destroy  our  moral  constitutional  principles  of  a  division  of 
power  between  the  people  and  the  government,  or  between 
the  general  and  state  governments,  by  political  or  civil 
laws.  And  it  can  keep  us  attentive  to  the  fact,  that  a  pow- 
er in  a  government  of  any  form,  to  deal  out  wealth  and  po- 
verty by  law,  overturns  liberty  universally  ;  because  it  is  a 
power  by  which  a  nation  is  infallibly  corrupted  ;  and  the 
legislature,  whose  laws  caused  the  corruption,  is  at  length 
forced  by  the  national  depravity,  to  abridge  the  liberty  of 
the  people  ;  or  an  usurper  makes  it  a  strong  argument,  even 
with  good  men,  for  erecting  a  despotick  government.  A 
power  in  Congress,  for  instance,  of  influencing  the  wealth 
or  poverty  of  states  by  taxing  exports  and  making  roads 
or  canals;  or  of  individuals,  by  charters;  would  be  used  by 
successive  parties  for  self  preservation,  with  an  activity,  by 
which  government  would  exchange  the  duty  of  protecting 
for  the  privilege  of  regulating  property.  The  alternative 
of  receiving  or  yielding  the  golden  fleece,  according  to  the 
will  of  these  parties,  would  suddenly  excite  an  equal  de- 
gree of  baleful  activity  among  the  people,  to  gain  the  one 
and  to  avoid  the  other  ;  and  soon  overturn  the  whole  cata- 
logue of  moral  principles,  necessary  for  the  preservation  of 
a  free  form  of  government.     In  whatever  numerical  class 


THE    LEGAL  POLICY    OF   THE   U.    STATES.  583 

a  government  is  arranged,  a  power  of  advancing  the  wealth 
of  one  part  of  the  nation,  by  civil  lasvs,  will  be  used  by  its 
successive  administrators  to  obtain  a  corrupt  influence, 
wholly  inconsistent  with  any  good  moral  principles  intervo- 
ven  in  a  constitution,  and  certainly  destructive  of  them. 

Every  party  of  interest,  whether  a  noble,  a  religious, 
or  a  military  order  ;  or  created  by  a  corrupting  degree  of 
legislative  or  executive  patronage;  or  by  usurping  a  power 
of  regulating  property  by  means  of  paper  credit,  charters 
or  fraudulent  wars  ;  is  the  instrument  and  ally  of  the  pow- 
er by  which  Its  interest  can  be  fed  or  starved.  It  must, 
acquire  an  influence  over  legislation,  both  to  do  its  own 
work,  and  the  work  of  the  power  it  serves.  It  can  by  law 
slip  under  governments  anew  substratum,  without  altering 
a  feature  of  the  numerical  analysis.  And  it  will  be  inva- 
riably purchased  at  the  puhlick  expense,  by  the  political 
party  in  possession  of  the  government,  at  a  rate  propor- 
tioned to  the  service  it  may  be  able  to  render. 

This  game  between  political  and  pecuniary  parties,  is 
precisely  the  cause  by  which  free,  moderate,  and  honest 
forms  of  government  are  destroyed  ;  it  inflicts  heavier 
taxation,  than  any  other  species  of  misrule  ;  and  it  cannot 
be  carried  on,  except  by  a  legislative  power  to  regulate 
wealth  and  poverty.  In  England  this  power  is  complete, 
and  has  scattered  every  where  parties  of  interest  of  all 
sizes,  and  individuals,  paid  for  their  services  directly  or  in- 
directly by  the  political  party  in  power,  at  the  national 
expense,  and  ready  to  serve  any  political  party  whatso- 
ever for  pay.  Hence  arise  the  excessivcness  of  taxation, 
the  parliamentary  corruption,  and  the  frequent  wars  of 
that  country.  None  of  our  constitutions  intended  to  endow 
legislation  with  this  power  of  regulating  property,  thus 
exercised  in  England,  because  its  effects  there  demonstra- 
ted,  that  the  moral  principles  upon  which  they  were  built, 
could  not  subsist  in  union  with  such  a  power  ;  and  that  it 
would  have  amounted  to  a  provision  in  them  all,  for  absolv- 
ing the  government  from  the  moral   restraints  previously 

75 


3S-h  THE    LEGAL    POLICY    OH   THE    U.    STATES. 

imposed.  But  political  parties  have  attempted  to  acquirer 
it  in  imitation  of  the  English  precedents,  (whieh  will  for 
ever  be  admired  by  men  in  power)  as  in  the  cases  of  a  legal 
appreciation  of  paper  stock  far  beyond  the  price  at  which 
it  was  purchased,  of  banks,  and  of  the  Yazoo  report ;  and  if 
the  system  of  changing  the  principles  of  a  government  by 
laws  is  not  well  understood  by  the  people,  they  will  go  on, 
and  at  length  make  sales  of  national  property  to  stockjob- 
bers, if  stockjobbers  will  sell  them  support  even  in  the  form 

of  a  war. 

A  legislative  power  of  regulating  wealth  and  poverty,  is 
a  principle  of  such  irresistible  ascendency,  as  to  bring  all 
political  parties  to  the  same  standard,  and  to  make  it  quite 
indifferent  to  nations,  which  shall  prevail.  It  is  the  solu- 
tion in  which  is  found  the  political  identity  of  the  whig  and 
tory  parties  of  England,  in  the  exercise  of  power,  during 
their  highest  state  of  acrimony  j  and  in  whieh  this  acrimo- 
ny was  at  length  lost. 

It  is  matter  of  surprise  that  mankind  should  owe  their 
greatest  calamities  to  the  two  most  respectable  human  cha- 
racters, priests  and  patriots,  from  a  political  gluttony,  like 
that  of  swallowing  too  much  food,  however  good.  If  re- 
sponsibility to  God  cannot  cure  priests  of  the  vices  which 
infect  legislative  parties  of  interest,  what  security  lies  in  a 
responsibility  to  man  ?  If  the  love  of  souls  cannot  awaken 
integrity,  laid  to  sleep  by  this  species  of  legislative  patron- 
age, will  it  be  awakened  by  a  love  of  wealth  and  power  ? 
But  nations  have  no  right  to  complain,  because  they  cor- 
rupt their  priests  and  patriots  by  temptations,  which  human 
nature  has  never  been  able  to  resist.  Our  policy,  rejecting 
a  reliance  upon  either,  because  they  are  men,  has  endea- 
voured to  exalt  political  law  from  a  numerical  form, 
into  a  science ;  and  to  substitute  permanent  principles  for 
fluctuating  passions.  But  if  laws  can  distribute  wealth  and 
power,  among  individuals  arranged  in  combinations  to  ac- 
quire both  ;  and  if  the  fashion  should  prevail  of  scanning 
them  by  party  comments,  and  not  by  honest  principles,'  our 


THE   LEGAL   POLICY   OF   THE   IT.    STATES.  585 

beautiful  experiment  of  confiding  for  a  free  government  in 
good  moral  principles  rather  than  in  priests  or  patriots,  will 
be  exchanged  for  a  confidence  in  stockjobbers  and  various 
other  parties  of  interest. 

These  parties  plead  patriotism  to  ignorance  and  credu- 
lity, and  offer  wealth  and  power  to  avarice  and  ambition, 
The  most  fraudulent  is  loudest  in  professions  of  zeal  for 
the  publiek  good,  and  like  the  Mississippi  and  South  Sea 
projects,  is  often  the  most  successful  ;  because  the  vicious 
principle  of  creating  wealth  by  law,  having  debauched  the 
minds  of  the  audience,  no  dishonesty  appears  to  be  attached 
to  any  excesses  of  legislative  robbery.  Audacity  or  delu- 
sion at  length  inculcates  an  opinion,  that  he  who  refuses  to 
surrender  his  conscience  and  his  understanding  to  some 
party,  is  a  knave  or  a  fool  ;  a  knave,  in  pretending  to  hon- 
esty under  a  legislative  distribution  of  wealth  ;  and  a  fool, 
for  preferring  hopeless  efforts  to  serve  the  publiek,  to  his 
own  aggrandizement  at  the  publiek  expense.  Thus  the  max- 
ims taught  by  the  legal  intercourse  between  political  and  pe- 
cuniary parties  reverse  the  dictates  of  common  sense  and 
common  honesty.  Knaves  or  fools  only,  surrender  their 
duties  and  rights  to  party  despotism.  Knaves,  to  get  a  share 
in  its  acquisitions  ;  fools,  because  they  are  deceived.  Can 
an  honest  man  of  sound  understanding  think  himself  bound 
by  wisdom  or  duty,  to  give  or  sell  himself  to  one  of  two  par- 
ties, prompted  by  interest  and  ambition  to  impair  the  publiek 
good  ?  Are  men  bound  by  wisdom  or  honour  to  take  side 
with  one  of  two  competitors, if  both  are  robbers  or  usurpers? 
On  the  contrary,  as  neither  could  succeed  except  by  dividing 
the  national  force  between  them,  a  nation  of  fools  only 
could  be  drawn  into  a  division,  in  which  the  success  of 
either  party,  is  a  calamity  to  a  majority  of  both.  And  as 
civil  government  affords  wealth  and  power  to  a  very  small 
proportion  of  a  nation,  if  those  who  reap  neither  from  it, 
are  seduced  into  an  opinion  that  they  ought  to  enlist  under 
one  of  two  small  parties  contending  for  both,  they  are  only 
entitled  to  the  same  character,  as  being  t\ie  instruments  n(* 


B80         the  legal  policy  of  the  tt.  states. 

their  own  misfortunes,  in  all  the  fluctuations  of  victory. 
Parties,  like  usurpers,  acquire  nothing  from  each  other. 
The  rich  spoils  of  a  gallant  but  deluded  nation,  were  the 
fruits  gathered  by  the  whig  and  tory  parties  from  the  opin- 
ion— that  it  is  knavery  to  adhere  to  the  publiek  interest,  and 
folly  to  exercise  one's  own  judgement.  Thus  election,  de- 
signed to  advance  this  interest,  is  converted  into  an  instru- 
ment for  parties  ;  and  that  which  is  successful,  hastens  to 
reap  the  transitory  harvest  by  legislative  abuses,  during  the 
delirium  of  victory,  until  its  crimes  make  room  for  a  rival, 
equally  unrestrained,  which  follows  its  precedents,  repeats 
its  frauds,  and  experiences  its  fate.  By  considering  a  zeal 
I'w  party  as  more  wise  or  honourable,  than  a  zeal  for  good 
or  bad  laws,  a  nation  is  thus  perpetually  suspended  in  a 
state  of  political  warfare,  pregnant  only  with  aggravations 
of  calamity. 

Election  in  the  United  States  becomes  more  contempti- 
ble than  in  England,  when  degraded  by  a  legal  power  of 
regulating  wealth  and  poverty,  into  a  whig  or  a  tory,  a  Pitt 
01  a  Fox.  if  it  is  seduced  by  a  worthless  maxim  to  commit 
the  erinie,  for  which  the  English  parliament  are  wise 
enough  to  obtain  a  valuable  consideration.  It  appoints  the 
primp  minister  of  our  sovereignty.  If  like  the  corrupted 
English  interests,  which  govern  the  appointment  of  theirs, 
it  was  well  paid  for  its  work  ;  or  if  like  the  king  by  whom 
this  appointment  is  nominally  made,  it  was  lavishly  endow- 
ed without  expense  to  itself;  it  might  boast  of  having  sold 
its  conscience  and  understanding  for  something  solid  ;  but 
to  give  away  both,  lor  a  hollow  notion  of  adhering  to  a 
party,  that  it  may  be  fleeced  and  not  bribed,  "would  be  an 
aet  of  self  abasement  demonstrating  that  it  was  unable  to 
distinguish  between  good  and  bad  principles,  and  was  of 
course  flattered,  despised  and  cheated.  A  sovereignty,  po- 
pular or  monarchical,  ignorant  of  the  principles  by  which 
it  is  preserved  or  destroyed,  is  first  a  cypher,  then  a  tool, 
and  finally  the  victim  of  its  own  servants.  The  folly  both 
of  a  foolish  people  and  a  foolish  king,  consists  in  suffering 


THE    LEGAL   POLICY    OF   THE    U.    STATES.  5S7 

ihe  attention  to  be  diverted  from  the  moral  nature  of  the 
acts  and  laws  of  their  servants,  to  the  frivolous  names  and 
treacherous  professions  of  contending  parties  and  rival 
courtiers. 

The  evil  moral  qualities  of  human  nature,  as  natural  to 
parties  as  to  man,  constitute  the  evidence  in  favour  of  re- 
straining them  by  good  moral  principles,  and  evince  the 
absurdity,  in  every  case,  of  losing  these  principles  in  a  ca- 
reer after  names,  to  be  equivalent  to  that  of  shutting  the 
eyes  for  the  sake  ojf  substituting  confidence  for  seeing.  The 
political  party  which  brought  Charles  the  first  to  the  block, 
made  sundry  good  laws  for  checking  the  regal,  hierarchical, 
and  titled  parties  of  interest,  from  which  the  petition  of 
right  for  repairing  the  usurpations  of  his  two  sons,  extrac- 
ted, all  its  merit.  Yet  it  soon  degenerated  into  a  fraudulent 
.and  oppressive  party  of  interest  itself.  This  ease  teaches 
us,  that  legislation  can  change  the  nature  of  a  government, 
without  changing  its  form  ;  that  the  numerical  analysis, 
being  unable  to  discern  such  changes,  describes  a  govern- 
ment bv  the  same  name.  after  it  has  undergone  a  material 
change  ;  that  without  understanding  the  moral  principles  of 
laws,  nations  can  neither  foresee  nor  regulate  revolutions  ; 
and  that  neither  party  principles,  merits  nor  names,  are  a 
good  security  for  the  continuance  of  party  patriotism. 

The  pigments  of  the  human  character,  by  which  this 
last  fact  is  exhibited,  are  so  numerous,  that  the  habit  of 
overlooking  them  is  like  the  simplicity  of  a  child,  unable  to 
recognise  his  own  image.  Eyes,  seeing  power  eternally 
corrupting  men,  and  minds,  acting  upon  a  supposition  that 
it  does  not,  make  up  the  foolish  compound  which  has  leg!  •- 
lated  for  the  world  ;  and  the  world  has  been  enslaved.  The 
patriots  Caesar,  Cromwell  and  Bonaparte,  and  the  parties 
v.  big  and  tory,  federal  and  republican,  have  acted  and  legis- 
lated alike,  because  men  are  influenced  by  power  as  all 
kinds  of  water  are  by  rum.  No  name  nor  badge  can  enchant 
a  man  against  a  moral  law  impinging  on  his  nature.  If  a 
partridge  was  called  an  ostrich,  it  would  not  save  him  fiohi 


588  THE   LEGAL   POLICY   OF   THE    17.    STATES. 

the  talon  of  the  hawk  ;  nor  can  a  man  be  shielded  against 
the  effects  of  power  by  writing  "  patriot''  on  his  forehead. 
Whenever,  therefore,  the  popularity  of  parties  or  individu- 
als, shall  free  law  from  a  strict  examination  at  the  tribunal 
of  moral  principles,  a  revolution  is  effected  or  at  hand. 

The  constitutional  power  of  the  president  to  influence 
the  legislature  by  his  patronage,  and  the  unconstitutional 
practice  of  its  members  in  influencing  the  election  of  a  pre- 
sident, might  be  moulded  into  a  powerful  ally  of  a  system 
of  legislation,  neither  suggested  nor  examined  by  good 
moral  principles.  Its  tendency  is  to  weaken,  and  at  length 
to  destroy,  the  responsibility  of  the  president  to  the  people  ; 
to  extend  the  corruption  of  patronage  in  the  legislature, 
and  to  defeat  the  good  effects  designed  to  be  produced  by 
the  division  of  power  between  the  legislative  and  executive 
departments.  By  the  constitution  of  Virginia,  a  patronage 
operates  visibly  upon  the  independence  of  that  branch  of 
the  legislature,  numerically  inferior,  because  its  members 
can  only  gain  the  best  offices  in  the  state  by  the  favour  of' 
the  other.  A  cross  patronage  between  the  president  and 
congress,  more  than  doubles  the  operation  of  this  mode  of 
appointment  against  the  principle  of  dividing  power.  In 
Virginia,  the  evil  is  mitigated  by  the  absence  of  any  execu- 
tive patronage  over  the  members  of  the  legislature.  But  if 
the  president  should  become  the  patron  of  congress,  and 
congress  the  patron  of  the  president,  checks  would  be  con-, 
verted  into  accomplices,  and  a  secret  and  intricate  conso- 
lidation of  those  divisions,  intended  to  restrain  legislation 
within  the  verge  of  good  moral  principles,  would  necessarily 
ensue.  The  political  sect  arising  from  this  commerce, 
would  resort  to  law  to  strengthen  an  evasion  of  the  consti- 
tution. The  obstacles  against  the  institution  of  titled  orders, 
would  turn  its  attention  towards  the  creation  of  parties  of 
interest  in  other  forms,  to  secure  its  power  and  gratify  its 
wishes.  And  besides,  all  the  artifices  for  inflaming  the  pas- 
sions of  the  vulgar,  and  bewildering  the  understandings  of 
the  ignorant ;  an  identification  of  the  government  with  the 


THE    1EGAL   POLICY   OF   THE    V.    STATES!  589 

nation  to  free  the  party  in  power  from  responsibility  ;  a  na- 
tional debt  to  chain  the  wealthy  to  the  combination  by  the 
same  strong  ligament  which  binds  them  in  France  to  Bona- 
parte ;  a  direction  of  the  publick  admiration  to  military  men  ; 
to  reduce  those  most  likely  to  oppose  arbitrary  laws,  to  a 
state  of  inferiority  ;  a  neglect  of  the  militia,  under  the  doc- 
trine that  it  is  unfit  to  resist  foreign  armies,  so  as  to  make 
it  unable  to  resist  domestick ;  a  gradual  reduction  of  the 
state  governments  to  insignificance  ;  and  a  perpetual  in- 
crease of  the  energy  of  government,  under  the  pretext  of 
extensive  territory  ;  being  all  within  the  scope  of  the  pow- 
ers of  the  general  government,  will  all  be  summoned  to  the 
aid  of  any  combination  between  political  departments  ;  and 
a  power  of  regulating  property  by  law  would  dig  the 
fosse  of  corruption,  and  render  the  circumvallation  for  its 
defence,  impregnable  to  its  slaves.  Against  this  host  of 
dangers,  no  security  occurs  to  me,  except  a  strict  scrutiny 
into  laws  and  all  the  measures  of  government,  by  the  light 
of  good  moral  principles. 

Our  policy  has  attempted  to  wrest  war  from  the  hands  of 
executive  power,  lest  it  should  be  used  as  a  means  of  making 
legislative  an  instrument  for  advancing  its  projects,  and  re- 
presentation a  mask  to  conceal  them.  War  is  the  keenest 
carving  knife  for  cutting  up  nations  into  delicious  morsels  for 
parties  and  their  leaders.  It  swells  a  few  people  to  a  mon- 
strous moral  size,  and  shrivels  a  multitude  to  an  equally 
unnatural  diminituveness.  It  puts  arms  into  the  hands  of 
ambition,  avarice,  pride,  and  self  love,  and  aggravates  these 
passions  by  erecting  the  holders  into  a  separate  interest, 
which  without  arms  has  in  no  shape  been  made  just  or  ho- 
nest by  the  restraints  of  moral  principles  or  didactick  pro- 
hibitions. It  breeds  a  race  of  men,  nominally  heroes,  mis- 
taken for  patriots,  and  really  tyrants.  It  enable  knaves 
and  traitors  to  delude  the  multitude  into  a  belief  that  real 
patriots  are  knaves  and  traitors,  and  thus  to  force  good  men 
to  become  the  instruments  of  bad,  to  avoid  the  persecu- 
tions of  this  delusion.     And  without  a  sound  militia,  it  is 


590  THE    LEGAL    POLICY    OF    THE    V.    STATES. 

more  dangerous  to  our  policy  than  superstition,  nobility, 
and  exclusive  privilege  united  ;  because  these  could  only  sap 
it  slowly,  whilst  that  can  carry  it  by  storm.  Hence  this  in- 
strument, so  well  adapted  for  its  destruction,  is  attempted 
to  be  withheld  from  executive  power.  But  no  provisions 
enforce  the  prohibition,  and  no  precautions  against  execu- 
tive intrigues  with  party  spirit,  the  influence  of  patronage, 
nor  the  precipitancy  of  passion,  are  resorted  to.  The  most 
trivial  law  is  suspended  for  the  president's  concurrence,  and 
the  most  trivial  amendment  of  the  constitution  must  reeeive 
a  chaste  national  approbation  ;  but  a  law  for  war  is  absol- 
ved from  this  check,  and  unsubjected  to  publick  opinion. 
Party  legislation  converts  the  constitutional  precaution  into 
an  aggravation  of  the  danger,  and  restores  the  knife  to  the 
president,  freed  from  any  responsibility  for  using  it.  Twen- 
ty six  per  centum  of  the  legislature,  being  the  dictators  of  a 
party  predominancy  of  fifty  one  per  centum,  in  virtue  of  the 
party  loyalty  spread  by  fashion  over  perjury  and  treason, 
like  embroidery  over  putrescence,  holds  in  fact  the  power 
of  declaring  war  ;  and  political  fashion,  having  thus  dimin- 
ished the  work  for  the  blandishments  of  flattery,  the  preju- 
dices of  party  spirit,  and  the  allurements  of  executive 
patronage,  then  covers  the  real  authors  of  war  against  re- 
sponsibility, under  the  canopy  of  a  fraudulent  majority,  and 
the  justification  of  a  national  concurrence,  drawn  from  a 
false  appearance.  The  gradation  of  reasoning,  "  that  each 
individual  ought  to  be  governed  by  the  majority  of  some 
party  ;  that  a  majority  thus  obtained,  is  a  genuine  republi- 
can majority  ;  and  that  it  is  both  the  government  and  the 
nation,"  seizes  upon  the  amiable  and  honest  respect  of  the 
people  for  their  representatives,  and  rewards  them  for  their 
virtues  by  the  calamities  of  a  war,  entrred  into  contrary  to 
the  true  wishes  of  themselves,  and  of  those  who  have  thus 
sacrificed  a  virtuous  to  a  wicked  allegiance.  Other  less 
important  consequences  of  party  allegiance  might  have  been 
cited,  to  illustrate  the  impossibility  of  maintaining  a  free 
government,  .unless  the  majority  of  a  nation  shall  eontinu- 


THE    LEGAL   POLICY    OF   THE    U.    STATES.  591 

Ally  try  two  parties  struggling  for  wealth  and  power  in  a 
free  government,  not  by  prejudices  and  delusions,  which 
these  parties  in  their  pleadings  infuse,  hut  by  fixed  moral 
principles.  Being  as  corrupt  as  hierarchies  or  noble  or- 
ders, and  struggling  for  the  same  objects  by  which  such 
parties  are  invigorated,  they  draw  their  qualities  from  the 
same  infusion  ;  and  a  nation  divided  between  them  in  a  con- 
stant political  warfare,  can  only  win  by  their  alternate  victo- 
ries that  kind  of  liberty,  to  be  reaped  from  a  similar  war- 
fare under  the  banners  of  an  order  of  priests,  and  an  order 
of  nobles. 

Whilst  the  preservation  of  a  federal  form  of  government* 
dictated  precautions  against  its  subversion  by  political  law, 
it  is  left  exposed  in  a  considerable  degree  to  the  lever  of 
civil  law  and  party  spirit  united.     Had  legislative  chastity 
been  secured  against  the  addresses  of  executive  patronage, 
and  laws  for  making  war  been  subjected  to  the  concurrence 
of  two  thirds  of  the  states,  precautions  better  than  those 
existing  might  have  prevented  the  differences  between  the 
states,  and  alleviated  the  animosities  between  the  parties, 
which  seem  better  calculated  to  foster  provincial  hatreds, 
and  the  gradual  approach  of  burdensome  government,  than 
wealth,  happiness,  and  liberty.     The  didactick  state   au- 
thority is  no  match  for  a  power  concentrated  in  a  few  hands, 
and  able  by  law  to  make  war,  and  to  require  «  all  the  reve- 
nue a  nation  can  pay."     Add  to  this  force  the  power  of  dis- 
tributing wealth  by  law,  and  the  division  of  might  between 
the  general  and  state  governments,  would  be  well  represen- 
ted by  a  giant  armed  with  a  scimitar,  and  an  infant,  with  a 
needle.     Heavy  taxes,  loaning.  Mar  and  legal  devices  for 
distributing  wealth   and  poverty,  are  the  modern  scalping 
knives,  tomahawks  and  rifles,  used  by  avarice  and  ambition, 
because  the  more  merciful  weapons,  superstition  and  nobil- 
ity, having  been  broken  by  knowledge,  snore  cruel  became 
necessary,  to  intimidate,  or  more  expensive,  to  corrupt  her; 
and  mankind  must  hence  suffer,  on  account  of  an  accession 
of  knowledge,  an  accession  of  oppression,  or  piously  ac* 

76 


:j9-Z         the  legal  policy  of  the  u.  states. 

knowledge  the  divine  favour,  by  reaping  from  it  the  great- 
est of  sublunary  blessings.  Legislation  must  either  be 
restrained  within  the  pale  of  good  moral  principles,  by  the 
exertion  of  this  modern  dispensation ;  or  it  must  more  ex- 
tensively than  ever  resort  to  bad  ones,  to  suppress  its  effects. 
And  neither  monarchy,  faction,  avarice  or  ambition,  will  be 
able  hereafter  to  effect  their  ends  in  the  mild  modes  of  an- 
cient oppression,  until  ancient  ignorance  is  restored,  as  was 
evinced  by  the  revolutionary  struggles  and  their  termina- 
tion in  France. 

Constitutions  are  often  converted  from  tests  for  law,  in- 
to snares  for  ignorance,  by  the  ingenious  verbal  criticisms, 
to  which  the  vices,  the  errours,  and  the  passions  of  parties 
will  often  resort.  If  the  single  words  "  religion  and  re- 
publick,"  are  often  made  to  cover  superstition  and  tyranny, 
what  party  can  fail  to  find  shelter  for  any  law  under  a  long 
constitution  ;  but  good  moral  principles  cannot  be  made  bad 
by  words,  nor  bad,  good.  Constitutional  powers,  being  all  su- 
bordinate and  subservient  to  the  end  of  preserving  a  free  and 
moderate  government,  do  not  admit  of  any  constructions  sub- 
versive of  these  ends.  If  a  nation  should  erect  a  temple,  and 
bestow  on  trustees  powers  for  its  preservation,  no  construc- 
tion of  these  powers  could  be  correct,  by  which  its  pillars 
would  be  gradually  weakened,  and  the  edifice  finally  de- 
stroyed. Even  no  power  expressly  given,  can  be  constitu- 
tionally used  to  defeat  the  intention  for  which  it  was  given. 
Congress  are  empowered  to  raise  armies  and  to  borrow 
money ;  but  by  using  one  power  to  erect  a  military  aris- 
tocracv,  like  the  French,  or  the  other  to  erect  a  stock  aris- 
toeracy,  like  the  English,  they  would  be  guilty  of  treason 
against,  the  constitution,  without  violating  its  letter. 

In  like  manner,  had  an  express  power  to  grant  charters 
been  given  to  congress,  it  could  only  have  been  constitu- 
tionally exercised  for  the  support  of  a  free  and  moderate 
government,  if  this  was  the  primary  end  of  the  constitution 
itself ;  and  its  use  for  the  destruction  of  this  end,  would 
have  hern  ;i  re;j!  usurpation,  by  the  help  of  a  legal  fraud. 


THE    LEGAX   T0L1CY    0¥   THE    t.    STATES.  59S 

If  this  reasoning  is  true,  all  aristocracies  of  interest,  mili- 
tary, stock,  ministerial,  or  party,  whether  created  by  laws 
literally  constitutional,  by  a  patronage  equally  warranted, 
or  by  the  struggles  between  the  inns  and  outs  under  less 
faithful  denominations,  for  the  powers  aiid  profits  of  go- 
vernment, being  hostile  to  the  true  principles  of  our  policy, 
are  really  treasonable,  and  would  at  once  appear  to  be  so,  if 
they  were  compared  With  the  moral  principles  by  which  the 
constitution  was  constructed,  and  the  end  it  had  in  view. 
Upon  the  same  ground,  the  great  legislative  power  bestow- 
ed by  most  of  the  state  constitutions,  would  not  suffice  to 
justify  the  destruction  of  the  primary  end  of  these  consti- 
tutions themselves,  by  any  laws,  however  justifiable  by  their 
letter.  The  state  and  the  general  constitutions  form  but 
one  system  of  policy.  The  spirit  of  this  policy,  to  be  only 
fairly  drawn  from  an  inspection  of  the  whole,  is  adverse  to 
aristocracy  in  every  form,  because  it  is  not  itself  an  aristo- 
cratical  spirit.  All  laws  driving  into  our  policy  any  portion 
of  this  new  spirit,  will  drive  out  a  correspondent  portion  of 
the  old.  But  we  are  not  left  to  infer  from  the  general 
structure  of  those  instruments  from  which  we  deduce  our 
policy,  whether  its  end  was  aristocratieal  or  not.  Titles, 
exclusive  privileges  or  advantages,  so  as  to  comprise  com- 
pletely the  ideas  of  personal  aud  pecuniary  aristocracies  in 
all  forms,  are  every  where  exclaimed  against,  for  the  pur- 
pose of  closing  the  legislative  door  against  all  such  modes 
of  destroying  our  policy.  AvA  the  success  with  which 
these  positive  inhibitions  have  been  hitherto  gotten  over,  by 
the  constructions  of  parties  of  interest  in  some  form,  serves 
to  demonstrate  both  the  inefiicacy  of  political  law  to  restrain 
such  parties,  and  the  necessity  for  ascertaining  the  principles 
which  constitute  a  good  or  a  bad  government,  as  a  test  to 
which  the  people  may  resort  for  discovering  the  tendency 
of  civil  law. 

The  laws  for  making  that  which  was  purchased  for  one 
shilling  worth  twenty,  and  for  making  these  twenty  worth 
thirty  or  forty,  as  stock  in  the  bank  of  the  United  States  ; 


59'k  THE    XEGAL   POLICY    OF   THE    V.    STATES. 

exhibited  so  dazzling  a  degree  of  success  in  the  legislative 
mode  of  becoming  rich,  that  all  the  objections  against  them 
as  a  mode  of  poisoning  our  policy,  disappeared  \  and  our 
legislatures  suddenly  became  staples  for  manufacturing 
anew  the  political  wares  broken  to  pieces  by  the  revolution. 
If  the  English  nation,  at  the  accession  of  William  of  Orange, 
had  restored  to  the  crown  the  fraudulent  prerogatives,  for 
exercising  which  Charles  bled  and  James  was  expelled,  our 
Jegislatures  would  have  had  a  precedent  for  reviving  the 
monarchical  policy  of  welding  aristocracies  of  interest  to 
our  new  government  in  a  thousand  forms,  by  legal  distri- 
butions of  wealth  at  the  publick  expense.  Privileges  and 
monopolies,  flowing  from  law,  are  of  the  same  nature  as  if 
they  came  from  prerogative,  like  the  same  poison  poured 
from  different  phials.  The  English  declaration  of  rights 
at  the  revolution,  does  not  more  explicitly  condemn  the  op- 
pressions it  corrects,  than  our  state  constitutions  condemn 
Ihe  principle  of  creating  aristocracies  by  legal  privileges. 
This  declaration  is  the  most  explicit  acquisition  obtained 
by  that  nation  at  the  expense  of  much  civil  war,  in  favour 
of  civil  liberty,  but  its  benefits  have  been  defeated  by  mak- 
ing the  statute  book  a  receptacle  for  the  same  frauds  which 
were  formerly  recorded  in  the  archives  of  prerogative.  An 
hundred  laws  to  create  an  hundred  aristocracies  of  interest, 
if  they  collect  as  much  monev,  are  the  same  to  a  nation,  as 
nn  hundred  of  queen  Elizabeth's  monopoly  grants.  These 
laws  require  armies  and  penalties  to  defend  them,  live  in 
the  United  States  upon  agriculture,  and  fear  a  militia. 

No  government  ever  commenced  its  operations  with  so 
pliable  a  people,  as  that  of  the  United  States.  Among  their 
most  firmly  rooted  principles,  were  an  aversion  for  legal 
privileges,  aristocracies  of  interest  and  standing  armies  ; 
and  an  affection  for  agriculture,  commerce  and  the  militia. 
By  considering  the  effects  of  legal  patronage  upon  the  first 
triumvirate,  and  the  effects  of  withholding  it  from  the  se- 
cond, its  force  upon  national  policy,  and  its  capacity  to  pro- 
duce one  evil  as  a  cause  for  another,  will  be  seen.     A  mill- 


THE    LEGAL  TOLICY    OF   THE    TJ.    STATES.  695 

tarv  nation,  received  from  the  revolution,  lias  been  treated 
for  thirty  years  with  stockjobbing  laws  ;  and  by  throwing 
away  three  hundred  millions  during  the  same  period  upon 
a  trifling  standing  army,  without  expending,  a  shilling  on 
the  militia,  an  argument  has  been  made  against  reposing  in 
the  latter  any  future  dependence. 

The  difficulty  of  proving  partial  laws  to  be  publick  evils, 
increases  as  the  fact  becomes  more  obvious.  As  feudal 
castles  and  the  monkish  convents  increased,  they  were 
thought  to  yield  to  nations  more  defence  and  more  charity, 
as  banks,  by  au  increase  of  their  paper,  are  said  to  add  to 
their  wealth.  The  people  of  England  have  rejected  the 
defence  of  the  castles,  the  charity  of  the  convents,  and  now 
want  bread  in  the  most  fruitful  of  all  countries,  though  tot- 
tering under  the  wealth  of  paper  stock.  Such  is  the  effect 
of  enriching  capital  or  cunning  by  Jaw,  of  robbing  talents 
and  industry  of  their  natural  right  to  divide  property,  of 
conveying  away  national  rights  by  irrepealable  laws,  and  of 
repealing  by  laws  constitutional  principles. 

In  England  the  crown  lands,  though  alienated  by  absolute 
deeds,  have  been  often  resumed,  as  a  publick  right,  without 
the  power  of  the  king  to  destroy.  Laws  for  enabling  char- 
tered aristocracies  of  interest  to  raise  a  revenue,  impair  (he 
national  ability  to  defend  its  liberty:  deeds  for  alienating 
crown  lands,  only  impaired  the  ability  of  a  king  to  maintain 
his  dignity ;  perhaps  his  vices.  For  the  first  species  of  right, 
nations  receive  nothing  ;  the  last  was  often  sold  by  kings.  If 
the  alienation  of  a  fourth  of  the  crown  lands  was  a  deduction 
from  the  whole,  ten  millions  collected  under  laws  by  aristo- 
cracies of  interest  from  a  national  ability  to  pay  forfy,  must 
be  an  equivalent  deduction.  Can  law  justly  convey  publick 
property  to  enrich  aristocracies  of  interest  or  individuals, 
(publick  services  being  out  of  the  question)  though  it  is  for- 
bidden to  prerogative,  as  too  fraudulent  and  oppressive  for 
monarchy  ?  Revenue  is  more  clearly  publick  property  and  a 
publick  right,  than  those  crown  lands.  Unhappily  for  En- 
gland, her  statesmen  discovered,  about  a  century  past,  that  it 


396*  THE   LEGAL  POLICY   OF    THE   V.    STATES. 

would  sell  much  better.  And  after  refusing  to  be  defrauded 
of  the  crown  lands  by  the  term  "prerogative,"  in  an  age  more 
enlightened  she  has  been  deluded  by  the  terms  "  charter 
and  national  credit,"  into  sales  of  her  liberty  and  property, 
under  the  usual  pretexts  of  statesmen,  but  really  to  enrich 
parties  of  interest,  to  sustain  ministries,  and  to  feed  vices 
tenfold  in  number,  and  similar  in  depravity,  to  those  which 
caused  the  alienations  of  crown  lands. 

The  practice  of  legislation,  in  imitation  of  queen  Eliza- 
beth, of  selling  charters  of  privilege,  will  suggest  some 
remedy  against  reviving  an  old  evil  in  this  new  mode  ;  and 
though  the  same  applause  awaits  the  repeal  of  law  char- 
ters, which  has  been  paid  by  all  historians  to  her  repeal  of 
privilege  charters,  (because  the  receivers  or  purchasers  of 
national  rights,  if  they  are  exeuseable  for  the  attempt  to 
acquire,  can  never  be  admitted  to  have  effected  the  acquisi- 
tion,) yet  her  precedent  will  rob  it  of  the  honour  of  first 
breaking  down  the  barriers  of  private  avarice,  to  come  at 
the  publick  interest. 

»'<  Common  consent,"  Aristotle's  definition  of  law,  is  only 
correct  in  reference  to  societies  actually  exercising  the  right 
of  self  government.  Force  and  fraud  are  in  fact  more 
frequently  sources  of  law,  than  consent.  Of  this,  the  ar- 
gument, that  a  law  should  remain  against  common  consent, 
because  it  had  been  enacted  by  it,  is  an  eminent  instance. 
Does  it  require  a  politician  as  erafly  as  the  English  judge 
who  invented  the  mode  of  docking  entails  of  land,  to  teach 
us  how  to  dock  entails  of  the  errours,  vices,  follies  and  mis 
fortunes  of  the  dead  upon  the  living  ?  Our  common  consent 
is  expressed  representatively,  in  a  mode  of  feudal  origin,  by 
which  dead,  often  legislates  against  the  will  of  living  eon  - 
sent.  If  the  representative  mind  consists  of  three  portions^ 
one  third  can  legislate  against  the  will  of  two  thirds  ;  if  of 
two,  one  moiety  legislates  against  the  will  of  the  other 
Custom  of  feudal  contrivance,  hasted  us  not  only  into  the 
practice  of  sustaining  law  against  the  consent  of  two  thirds* 
or  a  moiety  of  the   legislating  mind,  but  even  in  the  ens? 


THK   LEGAL  POLICY   OF  THE   IT.    STATES.  597 

of  the  general  government,  to  that  of  sustaining  it  against 
the  consent  of  an  entire  legislative  mind. 

The  union  is  a  compact  between  two  distinct  minds,  state 
and  popular.  The  two  branches  of  its  legislature,  consist 
of  the  separate  representatives  of  these  two  minds.  Its 
health,  peaee,  and  perhaps  its  existence,  depends  upon  the 
consent  of  both  of  these  minds  to  law.  If  either  could  re- 
tain a  law  by  which  it  had  acquired  an  unforeseen  superiori- 
ty over  the  other,  the  dissatisfaction  of  the  ensnared  party 
would  ensue,  and  the  law  itself  would  be  a  violation  of  the 
federal  compact.  The  constitution  provides  for  the  consent 
of  both  of  these  minds  to  law,  and  a  feudal  form  has  intro- 
duced a  mode  of  making  it,  against  the  consent  of  one,  and 
sometimes  against  that  of  both ;  so  that  a  portion  of  our 
laws  are  derived  neither  from  consent,  force,  or  fraud,  but 
from  the  form  of  stating  a  question  j  a  source  which  Aris- 
totle himself  has  overlooked. 

In  a  state  legislature,  composed  of  two  branches  repre- 
senting one  mind  or  body  politick,  a  concurrence  of  some 
portion  of  this  mind  must  attend  the  continuance  of  every 
law.  In  congress,  the  representatives  of  the  state  mind  may 
prevent  the  repeal  of  law,  which  will  then  continue  against 
the  will  of  the  entire  popular  mind,  or  against  the  will  of 
the  states,  if  the  repeal  is  prevented  by  the  popular  repre- 
sentatives. Or  if  the  repeal  is  prevented  by  the  president, 
the  law  continues,  somewhat  equivocally  on  account  of  his 
representative  character,  against  the  will  of  both  minds. 

A  perfect  consolidated  government  guided  by  the  popu- 
lar mind,  or  a  perfeet  federal  government  guided  by  the 
will  of  the  states,  would  be  very  different  from  the  existing 
general  government.  To  prevent  fraud  or  accident  from  de- 
stroying by  means  of  law,  the  equilibrium  between  these  con- 
tracting minds,  as  established  by  the  constitution,  both  should 
be  free,  and  neither  able  (o  retain  an  intended  or  accidental 
legal  advantage  over  the  other.  If  either  of  the  political 
contracting  parties  composing  the  union,  keeps  the  other 
subject  to  a  law  contrary  to  its  will,  it  is  equivalent  lo  ke**p- 


598  THE   LEGAL    POLICY    OE    THE    L\    STATES, 

ing  the  people  of  a  state  subject  to  a  law, 'although  the  en- 
tire organ  of  their  will  should  dissent  therefrom.  And  if 
self  preservation  requires  that  this  entire  popular  mind, 
should  he  able  by  its  whole  representative  to  repeal  a  law, 
the  reason  is  equally  cogent  to  prove,  that  each  of  the  dis- 
tinct minds  composing  the  union,  should  be  able  to  exercise 
the  same  power  by  its  similar  organ.  A  power  which 
holds  another  to  law  against  its  will,  is  dominant,  and  ine- 
quality or  war  must  ensue. 

The  danger  from  making  law  by  form,  contrary  to  prin- 
ciple, is  greatest  to  the  popular  mind.  It  ought  to  be  less; 
because  that  is  a  natural  being  having  natural  rights, 
whereas  the  states  are  artificial  beings  having  artificial 
rights  only.  But  law  is  the  engine  of  usurpation  upon  na- 
tural rights,  to  which  the  factitious  beings  called  aristocra- 
cies, constantly  resort.  The  contest  between  artificial  and 
natural  rights  is  never  equal.  One  band  of  these  comba- 
tants may  win  rich  and  substantial  booty  ;  the  other  can 
win  nothing.  The  reciprocity  is  as  unequal  in  relation  to 
the  chance,  as  to  the  stake.  The  duration  and  small  num- 
ber of  the  Senate,  affords  room  for  more  concert  and  dexte- 
rity, in  procuring  and  sustaining  laws  favourable  to  facti- 
tious interests,  than  can  be  practised  by  the  house  of  repre- 
sentatives against  them. 

A  strict  computation  of  chances  is  unnecessary  to  the 
argument.  It  is  enough  to  shew,  that  out  of  an  unprincipled 
form,  the  great  social  evils  of  disordering  the  equilibrium 
of  the  general  government,  and  of  quartering  artificial 
burdens  upon  natural  industry,  may  grow  ;  and  that  these 
evils  are    unattended  by   a  chance  of  equivalent  benefits. 

As  law  is  the  machine  used  by  all  factions  and  aristo- 
cracies of  interest,  for  boarding  and  capturing  both  social 
and  natural  rights,  an  easy  mode  of  recapture  will  discou- 
rage, whereas  a  difficult  one  excites  efforts,  never  fraught 
with  good  to  human  happiness.  An  advertisement  inform- 
ing a  nation,  that  whatever  can  be  gotten  by  legal  frauds 
shall  be  sacred,  will  tend  as  much  to  the  encouragement  of 


THE    LEG  AX.   POLICY    OF   TUB    IT.    STATES.  599 

virtue,  as  one,  that  such  acquisitions  from  social  lights 
shall  he  suddenly  reclaimed,  would  to  the  encouragement 
ot*  vice. 

Let  us  view  this  subject  hy  the  tight  of  moral  and  repub- 
lican principles.  One  branch  of  a  legislature  is  not  invested 
with  a  power  of  making  law  affirmatively,  in  a  society  ex- 
ercising self  government,  because  it  cannot  express  the. 
common  consent,  on  account  of  representing  only  a  portion 
of  it.  If  the  reason  for  prohibiting  it  from  making  law  hy 
saying  yes,  is  good,  how  can  the  same  reason  allow  it  to 
make  law  hy  saying  no  ?  Shall  a  law  continue?  Shall  a  law 
be  repealed  ?  are  the  same  questions  in  substance  ;  but 
English  monarchy  and  feudality  saw  the  advantages  they 
would  gain  over  the  popular  interest  by  the  latter  form.  It 
would  enable  both  to  retain  every  encroachment  upon  popu- 
lar rights,  by  the  affirmative  will  of  either,  under  the  garh 
of  a  negative  erroneously  supposed  to  be  inefficacious. 
T  le  pretence,  that  this  negative  was  necessary  in  a  govern- 
ment of  orders,  for  the  preservation  of  each,  is  exploded  by 
discovering  that  such  an  end  would  have  been  much  better 
effected  by  the  principle,  that  no  law  should  continue  with- 
out the  consent  of  all.  This,  in  a  government  composed  of 
three  minds  or  three  orders,  would  have  been  Aristotle's 
«f  common  consent."  And  whilst  such  a  principle  would 
hare  produced  the  common  safety  of  these  distinct  political 
beings,  it  would  have  repressed  the  encroachments  of  either, 
by  affording  a  peaceable  mode  of  self  security  to  all,  infi- 
nitely more  effectual  for  the  meditated  end,  than  the  civil 
wars  produced  by  the  defectiveness  of  the  remedy  resor- 
ted to. 

Republican  and  moral  principles  concur  with  the  lan- 
guage of  all  our  constitutions,  in  the  opinion,  that  legisla- 
tures are  divided  into  several  branches,  not  to  enable  one 
only  to  make  law  against  the  will  of  two  others,  but  to  ob- 
tain a  sounder  expression  of  that  common  consent,  which  i* 
the  basis  of  law  in  a  free  government.  Let  us  imagine 
these  branches  to  be  three,  each  consisting  of  an   hundred 

77 


GOO  TilE    LEOAL    rOL'ICY    OF    THE    U.    9TATE3. 

members ;  why  should  one  hundred  he  able  to  retain  law 
against  the  will  of  two  ?  Suppose  there  had  been  only  one 
legislative  chamber  of  three  hundred  members;  would 
the  negative  of  one  hundred  members  on  the  proposed  re- 
peal of  a  law,  have  controlled  the  negative  of  the  two  hun- 
dred as  to  its  continuance  ? 

By  our  constitutions  a  power  to  legislate  is  bestowed, 
generally,  upon  several  legislative  branches  ;  but  the  legis- 
lature of  Vermont  consists  of  a  single  chamber.  Bestowed 
cither  upon  several  branches  or  this  single  chamber,  it  is 
an  affirmative  power.  What  reason  can  exist  why  this 
affirmative  power  should  in  substance  be  acquired  by  a  moi- 
ety or  a  third  of  the  legislature,  when  it  consists  of  two  or 
three  branches,  and  be  yet  incapable  of  being  acquired  by  a 
moiety  or  third  of  a  legislature  consisting  of  a  single  cham- 
ber ?  Legislative  power  is  bestowed  on  both  in  the  same 
terms.  Yet  in  consequence  of  the  feudal  form  of  putting 
a  question,  this  moiety  or  third  of  the  legislature  constitu- 
ted iri  the  first  mode,  makes  law  by  retaining  it ;  whereas 
no  such  power  can  be  exercised  by  the  legislature  constitu- 
ted in  the  second  mode,  although  the  powers  given  to  both 
are  precisely  the.  same. 

Thus  a  body  of  men  gains  out  of  a  form  moulded  by  it- 
self and  subject  to  its  own  pleasure,  a  power  to  legislate, 
bestowed  neither  by  the  constitution,  nor  by  republican 
principles,  nor  even  suggested  by  sound  reasoning,  in  a  go- 
vernment planted  in  a  compromise  between  three  orders. 
"When  the  true  question  is  "  whether  an  old  lawr  shall  con- 
tinue." the  collateral  question  "  whether  a  new  law  shall 
pass,"  important  only  from  its  incidental  influence  upon  the 
true  question,  bestows  upon  a  negative  vote  an  affirmative 
power,  or  a  suhstantial  legislative  power,  which  it  could 
never  exercise  by  voting  affirmatively.  And  a  negative 
upon  a  bill  by  one  legislative  branch,  supersedes  negatives 
upon  the  continuance  of  a  law  by  two,  in  consequence  of  an 
arbitrary  form,  in  a  country  whose  policy  it  is,  that  law 
should  be  the  genuine  result  of  common  consent  affirmative- 
ly enunciated. 


THE    LEGAL   POLICY    OF    THE    U.    STATES.'  601 

This  invention  of  the  English  orders,  transplanted  by 
tftUod  imitation  into  our  policy,  cannot  be  favourable  to  this 
policy,  if  it  was  favourable  to  those  orders.  But  it  may  be 
highly  favourable  to  all  the  legal  aristocracies  of  interest, 
which  may  be  created  to  subsist  on  the  common  interest,  by 
impeding  the  recovery  of  national  rights,  conveyed  in  char- 
ters or  laws  fraught  with  privileges  like  those  of  queen 
Elizabeth.  And  if  we  should  even  so  far  violate  the  prin- 
ciples of  our  policy,  as  to  reduce  the  people  to  the  station 
of  a  demoeratick,  and  to  exalt  all  the  charter  or  privileged 
men,  to  that  of  an  aristocratick  order,  yet  self  preservation 
would  require  a  negative  in  each  upon  law,  as  the  only  se- 
curity against  the  disorders,  invariably  produced  in  the  best 
constructed  species  of  political  balance.  It  is  particularly 
remarkable  therefore,  under  a  system  of  government,  ac- 
knowledging the  sovereignly  of  the  people,  and  reprobating 
privileges  and  exclusive  interests,  that  laws  may  be  retained 
against  the  will  of  this  acknowledged  sovereignty,  after  they 
have  been  found  to  operate  to  a  revolutionary  extent,  in 
favour  of  the  reprobated  principles.  If  the  form,  by  which 
an  anomaly  so  egregious  has  been  ingrafted  upon  our  policy, 
without  the  concurrence  of  the  sovereign  we  acknowledge, 
was  skillfully  contrived  to  yield  advantages  to  the  ennobled 
English  orders,  its  introduction  here  is  no  proof  of  popular 
aeuteness;  antl  if  this  device  is  found  there  to  be  favourable 
to  the  sprouts  from  the  principle  of  privilege  or  exclusive 
interest,  iu  all  the  modifications  produced  by  modern  man- 
ners, its  partiality  to  the  family  of  factitious  honour,  ought 
not  to  excuse  its  partiality  to  the  family  of  factitious  wealth, 
in  the  eyes  of  a  sovereign  who  must  supply  it. 

The  numerical  analysis  is  incompetent  to  the  detection 
of  real  legislation,  by  an  unconstitutional  authority,  under 
a  negative  ceremony  ;  but  the  moral  will  discern  with  ease, 
that  it  is  pregnant  with  eiFcets  founded  in  bad  principles,  or 
at  least  in  principles  adverse  to  those  of  our  policy.  It  in- 
vests minorities  and  parties  of  interest,  with  a  formidable 
power  of  retaining  oppressive  or  fraudulent  laws,  which  the 


CDZ  THE   LEGAL   TOLICY   OF   THE   V.    STATES. 

majority  and  (he  publiek  interest,  wish  to  repeal.  It  Cor- 
rupts tlie  outs  or  opposition,  as  well  as  the  administrators 
of  the  government,  because  the  leaders  of  both  are  equally 
liable  to  be  annexed  to  some  party  of  interest  by  wealth  or 
ambition.  And  it  combines  together  these  rivals,  for  self 
preservation,  so  as  to  resemble  an  army,  which  the  people 
•could  not  disband  except  by  its  own  vote,  however  its  offi- 
cers may  struggle  with  each  other  for  command  and  lu- 
crative employments. 

Hence  all  aristocracies  of  interest  contend,  that  it 
should  be  easy  to  pass  laws,  when  we  can  only  conjecture 
their  consequences :  and  hard  to  repeal  them,  when  these 
consequences  arc  known  ;  and  the  sovereignty  of  the  people, 
being  persuaded  that  it  is  impregnably  fortified  by  a  nega- 
tive against  unforeseen  evils,  and  an  inability  to  arrest  such 
as  it  feels  is  gradually  inclosed  within  a  circle  of  long  and 
perpetual  laws,  drawn  by  this  negative  magician;  and  finally 
becomes  a  pageant  as  powerless  as  the  grand  Lama  ;  whilst 
factitious  interests  become  oppressors  as  tyrannical  as  his 
substitutes. 

Attempts  to  reconcile  opposite  principles  are  causes  of 
party  spirit  and  revolution.  To  sanction  law  by  common 
consent  or  publiek  will,  is  one  principle  ;  by  the  will  of  a 
combination  among  parties  of  interest,  another.  If  the  first 
principle  can  only  prevent,  whilst  the  other  can  retain 
fraudulent  laws,  it  is  obvious  on  which  side  lies  the  ability 
to  make  encroachments.  One  is  armed  with  a  power  strict- 
ly defensive,  and  utterly  incapable  of  conquest  ;  the  other 
with  n  power  of  retaining  every  acquisition  it  can  make,  by 
its  frequent  and  sudden  inroads  upon  the  territory  of  its 
honest  and  peaceable  neighbour. 

The  unsettled  question  in  relation  to  (lie  right  of  in- 
struction, aggravates  the  evil  of  minority  legislation,  and 
the  moral  right  of  self  government  is  defeated  in  both 
cases  by  form  and  ceremony.  In  one,  (he  mode  of  putting 
:i  question  confers  on  minorities  a  legislative  power  withheld 
}>y  the  constitution  :  in  the  other,  the  mode  of  giving  the 


THE    LEGAL   TOLICY    OE   THE    U.    STATES.  COS 

instruction,  is  also  used  to  confer  on  the  representative  a 
power  af  legislating  contrary  to  the  will  oi'his  constituents  ; 
and  yet  both  the  minorities  and  the  representatives  acknow- 
ledge a  moral  obligation  to  be  bound  by  the  wills  they 
respectively  defeat.  Although  a  nation  holding  extensive 
territory,  resorts  to  district  election,  as  the  only  possible 
mode  of  acquiring  the  benefits  of  representation,  it  cannot 
exercise,  it  is  said,  the  inherent  right  of  instructing  its 
agents,  in  the  same  practicable  mode.  Had  the  division  of 
election,  heretofore  celebrated  among  the  moral  beauties 
of  our  policy,  been  rejected,  representation  must  also  have 
been  banished  from  it.  Aggregate  instruction  is  as  imprac- 
ticable as  aggregate  election.  Hut  supposing  that  both  or 
either  could  have  been  effected,  it  was  not  desirable,  if  the 
principle  of  division  is  as  salutary  in  restraining  the  pas- 
sions of  the  multitude  as  the  powers  of  a  government.  And 
although  it  is  alleged  that  the  risque  of  re-election  is  a  suf- 
ficient substitute  for  the  right  of  instruction,  it  is  an  argu- 
ment so  analogous  to  the  notion  of  thieves,  •*  that  the 
risque  of  the  gallows  justifies  the  theft,"  as  hardly  to  de- 
serve refutation  upon  the  still  stronger  ground,  that  it  would 
deprive  nations  of  self  defence  whilst  their  ruin  was  effect- 
ing, upon  a  speculation  quite  useless  after  it  is  accomplished. 
A  combination  among  parties  of  interest,  founded  upon  the 
negative  mode  of  legislation,  thus  absolved  from  the  super- 
vision and  restraint  of  instruction,  might  continue  legal 
tyranny  fraudulently  or  accidentally  introduced,  against  the 
will  of  a  nation  and  of  the  majority  of  its  representatives, 
if  it  possesses  no  practicable  mode  of  instruction  :  and  its 
own  money  would  at  the  same  time  pay  the  cost  of  treason 
and  be  used  in  corrupting  election  itself. 

Liberty,  like  religion,  is  lost  by  planting  it  in  dogma. 
Roman  Catholick  Christianity  was  corrupted  by  heathen 
ceremonies.  The  United  States  have  burst  through  the 
political  superstitions  of  church  and  state,  and  protection 
and  allegiance,  into  the  principle  of  national  right  to  make 
and  alter  national  laws  :  and  boast  of  constitutions  calcula- 


604'  THE    LEGAL   POLICY    OF   THE    U.    STATES. 

ted  to  prevent  legislatures  from  introducing  legal  oppres 
sion.  Yet  we  see  them  suffering  law,  from  a  superstitious 
veneration  for  a  feudal  ceremony,  highly  favourahle  to  the 
ohjeets  of  all  aristocracies  of  interest,  which  will  use  it  to 
secure  the  species  of  property  arising  from  legal  frauds,  hy 
inculcating  an  opinion,  that  it  is  dangerous  to  amend  con- 
stitutions. Such  an  opinion  deserves  consideration,  as  a 
powerful  ally  of  the  two  forms,  hy  which  the  negative/of  a 
minority  retains  obnoxious  laws,  and  the  only  practicable 
mode  of  instruction,  is  disqualified  for  restraining  perfidious 
agents. 

As  the  human  mind  is  unable  to  foresee  or  to  provide 
against  its  own  devices  ;  a  code  of  political  law,  is  as  unable 
to  provide  completely  for  the  safety  of  publick  rights,  as  a 
code  of  civil,  for  private.  Perhaps  this  is  making  too  great 
a  concession  to  the  adversaries  of  amending  constitutions, 
and  that  it  might  with  justice  be  asserted,  that  it  is  much 
more  difficult  to  foresee  and  restrain  the  arts  of  cunning 
politicians,  aided  by  means  infinitely  greater,  than  those  of 
ignorant,  disunited  individuals. 

Suppose  a  legislature  appointed  to  prepare  a  code  of 
civil  law,  to  be  dissolved  upon  a  supposition  that  the  work 
was  perfected.  If  crimes  and  evasions,  unforeseen  and  un- 
provided against,  should  occur,  who  would  contend  that  it 
would  ruin  the  nation,  should  it  appoint  another  legislature 
to  correct  these  crimes  and  evasions  ?  Criminals  and  so- 
phists. Ought  nations  to  hallow  guilt  or  crrour  by  suffering 
the  evils  they  cause  ? 

The  temptations  to  violate  political  law  are  greater,  and 
the  danger  of  punishment  less,  than  in  the  case  of  civil 
law.  In  one  case,  wealth  and  power  are  solicitors  for 
crime  ;  in  the  other,  temptation  is  comparatively  trivial, 
and  the  spectre  of  punishment  stares  it  in  the  face.  Will 
the  terror  of  the  gallows  seduce  men  to  violate  civil  law, 
and  the  allurement  of  wealth  and  power  deter  them  from 
violating  political,  so  that  the  stratagems  of  theft  must  be 
eternally  met  by  new  remedies,  whilst  those  of  avarice  and 


THE    LEGAL   POLICY    OE    THE    trj    STATES.  005 

ambition  will  never  require  them  ?  If  a  party  should  per- 
suade a  nation  to  make  no  more  laws  against  fraud,  would 
it  not  be  considered  as  a  band  of  thieves  ?  The  illustration 
of  the  opinion  «  that  it  is  dangerous  to  devise  new  remedies 
against  avariee  and  ambition,"  by  tbe  idea  of  prohibiting 
amendments  or  additions  to  civil  law,  is  too  feeble.  Indivi- 
duals would  retain  the  right  and  the  power  of  self  defence* 
against  injuries  from  individuals,  for  which  the  civil  code 
provided  no  remedy  ;  but  all  aristocracies  of  interest,  or 
combinations 'of  avarice  and  ambition,  work  their  ends  with 
civil  law,  against  which  a  nation  has  no  remedy,  if  amend- 
ments  or  additions  to  political  law  should  fall  into  disuse. 
Wherever  the  idea  of  political  law  exists,  frequent  charges 
will  be  laid  before  the  people  against  those  in  power,  for 
violating  it  ;  and  as  these  charges  will  seldom  want  some 
foundation,  they  will  sometimes  cause  the  nation  to  transfer 
the  reins  of  government  to  the  accusers  ;  but  they  seldom 
or  never  produce  any  effectual  new  political  law,  because 
the  accusers,  by  acquiring  power,  are  converted  into  an 
aristocracy  of  interest  ;  at  least  to  the  extent  of  the  univer- 
sal desire  to  hold  good  offices  ;  and  instantly  become  more 
inclined  to  extend  this  power  by  the  help  of  the  precedents 
of  their  predecessors,  than  to  contract  it,  by  declaring  these 
precedents  to  be  unconstitutional  or  fraudulent. 

The  policy  of  the  United  States  is  attached  to  the  idea 
of  a  government  contrived  for  dispensing  benefits  equally, 
(the  case  of  payment  for  pnblick  services  excepted)  and  ad- 
verse to  all  partial  dispensations.  In  an  extensive  country, 
conventions  (as  we  understand  the  term)  are  the  only  guar- 
dians of  this  policy,  and  civil  law  is  every  where  the  chief 
or  only  instrument  by  which  it  is  destroyed.  A  rejection 
of  its  creator  and  guardian,  and  a  confidence  in  its  destroy- 
er, would  be  a  revival  of  the  policy  by  which  mankind  are 
universally  enslaved. 

Legal  prescience  must  for  ever  remain  imperfect,  be- 
cause the  evolutions  of  the  human  mind  can  never  be  limi- 
ted.     How  can  unchangeable  constitutions  manage  this 


606  THE    LEGAL   POLICY    OF    THE    V.    STATES. 

prolifiek  being?  It  leaves  every  thing  behind  which  docs  not 
move  with  it,  except  mere  matter,  ami  hence  laws  thus  for- 
saken are  called  «  a  dead  letter."  When  the  mind,  upon 
which  a  constitution  was  calculated  to  operate,  is  gone, 
though  it  may  exist  embalmed  in  the  statute  book  like  mag- 
na charta,  it  exists  in  the  repose  and  nullity  of  a  mummy. 
If  a  moiety  of  national  moral  character  is  changed,  then  an 
unchanged  constitution  would  he  half  dead,  and  the  remain- 
der would  be  in  the  state  of  a  living  twin,  united  to  a  dead 
one.  A  constitution  cannot  be  kept  alive,  or  efficient,  ex- 
cept by  connecting  it  with  a  living  national  character  ;  this 
is  not  to  be  done  in  any  other  mode,  than  that  of  extending 
its  remedies  to  new  inventions  and  living  abuses,  before  they 
gain  strength  to  defy  reformation.  A  neglect  of  this  pre- 
caution by  political,  and  a  constant  use  of  it,  by  civil  law,  is 
the  cause  of  the  difference  between  the  danger  of  altering 
these  two  kinds  of  law.  Attempts  to  reform  abuses  of  long 
standing,  generally  terminate  like  those  of  the  emperor 
Pertinax  or  of  the  French  jacobins.  When  civil  war  is  the 
reformer,  it  is  apt  to  forget  its  business,  and  to  create  more 
cause  for  reformation  than  it  removes.  When  the  funding 
invention,  which  has  nearly  destroyed  the  political  weight 
of  the  English  nobility,  and  wholly  overwhelmed  that  of  the 
landed  interest,  or  interest  of  industry,  was  in  its  infancy, 
this  species  of  revolution,  not  provided  against  by  magna 
eharta  (considering  that  instrument  in  the  light  of  a  consti- 
tution) might  have  been  arrested  by  an  addition  to  the  po- 
litical code  ;  but  now  the  English  nation  is  forced  to  live 
under  the  oppressions  of  this  modern  invention,  only  to  ag- 
gravate the  evils  to  be  suffered  at  its  death. 

The  idea  SA  that  it  is  wrong  to  correct  wrong,"  is  illus- 
trated by  the  errours  it  engrafted  on  Christianity  in  the 
church  of  Rome,  and  the  injury  that  church  thereby  sus- 
tained. If  revelation  can  be  corrupted  and  its  end  defeated 
by  civil  laws,  how  can  a  constitution,  contrived  by  human 
wisdom,  be  safe  against  the  ambition  and  avarice  of  parties 
and  individuals?  It  is  better  illustrated  by  the  usual  eoinH* 


THE    LEGAL  POLICY    OF    THE    U.    STATES.  607 

dencc,  between  an  enmity  to  the  idea  of  the  perfectibility  of 
man,  and  an  enmity  to  a  removal  of  constitutional  defects. 
Those  who  can  see  the  absurdity  of  the  notion  of  his  per- 
fectibility, can  discover  the  perfection  of  his  foresight. 
However  inconsistent  such  opinions  may  appear,  both  are 
consistent  with  their  motive.  Improvement,  the  best  evi- 
dence of  man's  imperfection,  is  suppressed,  whilst  that  im- 
perfection is  exaggerated,  for  the  purposes  of  taking  advan- 
tage of  his  oversights,  and  subjecting  him  to  hard  govern- 
ment, under  pretence  of  restraining  his  vicious  nature,  but 
really  to  defend  these  vicious  advantages. 

The  most  immoral  motives  contend  most  loudly  for  the 
capacity  of  human  nature,  to  turn  out  of  its  hands  a  perfect 
moral  work.  All  priesthoods  assert  the  perfection  of  the 
dogmas  under  which  they  get  wealth  and  honour.  Magna 
charta,  that  machine  for  any  kind  of  political  work,  has 
been  equally  praised  by  a  haughty  nobility  and  rebellious 
mobs  ;  a  papistical  and  a  protestant  episcopacy  ;  sound  and 
rotten  borough  representation;  annual,  triennial  and  septen- 
nial election  $  a  militia  yeomanry  and  a  mercenary  army  ; 
and  moderate  and  stock  taxation.  Avarice,  ambition  and 
self  interest,  are  loud  in  proclaiming  the  perfections  of  the 
principles  of  a  government,  in  proportion  to  their  own  vio- 
lation of  these  principles.  A  representation  in  England, 
designed  to  shield  the  people  against  oppression,  has  been 
gradually  changed  into  a  representation  to  shield  oppression 
against  the  people.  Whatever  objections,  therefore,  lie 
against  conventions,  they  are  to  be  balanced  against  a  tame 
surrender  of  the  right  of  making  political  law,  to  fraud  and 
corruption.  Their  certain  tyranny  is  more  terrible  than 
this  modern  experiment,  to  which  we  are  indebted  for  all 
the  political  good  we  enjoy. 

As  good  and  evil  are  natural  enemies,  eternal  warfare 
must  exist  in  the  moral  world,  and  the  combatant  which 
desists  from  hostility  must  be  subdued.  Good,  too  often 
falls  into  this  errour  ;  evil,  seldom  or  never.  Hence  thd 
first  is  more  liable  to  lose  tiie  fruits  of  victory.     Upon  poli- 

78 


005  THE    LEGAL    TOLICY    OF    THE    V.    STATES, 

(ical  success,  it  has  hitherto  established  a  wise  numerical 
form  of  government,  as  it  supposed,  formed  a  didactick  lec- 
ture for  this  government  to  govern  itself  by,  and  thrown 
away  its  arms.  These  are  seized  by  the  foe,  forged  into 
the  shape  of  civil  law,  and  turned  against  the  late  victor  ; 
and  it  soon  appears  that  armed  sinners  are  an  overmatch 
for  unarmed  saints. — The  control  of  nations  over  govern- 
ments, can  only  consist  of  political  law,  enforced  by  good 
moral  principles.  A  dread  of  conventions,  enables  govern- 
ments to  make  political  law  to  control  nations.  They  are 
compelled  to  do  it,  if  nations  will  not,  to  provide  for  new  cir- 
cumstances. Thus  the  design  of  political  law  is  reversed, 
and  its  power  for  preserving  a  free  government,  destroyed. 

A  nation  must  keep  and  use  an  unlimited  power  over  its 
government,  or  a  government  must  acquire  such  a  power 
over  a  nation.  The  question  in  fact  lies  between  the  genu- 
ine political  law  of  conventions ;  and  the  spurious,  made  by 
the  frauds  of  parties  of  interest,  aided  by  the  form  of  re- 
pealing civil  laws. 

It  is  an  old  question.  Conventions  are  discredited  for 
the  same  reasons,  which  caused  kings,  courtiers  and  publick 
harpies,  to  discredit  parliaments,  whilst  they  checked  fraud 
and  oppression.  >Ve  have  seen  in  Filmer  and  other  court 
writers,  all  the  arguments  against  parliaments,  or  their  fre- 
quency, now  used  against  conventions.  Parliaments  were 
feared,  whilst  they  nurtured  liberty  and  corrected  abuses. 
Their  meetings  are  no  longer  deprecated,  because  this  fear 
is  removed  by  corruption.  And  an  apprehension  of  con- 
ventions in  the  United  States  is  in  like  manner  a  testimonial, 
both  of  the  eminent  virtues  they  have  so  often  displayed, 
and  of  the  great  abuses  which  have  already  eluded  their 
authority. 

If  our  allotment  of  political  law  to  national  conventions, 
and  of  civil  to  governments,  so  essential  for  the  preserva- 
tion of  liberty,  cannot  be  legitimately  defeated  by  an  entire 
government,  the  enormity,  committed  by  the  creature  and 
dependant  of  a  government,  must  be  flagrant.     Judicial  de- 


THE    LEGAL   POLICY   OF   THE    U.    STATES,  600 

eisions,  ill  spite  of  every  precaution,  might  impair  and  un- 
dermine the  principles  of  any  constitution,  against  the  will 
botli  of  the  nation  and  the  government,  nor  is  there  any  suf- 
ficient remedy  against  such  an  evil,  except  additional  poli- 
tical law.  The  absence  of  any  check  against  this  mode  of 
changing  constitutions,  displays  the  errour  of  considering 
election,  singly,  as  a  sufficient  sponsor  for  a  free  govern- 
ment. It  is  itself  the  child,  the  creature  and  the  instrument 
of  political  law,  amidst  whose  numerous  progeny  it  occupies 
but  one,  though  an  important  station.  If  self  government 
or  political  law  should  yield  all  its  rights  and  all  its  power 
to  election,  like  the  parent  who  transfers  his  whole  estate  to 
a  favourite  child,  it  would  first  become  contemptible,  and 
then  die  forgotten. 

An  ignorance  of  conventions  and  political  law-,  and  an 
unlimited  confidence  in  election,  have  heretofore  defeated  the 
(ropes  of  all  the  fabricators  of  free  governments.  Election, 
both  legislative  and  executive,  has  been  uniformly  corrupted 
by  parties  of  interest,  political  or  pecuniary.  In  Rome,  and 
in  Italy  during  the  three  centuries  quoted  by  Mr.  Adams, 
by  patrician  orders.  In  England,  first  by  feudal  barons, 
then  by  the  papal  hierarchy,  and  now  by  the  ministerial 
and  stock  parties  of  interest.  These  eases  shew  that  aris- 
tocracies of  interest  in  all  shapes*  titled  or  untitled,  can 
hammer  election  into  a  political  machine,  resembling  a  cu- 
rious knife  said  to  have  been  invented  by  ingenious  thieves, 
for  cutting  purses  from  pockets,  without  alarming  the  own- 
ers. Whig  election  passed  the  septennial  law  in  England, 
and  party  aristocracy  debauched  even  Addison  into  a  stren- 
uous vindication  of  this  atrocious  usurpation.  Elective  re- 
sponsibility passed  a  law  in  Virginia  in  177<>,  declaring  "that 
"  it  was  inconsistent  with  the  principles  of  civil  liberty,  and 
«  contrary  to  the  rights  of  the  other  members  of  the  socie- 
"  ty,  that  any  body  of  men  therein  should  have  authority  to 
"  enlarge  their  own  powers,  prerogatives  or  emoluments, 
s*  and  that  the  General  Assembly  cannot,  at  their  own  will, 
M  increase  their  allowance,"     And  near  twenty  years  after-. 


1010  THE    LEGAL   POLICY    OF   THE    U.    STATES* 

wards,  in  the  true  spirit  of  a  party  of  interest,  it  added  fifty 
per  centum  to  its  own  wages.  This  addition,  and  the  reci- 
ted law,  stand  unrepealed  to  this  day,  as  evidences  of  the 
feebleness  of  constitutional  or  political  law,  made  by  go- 
vernments ;  and  the  inefficacy  of  election,  singly,  to  pre- 
serve the  plainest  principle  of  civil  liberty.  But  the  elec- 
tion of  conventions  is  a  different  thing.  It  looks  for  different 
qualities  ;  it  is  not  bribed  by  hopes  of  money  or  office  ^its 
offspring  cannot  bestow  either  on  itself,  and  its  life  is  too 
short  to  admit  of  corruption,  or  to  reap  power  and  wealth 
from  the  political  law  it  enunciates,  like  a  government. 

It  is  universally  allowed  that  forms  of  government  are 
liable  to  decay.  Without  repair,  decay  terminates  in  de- 
struction. A  constitution  must  therefore  die  in  the  com- 
mon course  of  nature,  unless  it  eludes  the  scythe  of  death, 
for  ever  in  the  hands  of  fraud  and  ambition,  by  occasional 
restoratives.  However  proudly  the  English  form  of  go- 
vernment at  one  period  reared  its  head  above  its  rivals,  pa- 
triots now  contemplate  it,  as  travellers  do  the  ruins  of  Pal- 
myra. Its  vital  faculty  is  gone,  though  an  interesting 
skeleton  remains  ;  but  its  resurrection  in  its  purest  form 
would  now  cause  a  degree  of  terror,  something  like  what  is 
expected  at  the  day  of  judgement. 

Mr.  Adams's  theory,  and  all  others  adverse  to  conven- 
tions, must  establish  the  constancy  of  human  opinion,  or  fail. 
Was  this  supposed  constancy  a  liction  whilst  he  was  a  dis- 
ciple of  Nedham,  and  does  it  become  a  truth,  now  that  he 
has  changed  into  an  enemy  to  this  author?  Can  that  nature 
be  constant,  which  is  to  day  ardent  for  democracy,  to-mor- 
row, for  monarchy  ?  Is  not  a  capacity  for  improvement 
inconsistent  with  the  attribute  of  constancy  ?  Can  unchange- 
able constitutions,  be  adapted  for  a  being  changeable  and 
corruptible  ?  Would  an  entire  nation,  as  accomplished  as 
Mr.  Adams,  require  the  same  form  of  government  as  a  na- 
tion of  savages  ?  If  the  moral  nature  of  man  is  inconstant, 
how  is  this  inconstancy  to  he  controlled  or  nourished,  in 
order  to  preserve  a  free  government,  except  by  new  politi- 


THE    XEGAL    TOLICY    OF   THE    IT.    STATES.  611 

cal  law  ?  It  is  unavoidable.  The  only  question  is,  whether 
it  shall  be  enacted  openly  by  eonventions,  or  covertly  by 
governments. 

The  whole  family  of  aristocracies  of  interest,  deprecate 
the  frequency  of  conventions,  on  account  of  the  imperfec- 
tions of  human  nature.  "  Man  is  man,"  exclaim  they  ; 
slyly  insinuating,  by  the  manner  of  the  exclamation,  that 
he  is  nearly  a  devil.  To  keep  this  devil  in  order,  hierarchy 
contends  that  he  ought  to  be  cheated  by  superstition  ; 
monarchy,  that  he  ought  to  be  lashed  by  despotism  ;  aris- 
tocracy, that  he  ought  to  be  pilfered  by  privileges  :  and  par- 
ties of  interest,  that  he  is  fair  game  for  all  fraudulent  laws. 
And  forsooth,  because  man  is  man.  And  why  not  lash  these 
lashers  of  man  themselves  into  the  path  of  moral  rectitude, 
by  political  law.  A  good  huntsman  lashes  his  worst  dogs 
into  the  right  trail.  Why  should  some  men  shrink  from  the 
mild  discipline  of  justice,  whilst  they  prescribe  to  others 
the  cruel  severities  of  fraud  and  oppression?  Oh  !  say  all 
parties  of  interest,  with  great  solemnity,  theJaws  for  gra- 
tifying our  avarice  and  ambition,  are  necessary  to  make 
other  men  good,  or  to  keep  them  in  order. 

Thus  thin  is  the  delusion  under  which  tyranny  is  con- 
cealed from  the  good,  and  perpetrated  by  the  bad.  And  as 
Indians  assume  a  new  disguise  when  their  prey  detects  the 
old.  the  centuries  employed  in  emptying  pockets  under  pre- 
tence of  saving  souls,  may  possibly  be  repassed  in  the  same 
business,  under  the  still  grosser  pretence  of  filling  them. 
Conventions,  alarmed  by  the  first  fraud,  have  expelled 
priests  from  legislatures  ;  and  legislatures,  participating  in 
the  second  through  the  channels  of  avariee  or  ambition, 
have  colonised  them  with  stockjobbers  and  legal  arti- 
ficial interests  of  every  description.  By  political  law, 
a  paper  instrument,  to  which  no  income  is  attached,  is  sup- 
posed to  create  a  dangerous  separate  interest  ;  by  civil,  a 
paper  instrument,  bestowing  an  enormous  annual  income,  is 
supposed  to  create  none.  The  pretended  enemies  of  Mr. 
Adams's  system  of  political  law,  separate  interests  wariby 


01£  THE    LEGAL   POLICY  OF  THE  X.    STATED 

balanced,  throw  open  all  the  avenues  to  power  in  favour  of 
civil  law,  separate  interests  without  check,  and  furnished 
with  the  artillery  which  has  demolished  even  his  hest  con- 
trived balances,  A  pecuniary  separate  interest,  unchecked 
by  some  coequal  power  to  which  its  growth  might  be  dan- 
gerous, constitutes  the  most  oppressive  conceivable  species 
of  government,  because  it  collects  private  wealth  for  itself 
from  the  people  by  its  own  laws  ;  and  it  will  loudly  depre- 
cate conventions,  because  the  abuse  admits  of  no  other 
remedy. 

Such  arguments  as  assail  conventions,  have  been  sug- 
gested by  the  same  motives,  against  every  moral  improve- 
ment, to  which  the  present  age  is  indebted  for  ail  the  hap- 
piness it  enjoys.  Christianity  was  dangerous  in  the  opinion 
of  pagan  priests.  Galileo's  speculations  were  dangerous  in 
the  opinion  of  the  Pope.  Toleration  is  dangerous  in  the 
opinion  of  established  churches ;  and  conventions  are  dan- 
gerous in  the  opinion  of  every  seperate  interest.  Yet 
Christianity  prevailed  ',  Galileo's  principles  triumphed  ; 
taleration  exploded  persecution  ;  and  conventions  bestowed 
upon  the  United  States  the  best  practical  government  which 
has  hitherto  appeared. 

All  craftsmen,  or  parties  of  interest,  exclaim  **  that 
human  nature  is  too  imperfect  to  avail  itself  of  the  princi- 
ples of  political  morality.*'  Ought  idolatry  to  have  defeat- 
ed Christianity  by  the  same  argument  ;  or  are  the  principles, 
of  Christianity  less  perfect  than  those  of  political  morality  ? 
Oris  human  nature  capable  of  being  benefitted  by  good  re- 
ligious, but  not  by  good  political  principles  ?  Let  prejudice, 
zeal  and  interest  jointly  answer  these  questions.  There  is 
no  opinion  more  injurious  to  mankind,  than  '*  that  virtuous 
nations  only  can  maintain  a  free  government."  It  enlists  on 
the  side  of  despotism  all  persons  of  a  misanthropic  k  turn  ofj 
mind,  by  a  computation  of  the  human  character,  founded  in 
a  casual  complexion,  and  liable  to  be  false  ;  and  which 
would  not  justify  the  inference,  if  it  was  true.  It  enlists 
industrious  men  under  the  same  banner,  bv  terrifving  them 


THE    LEGAL   POLICY   OF   THE    U.    STATES.  6iS 

with  tlic  consequences  of  indulging  vicious  beings  with 
liberty.  It  cuts  off  the  hope  of  improving  the  morals  of 
mankind,  by  excluding  the  most  successful  preceptor.  And 
it  excludes  the  remedy  against  abuses,  by  asserting  that  it 
must  fail,  if  the  nation  is  not  virtuous.  Without  losing  time 
in  shewing,  that  tbe  difficulty  of  ascertaining  the  prevalence 
of  national  virtue  or  vice  j  and  whether  it  is  natural  or  arti- 
ficial ;  and  the  want  of  a  standard  for  fixing  the  quantity 
able  to  maintain  good,  or  requiring  bad  government,  leaves 
the  position  in  a  state  of  generality,  incapable  of  being  proved 
or  disproved  ;  I  shall  upon  other  grounds  advert  again  to 
this  doctrine,  on  account  of  its  special  hostility  to  the 
conventional  mode  of  preserving  good  political  principles. 
Which  is  the  best  defender  of  human  rights,  virtue  or 
wisdom  ?  Cannot  an  individual  maintain  his  rights  unless 
he  is  virtuous  ?  Behold  the  virtuous  fool  and  the  wise 
knave.  If  a  philosopher  should  run  through  the  world  ex- 
claiming to  every  vicious  man  he  met,  ««  Sir,  you  cannot  bo 
free,  because  you  are  vicious  ;  the  best  thing  you  can  do  is 
to  become  my  slave,"  would  he  make  one  proselyte  ?  Would 
he  be  thought  a  maniack  or  an  apostle  ?  Why  has  the  same 
egregious  absurdity,  preached  by  politicians,  succeeded  ? 
Simply  because  it  was  favourable  to  abuses,  frauds,  parties 
of  interest,  and  tyranny  in  every  form.  All  associations, 
chartered  and  unchartered  for  trade,  city  government, 
banking,  and  speculations  of  every  kind,  earnestly  preach 
and  sedulously  in  practice,  contemn  this  doctrine.  They  rely 
upon  wisdom  and  republican  principles  for  the  security  of 
their  own  rights,  and  deny  the  efficacy  of  the  same  security 
in  respect  to  national  rights,  because  of  a  defect  of  virtue 
in  a  nation,  of  which  they  compose  a  portion,  not  more  vir- 
tuous than  the  rest.  They  are  perpetually  calling  partner- 
ship and  separate  interest  conventions,  in  order  to  make  use 
of  their  wisdom  to  defend  legal  or  chartered  privileges,  to 
advance  private  interest,  and  to  annoy  the  publick  ;  but  they 
will  not  allow  nations  to  use  their  wisdom  for  self  defence 
in  the  same  mode,  because  they  want  virtue.     If  wisdom 


611)  THE   LEGAL   POLICY    OF   THE    U.    STATES* 

and  strength  enables  individuals  to  maintain  their  rights? 
why  may  not  social  rights  be  maintained  by  the  same  agents? 
Is  it  virtue  which  enables  one  nation  to  conquer  another,  or 
a  treacherous  faction  to  enslave  their  own  country  ?  Virtue 
could  not  protect  the  Roman  Senators  against  the  swords  of 
the  Gauls,  and  vice  can  see  that  eleven  men  can  control 
the  tyranny  of  one.  If  minorities  often  make  themselves 
tyrants  by  wisdom,  why  may  not  nations  preserve  their 
liberty  by  it  ?  Why  do  all  minor  societies  find  wisdom  and 
?»epublican  principles,  the  best  securities  against  their  own 
vices,  if  they  are  no  check  upon  national  vices  ?  Why  are 
conventions  useful  to  them,  and  pernicious  to  nations  ?  And 
why  are  additional  conventional  laws  necessary  for  the  safe- 
ty of  sub-societies,  but  not  for  national  safety  ?  The  solution 
of  these  inconsistencies  is  short  and  plain.  Conventions, 
wisdom,  and  republican  principles,  are  the  best  controllers 
of  vice  hitherto  discovered.  All  sub  societies,  therefore, 
use  them  to  restrain  the  vices  of  their  own  members.  But 
they  are  not  willing  that  nations  should  use  them,  for  the 
same  reason  by  which  they  are  induced  to  do  it.  Being 
themselves  the  least  virtuous  members  of  every  nation,  they 
are  unwilling  to  suffer  the  control  they  carefully  inflict. 
To  this  cunning  and  self  interest  mankind  are  indebted  for 
the  doctrine,  "  that  they  cannot  be  free  unless  they  are  vir- 
tuous." Whereas  the  fact  is,  that  virtue  may  be  more  safe- 
ly dispensed  with  in  a  national  convention,  than  in  an  infe- 
rior association,  or  in  an  individual  ;  because  wisdom  in  the 
first  ease  is  exposed  to  no  temptation  to  vice,  as  it  can  dis- 
cern no  object  to  defraud  or  oppress  ;  whereas  such  objects, 
In  abundance,  assault  the  wisdom  of  exclusive  interests. 
Wisdom  is  of  no  use  without  will,  and  national  will  with  us 
oan  only  be  expressed  by  conventions,  or  additional  political 
law.  By  withholding  from  a  nation  the  use  both  of  its  wis- 
dom and  will,  it  must  become  a  statue,  and  some  aristocra- 
cy of  interest,  a  Prometheus,  who  will  animate  it  with  such 
civil  law. as  he  pleases,  but  never  inspire  it  with  celestial 
lire. 


THE   liEGAI.  POLICY    OB   THE    U.    STATES.  615 

Conventions  are  the  remedy  against  the  errour  of  trust- 
ing to  some  dogma  for  a  free  government,  and  against  the 
danger  of  despair,  whenever  this  dogma  is  exploded.    That 
liberty  cannot  exist  without  virtue,  that  it  depends  upon  edu- 
cation, and  that  it  is  graduated  by  skilfully  balancing  the 
members  of  the  numerical  analysis,  are  among  the  most  spe- 
cious and  the  most  pernicious.  By  making  virtue  a  necessary 
antecedent  to  a  free  government,  their  natural  moral  order 
is  transposed,   and   the   prospect  for  hoth   is   diminished. 
Those  moral  principles  upon  which  every  fair  association, 
political  or  private,  must  be  built,  constitute  in  their  opera- 
tion a  school  for  virtue,  by  the  restraints  or  responsibilities  of 
which  justice  to  associates  is  enforced,  whilst  morality  is 
impressed  by  habit.     No  opinion  could  be  inculcated  more 
fatal  to  a  science,  than  that  it  must   precede  instruction. 
The  second  dogma  is  more  dangerous,  as  containing  a  gt  eat- 
er portion  of  truth  ;  because  education  is  undoubtedly  one  of 
the  sources  of  wisdom,  although  it  might  be  fatal  to  a  nation, 
to  mistake  it  for  wisdom  itself.     Comparisons  between  the 
Augustan,  and  some  early  age  of  the  Roman  Commonwealth; 
between  some  Gothick  age,  and  that  of  Lewis  the  14th  of 
France;  between  England  and  France;  and  between  Scotland 
and  the  United  States  ;  would  demonstrate  that  free  govern- 
ment was  not  graduated  by  education.     The  refutation  of 
the  third,  as  infinitely  the  most  dangerous,  has  been  the 
chief  object  of  these  essays  ;  for  although  Mr.  Adams  him- 
self has  proved  it  to  have  been  the  most  unfortunate  of  all 
in  practice,  he  has  persuaded  himself  that  it  is  the  most  per- 
fect in  theory. 

Mr.  Godwin  has  said,  "  that  a  scheme  of  national  edu- 
«(  cation  is  the  most  formidable  and  profound  contrivance  for 
f«  despotism  that  imagination  can  suggest;'**  and  hence  con- 
cludes that  education  ought  to  be  left  to  itself.  The  philo- 
sophick,  as  well  as  the  religious  fanatick,  must  be  detected, 
to  come  at  practical  truth.     If  education  is  this  powerful 

*Pol..Tus.  vol.2,  p. 298. 

79 


616  THE   J-EOAI.   POLICY    OF   THE   V.    STATES* 

instrument,  liberty,  by  foregoing  its  use,  would  experience 
the  same  fate,  as  she  would  suffer  from  surrendering  to 
despotism  the  exclusive  use  of  fire  arms.  And  as  these, 
however  dangerous  to  liberty,  united  with  the  invention  of 
standing  armies,  may  be  made  subservient  to  her  safety  by  a 
good  militia  system,  so  a  good  system  of  education,  would 
send  large  contributions  into  that  reservoir  of  materials,  of 
which  knowledge  is  compounded.  The  superstitious  mode 
of  trial  bv  battle,  would  have  been  rendered  too  ridiculous 

to  * 

even  for  its  Goihick  sera,  by  allowing  to  one,  and  withhold- 
ing from  the  other  combatant,  the  most  formidable  weapon 
which  imagination  could  suggest.  Neither  philosophers 
nor  priests  will  ever  be  able  so  far  to  change  the  materials 
of  human  nature,  as  to  invest  one  with  the  powers  of  all.  It 
is  difficult  to  form  education  into  a  despot  by  precept  ;  for 
however  undisciplined  the  militia  of  man's  other  powers 
may  be,  education  will  constantly  lean  towards  their  regula- 
tion. But  if  a  fraudulent  system  of  education  and  a  mer- 
cenary army,  can  bestow  long  life  upon  a  tyrannical  form 
of  government,  it  is  probable  that  a  just  system  of  education 
and  a  sound  militia,  would  perpetuate  a  free  one.  Why 
should  auxiliaries  so  powerful  to  a  bad  cause,  be  renounced 
by  a  good  one  ?  Wisdom  will  work  for  vice  as  well  as  for 
virtue.  The  rulers  of  the  civilized  world  at  this  time,  pos- 
sess a  far  greater  portion  of  knowledge,  than  the  individu- 
als composing  a  nation  could  ever  acquire  ;  some  displaying 
its  effects  under  the  tutelage  of  political  law,  and  others  its 
effects  under  no  such  restraint.  And  a  comparison  be- 
tween these  effects  is  a  decisive  proof,  both  that  Mr.  God- 
win's idea  of  extracting  from  wisdom  unrestrained  by  politi- 
cal law  a  free  government,  is  chimerical ;  and  also  that  this 
restraint,  imposed  by  national  wisdom,  causes  the  wisdom  of 
governours  to  be  infinitely  more  subservient  to  publick  good* 
The  facts  on  both  sides  go  to  demonstrate  the  impossibility 
of  national  freedom,  if  nations,  by  losing  the  custom  of  enac- 
ting and  enforcing  political  law,  should  suffer  this  right  to 
be  gradually  usurped  by  their  governments.    The  doctrine, 


THE    LEGAL  FOLICY    OF   THE    U.    STATES.  GJ ,7 

**  that  school  masters  can  keep  us  out  of*  tyranny,  so  as  tc 
enable  nations  to  dispense  with  political  law,"  is  a  depen- 
dence like  that  upon  priests,  to  keep  us  out  oi'  purgatory. 
But  if  a  mode  of  education,  like  a  standing  army,  can  change 
the  nature  of  a  government,  and  constitute  the  most  formi- 
dable contrivance  for  despotism,  a  nation,   to  preserve  its 
liberty,  must  have  wisdom  enough  to  influence  this  moral 
mode  of  destroying  it,  just  as  it  must  control  a  standing 
army,  for  the  same  purpose,  by  the  superior  physical  force 
of  a  militia.     Education  must  be  supervised  by  the  same 
vigilant  national  wisdom  necessary  to  defend  liberty  against 
whatever  can  he  used  to  destroy  it :  and  the  same  care  must 
be  taken  to  prevent  it  from  being  converted  into  an  instru- 
ment by  a  sect,  religious,  political  or  chartered,  as  to  with- 
hold from  avarice  and  ambition  the  use  of  a  standing  army. 
The  benefits  derived  by  mankind  from  academical  institu 
tions,  though  fettered  or  corrupted  by  despotism  or  super- 
stition, are  a  pledge  for  their  effect  when  nurtured  by  the 
principles  of  a  free  government.     How  great  is  our  debt  to 
those  of  Athens  onjy,  during  a  short  period  !  The  objection 
to  an  expense,  of  which  a  proportion  falls  on  those  who  can 
receive  no  part  of  the  education,  would  be  stronger  against 
publick  taxes  to  support  government,  because  many  more 
people  participate  in  the  good  effects  of  academical  institu- 
tions, than  in  the  salaries  or  benefits  of  publick  offices.    An 
augmentation  of  knowledge  always  dispenses  some  good  to 
the  whole  nation,  whereas  the  majority  frequently  suffers 
much  evil  from  certain  modes  of  civil  government.   The  ac- 
cess to  wealth  and  power  is  widened  by  education,  and  con- 
tracted by  its  absence,  because  genius,  however  poor,  will  ac- 
quire knowledge  if  it  is  introduced,  into  a  country,  just  as  the 
art  of  weaving  has  spread  from  a  few  looms  throughout  the 
civilized  world.     A  publick  patronage  of  a  few  good  colle- 
ges, is  therefore  a  patronage  of  genius  ;  a»d  as  the  chance 
for  it  is  equal  among  all,  the  poor,  from  their  superiority  of 
number,  will  draw  most  prizes  in  the  lottery  of  knowledge, 
established  by  means  of  colleges,  chiefly  support  ed  by  the 


61 S  THE    LEGAL   POLICY    OE    THE    U.    STATES. 

rich.  It  is  only  necessary  to  chasten  academical  institutions 
by  the  same  good  moral  principles  necessary  to  make  a  good 
government.  To  establish  responsibility  ;  to  mat  *  income 
depend  on  merit  ;  and  to  banish  offices  for  life,  sinecure 
salaries,  and  idle,  vicious,  or  incompetent  functionaries. 

The  difference  between  knowledge  and  education  is  cer- 
tainly considerable.  We  often  find  most  liberty  attached  to 
the  inferior  stock  of  education,  but  we  should  be  able  to 
discern  a  more  equal  distribution  of  knowledge  attached  to 
it.  Without  attempting  to  reconcile  theory  and  fact  in  such 
cases,  it  is  sufficient  to  observe,  that  civil  laws  contrived  to 
dispense  knowledge  to  parties,  sects,  or  exclusive  interests 
of  any  kind,  and  ignorance  to  the  majority,  are  precisely  of 
the  same  nature  with  those  contrived  to  dispense  wealth  and 
poverty  in  the  same  way.  A  wise  clergy  and  an  ignorant 
laity,  or  a  wise  stock  interest  and  an  ignorant  agricultural 
interest,  produce  the  same  consequences  as  any  other  rich 
and  poor  orders  or  interests.  Either  molten  or  printed  im- 
ages can  forge  and  fix  fetters.  Hence  it  behooves  a  nation 
having  wisdom  enough  to  be  free,  to  supervise  the  conduct 
of  its  government  by  conventions,  and  to  prevent  a  fraudu- 
lent management  of  education,  as  well  as  of  property,  by 
civil  laws,  for  the  purposes  of  fostering  parties  of  interest, 
defending  fraud,  and  maintaining  despotism. 

In  the  United  States,  agriculture  covers  the  interest  of 
a  vast  majority.  Whatever  civil  laws  pass  for  distributing 
knowledge  or  wealth,  operate  against  her;  because  being 
the  mother  which  suckles  all  other  interests,  her  own  chil- 
dren cannot  suckle  her.  Our  landed  interest  corresponds 
with  the  tenantry  of  England,  being  composed,  generally, 
of  cultivators.  The  English  landlords  are  satisfied  with  a 
policy  which  distributes  wealth  and  knowledge  by  civil 
laws,  because  they  are  themselves  the  chief  objects  of  its 
fraudulent  bounty,  and  their  tenants  the  chief  assignees  of 
ignorance  and  poverty.  The  gross  errour  of  the  American 
agricultural  interest,  in  imagining  itself  to  bear  a  resem- 
blance to  the  English  landlord  interest,  may  beguile  it  into 


THE   LEGAL  POLICY   OP   TIIE    V.    STATES.  C19 

the  English  system  of  legislating  ways  and  means  for  ex- 
tracting wealth  from  labour,  awl  of  course  leaving  it  igno- 
rance; but  if  it  should,  our  cultivators  will  voluntarily  inflict 
on  themselves  the  evils,  under  which  the  English  tenantry 
unwillingly  groan.  Laws  for  dividing  landed,  and  accumu- 
lating legal  wealth,  will  also  convey  mean  talents  to  real, 
and  splended  to  artificial  property  ;  and  the  effects  of  moral 
superiority  inevitably  follow.  Even  laws  with  the  specious 
object  of  diffusing  education,  may  be  contrived  to  distribute 
knowledge  and  ignorance,  so  as  to  establish  the  power  of 
legal  aristocracies  of  interest.  It  is  easy  to  educate  agri- 
culture and  labour  at  their  own  expense,  sufficiently  for 
submission,  but  insufficiently  to  balance  or  control  the  hijrh 
moral  accomplishments  bestowed  upon  aristocracies  of  inte- 
rest, as  an  appurtenance  of  the  wealth  transferred  to  them 
from  agriculture  and  labour  by  fraudulent  laws.  Projects 
of  this  kind  will  be  used  to  conceal  from  the  mass  of  a  na- 
tion, the  undeniable  truth,  that  no  such  experiments  ean 
save  its  liberty,  whilst  laws  exist  for  creating  factitious 
wealth  ;  because  all  parties  will  use  such  a  legislative  pow- 
er to  produce  great  inequalities  of  wealth,  and  this  wealth 
will  carry  with  it  those  talents  which  guide  all  civilized  go- 
vernments, though  ail  the  rest  of  the  nation  should  receive 
ordinary  educations. 

The  idea  of  equalising  knowledge,  is  as  impracticable  as 
that  of  equalising  property  by  agrarian  laws.  Both  are 
extremities  of  political  fancy.  But  the  opposite  extremities 
arc  unfortunately  practicable.  Knowledge,  and  property 
or  wealth,  may  be  rendered  extremely  unequal  by  fraudu- 
lent laws.  And  it  often  happens,  that  the  destroyers  of 
primogeniture,  for  the  sake  of  dividing  lands,  are  so  incon- 
sistent, as  to  accumulate  wealth  by  laws  founded  in  the 
contrary  principle.  A  power  to  distribute  knowledge  or 
wealth,  is  a  power  to  distribute  both.  One  is  annexed  to 
the  other.  A  free  government  cannot  subsist  with  cither 
power,  because  selfishness  iuvariably  patronises  itself  and 
its  adherents,  and  allots  ignorance  and  poverty  to  the  mass 


620  THE  LEGAL   POLICY   OF  THE    V.   STATES. 

of  people,  always  necessary  to  be  sacrificed  to  the  legal 
opulence  of  a  few.     If  knowledge  and  wealth  are  left  to  be 
distributed  by  industry,  a  beneficial  excitement  of  effort, 
and  a  division  sufficient  to  preserve  a  free  government,  are 
produced.     By  dividing  lands,  and  creating  stock  of  various 
kinds,  drawing  twenty  millions  ayeai*  from  labour,  a  double 
operation  to  great  extent  is  produced,  of  enriching  and  en- 
lightening  factitious  interests,  and  of  impoverishing  the 
landed  and  working  interests  of  the  United  States,  both  as 
to  their  minds  and  estates.     This  impoverishment  of  mind 
will-endow  the  legal  interests  with  the  offices  of  government, 
convert  representation  into  a  mantle  for  fraud,  and  our  go- 
vernment into  an  elective  aristocracy.     Had  these  twenty 
millions  remained  in  the  hands  of  agriculture  and  labour, 
they   could  have  annually   purchased  knowledge   to  that 
amount ;  and  the  difference  between  this  annual  supply,  and 
its  transference  by  law  from  them  to  factitious  interests, 
constitutes   the   pure  principle  of  aristocracy.     Common 
good,  is  the  best  principle  for  industry  and  majority  ;  partial, 
for  fraud  and  minority.     If  the  first  associates  assign  their 
wealth  and  knowledge  to  their  natural  enemies,  as  they 
have  generally  done,  the  war  will  terminate  in  the  old  way. 
By  cutting  up  the  landed  interest  into  little  farms,  the  inte- 
rest of  industry  and  majority  will  gradually  lose  that  dissem- 
ination of  moral  talents,  necessary  to  restrain  the  frauds  of 
the  whole  family  of  legal,  exclusive  or  aristocratical  interests. 
The  interest  of  the  majority  must  perish,  unless  a  sound  mind 
is  lodged  somewhere  within  it.     To  cheat  it  of  the  share  of 
knowledge  by  which  it  may  maintain  its  rights,  under  pre- 
tence of  making  it  all  mind,  would  be  like  persuading  the 
other  members  to  cut  off  the  head,  and  to  depend  for  their 
future  safety  on  a  new  contrivance  for  making  all  of  them 
heads.     Such  is  the  reimbursement  promised  by  a  sytem  of 
general  education,  for  the  removal  of  wealth  and  knowledge 
from  agriculture  and  industry  to  legal  interests.     It  resem 
bles  the  device  of  sumptuary  laws  to  hide  the  cause  of  lux 
ury.     Remove  the  cause,  and  the  luxury  ceases.     Remove 


THE    LEOAL   POLICY    01«    THE    V.    STATES.  621 

the  frauds  which  make  a  majority  poor  and  ignorant,  by 
making  a  minority  rich  and  wise,  and  these  evils  also  cease. 
Sumptuary  laws  cannot  prevent  luxury,  if  its  cause  re- 
mains ;  nor  can  the  poverty  and  ignorance  of  the  mass  of  a 
nation  he  removed  by  any  system  of  education,  if  laws  exist 
for  enriching  a  minority.  The  laws  enabling  individuals  to 
amass  great  wealth  by  means  of  the  spoils  of  conquest,  en- 
slaved Rome.  Laws  for  enriching  parties  of  interest,  by 
tythes,  offices,  sinecures  and  stock,  enslave  Europe.  A  di- 
vision of  wealth,  by  industry  and  talents,  never  enslaved  any 
nation.  Some  idea  of  this  intelligence  from  experience, 
seems  by  their  constant  hatred  of  heavy  taxation,  to  have 
been  planted  in  the  minds  of  the  people,  of  which  ignorance 
is  often  cheated  by  the  arts  of  fraud.  Sometimes  by  char- 
ges of  sordid  parsimony,  advanced  hy  avaricious  parties  of 
interest ;  sometimes  by  means  too  indirect  and  intricate  to 
be  unravelled  by  instinct ;  and  at  last  by  pretences  of  asso- 
ciating it  in  a  plot  for  plundering  and  enslaving  posterity. 
Inferior  agents  in  all  wicked  plots  suffer  punishment  in 
this  world,  whilst  their  leaders  often  avoid  it  until  the  next. 
It  seems  as  if  these  leaders  hoped  to  expiate  their  own 
crimes  by  chastising  their  instruments,  without  suspecting 
that  they  may  be  reserved  for  severer  justice.  Thus  par- 
ties of  interest  universally  treat  the  mass  of  nations,  for 
assisting  them  in  their  conspiracy  against  posterity.  They 
reap  the  whole  benefit  of  the  fraud,  and  use  it  to  corrupt 
and  change  the  existing  government.  If,  however,  the 
fraud  of  transmitting  debt,  taxes  and  tyranny,  to  posterity, 
was  assented  to  by  every  individual  of  an  existing  age,  to 
gratify  its  follies  or  enrich  its  parties  of  interest,  the  assent- 
ing age  itself  would  still  be  a  party  of  interest  or  an  aris- 
tocracy, in  relation  to  its  successors.  It  endeavours  to  en- 
rich itself  or  pay  its  debts  at  the  expense  of  a  vast  majority, 
for  which  it  legislates  without  any  authority.  It  violates 
its  own  principles  of  representation  and  taxation  far  more 
tyrannically,  than  was  attempted  by  England  against  these 
states.     The  taxes  imposed  are  infinitely  heavier.    Not  a 


G22  THE    XEGAL   POLICY    OF    THE    U.    STATES* 

single  cord  of  sympathy  draws  commiseration  towards  the 
unborn.  Their  money  is  spent  without  a,, possibility  of  the 
reimbursement,  whatever  it  amounts  to,  drawn  by  cunning 
from  the  vices  created  by  fraud  and  oppression.  The  par- 
ties of  interest  who  receive  the  tax  by  anticipation,  avoid 
the  small  cheek  of  contributing  towards  it.  And  the  oppres- 
sor having  enjoyed  his  spoil,  has  gotten  out  of  reach,  be- 
fore the  oppressed  acquires  a  power  of  resistance. 

The  celebrated  idea,  «  that   the  people  are  their  own 
worst  enemies,"   expressed   by   Ovid  in  his  assumption  of 
Romulus,  and  alluded  to  by  Garth  in  his  preface  to  a  trans- 
lation of  the  author,  in  the  observation,  !<  that  after  a  people 
are  preserved  from  the  enemy,  the  next  care  should  be  to 
preserve  them  from  themselves,"  is  adverse  to  the  argument 
against  a  system  of  legislation  in  favour  of  parties  of  inte- 
rest or  aristocracy.     Romulus   himself  was  the  author  of 
the  patrician  party  of  interest  at  Rome,  which  murdered 
him,  appropriated  to  themselves  the  publick  wealth,  oppress- 
ed the  people,  and  drove  them  finally  under  the  dominion  «.f 
one  tyrant,  as  a  refuge  from  many.     The  Spartans  never 
thought  of  these  saviours  against  themselves.     They  were 
a  democracy  of  masters  over  a  democracy  of  slaves.    These 
masters  remained  long  free,  because  they  trusted  to  them- 
selves for  safety.     Nations  who  receive   safety,  receive  at 
the  same  time  a  master,  whether, that  safety  is  bestowed  by 
law  or  by  force.     If  by  law,  it  must  be  the  donation  of  some 
party  of  interest,  and  as  it  is  of  the  essence  of  all  such,  to 
elevate  without  merit,  and  to  enrich  without  industry,  the 
genuine  cements  of  honest  society,  and  the  motives  inciting 
men  to  good  and  useful  actions,  must  all  be  destroyed.     By 
seeking  for  honour  and  wealth  in  title  and  law,  men  scatter 
curses.     Left  to  feed  their  passions  by  the  help  of  merit  and 
industry,  they  scatter  blessings. 

Mercier,  a  French  political  writer,  ascribes  our  consti- 
tutions to  the  wisdom  of  European  philosophers,  and  fore- 
sees our  ruin  from  mercantile  guile.  If  the  assertion  is 
true,  our  gratitude  for  a  policy,  which  that  quarter  of  the 


THE    XEGAL   POXICY    OF   THE    IT.    STATES.  623 

earth  has  heen  unable  to  equal,  ought  to  be  measured  by 
their  envy  ;  and  when  this  envy  shall  cease,  no  reason  fop 
our  gratitude  will  exist.  His  apprehension  glances  at  its 
termination,  but  he  has  contracted  a  great  idea,  after  he 
had  almost  compassed  it,  down  to  nothing,  by  the  epithet 
u  mercantile."  Knowing  that  guile  and  venality  led  the 
way  to  despotism,  but  seeing  none  established  by  our  politi- 
cal laws,  he  turned  his  eye  towards  the  mercantile,  and 
overlooked  the  capacity  of  civil  law  to  issue  it  in  copious 
streams.  The  mercantile,  concealed  like  guilt  in  the  breast 
of  an  individual,  boars  no  resemblance  to  the  political,  pub- 
lished like  justice  in  the  face  of  the  statute  book.  One 
never  destroyed  a  free  government  ;  the  other  never  failed 
to  do  it,  unless  the  nation  destroyed  that.  When  the  English 
blergy  owned  2Sf,tf  3  knights'  fees  out  of  60,215  into  which 
the  whole  kingdom  was  divided,  the  guile  and  venality  of 
this  party  of  interest,  made  it  the  pest  and  the  tyrant  of  the 
country  for  five  centuries.  If  our  exports  amount  to> 
SiO, 000,000,  twenty  of  which  are  expended  in  taxes  ami 
the  sustenance  of  labour,  and  the  banks  have  already  gotten 
a  moiety  of  the  remaining  twenty,  they  have  outstript  the 
monks  in  availing  themselves  of  the  civil  law  mode  of 
growing  rich.  The  clerical  party  of  interest  contended 
successfully  for  a  long  time,  that  to  tax  it  was  wicked  \  the 
banking  has  successfully  advanced  the  same  doctrine.  The 
clerical  intrigued  with  kings  and  beneficed  the  sons  of  no- 
bles, to  obtain  the  support  of  the  government  ;  the  banking 
bribes  governments,  and  infuses  stock  into  agriculture. 
The  clerical  pretended  to  bestow  heaven  on  the  laity  ;  and 
the  banking  pretends  to  bestow  wealth  on  labour* 

The  republican  principle  of  general  or  puhli<k  interest, 
cannot  be  successfully  assailed  by  the  mercantile  guile  and 
penality  of  individuals.  But  (he  guile  and  venality  emitted 
by  civil  law  in  the  shape  of  a  party  of  interest,  endeavours, 
by  every  expedient,  to  cut  up  the  general  interest,  for  the 
sake  of  its  own  safety  or  aggrandizement  ;  and  soars  above 
little  individual  frauds  in  the  sunshine  of  legislative  favour, 

SO 


(5ii  THE    LEGAL    POLICY    OS    THE    U.    STATES. 

To  these  parties  of  interest  nations  owe  the  exclamations 
against  a  militia,  and  (he  commendations  of  standing 
armies.  The  conquest  of  (he  lloman  empire  ;  the  emanci- 
pations of  Holland  and  the  United  States  ;  the  resistance  of 
France  against  a  combination  of  nearly  all  Europe,  aided 
by  her  deserted  standing  army  ;  (he  resistance  of  Spain, 
defrauded  of  her  standing  army,  against  France ;  and  the 
consequences  of  a  single  defeat  (o  countries  confiding  in 
standing  armies,  can  never  plead  successfully  for  a  militia, 
where  the  system  of  rearing  separate  interests  prevails  ; 
because  a  militia  cannot  exist  where  its  natural  ally  ((he 
general  interest)  has  been  massacred  up  by  civil  law,  into  a 
herd  of  parties  of  interest,  actuated  by  that  species  of  guile 
and  venality  by  which  free  governments  are  destroyed.  If 
men  could  be  made  wise  as  well  as  knavish,  by  self  interest, 
the  majority  would  see  (he  same  principle  in  the  doctrines 
of  saving  nations  against  themselves,  of  defending  them  by 
standing  armies,  and  of  governing  them  by  a  knot  of  parties 
of  interest,  intertwined  like  a  knot  of  serpents  for  self  gra- 
tification. V  standing  army  being  itself  a  legislative  party 
of  interest,  becomes  naturally  the  associate  and  ally  of  a 
pulicy  compounded  of  such  parties.  If  a  militia  cannot  de- 
fend a  country,  the  inhabitants  cannot  long  exercise  the 
right  of  self  government.  If  it  cannot  repel  invasion,  it 
cannot  prevent  the  usurpation  of  an  army  which  can.  A 
government  at  the  head  of  an  army  able  to  control  the  peo- 
ple, will  never  regard  election  but  as  another  instrument  to 
rivet  oppression. 

The  events  of  (he  revolutionary  war  are  misrepresented 
by  the  combination  of  parties  of  interest  (at  (he  head 
of  which,  it  is  to  be  remembered,  that  the  existing  govern- 
ment by  which  (hey  are  created  or  sustained,  is  always  sta- 
tioned) as  sufficient  to  explode  a  reliance  upon  a  militia, 
During  that  war  they  performed  many  gallant  actions,  often 
gained  victories  unconnected  with  regulars,  and  submitted 
at  least  to  equal  hardships,  without  bounties,  without 
clothing,  without  half  pay,  without  donations  of  laud,  and 


THE    LEGAL    POLICY    OF   THE    U.    STATES.  62* 

•without  mutiny.  A  theory  of  what  might  have  hern  achie- 
ved by  a  great  regular  army,  is  arrayed  against  a  mass  of 
actual  services  rendered  by  the  militia.  But  it  ought  never 
to  he  forgotten,  that  the  maladies  which  swept  away  the 
first  small  army,  would  have  reached  a  great  one  ;  that  the 
inability  to  arm,  clothe.  Peed  and  physicK  it,  would  not  have 
been  removed  by  its  increase  ;  that  the  small  army  hardly 
suffered  those  unavoidable  privations,  which  a  large  one 
would  have  redressed  in  its  own  way  :  and  that  this  experi- 
ment of  a  militia,  was  made  by  a  government  without  re- 
sources, without  military  knowledge,  uriestabJislied,  and 
divided  into  thirteen  independent  sections. 

No  department  of  the  legislative  policy  of  the  states,  sep- 
arately or  united,  seems  to  me  So  be  more  defective,  than  the 
management  of  the  militia  ;  which,  like  a  government,  is  ca- 
pable of  being  corrupted  or  destroyed  by  bad  principles.  The 
ttiilitia  of  Virginia,  for  instance,  is  commanded  by  officers 
holding  commissions  by  a  more  independent  tenure  than  the 
judges;  namely,  during  good  behaviour,  of  which  they  are 
themselves  to  decide  :  and  these  officers  are  almost  entirely- 
promoted  by  rank.  Responsibility  is  lost  or  enfeebled. 
Successional  power,  as  poisonous  to  our  policy  as  heredita- 
ry, supersedes  the  qualities  fit  for  office  ;  and  patrician  no- 
tions are  infused  into  those  who  ought  to  he  the  \ indicators 
of  equal  rights.  If  civil  offices  were  made  successional,  if 
they  were  held  for  life,  and  if  the  incumbents  were  only  re- 
sponsible to  their  own  corps,  it  would  beget  a  political  exhi- 
bition resembling  a  militia,  moulded  by  the  same  principles. 

The  commendations  bestowed  by  foreigners  upon  our 
form  of  government,  are  suggested  by  an  inspection  of  our 
political  laws,  and  the  principles  they  inculcate  upon  civil 
legislation.  It  is  probable  that  a  discouragement  and  ne- 
glect of  agriculture  and  the  militia,  was  never  suggested 
by  this  inspection  to  the  most  capricious  imagination  ;  and 
yet  it  is  equally  probable,  that  our  legislatures  have  devoted 
a  thousand  fold  more  time  to  the  single  subject  of  banking, 
than  to   both.     The  maxim,  "  that  nations  cannot  be  free 


626  THE    LEGAL    POLICY    OF    THE    U.    STATES. 

without  a  sound  militia,"  is  reiterated  by  our  constitutions  ; 
and  our  legislatures  bestow  penalties  and  contempt  on  this 
mode  of  defence  associated  with  the  general  interest  ;  and 
pay,  clothes,  rations,  bounties  and  honour,  on  a  mode  of  de- 
fence associated  by  its  moral  nature  with  legal  brings  of  the 
same  moral  nature.  Fraud  and  lolly  then  express  astonish- 
ment at  beholding  a  good  thing  uncultivated,  less  thrifty 
than  a  bad  one  carefully  nurtured.  Suppose  the  comparison 
had  been,  between  a  regular  army  nursed  by  privations,  and 
a  militia  fed  hy  money.  Let  an  honest  inquirer  after  truth, 
ascertain  the  amount  spent  on  the  perishing  modes  of  de- 
fence by  parties  of  exclusive  interest,  military  and  naval, 
since  the  revolution,  and  estimate  the  impetus  which  the 
same  sum  judiciously  applied,  would  have  communicated  to 
the  general  and  immortal  mode  of  defence. 

Perhaps  the  principles   and   doctrines  of  England,  for 
many  centuries,  in  favour  of  liberty,  so  incomprehensible  to 
the  rest  of  Europe,  and  so  useful  to  these  U.   States,  arose 
from  her  long  disuse  of  standing  armies,  and  her  moderate 
recourse  to  them,  after  the  rest  of  Europe  had  been  made 
subservient  to  the  chiefs  of  these  parties  of  interest.     Pro- 
vidence seems  to  have  raised  up  another  nation  in  the  United 
States,  better  isolated  against  ihe  pretexts  under  which  the 
military  separate  interest  poison  is  administered.     Oceans 
in  front  and  rear,  on  one  flank  a  barren,  and  on  the  other  an 
enervating  climate,  with  a  vast  expanse  of  territory  within 
these  natural  circumvallations,  ought  to  enable  them  forever 
to  reject  the  bitter  potion,  so  long  resisted  by  their  ancestors 
within  the  shadow  of  powerful  rivals.     The  legislative  ne- 
Hectof  agriculture  and  the  militia,  and  cultivation  of  par- 
ties  of  interest  to  enrich  and  for  defence,  have  been  selected 
to   shew  the  necessity  of  distinguishing  between  good  and 
bad  principles,  for  the  purpose  of  preserving  the  loyalty  of 
legislation  to  the  political  laws,  enunciated  by  the  sovereign 
national  authority. 

Rely  not  upon  oaths  for  this  loyalty.     They  were  for- 
merly used  to  hide  treachery  by  kings  themselves,  who 


THE    LEGAL  T0LICY    OE   THE    IT.    STATES.  C27 

.swore  to  defend  liberty,  fulfil  treaties,  and  observe  charters. 
Oaths  never  stop  the  current  of  consequences  flowing  from 
Jaws  inconsistent  with  the  principles  of  constitutions.  Pros- 
pective oaths  may  possibly  be  presumptuous  and  impious,  in 
promising  mental  stability,  when  the  Deity  has  not  implant- 
ed that  quality  in  man.  Being  taken  according  to  law,  and 
broken  according  to  nature,  the  reverence  which  would 
have  sanctified  the  obligation,  had  it  been  limited  to  past 
occurrences,  is  weakened.  As  a  security  for  the  observance 
of  political  law,  the  sovereign  power  of  construction  to  heal 
the  most  tender  consciences,  renders  them  quite  insignifi- 
cant. A  thousand  instances  of  this  species  of  party  medical 
skill  have  occurred.  "  The  constitution,  the  laws  of  the 
"  United  States,  and  treaties,  shall  be  the  supreme  law  of 
"  the  land."  Construction  can  condemn  the  second  member 
of  this  sentence  into,  an  allegiance  to  the  third,  and  open  the 
May  for  a  subserviency  of  the  first  to  the  two  last.  It  can 
substitute  for  the  responsibility  of  the  house  of  representa- 
tives to  the  people,  a  submission  to  the  President  and  Senate. 
It  can  require  law  unsuggested  by  discretion,  and  unexam- 
ined bv  the  understanding.  And  it  can  invest  the  President 
and  Senate,  having  the  concurrency  of  the  judges,  with  a 
power  to  impose  taxes,  incur  debts,  dismember  the  territory, 
and  legislate  almost  without  limitation.  Let  us  rather  then 
establish  principles,  than  trust  to  oaths,  for  the  mainten- 
ance of  our  policy. 

Patronage  must  he  recorded  among  the  modes  of  de- 
stroying forms  of  government  ;  or  political,  by  civil  law. 
Jt  can  seduce  the  servants  of  God  to  advocate  fraud  and 
superstition.  It  excites  talents  against  truth.  It  corrupts 
by  hope,  by  fruition,  and  by  disappointment.  It  teases  and 
deceives  the  people  by  its  contentions  for  office,  into  a  fatal 
indifference  towards  the  measures  of  a  government.  And 
its  poisonous  influence  readies  electors,  as  well  as  represen- 
tatives, by  a  thousand  imperceptible  channels.  A  balance 
of  good  and  evil  ought  to  be  struck  between  patronage,  ex- 
ercised by  one  man  or  divided  among  a  multitude.     In  the 


628  THE   LEGAL  POLICY   OF   THE   V.    STATE3. 

first  shape,  it  is  able  to  produce  a  monarchy  in  disguise  ;  in 
the  second,  its  factions  are  perishing.  Exercised  by  various 
transitory  bodies  of  men,  it  produces  no  fraudulent  party 
combinations,  because  such  bodies  escape  both  from  vice 
and  rancour,  as  a  cloud  escapes  from  view  ;  and  the  happy 
divisions  of  our  government,  bestow  an  opportunity  to  dis- 
perse a  tumour,  constituting  a  species  of  accumulation  of 
power,  of  thp  most  acrid  nature,  in  relation  to  our  princi- 
ple of  division,  in  all  its  applications.  AcC'untitlated,  patrd- 
nage  becomes  the  real  legislator  of  a  nation,  under  what- 
ever forms  laws  are  constructed  ;  and  secrecy,  both  legisla- 
tive arid  executive,  draws  ever  its  operations  a  dark  cloud, 
through  which  a  combination  of  intellect  and  opportunity 
only  can  penetrate.  Pretexts  for  this  secrecy  can  never  be 
wanting,  when  philosophers  have  represented  the  principle 
as  a  valuable  attribute  of  monarchy,  by  inventing  a  theory 
of  its  usefulness,  without  contemplating  the  real  objects 
exposed  to  view,  whenever  time  lias  torn  off  the  veil,  under 
which  kings,  priests  and  statesmen,  modestly  pretend  to 
conceal  their  virtues.  Are  these  gentlemen  less  inclined  to 
boast  without  merit,  or  to  disclose  their  virtues,  than  others, 
because  they  can  pay  flatterers  without  disgrace,  and  repel 
contempt  by  power  ?  If  so,  there  is  some  reason  for  bestow- 
ing upon  their  humility  that  confidence,  which  consigns  the 
fate  of  nations  to  the  exclusive  custody  of  governments,  and 
subverts  the  entire  political  structure  erected  upon  the  prin- 
ciple of  self  government,  and  the  sovereignty  of  the  people. 
Secrecy  is  good  for  conquest,  say  its  advocates.  Let  nations 
who  wish  to  be  free,  remember  that  freedom  cannot  exist, 
except  by  controlling  the  conquests  of  their  own  governments 
at  home.  Patronage  and  secrecy  united,  arc  daily  carrying 
some  of  their  defences.  Conquest  abroad  is  rare,  and  no 
compensation  for  conquest  at  home.  Algernon  Sydney  (ari 
author,  who  stands  as  a  witness,  that  talents  and  truth  nun 
be  outfaced  by  ignorance  and  errour)  has  proved  that  the 
ardour  of  conviction,  is  preferable  even  in  war,  to  the  apa- 
thy of  secrecy.     If  this  ardour  is  too  strong  for  discipline. 


TliE    LEGAL   POLICY   OF   THE   U.    STATES.  629 

where  discipline  is  strongest,  what  will  be  the  success  of  a 
free  form  of  government,  capable  of  being  sustained  only 
by  the  convictions  of  reason,  if  it  is  confided  to  the  same 
species  of  apathy  ?  Conviction  built  upon  secrecy,  is  reli- 
gion built  upon  mystery.  Is  religion  improved  or  injured, 
by  being  purged  of  this  feculency  ?  Will  that  which  purifies 
religion,  corrupt  a  government  ?  A  system  of  legislation  in 
favour  of  parties  of  exclusive  interest,  influenced  by  patro- 
nage and  shrouded  in  secrecy,  constitutes  a  body  politick  of 
thorough  putrefaction  in  the  eyes  even  of  an  ordinary  re- 
publican anatomist.  He  will  easily  discern,  that  though  a 
government  founded  upon  a  publick  opinion,  which  opinion 
was  to  be  founded  upon  secrecy,  might  rival  the  Indian  cos- 
mography, it  could  never  know  the  principles  on  which  it 
stood. 

Governments,  like  persons  or  poems,  ought  to  sustain  a 
consistent  character.  Had  Homer  made  his  heroes  whine 
in  elegy,  or  chat  in  pastoral,  he  never  would  have  been  called 
the  prince  of  poets.  If  antiquity  had  transmitted  to  us  two 
fabulous  poems  ;  one,  of  a  king,  nobility  and  house  of  com- 
mons, contending  for  mastery  during  several  centuries  ;  the 
other,  of  a  nation  which  had  sustained  the  calamities  of  a 
long  war  to  establish  a  republican  government ;  both  con- 
cluding in  the  catastrophe  of  swallowing  up  the  long  ad- 
justing balances,  and  the  late  established  republicanism, 
with  the  greedy  throats  of  paper  stock  and  parties  of  inte- 
rest; would  they  not  have  been  considered  as  monstrous 
violations  of  probability,  well  depicted  in  the  first  five  lines 
of  Horace's  art  of  poetry  ?  Still,  either  monster,  like  (he 
God  Fo,  would  be  celebrated  by  its  priesthood.  A  know- 
ledge of  principles  is  as  indispensable  to  a  nation,  to  enable 
it  to  sustain  a  free  government,  as  of  plants  to  a  horticultu- 
rist. It  is  as  absurd  to  ingraft  aristocratical  or  monarchi- 
cal buds  upon  a  republican  root,  as  a  brier  upon  an  oak. 
Those  who  pretend  to  this  art,  design  gradually  to  eradi- 
cate the  oak,  and  to  plant  the  brier  where  it  stood.  By 
being  able  to  class  principles*  we  shall  easily  class  law«. 


?)£d  THE   LEGAL   POLICY   OF   THE    U.    STATES. 

Aristocracy,  by  playing  (lie  Harlequin,  by  Protean  trans- 
formations, and  by  its  painted  draperies,  will  no  longer  be 
able  to  perplex  and  deceive  mankind.  Through  the  robes 
of  superstition,  noble  orders,  paper  stock,  and  of  all  the 
various  parties  of  interest,  the  same  principle  will  be  seen, 
and  whenever  it  changes  its  dress,  every  body  will  know  it 
to  be  a  new  attempt  to  coneeal  its  deformitv. 

But  our  efforts  to  understand  principles,  are  obstructed 
by  that  toad  acoucheur,  construction,  which  pretends  to 
draw  out  of  the  womb  of  the  term  «  republick,"  every  con- 
ceivable form  of  government,  except  the  solitary  despotism 
of  one  man  ;  and  to  require  her  maternal  tenderness  and 
blind  affection  for  the  Avhole  monstrous  progeny.  This  skil- 
ful operator  boasts  of  the  still  rarer  art  of  making  two  be- 
ings out  of  one  foetus,  in  the  case  of  the  English  govern- 
ment ;  and  of  proving  that  though  this  republick  and  mon- 
archy, this  piece  of  hermaphrodite  political  mechanism,  has 
been  born  again  and  again,  according  to  the  motley  humours 
of  barons,  priests,  kings,  conquerors,  mobs  and  stockjob- 
bers, it  has  yet  the  wonderful  property  of  being  always  the 
same,  or  at  least,  whatever  our  operator  pleases  to  make  of 
it.  By  travelling  over  history,  and  collecting  the  fraudu- 
lent or  erroneous  applications  of  the  word  republican  to  re- 
duce it  to  an  equivalency  with  the  word  "  government,"  it 
is  made  like  the  term  "  man,"  to  embrace  all  moral  quali- 
ties, good  and  evil  ;  and  liberty  is  deprived  even  of  her  name. 
This  device  can  only  he  eluded  by  a  moral  analysis.  It  will 
enable  us  to  know  good  or  bad  governments,  or  good  or  bad 
laws,  in  the  mode  by  which  we  distinguish  between  good  or 
bad  men.  Its  basis,  is  a  specification  of  qualities,  illustrated 
by  those  of  our  policy  ;  as  for  instance,  "  the  sovereignty  of 
"  the  people,  an  equality  of  rights,  a  abhorrence  of  privi- 
«•'  leges  and  sinecures,  free  discussion,  a  preference  of  a 
"  militia  to  mercenary  armies,  a  protection  and  not  adistri- 
"  bution  of  property  by  law,  an  enmity  to  all  parties  of 
'*  interest,  and  many  others  f*  and  not  political  names,  al- 
ways expounded  by  interest  and  party,  to  mean  any  thing  of 


TflE   LEGAL   POLICY   OF   THE    IT.    STATES.  051 

nothing.  Guelph  and  Gibeline,  Whig  and  Tory,  Federal 
and  Republican,  have  all  been  equally  capable  of  no  mean- 
ing or  any  meaning  ;  nor  was  the  name  Praise  God  Barbone, 
any  proof  of  the  piety  of  its  owner.  Km  though  ilie  names 
of  men  or  of  parties,  are  a  frivolous  delinition  of  such  human 
qualities  as  are  liable  to  fluctuation,  yet  it  is  easy  to  invent 
or  agree  upon  some  epithet,  denoting  a  definite  collection 
of  moral  principles,  applicable  to  the  formation  of  a  govern- 
ment, having  previously  arranged  sucli  as  are  contrary  to 
each  other  in  distinct  divisions.  Freedom  of  speech  or  its 
suppression,  responsibility  or  exemption  from  control,  divi- 
sion of  power  or  its  accumulation,  defence  by  a  militia  or 
by  a  standing  army,  division  of  property  by  individual  ex- 
ertions or  by  fraudulent  laws,  are  instances  of  the  facility 
with  which  an  arrangement  might  be  made,  exhibiting  dis- 
tinct classes  of  moral  principles,  capable  of  receiving  a 
name,  or  of  being  used  to  chasten  governments  or  legisla- 
tion, without  being  comprised  by  any  epithetical  definition. 
Either  the  word  ««  republican,"  may  be  used  to  convey  an 
idea  of  the  class  of  good  political  principles,  or  if  it  be  true 
as  is  often  contended,  that  like  the  names  Peter  and  Judas, 
applied  to  men,  and  whig,  tory,  republican  and  federal,  ap- 
plied to  parties,  it  can  convey  no  idea  of  principles,  then 
the  class  of  good  principles  may  be  constituted  into  a  band 
of  sentinels,  each  ready  to  alarm  nations  whenever  an  in- 
road is  made  by  fraud,  avarice,  or  ambition,  upon  the  quar- 
ter where  he  is  stationed.  It  is  true  that  the  names  of  go- 
vernments are  as  unable  to  convey  an  idea  of  the  qualities  of 
governours,  as  are  the  names  of  men  or  of  parties  of  theirs, 
because  men  are  still  the  subject  named,  and  therefore,  un- 
less we  abstract  the  name  of  our  form  of  government, 
from  those  who  may  administer  it,  and  consider  it  as  imply- 
ing a  fixed  class  of  principles,  for  the  express  purpose  of 
controlling  the  fluctuating  and  selfish  nature  of  these  ad- 
ministrators, its  freedom  cannot  continue.  By  relying  upon 
the  undulating  temper  of  undisciplined  man  for  the  admin- 
istration of  a  government,  we  are  brought  back  to  the  most 

Si 


«*S2  THE   LEGAL   POLICY   OF   THE    U.    STATES, 

artless  and  savage  state  of  society  which  can  be  conceived, 
and  lose  all  those  principles  for  regulating  human  nature, 
to  which  the  world  is  indebted  for  its  whole  progress,  from 
a  state  of  barbarity.  Government,  freed  from  moral  re- 
straints, is  the  result  of  the  passions  of  the  men  who  govern. 
Men,  combined  in  self  constituted  parties,  such  as  whig  and 
lory,  republican  and  federal,  not  being  exposed  to  any  moral 
restraints,  similar  to  the  political  laws  of  constitutions  for 
disciplining  governours,  act  as  governours  would  do,  unre- 
strained by  political  law.  If  governours  thus  unrestrained, 
would  be  gaided  by  selfishness,  avarice  and  ambition,  all 
such  political  parlies  must  by  the  laws  of  nature  follow  the 
s'ame  guides.  If  governours,  at  liberty  to  follow  their  own 
passions,  would  not  be  constituted  into  a  genuine  republick 
by  assuming  that  name,  neither  can  a  name  infuse  republi- 
can principles  into  unrestrained  parties  of  interest,  of  ins 
and  outs,  struggling  for  wealth  and  power.  The  world  has 
never  seen  such  parties  guided  by  the  principles  which  se- 
cure a  free  government,  because  they  are  not  tied  to  loyalty 
by  the  ligament  of  political  law  in  their  party  proceedings, 
nor  would  it  have  ever  seen  a  republican  government,  if  all 
governours  had  been  equally  at  liberty  to  pursue  the  dictates 
of  self  interest  or  passion.  Nominal  republicanism,  being 
spurious  and  fraudulent,  takes  every  thing  it  gains  from 
that  which  is  real  and  true.  The  penalties  paid  by  nations 
for  an  opinion,  that  good  names  implied  good  principles, 
caused  the  United  States  to  resort  to  the  expedient  of  eon 
trolling  men  by  political  law,  to  which  they  have  already 
been  indebted  for  a  wonderful  number  of  good  governours, 
whilst  few  or  none  have  ever  been  made,  even  by  the  good 
names  judge,  bishop  or  nobleman.  Whenever  they  are  de- 
luded of  this  expedient  by  the  artifice  of  adapting  names  to 
a  temporary  prejudice,  they  will  pay  the  same  penalties 
paid  by  other  nations  for  the  same  absurd  idolatry.  Govern- 
ment has  been  called  a  necessary  evil,  on  account  of  the  pro- 
pensity of  governoui-s  to  sacrifice  the  publick  good  to  their 
mm  selfishness.     Why  should  nations  invent  a  whole  tribe 


THE    LEGAL   FOLIC  1    OF   THE    U.    STATES.  633 

of  parties  of  interest,  which  are  not  necessary  evils,  when 
it  is  so  difficult  to  manage  one  ?  Their  unrestrained  vices 
replenish  governours  with  the  had  qualities  designed  to  he 
effaced  hy  political  law  ;  and  the  loyalty  of  folly  to  party 
names,  occasionally  releases  a  government  from  the  whole- 
some restraints  of  political  law  and  good  moral  principles, 
so  as  to  place  arbitrary  power  within  the  reach  of  the  hu- 
man deities  of  the  day. 

Let  us  draw  a  short  comparison  between  the  tnie  legal 
policy  of  the  United  States,  according  to  their  constitutions, 
and  that  of  England.  The  first  is  guiltless  of  making  it  gal 
virtue  and  vice,  knowledge  and  ignorance,  wealth  and  po- 
verty ;  of  preventing  industry  from  counteracting  pernicious 
extremes;  and  of  rooting  out  social  order  hy  levelling,  or 
social  liberty,  by  monopolizing  laws,  to  exhiiirate  tran- 
siently mad  zealots,  or  to  enrich  permanently  knavish  par- 
ties of  interest.  The  disposition  of  wealth  to  individuals 
and  parties  of  interest,  is  the  essential  employment  of  the 
English  legal  policy.  In  such  a  legal  policy  is  lodged  the 
kernel  of  every  civilized  tyranny,  however  the  shells  may 
be  diversified.  If  a  nation  is  wise  enough  to  chace  this 
single  political  demon  out  of  its  statute  book,  it  can  hardly 
lose  its  liberty  ;  if  it  is  so  weak,  as  to  surrender  that  book 
to  the  fiend,  it  cannot  keep  it.  By  leaving  property  to  be 
divided  by  industry,  the  avarice  of  the  majority  is  engaged 
on  the  side  of  a  free  government  ;  by  legal  divisions  of  it, 
the  avarice  of  a  minority  is  .bribed,  to  destroy  one.  Nature, 
cries  one  philosopher,  produces  equality  ;  it  produces  aris- 
tocracy or  the  well  born,  says  another  :  our  policy  draws 
on  itself  the  hatred  of  both,  by  refusing  to  both,  laws  for 
effecting  that  which  they  assert  is  produced  by  nature  ;  and 
the  English  obtains  the  admiration  of  one,  for  effecting  hy 
law,  that  which  is  said  to  have  been  effected  by  nature. 

Laws  to  make  men  rich,  are  like  those  to.  make  them 
wise.  Both  cause  innumerable  evils  to  mankind.  The 
wise  men  made  by  nature,  are  eternally  overturning  those 
made  by  law  :  and  industry,  like  wisdom,  being  unequally 


634  THE   iEGAL   POLICY    OE   THE    U.    STATES. 

distributed,  is  for  ever  resisting  similar  legal  frauds  against 
its  rights  Nature,  by  refusing  to  transmit  talents  or  in- 
dustry from  father  to  son,  frowns  both  upon  hereditary 
forms  of  government,  and  equalising  and  accumulating 
laws.  The  first  are  the  least  adverse  to  her  decrees.  In- 
dividuals of  fine  qualities  may  be  selected  with  whom  to 
commence  monarchies  or  aristocracies,  and  accident  or  edu- 
cation may  possibly  cause  some  succession  of  these  quali- 
ties, however  certainly  fools  or  tyrants  will  turn  up  at  last. 
But  laws  for  enriching,  in  their  commencement  and  through- 
out their  operation,  are  regardless  of  merit  ,•  and  the  equa- 
lizing theory  pretends  both  to  keep  properly  equal  among 
evanescent  beings,  and  to  supersede  mental  inequalities. 
The  ability  of  industry  to  divide  property  sufficiently  to 
desti'oy  political  combinations,  was  demonstrated  in  England 
by  the  contrivance  of  the  king  and  the  judges,  for  letting 
her  loose  upon  entails  ;  and  the  ability  of  accumulating 
laws  to  destroy  this  wholesome  operation,  was  subsequently 
demonstrated,  by  letting  loose  funding  and  banking  laws 
upon  industry.  The  idle,  who  seek  for  wealth  by  charter- 
ing laws,  are  wiser  than  their  equalising  brethren.  Law 
Iras  never  been  able  to  produce  an  equality  of  property, 
where  industry  exists  ;  but  it  can  produce  its  monopoly. 
Our  policy  rejects  its  application  to  both  objects,  and  our 
constitutions  unequivocally  disclose  an  opinion,  that  civil 
liberty  depends  upon  leaving  the  distribution  of  property  to 
industry ;  hence  laws  for  this  end,  are  as  unconstitutional,  as 
those  for  re-establishing  king,  lords  and  commons.  Legal 
weahh  and  heredilary  power,  are  twin  principles.  These 
frauds  beget  all  the  parties  or  factions  of  civil  society,  such 
as  patrician  and  plebeian,  military  and  civil,  stock  and 
landed.  The  enmity  and  contrast  in  all  these  cases,  arise 
from  a  legal  difference  of  interest,  and  the  active  and  pas- 
sive members  in  this  fraudulent  system,  are  distinctly  de- 
signated by  the  wealth  and  poverty  it  diffuses.  In  England, 
where  it  prevails,  "  every  seventh  person  draws  support 
«  from  the  parish  at  some  period  of  his  life,  exclusive  of 


THE    LEGAL   POLICY    OF    THE    L.    STATES.  63b' 

"those  who  submit  to  misery,  in  preference  to  the  humilia- 
«*  tion  of  askinir  efiarity." 

It  is  an  unalterable  law,  that  man  shall  he  guided  by 
self  interest.  Governments,  therefore,  ad  ministered  by 
man,  though  made  by  constitutions,  are  maintained,  corrup- 
ted or  destroyed  by  laws.  Legislation  in  favour  of  parties 
of  interest,  shews  that  they  govern  legislation  ;  and  in  that 
case  they  always  cut  a  new  government  out  of  any  consti- 
tution, by  a  succession  of  laws,  as  a  statuary  cuts  a  statue  of 
any  form  out  of  a  rock.  The  party  of  interest  created  in 
England  by  paper  stock,  moulded  the  government  in  a  cen- 
tury, into  the  form  most  suitable  to  itself;  and  the  celerity 
observable  in  the  motions  of  a  similar  party  here,  is  an  evi- 
dence of  the  advantage  it  derives  from  the  precedent. 

Self  interest  is  so  ingenious  as  to  deceive  both  itself  and 
others,  by  verbal  patriotism  and  false  comparisons.     The 
order  produced  by  hereditary  magistrates,  is  compared  with 
the -confusion  produced  by  fraudulent  laws  ;  superstition  is 
compared  with  atheism  ;  a  well  armed  and  appointed  mer- 
cenary army,  with  an  unarmed  and  unorganized  militia;  and 
the  freedom  with  the  licentiousness  of  the  press.     By  such 
arts  and  arguments,  parties  of  interest  effect  their  selfish 
purposes*     The  two  artifices  of  comparing  loans  wifh  taxes, 
and  war  with  a  dishonorable  peace,  are  most  unhappily  adap- 
ted for  consigning    nations   to  those  who   deal    in    credit. 
The  ancient    aristocracy   perished  with    idolatry  ;  the 
modern,  rejecting  divine  descent  as  no  longer  tenable,  relies 
for  defence  on   human  laws.     It  is  remarkable   that  Mr. 
Godwin,  discerning  no  match   for  aristocracy   but  aristo- 
cracy, (as  if  the  devil  could  only  be  controlled  by  the  devil) 
should  propose  a  theory  bottomed  upon  its  essential  princi- 
ple, for  the  purpose  of  destroying  it.     Can  a  more  wieked 
assoeiation  of  aristocrats  be  conceived,  than  the  idie,  assem- 
bled to  enact  Mr.  Godwin's  law,  for  dividing  among  them- 
selves the  property  of  the  industrious.     Proteus,  in  his  ug- 
liest form,  does  not  eease  to  be  Proteus.     Considering  pri- 
vate property  as  a  natural  or  social  right,  the  observation 


6S&  THE   LEGAL  POLICY    OF    THE    U.    STATES. 

is  equally  just.  As  nature  compelled  man  to  acquire  in  or- 
der to  exist,  his  acquisitions  from  his  own  labour  are  his 
property,  according  to  the  law  of  his  maker  ;  since  man 
must  have  existed  before  society.  Man's  unequal  moral 
and  physical  powers  and  wants,  further  disclose  nature's 
enmity  to  the  equality  of  his  acquisitions.  And  the  plea- 
sures and  pains  annexed  to  industry  and  idleness,  strongly 
prove  that  they  are  bestowed  by  nature,  as  just  rewards  or 
punishments  for  a  virtue  or  a  vice.  But  both  the  levellers 
and  monopolists  are  for  destroying  nature's  or  the  creator's 
law,  built  upon  these  physical  and  moral  grounds ;  the  first 
faction,  because  property  is  thereby  made  too  unequal,  the 
second,  because  the  same  law  distributes  it  too  equally;  and 
though  inveterate  enemies,  they  agree  that  this  divine 
errour  should  be  corrected  by  human  laws  ;  only  that  each 
contends  for  an  opposite  excess,  and  brands  the  extremity  of 
its  adversary  with  all  the  epithets  used  to  define  tyranny. 
But  either  would  be  a  legal  metempsychosis  of  our  policy. 
The  levellers,  indeed,  by  attempting  that  which  is  unattain- 
able, betray  the  principle  of  leaving  property  to  be  divided 
by  industry,  and  destroy  the  interest  by  which  they  are  di- 
rected. If  the  accumulators  succeed,  the  two  most  remark- 
able revolutions  recorded  in  history,  will  terminate  at  the 
points  they  started  from  ;  the  equality  of  France,  in  ades- 
potick  hereditary  dynasty  ;  and  the  republicanism  of  the 
United  States,  in  the  English  aristocracy,  compounded  of  a 
variety  of  parties  of  interest. 

This  species  of  confederation,  so  different  from  that  by 
which  these  states  are  united,  has  invented  a  species  of  law 
neither  constitutional  nor  legislative  ,•  and  sought  for  a  new 
ierm  to  gain  for  it  an  independency  of  the  nation,  who  can 
alter  the  one  species  of  law  5  and  of  legislatures,  whieh  can 
annul  the  other.  Law-charter  claims  an  inviolability  be- 
yond all  civil  and  political  laws  whatsoever.  The  origin 
and  use  of  instruments  assuming  the  privilege  of  violating 
whatever  principles  they  please,  without  being  subject  to 
any,  is  worthy  of  some  attention. 


THE   LEGAL   POLICY   OF   THE    U.    STATES.  637 

Charter  was  originally  a  monarchical  mode  of  conveying 
to  towns  or  mercantile  associations,  certain  portions  of  civil 
liberty,  considered  as  valid,  upon  the  ground  that  the  liberties 
of  the  grantees  belonged  to  the  grantor,  and  were,  therefore, 
subjects  of  sale,  gift  or  barter.  Upon  this  stock  has  been  en- 
grafted the  idea,  that  law-charters  were  irrevocable,  without 
considering  that  liberty,  according  to  our  policy,  is  not  a  sub- 
ject of  sale,  gift  or  barter  $  or  the  property  of  the  government. 
Though  kings,  according  to  the  first  opinion,  might  by  char- 
ters, sell  or  give  more  liberty  to  some  of  their  subjects  than 
to  others  ;  and  though  such  deeds  ought  to  be  considered  as 
not  within  the  power  of  one  contracting  party  to  vacate; 
yet  it  does  not  follow,  according  to  the  second,  that  our  go- 
vernments can  do  the  same  thing,  or  that  charters  made  by 
them  for  privileges  or  monopolies,  ought  to  be  equally  sa- 
cred. Liberty,  by  means  of  royal  charters,  crept  into 
cities,  and  from  these  diffused  many  benefits  over  nations. 
That  aristocracy  should  make  this  fact  a  precedent  upon 
which  to  creep  into  our  policy,  is  a  striking  illustration,  either 
of  its  own  ingenuity,  or  of  its  rival's  ignorance.  To  draw 
a  precedent  in  favorem  mortis,  out  of  one  in  favorem  vitse, 
and  to  pass  oft*  the  deduction,  as  genuine,  upon  those  to  be 
killed  by  it,  shews  that  logick  itself  deserves  the  character 
we  have  heard  given  to  republican  forms  of  government  j 
and  that  Mr.  Locke  might  have  saved  himself  all  the  trou- 
ble he  has  taken  about  the  human  understanding,  by  sub- 
jecting it  to  the  same  definition.  The  fetters  of  bondage 
were  gradually  broken  by  the  irrepealable  charters  of  kings, 
and  ought,  therefore,  to  be  gradually  welded  by  the  irre- 
pealable laws  of  republicks  ;  and  frequent  elections  being 
necessary  to  enable  nations  to  preserve  liberty,  the  design 
ought  to  be  defeated  by  the  irrevocable  laws  of  a  single 
legislature,  which  may  choose  to  destroy  it.  "What  but  the 
corruption  of  hope,  from  the  dreams  of  wealth  poured  by 
aristocratical  artifice  into  the  imagination  of  ignorance, 
can  make  such  reasoning  current  ?  Thus  alchymy  is  made 
to  appear  practicable,  and  soldiers  are  persuaded  to  make 


638  THE   lEGAL  rOilCY   OF   THE    U.    STATES. 

conquests.  The  conquest  is  made,  their  leaders  are-enrich- 
ed, and  the  soldiers  live  in  poverty  and  die  in  hospitals. 
And  so  the  people  of  England  have  been  led  to  make  laws 
in  favour  of  parties  of  interest,  and  to  experience  the  fate  of 
soldiers. 

Mr.  Adams  considers  the  existing  English  government, 
not  as  a  confederation  of  parties  of  interest,  but  as  a  kind 
of  national  confederation,  inclosing  every  individual  within 
its  pale,  marshalled  into  three  orders.  But  having  exhibit- 
ed it  in  a  theory  to  which  he  allows  perfection,  he  goes  over 
the  world  in  search  of  its  practical  existence,  exclaiming, 
*•'  lo  it  is  not  here,  lo  it  is  not  there,  but  it  would  have  ap- 
«  peared  both  here  and  there,  had  the  balances  been  pro- 
«  peidy  adjusted."  To  me  this  government  seems  to  consist 
of  a  confederation  of  parties  of  interest,  excluding  the  ma- 
jority of  the  nation.  Such  as  the  church  of  England,  the 
paper  slock  party,  the  East  India  company,  the  military 
party,  the  pensioned  and  sinecure  party,  and  the  ins  and 
outs,  once  called  whigs  and  tories  ;  each  struggling  for  self 
interest  and  self  government,  but  all,  creeping  forth  like 
caterpillars  from  the  legal  nests  in  which  they  have  been 
hatched,  to  feed  upon  the  fruits  of  the  nation.  Most  of 
these  combinations  are  republicks,  convinced  that  they  are 
their  own  best  friends,  whilst  they  prescribe  monarchy  to 
nations,  pretending  that  national  association  is  i(s  own  ene- 
my. The  last  doctrine  is  preached  to  transfer  to  them- 
selves the  property  of  others.  But  they  prefer  republican 
principles  to  secure  it. 

The  form  of  the  English  parliament  was  originally 
fashioned  by  feudal  principles  ;  to  give  money  to  the  king 
was  its  chief  duly  :  and  he  could  garble  election  to  effect  his 
ends.  The  modes  by  which  its  pristine  end  was  effected, 
are  changed,  but  the  end  is  the  same.  The  king  has  found 
rotten  borough  and  septennial  representation,  with  a  close 
union  between  the  crown  and  the  herd  of  parties  of  inte- 
rest, a  better  system  for  raising  money  upon  the  nation, 
than  even  his  feudal  privilege  or  power  of  bestowing  or 


THE   LEGAL  POLICY    OF   THE   F.    STATES.  639 

revoking  the  right  of  representation  ;  because  these  parties 
freely  give  him  the  money  of  the  nation  for  a  good  share  of 
it.  The  poverty  of  the  English  nobility,  compared  with  its 
wealth  before  the  abolition  of  perpetuities,  has  exposed  the 
house  of  Lords  to  the  full  effect  of  the  modern  modes  for 
guiding  the  house  of  Commons.  Can  we  more  clearly  dis- 
cern Mr.  Adams's  idea  of  a  beautiful  balance  of  orders  in 
England,  either  in  the  original  feudal  parliamentary  con- 
stitution, or  in  its  existing  modification,  than  we  can  Dr. 
Henry's,  of  a  beautiful  English  constitution  somewhere  hid- 
den, in  a  short,  frivolous  and  dead  code  of  civil  laws,  called 
magna  charta  ?  If  this  is  a  just  picture  of  the  English  go- 
vernment, with  what  reason  has  Mr.  Adams  eulogized  it  ? 
With  what  reason  has  Publius  or  the  Federalist,  assigned 
to  it  the  rank  among  governments,  which  Homer  bears 
among  poets  ?  And  with  what  reason  are  politicians  intro- 
ducing parties  of  interest,  the  present  poison  of  that,  into 
our  form  of  government  2 

Let  us  count  the  cost  of  the  modern  English  system  to 
that  nation,  to  place  before  our  eyes  what  the  same  system 
will  cost  here.    It  draws  from  the  nation  into  its  unappeas- 
able avarice,  not  less  than  one  hundred  millions  of  pounds 
sterling  annually.     If  the  English  king  was  to  ask  the  na- 
tion for  one  third  of  its  lands  only,  the  dullest  man  would 
see  that  despotick  power  must  grow  out  of  such  excessive 
wealth  ;  but  an  annual  receipt  by  himself  and  the  parties  of 
interest  leagued  to  the  crown,  of  more  than  the  rent-roll  of 
the  whole,  has  hidden  the  despotism  in  an  aggravated  de- 
gree, under  the  various  covers  these  parties  of  interest  are 
bribed  to  throw  over  it.     England  and  Scotland  contain 
about  fifty  millions  of  acres  of  land.     It  is  probable  that  an 
average  rent  of  twenty  shillings  an  acre  would  exceed  its 
value,  and  certain,  that  double  this  rent  would  do  so.     Le- 
gislation, exercising  a  power  of  distributing  wealth,  has 
then  in  England   already  disposed  of  all  the  land  of  the 
kingdom,  or  its  income.     In  the  United  States,  the  same 
system  has  not  yet  ripened  into  equal  maturity.     Hut  such 

*2 


6*0  THE    LEGAL    1'OLICY.    OF    THE    B.    STATES. 

political  arithmetick  Avould  probably  in  a  state  of  peace, 
exhibit  an  expenditure  of  about  twenty  millions  annually, 
by  all  our  governments,  state  and  continental,  partly  for 
necessary  purposes,  and  partly  to  feed  parties  of  interest ; 
ami  a  gross  income  to  banks  of  about  live  millions  annually. 
This  total  exceeds  a  moiety  of  our  exports,  and  yet  the  sys- 
tem, discontented  with  this  proportion  of  them,  may  possibly 
propose  to  be  let  loose  upon  exports  more  directly.  Twenty 
five  millions  of  income  at  six  per  centum,  require  a  princi- 
pal o£  C  ur  hundred  and  fifty  millions.  Supposing  the  lands 
of  the  United  States  to  be  of  the  average  value  of  four  dol- 
lars an  acre,  this  income  covers  above  one  hundred  and 
twelve  millions  of  acres.  If  a  moiety  of  it  is  received  by 
funding  and  banking,  then  these  two  parties  of  interest, 
have  already  attached  upon  more  acres  of  land  here,  than 
the  whole  family  have  been  able  to  lay  hold  of  in  England. 
The  question  to  be  determined  is,  which  is  best  for  man- 
kind ;  a  government  fop  advancing  the  prosperity  of  an  en- 
tire nation,  or  one  for  selecting,  by  law,  sundry  minor  na- 
tions out  of  the  great  one,  and  extracting  as  much  money 
as  possible,  in  straight  and  crooked  ways,  under  honest  and 
fraudulent  pretexts,  from  the  entire  nation,  to  enrich  these 
legal  selections.  If  the  united  interest  of  tiie  king,  nobility, 
priesthood,  stockjobbers,  placemen,  chartered  companies, 
army  and  navy,  with  their  associates,  governs  the  British 
government,  then  the  national  association  (if  there  is  or  ever 
was  one)  has  no  government.  There  is  no  British  nation, 
except  a  combined  minority  of  interests,  distinct  from  the 
general  interest.  It  might  with  equal  propriety  be  assert- 
ed, that  the  servants  avid  drudges  who  enrich  the  East  India 
company,  were  members  of  that  company,  as  that  British 
people,  not  belonging  to  the  association  of  exclusive  inte- 
rests, but  serving  and  enriching  it,  were  members  of  the 
British  nation.  The  first  species  of  government  does  good 
to  a  multitude  of  people,  without  injuring  one  ;  the  second, 
does  good  to  a  few  people,  by  injuring  a  multitude.  The 
latter  is  the  principle  of  every  species  of  political  eppres- 


THE   LE«AL   POLICY    OF   THE    U.    STATES.  611 

sion.     Can  a  preference  be  given  to  a  principle  in  any  form, 
comprising  the  essence  of  political  lyranny  in  every  form  ? 

The  malignity  of  monarchy,  aristocracy  and  \  areby, 
rests  in  their  disposition  to  bestow  by  law,  benefits  upon1 
some,  at  the  expense  of  others.  It  will  be  curious  if  the 
human  intellect  should  be  able  to  see  this  evil,  however  dis- 
guised by  governments  thus  denominated,  and  also  be  blind 
to  it  undisguised,  when  practised  by  a  republican  govern- 
ment. When  posterity  shall  compare  Europe,  plundered 
by  the  tricks  of  popery,  with  nations  plundered  without  a 
juggle,  its  verdict  as  to  the  relative  state  of  knowledge  be- 
tween the  tenth  and  nineteenth  centuries,  may  be  anticipa- 
ted. The  more  pilgrims,  the  more  wealth  for  the  priests  of 
Loretto,  and  the  less  for  .he  htity.  The  more  paper  stock, 
the  more  wealth  for  stockjobbers,  and  the  less  for  those 
from  whom  it  is  drawn.  Such  will  be  the  evidence  upon 
which  it  must  decide. 

Doctor  Samuel  Johnson,  who  was  probably  the  best  in- 
formed tory  (if  despotick  principles  are  meant  by  that  name) 
who  ever  lived,  has  been  able  to  find  but  one  argument  in 
defence  of  converting  civil  government  into  a  pecuniary  ma- 
chine ;  and  those  who  mistake  names  for  principles,  or  sacri- 
fice principles  to  self  interest,  have  availed  themselv  s  of  it 
in  a  multitude  of  modes.  Pecuniary  extravagance  is  in  his 
opinion  no  evil,  but  a  good,  as  it  produces  a  brisk  circula- 
tion of  money.  A  sophism  which  can  only  acquire  credit 
by  proving,  that  the  situations  of  debtor  and  creditor,  paver 
and  receiver,  and  rich  and  poor,  are  equally  desirable.  Cart 
the  opinions  of  all  mankind  upon  these  contrasts  be  chan- 
ged by  an  author,  however  famous,  who  has  in  a  thousand 
other  parts  of  his  writings,  discovered,  that  he  himself  con- 
curred, unequivocally,  with  the  universe.  Nations  deluded 
by  it,  when  reduced  to  the  state  of  the  prodigal  son,  find 
prisons  and  poor  houses,  in  lieu  of  a  father's  roof  and  a  fat- 
ted kid.  If  the  argument  is  false  in  respect  to  the  party 
of  interest  exercising  a  government,  it  must  be  equally  so, 
respecting  every  other  party  of  interest.     Kings,  hierar 


642  THE    LEGAL  POLICY   VE   THE    U.   STATES. 

ehies,  noble  orders,  stockjobbers  and  chartered  companies 
enriched  by  law,  must  either  be  all  blessings  or  all  curses, 
as  the  circulation  of  money  is  increased  in  all  these  cases, 
first  by  taking  it  from  the  multitude,  secondly  by  giving  it 
to  the  few,  and  thirdly  by  its  employment  in  the  purchase 
of  property  and  the  enjoyments  of  luxury. 

In  tbe  same  ingenious  mode  a  brisk  circulation  of  power 
is  also  produced.  Accumulated  in  a  few  hands,  like  money, 
it  breaks  down  confinement,  spreads  itself  far  and  wide,  and 
compensates  majorities  as  they  are  compensated  for  legal 
accumulations  of  money.  Doctor  Johnson  has  neglected  to 
tell  us,  that  mankind  cannot  have  one  of  these  blessings 
without  the  other  ;  that  money  attracts  power,  and  power, 
money  j  and  that  by  accumulating  either  for  the  sake  of  a 
brisk  circulation,  you  accumulate  and  circulate  both.  The 
accumulation  of  power  has  used  two  arguments  in  its  de- 
fence, infinitely  more  plausible  than  any  urged  by  legal 
projects  for  accumulating  money  ;  namely,  the  supposed 
benefits  of  a  uniformity  of  religion,  and  the  difficulty  of 
governing  an  extensive  territory.  Europe,  however,  re- 
nounced a  religious  monarch,  and  the  United  States  a  civil 
one  ;  the  latter  upon  principles  incapable  of  being  disse-r 
vered  from  those  which  forbid  legal  accumulations  of 
wealth.  Knowledge  and  will  being  considered  as  the  go- 
verning agents,  it  seemed  unnatural  to  contract  the  agency, 
as  the  territory  to  be  governed  became  more  extensive. 
The  sphere  of  one  man's  knowledge  and  will,  is  infinitely 
less  than  that  of  several  millions  of  men.  Each  planet, 
however  brilliant,  is  unable  to  exceed  its  limited  orbit  in  the 
-firmament.  The  knowledge  and  will  of  a  monarch  is  limi- 
ted by  this  moral  geometry,  like  those  of  other  men.  When 
the  territory  bursts  beyond  his  orbit,  monarchy  ceases,  and 
some  anomalous  government  ensues  ;  oligarchical,  military, 
deputy-royal,  tumultuous,  or  infinitely  variegated  by  cir- 
cumstances. Hence  neither  the  virtues  nor  vices  of  a 
monarch  are  felt  at  a  distance  from  his  person.  Miserable 
provinces  under  a  good,  and  flourishing  under  a  bad  mo- 


THE    LEGAL  POLICY    OF   THE    V.    STATES.  613' 

narch,  are  common  spectacles  ;  because  monarchy  ends  at 
the  end  of  the  monarch's  sphere,  and  some  political  anom- 
aly commences.  Instead  of  monarchical  or  aristoerutical 
accumulations  of  power,  to  give  it  a  brisker  circulation, 
the  United  States  have  rested  their  policy  upon  the  two  go- 
verning agents,  knowledge  and  will,  of  a  capacity  or  moral 
sphere  commensurate  to  their  territory,  and  naturally  expan- 
ding with  it.  The  capacity  of  this  policy  beyond  monarchy, 
for  the  government  of  an  extensive  territory,  is  proved  by 
the  equality  of  liberty  or  of  government,  between  those  who 
reside  near  to  the  capital,  and  those  far  from  it  ;  an  effect 
of  infinite  value,  which  monarchy  cannot  produce.  Near  the 
monarch  and  at  a  distance  from  him,  different  governments 
are  always  found.  Monarchy  only  succeeds  in  cases  where 
it  is  not  unnaturally  loaded  j  as  those  of  armies,  garrisons, 
savage  tribes  and  private  families  ;  and  the  same  cases  are 
found  to  be  below  the  genius  of  a  policy  calculated  for  a 
wider  sphere.  With  such  experience,  and  without  consi- 
dering that  the  mind  of  a  nation  is  spacious,  and  that  of  a 
monarch  narrow,  the  maxim,  "  ne  sutor  ultra  erepidam," 
is  wonderfully  violated  by  the  dislocated  notions,  that  mon- 
archy is  fitted  for  spacious,  and  republican  forms  of  govern- 
ment, for  narrow  spheres. 

A  power  of  changing  oligarchs,  is  the  most  perfect 
capable  of  being  exercised  by  the  monarch  of  an  extensive 
territory ;  but  this  change  of  oligarchs  is  far  from  proving 
that  no  oligarchy  exists,  and  therefore  unless  oligarchy  is 
monarchy,  the  latter  cannot  cover  a  large  territory. 

As  election  cannot  extend  the  knowledge  and  will  of  one 
man  contrary  to  the  laws  of  moral  geometry,  the  execution 
of  the  boundless  power  of  appointment  bestowed  upon  the 
president,  must  depend  upon  the  knowledge  and  will  of  the 
very  worst  kind  of  oligarchs  ;  such  as  are  irresponsible  and 
unknown.  The  moral  incapacity  of  one  man  to  legislate, 
knowingly,  for  a  great  nation,  is  the  same  in  respect  to  offi 
cial  appointments.  Accumulated  power  to  be  circulated  by 
one  man,  bears  a  close  resemblance  to  accumulated  wealth 


6-1*  THE   LEGAL   POLICY   OF   THE   V.    STATES. 

to  be  circulated  by  a  few  men.  If  merit  could  arrange  its 
own  claims  to  office,  with  a  degree  of  justice  infinitely  ex- 
ceeding the  power  of  one  man,  that  imperfect  mode  of  ap- 
pointment would  never  have  been  admitted.  Industry, 
talents  and  labour  can  arrange  their  rights  to  property,  with 
infinitely  more  justice,  than  any  species  of  legislative  dis- 
tribution can  effect.  Election  infuses  into  Ihc  legislature  a 
quantity  of  publick  spirit,  beyond  what  it  infuses  into  a  pre- 
sident, of  numerical  proportion  ;  but  this  spirit  commensu- 
rate to  our  territory,  is  itself  altered  and  narrowed  by  re- 
placing it  with  the  avarice  and  ambition  of  individuals, 
infused  by  a  power  of  distributing  wealth  by  law.  By  su- 
peradding this  power  to  the  injurious  influence  of  executive 
patronage,  self  interest  i9  awakened  as  far  as  it  can  be 
awakened  by  any  political  means,  and  totally  expels  from 
legislatures  the  publick  spirit  infused  by  election,  because 
representatives  able  to  distribute  wealth,  never  forget  them- 
selves. Oligarchy  and  aristocracy  are  the  natural  fruits  of 
this  legislative  patronage,  far  richer  than  the  president's, 
and  corrupting  whole  corporations  and  all  legislative  per- 
sonages. And  if  our  policy  meditated  an  elective  aristocracy 
still  less  than  an  elective  monarchy,  any  mode  of  introdu- 
cing one,  must  be  a  usurpation.  As  money  and  power  accu- 
mulate together,  laws  for  introducing  one  will  produce  both. 
In  empowering  governments  to  control  the  passions 
which  stimulate  individuals  to  injure  each  ether,  nations 
have  unwarily  by  unnecessary  powers,  stimulated  gover- 
nours  to  become  themselves  the  wrong  doers.  The  whole 
preference  of  the  policy  of  the  United  States,  consists  in  an 
avoidance  of  this  errour  ;  by  adopting  the  errour.  this  pre- 
ference will  be  lost  ;  the  old  system  of  distributing  property 
by  law,  is  exactly  that  unnecessary  power,  by  which  most 
or  all  the  governments  tried  by  men,  have  been  stimulated  to 
oppress  the  people,  upon  the  merit  of  preventing  the  peo- 
ple from  oppressing  each  other.  Hence  has  arisen  the 
difficulty  of  deciding  between  republican  and  monarchical 
forms  of  government.     When  both  exercise  the  tyrannical 


THE    LEGAL   POLICY   OE   T1IE   IT.    STATES.  fiiS 

power  of  distributing  wealth,  the  latter  must  be  least  op- 
pressive, because  it  is  less  expensive  to  gratify  the  rapa- 
cion  sb  •  of  one  than  of  many.  Accordingly,  spurious  re- 
pubiicks,  or  those  exercising  this  power,  universally  afflict 
the  people  with  the  heaviest  taxes.  Life  is  not  without  its 
evils,  though  spent  in  the  lap  of  a  genuine  republican  go- 
vernment ;  but  morbid  ideas  of  imaginary  perfection,  or 
the  disposition  of  ignorance  to  encounter  unknown  evils  to 
escape  from  present  inconveniences,  too  often  draw  us  out 
of  limited  happiness  into  unlimited  tyranny.  If  we  should 
exchange  a  bed  of  down  for  a  bed  of  thorns,  because  we 
sometimes  rested  badly,  we  should  resemble  the  nations 
who  have  preferred  a  distribution  of  property  by  the  will 
of  a  government,  to  its  genuine  republican  distribution  by 
industry,  talents  and  labour. 

It  was  an  early  discovery,  that  conscience  was  an  insuf- 
ficient security  for  justice  between  man  and  man  ,•  but  the 
insufficiency  of  the  same  security  for  justice  on  the  part  of 
governments  to  nations,  was  never  distinctly  perceived  be- 
fore the  American  revolution.  Out  of  the  complete  disco- 
very then  made,  arose  our  political  laws  for  assisting  the 
consciences  of  governours  ;  and  if  they  can  emancipate 
themselves  from  restraint  by  civil  laws,  sowing  cancerous 
seeds  in  the  body  politick,  the  discovery  will  probably  be 
lost  forever. 

If  separate  legal  orders  or  interests  are  the  causes  of 
social  oppression,  free  government  ensues  of  course,  by 
avoiding  them.  If  a  combination  among  the  legal  distribu- 
tees of  wealth,  generates  the  kind  of  government  existing 
in  England,  then  the  same  hind  of  government  naturally 
ensues  here  from  the  system  of  distributing  wealth  by  law. 
Mr.  Adams's  book  contains  an  extensive  collection  of  the 
causes  which  have  produced  tyranny.  These  are  unexcep- 
tionably,  the  separate  interests  of  legal  privileges  or  emolu- 
ments. As  to  the  evil  we  agree  ;  in  the  remedy  we  differ'. 
Introduce,  says  he,  the  cause,  to  prevent  the  effect  ;  expel 
it,  say  I,  for  the  same.  end. 


6k6  THE    LEGAI.  POLICY    OF   THE    V.    STATES, 

There  is  no  difficulty  in  deciding  upon  the  proper  objects 
of  this  expulsion.     The  polarity  oi'  the  moral  is  as  distinct 
as  that  of  the  material   world.     A  politician  as  certainly 
knows  the  point  of  the  moral  compass  to  which  the  system 
of  distributing  wealth  by  law,  inclines,  as  the  mariner, 
whether  his  needle   points  toward  the  north  or  the  south. 
The  polarity  of  the  re-eligibility  of  the  president  has  been 
seen  in  the  re-eligibility  of  consuls  Augustus  and  Bonaparte  ; 
and  (hat  of  individual  patronage  and  legal  parties  of  inte- 
rest, is  before  our  eyes  in  the  present  state  of  Europe. 
The  extent  and  situation  of  the  territory  of  the  United 
States,  enable  them  to  resist  this  system  more  successfully 
than  any  other  nation.     Extent  keeps  at  a  distance  from 
the  bulk  of  the  nation  the  calamities  of  war,  and  enables  it 
to  reflect.    Cut  up  into  sections,  not  a  single  individual  might, 
escape  tbem.     Small  nations  are  continually  exposed  to  the 
artifice  of  legal  wars,  from  the  facilities  for  them  furnished 
by  impinging  territories  ;  and  are  debarred  from  the  use  of 
reason  to  detect  the  fraud,  by  the  universality   of  the  dis- 
traction they  produce.     But  a  nation  possessed  of  extensive 
territory,  happily  removed   from  real  causes  of  collision 
with  other  nations,  like  the  United  States,  is  peculiarly  fa- 
voured  by  providence  for  the  detection  of  this  artifice  (so 
generally  practised  by  ins  and  outs,  and  other  parties  of 
interest)  both  as  the  pretext  for  it  must  be  shallower,  and  the 
national  capacity  for  its  detection  by  reflection  and  reason, 
greater.     The  pledge  for  a  free  government  arising  from 
the  extent  and  situation  of  our  territory  is  so  transcendant, 
that  the  enemies  of  a  republican  form  of  government  craf- 
tily inculcate  an  opinion,  that  this  form  is  not  adapted  for 
an  extensive  territory  ;  for  the  purpose  of  producing  terri- 
torial  divisions   to   discredit   republican  systems,   by  the 
calamities  to  which  impinging  states  are  exposed  from  the 
artifices  of  parties  of  interest  ;  or  with  a  design  of  trans- 
ferring to  their  rival,  monarchy,  the  advantage  of  extensive 
territory,  so  important  that  it  is  at  least  doubtful  whether  a 
greater  portion  of  human  happiness  would  not  result  from 


THE   1EGAE  POLICY   OE   THE   V.   STATES.  6*7 

it,  though  united  to  a  bad  form  of  government,  than  from 
the  same  region  cut  up  into  narrow  territories,  governed  by 
the  best  forms. 

The  United  States,  under  a  monarchy,  can  only  retain 
the  advantage  of  extensive  territory,  by  an  oligarchy  com- 
posed of  deputy-kings,  bashaws,  satraps  or  mandarins.  As 
a  republick,  the  advantage  can  only  be  retained,  by  rejec- 
ting the  aristocratical  system  of  feeding  avarice  by  law  ; 
because  this  system,  being  more  oppressive  than  monarchy, 
would  be  exchanged  for  it.  If  litis  erronr  is  rejected,  in- 
stead of  paying  the  old  price  for  extensive  territory,  no 
inequalities  of  liberty  or  of  government  can  exist,  and  the 
territorial  capacity  of  onr  policy,  will  be  adequate  to  the 
liberty  and  happiness  of  the  whole,  instead  of  being  devoted 
to  the  avarice  and  ambition  of  parties  of  interest.  Monar- 
chy ties  extensive  territories  together  by  deputy-kings, 
fortresses  and  armies.  A  numerical  but  spurious  republick, 
uses  for  this  purpose  both  armies  and  laws  for  distributing 
property,  but  soon  becomes  the  victim  of  the  first,  because 
the  hatred  purchased  by  the  second  deprives  it  of  national 
assistance.  But  a  genuine  republick,  unites  the  most  ex- 
tensive territories  by  justice,  and  is  defended  by  the  national 
affection.  It  travels  over  space  without  bloodshed,  advan- 
ces without  conquest,  and  is  only  arrested  by  the  ocean. 
How  much  more  sublime  is  the  idea  of  forming  a  great  na- 
tion, by  a  chain  of  republicks,  subordinate  to  publick  good, 
than  by  a  chain  of  satraps  subordinate  to  imperial  will,  or 
of  chartered  companies  subordinate  to  selfish  avarice  ? 
Such  a  system  stands  upon  national  interest.  No  people, 
except  ourselves,  have  seriously  attempted  to  make  this  in- 
terest the  basis  of  civil  government.  Sometimes  it  is  lost 
in  the  pomp  of  titles,  at  others  under  the  cowl  of  supersti- 
tion ;  sometimes  it  is  drowned  in  the  din  of  arms,  at  others 
counterfeited  in  the  garb  of  patriotism  :  sometimes  it  is 
sacrificed  for  the  bribes  of  patronage,  at  others  stupified  by 
the  promises  of  stock  ;  but  under  our  policy  it  can  never 
become  completely  a  felo  de  se,  except  it  shall  submit  to 
the  legislative  usurpation  of  distributing  wealth  and  poverty. 

H3 


848  THE   LEGAL    POLICY   OF   THE    U.    STATES, 

A  free  government,  like  the  trinity,  eonsists  of  integral 
qualities.  General  legislation  or  legal  impartiality  is  one, 
Legal  dispensations  of  wealth,  heing  a  contrary  quality, 
cannot  be  also  a  quality  of  a  free  government.  On  the 
contrary  they  enable  governours  to  create  factions,  feed 
avarice,  and  usurp  arbitrary  power.  Perhaps  the  final  suc- 
cess of  the  revolutionary  war,  was  produced  by  the  depre- 
ciation of  the  paper  money,  and  the  other  causes,  by  which 
government  was  prevented  from  creating  parties  of  interest 
by  pecuniary  laws  ;  an  impotence  which  guaranteed  the 
patriotism,  even  of  both  ins  and  outs.  Election,  though  ano- 
ther integer  of  a  free  government,  is  so  far  from  being  a 
compensation  for  the  errour  of  distributing  property  by 
law,  that  it  is  itself  corrupted  by  it.  In  England  it  is  made 
the  instrument  of  the  will,  the  advocate  of  the  follies,  and 
the  shelter  for  the  crimes  of  an  officer,  who  is  thus  consti- 
tuted a  despot,  capable  only  of  being  displaced  by  another 
despot.  An  alliance  between  election  and  a  legislative  pow- 
er to  divide  property,  constitutes  the  elysium  of  statesmen 
and  the  purgatory  of  labour  and  industry.  There  is  no 
other  mode  by  which  one  party  can  be  induced  to  pay,  and 
the  other  can  acquire  as  much  money.  Hence  statesmen 
will  for  ever  admire  and  recommend  the  English  form  of 
government.  But  what  answer  could  they  give  to  the  fol- 
lowing simple  address  :  "  You  tell  us  that  we  shall  bewon- 
"  derfully  benefitted  by  legal  transfers  of  our  income  to  the 
"  creatures  of  law,  in  a  multitude  of  modes.  As  your  ar- 
"  guments  perplex  us,  be  pleased  for  one  year  to  transfer 
"  the  income  of  these  creatures  of  law  to  the  children  of 
'<  industry,  that  we  may  feel  the  truth." 

The  question,  "  whether  a  legal  power  can  be  eonstitu- 
f*  tionally  used  to  impair  or  destroy  the  principles  of  our 
"  policy,"  has  been  already  brought  before  the  publick,  in 
the  efforts  of  the  general  government  to  distribute  gain  or 
loss  between  the  states  by  protecting  duties,  banking  char- 
ters, making  canals  and  roads,  and  other  legal  benefactions. 
The  children  of  a  father  who  lives  for  ever,  but  annually 


THE   1E6AL  POLICY   OF   THE    U.    STATES.  649 

flakes  a  division  of  their  property  according  to  his  own 
pleasure,  are  his  slaves.  If  the  general  government  gains  a 
similar  position  in  relation  to  the  people  and  to  the  states, 
the  principles  of  a  division  of  power,  of  its  responsibility, 
of  protecting  property,  of  its  division  by  industry,  of  state 
confederation,  and  indeed  all  other  principles  constituting  a 
genuine  republick,  are  abolished. 

The  best  restraint  upon  legislative  acts  tending  to  the 
destruction  of  a  true  republican  government,  consists  of  the 
mutual  right  of  the  general  and  state  governments  to  ex- 
amine and  controvert  before  the  publick  each  others,  pro- 
ceedings. This  right  is  stated  in  certain  resolutions  which 
passed  the  legislature  of  Kentucky  on  the  8th  of  November, 
1798,  in  the  following  words,  «  .Resolved,  that  the  several 
"  States  comprising  the  United  States  of  America,  are  not 
«  united  on  the  principle  of  unlimited  submission  to  their 
"  general  government :  but  that  by  compact  under  the  style 
"  and  title  of  a  constitution  for  the  United  States  and  of 
»  amendments  thereto,  they  constituted  a  general  govern* 
"  ment  for  special  purposes,  delegated  to  that  government 
"  certain  definite  powers,  reserving  each  State  to  itself,  the 
"  residuary  mass  of  right  to  their  own  self  government ; 
«  and  that  whensoever  the  general  government  assumes  un- 
«  delegated  powers,  its  acts  are  unauthoritative,  void,  and 
««  of  no  force.  That  to  this  compact  each  state  acceded  as 
"  a  State,  and  is  an  integral  party,  its  co-states  forming  as 
««  to  itself,  the  other  party.  That  ihe  government  created 
"  hy  this  compact  was  not  made  the  exclusive  or  final  judge 
"  of  the  extent  of  the  powers  delegated  to  itself,  since  that 
«  would  have  made  its  discretion,  and  not  the  constitution, 
<(  the  measure  of  its  powers  ;  but  that,  as  in  all  other  eases 
(i  of  compaet  among  parties  having  no  common  judge,  each 
((  party  has  an  equal  right  to  judge  for  itself  as  well  of 
"  infractions,  as  of  the  mode  and  measure  of  redress. 

The  style  of  these  resolutions  throughout  ascertains 
the  author*.    Both  the  parties  of  the  United  States  have 

*  Mr.  JeffcvgOjf. 


650  THE    LEGAL   POLICY    OF   THE    V.    STATES. 

asserted  and  denied  this  doctrine,  as  they  happened  to  he  in 
or  out  of  power  ;  for  or  against  the  existing  administration. 
But  I  am  unable  to  diseern  any  better  resource  for  the  pre- 
servation of  civil  liberty,  than   it  affords.     The  state  go- 
vernments  are   wise,   watchful   and   temperate   sentinels, 
checks  upon  each  other  as  well  as  upon  the  general  govern- 
ment, not  dictators  armed  with  force,  but  advocates  armed 
with  reason.     Vindications  of  this   salutary  doctrine  are 
necessary  to  save  it  from  the  usurpations  of  precedents,  of 
which  parties  will  even  avail  themselves  in  power,  although 
that  power  was  obtained  by  opposing  them.     But  this  mode 
of  extending  the  powers  of  the  general  government,  is  in- 
consistent with  the  principles  of  our  policy.   It  is  restricted 
by  limitations  imposed  by  a  superior  authority,  whieh  it 
can  neither  diminish  nor  destroy  by  its  own  acts.     It  is  not 
a  complete  government,  but  associated  with  the  state  go- 
vernments by  the  same  superior  authority,  which  has  allot- 
ted specified  powers  to  each  party,  and  neither  can  increase 
these  powers  by  its  own  precedents,  nor  even  by  its  positive 
laws,  without   rebellion   against   this  authority.     If  both 
should  concur  in  extending  or  diminishing  the  powers  of 
one  or  either,  by  the  plainest  precedents  or  laws,  it  would 
still  be  the  same  species  of  rebellion,  and  unconstitutional. 
Prescription  and  precedent,  founded  upon  the  acts  of  an 
entire  government,  are  extremely  different  from  those  foun- 
ded upon  the  acts  of  a  section  of  a  government,  because 
the  first  is  a  complete  political  representative  of  the  nation 
and  the  second  not  so.     Their  authority  is  also  widely  dif- 
ferent in  limited  and  unlimited  governments  ;  if  the  former 
could  extend  their  powers  by  such  agents,  they  could  make 
themselves  unlimited.      The  legislation  of  congress,  con- 
trary to  the  principles  of  the  general  constitution,  is  in 
every  view  similar  to  the  legislation  of  the  senate  without 
the  concurrence  of  the  house  of  representatives,  and  equally 
entitled  to  the  authority  claimed  by  precedents  under  abso- 
lute governments  ;  an  authority  founded  only  in  unlimited 
power. 


rTHE   LEGAL  POLICY   OF  THE   TJ.    STATES.  651 

The  danger  of  extending  by  legislation  powers  given  to 
powers  not  given  or  prohibited,  is  also  exposed  to  the  pub- 
liek  view  by  the  same  resolutions,  as  follows  :  »«  That  the 
«  eonstruetion  applied  by  the  general  government  (as  is 
¥  evident  by  sundry  of  their  proceedings)  to  those  parts  of 
i(  the  constitution  of  the  United  States,  which  delegate  to 
"  congress  a  power  to  lay  and  collect  taxes,  duties,  imposts, 
"  and  excises,  to  pay  the  debts  and  provide  for  the  common 
«  defence  and  general  welfare  of  the  United  States,  and  to 
«<  make  all  laws  which  shall  be  necessary  and  proper  for 
"  carrying  into  execution  the  powers  vested  by  the  eonsti- 
"  tution  in  the  government  of  the  United  States,  or  any 
»'*  department  thereof,  goes  to  the  destruction  of  all  limits 
"  prescribed  to  their  power  by  the  constitution.  That  words 
"  meant  by  that  instrument  to  be  subsidiary  only  to  the  ex- 
**  ecution  of  the  limited  powers,  ought  not  to  be  so  construed 
"  as  themselves  to  give  unlimited  powers,  nor  a  part  to  be 
«  taken  so  as  to  destroy  the  whole  residue  of  the  instrument. 
««  That  the  proceedings  of  the  general  government,  under 
«  colour  of  these  articles,  will  be  a  fit  and  necessary  subject 
«  for  revisal  and  correction  at  a  time  of  greater  tranquillity, 
"  while  those  specified  in  the  preceding  resolutions  call  for 
«  immediate  redress."  It  is  to  be  lamented  that  these  pro- 
ceedings of  the  general  government,  going  ii  to  the  destruc- 
tion of  all  limits  prescribed  to  their  power  by  the  constitu- 
tion," had  not  been  specified  by  the  same  able  pen.  That 
they  could  only  be  of  a  legislative  nature  is  plain  ;  but  whe- 
ther laws  for  subjecting  agriculture,  manufactures,  talents 
and  labour  to  legal  capitalists  ;  for  rallying  chartered  and 
stock  feudatories  around  the  general  government  ;  or  for 
destroying  commerce  under  the  power  of  regulating  it, 
were  meant,  is  uncertain.  The  evil  however  has  arisen 
from  a  confidence  inspired  by  the  numerical  analysis.  By 
deluding  us  to  expect  from  men,  that  which  principles  alone 
can  yield,  namely,  a  free  government,  we  are  induced  to 
neglect  the  application  of  principles  to  laws.  A  numerical 
classification   of  men,  triple,  decimal,  or  centuriate,  as 


$52  THE   LEGAL  POLICY   ©E  THE    V.   STATES. 

imperfectly  ascertains  their  moral  qualities,  as  one  draw* 
from  size,  meat,  bone  or  hair.  An  analysis  of  sheep, 
founded  in  moral  qualities,  is  equivalent  to  the  numerical 
analysis  of  governments  ;  by  the  first,  we  can  never  disco- 
ver whether  we  have  good  sheep  ;  nor  by  the  second,  whe- 
ther we  have  a  good  government  or  good  laws.  Had  each 
quarter  of  the  globe  adopted  a  different  member  of  the  nu- 
merical analysis,  supposing  it  to  comprise  monarchy,  aris- 
tocracy, democracy,  and  a  mixture  of  the  three,  the  whole 
World  might  still  have  suffered  oppression.  Crimes  perpe- 
trated individually  or  collectively  are  still  crimes  j  but  na- 
tions led  astray  by  the  numerical  analysis,  having  selected 
one  of  its  members  for  their  form  of  government,  conclude 
that  they  have  attained  to  the  utmost  degree  of  political 
perfection,  and  cannot  do  better  than  to  bear  its  crimes  as 
they  do  a  drought.  Ilenee  a  disciple  of  the  most  repub- 
lican member  of  the  numerical  analysis,  is  induced  to  bear, 
defend  and  applaud  the  crimes  of  his  selected  form,  an  ab- 
horrence of  which  when  committed  by  other  forms,  caused 
his  preference  ;  and  hence  political  parties  are  equally 
strenuous  for  the  justification  or  correction  of  the  same 
abuses,  as  they  happen  to  preeecd  from  their  own  or  the 
leaders  of  their  adversary.  Both  evils  arise  from  tfte  want 
of  a  worthy  object  on  which  to  bestow  our  zeal.  Having 
been  taught  to  believe,  that  the  numerical  analysis  presents 
us  with  a  complete  political  pantheon,  we  are  compelled  to 
pay  our  adoration  to  some  of  its  deities.  Yet  we  never  ex- 
tend the  blindness  we  attach  to  the  object  of  our  own  wor- 
ship, to  the  objects  selected  by  others  to  receive  a  similar 
offering.  A  republick  sees  very  plainly  oppressions  com- 
mitted by  monarchy  and  aristocracy,  and  these  two,  those 
committed  by  republicks;  but  whilst  each  sees  the  vices  of 
the  other  members  of  the  numerical  analysis,  the  blindness 
occasioned  by  the  want  of  a  moral  analysis,  tolerates  the 
same  vices  in  itself.  If  we  would  consider,  that  we  discover 
the  vices  of  the  rejected  forms  of  government,  by  bringing 
them  to  trial,  without  favour  or  affection,  before  a  jury  of 


THE   XSGAL  POLICY   OF   TKE    V.    STATES;  653 

good  moral  principles,  we  should  instantly  discern  that  the 
same  tribunal  would  detect  the  vices  of  the  government  we 
have  selected  ;  and  that  an  analysis,  similar  to  that  formed 
in  our  own  minds  to  try  supposed  culprits,  might  be  per- 
fected into  a  complete  capacity  for  rooting  up  as  they  are 
planted,  (hose  legal  scions,  which  otherwise  never  fail  to 
grew,  until  they  draw  to  themselves  all  the  nourishment  of 
a  free  government. 

It  is  necessary  to  illustrate  these  observations  by  the  aid 
of  a  familiar  fact.  The  two  parties,  called  republican  and 
federal,  have  hitherto  undergone  but  cne  revolution.  Yet 
each  when  in  power,  preached  Filmer's  old  doctrine  of  pas- 
sive obedience  in  a  new  form,  with  considerable  success ;  and 
each  out  of  power  strenuously  controverted  it.  The  party 
in  power  asserted,  that  however  absurd  or  slavish  this  doc- 
trine was  under  other  forms  of  the  numerical  analysis,  the 
people  under  ours  were  identified  (the  new  term  to  cog  this 
old  doctrine  upon  the  United  States)  with  the  government  ; 
and  that  therefore  an  opposition  to  the  government,  was  an 
opposition  to  the  nation  itself.  The  extraction  of  passive 
obedience,  of  all  political  principles  the  most  slavish,  out 
of  the  best  member  of  the  numerical  analysis,  as  the  ex- 
tractors themselves  confess,  furnishes  a  conclusive  proof  of 
its  insufficiency  for  teaching  us  how  to  preserve  a  free  form 
of  government.  This  identifying  doctrine  is  exactly  analo- 
gous to  Agrippa's  fraudulent  apologue,  for  constituting  a 
government  the  intellectual  dictating  head  of  the  whole 
body  politick,  and  subjecting  the  members  to  a  passive  obe- 
dience.  It  puts  an  end  to  the  idea  of  a  responsibility  of  the 
government  to  the  nation  ;  sameness  cannot  be  responsible 
to  sameness.  It  renders  useless  or  impracticable  the  free- 
dom of  speech  and  of  the  press.  It  converts  the  represen- 
tative into  the  principal.  It  destroys  the  division  of  power 
between  the  people  and  the  government,  as  being  themselves 
indivisible.  And  in  short  it  is  inconsistent  with  every  prin- 
ciple by  which  politicians  and  philosophers  have  hitherto 
defined  a  free  [government.     This  ingenious  doctrine  of 


654  Tire   LEGAL  POLICY   OF   THE   17.    STATES. 

identity  for  justifying  tyranny  in  fact,  because  a  government 
is  free  in  form  ;  and  for  defeating  the  responsibility  of  the 
government  to  the  people,  because  the  constitution  was  cal- 
culated to  produce  it ;  asserted  and  denied  by  both  our 
parties,  demonstrates  that  opinions  fluctuate  with  power. 
From  this  undeniable  fact  it  follows,  that  a  nation  and  its 
governours  can  never  entertain  the  same  opinions.  Nations 
will  for  ever  wish  to  be  free,  and  governours  to  be  despotick. 
Future  parties  will  not  be  less  infected  by  power  than  for- 
mer, and  former  have  successively  advanced  the  doctrine 
refuted  by  Sidney. 

The  parties  called  whig  and  tory  in  England,  the  first 
the  diseiple  of  Filmer  and  the  other  of  Sidney,  have  con- 
clusively settled  the  fact  ;  and  out  of  the  demonstration 
have  arisen  the  efforts  of  the  United  States  for  securing  the 
general  interest  of  the  nation,  against  the  ambition  and 
avarice  of  the  party  of  interest  administering  the  govern- 
ment, by  a  string  of  moral  precautions,  endeavoured  to  be 
explained  in  this  essay  ;  such  as  responsibility,  division  of 
power,  a  sound  militia,  and  a  distribution  of  property  by 
industry  and  talents  and  not  by  law.  And  if  a  nation 
should  sacrifice  to  any  governours  whatsoever,  these  moral 
precautions  for  the  preservation  of  its  liberty,  it  is  as  cer- 
tainly lost,  as  are  the  previous  principles  of  every  party  by 
the  acquisition  of  power. 

The  danger  of  parties  to  free  governments,  arises  from 
the  impossibility  of  controlling  them  by  the  restraints  of 
political  law  ;  because  being  constituted  upon  selfish  views, 
like  a  set  of  mountabanks  combined  to  administer  drugs  for 
the  sake  of  getting  fees,  the  nature  of  the  poison  cannot  be 
foreseen,  nor  an  effectual  antidote  anticipated.  No  division 
of  power,  no  responsibility,  no  periodical  change  of  leaders, 
no  limitation  of  "  thus  tar  you  may  go  and  no  farther," 
stops  their  career.  In  every  form,  therefore,  they  consti- 
tute the  same  avaricious  or  furious  species  of  aristocracy, 
which  would  be  produeed  by  a  form  of  government  in  the 
hands  of  a  self  constituted  and  uncontrolled  body  of  men. 


THE    LEGAL  POLICY    OF   THE    U.    STATES.  653 

They  are  universally  disposed  to  persecute,  plunder,  op- 
press and  kill,  like  all  governments  unsuhjected  to  political 
law ;  and  under  the  title  of  patriots,  are,  like  fanatieks  under 
the  title  of  saints,  ready  to  perpetrate  any  eiimes  to  gratify 
their  interest  or  prejudices.  By  melting  down  the  fetters 
of  moral  and  republican  principles  in  party  confidence,  we 
abolish  the  only  known  remedy  against  the  evil  qualities  of 
human  nature,  abandon  our  experiment  of  political  law 
founded  in  these  principles,  and  rest  for  security  on  igno- 
rant mobs,  guided  by  a  few  designing  leaders,  or  on  cunning 
combinations,  guided  by  avarice  and  ambition.  The  Inde- 
pendents of  England  and  the  Jacobins  of  France,  even 
abhorred  the  despotisms  they  introduced,  but  the  results 
were  unavoidable,  as  the  natural  effect  of  the  unlimited 
confidence  these  parties  acquired.  This  confidence  produ- 
ces an  unlimited  government,  or  one  unrestricted  by  the 
ligatures  of  a  moral  analysis  ;  and  such  a  government  is 
despotick.  Under  a  despotism  of  any  form,  and  in  the  form 
of  a  party  of  interest  more  than  in  any  other,  bodily  safety, 
the  safety  of  property,  and  the  freedom  of  the  mind,  cease. 
Malice,  envy  and  calumny  instantly  become  the  prime  mini- 
sters of  the  furious  and  tottering  tyrant.  Knowing  his 
doom  from  the  fate  of  his  predecessors,  he  hastens  to  glut 
his  appetite  for  mischief  before  he  dies.  No  numerical 
checks  or  balances  can  reach  this  dreadful  party  tyranny. 
It  is  even  able  to  suspend  or  destroy  those  solemnly  establish- 
ed  by  nations,  and  to  make  the  people  themselves  the  authors 
of  their  own  ruin.  A  political  analysis  alone,  composed  of 
moral  principles,  can  reach  and  tame  a  beast,  from  which 
men  flee  to  monarchy,  because  it  lays  waste  and  devours 
their  rights  with  a  thousand  hands  and  a  thousand  mouths. 
This  can  test  party  legislation  and  actions.  But  freed 
from  the  rigid  control  of  good  moral  principles,  the  profes- 
sions of  parties  are  like  the  flattering  sunshine  of  the  morn- 
ing, and  their  acts  like  an  evening  deluge.  In  legislation 
contrary  to  genuine  republican  principles,  sustained  by  a 
dominant  party  zeal,  lies.,  in  my  view,  the  greatest  dangei 

84 


656  TJ1K    JLEGAL    POLICY    0¥    THE    ¥.    STATES. 

to  (lie  free  form  of  government  of  the  United  States  ;  nor 
can  I  conceive  any  augmentation  of  the  danger,  equivalent 
to  an  exercise  of  the  power  of  distributing  wealth  by  law. 
H\  therefore,  these  essays  should  only  prove,  that  it  is  the 
office  of  a  republican  government  to  protect,  hut  not  to  be- 
stow property,  they  may  protract  the  period  during  which 
our  government  may  remain  the  servant  of  the  nation. 
For  as  worldly  omnipotence  is  annexed  to  a  power  of 
dealing  out  wealth  and  poverty,  nations  are  universally 
retributed  Tor  the  folly  and  impiety  of  submitting  to  this 
species  of  human  providence,  by  a  divine  decree,  that  it 
shall  unexceptionable  convert  these  servants  into  masters 
j  tyrants. 


THE  EMK 


ERBJLTA. 


j'Abl, 

XTUTE 

EXPUNBE 

BEAD 

89 

- 

24 

f        these 

there 

181 

- 

• 

-    37    - 

-    principles       -        • 

principes 

204 

- 

36 

formed      - 

found 

245 

- 

m 

.    37    - 

•       -    ever               - 

even 

270 

- 

34 

unexceptionable 

exceptionable 

280 

- 

- 

-    35    - 

-    its 

■     is 

317 

* 

22 

»        his            -          » 

its 

324 

- 

• 

-    35    - 

-    change 

charge 

325 

- 

13 

formed 

found 

337 

- 

• 

-    10     - 

-    lost    - 

-    best 

362 

- 

22 

Tace 

Face 

363 

- 

• 

-    37    - 

»       -    calculation    - 

-    inculcation 

365 

- 

2 

their        -            • 

these 

416 

- 

- 

-      2    - 

.       -    intermediate 

immediate 

418 

- 

16 

state 

462 

- 

- 

-    37    - 

-    respects 

respect 

607 

- 

1 

deeated 

defeated 

542 

- 

- 

-    19    - 

-    affecting 

effecting 

H57 

a> 

6 

tenant 

-    tenants 

561 

*. 

- 

-    37    - 

-    title 

titled 

589 

- 

27 

diminituveness 

diminutiveness 

596 

• 

m 

-    35    -    . 

-    hasted 

has  led 

611 

- 

37 

(  ,  )  after  law 

612 

- 

- 

-      2    - 

-     (  ,  )  after  law. 

2Mm  JKframs 


IN  THE  CUSTODY  OF  THE 

BOSTON     PUBLIC   LIBRARY. 


£HELF    N° 


WW 

m 


(W 


•/■vVi? 


t*<? 


t 


■ 


f! 


■i 


