^  A4{ 


ARATOH 


IBEINC  A  SESIES  OB 


AGRICULTURAL     iESSAYS, 


FBACTICAL  &  FOLITICJIL: 


SR  6KTT  OHJS  SfUMBES^. 


BF  A  VITIZEJ^  OF  VIRGIXJ^ 


IIRSNTEO  AJUTi  PUBLISHES 

BT   jr.   M.    AND    J.   B.    CAXTEE, 

CeorgctowD,  Coluxibia, 


J 


14^4- 


xw€C-/ 


District  of  Columbia^  to  ivit  : 
iE  it  re  trie  m  be  red.  that  on  tlie  sixteenth  clay  o^ 

r^  November  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  eighteen  hun." 
dred  and  twelve  ;  and  of  the  Independence  of  the 
United  States,  of  Am-erica  the  thirty  seventh,  J,  M. 
^  J.  B.  Carter  of  Georgetown,  in  the  District  #»f 
Columbia,  deposited  in  this  Ofiice  the  title  of  a  Book, 
the  Right  whereof  they  claim  as  Proprietors  in  the 
■words  followiDg,  to  wit^ 

*'  Arivtor,  being  a  series  of  Agricultura,!  Essays, 
*'  Practical  and  Political,  in  sixty-one  nurnfcers — By 
**  a  Citizen  of  Virginia.'* 

In  conformity  to  the  Act  of  the  Congress  of  the  Unit 
ed  States,  entitled  *'  An  Act  for  the  encouragement  of 
learning,  by  securing  the  Copies  of  Maps,    Charts 
and  Books,  to  the  Authors  and  Proprietors  of  such 
Copies  during  the  times  therein   mentioned."    And 
"also  to  an  Act  entitled  "An  Act  supplementary  to 
an  Act  entitled  "  An  Act  for  the  encoviragement  of 
learning,  by  securing  the  Copies  of    Maps,   Charts 
and  Books,  to  the  Authors  and  Proprietors  of  such 
Copies,  during  the  times  tlierein  mentioned,"   and 
lextending  the  benefits  thereof  to  the  arts  of  design- 
ing,   engraving   and  etching   Historical    and  other 
Prints." 

In  testimony  of  which,  I  have  hereunto  set  my 
hand,  and  aftiixed  the  seal  of  my  OlSce,  the  date 
above  mentioned. 

G.  DENEALE,  Cik» 
Dist.  Col'a,' 


PREFACE 

BF    TEE  :FUBLISUEES..: 

Tlie  Publishers  of  the  following  essays  are 
llie  ftrst  who  have  olTered  to  the  public  patron- 
age, an  experimental  composition,  adapted  to 
the  Soil,  Climate  and  Agriculture  of  the  great- 
er portion  of  the  United  States  ;  and  so  far  as 
their  knowledge  extends,  it  is  the  first  of  the 
kind  which  this  great  district  of  country  has 
produced.     They  are  not  qualified  to  judge  of 
its  merit,  and  can  cnly  infer  from  its  being 
the  work  of  a  successful  practical  farmer, 
sind  not  the  olfspring  of  interest  or  theory, 
llmt  every  purchaser  will  be  reimbursed  his 
money  many  fold.     Hut  however  this  may  bcj 
the  Publishers  respectfully  state,  that  rude  in- 
ventions have  terminated  in  great  public  good; 
and  that  the  deficiency  of  graphical  merit  in 
the  Agricultural  country,  for  which  the  com- 
position was  intended,  is  almost  as  strong  a 
recommendation   of  this  effort  towards  im- 
provement, as  the  hierogliphicks  of  antiquity, 
were  of  those  made  for  the  discovery  of  let- 
ters.    An  encouragement  of  small  improve- 
jnents  is  the  parent  of  perfection  in  every  art 
and  science,  and  as  Agriculture  is  the  queen  of 
the  whole  circle^  the  Publisher?  Iiave  thought 


t  their  duty  to  give  the  public  an  opportunity 
of  awakening  better  talents  and  greater  exer- 
Ijocs,  for  occupying  the  extensive  space  be- 
tween its  present  and  a  desirable  condition. 

The  United  States  have  been  charged  witli 
a  dearth  of  original  compositions.  Their 
reach  of  European  books  is  the  reason  of  the 
fact,  so  far  as  it  extends  to  moral  subjects ; 
whilst  the  multitude,  novelty  and  usefulness 
of  their  Kicchameal  inventions,  repels  an  in- 
sinuation, that  it  arises  from  a  want  of  genius 
or  industry.  Tiie  strongest  ground  of  the 
charge,  is,  the  deficiency  of  native  books  up- 
on Agriculture.  Whilst  the  country  was  fresh 
it  was  natural  for  the  inhabitants  to  neglect 
the  subject  in  the  midst  of  abundance  ;  but  It^ 
evident  impoverishment,  ought  to  have  sug- 
gested to  us  the  necessity  of  native  remedies 
for  local  errors  ;  and  the  incongruity  of  En- 
glish books  upon  Agriculture,  with  the  cli- 
mates, soils  and  habits  of  the  United  States. 
This  incongruity,  by  drawing  ridicule  upon 
imitators,  too  often  extinguislies  a  patriotic 
ardor,  and  checks  instead  of  advancing  im- 
provement. 

If  the  book  now  offered  to  the  public  should 
have  no  other  good  effects,  but  those  of  sug- 
gesting the  necessity  of  writing  for  ourselves 
on  the  subject,  and  introducing  some  taste  for 
such  discussion*,  the  compensation  to  the  Pub- 


iishers  for  their  labour  will  be  amply  repaid. 
To  this  taste  the  Agriculture  of  Europe  la 
general,  and  of  Britain  in  particular,  i&  in- 
debted for  a  vast  improvement  v?ithin  the  last 
century,  and  a  similar  spirit  in  the  United 
States  will  undoubtedly  produce  similar 
effects. 

Every  class  of  men  will  be  benefitted  by  it* 
The  Merchant  will  receive  more  produce,  and 
sell  more  goods.  The  demands  upon  the  Ma- 
nufacturer  will  extend  to  more  and  finer  com- 
modities. Lawyers  and  Physicians  will  have 
richer  clients  and  patients,  and  receive  better 
fees.  The  Politician  may  find  more  resources 
for  defending  his  country,  maintaining  her  in- 
dependence and  rewarding  patriotism.  The 
Pnnters  will  sell  more  books  and  newspapers. 
And  the  Tarmer,  though  the  fountain  from 
which  all  these  benefits  must  flaw,  as  receiv- 
ing first  the  fruits  of  improvement,  will  make 
them  subservient  to  his  own  happiness,  before 
he  diffuses  tliem  to  advance  the  happiness  of 
others.  A  tendency  to  shed  prosperity  over 
all  these  classes,  has  some  claim  to  general 
encouragement,  and  whilst  the  Publishers  re- 
spectfully solicit  the  public  patronage  on  this 
ground,  they  also  confidently  hope,  that  a  con- 
siderable portion  both  of  amusement  and  in- 
formation, will  be  found  in  the  following 
sheets. 


I 


INDEX; 

The  Present  State  of  Agriculture,  9 

The  Political  State  of  Agriculture,  ±6 

Slavery,  62 

Overseers,  74> 

Iiieiosiiig,  78 

Mauuricg,  9* 

Labour,  126 

Indian  Corn,  146 

Ploughing,  ±68 

Culmiferous  Crops,  172 

Succulent  Crops,  178 
Leguminous  Crops,                               '       183 

Live  Stock,  186 

Sheep,  204 

Hogs,                  "  208 

Succession  of  Crops,  221 

Live  Fences,  226 

Orchards,  230 

Braining,                     ••          -  235 

Tobacco,  266 

The  Economy  of  Agriculture,  271 

The  Pleasures  of  Agriculture,  277 

The  Rights  of  Agriculture,  282 

Agricidture  and  ihe  Militia^  290 


ERRATA* 

Page    14,  line  17,  for  "  any''  read  "  an.'* 

18,  20,  for  "  the  strength  which'' 

read  "  the  strength  witk 
which." 

59,  6,  fop    <*  enchantment"  read 

**  enhancement." 

SOf  7,  for  <<  outstrip"  read  "  out- 

strips." 

Mif  S5,  for  ^*  and  impoverishing'* 
read  "  and  an  impove- 
rishing." 

il,  2,  for  "  the  shoulder  Aan  the 

tail"  read  "  the  tail  than 
the  shoulder." 

t22,  21,  for  "  turning  into'*  read 
<<  turning  it  into." 

162,  2i>  foi*  **  reap  rich"  read  *^  reaji 
a  rich.'* 

^0,        U^  fw  *'  oil"  read  «  soil.'* 


°^-^ 


ARATOB. 


The  present  state  of  ^Igricidtiire, 

I  shall  consider,  in  a  succession  of  short  es- 
say s,  llie  present  state  of  Agricuitiire  in  the 
United  States^  its  oppressions  and  defects,  and 
the  remedies,  political  and  domestic,  which  it 
needs.  It  is  confessed  however,  that  the  chief 
kno^tvlcdge  of  the  author,  as  to  modes  of  Agri- 
enltiire,  is  confined  to  the  states  of  Maryland, 
Yirginia  and  North-Carolina.  And  therefore, 
whilst  his  remarks  in  relation  to  its  political 
state,  will  generally  apply  to  the  w  Iiole  nnion, 
those  in  relation  to  these  modes,  will  particu- 
larly apply  to  all  states  using  slaves,  or  to  the 
three  enunnerated  states. 

Mr.  Strickland,  an  Englishman,  repnted  to 
be  sensible  and  honest,  published  at  London  in 
the  year  1801,  a  pampMet  upon  the  Agricul- 
ture of  the  United  States,  being  the  result  of 
his  own  observation^  during  a  considerable  pe*' 


ID  THE   PSESENT    STATE 

riod  spent  in  travelliiig  tliroiigli  ihe  country, 
for  the  special  purpose  of  investigating  it..,. 
Tlie  judgment  of  this  impartial  stranger  ap- 
pears  in  the  follo^ying  quotations. — Page  26  : 
*•  Land  in  America  affords  little  pleasure  or 
profit,  and  appears  in  a  progress  of  continually 
affording  less." — ^P.  31  :  "  Virginia  is  in  a  ra- 
pid decline." — ^P.  38  :  "  Land  in  Nev/-York, 
formerly  producing'  tTventy  bushels  to  the  acre, 
now  produces  only  ten." — ^P.  41  :  •*  Little  pro- 
fit can  be  found  in  the  present  mode  of  Agii- 
eulture  of  this  country,  and  I  apprehend  it  to 
be  a  fact  that  it  affords  a  hare  suhsistence,*' 
P.  45  :  *'  Virginia  is  the  southern  limit  of  my 
enquiries,  because  Agriculture  had  there  al- 
ready arrived  tc  its  ^lowest  state  of  degradati- 
on."— ^P.  49  :  '^  The  land  owners  in  this  state 
are,  v/iih  a  few  exceptions,  in  low^  circumstan- 
ces ;  the  inferior  rank  of  them  v»  retched  in 
the  extreme.**- — ^P.  52  :  '*  Decline  has  perva- 
ded all  the  states," 

These  conclusions,  if  true,  are  awfrJly  threat- 
ening to  the  liberty  and  prosperity  of  a  coun- 
try, whose  hostage  for  both,  is  Agriculture.... 
An  order  of  men,  earning  a  have  subsistence , 
in  low  Circumstances,  and  ivliose  inferior  rank 
is  ivretched  in  the  extreme,  cannot  possibly  con- 
stitute a  mora)  force,  adequate  to  either  ob- 
ject. It  is  therefore  higlily  import  ant  to  the 
Agricultural  class,  to  ascertaia  whether  it  is 


v^  or  AGKlCUiTUHB.  11 

true,  that  Agriculture  is  in  a  decline. — A  de- 
cline terminates  like  every  other  progress,  at 
the  end  of  its  tendencT. 

Upon  reading  the  opinion  of  this  disinterest- 
ed foreigner,  my  impressions  were,  indignati- 
oa,  alarm,  conviction ;  inspired  successively, 
bv  a  love  for  mv  countrv,  a  fear  for  its  wel- 
JTare,  and  a  recollectiou  of  facts. 

The  terrible  facts,  that  tlie  strongest  qIigvH 
which  vibrates  on  the  heart  of  man,  cannot 
tie  our  people  to  the  natal  spot,  that  they  view 
it  xiith  horror,  and  Hee  from  it  to  new  climes 
•with  joy,  determine  our  Agricultural  progress, 
to  be  a  progress  of  emigration,  and  not  of  im- 
provement I  and  lead  to  an  ultimate  recoil 
from  this  exhausted  resource,  to  an  exhausted 
country. 


Number  2. 


The  present  state  of  tlgriculiure  cordinued, 

A  PATiE:r?^T  must  know  that  he  is  sick,  be- 
fore he  T^*ill  take  physick.  A  collection  of  a 
few  facts,  to  ascertain  tlie  ill  health  of  Agri- 
culture, is  necessary  to  invigorate  our  efforts 
towards  a  cure.  One,  apparent  to  the  most 
superficial  observer,  is,  that  our  land  has  dimi- 


12  THE  PSESEXT  STATE 

nished  in  fer»tility.  Arts  improve  the  work  of 
nature.  When  they  injure  it^  thej  are  not 
arts,  but  barbarous  customs.  It  is  the  office 
©f  Agriculture  as  an  art,  not  to  impoyerish, 
liut  ta  fertilize  the  soil,  and  make  it  more  use- 
ful than  in  its  natural  state.  Such  is  the  ef- 
fect of  every  species  of  Agriculture,  which  can 
aspire  to  the  character  of  an  art.. ..Its  object 
being  to  furnish  man  with  articles  of  the  first 
necessity,  whatever  defeats  that  object,  is  a 
crime  of  the  f^rst  magnitude.  Had  men  a  po%Y- 
er  to  obscure  or  brighten  the  light  of  the  sun, 
by  obscuring  it,  they  would  imitate  the  mora- 
lity of  diminishing  the  fertility  of  the  earth. 
Is  not  one  as  criminal  as  the  other  ?  Yet  it  is  a 
fact,  that  lancts  in  their  natural  state,  are  more 
valuable,  than  those  which  have  undergone 
our  habit  of  Agriculture,  crv»1iich  emigrations 
are  complete  proofs. 

The  decay  of  a  multitude  of  small  towns,  so 
situated  as  to  depend  for  support  on  unaltera- 
ble districts,  is  another  proof  of  the  impove- 
rishment of  the  soil.  It  is  true,  that  a  few  large 
towns  have  grown  up,  but  this  is  owing,  not 
to  an  increased  product,  but  to  an  increased 
pasture  ;  whereas,  in  every  case,  where  the 
pasture  is  limited,  or  isolated  by  local  circum- 
stances, small  towns  have  sprung  up,  whilst 
the  lands  were  fresh,  and  decayed,  as  they  were 
vrorn  out,    I  have  no  facts  to  ascertain  c(?r* 


♦ 

tainly  the  products  of  Agriculture  at  diifcrent 
periods  relatively  to  the  number  of  people  ; 
such  would  furnish  a  demonstration  of  its  state* 
But  I  have  understood,  that  sixty  thousand 
hogsheads  of  tobacco,  were  exported  from  Vir- 
ginia, when  it  contained  about  one-fourth  of 
its  present  population.    If  so,  had  the  fertility 
of  the  country  remained  undiminished,  Virgi- 
nia ought  now  to  expoii;  two  hundred  and  for- 
ty thousand  hogsheads,  or  an  equivalent.     In 
this  estimate,  every  species  of  export  except 
tobacco,  is  excluded  at  one  epoch,  and  exports 
of  every  kind  included  at  the  other  :  yet  the 
latter  would  fall  far  short  of  exhibiting  the 
equivalent  necessary  to  bring  itself  on  a  foot- 
ing, as  to  xlgriculture,  with  the  former*     Two 
hundred  and  forty  thousand  hogslieads  of  to- 
bacco, which,  or  an  equivalent,  Yirginia  would 
now  export,  if  the  state   of  Agi^icuiiure  had 
been  as  flourishing  as  it  was  sixty  or  seventy 
years  past,  at  the  present  value,  by  which  all 
our  exports  are  rated,  vfould  be  worth  above 
seventeen  millions  of  dollars  ;  and  supposing 
Virginia  to  furnish  one  seventh  part  of  the 
native   Agricultural  exports    of  the   United 
States,  these  ought  now  to  amount  to  one  hun- 
dred and  twenty  millions  of  dollars,  had  the 
products  of  Agriculture  kept  pace  with  the  in- 
crease of  population.     If  this  statement  is  not 
jexactly  correct^  enough  of  it  certainly  is  so;  to 


li  THE  PEE9ENT   STATE 

Remonstrate  a  rapid  impoverisliment  of  thp 
soil  of  tlie  United  States. 

Tlie  decay  of  the  culture  of  tobacco  is  testit 
moiiy  to  this  unwelcome  fact.  It  is  deserted 
liecause  the  lands  are  exhausted.  To  conceal 
from  ourselves  a  disagreeable  truth,  we  resort 
to  the  delusion,  that  tobacco  requires  new  ov 
fresh  laud ;  whereas  every  one  acquainted  witli 
the  plants  knows  that  its  quantity  and  quality, 
as  is  the  case  with  most  or  all  plants,  are  both 
greatly  improved  by  manured  land,  or  land, 
the  fertility  of  which  has  been  artificially  in-? 
creased.  Whole  counties,  comprising  large 
districts  of  countr^^,  which  once  grew  tobacco 
in  great  quantities,  are  now  too  sterile  to  grow 
any  of  moment ;  and  the  wheat  crops  substi- 
tuted for  tobacco,  have  already  sunk  to  any 
average  below  profit. 

From  the  mass  of  facts,  to  prove  that  the 
fertility  of  our  country  has  been  long  declin- 
ing, and  that  our  Agriculture  is  in  a  miserable 
state,  I  shall  only  select  one  more.  The  ave^ 
rage  of  our  native  exports,  is  about  forty  miL 
lions  of  dollars  annually.  Some  portion  of  this 
amount  consists  of  manufactures,  the  materi- 
als for  which  are  not  furnished  by  Agriculture; 
another,  as  is  extensively  the  fact  in  the  case 
of  flour,  has  passed  through  the  hands  of  the 
manufacturer.  Of  the  first  portion  he  re- 
cdvei  the  whule  price,  pf  th^  second  a  propor- 


idon^    And  a  tliird  portion  of  our  products  is 
obtained  from  the  sea.     Of  the  foHj  millions 
exported,  Agriculture  therefore  receives  oa^ 
ly   about  thirtj-fi\e.     The    taxes   of  every 
kind,  state  and  federal,  may  be  estimated  at 
twenty   millions   of  dollars,  of  wliich  Agri- 
culture pays  at  least  fifteen,  leaving  twen- 
ty millions  of  her  exports  for  her  own  use. 
Counting  all  the  slaves,  who  ought  to  be  count- 
ed both  as  sources  of  product  and  expenee 
in  estimating  the  state  of  Agriculture,  the  peo- 
ple of  the  United  States,  may  probably  amount 
to  about  seven  millions,  and  it  may  be  fairly 
assumed,  that  the  interest  or  occupation  of  six 
millions  of  these  seven,  is  Agricultural.    Of  the 
whole  surplus  product  of  Agriculture  exported, 
after  deducting  the  taxes  it  pays,  there  re- 
mains for  each  individual  a  few  cents  aT)ove 
three  dollars.     Out  of  this  mass  of  profit,  he  is 
to  pay  for  the  manufactures,  luxuries  and  ne- 
cessaries he  consumes,  not  raised  by  himself; 
and  the  only  remaining  article  to  be  carried 
to  the  credit  of  Agriculture,  is  the  small  gain 
it  derives  from  its  domestic  sales,  not  to  itself, 
©r  from  sales  by   one  of  its  members  to  ano- 
ther, for  that  does  not  enrich  it,  but  to  other 
elasses,  such  as  manufacturers  and  soldiers. 
Against  the  former,  Agriculture  is  to  be  debit- 
-cd  with  the  bounties  she  is  made  by  law  to 
pay  them  5  against  the  latter,  she  has  been 


19  TUB  PHESBKT   STATB 

already  debited  by  deducting  her  taxes  froia 
her  exports.  Neither  can  be  a  source  of 
much  wealth  or  profit  to  her,  because  in  one 
case  she  furnishes  the  money  by  taxation,  and 
in  the  other  by  bounties,  with  which  her  pro- 
duets  are  purchased.  It  is  therefore  nearly 
true,  that  the  income  of  Agriculture  is  only 
three  dollars  per  poll,  and  that  this  income  is 
her  whole  fund  for  supplying  her  w^ants  and 
extending  her  improvements.  This  estimate 
is  infinitely  more  correct,  than  one  drawn 
from  individual  wealth  or  poverty. — ^To  infer 
from  the  first,  that  e^yerj  body  might  become 
rich,  as  a  defence  of  our  Agricultural  regimen, 
"Would  be  a  conclusion  as  fallacious,  as  to  in- 
fer from  the  second,  that  every  body  must 
become  poor,  as  a  proof  of  its  badness.  Ex- 
traordinary talents  or  industry  will  produce 
extraordinary  effects.  Instances  of  happiness 
or  wealth  under  a  despotism,  do  not  prove  that 
its  regimen  is  calcuhitcd  for  general  wealth 
or  happiness.  A  system  commercial,  politi- 
cal or  agricultural,  so  wretched  as  not  to  ex- 
hibit cases  of  individual  prosperity,  has  never 
appeared,  because  an  universal  scourge  would 
be  universally  abhorred.  It  is  not  from  par- 
tial, but  general  facts,  that  we  can  draw  a  cor- 
rect knowledge  of  our  Agriculture.  Even  a 
personal  view  of  the  country,  might  deceive 
the  thoughtless,  because  neither  the  shortness 


or  AGRICrXTtJHE.  17 

of  life,  Ror  tlie  gradual  impoverisliinent  of 
laiid^  are  calculated  to  establish  a  \  isibie  stand- 
ard of  eoniparison.  A  man  must  be  old  and 
possess  a  turn  for  obseiTation  from  his  youth, 
to  be  able  to  judge  correctly  from  this  source. 
I  have  known  many  farms  for  above  forty 
years,  and  though  I  think  that  all  of  them  have 
been  greatly  impoverished,  yet  I  rely  more  up- 
on the  general  facts  I  have  stated  for  agree- 
ing with  Strickland  in  opinion  "  that  the  A- 
griculture  of  the  United  States  affords  only  a 
bare  subsistence — that  the  fertility  of  our  lands 
is  gradually  declining — and  that  the  Agricul- 
ture of  Virginia  has  arrived  to  the  lowest  state 
of  degradation.'^ 


Number  3. 

The  Political  state  of  Jlgvimltiive, 

In  collecting  the  causes  which  hare  contri- 
buted to  the  miserable  Agricultural  state  of 
the  country^  as  it  is  a  national  calamity  of  the 
highest  magnitude,  we  should  be  careful  not 
to  be  blinded  by  paHiality  for  our  customs  or 
institutions,  nor  corrupted  by  a  disposition  to 
flatter  ourselves  or  ollters*    \  shall  begin  with 


18  THE   POLITIC  At    STATE 

those  of  a  political  nature.  These  are  a  se- 
condary providence?  wliicli  govern  unseen  the 
great  interests  of  society  ;  and  if  Agriculture  is 
bad  and  languishing  in  a  country  and  climate, 
where  it  may  be  good  and  prosperous,  no  doubt 
remains  with  me,  that  political  institutions 
have  chieiiy  perpetrated  the  evil  |  just  as  they 
decide  the  fate  of  commerce. 

Tlie  first,  which  I  shall  consider,  is  that  of 
subjecting  Agriculture  to  pay  bounties  to  ma- 
nufactures, by  the  device  of  protecting  duties. 
This  device  was  a  leading  feature  of  Mr.  Ha- 
Biiiton's  policy,  which  in  every  item  bore  hard 
upon  Agriculture.  Its  great  end  was  to  strength- 
en the  government  by  creating  classes  of  in- 
terest at  the  expence  of  Agriculture,  depend- 
ent for  existence  and  wealth  upon  the  govern- 
ment. Hence  his  army,  navy,  loaning,  bank- 
ing, protecting  duties,  and  treasury  arrange- 
ments. The  strength  v/hich  he,  and  not  the 
people,  endowed  the  government  by  these  con- 
trivances, and  the  wealth  to  buy  tliis  strength, 
were  both  taken  from  the  Agricultural  class, 
which  constituted  about  seven-eighths  of  the 
society.  That  this  strength  and  wealth  is  ta- 
ken from  the  Agricultural  class,  must  either 
be  admitted,  or  it  must  be  proved  that  the 
corrupted  classes-  supply  tlie  money  to  cor- 
rupt themselves.  It  was  therefore  the  A- 
gricultural  elass,    mIiosc    power    Hamilton 


OT  ACBICtJXTURfi.  19 

meant  to  control^  by  transferring  its  wealth 
to  otlier  classes,  and  these  are  the  only  ob- 
jects of  an  alliance  between  government, 
and  Ms  legislative  or  artificial  classes.  A 
strong  government  in  every  ease  is  only  a  con- 
spiracy between  a  government  and  the  inter- 
ests it  creates,  tlie  object  of  wliich  conspiracy 
is  always  tbe  majority  of  nations.  As  Agri- 
cnltiire  covered  this  majority  in  the  United 
States,  Mr.  Hamilton's  conspiracy  for  making 
a  strong  governmenfji*,  could  operate  on  nothing 
else.  The  desertions  from  its  ranks  produced 
by  his  temptations,  diminished  its  strength  | 
and  the  wealth  necessary  to  subsist  and  enrich 
those  who  had  thrown  away  the  plough^  dimi- 
nished its  property. 

Among  the  drafts  from  its  property,  are  the 
bounties  extorted  by  protecting  duties^  vyith 
the  pretext  of  encouraging  manufactures,  but 
really  as  an  item  of  his  system  for  creating  a 
monied  interest,  aristocracy  or  despot,  as  a 
machine  for  subjecting  the  nation  to  his  in- 
tended strong  government.  The  products  of 
Agriculture  and  manufacturing,  unshackled  by 
law,  would  seek,  each  for  themselves,  the  best 
markets  through  commercial  channels,  but 
these  markets  would  liardiy  ever  be  ihe  same  ; 
protecting  duties  tie  travellers  together,  whose 
business  and  interest  lie  in  diiferent  directions. 
This  ligature  upon  a  natural  calculation,  will? 


^0  THE  POLITICAL   STATE 

like  all  imiiatnral  ligatures,   weaken  or  kill. 
Tlie  best  markets  of  our  Agriculture  lie  in  fo- 
rign  countries,  whilst  tlie  best  markets  of  our 
manufactures  are  at  home.     Our  Agriculture 
lias  to  cross  the  ocean,  and  encounter  a  com- 
petition With  foreign  Agriculture  on  its  own 
ground.     Our  mamifactiires   meet  at  home  a 
competition  with  fGreign  manufactures.     The 
disadvantages  of  the  first  competition,  sulHce 
to  excite  all  the  eiforts  of  agriculture  to  save 
her  life  5  the  advantages  of  the  second  suffice 
gradually  to  bestow  a  sound  ecnstitution  on 
manufaeturing.     This  and  tlie  other  pressures, 
arising  from  the  several  enumerated  items  of 
'J^Ir.  Hamilton's  plan  for  mciiufucturing  bj  law 
a  strong  government,  have   reduced  A.gricul- 
lure,  to  use  Strickland's  words  *^  to  the  lowest 
state  of  degradation.*' 

This  degradation  could  never  have  been  seen 
Ly  a  fi'iend  to  Agriculture,  who  could  after- 
wards approve  of  protecting  duties.  Let  us 
take  the  article  of  whep.t  to  unfold  an  idea  of 
the  disadvantages  which  have  produced  it. 
Ifwlieatis  woHh  ICs.  sterling  in  England  the 
70lb.  the  farmers  sell  it  here  at  about  6s.  ster- 
ling. American  Agriculture  then  meet s  Eng- 
lish Agriculture  in  a  competition,  compelling 
her  to  sell  at  little  more  than  one  third  of  the 
price  obtained  by  her  rival.    But  American 


0£*  AGEICtXTU2E.  21 

manufactures  take  the  field  ugainst  Enf^'lisli  on 
yevy  different  terms.  These  competUors  meet 
in  the  United  States.  The  American  inaiiu- 
factures  receive  first,  a  bounty  equal  to  ths 
freight,  commission  and  English  taxes,  upon 
their  English  rivals  ;  and  secondly,  a  hoimty 
equal  to  our  o^vn  necessary  imposts.  Without 
protecting  duties  therefore  the  American  ina- 
Rufaeturer  gets  for  the  same  article,  ahout  25 
per  cent,  more,  and  the  American  Agricultu- 
rist about  180  per  cent,  less,  than  their  En- 
glish rivals.  To  this  enormous  inequality 
protecting  duties  are  added,  further  to  enrich 
the  one  and  impoverish  the  ctlier. 


KCMBEF.  4. 


The  Toliiical  Slate  of  t-lgrkuJhire  co7:i!:iued> 

In  this  number,  I  shall  consider  a  reason  for 
protecting  duties  to  encom^age  maniifactures> 
which,  if  it  is  sound,  overturns  the  whole  ar- 
gument againt  them.  In  every  essay  on  be-* 
half  of  manufactures,  v.  e  are  told,  that  by  cre- 
ating tills  class  with  bounties  and  privileges, 
%ve  shall  both  make  ourselves  independent  oi 
fbreign  nations^  and  also  provide  a  market  f!o^ 

c 


^2  THE   ^OXITICAL   STATE 

Agricultural  labour,  as  an  aristocraej  in  all  its 
forms  is  a  market  for  labour.  And  the  high 
priceof  wheat  in  England,  is  contrasted  with 
its  low  price  here,  to  prove  the  latter  asser- 
tion. It  would  be  sounder  reasoning  to  con- 
trast the  high  price  of  manufactures  here, 
with  the  low  price  there  to  prove  that  they 
ought  to  give  bounties  to  Agriculture  to  pro- 
vide a  market  for  manufactures.  Nations 
and  individuals  are  universally  promised  wealth 
by  political  swindlers. — The  English  price  fop 
wheat,  is  coupled  with  the  English  political 
system.  Without  adopting  the  causes  of  that 
price  the  eifects  springing  from  these  causes 
cannot  follow.  The  idle  classes  of  the  nobility, 
clergy,  army,  navy,  bankers  and  national  debt 
holders,  with  their  servants  and  dependents, 
are  the  items  of  an  aristocracy,  which  has  redu- 
ced the  Agricultural  class  to  a  poor  and  pow- 
erless state,  by  the  juggle  of  persuading  it  to 
buy  high  prices,  by  creating  and  maintaining 
these  idle  classes.  The  national  debt  alone 
maintains  more  people,  than  there  are  Agri- 
culturists in  Britain.  These  do  not  amount  to 
a  tenth  part  of  the  nation.  It  is  to  this  com- 
bination of  causes,  and  not  to  manufactures 
singly,  that  the  English  Agriculture  is  indebt- 
ed for  its  high  prices. 

These  very  prices  are  themselves  proofs  of 
the  oppression  which  produced  them.    They 


OF  AGRICUXTUHEe  %a 

are  the  effect  of  tlie  tendency  wliieh  indiisli^ 
has  to  recover  hack  some  eqiiiyalentfromfraud* 
and  of  the  necessity  of  fraud  to  extend  some 
encouragements  to  industry.  But  shall  we  op- 
press our  Agriculture,  merely  to  demonstrate 
that  abuses  have  a  tendeHcy  to  excite  counter- 
vailing efforts,  and  load  it  with  English  impo- 
sitions, for  the  sake  of  the  inadequate  reim- 
hursement  of  English  prices  ? 

Let  him  who  hopes  to  live  to  see  the  Agricul- 
tural class  of  the  United  States,  reduced  by  En- 
glish policy  to  a  tenth  part  of  the  nation,  under- 
take to  prove,  that  such  a  reduction  would  be  a 
proof  of  its  prosperity.  If  he  could  defend  such 
a  theory,  he  w  oiJd  at  last  be  practically  disap- 
pointed, unless  our  manufactures  should  drive 
the  English  manufactures  out  of  the  world, 
and  occupy  their  place.  The  ingenious  de- 
vice of  Agriculture  in  England,  in  bestow* 
ing  money  on  noble,  clerical,  military  and 
chartered  idlers,  for  the  sake  of  selling  its 
bread  and  meat  to  them  to  gQt  back  the  same 
money,  would  turn  out  still  more  miserably, 
except  for  the  vast  addition  to  the  manufac- 
turing class,  by  foreign  demands  for  its  labor. 
If  England  only  manufactured  for  herself,  her 
manufacturers  w  ould  constitute  but  a  w  retched 
market  for  Agriculture.  One  labourer  feeds 
many  manufacturers.  One  nianufacturer  sup- 
plies many  labourers.    Before  the  promise  cf 


2i  THE  PGXITICAL  STATE 

English  prices  for  bread  and  meat,  tobacco 
and.eotton,  can  be  realized,  from  driving  ia 
mamifactiiring  by  protecting  duties,  we  must 
be  able  to  driYC  out  maiiufactures  by  protect- 
ing fleets,  iato  every  quarter  of  the  globe  ;  and 
so  like  some  booby  heirs,  take  up  a  parent's 
follies,  at  the  period  be  is  forced  to  lay  tbem 
down. 

Still  more  hopeless  is  the  promise  of  the 
ma^uifactos'iiig  mania,  "  that  it  wiil  make  us 
independent  of  foreign  nations,"  '^^hcii  com- 
biaed  with  its  other  promise  of  proTiding  a 
jnarket  for  agriculture.  The  promise  of  a 
market,  as  we  se<;  in  the  experience  of  Eng- 
land, can  only  be  made  good,  by  reducing  the 
Agricultural  class  to  a  tenth  part  of  the  nati- 
on, and  increasing  manufacturers  by  great 
manufacturai  exportation s.  This  reduction 
eaa  only  be  accomplished  by  driving  or  se- 
ducing above  nine  tenths  of  the  Agricultural 
class,  into  other  ckisses,  and  tlie  increase,  hy 
a  brave  and  patriotic  navi^^  Discontent  and 
Bilsery  will  be  the  fruits  of  the  first  operation, 
and  these  would  constitute  the  most  forlorn 
hope  for  success  in  the  second.  Ey  exchang- 
ing hardy,  honest  and  free  husbandmen  for 
the  classes  neeessai'^'  to  reduce  the  number  of 
Agricalturisls,  low  enough  to  raise  the  prices 
of  their  products,  shail  we  liecome  more  inde- 
pendent of  foreign  nations?     What!    Secure 


01?    AGIIICUITURE.  2o 

our  independence  by  bankers  and  capitalists  ? 
Secure  our  independence  by  impoverisliing, 
discouraging  and  annihilating  nine  tenths  of 
our  sound  yeomanry  ?  By  turning  them  into 
sAvindlers,  and  dependents  on  a  master  capital- 
ist for  daily  bread. 

There  are  two  kinds  of  independence,  real 
and  imaginary.  The  first  consists  of  the  right 
of  national  self-goyernment  j  the  second,  of 
individual  taste  or  prejudice.  The  yeomanry 
©f  the  forest  are  best  calculated  to  prcseryo 
the  first,  and  the  yecmanry  of  the  loom  arc 
best  calculated  to  feed  the  second.  A  surren- 
der of  the  first  to  obtain  the  second?  would  be 
a  mode  of  securing  our  independence,  lik<i 
England's  converting  her  hardy  tars  into  bar- 
bers and  tailors,  in  order  to  become  indepen- 
dent of  French  fasliions. 

The  manufacturing  mania  accuses  the  Agri- 
cultural spirit,  of  avarice  and  want  of  patri- 
4)tism,  whilst  it  offers  to  bribe  it  by  a  prospect 
of  better  prices,  v/hitlles  down  independence 
into  cargoes  of  fancy  goods,  and  proposes  to 
metamorphose  nine  tent] 53  of  the  hardy  sons 
of  the  forest  into  every  thing  but  heroes,  for 
the  grand  end  of  gratifying  the  avarice  of  a 
capitalist,  monied  or  paper  interest. 

Opinion  is  sometimes  prejudice,  sometimes 
zeal,  and  often  crai^.  These  counterfeits  of 
truth  have  universally  deluded  the  majorr^y 

c  2 


^^  O^HE   POLITICAL   STATE 

df  nations  into  the  strange  conclusion,  tliat  it 
will  flourisli  by  paying  bounties  to  undertakers 
for  national  salvation,  for  national  wealth,  and 
for  national  independence.     The  iirst  impose 
ture  is  detected,  the  second  begins  to  be  strong- 
ly suspected,  but  the  third  has  artfully  provok- 
ed its  trial,    at  a  moment  when  it  can  conceal 
the  cheat  under  the  passions  excited  by   tran- 
sitory circumstances.     Hatred  of  England — a 
pretended  zeal  for  national  honour  ;   the  real 
craft  of  advancing  the  designs  of  France,  and 
the  pecuniaiy  interest  of  a  few   capitalists ; 
have  conspired  to  paint  a  protecting  duty  sys- 
tem, into  so  strong  a  resemblance  of  patriotism 
and  honesty,  as  to  lead  Agriculture  by  a  bridle 
made  of  her  virtue  and  ignorance,  towards  th« 
worship  of  an  idol,  compounded  of  folly  and 
"Wickedness, 


Number  5. 


'llie  Political  state  of  *,igricnlture  contintiei,^ 

English  Agriculture  has  completely  tried  the 
project  of  enriching  itself,  by  buying  market* 
with  bounties.  It  lias  provided  more  of  these 
markets,  than  the  Agriculture  of  any  other  na- 


OF    /LGRICUITUKE.  %i 

tion.    Yet  it  is  unable  to  feed  its  own  people, 
many  of  whom  are  indebted  to  foreign  Agricul- 
ture for  daily  bread.     IN^o  profession  in   En- 
gland is  deficient  in  hands^  but  the  Agricultu- 
ral, and  none  other  a  cypher  in  goyernnient. 
They  have  Lords,  Bisliops,  ofiicers   civil  and 
military,   soldiers,   sailors,  bankers^  loaners 
and  capitalists  in  abundance,  and  all  of  them 
have  an  influence  in  the  government.    These 
are  the  markets  in  which  the   English  Agri- 
eulturists  have  successively  laid  out  their  mo- 
ney, in  order  to  get  good  prices,  and  the  more 
of  these  markets  they  buy,  the  less  liberty  and 
wealth  they  retain.     Mr.  Hamilton  persuaded 
the  United  States  to  buy  some  of  these  mar- 
kets, and  all  subsequent   statesmen  have  ex- 
tended the  Agricultural  commerce,  of  bu^-ing 
w  ealth  and  power  for  others,  for  the  sake  of 
increasing  its  own. 

If  the  Agriculture  of  the  United  States 
would  only  consider  how  it  happens,  that  it 
can  yet  live  upon  six  shillings  sterling  a  bushel 
for  wheat,  when  the  English  Agriculture  is 
perishing  with  sixteen,  the  film  drawn  over  its 
eyes  by  the  avarice  with  which  those  charge 
it,  who  design  to  cheat  it,  would  fall  off.  The 
solution  of  the  apparent  wonder,  lies  in  the 
delusion  of  buying  price  by  bounties.  The 
bounties  are  partly,  but  never  completely  re- 
imbursed by  the  price.    Though  the  payer  of 


23  THE   POLITICAL   S^'A^DB 

the  bouiiiies  gets  more  price,  he  gains  less  pror 
lit  than  from  the  lower  price?  when  he  paid 
no  bounties.  Therefore  the  receivers  of  the 
bounties  become  rich  ami  idle,  and  the  receiv- 
ers of  the  price,  poor  and  laborious.  And  this 
effect  is  inevitable,  because  the  bounties  must 
for  ever  outrun  the  prices  they  create,  or  no 
body  could  subsist  on  them.  If  the  bounty 
paid  was  equal  to  one  shilling  a  bushel  ott 
wheat,  and  should  raise  the  price  nine  pence, 
the  receiver  of  the  bounty  would  gain  three 
pence  a  bushel  on  the  wheat  he  bought,  and 
the  farmer  lose  that  sum,  though  he  got  a  high- 
er price.  And  this  obvious  fraud  is  precisely 
the  result  of  every  promise  in  ever^^  form  made 
hj  charter  and  privilege  to  enrich  or  encou- 
rage Agriculture. 

The  Agriculture  of  the  United  States  found 
itself  in  the  happiest  situation  for  prosperity 
imaginable  at  the  end  of  the  revolutionary 
war.  It  had  not  yet  become  such  an  egregi- 
ous gudgeon  as  to  believe,  that  by  giving  ten 
millions  of  dollars  every  year  to  the  tribe  of 
undertakers  to  make  it  rich,  they  would  return 
it  twerjty  ;  and  it  could  avail  itseif  of  all  the 
markets  in  the  world,  where  this  ridiculous  no- 
tion prevailed.  These  were  so  many  mines  o£ 
wealth  to  the  Agriculture  of  the  TJ.  Suites* 
The  idle,  clerical,  miJitar} ,  banking,  loaning 
and  ennobled  classes,  as  has  been  stated,  do 


OF  AGIIICTJLTUIIE,  2^.0 

ccrtuiuly  have  llie  effect  of  raising  Agricultu- 
ral prices  very  considerably  |  but  tbe  Agri- 
culturists who  pay  and  maintain  these  classes, 
still  lose  more  by  them  than  they  gain.  Now 
the  United  States,  as  a  section  of  the  com- 
mercial world,  might  have  shared  in  the  en- 
chantment of  Agricultural  price,  produced  by^ 
such  unproductive  orders  ia  other  countries  ; 
and  paid  none  of  the  ruinous  cxpence  of  wealth 
or  liberty,  which  they  cost.  They  might  have 
reaped  the  good,  and  avoided  the  evil.  And 
Agriculture,  for  once  in  it's  life,  might  have 
done  itself  justice.  But  the  wiseacre  chose  to 
reap  the  evil,  and  avoid  the  good  ;  and  if  it'3 
situation  has  been  occasionally  tolerable,  it 
Was  sorely  against  it's  will,  or  by  accident.— 
la  the  first  eight  years  after  the  revolution,  be- 
ing the  first  period  in  the  latter  ages  <ff  the 
world,  that  Agriculture  could  make  laws,  it 
legislated  sundry  items  of  the  British  system 
for  buying  markets  or  raising  prices.  In  the 
next  twelve,  it  nurtured  their  growth,  so  as  to 
raise  up  some  to  a  large,  and  one  to  a  mon- 
strous size  ;  and  also  most  sagaciously  prohi- 
bited itself,  jirst  from  sharing  in  the  benefit  of 
the  high  prices  produced  by  aristocratieal  in- 
siitutions  in  France,  and  secondly  from  shar- 
ing in  those  produced  in  the  same  way  in  Eng- 
land. European  Agriculture  is  gulled  or  op- 
pressed by  ethers  ;  Amerlcati!^  gulls  or  o|i-* 


go  TRE   POLITICAL    STATE 

presses  itself.  The  first  is  no  longer  weak 
enough  to  think,  that  it's  battalion  of  aristo- 
cratical  items,  does  it  any  good  |  but  it  is  now 
unable  to  follow  it's  judgment ;  the  second, 
though  able  to  follow  its  own  judgment,  has 
adopted  the  exploded  errors  heartily  repented 
of  by  the  first,  and  far  outstrip  it  in  the  cele- 
rity of  it's  progress  towards  a  state  of  abso- 
lute submission  to  other  interests,  by  shutting 
out  itself  from  markets  enhanced  at  the  ex- 
pence  of  other  nations  ;  and  at  the  same  time 
by  creating  the  English  item^  of  capitalists,  or 
masters  for  manufacturers,  bankers,  lenders, 
armies  and  navies.  Our  true  interest  was  to 
pay  nothing  for  markets,  spurious  and  swind- 
ling to  those  who  buy  them,  and  yet  to  share 
in  their  enhancement  of  prices.  We  have  pur- 
sued a  different  course,  and  I  do  not  recollect 
a  single  law,  state  or  continental,  passed  in 
favour  of  Agriculture ;  nor  a  single  good  house 
built  by  it  since  the  revolution ;  but  I  know 
many  built  before  which  have  fallen  into  de- 
cay. Our  Agriculture  is  complimented  by 
presidents,  governors,  legislators  and  indivi* 
duals  ;  and  tlie  Turks  reverence  a  particular 
order  of  people  as  being  also  favoured  by  liea- 


OF  AGRicnTTias*  81 


NUMBBE   6. 

The  Political  state  of  Agriculture  continued.. 

The  arguments  to  prove  the  political  errors 
under  which  our  Agriculture  is  groaning,  may 
suggest  a  su^spicion,  that  I  am  an  enemy  to 
manufactures.  The  fact  is  otherwise.  I  be- 
lieve that  protecting  duties,  or  whatever  else 
shall  damp  Agricultural  effort,  and  impoverish 
the  lands  of  our  country,  is  the  only  real  and 
fatal  foe  to  manufactures ;  and  that  a  fiourish- 
ing  Agriculture  will  beget  and  enrich  manu- 
factures, as  rich  pastures  multiply  and  fatten 
animals.  He,  who  killed  the  goose  to  come  at 
her  golden  eggs,  was  such  a  politician,  as  he 
who  burdens  our  expiring  Agriculture,  to  raise 
bounties  for  our  flourishing  manufactures.-— 
He  kills  the  cause  of  the  end  he  looks  for, 

I  meet  such  an  insinuaticn  by  another  argu- 
ment. Protecting  duties  impoverish  and  en- 
slave manufacturers  themselves,  and  are  so 
far  from  being  intended  to  operate  in  their  fa- 
vour, or  in  favour  of  a  nation,  that  their  end 
and  effect  simply  is  to  favour  monied  capital^ 
which  will  seize  upon  and  appropriate  to  itself, 
the  whole  profit  of  the  bounty  extorted  from 
the  people  h^  protecting  duties  :  and  allow  as 


6 


2  THE   POLITICAX    STATS 


scanty  wages  to  it^s  workmen,  as  it  can.  Mo- 
nied  capital  drives  indiisti^  without  money  out 
of  tlie  market,  and  forces  it  into  it's  service, 
in  every  case  where  the  object  of  contest  is  an 
enormous  income.  The  wages  it  allows  to  in- 
dustry are  always  regulated  by  the  expenee  of 
subsistence,  and  not  by  the  extent  of  it's  gain. 
l^Ionied  capitalists  w  ere  an  essential  item  of 
Mr.  Hamilton's  project  of  government.  It 
could  not  be  otherwise,  being  modelled  by  the 
Koglish  form.  To  advance  this  item,  for  the 
sake  of  strengthening  the  government  against 
thepeople,  andnot  forthe  sake  of  manufactu- 
ix;rs,  w  as  his  object  by  protecting  duties.  Tru^ 
>YiIi  say  many  a  reader,  but  that  is  not  the  de- 
sign now.  Oh  !  how  reverential  is  the  logici- 
an who  can  prove,  that  an  axe  will  cut  imder  a 
federal  administration,  but  not  under  a  repub- 
lican. 

.  Some  king,  I  believe,  requested  the  rnercan^ 
tile  class  of  his  subjects,  to  ask  of  him  a  fa- 
vour. The  greatest,  your  majesty  can  grant 
lis,  said  they,  is,  to  let  us  alone.  Protecting 
duties  are  such  favours  to  manufacturers,  as 
the  pretended  favours  of  kings  are  to  mcr- 
ohants.  They  impoverish  their  customers, the 
Agriculturists,  and  place  over  themselves  an 
order  of  masters  called  capitalists,  wliich  in- 
tercepts the  profit,  destined,  without  legal  in- 
terposition; for  industry.    Many  other  argu- 


OF  AGBICUIiTUHE.  So 

inents  Riiglit  be  urged  to  prove  that  protecting 
duties  beget  Uie  poverty  of  Bianufaeturera, 
but  this  is  not  mj  subject*    To  that  I  return. 

The  bitterest  pill  which  the  English  govern- 
ment  compelled  our  Agriculture  to  swallow 
be&re  the  revolution,  was  the  protecting  duty 
pill,  or  an  eq.uivalent  drug,  gilded  with  the  na- 
tional advantage  of  dealing  with  follow  sub- 
jects 5  and  after  having  gone  through  a  long 
war  to  get  rid  of  this  nauseous  physick,  we 
have  patiently  swallowed  it,  gilded  also  by 
other  doctors  with  the  national  advantage  of 
dealing  with  fellow  citizens  :  The  power  and 
wealtli  of  the  political  doctors,  who  have  re- 
commended these  self  same  political  drugs^ 
depended  considerably  in  both  cases,  on  their 
being  sw  allowed. 

I  will  suppose  that  our  protecting  duties  do 
not  exceed  the  average  amount  of  25  per  cen- 
tum, that  they  had  expelled  every  artiele  of 
foreign  manufacture,  and  bestowed  on  our  bror 
ther  citizens  a  complete  monopoly  of  our  ma- 
Bufactural  wants,  and  an  ability  to  supply  them* 
I  will  suppose  too  in  fevor  of  a  project,  which 
must  depend  on  eencessions  to  obtain  the  re- 
spect of  examination,  that  the  Agricultural  in- 
terest shall  be  able  after  this  blessed  desidera- 
tum of  the  protecting  duty  system  is  obtained, 
to  ^et  at  it's  oM  mai'kets  the  same  price  for 
it's  products^  and  annually  bnn^  home  the 


THE   POUITICii    STATE 


whole  in  gold  or  silver,  for  the  use  of  our  own 
capitalists  and  monopolisers.  Tids,  have  said 
many  great  miiiisters  of  state,  ivho  had  no 
knowledge  of  Agriculture,  would  complete  it> 
prosperity. 

It  is  the  prosperity  of  giving  one  fourth 
above  the  market  price  for  all  the  manufa<v 
tures  it  needs.  It  is  the  boon  of  returning 
with  empty  ships  from  ports,  at  which  the 
game  things  can  be  bought  for  one  fourth  lessu 
It  is  the  boon  of  a  direct  tax  or  a  system  of 
excise,  to  supply  the  revenue,  which  the  s^^j- 
cess  of  the  project  would  annihilate. 


The  Folitical  State  of  Agriculture  eontinueif 

The  blessing  of  complete  success  in  the  plan 
of  expelling  foreign  manufactures,  by  raising 
bounties  upon  Agriculture,  may  be  exhibited 
by  figures  upon  data,  however  conjectural  in 
amount,  correct  in  principle.  Suppose  Agri- 
culture annually  to  bring  home  forty  millions 
of  dollars,  she  would  be  annually  robbed  of 
ten  millions,  by  a  protecting  duty  of  525  per 
crntiu:^^  for  the  benefit  of  capitalistak    Sup^- 


jpcse  licr  share  of  the  taxes,  state  and  continen- 
tal, to  be  15  millions,  and  that  out  of  the  re- 
maining fifteen,  she  has  live  millions  to  pay  to 
hankers  ;  tea  will  remain,  leaving  hcp  a?i  ati- 
Bual  income  per  poll  of  about  gl.oO  for  build- 
ing houses,  pa^-iDg  expences,  and  improving 
lands.  But  if  we  take  into  the  account,  that 
foreign  nations  neither  would  or  could  pay  our 
Agriculturists  with  specie  for  their  produce, 
ihzX  they  would  countervail  upon  this  prepos- 
terous project,  and  that  every  con ntery ailing 
act  of  theirs,  would  operate  upon  our  Agri- 
cultural products,  even  this  $i.BO  would  be- 
come the  victim  of  retaliation,  and  leave  the 
farmer  as  fundiess  for  pur-chssing  manufac- 
tures, as  for  impreving  his  land. 

This  blessed  scheme  of  shutting  up  it*6 
markets,  for  the  encouragement  of  Agncul- 
lure,  has  been  wonderfuHy  overlooked  as  a 
means  for  encouraging  mantifactures.  In  the 
latter  case,  markets  are  eagerly  sought  for, 
und  barter  universally  all  j wed.  England 
takes  special  care  not  to  limit  the  sales  of  her 
manufacture 3  directly  or  indirectly  to  returns 
in  specie,  knowing  that  tlie  attempt  would  de- 
stroy them.  She  endows  them  with  the  home 
monopoly,  and  freedom  to  make  the  best  bar- 
gaii^s  in  all  the  foreig)^  markets  they  can  get 
to.  ^lanufacturing  is  her  staple ;  Agriculturo^ 
is  ours. 


2(J  THE  POLITICAX  STATS 

Mt.  Hamilton  hit  exactly  upon  tlie  same 
mode  for  tin;  encoiiragem-ent  of  our  Agricul- 
ture after  tlie  revolution,  that  the  English  dM 
before  it,  for  the  purpose  of  pillaging  it.  E^ve-* 
rj  congress  has  adhered  to  their  predecessors 
in  the  same  pollej.  The  Agrieulturists  to 
get  rid  of  it  fought  England^  drove  Hamilton 
fi'om  the  n^ional  coniideKee,  and  having 
evinced  their  power  to  control  a  ^reat  nation, 
and  a  great  man,  are  quietly  submitting  to  this 
gpectre  of  patriotism. 

The  English,  before  the  revolution,  quar- 
tered upon  our  Agriculture,  a  necessity  of  buy- 
ing its  manufactures  at  home,  or  i^ithin  the 
.  empire,  whilst  it  enjoyed  the  equivalents  of 
being  free  from  their  taxation,  from  pacing 
any  of  the  interest  of  their  paper  systems, 
from  contributions  for  supporting  their  ar- 
mies, navies,  bishops  and  pensioners,  fr(.*in  the 
fi^auds  of  their  treasury  system,  and  of  sharing 
in  the  enhanced  prices,  produced  by  frauds, 
which  did  not  reach  the  provinces.    The  same 
system  inflicted  by  congress,  is  attended  with 
none  of  these  equivalents.    Agriculture  pays 
and  must  forever  pay  most  of  whatever  is  col- 
lected by  taxes,  by  charters,  by  protecting  du- 
ties, by  paper  systems  of  every  kind,  for  ar- 
mies, for  navies,  and  though  last,  not  the  least 
of  its  losses,  of  whatever  the  nation  is  defraud- 
ed by  the  Ilamiltonian  treasury  system,    if 


or   AGEICUtTUBE.  37 

the  taxes  are  directly  laid  on  property,  Api- 
culture pays  nearly  the  whole  of  them  ;  if  on 
consumptions,  an  imequal  share,  because  of 
the  greater  mimher  of  hands  she  employs  than 
4  "any  other  business,  and  the  smaller  profit  de- 
rived from  their  labour.    When  Mr.  Hamil- 
ton therefore  heaped  upon  Agriculture  iliQ  ar- 
mies,   navies,    paper  projects  and  treasury 
frauds,  which  even  England  had  not  the  cru- 
elty to  do,  if  his  bowels  had  yearned  with  the 
least  degree  of  compassion  towards  her,  he 
would  have  relieved  her  from  the  protecting 
duty  policy,  to  throw  off  which,  she  had  re» 
cenily  freely  spent  her  blood  and  treasure.— 
He  had  none,  and  he  might  have  trrJy  address- 
ed the  Agriculturists  in  the  words  of  Relic- 
boam,  *«  My  friends  (the  English)  made  your 
yoke  heavy,  and  I  ^ill  add  to  your  yoke jjthey 
also  chastised  you  with  vfhips,  but  I  will  chas- 
tise you  with  scorpions.'' 

The  effects  of  yoking  Agriculture  to  armies, 
navies,  paper  frauds,  treasury  frauds,  and  pro- 
tecting duty  frauds  since  a  revolution,  which 
it  labored  for,  like  the  ox  who  tills  the  crop 
to  be  eaten  by  others,  are  visibly  an  increase 
of  emigration,  a  decrease  in  the  fertility  of 
land,  sales  of  landed  estates,  a  decay  and  im- 
poverishment both  in  mind  and  fortune  of  the 
landed  gentry,  and  an  exchange  of  that  honest, 
virtuous,  patriotic  and  bold  class  of  men,  for 


38  THE   POlITICAl   STATE 

an  order  of  stock-jobbers  in  loans,  banks,  ma- 
nufactories, contracts,  rivers,  roads,  houses, 
s-hips,  lotteries,  and  an  infinite  number  of  infe- 
rior tricks  to  get  money,  calculated  to  instill 
opposite  principles. 

All  the  varieties  of  this  order  re<?eive  boun- 
ties, and  Agriculture  pays  them.  Tliey  gaia 
from  six  to  twenty  per  centum  profit  on  their 
capitals ;  Agriculture  seldom  or  never  gains 
six,  except  in  a  few  southern  instances.  In 
fact,  it  very  rarely  gains  any  thing,  if  an  in- 
come, derived  from  an  impoverishment  of  the 
land,  ill  deserves  the  name  of  profit. 

The  injustice  of  superadding  upon  Agricul- 
ture these  unnecessary  burdens  to  those  which 
are  necessary,  is  illustrated  by  supposing  the 
duties  upon  foreign  manufactures  to  be  only 
five  per  centum,  and  nearly  or  quite  all  our 
duties  are  above  the  supposition.    To  such  du- 
ties are  still  to  be  added  the  profits  of  the  En- 
glish and  American  merchants,  through  whose 
hands  the  goods  pass,  and  the  freight,    These 
duties,  profits  and  freight  would  alone  consti- 
tute au  encouragement  to  home  manufactures 
of  at  least  20  per  centum  j  a  sum  quite  ade- 
quate to  any  encouragement  which  honest  po- 
licy would  defend,  or  common  justice  suffer.—- 
And  as  all  the  occasional  calamities  of  com- 
merce, are  losses  to  Agriculture,  and  prizes  to 
ntinufactures,  her  fatuity  in  kneeling  like  the 


0?   AGRICULTUREi,   ,  89 

eamel  to  receive  burdens,  under  the  notion  that 
she  is  receivmg  bounties,  can  have  no  antithe^ 
sis  more  perfect,  than  the  species  of  dexterity 
whicli  infiiets  them. 


NUMBEH  8. 


The  Potitkal  State  of  tlgricuUi^re  continued. 

Protecting  duties  to  enrich  manufacturers, 
are  like  banks  to  enrich  farmers,  bishops  to 
Save  souls,  or  feudal  lords  to  defend  nations 


England  has  demonstrated  the  character  of 
each  member  of  this  kindred  quartumvirate. 
Protected  by  feudal  lords,  it  was  conquered  al- 
most  by  every  invader  $  taught  by  bishops,  cor- 
ruption, having  been  distilled  through  all  infe» 
riorranks,  deposits  it's  essence  in  this  reve« 
rend  order  of  servility  and  selfishness ;  enrich- 
ed by  bankers,  farmers  fiee  from  the  cultiva= 
tion  of  lands,  which  yield  the  highest  nominal 
returns  to  Agricultural  labor  of  any  in  the 
world,  until  a  surplus  of  bread  is  exchanged 
for  a  deficiency;  and  fed  with  the  endless  boun- 
ties of  protecting  duties,  one  sixth  of  the  la- 
bouring manufacturers,  constantly  occupy  pri- 
sons  or  poor  houses,  whilst  the  rest  may  be 
said  to  dief  daily  upon  their  daily  wages^ 


40  THE   P01ITICA3L   STATB 

Monarchies  and  aristoeraeies,  being  founded 
■in  the  principle  of  distributing  wealth  by  law, 
can  only  subsist  by  frauds  and  deceptions  to 
dupe  ignorance  into  an  opinion,  that  such  dis- 
tributions are  intended  for  its  benefit ;  hut  in 
genuine  republieks,  founded  on  the  principle  of 
leaving  wealth  to  be  distributed  by  merit  and 
industry,  these  treacheries  of  government  are 
treasons  against  nations. 

They  substitute  the  principle  which  consti- 
tutes an  aristocracy,  for  the  principle  which 
constitutes  a  true  republick ;  strike  with  a  fa- 
tal ignoi'ance,  or  a  sordid  malignity,  at  the 
heart  of  the  political  system  ;  and  eWect  a  frau- 
dulent and  treasonable  revolution. 

3Iy  feilovr^  laborers,  mechanical  or  Agricul- 
tural, let  us  never  be  deluded  into  an  opinion, 
that  a  distribution  of  wealth  by  the  govern- 
ment or  by  law,  will  advance  our  interest. — 
We  are  the  least  successful  courtiers  of  any 
rank  in  society,  and  of  course  have  the  worst 
prospect  of  shainiig  in  any  species  of  wealth, 
bestowed  by  governments.  It  is  both  contrary 
to  the  experience  of  all  mankind,  and  even  im- 
possible. We  constitute  the  majority  of  na- 
tions. A  minority  administers  governments 
and  legislates.  Compare  the  probability  of  its 
taking  wealth  from  itself  to  give  it  to  the  ma- 
jority, with  that  of  it's  defrauding  the  majority 
to  enrich  itself  and  it's  partizans ;  and  you  will 


at coxnit  for  th«  regular  current  of  experience* 
Consider,  however  splendidly  a  minority  may 
live  upon  the  labors  of  a  majority,  that  a  ma- 
jority cannot  subsist  upon  those  of  a  minority, 
and  you  will  see  that  it  is  impossible  for  expe- 
rience in  future  to  teach  a  diflfereiit  lesson. 

Let  us  not  flatter  ourselyes,  that  laws  can 
be  made  to  enable  majorities  to  plunder  these 
minorities,  or  to  plunder  themselves;  or  to  fat- 
ten a  man  by  feeding  him  with  slices  cut  f  ro^ 
bis  own  body.  If  a  scheme  <iould  be  contrived 
in  favor  of  Agriculture,  similar  to  the  pro* 
tecting  duty  scheme  in  favor  of  manufactu- 
rers, it  would  enslave  the  farmers  as  it  does 
manufacturers.  The  utmost  favor  which  it 
is  possible  for  a  government  to  do  fm*  us  far- 
Baers  and  mechanieks,  is  neither  to  help  noT 
hurt  us.  The  first  it  cannot  do,  for  whosa  »aa 
laws  ^trip  or  famish  to  clothe  or  feed  the  vast 
m^ority  we  compose.  Aware  that  fraud  or 
oppression  cannot  permanently  subsist,  except 
by  feeding  on  majorities,  those  who  compose 
these  majorities,  if  they  are  wise,  i5«ver  fail 
to  see  that  their  interest  points  to  a  republican 
form  of  government,  for  the  yqvj  purpose  of 
preventing  the  passage  of  laws  for  quartering 
or  pasturing  on  them  minor  interests.  These 
majorities  are  the  pasture  upon  which  all  mi- 
sor  factitious  interests,  however  denominated^ 
fatten ;  and  it  would  bs  as  unnatural  formaje- 


%2  THE   POlITICiX   STATE 

rities  to  fatten  upon  sucli  legal  minor  intere&tsy 
as  for  pastures  to  eat  the  herds  grazing  oa 
them. 

The  interest  of  labor  covers  every  nation- 
al majority^  and  every  legal  bounty  is  paid  by 
labor,  Tliis  interest  cannot  receive  legal 
bounties.  bs€au§e  there  cannot  exist  a  treasury 
for  tlieir  paymento  The  utmost  boon  with 
which  government  can  endow  it,  is  the  enjoy- 
ment of  that  portici?  of  it's  own  earning,  whicU 
the  public  good  can  spare.  Whenever  boun- 
ties are  prctesded  to  be  bestowed  on  labor,  by 
privileges  to  feudal  barons  to  defend  it,  to  bi- 
shops to  save  it,  or  to  capitalists  or  bankers 
to  enrich  it,  an  aristacratical  order  is  unavoi- 
dably erected  to  pilfer  and  enslave  it ;  because 
though  majorities  cannot  fee  enriched  or  enno- 
bled by  bounties  o?  privileges^  minorities  can ; 
and  these  bounties  or  privileges  must  of  course 
settle,  not  against,  but  coB&nnably  with  the 
laws  of  nature,  both  nicral  and  physical. 

The  farce  of  legal  favc  r  or  encouragement, 
has  been  so  dexterously  acted  isi  England,  to 
delude  both  the  Agricuitur?M  and  mechanical 
Inter'^st,  the  interest  of  labor,  or  ilw  majcri- 
ty  cf  the  natioa,  us  to  have  delivered  this  ma- 
jority, shackled  by  protecting  duties,  bounties 
and  prchibitions,  into  the  hands  of  an  iiieonsi- 
derable  moiiied  aristocracy,  or  combination  of 
capitalists.    Into  this  net,  woven  of  intricate 


Oi?  AGniCrLTIRE,  43 

frauds  and  ideal  credit,  the  majority  of  the  na- 
tion, the  interest  of  labor,  the  Agrieulturists 
and  mechanicks  have  run,  after  the  baits  held 
out  bj  protecting  duties,  bounties  and  prohi- 
bitions. From  it^s  dreams  of  wealth  it  is  awa* 
kened  under  the  fetters  of  a  monied  aristocra- 
cy, and  unfortunate  as  Prometheus,  it  is  destin- 
ed to  eternal  and  bitter  toil  to  feed  this  politi- 
cal harpy,  and  to  suffer  excruciating  anguish 
from  it's  insatiable  voraciousness.  Some- 
times this  net  has  been  baited  to  catch  mecha- 
nicks,  at  others  to  catch  Agriculturists,  and  per- 
haps it  is  but  just,  that  these  real  brethren  in- 
terests should  fatten  the  alien  tribe  of  stock- 
jobbers, as  a  pimishment  for  manifesting  a  dis- 
position to  devour  each  other. 

We  farmers  and  mechanicks  have  been  po» 
litical  slaves  in  all  countries,  because  we  are 
political  fools.  We  know  how  to  convert  a 
wiideraess  into  a  paradise,  and  a  forest  into 
palacQs  and  elegant  furniture ;  but  we  have 
been  taught  hy  those  whose  object  is  to  mono- 
polize the  sweets  of  life,  which  we  sweat  for^ 
that  politicks  are  without  our  province,  and  in 
us  a  ridiculous  affectation ;  for  the  purpose  of 
converting  our  ignorance  into  the  screen  of  re- 
gular advances,  which  artificial  interests  or 
legal  factions,  are  for  ever  making  in  straight 
or  zigzag  lines,  against  the  citadel  of  our 
rights  and  liberties.    Sometimes,  after  one  (rf 


^  THE   POLITICAX   STATE 

these  marauding  families,  liave  pillaged  for  a 
tliousaad  yearsy  we  detect  the  clieat,  rise  in 
the  majesty  of  ouf  strengtb,  drive  a>yay  the 
t^iief,  and  sink  again  into  a  lethargy  of  intel- 
lect so  gross,  as  to  receive  him  next  day  in  a 
ioew  coat  as  an  accomplished  and  patriotic 
stranger,  come  to  cover  us  with  benefits.-^ 
Thus  we  got  rid  of  tythes,  and  now  we  clasp 
banks,  patronage  and  protecting  duties,  to  our 
bosoms.  Ten  per  centum  upon  labor  was 
paid  to  a  priesthood,  forming  a  body  of  men 
which  extended  knowledge,  and  cultivated 
good  morals,  as  some  compensation  for  form* 
ing  also  a  legal  faction,  guided  by  the  spirit  of 
encroachment  upon  the  rights  and  property  of 
the  majority.  Forty  per  centum  is  now  paid 
on  our  labor,  to  a  legal  faction  guided  by  the 
same  spirit,  and  pretending  to  no  religion,  to 
no  morality,  to  no  patriotism,  except  to  the  re- 
ligion, morality  and  patriotism  of  making  it- 
self daily  richer,  which  it  says  will  enrich  the 
nation,  just  as  the  self  same  faction  has  en- 
tiched  England.  This  legal  faction  of  capi- 
talists, created  by  protecting  duties,  bankers 
and  contractors,  far  from  I>eing  satisfied  with 
the  tythe  claimed  by  the  old  hierarchy,  will  in 
the  case  of  the  mechanicks  soon  appropriate 
the  whole  of  their  labor  to  its  use,  beyond  a 
bare  subsistence  ;  though  in  the  case  of  far- 
mers, it  has  yet  only  gotten  about  four  tiajes 


^  Iniicii  ^f  tli€irs,  as  was  extorted  by  tte  odi- 
ous, oppressive  aad  fraudulent  tytha  systeui^ 
We  know  death  very  well,  when  killing  with 
one  scythe,  but  mistake  him  for  ^  deity,  bi^ 
cause  he  is  killing  with  four. 


NlJMBBB  S. 

The  Political  State  of  ^gtneulturt  eentiiine^. 

3?*rosptBrity  neither  in  manufactures,  nor  in 
paper  speculatioiis,  is  ever  expected  without  a 
capital,  and  yet  capital  is  iSichcd  from  Agri- 
culture, under  pi'etence  that  it  mil  produce 
her  prosperity.     Tlie  capital  thus  filched  h 
made  by  laws  to  yield  a  better  profit  without 
labor,   than  it  could  with  it,  and  becomes  a 
prfemilim  offered  by  govermreiit  to  those  wh« 
dlesert  the  labors  of  ilgiiculture.    Hence  v*  e 
see  capital  flyitig  from  the  fields,  to  the  legal 
tnonopolics,  banking  and  manufacturing.    The 
la\ts  hate  established  a  thousftnd  modes  by 
which  caiiital  Will  produce  quicker  and  larger 
profits,  than  when  employed  in  the  slow  im* 
J)r6veriients  of  Agriculture.    These  bribes  of- 
fered to  it's  deserters  have  already  produced 
the  most  ruiiiOus  ct>hsequeuce8«    Avarice  eTe» 

E 


liS  TIIE   POLIITGAL   STATE 

ry  wltere  seizes  them  with  avidity,  and  rails  at 
Agriculture,  as  sordid  and  unpatriotic,  for 
v/ishing  to  mthhoM  them ;  as  the  Tulture 
might  have  railed  at  Prometheus  for  wishing 
to  keep  his  liver.  The  hest  informed  Agri^ 
culturists  are  driven  for  self  defence,  op  se- 
duced hj  the  temptations  of  the  wealth,  with 
which  they  are  solicited,  to  sell  their  lands, 
which  require  labor,  for  the  purchase  of  a 
better  profit  requiring  none  |  or  at  least  to  di- 
vert to  this  object,  whatever  capital  accident 
OP  industry  may  have  thrown  into  their  hands. 
A^^d  the  capital  thus  drained  from  the  uses  of 
Agriculture,  by  tbis  irresistible  and  perpetual 
le«;al  system,  has  reduced  it  to  a  skeleton  for 
want  of  nourishment. 

Strickland,  the  English  farmer,  who  cami5 
to  this  country  with  the  intention  of  escaping 
from  the  Agricultural  oppressions  of  his  own, 
and  returned  disgusted,  discovered  and  describ- 
ed this  death-iniiloting  operation  in  the  52d 
and  53d  pages  of  his  pamphlet.  ''  Before  the 
<^<  revolution,"  says  he,  "  the  capital  of  the 
*<  country  was  vested  in  the  lands,  and  the 
<^  landed  proprietors  held  the  iirst  r-ank  in  the 
^*  country  for  opulence  and  information,  and 
«  in  general  received  the  best  education  which 
^*  America,  and  not  unfrequently,  Europe, 
«  could  afford  them.''  Now,  *<  the  capital,  sr^ 
<y  wcil  a;s  tho  goves^mon^  ©f  the  country  haa 


»  sMpt  out  of  llie  hands  of  land  owners  ;  ar.d 
^^  tliese  new  people  are  employed  in  vory  dif- 
«  lerent,  and,  in  Iho  present  state  cf  things, 
^•'  more  productive  speculations  tlian  the  culti- 
"  vation  of  lands ;  in  speculations  frequently 
*•'  at  yariance  with  the  hcst  interests  of  the 
^*  countj-j'.  In  some  of  the  states,  the  gentle- 
*'  men  of  landed  property  have  past  into  pcr- 
*^  feet  oblivion  5  in  none  do  thej  hear  the  sway, 
"  or  even  possess  their  due  share  of  infliience.'* 
On  the  eleventh  day  of  January,  iT97,  a  com. 
mittee  was  raised  in  congress  for  the  promoti- 
on of  Agriculture,  who  reported  ^'  That  the 
^'  encouragement  of  Agriculture  is  an  object 
^*  highly  worthy  the  public  attention,  as  it 
^'  constitutes  the  most  useful  emplojaiiciit  for 
*^  our  citizens,  is  the  basis  of  manufactures 
*^  and  commerce,  and  the  richest  source  of  na^^ 
^^  tional  wealth  and  prosperity  ;  and  that  the 
^*  science  of  Agriculture  was  in  it's  infancy.'* 
One  would  have  thought  that  these  sentiments 
would  have  suggested  the  folly  of  starving  this 
useful  infant,  to  fatten  the  pernicious  legal  in- 
fant called  capital ;  of  compressing  one  into  a 
dwarf  and  stretching  the  other  into  a  giant.— 
K^o  such  thing.  It  was  dandled  a  little.  A 
toy  for  it's  amusement  called  "  ihc  American 
Society  of  Agriculture,"  was  talked  of.  This 
toy  was  found  to  be  unconstitutional,  because 
ft  would  add  but  iitll«  to  the  power  of  the  ge- 


is  THE  raLITICAL  STATK 

neral  goverBinent,  and  the  iiifant  was  turae4 
to  graze  in  impoverished  fields.  The  constitu-r 
tion  v/as  construed  to  exclude  congress  frora 
the  power  of  fostering  Agriculture  by  patents 
or  bounties,  and  to  give  it  the  power  of  foster- 
ing banks  and  manufactures  by  patents  an4 
bounties  ;  and  a  republican  and  Agricultural 
people  plunged  into  this  absurdity,  to  advance 
the  project  of  a  statesman  in  favor  of  monc^r-* 
cliy.  Agriculture,  in  it's  Souadcring,  like  an 
0x  whilst  breaking,  gave  the  statesman  a  tuni«P 
ble,  and  then  tanaeiy  s^bmittc^  to  the  yolie  hf 
had  fashioned. 


HUMBBB  10,. 

Hie  Political  State  of  Agriculture  cafitimied. 

As  Agricultural  iiuprovements  cannot  be 
made  without  capital ;  as  capital  will  not  be 
employed  in  them,  if  it  can  find  more  profita- 
ble employment ;  as  the  laws  have  created  % 
variety  of  employments  for  capit^-l^  attrq-etiqg 
it  by  bounties  and  premiums  drawnfr(?m  AgrJ- 
oulturc  ;  and  as  this  subtraction  f  rom^  one  an4 
addition  to  the  others,  have  caused  capital  in- 
vested under  such  legal  patronage  to  be  i^iore 
profitable  than  when  employed  in  Agncult^,ra| 


improvements ;  it  follows,  that  such  improYC- 
lafints  cannot  take  place,  whjtlst  a  policy  so 
completely  fitted  to  counteraet  them,  remains, 
BHng  before  your  mind  some  twenty  op  thirty 
modes  of  employing  capital,  and  imagine,  that 
cme  of  them  produces  the  least  profit  and  mo^t 
toil ;  and  further  that  this  one  is  oppressed  ia 
various  ways  to  advance  the  prosperity  of  all 
the  rest.  Could  one  of  the  emblems  of  Agri« 
milture  himself  (mentioned  in  the  last  number) 
eonceive,  that  capital  would  fly  from  all  the 
profitable  modes,  to  acquire  comparative  pe» 
nury  and  exclusive  toil  in  the  service  of  the  un- 
profitable mode  ;  or  be  persuaded,  that  an  ut- 
ter destitution  of  capital  canad?ance  (he  pros- 
perity of  this  one  mode,  whilst  he  is  told  on  all 
hands,  that  capital  alone  can  advance  that  of 
every  other  ?  This  is  not  an  imaginary,  but  a 
real  ease. 

Mr.  Hamilton's  project  to  create  a  race  of 
capitalists,  as  an  engine  to  endow  the  goyern- 
fi]ient  with  more  power^  seemed  to  me  to  be 
unfavorable  to  all  the  callings  and  interests 
of  society,  save  to  the  calling  of  governing^ 
and  the  calling  of  capitalists.  \^liikt  Airri- 
culture  was  more  particularly  impoVcrislied 
by  ity  that  impoverishment  contained  a  result* 
in^  blow  for  every  thing,  which  a  fertile  coun- 
try and  a  flourishing  Agriculture  nurtures  ; 
^d  the  bdunty  of  protecting  duties  will  inflict 

B  2 


56  thB  politic ai*  state 

upon  the  manufacturers  themselves,  or  real 
workmen,  in  lieu  of  comfort  and  competence, 
which  a  multitude  of  them  would  gain  by  free 
industry,  an  impossibility  of  obtaining  cither, 
with  the  consolatory  prospect  of  the  vast 
wealth  of  their  masters,  the  capitalists.  ^ 

Under  the  same  system,  England,  the  most 
fertile  country  in  the  world,  wants  bread.  Ar- 
thur Young  states,  that  a  portion  of  that  coun- 
trj ;  suScing  if  cultivated  to  make  England  a 
great  exporter  of  bread  stuff,  lies  uncultivated. 
The  average  crop  of  wheat  in  England  is  about 
35  bushels  an  acre,  and  the  average  price  about 
15s.  a  bushel  sterling.  Yet  capital  finds  bet- 
ter employment  under  this  system  there,  copi- 
ed here  by  Mr.  Hamilton,  than  in  Agriculture. 
This  exorbitant  price  is  therefore  an  insuilici- 
cnt  equivalent  for  the  oppression  it  suffi^rs 
from  the  system.  The  average  crop  of  wheat 
in  some  states  is  as  low  as  five,  in  none  above 
ten  bushels  to  the  acre,  and  tlie  average  price 
about  five  shillirigs  sterling.  WUi  one  seventh 
or  one  {t*arth  of  the  crops,  and  one  third  of  the 
price  here,  enable  Agriculture  to  bear  a  sys- 
lera,  under  which,  with  a  product  and  price, 
tc!i  or  twenty  fold  better,  it  is  not  enabled  to 
supply  a  nation  with  bread  ?  An  acre  of  wheat 
in  England  produces  to  the  farmer  26L  Bs,  stg.— .» 
here  in  some  states  1?.  10.9, — in  others  3l,  stg^ 
And  licre  the  profits  of  money-jobbing,  or  ca- 


or  AGRICULTITE^.  1^1 

pitalists,  are  as  great  as  in  England.  If  Agri- 
culture with  such  products  and  prices,  is  so 
bad  a  business  there,  compared  with  credit- 
jobbing,  as  to  be  unable  to  raise  bread  for  the 
nation,  what  fate  do  our  products  and  prices 
pronounce  upon  it  here  ? 

A  material  difKsrence  between  the  landed  in- 
terest  of  the  United  States  and  of  England, 
is  the  funeral  dirge  of  the  former.    There  it 
is  distinct  from  Agriculture,  and  associated 
■with  the  aristocracy  of  capitalists.    Here  it 
is  united  with  Agriculture,  and  fated  without 
equivalent  to  feed  that  aristocracy.     There  it  is 
a  landlord,  here   it  is  a  tenant.     There  it's 
rents  supply  it  with  capital  to  embark  in  the 
legal  money  sponges  for  absorbing  the  earn- 
ings of  labor ;   here   it  is  labor   itself  whose 
earnings  these  money  sponges  absorb.     There 
it  is  fed  with  the  most  delicious  morsels  of  roy- 
al  patronage,  afforded  by  a  system  for  pilfer- 
ing not  landlords,  but  labor  :   here,  but  a  few 
of  these  morsels  fall  to  its  share,  and  these 
have  been  previously  carved  from  its  own  car- 
ease.     There  the  interest  of  idleness  legislates, 
and  it  legislates  in  favor  of  idleness.     Here, 
the  interest  of  labor  le^Jsates,  and  it  also 
legislates  in  favor  of  idleness* 


^M  1*HB  POilTICAI*  STATJS 


The  roliikal  State  of  Agriculture  eontintted. 

The  political  evils  whicli  bear  upon  Agri- 
culture, are  a  providence  which  ^vill  unaltera- 
bly determine  it's  fate,  unless  they  are  remov- 
ed, and  therefore  the  only  remedy,  which  can 
avert  this  fate,  is  to  remove  them.    I  shaU 
quote  Strickland  but  once  more,  because  his 
veracity  is  insufferable.     I  have  selected  hi- 
therto his  seftest  passages,  for  he  asserts,  that 
our  soil  is  nearly  a  caput  mortuum ;  that  our 
landed  property  is  no  longer  an  object  of  pro- 
fit or  pleasure  : — ^that  few  good  houses  arc 
buildiiig  in  the  country  or  improvements  of  any 
kind  taking  place  ; — and  that  the  opulent  are 
quitting  it  for  the  towns.     But  when  he  says^ 
page  55^   '^  the  mass  of  those  we  should  call 
<«  planters  or  farmers,  are  ignorant,  uneducat- 
^  ed,  poor  and  indolent^'  his  veracity  becomes 
insolent.     Has  Mr.  Strickland  forgotten,  that 
wc  Agriculturists  had  the  sagacity  to  discover 
that  the  Anglo-Hamil Ionian  system  of  creat- 
ing an  order  of  capitalists,  was  levelled  directly 
at  our  prosperity,  and  the  magnanimous  perse- 
verance to  g^et  rid  of  it's  authors  ?    Let  him 
remember  this  achievement,  and  forget  what 


jij^ij  becQiQe  of  the  system  itself;  an;!  then  he 
ifill  certainly  retract  his  severe  censure  upoa 
Oup  uiiideratandings  and  perseverance* 

I  ^ould  further  ask  ^fr.  Strickland,  whether 
it  is  a  very  uncommon  thing  even  in  his  enlight-? 
ened  England,  fi)r  the  people  to  mistake  the 
shadow  for  the  substance,  or  to  follow  theiy 
pa^ions  in  pursuit  of  the  oppressor,  rathei? 
than  their  reason  in  pursuit  of  the  oj>pression« 
la  short,  are  aot  the  page?  of  history  replet<^ 
with  insts^nces  of  destroying  the  tyrant  and  re- 
taining the  tyranny?  Aud  why  should  W0 
Agriculturists  he  called  ignoraut  and  indolent^ 
Hfhrn  we  are  only  gulled,  just  as  mankind  is 
general,  the  enlightened  citizens  of  Eur«pe» 
^r\d  hl§  (fwn  fellow  subjects  are  gulled  ?  Why 
f  hpuld  the  good  sense  and  constancy  of  regard? 
ing  the  principle  rather  than  the  agent,  be  e^t 
ijlusively  expected  of  us  ? 

Xi  is  however  certainly  true,  that  nothing 
$an  Nourish  under  oppression.— -Neither  agri- 
j^ulture  nor  civil  liberty  can  exist  in  declama- 
tions, or  he  toasted  into  pro&perity.  Oui? 
struggles  to  resuscitate  dying  AgriculturCf 
Biust,  like  those  of  Sisyphus,  yield  to  a  strong- 
er depressing  power.  The  plough  can  have 
Eery  little  success,  until  the  laws  are  altered, 
which  obstruct  it.  Societies  for  improving 
the  breed  of  sheep  or  the  form  of  ploughs,  will 
be  as  likely  to  produce  a  good  system  of  Agn- 


54  TflE    rcXITICAX    STATE 

culture,  under  depiTssing  laws  ^  as  sockCicfS'* 
for  improving  tlie  English  form  cf  govem- 
ineiit  under  their  depressing  system  of  cor- 
ruption.    A  good  pen  may  produce  a  \Grj  had 
treatise. 

Agricultural  societies  to  take  a  chance  for 
success?  must  begin  with  efforts  to  elect  into 
the  general  and  state  legislatures,  a  genuine 
Agricultural  interest,  uncorrupted  by  stock- 
jobbing, by  a  view  of  office,  or  by  odious  per- 
sonal vices  ;  taking  care  to  combine  talents 
with  this  genuine  character.  Wise  Agricul- 
tural elections,  constitute  the  only  chance  for 
Abrogating  a  policy,  w  hich  is  the  ruin  of  ^Igri- 
oultural  prosperity. 

The  bounties,  frauds  and  useless  espenccs, 
ivhich  strengthen  the  government  and  corrupt 
the  nation,  and  are  drawing  a  vast  annual  ca- 
pital from  Agriculture,  Avould  then  be  applied 
to  the  invigoration  of  the  militia.  Such  a 
measure  would  return  to  manicfactures  and 
Agriculture  their  own  capital,  and  improve 
both  the  national  soil  and  the  national  spirit.. 
The  nation  would  exchange  iuefiectual  aniia- 
ments  for  an  irresistible  ardor ;  and  impo- 
▼erishing,  for  an  improving  soil  ;  disrespect 
for  itself  and  it's  native  haunts,  for  national 
pride  and  love  of  country ;  and  a  school  of 
stock-jobbers  and  contradcrs  for  a  school  of 
fwtriols,  Bujt  Agriculture  and  the  militia  r^- 


ccire  an  abundance  of  pi*aise  and  an  abundance 
,of  oppression  and  neglect,  nor  can  a  mode  of 
encouraging  either  by  la%v,  be  discovered^ 
/whilst  no  difficultj  is  fell  in  rearing  np  mep- 
ceaary  armies,  and  more  mercenary  capital- 
ists, for  the  same  reason.  It  is  impossible  by 
law  to  encourage  Agriculture  and  the  militia, 
and  also  capitalists  and  staodiiig  armies. 

The  remedy  of  construing  the  constitntiaiL 
honestly  is  a  simple  one.  It  certainly  intend- 
ed to  bestow  as  little  power  to  tax  AgricnU 
ture,  in  order  to  raise  a  bounty  for  manufac- 
tures and  credit  corporations,  as  it  does  to 
"tax  manufactures,  in  order  to  raise  a  bounty 
for  Agriculture.  Let  th«  imposts  be  regulat- 
ed by  their  constitutional  intention,  and  Agri- 
ouiture  will  cease  to  be  oppressed  by  bounties, 
bestoweil  by  statesmen  out  of  her  purse  toad» 
vance  their  own  designs.  The  words  and  spi- 
rit of  the  constitution  are  so  entirely  adverse 
to  the  idea  of  enabling  congress  to  exercise  a 
partiality  equivalent  to  the  ruin  ov  opulence 
tf  states,  relying  distinctly  upon  Agricultural 
or  manufactural  staples  of  commerce,  that 
the  unconstitutionality  of  the  power,  ought  to 
Pender  the  policy  of  it's  exercise  an  unnecee^ 
3ary  enquiry.  It  is  further  unnecessary,  be- 
cause however  favorable  it  may  be  to  capitril- 
ists,  it  is  subjugation  even  to  manufacturers, 
and  must  impoverish  a  vast  majority  of  iW 


people  in  ^Very  state  of  the  unioh  to  gnricii  ti 
few,  neither  the  neeessity  or  advantage  of 
which  is  suggested  by  the  constitution. 

it  is  easy  to  withhold  fiitui*e  charters  for 
^tahlishing  corporations  to  fleece  Agricirlture 
snd  maniifactnres  ;  it  will  be  harder  io  repeal 
those  already  granted.     Yet  there  is  fiO  point 
upon  which  the  liberty  of  the  nation  more  eeir- 
tainiy  depends,  than  the  subversion  of  the  doc- 
trine of  a  judicial  poWer,  to  turii  laws  iht» 
contracts,  and  render  them  irrepealable,  uiir 
der  a  line  of  the  constitution,  which  uses  the 
identical  words  "  law  and  contract"  in  differ- 
ent senses.    To  try  this  doetriiie,    by  which 
charters,  once  the  Tehicles  ef  liberty,  are  in- 
geniously converted  into  vehicles  of  slavery,  I 
wish  that  congress  would  grant  to  a  corporati- 
on of  capitalists,  the  exclusive  privilege  of  fur- 
Bishing  the  country   with    manufactures  for 
cne  thousand  yeat's,  with  a  stipulation  for  pro- 
tecting duties,  equal    to  an  exclusion,  for  the 
same  term.     It  Would  bring  this  mcmentou&  • 
Question  to  a  fair  decisidh  whilst  we  have  pow* 
er  to  consider  it. 

The  last,  though  tiot  the  least  political  op« 
pression  upon  Agriculture,  which  I  have  se« 
lecte^l,  for  this  short  consideration  of  it's  po- 
litical state,  is  Mr.  Hamilloii^s  treasuiy  sys- 
tem, copied  from  the  Eyiglish,  and  of  course 
Uablc  to  the  samo  abuses.    It  £^  soutterljt. 


6j  Aimitvutuni^  ^7 

ScatiCute  of  any  security  for  the  honest  appli- 
cation of  public  money,  tliat  no  congresS| 
committee  of  congress,  or  member  of  congress, 
has  ever  examined  the  accounts  of  a  singly 
year,  or  been  able  to  form  a  conjecture  on  the 
subject.  The  detail  of  checks  is  a  detail  of 
dependence  and  subserviency,  and  a  tissue  o^' 
ineffectual  formality.  The  money  passes  in 
gross  sums  into  the  hands  of  a  host  of  sub-trea- 
surers. The  system  fell  at  once  into  the 
grossest  of  those  corruptions  which  contami- 
nate the  British  policy,  that  of  losing  sight  of 
money  after  its  appropriation,  and  considering 
it  as  constitutionaliy  gone,  however  small  a 
proportion  of  it's  object  was  obtained  ;  so  that 
an  army  upon  paper?  costs  the  same  sum  as  am 
army  in  the  field.  This  subject  is  however  too 
long  and  intricate  to  follow  away  from  that  I 
am  pursuing.  This  abuse  in  both  countries  en- 
deavors to  shrink  from  public  view,  behind 
screens  called  sinking  funds,  for  applying  a 
surplus  of  revenue  to  the  payment  of  ikeht^ 
These  screens  cover  pecuniary  abuses  against 
those  annual  critical  examinations  of  the  items 
of  public  expenditure,  so  wholesomely  practis- 
ed by  state  legislatures.  Such  annual  exa- 
minations by  congress  would  probably  leave 
with  Agriculture  a  considerable  amount  of  ca- 
pital annually  taken  from  her,  to  enrich  knaves  5 
*or  no  other  deseription  of  men  caa  get  a  sh??- 


58  THE   POLITICAL   &TATE 

ling  from  tlie  omission  of  an  annual  examina» 
tioa  of  the  public  accounts.  From  Mr.  Ha- 
milton's loan  of  money  in  Holland?  to  put  the 
United  States' Bank  in  motion,  to  this  day,  eve* 
ry  minority  has  testified  to  great  pecuniary 
abuses  ;  and  none  when  converted  into  a  majo- 
rity, has  ever  provided  a  remedy  against 
them. 

The  only  remedy  in  this  case,  as  in  others, 
is  to  elect  into  congress,  a  genuine  Agriculta- 
ral  interest,  uncorrupted  by  a  mixture  with 
stockjobbing,  by  a  view  of  office,  or  by  odious 
personal  vices?  and  combined  with  good  ta- 
lents* 


The  Political  State  of  Jigi^iculture  continued^ 

llie  political  causes  which  oppress  Agriculr 
ture  have  been  considered,  before  the  domes- 
tic habits  which  vitiate  it,  to  guard  against 
the  error  of  an  opinion,  that  the  latter  may  be 
removed,  whilst  the  former  continue.  So  long 
as  the  laws  make  it  more  profitable  to  invest 
capital  in  speculations  without  labor,  than 
in   Agriculture  with  labor  5  and    so  long  a& 


HT  AGHICUXTUSE.  3^ 

the  Wherif  of  pursuing  one's  oAvn  interest  ex- 
ists ;  the  two  strongest   human  propensities,  a 
love  of  wealth,  and  a  iove  of  ease,  will  render 
it  impossible.    The  reason  why  Agriculture  is 
better  managed  in  Europe  than  in  the  United 
States,  is,  the  coercion  of  necessity  upon  the 
laborers   to    improve  it  to  the  utmost. — ^The 
landed  interest  there  and  here,  as  was  before 
©bserved,  entirely    differ.— The    tenants    or 
Agriculturists  are  a  species  of  slaves,  goaded 
into  ingenuity,  labor  and  economy,  without 
possesising   any  political   importance,  or  the 
least    share  in    the  government.     They  are 
lashed  into  a  good    system   of  Agrieultnre  in 
the  same  way,  that  good  discipline  is  produced 
in  an  army  ;  and  this  good  system  of  Agricul- 
ture is  also  for  the  benefit  of  their  landlords 
and  legislators,  just  as  the  good  discipline  of 
an  army,  is  for  the  beneiit  of  its  generals  and 
other  officers.     It  Is  more   out  of  the   power 
ef  English  tenants  or   Agriculturists,  to  be- 
come landlords,  capitalists  or  manufacturers, 
©r  to  escape  the  coercion  which  forces  them  to 
stretch  the   mind  and  the    muscles  after  im- 
provement, than  of  soldiers  to  desert.     How- 
ever they  may  move  from  place  to  place,  like 
horses  transferred  from  owner  to  owner,  they 
are   doomed  to  the  same  fate.     Oppression 
which  causes    Agricultural  improvement  in 
England,  will  prevent  it  in  the  United  States^ 


00  l:S!E  P©iiTieiX  STATE 

because  it  cannot  seize  and  hold  fast  tlig*Agl»i- 
ciilturist.  There,  he  can  only  soften  oppress 
sion  bj  superior  skill  or  industry.  Here,  lit 
can  flee  from  it  into  a  wilderness,  into  a  char- 
ter? or  into  a  mechanical  employment,  and  gain 
greater  profit  with  less  labor.  We  copy  th* 
English  frauds  upon  the  Agriculturists,  for- 
getting that  the  English  power  over  him  does 
not  exist  here.  That  instead  of  being  able  to 
lash  him  into  excellence  for  the  beneiit  of 
others,  we  can  only  solicit  him  by  his  own  in- 
terest and  happiness  ;  and  that  this  solicitation 
is  an  insult  upon  his  understanding,  if  it  honest- 
ly tells  him,  that  government  will  establish  the 
policy  of  scattering  bounties  at  his  expenee, 
and  of  bestowing  more  proUt  and  ease  upon 
paper  capital  or  fraudulent  credit,  than  he  ca» 
derive  from  solid  land  and  honest  labor.  Be- 
ing free,  if  he  is  wise,  he  will  prefer  a  share  of 
profit  and  ease  to  a  share  of  loss  and  toil.— 
The  cunning  declaimers  in  praise  of  those  who 
choose  the  yoke  of  evils,  for  the  sake  of  getting 
the  yoke  of  blessings  for  themselves,  only  de- 
ceive fools,  so  that  wisdom  as  well  as  wealth  is 
flying  from  the  Agricultural  interest,  and  tak- 
ing up  her  residence  with  the  policy  of  making 
©apital  employed  under  charters  in  credit 
shops  and  in  manufacturing,  more  profitable 
than  capital  employed  in  Agriculture.  This 
union  of  wisdom  and  wealth,  will  in  time  re- 


€Hce  Agriculture  to  the  Euroi^ean  regimeB, 
and  the  Agriculturists  to  the  grade  of  tenants 
to  a  system  for  fostering  dealers  in  monej  and 
credit,  at  the  expence  of  the  makiers  of  bread, 
Bieat  and  cloth.  This  system,  however  slowly, 
certainly  creates  a  class  of  rich  and  wise,  and 
a  class  of  poor  and  ignorant,  atfd  terminates  of 
iiourse  in  some  European  form  of  government. 

I  have  heard  it  said  that  the  weight  of  ta- 
lents in  Congress,  has  already  appeared  very 
Tisibly  against  the  Agriculturists.  Let  us  not 
deceive  ourselves  by  ascribing  this  to  popular 
folly  in  elections.  It  is  owing  to  the  transit  of 
wealth  and  of  course  wisdom,  from  Agricul* 
ture  to  its  natural  enemies,  charter  and  privi- 
lege. This  constant  process  diminishes  daily 
the  chance  for  elections  to  hit  on  Agricultural 
talents,  and  will  soon  destroy  the  power  to  ob- 
tain them.  If  the  fact  exists  as  to  a  deficien« 
oy  of  these  talents  in  Congress,  it  proves  the 
existence  of  a  moral  system  which  begets  that 
fact,  and  discloses  the  inevitable  fate  of  the 
Agricultural  interest. 

To  the  force  of  this  baleful  system,  as  well 
as  to  the  brevity  proper  for  an  essayist,  some 
of  the  defects  sprinkled  throughout  the  view  I 
have  taken  of  the  political  state  of  Agriculture, 
ought  in  justice  to  be  ascribed ;  and  if  it  fails 
to  excite  the  Agriculturists  in  and  out  of  Con- 
fess te  look  into  their  situation^  it  will  ©nly 

W  2 


62  SXAVEfiT^ 

prove  that  the  system  has  alreadj  had  its  effeet 
on  the  author  or  his  readers.  Chartered  know- 
ledge is  kept  alive  hy  its  associations,  and  char- 
tered interests  advaneed  hy  frequent  and  ma- 
ture consultations.  An  imitation  of  this  ex- 
ample is  the  only  mode  of  reviving  Agricultu- 
ral knowledge,  and  of  obtaining  justice  for 
Agricultural  interest.  And  if  the  suggestion 
of  establishing  Agricultural  societies  in  each 
Congressional  district,  for  the  purpose  of  con- 
sidering and  explaining  respectfully  to  Con- 
gress, what  does  it  good,  and  what  does  it  harm, 
in  imitation  of  other  interests,  should  be  adopt- 
ed by  Agriculture,  it  may  at  least  acquire  the 
capacity  of  distinguishing  between  good  and 
evil. 


KUMBEH  13.. 

Negro  slavery  is  a  misfortune  to  Agricut- 
turc,  incapable  of  removal,  and  only  within 
the  reach  of  palliation.  The  statf.  legisla- 
tures, hopeless  of  removing  all  its  inconveni- 
ences, have  been  led  by  their  despair  to  suffer 
3,11 1  and  among  them,  one  of  a  magnitude  suf- 


iieient  to  affect  deeply  the  prosperity  of  A^i- 
.  culture,  and  threaten  awfully  the  safety  of  the 
country  ;  I  allude  to  the  policy  of  introducing 
hy  law  into  society,  a  race  or  nation  of  people 
between  the  masters  and  slaves,  having  rights 
extremely  different  from  either,  called  free 
negroes  and  raulattoes.  It  is  not  my  inten- 
tion to  consider  the  peril  to  which  this  poiicj 
exposes  the  safety  of  the  country,  by  the  ex- 
citement to  insurrection  with  which  it  perpe- 
tually goads  the  slaves,  the  channels  for  com- 
munication it  aifords,  and  the  resei^voir  for  re- 
cruits it  provides.  I  shall  only  observe,  that 
it  was  this  very  policy,  which  Urst  doomed  the 
whites,  and  then  the  mulattoes  themselves,  to 
the  fate  suffered  by  both  in  Saint  Domingo  ; 
and  which  contributes  greatly  to  an  a^pprehen- 
sion  so  often  exhibited.  Being  deSned  by  ex- 
perience in  that  country,  and  by  expectation 
in  this,  it  is  unnecessary  for  me  to  consider  the 
political  consequences  of  this  policy. 

My  present  object  is  to  notice  its  influence 
en  Agriculture.  This  «o  entirely  depends  on 
slaves  in  a  great  proportion  of  the  union,  that 
it  must  be  deeply  affected  by  whatever  shall 
indispose  them  to  labor,  render  them  intrac- 
■feible,  or  entree  them  into  a  multitude  of  crimes 
and  irregularities.  A  free  negro  and  mulatto 
class  is  exactly  calculated  to  effect  all  these 
ends.    They  live  upon  Agriculture  as  agents 


64  SHATERT. 

or  brokers  for  disposing  of  stolen  products,  an^ 
diminish  its  capital,  both  to  the  extent  of  thes« 
stolen  products,  and  also  to  the  amount  of  the 
labor  lost  in  carrying  on  the  trade. 

They  wound  Agriculture  in  the  two  modes 
•f  being  an  unproductive  class  living  upon  it, 
like  a  stockjobber  or  capitalist  class,  and  of 
diminishing  the  utility  of  the  slaves.  This 
latter  mode  might  be  extended  to  a  multitude 
of  particulars,  among  which,  rendering  th© 
slaves  less  happy,  compelling  masters  to  use 
more  strictness,  disgusting  them  with  Agricul- 
ture itself,  and  greatly  diminishing  their  abi- 
lity to  increase  the  comforts,  and  of  course  the 
utility  of  slaves,  would  be  items  deeply  trench- 
ing upon  its  prosperity.  It  is  however  unne- 
oessary  to  prove  what  every  Agriculturist  ia 
the  slave  states  experimentally  knows,  namelj 
that  his  operations  are  greatly  embarrassed, 
and  his  efforts  retarded,  by  circumstances  hav- 
ing the  class  of  free  negroes  for  their  cause. 

The  only  remedy  is  to  get  rid  of  it.  This 
measure  ought  to  be  settled  by  considerations 
of  a  practical  moral  nature,  and  not  by  a  mo- 
ral hypothesis,  resembling  several  mechanical 
inventions  incarcerated  at  Washington,  beauti- 
fiil  and  ingenious,  but  useless.  It  is  substan- 
tial, not  balloon  morality,  by  which  the  ques- 
tions ought  to  be  considered ;  whether  a  seve- 
rance of  the  free  negro  class  from  the  whites 


fltATEHY.  €5 

and  slares,  tvill  benefit  or  injure  either  of  the 
three  classes  ^  or  whether  it  will  benefit  or  in^ 
jure  a  majority  of  them  as  constituting  one  bo- 
dy ?  The  situation  of  the  free  negro  class  is 
exactly  calculated  to  force  it  into  every  spec  ies 
©f  vice.  Cut  off  from  most  of  tho  rights  of 
citizens,  and  from  all  the  allowances  of  slaves, 
it  is  driven  into  erevy  species  of  crime  for  s^ib- 
aistence  ;  and  destined  to  a  life  of  idleness,  anx- 
iety and  guilt.  The  slaves  more  widely  share 
in  its  guilt,  than  in  its  fraudulent  acquisitions. 
They  owe  to  it  the  perpetual  pain  of  repining 
at  their  own  condition,  by  having  an  object  of 
eomparison  before  their  eyes,  magnified  by  its 
idleness  and  thefts  with  impunity,  into  a  temp- 
tatioa  the  most  alluring  to  slaves  ;  and  will 
Eventually  owe  to  it  the  consequences  of  their 
insurrections.  The  whites  will  reap  also  a 
harvest  of  consequences  from  the  free  negro 
©lass,  and  throughout  all  their  degrees  of  rank 
sufier  much  in  their  morals  from  the  two  kinds 
•f  intercourse  maintained  with  it.  If  vice  is 
misery,  this  middle  class  is  undoubtedly  placed 
in  a  state  of  misery  itself,  and  contributes 
greatly  to  that  of  the  otheF  two.  The  interest 
of  virtue  theiefore,  as  well  as  sound  policy,  is 
allied  with  the  interest  of  Agriculture,  in  re- 
commending the  proposed  severance.  If  it 
should  not  benefit  evei^  individual  of  the  three 
classes,  as  is  probable,  no  doubt  can  exist  ef 


f  6  SLAVEKT. 

its  benefitting  a  majority  of  each,  and  a  very 
gixat  majority  of  the  whole.  No  injury,  but 
much  good  to  the  whites  and  slaves  is  perceiv- 
able in  the  measure.  And  relief  from  the  dis- 
advantages of  inferior  rights,  from  the  neces- 
sity of  living  in  a  settled  course  of  vice,  and 
from  the  dangers  portended  to  it  by  a  commo- 
tion among  the  slaves,  promises  great  beneiits 
to  the  free  negro  class  itself  from  a  severance. 

It  may  be  easily  effected  by  purchasing  of 
Congress  lands  sufficient  for  their  subsistence 
in  states  where  slavery  is  not  allowed,  and  giv- 
ing them  the  option  of  removing  to  those  lands, 
or  emigrating  wherever  they  please.  Perhaps 
both  the  national  safety  and  prosperity  would 
justify  a  harsher  measure.  To  advance  both 
hj  bestowing  rewards,  cannot  be  severe,  unjust 
^r  illiberal. 

At  least  it  will  be  admitted  by  those  acquaint- 
ed with  the  subject,  that  the  prosperity  of 
Agriculture  is  considerably  influenced  by  the 
circumstances  alluded  to  in  this  numbep* 


StJLTEBY,  W 


8LJlVEEr,,.*.Continu€d. 

Societies  are  instituted  to  control  and  di- 
minish the  imperfections  of  human  nature, 
because  without  them  it  generates  ignorance, 
savageuess  and  depravity  of  manners.    Those 
best  constituted,  cannot  however  cure  it  of  a 
disposition  to  command,  and  to  live  hj  the  la- 
bor of  others  ;  it  is  eternally  forming  sub-soci- 
eties for  aequiring  power  and  wealth,  and  t^ 
these  perfidious,  ambitious,  avaricious  or  un- 
eonstitutional  sub-societies,  the  liberty  and  pro* 
perty  of  the  rest  of  the  body  politick  has  uni- 
Yersally  fallen  a  prey^,    They  are  of  a  civll'or 
Bailitary  complexion,  or  of  both,  as  the  circum» 
stances  of  the  case  may  require  fraud  or  force. 
Antiently,  the  general  ignorance  of  mankind, 
eaused  the  frauds  of  superstition  to  suffice  for 
working  the  ends  of  traitorous  sub-isocieties.— 
As  these  became  exploded,  the  more  intricate 
pecuniary  frauds  were  resorted  to.    Now,  on 
account  of  the  increasing  knowledge  and  more 
prying  temper  of  mankind,  military  force  is 
united  with  pecuniary  frauds.     And  hitherto, 
the  most  perfect  society  for  the  publick  good, 
has  never  been  able  to  defend  itself  against 


m  -         SIATEET. 

sub-societies  in  some  form  for  advancing  i\£& 
wealth  or  power  of  a  faction  or  a  particular  in- 
terest. Combine  with  this  universal  experi- 
ence, that  it  is  impossible  to  conceive  a  form 
ef  society  better  calculated  to  excite  and  foster 
factions  or  sub-societies,  than  one  constituted 
®f  distinct  colors,  incurable  prejudices,  and 
inimical  interests,  and  the  inferences  are  una- 
Yoidable.  If  the  badges  of  foolish  names  can 
drive  men  into  phrenzy  without  cause,  will  not 
those  which  powerfully  assail  both  reason  and 
the  senses,  create  deadly  factions. 

The  attempt  will  undoubtedly  terminate  ao* 
cording  to  the  nature  of  man,  as  it  has  once 
already  terminated  ;  but  its  catastrophe  ought 
rather  to  be  courted  thun  avoided,  if  the  author 
©f  the  notes  on  Yirginia  is  right  in  the  follow- 
in.s^  quotations.  "  The  whole  commerce  be- 
tw»>en  master  and  slave"  says  he  **is  a  perpc- 
<<  tual  exercise  of  the  most  boisterous  pas&l- 
**  ons,  the  most  unremitting  despotism  on 
*«  one  part,  and  degrading  submissions  on  the 
*<  other.  The  parent  storms,  the  child  looks 
«  on,  catches  the  lineaments  of  wrath,  puts 
<<  on  the  same  airs  in  the  circle  of  smaller 
<*  slaves,  gives  a  loose  to  his  worst  of  passions, 
^  and  tbus  p^ursed,  educated  and  daily  exercis- 
«  ed  in  tyranny,  cannot  but  be  stamped  by  it 
•<  with  odious  T>eculiarities.  The  man  must  be 
^^  a  prodigy  who  caa  retain  his  manners  aad 


StATliST.  ^1' 

^*  laorals  uiidepraved  hj  sucli  circumstances. 
"  The  Almiglitv  lias  no  attribute  wMch  can 
"  take  side  with  us  in  such  a  contest.*'  Such 
is  the  picture  exhibited  in  tlie  Notes  on  Tir- 
giiiia  orf  '*  the  maaners"  of  the  people,  withou|^ 
a  eiiigle  palliating  circumstance  ;  and  Y»  inter- 
hot  ham  in  his  history  of  Amerlea  has  quoted 
and  varnished  it  anew. 

No  man  has  heeu  less  accustomed  than  the 
author  of  the  Notes  on  Virginia  to  paint  his 
opistiioiis,  for  the  same  reason  that  an  Indian 
paints  his  body ;  and  yet  from  reading  the 
whole  chapter  on  the  manners  of  that  state,  a 
stranger  would  hardly  form  a  more  correct 
idea  of  them,  than  a  stranger  to  Indians  vf  ouid 
of  their  color,    on   seeing  one  painted  eoal 
black.    Circumstances  affect  the  miudj  as  wea- 
ther does  beer,  and  frequently  produce  a  sort 
of  moral  fermentation  which  throws  up  bub^ 
blcs  of  prismatick  splendor,  whilst  iliej  are 
playe<l  upon  by  the  raysof  some  temporaiy 
effervescence,  feut  destined  to  burst  vvlien  the 
fermentation  ceases.     The  Notes  on  Yirginia 
were  written  in  the  heat  of  a  war  for  liberty ; 
iAie  human  mind  was  made  still  hotter  by  the 
French  revolution  ;  and  let  those  who  were  iii- 
sensible  of  the  mental  fermentations  and  mo- 
ral bubbles  generated  by  these  causes,  cen- 
sure Mr.  JeSerson.   I  should  be  unjust  to  do  it. 
If  Mr.  Jefferson's  assertions  are  correct,  it 


'^'0  ^XAVERt; 

is  belter  to  run  the  risque  of  national  extxnc- 
tloa,  by  liberating  and  fighting  the  blacks, 
than  to  live  abhorred  of  God,  and  conscqucnt- 
Ij  hated  of  man.    If  they  are  erroneous,  they 
ought  not  to  be  admitted  as  arguments  for  the 
emancipating   policy.       The    considerations, 
which  this  chapter  of  impassioned  censure  of 
slave  holders,  inspire,  are  too  extensive  for  a 
hasty  essay,  but  a  few  of  them  may  be  noticed, 
I  shall  pass  over  the  enlistment  of  the  Deity 
in  the  question  with  an  humble  hope,  that  his 
justice  and  mercy  do  not  require  tlie  whites 
and  blacks  to  be  placed  in  such  a  relative  situ- 
ation, as  that  one  color  must  extinguish  the 
other  ;  and  as  inclining  to  think  the  enrolment 
of  his  name  on  the  side  of  the  slaves,  some* 
wiiat  like  a  charge  of  inattention  to  his  own 
attributes,  in  apparently  siding  with  masters 
throughout  all  ages  and  among  most  nations 
hitherto,  the  liberating  St.  Domingo  masters 
-excepted  ;  and  not  a  little  tinged  with  impiety. 
Slavery  was  carried  farther  among  the  Greeks 
and  Romans  than  among  ourselves,  and  yet, 
these  two  nations  produced  more  great  and 
good  patriots  and  citizens,  than,  probably,  all 
the  rest  of  the  world.     In  the  United  States  it 
is  also  probable  that  the  public  and  private 
character  of  individuals  is  as  good,  as  ia  the 
oenutries  wlicrc  loco-motive  liberty,  and  slave- 
ry te  a  faction;,  exist ;  nor  do  the  slave  states 


SLAVERY.  7i 

seem  less  productive  of  characters  in  Aviiom 
the  nation  is  willing  to  confide  than  the  others. 
Even  the  author  of  the  quotation  himself  xnay 
be  fairly  adduced  as  an  instance  which  refutes 
every  syllahle  of  his  chapter  on  Yirginia  man- 
ners, unless  indeed  this  refutation^  and  an 
abundance  of  others  like  it,  can  be  evaded  by 
forming  the  best  citizens  into  a  class  of  prodi- 
gies, or  monsters,  to  evade  the  force  of  emi- 
nent virtues  towards  the  refutation  of  crrone- 
oi^s  assertions. 

These  facts  arc  referred  to  the  consideration 
0f  the  physiologist.  To  me,  it  seems,  that 
slaves  are  too  far  below,  and  too  much  in  the 
power  of  the  master,  to  inspire  furious  passi- 
ons ;  that  such  are  nearly  as  rare  and  disgrace- 
ful towards  slaves  as  towards  horses ;  that 
slaves  are  more  frequently  the  objects  of  bfi- 
nevolence  than  of  rage  ,•  that  children  from 
their  nature  are  inclined  to  soothe  and  hardly 
ever  suffered  to  tyrannize  over  them  ;  that  they 
•pen  instead  of  shut  the  sluices  of  benevolence 
in  tender  minds  ;  and  that  fewer  good  public 
er  private  characters  have  been  raised  in  coun- 
tries enslaved  by  some  faction  or  particular 
interest,  than  in  those  where  personal  slavery 
existed, 

I  conjecture  the  cause  of  this  to  be,  that  vi, 
oious  and  mean  qualities  become  despicable  in 
the  eyes  of  freemen^  from  their  association 


with  thQ  tliaraeter  of  slaTCi.  Cliaraeter,  Hire 
condition,  is  contrasted,  and  as  one  contrast 
causes  us  to  Iotc  liberty  better,  so  tlie  othcl* 
causes  us  to  loYe  virtue  better.  Qua-litieg,  oai- 
oiia  in  theQiBelves,  become  more  contemptible, 
^Tiieri  united  vvltb.  the  most  degraded  class  of 
xaen,  than  YihQii  seen  in  our  equals  ;  and  pride- 
ete|>s  m  to  aid  tlie  struggles  of  virtue.  In- 
stead therefore  of  fearing  that  children  should 
iiiibibe  the  qyalities  of  slaycs,  it  is  probable, 
that  the  circuinstaiice  of  seeing  bad  qualities 
in  siaTCSj  will  coatribute  to  tlielr  yiilue. 

For  the  same  reason  the  submission  and  fiat- 
terj  of  slaves  will  be  despised,  and  cause  us 
rather  to  hate  servility  than  to  imbibe  a  dicta- 
torial arrogance  ;  ^.nd  orJy  inspire  the  same 
passion  with  the  submission  and  flattery  of  a 
Spaniel.  It  is  the  submission  and  flattery  oi 
equals,  which  Ms  men  with  the  impudent  and 
wicked  wish  to  dictate,  and  an  impatience  of 
free  opinion  and  fair  dir.cussion.  This  repre- 
heiisihle  temper  is  a  sound  objection  against 
any  s^)«;^eies  of  human  policy,  which  generates 
it,  and  applies  most  forcibly  against  tliat  con- 
ferliig  on  an  individual  a  power,  so  to  dispense 
money  and  honors,  as  to  procure  submission 
and  flattery  from  the  highest  rauksB  and  con- 
iiitions  in  society,,  a  thousand  times  inorege- 
nia]  to  pride,  than  the  submission  and  flattery 
of  a  poor  slave ;  and  ten  thousand  time^  mor^j 
|5erniijiftus  to  nations. 


Virtue  and  vice  are  naturally  and  unaroidar 
biy  coexistent  ia  the  moral  world,  as  beauty 
and  deformity  are  ia  the  animal ;  one  is  the 
oaly  mirror  in  wliieb  the  other  can  be  seen, 
and  therefore  in  the  present  state  of  aaan,  on^ 
cannot  be  destroyed  without  the  other.  It 
may  be  thus  that  personal  slavery,  has  con^ 
stantly  reflected  the  strongest  rays  of  civil  ii» 
berty  and  patriotism.  Perhaps  it  is  suffered 
by  the  deity  to  perform  an  oSiee,  vathout  whick 
these  rays  are  gradually  obscured  and  finally 
obliterated  by  charters  and  partial  laws.  Per* 
haps  the  sight  of  slavery  and  its  vices  may  in- 
spire the  mind  with  an  affection  for  liberty 
and  virtue,  just  as  the  climate  and  desarts  of 
Arabia,  vrould  make  it  think  Italy  a  paradise* 

Let  it  not  be  supposed  that  I  approve  of  sla» 
very  because  I  do  not  aggravate  its  evils,  op 
prefer  a  policy  which  must  terminate  in  a  war^ 
of  extermiaation.  The  chapter  on  the  man- 
aers  of  slave-holders  before  quoted,  concludes 
with  an  intimation,  that  the  eonsent  of  the 
masters  to  a  general  emancipation,  or  their 
©wn  extirpation,  were  iliQ  alternatives  between 
which  they  had  to  choose.  Such  a  hint  from 
a  profound  mind  is  awful.  It  admits  an  ability 
in  the  blacks  though  shackled  by  slavery,  t« 
cxtii'pate  the  whites,  and  proposes  to  increase 
this  ability  by  knocking  off  their  shackles.— 
Suck  a  hiat  adds  force  to  th«  recoBsaneadatien 

Of 


In  tliQ  previous  essay  for  separatlag  the  efiji 
-slaTed  and  free  ]>lacks,as  some  security  against 
the  prognosticated  extirpatioH.  And  afitcs* 
s^eb  a  Mat,  *^  with  what  execration  should  the 
statesman  he  loaded'*  who  thus  forewarned^ 
should  produce  the  destruction  of  the  most  ei- 
Tilized  portion  of  society,  and  re-people  half 
the  world  with  savaires.  If  England  and  Am©- 
riea  would  erect  arid  fo&ter  a  settlement  of  free 
negroes  in  some  fertile  part  of  Africa,  it 
Vi^oald  soon  subsist  by  its  own  energies.  Slave- 
ry might  then  be  gradually  re-exported,  aii<i 
pliilaothropy  gratified  by  a  slow  reanimatioa 
of  ike  virtue,  religion  and  liberty  of  the  ne^ 
gpoes,  instead  of  being  again  aiSicted  with  the 
eifects  of  her  own  rash  attenipts  sudden%  t5 
change  Immaii  nature^ 


OVEHSEEnS., 

So  far  from  havin.sc  a  system  of  A^ieuitup^ 
•Jl03i©ng  us,  very  few  have  even  taken  the  trou* 
ble  to  discover  or  provide  any  basis  for  one- 
Had  Archimedes  proposed  to  more  the  earth 
with«?st  any  thing  for  himself  or  his  mechaii'- 


torn  to  staiid  on,  or  aa  arciiitect  to  ereet  a  city 
without  a  foundation,  such  projects  would  have 
been  equivalent  to  ours  for  erecting  a  system 
of  Agriculture  upon  the  basis  of  the  impov©* 
rishment  of  the  land*  Of  what  avail  is  any 
rotation  of  crops,  the  best  coMrived  imple- 
ments of  husbandry,  or  the  most  perfect  use 
of  those  iiaplemeuis,  applied  to  a  barren  soil  2 
Could  a  physiciai^  correctly  call  the  regulLO? 
administration  of  a  slow  poison  a  system  of 
medicine,  because  he  used  the  best  construct- 
ed lancets,  caudie  cups,  syringes  and  clystec 
pipes  in  killing  his  patient  ? 

it  is  absurd  to  talk  of  a  system  of  AgriouJU 
ture,  without  having  discovered,  that  every 
such  system  good  for  any  thing,  must  be  hot* 
tomed  upon  fertility.  Before  therefore,  we 
launch  into  any  system,  we  must  learn  how  t« 
enrich  our  lands.  The  soil  of  the  United 
States  upon  the  Atlantic  Ocean  is  naturally 
thin,  and  exceedingly  impoverished.  It  pro* 
duces  however  good  crops,  when  made  riel^ 
almost  mider  any  species  of  cultivation.  To 
make  it  rich  therefore  ought  to  be  the  Srst  ob- 
ject of  our  efibrts,  as  without  eifectiagthis,  all 
Other  Agricultural  objects  beneficial  to  our- 
selves or  our  country  must  fail.  Instead  of 
this,  for  one  acre  enriched,  at  least,  twenty  are 
impoverished. 

The  di^|>osltioa  ©f  oar  soil  aud  eiimat©  t& 


reward  husbandry  bountifully,  is  disclosed  fa 
the  great  returns  bestowed  upon  bad  culture, 
hj  the  very  moderate  degree  of  uatural  ferti* 
lity,  possessed  by  tiie  former.     Tbe  climate  Ut 
feeyoud  our  power,  but  the  productiveness  of 
tbe  soil  without  the  help  of  art,  is  an  encou* 
rageiaent  for  us  to  recollect  how  impiously  we 
have  neglected  the  cultivation  of  a  Deity  s9 
propitious.     But  this  Deity  has  a  rival  demom 
called  igneraace,  for  whose  worship  the  slav« 
states  have  erected   an   established   churchy 
with  a  ministry,  entitled  overseers,  fed,  cloth- 
ed and  paid  to  suppress  every  effort  for  in* 
trodaeing  the  worship  of  its  divine  adversary* 
This  necessary  class  of  men  are  bribed  by 
Agriculturists,  not  to  improve,    but  to  impa* 
Terish  their  land,  by  a  share  of  the  croa  for 
<^ne  year  ;  an  ingenious  contrivance  for  placing 
ike  lands  in  these  states,  under  an  annual  rack 
rent,  and  a  removing  tenant.     The  farm,  from 
several  gradations  to  an  unlimited  extent,  is 
'Surrendered  to  the  tra'isient  overseer,  whosg 
salary  is  increased  in  proportion  as  he  can  im- 
poverish the  land.     The  -greatest  annual  crop,   4 
and  not  the  most  Judicious  culture,  advances 
Lis  interest j  and  establishes  his  character  ;  and 
the  five's  of  these  land  doctors  are  much  higher 
■for  killing  than  for  curing.     It  is  common  for 
an  Indusli-ious  overseer,  after  a  very  few  years, 
ttf  q»iit  a  farm  on  accouat  ©f  the  baiTeiiaes*^ 


^acasioricd  by  liis  owa  industry ;  and  frequent 
cliaiiges  of  these  itinereat  managers  of  Agri^ 
eulture,  each  striving  to  extract  the  remoani 
of  fertility  left  by  his  predecessor,  combinies 
Aylth  our  Agricultural  ignorance^  to  form  the 
oompletest  system  of  impoverishment,  of  whick 
any  other  country  can  boast. 

I  mean  not  to  speak  disrespeatfidly  of  oveiv 
seei's ;  they  are  as  good  as  other  people  ;  iioF 
is  it  (heir  fault  if  their  employers  have  made 
their  wealth  and  subsistence  to  depend  on  ih^ 
impoverishment  of  half  a  continent.  The 
most  which  the  land  can  yield,  and  seldom  op 
never  improvement  with  a  view  to  future  pro- 
fit, is  a  point  of  common  consent  and  mutual 
need  between  the  Agriculturist  and  his  over- 
seer ;  and  they  generally  unite  in  emptying  the 
©up  of  fertility  to  the  dregs. 

It  is  discovered  in  England  from  experience, 
that  short  leases  were  the  worst  enemies  to 
Agriculture.  Those  of  twenty  one  years  are 
found  hy  ex}>erienee  to  be  too  short  for  im- 
provement. Must  the  practise  of  hiring  a 
man  for  one  year  by  a  share  of  the  crop,  to  lay 
®ut  all  his  skill  and  industry  in  killing  land, 
and  as  little  as  possible  in  improving  it,  sug- 
gested by  the  circumstances  and  necessities  of 
settling  a  wilderness  among  hostile  savages,  be 
kept  up  to  eommemorate  the  pious  leaning  of 
man  to  his  primitlv*  state  of  ignoraiic®  aad 
barbarity? 


7$  ]iflfCiOSIN€i^ 

Unless  this  custom  is  abolished,  the  attempt 
to  fertilize  our  lands,  is  needless.  Under  the 
frequent  emigrations  of  owners  from  State  to 
State,  and  of  overseers,  from  plantation  to  plan 
tation,  it  cannot  be  accomplished.  Impove- 
rishment will  proceed,  distress  will  follow,  and 
famine  will  close  the  scene.  It  is  a  custom 
which  injures  both  employers  and  overseer^ 
Ibj  gradually  diminishing  the  income  of  the  one, 
and  of  course  the  wages  of  the  other.  Wage4 
in  money  would  on  the  contrary,  correspond 
with  a  system  of  gradual  improvement,  by 
which  the  condition  of  both  parties  would  be 
annually  bettered,  and  skill  in  improying,  not 
a  murderous  industry  in  destroying  land,  would 
soon  become  a  recomiiiendation  to  business  and 
the  thermometer  of  compensalioi^* 


Number  16. 


IJTCLOSLYa, 


'/ 


The  modes  of  fertilizing  land  form  a  systcHij 
wholly  unlit,  as  we  shall  see  upon  enumerating 
a  few  of  its  constituents,  to  be  enforced  by  an 
itinerant  order,  bribed  to  ccvnteract  most  or 
all  of  thei%.     The  most  eiTectual  is  foundy 


when  we  have  found  the  most  copious  fund  of 
manure.    Manures  are  mineral,  vegetable  op 
atmospherical.    Perhaps  the  two  last  may  he 
resolvable  into  one.    Mineral  manures  are  lo- 
cal and  hard  of  access.    But  the  earth  swims 
in  atmosphere  and  inhales  its  refreshments-. 
The  vegetable  world  covers  the  earth,  and  is 
the  visible  agent,  to  which  its  surface  is  in- 
debted for  fertility.    If  the  vast  ocean  of  at- 
mosphere is  the  treasury  of  vegetable  food^ 
Tegetabie  manure  is  obviously  inexhaustible. 
The  vegetable  world  takes  its  stand  upon  our 
earth  to  extract  the  riches  of  this  treasury, 
larger  than  the  earth  itself,  and  to  elaborate 
them  into  a  proper  form  for  fertilizing  its  sur^ 
face.     The  experiment  of  the  willow  planted  , 
a  slip  in  a  box  containing  200  pounds  of  earth, 
and  at  the  end  of  a  few  years,  exhibiting  a 
tree  of  200  pounds  weight,  without  having  di-^ 
minished  the  earth  in  which  it  grew,  demon- 
strates the  power  of  the  vegetable,  world  to 
extract  and  to  elaborate  the  atmospherical 
manure.     This  200  pound  weight  of  wiliow, 
was  a  prodigious  donation  of  manure  by  the 
atmosphere  to  the  200  pound  weight  of  earth 
in  which  it  grew.     It  was  so   much  ata?os- 
phere  condensed  by  the  vegetable  process,  in- 
to a  form  capable  of  being  received  ^nd  held  by 
the  earth,  and  of  being  reduced  to  vegetable 
food,  during  its  struggles  to  return  to  its  own 


so  XXC1.6SI1CG. 

principle  througli  the  passes  of  piitridily  tmd  , 
evaporation.  Tegetables,  like  animals,  feed  on 
each  other.     Ineksing  for  the  sake  of  rcariDg 
TegetaMes  to  carieh  the  earth,  is  the  mode  by 
ifliich  the  greatest  quantity  of  atmospherical 
manure  can  be  iafused  into  it  with  the  least 
labor.     It  is  prepared  and  spread  without  ex- 
pence.       Cross  fences,   those   drawbacks   of 
Bian's  folly  from  divine  beRevolcnee,  are  saved 
by  inclosing  to  fertilize  ;  and  if  the  laws  for 
Qonfiuing  land  under  inclosures,  for  permitting 
animals  to  prowl  at  large,  and  for  punishing 
landholders  for  the  trespasses  committed  by 
these  marauders  on  their  land,  were  made 
more  conformable  to  justice,  common  sense 
and  common  interest,  the  supplies  of  manure 
from  the  vegetable  world,  would  become  com- 
bined with  a  vast  diminution  of  labor.     Thus 
the  two  primary  objects  of  Agriculture,  (to 
fertilize  the  land  and  save  labor)  would  be 
both  atiaincd  to  a  measureless  extent.     Vege- 
tables would  collect  from  the  atmosphere,  an 
incxiiauslible  supply  of  manure,  and  spread 
It  on  land  ^  fencing  and  timber  to  great  extent 
would  be  saved,  and  Agriculture  would  soon 
aspire  to  her  most  elegant  ornament  and  use- 
ful improvement,  live  fences.    But  alas  !  wc 
persist  in  the  opinion  that  lands  trespass  on 
cattle,  and  not  cattle  on  land.     Out  of  emu- 
lation I  suppose  ^f  an  ancient  doctrine^  which 


KfCXOSIXG.  81 

the  bayonet  only  could  confute,  that  it  was 
better  to  fasten  the  plough  to  the  shoulder 
than  the  tail. 

It  is  yet  a  question,  whether  the  earth  is  en- 
riched by  any  species  of  manure,  except  the 
vegetable  or  atmospherical,  and  experiments 
Jiave  hitherto  leaned  towards  the  negative. — • 
Without  new  accessions  of  vegetable  matter, 
successive  heavy  dressings  with  lime,  gypsum 
and  even  marie,  have  been  frequently  found  to 
terminate  in  impoverishment.  Hence  it  is  in- 
fered,  that  minerals  operate  as  an  excitement 
only  to  the  manure  furnished  by  the  atmos- 
phere. From  this  fact  results  the  impossibi- 
lity of  renovating  an  exhausted  soil,  by  resort- 
ing to  fossils,  which  will  expel  the  poor  rem- 
nant of  life,  and  indeed  it  is  hardly  probable 
that  divine  wisdom  lias  lodged  in  the  bowels 
of  the  earth,  the  manure  necessary  for  its  sur- 
face. 

However  this  question  may  be  determined, 
the  impossibility  of  obtaining  mineral  manure^ 
in  quantities  sufficient  to  enrich  an  impoverish- 
ed country,  leaves  us  no  alternative ;  whilst 
thft  spasmodic  efforts  it  excites  in  the  agony 
of  death,  are  better  calculated  to  accelerate 
the  evil,  and  to  aggravate  national  distress  by 
inspiring  false  hopes,  than  to  remedy  the  im- 
jloverishment  of  excessive  culture. 


If  A'^eg^table  matter  is  either  the  only  ma- 
nupc,  or  the  only  attainable  manure,  capable 
of  renovating  our  country,  let  us  cast  our  eyes 
upoj>  its  surface,  and  discover  the  demand,  by 
Qomputiiig  the  impoverishment.  We  Avaiit  as 
Bmch  as  we  have  expelled,  to  get  back  to  the 
state  froni  \Yhich  we  set  out.  We  must  re- 
trieve, before  we  can  improve.  The  nation 
never  dies  ;  it  is  the  yoke  fellow  of  the  earth  5 
|hese  associates  must  thrive  or  starve  together; 
if  the  nation  pursues  a  system  of  lessening  the 
food  of  the  earth,  the  earth  in  justice  or  re^- 
yenge,  will  starve  the  nation.  The  inclosing 
system  provides  the  most  food  for  the  earth, 
and  of  course  enables  the  earth  to  supply  most 
fead  to  man.     It  is  time  working  on  space. 


Dumber  ±7, 

IXCLOSIJSTG Continued, 

Let  us  boldly  face  the  fact.  Our  country 
is  nearly  ruined.  We  have  certainly  drawn 
out  of  the  earth  tlii^ce  fourths  of  the  vegeta- 
ble matter  it  contained,  within  reach  of  the 
plough.  Vegetable  matter  is  its  only  ve- 
hicic  for  conveying  food  to  us.     If  we  suck  our 


INCXOSI&Gf,  S^ 

iiiotber  to  death  we  must  die  ourselves. — 
Though  she  is  reduced  to  a  skeleton,  let  us 
not  despair.  She  is  indulgent,  and  if  we  re- 
turn to  the  duties  revealed  by  the  consequen- 
ces of  their  infraction,  to  be  prescribed  by 
God.  and  demonstrated  by  the  same  consequen- 
ces to  comport  with  our  interest,  she  will  yet 
yield  us  milk. 

We  must  restore  to  the  earth  its  vegetable 
matter,  before  it  can  restore  to  us  its  bounti- 
ful crops.  In  three  or  four  years,  as  well  as  I 
pemember,  the  willow  drew  from  the  atmos- 
phere, and  bestowed  two  hundred  weight  6f 
vegetable  matter,  on  two  hundred  weight  of 
earthj  exclusive  of  the  leaves  it  had  shed  each 
year.  Had  it  been  cut  up  and  used  ^s  a  ma- ' 
nure,  how  vastly  would  it  have  enriched  the 
two  hundred  weight  of  earth  it  gr^w  on  ?  The 
fact  demonstrates  that  by  theuseof  vegetable^^ 
we  may  collect  manure  from  the  atmosphere^ 
with  a  rapidity,  and  ia  an  abundance,  far  ex- 
ceeding that  of  which  we  have  robbed  the 
earth.  And  it  is  a  fact  of  high  encourage- 
ment ,*  for  though  it  woiild  be  our  interest,  and 
conducive  to  cur  happiness,  to  retrace  our 
steps,  should  it  even  take  us  two  hundred  years 
to  recover  the  state  of  fertility  found  here  by 
the  first  emigrants  from  Europe  ^*  and  though 
religion  and  patriotism  both  plead  for  it,  yet 
Jthere  mijrht  be  fmmA  some  minds  weak  or 


8:*  I^'CIOSING, 

%yicked  enougli,  to  prefer  the  murder  of  tlie 
little  life  left  in  our  lands,  to  a  slow  process 
of  resuscitation. 

Forbear,  oh  forbear  matricide,  not  for  fur 
turitj,  not  for  God's  sake,  but  for  your  own 
sake.  The  labour  necessary  to  kill  the  rem- 
iiant  of  life  in  your  lands,  Avill  suifice  to  revive 
them.  Employed  to  kill,  it  produces  want  and 
misery  to  yourself.  Employed  to  revive,  it 
gives  you  plenty  and  happiness.  It  is  matter 
of  regret  to  be  compelled  to  rob  the  liberal 
mind  ©f  the  sublime  pleasure,  bestowed  by  a 
eonsciousncBs  of  liaYing  done  its  utmost  for 
future  ages,  by  demonstiatiog  tbat  the  most 
sordid  will  do  the  utmost  for  gratifying  its  own 
appetites,  by  fertilizing  the  earth  ;  that  the 
process  is  not  slow,  but  rapid  ;  the  returns  not 
distant,  but  near  5  and  the  gain  not  small,  but 
great. 

Inclosing  is  a  single  channel  for  drawing 
manure  from  the  atmosphere  and  bestowing  it 
on  the  earth.  Though  it  is  the  great  canal, 
there  are  a  multitude  of  feeders.  These  are 
not  lost  in  admiration  of  the  most  powerful 
mode  for  fertilizing  the  earth,  and  will  be  sub- 
sequently remembered. 

At  present  it  is  necessary  to  consider  the 
best  mode  of  practising  the  inclosing  theoiy. 
It  is  one  wliich  can  only  succeed  in  combina- 
tion with  a  great  num]>er  of  Agricultural prac>- 


tkes,  at  enmUy'  with  those  which  sil  present 
prevail. 

It  is  ut  enmity  with  the  practice  of  summer 
fallowing  for  wheat.  Eeiiig  founded  in  the 
doctrine,  that  vegetahles  extract  the  principles 
of  fertiiify  from  the  atmosphere,  and  elaborate 
them  into  a  manure  for  the  earth,  it  is  incon- 
sistent with  the  doctrine  that  tlie  eaith  will  be 
improved  by  keeping  it  bare.  If  vegetables 
do  not  feed  upon  and  consume  earth,  hut  upoa 
the  atmospherical  manure  which  may  have 
been  introduced  into,  or  is  fioating  around  it. 
then  a  naked  fallow  by  increasing  evaporation, 
will  impoverish  the  earth,  and  waste  at  each 
ploughing  a  portion  of  this  fleeting  fertility, 
Avithout  its  being  arrested  by  a  crop. 

It  accords  with  the  doctrine  of  turning  in  a. 
clover  lay,  or  a  bed  of  any  other  vegetable 
matter,  for  a  crop  speedily  sown  or  planted 
thereon,  without  disturbing  this  new  bed  of 
vegetables,  by  which  the  previous  stock  of  at- 
mospherical manure  in  the  earth  is  vastjy  in- 
creased, and  the  least  loss  by  evaporation 
sustained. 

It  is  at  enmity  with  shallow  ploughing,  he- 
cause  it  admits  at rao spherical  manure  into  tl#e 
earth  by  water  and  air,  to  a  less  depth,  and 
loses  it  sooner  by  evaporation,  and  the  mere 
j  rapid  escape  of  water  from  its  fluidity. 


86  IJ^CLOBING, 

It  accords  with  deep  ploughing,  because)  n 
oiiables  the  earth  to  absorb  more  atimospheri- 
cal  manure  throiigh|the  two  great  veliicle^,  ar.* 
and  water  ;  and  because  it  buries  deeper  the 
manure  deposited  on  the  earth  in  a  voj^etable 
form  ;  in  one  case  inhaling  moro.,  and  in  both 
exhaling  less. 

It  is  at  enmity  with  the  custom  of  exposing 
a  iiat  surface  to  the  sun,  and  accords  with  a» 
opposite  one  ,'  because  by  the  iirst  liie  force  of 
its  rays  in  promoting  evaporation  is  encreased, 
and  bv  the  second  diminished.  These  case^» 
are  selected  to  suggest  to  the  reader^  that  tlie 
theory  of  fertilizing  the  earth  hj  atmcsphe- 
lieal  or  Yegetable  manure?  is  one,  which,  if 
correct,  will  reach  and  influerice  nearly  tlie 
whole  circle  of  our  Agricuiiural  mades  of 
managing  the  earths 


NUMBEII  i  8. 

IJ^'^CLOSLIS'^G Conlinueih 

If  plants  feed  on  earth,  why  do  they  pcrisli 
by*  drought  ?  If  they  did  not  feed  on  atmos- 
pherical manure,  why  do  they  instantly  revive 
from  4'ain  ?     And  wby  do  ^vc  see  them  consi- 


derably  peTived  0311  witliout  ruin,  wliea  tlie 
air  becomes  condeuse?!,  after  liavirjg  been 
greatlj  nirmed,  if  tlie  food  it  affords  them  wa& 
not  too  thin  in  oiio  ca.se,  and  Biore  substantial 
ill  the  other? 

Drought  becomes  far  less  pernicious  t» 
crops,  in  pvoportioa  to  the  stock  of  atmos- 
pherical  manure  with  which  the  earth  has 
been  stored  to  meet  it,  and  the  obstacles  op- 
posed to  its  loss. 

To  avoid  a  fi'equent  reference  to  experience 
as  a  voueher  for  the  doctrines  advanced  in 
these  essays,  I  shall  onee  for  all  observe,  that 
the^  are  always  drawri  from  that  source,  ex- 
itmt  when  the  eoAtrary  is  expressed.  But  it 
wouicjl  be  tiresomje  to  the  reader  to  wade 
through  a  list  of  ex||eriments  made  with  more 
industry  than  seiectific  skill,  for  along  course 
of  time^  and  suggested?  not  by  a  love  of  fame, 
but  by  necessity.  Besides  we  mu&t  aeqwire^ 
principles,  before  we  descend  to  details* 

Let  us  returii  to,  the  case  of  drought.  Its 
eifeets  aregreatiy  diminished  by  burying. witK 
the  ploiigh,  a  copious  supply  of  vegetable  mat* 
i'Qv,  and  by  opposing  an  uneven  surface  to  era^ 
poratlon.  It  is  because  this  vegetable  matter 
or  atmospherical  manure,  elaborated  into  a 
solid  form,  is  the  food  of  plants  ;  and  this  food 
is  retained  longer  by  deep  ploughing  and  an 
uneven  surface^  than  by  shallo>T  ploughing  and 


8S  l*JS't  LOSING. 

a  ieyel  surface.  And  if  these  latier  practkcs 
•are  not  combirred  with  a  good  stock  of  vege- 
table food,  tlie  effects  of  drought  appear 
sooner,  and  are  more  fatal. 

The  sudden  benefit  of  rain  to  plants,  de- 
monstrates tJiat  it  is  loaded  with  their  food  ; 
and  its  transitory  effect  equally  demonstrates 
that  this  food  rapidly  evaporates.  There  is 
no  manure  tlie  effects  of  which  are  more  sud- 
den or  less  permanent.  As  they  disappear 
from  drought,  the  loss  must  be  attributed  to 
evaporation.  Checks  upon  evaporation  are  of 
course  auxiliaries  to  the  inclosing  system. 

The  shade  to  the  earth  is  a  cheek  it  natural- 
ly produces,  and  a  consequence  of  this  check 
is,  that  the  atmospherical  manure  carried  hj 
air  or  rain  into  the  earth,  being  longer  retain- 
ed, is  imbibed  in  greater  quantity  by  the  ve- 
getable cover,  and  elaborated  into  a  manure 
more  permanent,  than  when  deposited  in  these 
vehicles. 

Wood,  and  all  the  vegetables  of  softer  tex- 
ture, are  exposed  to  the  effects  of  putrefaction 
and  evaporation,  in  a  degree  so  far  below  wa- 
ter, that  a  complete  dressing  of  atmospherical 
manure,  conveyed  in  tlie  vegetable  vehicle, 
will  discover  its  benefit  for  years,  whilst  one 
conveyed  in  rain  will  disappear  in  a  few  weeks. 
It  follows  that  the  nearer  the  vegetable  vehicle 
of  manure  from  the  atmosphere;  approaches 


U>  wooda  the  longer  it  will  last,  and  tliai  the 
n-earer  it  approaches  to  water,  the  shorter  it 
will  lj*st. 

If  this  principle  is  sound,  a  point  of  great 
importance  to  the  inclosing  system  is  settled  ^ 
whether  it  is  hetter  to  plough  in  vegetables  in 
a  succulent  or  a  dry  state  ?  Every  experiment 
I  have  ever  made,  decides  in  favour  of  the  lat*. 
ter,  and  these  decisions  correspond  with  the 
requisitions  of  our  theory.  By  ploughing  in  the 
vegetables  succulent,  we  stop  the  process  for 
extracting,  elaborating  and  condensing  atmos- 
pherical manure,  and  chiefly  bury  water,  liable 
to  the  laws  of  evaporation,  demonstrated  in 
the  ease  of  rain,  the  richest,  but  the  most  short 
lived  of  every  species  of  manure.  The  rapi- 
dity with  which  the  water  of  vegetables  in  a 
succulent  state  evaporates,  is  demonstrated  in 
euring  grass  for  hay  ;  and  the  loss  is  probably 
greater  when  the  vegetable  is  never  reduced 
at  all  to  a  dry  and  hard  state*  On  the  contra- 
ry,  by  suffering  the  vegetable  to  acquire  its 
most  solid  form,  it  will  extract  more  manure 
from  the  atmosphere,  and  this  manure  will  be 
retained  vastly  longer  by  the  earth  ;  so  long 
indeed,  that  a  good  farmer  will  accumulate 
fresh  supplies  upon  a  remaining  stock  from 
time  to  time,  so  as  to  replenish  his  land  at  a 
compound  ratio.  And  by  suffering  the  vege- 
table cover,  whatever  it  is,  to  gain  it?  hardest 


9Q  larcissisfi}., 

form,  ft  affords  longer  shade  to  the  surface  o^^ 
the  earth,  \i'hilst  it  is  also  making  dailjr  ex- 
tracts from  the  atmosphere,  during  its  whole 
succulent  existence^  to  he  deposited  wit&ia  its 


TCo  draw  from  the  atmosphere  the  greatest 
quantity  of  manure,  to  cheek  the  loss  the  eartli 
sustains  from  evaporation  during  the  process 
by  shade,  to  give  the  manure  the  most  lasting 
form,  and  to  deposit  it  in  the  most  beneficial 
manner,  are  primarv  objects  of  the  inclosing 
sjstem.' 

The  best  agent  known  to  us  for  effecting  the 
tliree  first,  is  the  red  clover.  Its  growth  is 
pspid  ;  its  quantity  exceeds  the  product  of  any 
other  grass  ;  it  throws  up  a  succession  of  stems 
in  the  same  summer;  and  these  stems  are  more 
solid  and  lasting  than  those  of  other  grasses, 
These  successive  growths  constitute  so  many 
distinct  drafts  from  the  great  treasury  of  at- 
mospherical manure  in  one  year.  Whilst 
^hese  drafts  are  repeated,  the  elover  is  daily 


jerexosiyS;.  91 

^iBurin^  the  treasure,  in  a  form  able  long  to 
^lude  the  robber  evaporation,  whom  it  aLso  op- 
poses by  shade.  To  its  extracting  from  the 
atmosphere  the  greatest  quantity  of  manure, 
and  elaborating  it  into  a  lasting  form  the  most 
suddenly  of  any  otlier  vegetable  cover,  clover 
lays  for  wheat  are  indebted  for  tkeir  fame.— 
"Their  success  has  been  attributed  to  the  por- 
tion of  the  vegetable  in  a  succulent  state,  whilst 
it  was  owing  to  the  greater  portion  which  had 
arrived  to  maturity  previous  to  the  fallow.  To 
ascertain  this  fact,  let  one  moiety  of  a  clover 
field  be  turned  in  as  soon  as  its  first  crop  flow- 
oi*s,  and  the  other  after  the  stem  of  the  last 
crop  is  hard,  and  the  whole  sowa  on  one  day 
in  wheat. 

The  peculiar  propensity  of  clover  to  be  im- 
proved by  a,  top  dressing  of  the  gypsum,  is  an- 
other striking  circumstance  of  its  affinity  i9 
the  system  for  fertilizing  land  by  its  ovt  n  cover. 
As  its  growth  is  suddenly  and  vastly  increased 
hj  this  top  dressing,  it  furnishes  reason  to  be- 
lieve, that  the  effect  flows  fi*om  a  disposition 
communicated  by  the  gypsum  to  the  clover, 
for  imbibing  atmospherical  food  by  its  exter- 
nal parts  ;  and  so  much  as  it  tlms  gains,  af- 
fords to  the  earth  a  double  benefit.  One,  that 
this  food  not  being  extracted  from  the  stock  of 
atmospherical  manure,  possessed  by  the  earth, 
^oes  not  impoverish  it ;  the  other,  that  being 


ii2  us^crosiNC?, 

bestowed  on  the  earth  from  wiience  it  was  not 
taken,  it  adds  to  its  fertility. 

Tlie  tap  root  of  the  eloTer  also  advances  tlie 
iaterition  of  the  inclosing  system  in  several 
respects.  By  plereiii^  the  earth  to  a  considc- 
I'able  depth,  apertiii  fcs  or  pores  are  created  for 
imhibing  and  sinking  deeper  a  greater  quanti- 
ty of  atmospherical  manure  }  so  well  defend- 
ed by  the  shade  of  the  top  5  and  the  friability 
thus  eommunieated  to  the  soil,  aifords  a  most 
happy  facility  to  the  plough,  for  turning  in  its 
vast  bed  of  vegetable  matter. 

In  commemorating  the  value  of  clover  as  an 
agent  for  transferin^  a  portion  of  the  inexliaus- 
tible  wealth  of  the  atmosphere  to  the  earth, 
we  must  not  forget  that  every  member  of  the 
vegetable  world,  contributes  to  the  same  pur- 
pose ;  and  that  these  auxiliaries  to  clover  will 
powerfiJly  second  its  efforts,  and  may  be  suc- 
cessfully substituted  for  it,  where  circumstan- 
ces deny  its  use.  In  the  exhausted  lands,  san- 
dy soil  and  dry  climate  of  the  country  below 
the  mountains,  clover  will  not  live.  Recourse 
must  therefore  be  had  to  otlier  means  of  im- 
proving the  land,  to  endow  it,  with  a  capacity 
of  resorting  to  its  use.  It  is  eminently  endow- 
ed with  this  capacity  by  a  certain  degree  of 
fertility,  and  thenceforth  good  management 
will  retain  and  increase  it. 


In  the  mean  time,  the  best  substitute  for 
clover  should  be  sought  for  by  experience.— ^ 
The  bird  foot  clover,  as  it  is  called,  is  one  of 
'considerbale  promise  ;  it  will  flourish  in  a  san- 
dy soil,  is  eqfially  improved  by  the  gypsum,  af- 
fords early  and  good  shade,  makes  a  muUitudsi 
of  seed,  and  may  by  a  small  degree  of  skill, 
be  kept  up  witliout  being  sown.  Though  it 
perishes  early  in  the  summer,  it  yet  leaves  a 
great  cover  of  dry  vegetable  matter  on  the 
earth,  which  defies  evaporation  until  the  plough 
can  turn  it  in.  And  its  dead  coat  is  frequent^* 
ly  pierted  by  other  grasses,  and  sometimes  by 
luxuriant  growths  of  weeds,  before  unknown 
to  the  soil,  which  seem  to  come  forward  as 
witnesses  to  the  fact  of  its  fertilizing  the  land« 
This  grass  is  an  enemy  to  wheat  on  account  of* 
its  early  and  rapid  growth,  and  of  course  ought 
only  to  be  used  to  fertilize  land  in  which  wheat 
ought  not  to  be  sown.  And  as  wheat  cannot 
be  beneficially  sown  in  land,  unable  to  produc© 
red  clover,  the  bird  foot  clover  seems  designed 
to  take  up  the  care  of  the  soil,  at  the  point  of 
impoverishment  where  the  red  lays  it  Jown.— » 
As  red  clover  is  tlie  best  associate  of  wheat, 
for  the  pui^iose  of  saving  and  improving  a 
good  soil,  bird  foot  is  the  best  associate  of  In- 
<iian  corn  for  rendering  the  same  services  to  ^ 
liad  oue.^ 


■9'^  "MANURING. 

Indhidtials  of  the  vegetable  world  are  qiiot- 
ed^  not  to  insinuate  that  their  powers  for  the 
object  proposed  are  extremely  peculiar,  but  to 
illustrate  my  liTpothesis.  The  entire  vegeta- 
ble creation  must  contribute  towards  sustaining 
this  hypothesis,  or  it  must  fall.  If  it  is  sup- 
ported by  this  spacious  foundation,  there  are 
few  systems  better  supported.  Therefore,  af- 
ter having  deduced  the  benefit  resulting  to 
land  by  inclosing,  from  the  hypothesis  that 
vegetables  draw,  retain,  and  bestow  on  the 
earth,  the  atmcspherical  manure  in  great 
abundance,  I  shall  proceed  to  consider  other 
jnodes  of  manuring  Uj,  chiefly  founded  in  the 
game  hvi)othesI;^» 


CS  ITjiUBEli    20. 


MJIJS'UBIXG, 


It  is  not  my  design  to  advance  any  thing 
fstrange  or  new,  or  to  recommend  expensive, 
difficult,  or  uncommon  modes  of  improving 
land.  Brilliant  projects  for  improvement,  in 
the  present  state  of  Agriculture,  would  be  like 
diamonds  set  in  lead.  My  utmost  design  is  to 
point  out  a  few  improvements  which  even  ig- 


24ANURING.  9B- 

lioriince  can  understand,  and  poverty  practice ; 
%ct  such  as  may  not  be  beneath  the  regard  ot 
knowledge,  nor  the  interest  of  wealth. 

The  most  abundant  sources  for  artificial  ma- 
nure in  the  most  exhausted  district  of  our  coun- 
try, are  the  offal  of  Indian  corn,^  the  straw  of 
small  grain,  and  the  dung  of  animals.  We 
find  in  the  two  first,  proofs  of  the  value  of  dry 
vegetables  as  a  manure.  If  these  few  means 
for  fertilizing  the  country,  were  skilfully  used, 
they  would  of  themselves  suffice  to  change  its 
state  from  sterility  to  fruitfulness.  But  they 
tire  so  egregiously  neglected  or  mismanaged^ 
that  we  hardly  reap  a  tythe  of  their  value. 

There  is  no  farinacious  plant  which  fur* 
nishes  so  rich  and  so  plentiful  a  crop  as  the 
Indian  corn.  It  yields  food  in  abundance  for 
men,  beast  and  land.  By  the  litter  of  Iiidiaii 
corn,  and  of  small  grain,  and  hy  penning  cat- 
tle, managed  with  only  an  inferior  degree  of 
skill  in  union  with  inclosing,  I  will  venture  to 
affirm,  tliat  a  farm  may  in  ten  years  be  made 
to  double  its  produce,  and  in  twenty  to  Qua- 
druple it ;  the  ratio  of  its  increased  value  is  of 
course  still  greater. 

There  is  no  other  secret  in  the  business  than 
that  none  of  these  manures  be  wasted.  Thci 
Agriculturist  who  expects  to  reap  good  crops 
from  neglecting  his  manures,  is  equally  a  fa- 
natick,  with  the  religionist  >Yho  expects  hea- 
ven from  neglecting  his  iuoralg. 


©6  MANtRl]N"G, 

Details,  however  imentertaining,  may  not  be 
useless  ^  therefore  I  shall  often  resort  to  tliem. 
The  stalks  of  corn  should  constitute  the  chief 
litter  and  part  of  the  food,  both  of  the  stable 
and  farm  pen  yard,  during  the  >vinter.  The 
sooner  they  are  used  after  the  corn  is  gather- 
ed, the  more  saeeharum  remains  to  bestow  va- 
lue on  them  as  food,  and  the  more  manure  they 
will  yield,  as  evaporation  diminishes  both  ^ 
and  this  proceeds  far  more  rapidly  whilst 
standing  single,  subject  to  the  vicissitudes  of 
weather,  than  when  immersed  in  the  steady 
moisture  arid  cold  climate  of  the  farm  yard" 
As  a  food,  they  are  better  for  horses  than  for 
cattle,  because  of  the  superior  masticating 
power  of  the  former ;  whereas  cattle  are  able 
to  eat  but  little  of  the  stalk  itself,  and  chiefly 
confine  themselves  to  picking  an  inferior  food 
attached  to  it.  Stalks  carried  morning  and 
evening  in  loads,  into  the  farm  pen  and  stable 
yard,  furnish  both  to  cattle  and  horses  much 
food,  but  to  the  latter  early  in  the  winter,  they 
are  a  species  of  fodder  the  most  beneficial  I 
have  ever  tried  ;  and  besides  tlie  manure  they 
furnish  will  amply  reeompence  the  farmer,  by 
enabling  him  to  spare  his  hay  and  corn  blades, 
to  be  used  when  the  labor  of  his  team  becomes 
harder.  Thev  enable  him  also  to  relieve  his 
land  from  the  tax  of  pasturing  horses,  by  iha 
preservation  of  hay  and  blades  for  summer's 


MANURING.  97 

use?  and  are  in  that  way  eniiiiently  subsorviciit 
to  the  mclosing  system. 

To  ihe  stalks  are  to  be  added  tlie  Mades, 
tops,  shucks  and  cohs  of  tlie  Indian  corn,  ail 
in  some  degree  a  food,  and  a  plentiful  litter. 
The  value  of  the  cob  as  a  food  is  highly  spoken 
of,  but  has  not  been  ascertained  by  me  ;  as  a 
manure,  by  depositing  them  in  deep  furrows 
t\vo  or  three  feet  apart,  barely  covering  them 
with  a  plough,  and  bringing  the  land  two  years 
afterwards  into  tilth,  I  have  found  them  excel- 
lent. In  every  view  they  illustrate  tlic  vege- 
table power  of  elaborating  atmosphere  into 
hard  and  enriching  substances. 

The  great  object  in  making  asd  applying  the 
manure  arising  from  litter  of  every  kind,  and 
the  dung  of  animals,  is  to  avoid  the  loss  by 
evaporation.  Jn  obedience  to  the  old  Sn^li§l\ 
authorities,  I  have  in  various  ways  compounded 
dunghills,  kept  them  through  the  summer,  and 
covered  with  earth  and  with  bushes  the  ma- 
nure of  the  farm  pen  ;  and  the  loss  has  been 
regularly  graduated  by  the  fermentation  pro- 
duced, from  a  moiety  to  three  fourths,  being 
invariably  greater,  the  better  the  litter  was 
rotted,  or  the  greater  the  degree  of  fermenta- 
tion. As  a  farther  experiment  to  ascertain  the 
same  fact,  I  have  several  times  penned  the 
saiaae  cattle  oa  the  same  space  for  the  samo 


98  MANURING* 

periodj  ploughing  up  one  portion  as  soon  as  the 
pen  was  removed,  and  leaving  the  otlier  iin- 
ploughed  for  eight  or  ten  weeks.  On  putting 
footh  at  one  time  in  the  same  crop,  the  result 
lias  uniformly  heen,  a  vast  inferiority  to  a  line, 
of  that  left  exposed  to  the  effects  of  eva- 
poration. 


Number  2i. 


MAJfUraXG Continued. 

An  eifervescence  which  shall  become  so  in  • 
tense,  as  to  produce  a  visible  evaporation  or 
smcke,  is  said  to  be  an  effect  of  ploughing  in  a 
cover  of  green  vegetables,  and  this  effect  is 
stated  as  an  argument  of  fertilizing  conse- 
quenees  to  the  Earth.  If  an  escaping  torrent 
of  manure  is  calculated  to  impart  lasting  fer- 
tility to  tlje  earth,  then  the  hypothesis  which 
considers  evaporation  as  a  channel  for  impo- 
verishing, and  not  for  fertilizing  the  earth,  is 
iin  error.  Then  also  the  ancient  English  ha- 
bit of  making  manure  by  contriving  every 
means  of  promoting  evaporation  is  correct, 
und  the  modern  notion  that  this  habit  wastes 
manure  by  restoring  it  to  the  atmosphere,  is 


incorrect.  The  heat  of  the  sun  will  sometimes 
make  wet  earth  smoke,  but  instead  of  enrich- 
ing, it  thereby  extracts  the  manure  contained. 
iii  water.  The  evaporation  of  green  vegetables 
in  a  perceptible  smoke,  must  have  a  similar 
effect.  The  idea  that  this  smoking  of  the 
earth  was  a  proof  that  we  w  ere  making  a  great 
quantity  of  manure  of  green  vegetabies,  may 
have  been  borrowed  from  infering  the  same 
thing  from  the  smoking  of  dunghills  com- 
pountled  of  dry  |  and  wliilst  the  latter  opinion- 
is  exploded  by  the  common  instances  of  the 
vast  loss  of  manure  it  produces  in  these  dung- 
hills,  the  former  may  have  continued,  though 
founded  in  the  same  principle,  for  want  of  fa» 
miliar  experiments  to  disprove  it. 

The  system  of  husbandry  for  fertilizhig  the 
earth,  by  increasing  its  friability,  for  the  sake 
of  enabling  it  more  copiously  to  inhale  the  at- 
mospherical manure,  has  the  great  defect  o£ 
not  providing  against  the  effects  of  exhalation* 
Inhaled  atmosphere  being  as  rare  and. light  as 
inhaled  water,  is  as  liable  to  the  laws  of  eva- 
poration, and  its  benefit  to  the  land  must  of 
course  be  as  transient.  Against  this  defect,, 
the  permanency  of  atmospherical  manure,  in 
the  form  of  hardened  vegetables,  so  much  less 
exposed  to  these  laws,  provides. 

To  support  the  details  of  manuring,  it  is  ne« 
eessary  to  advert  cccasioaaily  to  principles,—^ 


100  MANURING, 

TulFs  husbandry  is  the  reinedj  reeommenJed 
for  the  erroneous  opirdoii,  that  ten  cultivated 
acres  Yvili  not  produce  the  means  of  maniiring 
above  one.  This  error  is  founded  on  the  inhal- 
ing without  considering  tiie  exhaling  fjuality 
of  the  earili  ;  and  to  supply  the  want  of  ma- 
imrej,  we  are  advised  to  expose  our  lands  to 
evaporation  in  the  greatest  possible  degree?  by 
naked  fallows. 

On  iliQ  contrary,  I  am  convinced,  that  if  we 
will  watch  and  arrest  the  thief  evaporation, 
whether  stealing  our  means  for  raising  ma- 
nure, or  sweating  the  earth  as  a  Jew  sweats 
gold,  we  shall  discover  modes  of  fertilizing 
land  infinitely  beyond  our  most  sanguine  hopes, 
both  by  additions  of  manure,  and  obstructions 
to  evaporation. 

Twenty  five  years  ago,  I  found  more  ditHr 
culty  in  manuring  one  acre  for  five  labourers, 
including  v/omen  and  boys,  owing  to  a  waste  of 
my  means  for  raising  manure,  and  an  igno- 
rance of  applying  it,  than  I  now  do  in  manur- 
ing two  acres  for  each.  By  manuring  two 
acres  for  each  labourer,  with  the  three  resour- 
ces only  common  to  every  bread  stuif  farm,  it 
follows  that  we  may  manure  about  one  seventh 
of  the  land  we  annually  put  in  tilth,  i ",  as  I 
suppose  we  can  seldom  plough  more  thai  four- 
teen acres  for  each  labourer,  including  women 
aud  boys.    This  is  at  once  attaiaing  to  the 


MANURING.  101 

summit  oi  European  exertion,  without  the  aid 
of  lime,  marie,  soot,  the  sweepings  of  cities, 
and  several  other  resources  for  improving 
land,  which  contribute  greatly  towards  eon- 
ducting  European  farmers  to  the  same  stage 
of  improvement :  and  without  the  vast  benefit 
of  inclosing.  Two  reasons  exist  for  an  event 
fipparently  so  unlikel^^ ;  the  Indian  corn  fur- 
nishes a  fund  of  litter  for  raising  manure,  in- 
finitely exceeding  any  of  theirs,  and  theit 
waste  of  manure  by  evaporation  is  avoidedt- 


3MJfUni.YG Continueih 

This  subject  compels  me  to  revert  io  a  us\^ 
of  Indian  corn,  before  the  mode  of  its  culture 
is  considered.  Its  blade  makes  the  finest  fod- 
der, and  if  well  saved,  furnishes  but  little  lit- 
ter, because  it  is  all  eaten.  Being  the  best 
hay,  it  ought  to  be  saved  for  the  hottest  and 
most  laborious  season  of  the  year,  which  oc- 
curs immediately  after  the  green  clover  fails. 
The  first  part  of  the  Indian  corn  which  should 
fee  used  as  food,  is  the  stalk,  because  it  is  har- 
der to  keep  sound  through  the  >^inter,  than 


any  other  fodder,  and  its  saccliaruin  is  coni^ 
tinualiy  wasting.  The  tops  should  be  devoted 
to  covering  a  farm  pen  of  rails,  in  the  form, 
of  three  sides  of  a  square,  closed  to  the  ground 
on  the  outside,  and  open  within,  and  to  a  house 
for  pumpkins  and  turnips  stacked  in  the  com- 
mon form.  Some  loss  will  accrue  from  the 
evaporation  of  a  cover,  whether  composed  of 
straw  or  corn  tops,  and  tops  make  infinitely 
the  best.  And  some  annual  cover  of  a  win- 
ter's farm  pen  for  cattle,  is  indispensible,  as 
being  a  vast  saving  upon  the  European  custom 
of  stationary  cow  houses.  Arthur  Young  is,  I 
think,  of  opinion,  that  1200  acres  is  that  size 
for  a  farm  best  adapted  for  the  economy  of  la- 
bor. Suppose  two  hundred  and  fifty  acres,  of 
this  farm  to  be  annually  ploughed,  and  fifty  to 
be  annually  manured  :  If  this  manuring  is 
commenced  around  a  station  for  raising  ma- 
nure, in  four  years  the  station  is  isolated  in 
the  midst  of  two  hundred  acres  of  manured 
land,  leaving  it  about  six  hundred  yards  dis- 
tant from  the  nearest  of  the  unmanurcd  land, 
which  distance  increases,  as  the  manuring  is 
extended,  from  that  minimum,  to  its  maximum, 
namely,  the  distance  from  the  centre  to  tiic 
verge  of  an  area  of  one  thousand  two  hundred 
acres.  Hence  the  expence  of  carrying  in  the 
litter  and  carrying  out  the  manure,  will  pre- 
sently become  so  enormous,  as  to  drive  the  far- 


Bier  into  the  ancient  ruinous  and  abandoned 
custom  of  infield  and  outfield,  or  that  of  high- 
ly improving  a  spot  around  his  house^  and 
highly  impoverishing  the  rest  of  his  farm. 

An  amhulatory  cow  house  is  the  remedy  for 
this  disastrous  mode  of  management.     Tlie 
sheep  and  cattle  should  he  employed  in  ma- 
nuring abroad,  and  the  horses  at  home.     The 
/arm  pens  of  the  farmer  should  be  placed  in 
the  field  for  cultivation,  with  an  eye  to  con^ 
venienee  or  saving  of  labour,  both  in  receiving 
the  stalks  from  the  shift  of  the  preceding  year, 
and  also  in  distributing  the  manure  in  that  ta> 
be  cultivated.     It  is  far  better  to  make  a  lane 
of  great  length  to  conduct  the  cattle  to  water^ 
^han  to  omit  this  management. 

The  greatest  assiduity  should  be  used  in 
conveying  the  corn  stalks  to  these  farm  pens, 
and  the  stable  yard  as  early  as  possible,  re- 
serving the  sliucks,  the  straw,  the  tops,  the 
blades,  and  the  hay  for  later  periods  j  because 
the  injury  to  the  stalks,  standing  single  and 
exposed  to  the  vicissitude  of  weather,  is  infi- 
nitely greater  from  evaporation,  than  to  these 
other  articles  of  food  and  litter.  Some  small 
quantities  of  straw  and  shucks  should  howe- 
Yer  be  used  with  them,  to  produce  compact- 
ness as  a  defence  against  evaporation,  and  to 
treat  the  cattle  with  a  variety  of  food,  so  grate- 
ful to  animals.    The  straw  and  the  shucks  af- , 


ter  the  stalks  are  all  in,  will  bestow  a  cover  on 
tliem  impenetrable  to  drouglit?  and  secure 
against  evaporation  ;  the  several  kinds  of  lit- 
ter are  beneficiallj  mingled,  and  tlie  tops  whieli 
covered  tlie  eow  house,  are  tlie  last  food  of  its 
inhabitaiils. 

Tlie  ground  to  be  manured ,  should  be  fal- 
lowed in  the  winter,  since  t!ie  more  friable- 
its  state?  tlie  better  it  commixes  with  the  iin- 
rotted  contents  cf  the  farm  pens,  and  the  bet- 
ter these  contents  are  covered  with  the  plongi?. 
If  this  is  neglected,  the  want  of  a  thorough 
commixture,  and  the.  exposure  of  manure  on 
the  surface,  both  of  which  will  happen  in  a 
degree  when  the  long  litter  of  the  farm  pen  is 
carried  on  unploughed  ground?  generally  causes 
the  loss  of  one  half  of  the  manure,  and  on«i 
Jiaif  of  the  crop. 


NrMBEP^  23- 

MA^  UIiI^*G...,,ConlinU€i. 

The  winter's  fallow  to  receive  the  spring 
manure,  is  a  business  capable  of  some  improve- 
ment, and  economy  of  labor.  This  fallow, 
wiien  the  manure  is  for  Indian  corn,  as  it  ought 


to  he  where  that  grain  is  cultivated,  should  be 
made  by  three  furrows,  forming  a  ridge  live 
feet  and  an  half  wide.     Two  of  these  furrows 
are  made  by  a  large  plough,  calculated  to  cut 
deep  and  wide,  and  to  turn  the  sod  completely 
over ;  and  the  third  !)y  a  plough  called  a  trowel 
hoe,  made  one  third  larger  than  usual,  with  a 
©oulter  on   the   point,  and  a  mould-board  on 
each  side.     If  the  iield  has  been  left  in  such 
ridg'es  at  its  last  cultivation,  the  large  plough 
cuts  a  furrow  on  the  ridge  on  each  side  of  its 
summit,  making  the  sod  it  turns  up  to  meet 
thereon,  and  leaving  under  th^t  sod  all  the 
earth  it  can  cover,  unbroken.     These  two  fur- 
rows will  leave  the  old  water  furrow  between 
them,  or  an  equivalent  space,  which  the  de-r 
scribed  trowel-hoe-plough,  with  its  two  large 
mould  boards  will  break  up,  throwing  thr  so^d 
on  each  side.     Both  these  ploughs  should  be 
drawn  by  four  horses,  leaving  the  furrow  made 
by  the  trowel-hoe  uneommortly  deep  and  wide* 
in  this  state  the  ground  lies  through  the  win- 
ter.    Its  vegetable  cover  is  buried  so  as  to  es- 
cape some  loss  by  evaporation,  the  unbroken 
space  is  so  mellowed  by  the  cover  of  the  sod, 
as  to  become  soft  and  friable  by  the  spring, 
and  the  bottom  of  the  large  open  furrow,  com- 
monly a  dead  clay,  is  invigorated  bj  a  winter's 
exposure  to  the  atmosphere. 

K 


106  MANURING, 

The  manure  oiiglit  to  1)6  devoted  to  Indlaa 
^orn,  because  a  crop  of  great  value  is  thereby 
gaiiiedj  >vhilst  it  is  going  thro'  the  process^ 
supposed  in  England  to  be  necessary  to  reduce 
it  to  vegetable  food.     Complete  putrefaction  is 
there  considered  as  necessary,  for  this  end.— 
Whereas  by  planting  the  Indian  corn,  as  soon 
as  the  unrotted  manure  of  the  farm  pen  is  car- 
ried out  and  ploughed  in,  its  growth  is  greatly 
nourished  and  fmally  perfected,  by  the  time 
the  putrefaction  is  completed.     It  catches  the 
evaporation  produced  by  the  moderate  fermen- 
tation of  the  rotting  vegetable  matter  of  which 
the  manure  is  compouiKled,  and  exactly  that 
portion  of  manure  whicli  is  lost,  by  the  custom 
©fretting  it  before  it  is  used,  becomes  the  pa- 
rent of  a  great  crop.     By  the  fall  the  manure 
is  reduced  to  a  f4  pabuhim  for  wheat,  and  evea 
more  of  it  is  saved  for  this  end,  ndnglcd  in  the 
earth,  and  su])Jcct  to  a  moderate  fermentation, 
than  if  it  had  been  retained  in  hot  dunghills 
tjirough  the  summer,  exposed  to  a  violent  ef- 
fervescenee,  and  then  exclusively  devoted  to 
this  crop  upon  a  naked  fallow.     The  area  ma- 
nured would  not  be  at  most  above  half  the  ex- 
tent, and  the  degree  of  em  ichment  nearly  the  j 
same. 

Indian  corn  thrives  better  with  unrotted  ma« 
nure,  than  any  other  crop,  and  is  precisely  the 
crop,  and  almost  tbc  solitary  one;  ready  to  as- 


MANUEING.  107 

Soeiate  with  coarse  litter  the  first  growing 
weather  which  occurs  after  it  is  applied.  Po- 
tatoes and  tabacco  may  possibly  possess  the 
same  quality.  The  former  certainly  associate 
well  with  coarse  manure,  but  neither  are  pro- 
fitable as  a  crop  ;  one  is  not  adapted  to  the  cli- 
mate favourable  to  Indian  corn,  and  the  other 
is  not  admissible  into  any  good  system  of 
Agriculture. 


M^J^UniJ^G Continued. 

Manure  from  the  litter  of  a  farm  ought  i& 
Be  chiefly  made  in  the  cool  portion  of  the  yea?^ 
to  avoid  the  enormous  loss  produced  by  a  com- 
bination of  heat,  moisture  and  vegetable  mat- 
ter. If  a  considerable  portion  of  this  litter  is 
reserved  for  the  summer's  use,  a  considerable 
loss  is  unavoidable.  A  small  pai-t  of  it  only 
may  be  kept  for  the  stable,  more  for  the  sake 
of  the  horses  than  for  the  object  of  manure.— 
It  is  better  for  that  object  to  exhaust  the  littei^ 
In  the  \Yinter  season,  than  lo  reserve  any  of  it 
for  Slimmer,  if  the  opinions  that  vegetables 
extract  marjj,re  from  the  atBio sphere;  and  that 


tOS  MANVniNQ. 

manures  are  gradually  evaporated  back  to  their 
origin,  be  true  ;  because  litter  is  exposed  to  a 
far  greater  loss  from  evaporation,  bj  a  com- 
jnixture  w  itb  moist  dung  in  summer,  than  if  it 
bad  been  spread  on  the  farm  yards  in  winter, 
and  ploughed  into  the  earth  in  spring,  before 
any  considerable  fermentation  occurs.  Hence, 
as  the  dung  of  animals,  constitutes  but  a  small 
portion  of  the  manure  which  ought  to  be  raised 
on  a  well  managed  farm,  it  would  be  a  loss  to 
sacriiice  a  considerable  mass  of  vegetable  ma- 
nure, for  this  object  of  inferior  value.  The 
American  custom  of  penning  cattle  during  the 
night  in  the  summer  season,  properly  attended 
to,  is  therefore  a  far  more  thrifty  one,  for  the 
object  of  manuring,  than  the  English  custom 
of  mingling  moist  dung  and  vegetable  littef 
during  that  season.  By  ours,  both  these  kinds 
of  manure  escape  much  of  the  loss  from  eva- 
poration ;  by  theirs,  this  loss  is  increased  as  to 
both  by  an  excessive  effervescence. 

■Yet  the  dung  of  animals  during  the  summer 
season  is  an  item  of  great  moment  for  enrich- 
ing lands,  if  it  is  saved  without  subtracting 
from  the  more  valuable  item  of  the  winter's 
farm  yards.  The  most  beneficial  mode  of  its 
application  within  the  scope  of  my  observation, 
is  penning  cattle  and  sheep,  graduating  the  size 
of  these  pens  by  observation,  until  the  designed 
quantity  of  manure  shall  be  deposited  within 


Manuring.  409 

two  veeks  at  most,  and  ploughing  it  in  on  the 
day  the  pen  is  removed,  invariablj.  The  loss 
from  evaporation  is  so  great  that  a  pen  ought 
never  to  remain  above  two  wcekg.  I  hare 
frequently  seen  cow  pens  contimied  in  one  spot, 
until  the  daily  loss  balanced  the  daily  accession 
of  manure  ;  and  the  richness  of  the  land  with 
these  daily  accessions,  became  stationary.  By 
a  regular  course  of  removing  these  pens,  and 
immediatiely  ploughing  in  the  manure,  the  far- 
mer will  be  agreeably  surprised  to  find,  that 
the  improved  area  will  infinitely  exceed  his 
hopes  ;  for  his  ground  will  be  equally  enriched 
by  far  less  dung,  on  account  of  these  precau- 
tions against  evaporation,  and  the  cattle  will 
of  course  go  over  a  far  greater  space. 

The  land  thus  manured  by  the  tenth  of  Au- 
gust, may  be  sown  in  turnips,  at  one  pint  of 
seed  to  an  acre,  broadcast.  After  that  period, 
the  pens  which  had  stood  from  fourteen  down 
to  ten  days  (for  the  time  should  be  diminished 
as  the  cattle  fatten)  should  be  removed  every 
seven  days,  because  no  draft  will  be  made  from 
the  land  by  a  turnip  crop,  the  quantity  of  tlio 
manure  is  increased,  the  evaporation  is  dimin- 
ished by  the  length  of  the  nights,  and  the  cat- 
tie  have  improved  in  plight. 

One  hundred  head  of  small  and  ordinary 
cattle,  of  the  ages  common  when  raised  on  the 
farm,  and  as  many  sheep,  will  in  this  way  ma- 

K   3 


no  MANURING. 

nure  eighteen  acres  annually,  sufficiently  to 
produce  fine  crops  of  Indian  corn  and  wheat, 
and  a  good  growth  of  red  clover  after  them, 
IrYlth  the  aid  of  gypsum ;  and  the  clover  when 
preserved  hj  the  system  of  inclosing,  will  hy 
two  years  crops,  left  to  fall  on  the  land,  re- 
store it  to  the  plough,  richer  than  the  manur- 
ing made  it.  About  eight  of  these  acres  will 
also  have  yielded  a  crop  of  turnips,  good  ar 
bad,  according  to  the  season  and  the  soil. 

But  horses  cannot  be  comprised  in  this  mode 
of  management,  because  of  the  inadequacy  of 
their  nature  to  its  exposure  and  hardships. — - 
Whatever  they  are  fed  on,  furnishes  some  lit- 
ter, some  must  be  saved  to  help  it  out,  the  ma- 
nure they  make  in  the  summer  should  be  used 
as  late  as  possible  in  the  spring,  and  as  early 
as  possible  in  the  fall,  and  the  litter  saved 
should  only  be  contemplated  to  last,  until  a 
new  supply  from  the  crop  of  wheat  can  come 
in.     These  precautious   against   evaporation, 
witliplacing  the  summer  cleanings  under  cover,, 
or  at  least  where  it  may  be  trodden  hard,  may 
be  resorted  to  without  a  great  s^teriiice  of  litr 
ter  or  veu'ctable  nianure. 


3ftAJfUEI3fG,  111 


NU5I3EII     2'. 


JltM^Ulim^G. ....  ContlTVUcd, 

Infimtcly  the  most  abundant  source  of  ard- 
fieiai  manure  mtliin  the  reach  of  a  bread  stiiflT 
farmer,  is  tiiat  raised  is  farm  pens  during  the 
>vinler,  Sidll  and  industry  in  this  single  point, 
Vf  oukl  as  suddenly,  but  more  permanently  im- 
prove the  face  of  our  country,  as  paint  does 
timt  of  a  wrinkled  hag.. 

Of  these  pens,   each  with  a  shelter,  there 
should  be  at  least  five,  or  equivalent  divisions 
for  catlle,  beeves,  sheep  and  calves,  muttons, 
and  hogs,    A  disposition  of  them  ought  to  be 
made  itpon  a  ealeulation  of  economy,  as  to  the 
combined  objects  of  collecting  the  litter,  car- 
rying out  the  manure  and  feeding  the  animals. 
After  the  Indian  corn  crop  is  planted,  tliat  por- 
tion of  it  excepted,  for  which  the  manure  of 
the   farm   yards   is   intended,  these  animals 
should  be  placed  on  their  summer's  establish^ 
ment ;  every  other  species  of  labor  on  the  farm 
.  siiould  cease,  until  the  harvest  of  manure  is 
secured,  and  its  security  against  evaporation 
should  be  an  olyect  of  as  much  solicitude,  as 
the  security  of  hay  against  rain.     On  making 
a  breach  in  the  body  of  manure,  the  olfactory 


112  MANURING. 

nerves^  y^ill  advise  you  of  the  necessity  of  pre- 
cautions against  this  loss.  These  arc,  to  re- 
iiiove  the  manure  in  regular  divisions,  and  not 
by  wounding  and  mangling  it  in  different  pla- 
ces, create  channels  for  the  escape  of  its  rich- 
est qualities.  To  deposit  it  in  straight  rows 
aud  at  regular  distances  across  the  whole  field 
to  be  manured,  that  the  manure  first  cariied 
out,  may  he  immediately  spread- and  ploughed 
in  after  one  row  is  finished.  And  to  spread  and 
plough  in  well  each  row,  without  waiting  for  a 
succeeding  one*  The  object  is  to  secure  the 
manure  against  evaporation  as  soon  as  possible 
after  it  is  exposed  to  it. 

My  general  rule  is  to  deposit  the  loads,  con* 
sisting  of  as  much  as  four  common  oxen  can 
draw,  in  squares  at  ten  yards  distance  from 
each  other,  so  that  the  extreme  distance  in 
spreading  it,  will  be  five  from  the  centre  of, 
each  heap.  But  this  general  rule  admits  of 
important  exceptions.  If  the  land  fluctuates 
in  fertility,  the  loads  may  be  deposited  at 
twelve  yards  distance,  which  is  a  good  dress- 
ing ;  and  if  it  is  accompanied  with  gypsum,  the 
quantity  to  an  acre  may  be  diminished  one 
fifth,  in  consideration  of  its  aid. 

For  some  years  I  have  used  gypsum  with 
the  coarse  manure  of  the  farm  yards,  and  I 
think  it  the  most  beneficial  mode  of  using  it. 
The  manure  carried  out  each  day  is  ploughed 


iti,  before  which  one  bushel  of  gjpsiim  to  the 
acre,  ground  fine,  is  sown  on  it  after  it  is 
spread. 

Tlie  reader  will  recollect  that  the  ground  to 
be  manured  has  been  fallowed  into  high  ridges, 
five  feet  and  a  half  wide,  having  a  deep  and 
wide  water  furrow  between  each  ridge.  Over 
this  uneven  surface,  the  coarse  manure  being 
spread  as  equally  as  possible  and  sown  with 
gypsum,  the  ridge  is  to  be  reversed  by  the 
same  three  furrows  and  the  same  two  ploughs 
with  which  it  was  formed,  each  drawn  by  four? 
horses.  On  both  sides  of  the  deep  furrow, 
with  the  mould  board  towards  it,  a  deep  and 
wide  furrow  is  to  be  run  by  a  large  plough, 
cutting  on  its  right  side  with  one  share,  so  as 
to  throw  the  earth  it  raises  by  its  mould  board, 
into  this  old  deep  furrow,  and  to  form  precise- 
ly in  it,  a  neat  ridge  or  list  on  which  to  plant 
ihQ  corn.  And  the  large  trowel-hoe-ploii. .h 
with  its  two  mould  boards,  splits  the  summit 
of  the  fallow  ridge,  and  throws  its  earlli  and 
Bianure  into  the  two  furrows  made  on  each 
side  by  the  preceding  plough.  If  these  ploughs 
are  of  the  proper  kinds,  and  the  operation  is 
well  performed,  the  manure  is  secured  in  the 
best  manner  against  evaporation,  ihe  ground 
is  placed  in  fine  tilth,  and  unless  it  is  of  a  very 
unyielding  texture,  shallow  culture  thereafter, 
will  secure  a  crop,  equal  to  the  capacity  of  the 
land* 


114  MANTJBUfG. 

A  considerable  saving  of  labor  may  be  made 
by  a  V€ry  simple  instrument  for  raising  the 
manure  into  the   carts,   and   scattering  the 
li^eaps  5  and  by  dividing  and  balancing  the  la- 
bourers so  judiciously,  that  loading,  carting, 
spreading  and  ploughing  may  proceed,  without' 
having  too  few  laborers  at  one  work  and  toO' 
»iany  at  another.     The  instrument  is  precise* 
iy  a  hilling  hoe,   except  that  three   strong: 
square  iron   prongs  are  substituted  for  the 
blade.    These  sink  from  the  usual  elevation i 
<&^f  a  hand  hoe,  by  thieir  own  weight,  into  the^ 
l)ed  of  coarse  farm  yard  manure,  easily  rend! 
from  its  edge  or  its  surface,  a  mass  of  maiiux?fi! 
CQiial  la  t^i« -strength  of  the  laborer,  hold  iti 
well  in  raising,  and  by  a  small  jolt,  from  the^ 
helve's  falling  on  the  top  of  the  cart,  drop  it' 
therein   with   certainty..      In   scattering  the** 
heaps,  they  take  up  the  manure,  and  hold  it 
sufficiently  to  aid  the  action  of  throwing  it 
two  or  three  yards.     Over  ecTged  instruments, 
their  advantages  are  infinite,  as  coarse  manure 
must  be  cut  and  cliopt  to  pieces  with  great  la- 
bor, before  these  will  raise  or  scatter  it  ;  as 
several  strokes  are  often  necessary  to  obtain 
a  hoe  or  spade  full ;  and  as  their  contents  of- 
ten fall  off  in  being  raised.    And  over  the  pitch 
forlv  with  a  horizontal  liandle,  their  pre-emi- 
nence is  little  less,  as  they  save  the  labor  of 
stoo}>in£3f»  and  possess  iu  a  far  greater  degr^je 


MANUBING,  115 

^lie  po%Yers  of  a  lever.  These  pronged  hoes 
are  only  unfit  to  scrape  together  and  raise  the 
small  quantity  of  fine  maniire,  which  falls  to 
the  hottom  as  the  coarse  is  removed.  Hoes 
and  spades  collect  this  as  usual.  This  very 
simple  instrument,  a  three  pronged  hoe,  helv- 
ed in  the  same  angle  as  a  common  hilling  hoe, 
and  having  its  prongs  as  long  as  the  hiade  of 
the  hilling  hoe,  has  I  think,  enabled  me  for 
some  years  to  carry  out  and  spread  my  farm 
yard  manure  in  half  the  time  it  had  previously 
occupied.  For  many  purposes  it  is  also  aa 
excellent  garden  hoe. 

Some  time  may  he  saved,  and  some  skill  ex- 
erted, even  in  the  simple  object  of  laying  off 
the  ground  to  receive  the  loads  of  manure.- — ■ 
Being  ridged,  these  ridges  and  furrows  must 
he  the  course  of  the  rows  of  manure,  to  avoid 
tJie  inconvenience  of  cressing  them.  The  per- 
son dividing  the  ground  for  receiving  manure 
ICbllows  one,  beginning  five  yards  from  the  ed^e 
^f  his  field,  if  his  rows  are  to  be  ten  apart,  and 
measuring  by  the  step,  which  he  must  by  ex- 
periments have  reduced  to  considerable  accu- 
racy ;  he  digs  a  hole  as  he  proceeds  at  one 
stroke  with  a  hoe,  at  each  spot  oit  which  a 
load  is  to  be  deposited.  At  the  same  time  he 
watches  the  quality  of  the  land,  and  lessens 
or  extends  the  distances  between  his  holes^ 
according  to  that  criterion. 


116  MANUEIJfG. 


Number  26> 


MAJS'UMIJ^G.....Continned, 

It  is  unnecessary  to  coDsider  whether  the 
animal  and  vegetable  manure  I  have  been 
treating  of,  ought  to  he  ranked  among  the 
auxiliaries  of  the  atmospherical,  or  the  atmos- 
pherical degraded  into  an  anxiliar^^  of  theirs. 
Ftr  my  pai't,  if  1  was  driven  to  the  alternative 
of  rejectirig  one,  I  should  not  hesitate  to  eling 
to  the  atmospherical,  as  the  matrix  of  all ;  or 
rather  to  that  portion  of  it  witlsin  our  reach, 
by  other  channels  than  those  of  farm  yards 
and  animals.  I  would  even  prefer  a  confine- 
ment to  the  single  mode  of  extracting  manure 
from  the  atmosphere  by  vegetables,  and  apply- 
ing these  ve^'i  tables  to  the  enrichment  of  the 
earth  they  grow  on,  by  inclosing,  to  every 
other  mode  of  manuring  land,  excluding  tids. 
It  works  so  widely,  so  constantly,  and  at  so 
small  an  expence  of  labour,  that  properly  us- 
ed, it  ensures  an  annual  improvement  ;  and  a 
constant  progress  towards  fertility,  hoAvever 
slow,  must  terminate  at  it .  Human  life  is  said 
to  be  short,  compared  with  what  we  know  and 
conjecture  of  time.  Wit  Inn  one  fourth  of  one 
of  these  short  cycles,  1  have  Imown  a  fourfold  i 


MANURING.  117 

increase  of  product  from  the  same  fields,  pro- 
duced cliiefly  by  the  incloshig  mode  of  manur- 
ing.    Without  however  insisting  on  its  title  to 
pre-eminence,  it  surely  deserves  to  be  consider- 
ed as  a  powerful  auxiliary  of  the  valuable 
modes  of  manuring  land,  recently  treated  of. 
To  make  room  for  this  invaluable  article  in 
a  system  for  improving  our  country,  it  is  ne- 
cessary to  explode  and  banish  a  scheme  of  til- 
lage, founded  in  the  massacre  of  the  earth,  and 
terminating  in  its  murder.     It  is  called,  the 
three  shift  system.     Its  course  is,  Indian  corn^ 
wheat,  pasture.     Under  it,  the  great  body  of 
the  farm  receives  no  manure,  and  no  rest ;  and 
the  result  is^  that  the  phrase  "  the  land  is  kil- 
led and  must  be  turned  out,"  has  become  com- 
mon over  a  great  portion  of  the  United  States. 
This  system,  the  most  execrable  within  the 
scope  of  imagination,  under  which  the  richest 
country  upon  earth  could  not  live  ,*  being  called 
an  improved  mode  of  Agriculture  at  its  intro- 
duction, was  blindly  received  under  that  cha- 
racter, and  our  eyes  cannot  even  be  opened  by 
the  sound  of  our  own  melancholy  confessions, 
<•  that  our  lands  are  killed.-'     As  a  system  for 
extorting  crops  from  the  earth,  it  is  precisely 
similar  to  the  rack  for  extorting  truth  from 
the  suiTerer ;  it  stretches,  tortures,  mangles, 
obtains  but  little  of  its  object,  and  half  or  quite 
■kills  its  victim. 


MS  MANTJUING. 

The  system  of  inclosing,  to  manure  the  earth 
hy  its  own  coat  of  vegetables,  is  at  open  war 
-with  this  murdering  three  shift  system,  npoa 
the  suppositions,  that  the  inatter  of  these  ve* 
getahles  being  chiefly  extracted  from  the  at- 
mosphere, Biiist  be  some  accession  of  fertility 
to  the  earth,  and  that  any  such  accession  is 
better  than  a  perpetual  exhaustion.  It  will 
probably  ])e  conceded  by  every  reader,  that 
both  Indian  corn  and  wheat  are  exhausting 
crops  ;  there  can  of  course  remain  no  doubt, 
but  that  this  system  impoverishes  land  two 
years  in  three.  The  only  question  then  m 
whether  this  loss  will  be  compensated,  by  graz- 
ing the  iieid  bare  during  the  third  year.  From 
whence  is  the  recompenee  to  come  ?  Soft  from 
recent  tillage,  and  unprotected  by  a  stror.g 
sward,  the  land  is  exposed  to  all  the  injury  tlie 
hoof  can  inflict.  Thinly  sprinkled  with  an  in- 
suflicient  food,  the  restlessness  of  perpetual 
hunger  produces  uuabating  industry  in  the  cat- 
tle, to  tread  it  into  a  naked  arena,  closing  its 
pores  like  a  road  against  refreshments  from 
the  atn\gsphere,  and  exposing  its  flat  and  na- 
ked surface  to  heat,  an  agent  of  evaporation, 
able  to  pierce  and  expel  from  stone  itself.— 
This  three  shift  system  has  only  one  merit; 
honesty.  In  theory  it  promises  to  kill  our 
lands ;  in  practice  it  fulfils  its  promise. 


MANIJKING.  1I& 

The  inclosing  system  requires  four  shifts,  to 
succeed  tolerably  well  without  manure,  and 
extremely  well  with  it.  From  a  long  course 
of  experiments,  my  result  is,  that  a  three  sliift 
system  is  far  inferior  to  four  shifts,  without 
grazing  either  |  and  that  one  fourth  of  a  farnv 
properly  managed  in  the  latter  way,  after  hav- 
ing been  worried  by  the  old  rotation  of  corn, 
wheat,  and  grazingj  may  in  fifteen  years  be 
made  to  produce  more  than  the  whole  would 
previously  do.  I  have  kept  a  farm  in  three 
and  in  four  shifts  for  years,  and  the  result  is 
extremely  in  favor  of  the  latter,  though  its 
land  was  at  ilrst  of  inferior  quality.  To  this 
article  for  manuring  our  lands,  oBjeetions  are 
made,  among  which,  the  want  of  pasturage^ 
and  the  want  of  siiace  for  onr  labor,  should  we 
reduce  the  size  of  owv  fields,  are  the  most  se- 
rloiiH,  Answers  to  tljose  ol>jections,  will  be 
XDore  apposite  in  'eonsicleriiij^^  the  subjects  of 
stocks,  pasturage  a.nd  Ik-ljor,  should  these  es- 
says ever  get  so  f^iT,  than  in  the  midst  of  our 
present  subject.  That  is  niairdring,  and  the 
object  of  this  paper,. is  to  confroi3t-lhe  iiicJoB- 
log  iwr  sliift  system,  with  the  grazing  three 
sliift  system,  asmodes  of  maniirihg  or  improv** 
ing  land. 

To  iliustrate  the  theory  "  that  vegetables 
extract  their  matter  chiefly  from  the  atmos» 
^^liere,  aiid  are  of  eoiu^se  a  ]JOwcrful  vekiele  for 


420  MANURING^ 

jfixing  and  bestowing  atmospiierical  manifre 
on  the  earth,"  the  following  fact  is  cireum- 
stantially  related,  on  account  of  its  eonipiete 
application,  and  to  expose  it  to  inyestigation. 
Some  years  ago,  a  locust  tree  at  Col.  Larkin 
Smith's  in  the  county  of  King  and  ^ueen  and 
state  of  Yirgioia,  received  an  injury  which 
made  it  necessary  to  cut  away  entirely  the  hark 
around  its  body  for  eight  or  ten  inches,  so  that 
its  bark  above  and  below  was  wholly  separated,, 
ivithout  a  cortical  vein  between.     The  wound 
w as  entirely  covered  with  a  close  bandage  of 
some   other  bark  which  lapped  beyond  the 
edges  of  the  wounded  bark  above  and  below. 
And  the  tree  was  left  to  its  fate.     The  plaster 
bark  never  giew  to  the  tree,  but  the  edges  of ^ 
the  wounded  bark,  gradually  approached  each 
other  undei"  its  shelter,  and  afler  several  years 
Biet  and  united.     By  the  time  the  wound  was^ 
healed,  the  body  of  the  tree  above,  had  become , 
one  third  larger  than  its  body  below  it.     And 
though  several  years  have  elapsed,  the  latter 
has  not  yet  been  able  to  overtake  the  former. 
The  upper  part  of  the  tree,  rooted  in  the  air, 
vastly  outgrew  the  under  rooted  in  the  cartli, 
Tiierefore  it  must  have  drawn  either  its  whole 
or  chief  sustenance  from  the  atmosphere.     In- 
deed between  the  bark  and  tlie  wood  of  most 
trees,  and  of  tlie  locust  ijarticvdarly,  we  find 
i5ie  chief  channel  of  their  juices ;  and  the  com 


jfiunication  of  these  juices  was  utlcrlj  eat  off, 
so  that  neither  poition  of  the  tree  could  sup- 
ply tlie  other.  If  the  part  of  the  tree  fed 
from  the  roots,  extracted  from  the  earth  the 
food,  which  the  earth  had  pre viouslj  extracted 
from  the  atmosphere  ;  and  if  the  eartli  was 
reimbursed  gradually  by  the  atmosphere^  what 
it  lost  in  feeding  this  part  of  the  tree?  tlieu 
even  the  small  acquisition  of  the  tree  below 
the  interdict  to  communication,  as  well  as  the 
great  one  above,  is  to  be  considered  as  wholly 
obtained  from  the  atmosphere,  and  might  on 
that  supposition  be  considered  as  probable  evi- 
dence in  favor  of  the  theory,  that  vegetables 
get  from  the  air  and  give  to  the  earth.  But 
probable  testimony  is  superfluous,  when  the  su- 
perior growth  above  so  clearly  evinces  that 
they  do  extract  food  from  the  atmosphere. 

I  might  quote  the  fertile  state  of  new  un- 
grazed  countries  ;  their  abatement  in  fertility 
if  grazed,  though  uncleared  ,*  the  improvement 
of  worn  out  lands  by  sufiering  them  to  grow  up 
in  trees  ;  their  greater  improvement  if  these 
trees  are  cut  down  and  suffered  to  rot  on  the 
surface,  as  further  proofs  that  the  earth  cannot 
bear  a  constant  drain  of  vegetable  matter,  and 
that  this  matter  in  any  form  enriches  it,  to 
evince  both  the  ruinous  effects  of  the  three  shift 
system,  and  that  inclosing  is  the  remedy;  hut 
the  intelligent  reader  will  advert  to  these  aad 

I.    3 


1^3  MAIfTJRING, 

many  otlier  considerations,  and  I  only  add,  that 
the  fact  of  the  earth's  surface  heing  the  depo- 
sitory of  its  fertility,  proves  that  this  fertility  is 
owing  to  atmospherical  or  vegetahle  matter, 
and  alone  determines  the  efficacy  of  the  inclos-? 
ing  theory. 


NlIMBES  27* 


Though  we  have  past  the  best,  all  the  re*- 
sources  within  our  power  for  manuring  land, 
are  not  exhausted.  Whether  gj^sum  is  a  ma- 
nure, or  a  medium  for  drawing  manure  from 
the  atmosphere  by  increasing  the  growth  of 
vegetables,  is  an  unimporlant  enquiry.  With-4 
in  the  last  ten  years,  I  have  expended  between 
two  and  tlirec  hundred  tons  of  it  in  a  variety 
of  experiments,  which  have  produced  the  con- 
clusion that  it  increases  very  considerabiy  the 
product  of  Yc,2;ctable  matter  in  almost  all 
forms.  Now  if  most  or  all  of  the  matter  of 
vegetables,  is  drawn  from  the  atmosphere,  and 
if  gypsum  increases  these  drafts,  we  have  only 
to  realize  this  unexpected  trcasurej1[)y  turning 


into  the  curth.  It  increases  like  coinpoiind 
iQlercs^  and  in  a  few  years,  land  wortli  only 
one  poimd  an  acre,  v/ili  become  worth  five. — 
Thus  by  the  help  of  inelosi'ig,  gypsiim  and  ve- 
getables, we  may  enable  ourselves  to  fix,  sur- 
vey, divide,  sell  or  bestow  on  our  children,  at- 
mosphere to  a  ^rcat  value.  Let  us  therefore 
at  least  admit  it  into  the  catalogue  of  manures, 
ivhen  used  in  combination  with  inclosing. 

It  would  be  tedious  to  recite  a  multitude  of 
experiments  in  tlic  rapid  excursions  of  an  es- 
sayist,  through   the   Agricrdtural    kingdom, 
with  very  little  regard  to  method  ;  and  there- 
fore I  shall  only  trouble  the  public  mth  the  re- 
sults deemed  most  useful.     Except  when  sown 
on  clover  which  it  benefits  almost  at  all  sea- 
sons, I  have  found  gypsum  succeed  best,  when 
covered.     I  would  even  prefer  harrowing  it  m 
with  oats  and  clover,  to  sowing  it  on  the  sur- 
face after  they  are  up.     The  best  modes  of  us- 
ing it,  according  to  my  experience,  are  sowing 
it  on  and  ploughing  it  in  with  coarse  litter  : 
sowing  it  just  in  advance  of  the  plough,  whea 
fallowing  for  corn,  on  land  well  covered  with 
vegetable  matter  from  having  been  inclosed, 
so  as  to  bury  it  with  the  litter ;  this  is  in  fact 
the  same  experiment  with  the  last,  except  that 
the  gypsum  has  less  vegetable  manure  to  y>  ork 
upon  in  the  second  than  in  the  first  case  ;  bcv- 
stowing  on  clover  annually  a  top  dressing,  giv- 


iiig  tiie  preference  to  the  youngest  if  there 
should  be  a  €leReier»ey  of  the  gypsum  ;  and 
rolling  both  wheat  ar*d  com  with  it,  when  sown 
or  phirxted,  biishcl  to  bushel.  This  has  been 
the  settled  course  of  a  farm  for  three  or  four 
years,  and  within  no  equal  term  has  it  equally 
improved.  The  wheat  crop  is  less  benefitted 
immediately  than  any  other,  but  this  rolling 
of  the  wheat  facilitates  the  vegetation  of  the 
clover  sown  on  its  surface  in  the  spring,  and 
strengthens  it  against  summer  drought,  so  fre- 
quently fatol  to  it  in  coarse  soils  ;  and  hj  thus 
improving  the  fertility  of  the  land,  considera- 
hlj  augments  succeeding  crops.  Intervals  of 
t\i  elve  3'ai*ds  wide,  quite  across  large  fields, 
sown  with  unplastered  wheat,  whilst  the  rest 
was  plasteretl  by  miiigling  a  bushel  of  one^ 
with  a  bushel  of  the  other,  exhibited  to  a  line 
on  each  side  by  the  natural  growth,  an  inferio* 
rity  of  strength  from  the  cutting  of  the  wheat, 
throughout  the  whole  period  of  rest* 

The  immediate  benefit  of  gj^sum  to  Indian 
eorn,  is  vastly  greater  than  to  any  other  crop, 
tiover  excepted,  whilst  its  benefit  to  the  laud 
is  equally  grea«.  Unplastercd  spaces  left 
across  large  fields  of  clover,  have  in  sundry 
instances  produced  a  third  or  a  fourth  only  of 
the  adjoining  plastered  clover.  Unplasterexl 
spaces  across  large  ikhh  of  corn,  have  been 
frequently  visible  during  the  whole  crop*  pro- 


ilucing  not  an  equal,  but  a  considerable  differ- 
enee.  Gypsum,  clover  and  inclosing,  working 
ia  conjunction,  have  within  my  own  knowledge 
doubled,  trebled,  and  in  a  very  favorable  soil 
quadrupled  the  value  of  land,  in  the  space  of 
twelve  or  fifteen  years  5  whilst  the  land  regu- 
larly produced  two  exhausting  crops,  thG«e  of 
eorn  and  wheat  in  every  four  years  of  the 
period,  and  these  crops  were  continually  in- 
creasing. 

Of  lime  and  marie  we  have  an  abundance^ 
but  experience  does  not  entitle  me  to  say  any 
thing  of  either.  About  a  family,  a  variety  of 
manures  may  be  thrown  together,  and  form  a 
small  store  for  gardens  and  lots.  Among 
these,  ashes  deserve  particular  attention. — * 
.Like  other  manures  they  suffer  by  exposure 
and  evaporation,  but  less,  because  water  is  a 
menstruum  Avhieh  will  convey  much  of  their 
salts  into  the  earth,  if  they  are  spread  ;  the 
same  menstruum  conveys  mo&t  of  these  sails 
out  of  the  ashes,  if  they  are  exposed  to  it  be* 
fore  they  are  applied  as  a  manure.  Hence, 
when  ashes  have  not  been  reduced  by  water  in 
richness,  they  are  to  be  used  as  a  manure  more 
sparingly,  and  when  they  have,  more  copious- 
ly. In  their  unreduced  state,  Just  from  the 
ehimney,  when  sprinkled  an  inch  thick  on  the 
long  litter  and  duag  from  a  recently  clean r^cd 
stable,  they  constitute  the  best  manure  I  have 


1^6  XABOTJR, 

ever  tried  for  asparagus.  The  beds  are  well 
forked  up  in  llie  fall,  covered  two  or  tiiree  In- 
dies deep  with  the  imrotted  stable  inaniire,  op 
which  the  fresh  ashes  are  placed,  and  so  re- 
main until  they  are  thr<)wn  into  groper  order 
in  the  spring. 


KuMEER  ^8* 


LilBOUM, 


Perhaps  this  subject  ought  to  have  preceded 
that  of  manuring,  ae  it  is  idle  even  to  think  of 
a  good  system  of  Agriculture  in  any  point  of 
view,  if  the  labour  on  which  it  depends  is  con- 
vulsed by  infusions  the  most  inimical  to  its  uti- 
lity :  and  if  those  who  direct  it,  are  to  live  in 
a  eonstaot  dread  of  its  loss,  and  a  doubt  of  their 
own  safety.  Such  a  slate  of  uncertainty  is 
painful  to  the  parties,  unfriendly  to  improve- 
ment, and  productive  of  extravagance  and  idle^ 
ness  in  all  their  varieties.  Yet  those  who 
keep  it  alive,  persuade  themselves  that  they 
are  complying  with  the  principles  of  religion, 
patriotism  and  moraliiy.  Into  such  fatal  er- 
rors is  human  nature  liable  to  fall,  by  its  deli- 
i^jumg  for  afefjulring  unattainable  perfection. 


One  would  think  that  the  circles  of  ethicks 
.and  iogii*,k  eoiiM  not  furnish  less  doubtful  ques- 
tions than  these.  Were  the  whites  of  St.  Do- 
Tuingo  morally  bound  to  bring  on  themselves 
the  nicissacre  produced  by  the  liberation  of 
their  slaves  I  I^  sueb  a  sacrihce  of  freemen 
to  make  freemen  of  slaves,  virtuous  or  wicked? 
Will  it  advance  or  destroy  the  principles  of 
morality,  religion  and  civil  liberty  ?  Is  it  wise 
or  foolish  ? 

The  history  of  parties  in  its  utmost  malig- 
nity is  but  a  famt  mirror  for  reflt-tting  the  cour 
sequences  of  a  white  and  a  black  party.  If 
bu,uges  aiid  names  have  been  able  to  maddta  ^ 
men  in  ail  ages,  up  to  robbery  and  murder  ia 
tlieir  most  atrocious  forms,  no  doubt  can  exist 
of  the  consequences  of  placing  two  nations  of 
distinct  colours  and  features  on  the  san^e  thea- 
tre, to  contend,  not  about  sounds  and  sigits.  Hut  - 
for  wealtli  aod  pov/er. 

And  yet  an  amiable  and  peaceable  religious 
sect,  have  been  long  labouring  with  some  suc- 
cess, to  piimge  three-fonrths  of  the  nnion,  in- 
to a  civil  war  of  a  complexion  so  inveterate,  as 
to  admit  of  no  issue,  but  the  extermination  of 
one  entire  party.  Suppose  the  extermination 
shall  fall  on  the  blacks,  the  ferocity  acquired 
by  the  whites  during  the  contest?  and  the  de- 
struction of  the  labour  in  three  fourths  of  the 
imion^  will  not  endow  the  remaining  fourth 


128  '  'LA^OVU, 

Willi  wealth  or  liappiness.  If  the  whites  shoaM 
be  the  ylctinis  of  iMs  enthusiastic  philanthro- 
py, and  our  isortliera  hrethreii  should  succeed 
m  overvt  helming  the  southern  states  with  Re»» 
gTO  patriotism  ?j\d  eiviJization,  wliat  will  they 
haye  done  for  the  benefit  of  the  liberty,  vir- 
tue or  happiness  of  ni^^nkind  ?  Tlie  Freneh 
reyolotion  bottomed  upon  as  correct  iibstraet 
prineiplesj  and  soiiiider  practical  hopes,  turned 
out  to  be  a  foolish  and  mischievous  specula- 
tion ;  what  then  can  be  expected  from  raaking 
republicans  of  negro  slaves,  and  conquerors  of 
ignorant  infuriated  barbai^ians  ?  ^V^iat  can 
those  who  are  doing  the  greatest  inisehiefs 
from  the  best  motives,  to  their  fellow  citizens, 
to  tjiemselves  and  to  their  countiy,  expect  from 
such  preachers  of  the  gospel,  such  champions 
of  liberty,  and  such  neighbouring  possessors  of 
a  territory  larger  than  their  own. 

But  what  will  not  enthusiasm  attempt  ?  Iti 
attempted  to  make  freemen  of  (he  people  off 
France  ,  the  experiment  pronounced  that  they 
were  incapable  of  liberty.  It  attempted  to 
compound  a  free  nation  of  black  and  white 
people  in  St.  Domingo.  The  experiment  pro- 
nounced that  one  colour  must  perish.  And 
.  now  rendered  blinder  by  experience,  it  propo- 
ses (o  renew,  the  last  experiment,  though  it  im- 
pressed truth  by  sanctions  of  inconceivable 
horror ;  and  again  tu  create  a  body  politick,  as 


XABOigili.  -  129 

monstrous  and  unnatural  as  a  mongrel  half 
tvhite  man  and  half  negro. 

Do  these  hasty,  or  in  the  language  of  exact 
truth,  fanatic  philosophers,  patriots  or  chris- 
tians, suppose  that  the  negroes  could  be  made 
free,  and  yet  kept  from  property  and  equal  ci- 
Til  rights  ;  or  that  both  or  either  of  these  ave- 
nues to  power  could  be  opened  to  them,  and 
yet  that  some  precept  or  incantation  could  pre- 
yent  their  entrance  1  As  rivals  for  rule  with 
the  whites,  the  collision  would  be  immediate, 
and  the  catastrophe  speedy.  Divested  of  equal 
civil  rights  and  wealth  to  prevent  this  rivalship, 
but  endowed  with  personal  liberty,  they  would 
oonstitute  the  most  complete  instrument  for 
invasion  or  ambition,  hitherto  forged  through- 
out the  entire  circle  of  human  folly. 

For  what  virtuous  purpose  are  the  Southerit 
runaway  negroes  countenanced  in  the  Norther* 
States  ?  Do  these  states  wish  the  Southern  to 
try  the  St.  Domingo  experiment  ?  If  not,  why 
tio  they  keep  alive  the  St.  Domingo  spirit  I 
War  is  the  match  which  will  in  the  course  of 
time  be  put  to  such  a  spirit,  and  an  explosion 
might  follow,  Avhieh  would  shake  our  nation 
from  the  centre  to  its  extremities.  Is  it  hu- 
manity, wisdom  or  religion,  or  some  adversary 
of  all  three,  which  prepares  the  stoek  of  eoirr- 
bustibles  for  this  explosion  ? 


ISO  XABOUK, 

Suppose  France  was  about  to  invade  the 
United  States,  and  should  ask  congress  previ- 
oiisly  to  admit  a  million  of  her  most  desperate 
people  into  the  Southern  States,  ready  to  join 
and  aid  her  armies.  Could  the  Northern  mem- 
]}ers  find  any  motive  drawn  from  policy,  reli- 
^iOG,  morality  or  self  interest,  for  agreeing  to 
the  proposal  ?  And  yet  in  case  of  such  an  in- 
vasion, a  Riiilion  of  negroes,  either  slaves,  hut 
arlificially  filled  with  a  violent  impatience  of 
their  condition,  and  deadly  hatred  of  their  mas- 
ters I  or  free-men,  but  excluded  from  wealth 
ai;d  power^  would  hardly  be  less  ferocious, 
merciless  or  dangerous^  than  a  million  of  des-- 
per  ate  Freiich  people. 

A  policy,  which  weakens  or  renders  incapa- 
ble of  self  d<;fence  at  least  three  fourths  of  the 
union,  must  also  be  excessively  injurious  to 
the  remaining  fourth,  whose  wealth  and  secu- 
rity must  increase  or  dimirash  by  Increasing  or 
diminishing  the  wealth  and  security  of  the 
larger  portion.  Nor  does  the  least  present 
gain,  afford  to  the  Northern  States  a  tempta- 
tio!i  for  incurring  so  dreadful  an  evil.  Their 
manners  will  neilhcr  be  improved,  nor  their 
jinppiness  advanced,  by  sprinlding  their  cities 
with  a  yearly  emigration  of  thieves,  murderers 
and  villains  of  every  degree,  though  recom- 
mended by  the  training  of  slavery,  a  black 
skin^  a  woolly  hotly,  and  an  African  contour. 


IiABOUH.  131 

And  yet  even  the  Northern  newspapers  arc 
continually  dealing  out  fraternity  to  this  race, 
and  to  this  nxoral  character,  and  opprohrium 
to  theu' white  masters,  with  as  little  justice  in 
the  last  case,  as  taste  in  the  first.  What  had 
the  present  generation  to  do  with  the  dilemma 
in  which  it  is  iuYolved  ?  How  few  even  of  its 
ancestors  were  concerned  in  stealing  and  tran- 
sporting negroes  from  Africa  ?  If  some  rem- 
nants of  such  moinsters  exist,  they  are  not  to 
be  found  in  the  Southern  quarters  of  the  union. 
And  if  self  preservation  shall  force  the  slave 
holders  into  stricter  measures  of  precaution 
than  they  have  hitherto  adopted,  those  who 
shall  have  driven  them  into  these  measures,  hy 
continually  exciting  their  negroes  to  cut  their 
throats,  will  accuse  them  of  tyranny  with  as 
little  reason,  as  the  prosecutors  of  the  slave 
trade  accuse  them  of  negro  stealing. 

The  fact  is,  that  negro  slavery  is  an  evil 
which  the  United  States  must  look  in  tkc  face. 
To  whine  over  it,  is  cowardly  ^  to  aggravate  it, 
criminal  5  and  to  forbear  to  alleviate  it,  be- 
cause it  cannot  be  wlioilv  cured,  foolish.  Be- 
wards  and  punishments  the  sanetioiis  of  the 
best  government,  and  the  origin  of  love  and 
fear,  are  rendered  useless  by  the  ideas  excited 
in  tiie  French  revolution  ,•  by  the  example  of 
bt.  Domingo  ;  by  the  liive  of  free  negroes 
!mi^g'led  with  staves  ^  and  by  the  i-eproaehes  t& 


132  XABOIK.,   ^ 

masters  and  sympathies  for  slaves,  breatlied 
forth  from  the  Northern  states.  Sympathies^, 
«uch  as  if  the  negroes  should  transfer  their  af- 
fections from  their  own  species  to  the  baboons. 
Under  impressions,  derived  from  such  sources^ 
the  justest  punishment  will  be  felt  as  the 
iiiiiietion  of  tyranny,  and  the  most  liberal  re- 
wards, as  a  niggardly  portion  of  greater , rights. 
For  where  will  th^  rights  of  black  saaseulottes 
stop  ? 

Such  a  state  of  things  is  the  most  unfavo- 
rable imaginable  to  the  happiness  of  both  mas^^ 
ter  aud  slave.  It  tends  to  diminish  the  humar 
nity  of  one  class,  and  increase  the  malignity 
of  the  other,  and  in  contemplating  its  utt^r 
destitution  of  good,  our  admiration  is  equally 
excited,  by  the  error  of  those  who  produce,  and 
the  folly  of  those  who  suffer  it* 


D^UMBEK    29, 


L,RBOUR Continubl^ 

SJiaves  are  docile,  useful  and  happy,  if  they 
are  well  managed  ;  and  if  their  docility,  uti- 
lity and  happiness  are  not  obstructed  by  the 
ci^cumstajices  adverted  to  in  the  last  number. 


Knowledge  manages  ignorance  witli  great  ease; 
whenever  ignorance  is  not  used  as  an  instni- 
Bient  by  knowledge   against  itself.     But  oiiv 
religious  and  philosophical  quixotte^  have  un- 
dertaken to  make  ignorance  independent    of 
knowledge.     They  propose  to  bestow  a  capa- 
city for  liberty  and  rule  on  an  extreme  degree 
of  ignorance,  when  the  whole  history  of  man- 
kind announces,  that  far  less  degrees  possess 
no  such  capacity.     One  would  suspect,  except 
for  the   integrity  of  these   divines   and  phi- 
losophers, that  they  were  impostors  disguised 
in  the  garb  of  religion  and  philosophy,  striving 
to  disengage  a  mass  of  ignorance  from  those 
who  now  direct  it,  for  the  purpose  of  appropri- 
ating it  to  themselves.    Free  it  cannot  be.     It 
must  become  the  slave  of  superstition,  cunning 
or  ambition,  in  some  form.     And  what  is  still 
worse,  when   thrown  upon  the  great  national 
theatre  to  be    scrambled  for,    that  interest 
which  shall  gain  the  prize,  will  use  it  to  op« 
press   other  branches  of  knowledge.    In  its 
hands  the  blacks  will  be  mofe  enslaved  than 
they  are  at  present :  and  the  whites,  in  pursuit 
of  an  ideal  freedom  for  them,  will  create  some 
vortex  for  ingulphing  the  remnant  of  liberty 
left  in  the  world,  and  obtain  real  slavery  for 
themselves. 

Under  their  present  masters,  the  negroes 
would  enjoy  more  happiness,  audi  even  jjiore 


134  '  lABOUK. 

liberty,  than  under  a  conqueror  or  a  liierar- 
©liy*     Slavery  to  an  individual  is  preferable  to 
slavery  to  an  interest  or  faction.     The  indivi- 
dual is  restrained  by  his  property  in  the  slave, 
and  susceptible  of  humanity.     An  interest  or 
faction  is  incapable  of  both.     Did  a  hierarchy 
or  a  paper  system  ever  shed  tears  over  its  op- 
pressions, or  feel  compunction  for  its  exacti- 
ons ?      On  the  contrary,  joy  swells  with  the 
fruits  of  guilt ;  and  the  vei^^  conscience,  which 
abhors  the  secret  guiliiotine,  used  to  cut  out  a 
iieighbour  s  purse,  and  to  transfer  it  to  its  own 
pocket,  without  difficulty  retains  the  contents. 
Thus  men  imagine  that  they  have  discovered 
a  way  to  eliulc  the  justice  of  God,  whose  de- 
nunciations have  overlooked  chartered  corpo- 
rations, and  are  only  levelled  against  individu- 
als.— The  crime,  they  suppose, is  committed  by 
a  body  politick,  and  scripture  having  exhibit- 
ed no  instance  of  one  of  these  artificial  bodies 
being  consigned  to  the  region  of  punishment, 
their  oppressions,  fiov»cver  atrocious,  are  con- 
sidered as  a  casus  omissus,  and  as  aftording'a 
mode  for  fattening  the  body  with  crimes  and 
frauds,  witliout  hurting  the  soul. 

It  is  otherwise  with  the  personal  owner  of" 
slaves.     Religion  assails   him  both  with  her 
blandishmens    and    terrors.      It    indissolubly 
.binds  his,  and  his  slaves'   happiness  or  misery 
fogethcr.  Thc^e  associates  he  cannot  dissever^' 


h.&  elioGses  the  alternative  indeed  loi*  both,  but 
he  must  choose  the  same. 

If  an  interest  or  a  emiibination  of  men  is  the 
worst  species  of  master,  ami  if  this  black  mass 
of  ignorance,  turned  at  large  and  delined   by 
the  plainest  marks,  must  naturally  fall  under 
tlie  dominion  of  some  interest  or  combinati- 
on, the  miseries  inflicted  both  on  their  owners 
and  themselyes,  by  the  |)erpetual  excitements 
to  insurrection,  and  those  to  be  expected  from 
the  experiment  whenever  it  is  made,  are  at- 
tended   Avith    no   compensating  counterpoise 
whatsoever  to  either  of  the  parties,  even  in 
hope.     Should  these  fruitless  attempts  be  for- 
borne, and   sliould  the  slave  states  take  mea- 
sures for  abolishing  tbese  excitements  to  gene- 
ral disquietude  and  calamity^  some  system  for 
tbe  management  of  slave s^beneficial  to  them- 
selves and  their  owners,  is  so  closely  connected 
witli  Agriculture,  tliat  the  next  number  will 
be  devoted  to  that  subject. 


136  XABOUB* 


Number  SO. 


LABOUR Continued. 

Animal  labour  is  brought  to  its  utmost  Yai- 
lue,  hj  being  completely  supplied  with  the  ne- 
cessaries and  comforts  required  bj  its  nature* 
These  comforts  have  more  force  to  attach  the 
reasonable  than  the  brute  creation  to  a  place, 
and  yet  the  attachments  of  the  latter  from  this 
cause,  are  often  strong.  The  addition  of  com- 
fort to  mere  necessaries,  is  a  price  paid  by  the 
master,  for  the  advantages  he  will  derive  from 
binding  his  slave  to  his  service,  by  a  ligament 
stronger  than  chains,  far  beneath  their  value 
in  a  pecuniary  point  of  view  ,  and  he  will  1 
moreover  gain  a  stream  of  agreeable  reflec- 
tions throughout  life,  which  will  cost  liim 
nothing. 

A  project  towards  an  object  so  desirable, 
may  possibly  contain  a  hint  which  some  one 
will  improve.  Let  the  houses  of  the  slaves  be 
of  bi'ick  walls,  able  to  withstand  hard  usage 
and  remain  tight,  built  in  one  connected  line, 
with  partitions  making  each  a  room  sixteen  or 
eighteen  feet  square  ;  let  there  be  a  brick 
chimney  in  the  centre  between  each  two  rooms 
affording  a  fire  place  to  each,  and  two  warm 


ciiasms,  one  on  each  side  of  tlie  Vlyq  place  for 
beds.  A  square  window  with  a  wooden  shut- 
ter to  be  opposite  the  door  of  each  room,  and 
three  panes  of  glass  above  each  door.  Na 
joists  or  loft,  but  to  be  lathed  on  the  rafters 
jand  their  couplings,  nearly  to  the  top  of  the 
roof,  and  the  whole  inside  to  be  plastered. — 
Hence,  though  the  house  should  be  low,  thc^ 
pitch  of  the  rooms  will  be  high  ;  and  salubrity 
will  be  consulted  with  a  precaution  against 
fire,  amounting  to  a  certainty  within  the  house^ 
as  there  will  be  no  inside  fuel,  the  floor  being 
of  earth.  The  roof  will  be  a  mere  shell  plas- 
tered within,  and  if  the  chimneys  are  suflici- 
ently  high,  the  absence  of  interior  combusti- 
bles, combined  with  the  lowness  of  the  house, 
will  form  a  great  security  against  iire,  so  fre- 
quently fatal  to  the  houses  of  slaves^aiid  soaie- 
times  to  the  inhabit  ant  s« 

A  regular  supply  ot  a  winter's  coat.  Jacket 
and  breeches,  with  the  latter  and  the  sleeYes 
of  the  former  lined,  two  oznaburg  shirts,  a 
good  hat  and  blanket  eyery  other  year,  two 
pair  of  stockings  annually,  a  pair  of  shoes,  a 
pair  of  summer  overalls,  and  a  great  coat 
every  third  year,  Avill  constitute  a  warm  cloth- 
ing for  careful  slaves,  and  the  acquisitions 
they  make  from  their  usual  permissions,  wilt 
iHipplj  them  with  finery. 


The  best  source  for  securing  their  happi- 
siess,  their  honesty  and  their  usefuhiesS,  is 
their  food ;  and  yet  it  is  seldom  considered  as  a 
means  for  advancing  either.  If  the  happiness 
of  an  idle  epicure  is  deeply  affected  hy  food, 
what  must  be  its  influence  upon  labour  and 
hunger  ?  In  the  article  of  food,  the  force  oC 
rewards  and  punishments  may  be  happily 
combined  to  unite  the  whole  body  of  slaves  in- 
to conservators,  instead  of  being  pilferers  of 
the  moveables  on  a  farm.  It  may  be  made 
both  a  ligament  to  tie  the  slave  to  his  service^ 
and  enable  him  to  perform  that  service  better. 
A  scheme  for  j>rodueii?g  these  ends  has  been 
foiind^  so  Bueccssfiil  in  ppaeti^e,  and  coineldeff 
so  intirely  with  the  subject  of  Agriculture  by 
slaves^  that  it  is  chosen  to  terminate  this  sub- 
ject. Bread  alone  ought  never  to  be  consider- 
ed as  a  suiRcient  diet  for  slaves,  except  as  a 
puiiishment  3*  and  at  one  meal  eaeli  day  they 
should  liiiYC  salt  meat,  boiled  into  a  soup  with 
peas,  beans,  potatoes,  turnips,  cabbages,  cim- 
biisis  or  pumptins.  At  other  meals  salt  ftshj 
milk  or  butter  millu  Vegetables  are  raised  in 
great  abundance  at  little  expence,  and  at  all 
seasons  a  supply  of  some  species  should  be  al- 
lowed to  the  slaves  without  stint.  We  shall 
be  afitonished  upon  trial  to  discover  that  this 
great  comfort  to  them,  is  a  profit  to  the  n^as- 
tcj',  in  its  single  efiVct  of  «:ontributing  to  their 


LABOUK.  159 

liealth,  -without  esti mating  tlie  benefits  arising 
from  a  cheerful  acquiescence  in  their  condi- 
tion. One  great  value  of  establisliing  a  com^ 
fortable  diet  for  slaves,  is  its  conveniency  as  an 
instrument  of  reward  and  punishment,  so 
powerful  as  almost  to  abolish  the  thefts,  which 
often  diminish  considerably  the  owner's  ability 
to  provide  for  them.  These  can  seldom  or  ne- 
ver be  committed  without  being  known  to  the 
©ther  slaves,  but  they  are  under  no  interest  to 
restrain  them.  It  is  the  interest  of  all  to  steal 
by  Yfhich  they  occasionally  ^et  some  addition 
to  bread,  if  this  addition  cannot  be  procured 
by  honesty.  But  if  thefts  are  punished  by 
placing  the  whole  on  that  diet,  all  will  have  an 
interest  to  prevent  and  forbear  theft,  provided 
a  diet  much  more  comfortable  is  thereby  se- 
cured. Nor  is  involving  all  in  the  punishment 
a  hardship,  because  all  share  in  the  benefits 
which  nothing  but  this  system  for  preventing 
the  waste  of  theft  can  produce  ^  and  because 
a  knowledge  of  the  criminal  is  usually  general, 
,lt  is  this  unavoidable  knowledge,  which  makes 
the  innocent  comrades^  who  will  not  surrender 
their  own  daily  comforts,  that  another  may  oc- 
casionally steal  luxuries,  a  solid  check  upon 
theft.  The  better  the  diet  of  negroes,  the 
more  effectual  will  such  a  system  become.  It 
should  be  executed  rigidly,  so  as  to  produce  a 
loss  ©f  food  additioual  to  bread,  of  doabk  ya- 


MO  XABoirS. 

liie  to  the  tiling  stolen.  Except  the  guilty  persok 
is  (letected,  avIio  ought  in  tliat  case  to  sustain 
tlie  whole  punishment,  which  must  either  he 
corporal,  or  a  sale  to  some  distant  place.  The 
latter,  combined  with  the  enjoyments  provided 
for  slaves  by  this  system,  will  soon  become  an 
object  of  terror  ;  and  as  many  huyers  care  lit- 
tle for  moral  cliaracter,  it  is  unexceptionable, 
provided  the  seller  states  it  fairly  and  records 
it  ill  the  bill  of  sale,  as  he  ought  to  do,  for  his 
own  honour  and  security. 

A  daily  allowance  of  cyder  will  extend  the 
success  of  this  system  for  the  management  of 
slaves,  and  particularly  its  effect  of  diminish- 
ing corporal  punishments.  But  the  reader  is 
warned  that  a  stern  authority,  strict  discipline 
and  complete  subordination,  must  be  combined 
with  it,  to  gain  any  success  at  all ;  and  that  so 
long  as  white  soldiers  cannot  be  kept  in  order, , 
or  rendered  useful,  without  all  three,  he  is  not 
to  expect  that  black  slaves  can  without  either  5 
nor  that  those  can  be  governed  by  the  finest 
threads  of  the  human  heart,  who  possess  only*' 
the  coarsest. 


LABOVS,  f^f 


Number  31* 


LABOUR Continued, 

Those  tied  by  habit  to  the  rotation  of  coni^ 
wheat  and  pasture,  or  the  three  shift  system 
object  to  the  inclosing  and  four  shift  system 
«*  that  having  labour  adequate  to  the  tilling 
one  third  of  their  arable  land,  a  portion  of  it 
would  be  unemployed,  by  restricting  this  la- 
bour to  the  cultivation  of  a  fourth  only."  The 
rotation  of  corn,  wheat,  and  clover  for  two 
years,  without  being  cut  or  grazed,  need  only 
be  confronted  with  its  rival  course,  to  satisfy 
the  reader,  that  under  tbe  latter  system,  the 
fourth  will  soon  overtake  the  third  in  product^ 
and  at  length  infinitely  ex«eed  it.  The  prafit 
of  making  greater  crops  from  less  land  is  visi- 
ble at  once.  The  same  crop  from  a  fourth 
may  produce  profit,  and  yet  a  loss  from  a  third. 
If  120  acres  of  poor  land  produce  120  barrels 
of  corn,  and  the  expences  of  cultivation  a- 
mount  to  a  barrel  an  acre,  there  is  no  profit  ^ 
but  if  90  acres  of  the  same  land  are  improved 
by  inclosing,  so  as  to  produce  120  barrels^ 
there  will  be  a  profit  of  30  barrels.  This 
principle  equally  applies  to  every  case  of  an 
>*xisting  prpfit  under  the  three  shift  systentf 


142  I.ABOUII. 

because  wliateyer  it  Biay  be,  it  is  greatly  in- 
creased  by  obtaining  an  equal  crop  by  cultivat- 
ing less  land. 

Tlie  error  of  making  tlie  mode  of  cultivati- 
on subservient  to  fluctuating  labour,  instead  of 
adapting  tlie  labour  to  permanent  land,  liowe- 
ver  egregious,  cannot  properly  be  termed  vul- 
gar, because  it  is  common  to  men  ef  the  best, 
as  well  as  to  those  of  the  meanest  understand- 
ings. However  glaring  it  is,  it  really  consti- 
tutes the  most  stubborn  argument  in  favour  of 
using  labour  to  kill  rather  than  to  improve 
land  ;  and  though  some  readers  may  think  it 
idle  to  controvert  a  mistake,  apparently  net 
within  the  scope  of  liiiman  weakness  to  com - 
mitj  the  greater  number,  w  ill  I  fear,  consider 
the  application  of  labour  to  the  improvement, 
rather  than  to  the  impoverishment  of  land,  as 
far  more  ridiculous.  The  collision  between 
these  opinions  will  excuse  the  matter  of  thi§ 
number,  though  it  may  seem  trite  to  some  and 
visionarv  to  others. 

An  application  of  labour  to  land,  which  dai- 
ly diminishes  the  fertility  of  the  land,  consi- 
dered in  a  national  light,  is  obviously  a  nati- 
onal evil ;  and  a  habit  from  which  such  bound- 
less or  wide  ruin  and  depopulation  must  ensue,: 
supposing  it  to  be  general,  seems  incapable 
of  deserving  the  approbation  of  virtue,  or  the 
r-Qjacurrencc  of  selii^lmess.    M  ikc^  employ- 


XABOUR.  1 iS 

inent  of  labour  in  the  course  of  com,  wheat 
and  pasture,  produces  a  regular  impoverish- 
ment of  the  soil,  the  practice  falls  within  the 
scope  of  this  observation. 

It  is  equally  at  enmity  with  the  purest  devo^ 
tion  of  self  interest,  which  ever  chilled  the  hu- 
man heart.  This  devotion  pants  for  compound 
or  increasing,  not  for  decreasing  interest ;  and 
beholds  with  horror  a  diminution  of  principal. 
Our  three  shift  system  gradually  destroys  the 
principal,  land,  and  gradually  diminishes  the- 
interest,  crop.  If  the  labour  increases  as  in 
the  case  of  slaves,  the  effect  is  not  to  enrich  but 
to  impoverish  the  owner. 

Flight  is  his  resource  against  the  poverty  he 
derives  from  the  increase  of  his  slaves.  If  the 
application  of  labour  to  the  impoverishment 
of  land  was  universal,  an  emigration  to  fi^.other 
world,  would  be  the  only  remedy  ;  if  nati- 
onal, it  must  amount  to  an  abjuration  of  our 
country  and  form  of  government  |  if  state,  to 
a  bauishment  from  our  native  soil  and  rela- 
tions. I*ut  this  miserable  remedy  itself  v,rd 
ere  long  be  exbausted,  and  after  an  internal 
struggle  for  tlie  best  birth  in  a  bed  of  thorns, 
the  discovery  will  be  made,  that  an  endeavor 
la  each  to  feather  his  own  nest,  is  the  only  way 
to  pi-ocsirc  coiLifort  for  all :  and  that  the  pros- 
licii'y  of  the  nation  and  the  happiness  of  in- 
(11  vidisals,  depend  on  the  improvement  of  land 
by  a  proper  application  t)f  labour. 


But  %vliat  shall  we  do  »ith  our  surplus  la- 
bour is  repeated,  if  we  cease  to  employ  it  Id 
killing  land  ?  One  would  think  that  this  doubt 
could  never  be  entertained,  except  by  a  fa- 
tialist,  who  believed  that  sucli  was  the  end  for 
Tf^hich  labour  was  created.  The  effects  of  la- 
bour are  the  same  in  Agriculture  as  in  archi- 
tecture ;  far  more  is  necessary  to  build  than  to 
destroy  ;  shall  we  thence  also  infer,  that  labour 
is  destined  to  destroy  houses  ?  Where  is  the 
difference  between  destroying  houses  ami  de- 
stroying the  means  by  which  houscsS  are  reiir 
dered  comfortable  ?  The  early  Kentucky  setr 
tiers  contended,  that  unless  the  sugar  makers 
killed  the  sugar  trees,  it  threw  a  portion  of 
their  labour  out  of  employnxent,  and  thereforje 
inferred  that  it  was  one  of  nature's  wise  laws^ 
that  labour  should  kill  the  sources  of  sugar. 
Bid  they  borrow  tills  opinion  from  our  querist, 
who  thinks  it  wise  and  natural  to  employ  it  in 
killing  the  source  of  bread  ?  If  an  abundance 
of  labour  caused  a  land  killing  Agricultural 
system,  and  its  scarcity  the  reverse,  Flanders 
should  be  a  wilderness  and  Yirginia  a  garder^* 
A  great  recommendation  of  the  inclosing  and 
four  shift  system,  is  the  saving  of  labour  it 
creates  in  fencing,  and  in  renouncing  the  cul- 
ture of  exhausted  lands,  to  be  applied  to  im- 
provement. When  we  come  to  consider  a  pro* 
ject  for  the  management  of  a  br^ad  stuff  farm? 


wje  shall  discover  full  employ meiit  for  lliis  siip» 
plus  labour,  which  the  three  shift  system  fears 
%ould  be  idle,  if  not  employed  as  a  laud  exe- 
cutioner.    The  raising  of  manure,  covering 
with  clover  every  spot  of  land  which  will  bear 
it,  and  converting  all  moist  land  into  meadow? 
would  alone  be  sponsors  for  the  futility  of  the 
apprehension.     And  yet  many  other  objects  of 
labour  must  be  combined  with  the  four  shift 
and  inclosing  system*  to  accelerate  and  aug- 
ment the  rewards  it  will  bestow.   Hay  in  abun- 
dance must  be  made,  crops  will  be  augmented, 
modes  of  tillage  must  be  improved,  transpor- 
tation will  increase  with  litter,  manure  and 
crops,  and  gypsum  if  resorted  to,  is  by  na 
means  niggardly  in  providing  employment  for 
labour.     If  these  observations  have   not   re- 
moved the  apprehension  of  ruin,  seriously  and 
generally  entertained  by  the  disciples  of  the 
.  corn,  wheat  and  pasture  rotation,  should  they 
change  the  application  of  their  labour  from 
impoverishing  to  improving  their  land,  it  will 
still  be  removed  by  their  own  superior  reflec- 
tions, if  they  will  be  pleased  to  reflect.     They 
will  certainly  discover  that  the   danger   of 
wanting  employment  for  their  labour,  lurks, 
not  in  improving  but  in  impoverishing  their 
lands,  and  that  whilst  they  shudder  at  an  ap- 
paritiony  they  ai^e  embracing  an  assassin, 

N   3 


146  INDIAN   COKN. 


Number  32. 


t 


It  was  very  improbable  that  one  ^vbo  has  of- 
ten joined  in  the  execration  of  Indian  corn, 
should  have  been  destined  to  write  its  eulogy. 
Had  v/e  designed  to  transfer  from  ourselves  to 
an  innocent  plant  the  heavy  charge  of  murder- 
ing our  land,  its  acquittal  before  a  jury  whose 
,i)wn  condemnation  would  be  the  consequence,, 
^ould  not  be  expected ;  but  as  nothing  is  more 
certain  than  that  the  exclamations  against  corn 
and  tobacco  (and  for  the  last  thirty  years 
wheat  ought  to  have  been  placed  at  the  head 
of  the  triumvirate)  for  killing  our  lauds,  have 
proceeded  from  conviction,  without  a  suspici- 
on that  we  ourselves  were  the  perpetrators  of 
the  act ;  I  shall  venture  to  bring  Indian  corn 
to  trial  before  tlie  real  criminals,  and  its  mis- 
taken accusers. 

Arthur  Young,  in  liis  travels  througli  France 
and  Spain?  observes  that  the  regions  of  maize 
exhibited  plenty  and  afilueiice,  compared  with 
those  where  other  crops  were  cultivated.  As 
a  faitiiful  agricultural  annalist,  he  records  the 
fact  ;  being  but  little  acquainted  with  the 
plant,  he  conld  not  satisfactorily  account  fw 


it.  Even  a  nation  which  has  lived  with  it,  and 
almost  upoR  it  for  two  hundred  years,  so  far 
from  eorrcctlj  estimating  its  value,  have  only 
learnt  to  eat  it,  but  not  to  avail  thejnselves  of 
hall  its  properties.  Those  for  killing  land, 
they  have  turned  to  the  utmost  account ;  those 
for  improving  it,  they  have  wholly  neglected. 
The  first  capacity  is  common  to  all  crops  ',  the 
last  is  possessed  hj  few. 

Indian  corn  produces  more  food  for  man, 
beast  and  the  earth,  than  any  other  farinaceous 
plant.  If  the  food  it  produces  for  the  two  first 
V,  as  w  asted,  and  men  and  beasts  should  thence 
become  poor  and  perish,  ought  their  poverty 
or  death  to  be  ascribed  to  the  plant  which  pro^ 
duced  the  food,  or  to  those  who  wasted  it  ?  Is 
Indian  corn  justly  chargeable  with  the  im- 
poverishment of  the  earth,  if  the  food  it  pro- 
vides for  that  is  not  applied  ? 

If  the  theory  which  supposes  that  plants  ex- 
tract most  or  all  of  their  matter  from  the  at- 
mosphere, and  that  the  whole  of  this  matter 
is  manure,  be  true,  then  that  plant  which  pro- 
duces most  vegetable  offal  must  be  the  most 
improving  crop,  and  it  will  hardly  be  denied 
that  Indian  corn  is  entitled  to  this  pre-emi- 
nence. 

Let  us  compare  it  with  wheat.  Suppose 
that  the  same  land  will  produce  as  much  grain 
of  the  one  as  of  the  other^  whicli  in  its  use  will 


raake  equal  returns  t«  the  earth.  Here  the 
equality  ends,  if  indeed  it  exists  even  in  this 
point.  The  corn  stalks  infinitely  exceed  the 
wheat  straw  in  bulk,  weight,  and  a  capacity  for 
making  food  for  the  earth.  If  any  attentive 
man  avIio  converts  both  his  stalks  and  straw 
into  manure,  will  compare  their  product  in 
April,  when  he  may  distinguish  one  from  the 
other,  he  will  find  of  the  former  a  vast  superi- 
ority in  quantity.  The  English  farmers  con- 
sider wheat  straw  as  their  most  abundant  re- 
source for  manure,  and  corn  stalks  are  far  more 
abundant ;  corn  therefore  is  a  less  impoverish- 
ing, because  a  more  compensating  crop  to  the 
earth,  credited  only  for  its  stalks,  than  any  in 
England.  In  comparing  crops,  to  ascertain 
their  relative  product,  and  operation  on  the 
earth,  we  must  contrast  farinaceous  crops  with 
each  other  ;  and  consider  the  litter  or  offal 
they  produce,  not  as  wasted,  but  as  judiciously 
applied  to  the  compensation  of  the  land.  At 
the  threshold  of  the  comparison,  corn  exhibits 
a  return  from  the  same  land  of  more  offal  or 
litter  in  its  stalks  alone,  than  wheat  does  alto- 
gether. Rut  to  the  stalks  of  corn,  its  blades, 
tops,  shucks  and  cobs  remain  to  be  added,  each 
of  which  will  nearly  balance  the  litter  bestow- 
ed on  the  land  by  wheat.  Not  only  the  quan- 
tity of  the  vegetable  matter  produced  by  corn, 
^  far  greater  than  the  quantity  produced  by 


lin)IAN   GORiVi  149 

wheat,  but  the  quality  is  better,  and  the  risque 
of  loss  from  evaporation  less.  The  straw  of 
wheat  after  it  is  ripening  or  ripe,  standing  or- 
lying  out  on  the  ground,  is  vastly  diminished 
in  weight  by  moisture,  and  injured  after  it  is 
cut,  even  by  dews.  I  think  I  have  known  it 
thus  lose  two  thirds  of  its  weight.  Among  the 
several  kbids  of  litter  furnished  by  corn,  the 
shucks  and  cobs  lose  nothing  of  their  value  by 
evaporation^  the  rind  of  the  stalks  seems  intend- 
ed by  nature  to  resist  it,  that  the  farmer  may 
have  time  to  save  tliem  both  as  food  and  litter  j- 
from  the  same  rind  the  top  derives  some  se^ 
curity,  and  the  fodder  is  only  exposed  to  it  as 
grass  is  in  being  made  into  hay.  But  the 
quality  of  every  part  of  the  corn  offal  is  better 
-as  manure  than  the  wheat  offal.  The  cob  is 
«aid  to  be  a  valuable  food,  reduced  to  meal  j 
if  so  it  probably  contains  an  oil.  The  stalk 
abounds  in  salts  far  beyond  wheat  straw.  The 
tops  and  blades  cured  green,  save  from  evapo- 
ration salts  lost  by  straw.  And  even  shucks, 
bein^  more  nutrielous  as  food,  must  be  allow- 
ed some  degree  of  richness  beyond  the  straw. 
The  whole  of  the  corn  offal  is  better  food  than 
wheat  straw,  but  its  blades  and  tops  are  sq 
greatly  superior,  that  cattle  prefer  them  to 
hay,  -and  will  fatten  on  them  as  well.  The 
corn  offal  can  therefore  maintain  a  fat  her4, 
furnishing  abundantly  that  wlileli  forms  a  eosr- 


±B0  IJfDlAJT   COKir. 

pound  wilii  vegetable  matter,  of  the  richest 
consistence.  To  tliis  object  the  straw  is  in- 
competent. 

Let  us  now  compare  corn  and  wheat  as  fari- 
naceous food  only.  Corn  in  a  proper  climate 
for  itj  produces  more  farinaceous  matter  than 
wheat  to  the  acre,  from  the  richest  down  to 
the  poorest  soil ;  and  hence  also  results  a 
greater  return  to  the  earth.  The  highest  pro^ 
duct  of  corn  I  have  heard  of  in  the  United 
States  is  125  bushels  to  the  acre,  of  wheat  60, 
a  dilTerence  somewhat  diminished  by  the  dif- 
ference of  weight.  Fifty  bushels  of  corn  to  the 
acre,  are  almost  invariably  produced  by  land 
well  manured  and  well  cultivated,  whereas 
even  half  that  crop  of  wheat  is  exti^emely  rare. 
And  in  districts  w^here  the  average  crop  of 
wheat  is  ^ye,  that  of  corn  is  usually  about 
fifteen  bushels  an  acre.  Besides,  corn  both 
growing  and  gathered,  is  less  liable  to  mis- 
fortunes than  wheat. 

Indian  corn  may  be  correctly  called  meal, 
meadow  and  manure.  To  its  right  to  the  fivU 
title,  almost  every  tongue  in  the  largest  por- 
tion of  the  United  States  can  testify ;  to  the 
second,  an  exclusive  reliance  on  it  for  fodder 
or  hay,  in  a  great  district  of  country  during 
two  centuries,  gives  conclusive  evidence  ;  bu1> 
the  rueful  countenance  of  this  same  district 
i^ithcr  disproves  it$  claim  to  the  third,  or  di** 


-—  tNDlATS^   CORX,  15,1 

allows  any  pretension  of  the  inliabitants  to  ia- 
dustry  or  Agrieultnral  knowledge. 

In  Europe,  no  husbandman  expects  a  tolerai 
hie  crop  of  any  kind,  except  the  land  has  been 
well  manured  within  seven  years  at  most; 
here  we  have  obtained  for  two  centuries  from 
Indian  corn,  bread,  meat,  and  fodder,  without 
giving  it,  generally  speaking,  a  dustrof  ma- 
nure, or  alloAving  any  rest  to  the  land  which 
produces  it.  Is  there  any  country  in  Europe 
able  to  bear  this  draft  for  such  a  period,  Avitli- 
out  exhibiting  the  cadaverous  aspect  of  the 
corn  district  of  the  United  States  ? 

But  not  content  with  bestowing  on  other 
crops,  the  meagre  modicum  of  manure,  which 
happened  to  lie  unavoidably  in  the  way  of  ig- 
norance, whilst  the  maintenance  of  every  thing 
was  required  of  corn,  without  allowing  it  any, 
we  have  suiTered  the  manure  provided  by  corn 
itself  to  waste  and  perish  ;  and  having  both 
%vithheld  from  it  foreign  aids,  and  transferred 
to  other  plants  the  small  portion  of  its  own  re- 
sources for  manure,  which  accident  may  have 
saved,  and  permitted  the  residue  to  be  lostj 
we  Tiharge  it  with  being  an  exhausting  and  kil* 
ling  crop. 

Such  is  ike  experimental  process  hitherto 
pursued,  but  it  must  be  reversed,  before  the 
question  can  be  tolerably  understood  or  fairly 
determined.    It  will  be  reversed  by  converting 


«very  dust  of  its  olPal  into  manure,  and  ma- 
nuring iiiglily  for  corn.  With  good  c ultivation 
an  acre  of  v*  ell  manured  land  seldom  produces 
less  than  fifty  hushels.  This  crop  furnishes 
also  other  food  equivalent  to  a  tolerable  crop 
of  hay,  and  such  an  abundance  of  means  for 
raising  manure,  that  I  have  no  doubt  if  pro- 
perly applied,  it  would  be  a  resource  for  our 
even  shortening  the  English  manuring  rota- 
tion, which  embraces  the  whole  farm  every 
seven  years  at  most.  Hence  I  conclude  that 
eorn,  besides  being  the  most  productive  of  any 
farinaceous  crop,  is  also  the  least  impoverish- 
ing, and  even  an  improving  crop,  aided  by  in- 
closing. 

The  brevity  I  have  prescribed  to  myself^ 
induces  me  to  pass  over  several  inferior  supe- 
riorities of  Indiaii  corn,  and  to  conclude  its 
encomium  with  one  of  peculiar  value.  As  a 
fallow  crop,  it  is  unrivalled,  if  as  fallow  erops 
ought  constantly  to  do,  it  receives  the  manure. 
Arthur  Young  proves  the  vast  superiority  of  a 
faUow  crop  ovev  a  naked  fallow  in  England, 
where  a  crop  greatly  inferior  to  corn  in  value, 
is  necessarily  used.  This  is  usually  peas  ov 
beans.  It  is  less  productive,  less  valuable  as 
bread  stuff,  less  fraught  with  fodder,  almost 
wholly  destitute  of  litter  for  raising  manure, 
more  precarious,  ^lore  liable  to  disaster  after 
h  is  gathered,  more  chargeable  in  point  of 


seed^  and  requires  more  skill,  trouble  and  ex- 
pence  in  its  cultivation.     Under  all  these  dis- 
advantages a  fallow  crop  in  England  is  prefer- 
able to  a  naked  fallow.     Under  all  the  advan- 
tages of  using  corn  as  such,  it  becomes  a  bril- 
liant object  in  America,  if  attended  y^iih  a  com- 
plete manuring,  as  fallow  crops  in  England  in- 
variably  are.     In  that  ease  fifty  bushels  of 
corn  and  thirty  of  wheat  may  be  expected  from 
good -culture.     No  value  is  produced  in  En- 
gland by  the  fallow  crop  and  the  following 
wheat,  equal  to  eighty  bushels  of  bread  grain*. 
But  credit  to  corn  the  savings  and  additional 
produce  arising  from  the  above  enumerated 
considerations,  and  it  certainly  promises  to  the 
American  farmer,  far  greater  benefits  from  a 
good  system  of  husbandry,  than  any  crop  with* 
in  the  reach  of  an  £Inglish  farmer. 


Number  So. 


UTDM^*  COBJ^.....CmitmueiL 

The  plant  which  contributes  in  the  greatest 
djBgree  to  national  subsistence,  best  deserves 
the  patronage  of  skill  and  industry  ;  and  yet 
the  eultivatiott of  maize  remains  asit  was bor- 


tM  INDIAN    CORX. 

2'owed  from  tli€  a]>or]ginal  farmers  of  Ame- 
rleuj,  except,  that  if  product  is  the  test  of  sci- 
enee,  they  must  he  allowed  to  have  heen  more 
.accOiiiplislied  husbaudmen  than  their  imita- 
tors.  As  th€  lodiaus  certainly  made  better 
crops  to  the  acre,  and  preserved  the  earth  in 
helter  li^eart,  tlian  we  do,  we  may  at  least  hope 
10  ae&omplish  a  degree  of  perfection,  which 
iTom  their  success  we  know  to  be  attainable, 
howcYer  deterltig  may  be  the  prospect  of  our 
ability  to  improYe  upon  it.  If  indeed  we  eeuld 
be  persuaded  to  relinquish  wliat  we  have  re- 
tained of  this  indigenous  system,  and  to  draw 
one  from  scientific  pi^ineiplcs  and  European  ex-° 
perience,  perlraps  we  might  recoYer  the  palm 
in  the  cultlYation  of  maize,  from  those  to 
*»?ho.m  we  have  ourselves  assigned  it  by  a  s|)e- 
€ial  cognominatioii. 

Neither  in  theory  or  practice,  in  Europe  ot 
elsewhere,  did  we  ever  hear  ojf  condemning 
land  perpetually  to  sere  re  crops,  two  years' out 
aof  three,  without  aiding  it  by  any  species  &£ 
manure.  But  if  we  add  to  this  system  the  two 
items  with  which  it  is  usually  attended,  oncj 
€]ose  grazing  tlie  year  of  rest  as  it  is  called  (a 
rest  like  that  enjoyed  by  a  man  first  stunned 
with  blows  and  then  trampled  to  death)  the 
other,  frequent  ploughJngs  of  two  or  three  in- 
ches deep  to  let  in  sun  and  keep  out  atmosphere 
ag  m«ch  as  possibk*  it  weuld  b^  viewed;  as  tliiB 


INDIAN    CORN^  155 

most-  complete  Agricultural  caricature  hi- 
therto sketched  by  the  finest,  fancy  for  the  ri- 
diculous. 

In  England,  a  thorough  manuring,  univer- 
sally attends  a  Mlow  crop,  the  effect  of  which 
is  a  medium  product  of  wheat,  of  about  thirty 
bushels  to  the  acre^  JLet  manuring  attend 
maize  as  a  fallow  crop,  and  we  follow  this  ex- 
ample. To  come  up  to  it  however,  we  must 
get  our  land  into  equal  heart  with  theirs,  when 
it  receives  this  manuring ;  and  then  we  should 
be  able  fairly  to  estimate  the  value  of  Indian 
corn.  In  its  cultivation,  the  first  improvement 
required,  is  therefore  to  manure  it  at  the  usual 
rate  of  other  fallow  crop&» 

The  second  is  to  plough  vastly  deeper  than  we 
plough  at  present.  In  our  dry  and  hot  eiimate, 
tliG  preservation  of  the  moisture  and  the  Inhn-r- 
lation  of  the  atmosphere,  are  sufflcieiit  reasons 
for  this.  To  tlicse  are  to  be  added,  the  deep- 
ailing  of  thi'  soil,  and  an  increase  of  pasture  for 
the  plant.  The  maize  is  a  little  tree,  and  pos- 
sessing roots  eorrespondent  to  its  size,  these 
roots  will  of  course  strike  deeper,  both  to  pro- 
cure nourishment,  and  to  strengthen  this  small 
tree  against  severe  winds.  It  follows  with  a 
great  degree  of  probability  that  this  iarg^ 
4>laiit  requires  deeper  ploughing  than  a  smaller 
o'le.  Yet  we  plough  shallower  in  its  cultiva- 
lion  than  the  people  of  Europe  do  in  cuithnK 
log  vvbeat. 


i  sliali  here  endeavour  to  pi^ove  the  truth  of 
a  pair  of  paradoxes*  One,  that  shallow  plough* 
hig  increases,  the  other,  that  deep  ploughing  di- 
minishes labour.  A  single  ohservation  alniosl 
suffices  to  sustain  both.  By  shallow  plough- 
ing, the  seeds  of  grass  and  weeds,  are  kept  neafr 
the  surface  throughout  the  year,  locked  up  h^ 
frost,  drought  or  immersion,  ready  to  sprout 
Mpon  the  occurrence  of  eV^I^  genial  seasoii';, 
when  they  appear  in  liiillions,  aud  instantly  re^ 
quire  the  plough,  however  recently  tisetl ;  by 
'ieep,  if  skilfully  done,  these  seeds  which 
iihound  most  near  the  surface,  are  deposited  be^ 
low  a  depth  of  earth,  which  ihej  penetrate 
^Mwly  and  in  small  numbers,  so  that  the  repe!- 
lition  of  ploughing  is  far  less  necessary. 

One  or  two  deep  ploaghings,  according  to  the 
nature  of  the  soil,  will,  with  the  subsequent 
use  of  the  skimmer  or  the  harrow,  serve  to 
make  iliQ  crop  of  corn  ;  in  place  of  which  at 
least  four  or  five  shallow  plougliings,  Avith  the 
.^me  aid,  wiU  often  destroy  it. 

To  demonstrate  the  difference  in  point  of  la-- 
hour,  I  will  describe  the  tillage  of  porn  as  I  n 
practice  it  to  some  extent,  and  leave  the  reader 
to  make  the  comparison  in  his  own  mind  with 
the  usual  mode  of  cultivation. 

The  rows  are  never  plougtied  but  in  one  di- 
rection, cross  ploughing  being  wholly  abandon- 
ed.   Their  width  is  five  and  a  half  feet.     Tlio 


IKDIAN    GOKJT.  157 

■field  being  once  thrown  into  tlie  position  of 
ridges  and  furrows,  never  reqiiii'es  to  be  laid 
off  again.     The  furrow  is  left  as  deep  as  pos* 
sible,  and  when  the  field  comes  again  into  til- 
lage, the  list  or  ridge  is  made  upon  this  f  ?i3'- 
row,  so  that  there  is  a  regular  allernity  l>r- 
tween  ridges  and  furrows,     If  the  soil  is  of  a 
friable  nature,  a  large  plough  drawn  by  foui- 
horses,  and  cutting  a  sod  about  twelve  iuchcB 
wide  and  eighCTfe'ep,  is  run  on  each  side  of  this 
old  furrow,  and  raises  a  ridge  in  its  centre,  oa 
which  to  plant  the  corn.     Tlie  old  ridge  is  split 
by  a  large  trowel-hoer-plough,  having  a  coulter 
on  the  point,  two  mould-boards,  drawn  by  four 
horses,  and  cutting  ten  inches  deep.     If  the 
soil  is  stiff  or  tough  w  ith  turf,  the  first  plough 
with  four  horses,  ridges  or  lists  on  the  old  wa- 
ter furrow,  with  four  fia^rows  of  the  same 
depth  and  widths     On  the  summit  of  this  ridge 
or  list,  a  deep  and  wide  furrow  is  run  with  a 
trowel-hoe-ptough  and  two  mould-boards,  in 
which  the  corn  is  planted  and  covered  between 
two  and  three  inches  deep  with  the  foot.     The 
planting  is  guided  by  a  string  carried  across 
the  ridges,  ^\itli  coloured  marks  at  tm  dis- 
tance apart  intended  for  the  corn.     Tliis  fur- 
row is  a  complete  weeding  of  the  ridge  previ- 
ous to  i>lanting,  which  it  should  barely  pre- 
cede.    The  corn  receives  no  more  ploughing 
\mtil  it  is  thin'd  and  hand-hoed  along  the  rows.. 
"■■•■■■.OS 


158  INDIAN   COBN* 

about  two  feet  wide.  After  this  a  deep  fur- 
row is  run  on  each  side  ef  it  by  a  large  plough, 
drawn  by  two  horses,wilh  a  mouId-Loard^caus- 
ing  the  earth  thrown  out  of  it  to  meet  at  the 
corn,  though  the  furrow  is  a  foot  from  it.^— 
Thenceforth  the  tillage  consists  of  a  streah  or 
furrow  of  a  mere  weeding  plough  called  a 
skimmer,  cutting  with  two  wings  twenty-four 
inches-^drawn  by  one  horse  ;  and  of  a  central, 
deep  and  wide  f  urrow>  made  with  a  trowel-hoe 
and  two  mould-boards,  drawn  by  two  horses^ 
tabe  repeated  when  necessary.  The  whole  lo 
be  concluded  with  a  narrow  weeding  or  hand 
hoeing  along  the  slip  in  the  direction  of  the 
row,  not  kept  e(^mpletely  clean  by  tlic 
skimmrr. 


Tiic  Judicious  reader  will  discern,  that  iiit 
cfTectBof  liigh  ridges  and  dtA-^pfiiirov/slii  ciil- 
livaling  cci'K  are  iiumcrci:?.  TI:e  corn  h 
ihiuicil  iinmcdiiitcly  (av.v  Cno  furrow  of  the 
preccdir.g  crop,  and  by  eciujkiing  the  rcver- 
'^al  oT  MiT  ri;lgc  cr..vh'  in  U^  cirTdri o.  it  gi<.^v.s 


INDIAN'    COIi:N.  lZ-^9 

upon  a  ilcpUi  of  tiltk  t];ree  of  fons*  tiii.cs  o» 
^^e^tllii^*;  what  is  attained  bv  planlisig-  and  cross 
ploug-liing  in  llic  usual  in<)de.  Its  roots  ar^ 
Rcrer  cut  in  one  direction,  and  this  great  depth 
of  liltli  til  us  carl  J  obtained,  bv  superseding  the 
occasioa  for  deep  ploughing  in  the  latter  pei*i- 
od  of  its  growth,  saves  them  in  the  otlier.^ — 
TJie  preservation  of  the  roots,  aad  their  deep- 
er pasture,  enables  the  corn  much  longer  tp 
resist  drought.  The  litter  of  inclosed  grounds, 
tlirown  into  the  deep  furrow  upon  which  the 
torn  list  is  made,  is  a  reservoir  of  manure, 
far  removed  from  evaporation,  within  ^reach 
of  the  roots,  which  will  follow  it  along  the  fuiv 
low  I  and  calculated  for  feeding  the  plant  in 
droughts.  The  dead  earth  brought  up  by  the 
plough  from  the  deep  furrow  is  deposited  on 
each  side  of  it,  without  hurting  the  crop  on  the 
ridge,  and  with  the  bottom  of  the  furrow  re- 
mains four  years  to  be  fructiiied  hj  the  at- 
mosphere, /  so  as  to  escape  the  present  loss 
t^ometimes  accrui^ig  from  mingling  too  much 
dead  earth  with  the  soil  by  deep  flat  ploughing, 
;ind  yet  to  mellow  and  deepen  it  more  rapidly. 
And  much  labour  is  saved  in  planting  the  corn? 
wlicther  the  hoe  is  used  after  a  string,  or  the 
string  is  carried  across  furrows  previously 
made  on  the  ridge. 

In  all  lands  unable  to  produce  forty  bushel-s 
of  corn  to  the  acre,  the  considerations  of  prp- 


duee,  and  saving  labour  liDiteii,  have  determia- 
ed  the  proper  distance  to  be  ^yq  and  an  half 
feet  square,  with  two  or  three  stalks  at  each 
station^  except  in  poor  spots,  whdre  one  will 
sufnce.  If  it  can  produce  that  crop  or^'inbre? 
I  h-ave  planted  it  at  the  distance  of  five  feet 
six  inelies,  by  two  feet  nine,  leaving  two  stalks 
in  sandy,  and  three  in  stiif  lands.  Deep 
ploughing  in  one  direction,  by  shielding  the 
corn  against  drought,  and  saving  its  roots,  al- 
lows it  to  be  planted  thicker  than  usual. 

Yomig's  experiments  have  ascertained  that 
fallow  crops  are  more  profitable  than  naked 
fallows.  Several  superiorities  of  Indian  corn 
over  the  fallov/  crops  used  in  England,  have 
been  noticed.  The  following  are,  I  believe, 
omitted.  The  high  ridges  produced  by  the 
mode  of  cultivation  I  have  adopted,  double  the 
surface  exposed  to  the  atmosphere,  and  lessen 
by  one  iiaif  that  exposed  to  the  sun,  so  as  to  iu- 
creascinhalaiion,  and  diminish  exhalation  ve- 
ry considerably.  No  other  fallow  crop  will 
enable  us  to  obtain  these  benefits  by  the  agen- 
cy of  the  plough,  because  none  of  them  will 
jiidmit  of  being  drilled  sufficiently  Viide  apart, 
nor  admit  of  an  equal  use  of  the  plough. 

Corn  is  a  fallow  crop,  peculiarly  adapted  to 
co-operate  with  the  system  of  inclosing  f 
whereas  a  fallow  for  wheat,  by  which  an  un- 
graded lay  of  ^rass,  weeds,  er  even  of  red  cJo' 


Tfe^i"  is  turned  under,  frequently  defeats  the 
hopes  of  the  farmer.  Hence  he  is  seduced  iu- 
to  the  ruinous  practice  of  feeding  off  his  clo- 
Ter  b^ore  he  commences  his  fallow  ;  a  prac- 
tice under  \?hich  very  rich  land  only  will  im- 
prove. Whereas-tlie  heaviest  cover,  turne?i 
under  hj  a  large  plough  and  four  horses,  is  a 
pledge  for  good  crops  hoth  of  corn  and  wheat. 
Owing  to  the  quality  of  the  former  of  thriving 
upon  the  food  yielded  hy  coarse  litter,  and  the 
time  gained  during  its  growth,  for  reducingr 
this  litter  to  proper  food  for  the  latter. 

The  winter's  manure  like  this  litter  is  also 
made  more  extensively  beneiicial  to  a  crop  of 
wheat,  than  if  it  had  been  exposed  to  putrefac-- 
^on  throughout  the  summer,  because  w  hateve? 
©scapes  into  the  atmosphere  during  a  violent 
summer's  fermentation,  is  lost  both  to  the 
earth  and  to  the  crop  of  wheat ;  w  hereas  the 
fermentation  is  less  violent,  when  this  litter  is 
mingled  with  the  earth,  whicli  catches  a  poFe 
tiou  of  its  fertilizing  qualities  as  the  slow  pu- 
trefaction proceeds,  and  less  of  the  manure  ts 
lost  when  the  wheat  is  sown,  than  if  rotted  in 
a  body,  whereby  much  of  it  is  di^isipated  in  the 
atmosphere :  a  dissipatioii  which  corn  partly 
prevents,  and  partly  saves. 

The  manure  made  on  the  winter's  farm  pea, 
remains  we^  cold,  and  unrolled  until  tlie 
month  of  Apiil,  and  when  composed  of  ticvrf 


462  INDIAN  COEK. 

stalks  IS  of  a  rough  and  hard  nature.  Yei 
land  covered  with  fifty  loads  and  sown  with 
one  bushel  of  gypsiim  to  an  acre,  will  produce- 
threefold  more  corn  than  in  its  natural  state  ; 
and  thi*  crop  is  made  in  five  months  ;  a  space 
just  sufficient  to  reduce  the  coarse  litter  to  a 
pabulum  proper  for  wheat.  The  better  this 
coarse  litter  and  the  earth  are  divided  and 
mingled,  the  less  will  be  the  fermentation,  and 
the  greater  the  crop.  The  sudden  growili  of 
the  corn,  demonstrates  a  vast  benefit  to  be  de- 
ifived  from  litter  as  coarse  and^  hard  as  corn- 
stalks, whilst  the  degree  ef  their  putrefaction 
is  inconsiderable,  and  consequeatly  the  vast 
loss  sustained  by  eompletiiig  this  putrefaction, 
without  gaining  a  valuable  crop  from  Its  pi'o^ 
cess.  After  the  process  of  fermentation  and 
putrefaction  is  finished  in  the  earth,  the  resi^ 
duum  is  the  same,  as  if  it  had  been  finish^ 
ed  out  of  tlic  earth  ;  besides  this  residuum, 
supposed  by  the  old  theory  of  compoundj. 
ing,  stirring  and  rotting  dunghills,  to  contain 
all  tha  fertilizing  qimlities  of  vegetable  matter, 
Indian  corn  enables  us  to  reap  I'ieh  harvest  of 
bread  stuS*from  the  process  towards  it. 

The  same  property  of  Indian  corn  presents 
lis  ulso  with  a  vayt  addition  to  our  vegetable 
matter  for  manure.  Th<;  crop  of  ofTal,  as  vtel! 
as  that  of  food^,  is  augmented  three  fold  by  the 
matfcj'  separated  from  coarse  IK  icr  in  rcciucing 
it  to  manure  proper  for  wheai.     Thi,^ of  itsdi' 


INDIAN   CORN.  _  i6Q 

fjxhibits  tlie  vast  preference  of  corn  as  a  fal- 
low crop,  to  the  application  of  rotted  manure 
to  a  naked  fallow  for  wheat.  No  two  crops 
<3an  be  so  exactly  fitted  for  advaiicitig  a  good 
system  of  Agriciikure,  The  coarse  organs  of 
tl^e  one,  relishes  the  food  rejected  by  the  de- 
licate organs  of  the  other^  and  by  the  ecorso- 
my  of  saving  what  would  othervr  ise  be  lost,  not 
enly  enable  us  to  obtain  an  additional  crop,  but 
by  increasing  ©up  means  for  raising  manure  in 
a  three  fold  ratio,  must  have  the  eifect  of  in- 
creasing the  crops  of  wheat  themselves,  far  be- 
yond the  confines  to  which  they  areliiitited  by 
jiaked  fallows. 


The  reader  v^  ill  remeniber  that  Indian  coFii 
is  tO  be  planted  on  a  high  ridge,  and  that  cross 
plojighing  is  excluded.  These  lidges  sliould 
run  North  and  South,  to  equalize  both  the  be- 
nefits and  injuries  dierived  from  the  sun.  The 
injury  suiered  by  a  fiat  surface  from  its  ex- 
cessive he^t,  would  be  raiher  increased  than 
dimiidsh^d^  by  exposing  one  fi^e  ef  tm  ritlge 


1^  li!fsiA]s'  eeKS. 

to  the  Souths  wliiist  the  Northern  aspect  woiihi 
Ipse  the  heiieiit  of  its  genial  warmth.  These 
liigh  ridges  have  aaother  ijnportant  elFect. — 
However  steep  the  declivity  we  never  see  the 
roots  of  trees,  shrubs  or  grasses,  penetrating 
through  the  ground  into  the  atmosphere.  It 
is  of  course  evident  that  they  recoil  from  one 
element,  and  bend  towards  their  food  in  the 
©tlier^  wherever  it  is  to  be  foMnd,  By  the  po* 
sition  of  the  corn  on  high  ridges  from  its  in- 
fancy, the  roots  on  approaching  the  declivity 
on  each  side,  are  trained  to  run  lengthways  of 
the  ridge,-  and  thus  escape  the  injury  they 
would  otherwise  sustain  by  getting  into  the 
I'ange  of  the  deep  middle  furrow. 

As  it  would  be  unreasonable  to  expect  the 
reader  to  recollect  observations  made  in  consi- 
dering the  subject  of  manuring,  1  shall  remind 
him,  that  the  ground  intended  to  be  manured 
for  Indian  corn  is  fallowed  in  the  winter  ;  that 
before  or  after  the  rest  of  the  ci*op  is  planted, 
this  manure  is  carried  out,  ploughed  in,  and 
the  corn  to  be  benefited  by  it,  planted ;  and 
that  before  it  receives  any  ploughing,  the  corn 
is  to  be  thinned  and  wed  or  hand  hoed.  This? 
process  will  bring  us  into  June,  and  allow  an 
interval  for  recruiting  the  teams,  when  clover 
is  in  its  best  state  for  that  end.  By  this  time 
the  corn  is  from  eight  to  twenty-four  inches 
high.    At  this  jiuicture the  deep  furrow  before 


tnentioned  on  each  side  of  it  being  run,  nar- 
rows the  ridge  for  about  eight  days,  until  it  is 
again  widened  by  the  middle  furrow ;  and  that 
space  will  suffice  to  give  to  the  corn  roots,  the 
longitudinal  direction  which  shields  them 
against  all  injury ;  this  furrow  being  the  only 
deep  one  received  by  the  corn  after  it  is  plant- 
ed, (the  water  furrow  excepted  out  of  the  way 
©f  which  the  roots  are  thus  trained)  being  be- 
stowed on  it  whilst  it  is  young  and  its  roots 
short,  and  being  run  near  a  foot  from  it,  the 
roots  of  the  corn,  by  this  mode  of  culture^ 
Avholly  escape  injury,  and  the  effects  of  drought 
on  the  plant  being  thus  diuunished,  its  product 
is  increased* 

The  first  ploughing  which  is  to  answer  the 
^nd  both  of  a  fallaw,  and  a  list  or  ridge  om 
which  to  plant  the  corn,  is  by  far  the  most  ma- 
terial part  of  the  system,  and  indeed  the  only 
good  security  for  its  success*  The  furrow^ 
must  be  deep  and  wide,  so  as  to  overturn  into 
the  old  water  furrow,  a  considerable  mass  of 
ihQ  litter  i)roduced  by  inclosingy  whether  weeds 
or  clover.  This  mass,  in  addition  to  its  being 
a  reservoir  of  food,  gradually  supplying  the 
corn  during  the  summer  as  it  putrifies,  ope- 
rates powerfully  in  preserving  the  friability 
and  mellowness  of  the  earth,  by  the  passage  of 
the  air  perpetually  escaping  from  it,  through 
its  tegument,  into  its  congenial  eieiQSiit.     jBy 


this  process,  tlie  propensity  of  hard  and  coM 
soils  to  run  and  bake,  is  removed  or  diniinish» 
ed  ;  a  propensity  which  is  encouraged  in  the 
highest  degree  by  shallow  ploughing*  on  naked 
or  grazed  fields.  And  by  the  same  process, 
the  inconveniences  of  a  mass  of  dry  litter  on 
5 Kclosed  fields,  eombined  with  shallow  plough- 
ing, are  also  avoided ;  because  it  is  so  well  bu- 
rled that  the  corn  is  planted  above  it,  and 
sprouts  in  a  bed  of  clean  earths 

The  accidents  to  which  Indian  corn  is  liable^y 
are  far  inferior  to  those  of  any  other  farinace- 
«jus  plant,  a«d  less  remediless.     It  conies  up 
betlKir  :  it  may  be  re-plasted  and  at  last  it  may 
be  transplanted.     This  last  precaution  for  en- 
suring a  crop  is  executed  with  little  labour,  by 
planting,  a  portion  of  it  very  early  in  the  quar- 
ter of  the  field  where  it  w-ill  vegetate  and  grow 
quickest,  somewhat  thicker,  to  furnish  plants  ; 
and  by  transplaiitiiig  those  drawn  out  in  thin- 
ning in  moist  weat]ieF,  or  after  a  season,  as  the 
tobacco  makers  say.     The  corn  plants  will  live 
better  than  those  of  tobacco  or  any  other  herb 
I  eve?  tried,  and  may  be  transplanted  until 
(hey  are  eighteen  inches   high.     The  large 
plants  will  be  equal  to  the  smaller   and  later 
|>ianted  corn.     Indeed  I  often  fill  up  vLcaneies 
by  setting  the  plants  of  the  same  ikM  as  it  is 
thinned,  and  always  thin  as  I  set  to  avoid  a  - 
double  perambulation,    A  pointed  stick  botM 


INDIAN  CORN.  167 

jaids  in  thinning  and  in  setting  the  corn,  \^hich 
is  done  nearly  as  rapidlj  as  tobacco  is  planted. 

I  repeat  a  fact  Avhich  most  people  know,  to 
remove  an  objection  against  the  very  deep 
ploughing  recommended  as  the  basis  of  the 
«orn  crop,  arising  from  an  erroneous  opinion 
in  a  few,  that  the  roots  of  corn  and  most  other 
herbaceous  plants,  seek  their  food  only  neap 
the  surface ;  whereas  the  roots  of  wheat  will 
penetrate  four  feeit  of  tilth,  and  those  of  corn 
will  strike  still  deeper.  An  objection  that  the 
roots  of  the  latter  will  not  reach  the  reservoir 
of  food  provided  for  them  in  the  deep  covered 
litter  of  an  inclosed  field,  would  therefore  be 
erroneous. 

3Vo  grain  exhibits  so  many  varieties,  or  is  so 
liable  to  change  as  the  maize  ;  the  prefered 
species  can  only  be  preserved  or  improved  by 
selecting  the  seed  at  the  time  of  shucking  ; 
this  will  also  prevent  its  exposure  to  a  sweat,^ 
and  produce  its  better  vegetation  j  and  it  in- 
ereases  the  crop,  which  is  deeply  influenced  by 
the  length  of  the  grain. 


10^  riiOVQWLsa^ 


NUMBEE   36. 

FLOUGHi;i^G, 

f  This  subject  has  been  unavoidably  antici- 
pated by  its  connexion  with  others,  but  yet  it 
is  not  wholly  exhausted. 

I  utterly  deny  the  truth  of  the  theory  which 
asserts  that  ploughing  is  a  substitute  for  ma- 
nure ;  for  though  I  admit,  that  the  atmosphere 
3s  the  matrix  of  manures  in  all  forms,  and  that 
deep  ploughing  will  cause  the  earth  to  inhale 
and  retain  atmospherical  manure  better  than 
shallow,  yet  atmosphere  being  more    subtle 
than  water,  must  be  more  fleeting ;  and  its 
properties  must  of  course  h«  elaborated  into 
more  permanency  than  when  merely  caught 
hj  the  earth's  power  of  absorption,  to  perfect 
their  efficacy.     Even  rain,  though  richer  and 
grosser,  is  quickly   wasted  by   evaporation; 
and  atmosphere,  a  diet  too  tliin  for  the  exclu- 
sive sustenance  of  plants,  as  is  seen  in  droughts 
and   on  all    i)oor  soils,  cannot  be  fixed  by 
ploughing,  because  earth  has  not  the  power 
like  vegetables  of  elaborating  it  into  a  lasting 
form.    Plants  speedily  die  in  atmosphere  and 
live  long  in  rain  or  water. 


PXdueuiNG.  ±&^ 

liime  and  gypsum  repeatedly  applied  to 
land  kept  in  constant  culture,  without  the  in- 
tervention of  vegetable  matter,  will  finally 
render  it  barren  ;  but  if  ploughing  was  a  suf- 
ficient substitute  for  manuring,  by  absorbing 
and  fixing  atmosphere,  it  would  have  provided 
a  sufficient  quantity  of  pabulum  for  these  ex- 
citers to  exercise  their  power  upon,  and  efl'ec- 
tually  have  prevented  the  imbecility  arising 
from  reiterated  exertions,  hy  reiterated  sup? 
plies. 

Plants  perish  by  an  overdose  of  dung  or 
rain,  but  not  by  one  of  atmosphere,  because  it 
is  sparsely  sprinkled  with  their  food,  and  this 
food  must  be  collected,  condensed  and  render- 
ed operative,  by  some  process  more  effectual 
than  the  inhalation  of  atmosphere  by  the  earth; 
which,  alone,  will  hardly  produce  more  sensi-* 
ble  effects  than  its  inhalation  by  a  man  as  a^ 
substitute  for  a  dose  of  nitre. 

The  degrees  of  value  in  manure  probably 
rise  with  its  permanency,  and  may  be  marked, 
•simple  atmosphere  1.  Rain  2.  Green  herbs 
3.  Dung  4.  Di^  herbs  5.  Wood  6.  If  the 
reader  should  place  a  large  decaying  trunk  of 
a  tree  mostly  under  ground,  and  manure  a  spot 
of  earth  with  a  different  substance  of  equal 
weight,  he  would  discover  which  would  longest 
preserve  the  land  in  heart, 

TuU's  theory   '^culture  without  manure'* 
has  hitherto  been  the  practice  of  the  Southe^'ii 


170  PLOUGHING, 

States,  with  this  difference,  that  he  ploughed 
deep,  they  shallow  ;  but  yet  the  complete  de- 
•Struction  of  a  soil  originally  good,  Avhich  it 
has  effected,  ought  after  two  hundred  years 
experience,  to  explode  so  much  of  it  as  ex- 
cludes the  necessity  of  manure.     The  same 
shallow  ploughing  which  produced  good  crops 
whilst  the  land  was  naturally  rich,  would  pro* 
duce  good  crops  if  it  was  made  artificially  rich. 
The  good   crops    obtained    by    bad    culture 
from  rich  land,  demonstrates  that  fertility  is 
the  first  object  to   be  effected.     But  whilst 
this  is  admitted,  the  effects  of  uniting  fine  til- 
lage with  a  fertile  soil,  ought  not  to  be  for- 
gotten, by  any  who  possess  a  taste  for  excel- 
lence or  for  wealth. 

Hence  deep  ploughing  has  been  often  recom- 
mended in  these  essays,  and  to  these  recom- 
mendations are  added  the  following  remarks. 
Deep  ploughing,  upon  a  naked  and   poor 
soil,  by  which  a  caput  mortuum  is  brought  to 
the  surface,  has  frequently  proved  pernicious. 
This  has  been  owing  to  a  variety  of  causes,, 
but  among  them,  the  preservation  of  a  flat  sur- 
face, though  least    suspected,   has   probablyi 
b«en  the  most  operative.     The  simple  process 
of  burying  under  a  sterile  tegument,  the  little 
strength  of  the  land,  neither  promises   non 
performs  much  ;  but  the   disappointment   of 
l^c;.es  really  forlorn,  frequently  causes  us  to< 
ubufidoii  tfibrl^  and  embrace  despair. 


PLOUGniNG.  171 

By  the  system  of  tliese  essays,  inclosing, 
nianuring,  and  Idgh  narrow  rklges  are  com- 
bined with  deep  ploughing.     The  two  first  re- 
plenish the  earth  witli  a  large  stock  of  vegeta- 
ble matter,  and  the  last  has  the  effect  of  col- 
lecting the  existing  soil  in  t]ie  centre  of  the 
I'idge,  and  depositing  the  sterile   on  its  two 
ijides,  there  to  remain  for  above  three  years 
exposed  to  the  aetion  of  the  atmosphere. — 
Thus  all  the  bad  effeets  of  deep  plongJiing  are 
avoided..     Instead  of  a  naked  surface,  it  is  ap- 
plied to  one  largely  replenished  Vt  ith  vegetable 
matter.     Instead  of  forcing  the  soil  and  siib- 
stratriim  into  a  topsy-turvy  position,  it  collects 
and  doubles  the  first  for  a  present  crop,  a.vd 
provides  for  the  amelioration  of  the  other,  f./r 
a  future  one.     It  deepens  and  fructifies  th^ 
^oil,  Avhilst  it  makes  the  best  provision  for  pre- 
sent proiit.     For  the  reader  is  to  observe  that 
I  am    speaking  of   poor  lands,    whose  soils 
require  doubling  for  present  subsistence,  and 
improving   for  future  comfort  ;   and   not   of 
those  whose  soils  cannot  be  pierced  by  the 
plough. 

Deep  ploughing  (by  which  I  always  mean 
the  best  to  be  performed  by  four  good  horses  in 
a  plough)  cpmbined  with  inclosing,  by  turning 
under  a  good  coat  of  dry  vegetable  matter, 
creates  a  covered  drain,  and  thus  vastly  ob- 
structs the  formation  of  gullies  in  hilly  lands/ 


173  rxouGHiNe. 

even  if  fallowed  with  a  level  surface.  But 
such  lands  will  admit  of  narrow  ridges  as  well 
as  level,  hy  a  degree  of  skill  and  attention,  so 
easily  attainable,  that  I  observe  it  to  have  ex- 
isted in  Scotland  above  a  ceptury  past,  under 
a  state  of  agriculture  otherwise  execrable, 
and  among  the  ignorant  highlanders.  It  is 
clfected  by  carrying  the  ridges  horizontally  in 
such  inflections  as  the  hillyness  of  the  ground 
may  require,  curved  or  zig-zag,  preserving 
their  breadth.  The  preservation  of  the  soil  is, 
hardly  more  valuable,  tha«  that  of  the  rain 
water  in  the  successive  reservoirs  thus  pro- 
duced, to  refresh  the  thirsty  hill  sides,  in- 
stead of  its  rushing  to  and  poisoning  the  val- 
lies.  This  classic  system  of  Agriculture  has 
been  introduced  into  Virginia  by  a  gentleman 
of  Albemarle,  in  a  style  completely  adapted 
to  the  nature  of  the  country,  and  which  will 
be  copied  by  those  who  shall  not  be  discouraged 
by  its  perfection.  His  ridges  liOAvever  are 
tvide,  whereas  in  the  maize  country,  they 
«>ught  not  to  exceed  five  or  six  feet. 

If  inclosing,  manuring,  deep  and  horizontal 
ploughing,  were  unattended  by  any  other  ad- 
vantages, that  of  preventing  the  land  from 
washing  away  would  in  many  views  be  a  suf- 
ficient recommendation  of  such  a  system,-^ 
The  disaster  is  not  terminated  by  the  destruc- 
tion of  the  soil,  the  impoverishmeatof  individii'- 


criMirEUous  chops.  173 

als,  ami  transmission  of  a  curse  to  futurity.— 
Navigation  itself  is  becoming  its  victim,  and 
in  many  parts  of  the  United  States,  our  Agri* 
,  culture  has  arrived  to  the  insurpassable  state 
of  imperfection,  of  applying  its  best  soil  to  the 
removal  of  the  worst  farther  from  market. 

The  alternation  once  every  four  years  be- 
rtween  deep  furrows  and  high  ridges,  according 
to  the  recommended  mode  of  cultivating  corn, 
and  the  deep  ploughing,  by  burying  one  por- 
tion of  the  garlick  very  deep,  and  exposing 
another  to  frost,  will  probably  destroy  it ;  a 
eonjeetur.e  founded  upon  its  considerable  dimi- 
nution  in  grounds  thus  treated. 


KtJMBER   B7* 

CULMIFEEOUS  CEOFS. 

Among  these  wheat  is  the  most  valuable, 
arid  is  exposed  to  most  calamities.  These  ca- 
lamities are  sometimes  the  effect  of  elimatcj 
at  others  of  bad  tillage,  and  gradually  di- 
minish, as  the  climate  becomes  less  favoura- 
ble for  Indian  corn  ;  for  which-  inconvenience, 
the  additional  compensation  according  to  the 
3sime  thermometer  is  bestowed^  of  a  great^p 


174  CJULMIFEROUS    CROPS. 

siiilableiiess  for  pje,  oats  arid  barley.  In  the 
climate  and  soil  proper  for  maize  (1  speak  ge- 
nerally without  regard  to  exceptions)  rje  and 
barley  seldom  succeed,  oats  are  light  and  pre-^ 
carious,  and  wheat  is  preferable  both  on  the 
score  of  value  and  risque,  to  either.  There 
are  two  calamities  only  common  to  wheat, 
wbieh  may  not  be  avoided  with  certainly ; 
those  of  the  Hessian  fly  and  rust.  As  to  the 
wea^il  they  are  ^certainly  avoided  by  getting 
it  out  early  ;  a  habit  which  will  prevail,  so 
soon  as  it  is  discovered,  that  wheat  may  be 
severed  from  the  straw  hj  treading  or  a  ma- 
chine, w  ith  the  labour  necessary  to  secure  it  ia 
stacks  or  barns.  The  facility  with  which  the 
grain  then  <iomcs  out,  has  enabled  me  in  a  dry 
harvest,  to  tread  an  entire  considerable  crop, 
almost  by  the  time  the  liarvest  ended  ;  and  I 
generally  pursue  the  practice  as  far  as  the 
"Weather  will  permit,  so  as  to  leave  a  remnant 
only  in  stoaks  capable  of  being  gotten  out  so 
soon  after  harvest  as  to  avoid  this  calamity. — 
The  best  bread  and  seed  wheat,  is  invariably 
that  gotten  out  and  cleaned  within  a  day  or  two 
after  it  Js  cut,  and  deposited  dry,  in  a  dry 
place,  in  barrels,  hogsheads,  or  chests,  open 
or  closed. 

The  Hessian  ily  is  so  little  understood,  as  to 
have  become  an  excuse  for  the  loss  of  crops 
proceeding  f lom  bad  tillage.    Lands  are  tired 


CHi\nFEPv0US    CROPS.  17 o" 

Ji\  sliallow  and  incessant  culture,  or  by  being 
prevented  from  invigorating  theiuselves  with 
■vegetable  substances.^  Even  the  richest  bot- 
tom lands  arc  subject  to  weariness,  and^  soui-e- 
times  are  said  to  have  grown  iousj,  so  that 
tliey  will  cease  at  length  to  yield  good  corn  f 
and  the  cri vp  has  the  appearance  of  being  in- 
fested by  insects.  To  such  causes  are  owing 
I  think,  mt)st  of  the  charges  brought  against 
the  Hessian  fly.  They  would  be  removed  by 
manuring,  covering  the  land  with  good  clover 
lays,  and  by  deep  ploughing,  in  the  cultivation 
of  the  maize  fallow  crop  or  of  any  other,  ac- 
cording to  the  faregoing  system ;  or  by  manag 
ing  naked  fallows  in  the  same  way.  And 
iQioreover  a  probability  exists  that  the  two  deep 
ploughings,  one  in  the  Avinter,  &  the  otiier  ear- 
fy  in  June,  recommended  by  the  same  system^ 
might  destroy  the  iiy  itself  in  some  form,  auil 
other  insects,  to  great  extent.  At  least  my 
cxperienee  has  never  furnished  me  with  a  sin- 
gle instance,  in  wMeh  a  crop  has  suffered  by 
any  insect,  when  the  land  was  in  heart  and 
w  ell  covered  with  dry  vegetable  matter,  when 
that  matter  was  turned  imtler  as  deep  as  four 
horses  in  a  plough  coiiM  do  it,  when  the  land 
had  received  a  second  good  ploughing  by  tw© 
horses  in  a  pleugii,  and  when  the  wheat  was 
seeded  oiiliigh  and  narrow  ridges,  with  a  clean 
farrow. 


±76  CFlMIFEEOirS    CSOFSt 

The  rust  as  it  is  called  may  be  better  ub* 
derstood,  because  it  may  be  certainly  produc- 
ed, by  a  due  combination  of  heat,  moisture, 
shallow  ploughing  and  a  flat  surface.  By  this 
process  we  shall  never  fail  of  obtaining  it  on 
a  stilf  soil,  from  which  the  rain  water  cannot 
escape,  just  as  by  dosing  a  man  with  arseniek, 
w^e  are  sure  of  poisoning  him  at  last.  Of 
course  v/e  should  no  more  prescribe  this  sys- 
tem of  Agriculture  to  the  wheat,  than  arsenick 
to  the  man,  if  we  do  not  wish  to  poison  it,  al- 
though its  diet  like  that  of  a  man  may  disa- 
gree with  it  occasionally  in  spite  of  art  and 
caution.  Deep  ploughing,  high  ridging,  and 
deep  wide  water  furrowB,  constitute  a  mode  of 
culture  the  reverse  of  that  which  inevitably 
afflicts  wheat  with  the  calamity  called  the 
rust,  and  hence  may  sometiines  prevent^  and 
generally  diiiiiiiish  it.  The  drainiiig  of  the 
ridges  and  the  flues,  for  th€  transmission  of 
air  through  the  wheat,  created  hj  the  deep 
wide  furrows,  will  diminish  the  heat  and  mois- 
ture, which  appear  to  be  the  lehief  causes  of 
the  disease  ;  and  vigorous  roots  in  a  deep  tilth, 
may  add  to  the  capacity  of  the  plant  to  resist 
the  malady. 

Plastering,  by  an  equal  measure  of  gypsum 
mixed  with  it,  and  moistened,  has  benefitted 
wheat  in  sundry  experiments  to  the  conjectur- 
ed extent  of  ten  p^r  teutuni,  when  it  has  bee^ 


free  from  whatyis  called  the  bird  foot  olover  ; 
and  injured  it  thrice  as  much,  when  infested 
with  that  grass,  owing  to  the  effect  of  gypsum 
on  its  growth,  Avhich  is  such,  that  this  species? 
of  clover  among  the  plastered  wheat  will  b» 
three  or  four  fold  more  luxuriant,  than  among 
the  adjoining  unplastered.  But  the  land  is  s» 
considerably  benefitted  by  this  plastering  of 
wheat,  that  in  several  instances,  I  have  seea 
intervals  of  ten  yards  wide  across  large  fields^ 
where  it  was  omitted  for  experiments,  exhibit- 
ing for  several  years  afterwards  a  decided  in- 
feriority of  soil.  Besides  it  produces  the  high- 
ly valuable  effects  of  causing  the  clover  seed 
soAvn  on  the  surface  of  the  wheat  to  sprout, 
grow  and  stand  drought  better,  and  of  doubling 
or  trebling  its  crop  the  year  succeeding  th© 
wheat,  either  for  cutting,  or  for  the  more  be- 
neficial purpose  of  falling  on  the  land. 

To  preserve  or  improve  any  species  of 
wheat,  a  selection  by  hand  must  be  annually 
made,  with  which  to  commence  a  new  stock  of 
^eed. 


trS  SUCCUIiENT  €R01*4 


Number  38. 

SUCCULEJs''T  CMOPS. 

llic  trials  I  have  made  of  tbis  family,  have 
lesiilted  in  the  rejection  of  the  whole,  an  indi- 
vidiral  excepted,  as  possessing  but  little  value 
except  for  euiinarj  purposes ;  and  the  remarks 
I  may  make,  denying  them  to  be  objects  olher^ 
wise  valuable,  are  to  be  understood,  as  admit- 
ting tlicir  high  usefulness  as  food  for  man,  in 
respect  to  his  comfort^  to  his  health,  and  to 
economy.  But,  pumpkins  excepted,  none  of 
them  liave  in  my  experience  produced  profit, 
used  in  any  other  mode.  I  have  long  and  pa- 
tiently persevered  in  trials  of  the  turnip  and 
polatoe,  according  to  every  mode  I  could  col- 
lect from  European  hooks.  The  former  arc 
extremely  precarious,  sown  broadcast,  and  ex- 
tremely troublesome,  drilled,  thinned,  ploiigli- 
cd  and  twice  hand  hoed ;  a  process  necessary 
to  obtain  a  tolerable  chance  for  a  great  crop. 
They  are  a  food  so  little  nutritious,  that  some 
animals  die  confined  to  them,  none  fatten  with- 
out an  additional  food,  and  all  eat  an  enor- 
inous  quardity,  so  as  serioussy  to  enhance  the 
labour  of  feeding.  They  are  great  exhauster* 
©f  land,  perhaps  the  greatest,  and  so  far  have 


SrCCULENT    CROf»S.  1?9 

I  failed  in  preventing  this  effect,  by  taking  up 
the  turnips  in  the  fail,  that  it  was  quite  visible 
in  lands  similarly  manureil  adjoining  the  tur- 
nips, both  in  straight  and  crooked  lines.  Nor 
have  I  discovered  the  great  benefit  said  to  be 
experienced  in  Europe,  of  feeding  the  turnips 
on  the  ground,  by  sheep  in  folds  removable 
every  twenty-four  or  forty-eight  hours. 

The  potatoe  is  by  no  means  so  precarious 
inor  exhausting  a  crop  as  the  turnip,  although 
it  participates  in  no  very  small  degree  of  both 
qualities.  The  objections  to  it  are  the  gi=;.;it 
quantity  of  seed  to  an  acre  necessary  to  be  pre- 
served through  the  winter,  and  used  in  the 
spring;  the  tediousness  of  planting  and  gath^r- 
ifig  I  and  the  poorness  of  the  food.  Before  I 
Bad  seen  Young's  experiments,  I  had  found. 
that  hogs  would  die  on  them,  raw  or  boiled, 
and  ascribed  it  to  the  inability  of  the  eliiuate 
to  briiig  them  to  perfection ;  but  he  proves  the 
fact  in  England  to  be  the  same.  It  is  true 
that  horned  cattle  will  thrive  well  on  a  liberal 
allowance  of  potatoes,  attended  plentifully 
with  good  hay  ;  but  they  would  thrive  on  the 
hay  alone,  uor  do  my  experiments  prove  that 
the  potatoe  is  the  clieapest  additicoal  food. 

The  pumpkin  «ii  the  contrary  in  several 
respects  seems  to  me  to  be  preferable  to  it.-—* 
The  expences  of  seed,  of  planting  and  of  ga- 
theriog  are  r^ry  wide  apart.     The  labour  of 


1S&  ^CCUIiENT    CIlO!t»S. 

cniltiTatioii  is  nearly  tlie  same.     The  pumpkiu 
•crop  is  less  imcertain,  and  far  iieavier  to  an 
acre.     Probably  a  pound  of  pumpkin  may  af . 
ford  less  nutriment  than  so  much  potatoe,  but 
tt  is  invariably  healthier^  and  seldom  faii^  in 
combination  with  Indian  corn,  to  dispose  all 
animals  to  fatten  kindly,  and  to  aid  in  advanc- 
ing  this  end,  so  as  greatly  to  diminish  the  ex- 
pence.     It  entirely  answers  the  end  of  fodder 
or  hay  in  the  fall  season,  in  fattening  cattle 
and  sheep,  and  enables  the  farmer  to  spare  hiS' 
stock  of  both  ;  a  circumstance  highly  beneli- 
c'jal  to  one,  who  does  n&t  abound  in  those  arti« 
cles,  by  enabling  him  fo  feed  his  teems  better^ 
and  to  save  a  sufficiency  to  allow  them  enough, 
from  tiie  failure  of  the  clover,  until  the  new 
Brop  of  hay  or  fodder  comes  in.     Perhaps  n^ 
circumstanee  lias  contributed  more  to  the  im^ 
povc^rishment  of  several  of  the  Uisiled  States^ 
than  the  negligence  to  provide  dry  forage  foi*' 
summer,  producing  the  evils  of  a  loss  of  la- 
bour, of  weakening  the  teams,  and  of  ruinous 
<grazing.     The  pumpkin  with  tlie  daily  addi- 
tion of  a  fev»^  corn  stalks  thrown  into  the  pens^ 
is  preferable  to  the  best  hay  or  fodder  I  ever 
tried  ;  and  it  appears  to  mc  to  be  much  less  of 
an  impoverisiier  than  the  potatoe  ;  arising,  I 
suppose,  from  its  entirely  covering  the  ground 
i^out  the  last  ©f  June,  if  properly  eultivated. 


stccriENT  CRorsi  181 

My  mode  of  eultivating  it  is  this.     I  select 
the  intended  number  of  aores  in  the  proposed 
corn  field  of  the  ensuing  year,  where  the  land 
is  infested  with  some  plant,  proposed  to  he  de- 
stroyed by  culture  for  two  successive  years, 
and  by  the  impenetrable  shade  of  the  pumpkin 
vine  during  the  first.     In  the  winter  the  ridges 
are  cleaned  by  four  furrows  run  as  deep  as- 
four  horses  can  manage  a  large  plough,  throw- 
ing the  moiety  of  each  into  the  old  water  fur- 
row ;  and  I  make  a  new  water  furrow  wide 
and  deep  where  the  centre  of  the  ridge  lay.— - 
In  the  latter  end  of  March,  as  much  manure 
as  will  make  the  land  rich  is  spread  on,  and  the 
ridges  are  restored  by  similar  four  furrows  to 
their  first  positron,  agreeing  with  that  of  those 
for  the  ensuing  year's  corn  field.     If  the  land 
is  stiff*  a  second  ploughing  with  a  small  plough 
may  be  necessary  to  pulverize  it.     The  pump- 
Idns  are  planted  in  the  mode  of  planting  corn, 
at  five  feet  and  a  half  distance  in  the  direction 
of  the  ridges,  and  two  feet  nine  inches  across 
them.     They  receive  one  deep  ploughing,  the 
ridges  are  raised  high,  and  the  water  furrows 
made  deep  and  wide  ;  the  plants  whilst  tender 
are  defended  against  a  small  bug  ;  ami  the 
ground  is  kept  clean  until  the  vines  begin  to 
overspread  it.    One  plant  only  is  left  iu  ^ 
place. 


-48$  SUCCUXENT    CItOP3. 

The  custom  of  sprinkling  pumpkins  ovei- 
<»,orn  fields,  scatters  the  crop  so,  that  the  la- 
hour  of  its  collection  exceeds  its  value.  Br 
giving  them  more  room,  tlic  fruit  Avill  he  lar- 
ger, hut  the  product  less.  As  sooii  as  they 
begin  to  ripen,  their  use  should  commence 
near  their  residence,  to  save  the  lahour  of  a 
distant  removal.  In  this  use  they  may  be 
iuade  considerably  subservient  to  manuring, 
hj  penning  the  animals  fed  on  them.  The 
remnant  must  be  gathered  before  frost,  and 
deposited  about  three  feet  high  in  a  slack  made 
of  corn  tops  in  the  common  form,  conveniejit 
to  the  pumpkins,  open  at  both  ends,  and  their 
use  rapidly  continued  to  avoid  risque. 

Indian  corn,  dry  or  boiled  alternately ^  is  the 
best  food  to  be  united  with  the  pumpkins  which 
I  have  tried.  The  pumpkins  are  fed  raw, 
chopt  by  broad  hatchets  in  troughs,  and  eaten 
ravenously.  They  produce  a  great  saving  of 
grain,  an  entire  saving  of  dry  forage,  a  consi- 
«lerable  addition  to  the  meat,  milk,  and  butter^' 
and  some  increase  of  manuiej 


liBeiuMiNotJs  crops;  183 


JbfuMBEB    39, 


LEGUMIXOIJS-  CEOPS. 

Indian  corn  must  be  recognised  as  tlie  princ^ 
of  this  familj,  if  it  belongs  to  it.  No  indivi- 
dual of  the  whole  tribe  can  compare  with  it 
for  meal,  malt,  fodder,  and  litter.  In  En- 
gland, where  sundry  of  its  cognominal  rela- 
tives, are  highly  celebrated  as  fallow  crops, 
their  chief  merit  consists  in  preparing  the 
ground  for  wheat,  or  for  some  other  cuimife- 
rous  crop.    It  was  never  imagined  that  the 

least  competition  as  to  yaiue  existed  between 
the  fallow  crop  and  its  successor ;  and  the 
great  doubt  has  been,  whether  a  naked  fallow 
or  a  fallov/  crop  ought  to  be  preferred.  Young 
decides  for  the  latter,  on  account  of  the  proiSt 
resulting  from  the  succulents  or  legumes  used 
as  fallow  crops  there ;  and  his  arguments  are 
tripled  in  weight,  hj  the  triple  value  of  Indiai) 
corn  used  as  a  fallow  crop  here. 

It  results  that  I  reject  the  succulents  and 
legumes  resorted  to  in  England  as  fallow 
crops,  and  prefer  the  maize  for  that  purpose  • 
wherefore  in  the  previous  chapter,  the  first 
have  not  been  considered  in  that  charaQtcr^  imkp 
mil  the  latter  be  so  in  this. 


^8^  liEGUMiNocs  crops; 

But  I  shall  advert  to  legumes  as  a  valuable 
food  for  man,  not  sufficiently  attended  to, 
whilst  1  admit  that  in  every  other  view,  in- 
eluding  tlie  danger  of  destruction  from  acci- 
dent, tliey  are  inferior  to  maize;  and  that 
even  in  this,  they  ar€  rather  to  he  considered 
as  its  coadjutor  than  rival. 

Among  them,  the  pea  is  selected  as  covering 
most  individuals,  and  most  fitted  to  oitr  cli- 
mate.   Four  gallons  of  dry  peas  annually  will 
add  inconceivably  to  the  health,  strength  and 
comfort  of  a  labourer,  if  prepared  by  good 
boiling  with  salt  meat  of  any  kind.     The  ru- 
inous state  of  our  country  affords  but  too  much 
space  to  raise  peas  without  much  expence  of 
skill  or  labour.    In  the  shifts  of  most  of  our 
farms  there  is  no  scarcity  of  poor  land.     Such 
ought  never  to  be  sown  with  wheat  or  any 
other  culmiferou^  grain,  because  they  will 
produce  no  profit,  and  because  severe  exhaus« 
ters  as  they  are,  must  be  excluded  from  lapd 
already  exhausted,  under  any  system  of  Agri- 
culture which  meditates  its  improvement.     A 
portion  of  such  land  may  be  selected  sufficient 
to  produce  four  gallons  of  dry  peas  for  each 
resident  on  the  farm  of  all  ages,  exclusive  of 
what  they  may  gather  and  use  at  their  will  in 
a  green  state,  to  be  planted  among  corn  at  the 
distance  of  five  feet  and  a  half  square,  th© 
distance  also  of  the  corn.     Of  this  one    talik 


LEGUMINOUS    CEOPS.  18.^ 

duly  is  left  in  each  hill.  The  ground  is  ridg- 
ed, ploughed  hut  one  way  and  both  crops  are 
planted  in  the  direction  of  the  ridges.  It  re- 
mains without  producing  any  other  crop  (these 
two  excepted  growing  together)  inclosed,  un- 
grazed,  in  deep  furrows  and  high  ridges  run- 
ning North  and  South,  until  the  revolution  of 
the  course  of  culture,  which  consists  of  fouE 
years,  is  completed  ;  and  is  very  much  improY- 
ed.  It  is  more  so  if  aided  by  a  bushel  of  gyp- 
sum to  the  acre.  This  poor  land  thus  treated 
is  rendered  more  productive  than  as  usually 
managed,  and  the  object  of  its  improvement 
i^s  aeceJcrated  by  such  a  culture  beyond  what 
would  be  obtained  by  a  state  of  perfect  idlenes??^ 
If  circumstances  prevent  this  course,  the 
peas  arc  raised  in  the  same  mode  with  pump-, 
kins  on  a  portion  of  the  intended  corn  field  of 
the  following  year,  where  noxious  plants  are. 
to  be  eradicated,  equally  enriched,  and  simi  ^ 
larly  cultivated  ;  except  that  the  labour  is  ve- 
i*y  much  lessened  by  the  use  of  a  weeding 
plough  called  a  skimmer.  Tliey  are  drilled 
by  the  hand  as  thick  as  the  common  gardejs 
pea,  in  a  shallow  furrow  on  the  summit  of  tl^e 
ridges,  and  covered  with  the  hand  hoe.  If  the 
land  is  rich,  they  will  cover  the  whole  ground, 
so  that  little  is  lost  by  the~  distance,  required 
in  reference  to  the  succeeding  corn  crop ;  and 
a  small  spot  of  land  will  produce  the  iieeessa- 
ry  quantity. 


186  I^IVE    STOeK. 

The  best  kind  of  pea  for  the  end  in  vie# 
(v/hich  is  extretiielj  important  to  a  Avell  ma- 
naged farm)  known  to  me,  is  white  with  black 
©yes.  But  as  there  are  many  peas  which  an- 
swer this  description,  besides  a  great  number 
of  others,  the  reader  mnst  be  referred  to  his 
own  experienee  or  enc|iurie&  for  the  necessai^ 
scle<iMoB> 


Bf UMBER   40* 

MVE  STOCK. 

Among  the  queries  proposed  bj  the  Rich* 
mond  society  to  awaken  the  dormant  science 
of  Agriculture,  the  eighth  is  so  propounded 
asio  admit  that  which  I  deny,  "that  keeping: 
a  large  stock  and  inclosing  to  improve  land  by 
excluding  stock  are  rival  and  incompatible  sys- 
tems." I  shall  therefore  consider  this  admis- 
sion as  a  prevalent  opinion,  which  powerfuliy 
oombats,  and  extensively  retards  a  system  up- 
on which  tlic  regeneration  of  our  lands  possi- 
bly depends. 

It  must  be  adutitted  tliat  keeping  a  stock, 
equal  at  least  to  the  whole  grass,  produced 
toth  by  the  arable  and  meadow  grounds  of  the 


MVE  /STOCK.  ':!  87 

j^arm,  and  not  the  inclosing  system,  has  gene- 
rally prevailed  ;  and  therefore  as  such  a  slotk 
is  not  only  a  large  one,  but  the  largest  capable 
of  being  kept,  it  follows,  that  one  of  the  ex- 
periments of  the  proposed  comparison,  has 
been  completely  tried  in  Yirginia. 

And  what  is  the  result  ?  It  is  found  by  com- 
puting the  consequences  reaped  by  Virginia 
from  her  system  of  keeping  these  enormous 
stocks  ;  enormous  in  proportion  to  their  food* 
\She  exports  neither  meat,  butter  nor  cheese - 
She  is  unable  to  raise  as  much  of  either  as  she 
consumes.  She  cannot  breed  a  sufficiency  of 
draft  animals,  for  her  own  use.  And  after 
liBving  ruined  her  lands  by  grazing,  so  far 
from  deriving  a  profit  from  it,  she  is  obliged 
to  deduct  annually  a  considerable  sum  from 
the  profits  of  her  Agriculture,  wretched  as  it 
is,  to  supply  the  defieiencles  of  her  more 
.WTctclicd  system  of  grazing.  If  it  is  a  fact, 
that  lands  will  sink  under  a  system  of  oppres- 
sive taxation  by  crops,  is  it  not  conceivable 
Shat  they  will  also  sink  under  excessive  graz- 
ing ?  And  i?  by  cropping  them  less,  more  bread 
Ban  be  raised,  may  it  not  follow,  that  more 
meat  may  also  be  raised  by  grazing  them  less  ? 
Fertility  is  as  necessary  a  requisite  for  rais- 
ing stocks  as  for  raising  bread,  and  whaterer 
>vill  produce  it,  is  a  harbinger  of  both  ,•  a  sys- 
tem of  grazing  therefore,  wliich  impoYcrifclies 


1-88  XI VE    STOCK. 

a  coimtrj,  is  as  likely  to  terminate  in  latge  ! 
-  flocks,  as  a  system  of  culture  having  the  same 
effect,  in  large  erops. 

The  opinion  ^*  that  hy  calling  in  the  aid  aJT 
inclosing  to  recover  the  lost  fertility  of  the 
country,  we  must  sacrifice  our  stocks,"  defeats 
its  own  object  j  stocks  depend  as  intimately 
upon  this  recovery,  as  hread  stuif ;  and  are  in 
fact  unattainahle  without  it,  except  hy  a  vast 
depopulation  of  the  country,  to  make  up  for 
the  loss  of  food  for  stocks,  occasioned  by  the 
impoverishment  of  the  land,  hy  extending  the 
space  of  their  range. 

It  was  hardly  to  be  expected,  that  a  good 
system  of  grazing  would  have  been  found  in 
Union  with  an  execrable  system  of  Agricul- 
ture, and  therefore  instead  of  enquiring  whe- 
ther w^e  ought  to  sacrifice  our  mode  of  tillage 
to  raising  stock,  or  our  mode  of  raising  stock 
to  our  mode  of  tillage,  the  true  question  proba- 
bly is,  whether  we  ought  not  to  abandon  both, 
because  both  modes  obviously  impoverish  our 
lands,  and  gradually  diminish  both  crops  and 
stocks. 

In  JSritain,  generally,  arable  lands  are  not 
gi'atzed,  though  grazing  is  pursued  probably  te 
an  injurious  excess.  There,  meadows,  natu- 
ral or  artificial,  and  well  turfed  standing  pas- 
tures, are  prepared  and  used  for  grazing  ;  and 
if  these  precautions  are  useful  to  a  moist  q^-^ 


IIVE    STOCK'r  .  1S# 

male  and  a  rieh  soil,  they  cannot  be  dispensedi 
with  by  a  dry  climate  and  a  poor  soil. . 

To  raise  large  stocks,  we  must  first  raise 
large  meadows  and  rieh  pastures,  defended  by 
a  sod  both  sufficient  to  withstand  the  hoof  and 
the  tooth,  and  capable  of  becoming  richer  under 
their  attacks.     If  any  local  difficulties  in  ef- 
fecting this  are  discerned,  they  point  directly 
to  another  view  of  the  subject.     Supposing 
that  raising  large  stocks  and  inclosing  arable 
lands  against  grazing,  were  really  incompati»* 
ble  objects,  our  attention  is  of  course  turned 
towards  our  climate  and  soil,  for  the  purpose 
of  making  the  election;  and  it  is  very  obvious 
that  a  warm  dry  climate  and  a  sandy  soil, 
ought  not  to  make  the  same  choice,  with  a  cli- 
mate cool  and  moist,  and  a  dlay  soil. 

Still  those  who  have  to  struggle  with  natu- 
ral disadvantages  in  raising  stocks,  will  not 
iind  them  insurmountable,  so  far  as  it  is  their 
interest  to  surmount  them,  if  they  will  resort 
to  the  very  system  for  fertilizing  their  lands, 
supposed  to  obstruct  the  object.  This  system 
itself  requires  strong  teams,  meat  for  labour-i 
ers,  and  stock  sufficient  to  consume  the  oifal 
of  all  the  crops.  Intilosing  is  only  a  coadjutor 
to  manuring,  and  had  it  excluded  the  means 
for  the  latter,  it  would  have  excluded  a  more 
valuable  object  than  itself.  So  far  from  it? 
that  it  vastly  advances  those  nieans^  hj  a  regii-^ 


ISO  XlVi;    STOCK. 

lar,  and  ultimately  a  great  increase  of  crop^s, 
and  consequently  of  litter,  offal,  and  stocks. 

Suppose  a  farm  mider  the  system  recom- 
Aiended  in  these  essays,  to  have  trehled  its 
crops  on  the  same  fields  in  twelve  years.  If 
the  whole  additional  crop  thus  gained  was  de- 
Toted  to  stocks,  is  it  not  certain  that  it  SvOuId 
support  far  greater,  than  the  same  farm  could 
do  in  its  grazed  state  ?  Is  it  not  also  ohvious, 
that  the  offal  of  this  treble  crop,  will  support 
a  stock  three  times  as  large  tlirougli  (he  win- 
ter, as  the  offal  of  one  tliird  of  it :  nvA  that 
the  tlireefold  crop  of  grain,  will  admit  of  large 
drafts  for  the  still  farther  increase  of  stocks, 
whilst  one  third  of  such  a  crop,  migiit  admit 
^f  no  such  contribution  ?  The  supposition  is  a 
fact.  It  may  be  farther  discerned  that  as  the 
crops  by  the  acre  increase,  the  space  cultivat- 
ed may  be  gradually  diminished,  so  as  to  re- 
lease a  portion  of  the  labour  for  the  purposes 
of  draining,  manuring,  and  raising  artriiclal 
grasses  ;  and  in  that  view  constituting  a  differ- 
ent mode  of  providing  for  stocks,  from  tiiat  of 
grazing  exhausted  arable  lands.  A  glance  of 
mtcllect  decides  between  the  two  modes. 


XJLYB    STOCK?  15t 


Number  41. 


hlVM  STOCK.....C(mtinued. 

TUe  grazier  and  the  plougliman  are  ckaraci^ 
lers  so  differentj  and  their  occupations  are  ko' " 
distinct?  that  had  these  essays  related  to  a  sys*' 
tern  of  grazing,  *^  Pecuarius"  ought  to  have 
l)een  their  signature.  What  stronger  proof 
ean  exist  of  our  Agricultural  ignorance,  thaa 
a  notion  of  succeeding  in  both  lines  at  th© 
same  time,  by  respectively  violating  the  first 
prineiples  of  both.  To  succeed  in  grazing?  J% 
is  necessai'y  to  cover  the  land  with  a  strong  anil 
rich  turf ;  to  succeed  in  Agriculture  this  tuicf 
must  be  destroyed.  Having  destroyed  the 
turf  by  the  plough,  we  endeavour  to  preveiit  its 
renovation  by  assailing  it  with  the  tooth  ancl 
the  hoofj  the  instant  it  germinates;  and  pro- 
pose to  raise  large  stocks  without  grass,  aa4 
I'^rge  crops  on  land  too  poor  to  produce  it.  Jii 
England,  the  ideas  of  promoting  crops  by 
treadiiig  and  grazing,  and  grazing  by  plougb- 
iug  up  pastures  and  meadows,  would  excite 
great  admiration ;  and  the  general  proliiMtioja 
in  leases  against  the  latter,  discloses  the  dis- 
approbation of  the  ??^stem  of  reaping  corn  and 
stocks   annually  fro^u  tlie  .^ame  iaia<}.     The 


192  XIVE    ^TOCK. 

questioB,  whetliep  the  business  of  grazing*  op 
of  tillage,  is  the  most  profitable,  frequently 
©ccurs ;  but  whether  the  same  land  ought  or 
«ught  not  to  be  exposed  both  to  tillage  and 
grazing,  is  one  never  made  by  good  hiisband- 
aaen.  In  many  parts  of  the  United  States^ 
the  distinction  between  tillage  and  grazing  is 
well  understood,  and  their  separation  benefici- 
ally practised ;  but  in  most,  sundry  circum- 
stances not  necessary  to  be  adduced,  have  unit- 
ed these  occupations  ;  a  union  indispensably 
necessary  to  a  certain  extent  for  tillage,  and 
incapable  of  being  dispensed  with.  It  isi 
therefore  necessary  for  me  to  prove,  that  the 
system  of  inclosing  arable  lands,  for  the  pur- 
pose of  excbiding  grazing,  is  not  inconsistent 
with  the  stocks  necessary  for  meat,  labour  and 
manure,  beyond  which,  the  occupation  of  tilr 
lage  forbids  their  extension. 

If  meadows  and  well  turfed  pastures,  are 
best  for  grazing,  and  if  by  excluding  grazing 
from  arable  land,  its  product  is  vastly  increas- 
ed, it  follows,  that  we  can  eff^ect  this  union  not 
•only  without  injury  to  either  of  the  objects, 
jbut  so  as  to  advance  the  interest  of  both,  by 
allotting  proper  portions  of  the  farm  to  each, 
and  managing  such  portions  according  to  the 
principles  indispensably  dictated  by  the  ends 
intended  to  be  pi^duced.  Whereas  the  princi- 
jples  jae^«ssary  tQ  produce  stocks  or  grain,  be* 


XI VE    STOCK.  1^3 

ing  not  only  different,  but  exactly  opposed, 
since  we  must  produce  grass  for  one  end,  and 
destroy  it  for  the  other,  by  applying  both  to  the 
same  land,  a  warfare  ensues  which  cripples^ 
and  finally  kills  both  the  combatants. 

By  thus  appropriating  particular  portions  of 
a  farm,  we  may  mai^age  each  portion  accord- 
ing to  the  principles  necessary  to  make  it  more 
productive  ,•  and  the  productiveness  of  each, 
will  advance  that  of  the  other.     The  better 
crops  of  grain  we  raise,  the  more  offal  is  pro- 
duced, and  this  offal  by  furnishing  litter  and 
food  for  stocks,  raises  stocks  sufficient  to  re- 
duce it  to  manure  *,  the  chief  means  for  im- 
proving our  pasture,  meadow  and  arable  land. 
An  increase  of  stocks  must  follow  an  increase 
of  manure,  because  it  begets  an  increase  of 
their  food  and  litter,  just  as  their  decrease  is 
an  inevitable  consequence  of  the  diminution  of 
manure. 

We  see  that  some  of  the  state s>  Virginia 
for  instance,  can  no  longer  raise  meat,  cheese 
or  teams  sufficient  for  home  consumption,  and 
the  cause  of  this  phenomenon  will  illustrate 
my  reasoning.  jVo  state,  and  probably  no 
Agricultural  country,  ever  went  more  tho- 
roughly into  the  plan  of  grazing  arable  land, 
of  neglecting  meadows  and  permanent  pas- 
tures, and  of  endowing  their  stocks  with  the 
privilege  of  unlimited  grazing ;  and  the  end  is 


194  XITB    STOCK. 

•Fuin  to  the  stocks  themselves,  as  a  consolatioii- 
fop  ruin  to  the  lands.  The  indiseriminat« 
grazing  is  the  very  cause,  which  is  impoverish- 
ing hoth  the  husbandman  and  grazier,  and  the 
greedy  project  of  succeeding  in  both  charac- 
ters, by  extorting  from  the  earth  a  double  con- 
tribution, has  defeated  our  success  in  either. 

Such  a  project  is  as  fatal  to  a  country, 
ifvhose  climate  and  soil  are  not  iiaturally  adapts 
ed  to  the  production  of  grass,  as  an  ohstinate 
culture  of  rice  and  cotton  would  be  to  the  state 
of  Massachusetts.  If  therefore  we  are  to  be 
brought  to  the  proposed  computation,  the  elec- 
tion betwjeen  tillage  and  stocks  is  settled  by  the 
consideration  of  soil  and  eliniate,  as  they  may 
!>e  favourable  to  grass,  breadstuff  or  other  pro- 
ducts, because,  however  we  may  sometimes  be 
able  to  force  nature,  her  spontaneous  efforts 
on  our  side  are  the  best  sureties  for  il  iccess. 

Let  any  gentleman  for  instance  of  the  bread* 
sUiff  country  of  the  United  States,  compare 
the 'profit  he  would  derive  from  doubling  his 
crops  of  grain,  with  that  lie  gains  by  keeping 
the  largest  stocks  wltljrin  his  power.  He  will 
discern,  that  sucli  an  accession  of  annual  in- 
come, will  generally  even  exceed  the  whole  va- 
lue of  his  stocks,  instead  of  their  profit  j  and 
if  the  inclosing  system,  aided  by  the  means 
heretofore  explained,  will  rapidly  double  his 
crops  of  grain,  the  preference  Ijetw^n-thut 


nVE    STOCK*  ±B^ 

and  its  viva!  is  iletermined  ;  ami  lite  olyfcet  of 
grazing  at  the  cxpeiice  af  tillage  in  an  imp^ 
«^rrisiied  countrj,  ought  to  be  abaadonsdv 


Number  42v 

Lir:E  S TOCK.„.Xontimici.     , 

If  we  impoverish  our  land  by  grazing  of 
tillage,  both  slocks  and  crops,  whatever  they 
be,  will  gradually  diminish ;  gradually  become 
less  profitable ;  and  finally,  insufiicient  to  af- 
ford a  maintenance.  It  is  true  that  sojKie  bot« 
torn  lands  exist,  so  rich,  as  to  bear,^  and  even 
improve  under  tillage  and  grazing,  if  red  •lo« 
ver  is  the  grass  used,  and  if  it  is  suifered  ta 
get  well  in  flower  before  the  stocks  are  turned 
on  it.  But  this  is  owing  to  the  extreme  fat» 
ness  of  the  soil,  its  ability  to  eover  itself  with 
a  luxuriant  coat  of  clover,  the  accession  of  ve- 
getable matter  by  a  great  portion  being  trod- 
den on  and  rejected  by  the  cattle,  and  tlie  en- 
lire  acquisition  of  its  tap  root,  containing  from 
the  size  it  acquires  in  such  land,  no  inconside- 
rable quantity  of  the  same  matter.  Besides, 
Jand  of  this  quality  is  so  rare  as  to  constitute 
an  anomaly  entirely  foreign  to  any  system  ^ 


i96  XI YE    STOCK. 

Agricullure  proper  for  the  United  States. — 
Yery  few  of  us  have  ever  seen  it^  and  still 
fewer  woiihl  profit  from  anj  system  built  upoii. 
its  qualities.     Nay  it  is  a  kind  of  land  which 
hardly  requires  a  system,  and  would  he  as 
prosperous  under  a  bad  one,  as  the  general 
Agricultural  state  of  the  country  would  be 
under  the  best.     It  is  necessary  however  to 
suggest  this  anomalous  case,  lest  we  should  be 
led  to  reason  from  it,  for  the  purpose  of  de- 
cidiyg  a  diifereat   ease.     The   most  zealous  . 
amor  patriae   will   confess  that  the    United 
Stales  have  infinitely  less  need  for  a  system  to 
improve  rich,  than  for  one  to  improve  poop 
land  'y  and  instead  of  being  blinded  by  its  wish- 
es, sholild  be  enlightened  by  truth,  as  the  only 
mode  of  gratifying  one  of  the  most  amiable 
of  human  passion sv 

The  expanse  of  our  territory,  generally,  is 
now  in  a  state  so  far  from  being  able  to  im- 
prove under  the  double  taxation  of  tillage  and 
grazing,  as  to  require  a  revolution  of  our  ha- 
bits to  improve  under  either ;  and  the  time  has 
^ome,  when  it  is  equally  necessary  to  discover 
some  mode  of  raising  meat  as  well  as  bread, 
without  impovenshing  our  lands. 

It  is  easy  by  a  good  system  so  wonderfully  to 
alter  the  case,  as  to  make  stocks  profitable 
simply  from  their  manure,  exclusive  of  the  la- 
bouFjj  meat,  tallow,  leather,  milk  and  buttex- 


MVB  sTocic;  la^ 

they  yield ;  and  to  draw  from  tliem  not  only 
tlie  entire  means  for  tlieir  own  support,  but  a 
surplus  for  enriching  tke  soil.  The  mode  of 
doing  this  has  been  heretofore  explained,  but 
in  order  to  combine  with  it  the  subject  now 
under  consideration,  with  more  perspicuity,  I 
will  take  up  and  consider  separately,  the  mode 
af  managing  each  species  of  our  domestic  ani- 
mals, usually  comprised  by  the  term  "  stock"'^ 
upon  a  tillage  farm  which  requires  the  nurture 
of  inclosing. 

The  working  animals  constitute  a  species  of 
stock  comprising  horses,  mules  and  oxen.—-* 
The  two  former  ought  to  inhabit  a  lot  having 
a  stable  and  stream,  and  to  be  excluded  wholly 
ft'om  grazing.  For  two  months  of  the  year^ 
clover  cut  daily,  and  exposed  to  six  hours  sub; 
to  prevent  the  animal  from  being  hoven,  should 
be  their  hay.  It  will  add  to  their  health  at* 
the  season  it  conses  in.  After  it  fails,  the  best 
fodder  or  hay,  preserved  for  the  hottest  sea- 
son, succeeds  it.  Corn  stalks  serve  them  from 
the  first  of  November,  whilst  they  last,  and 
are  succeeded  by  iliQ  inferior  tops,  blades  or 
hay.  By  littering  the  stables  and  yards  w  ell 
in  winter,  they  will  make  manure  sufiiciiig  to 
enrich  more  land  than  will  pi'oduce  their  corn  ^ 
as  this  enrichment  is  not  exhausted  by  one 
i^rop,  and  as  clover,  proper  cultivation,  and  in- 
.dosing  will  preserve,  and  farther  improve  tkn 


1#  I4y^  sTc^c^i, 

iand^  the  working  stock  exclusive  of  its  labou^/ 
«aibscribes  largely  to  the  renovation  of  tho 
.<spil  instead  of  its  injpoverishment  by  pastur- 
ing.  The  considerations  of  saving  the  labour 
of  collecting  working  animals  from  pasture% 
a|id  avoiding  the  loss  of  the  morning,  so  ma- 
terial in  a  Avarm  climate,  are  inferior,  but  ad- 
ditional recommendations  of  the  same  system. 
The  oxen  in  summer  should  be  penned  and 
fed  separately  from  the  other  cattle,  and  in 
winter  the  same  separation  should  take  place, 
with  a  more  comfortable  cover.  They  will 
feirnish  the  same  supply  of  manure  as  the  hor- 
ses and  mules  in  winter,  and  more  in  summer 
from  the  removal  of  their  pen,  calculated  to 
stand  not  beyond  ten  days.  Whilst  not  at 
work,  they  may  be  pastured  with  the  othey 
Uattl^, 


HlJMBEU  ^3.. 


LIVE  STOaK..,..Continu€d. 

The  horned  cattle  are  happily  able  to  eu- 
counter  the  hardships  inflicted  on  them  by  the 
impoverishment  of  our  country.  These  will 
hp  gr«idually  d^iitrvc^ycd  by  enricUing  it.    Their 


Ibed  for  half  the  year  consists  of  the  coarse 
offal  of  bread  grain  in  much  of  the  greater 
portion  of  the  United  States,  and  a  system 
which  will  increase  such  crops,  will  increase 

"their  food  during  that  season  of  the  year,  when 
they  suifer  inost,  and  perish  in  great  number s» 

besides  affording  them  a  chance  fi^m  its 
'greater  plenty,  of  participating  more  copiously 

^'4if  the  grain  ilself.  Such  an  increase  of  sta- 
ple crops,  begets  capital  and  releases  labour, 
for  draining  improTcments ;  and  speedily  points 
at  sv/anips  and  marslies  of  a  soil,  capable  la 
general  of  being  made  one  hundred  fold  more 
productive  in  grass,  than  our  exhausted  fields. 
IRIcadows  tlius  grovf  out  of  the  enclosing  sy.^ 
tern,  if  that  system  increases  the  staple  crops, 
and  are  a  retribution  with  acc^amuiating 
interest  to  the  stock,  for  the  loss  of  naked 
fields.  This  retribution  extends  to  both  fall 
and  winter.     Meadows  should  be  cut  for  hay, 

*  and  grazed  with  horned  cattle,  after  the  second 
crop  has  arrived  to  its  most  luxuriant  state. 

^  So  far  from  being  deteriorated  by  it,  they  are 
improved,  produce  cleaner  and  larger  crops  of 
hay,  are  longer  defended  against  the  intrusion 
of  weeds,  bushes  and  coarse  grasses,  and  final- 
ly, when  tillage  becomes  necessary  for  cleans-^ 
ing  them,  their  state  for  receiving  it  wJU  be 
better  and  the  crop  enhaaced. 


200  3LIVE    STOCK. 

By  the  increased  oifal  of  increased  crops, 
and  by  the  liay  of  tliese  meadows,  stocks  will 
be  better  provided  for  during  the  winter,  than 
'iiiider  the  unlimited  grazing  system ;  to  which 
add  the  grazing  of  the  after  math  of  the  mea- 
dows, and  this  superior  provision  is  extended 
to  about  eight  months  of  the  year.  Betv/een 
three  and  four  months  of  spring  and  summer 
pasturage  only  remains  to  be  supplied.  An 
abundant  resource  for  this  is  one  effect  of  un- 
iimited  grazing,  and  our  greatest  agraria^n  ca- 
lamity. Vast  tracts  of  exhausted  country  are 
every  where  turned  out,  or  left  uninelosed,  to 
recover  what  heart  thej  can  in  their  own  way  ; 
and  their  progress  in  that  effort  is  accelerated 
by  inclosing  them  as  pasturage  for  cattle  alone, 
or  at  least  exeluding  hogs.  Such  fields  pre- 
sently produce  shrubs  and  coarse  grass,  and 
lands  never  cleared  may  be  inclosed  with  them, 
as  auxiliaries.  Together,  they  will  constitute 
a  pasture  for  cattle  far  better  in  the  spring 
and  summer,  than  that  generally  afforded  by 
arable  lands,  which  in  the  maize  country  of 
the  United  States,  are  particularly  scanty  of 
grass  until  towards  the  fall ;  and  then  ihe  su- 
perior resource  of  the  meadow  grazing  is  pro- 
Tided  by  Mie  system  of  inclosing. 

It  would  he  too  alarming,  to  subjoin  to  these 
reasonings  (and  probably  by  its  strangeness 
migiit  destroy  them  all)  the  idea  of  manuring . 


ZITE    STOCK.  201 

,a  spacious  Viigliland  meadow,  as  a  farther  aux- 
iliary to  the  inclosing  system  ;  and  therefore 
it  will  be  deferred  until  crops  are  trebled  by  it* 
But  it  is  indispensably  necessary  to  point  out 
in  what  way  this  system  is  prepared,  to  satisfy 
those  cravings  which  cannot  be  deferred. 

As  crops  increase  in  a  warm  and  poor  coun- 
try, no  department  will  more  suddenly  expe- 
lience  an  improvement  than  that  of  the  table. 
As  to  beef,  it  is  received  from  the  after  math 
of  the  meadow,  by  the  pumpkin,  and  Indian 
corn,  the  corn  stalks  succeed  the  pumpkins, 
and  it  is  finished  in  March  on  corn  and  hay. 
In  the  interim  the  knife  is  at  work  and  tha 
manure  is  accumulating.    During  the  mode- 
rate weather  after  leaving  the  meadow  for 
the  pumpkins,  the  beeves  are  penned  on  suc- 
cessive spots  and  not  littered,  the  plough  suc- 
ceeding the  removal  of  the  pen.     When  the 
stalks  come  in  they  are  placed  in  their  stati- 
onary winter's  habitation,  and  copiously  lit- 
tered.    And  with  proper   management,  the 
manure  thus  raised,  overpays  the  expence  of 
fattening  them.    The  additional  advantage  of 
milk  and  butter  is  derived  from  fattening  for 
beef  the  old  cows  yielding  milk,  through  the 
winter.     They  may  be  often  made  fine  meat, 
and  will  at  least  be  a  valuable  acquisition  td 
^  he  stock  of  salt  provisions  for  the  labourer?, 


202  IiIVE    STO€K. 

instead  of  being  devoted  to  their  eonimon  fsde 
in  a  primiture  age,  hy  want  of  food. 

The  best  and  cheapest  mode  of  raising 
calves,  and  of  fattening  lambs,  I  have  ever 
tried,  is  also  suggested  by  the  inclosing  sys- 
tem. It  is  that  of  folding  them  on  red  clover 
from  a1}out  the  twentieth  of  April,  or  from  the 
clover's  becoming  three  or  four  inches  high  ; 
the  calves  until  fiost.  Small  common  fence 
rails,  and  the  common  crooked  fences,  make 
folds  witli  less  labour  and  stand  better  than 
any  I  have  tried.  This  pen  ought  never  to 
stand  longer  than  three  days?  in  which  time  it 
ought  to  be  grazed  clean.  If  it  stands  longer 
the  grass  is  injured  by  treading.  When  it  is 
to  be  removed,  the  calves  and  sheep  are  con- 
lined  in  a  corner  next  to  the  new  pen,  by  using 
some  of  the  top  rails.  An  acre  of  fine  clover, 
unless  it  is  disabled  by  drought,  will  grp.ze  ten  " 
calves,  ten  ewes  and  ten  lambs,  through  the 
'grass  season,  allowing  for  the  gradual  remo- 
val of  the  sheep,  all  of  which  ought  to  be  kil- 
led. To  make  them  good  meat,  they  must  be 
allowed  other  food.  Wash  of  corn  meal,  or 
well  boiled  corn  itself,  is  the  best  and  cheapest 
I  have  tried.  The  acre  will  be  frequently  fed 
over  without  destroying  the  clover,  and  the 
land  will  be  improved.  Calves  will  make  a 
reimbursement  with  a  profit  for  this  mode  of 
•raising  them,  by  their  superior  value  beyond 


MVE    STOCK.  SOa 

those  raised  in  the  eommon  way,  and  by  sur- 
rendering at  an  early  age  their  mother's  milk. 
And  its  economy  is  increased  by  selecting  an- 
nually the  old  ewes  and  their  lambs  for  fat 
tening,  comprising  so  many,  as  that  a  portion 
of  the  latter  and  all  the  former,  may  be  be- 
stowed on  the  slaves.  By  harvest,  lambs  have 
grown  too  large  and  coarse  for  the  table,  and 
the  ewes  have  become  good  mutton.  The  mo- 
ther should  die  within  three  days  of  the  lamb, 
or  she  falls  oif.  Both  furnish  a  supply  of  ex- 
cellent food  at  that  laborious  season  5  and  so  as 
to  have  good  lambs  we  must  make  their  mo- 
thers fat,  the  luxury  of  the  master  bestows  a 
luxury  on  the  slaves,  without  an  additional  ex- 
pence,  and  undoubtedly  with  more  economy, 
than  to  devote  such  sheep  to  their  usual  des- 
tiny. These  old  ewes  thus  managed,  yield  fine 
lambs,  much  wool,  good  mutton,  and  hides 
able  to  bear  tanning  for  the  purpose  of  mak- 
ing pads  for  the  back  bands  of  the  plough  hor?* 
ses  to  pass  through. 


KUMBEB    M; 

sheep: 

It  is  with  reluctance  tliat  I  am  about  to  e:^- 
press  my  opinions  as  to  this  stock,  lest  they 
may  discredit  those  upon  subjects  concerning 
%vhich  I  have  had  more  expcrfence*     For  six- 
teen years  I  have  laboured  to  estimate  their 
value  and  character,  upon  a  small  scale,  hav- 
ing a  flock  only  of  from  one  to  four  hundred, 
daily  attended  by  a  shepherd^  and  my  conclu- 
sions are,  that  they  require  and  consume  far 
more  food,  in  proportion  to  their  size,  than 
any  other  stock,  that  they  are  more  liable  to 
disease  and  death,  and  that  they  cannot  be 
made  a  profitable  object,  throughout  the  whole 
extent  of  tlic  warm  dry  climate,  and  sandy 
soil  of  the  United  States,  but  by  banishing  til- 
lage from  vast  tracts  of  counti'y.     These  opi- 
nions are  by  no  means  intended  hoAvever  to  ex- 
clude them  as  a  luxury  for  the  table,  capable 
of  being  made  to  repay  a  considei^le  portion 
of  the  expence  it  causes^ 

It  is  probable  that  the  hot  constitution  of 
elieep,  produces  a  rapid  digestion,  and  that  in- 
satiable appetite,  by  which  the  fact  is  account- 
ed for,  of  their  flourishing  only  to  any  extent 


SHEEP.  20i* 

in  fine  meadows  or  extensive  wildernesses.     If 
this  voratiousness  is  not  gratified,  the  animal 
perishes  or  dwindles  ;  if  it  is,  he  depopulates 
the  country  he  inhabits.     The  sheep  of  Spain 
have  probably  kept  out  of  existence,  or  sent 
out  of  it,  more  people  than  the  wild  beasts  of 
the  earth  have  destroyed  from  the  creation  ; 
and  those  of  England   may  have  caused  a 
greater  depopulation,  than  all  her  extravagant 
wars.     It  may  be  owing  to  this  animal  that 
the '  independence  of  one  country   is  almost 
overthrown,  and  of  the  other  tottering.     In 
both  countries  the   sufiiciency  of  bread  for 
sheej),  may  have  produced  the  in  sufficiency  of 
bread  for  man,  and  prejudice  may  have  nur- 
tured errors,  of  which  our  folly  may  relieve 
them,  just  as  superstition  has  been  known  to 
seize  or  steal  an  idol,  which  had  long  been  a 
curse  to  the  place  of  its  invention.     It  is  ad- 
mitted that  the  wool  of  sheep  is  to  a  certain 
extent  a  necessary,  and  often  a  luxury  ;  but  if 
I  fancied  a  pearl,  why  should  I  dive  for  it  my- 
self, when  those  who  love  the  employment, 
vish  to  supply  me  ^  or  why  should  a  nation  de- 
populate itself  to  gain  them,  if  it  can  become 
strong   and   populous  without  pearls  ?    The 
earth^s  capacity  to  produce  food  and  materials 
for  clothes  is  limited,  and  by  endowing  the 
brute  creation  with  so  much  of  the  former,  as 
to  produce  a  deficit  for  man's  use;  ia  ordei'.t© 

s  2 


206  SHEEP.- 

obtain  a  sui'plus  of  the  latter  for  exportation, 
the  sheep  policy  is  said  to  be  perfected.  It  is 
probable  that  an  acre  of  the  proper  soil  in  the 
proper  climate,  is  capable  of  raising  ten  times 
as  much  cotton  wool,  as  sheep's,  and  if  wj& 
shall  only  glance  at  the  vast  quantity  of  the 
former  material  for  cloathing,  exported  from, 
a  small  district  of  country,  thinly  peopled,  we 
shall  at  once  see  the  capacity  cf  the  earth  to 
produce  it  to  any  needful  extent,  without  pay- 
ing depopulation  for  raiment.  Although 
sheep's  wool  was  the  best  resource  for  a  state 
of  ignorance,  it  is  superceded  to  a  great  extent 
by  a  state  of  cotton  manufacturing  skill  ,•  and 
whilst  the  English  nation  Lave  proved  the  high 
value  of  our  cotton,  and  opened  an  inexhausti=- 
ble  demand  for  the  abundance  we  can  spare,  it. 
is  certainly  a  responsible  hostage  for  the  small 
portion  of  her  w  oolens  we  may  want ;  and  an 
exchange  is  probably  better  than  turning  our 
corn  fields  into  sheep  pastures.  It  is  exactly 
the  case  in  which  commerce  renders  a  mutual 
benefit,  as  we  under  our  warm  and  dry  cli- 
mate, and  in  our  sandy  soil,  can  raise  cotton, 
cheaper  than  England  ;  and  she  by  the  help  of 
her  li^-oisture  and  verdure,  can  raise  wool, 
cheaper  than  tlie  United  States.  It  is  curious 
that  wool  sliould  be  supplanting  cotton  here, 
whilst  cotton  is  supplanting  wool  in  Europe  ; 
but  as  fashions  wei\r  out  ia  one  country,  they 
flee  to  tinotlieji'* 


Their  manure  is  the  chief  reeonipence  for 
the  expeiice  of  sheep,  and  worth  more  than 
their  wool  if  they  are  regularly  penned.  It 
is  true  that  this  will  in  some  degree  injure 
them,  hut  it  is- indispeiisahlc>  unless  hy  surren- 
dering to  them  a  power  of  grazing  at  will,  the 
calamitous  alternative  of  speedily  reducing  the 
farm  to  a  harren  is  resorted  to. 

Moveahle  pens  as  ia  the  case  of  cattle,  are 
best  in  tlie  warm  seasons  of  the  year ;  in  the 
C4)ld,^  a  faiiii  pen  shelter  also,  open  to  the 
South,  and  closed  to  the  ground  towards  the 
other  three  cardiual  points,  will  suffice  to  the 
tliirty-nintli  degi^ee  of  Korth  latitude.  This 
pen  should  he  regularly  littered  with  stalks, 
straw  or  litter  of  any  kind. 

Under  the  system  of  enclosing,  the  sheep 
may  be  managed  like  horned  cattle,  except 
that  they  must  be  better  fed.     For  this  pur- 
pose they  ought  to  be  attended  by  a  shepherd, 
that  besides  the  grazing  allowed  to  the  cattle, 
they  may  be  treated  with  such  parts  of  the 
enclosed  area,,  as  they  may  benefit  or  not  in- 
jure.    Of  the  first  description  are  grounds  in 
fested  with  the  garlick,  over  which  the  sheep 
should  be  rapidly  carried  after  it  has  headed, 
to  eat  its  seed  ;  of  the  second  the  banks  of  ri- 
vers, rivulets  or  woodland.^    In   winter  the 
sheep  will  eat  every  thing,  and  the  better  the 
food  the  more  they  will  thrive.    A  great  quan- 


208  HOGS. 

tity  of  corn,  caught  soft  by  frost,  most  of  which 
became  quite  black,  and  all  of  it  such  as  to 
be  refused  by  hogs,  was  greedily  eaten  by 
sheep  ;  and  the  supply  being  copious,  made  the 
best  flock  I  ever  saw.  In  winter,  their  farm 
pen  is  made  in  the  field  to  be  cultivated  in  corn 
the  following  summer,  in  which  field  the  sheep 
are  then  allowed  daily  to  feed  under  the  super- 
iMtendence  of  the  shepherd.  Being  covered 
with  the  dry  litter  of  clover,  the  little  grass 
they  get  under  it  is  af  some  service  to  them, 
and  the  litter  itself  is  more  conveniently  dis» 
posed  for  the  plough  by  being  trodden  dowu.^ 


Number  45. 


HOGS. 


Few  animals  do  us  more  real  mischief,  and 
sulfer  more  unmerited  reproach  than  these. 
They  are  the  cause  of  dead  wood  fences, 
V^hich  render  more  labour  unproductive,  than 
any  item  of  the  long  Agricultural  catalogue 
of  practices,  portrayed  in  the  miserable  coun- 
tenance of  our  country.  A  consumption  of 
labour  in  making  ei)hemeral  fences,  which 
might  be  employed  in  jnaking  food;  eloathiiig 


#r  lasting  improvements,  is  a  cheek  upon  popu- 
lation even  j^reater  than  tlie  English  and  Span- 
ish sheep  system  5  but  if  we  add  to  it,  the  im- 
poverishment of  land,  and  waste  of  herbage, 
by  the  eradicating  licence  legally  conferred  on 
hogs,  it  will  require  but  a  small  portiou  ot 
prophetic  skill  to  anticipate  the  impeachment 
of  our  Agricultural  system,  to  be  gradually 
pronounced  by  the  census^  We  shall  how- 
ever long  struggle  against  the  admonitions  of 
this  unerring  logician,  by  assigning  to  the  al- 
lurements of  a  wilderness,  emigrations  result- 
ing from  a  policy  and  system,  incapable  of 
withstanding  these  allurements,  compared 
with  all  the  benefits  of  our  cultivation.  Our 
system  of  Agriculture  is  felt  as  a  greater  evil 
than  no  system.  A  country  wanting  people 
with  actual  tillage  on  its  side,  is  robbed  of  a 
great  portion  of  the  few  it  has,  by  one  expo- 
sed to  every  evil,  except  our  Agricultural  sys- 
tem. But  we  ascribe  the  expulsions  caused 
by  its  impoverishment  to  the  attractions  of 
piitrifyiiig  forests,  of  an  exposure  to  all  weath- 
er, of  innumerable  hardships  and  of  Indian 
scalping  knives,  and  lose  the  faculty  of  seeing 
their  cause  Avhere  we  tread  by  ascribing  it  to 
imaginary  notions. 

The  destruction  of  wood  and  timber  pro- 
duced by  the  mode  of  raising  hogs  according 
to  law,  exchisivc  of  the  depopulation  it  ad- 


210  HOGS* 

vances,  is  itself  a  calamity  grievous  in  all 
quarters,  but  ruinous  to  those  unpossessed  of 
coal  for  fuel  and  stone  for  fencing.  This  de- 
struction encreases  in  a  ratio  correspondent 
to  the  dimunition  of  our  means^  to  bear  it ; 
because  the  young  wood  and  timber  used  for 
fences,  fuel  and  building,  is  more  subject  to 
decay  than  the  old ;  and  a  perseverance  in 
prejudice  cannot  be  more  amply  displayed, 
than  by  an  expectation  of  resisting  with  tend- 
er sajjlings,  a  practice  which  has  demolished 
the  tough  forests  of  oak. 

All  the  calamities  arising  from  fences  of 
dead  wood  are  ascribed  to  these  ill  fated  ani- 
mals, as  if  they  had  themselves  forced  upon  us 
the  system  which  has  produced  these  calami- 
ties ;  just  as  the  impoverishment  of  our  lands 
is  ascribed  to  Indian  corn,  as  if  tliat  had  dic- 
tated the  system  of  Agriculture  by  which  it 
is  effected.  But  it  is  neither  new  nor  unnatu- 
ral to  mistake  our  best  benefactors  for  our 
worst  enemies. 

Yet  a  single  question  refutes  the  calumny. 
Bid  the  hogs  enact  the  law  s,  by  which  they 
are  turned  loose,  without  rings  in  the  nose  or 
yokes  on  the  neck  to  root  out  the  herbage,  and 
assail  the  inclosures  ?  Had  they  been  legisla- 
tors, self  interest  (allowing  them  wisdom) 
would  have  suggested  to  them  a  mode  of 
coming  at  subsistence,  infinitely  better  than 


Hoes.  211 

eae,  "by  which  they  are  exposed  to  disasters, 
hunger,  poverty  and  assassination. 

Exchiding  from  the  argument  all  the  mis- 
«hiets  flowing  from  the  system  of  raising  hogs 
introducdd  hy  law,  and  confining  the  question 
simply  to  the  mutual  interest  of  the  hog  and 
his  owner  in  tlie  points  of  comfort,  profit  and 
plenty,  we  gain  conviction  of  its  imperfection, 
hy  placing  it  on  its  strongest  ground. 

Meat  is  the  end  in  view.  No  animal  fur- 
nishes hetter  than  the  hog.  If  there  is  any 
other  which  will  furnish  more  at  less  expence 
in  a  dry  country ;  or  which  possesses  more 
congruity  with  Indian  Corn  where  that  is  the 
chief  fund  for  subsistanee,  it  ought  to  be  pre- 
ferred ;  if  not,  the  hog  deserves  more  atten- 
tion titan  he  has  hitherto  reoeived*  In  the 
maize  country,  the  existence  of  no  such  ani- 
mal is  admitted,  by  the  general  recourse  to 
the  hog  as  the  chief  resource  for  meat ;  and 
the  first  question  is,  whether  he  is  made  to 
answer  the  purpose  for  which  he  has  been 
thus  selected. 

The  fact  is  too  notorious  to  require  proof. 
The  maize  Atlantic  districts  raise  an  insufiiei- 
ency  of  meat  for  their  own  conumption,  by 
means  of  an  animal  selected  on  account  of  his 
peculiar  fitness  for  the  object.  A  failure  in 
the  object  with  the  best  means  of  attaining  it, 
is  the  strongest  evidence  of  the  misapplication 
of  those  means. 


213  HOGS. 

Though  tills  supply  of  Wie^.t  from  hogs  is 
lusiifHeicnt,  it  is  yet  considerable,  and  far  ex- 
eo^diag  the  qiiaality  famished  by  all  other 
animals.  But  it  is  still  considered  by  a  pe- 
cuniary computation  as  an  unprofitable  busi- 
ness to  raise  them.  If  there  is  any  founda- 
tion for  this  opinion,  drawn  from  a  computa- 
tion which  excludes  all  the  mischiefs  arising 
from  dead  fences,  it  determines  the  mode  of 
raising  them  to  be  excessively  erroneous. 

This  pecuniary  loss  must  arise  from  the 
mode  of  raising  them,  in  tkose  districts  where 
hogs  are  the  Ijest  resource  for  meat,  unless 
we  suppose  that  nature  has  treated  these  dis- 
tricts with  such  severity,  as  to  provide  no  ani- 
mal to  supply  a  moderate  comfort,  except  afc 
an  expence  which  must  exclude  a  great  num- 
ber of  people  from  its  use.  And  as  this  sup- 
position cannot  be  admitted,  the  evil  can  only 
be  sought  for  in  this  mode,  where  it  will  bq 
found  in  the  disasters  of  the  hogs,  the  inatten- 
ticm  of  their  owners,  the  badness  and  insuffici- 
ency of  their  food,  and  the  mean  quality  of 
their  meat.  I  shall  therefore  attempt  in  the 
next  number  to  point  out  a  different  one, 
more  profitalvlc  to  the  owner,  more  comfort- 
able to  the  animal,  and  entirely  exempt  from 
the  ruinous  vice  of  operating  as  an  exclusio* 
of  live  fences. 


HOGSr,  21  s 


Number  46. 


HdfrS, .  ,•.  Continued^ 

No  domestic  animal  multiplies  eqiiaHy, 
-grows  as  rapidly,  is  as  thrift j,  makes  as  good 
'Salt  meat,  is  as  hardy,  as  healthy,  as  docile,  op 
eats  as  little  in  proportion  to  size,  as  the 
hog.  A  mode  of  raising  him  which  takes  ad- 
vantage of  all  these  qualities,  designating  him 
as  the  best  resource  for  meat,  is  a .  subject 
wortliy  of  particular  attention,  and  would  be 
a  great  improvement.  My  experience  is  iu- 
eonsiderablc,  and  my  knowledge  limited  in  re- 
lation to  it.  But  I  shall  give  the  result  of  the 
former,  without  deviating  into  conjecture  or 
recurring  to  books. — Indeed,  as  neither  distil- 
leries nor  dairies  constitute  any  resouixje  fop 
the  country  mthin  my  view,  little  aid  could  be 
extracted  from  the  latter. 

Indian  corn,  clover  and  pumpkins  are  my 
only  resources  for  raising  hogs.  They  are 
raised  within  the  enclosure  of  a  farm  having 
lio  cross  fences,  regularly  coniined  in  a  pen  of 
nights,  and  suffered  to  run  at  large  in  tlie  day, 
in  that  portion  of  the  farm,  designed  for  Indian 
corn  the  succeeding  year.  The  farm  is  divit'- 
ed  into  four  shifts,  the  greater  part  of  each 

T 


^1-1  HOG*. 

being  left  in  red  clover  after  wheat,  so  that  a 
sliifi  during  the  last  year  of  its  rest,  is  well  co- 
vered, 1  he  ii5J  ury  to  clover  by  hogs  from  graz- 
ing, is  iiiliiiitely  less  tlian  that  from  any  other 
ciiiiiuaL  No  Mumher  necessary  for  domestic 
coMsiiraptioii  v/ill  materially  affect  the  field  ex- 
posed to  it  in  tliis  mode.  Twenty  sheep  would 
iujirreit  more  tlmsian  hiuidred  hogs.  And  to 
prevent  rooting,  iron  rings  of  the  size  and 
shape  of  a  hirge  one  for  the  fiiig*er,  are  con- 
stantly kept  in  the  cartilage  of  the  nose. 

Until  tliepil IT! pkiiis  come  in,  the  hogs  suhsi^ 
\yv  ^*p^mriQr>  with  an  allo\^"atice  of  shattered  In- 
"di an  corn,  siiUfcing  to  keep  the  sows  having 
pigs'  irs- tolerable  lieart ;  otber  hogs  will  ■.be- 
come very  fat  tipoii  the  saine  allowance.  As 
soen  as  the  pumpkins  are  ripe  the  whole  fa- 
iTiily  are  coiiUned  to  the  pen,  and  fed  wilii  as 
many  as  tbey  Avill  eat,  cut  up  in  trougli^,  be- 
sides a  full  meal  of  sonnd  corn  daily,  raw  oi* 
(}j>iled  as  liieir  appetite  fluctuates.  Afu!  those 
\hr  slaughter  i-rc  fed  with  corn  about  ten  days 
after  the  pninpkiys  are  expended,  to  harden 
and  flavour  the  meat. 

By  removing  the  pen  with  regularity,  and 
jd(j?'g(iingit  up,  as  in  the  case  of  cattle,  hogs 
will  iu  my  judgment  manure  land  to  the  value 
of  the  wliolc  expence  of  raising  tlicm ;  and 
instead  of  contributing  to  the  ruin  of  the  coun- 
Wy  by  eradicating  herbage^  and  compelling 


HOGS?  21^ 

rarmers^  to  reject  live  fences  ;  contribute  to  i(* 
renovation  by  tlieir  manure. 

The  whole  stock  exceeding  nine  months  oidi 
except  a  male  and  two  or  three  females,  is  kil- 
led annually.  If  a  species  is  selected  v/hicTi 
breeds  young,  and  gains  its  growth  quickly* 
the  litters  between  the  first  of  June  and  the 
first  of  March,  will  furnish  an  abundance  of 
progeny  for  the  second  killing  time.  Tlieir 
mothers  will  make  fat  and  small,  and  the  males^ 
fat  and  large  meat  for  the  first.  These  pigs 
are  accelerated  in  growth  by  being  suiFercd  to 
share  in  all  the  luxuries  of  the  large  hogs,  un- 
less it  may  happen  to  be  necessary  to  wean  a 
litter  occasionally,  to  gain  time  for  recovering 
the  flesh  of  its  mother.  And  the  annual  clear- 
ance of  nearly  all  the  old  hogs,  is  a  matter  of 
considerable  economy,  because  the  espence  is 
thereby  diminished  to  a  great  extent,  fcM^  hIhvv© 
half  the  year,  by  having  young  ones  only  to 
sustain,  > 

The  mischiefs  from  hogs  allowed  such  ii- 
conee,  is  the  chief  objection  to  be  exnectedto 
this  mode  of  r^iising  them.  I  kr.ow  not  of  anv 
Agri<5ultural,  mechanieiil  or  seientifical  object 
of  m  uch  value,  altaiaable  without  effort  or  skiiL 
Some  degree  of  both.and  but  a  small  one, is  fje- 
eessarv- to  avoid  tliis  objeetion.  The  hogs  ought 
whilst  young  to  J)e  made  quite  gentle.  Pigs 
are  as  docile  as  puppies.     They  will  not  be  irf- 


S16  HOGSv 

elined  to  wander  far  from  their  feeding  pen  i^ 
a  field  of  red  elover,  if  care  is  taken  to  secure 
for  them  an  access  to  water  ^  and  a  small  hoy 
with  a  whip  will  find  it  an  easj  task  to  disci- 
pline Ihem  out  of  any  such  inclination.  No 
temptation  solicits  them  at  most  seasons  of  the 
year,  and  should  they  occasionally  light  upon 
one  so  irresistihle  as  to  render  them  trouble- 
some, they  must  be  confined  in  tlieir  pen,  until 
it  is  past  or  they  are  weaned  from  it. 

Hogs  are  sufiiciently  hardy  to  bear  the  wea- 
ther without  injury  for  eight  months  of  the 
year  ;  a  warm  cover  is  necessary  for  them  dur^ 
ing  the  other  four.  This  is  easily  made  and 
removed  by  four  forks  let  two  feet  into  the 
earth,  the  two  in  front  eirxhi  feet,  aiifl  the  two 
in  rear  two  feet  above  it,  having  a  secure  roof 
of  stallvs  and  straw  hiid  an  poles,  and  llie  Fear 
and  two  sides  made  perfectly  close  by  two 
courses  of  rails,  one  pressing  against  the 
^orks,  and  the  other  against  stakes  two  feet 
from  them  all  around,  with  the  interval  filled' 
ti^rht  with  straw.  The  froist  is  open  to  the 
Soutli,  and  a  diameter  of  tx3n  feet  each  way 
will  form  a  comfortable  cover  for  a  large  stook 
of  hogs. 

Small  warm  huts  of  a  similar  eonstructioir 
for  the  separate  use  of  each  sow  about  to  pig 
in  cold  weather,  is  a  precar.tion  most  useful, 
and  much  neglectod,     Witkout  it,  the  greater 


part  of*  the  litters  will  be  lost.  And  such 
losses  diminish  considerably  the  proiit  arising 
from  a  system,  an  article  of  which  is  to  com- 
pensate by  number^foi'  the  size  of  hogs  brougM 
qM  to  the  knife. 


Number  47. 


MOGS ContinueiL 

The  reader  will  discern,  that  f  consider 
Agriculture  as  a  felo  de  se.  As  leading  her- 
self to  the  altar,  and  inflicting  her  own  death, 
not  with  the  dispatch  dictated  \y^  humanity 
even  in  killing  a  hog,  but  by  repeated  strokes 
upon  every  part  of  her  body.  By  laws  of  her 
own  making,  she  has  quartered  upon  kcrself 
tribes  of  factitious  capitalists.  By  laws 
of  her  own  making,  she  has  adopted  the  police 
of  mingling  free  blacks  and  slaves,  mutually 
exciting  each  other  to  rebellion,  teaching  one 
elass  the  trade  of  living  upon  herself  by  theft 
without  labour,  and  instilling  into  the  other  a 
hatred  of  her  duties.  She  spontaneously  hires 
overseers  not  to  improve,  but  to  exhaust  her 
land,  with  the  wisdom  of  a  saint  who  should 
expect  to  advance  true  religion>  by  hiring  ^ 


^18  HOGS.. 

priesthood  to  preach  and  practice  idolatry .-^ 
And  she  closes  her  system  hy  a  mode  of  rais- 
ing hogs,  which  burdens  her  defective  labour 
with  the  incumbrance  of  dead  and  decaying 
fences  ;  which  aids  the  overseers  in  substitut- 
ing a  wrong  for  a  right  culture ;  and  which  has 
already  caused  a  deficiency  of  meat,  requiring 
supplies  from  the  Western  country  ^  supplies 
destined  to  fail  by  an  imitation  of  the  sys- 
tem of  Agriculture,  which  rendered  them 
necessary. 

As  these  evils  united,  are  obviously  killing 
our  lands,  any  one  will  cripple  them,  and 
therefore  a  successful  effort  to  remove  any 
one,  is  not  unimportant.  If  legislatures 
should  persevere  in  wounding  Agriculture  by 
endowing  hogs  with  a  right  of  unlimited  emi? 
gration,  to  and  fro,  and  exposing  them  to  the 
usual  consequences  of  licentiousness,  namely, 
poverty,  disease  and  death ;  yet  Agriculture 
may  be  so  far  favoured,  as  to  procure  some 
small  alleviation  of  the  pains  and  penalties 
thus  inflicted  on  her.  If  hogs  were  prohibit- 
ed from  going  at  large,  except  with  a  ring  in 
the  cartilage  of  the  nose,  and  a  yoke  with  three 
projecting  wings  of  six  inches  long*  one  at  top 
and  one  at  each  side,  these  pains  and  penalties 
would  be  vastly  diminished.  The  ring,  besides 
putting  an  end  to  the  eradication  of  herbage, 
^;ould  counteract  the  use  of  the  nose  as  a 


HOGS,  21^^ 

wedge  al)la  to  pierce  the  best  live  fences,  ami 
the  wings  would  powerfiiilj  contribute  to  the 
same  end. 

But  this  remedy  would  reach  a  portion  onlj 
of  the  evil  we  are  considering,  and  will  ieaye 
in  full  operation  the  present  expensive  and  in- 
sufficient mode  of  raising  meat.  By  prohibit- 
ing hogs  from  running  at  large,  we  should  be 
compelled  to  recur  to  a  new  mode,  which  might 
possibly  be  more  adequate  to  our  wants. ^  To 
form  a  correct  opinion,  it  behoves  us  to  reflect 
upon  the  present  mode  of  raising  hogs,  and  to. 
contrast  it  with  tliat  proposed,  or  with  more 
promising  suggestions.  Our  subject  is  closed 
with  a  specimen  of  (liis  mode  of  reasoning. 

By  the  present  mode  of  raising  hogs,  vast 
quantities  of  wood  and  timber  are  annually 
destroyed  f  by  the  proposed,  none  will  be  de*" 
stroyed. 

By  the  present  mode,  much  labour  is  lost  in 
making  mouldering  fences ;  by  the  proposed, 
the  inhibition  on  live  fences  being  removed> 
much  will  be  saved. 

By  the  present  mode,  one  half  of  the  pigs 
^nd  hogs  perish,  and  a  considerable  portion  of 
the^  residue  are  stolen  :  so  that  less  than  half 
come  to  the  knife  ;  by  the  proposed,  few  will 
perish,  fewer  will  be  stolen,  and  a  double  sup*- 
ply  of  meat  may  be  expected. 


^0  HOSS. 

By  the  present  mode,  a  great  proportion  of 
tlie  meat  is  lean  and  dry  5  by  the  proposed, 
most  of  it  will  be  fat  and  juicy. 

By  the  present  mode,  corn,  generally  hard, 
being  chiefly  relied  on  to  raise  and  fatten  hogs 
much  is  nsed  and  much  is  wasted ;  by  the 
proposed,  the  use  of  the  pumpkins  and  clover 
vastly  lessens  the  use  of  corn,  and  diminishes 
the  expence,  whilst  it  encreases  the  meat. 

By  the  present  mode,  no  return  for  his  food 
is  made  by  the  hog,  but  that  of  his  carcase; 
by  the  proposed,  he  will  pay  for  it  and  in  my 
opinion  more  than  pay  for  it,  by  his  manure. 
If  this  is  wholly  true,  his  meat  paid  for  by  the 
present  mode  at  a  price  so  exorbitant,  as  4:« 
induce  some  farmers  to  buy  rather  than  to 
raise  it,  will  be  gotten  for  nothing ;  if  partial- 
ly, this  single  consideration  may  at  least  re- 
duce the  cost,  far  below  the  usual  price. 

The  value  of  the  clover  to  hogs  is  demon- 
strated by  the  fact,  that  (sows  giving  suck  ex- 
cepted) they  will  thrive  and  grow  on  it  alone, 
if  allowed  to  run  at  large ;  and  yet  make 
l)ut  a  small  impression  on  the  crop.  The  ad- 
dition of  corn  recommended  is  necessary  for 
these  sows,  and  higly  improves  the  other  hogs. 
It  is  indispensable  to  gentle  and  lure  all  to 
the  pen  at  niglit.  Clover  cut  and  given  green 
to  hogs  in  a  pen,  will  be  eaten  greedily,  and  yet 
the  hogs  will  fall  06)  and  wouW  I  think  finally 


SUCCESSION    OF  CK01>^.  2^1^ 

perish ;  Bor  is  it  by  any  means  so  efficacious, 
united  with  other  food,  as  if  gathered  by  t|ue? 
a»imal  himseilf- 


BTJCCESSIOJS^  OF  CUOPlk 

Tiiis  idea,  according  to  the  theory  of  ml^ 
Hures  advanced  in  several  former  numbers  of 
these  essays^  must  contain  much  error,  and  all 
its  truth  must  be  limited  to  the  simple  faets, 
that  the  cultivation  of  one  crop  will  clean  and 
pulverize  the  ground  for  the  reception  of  an- 
r»thcrj  and  that  some  cn>ps  will  produce  thes® 
effects  bettei?  than  others,  either  as  requiririg^ 
more  cultivation,  like  tobacco  ;  as  killing  grass 
and  weeds  by  shade,  like  the  pea  and  pumpkin  5 
or  as  rendering  the  earth  more  friable,  like 
the  potatoe.  But  an  opinion  that  the  earth- 
can  hie  enriched  by  an  annual  succession  of 
crops,  wiil  blast  GYevj  hope  of  its  ioiproYe- 
ment,  if  this  can  only  be  eifeeted  by  maiiure  y 
I^eeause  all  ^Till  prefer  the  ease  and  profit  r>f 
annual  tillage,  as  a  mode  of  fertilizing  tiic 
earth,  to  the  hiboiir  and  delay  of  resting  ]aiK% 
peducing  tough  SYfards,  andrai;*ing  aiii  apply- 
itig  manure. 


2^^  SFCeESSION   frF  CUOPS. 

In  England,  a  tlioroiigli  maniirlug  of  gi'ounci 
already  rieli,  eyery  five  or  six  yeai^s,  is  allow- 
ed hy  all  authors,  to  be  indispensably  necessa^ 
ry  to  fulfil  the  promises  of  a  succession  of 
crops  ;  what  then  have  we  to  hope  from  a  suc- 
cession of  crops  applied  to  ground  already  poop 
"without  this  sex-eanial  manuring  ?  la  our 
gardens,  a  succession  of  crops  is  seldom  con- 
sidered as  a  necessai^'  aid  to  an  annual  manur- 
ing. Draw  from  the  earth  as  you  will  it  ue-- 
Ter  fails,  if  replenished  annually  with  atmos- 
pherical matter ;  let  your  rotation  of  crops  be^ 
what  it  will,  it  never  lasts,  if  this  replenish- 
ment is  withheld.  Industrious  eSbrt,  and  not- 
lazy  theory,  can  only  save  our  ruining  country. 

Trust  not  to  the  delusive  promises  of  a  ro- 
tation of  crops  for  restoring  our  soil.  It  will 
aggravate  the  evil  it  pretends  to  remove.  It 
is  a  remedy  which  will  be  greedily  seized  upon 
by  the  annual  prime  ministers  of  a  Southern 
farm,  whose  tenure  is  prccariQus,  and  whose 
object  is  sudden  income  ;  and  thcj  will  with 
joy  abandon  the  labour  of  manuring  and  im- 
proving 4br  prospective,  to  gain  the  bribe  of 
immediate  profit. 

lliis  disposition  is  so  ruinous  already,  that 
I  have  known  an  owner  with  v«ry  impeifect 
management,  to  manure  annually  ten  times 
more  >vith  ecjual  means  at  the  place  of  his  re- 
'^^■'dente,  than  on  a  fi\i'm  some  miles  distant  e$i~ 


SUCCESSION  «¥   CROPS.  2^5 

%i-usted  to  an  overseer.  Money  wages  is  one 
mode  of  cimng  an  evil  sufficient  without  an 
ally  to  ruin  our  country.  But  to  give  this  re- 
medy elfect  the  apocryphal  opinion  of  reco- 
Yering  our  lands  by  a  succession  of  crops, 
ought  to  be  driven  out  by  the  more  solid  re- 
liance upon  manuring  and  enclosing. 

Our  funds  for  manuring  are  sufficient  to  em» 
ploy  all  our  energies,  and  if  our  energies  were 
employed  suincientiy  to  exclude  all  worn  out 
land  from  cultivation?  and  to  produce  the  sex- 
ennial supply  of  manure,  without  which  a  ro- 
tation of  crops  will  be  delusive,  and  pernici- 
ous? cfFeets  would  follow  as  far  surpassing  in 
usefuliiess  those  of  mere  rotation  theory,  as 
the  Atlantic  ocean  surpasses  in  extent  the  lake 
of  Geneva.  Many  of  these  funds  of  manure^ 
ready  to  pay  the  drafts  of  industry,  have  been 
heretofore  noticed ;  more  perhaps  are  over- 
1  coked.  They  are  scattered  every  where 
around  us  |  and  Providence  has  blest  our  shal- 
low ^oil  with  a  capacity  of  suddenly  throwing 
up  Ifiickets*  constituting  a  bountiful  provision 
for  nia?iuring  aud  curing  galls  and  gullies.  I 
liave  tried  this  vegetable  manure  by  strewing 
the  whole  surface,  by  packing  it  green  in  large 
furrows  and  covering  it  with  the  plough,  by 
packing  it  in  such  furrows  in  the  same  state, 
^nd  leaving  it  to  be  covered  with  the  plougk 
thji'ee  years  afterwards,  ^nd  by  covering  it  as 


^^-%  ^UCCESSIOX   OF    CROPS. 

soon  as  the  leaYes  vn^.vQ  pei'feetly  dry,  sowing 
jt  previously  with  plaster.  Each  experiment 
of  which  the  result  is  determined,  is  highly 
^  gratifying.  Tiie  last,  on  nearly  a  caput  mor- 
tuum  of  a  galled  and  gravelly  hill  side,  exhi- 
bits good  corn  planted  mev  the  bushes,  as  soon 
as  they  Avere  covered.  It  is  in  vain  to  begin 
at  iha  wrong  end  to  improve  our  systeni  of 
Agriculture.  Fertility  of  soil  alone  can  giv« 
success  to  ingenious  theories.  These  applied 
to  barrenness  at  best  •resemble  only  the  beau- 
tiful calculations  of  a  speculator,  who  demon- 
strates a  mode  of  making  Miy  thousand  dol- 
lars from  a  capital  of  an  hundred  thousand^  t© 
a  man  worth  only  an  hundred  eents.  The  ca- 
pital must  precede  the  profit. 

Manuring  only  can  recover  this  capital,  s© 
much  of  which  is  already  wasted  by  bad  hus- 
bandry. It  is  the  great  object  to  be  impres- 
i»8d,  and  ail  its  modes  should  be  tried.  When 
that  I)  as  provided  a  fund  for  experiment,  and 
an  excitement  to  ingenuity,  by  presenting  to 
induft^ry  and  genius  a  fertile  area,  the  time 
mil  have  arrived  for  exploring  the  more  recon- 
dite principles  of  AgTiculiure',  and  descending 
to  the  diminutives  of  improvement. 

The  elf<'ct  of  manuring  and  enclosing  unit- 
ed in  stopping  gullies  and  curing  galls,  is  an 
hundred  fold  greater,  than  the  most  ingenious 
mechanical   conti'ivance.      I<.and  filled   with 


I 


SUCCESSION  OF    CROPS.  225 

foots^  covered  with  litter,  aided  by  buried  bu- 
slies  forming  covered  drains,  protected  against 
the  Avounds  of  swine  and  hoofs,  and  replen- 
ished sex-ennially  with  the  coarse  manure  of 
th«  farm  and  stable  yards,  will  not  wash.-— 
Under  such  management,  the  bottoms  of  the 
gullies  will  throw  up  a  growth  capable  of  ar- 
resting whatever  matters  the  waters  shall  con- 
vey from  the  higher  lands,  soon  become  the 
richest  parts  of  the  field,  and  thenceforth  gra- 
dually fill  up.  I  have  long  cultivated  consi- 
derable gullies  created  by  the  three  shifty 
grazing  and  unmanuring  system,  and  cured  in 
this  mode,  which  produce  the  best  crops,  are 
secured  against  washing  hy  their  great  ferti- 
lity, and  are  gradually  disappearing  by  deep- 
ening their  soil. 

A  succession  of  crops  is  utterly  incompe- 
tent to  the  ends  so  necessary  to  our  lands,  as 
it  will  not  produce  their  renovation ,'  and  the 
portion  of  truth  the  theory  possesses,  if  it  has 
any,  is  so  inconsiderable,  that  it  will  produce 
the  most  ruinous  errors,  if  it  leads  us  to  be- 
lieve, that  our  efforts  to  manure  them  may  b6 
safely  diminished  or  superseded,  by  any  rota* 
tion  of  crops,  however  skilfuL 


2M  IJLVE    FENCES. 

LIVE  FEA^CES. 

This  subject,  so  extremely  matei^ial  to  a  conn- 
ivj  requiring-  to  be  raised  from  the  dead,  by 
vast  and  repeated  doses  of  the  only  genuine  ter- 
reiie  elixir,  testiiies  in  every  quarter  of  the  U. 
States,  to  the  scantiness  of  our  Agricultural 
knowledge  i  and  is  one  of  the  presages  that  it 
is  doomed  to  live  and  die  an  infant.  If  it  is  an 
idiot,  its  ease  is  hopeless  ;  but  if  it  is  only  a 
dunecj  it  must  in  time  discern  the  vast  saving 
of  labour  to  be  applied  to  diwning  and  manu- 
ling,  tlie  vast  saving  of  wood  and  timber  for 
fuel  and  building,  and  the  vast  accession  to  ar- 
able, by  rendering  less  woodland  necessary, 
as  acquisitions  arising  from  live  fences. 

In  the  *^  Memoirs  of  the  Agricultural  So- 
ciety of  Philadelphia,"  several  modes  of  rai- 
ding live  hedges,  s!iitable  for  diffei'ent  soils  and 
climates,  are  stated  and  explaiiied.  Two  vo- 
lumes of  these  memoirs  have  been  published, 
containing  more  valuable  information  upon  the 
subject  of  Agriculture,  than  any  native  book  I 
have  seen  ;  and  if  we  have  no  relish  for  the 
wit,  learning  and  experience,  with  which  they 
abound;  but  little  good  can  be  expected  from 


riVB    FENCES.  22l!r 

these  ephemeral  essays.  To  say  miidi  upon  a 
subject,  copiously  handled  ia  a  book  ^vhicU 
every  farmer  ought  to  have,  Avouid  insinuate 
the  existence  of  a  general  apathy  towards  the 
eminent  talents  which  have  presided  over  and 
greatly  contributed  to  its  composition  ;  to  say 
nothing,  would  be  a  neglect  of  a  subject  of  the 
utmost  importance. 

Several  plants  are  mentioned  in  these  me- 
moirs as  proper  for  making  live  fences,  but  I 
shall  coniinc  my  observations  to  one,  because 
my  knowledge  experimentally,  does  not  extend 
to  the  others.  The  cedar  is  peculiarly  fitted 
for  the  purpose,  throughout  a  great  district  of 
the  United  States.  It  throws  out  boughs  near 
the  ground,  pliant  and  capable  of  bein^  easily 
%^oven  into  any  form.  They  gradually  hoAve- 
Ver  become  stiiT.  Clipping  will  make  Cedar 
hedges  extremely  thick.  No  animal  will  in- 
jure them  by  browsing.  Manured  and  culti- 
vated they  conie  rapidly  to  perfection.  The 
plants  are  frequently  to  be  found  in  great  a- 
buiidance  without  the  trouble  of  raising  them. 
As  an  ever-green  they  are  preferable  to  de- 
ciduous plants  ;  and  they  live  better  than  any 
young  trees  I  have  ever  tried,  planted  as  fol- 
lows : 

From  Becem1)er  to  the  middle  of  March, 
the  smallest  plants  are  to  be  taken  up  in  a  sod 
of  a  square  conformable  to  the  size   of  the 


^bS  XIVE   FENCES. 

Spade  used,  as  deep  as  passible,  wliicli  sod  is 
to   be  deposited   unbroken  in  a  hole  as  deep 
made   by  a  similar  spade ;   tlie  earth  coming 
out  of  it  being  used  to  fill  up  the  crevices  be- 
tween  the  sod  and  the  hole  for  its  reception. 
I  plant  these  cedars  on  the  out  and   inside  of 
a   strait  fence,  on  the  ridge  of  a  ditch,  the 
plants  in  each  row  being  two  feet  apart  botji 
in  the  direction  of  and  across  this  ridge ;  but  so 
that  the  plants  on  one  side  of  the  fence  Avill 
fje  opposite  to  the  centre  of  the  vacancies  be- 
tween those  on  the  other.     Each  row  will  be 
one  foot  from  the  fence,  so  that  the  top  of  the 
ridge  will  be  about  eight  inches  higher  than 
the  position  of  the  plants.     They  should  be 
topt  at  a  foot  high,  and  not  suffered  to  gain 
ahove  three  or  four  inches  yearly  in  heighth, 
such  boughs  excepted  as  can  be  worked  into 
the  fence  at  the  ground.     Of  these  great  use 
may  be  made  towards  thickening  the  hedge, 
hy  bending  them  to  the  ground,  and  covering 
them  well  with  earth   in  the  middle,  leaving 
them  growing  to  the  stem,  and  their  extremi- 
ties exposed.     Thus  they  invariably  take  root 
and  fill  up  gaps.     If  these  hedges  are  cultiva- 
ted properly,  and  the  land  is  strong,  they  will 
form  an  elegant  live  ever-green  fcnce^  in   a 
shorter  time,  than  is   necessary  to  raise  a 
thorn  fence  in  England,   according  to  the 


XI VE    TENCES.  £"9 

But  will  they  keep  out  hogs  ?  I  am  told  by 
travellers  that  few  or  none  of  the  hedges  ia 
England  will  do  so.  Yet  hedges  are  both  the 
chief  Agricultural  ornament,  and  most  valua- 
ble improvement  of  that  well  cultivated  eoun- 
try.  But  hogs  are  not  there  turned  loose  by 
law  to  assail  them.  I  do  however  think 
that  a  cedar  hedge  is  far  more  capable  of 
forming  a  fence  against  hogs  than  the  thorn, 
because  one,  as  a  tree,  will  acquire  more 
strength  or  stubbornness  than  the  other,  a 
shrub,  can  ever  reach ;  and  because  the  cedar 
is  capable  of  being  worked  into  a  closer  tex- 
ture than  the  thorn. 

Yet  the  wedge  like  snout  of  the  hog,  the 
hardiness  of  his  nature,  and  the  toughness  of 
his  hide,  certainly  exhibit  him  as  a  dangerous 
foe  to  live  fences  ;  and  the  resources  of  ring' 
ing  and  yoking  to  controul  his  powers  and  hU 
disposition,  ought  to  be  adverted  to  for  the 
sake  of  an  iinprovement  so  momentous.— 
These  will  not  shock  our  prejudices  nor  vio- 
late our  habits,  and  are  supported  by  a  consi- 
deration of  weight,  far  inferior  to  the  im- 
portance of  hedging ;  and  yet  light  as  it  is, 
of  weight  sufficient  to  justify  the  reconimen- 
dation.  If  hedges  are  not  protected  against 
hogs,  at  least  four  rows  of  plants^  and  a  dou- 
ble width  of  ridge  or  bank  will  be  neeessa,-* 
ry  p  there  must  be  a  double  sized  ditch  to  f  ur- 

u.  2 


^30  ORCHARDS. 

nish  this  earth ;  a  doiible  portion  of  land  will 
be  occupied  by  the  hedge  and  ditch ;  and 
more  than  double  labour,  owing  to  the  incon- 
venience arising  from  great  breadth,  will  be 
always  required  to  keep  the  hedge  in  order. 
Something  less  than  moieties  in  all  these  ca- 
ses will  suffice  for  hedges  capable  of  fencing 
out  every  other  animal,  if  the  legal  rights  of 
Bogs  are  only  modified*  and  besides  the  narrow 
hedges  will  be  far  more  beaiitif  uL 


Number  50'. 


<fR€IMUBS. 


In  our  warm  and  dry  climate,  I  consider 
Kve  fences  as  Jhe  matrix  for  apple  orchards. 
These  are  the  only  species  of  orchards  at  a 
distance  from  cities,  capable  of  producing  suf- 
ficient profit  and  comfort,  to  become  a  consi- 
derable object  to  a  farmer.  Distilling  from 
fruit  is  precarious,  troublesome,  trifling  and 
out  of  his  province.  But  the  apple  Avill  fur- 
nish some  food  for  his  hogs,  a  luxury  for  his 
family  in  winter,  and  a  healthy  liquor  for  him- 
self and  his  labourers  all  the  year.  Indepen- 
dent of  any  surplus  of  cyder  he  may  spare,  it 
if<  an  object  of  solid  profit,  and  easy  acquisir 


ORCHARIJS*  23i 

tioii.  In  the  Southern  states,  the  pi'diiaturc 
decay  and  death  of  a\)ple  trees,  is  the  chief 
obstacle  to  its  attainment.  And  this  my  ex- 
perience tells  me  is  generally  occasioned  by  a 
stroke  of  the  sun  on  the  body  of- the  tree. — 
Hedges  in  a  great  variety  of  positions  will  af- 
ford shelter  to  trees  against  this  stroke. 

This  conclusion  has  been  drawn  from  many 
facts,  but  a  single  case  only  shall  be  stated.— 
Some  years  past  tlie  following  experiment  was 
tried.  An  area  of  above  an  acre  was  inclosed 
by  a  cedar  hedges,  in  the  form  of  a  square, 
with  each  side  presented  to  a  cardinal  point  of 
the  compass.  Soon  after,  a  young  apple  or- 
chard was  planted  on  the  outside  around  the 
hedge  three  feet  from  it,  and  at  tw  enty  feet 
distance  between  the  trees.  The  hedge  shad- 
ed the  bodies  of  the  trees  when  it  could  do  «>, 
and  has  been  for  some  years  thick  and  high. 
Not  a  single  tree  has  dccayed^or  died  on  the 
North  or  East  side  of  it,  many  have  on  the 
West  and  several  on  the  South ;  and  the  ge^ 
neral  tliriftiness  of  the  tress  on  the  North  and 
East  aspects,  greatly  exceeds  that  on  the  two 
others. 

If  the  result  of  this  experiment  caa  be  de- 
pended on,  for  uniting  live  fences  and  orchards, 
the  same  culture  will  answer  for  both,  and  a 
vast  saving  of  land,  a  great  saving  of  treesi 
a  great  accession  of  comforts  and  profit,  and 
a  useful  and  ornameutal  border  of  roads  will 


ensue.  The  same  experiment  tends  to  reeom'- 
mend  low  or  short  bodies,  as  some  preserva- 
tive for  fruit  trees  against  strokes  of  the  sun. 

Next  to  this  cause  of  the  death  of  apple 
tl^ees,  the  residence  under,  and  subsistence  up- 
on the  bark  of  the  bodies  and  roots  below  the 
surface  of  the  ground,  during  winter,  of  the 
iield  rat,  has  been  the  most  common.  The  re- 
medy against  this  animal,  perhaps  the  mole 
also,  and  probably  against  the  whole  family  of 
insects,  is  to  dig  away  so  much  of  the  earth 
from  the  roots  near  the  body,  to  remain  open 
during  the  winter,  as  will  make  the  place  too 
uncomfortable  a  residence  for  them,  during 
that  season,  in  which  they  are  most  apt  to  feed 
on  the  bark. 

A  saving  of  much  time  and  trouble,  and  an 
acquisition  of  sounder  trees  would  result  from 
an  easy  practice,  to  which  I  have  of  late  years 
conformed.  By  earthing  up  the  young  grafts 
gradually  as  they  grow,  to  about  six  inches 
above  the  junction  of  the  slip  and  the  stalk, 
roots  will  invariably  shoot  out  a])ove  this  junc^ 
tion,  and  by  cutting  off  the  stalk  just  above  it, 
when  the  young  tree  is  transplanted,  you  get 
rid  of  the  defect  in  its  constitution,  sometimes 
occasioned  by  the  operation  of  engrafting,  and 
what  is  infinitely  more  important,  all  tlie  sci> 
on s  sprouting  up  from  its  roots,  during  the 
whole  life  of  the  tree;  wiU  be  of  the  true  fruity 


ORCnARDS.  23^3 

and  furiiisli  sponlaiieously  and  j)ermanently 
healthier  orchards,  than  can  be  obtained  by 
the  labour  and  art  of  engrafthig. 

Good  cyder  would  be  a  national  saying  of 
wealth,  by  expelling  foreign  liquors  5  and  of 
life,  by  expelling  the  use  of  ardent  spirits. — 
The  cyder  counties  of  England  are  said  to  ex- 
hibit the  healtliiest  population  of  the  king- 
dom. Even  hard  cyder  would  be  a  useful  be- 
verage to  our  slaves.  Reduced  to  vinegar  it  is 
considered  as  a  luxury,  and  allowed  to  be 
wholesome.  But  the  extreme  ignorance  of 
mankind  in  making  cyder  is  demonstrated,  by 
an  uncertainty  whether  the  manufacture  shall 
turn  out  to  be  sweet,  hard  or  sour.  It  often 
happens  that  things  of  most  value  are  not  per- 
fected, because  perfection  is  easily  attainable. 
A  thousand  times  more  ingenuity  has  been  ex- 
pended on  steam  engines,  than  would  have  suf- 
ficed for  discovering  the  best  modes  of  Agri- 
culture ;  and  the  art  of  making  cyder  is  in  ita 
infancy,  whilst  that  of  making  wine  has  been 
brought  to  maturity.  Yet  the  former  liquor 
would  furnish  infinitely  more  comfort  at  infi- 
nitely less  expence  to  mankind,  than  the  lat- 
ter, if  the  art  of  making  it  had  been  equally 
perfected. 

It  is  probable  that  a  similarity  exists  in  the 
hest  process  for  making  both  liquors,  and  that 
i^seful  hints  may  be  collected  from  the  details 


334  0RCHA"B3JS, 

as  to  wine,  towards  forming  a  process  for  mak- 
ing cyder.  From  tins  source  I  liave^  extracted 
a  practice,  though  undoubtedly  imperfect,  yet 
tolerably  sufficing  for  family  purposes.  It  is 
this  : 

When  the  fermentation  of  the  must  is  half 
ipf^Vf  so  that  it  is  considerably  SAveeter  than  it 
ouglit  to  remain,  it  is  drawn  oiF  (throwing 
away  the  sediment  at  the  bottom  of  the  cask) 
and  boiled  moderately  about  one  hour  in  a  cop- 
per, during  which  the  impurities  rising  to  the 
top  are  taken  off  by  a  skimmer  with  holes  in 
it,  to  let  the  cyder  througli.  Twelve  eggs  for 
each  thirty-three  gallons,  yolks  and  whites, 
are  beat  up,  pouring  gently  to  them  some  of 
the  boiling  cyder,  until  the  mixture  amounts 
to  about  a  gallon.  This  mixture  is  gradually 
poured  into  the  boiling  cydei-,  and  well  mixed 
with  it  by  stirring.  It  then  boils  gently  ^\q 
minutes  longer,  when  it  is  returned  hot  into 
the  cask.  In  eight  or  ten  days  it  is  drawn  off, 
leaving  the  sediment  to  be  thrown  away,  and 
put  into  a  clean  cask,  with  six  quarts  of  rum 
or  brandy  to  thirty-three  gallons.  The  cask 
is  ma(|e  completely  full  and  stopt  close.  For 
this  purpose  a  siiiiicicnt  provision  of  cyder 
must  be  made.  The  cyder  is  bottled  in  th© 
spriniT. 

The  chief  object  in  making  cyder,  must  be 
(he  management  of  the  fermentation,  so  as  to 


,ayaii  ourselves  of  the  spirituous  and  avoid  the 
acetous.  In  the  fall  it  is  accomplished  hj  the 
above  process.  But  cyder  is  subject  to  a  se- 
cond fermentation  in  the  spring  like  wine, 
which  often  demolishes  bottles,  or  euds  in  aci- 
dity. To  manage  this,  so  as  to  make  it  keep 
good  in  caskSy  is  an  object  highly  desirable, 
but  which  I  have  not  attempted  to  accomplish* 
Perhaps  it  is  attainable  by  racking  it  off  in  the 
spring  and  making  a  second  addition  of  spirit. 
The  simple  process  above  stated,  will  carry  it 
well  through  the  winter,  and  furnish  good  bot- 
tled cyder  ;  but  it  promises  nothing  more.— 
By  cutting  off  the  corks  even  with  the  bottle, 
and  dipping  its  mouth  in  boiling  pitch,  it  is  as 
completely  closed,  as  the  best  waxed  bottled 
claret  or  burgundy. 


jSTumber  Bl. 


BBMJfl^YG, 


Prejudices  have  assailed,  and  will  continue 
to  assail,  every  species  of  improvement,  and 
theoiy  instead  of  experience  will  often  sow 
opinion.  It  is  frequently  believed,  that  drain- 
ing, cleas'iog,  and  reducing  to  cultivatioH  mar- 


shes,  bogs  and  swawips,  will  add  to  the  insala* 
brity  of  the  air,  because  vegetables  feed  upon 
certain  qualities  of  it,  unfit  for  animal  respi- 
ration ,•  and  thus  render  it  purer  for  that  pur- 
pose. But  why  should  we  load  the  atmosphere 
with  poison,  because  vegetables  will  absorb  a 
portion  of  it  ?  Countries  kept  damp  by  end* 
less  forests,  though  abounding  in  the  utmost 
degree  with  these  absorbents  of  atmospheri- 
cal miasma,  are  peculiarly  unwholesome  ;  and 
first  settlers  unexceptionably  become  victims 
to  the  fact.  It  proves  that  the  air  may  be? 
contaminated  beyond  the  purifying  power  of 
an  entire  vegetable  wilderness,  and  that  a  re- 
liance for  its  salubrity  upon  the  eaters  of  poi- 
son, would  be  equivalent  to  a  reliance  upon  the 
eaters  of  carrion  for  its  purification,  if  sham- 
bles were  as  extensive  as  bogs.  After  having 
made  the  air  as  pure  as  possible  by  every 
means  in  our  power  the  vegetable  ehymistry  by 
absorption  is  a  means  provided  by  providence, 
for  its  last  filter ;  but  to  infer  from  this  natu- 
ral operation,  that  our  efforts  to  render  it 
purer  by  draining  are  pernicious,  would  be  an 
equivalent  inference  to  the  idea,  that  the  cul- 
tivation of  the  earth  is  pernicious,  because  it 
is  capable  of  spontaneous  productions. 

Campania  and  some  other  flat  and  marshy 
districts  of  Italy,  are  recorded  in  history  as 
having  been  made  so  healthy  and  delightful  in 


ihe  flourishing  period  of  the  Roman  Empire 
by  draining,  as  to  have  heen  selected  by  the 
opulent  for  country  retirement,  and  splendid 
palaces.  The  drains  neglected  byihe  barba- 
rous conquerors  of  Italy,  have  never  been  re- 
established by  its  modern  inhabitants ;  and  the 
swamps  and  marshes  have  restored  to  these 
districts  an  uninhabitable  atmosphere,  by  hav- 
ing their  waters,  their  trees,  and  tbeir  verdure 
restored  to  them. 

As  new  countries  are  cleared  and  ploughedj^ 
they  become  more  healthy.  The  draining  ef- 
fects of  these  two  operations  exceed  those  of 
any  other,  and  hy  drying  the  earth  very  exten- 
sively, furnish  the  strongest  evidence  for  as* 
certaining  the  effects  of  draining  wetter  lands^ 
If  the  healthiness  of  a  country  is  increased 
by  these  modes  ef  draining,  it  will  not  be  di* 
minished  by  auxiliary  modes. 

The  connection  between  draining  or  drying 
the  earth,  and  human  subsistence,  furnishes  a 
]iind  of  argument,  neither  logical  nor  demon- 
strative, and  yet  of  conclusive  force  to  my 
^ind.  Can  it  be  believed  that  the  author  of  ^ 
creation,  has  committed  the  egregious  blunder 
of  exposing  man  to  the  alternative  of  eati&g 
bad  food,  or  of  breathing  bad  air  ?  If  not, 
draining,  whether  by  the  sun,  the  plough  op 
the  spade,  being  indispensible  to  avoid  th«^ 
first,  cannot  wreck  him  on  the  second  efil. 

X 


3SS  DEAIXING. 

Froai  llic  g^eat  improvement  made  hi  tli« 
health  of  the  Eastern  parts  of  the  Union,  if 
^ve  may  trust  in  recent  history,  by  opening  the 
lands  to  tlie  sun?  and  with  iha  plough,  I  long 
since  cjjnciuded,  that  tliis  improvement  would 
he  vastly  extended  by  resorting  to  every  other 
species  of  draining.  And  having  removed 
some  years  past  to  a  farm,  reported  to  he  ex- 
tremely liable  to  bilious  fevers,  I  threw  seve- 
ral small  streams  into  deep  ditches,  di'ied  a 
wet  road  leading  to  the  house,  hj  open  or  co- 
vered drains,  and  cleared  and  drained  some 
acres  of  springy  sviamp,  closely  covered  wilh 
ST/ amp  wood,  lying  four  or  five  hundred  yards 
South  of  the  house.  The  multitude  of  springs 
in  this  swamp,  made  deep,  central,  and  dou- 
ble lateral  ditches,  entering  into  it  every  six 
yards,  necessary  throughout  the  ground.  The 
labour  was  greats  hut  the  wet  thicket  is  now 
a  clean  dry  meadow.  Perhaps  an  attachment 
1^  a  theory  may  have  eau^ed  me  to  imagine, 
tliat  the  improvement  in  the  healthiness  of  my 
family  and  the  draining  improvements,  have 
kept  pace  with  each  other  ;  but  I  am  under  no 
delusion  in  asserting,  that  the  healthiness  of 
no  part  of  the  world,  according  to  the  tables 
of  mortality  which  I  have  se<?n,  has  equal- 
led it. 

A  yerj  large  proportion  of  the  country  on 
the  Eastern  waters  consists   of   level  land. 


sWamps,  bogs  and  marshes.  The  first  is  chief- 
ly cleared  and  exhausted  f  the  two  last  are 
chiefly  in  a  natural  state ;  and  all  generate 
poison  for  want  of  proper  draining  by  the 
plough,  by  ditches,  and  by  dams,  instead  of 
producing  the  richest  crops  of  everj^  kind  for 
man  and  beast,  of  any  other  part  of  the  coun- 
try, v/ithout  infecting  the  air. 

The  swamps,  bogs  and  marshes^  constitute 
one  of  our  best  resources  for  recovering  the 
exhausted  high  lands,  as  furnishing  employ- 
ment for  labour,  and  funds  for  manure  ;  to  the 
farmer  they  offer  a  certainty  of  profit,  in  exr 
change  for  the  frequency  of  loss  ;  and  to  the 
worn  out  land,  an  intermission  of  its  torturesj 
and  a  cure  for  its  wounds. 

If  the  bounties  of  draining  include  an  im* 
provement  in  salubrity,  in  subsistence,  in  pro* 
fit,  and  of  exhausted  lands,  they  ought  to  ex- 
cite an  ardour  which  will  presently  leave  be- 
hind, the  few  and  plain  remarks  which  I  shall 
make  upon  the  subject;  or  at  least  to  awaken 
great  districts  of  country  to  the  facts,  that 
their  best  lands  ;  those  capable  of  yielding  the 
most  profit,  if  not  those,  only  capable  of  yield- 
ing fiiiy  or  much  profit ;  lands  able  to  support 
mere  people  than  those  at  present  under  cul- 
1  are,  lie  wholly  useless  ;  except  it  may  be  use- 
ful to  Idll  people  who  are  employed  in  killing 
land,  and  thus  shelter  the  survivors  in  some 
measure  against  the  evils  of  penury. 


^*0  <BRAll!aSOC. 


HUMBEE   5^ 

JJIUIJS^IJ^G Continnei, 

The  simplest  mode  of  draining  is  by  tlie 
plough,  and  yet  even  this  is  rare.     Considera- 
ble districts  of  flat,  stiff  and  close  land,  are 
soured  by  stagnant  water  and  baked  by  the 
sun,  for  want  of  this  plain  operation ;  so  as  to 
increase  labour,  diminish  crops  and  taint  the 
air.     Sometimes  this  rigid  land,  though  in- 
tended   for    Indian    corn,   is   left   unbrokea 
through  the  winter,  and  retains  its  excessive 
moisture,  for  want  of  a  declivity  to  discharge 
'Hj  at  others,  being  fallowed  level,  the  water 
^}ecomes  a  menstruum  for  melting  down  the 
oil  into  a  brick  like  cover,  which  is  generally 
a'endered  excessively  hard  by  the  sun,  before 
the  water  is  evaporated  sufficiently  to  admit 
Jthe  plough.     If  the  glutinous  quality  of  wa- 
^ter  had  not  been  demonstrated  in  the  familiar 
operation  of  brick-making,  it  ought  to  have* 
been  instantly  perceived  in  the  case  under  con- 
sideration.    This  soil  holds  it  upon  the  surface 
with  such  surprising  retentiveness,  as  often  to 
^hew  it  in  a  rut  or  some  other  small  aperture, 
at  a  lime  when  the  crop  is  suffering  by  drought. 
.Bein^  naturally  adapted  to  extiWJt  and  retaiij 


the  gluten  in  w  ater,  a  surface  is  formed  wLieh 
obstructs  absorption,  and  suspends  the  water 
excessively  exposed  to  evaporation ;  so  that 
the  crops  suffer  more  than  those  of  any  other 
kinds  of  land,  both  from  its  excess  and  defici- 
ency, under  the  flat  culture  habit. 

For  both  these  misfortunes,  draining  is  the 
only  remedy,  and  in  most  cases  it  can  be  ef- 
fected by  the  plough.  This  will  make  ridges 
and  furrows,  differing  in  their  level  in  propor- 
tion to  the  breadth  of  the  former.  The  wider 
the  ridge,  the  deeper  the  furrow  muy  be  made  }■ 
and  in  ridges  calculated  for  Indian  eoni,  of 
fiwe  feet  and  an  half  wide,  the  bottom  of  the 
furrow  may  easily  be  made  fifteen  inches  lower 
than  the  top  of  the  ridge.  Land  of  tite  na- 
ture described^  from  the  worst,  is  capable  by 
skilful  plough  drainings,  of  being  converted 
into  the  best  of  our  soils.  If  a  habit  had  ex- 
isted of  draining  wet  meadow  lands,  first  by 
cutting  lines  of  ditches  from  North  to  South 
over  the  whole  surface  of  the  meadow,  and 
then  by  filling  them  all  up,  in  cutting  the  same 
number  from  East  to  West,  and  so  cutting, and 
filling  ditches  alternately;  all  the  arguments 
in  favour  of  this  mode  of  draining  meadows^ 
would  apply  against  the  only  practicable  mode 
of  draining  cornfields  by  the  plough ;  for  the 
latter  object  can  only  be  effected  by  abolishing 
tb«  liabit  of  ei'O^s  ploughing. 

%  % 


^42  BKAININCU 

The  difference  af  the  level  between  the 
ridge  and  the  furrow,  in  almost  every  case, 
enables  us  to  seize  upon  some  descent  in  the 
iield  (as  the  smallest  will  suiRce)  by  which  to 
dispose  of  the  superfluous  moisture.  Howe- 
ver distant,  a  descent  comes  at  last,  and  ad« 
joining  land  holders  Avould  find  a.rautualbene* 
ilt  by  uniting  in  the  operation,  because  stag- 
nant water  on  the  higher  field,  does  an  injui-y 
to  the  lower,  only  capable  of  being  removed 
by  allowing  it  a  passage. 

Supposing  however  the  unusual  case  of  a 
perfect  level,  essential  benefit  will  yet  accrue 
from  the  proposed  mode  of  draining  by  ihe^ 
plough.     The  climate  of  the  country  under 
consideration  is  by  no  means  a  wet  one,  and 
therefore,  even  in  this  case  an  instance  would 
rarely  happen  of  a  fall  of  rain  so  excessive,  as 
to  drench  the  earth,  fill  the  proposed  furrows, 
»nd  overflow  tlie  ridges  ;  because  the  earth  of 
these  ridges  having  been  retrieved  from  a  sa- 
turity  of  moisture,  keeping  it  in  winter  con- 
stantly unsusceptible  of  an  addition,  and  hav- 
ing been  rendered  friable  by  lying  in  ridges 
exposed  to  frost,  will  absorb  infinitely  more 
than  the  same  earth  in  its  fiat  compact  state  ; 
because  the  deep  furrows  having  passed  below 
the  crust  caused  by  the  union  between  the 
earth  of  the  surface,  ai>d  the  glueiness  of  the 
water,  will  thereby  have  opened  new  ehanneb 


DRAINIXG.  ilii} 

ibr  tibsor[»tion  ;  and  because  the  eapaeiiy  of 
Ibe  furrows  if  praperlj  cosistructed,  will  f*f^- 
neraliy  or  invariably  be  rideijriRto  to  the  f]ua«- 
lit  J  of  superiliioiis  wiite?'. 

All  iiifaHible  mcle  however  of  pi^rfectiir^ 
the  operation  af  draininjrby  tlv?i>lo'dg:b.  exi^sls 
ill  subjoiiiiag  to  it  ii  dry  diteli^  v,  bicli  in  no  cas^ 
need  be  above  eigliteen  inches  deep?  and  Iwen^ 
<\-foi»r  %yide,  to  be  placed  on  the  side  (>f  the 
fiehl  most  proper  for  coiivejing  off  the  water, 
if  there  is  any  descent,  tliis  ^itiih  must  run  at 
its  foot;  if  B4)ae,  it  must  receive  the  water 
nearest  to  some  descent,  to  which  the  ditch 
must  be  coiitinued,  in  both  cases  every  fur- 
row of  the  field  must  deliver  its  water  into  the 
ditch. 

Those  readers  who  have  seen  large  flats  of 
close,  wet  land  on  the  Eastern  ^vater  courses, 
employed  in  killing  teams,  poiaoning  the  air, 
and  disappointing  the  hopes  of  the  husbands 
mun,  will  not  consider  the  suggestions  of  this 
number,  as  useless.  Our  Agriculture  is  hard- 
ly prepared  for  the  plainest  improvements,  and 
aa  attempt  to  introduce  those  of  a  complicated 
nature,  would  of  course  be  unsuccessful.  The 
double  paradox  however  contended  for,  having 
been  the  result  of  experience,  may  safely  be 
referred  to  the  same  tribunal,  with  a  word  or 
two  to  solicit  a  fair  trial.  It  is  asserted  that 
the  flat  surface  in  the  kind  of  soil  I  have  i^eeu 


^i^  DIUINING. 

speaking  of,  will  produce  the  evils,  both  of  too 
iHucli  and  tea  little  moisture  :  and  that  the 
high  ridges  and  deep  furrows  earnestly  recom- 
mended, will  prevent  both-  Id  addition  to  the 
previous  observations  in  this  number,  applying 
to  the  reconciliation  of  these  apparent  contra- 
dictions, the  reader  will  be  pleased  to  recollect 
those  in  a  former  one>  designed  to  prove  that 
evaporation  will  be  greater  from  a  flat  than 
from  a  ridged  surface,  and  therefore  in  win- 
ter when  it  is  too  slow,  the  furrows  may  carry 
off  the  superfluous  water,  and  in  summer,  when 
it  is  too  rapid,  the  ridges  may  obstruct  it. 

If  twenty  inches  of  rain  falls  in  the  year, 
which  would  retain  moisture  in  droughts  lon- 
gest; a  level  iron  pan  of  an  hundred  acres 
area,  or  an  hundred  acres  of  earth  of  a  soil 
absorbing  all  that  fell  ?  The  soil  I  have  been 
speaking  of,  flat  and  undrained,  is  somewhat 
of  the  nature  of  the  pan ;  drained  by  ridges 
and  deep  furrows,  it  is  converted  into  one  mor^ 
absorbent. 


KUMBER    53. 

DUMmXG Continued. 

The  next  species  of  draining  to  be  consi- 
tlered  is  nearly  as  simple^  as  useful,  and  as 
much  neglected,  as  that  we  have  just  past.— - 
A  great  part  of  the  country  below  the  moun- 
tains is  of  a  sandy  soil,  and  abounds  with  a 
multitude  of  creeks,  bogs  and  rivulets,  gene- 
rally furnishing  fine  land  up  to  their  very 
springs,  if  they  were  drained.  But  instead  of 
doing  this,  the  labour  of  the  country  has  beea 
applied  with  great  perseverance  and  success> 
to  draining  the  hills  of  their  barren  sands,  fo» 
the  pui'pose  of  poui'ing  them  upon  these  rich 
valiies.  To  arrest  and  repair  so  ruinous  an 
evil,  would  be  the  means  of  bringing  under 
culture-  an  immense  body  of  land,  iniinitely 
more  fertile  than  that  in  cultivation ;  and  if 
health  and  plenty  are  bad  motives  for  the  un- 
dertaking, this  fertility  ought  to  suggest  the 
folly  of  neglecting  the  smallest  slipe  of  these 
Wet  lands,  from  pecuniary  considerations  oiily. 

If  however  the  wonderful  manner  in  wnick 
the  Eastern  States  are  watered,  is  adverted  to, 
the  very  great  quantity  of  these  wetlands  will 
«tiike  the  jaiiul^  and  ddscios*  i&  It  a^  oaee  a- 


eapaciiy  as  great  for  causing  iinhealliiiness,» 
as  for  producing  profit  5  and  as  in  reaping  the^ 
good  we  remove  the  evil,  an  admiration  of  hu- 
man nature  is  awakened,  when  we  see  it  hrave 
the  worst  climates,  and  court  death  abroad  for 
the  sake  of  wealth,  rather  than  acquire  it  at 
home  hj  highly  improving  a  tolerable  one,  and 
courting  long  life* 

There  is  hardly  a  habitation  in  most  of  tlie 
Eastern  States,  however  distant  from  the  lar- 
ger rivers,  without  the  atmospherical  influence 
of  this  vast  mass  of  creeks,  bogs  and  rivulets  ; 
and  accordingly  their  effect  is  almost  every 
"where  in  some  degree,  experienced.  Few  of 
their  channels  retain  any  appearance  of  their 
natural  state,  being  every  where  obstructed 
by  sands,  bogs,  bushes  and  rubbish,  so  as  to 
form  innumerable  putrid  puddles,  pools  and 
bogs,  upon  the  occurrence  of  every  drought  ^ 
to  several  of  wliich,  all  our  summers  and  au- 
tumns are  liable.  By  slopping  and  spreading 
the  waters  of  our  creeks  and  rivulets,  they 
soon  cease  to  flow  in  droughts,  and  the  water 
whieli  might  be  carried  off  in  a  healthy  cur- 
rent at  all  times,  in  wet  seasons,  poisons  th€. 
earth,  and  in  dry,  the  air,  because  then  eva- 
poration becomes  its  only  channel. 

Every  rational  being  will  acknowledge,  that 
nothing  can  be  more  ridiculous  than  to  kill 
ourselves  for  the  sake  of  remaining  poor,  and 


i)EAI:^7ING.  '    Sir 

Hotliing  \vis6p  than  to  lengthen  our  lives  for 
the  sake  of  becoming  daily  more  comfortable. 
The  latter  objects  will  both  be  certainly  ac- 
ftomplisiied  by  draining  onr  creeks,  rivulets 
and  bogs,  so  as  to  bestow  on  them  unobstruct- 
ed currents,  and  to  cultivate  their  borders. — 
In  sandy  countries,  where  tliey  are  most  ex- 
tensive, valuable  and  pernicious,  their  last 
quality  is  most  easily  removed,  as  I  shall  en- 
deavour to  shew. 

Side  and  straight  ditches,  where  ditching  is 
necessary,  ought  generally  to  be  abandoned, 
and  the  stream  trained  nearly  to  its  natural 
course,  avoiding  acute  angles,  and  aiming  at 
gentle  sinuosities.  The  loose  texture  of  a 
sandy  soil  suggests  these  preeantions.  In 
consequence  of  it,  side  ditches  are  speedily 
filled  up.  Straight  ditches  give  an  impetus 
to  the  current,  exposing  a  crumbling  soil  to  u 
constant  abrasion,  and  devoting  the  point  upon 
which  it  expends  its  greatest  fury,  to  great  in- 
jury. Acute  angles  create  strong  currents 
and  are  unable  to  withstand  weak  ones.  The 
lowest  ground  is  naturally  the  best  for  drains. 
And  gentle  bends  check  the  impetuosity  of 
currents.  From  adhering  to  the  lowest 
grA)und  or  natural  course  of  the  stream,  we 
may  avail  ourselves  to  great  extent  of  the 
stream  itself  toy/ards  perfecting  the  drain,  by 
periodically  removirig  suck  obstructions  as  it 


is  unable  ttt  remove,  or  illseloses  in  cultinj?  a, 
ditch  for  itself.  These,  in  the  sandy  coiin- 
iiies,  consist  generally  of  old  wood,  occasion- 
ally of  Teins  of  sonre  more  rigid  species  of 
earth  ^  the  iirst  to  be  removed,  the  latter  to  be 
eiit  through.  In  cutting  ditclies,  widening; 
channels,  pairing  off  poiuis,  cleaning  and  deep- 
ening drains  of  any  kind,  one  of  the  most  ob- 
vious, and  most  common  errors,  is  to  leave  the 
tarth  on  their  borders,  so  as  to  dam  out  a  eoa- 
Biderable  portion  of  the  water  the  drala  ¥/as 
intendetl  to  receive,  and  to  destroy  all  the  crop 
within  its  influeiiee.  Tliis  earth  englit  unex- 
^eptionably  to  be  employed  in  curing  hollows, 
leaving  the  edges  of  the  drain  every  where 
lower  than  the  adjacent  grouml.  By  this 
means  floods  will  seldomer  occur,  and  more  ra- 
pidly return  to  the  channel ;  because  as  the 
water  is  evei'v  where  trickling  into  the  drain 
as  the  rain  falls,  it  has  more  time  to  dispose  of 
it,  and  for  the  same  reason,  an  excess  will 
sooner  be  reduced.  Both  the  rapid  and  com- 
plete reduction  of  floods  is  of  great  importance 
to  crops,  few  of  which  will  sustain  much  in- 
jury from  a  very  short  immersion.  They  are 
ruined  for  want  of  a  remedy  against  stagnant 
water.  Drains  in  the  lowest  ground,  with 
edges  lower  than  the  ground  designed  to  be 
dried,  aided  by  ridges  and  furrows,  emptying 
into  tlie  drains,  will  afford  this  remedy,  in  tlw- 
most  perfect  manner.. 


DRAINING.  349 


Number  5*. 


J)RJlIXIJSrGr..„Continued. 

As  all  our  streams  have  others  falling  into 
them?  and  are  attended  with  a  multitude  of 
springs  hreaking  out  at  the  termination  of  the 
high  land,  some  suhstitute  for  the  side  ditches 
so  unsuccessfull;y  tried  for  the  purpose  of  in- 
tercepting these  rills  and  springs,  is  indispen- 
sable. I  have  tried  three  with  entire  success^ 
at  an  expence  of  labour,  infinitely  less  thau 
that  so  frequently  lost  by  adhering  to  sidie 
ditches,  in  such  cases  as  we  are  considering* 
If  the  tributary  stream  rises  beyond  the 
ground  we  are  draining,  it  is  managed  by  the 
same  principles  as  the  chief  stream,  so  far 
upwards,  as  is  necessary.  If  it  rises  in  a  bold 
spring  at  the  junction  of  the  hills  with  the  flat 
we  are  reclaiming,  a  channel  is  made  for  it  in 
the  lowest  ground,  and  by  the  shortest  dis- 
tance, to  the  central  drain,  as  narrow  as  the 
spade  will  allow,  never  more  than  eighteen  in- 
qhes  deep,  with  perpendicular  sides,  which  in 
these  narrow'' cuts  last  much  longer  than 
slopes,  because  they  are  not  equally  exposed 
to  frosts.  If  springs  ooze  in  a  continued  line 
at  the  junction  of  the  hill  and  flat,  a  side  cut 

Y 


JLii 


2s(l  DIlAI!rilC€?i' 

as  narrow  as  possible,  and  deep  enough  toltiH 
tersect  them  all,  with  a  direct  cut  as  above  to 
the  main  drain,  is  one  remedy*  The  labour  of 
these  cuts  is  trifling.  The  last  however,  like 
rJl  ditches  above  the  lowest  ground  In  sandy 
«oils,  is  liable  to  be  filled  up.  To  obviate  this 
iiscojirenieiice  (which  in  these  small  cuts  is  not 
very  great)  I  have  frequently  tried  covered 
drains,  constructed  as  follows,  with  invariable 
..success, 

A  ditch  at  least  four  feet  deep  is  cut  s©  a^ 
completely  to  intersect  th<3  whole  line  of  these 
-4iozir.g  springs,  to  the  depth  of  about  three 
feet,  and  it  is  continued  "to  the  open  drain  in- 
to vvhich  it  must  discharge  its  water,  by  the 
rout  aifordiiig'the  most  cQnvenient|fail  for  (hai. 
])urpose.  The  ditch  is  cut  gradually  narrower 
from  the  top  .to  the  bottom^  where  it  is  not 
above  eight  inclies  wide*  A  row  of  poles  of 
such  a  size  as  nearly  but  not  entirely  to  touchy 
is- laid  on  each  side  of  th«  ditch  at  bottom. — 
Green  or  seasoned  brush,  witlioiit  leaves,  trim- 
ed  to  lie  close,  is  then  packed  into  the  ditch, 
with  the  small  ends  downwards,  and  touching 
the  pole?^.  beginning  at  the  upper  end  of  tie 
ditch*  The  incli?nition  of  the  brush  must  be 
up  stream,  at  an  angle  of  about  foriy  five  de- 
grees with  the  bottom  of  the  ditcli ;  it  must 
be  packed  as  close  with  the  hand  as  possible, 
and  cut  int©  lengths  proper  for  the  end  of  iiJ- 


•RAINING.  2^1 

ling  ilie  ditch  within  ten  inches  of  the  top.-^ 
The  brush  is  then  to  be  covered  with  four  in- 
clies  of  dry  sound  leaves  of  any  kind,  and  the 
whole  of  the  earth  to  be  returned  upon  the 
ditch  and  Well  rammed.  It  will  press  down  the 
brush  and  leaves  low  enough  to  admit  of  any 
species  of  culture  without  disturbing  them. 
The  oozing  water  will  be  received  by  the  for- 
mer, and  must  trickle  through  tiiG  apertures 
eaused  by  having  its  small  ends  at  bottom,  &by 
the  poles,  down  to  the  open  drain,  and  the  sour- 
ed ground  will  lose  every  boggy  appearance. 

This  modie  of  draining  seems  in  description 
to  be  more  troublesome,  than  I  have  found  it 
to  be  in  practice.  tJnless  its  duration  could 
be  ascertained,  we  cannot  certaliily  pronounce, 
as  to  its  cheapness.  The  oldest  I  have  had 
an  opportunity  of  attending  tx>,  was  constriicl- 
ed  about  ten  years  past,  its  objects  were  to 
render  a  road  dry,  and  about  two  acres  of 
soured  barren  land  better,  by  sinking  aline  of 
oozing  springs  lying  collaterally  with  the 
I'oad,  which  made  it  a  quagmire  in  wet  wca* 
tlier,  and  rendered  the  two  acres  barren.-^ 
The  road  has  been  ever  since  dry  and  firm^ 
and  the  land,  of  the  best  in  the  field.  1  can- 
-jiot  help  thinking  that  a  w^U  constructed  drain 
of  this  kind,  will  last  a  century.  Where  stones 
ean  be  had,  t  hey  may  be  made  to  last  for  ever, 
but  I  doubt  whether  brick-work  would  b«& 
^  t|ual  to  the  brush. 


252  DBAINIJiTG, 

'  But  this  is  like  shooting  speeulatioii  a  eeii- 
tury  beyond  hope.  It  is  superiiuous  to  invent 
modes  of  preserving  spots,  whilst  we  are  de- 
stroying districts.  1  will  therefore  return  to 
the  subject,  as  it  relates  to  draining  the  vast 
body  of  land  lying  on  creeks  and  small  m'ers. 
There  is  no  species  of  draining  so  cheap  or  be- 
neiieial,  as  where  there  is  water  suificient  to 
perform  a  chief  part  of  the  work.  Most 
streams  can  perform  some  of  it.  In  either 
case,  the  removal  of  obstructions  of  wood  or  J 
loose  stone,  requires  infioitely  less  labour  than 
to  dig  an  equivalent  canal ;  and  the  water  thus 
aided  will  eontinuei  to  deepen  its  channel,  un- 
til its  elT^:rts  are  cciitrolied  by  withholding  the 
:as3istai3ee.  The  earth,  it  scoops  out  of  the 
channel,  becomes  an  alluvion  for  curing  an 
a])undance  of  chasms  and  inequalities,  the 
fruit  of  torrents  and  obstructions.  And  by 
.correcting  some  angles,  and  deepening  the 
channels  of  the  creeks  and  small  rivers,  a  very 
l^rge  quantity  of  tiie  best  land,  now  yielding 
fotii  air,  may  be  brought  at  a  trifling  expence 
to  yield  line  crops. 

For  the  imrodnction  of  this  mode  of  drain- 
ing, ilte  cheapest,  the  most  practiciible,  and 
the  most  profitable,  a  law  is  necessary.  I  do 
not  know  that  Coke's  summa  ratio  provides 
for  the  case,  and  the  absurdities  to  be  found 
m  the  code,  upon  which  this  exalted  encomi- 


DRAIXING.  253 

urn  is  pponoiiiieed,  are  records  of  humati  folly 
stifRcieiit  to  shake  a  cotiOclenee  in  tlie  gorM 
sense  and  justice  of  an  entire  natioiij  however 
plain  the  case  may  be.  A  proprietor  below 
may  perhaps  be  found ?  blind  to  the  clear  inonil 
obligations  which  require  him  to  remove  tlie 
obstructions  against  the  draiiiing  of  a,  propri- 
etor above ;  whilst  one  above  may  be  so  Lynx 
eyed,  as  to  see  injuries  to  himself  from  drain- 
ing land  belovf.  And  yet  tli3  prosperity  anti 
the  health  of  the  wiiole  nation  is  at  least  as 
deeply  affected  hj  the  object^  as  by  the  esta 
blishment  of  roads  ;  nor  would  a  lower  eouu- 
ty  which  should  stop  all  the  roads  leading 
from  above,  act  as  unjustly  or  absurdly,^  as 
those  who  stop  the  drains  from  above.  Ii; 
would  not  injure  the  climate,  and  by  arresting 
commodities,  it  woukl  establish  some  monopo- 
ly beneficial  to  itself  ,•  but  the  obstructor  of 
draining  gains  no  exclusive  advantage,  and 
shares  in  the  general  calamity  of  a  bad 
climate. 

Such  laws  are  not  novel.  Pennsylvania  is 
indebted  to  them  for  some  of  her  finest  farms. 
I  much  question  whether  the  state  legisla- 
tures have  a  power  to  pass  any  laws,  equally 
beneficial.  They  might  try  the  experiment, 
short  of  that  requiring  social  embankments, 
hy  only  imposing  the  simple  and  easy  obliga- 
tion of  keeping  up  a  social  current,  sufficient 

Y  2 


to  drain  all  lands  above^  in  eveiy  stream  lyin^ 
above  tide  water.  Such  laws  might  at  first 
be  limited  to  the  removal  of  obstructioiis  of 
wood  or  eartli,  until  experience  should  decide*? 
whether  they  might  not  be  beneficially  cxters;!,- 
ed  even  to  obstructions  of  stone* 


The  residue  of  this  subject,  contiiins  in: 
every  view  its  most  important  division,  ant! 
unfortunately  meets  with  less  capacity  to  do 
U  justice.  The  benefit  s  arlshig  from  draining 
the  kind  of  ground  we  have  past  over,  though 
great  in  themselves^  are  ineonsidei^able,  t^om- 
pared  with  those  which  Avould  rcsuK  from, 
draining  the  marshes  and  sunken  grounds  up- 
on tide  water.  A  new  country  and  eiiinate 
v/ould  be  gained  by  it.  We  know  ihat  tiie 
l>utch  in  both  hemispheres,  Imve  reclaimed 
ricli  countries  from  the  ocean,  wlalst  we  aban- 
don them  to  the  rivers  ;  but  I  do  not  recollect 
to  have  heard  of  a  book  upon  draining  and 
iKJikini;,  My  whole  experience  is  confined  to 
a  sIdqIc  experiment,  yet  unfinished,  the  occur- 


DRAINING.  2Bo/ 

reiices  of  which  I  shall  relate,  so  far  as  Ihey 
may  be  useful.  It  is  made  on  gromid  similar 
to  the  body  of  marsh  and  wet  land,  abounding" 
on  the  tide  rivers  and  creeks  of  the  Eastern 
States,  to  an  extent,  suiRcient  if  reclaimed,,  to 
dispense  wealth  and  comfort,  and  unreclaimed^ 
UDwholesomeness  and  death. 

About  two  hundred  acres  of  such  land,  thre€ 
fourths  of  which  were  subject  to  the  tides, 
which  fluctuate  to  the  extent  of  about  three 
feet,  and  within  half  a  mile  of  a  large  river, 
is  the   subject  of  the  experiment.     The  re- 
maining fourth,  though  a  few  inches  above 
tide  water,  was  sunken  land,  covered  with  the 
usual  growth  of  such  ground.     A  large  por- 
tion was  soft  marsh,  subject  to  common  tides, 
and  nearly  as  much,  a  sheet  of  water,  shal- 
low at  low  tides.     On  one  side  of  this  area, 
has  been  constructed  a  canal  about  eighteen 
feet  wide,  to  coudiieta  creek  sufficiently  large 
for  two  mills  above  j  and  on  the  other,  one 
half  as  wide,  to  receive  and  convey  several 
small  streams,  and  a  great  number  of  springs. 
At  the  termination  of  the  work,  these  canals 
are  connected  by  a  dam  nearly  two  hundred 
yards  long,  one  half  crossing  the  soft  marsh, 
and  the  other  the  space  constituting  the  for- 
mer bed  of  the  creek.     These  canals  are  be- 
tween four  and  five  miles  long,  and  have  been 
constructed  cautiously   anil  leisurely,  to  di- 


256  DEAINIWG. 

minish  tTie  loss  of  tiie  adventure^  sliould  it 
ppoTe  imsuccessfii]. 

The  experiment  was  commenced  by  ciitting 
a  ditcli  on  tli€  left  side  for  the  sm?Ji  caaai, 
about  four  feet  wide^  and  two  deep?  near  the 
drj  land,  but  wholly  in  the  soil  of  the  wet. — 
It  was  found  to  yield  too  little  earth  to  make 
abank  higli  and  strong  enough  to  resist  either 
inundations  or  liigli  (ides  ',  that  the  earth  be- 
came so  porous,  on  drying,  as  to  produce  leaks 
and  breaclies  ;  and  that  it  was  yet  so  adhesive 
as  to  admit  of  the  burrowing  of  musk  rats, 
with  whieli  the  place  abounded.  Thus  the 
first  attempt  failed,  and  a  considerable  ditch 
became  wholly  useless. 

As  this  spongy  and  fibrous  soil  extended  to 
the  base  of  the  bills  on  both  sides,  the  next 
attempt  was  made  by  driving  a  double  row  of 
stakes  and  puncheons  round  and  split,  being 
six  feet  long,  two  feet  into  the  wet  ground, 
about  eighteen  from  the  dry,  fitted  together 
as  close  at  possible,  and  covering  them  with 
the  same  kind  crsoil,  dug  out  of  the  canal  for 
Conducting  the  creek,  which  afforded  earth 
when  cut  about  one  foot  deep,  to  cover  the 
stakes.  The  result  was,  that  the  wooden 
wail  under  this  spong^  and  fibrous  earth,  was 
no  security  against  the  musk  rats,  and  that 
the  bank  was  pierced  by  them  at  pleasure. — » 
The  labour  in  wood  was  therefore  lost,  but 
not  the  ijisufficient  chauncl  nor  the  bank. 


DRAINING.  257 

The  channel  being  about  twelve  inches  deep- 
er than  the  adjacent  sunken  ground,  would 
contain  and  conduct  the  creek  except  in  inun- 
dations, and  as  the  bank  hitherto  described, 
was  in  every  view  insufficient,  chasms  of  fif- 
teen or  twenty  feet  wide  were  made  in  it  at 
a1>out  three  hundred  yards  apart,  to  let  the 
water  pass  out  when  high.  The  creek  was 
turned  into  this  canal,  with  a  view  of  floating 
the  sand  from  above,  and  depositing  it  along 
the  bottom,  conveniently  for  removal  to  the 
bank,  in  order  to  oppose  its  friable  nature  to 
the  architectural  skill  of  the  muskrats. 

At  some  convenient  season  once  a  year  (for 
the  experiment  proceeded  for  years)  the  wa- 
ter of  the  creek  being  turned  successively 
through  these  chasms  above,  left  its  bottom 
below  of  firm  sand,  which  was  very  easily 
raised  upon  tlie  bank.  By  the  pressure  of 
this  annual  alluvion  of  sand,  upon  the  spongy 
soil,  the  channel  of  the  creek  became  dee[>er, 
and  the  alluvion  was  increased,  so  that  finally 
the  first  embaiiknieiit,  bei»7g  greatly  raised 
and  complelely^^eovered  with  the  sand  filtered 
by  the  water  iuio  a  state  for  the  objeet,  be- 
came a  fortifieation  proof  against  the  skill  of 
these  troublesome  animals. 

The  chasms  left  for  inundations  being  of 
the  kind  of  soil  described,  were  not  liable  to 
be  cut  by  the  water  into  new  channels^  and 


their  edges  op  banks,  being  higliei*  than  tke- 
bottom  of  tlic  creek,  verj  little  sand  could 
c5seape  through  them; 

As  the  body  of  water  on  the  left  side  >yas 
"ioo  inconsiderabW  for  the  all  avion  process,  it 
became  necessary  to  abandon  the  old  ditch, 
and  to  commeaee  a  new  one  so  far  touching 
npon  the  base  of  the  rising  dry  land,  as  to  se^ 
cure  a  sufficiency  of  sand  for  the  bank,  and 
yet  to  be  able  to  penetrate  to  the  sprin^s^, 
which  created  a  perpetual  pond  and  bog  in  a 
portion  of  the  area  to  be  drained.  It  is  now 
cut  throughout  its  whole  Course  of  about  tlires 
miles,  so  deep  as  to  have  reached  many  of  the 
springs,  with  a  bank  able  to  eomirsand  inim- 
<!ations  and  tides.  The  haiik  was  coihposed  of 
sand  only  (the  wooden  staccade  having  turned 
out  to  be  useless)  and  being  of  considerable 
«ize,  proved  a  complete  barrier  against  the 
musk  Ptits,  in  llic  following  eases  excepted.^H* 
In -three  several  places  tlie  bog  or  marsh,  pro* 
Iruded  into  the  diy  land  at  right  angles  with 
the  course  of  the  ditdi,  in  narrow  necks  not 
worth  the  expeirce  of  including.  Two  of  these 
were  about  thirty  ynrds  wide,  and  the  third 
near  ten.  All  were  crossed,  and  to  save  the 
li'oijiilo  (pf  getting  sand  for  the  bunk,  a  more 
oan  foi  trial  was  made  of  the  staceaile  and 
f»pongy  sail.  They  proved  in  all  three  places 
insiinicient  to  conliuo  the  water,  or  resi^it  the 


linilsk-i^is,  A  sandy  sqU  lay  on  hoih  skies  of 
these  guts,  but  stiii  it  would  be  eonsidcrable 
labour  to  remove  a  quantity  of  n  suiricient  for 
tiie  whole  bank  5  to  save  this  la.bour,  a  diteli 
^yas  cut  on  the  inner  i)r  lower  side  of  the  bank 
close  to  its  base,  three  feet  wide,  and  as  many 
^eep,  quite  across  the  mouths  of  the  two 
largest  guts,  and  filled  with  the  adjacent  san- 
dy soil  5  and  this  thread  of  sand  was  couh- 
?!ued  on  the  back  of  the  spongy  part  of  tlie 
bank  above  liigh  water  mark  in  the  canal.-— 
At  the  narrow  gut  the  bank  was  welj  coated 
above  ground  with  sand.  At  ail  three,  sue- 
aess  was  complete. 

Before  the  inefiicacy  of  the  staeea.dc  was 
discovered,  k  was  resorted  to  in  making  the 
dam  across  Uie  creek  and  the  marsh.  Slakes 
and  puncheons  of  about  nine  feet  long,  were 
driven  about  three  into  the  earth  across  both, 
in  the  center  of  the  intended  dam,  and  in  a 
triple  row.  Nine  fa^i  from  this  staceado  on 
each  side,  a  «lose  and  strong  wattled  fence  of 
green  cedar  was  made,  for  the  purpose  of 
hokung  the  moist  soil  of  the  marsh,  so  far  as 
the  dam  was  to  be  compounded  of  it,  and  of 
arresting  the  sand,  v/liere  It  was  to  be  made 
by  an  alluvion.  By  laying  plank  for  the  la- 
bourers on  each  side  at  iifteen  feet  distance 
from  Oiese  watlHngs,  and  working  backwai^ds 
iowai^s  themj  cutting  out  the  earth  as  deeply 


260  DRAINING* 

as  tlie  labourers  could  reach,  marsh  earth  "Was 
easily  obtained  at  low  tides  to  raise  the  dam 
to  a  sufficient  height,  so  far  as  the  marsh  ex- 
tended^ but  though  it  was  eighteen  feet  wide, 
it  proved  unable  to  resist  either  the  water  or 
the  muskrats.  It  therefore  became  necessary 
to  cut  a  ditch  along  the  whole  length  of  this 
moiety  of  the  dam,  binding  on  the  center  or 
staccade,  four  feet  wide,  and  tw  o  feet  deeper 
than  the  summit  of  the  marsh,  and  to  fill  it 
with  a  thread  of  well  filtered  alluvion  sand. 
This  remedy  has  hitherto  been  sufficient,  but 
nine  months  only  having  elapsed  since  it  was 
tried,  it  is  not  entirely  confided  in. 


Number  B6. 

J)  jMUVIeTG Continued. 

The  remaining  moiety  of  the  dam  was  en- 
tirely composed  of  alluvion  sand.  For  tliis 
object,  the  canal  for  the  creek  was  made  to 
terminate  at  a  steep  sandy  hill,  being  cut  close 
to  its  base.  Care  was  taken  to  keep  the  bot- 
tom of  the  creek  two  feet  above  low  water 
mark,  for  the  sake  of  a  current,  which  being 
directed  into  the  two  nine  feet  lanes  made  by 


DUAINING.  26i 

tlie  staceade  and  the  wattlings,  gradually  con- 
veyed tiie  sand  into  them,  and  forced  the  creek 
to  retire  into  a  narrow  channel.  To  accele- 
rate the  operation,  the  sand  of  the  hill  was 
occasionally  thrown  into  the  creek,  and  to  les- 
sen the  labour  of  doing  it,  the  channel,  as  the 
canal  widened  by  drafts  of  sand  from  the  hill> 
was  kept  near  its  base.  This  was  done  by  oc- 
casionally removing  the  stones  and  pebb?es, 
generally  found  in  sandy  soils,  and  left  behind 
by  the  Itltration,  to  the  base  of  the  bank» 
where  they  produced  the  indispensable  end  of 
preventing  the  attrition  of  the  current. 

As  much  sand  being  thus  conveyed  and  de- 
posited as  the  descent  would  allow,  two  close 
parallel  green  cedar  wattlings  were  made  eigh- 
teen feet  below  the  lowest  hitherto  mentioned^ 
from  the  high  land  to  the  marsh ;  the  cut 
through  the  marsh  on  the  lower  side,  made  in 
raising  that  part  of  the  dam,  was  converted 
into  a  channel  for  the  creek  to  the  opposite 
high  land,  and  a  short  canal  was  cut  through 
a  neck  of  marsh,  to  conduct  it  from  thence  to 
tide  water  below.  And  thenceforth  the  sand 
Was  deposited  by  the  current  along  the  whole 
extent  of  the  dam,  from  whence  it  was  occa- 
sionally v/;th  great  ease  removed  upon  it,  by 
taking  off  the  ere  k  iu  low  tides  and  dry  sea- 
so»s,  in  which  there  is  no  difficulty 

z 


In  carryii3g  the  staccade  aeaoss  the  creel:, 
great  care  was  taken  to  make  its  top  one  feot 
liig'her  than  the  highest  tides,  and  on  covering 
it  with  the  sand,  the  aperture  left  for  the  tides 
was  closed.  The  dam  was  however  twice  bro- 
ken by  high  tides,  before  it  was  conjectured, 
that  the  sand,  by  i|s  weight,  had  compressed 
the  porous  nsarsh  soil  of  wliich  the  bottom  of 
the  creek  was  composed,  and  lowered  the 
wliole  staccade  with  it.  Upon  a  strict  atten- 
tion to  tliis  idea,  however,  it  was. concluded, 
that  such  a  compressiire,  in  proportion  to 
weight  and  compressibility  took  place  through- 
out the  dam  and  banks  ;  and  that  thoiigli  it  re- 
quired occasional  additions  to  both,  to  pre- 
serve their  level  at  least  two  feet  above  the 
the  highest  tides  and  innndations,  its  effect  of 
obstructing  the  percolation  of  the  surround- 
ing water  into  the  space  to  be  drained,  admit- 
ted by  the  nature  of  the  soil  to  a  great  extent, 
was  a  foil  reiribution  for  the  laboiu"  thus 
pxpended. 

The  dam  and  banks  being  closed  quite 
around,  to  get  rid  of  the  internal  water,  con- 
stituted the  remaining  difficulty.  It  was  ne- 
cessary to  construct  a  gate  to  discharge  it  at 
low  tides.  A  tide  gate  in  the  centre  of  the 
dam  was  unsuccessfully  tried.  And  finally  a 
trunk  made  of  two  inch  oak  plank,  sixteen 
feet  long,  with  a  cavity  three  feet  wide  and 


one  deep,  answered  the  end  much  better  than 
any  other  experiment.  The  water  on  the  in- 
side passes  along  the  dam,  parallel  to  the  wa- 
ter on  the  out,  in  the  channel  cut  for  raising 
the  dam  across  the  marsh,  to  the  small  canal 
near  the  junction  of  its  bank  with  the  dam. — 
At  this  spot  the  foundation  is  an  unctuous  ful- 
lers earth.  The  place  being  made  by  bay- 
dams,  was  dug  out  to  the  precise  level  of  low 
"^vater,  and  the  trunk  accurately  laid  down  up- 
on it.  Flank  one  foot  wide  was  sunk  quite 
around  it  edgeways,  so  as  to  lap  two  inches 
on  the  bottom  of  the  trunk,  and  the  whole  was 
covered  with  earth,  and  well  ram'd  to  within 
two  feet  of  the  ends,  so  as  to  diseharge  the 
water  into  the  small  canal.  At  each  aperture 
of  the  trunk,  is  a  door  made  of  a  single  plank, 
fitted  to  the  outside,  having  four  folds  of  coarse 
woolen  cloth,  dipped  in  hot  tar,  nailed  on  so  as 
to  lit  (he  mouths  of  the  box,  fixed  by  strong 
hinges  made  for  the  purpose,  and  latched  un- 
der w  ater  hy  the  help  of  a  long  handle  attach- 
ed to  the  latch.  The  defect  hitherto  disco- 
vered, is  that  the  trunk  is  not  long  enough  by 
aboiit  six  feet. 

This  species  of  trunk  Avas  first  tried  to 
save  the  water  of  a  small  branch  for  grinding 
gypsum,  in  a  simple  tub  mill,  built  for  that 
purpose.  Only  one  door,  and  no  latch  was 
necessary.     The  pressure  of  the  water  in  iht 


^6^  DRAISriKG. 

pond  was  such,  lliat  wlieii  bigli,  a  strong  eliain 
altaelied  well  to  tLe  door,  woiked  with  a  siiiall 
lever,  was  necessary  to  opeii  it.  A  hole  of 
two  inches  diameter,  kept  closed  with  a  ]Q.vgG 
peg,  to  he  pulled  out  hj  a  pole  fastened  to  iU 
was  resorted  to  for  diminishing'  tJie  resistance 
of  the  water,  and  caused  the  door  to  open 
more  easily.  And  the  end  of  saving  the  v.a- 
ter  was  very  well  effected. 

It  was  discovered  that  the  interval  water  to 
be  voided  by  the  trunk,  was  vastly  increased 
by  springs  passing  under  the  canak,  for  which 
there  was  no  remedy  hut  to  deepen  them.— 
This  reinccjy  was  a]>plied  to  the  small  one  with 
such  effect,  lliat  its  continuance,  until  the-  bot- 
tom in  its  whole  course  shall  he  brought  to  a 
level  with  the  water  at  low  tide,  is  confident- 
ly considered  as  a  certain  cure  for  the  evil.— 
The  number  aiid  size  of  the  springs  discover- 
ed, were   beyond  expectation,  and  the  inter- 
ception of  the  residi'c  is  considered  as  certaiiv 
rP/jc  hir^e  canal  could  not  he  deepened  hither- 
to, because  it  has  not  quite  finished  the  work 
of  alluvion.     But  there  will  ^e  no  diilicultv  in 
cutting  off  tlie  Eprii?f?:s  berxeath  it,  by  a  narrow 
ditch  in  the  centre.     For  when  this  work  is 
done,  the  obstructions  to  prevent  ihe  creek 
from  dcepenhig  itself,  will  be  removed,  and 
that  operation  will  both  lessen  the  Avoik  of  pe- 
netrating to  the  springs,  iind  also  bestow  upon 
Uie  bank  a  more  perfect  degree  of  strengtii. 


DEAINiKG.  265 

The  efforts  used  to  prevent  the  abrasion  of 
the  water  m  acute  angles,  eddies,  or  strong 
currents,  consisted  of  single  or  double  wattles 
of  green  cedar,  in  proper  decliviiies  vo  resist 
water,  and  to  retain  earth;  and  of  throwing 
all  stones  and  gravel  washed  from  the  base  of 
tlie  hills  cut  by  the  canal,  to  the  base  of  the 
bank.  The  bank  also,  generally,  had  covered 
itself  before  its  apertures,  for  allowing  a  pas- 
sage to  inundations,  were  closed,  with  a  stron™ 
tegument  of  shrubs,  weeds  or  grass  i  and  thescf 
several  remedies  against  the  attrition  of  the 
current,  have  hitherto  been  eifectual.  A  por- 
tion of  the  land  heretofore  flooded  by  coranioii. 
tides,  is  quite  dry,  and  will  be  this  year  culti- 
vated. After  widening  the  dam  by  alluvion, 
to  about  thirty  feet,  the  creek  will  no  longer 
be  kept  parallel  with  it,  but  will  be  sent 
straight  on  from  the  right  bank.  And  the 
bank  is  destined  to  the  use  of  apple  trees. 

The  sandy  soil  approximating  upon  most  or 
all  of  the  marshes  and  sunken  grounds  of  the 
Eastern  States,  seems  to  be  the  providential 
provision  of  the  means  for  reclaiming  them  ;, 
and  the  multitude  of  currents  passing  through 
this  soil,  are  like  vehicles  for  conveying  these 
means  to  the  necessary  positions.  They  are 
vehicles  which  disregard  distance,  travel  con- 
stantly, and  never  decay.  They  will  calk  the 
most  porous  soil,  overwhelm  the  stcpngest  vir- 

z  2 


ii66  TOBACCO. 

Diin,  and  follow  the  slightest  direction.  1  heir 
ejSbrts  may  be  aided  by  the  plough,  by  remov- 
ing obstructions,  and  by  tumbling  into  them 
sandy  declivities  with  little  labour,  near  to 
which  they  should  be  guided  for  that  purpose* 


IM  UMBER    0%^ 

TOBACCO. 

The  extent  of  country  yet  devoted  to  the 
cultivation  of  this  plant,  entitles  it  to  a  place 
in  an  Agricultural  ephemeris,  the  object  of 
wliieh,  is  to  kill  bad  habits,  and  to  be  killed  it- 
self by  a  complete  system.  Thepreservable- 
ness  of  tobacco,  endows  it  with  the  rare  capa- 
city of  wai^ling  for  a  market,  and  constituted 
a  recommendation  which  induced  me  to  culti- 
vate it  attentively  during  two  years.  Both 
cr^ps  succeeded  beyond  the  medium  tjalcula- 
llon,  and  the  experiments  still  exhibited  re- 
sults conclusively  proving  the  propriety  of  its 
?i])andonment.  These  I'csnlts  were  all  with 
ease  reduced  to  iigures.  It  was  easy  to  fix  the 
value  of  labour  bestowed  on  an  acre  of  tobae- 
fto,  and  on  its  crop  after  severance ;  and  en  an 
•acre  o^f  cQin  or  wheat,  with  the  preparation  of 


'TOBACCO,  ^67 

fiji  etop  also  for  market.  It  was  as  easy  to  as- 
certain the  produce  of  equal  soils,  and  price* 
were  settled  by  sales.  Siicli  estimates  demon* 
^trated  the  loss  of  growing  tobacco,  merely 
on  the  score  of  ann»tal  profit,  without  taking 
into  the  account,  the  formidable  obstacle  it 
constitutes  to  the  liuprovemeint  of  land. 

This  objection  is  not  founded  upon  the  erro- 
aeous  opinion,  that  it  is  peculiarly  an  impove- 
risher.     On  the  contrary,  my  impression  was, 
that  it  was  less  so,  than  any  other  crop  Iknew 
of,  except  cotton  and  the  sweet  potatoe.     But 
upon  its  enormous  consumption  of  labour,  and 
its  diminutive    returns  of  manure,  it  would 
startle  «yen  an  old  planter,  to  see  an  exact  ac- 
count of  the  labour  devoured  by  an  acre  of 
tobacco,  and  the  preparation  of  the  crop  for 
market.     Even  supposing  that  crop  to  amount 
to  the  extraordinary  quantity  of  one  thousand 
.pounds,  he  would  find  it  seldom,  if  ever,  pro- 
dueing  ^  profit  upon  a  fair  caleuiation.     He 
would  be  astonished  to  discover  how  often  he 
iuid  passed  over  tlie  land,  and  the  tobacco 
through  his  hands,  in  fallowing,  hilling,  out- 
ting  off  hills,  planting,  replantings,  toppings^ 
suckerings,  weedings,  cuttings,  picking  up^ 
removing  out  of  the  ground  by  hand,  hang'ing, 
striking,  stripping,  st-emming,  and  prizing,  and 
that  the  same  labour,  devoted  to  almost  any 
either  employment,  weald  have  produced  a 


^68  TOBACCOf. 

better  return  by  ordinary  success,  tlian  t(>ba<?» 
eo  does  by  the  extravagant  crop  I  have  sup- 
posed. 

Thougifc  its  profit  is  small  or  nothing,  its 
quality  of  starving  every  thing  exceeds  that 
of  any  other  crop.  It  starves  the  earth  by 
producing  but  little  litter,  and  it  starves  its 
eultivators,  by  producing  nothing  ta  eat.— 
Y/hatever  plenty  or  splendour  it  may  bestow 
on  its  owner,  the  soil  it  feeds  on  must  neces- 
sarily become  cadaverous,  and  its  cultivators 
squalid.  Nor  can  it  possibly  diifuse  over  the 
face  of  the  earth,  or  the  faces  of  its  inhabi- 
tants, tlic  exuberance  which  fiaw^s  from  ferti- 
lization, nor  the  happiness  which  flows  from 
plenty, 

A  substitute  is  the  object  of  enquiry,  after 
we  are  convinced  of  the  detrimental  nature 
of  any  crop.  When  floiip  sells  for  as  much  as 
tobacco,  by  the  pound,  wheat  would  be  a  cofii- 
plete  one,  at  any  distance  from  water  carriage  5 
but  as  that  is  seldom  the  case,  others  must  he 
sought  after.  The  extent  and  population  of 
the  country  within  reach  of  navigable  water, 
opens  to  the  tobacco  districts  a  wide  market, 
for  the  disposal  of  many  better  substitutions. 
Horses,  mules,  beef  and  pork,  would  more 
than  suffice  to  replace  all  the  advantages  lost 
by  relinquishing  the  cull»Ure  of  tobacco ;  and 
materials  for  manufacturing,  with  manufac- 


TOBACCO*  269 

im'mg  itself,  would  aiiiply  provide  for  any  pos* 
sible  defieieiicj.  The  market  for  live  stoek 
and  mealvis  so  great  and  vahiable  iathe  bread 
stuff  districts  of  the  Eastern  waters^  as  to  at- 
tract supplies  from  quarters  far  beyond  tbe 
narrow  tobacco  belt,  witk  wliiek  they  are  im- 
mediately surrounded  |  and  if  it  is  a  question 
in  the  best  cultivated  countries^  whether  graz- 
ing and  breeding  live  stock,  even  upon  the 
margin  of  navigation,  is  not  the  most  profitci- 
ble  Agricultural  employment ;  every  doubt 
vanishes  in  comparing  it  with  the  culture  of 
tobacco,  in  situations  where  the  capacity  of 
walking  to  market  wiit  create  a  considerable 
item  of  that  comparison. 

The  system  of  Agriculture  for  a  bread  stuff 
farm,  according  to  the  experience  I  have  had^ 
requires  live  stock  sufficient  to  consume  amh 
reduce  to  manure,  every  species  of  provendei'^ 
and  littery  in  eiTecting, which,  a  sufficiency  of 
meat  may  be  provided  for  the  labourers,  either 
without  expenec,  or  even  producing  a  proiit. 
But  if  I  am  right  in  coricluding,  that  tlie  live 
stock  of  such  a  farju  ought  to  stop  at  that 
point,  wliC^icvcF  its  siluiitioi:  renders  the  ex. 
peiice  of  transporting  its  gruiii  ig  market  tri- 
vial, it  foilov.  •,  that  a  vast  niiciket  would  re- 
main far  the  u^qvA  and  ^ live  stock  of  the  to- 
liaeco  district.,  consisting  of  towns,  artizans, 
a,ll  who  live  by  professions  and  thQ  interest  of 


money ;  and  of  the  bread  stuff  farmers  them- 
selves, as  to  horses  and  mules,  the  breeding  of 
"which  is  excluded  bj  this  system  ;  and  as  to 
pork  also,  whereyer  a  better  mode  of  raising 
it  than  the  present,  shall  not  be  adopted. 

Having  had  no  experi43nce  of  a  farm  devot- 
ed to  raising  iiv^  stock,  my  observations  are 
conjectural.  It  seems  to  me  that  manuring 
might  be  carried  much  farther,  where  the 
^vhGIe  produce  was  consumed  on  the  land,  than 
when  a  part  of  it  was  exported  |  that  the  pro- 
duct might  be  therefore  more  rapidly  increas- 
<sd,  and  the  space  cultivated,  diminished  ;  and 
that  the  herbaceous  and  succulent  crops  would 
so  far  banish  the  use  of  those  more  exhaust- 
ing, as  greatly  to  accelerate  the  improve- 
Bient  of  the  exhausted  tobacco  district,  and 
to  insure  an  immediate  or  very  near  return 
of  profit,  exclusively  of  a  return  of  comfoi't, 
far  exceeding  that  to  which  it  has  been  aft- 
customed. 


*rtSE  ECd*fOMY  271 


Number  5s  , 

J'he  Economif  of  Jlgrkulliiveo 

There  is  no  subject  less  uiiderst.ood,  »or 
more  generallj  mistaken  than  this  ;  nor  any 
more  essential  to  the  prosperity  of  Agricul- 
ture. Sufficient  to  afibrd  matter  for  an  en- 
tire treatise,  it  cannot  be  embraced  hj  a  short 
cliapteT.  But  a  short  chapter  may  put  minds 
upon  the  tract,  able  to  unfold  its  involutions 
Vt  ith  every  braneli  of  Agriculture,  and  more 
specially  to  disclose  its^  value. 

Diminutions  of  comforts,  necessaries  and 
expense,  are  too  often  mistaken  for  the  means 
of  producing  the  ends  they  obstruct ;  and  the 
rapacity  >^hich  staTves,  frequently  Tec  elves 
tlie  just  retribution  of  a  disappointment,  be- 
gotten by  a  vieious  mode  of  avoid ilig  it. — 
From  the  master  down  to  the  meanest  uten- 
sil, the  best  capacity  for  fulfilling  the  con- 
templated ends,  is  invariably  the  best  econo- 
my; and  ihe.  same  reasoniog  which  demon- 
strates tiie  bad  economy  of  a  shattered  loom, 
will  demonstrate  i\\e  bad  economy  of  a  shat- 
tered constitution,  or  an  imperfect  state  of 
body.  The  cottagers  who  inflict  upon  them- 
selves and  tlieir  families  tlie  discomforts  of 


J^7%  0:»    AO-RICl'LTeSE. 

cold  liouses,  liad  bedding  and  insufficient 
«lotliirig,  to  acquire  wealth,  destroy  the  vi- 
gour both  of  the  mind  arid  body,  necessary  for 
sttaiiiiog  the  t^ontemplateil  end,  at  ^YhIch,  of 
course,  they  can  nevcT  arrive.  The  farmer 
who  starves  his  slav^3s,  is  a  still  greater  suf- 
ferer. He  loses  the  profits  produced  by  health, 
strength  and  alacrity  ^  tind  suffers  the  losses 
caused  by  disease,  abort  life,  weaiincss  and  dc- 
jection.  A  portion  or  the  v.hole  of  i\ie  profit, 
arising  from  their  increase  is  also  lost.  Mr»re- 
over,^ he  is  exposed  to  various  iiijuiies  from 
the  vices  inspired  by  severe  privations,  und  re- 
jects the  best  sponsor  for  his  happinessj  a^ 
well  as  prosperity,  by  banishing  the  soUk  e  of 
labour.  In  like  manner  the  more  perfect,  the 
more  profitable  are  working  animals  and  im- 
plements, and  every  sAvlng  by  wiheh  the  ca- 
pacity of  either  to  fuUHl  their  destiny  in  the 
best  manner  is  diminished,  termiiiates  with 
certainty  in  some  portion  ^f  loss,  and  not  un- 
freqriently  hi  extravagant  waste.  Even  the  ob- 
ject of  manuring  is  vastly  aifeeted  by  the 
pliglit  of  those  animals,  by  which  it  is  aided. 

A  pinchinp^  miserly  system  of  Agriculture, 
mny  indeed  keep  a  fiiriner  out  of  a  prison,  but 
it  will  never  lodge  him  in  a  palaee.  Great 
profit  depends  on  great  impr-UYCUients  of  tJie 
soil,  and  great  im.pr',>ve:"?frits  can  never  be 
made  by  penurious  eJforts.     The  discrimina- 


THE  ECOBTOMr^  273 

tion  between  useful  and  productive,  and  useless 
and  barren  expences,  contains  the  Agricultu-* 
ral  secret,  for  acquiring  happiness  and  wealtli. 
A  good  farmer  will  sow  the  first  with  an  open 
hand,  and  eradicate  every  seed  of  the  other. 

Liberality  constitutes  the  economy  of  Agri- 
cultiire,  and  perhaps  it  is  the  solitary  human 
occupation,  to  which  the  adage  ''  the  more  we 
give,  the  more  we  shall  receive*'  can  be  justly 
applied.  Liberality  to  the  earth  in  manuring 
and  culture,  is  the  fountain  of  its  bounty  to 
us.  Liberality  to  slaves  and  w^orking  aninials 
is  the  fountain  of  their  profit.  Liberality  to 
domestic  brutes  is  the  fountain  of  manure- 
By  raising  in  proper  modes  a  sufficiency  of 
meat  for  our  labourers,  we  bestow  a  strength 
upon  their  bodies,  and  a  fertility  upon  the 
ground,  either  of  which  will  recompence  us 
for  the  expence  of  the  meat,  and  the  other 
will  be  a  profit.  The  good  work  of  a  strong 
team,  causes  a  profit  beyond  the  bad  work  of 
a  weak  one,  after  deducticg  the  additional  ex- 
pense of  feeding  it ;  and  it  saves  moreover 
half  the  labour  of  a  driver,  sunk  in  following 
a  bad  one.  Liberality  in  warm  houses  produ- 
ces health,  strength  and  comfort ;  preserves 
the  lives  of  a  multitude  of  domestic  animals ; 
causes  all  animal^  to  thrive  on  less  food ;  and 
secures  from  damage  all  kinds  of  crops.  And 
liberality  iit  the  utensils  of  husbandry,  saves 

i  a 


L^our  to  a  yast  extent,  by  providing  the  ^m 
per  tools  for  doing  the  work  both  >yell  and  ex< 
peditioiislj. 

Foresight  is  another  item,  in  the  eeonomy 
of  Agriculture.  It  consists  in  preparing 
work  for  all  yyeather,  and  doing  all  work  in 
proper  w  eather,  and  at  proper  times.  The 
climate  of  the  ^United  States  makes  the  first 
easy,  and  the  second  less  difficult  than  ia  most 
countries,  lliiinous  violations  of  this  impor- 
tant rule  are  y^t  frequent  from  temper  and 
i mpatien ce.  Nothing  is  more  common  than  a 
persistance  in  ploughing,  making  hay,  cutting 
Vfheat..  and  other  works,  when  a  small  delay 
might  have  escaped  a  great  loss ;  and  the  la- 
]>our  employed  to  destroy,  would  have  been 
employed  to  save*  -Crops  of  all  kinds  are  of- 
ten planted  or  sown  at  improper  periods  or 
unseasonably,  in  relation  to  the  state  of  the 
weatlier,  to  their  detriment  or  destruction, 
fr©m  the  want  of  tin  arrangementof  tlie  work 
on  a  farm,  calculated  for  doing  eveiy  species 
of  it  precisely  at  the  periods,  and  in  the  sea- 
sons, most  likely  to  enhance  its  pi  ofit. 

A  third  item  in  the  economy  of  Agiiculture 
5s  not  to  kill  tioie  by  doing  the  same  thing 
twice  ove?.  However  laboriously  at  work# 
we  are  doing  notliing  during  one  of  the  ope> 
rations,  and  frequently  woi  se  than  nothing, 
Ott  account  of  Uxe  double  dctrimcflt  of  U)^i 


0»  AGBICVLTITRB^  '27^ 

•flRwns  and  clothing.  The  losses  to  farmers 
occasioned  bj  this  error  are  prodigious  under 
every  defective  system  of  Agriculture,  and 
under  ours  are  enormously  enhanced  by  the 
habit  of  sharing  in  the  crop  with  an  annual 
overseer.  Shifts  and  contrivances  innumera- 
ble are  resorted  to,  for  saving  present  time, 
by  bad  atid  perishable  work,  at  an  enormous 
loss  of  future  time^  until  at  length  the  several 
fragmients  of  time  thus  destroyed,  visibly  ap- 
pear spread  over  a  farm,  in  the  form  of  ru- 
ined houses,  fences,  orchards  and  soil;  de- 
monstrating that  every  advantage  of  such 
Shifts  i?»  the  parent  of  many  disadvantages, 
land  that  a  habit  of  finishing  every  species  of 
ivork  in  the  best  mode,  is  the  best  economy* 

The  high  importance  of  tliis  article  of  Agri- 
tulturai  economy,  demands  an  illustration.-i- 
!Let  us  suppose  that  dead  wood  fencing  will 
eoiisnme  ten  per  centum  of  a  farmer's  time, 
which  supposition  devotes  about  thirty-six 
ilays  in  the  year  to  that  object.  It  would  cost 
him  ^ve  whole  years  in  fifty.  If  Ms  farm  af- 
forded stone,  and  his  force  could  in  one  whole 
year  make  his  inclosures  of  that  lasting  ma- 
teriai,  he  w  onld  save  four  w  hole  years  hj  this 
Sfiore  perfect  operation  ;  exclusive  of  the  be- 
nefits gained  by  a  longer  life,  or  ti'an&mitled 
to  his  posterity.  If  his  farm  did  not  furnish 
stone,  as  live  fences  ca»  be  made  with  infinite* 


^76  THE   ECONOMY 

}y  less  labour  than  stone,  his  saving  of  time 
M  oiild  be  greater  by  raising  them,  but  the  do- 
nation to  posterity  less,  from  their  more  pe-- 
rishable  nature.  It  seems  to  rae  that  the  time 
necessary  to  rear  and  repair  live  fences,  is  less 
than  one  tenth  of  that  consumed  by  those  of 
dead  wood.  By  doing  this  article  of  work  in 
a  mode  thus  surpassing  the  present  miserable 
fencing  shifts  in  use,  our  farmers  would  gain 
the  enormous  profit  of  four  years  and  an  half 
in  fifty,  and  an  entire  country,  that  of  nine 
years  in  each  hundred.  Time  constitutes  pro- 
lit  or  loss  in  Agriculture,  and  many  other  em- 
ployments. Such  an  enormous  loss  is  itself 
^ullicient  to  bankrupt  the  soil  of  a  fine  cm)uu- 
try.  Transformed  into  an  equivalent  gain^ 
the  diiferenee  of  eighteen  per  centum  to  the 
Same  country  might  retrieve  it.  The  case 
simply  consists  of  the  difference  between  pay- 
ing and  receiving  enormous  usury,  for  the  sake 
pf  growing  I'ich. 

I  have  selected  a  few  items  merely  to  at- 
tract the  reader's  attention  to  the  economy  of^ 
Agriculture,  that  his  own  sagacity  may  pursue 
the  subject  beyond  the  limits  assigned  to  these 
essays.  It  is  one  highly  necessary  to  all  prac- 
tical men,  and  worthy  of ,  the  minute  conside- 
ration of  the  most  profound  mind;  nor  do  I 
know  one  exliibiting  to  experience  and  talents 
a  stronger  invitation  to  make  fhemscilves 
useful. 


op  AGRICULTUmi3.  if^ 


Number  59, 

iiie  Pleasures  qf  Jlgrkulturc. 

In  free  countries  are  more,  and  in  enslaveH, 
fewer,  than  the  pleasures  of  most  other  em- 
ployments.    The  reason  of  it  is,  that  Agricul- 
ture both  from  its  nature,  and  also  as  being 
generally  the  employment  of  a  great  portion, 
of  a  nation,  cannot  be  united  with  power  con- 
sidered as  an  exclusive  interest.     It  must  of 
course  be  enslaved,  wherever  despotism  exists, 
and  its  masters  will  enjoy  more  pleasures  in 
that  case,  than  it  can  ever  reach.     On  the 
contrary,  where  power  is  not  an  exclusive,  but 
a  general  interest.  Agriculture  can  employ  its 
own  energies  for  the  attainment  of  its  ow^a 
happiness.  — ^^— ^ 

Under  a  free  government  it  has  before  ^ 
the  inexhaustible  sources  of  human  pleasure, 
of  fitting  ideas  to  substances  and  substances 
to  ideas ;  and  of  a  constant  rotation  of  hop^ 
and  fruition* 

The  novelty,  frequency  and  exactness  of  ac- 
commodations between  our  ideas  and  opera- 
tions, constitutes  the  most  exquisite  souree  of 
Hiental  pleasure.  Agrieiiltiire  feeds  it  with 
endless^  supplies  in  the  natures  of  soils,  plants 


^78  THE   PLEASURES 

«;limates,  manures,  instruments  of  culture  and 
domestic  animals.  Their  combinations  are 
inexhaustible,  the  novelty  of  results  is  endless, 
discrimination  and  adaption  are  never  idle,  and 
an  unsatiated  interest  receives  ^ratiiieations 
in  quick  succession. 

Benevolence  is  so  closely  associated  witk 
this  interestj  that  its  exertion  in  numberless 
instances,  is  necessarv  to  foster  it,     Liberali- 
ty  in  supplying  its  labourers  m  ith  the  comforts 
of  life,  is  the  best  sponsor  for  the  prosperity 
of  Agriculture^  and  the  practice  of  alnios.v 
every  moral  virtue  is  amply  remunerated  in 
this  world,  whilst  it  is  also  t\\^  best  surety  for 
attaining  the  blessings  of  the  next.    Poetry  in 
alio wi Tig  more  virtue  to  Agriculture,  than  to 
any  other  profession,  has  abandoned  lier  pri- 
vilege of  iiction,  and  ^delded  to  the  natural 
moral  eifect  of  the  absence  of  temptation. — 
The  same  fact  is  commemorated  by  religion, 
upon  an  occasion  the  most  solemn,  within  the 
scope  of  the  human  imagination.     At  the  aw- 
ful day  of  judgment,    the  discrimination  of 
the  good  from  the  wicked,  is  not  made  by  the 
criterion  of  sects  or  of  dogmas,  but  by  one 
.  which  constitutes  the  daily  employment  and 
the  great  end  of  Agriculture.     The  judge  up- 
on this  occasion  has  by  anticipation  pronounc- 
ed, that  to  feed  the  hungry,  clothe  the  naked, 
tSind  give  drink  iKi  the  thirsty,  are  the  passports 


OF  AGlUCUr.TURE.  279 

*  to  future  happiness  ;  and  the  divine  inteMi- 
gence  which  selected  an  Agricultiiral  state  as 
a  paradise  for  its  first  favourites,  has  bere 
again  prescribed  the  xigrieulturalviFtues  as 
the  means  for  the  admission  of  their  posieri- 
tj  iuto  heaven. 

With  the  pie?isures  of  religion,  xlgriculture 
unites   those  of  patriotism,  and  among'  the 
worthy  competitors  for  pre-eminence  in  the 
practice  of  this  cardinal  virtue,  a  profound 
author  assigns  a  high  station  to  him,  who  has 
made  two  hlades  of  grass  grow  instead  of  one  ; 
an  idea  capable  of  a  signal  amplification,  hj  a 
coiisparison  between  a  system  of  Agriculture 
which  doubles  the  fertility  of  a  country,  and 
a  successful  war  which  doubles  its  territory. 
By  the  first,  the  territory  itself  is  also  sub- 
stantially doubled,  without  wasting  the  lives, 
the  wealth,  or  the  liberty  of  the  nation  which 
has  thus  suhdued  sterility,  and  drawn  prospe- 
rity from  a  willing  source.     By  the  secom^ 
the  blood  pretended  to  be  enriched,  is  spilt ; 
the  wealth  pretended  to  be  increased,  is  wast- 
ed ;  the  liberty  said  to  be  secured,  is  immo- 
lated to  the  patriotism  of  a  victorious  army  ; 
and  desolation  in  every  form  is  made  to  stalk 
in  the  glittering  garb  of  false  glory,  through- 
out some  nei^'hbouring  country.     Moral  law 
decides  Oie  preference  with  undeviating  eon- 
sisteney,  in  assigning  to  the  satioir^  which 


280-  THE   PiB A^SUTJE S 

elects  true  patriotism,  the  reeoiapeiiee  «f 
truth,  and  to  th«  electors  of  the  false,  the  ex- 
piatioii  of  error.  To  the  respective  ageats 
the  same  law  assigTis  the  remorses  of  a  con- 
queror, and  the  quiet  conscience  of  the  Agi4* 
csuiturist* 

The  capacity  of  Agriculttire  for  affording 
luxuries  to  the  body,  is  not  le&s  conspicuous 
than  its  capacity  for  affording  luxuries  to  tliC 
mind,*  it  being  a  science  singularly  possessing 
the  double  qualities  of  feeding  with  unbounded 
liberality,  both  the  moral  appetites  of  the  one^ 
and  the  physical  wants  of  the  other.  It  can 
even  feed  a  morbid  love  of  money,  whilst  it  is 
habituating  us  to  the  practice  of  vii*tue ;  and 
whilst  it  provides  for  the  wants  of  the  philo- 
sopher, it  affords  him  ample  room  for  the  most 
curious  and  jet  useful  researches.  In  short, 
by  the  exercise  it  gives  both  to  the  body  and 
to  the  mind,  it  secures  health  and  vigour  to 
both  ;  and  by  combiiiing  a  thorough  knowledge 
of  the  real  affairs  of  life,  with  a  necessity  for 
investigating  the  arcana  of  nature,  and  the 
strongest  invitations  to  the  practice  ol*  mora- 
lity, it  becomes  the  best  architect  of  a  com- 
plete man. 

If  this  eulogy  should  succeed  in  awakening 
the  attention  of  men  of  science  to  a  skilful 
practice  of  Agriculture,  they  will  become 
models  for  individuals^  and  guardians  for  na- 


OF  A-GBICTTLTURE,  281 

tional  happiness.  The  discoveries  of  th^ 
learned  will  be  practised  by  the  ignorant ;  and 
a  system  which  sheds  happiness,  plenty  and 
virtue  all  around,  will  be  gradually  substituted 
for  one,  which  fosters  vice,  breeds  want,  an4 
begets  misery. 

Politicians  (who  ought  to  know  the  most^ 
and  generally  know  the  least,  of  a  science  in 
which  the  United  States  are  more  deeply  in- 
terested than  in  any  other)  will  appear,  of 
more  practical  knowledge,  or  at  least  of  bet- 
ter theoretical  instruction  ;  and  the  hopeless 
liahit  of  confiding  our  greatest  interest  to  peor 
^le  most  ignorant  of  it,  will  be  abandoned. 

The  errors  of  politicians  ignorant  of  Agri* 
culture,  or  their  projects  designed  to  oppress 
it,  can  only  rob  it  of  its  pleasures,  and  consign 
it  to  contempt  and  misery.  This  revolution  of 
its  natural  state  is  invariably  effected  by  war, 
armieSi  heavy  taxes  or  exclusive  priviliges.-^ 
In  two  eases  alone,  have  nations  ever  gained 
any  thing  by  war.  Those  of  repelling  inva- 
sion, and  emigrating  into  a  more  fruitful  ter- 
ritory. In  every  other  ease,  the  industrious 
of  all  professions  suffer  by  Wa?,  the  effects  of 
which  in  its  modern  form,  are  precisely  the 
same  to  the  victorious  and  the  vanquished  na- 
tion. The  least  evil  to  be  apprehended  from 
victorious  armies,  is  a  pcroianent  system  of 
heavy  ta^ation^  than  which,  nothing  can  more 


Titaliy  wound  or  kill  tlie  pleasures  of  A^nM^  ^ 
ture.  Of  the^ame  stamp  are  exclusiTe  prirr- 
leges  ia  every  form ;  and  to  pillage  or  steal  ua 
dertiie  sanction  of  tli©  statute  book,  isiio  less 
fatal  to  the  happiness  of  AgriGuiture,  tliaa 
tlie  hierarchical  tyranny  over  the  soul,  under 
the  pretended  sanction  of  God,  or  the  feudal 
tyranny  over  the  body,  under  the  equally  frau- 
dulent pretence  of  defending  the  nation.  lo 
^  clinicite  and  soil,  where  good  culture  nevei* 
fails  to  beget  plenty,  where  bad  cannot  pro^ 
duce  famine,  begirt  by  nature  against  the 
risque  of  invasion,  and  favoured  by  accident 
with  the  power  of  self  ►goYernments  Agricul^ 
^re  can  only  lose  its  happiness  by  the  folly 
m  firaud  of  statesmen,  or  by  its  o^vn  ignorant* 


The  Uights  of:  tigricuUure, 

ft  is  lamentable  to  confess,  that  this,  to  be 
*tri!e,  must  be  almost  a  ne.*>;ative  number.— 
This  most  usel\il  and  virtuous  interest,  enjo\$ 
HO  rights,  except  in  the  United  States;  and 
there  it  enjoys  no  exclusive  rights,  whilst  the 
fe.w  in  which  it  shares  are  daily  contracted  hx 


to  AGHI€tJI.TtJll».  ^83 

'Hie  V^tKHis  ^Tts  of  ambition  and  avai4e#.  Ere- 
yy  "where  else,  Agrieulture  is  a  slave;  liei*e 
'She  is  only  a  diipe.  Abroad  she  is  condemneBi 
hj  avowed  force  to  feed  voluptuousness,  ava- 
i»ice  and  ambition  ;  here  she  is  deluded  by  flat- 
tery and  craft,  during  fits  of  joy  or  of  fury^ 
to  squander  her  property,  to  mortgage  her  la- 
bourers, and  to  shackle  her  freedom.  Abroad, 
dhe  suffers  contempt,  and  is  sensible  of  her 
vdegradation  ;  here,  she  is  a  blind  Quixote 
mounted  on  a  wooden  horse,  and  persuaded  by 
the  acclamations  of  her  foes,  that  she  is  soar- 
ing to  the  stars,  whilst  slic  is  ready  to  tumble 
iato  the  dust. 

Privileges  are  rearing  by  laws  all  around  at 
tier  expense,  and  Avhilst  she  is  taught  to  be- 
lieve that  they  will  only  take  fraic  ,hcr  a  few 
inconsiderable  siipes,  they  will  at  leisgth  draw 
a  spacious  cireumvaliatioH,  within  which  will 
gradually  grow  up.  a  power,  beyond  her  con ^ 
tp«].  Tricks,  as  well  as  inventions  are  daily 
fortified  with  legal  bulwarks,  called  charters, 
to  transfer  her  wealth,  and  to  secure  frauds 
against  her  efforts.  Capital  in  every  form, 
save  that  of  Agriculture,  is  fed  by  taxes  and 
fey  bounties,  which  she  must  pay  ;  whilst  r^at  a 
single  bounty  is  paid  to  her  by  capital  in  any 
form ;  and  instead  of  being  favoured-  with 
some  prizes  in  the  lottery  of  society,  she  pays 
znos^  and  is  rewarded  herself  by  the  blanks 


SS4»  THE   IlIGHI^ 

of  tin(krwrltmg  the  projects   o^  staft^smeii, 
and  bearing  the  burthens  of  government. 

The  use  of  society,  is  to  secure  the  fruits 
of  his  own  industry  iiiid  talents  to  each  asso- 
ciator.  Its  abuse  consists  in  artifice  or  forcCf 
for  transferring  those  fruits  from  some  pai;t- 
ners  to  others.  Of  this  abuse,  that  interest 
covering  the  majority  of  partners  is  the  vic- 
tim. And  the  ditiiculty  of  discriminating 
laws,  transferring  such  fruits  for  the  benefit  of 
society,  from  those  having  in  view  the  gratifi- 
cation of  avarice  and  ambition,  produces  a 
sympathy  and  combination  betweeii  these^dis- 
tinet  kinds  of  law.  As  the  members  of  the 
government,  and  the  members  of  legal  frauds, 
both  extract  power  and  income  from  the  ma- 
jority, they  are  apt  to  coalesce ;  and  each  par- 
ty to  favour  the  designs  of  its  ally,  in  their 
^operations  upon  the  common  enemy.  Hence 
governments  love  to  create  exclusive  rights, 
and  i?xclusive  rights  cling  to  governments.— 
The  ligament  of  parent  and  child  binds  them 
together,  and  the  power  creating  these  abuses, 
must  make  them  props  for  its  support,  or  in- 
struments for  its  subversion.  Its  election  be- 
tween these  alternatives  is  certain,  and  society 
is  thus  unavoidably  thrown  into  two  divisions. 
One  containing  all  those  who  pay,  and  the 
other,  those  Aviio  receive  contributions,  requir- 
es! either  for  public  use>  or  ta  foster  private 


01^  AGRICULTURE.  285 

uvavjce  or  ambition.  Good  government  is 
.graduated  by  tbis  latter  kind  of  contribution 
tbiis  unfortunately  allied  to  the  former.  Tbe 
bi^^'best  amount  constitutes  tbe  worst,  and  tbe 
lowest,  the  best  possible  species  of  govern^ 
ment.  But  as  both  are  drawn  from  the  ma- 
jority of  every  society,  wlienever  tbe  Agricul- 
tural interest  covers  that  majority,  this  inte* 
rest  is  tbe  victim  of  tbe  coalition ;  and  as  it 
ulmost  universally  does  cover  this  majority, 
the  Agricultural  interest  is  almost  universally 
its  slave. 

The  consequences  to  Agriculture  will  be  de- 
monstrated by  converting  this  coalition  be- 
tween government  and  its  creatures,  or  of  all 
who  receive  toils  given  by  law,  into  a  political 
pope,  and  placing  in  his  mouth  an  address  to 
Agriculture,  in  a  parody  of  Ernulphus's  form 
of  excommunicatioli. 

^*'  May  you  be  taxed  in  your  lands,  youi' 
slaves,  your  houses,  your  carriages,  your  hor- 
ses, your  clothing,  your  liquors,  your  coffee, 
your  tea  and  yoiir  salt.  May  you  be  taxed  by 
banks,  by  protecting  duties,  by  embargoes, 
mnd  by  charters  of  a  thousand  different  forms. 
May  the  exemption  of  your  exports  from  tax- 
ation be  removed,  and  may  you  then  be  taxed 
through  your  y»lieat,  your  corn,  your  tobacco^ 
your  cottoa,  your  rice,  your  Indigo,  your  su- 
gar, your  hemp,  your  live  stock,  your  beis^ 

s  h 


'286  THE    RIGHTS 

jonr  pork,  your  tar,  pitch  and  turpentine,  your 
osiions,  youi*  clieesie,  and  your  potatoes.  May 
you  be  taxed  for  the  support  of  gorernmeu^ 
or  to  enrich  exclusive  or  chartered  interests, 
through  every  article  you  import,  and  througli 
HYery  article  you  export,  by  duties  called  pro- 
tecting, but  intended  to  take  away  your  con- 
stitutijoual  protection  against  taxation  for  the 
benefit  of  capitalists.  May  you  be  taxed 
throisgh  every  article  produced  by  your  labour 
or  necessary  to  your  subsistenee,  comfort  and 
pleasure,  hj  excises*  And  whilst  every  spe- 
cies of  your  products,  and  of  your  consump- 
tions are  thus  taxed,  may  your  capital,  being 
visible,  be  moreover  taxed  in  various  modes. — ^ 
]\Iay  all  these  taxes  whether  plain  or  intricate 
(after  deducting  the  small  sum  necessary  to 
produce  the  genuine  end  of  society)  be  employ- 
fd  in  enriching  capitalists,  and  buying  sol- 
diers, placemen  and  eontractors,  to  make  you 
submissive  to  usurpations,  and  as  quiet  under 
your  burthens,  as  a  martyr  tied  to  the  stake, 
under  the  flames.  After  you  have  been  taxed 
as  far  as  you  can  pay,  may  you  by  the  bounty 
of  God  Almighty  be  moreover  ifiortgaged  up 
to  your  value  or  cicdit,  for  the  benefit  of  the 
said  coalition  of  capitalists.  And  iinaily,  may 
none  of  this  good  and  useful  coalition,  to  whom 
is  given  the  wealth  of  this  world,  as  the  king- 
dom of  heaven  is  to  the  pope  and  Lis  clergy* 


OT   AGRlCrLTURE*  287 

be  taxed  in  tlieir  stock  or  principal  held  under 
any  law  or  charter  whatsoever ;  nor  in  their 
capital  employed  in  any  manufacture  or  spe- 
culation ;  nor  in  any  profit  drawn  from  such 
principal  stock  or  capital  5  nor  through  any  of 
their  sinecures,  salaries,  contracts  or  incomes; 
hut  on  the  contrary,  may  such  stock,  princi- 
pal, capital,  profits,  saliaries,  contracts  and  si- 
necures, be  constantly  fostered  by  bounties  in 
various  injurious  forms,  to  be  paid  by  you,  you 
damned  dirty  working,  productive  bitch  Agri- 
culture.^* Throughout  the  world,  Agricul- 
ture, like  one  of  Ernulphus's  contrite  excom- 
Biunicants,  responds,  amen,  to  thig  pious  in- 
vocation. 

Tliroughout  the  world  Agriculture  has  en- 
joyed, and  in  England,  continues  to  enjoy,  one 
of  the  rights  in  which  she  has  a  share  in  the 
United  States ;  that  of  a  voice  in  elections.— 
And  throughout  the  world,  this  right  has  been 
unable  to  shield  her  against  an  anathejna, 
which  prescribes  for  her  as  perfect  a  hell,  as 
the  formula  of  Ernulphus  prescribes  for  his 
heretlck.  Let  the  Agricultural  interest  of 
tlie  United  States,  pause  here  and  look  around,. 
Is  a  blind  confidence  in  a  night  so  universally 
ineffectual,  a  sufficient  safeguard  for  its  free- 
dom and  happiness  ?  To  me  it  seems,  that  an 
interest  can  never  be  long  free,  which  blindly 
esniides  m  a  coalition,  whose  object  it  is  to 


288  THE    mGHT^ 

draw  from  that  interest,  power  and  ^\Tailho—- 
Tliat  the  Biajor  interest  must  be  as  cunnings 
as  wise  and  as  watchful,  as  the  minor,  or  that 
the  minor  interest  will  enslaye  it.  And  tliat 
Agriculture  must  as  attentively  keep  her  eyes 
upon  the  coalition,  to  avoid  its  operations  upoa 
her,  as  the  coalition  (Tees  imon  Agriculture,  for 
^he  purpose  of  transferring  to  its  meiiibers 
portions  of  her  power  and  wealth,  whenever 
'£!ic  slumbers. 

Hence  have  arisen  the  political  suggestions 
to  be  found  in  these  essays.  I  cannot  discern 
iiiueh  good  in  an  improvement  of  Agriculture, 
to  get  luxury,  voluptuousness  and  tyranny  for 
a  few,  and  wretchedness  for  a  multitude.—- 
The  best  cultivated  country  in  the  world, 
abounds  most  in  paupers  and  thieves.  Agri- 
cultiire  must  be  a  politician  to  avoid  this  fate  | 
and  those  who  ridicule  her  pretensions  to 
knowledge  in  this  science,  intend  by  persuad- 
ing her  to  repose  in  a  blind  confidence,  built 
upon  the  frail  right  of  election,  to  expose  her 
to  it.  How  can  she  even  judiciously  elect,  if 
she  cannot  or  will  not  judge  of  public  mea- 
sures, bv  the  liglit  of  her  own  interest  ? 

The  moral  consequence  of  this  supineness 
or  ignorance,  is,  that  social  happiness  gradual- 
ly becomes  the  dependent  of  a  minority,  and 
of  course  it  is  provided  for,  by  conlirjuallv 
subtracting  from  the  happiness  of  a  majority. 


4 

03?   AGKlCULTUEE.  2S^ 


5Phe  visible  immorality  of  this,  demonstraters 
the  virtue,  as  well  as  wisdom  of  sug.^'eslioiis, 
designed  to  obstruct  it. 

The  remaining  right  in  which  Agriculhirc 
participates,  in  common  with  all  other  inte- 
rests having  any  thing  to  export,  is  bestow- 
ed by  the  constitutional  prohibition  of  duties 
upon  exports.     This  right  originated  in  state 
jealousies,  and  not  from  a  disposition  to  favour 
Agricultiire  ;  hut  yet  it  is  her  best  security, 
for  the  preservation  of  timt  portion  of  our 
government,  which  will  longest  be  sensible  of 
her  elective  influence  ;  and  its  relinquishment, 
will  be  the  most  fatal  wound  which  can  be  in- 
flicted on  her.     The  coalition  I  have  describ- 
ed will  try  ever^'  art  in  her  most  unguarded 
moments,  to  snatch  it  from  her,  and  it  will  be 
the  Jast  relinquishment  it  \fill  need.     To  de- 
termine  whether  her  elective  influence  can 
bear  further  wounds,  let  Agriculture  resurvey 
the  legislation  of  our  whole  term  of  indepen- 
dence, and  compare  the  catalogues  she  may  se*- 
lect,  of  laws  for  creating  or  fostering  privi- 
leges and  exclusive  interests,  with  those  iov 
fostering   herself;   and   let  this   comparison 
form  the  criterion  for  ascertaining  her  legis- 
lative influence.     Thus  only  can  she  judicious- 
ly increase  this  influence,  if  it  has  settled  too 
low,  or  diminish  it,  if  it  has  raised  too  high. 
There  is  no  fair  mode  of  judging,  except  by 

M  h  2 


^90  AGBICUlTUEjl 

these  legislative  acts.  To  infeiv  that  the 
Agricultural  interest  influences  legislatures 
because  it  chiefly  elects  them,  would  be  like 
inferring,  that  the  French  nation  influences 
the  trihunate,  heeause  thej  wholly  elect  it.-— 
Let  Agriculture  therefore  hold  fast  the  soli- 
tary security  she  enjoys  in  common  with  her 
industrious  associates,  against  the  ambition  of 
usurpers,  and  the  avarice  qf  capitalists,  nor 
be  deluded  into  the  absurd  notion,  that  it  is 
wise  to  relinquish  the  only  peculium  of  indus- 
try, for  the  sake  of  some  temporary  operation 
upon  foreign  nations,  inevitably  result] ng  up- 
on herself  in  the  form  of  retaliation,  whilst 
the  protection  of  exports  against  taxations 
will  be  gone  for  ever. 


Number  61. 

AgrkuUuref  and  the  Militia — 

Tbe  rocks  cf  our  salvation ;  as  they  are 
tailed  by  Icgislatiircs,  presidents,  |L»'overnors, 
and  tot/il -jriakers,  throisgboiit  the  Upitecl 
State?  \  -i?  u  bard  rockj?  indeed  they  need  be, 
to  wiUiStarir?  the  sa>ys,  wedges,  and  chisels, 
Xttjjde  by  ixiW;  to  cut^  £^:il  and  chip  ihcni  io 


AN^  THE   MiriTIA.  '     291 

pieces.  It  is  probable  that  more  talents  were 
wasted  upon  tbe  bank  of  the  United  States, 
at  each  of  its  epochs,  than  have  been  expend- 
ed for  the  improvement  of  these  national  for- 
tresses, for  securing  wealth  and  independence, 
since  the  revolution.  Ediiiee,  after  edifice, 
has  been  raised  upon  their  ruins  ;  but  the  new 
structures  resemble  the  venerable  fabricks 
from  whence  thej  are  torn,  as  the  modern  huts 
raised  of  its  ruins  resemble  the  ancient  city 
of  Palmjra. 

A  pernicious  little  army,  (pernicious  as  con- 
stituting; a  reason  for  neglecting  the  militia) 
a^ species  of  marine  preparation,  whose  most 
striking  features  ate  decay,  imbecility  and  ex- 
pense *,  and  an  awful  unconstitutional  prece*- 
tlent,  for  resorting  to  a  volunteer  militia,  offi- 
rf,ered  by  the  president  instead  of  the  states, 
have  dismantled  one  fortress,  and  all  the  arts 
to  enrich  caplital  and  speculation  legerdemain, 
by  paper,  at  the  expense  of  property  and  in- 
dustry, as  practised  in  England,  are  playiag* 
upon  ihe  other. 

When  the  future  historian  of  our  republic, 
shall  search  for  acts  of  patriotism,  and  matter 
far  Inographv,  the  contrast  between  the  heroes 
wh?^  b^ve  creat-^d,  and  Ihe  politicians  who 
liave  ruined  a  nation,  ^nll  afford  him  ample 
room  for  exliHUstiog  the  ^roFsgest  phrases  of 
-#nl©gy  i«id  censure.    The  first  was  not  ei§5|J- 


292  AGRICUXTUSB  ^ 

ed  by  erifeel)iiHg  the  heart,  nor  ^vffi  (he  second 
be  avoided  by  iiiipoverishiPig  the  soil  and  its 
cultivators ;  by  beguiling  the  militia  of  its 
power  and  importance^  with  substitutioas 
founded  in  the  pretext  of  diuiinishing  its  duty, 
but  preparing  the  means  of  usurpation  for 
some  ambitious  president^  and  by  taxing  Agri- 
culture in  various  crafty  modes,  under  pre- 
tence of  enriching  it,  but  in  fact  to  enrich  ca- 
pitalists at  its  expencc, 

Tlie  patriots  of  the  revolution  have  chiefly 
retired  to  the  enjoyment  of  a  treasure,  depo- 
sited beyond  the  schemes  of  craft,  leaving  t* 
their  successors  two  spacious  fields  as  produc- 
tive of  glory^  as  the  field  of  war  was  to  them* 
Far  from  exhausting  the  resources  for  gaining 
tiic  transporting  consciousness  of  having  be- 
iieiitted  our  country,  they  left  fop  these  suc- 
cessors the  creation  of  a  proud  militia  and  a 
fertile  country,  as  equally  meriting  national 
admiration  and  gratitude,  m  ith  the  feats  which 
Secured  our  isidependence,  and  placed  prospe- 
rity within  our  reach.     But  of  what  avail  is 
it,  that  one  set  of  patriots  should  have  cut 
away  the  causes  which  enfeebled  our  militia 
and  injpovei  ished  our  Agriculture,  if  another 
does  not  enable  us  to  reap  from  their  valour 
the  rewards  which  excited  it }     After  wading 
through  the  calamities  of  war  near  to  these 

ewards,  to  reject  them,  one  by  neglect^  and 


M 


AND    THE   ^IILITIA.  2do 

life  otlicr  by  the  preference  of  a  harpy  wLicii 
always  eats  and  never  feeds,  seems  only  con- 
sistent with  the  policy  of  the  British  parlia- 
ment, which  excited  the  resistance  of  the  re- 
volutionary heroes.  Had  they  been  told  that 
Ihev  WQV&  iiiihlins;  to  destrov  the  militia,  and 
lo  make  Agriculture  food  for  cliarter  and  pa- 
per capital^  they  would  have  discerned  no  rca.- 
soii  for  making  themselves  food  for  powder. 

It  would  be  easy  to  shew  that  Agriculture 
Defer  can  experience  fair  treatment  without  a 
sound  nulitia^  but  it  is  a  subject  too  extensive 
and  import-ant  to  be  considered  m  this  light 
way,  and  therefore  they  are  only  exhibited  in 
union,  in  the  concluding  essay?  to  remind  the 
reader,  that  they  are  political  twins,  one  of 
whom  never  lives  long  after  the  other  dies. 

Executive,  legislative  and  festive  eaeomr- 
|5ms  of  these  twins,  which  ought  to  he  called 
*'  Liberty  and  prosperity,"  thoyghthe  unhap- 
py delusions  of  fervour,  produce  the  knavish 
eift'cts  of  flattery ;  they  prevent  us  from  ac- 
quii'lng  a  liiilitia  and  an  Agriculture,  which 
deserve  praise  (false  praise  idways  excludes 
real  merit)  and  keep  us  without  laws  for  rais- 
ing eillier  to  mediocrity,  much  less  to  perfee- 
tion.  I  do  not  believe  that  these  encomiums- 
are  generally  the  ariifices  of  deliberate  vice 
and  secret  purpose,  to  impose  upon  the  enthu- 
siastic and  unwary^  i:i  [pursuance  of  tliQ  pre- 


294  AGsrcuirriJRE 

cedents  so  often  exhibited  by  rapacious  priestg 
clothed  in  the  garb  of  saiiclity  ;  but  yet  rapa- 
city may  sometimes  assume  the  language  of 
patriotism,  takeep  the  people  blind  to  the  dan*- 
gers  Tvhieh  threaten,  and  to  the  measures 
which  can  save  them. 

The  good  humour  of  the  festive  board  will 
bear  illustrations  of  these  assertions,  with 
le«s  discomfort  than  cold  design,  or  deluded 
negligence ;  and  therefore  however  inconsis- 
tent it  may  be  without  the  gravity  and  impoi^* 
tance  of  our  &ubject,  an  aversion  for  giving 
pain  to  ar^y  one,  induces  me  to  supply  it  with 
the  following  toasts. 

imE  MILrrM..,..The  Roek  of  our  Liberitj. 

Unarmed,  nnflis&iplincd,  and  without  unifor- 
luiiy,  siJ)stitiite*l  by  an  ineffectual  Ravy, 
an  ineifectual  Army,  and  Paper  Yolun- 
teers,  oiHcered  by  the  President, 

Unpat ionized  even  at  the  expense  of  a  gun 
boat. 

F^  at  i  e  ■  ed  a  •:  d '  dc spi  sedi 

Taught  self  contempt,  instead  of  a  proud 
and  erect  spirit, — ?Cbic  cheers, 

JIGRICULTUEE The  JoiMahi   of    our 

Wealih  : 

A  land  killer. 

A  payer  of  bounties  and  receiver  of  noue» 


AND    TfiE    MItlTIA.  295^ 

Abeautifier  of  towns  and  a  sacrifieer  of  tlie 

country. 
A  cultivator  for  stock,  without  stock  for 

cultivation. 
Giving  its  money  to  those  who  will  give  it 

flattery, 
A  weight  in  the  legislative  scales  of  the 
United  States,  as  much  heavier  thaa  a 
feather,  as   a   feather  is   heavier  than 
nothing. 
Its  iahour  steeped  in  an  infusion  of  thieve- 
ry, dissatisfaction  and  seditionj  by  a  mix- 
ture of  bond  and  free  negroes. 
Producing  40,000,000  dollars  aniiually  for 
«xporlaliori,  bearing  most  ta3:es  for  public 
benefit,  and  taxed  in  various  modes  for 
the  private  benefit  of  £00,000,000  dollars 
worth  of  capitalists  v»ho  pay  no  taxes. 
Out  of  a  remnant  of  the  4 OjO'OO^OOO  dollars 
exported,  cempelied  by  pFol^etiiig  duties 
to  j)ay  heavy  bounties  for  the  encourage- 
ment of  manufactures,  already  amount- 
ing to  above  150,000,000  dollars  annu- 
ally.— Js^ine  cheers  more* 
A  fev/  vr'ords,  at  parting,  to  the  reader,  will 
close  these  essays.     If  he  is  of  the  courteous 
nature  wliif  h  loves  to  give  and  to  receive  flat- 
tery; or  if  his  intcrcFjt  tugs  him  violently 
against  them,  he  may  disbelieve  the  plainest 
truth*  they  contain,  or  at  least  reject  ihem  as 


^96       AGEICULTUKB  AND  THE  MILITIA* 

being  told  in  too  l}liinit  a  stile.  If  he  is  igiio* 
1*arit  of  Agpiciiltiire  or  a  devotee  of  a  party 
or  an  idol,  he  will  rather  presume,  that  our 
Agriculture  is  perfect  and  imdefrauded,  than 
take  the  troiihle  of  e«abling  hiniself  to  judge  ; 
or  sileotlj  swallow  tli«  grossest  errors,  than 
give  up  his  superstition.  These  papers  nevei' 
contemplated  the  desperate  hope  of  obtaining 
the  attention  of  any  one  of  these  eharacter&. 
lialf  the  profit  of  Agriculture,  must  isndouht- 
edly  convince  the  several  tribes  of  capitalists, 
that  it  flourishes  exceedingly.  The  idolater 
will  rather  embrace  the  stake  than  truth,  and 
the  Agriculturist  who  prefers  ignorance  to 
knowledge,  though  these  hasty  essays  coiisti- 
iuted  a  complete  system  of  husbandry,  would 
be  as  little  benefitted  by  them,  us  a  lawyer  or 
a  physician  who  practised  by  deputy,  would  b^ 
by  the  reports  of*  Coke,  or  the  dispensatory  of 
Cullen.  Yet  to  those  who  would  think  and 
enquire,  o]Tinions  slowly  and  cautiously  ad- 
mitted, upon  various  views  f>f  natioiTal  inte- 
i»est,  without  a  motive  likely  to  mislead  or  de- 
ceive, might  afford  suggestions  capable  of  be- 
Gdming  subservient  to  beiter  talents,  awaken- 
ed to  the  discussion  of  subjects  so  momentous 
to  national  liappiness.  To  awaken  such,  was 
the  summit  of  the  author*s  design. 


I 


i 


