
This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 

We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at http : //books . google . com/| 



Digitized by 



Google 



\ 




vGoogle 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



®(DSr9^2Slf(ra4I(!)Sr 



CONSTRUED 



-^.r 



AND 



(^(DSJQVIIVIffVIKDSje 



Tisrms(OAvm®« 



BY JOHN 'i;|ATLOR, 

AUTHOR OP THE ENQUHIT, AND ABATOR. 



RICHMOJVD: 
PRINTED BT SHEPHERD & POLLARD. 

18180. 



Digitized by 



Google 



1 






DISTKICT OP VIRGINIA, TO Wit i 

Bs IT mBOMBBBBD, Thftt Oil the (]iirteeB<h dtr «f Novembw. 
gi XXXXXX * in ^e forty-fifth year of the independenoe of the United States of 
^' SE.SL- Sk America, Tliomas Bitehie and Company, of the laid dittriet, hate 
^ XXXXXXO deposited in this offioe the title of a book, the pght whereof t^ 
eUim as proprietors, in the words fottowin|^ to wit ; ** ConrtraetiQa 
'* construed, and eonstitatigos vindicated. By John Taylor, author of the Eq. 
^ qniry, and Arator." In conformity to ^ act of the coopress of the United 
States, entitled, *< An act for the eneonngement of leamiBf , by semniBf the 
** coptes of maps, charts, and books to the anthon and proprieton of such copies^ 
« diuiof the timet thereiii meatioaed.* 

Rd. JEFFRIES, 
Cierk of ^ JMitri^ qf Flf^^Ma. 



Digitized by 



Google 



Xf^i'^f 



r^ 



TO THE PUBLICK. 



The crisis has C011169 wben the foHowing i¥ork ^ may do 
the state some service/* 

The MsBowri ^lustum b probably not yet closed. The 
prindpU, on which it turns, is certainly not settied. Farther 
attempts are to be made^o wrest from the new states, about 
to enter into the American confMeracy, the power of regu- 
lating their own concerns. — ^The Tart^ question is again to 
be agitated.^ — It is time to bring the policy and the power of 
a legislature's tnterfering with the jvdicial functimis to the 
bar of publick opinion.^— The usurpation of a federal power 
over roads and canals is again to be attempted, and again to 
be reprobated.-— That gigantick institution, the Bank of the 
United States, which, while yet in the green tree, was pro- 
datmed by tiie republicans a breach of the constitution, 
M stands now upon its bond f* but that charter, bad as it is, 
has been justified by the supreme court of the United States, 
on prittdples so bold and alarming, that no man who loves 
the 'constitution can fold his arms in apathy upon the sub- 
ject. Those principles, so boldly uttered from the highest 
judicial tribunal in the United States, are calculated to give 
the tone to an acquiescent people, to change the whole face 
of our government, and to generate a thousand measures, 
which the framers of the constitution never anticipated, 
lliat decision 

■ will be recorded fiar « preeedent^ 

And many an error by the same example 
May nub into the itate. Iteannotbe. 

Againist such a decision, it becomes every man, who values 
the constitution, to raise his voice. 



" -^ -*"*• Digitized by GoOglC 



ii 

In trnfht we have ftnired at acrisisy when the first pita* 
ciples of the governinent and some of the dearest rights of 
tbO' states are threatened with being utterly ground into dust 
and ashes. When we look to the original form of the 
g^vemmentt we are struck with its novelty and beauty. It 
presents to us one of the grandest experiments that ever was 
made in political science. We see in it an attempt to asoer-* 
tain, how far power could be so distributed between two 
govemmeats, as to prevent an txcesmroe concmtraHan and 
consequent abuse of it in one set of hands } at the sune 
time, that 9o much power was conveyed to each^ as to enable 
them to accomplish the objects to which each of them was 
best adapted. The federal governnieat was to watch over 
our foreign relations ; that of the states, was particularly 
to take care of our internal concerns. The great secret 
was> to have these functions so wisdy regidatedt as to pre« 
vent the general government finom rushing into conscrfida- 
ti<m ; and the states, into a dissolution of the union. The 
first extreme would infallibly conduct us to great tippres*^ 
sion^ and probably to monarchy : the last would subject us 
to insults fuid injuries from abroad, to contentions and 
bloodshed at home. To avoid these extr^nes^ we sboidd 
never have lost sight of the true spirit of the federal con« 
stitution. To interpret it wisdy» we should have rigidly 
adhered to the principle^ laid down by Cko^ge Clinton^ 
when he, fhnn the chair of the senate of the United Stfttes» 
gave the casting voice against the renewal of the first bank 
charts : << In the course of a long life^ I have found tiiat 
f< government is not to be strengthened by the asswrnpHon 
** of doubtful powers, but a wise and energeti^k execution of 
^ those which are incontestable; the former never fails to 
«< produce suspicion and distrust, whilst the latter inspires 
<< respect and confidence. If, however, on fair experience, 
'< the powers vested in the government shall be fownd in<^ 
^< competent to the attainment of the objects for which it 
<^ was instituted, the constitviion happU^f furnishes the means 
**for remedying the evil by amcndmentJ^ This maxim 



Digitized by 



Google 



IE 

dcserros to be written m k/tban of goM ipoa tlie wall of 
the capitol in Wasbington. 

But, we have bem aUoort deaf to the voice of wMom; 
We have neariy forgotten the prioci|4e8 of our fathem. 
In repeated instanceo^ we have auffered the eonotHotion to 
he trodden under foot. We hare been lately rosfaiNg rapidly 
towanb the gulph of consoKdation. We have even seen the 
purest triumphs of the repoUican party in 1800-*1 , (when an 
alien and sedition law were rtiivered into atona by an in* 
dignant people,) almost forgotten. We hare seen a deci- 
9ion promulgated from the federal bench, wbtGh is calcu- 
lated to sweep down the dearest rights of the states. The 
infatuation of the day has been carried so far, that we have 
just seen an attempt made, and bolstered up by the seriatim 
opinion of five, eminent counseUers, to hnmble the powers 
(^ the state governments at the feet of the District of Co- 
lumbia! 

The period is, indeed, by no means an agreeable one. It 
borrows new gloom from the apathy which seems to reign 
over so many of our sister states. The very sound of State 
Rights is scarcely ever heard among them ; and by many 
of their eminent politicians, it is only heard to be mocked 
at. But a good citizen wiH never despair of the republick*^ 
Among these good citizens, is John Taylor, of Caroline. 
Penetrated by the conviction, that the constitution is in 
danger; that the balance has seriously inclined towards 
the side of consolidation ; he comes forward to commune 
with his countrymen, and to stote to them frankly his im« 
pressions and his fears. 

If there be any book that is capable of rousing the peo- 
ple, it is the one before us. Bold and original in its con- 
ceptions, without passion, and with an admirable ingenuity 
to recommend it, it is calculated, we should think, to make 
a deep impression. Its author is far removed from the 
temptations of ambition. He holds no ofiice. He wishes for 
none. He writes, for he has thought much; and the present 
is a sort of last legacy to his countrymen. It is unnecessary 



Digitized by 



Google 



u 

to dwdl Qpon tiie particdar traits of tbis work; yet tho 
finger upon ttie wall is not to be mistaken. We bere see 
the spirit wbicb breatbes in tbe pages of << Arator/' and ci 
tbe <^ Political Enquiry/' Tbe first bas made bim known 
tbrougbout America : The last is less generally read ; but 
unless some intelligent men are mucb nusteken^ it is yet to 
win its way to distinguisbed reputation. Tbey bave all 
one trait, witbout wbfeh genius exists not The man, v>h0 
wnUi ihemrdarcM to tinhikfor himulf. 

EDITOR. 
EiGsofoRii^ Novetaber, 18S0. 



v\ w^V / ■ 






Digitized by 



Google 






^mavA^oa 



<^ 



Tub anthor of the foUowhig wmrk eunesfly irishad to 
ranain imknowii ; but circuBMlanoes having rendered it im- 
possible, his altematire 'was reduced to an avowal, or aa 
aflfoctation of concealment : he hopes, however, that no one 
will belieye him to have been iidUmiced by money^ or fame, 
or any personal consi^ration, excqit that kind of feeling 
experienced when about to take a last leave of our friends^ 
ire say to tbem << Gk>d bless yon.^ 

He does not solicit the indidgence of his readers, as he 
wishes his errors to be corrected ; nor does he expect any, 
exc^t from those whose interest is not disunited from that 
of the society. 

The end of fostering eleemosynary families has evidently 
suggested a mode of construing our constitutions, which 
requires that such phrases as the fdlowing should be recon- 
ciled : << Sovereign servants. Supreme equality. Unlim- 
ited UmitaUons. Cons<didated divisions. Inferior superi- 
ority. And desirable misery.*^ Thus, representative power 
may be made despc^ick ^ a co-ordinate sphere may be made 
supreme ; convenience, like the waves produced by a pebble 
tiirown on smooth water, may be made to undulate indefi- 
nitely ; a subordinate judicial power may start up into a 
dictatcHT to the state governments ; divisions and limitations 
of power may be confounded and abolished $ and English 
lollies are converted from objects of our abhorrence, into 
models for our imitation. Under a reconciliation between 
rq^ublican and despotick princijdes, eflTected by the new idea 
of <^ sovereign servants,'' our legidatures are converted into 
British partiaments, daily new-modelling the substance of 
oar government, ^y bodies politick, exclusive privileges^ 
pensions^ bounti^y imd judicial acts, conq^ing an arbi- 



Digitized by 



Google 



trary power of dispensing wealth or poverty to individmds 
and combinations^ at their pleasure. . 

If our system of government produces these bitter fruits 
naturally, it is substantially European; and the world, 
after having contemplated with intense interest and eager 
solicitude the. experiment of the IJnited States, will be 
fiurprised to find, that no experiment at all has been made, 
and that it still remains to be discovered, wh^ber a poli- 
tical system preferable to the Britisii be within the scope 
of human capacity. But, if these fruits ^e not its legitir 
mate offsprings, but of foreign knportation, we ought iq 
fulfil the hopes of mankind, by returning to tliose princple|( 
in construing our system, by which it was dictated. Let 
us remember, that the lucrative partialities of a governr 
ment, instead of being destroyed by use, like the splendid 
fabricks of the loom bespangled with gold and silver to 
gratify pride and luxury, become richer and stroniger, tb^ 
longer they are worn by ambition and avarice. 
^ The habit of corrupting our political system, by the iur 
»strumentality of inference, convenience and necessity, witb 
an endless series of consequences inched to them, is t^e 
importer of contraband principles., and the bountiful gnm^- 
tor of powers not given, or withheld by our coiistitutioi«9t 
It is, therefore, the natural enemy of our home-bred form oi 
government and ought to awaken the resistance of ^11 legis* 
lative and judicial departments, and the detestation of ev^y 
person not enriched by this ruinous comm^^ce. Every 
lover of our institutions ought to be a vigilant custom-bouse 
officer, and do his utmost to prevent a heavy governpeot 
from being brought in gradually by these seemingly light 
skiffs. It is convenient for the tranepiissio& of tas^s, tbi^ 
congress should create banks; but the constitutioa does 
not del^ate to the federal government a power to create 
political combinations, invested with a power to. regidate 
. the wealth and poverty of individuals. This new pqm&c of 
indefinite magnitude is, however, said to be conveyed, as % 
consequence ^ the convenient mode of rMievbg mraiey. 



Digitized by 



Google 



Agsdn: c6ngre68 bave a power to r^ulate commerce ; but 
tiie coMlitiitioii doesBol dd^ate to the federal government 
m power to make several statos tribiitary to one, nor a 
poww^ to make the peojde of all the states tributary to a 
combination of capitdists, constituting in fact a body poii* 
tick, materially i^ecting the interests of all persons. In 
tiiis case also^ the inference is made to bestow a far greater 
pom&Tf than that from which it is extracted. 

Hie nourishment of exclusive interests^ in all its forms^ is 
tibe universal cause which obstructs the progress of politi- 
cal science, and has placed that which ought to be the first, 
in the rear of human improvements. The emoluments, at- 
tached to flie administi*ation of civil government, are un- 
iQippily a sufficient suggestion to avarice and ambition, that 
firaud and ofqpresirion may aflTord them gratifications. EveA 
this excitement was viewed by Doctor Franklin as so dan- 
gerous to liberty, that he wished for its suppression, and re- 
fused to receive any compensation as president of Pennsyl- 
vania ; and Washington would only receive his expenses for 
all his services. However impracticable these speculations^ 
may be, yet the opinions of these great men are weighty 
antborities against the policy of superadding to an unavoid- 
able temptation, a host of unnecessary solicitors in behalf 
of avarice and ambition, retained by exorbitant fees pmd 
by the people, whilst no reward whatever is offered to the 
idvocates for integrity and moderation. By this pernicious 
policy, an union is formed between flie administrators of go- 
vernment and corrupted combinations, creating an impulse 
towards oj^ression, which abstract principles, however 
good, have hitherto been unable to withstand. As the 
brightest beacon may^ be extinguished by throwing some 
ho^le dement on the flame, so the best principles are des- 
troyed by fostering theik* foes. 

Yet tl» argument in favour of exclusive privileges is, that 
it is the best mode by which knowledge can be advanced, 
iRrf arts, perfected. Under colour of this assertion, it is 
mii, tb^t maidu^tures havte never been introduced into any 



Digitized by 



Google 



cMiantiy, eieeptbytheeoerdioii«f tiMgO¥unm«^ Thm 
a degpotiek powei' of dlstrHrating wealtib mA pov^ety* §§ 
tiie caprices and vtees of indiTidaals laay dietete» ia arttill j 
covered by the pretext^ that it is tiie best modo of advanci* 
ing arts and semceei but the troth is^ that ttifgr have 
flotiridied in p-oportkni as iadiisfay has been feoe and 
property safe. The gratitude of knowledge iSf th(N?^oi«b 
due to that pow^, wbicfa has sheeted iodnstry and phBoaA* 
pliers fin* its comnranicatioB. The ckiin of govemneirf» 
to be considered as the apostles of knowfedge* is preeiaa^ 
ly the same witii their claim to rdigious apostoliek poiwer^ 
and experience baa sofficie^y proved^ tlmt both powers 
b^get oppression. 

l%is is a sabject which ^qM fill a book of no small mm^ 
and^ therefore, a limited plan would not admit of its firitt 
applicatk>n to the manufacturing ar^ sdected to estabUuA 
the pernicious general principle^ that governments ought to 
have a power of granting exclusive privileges. Yet, it is 
highly worthy of publick consideration Privileges im^ 
a general depriyation. To take away in order to bestow^ 
is merdy to pull down with one hand for the purpose of 
building up with flie other, if the d^-ivation discouragesaa 
orach industry, as the privttege will excite. Hiese politi- 
cal contradictions would then neutralize each dfcher. Bu^ 
if the discouragement operates upon greato* numbers than 
fte privily, as is alwfQrs the case, a balance arises unfiiM* 
vourable to indimtryf arts and sdences. Hjenco, they have 
flourished as exclusive privH^es have decreased, and dwin* 
died where fliey abound. The abolition id a vast numheff 
of feudal and hierarchical privil^;es gave them a great in* 
pulse in England, and a gradual multiplication of pecunia- 
ry privfl^ges since has brought the same Qoontry to a sti^ 
of misery, which may involve them in some gmiCNral c<mvuk 
^ion. Is this misery, or the mystsrioos advances of know* 
ledge and liberty, the best bostage for their ki^rovemeat 3 
These have co-extensively pushed forward all arta aoA 
acmwip aided <Mr aamded by Ao patriotimn of govem* 



Digitized by 



Google 



ttaetfmtt^ and wtbmift bMnttas* Thk concoodtucjr i 
Mm a ooBMDOB canae, eateUiBiiMi tha aacandancy of know^ 
laigi^ and ex^adea the meearily for tba partbliliaa oi go^ 
ttMmeatB) or tka paliey of diqienng geaeral evily to cm- 
ridi selected aecta. After the Atfk aya> a manaflictoytog 
sajpertority i^tMared ia Italy aad France, wlflioiit any.q^ 
dal pati*ottage fipom tiieir ^^Mrgamaed goTemmeatB, be* 
cause those eoontrksaorpassed the rest nfEnrope IB know* 
\adgb ; and several English kii^ Med ansnccesaftilly to 
rtval it by \6gti coercions. The revocation of ^ edict of 
Nantes at lengtti expelled a great mass of manafadnrrag 
knowledge from France, and stqqAied Enf^aad with the 
leattngcanseof maan&ctaringprQi^rity; from this qpoch^ 
she dates hers. The hnpravenmits of machinery in E^ 
hand were the woiiuof bi^fidaal knowledge and indastry, 
after her prohibitory qrstem had becooM nottunaL The 
wonderfiil art of sbip-bnSdingy carried to such forbdMrn 
in "ttie United States, prc^osed to be checked by coaiiaer* 
dal restrictions) proves, Ihat when the knowledge of an art 
is obtained, it is only necessary ttat it shoold correspond 
^th the interest of individuals. Compute and compare the 
progress of the United States in the arts and sciences, in 
about thirty years, with the ingress of Europe during a 
sin^ar spa/te, and anticipate its reach in six centuries^ 
during which Europe has been «i^oyed in effecting her 
attainments. To what can the vast difference in velocity 
toward exceUence be ascribed, but to a greater freedom of 
intdlect and industry i Why, then, should we substitute for 
these, avarice and fraud, as better teachers of arts and 
sciences i 

Alexander of Russia, a few years past, asserted the right 
of all states to internal self-government, and entered into 
a treaty with the cortes of Spain, to guaranty the constitu* 
tion they had made. Now, to advance the interest of a 
cembinaticm of monarchs, he renounces his principles and 
his honour, and even forbids the penitent Ferdinand to 



Digitized by 



Google 



6 

acknowledge what he had asa^-ted, and to confirm what he 
liad guarantied. The federal constitntion as esqiready 
guaranties to the states the right of kit^mal sdf-gov«m- 
nent ; but a mode of construction is introduced to advance 
the interest of mercenary combinations. Is not the analogy 
between the Russian and this mode of constenctiony appa- 
rent? The differences arefttmt Alexander proposes to over- 
turn princi^es and a compact by force^ and construction 
acts by sap; he adheres to the interest of hereditary mon- 
archs ; construction, to the interest of exclusive privileges. 
The importance of these differences may be ascertdned by 
comparing force with fraud, and a confederacy of foreign 
kings, with a confederacy of domestic parasitical privileges. 
Whatever may be the result of fliis comparison, it can DNffer 
us nothing but the old alternative between monarchy and 
aristocracy ; and almost dl writers have agreed, thi^ the 
former is to be preferred. 

Against all such modes of construction, as being adverse 
both to republican principles, and our positive institutionSf 
the humble reasoning of the following work is levelled. 



Digitized by 



Google 



8Ecnoir& 

Page. 
1. 2%e principles of our eonsHtutians, • - 9 ^ 

S. Construction, ---'-«>-•» £1 

d. Sovereigntys - • - .. . . .£5 

4. 2%e Vmmp d9 

5. IHvinom and limUtsiion of power, - • -51 

6. Fropertg, ----.^..67 
r. Tfce tenfc decision,^^Corparatian, - • - . 79 

8. 2%6 6anA: decision^^'''8overeignty of spheres, - 99 

9. 2%« hank dedsUm^^Supremacy, - - - • 119 

10. The bank deeisunu — Common defence and general 

welfare. Mcessary and proper. Convenient. 
J^aii&nal, 161 

11. The hank dectsion^^Freeedents, ... 191 

12. Protecting duties and bounties, .... soS 

13. Jlssumption of judicial powers, and patronage by 

legislaiures, 259 

14. The laws of nations, 279 

15. The Missouri question, 291 

16. The distresses of the United States, - - - 315 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



CONSTRUCTION CONSTRUED, 



«n 



COJ^STITUnOJ^S VLPrmCdTEB. 



SECTION 1. 



THE PRINCIPLES OF OUR REVOLUTION. 

These are the keys of constntctioD> and the locks of liberty^ 
The question to be considered is, ivhetber our revolution was 
designed to establish the freedom both of reli^on and proper* 
ty, or only of the former. 

It is Grange that the human mind should have been expanded 
in relation to religion, and yet should retain narrow notions in 
relation to property. Objects unseen, and incapable of being 
explained by the information of the senses, afford less perfect 
materials for the exercise of reason, than l^se capable of be- 
ing investigated by evidence, within the scope of the human 
understanding. As the difficulties opposed to the correction 
of religious fanaticism seemed less surmountable, whilst its 
effects were more pernicious, the zeal of philosophers was con- 
densed in an effort to relieve mankind from an evU the most 
distressing ; and their attention was diverted from another, at 
this period the most prominent. But having wrested religious 
liberty from the grasp of fanaticism, it now behooves them to 
turn their attention towards pecuniary fanaticism, and to wrest 
civil liberty from its tyranny also. Between an absolute pow- 
er in governments over the religion and over the property of 
men, the analogy is exact, and their consequences must there- 
fore be the same. Freedom of religion being the discovery by 
B 



Digitized by 



Google 



10 

which religious liberty eould only be established ; freedom of 
property must be the only means also, for the establishment of 
civil libeiiy. Pecuniary fanaticism, undisciplined by constitu- 
tional principles, is such an instrument for oppression, as an un- 
disciplined religious fanaticism. A power in governments to 
regulate individud wealth, will be directly guided by those 
very motives, which indirectly influenced /^l governments, pos- 
sessed of a power to regulate religious opinions and rites. Jf 
we have only restrained one of these powers, we have most im- 
providently retained the other, under which mankind have 
groaned in all ages ; and which at this time is sufficient to op- 
press or enslave the European nations, although they have 
drawn some, of the teeth of religious fanaticism. An adora- 
tion of military fame, specious projects and eminent individu- 
als^ has in all ages brought on mankind a multitude of evils ; 
and a sound freedom of property is the only mode that I 
know of, able to destroy the worship of these idols, by remov- 
ing beyond their reach the sacrifices upon which themselves, 
and their proselytes, subsist 

. Many princes have patronized literature, but none have pa- 
tronized knowledge. Augustus was celebrated for the former 
species of munificence ; yet the temporary splendors of impe- 
rial patronage were soon obscured by the bad principle of & 
tyranny over property ; a principle, unpropitious to knowledge, 
because it was hostile to individual liberty. We must reason 
from a compariscm between general or universal facts, and not 
from a contemplation of temporary exceptions, to come at truth; 
and when we discovei: that an absolute power over property, 
thoi^gh occasionally exercised for the attainment of praise-wor- 
thy ends, is yet constantly attended by general evils, infinitely 
outweighing such particular benefits ; we forbear to draw our 
concli|sipn from the partial cases, or decide erroneously. A 
truth, established by its universality, ought to be an overma^h 
for the sophistries of cupidity. The best general principle, un- 
der the destiny of mankind, is capable of producing partial 
evils. The freedom of the press, of religion, and of property, 
may occasionally produce inconvenienpes ; but ought mankind 
therefore to transfer their approbation from these three founda* 
tions of citil liberty, to the instiiiments by which it is des- 
troyed ? 



Digitized by 



Google 



11 

No form of government can foster a fanaticism for wealths 
without being corrupted. The courtiers oi republicks, able to v 
exercise an absolute power over the national property, are more 
numerous and more vicious than the courtiers of kings, because 
access to patrons is easier ; they have more occasion for parti- 
sans, and a multiplication of despots over property multiplies 
the channels of fraud. New ones also are frequently opened by 
a revolution of parties, and of patrons, who with their favorites 
and dependants^ are in haste to bolster power or amass wealth, 
during the continuance of a fleeting authority. Against a propen- 
sity so mischievous, and so fatal to repubiicks, there seems to 
be no resource, but a constitutional prohibition of the power by 
which it is nurtured; and a rejection of precedents, by which 
infringements of so wholesome a prohibition are usually justi- 
fies]. Both reason and morality unite to impress upon nations, 
a necessity for imposing restraints upon a propensity, which 
may so easily be concealed under the most glittering robes of 
patriotism. What real patriot would feel himself molested, 
by restraints upon avarice and ambition ? Are not both unfriend- 
ly to human happiness ? Some patriots have sacrificed their 
lives for the happiness of their country. Is the sacrifice of an 
error, by which fraud and avarice are nurtured, too much to ex- 
pc^ of ours ? ' I 

A love of wealth, fostered by honest industry, is an ally both ( 
of moral rectitude, and national happiness, because it can only 
be gratified by increasing the fund for national subsistence, ^ 
comfort, strength and prosperity^ but a love of wealthy fostered 
by partial laws for enriching corporations and individuals, is 
allied to immorality and oppression, because it is gratified at 
the expense of industry, and diminishes its ability to work out 
national blessings. 

Look for a moment at Congress, as a power for creating pe- 
cuniary inequalities, or for striking balances between ffivours to 
states, combinations and individuals. If it could even distri- 
bute wealth and poverty, by some just scale, which has never 
yet been discovered, justice itself would beget discontent, and 
sow among its medley of courtiers, a mass of discord, &ot more 
propitious to the safety of tiie union, than to the happiness of 
the people* All would weigh their own merits, and none would 
be convinced that they were light Even the distribution of 



Digitized by 



Google 



12 

those preCBrenceSy necesaarj to ciyil goVerDment, is IkUe to 
defects and productive of inconveniences. Where then is tlie 
wisdom of extending the power beyond the Hmits of social ne- 
eessitj, to the despotick principle of a gratuitous distribution 
of wealth and poverty by law; and of converting a small evil» 
abundantly counterbalanced by the Uessings oi government, 
into a calamity by which these blessings are diminished or des- 
troyed ? 

To answer this question, turn your eyes towards a govern- 
ment accoutred in the complete panoply of fleets, armies, banks» 
funding systems, pensions, bounties, corporations, exchisive pri- 

/ vileges ; and in short, possessing an absolute power to distribute 
property, according to the pleasure, the pride, the interest, the 
ambition^ and the avarice of its administrators ; and consider 
whether such a government is the servant or the master of the 
nation. However oppressive, is it not able to defy, to deride 
and to punish the cmnpl^dnts of the people? Partisans, pur> 
chased and made powerful by^ their wealth, zealously sustain the 
abuses by which their own passions are gratified. I discern 
no reason in the principles of our revolution, for investing our 
governments with such of these instruments for oppression, as 
were bo& unnecessary for the end in view, and even inimical 
to its attainment ; and no such reason existing, it is more difit* 
cult to discern the propriety of investing our governments with 
these superfluous and pernicious powers, by teference and con- 
struction. Would liberty be well established in England, if 
her hierarchy was destroyed, whilst the government retained 
the absolute power of distributing wealth and poverty? Is not 
that establishment merely one of the modes for exercising this 
species of despotism ; and what substantial or lasting remedy 
could arise from abolishing one mode, whilst others remained 
amply sufficient to establish the same pernicious principle ? Is 
not a power of transferring property by pensions, bounties, cor- 
porations and exclusive privileges ; and even of bestowing pub* 
lick money by the unlimited will of legislative bodies, as dan* 
gerous to liberty, as a power of doing the same thing by the in- 

, struraentality of a privileged church? Is the casuistry consistent, 
which denies to a government the power of infringing the free- 
dom of religion^ and yet invests it with a despotism over the 
freedom of property ? A corporation* combination, (n: chartered 



Digitized by 



Google 



13 

church for one purpose, in its pecuniary effects, is anaUgons to { 
corporations for effecting the other. It has been said, that govern- 
ment in its best form is an evil. This absurd idea seems to have 
been suggested, by its being usually invested with an army of 
supernumerary powers wholly unnecessary for effecting the end 
of preserving social tranquillity and safety. Against these su- 
pernumerary powers, the United States waged a long war, upon ^ 
the ground, that goveniments are instituted to secure, and not 
to bestow the freedom of property ; and it would be highly ab- 
surd to suppose, that having established their great principle, 
they directly became contented with an unfruitful theory, and 
surrendered the idea of its application. It was tyrannical in 
the English government, said the colonies* to insist upon taking 
away.tlieir property, and giving it to placemen and pensioners ; 
and they very justly considered life and liberty as so intimate- 
ly connected with property, that the rights of the latter could 
not be mvaded, without invading the other rights also. They 
fought for a revolution, and established governments to secure 
all three^f these natural rights, because a loss of one was equi- 
valent to a loss of all, in a national view. 
. I see no infallible criterion for defining the nature of a go- 
vernment, except its acts. If the acts of a monarchy, aristocra- 
cy, and democracy are the same, these forms of government 
are to a nation essentially the same also. To contend for forms 
only, is to fight for shadows. The United States did not go to 
war for nothing but forms. A government is substantially good 
or bad, in the d^ree that it produces the happiness or misery 
of a nation ; and I see but Uttle difficulty in finding a mode of 
detecting the fallacy of form, and the frauds of profession. If 
we can ascertain the quality in human nature, from which poli- 
tical evil has chiefly proceeded under every form of govern- 
ment, this quality is the cause which can corrupt any form ; 
and instead of amusing ourselves with tliese new forms, not to 
be confided in, it behooves us to search for a remedy, able to 
remove or control the cause itself. 

Cupidity, avarice or monopoly, both in the savage and civil* 
ized state, is the quality of human nature, always requiring 
control, and always striving to break down the restraints im- 
posed upon it. To resist this quality, the United States en- 
dured the evils of a long war with a powerful nation. They had 



Digitized by 



Google 



14 

seen a limited monarchy tried in the parent country, as a re** 
medy for this bad quality of human nature ; but ineffectually; 
because a considerable power remained with the king, and an 
absolute power was conceded to or usurped by the goYemment, 
of'distributing property. The hostile principles, of leaving 
men to be enriched by their own industry, or of enriching them 
by the BiYours of the government, were to be weighed against 
each other ; that which made many poor to enrich a few was 
rejected, and that which encouraged industry was preferred, in 
the most distinct manner, as I shall hereafter endeavour to proves 
Almost all governments have espoused and nourished the 
spirit of avarice, which they were instituted to discipline by 
justice; and have betrayed the weak, whom it was their duty 
to protect. In assuming a power of distributing property by 
law, they have reduced it in a great degree to a destiny, ap- 
proximating to its savage destiny, when subjected to force. From 
this cause have arisen the most pernicious imperfections of soci- 
ety. Aristocracies and democracies, by usurping this despotick 
power, in imitation of monarefas, have driven nations into a cir** 
cle of forms, throu^ which they have perpetually returned to 
the oppression they intended to escape. Had the essentialsy- 
rather than the structure of governments, attracted the atten- 
tion of mankind, they would not have trusted to any theory, 
however excellent, assertii^ it to be the duty of a government 
to protect rights ; under a system of leg^lation, by which go- 
vernments of the worst forms destroy them. They would have 
discovered, that a power of distributing property, according to" 
its pleasure, has made governments of the best forms, bad ; and 
that a remedy for an evil, poisonous to the best theories, ought to 
awaken their solicitude and ingenuity. For want of this reme- 
dy, repuWicks, of the finest theoretical structure, have univer- 
sally died more prematurely, even than absolute monarchies ; 
because, tlie more numerous the depositaries of an absolute 
power over property have become, the more widely has the spi- 
rit of avarice or monopoly been excited. If this universal cause 
of oppression must exist, that government which afforded the 
most channels for its operation, is the worst ; and hence has ari- 
sen the general preference of mankind for monarchy. Govern- 
ments of all forms having exercised an absolute power over pro- 
perty, they have experimentally ascertained, that the oppression 



Digitized by 



Google 



15 

derived from this source was the most tolerable, when the ty- 
rants were tiie least numerous. 

If the age has at length arrived, in which knowledge is able 
to break tlie fetters forged by fraud and credulity, political en- 
quiry, as in other sciences, may take its stand on the eminence 
of truth, hail with exultation the happy advent, and direct its 
arrows straight forward against an error fraught with plagues 
to mankind. 

To define the nature of a government truly, I would day, 
that a power of distributing property, able to gratify avarice 
and m<Hiopoly, designated a bad one ; and that the absence of 
every such power, designated t good one. 

Of what value is an exchange of one system of monopoly for 
another ? How shall we estimate the dift'erence between noble 
and clerical orders, and between combinations of exclusive 
pecuniary privileges? Is pure avarice better than some honour 
and some sanctity? The encroachments upon property by 
noble and clerical combinations, once fixed by law, remained 
srtationarj; and each indindual could calculate his fate with 
some certai&ty : but pecuniary combinations, once sanctioned 
Ml constitutional, will perpetually open new channels, and breed 
new. invaders, whose whole business it will be, to make inroads 
upaa the territories of industry. Legislatures will become col- 
leges ftjar teaching the science of getting money by monopolies 
or favours ; and the deluge of laws will become as great in the 
United States, as was once the deluge of papal indulgences in 
Europe for effecting the same object What an unaccountable 
feature of the human character it is, that it should exert so 
n^uch ingenuity to get the property of others, and be so dull in 
finding out means for the preservation of its own ? 

The morality of the gospel and that of monopoly, seem to 
me, not to bear the least resemblance to each other. A christian 
" loves man. His light must shine before men. He keeps judg- 
« ment and does justice. He trusts in the Lord and does go6d. 
" He lives in goodness and honesty. He is a doer and not a 
« hearer only of the divine law.. Whoever doeth not right, is 
« not of God, neither he that loveth not his brother. Repen- 
« tance and an avoidance of sin, constitute the claim to the 
« atonenient of a saviour. By their works ye shall know them." 
The pope of Rome for many cebturies persuaded the people 






V 



Digitized by 



Google 



16 

of Europe, that he falftlled all these texts of scriptore, bj utter* 
ing annually a great number of indulgences, to cheat the pe^le 
of money. 

Is there a man who could be so infatuated, as to foster zea- 
lously both Uble and missionary societies, and also a spirit id 
ararice and monopoly ? Geographical malice, comlnned frauds, 
indiridual deceit, and civil commotion, some of the dBTects o^ 
this latter policy, suggest the idea, that the same person is 
equally zealous to convert the heathens to Christianity, and the 
christians to heathenism. This ideal character may be also a 
philosopher, who ridicules the notion of being saved by faith 
witliout works; and yet contends that the people ought to con- 
fide in furns without act^b and take it for granted that their 
property will be safe under a theory, which exercises an abso- 
lute power over it If he should make an eloquent speech, one 
half in favour of the theory of equal laws, and the other half 
in favour of actual exclusive privileges, what should we think ? 
that it was like placing Christ on the car of Juggernaut, and 
dressing the United States in British r^mentals. 

There are sundry points of resemblance between the Englisk 
revolution in the time of Charles the first, and ours, replete 
with edification. Let us go into a comparison. The English re- 
formation of religion, by compromising with the rapaciousnessd" 
individuals, and by ret»ning sundty of the principles and ha- 
bits of popery, inoculated the government with a poison, which 
diffused its virulence throughout tlie body politick, and conta- 
minated the blessings promised by the experiment. Those who 
resisted the frauds of selfishness, and the artifices of ambition, 
were called puritans ; and the derision of a nickname, united 
with the excesses produced by oppression, to render the doctrine 
of a freedom of religion, botli ridiculous and detestable. Those 
who contended for it, were successfully represented as wiM 
visionaries, whose views were unnatural and impracticable. 
Yet to these puritans the United States are indebted for the 
religious freedom they enjoy ; and the whole world, for a refu- 
tation of the ailments advanced by ambition and avarice, to 
obstruct the progress of political improvement, and the advance- 
ment of human happiness. 

The same contrivances practised in England to destroy re- 
ligious freedom, are using m the United States to defeat civil 



Digitized by 



Google 



17^ 

liberty. The puritioiism of rq>ublicatt jniticipl^ is ridiculed ; 
it is called democracy; and ▼ijolaitions of the freedom of pro- 
perty (an important principle of our civil puritanism) are pro- 
viding combiistibleB fer some calamitous explosion. Oufr poiitiv 
cal reforinatiOB is daily corrupted by the principles and haUtt 
of the English system^as waff the English religious reformation^ 
by the principles uid habits of popery; and we are exchanging 
the pure principles of the revolution, for HtLe garbage of ari^» 
cracy, and compromises with venality. By disregarding^bese 
principles, our fluctuations of parties invested with powers have 
been made to resemble the bauble called a Kaleidescope, whic^ 
at each revolution exhibits new scenes of glittering delusions^ 
whilst the pebbles from which they are reflected, remain sub- 
stantially the same. The remedy for an evil so nuschievous, 
is that by which religious freedom has been established. Free- 
dom of property wiH beget civil liberty, as freedom of conscience 
has begotten religious. The success of one experiment ptoved> 
the other to be practicable. Everj man, except he belong to 
a privileged combination, is as^much interested to effect a free- 
-dom of property, as he is to maintain a freedom of religion, ex- 
cept he could become a priest of an established an4 endowed 
hierarchy. 

The English protestants had adopted a variety of imaginary 
habits and opinions. The several American States also enter- 
t^ned a variety of opinions and habits, fixed by real interest, 
more reasonable and more stubborn, as being derived from na- 
tural and unconquerable circumstances. Each of the secis in 
England, after the religious revolution was estaUished, as power 
fluctuated among them, endeavoured when uppermost, to im- 
pose its own opinions and habits upon the others. The appa- 
rel of the\clergj, surplices, tippets, caps, hoods and crosiers > 
and ceremonies ; such as the sign of the ci*oss in t>aptism, the 
ring in marriage, the mode of administering the sacrament, and 
the consecration and powers of bishops ; all inconsiderable 
compared with the cardinal end of religious freedom ; became 
subjects of controversy in England. The endowment of cer- 
tificate holders, banking corporations, exclusive privileges, com- 
pulsory IjCws over free will in the employment of the earnings 
of industry^ and violations of the local interests and habits of 
States, more materially affecting the cardinal end of civil liber- 
C 



Digitized by 



Google 



18 

ty, have become subjects of controversy in the United States. 
In England, the force of opinions, less substantia], produced 
^ a frightful civil war. In the United States, opinions, better 
Y^ founded, have already produced awful ideas of dissolving the 
union* In England, the religious controversies terminated in 
an act of uniformity, by which a majority of the people are 
cruelly oppressed ; there are more meeting-houses than churches, 
and more dissenters than conformists ; yet by bribery with pub- 
lick money, so as exorbitantly to increase taxation, the majo- 
rity are both excluded from civil offices, and subjected to the 
payment of tithes for the suppression of their own opinions 
and interests. In the United States, the majority of the peo- 
ple of each state, are subjected to the payment of more than 
tithes, to deprive themselves of free will as to their own inte- 
rest, and to foster exclusive privileges. Our division into state 
governments of great extent, and embracing a great variety of 
local circumstances, will render a compulsory uniformity 
of temporal interests, habits and opinions infinitely more diffi- 
cult, than a religious uniformity in England ; and require 
means, more coercive and severe to effect it. A very power- 
ful standing army, so necessary in England for one purpose, 
would be more indispensable here for the other. Whole states 
will more sensibly feel, and be more able to resist burdens, in- 
flicted to enrich privileged civil sects, bearing heavily on their 
local interests and habits, than individuals only combined by 
the slight threads of ceremonials and speculative prejudices. 
Had the freedom of religion been established in England at 
the Reformation, a mass of civil war, national inquietude and 
oppression would have been avoided. A greater mass of these 
evils was foreseen by the framers of the Union, and attempted 
to be avoided^ by restricting the powers given to Congress, and 
by retaining to the states those powers united with the local 
interests, habits and opinions of each state ; in fact, by secu- 
ring the freedom of property. 

This wise precaution was sdggested by the character of hu- 
man nature, sound reason, substantial justice, and unequivocal 
experience drawn from the consequences of the different policy 
pursued by England in her religious revolution. Why ought 
npt industry to enjoy a freedom of will, similar to that demon- 
strated in the United States, to be so wholesome and happy in 



Digitized by 



Google 



19 

the case of religion? How can an expensive, compulsory unifor- 
mitj in one case, generate blessings, when it has generated 
curses in the other ? It was not intended by our revolution to 
destroy the freedom of will, in relation either to speculation, 
actual habits or personal interests. It designed to draw a plain 
line between the foreign relations of the United States, and 
the internal concerns of each state ; and the vitality of the 
union, as well as the vitality of religion, lies in a strict adhe- 
rence to the same principle. Each state, however different in 
its habits and interests, like each sect however different in its 
tenets and ceremonials, has its liberty and happiness embarked 
and hazarded upon its preservation ; and if any are tempted by 
the bribe of delusive advantages to abandon it, they will, like 
the religious sects which yielded to the temptations of pride, 
enthusiasm and avarice, when possessed of the majority, pro- 
duce civil war, forge chains for themselves, and obtain a tolera- 
tion of property instead of its freedom. A combination of 
corporations, exclusive privileges and pecuniary speculations, 
assails republican puritanism, as protestant puritanism was as- 
sailed by a combination of Roman Catholick princes, and for 
the same reason. It obstructs frauds. 

The maxim of James the first, ** no bishop no king,'' was a 
political truth ; not limited to the idea of hierarchical orders, 
but an exemplification of the necessity of intermediate orders 
between an individual and a nation, for the support of a des- 
potick government. It applies to all intermediate orders or 
exclusive privileges between a nation and a government, whe- 
ther pecuniary, civil, religious, or military; whether they be 
called lords, mandarins, bashaws, generals, bishops, bankers, 
exclusive privileges, corporations, or companies^ Adhering to 
the maxim in its amplified sense, the English government, for 
its own security, has extended it gradually from bishops and a 
nobility, to an army and to a vast pecuniary order; which, 
though compounded of various corporations, companies and 
exclusive privileges, as the noble order is compounded of a 
variety of titles, is united in the support and defence of the 
government, whatever it may do, as being dependant upon it 
for all the privileges, however denominated, enjoyed by its 
&vour. These dependant orders are even better props of an 
oppressive government than a hereditary nobility. Accordingly, 



Digitized by 



Google 



20 

they are more ardent in defence of political severities, and 
more rapidly create the evil of excessive taxatiw, than the 
orders of ancient coinage. Hereditary titles were more honor- 
able than lucrative, embraced and coBnipted fewer individuals, 
and extorted less from the savings of industry, than depen- 
dant privileges entirely mercenary,: and only capable of being 
fostered by perpetual drafts from the 'majority of nations. 
Andy therefore, the latter have accomplished in England a de- 
gree of oppression, which the former could never effect. Did 
our revolution meditate an intermediate order between the go- 
vernment and the people ? Are not privileged mercenary com- 
binations, dependant on the government, both such an order, 
and of the worst species ? Have we then adopted the essence 
of James's maxim, and subscribed to the opinion, " no exclusive 
privileges, no republick?" 

During* the reigns of the Stuarts, there existed two kinds of 
puritanism; one for purifying religious, the other for purify- 
ing civil government. The natural affinity between the two 
ob^pts, combined the individuals devoted to each ; and {^though 
the imperfect state of political knowledge, and a spirit of 
fanaticism obstructed their efforts, and prevented their com- 
plete success, yet the English weie indebted to this double 
^pulse .for some accessions both of civil and religious liberty, 
which«coi)^titutedr a platform upon which we have raised a more 
perfect superstructure. The civil and religious patriots of that 
period were united by the conviction, that ,a despoHck power 
over the mind will ab^rb a despotick power Over prop^rty^ ^ 
and that a despotick power over property will absorb a des- 
potick power over the mind. The English government, by^ 
retaining such a power over property, has been enabled to retain 
a similar power over the mind. Our revolutionary patriots 
evidently entertained the same opinion, and therefore endea^ 
voured to destroy both kinds of despotism ; and their cpmplete 
success in the establishment of religious freedom, ought not to 
raider the freedom of property hopeless, espemally when it is 
considered, that if the latter is impracticable, the focmer, in 
time, will become abortive. The consideration of the princi- 
ples of our revolution will be resumed in several of the suc- 
ceeding sections. 



Digitized by 



Google 



SECTION S. 
CONSTRUCTION. 

It is necessary^ before I proceed, to appn^riateH stioft ac- 
tion to thig art or artifice. There are two kinds of dmstructioii} 
one calculated to maintaiii, the other to corrupt tir destH>jr tiie 
principles upon which governments are esiabUshed ; one tris^e 
to common sense, the other cotisisting of filaments so slender^ 
as not to be seen except through some magnifyiug glass; one 
which addresses the understanding the other which addresses 
/ ^ejudice or seif*interest. When a njan spKts his mind, and 
glues one haSf to certain principles^ and the other to a mpde of 
construction, by which the same principles are subverted, it is 
no easy matter to find arguments which will {deaseboth hidves. 
There was in old times a God, said by bis worshippers to be 
Mind and lame and foolish, but who seems to me to be more 
quick'Sighted, active and acute in the arts of eoiistruction than 
Minerva herself. But his inspirations are unhappily partial ; 
for, if tM3 deity would but open the eyes* of every one to his 
own interest, the m6de of t^nstitictibn most conducive to the 
general interest would be elected by a repuUican majority. 

Next to this influence over construction, is that of govern^ 
ments. In all, except our own, the pe<^e have nothing to do 
with it ; but ours is modelled With an intention that they should 
hav0 ntuchto do with it; and what is better for current use, 
tt^tt the members of the government themselves shall be 
strongly induced, individually, to give it fair play. But as the 
pride of power, the temptations of self-interest, and ev^n th« 
consciousness of good intentions, might crwjk or sharpen this 
terrible weapon, those invested with most power, hold theit 
offices for short periods ; and are exposed to frequent returns 
to private life ; that the people might straighten or blunt its 
edge occasionally. This dependance, and our affection for 
eUldrea and relatiims, whose fate we are dealing ooti unite to 



Digitized by 



Google 



22 

chasten and restrain the unlimited power of construction ; and. 
though the solicitations of pride, vanity, or avarice, may in a 
few cases prevail, yet, under our form of government, a great 
majority of legislative bodies must feel an honest loyalty to 
correctness. 

All other governments, as expositors of power, are influenced 
/ by motives exactly the reverse of these. With them, construc- 
tion is not a science to preserve the rights of mankind, but an 
art for extending their own power. Its business is to forge wealth 
for individuals or combinations, and chains for majorities : To 
make payment for usurpations, in fulsome flatteries, and insi- 
dious projects: To substitute successive, vacillating, eccentrick 
meteors, for steady planets of fixed orbits : To promise future 
blessings for present innovations, with the* prophetical truth of 
those prospective chronologists, who have so often foretold the 
arrival of the millenium : And to furnish parties, factions, 
combinations and individuals, with concealed dirks to stab 
liberty. • 

The framers of our constitutions exerted all their faculties, 
to exclude from our policy this pernicious species of construc- 
tion, by specifications and restrictions. Its wonderful acute- 
ness in misinterpretation, was understood, and sedulously 
guarded against. It had often perverted the Scripture, and 
converted patriotism into treason. Russel and Sidney fell 
under the ed^e of constructive treason. The day on which 
the former was beheaded, the wise and learned university of 
Oxford, convinced by its doctors in the art of construction, 
declared every principle by which a free constitution can be 
maintained, to be " impious and heretical,'^ especially the doc- 
trine, that **all civil authority is derived from the people." 
Sidney had maintained it Thence it was inferred, that he 
meant to excite the people to enforce it ; that this would cause 
insurrection ; that insurrection was treason ; and that Sydney 
was therefore guilty of treason. He had also asserted,, that 
tyrants ought to be deposed and punished, as in the cases of 
Nero and Caligula. Thence it was inferred, that he was 
a traitor in imagining, that tiie king of England, if a tyrant, 
might be justly deposed and punished. Which can do most 
harih tomankind^ constructive treasons or constructive powers? 
The fir§t takes away the life of an individual, the second des- 



Digitized by 



Google 



25 

troys the liberty of a nation. The machine called inference 
can act as extensively in one case as in Ihe other. A govern- 
ment, by an unlimited power of constructioni may stretch con- 
stitutions as Jeffiies did laws, or interpret them as synods do 
scripture, according to the temporal interest of the predomi- 
nant sect. Yet it often happens, that whilst our hea^ glow 
on recollecting the political and religious martyrs, who have 
fallen by the edge of this destructive weapon ; our heads freeze 
when it is applied to our constitutions, by forgetting its ability 
to destroy the political as well as the natural body. 

The Stuart family, in three successive reigns, pertinaciously 
adhered to the ingenuity of conceding principles, and then con- 
struing them away. Thas they craftily endeavoured to extend 
their powers ; and two of them paid the forfeits of the experi- 
ment. An admission of a line of separation between tlie 
powers of the state and federal governments, followed with its 
obliteration with the sponge of inference, would bear a close 
resemblance to many of the stratagems practised by this con- 
struing family. 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



SECTION 3. 
SOVEREIGNTY. 

I DO not know how it has happened, Ihat this word has crept 
into our political dialect, unless it be that mankind prefer mys- 
tery to knowledge; and that governments love obscurity better 
than specification. The unknown powers of sovereignty and 
supremacy may be relished, because they tickle the mind with 
hopes and fears ; just as we indulge the taste with Cayenne 
pepper, though it disorders theliealth, and finally destroys the 
body. Governments delight in a power to administer the palat- 
able drugs of exclusive privileges and pecuniary gifts; and 
selfishness is willing enough to receive them ; and this mutual 
pleasure may possibly have su^ested the ingenious stratagem, 
for neutralizing constitutional restrictions by a single word, as 
a new chymical ingredient will 6ften change the effects of » 
great mass of other matters. 

Neither the declaration of independence, nor the federal con- 
stitution, nor the constitution of any single state, uses this 
equivocal and illimitable word. The first declares the colonies 
«' to be free and independent states." The second is ordained 
to "secure the blessings of liberty tci ourselves and our poste- 
rity :" And the rest recognize governments as " the servants 
of the people." In none, is there the least intimation of a 
sovereign power ; and in all, conventional powers are divided, 
limited and restrained. There is, I believe, an instance in a 
bill of rights, in which a state is declared " to be free, sovereign 
and independent.'? But it was the state and not its govern- 
ment which was the object of this declaration ; and the refer- 
ence was to other nations. The language of all these sacred, 
civil authorities, is carefully chastened of a word, at discord 
with their purpose of imposing restrictions upon governments, 
by the natural light of mankind to establish societies for them- 
selves. It could not be correctly used as a vehicle of power, 
D 



Digitized by 



Google 



either external or internal. The idea of investing scrvanta 
with sovereignty, and that of investing ourselves with a sove- 
reignty over other nations, were equally preposterous. Sove- 
Vreignty implies superiority and subordination. It was therefore 
inapplicable to a case of equality, and more so to the subordi- 
nate power in reference to its creator. The word being rejected 
by our constitutions, cannot be correctly adopted for their con- 
struction ; because, if this unanimous rejection arose from its 
unfitness for their design of defining and limiting powers, ita 
interpolation by construction for the purpose of extending 
these same powers, would be an evident inponsisteucy. It 
would produce several very obvious contradictions in our poli- 
tical principles. It would transfer sovereignty from the people^ 
(confining it to mean the right of self-government only,) to their 
own servants. It would invest governments and departments, 
invested with limited powers only, with unspecified powers. It 
would create many sovereignties, each having a right to deter- 
mine the extent of its sovereignty by its own will. And if two 
sovereignties over the same subjects could never agree, it would 
propose for our consideration what was to be eiqpected from an 
army of sovereignties. Our constitutions, therefore, wisely 
rejected this indefinite word as a traitor of civil rights, and 
endeavored to kill it dead by specifications and restrictions of 
power, that it might never again be used in political disquisi- 
tions. 

In fact, the term ** sovereignty,'* was sacrilegiously stolen 
from the attributes of God, and impiously assumed by kings. 
Though they committed the theft, aristocracies and republicks 
have claimed the spoil. Imitation and ignorance even seduced 
the English puritans and the long parliament to adopt the des- 
potism they resisted ; and caused them to fail in accomplishing 
a reformation for which they had suffered the evils of a long 
war. By assuming divine rights, because they had been claimed 
popes, and drawing powers from an inexhaustible 
hey aggravated the tyranny they intended to des- 
3rited the fate which they finally experienced, 
and synods snatched the keys of Heaven from 
ihops, and the long parliament, those of property 
ig ; and both demonstrated whaf man would do 
ers of Providence. By our constitutions, we re- 



Digitized by 



Google 



jected the errors upon which oar forefathers.had been wrecked, 
and withheld from oar governments the keys of temporal and 
eternal rights, by usurping which, their patriots had been con- 
verted into tyrants ; and invested them only with powers to 
restrain internal wrongs, and to resist foreign hostility ; with- 
<>ut designing to establish a sovereign power of robbing one 
citizen to enrich another. 

Sovereignty is neither fiduciary nor capable of limitation. 
Accordingly, the long parliament asserted, that *' there were 
two sovereignties in England, their's and the king's," and left 
us a specimen of what may be expected from two sovereignties 
here, state and federal. Two sovereignties or supremacies 
over the same subjects have often appeared. Two or more 
emperors frequently existed in the Roman empire, each claim- 
ing the absolute powers of sovereignty. Several popes have 
existed at the same time, each claiming the absolute powers of 
supremacy, and both pretending to keep the keys of Heaven« 
But sovereignty being by its nature a unit, its division implied 
usurpation, and therefore the king, the parliament, the empe- 
rors and the popes, in exercising it, were all usurpers; and 
hence an allotment or division of the powers of sovereignty by 
our governments among themselves, would also be an usurpa- 
tion. If we must use terms, taken from the deity to adorn 
the brows of men, we cannot still divest them of their mean- 
ing ; and as sovereignty implies individuality, we are reduced 
to the necessity, to satisfy its meaning, of looking for this 
essential quality. I admit that it may be found among us, 
either in congress or in the people j but I deny that it can exist 
in both. Chastened down to the signification of a natural 
right in nations to institute and limit their own governments, 
it only embraces the principle by which alone social liberty can 
be established ; extended to the idea of a power in governments 
to regulate conscience or to distribute property at its pleasure, 
it includes the principle by which social liberty H destroyed. 

Oppression is universally caused by pecuniary fanaticism. 
If the proposition be true, the remedy is indicated. Does the 
indication point to a sovereignty in governments over property, 
or to its security agunst a power so despotick ? As the evil 
has eluded and corrupted all political theories hitherto, it re- 
quired a remedy at its root Sovereignty was its root, and we 



Digitized by 



Google 



f^-' 



£8 

endeavoured to eradicate it by establishing goTemments inves- 
ted with specified and limited powers. But the evil» restless 
and persevering, requires a perpetual activity and jealousy on 
the part of nations, to keep it from shooting up new scions. 
Wi" Protean and plausible, its shrubs must be grubbed up as they 

appear, or they will soon grow into trees. As the love of 
wealth is common to all civilized men, and governments are 
composed of men, laws to protect the properly of nations 
against governments are as necessary, as laws to protect the 
property of one man against another. Jngurtha's exclamation 
against the government of Rome was foolish. The influence 
of avarice even at that early age was not a novelty. What 
ground then was there for surprise, because * Rome was for saleP 
The government exercised an absolute power over tiie national 
property. How then could he have doubted, whether this 
power could find purchasers ? I discern no age, no country, no 
government, wherein these sales of the rights and properties 
of mankind have not abounded. Though the modes of this 
political traffick are multifarious, yet the result is as certain 
as a mathematical conclusion ; and a remedy which can reach 
all modes can only bc^ effectual. 

Lycurgus, sensible of the cause by which governments were 
corrupted, excluded it entirely ; and surrendered the amemties 
of life, the acquisition of knowledge^ the elegancies of taste, 
the fine arts, the circle of the sciences^ and almost civilization 
itself; because he computed a loss so enormous as a cheap sa- 
crifice, to get rid of fln evil so calamitous. The Athenians; 
unwilling to surrender the blessings of life, but sensible of the 
evil, endeavoured to restrain it, by the ineffectual expedient of 
the ostracism. The Romans long resisted the avarice of the 
senate, vainly depended upon elective tribunes to abolish 
frauds in which they participated, and at length fled from the 
avarice of many, to the avarice of one. The ignorant northern 
conquerors saw no better remedy against oppression, than to 
yield the utmost scope to the principle of sovereignty, by an 
absolute transfer of themselves and their proper^ to feudal 
kings and barons. As the Europeans became more enlightened, 
they became sensible of the tyranny of avarice, and aft^a 
series of ineffectual stru^les to emancipated themselves fnusi 
its grasp, have only changed the form of its operation, wit^Jiaut 



Digitized by 



Googk 



29 

diminishing its oppressions. England, the most successful in 
theory, has nothing to boast of in practice ; and even the im« 
proyements in the form of her government, have become instru- 
ments for avarice, by which it has effected as much at least as 
the feudal system could accompliph* By the confidence deri- 
ved from representation, united with the power of a sovereignty 
in the government over property, avarice is enabled to draw 
from the people all they can possibly sp^ire. Thus they owe 
to the wisest political discovery, the greatest political evil ; and 
representation itself, the last refuge of hope, is contaminated 
and rendered abortive, by its union witii a sovereign power over 
property. The means used by a sovereignty in the English 
government, are monitors to us. They consist of a long cata- 
logue of exclusive privileges, and legal donations, bestowed by 
the power of sovereignty, and taken from private property. 
The nation, tutored by the domestick usurpations of sovereignty, 
have been taught to believe, that it was as right to sacrifice 
foreign nations to its own avarice, as it was, that themselves 
should be sacrificed, to the avarice of domestick combinations ; 
and have suffered a second series of calamities from the same 
unjust principle, because the spoils of oppression are always 
intercepted by the instruments for inflicting it. The same 
thing arises universally from tiie most specious domestick 
combinations, under pretence that they will advance tiie national 
good. The managers of the pretext absorb its fruits, and the 
majority of the nation get regret for their loss. The people of 
England have gazed at the wealth amassed by the bounties, 
the pensions, the monopolies, the exclusive privileges, the tithes^ 
and the contracts of their sovereign government, until, being 
undeluded by the argument of sensation, and deceived no lon- 
ger in the promises of projects to dii^se blessings, they are 
only restrained from subverting society itself by the force of 
a mercenary army. 

A love of property is the chief basis of civil society ; but 
like all other passions it ought to be regulated and restrained, 
to extract from it the benefits it can produce, and to counter- 
act the evils it can inflict. All honest politicians have acknow- 
ledged the necessity for constitutional restrictions, to curb the 
fanaticism of ambition ; and as the love of wealth is a passion of 
^der influence, being often even the primary motive by which 



w 



Digitized by 



Google 



II 



w 



80 

ambition itself is awakened, that also demanded constitutional' 
restrictions, at least as forcible, to operate upon the individuals 
who composed a government. If a society is so constituted, 
as to invest a government with a sovereign power over property, 
restrictions upon the passion of ambition must become abortive, 
because the government will possess the means by wliich it is 
excited and nourished* 

The distribution of wealth can only be regulated by industry, 
by fraud or by force* Fraud and force are of equal weight in 
the scales of justice. Theoretically, they are of the same cha- 
racter ; practically, fraud has been by far the most pernicious^ 
in distributing property. Yet pecuniary fanaticism or exck- 
eive privileges, can abhor a resort to force, and admire a resort 
to fraud for the same purpose. What could be objected to the 
exercise of a sovereignty in the people, forcibly to distribute , 
property? Nothing stronger than may be objected to a sove- 
reignty in the government, to do it fraudulently. If pecuniary 
morality, or the freedom of property is the basis of a good 
government ; and if a distribution of property by the power of 
the government or even of the people would designate a bad 
one; no remedy which would reach only half the evil, could 
make the government good. If it deprived (he people of this 
pernicious power and gave it to the government, or if it depri- 
ved the government of the power, and gave it to the people, 
the social principles would either Way be imperfect, because 
neither expedient would be bottomed upon the natural right 
of mankind to the fruits of their own labour. We must ex- 
tract principles from facts, and the experience of the whole 
world supplies them in abundance. England alone, the admir- 
ed model of a sovereignty in government over property, sup- 
plies facts enough to establish the principles, and to justify the 
conclusions for which I have contended ; and would prove, 
that an artificial sovereignty for taking away that which belongs 
to others, cannot be better, than a natural sovereignty, for keep- 
ing that which belongs to ourselves. 

The use of a hyperbolical word, su^ested by a laudable zeal, 
has exposed pliilosqphers to some degree of ridicule ; and their 
exertions for benefiting mankind, have been considerably coun- 
teracted, by insisting upon our « perfectibility." If the exagge- 
rated word "sovereignty" can he successfully used to disencum- 



Digitized by 



Google 



ber our governments in general, or the federal government in 
particular^ of the restrictions imposed upon them by the people ; 
it would be peculiarly hard, that one extravagant word should 
arrest the improvement of man's state, and also that another 
should deprive him of. the improvements he has made ; though 
both as being hyperbolical, would seem to merit an equal share 
of ridicule. 

Sui^ose, however, we admit the hyperbolical claim of sove« 
reignty to divine origin, and concede the consequence, that 
as its origin is divine, its powers must be boundless ; it will 
then be necessary to enquire upon whom the splendid donation 
has been bestowed^ whether on kings, on governments, or on 
the people ; on one man, on a few men, or on all men* Now, 
as the two first of these competitors are artificial bein^, and 
the last only natural beings ; and as we know of no other 
channel, except that of nature, through which this divine boon 
has been conveyed ; and as mental and bodily facultiesj common 
to all men, are the only evidences of it ; the enquiry would 
seem very clearly to terminate in the conclusion, that the rodo* 
montade ** I alone am king of me'' was considerably more mo« 
dest, than that other, now ^^ontended for, " I alone am king of 
you/' 

This is a concession conformable to the doctrine of the 
hi^est-toned advocates for sovereignty which have ever ap- 
peared ; but it would be uncandid to confine the enquiry to a 
ground which would only propose for our election, liberty on 
one. hand, or the utmost conceivable degree of despotism on the 
other. The modern and more moderate advocates of sove- 
reignty have ceased to contend for its divine origin ; and have 
rather stru^led for its powers, than defended the genealogy so 
much insisted upon by their predecessors. They seem tacitly, 
but by no means plainly, to admit that sovereignty is not a 
divine, but a conventional right. They ,must assume pne of 
these grounds in asserting the sovereignty of governments, and 
as the latter is the strongest, I will yield it to them. Having 
gotten upon this ground, chosen by the advocates for sovereign- 
ty, I now ask them to shew me the conventional sovereignty 
for which they contend. Far from discerning any glimpse of 
the powers of sovereignty in our constitutions, I see nothing 
but long catalogues of limitations, restrictions, balances and 



Digitized by 



Google 



\\ 



32 

divisions of power» and if this young political family can bt 
ground back into the old hoary traitor sovereignty, in the mill 
of construction, it will be just reversing the ancient prodigy of 
grinding old men into young ones. 

nl do not however admit that ** sovere^ty and the right of 
i self-government" are equivalent things, except it is supposed 
that both reside in the people, and neither in a government 
Under this supposition it follows, that sovereignty or self-go- 
vemment are natural rights, and that governments cannot par- 
ticipate of either, because their rights are all conventional* 
This opinion is so firmly fixed in our country, however in some 
cases exterior politeness may subsist with internal contempt, 
or verbal concession with practical disavowal, that I may safely 
assume the principle, that the right of self-government, and so- 
vereignty also if it came from God, resides in the people. This 
being a natural right, like the right to our own labour, no exist- 
ing generation can deprive another of it, and convey it to kings 
or governments, upon any better ground, than it could decree, 
that the heads of all future generations, as fast as they arrived 
to manhood, should be taken away from them. If no conven- 
tional act can deprive man of life, liberty and property, and if 
sovereignty in governments would have this effect, it follows 
that sovereignty cannot be conventionally established ; and that 
whether gentlemen deduce it from this source by hyperbolical 
inferences, or from a divine origin, it is still a useless, foreign 
and perplexing word to our political system. But supposing 
the rights of sovereignty and of self-government to be insepa- 
rably united with each other; and that a number of men assem- 
bled to exercise one right, are also invested with the other ; yet 
I see no reason why they may not establish a government with 
limited powers, and retain this imaginary sovereignty if it ia 
real ; and instead of , uniting with these limited powers, the 
indefinite powers of sovereignty, agree that they shall be subor- 
dinate to their will, restricted by their constitutional mandate, 
and liable to their revision. This was actually done in the es- 
tablishment of all our constitutions; and as these conventional 
acts, far from bestowing sovereignty on governments, have 
actually retained it in the hands of the people, if it existed at 
all, and if sovereignty may have a conventional origin, it is so 
deposited, I shall therefore disregard the distinction between 



Digitized by 



Google 



33 

the rights of soTereigntj and of self-goverament in the pro* 
. gress of thk enquiry, and in accordance with common language^ 
use the term ** sovereignty'^ as an attribute of the right of self- 
government; and only applicable to the people. 

We must then return to the old idea of sovereignty^ in or- 
der to compare it with the new one. The sovereignty of kings, 
presumptuously derived from the same source, from which man- 
kind derive the right of self-government, long puzzled philoso- 
phers and patriots before it was exploded; but no sooner was 
the usurpation wrenched from kings, but other men, with other 
titles, seized upon it for their own use. Thus the enquiry glid- 
ed into an immaterial controversy, and instead of considering 
the question, whether any man or set of men ought to exercise 
the absolute power of sovereignty, the only contest was, whe- 
ther it ought to be exercised by a monarchy, aristocracy or a 
republick. In such a contest the people could never gain any 
t^id or permanent victory ; for, sovereignty was the prize of the 
victor, in any event, at their expense. In England, it has cir- 
culated among all these combatants. It has been exercised by 
kings, by occasional aristocracies of barons, by lords and com- 
mons, by the commons alone, and by a protector of the liber- 
tks of England $ by governments, regal, aristocratical, elective 
jad hereditary. All of them exercised its despotick powers; 
granted franchises to the nation or to any section of it; bestow- 
ed, revoked and modelled representation; created monopolies, 
corporations and exclusive privileges, and managed commerce 
as a means for defrauding labour and gratifying avarice. First 
the barons, and th^i the lords and commons, transferred the 
crown from one man or family to another; and finally, this fluc- 
tuating sovereignty has settted, not upon the people, but upon 
king, lords and commons, with a power unlimited, except as 
lord Coke observes, that it is unequal to impossibilities. Its ca- 
pacity to effect Mty political changes or innovations, is demon- 
strated, by its having extended the power of a house of com- 
mnns elected for four years only, to seven. These facts are 
constructions of the wwd •* sovereignty," displaying the con- 
sequences of its adoption into our political vocabulary. By 
referring to the Si^^lish bo^s and practices, from which it is 
borrowed, for its interpretation, it turns out to be synonimous 
wUh despotism* fiow. then can it be incorporated with our 
E 



Digitized by 



Google 



S4 

political system, without inyesting our governments with a 
power of encroachment; without freeing them from constitu- 
tional restrictions ; and without subverting the sovereignty of 
the people? No English sovereignty regal, parliamentary or 
republican, recognized sovereignty or a right to self-govern- 
ment in the people. The long parliament loved sovereignty 
as well as any other form of government All the usurpers of 
sovereignty used favours and penalties to sustain it, and the ac- 
ceptance of the former was a voluntary acknowledgment of a 
right to bestow them. Among a people jealous of their liberty, 
this mode for procuring a confession of the existence of a so- 
vereign power in government, will undoubtedly be preferred 
as the safest, and selected as the most successful ; but as it is 
the most seducing and dangerous, it ought to be restrained wi& 
the greatest circumspection. Exclusive privil^es will make 
more proselytes to despotism, than the severest punishments. 

But it may be objected, if sovereignty and despotism are 
synonimous terms, that the sovereignty of the people is also 
a despotism. The objection is answered by the following con- 
siderations. If societies are instituted by consult, the ofcjee- 
tion fidls, because the despotism objected is converted into free 
will and in fact becomes the very opposite of despotism. If by 
the majority; it is then to be considered, whether this species of 
despotism or sovereignty, is preferable or not, to despotism or 
sovereignty in one person or in a minority. An alternative* 
arising from comparison, constitutes the scope for the range of 
intellect In theory, it is probable that much fewer causes w91 
exist, wtiich would induce the majority of a nation to invade 
the rights of a minority, than such as solicit one or a few to in- 
vade the rights of the nation or of some of its parts. In fact 
the first have been extremely rare and evanescent ; the latter, 
continual and lasting. It is true that many wise and good men, 
whilst they intuitively admit the right of self-government to 
reside in nations, suffer imagination to conjure up a tumultuous 
populace, discharging its fury upon life, liberty and property, 
and shrink from the terrifick spectre; whilst they cannot see 
any danger in a sovereign government discharging its frauds 
against liberty, property and individual happiness, by monopolies 
and exclusive privileges. Such apparitions appeared to devout 
men, and caused them to deprecate the introduction of religious 



Digitized by 



Google 



35 

freedoib. Thej were also seen by 'no small number during 
pur revolutionaiy war« and eyen disfigured the declaration of 
independence into an uglj monster. But having, in these cases, 
rubbed off the rust, spread over the sovereignty of the people by 
Ignorance and monopolies, it ought not to be lost under a new 
incrustation composed of phantoms, kneaded by selfishness, 
and spread by construction and inference. Let us recollect 
that this composition, if left undisturbed, indurates with won* 
derful celerity. 

It is however superfluous to consider, whether the sovereign* 
tj of the people is a better or worse political maxim, than the 
sovereignty of the government; because the question to be set- 
tled for q)plication as we proceed, is, which of these competitors 
is sovereign in fact. If the government created the people, that 
is, organized them into a nation, there can be no doubt but that 
the government is sovereign. The kings of England had a 
claim to sovereignty upon this ground. They created a nation 
(lords and commons) by successive charters and franchises. But 
4inhappily for the argument, our nation created their govern* 
ments. Yet it sug^sts an observation of no little weight Had 
the lords or commons, or bodies politick, or corporations, exer- 
cised a right of creating other lords, or commons, or bodies poli- 
tick, or corporations, it would have been a usurpation of the 
king's sovereignty, and must gradually have subverted it. The 
application of this remark is obvious. 

It has been observed, that sovereignty implies a correspon- 
dent inferiority ; and required, that the subject for a sovereign 
power in our governments to operate upon, should be pointed 
out. Does it reach the sovereignty of the people, or is the go- 
Ternment only sovereign over itself? Is the foolish boast, '' I 
alone am king of me," converted into sound sense, by being 
applied to a state or federal government ? Our governments must, 
if they are sovereigns, have the people, or only themselves for 
subjects. To avoid a collision with the sovereignty of the peo- 
ple ; to find subjects for the sovereignty of a government ; and 
to avoid the absurdity of a sovereignty without subjects ; it has 
been conceived, that some of our political departments are sove- 
reigns over others, and one over all. This anomalous sovereign- 
ty, whilst it pretends to respect, directly assails the sovereignty 
nf the people., . AH our political departments hold their; power 



Digitized by 



Google 



S6 

under this authmtj, and not under the authority of the govern* 
ment. But this new species of sovereignty proposes to take 
away all its subjects from the sovereignty of the people, and 
reduce it to the state of a king whose sovereignty was admitted, 
but who had no subjects. The pope of Rome manages this afiair 
admirably. When he wishes to get a troublesome bishop out 
of his way, whom he fears puUickly to disgrace, he transfers 
him to a cure of souls in foreign parts, where there are no souls 
to cure ; still leaving to him the title of bishop. So if congress 
have any sovereignty over the political departments called states, 
the sovereignty of the people would lose a great portion of its 
eure of souls, although congress should politely leave them l^eir 
title. 

Our state constitutions confer upon a state majority, a power 
oyer every department of government, either directly by elec- 
tion, or by an influehce over elective departments, entrusted 
with appointments. In this elemental basis, we discern clearly 
a positive conventional power, designed to exercise and to re- 
tain the sovereignty of the people, or the right of self-govern- 
ment; and we as clearly discover in the governments them* 
selves, the subjects over which this conventional power was i/^ 
be exercised. The federal constitution established three con^" 
ventional powers over the federal government, lodging one in 
the majority of the people of each state ; anoMier in the state 
governments, comprised in the appointment of federal senators ; 
and a third in the state governments also, comprised in a mode 
of amending tlie federal constitution. A conventional sove- 
reignty being thus retained by the people over the state govern- 
ments, and by the people and the state governments also, over 
the federal government, neither of these governments can legi- 
timately acquire any species of sovereignty at all, because it 
would be contrary to the conventional sovereignty actually esta- 
blished. The positive supervising powers bestowed by the com- 
pact of the union, upon the state governments, over the whole 
federal government, flatly contradicts the idea, that the same 
compact designed constructively to bestow a supervising power 
upon congress, a department only of the federal government, 
over the state governments. 

The divinity of sovereignty, and the natural right of self-go- 
vernment, are therefore really the competitors for our prefei:- 



Digitized by 



Google 



S7 

ence* As the latter hss been evidently Reeled as the basis of 
oar conventioflal associations, the former is the only foundation 
upon whiefa any of our governnlents can establish a right to 
sorereignty. Before the American revolution, the natural right 
of self-government was never plainly asserted, nor practically 
enforced ; nor was it previously discovered, that a sovereign 
power in any government, Aether regal or republican, was in* 
consistent with this right, and destructive of its value. Then 
the divine sovereignty claimed by governments of every form, 
was completely exploded or reclaimed by the natural or divine 
tight of self-government, not to be again surrendered, but to be 
retained and employed in creating and controling governments, 
considered as trustees invested with limited functions, and not 
as sovereigns possessing powers derived from that source of des- 
potism. 

The difference between the right of self-government, and the 
90vereignty of governments, is very material. Under one prin- 
ciple the people bestow limited powers ; under the other, they 
receive limited franchises. The sovereigns of England sparing- 
ly and partuiUy bestowed rights upon the people, and retained 
all tiie powers they did not surrender. Here the people or the 
states retain all the powers they have not bestowed. It would 
be as absurd in the one case as in the othef, to infer from limited 
grants, a transfer of the sovereignty itself. Whenever such in- 
ferences were made, the king was substantially dep6sed, until 
the inference itself was exploded; and similar inferences ^11 
in like manner depose the sovereignty of the people here. 

In the hurry of a revolution, before this subject had been well 
considered, and in imitation of the English practice of receiving 
franchises from kings, a bill of rights was annexed to several 
of the state constitutions ; but it was soon discovered, that this 
' was both superfluous and dangerous ; superfluous, as according 
to the right of self*government, powers not bestowed, remained 
with the people ; dangerous, as it seemed to imply that the peo- 
ple, as in England, derived their rights from the government. 
In England, residuary rights not granted, remained with the 
government, and therefore it was iniportant to the people to 
extend such grants as far as possible; here, such ungranted 
rights remain also with the grantors, but these are the people. 
l%is distinction put an end to the custom of annexing a bill of 



Digitized by 



Google 



38 

rights to state constitutions^ and caused a proposition of the 
kind to be rejected by the sages, statesmen, and patriots, who 
framed the constitution of the United States. It can only be 
correct upon the ground, that neither the state nor federal gor 
▼emments received any powers except as trustees, or specified ; 
and of course it was thought that the term « sovereignty," and 
its coadjutors *' supremacy and prerogative" were inapplicable 
to our governments, and incapable of defeating the reason, upon 
which a bill of rights was rejected. Otherwise, this rejection 
most be considered as a stratagem (for they cannot be charged 
with a want of knowledge,) invented by a considerable number 
of our wisest and best men to enslave their country. « 

The patience of tlie reader is solicited, whilst I am endea- 
vouring to establish the principles by which we ought to be 
guided in construing our constitutions. Unless this is done be** 
fore we enter into that intricate field, as the soundest minds 
cannot suddenly and intuitively understand new and intricate 
questions, they will never be understood at all ; nor construc- 
tion confined within any range. To prove that the right of self- 
government, or sovereignty, if the right should be so called, 
resides in the people, may be thought a waste of time, as it ig 
generally admitted; but in my view it seemed necessary to con- 
sider the point, both to sustain the arguments to be extracted 
from it as I proceed ; and because an inattention to its conse- 
quences has, I think, caused several unpremeditated deviations 
from that loyalty to this primary principle of our whole political 
system, which our governments both feel and profess. 



Digitized by 



Google 



SECTION 4. 

THE UNION. 



Who made it ? ^ We, the people of the United States." But 
who were they ? The associated inhabitants of each state» or the 
unassociated inhalntants of all the states. This question is an 
exposition, either of the ignorance or the design of construction* 
If there is no difficulty in answering it, construction ought to 
be lauded at for playing the fool ; but if it gives the wrong an- 
swer, as supposing it to furnish contrary inferences to the right 
one, it ought to be suspected of playing the knave. At least 
an attempt to construe away a fact, known to every body, is a 
very fine specimen of its character when aiming at an acces^on 
of power. It has been imagined, that by considering the union 
as the act of the people, in their natural, and not in their poli- 
tical associated capacity, some aspect of consoUdation might be 
shed over the country, and that the federal government might 
thereby acquire more power. But I cannot discern that the 
construction of the constitution will be affected in the smallest 
degree, by deducing it from either source, provided a sound 
au^rity is allowed to the source selected. Every stipulation, 
sentence, word and letter ; and every donation, reservation, di- 
vision and restriction, will be exactly the same, whichever'is 
preferred. A man, having two titles, may distinguish himself 
by which he pleases, in making a contract; and whichever he 
uses, he remains himselfl So the people having two titles or 
capacities, one arising from an existing association, the other 
from the natural right of self-government, may enter into a com- 
pact under either, but are themselves still ; and their acts are 
equally obligatory, whichever they may select. Politicians may 
therefore indulge their taste in deducing the constitution of the 
union from either, but whichever they may fancy, no sound 
ground will thence result for tiieir differing in the construction 
of it. 



Digitized by 



Google 



40 

Nevertheless^ to take away the pretext, however unsnbstan- 
tial« for a difterent construction of the constitution, oa account 
of the capacity or title under which the pei^le acted in its es- 
tablishment^ it is material to ascertain thi^ meaning of the phrase 
« we the people of the United States;" towards which, let us 
run over most of the state constitutions. 
Mw Hampshire^ ** The people of this state have iht sole and 
exclusive right of governing themselves as a free» sovereign 
and independent state. Every subject of this state. In the 
government of this state. The people inhabiting tiie terri- 
tory formerly called the province of New Hampshire, do 
hereby solemnly and mutually ugree with each otikr to form 
themselves into a free, sovereign and independent body po- 
litick or state. That the state may be equally represented. 
I do swear that I will bear faith and true allegiance to ih€ 
state of New Hampshire." 
Massaii^usetts. " The body politick is formed by voluntary as* 
sociation of individtuils. The people of this commonwealth 
have the sole right of governing themselves as a free, sove* 
reign and independent state. The people do hereby mii- 
tually agree with each other, to form themselves into a fireet 
sovereign and independent body politick or state.*^ 
J\rew York. ** This convention, in the name and by the autho* 
rity of the good people of this state. The l^;isktttre of &is 
state. No members of this sMe shall be disfrsnchised* JDe^ 
legates to represent this state in the general congress of the 
United States. Be it enacted by the people of the sta^" 
Pennsylvania. ** We the people of the conlmonwealtk of Penn- 
sylvania ordain. The legislature df a free state. All go- 
vernment originates from the people and is founded in com- 
pact only." 
Delaware. *' The people of this staJte. The government shall 
be called the Delaware state. The legislature of this state. 
The general assembly of this stiAe. There shall be no es* 
tablishment of any oi^ religious sect in this sto^e." 
Maryland. <<11iepeopfe o/tftisjtoia ought to have the sole and 
exclusive right 6f regulating the internal government thereof 
The legislature of this state. The delegates to cong^-ess 
from this state shall be chosen by yant ballot of both houses 



Digitized by 



Google 



4t 

of assembly. I will be faithful and bear true allegiance to 
Hie state*^^ 

Virginia. " All power is derived from the people. Magis- 
trates are their trustees or servants. A well regulated mi- 
litia is the proper defence of a free state.^^ 

J^Torth Carolina. " The pe^le of this state have the sole and 
exclusive right of regulating the internal government there- 
of. Monopolies are contrary to the genius of a free state* 
All commissions shall run in the name of the state of North 
' Carolina. The legislature of this state. The constitution 
of this stated' 

South Carolina. ** The legislative authority of this state. The 
several election districts in this state shall elect. The 
style of process shall be " The state of South Carolina, and 
conclude against the peace and dignity of the state.^^ 1 
swear to preserve the con8titu1i(m of this state and of the 
United States.^^ 

Georgia. "Members of the legislature shall swear to promote 
the good of the state^ to bear true allegiance to the same, 
and to observe the constitution. To make laws necessary 
for the good of the state. Citiz^is and inhabitants of this 
staU.^^ 

Vermont. "The people arc the sole source of power. They 
have the exclusive right of internal government. All offi- 
cers of government are their servants. Legislative and 
executive business of this state. The people have a right^ 
to exact from their legislators and magistrates the good go- 
vernment of the state. The l^slature of a free and sove^ 
reign state. Shall be entitled to all the privileges of a free- 
man of this state. Every officer shall swear to be faithful 
to the state of Vermont, and to do nothing injurious to the 
constitution or government thereof." 
Without further quotations, let us demonstrate the force of 

these, extracted from a majority of the state constitutions, to 

fix the meaning of the term " state" according to the publick 

judgment, by substituting the word ** govemnient" for it They 

would then read as follows." 
" The people of this government have the sole and exclusive 

" ri^t of governing themselves as a free, sovereign and inde- 

•* pendent governments^ 
V 



Digitized by 



Google 



4£ 

•« In the government of this governments*^ 
" That the government may be equally represented*'* 
<* The people of this government ought to have the sole and 
* exclusive right of regulating the internal government thereof*^ 
«* The legislature of this governmentJ*^ 
" I will be faithful and bear true allegiance to ihegovemmmii.^^ 
« The several election districts in this ^^ovemmen^ shall elect" 
** Members of the legislature shall swear to promote the good 
*« of the goventment and to make laws for the good of the go- 
•* vemment.'*^ 

** Citizens and inhabitants of this government?^ ' 
** The people have a right to exact from their legislators a»d 
*^ magistrates the good government of the govemmeni.^^ 

^ Commissions shall be in the name of the freemen of the^- 
«* vemmentJ^ 

It would be an incivility to the reader, to subjoin to these 
quotations, many arguments, to prove, that the term " state" 
is not in any one instance used in reference to all the people of 
the United States^ either as composing a single state, or as being 
about to compose a single state. Used geographically, it refers 
to state territory ; used politically, it refers to the inhabitants 
of this territory, united by mutual consent into a civil society. 
The sovereignly of this association, the all^;iance due to it, 
and its right to internal government, are all positively asserted. 
The tetius ** state and government" far from being synonimous, 
are used to convey different ideas ; and the latter is never 
recognised as possessing any species of sovereignty. 

It next behooves us to consider whether tiie term *« states" 
has changed its meaning, by bdng transplanted from its ori^- 
nal nursery, into the constitution of the United States ; and is 
there used to designate all the inhabitants of the United States, 
as constituting one great state ; or whether it is recognised iii 
the same sense in which it had been previously used by most or 
all of the state constitutions. 

The plural " states" rejects the idea, that the peqile of all 
the states considered themselves as one state. The word *» uni- 
ted" is an averment of pre-existing social compacts, called 
states ; and these consisted of the people of each separate state. 
It admits the existence of political societies able to contract 
with each other, and v^o had previously c(mtracted. And the 



Digitized by 



Google 



43 

words " more perfect union" far from knpljing that the idd 
parties to the old union were superseded by new parties, eTi* 
dently mean, that these same old parties were about to amend 
theinold union* 

But the parties, though recognised ^ being the same, were 
not strictly so. The authority of the people of each state is 
resorted to in the last union, in preference to that of the go* 
vernment of each state, by which the old confederation was 
formed. This circumstance by no means wei^ens the force of 
the last observation, because tiie recognition of existing politi* 
cal parties able to contract, remains the same. The states, in . 
^eferrii^g to the old union, only admit themselves to have been 
bound by their governments, as they possessed the ri^t of 
making treaties. But as the state governments were the par- 
ties to the first confederation, and as such, had a mutual right 
to destroy that treaty, this danger su^sts another reason for 
tiie style and principles of the new union. Among its improve- 
mei^ts, that by which it is chiefly made " more perfect," was 
the substitution of the authority of ** the people of the United 
States" for that of the governments of the United States ; not 
with an intention of excluding from.the new union the idea of 
a compact between the states, but of placing that compact 
upon better ground, than that upon which it previously rested^ 

The term " union" has never been applied to describe a 
government, established by the consent of individuals; nor do 
any of our state constitutions use it in that sense. They 
speak indeed of individuals '* uniting" to form a government* 
not to form a union ; and I do not recollect that a single com- 
pact between individuals for the. establishment of a govern* 
ment, has ever been called a union ; though a multitude of 
cases exist, in which that mme has been given to agreements 
between independent states. If therefore this term comprised 
the whole evidence, to prove that our union was the act of dis- 
tinct bodies politick, composc^d of the people within different 
geographical boundaries, and not of a number of people* en- 
circled by one line, without any such discrimination, it would 
be sufficient. 

But the constitution itself furnishes the plainest correspond* 
ent evidence, in its ori^, establishment and terms. The 
members of the convention which formed it, were chosen by 



Digitized by 



Google 



44 

states^ and voted by states^ without anj regard to the BHmber 
of people in each state. It was adopted bj thirteen vote^ 
without respecting the same principle. Now what was repre- 
sented by these voters ; the territory of each state, or the 
people of each state ? The terras " United States'' must refer 
to one or the other. If to the former, then the territories of 
each state entered into a compact " to form a more perfect 
" union, establish justice, insure domestick tranquillity, provide 
•* for the common defence, promote the general welfare, and 
** secure the blessings of liberty t(^ ourselves and our posterity.^ 
The posterity of territories. If to the latter, it was ihe peo- 
ple of each state, who by compact in their political capacity, 
by giving one vote each, formed the union. 

The concords with this opinion present tiiemselves at every 
step, throughout the compact. 

The house of representatives are to be chosen by the people 
of the several states, not by the people comprised within the 
^territories of all. The right of choice is confined to the 
electors of the most numerous branch of the state legislatures. 
Thus the right of sufl&*age is placed upon different grounds in 
different states. Had the constitution of the United States 
been the act of all the people inhabiting the territory of the 
United States, this right would have been made uniform ; but 
being the act of the people of each state, in their existing 
political capacity, the right of suffrage of course remained as 
it had been settled by each in forming its society. 

Each state may elect these representatives by a general 
ticket, as some have done ; and however they may have dis- 
bicted themselves by their own act for their own reasons, the 
recognizance of state individuality by the constitution is as 
strong, as if they had not done so. The modes of choosing 
both the president and senate, cmncide also with the opinion, 
that the constitution considered the union as the act of bodies 
politick called states ; and not as the act of a consolidated 
nature ; and it seems to have settled its own construction, by 
providing in the case of no election of a president by electors, 
that he shall be chosen by the house of representatives, •* the 
votes to be taken by states, the representaticm from each state 
having one vote.^^ 



Digitized by 



Google 



45 

As the great politicsd departments of the federal govem- 
ment, legislative and executive^ emanated from the societies 
called states, so thej are made dependant upon them, in the 
mode prescribed for amending the constitution of the union; 
because the authors had the right of altering their own work. 
Had this constitution originated from, or been made by the 
people inhabiting the territories of the whole union, its amende 
ment would hare remained to them, as the amendment of the 
state constitutions belongs to the people t)f a state* But as 
Such a body of associated people, did not exist, the amendment 
of the union is left in the hands of the existing bodies politick, 
to which, as its /authors, it obviously belonged. No majority 
in congress can either calt a convention, or amend the consti- 
tution ; but the legislatures of two-thirds of the states may 
compel congress to call one, and those of three-fourths, may 
amend it. Thus a supremacy of the states, not only over con- 
gress, but over the whole constitution, is twice acknowledged ; 
fo-st, by their power over the legislative and executive depart- 
ments instituted for executing the union ; and seccmdly, by their 
power over the onion itself. I cannot conceive that tlie con- 
stitution could have contained any thing more hostile to the 
doctrine " that the sovereignty or supremacy over the govem- 
** ment of the union, rested in the people of the United States, 
"not in their political, but natural capacity." It clearly dis- 
closes an opinion, that ]diere were no such people, politically 
speaking; nor can I discern a vestige of the people inhabiting 
ike territories of the United States, having ever formed them- 
selves, or attempted to form themselves, into any political so- 
ciety or civil government. By this new doctrine, however, the 
checks provided to controul the powers of the government of 
tiie union are ingeniously evaded. It asserts, that the govern- 
ment of the union is responsible to the sovereignty of the peo- 
ple residing throughout the uni<m, and not to the sovereignty of 
the people residing in each state. Now as an effective sovereign^ 
ty of the people can only result from their having constituted 
themselves into a civil society, and the first people having never 
done so, an acknowledgment of a sovereignty which does not 
exist, only annuls tiiat which does ; and escapes altogether from 
any species of loyalty to this superior authority. It brings us 
back to the old ground of a tacit compact between governments 



Digitized by 



Google 



46 

and sidi^ects. The peo^^ of each state inyested fkeir gorern* 
ments with limited powers, l^ey have also establkhed a 
gOTerament of the union with powers infinitely more limited* 
than those originally bestowed on the state governments* But 
if a tacit social compact between this last government, and the 
peq)le individually of all the states, should be admitted, all 
these specifications would be abolished ; because^ as it is un- 
written, the government of the union might construe it as was 
most convenient to itself, as all governments haye done, whioh 
have condescended to acknowledge implied obligations only* 
The only diSerence between the Europeans and ourselves 
would be, that though some of tiieir govei*nments hardly allow 
of this silent social compact, none acknowledge the sovereign* 
ij of the people; whereas here this sovereignty would be 
denied, where it (^ratively exists, and acknowledged, where 
it does not exist at all ; so that we should still possess over the 
government of the union, all the advantages generally reaped 
from '* we are,gentlemen4 your most obedient servants," whilst 
the story of Saturn would be gradually reversed. 

The eleventh amendment prohibits a constrTietion by which 
the rights retained by the people shall be denied or diaparaged^ 
and the twelfth " reserves to the states respectively or to the 
peopk the powers not delegated to the United States, nor pro- 
hibited to the states.^^ The precision of these expressions is 
haj^ily contrived to defeat a construction, by which the origin 
of the union, or the sovereignty of the states, could be rendered 
at all doubtful. " Powers are reserved to the peopleJ^, « The 
people," says Johnson, ar& ** those who compose a comnm« 
nity." In, a political instrument, the term eo^dusively possess- 
es a collective, inclusive, and social sense, and is never used 
to describe a number of men in a state of nature. A people 
is a collective being. No people or community has ever been 
composed in the United States, except by the inhabitants of 
each state, associating distinctly from every other state, by their 
own separate consent Thus a people in each state was con* 
stituted, and these separate communities confederated, first by 
the instrumentality of their separate governments, and se- 
condly by the separate authority of the people composing each 
state. Common consent is necessary to constitute a people, and 
no such consent, expressly or impliedly, can be shevm, by which 



Digitized by 



Google 



47 

all the inhabitaotft of the United States Imitb ever constitated 
themselves into one pe<^le* This could not have been eflfected 
without destroying every people constituted within each state, 
as one priitical bdng called a peo^e cannot exist within anp* 
then 

The rights of a people are indivisible ; and if a great people 
be compounded of several smaller nations, as it inherently 
possesses the right of self-government, it must absorb the 
same right of self-government in its component parts ; just as 
the rights of individuals are absorbed by the communities inta 
which they constitute themselves. Therefore had a pe<^le been 
Constituted, by melting down the little nations into one great 
nation, those littie nations must have lost the right of self- 
government, because they would no longer have been a people. 
As it was never imagined, that the individuals inhabiting all 
the stetes had constituted themselves into one people, so there 
has never appeared from this imaginary body politick, the least 
attempt towards claiming or exercising the r^t of self-go* 
vemment; nor is the government of the union subjected to its 
controul or modification. Not a single one of the United States 
would have consented to have dissolved its people, to have re- 
united them into <me great people, and to have received state 
governments or unrestricted legislation from this great people* 
so ignorant of local circumstances, and so different in local 
habits. This reasoning would I think have been suflScient to 
ascertain the people by whom the constitution was made, had 
it' contained no internal evidence of the sense in which it 
uses that term. But if tiie phrase " we the people of tiie- 
United Btates'' refers to the people of each state,' the argument 
is superfluous, and the decision of the constitution itself, deci- 
sive. 

The powers reserve<l are those "not delegated by the consti- 
tution." They could only be reserved by those who possessed 
them. They were not powers possessed by a consolidated 
people of all the states, but by a distinct people of each state ; 
and as those who reserved were those who deleted, it follows, 
either tiiat the reservation was to a consolidated people of all the 
States, or tiiat the delegation of powers flowed from the people 
of the separate states. Perhaps the interpolation of -a grantor 
and reserver of powers into the constitution, who had nothing 



Digitized by 



Google 



48 

either to grant or to reserve, may have arisen from an erroneous 
construction of the word " or." If the remark just made is cor« 
rect, consistency decides its true meaning. "Are Reserved to 
the states respectively or to the people." This word is use4 
either to <?ouple synonymes, or to denote opposition. The words 
*< stateib and people" had the same, and also a different mean^ 
ing: The same, as an associated people constituted a stated 
and a different meaning, from the right of self-^vernment at- 
tached to mankind. But another construction seems to me to 
be the true one. " Or" is used merely to conjoin two wwds 
considered as completely synonymous ; and the latter is intr^ 
duced as an expletive of the former, lest it should be interpreted 
to mean " governments." The word " states" had been so 
often used in the constitution, that it was necessary to fix its 
meaning; and this amendment was intended to remove the sus- 
picion of a tendency in the constitution towards consolidation, 
with which it had been charged previously to its adoption; by 
defining " states and people" as words synonymously used, 
effectually to defeat the pretence, that the term " people" meant 
the people of all the states, instead of the people, "respectively^^ 
of each state. A construction which supposes that all the 
inhabitants of all the states, and not the people of each state* 
were meant, would produce consequences which never could 
have been contemplated. The reservation would have been in 
favour of two incongruous objects, and therefore both could not 
reap its benefits. Being in the disjunctive, it might have been 
fulfilled by acknowledging the right of either, although the odier 
should get nothing. By selecting the inhaUtants of all the states 
in one mass, as the assignee of the reserved powers, the govern- 
ment of the union might extend their own powers; since there 
could be no loss, in conceding powers to those who could nei- 
ther receive, exercise, nor preserve them. 

In one other view, highly gratifying, these two amendments 
correspond with the construction I contend for. Several pre- 
vious amendments had stipulated for personal or individual 
rights, as the government of the union was invested with a li- 
mited power of acting upon persons; these stipulate for political 
conventional rights. But different modes are pursued. By 
the first, certain specified aggressions are forbidden; by the se- 
cond, all the rights and power^not delegated are reserved* The 



Digitized by 



Google 



49 

fliiM: mode is imperfect, as the specific iigg^moBS may be 
avoided, and yet oppresi»on might be practised in other forma. 
By ihe seecmd, specification is transferred to the government 
of the union; and the states, instead of being the grantees ci 
limited rights, whibh might have been an acknowledgment of 
subordination, are the grantors of limited powers ; and retain 
a sufu'emacy which might otherwise have been tacitly conceded^ 
as ha3 been often done by the acceptance of franchises from 
monarchs or other sovereigns. Thu^ the powers reserved am 
imly exposed to specified deductions, whilst those delegated 
are liouted, with an injunction that the enumeraticm of certiuii 
ri^ts shidl not be construed to dispan^e those retained though 
not specified, by not having been parted with* . The states, iur 
stead of rec^ving, bestowed powers $ and in confirmation of 
their authority, reserved every right they had not conceded, 
whether it is particularly enumerated, or tacitly retained* 
Among the former, are certain modes by which they can amend 
the constitution ; among the latter, is the original right by which 
they created it. 

When we have discovered who made a treaty, we have also 
discovered where the right of construction resides. Mr. Jef- 
ierson, Mr. Pinkney, Mr. Marshall, aa^d Mr. Gerry, in their ne- 
gotiations with revolutionary France, have furnished us with an 
ndmirable treatise, both to fix the residence of the right, and to 
display the wantonness of construction, assumed without right 
Presidents Washington and Adams, all the successive members 
of the cabinet and congress itself, concurred in the principles 
^advance^ by these gentlemen. They prove, that an exclusive 
right of construction in one party, is a degradation of the other 
to a «tate of infmority and dependance* Their arguments 
might be applied with great force in many views to our subject 
If the states made the union, they demonstrate, that the same 
consent, necessary to create, is necessary to construe. Where- 
ever the creating consent resided, there we are directed to look 
for the construing consent. It would be a much grosser violati(m 
of their principles, for no party to a treaty to usurp an exclusive 
right of construii^ it, than for one party to do so. As neither 
the executive, legislative nor judicial departments of the state or 
federal governments have ever consented to the union, no one 
of these dcf artmei^tscan h^ve an exclusive right of construing 



Digitized by 



Google 



M 

OerigbtkflMtuL And if tkcy are aO to be < 
fte c<»-onl]Bate dqnrtmeBts or cresteret ef 'Uttpcaple ef 1 
United States,'^ tbej derive a ■mtaai rigM ^ laaiUattiu^ 
IfOB Oe BntBal rig|it potaewed bj the states wludi tbej repre- 
mat Sappase ear legblative and jadidal dcfsitinti had fix- 
ed tbnrowa r^ts bjr a treatj between theaiselTes. iatiie wvrda 
af the general or state coostitBtkms; woald not eack have paa- 
aesaed an aosabsenrient rigbt of constivctioa ? If this right 
woald be aiataal in the case sapposed, what hinders it inm be- 
ing also nuitoal, if these d^iartments are created bjr an anth»* 
ntj saperior to both, and invested with distinct and linuted 
agencies. Bach tnistea is snbf ect to the soperriaian of hia em* 
^ojer, and neither liaUe to a asarpatiaa af anotiier, an j mare 
than sereral co-ordinate ambassadors, woald be to a claim of 
one to prescribe the duties of the rest, and regalate their con* 
sciences. It is easiest for an exdosiTe power of constractioi^ 
where the Unuts of respectire territories are hardest to ddue^ 
to make conquests which will destroy balances, and break 
down restrictions; and therefore its interdictioa in such ca s e s 
is more necessary, than in others. 

I conclnde ^is section with a quotation from the Federalist 
^ The assent and ratification of the pe<^le, not as indiriduab 
** composing one entire nation, but as composing the distinct 
^ and independent states io which the j belongs are the sources 
** of the c^postitution. It is therefore not a national, but a fede- 
** ral compact.''(a) 

{a) Fed. 906. M. The qaotalions frooT the Fedenlirt are takee from tke 
edilioo of 1817, whidi detignates the writer of eaeh emy ; and I liaTe added 
Oie leoert M. or U. to inform tlie reader irhidi are eited from Mr. Madison, 
and whieh from Mr. Uamfltoo. 



Digitized by 



Google 



SECTION B. 

DIVISION AND LIMITATION OF POWER- 



In this and the following seetion, I shall endearour^to esta* 
bEsh principles vitallj isiportant to our system of gorernn^erit, 
and however the mibject maj be handled, particularly worthy 
of the publick consideration. 

Human societies were originally constituted with a view to 
the interest of one or a few, and governments were consequent* 
ly founded in the simple principle of subord ination* They were 
splendid statues, the people were pedest^s, and a succession of 
convulsions, occasioned by a gas too sublimated or too heavy, 
instantly overturned, only to set them up again. Monarchy, 
aristocracy, and democracy succeeded each other ; but all being 
founded in the principle of subordination to unlimited power, it 
ran like the blood of the Stuarts throu^ tlie whde family, and 
made each individual a scourge to mankind. As knowledge 
advanced, philosophers sought for alleviations of a condition so 
unhappy ; and having only seen those three forms of govern- 
ment, called them natural principles, and expected a remedy 
lor the defects of each, from a mixture of all. It was seen and 
admitted, that the formation of a government, after the model 
of an army, by a series of suborduiation from a king to a con- 
stable, from a general to a corporal, made tyrants and slaves; 
and checks and balances were contrived to prevent both conse- 
quences, by poizing the three supposed natural principles against 
each other, fraught with co-ordinate, distinct ^nd independent 
powers. Thus the principle of a necessary series of subordina- 
tion was exploded ; but as the discovery was new, and as the 
dogma "that monarchy, aristocracy, and democracy comprise4 
all the ingredients of government" was still believed ; it was 
imperfectly cultivated. Hence absolute sovereignty continued 
to be assigned to mixed governments, and absolute subordina- 
tion to the people. This first effort of political improvement 



Digitized by 



Google 



5£ 

was however recommended bj a considerable portion of prac- 
tical success. The checks, collisions and balances* though im-^ 
perfectly contrived, produced effects, which exalted and invi- 
gorated several nations, above those which had neglected similar 
political modifications* But still the error of retaining absolute 
power in the government, and inflicting absolute subnussion on 
the people, caused no small degree of oppression, which excited 
mankind to search for a better remedy. Locke and others at 
length discovered, that sovereignty in governments and passive 
obedience in nations, far from being natural or neeessM*y prin-^ 
ciples for civil societies, were arbitrary and pernicious notioiiOy 
capable of being supplanted by opinions more natural ; and Aat 
civil government, constructed upon different principles, tmA 
subjected to responsibility and control, might be made more 
productive of national happiness. But the natural right of 
self-government, and the consequent rights at dividing and 
limiting power, might have dept forever in theory, except for 
the American revolution ; which seems to have been des^ned 
bj Providence for the great purpose of demonstrating its prac«> 
tlcabifity and effects. We seem to have been propelled by ne^ 
cessity and commanded by fate, to stride beyond the princij^et 
of absolute sovereignty in a government, and absolute subordi- 
nation in the people ; and beyond'the ineffectual project of mix-^ 
ing monarchy, aristocracy, and democracy together ; quite up to 
the sound political doctrines of limitation, restriction, and divi- 
sion of power. Far from allowing sovereignty to governments. 
Or confiding our rights to a balance between arbitrary and arti- 
ficial political principles, we were obliged to feel and to act 
upon the genuine and natural principle of self-government; to 
extract from it the obvious truths " that sovereignty resided in 
the people, and that magistrates were consequently their trus- 
tees," and to vindicate these rights by creating co-ordinate and 
collateral political departments invested with limited powers ; 
instead of that absolute power, so highly pernicious in the hands 
of any one of the three ancient principles, and so far from being 
made harmless by their mixture. Thus we constituted a vride 
difference between our policj lind that of the finglish ; in its 
origin ; in expelling from it two of their principles entirely ; in 
rejecting the balances for the better security of co-ordinate de- 
partments; and in witb-holding from these departments, either 



Digitized by 



Google 



5$ 

niuf^jfui uBMed» tiMm^ts of sovereigBtj, as exaxised bj the 
Engiish goveramenLJ/rhe first diyision of power we have esta- 
Uished accoi^og to this new policj, consists of the limited 
lights delegated by the people to their governments or trustees ; 
mad of all the residue of the attributes ai sovereignty, retained, 
as not having been delegated bj the people. Under the English 
form of govemmeat, this division, with its concomitant limita- 
^sms, is utterly unknown, 
q, j^ur second division of power, also unknown to the English 

^iystem, is that between the governments of the states, and the 
l^vemment of the union. Previously to our revolutionary war, 
the colonies had been thorou^ly lectured upon the subjects of 
sovereignty, supremacy, and a division of powers. The English 
parliament contended, that its sovereignty or supremacy in- 
claded all means necessary or convenient, in its own opinion, 
to effect its ends. The colonies admitted its supremacy in 
maJcifig war and peace, and in regulating commerce ; but denied 
tbat tiiis admission included, a concesHon of means, subversive 
of tlkeir own right of internal or local government; as to which 
they claimed a supr^aaacy for themselves. The ps^rliament con* 
tesidedi that the right of making war, conceded by the colonies, 
implied a right of using all the means necessary for obtaining 
success; such as raising a revenue, appointing collectors, rais- 
ing troops, quartering them upon tlie colonies, and many other 
internal laws; and that the right of regulating commerce, also 
iavolved a right of imposing duties, and establishing custom 
hooves for their collection ; arguing, that it would be absurd to 
allow powers, a^ with-hold any means necessary or proper to 
xarry them into execution. The colonies replied, that it would 
be more lUisurd to limit powers, and yet concede unlimited 

y .means for their execution* by which the internal supremacy, 
upon which their liberty a^d happiness depended, though nomi- 
nally allowed, would be effectually destroyed : That the terms 
« soverei^ty or supremacy," however applicable to the parlia- 
ment, ware applicable also to the colonial governments, as to 
internal powers : That the neces^ty of controuling supreme, 
sovereign or absolute power, in governments, had been proved 
by experience, particularly in Englftnd; where ma^ia charta, 
the petition of right, and many decUu'atory laws, had limited its 
means to a great extent : and that however the meanis contended 



V 



Digitized by 



Google 



54 

for by the parliMDent, mi^t be usefal fw carryiiig, en war er 
regulating commerce ; yet, that a restriction of those means 
would be still more useful, because it was necessary for tlxe pre- 
servation of their liberties. The parliament closed the debate, 
by declaring that it had a right to legislate over the cdonies in 
all cases whatsoever; and denying Uie distinction between in- 
ternal a^d external legislation, imposed some trifling taxes of 
the former character, as an entering wedge into the colonifd 
claim of local supremacy, to be gradually driven up to ike head» 
In that on tea, the ingenuity was used of attempting to establish 
a ruinous precedent, by conferring a pecuniary favour, in dimi- 
nisliing the price of the article in favour of the colonies. But 
the colonies, too wary to be caught by a gilded hook, detected, 
resisted and defeated the artifice. 

The controversy lasted for many years. It drew forth the 
talents of the ablest writers on both sides the question ; and 
those of the great Doctor Johnson were exerted to the utmost, 
in favour of the passive obedience due to sovereignty or supre- 
macy. All the treasures of wisdom, and all the sensibilities of 
interest, united to attract the attention of both countries to the 
subject. There never was one more ably discussed, or better 
understood. And no national interpretation of the terms used 
in the debate could possibly be more complete. Their right to 
local supremacy and internal legislation, was asserted by every ^ 
colony, ably defended by many individuals, and conclusively 
proved by our early congresses composed of a rare body of men. 
This thorough investigation produced a conviction, never I hope 
to be eradicated, which dictated our political system, prescribed 
the terms both o[ the first and- second union, and defined the 
Aature of the division ef powers between the state government^* 
and the government of the union. 

I have never met with but one respectable authority amcmg 
our own writers, by which the correctness^ of the colonial prin- 
ciples has been questioned ; and this is only comprised in a 
relation of facts, without being stampt by the concurrence of 
the author. In Marshall's life of Washington, vol. ii. 71 and 
72, it is said, " that many of the best informed men in Massa- 
'< chusetts, had perhaps adopted the opinion of the parliamen- 
" tary right of internal government over the colonies , that the 
" English statute book furnishes many instances of its exercise ;- 



Digitized by 



Google 



55 

^ thtt in no case recollected was their authority openl j cimtro* 
^ verted ; and that the general court of Massachusetts on a late 
** occasion, explicitly recognized iiie same principle." These 
historical facts »e undoubtedly designed to warn us of the 
stealth with which oppression approaches, and the enormities 
towards which precedents travel ; that they ought not to be sanc- 
tified by time nor repetition ; and that the best informed men 
may be led by them into the most obvious errors ; for the same 
book abounds witii eulogies upon those who denied this doctrine ; 
and concurs, when the author expresses his own opinion, in the 
propriety of resisting it The essays of president Adams, writ- 
ten in 1774 and 1775, fully explain how it happened, that many 
of the best informed men in Boston took a side, opposite to that 
which was embraced by almost all the philO)M>phers of Europe^ 
who annexed a degree of veneration to the characters of our 
own patriots, in which even other nations participate. These 
essays, lately published, are replete with profound observations 
upon the principles we are considering. 

It is sufficient however for my argument, if the people of the 
colonies believed in the doctrines which they asserted, bled for 
and established ; because the influence of opinions thus rivetted, 
upon their political measures, will be weighed by impartiality 
and admitted by candour. During, and soon after a war, firm-'^ 
ly waged for eight years, to resist a right to legislate for them, 
locally and internally, inferred from parliamentary sovereigntj' 
or supremacy, the colonies or states constructed two unions, and 
estabitshed in both a division of power, bearing a strong simili- 
tude to that upon which they were willing to have continued 
tiieir union with England ; yielding to her tiie regulation of war, 
peace and commerce, and retaining for themselves local and - 
internal legislation. The first *• union between the United 
States of America for their common defenet and general wd- 
fare^^ begins where the second ends. The first ** retains the 
sovereignty and rights to the states not delegated to the United 
States,^^ The second •* reserves to the states the powers not 
delegated to the United States.^ The first confers upon con- 
gress, almost all the powers of importance bestowed by the 
second, except that of regulating commerce ; and among them 
the power of establishing a post office. The second only ex- 
tends the means ior executing the same powers, by bestowing 



Digitized by 



Google 



56 

on congreBa a limited ppwer of taKation ; bat these means were 
by neither intended to supersede nor defeat those ends retained 
, or reserved by both. By the first, unlimited requisUions to meet 
** the charges of war and all other expenses for the common ife- 
fence and general welfare^ ^ were Xo be made by congress np^ 
the states. By the second, congress are empoweired to lay tai^ 
under certain redtrictipns " to provide for the common defence 
i emd general welfare.*^ But a sovereign and absolute right to 
dispose of these requisitiohs or taxes without any restriction is 
I not given to congress by either. The general terms used in 
both are almost literally the same ; and therefore they must 
have been used in both, under the same impressioo of their im^ 
port and ^ect. By connecting in one view the controversy 
with England, the "first, and the second union; the vindicaticA 
of colonial, local and internal government |>y a long war, and 
innumerable publick acts ; the reteatmn of it by the first union,; 
its reservation by the last ; and the accommodalion proposed 
with England on the terms of allowing to the parliament tb^ 
powers of war, peace, and regulating commerce, given to con- 
gress ; it is impossiUe not to discern a series of testimony, de- 
monstrating a strict subserviency of each distinct item to tbe 
primary end, of establishing a division of power, by which an 
independent internal government should be secured, first to the 
colonies, and subsequently to the states. Nor can a better ex- 
positor of particular words and phrases, than this primary end» 
be discovered. 

In fact, the question between England and the colonies was 
far more favourable to the fwmer, t;han that which has arisen 
between congress and the states. The colonial governments 
were chartered bodies politick, and tlie acceptance of these 
charters was an acknowledgment of a supremacy in the grantor* 
As the English king in granting these charters acted as the 
agent of the English policy, he had no better right to dismember 
the pariiamentary sovereignty by chartet^, than congress have 
to dismember the state sovereignty by the same instruments^ 
Therefore these charters could not contract the parliamentaqr 
supremacy of legislation. But they contained no restriction of 
it, nor any reservati(ms or donations to the colonies of ea^bi^im 
internal le^slation. Now, the state governments are not chai> 
tered by congress, and instead of a tacit acknowMgment of a 



Digitized by 



Google 



5f 

flupremacy in that body, or in any other department ot the go- 
Temment of the union, the states have expressly asserted and 
retained their respective internal sovereignties. The case is 
yet strcNSger against the claim on behalf of congress. The go- 
vernment of the union is chartered by the states. Had the 
<»dimies, under their charters from the king of England, claimed 
a supremacy over the parliament, their pretension would have 
been equivalent to a claim of sapremacy by the government of 
4he union over the states. The grant of a charter implies a 
ret^ition of every power not granted, just as a deed of gift or 
ttde for a portion of an estate leaves unimpaired the tiUe of ibt 
owner to the portion he does not convey away. A conveyance 
9i part doea not entitle, the grantee to take more, or the whole 
rf liie residue if he pleases. The people were the true owners 
of a great fee rimple estate. Tliey have granted one portion of 
it to the state governments, another to the government of tbt 
union, and retained the residue for themselves. The grants 
were in trust for their benefit ; and created the division of power 
between the government of the union, and the state govem- 
ments, which we are contemplating. Now, if one trustee can 
by construction or by force, despoil the other of his p(u^n, he 
will become so rich, as to be able to betray his trust, and de- 
prive the owner of the part of his own estate retained. To 
allow, that a claim of sovereignty or supremacy in the govern- 
ment of the union, over the state governments, stood on as 
strong ground) as the same claim of the English parliliment 
over the colonies, would be a concession more favourable than 
the fftct; and, if neither the opinions of several well informed 
men in Massachusetts, nor the continued endeavours of the 
parliament to sustain the more plausible pretension, could 
pnffice to obliterate the necessity of a division if power for the 
preservation of liberty, between the English and colonial go- 
vernments, able to resist the assaults of encroachment ; neither 
c^inions nor precedents ought to unsettle the division of power 
between the state and fedend governments, dictated by the 
same motive. Many of the arguments which convinced the 
colonies of the necessity for suoh a division in relation to En- 
gland^ Apply forciUy to the government of the union ; and a 
supremacy at London or at Washington, however more direfol 
to liberty at one place, would not be diverted of terrors at the 
H 



Digitized by 



Google 



58 

other. The ofcjectkmg ftriBing from distance, though the eol«* 
nies should be repretented in the parliament, were forcibly 
tti^ed ; and the experience of Ireland has subsequently fomish-i 
od a proof of their propriety. From the same source, a number 
of weighty arguments may be drawn by the reader, siifficienl 
to prove, that the great extent of the United States will not 
admit both of a central supremacy, and of a free form oi p^ 
iremment ; and that the preservation of liberty must depend 
on the division of power between the state and federal govern- 
ments ; or an accurate distinction between the powers bestowed 
and reserved^ 

Our system of civil policy, having established two dtvinons 
(rf" power; that between the people and their government^ anA 
that between the state governments and the government of tbo 
snion; proceeds to avail itself of all the advantages whick 
could be extracted from the English form of government. Had 
it set out from this point, I do not deOy that it might have gives 
some countenance to sundry constructions to which it has been 
exposed ; but, if I am right in ascribing to it the two previous 
principles for which I have contended, they seem to be insure 
mountable obstacles to such inferences as the British syste«i 
controuled by no such obstacles, might supply. But though it 
has derived an intimation from this system, that, the principle 
of dividing power is a good one, it is far from copying its checks 
and balances ; and after having established the two great and 
^[>eradve divisions we have passed over, it proceeds to those of 
an inferior character, and continues to enforce the princi^ of 
division in a mode wholly new and entirely intrinsick. It re« 
jects two of the English balances or divisions, and substitutes 
for them, an elective president and senate. It substitutes for 
the unsettled IMea of the balances, a co-ordination of depart^' 
ments, a definidon of the powers of each, and a subserviency 
of ^1 to the power of the peo^de. And it advances judicial 
power to an equivalency of independence, by an allotment ot 
powers and duties conferred by the same constitutions, which 
prescribed tile powers and duties of the other departments. 

Our political philosophers surveyed the world of governments^ 
nGt for the purpose of a servile imitation, but to collect, to com^ 
pare and to weigh facts, in order to enrich their own by im* 
provements; and by a more reined orgamzation, to'reap the 



Digitized by 



Google 



59 

hm^Stb^, tmalloyed hj tlie calamities of the models which they 
eentemf^ated. Far from belieying that maQ» whilst constantly 
adyaneing in his other attainments^ had gotten to the end ef 
his capacity in the science of government, and ought still to 
expect liberty in the lethargick lap of a political vis inertise; 
they saw that an extraordinary shock had aroused his &culties, 
and wisely seized upon a serks of hapfi^ dispensations, tp ga^ 
liier. the morsd blessings, which Providence seemed to have 
revealed. 

The divisifms, balances or linuitations of power, in Greece, 
Italy, and England, had all been the result of civil wars, per* 
ional ambition, or domestick commotions ; and therefore none 
had provided any visible restrictions for preventing, assuaging 
•r deciding the hostilities which must forever ensue, between 
political departments invested with the right of controuling each 
other. Such hostilities between the people and senate of RomOf 
and among the king, lords and commons ef England, had pro* 
duced consequences which inculcated two truths; one, that a 
division of power so imperfectly delineated as to cause perpetual 
snd violent collisions, was nevertheless greatly preferable tQ 
any form of government, founded in the most perfect series rf 
subordination; the other, that these violent collisions were se^ 
rious calamities, and seeds of frequent revolutions or settled 
despotisms. The oljject of our wise and good patriots, was to 
reap the benefits and avoid the evils arising from a division of 
power. By the declaration of independence, they solemnly 
stationed our social institutions upon solid ground, f6r the pur*- 
pose of effecting both ends. It proclaims it to be " the right 
** of the people to alter, abolish and institute governments, as to 
«* them shall seem most likely to eflfect their safety and happi^ 
^ness.'' This right had been previously exercised by balanced 
orders. Their usurpation was thus subverted. A powerfiil 
supervisor and arbitrator, for moderating and deciding the con- 
troversies of political departments, was formed and recognized 
in the people; and a great defect of the old thfeory of the bar 
lances, in supposing there was none, removed. The same source 
of civil society furnished a specification of the rights and duties 
of each co-ordinate political or civil department, to which the 
theory of the balances was inadequate, as neither member of 
this llieory could submit to another to ascertain its rights and 



Digitized by 



Google 



60 

powers, without being reduced to insignificaBce; and therefore^ 
the rights and powers under the balancing theory, were left to 
be distributed by perpetual contentions, secret frauds or open 
violence. But when this genuine authority for defining and 
limiting the rights and powers of political departments was 
found, the contentions between regal, aristocratical and demo- 
cratical orders ceased ; and a new species of political subordi* 
nation, more perfect than any subsisting under the theory of 
balanced orders, succeeded. I ask the reader's attentive con* 
sideration of the doctrine I am about to advance, i» the truth 
or error of many subsequent observations will depend upon it» 
Between balanced orders there is no supremacy and no subor<^ 
dination^ The supremacy they possess is over the nation, and 
the subordinadon they inlHet, is not upon each other, but upon 
the nation, and upon the inferior officers of government. Are 
eur political departments, balanced orders ; if so, one depart* 
ihent cannot be subordinate to another, according to the English 
system. Indeed a supremacy of one check or balance, over 
that check or balance intended as a controul or abridgment of 
this one's power, would obviously defeat the check or balance 
designed to be substantial. By the authority of the right of sei#> 
\ government, we have with great deliberation established divi* 
Tl sions of power, created political departments subordinate to 
flie people, defined the functions of each, and prescribed to in- 
dividuals and the inferior officers of each, the obedience respec- 
tively due to these departments. The only supremacy bestowed 
on these departments, is over the persons and things specifi- 
cally Bubjected to the limited power of each ; and the only su- 
bordination due to them, is from such persons and things. No 
supremacy is given to one department over another ; and tiie 
sovereignty and its relative, subordination, contended for and 
admitted, as an indissoluble attribute to civil government, is 
established between the people and these departments ; whilst 
good order is secured by the subordination of individuals and 
inferior officers, to the political departments to which they are 
severally subjected. Of this improved system for dividing and 
Kmiting power, we took the hint from the balances between 
monarchy, aristocracy and democracy, as established, not by a 
deliberative choice, but by violence; but whilst we adhered to the 
principle practised by this triumvirate for self-preservaticm, wie 



Digitized by 



Google 



61 

I^Hed it to the preservation of lite genend liberty, bj creati^ 
eo-ordtnate and collateral political departments, with distindt 
powers, for the special design of making them mutoal ckecki 
. upon each other. For this end we hme divided power between ^ 
the people of each state and their governments; betw^n the 
legislature, executive and judicature of the state governments; 
between the people of the United States and the government of 
the union ; between the legislature, executive and judicature of 
the government of the union ; and between the state governments 
and the government of the union. These divisions are snrelj 
as natural and practicable, as that between moni^rchj, demo* 
cracy, and aristocracy. If a subordination of the king to the 
house of lords, or of the Iwtls to the king, would destroy the 
intention of that division of power; a subordination of the go- 
vernment of the union to the governments of the states, or of the 
governments of the states to the govemmentjof the union, would 
also destroy the intention of this. The same idea applies with 
equal force to our other divisiims of power, and proves, that an 
exchange of their nnitual independency of each other, for a de- 
pendency and subordination upon one, would be contrary to the 
only principle, for which the balances and checks of kings, lords, ^ 
«nd commons have been so much applauded. If two of these 
co-ordinate divisions of power were subordinate to the third, 
tiiat system would be destroyed, because its essence, the cheeky 
and balances, would be no more. Should either of our co-ordi-\ 
nate divisions of power acquire a supremacy over another, th^^V 
effect would be the same. Less than two centuries ago, the iden- 
tical question we are now considering was debated wHh great 
pertinacity by tiie ablest writers in England, and was finally 
settled by a civil war. Filmer and Sydney espoused opposite 
Bides. The former, with his co-adjntors, asserted the supremacy 
of the regal balance, and taught the Stuiu^ts this principle, which 
lost the throne, and rendered their names detestable to poste- 
rity. Sydney became a martyr to the contrary faith. All the 
eulogies to the En^ish system have been paid to their checks 
and balances; and all the liberty of the English nation, has 
been ascribed to the principle of dividing power. If, having 
more studiously laboured to avail ourselves of this principle, 
s^nsidered even in England as indispensable for the presi^rva- 
tion of liberty, than any nation ever did; we have yet stupidly 



Digitized by 



Google 



annihilated it, by investing one check or one balance with m 
•npremacj over the rest, we had better go back to the Englidi 
sjstem, where it imperfectly exists, but in a degree to do some 
good, than to surrender it entirely. Bitt if we construe our 
system of go'r emment as the English do theirs ; that is, with 
an eye to the preservation of our checks and balances, as the 
only securities for a free government ; its superior theory will 
secure to us more beneficial consequences, than they have ever 
experienced. A great defect of the English system is, that 
although in theory it professes to have created three co-ordi- 
nate departments of power, it has neglected to specify the rights 
^ each with any precision; wherefore the triumvirate havo 
bad many violent contests to settle th^m ; and these contests 
have only subsided in one mighty chaldron of corruption. But 
by ours, the powers of the several co-ordinate or bdancing de- 
partments, £Eir from having been left undefined to be scrambled 
for, are specified' with such deliberative exactness, that each 
foay very easily descry its own, unless it be blinded by ava- 
rice and ambition. Collisions are therefore likely to be more 
rare. But should they occur, our system has provided a safe 
referee and impartial judge, sufficient to prevent them from pcio« 
ducing the aggravated consequences, which have been so often 
experienced in England for want of this powerful moderator. 
After having thus given practical effect, to the great princiido 
<^ checking power by division, recommended by all sound poli* 
ticians ; constituting the boast of England and the envy of alt 
other European nations; with an ii^enui^y and success, hitherto 
unexampled ; shall we imitate some whimsical artists, who after 
having invented a beautiful machine, throw it away? 

Let us go back to the quotation from the declaration of inde- 
pendence, foi* the sake of remarking, that its assertion of ike 
** right of the people to alter, aboli^ and institute governments^' 
could only have a reference to the conventional or collective 
beings, under that denomination, then existing. These were a 
people of ^ach state. Accm^dingly the people of each state 
executed the vindicated right, and no body thought of any other 
people. By virtue of this right, the people of each state esta-' 
blished certain co-ordinate divisions of power, without investing 
one with a supremacy over the others ; and by virtue of fte 
same right, solemnly asserted in that sacred instrument, the 



Digitized by 



Google 



63 

game people uniting with each other» established other co-OFdi« 
ttate divisions of power, still excluding an inyestiture ^ oae» 
with a snpremacj over the others. If this last act, so umilar 
to the first, left an unexpressed supremacy to be found by cfm* 
struction; .the first is exposed to the same species of ingenuitj 
for abolishing from our entire political system, every thing ana-^ 
If^us to checks and balances : For, legislative, executive and 
judicial mutual independence, cannot in my view, be placed 
upon stronger ground, than the independence of the govenn 
ments of the states and of the union upon each other. 
, Lest however some future Filmer may undertake to prove, 
that one df these departments may constitutionally assume » 
supremacy over the other, by the instrumentalUy of means to 
effect good ends ; as Charles the first did over the lords and 
commons, by resorting t<^ ship money, as a convement or neces- 
sary means* to effect an end highly beneficiid to the English 
nation ; I sh^l, on account of my own deficiency in authorit/, 
conclude this section with a few quotations^ leaving their 
application to the reader. Ramsay's history of the United 
States voL ii. p. 167. •• The rejection of British sovereignty 
theveiore drew after it the necessity of fixing on some aOier 
fvindple of government.'^ 

P. 172. '* The far-famed socisd compact between the people 
and their rulers, did not apply to the United States. The 
sovereignty was in tiie people. In their sovere^n capacityi bj 
their representatives, they agreed to forms -of government &r 
their own security, and deputed certain individuals as their 
agents, to serve tiiem in publick stations^ agreeaUy to conUitu* 
tions tvhiek Ijtmf preseribed for their condtkctJ^ 

P. 173. <^ It is hoped for the honour of human nature, that 
Ae result will prove the fallacy of those theories, which sup- 
pose- that mankind are incapable of self-government." 

P. 174. «« Political evil will at least be prevented or res- 
trained with as much certainty, by a proper separation or eom- 
HnaMon of power, as natural evil is lessened or prevented, by 
tiie application of the knowledge or ingenuity of man to 
domestick purposes. 

"From history the citizens of the United States had been 
taught that the maxims, adopted by the rulers of the earth, that 
society was instituted for the sake of the governors, and that 



Digitized by 



Google 



64 

the iiiterest of the many was to be postponed to the conTe- 
nience of the privileged few, had filled the world with blood- 
shed and wickedness ; while experience had proved, that it is 
the invariable natural character of power, whether entrusted 
or assumed, to exceed the proper limits, and, if unrestrained, 
to divide the world into masters and slaves* Thej therefore 
began upon the opposite maxims ; that society was instituted, 
not for the governors but governed ; that the interest of the 
few should in all cases give waj to the interest of the man j ; 
and that exclusive and hereditary privileges were useless and 
dangerous institutions in society. With them the sovereignty 
of the people was more than a i^re theory. The characteris- 
tick of that sovereignty was displayed by their authority in 
written constitutions." ' 

P. 175. " It therefore became necessary to run the line of 
distinction between the local legislatures, and the assembly of 
the States in congress." 

Federalist p* 81. H. " The general government can have no 
temptation to absorb the local authorities left with the states. 
Commerce, finance, negociation and war, comprise all the ob- 
jects of a love of power. All those things which are. proper td 
be provided for by local legislation, can never be desirable cares 
of general jurisdiction. It is therefore improbable, that there 
should exist a disposition in the federal councils, to usurp the 
powers with which they are connected. Bat let it be admitted, 
for argument sake> that mere wantonness, and lust of domina- 
tion, would be sufficient to beget that disposition ; still it may 
be safely affirmed, that the sense of the people of the several 
stat^ would controul the indulgence of so extravagant an appe- 

tiu:^ 

P. ^54. M. " The federal and state governments are in fact 
but different agents and trustees of the people, instituted witk 
different powers, and designed for different purposesJ*^ 

P. £82. H. *' In the compound republick of America, tiie 
power surrendered by the people, is first divided between two 
dtstinct governments, and the portion allotted to each sub^ 
divided among distinct and separate departments* Hence a 
double security arises to the rights of the people. The different 
governments unll controul each other, at the same time that 
eadi will be oontrouled by itself." 



y Google 



'65 

P. 288. H. <* The federal legislatare will not only be res- 
trained by its dependance on the people, but it will be more- 
over watched and coTitrouled by the several collateral legisla- 
tures." 

P. 30£. H. " I am unable to conceive, that the state legisla- 
tures, which must feel so many motives to watch, and which 
possess so many means of counteracting the federal legisla- 
ture, would fail either to detect or to defeat a conspiracy of 
the latter against the liberties of their constituents." 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



SECTION 6. 
PROPERTY. 



JMAckstone has treated of '* The rights of persons, and the 
. i%hts of things ;" but the rights of man include life, liberty and 
I^pertj, according to the prevalent fashion of thinking in 
the Umted States* The last right is the chief hinge upon 
which social happiness depends. It id therefore extremely im- 
portant to asoertain, whether it is secured bj the same princi- 
ple with our other ri^ts; and whether the security, if the 
same, ought to be equivalently efficacious ; before we proceed 
to the contemplated examinati(m of several constructions of 
our constitutions. The rights to life, liberty and property, are^ 
so intimately blended t(^ther, that neither can be lost in a> 
i^te of society witiiout all ; or at least, neither can be im-^ 
paired without wounding the others* Being indissolubly united^, 
a principle which embraces eidier must embrace^ all ; and by 
allowing it to constitute the only solid security for one, we 
admit it to be theonly solid security of the rest. A sovereignty 
in governments, of every form, has universally claimed and 
exercised a despotick power over life, liberty and property. 
Whether enjoyed by a monarchy, aristocracy, democracy ,^ or 
by a mixture of the three, it acknowledges no controul, and 
submits to no limitations. In England, this sovereignty has 
in many instances legislated death, banishment, and confisca- 
tiooi ; and in many more, exercised a despotick power over 
property, by giving aw&y the national wealth, not for the na- 
tional benefit, but according to its own will, or to purchase 
adherents to sustain its own power. All this is & correct and 
le^timate consequence of the principle of a sovereignty in 
governments. Every thing within the scope of a sovereignty 
belongs to it; therefore the sovereignty of king, lords and com* 
mons in England, exercises an unlimited power over every things 
not only in the direct modes of cutting, off heads, confiscating 



Digitized by 



Google 



68 

property, and lavishing the national money upon themselves and 
their dependants; but by the indirect modes of exclusive and 
corporate privileges, for enabling some individuals to obtain the 
property of others. To avoid such calamities, we have adopted 
the policy of transferring this illimitable power called sovereign- 
ty, from the government to the people 5 and the present question 
is, whether the transfer is partial or complete; whether our 
governments still possess a sovereign power over our property, 
like the English government 5 or whether they are only trustees 
in respect to that, as they are in respect to our lives and liber- 
ties. 

In deciding this question, our suffrages are solicited by two 
distinct and opposite principles ; the principle of a sovereign- 
ty in governments, with its boundless appendages ; and the prin- 
ciple of divided, tiefined and limited powers, under the super- 
vision and controul of the people. If we waver between them, 
we cannot guide our policy by any fixed rules, nor pursue any 
steady ends. If our accomplished men should halt between the 
two opinions, sometimes leaning towmis one, and then towards 
the other; the people must rove in conjecture for representa- 
tives, be deprived of the means of judging as they wish by the 
distractions of complicated professions, and may often catch a 
tartar instead of a friend. If, like an archbishop Laud, leaning 
sometimes towards the church of Rome, and at others towards 
the church of England, politicians of high standing should 
endeavour to find a medium between these two principles, in- 
finitely more remote from each other than the two churches ; 
they may generate evils more calamitous than he did ; and 
prepare the nation for a revolution, by weakening its affection 
for our present form of government For my part, when I 
contemplate on one hand, the justice, the mildness, the fe* 
straints upon arbitrary power, the subordination of individuals, 
the security of property, and the social harmony, flowing from 
the sovereignty of the people, and the division and limitation 
of power by their tiuthority ; and on the other, the endless 
catalogue of overwhelming evils which have flowed from a 
sovereignty in governments ; veneration and abhorrence seem 
as instinctively to rush into my mind, as in viewing the most 
lovely or the most hateful objects. Under such impressions, 
my reason is wholly unable to conceive what advantage can 



Digitized by 



Google 



69 

arise to mankitid, from leaving property in bondage to govern- 
ments ; after otiier human rights have been released from the 
same species of thraldom, by transferring sovereignty to nations, 
and reducing governors to trustees. A constitution which 
should secure life and liberty, but invest the government with 
an absolute power (^er property, would only have the merit 
of forming a society of naked people, divested of those appen- 
dages upon which social happiness depends. 

Pecuniary patronage, and the creation of corporations to 
transfer prc^rty, are among the a{^)i^dages of sovereignty, 
because its power over property is unlimited and absolute ; 
and mankind have undoubtedly suffered more injustice and 
oppression, from the exercise of these two sovereign rights, 
when sovereignty is lodged in governments, than from all the 
rest. In the civilize^ worid, prop^ty is the franklin for con- 
ducting the eJectrical stream, either of liberty or of slavery, 
to invigorate or to M^rade mankind. If therefore in exer- 
cising the right of setf-govemment, and vindicating the sove- 
reignty of the people, we have left a sovereign power over 
property, in the hands either of the state governments or the 
government of tiie union, all our work will be fruitless ; be- 
cause we shall have placed in the hands of power the precise 
instrument, With which it can root out any restriction however 
carefully planted. This error is the rock,, upon which most 
republican governments have split. Possessing a sovereign 
power, that power included a right of disposing of and regula- 
ting both national and private property, by the will of the go- 
vernment; and the greater the number of individuals who 
participate of this sovereign right, the more people there will 
be whose avarice must be gratified at the public expense, and 
bf private oppression. It has been owing to this uniform con- 
sequence of investing republican governments with a sovereign 
power over property, that nations have been constantly driven 
to take refuge from a host of sovereigns, under one, as the 
lesser evil of the two* The history of Athens furnishes us 
with many instances of the great wealth amassed by these 
republican sovereigns^ and that of Rome exhibits the frauds 
and tyranny produced by a republican sovereignty over pro- 
perty, to an extent which Would have been incredible, except 
that the enormous wealth rf the few, the great poverty of the 



Digitized by 



Google 



70 

ro^my, the peqtttatl strogi^ betw€«i these t«ro puiieft for 
riveting or subverting the abuse, and its exchange for the sove- 
reignty of one man, testify to their truth. These consequenees 
of a sovereignty over property in a republican form of govern- 
ment, demonstrate ,the importance of the enquiry to ours^es^ 
whether our governments do, or do not possess it. 

The sovereignty over property, always claimed and oltea 
c^xercised by governments, regal, aristocratical* or republican^ 
is a subject for historical research, whieh neither my capacity 
nor the limits of this work, will allow me to attempt. Suck n 
history would detail the different forms it has assumed, the 
struggles it has produced, and the evils it has inflicted. It 
would prove that the notion of a sovere%nty over private pro- 
perty Was derived in En^and from the feudid system, and 
borrowed by us from En^and. Kings bestowed and resumed^ 
seigniories, and barons sub-divided them ; both givii^ and tak^ 
ing away property at their will, and placing it in a state of 
vassalage to sovereignty. Out of the vassalage of property 
gained by conquest,^ grew the vassalage of property gained by 
industry. Under the impression of lius hidntual way of think- 
/ ing in England, our revt^utionary stru^es commenced ; and 
before we had transferred sovereignty from the government ta 
the people, we yielded to its, force, by only contending for re^ 
presentation as the solitary protector of private {Hfvperty. In 
the ardour of asserting that representa^on and t«Eation ought 
to be indissoluble, and from the forbearance of our govemmei^ 
for a long time to assert a sovereignty over private property 
the other securities it derives from our consUtutional prinoiv 
pies, have been too much neglected. In contending that our 
7>roperty could not be taken from us without our consent by 
our representatives, it was admitted, ^ilst we spoke in refsn- 
ence to the English system of government, that it might be 
both taken and expended by our r^resentatives, without res- 
triction; because, an unlimited power over property was m 
attribute of the English sovereignty* But whcai we separated 
from that government, this admissk)n, suggested by the wish 
for a compromise, was renounced by the adopticm of forms of 
governments founded in the principles, ^tsorereignty resided 
in the people, and that these governments were their trustees* 
Far from acknowledging that representation was the sovereign 



Digitized by 



Google 



ft 

ud^mMurf past&km of tiie T%htB ef'^persons or of property, 
acocNrding to the En^ish sjstefkf, we abandoned ^t doctrine 
by s^dttloQBlj iaventing and prescribing snndrj additional 
securities for betii, as I M»U presently shew. We resorted to 
Section and representation, not to liberate our representatives 
from tbe principles and restrictions of onreonstitutions ; nor to 
invest tbem with an absolate power over either persons or pro- 
pitrtj ; bnt as modes of carrjing those principles into practical 
effect Ejection is one secoritj i^inst tlteir infringement, 
«id cannot tifceref ore be a good argument for jnstifjing it. Such 
ai'gttnients at« ^jnonjmons to- that ui^ed by criminals to ex- 
cuse violations of civil laws. They teach their consciences to 
believe, that a risque of pnni^ment- balances every crime, as 
an exposure to the judgment of election is fdeaded as an abso- 
lution from conforming to p^iticid law. In both cases, the 
remedy is ei^isted as an ally of the misdeed, and converted 
uito an inc&Eitive to commit tiiat wMch it was intended to pre^ 
vent. . 

The first, the mol»t <^idous and the most conclusive argu- 
ment to prove, that our governments including those of the 
atates, do not possess an absolute or sovere%n power over the 
national property, arises from the admission, that they are the 
^ustees of the people. The relation between principal and trus- I 
tee is sufficiently understood to induce the reader to accord in ' 
the concluuon^ that the trustee, so fur fron^ possessing an unli- 
mited poww over the^property of his principal, is limited to the 
exercise of his authority and the execution of* his trust, by the 
intention with whi^ it was conferred. It has often been 
imagined that the state governments have been absolved from, 
an obligation so obvious ; and their absolute sovereignty has 
kfifim frequently asserted, without considering that the doctrine 
would iBubvert the great principle (the sovereignty of the peo- 
|Jie) upon which our p<^itical superstructure is founded. But, 
if that principle is held sacred^ then it follows, ^at the powers 
not delegated by the people to the state governments, are as 
imdoubtedly reserved to them, as the powers not delegated to 
the government of the United Stetes j and thiit the exercise of 
uny undeleted power by either» under a belief that it will 
advance the pubiickgood, is unconstitutional in both cases ; 
because a right to seek for the puUick good, ^thout our con- 



Digitized by 



Google 



stitational limits, iiiTol^s a power of findiog pnUkk haniL. 
No reservation of powers not bestowed can be necessary ; nor 
can this superfluous precaution in the constitution of tiie Uni- 
ted ' States invest the state governments with a sovereignty 
Dver property, and only leave to the people the franchise of 
election for its security ; so as to slide it back upon the scatea 
of modern construction and old prejudices, under the same 
bondage which exists in Englabd. This would be to repass 
the Rubicon, after we had gotten safely over it. 

If the state governments are not sovereigns and only trus- 
tees, then their powers are restricted by the intention of their in* 
stitution, and when this intention is ascertained, the restriction 
is also discovered. Were they invested with an unlimited 
power of taxation for the purposes of sustaining civil govern- 
ments, and meeting national exigencies ; or for those of trans- 
ferring property from one man to another, or of gratifying 
personal friendship, charity or a love of &me, at the expense 
of their constituents ? A sovereign has a right to exercise his 
caprice, his partiality or his benevolence at the expense of his 
subjects, because both their persons and property are. his, and 
his power over both is uneontrouled. But, as mankind advai^ 
ced in knowledge, the tyranny and falsehood of this doctrine 
were gradually detected ; and therefore in many civilized na^ 
tions it has ceased to be openly avowed, whilst it is yet indi- 
rectly practised; ^ avoid the effects of an overwhelming 
popular indignation, which the unconcealed despotism would 
inspire. In the greater portion of Europe, regal sovereignty 
at this day exercises an uneontrouled power over property by 
taxation, by an unfettered appropriation of taxes, by exclusive 
privileges, by corporate bodies, and by an unrestrained patron- 
age. Thus th^ pretext of publick good is made into a maak 
with which to hide publick oppression. To this pretext, in 
England, and at length in France, has been added election ; 
not to subvert the false principle from which the evil has arisen, 
but to render the sovereignty of the government over property 
stUl stronger ; and harder to transmute from being an instru- 
ment for inflicting private misery, into one for securing na- 
tional happiness. Accordingly, the sovereignty over pn^>erty» 
claimed by the English government, has been more grievously 
exercised^ than in neighbouring countries^ vdiere election has 



Digitized by 



Google 



•-.J 



73 

BOt been used to betray, that which it was designed to preserve. 
Yet the English government does not derive its absolute power 
over property fnnn the partial franchise of election, but claims 
ktis being one of the a]^ndages belonging to the illimitable 
power called sovereignty ; and indeed, two of the branches of 
that government have no {nretensions to an accession of ri^ts 
from the former source. If then this absolute power over 
property flows from sovereignty, and not from election ; and if 
the people of the United States, and not their governments^ 
possess the sovereignty; it follows, that the source of that 
stream of despotism, called a sovereignty over property, which 
has flowed over mankind immemorially, being dried up here» 
our system of government ought not to be poisoned by its 
effluvium. A sovereignty in the government is the propo- 
si^on, from which an absolute power over property is inferred; 
but if the proposiUon be false, the inference fails. 

Having established a princifrfe so distinct, let us proceed to 
enquire, whether the state and federal constitutions recognize or 
explode it To avoid prolixity, the reasoning must be often 
generalised. In some of the state constitutions, exclusive pri- 
vileges are prohilnted, because they operated fraudulently upon 
private property. In all, great attention is bestowed upon the 
publick treasury, to ensure the proper application of the pub- 
lick property. And for both objects, divisions of power, dis- 
tinct departments, specifications of rights and duties, and spe- 
cial assignments of patronage, were instituted. These unite 
to indicate an anxiety in the people to preserve their property, 
and to withhold an absolute power over it from the government 
Suppose a state legistoture should^ as sovereigns have often 
done, directly take by law the property of one man and bestow 
ftupon another* Would the judges sustain an act so despotick ? 
And upon what ground eould they annul it, except that the 
legislature were trustees only and not sovereigns P Is there any 
difference between offending against the same principle, directly 
nr circuitously ? 

One of the chief motives for amending the union, was the 
sovereign power, unwisely assumed, and imprudently exer- 
cised by the state governments. To correct an usurpation in 
theory, and an evil in practice, the constitution of the United 
States prohibits the state govenunents from passing << any bill 
K 



Digitized by 



Google 



74 

I of attiunder er expost facto Uw^or aoj law impairiiig thei obU* 
I gation of contracts^'' and empowers oongreas " to coin mowtj 
' aod fix the standard of weights aad measures.^ These pre* 
cautions for defendiag property against modes for assailing it, 
lire examples for establishing its substantial rights^ and prece- 
dents against a recourse to other medes^ infringing 4he principle 
upon which these prphiiHtions are imposed. And a specified 
permission to congress, by which the j may establish modes of 
measuring propartj for the whole union, would bave been 
unnecessary, had that body possessed any species of sove* 
reignty over property itself; because such modes would have 
been included among its appendages. No power is g^ven to 
congress to do that which the state governments are thus pro- 
hibited from doing; and if some species of sovereigpify can 
extend the power of congress to ends not delegated, it can 
also extend the powers of tiie state governments to ends pro* 
hUiited ; and efifectually undermine our system of government, 
made up of del^ation and prohibitioA. The power to ** cmn 
money and regulate ftmreign coin" is limited by the terms ^ coin 
and foreign" to the precious metals, because it could not ex- 
tend to native paper currency, without including foreign; as^ 
a standard of weights, respecting money, vef^rs to money ca« 
pable of being weighed. The states are prohibited *' frem 
coining money, emitting bills of credit, or making .any thing but 
gold ^nd silver a tender in payment of debts." The distinc- 
tion between specie and paper currency is in this clause estab* 
lished. A power, prohibited to the states and not delegated to 
congress, can be exercised by neither. A power, the dir^t 
exercise of which is prohibited, ought not to be indirectly ex- 
ercised. A power, prohibited or not delegated to the princi- 
pal, cannot be delegated by that principal to another. Biil^ 
of credit are distinguished from other objects of tender laws^ 
which had been numerous among t^e states^ and are prohibited 
absolutely, whether the quality of being made a tender for 
debts was annexed to them or not. Otherwise, it would have 
been unnecessary to mention tiiem at all. The powers of 
** coining money, emitting bills of credit, and mali^ing $ny thing 
l>ut g(^d and silver coin a tender in payment for debts," being 
prohibited to the states ; and the first power only being delega-^ 
ted to coi^ress ; it follows that tite other two are prohUuted 
and not delegated. And it seems to me, that it may be as 



Digitized by 



Google 



75 

speckraslj contended, according to the kle fashion of construc- 
tton» that the states may make any things hut gold and silyer, 
a tender ; as that either congress or the states can delegate to 
individnals or corporations a power to emit bills of credit ; or 
impair contracts bj suspensions of pajments in favour of 
thmr own creatures, or of unlucky speculators. Either woukl 
be a usurpation of a sMrereign power over property^ not dele-* 
gated to one department, and expressly prohUnted to the other. 
It may be also remarked, that the power given to cong^'ess ^* to 
provided for the punishment of counterfeiting the securities waA 
current coin of the United States" by omitting bills of crediti 
recc^izes their exclusion, and does not include bills of credit 
emitted by corporations* 

From these efforts to protect the rights of private prepertyy 
or rather the right of individuals to what belongs to them, let 
us pass on to those for security the national property, col* 
lectively« Here the question is, whether conoress derive from 
the power of taxation, a sovereign power to expend the money 
ihus raised, according to its own will and pleasure, like an 
English parliament or a Russian emperor. If congress possessed 
an unlimited power to appropriate the publick money raised by 
taxes, tiiere was no occasion to specify the objects to which 
it might be applied, such as to raise and support armies, to 
provide and mainUmi a navy. Among these objects, all the 
powers granted, requiring an expense, are enumerated; and 
this ^mmeration proves, that no deject of expense, not in- 
cluded within m^ delegated powers, can be constitutionally 
adopted by congress. For where was the necessity of any 
enumeration at all of the objects of expense, if congress were 
not subject to any restriction in the appropriation of the pub- 
Itok money P The widest scope for appropriation is included 
in the ¥Fords <' to pay the debts and provide for the common 
defence and general welfare of the United States.^' The de- 
fence and welfare of the United States, without any explanatory 
words, would of themselves refer to tlie affairs of the union, 
and exclude those of the states; but the words ^etieraZ and 
cofftmotti are used in contrast to local and individualf for the 
purpose of more-explicitly excluding congress, in the appropri* 
ation of the money raised to be iqiphed to the benefit of the 
United States, from indulging a sovereign legislative patrom^ 
in favour of local* pvivato or individual interests. 



Digitized by 



Google 



75 

Let us sappoBe» tiutt a recoiiciliati<m hid isaken place between 
Great Britain and the colonies, by which precisely the same pow- 
ers of taxation for the common defence and general welfare bad 
been conceded to the British parliament, ^e same objects of 
expense specified, and the same reservations of local and inter- 
nal goYemment to the colonies made, as are contained in the 
consti^tion of the United States. Iftkt not obvious, that an 
assumption (under a compact intended to provide for the com- 
mon^ and not for the separate interests of these parties,) of a 
power to appropriate the common purse to local or personal in- 
terests, would have . infringed its intention, and would gra- 
dually have swallowed up the rights reserved? The same 
chastity of construction may possibly be necessary to preserve 
our union, which would certainly have been indispensable for 
the preservation of such a reconciliation* 

It is true that the doctrine of absolute sovereignty, witii its 
indefinite catalogue of appendages, can adduce in its defence 
many plausible arguments, and enumerate sundry conveniences 
which might result, from its unlimited capacity to devote 
both persons and property to whatever purposes it may think 
proper* What conveniences may arise from the abscdute^sn^ 
bordination i^ppertaining to it, in war ! How wonderful are its 
energies, in punishing crimes which will for ever elude estab* 
lished laws ! How inexhaustible are its resources for reward* 
i^g merit, fostering the arts, and rearing pyramids ! Limited 
powers and co-ordinate departments, occupied by dependant 
trustees, are often incompetent to effect ends really good, and 
never able to perform exploits, which historians have called 
magnificent; whilst sovereignty can enshrine itself in splen- 
dour, and dazzle the quietism with which it is able to encircle 
its throne. Such indeed are the advantages arising from a 9^ 
vereigttty in governments ; but, to decide whether it b prefera- 
ble to our system of self-government and a division of power* 
a strict comparison between the whole mass of good and evil 
resulting from both forms, ought to be made. As imperfection 
is an attribute of every human contrivance, comparison is the 
only resource for a judicious preference. In the particular 
case of property, if we were to confine it to the good and evil 
derived by nations from a sovereign or limited power in govern- 
ments oyer the publick purse, a dismal balance of evil would 
render the first principle even hideous ; and inspire a horror. 



Digitized by 



Google 



77 

ftuflkient to nrnke the latter* with all its imperfections, appear 
beautifdl. Evil is indissolubly attached to good ; and therefore 
the inconTentences, arising from the sovereignty of the people 
and a limited power in governments over persons and property, 
are by no means sufficient to establish the expediency of under- 
mining these principles. Many wise and good men, howevei^ 
alarmed by the illusions of Rousseau and Godwin, and the 
atrocities of the French revolution, honestly believe that these 
principles have teeth and claws, which it is expedient to draw 
and pare, however constitutional they may be ; without conr 
sidering that such an operation will subject the generous Hon 
to the wily fox ; or to speak without a metaphor, that it will 
subject liberty and property to tyranny and fraud. In short; 
that if our new principle of a sovereignty in the people can 
be disarmed of its property, by transferring to the government 
an unlimited power over it ; the old English principle must in- 
evitably swallow it up, with all its appurtenances* \^ 

The reader perceives, that the freedom of property is the 
chief principle, which distinguishes governments founded in the 
rights of nature, from those founded in some arbitrary act. 
^r societies were instituted by a resignation of such natural 
rights, as was necessary for the preservation of those retained. 
Property was only made a common stock, so far as the social 
safety and happiness required ; but social safety and happiness, 
far from requiring that governments should possess a power 
of dooming one portion of the people to indigence and igno- 
rance, and another to opulence and insolence, by supplanting 
industry, and substituting law, as the dispenser of private pro* 
perty, require a system precisely the reverse, v Modern phi- 
losophers, without discerning, or if it was discerned, without 
assailing the usurpation of an absolute and despotick power 
over private property, have yet strenuously contended for a 
system of policy^ founded upon the opposite principle ; which 
tiiey have called the economical system ; and have agreed al- 
most unanimously, that there is littie hope of free governments, ' 
until it is better understood, and mwe actively eiforced. The 
difference between judicatures to secure, and corporations to 
defraud private property, concisely displays both the power 
delegated, and the right reserved under our system of govern- 
ment ; and the possibility of reaping a social blessing by a li- 
mited power, without the alloy of a social curse, by an unli- 



Digitized by 



Google 



7B 

mited pow«r oTer priTate firoperty. Common iatarest i» ili« 
object of a restricted power, and tiierefore it dispenses general 
prosperity; an accnmnlation ci individual bononrs or wealth 
comprises all the business in which an absolute power over 
property can engage ; and therefore it dispenses comparative 
disgrace and poverty npon the mass of society. The freedom 
of property from the indefinite despotism of sovereignty, is 
the best security to be found against those unjust laws by 
which social liberty is so often injured ; and agiunst that des- 
potism of majorities, by winch it has been so often destroyed. 
This wise and just. principle even denies to the sovereignty of 
the people, a right to the private property of individualsr be* 
cause the conventional act by which tiiat species of sovereignty^ 
was created, conceded a right to tax for social purposes only, 
and witiiheld a right to tax for individual aggrandizement* I 
conclude therefore, that neither the state governments nor eon^ 
gress have a sovereign power over property ; that nether of 
them has any right at all to create tnodes fdn: transferring it 
artificially from one man or one interest to another ; that the 
right of taxation, with which they are invested, is limited t^ 
the attainment of social ends or specified objects ; and .Mu^ 
the right of appropriation, being merely an appendage of tiie 
right of taxation, is restrained to the same ends or ot^eets.. 

But, admitting the truth of this conclusion, though much will 
be gained, the difficulty of distinguishing between qrarioun 
and genuine ends or objects will still remain ; and the impos- 
sibility of conceiving a complete catalogue of either leaves no 
remedy but a watchful attention to current measures, and % 
fair investigation of the principles by which they ought to be 
justified or condemned. Yes, there is another; If the honour-* 
able, just and patriotick men, who abound in our legislativi^ 
bodies, should consider the subject and concur in the conclu- 
sion, they will, in obedience to an essential social princi{^e, 
through affection for their country, and from a zeal for its glory^ 
forbear to impair tlie foundaticm upon which it has be^i erected.* 
They will no# approach towards the rival principle arrayed in 
calamities to mankind *' that governments possess a sovereigntjp 
over property," without a sensation of horror, and shrinking 
from its contamination. Hie right to property or labour is 
involved with our whde subject, and as it must coni^quentl^ 
be often adverted to, its ccmsideration is not here conelnded. 



Digitized by 



Google 



SECTION r. 

THE BANK DEClSION^p-CORPORATION. 

The prerieiis ptges have been devoted to the establishment 
of several important principles^ from an opinion, tiiat they are 
better expounders of our constitutions, and sounder sr^ters 
of construction, than dictionaries. The philosopher, who is 
led astray from thii^ by signs, resembles a botanist whose 
taste leads him to wander in a wilderness of flowers, and to 
contemplate their hues, without caring whether their fruit is 
noxious <»" wholesome. Principles are the fruit of words; and 
ais no man in his senses would swallow poison, because it grew 
from the beautiful flower of the poppy ; so bad principles 
ought not to be recommended «or good ones defeated, by a 
verbal Mosaick, however ingenious. By the standard of prin* 
ciples, I shall therefore proceed to examine several measures 
and c^inions ; and beginning with the most recent, select a 
few others, without regard to chronol<^cal brder, as opposite 
to such as I believe to be constitutional. 

An examination of the opinion of ihe court of appeals, 
against ^e right of the state governments to tax the bank of 
the United States, not with arrogance, but with humility ; not 
vrith confidence, but with distrust ; will I hope be pardonable. 
Against the talents and integrity of that respectable body of 
men, I have no counterpoise but my creed ; against the acute 
argument by which their decision is defended, I have no 
•ftet, but an artiiess course of reasoning. An unknown writer 
is but a feather, weighed against acknowledged uprightness, 
erudition, and well merited fmblick confidence; yet under 
all these disadvantages, as wisdom and virtue are sometimes 
liable to error ; as the battle is not always to the strong, nor 
the race to the swift ; and as enquiry is the road to truth ; 
'I shall endeavour to reconcile my respect f<»* the court, with my 
right, perhaps 'my duty^ as a citizen of our happy common- 
wealth. 



Digitized by 



Google 



80 

Bcrfore 1 proceed, as some defence of this preramptioti» I 
quote a judicial precedent* The decision of a bad or a cor- 
rtipt judge would not ap}^ j ; but one rendered by the great, 
the good, the wise Sir Matthew Hale, so late too as the seven- 
teenth centurj, is quite in point This judge, of superior 
talents and spotless integrity, condemned and put to death two 
poor old women as witches ; and the correctness g[ his judg- 
ment was not questioned. Behold in this case, confidence 
yoked to fallibility. Perhaps the time may arrive, when it 
would be as absurd to contend for the witchcraft said to be 
lurking under the words sovereignty, supremacy, necessary 
and convenient, as it would be to prove now, that it does not 
lurk under a wrinkled visage ; and when it would be thought 
as superfluous to prove, that our constitutions ought not to be 
destroyed by one species of witchcraft, as that old women 
ought not to be burnt out of compliment to the respectable 
Judge Hkle's decision establishing the other. 

The following quotation from the opinion of the court is 
copious, from an apprehension of omitting any thing material 
towards a thorough knowledge of the question. 
' ** Banking was introduced at a very early period of our his- 
'* tory, has been recognized by many successive legislatures* 
** and has been acted upon by the judicial department in cases 
** of peculiar delicacy, as a law of undoubted obligation." 

'< It has been saidj that the people had already surrendered 
** all their pofwers to the state sovereignties, and had noting 
*^ more to give." 

** If any proposition could command the universal assent of 
** mankind, we mightVexpect it would be this ; that the govem- 
** ment of the union, though limited in its powers, is supreme 
« in its spliere of action. This would seem to result necessft- 
** rily from its sphere of action. It is the government of all; 
*' its powers are delegated by all, it represents all, and acts 
" for all. The people have said < This constitution and the 
<* laws of the United States, which shall be made in pursuance 
<< thereof shall be the supreme law of the land, any thing in 
*» the constitution or laws of any state notwithstanding." 

** There is no phrase in the constitution which excludes 
«* incidental or implied powers." " Its nature requires that 
« only its great outlines should be marked." « We find in' 



Digitized by 



Google 



SI 

*' it the great powers to lay and collect t«xeai to borrow moiiej, 
<' to regulate commerce, to declare and conduct War, and to 
<^ raise mid support armies and nanes. Gati we adopt that 
*' construction, unless the words imperiouslj require it, which 
** would impute to the framers of the instrument, when grant* 
** ing thesie powers for the .publick good, the intention of irape* 
** ding their exercise by withholding a chmce of means ? The 
** instrument does not profess to enumerate the means by which 
** the powers it confers may be executed^ nor does it prohibit 
** the creation of a.ccnporation, if the existence of such a thing 
^. be.,es8entid to the beneficial exercise of those powers. The 
'^creajtion of »> corporation appei^ns to sovereignty." 

*• The powers of sovereignty are divided between the govern- 
'Vment of the union anjd those of the states. They are each 
** sovereign with respect to the objects committed to it, and nei- 
*^ ther soverei^ with reqpiect to the oligects comnutted to fiie 
"other." , 

" Congress shall l^ave power to make all laws necessary and 
*y proper to carry into execution the powers of the govempnent." 

V Let the end be legitimati;, let it be within the sc<^e of the 
«* ^:onsUtution, and all means which are af^ropriate, which are 
*' f^nly adapted to that end, which are not prohibited, but 
" consist with the lett^ and spirit of the constitution, are c<m- 
« stitutional." 

*\ That banking is a convenient, a useful, and essentiid in-* 
** strument in the prosecution of fiscal operations, is not now 
" a subject of controversy.'* v ^ 

** The power of taxation by the states is not abridged by tiie 
** grant of a similar power to the government of the unimi ; it 
<< is to be concurrently exercised by the two governments. The 
" states are forbidden to lay duties on exports or imp(>rts. If 
"the obli^tion of this prphibitiop must be conceded; if it 
** may restrain a state from the exercise of its taxing power on 
" imports ^d exports, the same paramount character would 
" seem to restrain as it certainly may restrain, a state from 
" such other exercise of this power, as is in its nature incom- 
** patible with and repugnant to the constitutional laws of the 
•Vunion." v 

" All subjects over which the. sovereign power of the state 
" extends, are olyects of taxation r but those over which it does 
L 



Digitized by 



Google 



EV-' 'f 



82 

r *«ii0t extmidt are upon the soandest princjides exempt from 

1, . «« taxation. The aovercigntj of a state extends to every thing 

« which exists by its own authority, or is introdoced by its pcr- 
*f misriont but does not extend to the means employed by con- 
<* gress to carry into execution, powers conferred on that body 
<< by the people of the United States." 

" Such is the character of human language^ that no word 
« conveys to the mind, in all situations, one sin^e definite idea. 
« It is essential to just construction, that many words which 
•• imply something exccs8ive# should be understood in a more 
** mitigated sense.'' 

" We find, on just theory, a total failure of the ori^nal right 
^ to tax the means employed by the genend government of ik% 
" union for the executioQ of its powers." 

" That tte power to tax involves the power to destroy j that 

« the power to destroymay defeat and render useless the pow- 

« er to create ; that there is a plain repugnance in conferring on 

^ « <Mie government a power to controul the constitutional mea- 

** sures of another, which other, with respect to those very 

j <« measures, is declared to be supreme over that which exerts 

C " «< the controul, are propositions not to be denied." 

V A «* The le^slature of the union can be trusted by the people 

^ with the power of controuling measures which concern aU» 

** with the cmifidence that it will not be abused." 

•* The principle,. for which the state of Maryland contends^ 
<< is capable of arresting all the measures of the general govern- 
«* ment, and of prostrating it at the foot of the states." 

« It is a question of supremacy." ** It is of the very essence 
» of supremacy to remove all obstacles to its action within its 
<< own sphere, and so to modify every power vested ip subocdi* 
« Bate governments, as to exempt its own operations.from theiyr 
«* influence.' ' 

^ Hie result is a conviction, that the states have no power by 

« taxation or otherwise to retard, impede, burden, or in any 

*< manner controul the operation of the constitutional laws en* 

** acted by congress to carry into execution the powers vested 

.' % *^ in ebngress. This we think the unavoidable consequence^ 

*< tiie supremacy, which the constitution has declared." 
4 The essential conclusion of this opinion is, that an absolute 

^' ^ sovereignty as to meims does exist, where there is no sovereigntf 



Digitized by 



Google 



83 

•t all as to ends. This doctrine seems to me> to be evufently 
kieoniistent with the principle of dividing, UmitiDg» balancing 
and restraining political powers^ to which all onr cwstilations 
have unequiv'ocallj resorted, as the onlj resource for the -pre- 
I Nervation otn free IRornr of goyemment. If liie means to which 
k the government of the umon may resort ibr execu^ng the 
^v*jpdWers confided to it, are unlimited, it may easily select such 
as will impair or destroy the powers confided to the state 
Vgovernments. If a delegation of powers impGeg a delegation 
of an unrestrained choice of means for the execution of those 
powers, then this unrestrained choice of means was bestowed 
by the people on the state ^verttments, by the double act of 
delegation and re8ervatk>n> and is attached to their powers ; 
and the same principle, by which it is contended that the go- 
vernment of the union may impair or destroy the powers of the 
state governments, entitles the state governments to impair or 
destroy those of the government of the union. It will be ad- 
mitted, that the powers delegated and reserved to the state go* 
vernments, are positive limitations of the powers d^egated to 
the government of the union ; and liiat the powers delegated 
to the union, are limitati<nis of those delegated and resterved to 
the state governments; and from this assignment of powers^ 
made by the saihe authority, it arises, that both are limited 
governments. The ends with which these governments are 
respectively entrtisted, are allowed to have been exclusively 
bestowed, and neither could constitutionally use its le^timate 
ends, io defeat or absorb the legitimate ends assigned to the 
other. So far tiie array of ends against ends a|>pears to have 
been placed by the constitution on equal ground^ and this 
equality justifies the inference^ that a mutulil check upon the 
* Exercise of political power by each government was intended. 
In dividing these ends, the constitution of the 4inion is positive 
and explicit; but, it is quite silent as to the means to be em- 
ployed ;by the «tate governments for effecting the ends com- 
mitted to them hy the people ; and also as to the means to be 
employed by the government of the union, in some degree. 
And this silence is attempted to be exclusively appropriated 
to tiie government of the unioni so that by the instrumentality 
of a monopoly of means, it may supplant and destroy the equality 
of ends plainly est^^shed by the constitution, subdue ,the state 



Digitized by 



Google 



84 

ends by the appendages of the union ends, though neither Cata- 
logue of these ends would be allowed openly to batter down 
the other; and thus eflfeetually overturn by implied meMis^ ova* 
whole positive division of ends» made for the purpose of limiting^ 
cheeking and moderating power. As ends may be made to 
beget means, so means may be made to beget ends, until the 
co4iabitation shall rear a progeny of unconadtutional bastards^ 
which were not begotten by the people; and their rights being 
no longer secured by fixed principles, will be hazarded upon a 
game at shuttletock with ends and means, between the general 
and state governments. To prevent this» means as well as 
ends are subjected by our constitutions to a double restraint. 
The first is special. In many instances, the means for exe- 
kuting the powers bestowed, are defined, and by that definition, 
limited. The other is general, and arises necessarily from the 
division of powers ; as it was never intended that powers given 
ito one department^ or one government, should be impaired or 
destroyed, by the means used for the execution of powers given 
;to another. Otherwise, the indefinite word ** means" might 
defeat all the labour expended upon definition by our consti* 
tutions. Numberless illustrations might be adduced in support 
of this reaftoning^ but those which have appeared, are preferable 
to inch as are coiytctural. Hie constitution of the United 
States contains many posiUve restrictions of the means for 
executing the powers bestowed. It bestows on congress the 
power of declaring war. But it restricts ^e means of exe* 
eating this power, by limiting the right of taxation ; by with- 
holding the light of ordering the militia without the United 
States; l^ withholding tiie right of impressing seamen or 
landmen ; by confining appropriations for an army to two years* 
and by excluding the government of the union from the appoint- ' 
m^t of militia officers. This last power, positively reserved 
to the state governments, is evidently intended as a check upciii 
the power of the sword, by dividing it between the two govern* 
ments ; and a volunteer militia, officered by the president,, or a 
g^ieral, is a mean, both convenient for the end of w^r, and 
also for impairing or defeating the end designed to be accomr 
plished by the constitution. Is tiiis inferred convenience, a 
fair abrogation of the specified end? Again; a sudden inroad 
under the authority of the president into a country at peacft^ 



y Google 



85 

t 

wiUi BSt might beJi beneficial and cmivemoit Hiodeof I 
a war, and a m«an towards ultimate success; but the right of 
myohring us in war, is exclusively Kmited to congress for ends 
infimtely more beneficial to the nation. Ought these more ra- 
hiable end« to be sacrificed, f6t the sake of one less raloable? 
So coi^^ss is empowered to borrow, and to coin money; and 
as one m^n for ^e execution of this power, to provide for 
the punishment of counterfeiting the securities and current coin 
of the United States* Ought this restraint of a power to create 
or punish crimes^ to be extended by co]»truction, to a power 
of punishing counterfeiters of corporation or individual piqier ? 
Such a powder was not given, because a paper currency was not 
recognized. To secure a fair exercise of the legislative power 
of congress, two means are resorted to. One, that no legislator 
f^ll receive an office created, or the emoluments of which 
shall Imve been increased, during the time for which he was 
elected ; the other, that no person holdii^ an office under the 
United States, shall be a legislator, if corporations are used 
to enable members of congress to be both legislators, office- 
holders, and emolument-receivers under their own laws, the 
means for effecting this triple violation of the constitution 
ought surely to be coppared, if the word ** beneficiaP is to 
decide 'the preference, with the means for preventing it The 
judicial power is invested with the right of deciding contro- 
Tersies between private persons, and between individuals and 
our governments, and even between states, to prevent the mis- 
ehie& of legislative patronage and adjudication. A legislative 
judicature is both excessively imperfect and expensive, and 
also defeats one of the most beneficial means, for attaining the 
great social ends of &ir trials and impartial decisions. 

A specification of some means for the attainme)it of ends, 
is a proof ftat means were not intended to be unlimited ; but 
as it was impossible to specify all which might be constitution- 
ally used, for the execution of the powers delegated to the go- 
vernment of the union, or reserved to the states, those not 
specified were unaToidably left tabe controuled by the division 
of powers and rights, which was specified. This controul is 
indispensably, necessary lor giving the intended effect, to all 
the minor divisions of power in the state constituticms, and 
also to tte major division of- power, between the state govern- 



Digitized by 



Google 



86 

g- ments and the goyernbent of the ttnion, as well as to the infe- 

rior divtsioDS of the latter. By rejecting this controtil, ottr 
whole system of sociid policy would be rent to pieces from top 
tolxyttom. If the unspecified means of the states for execut- 
ii^ the powers reserved to them, were not limited by the pow- 
'Ky ers delegate to-congre8s» the state governments might defeat 
the latter powers, by the instrumentality of means. But, if . 
*• the unspecified means which the stated may use to effect llite 
ends committed to their care, are limited by the powers dele- 
gated to the govertiittent of the uiuon,it follows, as being the 
same principle, thtt the unspecified means which congress may 
/use to effect the endd committed to the care of the government 
, ; of the union, are also limited by the powers delegated and rc- 
j served to the states. Neither government can, under cover 
vof such words as ** sovereign, convenient, necessary and su- 
I preme," legitimately resort to means which ivould impair their 
co-ordinacy of origin, or the distribution of ends made by the 
people for their own security ; and both or neither must be 
restrained by a principle, exactly common to both. Otherwise, 
the words " sovereign, convenient, necessary and supreme" 
will enable the same parties, factions and exclusive interests, 
which have been changing and modelling the English form of 
government from time immemorial, gradually to wort^ up 
ours into a similar compound pf exclusive privileges and emo« 
luments, le^slative corruption and Venality, excessive taxation, 
and stock aristoctacy. Our civil revolution Will tiien have 
eventuated, precisely like the regions revolution in Englaml 
under Henry the 8th. The pope was gotten rid of, but tbe 
tithes and the episcopal aristocracy remained. 

But, the wise men who framed our fM*m of government ne^ 
ver intended, that its great princij^^s and great ends should be 
altered and modelled from time to time, by the means and 
ends of factions, parties or individuals; to render it quite un- 
steady, liable to important innovations without any real refer- 
ence to the people, or to the right of self-government; and to 
carry it back to the same unfixed principle or no principle of 
the English form of government ; in which, change has been so 
constant, and constitution so changeable, that it is said in a 
late Edinburgh Review, that the old English reporters do not 



Digitized by 



Google 



■ %^--*'<'W]'^''^' 



87 



eontftui a sio^je precedent which is now law ; and ia Eog^d^ 
law is constitutioD. 

Qn the cODtrary» they intended to erect a political fabrick, 
with separate compartments, ea<^ watered hy dbtinct streams 
of power ; and hot, whilst ajqiarently perfecting a work so 
glprieas, to invent coTertly a machiae, then nameless but now 
called the <' supremacy of means," for diverting the streams 
assigned to some department^ into others, so as to famish some 
occupiers and poison others by a plethora. Though the outside 
walls of the &brick may stiU stand after the operations of this 
machine, like those ol* an old Gothick castle, and occasion- 
ally attract the admiration of future connoisseurs; yet they 
will no longer be capable of sheltering liberty against the 
Masts of ambition or the reptiles of venality, after the apa^ 
ments cease to be habitaUe. 

Having thus opened the way for a more particular conside^- 
ration of the opinion of the court, I shall proceed to exhibit to 
the reader extracts from the quotation, arranged with a view to 
the perspicuity of the argument. 

^ The creation of a corporation appertains to sovereignty^" 
This position, the fountain frmn whence the court draws all its 
arguments, is assented to ; but I shall endeavour to prove, that 
if their proposition be true, their inferences are false. 

There are some words innately despotick, and .others in- 
nately liberal. Among those of the former character, corpo- 
ration and hierarchy bear the most exact analogy to each oth^r, 
the first being used to destroy civil, and the second to destroy 
religious liberty. . Both are aj^rtenances of sovereignty, and 
sovereignty being despotick because it is indefinite, both are 
appurtenances of despotism. The fruit uniformly produces a. 
tree Hke that on which it grew. The English sovereignty has 
availed itself of these two appurtenances to a great extent 
Kings and towns conspired in the use of corporations ; Kings 
to purchase partisans, reduce the barons, and increase their 
own power ; towns to obtain more liberty than the rest of the 
people* Kings soon discovered, that the sovereign right pf 
granting exclusive privileges was much better adapted for get- 
ting money, corrupting factions, and gratifying minions, than for 
di&sing liberty ; and they substituted this new appurtenance 
of sovereignty for its old prerogatives, with the advantage 



Digitized by 



Googl 



f 



which a pUuaible novelty posseisefl over a d^eeted f^resrion* 
Commerced mcmopolies^ commercial compain^» local immuoi- 
ties and personal privileges, fully compensated their ambition 
ai|d avarice for the loss of prerogatives, and the word *' corpo^ 
ration" ha9 furnished history with a list of grievances, often 
resisted, occasionally redressed, again revived in new fbn^&» 
and terminating u\ taxation and pauperism, both so excessive* 
that England is ^ ripe for reformation, as it was under royal 
{Hrerogative ii^ its most aggravated form. The word was 
adi^ted into Eq^ish jurisprudence, and endowed with . a cha-? 
racter both sacred and indefinite, by r^l " during pleasure" 
judges, to enlarge re^l power, to obtain regal favqpr, and to 
avoid regal displeasure. It was thrust into the English law 
books by sheq>, clothed in ermine by lions, and sanctified by 
precedents bottomed upon fear, hope and flattery. From these 
receptacles, wherein it hides the heart of a prostitute under the 
habiliments of a virgin, it has found its way into the heads of 
lalvyers, seduced by the habits of intercourse, or deceived by a 
primness of feature, adjusted to conceal imposture, and to im- 
pose upon credulity. But it did not get into our constitutions, 
and the question is, whether its congeniality with their pria^- 
ciples is sufficiently apparent, to justify our judges in supply- 
ing the oversight of the people. R^al sovereignty was its 
father, and r^al prerogative (a respectable matron in E^land, 
though not much beloved here,) its mother. 

The English dictionaries, in accordance with their intention. ' 
and effects, define corporations to be ** bodies politick." Sove- 
reignty alone could create bodies politick, and therefore it ex-i 
clusively granted the charters or enacted the laws by whichL 
they were Created in En^and. The English law books them- 
selves do not recognize a right in some bodies politick to ere* 
ate other bodies politick. Whether our governments are sove- 
reigns, or only bodies politick created by the charters of the 
only sovereignty we acknowledge, is a question, involving in 
my view the existence of our form of government. If they 
are sovereigns, it must be admitted, that according to the En- 
glish precedents, they have a right, to prop and secure tiiem- 
selves by all bodies politick, capaJ[>le of defending an absolute, 
unquestionable, ai\d indefinite power^ the attribute of ,sove« 
reignty ; but if they are hot sovereigns, they can only be bodies 



Digitized by 



Google 



89 

pdtticfci created bj ihe charters^ cafled constitotions, and as 
«ich, according to the incorporating principles of the Bnglish 
law books, they hare no right to create other bodies politick* 
If we are to be boand by the laws of England, those' laws 
ought surely to be correctly constmed. Do these allow bodies 
politick cr^tted by the sovereignty of that country, to create 
c^her bodies politick, without the asseiit of itd sovereign power ^ 
Is it less necessary for the safety of the sovereignty of the peo- 
ple, to attain its appurtenant power of creating bodies politick, 
than for the sovereignty of a king or ji government ? It is 
undoubtedly a power, which cannot be surrendered by any 
species of sovereignty, without ultimately losing the sovereignty; 
because, after its attributes are gone, an empty shell only re- 
mains. If ttierefore it be true, as the English authorities assert, 
that the opinion of the court admits *< that the creation of cor- 
porations appertains to sovereignty,'^ and if sovereignty among 
us appertains to the people, it follows that the creation of cor- 
porations does not appertain to either of our governments, or 
td either of their departments. 

There is no political influence capable of producing greater 
impressions upon the sovereignty of the people, or their forms 
of government, than a system of legislative patronage, or of 
sbedding wealth upon corporations, and lustre upon Ambition. 
By incorpora^ons, great bodies politick, whole parties, and en- 
tire states, may be degraded into clienti^e, and bribed to obe- 
dience; and legislators themselves may participate in every 
bonus they bestow. Among these, an exempi»>n from taxation 
extended to a gireat mass of incoiporated wealtii, is an exclusive 
privilege, of a value sufficient. to purchase the most abject 
submission to political projects, the expense of which is im- 
posed upon other classes of society. This mode of purchasing 
tiie adherence of priests and nobles was universally resorted 
to by European kings, and is still practised by all European 
governments. And although our system of election and re- 
presentation, is often urged as a complete security against this 
palpable injustice to the rest of society, yet it must be admit- 
ted, that the additional, securities we have provided against an 
evil so general, by divisions and restrictions of power; that 
the experience of the whole world; that' the example of En- 
gland in particular; tlmtthe concurrence of all political wri- 
M 



Digitized by 



Google 



90 

ters ; unite in concluding, that election, alonei is in^uficieBt, 
and requires many auxiliaries. Whj should these auxiliaries- 
be renounced, if the consequence is ^knowledged, under the 
pretext, that election, unaided by divisions a.nd limiti^tions ixt 
power, has universally failed to prevent the evil P 

Confess is prohibited from legislating respecting the es^,- 
bUshmeni of religiop. Bu^ if it possesses a sovereign pow^r 
to create corporations, it may nevertheless incorporate a sect, 
ivithout estat^ishing a religion, inyest that sect with a right to 
acquire wealth; and protei^t that wealth ag^st taxatiop, 
under the doctrine contended fpr in the case of banking cor- 
porations* The states might exercise the same power. And 
thus, a positive priqciple of our constitutions might be e^vaded 
by the sovereign incorporating privilege, which has every where 
sufficed to beget the most enormous oppression. But supposing^^ 
that this species of incorporation is prohibited by our constitu- 
tions ; yet, allowing that it would have sufficed to destroy reli- 
gious liberty, had it not been prohibited, it follows, that a 
sovereign power to create civil corporations would also suffice 
to destroy civil liberty. The wise men who prepared the con- 
stitution of the United States, conceived, that as no power 
was delegated to congress to create religious corporations* its. 
exercise was sufficientlj prohibited ; and such was the cofi* 
etruction of the instrument before its adoption.. Hence it fol* 
lows» that, this patriotick convention was of opinion, t^at the 
same absence of any power, to create civil cor iterations, also> 
prohibited its exercise. And though the object of adopting 
the constitution suggested the amendment referred to, for qui- 
edng unfounded apprehensions, yet the weight of this respecta- 
able contemporaneous opinion remains unshaken. If the con- 
vention was mistaken, and really conferred upon congress ao, 
unlimited incorporating power, though it intended to do no 
such thing, then congress may create an East India corporation« 
settle it upon the Pacifick oceap, aiid under the power to dis- 
pose of the lands of the United States, endow it vrith a western 
territory ; or it may create commercial corporations i or it may 
. incorporate towns ; aQd shield all against taxation. I need not 
remind the reader of the political consequeiices which would 
flow from such measures. 



Digitized by 



Google 



91 

A ^wer df excusing either personal or real property from 
taxatron, id so far from being found in the constitution of the 
YJnit^d St&tes, that it contains positive prohibittons against it, 
in the noidd^ prescribed for taxing both. Congress is prohibited 
fhnik exempting the whole personal or real property of a state 
from taxation by tiiese prescribed modes, atid not inrested with 
d po^e^ of granting partial exemptions to any portion of either, 
feten in the imposition of taxes for the benefit of the union ; 
but, if it may assuhie the latter power, it may in detail defeat 
the actual prohibition. If however it cannot exercise this par- 
tiality even in taxing for the benefit of the union, the con- 
struction, which supposed that it may partially exempt real 
6r personal property in particular states from state taxation, 
as still more violent, cannot be admitted. 
' --A power to exempt, is equivalent to a power of imposing ; 
since the deficit it creates, must produce a relative accumulation 
upon property not exempted. The whole field of taxation not 
delegated to congress, is reserved to the states. A construc- 
tion which imposes a restriction upon the states, where ther^ 
is none; and destroys tiie restrictions to prevent partialities . 
kctually imposed upon congress, is doubly at war with a con- 
litruction, drawn from positive rules. There is rio distidction 
in th& right of taxation reserved to the states, between real sLnd 
personal property. Their original right to tax both is Reserved 
to theih as it stood, and a right to tax both in specified modes 
only id delegated t6 congress* If congress can exempt per- 
gonal property from taxation by the instrumentality of corpo- 
rations, it may exempt real, as the stock of banks as well as of 
other corporations, may as easily be composed <^ lands as of 
money; and thus accumulate direct tastation upon lands not 
€ixempted. 

But it may be said, that though congress possess a dispen- 
sing power of exempting both real and personal property from 
state taxation, by first inferring from a gratuitous sovereignty^ 
never created, a right to create corporations, and then inferring 
from this inference, a right to exempt the property of these cor* 
poratiohs from taxation ; and though ^ese same inferences from 
the gratuitotis sc^vereignty allowed also to the state govern- 
ments, we Rejected; yet, that congress may tax the property of 
tirese corporations^ itnd obseire In i^ doings some degree of 



Digitized by 



Google 



ttDiformitj. But suppose their stock is SHide to iNmsist of had. 
Is this land to be taxed by the rule of population ? If so, a i^u- 
sand acres of landed corporate stock, in a state having fifty- 
thousand people, will only pay one-twentieth of the amount to 
be paid by a thousand acres in a state having half a millioni 
and states having no land stock, would pay no part of this 
direct tax. The same inequalities would ensue from th6 tax- 
ation of personal stock by congress. This power of exemption 
clai^med on behalf of congress, (for congress ha& never claimed 
it for itself, and I believe never will,) must have the effects /of 
rendering state taxation unequal and unjust, by shielding 
masses of state property,) real or personal, from contribution ; 
and also of rendering union taxation unequal and unjust, or of 
placing corporation property beyond its reach: thus it is in 
fact already exempted from taxation, great as it is, imd greater 
as it may become ', and exactly occupies the privilege of the 
clergy and nobility of France, which caused the revolution of 
that country. By taxing state banks, congress has acknow- 
ledged the injustice of exempting corporate property from tax- 
ation. 

There is no idea expressed in the constitution, of any object 
of internal taxation, or any species of internal property, within 
tiie reach of congress, and without the reach of the state gov- 
enunents. Their 'power, as to all such objects, is evidently- 
considered as concurrent, except where the taxing power of the 
state govemuients extends farther than the taxing power of 
congress. Whatever internal property congress may tax, ik^ 
state governments may tax, and therefore corporation property 
must be exposed to state taxation, or it must be entitled to an 
absolute exemption from paying taxes, both to the state govern- 
ments, and tl;ie government of the union. Thus, the power ^ 
exemption claimed will defeat the concurrent power of taxation, 
bestowed for the mutual security of both governments; and 
also introduce either an inequality of taxation, or a complete 
exemption from it, both of which are inconsistent with a fair 
and free government, and neither of which was intended to be 
introduced by the general or state constitutions. Both partial 
exemptions and partial douceurs have the same effect, as if 
congress should tax in accordance with the formalities pre- 
scribed by the c<mstitution> and then restore their proportional 



Digitized by 



Google 



eontributions to istates or individuals) kstead of applying them 
to pfafalick use. A shield against unequal taxation, which can 
be pierced by any of ^ese contriyances, is no shield at all. 

Letus suppose^ that the state governments could diminish the 
ejects of the concurrent right of taxation^ on the part of con- 
giress. The gratuitous sovereignty conceded to both, carriea 
with it the mutual right, it is supposed, of establishing corpora- 
tions. So far the doctrine of the court, though erroneous, is 
consistent. But at this point it becomes eccentricL Having 
created mutual sovereignties, and having endowed them with 
a mutual right of creating corporations, it becomes suddenly 
disloyal to the sovereignty bestowed^ upon the states, and denies 
to it the same appurtenance, claimed for the sovereignty be4* 
towed upon congress ; although these sovereignties must^ be 
cO'^nrdinate, whether they are bestowed by the people or the 
judges. But, consistency required an acknowledgment, that if 
the state, governments cannot controul or defeat the sovereignty 
of congress, so neither can congress con^oul or defeat the 
sovereignty of the state governments, as to incorporations ; these 
being included mthin tlie spheres of both governments. Now, 
if the9tate governments could diminish by corporations, the 
.concurrent objects of taxation on the part of congress, it is very 
evidl»it that by multiplying them they migb^ weaken wad 
endang^ the government of the union. This daii^r both con- 
gress and the court have distinctly discovered. Congress have 
warily resisted it, by the precedent of a slight tax on state 
blanks ; and the judges have wisely sacrificed consistency io 
prevent it. But then this foresight, both oi congress and the 
court, as to the danger to the government of ^e union, fr(mi a 
power in the state governmei^s to diminish the objects of a 
^^tmcurrent right of taxation on the part of congress, ought not 
to make the governments and courts of the states blind, as to 
their danger from a power in congress, to diminish, the objects 
of -the concurrent ri^t of .taxation on the part of the states. 

There is no view, in which a power to create bodies politick 
with pecuniary privileges and exemptions, is more manifestly 
unconstitutionali, than in its capacity to subvert the distinct 
divi^oa of pow^^ between the general and state governments. 
It has been remaik^ed, that the opinion of a state right to local 
and internal regulation* was derived from the [nrinciples of our 



Digitized by 



Google 



renriirtHm ; tad Ibat the kieft of a um wat ienmi fro* 
general relalMiis» and not from local coosideratioiis. To tteae 
•oarcesy boft die special powers gitea to coi^;re9S, and liic 
midaaiy powers resenred to the states, mast be icfeii eA. 
The creatioii of bodies politick bj the states or bj congress; 
endowed with pii f il ege s inconristent in anj degree, with tiM 
ends and duties expected from either, is snbstantiall j \ 
atitational ; and substance is the best lexicographer for i 
taining both political rights and wrongs. There are two pria- 
eiples pre-emmently nnfaroaraUe to a free goremment ; tt 
absence of checks and balances, and a partialitjr in taxatioa. 
The judgment of the court snbrerts our best counterpMse of 
power bj power, and admits of an exemption from taxati«i la 
fkToor of wealth* 

The admission, that our priaurj ditisions of power were co- 
ordinate, was liberal, if the general goremment was created bj 
a union between states politically existing ; because a claim of 
tuperioriQr rather appertains to the creator, than to the created; 
and because this co-ordinac j is the highest ground, upon which 
the created power can be placed, and is precisely its guardian 
angel ; since a superiority ni one and a subordinatioa in the 
atfaer, would certainly cause the destruction of both. Usurpa- 
tion may be an appendage of spherical sorere^nty, unnoticed 
by the court, and rerdtttion is its sequel* These consequences 
can only be preyeated, by eonmdering our goveraaieats as the 
creatures (tf the people, invested with expressed, and profaiMled 
from implied powers, derired from the idea that they are sor^ 
reigns* 

An indiscriminate use of tiie term ^ corporation" has ifttrtf- 
dttced a loose idea of its meanu^, which appears to me to ba 
incorrect; but if correct, as militating against the opiaiott of tifo 
court* It is applied to towns, counties, and other section^ 
^visions, necessary for ciril govemment, for the admtaimtratioa 
of justice, the prevention or punishment of crimes, tiie care of 
tiie poor, the removal of nuisances, and the preservation of reads, 
streets and bridges; all objects of a social rather tiian a politi- 
cal nature; meaning by the first term, modes of civil govern* 
ment, and 1>y the second,^ nu>des of chi^ging that civil ^ 
vemment There is an evident di»tinetion, betweeq provisions 
for executing a government, and meaM for changing its &«t 



Digitized by 



Google 



9« 

gri9qqg|Le«; between 9>iiidcipal and p^yiticd eod& And^if tlier* 
18^ it is iacorrept to infer from the application of the word ** cor- 
poratLon'^ to a constitutional class of ends, an extension <^ the 
power of gavernment to an unconstitutional class oC en^is, fnw 
the mere accident of both being called by one; name, arisiog, 
from the want of different words to express every diffiDrent 
thing; just as it would be incorrect to suppose* tiiat two n^eQ 
bad the same rights and qualities, because they were called fagp 
one name. TboMgh the same word may hare been applied ta 
Siectionaldiyisions for sustaining ciyU goTeniment» and also t» 
*l bodies pplitick" for altering civil government, it does not 
confound tilings so different in their nature, imd only prov^ 
that our language,. participating in s^me d^ee of the hi«i]|g}y- 
phical defects of the Chinese, has c^ten but one word to convey 
idea^ extremely distinct* Besides,^ it will appear from a carefiil 
p^MSaU that the state. constitutions, literally^ virtu^ly or m- 
pliedly, recc^nize the class of municipal sections for executii:^ 
civil government, never recognize the class of corporate exclu- 
»ve privileges or bodies politick for ajterij^ its principles, aad 
sametimes express an aUkorrence of tbem* 

But, if the term ** cprporation" is to be so loosely oonstrueA 
as to convey these distinct powers, tiie clam of congref s ta it& 
instrumentality must becpme still more remote* unless it ea» 
be proved, ttiat this body can incc^rpocate towns, divide coua-^ 
tjies, and create the whole. genus* comprehending b^h the 
mnnkipal and political species. To exclude congress (vGOk 
the f<Nrmer cla^s^ although it is a legitimate appurtenance of & 
limited government^ and to invest it with. the. latter, although it 
is an illegitimate attribute of a limited government, would be a 
flange perversion of the science of oonstrnction* As. therefore 
the slate governments are either invested with^ <Mr not prohibited 
&om» the power of creating municipal sections for local state 
gnvernments ; and as congress is not invested with, but prpr 
lubited from, the power o£ cheating munidpa) local sections for 
internal government, this word must be ccmsid^ed as excln^elgn 
]^^rtaining to tiie* ^te yocabulary* ft is neither literaUy 
nor virtually applied t^, the constitution of the United dtaies>^ 
to. " ike coinmon defence and general wel&re*'^ On the con* 
tnii;y, thia common defence and gener^ welfare 4iad. for it& 
chi^ olgeot the comnma secttrily of the state goivemnieiits. 



Digitized by 



Google 



96 

And the unioii, far from mtending to defeat, was entered uito» 
for the purpose of attaining this object. The use of the word- 
^ corporation'' must either, be disallowed to the goYernment of 
the union, or the union must be considered as intended to absorb 
and abolish the powers reserved to the states, and to create an 
ab9olute g^ietid sovereignty, which it was instituted to prevent 
If however this word may be used by the state goveniments, 
to contaminate their own principles, (which I deny,) some conf- 
lation exists in the consideration, that a weapon so dangerous 
will be local ; and that they are prevented by the federal con- 
stitution from extending its malignancy to the government of 
the United States. 

Political words of all. others are the most indefinite, on ac- 
count of the constant struggle of power to enlarge itself, by 
selecting terms not likely to alarm, but yet capable of being 
tortured by construction to produce effects generally execrated. 
In the catalogue of examples testifying to the truth of this ob- 
servation, the words ** sovereignty and corporation" occupy the 
most prominent place. If "despotism" were substituted for 
"sovereignty," the mask would be torn from the latter, and its 
deformity would be exposed to the weakest minds ; and if ** ex- 
clusive privileges" were substituted for ** corporation," the po- 
rtion *' that exclusive privileges are general grievances" so 
generally assented to, would detect that. 

An unlimited right of taxation was possessed by the states, 
. previous to the union. The solitary exception to this right is 
contained in the prohibition to tax imports and exports. A 
concurrent right of taxation under some limitations, is given to 
congress; but one concurrent right is no restriction upon the 
other, and both reach every object of taxation to which either 
extends, f Therefore, congress in virtue of this concurrent rigH 
can inflict no tax, to which the same right in the states does 
not extend. Hence it irresistibly follows, either that the states 
can tax corporate wealth under their original power of taxation, 
not prohibited, but reserved by the constitution; or that con- 
gross cannot tax the corporate wealth of their own creation, 
because no such exclusive right of ^laxation is given to them, 
and therefore it must either be a concurrent right or no right at 
all; and in the concurrent right of taxation, the states parti* 
cipatc^ Can congress exempt any species of wealth £(Wi t«xa* 



Digitized by 



Google 



97 

fioD» and how would the consequences of a power so fkial te 
cml liberty teiminate ? 

I shall conclude this section with a few quotafions, stili leaT^ 
ing to the reader iheir application. 

Fed. p. 16S. H. "< I affirm that (with the sole eoreepHon of 
«* duties on imports and exports) the indiyidual states retain an 
*< independent and uncontrovlabU authority to raise their own 
<* revenue, in the most absolute and unqualified sense^ and that 
*^ an attempt on the part of the national gojsemment to abridge 
** them in the exercise of it» would be a violent assumption of 
'* power, unwarranted by any article or clause of Ae eousH* 
« tution.^^ 

Fed. p. 168. H. <' Suppose that the federal l^lature, bj 
^ some forced construction of its authority (which indeed cannot 
<« easily be imagined) upon the pretence of an interference with 
** its reyenues, should undertake to abrogate a land tax, imposed 
** by the authority of a state, would it not be evident that it 
<< was an invasion of that concurrent jurisdiction in respect to 
«' this species of tax, which the constitution plainly supposes to 
^ ex^t in the state goyemments.^ 

Fed« p. 169. H. ^ Though a law, therefore, laying a tax for 
<' the use of the United States would be supreme in its nature^ 
** and could not l^ally be opposed or controuled, yet a law 
«* abrogating or preventing the cdlection of a tax laid by tiie 
<' authority of a state (unless upon imports or expcnis) would 
** not be the supreme law of the land, but an usurpation of 
« power not granted by the constitution.^^ *' The inference 
<< from the whole is, that, the individual states would, under the 
^ proposed constitution, retain an independent and uncontraul^ 
" able authority to raise revenue to any extent of which they 
^ may stand in need, by every kind of taxation^ except duties 
*< on imports and exports." 

Fed. p. 175. H, ** The convention thought the concurrent 
<« jurisdiction in the case of taxation, prrferable to subordi* 
*• natUmJ^ 

We shall meet with many other disagreements in construe- 
tionj between avarice and great statesmen. 



N 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



SECTION 8. 

THE BANK DECISION.— SOVEREIGNTY OF SPHERES. 

'* If any one proportion could command the universal assent of 
" mankind, we might expect it would be this; that the goyem- 
<' ment of the union, tliough limited in its powers, is supreme 
^ in its sphere of action. This would seem necessarily to result 
'* from its sphere of action. It is the government of all; its 
"powers are delegated by all, it represents all, and it acts for 
** aW." " The powers of sovereignty are divided between the 
<^ government of the union and those of the states. They are 
** each sovereign with respect to the objects committed to it, and 
" neither sovereign, unth respect to the objects committed to the 
"other:^ 

The- word *' sphere'* conveys an idea of something limited,, 
in which sense it is correctly applied to our governments by the 
Federalist, and may be easily undersood; but I confess my- 
self extremely puzzled to discern, how this word, being a suIh 
. stantive circumscribed, can be converted into a substantive un- 
circumscribed, by tiie help of the adjective ** sovereign.'* And 
I think it almost as difficult to see what is meant by the sove- 
reignty of the spheres, as it is to hear the musick of the spheres. 
But, as some change of tiie nature of a sphere must be effected 
by an incong^ous epithet, to sustain the opinion of the court; 
tibe experiment deserves a very serious and respectful consi- 
deration. 

The word " sphere" was very happily used in the Federalist, 
and conveyed an idea of our system of government, both just 
and beautiful. It refers to the structure of the universe, as 
the model of our political system; and in the allusioni tacitly 
suggests, and forcibly illustrates the sovereignty of the people 
over the spheres they have created. The beauty of the simili- 
tude consists in the regularity produced by a strict confinement 
of these spheres within their respective orbits; and it contains 
a fine admonition^ in extending our idea^ to the consequences 



Digitized by 



Google 



100 

wUch would ensae to the universe, should one of its spheres 
leave its own and travel into other orbits ; to forewarn us of 
the consequences wliich would ensue to our political system 
^m a similar aberration. But the similitude is utterly spoilt, 
by the ided that one of our spheres may annex to itself a long 
t^ of means, reaching into the orbits of other spheres, so a^ to 
defeat the sublime allusion, and leave us only a regret for hav- 
ing neglected its admonition. 

If the sovereignty of the spheres means any sovereignty at 
all, it supersedes the sovereignty of the people, since they can 
no longer possess that, which they have divided among spheres. 
But, if these spherical sovereignties are restrained by their 
orbits, called << spheres of action," then this new phrase means 
nothing at alU because a change in the description, does not 
alter the nature of the thing described; and if our divisions of 
power will still renudn the same, whether they are called sphe- 
rical sovereignties, spheres of actioii, limited powers, balances, 
checks or trusts (as the moon (Ud under the several names 
<tf Phcebe, Cynthia, Diana, Dictynna, Hecate and Luna,) no 
sound argument can be deduced from using one appellation in 
preference to another. " The limited monarchy of spheres'' 
would have been more appropriate to the apparent meaning of 
the court in this extract, as clearly conveying the idea of sphe- 
rical limitatioUi and clearly excluding that of a spherical ex- 
tension of power lurking in the ^ord sovereignty. We see a 
sovereignty of spheres in England, to justify the language adopt- 
ed by the court, and we know that the sphere of acti<m of eaeh 
is limited and restrained by the spheres of action <^ the other 
two. By calling each '* sovereign with respect to the objects 
committed to it, and neither sovereign with respect to the 
objects committed to the other," I cannot see that the powers 
of the king, of the lords, or of the commons, would be enlarged 
in the leai^ degree; or that a choice of means would be be- 
stowed upon either, by which it could encroach upon the others. 
To our imitation of this model in the arrangement of le^da- 
tive and executive power, we have, besides others, sufcjoiiied 
two improvements, by a judicial sphere possessing a great poli- 
tical power; and by the important spheres called state and 
federal governments. Now, if a spherical sovereignty exista 
here as it does in Englapd, it would be as certainly destroyed. 



Digitized by 



Google 



101 ' ' • •• --. ' . ■ 

as it has often been there, if either ^ere possessed an exdii- 
siye or an uneontroaled choice of means, in the exercise of a 
species of soyereignty separately from the rest. Encroach- 
ments of sphere upon sphere can only be made by means; and 
it is yielding nothing to admit that the spheres are ciroim- 
scribed, bat to ipsist, that their choice of means, by which en- 
croachments a^ made, is tinlimited ; because a political sphere 
of action, cannot possibly be created in any other way, thiui 
that of mthholding from it many means for effecting the ends, 
even the legitimate ends it may have in view. Even in brings 
ing a murderer to justice, the means, as well as the .sphere of 
action in the court, are all limited. If it was otiierwise, con- 
fusions, usurpations^ and oppressions would ensue on all sides; 
because power never finds any difficulty in choosing means 
calculated for its own enlargement* In fact, we know that 
the English political history is only a compilation of insidious 
j9Lad specious means, occasionally res(Hied to by each of the 
spheres, for the purposes of deluding the people, and encroach- 
ing upon the others. At length these spheres having harrassed 
eac^ other for many centuries, by each having chosen means 
for encroaching on tiie others, came to a compromise; and 
compounded among themselves a sovereignty of spheres; and 
this precedent justifies the court, however puzzled I may be 
to understand it upon American ground, in using that phrase. 
But in quoting it, especiidly if I do not dispute its authority, 
I hope I may be allowed to contend, that it cannot prove the 
same thing to be wrong in England and right here. It proves 
that political spheres/ by uniting, may acquire, not an indivi- 
dual but a collective sovereignty. It thence follows, if the 
sovereignty has passed in the United States from the peo- 
|ile to. political spheres, either by delegation, or by the usur- 
pation of those spheres, that it can only be executed legiti- 
mately by the collective or united conseiit of all these spheres; 
unless it can be shewn, that a sort of interregnum or suspen- 
sion of this spherical sovereignty, like those which often hap- 
pened in England, has already happened here. The same 
precedeni/ proves, that neither sphere ought to have any chmce 
of means in the exercise of its own spherical powers,!^ which 
it may encroach upon its collateral spheres; for, though they 
i^crc not co-ordinate, nor circumscribed to preserve the liberty 



Digitized by 



Google 



of the people, jet they became balanced by mutual f(^r for 
Butual safety ; and accordingly each sphere has been obliged, 
as the only chance for self-preserration, to be excessively jea- 
lous of tiie means resorted to by eath to increase its own power. 
Now what does this English precedent teach us? That a sphe- 
rical sovereignty can only be exercised by the mutual consent 
of the spheres: That om sphere can only be prevented by the 
watchfulness and resistance of the others, from using means to 
make itself the master of these others. That its success has 
^ways been considered as a usuipation, and has always intro- 
duced a tyranny : And that it was necessary to preserve the 
independence of the spheres of each other, to maintain even the 
semblance of a free government. 

If then we are to adopt the English spherical sovereignty, 
we ought not to make it worse liian it is, by subjoining to it 
vices, which it rejects, as utterly inconsistent with tiie spherical 
system, and certainly destructive of all the good it can produce. 
In that country, each sphere is a judge, independently of the 
o^ers, of its own sphere of action, and of its own means ; but 
both this sphere of action, and these means, are checked and 
restrained by the sphere of action and the choice of means» 
possessed by the other spheres. The same equivalency is ne- 
cessary here to preserve a sovereignty of spheres, and prevent 
one from becoming the master of the others. The English 
system has made no specified provision to settle the collisions 
which will naturally arise, and have arisen in England from 
this equivalency of powers, " because power controuled or 
^ abridged is almost always the rival and ^nemy of that power 
•* by which it is controuled or abridged,** as Mr. Hamilton justly 
observes in the Federalist, page 81 ; and this important office 
is loosely left to publick opinion, without establishing an or- 
derly mode in which it might be expressed. Our system, 
foreseeing the probabilify of such collisions, both from the tem- 
per of human nature, and also from the occurrences in England, 
has provided a constitutional and orderly mode, by which pub- 
lick opinion may exercise this supervising office. It would be 
a radical violation of the English policy of checks and balan* 
ces, considered in that country, as the only safeguard of liberty, 
even without a speoifick provision for reconciling collisions, 
were we to surrender the stone safeguard^ with specifick pro- 



Digitized by 



Google 



103 

visions for i^s exercise* By th&t» &e soverdgnty aX the 
people is d^ied* and soTereignty is possessed by the tiirec 
i^pheres, king* lords and 'Commons ; this is the reason* why it 
contains no orderly mode by which a direct reference can be 
made to the people, for the settlement of collisions aoMMig 
these spheres ; yet the English system does not relinquish the 
essential principle of the co-ordinacy> indcp^dency and eqna- 
lity of the political spheres themselTCS* from an apprehensicm 
of their collisions. If we should relinquish this essential 
principle from, the same apprehension* we should adopt the 
English spherical soverdgnty* renounce the English security 
of a co-(»'dinacy or balance of spheres* and lose the sove* 
reignty of the people. According to the English system, no 
sphere possesses the least degree of supremacy in the exercise 
of sovereign power, over the others, by the instrumentality of 
means, because it would enable tlie supreme sphere to swallow 
up these others; and therefore to admit of sudi a supremacy 
in one of <mr spheres, would be contrary to the most valuable 
principle of theirs; and by adopting the sovereignty of the 
spheres, and also rejecting the only security against its abuse^ 
namely the check and controul of these spheres upon each other, 
we should introduce here a worse government than the English, 
in an essential circumstuice. 

There is but one mode of getting over this reasoning, and 
to that mode the ccmrt has resorted. It asserts that ** the 
«' government of the union is delegated by all, represents all^ 
f' and acts for all." Do these assertions (the truth of which I 
shall presently examine) squint at consolidation, and inge- 
niously undermine the state spherical soverei^ty admitted by 
the court ? Do they design to recc^nize the English spheri<^ 
sovereignty of kings, lords and commons, as existing here in the 
president, senate and house of representatives ? Do they mean 
to insinuate that our system of government will be safe under 
the guardianship of these three departments, as the English 
system is safe undo: the guardianship of the king, lords and 
commons? If these inferences were not intended, L cannot 
discern what was meant by these assiertions ; but admitting them 
to be true, I deny their sufficiency to justify such inferen<^8. 
The people certainly had a right to create the union sphere to 
re^ct thf iBtat^ spheres ; and to retain the stirte spheres, to 



Digitized by 



Google 



104 

ri^tiict the union sphere* The court admit that they have 
exercised this right; therefore no inference from these asser- 
timis can be correct, by which this co-ordinacy of restriction 
would be abolished. Had the pec^le of England created their 
co-ordinate spheres, they might have varied their form and 
their number from what they are ; and surely the people of the 
United States might vary the form and the number of tiieirs 
from tiiose of England, without defeating the principle of a 
co-ordinacy of spheres, and still retaining its application to 
whatever spheres they chose to create. The establishment of 
the union and state spheres, was not only a happy circum- 
stance for extending the compass and capacity of republican 
government, but wisely comprised an advantage to which the 
English spherical system cannot pretend. Each of these spheres 
is invested with an independent legislative and judicial power 
within their respective orbits, so that collisions may be con*" 
ducted and reconciled orderly and argumentatively, whilst 
those of the .English spheres can only appeal to mobs or fac- 
tions. Why thwefore should these spheres, so much better 
supplied with the means of self-preservation and for mutual 
restriction, be considered as less estimable than those esta- 
blished in England by civil war, and the intrigues of faction ? 
The ordinances of the people approved of by the best talents 
of the country ought at least to be as venerable, as the com- 
promise&i of ambitious self-created orders. 

Let us now calmly consider whether the prodigiously inclu- 
atve assertions, *' That the government of the union is the 
« government of all ; its powers are delegated by all, it repre- 
*' sents all, and acts for all," are really true. Another asser- 
tion to Gcmfront it brings it to a fair test. The government of 
the union, in respect to the powers reserved to the states, is iht 
government of none, is^ delegated by none, represents none^ 
and can onjiy act for all, by assuming a power, neUher delegat- 
ed nor representative. If one of these assertions be true and 
the other &lde, the reader will not hesitate in deciding to 
which a deficiency, in veracity, a[q[>ertains. I admit, that the 
first may be made true by a restrictive qualification, similar to 
the qualification which makes the second assertion true, by ad- 
ding to it the words, *' in respect to the powers delegated to the 
general government. Both governments represent all in exer^ 



Digitized by 



Google 



105 

ciaing the powers committed to them respectively, and neither 
represent any, with respect to the powers committed to the 
other. Both may act for all, within their respective delegated 
spheres ; but neither can act for all within the spheres delist- 
ed to the other. *< If any propositions could cmnmand the nni- 
** versal consent of mankind, we might expect they wouM be 
'< these." And if these propositions are true, it follows, that 
neither government can, under cover of a sovereignty of spheres, 
or by the use of inferences, exceed its limitations, without vio- 
lating the essential principles of delegation and representation. 
If we were to admit the assertion of the court in dl its latitude, 
it would amount to the following position ^—^ A government 
** representing all, may act for all." This position, unqualified, 
applies more forcibly, (as I shall attempt to shew,) to the end of 
unfettering the state governments, than to the end of unfetter-^ 
ing the government of the union, because they actually repre- 
sent all, which the latter government does' not 

The principle of personal representation was violated to a 
considerable extent, for the sake ^ comprondse and accomino- 
dation, and because a spherical representation was necessary 
to a union of states. The house of representatives only, of the 
federal government, is elected with a view to the first principle, 
whilst it is throughout applied to the state governments. The 
senate of the United States is a representation of state sove« 
reignties, not of numbers; and this fact circumscribes very 
materially, the generality of the assertion made by the courts 
or transfers its application to the state governments. It was 
instituted to preserve that which it represents, and not as the 
guardian of individuals whom it does not represent The 
union was established for the management of the general con* 
cerns of the states united, and not for the management of lo- 
cal or individual concerns ; to which intention the construction 
of the senate has a distinct relaticm. The present senate is 
exactly analogous to the old congress, in which each state 
had one vote, as each has two in the present senate ; and the 
present senate is no forther a representative of individuals, 
than was that congress. Both were chosen by the state legis- 
latures. Hence it appears that the government of the union 
does not repres^it all, as the court assert, and of course, that 
it has no ri(^t to act for all. The house of representatives is 




Digitized by 



Google 



elected hj states ; but that house is not the goTemmmit of the 
union ;, and the mode of its electi<>n may be easily accounted 
for, exclusively of an intention by that mode, to extend the pow- 
ers of the federal goyemment The want of a power in the old 
confederation to act upon individuals by taxation, had destroyed 
its efficacy, and this defect was the chief object to be removed in 
the formation of *« a more perfect union.*' The concomitancy 
of representation and taxation, dictated the form of the house of 
representatives, and not an intention of extending the powers 
of the federal government, by the mode of representation esta- 
blished in that single branch. For, the president is also elected, 
in the first instance, upon indirect federal principles, and 
directly by states, in case of no election by electors. As two 
branches of the federal government are federally constructed, 
as only one participates of individual representation, and as 
the construction of this one was dictated by the limited power 
over persons bestowed for effecting federal, and not personal 
or local ends, the assertion of the court is exploded by fac<; 
and the inferences from it subverted by a genuine construction 
of the federal constitution. It never intended to inflict upon 
state legislatures, elected by all, a responsibility to the federal 
senate, not elected by the people, and only the representatives 
of state sovereignties. Nor did it intend, by bestowing a limit- 
ed power of taxation upon the federal government, for the spe- 
cial purpose of eflfecting federal ends, and by sujbjecting this 
power to the check of personal representation, to make this 
partial representation a pretett for assuming local or personal 
powers, and for exercising the unlimited power of « acting for 
all." If this reasoning be true, it applies conclusively to banks, 
corporations, roads, canals, and congressional patronage. 

To sustain the assertions I have been combating, the couft 
*iays, "There is no phrase in the constitution which excludes 
** incHental or implied powersJ^ " Its nature requires that 
** only its great oui-Unes should be marked." « We find in it 
^' the great powers to lay and collect *taxes, to borrow money, 
'< to regulate commerce, to declare and conduct a war, and to 
« raise and support armies and navies. Can we adopt that 
" construction, unless the words imperiously require it, which 
'• would impute to the framers of the instrument, when grant*- 
^ ing these powers for ih%publick good, the intention of impede 



Digitized by 



Google 



107 

<* ii^ their etercise bj withhdding a chqice of means? The 
** instrument does not profess to enumerate the means hj whicfi 
** the powers it confers may be executed* nor does it prohibU 
^ the creation of a corporation, if the existence of such a thing 
''be essential to the heneiciid exercise of those powers.'', 

If the assertions we have just examined are true» they do not 
need the various auxiliaries summoned to their assistance in 
this extract ; if they are false* these auxiliaries cannot make 
them true ; and as the assertions comprise the princi{des to be 
vindicated* the auxiliaries brought forward in their defence are 
of no use or weight, if the principles themselves should have 
been exploded. The great weight of the authority of the courts 
however* will justify their examination. 

When the adoption of the federal constitution was under 
discussion* its enemies expressed an alarm* on account of the 
magnitude of the powers conferred on the federal government* 
and its friends an ^^ehension of its feebleness* compared 
with the powers reserved to the states; but neither party con- 
tended* that an amplification of the greater division of power* 
and of course a diminution of the lesser* could constitutionally 
be made by equipping the giant in all the panoply of means* 
implication and inference* and compelling the dwarf to appear 
naked in a combat with his antagonist. On the contrary* it 
was successfully urged by the warmest friepds to the constitu* 
tion* and in particular by the authors of the Federalist* that the 
supposed inequality of power between the state and federal 
spheres did not, exist; and that either division, especially the 
state, was able to balance and controul the other. la this com- 
putation* the comparison was made between the federal sphere, 
and the state sphere* comprising all , the state governments; 
and the equilibrium of power was Reduced from the expectation, 
that if the riglits of one state were assailed by the federal go- 
vernment, the rest would not suffer their copartner to be over- 
whelmed by the weight of power* and their own rights to be 
destroyed by a victory, in a contest so unequal. To estimate 
the magnitude of their relative powers* the state governments 
ought to be considered as constituting one s{Aere* and the fede- 
ral government another. Perhaps a cool philo80{Aer may con- 
aider the security of private property* the protection of per- 
sonal rigbt8*the suppression oi (crimesi the care of good manners 



Digitized by 



Google 



lOS 

and the catalogue of nmmcipai regvlations, as embr^icing a 
sphere of action^ of greater moral extent, than the powers dele* 
gated to congress ; and if the two spheres are to be geograpbi- 
callj compared, the map demonstrates their equality. If these 
spheres are equal as to magnitude, one magnitude attracts un- 
defined appurtenances as stronglj as the other ; and if the 
fraroers of the constitution designed to balance magnitude by 
magnitude, thej could not also have designed to destroy the ba- 
lance, by annexing to either an exclusive privilege of attracting 
undefined -powers. 

Be this as it may, I contend, that the federal constitution, 
so far from intending to make its political spheres morally 
unequal in powers, or to invest the greatest with any species 
of sovereignty over the least, intended the very reverse; and 
that the court have recognbed the latter intention by avowing 
its right to declare an unconstitutional law, void. As the 
powers of congress must be confessed tp transcend those of 
the court, much farther than tiiey do those of the states, it fol^ 
lows, that if they cannot be constitutionally used to contract 
the powers of the court, they cannot be constitutionally used to 
contract the powers of the states. The reason why great 
spheres derive no authority from magnitude to transgress upon 
small spheres, is, that both are donations from the same source ; 
and that the donor did not intend, that one donation should 
pilfer another, because it was smaller. 

^ Can we adopt that construction, unless the words impe-t 
** riously require it, which would impute t^ the framers of the 
*' instrument, when granting these powers for publi^k good, 
" the intention of impeding their exercise by withholding a 
<< choice of means?" This question might be answered by 
another. Can we adopt that construction, unless the words 
imperiously require it, which would impute to the framers of 
the constitution, when granting powers for fublick good^ the 
intention of allowing one sphere by an unlimited choice of 
means, to impede the exercise of powers conferred upon others ? 
It admits also of so many other answers, quite satisfactory, 
that a few only need be urged. There is no imperious, or 
rather positive power, requiring the judicial sphere to declare 
a law void ; yet it claims this right, by which it may limit the 
means of legislative power, and impede its exercise. Thb can. 



Digitized by 



Google 



109 

o^j h% justified bj to-ordinacy and redtrictiims imperiandji 
established, in the pwittve divisioii of power» into limited 
political spheres* This division was intended to efect ^<^ 
precise end, for t^e publidc good, here objected to ; tiie end 
of controuling power by power. And if^is controul does not 
extend to means, as power €ann<^ be exet'cised nor nsorpatioii 
become successful, except by means ; all our divisions, restric* 
tions and limitations of power, designed to prevent, for the 
publick good, the profligacy it hats invariably displayed, when 
uncontrouled, must become nugatory and ineflfectoaU The 
words of the constitution ^are literally imperious in reserving 
to the states, for the publick good also, a right of taxation sub* 
jeet only to a positive limitation. The means by which the 
stat^ may provide for raising a revenue, being expressly 
bestowed by the people, are surely as sacred, and as consti- 
tutional, and as likely to advance the publick good, as any 
conjectural coufiicting means, which can be imagined by 
congress. . 

" There is no phrase in the constitution, which excludes 
^ incidental i>t implied powers. Its nature requires ^uit only 
*< its great eutUnes should be marked/' A contrast between 
positions often elicits light. There is no phrase in the consti- 
tution which even insinuates, that the actual divisions of power 
should be altered or impaired by incidental or implied powers. 
A revolution in our system of government would be no longer 
ai^tici|mted, after supplanting tiie position *' that actual powers 
controul implied powers," and planting in. its place the dogma 
*< that implied powers controul actual powers.** A great ono 
would be effected, if it could be established, that " incidental or 
implied powers not excluded'' were not prohibited. Let it be 
remembered, that the great outlines of state governments are 
more sl^Uy referred to by the constitution, tiian the outiines 
of the federal government; that the means for executing the 
powers delegated to the latter are frequently marked, whilst 
those for executing the powers reserved to the former, are left 
chi^y unlimijted* And then let it be computed, which sphere 
may make the greatest use of the stonge position *' that means, 
or incidental, or implied powers not excluded, are not prohi« 
bited," however they m?iy be at discord with the positive divi- 
^ns of power. If this reasoning of the court be incorrect, the 



Digitized by 



Google 



no 

conclasion it is used to establish '< ftat the creatioii of a cmpo- 
** ration, if the existence of sach a thing be essential to the 
^ beneficial exercise of the powers of congress, is constitU' 
** tional, because not proAi&ifed"— -is incorrect also, if however 
beneficial considered alone, it disorders or impairs actual pow- 
ers bedtowed upon political spheres, as in the case of limiting 
the power of state taxation, farther than it is litnitod bj the 
constitution. The idea, that one limited sphere has an exclu- 
sive privilege of doing whatever it may conceive to ** be essen- 
tial to the beneficial exercise of its own powers" is still more 
extravagant, more subversive of co-ordinate spheres, and ut- 
terly inconsistent, in every view, with our system of checking 
power by powjer ; as well as with the English theory of ba- 
lances. 

Another argument urged by the court is,^ I think, less 
ingenious than any of those we have previously considered. It 
says " The power of taxation by the states is not abridged by 
" tlie grant of a similar power to the government of the unions 
** it is to be concurrently exercised by the two governments^ 
*< The fitates are forbidden to lay duties on exports or imports. 
** If the obligation of this prohibition must be conceded ;. if it 
«< may restrain a state from the exercise of its taxing powers on 
** imports and exports, the same paramount power would seem 
" to restrain, as it certainly may restrain, a state from such otket 
** exercise of this power as is in its nature incompoHhle vottk 
•*and repugnant to the constitutional laws of the union." The 
artifice of acknowledging a constitutional principle, and dis- 
tinctly admitting the powers actually bestowed on the federal 
and state spheres of our government; and then of immedi* 
ately defeating these actual powera on one side, and extending 
them on the other, is repeatedly resorted to in the opinion of 
the court. But, tliis bold mode of reasoning is in every instance 
completely overthrown by. the principle, if it be a true onc^ 
'« that expressed powers and rights contract and limit implied 
^powers and rights, and that implied powers and rights do not 
"controul and limit expressed powers and rights." The asser- 
tion " that the same paramount power" (by which I understand 
the constitution) *< which restrained the states from taxii^ 
"imports ^nd exports, may restrain a state from such other 
" exercise of their taxing power as is in its nature incompa^iiU 



Digitized by 



Google 



Ill 

^^unih and repugrumt i^ ike ^shstUuHmal laws of (he nmon/' by- 
blending a seqnitiir and a non sequitar together and confoand- 
ing our ideas, endeavours to ddndfi them into an erronecms 
conclusion. Stript of this ambiguity the argament stands thus : 
-** The constitution n»ght Ijiave further restrained, and therdbre, 
''it has further restrained the taxing power €i the states.^ 
Tlius fairly stated, ^e conclusion does not follow. To use the 
prospective terms employed by the court, the argument would 
be this : " A constitution may, luid therefore has further re- 
** strained this power." This mode of anticipating innovation, 
renders the mode prescribed for amending the constitution 
quite superfluous. It unfolds to legislatures the entire cargo 
of powers not prohilnted, but not given ; they are told that they 
may exercise any powers^, which the constitution might have 
given them, and are very courteously invited to pick and choose. 
As a complete spherical sovereignty is conceded both to the 
federal and state governments, and as the constitution does 
not forbid to either this mode of extending their respective 
powers, it is open to both ; and the laws oi neither, under this 
novel, constitutional power, can be unconstitutional, because 
»taike laws made in virtue of its spherical sovereignty comprising 
n right of construction, will be equally constitutional with 
federal laws, when both may defend themselves by a com- 
i^on principle. The clashings likely t6 arise between spe- 
cified powers and rights will be nothing to those, which 
would be produced by a mutual power to assume implied rights 
1^ powers not prohibited. But I believe that I have misun- 
derstood the court in supposing, that it meant << constitutional 
power'' by tile phrase " paramiount character.** It seems by 
Ae expresrion *' constitutional laws of the union" as if it meant, 
not that the constitution, but that congress was the paramount 
power. The consideration of thi^ idea is postponed to the 
next section ; at present I shallonly observe that the laws both 
of the federal or state governments may be either conformable 
or repugnant to the constitution ; that one government is 
eqtially restrained with the other from passing laws repugnant 
to the constitution ; and that neither can be absolved by a 
claim of one to the title '* paramount" bestowed upon neither, 
tb defeat the laws of its co-ordinate sphere. 'Vhe paramount 
power of the people, by prohibiting the states from taxing 



Digitized by 



Google 



lis 

imports ttid eiports» did not create a paramount power in 
congress, to extend the prohibition to internal objects of taxa- 
^on. it is therefore obvious, that the restrictive expressioa 
*« constitutional laws of the union'V has no relation to the 
•ufaject under discussion, as that relates entirelj to unconsti- 
tutional laws ; and that it is used merelj to conceal, under 
the position "that the states have no right to pass unconstitu- 
*• tional laws,'* which is true, the conclusion ** that the federal 
** government possess a paramount and exclusive power of 
" deciding upon the constitutionality and unconstitutionalitj of 
**all laws, both state and federal,'^ which is denied to be true. 
Let us illustrate this reasoning by the fact. Confess have, 
by one corporation, subtracted from the fund made liable by 
the constitution to state taxation, thirty millions of specified 
fight, by the instrumentality of power implied or not pro- 
hibited. The same species of instrumentality, not being pro- 
hibited, may also be implied in behalf of the states. And to 
place the federal and state governments in the constitutional 
relation exbting between tiiem previously to its exercise, the 
states ought to subtract thirty millions also from the specified 
fund exposed to federal taxation ; a precedent by which one 
fund is diminished to the extent of thirty millions, and by the 
capacity of an incorporating power to diminish it without 
limitation, decides the fate of either of these sovereign spheres, 
which should be deprived both of resistance, and every coun- 
tervailing expedient. Revenue is the sustenance of powei^. 
The old congress dwindled into imbecility, because the states 
could subtract from its funds without limitation ; and the old 
states will ultimately sulier the same fate, if the new congress 
may by corporations subtract from their power to raise a reve- 
nue, without limitation. The position between these t#6 
spherical sovereignties would be exactly reversed, and however 
it may be justified upon the principles of retaliation and 
revenge, the reciprocity of defeat would, by the humiliation 
of the state governments, inflict greater evils upon the people, 
than they suffered ft'om the humiliation of the old congress 
from a similar cause. Our experience had taught us the 
necessity of anr independent revenue for the support of power ; 
and the constitution under the conviction of experience, invest- 
ed each sphere, sovereign say the court, with this paramount 



Digitized by 



Google 



IIS 

Becessiiy, in terms tiie most distinct ; bfut^ if another -paramount 
necessity ibr creating corporations, shall be able to subtract 
ii^at it pleases from the paramount necessity for reveme, 
these spherical soverrignties will occupy the stations of Eng- 
land and Ireland, whilst the former took away revenue from 
the latter, by quartering a substantial, though not a nominal, 
corporation af pensioners upon the Irish funds. Had it been 
|nt)po8ed in the convention, still further to reduce tiie fund for 
^v^nue left with the states, by investing congress with a 
power of subtracting any portion or the whole of internal state 
funds for rusing revenue ; or had such a constructioa been 
put upon the constitution whilst under the consideration of 
the people, it is impossible to hesitate in our opinions as to 
^the results ; and this unavmdaMe retrospective impression is 
iu> slight proof of its real intention. 

Sometimes the court reject a restiiction imposed upon 
particular words by the general tenour <^the constitution, and 
at others eiMieavour to des^y the most ISieral rights, though 
according with the general tenour. An exceptimi excludes 
that which it does not contdn* A delegation of power does 
the same. The prohiUtion to ttpc exports and imports leaves 
untouched every other species of taxation. The delegated 
power of taxation to coDgr^ss, t^ootains no new prohibition 
upon the states. The intention in both cases is literally 
expressed. The reservation of all powers not delegated to the 
United States, nor prohibited to the states, is a third literal 
•restriction of the prohibition to tax imports and exports, to the 
things actually prohibited. Add to the positive letter the 
consideration, that sovereign states were delegating limited 
powers ; and the idea, tiiat both the specifick prohibition upon 
the states, and the restricted delegation to congress, may be 
defeated by an implication, hostile to both, and contrary to 
th^ rules of construction, seems entirely inadmissible. Had 
the fiNuners of the constitution conceived, that the state taxing 
pewer» originally unlimited, could be limited by implication, 
a far mcnre specious foundation for this doctrine was furnished 
by the power given to congress to regulate commerce; as the 
taxation of exports and imports by the states might have been 
<* incompatible with and repugnant to" this constitutional 
P 



Digitized by 



Google 



114 

power ; uid hy not confiding in this impliod specie of pr^ii^ 
tution, they positively reprobate it. The iraplicatipB in thii 
case would have been specially confined to imports and export% 
had thfs constitution failed to prohibit the states from taxing 
them ; but as it does contain tiiis limited prohibition, I canfio(b 
conceiTe by what train of ratiocination, the limited {Nrohitntioii 
expressed, can be made to b^t an unlin^ited power in congress 
farther to restrict the original state right ef taxation* 

It has been proved, that the English spherical sovereignty 
rejects any claim of sovereignty by one sphere over anoth«^ 
and limits the means of each, by the sphere of each. Admitting 
composed of spheres to be still one and indivisible 
al sovereignty of spheres here would ^so be one 
3. Unity is an innate quality of sovereign poweiv 
islative, though it may be compounded of indivi^ 
the moral or political beings called a sovereignty 
re are units, oi whatever individuals composed. 
Such is the case with the sovereignty of the people. As this 
is composed of natural individuals, a sovereignty of spheres is 
composed of individual spheres. Neither of these can possess 
a better right to assume by any means a superiority over cqp 
fpheres composing a sovereignty, than one citizen under the 
pretext that he also is a component part of the sovereignty of 
the people can assume a superiority over other citizens. la 
both cases, however a love of power has suggested a multitude 
of means, by which both the individuals composbg the sove* 
reignty of the people, and the individuals composing a sove^ 
reignty of the spheres, have violated their allegiance. Sove- 
reignty here resides in the people, or in our individual political 
spheres. If in the people, these spheres are limited depart- 
ments only, not having more power individually, than if they 
participated as is contended of sovereign power. If we even 
enlarge this power, by endowing our political spheres with 
sovereignty, then one sphere, being only an individual of the 
sovereignty, has no controuling authority over the others ; 
such an authority, however disguised, would destroy a sove- 
r^gnty of sfHieres and establish a sovereignty of one sphere ; 
and this sphere would be a despot over the others, just as one 
citizen, who obtains a controuling authority over the rest, is also 
a despot. The case is peciseljr the same if one sphere of ac- 



Digitized by 



Google 



115 

Hm €m bj^^ftimM ebtahi a <»tttrdtiM6g tutt^rity over ttit 
dther spkeres of action ; the Irightg of the eontrouled gpherea^ 
derived from the sovereignty of the people, would be nrade 
Ikpend^nt upon another sphere of actimi, created by the 8am€ 
fti»^onty. Tfauo & citi^n having social rights loses tiiem, if 
Another citizen has by any means obtained an authority of con^ 
fouling them. It follows from both aspects of the a»e, one cf 
Ivhich mnst be admitted, that political spheres, eonstitnting a 
^^ricid sovereignty, must controml and restrain each other ; 
ttttt pditieal departments, circnmscribed by the sovereign 
power of the people, mast still more clearly contronl each 
dtteer ; that is, spheres of action must c(mtroul each other ; and 
ihat th« mc^ms of each of these individual moral beings, mast 
also be eontrouled and restrained by the means of the others ; 
because an authority capable of controuling the rest, obtained 
l^y one, destroys the end and design of either political systemw 
The argumeM in reply to^ this reasoning is, that anless it 
supreme autiunrity i» alkWed to the federal l^slature and 
federal^ comets, to conti'oul the legislatures and courts of the 
itates, suboi^nation vnSk not exiflft, tand sundry inconveniencei 
WouM tesult from its absence. This ai^raent would be suflb- 
eiently answered by asking for the words in the constitution, 
1^ wMdi one spha'e of action is made subordinate to another; 
^r by which one is invested with^e exclusive authority to 
I'^strain the rest witiiin thieir proper spheres. But it ovei^ 
throws ftself by its own force, and by proving too much, proves 
BOthii^. It implies, that every division, balance, restriction 
0^ check of power by power, which has be6n or can be invented^ 
must be ii^rong; and that subordination is prefers^le to thom 
all : that Mr. Hamiltoh is wrong in observing til»t ^* power 
^eontrouled or abridged is almost always the rival and enemy 
•• 6f that power by which it is eontrouled and abridged," and 
dught to have pk^ed in favour of removing all restrictions by 
«upremacy, for the ^sJceof establi^ing subordination ; and thtft 
he Wt^ stiH more wrong in supposing, that power could only 
be eontrouled by power. It is not uhcommon to destroy the 
highest attainable temporal Mesaugs, by selecting and dii^ay- 
ing the imperfections of which all human institutions partici- 
pate. Thu§ the inconveniences of co-ordinate and balanced, 
departments, and the conveniences of subordMmtion areboflu 



Digitized by 



Google 



116 

nagmfied. Indhidual sphered or departments are easily p^« 
suaded, like kings, that a subordination to themselves would 
be better for a nation, than the occasional collisions produced 
bj a division and limitation of power. The federal and state 
governments might both be induced to beUeve, tiiat its own 
supervising supremacy over the other would produce m<N:% good 
to the p^c^le, than the plan adopted by the people themselves. 
And thus an object of the first necessity or convenience, that 
of a free, moderate and limited form of government, m^ht b^ 
sacrificed for such pitiful objects, called objects of necessity 
or convenience, as transmitting the puUick money by banksi 
staying judgments and executions, making a road or a canak 
creating fraudulent corporations, and absolving their great 
wealth from taxation, whilst very poor people are contributing 
to tiie support of government. Usurpation begins with weav- 
ing a shroud for free principles by the woof and warp of little 
conveniences and pretended necessities, and ends by inflicting 
the slavish quietism of a perfect subordination. 

The court has cautiously forborne to define the origin, or the 
extent of spherical sovereignty. By denying the argument of 
the counsel, ** That the people had bestowed sovereignty on the 
** state governments, and therefore had none left to bestow on 
** the feder^ government," it clearly asserts, that the peojde 
do not lose their sovereignty by creat^g a government. By 
contending that the federal government, created in virtue of 
their retained and inherent sovereignty, has acquired any 
species of sovereignty, it as clearly asserts, that they do lose it. 
By asserting, that our political spheres are limited by their con-> 
stitutional spheres of action, it admits, that they are not invest- 
ed with sovereignty. By investing them with the right of 
creating corporati<ms, as resulting from the power appertaining^ 
to sovereignty, it declares that they are. This sample of its 
appurtenances, and the general position that it may emj4oy any 
means which, it chooses, or may think necessary or convenient, 
leaves the capacity of the new political structure called sphe* 
ricid sovereignty, quite indefinite. I have heard of a lady 
desirous of having a new house, and unable to prevail on her 
husband to build it, who persuaded him at length to sufier h^ 
to repair the old one. With the help of an ingenious carpenter, 
under her own influence and direction, she went to work; and 



Digitized by 



Google 



IIT 

pfocee^fing bj' emitieus degrees^ not to twakeo her hisband^ 
attention, so altered and enclosed the old one, timt when he at 
bist discovered the lu^ifice, he found himself obliged to poll it 
down and throw it piece by piece out of the windows. Thus 
the indefinite attributes of a sovereignty of spheres, will gra- 
dually usurp and supplant the attributes of the sovereignty of 
the people. The dd priiiciple of limited ends will be thrown 
out of the window by the new principle of unlimited means; 
and the rig^t of the old sovereignty to create bodies politick, 
will be swallowed up by a new spherical sovereignty. 

Oi this sophistical sphericid sovereignty, the instances 
abound ; and we find it in every case to be the identical ma- 
chine, by which all free and limited governments have been 
overthrown. The conventions of France (elected to form a 
constituUon) upon the ground of representing the people, as- 
sumed a sph^cal soy^e^nty with its attributes as settled by 
themselves ; and exercised unlimited power, under a nominal 
acknowledgment of the sovereignty of the pec^le. Bonaparte* 
both in his Bfhere of consul and emperor, took their votes, and 
thus owned the sovereignty of the people. But what was the 
vahie of the allegiance professed in either case, united with a 
choice of means, necessities, and convenieopes, by these sphe- 
rical sovereignties P The same as that of the divine right of 
sovereignty in kings, nobles and political sj^eres, from the be^ 
ginning of history to this day. 

The reader is reminded, that idthough I have adopted the 
phrase *' spherical sovereignty^' and supposed its eustence, 
with a hope of proving that even this concession does not war* 
rant the judgment of the court; yet I do not thereby design 
to admit of its application, under any definition, to our system 
of government; because its meaning is so utterly equivocal, as 
to be innately incongruous with the idea of limited powers, 
of which this system is composed. I contend that the idea 
of one or many spherical sovereignties is an adulterati<m of 
the sovereignty of the people ; that a limitation of spheres of 
action, is a limitation of means of action ; that no sphere cati 
do any thmg, because it may be convenient or necessary, un- 
less it be constitutional ; that no sphere can invade another by 
n^eaus however beneficifil, because it would be unconstitutional ; 



Digitized by 



Google 



lit 

that no $jfimtt htta power of doing what is good w bad, gOft«» 
ttilf, but con^tutionally onl j ; and that if these jj^rinciples can 
be overtarned bj an iBgenious mani^ment of words, aH oof 
checks, balaaceSt Umitatioiis and dinsums of power, act good 
for nothing. 



Digitized by. 



Google I 



SBCmON 9. 

THE BANK DECIBION.-SUPBSMACT. 



''Thepei^e htve Mid, ^Thb eonf£i#iie&m and the lawsof tiie 
^ United Statea made in pursuance Vaereei, shall be the si^^reme 
^ law of the land." '' It is a question of supremacy J^ <* It is 
^' of die very essence of supremac j to remoTe all obstacles to 
^ its action within its own sphere, and so to modify efsery power 
** vested in subordinate govemmente, as to exempt its own 
<» operaHonsfrom their influence?^ 

^* It is a question of sapremacj.'^ This expression, beii^ 
unequivocal, had it remained unmodified, would have submit- 
ted to the publick conrideration the ]dain question ; whether 
the constituticm of the union had, or had not, invested the fede- 
ral government with a supreme power over the state govern* 
ments. National questions ought to be candidly and fairlj 
stated, to obtain a genuine national o|nnioH. Out of complai- 
sance to national opinion it was conceded bj the court, that 
both the federal and state governments were sovereign within 
their respective spheres, to obtain as an attribute of sovereignty^ 
a mutual right of creating corporations, and concOiate the 
nsurpatimi practised bj both. But, after allowing to both this 
attribute of sovereignty, a variety of equivocations are resorted 
to, for inhilnting to the states its other attributes, and assign- 
sig their exclusive enjoyment to the federal government T%e 
means, the necessities, and the conveniences of the federal go- 
▼emment as attributes of sovereignty are dilated, and those of 
the state governments consigned to oblivion* The federal go« 
iremment is acknowledged to be limited | but then it is said, 
that th«re is no phrase in the constitution which excludes inci« 
4entd OF implied powers, without admitting, that no enlai^ge- 
iBeQt of power can be inferred from this assertion in favour tf 
. the federid sovereignty, in which the state sovereignties would 
WA partidpate« Xt is conceded, that the poirar of internal 



Digitized by 



Google 



1£0 

taxation is not abridged with respect to the states, by the grant 
of a similar power to the government of the union, and that it 
is to be exercised concurrently by the two govemments ; but 
the concession is retracted, by inferring from the constitutional 
abridgment in the subjects of imports and exports, a right in 
the federal government still farther to abridge the concurrent 
right of the states to an unspecified extent It is said that the 
power of the states is subordinate to, and may be controuled by 
the constitution of the United States ; but then it is inferred, 
that it is also subordinate to and may be controuled by the fe- 
deral government. But, as this alternation between concession 
and retraction was liable to formidable objections, it is finally 
abandoned, or shielded against confutation, by the assertion 
** that it is a question of supremacy, and that it is of the very 
" essence of supremacy to remove all obstacles to its action 
<< within its own sphere, and so to modify every power vested 
** in subordinate governments^ as to exempt its own operations 
*' from their influence.^ The sweeping power asserted in the 
conclusion of this extract, is obviously distinct from a power 
of removing obstacles within its own sphere^ previously asser* 
ted ; and is another instance, in which unlimited power is 
attempted to be inferred from a power acknowledged to be 
limited. Thus the wisdom of concession and the ingenuitj 
of retraction are so constantly blended, as finally to invest a 
government acknowledged to be limited, with an unlimited 
power over the very restrictions imposed upon itself; and also 
over the state governments, acknowledged also to be its co- 
sovereigns. To fortify this mode of reasoning, it became even 
necessary to find a higher power than sovereignty, in order to 
eontroul the admitted sovereignty of spheres ; and though hi- • 
therto thought not to exist, it is supposed to be found in the 
words " paramount and supreme'' so sublimated, as to reduce 
the sovereignty both of the state spheres and of the people 
to mere glow worms. 

The declaration of independence declares the colonies to 
be free and independent states ; the constitutions of many 
states assert the sovereignty of the people; uid sovereignly 
has hitherto been considered as the highest political degree. 
In that sense it has been claimed, held and exercised by the 
peoj^e of every state in the union from the revolution to this 



Digitized by 



Google 



121 

Akj. The attempt made by the court (before conBidered) to 
transplant sovereignty from the people of each state, by whom it 
has been and may be exercised* to the people of the United 
States, by whom it never has been nor can be exercised, under 
our present system of government, might fail of success ; and 
therefore a new mode of destroying the sovereignty of tiic 
people is resorted to. Its jealousy is first appeased by the 
acknowledgment of spherical sovereignties, and then its de- 
gradation is finished by subjecting these sovereignties to su- 
premacy. If the ground is a good one, all the states of 
the union took bad ground both in establishing and sustain- 
ing their independence. Supremacy was the literal claim of 
the British parliament over the colonies ; and these colonies 
having only established sovereignties (an inferior political de- 
gree) have in fact tacitly acknowledged the British claim, 
which, being thus recognised, may be still prosecuted. It is 
also probable that the treaty failed to acknowledge our title to 
paramount and supreme flower. If the treaty and the decla- 
ration of independence had not unfortunately committed this 
Oversight, it would have narrowed the question considerably^ 
by excluding from it a necessity for this entire section. Had 
these instruments declared the states to be sovereign, inde** 
pendent, paramount and supreme^ then the language of the 
court's admission must have been correspondentiy changed ; 
and instead of admitting that both the federal and state go- 
vernments were each sovereign within its sphere, they must havfe 
admitted that each was sovereign, paramount and supreme 
within its own sphere. But, if this language, to give each 
word its excessive meaning, would have been tautological; 
then these instruments have committed no error, but merely 
avoided repetition, by rejecting useless synonymes. To ad- 
mit, that the words " sovereign, paramount and supreme" are 
synonymes, to express the highest degree of political power, be- 
stows on the two latter their most excessive meaning ;' whilst 
there is no excess at all in allowing that meaning to the first ; 
therefore this admiission bestows. on the doctrine of the court 
tiie utmost force of which it is susceptible. And yet after tiius 
doing for it all that can be done, and more than it can claim, it 
< is obviously defeated by the error of giving to one synonyme a 
Afferent meaning from another ; just as it is impossi^e to 

Q 



Digitized by 



Google 



122 

prove, that though three apples are of the same weight, yet 
that one may be made heavier than the others, by calling it a 
supreme apple. But I shall endeavour to prove, that even tiiis 
ground is stronger than the opinion of the court is entitled to» 
by shewing that «• sovereignty" describes a higher power, than 
*» paramount or supreme," and therefore that it was never in- 
tended to be subjected to them. 

The word "paramount" is not mentioned in the constitution^ 
nor any where adopted, that I recollect, by our political phrase* 
ology ; wherefore in considering the leader, it will be unne- 
cessary to pay much respect to a feeble ally. Hence I proceed 
to shew, that the word *• supreme" is invariably used by the 
constitution, not in a paramount but in a subordinate sense to 
sovereignty. 

" The constittiHon, and the laws of the United States which 
** shall be made in pursuance thereof, and all treaties made or 
** which shall be made, under the authority of the United States, 
*« shall be the supreme law of the land, and the judges, in 
«* every state, shall be bound thereby, any thing in the consti- 
" tution or laws of any state to the contrary notwithstanding.^ 
This is the clause of the constitution, supposed by Hie coutri 
to confer on congress a power over the state governments and 
state sovereignties. These state sovereignties made, may re- 
voke, or can alter the constitution itself^ and therefore Uie 
supremacy bestowed upon the constitution, being some power 
subservient to the state sovereignties, demonstrates that the 
word " supreme" was used in a sense subordinate to these so- 
vereignties; and being used in that sense, it is impossible 
that the people intended it as a r^ocation of those powers, 
or of any of their appurtenances, or of the spherical sovereign- 
ties, previously bestowed, never recalled, and specially reser«> 
ved to the state governments, by the sovereignties, to whom 
the whole constitution and all its words, are subordinate. Ac- 
cording to the construction adopted by the court, the stile of 
tlie constitution ought to have been this. "We, state sove- 
" reignties, do hereby establish a fed'eral government invested 
" with limited powers, and retain our state governments, wi& 
" all their powers not delegated to the federal government, 
" each of which governments shall be sovereign within flieir 
^' respective spheres, but over these sovereignties, we also cre- 



Digitized by 



Google 



123 

^i ftte three suprcimacies ; one a supren(iacy of the constitutioii ; 
« another, of the laws of the United States; and a third of 
^ the treaty-making power." It is hard or inpossible to serve 
two masters only* The court has turned the federal and state 
governments into sovereignties, and placed over all, three su- 
premacies. The difficulties of such a system would be insur- 
mountable : whereas, by acknowledg^^ one master only, in the 
sovareignty of the people, and confesMng [the obligation of the 
political departments created by that sovereignty* to move 
within the orbits assigned to th^m, as great a degree of order 
mny ensue^ united with liberty, as is attainable by humaa 
wisdom, . 

Are. these supremacies of co*ordinate and equal power ; or 
are laws and ti*eaties subordinate to the constitution P The 
constitution, the laws and the treaties are all declared to be 
the supreme law of the Und> and therefore, as it could not 
have been desigiied to bestow on laws, an authority equal to 
the authority of the constitution, no construction can be correct, 
which does not sustain both the superiority of the constitution 
over laws, and also a perfect equality as to the obligations 
imposed by the supremacy declared; and such a construction 
is I think <]^ite visible. The supremacy is not bestowed upon 
the federal government. It is a moral and not a personal 
supremacy which is established. It was not intended to confer 
#11 one department, sphere, sovereignty, or organization of 
persons, any superiority over another department, sphere* 
i^vere^nty, or <»^nization of persons; and was merely a 
declaration of the respect to whic^h the recited moral beings 
were equally raititled. The constitution cannot be personified, 
so lUB to he reduced to a supreme body politick distinct from 
the people; and if laws are to be personified by congress, and 
tx'eaties by the president and senate* their supremacy would 
either be of a diferent nature from the supremacy of the 
constitution, or these two departments, neither of which, nor 
, both CiQfistiiute the federal government, would be made supreme 
over the federal and state governments, and equal to the 
supremacy of the people, if they are to be considered as the 
representatives of the supremacy of the constitution. But as 
no additional personal or national power was conferred by 
d^^pdming the constit.ution to be the supreme law of the lai|d« 



<^ 



Digitized by 



Google 



1/24 

it prOTes that no additional personal or spherical power wai 
conferred by declaring the laws and treaties to be also the 
SQpreme law of the land. The declarati<Hi> that the constitu- 
tion was the supreme law> confirmed all its limitations* divi- 
sions, restrictions and limitations of power, and it never y/nm 
intended that either should be altered in the least degree bj 
laws or treaties, or be placed nnder the power of those who 
should make laws or treaties. On the contrary, tiie laws 
were to bQ made in pursuance of the constitution, and tto 
treaties, under the authorittf of the United States. The Uni- 
ted States have no authority, except that which is given by the 
constitution. Both the laws and treaties to be supreme must, 
therefore, be made in conformity with the powers bestowed, 
limited and reserved by the constitution, and by these we 
must determine whether a law or a treaty has been constitu- 
tionally made, before the question of its supremacy can occur. 
The judges are expressly referred to, as the curators or execu- 
tors of this moral supremacy, and no other department is by the 
least hint recognized, as being able to impair or enforce it And 
finally, all officers, legislative, executive and judidal, take an 
oath to suiq[K>rt the constitution, which is a moral sanction in 
favour of a moral system ; and none take an oath to acknow- 
ledge any species of personal or spherical supremacy. This 
clause then amounts to no more, than that the constitution 
shall be the supreme law of the land* As proceeding from the 
sovereignty of the people, the highest political authority, the 
term was proper ; because it was paramount and supreme over 
whatever should proceed from any inferior authority ; and as 
the constitution embraced our whole system of government 
both state and federal, by delegating and reserving powers, 
the supremacy bestowed on it was intended equally and eo- 
extensively to protect and secure the powers delegated to the 
federal government, and those reserved to the states. In this 
construction of the word ** supreme," the court itself has lite- 
rally concurred, in assertmg <' that it would be its duty to 
*' declare an unconstitutional law void." The right of doing 
this arises fi:Dm the supremacy of the constitution over law; 
from the restriction it imposes upon political departments or 
sjjieres to confine themselves within Ibeir limited orbits ; and 
from its intention that each department or sphere should 



Digitized by 



Google I 



125 

controul another, if it trangresses its boundary. Upon thift 
ground the court has asserted this constitutional power in ita 
own sphere. It can be defended upmi no other; because the 
constitution does not say, that their judgments shall be the su* 
preme law of the land. If the ground be solid in relation to the 
judicial sphere, it is equally solid in relation to the limited fede- 
ral and state spheres. If the le^slatire federal sphere have no 
supreme power over Ae judicial federal s|Aere ; because its 
power is limited by the constitution, and not extended beyond 
these limitations by the clause of the constitution under 
consideration; it follows, that neith^ the federal nor state 
spheres derive any supremacy over the other from the same 
clause, whilst acting witiiin their limited boundaries. 

In fact, tiie opinion of the court admits the soundness of this 
construction, though it qualifies the admission by an unexplained 
ambiguity, which ingeniously keeps the questbn out of si^t 
<< It is a question of supremacy." But it does not explain what 
this supremacy is, nor how far it ^tends. ** It is of the very 
" essence of supremacy to remove all obstacles to its action 
^unthin Us own sphere.^^ By the words "within its own 
" sphere" the court seems to admit, that a sphere ought to act 
within tiie boundaries prescribed to it, without suffering any 
hindrance from another sphere. This is all for which I con- 
tend ; and if this be allowed (and it must be allowed to justify 
the judicial sphere in annulling an unconstitutional law of 
congress,) then neither the federal nor state spheres whilst 
acting within their spheres, are subjected to the impediments 
of the other, and each has a right to controul such impedi- 
ments. But then the court produce the ambiguity by adding, 
that a supreme sphere may "so modify every power vested in 
** subordinate governments, as to exempt its own operations 
•* from their influence.^' It is useless to concede principles if 
they can be evaded. The court had previously admitted that 
the federal and state governments were *' both sovereign with 
^ respect to the objects committed to them, and neither sove^ 
« reign with respect to the objects committed to the other ;" 
but now it takes it for granted, that the federal sphere is 
wupreme, the state spheres subordinate, and that in conse- 
quence of this supremacy and subordinacy, the federal govern- 
ment haB a right <* so to modify every potcer vested in the 



Digitized by 



Google 



1£6 

<' state governmeotSy as to exempt its own operation frooL 
*' their influence." 

Power in the exercise of verbal construction, and in dedu-. 
cing inferences from particular phraseSj^ lil^e a fine lady admi< 
ring a casket of jewels, very easily discovers whatever it 
wishes for, to be right, convenient, useful and necessary. Par- 
ticular texts are often tortured to appease conscience, or ta 
gratify prejudice ; and good or bad intentions are ^ually 
fertile in expedients for surmounting obstacles. A single word 
is often so indefinite, that its meaning is controuled by another, 
A single sentence may generally be twisted into an enmity 
with principles plainly asserted, in any book ; but the defect 
of language do not equally extend to an entire treatise. Thus 
the imperfections of isolated words and sentences, and the 
frailties of mankind unite to teach us, that tiie licentiousness 
of constructimi can only be controuled by an impartial estimate 
of a whole, and a candid comparison of its parts. If the reader 
shall examine the federal constitution by this rule, and should 
discover that it delegates a power to the federal government 
** so to modify every power vested in the state governmenta as 
*' to exempt its own operations from their influence,'' he must 
conclude, that the decision of the court, founded upon the 
existence of this power in the federal government, is correct f 
but if the constitution invests the federal government with no 
such power, then it follows, that this decision, founded upon a 
supposition that it did, must be unconstitutional* This is ia 
fact the very essence of the question ; as interferences by the 
federal or state governments with pow^*s delegated to the 
other, are in truth modifications of those powers; anditia 
extremely important to ascertain, whether a power so enor- 
mous and unspecified is common to both, or exclusively c<mfer« 
red upon the former. The latter is asserted by the court ftr 
the purpose of modifying the state right of taxation ; by those 
members of congress who supported a bill finr prohibitii^ slave- 
ry in a particidar state, and is the ground upmi which alone att 
interfering with the police of states can be defended. 

It will be allowed, that the people of each state had» and 
exercised the right of modifying the powers vested in the state 
governments. If the federal government now have it, the most 
unexpected consequences will ensue* The peqple can no 



'Digitized by 



Google 



nr 

longer exercise the right, because they helve given it away. If 
it be a concurrent right, should they exercise it, the federal 
government may re-modify their modifications* The state gov- 
ernments will be responsible either to the federal government 
singly, or both to this government and the people for their 
conduct It was quite idle to reserve to the state governments 
ike powers previously bestowed, if they were at the same time 
subjected to the subsequent modifications of the federal govern- 
ment. And the meditated check upon the federal government 
by the powers reserved to the state governments Would be 
equally insignificant. These consequences of the construction 
given to the word •'supreme^ by tiie court, so confpletely 
subversive of the essentia principles of our system of govern- 
ment, are a sufficient exposition of its incorrectness. 

But the argument becomes stronger, when we resort io the 
provisions of the constitution. I shall venture to test the 
position relied on by the court, by the mode before practised of 
confrimting it with a contradictory position ; so that one or the 
other must be disallowed. It is a question of supremacy ; the 
Constitution has invested the states with a complete, and the 
stalte governments with a limited supremacy, over the federal 
government, and expressly subjected its operaHons to the 
influence of the latter, in sundry important instances. The 
states by common consent may dissolve or rtiodify the union, 
over which, by the natural right of self-government, which they 
have never relinquished, they retadn a complete supremacy. 
By tiie constitution, the state governments are invested with 
the rights of appointing senators and electors of a piiesident, 
ibr the very purpose of influencing the operations of the federal 
government for their own security. They may forbear to 
exercise this right, and thus dissolve the federal government. 
They may elect the members of the house of representatives by 
a general ticket, and thereby very considerably influence its 
operations. They may compel congress to call a convention. 
They may ratify changes of tiie federal government, without 
its consent. Hiey may affirm or reject amendments proposed 
by congress* They have a cohcurrent right of internal taxa- 
tion with tiie federal government, and these concurrent rights 
may deeply influence each other; and they are exclusively 
'invested with the appdintment of all the officers (ji that force. 



Digitized by 



Google 



-// 



1£8 



Aipon which the safety and liberty of the nation depend. These 
powers seem to roe, to invest the state govemments with a 
limited supremacy over the federal government ; at least it 
must be admitted, that they are such as may and do deeply 
influence its operations. The constitution gives no authority 
to the federal government to exercise such powers over the 
state governments. Can it then be true, as the position of the 
court declares, that the federal govemtnent have a right so to 
modify every power vested in the state governments, ns to 
exempt its own operations from their influence ? Upon the 
ground of this doctrine, the supreme court of the federal 
government has attempted so to modify the concurrent right 
of taxation reserved to the states, as to exempt the incorpora- 
ting power assumed by congress, from its influence. This is 
one of the enumerated powers invested in the states, by which it 
was certainly foreseen and intended, that they might influence 
the operations of the federal government ; and if in this case 
such an influence justifies a modification of the state power of 
taxation by the federal government, and even by one of its 
departments, the same reason will justify a modification of 
all the rest of the enumerated influencing state powers. The 
supreme court might by the same principle, appoint senators, 
electors, and militia officers, should the states neglect to do it ; 
in order, by modifying these powers of the state govemments, 
as being subordinate to the supposed supremacy of the federal 
government, to exempt the latter front their influence. 

If, therefore, it should have been proved, that the federal 
government is not invested with a power of modifying the 
powers bestowed by the people on the state governments, the 
pretended supremacy,'8upposed to bestow a right so unlimited, 
does not exist ; the modification on the state power of taxa- 
tion was of course unconstitutional ; and the question would 
seem to be settled. But it starts up again in a new form ; 
and though it should be allowed that the entire federal govern- 
ment do not possess a right to modify the state constitutions, 
yet it is still contended, that one of its subordinate depart- 
ments does possess it ; and its supreme court have accordingly 
modified and restricted the power of internal taxation bestow- 
ed by the state constitutions on their governments. This 
power under the state <;onstitution9 was unlimited. It is 



Digitized by 



Google 



129 

not limited by the federal constitutiofi. But the federal court 
have adjudged^ that it is either necessary or conYenient that it 
i^onld be limited ; and for that reason they have modified it 
by a precedent sufficient to justify other modifications of state 
powers to any extent, upon the groand of possessing an unli- 
mited supremacy over the legislative and judicial power of the 
states. 

The supremacy we have examined is confined to the consti- 
tution, the laws, and treaties. It is not extended to judicial 
decisions* Suppose congress should pass a law declaring such 
state laws as they pleased, to be unconstitutional and void. 
An excessive interpretation of the word " supreme," might give 
some countenance to so evident an usurpation ; and as one 
branch of the federal legislature is elected by the people, it 
would afford some security, however imperfect, against such a 
prostration of the state governments at the feet of the federal 
legislative power. But neither this excessive supremacy, nor 
this defective security, plead for lodging the same unlimited 
power in the federal coufts. Were they to possess it, they 
might modify the state governments, in a mode, contrary to 
the will of congress, as is exemplified in the case under con- 
sideration. In creating the bank of the United States, congress 
did not endeavour to prohibit the states from taxing the pro- 
perty employed in that speculation. Had the state right to do 
so been considered in that body, its constitiitionality might have 
been decided in the affirmative. The court, therefore, in assu- 
ming a power to restrain this state right, may have violated 
the will both of the federal and state legislature, and modified 
the state constitutions, contrary to the judgment of both. The 
state law asserted the right, the federal law is silent, and the 
court imposes a constitutional rule on both (as if it were itself 
a constituent or elemental power,) objected to by one, and 
never assented to by the other. This outstrips even the arbi» 
trary principle laid down by the court itself "that the supreme 
« government may modify every power vested in subordinate 
<< governments, to exempt its own operations from their influ- 
** ence.'^ It will not be asserted that the federal court is the 
supreme government, or that it has operations to carry on, 
which ought to be exempted from the influence of the subordi- 
nate state governm^ts. If these governments stre not ^ubordi- 
R 



/ 



Digitized by 



Google 



ISO 

ntte to that coort, it cannot modify their powers, even under 
its own principle ; and if the federal goyemment posses^ this 
modifying power, it oa^t to be exercised by congress, before it 
can be enforced by the court The court at most can only exe- 
cute, and have no power to pronounce the modification. Con- 
gress might hare intended, tiiat the power of taxing the United 
States bank, like that of taxing state banks, should remain as a 
concurrent power, like the other concurrent powers of taxation. 
If that body conceived itself possessed of a power to modify 
the state power of taxation, it could only do so by its own act, 
and that act ought to have been explicit, that the people might, 
by election, have expressed their opinion concerning it. But 
when the modification is expressed by the court, the chief 
remedy for deciding spherical collisious,and for restraining 
each division of power within its own orbit, is wholly evaded, 
and completely transferred from the people to the judges. 

But, though it should be allowed, that the court derives no 

supremacy from that clause of the constitution, which bestows 

it upon the constitution itself, the laws and treaties, yet it has 

been claimed under another. *' The judicial power of the Uni- 

'* ted States shall be vested in one supreme court, and in infe* 

** rior courts. The judges, both of the supreme and inferior 

'* courts shall hold their offices during good behaviour." And 

in the next clause, this " judicial power of the Umted States^^ 

is defined and limited. By this clause, a judicial power is 

vested. Was it a limited or an unlimited power? It is ex* 

pressed to ht** the judicial pouter of the UnUed StatesJ* In 

the second section of the same article, the judicial power of 

the United States is expressly defined and limited ; and this 

defined and limited judicial power, is that which is vested in 

the supreme and such inferior courts as congress may from time 

to time establish. The word " supreme" is evidently used in 

reference to <* inferior.'' The supremacy bestowed is over the 

inferior courts to be established by congress, and not over the 

state courts, either supreme or inferior. This is manifested 

by the division of jurisdiction between the supreme and inferior 

courts. In cases ** affecting ambassadors, publick ministers and 

*• consuls, and where'a state shall be a party, the supreme court 

<< shall have original jurisdiction. In all other cases before 

« mentioned the supreme court shall have appellate jurisdic* 



Digitised by 



Google 



131 

** iion.'' ^ Before mentioned." Thus ezpresaly limiting the 
jurisdiction of the supreme court of the United States* to the 
subjects defined in tiie preceding article. If, therefore, anjr 
tiling in the federal constitution is plain enongji to be under* 
stood, I think we may certainlj ccmclude, that the word ** su- 
preme^' w^s not intended to extend the power of the federal 
court in any degree irtiatsoever. That court by declaring every 
local or internal law of congress constitutional, would extend 
its own jurisdicticHi ; a limitation of which, attended with a 
power to extend it without controul, by a supreme power over 
the state courts, woi^ld be no limitation at all ; since the pow- 
er of supremacy would destroy the.c^-ordinate right of con- 
struing the omstitution, in which resides the power of enfor- 
cing the limitation. A jurisdictimir limited by its own will, is 
an unlimited jurisdiction. As a further evidence of this con- 
clusion, it may be observed, that if this word had bestowed •« a 
supreme jurisdiction," there would have been no occasion for a 
subsequent delegation of jurisdiction to the sepreme court; 
and that, as by the subsequent jurisdiction bestowed (in the 
fyvr cases of ori^nal jurisdiction given to the supreme court ex- 
cepted,) the power of the inferior courts is made the basis of the 
ai^ellate jurisdiction, given to the supreme court, it follows, that 
if the word *' supreme" does not extend the jurisdiction of these 
inferior ccmrts, it does not extend the jurisdiction of the supreme 
court. As the word " supreme" is not applied to the inferior 
. courts, it cannot invest them with any power over the state 
courts. And as the appellate jurisdiction of the supreme court 
is limited to the cases before mentioned, of which the inferior 
courts can only tkke cognizance, it cannot invest the supreme 
court with any power over the state courts, unless it has also 
invested the inferior courts with the same power. 

The federal constitution does not say, " that the legislative 
power shall consist of .one^siy)reme andinferior legislatures;" 
because it considered the stetelCfid tederal legislatures as in- 
dependent of each other, within their respective spheres. Had 
it considered the state legi^atures as subordinate to the federal 
legislature, the supremacy of the latter would have been de- 
clared, and the subordination of the former expressed, as objects 
upon which this supremacy was to operate. If one federal 
court only bad been allowed by the constitution, the word " su- 



Digitized by 



Google 



13^ 

preine'' woald hare been unnecessftry. Id creating and sped- 
fytng the objects, namely, the inferior federal courts, upoa 
which the supremacy was to operate, ali other objects are 
excluded. The j^icial federal 4>ower therefore stands in the 
same relation to t|ie state judicial power, as the federal leg^s^ 
htive power does to the state legislative power; aiMl if either 
be independent of the other whilst acting within its own sphere, 
both must be also independent of the other. If congress can- 
not repeal or injoin state laws, the sopreme federal court cannot 
injoin or abrogate state judgments or decree^* If the federal 
l^islative power be limited, the federal judicial power must also 
be limited. 

For the elucidation of this very important p^t of the sub- 
ject, I shall resort to authorities, as respectable as authorities 
can be. 

Fed. p. 72. M. *' The jurisdiction of the general government, 
'• is limited to certain enumerated of^cts, which concern all the 
" members of the republick, but which are not to be attained 
** by the separate provisions of any.'' 

Fed. p. £08. M. ** The local or municipal authorities foitn 
'« distinct and independent portions of the supremacy no morer 
" subject within their respective spheres^ to the general authority, 
** than the general authority is suhject to them within its otpn 
" sphere J^ In the same page, however, Mr. Madison makes what 
tlie lawyers call an obiter observation, tliat is, he drops an opinion 
by chance, apparently without due consideration. '* It is true," 
says he, '* that in controversies relating to the boundary between 
*< the two jurisdictions, the tribunal which is ultimately to de* 
" cide, is to be established under the general government" 
Perhaps I mistake his meaning. If he mean, << controversies 
«' between two state jurisdictions," I admit that their decisien- 
is vested in the federal judicial power. But if, as I confess it 
appears to me, he meant << that the federal judicial power was 
*< vested with a right of deciding controversies between itself 
<< and the judicial power of the states," I must with much con- 
fidence, yet with great respect, differ with him in opinion. 
The point ought to be determined by the c(M)stitution itel& 
Mr. Madison asserts that, <* the jurisdiction of the genead 
*' government is limited to certain enumerated oigects.^^ Is thk 
case comprised within that enumeratt<m ? Is it said, geoierally^ 



Digitized by 



Google 



ISS 

^ thi^ the state jndidftl sfrfiere shaU be sutgect tatiie eimtrdiil of 
l^e federal judickl gphere P' Or is it said« speciallj* that con- 
troversies as to jurisdictifm between these two spheres shall be 
dedded hj one of the parties? Are controYersies between the 
state and federal l^lslitiTie spheres to be also decided by one 
of the parties? Neither conclusion can consist with the prece- 
ding opinion of Mr. Madison, that ** the local or municipal air* 
** thorUiei form Mstinet and independent portions of tiie supre- 
^ maey no mare subject within their respectire i4>heres, to the 
** general authority, than the general anthoritj is subject t# 
« them within its own sphere." However, therefore, we shift 
our wordsor phrases, in describing the powers delegated to the 
federal government and reserved to ^e stales ; whether we 
call them sovereign, supreme, legislative, executive or judicial; 
they still retain their spherical, limited, co-ordinate and inde- 
pendent nature, in relation to eactt other, according to the 
consCruction of contemporary writers of the best authority. 

Fed. p. 456. H. ** There is not a syllable in the plan which 
** directly empowers the national courts to construe the laws 
^according to the spirit of the constitutkHi, or which gives 
^ 4hem any greater latitude in this respect^ than may be claimed 
'* by the courts of every state ;" Unequivocally rejecting tiie 
idea of judicial spherical subordination. 

But ihis constitutional question is deliberately and distinctly 
stated, iq^arently upon the most prc^ound consideration, in a 
style, and with^ precision, which it would be presumptuous in 
me to defend, in certain resolutions of ^e Kentucky legisla- 
ture, passed in the year ir98, said to have been drawn by Mr. 
Jefferson, and bearing internally, evidence of flowing from an 
enlightened mind. The first is in these words : — *' Resolved, 
"that the several ^tes com]po8ing the United States of Ame- 
*« rica, are not united on tfie principle of unlimited ^ubmission 
** to their general govemtnent ; but that by compact under the 
** style and title of a constitution for the United States and of 
<* afoendments thereto, they constituted a general goveniment 
" for special purposes, delegated to that government certain 
« desfinite powers, reserving each state to itself the residuary 
« ma$s of right to their own self-government; and that when- 
<* soever the general g^ernment assumes undelegated powers, 
^ its acts are iinau&eiitative, void and cf no force : That to this 



Digitized by 



Google 



134 

*^ eompact each state acceded as a state, and is an integral 
" partj, it» co^tates forming, as to itself, the other partj ; that 
'* the goremment created by this compact was n^t made tite 
^' exduiive or ftmd judge of the extent o^ihs powers ddegatei 
" to itself $ since that would have made its discretion, and not 
** the constitution, the measure of its powers j but, t^t as in 
" all other cases of compact among parties having no common 
" judge, each party has an e,qual rig^t to jud^ for itself, as 
" well of infractions as of the measure of redress." The co- 
ordinacj of institution, the independence of each other, and 
the mutuality of the right of construing the federal constitution, 
are thus recognised and asserted, as existing in the federal and 
state governments ; axid the principle, which pervades tiiewhole, 
must also pervade the parts. If the entire federal government 
possesses no supremacy over, and can require no subordina- 
tion from the entire state governments, whilst acting within 
tiieir respective spheres, no part or department of that govern- 
ment can exert a supremacy over, or exact a subordiiSation 
from, the corresponding parts or departments of the state 
governments. The federal legislature having no supremacy 
over the state le^slatures, the federal judicial power can have 
no supremacy over the state judicial power* The same pro- 
hibition of such claims, co-extensively forbids to both an enlarge- 
ment of power by trespassing on the state sphere or state 
departments. It arises from the limited powers bestowed on 
the legislature and judiciary of the federal government, and 
the reservation of the residuary mass of right to the states. 

With this construction, the oath of office prescribed by the 
federal constitution is a remarkable coincidence. Both legis- 
lators; judges and other officers, of the state as well as tii^ 
federal governments, are required to take an oath to support 
tlie federal constitution; but neither federal legislators, judges 
nor other officers, are required to take an oath to support the 
state constitutions. The reason of this distinction is, that 
state legislators, judges and officers, have some duties assigned 
to them by the federal constitution, and would necessarily 
have others, arising from the laws of the United States ; but, 
that federal legislators, judges or officers, having no duties to 
discharge under the state constitutions or laws, but being con- 
fined within the limited spheres defined by the federal constl- 



Drgitized by 



Google 



135 

^tiofl, no ftUegiaace to state constitutions was necessary on 
tiieir part. I cannot imagine a power more inconsistent with 
republican prindples in general, and with ours in particular^ 
than thai claimed over the state laws, and con^uentiy over 
the state constitutions, by the supreme federal court. It is 
under no obligation or responsibility of any kind to respect 
either. If it should yiolate its Intimate federal or spherical 
duties, it violates its oath ; and is liable to trial and removal 
from office. But, in virtue of its supposed supremacy over the 
state courts, it might be tempted to annul state laws, to ad- 
vance the power of congress, by whom it is paid and tried ; 
Und it might alter the institutions of the peofde according to 
its own pleasure, without even breaking an oath. Ttie case is 
analogous in all its aspects to the claim of the British parlia- 
ment, neither bound by an oath, nor elected, nor piud, nor 
removable by the people of the colonies, over the legislatures 
of tiiese colonies; which were elected, paid and removable by 
the people, and also bound by an oath. A judicial power, 
though under the obligation of an oath, paid by the king of 
England, was justiy considered in Massachusetts, as an outrage 
upon the principles of justice and liberty, tt was a feather to 
one, created by and accountable to a native distinct govern- 
ment, emulous (as is the nature of man) of power, possessing^a 
supreme power, over the laws of a collateral government, with- 
out being under any influence or responsibility to observe 
those laws. 

But cannot judges declare unconstitutional laws void? Cer- 
tainly. Constitutions are only previous supreme laws, which 
antecedentiy repeal all subsequent laws, contrary to their tenor; 
and the question, whether they do or do not repeal or abrogate 
such subsequent laws, is exactiy equivalent to the question, 
whether a subsequent repeals a previous law. Therefore Judges, 
juries and individuals have a correspondent power of deciding 
this question in all Ultimate occurrences. But the constitu- 
tionality of state laws cannot legitimately be decided by the 
federal courts, because they are not a constituent part of the 
state governments, ncnr have the people of the state coc^ded to 
them any such authority. They have confided it to the state 
courts, under the securities of an oath, and of various modes 
of responsibility. The people also have confided to the federal 



Digitized by 



Google 



136 

e<iurt» a power of deelarmg an uncemtitatimial federal law 
toid, under similar securities; but where sudi a pc^rer is nei- 
tlier bestowed by the people, nor anjr seoartty against its abuse 
provided^ its assumption by inference is repelled by the absence 
of ererj regulation for moderating its exercise. In fact, the 
spheres of action of the federal and state courts are as separate 
and distinct, as those of the courts of two neighbouring states* 
Because the judges of each state are empowered under certain 
regulations to declare a law of their own state void, it does i»)t 
follow, that the judges of another state can abrogate it The 
federal judges owe no all^ailce to the state govemtiieBts, nor 
are more a component part of them, nor are more responsible 
to them, than the judges of a different state. Ramsay's United 
States, Yo. 1. p. 202. *' Great Britain ccmtended, that her 
^parliament, as the mtpreme p&wer, was constitutionally in* 
•* vested with an authority to lay taxes on every part of the 
** empire." ** If the British parliament, said the colonies, in 
«• which we are unrepresent^, and over which we have no am- 
^ irottl, can take from us any pari of our property, they may 
'* take as mach as they please, and we have no security for any 
«• thing that remains." p. 303. " That by the novel doctrine 
** of parliamentary power, they were d^raded from being the 
•* subjects of a king, to the low condition of being subjects of 
** subjectsJ'^ p. 306. ** "Where parliameidary supremacy ended^ 
*' and at what point colonial independence hegan, was not ascer* 
** tained.'' p. 307. ^ The omnipotence of parliament was so 
*' familiar a phrase, tiiat few in America, and still fewer in 
** Great Britdn, were impressed, in the first instance, with the 
** illegality Of taxing the colotiies." Let us parody this quo"* 
tation. The federal court contends, tiiat as the supreme power, 
it is constitutionally invested with an authority to abrogate 
state laws, and contract state revenue. If, say tiie states, tiiis 
court, over which we have no controul, can take from us any 
law, or any revenue, it may take away as many or as mticft as 
it pleases, and we have no security for retaining any. By the 
novel doctrine of federal judicial supremacy* we are degraded 
from the right of internal self-government, to the low condition 
of being subjects of sul^ects. Where the federd juri$dieHon 
ends, and where stide jurisdiction begins, is ascertained by the 
federal constitution, but the amnifotenu of federal supremacy. 



Digitized by 



Google 



legisl&tii^ and jadi<^a!, nutj become so familiar a pbme, that 
few may be impressed, in the first instance, with the conse- 
quences to which it tends, or the evils in which it may termi- 
nate. 

The ^rst instance of a spherical supremacy which I recollect, 
M%m the claim of the treaty-making power, to bind the taxing or 
legislative power, by stipulating in a treaty for the payment of 
money. This was a depute between two federal political 
spheres ; but the principles, upon which it has been or must be 
settiLjed, are those by which the rights of the federal and state 
political spheres can alone be ascertained. In both cases, to 
find where powers begin and end, we most either conclude^ 
that one sphere cannot be let into another under a clum of 
8upremacy,*or by any verbal construction, so as to abridge rights 
bestowed by the constitution ; or concede, that the copstitution 
has unsuccessfully attempted to establish, divisions of power . 
between political departments. The federal le^shUve and 
treaty -making powers are obviously more interwoven with each 
other, than the federal and state powers delegated and re- 
served; yet the federal legislature would not be at a loss to. 
find limits for the treaty-making power, nor to discern the 
powers confided by the constitution to itself. As the federal 
legislative sphere may justly deny to the treaty-making power, 
a ri^t to abridge tlie powers delegated to itself by the consti- 
tution, under a claim of supremacy, or by any species of con- 
struction f so> the state spheres may justly deny to the federal, 
legislative or judicial spheres, a ri^t to abridge by similar 
modes the powers reserved to them. Suppose tiie treaty- 
making power should stipulate with England to declare war 
against France ; would that deprive c^igress (^ the right of pre- 
serving peace, with which it is invested by the. constitution ? 
Suppose in like manner that congress should stipulate with a 
corporation by one 6f those laws called charters (in awkward 
imitation of monarchical sovereignty,) that its property should 
not be liable to state taxation ; can that deprive the states of a 
light as distinctly given to them by tiie constitution, as the 
ri^t of decUriAg war is given to copgress ? Previously to an 
incorporation, its funds, of whatever species of property com- 
posed, were by the constitution subjected to state taxation. 
Could congress or the supreme court have exempted this pro- 



Digitized by 



Google 



1S8 

pertj, directly, from the state coDstituttooal right to tax it? 
If the J could not, can thej do it by the circumlocutory coa- 
trirance of using two words •» corporation and charter ;'' neither 
of which is recognized by the constitution ? Cases might be 
stated to shew, that there are many objects within the reach oi 
a supreme or sovereign treaty-making power, to which our« 
does not extend ; such as, stipulating to keep on foot standing 
armies ; to raise armies and navies as foreign auxiliaries agunat 
nations with whom we are at peace ; or to destroy the union 
by ceding states to form a kingdom . for some foreign prince ; 
and these powers may as correctly be implied because they are 
not prohibited, as the powers of supremacy claimed by congress 
or the court. If we must resort to the obvious ends, the general 
texture, ^d the special divisions and limitations of -the con- 
sUtutron, to avoid these violations of its positive principles, b jr 
a treaty-making supremacy ; ihe same remedy exists to defeat 
the evils, equally indefinite, which would arise h*om any other 
spherical supremacy. We have a multitude of political spheres^ 
state and federal ; and if the orbit of one does not terminate 
where that of another begins, I am unable to discern any boun- 
daries between them, so convenient or necessary for preventing 
a political chaos. If either of these spheres may create corpo- 
rate political spheres, capable of corrupting, or of diminishing 
the powers of constitutional spheres, the musick, after which 
we have been dancing for almost forty years, will I fear be- 
come so harsh, as to make us weep. The licentiouniess te 
which construction may be carried is remaikably exemplified, 
by its attempts to invert the climax of supremacy, estaWshed 
by " the constitution of the United States." «* The consd- 
'* tution, the laws made in pursuance thereof, and the treaties 
" mad^ under the authority of the United States, shall be the 
« supreme law of the land." Under this clause, treaties have 
aspired to a supremacy over laws, and laws to a supremacy 
over the constitution, though both the legislative and treaty- 
making spheres have no powers, except those given by the con- 
stitutipn, and are limited by the authorities it bestows. It 
wcmld seem therefore perfectly plain, that neither is invested 
with a supremacy, able to justify an abridgment of a power 
given by the constitution to the state spheres, and that these 
may resist such attempts, upon the ^me ground that the legis- 



Digitized by 



Google 



139 

lative fedeirat sphere resists an attempt of the treatj-making 
sphere to abridge its constitutional rights. 

The argument of the court maj be thus condensed. The 
federal and state governments have limited powers under the 
federd constitution. The powers <ff both are attended by such 
a portion of spherical sovere^nty, as is neces^rj or convenient 
for. their execution. Sovereignty can Intimately use the 
means it may choose, for the execution of the powers it legiti- 
mately possesses. So far nothing is gained ; because the sove- 
reignty bestowe^ and the means it may use, are limited by the 
spheres of action bestowed upon each government, fiut the 
difficulty is gotten over, and the court^s own argument over- 
thrown, by thrusting the word *< paramount" into the consti- 
tution. The mutuality and equivalence of the spherical sove- 
reignties allowed to the state and federal sovere^ties is 
revoked ; and one is made an absolute sover^gn over the other, 
by a construction of the word « supreme" and an interpolation 
of the word *< paramount ;" which must be unconstitutional, if 
the limited spherical sovereignties, previously assigned to each, 
are sustainable by a correct construction. To say the most 
for " paramount and supreme," they are only tautologies of 
f* sovereign;" and being so, shed no new light upon the case. 
Had the court declared, that the federal and state governments 
were each paramount and supreme, within their respective 
•spheres of action, it would havei only been a repetition of its 
assertion, "that they are each sovereign, within their spheres 
0f action." 

The reader perceives that the enquiry is reduced a plain 
question. Is. our system of government founded in the princi- 
ple of co-ordinate political departments, intended as checks 
iipon each other, only invested with defined and limited 
powers, and subjected to the sovereignty, supremacy, paia- 
mount power, superintendence and controul of the people ; 
or in the principle of a supremacy in the federal legislature or 
judges, witii its concomitant controul over the state legislative 
and judicial departments ? If ,the division of powers among a 
great number of political departments, endowed with rights . 
independent of each other, constitutes its chief beauty, its 
distinctive superiority, and its soundest security fc^r human 
happiness ; then t^e absence of supremacy or sovereignty in one 
department over the rest does not require the expedient of 



Digitized by 



Google 



140 

iliuiBhig words and phrases for 6ie fmrpose' of getting rid of an 
hnaginarj defect, bj introducing tbe very evil intended to be 
avoided. If words are to be tortured or borrowed, let it be done 
to sustain, not to subvert the essential principles ef our political 
System ; if we continue to \&ve that, which <yther nations admire. 
Should congress assume a paramount or supreme power oiper 
the state governments, it would acquire the authority of the 
people themselves, naturally possessed, never transferred, spe*- 
cially reserved, and necessary for the preservation of their 
liberty. Even the English monarchy derive^ all its eulogies^ 
and owes all its benefits to the want of supremacy and subordi« 
nation between its political spheres, and to the collisions which 
their absence produces. By extending the same principle, 
our system of government has obtained greater eulogies, and 
diffused greater blessings. Of these euk^es and blessings 
the checks and collisions between several legislative branches | 
between legislative, executive and judicial departments ; and 
above all, between the federal and state governments, are. 
the sources. To this principle we owe the valuable judicial 
right of restraining legislatures within their constitutional 
powers. To the same principle we have resorted for the same 
purpose, by dividing powers between the. federal jand state 
governments. Are the state spheres less respectable than the 
supreme court, or less able to restrain congress witiiin its 
limits, that they must be doomed to subordination because of 
tiie great powers of the federal legislature ; whilst the court 
feel their capacity and avow their resolution to controul these 
powers, if unconstitutionally exerted P If congress in conse-t 
quence of the great power of the federal government possess 
a supremacy over the state governments, what must be the power 
of the court, which claims a supremacy over congress ? As su* 
premacy has been found to govern sovereignty, it is necessary . 
to find some word, by which the court can govern supremacy. 
By turning our attention from a complexity of words and 
phrases, to the true principles of the federal constituti<m» 
we shall find one by which the federal court, feeble as it is, 
is able to controul the federal legislature, powerful ad it 
may be ; a principle, in which the court confides so firmly, 
as to express its prowess for vindicating^ its spherical rights. 
Feeble also as the state governments, .may be, they are pro- 
tected by the same power u|>on which the court relies. 



Digitized by 



Google 



141 

and haTe b6 reaBmnio be less fimi and lejal m diichargiiig 
the duties with which thej also are entrusted. The strength 
of the government lie§ in the people. They are the pro- 
tectors and supervisors of the collateral political sp^erest 
which thej have created. If one of these spheres conld 
acquire sufficient power to centrmil the o&ers* U would^ Hke 
an officer of a momircb, who can c^ntronl all the other officers 
of the governmenty obtain^a supremacy over the monarch him- 
self $ as many prime ministers of kings have actuaUy done. 
Every inference deducible from the inconvenience of conflictii^ 
powers, and every reason in favour of a r^^lar series of politi- 
cal subordination between the several departments of a govern- 
ment, apfdii» as forcibly against the check of one legislative 
chamber upon Anotiter, and of judicial upon legislative power ; 
as against mutual checks of the Meral and state governments 
upon each other ; and to supply, what the reasoning of the 
court craves, the whole system of division and limitation of 
power must be destroyed. If it should make a breach at one 
point upon this principle, especially at the strongest, there can 
^ther be no talisman able to save tiie weaker from destructioa, 
or there is one upon which the strongest may rely. 

I cannot discern any difference between a supremacy in one 
man, or in one political department; between a singular or a 
fdural absdnte power. The divine supremacy both of kings 
dmd of popes have been limited by tiie more divine supre* 
micy of hnman nature. Neither the uniformity of religion^ 
nor a complete subordination of one dyil department to another, 
has,^ by any modem writer of credit, been considered as equally 
beneficial to mankind^ with the principle of limiting power, 
whether it be entrusted to tme person, m* to a pditical depart- 
ment. The balls of the pope claimed supremacy; but the 
conclave of cardinals clumed and exercised a supremacy over 
these supreme bulls ; and the Romui cathdick countries found 
it necessity to limit both these supremacies. The laws of con* 
gress claim a genend supremacy, but the supreme court claims 
and exercises a supremacy over them ; and the division of pow- 
elrs by the constitution, like thecatholick nations, {lossesses a 
right to limit, and has limited both these supremrfies also. 
The supremacy of the fope, and of the kings of En^and, waged 
a long war against the sovereignty ei imtions and the rights of 



Digitized by 



Google 



14£ 

haman nature, clalmtBg a power to remove all obstacles whieh 
should impede its will, and ta exempt its operations from con- 
troul ; but the war of these allies terminated in their defeat. 
The supremacy of congress and of the court, in alliance also, 
has declared war against the sovereignty of the states ; but how 
ft will terminate, is hidden in the womb of time. We must 
enlist either under the banner of spherical supremacy or of a 
limitation of political power. 

Previously to the union, tJie states were in the enjoyment of 
sovereignty or supremacy. Not having relinquishc^l it by the 
union, in fact having then exercised it, there was no occasion, 
in declaring the supremacy of the .constitution and laws made 
in pursuance thereof, to notice that portion of state supremacy, 
originally attached to, not severed from, and of course remaining 
with the powers not delegated to the federal government; 
whilst it was necessary to recognize that other portion of sa- 
premacy, attached to the special powers transferred from the 
states to the federal government. But, by recognizing the 
supremacy transferred, it was not intended to destroy the 
portion of supremacy not transferred. The supremacy retained, 
and a choice of means convenient or necessary for the execu- 
tion of the powers reserved, was as indespensable an appendage 
of state rights, as of the limited powers delegated to congress. 
And in fact the unqualified supremacy, bestowed upon the con-* 
stitution, is equally a guaranty of state and of federal powers, 
as is demonstrated by the positive limitation of the supremacy- 
bestowed on federal laws, to such as were conformable to the 
restricted legislative power, created by the constitution. Sup* 
pose a state should declare war, tax imports, or regulate com- 
merce ; or, that congress should tax exports, alter the course trf" 
descents, or liberate the negroes ; would these be questions rf 
supremacy, unconnected with tlie powers actually delegated 
and reserved ? If not, supremacy is limited by these powers, 
and cannot extend them. In like manner, neither the fedend 
nor state courts, can under colour of supremacy, exceed rts 
own sphere. If one should assume admiralty jurisdiction, and 
the other the dtstrU>ution of intestates' estates, the party usurp- 
ing coulf! not constitutionally defend its Usurpation under 
colour of supremacy. Unconstitutional judgments, like uncon- 
stitutional laws, are null and void, und both courts are mu« 



Digitized by 



Google 



143 

teallj bound by tbeir oaths to the constitutioii, and have a 
mutual light to resist and defeat, bj every means in their power, 
unconstitutional laws, failing within their respective jurisdic- 
tions. Had an oath of loyalty, not to the constitution, but to 
the supremacy of one court, been imposed, it might have been 
otherwise. An exclusive right in either to ascertain the extent 
of its own jurisdiction would leave its jurisdiction without 
limits, and the rights of neither judicial sphere can be defetided 
agfdnst tlie other, except by using all the means it possesses ; 
just, as a senate and house of representatives can only defend 
their respective constitutional ri^ts. The supremacy of the 
constitution i& not confined to any particular department or 
functionary, but extends to our entire system of political law. 
Under its protection, the federal senate has a right to defend 
itself against the house of representatives; and the federal 
judicial power agdnst the federal legislative power ; and if so, 
it seems impossible to doubt, that the same sanction invests the 
state and. federal judicial powers with a mutual right of self 
ijtefence, against the aggressions of each other.^ 

I renounce the idea sometimes advanced, that the state go^ 
vemments^ ever were or continue to be, sovere^n or unlimited. 
If the people are sovereign, their governments cannot also be 
sovereign. In the state constitutions, some limitations are to be 
found ; in the federal constitution, they are infinitely more 
abundant and explicit. Whatever arguments can be urged 
against the sovereignty of state governments, stronger can be 
flrged against the sovereignty of the federal government. Both 
governments are subjected to restrictions, and the power by 
which both Were constituted has entrusted neither with an 
exclusive power of enforcing these restrictions upon the other, 
because it would have conceded its own supremacy by so doing, 
and parted with its inherent authority. 

No derived power can be greater than the primitive power* 
No state; nor a majority of states, had any species of primitive 
sovereignty or supremacy over other states. Elections by states, 
therefore, cannot confer upon a majority of congress a supre- 
macy never possessed by a majority of states, especially as 
froih the form of the senate, the representatives of a minority 
of people may pass a law, and this representation of the mi- 



Digitized by 



Google 



144 

iMtfity ndght, if it possessed a legtslatiTe sapremacy, exercise 
a sovereign power over the inajoritj. If federal legttlatnrea 
do not possess an absolute supremacy, federal judiciaries cannot 
possess it, since judgments cannot enforce that which is not 
law. In cobformitj with this reasoning, neither federal legisla- 
tive majorities, nor a majority of the states, can amend the 
constitution, because it was a compact by which each state 
delegated for itself only limited powers to the federal govern- 
ment ; attended by a supremacy not of any political sphete» but 
of the constitution, limited and confined to the powers dele- 
gated, and not extending to the portion of primitive state 
supremacy, never delated. Thus it happened, tliat no state 
was bound by the constitution, until it had acceded individu- 
ally to that compact. And hence it result^ that the right of 
construing the constitution within their respective spheres, is 
mutual between the state and general governments, becai^ 
the latter have no supremacy over the state powers retained, 
and the former no supremacy over the federal powers delegated, 
except that which provides the stipulated mode for amending 
the constitution. 

It is objected, that if the supreme federal court do not pos* 
sess an unlimited or unchecked supremacy in construing the 
constitution, clashing constructions will ensue* This is true ; 
and yet it is not a good reason for overturning our system for 
dividing, limiting and checking power, if that system be a good 
one ; and if it be even a bad one, the people only, and neither 
one of their departments separately, nor all united, can alter 
or amend it The objection applies as strongly to the other 
departments of our government, as to the judicial. If the 
federal legislature and executive do not possess an absolute 
supremacy over the state legislatures and executives, clashing 
constitutional constructions will ensue. The jurisdiction of 
the federal judicial power is as expressly limited, as the legis- 
lative and executive federal powers. There is no judicial 
supremacy recognized in the supreme federal court, except 
that over inferior federal courts. And, if the supremacy of the 
constitution bestows upon any federal department a supremacy 
over the correspondent stete department, it must bestow upoa 
every federal department, a similar supremacy over the other 
correspondent state departments. 



Digitized by 



Google 



145 

It is there&re obyious^ tiutt tiie subject proposed by the ofajec- 
tion for consideration is, whether it is better to abandon oar 
primary division of powers between the state and fedeml go* 
TemmentSy to prevent clashing constructions; or to retain this 
chief security against a gradual introduction of oppression^ 
trusting to the mutual prudence of the^e goyemmentSy and the 
supreme authority of the people, for meeting the inconveniences 
as it appears* The greatest scope of human wisdom is, to 
compare evils and choose the least. I cannot discern the wis- 
dcHtt of one who cuts off his head, lest his face should be 
seratched occasionally as he journeys through life. Montes- 
quieu has somewhere said, that when the savage of America 
wants fruity he cuts down the tree to obtain it Shall we act 
^ith stijl less foreMght, by cutting down the division of power 
between the general and state governments, calculated to pro- 
duce ihe fruit of moderation in both, that one may cram us with 
the fruits of supremacy ? 

How or when have co-ordinate political spheres existed, with 
a sU{Nremacy in ome over the others ? The idea involves a con- 
tradiction. Indeed, the regal sphere in England has often 
attempted to reconcile it in various ways, and with temporary 
success. Henry the 8th exercised a supremacy over the two 
other spheres (at length by rebellions and civil wars rendered 
co-ordinate,) strongly resembling that now claimed over the 
state spheres ; and the blessings reaped from his success, and 
the success of his daughter Mary, and of the Stuarts, in remo- 
ving the evil of clashing powers, by the help, of supremacy, 
were such as we shall reap by pursuing the same policy. It is 
very true, that the federal and state courts may occasionally car- 
ry on little wars with the weapons called injunction and habeas 
•corpus, wlHcih both have an equal right to use ; but then these 
weapons cannot shed blood, confiscate property, iior bum here- 
ticks, as supremacy has frequently done; and besides, the states 
can at any time force th^ combatants to lay down their arms. 

The mutuality of the right of construction in the several 
departments of the state and federal governments, was the 
reason, which suggested the section of the constitution of the 
United States requiring that, "the senators and representatives 
^{ in congress, and the members of the several state legislatures, 
**and all executim and judicial officers, both ef the United 
T 



Digitized by 



Google 



146 

«» States, and of the several ^ates, shall be bound, by oath or 
*« affirmation, to support the constitution.'' The mutuality of 
the oath, by imposing a common duty, implies a common riglit; 
because the duty cannot be discharged, except by exercising 
. the right of construction. To impose the duty by the highest 
sanction, and yet to have impliedly designed that its perfor- 
mance should be rendered null and void, by a constructive 
supremacy in one political sphere over thfe others, would 
amount to the same thing, as if the oath had been, that the enu- 
merated spheres should be subordinate to one, invested with 
a supremacy over the rest Would this latter have been equi- 
valent to the actual oathf? If not, can a construction by which 
it is substantially enforced, be correct? By the actual oath, the 
constitution, in conformity with its great principle of a di- 
vision and co-ordinateness of powers between the state and 
general governments, divides also its confidence for its own 
preservation. The same confidence is divided by the special 
powers invested in the states and in the general governinent 
for its execution. If the oath binds the federal judicial power 
to disregard a mandate from a state judicial power, prohibiting 
the exercise of its constitutional powers ; it also binds the judi- 
cial power of a state, to disregard a similar mandate from the 
judicial power of the union ; and compels both to protect the 
officers and individuals upon whom their respective jurisdic- 
tions may operate: otherwise, one jurisdiction may supersedtb 
the other. ^ This would be certainly a greater evil, than even a 
necessity fdr a reference to the people to settle a collision. 

If a greater spheric of action conferred supremacy according 
to the constitution of the union, and if the federal governmezrt 
possesses the greater sphere of action, (the positions upon which 
the court relies as justifying its decision,) where was the neces- 
sity for declaring the constitution and the laws made in pur- 
suance thereof to be the supreme law of the land? The supre- 
macy had passed^ as the court asserts, attached to the greater 
sphere of action. If it was attached to this -greater sphere of 
action, it is not bestowed by this clause; and yet this clause is 
referred toby the court, as auxiliary to their implied supremacy. 
In the several mixtures of truth and error to be found in the 
opinion of the court, this has been managed with the most in- 
genuity. The supremacy expressed has been united with the 



Digitized by 



Google 



U7 

oupremacj implied, witiiout any examination of the nature of 
the firstj or of its great difference from the latter. A govern- 
ment of laws and not of men, is a definition of liberty ; a go- 
vernment of men and not of laws, of despotism. The expressed 
supremacy asserts the first principle; the implied supremacy of 
the men composing the legislative or judicial federal depart- 
ments, asserts the second. By blending them, their extreme con- 
trariety is endeavoured to be obscured, and the clause confer- 
ring supremacy on the constitution and the laws made in pursu* 
Mn^e thereof, h very ingeniously changed from a restriction, into 
an amplification of power. Yet it is under the supremacy con- 
i*erred upon the constitution by this very clause, that the federal 
judicial sphere exercises a controul over the federal legislative 
sphere in the case of unconstitutional laws, because the differ- ^ 
ence between a supremacy of the constitution and a supremacy 
in congress, is manifest; whilst the same coi^rt insists upon a 
supremacy in. congress over the powers reserved to the states, 
and 'denies to congress a supremacy over the powers delegated 
to itself. This seems to me to be obviously incorrect, because 
I consider the constitution to have derived from this clause an 
absolute supremacy for the preservation of the powers reserved 
to the states, as well as of those delegated to the general go- 
vernment; and not as bestowing on any one spher^, state or 
federal, an exclusive right to ascertain the extent of those pow- 
ers ; such a right.being in fact a despotism of men. 

Important as this subject is, to avoid prolixity, I shall over- 
look sundry features of the constitution, and only add a few 
observations to those already urged. A union of states clearly 
admits the sovereignty and equality of the parties uniting. A 
union does not, as a consequence of union, tacitly and impliedly^ 
reduce these sovereign and equal parties to subordinate corpo- 
rations; because in that case, they could not alter or dissolve 
the union, witliout the consent of the power, to which they 
would be subordinate. The federal government is allowed by 
the court to be limited. Can it be limited by a power subor- 
dinate to itself or is it only limited by^the didactick lessons of 
the constitution? The Federalist speaks of the jealousy which 
would arise between the federal and state governments, because 
they would be mutual checks upon each other, as co-ordinate 
powers always struggle for sovereignty; and of the great secu- 



Digitized by 



Google 



• 



148 

rity for a free government, arising from this feature of the con- 
stitation. But a paramount or supreme power in congress 
obliterates this feature. And of what avail is a preceptive 
limitation, bereft of the co-ercive resource for its execution P If 
congress be a paramount ^r supreme judge of its own legislative 
power, its power is unlimited. We have no conception of an 
unlimited power, beyond one, limited only by its own will. If 
the jurisdiction of ihe svfpreme federal court is limited only 
by. its own will, it is in like manner unlimited. Power can . 
never be checked by itself, or by its own subordinate instru- 
ment. The constitution certainly intended to invest the legis- 
lative and judicial spheres of the federal and state govern- 
ments, with distinct and independent objects of legislation and 
^ cognizance ; but, these mutual rights however clear can never 
be preserved, if one party possesses a supremacy over the other, 
and the other, no power of resistance. Mr. Locke has some- 
where said, << that no man has a right to that, which another 
" has a right to take from him.*' 

The art of melting up brass with gold, and calling the whole 
mass gold, is not a new one. When good and bad principlea 
are thus fused together, it requires some intellectual chymistry 
to separate them. The court say, «* the result is a conviction 
** that the states have no power by taxation or otherwi&e to retard, 
" impede, burden or in any manner controul, the operations of 
^ the eonsHtuHonal laws enacted by congress to carry into exe- 
" cution the powers vested in congress. This we think the 
** unavoidable consequence of the supremacy which the eonsti- 
*' tution has declaredJ^^ The supremacy which the constitution 
has declared ! This phraseology conveys a different idea from 
" the supremacy of the constitution.'' The foregoing part of 
the extract only amounts to an assertion, that congress have a 
right to pass constitutional laws, and that the states have no 
right to resist them. So far the metal is pure. But, instead of 
declaring that these conclusions result from the powers dele- 
gated to congress and prohibited to the states, they are said to 
be " an unavoidable consequence of the supremacy which the 
constitution has declared ;" as if it had declared any species 
of. supremacy to which it was itself subordinate. Here lies 
the essence of the question, and here the court are silent. They 
have not informed us, whether the declared supremacy created 



Digitized by 



Google 



14^ 

a sphere able to legislate or to judge unconstitntiofiaHj' ; nor 
pointed out the remedy, in case any such sphere should attempt 
to do so. There is no duch question as the court have stated, 
namely, whether constitutional laws are supreme or obligatory. 
The true question is, whether any one political department is 
invested with a supreme power of deciding, what laws are con- 
stitutional, and of course obligatory. Now, if the supremacy 
of the constitution be really the dedared supremacy, the court 
ought to have ascertained the objects upon which it was intend- 
ed to operate, in order to decide this true question. These 
undoubtedly and principally are both the state and federal po- 
litical departments or spheres, all of which being themselves 
sijibordinate to the declared supremacy of the constitution, no 
one could derive from that declaration a supremacy over the 
rest; and what would be still more absurd, a supremacy over 
the constitution itself, which would be involved in an exclusive 
right of deciding upon the constitutionality of laws or judg- 
ments. The declared supremacy of the constitution embraces 
the rights reserved to the states, as well as those delegated to 
the federal government ; and therefore, if the administrators of 
the delegated rights derive from it any species of supremacy, 
the administrators of the reserved rights must derive from iik 
the same species of supremacy, because both are guaranteed 
by the same sanction ; na^mcly, the supremacy of the consti- 
tution. 

That the phrase " the supremacy which the constitution has 
declared^' was intended by the court to convey a very different 
idea from " the supremacy of the constitution,'^ is demonstrated 
by the following quotation from its t>pinion. " That the po\^er 
*• to tojc involves the pk)Wer to destroy ; that the power to 
« destroy may defeat and render useless the power to create; 
«* that there is a plain repugnance in conferring on one govern- 
** ment a power to controul the constitutional measures of ano- 
" ther» which other, with respect to these very measures, is 
** declared to be supreme over that which exerts the controiit, 
"are propositions not to be denied." And yet I think that 
idl of them are deniable or of no weight. It is deniedi that the 
federal government is declared to be supreme over the state 
governments. It is even denied, that the federa^government 
is declared to be supreme in the escerciseof its constitutional 



Digitized by 



Google 



150 

powers, anj farther than the state governments are declared 
. to be supreme in the exercise of their constitutional powers. It 
is contended, that the constitution, and not either oC these go- 
vernments is declared to be supreme, and that its supremacy 
is an equivalent guaranty of the division of powers it has made. 
And it is concluded under the arguments previously urged« 
that the repugnance to the constitution is exactly the same, 
whether the federal government shall controul the constitu- 
tional measures of the state governments, or the state govern- 
ments shall controul the constitutional measures of the federal 
government It was to prevent evils thus repugnant to the 
nature of the constitution, that the powers of each were made 
co-ordinate, and a mutual right of construction delegated and 
reserved. If the remedy be defeated, the repugnance follows. 
The propositions «' that the power to t^x involves the power to 
*' destroy, and that the power to destroy may defeat and render 
** useless the power to create," appear to me to be both incor- 
rect and irrelevant. Sliall not civil government tax, because a 
power to tax may destroy? Have not both the state and federal 
governments a power to tax ; can they therefore destroy ? Does 
not our political system contain remedies against an abuse of 
the power ta tax ? Can either government destroy by unconsti- 
tutional laws or usurpations? If we have le^timate modes of 
preventing it, why should an apparition terrify us into an aban- 
donment of these modes ? May not a power in the federal go- 
vernment to destroy state laws, defeat and render useless, the 
state power to create laws? May it not defeat and render 
useless, the power of the states to create a new constitution ? 
How does a power to destroy, defeat and render useless a 
power to create? Is not the destruction of the old, and the 
creation of our new confederation,. a refutation of the assertion? 
Did not this power reside, and does it not yet reside in the 
states ? Is it not recognized by the constitution ? Pas not the 
constitution by thjs recognition, and by depending on the states 
for senators, and other materials for sustaining the federal go- 
vernment, admitted the state power to destroy and create ? If 
the states have this power, where is the danger of their exer- 
cising it indirectly by opposing a constitutional law of congress ? 
On the contrary, is, not their acknowledged power over the 
constitution, a security for a temperate and conscientious op- 



Digitized by 



Google 



151 

position to anconstitutional laws? These general pr<.|K> itiins 
therefore, do not prove tl;eir conclusion of a supremacy in the 
general government over the state governments; but tlie first, 
however irrelative in its present shape, inaj, by a small altera-^ 
tion be rendered extremely applicable. A power to prohibit a 
government from taxing involves Ihe power of destroying tli*lr 
government. If congress may take from the states, -bjTvirtu^ 
of the spurious supremacy assigned to it, one objec^^of taxation, 
they may take away all ; and I know of no better Veapons to 
be employed by co ordinate powers, always struggling for su- 
premacy, than a right in one and not in the other, to wi'tbdraw 
from its competitor, by corporations, subjects of taxation.^ >. 

But this argument is foreseen and opposed in the T>pinion of the 
court That opinion declares, that "all subjects over which the 
<' sovereign power of the state extends are objects of taxation ; 
<^but those, over which it does not extend, are upon the soundest 
" principles, exempt from taxation. The sovereignty of a state 
•* extends to every thing which exists by its own authority, 
'*or is introduced by its permission ; but does not extend to 
•*tlie means employed by congress to cany into execution- 
*» powers conferred on tliat body by the people of the United 
«• States. We find on just theory a total failure of the original 
f right to tax the means employed by the government of the 
•« union, for the execution of it^ powers. The piinciple for 
" which the state of Maryland contends, is capable of' arresting 
**all the measures of tlie general government, and of prostra^ 
**ting U nt the foot of the states." If I understand the asser- 
tions of this extract, (as to which I am extremely doubtful,) 
they either apply against the paramount or supreme power 
claimed for the federal government, or are incorrect in point 
of fact. ** All subjects, over, which the sovei-eign powers of the 
'• state extends, are objects of taxation.'^ Whether sovereignty 
be natural or conventional, 1 have endeavoured to prove, that it 
resides in the people of each staie. The conventional sove- 
reignty created in each state, e^ibraced 2kxA extended to every 
species of property, real, personal and mixed. Therefore, pio- 
perty of every kind was an object of taxation before the con- 
federation. Have the states relinquished by that compact a 
right to tax any species of property, except imports and exports ? 
If not, as the sovereignty of the states extends to all internal 



.Digitized'by 



Google 



.152 

praptHy, and as i^l objects to which UJocs eMe4^ are ol^^eis 
^ of taxatiottt a conclusion adverse to the conclusion of the court 
is unavoidable. To avoid it» the court subjoin, that which 
they seem to consider as a new and explanatory position. 
«* The sovei^ignty of a state es^tends io every thii^ which exi^ 
Jts own authority, or is introduced by its permission ; but 
'doe^M^uUend to the means employed by congress to carry 
'* into execution powers conferred on that body by the people 
«*of the Ignited States." The first member of this assertion 
is merew a repetition of the idea tf sovereignty, as whatever 
it ext^fuds to, may be said to ejcist by its authority. Hence,, the 
observations just urged apply to this modification of the san^e 
idea; to which it may be added, that property, so far as it is a 
conventional or social right, may be said to exist by the autho- 
rity of the sovereign power,, with peculiar propriety. So far, 
the positions of the court seem to be ccmclusive agu^st its 
decision. But here a new, authoritative, and uncons^que;itial 
assertion is advanced. "The sovereignty of a state does not 
*< extend to the means employed by congress to carry into exe- 
•* cutien the powers conferred on that body by the people of tjie 
" United States." What! not if these means contractor 
destroy the state sovereign right of internal government? It 
is difficult to discern, what is meant by the inexplicit word 
" means," nor could any have been selected, more suitable for 
establishing a precedent without limits, and a judicial supremacy 
vrithout controul. If it includes men or property, so far as 
congress may employ either as means for executing its powers 
then the assertion is incorrect ; because, the sovereignty, of the 
states does extend both to men and property thus used as meam. 
If afedenal judge commits a crime or incurs a debt, he js 
amenable to the jurisdictions of state sovereignties. All resi- 
dent federal officers are liable to pay a state poll tax, and the 
taxes imposed for supporting the poor, and keeping up roads and 
bridges. The property, real and personal, of all these descrip- 
tions of persons, to which we may add the president and membeiis 
of congress, is liable to state taxation, and their persons exposed 
to state jurisdictions. Are none of these persons means employed 
by congress ? If they are, where is the distinction to be found 
in our system of gove^ment, under which all the means 
e^r^ssed^ to be employed for its own execution, imports 



Digitized by 



Google 



153 

ezce]pt^» are left as tbey were founds exposed to state sove- 
^teigatj, by which uii(|er cover o( implied means, congress maj 
remove dther persons or property, beyond the reach of state 
sovereignty ; and liberate them from its cognijutnee, whilst 
both themselves and their property remained subordinate to it ? 
Are bankers more worthy means to be employed for executing 
the constitution than judges ? 

But, suppose we admit « that the state sovereignty does n^ 
extend to means either expressed or implied, employed by con- 
gres8,"and allow that banking may be correctly numbered amcH^ 
the latter ; I would ask, whether it is the persons or the property^ 
the bankers, which are thus absolved from state allegiance, and 
excluded from state jurisdiction? If the former, they may be 
killed wift impunity ; if the latter, it may be plundered with- . 
out redress. The federal government have no junsdiction as 
to local wrongs, and the states can have no jurisdicticm as to 
objects over which they have no sovereignty. If, however, they 
do possess a sovereignty, able to protect persons and property, 
^though employed by congress as means to effect ends, that 
sovereignty extends to taxation, as protection and contribution 
are reciprocal political principles, and it would be unjust to the 
rest of society, to establish a sub-society, entitled to tiie one 
and absolved from the other. 

Far from admitting, however, a position which would produce 
such consequences, I contend that the state sovereignty ex- 
tends to all the means which congress can employ. It is ne- 
cessaty to protect the lives, the limbs, and the reputations even 
of the standing army; and to secure every atom of property, 
from which the federal government can extract resources. 
'Except for the protection of state soverei^ty, even imposts 
would ML Whatever is not a subject of a sovereignty, is not 
entitled to its protection. Congress cannot pass a municipal 
law to protect persons or property, because the federal go* 
vemment is in no respect a sovereignty. Private property 
exists by, and is subject to state sovereignty. With this opi- 
nion the Federalist, formerly quoted, when explaining the con* 
current power of the state and federal governments, as means 
for effecting the ends respectively eonfided to them, explicitly 
concurs. To me it seems, that the two governments are de- 
signedly blended and interwoven with each other, that each 
U 



I 



Digitized by 



Google 



154 

may contribute towards the prcsenratioii of the other j wid Oat 
a cWm of independence, sovereignty or supremacy* in fftvoar 
of one, is unfriendly to the federal constitution in general, and 
to the federal government in particular. If thi» be true, is 
there not something invidious and reprehensible in this ex- 
pression used by the court ? •« The principle for which the 
** state of Maryland contends, is capable of arresting all the 
" measures of the general government, inA of prostrating it ai 
•« the foot of the states." Without enlarging upon the fact, 
that the federal government is dependent upon the states for 
its existence, this principle may be compared with that con<- 
tended for by the court. The state of Maryland contends for 
its original and reserved right to tax property. The court 
asserts, that congress by creating corporations may diminish or 
destroy the state resource for raising revenue, co-extcnsively 
with its own pleasure. By the first principle, the pecuniary 
resources for sustaining the federal government are untouched ; 
by the second, those of the states become dependent on iht 
federal government. By the first, the power of both goVem* 
ments, either original or delegated, as to revenue, remains con* 
current ; by the second, congress assumes a power of placing 
Whatever property it pleases beyond the reach of contribution 
for the support of either. By the first, a sovereignty which 
created private property, retains its rights ; by the second, a 
right is claimed on behalf of a spurious sovereignty to creati^ 
private property, or rather to rob the legitimate sovereignty of 
that which it had previously created. If congress be indeed a 
limited sphere, as the court admit, it can neither create private 
property, nor absolve it from taxation, because these are attri* 
foutes of sovereign, and not of limited spheres. Let the reader 
consider whether the principle of the court is not capable, in 
theory, of arresting all the measures of the state governments 
and prostratHng them at the foot of congress, I say in theory, 
because I trust that in practice, all efforts for rendering these 
departments, equally necessary for our liberty and prosperity, 
jealous of, or hostile to each other, will be unsuccessful; and 
that both will cultivjite, not the means of acquiring a paramount 
or supreme power over each othei> but thos^ f(dfr advancing tfie 
pubiick happiness. 



Digitized by 



Google 



151 

' But the court, ioBtead of caafiding in the argmnenti which 
1 imve attaxq>ted to examine, endeavour to supersede them all, 
bj observing that " the legislature of the union con htrtrusUd 
^ tytke people with the power of aontrouling mea$ures whidt' 
* eone^m M, with the confidence ^t it will not be abused." 
Can be trusted by the peopfo / The rdterated attempts to distin- 
gtttsh between the pe^^ and the states, to sootti and flatter 
the former by com[^iments to their elective si^ad^* and bj 
iosidiona blandishments to seduce them from the substantial 
ground of checks and balances, into the intricate and slippcay * 
|Mths of passion and confidence, are sufficient to awaken all 
the v%ilance of those who believe, that pow^ must be divided^ 
limited and controuled, to keep it within bounds. In its every 
^etch, it uniformly solicits tiie popular confidence by protes- 
tations, of integrity and promises of moderation. But, in con- 
aidering the rights under the constitution of the federal and 
state governments, an estimate of the confidence due to either 
ia certainly inapplicable to the subject, and productive of a 
nalevdence, to be deprecated as ^e greatest national misfor- 
tune. Shall we exchange our constitutional compact, for a 
successimi of artifices to win pop^Jar favour, or to take advan- 
tage of popular folly? Is not uxk appeal from an inv^tigation 
of constitutional principles, to an estimate of fluctuating popu- 
lar confidence, an ackiKiwledgement of diffidence in the argu- 
ments previously advanced ? If, however, a scramble for popu- 
larity is to be substituted for a limitation of powers^ let us 
beware how we stake the federal government upon the event of 
the confusion. Mr. Itf adison, p. 252 of the Federalist, has 
observed, that. '< the powers delegated to the federal goveriunent; 
« are few and defined. Those, which remain to the state 
** governments, are numerous and indefinite, and extend to all 
«Vthe. o^eets which, in the ordinary course of aSSurs, concern 
** the Uves, liberties, and properties of the people." And in^ 
page 251, << the state governments may be regarded as consti* 
*' tumt and ^senHal parts of the federal government; whilst 
^ the latter is in no wise essential to the operation or organiza-f 
*! tioa of the former." The reader vriil see in these quo- 
tatioDis an affirmatioQ of the prmcipks for which I have 
contended in this section ; and he will also discern, that the 
popular confidence haa. been extended in a greater degree to 



Digitized by 



Google 



U6 

file state than to the federal ^emme&t, both in the mass ef 
powers bestowed, and also in the dependence upon the former to 
which the latter is subjected. ' I forbear to enumerate the advaiH 
tages which the states possess in this struggle for conidence, be^- 
cause I earnestly hope that the ever-to-be-aToided contest 
will never occur. They are perhaps too copiously remembered 
in the book last quoted. Let me, however, remind ih% reader, 
that the same book describes the superior sagacity and iutd- 
ligence ci the state legislatures, for detecting and repelling 
artful and insidious violations of the federal constitution, as a 
feature of our political system, most happily contrived to pre- 
vent the bad effects universally expenenced from tornadoes of- 
antipathy, affection, prejudice and zeal, to which even repre- 
sentative absolute power has been universally sutject ; and by 
which a mighty effort in France to establish a free government 
was frustrated. How can this feature of our political system, 
80 highly eulogised in the Federalist, be preserved, if the nieans 
for ^ving it efficiency should be taken away from these same 
state legislatures, by investing the federal judges with a su- 
preme power over these means P Ought this inestimable feature 
of our government, by which deliberation is substituted &r 
passion, intelligence for prejudice, and restraint for unshackled 
ambition, to be exchanged for a confidence, in a single le^s- 
lative department P Yes, says the last ex^act from the opinicm 
of the court, it will be advantageously bartered for a power 
in the legislature of the union to cdntroul measures which 
concern all, because the people can possess a confidence that it 
will not be abused* But, the constitution intended^ according 
to the Federalist, that the legislatures of the states should be 
a check upon the legislature of the union, and when this check 
is endeavoured to be defeated by the words *« confidence and 
supremacy,'^ it only illustrates the absurdity of construing it 
by an excessive interpretation of particular terms, instead of 
adhering to its obvious intention. 

The convenience or necessity of untforatity is tiie great argu- 
ment, upon which tiiis vital change of the federal con^tution is* 
contended for. Archbishop Laud, under the supremacy of 
Charles the second, attempted to effect a religious unifinrmity by 
the instrumentality of judges, and^rew for that purpose a gi^t 
portion of the business, of the common law courts, into tim* 



Digitized by 



Google 



157 

eci^Mtftical,htt?iiigrt^iwbeAd(mesaprem6coiH^ Ifiadtgeot 
iras ta estaUigh arbitnuy power ; and that his means were as 
wke as they w^tt mtked, is proved by the necesMty of a loi^ 
and blood jr civil war to defeat it The rights of the puritans 
under Charies's sii]^emacj» experienced the &te to be expected 
1^ the rights of the states sulijected to the jorisdietion of fiederal 
judges, under a supremaisy in congress. One sectt subjected 
to the laws and judges rf another sect, or one goTemment* snb^ 
jecled to the Isrws and judges of another goTemment* may 
consider its rights as equally secured or lost The Eng^iidi 
saw the cimsequenees of the judicial usurpations by tiie eccleri- 
afitical courts, and many great men, though adverse to the 
I»irkans, united with them to defeat a progress so obvious 
towards arbitrary government Ev^y stretch of the jurisdiction 
ei the federal ^courts, in virtue of the supremacy of congress^ 
must operate upon state ccmstitutional rights, as accessions of 
ecclesiastical jurisdicti<m, in virtue of the supremacy of Charles, 
operated uptrn common law rights in England* The uniformity 
attempted is as impracticaUe and chimerical in one case as in 
ik» o^er. if religious sects^ severed by speculation, cannot be 
reconciled by any liiii^ short of tyranny, how can great states^ 
S<evered by local interests^ be coerced within one bandage by a 
weaker power i The remedy in one case is, to let the ojunion^ 
and the internal self-government of churches alone. The reme- 
dy provided by the federal constitution for the other* was also 
to let alone the local interests and internal self-government of 
ihe states. If e^ie state, or a minority of states, under the 
contended-for suprema(gr of congress, to be enforced by the 
' kdinl court should interfere with the internal affidrs of 
another; it cannot be justified by any mode of reasoning; 
except on^, which would prove that one churchy or a miyerity 
of churches, may rightfully and beneficially interfere with tl^ 
ittteimal affiura of another. Mankind have discovered, that 
equid or co-ordinate religious rights are preferable for hu<» 
sum happiness, to uniformity ; and every sect treats the idea 
of submission to another sect, with scorn and derisiim. Laud 
tost hi9 head for assailmg an opinion so natural, by eccle- 
siastieal supremacy. Will the notion in the states of their 
natural right to mtemal self-government be more conquerable, 
by federal si^remacy f Religious uniformity was recommended 



Digitized by 



Google 



15B 

ai a go6d thiiq^ by cuniu&g knamy or fimatical seal; bat 
neither {rfiilosophical theory nor fiiaatical zeal will adrocate 
the uniformity to be produced by the aupremaey of congress or 
the federal court Solid selfiahneasy and not moral reasoning; 
to de^royiand not to nurture our constituticRial checks and di- 
visions of power, will be the motire for assailing state ri^ts. 
No imp^iant colMsion would ever happen between the federal 
and state governments, if it was referred to the arbitrament of 
the common good or general interest only. To keep the peace 
between them, it is only necessary to discern whether they arei 
embroiled by honest patriotism* or by the pretended patriotism 
of monopoly, speculation, selfishness or amMtion. Even ehurcfaes 
have been much oftener involved in controversies by fraadulent 
and pernicious designs, than by honest and intemperate zeaL 
There was no remedy i^^st such fraudulent arts, except that 
of preventing the artificers from getting any thing from their 
occupation, by allowing to these churches the natural r^t of 
internal self-government. So, by a sacred adherence to the 
right of the states to internal self-government, the matiufac* 
turers of broils between them and the federal government, 
would be disal^ed from getting any thing by the occupation, and 
then the business will cease. In times <tf ignorance, mankind 
have been bitten by a political or religious tarantula, and either 
cured or made worse by sounds ; but now, their knowledge is 
such, that they can keep both their temper and their honesty 
with great philosophy in all discussions, which do not involve 
some exclusive advantage for themselves. 

Besides the counterpoise inteiuled by the federal constitution 
to be established between the federal and state legislatures, two 
clauses of the constitution seem positively to have renounced 
the idea of any species of sovere^nty or supremacy, by whidi 
congress could create or regulate property. It must purchase 
with the consent of the state legislatures real property, however 
necessary or tonvenien$ in its opinion for the common defence or 
f;eneral welfare. As this consent is necessary to subtrsct 
real property from state resources, and subject it to federal 
legislation, it follows, since the state internal power is the 
same over both real and personal property, that the latter can* 
not be subtracted from the state internal power, and transferred 
to the exclusive legislation of congress, without any state con- 



Digitized by 



Google 



I5§ 

teiU^ Congresft mBj dispose of* and make regala^nB oobceni- 
Hig the property of the UmUed States, 'mfAjing, very distinctfy, 
tlu^ it cannot dispose of» or make regulaliona coBcermng the 
property of individaab^ embraced bj the states. These, and 
other specified powers ^ven to congress oyer persmis and pro« 
perty» seem to demonstrate, that it does not possess any nnspe- 
cified power over them derived from the words ** sorereign and 
"supreme." 

Finally, it ought to be observed, that tiie constitution does 
not invest the federal court with any jurisdiction, in cases of 
coUision between either the legislative or judicial powers of 
the state and federal governments; and as such a jurisdiction 
would be infinitely more important than any other with which 
it is endowed, the mnission is not sufficiently accounted for by 
sayii^ either that the case was overlooked, as never likely to 
hi^n^en, or, that though its occurrence was foreseen as extreme- 
ly {HTobal^e^ this important jurisdiction was bestowed by infer* 
ence only, whilst cases of jurisdiction comparatively inngnifi- 
cant were minutely expressed. 3ut the omission is well account- 
ed for, if we consider the constitutipn as having contemplated 
the state and federal govomments as its co-ordinate guardiims^ 
designed to dieck and balance each other; since, having esta- 
bliahed that primary and important principle by ^e division 
of powers between them, it would have been as obvious an 
inconsistency to have bestowed a power on the federal courts 
to settle collisions as to tiiek nni<»al r^ts, as to have reserved 
the same supervising power to the state courts. 

I hqpe the reader ha9 pevceived the propriety of my endea- 
yours, to aseertw iht principles of our fcMrm of government, as 
preparatory to & oimsideration of the aujnremacy claimed for 
congress, sujj^^osed by the court to justify its decision ; and as 
necessary to enable us to determine, whether the ground it has 
token is real cnt imaginary. 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



SECTION, iO. 
bank: decision— common defence and gene- 

' RAL welfare. — necessary AND PROPEIL— 
convenient— NATIONAL. 



I turn with sorrow from the constnictioB of tn entire ajstem^ 
to the science of verbality ; from a consistency of meaning, to 
the artifice of verbalizing a single word, to destroy that 
consistency; and proceed to examine a mode of managing 
controversies, into which prejudice, ambition and self-interest 
continually strive to drag reason. The frippery of precedents* 
like the tinsel patched upon lord Peter'd coat ; here a bank* 
there a road, yonder a canal, bounties for these, their payment 
for those, bow an epaulet of sovereignty, and then another of 
supremacy, may bespangle our form of government with armorial 
ensigns of despotism, and yet leave much of its original 
substance perceivable ; but the art of verbalizing single words 
into a different system^ may render the constitution as umntelli- 
g^le, as A single word would be made by a syllabic 
or a jumble of its letters ; and turn it into a reser 
meaning for which its expounder may have occa^ 
that wise imd good men amy entertain a grea 
the British form of government; and may a 
beHeve, that it would improve the constitution or the tinitea 
States to draw it by construction towards that model : but yet 
I contend it would be proceeding too impetuously, to borrow 
its modes of construction practised in its most oppressive 
periods, and resisted by its best patriots* 

In the time of James the second, all the judges of En^and 
(except one) decided *« that the laws of England were the 
**king^8 laws. That it is an inseparable branch of the jire-. 
*'rQgative of the kings of England, as 0/ aU other sovereign 
'^princes, to dispense with all penal laws in particular cases, 
''^xiimpaHicularoctasions. That of tftese reasons and neces* 
V 



Digitized by 



Google 



1^ 

^sUy the king is the sole ju^e* That thig is not a^trast iiow 
'* invested in and granted to tlie present king, but the ancient 
** remains of the sovereign power of the kings of En^and, 
** which was 6ever taken from them, nor can fte.'^ Is not this 
decision a parallel both in langns^ and substance with tbs 
decision of the court, and a complete precedent for its defence^ 
except that the mode of constructiim it adopts is no longer jus- 
tified in England ? The liarmonj between the words " sove^ 
"reignty, particular cases, prerogative, reasons and necessity,'* 
used by the English judges, and tiie words "spherical sove- 
••reignty, supremacy, convenience and necessity," used by the 
decision, strikes the ear, and settles in the nndarstandio^ 
Prerogative arises out of the king's sovere^ty ; supremaej 
out of the spherical sovereignty given to congress. This sovc^* 
rei|^ power of the kings could net be taken away ; that of 
congress may remove all obstaeles to its action. Of particular 
cases, occasicms, reasons and necessity, the king by virtue of 
Ms prerogative arising out of his sovereignty, is declared to be 
the sole judge ; of convenience and necessity, congress in 
virtue of its supremacy, ari^ng out of spherical sovereignty, 
is declared to be the sole judge. The king may dispense wtth 
the penal laws of England; but the decision does not declare 
fimt congress may dispense with tiie constitution. It only 
invests congress with a spherical sovere^nty blotting a su- 
premacy for removing all . obstacles to its action, and establi^es 
the premises producing the conclusion, that congress may 
dispense with the rights reserved to the states. The English 
judges reasoned illogicdly, by inferring only from their pre* 
mises that the king could dispense with penal laws ; but the 
decision of the court, rejecting an error so apparent, does not 
limit the supreme power of congress, but leaves it co-extensive 
with the premises asserted. Thus, as t(ie king's sovereignty 
made the laws of England his laws, so the supremacy of con* 
gross makes the constitution of the United States, its consti* 
tution. 

Though this mode of construction be ex^oded in Engliratd* 
jei as it is revived h^^, I shall endeavour to bestow <m it the 
consideration merited by its consequences. 

" To provide for the common defeiice and promote the genfi* 
^ welfcre," powcars are bestowed upon the fe^orsl «M^eni' 



Digitized by 



byGoogle 



165 

meiit, with a right to make dl laws which shftH be me(f$iarg 
and prtyper for carryiiig the delegated powers into executioii. 
8ome sound fH'inciple, sufficietit to ascertain the true constrae- 
tidi of these expressions^ ought to be settled. The constitu*-' 
tion consists of correlative rights and duties, divided between!. 
^ state and federal govemmeBts ; and neither allotment was! 
intended to become the prey, directij or indirect! j, of the;^ 
•other. This^iviston was a limitation of the powers of both, and 
the laws to be toade by either could not violate it» because a le- 
gal power in- either of that character would have rendered the 
divisionitself utterlyinefficient* The federal government cannot 
dimtmsh the right of taiatton reserved to the states, nor the 
state governments, the right of taxation delegated to the federal 
government, because these rights clash ; since their ^slashing 
being foreseen as certain, was not intended to be prevented bj 
the division. The division of powers was not intended to be 
8ubm*dtiiate to a dashing of rights, but a dashing of rights was 
. intended to be subordinate to the division of powers. These 
positicms are entirely rev^^d, if either party received with its 
share of powers a supremacy aUe by inferences to>e made by 
itself, to remove all obstacles to its action ; because all the 
clashings of powers^ certain, f(H*eseen»and not provided against 
by the constitution, would become accessicms^ of power to the 
construing party and defeat the division itsdf. It would be 
exactly the ease, as if the senate or house of representatives, 
between whom powers are divided and clashings arise, as in all 
such divisions, should rither of them usurp a sijpremacy over the 
4)ther, to remove the obstacles to its action^ produced by these 
clashings. The ideas of limited powers and unlimited inferen- 
ces Hbeing irrecondlable, any construction of particular words 
or phrases, which would unlimit the limitations exprep^ed, is 
uneonstitutiomd, if the constitution intended to make any sub- 
stantial division of power. The field of expediency and con- 
venience bekmged exclusively to the framers of the constitu- 
tion, and was shut by the constitution, a^inst the trustees 
Sttbsequ^itly app^ted to execute it, because otherwise it 
would have been, no constitution at all* 

The principle "that clashings of ri^ts are subordinate to 
wflivisions of power" is ai^licable to ti^e structure of the state 
in4 federal gsiFei»m€|atSt and restraias their le^latiye. execu- ^ 



Y 



Digitized by 



Google 



164 

/ ttre and judiciil departments wHUn their proper orbits. If" 
^ oittier conld make the rights of a co-ordinate department sub* 
ordinate to itself; bj inference or expediency, those cmistita- 
tional divisions of power would be destroyed. I therrfors 
cffiitend, that no constroction of particular words or phrases 
can change or abolish the division of power between the state 
and federal goremments, without changing or aboBshing an 
essential principle of the constitution itsel£ * 

It seems to me, that constitationai law, enacted by the peo- 
ple, is as binding upon political departments, as civil law is 
upon individuals ; and that none of these departorants have 
any better right to dischuge themselves from its observance 
by the f^ea of amvenience, than an individual would have to 
disobey a civil law under the same |^ea. 

The states united «*to provide for the eommmi defence and 
tiie general welfere.'' The words ^ common and general" can 
only refer to the parties uniting, and these were the states. 
Therefore, if these words bestowed any power, instead oi only 
reciting the ends intended to be accomplished by the union and 
itstetm8,it could only extend to interests *• common and geaiend'' 
to all the parties, in their state associated individuality. But 
they have been construed as conveying some local and internal 
powers over persons and * things, and if they convey any, it 
must be admitted that they bestow all powers of this character. 
To determine the propriety of this construction, we can only 
^advert to the nature and compass of the powers delated to 
the federal government, and reserved to the states. No power 
[ is given to the general government to pass a law for the r^ula- 
tion of private property, or the security of personal rights; 
therefore, << common defence and general welfare" did not 
include these important objects of welfare and defence; and 
they are provided for in the reservation to the states, because 
they are not included by these terms. These terms of course 
have in view the defence and welfare of the states, as states^ 
and not the internal government of the individual states. 
The provisions of the constitution, in relation to foreign nations 
and domestic insurrections, are analogous to this construction. 
Had these words conveyed power, there would have been no 
occasion for the provision in the case of insurrection ; and th*ia 
special power of internal interposition, excludes a general- 



Digitized by 



Google 



165 

fitfw^r of the same tenour. A simihur exclusum is cmittined 
in tiie special power bestowed upon congress to legislate for 
the ten miles square ^ in all cases whatsoever.'' As this 
anomalous district would lose- state care and protection, it is 
thus specially provided for» because the words under amndera- 
tm gave no power to the federal government. Had they done 
ao» no specificatbn of federal powers would have been neces- 
iary ; and if they do so, the subsequent specifications mean 
nothing. Under the first supposition, the convention needed 
only to have organized the government after the first clause of 
the constitution, to take care of the eommon defence and gene- 
ral welfare, which would have comprised unlimited power. 
And if the seccmd supposition be true, then a catalogue of 
powers was superfluous, because tiiese words covered both those 
specified, and all otiiers- not specified, which ini^t advance 
the general welfare. It follows, either that these words 
convey no power, or that the subsequent definitions of the 
powers d^egated restrict their meaning. In fact, they are 
obviously introductory, and not decretal. The ends in view 
are recited, and then follow the means for effecting those ends. 
If Aese means should prove to be insufficient, the constitutiottt 
far from confiding to its officers a power to »ipply deficiencies, 
provides for the occurrence. In all questions, therefore, con* 
coming banks, roa4s, canals, taxes, agriculture, nmnufiictures 
and internal or local {HXMsperity, the oonstructimi of U^e consH- 
tuHan ought to be confined to its decretal sections. In tiiese 
we find two concunrent proviskms. Both congress and the 
state governments may tax the same property and suppress the 
same insurrections. And the specification of these two in- 
stances of a concurrent power excludes the idea of a concur- 
rency of power, in the otiier enumen^ed cases. 

But, if the sweeping powers said to be conveyed by the ntro- 
ductory clause of the constitution cannot be proved, their 
absence is said to be neariy supplied, by the power given to 
congress to make all laws, ** which shall be necessary taid proper 
•« for carrying into execution the forgoing potrers." I shall 
endeavour to prove that these words, far from enlaiging, restrict 
the legislative power of congress ; and that, coupled with other 
parts of the constitution, they also limit the jurisdiction of the 
federal courts. 1. They expressly limit tiie legislative power 



Digitized by 



Google 



166 

of congress to laws necessary and proper for executing the 
ddegaied powers, and bestow no anthoritj to assume powers 
fu4 delegated. £• The jurisdiction of the federal courts under 
kws, is limited to « the laws of the United States^" meaning 
such laws as these states by their representatires in congress 
hare a right to enact*. Thej have only a right to enact laws 
^ for carrying into execution the delegated powers.^ 3. Con- 
gress have n6 power to enact laws ^ necessary and proper % 
** carrying into execution'' the powers reserred to the states, 
as their legisiatire powers are limited to i}^e foregoing or dele- 
gated powers; and in cases concerning which congress hare 
no power of legislation* the federal courts have no jurisdietron. 
4. The states possess an exdusive legislative power with res- 
pect to the powers reserved to them, with the appurtenant 
ri|^t of passing all laws, which shall be necessary and proper 
lor carrying into execu^n such reserved powers. 5. The 
jurisdiction of the state courts is limited to the execution of 
the laws vfbich the state governments have a right to pass, la 
the junsdiction of the federal courts is limited to ^e laws^ 
which congress have a right to pass; and neither of these 
courts can derive any powers from laws, which the respective 
legislatures under which they act have no right to pass. 

The remarks, in defence of these propositions, must be more 
concise than th^ir importance merits. The. division of delegat- 
ed and reserved powers between the federal and state leg^sl^ 
tures would have been quite nugatory, without a division of 
the right of legislation respecting them ; and except for botii 
divisions, the principles of representation adopted by the federal 
government would never have been approved of. These are 
calculated for external objects, or objects common to all the 
states, as to which a consentaneous interest and feeling would 
prevail among the representatives ; and in the power of taxation 
necessarily bestowed on congress, precautions are taken ta 
prevent the ill consequences which might be produced by the 
absence of those ingredients^ necessary to. secure legislative 
impartiality. These precautions shew, that the framers of the 
constitution were conscious, that the principles of represenia- 
tkm in congress were so defective as to require some safi^ard 
beyond the usual confidence in representation, against the 
i^se, even of a power of taxation for tiie benefit of the unioBi 



Digitized by 



Google 



167 

Tbe censtUatkm ci^taini no provision wh&tsoe?e( for the 
exercise of the rights reserved to the states, nor anj stipalatioa 
re&pectiiig it. Can it be imagined, that, having expresd j placed 
them without the compass of the compact between the states 
it mejuit impliedly to bring them back under the power of 
congress, without suly oining any provision for its defective form 
9i repr^seiitatioB, as in the case of taxation ? , Numerous and 
iH^portant powers and rights are reserved to the states, to secure 
which the members of c<mgress are bound by no sanction* nor 
any sympathy. The dave question* and the unlimited right 
of taxation reserved to the states, are among tJie number. 
Mutual prejudices, separate interests, different circumstances, 
and want of local information, all operate against the idea that 
the cfmstitudon intended to invest congre^ impliedly with a 
power of local and internal legislation. But arguments abound 
to prove* that the rqiresentation in congress is devoid of every 
principle of representation* in respect to these objects* or the 
powers reserved to the states. Load laws» passed by the repre* 
sentation in congress, could only openite upon the represen* 
tatives of a single state. The sufferers under such laws 
could not by election influence the legislature. The qualiica.-* 
tions, required by state constituticms in legislative representa- 
tives* would be wholly abolished. The necessity of residence 
would be superseded. In short, the representatives from Geor* 
giftvin congress might legislate as to the locid and internal con- 
- cerns of Massachusett's bay. Every relation between consti- 
tuents and representatives would be violated by a power of 
local or internal legislation in congress. Both in theory and 
practice* it would approach near to that detestable virtual repre* 
Sentation, under which the British pariiam^ claimed a power 
of local and internal legislation over the colonies. Implied* 
inferred, and virtual representation* are substantially equiva- 
leait No express power was given to congress to legislate in 
xeferenee to local or internal objects, c^ to o)]jects reserved to 
the states; because that body was not.oiganized liy any repre- 
sentative principle in reference to these ol^ects. All the rea^ 
sons which excluded an express, exclude an implied power of 
l^oal and internal legislation. Implication cannot transform 
oengcess into a representation of local state rights* when they 
«De ilot so reoognksed by the conrtitution* «idare devoid of every' 



Digitized by 



Google 



168 

quality and diaraeter of such a representation. In Iq^slation 
tiiey are therefore limited to the delegated powers, in the ^cecuo 
tion of which they have im> right to usurp any power of local or 
internal legislation, as in the cases of roads and banks, becaase 
there is not in that body any species of local representaticm. 

The acquisition of powers either not delegated, or inoonsis- 
tent with the powers reserved to the states, or incongruous with 
the nature of the representation in congress, must all be T^f 
different from the execution of the powers bestowed. Congress 
may ** make all laws which may be necessary and proper for 
carrying into execution the foregoing powers." Suppose the 
clause had thus proceeded. « And may also invest thems^Tes 
** with other powers by implication, inconsistent with the prind- 
^ pies of represmitation." Would this additi<m have altered 
its meaning? If so, what does it mean as it stands? If I have 
proved that the powers of congress cannot, under colour ef 
legislating for the execution of the powers delated, be extend- 
ed to powers not delegated and reserved, it follows that the 
jurisdiction of the federal courts cannot be extended by a ^- 
cies of l^islation which is unconstitutional and vend. The 
speoial objects of jurisdiction given to the federal judicial power, 
have no connexion with their jurisdiction founded upon the 
laws of congress. An act or law of congress, which is unom- 
^tutional, is agreed to be no law at all. Suj^iose congress 
should pass a law to liberate the slaves of a particular atate, or 
to give the land of A to B ? Would the federal courts derive 
jurisdictiwi from it, or would the state courts retain their ex* 
elusive jurisdiction between the people or citizens of their own 
state ? But is there not an appellate jurisdiction Io<^ed in the 
federal supreme court, able to reach cases in which the federal 
judicial powers have no cniginal jurisdiction ? The reasoning 
upon this point seems to be superseded by a complete perspi- 
cuity in the constitution. We have seen, that the l^islative 
power of congress is limited to the delegated powers, and that 
the federal judicial power under the laws of congress only ex- 
tend to such as come within the limitation. Such is its original 
jurisdiction. The constitution declares, <«that the appellate 
jurisdiction of the supreme court," shall extend to the cases 
before mmtiomi* The jurisdiction arising under a law of 
congress is. that* mth which the argument is concerned. To 



Digitized by 



Google 



i6d 

bestow the original jurisdiction, the law must conform to the 
delegated powers. Therefore, the appeUate jurisdiction cannot 
take cognizance of a case, in which the original jurisdiction has 
none. The federal courts deriye no jurisdiction from state 
laws. Their jurisdiction, arising from law, is limited to laws 
passed by congress in conformity with the delegated powers. 
On the contrary, the jurisdiction of the state courts is limited 
|p state laws in conformity with the reserved powers. Neither 
of these courts has an appellate jurisdiction from the other. 
As the federal and state legislatures have a right to letgislate 
within their respective mrbits, independently of each other, the 
respective judicial powers have a rig^t to execute these inde- 
pendent laws, independently also of each other. It is said, 
that some supreme power is necessary to prevent collisions. A 
saying of the Marquis of Halifax (a man renowned for under- 
standing) recorded by Wrangham, fits our case. " The word 
" necessary, is miser^ly applied ; it disordereth families and 
" overturns governments by being abused." Necessities are, 
strictly, things unavoidable. In practice, they may be divided 
linto absolute or imaginary. In relation to the principles of 
government, tiiey are all erf* the latter class, as governments are 
capable of endless modifications. In this case they are only 
expedients. The plain question, divested of verbal evolutions, 
is, whether congress are invested with the supreme power of 
altering or mending the constitution, should they imi^ne it to 
be expedient? The same management is used to excite the 
doubts, which have been laid hold of to produce a radical change 
in our constitution. As necessity is used instead of eafpediency^ 
collision is used instead of check, whereas in political effect 
they are essentially the same. A supreme power able to abolish 
collisions, is also able to abolish checks^ and there can be no 
checks without collisions. The checks resulting from the coH)r^ 
dinacy of the lords and commons of England, could not produce 
any ^>od, if sl political department existed able to controul those 
collisions, and much less, if one of these bodies possessed a su- 
premacy over the other* In that country, checks attended with 
collisions, are preferred to subordination, under a very imper- 
fect supremacy, hardly acknowledged or capable of actings 
called publick opinion. Here, also, we have preferred checks 
and collisions, to a dictatorship of one departme&t, under the 
W 



Digitized by 



Google 



iro 

iii|Nremaey of tiie people* fdlj acknowledged, and acting with* 
out difficulty. If the inconvenience of collisions between co« 
ordinate political departments begets a necessity for the supre** 
macj of one« and this necessity will jastjfy its assumption, the 
scheme of checks and balances is entirely chimerical, and a 
political fabrick built upon that theory must fall. Necessity, 
inference and expediency never fail to beget an endless succes- 
mve progeny. Roads are'necessary in war ; therefore congress 
ttay lq;islate locally concerning roads. Victuals, manufactures* 
and a certain state of national manners, are more necessary in 
war ; ^erefore congress may legislate locally, concerning agri-^ 
culture, manufactures and manners. The favour of the Deity ia 
more necessary than either; therefore congress may provide 
salaries for priests of all denominations, in order to obtain it, 
without infringing the constitutional prohibition against an estn* 
Uishment; or they may incorporate sects, and exempt thena 
from taxation. Roads are more necessary for collecting taxes 
than even banks. Taverns are very necessary or convenient 
for the officers of the army, congress themselves, the convey- 
ance of the mail, and the accomodation of judges. But horses 
are undoubtedly more necessary for the conveyance of the mail 
and for war, than roads, which may be as convenient to assail- 
ants as defenders ; and therefore the principle of an implied 
power of le^slation, will certidnly invest congress with a legis- 
lative power over horses. In short, this mode of construction 
<;ompletely establishes the position, that congress may pass any 
internal law whatsoever in relation to things, because there is 
nothing with which, war, commerce and taxation may not be 
closely or remote\y connected ; and the constitution does not 
contain any prohibited degrees of consanguinity. The personal 
departments established by the state constitutions seem indeed 
to be without the scope of this mode of construction, which 
can only strip them of their whole wardrobe of rights, and 
reduce them to a sort of naked political skeletons. 

I see no end to the power of necessity, armed with supremacy. 
}t seems already to have carried us nearly a thousand years 
backwards in the science of political justice. In 846, Ethel- 
wolf established tytiies, and exempted the property of the 
clergy from taxation. Bankers tire said to be useful and con- 
tement to the government. The established clergy are still 



Digitized by 



Google 



171 

thought go by the English government Governments and na- 
tions ver J often differ in opinion as to conveniences. 

The argument of collision would reach a multitude of cases* 
As an instance. It has been judicially and practically esta- 
blished^ that both congress and the state governments have a 
right to tax carriages. Suppose the states should impose a tax 
on them amounting to a prohibition. Would this state law 
Ibe void, because it might defeat the law of congress? Collisions 
between concurrent and co-ordinate powers, are natural and 
certain, and must have been foreseen by the framers of the con- 
stitution. Moderation and the people, are the only arbiters they 
thought safe or necessary. But a conflict between a positive 
and an implied power, is the question we are considering. Can 
the latter abrogate the former under any pretext ivhatsoever? 

Let us consider the subject in this new light with some atten- 
tion. The natural rights qf nations, in respect to each other» 
are more evident, better understood, and more universally 
recognized, than the rights of individual men ; because a nation 
can more conveniently exist independently of other nations, 
than one man can of other men. Accordingly they are acknow- 
ledged by all political writers to ccmfer on nations the character 
(a£ individuality, and the utmost degree of independence, di 
which human nature is susceptible. The United States, whilst 
provinces, were imperfect nations. Under charters, they ob- 
tained and exercised a separate and distinct national cha- 
racter, in relation to intemal affairs, yielding to Great Britain 
the management of their external national rights. By the revo- 
lution, each state became a perfect individual nation, possessed 
of all the natural rights of nations. As perfect nations, they 
have entered into two confederations, both influenced by the 
principles to which as colonies they were willing to have con- 
formed in a union with Britain. By these confederations, they 
relinquished several national rights, and retained all not relin- 
quished« As to their natural rights retained, they remain per- 
fect nations; or in other words, their national individuality 
and independence of each other, respecting these r%hts, are 
unchanged. A conveyance of one portion of an estate, by 
metes and bounds, does not impair the title to the portion not 
conveyed, especially if attended with a positive reservation. 
Had they entered into a similar unipn with Bdtain, th^ir inter- 



Digitized by 



Google 



17t 

nal and local rights must have been specified, as not having 
been settled; and they would have been justified in asserting 
and maintaining the specifications ag-^nst any implications, for 
"which an assumed British supremacy, or the appellate juris- 
diction of the king in council might have contended. Bui, n<> 
specification of the state rights reserved was necessaiy in 
establishing our union, because these rights were not conce- 
ded, as being national and antecedent to tiie compact Being 
natural and national rights, and also never delegated, but re- 
served, they are held by the states in their original character, 
as perfect national rights. This amounts to a plain specification 
of the powers of the states, and a positive prohibition bearing 
upon those of congress. The conflict, therefore, is not between 
implication and implication, but between specification and im- 
plication. Ought tiie positive stipulations of contracts to be 
supplanted by doubtful conjectures ? " Congress shall have 
power to make all laws which shall be necessary and proper 
for carrying into execution the delegated powers," says the con- 
stitution ; and also, subjoins the implication, ^ power to make 
all laws necessary and proper to contract the powers reserved 
to the states." The chief forces on the two sides of the ques- 
tion are thus opposed. The states are armed with their original 
national rights; congress with conventional rights. The states 
have a natural right to make all necessary and proper laws 
within their national powers reserved ; congress aright of legis- 
lation limited to delegated powers. Implied powers may be as 
copiously extracted from the rights of the states, as from those 
of congress ; but if their absolute and conventional powers are 
independent of each other, their powers by implication must 
also be liable to the same limitation. If congress cannot directly 
contract the state power of taxation, being a national right, 
ihey cannot have an implied power to do it indirectly. But if 
congress can by implication assume a power of passing any 
local or internal law beyond the specifications of the constitution^ 
it must be admitted that they have a right to undertake the 
care ofstate prosperity in relation to agriculture, manufactures, 
private property, corporations, roads and canals ; as it is impos- 
sible to find a justification for one case, which will not extend to 
the others. Suppose the clashing laid hold of, for introducing 
a catalogue of implied powers» under the supremacy of the 



Digitized by 



Google 



^ 



ITS 



very power intended to be checked, was not between ^cifi* 
cation and implication^ but between specification and specifi- 
cation. This supposition places the subject upon much stronger 
ground in favour of the doctrine of implied powers, in congress 
onlj (forgetting the equal right of the states to them,) than hat 
been yet taken. Congress have no specified power to create a 
corporation, but thej have one to impose a tax on stills and 
whiskey. It will not be denied that tiie states have a concur- 
rent power to tax the same objects. Suppose they should im- 
pose on them a tax amounting to a prohibition. It would defeat 
a law passed by congress for taxing them. This would be a 
conflict between specification and specification, or betw^n two 
powers, undoubtedly residing in the respective governments. 
Could the federal court defeat the state law, upon the ground 
«< that the states have no right by taxation or otherwise, to 
** retard, impede, burden, or in any manner controul the opera- 
«< tions of the constitutional laws enacted by congress," as the 
.court has declared ? In this case the law of congress would be 
constitutional, and the argument deducible from it surrenders 
4he objection arising from the unconstitutionality of the bank 
law. If the question be answered in the negative, it follows^ 
that if no power resides in congress or the federal court to abro- 
gate a constitutional state law, thus impeding and controuling 
a constitutional law of congress, ihe argument is insufficient in 
every other similar case. And if I am not mistaken in the 
reason of its insufficiency, neither the constitutioruility of the 
law passed by congress, nor its impediment nor controul by the 
«tate law, ought to have any weight upon the sul^ect. l^his 
reasoning establishes an essential conclusion, towards which all 
my arguments have been directed. It is this. Powers are 
delegated or reserved both to the state and federal governments 
to make laws. Under the concurrent power of taxation, they 
may each pass a law, both of which may be constitutional, and 
yet these laws may clash with, or impede ^ach other. The 
same thing may happen in many other cases. For this clashii^ 
the constitution makes no provisimi. The right of passing con- 
stitutional laws w))ich clash with the constitutional laws of con- 
gress, is not prohibited to the states ; nor is the right of passing 
constitutional laws, which may clash with the constitutional 
laws of th^e states, prohibited to congress; because the evil of 



Digitized by 



Google 



174 

clashiog, bftianced, er checked powers, appeared to its framera, 
to be inconsiderable, compared with that of an absolute sapre« 
mac J. I have called the first an eril, in a spirit of concession, 
bat I think it the onlj secnritjfor the whole catalogue of social 
blessings ; and not to be counterpoised bj a concentrated supre* 
nacj, which would be obviously a step towards consolidation 
and despotism. As the constitution has not prorided for the 
clashing of constitutional laws, it may safely be demanded, by 
what authority either the state or federal legislative or judicial 
power, can abrogate one constitutional law because it clashes 
with another? After ttke peojde have invested two legislatures 
with the power of passing laws within specified orbits, who but 
themselves can circumscribe those orbits ? If the constitutional 
rights and powers, established by the people between legislative, 
executive and Judicial departments, and between state and fede- 
ral departments, do in the language of the court retard, impede, 
hurden or controul each other, where does the authority lie for 
removing the inconvenience, admittbg it to be one ; in the people 
or in an implied supremacy of one of these departments, in* 
tended by the people to be controuled ? If in the latter, the con- 
stitution is exposed to be altered by laws or adjudications with* 
out restraint If in the former, then it can never be a question 
before any judicial department, whether a law is void because 
it retards, impedes, burdens or controuls another law; and the 
only chaste question is, whether or not the obstructing law is 
itself constitutional. Supposing then the bank law to be con^ 
stitutional, and also that the national right of the states to 
impose internal taxes is not surrendered, and of course constitu- 
tional also, neither congress nor their courts can modify this 
state power without invading the sovereignty of the people. 

In some of the West India islands, as I have heard, the 
power of an executor extends to all the testator's estate, real 
and personal ; and to such an extent has legal chicanery been 
carried, that he can easily cheat the devisees out of the whole. 
A rich father on his death bed informed an only son, tiiat he had 
^ven a moderate legacy to one of his friends and appointed him 
his executor, but that he had devised to him (the son) the whole 
residue of his estate. The son, thanking his father for his good 
intentions, but recollecting the sophistry so successfolly prac- 
tised on behalf of executors, besought him to alter the will, to 



Digitized by 



Google 



ITS 

pvt him the fimall specifiek legacj with th« a^poiatmeat of 
executor, and to make his friend residuary legatee. The federal 
govemment is the specifick» and the states the residuary legatee* 
If the former can transfer to itself such pcnrtions of the residu- 
ary estate as it pleases, ^ther by its own will, or by judges 
appointed, paid and remoyable by itself, the fate of tiie lal^ 
must be that of a West India residuary l^atee. I know of 
nothing, equivalent to this West India precedent, more in poiat 
for construing our constitution^ so as to transfer the residaary 
estate to the special l^tee. And yet even this precedent 
does not go far enough. The legal power of the executor ex* 
tended to the whole estate, whereas the constttutional power of 
congress is prohibited from touching the powers resenred. Much 
less ingenuity was therefore necessary to hold a legal posset* 
sion. contrary to justice, than to acquire possession contrary ta 
law. The executorial power of tiiis country is more like ^btt 
power of congress. It does not extend to real estate. Whea 
an executor or administrator here shall deprive the heirs or de- 
visees of their lands, we ghall have a better precedent for esta- 
blishing the right of congress or the federal courts, to depiva 
the states, or rather the people, of their natural, naticmal and 
reserved rights. These are truly their real estate, far surpas- 
sing in value the administration of external concerns. 

The court, probably witiiout intending it, seem to me ta 
have advanced a position which folly justifies the ground I 
have taken. They say, ** let the end be legitimate, let it be with- 
** in the scope ^f the constUwHen, and all means which are appro- 
<*priate, which are plauily adapted to that end, which are not 
«* prohHnted, but consist with the letter and spirii of the oonstt- 
<<tution, are con^tutional." It is plainly intimated in tMa 
extract, that whatever is constitutional, is valid ; and e( course 
eonceded, that in a conflict between two constitutional acts, 
neith^ can have any sovereignty over the oiiier. The court 
indeed m advancing this doctrine, seems only to have turned 
its eye towards tiie constitutionality of the acts of coi^rest, 
overlooking entirely the constitutionality rf tite acts of ihid 
atate governments. But if constitutionaHty bestows validity, 
and if the state governments, and other political departments 
can perform consti^tkmal acts, then the validity of thes^ acts 
rests up<m.theisame foandation, with tiie validity of the a^ of 



Digitized by 



Google 



176 

eOBgress. Bj'^eiids'' the court seems to understand expressed 
powers, and bj ** means" the execution of those expressed 
powers. What then are the powers expressed ? Undoubtedl j, 
those delegated and those resenred. Unless the reservation be 
an expression of powers, it can mean nothing. What are these 
powers P Thejr can be none others, but the national rights not 
surrendered. Taxation is one of these : or rather the support 
of the state governments by revenue maj be cidled the end, and 
taxation the means. This end is legitimate^ toiihin the scope 
of theconstitutian; the means are appropriate and platnly 
adapted to the end, not prohibited and consist with the spirit 
and letter of the constitution* 

The constitution has involved ends and means, in such a 
manner, as to prove that it never intended that the latter should 
beget anj ends inconustent with its great principle, express 
letter, and obvious spirit ; all uniting to estabbsh a line be- 
tween external and internal powers. The power of declar- 
ing war is an end for which the federal government was 
instituted, and nothing could be more necessary for carry- 
ing this end into execution, than to raise armies, support them» 
and to make rules for their government. Yet these tneans are 
not left to be implied as necessary for the execution of the end. 
The reason I take to be this. Wherever the means, such aa 
taxation for the support of armies, and a code of military laws* 
would trench upon or circumscribe the national rights inherent 
in the states, they are expressed and constituted into a dele- 
gated power. If such was the reascm for specifying means of 
this character, so necessary in war, it follows that no means 
of the same character, namely, such as subtract from the na- 
tional state rights, were intended to be inferred from necessitg* 

But the court, apparently wanting confidence in the words 
necessary and proper, as being under an expressed restriction^ 
and subjected to a comparison with all the other parts of this 
instrument, in which they are used ; in order to determine their 
meaning, have taken a ground so comprehensive, and so ade- 
quate to the defence of any acquisition of unconstitutional 
powers by congress, that if it be solid, every thing hitherto said/ 
is immaterial. They add to the last extract, as conclusively 
responsive to its doctrine, "that banking is a convenient, a use^, 
^ful, and essential inatrument in the prosecution of fiscal ope- 



Digitized by 



Google 



177 

^rtti<m8» is not now & sutject of controyersy." Of coarse a 
syllogtsm bounces unexepectedly upon us, out of the two ex- 
tracts. Fiscal operations are within the powers of congress* 
and all means appropriate to that end are constitutional ; bank- 
ing is a means convenient, useful and essential to iscal ope- 
rations ; the conclusion is inevitable. But this interpolation 
Df the words, '* convenient, useful and essential," into the 
constitution, is in my view not even a plausiUe argument. 
It is merely a tautology of the phrase ^ necessary and proper," 
but excluding the restriction attached to the latter. If the tau- 
tology may be fairly used, it can only be as an illustration, unce 
the word "proper" is equivalent to ''convenient and useful" 
so far as they are applicable, and " necessary" to <* essential." 
" Proper" indeed has a reference to the impropriety of swerving 
from the constitution, and the substitution of w<Nrds otherwise 
equivalent may be so far ingenious. The substitution, however, 
is not a correct illustration of the constitution without the 
restriction. To reason from it, the court ought to have stated 
it thus. Congress may pass all laws, which shall be '< conve- 
nient, useful and essential" for cairying into execution the /ore* 
goirtg pawers. Thus stated, all the arguments, used in r^er- 
euce to ** necessary and proper," plainly apply to the substitu- 
ted words. And if no power, expressed or implied, be given to 
congress by the words used, to abrogate constitutional state 
lawsr or to travel out of its delegated orbit into the reserved 
orbit, I think I may assert, that it cannot derive this power 
from the substituted words. 

But whatever use can be made of these substituted words, it 
surely cannot appertain exclusively to the delegated powers^ 
and must extend also to those reserved. These would be quite 
nugatory, under a prohibition to resort to that which was con- 
venient, useful and essential for their execution or preserva- 
tion. And the constitution having divided and balanced the 
powers between the federal and state governments, has united 
itself with common sense in dividing and balancing me&ns^ 
words, phrases and implications, by not investing either de- 
partment with an exclusive use of these implements necessary 
to its existence ; foreseeing that powers in either case divested 
of means, would be inefficient ; but it did not intend that either 
X 



Digitized by 



Google 



irs 

should destroy the other with its means, thou^ prohibited from 
doing it with its powers. 

It is easy to see, that the court have erected a climax by the 
words ''conyenient, useful and essential/' to unite an extensioft 
of power with an apparent adherence to the words of the con- 
stitution. We are gently led along from convenient to e^en* 
tial, as if all the three words were legitimate, because of the 
resemblance in the last to the word ** necessary.'' Considering 
all three as restricted by the words •* foregoing powers," this is 
not very material ; but yet, as the incorporating power of con- 
gress IS deduced from these substituted words, the expediency 
of banking thus asserted by the court cannot be wholly passed 
over. I shall, therefore, Subjoin a short catalogue of its incon- 
veniences. 

The court, with candour and justice, has limited the power 
of congress to create banks, to the circumstance of their being 
•* convenient, useful and essential to fiscal operations," and for- 
borne to urge their general u^lity as a reason for the exercise of 
that power, because it was conscious that the country was not 
ripe for tiiat doctrine ; or that the constitution did not authorise 
the extension of federal power, upon the ground of internal social 
expediency ; and therefore, it was necessary to hook every im- 
plied, to some delegated power. Banking is of course suspended 
to fiscal operations. As to these, the eulogy is consequently 
wholly pecuniary; and can have no other meaning, than that 
banking will save publick money, by the facility with which it 
can be transmitted. And I admit that pecuniary frugality is 
convenient, useful and even essential to republican governments. 
This solitary argument for investing congress with the right to 
incorporate banks, if it can overthrow all those I have advanced, 
depends yet upon the fact, to which I shall therefore call Hke 
reader's attention. 

The depreciation of money caused by bankings has been 
repeatedly and successfully ui^ed both under the state and 
federal governments, as a reason, for an increase of wages and 
expenditure ; and has considerably aggravated taxation, botii 
state and federal. Whatever increase of wages or expenditure 
has been produced by banking, has been nearly a total loss to 
the nation, unless it can be proved, that an increase of taxa- 



Digitized by 



Google 



17^, 

iifmv$ & puUick b^i^fit ; a doctrine, which all goTeramenti 
have inculcated, and no nation has yet believed. The reader 
must compute the extent of this increased taxation, both state 
and federal, for himself. I can only furnish him with two facts. 
lCb» federal expenditure in the time of Washington amounted 
to about three millionsr annually, and in that of JeSerson to 
about six. < At the first epoch, the United States were paying 
the interest of their debt ; at the second, both the interest 
and a portion of the principal. Now, the expenditure of the 
federal government exceeds twetity-five millions. The same 
candour which will admit, that only a portion of this rapid 
inprease of taxation is attributable to banking, must also allow 
that much of h is so. I compute the additional taxation, state 
and federal, thus derived, at not less than five millions annu* 
ally ; paid for the facility of transmitting the publick money 
fr^mi one place to another. Neither our army, nor our navy costs 
so much. Whatever is the amount, it undoubtedly is directly 
the reverse of fiscal convenience or utility ; that is, in regard to 
th^ nation ; for I know that it is not rare for governments 
to consider an increase of taxation as ''a convenient, useful 
^ and essential instrummi in the prosecution of fiscal opera- 
<< tions," and that banking has therefore been very much of a 
&vourite with those of the old world. I acquit, however, aU 
our governments of this design, because I believe they never 
thought of it, however extensively their laws may have brouglit 
it about It only happened from the circumstance, that similar 
causes, either in the west or east, will generally produce simi- 
lar eflfects. In the east, exclusive privileges have invariably 
turned out to be publick grievances; and aggravated taxation^ 
legal extravagance and pauperism^ have r^ularly brought up 
tiie rear of blinking. But our l^islatures have fondly hoped* 
that exclusive privile^, granted by good republicans, would 
be puUick blessings. 

It was once asserted, that banking would reimburse the loss 
it caused to the nation in a^ravating wages, expense and taxa^ 
tion,by enhancing the price of our commodities ; and the argu- 
ment kept its grouEid, so long as these brought a high price in 
Europe ; but woful experience had detected the delusion. It 
is at length demonstrated, that the price of our exports is fixed 
in foreign markets, and that banking does not, by enhancing 



Digitized by 



Google 



it, rambirfe the natien for the iacreue of tazatieQ it < 
The ftrguiaeiit of the coort can derire no beneit firmn uxf 
mSXxij in banking* except in Jiaeal op^nrtionty at it does not 
pretend a right to extend the powers of congress firon any 
general considerations of national good; bvt only as meara 
appurtenant to an actual delegated power, which in this cue 
it supposes to be the power of taxation, thongh called ** fiscal 
operations." Bnt, whilst the court, in sustaining this argwnent 
is limited to the conYenience of banking for the execution irf'a 
delq;ated power, in refoting it, all the national inconreniences 
it causes are foir counterpoises against its solitary confentence 
of transmitting pnUick money. This is, apparently, a pecu- 
niary conTenience ; bat if we pay for it more than it saves, by 
the increase of taxation arising from the depreciation of bank 
currency, it is clearly a pecuniary inconrenience ; and it is not 
yet contended, that the powers of congress may be extended 
by implication to rights inconvenient and oppressive to the na- 
tion. No one, who computes impartially, will hesitate to con- 
clude, that the increase of taxation, caused by the depreeiation 
of bank currency, infinitely exceeds the saving of transmitting 
taxes by bank instrumentality. Waving the facilities arising 
from bills or orders, which would be considerable* I will ven- 
ture to assert, that if it was removed under a militarj escort, 
tte expense would be comparatively trifling. 

To the increase of taxation by banking, another great item of 
pecuniary loss is to be added. The local depreciation of its 
currency causes us to pay &n additional price for our imports. 
Sellers will reimburse themselves for this deinreciation, to our 
excessive injury when the balance of trade happens to be 
against us, by asking a price sufficient to enable them to make 
remittances in specie. And exclusively of the diminution of 
the precious metils thus caused, the difference between their 
value and the value of bank paper is a large item of national 
pecuniary loss, independentiy of the pecuniary individual lost 
arising from the same cause. 

FUcal operations are the means, by which civilized natimis 
are oppressed and enslaved. If a government may do whatever 
it pleases to think "convenient, useful or essential in the pro- 
<«secution of fiscal operations," however inconvenient, usdess 
and injurious to a nation, and however detriukental to the 



Digitized by 



Google 






r n 



Ul 



rnnnds^ inteteftty and hairiness of individuals, il is dtficoH t* 
conceive any limitations by which it can be restraitked. The 
iiramers of the constitution, aware of the necessity for restrain- 
iDg this dangerous instrument, confided to the federal govem- 
ment a fiscal power, defined and limited. In the division of 
powers between the federal and state governments, the care 
of the morals; interest and happiness of individuals is confided 
to the latter ; nor is any power over perscms given to the 
former, except for the carrying into execution the delega* 
ted powers, which were not intended to absorb a right to 
take out of the hands of the states their national and original 
right to provide for the morals, interest and happiness of the 
individuals composing each state. Suppose experience should 
disclose mischiefs and inconveniences to the people from the 
drculalion of notes payal^e to the bearer. Is the federal or 
state governments to apply the remedy? The limited power of 
the federal government over persons does not reach the object 
The state governments have endeavoured to prevent it, by pro- 
Ubiting individuals or unincorporated banks from issuing such 
notes. They might have sufibred this, but congress could not. 
It is merely an internal local regulation, like the transfer of 
bonds, bills or notes, within the power of the state govern- 
ments, and without the power of congress. The right of prohi- 
bition is consecutive to the right of permission ; and congress 
have no power to prohibit, because they have none to permit 
Whilst the care of the morals, interest and happiness of the 
people internally, is confided to the states, it can hardly be 
imagined that congress was invested with a power of legisla- 
ting, so as to afflict all three in a mode, which they had no 
power to prevent They could not, constitutionally, even con- 
sider the inconveniences of banking under any power given to 
tiiem by the federal constitution, as to the morals, interest and 
happiness of fhe people, because the care of these is reserved 
to the states ; and oug^t to have confined themselves to the 
meagre point of its afibrding a facility in transmitting money, 
as all its other effects belonged to the state orbit In this view, 
the decision of the court allows that congress may cause great 
and general internal inconveniences, <^ a character beyond its 
power to prohibit or even to consider ; and that the states, who 
csm only consider these inconveniences, and cannot apply a 



Digitized by 



Google 



ranedjr under their internal power of forbidding the eircnbitioit 
«f notes payable to order, often exercised and ne^er rdin* 
qnished. 

Congress were never expected to consider those local frauds 
by which life is embittered and society cormpted ; even. the 
manners of the individuals who conduct its banks, are without 
its province and beyond its correction ; and although the idea 
of correcting the frauds of institution^ shrouded in secrecy, is 
only a theory, yet this unfortunate fact, is an unanswerable 
argument for a power of suppression in a government. Being 
of an internal nature, congress cannot exercise this power f yet 
evils ought to be supj^ressed. Is there a single case of a stock* 
holder, defrauded by the management of these secret insti-^ 
tutions, having been able to obtain justice? Whilst widows 
and orphans are pining in silence, under the distress of the spo* 
liations they have suffered, the newspapers roar with the 
dolours of the patriots who have employed their property in 
unsuccessful speculations. Legislatures are invoked by arts 
and wailings from bankrupts of borrowed property, to have 
compassion on their aversion to the payment of their debts^ to 
sequester a poor remnant which their unfortunate creditors 
may recover, and confiscate this remnant, by devising some de«» 
predated currency with which to balance accounts. 

Under our form of government, fiscal operations ought not to 
be considered in reference to the convenience or benefit of a 
government, as they are considered under European monar« 
chies, but in relation to the convenience or benefit of the peo- 
ple. Kow, though the government may suffer no inconvenience 
or injury from the increase of salaries and expenses produced 
by the depreciation of bank currency, the people from oar- 
peculiar situation may sustain both. Their funds arise chiefly 
from the exportation of agricultural or marine producti(ms, by 
which they are enabled to pay their taxes. The price of these • 
productions being limited by their trans-atlantick value, the 
people cannot be reimbursed by the depreciation of a local cur- 
rency, for an increase of taxation chiefly paid out of this re* 
stricted price. 

Again. The fiscal operations of a government may be nur- 
tured by a corruption of manners, and a violation of justice 
among individuals. Unhappily, the revolutionary patriots 



Digitized by 



Google 



1S3 

were driven into the latter evil bj necessity. Bat we hate 
voluntarily introduced both without any. The United Statea 
have ascertained the effects of paper money by two experi- 
laents, and its character under a free government has been 
•scuttled by both* By the first it is ascertained, that the meet 
solemn national promises of redemption, without equivalent 
funds, cannot sustain its value, or prevent its fraudulent ope- 
ration upon individuals : By the second, that a promise of re- 
demption by the payment of specie will sustain its value, or 
delay its fraudulent operation upon individuals, so long only 
as the nation believes in the falsehood^ that the banks are able 
to pay it. In a free country, the detection, sooner or later, is 
inevitable, and a heavy shock of factitious misfortunes ensues. 
Banks, managed by Che power of despotism or of aristocracy, 
live long either upon delusion, or upon supplies extracted from 
the peoples The same motives unite these parties in these 
means, for conducting their fiscal i^perations* Exposed to the 
scrutinizing eye of liberty, a detection of fraud will come at 
last. Under the iron rod of despotick governments, these insti- 
tutions are deterred from committing any frauds, but in con- 
cert with their accomplices, both by the fear of punishment^ 
and the influence of patronage; but under our mild policy, 
neither expiation nor bribery is practicable in the case ot 
banks. Their crimes may possibly be numbered, but no figures 
can rec(H^ their punishments, because they are never punish- 
ed. Had the bank of the United States commenced its very 
career, by committing the most enormous frauds, congress 
might have been deterred by the magnitude of its offences, or 
an inability to do justice to the injured, even* from making 
them publick. 

A catalogue of the immoral tendencies of banking ought to 
be awful to a republican government, which many great writers 
assert to be incapable of subsisting long, except by the preserva- 
tion of virtuous principles. Can these be preserved* by invest- 
ing corporate bodies with the privileges of committing remediless 
frauds, of laughing at detection, and of retaining the pillage ? 
By nurturing and then ruining, pride, extravagance, specula- 
tion, folly, rapaciousness and dishonesty, as the arch fiend 
entices into guilt, and punishes those whom he has deluded ? 
By corrupting l^slative bodies, the temporary representatives 



Digitized by 



Google 



1S4 

of the people, into ftn ojHnion, that ibej may prolong their 
power and establish tiieir speculations, howeyer detriroen* 
tal to their constituents, for unlimited periods P By deluging 
a whole nation with foods of depreciation usury, having first 
banished the only cheek by which it could be restrained ? By 
enlisting in the cause of this overwhelming system of usury, 
from which even those who never borrow cannot escape, a great 
portion of the talents of the country ; and teaching them to be 
satisfied with its intellectual pleasures, without salaries ? By 
rewarding atrocious frauds, sometimes with wealth, and always 
with impunity ? By first expelling specie, and then subjecting 
the nation to the alternative of suffering a great loss in getting 
it back, or of submitting for ever to banking prescription ? By 
briUng corporations with an absolute power of acquiring wealth 
by frauds with impunity, for the sake of a trivial political con- 
venience ? By committing the national safety and prosperity 
to the care of individual character, without responsibility or 
controul, for indefinite periods ; except such as may be fixedT 
by the will of temporary representatives ? By thus regenera- 
rating the hereditary principle of subjecting mankind to the 
chance of being governed by knaves in the aifair of money (so 
important to social happiness,) under an interest to do wron^ 
and under no compulsion to do right ? By substituting an arro- 
gant divination for actual experience (the true source of human 
knowledge,) in usurping a right to pass irrepealable laws ? By 
staking the national prosperity oh the maxim, that it may 
safely be intrusted to unchecked avarice? By arranging 
society into debtors and creditors, bribing usury to lend, 
tempting indiscretion to borrow, protecting the former against 
the payment of its own debts, and producing by law a state of 
things, calculated for destroying a good government, or subject- 
ing it to the clamours and threats of dishonesty ? And by 
making it improvident to be prudent ; as by endeavouring to 
provide for old age or misfortune, we should probably lose the 
whole, and certainly a portion of our labours ? 

The facts, to justify these inconveniences produced by bank- 
ing, are left to the recollection of the reader; but the ex- 
pression "depreciation usury, "requires a short explanation. 
It refers to the loss sustained by the nation, from the depreci- 
ation of bank currency, beyond the interest paid for it hj the 



Digitized by 



Google 



18S 

borrower. This itepi of pectmiary ioss^ frequently rqieaied in 
the circulatioQ of the paper, may possiUy amount to as mack. 
%s the additional^ taxatfon caused by the same depreciation. 
The two items and the interest paid to banks chiefly constitute 
the price paid by the nation for the convenience of transferrii^^ 
tbe taxes from place to place. It b probable that it amonnts 
to thirty or forty per centum per annam» on a larger sum than 
the amount of taxes ; and equally so, that these taxes could be 
transmitted in the most inponrenient mode, which could be 
devised, a^ess than one. 

^ Wherein consists the difficulty on this suligect ? may the truth 
be permitted to answer the question P Men incline to acquire 
wealth, without encountering the labours of industry ; as they 
incline to get to heaTen, ¥rithout dischargmg the duties of 
morality. Speculators for both objects are therefore greedily 
attended to, and often infuse tenets into nations so stubborn^ 
as to divide society for ages into jugglers and dupes. (Govern- 
ments have repeatedly aggrandized themselves and enriched 
the initiated* under intricate and plausible . schemes for en- 
riching the nation ; and labour is induced cheerfully to exchange 
its earnings, for a dogma or a charm. When these schemes 
or incantations are directed against a foreign nation, the im- 
position is easy ; and governments generally cajole nations out 
of their property to a great amount, by ingenious lectures to 
prove that they will be reimbursed ten fold in heaven, or by 
other nations. Once taught that we may be enriched by the 
speculations of our , government at the expence of foreigners, 
a transition from a dc^ma having a glimmering of truth, to one 
having none, becomes easy; and we rashly believe that a pa- 
triotick magician can instruct a nation to enrich itself, by spec- 
ulations upon itself; that exclusive privileges conferred on an 
incorporated section of the national wealth will produce a 
greater degree of national prosperity, than equal privileges 
retained by the whole. 

Congress, in rejecting lord North's insidious proposal for rais- 
ing a revenue by colonial laws, observed, ^< that all history shews 
*' that a power over the jfurse is the be^ intercessor for aredress 
" o^ grievances, and a re-establishment of rightsJ^ Banking 
has gotten into its possession that which the national purse can- 
toned; intolerable grievances have ensued; the right to pri- 

^ y ^ 



Digitized by 



Google 



IM 

hu been fwodaced. The TeTolutioMry <)<«grM9, tkat higbeit 
fSBOrien ef wiBdom mA rirttte^ with which Providence ha* tm^ 
dowed man ; the fiitheni of our liberty, uninflaenced by aviriee 
ar ambition ; the revolutionary congresi decided, "* that a 
power over the purse it the best interoessor for a redress of 
grieTanoesandare-eatablishmaitofrights." The power mm 
the fftne has escaped from the people and their govenunaila 
This best security against grievancea and wrwip has bee« 
transferred by legislatures to corporations. If the^iad m right 
to transfer the best, they mi^ transfer all other aeeuiities to the 
custody of chartered bodies. Dazzled by a spurious lustre, we 
have violated this sound nuudm; we have worshipped a deBM« 
instead of a Deity; and now that we are awakened bj sensa« 
tion from tiie infiituatioii, we are told that the altars of fraud 
are sacred. Grievances and violated rights abound ; the prin* 
ciples of justice are prostrated; but the hurricane of evili 
daias a power founded in the impesition of callinga law a 
charter, to molest an entire generation during its whote life 
without redress; and the ising^Ms of censtruction is its ally 
against the diamond of justice. Money governs tiie world* Is a 
corporate despotism over the money or currency of a nation no 
political power? That which is aUe to do good or harm to na^* 
tions. is power. All our constitutions have provided represent 
tation. checks and responsibilities^ to frevewi grievtmees md 
preserve rights* Can representation invest corporations with 
a power of dwng good or harm to the nation for long terms, 
without being sul^ect to the constitutiiMud provisions for fare- 
venting grievances and preserving rights ? No l^;islature is it- 
self -invested with any power, unsubjected to these ppovisiena. 
If le^slatures can create a power beyond their own. the coetv 
ticin of which is without the reach even of election, they may 
thus overthrow every principle of our constitutions. Our con* 
stitutions unite in deciding, th^ political power ought to be 
responsible, to be entrusted for short periods, to be controlled, 
and to be punished if abused. Ip the k^slative creation of 
political corporations, ncme of these precautions has be^ re- 
garded. We have had an irresponsible, unoontrouled. unpuur 
ishable. uneleeted power over the national purse, in operation 
for a short tune. Compare Hmt effects of the two principles^ 



Digitized by 



Google 



I 

ike evils embowdled in one^ bj haTUig been littered oyer th« 
iandyliide theUessings whicfa bare flowed frem the ether ? TUs 
absolute' power over the natimial purse was never before jctm" 
ferr^ on banking corporationsi nor has a pecuniarj despotiaia 
be^i before entrusted hj any goTcmment, to such estabtisk* 
mentfl* The banks^ created by monarctdes and aristocracies^ 
hare all been subjected to those govemments, and subservient 
to tiieir designs. The government directs their political elfecti. 
Priviite bankers are liaUe» pers(maUy, to the payment of their 
debts. Our bankers are neither liable to the contnuul of our 
governments, nor subjecti personally, to the payment of their 
debts. A non-deseiipt in their nature, they have of course 
been a non-descript in their consequences* 

But, if these evils of banking are recompensed to the nation 
by its convenience in transmitting federal money from one 
part of the country to anotiier. there would yet remain wei^ty 
institutional arguments against it The absorption rf power 
by money was^so vc^^y well known by the Iramers of our con* 
atitt^t»^ tiiat they studiously erected a circumvallation of nt^ 
etrittions, such as electimi, representation, sympathy, rota* 
tion, responnbiUty, checks, balances, divisions and limitaticms, 
around the power of the purse, when exercised by the govern*- 
fidents they created, and these governments have bestowed 
that power on bankers, unattended by any restriction at all, 
in return for the convenience of transmitting the publick money. 
It is, as if a monarch had surrendered to a corporation all the 
]^ncipks by wftich his throne was secured, for the same mighty 
^tsject. Weighty enough, as the court think it, to invest a go- 
vernment with the most dangerous and ^pressivec^ all po%v 
«ff«, that of granting ezckaive {nivileges, and creating bodies 
]politick; nei^er France^ nor many othw lai|;e countries, have 
ever thought cC it; and the novrity of making an object, so ^ 
niimtive hitherto in the history of mankind, a source of acquire 
ing enormous powers, must be an evidence of the profiindti)r oi; 
ehallowness of the American genius. There is evidentiy mudi 
ingenuity in madung &e convenience of transmitting puUSek 
money, on die ground of die great extent of die United fitates^ 
Ae matrix of the right to incorporate, because die state govera- 
mxfsto cttt^t, iiidi any plaitsib^i avad. themselves of the 



Digitized by 



Google 



18S 

arfi;unieni; the vHi^.fi>rce of whidi must redound to the fedefd 
government ; tntt yet I shall proceed to controvert it. 

The mother bank rf the United States^ I rappose (for I have 
not the law before me,) may, or nfaj not, e^talHsh or abolish 
branch lianks at its own pleasure. If so, it may, or it may not, 
at its own will, transmit publick money from one place ^zc^j^ 
ed. I do not know whether the buik is compelled by ihe 
law, under a penalty to receive and transmit publick money, 
wherever it may establish branches; or whether the law is 
merely preceptive as to the pmnt; but I suppose, that it can 
only be required to transmit what it receives, and that it is not 
bound to receive where it has no branch. If this should be the 
case, this compensation to be paid by the bank, as justifying its 
incorporation, may be extended or diminished, at its own plea* 
sure. It is true, that the profit arising from deposites of pub- 
lick money, inspired a very reasonaUe hope, that the bank 
would semi out; branches to those places where n>ost of it was 
to be received, and from whence it could most- easily be trans«* 
mitted ; but hope is eventual, and the constitutionality of a law 
ought to be positive and not fortuitous, at the time it is passed ; 
not now constituticmal and then unconstitutional, as the bank 
should choose to hook it to, or unhook it frpm fiscal operatic^9 ; 
and not constitutional in one state, or atone place, where the 
bank might choose to have a branch to aid those operations, and 
un<?onstitutional in another, where it might choose to have 
none. However this may be, it must be admitted^ that the 
size of the (convenience can have nothing to do with its power 
to invest congress with the right of creating corporations, and 
that the transmission of a cent would be a convenience, as ef- 
fectual to ccmstitutionaKze an incorporating law, as the trans-^ 
mission of a million. The constitution does not confine the 
virtue of this poWer-amj^fying principle to conveniencies, or 
means of any specified degrees of magnitude, and each, how- 
ever small, like every magnet^ contains, the power of attraction. 
The least convenience, therefore, in the exercise of every dele- 
gated power, will justify congress in granting individual or cor- 
porate privileges ; and those who will transmit federal horses* 
arms or victuals, (so much more cumbersope than money,} haye 
a better right to them than the money-changers themselves. In 
short, if the argument of convenience be sufficient to establish 



Diqitized by 



Google 



the congtitofimiaUtf ofNthe law in the case of the btidts, tsfoj 
power whatsoever, delegated to cong^ress, may reward its co> 
aerators witii excksive priTilq;e8« and embrace within its 
■leans, mone^lies of every desmptibn. 

It would be a suli^ct worthy of mature eonslden^on* 
whether a bank currency, snch as we are suifering under, does 
Bot bear a strong analogy in its eftcts, to the monopoly of the 
colonial trade long held by the En^h, and which we supposed 
we had happily abolished by a long war. But it is too co|ttOus 
for the limits I must observe^ uid I only si^gest it to the reader, 
that he may compare in his own mind, both the extent of the 
two monopolies, and th^ cost of getting rid of ikem. 

A phalanx of words have been enlisted to assail the plainest 
provisionsof the federal constitution ; but only one more shall be 
adverted to. The word ^ national,'' is often made an auxiliary 
of *' sovereign, supremoi necessary and convenient,'' towards 
destroying or relaxing the restrictiflais imposed upon congrera 
by the union. It is conit^ded, that congress may exercise 
naUtmal powers. Where is this nation, of which gentlemen 
speak ? Is it composed of twenty 4hree individuals only? If 
so, if the states made the unioA> and if congress possess no 
powers, except those bestowed by the union, then the term is 
only an expedi^it, like that in u^ig the words sovereign, su- 
preme, convenient and necessary, to convey to the federal 
government recondite, in the place of defined powers. All 
tiiese wordb being equally sufficient to convey inde&iite,' in- 
stead of the limited powers really delated to congress, why 
dumld we be led round the radii of a circle to get at its cen-^ 
tre, omnipotence^ The premises being settled, the argument 
would terminate in a syllogism, and put us out of our pain. As 
thus ; Such a thing is an act of power, congress is omnipotent; 
therefore it is within the sphere of copgress. Is it not the same 
sort of reasoning to ^ay, such a. thing is an act of sovereignty, 
tnr of supremacy, or necessary, or convement, or national ; con- 
gres&may do what is sovereign, supreme, necessary, convenient, 
or nationa], therefore it is withm the ^ere of congress P 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



SECTION 11. 

THE BANK DECISION^PBECEDENTa 



I riiall ce&cliide ifak Stttgect» by an examinatioB of an argu- 
ment with which the court began. It remarkg, that ^banking 
** was introdaced at a Tcry early period of onr history, haa been 
** recognized by many duccessive l^slatures, and has been 
** acted upon by the judicial department in cases of peculiar de- 
** licacy, as a law of undoubted obligation.'' This remark must 
^ ^ther furnish the conclusion* that precedents may change the 
federal constitution, tn* it has no weight As it was intended 
to have weight, it deserves an attentive consideration. 

In consolidated societies, suligect to one sovereign govern- 
ment, having but one legislature, and but one judicial power, 
where law is omnipotent, the omnipotence of precedents is a 
component pait*of the farm of the government ; but in a federal 
republick, having two co-ordinate and distinct legislatures, and 
two judicial powers, where law is not omnipotent, md where 
Ae governments, instead of being sovereigns, are only invested 
with limited powers, it would be an incongruity witii the form 
of government, to allow to precedents the same force. The 
constttutioB does not invest either the state or federal govern- 
ments with an exclusive power of changing its prind{des by 
precedents, because it would destroy their co-ordinacy, disor- 
der the division of powers, and subject one to the other. Nor 
ean such a power be common to all ^se governments, because 
tile different precedents, whkh would thence arise, must soon 
make as many federal constitutions as we have governments. 
In countries where the unity and sovereignty of the govern- 
ment is the primary political princi|de, these objections to pre- 
cedents would have no weight; but here, where neither this 
unity nor sovereignty is to be found, they would, if used as 
they mre used under those governments, destroy our existing 
syrtem; because, a r%ht to make pretedents in spy one of our 



Digitized by 



Google 



de^ttiaeiits 18 w ftclaowledgmeiit of . a 10? er^^ 
pirtraeiit. The reader will remark, that I am speakiiig <^ po- 
litical precedents, which ought not to be confounded in any de- 
gree widi munidpal or for^sick, estaUished for awertainmg 
private r^;ht8, because we did not intend by constitutions ^ 
subject the national liberty to so uncertain a tenure. 

If» howerer, we should eyen be governed in relation to <;har- 
ters, by the precedents of other nations, and other forms of 
government, they would furnish us with a volume of authorities, 
subversive of their suffidency to sustain our banUng c4H*pora- 
tions. In Ei^land, the granting of charters was an executive, 
not a legislative act ; and as the En^ish king, (the grantor) 
never dies, so his act could never be revoked* But all our 
legislatures die r^ularly, and the precedents of repeiding laws 
are numerous enough, if the rig^t of repeal depends upon pre- 
cedents to estd[>lbh it beyond a doubt In En^and, itnev^ 
was even contended, that the parliament could not annul 
charters, and therefore charters cannot have drawn from that 
country a sanctity for precedents, with the help of which they 
*may annul constitutions. 

It would be tedious to collect the changes made by laws in 
the English magna charta. This charter itself has been so 
entirely obliterated by laws, as to have become usdess, and to 
deserve a very opprobions appellation bestowed upon it by an 
English judge, but yet so appropriate as to have been long 
commemorated^ The commercial charters granted by ^peen 
Elizabeth, and other English monarchs, were often annulled or 
revoked by law ; and even by the kings themselves, in spite td 
their legal immortality. Thue south sea charter was iuu&ull6d» 
and remedies applied by the guardians of the publick good, to 
the evils of chartered frauds. Precedents therefore pronoumce, 
that legislative power is not prohibited by corporation fictions, 
not even by the ancient fiction that the kii^ never dies, " intro' 
^ dueed at a very early period of oVT history tteeognized by many 
<* successive legislatures, and acted upon hy the judicial depart' 
^ment, in atses of peculiar delicacy, as a law of undoubted 
^ obligation!^ from shielding nation^ against any calamities 
produced by charters. The mischiefe of havii^ south sea di- 
rectors in the English parliament were so apparent, as to 
have sttgg^ted a law prohibiting the officers rf revenue from 



Digitized by 



Google 



tM 

i^ttn Yotii^^ dectioiui; and this id a vtfj pointed pneceden^ 
appijing to the case of fiUiDg our legislatures with iMUdk direc- 
tors and, stockholders, who receive neaiiy the whole of our 
taxes both state and federal, and make a pn^t on all tiiese 
deposites. So that like English revenue officers, the higher the 
taifces the greater will be fteir income. 

Many precedents in relation to charters have been ^ introdu* 
^eed at periods jof oter ^is^on/" still ^lier than banking; 
have «< been reeogtiized ky mtmy succemve legislatures,^^ and 
have been ** acted upon bif judicial departments in cases ofpecu^ 
.'*liar deUcacy as laws cf undmHed oWgatUmJ^ yirginia» 
when a colony, oppressed by a mercantile or money*making char- 
ter, lunvii^ the acquisition of weiUth» and not the good of the 
colony for its object, was «aved by taking refuge from it under 
a king ; even a king of the Stuart family. The same king divided 
Virgima in violation of chartenu Carotina and other colonies 
were in like manner divided. All the colonies broke through 
charters to get at publick good and national safety. The effects 
of foaidc charters were not better understood when these laws, so 
niek-named, were passed, than the e:(cessive extent of a few co- 
Icmial charters, when they were granted. This unforeseen eltent 
de^»anded and received remedies. Even since the revolution* 
it was a sula^ect of debate in congress. The smaller states 
asserted, that justioe demanded arestnction of the charters 
.extending to the western ocean, apd an application of unsettled 
, territcnies ta thie general benefit; and the states possessing 
such charters yielded to the call of justice* imd the general 
interest* Is this a precedent for aacrificing both to banking 
garters, and for re*instating musty fe^dal errors, so very soon 
.after we have subverted a host of them ; by subjecting our pro^ 
p^rty and industty to a ruinous tenure, renewable forever by 
those who recdve the rents P 

Let us look at the logick which supposes that acquiescence 
makes precedents, and that precedents make reason. . All 
, precedents or laws are at first theory, and acquiescence alone 
can convert them into practice. . Bwking b^n as a tilery ; 
and political augurs differed in their prognostications of its 
effectsii The worst precedents are often but little felt in their 
infancy, because they move with caution, until they gather 
atrength; and the worse they are, the more time is (rfifm required- 
Z 



Digitized by Google 



194 

to derelope their chaneter. Some foretold that hanking WobM 
be ben^cial ; others, that it would be pernicious to oar coontiy. 
It wouM be an odd judgment, howeTer honest, which should 
assert, that fulfilment oug^t to destroy, and falsehood to esta- 
blish an augurj, because just at the time when experience has 
converted the theory of banking into evidence, both felt and 
understood, acquiescence has also mellowed the same theory 
into a precedent, and a precedent deprives us of the benefit ^f 
experience ; so that the time, expend^ in ascertaining the truth 
or falsehood of an augury, renders iff impossible to remedy its 
imposition, just at the moment when it is discovered. 

Judicial precedents are commonly the work of one manor a 
very few men. An opinion becomes an authority, and as it rolls 
along, it magnifies by others which adhere to it, not because it 
is right, but because it is authority. In my view, it bears no re- 
semblance to the species of consent by which we mi^e consti- 
tutions. 

The submission of the people is oneaigument of iittie or no 
weight to prove the constitutionality of laws. The influence 
of government, and not the approbation of the people, generally 
causes a submission to laws ; and therefore, it is but a bad argu- 
ment for sanctifying precedents. But under the federal con- 
stitution, the argument has moreover a fraudulent aspect, be* 
cause its provisions for amendment have taught the people to 
believe, that there are no other modes by which the constitution 
can be altered ; and lulled them into security against prece- 
dents. Expecting solemnities and publick discussions before 
their own solemn compact could be changed, they would be 
caught by the snare of precedents, from an opini(m that no 
such snare existed. It would have been better to have declared, 
that all laws which should live to a certain age should be en- 
grafted into the constitution, because it would have kept the 
people attentive to legislation, and induced them to save such 
laws as were good, and to xheck the vigilance of governments 
in making precedents favourable to power. Suppose, it had 
. been proposed to amend the constitution in either oi the pre- 
scribed modes, by investing congress with powers to create 
banks, to bestow bounties, to grant exclusive privileges, to 
make roads and canals, to annet conditions to the admissioa 
of new states into the nnion, and to prohibit th^ state gQvern- 



Digitized by 



Google 



195 

mentd from taxing the^ persons or property it should invest 
with exclusive privileges ; would all these powers have been as 
quietly and silently obtained in the constitutional mode, as by 
precedents ? There is no fair way of deciding the doubt, except 
one, which I wish to see resorted to, namely, a formal proposal 
in congress for conferring all these powers upon itself, by a po^ 
sitive amendment of the constitution. The inconsistency be« 
tween limiting a government attended with prescribed modes 
of amendment, and the doctrine that this same government 
might extend its powers by its own precedents, is sufficient to 
have deluded the people into ah opinion, if it be a delusion, 
that the constitution was not liable to be altered by precedents j 
and that whatever law could do, law could undo. Precedents 
would make a strange species of constitution, according to our 
notions ; they would be repealable by the legislatures which 
i^ade them. In those countries where the governments are 
absolute, this is no objection to them ; but here precedents are 
nothing but laws, and the question, m^ether they are constitu- 
tional or not, must forever remain attached to them, unless it 
can be proved that it is a question of no importance after they 
have obtained the title of precedents. It will then become a 
matter of very great importance, to ascertain by whom this title 
is to be bestowed. 

The Stuart family were mighty sticklers for precedents, and 
sedulous builders of these political forts to hold the ground 
gained by construction from time to time, by its inroads upon 
constitutions ; because, successive encroachments terminate in 
conquest. To prevent these encroachments, as a fatal appen- 
dage to all governments invested with sovereignty, we have 
deprived ours of the right to modify our constitution by pre- 
cedents, by prescribing the modes of modification. The pre- 
^ution was suggested by two very important considerations. 
One, that every government which has possessed a power of 
modifying its own form, has used it fraudulently and oppres- 
sively : The other, that we having established co-ordinate go- 
vernments, state and federal, a right nodification by pre- 
cedents must either be equal or excluhx^e. If it was equal, 
. inextricable confusion would ensue ; if exclusive, the principle 
<»f co-ordinacy would be abolished. 



Digitized by 



Google 



196 

The distmction between limitations and restrictioiia impMei 
bj the people on their goyemments by constitntiims, and tlMse 
imposed by the governments on ftemselres, by tiieir own pee- 
cedents, is manifest There is no similitude between the caseSi 
Constitutions and precedents perform contrary offices. The 
first tie, and the second untie. It has always been dificstt be 
nations to tie governments by precedents ; and to give tbttm 
knives, for precedents are such, to cut these ccmstitutional knots* 
would make every government an Alexander. Each adHnnis- 
tration would have as good a right to make precedents, as Its 
predecessor ; and this guillotine of restrictions would seldom 
lie idle. Veneration for our constitutions is the best security 
for the endurance of our free form of government, and the best 
infusion for elevating tiie national character. But, how can a 
nation love an embryo litter of fluctuating precedents, conceal- 
ed in the womb of time, each of vrhich as it grows, hustles som^ 
principle out of the constitution, as the cuckoo does the spar* 
row out of its own nest? Had Pygmalion's beautiful statue, 
after it was animated, been seduced to {HtMluce bastards, would 
he have loved her the better for it ? What should we say to a 
husband, who should surrender the custody of his wife to a set 
of professed rakes ? That which ou^t to be said of a nation, 
which entrusts its constitution to the care of precedents. They 
are only the projects or opinions of successive l^islators, presi- 
dents, judges, generals or statesmen, none of whom will ac- 
knowledge that their laws, actions, decisions, orders or schemes 
are unconstitutional, though they will be forever as various 
and contradictory as the characters from which they proceed! 
Mankind have generally, however, confided in this chance 
medley current of governmental promulgation, for the preserva- 
tion of their happiness; but we have preferred principled, 
maturely considered, carfeully selected, otutiously approved, 
and distinctiy defined, as a better security. Our mode of esta- 
blishing the principles in which we confide is infinitely prefera- 
ble to the European practice, of leaving them to be found and 
to be lost, by a succession of precedents ; from the considera- 
tion, that our conventions have no other business, and reason 
acts, uncorrupted by avarice or ambiticm; whereas, after a 
government is in operation, the whole tribe of selfish motives 
becomes active, And time for inventing and practising «ti^ata- 



Digitized by 



Google 



' 19T 

gems lb endless. Fcance, by demtiiig from oar mode, and in* 
▼esting her constituent assemblies with the current powers of 
government, received a lecture upon the consequences of de* 
rivi;pg constitutional principles from the governing power, which 
she has cause to remember, and which we ought not to forget. 

It is admitted, that precedents, both good and bad, ought to 
have weight in fixing our conclusions. They are practical de- 
monstrations of wisdom w fpUy ; and constitute the fund of 
experience, by which the faculty of reasoning is supplied with 
materials. But discrimination is as applicable to precedents, 
m ioxaj other species of evidence ; and if mankind have impro* 
ved in the theory of political morality, their age only suggests 
a suspicion of their goodness, and the propriety of their rigour- 
OUS examination. As rigourously ought current measures to be 
sul^ected to the test of an improved political system, because 
its value depends upon its practical effects. It is true, that 
power^ to prevent this necessary examination of precedents, has 
in all ages attempted to fortify them by a spurious sanctity, for 
file purposes of fostering usurpations, and securing its acqui- 
sitions ; and tiiat the worse they are, the more eaitiestly is their 
sanctity asserted. The exclusive power and wealth they obtain 
from the general evils they inflict, are zealous preachers in self 
defence, whi^h never fail to convince themselves.* Hence no 
improvement in civil government has ever been made, or can 
be preserved, but by a subversion of precedents, until a form is 
discovered incapable of corruption. Being numerous as foes, 
and few as friends of liberty, she must constantly have recourse 
to constitutional principles to keep them ii^ check, or fall a 
victim to th^ power* By surrenderiu^ its constitution to 
precedents^ a nation would surrender its strongest fortress 
to its strongest enemy; and would subscribe to the opinion, 
that the best mode of defending itself, is to throw down its arms. 
Constitntiims are exposed to the jurisdiction of experience ; but 
precedenta presumptuously renounce it, and impiously say to 
' improvement ^ stop ;" so that when experience has discovered 
an evil, our sensiUlity of Us affliction is rendered more poignant 
by* the veto of a precedent against the remedy. 

An exaltation of precedents to an, equality with constitutions 
would exceed their pretension, however it might dissa^fy their 
ttrrogance; and yet a dignity so extravagantiy gratuitous 



Digitized by 



Google 



198 

wodd not alMMdre tiion from constnictioii by a rdference to 
principles, nor entitle them to comphuB of a treatment, wbicii 
thej api^j to constitutions. But, if we reduce precedents to 
their just rank, we shall discern that they are exposed to two 
tests, to which con^tutions are not subject They are am^ia- 
Ue both to constitutions and expediency. The enquiry upon 
the first ground is not, whether the precedent is better or worse 
tiian the constitution, but whether it is omformsble to consti- 
tutional principles; and if it is, the precedent is stiU amena- 
ble to the second enquiry, whether it is working good mr evil^ 
If a succession of wrongs can constitute ri^ts under the name 
of precedents, as in Europe, then indeed they are beyond the 
reach of these enquiries, and have obtained a degree of insubor- 
dination, to which constitutions themsdves do not aspire; 
otherwise, they are always liable to an arraignment for disloy- 
alty to constituti(ms, or injury to society; and if found guilfy, 
constantly exposed to the mild punishment of suppression. If 
they should slip by constitutions, upon the smooth profession 
of benefiting society, they ought certainly to be arrested, should 
the profession turn out to be fallacious. 

But suppose, as the court contend, that banking ** having been 
" introduced at a very early period of our history, been recdg- 
^ni^ed by many successive le^latures, and been acted upon by 
" the judicial department in cases of peculiar delicacy, as a law 
"of undoubted obligation," is settled by a cloud of precedents 
to be constitutional ; and that the question should be considered 
under an admission so copious, of the efficacy of jHrecedents* 
Yet this same efficacy is as strong to sustain posiiive, as to sus* 
tain implied constitutional articles. The court does not say 
that the federal constitution bestows a positive power on con- 
gress to create banks, and only asserts that « thwe is no phrase 
*<in the constitution which excludes incidental or implied 
** powers,'' among which it includes banking. A concurrent 
right of taxation is a positive power given and reserved to tte 
federal and state governments by the constitution. It hoe been 
exercised to great extent from the c&mmenc&nent. of our consti" 
tutional history; it has hem recognized by many succesHve 
legislatures ; and it has been acted tepon by the judicial depart* 
ments in cases of peculiar delicacy, as undoubtedly eonstttU" 
tional. If a cloud of precedents can establish an incidental ^r 



Digitized by 



Google 



199 

implied power, another cloud of precedents ought to egtablish 
a positiTe and expressed power. The finest effort of ingenuity 
to be found in the opinion of the court, is, that of availing itself of 
|H:ecedent8 in a point only incidental, and of passing them by 
altogether in reference to the true question to be decided. The 
state of Maryland had not disputed the constitutionality of the 
iMLnk, but had exercised it) concurrent right of taxation ; and the 
court refers to the multiplicity of precedents as a proof of its con- 
stitutionality, and forgets the same species of multiplicity as a 
proof of the constitutionality of the concurrent right There was 
asouuid reason for doing so. The intended decision was to make 
a new precedent, to overthrow the whole multitude of precedents 
establishing the concurrent right of taxation, and tiierefore it 
was wise to transfer our attention from the precedents applying 
to the question, intended to be destroyed, to make a shew in 
the back ground, as some generals have gained a victory by 
fimnally arraying .the scullions <^ their, army, and deceiving 
their adversaries kito an opini<m, that they were really soldiers* 
Besides, it held out an aspect of pajring respect to precedents, 
under cover of which they were actually to be overturned. 
There was no precedent at all by which the court could abridge 
or modify tiie concurrent powers of taxation established by the 
constitution ; but a multitude of precedents in favour of the 
constitutionality of this concurrency, had arisen from its mu- 
tual exercbe. Congress had established it by many laws, espe- 
cially in taxing the state banks by a stamp act If the esta- 
blishn^nt of state banks was within the state spheres, congress 
had no right to throw ohstaeles in the way of tkeir sphere ofuc- 
tion, expept by vkctue of the concurrrent power of taxation ; and 
if this power justified confess in taxing state banks, the same 
power justified the states In taxing the bauifiks of congress, though 
these latter were also constitutional. But, the court, instead 
of considering the precedents in relation to] the concurrent 
ri^t of taxation, have insisted at large upon those which relate 
ta the constituticmality of banking, and adhered to the prece- 
dent of searching for a goose, when the thing lost was a cow. 
The excessive departure from the true question by this pro- 
cess, will be seen at once by supposing all that it could prove; 
s namely that the constitution had given to congress a positive 
powear to create banks. We should then have seen it in 



Digitized by 



Google 



too 

a state of equality, as to ori^n» rank and obligation,' witk 
the positive concurrent power of taxation ; and the question 
would have come fairly forth, whether one power revokea 
another equal to itself, because they clash ? If this question was 
answered i^fllrroatively, and the revoking power ascertained, it 
would be easy to prove that very little of the constitution would 
remain. I suppose it will hardly be asserted, that an implied 
power is better than if it had been expressed, because though it 
may be moulded so as to defeat other implied powers, it can 
hardly be made to destroy a power expressed. The concurrent 
right of taxation reaches all property real and personal, and had 
banking been positively allowed, still it would not have follow- 
ed, that any modifications of property thus subjected to taxation, 
by the state or federal government, should discharge it fronk 
the liability to which it is clearly subjected. The property 
tould not evade the constitution by changing its shape. The 
authors of The Federalist have considered this concurrent ri^t 
of taxation in the federal and state governments as a plain, 
positive and vital principle of the constitution ; and the court 
has merged it in the implied constitutionality of bankjing, as by 
precedents established. 

If I have overlooked any argument used by the court, it has 
been done undesignedly ; and if I have any hope of victory, in 
a contest between a dwarf and half a dozen ^ants, it is found- 
ed in the following consideration. It seems to me that the 
a^rgument of the court may be defined <' an exquisite sample of 
«• artificial phraseology;'' and that the simplicity of ignorance 
may possibly break through fine webs spun from the wombs of 
single words, because truth can be seen without being dressed 
in such flimsy robes. Mystical interpreters extract from texts 
whatever doctrine is necessary for their purpose, but sound lo- 
^ck is not like money ; an hundred light arguments will not 
make a heavy one, as an hundred cents make a dollar ; and I 
cannot discern an argument in the opinion, which weighed sin- 
gly, seems heavy. When I read those extracted from the werda 
*« sovereign, supreme, sphere, paramount, necessary and cwivc* 
nient,'' I thou^t I saw the end of the sound revolutionary good 
sense by which our governments were constituted, as Borne 
saw puns and quibbles substituted for the masculine doqu^ce 
which preceded the age of Augustus. It seemed Ukc extract- 



Digitized by 



Google 



fiOl 

ing pmsoQ from vipers, under an opinion that it woold be medi- 
cinal. If I were asked, how it has happened that men in power 
can inveigh against, oppose, support, and practise the same 
maxims? I should reply, by artificial phraseolc^. How are 
political parties drilled into contradictions ? Bj artificial phrase* 
ology. How has the reasoning of the court been assailed, whilst 
its conclusion is allowed to be correct ? By artificial phraseo* 
logy* How is the right of incorporating banks conceded, when 
the, mode of defending the right is censured? By artificial 
phraseology. And what is this artificial phraseology ? It is the 
vocation of stripping evils of unseemly attire in order to dress 
them more handsomely, or of subjecting the federal constitu- 
tion to the needles of verbal embroiderers, in obedience to the 
saying " the tailor makes the man." 



2 A 



Digitized by 



Google 



■ Digitized by 



Google 



SECTION 18. 

PROTECTING DUTIES AND BOUNTIEa 

The points presenting themselves in considering this impor* 
tant subject, arei first, whether either the federal or state go- 
vernments possess a right to distribute wealth and poverty, 
^n and loss between occupations and individuals. Secondly, 
whether the federal government possesses this right And 
thirdly, supposing both or dither to possess such a right, whether 
it is wise, or honest, or beneficial to the United States, to exer- 
cise it 

To understand the rights of mankind, the powers of govern- 
ment, and the meaning of constitutions, we ought to ascertain 
the design of civil society. Man, by nature, had two nghts ; 
to his conscience, and to his labour; and it was the design of 
civil society, to secure these rights. In the case of religious 
freedom, we have seen one right ; in that of the freedom of pro- 
perty, our vision is not so clear ; yet both, aa natural rights, 
stand on the same foundation. 

By suppressing the distinction b^w«en occupations* and co- 
vering aU by the inclusive term, labour, we at once discern the 
natural equality of the right The occupations of i 
men themselves ; and every free government supp 
is only distinguishable from a tyrannical one by equi 
equal rights in its citizens. Our societies grew u 
principle, and we find nothing in our constitutions 
is abolished. Our governments received man, ai 
the creator, with a free will over his mind and his 1 
were instituted to protect the divine bounty. The freedom qf 
conscience was made complete, because no contributions from 
that natural r^ht were necessary for the support of civil go- 
vernment; but the freedom of labour was incomplete, from the 
necessity of such contributions. For ages, governments used 
tl^e division of mankind into religious sects, as a means for 



Digitized by 



Google 



204 

mlong some men subservient to the avarice of others. We have 
detected this fraud ; but its principle is vindicated by our govern- 
ments having used the division of mankind into different occu- 
pations, as a means for making some men subservient to the 
avarice of others. Hie natural rights of labour, in sulgectii^ 
themselves to contributions for the support of civil government* 
never meant to acknowledge themselves to be the slaves of a 
despotick power. These contributions were agreed to, for the 
purchase of protecti(m» and not to estaUiish a power for trans- 
ferring the fruits of labour from one man to another. When 
paid, the freedom of property, as a natural right, occupies in 
relation to the remainder, the same ground which is occupied 
by the freedom of conscience. There is no reason to make any 
deduction from the latter right, for the sake of civil govern- 
ment; the reason for doing so, as to tiie former, extends only 
to publick contributions, and when these are paid, the rights of 
property are the same as the rights of conscience. Had it been 
proposed in forming our constitutions, to invest government 
Vfiih a power (over and above the power of exacting contribu- 
tions for publick use) of taking away the property of some and 
giving it others, it would haye been rejected with indignation ; 
yet this power is as much exercised by bestowing gratuities 
or exclusive pivileges, as if the individuals, impoverished and 
enriched, had been named. This evasion of the freedom of 
property is particularly fraudulent, when a new society is con* 
stituted of men prcYumttly divided into distinct sects or occu- 
pations. Then the names of the»e sects xnr occupations are ex- 
actly the same as the names bestowed on in&ncy, as a medium 
for transferrii^ property from one to another, and more diflBcolt 
to exchange, in order to elude the imposition. Suppose, that at 
the period when the Highlands of Scotland were inhabited by a 
very few co^onunal families, these fandlies had united in a 
civil government by the names of tribes, either in the terms of 
the state or federal constitutions. In the first case, an assump- 
tion of power by their goveniment to tax one family or tribe to 
enrich another, would have been exactly equivalent to state ex- 
clusive privileges in favour of some occupations, and injurioua 
to others. In the second, an assumption of the same power 
would also have had this effect, and would moreover have re- 
iembled partialities on th^ part of congress for and agiunat par- 



Digitized by 



Google 



205 

Ocular states. The endowment. of one class of men hfy the 
names of their occupations, at the expense of another, is eri- 
dentlj the same in substance, as to tax the McGh'egors to en- 
frich ^e McDonalds. All these cases, however modified, are 
an actual subjection of labour and free will for self good, to the 
use of avarice ; and if tiiis be not tynuray, I know not what is so. 

Had beasts established a government among themselves, to 
protect each individual in the exertion of his own skill and in- 
dustry, in gathering the fVuits of the forest, and this government 
should have passed laws to prevent the majority of beasts from 
eating clover and cherries, and confining them to broom straw 
and blackberries, that a few might indulge in the most delicious 
fruits ; would it not have been an arbitrary restriction of the 
desires and comforts bestowed on beasts by divine bounty, and 
a tyrannical abridgment of their natural power and liberty to 
provide for themselves ? The case is much stronger, when the 
fruits are produced, not spontaneously, but by labour. Can it 
be less humiliating to reason tiian to instinct, to suffer this de* 
privation ; or is the latter most capable of feeling it? Yet so- 
phistry, or at ledst self-interest, has deluded several states intd 
an opinion, that it is a Uessing. But Doctor Rezio of Barata* 
ria could never persuade honest Sancho, that he would be made 
healthier or happier, by having good victuals or drink conjured 
away by the wand o^ power. Nations, excluded by prohibitory 
duties upon industry and free will, from enjoying the good 
things produced by different climate;s and different degrees in 
tiie arts, are placed in the situation of ^ beguiled and half 
starved Sancho. This is not surprising^ when ihej are obliged 
to submit to doctciirs; but what shall we say to nations who 
boast of doctoring themselves ? Are our comforts so numerous 
that they ought to be diminished P Yes, says the doctor, it will 
make you richer. When we reflect, however, upon the existence 
x>f an ocean for the d^usion of these comforts, and that man 
has been taught to walk all over the world upon the water, it 
ought to induce us to doubt, whether this worldly wisdom, even 
if it were not a fraud, of bartering comforts for deprivations, was 
preferable to the wisdom which has provided the means of bar-' 
tering comforts for comforts. 

The capacities of reasoning and labouring beget among men 
a relation ff^unded in, desires and wants, which designates them 



Digitized by 



)y Google 



aicongtitxited by iigti»re» for society. Whether sodetylie tadt 
or conTenlioiial, itseiidaBd desgn is to |ffotect each indiyidoal 
of which it is composed, in tl^ eDJojment and exercise of 
his primitiye and natural fftcolties of labour and free w3l 
Restraints upon these, so fiu* and no farther, than to protect 
the same natural r^ts of other individuals, constitute social 
Ubertj ; and restraints imposed, not for the end of this social 
protection, constitute tyranny. If the society has crept tacidy 
into existence, these two natural rights are the strongest of all 
limitations upon the powers of its goyemment, because they 
are imposed by God ; if it be conventional, the same limitations 
also remain, unless the compact should expressly surrender 
them. It would even be a doubt, if an existing generation 
should improvidently do so, whether future generations would 
be bound by the surrender ; and the soundest opiiuon is, that 
they would not Suppose the compact should say, that the 
goremment should have the power of taking away the life ei 
one man for the private benefit of another ; would this be a free 
government ? But if it be silent upon the point, could lite go- 
vernment exercise the power because it was not prohibited? 
And what prohibits it, but the natural paramount human right 
to the enjoyment of life ? It is this paramount right, which has 
made it unnecessary to stipulate in our constitutions against 
the killing of one man for the benefit of anotiier. The ri^t 
of each man to his own labour, by which only his; life can be 
preserved, is as much a natural right, as a right to life itself; 
nor was there any more need to stipulate in actiial social com* 
pacts for its safety, than for the 'safety of life. It is an evasion 
of the right to live, to take away the products of labour by which 
men live, and to give them to other men. If a government can 
take some, it may take all ; and bad governments, by this spe- 
cies of tyranny, do often starve men to death. But there is no 
difference in the principle, whether men are partially starved, or 
quite starved, to enrich other men. If the reader will reedlect, 
and apply to this point what has been before said in relation to 
a bill of rights, he will discern that there was no reason to yii^- 
dicate natural rights in tiiat mode, because they remain, if not 
surrendered ; and as the rights to our lives and our labour are 
not surrendered by our state constitutions, their design being on 
the contrary, to protect and preserve botb> it f6llow«» that thcfse 



Digitized by 



Google 



%0T 

paramosuBt ri^ts are lioutations upon the power of staie gotem- 
ments to mvad^t either bj exclusive privileges or otiierwise, to 
Zurich private individuals. 

I might rest the ailment here, and leave it to the reader to 
determine whether the interest^ liberty w happiness of any sts^ 
in the umon can be possibly advanced by overturning these 
princ^les ; but as the freedom of {unperty is the object intend- 
ed to be vindicated by this treatise, I hope he will have patience 
with me in Imnging it into view in as many shapes as I may 
happen to recollect 

All, or most intellectual improvements, are referable to the 
free exercise of eack man's will, in procuring his own hjipinness. 
It unfolds his understanding, increases his knowledge, and ani- 
mates his virtue* By multiplying the relations between the in- 
d^ividuals of the human family, the blessings of society mre also 
multiplied; and an ateidgment of tt|iese relation? is a retro- 
gade movement towards that ravage state, in which they are 
fi^W* These reUtions are called commerce ; and all obstacles 
thrown in its way are diminutic&is of an intercourse, from which 
men have derived th^ accomplishments, luid a capacity for 
happiness* 

Thouj^ a power of interfering in the intercourse between in- 
dividuals by bestowing exclusive privileges on particular sects 
or interests, civil or religious, is contrary to the rights of nature 
and the end of society, and has produced oppression, when ex- . 
ercised in all other modes; it is contended, that one mode re-' 
mains, by which a bad principle may be changed into a good one,i 
and fra^^ white-washed into justice. By baptizing this bad, 
principle with the goodly name of *^ an encouragement of manu- 
ftctures," avarice is supposed to be turned into patriotism, asl 
Jefferies was made an upright judge, by clothing him in ermine^ ^ 
or, as it was once endeavoured to be purified by the still better 
name <<j:di^on.'' It behooves us, there&re, to consider this 
new nominal modification of the same old tyrannical principle, 
with great attention. 

If men were classed by the colour of their hair, yet the gene- 
rick term «*man'' would include them all. Classed by their 
occupations, all are also included by the generick term '< la- 
bour." They aU have ^ same rights, whatever may be the 
iv^tUnes of their physical or moral qualities, and to stretch or 



Digitized by 



Google 



tot 

ciBtract their moral qoalkies bj force» in order to poaiper ikm 
passions of a particular sect, or their physical qualities togtatifjr. 
those of a Procmstes, is one and the same act It is the same 
tiling for a government to grant exclusive privileges to a parti- 
cular occupation at the expense of the oUiers, as to the daii 
of black-haired men, at the expense of those having hair of other 
colours, because the effect of both would be, to confiscate a 
portion of the faculties of some men to provide for their own 
subsistence and comfort, and to bestow the amount of the con- 
fiscation upon other men; and it exceeds in atrocity the contri- 
butions imposed bj generals on conquered towns, because it 
cannot be defended bj the right of conquest. We have been 
led into this error bj the abundance and vagueness of words. 
The words *< agriculture, manufacture, commerce* profession 
and science" have produced artificial distinctions, whidi have 
obscured the reach of the inclusive word ** labour," and caused 
us to forget, that it is a natural faculty, like that of seeiof^ 
given to all men, that each might provide for his own individual 
happiness. I cannot see any difference between taking away 
from a man one of his eyes, if it could be done, and giving it to 
another ; or taking away and giving to another fifty per centum 
of his labour. But this has been effected by maldng the plenty 
of words change the nature of things, although labour is in fact 
the only manufitcturer. Workers upon the land, or upon the 
ocean, who give to things new forms or new places, are ail 
manufacturers; and being comprised in one essential charac- 
ter, are entitled to the same freedom in free societies. It is 
this equality of rights, and nothing else, which constitntes a free, 
fair and mild government. 

The power of a strong man to extort from a weak one, more 
labour than he gave in exchange, identifies the character of a 
government, which personifies the strong man, in deprivii^ 
some occupations of free will in making exchanges of Ifdbour. 
It assumes that very practice of the strong man, which caused 
mankind to form themselves into societies^ for the purpose of 
resbtance. An exertion of this power first defrauded ^e suf^ 
ferers of all the labour they had lost during the revolutionary 
war, by the circulation of certificates whilst they were dqirea- 
ating; and secondly, of as much more by taxes imposed on the 
sufferers themselves^ to raise an enormous bounty for the last 



Digitized by 



Google 



C09 

i«6lder^ A certifieate sect^ stroi^ m influencei used the power 
of government to transfer to itself a great mass of the labour 
.<of more useful occupationsi like the strong unassociated man. 
The banking sect, also", has been able to convert the legitimate 
power of government to protect the freedom and fairness of 
exchanges, into an illegitimate power ttf destroying both, by ena* 
blii^ ihat sectto rob all useful occupations of a great portion 
of their labour, bj m^ins of felse or depreciating tokens of value, 
^Irawing an interest paid by these occupations, in addition to 
'tiieir losses from depreciation and bankruptcy. But, the manu* 
facturing sect do not propose to divert the power of government 
v^rom the (n'otection to the invasion of property in the same 
atrocious degree, and only asks it to compel all other occu- 
pations to excha:nge labours with it, not by the mutual valua- 
iions of free will, but by a compulsory, inisulequate valuation ; 
'and like a liberal, unassociated strong man, it is willing, for the 
preseht, to receive annually, from dl other occupations, two 
measures only for one* In exchanges of labour, that which a 
freedom of intercourse can obtain, constitutes* the only true 
measure. 

The effects of this annual exchange of labour to a great 
amount, by a false, and of course, a fraudulent measure, are too 
extensive to be explained in this short treatise, and too intricate 
to be completely developed ; but some of its consequences are 
necesst^ry to clarify the argument. 

As all the other occupations, by being compelled to give two 
-measures of labour for one, will sustains great diminution of 
their means for procuring subsistence, competency or affluence, 
every individual belonging to them will immediately exert his 
ingenuity to evade the imposition, and to reimburse himself for 
his losses, at the expense of other individuals. He will endea- 
,.'Vourto enhance the price of his own manufactures, whether 
agricultural, mechanical, commercial, scientifick or profession- 
al, in order to teing back exchanges from the false measure of 
- legal compulsion, to the true measure of free will. If these 
other occupations could succeed in this attempt against the occu* 
pati<m obtaining the bounty by means of the false measure, the 
bounty or privilege would become abortive, and exchwges 
would be honestly made, measure for measure, as they were 
previously to the cmnpulsion. In this event, the experiment * 
2 B 



Digitized by 



Google 



£10 

would only have the effect of disordering for a lime the onlj 
fair principle of social intercourse, and of exciting new arts for 
mutual imposition. If these other occupations cannot succeed in 
reinstating the golden rule of free will in the exchanges of la* 
bour» they will endeavour, like starving men, to prej upon each 
other; and the oppression of the bounty will fall heavily upon 
them a second time, by producing fraud jand extortion among 
themselves. Those occupations, which cannot find at home ob* 
jects on which to operate, to indemnify themselves for the ex- 
tortions of the occupation which is privileged to mete in a 
smaller measure, than they are willing to receive by, cannot be 
reimbursed. The s^cultural and commercial occupations 
are in this situation. Neither of these can for many years ^nd 
objects at home for. exchanges, sufficient to reinstate the free- 
dom of intercourse ; and neither can indemnify itself for the 
coerced contributions to the domestic privileged sect, at the ex- 
penseof foreign nations, because all exchanges between them 
and these nations must still be made and measured by free 
will and mutual computation, whilst the extortions they will suf- 
fer from the false legal mode of exchanges at home will remain* 
The agricultural class may indeed retain and employ its capi- 
tal, subject to the contribution, but a considerable, poiiion of 
the mercantile capital will be thrown out of employment f and 
its owners must suffer miseries and losses from leaving a busi- 
ness in which they are skilful, for one of which they are igno* 
rant. They will be emigrants from a highly cultivated to an 
unexplored country. Though the scientifick classes may make 
a few reprisals from the endowed class, and many inroads for 
indemnification upon the mercantile and agricultural classes^ 
yet it will be incomplete, because they must participate of the 
loss sustained by their best custpmers. The valuable classes of 
ship builders, owners and navigators, subsisting entirdy upon 
the capital of the mercantile and agricultural classes, must in- 
evitably lose a portion of employment equivalent to the losses of 
their patrons or customers, without the smallest chance of reim- 
bursement* These classes sell neither bread, meat, phyaick 
nor law, and their wages will be diminished by a diminution of 
employment Such will be the effect until a sufficient number 
of these maritime manufacturers are starved, or thrown out of 
employment, to create a demand for the labour of the remnant* 



Digitized by 



Google 



The great lu^ment, in favour of compelling all other occu- | 
pations to paj double prices to that which is very incorrectly 
called, exclusively, the manufacturing occupation, is, that the 
iniposition will be temporary ; for that when it has coerced 
an emigration from other occupations into this, to stock the 
market sufficiently with manufactures, the fraudulent measure 
or compulsory price will disappear, and the fair measure, or free 
will in computation, will be re-instated ; dnd an anticipation 
of a recovery of the principle for which I am contending, is said 
to be better than its actual enjoyment. No proverb has Mid, 
tiiat a bird in the bush is worth as much, as one in the hand. 
This argument, containing the essential and solitary promise, by 
which a protecting-duty policy is defended, is infinitely more fal- 
lacious than any I have ever met with, by which privileged sects 
have heretofore dazzled reason, and defrauded ignorance. These 
fuHgi have usually asserted, that their monopolies and exclusive 
privileges were good, and proper for endurance. But this ad- 
mits, that the privilege and monopoly it is striving to obtain 
bad ; by asseiing that it ought to be granted, because it will 
in time cease to operate partially and unjustly upon the other 
occupations of society. Let tts, says its great argument, relin- 
quish the good principle of exchanging labour by tiie measure 
of free will, and undertake a journey, long or short, upon the 
bad principle of forcing all other occupations to give two mea- 
sures for (me, to a certain detachment of manufacturers, that we 
may get back to the same good principle from which we set 
out. What should we think of the general of a vast army, 
encamped on firm ground, who should march for many years 
over bogs and marshes, in order to get back to the same ground ? 
If he should even accomplish a project so profound, would 
luB getting back resuscitate or cure the soldiers who had died 
or been cripj^led by the way? A journey through exclusive 
privileges, in order to get back to the principles of social liberty, 
is even more hopeless than the march of an army round the 
world, in order to get back to a safe station ; for this latter jour- 
ney m^ht possibly have an end. But where is the end of the world 
of exclusive privileges? What man can hope to live to the end 
of a journey thi*ough its protecting-duty region onlyf If he 
should survive the hardships and privations of this long and 
perilous journey, could he be 90 infatuated as to expect, that 



Digitized by 



Google 



212 

^ no new exclusive privileges vrill be invented by the way ? Will 

avarice be glutted and put to sleep by its success in tbis m- 
stance ; or will that success b^t a new progeny, and cause tlie 
hopes of our traveller from good principles^ to get back to the 
same good principles, by the road of bad princi[des, to be noie 
extravagant than those of a turnspit dog, which expects Aat 
every step will be his last, and that then he wUl eat the meat 
he is roasting ? But why do I argue this point, when he who 
gave to man the capacities of free will and lidMmring; hath 
8aid,^«<with what measure you mete, it shall be mei»ured 
to you again ?" 
A Let us, therefore, proceed to the second point, namely, 

; whether the federal government has a right to regulate the 
wealth and poverty of individuals, or of corporations, by pro* 
tecting duties and bounties. And if it has, mark the conse- 
quence ! Protecting duties for ^le encouragement or coercion 
of manufactures are within the sphere of acHon of congress ; Ike 
supremacy of congress over subordinate governments entities it 
to remove alt obstacles to its measures within that sphere; 
therefore, the state governments cannot tax internal nuinafao 
tures, because it would obstruct the intention of congress to en- 
courage them by bounties. Here is a new case, displaying tl^ 
extent of the principles asserted in the bank decision, and 
evincing that their power to enable congress gradually to strip 
the states of the right of taxation is hot ascertained, if accmrd- 
ing to that decision, it admits of, any limitation* I hope the 
reader, in considering this important point, will en^avour to 
recollect the observations previously made, in relation to sove- 
reignty, supremacy, and our distinction between local imd ex- 
ternal powers, which caused us to go to war with England^ 
and dictated mlich of our former and exie^g confederatioiili 
He is not to determine, whether congress could create a bank, 
or grant protecting-duty bounties, or gratuitoutsly bestow the 
property of the people upon revolutionary sddiers, as if these 
were special and particular cases ; but, whether it has an uali- 
mited right to establish monopolies, grant exclusive privil^es to 
persons, exempt capital or wealth from state taxation, and give 
away the property of the people in any amount to whwnsdever 
it pleases. Such are the general eonclusions arising from these 
special cases^ which seem to me to deserve the natmsttl 
attention. 



Digitized by 



Google 



^ ' mie truth of the fi^ewing {M-epoeition, depends upon the in- 
tention of the federal ccmstitution. Congress is only invested 
with Z«ni^ powers over persons and things, for the purpose of 
execnting the defined powers delegated to it The 8th section 
ef the first article of the constitution contains a list of these 
defined powers, amounting to seventeen ; and the eighteenth 
clause of tiie section empowers congress to make all laws ne- 
^ceasary and proper for executing the seventeen defined powers 
delegated. ^ Thus, 4 correlative power of acting upon persons 
and ttu^s is attached fjo each defined power delegated, as a 
necessary and proper means for the execution of that power ; 
and not as a means of obtaining power not delegated, or of des- 
troying or dimiinshing any power reserved to the states. 

The first power ^ven to congress is that of taxation, to pro- 
^Tide for the common defence and general welfare of the United 
JSiates. Under this power, congress can act upon persons and 
.things, so far as is necessary and proper to collect these taxes. 
It has however been often asserted, that the power given to 
congress to layta^es is amplified by the wwds *' to provide for 
the coDimon defence and general welfare of (he United States^^ 
This construction^ is obviously erroneous. These words refer 
to the destination of the taxes, and are only |i reason for the 
power of taxation. If they convey any power over persons and 
things, internally or externally, they convey all power over all 
-objects; and under a construction of the latitude contended 
foe the power of taxation, and all the subsequent powers bes- 
towed in the same section, would have been quite superfluous. 

^ For, if these words comprise a grant of power to congress, the 
power is unlimited, and includes both all the specified powers, 
and also every other power, which in their opinion may be ne- 
'cessary and proper to provide for the common defence and 
, g^eral welfiure. They would suffice to swallow up the treaty- 
' inakmg power, as well as the other specifications of the consti* 
ttttion; bat, if they, do not suffice to swallow up all the specific 

^ cations and restrictions of the constitution, they are not suffi- 
cient to swallow up any one. Of course, they cannot absorb any 
pmiion of the local or internal powers, specially reserved to the 
states, among which that of making roads is undoubtedly one. 
But, suppose we detach the phrase " to provide for the com- 
mon defence ai»d general weUare of the United States^^ from 



Digitized by 



Google 



dl4 

the power of taxation, and consider it as an isolated and dw- 
tinct grant of power ; it will then be necessary to ascertain 
whose defence and welfare was to be provided for; the defence 
and welfare of the individuals composing the states, or of the 
political individuals called states. I think the letter and tenoar 
of the constitution correspond upon this point with perfect 
perspicuity. " The United States" are specified as the olgects 
or individuals, whose common defence and general welfare was 
to be provided for. In the first clause of the constitati<m the> 
same phrase is used : '* The people of the United States to pro- 
** vide for the common defence and promote the general wel- 
*• fare establish this constitution /or the United States oJJkne- 
~ ricaJ^^ It was not, therefore, a constitution for the government 
of persons or things generally existing in these United States, 
but for the government of the states themselves, and in order 
to promote their common defence and general welfiu*e. The. 
words common and general refer to the objects or political 
beings, whose defence and wel^re was to be provided for» as 
being in a state of union. And as no state of union or any spe- 
cies of social compact existed among the persons composing 
the states, inclusively, these words cannot be made to refer to 
them. They therefore restrain the power of congress to the 
defence and'welfare of the states themselves, instead of enlarg- 
ing it to include the defence and welfare of private persons. 

The whole tenour of the constitution corresponds with this * 
literal construction. All the powers given to congress point 7^ 
to the defence and welfare of United States, and those neces- 
sary for the defence and welfare of private individuals are 
reserved to the states themselves. If this construction be cor« 
rect, it clearly follows, that congress can only impose taxes, 
constitutionally, for the defence and welfare of the states^ and 
that an imposition of taxes for the purpose of enriching 01^ 
state, one interest, or one individual, at the expense of another 
state, another interest, or another individual, is as unconstitu- 
tional, as it is adverse to the freedom and fairness of exchanges. 
In fact, this declaratory end is a complete key to the intention 
of the constitution, and locks out congress, i^ c<»yunction with 
the reservation to the states, from all constructive powers over 
persons and things, of a local and personal nature, especially 
the power of taxing either to foster political fungi, or to grant - 
bounties or exclusive privileges. 



Digitized by 



Google 



215 

Let n% however, look farther into the constitution, to see if 
it affords other proofs of the correctness of the construction 
for which I contend. Its terms, in creating the departments 
of the federal government, are the same with those used to 
define its design. " The house of representatives shall consist 
** of members chosen by the people of the several states. Repre- 
'< sentatives and direct taxes shall be apportioned among the 
** several states. Until the enumeration, the state ef ^em 
'* Hampshire shall he entitled to choose three representatives* 
" When vacancies happen in the representation from any state. 
'< President of the United States. Senate of the United States. 
** He^se of representatives of the United States. Jind the cou' 
** gress of the United States.^^ Now, can anj fair reasoner con- 
tend, that the states are not here repeatedly recognized, as the 
authors of the federal government, and the federal government 
as a government of the states, and not of the people ? Those 
who made it are its constituents, and over these constituents 
its powers are delated. The states are expressly charac- 
terized as individual political beings, and every department of 
the fedetnl government, even the house of representatives, is 
positively asserted to be the representative, agent or trustee of 
the states, and none are even insinuated to be the representative, 
agent or trustee of the people, except as comprised by the term 
" states." Congress is therefore a representation of those inte- 
rests only common to its constituents, the states. But the fra- 
mers of the constitution, lest this representation should usurp 
powers over private persons and internal concerns, carefully 
defined such common interests of these constituents, as were 
intended to be entrusted to their representative; and the ques-. 
tion is» wheth^ the doctrine of means to effect ends, can bring 
under the power of a representation of states, persons and 
things, neither its constituents, nor subjected to its power. 
. !Let us look at a sample of this question; 
Powers bttUmed by ths comHtuHon. Potvert claimed at means. 
Taxation, Incorporating banks. 

War, Making roads. 

Appropriating money. Giving it away. 
Regulating trade. Granting monopolies. 

Admitting new states. Prescribing state constitutions. 



Digitized by 



Google 



S15 

In one column, we find olyects of general coaceiEB to the 
ftates ; in the other, said to be their legitimate progeny, <ib|ects 
merely personal or local. Now I contend, that the progeny of 
the parent powers ought to be sni generis ; and that a progenj 
of means, which violate the powers resenred to the states, under 
the influence of a different species of lust, from that which ex- 
cited the heathen gods, is no less spurious, than the frnk of 
their amours. 

Let us deduce a few arguments from the following -positioD. 
No powers, delegated to congress, are represented in the state 
goremments ; and no pcmrers resenred to the states, are repre- 
sented in congress. If this be true, it evidently fottows, that 
the design of the federal constitution was to establish two c<mL«- 
munities, assigning to each a distinct representation, and enr 
trusting each with distinct powers and duties, so modelled as 
to preserve the common interest, fellow feeling and symp^thjt; 
which constitute the essence of a true representation. Con- 
gress was entrusted with powers concerning t^ common de- 
fence and general welfare of the communis of states, which it 
represents ; and the state governments, witii the common dev 
fence and general welfare of the communities of individuds 
represented by them. If tlie latter should exercise powers 
within the sphere of the former, under the pretexts that It 
would advance the welfare of the community of s^tes con^ 
tuting the union, and were means which might be inf(|rred from 
the reserved powers, they would be acting for a communttjr 
which they do not represent; and if congress should exercise 
any powers within the state spheres, under the same pret^ts, 
it would in like manner be acting for a communkj which k 
does not represent. Now, as it is not pretended that either 
congress or the state governments can violate the principles of 
representation, by directly assuming powers as»gned to the 
other, the only question is, whether either can do it indirectly, 
by the instrumentality of means. It seems to me, tiiat both 
these governments must as well be the representative of means, 
as of powers, and this consideration is as much a resti^cticm upon 
the former, as upon the latter. Means ought to be emUenuitical 
of the powers they commemorate, and the converting of them 
into powers which penetrate into the territories, either (tf rights 
delegated or rights reserved, is a specie^ of political taransub* 



Digitized by 



Google 



«bimtlatkM^, Mki^riBSSiiig the eMtotial principles 6f reprei^ts- 
tiob. They are emanations i^eiii the powers delegated to con- 
gress or reserved to the states; but th<toe emanations must 
surely be limited and restricted bjr the same principles which 
limit atid restrict the powers themseWes. The primary and 
obrious intention of the fSederal Consfitation was, to inrest con- 
fess with such powers only, as equally affected the membet* 
df the community called the union; and to leave to the state 
gtyv^mtiients, all those powers alfeoting the members of the 
community called the states. In both cases, this was necessary 
to sustain the principles of representation, and in neither call 
fhis primary and obvious intention^ be evaded by any meant^ 
witiioUt destroying both the positive division of powers, and 
file moral principle of representation. A legislation of eitlier of 
ttese cotiimunities within the territory assigned to the other, 
ift^ equivalent to a k^stlation by one independent nation over 
lmothei^« I now ask the reader, if numepolies, exclusive privi^ 
leges, or bounties to persons ; or local improvementSi such at 
tiottds Or cumls, and an encouragement of agriculture or manu* 
fectures ; are represented in congress ; and if congress in lega^ 
lating upon such subjects, can possiMy be invigorated by tt6 
^Oftintumty of interests^ which ought to pervade that body in 
the dfsdiarge of its federal functions P Are not the recited 
fon)6tions plainly local and personal, and would they not be ex- 
ei*dsed in congress by feelings and motives, entirely different 
kmii the common interest, fellow feeling and sympathy, essen* 
fial to rej^esentation ? 

In the Federalist, pages 173, 176 and 177, Mr. Hamilton! 
who was neither disposed to diminish the powers of congresir, 
tt^ to extend tiiose of the states, has delivered the foUoMrii^ 
eonteniporary construction of the bonstitution. <* !I%e eticou^ 
^ tttgefAieM of agricuUwre and maimtfaeture$ is an appendage 
^ 4^f ihe dtmeitick police cf ike states* Exorbitant duties on 
<*b«iported articles tend to render other classes of the com^^ 
^ muafty, trilmtatif, in an improper degree, to the manufactnr • 
" ing c^ses. They Would be attended vnth tnequaliit/, be* 
''tween the manufactinring and non-manufacturing states." 
What a wkittisical Mng is party politicks ! This gentieman 
assisted ift framing the federal constitution^ . He knew that 
tbs agricidtural and manu&cturii^ btterests were not repre- 
2 G 



Digitized by 



Google 



tented in congreiff and that a patronage of either by thailM>dj» 
would therefore be an usurpation ; and having stated that they 
appertained to the s^tes, he suggests the tyrannical effect of 
high duties, in noJung one sti^ trUnUartf to another. Mr* 
Hamilton had a clear yiew of the subject. As the states and 
not individuals were the cimstituents of congress, he saw that 
it could not legislate concerning the property, the persons, or 
the rights of individuals, of a local or internal nature ; because 
in such cases the relation necessary to bestow a right of legiis- 
lation, between constituent and representative, did not exist. 
He saw that the absence of this relationship would, as it always 
does, make some people tributary to others. He saw that the 
care of agriculture and manu£Eictures equally appertained te 
the states. And he knew that a right to encourage one involved 
9Lr right to discourage the other; and that, however modest and 
unassuming the first word mq;ht appear, it contained as much 
internal tyrannical power, as any degree of ambition could 
wish for. 
But, may not the power of encouraging and discouragmg both 
' agriculture and manufactures, be common to congress and the 
state jgovernments ? This is a doubt which deserves great atten* 
tion, and will refiect much light upon the subject. We have 
not forgotten the assertion in the decision of the bank question* 
^ that congress being elected by and representing all" may be 
trusted with internal powers, and therefore tit behooves us te 
look into the constitution itself, to discover how far this is the 
ease. When we do so, we at once discern that the elective and 
representative qualities of congress are not considered in the 
least degree as vehicles of powers ; but that defined and limib- 
ed powers are delegated, adapted to the nature of its represen- 
tative character, and of its constituents. The powers delegated 
are sttch» as would act up<m the common interest (tf its con*' 
stituents, and not such as would foster local partialities. And 
there is no concurrency of powers between the federal and 
state governments, except in the case of taxation; from whence 
it is fair to infer that none other was intended to exist* It 
will not be denied, that a right to' encourage agriculture and 
manufactures, and to make roads, was possessed by the states 
previously to die union ; and that, as it is reserved by the consti* 
ttttion, it still renMiips. The ccmcurrent power estabUsh^ from 



Digitized by 



Google 



Becessitj in the case of taxation seems to exclude the idea of 
tacit concnrreiit powers. At least, these cannot be inferred from 
the representatiye nature of congress, without endowinf; that 
bod J witiv a concurrent power as to all the other powers re- 
served to the states ; nor without exploding the reasoning which 
goes to prove that coi^ress is the representative of federal, and 
not of personal or local interests. The meaning of the word 
** reserved" must also be overlooked. A has no right to par** 
ticipate in that which is reserved to B, and if ocmgress be ex^ 
eluded from the exerd»e of the powers reserved to the states^ 
and those encouraging agriculture and manufkcturea are among 
the powers reservedi its right to exercise either power cannot 
be established. 

But, tiiese powers have been claimed as an appendage of that 
to ** regulate commerce,'^ and as the power of taxation has been 
made to beget a power of creating corporations and granting 
exclusive privileges to perwms and property, so this power to 
regulate commerce is supposed to contain both the latter pow«*, 
and also that of inflicting a tax upon all other mterests to en- 
ricb one. This art of making external and federal powers 
teget local and internal powers, resembles I suppose the ioge- 
flious process by which ]ngeon-br«eders are «aid to be able to 
furnish birds of any cdU>ur; but it ia not yet pu^ed quite as 
lar in this instance as in the bank case. In the latter, tmcation 
kuLB begotten banks, and these banks have b^fotten a restric- 
tion of the right of taxati(m reserved to the states; a very 
anomalous progeny indeed ; the right of transmitting taxes 
httB taken away the right of imposing them. Thus, as two per- 
sons re-peq>M a deluged world by throwing «t(mes over their 
keads, die tos«ng about of words is made to revive all the 
powers ]m>hibited to a federal congress by a federal constitution, 
9axd to resuscitate legions of those principles of de^iotism, 
•which were intended to be suffocated by dii^sions and limita- 
tions of power* It is not uncommon for a skilful verbalist, to 
engraft upon an old root, new scions bearing very different fruit; 
but we might as justiy contend that an a[^le engrafted on a 
pear, would produce pears, as that a power to tax all other 
OGcupi^onE. to enrich one, engrafted on the power to regulate 
commerce, would be an imposition of duties ** to pay the debts 
<< and provide for the common defence and generid welfare" of 
the United States. 



Digitized by 



Google 



MB 

During the prewr^ {mt OMwey towards thec^nelufwi of flie 
cevolutioiiar J war, an ingeiMoua member of owignaa, hy wigr 
of amosemeDty iii£(W9ie4 a^ very rich fnend of his, that can** 
greaa bad resolved to engraft upoA the words *' gniend web 
Sure,'' in the oU confedoratioii, an absolato power 9f&c prifato 
pcoperty; and that coerced hj necessity, it had resolred, tha^ 
the estatos of one hundred of the richest kidiriduals in the 
United ^tes should be soU, and anpUod to the ^ oooDunon 
d^nce and general wdfee** for which it was the duty of own 
gross to pnmdo. Being a gentleaum of great ii^gennity* ba 
alarmed his friend 1^ many (dansiUe arguments to prove ^ii9i 
oxistence of the power and a neoeasify, for its exercise ;.aci4 
drew from him a serious and laboured answer. This case ia 
oridntty mn^ stronger, than that under conrideratioc^ and 
afliwrded a wider scope for the verbalizing science- Thewovdii 
^to provide for the common defonco and general welfare" are ofi 
laii^sr conq^s, than the words *' to r^lato commerce*" Tho 
api^ibpalion of the money, tohe^inised by this vidation of prhnto 
property, to the use of the nation, was more conformable to tine 
consUtation, than a iranafer of (Nrivato property to privato 
people. And it was nmre equitaido that toe rights^ of <me 
hwdred men shooU be sacrificed to defend the natioD, than 
that the righto of all other occupations sheafal be sacrificed to 
enrich, the manufiEustoring class* 

Let us place before our eyes toe root, and the scion proposed 
to be engmftod on it The root is, ** omgress shall have pow^^ 
to r^ulato commerce ;" toe sciim, " congress shall have pomee 
^ by protocting duties to tax nil otoer occupations for ttu& pur'*' 
<< pose of enriching toe manufacturing claa&" But toe power to 
lay duties had been defined and limited by the first clause rf 
toe section, and tomr application limited to national use. Ihfr 
power to regulate commerce could not be int^ded to convey 
to congress an indefinite power of taxation, because a definUe 
power of taxatiim had been previously expressed. Specification 
precludes inference; at least, if the inference ccmtradieto the 
specification. As the subject of taxation had been expresdgc 
disposed of» it camiot be fairly supposed that it was tacitiy t»< 
sumed; and as the specification appn^uiates duties. tothe mo 
of toe United Stotes, this tacit resunqi^tion cannot also oontaui 
a hidden power, to lay duties for the bei^t of a pasl|onbir 



Digitized by 



Google 



•M 



^ceufaiioi^ Thi» recondite ]KMiir«rftc«ita^ 
r^;ttUte Gfmuiierce'' mgLj fiii4 Ql^e<;t» for their operation, as 
thej are ni^tifiKioiias withc»it adding to the catalogue, a power 
eacpresdjgiven in another clause; bQt» if they are flowed to 
be a root, capable of endowing congress vfiih all powers having 
relation to commerce, they will eimvey naany pow^is inconsisr 
tent with the tenoor of the constitution. 

They would invest congress with an, internal p(»rer wet 
p^PBont and tbiiigs, not represented in that hody ; and botii pro^ 
hihited to it, and reserved to legislatures in which they are 
represented. The idide jH^op^iy and wealth of tt« country 
are more nearly cminected with commerce, than roAds are with 
war; and the mode of reasoning in that case wiH embrace 
Hgriculture, and invest congress with a power of regulating 
&at also, as is attempted by making it tributary to manufifcc* 
iiuresw The constitution has. labou^ to prevent this illidt 
intercourse between construction and a lust of power. <«Ne 
**ot^itation or other direct tax sfaoU be laid, unless in proportion 
<« to an enumeration. A*o taa> thall be laid on. attieles $3ifpoHed^ 
«*Na prefereoee shall be given, by any reguiation of commmmi 
*< or rsi;eniis, to ports 5f one state over those of imotber.'' The 
intention ^ these reftbrictioos was, to deprive congress of the 
power of exerciaLng local or personal partialities. Protecting 
duties operate in fact as a direct or capitation tax, for the benefit 
i$i one oceupatiim, imposed upon a^l others by legal necessity ; 
and such taxes ought to be i^pmiioned by the census, unless it 
be said that tins rule is only rehired when the tax is imposed 
for pubUc service* and may tiierel<H« be disregarded when it is 
ipiposed £n- the benefit of a pecuniAiy aristocracy. << No taj^es 
shall be laid on articles exported." The value of agrieultund 
ttbiples must long depend ttp<m exclmnges with foreign nations^ 
They* are ccmsumers of our breadstu^', cotton, tobacco, fish, and 
msny other articles. Consumers neither e:dst, nor can be spee- 
dily created at home. These forrigners are utterly unable to 
pay us in specie for the products we cao spare, and if they 
eoulda, this q>ecie would d^reciate like paper money, unless we 
eouid: esq^ort it, not to boy more specie* but articles of consumpf 
iioxu A proh9nti(m» theref<»^, complete or partial, of the im* 
portation of the articles of consumption in which agriculturists 
mnat rec^ve paymeitt» is in imbtfauice a double t^ upon ex- 



^^^ 



•'J 






Digitized by 



Google 



ports. It lessens flteir vtivte, and enhances the price of the 
few articles of consumption thej can procure at home. It will 
have an effect similar to a diminution of circulating currency by 
banks, because it diminishes the currency, (the soundest ima- 
ginable,) circulated bj the freedom of exchanges. It is an illa- 
tion to suppose, that this banishment of currency from the agri- 
cultural market of our country will not cause it to decline, 
because specie may still be brought in payment. The currency 
IntHJght to this market consists of specie and articles of con- 
sumption; by banishing both, the market would be starved; bj 
banishing one, it will be half starred. It is surprising that gen- 
tlemen who despise and deride a miser abounding in wealth, 
and yet denying to himself the comforts and delights of life, 
should recommend an example which they reprobate, for the 
imitation of their country. 

** No preference shall be given, hy any regulation of com'- 
** merce or revenue, to ports of one state, over those of anothen'* 
In all these prohihiti<ms, we find the great principle of inter- 
dictitig to congress a power of regulating the wealth or pros- 
perity of particular states or occupations, carefully enforced* 
Ports is here put for people. Inanimate things have no rights, 
and can enjoy no preferences.- A tax paid by agricultural to 
manufacturing states, if the bounty be sufficiently high to enable 
the manufacturing class to meet foreign competition, will ope-^ 
rate as a favour to particular ports in the state where the 
manufacturers reside. The bounty, bestowed by the British 
parliament upon Irish linen exported, was a preference to the 
ports frdm which the exportations were made, i^ the same kindv 
And all such bounties, direct or indirect, have been considered 
universally as highly valuable local preferences. The weight of 
the restrictive clauses of the constitution, as an exposition of the 
intention to exclude congress from an exercise of power, inter- 
nally, over persons or things, by which partialities or pecuniary 
inequalities among states or individuals might be cultivated, 
would be sufficient to over-balance a I6ng list of verbal subter- 
fuges, by which this principle, so anxiously enforced, is endeai- 
voured to be eluded ; even if literal prohibitions, exactly fitting 
every deviation frcmi it, could not be found. Man's foresight 
cannot anticipate all the artifices of ambition 4tnd avarice; but 
the restrictive clauses of the cfmstitution^ compared with the 



Digitized by 



Google 



Umited powers bestowed, deimmstrate an abhotreBce of the ^ 

idesi, that the federal goTernment shwldliave a power of be- 
stowing preferences of any kind upon states, districts or occa* 
pations. The restrictiye clauses are precedents bj anticipation, 
and the reason which suggested them, extends to similar cases. 
This was the division of powers between the federal and state 
governments, and therefore a construction so ingenious, as to 
elude the letter of the restrictive clauses, will still be incwrect, 
if it violates the reason which suggested them. Have protect- 
ing duties been imposed bjr congress under the expressed poww 
in the first clause of the eighth section "to lay duties/' or un- 
der the clause "to regulate commerce?" If under the power 
expressed, their purpose must be " to pay the debts and pro* 
vide for the common defence and general welffure of the United 
States;'^ if under a power inferred from that to regulate <?om- 
merce, can the constitutional appropriation or purpose be there- 
by evaded or repealed ? To lay them for the purpose of paying 
the debts, enriching or advancing the welfare of particular per- 
Sfflis or occupatioiis, seems to accord as little with the words of 
the constitution, as with its sfMrit in creating a division of pow* 
ers; assigning to congress those exclusively relating to the de- 
fence, wel&re and debts of the mepibers constituting the union, 
called ^states; and to the state governments, exclusively aiso^ 
those relating to the defence, welfare and debts of individuals 
and occupations. 

But the following argument seems to be conclusive. A go-* 
yernment, which exercises a power of distributing welfare 
among occupations uid individuals, must be sovereign and 
absolute over persons and occupations, to enable it to do jus- 
tice by bestowing countervailing favours, because it must of 
necessity otherwise commit great injustice. Even the British 
government acknowledges the right to »ich equivalents, and 
accordingly endeavours to compensate tiie agricultural occupa^* 
tion by particular favours and a considerable monopoly, for the 
favours and monopoly it has granted to the manufacturing 
class. It is unnecessary to enlarge upon the intricate system 
of equivalents extended to a variety of interests in England ; 
and it is enough to know that this system must exist as an 
app^idage of exclusive privileges, necessary to give them even 
in appearance of justi^fr and^uity; By thid game of govern- - 



Digitized by 



Google 



Hi 

ttent, thoagh played irith ^ktfessed fiiiimeftl, th^ great bodijr of 
the people do not appear to have been gainerd. What then would 
be ^e effect of a poWer in congt'ess to grant exclusive priTil^;ea 
to two occupations only, those ai bankers and manufacturer, 
without any power to grant to other occupations or the person^ 
engird in them^ the countervailing equivalents ? We must 
therefore conclude, either that congress have no powek* to grant 
exclusivie {Nivileges to the individuals engaged in these occupa- 
tions, or that the constitution has invested it with an absoiuti^ 
internal power over persons and property; because it can never 
be imagined, that its wise framers intended to invest congresi 
with a power of grantilig exclusive privileges to two occupa^ 
tions, one of no value, and the other of inferior value, and td 
prohibit it from advancing the welfare of the agricultural, 
commercial, maritime, and scientifick occupations, of so much 
more importance. We must either embrace an absurdity ^ 
flagrant, or discern that our decision upon this point is reduced 
to a plain alternative; and that we are forced to conclude 
either that congress may constitutionally incorporate, or grant 
exclusive privileges to every species of human occupation, or td 
none. By the first decision, congress will acquire an imlilmt< 
ed internal power over persons and things ; by the second, the 
powers reserved to the states will be retained. The third 
q>inion, that congress may grant favours to particular states of 
districts, by granting exclusive privileges to occupations locaHy 
prevalent, is inconsistent with a possibility of disusing equal 
justice or general welfare among the parties to the union, tkof 
less forcibly impressed by the tenour of the constitution, than 
by common sense and sound pdicy. All places and all states 
are not susceptible of the same exclusive privileges, and thestf 
cannot therefore be equalized, except the power of graptni^ 
tiiem shall embrace the means by which only it can be effected. 
Each reader will select that of these opinions, which may cor- 
respond with the true intentioii of the federal constituticm. 

But, if all our le^slatures have an absolute power over per- 
sons and property, and the freedom of exchanges is an ima^ 
ginary notion; and if the federal constitution does eti^power 
congress to incorporate or grant exclusive privileges lo alt 
occupations, or to two only, it still remains to be considered^ 
whetiier its exercise iswise^^msV^ to^ial ta tto V^lteA 
States. 



Digitized by 



Google 



It 19 s^i^ tluit prot^ctiiig duUes bj tt^ei 
iexchanges will be a bounty to starving ai 
turers. I shall not stop to enquire into 
to provide for the poor of all occupation 
iniquity of taxing the poor of all other 
bou^nties for the poor of one ; nor to enfcn: 
such a law« and one for taxing the dissentc 
to raise bounti<es for the poor of the churc 
press the existing similitude of these diss 
England to raise bounties for the episcoj 
pearly resemble those who will get the | 
ties ; but passing over these fruitful argum 
facts. 

It will hardly be imagined, that the wo 
ries wrote the multitude of pamphlets and 
Itppeared in favour of the protecting-dut 
bounties upon the occupation of manuf 
phenomenon does not arise from the coi 
which exclusive privileges have been hither 
b^en produced by a pure and disinterested 
employers, of intending to enhance the \ 
themselves to pay. Allowing a motive so 
ierested for the expenditure of talents and 
brought forth by the occasion, it will be 
tleinen to enquire, whether their charitable 
by the mode they have recommended ; be 
they have no mercenary design, it will be 
to cool a consuming zeal, and save them 
sore disappointment It will undoubted 
be told, that all the bounties arising fron 
project, must inevitably settle in their ow 
the wages of their poor workmen (the objec 
will ultimately be diminished by it Yi 
be the consequences. 

As consumers must pay these bounties, 
consumers are poor, it follows, that if ad 
have been bestowed upon the workmen in 
impost on consumptions, it would have 
comforts of more poor men than it would 
this observation derives additional force 
2D 



Digitized by 



Google 



. ivhibtimir manufiurtories are jomsg, aad tliair ftMs^&mn^, 
the J will be chiefl j consamed bj ihe poorest classes in socie^. 
Our capitalists so well skilled in figures may therefore v^ 
easily discover, that their project b on the debit side in te 
account of benevolence. 

Their poor workmeui like all other poor people, are c<nii- 
sumers themselves, and a tariff to bestow bounties by a general 
monopoly will reach and tax them, with the exception of the 
Solitary article manufactured by each. Thus each workman 
will pay two measures of labour for one, on a multitude <^ arti^ 
cles, even if he should receive two measures for one, oa 4t 
aingle article. What a number of these double prices, for ia«- 
stance, will be paid by tiie poor grinder of snuff, for that por- 
tion of ti^e double price which may get into his pocket ! Suck 
is the theoretical benefit to the poor woriunen; practically^ 
even this poor benefit does not exist. 

The theory supposes, that the workmen are to get the whtdsa 
excess of price arising from protecting duties, but as they havt 
a violent tendency to aggravate taxation and provoke a taste 
for expense in the government; and as the system can only b# 
enforced by a great increase of piMiek officers, the share of 
these burdens, which Would fall on the workmen, would proba* 
bly balance or certainly diminish the bounties very con»de» 
rably. 

But the system must encounter a still more formidable faei 
It must meet and destroy a principle much sounder than itself» 
before it can fulfil its promise to enhance the wages of the 
Ivorkmen. The wages of laboub are not settled bylaw, but by 
circumstances over which law can possess but a very feeble aii^ 
transient influence. As the level of wages among labouring 
occupations had been settied previously to protecting-du^ 
laws, the circumstances by which it had been effected were too 
stubborn to be suddenly subverted ; otherwise, when fifty ^Hrun 
hundred per centum had been added to the price of a manit* 
facture by law, the same addition would haVe been umfomtly 
tnade by employers to the wages of their workmen. We know 
that this is never the case. Even a struggle for the boun^ 
Seldom ensues between the employers and their workmen, and 
it was never seen that the workmen have gottien it all. Now* 
all could not possiUy be more than sufllcien^ to reimbutse^he 



Digitized by 



Google 



9» 

WJiAimeth^ 4He loss they sustain bjtite uK^reaaed e^ptuse of 
Ifovernment, and by the additional price they must pay for the 
Articles they coBSHme, but do not febricate ; and if the employ- 
ers get any part of the bounty, the labour of the workmen wiU 
mt go 80 far in providing them with subsistepce, as it would 
have gone, had not the price of consumptions been enhance^ 
by protecting duties ; and although the wages of manufacturin|; 
labour should be somewhat raised, aboye the level of those paid 
to the worknien in other occupations, the retrenchments w<mld 
exceed the accession, and leave the workmen less to subsist 
upon, than when the^r wages, expenses and taxes wer^ all 
lower. 

Suppose however, that the whde tax collected by a multitude 
of monopolies from the community should go to tiie ^orkmen, 
witiiout their employers being able to intercept any portion of 
it, and suddenly create a great inequality between the wage^ 
eCnumufacturiog woricmen, and the workmen in other occupa- 
tions; yet the circumstance of abundance, which so absolutely 
diminishes the price of labour, would tread upon the heels of 
the acquisition, and very soon defeat it An enhanced price 
suddenly removes scarcity, begets plenty, and terminates in 
cheapness* Therefore, when merchants design to obtain an 
aaticle at a low rate, they wisely be^n with giving a high price* 
The bait fills the market, and they avail themseiyes of the 
abunduice to buy chea^i. So in this case, if the wages of the work- 
men should be raised far above the level of the wages of labour 
in other occupations, the bait would suddenly draw an abunr 
dance of workmen to the manufacturing occupation, and this 
abundance would immediately reduce the wages to the rat^ 
dictated by the necessity for subsistence, or by a comparison 
with Urn wages of labour in other occupations, leaving to thf 
employers the whole of the bounty* The most favourable ope- 
ration of the protecting-duty system, as to the workmen, is, 
that the whole body of consumers in the community, including 
themselves, will be ta^d to raise a great annual bounty ; that 
this will augment the expenses of government of which they 
inust bear a share ; that this bounty may draw an abundance of 
virorkmen to the market ; that this abundance will ce^inly 
reduce their wages lower, comparatively with the expense 
ef subsi^tcAce, than whcm there was a scarcity of workmen ; 



'^c 



'T^m) 



Digitized by 



Google 



^y^ 



and that the boiintj will inftlUbly settle in the poektte 
•f their employers. Thas the system eventaates as all etiMr 
exclttslTe-priyilege projects^ in an absolute conspiracy against 
the interest of labour, by inflicting on it an additional bw^ 
den, precisely of the same character and effect, as if th^ 
sum paid to employers had been added to the salaries of the 
irfBcers of government, or given as a bounty to any two or three 
hundred men by name. 

A few facts will be the strongest arguments in support of 
this reasoning. Society may be divided into the classes of rich 
and poor ; both are consumers ; but as the poor class is by far 
the most numerous, it is of course the greatest consumer ; and 
therefore, it must pay the greatest portion of the tax imposed 
by the protecting-duty system, especially as that tax falls 
chiefly upon coarse fabricks. In iron foundries for instancy 
as in all other manufactories, the workmen belong to tiie poor 
class, and consume more of the taxed articles of home manu- 
Ikcture, than their employers ; upon all of which they pay the 
tax. As to the tax upon iron itself, it is chiefly paid by the 
poor of the whole community, because they consume more of 
it than the rich. This instance is adduced to establish the fact, 
that Ihe poor class, including the workmen in all the manufac- 
tories, instead of receiving, actually pay the largest portion of 
the protecting-duty tax. 

The manufacturing workmen in England are among the poor- 
est of the poor class, although the prohibition i^inst the impor« 
tation of their fabrications is complete. Why has not this prohi- 
bition enriched the workmen? Because it has established a 
monopoly which operates only in favour of their empl^ers, 
increases the expenses of government, and feeds unproductive 
eafntal by sacrificing productive labour. It keeps down the 
price of labour both by a concert among employers, and also by 
a comparison with its price employed in other occupations $ 
and subverts the pretence, that the same system will produce 
opposite effects in this country. It i^ evidently a system in fa- 
vour of the rich, and against the poor class, because the first 
elass possess the capital which the system nourishes, and the 
second perform the labour, which supplies the nourishment. 

Employers are called capitalists with great propriety, be- 
cause more capital is necessary to estaUish a mUno&ctory, 



Digitized by 



Google 






^um to employ onrsdres in indmdual oe(^qpalieii8. Fewfu 
Bone, therefore^ of the manufacturiBg cajntaiists can belong to 
the poor class of sotfcty. The mercuitile occupation requires 
capital in the n^Lt degree> and of coarse furnishes the next 
^west number of individuals belonging to the poor class. The 
icienftifick and professional occupations include the next fewest 
number of persons assignable to the poor class. And the agri* 
cultural occupation Contains a much greater number of indi- 
viduals belonging to the poor class, than either of these, because 
Bo capital, except bodily labour, is necessary to go to work ; 
And a very small sum suffices to procure means sufficient to 
employ ourselves in that occupation, to the utmost extent of 
bodily capacity. Of the v^ety of other occupations, highly 
useful, but yet containing a still greater number of individuals 
belonging to the poor clasd, I shall specify two, for the sake of 
an observation suggested by each. The s^tafimng occupation 
is chiefly composed of peo{Je having very Httie capital except 
iheir bodily labour^ If a bounty should be ^ven to this occupa- 
tion, by taxing all other occupations, these other occupations 
would presentiy exclaim, that the law of plenty or scarcity, which 
governs the price of labour, would certainly enable its employer, 
the rich mercantile occupation, to appropriate this bounty to it- 
self, by diminishing W2^s from an estimate of the bounty, and of 
other wages ; and that, under pretence of favouring poor sailors, 
the poor of all other occupations would be taxed, for the beneit 
of the richest merchants. I see no difference between capi- 
talist merchants and their sailors, and capitalist manufacturers 
and their workmen. The carpenter occupation, like the agri- 
cultural, contains a large proportidn of the poor class. A law 
laying a heavy duty upon the importation of houses, as a 
recompense for the tax these pom* people pay tbrou^ their 
consumptions to the manufacturing capitalists, would be equiv- 
ident to laws laying duties upon the importation of bread tstuff, 
tobacco and cotton, to reimburse the pocMr agriculturists for the 
same tax. ^ 

The wealth of the owners of manufactories, having conferred 
upon tiiem withgreat propriety, the title of capitalists, I cannot 
see the policy, wisdom or justice, of taxing the whole class even 
of the rich in all other occupations, to make them wealthier ; 
but when the tax producing this effect, is extended to the po<Hr 



Digitized by 



Google 



MO 

<rf iB otiior ooc«]pfttioni» it is flome^hiiig worse thiui "^a fhtirt^ 
and becomes a grinding oppressian. Mcntility may caln^y dis* 
approTe of the rich |dundering the rich, Mt humanitj sb'hdES 
With no littte impression of abhorrence, from the idea of the 
rich plundering the poor. If avarice shonld endeayour to con- 
ceal this appalling spectre from herself, by the flimsy pretence, 
^t the manafactnring poor and not the manufactoring rich, 
will get the protecting-duty tax, it only proyes that a rery 
small matter of reasoning, attended by a great sum of money, 
will satisfy her. Where is the justice or policy of taxing the 
great body of the poor class, included in all other occupations, 
for the benefit of the small number of poor, included by the 
manufkcturing occupation? Supple two capitalists, haying 
each a million ei dollars, and a law should pass for taking 
firom the one and giving to the other only half i^a millicm. How 
would he feel, though he would have more than enou^ left ^ 
Bodily labour is all a poor man's capital. In taking away a 
moiety of this, though for the purpose of giving it to another 
poor man, a more cruel injury is committed, because he has 
not enough left. It is not an excision irom a superfluity, but 
from the necessary natural capacity to labour, and strongly re- 
sembles the Abyssinian morality of feeding upon an animal 
which is still living. To tax one poor man for the ben<^t of 
another, each having no other capital, but his nigral ability to la<» 
bour, in its degree of oppression, is the same to the sufferer, as if 
the tax had been appropriated to the rich ; but the distinction ia 
of no consequence, because the fact upon which it is surmised 
does not exist The whole community, poor and rich, is taxed l^. 
the protecting-duty system. Had the small body of poor compri** 
sed in the manufacturing occupation received this tax, they 
would have ceased to be poor. If such be the case, there is no 
fartiier occasion for the tax ; but if their poverty omtteues, we. 
can no longer reason upon a supposition, that the pt?otecting«' 
duty tax is received by the poor manufacturers; and we wi 
forced to conclude, that it is a tax upon the poor and rich of 
the whole community, all being ccmsumers, for the exc)u»ye 
benefit of the rich of one occupation* This is aristocracy in ita 
worst character. 

To corrupt our political system by the princi^s of tanri^ 
cracy is, of itself, sufficiently immoral and unwise* The i|rag« 



Digitized by 



Google 



pestramed hj pun! Amenta; biit a strug^e for wealth by ceo^« 
binatioBd is festered bj laws» atid encomraged by rewardi. 
The first is incapable of begetting civil wars or political r^T^ 
lotions ; the second acts with a conceH;^ an infliience and n 
force> aUe to corrupt pinciples, subvert goyeramentSt and 
dispense ^neral oppressicm. As combinations multiply^ they 
tecome chafferers unoi^ themselves for a divisbn of nationAl 
spmly and measure out their own privileges and emolumento 
by their own wilL In i^slative bodies, they exactly resemble ^ 
religious sects, invested with a power to rebate the rights of 
eons^ienGe; and by the same corrupt devotion to their own ex- 
•clusive interest, regulate tiie rights of pr<^erty« All thek 
'Compromises are dictated by this design. Civil combinatioi^ 
indeed invariaUy promise to invest nations with the riches -of 
^arth, ais religious (»tHnise to endow them with the kingdom of 
Heairen; but all history informs us, that one promise terminaites 
in adding to the mass 4^ wickedness, and the other in adding 
io the mass of poverty- 
Let us enquire whe^er the pc^culiar sitaation of the United 
^:ates holds out to them this historical experience as an admo- 
nition, or a policy worthy of imitation. We know that comtH- 
nations, by the force of cimcert acting against disunion, have 
been able in all ages to delude or purchase allies enough, to 
<enidile them to pillage and oppress majorities. If they can Ui 
this country enlist whole states under their ba^nner, they will 
•beconie infinitely strtmger here, than in countries where no 
WLch allies are to be obtained ; ImU as other or^ganb&ed states, 
intended to be the victims of their a:varice, will act in conceitt 
in Imposition to the design, the remstance will also be stronger 
^lan in countries where no such organized interest exists.^ 
fience would arise coUi^ons between the general interest aniel 
tiie exclusive interest, infimtely more violent, than the colli- 
sions between these combatants in countries, where the general 
interest is unaided by organization and concert; and yet such 
^tiskms with weaker weapons have been sufficientiy balefui 
to htttxjom happiness* 

Combinations have Mthefto succeeded by deludii^ particular 
•fitatoi^ into an opinion, that they would be benefitted by serving 
iiDder ^ banners of mercenary setf-int^rest The certificate 



Digitized by 



Google 



2S2 

peculators succeeded in establishing a system for liqniifaiiii^ 
the expenses of the reTolutionary war« exuberantly partial to 
themselves, and atrociously unjust to a vast majority of the 
community ; by urging the locality of their exclusiye interestj^ 
as combined with the general interest of the states in which 
they resided. Banking combinations have by the same artifice 
cajoled towns* districts and states, to become partizans in 
favour x>f their selfish speculations, pernicious to the common 
interest The acquisitions of all these projects have been paid 
by the labour, and the mischiefis they have caused, have been 
suffered by the people of the deluded states, together with the 
people of the other states ; and the question simply b, whether 
it would be beneficial to the people of any one state, to create 
an order of bishops, or of useless officers, because these bishops 
or officers happened chiefly to reside in it. If I have proved 
that this pretence is a snare in the case of manufacturing work-' 
men, it must be a deception still more notorious, when ad** 
dressed to the people of a whole state. These w(H*kmen are 
placed much nearer to the benedictions supposed to emanate 
from a sect of privileged cajHtalists, than the great body of the 
people in any state ; and if to them the dew of monopoly will 
be as littie refreshing as the benedictions of the pope himself* 
I cannot conceive how the people of any state can imagine* 
that they will be reimbursed by this visionary manna, for the 
solid contributions they must annually pay to enrich a monopo- 
lizing sect 

But suppose, that the locality of the monopoly may be a pe- 
cuniary benefit, fully equal, in the case of a particular state, to 
tiie pecuniary contributions it will exact; it will then behoove 
the state, which may be so wonderfully fortunate as to balance 
its account of profit and loss with the monopoly, to consider^ 
whether a pecuniary reimbursement will also comprise a com- 
pensation, for the political calamities the pidicy is calculated 
to produce. 

The policy of fostering combinations by federal laws, has 
undoubtedly transferred, and continues to transfer, a conside- 
rable portion of the prints of labour, from one portion of the 
union to another; not to enrich -the people generally of the 
receiving states^ but to amass great capitals for a few indivi- 
duals residing in them; towards which. all the states contri* 



Digitized by 



Google 



StSi 

Imte, and by which is artificially reared a monied interest at 
tiie expense of the whole community, which is gradually ob- 
taining an influence over the federal government, (rf the same 
kind with that possessed by a similar sect over the British par* 
liament. The operations of this sect, being already sorely 
felt, have already produced awful calculations in reference to 
a dissolution of the union. These arise from its new efforts to 
gratify an insatiable avarice, and its fears of the resentment it 
excites. It therefore craftily works npon the passions of the 
states it has been able to delude, by computations of their phy- 
sical strength and their naval superiority ; and by boasting of 
an ability to use the weakening circumstance of negro slavery, 
to coerce the defrauded and discontented states into submis- 
sion. The indignation, excited by these threats, has suggested 
on the other hand estimates of resources and means of defence. 
The value of their exports ; an ability to procure foreign co- 
operation for the protection of commerce ; and an exclusion of 
the rapacious monied sect from a farther participation of their 
wealth ; are suggestions natural to the occasion. Whence has 
arisen this ugly account, replete with other exasperating items; 
from the interest of the people of any one state in the unions 
or from the interest of a monied sect, embracing only an incon- 
siderable portion of these people P For what are the states talk* 
ing about disunion, and for what are they going to war among 
tiiemselves ? To create or establish a monied sect, composed of 
privileged combinations, as an aristocratical oppressor of them 
all. I appeal to every disinterested man of common sense to 
say, whether the least cause for discontent or dislike between 
the states exists or has appeared, founded in any interest of 
which the people in any one state of the union generally par- 
ticipate ? It is notorious, that all discontents between the states 
have been produced and fostered by pecuniary projects of a 
monied interest, the success of which, however beneficial to 
the individuals composing that interest, must be highly inju- 
rious to the majority of every state in the union. An inter- 
course upon fair and equal terms, between the sections of the 
union, founded in an exchange of agricultural labour, for naval> 
commercial and manufactural, is the basis of mutual prospe*' 
rity, and utterly distinct from the speculations of a monied 
interest^ whose prosperity is founded irt principles, always hos- 
2 E 



Digitized by 



Google 



2S4 

tile to the interest of labour. Shall honest labour and fiur 
industrj go to war with themselves to bestow a soyereignty 
orer both, upon their greatest enemy ? Charles the first lost hb 
life and his kingdom bj his infatuation for episcopacy, and suf- 
fering himself to become the tool of his bishops. If the United 
States should be plunged into a civil war, and lose the union: 
by a devotion to capitalists, and bj suffering themselves to be- 
come the tools of a monied interest, I will venture to predict, 
that future historians will degrade Charles from the summit of 
folly, which he has so long occupied witiiout a rival. 

I freely admit, that capitalists, whether agricultural, commer- 
cial or manufactural, constitute useful and productive classes 
in society ; and by no means design, in the use of the term, to 
insinuate that it contains an odious allusion. It may even be 
applied to the man, whose bodi}y labour is his sole capital. But 
I also contend, that capital is odly useful and re-productiv^ 
when it is obtained by fair and honest industry ; and that when- 
ever it is created by legal coercions, the productiveness of liie 
common stock of capital is'diminished, just as it is diminished 
by the excessive expenses of a civil government. Every species 
of capital thus accumulated, by whatever name it is called, he- 
longs to the same genus, diminishes the efficacy of the common 
stock of capital, enriches individuals, impoverishes a nation, 
and all operating in the same mode deserve to be equally 
odious. 

I will endeavour to exhibit an old idea in a new form, for the 
purpose of explaining how it has happened, that the policy of 
creating a monied interest has become so lamentably inter- 
woven with the continuance of the union. 

The federal is not a national government; it is a league be- 
tween nations. By tiiis league, a limited power only over per- 
sons and property was given to the representatives of the 
united nations. This power cannot be fkrther extended, und^ 
tiie pretext of national good, because tiie league does not create 
a national government Either this word "national" can or 
cannot enlarge the limited powers bestowed by the constituticm 
over persons and -property, upon the federal government if 
it can, it expunges all its limitations and restrictions, and 
leaves to the constitution only the simple office of organizing 
a govemmentt invested with an absolute power of providing f<»: 



Digitized by 



Google 



235 

Oift national good, equiralent to the power of the British go- 
▼emment, oi^anized bj events, without being subjected to con- 
stitutional laws. If it cannot, the term can never be fairlj 
used in any discussion whatsoever, for defining the powers of 
congress. If the federal league creates a government for exer- 
cising specified powers, as to those cases onlj, wherein the 
united nations have a common interest; and contuns no clause 
for investing it with the great power of acting upon persons and 
j^opertj, or of transferring property from man to man, or from 
state to state, or from the states to individuals, by donations, 
or bj exclusive privileges ; it can never be imagined, that a 
power so enormous and tyrannical could have been given with- 
out using a single word expressive of such an intention. The 
exercise of these powers, even by a government really national, 
and absolutely sovereign, has uniformly resulted in oppcessioii, 
although the persona thus legislated out of natural rights, are 
actually represented; but under the federal government, in 
which local and personal interests are not, and cannot be repre- 
sented, an exercise of these powers, utterly unnecessary to a 
fiiir and free government, must produce mischiefs of ten-fold 
magnitude. These local and personal interests were there- 
fi»re left as politically and geographically arranged, into dis- 
tinct compartments ; and a federal was preferred to a national 
government, because that commixture of local interests, and 
inextricable sympathetick cohesion, which infuse into election 
and representation their substantial value, was stopt by nature 
at the state governments, and could not be extended to a na- 
tional Kpvernment, by melting up the states into one vast em^ 
{nre. A federal government was therefore adopted to provide 
for the interests of states as separate nations, as to those cases, 
and those cases only, in which a similar commixture would pro* 
duce a mutual sympathy, and federal cohesion would infuse 
into election and representation their substantial value. It 
was intended by this federal policy to prevent a geographical 
majority from dbpensihg injustice, oppression or ruin, to geo- 
graphical interests; but if a geographical majority in congress, 
under cover of misconstrued or interpolated words, such' as 
sovereign, supreme, national, paramount, necessary and conve- 
nient, may still exercise a power so enormous, the precaution is 
defeated, and the essence of a federal government is already 



Digitized by 



Google 



2se 

kmt Even the iKiembers of congress and the president of iit^ 
United States do not take an oath to protect local or personal 
interests ; and that friYolous security does not exist in thdr 
favour, however little its absence is to be deplored, after tiie 
loss of a genuine representation. If these ideas, though badly 
expressed, are sound, they iumish a very plain rule, by whick 
to determine the extent of federal legislative power. It wat 
never intended to become an instrument of geographical par^ 
tialities, or personal privileges, or an illegitimate (Spring of the 
principle of representation. 

We felt with great resentment the u$urpation8 of internal 
powers over this country by Great Britain* We hear with in- 
dignation of the interferences of one European state with the 
internal affiiirs of another. We viewed with disapprobation* 
the interferences of other states with the internal affidrs of 
France, under the pretence that a European nation existed | 
and that therefore some of these states had a right to meddle 
with the internal affairs of others, for the general good of 
Europe. Even an emperor has protested against this doctrinot 
and we applaud his opinion. And at this very time, judging 
disinterestedly, and guided by the principles of justice, we de^ 
]precate any interference by other states, vAiAk the internal 
affidrs of Spain. Is there any diflRsrence between these casen^ 
and an interference by congress with the internal affairs of the 
states I A majority of states in ccmgress are as much a foreiga 
power, as to the internal afihirs of each fatate, as was a miyoritjr 
of European states to France. If such a majority can transfer 
to themselves by their own laws the property of any <me &ta:^ 
they are not less inimical to the injured state, becimse they da 
not effect their purpose by armies ; and may as justly be re* 
sisted, as Poland resisted the impositions of momurchs l^;idat^ 
ing for their own benefit. 

Let these observations be a telescope, throu^ which to view 
the continuance of the tinion. Something has suggested to 
the members of congress the policy of acquiring geographical 
majorities. This is a very direct step towards disunion, and 
must foster th6se gec^aphical enmities by which alone it can 
be effected. This something must undoubtedly be, a conten^*- 
plation of particular advantages to be derived from such nu^o* 
rities. If we can discover what these are, and can dsp remove 



Digitized by 



Google 



ftor 

Hk^ tMnptaticNri, ve slmU destroy* the most dangerous enemy to 
the best system of government* which ever existed. And is it 
Bot notorious* that they can consist of tiothing else but usurpa- 
tions of internal powers over persons and property, by which 
they can regulate the internal wealth and prosperity of states 
and individuals ? This was the sole cause* which has rendered 
the possession^ of a geographical preponderance in congress of 
S9 much importance* as to have suggested sundry pernicious 
artifices to obtain It* and to have produced sundry battles with 
pens* the precursors of battles with swords. To this motive 
l^e Missouri controversy itself is ascribable.. It was really at 
the bottom of all the ingenuity and zeal lavished upon that 
subject. The true case may be shortly stated thus. Congress 
has no power to bestow exclusive privileges, or to arrange pro- 
perty between states or individuals ; therefore* no motive exists 
for obtaining a geogri^hical majority in congress. Congress 
has a power to bestow exclusive privileges and to arrange pro- 
perty between states and individuals ; therefore, a powerful 
notive exists for obtaining a geographical majority in congress. 
Qad the motive for the pernicious Missouri discussion never 
existed* the discussion itself would never have existed ; but if 
:the same cause continues* more fatal controversies may be ex- 
pected. It is therefore evident that if the people in any state 
should be deluded into an qunion« that they will be enriched 
by an exclusive privilege for enriching a few capitalists* they 
Wight very seriously to c<msider the risque to which the union 
will be exposed, by a power in congress to regulate wealth and 
poverty intemdly* so well calculated to generate the most ex- 
asperated geographical parties. If the neighbours to a courtier 
should wish him to receive extravagant douceurs* from a hope 
of admiring the palace he might build* or of tasting occasionally 
the luxuries of his table* yet* should these partialities be likely 
.to^ excite a civil war* they would hardly be so infatuated by 
these frivolous considerations* as to bring upon themselves the 
.worst of evils* by becoming advocates for the partiality b^ 
which It may be caused. 

The wei^ty authority of congress has affirmed the truth of 
tills reasoning, by changing the sales of publick lands from 
credit to cash, because the creation of a considerable pecuniary 
mterest by credit sales might produce a combination of a per- 



Digitized by 



Google 



sss 

rndims political tendency. If a pecvniaiy combinatiaOt whidi 
leeds upon -a wilderness, would endanger our form of goyem« 
ment» what maj be expected from such combinations, whichr 
feed upon the profits of labour? If a combination of a small 
band of land-speculators, united in one interest by a small cajH- 
tal, might shake the union ; what may be done by the mighty 
combination of banking and manufacturing capitalists, stronger 
in number, in influence, and united by an enormous annual 
income? And if a policy which must have vanished, when the 
uncultivated lands were exhausted, was yet an object of appre- 
hension, ought not the same policy, which may last as long as 
land is cultivated and labour is exerted, to suggest some de- 
gree of foresight ? ^- 

But suppose, that all these objections to the protecting-<luty 
system are unfounded ; and that, surrendering the freedom of 
labour, the federalism of the constitution, and the safety of the 
union, its policy should be settied by a maxim, canonized by 
capitalists ; " Get money; fiurly if you can, but get money*" 
The only difficulty is to ascertain these to whom this maxim la 
addressed by the protecting-duty system; to the capitalists or 
to the community. If to the capitalists, they may avail them* 
selves of its whole doctrine ; if to the community, it can only 
avail itself of the two first words. The «cope and deagn o^ 
this treatise, is to maintain the right of every body to get mo- 
ney, and I only differ with the capitalists, by proceeding to^ 
assert, that every one has a further right to use it for his own 
benefit, because he has earned it This every body con^ioses 
the community, and if it shall consider the two first words of 
the protecting-duty maxim, as applicable to itself^ the question 
(mly is, whether it will be made richer by each (^ its members 
employing his own eaintal for his own benefit, or by yielding 
up annually a portion of it to rich capitalistSv There is nothing 
which excites an ardour for gettii^ money, more than a righ^ 
to use it ; and nothing which damps that ardour more, than its 
being annually taken from us. To effect the object of getting 
money, the policy of transferripg the ardour to a few capitalists, 
and applying the refrigerator to the community, is as if a na- 
tion having ten millions of hands should diminish the industry 
of nine millions nine hundred and ninety-iline thousand, to ex- . 
<ate a money-getting temper in onj& tiiousand* The pecuniary 



Digitized by 



Google 



239 

loss to the community wUl therefore not be limited bj what 
^e one thousand may gain»bu^ will be incomputably aggravated 
by a general discouragement of industry. 

A dislocation of capital by laws has no other object but to 
efiect its accumulation in a few hands^ by diminishing it in 
those of all others ; an effect, comprising the essence of oppres- 
sion, in every form hitherto experienced. The real que^ioQ» 
therefore, is, whether nations are richer, unexposed to the essen* 
tial instrument of tyranny, than when suffering under it If free 
nations are more prosperous than enslaved, free capital will be 
more productive, than capital deprived of its liberty. It would 
be a strange anomaly, if the freedom of other human r^ts ad« 
vance the wealth and happiness of nations, that the freedom of 
labour or capital should produce poverty and misery. And it 
would be an evident contradtfition in economists to assert, that 
cultivation by personal slavery is unthrifty, but that the subjeC' 
tion of caj^tal to legislative dislocation, will make it more pro- 
duetive. I perceive no consistency in patronizing the rights of 
slaves, and anathematizing the rights of capitaL The freedom of 
ktbour must supply. the arguments in both cases, since there is no 
difference between constraints imposed upon the body, and con** 
.straints imposed upon the acquisitions of the body. 

After capital is dislocated by law, is the law still to pursue 
it in iU accumulated state, and to prescribe its future desti« 
nation ; or are the receivers to hold and use it, according to 
their own free will and judgment P The law it is said transfers 
it, that it may be employed in a mode more productive, than if 
it had remained with its owners ; but if these new occupants 
are left at liberty to use it as they please, its productiveness 
must continue to depend, not upon the law, but upon the free- 
dom of individual will. If the principle of free will in the use 
of capital be a good one, applied to the acquirers of capital by 
law, it cannot be a bad one, applied to the acquirers of capitid 
by labour ; nor can it cause capital to be productive in one casoj 
and unproductive in the other. 

Let us consider some other established facts, and apply 
them to the point of national wealth. No fact is better esta- 
blished, than that commerce is a source of wealth* Such is ita 
effect from its powerful capacity to excite industry. The 
(^xam^es of Venice and Holland are modem ; that of Carthage 



Digitized by 



Google 



if less explicit from its antiquitj. In the former cases* sad 
probably in the latter also, the national wealth obtained ^ con* 
merce did not arise from probibitorj daties imposed npon tke 
imp(H*tations of finttign mana&ctnres, bat from the freedom of 
importations and. exchanges, combined with the skill and i]i'» 
dostrj. produced by this freedom* Holland long iourii^ed tnr 
the midst of Europe, under Terj unfavouraUa circumstances* 
tottering on the brink of some political precipice, by importing 
the manu&ctures of all countries within her reach. 

The case of Britain differs from these in the protecting^^j 
item ; but her commercial system, considered in its essential 
characters, is substaiitiaUy the same. She imports tchotei^er 
tike wanU or can adoaftiageoudjf exchange, and does not in^iofft 
wbat she does not want nor can exchange with otber natioDS 9 
taking care that her ships shall returo with valuable cargoes. 
How far these cargoes are composed of articles ready for con<« 
sunqption, or requiring labour to be prepared for it, is a pointy 
difficult and not material to decide. Her importations frite 
tiie east are chiefly ^ the former description ; those from th« 
west remain doubtful, as to their comparative value. Among 
the articles ready for consumption are bread-stuff, fish, rice* 
indigo, and others ; even tobacco may be considered as belong'* 
ing to this description of her importations, as she re-«xport8 
the most of it, in the state received, and as it employs aa 
inconsiderable portion of manufacturing labour. These are 
manufactured articles of the United States, imported by Bri« 
tain and her dependencies to a great amount, to be consume 
ed or exchanged ; and probably equal in value to the raw 
materiids. she also imports to manufacture; but taking her 
whole commerce into contemplation, there can be no doubt 
that her importations of manufactures to be consumed or ex- 
changed, greatly exceed in value her importations of raw ma« 
terials to be manufactured. Such is the general character of 
her commerce; she has prohilnted the importatmn of thoMl 
particular kinds of manufactures only, which she does not whv^ 
and cannot advantageously exchange, because she is over* 
stocked witli them ; but this is a particular exception suggested 
by a particular circumstance,' and not extending to the gene- 
ral charactw of her commercial system. And yet, bj adverting 
to the rec^t suspidmis in Britian itself, as to its wisdom> and 



Digitized by 



Google 



f4i 

combining with its policy her debt and taxes, far exceeding the 
a^t and taxes of any other European nation, a doubt of its 
effect, and a fear of its ado|(tion, ought to be inspired. 

Instead of teasing ourselves in a perplexing endeavour to dis^ 
«itan^e the convolutions of a tissue, made of shavings from 
these facts, let us apply the plain facts themselves to the Uni« 
ted States* Venice and Holland became rich, by importing 
manufiEtctures ; and had tiiey prohibited this importation, their 
commerce must have dwindled and perished. Will not the 
eommerce of the United States be more flourishing, by follow- 
ing, than by rejecting these brilliant examf^s P En^nd im^ 
ports a great variety of manufactures, which she either consumes 
or exchanges ; may not the commerce of the United States be 
nourished by the same means P England only prohibits the im* 
portation of those manuiiEu^tures in which she abounds, and be- 
gins to doubt whether even this prohibition b a wise one ; does 
this exan^le recommend here a prohibition of the manufactures 
%Mch we want, whilst England encourages the importation of 
•ueh as she wants P The prohibition of those manu&ctures in 
which England overflows, causes no monopoly, and inflicts no. 
tax upon consumers for the benefit of capitalists ; but the pro- 
hilntion <^ the importation of those wanted here, causes a tax 
and bestows a bounty, locally and individually partial. 

In all these cases the soul of commerce shews itself at its 
eyes, to be compounded of full frei^ts, rich cargoes, and free 
exchanges. The facility and freedom of exchanges is as essen- 
tial to commercial prosperity, as to civilization and happi- 
ness. Abolish it entirely, commerce is destroyed, and savage- 
ness and misery restored* Dom^stiek, as well as foreign com^ 
merce all over Europe is restrained of its freedom, and avarice 
has erected toll gates for cities, just as it purposes to do it 
here for whole states, by the protectimg-duty project ; not 
for the sake of increasing the comforts of those within, but 
merely to get money for itself. The English protecting-du^ 
^stem does not impair ihe facility and freedom of exchanges, 
as to internal or domestick commerce* in any degree ; ours 
destroys it ; nor does the English system impair this freedma 
and facility in relation to foreign commerce, beyond what we 
^uld do by duties to prohibit the importation of cflftton, flour 
and tobacco, as articles are chiefly prohibited^ ^ich could not 
2 F 



Digitized by 



Google 



242 

be imported to any advantage if ^ey were not prohSnted. 
The domestick commerce of England is left quite free ; the 
foreign nearly so. And to procure tke commercial prosperity 
she is supposed to hare obtain^ by this policy, vre are rapidly 
subjecting both domestick and foreign commercei to strangling 
restrictions. 

We are blinded to the rights of domestick commerce, by 
clouds of dost brushed frotn foreign practices, of which we can<> 
not form a judgment by the help of those honest intelligencers, 
the senses ; but surely we may be permitted to take a glance at 
it, through this dusky medium. 

Suppose the nations, composing what is very incorrectly cal- 
led the non-manufacturing district of the United States, (for 
they are probably as great manufacturers as their sisters,) should 
believe the arguments and adopt the policy recommended bjr 
the protecting^uty system. If the policy be wise and good 
between the United States and England, it must also be wise 
and good between the nations composing our union. If it be 
injurious to the United States, to admit the importation aid 
use of foreign manufactures, subject to competition, it must te 
more injurious to the southern states, to suffer the use of 
northern manufactured, enhanced by a monopoly* It cannot be 
proved, that a policy, chastened by competition and a freedom 
of exchanges, is bad, but that it may be made good by poison- 
ing it with monopoly. It cannot be proved, that foreign nations 
draw wealth from the United States, unjustly, by sealing them 
manufactures cheap ; and that one state may draw wealth from 
another, justly, by selling to it manufactures, dear. Nor is it 
possible, that so enlightened a body of men as congress should 
be able to discern any species of injustice or loss in one case* 
which is not aggravated in the other. Therefore, if the capi- 
talists can prove that a prohibiting policy is wise and just for 
the United States in reference to other nations, they have also 
proved that it would be wise and just for particular states in 
relation to themselves. Its wisdom and justice in relatitm te 
the southern states, called non-manufacturing, being proved by 
the capitalists, it only remains to consider whether they have a 
Tight to do. that which is necessary for the preservation of their 
internal wealth and prosperity. Have congress a right to in- 
flict upon some nations composing the union, local and inters* 



Digitized by 



Google 



£43 

mH evils of impoverishisg severity? This question has been 
jdis<^ssed in a former sectton. But it may be added, that if 
congress can effect this, by a circuitous mode of internal taxa- 
tion, the complete concurrency of that power between the 
t^tes and congress, in every ease, invests, or rather leaves to 
the fiitates, a constitutional right of resistance. The states may 
tax every species of internal property; and by internal prohiU- 
twy excbes, prevent the use of. any manufactures of pernicious 
internal consequences. This idea will again be adverted to; 
now I shall only observe, that every state in the union has 
exercised the right in a multitude of instances. If then congress 
Assumes a power of dealing out the same partialities, in an 
aggravated form, between states and manufacturing capitalists ; 
said tQ be ruinous between the United States^ and the English 
manufacturing capitalists, though of a milder type ; the old 
contest arises (so common among mankind) between a power to 
oppress and a right to resist ; and it would not be very important 
to decide, whether ^e right was both natural and constitutional, 
or natural only. But ibis contest between power and power, 
or power and right, or injury and resistance, will never occur, 
provided tiie principle of the freedom and fairness of exchanges 
between the individuals com^MMing the several states, is ad- 
liered to, as a principle of the union, uncontaminated by a capi* 
talist monopoly. 

This principle, internally just, has universally been also con- 
sidered as wise, by all comment nations. This princif^e, 
and not prohibition, was the basis of Cardi^inian, Venetian and 
Dutch commercial prosperity ; and is in &ct the basis also of 
the British. It brings home merchandise and not ballast, either 
for consumption or re-exportation. Both descriptions of mer- 
chandise constitute the sustenance of commerce; and of course 
commerce will languish^ if its sustenance be diminished. I am 
no merchant, but it seems to me, that by diminishing the busi* 
ness of commerce in any way, we must unavoidably diminish 
. its weidth, and also the naval power of the United States. I 
have endeavoured to prove, that the distinction between raw 
materials and manufactures is verbal and unsubstantial, as 
labour is the source of both* Whenever ships bring home the 
products of labour, they bring home solid wealth, and by bring- 
ing home wealth, they add to the wealth both (tf the mercantile 



Digitized by 



Google 



£44 

class and of the comnmnitj. This truth is universallj assefkted 
to, except when it is contested by the design of enriching some 
home monopolj or exclusive privtiege* Thus we import ther 
manufacture called tea» both to supply our own wants and to- 
re-export, because b manufacture brought from a foreign coun-^ 
try is an acquisition of so much wealth ; and we prohibit the 
importation of other manufactures, only because tiie nourish*- 
nent of a monopoly is preferred to the nourishment of com- 
merce,, and the acquisition of national wealth. Had no sucIl 
combination as manufacturing cafntalists existed, the policy c^ 
encouraging commerce by leaving its importations free would 
never have been doubted; and the cause of the ^bi^t afiRirds 
no argument in favour of it? confirmation. 

What are importations? Money. They are something better; 
they are a universal currency. They are the substance, o£ 
which money is only a representative ; and are of more univer^ 
sal value, than money itself. And they inspire more skill and 
industry than money, because they give employment to more 
labour. Commerce is supposed to flourish, and a nation to be 
rich, when they abound in money or currency ; but this is only- 
k sign of probability, and not a positive truth, as Spain has 
proved by a metallick, and the United States by a paper cur- 
rency. On the other hand it is a positive truth, tiiat nations 
abounding in things represented by currency or money^ whe« 
ther imported for use or exchanges, or fabricated by itself, is 
wedlthy; and that commerce abounding in the same things, is 
prosperous and flourishing. This abundance can never be^ 
effected except by importations, and no nation nor commerce 
can therefore be rich and prosperous, if these are excluded* 
A total exclusion is death to commerce; a partial, sickening; 
I do not believe that either nations or commerce are benefitted 
by confining their importations to things in their least valuable 
form, or what are commonly called raw materials ; on the con* 
trary, it seems to me, that the richer the cargoes, the greater 
will be the prosperity both of the nation and its commerce. . 
Would it be better for us to import from Mexico the ore^ than 
the manufactured dollar? This might possibly be answered in 
the affirmative, if our country was so overflowed with peo|^» 
that the loss in freight and labour occarioned by importing only 
as much wealth in fifty or an hundred ships^ as could be brought 



Digitized by 



Google 



M5 V 

in onet would be compensated by the empl^ment of mtnofiic- 
taring the ore into money ; but under our circumstances, it 
"would enrich us more to receiTe one cargo of dollars, as valua- 
ble as an hundred of ore, because it would be a great savingof 
capital and labour, capable of being beneficially employed other- 
wise. For the same reason, it is better for us to import English 
cloth than English wool* 

The Dutch were extremely wealfliy, whilst their warehouses 
groaned with the most valuable manufactures of all nations* 
They prefeired rich cargoes to those of little value, because fine 
manufactures were a currency of gold, and raw materials, like 
flie iron money of Sparta. An abundance of universal curren- 
cy brouj^t wealth to the Dutch through the instrumentality of 
exchanges ; but it mil bring wealth to us through an additional 
and important channel. The Dutch had few or no domestick 
articles for sale and exportation ; the United States abound in 
them. An abundance of currency enhances prices. Manufac- 
tores are a substantial and universal currency, and of course 
the more of this currency is brought to us by commerce, the 
better will be the price of erery article we have for sale. By 
a diminution of tiiis currency, the prices ot all articles we havo 
for sale must be corresp<mdently diminished. Such is the effect 
of embargoes and restrictions upon cmnmerce, because they 
expel from the market a portion of the currency, foreign manu- 
fieu^tures, by which the prices of our own are upheld* If bar- 
ter was practised without the intervention of money, the more 
manufactures were broi^t to us by foreign nations, to ex- 
change for oursy the more we should get for ours ; and the fewer 
they brought, the less we should receive. Thus it is better, that 
a foreign merchant should come to us full than empty-handed, 
because we shall get more for our commodities in the first than 
in the latter case ; and though we receive payment in a cur- 
rency called manu&etures, yet as it is universal, and we live 
in the commercial world, it is real wealth to us. Indeed it 
lAen happens, that the enhanced price for our commodities, 
arising from an abundance of manufacturing currency, will 
enable us to rival or undersell in other countries the fabricators 
themselves. Accordingly, those i/riio have observed the fluc- 
tuations of prices since our revolution, must have seen, that 
tiiey have been distinctly influraced by the plenty or scarcity 



Digitized by 



Google 



M9 

tt imported wi^eml curtencji «Bd that the wealth and pros- 
perity of the United States has been visibly increased by itff 
abundance^ and diminished by its expulsion. In fact, it is ex- 
actly the case of a plenty or scarqity of money. 

The protecting-duty system advocates a scarcify of currency, 
and gravely informs a^culture, commerce, the fisheries apd all 
other occupations, except one, that by expelling the abundance 
of imported currency, and substituting one about twenty fold 
less in amount, these occupations will get as good or better 
prices than ever. But do we pot know» that as cuirency be- 
comes scarce, its value increases ; and must it not of course 
follow, if ninety-five per centum of it is driven away, that the 
holder of the remaining five would be made very rich P The 
policy of this project therefore is, to deprive commerce of that 
branch of her business, consisting of importations, re-exporta- 
tions, and free exchanges by which the Dutch grew rich, an4 
English commerce is now flourishing ; and moreover to deprive 
agriculture and all, other occupations except <me, of good ffy 
ces for their labours, by expelling a great portion of the cur- 
rency by which these prices are enhanced, and granting toil 
few individuals an exclusive privilege to coin the veiy same 
kind of currency proposed to be expelled. They do not pre- 
tend that t^ey can coin as much as they propose to expel, but 
tiiey propose by way of some compensation fm* the deficiency, 
to make each half d(dlar, pass for a whole cme. 

iN^eal, in his history of tilie puritans, vol. £« p» ££3, speaking of 
the government of Charles the first, remarks, that *' he levied 
" the duties of tonnage and poundage, and li^d what othv 
*' duties he thought proper upon mercbatidiae^ which he let out 
<< to farm to private persons; the nwmber qf mowipoli^ WMS 
'< wcredible^ there wm no part of the suijeets^ pr^eriy that 
<' miniOry eouid dispose cf, Imi was bougM md sold. Th^ 
** ridsed idiove a million a ye^ by ti^es on soap, salt, candks, 
** wine, cards, pins» leather, coals, &c. ewn to^the sole ga$hef' 
" ing of rags. Grants were given out for weighii^ hay and 
" straw, for gauging red herring bairels and butter casks ^ for 
*^ marking iron and sealing lace ; and a great many.othen^; 
^ which being purchased of the crown, mvst he paid for 6^ Ite 
<* suljeet. His nuyesty claimed a right, in cases of neees^tfy, 
•• (of which necessity himself was the sole judge) to raise «io- 



Digitized by 



Google 



"^ nej by 8liip*wri1» for the maiateiuawe of the royal naty. 
^ The tike was demftoded for the royal army, by the name of 
"coat and condact money; the men were billeted upon pri« 
" Tate houses* Large sums of money were raised by the &ie« 
*' of the star-chamber and high commission coart» and the em* 
** traordinary projects of loans, benevolences and free gifts**' 

We have imposed duties, not for the exclusive purpose of 
defraying the expenses of government, but also to enrich pri- 
mte persons. The number of monopolies tiius created is in^ 
erediMe. They extend to clothes of all kinds, iron, furniture. 
Carriages, and a multitude of manufactures, and even to the 
conversion of rags into money. The profit reaped from all 
tiiese monopolies must he paid by the eitixen. Every citizen's 
property is reached by them to a great extent, and as far as it 
is reached, transferred to other citizens. Thus it is bought and 
sold by a traffick between laws and Courtiers and speculators* 
Charters to collect money of the people are openly sold, under 
the pretexts of necessity or convenience, and in virtue of the 
fower of sovereignty, according to the maxims and policy of 
Charles. Much lai^er sums of money are annually taken from 
free citizens by charter-bounties and monopolies, than were 
taken from Charles's subjects by the star-chamber and hi^ 
commission courts. Charles extorted money from the peoploi 
and then squandered it among his favourites; we squander it, 
and then extort it from the people; as iu tiie cases of the 
grants to certificate-hcdders and revolutionary soldiers. Charlea 
sometimes, by granting monopolies, enabled his favourites in 
collect great sums of money from the peoj^e themselves ; we 
follow his example by banking and protecting^uty monopolies* 

I shall not attempt to try either the conduct of a Stuart, or 
our own by tiie principles of civil liberty, in order to discern 
^e preference. The most niaterial differences between them 
are, that our banking and ^otecting-dnty monopolies cover 
every thing; whereas by selecting particular articles, acute as 
he was in the science of monopoly, Charles might have over- 
looked a few. His monopolies were always sold ; ours are 
sometimes given away* PubHck revenue was the pretext of 
his; private emolument the design of ours. He pleaded neces- 
Mty; we plead speculation* He used force; we delusion. 



Digitized by 



Google 



** Tax humries,^ is sometimes tte aj. ** Tax necessaries," 
at others. Bat "tax both" is at all times the creed of (nuid 
and avarice. What are these laxnries and necessaries P Are 
the products of agriculture ass^nakde to the former class, imd 
those of manu&cturing to the latter? Is food a luxury, and 
dothing a necessary? Is iron a luxury? Are wine, rum, whis- 
key, sugar, ccdfee, tea, sj^ces, salt and physick, all luxuries? 
God saw that all his works were goodi and avarice impious^ 
prohibits the divine benevolence. It taxes comforts, by calli^ 
them luxuries, and it taxes necessaries, by pretendiog that th^ 
are politically pernicious, with the dengn of introducing those 
▼eiy abuses, to which the term luxury is most correctly applied. 
A legislative distribution of wealth b^ts the luxury which Is 
pernicious, and the poverty which is miserable; but the free* 
dom oi industry diffuses the pleasures which the creator has 
provided for man, and softens the evils by which they are at- 
tended* 

But avarice pursues industry in all her recesses, and eom^ 
putes her earnings with the eye oi a master. Self-interest is 
capaUe of any estimates, however falser for its own ^tifi- 
cation. Thus we have seen the wages of labour in the agri-* 
cultural occupation, enhanced beyond those in the mechanical, 
merely because it was necessary to make the only accessible 
victim of a pecuniary combination, rich, and the soldi^^ by 
whom they were to conquer, poor; although it is notc^ous that 
mechanicks, white or black, freemen or slaves, earn much higher 
daily wages than agricultural labourers can gain; and that 
slaves, having a good trade, sell for double the price they w6ukl 
do if they had none. The capitalbts, whilst they deny or 
obscure this fact, confide in it for the succe^s of the protecting>- 
duty prcject in convejring to their own pockets whatever it 
shall extort from those of the community ; for it demonstrates, 
tiiat the present disproportion between mechamcal and agricol* 
tural wages is sufficiently great to secure to them a supply of 
workmen, without the least necessity for alimenting the temp- 
tation by suffering their labourers to participate of the bounty. 
Truth is every where truth, but imposture, stimulated by 
avarice, every where attends her ; thus benevolence to woric- 
loen is the exterior of the protectingHiuty system, as beaut^d 



Digitized by 



Google 



' SMi9 

419 the skin of the tigtr, which never^less covers a rapacious 
animaL 

The art of cutting up nations into sects, or creating combi- 
nations, is the work-shop of avarice and ait^lntion, the wares of 
which are never offisred to nations without being varnished. 
The framers of our governments, impressed with the danger of 
this art, which had been unexceptionablj pernicious to human 
happiness,, endeavoured to destroy it bj estaUishing religious 
freedom, by forbiddii^ noble orders, by denouncing exclusive 
privUegeS', and by limiting the powers of governments to prevent 
* its introduction, and equalize the rights of property, knowing it 
to be a Trojan horse, either to be disembowellkl, or to become 
the vehicle of destruction. We have rejected tithes as hi^ly 
oppressive, though pud for the blessings of religion, and estab- 
lished a five-fold tithe, paid for the curse of a capitalist sect. 

The advocates of the protecting-duty system assume the title 
of " friends to national industry," formed their reasonings upon 
the maxim, that <'the productiveness of labour is increased in 
*«proportiMi aS it is directed by inteUigenee^^* and endeavour to 
sweep away all the arguments which are adverse to the system, 
by asserting that the ^miseries of labourers in Britain and 
<< China result, not from manufactures, but from the nature of 
« the$e govemmentsJ^ 

A maxim, theoretically sound, may be erroneously applied; 
and its obvious truth is often plausibly used to recommend prac- 
tical conclusions^ at enmity with the real principle of the max- 
im itself. The position >*that intelligence will increase the 
productiveness of labour" is unquestionably true; but an in<^ 
ference, <* that combinations ought therefore to possess a power 
'* of taxing labour by a monopoly acting upon labour,'' may yet 
be unquestionably false. A monopoly of intelligence by any 
class or combination would be tL tyranny, if it could be effected ; 
but a monopoly of any means for obtaining wealth from a com- 
munity, by a class or combination, unpossessed of an unnatural 
superiority of intelligence, prevents tiie increase and diminishes 
the stock of national intelligence ; because it is only cunning, 
associated with avarice, which resorts to means for the gratffica- 
tion of self-interest, un&vourable to the increase of intelligence 
itself. The productiveness of virtue by religion is at least a* 
desirable as the productiveness of labour; but mono^Mdiei ni 



Digitized 



by Google 



5UW 

intelligence bj comlnnations faaye assumed its direcli<m» uA 
OYerspread mankind with vice. The productiveness of civil 
liberty bj government is of the next importance; but mono- 
polies of intelligence bj comlnnations have assumed its direc* 
tion, and overspread mankind with o^ression. The produc- 
tiveness of labour is the third great source of human happiness; 
but monopolies of intelUgenee by combinatiims have also aa^ 
sumed the direction of labour, and overspread mankind with 
fraud and poverty. The eTils resulting from the usurpations 
of a power of direction, founded in the false assumption of supe- 
nor intelligence, in these three cases which decide the tempo* 
rai destiny of nations, admit of no remedy, except that of the 
freedom of mteUigence. It is this freedom which makes both 
vdigion and civil government more productive of benefits to 
mankind, than when intelligence is monopolised by combina- 
tions, and exerted by excluri^^ privileges. And if the freedom 
of intelligence both produces it and makes it more prbductive 
in these two cases, it must have the same effect in the case of 
labour. The three cases make up but one political system^ and 
that sjrstem, to be consistent, must adhere to one principle; it 
must either prefer the national intdligence to the intelligence 
df combinations, or the intelligence of combinations to that of 
the nation ; and having made an election, it must embrace all 
tbre^ cases, or the system will be incomplete and internally 
contradictory. Can the freedom of intelligence or intellect be 
productive of good in the two first cases, and of evil in the 
third ? Can the freedom of religion and of civil government be 
preserved, if the freedom of labour be surrendered to the int^ 
ligence of combinations i Are slaves free, because their labour 
is made more productive, (if such be the fiict,) by the intelli- 
gence of their masters? Is the white population of the world 
justified in c(mvertin^ to .its own use the labour of Africas Oft 
account ^ a superiority of intellect ? Would the intelligence 
of the negroes in Africa be diminished by a freedom of labour ? 
In shdrt, the whole reasoning upon whic^ the advocates for the 
protecting-duty system rely, is at ilie threshold, dependent upon 
a preference between national intell^nce, uidthe intelligence 
of a self-interested combination for the ot^ect of generating pr«i* 
ductiveness, moral, and physical, as th^ means of national pi:«s- 
pmtf and happiness; and havii^ made an election he<weeft 



Digitized by 



Google 



Ml 

tiiese competitors, a fiirtiier ea^mUialioii of the argument be- 
comes superfluous. 

The *' miseries of labourers in China and Britain results, not 
^ from in$inufii)eture8i but from tiie nature of their goifern- 
** ments^^ Here again the position is true, and the inference 
false. A position, that the " miseries of labourers in China and 
«« Britain results, not from ^grimtture, but from the nature of 
•* their governments," would have been equally true, and tiie 
inference, « that therefore agriculture ought to be directed by 
^ the intelligence of a mercenary combination here, to increase 
^' its productiveness," would equally follow. I am not reasoti- 
ing against manufactures, but for the freedom of labour, and 
against combinations and exclusive fnivilcges destructive of 
tiiat freedom; believing that the generaVintelligence of labour 
will be increased, and its general productiveness encouraged 
by its freedom. The same principle embraces manufacturii^ 
agricultural, and every other species of labour. If the maxim 
advanced by the advocates of the protecting-duty system will 
justify congress in. assuming, or rather in empowering a few 
capitalists to assume the direction of manufacturing labour, it 
also invests that body with a power of le^slating for the direc- 
tion of every other species of labour^ and assigning all occupa- 
tions whatsoever to the care of the inteUigenee of mercenary 
combinations. This is the very power which constitutes the 
nature of the Chinese and BrUish govemmewts, enables them 
to place labour under the intelligent direction of mercenary 
combinations, and causes the miseries of labourers in those 
countries. To admit the deplorable consequences of a cause, 
and immediately to propose tiie introduction of the same cause, 
discloses a latitude of reraoning, which evinces no small degree 
of confidence in a deficiency of intelligence in those who are 
thus addressed. The reliance expressed to avert the evils 
said to be caused by the nature/of the British government, is 
in the nature pf our own govcirnment; and the nature of our 
own government is proposed to be changed, by infecting it with 
the identical principle which constitute the nature of the Bri- 
tish government, and have caused the miseries oflabmt&rs. 

A i^ecurrence to sundry of the okjeetions which have been 
urg^d against the protecting^uty system will enfMeus both 
tQ estimate tiie extent of ^tese Eng^sh mterpidations, asA also 



Digitized by 



Google 



£56 

to discern that the tjitem here will coDMcleraU; exceed, ia 
inability, its criminality in England. 

It destroys the diyisi<m of powers between the federal and 
state govemments, by investing the former with a swee|»ng^^ 
internal power over persons and things. In En^and, it does 
nothing so bad* 

It violates the principles of representation, because local and 
personal interests are not rejuresented in congress. Not so in 
England. 

It recognizes a sovereign power over property, and conse- 
quently over persons, according to the political principle® of 
England and China. 

It destroys the freedom of labour, and enables government, 
to subject it to the cupidity of combinations or individuals; as 
is practised in England. 

It taxes the great mass of capital and labour, to enrich a 
favoured few ; as in England. 

It increases the burden upcm the people by this operatioji, in 
the same degree as if a correspondent addition had been made 
by law to the salaries of tlie officers of government; as in 
England. 

It subjects the poor to this burden, of raising ca^tal for the 
rich, and thereby increases the mass of poverty ; as in England. 

It impoverishes workmen and enriches employers; as in Eng- 
land. 

It increases the expenses of government, and entices it into 
prodigality ; as in England. 

It leaves to one occupation free will in exchanges^ and takes- 
itaway from all others. Not so bad in England. 

It is a system of pains and penalties, by contracting the na«. 
tural right to provide forsubsistence, comfort and pleasure, aod 
leaving so much pf this right as it does not take away, depen- 
dent upon a precmous toleration, like the freedom of religion; 
as in England. 

It deprives commerce of the freedom of exchanges, and pro- 
hibits it from bringing home universal currency, so as to dimin- 
ish its profits, depreciate native commodities, and obstruct naval 
prosperity. Not so in En^and. 

It corrupts congress and endangers the unira, by making a 
geographical nuyority an object of solicitttdi^, for the fmrposeitf 



Digitized by 



Google 



85S 

dbiaining geographical adyantages. This enormous evil is not 
attached to the system in England. 

And it generates the extremes of luxury and poverty; as in 
England. Most of these lineaments identify the visage of this 
policy^ both here and in England ; but there are severid of such 
local hideousness and exclusive deformity, under our particu- 
lar circumstances, that I cannot see a better motive for its 
adoption, than that which induced some uncivilized nations to 
become enraptured with their idols. 

The suligect of bounties or pennons has been anticipated. 
Ad it regards all our legislatures, their constitutionality de- 
pends upon the truth of the doctrines I have advanced concern- 
ing sovereignty, and the natural rights of labour. If our leps- 
latures are not sovereigns, they have no power to give away one 
state or its property to another, or one man's person or his 
)»x>perty to another man. In regard to congress, their constitu- 
tionality depends also upon the limitations of the powers *of 
that body over persons and things. 

I discern no difference between pension, and alien and sedi- 
tion laws, in principle. All depend upon the doctrine, that 
congress have a mysterious power, to act upon persons and 
things* beyond the definitions of the constitution. If such had 
been the opinion of its framers, a special power to legislate 
ccmceming counterfeiters, pirates atid traitors, would have been 
unnecessary. The coincidence in the powers bestowed, between 
persons and lands^ demonstrates an intention that the restric- 
tions resulting from specification should not be destroyed by 
inferences from sovereignty. A limited internal power over 
land is given to congress, similar to the limited power^over per- 
sons ; as in the cases of public lands, forts, dock-yards, and the 
ten miles square* A state cannot constitutionally make a ces- 
sion of eitiier persons or lands to congress, beyond the consti- 
tutional permission. Maryland and Virginia could not have 
conveyed to congress twenty miles square, because congress is 
only permitted to rieceive and govern ten. If H state cannot 
convey all its territory to congress, it cannot convey an inch, 
beyond the permission of the constitution ; because the powers 
bestowed by the federal compact cannot be extended in the 
smallest degree by unfederal means; Now, if no bargains of any 
land between congress and a state can constitutionally alter 



Digitized by 



Google 



£54 

the federal compact bj diminishing Hie state powers reserved, 
or increasing the federal powers delegated, it frilows more 
strongly, that congress cannot extend its sphere of action with- 
out the consent of the states* And as the specification of a 
liildited power over land was intended to be restrictive by the 
termb of its definition, so the specification of a limited power 
over persons was intended to prohibit every other power over 
persons, not therein contained. Hence congress cannot gradu- 
ally disembowel a state of its citizens or property by incorpo- 
rations, alien or sedition laws, or protecting duties. 

Does the constitution empower congress to act without limi- 
tation over perscms and property by bestowing pensions on pa- 
triots or paupers, at the expense of the community F It niust 
be admitted that no such power is delegated. It can tiien only 
be inferred from the recondite sovereign power supposed to 
reside in that department of government ; and if such a powo- 
does exist, it will cover the alien, sedition and protecting-duty 
laws, as well as the pension laws. Of the whole catalogue, the 
last is the most dangerous, and is most capable of disordering 
the division and limitations of power, so assiduously contem- 
plated by the constitution. Kings by pensions strengthen and 
extend their power ; congress may do the same. It is an unli- 
mited power over |)ersons and property, and therefore liable te 
be abused ; the federal constitution delegates limited powers 
over both, to prevent abuses. The alien and sedition laws 
acted only on a few persons by penalties ; pension laws upon a 
great number, by douceurs and taxes to pay them. The pro^ 
tecting-duty laws are called bounties, because they contemplate 
some compensation to the publick ; pension laws are gratuitous. 
The strong objection td the protecting-duty laws arises from 
their effect in transferring the private property of one man to 
another ; pension laws do the same thing. Both violate the 
natural freedom of labour, and the latter are more illimitable 
than the former. The soverdgn power of disregarding the 
rights of property by congress, as to pensions, is as dangerous 
as it is comprehensive. Not only individuals, not only corpo- 
rations, but whole states may become pensioners of congress; 
and by the instrumentality of this power, all the constitutional 
restrictions, for securing the equality of taxes, and their des- 
tination to federal purposes, may be effectually defeated. As 



Digitized by 



Google 



255 

all QnKmited power, it may be exerds^ upon wtiaterer persons 
it shall please congress to select; and the ministers of a par-* 
ticnlar sect, or of all sects, are as much within its scope, as 
anj other persons. 

The history of pensions would be a history of frauds and 
abuses; and tiieir consequences to society are uniTersally 
agreed to be demoralizing and oppressive. These consequences 
will be a^avated here by the great number of patrons, the fa- 
cility with which they are approached, and the variety of causes 
for invigorating their solicitude, for the success of their clients* 
The effects of these causes are already severely felt both by 
the people and our governments ; and much as pensions have 
been complained of as a grievance in other countries, and rep- 
robated in this when contemplated at a distance, they have 
already come home to us in an extent exceeding the semblance 
of justice, and making even benevolence ridiculous. The 
multitude of pensions granted by congress and the state go- 
vernments, and the increase of legislative expenses occasioned 
1^ this extensive business, would probably compound a sum of 
money far exceeding whatever any other community has ever 
paid on the same score, and constitute a very considerable 
item in accounting for the publick distresses ; but, if we exclude 
from the computation all these expenses, and the whole eata- 
ble of pensions, except those bestowed by a single law, the 
astonishment and indignation of beholding a capital of fifty mil- 
lions devoted at a blow by a temporary fanaticism, as a gratuity 
to actual fraud or hypothetical merit, would sufiiciently de- 
monstimte the magnitude of a sovereign power over property, 
and the danger of its abuse when usurped by legislative de- 
partments. 

I have never heard the law alluded to, or the loose mode of 
bestowing pulsions approved of; and probably at this time 
that law is more generally reprobated, both by congress and 
their constituents, than the alien and sediticm laws ever were at 
any period ; but, it remains as a monument of the falsehood 
of the common assertion, that the continuance of a law, is an 
evidence of publick approbation ; and as an evidence in favour 
of the common observation, that mankind are more fickle in 
practising what is right, than in adhering to what is wnmg. 



Digitized by 



Google 



5tS6 

<<Notiimiik leges Ai^life muttre,^ we are unwilliiig to- 
change the laws of England, is a maxim borrowed from our aa* 
cestors, which we reverence so far as it is foolish and bad ; and 
despise so far as it is wise and good. In multipljing laws and 
changing constitutional principles, no people erer disclosed 
more mutability; in adhering to laws unconstitutional or 
grievous more perseverance. This English maxim sustains 
bad principles in their form of goyemment* and bad laws here ; 
and though it is rejected when constitutions are violated^ it is 
quoted with veneration, if it be proposed to abolish such viola- 
lations. Pecuniary combinations have the address to persuade 
us to reject it, in granting them an introduction, and to adhere 
to it as a sufficient counterpoise to their impositions after they 
are detected. 

I shall presently advert to the evils resulting from an assump- 
tion of judicial powers by legislatures, and from le^lative 
patronage ; but the mischiefs arising even from these unjust an4 
prodigal practices^ are inconsiderable, compared with those <4 
a power to bestow exclusive pecuniary advantages upon char<^ 
tered companies, sectarian combinations, entire states, or par- 
ticular districts. As nations like individuals are often tempted 
to imitate other nations with whom they associate, instead of 
considering the evils which have been produced in England, as 
an admonition to avoid a baleful system, we have been seduced 
by avaricious combinations to imitate the pernicious example^ 
at the expense of our republican policy, and contrary to our con- 
stitutional principles. Publick good is invariably the plea of 
all such combinations, and publick distress as invariably the 
fruit The specious pretext of encouraging manufactures has 
caused the United States to shut their eyes upon two maxims 
of Mr. Jefferson's (when shall we see his like again P) contained 
in his messages to congress of 1801 and 1802, then recdved 
with general applause, and now buried in the tomb of forget- 
fulness. <* Let economy be substituted for taxation, and indus- 
**try be free." Against these maxims, wise, benevolent, honest 
, and republican, combinations have successfully urged the fol- 
lowing arguments* ** Manufacturing is more profitable than 
"agriculture; therefore, give it a bounty. It is less so; there- 
^fore, give it a bounty. Navigation is a blessing ; therefor^ opes 



Digitized by 



Google 



1 



25? 

*** canals and shut up the ocean. One portion of the union is 
^afflicted by negro slayerj; therefore, make it tribatarjr to 
^'capitalists* Cultivation bjr slaves is unprofitable; there- 
"** fore, make it tributary to capitalists. The freedom of labour 
^'deprives it of the benefit of being directed by intelligence; 
«<^therefore9 subject it to capitalists. Taxation is preferable to 
** economy; therefore, enhance it for the nourishment of capi- 
''talists, and the gratification of avarice." Such reasoning de- 
pends upon the position, that it is better to raise oranges in a 
hot houses than to import them from a warm climate. The 
structure of the terraqueous globe seems to have forbidden a 
, policy for enhancing prices, breeding scarcity, diminishing com- 
finrts, and excluding pleisures. It seems to have intended to 
equalize the means of acquiring happiness among mankind, nw 
ean I discern a stronger reason than that of retaliation and ven- 
geance for frustoting the beneficent design. England has 
already revenged itself upon the feudal aristocracy by creating 
a monied one. But a landed aristocracy in Russia at this time 
holds the manu&cturing interest in a tributary state. Let us< 
therefore, revenge the injury by making the landed interest 
here, though it asks for no exclusive rights or privileges, tribu- 
tary to the owners of manufactories, and create one species of 
aristocracy, because the other still exists in Russia. Is the 
British and Bonapartean policy of commercial restrictions 
recommended by his being in St. Helena, and the heaviest tax- 
ation in the world being in England i 



dH 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



SECTION 18. 



ASSUMPTION OF JUDICIAL POWERS AND 
PATRONAGE BY LEGISLATURES. 



The us!^per» AugustuSy could nerer be persuaded to re- 
establish the Roman republick. What hope is there» if one 
man was thus inexorable, that three thousand should be 
persuaded to renounce the unconstitutional powers which thej 
have |u»sumedP With ten times his honesty, thej have ten 
times as much of that invigorating aliment of a love of power; 
called conscicms integrity; and our strongest ally ma^ there-* 
fore become oqr 8tr<mgest adversary. Augustus no doubt 
persuaded himself^ that his government would make Rome 
happier, than the restoration of the republick ; and our legisla- 
tures undoubtedly have as good reasons for believing, that their 
usurpations will be better for the community, than our consti- 
tutionsd divison of powers ; but both he and they in such rea- 
soning look only at themselves, without weighing their succes- 
sors in the scales of probability. He did not anticipate a Cali- 
gula, nor do they a French revolutionary assembly. The 
solid value of representation is a plausible and seducing ai^- 
metit in favour of usurpations, and yet nothing has be^sn more 
fiEttal to science in general, and especially to political science, 
than the art of extracting erroneous conclusions from sound 
principles. The framers of all our constitutions, sensible of this 
truth, have laboured to enforce it, by limiting the powers of 
l^slative representatives, to prevent an accumulation of pow^ 
er, which is invariably overwhelming. Their chief precaution 
has been to take care, that they ^ould none of them be reprer 
sentatives^ of any judicial power, by assigning judicial power 
to other trustees ; and, therefore, representation in exercising 
judicial powers acts exactly as the judges would do,?by exer- 
cising legislative power. Through inattention, however, to a 



Digitized by 



Google 



S6a 

irerj yitible constitatioDal dittiitciioD» all onr lepakrinres inre 
fallen into an erroi;, which all would condemn if cemmittod 
bj the judges. 

The delicacj of the proposed sidgecta is as deterriBg»as 
their importance is imperative. The difficuUy of writing in a 
style, vigorous enough to convince* and yet polished enough to 
please the very gentlemen^ who must either be censured, or tiie 
proposed reformation abandoned, becomes ^ctremelj formi- 
dable whea we reflect, that the reformation to be recommended 
depends entirely upon the persons, so likely to be tended. I 
have no reliance upon myself for getting over this risque ; 
but 1 have great reliance upon the consideration, thatpatrbt- 
ism and integrity do yet greatly preponderate in «ttr le^Uiive 
bodies ; and that these qualities would view with scorn a saeri* 
fice of truth at the shrine of power« and will pardon argusMnta 
enjoined by loyalty t<^ her dictates. BesideSj our wpe&mi^ 
tives are themselves governed the greats purt of their lives^ 
and their families and friends belong entirely te^e govern^ 
class. For this reason they woidd prefer a rough i^eadet in 
favour of c<mstitutienal principles, to the smoothest flatterer of 
temporary power. My apprehensions, therefore^ are gone, and 
I will consider the subjects with the same integrity, by which 
the representatives of the peo^e are themselves actaaiied. 

Let us take a gluice at the origin and progress of judicial 
power in England. It was at first considered as an attribute of 
sovereignty, and whilst that was apposed to reside in the kiogi 
he either exercised it himself, or delegated it to judges, depead* 
ant on his pleasure, and guided by his wilL 

The judicial power of the house ^ lords is a remnant of the 
feudal power of the barons. The caprices, the passions «id 
the partialities of feudal kings and barons, in the administra* 
tion of justice, had scourged England for c^turies, and long 
called for remedies in vun. At length the king was deprived 
of his sovereign judicial power, and the house oi lords moulded 
into a jurisdiction less ol^ectionable. Had that house exerdsed 
the power of receiving original suits, and dedding upon «i- 
parte testimony, the zeal, address or eloquence of individual 
members would have directed each decision ; and innumerar 
ble fraudulent individuals would have taken tickets, which cost 
nothing, in a lottery whicli mig^t yield prizes- 



Digitized by 



Google 



diiced^seviefttl remedies for these evils. The origmal jarisdic- 
tion of the bacons bexuune appdlftte> so as to exclude the4iscii8^ 
sion of fi^ctSy and the frauds of ex^parte affidayit testimony. 
But the house oi lords> stijl consctous of the inadequate nature 
of a numerous assembly for dispensing justice in particular 
cases^ have been invested with a power of requiring the assis* 
tance of the judges; so that this appellate jurisdiction is prac- 
tically exercised by twelve men of the best l^al knowledge*. 
By inroviding thus agiunst fluctuating and inconsistent deci* 
^iona uid by subjecting the parties to posts, the incitement to 
try. luck by frivolous suits has been suf^fvessed. 

The expenses of the Bn^bh g^vermnent were for a long 
time chiefly defrayed by lands appropriated to kings, but which 
seen aune to be considered as natkmal prqierty, and when, 
squandered by regal d^mi^cms, were frequently as such re^ 
ehimed* The disposition of this motional property, by the will, 
eiq^ce^ or favour of the sovereign, without any judicial inters 
positioUf guided l^ estublished laws uid rules of evidence, 
was nasally infected with tiie foints of waste, and injury to 
the puUick, so incuraUe, that in spite of the occasional resump« 
tions of tiiis landed national ^cj»erty^ that resource for sus« 
tainihg the g^emment was at length exhausted, and taxation 
was necessarily substituted for it. At irst, the king or sove-' 
leign claimed and exercised an absolute power of disposing of 
the national property in the shape of taxes, according to his 
pleasu)re ; bttt^ it wlui soon discovered that this [H^tended sove* 
re^ ri^t over the natiomd property operated upon taxes, 
just as it bad done tuptm lands i and prodi«ced the same capri- 
cious misapiriijGatioM and prodigality. After variotis struggles 
between the kings said the commons ; by the first to retain, and 
by the second to destroy the royal sovereignty over the national 
property; the ewW Mras at len^ imperfectly corrected by the 
estaUishment rf a tr^t^iry department, under the superinten- 
dence of a court of exchequer, both subject to known laws, and 
fixed lilies of evidence. The parliament, however, retai^^d 
the sovereignty over the property of the nation, of which tiie 
king had been so justly deprived ; and the innate viciousness 
of ^s politick principle has produced in their hands, the 3ame 
provision vrimh it caused in the hands of the king. Still howe- 



Digitized by 



Google 



M9 

▼tr, it deserret the praise of having estaUiahed a cowt to ffe* 
Tent its own time from being diverted from great national Gl- 
eans, and expended in the trial of trivial private suits. It 
najr perhaps be thought, that the English lords and commons 
deserve no eulogy for a regolationy so wise, economic^ and jus^ 
because thej receive no wages; and that, had they been paid 
by the day, at a rate fixed by themselves, each house would 
have entertained all private suits for publick property, and 
would long since have grown into courts of exchequer, the moist 
whimsical, burdensome and inconsistent which can be imag^ed; 
and that as judges, whose income depends on their business, 
will draw before them as many suits as they can, a perpetual 
session of these two numerous courts, would long since have 
been the consequence* I confess that all men, and particularly 
the lords and commons of England, have disclosed sufi^ient. 
indications of a respect for money, to justify a supposition, that 
if they could have acquired comfortable annuities by assuming 
a judicial power over the property of the nation, it is not impose 
Bible that they would have yielded to the temptation. 

But, besides the want of daily pay by these lords and com- 
mons, there was another obstacle to their tryhig suits and ren- 
dering judgments. The king had long been conudered as the 
fountain of justice, and they had laboured to deprive him of a 
power to render it personally, or by during'pleaswre judges. I^ 
would have been an awkward business therefore for them to 
practice that, which they had forbidden to the king as iyran- 
nical, after they had gotten during^good-behaviour judges. The 
king would forcftly have retorted upon them their own ai^? 
ments. ** You," he might have said, «' have successfully proved 
« in my case the mischiefs arising from a judicial power in one 
'* man, neither subject to impeachment or any appellate juris- 
«• diction. You have proved, that judges cw^t to hold their 
*'' ofiSces during good behaviour, without being subject to be 
" dismissed from office, should I dislike their judgments. Are 
'' you subject to impeachment as judges, and removal from 
''office; or to an appellate jurisdiction? Do you hold your 
** places during good behaviour, as you say all judges ou^t to 
<* do ? May not you be influenced by electors, as during-pleasure 
« judges were bj kings ? If th^sc judges would buy the vote or 
" good will of tiie king by giving him the property and even 



Digitized by 



Google 



fi6S 

^ the lives cf individiials, in order to keep their offices ; may 
'^ not you be tempted to bay tiie votes or good will of electors* 
^ by giving to them the property of the nation? And are not 
^ yon moreover exposed to the great influence of private friend- 
^ ship and family connexions^ in acting as exchequer judges, or 
*^ exercising an arbitrary power over the national property, from 
** vtrfaich my during-pleasure judges were free?" The English 
lords and commons have avoided much of this retort, by for* 
bearing in a considerable d^ee to meddle with judicial bu^^^ 
fliness. 

The habit, which prevaSs in all the l^islatares of the United 
States, of tr/ftig individual suits or claims for pubHck property 
/evidently bears a strong resemblance to the old feudal modes 
ef dispensing justice and expending the publidt property. Tea* 
timony is ex-parte. Evidence is not wei^ied by any rules. Ora- 
tory and influence generally supply its place. No witnesses 
sore examined or confronted. The trial by jury is excluded. 
Decisions are never directed by law, but always dictated by 
policy, influence, selfish views or benevolence, except when 
they are the result of accident, inattention, fluctuation of the 
judges, ignorance of the truth, or some species of cunning man- 
agement. In short, our exchequer legislative judgments are 
generally r^dered in the same mode, that legislative attainders 
and coiidKscations were enacted during the most tyrannical 
periods of the British histories. 

It may however be objected, that looser principles are justi- 
fiable in the disposition of the property ci a nation, than that 
of one man; and that what would be robbery in one case, is 
munificence in the other ; just as the killing of a Sngle person 
is murder, and the extirpation of a nation, heroisim. Supposing 
this reasoning to be sound in general, (and it must be admitted 
to be so, if usage makes moral rectitude,) I think that it may be 
cbntrouled by national ccMistitutions. It is admitted that all 
G^vil powers are appendages of sovereignty, and that sovereign- 
ty may of course bestow them as it pleases. If a sovereign 
monarch should ajqpoint one set of men to form a code of laws, 
and another to execute themt neither would think of discharg- 
ing the functions of the other, nor would he suffer it If we 
were to select the plainest intention disclosed by the sove- 
te%nty oi the people, none c(mld be preferred to Hn^ separation' 



Digitized by 



Google 



S64 

•f kgiilatife ind jidicttl {lower; nor can I aee htw Hit kp«- 
Istaret of the sttte or federal goremmenti can have acqaiied 
jBqr judicial powfga» ercept thqr can ahew, that the aoveteig afcf 
of the people ta dead, haiing detiaed tta eatate, with all the 
app«irteikancea» pririlegea and eaMliuoenta, to the legblatite 
department Tlioiigjh no anch wttl haa been produced, jet tiie 
fict of the death of the aorereignty of the people aeema to be 
INreannudrie, from the anndrj law auita aboot the diriiaon of the 
eatate. All civil powers beii^appendagea of aorereigntj, if lepa- 
latarea can aasnme jediciai powers, thej are ondoabtedlj enti- 
tled to the rest. Tlie fedend court haa ttdeed made a diviaion 
of the inteatate'a estate, among a £unil j of poBtical s|iherea» 
nowiinally upon principles of dbtribation, bat easentiallj acoor^ 
ding to theae of piimcgenitare, excq»t that it is i^fficiilt to de- 
tnuine whether cengresa or itself is hair at law; or ra&er, 
according to the tenure called borough Rngliah, faj which the 
youngest 8<m gets all the estate. But tiiia diatrihution, however 
it may reserve to the court something like legblatiTe and even 
conatituent powers, by no means inve^ legislatBies inth jodi' 
dal, and menaces such a usurpation, by barling a gaantlet at 
unconstitutional laws. 

If the soverdgnty of the peoj^e be howevtf sifll alive, and 
we look into the commissions to aaake laws, we shall fisfd nO 
trace of a power to try auits. The law-makers lake no judiciid 
oath. They have no power to Miforce the attendance of wit- 
nesses ; nor does a ring^e precaution exist for ebtttniz^ from 
legislators upright judgments, because ibej were notemp<yw- 
ered to try any suits at ail. In fact, the sovereignly of the 
people established a judicial power distinct from and indepen- 
dent of all other political spheres, for the puipose of securing 
property ; and improved upon the principles of the English 
system of government in relation to it, by the identical maxiai, 
considered among us as the only solid security for that and lA 
other civil rights. Our maxim is, that a government is not a 
sovereign, but a trustee of the sovereignty of tiie people, in- 
vested only with limited powers and composed of co-ordinate 
departments established to discharge specified duties. Th» 
manm withholds from these departm^its all the ai^ndagesef 
sovereignty, and only entities them to exercise the powers bes- 
towed. It deprives them of. the ai)8<dirte power over the Jivea 



Digitized by 



Google 



^< 



9XlA ptoperty itf th« people, dai«ied tnd exercised bj^rerjr 
other speeds of soivereigiitj. Hence the creation of a judicial 
sphere hecame necessary, which would have been useless had 
legiskitiTe power possessed a sovereignty oyer property ; since, 
it could in that case have moulded courts according to its will, 
«D as^ to make them subservient to its wishes. Hiis corrects 
that principle of the English government, which has produced 
the greatest evils» " tiiat the parliament is invested with aH 
•* absolute sovereignty over property and all other rights,'' 

Whilst I contend that it is true in theory, that our legisla*- 
tares do not possess a power of giving away the national pro- 
perty according to their caprices, or even from motives of bene- 
volence ; because^ they are not invested with a sovereignty, but 
only with a trust in regard to it ; I admit that an adherence to 
tills undoubted principle must, in a great me^ure, depend upon 
themselves. If| however, the men who compose them should 
turn their attention to this Subject, and be convinced of the 
truth of the doctrine advanced, this dependance is far from 
Iteing insecure. Our system of government is happily con- 
trived to unite intereiit and patriotism ; and deviations from its 
principles, which may inadvertentiy arise, will tlierefore be cor- 
rected as they are discovered, so long as the system itself re- 
mains unCorrupted. 

The practice of ti*ansferring the property of one man, or of 
one class of men to another, directly and unequivocally, gra- 
dually became unsafe even to despotism itself, and therefore it 
has been abandoned by the best Of those governments which 
yet retain a sovereignty over property. But, although this 
species of tyranny has become too atrocious to be borne by any 
rf the Europeans except those subject to the Turk, when in- 
flicted without disguise, yet it is still pursued to a most oppres- 
sive extent by their governments, concealed behind exclusive 
privileges, pensions, and a variety of abuses, by which the evil 
is disseminated over a! whole nation, and every individjual, ex* 
cept the objects of its bounty, is injured. 

Between the declaration of independence and the ^tal^ish* 
ment of our present federal constitution, sundry lepslative ex* 
^i<ms of sovereign power had occurred, which displayed some 
Of the evils deposited in that principle. Laws of attainder 
had past, and many partial confiscations cf private property 
2 1 



Digitized by 



Google 



« 5166 



had been made, by laws o^ tender, and for suspen^ng the ad« 
ministration oi justice. The injustice and tyrannj of these 
legislative usurpations, under pretence of being invested with 
fL sovereign power over persons and property, induced the states 
to apply a remedy, by prohibiting themselves *< from makings 
''any thing but gold and silver a tender, from passing any bill of 
*' attainder or ex post facto law, or any law impairing the obli^ 
" gation of contractsJ^^ These iqipendages of sovereignty, pro- 
hibited to the states, are not delegated to congress. This 
constitutional fact proves, that none of our governments ia 
invested with sovereign powers, and is particularly adverse to 
the novel idea of 8|)herical sovereignties ; for, if the umon of 
all our political spheres will not constitute a sovereignty, surely 
it is not constituted by their sepanition. If ndther of our de« 
partments constituted by the sovereignty of the people, nor all 
of them united, are a sovereignty, then they can only be co- 
ordinate deputies entrusted with appropriate powers. As no 
V one is a sovereign, neither can suppress another. The legisla** 
tive department cannot suppress the judicial, nor the judicial 
the legislative. The former cannot prohibit the latter from 
rendering judgments according to law, nor the latter prohitMt 
the former from legislating. In shorty no department can con- 
stitutionally suspend the functions of another, because all de- 
rive their authority from the sovereignty of the people. 

What then is the obligation of a contract, how is it to be en* 
forced, and how may it be impaired ? The obligation of a con- 
tract arises from the consent of the parties, entered into under 
the sanction of the existing laws ; and the constitutions under 
which we live, are a notification to them, that it is to be enforced 
by the judicial department having a jurisdiction of the case. 
The prohibition to impur contracts is directed to that quarter 
from whence only the impediments can proceed. This is le- 
gblative power. From hence the impediments which produced 
a positive vindication of the true spirit of our constitutions 
proceeded ; and if the remedy be so construed, as to permit the 
very evil it designed to remove, both its reason and its end 
must be disregarded* 

Every suspension of the payment of debts by law is an actuat 
sequestration^ wluch almost invariably terminates in a partial 
confiscation for the benefit of the debtor. If our le^ktureft 



Digitized by 



Google 



£6r 

do not possess a sovereign power to take awaj directl j the pro- 
perty of one man, and give it to another, they have no power 
to do the same thing indirectly. Their office is to pass laws \ 
for establishing rules by which property is to be distributed ; I 
but when the right is vested under those laws, so long as tiiey 
exist, it is beyond the cognizance of legislative, and appertains 
to judicial power. Laws cannot constitutionally transfer the 
property of debtors to creditors, nor of creditors to debtors, 
any more than they can transfer that of the rich to the poor or 
of the poor to the rich. It is our policy, that property should be , 
divided by industry and not by any species of sovereign power; 
and our judicial departments were established for the preser- 
vation of that policy against whomsoever should molest or ' 
impair it ; and particularly against executive and legislative 
power, by which the principle has been generally overturned. 

A suspension of debts by replevy or any other laws, not only 
impairs contracts, by defeating the mutual risque, as to the 
fiuctuation of money, voluntarily incurred by the contracting 
parties ; but is always intended to operate, and generally does 
operate, as a confiscation of a portion of the property of the 
one, for fhe benefit of the other. In contemplation of this effect 
only are such laws either solicited or past. Besides this un- 
constitutional character^ such laws are highly penal upon inno- 
cence, ex post facto> and participate largely of the nature of 
le^slative attainders. Man cannot live over again the days he 
has past, nor postpone his wants until his incarcerated property 
is liberated. Though robbed of it but for a year, it is still a 
robbery in the proportion that year bears to his chance for life. 
He may starve, he may suffer, or he may be forced to sell his 
deferred stock at a loss, to get the necessaries of life. When 
the prison doors are unlocked, some is always found to have 
perished in jail, and all returns impaired by confinement, in its 
value. But such laws have effected their intention, though 
they violate the constitution ; for the depreciation they produce 
in debts, by the fear and distress they inflict upon creditors, 
never fails to diminish their value, and to enable debtors tor 
obliterate them by modes, incorrectly called payments. What 
species of pati'onage can be more unjust? 

The evil of bad examples by governments is often greater, 
iban the immediate mischiefs arising from the act itself^ The 



Digitized by 



Google 



£68 

replerj laws which have conferred on many indifitoda the 
use of property belonging to others, and inyented easy modea 
<tf getting rid of debts, hare induced the bankers also to exer^ 
cise the power prohibited to the states; and taught them t» 
refuse to pay their debts, in order to make money by seques-* 
teriiig the property of others, or to take time for ^ectii^ a con- 
fiscation, by becoming insolyent. The same example solicited 
individuals to seek for wealth by speculation in preference to 
industry, from a reliance on legislatire shelter against payment* 
The catastrophe arising from the excitement to incur deM;. 
happened in a year of exuberant plenty, as a providential de- 
monstration of the inveterate malignity, contained in tho j^nd- 
pie of a sovereignty over property and its exercise by impair'^ 
ing contracts, to human happiness. The year 1816 produced - 
unexamined abundance and unexampled com^aints in the 
United States. The fields teemed with crops, and the news* 
papers with lamentations. All the comforts of life were plenty 
and cheap, but the United States resounded with distress* 
The beneficence of the Deity was insufficient to remedy or to 
satisfy the speculations of avarice. Disappointed in ihi^ hope 
of amassing wealth by cunning, it asserts, that the patronage 
of industry by providence ought to be countervaUed by a pa- 
tronage of speculation by legislatures. Despising constitutions, 
from its innate depravity, it proposes to invest congress and 
the state legislatures with a common power of suspending 
specie payments in fiivour of banks, and the latter with a 
power of impairing all other private contracts. Banks stand 
at the head of the faction, which pretends to a degree of merit 
80 transcendant, as to require the sacrifice of the second best 
principle of our political system. Their character defines that 
of their progeny. They have caused the nation to divide its 
money among swindlers, and those who have gotten it, request 
that the remnant of justice left to the injured may be. converted 
into an additional reward for the guilty. The banking projects 
of England, exhibited in all the finery of fancy, are said to be 
worthy of our imitation; whilst the squalid legions they have 
helped to generate, the misery only cOntroulable by a great- 
army, and our own experience, are passed over as proving, 
nothing. A sovereignty over private property is the European 
{Nrinciple of government, to which I ascribe most of the bW-: 



Digitized by 



Google 



1MB •ppvetsMiuL All essential prineiple^fottrptlky is, tkal 
private pr^»eF^ eaimot be constitutioDaUj transferred by law 
to others^ except for national purpoees* Ta a deviation from 
this prmciple I aseribe many of oiur own sufferings^ 

A legislative sovereignty over the nati^al pr<^rty seema 
t» me to have been uneonstitationally exercised to a great ex- 
teat, and in a mode highly pernicious by. what I shall call 
le^lative patronage* It is tme that in a few cases of a par- 
ticular kindy the state legislatures are wisely invested with the 
power of making appointments ; but with respect to the federal 
government completely^ and to the state govemm^its generally, 
the legislature raises the money, whilst son^ other department 
designates the person who shall receive, it The framers of all 
our constitutions must therefore have seen a distinction be< 
tween legislation and patronage, and have conceived that oue 
fi^e form of government would be destroyed by their union ia i 
one body of. men, if we may draw a conclusion from their efiorts / 
to keep them disunited* Personal calculations constitute the / 
chief danger to be avoided in legislative bodies. If these can ' 
taz» bestow»and designate the receivers of pubUek money, per-^ 
Mmai calculations to a countlesa, extent must be awsAened. 
The advanti^ea and gratificatlops resulting to ourselves from 
pecuniary favours to our friends, relations and partisans, influ- 
once most the minds of the ambitious and dangerous ; and 
tl^re is but Uttie difference in the degree of corruption betweea 
patron and client Kings and popes, who could corrupt civil 
aaid religious principles by patronage, could never remaia 
vktuoua themselves- The senate of Rome was converted into 
a desjHcal^ body of men by uniting legislation and patronage* 
The le^slative assemblies of France owed both their crimes 
and their fatOj to an honest ojunion, that their conscious inte- 
grity and representative character might safely exercise both 
leg}slati(m and patronage* But the experiment terminated in 
ft, despotism* A division of tbe powers to raise and appr^riata 
Ukoney for puMick use^and to nominate the receivers of tiiat 
money, is our constitutional precaution for sustaining a frug^ 
and honest system of legislation ; and for excluding stratagems 
fer purchasing votes» peoviding for friends and gratifying vanity 
and avarice fri»n those bodies of mm, upon whose purity and 
patriotism: the cmtinionce of a firoeand easy government de« 



Digitized by 



Google 



»9 ♦ 

poidt. Eyen commiseratioii will be snccestiitHy implored to 
weep orer the calamities of indiTidoals* and easil j persuaded to 
gratify its feelings at tfts pubUeh expense ; and to oreriodi the 
.wonnds it is inffictuig on the constitutkm of its coontiy, hj 
assuming a sover^gn power oyer its property. 

It was an olgect of oar constitations to secure a common 
feeling between legislators and constitoents under the opera- 
tkm of laws, whether good or bad. This is confessed to be a 
wise and just, and some dunk, an indispensable security fin- good 
laws. Can a legislator, who gires away the publick money to 
his friends, his clients, or his partisans ; who is interested in the 
traffick of corporations, to be created and nurtured by his laws, 
or who can increase his own wages by protracting a session in 
trying privato suits, be any other than a representative of him- 
self? 

Congress has already enlisted stato governments among its 
clients, and these, like the Roman provinces, are reduced to the 
necessity of providing patrons in the senate. An union betweetf 
legislation and patronage will enlist an assortment of suitolrSi 
composed of individuals who ask for dollars, of companies who 
ask for millions, and of statos which ask for bounties, roads and 
canals. Patronage begets clientship. States will soon vocife- 
rously demand local favours, to balafice other local favours. 
Why should not congress endow schools in the old, as well at 
tiie new states? I see no end to the parties, intrigues and ani^ 
mosities, by an usurpation on the part of the federal government 
of internal and local powers, and of unlimited patronage. These 
will not be less dangerous, for being geographical. Federal fa*' 
vours are at first silken fetters to the states, which will gradu^ 
ally be converted into iron by the menstruum of precedent, as 
soft stones exposed to the atmosphere become hard. Yes, I do 
see an end to this baleful policy, and I write only as a bumble 
assistant to abler advocates of our constitution, towards ob^ 
structing its arrival. I see a nation dissected into pecuniary 
and political corporations ; legislation dalMing in the frauds it 
fosters, and sharing in the spoils it bestows ; repres^tati<m con-^ 
verted into personal motives, incapable of detection ; legists'^ 
tures sinking into exchequer spendthrifts ; hordes of specula^ 
tors gambling with legislative judicial patronage, for privato 
uid publick property ; the recomUdendatiwis of frugality as in** 



Digitized by 



Google 



i^pensiMe to tlie costmaance of oar free form of govemment^ 
go often recommended^ and so steadilj practised by two of the 
wisest and most Tirtuous patriots who erer blessed a nation 
(Wa^ington and Jefferson) derided; in short, I see a pictnre 
bespangled with noxious meteors, gliding between our eyes and 
the admired system of goremment, under which we have en- 
joyed so much happiness. 

The judicial mode of patronizing individuals has been as- 
sumed by legislatures, under a garb apparently innocent and 
lovely, nor have they perceived the corruption and unconstitu- 
ticmality which it covered. It is the right of the people to pe- 
tition, and the duty of the representatives to redress grievances. 
Bat DO individual has a right to petition legislatures to perform 
judicial functions, or to expect that a coilstitutional divbion of 
powers and duties should be confounded for his benefit. Legis- 
latures are well qualified to ascertain general principles, and 
utterly incompetent to ascertain piurticular fi^ts. The first 
emnprise the field of their power, and the second object, with 
&e means for effecting it, is committed to the courts of justice. 
Qan that be a legitimate jarisdictiony which is unaMe to come 
at truth, and of course, to do justice i A court of this character, 
which can only decide in favour of the plaintiffs ; which cannot 
subject him to costs; which cannot ^ve a final decision, nor 
Invent the most vexatious reiteraticm; which is annual or 
duennial, and also subject to influence in various ways ; and 
where the judges must act as solicitors or attomies ; is cer- 
tainly a judicial monster. If tins court should assume a power 
of t^hg suits between individuals, its incapacity would be in- 
stantly discerned even by itself; and yet it is better calculated 
finr rendering justice in suits between these^ than between in- 
dividuals and the publick, because it would not be influenced 
by a notion of a sovereign power or right over the money in 
dispute, nor by amlntion or a love of popularity. A judge be* 
iween individuals could not benefit himself or a partisan to any - 
great extent If this be true, how can it be imagined, that our 
constitutions deugned to delude l^datures from a power to 
try suits between individuals, and yet to invest them with a 
ri^t of trying suits between an indiyidual and the pubiick ? Is 
it to be imagined, that in the establishment of a judicial de- 
fartmentf the secarity of the property oi the whole nation was^ 



Digitized by 



Google 



ntt at all regarded, wfailftt that of iht poorest iitdintel wtta 
proteeted faj a aalutarj dinaioii of power ? 

The fiederal conttitatioii includes within the jurisdiction of 
the federal courts ** controversies to wkick the United /^ettes 
^ shall be m pmrtifJ* How then can congress try them? It ena* 
bles congress to tax» not as hanng a sovereignty over property, 
but ** to paj the debts, and provide for the common drfence and 
^general welfare, of the United States.'^ How then can it 
indulge a patronage in favour of individuals, or impose taxes 
for conferring local benefits ? The courts of all the states tffe 
open against the govmiment; therefore, the state legislatures 
bj exercising thb judicial legislative patronage exercise a con* 
current jurisdiction trith these courts ; and it is often a reason 
fer entertaining a cause, that the courts would decide against 
the claimant Nodnng has been more t>iq>ressive to nations, 
than the practice of kings, to buy popularity at their expense- 
Should this practice become established here, as we shall have 
three or four thousand kings, exercising sovereignty over the 
property of the nation, one need not be a conjurer to foresee 
the consequences. If the aimmal docket of all our legislative 
bodies were published, reasoning would be superfluous. It would 
account to a great ^rtmt, for our deviation so rapidly from that 
frugality, deemed essential to the preservation of liberty by 
almost all the real patriots who have ever appeared. Or, if our 
pension list were compared with the pension list of Great BfK> 
tain, I believe we should be found to have already outstript her 
in the application of the maxim, ''that governments are sove- 
** reigns over national [H*operty*'' The reason I suppose to be, 
tiiat she has only one sovereign, whereas, according to the new 
opinions, we have at least two, each of which possesses an unli- 
mited spherical sovereignty over property; and these, instead 
of being units like those of Lacedemon, are above ten times as 
numerous as were the sovereign conscript fathers of Rome. If 
l^slaters are publick servants, then* numerosity will be our 
salvation ; but if they are sovereigns over our property, and 
exercise without controul judicial le^lative patnmage, the 
same numerosiiy must be our ruin* Avarice and anAition de* 
ride political restrictions, and talk of estimating how vindtL 
Ubtrty a people can bear; but the fact is, that governments by 
their own morals mould them into acapadty to befree or tobe 



Digitized by 



Google 



smt 

<mri«v0^ The IVeiich nati(9& wst sdipirmoidded by tie pB^Ktti^ 
jqge and judicial utuqtttions ^ le^latures> into a fitnew even 
far a mibtarjr despotism ; and then the sophistry which inffiioted 
Hia eiil» under pretence that the nation could not bear good 
gm^emttmitt prevailed; but these legislative errors were in fact 
Ibe st^ping*stones of fraud, the corrupters of the nation, and 
Aa ladders of amUtion. 

The reason why a nation it oppressed and enslaved, when^ 
flfver one man, or any body af men, though elected by the people 
Ahall absorb and eiercise a sovereign power over property, is 
ebviouB. It disorders all balances, and. overturns ail cheeky 
and establishes an irresistible authority. The framers of our 
excellent system of government, sensible that election and re- 
prosentationi however inestimable, were yet insufficient, alone, 
to prevent an evil whii^h has frequently proved fatal to repub- 
lican governments, called in divisions of power, checks and 
iMdances as auxiliaries. They divided legislation between local 
imd internal olgects, and those of an external or general nature ; 
they excluded legislation from judicial functions ; and they de- 
nied to every department of government the appendag^ of 
iover^gnty* All were only fiduciaries, and the duties of each 
trustee were defined and limited. But if the congress, one of 
tbese departments, can pass local and internal laws; if it can 
gire away the publidsL money by no rule but its own pleasure ; 
and if it cMi exercise judicial functions, it cannot be in co&* 
fihFtmty with those jNnnciples upon which our system of govern- 
ment was established. 

I recollect but two classes of claims, which can be offi^ed to 
legiriatures by individuals or corporations ; the gratuitous, and 
the just As to the first, if legislatures are only trustees, and 
do not possess a sovereign power over property, they have ne 
right to exercise benevolence at the exp^ise of its owners. As 
to the second, they are. constitutionally prohibited, and inter- 
inJIy disabled from dispensing justice to individuals. Particu- 
Itr laws fbr rendering individud justice, instead oi general 
laws extendii^ to all similar cases, we substantially judgments 
and decrees^ Tb»r character resemUes a scheme of jurispru* 
dence, wyefa should ^dude general rules of inheritafuce, and 
leave it to legislation to provide for each case. They are exact- 
ly the same in principle with the mode of rendering justice, 
2 K 



Digitized by 



Google 



97A 

adopted in Tmrkej. A flnctuatiBg will and pleasure deoides 
upon an imperfect enquiry after facts, instead of a general law» 
to be executed by judicial inyestigation. If the indiYtdual 
grievance be real, it ought to be the basis of a general law 
extending the remedy to all similar cases ; and if such a law 
would be an evil to the community, the suf^posed individual 
grievance cannot exist The multitude of suits for publick 
property, instituted before legislatures, evinces that such claims 
are not solitary, but similar to a great extent; and that there 
would be no great difficulty in framing a law, by which the just 
might be reached, and the unjust excluded. Thus fixed, rules 
of decision would be commuted for fluctuating, truth mi^t be 
discovered, and our legislative bodies might avoid a waste of 
time, in trying frivolous claims in an imperfect manner, which 
no other legislatures that I know of have ever incurred. 

We have not lost sight of our great question of internal le« 
gblation by congress, in considering this subject. On the con- 
trary I contend, admitting the state legislatures to possess a 
sovereignty over property, and a ri^t to bestow the publick 
money upon objects of benevolence, that it is a subject for inter- 
nal and local legislation, not comprised within the powers of 
the federal government It is true, that the federal constitution 
invests congress with a limited and special power in relation 
to persons, but it cannot act upon persons beyond the power 
bestowed. By referring to the constitution it will be found* 
that all the powers over persons ^ven to congress are intended 
to effect some general federal end, and not to confer any rig^t 
to legislate over persons, except for such a purpose. As for 
instance ; the power over persons in the imposition of taxes is 
l^ven for the purpose of providing a revenue. No power to 
lavish the revenue thus obtained, in donations to individuals, ia 
bestowed ; on the contrary, it is limited to the use of the Uni- 
ted States. If this reasoning be correct, the donation* to the 
remnant of the revolutionary army, (a remnant more numerous 
tiian the army itself at the end of the war, after an interval of 
above thirty years,) was unconstitutional. Whether this dona* 
tion was constitutional or not, it is a monument of what is to 
be expected from the principle of a legislative sovereignty over 
the national property, and the effects of a casual humoursome 
enthusiasm, which had slept forbear forty years, and was awak- 
ened, not by reason or justice^ but by the sound of a drunu 



Digitized by 



Google 



£75 

President Adanis has smnewhere sud, I helieYe, tiiat libertf 
consisted in an equality of laws. The definition is good» as far 
as it goes ; but it is imperfect in being onl j one ingredient of 
liberty. An equality of oppression, which may exist with an 
equality of laws, cannot constitute liberty. It would be a better 
tnaiim to say, that liberty cannot subsist under an inequality of 
laws, by which one portion of the society or associators is en- 
dowed with exclusiye benefits. Upon this maxim the union of 
tile states was founded. The states were the associators, and 
in their compact laboured to prevent congress from being aUe 
to distribute among the members of the association, by the in- 
strumentality of exercising local or internal powers oyer persons 
or things, unequal advantages ; because, an inequality of laws 
would destroy the equality of rights among the assodators, in- 
tended by their compact to be established. Hence that body 
was only invested to legislate upon subjects common to all. 
Suppose that a body of guardians were appointed to take care 
of an estate held in common by twenty-three virgins, each of 
whom held also a particular estate, over which these guardians 
were not invested with any power. If these guardians should 
endeavour to corrupt and seduce some of these virgins by using 
ftie profits of the Estate held in common, to improve several of 
the particular estates, by cutting canals or making roads; by 
granting bounties or exclusive {>nvileges to some of the tenants 
<if the particular estates, to be paid by the tenants of other par- 
ticular estates; or by bestowing pensions on others of these 
tenants, to be paid out of the profits of the common estate ; 
what maxim of equality, of justice, or of liberty, would they 
fulfil? 

The constitution of the vimon prohibits to the state govem.- 
ments a power of regulating currency, and limits the power of 
(congress to the establishment of a metallick currency. These 
restrictions of power, in relation to the representative of pro- 
perty^ do not recognize in either government an absolute power 
over property itself. On the contrary, it was idle and vain to 
Hmit the powers of governifient as to the sign of the thing, if the 
government possessed a despotick power over the thing itself. 
Where is the difference in principle between giving away fifty 
millions.of the national property in pensions, and in giving away 
the whole i And what power over pr<^erty can be more des- 



Digitized by 



Google 



potidk, thuapowerthiMiodkpoteflf k? TheTettricfiwi as 
t^xunencj, coBilniied wiih the dhrisMii of lef^kdte and |i£^ 
eiid powera» eviace* that tfiia atveveigii power swejft€ifeaptj HA 
•et «xiat under our princij^ea of government 

The restrictiona as to taxing pnqpertj* inpoaednpoa both tiM 
federal and state govemiMiits» diao recognioDe <ttly « Ifanttai 
power over it in either; and aa te the a|^e«tioB<«f taxes, it is» 
. in the case of the former, expressly liaMted to the eKecntton «f 
the powers ddegated, for wtnch purpose and no other the pow* 
er of taxation ^ras bestowed. Among the powera del^iated, 
fliere is none to grant pensions, or to disposeof tiie piMtcmo* 
nej according to the dictates of caprice, er benevolenoe, «a the 
Englirii tings ckdned a right to do* As to tiie state govern- 
ments, the same principle, which is the onlj sovnd secnrity Ar 
civil l&ert J, fought dso to be a security for prop^iy. As tnis« 
tees, they have no better right to give away one than the other. 
If they eannoit take away tfie property of A to give it toS, what 
light have they to take away property from the whole a]phid>e4^ 
togiveittoB? 

Societies are not instituted for the purpose of enaUing go- 
vernments to destroy natural rights; and as no manposaessea 
a natural, or necessary, or convenient power over the naturd 
ri^its of another, a majority of men cannot have a ri^ to«ur- 
render to a government an absolute power over these natural 
rights, i have previously endeavoured to prove, thaft fbe Ireea 
dom of conscience and of labour are essentially nateral rights. 
If it be the intention of a society to ^ect a government for the 
purpose of protecting both, an invasion of either is a deviation 
from that intention; and nothing can be mone unconstitutional 
than a stab at the vital part of our political system. Neither 
nature, nor necessity, nor convenience, has invested the peo- 
ple, QT their representatiTes, with an absolute power over pri- 
vate jn-operty, or over conscience; and thou^ mankind were 
long deluded by fraud into an opinion, that civil government 
could not subsist without one species of tyranny, this imposition 
is so thoroughly exploded, that it ought to si^gest a strict exami- 
nation of the other. The same orators, whose eloquence so loi^ 
suppressed the rights of conscience, now plead, that civil go- 
vernment cannot subsist without regulating property by char- 
ters, establishments, corporationsi exclusive privUq^es, bounties 



Digitized by 



Google ^ 



that tcoiiBoienoe ougbt to %e ngidated^ &r they saj, that frM 
opurioii Bsto^thevse of pnqpertywHI iie MpemicioiiB totha 
publick* as free opiBioii in velatiea to reKgion was, aeoonfag 
to thrir exploded doct^nes. Lvxiny is now made the heresy, 
hj which tiie new order of aiqparent zeakft8»t«t oool catoub- 
tors of dollars and ceivts, advance titekr drngno. Wealth and 
powor to priests was the pretended ^cuve of heresj; wealth and 
power lo corporations and combinations and pensioners, is tho 
protesided core of hiznrj. The orators long permaded man* 
kind, that they would damn theraselYes bf hereqr, if thejr en* 
joyed a freedom of opinion as to religion ; they now endeavonr 
to persuade them that th^ wiH ruin themselves by luxury, if 
fliey enjoy a freedom of opinion as to property. 

In selectii^ generdi principles, we o«|^ to be guided by 
general eftects, and not by partieular cases. 8evend devout 
ministers undoubtedly deserved the salaries derived from an 
absolute power in a government over the freedom of eonscience ; 
and several woithy pensi<mers undoubtedly deserve also the 
pensions derived from An absdute power a governments over 
the freedom of property ; but both powers are so ineurably ex- 
posed to abuses, and, an exercise of judicial powers and legis- 
lative pi^enage so incurably infected with qualities of irrecon-^ 
eilable enmij with the virtue, happiness and interest of a com- 
mui^y, tiiat the policy of being led astray from the gmeial 
good, by particular cases, is simply thatof preferring an op- 
pressive to a free and moderate government. 

It is an error to suppose, that the people approve of bad mea- 
sures, because they are silent* In M nations, the majority ap^ 
prove of pcditical morality ; and they are silent, both from the 
iniuenoe of government and a want of <imeor information to 
detect ks infraction. Ther^ore, they are seldom roused into 
remstance, except by the extremity of the evil. Our govern- 
ments are so happily contrived to influence those in power in 
fitvour of truth and justice, as to infuse into the people a reli* 
aace on their structure, which yet farther disposes them to be 
inattentive to the laws* But, this reliance dictates a cautioiM 
watchfulness against the introduction of any new prindples, by 
melms of laws or l^slalive patronage, undernuning the basis 
cf the reliance itself, by having the effect of exchanging an 
influence in favour of truth and justice, des^;ned to be ^ti&* 



Digitized by 



Google 



£78 

Ibhed bj the strnctiure of oar govemmeiits, for an inflaciiee in 
fiivoiir oi partiality^ exclusive privileges and erroneous princi- 
ples. It is impossible to convince the suitors of legislative 
tribunals, the fevers upon le^lative patronage* or ike receivers 
of exclusive privileges, bestowed, not by constitutions, but bjr 
laws; that l^riative bodies ought not to possess the unhdj 
power of converting puUick property into private donations : 
but, if the question was propounded to the people, silent aa 
Aej have been upon the sulgect, « whether l^islatures had not 
** better employ the portion of their sessions, worse than wasted 
*' in trying and deciding cases ai cupidity, in a thorough ex-^ 
^ amination of treasuries, and an annual disentan^ement of 
^ the destinations of the taxes," would the answer of their 
moral sense and common sense accord with the practice, to 
iriiich they have indiscreetly submitted ? Do they really approve 
of the new policy of sacrificing the general good to private in* 
terest? 

When the human mind receives a strong impulse towarda 
either truth or error, it is difficult to check the current of con- 
viction or prej udice, and to give it a new direction. The im- 
pulse derived from our revolutionary principles was stron^y 
adverse to legislative sovereignty and excluuve privileges, and 
a counter-current in their favour has been gradually introduced* 
One flows from truth, and the other from ernn-. Being ^posed^ 
they are of different characters. In which are we to look jfop 
that mercenary temper which has notoriously generated for the 
few last years an unusual number of instances of moral turpi* 
tude, and materially affected the national character? Morals 
are regulated by religion or by laws. Our religion will not be 
accused of imperfection. A love of money or of property, 
nurtured by fraud, becomes sordid and base; but nurtured by 
justice, it is a source of civilization, of virtue, oi happiness, and^ 
the bond of society. If it could be destroyed, civilized society- 
would perish. But the value of property is a temptation to 
fraud, and the end of government is to restrain and correct this 
temptation. If then, governments themselves shall yield to it 
by contriving means to transfer property from the community, 
to individuals, each culprit in contemplating their example will 
conclude, that if this be right in relation to a whole nation, it 
cannot be wrong in relation to one man; and so the national 
character is changed. 



Digitized by 



Google 



SECTION 14. 

THE LAWS OF NATIONS. 



This fonmdable phalanx has with great ingenuity been impres-^ 
Bed into the service of spherical sovereignty. The philosophers 
who invented them, were actuated by the benevolent intenticm 
.of civilizing^e intercourse between na^ons, and softening the 
evils of war ; and not by the wicked design, of increasing do« 
mestick oppression, by dissolving restrictions imposed for the 
security of civil liberty. They did not intend by restraining 
the ravages of avarice and ambition, when exercised against na- 
tions, to turn them loose upon individuals. little would be gain- 
ed from these laws by mankind, at the expense of opening tiiose 
sluices at home, through which they have so often been flooded 
with misery ; and if the laws invented by one set of benevolent 
philosophers, to ci^ize imtions in their commerce with each 
other, should demolish those contrived by another set of bene- 
volent philosophers, to procure internal national happiness, ^e 
former will evidently produce more evil than good. The self- 
constituted legators, who compiled the laws of nations, drew 
their conclusions from the then established principle ^that 
•^governments were invested with sovereignty ;" but our consti- 
tutions, framed by legitimate legislators, are founded upon the 
pincipl^ ''that there is no sovereignty among men, except 
''that species which resides in the people or society." Hie 
question therefore is, whether a &lse principle shall destroy 
a true one ; or whether rules rec<mimended without authority 
ought to supersede those established in the most perfect mode. 
The old principle placed nations in a state of vassalage to go- 
vernments ; the new one places governments in a state of de- 
pendance upon nations. Without launching into the ocean of 
despotism, created by the old principle, it will suffice to observe, 
that governments could sell or ^ve away the people, or their 
p^pertjri and alter or abolish, tiie form of the government 



Digitized by 



Google 



S80 

itself. The power <tf treating away a part of the communitj, 
and transferring them to any degree of tyranny* far transcends 
that of taxing them without their consent The cortes of Spain 
saw the enormity of this power, and endeavoured to moderate 
it, by prohibitii^ its exercise, without the concurrence of a 
representative assembly : but we have gone farther ) and by 
withholding from our governments the powers of sovereignty 
of which this was one, abolished it entirely, by rooting out the 
error from which it sprouted up* The rights of declaring war« 
'mndof creating corporations or granting exclusire privik^s, 
IS' considered by the writers upon the laws of natioas^were 
idglits- of aovenBignly ; but the caseof war is specially pro> 
iri^led for by the fedenal cfmstttution^ because the federal go^ 
vemment^ as having no sovereignty, could not otherwise have 
declared it; whilst no pnivisi<m is made for tiie cases of corpe* 
raiticna and exclusive priiilegeB, because none was* necessai* 
ry ; these^ tbosfcHre, were dwlished, as- bemg powers derived 
from tiie old. doctrine of a sovereignly^ in governments* As the 
powers of malung war and peace were necessary, it became 
necessary alioto provide for them* not as emanations from the 
prineifde of a smrereignty in govennnents, but b» dd^ted pow- 
ers conferred by the soduil sovereignty, or natural right of self- 
government. Several conduskma result from this reasmung^ 
No powers in relaticm to warase derived: fr(MB the old doctrine 
cf a sovereignty in gov^rmnents under our system ; andiume 
am be justly inferred, from the conclusions of the writers ttpoa 
thelaws of nations^ deduced from that'Old doctrine. As it Mfta 
tfaoi^t necessary to dd^;ate powers in relation to war tor tikcr 
federal goventment^it.isj^bin that without such adelegatioB« 
the framers of the constitution did not coacexve that the fi9de-^ 
ral government would possess- any powers at all inrelajtioii to 
war. If the fed^al government would have possessed vm 
powers at all in relatiea to war, had none be^i del^ated to it 
by the states, because it has n» sovereignty, either nmate et 
ccmventionid; the conclusion amounts to a demonstration, 
that it has no power to create corpon^onsj or grant excludiver 
privil^;es, because sudi powers m^st either fiow from an innato 
apAf^reignty, or from an express delegatira, and neither of ttMo 
aoinrces of power exists in the cases of oorponrttoufrpemmHi^ 
and excbisive privilq^ 



Digitized 



J by Google 



S81 

Bat this reasoning is endeayoured te be overthrown, bj in- 
ferring the powers of sovereignty from a delegated power; as 
the power of establishing banks, from the power of taxation ; 
the power of granting exclusive privileges and pensions, from 
the power of regulating commerce and appropriating publick 
money ; and the power of making roads and canals, from Ihe 
power of declaring war. To deduce the powers of sovereignty 
from the delegated powers, the greater powers from the lesser^ 
undefined and unlimited powers from defined and limited ; 
is an evident inversion of reasoning, which terminates in the I 
conclusion, that the limited powiers substituted for the unH- 
mited powers of sovereignty, supposed to have been abolished, ; 
fnrnish inferences which revive these same unlimited powers 
€i sovereignty. 

But in the case of war, tlus mode of reasmung was not 
foreseen. When two nations are at war, a third may subject 
itself to a legitimate attack from either, by certain actions ;^ 
yet even in this case, which calls for a prompt decision, the 
constitution pays no regard to the idea of a spherical sovereign- 
ty ; and disregarding the language of the laws of nations, 
assigns the power, as in every other case where a declaration of 
war may be necessary, to a department, not as being sovereign, 
but as being a trustee of the sova'eign power, lliis trustee 
lllone possesses a right to involve the United States in war ; 
ilnd no other department, nor any individual, has a better right 
to do so, than a constable has to bring the same calamity upon 
England. As the laws of nations cannot deprive congress of 
Any power with which it is invested by the constitution, so they 
cannot invest congress or any other department, with any 
power not bestowed by the constitution. If the laws of nations 
could bestow any powers under our system, there would be 
great difficulty in ascertaining the department which should re- 
ceive them. They contemplate the powers of declaring war 
amd making peace, as residing in an executive department; 
but the constitution divides them, and does not intrust the 
president with either. Which then of these three departments 
ri:iall receive the new powers, drawn from the law of nations ? 
As to these,' the constitution is silent, except that so far from 
recognizing any sovereignty in either, it rejects the idea entire* 
ly by a division of powers allotted to sovereignty by the lavrs i 



Digitized by 



Google 



of natians. As these Uwt cuiBot find a ftoveraig&fy to r^cem 
their bounty, U it to be bestowed according to their recognitiao 
rf execntiTe power as the recipient ; or can there be any t©. 
ciptent at all under ihe fedfcal constitution, which only creates 
department with limited powers, and does not create any spe- 
cies df sorereignty ? If congress does receive the powers 
of soTereignty from the laws of nations, then it mity create 
corporations, because being inTested with soverrignty, these 
laws hare an object to act upon, and to endow with powers; 
b«^ if these laws cannot give soverdgnty to congress, they can 
j^Te it nothii^. Upon this hinge the rig^t of creating corpo- 
rations turns, as belonging to the powers of sovereignty. If 
the power of creating corporations results from a paramount 
spherical sovereignty, all other powers allowed to sovereignty 
by the laws of nations fdlow it, and henceforward, conadenng 
^e liberaliiy of the laws of nitons to sovereignty, the dif&culty 
will not be» to discover what powers congress has, but what it 
has not The question, therefore, is, whether these laws of 
nations or our constitutions have delegated powers to our po- 
litical departments* If it should be decided in favour of the 
constitutions, sovereignty and the laws of natians united can* 
not create corporations, nor confer any power whatsoever ; 
if agamst them, these allies can convey every other power, 
as well as one to create corporations. 

It was wholly unnecessary to the advocates of a power in 
congress to mdce corporations* roads and canals, to append 
the two latter among the wide spreading branches of tiie w v- 
making power, if a paramount spherical power to remove qbsta- 
cles» by setting aside the state power of internal taxation, exist- 
ed; because this species of sovereignty would as easily be 
B(iade to reach internal things, as persons: but still there is 
much ingenuity in the habit of allowing limitations to this pro- 
lifick source of power, whenever one is drawn from it, because 
tins language is less tdarming to the nation, than an undisguised 
claim of power in virtue of spherical sovereignty, construed' by 
the laws of nations. It is agreed, that the powers oi coogjceaa^ 
inferred from the paramount sovereign power of declarii^ war, 
are Umited to things useful in war, and only roads md canals 
are a3 yet specified as amoi^ these useful tilings* Now muk 
the united effect of the concession, and its exanqple ; and it 



Digitized by 



Google 



ingteiflj ifipeiHrB^ liiftt titey coy«r idl tiie gitmiri which the 
most ftbidvie soTereign^j caa eocapy, er at least enough te 
eafiify the atmast greecSttess for power. Men, food, agricttl* 
tare, naimFaetiiir^, clothes, Wsee* kon, leather, powder, lead, 
iiqwnrt, and many other things, are more usefal in war than 
teads^nd canals ; and are net ef a more locd, and interwd na» 
isake. It would be ndicnloiis to say, that a flearirinng state rf 
sgrlenlture would be a less tsefiil preparati<m for war, than a 
powtat In congress to make roads and canals* If the powers of 
isongress are impliedly ext^uted to means nsefal in war, they 
fnast embrace snch as are important, as well as those which are 
trifling. Insignificant as these roads and canals are in them<» 
selves, they cover a boundless political space. They carry tilke 
powers of congress, to be exerted according to its own will, to 
«very thing at least, equally nsefiil in war. By this doctrine, 
^congress may create c(»rp(N:tttions to provide £9od, d^thes, 
horses, iron, powder, lead, liqnora, and even men for war; oit 
^ manage agricultnre and mannfactnres ; for, these are un- 
dottbtedly as convenient and necessary for war, as banks are 
for taxation. The doctrine by whieh this constmetion is assert- 
ed, collected and condensed, is this : *<The federal coAstittttion 
" has not prohMted koflted powers ; whatever is nseftil, necea- 
•*^6ixy or conveni^t in the execution of the delegated powers, 
^coDstitntes an implied power ; the receive of the expressed 
^ power is the srte judge of the extent of the implied power, 
^in ^vo cases only ; those ef congress and the supreme court 
««of the Unit^ States; congress in i^irtue of a paramount 
«* spherical sovereignty may remove evety obstacle to its action 
f^frmn sabc^tnate spheres ; the states are subordinate spheres, 
ffand congress txmj restrict their r%ht of intemd taxation, if 
^' it obstructs the execution 6f any implied power in the opinicm 
^'of ikt fed^al court ; but this court is not a subordinate 
^sphete to congress^ and it has the exclusive power of obstruct- 
''ing the action of congress 1^ letting aside laws as unconsti- 
«tutional-" This medley of conclusions is collected indis- 
criminately ftom the constitution, the idea of sovereignty, and 
tiie emanations (^ that idea scattered in Ae laws of nations ; 
ti«t there is no confnshm in their design. They unequivocally 
tend to the destructien of the state governments* and the erec- 
iion tf Mm non^descript federal government upon their ruins. 



Digitized by 



Google 



9M 

The road {mcedent is enough to justify cmig^ress in a restric* 
tioD of the 9tate right of taxation, to a demolishing extent, ac- 
cording to the decision of the federal court in the bank case; 
as it might legidate upon every other ol^ect useful in war» and 
the court would determine that the states could not tax those 
oljects. I can recollect nothing whkh mig^t not, according to 
the doctrines miyanced, be made an i^ect of exclusive legisla- 
tion by congress. It might abolish slavery as useful for war. 
It mif^t legislate over the class of free blacks, for some useful 
war purpose. Let war be the proposUum, and all means useful to 
prepare for, or prosecute it, are considered as its legitimate pro- 
geny of powers, and the fedotd judges must have erred, ia 
admitting the federal government to be a limited one. It w(»ild 
resemble the praying wheel of some Russian hordes, patched 
round with prayers, from which the Deity may pick and choose 
as he pleases. 
V To me this new notion of a constitution by implicatiou is, I 

confess, exactly like no omstitution at all; nor has it been 
in'oved to my satisfaction, that principles ought to be lost ia 
verbal definitions, or property crushed in the jaws of sove- 
reignty by its prerogatives, to create corporations, exclusive 
privileges and pensions, bestowed upon it by tiie laws of na- 
Urns. A have not the least doubt that the Umted States^ 
though they thought the federal government highly trust^wor- 
thy, as is proved by the great powers witii which they invested 
it, thought themselves trust-worthy also, in relation to the infe- 
rior powers retained ; nor was it presumptuous, whilst they 
were granting a power to nuse armies, to imagine that they 
mi^t be confided in for making roads. If they cannot, with 
what right affecting the puUick good, can they be trusted ? md 
if this pitiful suspicion is sufficient to deprive them of a power 
80 inconsiderable, ought not the mistrust to swell as a power 
becomes grater, and the reason for an assumptkn of local 
powers by congress, to reach every case of more importance 
than roads i 

I think the constitution contfuns internal evidence, adverse 
to that construction, which, taking its stand upon a supposed 
paramount spherical sovereignty, and armed with mining toola 
by the laws of nations, endeavours to work out a new division 
of powers between the federal and state governments, by the 



Digitized by 



3y Google 



285 

pioneer implic&tkm. Where wad the necesrity of adding the 
power of raisii^ armies to that of declaring war« if toia pioneer 
could dig new powers out of those expressed? Snrely the rais- 
ing of armies was as nmch an appurtenance of declaring w«r^ 
as making roads. Argnments of this kind might be greatly 
raoltifdiedy but I will endeaiwnr to include them in a general 
obsenratton. Supposing all means convenient or necessary for 
the executkm of an expressed power to pass with it by impli- 
cation, the powers of taxmg and declaring wur wooM include, 
with less violence than one is made to include banks and the 
otiier roads, muiy of the powers also actually given to con- 
gress, together with so many more, as to obliterate to a great 
extent, or entirely, from the constitution, the idea of a limited 
government. Now, as means which would have been included 
bj the implication-mode of defining powers, are yet expressed, . 
does it not follow, that other means not expressed are not dele- 
gated by im{dication, since otherwise the expresrion of any was , 
a mere tautol<^ P It was bestowing powers by a specification, 
which, as this mode i^ coiistruction supposes, had before passed, 
along with the mother power, by implication. There is no 
such incongruity in that mode of construction, which supposes, 
tiiat a division of internal and external means, as well as of 
internal and external powers between the federal and state 
govemmentSi was intended to be established by the constitu- 
tion. The {mUick confid^ice does not seem to have been ex- 
clnnvely extended to either of these governments in the divi- 
»on of powers ; was it suddenly withdrawn from one, in the 
case of means? In this view, as means are powers, their divi- 
sion between governments intended as checks upon each other 
was as necessary as a division of any other powers ; and the 
local or internal rule, applied to powers expressed, was equally 
called for by implications of new powers umler the disguised 
name of means. 

It is obvious, that this word <' means" is only a tautology of 
the words ** necessity and convenience," and therefore I will 
illustrate the nature of the coalition by another quotation. In 
Hit famous trial of Hampden in the case of ship-money, the 
decision of all the judges of England, except Crook and Hut- 
ton, was in these words : ** That the king mig^t Iwy taaes 
<^ without grant of parliament in cases of necessity, or when the 



Digitized by 



Google 



tM 

wislndbNigfri 9f wkUkitmgetmiiiiie&BdtiihU 

• miy uh f wMt A t wd t mdjltmljm^** LordClttrndmiythovgll 
a €MK-writcr aid partial ta ikt kmgp makes the ftHowii^ ab* 
ttttaUan apM tUs ilacism : ^Tkadaaiageaiid nmckief cam* 
« Mt be cK|mntd, that the ctoim sattuaed hy the deM^ed 
« rapnaoh and Muay Aaft attended thii behamar of the 

• jadgM» whaaataf their caartrid|sMhBitlad the grand ^m- 

• tM of law ta be wmmtmi bf what tfaej <aUed the Madani 
«*af feacrafrMtaii aadaeoestfty.'' Aiid» eajs aaotlMr hista^ 
litti, •'the people bj tUi decitton irere atmek witfa despeit, 
« aad eoacfaded very jtufbf, Hm mitgna dkarta mid thB M 

• Miigkak t a w t tlaf f aa toi»c M aa ead>^ How hearly rdaftad era 
thia *<geaeral raaaaii^ and «ttie laws of natioDsr' 

Ikano beiog anlj necasutiet er coBT^iiences* the ap^oi* 
Itei af tfaia p re ced e nt to oar mlgect li ebrioas. To metsnira 
the grand qaeetien of the parliamaatary r^t of texation by 
the standard rf general reason aad aecessitj^ was the same 
things as ta naaaape the state rigM of taxation by the sana 
standard. In both cases, a plam posttire right woidd be sab* 
verted bj necessary or contanisnt nieaas. The king's claiBS 
of an exolastTeilghtof jodgingastahisBieaaStwaseqaitalent 
ta M exclusive right by oaagress of judgbg as to their means* 
M this spheriod power in the king was saficieat to destroy 
BMgna chartv aad the old oonstitation of Bnglaad ; it is saffi* 
eient ta destroy the new constitution of the Unitsd Static 
The dastractbn in Ba^aad would have been eftcted by moA^ 
hHatii^ the balancing powers of the lords and ooauaons ; ^ 
destmctioa it will dhct here» will arise from the ttmiWatien 
of the balancing powers rf the state goTetvmentk This deei^ 
sioQ in England was bottomed apon the words pammoimt aad 
sorercignty as coastraed by the laws of natiOBS* Had the 
jac^es considered the principle of oo^ordteatbn as applicable 
to king* lords and commons, they coald neYer have decided 
fliat one sphere wifjtkt resort to means for taking away powers 
from the others. But by widowing one sphere with a para* 
mount sovereignty, and then eni|uiring df tiie laws of nations 
irhat was meant by a paramount sorerdgnty in the king, it 
was discovered, that it was something which had a right to re^ 
move all obstacles to its action^ iH*oceeding fi«m sabmdinate 
spheres (as the lords and cMsmoDS w^:e snjqposed to be,) out of 



Digitized by 



Google 



UT 

file way. Sa herer by njeeifaig tiie principle <^ eo^rdiiii^tiM 
ts inapplicable to the federal aad state govermnentBi ai>d.ea« 
dewing the former with a paramount soverrignty, wad then en« 
qniringof the laws of nations what a paramount sovereignty iii. 
the conclusion also follows, that it is something which bat a 
right to remove all obstacles oirt of its wayi^ The judges de- 
cided, thit the royal sphere wtm only limited by spberieel 
toverdgaty, supremacy, necessity, cowenience, and means of 
which the king was to be the s(4e judgei but the nattw eensi* 
dered the decision as destructive of its constitution. If oof 
congressional sphere be only limited by spbericid sovereign^ 
aupremacy, necessity, convenience, and meane ^ which it i| 
the sde judge, can the nation believe that it will [Hreserve tht 
constitutiim of the United States ? 

The security, arising from representa1mi» is m repeatedly 
urged to defeat the force of these observatiims,- thai it must be 
repeatedly noticed. The undemable £ict that sover^gnty ex<« 
pounded by tiie laws of nations has in every form of^uressed 
mankind, stt^;ested to them the idea of dividing it, before they 
had concaved tb^ idea of a govemment throughout respensib^ 
and subservient to the interest of the eonanunity. In these 
divi»<ms, refn^sentaticm has been subjected to restraints; but 
if it cannot be restrained because it is representation; if it can 
destroy the checks imposed upon itself, then no geremment 
0att admit of checks, balances, or di^siens of power* in which 
representation is an ingredient; and mankind after a long tra-^ 
vail have returned to tiie very doctrine they have been trying 
to abdUsh, namely, that they must inevitably elect between a 
deiqpotism in one, a few, or in many, becamm representation may 
he trusted mth unlimited power. Confined fo such a choice, 
tbey have generally agreed that the last species of sovereignty 
is the worst of its bad associates* 

But we have eneountared Ibe doctrine of sovereignty in re- 
presentaticHH because it is represeii1»tion« by a great variety of 
eenstitotiomd limitati(ms and restrictions uppn representation! 
thus expiessing a puUick opinion, that, inve^;ed with sovereign 
power^ it could not be confided in« We have made executive 
power a representativei of the people ; shall this, like legislative* 
Uftract eevereignty from representi^on? But, as if to pu^^le 
k^ibioMj the eitrnctrnv of soTere^nty from representation* 



Digitized by 



Google 



Mi 

we have made both the federal and gtate governments represen- 
tathre, and g^ven to each the quality said to absorb sovereignty ; 
Bor is there any way of getting over this unlucky moral equality, 
but by asserting that representation is paramount to represent 
tation* 

An interlude was ]dayed off many years ago between the 
treaty-making power and the house of representatives of con- 
gress, appltcaUe to tiiis idea of a spherical sovereignty. The 
treaty-makii^ power contended, that the house of representa^ 
tives had no right to contravene the means it had resorted to 
within its sphere of action, but were obliged, in obedience to 
its paramount spherical sovereignty, to approptiate money for 
carrying a treaty into execution. But it being a case at whicfb 
the federal court could not get, there was no tribunal able to 
remove the obstruction of a refusal to surrender a constitutional 
discretion, as to appropriating money by the house of represen- 
tatives; and they arrayed iiie positive powers conferred by 
the constitution, against the implied powers and paramount 
means claimed by the treaty-making power, though defended by 
many quotations from the laws of naticms. The positive power, 
of taxation reserved to tiie states, has not been so fortunate in 
its controversy with the implied power in congress to create a 
bank, merely because a powerful ally of the latter has inter- 
posed ; fdHT I cannot discern any dbtinction between the cases*- 
The doctrines c^ a paramount spherical sovereignty, of means, 
of convenience and of necessity, drawn from the laws of na- 
tions, were the pillars which sustained the pretensions of the' 
treaty-making powers over the house of representatives, as they^ 
are now repeated, to deprive the states of a power as expressly 
reserved to them by the federal constitution, as the power of 
appropriating was to congress. But, co-ordinacy kept its ground 
in one case, and subordination is imposed in the othen 

I think this concubinage between these words and the laws 
of nations is very Mrly detected', by observing that tiie 8th, 
9th and 10th sections of the constitution comprise a system of 
delegated and prohibited powers, by which some are eocpresdy 
prohibited to the states, and others expresdy delegated to con* 
gress. Delegation is a species of prohibition, which b^jins 
where delegation ends. The objects in view were, to bestow 
exclusive powers on a federal government, to retain exclusive 



Digitized by 



Google 



£89 

powers to the state gOTernments* aod to invest both with con- 
current powers. This third class was the least numerous, and 
consisted chiefly of taxation and promoting arts and sciences. 
If a specification of the concurrent powers bestowed on con- 
gress was not intended as a limitation of this class of powers, 
congress may exercise any power which the state govemmenta 
can exercise ; if it was, congress cannot exercise concurrently 
with the state governments, any power not contained within 
the q>ecification of that class. If the specification of the exclu- 
^ve powers given to congress be a limitation of that class of 
powers, tlie specification of the concurrent powers ^ven to 
congress must be a limitation of that class also ; because can* 
did reasoning does not admit of a different construction of the 
same cases in the same instrument. The specification of both 
classes of power, the exclusive and concurrent, must therefore 
prohibit congress in both cases from extending the powers dele- 
gated, or in neither. Yet, as if the principles by which these 
two classes of delegated powers are limited were not the same, 
the catalogue of exclusive powers has received no addition that 
I recollect, whilst that of concurrent powers, ori^nally much 
the shortest, is daily growing. The precedents of the alien and 
sedition laws, and of the bank corporation, recognize a concur- 
rent power in congress with the state governments, over per- 
sons; and that as to roads, a concurrent power over every thing 
useful in war. Under the operation of these precedents, which 
have arisen merely from selecting six or eight very compre- 
hensive words, and making a glossary of the laws of nations, 
the federal constitution is rapidly becoming an instrument, by 
which sundry very great powers are exclusively bestowed upon 
congress, and by which nearly all other powers are consigned 
to the concurrent class, so as to leave very few exclusive pow- 
ers to the state governments, except those which go to the or- 
ganization of the federal government 



2M 



Digitized by 



/Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



SECTION 16. 



^B 


- >'^§^i 


' X-<4^B 


>^<^M 


■*^ 


^'■^ 


#- ^'t^ 



THE MISSOURI QUESTION. 



4<M 



It is with great reluctance that I consider a question, which 
has been so ablj discussed with so little edification; but it 
constitutes a proof so forcible, in favour of the construction of 
the federal constitution for which I have contended, that it 
cannot be neglected. 

The idea of a balance of power between two combinations of 
states, and not the existence of slavery, gave rise to this unfor- 
tunate, and as I shall endeavour to prove, absurd controversy. 
What is the political attitude of nations towards each other, 
supposed by a balance of power? Hostility. What is the eflfect 
of hostility ? War. A balance of power is therefore the most 
complete invention imaginable for involving one combination 
of states, in a war with another. It is in its nature, and will 
be in its consequences, equivalent to the balance of power be- 
tween England and France ; and after a series of bargains and 
contrivances to stunt or pilfer each other, the party worsted in 
the warfare, disguised by these bargains and contrivances, will 
be driven by interest or resentment to use more destructive 
arms. 

But can this happen, when congress itself is to hold the 
scales, make the bargains, and adjust the balance? If it would 
discharge this business fairly, a balance of power would be 
worth nothing, nor would a preponderance be so fiercely con- 
tended for. The extreme anxiety to obtain a preponderance 
acknowledges a thorough conviction on both sides, that a ma- 
jority in congress will not make fair bargains ; and that it will 
sacrifice the interest of some states and individuals to advance 
that of others. The very first debate under the influence of 
this new balance of power has ascertained, that it will destroy 
the old federal principles, founded in similar and sympathetick 
interests^ and transform congress into a body, merely diplo- 



Digitized by 



Google 



mtticlu The new confiwleratioii to be sobsiitttted for ihe old 
one, ought to be stated without disguise, that it may be duly 
estimated, and compared with its rival. It proposes to draw a 
geographical line between slavery and no-slavery; to train the 
people on each side of it, into an inveterate habit of squirting 
noisome provocations at each other through the press ; and to 
create a degree of animosity as an ally to ambition and avarice, 
quite sufficient to induce a preponderating balance to exert its 
whole enei^, in obtaining exclusive advantages. Thus every 
vestige of the federal union, according to the existing compact, 
would be gradually destroyed, because the two bands of con^* 
gressional negotiators would be employed in making sucees* 
sive bargains in relation to the balance of power, or in trium^ 
phantly exercising an acquired preponderance over a van- 
quished adversary ; and every new bargain like the one already 
made, and every new partiality, would be an alteration of the 
federal constitution. Congress would be converted by the new 
federal scheme of a balance of power, between two combina* 
tions of states, into a convention, meeting annually to make 
new bargains for obtaining a preponderance, and local advan- 
tages over each other; or in fact to make annually a new fede- 
ral constitution. To those who saw the difficulty of making 
that we now have, the consequences of this species of policy 
will be quite plain. 

It will very much resemble the whig and tory policy of En- 
gland. By that, two parties were artificially created, whose 
whole business it was to get money and power, without any re- 
gard to the publick good. The parliament retained its repreften^ 
tative and debating qualities, but tiie intention of discussion 
and deliberation was wholly defeated. The most conclusive 
reasoning ceased tp make any impression, aikl every decision^ 
almost every individual vote, is certainly foreseen before a 
deliberation. But there is one very material difference between 
this new project for a balance of power in the United States, 
and the English balance between whigs and tories. Ours will 
superadd to the disgusting moral deformities of theirs, the hide- 
ous feature of being geographical. 

Our idea of a balance of power contemplates two spacious 
territories, with the population of each separately integral, as 
ximj^omerated by an adverse interest; and though substantially^ 



Digitized by 



Google 



MS 

federal in ihetnelires^ sidistuitiilly aiiti4ed6nl willi respect to 
each other. It is absurd to imagine tiiat slarerj is the real con- 
glutinator of these conglomerations, (hard words will be par- 
doned on this hard sa^ect,) becanse «ie party cannot want 
slaves, now that the ^ave trade is abolished ; would not keep 
tliem; and a rape, like that of the Sabine women, is by no 
means to be apprehended ; and because, should any disposition 
exist to take tiiem away, the other party are quite willing to 
part with them. 

A political balance rf power, and a crusade against slavery, 
through ^e bowels df the constitution, are two things so very 
distinct, that a thousand reasons might be urged against their 
supposed consanguinity; I shall, however, only trouble the 
reader with six. First, the crusade would certainly destroy 
the union ; now the conviction of both parties, that it is their 
interest tb preserve it, causes a profession on the part of our 
balance-mongers, that this new division is intended to cement 
it. Secondly, zeal to abolish slavery may find ample food, 
without hazardingr the union upon the experim^it. The Bra» 
Zils, Cuba, or Africa itself, would supply it with ample employ- 
ment for the furor liberandi. Thirdly, a little matter of trade 
might be mingled with crusades to these countries ; and if in 
Africa for instance, things should not be found ripe for chivalry, 
a consolation for the disappointment might be found in lucra- 
tive return cargoes for the other two countries. Fourthly, the 
honour of a crusade against foreigners, and in one case hea- 
thens, would be as great as the honour of a crusade against 
brethren and christians, and the danger would be less^ Fifthly, 
it is prudent, when a resolution is taken to set fire to ^K>me 
body's house, to go far from home, lest the flames may reach our 
own, as the wind is apt to change. Sixthly, if our consciences 
tdl us that we ought to enslave freemen, to make slaves free, 
and to cause the destruction of a million or two of peo{de, white 
and black, in the good work, nature tells us to give the prefer^ 
ence in such favours, to those who need them most; and not 
to destroy the rights and lives of those whom we love and who 
love us, because they are suffering a misfortune imposed on 
them by others. My imagination seizing upon this suggestion 
Went to work, and conjured up a set of witches before my eyes, 
irtio seemed to be pouring into a huge cauldron called the 



Digitized by 



Google 



»94 

United States, a collection of poisonous ingredientB; all labelled 
at t<^ ''slayeryt'' and to be singings 

* Donlile, doable, toil aod trouble, 
** Fire boTDy and canldroii bubble.* 

Bttt upon looking at the nnderside of the labels, I invariably 
discerned the words .'* ambition, ayarice* exclusive privil^esg 
bciunties, pensions and corporations.'' 

The subject of internal slavery was definitively disposed of 
by the federal compact, and it would be a fraud to open it again. 
To violate the compact as. to a local internal affiiir» would des^ 
troy it. For above thirty years since the last union, this sub- 
ject, unstirred, has given the United States no trouble. No 
reflecting man can hesitate to believe, that our experience has 
ascertained, that let alone, it will be harmless to the union ; and 
that if it be used to excite hostile feelings between two great 
divisions of states, its mischiefs may exceed the most apprehen- 
sive anticipation. Besides, all politicians agree that a reforma- 
tion of long standing evils is best effected by slow remedies, and 
the progress made by the states themselves towards diminishing 
this, shews that they may be trusted with confidence in an af- 
fair of thdr own, of which thc^ are the rightful and best judges. 

When I was at college in 1775, a shoemaker sometimes made 
qieeches to the students to invigorate them in the patriotism so 
necessary at that period* Being intoxicated upon one of these 
occasions, he was obliged to sustain himself by a post in the 
street whilst be delivered his harangue, which he demonstrated 
^ concluding with the maxim *f united we stand, divided I 
&11," and letting go the post, down he tumUed. The post, it is 
true, kept its ground ; but if the union be lost, no divination is 
necessary to foresee, that every state will get a falL If the 
United States ar^ intoxicated by the word "slavery'* not only 
to let go, but to dig up the post, by which they are supported, 
how will the comparison stand between them and tiie drunken 
shoemaker? 

I have said that tiiis new policy is absurd, and I will attempt 
to prove it. A permanent balance of power can only be fouhd- 
ed in natural causes, and slavery has no connexion with geogra- 
phical circuQistances. Climate, proxiiKiity and navigation^ can 



Digitized by 



Google 



£95 

jftnly beget co^iUBations between states, svScient to create tke 
baleful idea of a ge(^;raphical balance of power* Maine ean 
never be united with Ohio, nor Maryland with Missouri, in £Mia- 
ing a balance of power composed of two divisions of states* Bo^ 
if a balance of power is attempted to be established by the line 
of slavery, it will introduce a natural, instead (rf* an unnatural 
geographical divisimi, and a line between eastern and western 
states will very soon be substituted for this whimsi^ species oi 
geography. The experiment will produce gr^t disorder and 
confusion^ and afford a temporary gratification to individual 
avarice and ambition ; but it will aoon be discovered that natu- 
ral, local and lasting interests are nuM'e ccm^utinating than a 
temporary, flaggii^ and crusading enthusiasm ; and if the ^tes 
must be divided and arrayed against each other, they vriil iMkt 
refuge from the sway of a ianatick, within lines marked out bj 
nature. 

The boundaries of the states were respected, and the right 
ef internal self-government reserved to them by the federal 
constituticm, to remove the temptations arising from a natural 
dissimilarity of circumstances, which mi^t seduce them into 
the ruinous system of partial comtnnations ; and congress were 
only invested with powers reaching interests which were com- 
mon to all tiie states, to prevent a possibility of geographicid 
partialities, which would certainly operate as provocations 
towards the chief danger which menaced the glory and hap- 
piness of the United States. From this policy, intended to 
avert the greatest misfortune the United States can sustain, 
the policy of an mterference by congress with an interest not 
common ammig all the states, of exciting local feelings and 
manufacturing mutual provocations, and of establishing two 
great combinations of sti^s, is a complete departure; and it 
cannot therefore produce the effects, which the policy of the 
constitution laboured to accomplish* In pursuance of its great 
object to prevent combinations between states, the constitution, 
after having distributed powers between the federal and state 
governments, with a view to supersede ail the means having a 
tendency towards the deprecated calamity, closes the subject 
by a positive prohibition upon a state ** to enter into any agree- 
<• ment or compact with another state.'' Now, is not the Mis- 
souri agreement or compaetf a positive violation of this plain 



Digitized by 



Google 



•06 

ppoUbitimiy mi rapf06i«giiaa4ier arpiiiMvt esifited, cletrly 
imeo&stitatioiial from this single conaideratioii? It is a compact 
cr agreement by one half of tlie states with tiie other half, aaA 
from its magmtttde» and the power of the parties, infinitely 
nore dangerons than the attempt by the Hartford conreBtion 
to oong^mnerate a few states into a separate interest, adterse 
to that general interest, comprised by the powers delegated to 
the federal goyeroment* The Missouri compact or agfeemei^ 
was made by n^;otiator8 elected by the states to anstain the 
existing federal union, and not to form two new confederations 
of states, and to make a new compact between ti^m j in d^ng 
so, the negotiators therefore exceeded their representattTO 
powers, and their compact was void. The members of ^ 
HartfM'd convention had better powers ; they were chosen lor 
the purpose of making a Hew compact between a few states, 
and though it would hare been against the constitution, and a 
subyersion of the union to do so, they would yet haye acted 1^ 
a representatiye authority. But, supposing that the members 
of congress should be considered as genuine representatiyes of 
tiie i^tes, cloAed with a power to make a new compact be* 
tween them, yet no such compact could constitutionally be 
made, by delegates or representatives, or tiie Hartford c6n« 
▼ention was not reprehensible. The attempts, therefore, of 
this convention and of congress vmere equally unconstitutional 
because the old compact of union prohibits any new compact 
between the states, except in the modes pointed out by the 
constitution itself, in which modes both are equally deficient* 

Slavery being an absurd motive for establishing the proposed 
geographical division and balance of power, so positively for « 
bidden, and so sedulously counteracted by the federal ccmsti-' 
tution, because it cannot be permanent, and would destroy the 
union; we are forced to look for some other, to unriddle tiie 
sudden enthusiasm, ardentiy cultivated at this juncture ; and 
to consider whether the true motiye is more favourable to a 
lasting union and to good government, than the spurious one^ 
Considered only an instrument to efiect ends, the real question 
to be considered is, whether these ends are good. The ends to 
be effect^ are, a monopoly of the offices of government, and 
iof the partialities of congress, by the means of this artificial and 
fanciful geographical balance rf power. This must ensueb un- 



Digitized by 



Google 



t9r 

iteit tiie biliooe bf k^ perfectl J enOi and if it WM k^ 
the federal machine eould not more at all ; but it cannot be 
jLept eveoy because it will be disordered by a sin^^ vote* and 
the votes will be influenced by aTarke^an^tion and local calca- 
latioaa. If we find it extremely difficult to sustain a diTisifni «f 
power between the federal and state goYemments, defined fay 
the federal constitution; what hope can exist of sustaining aa 
undefined balance^ dependant upon the caprices and selfiskiesa 
c^ fiuctuating individuals P Letiis suppose, that one of these ba- 
lances should acquire a preponderance^ which would be certain^ 
and contemplate the consequences. It would absorb the offices 
of government, and the favours of congress. Well, what good 
would this do to the inhabitants of the preponderating balance ? 
It might indeed gratify the avarice and ambition of a few indi- 
viduals among them for a short space; but the people would 
have the same sum to pay for the support of government, and 
in the end much more, because by substitutiing personal avarice 
;ind ambition for g^ieral good, an oppressive political principle 
is introduced, of the bitterness of which, the people of the pret 
ponderatii^ balance would very soon taste. It would i^so tend 
atrongly towards the dissolution of the union, in the effects (tf 
which tiie people of both balances would share. It is therefore 
very plain, that the interest of the people in every state of the 
union will be more advanced, by leaving appointments to be 
made by a labyrintii of interests and opinions, as at present, 
than by transferring them to a preponderating balance for the 
purpose of gratifying personal avarice and ambition. 

The end of monppoUs&ing the favours of congress, wouinds more 
deeply the tr^e principles of the union. These were intended 
to disable congress from granting internal favours, and commit- 
ting internal partialities; but the design of obtaining them by 
means of a preponderating balance, positively expresses an opi- 
iiion, that congress has a power of exercising internal partiali- 
ties; and this ofHnion expunges firom the federal constitution 
the distinction between delegated and reserved powers, for 
which the construction I have endeavoured to support, c,on<« 
tends. The opposite construction, by its baleful success, has 
already established the doctrine, that congress does possess this> 
power, and suggested the idea of a preponderating balance, no^ 
to correct it, but to aggravate its operation | and to j^ther from. 



Digitized by 



Google 



i9B 

it the fruits it can yieM, without controul. The policj clcitrly 
meditates an extension of internal usurpations, and is itself 
one. If a lust of power, natural to man, has been sufficient to 
induce congress, unmoulded into two diplomatick i>odks, tt 
assume internal powers over persons and property, what will 
be the consequence, when a preponderating geographical ba- 
labce shall be able to play the whole game, and win of the light- 
est, even by a single vote, under no restraint but that of its 
own conscience ? Is there no difference between constitutional 
restraints upon the frail^es of human nature, and the boundless 
liberty they will derive from commuting these restraints fmr 
the contemplated preponderating balance P Let us recite th6 
succession of events. The great pecuniary favour granted by 
congress to certificate-holders, begat banking; banking begat 
bounties to manufacturing capitalists ; bounties to manufacture 
ing capitalists begat an oppressive pension list ; these partialis 
ties united to beget the Missouri project ; that prefect begat 
the idea of using slavery as an instrument for eftlecting a ba* 
lance of power ; when it is put in operation, it will beget new 
usurpations of internal powers over persons and property, and 
these will beget a dissolution of the union. The genealogy .ii 
strictly consanguineous, and the prolificacy of the family ob« 
viously natural. It furnishes complete materials for a tompa* 
rison between the construction of the federal constitution, 
which excludes congress from exercising internal powers ov^ 
persons and property, not expressly delegated; and one whk^h 
lets it into this boundless field by inferences at enmity with the 
meditated division and limitation of powers. A field, thick s^ 
with modes of transferring money from balance to balanee» 
from states to states, and from persons to persons, cannot be 
entered at all by congress, without provoking those feelings 
which never fail to embroil nations with each other. The fede- 
ral constitution proposed to shut (mt both tiie federal and state 
governments from this perilous field, by excluding the former 
from a power of bestowing money on some states and indivi- 
duals at the eitpense of others, and the latter frx>m a power c{ 
exercising any stratagems to get money from a sister state. It 
contemplated a political garden of Eden, planted with {ninci* 
pies yielding fruit. nourishing to the community, and did not 
design to invest mther the federid or state governments with • 



Digitized by 



Google 



fQver to eradicate ihem, and aubstitiite a parasitical skmbberj* 
enfeeUiog the good principles, and only nourishing serpents. 
If the division of powers between the state and federal govern- 
ments berooted out of the federal constitution* and the free- 
flom of labour or of property should be lost, bj the temptations 
«f the two devils, avarice and ambition, to induce le^slatures 
io meddle with forbidden fruit, the essence of our political S79* 
t;em will be destroyed, and with it our vaunted residence in a 
region of political felicity. 

The schema for creating the proposed balance of power, con- 
sidered as addressed to the states, evidently required some 
stupifying ]M*eparative tp induce them to swallow it.. Their 
inclination and interest to keep their reserved powers was too 
manifest to venture upon a proposition in direct terms, advisii^ 
them to surrender to congress a power of distributing internal 
partialities ; and to divide themselves into two combinations, to 
trj which should be able to gel the most of these pardalitie& 
It was too absurd plainly to say to the states, "yield to con- 
i^ gress your internal r%hts, for the sake of a chance to get 
*< some of ^em back." The spectacle of slavery was therefm 
a cunning device to draw their attention from home ; but let 
them remember^ that those who forget their own pockets in a 
fray, often lose their money. 

I might stop here, and rest the constitutionality of the Mis- 
souri question upon the positive prohibition of compacts or 
agreements between the states; and its policy, upon, the very 
visible conseq^iences which would follow the noti(m of the pro- 
posed balance of power between two great combinations of 
states : but I will proceed with the subject, becai^e it ought to 
be considered in all its beariAgs^ by a great community, the 
happiness of which it will materially affect. 

The extremities of the union can neyer b§ made by law, to 
think alike upon the subject of. slavery, because tlie evidence 
respectively contemplated is entirely different in different 
slates ; and therefore the idea of copsolidating the union by 
coercions of opinion as to this sJEair, is as preposterous as iim 
exploded idea of consolidating religion, by legal coercions upon 
conscience. Compulsion in both cases is so evidently tyran- 
{liqal, that it never fails to be met by resistance, whenever it is 
practicable. Missouri has no ri^ht to coinp^l Maine ten admit 



Digitized by 



Google 



of slaverjr, nor Maine any rig|ht to compel Misioim to pmldlii 
it, becaase each state has a right to think for itself. A soi^- 
ern majority in congress has no right to compel the nor&em 
states to permit slavery, nor a norliiem majority to compel the 
southern states to abolish it, because it is a dubject of internal 
State regulation prohilnted to congress, and reserved to the 
states. One and the same principle applies to the two rights of 
suffering or abolishing slavery, and to assert and deny its effi- 
cacy, will never operate any conviction upon tiie party whose 
rights under it are invaded, by a party who clainffi and uses its 
protection. It has been handled as a religious qaesdon, and 
zeal, even in these modem times, has forgotten ^e freedom of 
conscience, and adopted the antiquated plan of efl^cting con- 
version by violence. The French nation, actuated at first by 
an honest but intemperate enthusiasm, attempted to compel the 
other nations of Europe to be free and happy ; an1d the events 
produced by the fisinatical undertaking were such as may be 
expected, should a combination of states attempt to adrntnister 
by force the same medicines to another combination of states. 
Nothing can be more offensive than such attempts, because 
they assail natural rights ; nor more presumptuous, because ^e 
dictators are infinitely worse informed upon the subject, than 
those who have the right of determination. To prevent this 
dictatorial and absurd exercise of power by a majority of states, 
as being an infallible cause of civil war and disunion, congress 
was not made a representation ci any internal powers, those 
few excepted necessary for common safety ; and all internal 
powers, except a few specified prohibitions, were reserved to 
the states. The reasons for this policy which then existed, 
still exist, and will exist forever. The members of congress 
could never be well informed of local concerns, and therefore 
could never decide upon them correctly. Vanity cannot supply 
tiie place of knowledge. They would not feel the effects of 
their local laws, and therefore congress as to local sut^ects 
would not possess the best quality of a. representative body. 
Above all, they would not decide like local representatives ; 
this is so true, that if all the members of congress now opposiMi 
to slavery in Misjsouri, should emigrate to that state, there is 
no doubt but that most of them would soon change their opi- 
inon. Indeed, this is the reason of the difference of opuudti 



Digitized by 



Google 



301 

tetw^entke eastern and soothern etttea upon the qvettion; 
and if either placed in the circnmstances of the other8»,wonld 
have adopted opimons the rererse of those now held, it forcibl j 
displays the injustioe of a dictatoriid power to be exercised by 
either party. 

It is hi^ly edi^jring, in computii^ probaUe consequences, 
to recollect similar cases* The society of Amis des Noirs in 
I'raoce, zedous for amending the condition of the free people 
of colour, and believing that a conscious philanthrophy was 
local information, invested them with unqualified citizenship, 
wrote the slaves into rebellion, finally liberated diem, and these 
friends of the blacks tamed out to be the real murderers of the 
whites. An intemperate zeal, united with an ignorance of 
local circumstances, had to bewail the massacre of about forty 
thousand ¥rhite men, women or children, of about thirty thou- 
sand mulattoes, after they had united with the blacks in that 
atrocity, of about one hundred thousand of the blacks them- 
selves, and of dividing the residue into tyrants, and slaves to 
tyrannical laws, always more oppressive than any other species 
of slavery. These friends of the blacks in France disavowed 
at first the design of emancipation ; but yet their speeches and 
writings gradually awakened the discontents of the slaves, and 
excited efforts which terminated in a catastrophe proving them 
to have been the worst enemies of the whites. This awful 
history engraves in the m<n^ code the consequences of a 
I^slation exercised by those who are ignorant of local circum- 
stances, and the wisdom of our distinction between internal 
and external powers. The people of St. Domingo pressed 
upon the general assembly of France, its ignorance of local 
circumstances, and consequent incapacity to judge of the case; 
but as St. Domingo had representatives in that assembly, it per- 
sisted in its fanatical philanthrophy, and lost the finest island 
in the world of its size. The eastern states have as littie know- 
ledge of the Mississippi states, as the general assembly of 
France had of St Domingo, and therefore the writings of the 
friends of the blacks in the United States are almost exacdy 
the same, with those which they uttered in France. 

The next case is the memorable controversy betwaen Gk^at 
Britain and her colonies. She msisted upon legislating for 
them locally and internally. They replied, that her parliament 



Digitized by 



Google 



90% 

had ]|«i a fufllcUwt koovrUdge of ttimr local drcnwiataiceg» to 
do thU with any propiietj, and ttiat thej were not repres^tod 
in that body* She at length proposed to remore the last ob}ec* 
tion, and offisved them & repraaentatton. Bat thej dedmed it 
upon the ground, that the same species of ignorance, so obvi- 
onsiy oti^tionable» would still prcTail over a su^oritj of tfae^ 
members. And the disunion between Great Britain and her 
colonies was caused by a dtam of internal legislation fin* a body 
of men, whose'internal knowledge d* the countries, which were 
to suffer it, was too imperfect to produce good laws* But there 
was another cogent reason for r^ecting a fompromise with Eoi- 
gland, upon the condition of a representation in parliament. It 
was impossible that the essential qualities of representation 
could ever be annexed to it by that pngect. These are, as w^ 
all agree, that the representative should feel his own laws, and 
that those, upon whom those laws operate, should have a peri- 
odical power to remove him. Now, the people of the cole^ea 
would have had no power to remove a member of parliam^^^ 
elected in Great Britain ; nor would the laws passed by a mar 
jority in that country, but operating exclusively in this, affect 
any individual of that majority. Such a representation was 
therefore viewed as a mere mockery of re^eseutation, and cre- 
dulity itself laughed at the clumsiness of the device. These 
projects, however, of Great Britain suggested our distinction 
between internal and external powers, and the necessity of a 
genuine representation for the exercise of each class, impres- 
sively illustrated by the question of slavery, although it is equal- 
ly applicable to roads, canals, the encouragement of mannfac* 
tures, and other laws operating locally, passed by congress. 
The proposed law as to^ slavery was to operate exclusiveij 
upi^n Missouri. She bad no representation in congress. If she 
tuid, it would be nugatory ; for, the majority necessary to paaa 
the law, would neither feel it, nor would it have been liable to 
be rejected at any time, by the electors who did feel it. Such is 
the case with respect to all local laws passed by cimgress. The 
minorities which pass them, must be insensiUe of their opera* 
tion. The 8th section of the federal constitution, is both an 
iUttStration of this reasening, and a test which forciUy confirms 
the construction for which I have ccHitended. All the powen^ 
bestowed upon congress, are such as will, in their exe€tttioii> 



Digitized by 



Google 



SOS 

operate genm^aUg botii upon the menabertef that body, and also 
upon the people of all tlie states. Th«8 the legtslatore would 
feel thefr owh laws, the electors will be ioflitenced by a com- 
mon interest, and ihe essential principles of representa^n are 
pr^smred* If the principles of representation are thus care« 
folly preserred, by the natnre of the powers delisted, a coa^ 
strucdon which supposes that they are destroyed by a taot 
permission of means, inconsistent with the design expressed* 
fes, in my view, both literally and morally incorrect; literally, 
by the care to del^ate such powers only as would operate 
equally upon all the members of the union ; morally, by the 
equal care taken to preserve the essential principles of repre«> 
sentation. Some years i^, much was said about virtual repre^ 
mentation. Under this idea, it has even bc^n contended, thi^ 
hereditary kings and nobles were national representatives. 
And it must be admitted, that they participate mm-e lai^Iy 
of that character, than a. body of le^slatMrs elected by one ^ 
our states, whilst making local regulattons to be imposed upim 
another; because, kings and nobles of the same state may fed 
their own laws to a great extent We have however an exact 
parallel of the local powers claimed on behalf of our Congress, 
in the recent congress of European kings for settling the ai&irs 
of timt quiurter of the g^obe, hardly larger than our share of 
tiiis« These kings, as re{»^sentatives of some states, under^ 
lake to make local relations for others, which, far front ieel* 
ing themselves, were dictated by their avarice and ambition* 
if our ccmgress can also make local regulations, which may 
gratify the avarice or amUtion of particular states at the ex- 
pense of others^ I do not discern any difference between the 
ciases. 

But, thou^ tiie exercise of local l^slation by congress may 
be evidently incon^tent with reason, with the essential cha- 
racters of representation, and with the primsif^es deemed hj 
us indispensably necessary for tiie preservation of liberty, yet 
in this slave question, as in some others, the pure and invigo« 
rating Sforit of the eonstitttticm has been assailed by \he science 
<tf constiruction ; and its words are turned into worms for eat* 
ing up its vitals. A sect called Pharisees* by preferring.cere^ 
n»>ny to essentials, and signs to substance, contributed laigety 
tontards the comiptioi^a&d ruin evea of a theocracy ; and there* 



Digitized by. 



Google 



.304 

Are Hm speeies of tepUstfy demvidt alltfie atteatiOD, wImIi 
iti cftpacitj to d» mischief deaenres. 

«JVW itato may be admitted bj congress into this unioikV 
Skidi is the vriiole power. But then this powor is a spherical 
sovereignty, and it is an appendage of sovereignty to an- 
nex cofiditions to its grants. Such is^ the r^^nt constnic- 
tiea of the words quoted* The meaning of the. word " sti^" 
is first to be settled. We have understood it to mean "a po^ 
<«litical association of people* able to confederate with siknilar 
^ associations.'^ It was never before iraagined» that congress 
^mM make a state. The power is to admit, not to mdle. fi 
e&agttw cannot mould, it cannot modify a s<3ite* It must be 
tile work of the sover^;nty of the peof^e, associatii^^ by tbek 
tMe to self-goTemment. Do congress participate of this sove^ 
relgnty with the people of Missouri, w is its supposed spheri- 
cal soverMgnty paramount to the soverdgnty of nature ? Tka 
parties to the assodation composing a state, are the indivyuals 
by whom it is formed. By what principle can a body of m^i^ 
neither collectively nor individually parties to this association* 
dictate its terms, except that of arbitrary power P The consti^ 
tution abounds with instances to prove, that it did not mean by 
fine term " states," a moral being capable of being created or mo- 
delled by congress, but we vrili confine ourselves to the special 
power under consideration. "JWw states." Old being the rda- 
five to new, both words are predicates ctf the same subject A 
new state was, therefore, literally contemplated by the censtitii^ 
tion, as exactly the same moral being, created and moulded hf 
tiie same right to self-government, with tiie dd. There was a 
good reason, why congress should be only entrusted with thenar 
ked power **to admit." Had it been empowered to annex condi^ 
tions to this admission, it might easily tiave enlarged its own 
powers, and obtained ain authority dangerous to thethirte<^ ori* 
ginal stat^. It was foreseen, that the new would in time ex- 
ceed the old states, in number aiid population ; and the old 
states, therefore, for their own security, withheld from ccm- 
^ss ttie dangerous power of modifying the new, by condi- 
tiions ; as such a power might easily be Immght to bear up«i 
tbemselves, and mi^t be used materially to alt^ ike coistittt^ 
tion. Suppose the naked power of admission had been given 
io tlie president Wcmld he also have had the power of amiesv 



Digitized by 



Google 



iag eoiutitid&s» by ^Mat of exeovtiye tfhenuXMmmigidj^ If 
it would have been in his hands a mere personal power of re- 
jection or admission, without conyejing to him a power of an- 
nexing to admission a local law for the goTemment of thestile^ 
it must be the same in the hands of congress ; fwr the nature of 
a trust is not changed by the name of the trustee* Congress 
have frequently conferred upon the president certain trusts. 
Could he have annexed conditions not warranted by these 
laws? As in the cases of his being empowered by proclamation 
to abrogate a law» upon the performance of some specified act 
by a foreign nation. Could he have enacted a new law» kgr 
annexing a condition to the execution of this trust? The power 
of appointment or nomination is exactly similar to the power 
4^* admitting new states into the union. No conditions can be 
annexed to the execution of such trusts. Congress are intrust* 
ed eventually with appointing a president, as well as with ad- 
quitting states into the uni<m. Does the power involve a right 
to annex^ conditions, in one, in both or in neither of these cases? 
The reason for intrusting congress with the power of admit- 
ting new states, was not to enlarge the powers of that body», 
Qor to bestow on it a species of l^^lation, purely local* but to 
jivoid the inconveniences which would have resulted from the 
reservation of the right by the parties who held it Hence, is 
H mere naked power or trust was conferred, there exists a pre- 
cipe description in a few words, of the body politick to be ad- 
mitted, and also of the compact of which it was to become a 
member, ^ew states were to be admitted into « this umonJ'* 
I do not discern any words which could more exactly have de- 
scribed parties and rights. , The new parties were to be the 
same as the old, and the rights received were to be those cen- 
ferred or secured by " this union." If, therefore, « this union" 
does not empower congress to legislate exclusively in relaticm 
to the interaal civil government of each old state, it cannot so 
legislate as to those adnutted. In fskct, « this union" would, 
never have existed, had such a power been proposed by tho 
constitution. The people of no one state claimed any power of 
Jipcal regulation oyer another. They neither thou|^t of« nor does 
there exist any compaict, conveying such a power to a mi^mty 
Qf states. There existed no primitive power by which one stiUo 
or several possess^ a right 1» form a^ ei3mdinJ6m$mi9 ^^^ 
% O 



Digitized by 



Google 



AM 

itttemal Uwt fcr tiie yv cn w p eat rf aaotiiar etate; aadiiMft 
i0Wld principle^ that a dekfiated power cannot exoeed the 
pow«r from wUdi it was derhred. 

A power in congreMof annexiDg conditions to the admission 
of states into t)ie uniim would be in its nature monarchical, and 
lttalo|0«s to the feadal STstenu Chiefs established that system 
•pon the principle, that conquests were made for them ; and 
thus obtained tl^ r^t of annexing conditions to grants. But 
Mth us» conquests are made for the community, and not for 
congress ; and the principle which sustained the right of an- 
nexing conditions, in the case of feudal chiefs, fails in the case 
of congress. The community, therefore, presoibed the rule by 
WUch conquered lands were to be erected into states, in doing 
Whioh they have not invested congress with a power of annex- 
ing feudal conditions to this disposition. 

fittt,this feudal power of annexing copditions to the settle*- 
ment of a conquered or acquired territory, by the goremmetit 
of the country making the acquisition, has even been ex{4oded 
m tyrannical both here and in England. One of our principles 
in the coloniid state was, that emigrants to such territori^ 
earned with them their natire rights. The colonies claimed 
the rights of Englishmen, and not only obtained them, but have 
I hope greatly extended them. But thb would not be the caae^ 
if our emigrants should be suligected to a diminution of their 
native rights, by the pleasure oi congress. All of them eiyoy^ 
ed tiie r^t of forming lociU constitutions and laws before their 
emigration. If congress cannot l^islate over the states from 
wfaehce they removed, and may do so by annexing conditions 
to a trust, over that which the emigrants from these states maf 
create^ it is obvious that these citieens must have lost some rerj 
important native rights, by an ^nigration from one part oi our 
tonntry to another. If the cc^onists emigrating from England 
were correct in asserting by force oi arms, that they brought 
With them all the rights conferred l^ the English system of go- 
vernment, our emigrants may also contend, that they carry with 
Ihem ail the rights conferred by our system. Among these, 
the unoooditional right to make ikeir own local constitution^ 
iSttd Uwsi without being subject to any conditions imposed by 
an extraneous anthorHy^ has been the mostimportimt ; and uiii- 
versally exercised by every state in the union. 



Digitized by 



Google 



The 8&H|e priociple has been judideHy decided te f4mttrt 
Some of the kings of England (of the Stuart family I ticti^toi) 
in admitting several West India isUnds to establish mpre- 
sentative governments, annexed the c<mdition to their grauti, 
that these islands should pay to the crown a perpetual revd- 
nne of four and a half per centum on all exports ; and sfvo- 
nd of the legislatures were so weak as to pass lawa eonfirpi- 
ing the condition, which soon became excessively oppressive* 
and greatiy impeded the prosperity of the isliMids upon wht^ 
it was inflicted. Grenada alone both clumed a right to repi>e- 
apntative government, and disputed the validity of the condip 
tion. And an English judge, even lord Mansfield, no enih^- 
'aiast for liberty, no enemy to the crown, decided in favour of 
the island, which retained its government, annulled the condi- 
tion, and prospered far beyond its paler-livered comrades. 
This decision was founded upon the rights of Englishmen, 
NvhicH adhered to these emigrants, and which bring rights, eould 
not be suljjected to conditions. 

In answer to a precedent, so fully up to the point, it is sup'* 
posed tiiat congress possess an arbitrary power to refuse the ad* 
mission of new states into the unicm, the language being permiit 
eive and not imperative. I consider even this olgeotioa as only 
literally plausible, and as substantially flimsy. Had congreSi 
attempted to retain our wide-spreading new states under its go* 
Temment, it would have been im enormous grasp at powfr» not 
intended to be bestowed upon that body, but intended to he pre* 
vent^ by the proviskm fin* multiplying states, as territories ex- 
tended. The old states would, by an attempt on the part of 
pongre$s» so flagnatly adverse to the princi^s of the coo^tUn 
tion, have been instantaneouriy excited ; and have united with 
the new territories in preserving their own rights, and vindioat- 
ing those of their fdlow citizens. Whilst the constitution liiKt* 
ect the local powers of congress to ten miles square, it hardly, 
intended to invest that body with perpetual and unliimted local 
powers over a country more extensive, and likely to become 
more numerous, than the thirteen states which adopted it The 
reason of the case was coopered as sufficiently mandatory, 
and has hitherto proved to be so ; and if the constittittonlias not 
provided for a viphition of tlie trust, it must have been upon the 



Digitized by 



Google 



\ gnand, tkttthe Uwsof Rmne prorided nopaniriimeiitfor 
a son who shmld marder his &ther. 

But, the decision of Lord Mansfield discloses a sufficient rea* 
son, wh J the framers of the constitution thought it unnecessuy 
to solijoiii to the trust, a prohihition upon congress to annex con- 
ditiMis. The J knew that the execution of the trust would be 
¥aUd, and that all conditions would be Toid. An affirmatiTe 
power does not require any prohibition against its being exceed- 
ed. Suppose then Missouri should have been admitted into the 
union upon the condition proposed. Her membership would be 
perfect, and the condition would be yoid. She might at nny 
time adopt a new constitution. Everj state retains that ng^; 
and maj, in that mode, abolish or re-establish slavery at its own 
pleasure. The proposal of this condition was therefore an in- 
vitation to congress to rush over rocks and precipices in pur- 
suit of a phantom. 

The conditions, annexed to the grants of kings, were founded 
on the fictions of an absolute sovereignty over persons and prtK-* 
p^y. If a similar power here can be engrafted upon our new 
•terns, called spherical sovereignty, no restraints would exist 
upon its exercise, as in the case of kings. Congress, by condi- 
tions, might mould states into as many Varieties as it chose, as 
kings did colonies; and render one as little like another, as an 
eagle is like a buzzard. It might create forfeitures of lands bjL 
annexing conditions to patents, or even forfeitures of mem« 
bership in the union, and revive the principles of the Boston 
port bill, enacted by the English parliament. And indeed, feu* 
dal might be substituted for allodial principles to an incomputa- 
ble extent If a trustee for the sale and conveyance of lands 
should annex conditions to the deed, suggested either by his in- 
terest or benevolence, and not specified by the trust, it must be 
admitted that the titie of the purchaser would be good, and tiie 
conditions void ; because it would be derived from the princi- 
pal, by whom no such conditions were required. But if the con- 
ditions annexed should be prejudicial to the interest of the prin- 
cipal, the case would become infinitely stronger ; as no power 
to perform a special act for his benefit was ever construed either 
in law or equity, as an unlimited or general power, to do tiiai 
which was injurious to him» Now a power in congress of exer- 



Digitized by 



Google 



ds&ng a conenrprat right with the stat€g, botii as to their eoasti- 
tutions and laws, is obviouslj injurioas to all the states in ih% 
iMftoa, from which, as principals, the trust of admitting new 
states is derived. 

Ramsay's United States, vol. 3, p. 8, *' In these arrangements 
** the difference between American and European principles in 
*^ colonizing is strongly marked. In the latter, the object has 
**'been pre-eminently the b«>nefit of the parent state: In the 
^ former, the joint bmefit of both, by a free communication cf 
** equal r^jMs and common privileges* In the one case, some 
" commercial advantages of the mother state has been pursued ; 
** in the other, the good of mankind, by extending the benefits 
** of civil government, on terms of equality and independence. 
** Congress give no charters to their colonies ; but sell lands in 
^ absolute property to settlers, who, /row ihe gift of €hd, were 
'* in the actual possession of the rights of man, and invite them 
** as such to join in a common, equal, social compact, llie 
«* soverdgns of Europe gave lands to their colonists ; Imt re- 
** served by tharters a right to controul their property, privi- 
•* leges and liberties.^^ This quotation is too explicit to need 
much comment. It is however remarkable, that the power 
claimed for congress of colonizing by conditional charters, ex- 
ceeds the similar power exercised by the kings of England. The 
Idngs gave away the lands as their own absolute property. Con- 
gress sd2(s the lands, not as an owner, but as a trustee for the 
proprietors; a power of annexing conditions to the sale of pro- 
perty belonging to the United States far exceeds a power of 
annexing conditions to a gift of property belonging to the king. 
The trustee by the first power might depreciate the value to the 
kijury of the owner. The receiver under the second may re- 
ject the donation, if he dislikes the conditions. When the docf- 
trines of spherical sovereignty and law charter shall have 
reached an entire ^tate, and comprised more than the charters 
of the king of England 2ould do in the case of Grenada, it will 
be impossible to foresee how far they may be extended. 

The last argument, (for I exclude declamations addressed to 
our passions or prejudices,) in favour of the proposed condition 
to the admission of Missouri into the union, is deduced from 
the fourth section of the fourth article of the constitution, which 
is this : *< The United States shall guarantee to every state in 



Digitized by 



Google 



910 

<* ihU anicMi, a rqpttblkaii form of gOTanunent ; aad sball pro- 
^ feci each of them agtinst uiTasioD, and on applieation ef the 
^ legiilaiur$t or of the executive, (when the legislature caniiot 
^ be coDTened,) against domestick violence.'' It has been con- 
toided, that this duty to guarantee a republican form of gorem- 
ment to each state is by this section imposed upon congress; 
Ihat to discharge it, that body must determine what is a repub- 
lican form ; and that this oUigation comprises a power of im- 
posing conditions <m a new state, necessary to ffilfil the guaran- 
tee. Admitting this construction, the argument either fails, or 
proves too much. It fails, if negro slavery does not destroy a 
repuUican form of government And it proves too much, sup* 
posing that it does, by investing congress under the powers of 
a guarantee, with a power to emancipate all the slaves in the 
union* All the states in the first confederation were slave* 
holding states^ when they formed their constitutions. If slave- 
holding states possessed the contemplated republican forms of 
government, then that circumstance is not inconsistent with 
such forms, and if not, it cannot justify an imposition i^ cona- 
tions upon Missouri under the authority of the section quoted, 
though it shall be so construed as to invest congress with the 
guarantee expressed. But even this in my view is an evident 
misconstruction. The 8th section of the first article is devoted 
to the enumeration of the powers bestowed upon Congress $ 
and tiie fourth article is chiefly emplojred in stipulating duties 
to be performed by states to states. Among these, the fourth 
section declares, that the United States shall guarantee to every 
state in the union a republican form of government The terms 
"United States" are frequentiy "used in the constitution, to 
convey a different idea from « congress." ** We tiie people of 
"the United States." "A constitution for the United States.*^ 
«A congress of the United States." "The senate of the Unitel 
"States." "A citizen of the United States." "A president 
<«of the United States." And in the section immediately pre- 
ceding, "United States" is twice used. A substitution of 
"congress" for the " United States" in all these instances 
would be manifestly absurd, and, therefore, I am unable to dis- 
cern how it can be consistentiy done in that under considera* 
tion. But the section is internally unequivocal. The plural 
and the singular are grammatically of the same genus. OtiW 



Digitized by 



Google 



su 

lU'row ifi the tiddnd of oar emblematiciil eag^e r^^reMiti mt 
state, and nobody ever suspected that all the arrows were em- 
blematical of congress. ''The United States shall protect each 
"qf them against invasion/' '*Each" is singular and relative, 
and ** them" is plural and antecedent The relative and antece- 
dent are "every state and the United States," unequivocally 
i'ecognizing the stipulation of guarantee, as entered into by 
the contracting parties for the preservation of their mutual 
liberty. What is a guarantee ? Undoubtedly a compact or 
undertaking. Now how could congress, neither in existence 
nor a party to the compact between the states, enter into any 
engagement whatsoever to preform a guarantee for the mutual 
safety of these States ? It is by no means rare or useless, for 
ipdependent states to enter into engagements for the sake of 
individual safety; buti if the United States of America, by en- 
deavouring to guard themselves against arbitrary power, with 
the bulwark of a mutual guarantee, have conveyed to congress 
an absolute power over the forms of their governments, they 
have not only committed a mistake which is rare, but one, 
which is, I think, solitary in the annals of mankind. The arti- 
cle proceeds, " and shall protect each of them against invasion, 
^ and on application of the le^slature or of the executive (when 
*f the legislature cannot be convened) against domestick vio- 
•« lence." ** Legislature and executive," terms applicable to 
states, are used because the whole section is speaking in refer- 
ence to states. And ** congress and president," terms applica- 
ble to the federal government, are not used, because the section 
has no reference to that government The mutual protection 
here stipulated for, is by an assistance to be rendered by states 
to states upon such emergencies, as would make contiguity 
ftnd dispatch important General powers for defending the 
whole union had been previously bestowed upon congress. It 
was empowered to declare war, to raise armies and navies, to 
call forth the militia, to suppress insurrections and repel inva- 
sions. These powers are not subjected to any special restric- 
tion, and the two last cases, ''insurrection and invasion" are en- 
tirely tantamount to "invasion and domestick violence," men- 
tioned in the section containing the guarantee. Now, it would 
have been absurd, after bestowing an unrestricted power on con- 
gress iu tUe first article of the con8titation» to have conferred 



Digitized by 



Google 



3U 

the stme power ufoa it» ta be exercised cmlj ^on offheatum 

*'ofthe legislature, or of the execuiiveJ^ The reasons are ob- 
vious, why congress are not to withhold assistance in all cases 
of invasion and insurrection, until applied to by the legislature 
or executive of the suffering state, and why the states are. It 
is the duty of the federal government to provide for the com- 
mon defence of the whole union, but it would not have been the 
duty of particular states to defend an invaded state, except 
for this stipulation ; and a previous application for assistance is 
required, to prevent one state from obtruding itself into the 
affairs of another. *' The United States shall guarantee and pro- 
tect on application^^ The same power was to do both, and if I 
have proved that the latter undertaking referred to states, it fol- 
lows that the former has no reference to, nor confers any power 
on congress, as to the constitution or form of government of any- 
state. It would have been a tremendous power, considering the 
scope given by the unsettled signification of the word "repub- 
*< lican," and quite sufficient to lash any state into an humble 
subserviency to the will of congress. Between the states them- 
selves, an agreement in interest rendered such a |!>ower both 
safe and useful; but between congress and the states, who 
would be often in collision, it would be a scourge in the hands 
of a rival. The United States must be the parties, both to the 
guarantee and to the union, or to neither, as the United States 
constituted both. 

But it is not in this pai*ticular case very important, whether 
the guarantee is a duty imposed upon the states, which con- 
tracted to perform, or upon congress, which did not contract to 
perform. Its end is " a republican form of government.'^ The 
meaning of this expression is not so unsettled here as in other 
countries, because we agree in one descriptive character, as 
essential to the existence of a republican form of government 
This is representation. We do not adnut a government to be 
even in its origin republican, unless it is instituted by represen- 
tation, nor do we allow it to be so, unless its legislation i^ 
also founded upon representation. Now, this condition pro^ 
hibiting slavery, both as constitutional and legislative, des- 
troys these radical and necessary qualities, without which 
no government can be republican. Congress is not a represew- 
tation of Missouri, either for legislation or foxTning ft constiia- 

Digitized by CjOOQ IC 



318 

iioii. Iff fherefore» fhe guarantee be imposed on the states^ it 
is the duty of all to resist an obvious violence to republican 
principles ; if on congress, it can never be its dutjr, or its rig^t» 
to commit an act, which the guarantee was intended to prevent. 
One other argument remains, apparently sufficiently strong of 
itself to settle the^question. Even allowing to congress a degree 
of sovereignty, equal to the regal, yet the plenary sovereignty 
of kings did not empower them to annex conditions subsequent 
to gifts or grants of land, much less to sales for a pecuniary 
consideration. Such arbitrary attempts have been frequently 
adjudged to be void in the English courts. Had the English 
kings, after having granted or sold lands upon specified terms, 
. prescribed new conditions as to the mode of their cultivation, 
their own courts would have decided it to be an unwarrantable 
imposition. Does congress possess a higher species of sove- 
reignty than the kings of England, able subsequently to con- 
troul the mode of cultivating lands previously sold, and to di- 
minish their v^ue to the purchaser, after having received the 
price ? Whatever may be the power of a state legblature in 
this case, the same power does not extend to congress. The 
power given to it by the constitution is *' to dispose of the ter- 
^ ritory of the United States." Having disposed of it by sale8» 
the power is at an end, because it is executed ; and no power 
remains with congress in relation to the lands sold, beyond 
what they possess over the lands, or the mode of their cultiva- 
tion in the oldest state of the union. Ex post facto laws, and 
laws impuring contracts, are recognized as contrary to repub- 
lican principles, because they are inconsbtent with the freedom 
of property or of labour, the preservation of which is an essen- 
tial object of those principles ; and thence arose the positive 
prohibition upon both the federal and state governments to 
enact, them. Thence also the powers delegated to congress are 
all prospective. I cannot, therefore, believe, that it will per- 
severe in legislating retrospectively, locally^ and contrary to 
the genuine principles of representation, as preferable to that 
republican moderation, which never witiih<dds from others the 
rights enjoyed by itself. 

In contending for political liberty, I have not meddled with 
the sutjects of slavery and emancipation, because it was suffi- 
cient to prove, that they belong to the local powers reserved to 
8P 



Digitized by 



Google 



dl4 

the states, and have been so considered by every state in the 
union. Inheritances and the regulation ai property are not 
powers more local than slaTOry, and if congress can legislate 
as to the last, and also regulate property by corporations, it 
may as correctly insist, that an uniform system of inheritances, 
and for distributing wealth, is comprised within the scope of its 
powers. But, although the absurd enthusiasm as to the sulqectB 
of slavery and emancipation, recently excited, needs no fuel« 
an endeavour to abate it is not reprehensible ; and for this pur- 
pose it would be well for moderate men to consider, whether 
emancipation in the slave-holding states does not appear by 
the census to be proceedii^ as fast as their circumstances will 
justify, and as the general interest of the community of states 
can require. 

There remains a right, anterior to every political power what<- 
soever, and alone sufficient to put the subject of slavery at 
rest; the natural right of self-defence. Under this right, so- 
cieties imprison and put to death. By this right, nations aro 
justified in attacking other nations^ which may league witb 
their foes to do them an injury. And by this right, they are 
justified, if they see danger at a distance, to anticipate it by 
precautions. It is allowed on all hands, that danger to the 
slave-holding states lurks in their existing situation, however 
it has been produced; and it must be admitted, that the right 
of self-defence iqpplies to that situation, of the necessity for 
which the parties exposed to the danger are the natural judges : 
Otherwise this right, the most sacred of all possessed by men, 
would be no ri^t at all. I leave to the reader the application 
of these observations. 



Digitized by 



Google I 



SECTION 16. 

THE DISTRESSES OF THE UNITED STATB^ 



The previous attempts to ascertain the principles and con- 
struction of our constitutions have beeh made with a view of 
unfolding the ultimate causes of the distresses experienced bj 
fte United States. If they have flowed from false construe - 
tionSy and real violations of constitutional principles, the re-* 
medj must lie in a return to those principles, and no where 
else ; because good principles are useless, iVithout practical 
extracts; and indeed pernicious, if thej ins[nre a confidences 
which serves as a cloak for abuses. 

Let us previously take a glance at the causes which have 
produced the existing distress in Britain, as a mirror by which 
those which have operated here, will be visibly reflected. I 
premise, that the distresses of Britain cannot have been caused 
by a deficiency of manufactures, because she makes a super- 
fluity of thend, beyond the demands of home consumption, and 
a surplus for exportation. The best authority for facts within 
my reach, is the Edinburgh Review. It states, that the 
publick burdens of that country amount to the annual sum of 
£ 106,084,£03 sterling. This total is compounded of taxes, 
£ 64,506,£03. Poor rates and county levies, £ 12,000,000* 
Tithes, £ 5,000,000. And an enhancement of grain by the 
protecting corn-laws, £ 24,578,000. But the acquisitions by 
banking, and by all other exclusive privileges, are left out of 
the computation ; and the total of the national burden is there- 
fore stated at considerably less than it ought to be. Neverthe- 
less, from this reduced total, the distresses of Britain al*e very 
clearly deduced. Estimating the profits of capital at three per 
centum, somewhat under the interest of money, but about the 
rate at which land sells, it requires a capital of three thousand 
millions of pounds sterling, to supply ninety millions annually^ 
being about sixteen millions less thaa th^ annual expenditure; 



Digitized by 



Google 



and ike craclnsion is uresistilde, ibat tbe di^titises of Btiim 
arise from the condemnatioii of this vast mass of natiiod 
capital to eleemosynary parposes. As I shall make some.iu» 
of the com prohibition when I come home* it is necessary jkf 
borrow a reas<m from the Review, to prove that it ia a tax <sf 
this character* This tax arises from an enhancement of ilm 
price of bread beyond what it would cost» if importation waft 
free. Now the Reviewers prove, that which is indeed obvious^ 
that this tax is paid by consumerSi and received by landlords | 
because, by increasing the value of agricultural products, or to 
speak more correctly, of agricultural manufactures, rents will 
be correspondently increased, and thus the protecting com* 
laws must augment the income of ci^italist land-owners. This 
transfer, though indirect, of the profits of labour to liiose who 
do not labour, is strictly of the eleemosynary character^ and 
the tendency of every eleemosynary measure to produce na-t 
tional distress, in whatever garb it a[^ears, is well established,! 
both by the existing state of England, and also by all experf 
rience* We have universally seen national distress graduated 
by mortgaging national capital, for the gratuitoua benefit of. 
idle or unproductive individuals. Though some people are ridi 
enough to be idle, it is an evil both corrected and more than 
counteii>alanced, by the great productive right of the freedom 
of labour or of property; but when a nation is robbed by laws, 
of this productive right, and forced to buy idleness, the best 
edrreclive of idleness is destroyed, and its prolifick procreator 
is created. Idleness is encouraged by beiug pensioned. Indus- 
try is discouraged by being subjected to the payment of these 
pensions. Capital becomes less productive by being taken 
away from its owners. And therefore, every increase of the 
eleemosynary family produces a correspondent degree of na- 
tional distress, as in the case of England* 

The United States, by associating themselves with several, 
of this family, have found a degree of national distress, which 
they are gravely told was caused by futurity ; for this is the. 
amount of the doctrine, that our distresses have been caused 
by our having neglected to make our protecting duties high 
enough. If the affairs of a merchant, a farmer, or a mechanick^. 
go on badly, he looks back for the cause, should he be a man of 
good understanding; but if He be a weak man, he rejects the 



Digitized by 



Google 



sir 

gndeace of ei^iierience, and trusts to some fature speculation 
fei^ amenditig hte circuradtaiices. This mode of discoyering the 
omiKS of dtetresSy that is» by shutthig our eyes upon them, and 
tftking a new leap in tiie daric, to core the wounds already bus* 
tained from such chivalry, is constanfly recommended by all 
abuses ; because Hiey abhor the prudence of looking back, as it 
would lead to det^stion; and therefore they assure us, that 
fdthou^ we have hitherto felt nothing but thcnms in the elee* 
Btosynary road, a-head it is strewed with flowers. 

It is really wonderfiil that the most lively imagination should 
be persuaded, that out distresses have been produced by what 
we have not done; or that the effect has preceded the cause.^ 
lUs, however, is the doctrine of the protecting-duty panacea. 
IVe are ruined, it says, for want of more protecting duties and 
c»bStructions to commerce : but as causes precede effects, it is 
more probable that we have had too many. Instead, therefore, 
rf ascribing the dtetresses of tiie United^ States to things which 
they have not done, I shall look for them in things which they 
have d<me; to whidtl am induced by considering, that the 
national distresses of Britain and (tf the United States could 
not botii have been caused by the manufacturing occupation, 
because abundance and scarcity could not have produced the 
same effects; and a similarity in the distresses does not indir\ 
cate a contrariety in their causes. 

llie creation of a nest-egg for rearing an eleemosynary^ > , 
&mily was almost the first act of the federal government. It ^^ 
received tiie people of the states with the pre-existing relations '^ 
produced by a paper-currency intercourse, prescribed by una- 
voidable necessity. This currency was called by two names, 
** certificates" and ^ paper money," both offsprings of the same 
necessity, botii sanctioned by publick faith, and both transfer- 
able ; but one species had been collected into a few hands, and 
the other was more equally distributed among the people. 
These currencies, whilst passing, had gradually depreciated ; 
and each tempolBiy occupant had sustained the losses thereby 
occasioned during his occupation. In this state of things, jus- 
tice called for some consistent remedy, equally applicable to 
all the currency and to all the sufferers. Either all the inter* 
mediate losses sustained between the emission and termination 
the whole currency* or ikont, should have been reimbursed^ 



Digitized by 



Google 



91S 

Both the <mrreiieiei should have been redeemed «t Ibeir tmmi* 
nal Tilue, or neither ; or both should hare been redeemed i^ 
their depreciated ralue. The last rule would bare perfecfiy 
corresponded witii the right of free will in contract or ex- 
changes, to risque gain or loss ; but it was directlj adrerse to 
legislatiye interferences with this right» for the introdacttoh of 
the eleemosynary system, to get rid of which the states had 
recently passed through a long war. Instead of an equal and 
consistent rule, according with the publiek interest, and recom* 
mended by justice, an exclusive eleemoSjmary capitalist interest 
was created by a partiality, unjust as it regarded indirtdualff, 
and highly impolttick as it regarded the United States, if such 
an interest be oppressive and dangerous to liberty. No recom- 
pense was made to tiiose who had sustained losses of property 
and labour by depreciation, during the circulation of these 
credit papers. If the right of free will in exchanges be sound, 
BO recompense was due or practicable, and each individud 
ought to sustain its consequences ; but by no principle could M 
be right, that these losses, instead of being thus mei^ged into 
the national capital, should hare been seized by law, and be- 
stowed upon a selected class, in order to introduce the elee- 
mosynary system. The looses inflicted upon individuals by 
depreoiation, during the circulation of these currencies, were 
either property or not property. As prq)erty, they were cither 
transferred with the paper, or not transferred. If they were 
transferred, they passed with both the paper certificates and 
the paper money, to the last holder of each species' of credit 
paper ; and the right of all such holders to the value of the 
paper, when issued, was the same. But if these intermediate 
losses did neither pass, nor constitute a just claim to compen- 
sation on the part of the last holders, both the certificate aiid 
paper-money holders were equally excluded from advancing 
such a demand against the pnblick. However, disregarding 
consistency, the partiality was committed, of considering certi- 
ficates as carrying to the last holder all intermediate losses, 
and paper money as carrying none. One sect of holders being 
a minority and influential, obtained the vidue i^its paper when 
issued, with interest ; and the other sect, including the body of 
the people, was put off with depreciated value without interest. 
This was the more glaringly unjust, as the receipt of dcpr^ 



Digitized by 



Google 



^ 



siftM ftsf9t mmtj^mB ^farced by tooder laws highly penal, 
and tke receipt of dc^^ciated certificates was free and vdim- 
taiy. Bjr this managemeBt* a certificate which had passed 
feom A to.Z, depreciating as it traveUed» and purchased by Z 
fw a twentieth part of its nonunal vidue^ resuscitated the inter* 
mednite losses for the benefit of Z, and subjected the actual 
sufferers to taxes for paying to Z what they had themselves 
lost, with interest; whilst the certificate holders escaped the 
burden of oontributuig for making good to the paper money 
holder a claim of the same nature with his own. This exclu- 
sive partiality transferred about one hundred millions of capi« 
tal» from the peq>le of the United States to a capitalist sect 
actificially created, and became the source of a stream of tax- 
ation» which may perhaps run and increase down to another 
nevojution. The wealth of tiiis sect was not derived from fair 
industry, but from an unfitir law [for what law cfox be fair 
which creates what indi^try never does, a rich eleemosynary 
a0ct?3 which, under cover of a sovereign legislative power over 
property, contrived to gratify the personal interest of a few 
members of congress, and a sect of certificate holders, by 
slicing off one hundred millions from the national capital ; a 
paltry sum indeed compared with subsequent speculations, but 
at that time considered as so very formidable, that it generated 
two ammated parties. The certificate sect happened chiefly 
to reside in particular states, and had the address to persuade 
these states, that the trivial and transitory circumstance of per- 
sonal residence was a sufficient reason to induce them to put 
upon their own necks an interminable eleemosynary system, to 
be transmitted with their other legacies to their children. 

A greater speculation upon the national cajntal soon grew 
out of the hutidred millions of capital thus created by law* The 
artificial cafutsiist sect wanted more profit than funding inte- 
rest, and taking into partnership meml^rs of legislative bodies, 
it convinced the states collectively and individually, that they 
would be enriched, by enabling certificate, now funded debt 
holders, to convert their fictitious capital into bank stock, 
without changing its capacity as funded stock. Thus, the same 
paper transferred national capital to an eleemosynary sect, in 
tfm characters; and the first acquisition of one hundred mil- 
fitms became cooiiparatively inconsiderable. The locality of 



Digitized by 



Google 



$90 

Mppetredtis if proTideaoe d«rigKd to 
te of the eleemosynarj policy, to enaUe 
er the resideace of its diseiples woidd 
tck good. Let m consider whether it 
r banking. 

lestion, I shall urge a new argnment to 
I state and federal, destroj a princi[de 
istitations, aiyl essential also to everj 
r gorernment; and that this Tital deso- 
of the pnblick distresses. The people, 
hare delegated to their representatiyes 
[rat b J none hare the j delegated to their 

to delegate I^islative powers to per- 
the pei^le, nor indeed by themselves. 

have no power to appoint deputy or 
nd if they had, they must do it thera- 
tiiers to do it both for their constituenta 
t positions bring to a fiiir test the doe- 
reignty. If it be true, I admit that our 

deputy legislatures, or enable stock- 
they please to elect deputy legislature 
elected with legulatire powers ; but if 
egislatures cannot directly or indirectiy 
ith legislative power, formal or substaii'' 
w^er of regulating the nationid currency^ 
Qishing its quantity at pleasure, is not 
mtial legislative power ? What is legis- 
ig able to dispense good or harm to a 
ink directors do this? Some body has 
ts the world. Have those who govern 
«rer8? If they have any, are they legjis- 
icial? The idea, that banking was an 
I, has been hitherto inferred from its 
ley in an exclusive mode ; but it is &r 
ablishes a great body of direet(»«, in- 
power of pecuniary legislation, and in 
o the people. If tlus be not a formal 
cal power, I am unable to conceive «ne. 
England is an imperfect aristocratical 
[Mtss no law without the concoirence if 



Digitized by 



Google 



Ml 

Jiime^amMmi talif itconldr^iilfttetikeciMrreiicyeftheeoiiii* 
tr/ without the eoncurrence of the representatives of the peo* 
,p)e» is there any one who can believe* that it would be less aris- 
rtocratical wd less legislative than, it now is P In that case it 
would be an exact portrait of our bank directors. 

I ask every candid man* whether the community has not| 
suffered a great variety of calamities from the doings of banki 
directors, in the exercise of their powers over currency. What V 
are these doings ? Are they not powers, able to hurt very ma- 
terially the whole United States ? If they are powers, do they 
belong neither to the civil nor political classes of powers P But 
if they belong to either, is not a body of men constituted as 
bank directors are, and exercising powers either civil or politi- 
cal, affecting a whole community, an aristocratical department* 
as formal and as complete as can be imagined, and inlinitely 
more so than the British house of lords P 
, Need we go searching about for the causes of the publick 
distress, after we have found a perfect aristocracy, exercising 
an absolute power over the national currency P If there be any 
. object of legislation, through which a nation can receive deeper 
wounds, I hope it will never be discovered ; as those which 
this can inflict, seem sufficient to punish us foi* all our political 
sins. The secret, as to the distresses of the United States, lies 
ii^ the difference between republi<;an and aristocratical legisla- 
tion, upon the important subject of money. It is a power pro- 
bably equal in its capacity of doing harm, to all other legis- 
lative powers united. It can derange the fairness of all 
exchanges between man and man ; it can tempt by legislating 
an abundance of currency, and ruin by legislating a scarcity ; 
it can raise and diminish prices according to its interest, its 
caprices or its partialities, without controul, detection or respon- 
sibility ; it can refuse when it suits its interest, to redeem its 
own paper, and terrify the people and the government into 
acquiescence, by a fear of losing their debts and salaries, an4 
by the inconveniences of wanting a circulating medium; and 
when it does not choose to pay its debts, it can put its funds in 
its pocket, say that it has got nothing, and enjoy the fruits of 
fraud beyond the reach of justice. Can any republican legis- 
lature remedy these evils except by removing the cause P Dare 
any republican legislature to produce the distresses, which have 



Digitized by 



Google 



for jrears been nere sport, however emel, in the hands of their 
aristoGratical deputies ? It is wonderfuU after mankind have 
discovered the folly i^nd mischief of a single legislative maxi* 
mum of price, to see them quietly submit to an eternal alterna- 
tion between maximum and minimum, and bear injuries frooi 
tile aristocracy by which they are imposed, which would be 
indignantly resisted if imposed by a republican legislature. I 
do not compute the power of an aristocratical legislation, with* 
out responsibility, over national morals ; it is sufficiently seen 
and felt, and it unfortunately operates most upon those classes 
of society, whose integrity and patriotism are perhaps the onlf 
hostages for the continuance of a republican form of govern** 
ment. These aristocratical legislatures have even been abl# 
to prescribe, not a test oath, but a test of honesty, to most or 
all of our republican legislatures, by furnishing them first with 
a pretext for raising their salaries, and then with a correspon- 
dent reason for reducing them ; thus directly legislating upon 
diat whole order of men, upon whose honesty and patriotism a 
free and fair government immediately depends. 

For this aristocratical legislation, the state and federal go- 
vernments have appropriated a portion of the capital of ^ the 
community, far exceeding that appropriated for all our rei^b- 
lican legislatures. It is probable, that the dividends of banks 
have sometimes amounted to twelve millions of dollars annually, 
requiring a capital of four hundred millions to supply; but as 
these dividends have sustained an occasional diminution pre- 
paratory to an augmentation, nine millions only may now con- 
stitute the total of the dividends received by all the banks ; yet 
in contemplation of a prospective augmentation, twelve may be 
assumed as a future probable amount, and four hundred millions 
of national capital as appropriated to the use of bankers. It 
would have been correct to have charged banki^ with a great 
augmentation of salaries, expenses and taxation, which it has 
bestowed upon the community, but this enormous item is left 
out, because the community possess the means of throwing it 
off; until it does so, however, it ought to be ccmsidered as 
nearly or quite equal to the other. 

The thirdele emosynary appropriation of national capital was 
efiected by the protectJnjg-duty laws. There is mwe difficulty 
in computing its amounti ihkn in the stmilar instancea of tt^ 



Digitized by 



Google 



N 



d2S 

same system we have passed over, because we cannot ascertain 
the portion of the tax thej inflict, which gets into the pockets of 
owners of manufactories. But, as these laws create a species of 
aristocratical legislature over manu^ctures, exactly of the same 
character with that created to regulate currency, there will un- 
doubtedly be a great similitude in their proceedings. Behold 
ihen a great community, industrious, at peace, and in distres$« 
What an enigma ? But behold its currency consigned to the 
regulation of bank directors, and its consumptions to the regtt*> 
lation of manufacturing capitalists, and you will confess that 
there is no enigma in the case. 

The com laws of England are equivalent to our protecting* 
duty laws, with respect to that portion of the tax, which goes 
into the pockets of capitalists. The prohibition of the impor- 
tation of grain, until wheat gets to the price of eighty shillings 
sterling a quarter, is a tax upon the nation for augmenting the 
rents of landed capitalists. Whatever is carried by our pro- , ' 
tecting-duty laws into the pockets of manufacturing capitalistSyV . 
is a tax upon the community for augmenting their wealth. Bread 
and manufactures being both necessaries, both these taxes are 
direct and unavoidable. By the com laws of England, the 
manufacturers are compelled to pay about one-third more for 
home made bread, than ihej would have paid, if importation had 
been free. At this time, the price of wheat in England is about 
nine shillings sterling, and about eighty cents here. By our 
protecting-duty laws, agriculturists and all other occupations 
are compelled to pay for home made manufactures, about one 
third more, than if importations were free* The com law tat 
falls most heavily on the poor, whence arises much of the dis- 
tress of the working manufacturers. Our protecting-duty tax 
must also fall most heavily on the poor, because every tax upon 
necessary consumptions operates as a poll tax. A protecting- 
duty system exists in England in favour df manufacturing, but 
it inflicts no tax upon the nation, because the surplus of manu^ 
factures, beyond the wants of home consumption^ renders their 
monopoly impossible, and makes the law internally, nominal ; 
but the land capitalists have used this inoperative law as a pre» 
text, to inflict an impoverishing tax upon manufocturers by the 
com laws. Protecting-duty laws have been passed here in &> 
vourof several agricultural manufactures, buttiiey are wholly 



Digitized by 



Google 



unbeneficial to agriculturists, and inflict no tax upon any otter 
occupation, because of the abundance of agricultural manufac* 
tures beyond the home demand. Yet the manufacturing capi* 
talists here, in imitation of the land capitalists in England, hare 
seized upon these inert laws as a pretext, for inflicting an impo- 
verishing tax upon all other occupations for their own beneflt* 
The appropriation of English national capital to the use of land 
capitalists is a heavy item of an eleemosynary system in fayoor 
of the rich, whidh requires a great standing army to maintain* 
The appropriation of a large portion of the capital of the United 
States to the use of the same system, has only caused hitherto 
such distresses, as suggested a necessity for the English army* 
An important distinction, however, exists between their emu 
laws, and our protecting-duty laws. Corn possesses few or 
none of the qualities of a general or universal currency. Being 
too perishable to bear repeated voyages, and of universal 
growth, it is unsuitable for a re-exportation and exchange | 
^d would not act as circulating currency upon English manu- 
foctures, or increase their value in any considerable degree* 
But manufactures possess most of the qualities of an universal 
currency. They are susceptible of long preservatidn, and can en- 
dure repeated voyages, and are every where in demand. They 
are in short a better currency than any local paper. A surplus 
imported, beyond the wants of internal consumption, is there- 
fore an accession of mercantile currency as valuable as coin, 
and will have a similar effect in raising the value of products in 
tiie country so fortunate as to obtain it We hear continually 
of the balance of trade; but we err, if we compute this balance 
only by money, and reject those things which money represents. 
A nation would have the balance of trade ?n its favour if it never 
Ixtraght home money, and only more valuable things than it eaD> 
ried out ; nor would it be difficult to prove, that it would be bet- 
ter to receive a balance of trade in commodities, than in cmn. 
Many cities have derived great prosperity from being depots of 
commodities, because they are the most valuable species of uni- 
versal currency ; and if all the manufactures of England could 
be circulated by way of the United States, it would undoufat- . 
edly add to our wealth. Whatever portion can be so circulat- 
ed, will have a comparative effect. Nor is it a sufficient answer 
to this observation to say, that protecting-duties do not prohaiJI 



Digitized by 



Google 



Sft5 

inpertatioiis for exportatioD, because bj diminisliiiig the fartMne^ 
market, and changing an alluring invitation into a scowling pro- 
hibitton» the adventures of commerce will be dispirited, and 1 
ike sources of a surplus for re-exportation dried up. However 
tlus may be, it is evident that the English com laws, bad as thej 
are, maj be defended by one argument, of which our protecting- 
duty laws cannot avail themselves ; namely, that an importa- 
tion of corn is not an acquisition of an universal currency, and 
an accession of wealth. t 

But there is another material distinction between com, an<jr 
the whole compass of manufactures. The consumption of manu# 
factures excites the effort and industry, which are better sour- 
ces of national wealth, than exclusive privileges and commer- 
cial prohibitions. It converts numberless feelings of human. 
Bature into productive labourers, and constructs comfort, taste, 
pride, luxury and self-love into a machinery, worked by the 
Uteam of our passions, which compared with the sluggishness 
caused by suppressing gratifications, or with the animation in- 
spired by consuming corn, will manifest the true character ot 
the intervening gradations. Freedom in the enjoyment of the 
comforts and elegancies of life is the parent of that activity 
whi^h reimburses a nation, both with intelligence and re-pro- 
ductions for its consumptions, by enlarging the capacities of the 
mind and body. By copying the English corn laws, we are 
therefore cultivating two supernumerary evils, with which those 
laws are not chargeable, in expelling from our shores a general 
and valuable currency, and in suppressing some of the strong- 
est motives for bodily industry and mental improvement 

In computing the evil inflicted by our protecting-duty laws, 
that inflicted by the English corn laws will reflect much proba- 
Wity upon our cQi\)ectures. The corn laws, says the Edinburg 
Beview, inflict ala annual tax amounting to £ £4,580,000. 
This, at three per centum profit, is a dislocation of above 
jg 800*500,060 of national capital for the benefit of land capi- 
talists. The enhanced price obtained by manufactory capital- 
ists upon their annual sale^ constitutes the tax here, and when 
we consider that a man cofisumes a far greater value in manu- 
factures than he does in corn, it is obvious that a tax upon so 
many commodities either is, pr will soon become more oppres- 
sive and distres^g than a tax upon one. Its present amount 



Digitized by 



Google 



iamtr and existiiig Unportatioiit, ftnA delntiiig the capitilMi 
Mth the GOMaropttoni rttoltiiig firom their dntinutifMi, mm weU 
as thoM arifing from aa inorease of papnlatioB. I eoigeetnre 
that borne mamifactures wmj be aanoallj loM to the amount of 
flfteen or t went j miilioiii, and that thek* price may be enhaneed 
bj the protecting-dutj laws about six millioDS^ Bat I think 
that thoM laws oa|^talsotobechaFged with a dead loss of three 
millions more, sustained bj the mercaiitiie» agrtenltand and 
■laritinie emplojments» by the eipulsion from our ports of a 
great number of commodities^ which would have inareased pr(>- 
fit, price and employment to that amoai^ at least These sums 
dislocate three hundred millions of national eapitaL 

The fourth great trespass upon this capital is compounded 
of pensions and legislative waste of time and nmney by dot^ 
judicial business. It is probable, that these items have absorbed 
about three hundred millions of national caintal, but as they 
are included in the item of taxation, it is unnecessary to esti* 
mate their amount for the condensed view to which I am adrano* 
ing, however important it may be in considering the remedks 
fcr the publick distress. 

Taxation is the last hcAvy item of the system for transferring 
BStional capital from its owners, to eleemosynary uses. Bimet 
Touchers to ascertain its total amount in the United States see 
not attainaUe, but I suppose the exipenses of the federal govern^ 
ment to be about twenty-rix millions, and ihme of all the state 
governments to be about thirteen millions. Didlars are meant 
in reference to the United States, and sterling money in refer- 
ence to England. I have understood that the revenue of Tir- 
ginia, exclusive of county taxes and poor ratss, exceeded a mtf» 
Hon, and these taxes generally amount to nearly as mudi mora. 
All the taxes of every kind in Virginia being about two miUions 
annufdly, as that state only contains about one tenth of Urn whole 
population of the union, it would follow from this rufe, that the 
tuesof all the states amount to twenty millions; butas Ihave 
BO vouchers, seven are deducted as a sufficient preeantimi 
against error. We shall not, therefore, be very much mmtaken, 
by supposing that the peofde of the United States are pigring ^ 
all their governments at this time about thirty ^mim anions. 
Estimating the profit of capital at three per centan> ttiis iHfm 



Digitized by 



Google 



imfl»f^ fhm ^ «M of owmrs t» etoeflimyBiiy ne^ 
hmidred miUknt of iiatieDal cftpitiQ. 

It is of iko consequence wlwtiier the term ^ eleemesTnarj^ 
be correctly or iacorreetlj a^q^lied to taxes* or wiiether govem- 
nents be classed as productive or unproductire, if tke focts be. 
admittedy that gOTemmeuts maj become oppressire by taxation^ 
and diat taxation, light or heavy, transfers capital by absorbing 
{NTofit Nor is it very in^rtant, that the estimate of three 
p^r centum as the aven^ nett profit of all the taxable capital 
of tbe country, should be exactly correct When an evil is 
fett with sufficient severity to suggest a remedy, it is losing time 
to be computing its amount in drachms and scruples. It is the 
amount of national ciq^ital, whatever that amount may be, trans- 
ferred by laws from the conventional and natural owners to 
eleemosynary uses, which is the true cause of the publick di^ 
tresses ; but consMeriug the dead surplus of land in the United 
States, for want of labour to t^uttfvate it, the general poorness 
of the soil, and the hi^ price of labour, my conviction is, that 
the whole capital of the country, siribject to taxation, does not 
average a nett prcAt even of three per centum. 
Thirty-nine millions of taxes absorb of national 

cajntal, - - - - 8 l,S00,000,00O 

Twelve miHions received by banks do. 400,000,000 

Nine millions received by captb^ists, or lost by 

a depreciatien of native commodities do. 300,000,000 



8 2,000,000,000 



In Great Britain, tiiree tiiousand millions of '^unds of national 
capital are mm-^;i^d to eleemosynary uses, and in the United 
States, two thousand millions of dollars are mortgaged to the 
same uses. Hie diflferenee is about six-fold. By computing 
the wealth and population of the whole Britisb empire, and its 
great supplies from tiie four quarters of the glebe, we should 
discover Aat it is able to raise six times more than we are, and 
thence we at once account for the existing similitude between 
the distresses of the two countries. It must be ascribed to 
causes common to both, and no other common cause can be 
found, except the system of appropriating national capital to 
dee mesynary uses. 



Digitized by 



Google 



hk eorrespmidtnee with this makuitjr betvcen ca«te Aod 
tKtctt memory Ainiishei evidence which seems to be irresisti- 
ble. The federal taxes in die time of Washington were three 
millions, and computing those of the states at half as much» one^ 
hundred and fifty millions of national capital sufficed to pajr 
them. At that time, no national capital was mortgaged to 
manufacturing capitalists, and but little to bankers. Two great 
changes have taken place ; a great hypothecation of national 
ca|rital to eleemosynary uses, and a great increase of publick 
distresses in a time of profound peace. Can any body believe 
that these fellow travellers have no connexion with each other? 

There is another consideration of vast weight, to be esti- 
mated by the reader, and by all republican legislators, befose 
we advert to the remedies for the publick distress. It is, that 
taxes, pensions, bounties, dividends and protecting duties, have 
been at least doubled by a rise in the value of money, and ,a 
&11 in the value of produce and property, since they were im- 
posed, without any legislative act by the re(N*esentatives of tiie 
people. Madmen or tyrants only impose taxes without regard- 
ing the ability to pay. The legislatures, therefore, which im* 
posed all. our burdens, must have estimated the pubiick ability 
to sustain them, and hajre been governed .by that estimate. 
When half this alnlity is gcme, the taxes are obviously doubled* 
and the same e^mate, by which they were i^^K)sed, requires 
that half of the tax^ should be taken offl It is apparent that 
the old tariff, thmi^ unaltered in figures, is in fact doubled ; 
together with all bounties, pensions, dividends and legislative 
wages, in their pressure upon the people. The notion of ttie 
inannfacturiiig caintidiats, that their bounties should be furt^r 
increased, after their value to themselves^ and their pressure 
upon the people, has been doubled by the appreciation of money, 
and &e fall in^ the prices of produce and property, is fouu4^d 
in the same reasoning, which would justify legislature's in m^^ 
ing tiieir wages, and pensioners in asking for an augmentation 
of pensions. Look at this reasoning. The taxes were imposed, 
the bounties and penrions bestowed, and th^ l^slative wi^ges 
increased, when the depreciation of money and the priqe of 
produce ambled the people to pay twice as much, as,easilj as 
they can now pay half as much ; therefore taxes, bounties^ pyan 
fBLom afid wages, all absoiiiers of natiional c^tal» ei^t tii.i>e 



Digitized by 



Google 



lynarians^ and it uttoriy (Hre9lude» ft re4r^ of t)^e evUs 9Bi4^ 
wM^h the Unitad Btajes ar^ lAbouriiy. 

There ie fti|other pode of rf^ponipfr efimUy forcible, whi^ 
fMn^cte it A4mittii^ that the publipk distressef iui9e fropi 
teg^sl^ive transfers of o^tipofl i^fal to eleefnoejiii^ uf ea» i^ 
would he cruel to restore thi^ capi^ tp th^ rjightfji^ ow^f^ 
Would a robber, who ha4» in ^ fit of geueri^it;, divi^^ 1^ 
purse he had tftken. between a rich and poor ^aau, b^ wrop^ ii| 
reelnMns mi restarilig it to the owner? After rep#nt^|i»pa 
^ oyeued our eye^ cjsu (ioi^ciem^e be ft^peaspd witbw^t r^o^- 
tuition ? Buti this is the great argument whi$h |deft4^ Kl^n^ 
|i»stice to the nMiou, ^nd therefore reqiiires sofne e^|:fM]^fuatio||, 

The legislative poww over curr^cy with vvbiqh b^k dir^r 
tim are invested* has bee^ e^^rcising, and is stUl e^rcisii^ipg 
as to produise sumj pd&tical evijs, find ((countless in^Jviditi) 
wfo^rtttBes* These have pro)red» that the prescnptioiis ^ f^ 
interested aristoerftcy in fielation to curre^jr euptribute neir 
ther to the health of society, nor the happiness of individiwiill^ 
They even render it uupossiUe, tb^t rfq;^Hpan li^lli^res 
ahould mppse taxes by any (perfect esti»i9^ beic;$tuse they c|g 
diminisb the ability to p^y, by di^inishijtig the P^rre^eyi gf 
ibssen the efieacy of the sum poUeated, by increauug it ThM^ 
ere consid^i^iiHis sufficient to open our ear^ to the felipwjing 
reasons ^^^posedtpiiieargHnieiit of cruelty. If legifla^inseiirip 
eorereigns, they had a right to invest beak diiieatprs with it 
legislative power of regulating curjrency^ if not moise fi^nut^ 
i» comprise in the breach of constitutions, by wh^h 4be UtMrty 
of a gn^t people is endansared^ end their hap|4nosi iaipaiiiiiit 
Ihan in thcdr vindication. The retention of unconstitutioaal 
Md misery-infiicting acquisitions* will he a liberal icompepea- 
^ion for the re8l;eration of republkan legialetion aver currencgr ; 
iMpeeially as bankers will receive the shaiae of the hMu^ts 
ff^hidi n^y flow from it Patriotick bankers will fipd rwnplete 
.^QQH^soUtion, by balancing puUick good agponst aiastocrwtieal 
jl^;islatian^ Suppose we bed biundei^ upon a king- oner jOmt- 
WB^iji 4>ttght we to edbere to the ecnnv a&er we had d^isfiesered, 
^u^ monarchy was as hsd a pnnci^e i^'govemiuent in respeet 
io the repvesentative of property, as to property itself ? ^faorge 
<tiie itfaml wasjr^cegnised as their king% Utijbf att.tha safe- 
^ R 



Digitized by 



Google 



met, aod flie rectgBititn was rivetled by the wiurd «Uegi«wse» 
the force of which these colonies admitted. Bank directors 
hare been recognized by ail the states as aristocracies to coq<> 
tiane for years, and the recognition b attempted to be rivetted 
1^ the word charter, to deprive legislatures of the power of 
repeal bj a misnomer, the force of which neither the j, nor our 
ceostitations allow. Shall the illegitimate word charter impose 
vpoa us an aristocracy for years, when the true word allegiance 
cottld not presenre a king for Itfe? Brutus exclaimed, ** virtue^ 
** thou art bat a name :" and it is now contended that liberty is 
only a word, subjected to another word of higher authority; 
but I do not see any possible mode of getting rid of monarchy 
or aristocracy, formal or substantial, except by their removal 
Oeorge the third had only a negative upon our laws, and could 
Bot legislate over a dollar. Bank directors legislate over nul* 
UuuB, and our governments have no negative upon their laws* 
Could the colonies have gotten rid of the royal negative, they 
would have acquired the independence enjoyed by our currency 
leipslatures. 

' The cruelty of abolishing the protecting-duty system admite 
of the same answers, because that system <is of the same cha* 
laeter with banking* It investe a cominnation of capitaliste 
wMi a legislative power over manufactures and exchanges* 
The nature of this power is illu^rated by the article of cottoop 
Its price is universally diminished by an increased product ii| 
Jlhe Bast and West Indies, Brazil, Spanish America and the 
Cfiiled Slates. The capitalists, by a partial monopoly iji ne* 
eessary commodities, have sutigected our cotton planters and 
the rest of the community, to a conskierable tax for their bene- 
fit. If this tax could raise the price of our cotton, it could no 
longer enter mto competition with foreign cotton. If not, the 
tax paid by our cotton planters upon home made cotton goods, 
would be an addition to the expense of cultivation, to^which 
their foreign competitors not being exposed, they uwuld stiB 
enter into the competition under great disadvantages. If our pro* 
kibition'Of cotton goods cimld raise the price of cotton abroad* 
pur cotton planters would derive no advantege, or a less advaa^ 
tags from it, than foreign cotton planters by the amount 
of the protecting*duty tex they paid to capitalists. If the 
tlUK could raise the price here and not abroad, it could oidj be 



Digitized by 



Google 



SSI 

ttwae n t ar y^ as it eirald myt be exported, and worid be amlig- 
Ijlad into tki» country ; nor cooM our cotton mairafactiirerg e¥er 
export their work» wkilst their riyals couM buy cotton cheaper. 
If the protectingHliitj systoro could raiae ike price of labour, 
jtstly and equally, it wirald do nothings beeaaae its rdatWie 
fyrtces would remain the same ; but if it should cKsorder this re- 
lattre valuoi it will cause such injuries to imlividuals as hvf% 
been caused by banking; The cotton planters throughout the 
mor]A are a ccunmunity, or a species of United States, no se»" 
tkm of which can tax other sections, or get bounties from them 
by taxing itself. The common law of this comRnMRty is tiie 
natural right of free exchanges. It cannot choose a congress, 
with a power of granting exclusiTe privileges to favoured sec- 
tions, nor can any section grant exdusire privileges to itseH 
Any section may, indeed, diminish or lose the benefits of tUt 
common law by taxing itscif ; but then it will be in a worm 
situation, than the sections whicK fully retain tiie right of free 
exchanges. Cotton manufiicturers throughout the commercial 
world compose another community. It is said, that a tax upea 
our cotton planters will give them some advantage over foreign 
cotton Ranters. Would a tax upon bur ooten manufaotttreva 
also give them an advantage over their competitors ? This is a 
mode of suppressii^[; rivalry, which I never knew any mtereit 
to try willingly. It is said, that by taxing cotton planters for the 
benefit of cotton manufoctorers, the capitalists may be bcibeA 
to sell cheap in some period, long or short ; but the first stop to- 
wards obtaining cheap manufactores, is to get raw materials 
eheap ; and, therefore, the bounty ought ei4dently to have been 
given to the cotton planters, as the surest mode of efiecftii^ the 
promised good. But the wrong end is selected to begin at, be*> 
cause the right one would not bestow an accession of wealth 
upon capitalists. These gentlemen admit, and indeed warmly 
contend, that the country is cruelly distressed ; and cdl loudly 
for a remedy. They propose one, as they declare, out of mere 
patriotism ; and that of a nature so complete and effectoaK 
that they all agree in ojunion. It is simply an increase of the 
very eleemosynary system, which has brought us where we are^ 
in their own favour. If this remedy will cure the puUick dia» 
teesses, it ooj^t undoubtedly to be a|^ied ; if not, the same rev 
nedy under which they have increased, ong|ht-to be renounced^ 



Digitized by 



Google 



IM sMiCulty between the dtttreNes expeiietic«d by Htm \ 
tti ititM» tiiMy qtmtM a ctase e^mnoti to tlL KMtvdiyiMl 
Ohk) nmfiifkctote iMM thtB Virgiiih and Maryfand, tml hcve 
lAae snflbred more. Manvfactaring is» tberelbfe, nettbci* Mie 
catiae nor tiie i«medy of the generd difttresa. Bat Kentaeky^ 
tnd Ohtb {mailed the banking member of the ^letmMjmrf 
a)r8tem, farther than Tirginia and Mainland* if oar dtetato ai o 
really pHKreed from this system, as I have contended, the argit- 
ftMnt of cruelty can only be settled, by com|Witfg the dmm «f 
^ttatt-eMes anstained by the commanity, under ila iniaehce, m¥k 
the distresses eleemosynarhins wW sustain by its abelitiM. 
• Annaities to bankeri and capitalists differ hi no respect ftmk 
Ute Bngliah poor lates, except in being penaions to the rich. 
•What coatd be said of a natiM, which had no men^eantiMl^ 
poor elasa at all, bat was so enamoored with the Bngfiah po6r 
laws, as to create one oat of rich people? That it inritated ^m 
policy Of the United States. The aereral states constitate tin 
oamaMNdty erfled the Unted States* Its individrndi Mag 
alctes, no mendicant claas can axiat in this tWerai nation, teir** 
eept <taie compounded of atatea i and we ind no power de!^;*^ 
tad to congraas to profidefMr poor states. Bntii has gone ^sAttof 
Hie fiwtenJ c o nnh an Hy hits bftar nattsna la tnd a class caHM 
^oorssl^Hfsrs, thoagh these indtridnate are membens of atat» 
wtomonitieak and though there is nothing ki the «onatitation» its- 
Vosting eoiqp^sa widi any power OTer indlvfdarie became the^ 
1M poor, or iimWhig it to give poniona to poor soldSera, iOtf 
«iore than to poor militia meik By a hlwef congress, poverty la 
aaade the criterion of a chum to a pension, and of ooano»ef tite 
right of congresats grant it What bounds are there to such a 
power of kgitlation over peraons ? No such boandMs psw<er 
^raa delegated to congress by the Memi cOnatitiMonk becaeae Ifc 
wasannecMsary to theolyects of the ankm, and that body^ma 
whdly nnquaiifted <br ha judicious exercise. LegMatiVe bodiMi 
are less qualified for an eiercise of a despotick pensioning pow^ 
or than even kings, and in foct none possess such a pow^r becaaan 
they are not aoToreign. A law granting peOfifions olr siMooMlh 
to an individual or class, is simply an exclusive privilege laW^ 
a^ ia ovMently of a different diaraeter from k genend laW.-mai^ 
lag provisten for all poor p€«op)e ii^ may fMl wRhai ita pil>^ 
i«aw,lqrftnlndiocrindniler«lef nor is this latter kiMtflitirlik 



Digitized by 



Google 



escrrite of a jftfiehd flmi^Ni* twciw * teftCti» Mt tyw fto* 
ilita oir seciij but vpcrn cases &d\j. Neither hat a gratnitoaa 
peBttoQ any r aM / mMimu iea (MMiaioB piU ki fidUomit «f i^ 
Mitfact, or to the right ordatjTesenrell to the itateaof pvo- 
▼idkig for their fo^» mat bf escteerni inditMwiL eeiwtiaie* bat 
1^ aftequal and general law. These casea dMIeriag kt princi- 
ple, have been U^ded l^ an ineon«ct ^lioaliMi of tiie wofA 
*^pen8ion" to b9th» if our le^tetaMs^ and eoapoN in par* 
ticidar, have no pow«r to give away the propertjr of the wh^ 
imtion bjsinecitres and exeluttve {N-ivil^ea, totaiividaalg and 
sects, either civil or rri%i«tt8 ; the qaesttoa^ whether more 
%i<ttelt]r mil be pit>d«oed bf reatoriag mt oonslHatiettal prin- 
dples, or bv adoring to an enror which is oppres ai ve npuMi in- 
Ikistrj, sohietj and merit, remaitts open^ 

Ail these sprouts of tyranny and ini^iiinents of qipressioii 
have spiiing ff6m the doctrine of l^idative sovereignty, whkh 
Wfl elongated the powers ai congress from special delegatton, 
itAa VffeeUL resermtion, and de wmst ra fe ad tittit k ims iia- 
tVMe neeeasaty mctard jp to twmt constitattonal c^slnrolnaa. 
What«anheaati«i^riiivtetiofttotheekercise«f adatyao 
iiiportant to onrselves and o«r poatn^, thiaA the lajndtotooa 
aMtempt to coav^rt the fedtiai mnan into a \egii halaneeaf 
pa#er? If 4 tove oonslrued oar constitatioM in eonftm^ 
irlthlikk^ latMioasttitese spronts oogllt tote enuHtsaied wtth 
im r^K»rse $ iMt, tf I ton miiti^Len, it is lihftli to he t e nsidtt w i 
HFheibM at to bm tot Ikft aatkto^ ^at its d i str e ss es skoiM be 
¥?ifeitf?ed c^ ^^Mttenedk - If HieielNrvie boin<oaieiod bjrtmnfci'* 
9^ two Kh^sand ^ItiMs of nuitfOHai t«piM to atoeaiosyna^r 
%^^, ft is dlifvto«i tiMt tts reiiieity exists, InH « iwtoviettoii #f 
th^maeh ^ itiih May mt ht foqairai for the psaimes <tf a«W 
Mid Wbdemte |0<i«rW«t tihtlM oily one Indf of Ms leiqli- 
M 'be tAi^ Yestomi toMfe'Ownerattheoiher ha*f ^rill inaris 
tM^^ tA^eoMAimily^aa the whole did wheniihe s&retlil 
%M9^teiid tNl*e iiA|Mifcd^ if tiane is i^toiitd, it is ^vMevtttoit 
itfem^l bf A^ ^ixrdm will be ^d^bM* Has in tact has 
ite«h4y hsippefi^^afli k liinoltvffitfttnt cause <of the paUidk 
ttlMfeifftes* 

'Xjot ^8, tfit^rafta^ ^txntiM^ haw much of ilie ttmsforred capi* 
im ftty 1^ f tito i m to »thie peupia wi Hiaa t Gingery to the yterti- 
Wfctit 



Digitized by 



Google 



8M 

Vm i wpp i m ii a of terinig wBl wrtw» rf 

cqiteU ...... ft4a0/)OO^MO 

TIm repiiftl of all piotecliiigdvtiesi oxo^ tiioso 

for r^vemie, do. .... SOOfiOOfiOQ 

Tho Mpppemoa of grutntooo penoioiM, stiO^ 

and fodoraU do. ... . ^00^000,^000 

Thyo remuiciAtion of judicial fiuietiou» a«d 
pocimiarj patronage by k^^latures, hf 
aToidi&g bftd judgmeiiti» partialities and 
long MMione^ do. ... . 50,000,000 

The flaipenriott of legialalhre pnyects, geoe. 

rally cateb^pemy, and nnprodaetiTe, do. 515^000,000 

The redaction of legiriatiTe wif;ea conlbrniaUy 

witii preoent prkea, do. - - 525,090^000 



g 1,000,000,000 



Bat at Ae two first samgs, thoi^ tkey will increase tiio 
ability of the people to pay taxe^ for the use of goTemment; 
are not dedactieBS from then, it is ebirioas that they would still 
bear heaTier upon the oommuntty, AioagH nominalfy reduced 
by the subsequent articles, than the whole did when propeHgf 
and products were more valuable. Other items towards lib^ 
fating national capital must, therefore, bo found, or a connsio- 
?Ale portion of the exteting distresses will remain. IfoadkU^ 
tional retrenchments, saficient to remove these distresses that 
I. know of, can be found, except by adverting to the army and 
nary. It would be frivolous for our legislatures to waste moio 
publick money than thqr would save, by internunable UMe 
wrang^ings about Ht^ sums ; and foolish in the pe^le tobo 
deluded into an opinion, that this was economy. The puMkk 
distresses being great, they can only be removed t^ great reiM- 
dtes. The European nations exist for the ben^t of annM 
and navies, and armies and navies do not exist for thmr^bencAI. 
If tiiis be right, these items, far from aiording room for-«e^ 
trendiment, rehire additional hypothecations of national catd-* 
tal ; but, if it be wrong, we ought rigidly to examine, whedier 
tiiese two great sources of eiqw^nse will not. adimt of some-t^ 
dttction, benefidal to the community for whose good we yi^ 
suppose th^n to havc^iieen incurred. How is H possible,^ ikttft 



Digitized by 



Google 



m 

the United Stales, btimig trebled tii^ miliOftaiid Mtaifii, 
ebduld yet require an army thrice as large, as in the Ume of 
Washin^n? Then they were engaged in a fierce war witfi 
several Indian nations ; now they are in profmid peace. ' Then 
the Indians were formidaUe; now they are fSseUe. And we are 
as distant from Europe as we were then. Ooremments say, 
that regular troops are (Reaper tiian a diiKtia ; hat taxes tell ^ 
very different tide. Ours have spoken veTf dkttnctiy to the 
p«nt In fact, the idea is ccdlected from partial calcnla- 
tkms in time of war, quite inapplicable to times ai peace. As 
to the navy, there may be more diffibulty ; but I do not know 
that it is much wiser to of^iress the cemminiity for the purpose 
of building ships, which, may probiMy rot before war comes, 
than for the keeping of an army which may die without render- 
ing any servkse. Perhaps it might be a better resource for naval 
defence, to prepare materials for building riiips suddenly in 
case of war, than to build, man and wear them out in time of 
peace, by voyages of pleasure. But I leave tins subject to 
&08e who understand it better. 

If the protectingnlnty system should^ be abandoned, and 
tariff fabricated with a single eye to revemae, A is objecteii^^ 
that consumptions will be increased. This effect is admitted 
but I ccmtend, that fiir from h^ng an evil, it will be highly 
ben^cial to iht oommunity. Ccmsumptions are the food of 
UHtttStry; diminish th^n, she.languu^es; remove them, she 
starves; feed her with them, she performs douUe woris ; and 
this double work enables her both to enjoy more jdeasures, and 
to pay more taxes. If half our duties weretaken off,it iswdt 
established that the other half would produce more revenue 
than the whole now does. Why ? Because indus^y, consump* 
tions and. enjoyments have all increased. Let the rival system 
fiice its competitor, and common sense decide which will add 
niost to the happiness of mankind. It is simply tins. Increase 
duties, and you diminish r^enue, industry, consumptions aiKl 
enjoyments. If commocUties are a curr^cy, having the effect 
of enhancing the prices of our commodities, this enhancement 
will also be a fund compensating for the increase of consump- 
tions. In fact, the ext^it of consumptions is the true measure 
of national prosperity and hafq^ness; both are contracted as 
^(^se ^ diminiahed* and b^ are extended as these are in- 



Digitized by 



Google 



m 

^vilizAtioB ; and thftir diminatiQii ta mere neoe^eami^ m ptm* 
ataotly attended by savafwa^ Qe^eei^ the eftrei&ea iuM' 
catad by ftawnwiytio»a. Ba«iely» % tkoatipB tbfi m99i exalted ar 
tbfriiMiBt dabaaedt lie all tbeFoei» for Urn ipgamity tf ^ flatr 
■loayiiariaiii. 

Tbe a^cieat ^^ropriatiPA el Mtiii^ 
tbe Qiedam ime in FriA^e, fto i;be uee irf" ti^ ic)#rgy« can^ 
aevera i»atimal miac^efi, wUpb iRere porfi)ct^.)n j^th pew* 
tries Igr n#iia^[^Mmst The bei^ts of tbe^e revmftm^ }mm 
been acknowledged ^y mmi writeFe^ ^ i|( tl^ amp ^ ffmc^» 
these beaefits are oeipidered by «e«9e j|a m a^pl^ ^mewt 
aatiea for its terribU reFotiatiAoai-y eviU* NatipQi^l 4MiP«$M9b 
i|i both cases» arose from hypfiKU^ec^ioas of oaMon^ <f^t4 1» 
wpsodiicti^ useit m^ the reoiedy ip bp^ i^fis^ WAi 9^ i^^N^r 
cation. But ihesa miaebief-w4irlq^ a^^pnations »( mVmd 
eajpital vera less i^ppresBiye to the |ieei4e tban qwh yt)mh 
)^ve the capital in the h^ds of its i>wiier#* mA tal^o %)Kr^ j|i^ 
profit. Although the clerical appropr^tioof fOP^tod §f land 
tFaosferredby legal inTeatitare^ and war^ of a tmaiiir^ P^vie- 
liiat le9s flagitious tbax;i our gratuitou3 bypotheqMsd^ tNsr 
became permcioui tf> natif^^^l prosperity, axid prodiM^ eyili 
which cansed national uij^easioeiis. The clergy loQg conteiid^ 
that the true remedy for tf^ese ^vil^ was to opdi^w mof a mm^ 
taiies or manufactories of reljigjboi^ and to cpn^ort more land isfe 
VQiortmain; and the advi^ being foU(»)ved» 4:aadt^ted the djfir 
temper to a paroxyaip. We arp ^Ml^d to e»^w mm^.^^' 
tali^ and to transfer mere natlQDal coital to elef^iipapMMSf 
^nes of yarious kinds. This advicp lead^ us abo tpwu^iiblf 
pajros^ysm- On the other hmif aa the jigbts 4^ vest^ Jff^fift^a 
or the ckimp qi hereditary power^ or the Fenerablene^sof j^Hr 
gjums sanctity, do not stand in our way ; because, alji oyr hy^ 
the^ations of national priqperty are legal expierimentf l^t^^ 
to legal abolition ; we can now calmly retri^e oip: st^p^ .m^ 
desist from advancing to the gulf of revolution* 

There is only one okyection to the restoration q( the palJ^n]^ 
ci^ital appropriated to banks. What sh^^ we tiq for H^ wfVQit 
of a currency P So then, it comes out unequiypqUly, Jtiatinsl 
directors are l^]atoi»4)r lords paiamoifnl; ov^ th^ fittTtfiPff 
of thi3gre»t;pq(Pfmpi^^ WJ^ iliaU ife ddiwr JKMt jC4Myyii' 



Digitized by 



Google 



4wr 

l^n ? my the priett^of established churches. The free mim^ 
4rj of the people, if suffered bj thegoTemment to operate fairlj 
up<m the commercial world, will j-apidlj supply us with a better 
currency than the involving, fluctuating, vanishing, counter- 
feited currency of corporations* If banks can pay their debts, 
we have a sufficient specie currency in hand ; if they cannot, 1 
their credit ought to cease. But is it possible, that a chain of 
aristocracies can give us a national currency, whilst our chain 
i»f republicks are incomp^nt to effect the object? If this be 
true, the haste with which we have been changing our princi- 
ples, admits of a better defence than I had foreseen. But, for 
my part, I do not hesitate to assert, that our republican legis- 
latures are able to give us a better paper currency, if one be 
necessary, than the aristocratical legislatures they have put in 
commission, can possibly do. The republican paper currency 
would collect no dividends, and would not hypothecate four 
hundred millions of the national capital for the use of an 
eleemosynary family of banks. It would not collect specie for 
exportation; and its fund for redemption could never run away 
(MT be concealed. It is incomprehensible to me, how an opinion 
came to take root, that paper money issued by a tiation oughdly 
to t)ear interest in favor of those who use it, but that paper Y\ 
money, issued by a corporation, ought to receive interest from \ 
the same persons. The nation and its territories cuinot be 
dissipated, stolen, or concealed by directors, cashiers or clerks; 
nor its responsibility fail by the disappearance of its stock; 
whilst the stock of banks is very often a complete illustration 
of Berkeley's philosophy. Do we derive this strange prejudice 
from the revolutionary paper money? Well, if that was damn- 
ed by experience, we also know that the same upright judge 
has at least condemned the paper money of banks to purgatory, 
a place requiring the purification by fire. Experience then ad- 
vises us to reject both these kinds of paper money most unequi- 
vocally; but it has something more to say. It has shewn us 
three kinds of paper money; that in use throughout the colo- 
nies before the revolutionary war, that in use dtiring the war, 
and that now in use. The first did great good and no harm; 
the second great good and great harm ; and the third great 
harm and no good; The first collected no dividends for eleemo- 
synariansy its stock was a colony, its quaiitity was related by 
38 



Digitized by 



Google 



358 

8, and its qpede for redemption was tav 
ras driven by the bayonet into the morasa 
unsustained by taxation, and rested upon 
uider laws ; but like a patriot, it fought 
itry, and disdained to live by infecting it 
y policy. The third absorbed four hun- 
nal capital, pretended it had specie to pay 
payment, depreciated, aggravated publick 
i, sometimes became bankrupt, made bank- 
duals, and by causing fluctuations in the 
lined and reduced to misery thousands of 
lerience has decided that the first was thi^ 
worst. If a paper money, was issued bj 
by a constitutional amendment to one 
I our taxes, state and federal ; if it was 
IS equal to such taxes, making each state 
ortion without interest ; if one moiety of 
ts to the publick was allowed to be made 
it was not made a tender ; and if banking 
iew of the circumstances attending the 
Kperiments seems to justify an expectatioii 
it be produced, infinitely preferable to the 
cy of corporations, and at least equal to 
for many years before the revolutioiu BuU 
by and independent, it is rather to be ex- 
4ican legislatures would be able to improvei 
British colonies. In times of peace the 
ency would be certain ; in times of war« 
' and fund, without being subjected to both 
Is for the paper borrowed, so as to hypothe* 
X hundred pounds of national capital for 
} borrowed. But though I believe that the 
aper currency was that before the revolu* 
itation of it would be our wisest course, if 
er currency, which I do not believe ; I do 
lubject, because it does not fall within mjr 

ever, might be certainly deot^pd by any onte 
deral government adhere to.its hjrpotheai- 
Lpital to unprodttclive and etsemoayiiaiy 



Digitized by 



Google 



Sa9 

uses. Suf^BOse a single state should make a trial of the policy 
of relieving its capital from such destinations as far as possible^ 
hj repealing banking laws; by prohibiting under sufficient 
penalties the circulation of every species of paper currency $ 
by prohibiting with internal protecting duties, the introductioii 
of all manufactures from other states, sent to collect eleemosy* 
nary taxes ; by suppressing all gratuitous pensions ; by reduc* 
ing legislative wages ; by a legislative forbearance to exercisi^ 
judicial fiinctidns; by shortening legislative sessions; by sus- 
pending improvement and catch-penny projects, until it shall 
be ascertained how the suspension will work ; by applying al} 
its resources to the payment of its debts ; and by reducing it4 
taxes down to the rate, which such a policy would justify. It 
would then experimentally appear, whether the policy of con-r 
demning national capital to eleemosynary uses, or of leaving it 
to the use of its owners, was most favourable to national pros- 
perity. The discovery of the longitude would be almost no- 
tiling, towards advancing human happiness, compared with the 
•access of this experiment; and if congress must rival monarchs 
in the bounty system, I discern no object so worthy of its libe- 
rality. It ought also to be highly gratifying to every state, to 
behold an experiment for testing the doctrines of the eleemosy- 
narians ; nor could it meet with any constitutional obstructions, 
because it falls within the powers reserved to the states. The 
state right of taxing both persons and property coming from 
other states remains ; otherwise, neither would be subject to 
state taxation. Some states have prohibited the introduction 
of slaves from others, and have also taxed itinerant merchants^ 
And some may think the introduction of home manufactures to 
collect an eleemosynary tax for capitalists, as injurious to their 
liberty and prosperity, as the introduction of slaves is thought 
to be by others. Both may be right, and both possess a power 
to keep off internal and local evil by internal and local laws. 

Tie eleemosynarians endeavour to conceal their pecuniary 
speculations, under the general idea too hastily swallowed, 
that taxation naturally increases with population. I have no 
quarrel with taxation, except that species which hypothecate*, 
natioiid capital for the uses of individuals or combtnationt^ 
and not f^ the use of governiiient. This only give» one man's 
pr^rty, to another. We have been considAring the principle. 



Digitized by 



Google 



S40 

atod the justice of taxation, and not its rate» thoogb its rat6 una* 
Toidably came into view, as an illustration of its {N-inciple and 
its justice. The principle and justice of taxation are equaU;f 
applicable to a great or a small, to a rich or a poor nation; and 
if an increase of population furnishes any argument applicdite 
to the subject, it is, that the more numerous we become, the 
more people will have bread taken out of their mouths bj the 
sinecure system, to pamper eleemosynary appetites. 

The preceding calculation of the amount of eleemosynary 
dislocations of national capital shews, that there is no con- 
nexion between the eleemosynary system and population, be- 
cause the former has greatly outrun the latter. In Washin^n's 
presidency, one hundred and fifty millions of national capital 
sufficed to supply the taxes, state and federal, then suggested 
by population, without the agency of an eleemosynary system. 
Now the single article of pensions, though the smallest item of 
that system, absorbs more of the national capital, than tiie whole 
expenses of our governments, state and federal, did then. Pro- 
tecting duties absorb double as much, and banking still more. 
The whole national capital, now hypothecated, is thirteen times 
greater than it then was ; and experience has determined, that 
thirteen nations of the then population of the United States 
may be governed for the money, as well as one was at thattime. 
I do not pretend that my calculations are quite correct ; b«t 
they are sufficiently so, to prove that the hypothecation of na- 
tional capital to eleemosynary uses has far ontstript popvla- 
tion ; and that this artificial system, and not our natund ia- 
t:rease, is the true cause of national burdens and national dis- 
tresses, to a very great extent -^ 

Sir George Staunton in his history of the English embassy to 
China nt 1793, states << that the taxes of China amounted to 5s 
^* sterling; of France under the monarchy previously to the re- 
<^ solution, to 16s ; and of Britain to 34s ; per head, upon their 
*' respective populations ; and that China maintained a stand- 
^ ing army of one million of infantry and eight hundred tfaen- 
"* sand cavalry." In China, corporate pecuniary privileges 
were unknown; in France, they were rare; in Eng^Umd, they 
were numerous; In the two first cases, the weight of taxation 
upon individuals k diminished by population, as it must be, 
excqit for the intervention of an eleemosynary iqrfitem. H^se 



Digitized by 



Google 



Ml 

few fwc^ are ere£ble witnemes to the following ocmeliirioBa. 
1. That the eleemosjmary system both conreys the use of iia^ 
lioiial capital to private people* and also greatly increases tax« 
ation. 2. That a sovereign power over labour or property ia 
less q>pres8ive in the hands of an absolute monarch, than in 
those of a representative legislature. 3. That die error of trust* 
ing republican governments with this tyrannical power, has 
probably caused their premature deaths, because they are most 
likely to push it to excess. 4. That great armies and low 
taxes are not incompatible; but that excluuve privil^s and 
low taxes are so. Thus many of the states, without any armies 
to support, have found mean» to increase their taxes, by enter- 
ing into partnerships with catch-penny speculations, which hy- 
pothecate the capital of the people, and are a losing trade. The 
deemosynarians have been for some years our popular patriots!, 
siiA their projects have already inflicted on us a tax of four 
dollars a head upon our whole population for the use of govern* 
ment, exclusively of the taxes to banks and manufactory capi- 
taliftts. A less tax caused a civil war in France. Supfiose 
some individual should ofStr to reduce the taxes to one dollar, 
if we would make him our king; politicianfl and die ffSOfie 
. would have this question to decide ; which is best, a king with 
one dollar tax, (nr an eleemosynarian aristocracy, with four to 
ik^ government and two to bankers and capitalists ? 

If a plain law were proposed to make tenants pay double 
rents to capitalist land-owners, every body would see its in- 
justice. A law to make the same tenants pay a second rent to 
oqpitalist manufactory owners amotmts to the same thing, hut 
its injustice is not seen, because it is not couched in the same 
words. There are no small tenants who do not pay to capital- 
ists under the protectii^-duty system, more than their rents 
amount to ; and who would not make a good bargain by buying 
of them with a second rent, a freedom of will in exchanges. 
¥ei: if a plain law was passed, enacting that all tenants who 
woidd pay a second rent to the owners of manufactories-should 
enjoy tiie r^tof procuring necessaries without being subjected 
to the pretecting-duty tax, it would open many eyes. But 
tui^pose, it could be ascertained how much each person patd-to 
the owners of manufi^tories under the protecttng-duty law, 
imd a new law shmild be past^ ab^^shing that indirect way^to 



Digitized by 



Google 



\ 



34« . « 

Ae vMMj, Mtmng tiie freedom of txchinges, and enactii^ 
that the Htme 8am» now paid in the character of conftamers^ 
akottld.be paid bj each individual to capitalists bj name. The 
CKpsies, it is said> possess the art of so disfiguring a horse, that 
it is very dificnlt to recognize him. One would think, that they 
drew the protecting-daty laws, and so disguised men's private; 
pwperij^ that the owners no longer recognize it. 

Our conduct is an enigma. A real hatred of Ihe English po-* 
Key is united with a real affection for its worst features, agmnst 
which the Ei^lish people would rebel, except for the bayonet. 
The poor system in En^and, though good in theory, strongly 
resembles our pension system in its effects. One breeds pau« 
perism; the other pensioners. That is subject to monstrous 
sboses from cuMing, vanity, partiality, benevolence or a love 
of popularity ; so is this. Vestries or overseers, superintending 
mmII districts, are unable to prevent these abuses ; legislatures* 
metamorphosed into vestries or overseers, are still more defi-^ 
cient in qualities to correct, and infinitely more copiously re- 
ploiished with such as cultivate these abuses. Both systems^ 
are demoralizing and op[Hressive; but one is an attempt to dis-* 
charge a sociid duty, whilst the other is an usurpation of sove* 
ragn power over property. And both have become puUick 
nuisances. England is struggling to 'get rid of one, and th^ 
United States to establish the other. Tithes are taken from 
worthy and usefiil ministers of religion, gallant armies are dis- 
banded, and meritorious civil oflicers are discharged for the 
publick good ; but the pension system claims an exclusive pri^ 
vilege of oppressing a nation. I have no doubt, but that this 
system receives more than all the civil oflScers both of the federal 
and state governments together. Can it be worth as much as civil 
government? At least it cannot be worth mcnre ; and no pecu- 
liar merit in any social occupation can possibly dewrve, thalt 
social liberty should be sacrificed for its reward. If we Were 
carefully to pick out from the superstitions and enthusiasms <€ 
mankind, die two by which they have been most frequently <^ 
pressed and enslaved, we probably ou^t to select th^ notiims, 
that governments are sovereigns over property, and that tiie/ 
may gratuitously transfer it to peculiar merit Hie art of mag- 
nifying individual power and cap'rtal at the publick eipense, by 
the pretext of peculiar merift, is tiie inchoate feature of ihoMf 



Digitized by 



Google 



us 

ta^asttres wkich have ttrmiuated iojvrionly to Ike lMi|»ptttis 
of nations. 

The authors of the Federalist aj^pear to think* that in the 
division of powers between the federal and state go¥emnent% 
the largest share had fallen to the latter; bat this must hare 
been a mistake, so far as a capacity for aagmeotation is cousin 
dered ; because, most or all of the measures complained of at 
unconstitutional^ have originated with congress ; and a cafiacitj 
for augmentation naturally encroaches. This symptom is sufi« 
cient of itself, to awaken the vigilance of those who think, thai 
federalism is indispensable for the good government of so laifia 
a country as the United States. Federalism cannot enst 
without confederates, and confederates are ioief&cient without 
power. A tacit alliance between confess and a family of elee* 
mosynarians, is a species of federalism inconsistent with tte 
positive confederatioa of a family of states. These two kind* 
of confederation cannot subsist long together. If the eleemeo' 
synarian family should be made strong enough to defend con-, 
gress against the states, it will be too strong for congress itself; 
and as courtiers for pay abhor the vacillancy of election, they 
will be always ready to desert from a fluctuating and depen* 
dant, to a permanent and hereditary patron. That congress 
should for a moment risque the friendship of the states, a fede- 
ral militia fighting without pay, to cultivate that of a few mer- 
cenary troops, sure to desert unless allowed to plunder, is a 
policy for which I cannot discern a motive. By weakening the 
state governments, congress would weaken itself, since they 
are the props upon which its power rests ; for if these props 
fall, a very different power from that of congress will spring 
from the ruins. The notion of a contest for power between 
the federal and state governments must therefore have origi- 
nated from sounds without sense, or from artifices without 
honesty. It is like a warfare between two diagrams or two 
dogmas, or between two dancing masters about the figure of a 
reel, neither of whom can gain any thing by the contest, how- 
ever they may cripple each other. No federal or state legis- 
htor can gain any thing for himself by the success of the 
diagram or dogma under which he fights. Had we hereditary 
families^ the warfare might be accounted for; but as we have 
not, we can only ^scribe it to the ele^mosynarian families,. 



Digitized by 



Google 



344 

which may g^t something by it The question of course settles 
into the plain alternative, whether to ^^pease its old friends 
the states, or to cling to its courtiers, the eleemosynanans, is 
the best policy for the federal government. The alternative 
for the state governments is nearly the same; they ought to 
consider, whetiier an imitation of the federal eleemosynarian 
system, or a cultivation of the publick good, will by economy 
and justice, contribute most to their preservation. Politick 
economists say, in defence of the freedom of property against 
exclusive privileges, that every man is the best manager of his 
own affiurs. They ought to have added the reason, namely, 
that no man will form intricate schemes to cheat himself. 

As for a balance of power, the other rival of our coustitu* 
tional federal policy, it may be accurately estimated by consi- 
dering whether an animal, created with a number of legs, would 
act wisely in cutting off one half, from a notion that it would 
walk better witii half tium witii all. 



THE £NI>. 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



/* / 



i • ^ 




Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



