•'." 


raBN 


mm 


I 


••■-/'• 


•v 


3Cibram 


N  THE  CUSTODY  OF  THE 

BOSTON     PUBLIC   LIBRARY. 


SHELF    N° 
ADAMS 


NEW  VIEWS 


©p 


8$C  &®M8titUW9U 


OF  T5E 


UNITED  STATES. 


BY  JOHN  TAYLOR,  OF  CAROLINE,  VIRGINIA, 

WASHINGTON  CITY : 
PRINTED  FOR  THE  AUTHOR,  BY  WAY  AND  GIDEON. 

3S23. 


¥* 


if/.  f 


DISTRICT  OF  COLUMBIA,  to  wit: 

f  **********     BE  IT  REMEMBERED,  That  on  the  nineteenth  day  of  Noyember, 
,j}il^L.  f  m  t'le  ^eal'  ot  our  Ij0r(1  one  thousand  eight  hundred  and  twenty-three, 
**********  and  of  the  Independence  of  the  United  States  of  America,  the  forty- 
eighth,  JOHN  TAYLOR,  of  the  said  District,  hath  deposited  in  the  office  of  the 
Clerk  of  the  District  Court  for  the  District  of  Columbia,  the  title  of  a  book,  the  right 
whereof  he  claims  as  proprietor  in  the  words  following,   to  wit : 

"  New  Views  of  the  Constitution  of  the  United  States.  By  John  Taylor,  of  Ca- 
u  roline,  Virginia." 

In  conformity  to  the  act  of  the  Congress  of  the  United  States,  entitled  "  An  Act 
for  the  encouragement  of  learning,  by  securing  the  copies  of  maps,  charts  and 
books,  to  the  authors  and  proprietors  of  such  copies  during  the  times  therein  men- 
tioned," and  also  to  the  act,  entitled  <c  An  Act  supplementary  to  an  act,  entitled 
"  An  Act  for  the  encouragement  of  learning,  by  securing  the  copies  of  maps, 
charts,  and  books,  to  the  authors  and  proprietors  of  such  copies  during  the  times 
therein  mentioned,"  and  extending  the  benefits  thereof  to  the  arts  of  designing, 
engraving,  and  etching  historical  and  other  prints."  * 

IN  TESTIMONY  WHEREOF,  I  have  hereunto  set  my  hand,  and 
affixed  the  public  seal  of  my  office,  the  day  and  year  aforesaid. 

EDMUND  I.  LEE, 

Clerk  of  the  District  Court  for  the  District  of  Columbia, 


That  many  eminent  and  respectable  men  have  ever 
preferred,  and  ever  will  prefer,  a  consolidated  national 
government  to  our  federal  system ;  that  the  constitution, 
under  the  influence  of  this  predilection,  has  been  erro- 
neously construed  ;  that  these  constructions  are  rapidly 
advancing  towards  their  end,  whether  it  shall  be  conso- 
lidation or  disunion  ;  that  they  will  become  a  source  of 
excessive  geographical  discord  ;  and  that  the  happiness 
and  prosperity  of  the  United  States  will  be  greater 
under  a  federal  than  under  a  national  government,  in 
any  form,  are  the  opinions  which  have  suggested  the 
following  treatise.  If  the  survey  taken  of  these  subjects 
is  not  proportioned  to  their  importance,  it  yet  may  not 
be  devoid  of  novelty,  nor  wholly  ineffectual  towards 
attracting  more  publick  attention  towards  a  question 
involving  a  mass  of  consequences  either  very  good  or 
very  bad. 


1 

a 

3 
4 
5 
6 


9 
10 
11 

12 
13 
14 
15 
16 

17 


SECT 

The  meaning  of  certain 

noNS, 

primary  word's, 

page    1 

The  journal  of  the  convention, 

11 

The  subject  continued, 

«                 •                 • 

.      17 

The  subject  continued, 

•                •                •      ■          « 

,      25 

The  subject  concluded, 

•                «                •                • 

.       35 

Yates's  notes, 

•              '  •                 •                 i 

,       39 

The  subject  concluded, 

•                 •                 • 

.       53 

The  Federalist, 

•    *            •                 •                 i 

63 

The  subject  continued, 

«                  •                  • 

.       73 

The  subject  continued, 

•                 '».•■ 

83 

The  subject  continued, 

•                          *                          •                          4 

.     105 

The  subject  concluded, 

a                   «                   •                   I 

.     119 

Sovereignty, 

•                   •                   •                   < 

171 

One  of  the  People, 

»                      •                       •                       i 

179 

Other  consolidating  doctrines, 

22S 

A  federal  and  national  form  of  government 

compared, 

•                   •                   •                   i 

237 

Construction, 

•                   •           -        • 

297 

NEW  VIEWS 


OF  THE 


CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  UNITED  STATES. 


SECTION  I. 

THE  MEANING  OF  CERTAIN  PRIMARY  WORDS. 

I  shall  attempt  to  ascertain  the  nature  of  our  form  of  govern- 
ment, and  the  existence  of  a  project  to  alter  it.  Principles  and 
words  are  the  disciplinarians  of  construction,  but  the  latter  re- 
quire definitions  to  come  at  truth. 

The  word  union  is  inexplicit  It  may  imply  either  a  perfect 
consolidation ;  or  an  association  for  special  purposes,  reaching 
only  stated  objects,  and  limited  by  positive  restrictions.  Of  civil 
unions,  the  matrimonial  is  the  most  intimate  ;  and  yet  the  par- 
ties to  it  are  invested  with  separate  and  independent  rights. 
The  ancient  union  of  the  independent  kingdoms  of  Spain,  effect- 
ed by  marriage  or  conquest,  left  to  each  many  local  privileges. 
The  union  of  England  and  Scotland,  effected  by  compact,  con- 
tains stipulations  beyond  the  power  of  the  united  government  to 
alter,  especially  that  in  relation  to  the' religion  of  the  latter  king- 
dom. That  between  England  and  Ireland  is  a  political  consoli- 
dation. The  latter  kingdom  did  not  obtain  an  establishment  of 
the  Roman  Catholick  religion.  Had  the  majority  of  the  people 
possessed  free  will,  they  would  have  reserved  this  local  right ; 
and  the  Roman  Catholick  religion,  like  the  Presbyterian,  would 
have  been  placed  beyond  the  reach  of  the  united  representation 
in  parliament;  just  as  the  reserved  rights  of  the  states  are  placed 
beyond  the  reach  of  our  united  representation  in  Congress  ;  be- 

1 


%  taylor's  views. 

cause  political  unions  for  special  purposes,  cannot  be  defeated  by 
inferences  from  tbe  form  adopted  for  their  execution.     In  order 
to  determine  whether  the  United  States  meant  by  the  term  union., 
to  establish  a  supreme  power  or  a  limited  association,  we  must 
commence  our  inquiry  at  their  political  birth,  and  accommodate 
our  arguments  with  the  principles  they  avowed  in  proclaiming 
their  political  existence.     These  are  stated  in  the  declaration  of 
independence  :    "  We  the  representatives  of  the  United  States 
i(  of  America,  in  general  Congress  assembled,  appealing  to  the 
"  Supreme  Judge  of  the  world,  for  the  rectitude  of  our  inten- 
"  tions,  do,  in  the  name  and  by  the  authority  of  the  good  people 
"  of  these  colonies,   solemnly  publish  and    declare,  that  these 
"  United  Colonies  are,  and  of  right  ought  to  be,  free  and  inde- 
"  pendent  states ;  and  that  as  free  and  independent  states,  they 
(<  have  full  power  to  levy  war,  conclude  peace,  contract  alliances, 
"  establish  commerce,  and  do  all  other  acts  and  things,  which 
a  independent  states  ma)^  of  right  do."     Such  is  the  origin  of 
our  liberty,  and  the  foundation  of  our  form  of  government.    The 
consolidating  project  ingeniously  leaves  unexamined  the  argu- 
ments suggested  by  this  declaration,  and  commences  its  lectures 
at  the  end  of  the  subject  to  be  considered.     If  the  declaration  of 
independence  is  not  obligatory,  our  intire  political  fabrick  has 
lost  its  magna  charta,  and  is  without  any  solid  foundation.     But 
if  it  is  the  basis  of  our  form  of  government,  it  is  the  true  exposi- 
tor of  the  principles  and  terms  we  have  adopted.    "The  word 
"  united"  is  used  in  conjunction  with  the  phrase  "  free  and  inde- 
pendent states,"  and  this  association  recognises  a  compatibility 
between  the  sovereignty  and  the  union  of  the  several  states. 
The  regulation  of  commerce  is  enumerated  among  the  rights  of 
sovereignty,  and  this  right  having  been  exercised  by  each  state 
under  their  first  confederation,  because  it  was  not  surrendered, 
is  an  evidence  of  what  was  meant  by  the  sovereignty  of  the 
states,  and  a  prool  that  the  separate  sovereignty  of  each,  and  not 
a  consolidated  sovereignty  of  all,  was  established  by  the  declara- 
tion of  independence.     The  same  observation  applies  to  the 
sovereign  rights  of  the  states,  not  surrendered  by  the  existing 
federal  constitution.      Take  from  the  states   the  political  cha- 
racter they  assumed  by  the  declaration  of  independence,  an$ 


Taylor's  views,  3 

they  could  not  have  united.  To  contract,  to  stipulate,  to  unite, 
are  among  the  "  acts  and  things  which  independent  states  may 
of  right  do."  The  first  confederation  or  union  recognises  the 
compatibility  between  the  union  and  the  sovereignty  of  the 
states.  The  existing  union  adheres  to  the  same  idea,  professes 
to  establish  a  more  perfect  union  of  states  created  by  the  Decla- 
ration of  Independence,  and  contains  many  provisions  incapable 
of  being  executed  except  by  state  sovereignty.  It  uses  the  words 
"  United  States,"  taken  by  the  first  confederation  from  the  de- 
claration of  independence,  and  transplanted  from  both  these  in- 
struments, in  which  they  are  associated  with  positive  assertions 
of  the  independence  and  sovereignty  of  each  state ;  and  there- 
fore the  last  instrument,  like  the  others,  recognises  the  compati- 
bility between  the  union  and  the  sovereignty  of  the  several 
states. 

The  notion  that  the  "  freedom  and  independence  of  the  states" 
refers  to  a  consolidation  of  states,  admits  of  a  perfect  refutation. 
It  would  render  the  language  of  the  declaration  of  independence 
ungrammatical,  because  had  this  been  intended,  it  ought  to  have 
recognised  the  rights  of  sovereignty  as  residing  in  one  consoli- 
dated state,  and  not  in  several  states.  It  would  have  rendered 
the  confederation  unnecessary  ;  because,  had  the  declaration  of 
independence  invested  a  consolidation  of  states  with  a  power  to 
do  "  all  acts  and  things  which  a  free  and  independent  state  may 
of  right  do,"  there  would  not  have  existed  the  least  reason  for 
delegating  powers  to  a  federal  Congress.  It  would  have  divest- 
ed each  province  or  state  of  the  right  to  make  and  alter  its  own 
constitution  and  its  own  laws ;  and  it  would  have  converted  the 
exercise  of  any  sovereign  power  by  a  state,  subsequently  to  the 
declaration  of  independence,  into  usurpation.  The  contempo- 
rary construction  of  the  declaration  of  independence  was  com- 
pletely adverse  to  the  idea  that  it  had  conferred  any  sovereign 
power,  whatever,  upon  a  consolidation  of  states.  Hence  a  con- 
federation became  necessary ;  and  hence  the  several  states  exer- 
cised, among  others,  the  sovereign  powers  of  raising  armies,  im- 
posing taxes,  and  regulating  commerce.  The  language  used  in 
the  declaration  of  independence  was  adopted  and  explained  by 
the  confederation  framed  in  1777.     It  is  entitled  a  "perpeteii 


4  taylor's  views, 

union/'  its  style  was  "  The  United  States  of  America,"  and  1 
declares  that  "  each  state  retains  its  sovereignty."  So  far  state 
sovereignty  is  explicitly  recognised,  and  no  idea  existed  that  it 
had  been  lost  by  a  union  of  states.  Upon  trial,  it  being  disco- 
vered that  the  powers  bestowed  upon  Congress  by  the  first  con- 
federation, were  insufficient  "  for  their  common  defence  and  ge- 
neral welfare,"  the  ends  it  expresses ;  another  union  was  framed 
by  the  constitution  of  1787,  rendered  more  perfect  by  enlarging 
federal  powers,  and  repeating  the  same  words  of  "  common  de- 
fence and  general  welfare"  as  its  chief  ends.  If  this  phrase  was 
understood,  as  neither  creating  a  supreme  national  government^ 
nor  extending  the  powers  delegated  by  the  confederation  of  1777, 
it  must  have  been  also  understood  in  the  same  sense  when  used 
in  the  constitution  of  1787.  Its  meaning  is  ascertained  by  the 
tenth  section  of  the  latter  instrument.  The  individual  states 
are  prohibited  from  exercising  certain  attributes  of  sovereignty, 
particularly  those  of  making  war,  treaties,  and  regulating  com- 
merce, because,  except  for  the  prohibition,  they  would  have  re- 
tained them,  as  adjuncts  of  sovereignty.  The  prohibition  is 
therefore  a  construction  of  this  phrase,  corresponding  with  the 
construction  it  received  when  used  in  the  confederation  of  1777, 
and  uniting  both  instruments  with  the  public  opinion,  that  neither 
the  word  union,  nor  this  specification  of  its  objects,  extended  de- 
legated powers,  created  a  general  government  or  supremacy,  or 
deprived  the  states  of  any  attributes  of  sovereignty  except  those 
prohibited. 

The  word  consolidation,  colloquially  adopted,  expresses  an 
idea  opposite  to  that  universally  supposed  to  be  conveyed  by  a 
political  union  of  sovereign  and  independent  states,  and  incon- 
sistent with  limited  powers,  or  positive  restrictions.  It  implies 
a  fusion  of  the  state  sovereignties  into  one  mass,  so  that  each 
would  lose  its  individuality.  Had  this  event  taken  place,  the 
aggregate  sovereignty  would  certainly  have  imbibed  all  the  pow- 
ers annexed  to  the  materials  of  which  it  was  compounded,  and 
the  several  states  wTould  not  have  retained  a  single  power.  We 
must  therefore  either  conclude  that  a  consolidated  sovereignty 
was  established,  or  that  every  attribute  of  sovereignty  remained 
with  the  states,  except  the  attributes  prohibited,  because  these 


TAYLOR'S  VIEWS.  5 

prohibitions  are  the  only  rule  by  which  those  they  surrendered 
can  be  distinguished  from  those  they  retained.  Had  a  concen- 
trated sovereignty  or  supremacy  been  contemplated  by  either  of 
our  three  political  instruments,  it  would  have  been  expressed  by 
consolidation  or  an  equivalent  word.  As  this  was  not  the  case  at 
either  era,  the  declaration  of  independence,  the  confederation  of 
1777,  and  the  constitution  of  17S7,  have  used  the  same  words 
and  phrases  to  express  the  publick  opinion  ;  and  if  the  Jesuit, 
construction,  can  extract  a  consolidated  supremacy  or  sovereignty 
out  of  the  last  of  these  instruments,  it  must  have  been  created  by 
the  two  former. 

The  word  Congress  requires  attention.  It  was  adopted  by  the 
provinces,  and  the  declaration  of  independence  was  framed 
"  by  the  representatives  of  the  United  States  in  Congress  as- 
sembled." The  representative  character,  was  common  to  the 
Congress  of  the  provinces,  of  the  states  under  the  confederation 
of  1777,  and  of  the  states  under  the  constitution  of  17S7;  but 
neither  this  character,  nor  the  intrinsick  meaning  of  the  word, 
were  supposed  to  convey  any  powers  until  very  lately.  If  the 
phrase  "  Congress  of  the  United  States,"  or  the  representative 
character  of  one  branch  of  that  body,  had  conveyed  implied 
powers,  it  would  have  been  useless  to  grant  specified  legislative 
powers  to  this  "  Congress  of  the  United  States"  by  the  first  ar- 
ticle of  the  constitution.  The  numerous  sovereign  powers  not 
granted  by  this  article,  must  either  pass  by  implication,  or  not 
pass  at  all.  If  they  did  not  pass  by  this  mode  of  conveyance., 
they  remained  with  the  states.  The  implication  or  inference  is 
obviated  by  selecting  the  word  "  Congress"  in  preference  to  the 
words  parliament  or  assembly,  to  the  comprehensiveness  of 
which  the  states  had  been  accustomed.  It  was  the  precise  word 
used  to  express  a  congregation  of  deputies  from  independent 
states  or  governments.  In  that  sense  it  was  adopted  by  the 
provinces,  used  in  the  confederation  of  1777,  and  repeated  in 
the  constitution.  No  word  could  have  been  selected  with  equal 
felicity,  to  convey  the  idea  contemplated  by  a  federal  system. 
It  avoided  the  implications  which  the  usual  words  parliament  or 
assembly  might  have  furnished,  and  demonstrated  that  a  body 
of  men  invested  with  powers  equivalent  to  those  exercised  by 


6  taylor's  views. 

such  denominations,  was  not  intended  to  be  established.  And  it 
intimated  the  independence  of  the  several  states  as  being  similar 
to  the  independence  of  the  several  provinces  of  each  other,  as 
well  as  to  that  of  distinct  kingdoms.  The  assemblage  of  men 
which  framed  the  constitution,  was  called  "  A  convention  of 
"  deputies  from  the  states  of  New-Hampshire,  Massachusetts, 
"  Connecticut,  New- York,  New-Jersey,  Pennsylvania,  Dela- 
"  ware,  Maryland,  Virginia,  North-Carolina,  South-Carolina, 
u  and  Georgia."  By  what  authority  did  the  states  appoint  these 
deputies,  if  not  in  virtue  of  their  respective  sovereignties,  exist- 
ing in  common  with  a  "  Congress  of  the  United  States?"  If  a 
Congress  did  not  destroy  the  sovereignties  of  the  states  at  that 
time,  is  it  reasonable  to  suppose  that  the  present  "  Congress  of  the 
United  States"  was  constituted  to  destroy  them  ?  The  deputies 
of  the  states  in  the  convention,  though  representatives,  could 
not  have  enacted  a  constitution,  because  it  would  have  violated 
the  limited  powers  which  they  received  from  state  sovereignties  y 
and  in  like  manner,  the  deputies  of  the  states  now  composing  a 
Congress,  though  representatives,  cannot  exceed  their  powers. 
It  is  upon  this  principle,  that  Congress  cannot  alter  the  terms  of 
the  union. 

The  word  "  federal,"  also  adopted  into  our  political  phraseo- 
logy, is  a  national  construction  of  the  terms  used  in  forming  our 
system  of  government,  comprising  a  definite  expression  of  pub- 
lick  opinion,  that  state  sovereignties  really  exist.  It  implies  a 
league  between  sovereign  nations,  has  been  so  used  by  all  classes 
of  people  from  the  commencement  of  our  political  existence 
down  to  this  day,  and  is  inapplicable  to  a  nation  consolidated 
under  one  sovereignty. 

The  meaning  of  the  word  "  state"  accords  with  that  of  the 
words  associated  with  it.  Used  in  reference  to  individuals,  it 
comprises  a  great  variety  of  circumstances,  but  in  reference  to 
the  publick,  it  means  a  political  community.  Johnson  thus  ex- 
pounds it,  and  adds,  that  it  implies  a  republick,  or  a  government 
not  monarchical.  What  other  word  was  more  proper  to  de- 
scribe the  communities  recognised  by  the  declaration  of  inde- 
pendence, the  union  of  1777,  and  the  union  of  1787  ?  Can  the 
same  word  have  been  intended  to  convey  an  idea  in  the  last,  in- 


Taylor's  views.  7 

consistent  with  the  idea  it  conveys  in  the  two  first  instruments  ? 
Neither  monarchy  nor  aristocracy  would  have  fitted  the  case, 
and  the  word  republick  itself  would  have  been  exposed  to  uncer- 
tainties, with  which  the  word  state  is  not  chargeable  ;  because  it 
has  been  applied  to  governments  discordant  with  those  which 
were  established  by  our  revolution.  As  no  word  more  expli- 
citly comprises  the  idea  of  a  sovereign  independent  community ; 
as  it  is  used  in  conjunction  with  a  declared  sovereignty  and  in- 
dependence; as  it  is  retained  by  the  union  of  1787,  and  in  all 
the  operations  of  our  governments ;  and  as  sovereign  powers 
only  could  be  reserved  by  states ;  there  seems  to  be  no  sound 
argument  by  which  it  can  be  deprived  of  its  intrinsick  meaning, 
contrary  to  these  positive  constructions. 

Against  this  concomitancy  of  interpretation,  the  consolidating 
school  takes  refuge  under  the  word  "  people,"  and  contends 
that  it  is  susceptible  of  a  meaning  which  inflicts  upon  many  of 
its  associates  the  character  of  nonsense,  and  deprives  them  of 
their  right  to  assist  in  the  construction  of  the  constitution.  Let 
us  therefore  endeavour  to  defend  it  against  the  aspersion  of  hos- 
tility to  its  best  friends,  and  to  save  it  from  the  crime  of  self- 
murder.  In  all  ages  metaphysicians  have  been  so  skilful  in 
splitting  principles,  as  to  puzzle  mankind  in  their  search  after 
truth  ;  and  morality  itself  would  be  lost  by  the  minuteness  of 
their  dissections,  except  for  the  resistance  of  common  sense,  and 
the  dictates  of  unsophisticated  conscience.  But  the  achievement 
of  losing  twenty-four  sovereign  states  by  the  acuteness  of  con- 
struction, and  getting  rid  of  a  people  in  each,  by  means  of  the 
word  necessary  to  describe  them,  was  reserved  for  the  refined  po- 
liticians of  the  present  day ;  and  is  equivalent  to  the  ingenuity 
of  a  fisherman,  who  should  lose  a  whale  by  a  definition  of  his 
name,  which  would  destroy  his  qualities. 

At  the  commencement  of  the  revolutionary  war,  emergency 
dictated  temporary  expedients,  and  delayed  the  formal  adoption 
of  measures  for  constituting  a  people  in  each  province.  A  Con- 
gress was  therefore  appointed  by  provincial  legislatures,  by  one 
branch  of  these  legislatures,  or  by  districts  in  a  province ;  but 
when  disorder  was  exchanged  for  independence,  it  was  appoint- 
£d,  and  its  powers  were  derived  from  the  state  governments,  who 


8  taylor's  views. 

were  deemed  sufficient  to  ratify  the  declaration  of  independence, 
because  they  represented  a  people  circumscribed  within  each 
state  territory.  The  same  species  of  sanction  was  resorted  to, 
for  the  ratification  of  both  the  union  of  1777  and  the  union  of 
1787.  The  ratification  of  the  first  was  to  be  made  by  "  the  le- 
gislatures of  all  the  United  States,"  and  of  the  latter  by  "  the 
conventions  of  nine  states."  The  reference  to  their  representa- 
tives in  both  cases,  far  from  acknowledging  that  each  state  was 
without  a  people,  acknowledged  the  contrary.  The  differences 
between  the  two  modes  of  ratification,  consisted  in  the  distinc- 
tion between  the  words  "  legislatures  and  conventions,"  and  be- 
tween the  necessity  for  unanimity  in  one  case,  and  the  sufficiency 
of  nine  states  in  the  other,  to  establish  the  proposed  unions.  In 
neither,  could  the  object  be  effected  by  a  majority  of  the  people 
of  the  United  States.  Whatever  may  be  the  difference  between 
the  words  legislatures  and  convention,  in  other  cases,  there  is 
none  in  this,  because  both  were  representatives  of  the  same  peo- 
ple. Why  did  the  first  union  require  a  unanimity  of  states  ? 
Because  a  people  of  each  state  had  been  created  by  the  declara- 
tion of  independence,  invested  with  sovereignty,  and  therefore 
entitled  to  unite  or  not.  Why  were  the  ratifying  nine  states 
only  to  be  united  by  the  second  ?  For  the  same  reason  ;  demon- 
strating, that  as  to  the  ratification  of  both,  no  distinction  was 
made  between  legislatures  and  conventions ;  and  that  a  concur- 
rence or  rejection  of  either,  was  considered  as  a  sovereign  act  of 
a  state  people  by  their  representatives.  This  principle  is  con- 
firmed beyond  all  doubt,  by  the  different  modes  in  which  men 
act  when  framing  a  constitution  for  a  consolidated  people,  or 
creatine:  a  federal  union  between  distinct  states.  In  the  first 
ease,  neither  the  consent  of  every  individual,  nor  of  every  coun- 
ty, is  necessary,  because  no  individual  possesses  sovereign  power, 
and  because  no  county  comprises  a  people  politically  indepen- 
dent. If  there  are  thirteen  counties  in  a  state,  and  the  deputies 
of  four  dissent  from  a  constitution,  it  is  yet  obligatory  upon  all, 
because  all  are  subject  to  the  sovereign  power  of  one  people. 
The  constitution  of  the  United  States  was  only  obligatory  upon 
the  ratifying  states,  because  each  state  comprised  a  sovereign 
fieople,  and  no  people  existed,  invested  with  a  sovereignty  over 


Taylor's  views.  9 

the  thirteen  states.  This  consent,  whether  expressed  by  state 
legislatures  or  state  conventions,  was  the  consent  of  distinct 
sovereignties,  and  therefore  the  consent  of  nine  states  could  not 
bind  four  dissenting  states,  or  even  one.  A  majority  of  a  state 
legislature  or  convention  dictates  to  a  minority,  because  it  exer- 
cises the  sovereignty  of  an  associated  people  over  individuals. 
If  state  nations  had  not  existed,  they  could  not  have  exercised 
this  authority  over  minorities,  and  therefore  it  is  necessary  to 
admit  their  existence  in  order  to  bestow  validity  upon  the  fede- 
ral constitution. 

The  establishment  of  state  governments,  demonstrates  the 
existence  of  state  nations.  No  act  can  ascertain  the  existence  of 
a  sovereign  and  independent  community  more  completely,  than 
the  creation  of  a  government ;  nor  any  fact  more  completely 
prove  that  these  communities  were  each  constituted  of  a  distinct 
people,  than  that  of  their  having  established  different  forms  of 
government.  If  the  art  of  construction  shall  acquire  the  power 
both  of  dispensing  with  the  meaning  of  words,  and  also  with  the 
most  conclusive  current  of  facts  by  which  these  words  have  been 
interpreted,  it  will  be  able,  like  the  dispensing  power  of  kings, 
to  subvert  any  principles,  however  necessary  to  secure  human 
happiness,  and  to  break  every  ligament  for  tying  down  power  to 
its  good  behaviour. 


• 


taylor's  views.  n 


SECTION  II. 

THE  JOURNAL  OF  THE  CONVENTION. 

Had  the  journal  of  the  convention  which  framed  the  consti- 
tution of  the  United  States,  though  obscure  and  incomplete, 
been  published  immediately  afler  its  ratification,  it  would  have 
furnished  lights  towards  a  true  construction,  sufficiently  clear  to 
have  prevented  several  trespasses  upon  its  principles,  and  ten- 
dencies towards  its  subversion.  Perhaps  it  may  not  be  yet  too 
late  to  lay  before  the  publick  the  important  evidence  it  furnishes. 

A  short  history  of  the  convention  itself  will  enable  us  to  un- 
derstand its  proceedings.  A  meeting  of  deputies  from  several 
states,  in  1786,  at  Annapolis,  recommended  the  appointment  of 
commissioners  to  devise  such  further  provisions,  as  shall  appear 
to  them  necessary  to  render  the  constitution  of  the  federal 
government,  adequate  to  the  exigencies  of  the  anion ;  and 
Congress,  in  1787,  recommended  a  convention  of  delegates  to 
be  appointed  by  the  several  states,  as  the  most  probable  mean  of 
establishing  in  these  states  a  firm  national  government;  and 
resolved  that  a  convention  of  delegates,  who  shall  have  been  ap- 
pointed by  the  several  states,  be  held  at  Philadelphia  for  the 
sole  and  express  purpose  of  revising  the  articles  of  the  confe- 
deration, and  reporting  to  Congress  and  the  several  legislatures, 
such  alterations  and  provisions  therein,  as  shall,  when  agreed  to 
in  Congress  and  confirmed  by  the  states,  render  the  federal 
constitution  adequate  to  the  exigencies  of  government  and  the 
preservation  of  the  union.  In  these  proceedings  the  word  con- 
vention is  used  to  describe  the  deputies  of  a  state,  and  the  word 
constitution  as  equivalent  to  the  word  confederation. 

The  confederation  of  1777  had  declared  that  "no  alteration 
"  should  be  made  in  its  articles,  unless  such  alteration  should  be 
"  agreed  to  in  a  Congress  of  the  United  States,  and  be  afterwards 
"  confirmed  by  the  legislatures  of  every  state."  Accordingly 
the  constitution  framed  bv  the  convention,  was  referred  to  Con- 


12  Taylor's  views. 

gress,  by  Congress  to  the  state  legislatures,  and  by  a  law  of  each 
state  legislature  to  a  state  convention.  Each  ratification  was  re- 
turned to  Congress,  and  it  passed  a  resolution  for  putting  the  new 
constitution  into  operation.  This  process  was  pursued  in  con- 
formity with  the  existing  compact  between  the  states,  proving 
that  the  states  were  at  this  time  considered  as  the  only  parties  to 
their  federal  union.  If  the  ratification  of  the  new  compact  was 
made  according  to  the  injunctions  of  the  old  compact,  it  was  the 
act  of  separate  states  required  by  that  old  compact,  and  not  the 
act  of  a  consolidated  American  nation ;  and  it  recognised  the 
states  as  the  parties  to  the  constitution.  Both  unions  were  ra- 
tified in  a  federal  mode ;  and  no  state  suspected,  that  by  exer- 
cising its  independent  right  of  assenting  or  rejecting,  it  was  ex- 
ercising an  usurped  authority,  and  moreover  acknowledging  its 
subordination  to  an  aggregate  American  nation. 

The  ratification  of  amendments  by  the  confederation  and  the 
constitution,  was  to  be  made  by  states.  In  both  the  word 
"  states"  must  have  been  used  in  the  same  sense,  because  no 
American  nation  had  appeared  in  the  interval.  Had  these  in- 
struments, or  either  of  them,  been  ratified  by  an  American  na- 
tion, they  would  not  have  been  thereby  made  obligatory  on  the 
states ;  and  should  an  American  nation  now  attempt  to  amend 
the  constitution,  it  would  be  a  usurpation,  because  no  such  nation 
exists  invested  with  a  supremacy  over  the  states ;  and  it  would 
violate  the  mode  of  amending  the  constitution,  agreed  upon  by 
the  parties  to  the  union.  Any  species  of  per  capita  supremacy 
over  all  the  states,  would  establish  an  oligarchy  of  a  minority  of 
states,  and  if  such  a  supremacy  does  not  exist  as  a  consequence  of 
national  sovereignty,  with  a  power  of  altering  the  constitution, 
a  supremacy  in  construing  it  cannot  find  any  basis  upon  which  it 
may  be  erected.  A  per  capita  supremacy  of  construction  would 
be  equivalent  to  a  per  capita  supremacy  of  amendment,  and  the 
same  oligarchical  power  in  a  minority  of  states  containing  a  ma- 
jority of  people,  would  be  the  consequence. 

To  avoid  this  identical  misfortune,  the  convention  required 
the  same  sanction  for  both  unions,  and  for  the  amendments  of 
both,  namely,  state  ratifications.  If  a  constructive  supremacy 
i  an  alter  the  intention  of  the  constitution,  then  it  would  have. 


Taylor's  views.  13 

been  necessary  to  subject  the  constructions  of  Congress,  as  well 
as  more  direct  alterations  of  the  constitution,  to  the  prescribed 
mode  of  ratification,  or  that  mode  would  be  soon  rendered  of 
little  use  by  resorting  to  the  constructive  mode  of  amendment. 
By  wholly  neglecting  to  guard  against  a  constructive  supremacy, 
so  evidently  destructive  of  the  federal  supremacy  by  which  the 
constitution  was  framed,  ratified,  and  is  to  be  amended,  it  seems 
certain  that  the  convention  did  not  entertain  the  least  suspicion, 
that  a  constructive  supremacy  would  be  pretended  to. 

In  the  mode  of  amending  the  constitution  of  1787,  as  well  as 
in  the  necessity  for  the  ratification  of  a  state,  to  make  it  binding 
upon  that  state,  we  discern  distinctly  the  opinion  of  the  conven- 
tion, that  no  American  nation  existed.  Had  it  been  made  by  an 
American  nation,  it  would  be  a  rare  anomaly,  that  state  nations 
should  have  the  power  to  reject  and  alter  it. 

As  a  difference  of  meaning  between  "  a  confederation  and  a 
constitution"  has  been  contended  for,  it  ought  not  to  be  over- 
looked, that  the  deputies  at  Annapolis,  applied  the  term  constitu- 
tion to  the  confederation  of  1777. 

It  is  very  remarkable,  that  the  Congress  of  1787  introduced 
the  word  national  into  the  resolve  recommending  a  convention. 
It  expressed  an  opinion  "that  a  convention  was  the  most  proba- 
"  ble  mean  of  establishing  in  these  states  a  firm  national  govern- 
"  ment"  So  far  it  unequivocally  advocated  the  exchange  of  a 
federal  for  a  national  form  of  government ;  but  an  intimation  so 
plain  and  positive,  that  the  state  governments  ought  to  be  de- 
stroyed, might  not  have  been  received  with  applause,  and  might 
have  obstructed  the  removal  of  the  defects  of  the  existing  federal 
union.  The  expedient  of  complexity  was  therefore  practised  to 
flatter  the  opinion  of  the  states,  and  yet  to  supply  a  text  for  the 
advocates  of  a  national  government.  After  suggesting  this  form 
as  one  propositum,  towards  which  the  convention  might  direct  its 
attention,  Congress  subjoined  another,  namely,  "  that  the  con- 
"  vention  shall  render  the  federal  constitution  adequate  to  the 
"  exigencies  of  government."  Except  for  the  restriction  com- 
prised in  the  word  federal,  this  part  of  the  resolve  would  have 
been  as  capacious  as  the  expression  "  national  government,'-'  be- 


14  Taylor's  views. 

cause  a  limitation  of  power  to  the  exigencies  of  government,  of 
which  the  government  itself  must  judge,  is  no  limitation  at  all. 
But  it  adds,  "  and  the  preservation  of  the  union."  The  recom- 
mendation of  Congress  comprises  "  a  national  government,  a 
"federal  constitution,  the  preservation  of  the  union,  and  a 
''  convention  for  the  sole  purpose  of  revising  the  articles  of  the 
u  confederation."  These  recommendations  are  at  discord  with 
each  other,  as  a  national  and  a  federal  form  of  government  are 
not  the  same  form.  By  planting  the  word  national  among 
them,  as  a  scion  to  be  watered  up  to  a  tree,  a  concert  between  in- 
dividuals, unfriendly  to  the  political  existence  of  the  states,  ap- 
pears at  this  period  to  have  existed. 

Let  us  see  how  these  recommendations  were  received  by  s 
concert  of  states,  and  by  the  concert  of  individuals.  Twelve 
states  appointed  deputies  to  assemble  at  Philadelphia,  and  each 
gave  its  deputies  credentials  specifying  their  powers.  The  idea 
that  the  recommendation  of  Congress  was  addressed  to  an  Ame- 
rican nation  or  people,  no  where  appeared,  and  that  of  a  national 
government  was  rejected  by  every  state.  The  powers  to  these 
deputies  were  the  following  : 

By  New-Hampshire,  "  to  discuss  and  decide  upon  the  most 
"  effectual  means  to  remedy  the  defects  of  the  federal  ifnion." 

Massachusetts,  "  in  conformity  with  the  resolution  of  Congress 
"  recommending  a  convention  for  the  sole  purpose  of  revising 
"  the  articles  of  confederation,  to  render  the  federal  constitution 
"  adequate  to  the  preservation  of  the  union" 

Connecticut,  "  for  the  sole  and  express  purpose  of  revising 
"  the  articles  of  confederation,  to  render  the  federal  constitution 
"  adequate  to  the  exigencies  of  government  and  the prese?*vat 'ion 
"  of  the  union." 

New-York,  in  the  same  words. 

New-Jersey,  "  for  the  purpose  of  taking  into  consideration 
"  the  state  of  the  union,  as  to  trade  and  other  important  subjects, 
"  and  of  devising  such  other  provisions,  as  shall  appear  to  be  ne- 
"  cessary,  to  render  the  constitution  of  the  federal  government. 
"  adequate  to  the  exigencies  thereof." 

Pennsylvania,  "  to  devise  such  alterations  and  further  pro- 


taylor's  views.  15 

**  visions,  as  may  be  necessary  to  render  the  federal  constitution 
"  fully  adequate  to  the  exigencies  of  the  union." 

Delaware,  in  the  same  words,  with  a  proviso,  that  each  state 
shall  have  one  vote  in  Congress. 

Maryland,  in  the  same  words,  without  the  proviso. 

Virginia,  in  the  same  words.  This  state  passed  the  first  law 
for  appointing  delegates  to  the  convention. 

North-Carolina,  "  for  the  purpose  of  revising  the  federal  con- 
"  stitution." 

South-Carolina,  "  to  devise  such  alterations  as  may  be  thought 
u  necessary,  to  render  the  federal  constitution  entirely  adequate 
"  to  the  actual  situation  and  future  good  government  of  the  con- 
il  federated  states." 

Georgia,  "  to  devise  such  alterations  as  may  render  the  federal 
"  constitution  adequate  to  the  exigencies  of  the  union." 

Thus  the  states  unanimously  rejected  the  recommendation  of 
a  national  government,  and  by  excluding  the  word  national 
from  all  their  credentials,  demonstrated  that  they  well  understood 
the  wide  difference  between  a  federal  and  a  national  union. 
The  distinction  was  enforced  in  Massachusetts  and  Connecticut 
by  the  words  "  sole  purpose."  The  reference  of  sole,  is  to  the 
word  national,  used  by  Congress,  and  in  all  the  credentials  the 
word  federal  is  used  also  in  opposition  to  the  word  national. 
There  existed  no  other  object  but  the  suggestion  of  a  national 
government,  for  the  restrictions  in  the  credentials  of  the  states 
to  operate  upon  ;  and  their  unanimity,  without  consulting  each 
other,  is  a  complete  proof  that  they  all  comprehended  the  dif- 
ference between  a  federal  and  a  national  form  of  government. 
The  word  constitution  is  also  uniformly  considered  by  the  states 
as  equivalent  to  the  word  confederation."  Having  seen  what  was 
the  unanimous  opinion  of  the  states,  let  us  next  inquire  how  far 
it  was  regarded  by  a  concert  between  individuals. 


taylor's  views.  17 


SECTION  III. 


THE  SUBJECT  CONTINUED. 


On  the  29th  of  May,  17S7,  the  convention  was  organized,  and 
Mr.  Randolph,  of  Virginia,  offered  sundry  resolutions  resuming 
the  word  national,  though  it  had  been  rejected  by  all  the  states, 
and  proposing  "  that  a  national  legislature  shall  have  the  right 
"  to  legislate  in  all  cases  in  which  the  harmony  of  the  United 
"  States  may  be  interrupted  by  the  exercise  of  individual  legis- 
"  lation,  and  to  negative  all  laws  passed  by  the  several  states, 
"  contravening,  in  the  opinion  of  the  national  legislature, 
"  the  articles  of  the  union,  or  any  treaty  under  the  union." 
The  resolutions  also  proposed  "  a  national  executive  and  a  na- 
"  tional  judiciary ;  that  the  executive  and  a  convenient  number 
"  of  the  national  judiciary  ought  to  compose  a  council  ofrevi- 
"  sion,  with  authority  to  examine  every  act  of  the  national  legis- 
"  lature,  before  it  shall  operate,  and  every  act  of  a  particular 
"  legislature,  before  a  negative  thereon  shall  be  final ;  and  that 
"  the  dissent  of  the  said  council  shall  amount  to  a  rejection,  un- 
"  less  the  act  of  the  national  legislature  be  again  passed,  or  that 
"  of  a  particular  legislature  be  again  negatived  by  of 

'•'  the  members  of  each  branch." 

It  is  worthy  of  particular  observation,  that  in  this  project,  the 
constructive  supremacy  now  claimed  for  the  federal  government 
" over  the  articles  of  the  union"  was  proposed  to  be  given  to 
a  national  government ;  because  the  actual  consideration  of  this 
identical  power,  and  its  absence  from  the  constitution  as  it  was 
finally  adopted,  seems  to  be  irresistible  evidence  that  it  does  not 
exist.  Throughout  Mr.  Randolph's  resolutions,  fifteen  in  num- 
ber, the  word  national  is  adopted,  and  the  word  Congress  reject- 
ed, except  in  reference  to  the  Congress  under  the  confederation 
of  1777,  proving  that  the  word  was  applicable  to  a  federal  union, 
but  not  to  a  national  government. 


18  taylor's  views. 

The  proposed  national  form  of  government  was  ultimately  re- 
nounced or  rejected,  but  the  negative  power  over  state  laws  with 
which  it  was  invested,  was  much  less  objectionable  than  that  now 
constructively  contended  for  on  behalf  of  the  federal  government. 
The  president  was  to  be  one  of  a  council  of  revision,  and  the  in- 
fluence of  the  states  in  his  election  might  have  afforded  to  them 
some  feeble  security,  a  little  better  than  could  be  expected  from 
a  council  of  revision  composed  of  a  few  federal  judges.  Both 
the  legislative  branches  which  were  to  pronounce  the  first  veto 
upon  state  laws,  were  also  to  be  exposed  to  popular  influence,  and 
might  feel  all  the  responsibility  of  which  a  body  of  men  are  sus- 
ceptible in  extending  its  own  power  by  its  own  vote.  A  judicial 
veto,  as  now  contended  for,  is  exposed  to  no  responsibility  what- 
ever. The  council  of  revision,  with  the  president  at  its  head, 
were  only  to  be  controlled  by  more  than  a  majority  of  the  na- 
tional legislature.  This  was  evidently  a  better  security  for  the 
small  states,  than  a  power  in  a  majority  of  Congress  to  abrogate 
state  laws.  But  all  these  alleviations  of  the  power  in  a  national 
form  of  government  to  negative  state  laws,  were  unsuccessful, 
because  the  principle  itself,  however  modified,  was  inconsistent 
with  the  federal  form  adopted.  It  can  never  be  conceived  that 
the  principle  of  a  negative  over  state  laws,  audibly  proposed  and 
rejected,  had  silently  crept  into  the  constitution.  This  was  quite 
consistent  with  the  national  form  of  government  proposed,  but 
quite  inconsistent  with  the  federal  form  adopted.  The  project 
for  a  national  form  of  government  was  deduced  from  the  doc- 
trine, as  vve  shall  hereafter  see,  that  the  declaration  of  inde- 
pendence had  committed  the  gross  blunder  of  making  the  states 
dependent  corporations ;  that  it  was  in  fact  a  declaration  of  de- 
pendence. When  this  doctrine  failed  in  the  convention,  the  na- 
tional negative  over  state  laws  died  with  it.  Revived  by  con- 
struction, it  assumes  a  far  more  formidable  and  consolidating 
aspect  than  as  it  was  originally  offered,  because  the  usurped  ne- 
gative over  state  laws,  by  a  majority  of  a  court  or  of  Congress, 
would  not  have  its  malignity  to  the  states  alleviated  by  the 
checks  to  which  the  project  itself  resorted.  Without  these 
checks,  even  the  advocates  for  a  national  form  of  government 
thought  such  a  negative  intolerable.     The  project  contemplated 


TAYLOR'S  VIEWS.  19 

a  mixed  legislative,  executive,  and  judicial  supremacy  over  state 
laws,  so  that  one  department  of  this  sovereignty,  like  that  of  the 
English,  might  check  the  other,  in  construing  "  the  articles  of 
the  union,"  and  did  not  venture  even  to  propose,  that  a  govern- 
ment should  be  established,  in  which  a  single  court  was  to  be 
invested  with  a  supreme  power  over  these  articles,  or  the  consti- 
tution. The  idea  seems  to  be  a  political  monster  never  seen  in 
fable  or  in  fact. 

On  the  same  day,  Mr.  C.  Pinckney  offered  a  draft  for  a  fede- 
ral "  constitution."  It  recognised  the  people  of  the  several 
states ;  proposed  "  that  the  style  of  the  government  should  be 
"  the  United  States  of  America  ;  that  the  legislative  power 
"  should  be  vested  in  a  Congress,  to  be  chosen  by  the  people  of 
"  the  several  states ;  enumerated  limited  powers  to  be  exercised 
"  by  this  Congress  ;  proposed  a  president  of  the  United  States  ; 
"  and  that  the  legislature  of  the  United  States  should  have 
" poiver  to  revise  the  laws  of  the  several  states  that  may  be 
i(  supposed  to  infringe  the  poivers  exclusively  delegated  to 
"  Congress,  and  to  negative  and  annul  such  as  do." 

This  project  for  a  form  of  government  being  somewhat  at  en- 
mity with  the  resolutions,  hostilities  between  them  forthwith 
eommenced,  and  the  resolutions  obtained  successive  victories  over 
a  nominal  rival,  during  the  greater  portion  of  the  time  expended 
by  the  convention.  The  journal,  however,  is  too  obscure  to 
supply  us  with  a  history  of  a  controversy  which  related  only  to 
the  form  of  a  national  government  mutually  advocated.  We  do 
not  find  in  the  constitution  the  negative  over  state  laws  proposed 
both  in  the  resolutions  and  the  draft.  As  it  was  distinctly  pro- 
posed by  both,  it  must  have  been  maturely  considered  and  doubly 
rejected.  The  reasons  of  these  rejections  were,  that  though  a 
supreme  power  of  construction,  was  consistent  with,  and  might 
have  been  intrusted  to  a  government  throughout  responsible  to 
one  people  or  nation,  it  was  inconsistent  with  and  could  not 
therefore  be  intrusted  to  a  federal  form  of  government,  or  any  of 
its  departments.  And  hence  when  the  federal  form  of  govern- 
ment prevailed  over  the  national  form,  the  alteration  of  the  fede- 
ral articles  was  exclusively  limited  to  the  modes  prescribed,  and 
not  extended  to  a  supreme  power  of  construction  in  the  federai 


20  Taylor's  views. 

government  or  any  of  its  departments.  The  constitution  was 
not  intended  to  be  an  alembick,  fraught  with  heterogeneous  prin- 
ciples, to  condense  the  tortuosities  of  construction,  and  distil 
from  taciturnity  a  supreme  power  of  construction,  and  conse- 
quently a  negative  upon  state  legislation. 

May  30,  Mr.  Randolph,  seconded  by  Mr.  G.  Morris,  moved 
"  that  an  union  of  states  merely  federal,  will  not  accomplish  the 
"  objects  proposed  by  the  articles  of  confederation,  namely, 
*s  common  defence,  security  of  liberty,  and  general  welfare ;" 
and  -"by  Mr.  Butler,  seconded  by  Mr.  Randolph,  "thatana- 
"  tional  government  ought  to  be  established,  consisting  of  a 
"  supreme  legislative,  judiciary,  and  executive."  In  opposition 
to  this  resolution  it  was  moved,  "  that  in  order  to  carry  into  exe- 
"  cution  the  design  of  the  states  in  forming  this  convention, 
"  and  to  accomplish  the  objects  proposed  by  the  confederation, 
il  a  more  effective  government,  consisting  of  a  legislative,  judi- 
"  ciary,  and  executive,  ought  to  be  established/'  excluding  the 
words  national  and  supreme.  Rut  it  was  resolved  "  that  a  na- 
"  tional  government  ought  to  be  established,  consisting  of  a 
"  supreme  legislative,  judiciary,  and  executive."  The  collision 
between  these  resolutions,  and  consequently  the  debate,  was  pro- 
duced by  the  words  national  and  supreme.  Massachusetts, 
Pennsylvania,  Delaware,  Virginia,  North-Carolina,  and  South- 
Carolina,  voted  for  this  resolution,  Connecticut  against  it,  and 
New- York  was  divided;  so  that  a  convention  of  only  eight 
states  decided  by  a  majority  of  six,  that  the  states  should  be  an- 
nihilated. It  was  late  in  the  session  before  twelve  states  assem- 
bled ;  but  whether  an  accession  of  votes,  or  the  repentance 
usually  attached  to  precipitancy,  produced  the  ultimate  discom- 
fiture of  the  resolution  to  establish  a  supreme  national  govern- 
ment, can  only  be  conjectured  by  computing  the  consequences 
likely  to  result  from  an  excessive  zeal  for  this  consolidating  poli- 
cy, and  from  a  refrigeration  inculcated  by  an  accession  of  votes 
or  a  firm  opposition. 

However  this  may  be,  it  is  plain  that  some  members  of  the 
convention  came  with  preparatory  impressions  that  the  distinc- 
tion of  states  ought  to  be  destroyed,  and  availed  themselves  of  a 
thin  convention  to  obtain  a  footing  for  that  opinion.     On  the 


taylor's  views.  21 

first  day  of  the  session,  two  projects  are  offered,  both  founded 
upon  the  principle  of  a  supreme  national  government,  and  on  the 
second,  the  deputies  of  six  states  resolve  to  annihilate  thirteen. 
The  hastiness  of  this  movement  indicates  a  design  to  obtain  a 
victory  by  surprise,  ascertains  the  existence  of  a  concert  un- 
faithful to  credentials,  and  displays  a  rooted  hostility  to  the  state 
governments.  A  blow  so  unexpected  and  violent  was  endea- 
voured to  be  suspended  by  succinctly  urging  in  the  adverse  re- 
solution, that  it  was  the  duty  of  the  convention  "  to  carry  into 
"  execution  the  design  of  the  states,"  but  not  a  single  day  is  allow- 
ed for  consideration,  and  the  treachery  of  sacrificing  duty  to 
prepossession  is  instantly  perpetrated.  The  states  and  the  duty 
are  entombed  together,  by  a  resolution  to  establish  a  supreme 
national  government. 

At  the  threshold  of  the  business,  we  clearly  discern  that  the 
convention  was  apprized  of  the  meaning  of  words.  One  reso- 
lution asserts  that  a  government  merely  federal  would  not  an- 
swer, and  that  a  supreme  national  government  ought  to  be 
established.  The  rival  resolution  rejects  the  words  national  and 
supreme,  as  incompatible  with  a  federal  union.  One  avails  it- 
self of  the  intimation  from  Congress  in  favour  of  a  national  go- 
vernment, and  rejects  the  intimations  of  the  same  Congress  in 
favour  of  a  federal  government ;  the  other  prefers  the  latter  in- 
timations, because  they  were  legitimated  by  the  states,  and  re- 
jects the  former,  because  it  was  rejected  by  the  states.  These 
adverse  opinions  were  evidently  dictated,  one  by  the  political 
opinion  already  invented,  of  a  consolidated  nation  ;  the  other, 
by  the  actual  existence  of  United  States.  The  contrast  between 
the  two  preliminary  resolutions  in  a  very  important  view,  de- 
pends on  a  single  word.  One  proposed  "  a  supreme  legislative, 
judiciary,  and  executive,"  the  other  "a legislative,  executive,  and 
judiciary,"  excluding  the  word  supreme.  This  word  was  adopt- 
ed as  suitable  for  the  proposed  national  government,  and  rejected, 
as  inconsistent  with  the  federal  form  of  government,  to  which 
the  states  had  confined  their  deputies.  The  adoption  and  rejec- 
tion conspire  to  furnish  us  with  a  definition  of  this  formidable 
word,  both  by  the  national  and  federal  parties  in  the  convention. 
The  sense  in  which  both  of  these  parties  understood  it,  caused  its 


%%  Taylor's  views. 

exclusion  from  the  constitution,  as  inapplicable  to  a  federal  go- 
vernment. The  advocates  for  a  national  government  proposed 
to  invest  that  form  of  government  with  a  supreme  power  to 
"  construe  the  articles  of  the  union."  The  advocates  for  a  fede- 
ral government  originally  proposed  to  withhold  supremacy  from 
the  legislative,  judiciary,  and  executive,  and  though  they  at  first 
failed,  finally  succeeded.  As  applied  by  the  successful  federal 
party  to  the  supreme  court,  it  evidently  refers  to  inferior  federal 
courts.  Instead  of  a  judiciary,  invested  with  a  supreme  power 
to  construe  the  articles  of  the  union  and  to  negative  state  laws, 
a  limited  judiciary  is  found  in  the  constitution.  To  reject  a  su- 
preme legislature  and  executive,  and  yet  to  retain  a  supreme  ju- 
diciary, was  never  even  suggested  by  either  the  national  or  fe- 
deral party  in  the  convention.  As  the  project  for  a  national 
form  of  government,  bestowed  the  supremacy  of  construing  the 
articles  of  the  union  and  negativing  state  laws,  upon  all  its  de- 
partments, by  plain  words  ;  and  the  project  in  favour  of  a  fede- 
ral form  intirely  rejected  this  supremacy,  it  is  doing  the  utmost 
violence  to  probability  to  imagine,  that  the  constitution  by  infer- 
ence without  plain  words,  and  without  its  having  been  proposed 
in  the  convention,  should  have  both  deprived  the  federal  legisla- 
ture and  executive  of  a  power  to  settle  the  construction  of  our 
federal  articles  and  to  negative  state  Jaws,  and  also  have  bestowed 
this  enormous  power  exclusively  on  one   federal  court. 

The  word  supreme  is  used  twice  in  the  constitution,  once  ia 
reference  to  the  superiority  of  the  highest  federal  court  over  the 
inferior  federal  courts,  and  again  in  declaring  "  that  the  constitu- 
"  tion,  and  laws  made  in  pursuance  thereof,  shall  be  the  supreme 
"  law  of  the  land,  and  the  judges  in  every  state  shall  be  bound 
u  thereby."  Did  it  mean  to  create  two  supremacies,  one  in  the 
court,  and  another  in  the  constitution  ?  Are  they  colateral,  or  is 
one  superior  to  the  other  ?  Is  the  court  supreme  over  the  consti- 
tution, or  the  constitution  supreme  over  the  court ?  Are  "the 
judges  in  every  state"  to  obey  the  articles  of  the  union,  or  the 
construction  of  these  articles  by  the  supreme  federal  court  ? 

The  project  for  a  national  government,  gave  a  supremacy  over 
the  articles  of  the  constitution  it  advocated,  to  the  legislative,  ju- 
diciary, and  executive,  and  did  not  propose  that  the  constitution 


taylor's  views.  23 

should  be  supreme  over  these  departments,  because  it  would  have 
involved  a  contradiction.  As  they  were  to  have  had  a  supreme 
power  of  construing  its  articles,  these  articles  could  not  possess 
a  supreme  power  over  their  constructions.  But  a  federal  system 
required  that  the  articles  of  union  should  be  invested  with  su- 
premacy, over  the  instruments  created  to  obey  and  execute  them. 
Hence  they  are  declared  to  be  so  in  reference  to  all  these  instru- 
ments, without  excepting  the  federal  court.  And  hence  the  right 
of  altering  these  articles  is  retained  by  these  parties.  In  all  trea- 
ties, the  right  of  construction  must  be  attached  to  the  right  of  al- 
teration, or  the  latter  right  would  be  destroyed.  No  right  of  al- 
teration was  proposed  to  be  reserved  to  the  states  by  the  project 
for  a  national  government,  nor  any  supremacy  of  the  constitution 
recognised  ;  and  in  lieu  of  such  articles  it  was  proposed  to  invest 
the  government  itself  with  a  supremacy  of  construction ;  be- 
cause, if  a  national  government  resulted  from  a  consolidated  peo- 
ple, collateral  state  and  federal  departments  would  not  have  ex- 
isted mutually  to  enforce  the  supremacy  of  the  constitution  ;  and 
a  national  government  must  necessarily  have  possessed  an  abso- 
lute power  of  construing,  under  the  sole  control  of  the  consoli- 
dated people,  by  election,  in  whom  the  right  of  alteration  resided. 
But  the  right  of  alteration  being  placed  in  the  states,  because 
they  made  it,  and  not  in  a  consolidated  people,  because  such  a 
people  did  not  make  it ;  the  right  of  construction  is  attached  to 
the  altering  power,  and  not  given  to  its  own  agents  under  the 
fictions  assumed  to  sustain  a  national  government,  namely,  that  a 
consolidated  people  existed  ;  that  this  people  possessed  a  right  to 
make  and  alter  a  constitution  for  the  union  of  states ;  and  that  a 
national  government  established  by  their  authority,  ought  not 
therefore  to  be  controlled  by  states  in  the  construction  of  its 
articles. 

The  supremacy  of  the  constitution  is  an  admonition  to  all  de- 
partments, both  state  and  federal,  that  they  were  bound  to  obey 
the  restrictions  it  imposes.  In  relation  to  the  federal  govern- 
ment, it  literally  declares  that  its  laws  must  conform  to  its  ex- 
clusive and  concurrent  powers ;  and  in  relation  to  the  state  go- 
vernments, it  implies,  that  theirs  must  also  conform  to  their 
exclusive   and  concurrent  powers.     It  neither  enlarges  nor 


24  taylor's  views. 

abridges  the  powers  delegated  or  reserved.  And  it  is  enforced, 
not  by  an  oath  to  be  faithful  to  the  supreme  constructions  of  the 
federal  departments,  but  by  an  oath  to  be  faithful  to  the  supre- 
macy of  the  constitution. 


TAYLOR'S  VIEWS.  25 


SECTION  IV. 


THE  SUBJECT  CONTINUED. 


I  shall  select  a  few  other  extracts  from  the  journal  of  the  con- 
vention, proving  that  the  words  "  national  and  supreme,"  con- 
stituted the  great  subject  of  debate ;  that  they  were  well  consi- 
dered by  the  respective  advocates  for  a  national  or  a  federal 
form  of  government ;  that  both  were  annexed  to  the  departments 
of  a  national  form,  and  neither  to  the  departments  of  the  federal 
form  ;  and  that  their  insertion  in  the  constitution  can  only  be  ef- 
fected by  reviving  the  fictions  upon  the  strength  of  which  they 
were  proposed. 

The  battle  between  a  national  and  federal  form  of  govern- 
ment began  now  to  wax  warm.  June  6th,  Mr.  Pinckney  gave 
notice  "  that  to-morrow  he  should  move  for  the  reconsideration 
"  of  that  clause  in  the  resolution  adopted  by  the  committee, 
"  which  vests  a  negative  in  the  national  legislature  on  the  laws 
"  of  the  several  states.     Friday  assigned  to  reconsider." 

"  June  8th,  Mr.  Pinckney,  seconded  by  Mr.  Madison,  moved 
"  to  strike  out.  the  following  words  in  the  sixth  resolution  : 
"  negative  all  laws  passed  by  the  several  states  contravening,  in 
"  the  opinion  of  the  national  legislature,  the  articles  of  the  union, 
"  or  any  treaties  subsisting  under  the  authority  of  the  union," 
and  to  insert  the  following  words  in  their  place,  namely,  "  to 
"  negative  all  laics  which  to  them  shall  appear  improper" 
This  motion  was  rejected,  only  Massachusetts,  Pennsylvania,  and 
Virginia,  voting  in  the  affirmative.  It  comprised  the  precise  ne- 
gative over  state  laws  now  claimed  by  the  supreme  court.  This 
trivial  advantage  seems  to  have  been  the  first  gained  by  the  party 
adverse  to  a  national  government ;  but  they  speedily  lost  it. 

June  13.  It  was  moved  by  Mr.  Randolph,  seconded  by  Mr. 
Madison,  to  adopt  the  following  resolution  respecting  the  na- 
tional  judiciary,  namely,  "that  the  jurisdiction  of  the  national 
"  judiciary  shall  extend  to  cases  which  respect  the  collection  of 

4 


26  Taylor's  views. 

"  the  national  revenue,  impeachments  of  any  national  officers, 
li  and  questions  which  involve  the  national  peace  and  har- 
"  monyP  It  passed  in  the  affirmative.  These  resolutions  ought 
to  be  kept  in  mind,  until  we  come  to  the  consideration  of  the 
Federalist,  as  the  origin  of  a  construction  of  the  constitution  by 
Mr.  Madison,  upon  which  the  pretension  of  the  federal  court  to 
a  supremacy  over  the  laws  of  states  and  the  articles  of  the  union, 
is  founded.  The  jurisdiction  of  the  federal  judiciary  is  extended 
by  the  constitution  to  cases  of  revenue,  but  not  to  cases  of  im- 
peachment, or  to  questions  ivhich  involve  the  national  peace 
and  harmony.  It  is  very  remarkable  that  the  very  jurisdiction 
now  claimed  was  actually  proposed,  considered,  and  rejected,  to- 
gether with  the  jurisdiction  proposed  in  cases  of  impeachment, 
as  appears  from  the  absence  of  both  in  the  specifick  statement  of 
federal  jurisdiction. 

June  15,  Mr.  Patterson  offered  sundry  federal  resolutions, 
among  them  "  that  a  federal  judiciary  be  established,"  which, 
with  all  the  resolutions  previously  agreed  to,  were  referred  to  a 
committee  of  the  whole  house. 

June  18,  it  was  moved  by  Mr.  Dickinson,  and  resolved  "that 
(l  the  articles  of  confederation  ought  to  be  revised  and  amended, 
"  so  as  to  render  the  government  of  the  United  States,  adequate 
"  to  the  exigencies,  the  preservation  and  the  prosperity  of  the 
"  union."  This  was  the  first  resolution  in  favour  of  a  federal 
government  in  opposition  to  a  national  government,  but  it  was 
speedily  revoked. 

On  the  same  day,  Colonel  Hamilton  read  a  plan  of  govern- 
ment, containing,  among  others,  the  following  proposals :  "  The 
(i  supreme  legislative  power  of  the  United  States  of  America  to 
"  be  vested  in  two  distinct  bodies  of  men,  the  one  to  be  called 
"  the  assembly,  and  the  other  the  senate,"  excluding  the  word 
Congress,  "  with  power  to  pass  all  laws  whatsoever,  subject  to 
u  the  negative  hereafter  mentioned.  The  senate  to  consist  of 
i(  persons  elected  to  serve  during  good  behaviour.  The  supreme 
"  executive  authority  of  the  United  States  to  be  vested  in  a  go- 
11  vernor,  to  be  elected  to  serve  during  good  behaviour.  To 
*?  have  a  negative  upon  all  laws  about  to  be  passed,  and  the  exe- 
il  cution  of  all  laws  passed.    To  have  the  intire  direction  of 


TAYLOR'S  VIEWS,  27 

et  war  when  authorized  or  begun.  To  have  the  power  of  par? 
"  cloning  all  oflences,  except  treason,  which  he  shall  not  pardon 
11  without  the  approbation  of  the  senate.  The  senate  to  have  the 
t(  sole  power  of  declaring  war.  All  laws  of  the  particular  states, 
"  contrary  to  the  constitution  or  laws  of  the  United  States,  to  be 
"  utterly  void.  And  the  better  to  prevent  such  laws  being  pass- 
"  ed,  the  governor  or  president  of  each  state  shall  be  appointed 
41  by  the  general  government,  and  shall  have  a  negative  upon 
"  the  laws  about  to  be  passed  in  the  state  of  which  he  is  govern- 
li  or  or  president." 

It  is  needless  to  waste  time  in  proving,  that  this  project  com- 
prised a  national  government,  nearly  conforming  to  that  of  Eng» 
land ;  but  it  furnishes  other  remarks  particularly  applicable  to 
our  subject.  Had  it  succeeded,  would  the  proposed  general  go- 
vernor of  the  United  States,  have  been  invested  by  "  the  intire 
41  direction  of  war,"  with  powers  to  raise  supplies,  impress  men, 
send  militia  out  of  the  states,  and  make  roads  and  canals.  If  any 
of  the  doctrines  "  that  a  power  includes  whatever  may  be  neces- 
u  sary  or  convenient  in  its  execution ;  that  great  power  implies 
44  small  power;  or  that  power  has  a  right  to  use  all  auxiliaries  it 
44  may  judge  proper  for  advancing  its  designs,  and  to  destroy  all 
"  obstructions  in  its  way/'  are  true,  then  a  power  oiintirely  di- 
recting war,  would  have  comprised  many  more  powers  than 
those  hitherto  supposed  to  have  been  tacitly  annexed  to  the  li- 
mited powers  delegated  by  the  constitution.  But  had  this  pro- 
ject been  adopted,  its  prototype  would  have  furnished  many 
proofs  that  none  of  these  doctrines  are  true,  and  might  have  de- 
feated the  usurpations  of  this  great  and  powerful  govern  or-gme- 
ral,  upon  the  pretence  that  they  were  so.  The  political  depart- 
ment, called  king,  in  England,  is  invested  with  many  very  great 
powers,  and  among  them,  those  both  of  declaring  and  directing 
war;  and  although  many  English  kings  have  attempted,  under 
cover  of  the  appurtenances  added  by  these  doctrines  to  power,  to 
extend  their  legitimate  powers,  such  attempts,  after  producing 
resistance  and  sanguinary  conflicts,  have  failed.  One  king  may 
have  lo6t  his  head  for  raising  money  unconstitutionally  to  build 
ships  of  war,  and  no  king  pretended  he  could  appropriate  the 
publick  treasure  to  roads  and  canals,  as  deeming  them  appurte 


28  Taylor's  views. 

nant  powers  to  his  rights  of  declaring  and  directing  war.  These 
would  have  been  formidable  precedents  towards  preventing  Co- 
lonel Hamilton's  great  governor-general  from  absorbing  the 
powers  of  less  powerful  departments,  and  it  seems  to  me  that 
they  are  equally,  and  even  more  forcibly,  applicable  to  our  fede- 
ral form  of  government.  The  integrity  of  our  political  depart- 
ments is  undoubtedly  as  necessary  to  preserve  that  form,  as  the 
integrity  of  the  English  departments  can  be  to  preserve  a  limited 
monarchy.  Our  specifications  and  restrictions  of  powers  are 
more  literal  and  intelligible  than  the  English ;  and  liberty  at 
least,  as  essentially  depends  here,  as  it  does  in  England,  upon  a 
resistance  by  one  department  against  the  encroachments  of 
another. 

By  Colonel  Hamilton's  project,  the  states  were  fairly  and 
openly  to  be  restored  to  the  rank  of  provinces,  and  to  be  made  as 
dependent  upon  a  supreme  national  government,  as  they  had 
been  upon  a  supreme  British  government.  Their  governors 
were  to  be  appointed  by  the  national  government,  and  invested 
with  a  negative  upon  all  state  laws ;  and  all  their  laws,  contrary 
to  the  laws  of  the  supreme  government,  were  to  be  void.  The 
frankness  of  this  undisguised  proposition  was  honourable,  and 
illustrates  the  character  of  an  attempt  to  obtain  a  power  for  the 
federal  government,  substantially  the  same,  not  by  plain  and 
candid  language,  like  Colonel  Hamilton's,  but  by  equivocal  and 
abstruse  inferences  from  language  as  plain,  used  with  the  inten- 
tion of  excluding  his  plan  of  government  entirely.  A  power  in 
the  supreme  federal  court  to  declare  all  state  laws  and  judgments 
void,  which  that  court  may  deem  contrary  to  the  articles  of  the 
union,  or  to  the  laws  of  Congress  ;  and  also  to  establish  every 
power,  which  Congress  may  infer  from  those  delegated ;  comes 
fully  up  to  the  essential  principle  of  Colonel  Hamilton's  plan ; 
except  that  the  court  will  both  virtually,  and  directly,  control  the 
legislative,  executive,  and  judicial  state  departments,  by  a  supre- 
macy exactly  the  same  with  that  exercised  by  the  British  king 
and  his  council  over  the  same  provincial  departments. 

June  19.  The  day  after  Colonel  Hamilton's  plan  was  promul- 
gated, Mr.  Dickinson's  resolution  for  a  federal  form  of  govern- 
ment was  taken  up  and  rejected.     "  For  it,  Connecticut,  New- 


Taylor's  views.  29 

"  York,  New-Jersey,  Delaware.  Against  it,  Massachusetts,  Penn- 
sylvania, Virginia,  North-Carolina,  South-Carolina,  Georgia. 
"  Maryland  divided."  Even  yet,  only  eleven  states  had  appear- 
ed, and  five  refused  their  concurrence  to  a  national  government, 
which  now  began  to  totter. 

June  23.  The  deputies  of  New-Hampshire  first  appeared, 
and  New- York  never  afterwards  seems  to  have  given  a  vote  in 
the  convention. 

June  25.  "  It  was  proposed  and  seconded  to  erase  the  word 
"  national,  and  to  substitute  the  words  United  States  in  the 
"  fourth  resolution,  which  passed  in  the  affirmative."  Thus  we 
see  an  opinion  expressed  by  the  convention,  that  the  phrase 
"  United  States"  did  not  mean  "  a  consolidated  American  peo- 
"  pie  or  nation,"  and  all  the  inferences  in  favour  of  a  national 
government  from  the  style  "  We,  the  people  of  the  United 
"  States,"  are  overthrown,  as  that  style  was  adopted,  not  to  es- 
tablish the  idea  of  an  American  people,  but  to  defeat  it. 

July  23.  "The  proceedings  of  the  convention  for  the  esta- 
"  blishment  of  a  national  government,  except  what  respects 
"  the  supreme  executive,  were  referred  to  a  committee,  and  the 
"  next  day  the  propositions  of  Mr.  C.  Pinckney,  and  of  Mr.  Pat- 
"  terson,  were  referred  to  the  same  committee." 

August  18.  It  was  proposed  to  empower  the  legislature  of  the 
United  States,  (the  word  national  is  now  dropt,)  "  to  grant  char- 
"  ters  of  incorporation  in  cases  where  the  publick  good  may  re- 
u  quire  them,  and  the  authority  of  a  single  state  may  be  incom- 
"  petent ;  to  establish  a  university  ;  to  encourage,  by  proper  pre- 
"  miums  and  provisions,  the  advancement  of  useful  knowledge 
"  and  discoveries ;  to  establish  seminaries  for  the  promotion  of 
"  literature  and  the  arts  and  sciences ;  to  grant  charters  of  incor- 
"  poration ;  to  establish  institutions,  rewards,  and  immunities, 
"  for  the  promotion  of  agriculture,  commerce,  and  manufactures ; 
"  and  to  regulate  stages  on  the  post-roads,"  which,  with  other 
propositions,  were  referred  to  the  committee  of  July  23d. 

August  27.  It  was  moved  and  negatived,  that  "in  all  other 
"  cases  before  mentioned,  the  judicial  power  shall  be  exercised 
"  in  such  mariner  as  the  legislature  may  direct." 


30  Taylor's  views. 

September  14.  a  Question.  To  grant  letters  of  incorporation 
il  for  canals,  et  cetera  ;  negatived.  To  establish  a  university  ; 
t(  negatived." 

The  propositions  of  August  the  ISth,  seem  to  have  been  the 
last  considerable  struggle  for  a  national  government ;  but  the  re- 
sidue of  the  journal  is  so  concise  and  imperfect,  that  their  re- 
jection is  only  discoverable  by  a  reference  to  the  constitution,  in 
which  not  a  single  one  of  them  is  to  be  found. 

Their  rejection  was  a  necessary  consequence  of  substituting  a 
federal  for  the  national  government  zealously  contended  for, 
from  the  29th  of  May  to  the  14th  of  September.  It  was  obvious 
that  powers  to  establish  corporations,  prescribe  the  mode  of  edu- 
cation, patronise  local  improvements,  and  bestow  rewards  and 
immunities  for  the  promotion  of  agriculture,  commerce,  and  ma- 
nufactures, would  certainly  swallow  up  a  federal,  and  introduce  a 
national  government.  When,  therefore,  a  federal  system  ob- 
tained the  preference,  it  would  have  been  inconsistent  with  the 
high  degree  of  intelligence  possessed  by  the  members  of  the 
convention,  to  have  permitted  their  determination  to  be  defeated 
by  these  indirect  attempts.  This  intelligence  was  assailed  by  the 
soothing  but  insidious  restriction,  that  the  powers  to  incorporate, 
grant  exclusive  privileges,  and  exercise  every  species  of  patron- 
age, were  only  to  be  exercised  "  in  cases  where  the  publick 
"good  may  require  it."'  The  same  soothing  but  insidious  argu- 
ment is  now  addressed  to  the  intelligence  of  the  publick,  to  jus- 
tify an  exercise  of  the  very  powers  which  the  intelligence  of  the 
convention  withheld  from  a  federal  government ;  and  whether 
the  promise  of  publick  good,  has  been  fallacious  or  fulfilled  by  the 
monopolies  of  currency,  of  manufactures,  and  the  extension  of 
federal  patronage,  the  publick  can  decide.  Yet,  whatever  may 
have  been  their  temporary  effect,  it  is  obvious  that  the  enlightened 
framers  of  the  constitution  considered  the  condition  of  publick 
good,  as  an  enlargement  and  not  a  restriction  of  power  ;  and  that 
it  would  defeat  all  the  limitations  of  the  constitution,  by  which  a 
federal  government  could  be  formed  or  sustained.  It  was  a  pre- 
text which  would  fit  every  encroachment  or  usurpation ;  and  no 
powers  could  be  more  indefinite  and  sovereign  than  those  of 
granting  exclusive  privileges,  bestowing  rewards  and  immunities 


Taylor's  views.  31 

upon  the  three  comprehensive  interests  of  society,  agriculture, 
commerce,  and  manufactures,  and  patronising  capitalists,  paupers, 
knowledge,  and  ignorance.  Such  a  nest  of  powers,  though  exhi- 
bited as  sleeping  in  the  bed  of  publick  good,  bore  so  strong  a 
resemblance  to  the  old  bed  of  justice  in  France,  which  was  the 
repository  of  evil  as  well  as  good,  that  they  were  all  rejected. 
It  was  evident  that  they  would  be  sufficient  to  re-hatch  the 
strangled  national  form  of  government;  and  the  convention 
having  finally  preferred  the  federal  form,  thought  that  no  good 
to  the  publick  could  result  from  such  powers,  which  would  re- 
compense it  for  the  evils  it  would  sustain  from  the  subversion  of 
that  form.  The  convention  saw,  that  if  Congress  could  exercise 
such  powers,  for  the  publick  good,  it  might,  upon  the  same 
ground,  usurp  any  powers  whatsoever,  and  in  rejecting  the  pro- 
positions, decided  between  investing  that  body  with  a  general  or 
a  limited  federal  authority.  Hence  the  power  to  regulate  com- 
merce was  not  intended  to  revive  the  rejected  proposition  to  em- 
power Congress  to  bestow  rewards  upon  agriculture,  commerce, 
and  manufactures.  Hence  the  rejected  proposition,  to  empower 
Congress  to  direct  the  exercise  of  the  judicial  power,  cannot 
enable  it  to  extend  the  jurisdiction  of  the  supreme  court.  And 
for  the  same  reason,  a  power  to  make  war,  cannot  revive  the  re- 
jected power  to  make  canals,  or  to  perform  any  of  those  et  ce- 
teras,  whatever  they  were,  referred  to  by  the  journal.  If  these 
sweeping  and  indefinite  sovereign  powers,  or  all  powers  thought 
by  those  who  exercise  them  to  be  necessary  for  the  publick 
good,  with  an  et  cetera  besides,  though  proposed  and  rejected, 
do  yet  pass  to  Congress  under  the  constitution ;  then  the  battle 
between  the  national  and  federal  parties  in  the  convention,  ter- 
minated quite  contrary  to  the  usual  course  of  things ;  the  van- 
quished were  victorious,  and  the  victorious  were  vanquished ; 
and  if  they  were  now  alive,  one  party  would  be  as  much  sur- 
prised to  discover,  that  it  had  carried  the  consolidating  proposi- 
tions which  it  had  lost,  as  the  other,  that  it  had  lost  the  federal 
principles  which  it  carried.  The  spectacle  of  the  slain  rising  up 
alive,  and  the  living  falling  down  dead,  could  not  have  been  ex- 
pected by  either. 


32  Taylor's  views. 

No  powers  can  be  more  sovereign  and  arbitrary,  than  those  of 
deciding  and  doing  whatever  may  administer  to  the  public  good, 
and  of  pilfering  private  property  by  privileges,  partialities,  pre- 
miums, monopolies,  rewards,  and  immunities ;  nor  more  capable 
of  reaching  any  end.  Had  the  rejection  of  such  powers  been 
unnecessary  for  the  security  of  a  federal  form  of  government, 
the  convention  might  have  still  been  justifiable  for  the  act,  as 
deeming  them  tyrannical,  fraudulent,  and  oppressive.  Did  the 
convention  reject  them  in  fact,  and  re-plant  them  in  masquerade  ? 
I  discern  no  evidence  in  the  journal  to  excite  such  a  suspicion. 
Colonel  HamiltQn,  far  from  discerning  the  supposed  ingenuity 
of  sinking  a  national  form  of  government  in  a  lake  of  obscurity, 
to  be  fished  up  by  a  long  line  of  constructions,  when  it  might  be 
safer  to  avow  the  intention,  seems  to  have  quitted  the  convention 
in  despair,  soon  after  the  failure  of  his  project.  Mr.  Randolph, 
undoubtedly  influenced  by  having  lost  his  plan  also,  refused  to 
sign  the  constitution.  And  though  Mr.  Madison  and  Colonel 
Hamilton  both  signed  it,  and  Mr.  Randolph  supported  it.  in  the 
Virginia  convention,  they  must  have  been  influenced  by  the 
patriotick  motive  of  effecting  some  good,  though  they  could  not 
accomplish  all  which  they  attempted.  These  are  strong  reasons 
to  prove,  that  the  gentlemen  who  had  contended  for  a  supreme 
national  government,  and  of  whose  propositions  for  that  purpose, 
not  one  was  adopted  by  the  constitution,  did  not  imagine  they 
had  succeeded. 

The  journal  of  the  convention  states  "  that  the  constitution 
"  was  transmitted  to  Congress,  and  by  it  to  the  state  legislatures; 
"  that  these  legislatures,  by  separate  laws,  appointed  state  con- 
"  ventions  for  the  consideration  of  the  constitution  ;  and  that  it 
"  was  ratified  by  the  delegates  of  the  people  of  each  state." 
Every  step  in  its  progress,  from  beginning  to  end,  defines  it  to 
be  a  federal  and  not  a  national  act.  The  deputies  who  framed  it 
were  federal  and  not  national  deputies.  They  transmitted  it  to 
Congress,  because  the  assent  of  that  body  was  required  by  the 
federal  union  of  1777.  It  was  transmitted  by  Congress  to  the 
state  legislatures,  because  the  federal  principle  required  it.  And 
it  was  ratified  by  each  state,  because  each  state  was  sovereign  and 
independent. 


TAYLOR'S  VIEWS.  33 

«  The  conventions  of  each  state,  reported  to  Congress  their 
"  ratifications.  That  of  South-Carolina  subjoined  to  theirs  a  de- 
"  claration,  that  no  section  or  paragraph  of  the  constitution  war- 
"  rants  a  construction,  that  the  states  do  not  retain  every  power, 
"  not  expressly  relinquished  by  them,  and  vested  in  the  general 
"  government  of  the  union  ;"  and  the  conventions  of  other  states 
subjoined  declarations  of  the  same  import,  or  still  more  explicit, 
to  their  ratifications.  The  various  efforts  in  the  convention  to 
invest  a  federal  government,  or  some  department  thereof,  with 
a  negative  -upon  state  laws,  though  generally  unknown,  were 
known  to  its  members.  It  was  natural  that  the  obstinacy  with 
which  they  had  been  persevered  in,  and  the  vehement  desire  to 
establish  a  national  government,  unequivocally  disclosed,  should 
inspire  a  jealousy,  lest  the  same  design  should  be  attempted  by 
constructions.  The  great  talents  and  weight  of  character  by 
which  it  was  advocated,  probably  increased  this  apprehension, 
and  suggested  the  necessity  for  these  declarations  to  those  mem- 
bers who  knew  the  fact,  and  could  estimate  the  danger.  They 
were  a  contemporaneous  federal  construction  of  the  constitution, 
intended  to  counteract  and  defeat  any  future  construction,  by 
which  the  rejected  national  government  might  be  reinstated. 
A  negative  in  the  government  of  the  union,  or  in  some  of  its 
departments,  upon  state  legislation,  had  been  strenuously  urged 
and  resisted  in  the  convention,  on  the  same  ground ;  by  one 
party,  because  it  would  establish  a  national  government ;  by  the 
other,  because  it  would  destroy  a  federal  government. 

The  convention  of  New-York  prophetically  declared  "that 
"  the  jurisdiction  of  the  supreme  court  of  the  United  States,  or 
"  of  any  other  court  to  be  instituted  by  Congress,  is  not  in  any 
"  case  to  be  increased,  enlarged,  or  extended,  by  any  fiction,  col- 
"  lusion,  or  mere  suggestion." 

These  contemporary  constructions  of  the  states,  produced  the 
amendment,  made  by  the  parties  to  the  union,  reserving  to  the 
states  or  to  the  people,  the  powers  not  delegated  to  the  United 
Stales.  No  negative  upon  state  laws  was  delegated  to  the  federal 
government,  or  any  department  thereof,  and  the  absence  of  such 
a.  power  had  been  enforced  by  its  rejection.  The  right  of  state 
legislation  without  being  subject  to  this  negative,  not  being  pro- 

5 


34  TAYLOR'S  VIEWS. 

hibiled  to  the  states,  is  among  the  rights  reserved.  It  is  in  vain 
to  say,  that  the  constructive  negative  contended  for,  only  extends 
to  such  state  laws  as  are  contrary  to  the  articles  of  the  constitu- 
tion, because  that  very  modification  of  a  negative  power  in  the 
federal  government  was  proposed  and  rejected.  It  would  have 
as  effectually  defeated  a  federal  and  established  a  national  govern- 
ment, as  a  negative  in  any  other  form  over  state  laws.  The 
mutual  checks  established  for  the  security  of  a  federal  govern- 
ment, between  the  state  and  federal  departments,  are  positively 
established,  by  the  exclusion  of  a  supreme  negative  power  in 
either  over  the  other,  for  the  purpose  of  inspiring  that  mutual 
moderation,  which  is  an  end  of  a  division  of  power,  and  one  of 
the  securities  for  a  free  government.  And  the  guardianship  of 
this  desirable  moderation,  is  deposited  in  three-fourths  of  the 
states.  Co-ordinate  and  independent  powers  alone,  can  beget 
mutual  moderation ;  an  unchecked  supremacy  uniformly  inspires 
arrogance,  and  causes  oppression.  To  defeat  or  weaken  federal 
checks  by  a  substitution  of  constructive  national  checks,  is  there- 
fore not  less  hostile  to  the  freedom  of  the  states,  than  to  the  suf- 
ficiency of  facts  and  words  for  establishing  a  federal  form  of 
government. 


TAYLOR'S  VIEWS,  35 


SECTION  V. 


THE  SUBJECT  CONCLUDED. 


Let  us  suspend  the  consideration  of  contemporaneous  testi- 
mony, and  concisely  review  the  ground  we  have  passed  over. 
Suppose  the  proceedings  of  the  convention  had  been  publick, 
and  that  all  the  panoply  for  the  establishment  of  a  national  go- 
vernment, had  been  displayed  in  the  newspapers.  Suppose  the 
states  to  have  been  alarmed  by  the  exhibition,  and  to  have  re- 
monstrated against  the  project.  That  this  would  have  been  the 
case,  is  demonstrated  by  the  credentials  to  their  deputies,  and 
the  opinions  annexed  to  their  ratifications.  Suppose  the  states, 
after  the  publication  of  the  constitution,  to  have  retained  fears  in- 
spired by  the  attempts  to  establish  a  national  government,  and 
that  a  great  number  of  eminent  men  had  assured  them  that  these 
fears  were  groundless.  And  suppose  that  the  states,  still  unsa- 
tisfied, had,  for  conclusive  security,  insisted  upon  the  amend- 
ments which  they  added  to  the  constitution  ;  particularly  that 
reserving  all  their  rights  not  delegated.  Had  the  proposals  for 
a  national  government,  and  for  negatives  over  state  laws  and 
judgments,  been  published  when  they  were  made,  there  is  no 
doubt  but  that  they  would  have  provoked  the  irresistible  remon- 
strances of  every  state.  Now  imagine,  that  in  consequence  of 
state  oppositions,  these  projects  had  been  abandoned  exactly  as 
they  were,  in  consequence  of  the  opposition  by  state  deputies ; 
that  the  federal  constitution  had  been  substituted  for  them  ;  and 
that  the  states  had,  under  the  impression  which  the  projects  had 
made,  subjoined  to  it  the  amendments.  Could  the  states  have 
been  honestly  told,  after  all  this  process,  that  the  apparent  re- 
jection of  a  national  government  and  its  supreme  negatives,  was 
only  a  delusion  to  appease  their  fears,  and  a  bait  to  allure  them, 
within  the  trap,  hypocritically  abandoned? 

Now  this  very  case  is  that  under  consideration.     The  propo- 
sals for  a  national  government  and  its  negative  over  the  state 


3(?  taylor's  views. 

acts,  were  really  made.  They  were  opposed  by  the  state  depu- 
ties, who  had  a  knowledge  of  them.  They  were  rejected.  A 
different  form  of  government  was  promulgated.  It  contained  no 
such  negative.  The  states  expounded  its  meaning  to  be  federal, 
by  a  positive  reservation  of  rights  not  delegated.  And  now  they 
are  told  that  the  devil,  thus  repeatedly  exorcised,  still  remains  in 
the  church. 

The  notoriety  of  this  deception  is  fully  illustrated  by  recol- 
lecting, that  the  states,  by  their  deputies,  (and  they  could  only 
do  it  by  deputies,)  had  made  themselves  sovereign  and  independ- 
ent ;  that  they  had  already  united  in  virtue  of  that  character ; 
that  in  virtue  of  that  character,  they  had  appointed  deputies  to 
frame  a  more  perfect  union  ;  that  by  these  deputies  they  voted 
as  states  ;  that  they  ratified  the  constitution  as  states ;  that  they 
immediately  amended  it  as  states ;  that  they  reserved  the  su- 
preme power  of  altering  it  as  states ;  that  they  vote  in  the  senate 
as  states  ;  and  that  they  are  represented  as  states  in  the  other  fe- 
deral legislative  branch.  Further,  the  declaration  of  independ- 
ence was  never  repealed.  Its  annual  commemorations  demon- 
strated, and  continue  to  demonstrate,  a  publick  opinion,  that  it 
still  lives ;  and  the  constitution  did  not  confer  sovereignty  and 
independence  upon  the  federal  government,  as  the  declaration  of 
independence  had  done  upon  the  states.  On  the  contrary,  by  the 
constitution,  the  states  may  take  away  all  the  powers  of  the  fe- 
deral government,  whilst  that  government  is  prohibited  from 
taking  away  a  single  power  reserved  to  the  states.  Under  all 
these  circumstances,  is  it  possible  that  any  one  state  of  the  union, 
in  ratifying  the  constitution,  which  literally  conformed  to  pre- 
vious solemn  acts,  to  previous  words  and  phrases,  and  to  the 
settled  rights  of  the  states,  entertained  the  most  distant  idea,  that 
it  was  destroying  itself;  betraying  its  people;  establishing  a  na- 
tional government ;  and  creating  a  supreme  negative  over  all  its 
acts,  political  and. civil,  or  political  only,  with  which  the  federal 
government,  or  one  of  its  departments,  was  invested  by  im- 
plication, 

Sovereignty  is  the  highest  degree  of  political  power,  and  the 
establishment  of  a  form  of  government,  the  highest  proof  which 
can  be  given  of  its  existence.     The  states  could  not  have  re- 


Taylor's  views.  37 

served  any  rights  by  the  articles  of  their  union,  if  they  had  not 
been  sovereign,  because  they  could  have  no  rights,  unless  they 
flowed  from  that  source.     In  the  creation  of  the  federal  govern- 
ment, the  states  exercised  the  highest  act  of  sovereignty,  and 
they  may,  if  they  please,  repeat  the  proof  of  their  sovereignty, 
by   its  annihilation.     But  the  union  possesses   no  innate  sove- 
reignty, like  the  states ;  it  Avas  not  self-constituted  ;  it  is  conven- 
tional, and  of  course  subordinate  to  the  sovereignties  by  which  it 
was  formed.     Could  the  states  have  imagined,  when  they  enter- 
ed into  a  union,  and  retained  the  power  of  diminishing,  extend- 
ing, or  destroying  the  powers  of  the  federal  government,  that 
they  who  "  created  and  could  destroy,"  might  have  this  maxim 
turned  upon  themselves,  by  their  own  creature ;    and  that  this 
misapplication  of  words  was  able  both  to  deprive  them  of  sove- 
reignty, and  bestow  it  upon  a  union  subordinate  to  their  will, 
even  for  existence.     I  have  no  idea  of  a  sovereignty  constituted 
upon  better  ground  than  that  of  each  state,  nor  of  one  which  can 
be  pretended  to  on  worse,  than  that  claimed  for  the  federal  go- 
vernment, or  some  portion  of  it.     Conquest  or  force  would  give 
a  much  better  title  to  sovereignty,  than  a  limited  deputation  or 
delegation  of  authority.     The  deputations  by  sovereignties,  far 
from  being  considered  as  killing  the  sovereignties  from  which 
they  have  derived  limited  powers,  are  evidences  of  their  exist- 
ence; and   leagues  between  states  demonstrate  their  vitality. 
The  sovereignties  which  imposed  the  limitations  upon  the  fede- 
ral government,  far  from  supposing  that  they  perished  by  the 
exercise  of  a  part  of  their  faculties,  were  vindicated,  by  reserving 
powers  in  which  their  deputy,  the  federal  government,  could  not 
participate ;  and  the  usual  right  of  sovereigns  to  alter  or  revoke 
its  commissions. 

If,  under  all  these  circumstances,  the  states  could  never  have 
conceived  that  they  had,  by  their  union,  relinquished  their  sove- 
reignties ;  created  a  supreme  negative  power  over  their  laws  ;  or 
established  a  national  government ;  their  opinion  ought  to  be  the 
rule  for  the  construction  of  the  constitution.  And  if  the  consti- 
tution has,  by  implication,  effected  all  these  ends  without  their 
knowledge  or  consent,  it  is  certainly  the  most  recondite  specula- 
tion that  was  ever  formed,  and  the  states  of  all  cullies,  the  most 
excusable. 


TAYLOR'S  VIEWS.  39 


SECTION  VL 


YATES'S  NOTES. 


It  is  obvious  to  the  reader,  that  my  chief  object  is  to  exhibit 
facts,  generally  unknown,  for  the  purpose  of  enabling  the  state 
republicks,  the  federal  republick,  and  the  people,  to  compare  the 
federal  division  of  power,  with  its  concentration  in  one  supreme 
national  government ;  and  that  though  I  subjoin  to  the  history, 
observations  in  relation  to  the  preference  of  one  system,  it  is  with 
a  deep  conviction  of  my  inability  to  do  justice  to  this  part  of  the 
subject,  and  a  sincere  reference  to  the  tribunal  of  publick  opinion. 

In  pursuance  of  this  historical  design,  I  shall  now  advert  to 
Judge  Yates's  notes  of  the  secret  debates,  preceded  by  Mr.  Lu- 
ther Martin's  statement  of  explanatory  facts ;  one,  chief  justice 
of  the  state  of  New- York ;  the  other,  an  eminent  lawyer  of  the 
state  of  Maryland.  Both  these  gentlemen  appear  to  have  been 
as  thoroughly  convinced  of  the  superiority  of  a  federal,  as  other 
gentlemen  were  of  the  superiority  of  a  monarchical  or  national, 
form  of  government ;  and  both  left  the  convention  under  a  con- 
viction that  the  latter  would  be  established.  They  unfortunately 
abandoned  their  opposition  to  the  national  form,  at  the  juncture 
when  the  New-Hampshire  delegates  arrived,  and  before  the  fede 
ral  system  prevailed  ;  carrying  with  them  a  belief,  that  the 
former  would  maintain  its  ground,  and  that  whatever  gloss  it 
might  receive  to  conciliate  or  deceive  publick  opinion,  it  would 
yet  contain  hidden  seeds  of  consolidation.  Subsequently  to  their 
departure,  the  plan  of  government  was  changed  from  a  national 
to  a  federal  form.  "Whether  this  was  effected  by  the  accession 
of  New-Hampshire,  or  by  the  refusal  of  the  states,  hitherto  in 
the  minority,  to  accede  to  a  national  form  of  government ;  or 
whether  the  change  was  radical  and  sincere,  or  only  superficial 
and  delusive ;  these  gentlemen  were  prevented  from  discerning, 
by  their  absence.  They  therefore  viewed  the  constitution  under 
the  prepossession  inspired  by  the  eagerness  for  a  national  govern- 


40  tavlor's  views. 

ment,  displayed  in  the  convention  before  they  left  it ;  and  were 
influenced  in  their  construction  by  the  suspicion,  that  the  majo- 
rity, whose  success  they  had  deplored,  would  endeavour  to  con- 
ceal in  a  labyrinth,  the  design  which  could  not  succeed  if  dis- 
tinctly disclosed.  Under  this  prepossession,  they  construed  the 
constitution,  and  their  constructions  must  of  course  be  erroneous. 
But  the  same  candour  which  estimates  the  prepossessions  of 
these  two  gentlemen,  will  also  estimate  those  of  Mr.  Madison 
and  Mr.  Hamilton.  If  the  constructions  of  the  two  first  were 
liable  to  be  influenced  by  their  fears,  those  of  the  two  last  were 
as  liable  to  be  influenced  by  their  wishes;  and  a  prepossession  in 
favour  of  a  national  government  was  an  authority,  at  least  as  sus- 
picious for  ascertaining  the  meaning  of  the  constitution,  as  a  pre- 
possession against  it.  On  tins  ground,  I  shall  reject  all  the 
opinions  of  Mr.  Martin  and  Mr.  Yates,  asserting  that  the  con- 
stitution would  be  construed  with  a  view  to  make  it  the  matrix 
of  a  national  government ;  and  on  the  same  ground,  those  of  Mr. 
Madison  and  Mr.  Hamilton,  asserting  that  it  was  really  intended 
for  this  matrix,  ought  also  to  be  rejected. 

But  there  is  a  great  difference  between  the  facts  asserted  by 
all  these  honourable  men,  and  their  speculative  opinions.  Pre- 
judice is  less  able  to  conceal  plain  truth,  than  to  invent  incorrect 
eonstructions.  Facts  may  be  sustained  or  contested  by  other 
facts ;  but  speculative  opinions  can  avail  themselves  of  all  the 
defects  of  language.  I  shall  therefore  only  select  the  facts  as- 
serted by  Mr.  Martin  and  Mr.  Yates,  which  are  sustained  by 
the  journal  of  the  convention,  or  by  other  evidence. 

Secret  proceedings  of  the  convention,  page  12.  Mr.  Martin. 
K  So  extremely  solicitous  were  they,  that  their  proceedings 
l"  should  not  transpire,  that  the  members  were  prohibited  even 
6i  from  taking  copies  of  resolutions,  on  which  the  convention 
"  were  deliberating,  or  extracts  of  any  kind  from  the  journals, 
"  without  formally  moving  for,  and  obtaining  permission,  by  a 
"  vote  of  the  convention,  for  that  purpose." 

The  fact  of  this  jealous  secrecy  is  ascertained  by  the  journal, 
and  the  perseverance  in  it  for  years.  Even  now,  the  veil  is 
imperfectly  removed ;  the  journal  has  not  come  to  the  general 
knowledge  of  the  publick,  and  it  appears  in  a  mutilated  state. 


Taylor's  views.  41 

It  stops,  or  is  impenetrably  obscure,  precisely  at  the  period  when 
the  projected  plan  for  a  national  form  of  government  was  sup- 
planted by  the  federal  system  ;  and  a  suppression  of  the  import- 
ant steps  by  which  this  radical  change  was  effected,  must  have 
taken  place  in  the  convention,  or  subsequently.     Thus  the  vin- 
dicators of  a  federal  construction  of  the  constitution  are  deprived 
of  a  great  mass  of  light,  and  the  consolidating  school  have  got- 
ten rid  of  a  great  mass  of  detection.     Secrecy  is  intended  for 
delusion,  and  delusion  is  fraud.     If  it  was  dictated  by  an  appre- 
hension, that  a  knowledge  of  the  propositions  and  debates,  would 
have  alarmed  the  settled  preference  of  the  states  and  of  the  pub- 
lick,  for  a  federal  form  of  government,  it  amounts  to  an  acknow- 
ledgement that  these  propositions  and  debates  were  hostile  to 
that  form  and  to  the  publick  opinion.     If,  by  an  apprehension 
that  a  publication  of  the  journal  and  debates,    would  produce  a 
construction  hostile  to  the  rejected  national  form  of  government, 
it  is  an  acknowledgment  that  constructions  in  favour  of  that  form, 
are  hostile  to  the  constitution  adopted.     To  avoid  these  conse- 
quences, and  no  others  that  I   can  discern,  it  was  necessary  to 
keep  the  people  in  the  dark,  and  this  stratagem  to  obtain  a  victory 
over  their  most  sacred  right  in  the  ambuscade  mode,  can  only  be 
accounted  for  upon  a  supposition,  that  a  real  hostility  of  opinion 
existed  between  the  publick  and  a  party   of  politicians  behind 
the  curtain,  which  rendered  it  necessary  that  the  people  should 
be  worked  as  puppets,  first  by  the  wire  of  concealment,  and  se- 
condly by  the  wire  of  construction,  into  the  catastrophe  of  a  con- 
solidated government,  either  national  or  monarchical. 

Page  13.  L.  Martin.  "  The  resolutions  of  the  members 
"  from  Virginia  were  discussed  with  great  coolness  in  a  commit- 
"  tee  of  the  whole  house,  and  hopes  were  formed  that  the  far- 
"  ther  we  proceeded  in  their  examination,  the  better  the  house 
"  might  be  satisfied  of  the  impropriety  of  adopting  them,  and 
"  that  they  would  be  finally  i-ejected.  Whilst  they  were  under 
"  discussion,  a  number  of  the  members  who  disapproved  them, 
"  were  preparing  another  system,  such  as  they  thought  more 
"  conducive  to  the  happiness  and  welfare  of  the  states.  The 
"  committee,  by  a  small  majority,  agreed  to  a  report,  declar- 
"  ing,  among  other  things,  that  a  national  government  ought 
6 


42  taylor's  views. 

"  to  be  established,  consisting  of  a  supreme  legislative,  judi- 
"  ciary,  and  executive.  That  the  national  legislature  ought  to 
"  be  empowered  to  legislate  in  all  cases  to  which  the  separate: 
"  states  are  incompetent,  or  in  ivhich  the  harmony  of  the 
"  United  States  may  be  interrupted  by  the  exercise  of  indi- 
"  vidual  legislation,  and  to  negative  all  laws  passed  by  the 
several  states,  contravening,  in  the  opinion  of  the  legislature 
of  the  United  States,  the  articles  of  the  union.  And  that 
the  jurisdiction  of  the  national  judiciary,  shall  extend  to 
"  questions  which  involve  the  national  peace  and  harmony. 
u  There  were  three  parties  in  the  convention.  One,  whose  ob- 
"  ject  it  was  to  abolish  and  annihilate  all  state  governments,  and 
"  to  bring  forward  one  general  government  over  this  extensive 
"  continent,  of  a  monarchical  nature,  under  certain  restrictions 
"  and  limitations.  The  second  party  was  not  for  the  abolition  of 
"  the  state  governments,  nor  for  the  introduction  of  a  monarchi- 
"  cal  government  under  any  form  ;  but  they  wished  to  establish 
"  such  a  system,  as  would  give  their  own  states  undue  power. 
•'  A  third  party  was  what  I  considered  truly  federal  and  repub- 
"  lican,  which  were  unwilling  to  act  contrary  to  the  purpose  for 
"  which  they  were  elected.  The  first  party,  conscious  that  the 
"  people  of  America  would  reject  their  system,  if  proposed, 
"  joined  the  second,  well  knowing  that  by  departing  from  a  fe- 
"  deral  system,  they  paved  the  way  for  their  favourite  object,  the 
"  destruction  of  the  state  governments,  and  the  introduction  of 
"  monarchy.  Parts  of  the  proposed  system  were  warmly  and. 
"  zealously  opposed." 

I  premise,  that  in  using  the  words  monarchist,  suprematist, 
consolidator,  republican,  federalist,  or  any  equivalent  expressions, 
neither  praise  nor  imputation  is  designed  to  be  insinuated  in  re- 
lation to  any  person  or  party  ;  and  that  they  are  only  employed 
to  explain  political  opinions,  and  to  display  the  force  of  extracts. 
My  wish  is  to  exhibit  a  fair  history  of  political  tenets,  to  assist 
the  publick  in  deciding  upon  their  respective  merits  ;  for  with 
great  satisfaction  I  declare  that  I  have  met  with  many  per- 
sons, belonging  to  all  these  political  sects,  of  unsullied  integrity 
and  great  talents,  with  whom  I  wished  to  reciprocate  the  most 
cordial  friendship ;  nor  do  I  claim  any  right  of  private  judgment 


TAYLOlt's  VIEWS.  43 

for  myself,  which  I  am  not  perfectly  willing  should  be  enjoyed 
by  them. 

The  facts  stated  by  Mr.  Martin  are  completely  sustained  by 
the  journal  of  the  convention,  and  far  from  being  aggravated,  are 
related  in  a  softer  tone  than  it  would  have  justified  ;  probably 
from  a  fear  of  exceeding  the  truth ;  as  the  vouchers  necessary  to 
refresh  his  memory,  were  locked  up  in  the  strong  box  of  secrecy. 
It  is  evident  from  the  journal,  that  the  difference  between  a  na- 
tional and  a  federal  government  was  earnestly  debated,  thorough- 
ly considered,  and  well  understood,  in  the  convention.  Both 
from  the  journal  and  Mr.  Martin's  assertion,  it  appears,  that  the 
identical  two  points  of  difference  between  these  two  forms  of 
government,  which  comprise  the  question  now  in  debate,  were 
considered  and  determined.  It  was  proposed  to  invest  a  nation- 
al Congress  with  an  unlimited  negative  over  all  laws  of  the 
states,  contravening,  in  its  opinion,  the  articles  of  the  union. 
It  was  determined  to  confine  the  negative  of  a  federal  Congress 
to  specified  cases.  It  was  proposed  to  extend  the  jurisdiction  of 
a  national  judiciary,  to  questions  which  involve  the  national 
peace  and  harmony.  It  was  determined  to  confine  the  juris- 
diction of  a  federal  judiciary,  to  specified  cases  also.  Con- 
troversies between  the  federal  and  state  departments  would  cer- 
tainly arise,  and  might  contravene  the  articles  of  the  union,  so  as 
to  involve  the  national  peace  and  harmony.  Propositions  to  in- 
vest a  national  legislature  and  a  national  judiciary  with  powers 
to  settle  such  controversies,  accorded  with  the  plan  of  a  national 
government,  and  must  have  been  adopted  had  that  plan  suc- 
ceeded. But  when  the  federal  plan  was  preferred,  the  attributes 
of  the  national  plan  were  necessarily  abandoned ;  and  a  federal 
balance  was  of  course  substituted  for  a  .national  supremacy.  The 
power  proposed  to  be  given  over  state  rights  to  a  national 
legislature  and  judiciary,  could  not  be  given  to  a  federal  legisla- 
ture and  judiciary,  because  it  would  have  made  them  national. 
Therefore  this  supreme  power  was  approved  of  in  connexion 
with  a  national,  and  rejected  in  connexion  with  a  federal,  form 
of  government.  The  reason  for  the  approbation  was,  that  a  na- 
tional government  could  not  exist  without  a  supreme  controlling 
power  over  the  states ;  and  the  reason  for  its  rejection  was,  that 


44  Taylor's  views. 

a  federal  government  could  not  exist  with  it.  A  mutual  con- 
trolling power  between  the  federal  and  state  departments,  was  as 
necessary  for  a  federal,  as  an  abolition  of  this  principle  was  for  a 
national,  government. 

Mr.  Hamilton's  selection  of  one  half  of  these  attributes  of  a 
national  form  of  government,  and  Mr.  Madison's  selection  of  the 
other,  to  be  constructively  reinstated  in  the  constitution,  pro- 
duces a  curious  anomaly.  The  convention,  so  long  as  it  con- 
templated a  national  government,  determined  that  a  concurrent 
power  of  preserving  the  articles  of  the  union  and  its  peace  and 
harmony,  ought  to  be  lodged  in  a  national  legislature  and  judi- 
ciary. Mr.  Hamilton  gives  this  power  to  Congress  exclusively. 
Mr.  Madison  gives  it  exclusively  to  the  federal  judiciary.  Thus 
neither  of  these  gentlemen  adheres  to  the  national  system  with 
which  a  supreme  power  was  associated  in  the  convention,  nor  to 
the  federal  system  from  which  it  was  dissevered  by  the  same 
body ;  but  yet  their  two  halves  make  up  a  whole  national  go- 
vernment, of  which  both  approved.  The  plan  for  a  national  go- 
vernment, proposed  to  invest  a  national  legislature  with  a  nega- 
tive power  over  state  laws  contravening  "  the  articles  of  the 
"  union  or  treaties,"  and  as  a  jurisdiction  in  the  case  of  treaties 
was  given  by  the  constitution  to  the  federal  judiciary,  but  not  in 
the  case  of  contraventions  to  the  articles  of  the  union,  a  violent 
presumption  arises,  that  the  latter  power,  only  contemplated  for 
a  national  legislature,  was  never  intended  to  be  given  to  a  federal 
judiciary,  ^¥e  do  not  discern  in  the  journal  of  the  convention, 
in  the  secret  debates,  or  in  the  constitution,  the  most  dislant  idea 
of  placing  the  articles  of  the  union  exclusively  under  the  guar- 
dianship of  a  judicial  department,  either  when  a  national  or  fe- 
deral government  was  contemplated ;  and  such  a  proposition 
would  not  have  obtained  the  least  countenance,  because  it  would 
not  have  accorded  with  either  of  the  three  forms,  national,  mo- 
narchical, or  federal.  Mr.  Hamilton's  construction  is  more  con- 
sistent with  the  national  system  proposed,  and  the  federal  system 
adopted,  and  also  more  republican,  than  Mr.  Madison's,  because 
a  supremacy  in  Congress  would  be  more  national,  as  the  house  of 
representatives  is  elected  by  the  people ;  more  federal,  as  the 
senate  is  appointed  by  the  state  legislatures ;  and  more  republi- 


Taylor's  views.  45 

can,  if  that  word  embraces  popular  influence  ;  than  a  supremacy' 
in  the  judiciary,  or  a  single  court.  A  judiciary  is  associated 
with  all  governments,  monarchical,  aristocratical,  or  republican, 
and  contains  no  innate  principle  for  discriminating  between  those 
which  are  despotick,  and  those  which  are  free.  The  nature  of  a 
government  is  defined  by  the  structure  of  the  legislative  and  ex- 
ecutive departments.  These  contain  the  essential  distinctions  be- 
tween free  and  despotick,  and  between  federal  and  national  go- 
vernments. Whether  therefore  it  was  the  intention  of  the  con- 
stitution to  establish  a  free  or  a  despotick,  a  federal  or  a  national, 
government,  the  departments  most  essential  for  effecting  either 
object,  must  have  been  the  means  used,  and  not  a  department 
never  contemplated  as  possessing  any  such  capacity. 

The  last  paragraph  extracted  from  Mr.  Martin's  statement, 
proposes  a  subject  for  public  consideration,  yet  more  important, 
as  being  more  deeply  connected  with  the  preservation  of  a  free, 
fair,  and  moderate  form  of  government.  If  the  parties  he  de- 
scribes did  exist,  yet  exist,  and  will  for  ever  exist,  it  is  evident 
that  civil  liberty  can  only  be  preserved  by  a  constant  attention 
to  their  movements,  and  a  perpetual  counteraction  of  their  efforts. 
Monarchy,  its  hand-maid,  consolidation,  and  its  other  hand-maid, 
ambition,  all  dressed  in  popular  disguises,  require  the  utmost 
watchfulness  from  those  who  do  not  love  them,  and  prefer  a  re- 
publican government. 

History  and  human  nature  both  demonstrate,  that  in  all  na- 
tions a  party  invariably  exists,  disposed  to  elevate  the  powers  of 
a  government  to  a  pitch  graduated  by  personal  motives,  and  to 
tighten  a  magical  cordage  about  the  people,  until  it  must  break 
or  be  made  of  iron.  Ambition  and  avarice  are  rope-makers  con- 
stantly at  work,  and  they  unfortunately  inlist  the  most  skilful 
workmen,  by  offering  the  highest  wages.  Hence  popular  rights 
are  forced  to  enter  the  list  under  great  disadvantages,  as  is  evinc- 
ed by  the  humble  instrument  they  have  used  in  this  instance. 
Superiorities  of  wealth  and  talents  meet  their  struggles,  and  have 
almost  universally  defeated  their  efforts.  Poor  and  rich  men  of 
great  talents  generally  unite  in  fostering  principles,  which  will 
afford  them  the  best  markets  ;  and  the  best  understandings  are 
often  the  worst  authorities,  because  they  are  exposed  to  the  high- 


46  taylor's  views. 

est  temptations.  History  and  human  nature  are  therefore  credi- 
ble witnesses,  united  with  the  journal,  for  confirming  the  truth 
of  Mr.  Martin's  formidable  assertion. 

Waiving  foreign,  it  may  be  sufficient  to  adduce  the  most  pro- 
minent domestick  events,  by  which  this  bias  of  human  nature  is 
established.  The  respectable  and  well-informed  party  called 
tories,  at  the  epoch  of  our  revolution,  contended  for  the  supre- 
macy of  the  British  parliament.  National  splendour,  national 
strength,  and  a  national  government,  were  the  arguments  they 
used  ;  but  personal  considerations,  suggested  by  the  prominence 
of  their  stations,  or  the  hopes  suggested  by  their  talents,  really 
forged  their  opinions.  If  the  war  of  words  between  the  whigs 
and  tories,  preceding  the  war  with  swords,  could  be  correctly  re- 
lated, it  would  be  seen  that  the  topicks  and  arguments  now  used 
by  the  parties  in  favour  of  a  federal  or  national  government,  had 
been  anticipated ;  and  that  the  similitude  between  the  cases  had 
produced  a  similitude  between  the  reasonings.  The  tories  loudly 
insisted  upon  the  benefits  of  a  supreme  power  in  the  British  par- 
liament and  judiciary  over  the  provincial  legislatures  and  judi- 
ciaries, as  sufficient  compensations  for  the  ignorance  and  partial- 
ity of  these  British  supremacies  as  to  the  local  interest  of  the 
provinces ;  and  that  local  oppressions  would  beget  national  pros- 
perity. They  considered  a  British  power  of  controlling  provin- 
cial patriots  and  demagogues,  as  an  instrument,  not  of  tyranny, 
but  of  liberty  ;  and  they  insisted  that  the  precedents  established 
by  these  supremacies,  though  usurpations,  were  constitutional 
laws.  The  whigs,  more  loudly  as  it  proved,  urged  the  oppressive 
consequences  certainly  resulting  from  a  supremacy,  incapable, 
from  the  supremacy  of  nature,  of  ascertaining  what  was  good  or 
bad  for  the  provinces,  locally.  That  the  pretended  national 
prosperity,  was  only  a  pretext  of  ambition  and  monopoly.  That 
by  unprincipled  precedents,  and  the  pretext  of  restraining  pro- 
vincial demagogues,  it  was  intended  to  feed  avarice,  gratify  am- 
bition, and  make  one  portion  of  the  nation  tributary  to  another. 
And  that  precedents  for  subjecting  liberty  to  tyranny  did  not 
become  sacred,  because  they  were  unheeded  or  could  not  be  suc- 
cessfully resisted.  The  whigs  did  not  consider  time  as  an  ocean, 
in  which,  should  the  principles  of  liberty  be  once  overwhelmed, 


taylor's  views.  47 

there  would  be  no  buoy  for  finding  them  again.    The  same  argu- 
ments are  now  revived.     The  natural  impossibility  that  the  su- 
premacies now  contended  for,  should  understand  the  laws,  man- 
ners, and  local  interests  of  each  state,  will,  it  is  said,  be  recom- 
pensed by  the  same  benefits  shed  over  the  provinces  by  the  Bri- 
tish supremacy.     Demagogues  are  yet  so  terrible,  that  their  sup- 
pression, at  the  expense  of  losing  state  rights,  will  still  be  a  good 
bargain ;  and  precedents  so  holy  as  to  be  more  valuable  than 
principles  or  constitutions.     Reformers  are  justly  objects  of  sus- 
picion, because  some  secret  design  too  often   lurks  under  their 
professions,  and  dictates  their  attempts.     Sensible  of  this,   the 
whigs  and  tories  charged  each  other  with  innovation  ;  and  the 
justice  of  the  allegation  on  either  side,  depended  on  the  question, 
whether  British  supremacy  over  the  provinces  internally,  could 
be  legitimately  exercised  ;  or  whether  the  provinces  possessed  a 
birth-right   title  to   local    self-government.     The  same  mutual 
charge  of  innovation  is  revived  in  discussing  the  same  question. 
The  declaration  of  independence  is  a  more  visible  birth-right  of 
the  states,  than  any  the  provinces  could  produce.     But  the  states 
are  reduced  to  corporations  by  the  suprematists,  as  the  provinces 
were  by  the  tories,  to  evade  the  charge  of  innovation.     It  is 
very  remarkable,  that  the  same  doctrine  which  was  used  as  a  jus- 
tification of  the  British  legislative  and  judicial  supremacy  over 
the  provinces,  is  now  used  to  justify  a  federal  legislative  and  ju- 
dicial supremacy  over  the  states.     It  is  said  to  be  no  innovation, 
and  only  a  vindication  of  the  ancient  political   subordination  of 
the  provinces.     If  the  argument   is  sound,    it  proves  that  the 
claim  of  British  supremacy  was  well-founded  ;  and  that  it  is  yet 
the  best,  because  it  is  the  oldest,  title,  which  could  not  be  vacated 
vi  et  armis,  as  the  lawyers  say.     Whether  the  revived  doctrine 
will  be  more  successful  than  its  lineal  ancestor,  or  less  likely  to 
terminate  in  civil  war  or  disunion,  may  be  doubtful ;  but  there  is 
no  doubt  that  it  is  a  further  confirmation  of  Mr.  Martin's  account 
of  the  parties  in  the  convention. 

If  more  was  known  of  the  intrigue  suppressed  by  General 
Washington,  about  the  end  of  the  revolutionary  war,  it  might 
illustrate  the  existence  of  such  parties  as  Mr.  Martin  describes. 
Its  object  must  have  been  formidable,  both  from  the  weight  of 


48  taylor's  views. 

the  characters  by  whom  it  was  conceived,  and  also  from  having 
called  forth  the  powerful  opposition  of  a  man,  too  modest  to  be- 
come prominent  without  an  urgent  occasion,  and  too  respectable 
to  waste  his  energy  upon  slight  occurrences.  It  could  have  been 
nothing  less  than  a  political  revolution,  either  to  a  national  or 
monarchical  form  of  government;  and  if  it  contemplated  either, 
it  establishes  the  previous  existence  of  the  parties  which  appeared 
in  the  convention. 

Historical  truth  requires  a  reference  to  Mr.  Adams's  volumes 
in  defence  of  the  American  constitutions,  published  during  the 
confederation  of  1777.  They  appear  to  be  the  result  of  profound 
literature  in  ancient  political  lore,  and  a  deep  conviction  imbibed 
from  that  source.  They  were  a  manly,  candid,  and  independent 
vindication  of  his  own  opinions,  by  a  gentleman  too  honourable 
to  advance  them  by  secret  or  indirect  modes,  and  too  strongly 
impressed  with  their  truth,  to  suspect  that  they  were  unable  to 
encounter  our  modern  improvements  in  the  science  of  govern- 
ment. These  learned  volumes  had  their  effect  upon  those  whose 
object  was  power  or  wealth.  They  opened  a  rich  and  tempting 
British  perspective  to  talents,  ambition,  and  avarice,  and  they 
effected  a  combination  of  these  powerful  agents ;  but  they  failed 
in  a  plain  contest  with  republican  principles.  Their  impression 
however  remained,  and  the  eternal  party,  though  foiled,  was  not 
subdued.  After  waving  its  crest  in  the  convention,  with  all  the 
candour  inspired  by  secreey,  and  all  the  energy  inspired  by  con- 
viction ;  and  after  having  sustained  a  signal  defeat;  it  is  again 
recruited  by  aspirants  from  the  republican  ranks,  throws  down 
the  gauntlet  in  open  day,  and  challenges  its  antagonist  to  renew 
the  combat. 

But  all  these  confirmations  of  Mr.  Martin's  assertions  are  sur- 
perfluous.  They  are  established  by  the  journal  of  the  conven- 
tion. In  this  we  see  the  very  parties  described  by  Mr.  Martin, 
and  foretold  by  experience.  Did  they  die  with  the  convention, 
and  could  the  lectures  of  the  constitution  repeal  the  laws  of  na- 
ture, and  obliterate  passions  destined  to  live  for  ever?  The  pre- 
ceding events,  the  journal,  and  the  testimony  of  Mr.  Martin,  con- 
cur in  proving  the  existence  of  the  parties  which  yet  divide  us, 
although  their  creation  has  been  ascribed  to  Mr.  Jefferson.     Can 


taylor's  views.  49 

any  assertion  be  more  groundless,  than  one  which  cannot  be  true, 
without  denying  the  well-known  qualities  of  human  nature,  and 
without  postponing  previous  events  to  subsequent  periods  ?  Irre- 
vocable laws  have  as  absolutely  decided,  that  a  perpetual  struggle 
shall  exist  between  liberty  and  tyranny,  as  between  virtue  and 
vice  ;  and  it  is  equally  unjust  to  charge  the  advocates  of  a  free 
form  of  government,  or  the  advocates  of  moral  rectitude,  with 
the  introduction  of  party  spirit.  Mr.  Jefferson  was  in  Europe, 
when  our  parties  appeared  in  the  convention.  Subterfuges  from 
historical  truth,  and  local  facts,  indicate  a  consciousness  of  frail- 
ty, or  a  supremacy  of  prejudice. 

The  principles  of  limited  monarchy  were  eulogized  in  the 
convention,  and  an  attempt  to  establish  a  national  government, 
was  persevered  in  during  the  greater  part  of  its  session.  These 
two  parties  are  therefore  unequivocally  defined.  The  third  par- 
ty, called  federal  and  truly  republican,  by  Mr.  Martin,  could  not 
be  so  clearly  identified,  because  the  various  interpretations  of  the 
words  federal  and  republican,  enable  political  parties  to  decorate 
principles  essentially  different,  with  these  robes  admired  by  the 
publick.  Like  stars  and  garters,  they  may  be  used  to  adorn  the 
most  opposite  characters,  and  the  beholder  who  is  content  with 
their  imposing  surface,  to  ascertain  patriotism  or  ambition,  will 
act  like  one  who  ascertains  the  principles  of  individuals  by  the 
richness  of  their  dress.  But  however  indefinite  may  be  the 
terms  used  by  Mr.  Martin  to  describe  it,  the  journal  demon- 
strates that  a  third  party  did  exist  in  the  convention,  and  that 
this  third  party  successfully  resisted  both  a  monarchical  and  na- 
tional form  of  government. 

So  far  the  journal  literally  sustains  Mr.  Martin's  statement  of 
facts,  and  to  establish  the  last,  namely,  that  the  monarchical  and 
national  parties  united,  the  evidence  is  not  less  conclusive.  It 
is  obvious  from  the  journal,  that  the  majority  so  long  prevalent, 
was  produced  by  a  coalition  between  these  two  parties  ;  and  that 
had  each  of  the  three  parties  persisted  separately  to  insist  upon 
its  own  principles,  the  federal  republican  party  would  have  been 
the  strongest,  although  it  received  the  aspect  of  a  minority  from 
the  union  of  the  other  two.  Of  this  union,  the  events  between 
the  formation  and  ratification  of  the  constitution  afford  proofs. 
7 


50  taylor's  views. 

What  became  of  the  monarchical  and  consolidating  parties  on 
the  dissolution  of  the  convention  ?  Were  their  principles  also 
dissolved,  and  did  they  become  adverse  to"  their  own  creeds  ? 
or  did  they,  from  the  same  policy  which  dictated  their  junction 
in  the  convention,  and  the  same  consciousness  that  the  people 
of  the  states  were  not  ripe  for  either  of  their  systems,  melt  up 
themselves  with  the  strong  federal  party,  as  a  safer  step  towards 
their  ultimate  designs,  than  an  open  avowal  of  their  principles  ? 
Is  it  not  as  evident  that  this  fusion  of  the  monarchical  and  con- 
solidating parties  into  one  mass,  took  place  to  procure  the  ratifi- 
cation of  the  constitution,  as  that  it  was  designed  in  the  conven- 
tion to  introduce  a  national  government  ?  There  are  some  me- 
tals of  properties  so  very  similar,  that  their  mutual  attraction  is 
highly  amicable,  and  their  amalgamation  easy.  Mr.  Madison 
and  Mr.  Hamilton,  the  champions  of  the  national  and  monarch- 
ical systems,  liberally  yielded  to  the  example  established  in  the 
convention,  and  renewed  the  same  conciliatory  treaty.  The 
publick  indeed  was  not  edified  by  the  arguments  used  by  one  of 
these  accomplished  men,  for  reducing  the  states  to  corporations, 
and  establishing  a  supreme  national  government ;  nor  by  the  eu- 
logies of  a  limited  monarchy,  expressed  by  the  other  ;  and  with 
unexampled  felicity  both  substituted  for  the  consolidating  and 
monarchical  dialect,  used  in  the  convention,  a  federal  one,  inge- 
niously constructed  to  accommodate  itself  with  publick  opinion, 
and  also  with  the  prepossessions  of  their  respective  partisans. 
Monarchy  and  consolidation  disappeared  from  the  question,  con- 
spicuous as  they  had  been  in  the  journal,  and  the  term  federal 
was  adopted,  because  it  would  embrace  the  parties  inclined  to 
either,  and  also  the  party  adverse  to  both,  but  friendly  to  a  fede- 
ral system.  If  this  new  dialect,  so  different  from  that  used  in 
the  convention,  was  policy,  the  monarchical  and  consolidating 
parties  will  of  course  adhere  to  the  same  policy  ;  if  it  was  the 
consequence  of  an  essential  difference  between  a  national  and  a 
federal  government,  a  national  dialect  cannot  be  proper  for  con- 
struing the  constitution,  since  a  federal  dialect  was  necessary  to 
procure  its  ratification.  If  these  gentlemen  were  sincere  in  the 
convention,  the  arguments  they  used  in  opposition  to  a  federal 
system,  cannot  be  applicable  in  defence  of  it ;  if  they  were  in- 


taylor's  views.  51 

genious  in  procuring  the  ratification  of  the  constitution,  the  inge- 
nuity consisted  in  copious  solicitations  of  publick  opinion  by  fe- 
deral doctrines,  mixed  with  tints  transfused  from  the  conclave, 
too  faint  to  alarm  the  federal  party,  and  yet  sufficiently  perceiva- 
ble to  obtain  the  concurrence  of  the  consolidating  and  monarchi- 
cal parties.  The  intimations  that  supremacy  or  sovereignty  was 
lodged  in  Congress  or  the  supreme  federal  court,  enveloped  in 
clouds  of  sound  federal  reasoning,  was  a  profound  or  lucky 
piece  of  dexterity  to  effect  both  objects. 

Truth  has  compelled  me  to  admit,  however  it  is  to  be  deplored, 
that  a  superiority  of  talents  will  for  ever  appear  on  the  side  of  a 
high-toned  system  of  government.  The  adoption  of  the  word 
federal  as  a  political  badge  is  an  illustration  of  this  fact.  I  do  not 
recollect  whether  the  Federalist  was  entitled  to  the  applause  merit- 
ed by  this  proof  of  genius ;  but  whoever  was  its  author,  it  was 
most  happily  contrived  for  covering  the  monarchical,  consolidat- 
ing, and  federal  parties.  The  last,  at  the  time  the  constitution 
was  ratified,  was,  and  yet  is,  the  most  numerous.  But  unfortu* 
nately,  both  then  and  since,  no  test  existed  for  expelling  hetero- 
geneous mixtures.  The  genuine  federal  party  in  the  conven- 
tion, proceeded  upon  two  principles,  one,  that  a  republican  equa- 
lity between  the  states  ought  to  be  established ;  the  other,  that 
each  state  ought  to  enjoy  the  exclusive  power  of  managing  its  lo- 
cal interests.  Could  not  some  device  be  invented  emblematical 
of  such  principles  ?  We  do  not  discern,  except  in  the  conven- 
tion, an  avowed  hostility  to  them.  So  far  as  this  hostility  can 
insinuate  itself  into  the  councils  of  a  genuine  federal  party,  it 
must  corrupt  or  warp  its  principles,  just  as  monarchical  princi- 
ples may  corrupt  republican.  Monarchical  or  consolidating  par- 
ties, whilst  they  pretend  to  fight  under  federal  colours,  will  fight 
for  their  own  principles.  They  are  seeds  of  disease  in  a  federal 
union,  which  will  be  for  ever  sprouting,  and  if  they  are  not  era- 
dicated as  they  appear  by  genuine  federal  principles,  they  will 
over-shadow  and  kill  them. 

A  party  "  federal  and  truly  republican,"  being  thus  deprived 
of  half  its  motto,  was  forced  to  take  the  other  half,  and  hoisted 
an  ensign  called  republican  ;  a  definition  which  expelled  from  its 
ranks  both  the  monarchical  and  consolidating  parties.    Ajnbt- 


52  Taylor's  views. 

tious  and  avaricious  people  were  all  disgusted  with  it.  Many  of 
the  genuine  federal  party  suspected  it  of  a  design  to  destroy  the 
union,  and  therefore  united  with  it  slowly.  The  consolidating 
and  monarchical  parties,  with  more  acuteness,  perceived  the  de- 
votion to  a  federal  system,  and  therefore  labored  to  keep  this 
suspicion  alive.  The  monarchical  party,  without  much  acute- 
ness, could  see  that  its  object  was  infinitely  more  likely  to  be  ef- 
fected by  consolidating  constructions  of  the  constitution,  than  by 
the  federal  constructions  which  obtained  its  ratification. 

The  political  tactician  who  displayed  a  banner,  with  only  the 
word  federal  written  upon  it,  ably  copied  the  policy  by  which  a 
conqueror  makes  a  nation  subservient  to  its  own  destruction. 
Federalists  and  republicans  were  engaged  in  hostilities  by  mo- 
narchists and  consolidators,  who  derived  strength  from  their  con- 
flicts, and  expected  victory  from  their  divisions. 

Between  the  monarchical  party  in  the  convention,  which 
wished  for  a  suppression  of  the  state  governments  ;  and  the  na- 
tional party,  which  proposed  that  they  should  be  made  depend- 
ent upon  a  supreme  legislature,  judiciary,  and  executive,  a  chink 
is  undoubtedly  discernible,  and  this  chink  is  now  said  to  be  the 
place,  not  for  crushing,  but  for  securing  a  federal  system,  because 
it  is  baited  with  didactick  federalism,  just  as  certain  traps,  baited 
with  honey,  are  contrived  to  catch  bears.  But  the  chasm  made 
by  the  ridiculous  quarrel  between  the  words  federal  and  republi- 
can, as  if  they  were  not  twins  which  must  die  or  live  together, 
seems  to  be  well  contrived  for  entrapping,  not  bears,  but  sove- 
reign states. 


TAYLOR'S  VIEWS.  53 

■■*         ' 

SECTION  VII. 

THE  SUBJEtfT  CONCLUDED. 

Whether  Yates's  notes  of  the  secret  debates  in  the  convention, 
are  to  be  considered  as  explanatory  of  the  secret  journal,  or  the 
journal  as  explanatory  of  the  notes,  the  connexion  between  them 
is  so  intimate,  necessary,  and  uniform,  as  to  stamp  both  histories 
with  unquestionable  veracity.  Every  speech  recorded  by  Yates, 
accords  with  some  proposition  recorded  in  the  journal.  His 
notes  coincide  with  Mr.  Martin's  account  of  parties.  When 
Mr.  Martin  wrote,  he  could  not  have  had  any  knowledge  of  the 
notes ;  and  when  Mr.  Yates  made  his  notes,  Mr.  Martin's  ob- 
servations were  not  written.  The  reader  can  compare  the  fol- 
lowing extracts  both  with  the  journal,  and  Martin's  statements. 

Yates,  page  97.  "  Governor  Randolph  candidly  confessed, 
"  that  his  resolutions  were  not  intended  for  a  federal  govern- 
"  ment,  he  meant  a  strong  consolidated  anion,  in  ivhich  the 
"  idea  of  states  should  be  nearly  annihilated." 

"  Mr.  Pinckney  read  his  system,  and  confessed  that  it  was 
"  grounded  on  nearly  the  same  principle  as  Mr.  Randolph's  re- 
"  solutions." 

106.  "  Mr.  Dickenson  is  for  combining  the  state  and  national 
"  legislatures  in  the  same  views  and  measures." 

"  Mr.  Madison  is  of  opinion,  that  when  we  agreed  to  the  first 
"  resolve  of  having  a  national  government,  consisting  of  a 
"■  supreme  executive,  judicial,  and  legislative  power ;  it  was 
"  then  intended  to  operate  the  exclusion  of  a  federal  govern- 
il  ment,  and  the  more  extensive  we  made  the  basis,  the  greater 
"  probability  of  duration,  happiness,  and  good  order." 

107.  "  Mr.  Wilson.  The  state  governments  ought  to  be 
"  preserved  ;  the  freedom  of  the  people  and  their  internal  good 

police,  depends  on  their  existence  in  full  vigour  ;  but  such  a 
u  government  can  only  answer  local  purposes.  That  it  is  not 
•'•  possible  a  general  government,  as  despotick  as  even  that  of  the 


a 


54  taylor's  views. 

"  Roman  emperors,  could  be  adequate  to  the  government  of  the 
tl  whole  without  this  distinction." 

108.  "  Mr.  Pinckney  moved  that  the  national  legislature 
u  should  have  the  power  of  negativing  all  laws  to  be  passed 
"  by  the  state  legislatures,  which  they  may  judge  to  be  impro- 
11  per.  Mr.  Madison  wished  that  the  line  of  jurisdiction  could 
"  be  drawn,  he  would  be  for  it,  but  upon  reflection,  he  finds  it 
"  impossible,  and  therefore  he  is  for  the  amendment." 

110.  "  The  question  put  on  Mr.  Pinckney 's  motion,  7  states 
11  against,  Delaware  divided,  Virginia,  Pennsylvania,  and  Massa- 
"  chusetts  for  it." 

112.  "  Mr.  Patterson.  Let  us  consider  with  what  powers 
11  we  are  sent  here.  By  our  credentials  we  see,  that  the  basis  of 
"  our  present  authority  is  founded  on  a  revision  of  the  articles 
u  of  the  present  confederation,  and  to  alter  and  amend  them  in 
"  such  parts  where  they  appear  defective.  Can  we  on  this 
"  ground  form  a  national  government  ?  We  are  met  here  as 
"  the  deputies  of  thirteen  independent  and  sovereign  states  for 
11  federal  purposes.  Can  we  consolidate  their  sovereignty  and 
"  form  one  nation;  and  annihilate  the  sovereignties  of  our 
'*  states  who  sent  us  here  for  other  purposes  ?" 

117.  "  Governor  Randolph.  If  the  state  judges  are  not  sworn 
"  to  the  observance  of  the  new  government,  will  they  not  judi- 
"  cially  determine  in  favour  of  their  state  laws  ?  We  are  erect- 
"  ing  a  supreme  national  government  ;  ought  it  not  to  be  sup- 
"  ported,  and  can  we  give  it  too  many  sinews  ?" 

"  Mr.  Gerry  rather  thinks  that  the  national  legislators  ought 
"  to  be  sworn  to  preserve  the  state  constitutions,  as  they  will  run 
"  the  greatest  risque  to  be  annihilated ;  and  therefore  moved  it. 
"  For  Mr.  Gerry's  amendment,  7  ayes,  4  noes." 

122.  "  Mr.  Lansing.  Had  the  legislature  of  the  state  of  New- 
"  York,  apprehended  that  their  powers  would  have  been  con- 
"  strued  to  extend  to  the  formation  of  a  national  government, 
"  no  delegates  would  have  appeared  on  the  part  of  that  state. 
"  New  plans,  annihilating  the  rights  of  the  slates,  (unless 
(t  upon  evident  necessity,)  can  never  succeed." 

124.  "  Mr.  Patterson.  When  independent  societies  confede- 
Ci  rate  for  mutual  defence,  they  do  so  in  their  collective  capacity: 


taylor's  views.  55 

"  and  then  each  state  for  these  purposes  must,  be  considered  as 
4t  one  of  the  contracting  parties.  Destroy  this  balance  of  equa- 
«*  lity,  and  you  endanger  the  rights  of  the  lesser  societies,  by  the 
<*  danger  of  usurpation  in  the  greater." 

Mr.  Patterson's  was  a  plan  for  a  federal  government,  supported 
by  many  other  arguments. 

128.  "  Governor  Randolph.  The  question  now  is,  which  of 
(*  the  two  plans  is  to  be  preferred.  The  resolutions  from  Vir- 
"  ginia  must  have  been  adopted  on  a  supposition  that  a  federal 
"  government  was  impracticable." 

129.  "  Mr.  Hamilton.  I  have  well  considered  the  subject, 
"  and  am  convinced  that  no  amendment  of  the  confederation  can 
"  answer  the  purpose  of  a  good  government,  so  long  as  state 
"  sovereignties  do  in  any  shape  exist ;  and  I  have  great  doubts 
*•'  whether  a  national  government  on  the  Virginia  plan  can  be 
"  made  effectual.  From  the  lessons  of  experience  results  the 
"  evident  conclusion,  that  all  federal  governments  are  weak  and 
"  distracted.  To  avoid  the  evils  deducible  from  these  observa- 
u  tions,  we  must  establish  a  general  and  national  govern-* 
u  ment,  and  annihilate  the  state  distinctions  and  state  cme- 
11  rations.  I  believe  the  British  government  forms  the  best 
u  model  the  world  ever  produced,  and  such  has  been  its  pro- 
,(  gress  in  the  minds  of  many,  that  this  truth  gradually  gains 
"  ground.  This  government  has  for  its  object  publick  strength 
"  and  individual  security.  It  is  said  with  us  to  be  unattainable. 
"  If  it  was  once  formed  it  ivould  maintain  itself.  See  the 
"  excellence  of  the  British  executive.  He  is  placed  above 
"  temptation.  He  can  have  no  distinct  interests  from  the  pub- 
"  lick  welfare.  Nothing  short  of  Such  an  executive  can  be 
"  efficient.  I  would  give  the  legislature  unlimited  power  of 
"  passing  all  laws  without  exception^  and  to  appoint  courts  in 
"  each  state,  so  as  to  make  the  state  governments  unnecessary  to 
"  it.  /  confess  that  this  plan,  and  that  from  Virginia,  are 
"  very  remote  from  the  idea  of  the  fjeople."  Mr.  Hamilton 
acknowledges  that  state  sovereignties  did  exist,  and  proposes  to 
destroy  them,  as  is  now  attempted. 

184.  "Judge  Read.     I  would  have  no  objection  if  the  go- 
"  vernment  was  more  national.    *fl  state  government  is  incom- 


56  taylor's  views. 

"  patible  with  a  national  government.  The  plan  of  the  gen- 
**  tleman  from  New-York,  (Mr.  Hamilton's,)  is  certainly  the 
"  best." 

"  Mr.  Madison.     Some  gentlemen  are  afraid  that  the  plan  is 

¥  not  sufficiently  national,  while  others  apprehend  that  it  is  too 

"  much  so.     If  this  point  of  representation  was  once  well  fixed, 

"  we  should  come  nearer  to  one  another  in  sentiment.     The  ne- 

"  cessity  would  then  be  discovered  of  circumscribing  more  ef- 

"  fectually  the  state  governments,  and  enlarging  more  effectually 

"  the  bounds  of  the  general  government.     Some  contend  that 

ct  the  states  are  sovereign,  when  in  fact  they  are  only  poli- 

"  iical  societies.    The  states  never  possessed  the  essential  rights 

"  of  sovereignty.       They  were  always   vested  in   Congress. 

"  Their  voting  as  states  in  Congress  is  no  evidence  of  their  sove- 

"  rcignty.     The  state  of  Maryland  voted  by  counties.     Did  this 

"  make  the  counties  sovereign  ?     The  states,  at  present,  are  only 

"  great  corporations,  having  the  power  of  making  by-laws,  and 

"  these  are  effectual  only  if  they  are  not  contradictory  to  the  ge- 

"  neral  confederation.      The  states  ought  to  be  placed  under 

il  the  control  of  the  general  government,  at  least  as  much  as 

"■  they  formerly  were  under  the  king  and  the  British  parlia- 

"  ment.    The  arguments,  I  observe,  have  taken  a  different  turn, 

&  and  I  hope  may  convince  all  of  the  necessity  for  a  strong  ener- 

"  getic  government,  which  would  equally  tend  to  give  energy  to, 

"  and  protect,  the  state  governments." 

1S8.  "  Mr.  Gerry.  It  appears  to  me  that  the  states  never 
"  were  independent." 

190.  "  Mr.  Madison.  The  great  dangei*  to  our  general  go- 
"  vemment,  is  the  great  southern  and  northern  interests  of  the 
"  continent  bemg  opposed  to  each  other.  Look  at  the  votes  in 
"  Congress,  and  most  of  them  stand  directly  divided  by  the 
a  geography  of  the  country,  not  according  to  the  size  of  the 
"  states:' 

200.  "  Judge  Ellsworth.  I  am  asked  by  my  honourable 
"  friend  from  Massachusetts,  whether  by  entering  into  a  national 
"  government,  I  will  not  equally  participate  in  national  security  ? 
"  I  confess  I  should ;  but  I  want  domestick  happiness,  as  well  as 


Taylor's  views.  57 

"  general  security.    «/?  general  government  ivill  never  grant 
"  me  this,  as  it  cannot  know  my  wants  or  relieve  my  distress." 

201.  "Mr.  Sherman.  It  seems  we  have  gotten  to  a  point, 
f*.  that  we  cannot  move  one  way  or  the  other."  This  happened 
on  the  2d  of  July,  and  Messrs.  Yates  and  Lansing  left  the  con- 
vention on  the  5th,  which  was  not  dissolved  until  the  17th  of 
September. 

"  Mr.  Morris.  It  is  confessed  on  all  hands,  that  the  second 
"  branch  ought  to  be  a  check  on  the  first,  for  without  its  having 
■'  this  effect,  it  is  perfectly  useless.  The  first  branch,  originating 
"  from  the  people,  will  ever  be  subject  to  precipitancy,  change- 
"  ability,  and  excess.  This  can  only  be  checked  by  the  ability 
"  and  virtue  in  the  second  branch.  The  second  branch  ought 
u  to  be  composed  of  men  of  great  and  established  property ;  an 
"  aristocracy  ;  and  to  make  them  completely  independent,  they 
u  must  be  chosen  for  life,  or  they  will  be  a  useless  body.  Such 
"  an  aristocratic  body  will  keep  down  the  turbulency  of  a  demo- 
"  cracy.  But  if  you  elect  them  for  a  shorter  period,  they  will 
M  only  be  a  name,  and  we  had  better  be  without.  Thus  consti- 
"  tuted  I  hope  they  will  shew  us  the  weight  of  an  aristocracy." 

' '  History  proves,  I  admit,  that  the  men  of  large  property  will 
"  uniformly  endeavour  to  establish  tyranny.  How  then  shall 
"  we  ward  off  the  evil  ?  Give  them  the  second  branch,  and  you 
il  secure  their  weight  for  the  publick  good." 

"  The  wealthy  will  ever  exist;  and  you  never  can  be  safe  un- 
"  less  you  gratify  them  as  a  body,  in  the  pursuit  of  honour  and 
■'  profit.  Prevent  them  by  positive  institutions,  and  they  will 
u  proceed  in  some  left-handed  way.  It  is  good  policy  that  the 
"  men  of  property  be  collected  in  one  body.  Let  vacancies  be 
u  filled  up  as  they  happen,  by  the  executive.  If  you  choose  fov 
"  seven  years,  whether  chosen  by  the  people  or  by  the  states ; 
u  whether  by  equal  suffrage  or  in  any  other  proportion,  how 
"  will  they  be  a  check  ?  They  will  have  local  and  state  preju- 
u  dices.  Ji  government  by  compact  is  no  government  at  all?9 
This  extract  discloses  the  influence  of  Mr.  Adams's  political  sys- 
tem.    All  these  ideas  are  borrowed  from  it. 

From  the  5th  of  July  to  the  17th  of  September,  nothing  is  to 
fc  found,  either  in  the  journal  of  the  convention  or  Yates's 

8 


58  TAYLOR'S  VlfiWS. 

notes,  by  which  the  change  from  a  national  to  a  federal  govern 
merit  can  be  traced  ;  but  in  addition  to  the  wide  difference  be- 
tween the  national  form  proposed,  and  the  federal  form  adopted, 
we  have  the  highest  authority  of  which  the  case  was  susceptible, 
that  this  radical  alteration  was  effected. 

In  the  appendix  to  Yates's  notes,  page  265,  is  the  letter  dated 
on  the  17th  of  September,  written  by  the  unanimous  order  of  the 
convention,  signed  by  its  president,  and  addressed  to  the  presi- 
dent of  Congress  ;  containing  the  following  passages  : 

"  It  is  obviously  impracticable,  in  the  federal  government  of 
"  these  states,  to  secure  all  the  rights  of  independent  sovereign- 
"  ty  to  each.  It  is  at  all  times  difficult  to  draw  with  precision 
"  the  line  between  those  rights  which  must  be  surrendered,  and 
"  those  which  may  be  reserved." 

By  this  solemn  document  the  constitution  was  offered  to  the 
states  as  a  federal  form  of  government ;  the  independent  sove- 
reignty of  each  state  was  explicitly  acknowledged ;  the  imprac- 
ticability of  securing  to  the  states  all  the  rights  of  their  inde- 
pendent sovereignty  in  conjunction  with  a  federal  government, 
and  the  practicability  of  reserving  some  of  these  rights,  is  stated 
as  comprising  the  character  of  the  constitution  ;  and  the  difficulty 
of  drawing  a  precise  line  between  such  of  these  rights  as  were 
surrendered,  and  such  as  were  reserved,  is  urged  as  an  apology 
for  any  imperfection  in  the  attempt.  It  expressly  announced  to 
the  states,  that  the  constitution  was  federal  and  not  national, 
and  that  it  had  drawn  a  line  between  rights  of  sovereignty  sur- 
rendered and  reserved  ;  and  it  constituted  the  unanimous  deci- 
sion of  the  convention,  of  the  two  great  questions  now  disputed. 
The  imperfection  of  this  line  might  apply  to  both  classes  of  these 
rights,  but  it  could  not  destroy  either,  nor  transfer  one  class  of 
rights  to  the  other,  so  as  to  obliterate  the  line  intirely.  The  line 
drawn  by  the  constitution,  though  imperfect,  was  the  only  crite- 
rion by  which  a  federal,  could  be  distinguished  from  a  national, 
government ;  nor  could  a  federal  union  be  contrived,  except  by 
the  concurrent  means  both  of  surrendering  and  reserving  sove- 
reign rights. 

Is  it  possible  to  imagine  that  a  respectable  convention  and  its 
magnanimous  president,  should  have  combined  to  deceive  the 


TAYLOR'S  VIEWS.  59 

states,  by  telling  them,  that  the  proposed  government  was  fede- 
ral, and  that  the  constitution  divided  by  a  line  the  delegated  fe- 
deral rights,  from  the  sovereign  state  rights  reserved  ?  The  in- 
dignity of  such  a  suspicion,  and  the  absurdity  of  supposing  that 
every  member  who  had  contended  for  a  federal  government, 
had  renounced  his  opinion  and  subscribed  to  a  falsehood,  are  the 
foundations  upon  which  the  doctrine,  "  that  the  government  is 
"  national/'  must  rest. 

The  journal  and  Yates's  notes  unequivocally  discover,  that  the 
difference  hetween  a  federal  and  national  government,  was  tho- 
roughly understood  in  the  convention,  and  that  the  members 
unanimously  admitted,  that  the  two  forms  were  incompatible. 
The  national  form  was  honestly  allowed  by  its  advocates,  as 
nearly  annihilating  the  idea  of  states,  and  as  not  intended 
for  a  federal  government.     It  was  admitted  that  a  national  go- 
vernment, consisting  of  a  supreme  executive,  judicial,  and  le- 
gislative power,  would  operate  the  exclusion  of  a  federal  go- 
vernment.    That   the  resolutions   for  the  national  plan    were 
adopted,  upon  a  supposition  that  a  federal  government  ivas  im- 
practicable.   That  a  general  and  national  government  would 
annihilate  the  state  distinctions  and  operations ;   and  that 
such  a  government  once  established,  would  maintain  itself.     To 
prevail  with  the  convention  to  propose  a  national  government, 
the  several  doctrines  "  that  the  states  were  never  sovereign  and 
"independent;  that  they  were  only    corporations;  that  they 
"  were  like  counties  ;  that  the  rights  of  sovereignty  were  always 
"  vested  in  Congress  ;  that  the  rich  ought  to  have  aristocratical 
"powers;  and    that  a  government  by  compact,  is  no  govern- 
"  ment  at  all,"  were  urged.      These  admissions  and   doctrines 
candidly  stated  the  question,   then  secretly  debated,  and   now 
openly,  but  with  less  candour,  renewed.     If  a  national  and  a  fe- 
deral government  were  then  incompatible,  as  the  whole  conven- 
tion believed,  they  must  be  so  still.     If  the  former  would  then 
annihilate  the  latter,  it  will  yet  do  so.     If  a  national  government 
was  then  very  remote  from  the  idea  of  the  people,  such  may  still 
be  the  case.     And  if  the  people  were  not  prepared  to  surrender 
their  principles  then,  an  attempt  to  overturn  them  now,  by  con- 
struction, may  produce  the  convulsion  then  apprehended. 


60  TAYLOR'S  VIEWS. 

There  was  no  substantial  difference  between  the  Virginia  plan 
and  Mr.  Hamilton's.  One  proposed  that  states  should  continue 
to  exist  as  corporations  or  counties,  but  as  subjects  of  a  govern- 
ment invested  with  supreme  legislative,  executive,  and  judicial 
powers;  the  other,  that  the  state  governments  should  be  directly 
and  not  indirectly  abolished.  One  gave  them  rights  upon  paper, 
subject  to  supreme  negatives,  without  any  means  of  defending 
those  rights  ;  the  other  more  candidly  denied  to  them  any  rights 
at  all.  The  two  plans  resemble  two  plans  for  defending  a  country ; 
one,  by  a  mercenary  army  combined  with  a  militia,  but  refusing 
to  intrust  the  militia  with  arms,  lest  they  should  use  them  against 
the  army ;  the  other,  by  a  mercenary  army  alone.  The  Virginia 
plan  opposed  paper  to  power ;  Mr.  Hamilton's  tore  the  frail 
sanction  to  pieces,  to  save  power  the  trouble  of  disorganizing  con- 
flicts, or  of  quelling  abortive  oppositions  whilst  doing  the  same 
thing  gradually.  Those  who  approved  of  but  could  not  carry 
Mr.  Hamilton's  plan,  saw  in  the  Virginia  plan  a  kindred  alterna- 
tive ;  and  deriding  its  federal  preachment,  adopted  its  circuitous 
and  strifeful  mode  of  effecting  their  object,  because  they  could 
effect  it  in  no  other.  Although  neither  the  Virginia  plan  nor 
Mr.  Hamilton's  succeeded  in  the  convention,  they  embraced  a 
mass  of  talents,  too  proud  and  powerful  for  humility  and  submis- 
sion ;  and  they  resorted  to  the  engine  of  construction,  to  be  di- 
rected by  many  an  Archimedes.  But  at  this  point  the  two  par- 
ties began  to  split.  Encroachments  upon  the  paper  rights  of  the 
states  soon  appeared,  and  then  Mr.  Hamilton  and  Mr.  Madison 
divided.  One  acted  and  the  other  preached,  each  in  accordance 
with  his  own  principles  as  displayed  in  the  convention.  The 
gentlemen  who  first  contended  for  a  federal  supremacy  over 
state  rights,  but  yet  sincerely  wished  that  this  supremacy  should 
preserve  these  rights,  bethought  themselves  of  lodging  it  exclu- 
sively in  the  supreme  federal  court,  insisted  that  this  court  should 
use  it  impartially,  and  that  Congress  should  have  no  share  of  it. 
Their  later  associates  laugh  at  these  paper  chains,  as  only  the  scru- 
ples of  good  souls ;  and  Congress  soon  believed,  that  which  is 
unquestionably  true,  that  its  right  to  supremacy  was  as  good,  and 
indeed  better,  than  that  of  the  judiciary.  In  virtue  of  this  su- 
premacy, contended  for  by  Mr.  Hamilton,  in  the  Federalist, 


Taylor's  views.  61 

Congress  construed  the  constitution  in  one  way,  and  Mr.  Madi- 
son's didactick  federalism,  construed  it  in  another;  as  in  the 
cases  of  the  bank  law,  the  sedition  law,  and  the  decision  of  the 
supreme  court,  that  the  supremacy  of  Congress  has  a  right  to  re- 
move every  obstruction  in  its  way.  And  a  union  between  fede- 
ral legislative  and  judicial  supremacy,  has  composed  an  impera- 
tive high  mightiness,  subject  to  no  check,  and  equivalent  to  the 
monarchical  and  national  projects,  advocated  in  the  convention. 
The  origin  of  the  coalition  between  the  monarchists  and  con- 
solidators  in  the  convention,  is  visible  in  the  journal.  It  arose 
from  the  question  of  representation.  The  deputies  from  the 
most  populous  states  naturally  contended  for  an  absolute  prepon- 
derance of  numbers  ;  those  from  the  small  states,  for  the  moral 
equality  of  sovereignties.  The  gentlemen  in  favour  of  monarchy 
or  consolidation,  united  with  great  address,  to  use  this  contest, 
as  the  means  for  effecting  their  object ;  and  acted  with  more 
skill  and  foresight,  than  the  didactick  federalists.  They  aimed 
at  a  possibilitjr ;  the  didactick  federalists  entertained  the  hopeless 
idea  of  reconciling  contradictions.  A  monarchy  or  a  consoli- 
dated government  might  be  established ;  but  a  union  of  states  in 
conjunction  with  either,  was  an  impossibility.  If  we  believe 
that  a  substantia]  distinction  between  different  forms  of  govern- 
ment exists,  we  must  conclude  that  a  national  government,  and  a 
union  of  states,  cannot  subsist  together,  however  the  appearance 
of  such  a  fellowship  may  for  a  time  be  kept  up,  by  the  courtesy 
or  policy  of  the  supreme  associate  ;  just  as  Augustus  retained  re- 
publican words  to  confirm  imperial  power.  The  verbal  federal- 
ists however  advocated  this  hopeless  experiment,  and  the  advo- 
cates of  a  monarchical  or  national  government,  profiting  by  the 
example  of  the  Roman  triumvir,  gladly  joined  them,  as  know- 
ing that  the  experiment  would  accelerate  one  of  these  ends.  Hap- 
pily the  experiment  was  defeated  by  the  establishment  of  a  fede- 
ral form  of  government ;  but  we  are  again  told  by  the  gentlemen 
who  prefer  monarchy  or  a  national  government,  that  a  national 
and  federal  government  may  be  made  to  subsist  together,  by 
giving  to  Congress  and  its  court  an  absolute  supremacy  over  the 
state  governments,  and  securing  the  states  by  federal  words,  just 
as  the  Roman  republick  was  secured  by  republican  words. 


62  taylor's  views. 

If  we  should  even  admit,  with  Mr.  Madison,  that  the  govern- 
ment is  semi-federal,  and  semi-national,  the  question  arises,  by 
what  means  can  it  be  kept  so  ?  These  are  ascertained  by  the 
means  necessary  to  maintain  a  government  semi-republican  and 
semi-monarchical.  Each  moiety  must  counterpoise  and  check 
the  other.  If  one  principle  possesses  a  supremacy  over  the  other 
principle,  and  can  remove  out  of  its  way  all  the  obstacles  which 
the  balancing-  principle  may  place  in  it,  the  consequences  are  ine- 
vitable ;  because  power  can  only  be  checked  by  power.  There- 
fore an  equal  capacity  in  each  moiety  to  maintain  a  government 
half  federal  and  half  national,  is  as  indispensable,  as  in  the  case 
of  a  government  half  republican  and  half  monarchical.  If  the 
state  governments  individually,  or  a  bare  majority  of  the  states, 
were  supreme,  or  had  a  negative  over  the  acts  of  the  federal  go- 
vernment, that  moiety  would  soon  perish ;  and  in  like  manner, 
if  the  federal  government  should  acquire  the  same  powers  over 
the  state  governments,  they  must  perish ;  just  as  a  limited  mo- 
narchy would  perish  if  one  ©f  its  principles  obtains  a  supremacy 
ever  the  other. 


Taylor's  views.  63 


SECTION  VIII. 


THE  FEDERALIST. 


I  have  arrived  at  the  most  difficult  portion  of  the  contempora- 
neous construction  of  the  constitution,  urged  for  the  purpose  of 
obtaining  its  ratification ;  difficult,  as  ingenious  ambiguities  and 
contradictions  are  to  be  detected.  A  conscious  inferiority  to  its 
accomplished  authors  in  a  capacity  for  investigation,  except  that 
which  arises  from  equal  integrity,  renders  the  task  truly  alarm- 
ing. These  gentlemen  believed  that  a  supreme  national  govern- 
ment was  best  for  the  United  States,  and  I  believe  that  a  genuine 
federal  system  is  more  likely  to  secure  their  liberty,  prosperity, 
and  happiness.  Two  of  them  had  avowed  their  preference  in  the 
convention,  and  although  they  were  defeated,  yet  the  opinions  by 
which  their  efforts  had  been  excited,  could  not  have  been  oblite- 
rated. How  unfortunate  it  was,  that  these  two  chief  authors  of 
the  Federalist  were  not  divided  between  a  federal  and  national 
system  of  government !  Had  this  been  the  case,  the  question 
would  have  been  discussed  by  the  most  eminent  talents ;  and 
the  publick  might  have  been  assisted  by  all  the  arguments  on 
both  sides,  couched  in  the  most  elegant  style. 

The  turbulence  of  a  free  government  is  perpetually  contrasted 
with  the  repose  of  tyranny,  by  those  who  plead  for  power,  and 
dread  the  untractableness  of  checks  devised  for  its  control.  Men 
are  apt  to  see  very  clearly,  whatever  they  wish  or  fear ;  and  often 
surrender  the  soundest  principles  to  their  imaginary  apparitions. 
Tinctures  of  such  impressions  are  discernible  in  the  Federalist, 
in  suggestions  of  the  disorderly  and  discordant  proceedings  of 
the  state  governments,  and  in  captivating  pictures  of  the  safety 
and  splendour  to  be  expected  from  a  supreme  national  govern- 
ment. Its  authors  had  a  difficult  task  to  perform,  and  they  per- 
formed it  with  an  ability,  which  must  excite  our  admiration, 
though  it  may  fail  to  reconcile  contradictions.  They  laboured 
to  gratify  both  their  own  prepossessions  and  those  of  the  states ; 


64  taylor's  views, 

and  if  their  success  in  effecting  the  ratification  of  the  constitu- 
tion, shall  be  followed  by  the  reinstatement  of  a  rejected  na- 
tional government,  their  ingenuity  in  proving  that  a  federal  sys- 
tem is  both  right  and  wrong,  good  and  bad,  must  excite  our 
amazement.  The  difficulty  of  proving  that  the  constitution  had 
reserved  a  great  portion  of  sovereign  rights  to  the  states,  and  yet 
tacitly  subjected  them  to  some  unexpressed  supremacy,  is  now 
vastly  increased  by  the  publication  of  the  journal  of  the  conven- 
tion, disclosing  the  proposal  of  a  supreme  national  government, 
the  thorough  consideration  of  it,  and  the  complete  expurgation 
from  the  constitution,  both  of  its  principles  and  phrases.  An 
honest  preference  of  this  project,  would  be  rather  whetted  than 
extinguished  by  disappointment ;  and  it  was  almost  impossible, 
whilst  the  subject  was  yet  fresh,  that  all  the  ideas  by  which  it 
was  impressed,  and  all  the  phrases  by  which  it  was  inculcated, 
should  have  been  forgotten.  It  is  even  wonderful,  that  the 
struggle  between  a  prepossession  for  the  rejected  supreme  nation- 
al government,  and  loyalty  to  that  which  was  adopted,  should 
have  terminated  so  honourably,  and  should  have  disclosed  so  few 
traces  of  a  preference  recently  riveted  to  the  mind  by  its  long 
and  animated  exertions.  The  stray  words  and  constructive  su- 
premacies, interwoven  with  the  constitution  by  the  Federalist, 
look  rather  like  the  casual  over-flo wings  of  an  accumulated  fund, 
than  the  effect  of  a  critical  examination  into  their  consistency 
with  the  form  of  government  adopted.  A  national  and  a  federal 
form  were  the  rivals  for  preference ;  and  if  the  same  terms  and 
the  same  construction  were  applicable  to  both,  the  contest  in  the 
convention  was  frivolous,  and  the  preference  of  the  latter  form 
unsubstantial.  Hence,  although  many  of  the  interpretations  of 
the  constitution  comprised  in  the  Federalist,  are  profound  and 
correct,  it  does  not  follow,  that  interpolations  of  words  used  and 
of  provisions  proposed  for  establishing  a  national  government, 
ought  to  countermine  the  constructions  which  are  federal.  I 
shall  endeavour  to  demonstrate  the  inconsistency  between  them 
by  quotations,  distinguishing  the  writer  by  the  initial  letter  of 
his  name. 

H.  No.  9.    "  The  proposed  constitution,  so  far  from  implying 
il  an  abolition  of  the  state  governments,  makes  them  constituent 


TAYLOR'S  VIEWS.  65 

"  parts  of  the  national  sovereignty,  by  allowing  them  a  direct 
"  representation  in  the  senate,  and  leaves  in  their  possession  cer- 
"  tain  exclusive  and  very  important  portions  of  sovereign  power." 
The  ambiguity  of  this  sentence  arises  from  the  interpolation  of  the 
words  national  sovereignty,  which  are  not  in  the  constitution  ; 
from  admitting  that  the  powers  not  delegated  were  sovereign 
powers  belonging  to  the  governments  of  the  states ;  and  from 
making  these  governments  constituent  parts  of  a  national  sove- 
reignty, in  virtue  of  their  representation  in  the  senate ;  by  which 
representation  they  become  the  subjects  of  the  assumed  national 
sovereignty.  State  sovereignty  is  lodged  in  the  people  of  each 
state,  but  by  supposing  it  to  be  lodged  in  their  governments,  and 
considering  these  governments  as  constituents  of  a  national 
sovereignty  in  consequence  of  their  representation  in  the  senate, 
state  rights  are  made  to  derive  their  security,  not  from  the  limi- 
tations and  reservations  of  the  federal  compact,  but  from  this  re- 
presentation of  their  governments,  just  as  Englishmen  derive 
theirs  from  their  representation  in  parliament.  Whatever  may 
be  the  rights  of  Englishmen,  representation  invests  the  parlia- 
ment with  a  supreme  power  over  them  ;  and  whatever  may  be 
the  rights  of  the  political  individuals  called  state  governments, 
representation  creates  a  national  sovereignty  over  these  also, 
according  to  this  ingenious  sentence. 

By  taking  it  for  granted  that  the  constitution  has  established  a 
national  sovereignty,  the  difficulty  of  proving  it  is  avoided.  The 
phrase  "  national  sovereignty,"  is  assumed  in  correspondence 
with  that  of  the  British  parliament ;  and  the  state  governments 
are  turned  into  its  constituents  by  the  structure  of  the  senate. 
Mr.  Hamilton  thus  concedes  to  himself  the  essential  principle  of 
his  plan  for  a  government ;  knowing  that  if  the  concession  should 
succeed,  its  consequences  would  certainly  follow.  A  national 
sovereignty  would  remove  most  obstacles  to  his  system,  and  to 
use  his  own  sound  language,  "  if  it  was  once  formed,  it  would 
"  maintain  itself." 

The  most  ingenious  and  conciliating  ground  upon  which  a  na- 
tional sovereignty  is  erected,  is  this  of  representation  in  the  se- 
nate. It  has  an  aspect  of  securing  instead  of  abolishing  the  re- 
served rights  of  the  states.  This  representation  was  not  intended 

9 


66  TAYLOR'S  VIEWS. 

to  create  a  sovereignty  in  Congress  over  the  reserved  rights  of 
the  states,  but  only  as  one  check  to  secure  a  correct  exercise  of 
the  delegated  powers.  The  rights  of  the  states  were  not  reserv- 
ed to  the  senate  of  the  United  States,  but  to  the  states  them- 
selves ;  and  are  not  conveyed  to  an  imaginary  national  govern- 
ment, upon  the  ground  that  their  governments  are  represented  in 
the  senate.  The  journal  of  the  convention  shews  that  a  national 
sovereignty,  founded  upon  the  principle  of  representation,  was 
contemplated  so  long  as  the  project  for  a  national  government 
prevailed  ;  but  it  does  not  contain  a  solitary  intimation,  after  that 
project  was  abandoned,  that  the  representative  character,  either 
of  the  president,  the  senate,  or  the  house  of  representatives,  con- 
ferred sovereign  or  supreme  powers  on  one  or  all  of  these  de- 
partments, as  had  been  contemplated  before  a  federal  system  was 
adopted.  If  representation  is  necessarily  attended  by  sove- 
reignty or  supremacy,  the  Congress  under  the  confederation  was 
indeed  a  sovereign  body,  but  a  very  dull  one,  in  not  having  made 
the  discovery ;  and  no  limitations  of  power  can  be  created  by 
constitutions  which  resort  to  representation,  if  it  inherently  pos- 
sesses the  quality  of  turning  agents  into  sovereigns. 

Suppose  it  is  admitted,  as  Mr.  Hamilton  seems  to  intimate, 
that  the  constitution  has  created  two  sovereignties,  one  of  the 
federal  and  the  other  of  the  state  governments.  By  dividing 
sovereignty  into  portions,  and  calling  the  portion  of  state  go- 
vernments exclusive,  he  states  a  very  plain  case.  The  owners 
of  a  loaf  of  bread  divide  it  between  two  persons.  The  donation 
of  one  half,  does  not  imply  a  right  to  eat  up  the  other  half.  If 
the  state  governments  possess  exclusive  sovereign  powers,  they 
cannot  be  deprived  of  this  exclusiveness  by  their  representation 
in  the  senate ;  and  if  that  representation  does  not  deprive  them 
of  their  exclusive  powers,  it  conveys  nothing  at  all.  It  follows, 
that  the  powers  of  the  federal  government  are  derived  from  the 
constitution,  and  in  no  degree  from  representation.  Under  the 
constitution,  it  is  a  limited  government;  by  inferring  sovereignty 
from  representation,  it  would  become  unlimited. 

Those  who  deal  most  in  paradox  and  superlatives,  find  the 
least  truth.  The  consolidating  school  contends  that  we  have 
two  sovereignties  ;  but  that  one  is  sovereign  over  the  other :  Mr. 


TAYLOR'S  VIEWS.  67 

Hamilton,  that  we  have  co-ordinate  sovereignties,  each  invested 
with  exclusive  powers,   but  that  one  is  made  superlative  by  the 
representation  in  the  senate.     That  a  federal  senate  should  be- 
get a  national  sovereignty,  if  we  have  one,  is  a  political  curi- 
osity.    These  superlative  sovereignties,  in  all   their  forms,  have 
been  less  friendly  to  human  happiness,  than  limited,  divided,  and 
balanced  powers.     Lodged  either  in  a  monarch,  an  aristocracy, 
or  a  representative  body,  they  have  an  innate  tendency  towards 
tyranny.     Lodged  in  one  government,  they  have  disclosed  com- 
binations among  its  members  to  extort  from  the  people  as  much 
property  as  possible.     They  are  uniformly  oppressive  in  a  high 
degree,  when  the  territory  is  extensive.     Such  imperfections  of 
a  superlative  sovereignty,  indicated  our  improvement  of  a  system 
for  checking  it,  otherwise  than  by  the  agency  of  its  own  mem- 
bers, or  of  its  own  will.     By  returning  to  a  sovereignty  conso- 
lidated in  one  government,    we  should  revive  all  the  evils  of 
which  a  superlative  sovereignty  has  been  productive,  and  surren- 
der all  the  benefits  hitherto  derived,  from  having  superadded  to 
the  English  mode  of  restraining  the  excesses  of  sovereignty  con- 
densed in  one  government,  the  new  remedy  of  assigning  differ- 
ent powers  to  two.     The  hostility  of  consolidated  sovereignties 
to  human  happiness,  is  frequently  demonstrated  by  their  recourse 
to  paradoxical   arguments,   in  order  to  defend  their  measures. 
They  contend,   that  the  greater  the  revenue,  the  richer  are  the 
people ;  that  frugality  in  the  government  is  an  evil ;  in  the  peo- 
ple, a  good ;  that  local  partialities  are  blessings  ;  that  monopolies 
and  exclusive  privileges  are  general  welfare ;  that  a  division  of 
sovereignty  will  raise  up  a  class  of  wicked,  intriguing,  self-inte- 
rested politicians,  in  the  states ;  and  that  human  nature  will  be 
cleansed  of  these  propensities  by  a  sovereignty  consolidated  in 
one  government.     But  in  proportion  as  power  becomes  superla- 
tive, its  ambition  and  avarice  are  inflamed ;  and  our  division  of  it 
between  two  governments,   is  one  more  attempt,  in  addition  to 
those  which  have  been  unsuccessful,  to  assuage  the  inflammation, 
and  diminish   its  malignity.     The   consolidating  school  rejects 
the  experiment,  however  hopeful,  and  contends,  that  it  degrades 
the  federal  government  below  the  English  standard.     Such  is 
the  argument  of  limited  kings,  and  such  the  motive  by  which 


68  taylor's  views. 

they  are  stimulated  to  acquire  the  power  enjoyed  by  absolute 
monarchs.  The  morbid  suggestions  of  envy  cause  them  to 
look  with  longing  eyes  upon  a  superiority  of  power ;  and  it  will 
not  be  contrary  to  human  nature,  if  our  statesmen  should  also 
contemplate  the  situation  of  English  statesmen,  as  more  desirable 
than  their  own,  and  should  languish  for  an  equal  degree  of  ex- 
altation. 

H.  No.  23.  "  If  the  circumstances  of  our  country  are  such, 
"  as  to  demand  a  compound  instead  of  a  simple ;  a  confederate 
"  instead  of  a  sole  government ;  the  essential  point  which  re- 
"  mains  to  be  adjusted,  will  be  to  discriminate  the  objects,  as  far 
"  as  it  can  be  done,  which  shall  appertain  to  the  different  pro- 
u  vinces  or  departments  of  power.  The  government  of  the 
K  union  must  be  empowered  to  pass  all  laws  in  relation  to  its 
K  powers.  The  local  governments  must  possess  all  the  authori- 
"  ties  connected  with  the  administration  of  justice  between  citi- 
"  zens  of  the  same  state.  Not  to  confer  in  each  case  a  degree  of 
11  power  commensurate  to  the  end,  would  be  to  violate  the  most 
"  obvious  rules  of  prudence  and  propriety." 

Mr.  Hamilton  admits  the  distinction  between  a  federal  and  a 
sole  government,  and  allows  that  the  constitution  annexes  to  the 
different  provinces  or  departments  of  power,  state  and  federal, 
an  authority  to  pass  all  laws  commensurate  to  the  exercise  of  the 
rights  assigned  to  each.  From  this  distinction,  the  existence  of 
separate  governments  under  the  constitution,  would  apparently 
result ;  but  this  conclusion  is  defeated  by  the  previous  doctrine, 
that  a  national  sovereignty  is  lodged  in  the  federal  government, 
by  the  instrumentality  of  state  representation  in  the  senate.  We 
have  two  governments  mutually  invested  with  independent 
rights,  and  with  authority  to  exercise  these  separate  rights ;  and 
yet  but  one  sovereignty.  What  are  mutual  rights,  unattended 
by  a  mutual  power  to  preserve  those  rights  ?  Satraps  subser- 
vient to  a  superior  power.  Is  there  not  an  obvious  inconsistency 
between  the  admission  of  two  distinct  governments,  constituting 
different  provinces  or  departments  of  power,  and  the  assertion, 
that  one  possesses  a  sovereignty  or  supremacy  over  the  other  ? 
Under  its  kings,  France  was  divided  into  provinces,  each  having 
separate  rights,  but  the  royal  sovereignty  reduced  France  into  one 


taylor's  views.  69 

consolidated  government.  Turkey  contains  many  provinces, 
but  all  are  subservient  to  one  consolidated  or  superlative  sove- 
reignty. By  allowing  the  separate  existence  of  states,  invested 
with  distinct  powers,  but  contending  for  a  national  sovereignty 
in  the  federal  government,  the  United  States  are  placed  in  the 
situation  of  the  provinces  of  France  and  Turkey. 

That  this  was  not  the  intention  of  the  constitution,  is  admitted 
by  the  hypothetical  manner  in  which  Mr.  Hamilton  introduces 
the  subject.  Under  his  prepossession  in  favour  of  a  consolidated 
government,  expressed  in  the  convention,  he  observes,  "  if  the 
"  circumstances  of  our  country  demand  a  confederate  instead  of 
£i  a  sole  government."  Whence  arose  the  doubt,  or  what  found- 
ation existed  for  the  contrariety,  if  the  constitution  had  created 
a  sole  sovereignty  ?  The  doubt  is  evidently  suggested  by  his 
own  opinion,  that  the  circumstances  of  our  country  did  not  forbid 
a  sole  government ;  the  contrariety  had  been  impressed  by  the 
debates  in  the  convention,  and  was  fixed  by  the  principles  of  the 
constitution.  The  proposal  and  rejection  of  a  sole  government 
was  felt;  but  the  predilection  for  it  was  also  felt ;  and  the  two 
sensations  generated  a  profound  attempt  to  reconcile  these  con- 
tradictions. To  advance  it,  the  local  authorities  are  reduced  to 
the  judicial  sphere  of  dispensing  justice  between  citizens  of  the 
same  state.  A  judicial  department  is  always  subservient  and  ne- 
cessary to  an  absolute  sovereignty,  and  by  reducing  the  state  go- 
vernments to  that  sphere,  their  insinuated  subordination  to  a  na- 
tional sovereignty,  as  being  represented  in  a  federal  senate,  is  cau- 
tiously maintained.  The  next  quotation  will  demonstrate  the 
struggle  between  an  inveterate  opinion,  candidly  and  honourably 
avowed  by  Mr.  Hamilton  in  the  convention,  and  the  plain  inten- 
tion of  the  constitution. 

H.  No.  28.  "  In  a  confederacy,  the  people,  without  exagge- 
<;  ration,  may  be  said  to  be  intirely  the  masters  of  their  own 
M  fate.  Power  being  almost  always  the  rival  of  power,  the 
"  general  government  will  at  all  times  stand  ready  to  check 
"  the  usurpations  of  the  state  governments ;  and  these  will  have 
"  the  same  dispositions  towards  the  general  government.  The 
K  people,  by  throwing  themselves  into  either  scale,  can  make  it 
"  preponderate.     If  their  rights  are  invaded  by  either,  they  can 


70  Taylor's  views, 

"  make  use  of  the  other,  as  the  instrument  of  redress.  How 
"  wise  it  will  be  in  them,  by  cherishing  the  union,  to  preserve 
"  to  themselves  an  advantage  which  can  never  be  too  highly 
"  prized  V 

"  It  may  safely  be  received  as  an  axiom  in  our  political  sys- 
"  tern,  that  the  state  governments  will,  in  all  possible  contin- 
i(  gencies,  afford  complete  security  against  invasions  of  the  pub- 
"  lick  liberty  by  the  national  authority.  Projects  of  usurpa- 
"  tion  cannot  be  masked  under  pretences  so  likely  to  escape  the 
"  penetration  of  select  bodies  of  men,  as  of  the  people  at  large. 
"  The  legislature  will  have  better  means  of  information  ;  they 
"  can  discover  the  danger  at  a  distance  ;  and  possessing  all  the 
"  organs  of  civil  power,  and  the  confidence  of  the  people,  they 
"  can  at  once  adopt  a  regular  plan  of  opposition,  in  which  they 
"  can  combine  all  the  resources  of  the  community.  They  can 
"  readily  communicate  with  each  other  in  the  different  states  ; 
"  and  unite  their  common  forces  for  the  protection  of  their  com- 
"  mon  liberty.  If  the  federal  army  should  be  able  to  quell  the 
"  resistance  in  one  state,  the  distant  states  would  have  it  in  their 
"  power  to  make  head  with  fresh  forces.  The  people  are  in  a 
"  situation,  through  the  medium  of  their  state  governments,  to 
"  take  measures  for  their  own  defence,  with  all  the  celerity,  re- 
"  gularity,  and  system,  of  independent  nations."     . 

But  of  what  use  is  this  eulogised  capacity  in  state  legislatures 
to  discover  usurpations,  if  they  cannot  constitutionally  resist 
them  ;  and  how  can  they  resist  usurpations,  if  they  are  subjected 
by  the  constitution  to  a  sovereignty  or  supremacy  in  the  usurp- 
er? The  people  of  each  state  are  recognised  as  independent 
nations  ;  and  the  state  governments,  not  as  judicial,  but  as  poli- 
tical departments,  intended  to  watch  over  the  constitutional  rights 
of  these  nations,  and  invested  with  a  power  to  resist  federal 
usurpations.  They  are  recognised  as  possessing  all  the  organs 
of  power  necessary  to  discharge  the  important  duty  of  breaking 
the  snares  of  tyranny,  by  which  the  people  are  frequently 
caught,  for  want  of  the  means  of  discovering  the  danger,  which 
these  select  bodies  of  men  possess.  It  is  even  admitted  that  the 
state  governments  may  form  regular  plans  of  opposition,  and  ap- 
peal to  arms  for  the  defence  of  their  rights.    But  what  becomes 


taylor's  views.  71 

of  this  whole  fabrick  intended  by  the  constitution  to  preserve 
the  rights  and  liberty  of  tbe  people,  if  the  federal  government 
is  sovereign,  or  the  federal  court  supreme  ?  What  becomes  of 
the  essential  right  in  these  independent  nations  to  control  their 
governments  for  the  preservation  of  the  union,  if  these  govern- 
ments cannot  control  a  sovereignty  or  supremacy,  usurped  for 
the  purpose  of  destroying  the  union  by  a  consolidated  national 
government  ?  Of  what  value  is  the  responsibility  of  state  go- 
vernments to  the  people,  when  it  is  liable  to  be  rendered  ineffi- 
cient by  a  supremacy  in  a  federal  court  ?  How  can  the  people 
cherish  or  preserve  the  union,  if  its  preservation  depends  on  this 
court,  and  not  on  their  state  governments?  What  good  can  the 
people  reap  from  the  intelligence  and  foresight  of  their  state  go- 
vernments, if  the  supreme  mandate  of  this  court  can  forbid  them 
from  seeing  or  resisting  usurpations  ?  Where  lies  the  mutual 
check  between  the  two  governments,  if  a  supreme  power  to  ex- 
pound the  articles  of  the  union,  is  thrown  into  the  scale  of  one 
by  construction  ?  By  this  contrivance,  the  influence  of  the  peo- 
ple over  their  state  governments,  urged  as  necessary  for  the  pre- 
servation of  their  rights,  both  state  and  federal,  is  transferred 
from  them  to  a  federal  court.  The  state  governments  may  still 
"  adopt  regular  plans  of  opposition."  Opposition  must  therefore 
be  constitutional.  They  may  even  oppose  armies  to  armies. 
Why  then  may  they  not  array  laws  against  laws,  and  judgments 
against  judgments?  This  is  the  very  remedy  contemplated  by 
a  system  compounded  of  co-ordinate  and  divided  powers,  against 
wars  with  guns  and  bayonets.  Whence  arises  the  state  right  to 
resist  usurpation,  to  form  regular  plans  of  opposition,  and  to 
watch  over  the  liberty  of  the  people  by  organised  governments, 
except  from  the  sovereignty  and  independence  attached  to  the 
powers  reserved,  and  the  inherent  mutual  right  of  self-defence 
attached  to  each  division  of  power,  state  and  federal.  But  the 
two  formidable  words  "  national  and  general,"  still  tingle  in  our 
ears,  and  protrude  themselves  against  these  concessions.  I  pro- 
test against  them,  because  they  are  not  in  the  constitution,  al- 
though they  have  been  drawn  from  the  recess  of  the  convention, 
borrowed  from  a  rejected  plan  of  government,  introduced  by 
the  high  authority  of  the  Federalist,  and  accepted  with  avidity 


72  taylor's  views. 

by  the  consolidating  school.  In  contending  that  we  have  neither 
a  national  nor  a  general  government,  nor  a  national  nor  a  federal 
sovereignty,  nor  a  judicial  supremacy,  it  is  necessary  to  point 
out  the  inconsistency  between  allowing  great  political  powers  to 
the  states,  and  rescinding  them  by  these  illegitimate  expressions. 


taylor's  views.  73 


SECTION  IX. 


THE  SUBJECT  CONTINUED. 


Let  us  proceed  in  our  quotations,  and  the  comparison  between 
the  positions  which  they  advance. 

H.  No.  81.  "The  state  governments,  by  their  original  con- 
u  stitutions,  are  invested  with  complete  sovereignty .  In  what 
"  does  our  security  consist  against  usurpations  from  that  quar- 
"  ter  ?  Doubtless  in  the  manner  of  their  formation,  and  in  a  due 
"  dependence  of  those  who  are  to  administer  them  upon  the 
"  people." 

H.  No.  32.  "  Although  I  am  of  opinion  that  there  would  be 
"  no  real  danger  of  the  consequences  to  the  state  governments, 
66  which  seem  to  be  apprehended  from  a  power  in  the  union  to 
"  control  them  in  the  levies  of  money ;  because  I  am  persuaded 
"  that  the  sense  of  the  people,  the  extreme  hazard  of  provoking 
"  the  resentments  of  the  state  governments,  and  a  conviction  of 
"  the  utility  and  justice  of  local  administrations,  for  local  pur- 
"  poses,  would  be  a  complete  barrier  against  the  oppressive  use 
"  of  such  a  power ;  yet  I  am  willing  to  allow  the  justness  of  the 
"  reasoning,  which  requires  that  the  individual  states  should  pos- 
"  sess  an  independent  and  uncontrollable  authority  to  raise  their 
"  own  revenues  for  the  supply  of  their  own  wants.  And  mak- 
"  ing  this  concession,  I  affirm  that  (with  the  exception  of  duties 
u  upon  imports  and  exports,)  they  would,  under  the  plan  of  the 
"  convention,  retain  that  authority  in  the  most  absolute  and  un- 
"  qualified  sense ;  and  that  an  attempt  on  the  part  of  the  na- 
"  tional  government  to  abridge  them  in  the  exercise  of  it,  would 
"  be  a  violent  assumption  of  power,  unwarranted  by  any  arti- 
"  cle  or  clause  of  the  constitution. 

"  An  entire  consolidation  of  the  states  into  one  complete  na- 
"  tional  sovereignty,  would  imply  an  entire  subordination  of 
"  the  parts ;  and  whatever  powers  might  remain  to  them,  would 
"  be  altogether  dependent  on  the  general  will.     But  as  the  plan 

10 


74  taylor's  views. 

(i  of  the  convention  aims  only  at  a  partial  union  or  consolidation, 
"  the  state  governments  would  clearly  retain  all  the  rights  of 
"  sovereignty  which  they  before  had,  and  which  were  not  by 
"  that,  delegated  exclusively  to  the  United  States." 

"  The  power  of  imposing  taxes  on  all  articles,  other  than  ex- 
(i  ports,  is  manifestly  a  concurrent  and  equal  authority  in  the 
"  United  States  and  individual  states.  In  any  other  view  it 
"  would  be  dangerous." 

"  It  is  not  a  possibility  of  inconvenience  in  the  exercise  of 
"  powers,  but  an  immediate  constitutional  repugnancy,  that  can 
66  by  implication  alienate  and  extinguish  a  pre-existing  right  of 
"  sovereignty." 

"  The  necessity  of  a  concurrent  jurisdiction  in  certain  cases, 
**  results  from  the  division  of  sovereign  power,  and  the  rule, 
"  that  all  authorities,  of  which  the  states  are  not  explicitly  di- 
u  vested  in  favour  of  the  union,  remain  with  them  in  full  vi- 
<(  gour,  is  not  only  a  theoretical  consequence  of  that  division, 
"  but  is  clearly  admitted  by  the  whole  tenour  of  the  instrument 
"'which  contains  the  articles  of  the  proposed  constitution." 

H.  No.  33.  "  The  declarations  authorizing  the  national  le- 
i(  gislature  to  make  all  laws  which  shall  be  necessary  and  proper 
u  for  carrying  into  execution  the  foregoing  powers,  and  all  other 
"  powers  vested  by  this  constitution  in  the  government  of  the 
"  United  States,  or  in  any  officer  thereof,  and  that  the  constitu- 
il  tion  and  laws  of  the  United  States  made  in  pursuance  thereof, 
"  and  the  treaties  made  by  their  authority,  shall  be  the  supreme 
u  law  of  the  land,  is  predicated  upon  the  specifick  powers,  tau- 
"  tology,  or  redundancy,  and  perfectly  harmless." 

"  Who  is  to  judge  of  the  necessity  and  propriety  of  the 
61  laws  to  be  pissed  for  executing  the  powers  of  the  union  ? 
u  The  national  government,  under  the  control  of  the  people." 

"  A  law,  by  the  very  meaning  of  the  term,  includes  supre- 
"  macy.  Laws  not  pursuant  of  the  constitutional  powers,  are 
"  not  the  supreme  laws  of  the  land." 

H.  No.  34.  "  To  argue  upon  abstract  principles,  that  the  co- 
"  ordinate  authority  cannot  exist,  would  be  to  set  up  theory  and 
"  supposition  against  fact  and  reality.  However  proper  such 
41  reasonings  might  be  to  shew,  that  a  thing  ought  not  to  exist, 


taylor's  views.  75 

"  they  are  wholly  to  be  rejected,  when  they  are  made  use  of  to 
"  prove  that  it  does  not  exist,  contrary  to  the  evidence  of  the 
"  fact  itself.  In  the  Roman  republick,  the  legislative  authority 
f  resided  in  two  different  legislative  bodies,  commitia  centuriata, 
"  and  the  commitia  tributia,  as  independent  legislatures,  each 
"  having  power  to  annul  or  repeal  the  acts  of  the  other  ;  in  each 
"  of  which  an  opposite  interest  prevailed,  the  patrician,  and  ple- 
"  beian.  A  man  would  have  been  regarded  as  frantick,  who 
f  should  have  attempted  to  disprove  their  existence.  These  two 
tf  legislatures  co-existed  for  ages,  and  the  Roman  republick  at- 
"  tained  to  the  highest  pinnacle  of  human  greatness."  He  might 
have  added,  that  when  the  two  independent  Roman  legislatures 
ceased  to  exist,  the  splendour  of  the  republick  was  obscured,  and 
liberty  was  destroyed. 

The  principles  I  am  advocating  are  forcibly  sustained  in  these 
quotations.  The  original  sovereignty  of  the  states ;  the  legiti- 
mate control  over  the  state  governments ;  the  unconstitutionality 
of  an  attempt  by  the  federal  government  to  usurp  or  abridge 
state  rights ;  their  independent  possession  of  all  rights  not  dele- 
gated ;  the  insufficiency  of  inconveniences  to  extinguish  pre-ex- 
isting sovereign  rights  ;  the  necessity  of  concurrent  powers,  as 
arising  from  a  division  of  power ;  and  the  incapacity  of  the  de- 
claratory clauses  of  the  constitution,  for  extending  the  limited 
powers  delegated  ;  are  all  positively  stated  and  plainly  enforced. 

Lest  these  plain  principles  should  be  evaded  by  subterfuges, 
or  facts  should  be  assaulted  by  suppositions,  an  example  is  hap- 
pily introduced,  illustrating  the  intention  of  the  constitution, 
and  placing  its  construction  beyond  the  reach  of  uncertainty. 
However  proper  reasonings  might  be, ^to  shew  that  co-ordinate 
legislative  authorities  ought  not  to  exist,  and  though  Mr.  Hamil- 
ton was  ardent  in  his  antipathy  towards  them  ;  yet  he  candidly 
admits  that  such  reasonings  ought  wholly  to  be  rejected,  when 
made  use  of  to  prove  that  these  co-ordinate  legislatures  do  not 
exist,  contrary  to  the  evidence  of  the  fact  itself.  He  defines,  by 
the  example  of  the  Roman  co-ordinate  legislatures,  his  idea  of 
the  state  and  federal  legislatures  under  the  constitution.  They 
were  co-equal,  as  to  concurrent  powers  ;  and  a  man  would  have 
been  considered  as  frantick.  who  should  have  attempted  to  djsw 


76  Taylor's  views. 

prove  it.  This  phrenzy  is  stated  as  emblematical  of  that  which 
should  deny  the  existence  of  our  co-equal  and  independent  legis- 
latures. Any  inconvenience  which  may  result  from  our  consti- 
tutional co-equality  of  legislatures,  is  not  sufficient  to  convert 
phrenzy  into  sound  understanding.  Each  of  the  Roman  legis- 
latures often  thought  the  other  very  inconvenient.  Both  legisla- 
ted over  the  same  objects,  and  exercised  concurrent  powers. 
Their  collisions  were  therefore  more  frequent  and  inveterate  than 
those  to  be  expected  from  our  co-ordinate  legislatures,  chiefly 
restricted  to  different  spheres.  The  Roman  legislatures  were 
exasperated  against  each  other  by  a  real  hostility  of  interests ; 
ours,  so  long  as  each  state  is  undisturbed  in  providing  for  its  in- 
ternal happiness,  are  bound  together  by  a  common  interest.  If 
the  Roman  republick  was  raised  to  the  pinnacle  of  human  great- 
ness, by  a  political  check  so  defective,  what  may  be  expected  by 
the  United  States,  from  a  purification  of  the  principle,  expelling 
its  defects,  and  retaining  its  friendship  for  liberty  ? 

But  the  fact  which  it  would  be  phrenzy  to  deny,  is  yet  denied  ; 
and  the  co-ordinateness  of  state  and  federal  legislative  authorities, 
emphatically  contended  for,  is  destroyed  in  the  very  mode  un- 
successfully proposed  in  the  convention,  in  the  face  of  its  rejec- 
tion, of  this  positive  vindication  of  the  principle,  and  of  the  as- 
serted constitutional  conslrution. 

"  Who  is  to  judge  of  the  necessity  and  propriety  of  the  laws 
u  to  be  passed  for  executing  the  powers  of  the  union  ?  The  na- 
"  tional  government,  under  the  control  of  the  people." 

It  will  appear  in  the  sequel,  that  Mr.  Hamilton  and  Mr.  Ma- 
dison have  answered  this  question  differently.  Mr.  Hamilton's 
supremacy  is  bestowed  on  a  national  government  under  the 
control  of  the  people ;  Mr.  Madison's,  upon  a  court,  not  under 
the  control  of  the  people.  Each  of  these  profound  politicians 
sought  for  a  supremacy  conformable  to  his  own  opinion  express- 
ed in  the  convention.  Mr.  Hamilton  has  found  one  similar  to 
that  of  the  British  parliament,  and  by  endowing  a  national  pre- 
sident, senate,  and  house  of  representatives,  with  it,  has  gotten 
back  to  his  plan  of  government  offered  to  the  convention.  Mr. 
Madison,  adhering  to  his  opinion,  that  the  state  governments 
should  be  preceptively  retained,  gives  his  supreznacy  to  a  court. 


TAYLOR'S  VIEWS.  7? 

upon  the  supposition  that  a  court  will  preserve  them.  Mr.  Ha- 
milton controls  his  supremacy  by  the  people,  in  imitation  of  the 
mode  by  which  the  British  parliament  is  supposed  to  be  con- 
trolled. Mr.  Madison  only  controls  his  by  the  will  and  power  of 
the  supremacy  itself.  He  rejects  the  suspicion  which  has  sug- 
gested checks  and  divisions  of  sovereignty  or  supremacy,  and 
bestows  absolute  power,  unexposed  to  any  control  at  all.  The 
reader  will  discern  which  would  be  the  best  security  for  the 
rights  and  even  the  existence  of  the  states  ;  the  opinion  of  the 
people,  or  the  opinion  of  a  court.  The  court  swear,  but  state  and 
federal  legislative  departments  swear  also  ;  so  do  kings ;  yet 
this  species  of  control  has  been  sufficiently  exploded  as  a  security 
for  liberty.  When  great  men  differ  as  to  the  residence  of  a  na- 
tional or  federal  supremacy,  is  it  not  presumable  that  it  resides 
no  where? 

Mr.  Hamilton  asserts,  that  the  "  state  governments,  by  their 
"  original  constitutions,  are  invested  with  complete  sovereignty. 
"  In  what  does  our  security  consist  against  usurpations  from  that 
"  quarter  ?  Doubtless  in  the  manner  of  their  formation,  and  in 
"  a  due  dependence  of  those  who  are  to  administer  them  upon 
"  the  people."  May  I  not  have  been  mistaken  in  supposing 
that  he  intended  to  invest  the  federal  government  with  a  supre- 
macy over  state  laws  ?  If  he  is  consistent,  he  denies  any  supre- 
macy in  one  of  our  legislatures  over  the  others,  and  asserts  their 
co-equality.  By  uniting  the  extracts,  we  may  discern  whether 
they  are  repugnant  or  homogeneal.  The  federal  government  is 
to  judge  of  the  necessity  and  propriety  of  the  laws  to  be  past  for 
executing  the  powers  of  the  union  ;  and  the  state  governments 
are  to  judge  of  the  necessity  and  propriety  of  the  laws  to  be 
past  for  executing  the  powers  reserved  to  the  states,  each  under 
the  control  of  the  people.  Thus  only  the  interpretations  of  the 
constitution  by  Mr.  Hamilton,  can  be  made  consistent,  and  thus 
a  co-equal  supremacy  is  attached  to  each  sphere  of  legislation, 
subject  to  no  control  but  that  of  the  people. 

Mr.  Hamilton,  in  reference  to  the  federal  government,  adds, 
u  that  a  law,  by  the  very  meaning  of  the  term,  implies  supre- 
"  macy.  Laws  not  pursuant  of  constitutional  powers,  are  not 
"  the  supreme  law  of  the  land."     I  accept  the  definition,  but  I 


78  Taylor's  views. 

deny  its  exclusive  application  to  federal  laws,  and  contend,  that 
it  co-extensively  applies  to  state  laws.  It  is  admitted  that  un- 
constitutional laws  are  not  supreme.  From  this  admission  it  re- 
sults, that  the  expression  in  the  constitution,  "  shall  be  the  su- 
w  preme  law  of  the  land,"  is  restricted  by  its  limitations  and  re- 
servation, and  did  not  convey  any  species  of  supremacy  to  the 
governments,  going  beyond  the  powers  delegated  or  those  re- 
served. The  supremacy  allowed  to  legislation  flows  from,  and. 
does  not  exceed  it.  Therefore  the  laws  of  the  states  withm  the 
scope  of  their  reserved  powers,  are  equally  supreme  with  those 
of  the  federal  government  within  the  scope  of  its  delegated 
powers.  The  division  of  legislation  cannot  be  sustained,  unless 
the  constitutional  laws  of  each  allotment  are  invested  with  legal 
supremacy.  If  the  proposition,  that  unconstitutional  laws  are 
not  the  supreme  law  of  the  land,  is  true,  its  converse,  that  con- 
stitutional laws  are  the  supreme  law  of  the  land,  must  be  also 
true;  and  of  course  the  constitutional  laws  of  the  states  are 
equally  supreme  with  those  of  the  federal  government. 

Mr.  Hamilton  admits  a  concurrency  of  legislation  in  the  state 
and  federal  governments,  as  to  taxation  ;  and  that  a  violation  of 
this  concurrency  by  the  federal  government,  would  be  manifestly 
unconstitutional.  How  can  this  doctrine  consist  with  his  posi- 
tion, "  that  the  national  government  have  a  right  to  judge  of  the 
"  propriety  and  necessity  of  the  laws  for  executing  the  powers 
"  of  the  union,  under  the  control  of  the  people  only."  Con- 
currency of  power  implies  an  equality  in  its  exercise.  So  Mr. 
Hamilton  expounds  it.  But  then  he  creates  a  national  govern- 
ment, and  a  consolidated  nation,  and  invests  this  imaginary  go- 
vernment under  the  control  of  this  imaginary  nation,  with  a  su- 
preme power  over  the  co-equality  he  admits,  by  bestowing  upon 
it  an  exclusive  right  to  decide  whether  its  own  laws,  and  conse- 
quently whether  the  laws  of  the  states,  are  necessary  and  proper, 
according  to  the  articles  of  the  constitution.  Thus  he  destroys 
the  admitted  concurrency,  and  revives  the  identical  supremacy 
in  construing  these  articles,  proposed  in  the  convention  for  the 
establishment  of  a  national  government.  By  this  assertion,  he 
invests  Congress  and  the  supreme  court  with  a  right  to  violate 


Taylor's  views.  79 

the  inviolable  concurrent  right  of  taxation,  as  was  done  in  the 
bank  case. 

Yet  he  declares  that  the  right  of  taxation  would  be  dangerous 
in  any  other  view,  than  as  a  concurrent  and  equal  authority  in 
the  United  States  and  the  individual  states.  Why  would  it  be 
dangerous  ?  Because  a  supreme  power  in  the  federal  govern- 
ment to  construe  the  articles  of  the  union,  so  as  to  defeat  this 
concurrency,  would  suffice  to  destroy  the  state  governments. 

Mr.  Hamilton  invests  the  state  governments  with  complete 
sovereignty.  Why  does  he  abandon  our  principle,  that  com- 
plete sovereignty  resides  only  in  the  people  of  each  state  ?  The 
reasons  are  obvious.  His  prepossession  in  favour  of  the  English 
form  of  government,  induced  him  to  deposit  a  complete  sove- 
reignty in  governments.  Therefore  he  proposed  a  national  go- 
vernment in  the  convention,  empowered,  like  the  British  par- 
liament, to  pass  all  laws  ivhatsover.  And  the  same  object  would 
be  effected,  if  a  national  government  assumed  as  established  by 
the  constitution,  can  pass  all  laws  which  it  may  deem  necessary 
and  proper.  The  British  parliament  do  no  more  than  pass  laws 
which  it  deems  necessary  and  proper,  according  to  the  British 
political  system.  Yet  he  admits  unconstitutional  laws  to  be 
void.  How  can  their  unconstitutionality  be  ascertained,  except 
by  uniting  a  concurrent  right  of  construction  with  our  concur- 
rent right  of  legislation  ?  In  England,  legislation  is  lodged  in 
the  king,  lords,  and  commons,  and  each  department  has  an  inde- 
pendent concurrent  power  of  deciding  whether  the  law  is  con- 
formable with  the  English  political  system.  Here,  legislation  is 
a  concurrent  power,  lodged  in  the  state  and  federal  departments, 
to  which  a  concurrent  power  of  construing  our  political  system 
must  also  appertain,  or  this  system  must  be  destroyed,  as  that  of 
England  would  be  by  a  supreme  power  in  one  of  its  legislative 
departments  to  impose  its  own  constructions  upon  the  others. 
But  this  reasoning  is  provided  against,  first  by  investing  the  state 
governments  with  complete  sovereignty,  and  then  by  transmit- 
ting all  these  sovereignties  to  the  federal  senate  by  representation. 
These  ideas  cannot  be  correct,  if  Mr.  Hamilton  is  right  in  ob- 
serving, that  "  our  security  against  usurpations  by  the  state  go- 
"  vernments,   consists  in  their  dependence  upon  the  people." 


80  Taylor's  views. 


Upon  what  people  ?  Certainly,  the  people  of  each  state.  Iu 
this  place,  we  find  that  the  state  governments  are  to  be  control- 
led by  the  people ;  in  another,  that  the  national  government,  as 
lie  is  pleased  to  denominate  the  federal  government,  is  also  con- 
trollable by  the  people  ;  and  in  a  third,  that  one  government  is 
controllable  by  the  other.  These  controls  refute  the  idea  that 
either  of  these  governments  possess  a  complete  sovereignty,  or  a 
supremacy  over  the  other.  The  concurrency  in  the  modes  of 
control,  sustain  a  concurrency  of  power  to  construe  the  articles  of 
the  union,  and  constitute  the  mutual  check  for  which  Mr.  Ha- 
milton contends,  as  the  only  means  of  inculcating  that  mutual 
moderation  in  the  exercise  of  power,  so  indispensable  for  pro- 
moting the  happiness  of  the  people. 

Mr.  Hamilton  affirms,  that  the  individual  states  possess  an  in- 
dependent and  uncontrollable  power  to  raise  their  own  revenue 
for  the  supply  of  their  own  wants  ;  and  that  an  attempt  on  the 
part  of  the  national  government  to  abridge  them  in  the  exer- 
cise of  it,  would  be  a  violent  assumption  of  power,  unwar- 
ranted by  any  article  of  the  constitution.  How  came  the 
states  to  possess  this  independent  and  uncontrollable  power  in  the 
case  of  taxation  ?  Undoubtedly  as  a  portion  of  the  sovereign 
power  previously  held  by  them.  The  illustration  of  state  rights, 
by  their  right  of  taxation,  includes  all  their  other  undelegated 
sights,  as  being  also  derived  from  state  sovereignty.  Neither 
the  state  right  of  taxation,  nor  any  other  reserved  state  right,  is 
bestowed  by  the  constitution.  They  all  either  flow  from  state 
sovereignty,  or  none  of  them  are  genuine.  Therefore  if  the 
state  right  to  tax,  is  independent  and  uncontrollable  by  the  fede- 
ral government  or  the  supreme  court,  their  other  undelegated 
and  reserved  rights  are  also  independent  and  uncontrollable.  If 
an  attempt  on  the  part  of  the  federal  government  to  abridge  the 
states  in  their  right  to  tax,  would  be  a  violent  assumption  of 
power,  an  attempt  to  abridge  them  in  the  exercise  of  any  other 
reserved  right,  must  also  be  a  violent  assumption  of  power.  And 
if  an  assumption  of  power  over  an  undelegated  and  reserved  state 
right  "  is  unwarranted  by  any  article  or  clause  in  the  constitu- 
Ci  tion,"  no  construction  can  justify  it.  The  mysterious  supre- 
macy supposed  to  be  tacitly  conveyed  to  the  federal  government 


Taylor's  views.  81 

(but  in  what  way,  the  eminent  men  whose  works  we  are  consi- 
dering, have  not  agreed,)  or  Mr.  Hamilton's  vindication  of  state 
rights,  must  be  given  up,  as  utterly  incompatible.  The  exem- 
plification of  the  independent  and  uncontrollable  character  of  state 
rights  under  the  constitution,  by  the  right  to  tax,  embraces  ex- 
clusive as  well  as  concurrent  rights,  as  all  are  derived  from  the 
original  sovereignty  of  the  states,  and  must  live  or  die  together. 
H.  No.  36.  "  As  neither  the  federal  nor  state  governments, 
"  in  the  objects  of  taxation,  can  control  the  other,  each  will  have 
"  an  obvious  and  sensible  interest  in  reciprocal  forbearance." 
Thus  we  are  conducted  to  the  precise  end  intended  to  be  accom- 
plished by  the  division  of  sovereignty,  supremacy,  or  powers, 
(all  equivalent  words.)  displaying  its  contrariety  to  a  concentra- 
tion of  sovereignty,  supremacy,  or  powers,  in  a  national  govern- 
ment. Moderation  was  not  equally  to  be  expected  from  these 
hostile  principles ;  and  moderation  in  the  exercise  of  power  was 
thought  necessary  to  foster  social  happiness.  "  Reciprocal  for- 
(i  bearance"  was  inculcated  by  the  intire  division  of  legislative 
powers  ;  and  not  by  the  item  of  taxation  alone ;  to  compel  the 
federal  and  state  governments  to  travel  kindly  and  sociably  toge- 
ther. Their  friendship,  like  that  of  individuals,  could  only  be 
supported  by  their  mutual  independence  in  the  exercise  of  their 
own  rights,  and  if  the  plain  arguments  of  Mr.  Hamilton  ought 
to  have  more  weight  than  illicit  words  and  dark  allusions  with 
which  they  are  sparingly,  and  perhaps  carelessly,  sprinkled,  they 
supply  us  with  a  conclusive  construction  of  the  constitution, 
namely,  that  federal  and  state  legislatures  are  co-ordinate,  co- 
equal, and  independent,  neither  being  controllable  by  the  other; 
that  only  legal  supremacy  appertains  to  both ;  that  their  mutual 
independence  was  intended  to  inspire  them  with  mutual  modera- 
tion ;  and  that  if  collisions  occur  which  they  cannot  amicably 
settle,  the  control  of  the  people  over  both,  and  not  a  dictatorial 
supremacy  of  one,  or  some  portion  of  one,  is  an  umpire. 


11 


TAYLOR'S  VIEWS,  83 


SECTION  X. 


THE  SUBJECT  CONTINUED, 


M.  No.  39.  "  The  constitution  is  to  be  founded  on  the  assent 
"  and  ratification  of  the  people  of  America,  given  by  deputies 
f  elected  for  the  special  purpose,  not  as  individuals  composing 
"  one  intire  nation,  but  as  composing  the  distinct  and  inde- 
"  pendent  states,  to  which  they  respectively  belong.  It  is  to 
"  be  the  assent  and  ratification  of  the  several  states,  derived 
**  from  the  supreme  authority  of  each  state,  the  authority  of  the 
11  people  themselves.  The  act  therefore  establishing  the  consti- 
"  tution,  will  not  be  a  national,  but  a  federal  act. 

"  That  it  will  be  a  federal,  and  not  a  national  act,  the  act  of 
"  the  people,  as  forming  so  many  independent  states,  not  as 
*'  forming  one  aggregate  nation,  is  obvious,  from  the  single  con* 
"  sideration,  that  it  is  to  result,  neither  from  the  decision  of  a 
"  majority  of  the  people  of  the  union,  nor  from  that  of  a  majo- 
"  rity  of  states.  It  must  result  from  the  unanimous  assent  of 
"  the  several  states  that  are  parties  to  it,  differing  no  other- 
41  wise  from  their  ordinary  assent,  than  in  its  being  expressed, 
"  not  by  the  legislative  authority,  but  by  that  of  the  people 
u  themselves.  Were  the  people  regarded  in  this  transaction  as 
"  forming  one  nation,  the  will  of  a  majority  of  the  whole  people 
u  of  the  United  States,  would  bind  the  minority,  in  the  same 
"  manner  as  a  majority  of  each  state  would  bind  the  minority ; 
fl  and  the  will  of  the  majority  must  be  determined,  either  by  a 
<k  comparison  of  individual  votes,  or  by  considering  the  will  of 

*  the  majority  of  states,  as  evidence  of  the  will  of  a  majority  of 
"  the  people  of  the  United  States.     Neither  of  these  rules  has 

*  been  adopted.     Each  state,  in  ratifying  the  constitution,  is 
i  *•  considered  as  a  sovereign  body,  independent  of  all  others, 

"  and  only  to  be  bound  by  its  own  voluntary  act.  In  this  rela- 
"  tion  then,  the  new  constitution  will  be  a  federal  and  not  a  na- 
"  tional  constitution. 


64  Taylor's  views. 

"  The  next  relation  is,  to  the  sources  from  which  the  ordina- 
*'  ry  powers  of  government  are  to  be  derived.  The  house  of 
se  representatives  will  derive  its  powers  from  the  people  of  'J2?ne- 
"  rica,  and  the  people  will  be  represented  in  the  same  propor- 
"  Hon,  and  on  the  same  principle,  as  they  are  in  the  legislature 
"  of  each  particular  state.  So  far  the  government  is  national 
il  and  not  federal.  The  senate,  on  the  other  hand,  will  derive 
"  its  powers  from  the  states,  as  political  and  co-equal  societies. 
"  So  far  the  government  is  federal  and  not  national.  From  this 
"  aspect  of  the  government  it  appears  to  be  of  a  mixed  character, 
"  presenting  at  least  as  many  federal  as  national  features.  The 
"  local  or  municipal  authorities,  form  distinct  and  independent 
"  portions  of  the  supremacy,  no  more  subject,  within  their  re- 
"  spective  spheres,  to  the  general  authority,  than  the  general 
"  authority  is  subject  to  them  within  its  own  sphere.  In  this  re- 
"  lation  then,  the  proposed  government  cannot  be  deemed  a  na- 
*'  tional  one,  since  its  jurisdiction  extends  to  certain  limited 
u  objects  only,  and  leaves  to  the  several  states  a  residuary  and 
"  inviolable  sovereignty  over  all  other  objects.  It  is  true, 
"  that  in  controversies  relating  to  the  boundaries  between  the 
u  two  jurisdictions,  the  tribunal  which  is  ultimately  to  decide 
"  is  to  be  established  under  the  general  government.  The 
"  decision  is  to  be  impartially  made,  according  to  the  rides  of 
11  the  constitution,  and  all  the  usual  and  most  effectual  pre- 
61  cautions  are  to  be  taken  to  secure  this  impartiality." 

M.  No.  45.  "  The  states  will  retain,  under  the'proposed  con- 
"  stitution,  a  very  considerable  portion  of  active  sovereignty. 
a  The  powers  delegated  by  the  proposed  constitution  to  the  fe- 
"  deral  government,  are  few  and  defined.  Those  which  are  to 
iC  remain  to  the  state  governments,  are  numerous-  and  indefinite. 
"  The  former  will  be  exercised  principally  on  external  objects, 
"  as  war,  peace,  negotiation,  and  foreign  commerce ;  with  which 
"  last  the  power  of  taxation  will  for  the  most  part  be  connected. 
"  The  powers  reserved  to  the  several  states  will  extend  to  all 
"  objects,  which,  in  the  ordinary  course  of  affairs,  concern  the 
"  lives,  liberties,  and  properties,  of  the  people ;  and  the  interna! 
"  order,  improvement,  and  prosperity,  of  the  state." 


tatlor's  views.  85 

It  is  necessary  to  look  back  at  the  journal  of  the  convention, 
before  a  critical  examination  of  these  extracts  is  attempted.  The 
great  difficulty  which  protracted  its  debates,  was  the  struggle  be- 
tween the  large  and  small  states.  On  one  hand,  to  obtain  an 
intire  influence  for  population  by  a  national  government ;  on  the 
other,  to  preserve  the  moral  equality  of  state  sovereignties  by  a 
federal  government.  Virginia,  Massachusetts,  and  Pennsylva- 
nia, then  the  three  states  containing  the  most  people,  though  re- 
mote from  each  other,  united  upon  that  consideration.  New- 
York,  then  intermediate  between  the  large  and  small  states,  as  to 
population,  was  divided.  Other  states,  looking  at  their  small 
population,  and  at  their  large  unsettled  territory,  vacillated j 
and  the  gentlemen  in  favour  of  a  consolidated  national  republick, 
or  a  limited  monarchy,  availed  themselves  of  this  unsettled  dis- 
position. 

Alas !  poor  human  nature ;  how  short  is  its  foresight,  and 
how  small  is  its  prudence  !     Neither  the  map  of  Massachusetts, 
nor  its  impending  division,  was  thought  of.     Virginia  did  not 
anticipate  an  exchange  of  situations  with  New- York.     The  west- 
ern and  southern  expansions  of  territory  rested  in  oblivion,  and 
supplied  reason  with  no  deductions.    Time  has  removed  the  ob- 
scurity, and  disclosed  how  short-sighted  were  the  motives  which 
laboured  to  consolidate   the  states  into  a  national  government. 
Why  should  this  project  be  revived,  now  that  these  motives  are 
extinct  ?     The  film  of  a  fluctuating  census,  which  prevented  pa- 
triotism from  discerning  the  great  difference  between  a  federal 
and  consolidated  system  of  government,  being  removed,  it  can 
contemplate  more  justly  the  consequences  of  both.     The  time 
may  come  when  a  national  government  would  talk  of  its  eastern 
provinces.     On  the  north,  population  meets  with  the  white  clifis 
of  snow  and  ice  ;  on  the  west  and  south,  its  waves  flow  on.     A 
contiguity  of  interests  has  abolished  the  ephemeral  intrigues  of 
states  remote  from  each  other,  founded  on  population ;  and  this 
temporary   cement  of  state  ambition  has  mouldered  into  dust. 
The  apprehensions  it  once  excited  are  effaced  by  the  increase  of 
states  ;  and  it  is  now  demonstrated,  that  geographical  combina- 
tions, founded  in  a  similarity  of  interest,  are  the  evils  in  future 
to  be  apprehended.    Whether  these  will  be  best  prevented  by 


86  caylor's  views, 

the  military  force  of  a  national  government,  or  by  the  milder 
means  of  faithfully  leaving  to  each  state  the  exclusive  manage* 
ment  of  its  local  interests,  is  now  the  question.  The  southern 
aristocracy,  inclined  by  pride  to  a  national  form  of  government, 
is  already  melted  by  the  abolition  of  entails  and  primogeniture, 
into  a  democracy.  These  circumstances  constitute  a  happy 
juncture  for  fixing  the  principles  of  the  constitution  by  federal 
constructions,  as  the  only  security  against  geographical  combi- 
nations, and  the  consequences  of  enabling  ambition  to  wield  the 
sceptre  of  a  national  government ;  and  the  time  has  arrived  for 
rejecting  opinions,  suggested  by  a  short-sighted  computation  of 
a  temporary  and  fluctuating  state  population. 

Yet  consolidating  projects  are  stiil  vibrating  in  the  souls  of 
ambition  and  avarice  ;  they  seize  upon  the  motives,  now  extinct, 
which  induced  the  deputies  of  large  states,  and  aristocratical  in- 
dividuals, to  contend  for  a  supreme  national  government ;  and 
use  the  terms  and  phrases  which  these  motives  suggested,  in  or- 
der to  overturn  a  federal  system,  because  it  is  the  strongest  ima- 
ginable barrier  against  usurpation  and  fraud.  It  is  no  longer  an 
honest  estimate  of  population,  nor  the  prejudices  of  a  virtuous 
aristocracy,  by  which  a  national  form  of  government  and  an  un- 
checked supremacy  are  advocated,  but  the  heroes  of  the  project 
are  now  the  evil  spirits,  which  are  constantly  at  the  elbow  of 
power.  As  the  deputies  of  the  three  large  states  were  evidently 
influenced  in  advocating  a  national  form  of  government,  by  the 
object  of  obtaining  a  preponderance  for  populousness,  and  no 
such  preponderance  being  now  attainable  in  consequence  of  the 
increase  of  states,  it  is  probable  that  the  same  men  would  not 
think  now  as  they  did  then ;  those  excepted  who  preferred  a  con- 
solidated government,  resembling  the  English  system.  This 
opinion  is  therefore  at  present  the  solitary  advocate  for  a  national 
government,  because  no  state  can  expect  to  obtain  any  preponde- 
rance over  the  rest,  in  consequence  of  its  population. 

But  the  delusion  was  not  extinguished  when  the  Federalist 
was  written,  and  therefore  Mr.  Madison's  construction  of  the 
constitution  was  as  likely  to  be  influenced  by  it,  as  Mr.  Hamil- 
ton's, in  contending  for  a  supremacy  according  to  the  British 
model.     It  was  no  easy  matter  to  discern  a  mode  of  re-instating 


TAYLOR'S  VIEWS.  8? 

half  a  national  government  for  a  plain  rejection  of  the  whole ; 
but  the  same  ingenuity  which  conceived  a  simultaneous  sove- 
reignty in  the  states,  and  an  absolute  federal  legislative,  execu- 
tive, and  judicial  supremacy,  suggested  a  nice  constructive  dis- 
section of  the  constitution,  so  as  to  make  two  nations  with  the 
same  individuals. 

Inexplicit  as  words  may  be,  they  are  untoward  instruments 
for  proving  contradictions.  Mr.  Madison  asserts,  "  that  the 
"  assent  and  ratification  of  the  people  of  America,  is  the 
"  foundation  of  the  constitution,"  and  "  that  the  assent  and  ra- 
"  tification  was  not  to  be  the  act  of  individuals,  as  composing  one 
"  nation,  but  of  the  people  of  each  distinct  and  independent 
"  state"  The  contradiction  is  explicit.  The  existence  of  an 
American  people  is  conceded  to  the  project  for  a  national  go- 
vernment, and  the  existence  of  a  distinct  sovereign  people  in 
each  state  is  conceded  to  the  constitution.  Yet  if  there  was  no 
American  people,  the  abstract  idea  of  such  a  people,  could  not 
make  a  constitution  or  union  for  real  state  nations ;  and  if  there 
was  really  such  a  people,  the  municipal  authorities,  as  he  calls  the 
states,  could  not  make  a  constitution  for  them.  It  was  necessary 
to  premise  the  existence  of  an  American  people,  to  sustain  the 
semi-national  physiognomy  ascribed  to  the  federal  government : 
and  it  was  necessary  to  admit  the  distinct  and  separate  sovereign- 
ties  of  the  states,  to  find  a  sound  ratification  of  the  constitution. 

An  American  nation,  able  to  make  a  national  constitution* 
is  not  to  be  found  in  the  declaration  of  independence,  in  the  con- 
federation of  1777,  in  the  constitution  of  1787,  or  in  its  mode  of 
•ratification.  And  if  no  such  nation  existed,  having  the  right  to 
make  a  whole  national  government,  can  the  idea  of  such  a  na- 
tion make  half  a  national  government?  To  form  a  national  go- 
vernment, the  state  nations  must  first  dissolve  themselves,  and 
these  fragments  must  constitute  themselves  into  one  nation ;  but 
instead  of  any  such  dissolution,  the  contrary  is  established  by 
the  constitution,  and  the  mode  of  its  ratification.  To  obtain  a 
semi-national  government,  Mr.  Madison  supposes  "  a  people  of 
"  America,"  as  assenting  to  and  ratifying  the  constitution, 
though  he  proves  that  both  acts  were  done  by  a  people  of  each 
state ;  and  asserts  that  the  house  of  representatives  of  the  fede- 


88  tavlur's  views. 

ral  legislature,  derives  its  powers  from  "  a  people  of  America." 
But  if  there  never  was,  nor  yet  is,  such  a  people,  able  to  make 
a  national  constitution,  or  to  alter  that  made  by  the  states,  how 
ean  there  be  such  a  people  for  this  house  to  represent  ?  Had 
there  been  such  a  people,  state  conventions  would  only  have  been 
a  mode  for  collecting  their  ratifications  of  the  constitution,  simi- 
lar to  that  practised  by  states  for  collecting  the  opinions  of  the 
counties  into  which  state  nations  are  divided,  when  a  majority 
decides  for  the  nation,  and  a  dissenting  county  cannot  establish 
a  distinct  government  for  itself.  But  "  the  constitution  was  to 
"  result  from  the  unanimous  assent  of  the  several  states  that 
"  are  parties  to  it,  expressed,  not  by  the  legislative  authority? 
"  but  by  the  people  themselves.^  This  language  contains  an 
insinuation  to  sustain  the  ideas  of  an  American  people  and  a  na- 
tional government,  utterly  groundless,  although  it  has  been  often 
repeated.  No  distinction  between  the  legislatures  and  conven- 
tions of  states,  as  organs  for  expressing  the  assent  of  the  states  to 
their  federal  compacts,  was  meditated.  Conventions  were  re- 
commended by  the  framers  of  the  constitution,  to  avoid  the  dis- 
inclination which  the  state  legislatures  might  feel  to  part  with 
power,  and  not  to  recognise  the  existence  of  an  American  nation. 
As  a  proof  of  this,  the  constitution  may  be  altered  by  the  assent 
of  state  legislatures,  because  they  represent  the  state  nations  who 
assented  to  it.  Had  it  been  ratified  by  an  American  nation,  the 
legislatures  of  these  state  nations  could  not  have  altered  it.  The 
extract  exhibits  a  distinction  by  a  mere  tautology.  The  states, 
and  the  people  of  the  states,  (as  Mr.  Madison  has  ably  proved  in 
the  extracts,)  are  expressions  completely  equivalent  when  ap- 
plied to  the  ratification  of  the  constitution ;  and  the  antithesis 
between  them  is  therefore  without  foundation.  If  it  was  made 
by  the  people  of  a  state,  it  was  still  a  state  ratification,  as  Mr. 
Madison  has  proved.  If  the  states  are  parties  to  the  constitu- 
tion, the  individuals  of  an  American  nation  are  not  so.  If  it 
was  established  by  the  assent  of  states,  however  expressed,  that 
assent  cannot  be  turned  into  the  assent  of  individuals,  for  the 
sake  of  creating  a  national  government,  by  changing  a  federal, 
into  a  national  act. 


TAYLOR'S  VIEWS.  8$ 

The  fact  was,  that  no  assent  to  the  constitution  was  expressed. 
or  to  be  expressed,  by  individuals  ;  and  Mr.  Madison  intimates 
this  erroneous  idea  by  a  figurative  expression,  so  as  ingeniously 
to  convert  the  state  organ,  called  a  convention,  into  individuals 
composing  an  American  nation.  But  state  conventions  are  as 
distinguishable  from  an  American  people,  in  expressing  the  as- 
sent of  the  state  to  a  federal  union,  as  state  legislatures  are  in  ex- 
pressing the  same  assent  to  its  amendment ;  nor  is  there  any 
difference  between  the  character  and  effect  of  this  assent,  whe- 
ther it  was  expressed  by  state  representatives,  called  a  legislature 
or  a  convention.  The  difference  is  contended  for  to  give  the 
constitution  a  national  hue,  contrary  to  its  own  verdict  that  there 
is  none,  pronounced  in  the  mode  of  its  amendment. 

An  argument  of  less  weight,  but  not  to  be  disregarded,  is,  that 
these  conventions  were  called  by  the  authority  of  the  state  legis- 
latures. Being  invested  with  the  authority  of  the  stale,  they 
had  a  right  to  command  or  prohibit  the  election  of  conventions, 
which  they  would  not  have  possessed,  had  an  American  people 
existed.  The  convention  which  framed  the  constitution,  did  not 
presume  to  call  conventions  of  an  American  people,  nor  did  Con- 
gress usurp  such  an  authority.  No  authority  existed  for  calling 
a  convention  of  an  American  people ;  none  was  even  called  by 
an  usurped  authority  ;  and  yet  the  consolidating  project  claims 
the  benefit  of  three  usurpations,  neither  of  which  was  ever 
thought  of.  First,  that  a  combination  of  individuals,  calling  it- 
self an  American  people,  had  usurped  an  authority  to  make  a 
constitution  for  sovereign  and  independent  states.  Secondly,, 
that  some  body  had  usurped  an  authority  to  empower  these  indi- 
viduals to  elect  conventions.  And  thirdly,  that  these  conven- 
tions had  usurped  the  character  of  representing  an  American 
people. 

The  constitution  in  a  multitude  of  places  refutes  Mr.  Madi- 
son's distinction  between  the  states,  and  the  people  of  the  states, 
by  considering  them  as  the  same  bodies  politick.  Mr.  Madison 
concurs  with  it  in  this  idea.  He  observes,  "  in  this  transaction" 
(the  establishment  of  the  constitution,)  "  each  state'  is  considered 
"  as  a  sovereign  body,  independent  of  all  others,  and  only  to  be 
"  bound  by  its  own  voluntary  act."    This  body  was  formed  by 

12 


90  TAYLOR'S  VIEWS. 

the  people  of  each  state  ;  the  people  of  each  state  are  therefore 
the  same  body  as  the  state ;  the  assent  of  the  people  of  the  states 
to  the  constitution,  is  precisely  the  same  as  the  assent  of  the  states 
distinctly,  and  equally  disproves  the  existence  of  an  American 
people.  Mr.  Madison  adds,  "  in  this  relation  then,  the  consti- 
"  tution  will  be  a  federal,  and  not  a  national  act,"  intimating, 
that  in  some  other  relation,  it  was  a  national  and  not  a  federal 
constitution  ;  and  he  proceeds  to  sustain  this  intimation  by  re- 
viving the  American  people,  both  killed  and  resuscitated  in  the 
preceding  extracts. 

"  The  next  relation  is,  to  the  sources  from  which  the  ordi- 
u  nary  powers  of  government  are  to  be  derived.  The  house 
"  of  representatives  will  derive  its  powers  from  the  people  of 
(l  America,  and  the  people  will  be  represented  in  the  same 
"proportion,  and  on  the  same  principle,  as  they  are  in  the  le- 
"  gislature  of  each  particular  state.  So  far  the  government  is  na- 
"  tional  and  not  federal.  The  senate,  on  the  other  hand,  will 
11  derive  its  powers  from  the  states,  as  political  and  co-equal  so- 
(i  cieties.  So  far  the  government  is  federal  and  not  national. 
"  From  this  aspect  of  the  government,  it  appears  to  be  of  a 
"  mixed  character,  presenting  at  least  as  many  federal  as  nation- 
"  al  features."  So  then  the  government  is  as  much  national 
as  federal.  To  come  at  these  wished-for  national  features,  Mr. 
Madison  distinguishes  between  a  people  and  a  state,  and  discards 
political  associations  by  which  individuals  are  made  a  people ; 
forms  one  state  or  political  society,  calling  it  a  people  of  Ameri- 
ca, of  the  same  individuals,  who  had  formed  themselves  into  se- 
parate societies  ;  founds  the  constitution  upon  the  assent  and  ra- 
tification of  this  newly  conceived  people  of  America  ;  yet  asserts 
that  it  was  exclusively  ratified  by  distinct  and  independent 
sovereign  states  ;  and  declares  that  the  house  of  representatives 
will  derive  its  powers  from  the  people  of  America  ;  but  that  the 
senate  will  derive  its  powers  from  the  states,  as  co-equal  societies. 
Words  and  facts  unite  in  detecting  these  contradictions.  States, 
and  the  people  of  each  state,  are  synonymous  words.  No  Ame- 
rican people  existed.  A  confederation  of  states  was  the  only 
political  association  which  could  be  called  American,  when  the 
constitution  was  framed.     It  therefore  could  only  be  made  and 


Taylor's  views,  91 

ratified  by  the  existing  political  societies,  and  was  so  made  and 
ratified.     If  no  American  nation  then  existed,  or  yet  exists,  to 
make  or  mend  it,  can  the  house  of  representatives  have  derived 
any  powers  from  a  people  merely  surreptitious  ?  When  the  con- 
stitution is  amended,  does  not  this  house  derive  its  powers  from 
the  states?     Can  an  ideal  American  people,  from  which  it  neither 
does  or  can  derive  any  powers,  infuse  into  it  any  political  cha- 
racter ?     Can  a  political  character  be  acquired  without  powers, 
or  political  powers  without  a  source  ?     Is  it  true,  that  the  states 
are  only  represented  in  the  senate?     According  to  Mr.  Hamil- 
ton, the  state  governments  are  represented  in  the  senate.     Ac- 
cording to  Mr.  Madison,  the  people  of  America  are  represented, 
in  the  house  of  representatives.     These  governments,   in  the 
opinion  of  one  writer,  transfer  their  powers  to  the  senate  ;  and 
this  American  nation,  in  the  opinion  of  the  other,  infuses  its  pow- 
ers into  the  house  of  representatives  ;  both    by   representation. 
Between  the  two,  the  states  are  not  represented  in  either  house 
of  a  federal  legislature,  created  by  them  for  executing  a  federal 
government,  to  which  Mr.  Madison  says  they  are  the  only  par- 
ties ;  and  according  to  either,  whether  representation   bestows 
the  powers  of  the  state  governments  on  the  senate,  or  whether 
it  conveys  the  powers  of  an  American  nation,  supposed  to  be 
supreme,  to  the  house  of  representatives,  an  indefinite  national 
government  is  introduced.    Now  I  contend  that  no  powers  at  all 
are  conveyed  to  the  federal  government  by  election  or  represen* 
tation,  and  that  these  are  only  means  for  selecting  the  persons  by 
whom  the  powers  vested  in  the  federal  government  are  to  be  ex- 
ercised.    If  I  am  correct  in  supposing  that  the  powers  of  the 
federal  government  are  derived  from  the  constitution,  how  can 
Mr.  Madison  be  correct  in  asserting,  that  the  powers  of  the  house 
of  representatives  are  derived  from  an  American  people  ? 

Mr.  Madison's  oversight,  in  not  discriminating  between  the 
instrumentality  of  election  to  convey  powers  in  the  different 
cases  of  a  national  government,  or  a  federal  union,  must  have 
arisen  from  his  opinion  in  favour  of  the  former ;  and  nothing 
could  be  more  happily  contrived  to  advance  that  opinion,  than  a 
construction  by  which  the  unknown  powers  of  an  American  peo- 
ple are  eonveyed  to  the  house  of  representatives. 


92  taylor's  views. 

The  constitution  declares,  "  that  all  legislative  powers  herein 
<l  granted,  shall  he  vested  in  a  Congress  of  the  United  States, 
i(  which  shall  consist  of  a  senate  and  house  of  representatives." 
Congress,  according  to  the  true  political  meaning  of  the  term,  is 
thus  expressly  defined  to  be  a  convention  of  states.  It  is  neither 
a  convention  of  state  governments,  nor  of  an  American  people. 
No  legislative  powers  are  given  by  the  constitution  to  a  Congress 
of  state  governments,  nor  to  representatives  of  an  American  peo- 
ple ;  and  no  such  Congress  would  have  any  more  power  than 
the  Hartford  convention.  All  legislative  powers  granted  by  the 
constitution  are  vested  in  a  Congress  of  states,  to  consist  of  two 
houses.  These  houses  or  chambers  are  described  by  one  title. 
How  then  can  one  be  a  federal,  and  the  other  a  national  repre- 
sentation ?  Can  one  branch  of  the  legislature  have  only  federal, 
and  the  other  only  national  powers  ?  Would  it  not  be  a  usurpa- 
tion in  the  senate  to  exercise  national  powers?  Are  not  the  le- 
gislative powers  of  both  limited  "  to  the  powers  granted  by  the 
"  constitution  ?"  What  then  was  the  design  or  effect  of  Mr. 
Madison's  distinction  between  the  senate  and  the  house  of  repre- 
sentatives ?  Was  it  to  extend  the  legislative  powers  of  a  Con- 
gress of  states,  beyond  those  granted  by  the  conventions  of 
states  ?  He  has  not  said  so ;  but  commentators  have  seized  upon, 
this  distinction  between  the  two  legislative  branches  of  Congress., 
although  the  constitution  makes  none,  to  effect  that  purpose  ;  and 
for  any  other,  it  is  quite  immaterial. 

The  constitution  in  fact  refutes  Mr.  Madison's  idea.  "  Each 
"  state  shall  have  at  least  one  representative.  Each  state  shall 
ic  choose  a  specified  number  of  representatives.  Each  state 
tl  shall  elect  representatives  in  the  manner  prescribed  by  its  le- 
"  gislature.  The  representation  of  each  state  shall  have  one 
"  vote  in  choosing  a  president."  No  language  could  be  more 
explicit  for  expressing  the  fact,  that  the  house  of  representatives 
was  a  representation  from  each  state,  and  not  of  an  American 
nation. 

The  distinction  between  a  state  and  a  people,  upon  which  Mr. 
Madison's  idea  seems  to  be  founded,  is  contrary  to  the  settled 
political  idiom  ;  and  too  feeble  to  defeat  the  plain  words  of  the 
constitution.    It  has  often  been  correctly  said  by  the  best  writers, 


TAYLOR'S  VIEWS.  93 

that  there  is  no  people  where  there  is  a  despot.  Not  that  there 
are  no  men,  but  no  political  society,  defined  by  the  term  people. 
As  a  despot  annihilates  a  people,  so  would  a  consolidated  govern- 
ment annihilate  the  people  of  each  state.  Upon  their  rights, 
the  supremacy  of  a  despot,  or  any  other  supremacy,  would  have 
the  same  effect.  To  obtain  an  American  nation,  Mr.  Madison 
confounds  the  words  men  and  people,  as  if  they  were  of  the  same 
political  import ;  and  as  state  representatives  could  only  be  elect- 
ed by  men,  he  makes  this  unavoidable  act  an  instrument  for  the 
destruction  of  the  rights  of  these  men,  obtained  by  their  having 
constituted  themselves  into  nations,  or  a  people  of  each  state ; 
and  transforms  these  men  into  an  American  people  having  no 
rights,  upon  no  other  grounds,  than  that  they  are  men,  live  in 
America,  and  vote  for  the  formation  of  one  branch  of  a  federal 
Congress. 

The  only  justification  of  this  transformation  which  he  alleges, 
is,  that  these  men  will  be  represented  in  the  same  proportion, 
and  on  the  same  principle,  as  they  are  in  the  legislature  of 
each  particular  state.     I  can  neither  accede  to  the  facts  nor  the 
inference.     As  to  the  fact  of  proportion,  it  is  defeated  by  the 
circumstance  of  counting  a  portion  of  slaves  to  apportion  repre- 
sentation, and  by  the  loss  of  any  surplus  of  population  beyond 
the  quota  adopted  for  fixing  the  number  of  state  representatives  ; 
and  as  to  the  principle  of  state  and  federal  representation,  it  is 
entirely  different.     State  legislatures  are  a  national  representa- 
tion, and  as   such    invested  with   general  powers.     Upon  this 
principle,  the  men  composing  a  people  or  a  state,  are  represented 
in  state  legislatures.     But  the  men  or  people  of  each  state  are 
represented  in  Congress,  upon  the  principle  that  it  is  a  federal 
legislature,  invested   with  limited,  and  not  national  or  general 
powers.     The  first  principle  of  representation  invests  state  legis- 
latures with  a  power  to  pass  national  laws  for  the  government  of 
actual  states  or  nations;  but  the  second  does  not  invest  Congress 
with  a  power  to  pass  national  laws  for  the  government  of  an 
imaginary  state  or  nation.     If  however  the  facts  were  true,  they 
could  not  destroy  the  restrictions  of  the  constitution. 

The  difference  between  a  representation  for  special  or  for  ge- 
neral purposes,  is  well  understood,  and  has  been  practically  set- 


94  taylor's  views. 

tied  in  this  country  hr  many  instances.  The  Congress  under 
the  confederation  of  1777,  was  a  representation  for  special  pur- 
poses. Many  representations  of  the  people  of  each  state  have 
taken  place,  for  the  special  purposes  of  enacting  or  amending 
state  constitutions.  And  in  conformity  with  the  established  dif- 
ference between  a  representation  for  special  or  general  purposes, 
the  intire  representation  in  Congress  is  only  for  the  special  pur- 
pose of  exercising  the  delegated  powers.  Suppose  a  convention, 
representing  a  nation  or  people,  for  the  special  purpose  of  enact- 
ing or  amending  a  constitution,  should  undertake  to  make  roads 
and  canals,  or  to  exercise  local  and  temporary  powers,  because 
it  represented  a  people  or  a  nation.  Would  the  exercise  of  such 
powers  be  justifiable  upon  that  ground  ?  So,  if  it  should  be  ad- 
mitted that  the  house  of  representatives  is  a  representation  of  an 
American  people,  it  would  not  derive  any  national  or  general  au- 
thority ^from  that  source,  and  is  equally  restricted  to  the  special 
purposes  for  which  it  is  convened,  as  any  other  representation 
for  special  purposes.  If  this  argument  is  sound,  it  demonstrates 
the  error  of  thrusting  the  words  general  and  national  into  the 
constitution,  and  destroys  all  the  inferences  drawn  by  judges  and 
statesmen,  from  that  source,  because,  though  very  fertile,  it  is 
not  constitutional. 

The  distinction  between  the  senate  and  house  of  representa- 
tives, in  order  to  obtain  a  government  partly  federal  and  partly 
national,  seems  to  be  untenable  in  another  view,  Mr.  Madison 
asserts,  as  the  foundation  for  it,  "  that  the  house  of  representa- 
"  tives  derives  its  powers  from  the  people  of  America 3  but  that 
"  the  senate  derives  its  powers  from  the  states."  Where  is  the 
difference  between  these  representations  ?  The  people  include 
all  the  states,  and  the  states  include  all  the  people.  If  repre- 
sentation conveys  powers  to  either  house,  it  conveys  them  to 
both.  The  representation  of  the  states  would  convey  the  same 
powers  to  one,  as  the  representation  of  the  people  of  each  state 
would  to'the  other.  Mr.  Hamilton  makes  the  state  govern- 
ments, and  Mr.  Madison  the  states  themselves,  the  constituents 
of  the  senate.  Either  mode  of  conveying  power  would  suffice 
to  establish  a  national  government.  If  the  principle  is  true,  that 
the  house  of  representatives  derives  power  from  its  imaginary 


Taylor's  views.  95 

constituents  ;  an  American  people  ;  the  principle,  that  the  senate 
derives  power  from  its  real  constituents,  must  also  be  true,  upon 
the  ground  that  representation  comprises  the  power  of  constitu- 
ents. It  is  quite  the  same  thing,  whether  one  house  can  exercise 
the  powers  of  the  people,  or  the  other,  the  powers  of  the  states 
or  of  their  governments,  because  either  source  of  power  would 
expose  the  whole  treasury  of  state  rights  to  defalcation,  and  ef- 
fectually establish  the  national  form  of  government  advocated  by 
both  gentlemen.  If  the  powers  of  the  senate  were  federal,  and 
those  of  the  house  of  representatives  national,  by  what  authority 
could  the  latter  exercise  federal,  or  the  former  national  powers  ? 
It  would  be  a  plain  usurpation  for  either  house  to  exercise  pow- 
ers, with  which  its  constituents  themselves  were  not  invested. 
But  if  both  houses  derive  the  same  powers  from  the  same  source, 
they  may  act  concurrently  in  exercising  them.  It  follows  that 
the  powers  of  both,  must  either  be  derived  from  the  constitution, 
or  from  a  representation,  comprising  all  the  powers  to  be  concur- 
rently exercised ;  that  in  either  view,  Mr.  Madison's  distinction 
is  groundless,  and  that  the  government  is  either  wholly  federal  or 
wholl}'-  national. 

But  ought  the  powers  of  the  federal  government  to  be  defined 
by  the  mode  of  nominating  its  officers,  or  by  the  articles  of  the 
constitution  ?  Can  the  means  by  which  its  powers  are  put  into 
operation,  change  its  character,  or  alter  its  principles  ?  If  the  go- 
vernment was  made  federal  by  the  constitution,  can  either  of  the 
modes  for  effecting  a  representation  of  the  parties  to  this  federal 
compact,  destroy  the  principle  of  the  compact  itself?  Yes,  says 
Mr.  Madison,  it  may  be  effected  by  "  a  relation  to  the  sources 
"  from  which  the  ordinary  powers  of  a  government  are  deriv- 
il  ed."  The  obscurity  of  this  expression  is  admirably  contrived 
for  changing  the  federal  system  adopted,  into  the  national  sys- 
tem rejected.  What  are  these  ordinary  powers  of  a  govern- 
ment ?  Are  they  powers  usually  resulting  from  the  establishment 
of  a  general  government  by  a  national  representation  ?  If  so, 
then  this  relation  woidd  invest  the  federal  government  with  the 
ordinary  powers  of  a  national  government.  If  not,  then  this 
relation  cannot  invest  it  with  any  power  at  all.  The  fact  is,  that 
the  federal  government  derives  all  its  powers  from  the  constitu 


96  TAYLOR'S  VIEWS. 

tion,  and  none  from  its  relation  to  the  sources  of  ordinary  power, 
whether  they  are  conquest,  usurpation,  legitimacy,  or  represen- 
tation. If  this  is  true,  then  no  relation  can  exist  between  the  fe- 
deral government,  and  the  ordinary  sources  of  power. 

There  are  two  plain  relations  established  by  the  constitution  ; 
one,  between  Congress  and  the  sovereign  states  by  which  it  was 
created ;  the  other,  between  Congress  and  the  special  powers 
with  which  it  was  invested.  To  substitute  for  these  relations, 
one  between  a  government  and  the.  ordinary  powers  conveyed  by 
representation,  is  only  an  attempt  to  make  a  limited  government 
the  carver  of  its  own  powers,  instead  of  deriving  them  from  a 
federal  compact ;  so  as  to  convert  state  elections,  intended  as  one 
means  to  enforce  the  compact,  into  an  instrument  for  its  destruc- 
tion. If  the  words  "  national,  general,  and  ordinary  powers," 
convey  no  powTers  not  delegated  by  the  compact,  they  have  no 
weight  in  the  argument;  if  they  do,  the  limitations  of  the  con- 
stitution are  quite  indefinite  and  frivolous.  Such  is  the  new 
scheme  of  measuring  the  powers  of  the  federal  government  by 
the  ordinary  powers  of  a  national  or  general  government,  instead 
of  measuring  them  by  the  intention  and  articles  of  the  union. 
It  is  only  the  old  artifice  in  a  new  dress,  of  using  the  people  to 
destroy  the  rights  of  the  people  ;  for  state  rights  are  the  rights 
of  the  people. 

Is  it  true  that  the  rights  of  the  federal  government  ought  to  be 
measured  by  the  rights  of  the  people  ?  Then  indeed  it  would 
follow,  that  as  all  state  rights  are  rights  of  the  people,  the  whole 
would  be  transferred  to  the  federal  government,  if  it  is  a  repre- 
sentation of  an  American  nation,  and  if  representation  conveys 
to  a  government  the  rights  of  the  people.  But  if  the  powers  of 
the  federal  government  are  only  emanations  from  the  constitu- 
tion, and  are  not  derived  from  representation,  these  emanations 
really  constitute  the  government,  and  it  is  not  constituted  by  ema- 
nations from  representation.  The  contrary  hypothesis  would 
destroy  all  the  state  rights  of  the  people.  It  is  as  easy  to  use 
words  which  will  include  absolute  power,  as  it  is  hard  to  discern 
the  futility  of  having  limited  the  powers  of  the  federal  govern- 
ment. Mr.  Madison  avails  himself  of  the  facility  by  reviving 
the  rejected  words,  national  and  general ;  and  he  surmounts  the 


taylor's  views.  97 

difficulty,  by  drawing  powers  from  his  assumed  American  peo- 
ple, as  a  higher  authority  than  that  which  prescribed  the  limita- 
tions. These  doctrines  have  generated  the  difficulty  of  discern- 
ing a  distinct  line  between  state  and  federal  powers. 

At  this  line  Mr.  Madison  and  his  commentators  split.  He 
asserts  the  existence  of  state  sovereignties,  invested  with  exclu- 
sive independent  powers ;  his  commentators  deny  it.  This  event 
has  proved  that  the  idea  of  a  federal  and  also  of  a  national  govern- 
ment, acting  upon  the  same  men,  was  too  fine  to  be  practical, 
and  that  a  naked  precept  could  not  withstand  an  absolute  supre- 
macy. Accordingly,  constructions  are  already  advanced  con- 
formable to  the  proposed  plan  for  a  national  government ; 
proving  that  the  supreme  negatives  for  which  it  contended, 
were  justly  considered  by  its  opponents  as  sufficient  to  destroy 
any  rights  preceptively  reserved  to  the  states,  but  deprived  of 
the  power  of  defence.  To  effect  the  same  end,  the  commenta- 
tors who  still  wish  for  a  consolidated  national  government,  have 
seized  upon  Mr.  Madison's  doctrines,  endowing  the  federal  go- 
vernment with  national  powers,  and  also  with  a  supreme  nega- 
tive over  the  laws  and  judgments  of  the  states,  for  the  purpose 
of  destroying  the  state  sovereignties  which  he  admits.  They 
see,  what  every  sound  understanding  must  also  see,  that  spheres 
of  exclusive  state  rights,  and  their  subjection  to  a  national  supre- 
macy, are  incompatible  ;  and  between  unavoidable  alternatives, 
elect  that  which  they  prefer ;  adopting  one  half  of  Mr.  Madi- 
son's theory,  and  rejecting  the  other,  as  the  two  halves  are  inca- 
pable of  reconciliation. 

There  is  no  choice  offered  to  either  party,  but  one  between  a 
federal  and  a  national  government;  and  the  only  question  to  be 
decided  is,  which  of  these  forms  has  been  established  by  the 
constitution.  It  must  be  admitted,  that  a  national  or  general 
government,  unable  to  punish  thieves  and  murderers,  or  to  regu- 
late the  descent  and  distribution  of  property,  would  be  a  politi- 
cal anomaly,  never  attempted,  nor  hitherto  conceived  even  by 
Utopian  historians.  A  government,  unable  to  provide  for  social 
safety  and  happiness,  could  hardly  be  called  a  government.  The 
only  modes  of  surmounting  this  formidable  objection,  are  either 
to  absolve  the  federal  government  from  all  the  restrictions  of  the 

13 


98  taylor's  views. 

constitution,  or  to  admit  that  these  great  ends  of  society  are  pro- 
vided for  in  the  structure  of  the  state  governments. 

One  argument  to  prove  that  no  part  or  parcel  of  a  national  go- 
vernment was  contemplated  by  the  constitution,  seems  to  be  in- 
capable of  refutation.  The  federal  government  cannot  alter  a 
county  or  incorporate  a  town.  It  cannot  divide  a  state.  And 
above  all,  it  cannot  obtain  a  pittance  of  land,  without  the  consent 
of  a  state  government.  A  national  right  of  territory  is  posi- 
tively recognised  as  residing  in  state  nations,  and  not  in  an  Ame- 
rican nation.  These  recognitions  affirm  the  existence  of  state 
nations,  and  deny  the  existence  of  an  American  nation.  A  na- 
tion without  a  territory,  erratick  tribes  excepted,  is  a  contradic- 
tion ;  and  a  national  government,  without  a  nation  invested  with 
territorial  rights,  is  a  castle  in  the  air.  A  Congress  composed  of 
deputies  from  sovereign  states,  is  invested  with  ten  miles  square 
to  meet  upon,  just  as  towns  or  districts  have  been  assigned  in 
Europe,  and  anciently  in  Greece,  for  holding  federal  diets  ;  but 
this  Congress,  like  those  diets,  cannot  exercise  any  power  upon 
the  lands  composing  the  territory  of  each  state  nation,  either  by 
regulating  inheritances,  or  cutting  them  into  roads  or  canals,  be- 
cause it  is  not  a  representation  of  an  American  nation,  invested 
with  an  American  territory. 

As  territory,  the  necessary  basis  for  a  national  government, 
belongs  exclusively  to  state  nations,  the  fact  is  an  index  directing 
us  to  the  true  intention  of  the  constitution.  It  was  intended  to 
unite  the  energies  of  these  state  nations ;  to  defend,  and  not  to 
consolidate  their  territories,  by  creating  an  American  nation,  and 
a  government  deriving  its  powers  from  this  supposed  nation ; 
and  to  prevent  collisions  with  each  other.  For  these  federal 
ends,  federal,  and  not  national  powers  were  created.  If  so,  the 
government  was  intended  to  be  wholly  federal. 

The  formulary  of  electing  one  house  of  Congress,  was  either 
intended  as  one  means  for  effecting  the  federal  ends  expressed, 
or  for  establishing  a  national  or  general  government,  not  ex- 
pressed. It  could  not  be  intended  for  effecting  both  objects,  be- 
cause the  latter,  if  effected,  would  supersede  the  former.  If 
this  formulary  can  establish  a  national  or  general  government, 
there  would  be  no  occasion  at  all  for  a  federal  government. 


Taylor's  views.  99 

The  mode  of  constituting  the  two  houses  of  "  a  Congress  of 
"  the  United  States,"  is  accounted  for,  without  ascribing  to  it  a 
tacit  design  of  exchanging  an  ostensible  federal,  for  a  recondite 
national  government.  It  was  the  result  of  a  compromise  be- 
tween the  large  and  the  small  states.  Suppose  the  small  states 
had  succeeded  in  obtaining  an  equal  vote  in  the  house  of  repre- 
sentatives with  the  large  states,  and  the  representatives  had  been 
elected  by  the  people  of  each  state,  would  this  house  have  de- 
rived any  powers  from  the  supposition  that  it  was  chosen  by  the 
people  of  America  ?  If  not,  the  same  credential  cannot  convey 
/•.^tional  or  general  powers,  in  consequence  of  a  compromise, 
not  intended  to  have  this  effect ;  but  to  give  weight,  both  to  po- 
pulation and  the  moral  equality  of  state  sovereignties,  in  the  ex- 
ercise of  the  federal  powers  created  by  the  constitution.  The 
mode  of  representation  in  either  house  of  Congress,  was  not  de- 
signed to  enlarge  or  contract  the  powers  given  to  the  body  com- 
posed of  both,  and  had  it  been  the  same  in  the  house  of  repre- 
sentatives as  in  the  senate,  the  powers  would  not  have  thereby 
been  altered.  Had  the  states  been  considered  as  the  election 
districts  of  an  American  people,  Congress  would  have  been  em- 
powered to  provide  against  the  inequalities  of  representation 
arising  from  a  surplus  population,  and  the  absence  of  such  a 
power  is  an  exposition  of  the  motive  of  the  compromise  between 
the  large  and  small  states,  proving  that  it  did  not  contemplate 
any  annexation  of  national  features  to  the  federal  government ; 
any  creation  of  an  American  people  ;  or  any  restriction  of  state 
rights  beyond  the  delegations  of  powers  expressed  in  the  con- 
stitution. 

With  the  argument,  "  that  the  house  of  representatives  is  ap- 
"  pointed  by  individuals,"  is  combined  the  circumstance,  "  that 
"  the  federal  government  acts  upon  individuals,"  to  infer  from 
the  united  force  of  both,  that  it  is  wholly  or  partly  a  national 
government.  The  old  Congress  acted  upon  individuals  to  a 
great  extent  in  many  cases,  particularly  in  the  government  of  an 
army,  and  in  making  peace  or  war ;  yet  it  was  never  imagined 
that  its  powers  were  enlarged  by  this  circumstance  so  as  to  ena- 
ble it  to  make  roads  and  canals  through  the  lands  of  the  officers 
and  soldiers,  or  deprive  them  of  any  rights,  over  which  it  was 


100  taylor's  views. 

not  invested  with  power  ;  although  these  officers  and  soldiers  in- 
dividually assented  to  their  constitution  by  inlisting  or  accepting 
commissions. 

This  auxiliary  doctrine  is  the  most  plausible,  inasmuch  as  the 
intire  federal  government  acts  directly  upon  individuals  ;  whereas 
direct  individual  election  extends  only  to  one  of  its  departments, 
unable  to  legislate  alone.  And  yet  it  cannot  sustain  the  infer- 
ence of  a  national  government,  because  it  is  impossible  to  ima- 
gine a  form  of  government  neither  flowing  from  nor  acting  upon 
individuals.  Every  hereditary  power  originally  flows  from  in- 
dividuals, but  wherever  it  does  not  exist,  both  positions  are  un- 
exceptionably  true.  Neither  fact  therefore  can  furnish  a  per- 
fect distinction  between  the  nature  or  principles  of  different  go- 
vernments. Both  are  mere  truisms  applicable  to  all  govern- 
ments, amounting  to  the  meagre  logick,  that  government  is  go- 
vernment. If  the  powers  of  a  government  can  be  enlarged  by 
such  reasoning,  all  the  inventions  for  restraining  power  are  inef- 
fectual, and  all  the  securities  for  civil  liberty  are  defeated.  The 
right  of  self-government  can  no  longer  be  vindicated  by  consti- 
tutions ;  and  though  it  should  be  nominally  conceded,  it  would 
be  practically  undermined  by  the  doctrine,  that  as  governments 
are  created  by  and  act  upon  individuals,  they  may  disregard  con- 
stitutional restrictions. 

This  new  doctrine,  by  attempting  to  prove  too  much,  proves 
nothing.  The  state  governments  proceed  from  and  act  upon  in- 
dividuals more  extensively  than  the  federal  government.  If 
these  circumstances  extend  the  constitutional  powers  of  the  lat- 
ter, they  would  extend  those  of  the  former  ;  and  if  they  invest 
the  federal  government  with  legislative  or  judicial  powers  be- 
yond those  delegated,  they  must  also  invest  the  state  govern- 
ments with  legislative  and  judicial  powers,  beyond  those  re- 
served. 

Governments  must  flow  from  individuals  to  be  free,  and  they 
must  act  upon  individuals  to  have  any  effect.  Both  circumstances 
are  necessary  to  constitute  a  government,  good  or  bad.  The  dif- 
ference between  them  does  not  lie  in  either,  but  in  the  restraints 
imposed  upon  an  abuse  of  power.  If  these  restraints  are  neces- 
sary to  secure  the  rights  of  individuals,  they  are  also  necessary 


TAYLOR'S  VIEWS.  101 

to  secure  the  rights  of  confederating  states ;  and  if  the  rights  of 
individuals  wouLd  be  endangered  or  lost,  by  the  despotick  doc- 
trine, that  the  power  of  a  government  is  co-extensive  with  its 
actions ;  the  rights  of  states  would  be  endangered  or  lost  under 
the  same  doctrine. 

By  the  confederation  of  1777,  powers  operating  upon  indivi- 
duals were  bestowed  upon  Congress ;  yet  that  instrument,  far 
from  creating  a  national  government  by  such  powers,  or  invest- 
ing the  federal  government  with  any  supremacy  over  the  states, 
asserted  their  sovereignty  and  independence.  It  is  true  that  the 
people  of  the  states  were  the  ultimate  source  of  the  powers  con- 
veyed to  that  Congress  by  the  instrumentality  of  their  agents, 
but  by  the  same  instrumentality,  they  are  the  ultimate  source  of 
the  powers  conveyed  by  the  constitution,  as  they  will  be  of 
powers  conveyed  by  amendments  through  the  agency  of  their 
state  legislatures.  The  powers  both  of  the  former  and  present 
Congress,  being  both  derived  from  the  people,  through  the  in- 
strumentality of  their  agents,  and  mutually  operating  upon  indi- 
viduals, comprised  both  the  circumstances  from  which  a  national 
government  is  now  inferred ;  but  had  the  inference  been  correct, 
it  would  have  supplied  every  deficiency,  and  removed  every  de- 
fect of  the  old  union,  and  rendered  a  new  one  unnecessary. 

If  the  ends  of  both  the  old  and  the  present  union  were  federal, 
the  degrees  in  which  each  flowed  from  and  operated  upon  indi- 
viduals, could  not  alter  the  federal  character  of  either.  By  the 
articles  of  both,  federal  ends  are  explicitly  avowed,  and  local 
ends  explicitly  renounced.  The  insufficiency  of  the  first  to  effect 
the  contemplated  federal  ends,  and  not  its  insufficiency  to  establish 
a  national  government,  suggested  the  substitution  of  the  second 
union.  To  remove  this  insufficiency,  the  imperfect  mode  of  fe- 
deral taxation  was  amended.  But  a  right  to  tax,  and  the  appro- 
priation of  taxes  to  federal  objects,'  is  nearly  the  same  in  both 
instruments.  The  first  declared  that  "  all  charges  of  war,  and 
"  all  other  expenses  which  shall  be  incurred  for  the  common  de- 
"  fence  and  general  welfare,  and  allowed  by  the  United  States 
"  in  Congress  assembled,  shall  be  defrayed  out  of  a  common 
"  treasury  to  be  supplied  by  the  several  states,  in  proportion  to 
"  the  value  of  all  lands  and  buildings,  to  be  estimated  in  such 


10Z  TAYLOR'S  VIEWS. 

"  mode  as  Congress  shall  from  time  to  time  direct  and  appoint. 
"  And  that  the  taxes  for  paying  that  proportion  shall  be  laid  and 
"  levied  by  the  state  legislatures  within  the  time  agreed  upon  by 
"  Congress."  By  the  existing  union,  Congress  may  tax,  not  in- 
directly but  directly,  "  to  pay  the  debts  and  provide  for  the 
"  common  defence  and  general  ivelf are  of  the  United  States. v 
In  both,  federal  and  not  national  ends  are  expres-ed  as  objects  of 
taxation,  and  in  both  the  taxes  would  operate  upon  individuals. 
But  no  effectual  security  for  a  revenue  existed  in  the  first  mode 
of  taxation  ;  and  it  furnishes  an  example,  foretelling  the  effect  of 
a  naked  precept  for  the  security  of  state  rights,  coupled  with  a 
supreme  power  able  to  prevent  their  exercise.  A  federal  supre- 
macy can  as  easily  defeat  state  rights  preceptively  reserved,  as 
the  state  supremacies  defeated  the  preceptive  power  of  taxation 
delegated  to  the  old  Congress. 

The  power  of  taxation  operates  upon  individuals  more  exten- 
sively than  any  other,  yet  we  see  that  under  both  unions,  Con- 
gress was  invested  with  it  for  federal  ends.  The  similitude  of 
the  powers  granted  by  both,  continues,  in  the  cases  of  war, 
peace,  embassies,  treaties,  commerce,  piracies,  coin,  weights,  and 
measures,  post-offices,  postage,  appointing  officers,  governing  the 
army  and  navy,  and  in  others,  comprising  most  of  the  powers 
granted  to  our  present  Congress  ;  yet  it  was  never  imagined 
that  these  powers  operating  upon  individuals  constituted  a  nation- 
al or  supreme  government,  or  abolished  the  sovereignties  of  the 
states.  All  the  inferior  powers  over  individuals,  as  plainly  refer 
to  federal  ends,  as  the  great  power  of  taxation ;  and  if  the  ends 
are  federal,  it  cannot  be  inferred  from  the  means  necessary  to 
effect  them,  that  the  government  is  national. 

It  was  impossible  to  form  a  confederation  of  popular  repub- 
licks,  of  which  the  people  were  not  the  source,  and  which  could 
not  act  upon  individuals.  Let  us  suppose  that  thirteen  monarchs 
should  unite  in  a  league  for  mutual  defence,  investing  their  dele- 
gates with  limited  powers  over  individuals,  for  the  purpose  of 
effecting  their  object.  Would  this  confederation  condense  the 
thirteen  monarchies  into  one  ?  But  if  we  add  to  the  supposition 
that  by  this  confederation  of  monarchs,  their  delegates  were  in- 
vested with  a  supreme  negative  over  all  the  acts  of  those  mo- 


taylor's  views.  103 

narchs,  and  an  exclusive  right  to  construe  their  own  powers,  is  it 
difficult  to  discover,  that  the  monarchs  would  be  deposed,  and 
their  monarohies  melted  up  into  one  consolidated  government? 
It  will  not  be  said  that  free  and  sovereign  states  occupy  a  political 
rank  inferior  to  that  of  absolute  monarchs. 

The  doctrines  of  Mr.  Madison  and  his  commentators,  termi- 
nate in  a  syllogism.  A  government,  the  ordinary  powers  of 
which  flow,  from  the  people  of  the  several  states,  and  operate  upon 
individuals,  is  national ;  but  no  federal  government  can  be  form- 
ed which  does  not  flow  from  this  source,  and  will  not  operate 
upon  individuals  ;  therefore  a  federal  government  cannot  exist  in 
the  United  States.  Is  this  hypothesis  a  sufficient  security  for  the 
state  rights  of  the  people  ? 


taylor's  views.  105 


SECTION  XL 


THE  SUBJECT  CONTINUED. 


Mr.  Madison  proceeds.  "  The  local  or  municipal  authorities 
"  form  distinct  and  independent  portions  of  the  supremacy,  no 
"  more  subject,  within  their  respective  spheres,  to  the  general 
"  authority,  than  the  general  authority  is  subject  to  them  within 
"  its  own  sphere.  In  this  relation,  then,  the  proposed  govern- 
"  ment  cannot  be  deemed  a  national  one,  since  its  jurisdiction 
"  extends  to  certain  limited  objects  only,  and  leaves  to  the 
"  several  states  a  residuary  and  inviolable  sovereignty  over  all 
"  other  objects.  It  is  true,  that  in  controversies  relating  to 
"  the  boundaries  between  the  two  jurisdictions,  the  tribunal 
u  which  is  ultimately  to  decide,  is  to  be  established  under  the 
61  general  government.  The  decision  is  to  be  impartially 
"  made,  according  to  the  7*ules  of  the  constitution,  and  all 
"  the  usual  and  most  effectual  precautions  are  taken  to  secure 
"  this  impartiality."  That  the  state  governments  are  subject 
and  not  subject  to  the  federal  government,  is  his  result. 

Mr.  Hamilton  also  frequently  and  emphatically  admits  the 
sovereignty  of  the  states,  and  he  illustrates  it  by  the  concurrent 
power  of  taxation,  supposing  it  to  be  perfectly  unquestionable  in 
the  case  of  exclusive  powers.  Even  in  the  weaker  case,  he  as- 
serts "  that  an  attempt  on  the  part  of  the  national  government 
"  to  abridge  the  concurrent  state  power  of  taxation,  would  be  a 
"  violent  assumption  of  power,  unwarranted  by  any  article  or 
"  clause  of  the  constitution."  But  he  adds,  "  Who  is  to  judge 
"  of  the  necessit}'  and  propriety  of  the  laws  to  be  passed  for  ex- 
u  ercising  the  powers  of  the  union  ?  The  national  govern- 
"  ment,  under  the  control  of  the  people." 

Even  a  humility,  inspired  by  the  deepest  conviction  of  infe- 
rior talents,  cannot  be  taxed  with  presumption,  for  differing  in 
opinion  from  gentlemen  at  variance  both  with  each  other  and 
with  themselves  ;  as  no  authorities,  however  respectable,  can  ex- 

14 


106  TAYLOR'S  VIEWS. 

pect  an  assent  to  contradictions.  Both  have  however  extracted 
their  respective  supremacies  from  the  same  source  ;  Mr.  Madison 
from  the  supposition  that  the  constitution  established  a  general 
o-overnment;  and  Mr.  Hamilton  from  the  supposition  that  it  had 
established  a  national  government.  From  this  equivalent  sup- 
position, they  have  drawn  different  inferences ;  one,  that  this 
general  government  may  establish  a  tribunal  to  determine  the 
extent  of  the  rights  reserved  to  the  states ;  the  other,  that  the 
national  government  itself  may  determine  the  extent  of  its  own 
powers,  under  the  control  of  the  people.  Both,  by  the  interpo- 
lation of  the  word  general  or  national  into  the  constitution,  vio- 
late the  inviolable  sovereignty  bestowed  by  both  on  the  states. 
Mr.  Madison  defeats  the  spherical  relation  of  equality,  from 
which  he  extracts  the  conclusions  that  "  the  government  cannot 
"  be  called  a  national  one,  and  that  its  jurisdiction  extends  to 
"  certain  limited  objects  only"  by  calling  it  a  general  govern- 
ment, invested  with  a  power  to  create  a  tribunal  armed  with 
unlimited  jurisdiction.  Do  we  find  this  power  given  by  the 
constitution  to  the  federal  government  ? 

I  understand  Mr.  Madison  to  mean,  that  the  federal  judiciary 
is  imperatively  to  settle  controversies  between  two  spheres, 
"  neither  of  which  is  subject  to  the  other,  and  both  of  which  are 
"  independent  and  supreme,"  that  is,  although  the  whole  of 
each  is  independent  of  the  whole  of  the  other,  yet  the  whole  of 
one  is  subjected  to  and  dependent  upon  a  part  of  the  other. — And 
Mr.  Hamilton  to  say,  that  the  whole  of  the  national  sphere,  as 
he  is  pleased  to  entitle  it,  is  invested  with  a  power  imperatively 
to  determine  the  necessity  and  propriety  of  its  own  laws,  under 
no  control  but  that  of  the  people.  Propriety  includes  constitu- 
tionality. I  discern  no  substantial  difference  between  an  exercise 
of  ultimate  supremacy  by  the  federal  government  over  the  state 
spheres,  or  its  bestowing  the  same  supremacy  upon  a  tribunal  to 
be  appointed  by  itself;  but  these  contradictory  constructions  are 
accounted  for  by  the  journal  of  the  convention.  "  It  was  moved 
"  by  Mr.  Randolph,  seconded  by  Mr.  Madison,  that  the  juris- 
"  diction  of  the  judiciary  should  extend  to  questions  which 
"  involve  the  national  peace  and  harmony  ;"  and  Mr.  Hamil- 
ton proposed  "  that  a  supreme  legislature  should  have  power  to 


taylor's  views.  107 

"jpass  all  laws  whatsoever."  Both  these  propositions  were 
made,  considered,  and  rejected,  and  yet  each  commentator  has 
discovered  that  his  own  is  tacitly  inserted  in  the  constitution,  by 
the  instrumentality  of  first  inserting  in  it  the  word  "  general  or 
"  national." 

But  Mr.  Madison's  discovery  is  evidently  more  ingenious  than 
Mr.  Hamilton's.  He  supported  propositions  for  investing  a  ju- 
diciary with  a  negative  power  over  state  laws,  and  with  a  juris- 
diction in  questions  which  might  involve  the  national  peace  and 
harmony,  both  of  which  powers  would  be  obtained  by  a  power 
to  settle  the  rights  of  independent  spheres,  unsubjected  to  any 
control. 

Mr.  Hamilton's  plan  for  a  government  was  adverse  to  this  ex- 
orbitant judicial  supremacy,  because  it  was  quite  inconsistent 
with  its  model.  No  such  judicial  power  existed  in  the  English 
system  of  government.  He  therefore  proposed  a  national  legis- 
lature'with  a  power  to  pass  all  laws  whatsoever,  in  accordance 
with  that  system ;  and  his  construction  "  that  the  national  go- 
"  vernment  can  judge  of  the  necessity  and  propriety  of  the 
"  laws  to  be  passed  under  no  control  but  that  of  the  people," 
gains  this  point  contended  for  by  him  in  the  convention.  He 
assumes  the  existence  of  a  national  government,  and  invests  it 
with  a  power  to  pass  all  laws  whatsover,  exactly  as  the  plan  pro- 
posed ;  for  that  also  subjected  the  national  legislature,  as  in  Eng- 
land, to  the  control  of  election. 

Mr.  Hamilton  prefers  the  control  of  the  people  over  legisla- 
tures to  the  control  of  a  court ;  Mr.  Madison  prefers  the  control 
of  the  court  to  the  control  of  the  people ;  but  both  reject  the 
mutual  check  or  control  between  the  independent  state  and  fe- 
deral spheres,  for  which  both  had  positively  contended  whilst 
construing  the  constitution.  Which  ought  to  have  most  weight, 
their  constructions,  mingled,  or  unmingled,  with  their  preposses- 
sions in  the  convention  ? 

It  was  regretted  that  these  eminent  men  were  not  opposed  to 
each  other,  as  to  the  great  question,  whether  a  federal  or  a  na- 
tional government  was  to  be  preferred  ;  and  their  difference  of 
opinion  upon  the  important  point  of  judicial  supremacy,  discloses 
the  loss  the  publick  has  sustained  from  their  having  united  in  a. 


108  taylor's  views. 

preference  for  a  national  form  of  government.  Mr.  Hamilton 
having  previously  asserted  that  "  a  law,  by  the  meaning  of  the 
"  term,  includes  supremacy,  and  that  the  national  government 
"  was  to  judge  of  the  necessity  and  propriety  of  laws,"  is  called 
forth  by  Mr.  Madison's  construction  transferring  supremacy  from 
his  national  government,  and  his  control  from  the  people,  to  the 
federal  judiciary  ;  and  by  a  long  and  able  argument,  he  energe- 
tically discloses  his  disapprobation  of  the  novel  idea. 

In  the  numbers  47  and  48  of  the  Federalist,  he  examines  the 
"  meaning  of  the  maxim,  which  requires  a  separation  of  the  de- 
"  partments  of  government,"  and  concludes  his  reasoning  in  the 
following  words:  "  The  conclusion  which  I  am  warranted  in 
"  drawing  from  these  observations,  is,  that  a  mere  demarkation 
"  on  parchment  of  the  constitutional  limits  of  the  several  depart - 
"  ments,  is  not  a  sufficient  guard  against  those  encroachments, 
"  which  lead  to  a  tyrannical  concentration  of  all  the  powers 
"  of  government  in  the  same  hands." 

In  the  numbers  49  and  50,  Mr.  Hamilton  proves,  that  the  su- 
premacy of  the  people,  alone,  is  not  a  sufficient  security,  to  pre- 
vent these  encroachments  leading  to  tyranny;  and  that  frequent 
appeals  to  them  for  the  maintenance  "  of  mere  parchment  de- 
"  markationsof  constitutional  limits,"  would  not  only  be  exposed 
to  many  objections,  but  utterly  insufficient  to  prevent  these  fatal 
encroachments. 

In  number  51,  Mr.  Hamilton  explicitly  states,  and  powerful!}' 
enforces,  the  true  remedy  to  prevent  them.  He  evidently  con- 
siders Mr.  Madison's  remedy  "  of  a  parchment  security  for  the 
"  state  departments  under  a  supremacy  of  the  federal  court,"  as 
visionary  and  unsubstantial.  He  examines  the  control  of  politi- 
cal departments  by  the  people  only,  and  also  a  concentration  of 
power  in  one  department,  unsubjected  to  the  control  of  another  ; 
and  ably  vindicates  the  remedy  for  the  insufficiency  of  both  to 
prevent  tyranny.  Having  previously  concluded  "that  mere 
"  demarkations  in  a  constitution,  are  not  sufficient  to  restrain  the 
several  departments  within  their  legal  limits,  and  that  frequent 
appeals  to  the  people  would  be  neither  a  proper  nor  an  effec- 
tual provision  for  that  purpose,"  he  proceeds  to  vindicate  the 
only  precaution  commensurate  to  the  end. 


f 


Taylor's  views.  109 

H.  No.  51.  "  To  what  expedient  then,  shall  we  finally  resort 
"  for  maintaining  in  practice  the  necessary  partition  of  power 
"  among  the  several  departments  as  laid  down  in  the  constitu- 
"  tion  ?  The  only  answer  that  can  be  given  is,  that  as  all  these 
"  exterior  provisions  are  found  to  be  inadequate,  the  defect  must 
"  be  supplied,  by  so  contriving  the  interior  structure  of  the  go- 
"  vernment,  as  that  its  several  constituent  parts  may,  by  their 
"  mutual  relations*  be  the  means  of  keeping  each  other  in, 
"  their  proper  places. 

"  In  order  to  lay  a  due  foundation  for  that  separate  and  dis- 
"  tinct  exercise  of  the  different  powers  of  government,  which,  to 
"  a  certain  extent,  is  admitted  on  all  hands,  to  be  essential  to 
if  the  preservation  of  liberty,  it  is  evident  that  each  depart- 
"  merit  should  have  a  will  of  its  own. 

"  The  permanent  tenure  by  which  appointments  are  held  in 
"  the  judicial  department,  must  soon  destroy  all  sense  of  de- 
u  pendence,  though  they  should  have  even  been  conferred  by 
"  the  people." 

"  The  great  security  against  a  gradual  concentration  of  the  se- 
"  veral  powers  in  the  same  department,  consists  in  giving  to 
"  those  who  administer  each  department,  the  necessary  constitu- 
"  tional  means  and  personal  motives  to  resist  encroachments  of 
"  the  others.  The  provision  for  defence  must  in  this,  as  in  all 
"  other  cases,  be  made  commensurate  to  the  danger  of  attack. 
"  Ambition  must  be  made  to  counteract  ambition." 

"  This  policy  of  supplying,  by  opposite  and  rival  interests, 
•'•'  the  defect  of  better  motives,  might  be  traced  through  the  whole 
"  system  of  human  affairs." 

"  There  are  two  considerations  particularly  applicable  to  the 
federal  system  of  America,  which-place  it  in  a  very  interest- 
ing point  of  view.  First :  In  a  single  republick,  all  the  power 
surrendered  by  the  people,  is  submitted  to  the  administration 
"  of  a  single  government.  In  the  compound  republick  of 
"  America,  the  power  surrendered  by  the  people,  is  first  divided 
"  between  two  distinct  governments,  and  the  portion  allotted 
"  to  each  subdivided  among  distinct  and  separate  departments. 
"  Hence  a  double  security  arises  to  the  rights  of  the  people. 
i:  The  different  governments  will  control  each  other,  at  the 


110  taylor's  views. 

e*  same  time  that  each  ivill  be  controlled  by  itself.  Secondly ; 
"  It  is  of  great  importance  in  a  republick,  not  only  to  guard  the 
"  society  against  the  oppression  of  its  rulers,  but  to  guard  one 
"  part  of  the  society  against  the  oppression  of  the  other  part. 
"  If  a  majority  be  united  by  a  common  interest,  the  rights  of  a 
"  minority  will  be  insecure.  A  method  of  providing  against 
"  this  evil,  will  be  exemplified  in  the  federal  republick  of  the 
"  United  States.  The  society  will  be  broken  into  so  many  dif- 
"  ferent  parts,  that  the  rights  of  individuals  or  of  the  minority, 
"  will  be  in  little  danger  from  interested  combinations  of  the  ma- 
"  jority.  In  a  society,  under  the  forms  of  which  the  stronger 
"  faction  can  readily  unite  and  oppress  the  weaker,  anarchy  may 
"  as  truly  be  said  to  reign,  as  in  a  state  of  nature,  where  the 
"  weaker  individual  is  not  secured  against  the  violence  of  the 
"  stronger." 

H.  No.  52.  "  The  federal  legislature  will  not  only  be  re^ 
u  strained  by  its  dependence  on  the  people,  as  other  legislative 
"  bodies  are,  but  it  will  be  moreover  watched  and  controlled  by 
"  the  several  collateral  legislatures,  which  other  legislative  bo~ 
"  dies  are  not." 

Mr.  Hamilton's  construction  of  the  constitution  may  be  thus 
condensed  :    "  Mere  preceptive  paper  declarations  are  insufficient 

to  restrain  political  departments  within  constitutional  limits. 
'  The  supremacy  of  the  people,  alone,   is  also  insufficient.     A 

concentration  of  power  is  a  tyranny.  A  judicial  department 
"  retains  no  sense  of  dependence,  even  upon  the  people.  Ours 
"  is  a  federal  system.  The  partition  of  power  between  the  state 
"  and  federal  departments,  is  necessary,  and  can  only  be  main- 
"  tained  by  an  independent  will  of  its  own  in  each,  admitted  on 
"  all  hands  to  be  essential  for  the  preservation  of  liberty.  The 
"  great  security  against  a  gradual  concentration  of  power,  is, 
"  that  each  possesses  constitutional  means  to  resist  encroach- 
11  ments  of  the  other.  The  provision  for  this  end  places  the 
"  system  of  America  in  an  interesting  point  of  view.  It  does 
"  not  constitute  a  single  government,  but  two  distinct  govern- 
"  ments  with  separate  powers.  Each  can  control  the  other, 
"  whilst  each  is  controlled  by  its  own  internal  construction. 
"  This  system  exemplifies  an  important  security  against  the  op- 


u 


a 


taylor's  views.  Ill 

"  pression  of  rulers,  and  secures  a  minority  of  states  against  the 
"  oppression  of  a  majority  of  states.  The  federal  legislature 
u  will  be  watched  and  controlled  both  by  the  people  and  the  col- 
"  lateral  legislatures,  which  other  legislative  bodies  are  not. 
"  Hence  a  double  security  arises  to  the  rights  of  the  people. 
"  If  a  faction  of  states  could  unite  and  oppress  a  weaker  faction 
"  of  states,  anarchy  would  reign ;  just  as  in  a  state  of  nature, 
"  weak  individuals  are  exposed  to  the  violence  of  the  strong." 

Such  is  Mr.  Hamilton's  construction  of  the  constitution,  when 
he  forgets  his  imaginary  national  government,  and  the  supremacy 
with  which  he  invests  it,  under  the  control  of  the  people  only. 
Mr.  Madison's  is  extremely  different.     Instead  of  the  collateral 
governments  controlling  each  other,  and  both    being  controlled 
by  the  people,  he  concentrates  an  absolute  power  of  control  over 
both,  in  the  supreme  federal  court.     The  contrariety  between 
the  two   constructions,  and  of  each  commentator  with  himself, 
seems  palpable.     Mr.  Hamilton,  having  drawn  a  picture  of  our 
system  of  government,  in  lines  so  beautiful  and  strong,  expunges 
it  by  a  single  dash  of  his  pen,  wherein  he  asserts,  that  the  na- 
tional government  may    exclusively  decide  upon  the  necessity, 
propriety,  or  constitutionality,  of  its  laws,  under  the  control  of 
the  people  only.     Immediately  before  this  assertion,  he  had  for- 
cibly urged  a  construction  of  the  constitution,  in  reference  to  the 
concurrent  right  of  taxation  in  the  state  and  federal  governments, 
inconsistent  with  it.     "  An  attempt  on  the  part  of  the  national 
"  government,  to  abridge  the  former  in  the  exercise  of  it,  would 
"  be  a  violent  assumption  of  power,  unwarranted  by  any  arti- 
"  cle  or  clause  of  the  constitution"     The  selection  of  a  con- 
current power,  to  illustrate  his  assertion,  that  the  state  and  federal 
governments  had  a  mutual  constitutional  right  to  prevent  the  ag- 
gressions of  either  upon  the  sphere  of  the  other,  was  the  strong- 
est mode  of  enforcing  it ;  because  if  a  concurrent  power  could 
not  be  abridged,  the  abridgement  of  an  exclusive  power,  such  as 
making  roads  and  canals,  would  be  still  more  violent  and  uncon- 
stitutional.    His  two  propositions  amount  to  this.     The  national 
government  cannot  abridge  a  concurrent  nor  an  exclusive  power, 
but  it  may  abridge  both,  by  a  supreme  power  to  decide  exclu- 
sively upon  the  constitutionality  of  its  own  laws.     Mr.  Hamil- 


112  taylor's  views. 

ton  has  ably  proved,  that  the  solitary  control  of  the  people  was 
insufficient  for  the  preservation   of  liberty ;  and   that  the  addi- 
tional mutual  control  of  the  two  governments,  was  essential  to 
prevent  a  tyrannical  concentration  of  power  in  one  ;  yet  his  dic- 
tum surrenders  this  essential  control.    It  must  either  exist  or  not. 
If  it  does  not  exist,  no  effectual  or  constitutional  mode  of  resist- 
ing federal  encroachments  remains  in  the  states,  separately,  and 
a  majority  may  usurp  any  powers  whatsoever,  over  a  minority  of 
states,  by  the  concurrence  of  a  majority  of  the  people ;  the  as- 
sertions that  the  people  alone  are  insufficient  to  control  political 
departments,  and  that  such  departments  must  mutually  control 
each  other,  are  both  revoked  ;  and  the  federal,  is  converted  into 
the  national  form  of  government  proposed  by    Mr.  Hamilton. 
If  the  mutual  control  exists,  Mr.  Hamilton's  dictum  is  destroy- 
ed ;  if  it  does  not  exist,  his  able  vindication  of  it,  and  his  double 
security  for  the  rights   of  the  people,  are  overthrown.     Either 
way,  a  contradiction  is  manifest.     Mr.  Hamilton  perplexes  the 
argument,  by  changing  the  epithet  of  the  government  from  fede- 
ral to    national.     The  federal  government    cannot,    he    says, 
abridge  a  concurrent  power  constitutionally  ;  but  the  national 
government  is  the  exclusive  judge   of  its  own  laws,  under  the 
control  of  the  people  only.     From  this  variation  of  words,  we 
discern  a  struggle  between  his  prepossessions,  and  a  fidelity  to 
the  constitution.     The  contrariety  between  the  national  govern- 
ment proposed,  and  the  federal  government  adopted,  required  the 
use  of  the  words  and  phrases  employed  in  the  convention  to  de- 
scribe the  former  for  the  purpose  of  supplanting  the  latter;  but 
this  recourse  to  words  not  expressed  in  the  constitution,  far  from 
reconciling,  illustrates  the  contradiction. 

Mr.  Hamilton  might  have  stated  an  opinion,  both  true  and 
consistent,  by  saying,  that  the  federal  and  state  governments 
might  mutually  decide  upon  the  constitutionality  or  propriety  of 
their  own  laws,  and  check  the  encroachments  of  each  other,  un- 
der the  control  of  the  people.  Hence  only  a  double  security 
arises  to  the  rights  of  the  people.  But  upon  what  ground  is  the 
control  of  the  people  resorted  to,  to  effect  his  deprecated  concen- 
tration of  power  in  the  federal  government,  and  rejected,  as  a 
restraint  upon  state  encroachments  ?    Applied  to  both,  it  becomes 


taylor's  views.  113 

a  mutual  auxiliary  of  the  mutual  control  between  these  depart- 
ments, and  constitutes  a  security  against  a  pernicious  concentra- 
tion of  power  in  either.  Admitting  that  the  people  are  an 
effectual  control  upon  political  departments,  which  however  Mr. 
Hamilton  denies,  it  would  follow  that  they  might  at  least  be  as 
much  depended  on,  to  prevent  the  state  governments  from  violat- 
ing the  constitution,  as  to  prevent  a  geographical  majority  in 
Congress,  from  defrauding  a  geographical  minority.  By  forget- 
ing  that  the  principle  of  popular  supremacy  is  the  true  justifica- 
tion of  the  mutual  and  co-ordinate  control  between  the  federal 
and  state  departments  for  which  he  contends ;  and  by  assuming 
the  exclusive  sufficiency  of  this  principle  in  reference  to  the  fe- 
deral department,  after  having  denied  it,  Mr.  Hamilton  destroys 
one  half  of  the  principle  itself,  and  the  whole  of  the  mutual  con- 
trol between  the  two  departments. 

With  great  humility  I  conceive,  that  the  disagreements  of 
Mr.  Madison  with  himself,  are  at  least  equal  to  those  of  Mr. 
Hamilton.  Mr.  Madison  derives  his  national  government  from 
the  form  of  electing  the  house  of  representatives  by  the  people 
of  the  states  ;  but  having  obtained  it  from  the  relation  between 
the  people  and  this  house,  he  severs  the  relationship ;  creates  in 
its  place  a  dubious  and  distant  relation  between  an  American  na- 
tion and  a  federal  judiciary ;  and  transfers  the  national  power 
supposed  to  have  been  generated  by  election  and  representation, 
to  a  court  having  little  or  no  relationship  with  either.  Mr.  Ha- 
milton having  also  assumed  a  national  government  from  the 
forms  of  election  and  the  principle  of  representation,  adheres  to 
the  relationship  between  them,  and  does  not  destroy  it  by  trans- 
ferring the  supremacy  he  makes  it  produce,  to  the  federal  court. 
By  lodging  his  supremacy  in  an  American  nation,  popular  con- 
trol, however  defective,  retains  some  value,  and  might  possibly 
be  exerted  by  the  people  to  preserve  their  state  rights.  Mr.  Ha- 
milton only  destroys  what  he  has  stated  as  the  strongest  of  his 
two  controls  for  preventing  a  tyrannical  concentration  of  power ; 
namely,  that  between  collateral  political  departments ;  but  Mr. 
Madison  rejects  both  this  mutual  control,  and  also  the  supremacy 
of  the  people. 

15 


114  taylor's  views. 

Let  us  advert  to  Mr.  Madison's  construction  of  the  constitu- 
tion. "  The  local  or  municipal  authorities,  form  distinct  or 
"  independent  portions  of  the  supremacy,  no  more  subject,  with- 
"  in  their  respective  spheres,  to  the  general  authority,  than  the 
"  general  authority  is  subject  to  them,  within  its  own  sphere. 
"  In  this  relation  then,  the  proposed  government  cannot  be 
"  deemed  a  national  one,  since  its  jurisdiction  extends  to  certain 
"  limited  objects  only,  and  leaves  to  the  several  states  a  resi- 
**  duary  and  inviolable  sovereignty  over  all  other  objects." 
Though  the  phrases,  local  or  municipal  authorities  and  general 
authority,  are  not  in  the  constitution,  and  are  ingeniously  equivo- 
cal, they  must  mean  the  state  and  federal  governments  ;  and  of 
course  the  construction  assigns  an  inviolable  sovereignty  to  the 
rights  of  the  states.  The  word  sphere  is  happily  chosen  for 
embracing  all  the  parts  of  which  each  great  department  of  our 
political  system  is  compounded.  It  therefore  comprises  the  state 
and  federal  judiciaries,  as  well  as  the  state  and  federal  legislatures 
and  executives.  If  the  respective  spheres  are  sovereign  and  inde- 
pendent of  each  other,  the  parts  of  which  these  spheres  are  com- 
pounded, must  also  be  sovereign  and  independent  of  each  other. 
No  species  of  sovereignty  or  independence  could  exist  in  the  state 
spheres,  if  each  part  of  them  was  subject  to  the  supreme  negative 
of  a  correspondent  part  of  the  federal  sphere.  These  spheres  are 
each  composed  of  legislative,  executive,  and  judicial  parts.  If 
one  part  of  the  federal  sphere  possessed  a  supreme  negative  over 
the  acts  of  all  parts  of  the  state  spheres,  the  sovereignty  and  in- 
dependence allowed  to  the  latter,  would  be  as  completely  de- 
stroyed, as  if  the  intire  state  spheres  were  thus  subjected  to  the 
intire  federal  sphere.  If  the  judicial  part  of  the  state  sphere 
was  thus  subjected  to  the  judicial  part  of  the  federal  sphere,  it 
would  destroy  the  residuary  and  inviolable  sovereignty,  both  ju- 
dicial and  legislative,  allowed  to  the  state  spheres.  In  either 
view,  the  states  would  cease  to  possess  the  portion  of  independ- 
ence, supremacy,  or  sovereignty,  conceded  to  them  by  Mr.  Ma- 
dison. It  was  attempted  in  the  convention,  to  subject  all  the 
parts  of  state  spheres  to  the  control  of  the  correspondent  parts  ol 
a  national  government ;  to  give  a  national  executive  a  supremacy 
over  state  executives,  a  national  legislature  a  supremacy  over 


Taylor's  views.  115 

state  legislatures,  and  a  national  judiciary  a  supremacy  over  state 
judiciaries.  Had  these  proposals  succeeded,  Mr.  Madison  could 
not  have  allowed  an  inviolable  sovereignty  to  the  state  spheres, 
because  a  subjection  of  all  their  parts  to  the  relative  parts  of  a  na- 
tional government,  would  have  been  a  subjection  of  one  whole 
to  the  other  whole.  The  titles  national  and  general,  gratuitously 
bestowed  on  the  federal  government,  must  either  bestow  on  each 
of  its  parts  a  supreme  power  over  the  correspondent  parts  of  the 
state  governments,  or  upon  none.  If  a  supreme  power  over  the 
state  spheres  is  exclusively  held  by  the  federal  judiciary,  it 
proves  that  these  titles  are  inapplicable  to  the  other  parts  of  the 
federal  sphere.  It  would  be  infinitely  more  dangerous  and  less 
republican  to  invest  a  few  men  not  controllable  by  the  people, 
with  a  supreme  power  over  the  uncontrollable  sovereignties  al- 
lowed to  the  states,  than  to  have  divided  this  supremacy,  as  was 
proposed,  among  the  departments  of  a  national  government,  ex- 
posed to  the  control  of  each  other,  and  of  the  people ;  as  Congress 
cannot  revive  a  state  law  annulled  by  the  federal  court.  If  the 
words  national  and  general  are  as  applicable  to  Congress  and  the 
president,  as  to  the  federal  court,  they  cannot  be  used  to  create 
a  national  or  general  judiciary,  and  not  a  national  or  general  le- 
gislature and  executive.  If  they  are  applicable  to  all  three  of 
these  departments,  they  establish  Mr.  Hamilton's  system  of  go- 
vernment proposed  in  the  convention  ;  if  to  the  judiciary  only, 
they  establish  a  form  of  government,  national,  as  it  regards  a 
power  in  a  court  fixed  for  life,  and  not  national,  as  it  regards  the 
representatives  of  the  people  or  the  states. 

I  cannot  discern  the  remotest  consistency  between  Mr.  Madi- 
son's sovereignty  of  states,  and  the  supremacy  of  a  federal  judi- 
ciary. The  federal  government  cannot  be  both  a  hemisphere  and 
the  whole  of  a  system.  Mr.  Madison  says,  "  in  this  relation," 
meaning  the  mutual  independency  and  supremacy  of  the  state 
and  federal  governments,  "  the  proposed  government  cannot  be 
"  called  a  national  one,  because  its  jurisdiction  extends  to  certain 
"  limited  objects  only,  and  leaves  to  the  several  states  a  residuary 
"  and  inviolable  sovereignty  over  all  other  objects."  Mr.  Madi- 
son extracts  his  federal  character  of  the  government,  from  the 
co-equal,  co-ordinate,  and  independent  relation  between  the  state 


116  Taylor's  views. 

and  federal  departments.  Take  away  this  relation,  and  no  ves- 
tige of  a  federal  government  would  remain.  The  relation  is  de- 
stroyed, if  a  portion  of  the  federal  department  possesses  a  supreme 
power  over  the  state  departments.  The  doctrine  amounts  to 
this.  The  whole  federal  sphere  possesses  no  supremacy  or 
sovereignty  or  power  over  the  state  spheres,  but  a  part  of  the 
federal  sphere  does  possess  power  or  supremacy  or  sovereignty 
over  the  state  spheres.  As  if  to  exclude  the  federal  judiciary 
from  being  the  part  to  be  thus  endowed,  Mr.  Madison  states  that 
the  independent  relation  between  the  spheres  by  which  a  federal 
form  of  government  is  constituted,  arises  from  the  circumstance 
"  that  federal  jurisdiction  extends  to  certain  limited  objects 
11  only,  leaving  to  the  several  states  a  residuary  and  inviolable 
"  jurisdiction  over  all  other  objects."  How  can  any  inviolable 
sovereign  state  jurisdiction  exist,  if  it  is  subject  to  a  federal  or 
national  judicial  supremac}'-  ? 

Mr.  Madison  affirms  the  construction  of  independent  state 
sovereignties  as  explicitly  as  words  would  allow.  "  The  states 
"  will  retain,  under  the  proposed  constitution,  a  very  considera- 
"  ble  portion  of  active,"  not  passive,  "  sovereignty.  The  pow- 
11  ers  delegated  by  the  proposed  constitution  to  the  federal  go- 
"  vernment,  are  few  and  defined.  Those  which  are  to  remain 
"  to  the  states,  are  numerous  and  indefinite.  The  former  will 
"  be  exercised  principally  on  external  objects,  as  war,  peace, 
"  negotiation,  and  foreign  commerce;  with  which  last,  the 
u  power  of  taxation  will  for  the  most  part  be  connected.  The 
"  powers  reserved  to  the  several  states  will  extend  to  all  objects, 
"  which  in  the  ordinary  course  of  affairs,  concern  the  lives,  liber- 
"  ties,  and  properties  of  the  people  ;  and  the  internal  order, 
"  improvement,  and  prosperity  of  the  stale."  The  gentle- 
men who  approve  of  concentrating  power  in  the  federal  depart- 
ment, which  Mr.  Hamilton  thought  would  be  tyrannical,  have 
resorted  to  the  great  extent  of  its  powers,  as  the  ground  for  giv- 
ing it  national  or  general  supremac)^.  But  how  can  powers  few 
and  defined,  be  better  entitled  to  the  epithets  general  or  national, 
than  powers,  numerous  and  indefinite  ?  There  seems  to  be  no 
sound  reason,  why  a  department  established  for  external  objects, 
should  have  tacitly  received  a  supremacy  over  internal  objects. 


Taylor's  views.  117 

Is  the  class  of  powers  reserved  to  secure  the  lives,  liberties,  and 
properties  of  the  people,  and  the  internal  order,  improvement, 
and  prosperity  of  the  states,  less  important  than  the  class  of  de- 
legated powers  ?  How  can  the  state  governments  fulfil  these 
great  duties,  if  they  are  controllable  by  the  federal  judiciary  ? 
Are  these  duties  assigned  to  the  federal  judiciary  or  to  the  state 
governments  by  the  constitution  ?  To  the  state  governments, 
according  to  the  constructions  both  of  Mr.  Hamilton  and  of  Mr. 
Madison  ;  who  have  repeatedly  asserted  the  sovereignty  and  in- 
dependence of  the  states  as  to  the  great  class  of  reserved  rights 
or  duties ;  and  that  its  violation  would  be  violent,  arbitrary,  ty- 
rannical, and  unconstitutional ;  and  yet  one  has  said  that  this  vio- 
lation may  be  committed  by  the  federal  judiciary ;  and  the 
other,  by  his  imaginary  general  government.  But  how  can  a 
government  be  called  general,  which  is  not  entrusted  with  the 
great  duties  enumerated  by  Mr.  Madison,  as  exclusively  assigned 
to  the  state  governments  ?  Under  colour  of  these  dicta,  the  dele- 
gated power  to  regulate  foreign  commerce,  and  the  undelegated 
power  to  create  corporations,  have  been  exercised  by  the  federal 
government  to  affect  very  materially  the  properties  of  the  peo- 
ple, and  the  internal  prosperity  of  the  states,  although  these  ob- 
jects are  enumerated  among  those  reserved  to  the  sovereignty 
of  the  states. 

Mr.  Madison  considered  the  powers  of  the  federal  government 
as  capable  of  being  counted,  as  there  was  no  other  means  of  dis- 
covering that  they  were  few  and  defined ;  and  he  subjoins  to  a 
general  enumeration  of  reserved  and  delegated  powers,  the  ge- 
nerick  distinction  of  internal  and  external.  Mr.  Hamilton  illus- 
trates the  independence  of  the  reserved  and  delegated  powers 
upon  each  other,  by  the  concurrent  power  of  taxation,  as  the 
weakest  example  he  could  select.  These  commentators  agree, 
that  the  reserved  powers  are  sovereign,  supreme,  independent, 
exclusive,  controlling,  applicable  to  the  lives,  liberties,  and  pro- 
perties of  the  people,  and  the  internal  order,  improvement,  and 
prosperity  of  the  states;  that  they  cannot  be  abridged  without 
violence  and  usurpation  ;  that  liberty  cannot  exist  unless  political 
departments  are  so  contrived  as  to  control  each  other  ;  and  that  a 
eoncentration  of  power  in  one  is  tyranny.     But  having  asserted 


118  taylor's  views. 

the  existence,  the  nature,  and  the  usefulness  of  the  powers  reserv- 
ed to  the  states,  each  has  settled  the  great  question,  as  to  who 
shall  count  them,  by  a  different  dictum  without  examination,  ac- 
cording to  his  own  wishes.  They  agree  that  the  division  of 
powers  into  two  classes,  delegated  and  reserved,  and  the  inde- 
pendency of  each  class  upon  the  other,  is  unquestionable,  and 
that  the  only  difficulty  is,  who  shall  keep  the  tally.  Mr.  Hamil- 
ton says,  that  a  general  government  must  count  both  classes  ; 
Mr.  Madison,  that  it  can  count  neither,  and  that  the  important 
office  of  measurer,  devolves  on  some  other  tribunal.  In  the 
common  affairs  of  life,  the  fancy  of  securing  distributive  justice 
by  making  a  receiver  the  measurer  to  himself,  or  by  allowing 
him  to  appoint  a  measurer  subject  to  his  own  control,  never  en- 
tered into  the  head  of  a  moralist.  The  politician  who  adopts 
the  same  system  of  ethicks,  ought  to  prove  that  men  are  more 
disposed  to  measure  powers  to  themselves  with  justice  and  mo- 
deration, than  grain  or  money.  If  few  and  numerous  powers 
go  into  partnership,  with  a  right  in  the  smaller  stock  to  cut  out 
notches  from  the  larger  tally  and  add  them  to  its  own,  it  would 
not  require  much  divination  to  foretel  how  the  trade  would  end. 


TAYLOR'S  VIEWS.  119 


SECTION  XII. 


THE  SUBJECT  CONCLUDED. 


A  supreme,  general,  or  national  government,  has  been  inferred 
from  three  sources,  and  deposited  in  two  places.     It  has  been 
inferred  from  the  election  of  the  house  of  representatives,  from 
the  magnitude  of  the  powers  delegated  to  the  federal  govern- 
ment, and  from  the  supremacy  of  the  federal  court ;  but   it  is 
sometimes  deposited  in  this  court,  and  at  others  in  a  federal  go- 
vernment.    Those  who  contend  for  the  latter  doctrine,  connive 
at  the  claim  of  the  judiciary,  well  knowing  that  it  is  a  powerful 
instrument  for  effecting  their  object  of  introducing  a  consolidated 
national  government.     Being  merely  the  executive  instrument 
of  legislation,  it  is  better  calculated  to  extend  than  to  control  the 
powers  of  a  legislative  department,  on  which  it  is  dependent. 
The  claim  of  the  judiciary,  therefore,  to  settle  the  rights  of  the 
federal  and  state  departments,  merits  a  section  appropriated  to 
the  construction  of  Mr.  Madison,  from  which  it  has  originated. 
"  The  local  or  municipal  authorities  form  distinct  or  inde- 
"  pendent  portions  of  the  supremacy,  no  more  subject  in  their 
"jurisdiction  to  the  general  authority,  than  the  general  autho- 
"  rity  is  to  them."    What  does  Mr.  Madison  mean  by  the  word 
authority  ?     Does  it  include  both  the  state  and  federal  judicial 
authorities  ?     If  so,  he  asserts  that  the  jurisdiction  of  each  is  su- 
preme and  independent  of  the  other.     Or,  does  the  word  gene- 
ral, include  the  federal  judiciary  ?     If  so,  he  asserts  that  the 
state  judiciaries  possess  a  jurisdiction  no  more  subject  to  the  fede- 
ral judiciary,  than  this  is  to  them.     In  the  face  of  this  dilemma, 
Mr.  Madison  proceeds.    *  It  is  true  that  in  controversies  relating 
"  to  the  boundaries  between  the  two  jurisdictions,  the  tribunal 
"  which  is  ultimately  to  decide,  is  to  be  established  under  the 
"  general  government.     This  construction  simply  asserts,  "  that 
"  the  state  jurisdiction  is  no  more  subject  to  the  federal  jurisdic- 
"  tion,  than  the  federal  jurisdiction  is  subject  to  the  state  juris- 


120  taylor's  views. 

"  diction ;  and  that  the  state  jurisdiction  is  subject  to  the  federal 
"  jurisdiction."     An  equivalent  inference  from  the  general  posi- 
tion, that  neither  of  these  authorities  was  subject  to  the  other, 
would  have  made  the  doctrine  complete ;  namely,  that  the  fede- 
ral authority  was  subject  to  the  state  authorities  ;  and  it  would 
have  contained  more  truth.    The  ambiguities  of  the  words  used 
by    Mr.  Madison,  will  shed  much    light    on   his    conclusion. 
What  is  meant  by  the  words  general  government  ?     Is  general 
equivalent  to  national  ?     Either  term  includes  the  house  of  re- 
presentatives in  Congress  ;  and  as  Mr.  Madison  deduces  his  na- 
tional government  from  the  mode  in  which  that  house  is  elected, 
it  would  be  evidently  incorrect  to  exclude  it  from  his  general 
authority.     If  it  constitutes  a  portion  of  this  general  authority, 
and  if  a  general  authority  has  the  power  of  appointing  a  tribunal 
to  settle  the  boundaries  of  state  and  federal  jurisdiction,  the  house 
of  representatives  ought  to  participate  in  its  exercise.     But  that 
house  does  not  participate  in  the   appointment  of  the  federal 
judges,  and  therefore  these  judges  do  not  seem  to  constitute  the 
tribunal  contemplated  by  Mr.  Madison.     If  the   word  tribunal 
means  the  supreme  court,  then  the  president  and  senate  confer  on 
a  few  men  a  power,  supposed  to  be  within  the  gift  of  the  general 
authority  only.     As  the  word   tribunal  does  not  designate  this 
court,  the  words  used  imply,  that  the  tribunal  for  deciding  con- 
troversies between  the  federal  and  state  governments,  as  to  the 
extent  of  their  mutual  powers,  is  to  be  established  by  the  federal 
government ;  and  this  would  be  less  objectionable  than  the  selec- 
tion of  these  supreme  censors  by  the  president  and  senate,  be- 
cause the  house  of  representatives  would  participate  in  its  estab- 
lishment, under  the  influence  of  the  people.     The  word  under 
means,  by  or  subordinate  to,  the  general  government.     If  this 
objection  is  answered  by  asserting,  that  Congress  may  extend  or 
contract  the  constitutional  jurisdiction  of  the  federal  court ;  the 
formidable  doctrine,  that  it  can  alter  the  constitution  by   laws, 
presents  itself;  furnishing  the  consolidating  inference,  that  it  can 
also  extend  or  contract  the  powers  of  the  legislative  and  execu- 
tive federal  departments.     Whatever  Congress  can  do   by   its 
agent,  is  a  power  in  itself.     If  it  can  confer  a  legal  concentrated 
supremacy  on  the  judicial  department,  it  can  enable  this  depart- 


taylor's  views.  121 

men l  to  extend  its  own  powers  or  contract  those  of  the  states, 
and  create  a  concentrated  supremacy  in  itself.  Congress  might 
suppress  a  refractory  majority  by  additions  of  new  men  to  the 
tribunal,  as  kings  of  England  have  managed  a  more  numerous 
body  of  aristocratical  noblemen,  by  making  new  peers ;  or  it 
might  by  impeachment  remove  a  firm  patriot,  and  terrify  others, 
as  has  been  often  practised.  Suppose  a  constitutional  article  had 
been  proposed  in  Mr.  Madison's  words :  "  The  general  go- 
"  vernment  shall  establish  a  tribunal  to  decide  the  limits  between 
"  the  delegated  and  reserved  powers."  Would  it  have  been 
acceded  to  ?  It  was  proposed  in  the  convention  to  effect  this 
end,  by  investing  a  national  government  with  a  negative  over 
state  acts ;  and  the  proposition  was  rejected.  Could  it  have  been 
intended  to  empower  such  a  government  to  effect  by  an  agent, 
that  which  it  was  not  allowed  to  do  itself?  Or  was  not  such  a 
power  either  in  itself  or  its  agent,  superseded  by  the  mode  pre- 
scribed for  altering  the  constitution  ? 

"  It  is  true  that  in  controversies  relating  to  the  boundaries  be- 
"  tween  the  two  jurisdictions,  the  tribunal  which  is  ultimately  to 
"  decide,  is  to  be  established  under  the  general  government." 
These  words  irresistibly  imply,  that  the  tribunal  to  decide  was  to 
be  distinct  from  the  parties  litigant  for  jurisdiction.  There 
could  be  no  controversy  of  the  kind,  if  one  party  could  dictate 
to  the  other.  In  that  case,  submission  and  not  controversy  must 
ensue.  Could  Mr.  Madison  have  intended  to  say,  that  in  con- 
troversies between  the  state  and  federal  judiciaries  for  jurisdic- 
tion, the  general  government  might  make  either  of  the  parties 
the  judge  of  its  own  cause  ?  Or  did  he  mean,  that  it  might  es- 
tablish an  impartial  tribunal  to  decide  between  them  ? 

"  The  decision  is  to  be  impartially  ^msAe,  according  to  the 
"  rules  of  the  constitution,  and  all  the  usual  and  most  effectual 
**  precautions  are  taken  to  secure  this  impartiality."  Parties 
litigant  always  claim  under  the  same  law,  as  federal  and  state 
judiciaries  contending  for  jurisdiction,  claim  under  the  same  con- 
stitution ;  but  it  was  never  before  inferred  from  thence,  that  a 
party  deciding  in  his  own  case  would  construe  a  law  or  a  consti- 
tution impartially.  To  secure  this  impartiality,  however,  Mr. 
Madison  says,  that  all  the  usual  and  most  effectual  precautions 

16 


122  Taylor's  views. 

are  taken,  by  the  constitution,  and  thus  he  recognises  the  federal 
judiciary  as  the  tribunal  intended.     Where  are  we  to  find  these 
precautions,  which  have  had  the  rare  effect  of  compelling  a  party 
to  decide  impartially  in  his  own  case  ?     Or  is  it  usual  to  invest  a 
judicial  department  with  a  supreme   power  of  regulating  the 
boundaries    between  independent  legislative    departments  ?     It 
would  be  difficult  to  discover  a  single  instance,  either  in  laws  or 
constitutions,  or  in  the  theoretical  reveries  of  political  writers, 
wherein  the  most  distant  idea  was  entertained  of  effecting  impar- 
tiality in  either  case.     We  must  therefore  search  in  vain  for 
"  usual  and  most  effectual  precautions  to  secure  impartiality," 
in  cases  never  before  contemplated,  namely,  those  of  a  party 
empowered  to  try  his  own  cause,  and  that  of  a  judicial  depart- 
ment empowered  to  exercise  the  supremacy  of  regulating  poli- 
tical powers  between  independent  legislative  departments.     To 
assume  the  sufficiency  of  the  usual  precautions  to  secure  judicial 
impartiality,  in   the  exercise  of  the  usual  judicial  power,  as  a 
proof  that  they  will  secure  judicial  impartiality,  in  the  exercise 
of  these  unusual  judicial  powers,  is  utterly  inconclusive.     The 
mutual  control  of  political  departments,  both  in  theory  and  prac- 
tice, has  hitherto  been  considered  as  the  usual  and  most  effectual 
precaution,  for  keeping  them  within  the  spheres  prescribed  by 
constitutions  ;  and  as  the  most  essential  security  for  liberty ;  nor 
do  I  recollect  that  this  security  has  ever  before  been  abandoned 
in  pursuit  of  judicial  impartiality.     Mr.  Hamilton  considers  this 
control  as  an  axiom,  and  as  the  only  effectual  security  for  a  good 
form  of  government ;  vindicates  the  republican  supremacy  of  the 
people  over  the  controlling  departments  ;  and  rejects  a  political 
supremacy  of  judges,  as  utterly  inconsistent  with  it.     So  far  his 
construction  is  true  to  his  creed,  and  he  only  cripples,  though  he 
does  not  quite  kill  it,  by  changing  the  federal  government  from 
a  department,  into  a  general  government ;  yet  he  retains  the  su- 
premacy of  the  people.    But  Mr.  Madison  obliterates  the  whole 
axiom,  and  the  supremacy  of  the  people  ;  and  confides  intirely 
in  judicial  impartiality  for  a  free  form  of  government.     Yet  it 
has  been  experimentally  established,  in  every  instance  of  a  su- 
preme control  of  one  political  department  over  the  others,  whe- 
ther it  is  itself  elected  by  the  people  or  not,  that  the  nature  of 


taylor's  views.  123 

the  government  is  overturned.  A  supremacy  of  the  British 
house  of  commons,  though  elected  by  the  people,  would  not 
tolerate  any  control  by  the  other  departments ;  and  those  who 
admire  that  form  of  government,  are  careful  to  maintain  a  mu- 
tual power  in  its  departments  to  control  each  other,  as  the  only 
means  by  which  it  can  be  preserved.  Those  who  admire  our 
federal  system,  may  therefore  read  in  the  book  of  experience, 
that  it  cannot  exist,  unless  a  mutual  power  of  control  between 
the  state  and  federal  departments  is  effectually  maintained  and 
exercised,  under  the  supremacy  of  the  people.  To  exchange 
this  best  security  against  ambitious  usurpations,  for  the  untried 
novelty  of  exalting  a  single  court  into  a  supreme  political  power, 
upon  the  ground  that  its  integrity  in  exercising  it  is  secured  by 
certain  usual  precautions,  is  a  hazardous  experiment ;  because,  if 
political  integrity  could  be  obtained  by  these  precautions,  they 
have  not  been  ever  thought  of  as  imparting  political  wisdom  to 
a  court,  which  is  quite  distinguishable  from  the  legal  knowledge 
considered  as  the  recommendation  to  office. 

To  ascertain  the  force  of  this  reasoning,  let  us  consider  what 
are  "  the  usual  and  most  effectual  precautions  to  secure  judicial 
"  impartiality."  The  judicial  system  of  this  country  has  been 
modelled  in  imitation  of  the  British,  and  by  borrowing  their 
precautions,  we  have  demonstrated  an  intention  of  effecting  the 
same  end  which  theirs  contemplated.  Tenure  for  life,  fixed  sa- 
laries, and  impeachment,  are  both  their  means  and  ours.  The 
end  of  the  British  precautions,  was  to  obtain  judicial  impartiality 
in  the  distribution  of  justice  between  individuals,  and  not  in  a 
distribution  of  powers  between  political  departments.  Had  the 
latter  new  and  extraordinary  end  been  contemplated  by  the  es- 
tablishment of  a  British  judiciary,  new  and  extraordinary  pre- 
cautions would  have  been  invented,  for  preventing  political  par- 
tialities or  errors,  infinitely  more  dangerous  than  any  frauds  which 
could  be  committed  in  relation  to  individuals.  And  had  our 
constitution  contemplated  an  extension  of  judicial  power  to  an 
object  so  superior,  it  would  not  have  been  contented  with  pre- 
cautions contrived  for  securing  distributive  justice  to  individuals. 
For  this  end,  judicial  tenure  for  life,  fixed  salaries,  and  impeach- 
ment, were  deemed  sufficient.     These  might  prevent  any  undue 


124  Taylor's  views. 

influence,  and  remove  the  temptations  of  bribery.  But  these 
precautions  were  not  intended  to  change  the  federal  government 
into  a  judicial  aristocracy.  Impeachments  were  not  to  be  tried 
by  a  party  to  the  controversy,  but  by  a  power  which  could  not 
be  involved  in  the  suits  or  questions  to  be  decided  ;  and  which 
might,  by  increasing  salaries  or  exerting  influence,  regenerate  a 
national  government,  rejected  by  the  constitution.  Although 
these  usual  precautions  might  be  sufficient  for  the  attainment  of 
judicial  impartiality  between  individuals,  yet  a  supreme  power  of 
distributing  rights  to  political  departments,  would  have  an  effect, 
precisely  the  reverse,  if  one  of  these  departments  could  exclu- 
sively appoint,  pay,  influence,  and  try,  the  judges.  Fear,  hope, 
undue  influence,  and  money,  would  convert  all  these  usual  pre- 
cautions into  instruments  for  soliciting  partial  political  decisions, 
instead  of  being  means  to  prevent  them.  If  the  solicitations  of 
ambition,  the  invariable  appurtenance  of  enormous  power,  could 
be  resisted,  yet  the  government  would  be  moulded  by  the  opi- 
nions of  a  few  men,  and  not  by  the  publick  judgment.  Were 
these  usual  precautions  designed  to  induce  the  supreme  court  to 
make  a  good  government  ?  To  imagine  that  the  convention  in- 
tended, by  copying  the  British  precautions  for  securing  justice 
to  individuals,  to  invest  a  single  court  with  a  power  to  regulate 
the  rights  of  the  federal  and  state  departments,  would  charge  it 
with  a  degree  of  simplicity,  which  the  character  of  the  mem- 
bers does  not  justify,  as  tenure  for  life  is  at  least  as  well  calcu- 
lated to  produce  political  partialities,  as  to  prevent  partialities 
between  individuals.  Suppose  the  court,  or  Congress,  or  a  po- 
pular and  powerful  individual,  should  prefer  a  national  govern- 
ment or  a  limited  monarchy  to  our  federal  system,  is  it  not  ob- 
vious that  an  exclusive  power  of  appointing,  paying,  advancing, 
and  trying,  the  judges,  united  with  a  tenure  for  life,  will  be 
means  of  advancing,  rather  than  of  preventing  the  design  ? 
May  not  a  power  in  the  federal  government  be  generated  by  a 
confederacy  between  Congress  and  its  court,  equivalent  to  the 
power  of  the  British  government,  often  exercised  in  altering  its 
form  and  principles  ? 

The  constitution  acquits  the  convention  of  a  design  to  confer 
this  moulding  power  on  the  federal  government,  by  containing 


taylor's  mews.  125 

provisions  bolh  for  securing  an  impartial  dispensation  of  justice 
to  individuals,  and  also  an  impartial  dispensation  of  constitutional 
alterations  to  the  United  States.  Instead  of  confounding  the  two 
ends,  it  contemplates  the  attainment  of  one,  by  the  usual  precau- 
tions for  securing  judicial  impartiality;  and  the  attainment  of 
the  other,  by  so  bestowing  the  moulding  power,  that  even  a 
majority  of  states  cannot  transform  our  federal  into  a  national 
government.  Is  there  no  difference  between  these  new  and  ex- 
traordinary precautions,  provided  for  the  new  and  extraordinary 
object  of  securing  a  federal  form  of  government ;  and  the  usual 
precautions  for  securing  judicial  impartiality  in  the  usual  dispen- 
sation of  justice  between  individuals  ?  Could  the  latter  have 
been  intended  to  secure  judicial  impartiality  in  the  dispensation 
of  powers  between  the  state  and  federal  governments,  when  a 
very  different  tribunal  is  positively  invested  exclusively  with 
this  jurisdiction  ?  Could  a  majority  of  one  man,  in  a  court  con- 
sisting of  six  or  seven  men,  have  been  invested  with  a  moulding 
power,  only  intrusted  to  three-fourths  of  the  states,  under  the 
control  of  the  people  ?  It  is  impossible  that  the  framers  of  the 
constitution  had  the  same  confidence  in  a  court  not  influenced  by 
the  people,  as  in  three-fourths  of  the  states,  for  the  purpose  of 
moulding  anew  state  and  federal  powers  ;  upon  the  ground,  that 
the  usual  precautions  were  taken  to  secure  judicial  impartiality 
in  the  distribution  of  justice  between  individuals  ;  because  it  can- 
not be  imagined  that  they  thought  a  majority  of  one  judge,  was 
equivalent  to  a  majority  of  three-fourths  of  the  states,  to  which 
the  power  of  re-moulding  the  rights  of  the  federal  and  state  de- 
partments, is  jealously  confined. 

Has  this  enormous  absurdity  been  committed  undesignedly  in 
defining  the  jurisdiction  of  the  federal  judiciary,  so  as  to  invest 
three-fourths  of  the  states  and  the  supreme  court,  with  a  concur- 
rent right  of  dispensing  powers  to  the  state  and  federal  govern- 
ments ?  Had  this  intention  existed,  it  would  have  appeared  in 
the  article  prescribing  the  modes  of  amending  the  constitution. 
It  would  have  declared,  that  the  constitution  might  be  amended 
by  three-fourths  of  the  state  legislatures,  or  of  state  conventions, 
or  by  a  majority  of  the  supreme  court.  Whilst  one  alternative 
is  expressed,  the  absence  of  another  amounts  to  its  rejection. 


126  taylor's  views. 

But  it  is  said,  that  the  judges  cannot  alter  or  amend  the  constitu- 
tion, and  are  to  decide  impartially  between  the  state  and  federal 
governments,  in  a  contest  for  power,  which  impartiality  will  be 
secured  by  the  usual  precautions  we  have  considered.  If  the 
state  and  federal  governments  should  differ  in  its  construction, 
they  may  refer  to  the  tribunal  able  to  remove  the  ambiguity,  but 
the  court  has  no  power  to  appeal  to  this  referee.  The  opinion  of 
the  court  cannot  remove  the  ambiguity,  unless  that  opinion  shall 
operate  as  an  amendment,  and  supersede  the  opinion  of  one  or 
both  of  the  parties.  Suppose  the  constructive  opinion  of  the 
court  shall  be  erroneous  ;  it  must  either  have  the  effect  of  alter- 
ing the  constitution,  or  be  void  as  not  proceeding  from  the  au- 
thority empowered  to  alter  it.  Why  is  there  no  provision  in 
the  constitution  to  provide  for  an  event  not  only  possible  but  cer- 
tain? Because  an  erroneous  construction  by  the  court  could  not 
alter  the  constitution.  Both  Mr.  Madison  and  Mr.  Hamilton 
have  provided  for  the  case  of  adverse  constructions  of  the  con- 
stitution by  the  state  and  federal  departments,  in  admitting  their 
mutual  independence,  and  mutual  right  to  control  each  other,  as 
the  genuine  principle  applicable  to  co-ordinate  political  depart- 
ments ;  but  the  erroneous  constructions  of  the  court  would  be 
liable  to  no  such  check,  and  the  constitution,  for  want  of  it, 
would  be  divested  of  the  best  security  for  its  preservation. 

Neither  the  declaration  of  independence,  nor  the  confederation 
of  1777,  referred  to  a  judicial  department  for  their  preservation, 
and  the  constitution  refers  to  the  states  for  this  purpose.  These 
three  constitutional  acts  unite  in  establishing  the  principle,  that 
the  guardianship  of  each  belonged  to  the  people  as  organized  into 
states,  and  they  have  never  surrendered  a  power,  essential  for  the 
preservation  of  their  liberty,  to  a  chamber  of  men  inducted,  like 
bishops,  for  life,  by  executive  selection.  If  the  king  of  England 
had  a  power  to  appoint  a  tribunal  to  settle  the  rights  of  the  regal, 
aristocratical,  and  republican  departments,  it  would  be  equiva- 
lent to  a  power  in  the  federal  department,  to  appoint  a  tribunal 
for  settling  the  rights  of  the  federal  and  state  departments.  Any 
mode,  direct  or  indirect,  by  which  the  people  of  the  states  are 
deprived  of  this  power,  will  destroy  the  basis  upon  which  the 
validity  of  both  departments  rests  ;  and  this  basis  must  be  the 


taylor's  views.  127 

master-key  for  unlocking  the  meaning  of  its  subordinate  regula- 
tions, or  these  subordinate  regulations  will  become  pick-locks, 
for  stealing  the  treasure  of  liberty,  the  master-key  was  intended 
to  secure.  Unless  it  can  control  constructive  thefts,  its  efficacy 
is  lost.  In  searching  for  the  intention  of  any  article  of  the  con- 
stitution, we  must  either  sustain  or  surrender  the  foundation  of 
our  liberty,  and  remember  that  good  principles  are  not  as  cor- 
ruptible as  great  men. 

With  these  preliminary  observations  unforgotten,  I  will  endea- 
vour to  discover  the  meaning  of  the  constitution  in  relation  to  the 
federal  judiciary,  and  to  prove  that  the  appellate  jurisdiction 
given  by  law  to  the  supreme  court,  was  deduced  by  Congress 
from  the  Federalist,  and  by  its  elegant  authors,  from  their  per- 
sonal opinions,  disclosed  by  their  propositions  made  in  the  con- 
vention. The  three  first  articles  are  devoted  to  its  legislative, 
executive,  and  judicial  departments,  defining  and  limiting  the 
powers  of  each.  It  will  not  be  contended,  that  all  or  either  of 
these  departments  were  intended  to  be  exonerated,  or  that  one  or 
two  could  exonerate  another  from  the  duty  of  confining  them- 
selves within  the  powers  delegated  to  each.  Neither  article  em- 
powers the  department  which  it  creates,  to  confer  an  additional 
power  upon  an  associate,  nor  to  extend  the  powers  bestowed  by 
its  peculiar  article.  The  special  legislative  modifications  pro- 
vided for,  do  not  create  a  new  constituent  principle.  In  the  le- 
gislative article,  no  power  can  be  found,  enabling  Congress  to 
confer  any  species  of  supremacy  upon  the  federal  judiciary  over 
the  state  judiciaries,  or  to  bestow  upon  the  former  an  appellate 
jurisdiction  extending  to  the  latter.  Congress  is  empowered 
"  to  constitute  tribunals  inferior  to  the  supreme  court,"  demon- 
strating the  true  relation  between  the  words  "  supreme  and  infe- 
"  rior,"  repeated  in  the  judicial  article ;  and  evidently  excluding 
the  idea,  that  Congress  could  make  state  courts  inferior  to  the 
supreme  federal  court,  any  more  than  it  could  make  state  legisla- 
tures inferior  to  the  federal  legislature.  The  states  derived  their 
judicial,  as  well  as  their  legislative  and  executive  powers,  from 
state  sovereignty.  All  the  arguments  extracted  from  the  sup- 
posed inconveniences  likely  to  be  produced  by  the  clashing  of 
state  and  federal  judicial  powers,  in  order  to  justify  an  appellate 


128"  TAYLOR'S  VIEWS. 

supremacy  in  the  latter,  apply  with  more  force  to  the  justification 
of  a  supreme  controlling  power  in  the  federal  legislature  and  exe- 
cutive, over  the  state  legislatures  and  executives  ;  and  if  federal 
laws  can  confer  a  supreme  power  on  one  of  its  departments  over 
the  correspondent  state  department,  they  may  confer  a  similar 
supremacy  upon  all.  The  construction  deduced  from  supposed 
inconveniences,  would  establish  the  national  government  propos- 
ed and  rejected  in  the  convention.  That  project  did  not  con- 
template the  immediate  destruction  of  the  state  governments,  but 
only  their  subordination  to  a  complete  national  government.  Let 
us  consider  whether  this  proposed  subordination  was  revived  by 
the  constitution,  or  whether  Congress  can  revive  it  by  law,  in 
favour  of  the  supreme  federal  court,  and  thereby  make  the  re- 
served sovereign  rights  of  the  states  dependent  upon  the  will  of 
the  federal  government ;  since,  if  they  cannot  be  protected  by  the 
state  judiciaries,  they  will  evidently  he  divested  of  all  protection, 
except  that  which  may  arise  from  the  deprecated  recourse  to  war. 

This  construction  given  to  the  third  article,  is  to  be  suspected, 
as  abolishing  in  fact  the  state  sovereign  powers  reserved,  attempt- 
ed to  be  abrogated  by  the  proposition  for  a  national  government  > 
but  happily  its  words  are  too  consistent  with  the  principle  of  a  di- 
vision of  powers  between  the  federal  and  state  governments,  and 
too  literally  adverse  to  the  rejected  project  for  a  consolidated  na- 
tional government,  to  have  contemplated  the  idea  of  destroying 
this  principle,  with  all  the  good  effects  it  is  capable  of  producing. 
State  ridits  can  no  more  exist  than  federal,  without  free  and  in- 
dependent  departments  for  exercising  and  preserving  them. 

The  third  article  begins  with  a  provision  for  the  exercise  of 
the  legislative  power  "to  constitute  tribunals  inferior  to  the 
"  supreme  court,"  by  declaring  that  "the  judicial  power  of  the 
"  United  States  shall  be  vested  in  one  supreme  court,  and  in 
"  such  inferior  courts,  as  the  Congress  may  from  time  to  time 
"  ordain  and  establish.,,  The  whole  legislative  power  given 
to  Congress  is  to  be  executed  by  ordaining  and  establishing 
supreme  and  inferior  federal  courts.  Does  this  empower 
Congress  to  ordain,  that  superior  state  courts  shall  be  inferior  to 
federal  courts  ?  The  supremacy  and  inferiority  to  be  derived 
from  federal  legislation,  are  both  limited  to  the  judicial  power 


Taylor's  views.  129 

of  the  United  States.     Were  state  courts  contemplated  as  con- 
stituting any  portion  of  the  judicial  power  of  the  United  States? 
If  not,  then  as  the  third  article  throughout  refers  to  "  the  judicial 
"  power  of  the  United  States"  only,  it  is   not  by  a  single  word 
extended  to  the  state  judiciaries,  though  the  gentlemen  in  favour 
of  a  national  government  may  think  that  this  ought  to  have  been 
the  case.     The  article  proceeds  to  demonstrate  its  meaning,  by 
declaring  that  these  supreme  and  inferior  judges,  invested  with 
the  judicial  power  of  the  United  States,  "  both  of  the  supreme 
"  and  inferior  courts,  shall  hold  their  offices  during  good  beha- 
"  viour,  and   receive  salaries  not  to   be  diminished."     All  the 
judges  in  relation  to  whom  Congress  could  legislate,  were  to  be 
reached    by  these   provisions ;  but  they   did   not  include  state 
judges,  whose  tenures  and  salar'es  Congress  could  not  fix.    Con- 
gress was  not  invested  with  any   legislative  power  over  state 
courts,  since  their  legislative  power  is  confined  to  judges  embra- 
ced by  these  two  federal  provisions.     The  supremacy  expressed 
can  therefore  refer  only  to  the  inferior  courts  or  judges  described 
in  the  same  section,  as  reached  by  the  two  provisions  annexed 
to  their  offices,  and  not  to  state  courts,  or  judges,  to  whom  these 
provisions  did  not  extend.     The  projects  for  a  national  form  of 
government  in  the  convention,  confirm  the  construction  dictated 
by  the  words.     One  of  these  contemplated  an   abolition  of  the 
state  governments;  the  other,  an  adoption  of  state  legislatures, 
executives,  and  judiciaries,  as  subordinate  parts  of  a  national  go- 
vernment.    The   latter   contemplated  a  supremacy  of  national 
departments,  legislative,  executive,  and  judicial,  over  the  cor- 
respondent state  departments.     Instead  of  this  proposed  national 
government,  the  constitution  established  a  federal  government, 
invested,  not  with  supreme,  but  with  limited  powers  ;  and  the 
consolidating  words  used  to  describe  both  projects,  were  rejected 
in  the  deed.     There  would  have  been  a  manifest  absurdity  in 
coupling  a  supreme  national  judiciary  with  a  legislature  not  na- 
tional, as  it  would  not  have  corresponded,  either  with  the  nation- 
al government  proposed,  or  the  federal  government  adopted. 
Such  a  supreme  judicial  power,   might  have  extended  or  dimi- 
nished state  powers,  against  the  will  of  Congress  and  the  presi- 
dent, and  these  powers  would  have  lost  the  protection,  designed 

17 


130  Taylor's  views. 

by  the  Virginia  plan  for  a  national  government,  to  be  derived 
from  its  proposed  general  supremacy.  By  an  exclusive  judicial 
supremacy,  federal,  as  well  as  state  powers,  would  have  been 
made  subordinate  to  judicial  power.  Therefore,  when  the  pro- 
jects for  a  national  form  of  government  were  given  up,  the  su- 
premacy contemplated  by  them,  for  national  legislative,  execu- 
tive, and  judicial  departments,  was  relinquished,  and  no  supre- 
macy over  the  powers  reserved  to  the  states,  was  incongruously 
given  to  a  judicial  department,  exclusively  of  the  other  two. 

The  perseverance  of  the  gentlemen  in  favour  of  a  national  go- 
vernment, proves  that  the  subject  was  thoroughly  considered; 
and  the  solemn  preference  of  the  federal  form,  demonstrates  that 
no  construction,  by  which  that  preference  will  be  frustrated,  can 
be  just.  Its  basis  was  state  sovereignty  ;  compatible  with  a  fe- 
deral limited  government,  but  incompatible  with  a  supreme  na- 
tional government.  Hence  state  sovereignty  was  denied  by  the 
gentlemen  who  proposed  a  national  government.  This  sove- 
reignty is  the  foundation  of  all  the  powers  reserved  to  the  states. 
Unless  they  are  sustained  by  it,  they  are  baseless.  State  legisla- 
tive, executive,  and  judicial  powers,  must  all  or  none  flow  from 
this  source.  All  are  necessary  to  sustain  the  state  republican  go- 
vernments. Subject  either  to  a  master,  and  the  others  become 
subject  to  the  same  master.  If  the  state  judicial  power,  as  flow- 
ing from  state  sovereignty,  is  not  independent,  state  legislative 
and  executive  power,  cannot  be  independent,  because  all  rest  upon 
the  same  foundation  ;  and  because,  if  a  supreme  federal  judiciary 
can  control  state  courts,  it  can  also  control  state  legislatures  and 
executives.  Thus  a  federal  form  of  government  would  be  re- 
jected, though  it  was  established,  and  a  national  government 
would  be  established,  though  it  was  rejected. 

The  second  section  of  the  article  we  are  considering;,  begins 
with  the  following  words :  "  The  judicial  power  shall  extend" 
The  word  extend,  far  from  meaning  supremacy,  implies  the  re- 
verse. The  distinction  is  expressed  in  the  first  article.  The 
legislation  of  Congress  is  not  extended  to  the  ten  miles  square, 
but  made  supreme  over  that  district,  in  order  to  abolish  a  state 
concurrency  of  power  within  it.  The  powers  of  Congress  are 
extended  to  specified  objects,  but  as  these  extensions  did  not  im- 


taylor's  views.  131 

ply  supremacy,  the  powers  beslowed  are  concurrent,  except  when 
attended  by  positive  prohibitions  upon  the  states.  As  the  word 
exclusive  is  used  when  exclusiveness  was  intended,  and  as  the 
extension  of  federal  legislative  power  to  specified  objects,  was 
not  considered  as  conveying  a  supreme  power,  but  as  establishing 
concurrent  powers  in  the  state  and  federal  governments,  flowing 
to  the  states  from  their  original  sovereignties,  and  to  Congress 
from  delegations ;  so  an  extension  of  judicial  power  by  delega- 
tions also,  only  created  a  concurrent  state  and  federal  jurisdic- 
tion in  the  cases,  as  to  which  it  is  not  prohibited,  arising  under 
the  constitution.  No  legislative,  executive,  or  judicial  power, 
is  given  to  the  states,  for  enabling  them  to  exercise  their  reserved 
rights,  because  they  were  derived  from  their  anterior  sovereignty. 
From  this  source,  and  the  special  delegations,  arose  many  cases 
of  a  concurrency  in  state  and  federal  legislation,  such  as  that  of 
taxation,  and  this  concurrency  would  have  extended  to  all  the 
delegated  powers,  except  for  the  prohibitions  of  the  tenth  section 
of  the  first  article.  These  in  relation  to  war,  troops,  and  imports 
and  exports,  would  have  been  useless,  except  that  the  states,  in 
virtue  of  their  sovereignty,  would  have  retained  an  absolute 
power  as  to  these  objects,  had  no  such  prohibitions  been  inserted 
in  the  constitution.  They  might  have  declared  war,  raised  ar- 
mies, and  imposed  duties,  though  Congress  might  have  done  it 
also,  upon  the  same  ground  that  both  the  state  and  federal  go- 
vernments may  tax.  Now  if  an  extension  of  some  sovereign 
powers  of  the  states  to  Congress,  did  not,  without  a  special  pro- 
hibition, take  from  the  states  their  right  to  exercise  the  same 
powers,  the  constitution  itself  furnishes  us  with  a  construction 
of  the  judicial  article.  As  the  extension  of  legislative  federal 
power  to  taxation,  did  not  destroy  the  „  sovereign  power  of  the 
states  to  tax,  nor  invest  Congress  with  a  supreme  power  to  annul 
state  laws  for  that  purpose  ;  so  the  extension  of  the  federal  judi- 
cial power  to  cases  in  law  and  equity  arising  under  the  federal 
constitution  and  laws,  did  not  deprive  the  states  of  the  inherent 
attribute  of  sovereignty  to  dispense  justice  to  their  people  in  these 
cases,  nor  expose  their  decisions  in  cases  of  law  and  equity,  to 
be  annulled  by  the  federal  judiciary.  A  concurrency  of  juris- 
diction arose  from  the  extension  of  judicial  federal  power,  upon 


138  taylor's  views. 

the  same  principles  which  produced  a  concurrency  of  legislatiou 
between  the  federal  and  state  governments.  Original  sovereign- 
ties were  not  in  either  case  surrendered  to  a  delegated  participa- 
tion. It  is  owing  to  a  concurrency  of  jurisdiction  in  the  federal 
and  state  governments,  that  the  judges  of  both  are  required  to 
take  an  oath  to  support  the  constitution  ;  and  this  concurrency  is 
distinctly  admitted  by  the  federal  judges,  in  revising  state  judg- 
ments, and  affirming  them,  if  right ;  whereas,  if  the  state  courts 
had  no  jurisdiction  in  cases  of  law  and  equity  arising  under  the 
federal  constitution  and  laws,  all  their  judgments  would  have 
been  coram  non  judice,  and  void.  Their  jurisdiction  is  thus 
admitted,  and  the  only  question  is,  whether  Congress  can  em- 
power the  federal  court  to  annul  it. 

If  the  concurrent  powers  of  the  states  were  not  destroyed  by 
delegations,  and  if  the  exclusive  or  supreme  powers  of  the  fede- 
ral government,  did  not  flow  from  these  extensions,  but  from  po- 
sitive prohibitions ;  wherever  no  such  prohibitions  exist,  the 
sovereign  powers  of  the  states  remain  ;  and  these  comprise  the 
right  of  trying  all  suits  in  law  and  equity  whatsoever.  The 
prohibitions  are  acknowledgments  of  this  position,  and  even  con- 
tain a  construction  of  themselves,  by  which  it  is  vindicated. 
The  prohibition  upon  the  states  to  engage  in  war,  is  void  in  cases 
of  invasion  or  imminent  danger.  In  these  cases,  the  sovereignty 
of  the  states  is  absolved  from  the  prohibition,  and  is  not  absorbed 
by  the  delegated  power  to  declare  war.  It  was  not  therefore 
absorbed  by  a  delegated  power  to  try  law-suits. 

The  constitution  creates  federal  legislative,  executive,  and  ju- 
dicial departments ;  and  such  departments  also  are  established  by 
state  sovereignties.  Are  these  departments  concurrent  or  exclu- 
sive rights,  or  does  their  extension  to  the  federal  government 
create  a  supremacy  in  the  departments  delegated,  over  the  de- 
partments reserved  ?  In  either  view,  we  discern  the  only  ima- 
ginable distinction  between  a  federal  and  a  consolidated  national 
government,  and  behold  the  identical  question  which  long  divid- 
ed the  convention.  The  abolition  of  these  state  departments,  or 
their  subordination  to  a  national  government,  was  contended  for. 
Our  alternative  is  yet  the  same  under  the  construction  of  the 
constitution  subsequently  advanced,  as  it  was  in  the  convention. 


Taylor's  views.  133 

We  must  either  vindicate  the  concurrency  of  powers,  except 
where  the  positive  prohibitions  intervene,  or  accept  of  the  pro- 
posed subordination. 

The  federal  judicial  power  is  extended  to  all  "  cases  in  law 
"  and   equity  arising  under  this   constitution,  the  laws  of  the 
"  United    States,   and    treaties."     If  the  judicial  power  of  the 
states,  in  virtue  of  their  sovereignty,  extends  also  to  these  cases, 
we  have  only  to  enquire,  whether  the  constitution  invests  the 
federal  judicial  power  with  a  coercing  supremacy  over  itself,  or 
whether  this  concurrency  establishes  a  mutual  independency,  as 
in  the  case  of  federal  and  state  legislative  powers.     Towards  the 
solution  of  the  question,    we  must  determine,  whether  the  enu- 
meration of  federal  judicial  powers,  is  not  a  limitation  and  re- 
striction, like   the  enumeration   of  federal  legislative   powers. 
Congress  is  empowered  to  "  make  all  laws  necessary  and  proper 
"  for  carrying  into  execution  the  powers  vested  by  the  constitu- 
"  tion  in  the  government  of  the  United  States."     The  federal 
judicial  power  is  extended  only  "  to  all  cases  in  law  and  equity 
"  arising  under  the  constitution."     The  analogy  between  these 
expressions  is  considerable.     Neither  conveys  a  power  to  alter 
the  terms  of  the  compact  between  the  states.     Both  must  there- 
fore have  been   intended  as  respectively  prohibiting  the  federal 
legislative  and  judicial  departments  from  effecting  this  end,  either 
by   laws   or  judgments.     Otherwise  Congress,   by  laws,  or  the 
federal  courts,  by  judgments,  might  alter  the  constitution.     The 
constitutional  mode  of  amendment  subverts  this  construction.     It 
prohibits  us  from  supposing  that  a  concurrent  power  of  amend- 
ment, was  lodged  in  Congress,  the  supreme  court,  and  three- 
fourths  of  the  states.     A  power  in  any  department  of  the  federal 
government   to  amend,   would  have  defeated  the  precaution  of 
requiring  three-fourths  of  the  states  to  effect  an  alteration.     If 
such  a  power  is  not  given,  how  can  its  exercise  be  prevented,  or 
does  our  federal  system  contain  no  principle  of  self-preservation  ? 
Suppose  Congress  should  alter  the  constitution  by  laws,  and  the 
federal  courts  should   execute    them.     Can   the  usurpation    be 
prevented  by    any  other   principle,  than    a  concurrent   power 
in  the  state  and  federal  governments  to  construe   and   preserve 
the   constitution  j    or  are    unconstitutional  federal    laws  void, 


$34  tailor's  views. 

and  unconstitutional  federal  judgments  binding  ?  Can  any  other 
principle  sustain  the  mode  of  amending  the  constitution,  and  the 
mutual  check  between  the  federal  and  state  departments,  so 
highly  praised  by  the  Federalist  ?  If  Congress,  or  the  supreme 
court,  can  annul  state  laws  or  judgments,  to  what  species  of  go- 
vernment are  those  of  the  states  to  be  assigned  ? 

Thus  we  are  conducted  to  the  restriction  contained  in  the 
words  "  cases  in  law  and  equity."  Their  true  meaning  must  be 
preserved,  or  the  plain  intention  of  the  constitution  destroyed. 
A  power  to  try  cases  in  law  and  equity,  has  never  been  under- 
stood to  comprise  a  power  of  common  legislation,  and  much  less 
the  higher  power  of  altering  constitutions  or  forms  of  govern- 
ment. The  English  judiciary  try  cases  in  law  and  equity,  but 
this  does  not  comprise  a  power  to  alter  the  rights  of  the  English 
political  departments.  These  are  the  guardians  of  their  own 
rights,  not  to  be  altered  except  by  a  concurrence  of  all.  The 
state  governments  are  also  the  guardians  of  their  own  rights,  not 
to  be  altered  except  by  a  concurrence  of  three-fourths.  The  se- 
nate of  the  United  States  is  a  precaution  for  preventing  evasions 
of  this  concurrence,  which  would  be  defeated,  if  the  supreme 
court  could  acquire  a  power  of  controlling  the  state  governments, 
because  the  senate  cannot  revise  judgments  or  decrees  in  cases  of 
law  and  equity. 

Controversies  may  arise  under  the  constitution  between  politi- 
cal departments,  in  relation  to  their  powers ;  between  the  legis- 
lative and  treaty -making  departments  ;  between  the  senate  and 
the  house  of  representatives  ;  between  the  president  and  the  se- 
nate ;  or  between  the  state  and  federal  departments ;  but  they 
would  not  be  cases  in  law  and  equity,  nor  is  any  power  to  decide 
them  given  to  the  federal  judiciary.  One  species  of  controversy 
relates  to  the  form  of  government ;  the  other  flows  from  its  ope- 
ration. The  power  by  which  a  government  is  formed  or  altered, 
is  not  the  power  by  which  the  law-suits  of  individuals  are  tried  ; 
and  therefore  a  power  to  try  suits  in  law  and  equity,  was  never 
supposed  to  comprise  the  former  power. 

Among  the  cases  to  which  the  federal  jurisdiction  is  extended, 
not  one  is  to  be  found  recognising  a  power  to  decide  controver- 
sies between  any  of  these  political  departments.     It  is  incon- 


tailor's  views.  13^ 

ceivable  that  a  jurisdiction,  transcending  beyond  comparison  the 
jurisdiction  cautiously  specified,  should  have  been  tacitly  given 
without  any  specification.  In  two  cases  only,  the  federal  courts 
have  received  an  exclusive  jurisdiction,  arising  from  the  circum- 
stance that  these  were  cases  created  by  the  constitution,  and  not 
comprised  by  the  anterior  state  sovereignties ;  in  all  other  cases 
the  states  have  a  concurrent  jurisdiction,  because  they  were. 
Any  other  parties  may  institute  suits  in  the  state  courts,  and  upon 
the  same  principle,  an  ambassador  or  consul  fleeing  from  pu- 
nishment for  a  criminal  act,  would  be  surrendered  to  the  justice 
of  the  state  tribunals. 

The  second  section  of  the  third  article,  resorted  to  as  an  exten- 
sion of  federal  judicial  power,  into  a  supremacy  over  state  judi- 
cial power,  is  in  these  words :  "  In  all  cases  affecting  ambassa- 
"  dors,  other  publick  ministers,  and  consuls,  and  those  in  which 
"  a  state  shall  be  a  party,  the  supreme  court  shall  have  original 
"  jurisdiction.  In  all  the  other  cases  before  mentioned,  the  su- 
"  preme  court  shall  have  appellate  jurisdiction,  both  as  to  law 
11  and  fact,  with  such  exceptions,  and  under  such  regulations, 
"  as  the  Congress  shall  make."  The  words  "  original  and  ap- 
"  peltate,"  both  refer  to  the  federal  courts,  and  are  used  for  di- 
viding the  federal  judicial  power  previously  defined,  between 
these  courts;  and  not  for  the  purpose  of  extending  that  power  to 
a  supremacy  over  state  judicial  power,  and  thereby  defeating  its 
specified  limitation.  They  are  a  consequence  of  the  legislative 
power  "  to  constitute  tribunals  inferior  to  the  supreme  court." 
This  inferiority  could  only  be  effected  by  appeals  from  the  infe- 
rior federal  courts,  to  the  supreme  federal  court.  As  Congress 
could  not  constitute  state  courts,  these  were  not  the  inferior 
courts  to  which  its  legislative  power  is  extended,  and  therefore 
the  appellate  jurisdiction  is  limited  from  the  inferior  courts  which 
Congress  could  constitute.  And  as  the  word  original  created  no 
new  judicial  power,  so  the  word  appellate  gave  none.  Both  the 
words  are  expressly  restricted  to  the  judicial  powers  previously 
bestowed,  by  repeating  that  portion  of  them  to  which  the  original 
jurisdiction  of  the  supreme  court  is  extended,  and  including  the 
rest  by  the  words  "  in  all  other  cases  before  mentioned.^  No 
language  could  more  positively  have  excluded  the  idea,  that  this 


136  Taylor's  views. 

second  section  created  any  additional  judicial  federal  power. 
And  therefore,  as  the  judicial  power  previously  defined  and  ex- 
pressly referred  to  by  this  second  section,  does  not  give  to  the 
federal  courts  any  power  to  try  cases  in  law  and  equity  arising 
under  state  constitutions  and  laws  ;  nor  controversies  between 
political  departments;  nor  the  least  power,  original  or  appellate, 
over  the  state  courts ;  the  second  section  can  give  no  such  pow- 
ers, because  it  is  restricted  by  its  reference  to  the  first.  The  ap- 
pellate jurisdiction  from  the  inferior  federal  courts  to  the  supreme 
federal  court,  provided  for,  was  to  extend  both  to  "  law  and 
i(  fact,  with  such  exceptions  and  under  such  regulations,  as  the 
"  Congress  shall  make."  Could  the  words  il  law  and  fact,"  have 
been  intended  to  refer  to  political  controversies  between  the  state 
and  federal  governments  ?  What  idea  would  be  conveyed  by  a 
power  to  try  the  constitution,  according  to  law  and  fact  ?  These 
appeals  were  to  be  tried  by  such  law  and  fact  as  Congress  might 
establish,  or  regulate.  Had  therefore  an  appellate  jurisdiction 
from  the  state  courts  been  given  to  the  supreme  federal  court,  a 
power  in  Congress  to  regulate  the  law  and  fact  by  which  they 
were  to  be  tried,  would  have  comprised  a  federal  legislative 
power  to  regulate  the  proceedings  in  the  state  courts  themselves. 
In  empowering  Congress  to  regulate  these  appeals,  a  power  of 
regulating  the  modes  of  proceeding  prescribed  by  state  govern- 
ments to  state  courts,  could  not  have  been  contemplated,  because 
these  are  various ;  and  though  it  was  proper  that  the  federal  go- 
vernment should  regulate  the  trials  in  federal  courts,  both  as  to 
law  and  fact,  such  a  power  in  relation  to  state  courts,  would  have 
produced  infinite  confusion,  provoked  litigation,  and  must  have 
terminated  in  a  national  government.  But  as  supremacy  means, 
and  appellate  implies,  dominion,  the  commentators  have  said, 
that  this  clause  invests  the  supreme  federal  court  with  dominion 
over  the  state  courts. 

The  constitution  is  susceptible  of  three  distinct  characters, 
which  will  shed  much  light  on  its  construction.  It  ought  to  be 
considered  as  a  compact,  an  organization  of  a  government  limited 
by  the  compact,  and  as  a  law  in  relation  to  individuals.  Its  es- 
sential stipulation  as  a  compact,  is  the  division  of  power  between 
the  state  and  federal  governments.     This  feature  is  impressed 


taylor's  views.  137 

upon  it  in  the  strongest  lines,  by  the  guarantee  of  a  republican 
form  of  government  to  every  state,  and  the  reservation  of  unde- 
legated powers.  Can  a  government  be  called  republican,  or  even 
be  any  government,  if  its' powers  maybe  taken  away  by  another 
governmnet,  or  if  it  is  responsible,  not  to  the  people,  but  to  a  few 
judges,  wrho  are  themselves  responsible  to  another  government  ? 
The  argument  used  in  the  convention,  now  again  advanced,  that 
the  states  are  subordinate  corporations,  is  refuted  by  the  consti- 
tution itself  in  its  guarantee  and  reservation.  Who  are  the 
guardians  of  the  compact,  the  guarantee,  and  the  reservation  3 
the  people  of  each  state,  or  the  supreme  federal  court  ?  Is  this 
court  a  state,  a  republican  form  of  government  for  every  state, 
and  the  receptacle  of  the  reservation  ?  Even  a  criminal  is  to  be 
tried  by  his  peers.  Suppose  the  guarantee  to  convey  a  power, 
instead  of  imposing  a  duty,  the  state  forms  of  government  fall 
under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  United  States,  and  cannot  be  regu- 
lated by  a  jurisdiction  to  try  suits  in  law  and  equity.  If  the 
guarantee  is  only  a  duty,  the  stale  governments,  to  be  republican, 
must  be  regulated  by  the  people  of  each  state.  How  can  they 
be  republican,  if  they  may  be  tried,  their  laws  and  judgments 
annulled,  and  their  powers  abridged,  by  a  court,  which  is  neither 
their  peer,  their  master,  nor  their  guarantee  ?  To  abridge  the 
powers  of  state  governments,  is  equivalent  to  the  suppression  of 
state  legislatures.  The  constitution,  in  accordance  with  its  cha- 
racter as  a  compact,  composes  a  jury  consisting  of  three-fourths 
©f  the  contracting  parties,  for  its  own  trial,  because  they  were 
compeers ;  and  neither  subjected  itself  as  a  compact,  nor  these 
compeers  and  mutual  guarantees,  to  the  power  of  a  few  men 
anly  enabled  to  try  cases  in  law  and  equity. 

By  organizing  a  federal  government  to  execute,  the  constitu- 
tion did  not  intend  to  alter  the  compact.  Its  organick,  was  in- 
tended to  be  subservient  to  its  contracting  character,  and  not  to 
be  exalted  above  it.  The  departments  and  officers  of  the  federal 
government  were  a  skeleton,  intended  as  the  residence  of  one 
soul  of  the  compact,  and  the  departments  and  officers  of  the 
state  governments  were  considered  as  the  residence  of  the  other 
soul.  The  federal  soul  might  have  been  infused  into  a  different 
njece  of  mechanism.     I  have  therefore  objected  to  Mr.  Madi- 

1-8 


138  taylor's  views. 

son's  idea,  that  the  house  of  representatives,  one  part  of  the  me- 
chanism or  skeleton,  contrived  as  a  receptacle  for  the  principles 
of  the  compact,  can  alter  those  principles  on  account  of  the  mode 
in  which  this  limb  is  moulded.  The  president,  senate,  and  house 
of  representatives,  all  limbs  of  a  federal  mechanism,  are  some- 
what formed  after  monarchical,  aristocratical,  and  republican  mo- 
dels, but  this  does  not  alter  the  principles  of  the  compact,  nor 
change  the  soul  of  the  skeleton  from  federal  to  national,  any- 
more than  the  mode  of  making  the  presidential  limb,  can  make 
our  government  a  monarchy. 

The  third  article  of  the  constitution  is  both  organick  and  legal. 
Organick,  in  establishing  a  federal  judiciary  ;  legal,  in  creating 
several  new  individual  legal  rights  ;  but  its  legal  character,  to  be 
discerned  in  this  and  other  articles,  is  addressed  to  all  indivi- 
duals, and  of  course  to  all  tribunals.  The  mechanism  of  a  su- 
preme and  inferior  courts,  does  no  more  create  a  supreme  na- 
tional judicial  power,  than  the  mechanism  of  Congress  can  create 
a  supreme  national  legislative  power.  None  of  these  wheels  or 
pullies  were  intended  to  destroy  the  state  governments,  or  their 
republican  forms,  or  the  reservation  by  which  only  life  is  infused 
into  those  forms.  Hence  the  mechanism  of  the  federal  courts 
into  supreme  and  inferior,  was  only  intended  as  an  auxiliary  to- 
wards enforcing  the  legal  character  of  the  constitution,  and  not  as 
an  instrument  for  altering  its  organick,  or  its  contracting  cha- 
racters. The  constitution,  as  a  law,  would  produce  cases  in  law 
and  equity.  To  such  cases  only,  and  not  to  the  principles  of  the 
compact,  nor  to  the  mechanism  of  our  system,  the  judicial  power 
of  the  United  States  is  extended.  The  state  courts  may  also 
try  cases  in  law  and  equity,  but  this  gives  them  no  power  to 
alter  the  mechanism  or  principles  of  constitutions,  or  to  deter- 
mine the  controversies  of  political  departments.  Authorities 
might  be  cited  in  great  number,  to  prove  that  such  powers  have 
never  been  considered  as  annexed  to  a  jurisdiction  in  cases  of 
law  and  equity,  but  only  a  federal  and  state  construction  is  ad- 
duced. Congress  have  given  to  the  courts  of  Columbia  a  power 
to  try  all  cases  in  law  and  equity.  Do  these  words  convey  a 
power  to  regulate  the  political  departments  or  principles  by 
which  the  district  is  governed  ?     The  states  gave  to  the  federal 


taylor's  views.  139 

courts  the  same  power.  Do  the  same  words  convey  a  power  to 
regulate  the  political  departments  or  principles  by  which  the 
states  are  governed,  and  not  those  by  which  Columbia  is  govern- 
ed ?  The  state  of  Ohio  gave  a  jurisdiction  to  one  supreme 
court  and  inferior  courts,  in  cases  of  law  and  equity.  Did 
this  create  a  jurisdiction  able  to  regulate  the  powers  of  political 
departments,  created  by  its  constitution? 

In  order  to  elude  the  difference  between  the  contracting  and 
organick  characters  of  the  constitution,  and  to  make  the  latter 
destroy  the  former,  it  has  been  said,  that  the  federal  is  a  perfect 
government,  and  not  a  political  department ;  and  therefore  that 
a  comparison  between  our  political  checks  and  those  of  England 
is  not  correct,  or  at  least  can  only  be  applied  to  the  departments 
of  the  federal  government.  These  being,  organically,  legisla- 
tive, executive,  and  judicial,  their  concurrence  is  supposed  to 
constitute  a  supremacy  like  that  of  the  British  parliament,  in- 
vested with  a  right  to  remove  every  obstruction  out  of  its  way ; 
and  an  army  sufficient  to  execute  its  pleasure,  is  then  all  that  is 
necessary  to  perfect  a  national  system  of  government.  If  this 
doctrine  is  insufficient  to  awaken  the  states,  they  will  soon  sleep 
forever.  But  the  assumption  on  which  it  is  founded  is  not  true. 
Neither  the  federal  nor  state  are  perfect  governments,  both  being 
only  invested  as  distinct  and  checking  political  departments) 
with  limited  portions  or  dividends  of  civil  and  political  power. 
If  a  political  mechanism,  resembling  that  of  the  British  perfect 
government,  and  invested,  not  with  any  power,  like  that,  to  alter 
the  constitution,  but  only  with  limited  legislative,  executive,  and 
judicial  powers,  is  sufficient  to  control  both  the  principles  of  our 
compact  and  the  organical  mode  for  giving  them  efficacy ;  as  the 
organization  of  both  the  state  and  federal  governments  equally 
resemble  the  British  mechanism ;  both  would  possess  all  the 
powers  of  a  perfect  government.  But  our  division  of  power 
operates  upon  this  mechanism,  and  converts  it  into  a  mode  of  es- 
tablishing collateral  and  balancing  departments,  similar  to  the  di- 
vision of  rights  and  powers  between  the  king,  lords,  and  com- 
mons, of  England.  The  king  to  preserve  his  prerogatives,  the 
lords  to  preserve  their  privileges,  and  the  commons  to  preserve 
their  rights,  do  not  resort  to  triers  of  law  and  fact.     If  the  lorch 


140  taylor's  views. 

originate  a  money  bill,  the  commons  do  not  sue  them  at  law  or  in 
equity.  Nor  do  I  discern,  how  the  state  department  could,  by 
such  a  suit,  preserve  its  reserved  rights.  The  federal  court  may 
be  the  aggressor,  or  possibly  take  sides  with  the  federal  legisla- 
tive or  executive  power,  if  either  of  these  should  be  the  ag- 
gressor. Of  all  defendants,  a  political  department,  in  trying  its 
competitors,  and  deciding  its  own  misdeeds,  is  the  least  likely  to 
do  justice.  If  the  federal  judiciary  is  a  political  department 
for  the  preservation  of  delegated  powers,  the  state  judiciaries 
are  also  political  departments  for  the  preservation  of  the  reserved 
powers.  But  as  no  tribunal  could  ever  be  found  able  or  willing 
to  do  justice  between  contending  political  and  balancing  depart- 
ments, without  subverting  a  division  of  power  indispensable  for 
the  preservation  of  civil  liberty,  such  departments  have  necessa- 
rily and  invariably  been  considered  as  the  guardians  of  their  own 
rights,  because  the  end  could  only  be  effected  by  their  clashing 
with  and  controlling  each  other. 

The  legal  feature  of  the  constitution,  in  relation  to  judges,  is 
expressed  in  the  sixth  article.  "  The  constitution  is  the  su- 
"  preme  law  of  the  land,  and  the  judges  in  every  state  are  to 
"  be  bound  thereby."  Can  the  judgments  of  the  federal  court  be 
a  supreme  law  over  this  supreme  law  ?  Is  there  no  difference 
between  the  supremacy  of  a  federal  court  over  inferior  federal 
courts,  and  the  supremacy  of  the  constitution  over  all  courts  ? 
The  supremacy  of  the  constitution  is  a  guarantee  of  the  inde- 
pendent powers  within  their  respective  spheres,  allowed  by  the 
Federalist  to  the  state  and  federal  governments.  A  supremacy 
in  the  court  might  abridge  or  alter  these  spheres.  The  state 
judges  are  bound  by  the  constitution  and  by  an  oath  to  obey  the 
supremacy  of  the  constitution,  and  not  even  required  to  obey 
the  supremacy  of  a  federal  court.  Why  are  all  the  departments 
of  the  state  and  federal  governments  equally  bound  to  obey  the 
supremacy  of  the  constitution  ?  Because  the  state  and  federal 
governments  were  considered  as  checking  or  balancing  depart- 
ments. Had  either  been  considered  as  subordinate  to  a  suprema- 
cy in  the  other,  it  would  have  been  tyrannical  to  require  it  by  an 
oath  to  support  the  supremacy  of  the  constitution,  and  also  to 
break  that  oath  by  yielding  to  the  usurped  supremacy  of  the 


taylor's  views.  141 

wther.  The  oath  requires  loyalty  to  state  and  federal  powers ; 
judgments  might  require  disloyalty  to  both.  The  answer  to  this 
dilemma  is,  that  as  the  federal,  in  its  mechanism,  is  a  perfect 
government,  because  it  somewhat  resembles  the  British,  the 
states  are  bound  to  consider  whatever  it  does  as  constitutional ; 
and  that  therefore  the  oath,  though  taken  in  fact  to  support  the 
constitution,  virtually  binds  the  swearer  to  support  both  the  laws 
of  the  federal  government,  and  the  judgments  of  its  supreme 
court.  But  since  the  state  governments,  by  their  organization, 
and  by  the  guarantee,  are  considered  as  perfect  governments 
also  in  relation  to  their  reserved  powers,  I  do  not  see  why  the 
federal  government  is  not,  by  the  same  virtual  interpretation  of 
the  oath,  bound  to  support  state  laws  and  judgments.  Is  it  not 
as  obvious,  by  endowing  the  federal  government  or  either  of  its 
departments  with  this  virtual  supremacy  over  the  state  govern- 
ments, deduced,  not  from  the  principles  of  the  compact,  but 
from  the  form  of  its  organization,  that  a  consolidated  national 
government  and  a  destruction  of  the  state  governments,  would 
ensue  ;  as  that  by  endowing  the  state  governments  upon  the  same 
grounds,  with  an  unexpressed  supremacy  over  the  federal  go- 
vernment, a  dissolution  of  the  union  would  be  the  consequence  ? 
The  fact  is,  that  both  are  perfect  governments  in  relation  to  their 
respective  powers,  subject  in  one  case  to  three-fourths  of  the 
states,  and  in  the  other,  to  the  people  of  each  state ;  and  that 
neither  this  species  of  perfection,  nor  the  mechanism  of  either, 
invests  one  with  any  species  of  supremacy  over  the  other. 

The  arguments  in  confirmation  of  this  construction  of  the  con- 
stitution, are  abundant.  Criminal  prosecutions  are  allowed  not 
to  be  comprised  by  the  words  "  cases  in  law  and  equity,"  be- 
cause these  words  refer  to  civil  suits  between  individuals,  and  not 
to  the  reserved  powers  of  the  states.  This  meaning  equally  ex- 
cludes a  jurisdiction  over  the  reserved  powers  themselves,  as  over 
the  state  inisdiction  in  criminal  cases.  The  criminal  state  ju- 
risdiction is  held  to  be  independent,  as  a  consequence  of  state 
sovereignty ;  and  would  it  not  be  absurd  to  admit,  that  an  effect 
of  a  reserved  power  is  independent  of  the  delegated  powers, 
but  that  the  power  itself  from  which  the  effect  flows,  is  subordi- 
nate to  and  dependent  upon  them  ?     If  the  supremacy  of  the 


142  taylor's  views. 

constitution  covers  the  effect,  it  must  cover  the  power.     The  su- 
premacy of  the  court  only  lifts  it  above  the  inferior  federal 
courts,  and  not  above  the  supremacy  of  the  constitution.     If  the 
latter  does  not  lift  state  powers  themselves  above  the  supremacy 
of  the  court,  no  effects  of  these  powers  can  be  beyond  its  reach- 
Judicial  and    constitutional  powers  are    made  distinct  for   a 
stronger  reason,  than  judicial  and  legislative.     One  species  of 
monopoly  would  only  endanger  private  justice ;  the  other  would 
destroy  publick  liberty.     The  limitation  to  cases  arising  under 
the  federal  constitution  and  laws,  excludes  cases  arising  under 
state  constitutions  and  laws.     An  extension  of  the  federal  juris- 
diction to  a  few  specified  cases  of  the  latter  description,  excludes 
all  not  specified.     The  federal  judges  are  not  required  to  swear 
that  they  would  support  state  constitutions  and  laws,  because 
they  had  no  jurisdiction  over  them.     State  and  federal  legisla- 
tive powers  cannot  be  independent  of  each  other,  if  state  and 
federal  judicial  powers  are  not.     If  Congress  can  extend  judi- 
cial federal  powers,  and  the  supreme  federal  court  oan  extend 
legislative  federal  powers,  the  constitution  is  not  susceptible  of 
the  federal  constructions  given  to  it  by  Mr.  Madison  and  Mr. 
Hamilton. 

If  the  preceding  argument  is  sound,  the  law  of  Congress  de- 
claring that  the  "  supreme  court  shall  have  appellate  jurisdiction 
4i  from  the  courts  of  the  several  states ;  and  that  it  may  issue 
"  writs  of  error  to  revise,  reverse,  or  affirm,  judgments  or  de- 
**  crees  of  the  state  courts,"  is  precisely  as  unconstitutional,  as 
sQttA  laws  for  bestowing  an  appellate  jurisdiction  from  the  deci- 
sions of  the  federal  courts,  upon  the  supreme  courts  of  the 
states.  No  power  is  given  to  either  legislature  to  pass  such  laws, 
nor  an  appeal  from  either  judiciary  to  the  other  allowed,  any 
more  than  from  a  legislative  state  or  federal  department  to  the 
other.  The  appellate  jurisdiction  given  by  the  federal  law,  is 
unsubjectcd  to  limitation,  and  the  writ  of  error  is  extended  to 
•very  case  which  may  call  in  question  the  sovereign,  indepen- 
dent, and  reserved  rights  of  the  states.  Does  the  limited  power 
»f  Congress  « to  constitute  tribunals  inferior  to  the  supreme 
"  court,"  enable  it  to  endow  the  judicial  power  of  the  United 
States  with  this  mighty  accession  of  jurisdiction,  or  with  any  ju- 


Taylor's  views.  143 

risdiction  at  all  ?  Congress  is  to  create  the  courts,  but  the  con- 
stitution created  the  jurisdiction ;  and  its  extension  by  law  was 
only  an  extract  from  the  monarchical  or  national  tumour,  which 
became  so  large  in  the  convention. 

The  federal  legislative  and  judicial  powers  are  both  plainly 
intended  to  be  limited  by  the  constitution,  and  any  mode  by 
which  this  limitation  can  be  evaded,  must  destroy  our  federal 
system,  or  be  destroyed  by  it.  If  Congress  can  give  a  judicial 
supremacy  to  a  federal  court,  the  federal  legislative  power  must 
be  itself  supreme,  and  may  extend  its  bounty  to  the  executive 
also.  This  construction  makes  it  the  design  of  the  constitution 
to  introduce  a  limited  monarchy  or  a  consolidated  national  go- 
vernment, as  proposed  in  the  convention,  disguised  in  the  ha- 
biliments of  a  federal  government,  falsified  by  the  misnomer  of 
a  union,  and  restrained  by  ropes  of  sand,  or  ineffectual  precepts. 

Even  the  law  for  giving  to  the  supreme  federal  court  an  appel- 
late jurisdiction  over  the  state  courts,  justifies  this  view  of  the 
subject.  Why  was  it  passed  ?  Because  the  third  article  of  the 
constitution  gave  no  such  jurisdiction  to  the  supreme  federal 
court.  Because  it  was  an  exercise  of  that  plenitude  of  power, 
said  to  be  inherent  to  a  perfect  government,  modelled  with  some 
resemblance  to  the  British  form.  And  because  it  was  a  prece- 
dent in  favour  of  the  capacity  of  construction,  for  turning  war 
into  roads,  and  commerce  into  canals.  As  Congress  could  make 
courts,  it  could  pass  any  laws  in  relation  to  courts,  state  and  fe- 
deral, their  jurisdiction,  supremacy,  or  subordination ;  and  by- 
one  profound  effort,  enlarge  its  own  power,  make  a  great  pro- 
gress towards  the  introduction  of  a  consolidated  government, 
and  establish  a  mode  of  construing  the  constitution,  by  which 
that  design  might  with  ease  and  certainty  be  effected.  And  thus 
the  mutual  control  between  the  state  and  federal  departments,  is 
in  the  road  to  ruin,  although  even  Mr.  Hamilton  allows  it  to  be 
the  most  excellent  feature  of  our  system  of  government,  and  that 
a  concentration  of  power  is  on  the  other  hand  the  most  infallible 
evidence  of  tyranny. 

The  judicial  power  of  the  United  States  is  extended  to  all 
cases  in  law  and  equity  arising  under  the  constitution,  the  laws 
of  the  United  States,  and  treaties,  without  discrimination,  de- 


144  taylor's  views. 

monstrating  that  these  cases  were  of  the  same  nature,  whether 
they  arose  under  the  constitution  or  under  laws  ;  and  as  the  lat- 
ter must  either  be  confined  to  private  law-suits,  or  Congress 
must  have  a  power  of  regulating  the  political  powers  of  the  state 
and  federal  governments  by  laws,  it  follows  that  the  former  were 
confined  to  the  same  cases.  Therefore,  as  political  controversies 
between  the  two  governments  were  not  considered  as  embraced 
by  "  cases  in  law  and  equity,"  and  it  being  deemed  necessary 
for  the  purpose  of  preserving  amity  between  states,  and  effecting 
several  federal  objects,  to  extend  the  jurisdiction  of  the  federal 
court  to  a  few  political  cases,  not  reached  by  the  jurisdiction  to 
settle  private  rights  comprised  in  the  phrase  "  cases  in  law  and 
"  equity,"  a  specification  of  these  few  cases  became  necessary. 
As  this  jurisdiction  did  not  extend  to  the  sovereign  or  reserved 
rights  of  the  states,  and  as  it  was  necessary  that  some  tribunal 
should  exist,  to  preserve  amity  between  the  separate  states,  the 
federal  judiciary  is  invested  with  a  power  of  settling  "  contro- 
"  versies  between  states."  This  special  jurisdiction,  extending 
only  to  a  distinct  sovereign  right  of  the  states,  is  both  an  ex- 
pression of  the  limited  meaning  annexed  to  the  words  u  cases  in 
"  law  and  equity,"  and  also  a  positive  exclusion  from  the  juris- 
diction of  the  federal  court,  of  all  other  sovereign  powers  reserv- 
ed to  the  states.  Among  the  controversies  of  a  political  nature, 
not  reached  by  the  words  "  cases  in  law  and  equity,"  were  such 
as  might  arise  between  the  federal  and  state  departments,  as  well 
as  such  as  might  arise  between  two  states.  By  extending  the 
jurisdiction  of  the  supreme  court  to  the  latter  controversies  only, 
the  former  are  excluded,  because  the  federal  court  was  considered 
as  an  impartial  tribunal  for  deciding  controversies  between  two 
state  governments,  but  not  for  deciding  controversies  between 
the  state  and  federal  governments. 

The  specification  of  controversies  between  two  states,  inter- 
prets the  word  supreme,  and  the  phrase  "  cases  in  law  and 
"  equity,"  as  insufficient  to  include  such  controversies ;  and  if 
controversies  between  two  states  were  not  embraced  by  them,, 
this  word  and  phrase  could  not  embrace  controversies  between 
the  federal  and  state  departments.  Such  would  be  the  construc- 
tion of  the  constitution,  even  if  we  could  not  perceive,  the  rea~ 


taylor's  views.  145 

sons  for  extending  the  jurisdiction  of  a  federal  court  to  contro- 
versies between  two  states,  and  excluding  it  from  any  jurisdic- 
tion over  controversies  between  the  state  and  federal  govern- 
ments. But  the  reasons  are  obvious.  A  jurisdiction  of  the 
federal  court  in  controversies  between  two  states,  could  neither 
alter,  extend,  nor  diminish,  the  political  powers  of  the  litigant 
states.  Whichever  might  gain  the  cause,  would  not  thereby 
transfer  to  itself  the  local  rights  of  the  other.  But  a  jurisdiction 
of  the  federal  court  to  settle  controversies  between  the  federal 
and  state  governments,  in  relation  to  their  respective  constitu- 
tional rights,  might  transfer  power  claimed  by  one  party  to  the 
other ;  and  would  also  supersede  the  essential  principle,  that  the 
jurisdiction  for  distributing  and  regulating  the  powers  of  these 
departments,  belongs  exclusively  to  the  people  of  the  states, 
acting  by  their  representatives.  And  moreover,  all  the  benefits 
resulting  from  their  mutual  control,  would  by  such  a  jurisdiction 
have  been  sacrificed  at  the  shrine  of  the  usual  precautions  for 
securing  judicial  impartiality. 

Controversies  between  states,  could  not  reach  the  sovereignty 
and  independence  of  a  state,  and  would  also  be  rare.  Those  of 
a  territorial  nature,  were  few  in  number,  and  would  soon  cease. 
Pecuniary  controversies  between  states  were  unknown  and  un- 
expected. The  greater  probability  of  controversies  between  the 
federal  and  state  departments,  would  not  have  been  over-looked, 
whilst  some  few  between  states  were  subjected  to  the  jurisdic- 
tion of  the  federal  judiciary.  The  convention  must  therefore 
have  considered  them  as  provided  for  by  the  division  of  powers 
between  these  departments,  their  mutual  right  of  self-defence, 
and  the  mode  prescribed  for  altering  the  constitution. 

Neither  of  the  enumerated  cases  of  extraordinary  jurisdiction 
contain  the  slightest  insinuation,  that  they  comprised  a  power  to 
regulate  or  alter  the  division  of  powers  made  by  the  constitution. 
Even  the  jurisdiction  of  the  federal  courts  over  individuals,  is 
limited  ;  otherwise  it  would  not  have  been  necessary  to  extend 
it  to  the  two  specified  cases  of  individual  controversies  between 
citizens  of  different  states,  or  claiming  lands  under  grants  of  dif- 
ferent states.  The  limitation  of  federal  jurisdiction  over  indi- 
viduals, can  only  result  from  a  supremacy  of  state  jurisdiction 
19 


146  taylor's  views. 

over  the  same  individuals.  A  supremacy  over  state  jurisdiction 
in  the  federal  court,  would  destroy  the  limitation  acknowledged 
by  specifying  two  cases  to  which  it  should  extend ;  and  also  the 
supremacy  of  state  jurisdiction,  as  to  those  individual  rights  spe- 
cified or  not  specified.  This  specification  proves,  that  the  words 
"  arising  under  the  constitution,"  in  the  judicial  section,  and  the 
declaratory  words  of  the  sixth  article,  did  not  confer  on  the  fe- 
deral court  any  supremacy  of  jurisdiction  over  any  cases  belong- 
ing exclusively  or  concurrently  to  state  jurisdiction.  Every 
right,  civil  and  political,  is  delegated  or  reserved  under  the  con- 
stitution ;  and  if  the  words  "  cases  in  law  and  equity,"  united 
with  special  extensions  of  jurisdiction,  not  comprised  by  them, 
are  not  limitations  of  federal  jurisdiction,  it  would  reach  every 
right,  civil  and  political ;  and  we  should  have  the  apparition  of  a 
judicial  national  government,  coupled  with  a  federal  legislative 
and  executive  government. 

I  admit  that  the  gentlemen  who  are  for  concentrating  power  in 
the  federal  government,  are  not  chargeable  with  the  intention  of 
creating  this  political  monster,  but  to  acquit  them  of  an  intention 
so  manifestly  inconsistent  with  the  universal  relation  between 
legislative  and  judicial  power,  we  must  believe  that  they  consi- 
der the  federal,  as  the  very  national  government  proposed  in  the 
convention. 

In  No.  80,  of  the  Federalist,  Mr.  Hamilton  observes,  "  If 
"  there  are  any  such  things  as  political  axioms,  the  propriety  of 
"  the  judicial  power  of  a  government  being  co-extensive  with 
"  its  legislative,  may  be  ranked  among  the  number."  To  sus- 
tain the  axiom,  the  rights  of  legislating  and  judging  must  be  co- 
extensive. To  whatever  objects  the  right  of  judging  can  be 
extended,  to  the  same  objects  the  right  of  legislating  can  go ;  and 
if  the  federal  judiciary  may  by  judgments  regulate  the  powers 
of  the  state  and  federal  governments,  the  federal  legislature  may 
by  laws  regulate  the  same  powers.  If  it  is  true,  that  judicial 
power  emanates  from  legislative,  the  converse  of  the  proposition 
would  be  false.  Both  axioms  would  be  destroyed  if  there  was 
no  judiciary  to  execute  laws,  or  no  laws  to  be  executed.  As  the 
judicial  flows  from  the  legislative  power,  it  would  be  an  inver- 
sion of  political  order,  to  deduce  legislative  from  judicial  power. 


taylor's  views.  147 

To  avoid  an  absurdity  without  example,  and  in  hostility  with 
political  axioms,  if  it  can  be  established  that  the  federal  judiciary 
can  regulate  the  rights  of  the  states  by  its  judgments,  it  must  fol- 
low, that  the  federal  legislature  may  regulate  the  same  rights  by 
its  laws.  And  accordingly  the  supreme  court  declares  that  the 
federal  government  may  remove  all  obstacles  out  of  its  way. 
Thus  an  unlimited  national  government  is  ingrafted  upon  a  fede- 
ral stock,  by  first  cutting  away  the  state  branches  with  the  prun- 
ing-knife  of  judicial  supremacy. 

In  this  view  of  the  subject,  it  is  unnecessary  to  estimate  the 
power  of  the  legislative  department  to  influence  the  judicial,  be- 
cause no  such  influence  will  be  needed  to  introduce  a  supreme 
national  government ;  since,  whenever  the  federal  court  shall 
determine  that  its  jurisdiction  extends  to  the  regulation  of  state 
powers,  federal  legislation  must  extend  as  far;  and  a  partnership 
between  federal  departments  for  the  acquisition  of  power  at  the 
expense  of  the  states,  will  be  cemented  by  a  common  interest 
as  strong,  as  that  by  which  partners  for  the  acquisition  of  money 
are  invariably  caused  to  act  in  concert. 

Mr.  Hamilton's  axiom  establishes  a  mutual  right  of  control  in 
the  state  and  federal  judiciaries,  because  if  the  state  and  federal 
legislatures  can  neither  extend  nor  contract  the  powers  delegated 
and  reserved,   and   if  "  the  judicial  power  of  a  government  is 
**  only  co-extensive  with  the  legislative,"  it  follows,  that  judicial 
power  can  neither  extend  nor  contract  the  powers  delegated  and 
reserved,  any  more  than  legislative.     If  the  state  and  federal  le- 
gislatures may  check  each  other,  so  may  the  state  and  federal 
judiciaries.  The  mutual  control  of  the  collateral  legislatures,  would 
be  rendered  abortive,  unattended  by  a  mutual  control  of  the  colla- 
teral judiciaries,  which  must  execute  the  laws  of  their  respective 
legislatures,  or  these  laws  would  not  operate.     It  is  admitted  on 
all  hands,  that  judges,  state  and  federal,  ought  not  to  execute 
an  unconstitutional  law.     This  doctrine  is  founded  upon  the  su- 
premacy of  the  constitution  over  laws,  and  is  the  source  of  the 
mutual  control  between  all  political  departments.     The  axiom 
declares  that  the  judicial  power  of  a  government  is  co-extensive 
with  the  legislative.     The  legislature  cannot  enforce  unconstitu- 
tional laws.    If  judicial  power  can  pronounce  and  enforce  unv 


14S  TAYLOR'S  VIEWS. 

constitutional  judgments,  it  would  exceed  legislative  beyond 
computation.  The  same  supremacy  of  the  constitution,  and  the 
same  reasoning  which  justifies  judicial  power  in  its  refusal  to 
obey  an  unconstitutional  law,  justifies  also  a  state  judiciary  in 
refusing  to  obey  an  unconstitutional  federal  judgment ;  and  there 
is  no  mode  by  which  unconstitutional  laws  and  judgments  can 
be  prevented,  except  the  mutual  control  between  the  state  and 
federal  departments  contended  for  by  Mr.  Hamilton,  which  can- 
not exist  unless  it  extends  to  the  spherical  judiciaries  as  well  as 
to  the  spherical  legislatures. 

Mr.  Hamilton,  it  will  be  remembered,  admits  the  existence  of 
concurrent  powers  in  the  federal  and  state  governments,  illus- 
trated by  the  mutual  right  to  tax  ;  and  asserts  that  an  abridg- 
ment of  the  state  share  of  this  concurrent  power,  would  be  a 
violent  usurpation.  Wherefore  ?  Because  a  concurrent  right 
of  construing  the  constitution  attends  concurrent  powers.  The 
same  concurrent  power  of  construction  attends  the  delegated  and 
reserved  rights,  and  is  precisely  of  the  same  force  in  giving  ju- 
risdiction to  the  state  courts  over  the  reserved  rights,  as  in  giving 
jurisdiction  to  the  federal  courts,  respecting  the  delegated  rights. 
The  reservation  to  the  states  equally  includes  their  legislative, 
executive,  and  judicial  powers,  and  if  the  last  are  subordinate  to 
the  will  of  federal  power,  so  are  the  former.  The  concurrency 
of  construction  is  as  strongly  annexed  to  one  division  as  to  the 
other,  and  it  cannot  be  invaded  either  by  the  federal  legislature 
or  the  federal  court,  according  to  Mr.  Hamilton,  without  a  vio- 
lent usurpation,  because  powers  under  the  constitution  could  be 
neither  concurrent  nor  exclusive  between  political  departments, 
without  a  concurrent  right  to  construe  the  constitution.  If  the 
state  and  federal  departments  have  distinct  and  independent  le- 
gislative powers;  and  if  it  is  an  axiom,  that  the  judicial  power 
of  a  government  is  only  co-extensive  with  the  legislative ;  it  fol- 
lows, that  the  state  and  federal  judiciaries  must  also  have  dis- 
tinct and  independent  jurisdictions,  whether  we  admit  the  gene- 
ral rule  by  which  both  these  judiciaries  are  circumscribed  by  the 
respective  legislatures  to  which  they  are  annexed,  or  estimate 
the  restrictions  imposed  upon  them  by  the  constitution. 


taylor's  views.  149 

Mr.  Hamilton,  in  controverting  Mr.  Madison's  idea,  thai  the* 
federal  judiciary  had  a  power  to  decide  controversies  between 
the  federal  and  state  departments,  observes,  No.  78,  "  I  agree 
"  that  there  is  no  liberty,  if  the  power  of  judging  be  not  sepa- 
"  rated  from  the  legislative  and  executive  powers."  Without 
estimating  the  consequences  of  our  legislatures,  state  and  federal, 
having  exercised  judicial  powers  to  a  great  extent,  it  may  suf- 
fice to  recollect,  that  this  maxim  was  suggested  by  the  oppres- 
sions which  the  kings  of  England  were  enabled  to  inflict  upon 
the  people,  and  the  conquests  they  made  within  the  territories 
of  other  political  departments,  by  the  aid  of  Iheir  judicial  power. 
It  is  true,  that  since  the  English  judges  have  been  manumitted 
from  the  influence  of  one  political  department,  they  have  polish- 
ed, by  their  precedents,  the  Gothick  roughness  of  the  common 
law ;  but  as  this  constructive  power  was  subordinate  to  legislative 
will,  it  was  not  that  which  Mr.  Hamilton  considered  as  incon- 
sistent with  liberty.  A  power  in  one  department  to  exercise  the 
powers  of  another,  constituted  the  evil  reprobated  by  the  maxim. 
It  cannot  be  aggravated  beyond  a  federal  judicial  power  to  su- 
pervise the  acts  of  state  legislatures,  executives,  and  judiciaries. 
This  would  confound  departments  which  must  be  separated  to 
preserve  liberty,  according  to  Mr.  Hamilton.  If  the  control  of 
election  is  insufficient  to  prevent  legislatures  from  wasting  the 
money  of  the  people,  by  an  exercise  of  judicial  powers,  a  power 
of  altering  the  constitution,  by  judges  without  control,  Would 
certainly  waste  their  liberties.  Pecuniary  taxation,  intrusted 
only  to  temporary  representatives,  is  sometimes  oppressive  ;  but 
a  right  to  tax  the  powers  of  one  department  to  increase  those 
of  another;  or  a  right  to  transfer  powers  from  another  depart- 
ment to  itself;  has,  I  believe,  invariably  produced  despotism. 
It  is  as  tyrannical,  that  a  court,  by  precedents,  should  make  laws 
and  constitutions,  as  that  a  legislature  should  render  judgments. 
The  English  judges  corrupted  the  English  laws  by  precedents, 
whilst  they  were  dependent  on  the  monarchical  department. 
Would  not  the  federal  judges  corrupt  our  constitution,  if  invested 
with  a  power  to  alter  it  by  precedents?  They  would  thus  ac- 
quire power  for  themselves,  as  well  as  for  the  departments  on 
which  they  are  dependent;  whereas,  the  English  judges  only 


150  taylor's  views. 

gained  power  for  the  king  by  their  partial  decisions.  Does  the 
consequence  of  exposing  a  judicial  power  to  the  influence  of  a 
political  department,  in  England,  invite  us  to  revive  it  here  ? 

It  seems  to  me  that  Mr.  Madison  has  departed  from  the  essen- 
tial principle  of  a  division  of  power  for  enforcing  the  integrity 
of  political  departments,  by  estimating  erroneously  the  usual  pre- 
cautions for  securing  judicial  integrity.     These  were  never  in- 
tended nor  used  as  a  sufficient  substitute  for  a  division  of  power 
between  political  departments,  or  to  enable  a  judiciary  either  to 
extend  the  powers  of  a  political  department,  or  enlarge  its  own 
jurisdiction.     Derangements  of  powers  between  political  depart- 
ments, can  only  be  prevented  by  investing  them   with  a  mutual 
power  of  controlling  each  other.     This  principle,  in  virtue  of 
which  the  federal  courts  disobey  an  unconstitutional  federal  law, 
also  empowers  the  state  courts  to  disobey  an  unconstitut'onal  fe- 
deral judgment.     Impeachment,  one  of  the  usual  precautions  to 
enforce  judicial  fidelity  to  a  government  which  inflicts  the  pu- 
nishment, is  not  designed  to  produce  judicial  impartiality  in  re- 
gulating the  powers  of  another  government,  or  of  political  de- 
partments ;  and  under  our  system,  would  be  a  precaution,  not 
for  securing  fidelity   to  state  rights,   but  for  extending  federal 
powers  at  their  expense.     An  authority,  superior  to  the  autho- 
rity of  Congress,  established  the  supremacy  of  the  constitution ; 
and  therefore,  if  a  law  of  Congress  is  unconstitutional,  it  is  void, 
as  being  treason  against  this  authority.     The  same  authority  re- 
served the  state  rights,  including  those  of  a  judicial  nature;  and 
if  under  its  protection,  the  judicial  federal  department  is  bound 
to  disobey  an  unconstitutional  law  of  the  federal  legislative  de- 
partment, the  state  departments  cannot  obey  an  unconstitutional 
federal  judgment,  without  also  betraying  the  constitution.    If  the 
mutual  control  is  imperfect,  and  sometimes  inconvenient,  so  are 
all  other  precautions  for  the  preservation  of  liberty.     As  man- 
kind can  only  select  the  best,  its  imperfection  is  not  a  good  rea- 
son for  its  abandonment.     If  the  application  of  the  supreme  au- 
thority of  the  constitution  to  the  judgments  of  the  federal  court, 
may  sometimes  be  inconvenient,  so  may  the  application  of  the 
same  principle  to   the  laws  of  Congress.     If  the  federal  court 
may  avail  itself  of  inconveniences  to  crush  the  principle,  as  it 


Taylor's  views.  151 

regards  state  rights,  Congress  may  use  the  same  argument  to 
crush  it,  as  a  justification  of  the  judicial  department  in  disobey- 
ing unconstitutional  laws.  If  a  mutual  controlling  power  results 
from  the  supremacy  of  the  constitution,  between  state  and  fede- 
ral legislatures,  the  same  supremacy  establishes  a  mutual  con- 
trolling power  between  state  and  federal  judiciaries.  Why 
should  the  federal  judiciary  be  absolved  from  constitutional  loy- 
alty, to  be  enforced  by  the  state  judicial  department,  and  the 
state  and  federal  legislatures  be  held  to  it  by  the  mutual  check  ? 
If  it  is  safe  to  transfer,  by  construction,  the  supremacy  of  the 
constitution,  to  an  inferior  authority,  representation  had  stronger 
claims  to  a  preference,  than  a  tenure  for  life.  The  authority 
which  created  the  supremacy  of  the  constitution,  refused  to  in- 
vest the  federal  legislative,  judicial,  or  executive  departments., 
with  a  negative  over  state  laws  or  judgments,  and  relied  upon 
the  mutual  control  of  political  departments,  eulogised  by  the 
Federalist,  for  its  preservation.  The  principle  is  allowed  to  be 
good,  as  applicable  to  unconstitutional  laws,  and  said  to  be  bad, 
as  applicable  to  unconstitutional  judgments. 

The  supreme  court  was  not  intrusted  with  the  trial  of  im- 
peachments, as  was  proposed  in  the  convention,  because  its 
judgments  might  deprive  individuals  of  a  few  political  rights ; 
but  it  is  contended  that  it  possesses,  constructively,  a  power  to 
try  impeachments  of  whole  states,  and  to  deprive  them  of  poli- 
tical rights,  infinitely  more  important.  It  was  not  allowed  to 
disqualify  an  individual  to  hold  a  federal  office,  one  political 
right,  but  it  is  said  to  be  tacitly  authorized  to  deprive  all  the  in- 
dividuals of  the  United  States,  of  reserved  constitutional  rights 
without  any  restriction.  It  was  not  intrusted  with  a  power  to 
deprive  the  descendants  of  a  guilty  individual  of  any  political 
rights  whatsoever ;  but,  say  the  consolidators,  it  may  deprive  all 
the  descendants  of  the  present  generation  of  political  rights,  by 
its  precedents.  Does  this  latitudinarian  power  correspond  with 
the  reasons  which  caused  the  power  of  trying  impeachments  to 
be  withheld  from  the  supreme  court  ?  The  usual  precaution  of 
impeachment  was  retained  by  the  federal  government,  to  secure 
fidelity  to  itself,  and  not  to  secure  fidelity  to  state  rights.  Can 
we  infer  from  a  want  of  confidence  sufficient  to  intrust  the  su- 


152  Taylor's  views. 

preme  court  with  the  trial  of  federal  officers,  a  confidence  suffi- 
cient to  intrust  it  with  the  enormous  political  power  of  trying 
whole  states  ?  If  a  power  in  the  court  to  circumscribe  the  poli- 
tical rights  of  individuals,  might  have  nurtured  ambitious  de- 
signs, would  not  a  power  to  circumscribe  state  rights  be  a  thou- 
sand-fold more  dangerous  ?  To  confound  legislative  and  judi- 
cial power  in  the  same  body  of  men,  creates  a  tyranny,  which 
both  makes  the  law  and  applies  the  sword ;  and  to  enable  a  sin- 
gle court  to  cut  off  state  rights  by  a  supreme  power  of  construing 
the  constitution,  would  confound  the  power  of  creating  a  consti- 
tution, with  the  power  of  construing  laws,  and  render  these 
rights  as  precarious,  as  human  heads  are,  under  an  absolute 
monarchy. 

The  process  prescribed  by  the  constitution,  in  the  case  of  im- 
peachment, suggests  several  weighty  arguments.     As  impeach- 
ment was  an  engine,  capable  of  being  used    for  political  pur- 
poses, great  care  was  taken  lest  it  might  be  abused  from  ambi- 
tious motives.     These  precautions  forbid  us  to  imagine,  that  the 
supreme  court  was  empowered  to  arraign  and  try  states  upon  the 
accusation  of  an  individual,   and  to    deprive  them   of  political 
rights,  so  as  to  effect  political  innovations  not  exposed  to  the  con- 
trol of  the  senate.     How  can  the  cautions  used   in  the  case  of 
impeachment,  imply  a  subversion  of  the  constitutional  security 
for  the  existence  of  a  federal  form  of  government  ?     The  idea 
of  extending  the  power  of  the  supreme  court,  because  impeach- 
ment is  a  usual  precaution  to  secure  impartiality,  presents  us  with 
a  political   caricature.     The   political  right  of  an  individual  to 
hold  an  office,  cannot  be  called  in  question  except  by  the  repre- 
sentatives of  the  people  of  the  states;  but  the  political  rights  of 
the  states  may  be  called  in  question  by  an  individual.     The  se- 
riate cannot  deprive  an   individual,  though   condemned,  of  any 
state  right,   but  the  federal  court  may  deprive  all  the  people  of 
many  state  rights.     The  federal   check   is  preserved  to  secure 
one  federal  right  to  an  individual,  and  abandoned  as  a  security 
for  all  the  federal  rights  of  the  people.     A  concurrence  of  two- 
1  birds  of  the  senate  is  required  to  deprive  an  individual  of  one 
federal  right,  but  a  majority  of  the  court  may  deprive  the  states 
of  all  reserved  rights.     Thus  we  are  led  to  compare  a  power  in 


Taylor's  views.  153 

the  federal  court  to  decide  controversies  between  the  state  and 
federal  governments,  with  the  security  for  a  federal  form  of  go- 
vernment, contemplated  in  the  formation  of  the  senate. 

Mr.  Madison  admits  that  the  senate  was  intended  as  a  security 
to  the  states,  against  a  concentration  of  power  in  a  representation 
of  numbers,  contended  for  in  the  convention  ;  and  that  the  object 
of  the  compromise  was  to  prevent  constructive  innovations  dic- 
tated by  the  interest   of  large  or  small  states.     But  if  the  su- 
preme court  can  abridge  state  rights,  the  object  of  this  compro- 
mise is  defeated.    Neither  the  house  of  representatives  can  main- 
tain the  rights   of  the  people  of  the  states,   nor  the  senate  the 
rights  of  their  governments.    Impeachment  is  no  remedy  against 
a  judicial  predilection  for  a  national  form  of  government,  be- 
cause the  right  of  accusation  is  exclusively  lodged  in  the  de- 
partment, considered  by  Mr.  Madison  as  bottomed  upon  that 
principle,  and  tending  towards  that  form.     The  senate  was  mo- 
delled with  a  design  to  control  this  consolidating  tendency ;  but 
if  the  house  of  representatives  should  be  influenced  by  the  pride 
of  populousness,  like  many  members  of  the  convention,  to  pre- 
fer a  national  to  a  federal  government,  it  would  not  impeach  the 
judges  for  fostering  its  design  by  constructions  of  the  laws  and 
the  constitution  ;  and  the  rights  of  the  states  might  be  gradually 
abridged  by  the  supreme  court,   without  being  exposed  to  the 
control  of  the  senate,    though   that  body    was  modelled  for  the 
special  purpose  of  controlling  such  abridgments.   Had  the  laws  for 
establishing  a  bank  and  a  lottery,  contained  clauses  prohibiting 
the  states  from  taxing  the  stock  or  excluding  the  tickets,  these 
abridgments  of  state  rights  might  have  been  expunged  by  the 
senate ;  but  the  court,  by  constructively  inflicting  them,  has  evad- 
ed the  senatorial  control  over  consolidating  laws ;  and  by  virtue 
of  this  supremacy  assumed  over  state  powers,  the  same  species 
of  evasion  may  be  extended  to  a  multitude  of  cases,  for  the  pur- 
pose of  introducing  a  national  form  of  government.     Even  if 
Ihe  house  of  representatives  should  magnanimously  impeach  the 
judges  for  extending  its  own  powers,   the  remedy  would  not 
reach  the  case  of  an  honest  opinion,  though  unconstitutional. 
The  constitution  provides  against  the  contemplated  case  of  an 
honest  opinion  in  favour  of  a  national  government.,  demonstrated 
20 


154  Taylor's  views. 

in  the  convention,  by  the  counterpoise  of  an  honest  opinion  in 
favour  of  a  federal  government,  organized  in  the  senate ;  and 
never  intended  to  refer  this  great  question  to  the  honest  opinion 
of  the  supreme  court. 

It  will  not  be  contended  that  the  usual  precaution  of  impeach- 
ment against  partiality,  was  designed  to  prevent  the  judges  from 
giving  honest  opinions,  any  more  than  the  members  of  the  senate 
and  house  of  representatives,  who  are  liable  to  be  impeached ; 
but  this  liability  was  not  considered  as  affecting,  in  the  slightest 
degree,  the  contemplated  propensities  of  the  two  houses  for  a 
national  and  federal  government.  Impeachment,  therefore,  was 
not  considered  as  a  precaution  against  a  propensity  in  the  supreme 
court  towards  a  national  form  of  government ;  and  if  such  a  pro- 
pensity should  be  attended  by  a  judicial  supremacy  over  state 
powers,  it  would  effectually  defeat  the  balance  between  national 
and  federal  propensities  established  by  the  constitution.  A  ma- 
jority of  the  senate  can  reject  consolidating  laws,  but  two-thirds 
can  only  convict  in  cases  of  impeachment.  If  this  remedy  had 
reached  consolidating  judgments  or  precedents,  it  would  not 
have  been  equivalent  to  that  provided  against  consolidation  by  the 
constitution,  because  above  one-third  of  the  members  of  the  se- 
nate might  come  from  large  states,  and  entertain  consolidating 
opinions  injurious  to  the  small  states.  The  difference  between 
crime  and  opinion  dictated  the  remedies  against  judicial  partiality 
and  political  propensity.  In  the  case  of  crime,  the  remedy 
might  be  safely  restricted  to  two-thirds  of  the  senate,  but  the 
contemplated  inclination  of  a  majority  of  the  house  of  repre- 
sentatives towards  a  national  government,  was  only  to  be  re- 
strained by  a  majority  of  the  senate.  Had  this  check  been  li- 
mited to  two-thirds  of  the  senate,  it  would  have  been  ineffica- 
cious, and  therefore  it  cannot  be  imagined  that  the  supreme 
court  were  invested  with  a  supreme  power  of  indulging  a  conso- 
lidating inclination,  without  being  exposed  to  any  control,  except 
that  of  two-thirds  of  the  senate,  even  if  its  movements  in  that 
direction  could  be  reached  by  an  impeachment.  The  political 
error  to  be  guarded  against,  was  that  of  abridging  the  rights  of 
the  states.     Is  a  majority  of  the  senate,  or  a  majority  of  the  su- 


TAYLOR'S  VIEWS.  155 

preme  court,  the  remedy  provided  against  the  anticipated  dispo- 
sition of  the  house  of  representatives  to  fall  into  it  ? 

The  process  of  impeachment  is  not  confined  to  judges,  but 
extends  to  the  president,  senators,  and  representatives.  Does 
this  usual  precaution  invest  them  all  with  additional  political 
powers  ?  It  reaches  bribery  in  every  case ;  and  there  is  no  dif- 
ference between  the  usual  precautions  in  the  case  of  the  judges, 
and  of  these  other  officers,  except  that  the  latter  are  exposed  to 
a  periodical  accountableness,  and  the  former  are  not.  May  the 
president,  senate,  and  house  of  representatives,  constitutionally 
abridge  the  rights  of  the  states,  because,  as  they  are  liable  to  be 
impeached  and  convicted  by  two-thirds  of  the  senate  for  criminal 
acts,  it  is  to  be  presumed  that  they  will  decide  impartially  the 
controversies  between  the  federal  and  state  governments  ?  Such 
an  inference  is  equally  deducible  from  the  process  of  impeach- 
ment, for  extending  the  powers  of  these  departments,  as  for  ex- 
tending the  jurisdiction  of  the  supreme  court.  The  idea,  that 
an  exposure  to  punishment,  confers  an  enormous  political  power, 
amounts  to  the  idea,  that  a  man  who  is  liable  to  be  hanged  for 
treason,  ought  to  be  considered  as  a  monarch. 

If  this  reasoning  is  correct,  it  proves  that  the  words  "  cases  in 
"  law  and  equity,"  before  noticed,  does  not  include  political  at- 
tempts to  introduce  a  national  form  of  government,  because  the 
senate  is  one  constitutional  remedy  provided  to  defeat  them. 
Cases  in  law  and  equity  arise  both  under  the  powers  reserved  to 
the  states,  and  under  those  delegated  to  the  federal  government, 
but  the  mutual  right  to  try  these  cases,  implies  no  right  to  try 
and  modify  the  powers  themselves. 

The  delegations,  reservations,  and  prohibitions  of  the  consti- 
tution, combined  with  the  rejection  of  powers  proposed  in  the 
convention,  constitute  a  mass  of  evidence,  more  coherent  and  ir- 
refragable for  ascertaining  the  principles  of  our  political  system, 
than  can  be  exhibited  by  any  other  country  ;  and  if  it  cannot  re- 
sist the  arts  of  construction,  constitutions  are  feeble  obstacles  to 
ambition,  and  ineffectual  barriers  against  tyranny.  Delegations 
are  limitations ;  reservations  are  repetitions  of  these  limitations ; 
prohibitions  expound  the  extent  of  reservations  ;  and  rejections 
of  powers  proposed  in  the  convention,  are  constructions  forbid- 


156  Taylor's  views. 

ing  their  assumption.  This  mass  of  evidence  stands  opposed  to 
those  constructions  which  are  labouring  to  invest  the  federal  go- 
vernment with  powers  to  abridge  the  state  right  of  taxation  ;  to 
control  states  by  a  power  to  legislate  for  ten  miles  square ;  to 
expend  the  money  belonging  to  the  United  States  without  con- 
trol ;  to  enrich  a  local  capitalist  interest  at  the  expense  of  the 
people ;  to  create  corporations  for  abridging  state  rights  ;  to  make 
roads  and  canals ;  and  finally  to  empower  the  supreme  court  to 
exercise  a  complete  negative  power  over  state  laws  and  judg- 
ments, and  an  affirmative  power  as  to  federal  laws.  Without 
going  into  the  wide  field  of  argument,  opened  to  our  view  by 
testimony  so  full  and  perfect,  I  shall  select  only  such  parts  of  it 
as  seem  particularly  applicable  to  the  question  discussed  in  this 
section. 

Powers  neither  delegated  nor  prohibited,  are  reserved  to  the 
states.  A  general  negative  power  over  state  laws  and  judgments, 
is  not  delegated  to  the  federal  government.  This  was  proposed 
in  the  convention  and  rejected.  The  supremacy  of  the  states, 
legislative  and  judicial,  in  reference  to  their  reserved  powers,  is 
not  delegated  to  the  federal  government.  By  prohibiting  to  the 
states  portions  of  their  supremacy,  the  existence  of  those  por- 
tions not  prohibited,  is  acknowledged ;  and  these  remained  to  be 
exercised,  according  to  their  previous  nature.  The  tenth  section 
of  the  first  article  of  the  constitution,  prohibits  to  the  states  the 
exercise  of  specified,  supreme,  or  sovereign  powers;  but  a  long 
catalogue  of  such  powers  remained  unprohibited.  The  powers 
of  engaging  in  war,  raising  armies,  and  making  treaties,  are 
among  those  prohibited  to  the  states.  These  prohibitions  of 
sovereign  powers,  are  acknowledgments  of  the  inherent  supre- 
macy and  sovereignty  of  the  states,  except  for  which,  the  pro- 
hibitions would  have  been  idle  and  useless ;  and  had  they  been 
omitted,  the  same  concurrency  of  power  to  engage  in  war,  make 
treaties,  and  raise  armies,  would  have  existed  in  the  state  and  fe- 
deral governments,  as  does  exist  in  the  case  of  taxation  ;  as  flow- 
ing from  the  sovereignty  of  the  states.  The  powers  of  the  states 
to  punish  crimes,  regulate  property,  and  impose  taxes,  not  being 
given  to  them  by  the  constitution,  must  either  be  usurpations,  or 
be  justified  by  their  sovereignty  and  supremacy.     If  they  are 


taylor's  views.  157 

legitimate  offsprings,  then  the  sovereignty,  from  which  they  pro- 
ceed, is  reserved  to  the  states,  as  necessary  to  give  them  birth, 
is  not  delegated  to  the  federal  government,  and  may  be  exercised 
in  every  case  not  prohibited. 

For  many  years,  previous,  during,  and  subsequent,  to  the  re- 
volutionary war,  it  was  the  general  opinion,  that  the  provinces 
and  the  states  ought  to  provide  for  their  internal  happiness  in 
their  own  way  ;  and  millions  have  expended  blood  or  treasure  in 
defence  of  this  opinion.  The  constitutions  of  all  the  states,  the 
declaration  of  independence,  and  the  confederation  of  1777,  con- 
cur in  asserting  the  sovereignty  of  each  state.  According  to  the 
sound  rule  which  advises  us  to  consider  old  laws  in  construing  a 
new  one,  the  long  standing  publick  opinion,  and  the  solemn  do- 
cuments by  which  it  has  been  frequently  expressed,  ought  to  be 
considered,  in  construing  the  existing  confederation.  By  advert- 
ing to  principles  previously  established,  we  are  enabled  to  under- 
stand its  limitations,  prohibitions,  and  reservations,  because  all  of 
them  flow  from  and  were  modelled  in  reference  to  subsisting;  in- 
stitutions.  But  instead  of  seeking  for  truth  with  these  lights, 
we  are  advised  to  find  it  in  the  mystical  doctrines  :  that  we  have 
several  sovereignties,  and  but  one  sovereignty ;  that  the  states 
have  independent  local  powers,  and  that  these  powers  are  de- 
pendent on  some  federal  department ;  and  that  the  residence  of  a 
supreme  power,  is  a  problem  too  obscure  to  be  solved  by  eminent 
politicians,  some  contending  that  it  is  in  a  general  government, 
and  others  in  the  supreme  federal  court.  A  curious  consequence 
of  this  mystical  mode  of  construction  is,  that  the  states,  if  will- 
ing to  serve,  cannot  discover  their  master.  Must  they  obey  two 
masters  ?  It  is  the  duty  of  man  to  believe  in  mysteries  revealed 
by  inspiration,  though  beyond  his  comprehension,  but  he  is  not 
bound  to  believe  in  mysteries  revealed  by  political  prepossessions, 
and  comprising  contradictions. 

The  ninth  and  tenth  sections  of  the  first  article  of  the  consti- 
tution, are  prohibitory  j  one  upon  the  federal  government,  the 
other  upon  the  states.  These  prohibitions  are  positive  in  several 
cases.  For  example :  the  United  States  are  forbidden  to  grant 
titles,  the  states  to  coin  money,  and  both  to  tax  exports.  In  these 
and  other  prohibitions,  the  judicial  power  is   incompetent   to 


158  TAYLOR'S  VIEWS. 

compel  a  compliance  with  the  constitution,  and  no  distinction  is 
made  between  the  federal  and  state  governments,  as  to  the  mode 
in  which  prohibitions  imposed  upon  both  are  to  be  enforced.  It 
can  therefore  only  be  done  by  the  influence  of  state  nations,  by 
the  correlative  check,  and  by  the  provision  for  supervising  the 
constitution.  The  equal  ground  upon  which  the  two  govern- 
ments are  placed,  as  to  these  mutual  prohibitions,  proves  that 
their  mutual  powers  were  intended  to  be  independent ;  and  that 
the  constitution,  though  mandatory  to  both,  did  not  endow  either 
with  a  general  supremacy  over  the  other.  If  their  respective 
powers  within  their  assigned  spheres  are  independent  of  each 
other,  the  parts  of  each  political  machine  are  uncontrollable  by 
either  intire  machine,  or  by  a  component  part  of  either ;  other- 
wise the  spherical  system,  contended  for  even  by  the  Federalist, 
cannot  exist. 

The  negative  given  to  Congress  by  the  tenth  section,  over  spe- 
cified state  acts,  is  an  exception  to  the  general  principle  of  a  mu- 
tual independence,  quite  sufficient  to  remove  the  obscurity  into 
which  mysteriarchs  have  endeavoured  to  plunge  the  constitution. 
u  No  state  shall,  without  the  consent  of  Congress,  lay  any  im- 
M  post  or  duties  on  imports  or  exports,  except  what  may  be  ab>- 
solutely  necessary  fm%  executing  its  inspection  laivs.  No 
'  state  shall,  without  the  consent  of  Congress,  lay  any  duty  on 
s  tonnage,  keep  troops  or  ships  of  war  in  time  of  peace,  enter 
into  any  agreement  or  compact  with  another  state,  or  with  a 
*l  foreign  power,  or  engage  in  war,  unless  actually  invaded,  or 
*'  in  such  imminent  danger  as  will  not  admit  of  delay." 
These  limited  negatives,  prove  that  no  general  negative  was  in- 
tended to  be  given,  either  to  Congress  or  the  federal  court,  over 
state  sovereign  powers  not  prohibited.  A  prohibition  upon 
some,  demonstrates  that  the  exercise  of  others  was  notprohibited^ 
A  special  supremacy  to  Congress,  demonstrates  that  no  general 
supremacy  was  given  to  the  federal  court.  The  special  supre- 
macy was  exposed  to  the  federal  control  of  the  senate ;  the  ge- 
neral supremacy  assumed  by  the  court,  would  elude  that  provi. 
sion.  The  special  supremacy  reserves  to  the  states  their  sove- 
reign powers  to  tax  exports  for  the  execution  oi  their  inspection 
laws,  to  keep  troops  or  ships  in  time  of  war,  when  invaded,  or 


a 


.-. 


taylor's  views.  159 

m  danger,  without  the  consent  of  Congress,  and  to  enter  into 
foreign  compacts  with  it.  These  reservations  would  be  swal- 
lowed up,  with  all  other  powers  reserved  to  the  states  by  the 
general  supremacy  assumed.  Suppose  Congress  should  consent, 
and  the  court  should  dissent.  Is  a  state  or  the  court  to  judge, 
whether  peace  or  war,  invasion  or  danger,  may  exist  ?  The 
court  was  considered  as  incompetent  to  prevent  the  exercise  of 
these  sovereign  state  rights,  because  it  was  invested  with  no  su- 
premacy over  the  state  powers  reserved.  If  it  was  not  contem- 
plated as  possessing  a  supreme  power  over  state  rights,  to  be  ex- 
ercised with  the  consent  of  Congress,  it  could  not  have  been  con- 
sidered as  empowered  to  control  state  rights,  not  prohibited,  and 
for  the  exercise  of  which  no  such  consent  was  required.  A  ju- 
risdiction to  try  suits  in  law  and  equity,  was  evidently  not  con- 
sidered as  reaching  the  sovereign  state  rights  specified  in  the 
tenth  section,  therefore  it  was  not  considered  as  reaching  the 
sovereign  powers  reserved  to  the  states,  without  being  subjected 
to  any  prohibition.  Reservations  in  grants  are  exceptions,  and 
the  special  reservations  to  the  states,  annexed  to  the  prohibitions 
of  the  tenth  section,  like  the  general  reservation  of  the  amend- 
ment, are  exclusions  of  federal  power  from  a  supremacy.  They 
reserved  nothing  to  the  federal  court,  because  it  had  no  previous 
supremacy  over  state  rights,  and  could  only  operate  in  favour  of 
the  state  sovereignties  previously  existing ;  and  the  limited  nega- 
tive given  to  Congress,  modifying  some  state  sovereign  powers, 
reserved,  proves  that  no  negative  was  designed  to  be  attached  to 
others. 

There  are  two  classes  of  prohibited  powers,  referring  to  the 
two  governments.  To  enforce  these  mutual  prohibitions,  no 
censorial  or  supreme  authority  is  created.  Was  this  an  over- 
sight, or  a  necessary  consequence  of  a  division  of  power  and  a 
federal  system  ?  The  mutual  prohibitions,  the  federal  system, 
and  a  division  of  power,  would  all  have  been  defeated  by  a  su- 
premacy in  either  class  over  the  other.  These  ends  were  only 
attainable  by  a  principle  able  to  reach  them  all.  Whether  that 
principle  is  the  mutual  check,  or  the  power  of  the  people,  or 
both,  it  excludes  the  idea  of  a  supreme  power  in  one  class  of 
prohibitions,  or  in  one  class  of  limited  rights  over  the  other. 


160  Taylor's  views. 

The  word  government  would  be  inapplicable  to  a  political  ins', 
tution,  which  was  subservient  to  the  will  of  a  supremacy  in  ano- 
ther government. 

If  the  consent  of  Congress  to  the  exercise  of  a  few  specified 
state  powers,  proves  that  no  federal  consent  was  necessary  to  the 
exercise  of  unprohibited  state  powers;  it  follows  that  a  judicial 
federal  consent  to  the  exercise  of  the  latter  powers  was  not  in- 
tended, because  a  concurrence  of  both  governments  in  the  allow- 
ed modifications,  could  not  have  been  considered  as  subordinate 
to  any  such  judicial  consent,  constructively  superadded.  The 
limitation  of  judicial  power,  state  and  federal,  to  their  respective 
spheres,  is  the  source  of  the  duty,  common  to  both,  by  which 
they  are  justified  in  disobeying  unconstitutional  laws  brought 
before  them  in  private  trials ;  but  neither  can,  like  a  council  of 
censors,  proclaim  an  unconstitutional  law  to  be  void,  because 
neither  is  invested  with  a  power  to  control  the  rights  of  sove- 
reignty, or  settle  the  controversies  of  political  departments. 
Both  state  and  federal  judiciaries  wandering  into  each  other's 
territories,  are  fugitives  from  their  own  spheres,  or  hostile  invad- 
ers, and  ought  to  be  arrested  by  the  sphere  attached,  as  the  only 
means  for  preventing  the  conquest  of  the  constitution  by  the  as- 
saults of  ambition,  or  the  stratagems  of  avarice.  If  state  or  fe- 
deral legislative  departments  should  attempt  such  eccentricities, 
resistance  would  be  a  duty  imposed  by  the  authority  of  the  con- 
stitution, and  the  most  solemn  of  obligations ;  yet  the  assumed 
supremacy  of  the  federal  court  is  founded  upon  the  whimsical 
idea,  that  the  state  judiciaries  are  bound  to  disobey  state  laws, 
trespassing  upon  the  federal  sphere,  and  to  obey  federal  judg- 
ments trespassing  upon  the  state  sphere.  Upon  this  idea,  a  ju- 
dicial supremacy  is  assumed,  unexampled  in  the  history  of  na- 
tions, except  in  the  Jewish  experiment,  from  which,  though 
aided  by  Urim  and  Thummjm,  the  people  took  refuge  under  a 
monarchy. 

I  cannot  discern  any  reconciliation  between  Mr.  Madison's 
assertions,  that  the  constitution  established  a  government  partly 
federal,  and  partly  national ;  and  that  it  also  invested  a  court 
with  supreme  power.  Mr.  Hamilton,  by  giving  supreme  power 
to  a  federal  government,  adheres  to  his  preference  of  the  English 


taylou's  Views.  161 

system.     Mr.  Madison  gives  no  supremacy  to  either  portion  of 
his  government,  nor  to  both  portions  united.    How  are  his  fede- 
ral and  national  features  to  preserve  themselves,  if  they  are  both 
subjected  to  a  supremacy  of  judges  ?  Is  the  supreme  court  partly 
national  and  partly  federal  ?  He  finds  these  features  in  the  house 
of  representatives  and  the  senate,  but  the  court  represents  neither 
the  people  nor  the  states.     He  uses  representation  to  define  the 
nature  of  the  government,  and  rejects  representation  as  the  basis 
of  power.     Imagine  a  government  compounded  of  monarchical 
and  republican  principles,    and  that  a  few  judges  should  be  in- 
vested with  a  supreme  power  to  regulate  both  these  principles, 
so  that  they  could  neither  control  each  other,  nor  preserve  them- 
selves.    Would  the  government  be,  in  reality,  partly  monarchi- 
cal and  partly  republican  ?     Supremacy  is  an  attribute  of  go- 
vernment, and  subordination  an  attribute   of  a  judicial  depart- 
ment.    Mr.  Madison  exchanges  these  attributes.     He   asserts 
that  we  have  a  government  partly  national  and  partly  federal,  in 
consequence  of  popular  and  state  representation.    But  he  reasons 
forcibly  to  prove,  that  this  government  possesses  no  inexplicit 
supreme  power,  that  its  powers  are  not  augmented  by  its  na- 
tional feature,  and  that  these  powers  are  limited  by  the  delega- 
tions expressed.     If   the   national  feature  gives   no   additional 
power  to  Congress,  how  can  it  extend  the  jurisdiction  of  the 
court?     If  the  constitution  had  established  a   national  govern- 
ment, its  attribute,  supremacy,  must  have  been  attached  to  it ; 
and  accordingly,  whilst  that  species  of  government  was  in  con- 
templation, it  was  proposed  to  invest  it  with  a  supremacy  or  ne- 
gative over  the  acts  of  the  states,  as  essential  to  its  existence. 
Had  this  form  of  government   succeeded,   could  the  supreme 
court,  though  vested  with  a  jurisdiction  in  the  very  words  of  the 
constitution,  have  exercised  a  constructive  supremacy  over  the 
national  supremacy  expressed  ?     The  supremacy  of  the  states, 
expressed  by  the  declaration  of  independence  and  the  state  con- 
stitutions, and  reserved  by  the  federal  constitution,  is  no  more 
liable  to  be  taken  away  by  a  constructive  supremacy,  than  an 
expressed  supremacy  of  a  national  government.     In  both  cases, 
supremacy  follows  national  power,  and  does  not  belong  to  judi- 
cial.    If  the  constitution   establishes  a  government  partly  na- 
21 


16&  taylor's  views. 

tional,  the  quota  of  supremacy  correspondent  to  the  quota  of  na- 
tional power,  must  also  reside  with  the  power  from  which  it 
emanates.  Judicial  power  is  created  to  preserve,  and  not  to 
destroy  or  usurp  the  supremacy  of  a  national  government,  and 
impeachment  enforces  its  subordination.  If  judicial  power  does 
not  imply  political  supremacy,  and  if  national  power  does,  then 
as  the  state  governments  are  in  fact  national,  and  the  federal 
government  not  so,  the  whole  portion  of  supremacy  of  which, 
our  system  admits,  resides  in  the  former ;  and  the  latter  is  ex- 
cluded from  any  share  of  it,  as  not  being  a  national,  but  a  limited 
government.  If  both  governments  have  national  features,  then 
each  possesses  the  share  of  supremacy  attached  to  these  features ; 
and  judicial  power  cannot  possess  any  supremacy  over  the  su- 
premacy of  either,  unless  it  possesses  a  sovereignty  obliterating 
the  national  features  of  both.  What  national  features  can  exist 
in  either,  under  a  supremacy  of  a  few  judges  ?  If  a  single  court 
can  carve  a  supremacy  for  itself,  from  a  constitution  dividing  all 
the  high  political  powers  between  the  state  and  federal  govern- 
ments, and  not  investing  the  court  with  a  single  national  feature, 
it  may  take  away  the  essential  attribute  which  determines  a  go- 
vernment to  be  national.  And  if,  as  Mr.  Madison  asserts,  the 
federal  government  has  no  more  supremacy  over  the  national 
features  of  the  state  governments,  than  the  state  governments 
have  over  the  national  features  of  the  federal  government,  I  can- 
not conceive  any  authority  in  the  court  to  obliterate  the  national 
features  of  either.  The  same  judicial  supremacy  which  destroys 
Mr.  Madison's  national  feature,  destroys  also  his  federal  feature 
found  in  the  senate.  And  thus  both  of  Mr.  Madison's  features, 
national  and  federal,  are  made  subordinate  to  a  power  having 
neither. 

The  idea  of  a  national  supremacy  over  the  states,  long  kept 
alive  in  the  convention,  seems  to  have  made  so  strong  an  im- 
pression on  the  minds  of  Mr.  Madison  and  Mr.  Hamilton,  that 
they  could  not  believe  it  was  dead  ;  and  like  the  two  aldermen 
in  Don  Quixote,  they  have  set  out  separately  in  search  of  the  ass, 
but  with  better  success  ;  for  in  lieu  of  the  one  lost,  they  have 
found  two.  Lo,  says  Mr.  Hamilton,  the  ass  still  lives  on  yon- 
der mountain,  called  a  national  or  general  government,  although 


Taylor's  views.  163 

the  mountain  itself  is  not  to  be  found  in  our  political  map.  The 
ass  indeed  lives,  says  Mr.  Madison,  but  he  was  snugly  concealed 
in  a  vale  of  the  expunged  mountain,  called  its  judiciary.  It  is 
contrary  to  political  order  and  relationship,  replies  the  first  gen- 
tleman, that  supremacy  should  reside  in  a  vale.  There  cannot 
be  two  asses ;  and  the  other  asserts,  that  he  should  be  placed  in 
the  vale,  as  the  only  means  of  re-establishing  his  rejected  conso- 
lidating system.  The  commentators  upon  these  authorities  are 
divided.  One  party  contends,  that  the  constitution  tacitly  estab- 
lished a  national  or  general  government,  and  tacitly  impregnated 
it  with  supremacy,  according  to  Mr.  Hamilton  ;  another,  that  it 
only  established  half  a  national  government,  and  tacitly  also  en- 
dowed the  judicial  department  with  supremacy,  according  to 
Mr.  Madison  ;  and  a  third,  that  the  ass  was  only  an  embryo, 
never  born,  but  smothered  by  the  common  consent  of  thirteen 
midwives,  expressed  both  by  their  deputies  and  themselves. 
This  party  also  believes,  that  a  concentrated  political  supremacy, 
would  find  it  harder  to  effect  a  uniformity  of  geographical  in- 
terests in  the  United  States,  than  the  pope  and  his  cardinals  did 
to  effect  a  uniformity  of  religious  opinions  in  Europe ;  and  that 
the  attempt  would  produce  several  very  determined  sects  of  poli- 
tical protestants. 

There  are  some  principles  necessary  for  the  existence  of  the 
political  system  of  the  United  States.     One  of  these  is,  the  su- 
premacy, both  of  the  state  and  federal  constitutions,  over  the  re- 
positories of  power  created  by  their  articles.     Another,  that  this 
is  a  limited  supremacy  in  both  cases,  subject  in  one,  to  the  su- 
premacy of  the  people  in  each  state,  and  in  the  other,  to  the  su- 
premacy of  three-fourths  of  the  states.     And  a  third,  that  no 
power  created  by  these  constitutions,  can   violate  their  articles, 
or  evade  the  supremacies  to  which  the  constitutions  are  them- 
selves subject.     From   these  principles  it  results,   that  neither 
laws  nor  judgments  are  valid,  which  do  not  conform  to  consti- 
tutions ;  and  that  a  mutual  control  of  political  departments,  is 
the  only  mode  of  enforcing  this  doctrine,  necessary  to  sustain 
both  the   supremacy  of  constitutions,  and  of  those  who  make 
them.     The  federal  judges  do  not  take  an  oath  to  obey  the  state 
constitutions,  because,  as  they  derive  no  jurisdiction  from  them? 


164  taylor's  views. 

there  is  no  privity  between  the  rights  and  powers  which  they 
establish,  and  these  judges.  If  the  federal  courts  could  abridge 
these  rights  and  powers,  it  would  defeat  the  principle  of  the  su- 
premacy of  the  people  of  each  state,  over  their  constitutions. 
This  would  vitally  destroy  the  federal  compact,  supposed  to  ex- 
ist between  republicks,  because  the  states  would  not  be  repub- 
licks,  if  their  constitutions  were  made  subordinate  to  the  will  or 
the  power  of  a  court,  instead  of  being  only  subordinate  to  the 
will  or  power  of  the  people.  But,  though  the  federal  judiciary, 
as  having  no  privity  with  state  constitutions,  and  no  power  to 
render  a  judgment  resulting  from  their  articles,  take  no  oath  to 
regard  them,  the  case  is  different  as  to  the  state  judges.  They 
were  in  many  cases  obliged  to  render  judgments  conformable  to 
the  articles  of  the  federal  constitution,  by  which  a  privity  was 
created  between  it  and  them,  requiring  this  solemn  security  for 
obedience.  The  state  judges  in  this  view  compose  one  portion 
of  the  judiciary,  entitled  to  conslrue  the  articles  of  the  federal 
constitution,  as  independently  as  the  other  portion.  As  state 
constitutions  are  subject  to  the  supremacy  of  the  people  of  each- 
state,  and  the  federal  constitution  to  three-fourths  of  the  states, 
neither  are  subject  to  laws  or  judgments  state  or  federal,  or  to  a 
consolidated  American  nation.  A  supremacy  in  a  federal  court 
to  construe  the  articles  of  the  declaration  of  independence,  and 
of  the  federal  and  state  constitutions,  united  with  a  power  to 
enforce  its  constructions,  would  as  effectually  destroy  the  supre- 
macy of  the  people,  and  of  three-fourths  of  the  states,  as  the 
same  species  of  supreme  power  in  state  legislatures  would  de- 
stroy the  supremacy  of  state  constitutions,  and  of  the  people  of 
each  state. 

If  the  constitution  of  a  state  should  be  so  altered,  as  to  bestow 
on  the  legislature  a  supreme  power  of  construing  its  articles,  and 
excluding  the  judiciary  from  the  right  or  the  duty  of  disobeying 
unconstitutional  laws ;  or  if  the  constitution  of  the  United 
States  should  invest  the  federal  judiciary  with  the  same  supreme 
power  as  to  the  construction  of  the  federal  constitution ;  the 
principles,  necessary  for  the  existence  of  our  political  system, 
would  be  abolished,  and  both  the  federal  and  state  governments 
would  substantially  be  reinstated,  according  to  the  English  poli- 


taylor's  views.  165 

cy,  by  which  the  government  itself  can  modify  its  own  powers. 
A  question  somewhat  similar  to  that  now  agitated  here,  has  often 
occurred  in  England.  Neither  the  king,  the  lords,  or  the  com- 
mons, have  been  exempt  from  ambition,  and  the  judges  have 
been  sometimes  impeached  and  punished  for  the  assistance  they 
have  yielded  to  an  aspiring  department ;  because  the  destruction 
of  a  mutual  control  between  political  departments,  was  considered 
as  an  inexcusable  crime  against  a  principle  necessary  for  the  pre- 
servation of  liberty.  But  here,  an  exaltation  of  the  federal  po- 
litical department,  over  the  state  political  department,  by  judi- 
cial assistance,  would  be  an  act  aggravated  beyond  the  similar 
experiments  made  in  England  ;  because  it  would  moreover  de- 
stroy the  supremacy  of  the  people  and  of  three-fourths  of  the 
states,  considered  and  established  as  a  higher  security  for  liberty, 
than  the  counterpoise  of  collateral  political  departments  in  Eng- 
land. If  the  federal  judiciary  shall  acquire  such  a  supremacy 
over  the  articles  of  the  constitution,  over  the  departments  created 
or  recognised  by  delegations  and  reservations,  and  over  the 
sources  from  which  these  powers  flow,  its  judgments  will  be 
both  laws  and  constitutions,  like  the  acts  of  the  British  go- 
vernment. 

There  are  three  kinds  of  supremacy.     A  per  capita  supre- 
macy, a  hereditary  supremacy,  and  a  supremacy  in  the  govern- 
ment.    The  evidences  of  a  per  capita  supremacy  in  this  country, 
are  state  constitutions,  the  declaration  of  independence,  the  two 
federal  unions,  and  the  mode  of  altering  the  last.     These  concur 
in   bestowing  a   per  capita  supremacy  on  the  people  of  each 
state  ;  and  both  the  federal  and  state  constitutions  were  created 
by  conventions  representing  the  state   per  capita  supremacies, 
These  affirmative  proofs  establish  the  negative  conclusion,  that  a 
per  capita  supremacy  does  not  exist   in  an    American  nation. 
They  demonstrate  a  necessary  alliance  between  the  sovereignty 
of  the  states,  and  a  per  capita   supremacy   of  the  people ;  and 
that  the  latter,   without  this  alliance,  cannot  exist,  in  relation 
either  to  the  federal  or  state  constitutions.     The  negative  con- 
clusion, that  no  supremacy  of  an  American  nation   exists,  is 
therefore  as  evident,  as  that  no  hereditary  supremacy  exists. 
One  is  as  much  a  fraud  of  ambition  here,  as  the  other  is  of  royalty 


166  Taylor's  views. 

in  Europe.  Thus  the  difficulty  is  concentrated  in  the  question5, 
whether  a  supremacy  resides  in  the  government.  Let  us  wave 
the  per  capita  supremacy  of  the  people  of  each  state,  and  also 
the  supremacy  of  three-fourths  of  the  states,  and  admit  that  it 
does.  We  must  yet  find  a  government,  before  we  can  find  its 
attribute  supremacy.  Do  we  find  one  or  two  governments  in 
our  political  system  ?  If  one  only,  then  we  may  have  but  one 
supremacy,  according  to  the  old  opinion,  that  supremacy  apper- 
tained to  governments  ;  if  we  find  two;  then,  according  to  the 
same  opinion,  we  must  also  find  two  supremacies.  If  these 
two  governments  are  invested  with  distinct  powers,  they  must 
also,  in  pursuance  of  the  same  doctrine,  be  invested  with  distinct 
supremacies.  The  federal  court  is  neither  a  per  capita,  heredi- 
tary, nor  governmental  supremacy,  and  therefore  it  cannot  claim 
this  attribute  either  under  the  old  or  the  new  tariff  of  power. 
At  most,  according  to  the  old  idea,  "  that  supremacy  resides  in 
"  a  government,"  it  can  only  participate  in  so  much  of  it  as  ap- 
pertains to  the  federal  government,  allowing  it  to  be  comprised 
by  that  term  as  one  of  its  political  members ;  as  it  would  be  ut- 
terly inconsistent  with  the  European  doctrine  to  imagine,  that 
more  supremacy  appertained  to  a  portion  of  the  government, 
than  to  the  whole.  But  the  federal  court  constitutes  no  portion 
of  the  state  governments,  and  therefore  it  cannot  participate  in 
any  supremacy  appertaining  to  them,  though  it  should  be  admit- 
ed  that  it  may  participate  in  the  supremacy  appertaining  to  the 
federal  government.  We  thus  discern  in  another  view  the 
question,  whether  the  supremacy  proposed  in  the  convention  for 
a  national  government,  was  given  to  a  federal  government ; 
or  whether  a  supremacy  over  the  powers  reserved  to  the  states, 
appertained  to  the  powers  delegated  to  the  federal  government. 
If  a  per  capita  representation  in,  one  branch  of  Congress,  or  the 
powers  delegated  to  the  federal  government,  invests  that  govern- 
ment with  a  supremacy  over  its  own  powers,  and  those  reserved 
to  the  states,  it  is  undoubtedly  the  duty  of  the  federal  court  to 
enforce  and  not  to  control  this  supremacy.  The  federal  govern- 
ment is,  or  is  not,  invested  with  a  supremacy  over  state  rights. 
If  it  is,  the  court  cannot  constitutionally  control  the  exercise  of 
this  supremacy ;  if  it  is  not,  the  court  cannot  control  constitu- 


Taylor's  views.  167 

tionally  the  state  supremacy  in  exercising  the  reserved  rights.  If 
it  is,  it  may  enact  positive  or  constructive  alterations  of  both 
state  and  federal  powers ;  if  it  is  not,  the  state  authorities  can 
resist  such  alterations,  both  positive  and  constructive.  Both  are 
equally  exposed  to  the  mutual  control,  residing  in  the  respective 
supremacies  of  each  government.  If  neither  a  national  per  ca- 
pita supremacy,  nor  a  supremacy  in  a  majority  of  states,  nor  a 
supremacy  in  a  concurrence  of  all  the  federal  departments,  can 
alter  the  powers  and  principles  of  the  state  and  federal  govern- 
ments ;  it  follows  that  no  supremacy  in  one  of  the  departments 
of  either  government  can  do  the  same  thing.  All  these  apocry- 
phal supremacies  were  proposed  in  the  convention,  under  the 
shelter  of  the  word  national ;  and  though  neither  this  word, 
nor  these  its  consequences,  are  to  be  found  in  the  constitution, 
both  the  word  and  its  progeny  were  resumed  in  the  Federalist, 
and  have  since  supplied  a  foundation  for  the  project  of  a  conso- 
lidated supreme  government  to  stand  upon. 

To  compute  the  force  of  these  arguments,  we  must  look  back 
to  the  journal  of  the  convention,  where  we  shall  find  the  source 
of  the  supreme  political  jurisdiction,  bestowed  by  Mr.  Madison 
on  the  federal  court.  June  Sth,  Mr.  Pinckney  moved  "  to 
"  strike  out  of  the  plan  for  a  national  government,  the  nega- 
"  tive  proposed  to  be  given  to  the  national  legislature  over 
11  state  laws,  which,  in  the  opinion  of  the  national  legislature, 
<(  should  contravene  the  articles  of  the  union,  or  any  treaties 
li  subsisting  under  the  authority  of  the  union,"  and  to  insert, 
"  to  negative  all  laws  which  to  them  shall  appear  improper." 
This  motion  was  seconded  by  Mr.  Madison,  and  rejected  ; 
only  Massachusetts,  Pennsylvania,  and  Virginia,  then  the  three 
most  populous  states,  having  voted  for"  it.  The  gentlemen  in 
favour  of  a  national  government,  having  been  defeated  in  this 
attempt,  Mr.  Randolph,  on  the  13th  of  the  same  month,  moved 
that  the  jurisdiction  of  the  national  judiciary  shall  extend 
"  to  questions  which  involve  the  national  peace  and  harmony." 
This  motion  was  also  seconded  by  Mr.  Madison,  and  carried. 
This  proposition  exactly  comprises  the  jurisdiction  given  by 
Congress  to  the  federal  judiciary,  but  it  was  excluded  in  settling 


168  taylor's  views* 

the  jurisdiction  of  a  federal  judiciary,  though  it  was  sustained 
whilst  a  national  judiciary  was  contemplated.     These  several 
propositions  are  evidently  the  seeds  from  which  have  germinat- 
ed Mr.  Madison's  construction  ;  parts  of  the  court  law,  as  it  is 
called,  passed  many  years  ago  by  Congress ;  and  the  subsequent 
extensions  of  its  own  jurisdiction  by  the  supreme   court.     A 
preference  for  a  national  form  of  government  dictated  the  effort 
to  give  a  national  legislature  the  power  "  to  negative  all  laws 
"  which  to  them  should  appear  improper."     This  having  failed, 
because  it  was  inconsistent  with  the  idea  of  a  federal  legislature, 
an  attempt  was  made  to  establish  a  national  judiciary,  with  a 
jurisdiction  "  in  all  questions  which  involved  the  national  peace 
"  and  harmony."     A  national  power  was  the  object,  however 
unfit  a  court  to  decide  cases  in  law  and  equity  might  be  for  ex- 
ercising it.     At  length  the  ideas,  both  of  a  national  legislature, 
and  a  national  judiciary,  were  abandoned  in  the  convention, 
and  with  them  perished  the  host  of  supremacies  and  negatives 
proposed  as  necessary  and    proper  for  a  national  government. 
The  controversy  between   a  federal  and  a  national  form  of  go- 
vernment, could  not  have  lasted  for  months,  if  they  had  been 
the  same.     Yet  Mr.  Madison,  under  a  decided  preference  for 
some  supreme  national  power,  has  constructively  bestowed    it 
upon  the  supreme  court ;  and  the  court,  under  the  influence  of 
the  same  preference,  has  received  the  supremacies  and  negatives, 
proposed  to  be  given  to  a  national  legislature,  as  well  as  those 
proposed   to  be  given  to  a  national  judiciary.     Accordingly,  it 
assumes  "  a  power  to  negative  state  laws  contravening  the  ar- 
Ci  tides  of  the  union,  and  a  power  to  negative  state  laws,  which 
a  to  them  may  appear  improper,"  both  of  which  powers  were 
proposed  to   be   given   to  a   national  legislature  ;  and  also  "  a 
•;  power  to  settle  all  questions  which  may  involve  the  national 
"  peace  and  harmony,"  proposed  for  a  national  judiciary  ;  thus 
making  itself  heir  to  two  propositions  for  the  establishment  of 
a  national  legislature,  and  to  one  for  the  establishment  of  a  na- 
tional judiciary,  though  neither  a  national  legislature,  a  national 
judiciary,  nor  either  of  the  three  propositions,  are  contained  in 
fhe  constitution.     Congress  seems  to  have  a  much  better  right 


taylor's  views.  169 

than  the  court,  to  inherit  the  power  of  a  negative  over  such 
state  laws  as  might  contravene  the  articles  of  the  union,  because 
it  was  proposed  to  be  given  to  a  national  legislature ;  and  neither 
the  national  nor  federal  parties  in  the  convention,  ever  appear 
to  have  conceived  the  idea  of  investing  a  court,  whether  national 
or  federal,  with  a  political  power  so  unusual  and  enormous. 


22 


taylor's  views.  171 


SECTION  XIIL 


SOVEREIGNTY. 


The  reader  has  perceived  that  the  question  concerning  state 
powers,  is  condensed  in  the  word  sovereignty,  and  therefore 
any  new  ideas  upon  the  subject,  if  to  be  found,  would  not  be 
unedifying.  A  will  to  enact,  and  a  power  to  execute,  constitute 
its  essence.  Take  away  either,  and  it  expires.  The  state  go- 
vernments and  the  federal  government,  are  the  monuments  by 
which  state  sovereignty,  attended  with  these  attributes,  is  de- 
monstrated. But  as  the  consolidating  school  will  not  see  it,  I 
will  endeavour  further  to  establish  its  existence,  in  order  to  pre- 
vent these  beautiful  examples  of  political  science  from  falling 
into  ruin. 

The  constitution,  like  the  declaration  of  independence,  was 
framed  by  deputies  from  the  "  states  of  New-Hampshire,"  &c. 
and  at  the  threshold  of  the  transaction,  we  discern  a  positive  ad- 
mission of  the  existence  of  separate  states  invested  with  separate 
sovereignties.  This  admission  expounds  the  phrase  "  We,  the 
"  people  of  the  United  States,"  which  co-operates  with  the  sepa- 
rate powers  given  to  their  deputies  in  the  convention,  and  is 
distinctly  repeated  by  the  words  "  do  ordain  and  establish  this 
"  constitution  for  the  United  States  of  America."  Had  the 
sovereignty  of  each  state  been  wholly  abandoned,  and  the  peo- 
ple of  all  been  considered  as  constituting  one  nation,  the  idea 
would  have  been  expressed  in  different  language.  Suppose  that 
Fredonia  had  been  assumed  as  an  appellation  comprising  the  ter- 
ritories of  all  the  states,  and  that  a  consolidated  nation  had  been 
contemplated  by  the  convention,  would  it  have  framed,  ordain- 
ed, and  established,  a  constitution  by  states  for  states,  or  by  the 
Fredonians  for  Fredonia.  The  appellation  adopted  by  the  decla- 
ration of  independence,  was,  "  The  United  States  of  America." 
The  first  confederation  declares,  that  the  style  ©f  this  confede* 


173  taylor's  views. 

racy  shall  be,  "  The  United  States  of  America."  And  the  union 
of  1787,  ordains  and  establishes  the  constitution  for  "  The  Unit- 
"  ed  States  of  America."  The  three  instruments,  by  adhering 
to  the  same  style,  co-extensively  affirmed  the  separate  sovereign- 
ties of  these  states.  It  was  a  style  proper  to  describe  a  confede- 
racy of  independent  states,  and  improper  for  describing  a  conso- 
lidated nation.  If  neither  the  declaration  of  independence  nor 
the  confederation  of  1777,  created  an  American  nation,  or  a 
concentrated  sovereignty,  by  this  style,  the  conclusion  is  inevita- 
ble, that  the  constitution  was  not  intended  to  produce  such  con- 
sequences by  the  same  style.  The  word  America  is  used  to  de- 
signate the  quarter  of  the  globe  in  which  the  recited  states  were 
established,  and  not  to  designate  a  nation  of  Americans.  A 
league  or  union  of  the  kingdoms  of  Europe  for  limited  objects, 
distinctly  reciting  the  name  of  each  kingdom,  would  not  have 
created  a  consolidated  nation  of  Europeans.  Suppose  in  such  a 
union,  the  phrase,  "  We,  the  people  of  the  united  kingdoms  of 
*'  Europe,"  had  been  used,  would  it  have  destroyed  the  several 
sovereignties  uniting  for  special  purposes,  and  have  consolidated 
them  into  one  kingdom  ?  Had  these  kingdoms  conferred  upon 
their  federal  representatives  limited  powers,  and  reserved  all  the 
powers  not  conferred,  would  they  have  had  no  remedy,  had 
their  federal  representatives  assumed  the  supreme  power  of 
abridging  the  powers  reserved,  and  extending  those  conferred  ? 
If  the  word  state  does  not  intrinsically  imply  sovereign  power, 
there  was  no  word  which  we  could  use  better  calculated  for  that 
purpose.  Will  the  words  empire  or  kingdom  be  considered  as 
of  higher  authority,  because  they  may  exclude  a  people  as  a  po- 
litical association,  which  the  word  state  may  comprise  ? 

This  construction  bestows  the  same  meaning  upon  the  same 
words  in  our  three  constituent  or  elemental  instruments,  and  exhi- 
bits the  reason  why  the  whole  language  of  the  constitution  is 
affianced  to  the  idea  of  a  league  between  sovereign  states,  and 
hostile  to  that  of  a  consolidated  nation.  There  are  many  states 
in  America,  but  no  stale  of  America,  nor  any  people  of  an  Ame- 
rican state.  A  constitution  for  America  or  Americans,  would 
therefore  have  been  similar  to  a  constitution  for  Utopia  or 
Utopians. 


TAYLOR'S  VIEWS.  173 

Hence  the  constitution  is  declared  to  be  made  for  the  "  United 
"  States  of  America,"  that  is,  for  certain  states  enumerated  by 
their  names,  established  upon  that  portion  of  the  earth's  surface, 
called  America.  Though  no  people  or  nation  of  America  ex- 
isted, considering  these  words  as  denning  a  political  association, 
states  did  exist  in  America,  each  constituted  by  a  people.  By 
these  political  individual  entities,  called  states,  the  constitution 
was  framed  ;  by  these  individual  entities  it  was  ratified ;  and  by 
these  entities  in  can  only  be  altered.  It  was  made  by  them  and 
for  them,  and  not  by  or  for  a  nation  of  Americans.  The  people 
©f  each  state,  or  each  state  as  constituted  by  a  people,  conveyed 
to  a  federal  authority,  organized  by  states,  a  portion  of  state 
sovereign  powers,  and  retained  another  portion.  In  this  divi- 
sion, all  the  details  of  the  constitution  are  comprised,  one  divi- 
dend consisting  of  the  special  powers  conferred  upon  a  federal 
government,  and  the  other,  of  the  powers  reserved  by  the  states 
which  conferred  these  special  powers.  The  deputation  and  re- 
servation are  both  bottomed  upon  the  sovereignty  of  the  states, 
and  must  both  fall  or  both  stand  with  that  principle.  If  each 
state,  or  the  people  of  each  state,  did  not  possess  a  separate  sove- 
reignty, they  had  no  right  to  convey  or  retain  powers.  If  they 
had  a  right  both  to  convey  and  to  retain  powers,  it  could  only  be 
in  virtue  of  state  sovereignty.  Admitting  the  utmost  which 
can  be  asked,  and  more  than  ought  to  be  conceded,  by  supposing 
that  these  sovereignties,  in  conveying  limited  powers  to  the  fe- 
deral government,  conveyed  also  a  portion  of  sovereignty,  it 
must  also  be  allowed,  that  by  retaining  powers,  they  retained 
also  a  portion  of  sovereignty.  If  sovereignty  was  attached  to 
the  ceded  powers,  it  was  also  attached  to  the  powers  not  ceded, 
because  all  or  none  of  the  powers  of  the  states  must  have  pro- 
ceeded from  this  principle.  In  this  observation,  no  use  is  made 
of  the  power  reserved  to  the  states  to  amend  the  federal  form  oi 
government,  by  which  a  positive  sovereignty  is  retained  to  the 
states  over  that  government,  subversive  of  the  doctrine,  that  the 
constitution  bestows  a  sovereignty  upon  it  over  the  states.  But 
a  delegation  of  limited  powers,  being  an  act  of  sovereignty, 
could  not  be  a  renunciation  of  the  sovereignty  attached  to  the 
powers  not  delegated.     A  power  to  resume  the  limited  delega- 


174  Taylor's  views. 

tion,  was  the  strongest  expression  of  sovereignty,  and  rejects  the 
idea,  that  the  delegated  authority  may  positively  or  construc- 
tively subject  the  sovereign  power  to  its  own  will ;  that  no 
sovereignty  may  destroy  an  actual  sovereignty.  By  this  power 
of  amendment,  the  states  may  re-establish  the  confederation  of 
1777,  and  thus  unquestionably  revive  their  separate  sovereign- 
ties said  to  be  extinct ;  because  they  are  positively  asserted  by 
that  confederation.  If  it  is  not  absurd,  it  is  yet  a  new  idea,  that 
a  dead  sovereignty  contains  an  inherent  power  to  revive  itself 
whenever  it  pleases. 

The  mode  of  making  amendments  to  the  constitution,  ex- 
presses its  true  construction,  and  rejects  the  doctrine,  that  an 
American  people  created  a  federal  government.     Their  ratifica- 
tion is  to  be  the  act  of  states.     It  is  the  same  with  that  of  the 
confederation,  which  asserted  the  sovereignties  of  the  states,  in 
concomitancy  with  this  mode  of  ratification,  with  only  two  dif- 
ferences.    By  the  first  confederation,  the  ratification  was  to  be 
the  act  of  state  legislatures,  and  unanimous  ;  by  the  constitution, 
the  ratification  of  alterations  is  to  be  the  act  of  "  state  conven- 
"  tions,  or  legislatures  by  three-fourths."     The  last  difference 
extended  the  power  of  the  slates,  by  removing  the  obstacle  of 
unanimity,  and  was  not  intended  to  diminish  it.     State  legisla- 
tures and  conventions  are  united,  as  equivalent  state  organs. 
Thus  the  constitution  construes  the  phrase,  "  We,  the  people  of 
"  the  United  States,"    and  refutes  the  doctrine  of  an  American 
people,    as  the  source  of  federal  powers ;    because,  had  these 
powers  been  derived  from  that  source,  it  would  have  referred  t© 
the  same  source  for  their  modification,  and  not  to  state  legisla- 
tures.    It  declares  that  both  state  legislatures  and  state  conven- 
tions, are  representations  of  state  sovereignties,  equally  compe- 
tent to  express  their  will.     The  same  opinion  is  expressed  by  de- 
claring that  "  the  ratification  of  the  conventions  of  nine  states,. 
'<  shall  be  sufficient  for  its  establishment  between   the  ratifying 
"  states."     Of  the  two  equivalent  modes  of  ratification,  it  selects 
one  for  that  special  occasion,  not  because  it  substantially  differed 
from  the  other,  and  was  not  an  expression  of  state  will,  but  be- 
cause it  was  apprehended  that  a  considerable  transfer  of  powers 
from  the  state  governments  to  a  federal  government,  might  pre- 


taylor's  views.  175 

duce  an  opposition  from  men  in  the  exercise  of  these  powers,  al- 
though when  experience  should  have  ascertained  the  benefits  of 
the  innovation,  and  time  should  have  cured  the  wounds  of  indi- 
vidual ambition,  a  further  adherence  to  one  equivalent  mode  in 
preference  to  the  other,  might  be  unnecessary  and  inconvenient 
to  the  states.  The  equivalency  of  the  modes  is  obvious,  as  state 
legislatures  are  empowered  to  revoke  the  act  of  state  conven- 
tions, by  which  the  residence  of  state  sovereignties  in  these  le- 
gislatures is  considered  as  the  same  as  its  residence  in  state  con- 
ventions, upon  no  other  ground,  than  that  both  constituted  a 
representation  of  the  state,  and  not  a  representation  of  an  unas- 
sociated  people. 

An  adherence  to  our  original  principle  of  state  sovereignty  is 
demonstrated  both  by  the  confederation  and  constitution.  Una- 
nimity was  necessary  to  put  the  first,  and  a  concurrence  of  nine 
states  to  put  the  second,  into  operation.  The  operation  of  the 
iirst,  when  ratified,  was  to  extend  to  all  the  states,  and  the  ope- 
ration of  the  second,  "  to  the  states  ratifying  only."  Both  con- 
sequences are  deduced  from  state  sovereignty,  by  which  one 
state  could  defeat  a  union  predicated  upon  unanimity,  and  four 
states  might  have  refused  to  unite  with  nine.  The  latter  cir- 
cumstance displays  the  peculiar  propriety  of  ordaining  and  esta- 
blishing the  constitution  "  for  the  United  States  of  America." 
The  refusing  states,  though  states  of  America,  did  not  constitute 
a  portion  of  an  American  nation  ;  and  their  right  of  refusal  re- 
sulted from  their  acknowledged  sovereignty  and  independence. 
"  The  United  States  of  America"  would  have  consisted  of  nine 
states  only,  had  four  refused  to  accede  to  the  union  ;  and  there- 
fore thirteen  states  could  not  have  been  contemplated  by  the 
constitution,  as  having  been  consolidated  into  one  people.  Hence 
it  adheres  to  the  idea  of  a  league,  by  a  style  able  to  describe 
"  the  United  States  of  America,"  had  they  consisted  but  of  nine, 
and  avoids  a  style  applicable  only  to  one  nation  or  people  con- 
sisting of  thirteen  states.  By  acknowledging  the  sovereignty  of 
the  refusing,  it  admits  the  sovereignty  of  the  concurring  states. 
Assent  or  dissent,  was  equally  an  evidence  of  it.  The  limitation 
of  federal  powers  by  assent,  establishes  the  principle  from  which 
the  assent  flowed.    There  could  be  no  sound  assent,  nor  any 


176  taylor's  views. 

sound  limitation,  unless  one  was  given,  and  the  other  imposed, 
by  a  competent  authority ;  and  no  authority  is  competent  to  the 
establishment  of  a  government,  except  it  is  sovereign.  The 
same  authority  could  only  possess  the  right  of  rejecting  the  con- 
stitution. Had  it  been  the  act  of  an  American  nation  or  people, 
a  state  would  have  possessed  no  such  right.  The  judicial  sages 
have  allowed  the  federal  to  be  a  limited  government,  but  how 
can  it  be  limited  if  the  state  sovereignties  by  which  it  was  limit- 
ed, do  not  exist,  and  if  the  state  powers  reserved,  which  define 
the  limitation,  are  subject  to  its  control  ? 

Having  proved  that  state  sovereignties  were  established  by  the 
declaration  of  independence ;  that  their  existence  was  asserted  by 
the  confederation  of  1777;  that  they  are  recognised  by  the  con- 
stitution of  1787,  in  the  modes  of  its  formation,  ratification,  and 
amendment ;  that  this  constitution  employs  the  same  words  to 
describe  the  United  States,  used  by  the  two  preceding  instru- 
ments ;  that  the  word  state  implies  a  sovereign  community  ; 
that  each  state  contained  an  associated  people  ;  that  an  American 
people  never  existed ;  that  the  constitution  was  ordained  and  es- 
tablished, for  such  states  situated  in  America,  as  might  accede  to 
a  union ;  that  its  limited  powers  was  a  partial  and  voluntary  en- 
dowment of  state  sovereignties,  to  be  exercised  by  a  Congress 
of  the  states  which  should  unite ;  that  the  word  Congress  im- 
plies a  deputation  from  sovereignties,  and  was  so  expounded  by 
the  confederation ;  and  that  a  reservation  of  sovereign  powers 
cannot  be  executed  without  sovereignty ;  the  reader  will  consi- 
der, whether  all  these  principles,  essential  for  the  preservation 
both  of  the  federal  and  state  governments,  were  intended  to  be 
destroyed  by  the  details  of  the  constitution.  The  attempt  to 
lose  twenty -four  states,  in  order  to  find  a  consolidated  nation,  or 
a  judicial  sovereignty,  reverses  the  mode  of  reasoning  hitherto 
admitted  to  be  correct,  by  deducing  principles  from  effects,  and 
not  effects  from  principles.  But  in  construing  the  constitution, 
we  shall  never  come  at  truth,  if  we  suffer  its  details,  intended  to 
fee  subservient  to  established  political  principles,  to  dem  their 
allegiance,  and  rebel  against  their  sovereigns.  A  will  to  act,  .^nd 
a  power  to  execute,  constitutes  sovereignty.  The  state  govern- 
ments, says  the  Federalist,  are  no  more  dependent  on  the  federal 


TAYLOR'S  VIEWS.  177 

government,  in  the  exercise  of  their  reserved  powers,  than  the 
federal  government  is  on  them,  in  the  exercise  of  its  delegated 
powers. 

The  treaty  between  his  Britannick  majesty  and  the  United 
States  of  America,  acknowledges  "  the  said  United  States,  viz. 
"  New-Hampshire,  Massachusetts-Bay,  Rhode-Island  and  Pro- 
"  vidence  Plantations,  Connecticut,  New-York,  New-Jersey, 
"  Pennsylvania,  Delaware,  Maryland,  Virginia,  North-Carolina, 
"  South-Carolina,  and  Georgia,  to  be  free,  sovereign,  and  inde- 
"  pendent  states ;  as  such  he  treats  with  them,  and  relinquishes 
"  all  claim  to  their  government  and  territorial  rights."  This 
king  acknowledges,  individually,  the  sovereignty  of  the  states ; 
he  relinquishes  to  them,  individually,  his  territorial  rights  ;  three 
eminent  envoys  demanded  this  acknowledgment  and  relinquish- 
ment, as  appertaining,  individually,  to  the  states ;  a  Congress  of 
the  United  States  ratified  the  act  and  the  doctrine  ;  the  treaty  was 
then  unanimously  hailed,  and  is  still  generally  considered,  as  a 
consummation  of  right,  justice,  and  liberty  ',  but  now  it  is  said 
that  the  states  are  corporations,  subordinate  bodies  politick,  and 
not  sovereign.  By  the  admirers  of  royal  sovereignty,  the  treaty 
ought  to  be  considered  as  valid;  by  those  who  confide  in  au- 
thority, it  ought  to  be  considered  as  authentick ;  by  such  as  re- 
spect our  revolutionary  patriots,  it  ought  to  be  venerated ;  and 
by  honest  expositors  of  the  constitution,  it  will  be  allowed  to 
afford  conclusive  proof,  that  the  phrase  "  United  States  of  Ame- 
"  rica,"  used  both  in  the  treaty  and  the  constitution,  implied  the 
existence,  and  not  the  abrogation,  of  state  sovereignty.  Consoli- 
dators,  suprematists,  and  conquerors,  however,  will  all  equally 
disregard  any  instrument,  however  solemn  and  explicit,  by 
which  ambition  and  avarice  will  be  restrained,  and  the  happiness 
of  mankind  improved. 


23 


taylor's  views.  179 


SECTION  XIV. 


ONE  OF  THE  PEOPLE, 


It  has  appeared  that  a  respectable  party  in  favour  of  a  mo- 
narchical or  national  form  of  government,  existed  in  the  United 
States,  from  the  commencement  of  the  revolutionary  question, 
down  to  the  meeting  of  the  convention,  and  that  it  predominated 
for  a  time  in  this  body.  Whether  the  monarchical  branch  of  it 
still  subsists,  must  be  left  to  the  fact,  that  it  is  constantly  per- 
ceivable in  large  territories,  and  generally  in  small ;  so  that  we 
may  conclude,  that  this  imperishable  alloy  is  incorporated  with 
human  nature.  It  being  on  record  that  a  majority  of  the  con- 
vention was  in  favour  of  a  supreme  national  government,  though 
we  should  admit  that  the  portion  of  this  majority,  which  then 
preferred  the  monarchical  form,  has  emigrated,  to  a  man,  into 
the  portion  which  preferred  a  republican  form  of  national  govern- 
ment, because  the  people  were  not  ripe  for  monarchy ;  yet  it 
may  be  safely  concluded,  that  this  emigration  has  not  destroyed 
the  predilection  for  a  supreme  national  government  in  one  or  the 
other  of  these  forms,  then  entertained  by  many  eminent  men, 
whose  talents  insured  to  them  a  great  share  of  the  power  to  be 
obtained.  The  allurements  of  anticipated  power,  can  hardly  be 
greater  than  those  of  restricted  power  in  possession,  united  with 
a  consciousness  of  integrity ;  and  if  a  prospect  of  power  gene- 
rated a  wish  for  some  national  form  of  government,  it  would  be 
rather  inflamed  than  extinguished  by  a  limited  acquisition. 
This  natural  inclination  suggested  the  division  of  power  between 
the  federal  and  state  departments,  their  mutual  independence, 
and  all  the  precautions  in  the  structure  of  the  state  and  federal 
governments,  for  the  preservation  of  civil  liberty. 

But  if  all  these  facts  are  insufficient  to  prove  that  the  influence 
of  power  prospective  or  possessed,  will  generate  a  longing  after 
a  form  of  government  which  will  increase  it;  others  ascertain. 


180  taylor's  views. 

that  the  party  to  be  expected  from  this  natural  cause,  univer- 
sally operating,  does  yet  exist,  and  will  probably  exist  forever. 
Exclusive  of  the  encroachments  of  the  federal  government  upon 
the  rights  of  the  states,  many  pamphlets  and  essays  have  ap- 
peared, for  the  purpose  of  proving  that  a  supreme  national  go- 
vernment was,  or  ought  to  have  been,  established  by  the  con- 
stitution. These  demonstrate,  that  an  active,  intelligent,  and  nu- 
merous party,  similar  to  that  formed  in  the  convention  by  the 
junction  of  the  two  parties  in  favour  of  a  government,  either 
monarchical  or  national,  is  still  in  operation ;  and  to  the  doc- 
trines of  this  party,  the  people  must  apply  the  most  mature  con- 
sideration, if  they  wish  to  understand  a  subject  upon  which  their 
liberty  depends. 

The  first  proof  of  this  fact  to  which  I  shall  recur,  is  a  pam- 
phlet by  "  One  of  the  People,"  in  South-Carolina.  If  the  au- 
thor neither  possesses  nor  anticipates  power  ;  if  he  is  too  old  for 
office,  and  beyond  the  reach  of  that  species  of  ambition  and 
avarice  which  feeds  upon  nations ;  if  he  is  dead  to  fame  and 
alive  to  moral  rectitude ;  we  shall  have  to  examine  arguments 
urged  by  a  spirit  of  moderation  and  veracity.  But  if  he  is 
young,  and  burning  with  hope,  which  raises  before  his  eyes 
all  the  allurements  of  wealth  and  power ;  we  must  expect  the 
vehemence  and  vituperation,  inspired  by  personal  interest  or 
corrupted  by  zeal.  By  the  word  people,  used  in  contrariety 
to  the  word  government,  we  mean  that  numerous  portion  of  so- 
ciety, which  neither  possesses  nor  has  a  prospect  of  obtaining 
offices ;  and  if  the  writer  of  this  pamphlet  really  belongs  to  this 
class,  his  signature  is  a  fair  solicitation  for  popular  confidence,  by 
the  strong  argument  of  a  perfect  similarity  between  this  class  and 
himself  in  point  of  interest  ;  but  if  not,  the  signature  is  a  good 
reason  for  distrust.  Being  ignorant  of  the  fact,  this  observation 
is  not  made  for  the  purpose  of  weakening  his  arguments,  but 
merely  to  remove  the  prepossession  which  the  signature  suppli- 
cates, and  bespeak  an  unprejudiced  consideration  of  the  opinions 
he  advances. 

Extracts  from  "  National  and  state  rights  considered,  by  one 
"  of  the  people."  Pages  1  and  2.  "  The  general  government  is 
"  as  truly  the  government  of  the  ivhole  people,  as  the  state  go- 


taylor's  views.  181 

M  veroment  is  of  a  part  of  the  people.  The  constitution,  in  the 
"  language  of  its  preamble,  was  ordained  and  established  by  the 
"  people  of  the  United  States.  The  moment  the  people  met  in 
"  convention,  all  the  elements  of  political  power  returned  to 
J'  them,  to  receive  a  new  modification  and  distribution,  by  their 
"  sovereign  will.  What  security  then,  did  the  convention,  or 
"  in  other  words,  "  the  people  of  the  United  States,"  provide, 
"  to  restrain  their  functionaries  from  usurping  powers  not  dele- 
"  gated,  and  from  abusing  those  with  which  they  are  really  in- 
"  vested?  Was  it  by  the  discordant  clamours  and  lawless  re- 
"  sistance  of  the  state  rulers,  that  they  intended  to  insure  domes*- 
"  tick  tranquillity,  and  form  a  more  perfect  union  ?  No,  the 
"  constitution  will  tell  you  what  is  the  real  security  they  pro- 
"  vided.  It  is  the  responsibility  of  the  officers  of  the  general 
"  government  to  themselves,  the  people.  The  states,  as  political 
u  bodies,  have  no  original,  inherent  rights."  Does  this  string 
of  coarse  assertions,  bottomed  upon  the  ingenious  though  erro- 
neous distinctions  in  the  Federalist,  which  its  authors  would 
have  viewed  with  derision,  contain  a  solitary  truth,  or  even  a 
plausible  suggestion  ?  Has  the  federal  government  the  same 
powers  over  all  the  people  of  the  states,  as  the  state  governments 
possess  over  the  people  of  each  state  ?  Was  the  constitution 
established  by  each  state,  that  is,  a  people  of  each  state,  or  by  a 
consolidated  American  nation  ?  Did  the  meeting  of  state  con- 
ventions possess  all  the  elements  of  political  power,  to  be  modi- 
fied or  distributed  by  the  sovereign  will  of  an  American  nation, 
or  did  these  conventions  possess  only  the  naked  right  of  adopting 
or  rejecting  the  constitution  ?  Did  an  American  nation  meet  in 
a  convention  and  invest  the  federal  government  with  powers  to 
be  exercised  under  no  other  control,  but  the  responsibility  of  its 
officers  to  this  nation  ?  Can  such  a  nation  diminish  or  extend 
the  powers  of  the  federal  government,  and  if  not,  must  not  the 
substantial  control  over  its  usurpations,  reside  where  the  power 
of  doing  both  resides?  Does  the  federal  government  derive  its 
powers  from  the  federal  compact,  or  from  a  convention  of  a  con- 
solidated nation  ?  Does  the  constitution  consider  state  rulers  as 
discordant,  clamorous,  and  lawless,  or  recognise  th,em  as  securi- 


188  taylor's  views. 

ties  for  social  order,  and  supporters  of  civil  liberty  ?     And  have 
the  states  no  original,  inherent  rights  ? 

By  these  assertions,  the  dogmas  of  the  consolidating  school 
are  slated  without  being  complicated  by  ingenuity,  and  the  fede- 
ral system  is  overturned,  without  any  apparent  consideration. 
The  very  title  of  the  pamphlet  settles  every  difliculty,  assumes 
the  existence  of  a  national  government,  and  buries  in  its  capa- 
city, both  the  rights  of  the  states  and  the  limitations  of  the  con- 
stitution. "  National  and  state  rights"  is  used  as  a  phrase  equi- 
valent to  "  sovereign  and  corporate  rights,"  and  therefore,  though 
the  consideration  of  both  is  promised,  the  promise  is  not  ful- 
filled as  to  either ;  and  the  title  of  the  pamphlet  comprises  the 
whole  argument  for  its  conclusion,  "  that  the  states,  as  political 
"  bodies,  have  no  original,  inherent  rights."  The  reservation  of 
these  nothings,  being  only  a  fraud  to  procure  the  ratification  of 
the  constitution,  their  consideration  was  precipitately  promised, 
and  unavoidably  abandoned.  The  author,  however,  ought  at 
least  to  have  informed  us  how  these  no  political  rights  have  ma- 
naged to  create,  sustain,  or  exercise,  the  whole  mass  of  political 
rights  existing  in  the  United  States. 

Let  us  add  a  few  other  arguments  to  those  before  advanced 
upon  a  point  which  really  includes  the  whole  question.  Under 
what  authority  have  the  several  cessions  of  territory  been  made 
by  particular  states?  One,  I  believe,  has  been  made  by  Georgia, 
since  the  establishment  of  the  federal  constitution.  A  cession  of 
territory  is  a  very  plain  act  of  sovereignty.  If  the  states  had  no 
original  or  inherent  political  rights,  these  cessions  are  void;  if 
the  cessions  are  good,   the  assertion  is  false. 

Upon  what  principle  has  the  constitution  declared,  that  no 
new  state  shall  be  formed  within  the  jurisdiction  of  another 
state,  nor  by  uniting  two  states  or  parts  of  states,  without  the 
consent  of  the  legislatures  of  the  states  concerned,  and  of  Con- 
gress ?  Undoubtedly  for  combining  a  sovereign  and  a  federal 
consent,  to  effect  an  act,  by  which  both  the  sovereign  and  the 
federal  interest  might  be  affected.  If  a  territorial  dismember- 
ment cannot  take  place,  except  by  the  consent  of  the  state  pos- 
sessed of  the  territorial  sovereignty,  no  dismemberment  of  any 
other  rights   possessed  by  the  same  sovereigntj-  can  take  place. 


Taylor's  views.  183 

except  by  its  consent  also  ;  and  the  federal  government  or  the 
federal  court,  might  claim  a  power  to  regulate  the  territories  of 
the  states,  upon  as  strong  ground  as  they  claim  a  power  to  regu- 
late the  other  sovereign  rights  of  the  states,  not  ceded  but  re- 
served, like  the  sovereign  right  of  territory.  In  short,  by  what 
tenure  does  the  federal  government  hold  the  ten  miles  square, 
and  the  sites  for  forts,  arsenals,  and  other  federal  buildings,  if  the 
states  are  not  invested  with  sovereignty  ? 

The  doctrine  "  that  the  constitution  has  established  a  supreme 
"  national  government,  and  that  the  states  are  only  corporations 
ei  having  no  inherent  and  original  rights,"  would  reach  and  de- 
stroy the  state  sovereign  right  of  territory,  if  it  can  reach  and 
destroy  any  other  sovereign  right  reserved  by  the  states.  But 
sovereignties  and  corporations  are  very  easily  distinguished. 
Sovereignty  is  distinctly  seen  in  the  rights  to  create  a  political 
society,  to  form  leagues,  to  cede  territory,  to  punish  crimes,  and 
to  regulate  property.  Are  corporations  defined  by  such  powers  ? 
As  states  and  corporations  have  no  resemblance  in  their  origin  or 
powers,  a  violent  zeal  for  a  consolidated  government,  can  only 
mistake  one  for  the  other;  just  as  some  hidden  light  within 
makes  us  see  strange  sights  without.  The  term  corporation, 
implies  a  derivation  from  a  sovereign  power,  and  the  term  state, 
a  sovereignty.  One  is  associated  with  the  idea  of  dependence, 
and  the  other,  of  independence.  Common  sense  never  thought 
of  proclaiming  to  the  world  the  sovereignty  and  independence  of 
thirteen  corporations.  What  a  figure  would  they  have  cut  with 
such  a  declaration  to  prepare  the  way  for  a  treaty  with  France  ? 
Corporations  are  the  creatures  and  subjects,  and  also  proofs  of 
sovereignty.  Hence  the  states,  being  sovereign,  can  empower 
their  governments  to  create  counties  and  corporations,  as  objects 
like  individuals  for  sovereign  power  to  act  upon ;  and  corpora- 
tions or  counties  being  subjects,  cannot  create  other  corporations 
and  counties,  constitute  a  state,  cede  territory,  regulate  property, 
or  pass  laws  for  punishing  crimes.  The  rights  of  towns,  coun- 
ties, or  corporations,  were  not  reserved,  because  they  were  sub- 
jects of  sovereignties,  whose  rights  were  reserved.  Whence  did 
the  reserved  rights  originate  ?  Had  they  originated  from  an 
American  nation,  they  would  have  been  given  and  not  reserved  ; 


184  taylor's  views. 

and  they  must  have  been  enumerated,  like  the  rights  given  to 
the  federal  government.  As  the  reserved  rights  were  not  given 
by  an  American  nation,  the  states,  as  corporations,  can  have 
none.  To  find  receptacles  for  the  reservation,  we  must  find 
rights  ;  and  if  we  can  find  rights,  as  they  were  not  derived  from 
the  sovereignty  of  an  American  nation,  we  must  find  some  other 
sovereignty  having  power  to  create  them.  We  are  therefore 
reduced  to  the  alternative  of  admitting  the  sovereignties  of  the 
states,  or  allowing  that  the  states  are  incorporated  subjects  of  an 
imaginary  American  nation,  and  liable  to  be  modified  or  abo- 
lished in  virtue  of  its  sovereignty. 

A  corporate  character  implies  a  derivation  from,  and  subjection 
to,  some  sovereignty ;  and  a  power  to  modify  or  abolish  this 
corporate  character,  designates  the  exact  place  where  the  sove- 
reignty resides.  The  federal  government  is  derived  from,  and 
may  be  modified  'or  abolished  by  the  states ;  and  its  corporate 
character  is  its  only  tenure,  good  only  on  account  of  the  validity 
of  the  sovereignties  by  which  it  was  bestowed.  The  style  of 
the  constitution,  however  hackneyed  by  construction,  admits  the 
fact  explicitly.  It  is  not  "  We,  the  people  of  the  united  corpo- 
"  rations  of  New-Hampshire,"  &c.  Could  corporations,  having 
no  political  powers,  botli  create  and  retain  the  right  of  altering 
or  resuming  political  powers?  If  not,  the  gift  and  limitation  of 
federal  powers,  united  with  an  actual  exercise  of  the  sovereign 
power  of  resuming  and  modifying  them,  point  both  to  a  sove- 
reign and  a  corporate  character.  If  we  should  admit  that  the 
sovereignty  thus  exercised,  is  spurious,  its  issue  must  also  be 
spurious;  and  if  we  contend  for  the  legitimacy  of  the  issue,  the 
parental  competency  to  produce  it,  must  be  admitted. 

These  observations  are  alone  sufficient  to  refute  the  positions 
assumed  in  the  convention,  and  revived  by  one  of  the  people, 
as  the  only  basis  for  a  supreme  national  government,  contended 
for  and  denied  by  the  parties  for  and  against  it.  The  first  party 
assumed  the  ground  work  of  one  of  the  people,  "  that  on  the 
"  meeting  of  the  convention,  all  the  elements  of  political  power 
"  returned  to  the  people,  to  receive  a  new  modification  and  dis- 
"  tribution  by  their  sovereign  will."  That  which  had  never 
been  possessed,  could   not  be   returned.     Did   a   consolidated 


TAYLOR'S  VIEWS.  1$5 

American  nation  ever  possess  all  the  elements,  or  any  elements, 
of  political  power  ?  A  few  gentlemen  made  a  nation,  only  that 
they  might  make  a  consolidated  government,  either  of  a  mo- 
narchical or  national  complexion.  The  federal  party  denied  that 
any  of  the  elements  of  political  power  were  dissolved  by  the 
meeting  of  the  convention  ;  asserted  that  the  meeting  itself 
flowed  from  existing  political  power ;  and  that  its  proceedings 
must  be  exposed  to  the  ratification  and  future  alteration  of  this 
state  political  power,  thus  recognised  as  existing.  It  was  a 
strange  dissolution  of  political  elements,  which  no  body  per- 
ceived ;  and  as  credible,  as  if  we  were  told  that  an  eclipse  of  the 
sun  had  produced  total  darkness  for  several  months,  though  we 
were  all  daily  enjoying  its  light  and  warmth.  If  all  the  ele- 
ments of  political  power  ceased  on  the  meeting  of  the  conven- 
tion, those  only  can  exist,  which  were  revived  by  the  constitu- 
tion. But  it  does  not  revive,  and  only  reserves,  state  rights. 
Powers  which  were  dead,  could  not  be  reserved.  If  the  con- 
vention had  not  framed  a  constitution,  or  the  states  had  not  rati- 
fied it,  would  no  elements  of  political  power  have  existed  ? 

The  meeting  of  the  state  conventions  must  have  been  pecu- 
liarly inauspicious,  and  provokingly  irksome,  under  this  doc- 
trine. All  the  elements  of  political  power  were  gone.  Whither? 
To  these  conventions?  No.  They  could  only  ratify  or  reject 
the  constitution.  To  that  or  to  this  dissolution  of  political  pow- 
er, their  alternative  was  confined.  They  could  not  revive  any 
of  these  elements,  not  revived  by  that  federal  instrument.  Had 
the  conventions  of  states  been  equivalent  to  the  convention  of  a 
consolidated  nation,  or  a  representation  of  an  American  people, 
they  might  have  modified  political  power  widiout  restriction ; 
but  as  they  were  only  state  organs  for  expressing  a  state  opinion, 
acceding  to  or  rejecting  a  federal  compact  between  states,  they 
had  no  power,  if  they  were  so  inclined,  to  change  the  existing 
political  elements  into  a  national  government,  republican  or  mo~ 
narchical.  As  these  conventions  did  not  receive  all  the  elements 
of  political  power,  but  were  limited  to  a  single  act,  they  were 
not  the  representatives  of  an  American  nation,  and  thence  arises 
a  complete  refutation  of  the  construction  which  supposes  that  the 
words  "  We,  the  people  of  the  United  States,"  had  any  refer- 
24 


186  taylor's  views. 

ence  to  a  consolidated  nation ;  since  the  convention  of  such  a 
people  would  have  constituted  an  unrestricted  element  of  poli- 
tical power.  The  truth  is,  that  the  idea  of  a  consolidated  na- 
tion crept  out  of  the  convention,  where  it  was  invented  before 
the  state  conventions  were  even  mentioned,  and  settled  itself  in 
the  minds  of  those  gentlemen  who  still  have  in  view  one  or  the 
other  of  the  forms  of  government  it  was  started  to  produce. 
But  if  it  is  not  too  late  to  revive  it,  after  the  rejection  of  these 
forms,  and  after  the  establishment  of  a  federal  government, 
founded  upon  the  co-equal  sovereignties  of  the  states,  the  con- 
stitution is  rotten  at  its  base,  and  the  superstructure  must  be  for- 
ever tottering. 

Let  one  of  the  gentlemen  who  advocated  the  project  for  a  na- 
tional government,  expound  the  object.  Mr.  Morris,  in  opposi- 
tion to  a  federal  compact,  observed  "  that  a  government  by 
"  compact,  was  no  government  at  all."  This  was  true,  if  the 
states  were  corporations,  because  under  that  character,  they  could 
form  no  government,- federal  or  national.  Compact  and  power 
are  the  different  elements  of  forms  of  government,  and  one  prin- 
ciple is  opposed  to  the  other.  This  profound  politician  rejects 
compact,  because  he  knew  that  the  rival  principle  must  prevail, 
if  a  national  government  was  established  ;  since  power  only,  and 
that  of  the  highest  degree,  could  govern  a  consolidated  nation 
spread  over  an  immense  surface.  Compact  being  nothing,  pow- 
er, which  is  something,  comes  out  naturally  as  the  basis  of  the 
national  government  he  preferred,  and  the  way  is  smoothed  for 
playing  this  deadly  engine  upon  the  state  governments,  and  all 
the  rights  of  the  people,  each  and  every  one  of  which  are  found- 
ed in  compact. 

"  Discordant  clamours  and  lawless  resistance."  Words  con- 
stantly applied  by  tyranny  to  the  people,  and  by  every  political 
department,  to  another,  which  it  wishes  to  suppress.  It  is  re- 
markable that  »iobs  and  tyrants  are  supplied  by  forms  of  govern- 
ment resting  upon  power,  and  not  upon  compact,  with  argu- 
ments exactly  of  the  same  weight.  Without  mobs,  tyrants  will 
oppress  ;  without  tyrants,  mobs  will  disorganize ;  both,  there- 
fore, are  necessary  in  governments  resting  upon  power,  as  a  sort 
of  mutual  check.     No  remedy  exists  in  most  countries  against 


Taylor's  views.  187 

sedition,  but  despotism,  nor  against  despotism,  but  sedition. 
Therefore  both  with  equal  propriety  assert,  that  they  commit 
their  respective  atrocities  for  the  sake  of  an  ultimate  good.  Such 
is  the  ground  occupied  by  the  advocates  for  a  national  supremacy 
in  a  federal  government.  It  is  necessary  to  suppress  "  the  dis- 
"  cordant  clamours  and  lawless  resistance  of  the  state  rulers." 
When  this  is  effected  by  substituting  power  for  compact,  the 
same  argument  will  be  applied  to  the  people  with  infinitely 
more  plausibility.  The  discordant  clamours  and  lawless  resist- 
ance of  a  populace,  will  be  better  reasoning  for  adding  link  after 
link  to  power,  to  suppress  the  rights  of  the  people,  than  it  is  for 
suppressing  the  rights  of  the  states.  If  the  state  governments 
ought  to  lose  their  rights  because  ihey  may  be  discordant,  cla- 
morous, and  lawless,  it  follows  very  clearly  that  the  people 
ought  to  lose  their's  for  the  same  reason.  But  this  foreign  mode 
of  reasoning  was  necessary  to  establish  a  foreign  principle  of  go- 
vernment, which  the  constitution  endeavoured  to  shun,  by  sub- 
stituting for  the  eternal  collisions  between  a  populace  and  a  des- 
potism, the  mediatorial  check  of  state  governments  ;  and  by  es- 
tablishing a  division  of  power  for  the  purpose  of  preventing  its 
accumulation,  by  which  discordant  clamours  and  lawless  resist- 
ance are  invariably  provoked.  As  it  is  a  political  axiom,  that 
great  concentrated  power  begets  popular  commotion,  and  that 
popular  commotion  begets  great  concentrated  power,  the  consti- 
tution relied  upon  a  sounder  check  to  prevent  both,  in  the  state 
governments.  There  cannot  be  a  more  direct  advance  towards 
monarchy,  than  the  dissolution  of  the  orderly  and  organized  con- 
trol of  the  state  governments,  and  an  exclusive  dependence  upon 
the  control  of  the  people ;  because  the  very  first  popular  commo-- 
tion  excited  by  an  oppressive  or  partial  law,  would  furnish  a  pre- 
text for  its  introduction.  To  talk,  therefore,  of  an  American 
people,  as  sufficiently  able  and  willing  to  act  in  concert,  so  as  to 
furnish  a  security  against  the  effects  of  a  supreme  concentrated 
power,  and  to  render  the  mutual  control  of  the  state  and  federal 
departments  unnecessary  for  the  preservation  of  liberty,  to  my 
mind  conveys  the  idea  of  great  ignorance  or  of  great  ambition. 

The  artifice  of  destroying  the  rights  of  the  people,  under  the 
Jttask  of  vindicating  them,  is  as  old  as  government  itself.     If  tbo 


188  TAYLOR'S  VIEWS. 

people  of  the  United  States  should  constitute  themselves  into  one 
nation,  the  question  would  still  occur,  which  was  the  best  mode 
for  preserving  liberty,  that  of  dividing  or  concentrating  the  pow- 
ers of  government  ?  The  election  would  lie,  in  fact,  between  a 
disorderly  and  lawless  resistance  of  mobs,  and  the  orderly  and 
constitutional  resistance  of  state  governments.  Suppose  a  majo- 
rity on  one  side  of  the  United  States,  to  oppress  a  minority  on 
the  other.  Would  this  probable  and  meditated  evil  be  best  con- 
trolled by  mobs  or  state  governments?  The  Federalist  eulo- 
gises the  latter  mode  of  control,  as  the  distinguishing  superiority 
of  our  system  for  preserving  the  rights  of  the  people.  A  suffi- 
cient mode  of  preventing  geographical  districts  from  being  op- 
pressed, must  be  found  in  all  extensive  countries,  or  they  will  be 
oppressed.  Is  it  better  to  intrust  this  indispensable  office  to 
mobs  or  self-constituted  combinations,  than  to  organized  depart- 
ments ?  Which  will  act  with  most  knowledge,  discretion,  lega- 
lity, and  effect,  in  maintaining  the  rights  of  the  people,  mobs  or 
state  governments  ?  In  a  country  so  extensive  as  the  United 
States,  we  must  have  one  or  the  other,  to  countervail  the  propen- 
sity of  great  concentrated  power  to  oppress,  from  ambition,  ava- 
rice, or  local  ignorance ;  and  the  state  governments  exposed  to 
the  control  of  the  people  in  each  state,  and  to  the  power  of  three- 
fourths  of  the  states  to  amend  the  constitution,  is  infinitely  pre- 
ferable to  insurrections,,  exposed  only  to  the  control  of  physical 
force. 

I  have  reserved  an  argument  to  face  the  undisguised  doctrine 
of  One  of  the  People,  that  a  power  in  the  state  governments  to 
sustain  state  rights,  is  a  diminution  of  their  liberty ;  and  the  same 
argument,  if  it  is  just,  will  overturn  the  whole  mass  of  more 
complicated  assertions,  advanced  to  establish  a  concentrated  su- 
premacy. Let  us  again  select  the  state  territorial  right,  from  the 
rest  of  the  reserved  rights.  Can  Congress,  the  supreme  court, 
or  a  concurrence  of  the  whole  federal  government,  abridge  the 
territorial  rights  of  the  states  without  their  consent  ?  Why  not  ? 
Because  these  rights  are  vested  in  the  people  of  each  state,  of 
which  they  are  not  to  be  divested,  without  the  consent  of  their 
state  representatives,.  Suppose  that  an  abridgment  of  state  ter- 
ritory should  be  attempted  by  all  or  either  of  these  self-consti- 


TAYLOR'S  VIEWS.  189 

tuted  supremacies,  would  the  state  governments  have  no  mode 
of  defending  the  territorial  rights  of  the  people,  and  be  constitu- 
tionally compellable  to  suffer  their  loss?  What  remedy  can 
they  have,  except  the  power  arising  from  the  mutual  obligation 
of  the  state  and  federal  governments,  to  defend  the  rights  of  the 
people  intrusted  to  each,  against  the  encroachments  of  the  other. 
Why  is  this  an  obligation  common  to  both  governments  ?  Be- 
cause the  rights  of  both,  being  also  rights  of  the  people,  com- 
prising their  whole  moral  security  for  civil  liberty,  it  would  be 
treachery  to  the  people,  should  either  surrender  the  rights  in- 
trusted to  it  for  their  benefit.  If  it  is  true  that  a  state  govern- 
ment has  a  constitutional  right,  and  is  bound  by  its  duty  to  the 
people,  to  resist  an  abridgment  of  a  territorial  state  right  with- 
out its  consent,  by  either  of  the  supposed  supremacies,  it  must 
also  be  true,  that  it  has  a  constitutional  right  and  is  bound  to  re- 
sist similar  abridgments  of  all  other  rights  of  the  people,  intrust- 
ed to  it  by  the  constitution.  The  power  given  to  the  state  go* 
vernments  to  participate  in  certain  specified  federal  rights,  with 
the  consent  of  Congress  ;  and  the  power  given  to  the  federal 
government  to  participate  in  the  specified  territorial  state  rights. 
with  the  consent  of  the  state  legislatures ;  unite  in  demonstrat- 
ing that  no  supremacy  existed  in  either  government,  over  the 
rights  of  the  people  intrusted  to  the  other,  even  by  the  mutual 
consent  of  the  federal  and  a  state  government,  except  in  the 
cases  specified.  The  territorial  and  other  state  rights,  are  re- 
served to  the  people  of  each  state,  upon  the  ground  of  the  pri- 
mitive and  inherent  sovereignty  of  each  state ;  and  powers  be- 
ing delegated  to  the  federal  government  upon  the  same  ground. 
it  could  not  abridge  the  territories  of  a  state,  because  the  idea 
was  interdicted  by  the  sovereignty  of  a  state.  By  the  very 
same  principle  every  other  abridgment  by  either  government  of 
the  delegated  or  reserved  rights,  is  interdicted.  If  state  sove- 
reignty is  able  to  secure  the  territorial  rights  of  the  states,  it  is 
able  to  secure  all  the  other  reserved  rights;  and  if  the  federal 
government  possesses  no  supremacy  by  which  it  can  abridge  this 
right  without  the  consent  of  the  state,  it  cannot  abridge  a  right 
as  to  which  no  consent  is  permitted.  If  such  a  supremacy  could 
have  abridged  the  territorial  right  of  a  state,  why  was  fhe  cor- 


190  TAYLOR'S  VIEWS. 

Sent  of  the  state  legislature  required  ?  The  requisition  of  this 
consent  acknowledges  state  supremacy  over  state  rights  reserv- 
ed, and  opens  the  way  to  an  argument  in  my  view  conclusive. 
"Why  were  the  state  governments  allowed  to  consent  to  an 
abridgment  of  the  territorial  right  of  the  people  of  each  state, 
and  not  allowed  to  consent  to  any  abridgment  of  the  other  rights 
reserved  to  the  people  of  each  state  ?  Because  the  people,  con- 
vinced that  the  undiminished  preservation  of  the  other  reserved 
rights  was  necessary  to  secure  their  liberties,  did  not  choose  even 
to  intrust  their  representatives  with  a  power  of  abridging  them. 
From  this  supremacy  of  the  people  in  each  state,  arises  a  con- 
struction of  the  constitution,  universally,  I  believe,  admitted  to 
be  correct,  namely,  that  no  state  government  can  cede  the  re- 
served rights  of  the  people  to  the  federal  government,  and  that 
the  federal  government  cannot  cede  the  federal  rights  of  the  peo- 
ple to  a  state  government,  because  it  would  defeat  the  division  of 
power  made  by  the  people  of  each  state,  for  the  very  purpose  of 
preserving  their  rights  and  liberties ;  and  a  jealousy  lest  this 
should  be  effected,  dictated,  in  a  great  degree,  the  mode  of 
amending  the  constitution,  as  necessary  to  preserve  both  the  de- 
legated and  reserved  rights  of  the  people.  If  state  consent  can- 
not justify  the  federal  government  in  exercising  powers  reserved 
to  the  states,  nor  federal  consent  justify  a  state  government  in 
exercising  exclusive  federal  powers,  there  cannot  be  the  least 
reason  to  suppose  that  either  government  can  violate  this  division 
of  powers  by  its  own  consent.  That  which  a  concurrence  of 
both  is  not  allowed  to  effect,  cannot  be  effected  by  the  will  of 
one.  If  not,  then  there  cannot  exist  any  mode  by  which  the 
state  and  federal  rights  of  the  people  can  be  preserved,  except 
the  mutual  control  and  independency  of  the  state  and  federal 
departments.  This  mutual  control  is  the  most  essential  of  the 
rights  of  the  people,  but  of  no  efficacy,  if  either  sphere,  even  by 
the  consent  of  the  other,  and  much  less  without  such  consent, 
can  derange  the  division.  The  division  of  power  cannot  be  con- 
stitutionally surrendered  by  either  department,  because  it  is  a 
right  belonging  not  to  itself,  but  to  the  people.  Let  the  people 
look  abroad,  and  contemplate  the  situation  of  the  rights  of  the 
people,  unsupported  by  a  division  of  power  between  political 


taylor's  views.  191 

departments  comprising  a  mutual  control ;  and  they  will  discern 
that  the  rights  of  the  people  in  the  whole  world,  have  shrunk  to 
nothing  in  the  hands  of  every  species  of  concentrated  or  conso- 
lidated government.  In  England  they  are  betrayed  to  a  king, 
and  a  monied  aristocracy.  Should  our  state  governments  be- 
tray the  reserved  rights  of  the  people  to  the  power  and  influence 
of  the  federal  department,  they  will  commit  the  same  treachery 
committed  by  the  house  of  commons,  acknowledged  to  be  fatal 
to  the  rights  of  the  English  people.  In  France,  we  behold  the 
rights  of  the  people  daily  perishing  under  the  solitary  protection 
of  one  elected  legislative  branch.  Such  a  protection  in  both 
countries,  has  even  been  unable  to  prevent  the  departments  of  one 
supreme  government  from  uniting  in  a  conspiracy  for  suppress- 
ing the  rights  of  the  people.  It  does  not  even  save  the  freedom 
of  the  press.  This  right  has  been  assailed  here  by  a  sedition 
law,  preparatory  to  the  establishment  of  a  supreme  consolidated 
government,  when  it  was  attempted  to  force  this  country  into  the 
European  alliance  against  the  rights  of  the  people,  by  a  war  with 
France.  Spain,  Portugal,  and  South-America,  are  yet  floating 
in  the  storms  of  revolution.  These  nations,  and  all  those  more 
completely  enslaved,  have  never  established  a  division  of  power 
bearing  any  resemblance  to  that  between  the  state  and  federal 
governments  ;  and  under  this  system,  the  rights  of  the  people  in 
the  United  States  are  infinitely  more  substantial,  than  in  any 
other  country.  Has  this  fact  no  connexion  with  the  system  un- 
der which  these  rights  enjoy  an  exclusive  superiority  ?  Will 
they  be  increased  by  resting  them  on  one  house  of  representa- 
tives, as  in  France  and  England,  or  on  one  court,  installed  for 
life,  of  which  there  is  no  example.  If  they  owe  their  security 
and  superiority  in  any  measure  to  the  system  under  which  they 
have  so  singularly  flourished,  the  declamatory  exclamations,  that 
the  responsibility  of  federal  officers  to  an  American  people  is  suf- 
ficient to  preserve  them,  must  be  counted  among  those  flatteries 
for  deluding  the  people  into  a  confidence,  by  which  their  rights 
will  be  reduced  to  the  same  state  with  such  rights  in  the  rest  of 
the  world. 

But  before  we  can  know  how  to  secure  the  rights  of  the  people, 
it  is  necessary  to  know  what  those  rights  are.     As  the  people  of 


l<#i  taylor's  views. 

all  the  states  never  associated  themselves  into  one  nation,  and  as 
the  political  rights  of  the  people  must  be  derived  from  such  as- 
sociations, they  rest  wholly  upon  their  state  communities.  By 
destroying  or  impairing  the  foundation  of  these  rights,  the  rights 
themselves  must  be  endangered.  Among  them,  the  right  of  elec- 
tion, retained  by  the  people  as  the  first  security  for  all  their  rights 
intrusted  both  to  the  federal  and  state  governments,  becomes  in- 
effectual for  preserving  those  intrusted  to  the  latter  governments, 
if  the  federal  government  or  the  supreme  court,  can  destroy  its 
effect.  Election  may  dictate  the  preservation  of  the  reserved 
rights  of  the  people,  under  an  opinion  that  when  they  were  re- 
served, the  mode  by  which  they  were  to  be  preserved,  was  also 
reserved ;  but  a  judicial  or  federal  supremacy  may  dictate  their 
destruction  or  abridgment.  If  state  representatives  adhere  to 
ihe  opinion  of  the  only  people  to  whom  state  rights  belong,  it  is 
only  necessary  to  call  them  discordant,  clamorous,  and  lawless, 
to  deprive  the  people  themselves  of  rights,  which  they  declared 
by  the  division  and  reservation  of  powers,  to  be  essential  for  the 
preservation  of  their  liberty.  Of  what  value  is  state  representa- 
tion, if  the  reserved  right  of  state  election  is  deprived  of  its  effi- 
cacy by  federal  supremacy  ?  It  is  in  form  a  supremacy  over  the 
state  governments,  but  in  fact,  a  supremacy  over  rights  reserved 
to  the  people  of  each  state. 

A  compensation  for  the  loss  of  the  contemplated  efficacy  of 
state  election,  is  offered  to  the  people  in  the  election  of  one  le- 
gislative branch  of  the  federal  government,  as  sufficient  for  re- 
straining federal  officers  "  from  usurping  powers  not  delegated, 
"  and  from  abusing  those  with  which  they  are  really  invested." 
The  people  have  retained  the  power  of  securing  both  their  fede- 
ral and  reserved  rights,  by  election,  to  be  separately  applied  to 
each  class,  in  different  modes.     State  election  was  not  retained 
by  them  to  control  the  delegated  powers,  nor  federal  election  to 
control   the   reserved  powers.      How  then   can  one  species  of 
election  compensate  for  the  loss  of  the  other,  or  answer  the  pur- 
poses of  both  ?     How   can  the  people   preserve  their  reserved 
rights  by  federal  election,  if  their  federal  representatives  have  no 
power  to  regulate  those  rights  ?     The  popular  right  of  election 
was  divided,  together  with  the  delegated  and  reserved  powers, 


taylor's  views.  193 

relatively  to  both  classes.     When  applied  to  the  first  class,  it  is 
not  applied  to  the  reserved  powers  ;  and  when  applied  to  the  se- 
cond, it  is  not  applied  to  federal  powers  ;  therefore  federal  elec- 
tion cannot  convey  reserved  powers,    nor  state  election  federal 
powers.     If  the  efficacy  of  state  election  is  destroyed  by  federal 
election,  the  people  will  lose  their  reserved,  and  retain  only  their 
federal,  right  of  election  ;  and  their  reserved  rights  will  not  en- 
joy any  security  at  all  from  election.     The  mode  proposed  for 
getting  over  this  difficulty  is,  to  transform  federal  election  into 
national  election,  that  it  may  reach  both  classes  of  rights,  state 
and  federal ;  under  the  pretence  of  compensating  the  people  for 
actual  rights  resulting  from  their  actual  state  associations,  by  a 
supremacy  collected  from  a  spurious  national  election.     But  this 
contrivance  would  vitally  derange  the  principle  of  representa- 
tion, because  federal  election   is  modified  for   effecting  federal 
purposes,  or  securing  a  proper  exercise  of  the  delegated  powers 
only  ;  and  state  election  for  purposes  wholly  different.     A  depu- 
tation modelled  to  fit  one  end,  cannot  possibly  fit  a  different  end. 
Federal  eleclion  is  by  no  means  modified  upon  principles  calculat- 
ed to  establish  a  general  government  able  to  regulate  the  affairs 
of  a  consolidated  nation,  and  prevent  fatal  geographical  partiali- 
ties or  errors.     The  hypothesis  of  a  general  government,  and  the 
supremacy  deduced  from  it,   is  therefore  false,  upon  the  princi- 
ple of  representation  itself,  referred  to  in  its  defence,  for  want  of 
Such  a  responsibility  in  federal  officers  to  the  people,  as  would  be 
necessary  to  create  a  national  government  thoroughly  republican, 
like  the  national  state  governments.     Is  it  true,  that  the  officers 
of  the  federal  government  are  completely  responsible  to  the  peo- 
ple ?     If  not,  did  the  people  intend  to  confide  in  a  falsehood  for 
the  preservation  of  their  rights  and  liberties  ?    If  the  people  are 
to  be  moulded  into  a  consolidated  nation,  they  ought  to  have  an 
opportunity  of  providing,  that  any  supremacy  with  which  they 
might  intrust  their  national  government,  should  be  quite  respon- 
sible to  themselves,  according  to  our  republican  principles.     In 
fact,  the  imperfect  responsibility  of  the  federal  officers  to  the 
people,  dictated  the  necessity  of  securing  their  reserved  rights  by 
a  sounder  responsibility.     No  responsibility  to  the  people  can  be 
found  in  a  political  supremacy  of  the  federal  court  5  on  the  con- 
25 


194  taylok's  views. 

trary,  its  essential  character  of  a  tenure  for  life,  would  defeat 
that  responsibility,  in  its  most  important  intention,  that  of  en- 
forcing a  loyalty  to  the  rights  of  the  people,  in  construing  the 
constitution.  The  responsibility  of  Congress  to  the  people, 
though  far  exceeding  that  of  the  supreme  court,  is  far  more  im- 
perfect than  that  ot  the  national  state  governments.  The  influ- 
ence of  the  people  extends  only  to  the  house  of  representatives, 
and  the  senate  is  exposed  to  the  influence  of  "  the  discordant, 
"  clamorous,  and  lawless  resistance  of  state  rulers."  The  house 
of  representatives  alone,  is  inert,  and  the  influence  which  reaches 
it  is  not  that  of  a  consolidated  people,  but  of  separate  states ;  and 
therefore  a  responsibility  was  contrived  for  the  federal  govern- 
ment, to  prevent  a  majority  of  people  inhabiting  a  minority  of 
states,  from  oppressing  a  majority  of  states.  How  can  it  be 
contended  that  the  constitution  relied  upon  a  responsibility  to  an 
American  people  for  its  faithful  observance,  when  it  abounds 
with  precautions  to  prevent  a  majority  from  using  its  influence  to 
destroy  the  moral  equality  of  the  states  ?  It  is  at  least  strange 
doctrine  to  states,  which  can  never  use  population  as  a  passport 
to  geographical  power. 

The  electors  of  the  president  are  appointed  as  these  discord- 
ant, clamorous,  and  lawless  state  rulers  shall  direct ;  so  as  to  se- 
cure, wisely  and  properly,  in  my  opinion,  a  state  influence  over 
this  officer;  and  if  no  choice  is  made,  he  is  elected  by  states  in 
the  house  of  representatives.  Far  from  being  responsible  to  the 
people,  considered  as  a  consolidated  nation,  he  is  made  respon- 
sible to  them  considered  as  state  nations.  The  mode  of  his  elec- 
tion is  federal,  and  not  national,  because  the  constitution  intended 
to  establish  a  federal  and  not  a  national  government.  If  the 
states  should  ever  part  with  this  federal  feature  of  the  constitu- 
tion, it  will  be  a  great  and  probably  a  conclusive  stride  towards 
a  consolidated,  and  perhaps  a  monarchical  government. 

Even  the  house  of  representatives  is  neither  a  national  repre- 
sentation, nor  exposed  to  a  national  influence.  The  exclusive  in- 
fluence of  each  state  over  its  own  members,  was  so  inevitable, 
that  the  large  states  contended  for  the  mode  by  which  it  is  ap- 
pointed to  extend  their  own  power,  by  means  of  the  responsibi- 
lity of  the  members  to  their  own  states ;  and  it  is  both  false  in 


TAYLOR'S  VIEWS.  195 

fact,  and  fallacious  in  theory,  that  this  house  was  ever  considered 
in  the  convention,  or  could  be  made,  a  national  representation. 
To  check  the  infallible  influence  of  the  great  states  by  their 
greater  number  of  votes,  the  small  states  obtained  the  representa- 
tion in  the  senate  ;  and  the  expectations  of  both  are  realized  by 
experience.  The  representatives  of  no  states  feel  any  responsi- 
bility to  the  people  of  other  states,  nor  have  the  people  of  one 
state  any  influence  over  the  representatives  of  another.  The  in- 
flue.ice  over  this  house  is  therefore  state  or  federal,  and  its  re- 
sponsibility to  a  consolidated  nation  quite  chimerical.  A  fore- 
sight of  this  dictated  its  appointment  by  states,  and  excluded 
fragments  of  state  population  from  representation,  because  the  re- 
presentation, both  in  theory  and  fact,  would  be  state  and  not  na- 
tional. The  contemplated  responsibility  of  the  representatives  of 
each  state  to  the  independent  nations  by  which  they  were  elect- 
ed, was  a  federal  and  not  a  national  feature  of  the  constitution. 
The}'  may  be  elected  by  a  general  state  national  ticket.  Their 
responsibility  to  their  own  states  is  real ;  to  an  American  nation, 
imaginary.  By  catching  at  the  shadow,  the  substance  would  be 
lost.  A  real  and  a  nominal  responsibility  piead  for  the  prefer- 
ence, as  securities  for  the  state  rights  reserved  to  the  people.  The 
responsibility  of  the  house  of  representatives  to  the. separate  state 
nations,  is  sufficient  to  preserve  the  federal  rights  of  these  na- 
tions, but  wholly  insufficient,  and  therefore  never  relied  upon,  to 
preserve  their  separate  and  dissimilar  reserved  rights ;  the  nomi- 
nal responsibility  assails  the  real  responsibility  with  opprobrious 
epithets,  to  destroy  the  real  friends  and  sincere  defenders  of  the 
reserved  rights  of  the  people,  and  introduce  a  national  govern- 
ment. One  of  the  People  quarrels  like  the  natives  of  Hindos- 
tan,  who  stigmatise  the  object  of  hatred  t)y  disparaging  his  near- 
est relatives,  in  order  to  render  him  contemptible.  In  like  man- 
ner he  labours  to  destroy  the  state  rights  of  the  people,  and  a  fe- 
deral form  of  government  founded  in  a  republican  equality  of 
states,  by  calumniating  their  best  friends,  the  state  governments. 
The  doctrine  of  One  of  the  People  displays  the  difference  be- 
tween Mr.  Hamilton's  and  Mr.  Madison's  plans  of  government, 
and  adopts  the  former.  Mr.  Hamilton  was  for  "  establishing  a 
"  general  and   national  government  completely  supreme,  anni- 


196  taylor's  views. 

"  hilating  state  distinctions  and  state  operations,  and  giving  a 
"  national  legislature  unlimited  power  to  pass  all  laws  whatso- 
"  ever,  and  to  appoint  courts  in  every  state,  so  as  to  make  the 
u  state  governments  unnecessary  to  it."  Mr.  Madison  was  for 
"  retaining  the  state  governments  and  operations,  but  subjecting 
u  them  to  a  supremacy  or  negative  in  federal  officers,  legislative, 
"  executive,  and  judicial."  Mr.  Hamilton  confessed  that  both 
plans  "  were  very  remote  from  the  idea  of  the  people."  One  of 
the  People  contends,  in  fact,  that  Mr.  Hamilton's  plan  was 
adopted  ;  that  the  constitution  established  a  national  government ; 
that  it  abolished  the  discordant,  clamorous,  and  lawless  state  go- 
vernments ;  and  that  they  were  not  relied  upon  to  insure  do- 
mestic tranquillity  or  a  more  perfect  union,  nor  to  defend  and 
preserve  the  rights  reserved  to  the  people  ;  so  that  these  rights, 
being  unprotected  by  the  states,  have  no  defenders  at  all. 

To  re-instate  Mr.  Hamilton's  rejected  system,  he  brings  for- 
ward the  hackneyed  quotation  from  the  preamble  of  the  consti- 
tution, to  prove  that  the  United  States  were  consolidated  into 
one  nation.  If  this  was  even  true,  it  would  not  follow  that  we 
must  have  a  consolidated  supreme  national  government.  A  na- 
tion may  establish  whatever  balancing  political  departments  it 
thinks  necessary  for  preserving  the  rights  of  the  people ;  and 
the  constitution,  in  reserving  a  great  mass  of  rights  and  powers 
to  the  people  of  each  state,  without  the  exercise  of  which  civil 
government  could  not  go  on,  acknowledges  and  uses  the  instru- 
ments by  which  only  these  indispensable  rights  and  powers  can 
be  exercised.  To  the  reasons  before  urged  to  prove  the  fallacy 
of  this  argument  for  introducing  a  national  government,  I  shall 
subjoin  others,  apparently  new  and  strong.  "  Treason  against 
"  the  United  States,  shall  consist  only  in  levying  war  against 
"  them,  or  in  adhering  to  their  enemies."  In  this  clause  of  the 
constitution,  the  word  "  people"  is  dropt,  and  the  words  "  Unit- 
"  ed  States"  used  to  define  the  nature  of  the  government.  I 
have  selected  the  case  of  treason  to  illustrate  the  argument,  for 
reasons  which  will  appear  as  we  proceed,  but  the  reader  will  be 
pleased  to  recollect,  that  throughout  the  constitution  the  word 
people  is  never  associated  with  the  words  United  States,  except 
in  the  first  line  of  the  preamble.     We  have  a  Congress,  a  presi- 


taylor's  views.  197 

dent,  and  a  judicial  power  of  the  United  States,  but  no  such 
departments  of  the  people  of  the  United  States.     Even  in  the 
preamble  itself,  the  constitution  is  established,  not  for  the  people 
of  the  United  States,  but  "  for  the  United  States  of  America." 
The  reconciliation  of  these  different  phrases  seems  to  be  easy. 
That  used  in  the  first  line  of  the  preamble  refers  to  the  ratifica- 
tion of  the   constitution,  and    that  used  in    the    last  line,  and 
throughout  the  constitution,  to  the  character  of  the  government. 
The  ratification  was  to  be  the  act  of  the  people  of  the  states,  by 
conventions,  but  the  government  was  to  be  a  confederation  of 
United  States,  and  not  a  consolidated  or  a  national  government  of 
the  people  inhabiting  all  these  states.     The  form,  therefore,  of 
the  ratification,  could  not  alter  the  nature  of  the  compact,  nor 
reflect  upon  federal  rulers  the  least  power  or  supremacy  what- 
ever.    "  The  president,  and  all  the  civil  officers  of  the  United 
"  States,  shall  be  removed  from  office  by  impeachment."    The 
article  reaches  representatives  and  senators.     Both  are  contem- 
plated as  equally  officers  of  a  federal,  and  neither  as  officers  of  a 
national  government,  or  officers  of  an  aggregate  nation.     They 
are  to  be  tried  by  a  federal  tribunal.     Had  any  of  them  been  na- 
tional officers,  they  would  have  been  tried  by  some  national  tri- 
bunal.    The  case  of  treason  suggests  several  important  observa- 
tions.    It  is  divided  into  two  classes,  high  and  petit.     The  first 
class  comprises  crimes  against  sovereignty,  and  their  punishment 
is  an  appendage  of  sovereign  power.     State  governments  exer- 
cise the  right  of  defining  and  punishing  these  crimes,  because 
they  represent  state  sovereignty,  and  corporations  can  do  neither, 
because  they  are  not  sovereign.     Indictments  are  drawn  in  the 
name  of  the  commonwealth,  or  of  the  people  of  the  state,  and 
conclude  "  against  the  peace  and  dignity  of  the  commonwealth, 
"  or  of  the  state  associated  people,  or  of  the  state,  or  against  the 
"  peace,  government,  and  dignity  of  the  state,"  for  these  varie- 
ties are  used  in  state  constitutions,  expressing  the  social  sove- 
reignty, by   which  traitors  and  other  criminals  are  brought  to 
justice.    Why  wTas  it  necessary  to  invest  the  federal  government 
with  a  power  to  punish  only  a  species  of  treason  defined  by  the 
constitution?     Because  it  was  not  a  national  government,  and 
therefore  had  no  power  to  define  or  punish  any  crime  whatso- 


198  TAYLOR'S  VIEWS. 

ever,  committed  against  sovereign  power.  Why  was  it  allowed 
to  punish  only  a  few  specified  crimes?  Because  they  were  in- 
jurious to  the  federal  union  of  states,  and  the  state  sovereignties 
were  competent  to  the  punishmei  t  of  all  crimes  against  the  peace 
and  dignity  of  the  state,  or  injurious  to  individuals.  Treason 
might  have  heen  committed  formerly,  by  words  or  writings,  in- 
tended to  subvert  a  government.  It  may  be  well  for  One  of  the 
People,  that  federal  treason  was  not  extended  to  such  attempts 
for  subverting  our  federal  form  0/  government.  11  the  old  art 
of  finding  constructive  treasons  had  remained,  he  might  perhaps 
have  himself  become  a  precedent  to  some  future  logician,  for 
finding  a  constructive  national  government.  Suppose  an  indict- 
ment for  federal  treason  should  be  brought  in  the  name  of  the 
people  of  America,  and  conclude  against  their  peace  and  dignity. 
Would  it  not  be  an  error  sufficient  to  arrest  the  judgment  ?  Or 
suppose  an  indictment  for  state  treason  should  be  instituted  in 
the  name  of  the  corporation  of  South-Carolina,  and  conclude 
against  the  peace  and  dignity  of  the  said  corporation.  Would 
not  the  error  be  equally  fatal  ?  Why  would  both  these  indict- 
ments be  erroneous  ?  Because  no  American  people  or  nation 
existed,  and  because  South-Carolina  is  not  a  corporation.  I  do 
not  know  how  federal  indictments  are  drawn  for  punishing 
crimes,  the  punishment  of  which  is  not  delegated  to  the  federal 
government.  As  to  treason,  they  must  conclude  against  the 
peace  and  dignity  of  the  United  States.  As  to  those  committed 
against  individuals  or  corporations,  I  should  be  glad  to  see  an 
indictment  concluding  against  the  peace  and  dignity  of  the  peo- 
ple of  America,  as  a  basis  for  federal  jurisdiction.  It  might  set- 
tle the  jurisdiction  of  the  federal  judiciary,  both  original  and 
appellate ;  for  if  the  supposed  national  sovereignty  can  bestow 
jurisdiction  in  one  case,  it  may  do  so  in  the  other. 

Let  us  return  to  One  of  the  People.  P.  3.  "  As  long  as  we 
"  (the  people,)  continue  the  officers  of  the  generul  government 
"  in  office,  their  acts  are  ours  ;  as  their  business  is  of  greater  im- 
"  portance  than  yours,  (the  business  of  the  state  governments,) 
"  we  of  course  select  the  most  intelligent  men  to  perform  it,  and 
"  your  attempt  to  control  them  is  therefore  peculiarly  unbecom- 
a  ing  and  arrogant."     This  would  be  awful,  and  not  very  mo- 


taylor's  vieavs.  199 

dest  language,  in  the  mouths  of  any  rulers  whatsoever ;  but  sup- 
pose Congress  should  adopt  it,   and  say,  "  our  importance  and 
<*  superior  intelligence  makes  it  peculiarly  arrogant  for  any  state 
"  government  to  attempt  to  control  us."     The  supreme  judges 
may  also  declare  that,  being  as  important  and  intelligent  as  the 
members  of  Congress,  they  are  entitled  to   the  same  implicit 
obedience.     The  pretensions  of  the  president,  under  this  new 
rule  for  dividing  power,  may  be  still  better.     Such  a  constella- 
tion would  soon  establish  Mr.  Hamilton's  system  of  government, 
if  it  would  be  peculiarly  unbecoming  and  arrogant  to  control  any 
of  its  doings,  and   presently  add  irresistible  power  to  its  other 
brilliances.     Rut  if  this  splendid   being   is  really  a  fiction,  this 
rule  for  dividing  power  between  the  federal  and  state  depart- 
ments, though  compounded  of  good  words,  is  so  very  imperfect, 
that  the   claim  for  veneration  seems  to  be  nearly  as  arrogant  as 
any  other  idolatry  ever  forged  to  obtain  power  and  money.     Is 
it  true  that  the  officers  of  the  federal  government  carry  with 
them  a  greater  mass  of  intelligence  than  they  leave  among  the 
officers  of  the  state   governments ;  that   their  business  is  more 
important  to  the  happiness  of  the  people,  than  the  business  of 
the  state  officers ;  or  that  any  people,  state  or  national,  invested 
mem    with  a  power   to  abridge    their   reserved    state    rights  ? 
Which  class  of  officers  may  be  able  to  do  the  people  most  harm, 
is  another  question  ;  but  ought  Milton's  poetical  decoration  of 
the  devil  to   entitle  this  powerful  being  to  implicit  obedience, 
and  convict  his  less  dangerous  adversaries  of  arrogance  for  with- 
standing his  machinations  ?     The   chief  distinction  of  state  offi- 
cers, like  that  of  beneficent   angels,    consists   in  a  power  to  do 
much  good,  and  but  little  evil ;  by  which  they  are  indicated  as 
a  happy  expedient  for  controlling  the  excesses  of  tremendous 
power.     If  the  constitution  had  contained  an  article  in  the  pre- 
cise words  of  One  of  the  People,  would  it  have  been  what  it  is, 
or  would  it  have  been  ratified  ?     If  not,  can  any  act  of  the  state 
governments  be  more  arrogant,  than  an  attempt,  by  an  indivi- 
dual, to  impose  such  an  article  upon  the  people  ?     If  charges  of 
unimportance,    ignorance,    and    arrogance,    can    confer  power, 
where  would  it  stop,  or  how  can  it  be  limited  ?     How  arrogant 
might  it  be  for  an  humble  magistrate  to  vindicate  the  rights  of  the 


20(*  TAYLOR'S  VIEWS. 

people  against  a  member  of  Congress  ?  The  important  functions 
of  a  president,  selected  for  his  intelligence,  would  reader  it 
highly  unbecoming  and  arrogant  for  a  member  of  Congress  to 
resist  his  usurpations.  No  weaker  political  department  could 
defend  its  constitutional  rights  against  a  stronger,  without  being 
chargeable  with  arrogance.  And  if  this  doctrine  is  true,  all  di- 
visions and  limitations  of  power,  for  the  preservation  of  civil 
liberty,  are  absurd.  Every  usurpation  implies  power,  and  every 
resistance  to  power  is  said  to  be  arrogant. 

P.  3.  "  The  assumption  of  state  authorities  will  appear  still 
"  more  glaring  and  unwarrantable,  when  we  reflect,  that  what- 
"  ever  is  assumed  as  a  state  right,  pertains  equally  to  every 
"  state  in  the  union,  separately  and  individually."  The  defence 
of  individual  rights  is  unwarrantable,  because  they  are  separate 
and  individual ;  all  social  rights  are  individual,  therefore  none 
can  be  withheld  from  power.  What  are  state  authorities,  if  they 
cannot  be  assumed,  because  the  same  authorities  pertain  to  other 
states  ?  This  doctrine  gets  rid  of  the  states  according  to  Mr. 
Hamilton's  principles,  and  concentrates  the  right  of  governing 
in  power,  according  to  Mr.  Morris's.  The  author's  insinuations 
that  the  states  have  some  powers,  mean  nothing,  if  their  indi- 
viduality makes  it  unwarrantable  to  assume  them.  It  was  of 
eoursc  unnecessary  to  make  any  distinction  between  state  rights 
and  state  usurpations,  or  between  federal  rights  and  federal 
usurpations,  because  individual  rights  are  naturally  subject  to 
concentrated  power,  and  power  is  concentrated  in  a  national  or 
general  government.  Accordingly  he  disencumbers  himself  of 
these  inquiries  as  frivolous. 

P.  5.  "  Ambitious  men  of  inferior  talents,  finding  they  have 
"  no  hope  to  be  distinguished  in  the  councils  of  the  national 
"  government,  naturally  wish  to  increase  the  power  and  conse- 
"  quence  of  the  state  governments,  the  theatres  in  which  they 
"  expect  to  acquire  distinction."  If  an  argument  may  be  ba- 
lanced, it  weighs  nothing.  Ambitious  men  of  superior  talents, 
naturally  wish  to  increase  the  powers  of  the  federal  government, 
for  the  sake  of  increasing  their  own  power  and  distinction.  The 
last  argument  is  the  heaviest,  if  the  liberties  of  mankind  are  ex- 
posed to  most  danger  from  ambitious  men  of  superior  talent*. 


Taylor's  views.  201 

The  division  of  power-  between  the  state  and  federal  govern* 
ments,  was  designed  to  control  the  achievements  of  both  the 
wholesale  and  retail  dealers  in  the  wares  of  ambition,  and  why 
the  men  of  great  capital  should  be  relieved  from  the  competition 
of  the  state  pedlars,  except  for  the  purpose  of  increasing  their 
profits,  at  the  expense  of  their  customers,  is  not  perceivable. 

P.  6.  "  But  I  will  offer  some  additional  views,  tending  to 
"  shew  that  the  fears  that  the  general  government  will  prostrate 
"  the  state  sovereignties,  are  wholly  unfounded."  After  having 
asserted  that  the  states  had  no  original  political  rights,  so  that  it 
was  impossible  for  the  general  government,  if  there  is  one,  to 
prostrate  what  was  never  erected,  it  is  a  great  condescension  to 
prove  ;  what !  that  the  said  general  government  cannot  pros- 
trate the  state  sovereignties.  By  no  means.  This  would  over- 
throw the  author's  whole  doctrine.  His  conciliating  humour 
therefore  is  exerted,  only  to  prove  that  the  general  government 
will  not  prostrate  the  state  sovereignties.  And  these  are  his 
arguments  to  prove  that  it  has  a  right,  but  not  a  disposition,  to 
do  so. 

P.  6.  "  The  powers  of  the  state  governments  constitute  pre- 
"  cisely  that  class  of  political  powers  that  has  the  least  attractions 
"  for  ambition.  They  establish  the  rules  of  property,  and  fix 
"  and  define  the  rights  of  persons." 

P.  7.  "  Ambition  holds  a  loftier  career.  The  states  are  ex- 
"  eluded  from  all  the  pride,  pomp,  and  circumstance  of  glorious 
il  war.  When,  therefore,  we  consider  the  nature  of  ambition, 
"  when  we  reflect  that  it  is  desirous  of  performing  those  actions 
"  only  which  history  records  with  her  brightest  and  most  endur- 
"  ing  colours,  and  nations  behold  with  the  highest  admiration, 
"  the  folly  of  the  apprehension  that  the  general  government  will 
"  subvert  the  state  governments,  is  most  strikingly  apparent." 

"  Upon  the  discretion  of  Congress  in  laying  and  collecting 
"  taxes,  and  in  raising  and  supporting  armies,  there  are  no  re- 
"  strictions  except  those  imposed  by  nature.  Congress  may 
"  draw  from  the  people  (of  the  states  too,)  the  utmost  farthing 
"  that  can  be  spared  from  their  suffering  families,  to  fill  the  na- 
"  tional  coffers;  and  call  out  the  last  man  that  can  be  spared 
ft  from  raising  the  necessaries  of  life,  to  fill  the  national  armies, 
26 


202  TAYLOR'S  VIEWS. 

u  and  fight  the  battles  of  ambitious  rulers.  These  tremendous 
"  engines  are  harmless  to  the  people,  and  will  not  be  depredators 
"  upon  the  more  peaceful,  inefficient,  and  unattractive  powers  of 
"  the  state  governments.  We  are  called  upon  to  believe  that 
"  our  federal  rulers  will  use  with  moderation  the  very  powers 
"  by  which  ambitious  men  have,  in  all  ages,  built  up  the  monu- 
"  ments  of  their  own  aggrandizement;  and  yet  that  these  rulers 
"  will  consummate  their  ambitious  purposes,  and  subvert  our  li- 
11  berties,  by  the  paltry  and  petit  larceny  process  of  pilfering 
"  little  fragments  from  the  temple  of  sovereignty.  It  is  not  in 
*'  the  course  of  ambition  to  descend,  for  in  its  proper  motion  it 
"  ascends.  Abstractedly  considered,  power  has  no  allurements. 
"  It  is  only  desirable  from  its  imposing  associations."  Such  is 
the  author's  political  theory,  and  he  adduces  the  following  proofs 
of  its  goodness. 

P.  8.  "  Congress  possess  absolute  power  over  the  ten  miles 
"  square,  yet  they  neglect  its  police,  and  seem  willing  to  abdi- 
"  cate  the  government." 

P.  9.  "  The  state  governments  delegate  portions  of  their 
"  power  to  city  and  county  corporations.  Great-Britain,  though 
"  despotick  oyer  the  colonies,  did  not  usurp  their  domestick  re- 
"  gulations.  Despotick  monarchs  disburden  themselves  from  the 
"  cares  of  local  government,  as  in  Persia  and  Turkey,  by  dele- 
"  gating  these  functions  to  royal  satraps ;  and  in  Russia,  many 
tl  provinces  have  scarcely  been  visited  by  a  ray  of  imperial 
"  power,  and  manage  their  own  internal  concerns  in  their  own 
"  way." 

P.  10.  "  From  these  examples  it  is  apparent,  that  if  govern- 
i{  ments  are  fond  of  power,  they  are  fond  of  ease." 

We  can  only  oppose  to  the  torrid  temperature  of  these  politi- 
cal opinions,  the  cold  dulness  of  common  sense.  Do  the  sparks 
of  ambition  really  produce  etherial  and  not  terrestrial  conflagra- 
tions ?  If  state  powers  have  the  least  attraction  for  ambition, 
how  happens  it  that  those  who  exercise  these  humble  powers  are 
most  likely  to  be  ambitious  ?  Mankind  have  hitherto  believed, 
that  great  power  begets  arrogance  and  ambition,  and  it  was  this 
opinion  which  dictated  the  divisions  and  limitations  established 
by  the  constitution.    But  if  it  is  true  that  the  general  govern- 


Taylor's  views.  203 

ment  will  be  ambitious,  and  that  therefore  it  will  pursue  a  loftier 
career  than  that  of  usurpation,  or  that  great  power  will  prevent 
ambition  and  arrogance;  then  the  remedy  for  removing  the  am- 
bition and  arrogance  of  state  rulers,  and  for  preventing  them 
from  usurping  federal  powers,  is  to  give  these  rulers  more  pow- 
er.  Whether  this  will  inspire  them  with  the  idea  of  making 
lofty  careers,  or  with  an  etherial  ambition  only,  to  obtain  the  ad- 
miration of  nations,  it  will  constitute  the  same  security  for  the 
federal  government  against  the  encroachments  of  the  state  go- 
vernments, urged  as  sufficient  to  secure  the  state  governments 
against  those  of  the  federal  government. 

The  powers  of  the  states  extend  only  to  life,  property,  and 
the  rights  of  persons,  but  ambition  holds  a  loftier  career.  I 
thought  that  ambition  fledged  itself  with  feathers  plucked  from 
other  birds;  and  that  it  could  not  ascend  without  lubricating  its 
wings  with  oil  squeezed  from  the  rump  of  society  ;  that  it  never 
confined  itself,  like  the  phoenix,  to  aerial  flights,  but  descended 
to  the  earth  in  search  of  food ;  that  war,  the  instrument  of  am- 
bitious rulers,  might  reach  life,  liberty,  and  property  ;  and  that 
the  lofty  career  of  Julius  Caesar  required  men  and  money,  for  the 
purpose  of  subjecting  all  social  interests  to  its  control.  If  the 
only  object  of  ambition  is  to  provide  matter  for  the  eloquence 
of  historians,  it  has  been  unfortunate  in  not  being  able,  by  the 
brilliancy  of  its  actions,  to  dazzle  them  against  the  heinousness 
of  its  crimes.  The  durable  colours  in  which  these  are  recorded? 
were  not  intended  to  inspire  us  with  an  admiration  of  a  tyrant, 
but  of  the  historian ;  and  if  we  bestow  our  applause  upon  the 
wrong  object,  the  end  of  history  is  defeated.  Instead  of  teach- 
ing us  to  resist  the  inexhaustible  frauds  and  oppressions  of  con- 
centrated power,  perpetrated  by  its  progeny,  arrogance,  ambition, 
and  avarice,  history  would  only  teach  us  to  behold  its  vices 
"  with  the  highest  admiration." 

The  tremendous  powers  of  glorious  war  and  unlimited  taxa- 
tion, to  fight  the  battles  or  fill  the  pockets  of  ambitious  or  avari- 
cious rulers,  have  suggested  political  divisions  and  checks.  Con- 
centrated power  has  other  affections,  nearly  as  pernicious  to 
human  happiness  as  its  love  of  war  and  taxation.  It  loves  im- 
plicit obedience,  and  partisans  purchased  at  the  expense  of  the 


204  taylor's  views. 

people.  On  the  contrary,  it  hates  whatever  obstructs  the  grati- 
fication of  these  passions.  If  we  have  married  Congress  to  men 
and  money,  and  to  several  other  rich  wives,  why  should  we  en- 
dow it  with  an  unlimited  polygamy,  by  allowing  it  to  take  away 
the  plain  housewives  of  the  states ;  and  break  the  tenth  com- 
mandment, in  order  to  establish  a  political  seraglio  for  satisfying 
the  lusts  of  ambition  ?  Truly,  because  the  concubinage  of  pow- 
er is  exposed  "  to  no  restrictions  except  those  imposed  by  the 
'*  laws  of  nature  ;  because,  though  tremendous,  it  will  be  harm- 
"  less  to  the  people,  and  will  not  become  a  depredator  upon  the 
"  peaceful,  inefficient,  and  unattractive  rights  of  the  state  go- 
"  vernments,  since  power  only  inspires  a  love  of  glory ;  because 
"  our  federal  rulers  will  use  with  moderation  the  powers  by 
"  which  ambitious  men  have,  in  all  ages,  built  up  the  monuments 
"  of  their  aggrandizement ;  because  they  will  never  pilfer  frag- 
u  ments  from  the  temple  of  liberty  ;  because  ambition  will  as- 
"  cend  and  not  descend  ;  and  because,  abstractedly  considered, 
"  power  has  no  allurements."  But  the  author  has  not  informed 
us  what  is  to  be  done,  if  this  glorious  ambition  should  not  pre- 
vent federal  rulers  from  usurping  the  state  rights  of  the  people. 
Are  the  powers  of  these  rulers  exposed  to  no  restrictions  ?  Tre- 
mendous power,  restrained  only  by  the  natural  moderation  of 
ambition,  is  a  very  new  plan  for  a  constitution.  I  imagined  that 
our  army  and  treasury  were  not  a  natural,  but  a  conventional 
army  and  treasury,  created  "  for  the  defence  and  welfare"  of  the 
confederated  states,  and  not  to  establish  a  tremendous  unlimited 
natural  power.  If  they  are  used  to  fight  the  battles  or  fill  the 
pockets  of  federal  rulers.,  and  the  states  should  say  to  Congress, 
"  You  have  perverted  the  powers  of  raising  men  and  money 
il  from  the  objects  specified  by  the  constitution,"  and  Congress 
should  answer,  "  True,  but  our  power  is  exposed  to  no  restric- 
"  tions,  except  those  imposed  by  the  laws  of  nature,"  would 
the  sufficiency  of  the  answer  be  admitted  ?  If  the  new  phrase. 
"  imposed  by  the  laws  of  nature,"  is  a  parody  of  "  national  go- 
"  vernment,"  it  well  expounds  the  design  of  the  project  for  in- 
troducing that  system. 

Besides    the  restriction   of  the  powers  of  the  purse  and  the 
sword  to  federal  objects,  others  abound  in  the  constitution.     Of 


Taylor's  views.  205 

this  nature  are  the  restrictions  of  taxation,  as  to  its  modes  ;  the 
concurrency  of  taxation ;  by  which  the  states  may  also  draw  the 
last  farthing  from  the  people ;  comprising  a  mutual  check  ;  the 
division  of  the  power  of  the  sword  in  its  great  reservoir  of  the 
militia  ;  the  right  of  the  states  to  raise  fleets  and  armies  in  time 
of  war  ;  and  the  division  of  powers  into  delegated  and  reserved, 
not  intended  to  be  abrogated  by  the  powers  to  tax  and  to  raise 
armies.  The  resources  of  the  constitution  for  enforcing:  these 
restrictions,  are,  state  election  of  one  branch  of  a  federal  legisla- 
ture by  the  people,  of  another,  by  state  legislatures,  of  a  third, 
in  a  federal  mode,  and  the  natural  state  right  of  self-preservation. 
Congress  are  also  restricted  to  three  cases  in  calling  out  the  mi- 
litia, neither  of  which  extends  to  fighting  the  battles  of  ambitious 
rulers ;  it  cannot  order  them  out  of  the  United  States ;  nor  can 
it  raise  regular  armies  by  compulsion.  Finally,  the  sovereignty 
of  the  states  is  a  barrier  against  the  tremendous  natural  power 
contended  for.  "  Ambitious  men  will  not  pilfer  fragments  from 
"  state  sovereignties."  This  admits  their  existence,  and  the 
question  is,  whether  they  constitute  a  temple  of  liberty,  which 
ambition  is  only  prohibited  from  pilfering  by  its  natural  mo- 
deration. 

Tremendous  powers  are  said  to  be  harmless,  and  sufficiently" 
restrained  by  the  laws  of  nature ;  state  powers  to  be  peaceful, 
inefficient,  and  unattractive,  but  too  arrogant  to  be  restrained  by 
these  same  laws ;  and  federal  rulers  to  be  too  ambitious  to  be 
guilty  of  petit  larceny  pilferings  from  the  temple  of  state  sove- 
reignties. But  may  they  not  be  inclined  to  commit  grand  lar- 
ceny. The  project  of  sweeping  off  all  these  sovereignties  by 
the  supremacy  contended  for,  does  not  remove  this  apprehension. 
The  doctrine  of  One  of  the  People  does  indeed  soar  far  above 
the  petit  larceny  of  pilfering  fragments  from  the  temple  of  state 
sovereignties,  and  magnanimously  leaves  not  a  fragment  stand- 
ing. It  is  a  Gengis  Khan  in  political  conquest.  Ambition  uses 
any  means,  great  or  small,  to  effect  its  ends.  Like  a  balloon, 
it  even  sometimes  employs  vapour  to  raise  itself.  The  happy 
contrast  between  grand  and  petit  larceny,  furnishes  the  argument 
in  favour  of  ambition.  It  is  made  to  say,  "  I  am  too  high- 
"  minded  to  be  content  with  pilferings  from  the  temple  of  state 


£06  taylor's  views. 

"  sovereignty,  but  I  will  nobly  carry  off  the  intire  temple,  by 
"  proving  that  the  states  have  no  original  rights,  and  that  I  hold 
€t  the  purse  and  the  sword  subject  to  no  restrictions  but  those  of 
"  the  laws  of  my  nature."  As  no  moral  edifice  is  more  splendid 
than  the  temple  of  liberty,  ambition  in  all  ages  aspires  to  the 
fame  of  pulling  it  down,  and  whether  it  succeeds  by  piece-meal, 
or  by  a  single  exploit,  by  the  sublimity  of  grand  larceny,  or  the 
eunning  of  petit  larcenies,  has  never  been  very  material  to  the 
people,  however  its  own  fame  may  be  graduated  by  an  achieve- 
ment which  must  owe  its  splendour  to  its  superlative  atrocity. 

These  comfortable  securities  against  the  consequences  of  tre- 
mendous concentrated  power,  are  founded  upon  the  fine  idea, 
"  that  power,  abstractedly  considered,  has  no  allurements,  and  is 
'*  only  desirable  from  its  imposing  associations,"  or  that  power 
ought  to  be  gazed  at  abstractedly  from  man,  or  man  abstractedly 
from  his  passions  and  qualities.  By  not  associating  man's  qua- 
lities with  power,  it  becomes  a  metaphysical  thing,  incapable  of 
doing  harm ;  or  by  stripping  a  man  of  his  qualities,  he  may  be 
converted  in  an  idea  as  sublime  as  you  please.  To  consider 
power  abstractedly  from  its  associations,  or  man  abstractedly 
from  his  qualities,  may  be  a  sublimated  mode  of  reasoning,  highly 
agreeable  to  the  aspiring  sons  of  ambition,  and  yet  quite  unintel- 
ligible to  the  humble  admirers  of  common  sense.  Let  us  reduce 
this  reasoning  in  favour  of  a  supreme  consolidated  government  to 
the  form  of  a  constitutional  article.  "  The  powers  of  the  purse 
"  and  the  sword  herein  delegated,  are  subject  to  no  restrictions, 
"  except  those  imposed  by  the  laws  of  nature.  They  may  there- 
"  fore  be  used  to  fight  the  battles  of  ambitious  rulers,  or  to  de- 
"  stroy  the  rights  reserved  to  the  states.  But  though  tremen- 
"  dous,  they  must  be  harmless  to  the  people  and  the  state  govern- 
"  ments,  because,  although  in  all  ages  ambitious  rulers  have  used 
"  them  for  their  own  aggrandizement,  yet  our  rulers  will  use 
"  them  with  moderation,  since  ambition  is  too  sentimental  to 
"  commit  petit  larcenies,  and  ascends  to  elevated  crimes  to  obtain 
"  admiration,  and  since  power,  having  no  allurements,  require* 
"  no  restrictions." 

Such  are  the  principles  necessary  to  introduce  a  supreme  na- 
tional government ;  but  are  these  the  principles  of  the  constitu- 


taylor's  views.  207 

tion?  That  is  one  continued  lecture  against  the  doctrine,  that 
liberty  will  be  secured  by  a  confidence  in  concentrated  power. 
Instead  of  relying  upon  this  speculation,  in  all  ages  so  unsuccess- 
ful, the  constitution  circumvolves  power  with  restrictions,  and 
moderates  it  by  divisions.  But  One  of  the  People  judiciously 
overlooks  these  restrictions  and  divisions,  because  they  subvert 
his  theory,  and  substitutes  for  them  several  metaphysical  pretti- 
nesses,  by  which  he  thinks  it  may  be  defended. 

"  Congress  is  tired  of  its  absolute  power  over  ten  miles  square, 
a  and  neglects  its  police."  This  unfortunate  piece  of  imaginary 
evidence  is  another  hypothesis  to  sustain  the  previous  hypothe- 
sis, that  power,  abstractedly  considered,  has  no  allurements,  and 
is  therefore  more  inclined  to  contract  than  to  extend  itself.  The 
reasoning  is  again  abstracted  from  the  facts.  Congress  still  hold, 
and  by  the  help  of  the  court,  has  stretched  this  little  power  to 
an  indefinite  size,  to  foster  the  "  paltry  and  petit  larceny  object 
"  of  pilfering"  the  states  by  a  lottery.  It  is  an  instance  to  shew 
that  ambition  and  avarice  are  not  uniformly  superior  to  little 
means  ;  but  it  is  a  bad  one  to  prove  an  aversion  to  power,  as  it 
is  made  tbe  most  of,  and  as  indeed  Congress  could  not  relinquish 
this,  any  more  than  another  delegated  power.  If  the  neglect  of 
the  police  of  the  ten  miles  square,  is  a  fact,  though  the  members 
of  Congress  see  and  inhabit  it  near  half  the  year,  it  does  not  re- 
commend a  national  supremacy  in  that  body.  This  has  happen- 
ed, not  from  want  of  knowledge,  but  from  want  of  interest  in 
the  concerns  of  the  district.  How  then  can  Congress  become 
a  good  legislative  body  for  states  which  they  never  see,  and  in 
the  concerns  of  which  most  of  its  members  have  no  interest  ? 
Thus  the  reference  to  the  ten  miles  square  recoils  in  every  view 
with  some  force  against  the  project  for  a  national  government. 
Even  the  existence  of  this  district  decides  the  question,  because 
it  would  have  been  unnecessary  for  the  constitution  to  have  be- 
stowed a  supreme  jurisdiction  upon  Congress  over  the  ten  miles, 
if  the  federal  government  possessed  a  supreme  jurisdiction  over 
itate  rights ;  nor  was  there  any  meaning  in  the  establishment  of 
this  district,  if  the  constitution  had  established  the  general  or  na- 
tional government  now  contended  for. 


20S  taylor's  views. 

Sensible  of  the  incapacity  of  Congress  for  exercising  the  pow- 
ers of  a  consolidated  government,  so  as  to  preserve  the  liberty 
and  advance  the  prosperity  of  the  people  of  each  state,  the  author 
endeavours  to  evade  the  objection,  by  observing,  "  that  the  state 
"  governments  delegate  portions  of  their  power  to  city  and 
"  county  corporations,"  inferring,  that  Congress  may  remove 
the  objection,  by  also  delegating  portions  of  its  power  to  the 
state  governments.  This  construction  of  the  constitution  derives 
the  powers  of  the  state  governments  from  Congress,  and  not 
from  the  people.  It  is  necessary  to  sustain  the  federal  supre- 
macy contended  for,  but  it  is  as  visibly  contrary  to  the  most  ex- 
plicit meaning  of  the  constitution.  A  supreme  national  govern- 
ment would  be  exactly  as  incapable  of  regulating  with  justice, 
and  impartiality,  and  fellow-feeling,  the  local  interests  of  the 
states,  by  deputies,  as  of  governing  them  directly.  The  compa- 
rison between  a  responsibility  of  these  interests  to  the  people  of 
each  state,  or  to  the  supremacy  of  a  national  government,  there- 
fore still  remains.  Will  internal  commotions  and  local  oppres- 
sions be  prevented  or  provoked  by  depriving  the  people  of  a  right 
essential  to  their  liberty  and  happiness  ? 

More  unfortunate  still  is  the  next  evidence  adduced  to  prove, 
that  state  rights  have  nothing  to  apprehend  from  a  concentrated 
supremacy.  "  Great-Britain,  though  despotick  over  the  colo- 
"  nies,  did  not  usurp  their  domestick  regulation,"  and  therefore 
the  federal  government,  though  despotick  over  the  states,  will 
not  usurp  theirs.  Had  the  fabulous  river  of  the  Pagan  hell 
caused  men  to  remember  what  had  not,  as  well  as  to  forget  what 
had  happened,  One  of  the  People  ought  to  have  administered  to 
his  readers  copious  draughts  of  this  miraculous  stream,  to  enable 
them  to  remember  that  Great-Britain  did  not  usurp  the  regulation 
of  colonial  domestick  affairs,  and  to  forget  that  the  colonies  went 
to  war  with  her  for  having  done  so  ;  as  both  facts  are  necessary 
to  prove  the  superiority  of  a  concentrated  supremacy  over  our 
federal  system. 

But  most  unfortunate  is  the  proof  of  the  harmless  nature  of  a 
concentrated  supremacy,  in  the  examples  of  Persia,  Turkey, 
and  Russia.  If  local  interests  may  possibly  feel  the  rays  of  a 
concentrated  supremacy,  yet  as  "  it  is  apparent,  from  these  ex- 


taylor's  views.  209 

amples  that  governments  are  fond  of  ease,"  it  follows,  "  that 
"  many  provinces  will  scarcely  be  visited  by  them,  and  may 
"  manage  their  own  internal  affairs  in  their  own  way."  But 
the  rays  of  a  concentrated  supremacy  happen  to  be  armies, 
fleets,  satraps,  and  a  multitude  of  officers.  England,  Persia, 
Turkey,  and  Russia,  send  forth  such  rays  in  abundance,  and.  do 
not  hoard  them  up  in  a  cave,  as  old  Neptune  did  his  storms,  for 
the  occasional  amusement  of  mankind.  They  are  admitted  to 
be  bad  things,  and  a  right  in  provinces  to  manage  their  local  af- 
fairs in  their  own  way,  is  admitted  to  be  a  good  thing ;  and  we 
are  advised  to  turn  loose  the  bad  things,  because  the  good  tiling 
will  be  obtained  by  means  of  the  laziness  or  love  of  ease  in  the 
bad  things,  as  a  new  political  check  for  the  security  of  civil  liberty- 
preferable  to  our  constitutional  restrictions. 

Are  mankind  yet  to  learn,  that  concentrated  power  has  never 
yet  been  made  virtuous  by  its  love  of  ease,  nor  forgotten  pro- 
vinces having  money,  through  its  idleness  ?  that  it  becomes  sus- 
picious, restless,  and  oppressive,  in  proportion  to  its  extension, 
and  multiplies  armies,  satraps,  and  officers,  for  its  security? 
Every  great  country,  subjected  to  an  undivided  sovereignty, 
must  sooner  or  later  be  divided  into  military  commanderies,  and 
crowded  with  officers.  If  a  consolidated  sovereignty  will  ne- 
glect distant  provinces,  it  is  unfit  for  the  management  of  local 
interests.  Its  rays  will  operate  differently  upon  these  interests, 
in  proportion  to  their  distance  or  proximity.  If  they  are  good 
things,  the  distant  provinces  will  suffer  injustice  for  want  of  their 
share  ;  if  bad,  the  provinces  within  their  reach  will  be  partially 
oppressed.  It  was  the  intention  of  our  federal  system  to  prevent 
the  partialities  and  inequalities  of  concentrated  power,  whether 
they  proceed  from  its  laziness,  or  avarice,  or  ambition,  or  igno- 
rance, or  capriciousness,  or  want  of  sympathy. 

But  "  the  authority  of  Washington,  Madison,  and  Hamilton, 
"  proves  that  the  danger  to  the  union  proceeds  from  the  centri- 
"  fugal  tendencies  of  the  states."  The  weight  of  authority  de- 
pends upon  known,  and  not  upon  unknown  opinions ;  yet  One 
of  the  People  claims  for  himself  the  respect  due  to  these  eminent 
men,  without  even  endeavouring  to  ascertain  their  opinions. 
He  takes  it  for  granted  that  our  federal  system,  in  their  judg- 
27 


210  Taylor's  views. 

ment,  was  exclusively  endangered  by  a  centrifugal,  and  perfectly 
safe  against  a  centripetal  tendency.  The  latter,  however,  was 
the  object  of  apprehension  which  obstructed  the  ratification  of 
the  constitution,  and  to  remove  this  apprehension  was  the  end  of 
two  of  these  gentlemen  in  writing  the  Federalist.  Did  the  three 
unanimously  subscribe  to  the  doctrines  advanced  by  One  of  the 
People ;  or  did  two  of  them  express  positive  opinions  as  to  the 
sufficiency  of  the  constitution  to  prevent  the  apprehended  centri- 
petal tendency  ?  Constitutional  restrictions,  and  a  division  of 
spheres,  were  as  necessary  to  prevent  the  state  planets  from  being 
absorbed  by  a  vortex,  as  to  prevent  them  from  wandering  into 
some  other  system.  The  delegated  powers  were  therefore  given 
to  one  sphere,  to  prevent  a  centrifugal,  and  the  reserved  powers 
retained  for  the  other,  to  prevent  a  centripetal  tendency.  Let 
us  look  again  at  a  few  of  the  doctrines  of  One  of  the  People,  in 
defence  of  which  he  claims  the  authority  of  these  three  eminent 
men. 

"  State  rulers  are  discordant,  clamorous,  and  lawless.  The 
"  states  have  no  original  rights.  Their  attempts  to  control  offi- 
w  cers  of  the  general  government,  are  unbecoming  and  arrogant 
"  Ambition  is  only  desirous  of  performing  admirable  actions. 
"  Congress  are  under  no  restrictions  in  drawing  men  and  money 
"  from  the  people,  except  those  imposed  by  the  laws  of  nature. 
"  Ambition  will  not  descend  to  petty  larcenies  for  subverting 
"  liberty.  Power  has  no  allurements.  Governments  love  ease. 
"  The  supremacy  of  Great-Britain  did  not  usurp  the  domestick 
"  regulation  of  her  colonies.  Despotick  monarchs  do  not  send 
"  the  rays  of  power  into  distant  provinces,  which  therefore  ma- 
"  nage  their  internal  concerns  in  their  own  way."  When  did 
these  three  gentlemen  express  such  opinions  as  these  ? 

It  is  difficult,  but  not  impossible,  to  ascertain  the  political 
opinions  of  Washington.  He  fought  faithfully  and  gloriously 
for  many  years,  under  the  authority  of  the  states,  against  a  na- 
tional supremacy  claiming  local  powers.  He  suppressed  a  plot 
for  establishing  a  national  government.  He  recognised  state 
sovereignties  and  the  division  of  powers  between  the  state  and 
federal  governments,  in  his  letter  as  president  of  the  convention. 
And  he  introduced  the  important  custom  of  confining  the  presi- 


taylor's  views.  211 

dency  to  two  terms,  as  a  precaution  against  a  centripetal  ten- 
dency. As  he  was  not  a  political  writer,  we  can  only  deduce 
his  opinions  from  his  actions. 

Mr.  Hamilton  approved  of  a  national  government  like  the 
English  form,  and  Mr.  Madison  of  a  national  government,  ex- 
eluding  the  monarchical  and  aristocratical  features  preferred  by 
Mr.  Hamilton.  To  which  of  these  opinions  does  One  of  the 
People  mean  to  subscribe  ?  Is  he  a  monarchical,  a  consolidat- 
ing, or  a  federal  republican  ?  Mr.  Hamilton,  in  the  convention, 
was  the  first,  Mr.  Madison,  the  second  ;  both  their  plans  failed ; 
and  the  constitution,  to  personify  it,  is  the  third.  Three  differ- 
ent principles  cannot  be  one  principle.  A  federal  republican 
cannot  approve  of  the  destruction  of  federal  and  state  rights,  by 
either  of  the  forms  of  national  government  rejected  in  the  con- 
vention. Mr.  Madison  and  Mr.  Hamilton  differed  in  the  con- 
struction of  the  constitution,  as  to  an  important  point.  Which 
authority  is  recommended  ?  Rut  they  concurred  in  a  multitude 
of  constructions,  at  violent  enmity  with  the  string  of  doctrines 
just  quoted.  Let  us  again  look  at  their  opinions,  for  the  sake  of 
comparison. 

"  The  state  and  federal  governments  are  mutual  checks  upon 
"  each  other.     Each   is  independent  of  the  other.     The  state 
"  governments  will  afford  complete  security  against  invasions  of 
"  liberty  by  the  federal    government.     These  cannot  so  likely 
"  escape  the  penetration  of  select  bodies  of  men  as  of  the  people 
"  at  large.     The  state  legislatures  will  have  better  means  of  in- 
"  formation,  and  can  adopt  a  regular  plan  of  opposition.     They 
"  can  unite  with  their  common   forces  for  their  own  defence, 
"  with  all  the  celerity,  regularity,  and  system,  of  independent 
"  nations.     The  state  governments,  by  their  original  constitu- 
"  tions,  are  invested  with  complete  sovereignty.     They  possess 
"  an  independent  and  uncontrollable  authority,  and  all  the  rights 
"  of  sovereignty,  not  exclusively  delegated  to  the  United  States. 
w  From  the  division  of  sovereign  power,  all  the  rights  of  which 
"  the  states  are  not  explicitly  divested,  remain  with  them  in  full 
"  vigour,  according  to   the  whole  tenour  of  the  constitution. 
"  The  constitution  was  a  federal  and  not  a  national  act.     The 
"  states  retain  under  it  a  very  considerable  portion  of  active 


%\%  Taylor's  views. 

"  sovereignty.  The  state  and  federal  governments  will  control 
"  each  other.  The  federal  legislature  will  not  only  be  restrained 
"  by  its  dependence  on  the  people,  but  will  moreover  be  watch- 
"  ed  and  controlled  by  the  several  collateral  legislatures."  It 
would  be  necessary  to  copy  the  greater  part  of  the  Federalist,  to 
collect  all  its  constructions  adverse  to  the  doctrines  of  One  of 
the  People.  Do  these  few  prove  that,  in  the  opinion  of  its  au- 
thors, the  states  have  no  political,  original,  or  inherent  rights,  or 
justify  the  centripetal  doctrines  of  One  of  the  People?  Against 
an  apprehension  that  such  attempts  might  be  made,  these,  and 
many  other  arguments  were  urged  in  the  Federalist.  Authori- 
ties cannot  justify  opinions  which  they  contradict.  One  of  the 
People  should  tell  us  whether  he  quotes  the  authority  of  these 
gentlemen  in  the  convention  or  in  the  Federalist ;  their  opinions 
about  government  in  general,  or  as  to  the  nature  and  principles 
of  that  established  by  the  constitution.  Different  opinions,  in 
reference  to  different  objects,  cannot  be  fairly  blended  so  as  to 
make  up  one  authority.  If  he  says  he  refers  to  the  opinions  of 
these  gentlemen  in  the  convention,  he  must  admit  that  he  is 
aiming  at  a  supreme  national  government ;  and  he  must  also  say 
whether  he  prefers,  with  one,  a  monarchical,  or  with  the  other, 
a  republican  form,  for  this  national  government.  If  he  refers  to 
their  authority  in  the  Federalist,  he  must  admit  that  it  establishes 
constructions  of  the  constitution  utterly  inconsistent  with  their 
range  of  opinion  expressed  as  to  government  in  general,  whilst 
they  were  unrestricted  by  the  federal  principles  adopted. 

Why  was  the  authority  of  Mr.  Jefferson  over-looked  ?  Its 
exclusion  is  an  acknowledgment,  that  his  difference  of  opinion 
with  two  of  the  gentlemen  referred  to,  was  real,  and  not  fabu- 
lous. In  accounting  for  this  omission,  several  weighty  consider- 
ations present  themselves.  The  political  principles  of  Mr.  Jef- 
ferson and  Mr.  Hamilton,  being  thoroughly  opposed  to  each 
other,  these  gentlemen  could  not  be  united  as  one  authority. 
An  honest  contrariety  of  opinion  between  a  federal  and  a  na-  • 
tional  government,  and  not  an  unprincipled  difference,  originally 
created  the  great  parties  in  the  United  States ;  and  the  several 
attempts  to  assign  their  origin  to  other  causes,  were  only  expe- 
dients to  conceal  from  the  people  the  true  principles  by  which 


Taylor's  views.  :<J13 

they  were  actuated.  This  contrariety  in  principles,  arranged 
Mr.  Jefferson  and  Mr.  Hamilton  as  the  leaders  of  opposite  par- 
ties, and  either  would  have  been  instantly  displaced,  if  he  had 
changed  his  principles.  The  fact  was  so  notorious,  that  foreign 
governments  and  foreign  politicians  took  sides  with  one  or  the 
other,  as  they  were  influenced  by  republican  or  monarchical 
principles.  This  could  not  have  happened,  had  our  parties  been 
created  by  the  frivolous  views  to  which  they  have  been  assign- 
ed, in  order  to  shun  the  republican  prepossessions  of  the  people, 
indicated  by  the  popularity  of  Mr.  Jefferson,  and  get  past  them 
towards  the  monarchical  opinions  entertained  by  Mr.  Hamilton. 
Thus  the  only  reason  which  could  have  excluded  Mr.  Jefferson, 
and  selected  Mr.  Hamilton,  as  an  authority,  becomes  visible. 
The  different  opinions  of  these  gentlemen  have  still  their  disci- 
ples, and  some  of  us  would  refer  to  Mr.  Jefferson  as  an  authority, 
for  the  same  reason  that  One  of  the  People  refers  to  Mr.  Hamil- 
ton. The  warfare  is  still  between  republican  and  consolidating 
principles,  and  therefore  a  champion  of  one  policy  could  not  be 
made  the  champion  of  the  other.  Had  Mr.  Jefferson  avowed 
the  same  principles  avowed  by  Mr.  Hamilton  in  the  convention, 
he  would  have  been  praised  and  quoted  by  the  same  principles 
which  praise  and  quote  Mr.  Hamilton.  The  political  principles 
of  these  gentlemen,  and  not  their  private  characters,  provoked 
the  slanders,  and  excited  the  applauses,  which  they  have  suffered 
or  received. 

Why  was  the  venerable  John  Adams  not  referred  to  as  an  au- 
thority ?  In  all  those  qualifications  which  merit  respect,  he  was 
at  least  equal  to  Mr.  Hamilton,  and  in  learning,  his  superior. 
Was  it  because  he  had  openly  and  honourably  avowed  a  predi- 
lection, secretly  avowed  by  Mr.  Hamilton  in  the  convention, 
and  lest  the  publick  opinion  might  not  yet  be  ripe  for  adopting 
his  candour  by  claiming  the  benefit  of  his  authority  ?  He  left 
his  principles  to  seek  for  advocates  by  their  strength,  and  never 
availed  himself  of  meretricious  partisans,  purchased  by  funding, 
banking,  and  offices ;  and  working  with  construction,  invective, 
and  declamation,  instead  of  a  candid  integrity.  Was  his  au- 
thority rejected,  because  his  defence  of  the  state  constitutions  ad- 
mitted and   asserted  the  sovereignties  of  the  states  ?  or  was  it 


814  TAYLOR'S  VIEWS. 

rejected  because  he  was  too  patriotick  to  use  the  indirect  mode 
of  advancing  his  principles  by  uniting  with  European  monarchs, 
and  involving  his  country  in  a  war  with  France  ?  A  pamphlet 
written  by  Mr.  Hamilton,  suggested  by  this  squeamishness  in 
Mr.  Adams,  (as  it  was  considered,)  is  said,  by  its  effects  in  South- 
Carolina,  to  have  prevented  Mr.  Adams's  re-election  to  the  pre- 
sidency. In  point  of  patriotism,  this  step  suggests  a  comparison 
between  Mr.  Adams  and  Mr.  Hamilton  ;  in  point  of  political 
wisdom,  between  Mr.  Hamilton  and  Mr.  Jefferson.  Mr.  Adams 
would  not  involve  his  country  in  a  war,  as  a  mode  of  advancing 
his  political  opinions ;  and  Mr.  Jefferson  never  committed  the 
indiscretion  of  defeating  his  great  end  of  fixing  republican  prin- 
ciples in  the  publick  mind,  by  provoking  divisions  upon  points 
of  minor  importance.  Mr.  Hamilton  undermined  his  own  party, 
from  a  thorough-going  zeal  for  his  monarchical  dogmas,  which 
disregarded  the  means  for  advancing  them.  Was  it  this  dis- 
tinction between  the  modes  of  attaining  the  same  end,  which 
awakened  a  congeniality  with  Mr.  Hamilton,  and  an  aversion  to 
Mr.  Adams?  To  whichever  of  these  causes,  the  exclusion  of 
one,  and  the  adoption  of  the  other,  as  an  authority,  are  attributed, 
the  true  principles  by  which  One  of  the  People  is  actuated,  are 
displayed. 

A  deep  conviction  of  inferiority  to  each  of  the  eminent  men 
quoted,  excludes  the  idea  of  a  competition  with  either  for  publick 
confidence,  and  only  admits  a  hope  that  the  humiliating  acknow- 
ledgment may  not  weaken  the  principles  in  which  those  great 
characters  concurred.  If  their  concurrence  in  asserting  state 
sovereignty  and  independence,  will  not  outweigh  a  discrepance 
between  Mr.  Madison  and  Mr.  Hamilton,  it  will  surely  suffice  to 
restore  liberty  to  reason ;  and  the  authority  of  Mr.  Jefferson 
thrown  into  the  scale,  ought  at  least  to  produce  a  counterpoise  in 
this  mode  of  argument.  It  would  be  well  if  another  false  weight 
could  be  as  easily  balanced.  By  not  having  thoroughly  dis- 
charged the  meconium  with  which  we  were  born,  it  generated 
an  English  fever,  which  was  nearly  fatal  in  the  revolutionary 
struggle.  It  produced  a  plot  at  its  termination.  It  preyed  in- 
wardly on  some  political  vitals,  after  the  plot  was  suppressed. 
It  disclosed  its  malignity  to  republican  principles  in  the  conven- 


TAYLOR'S  VIEWS.  215 

tion.  And  now,  weary  of  our  refrigerating  federal  system,  it 
breaks  out  in  the  guise  of  a  national  government,  invested  with  a 
supreme  concentrated  authority.  The  patients  afflicted  with  this 
disease  have  all  along  rejected  the  prescriptions  of  Mr.  Jefferson. 

The  next  example  adduced  to  prove  that  the  rights  of  the 
states  are  subordinate  to  a  national  supremacy,  is  that  of  the 
Hartford  convention. 

P.  12.  "  Who  that  feels  any  interest  in  the  glory  of  his 
"  country,  does  not  wish  the  story  of  the  Hartford  convention 
"  blotted  forever  from  her  annals?  Who  that  regards  her  per- 
"  manent  happiness,  would  not  deprecate  the  recurrence  of  such 
"  another  infamous  association,  as  the  greatest  calamity  that  could 
"  befal  her  ?  And  do  we  not  see,  almost  passing  before  us,  in 
"  this  tranquil  period  of  peace,  an  example  of  state  insubordina- 
"  tion,  less  glaring,  but  more  alarming,  than  that  to  which  I 
"  have  just  alluded  ?"  It  was  impossible  to  select  a  happier  ex- 
ample for  displaying  the  principles  of  One  of  the  People,  than 
this  of  the  Hartford  convention  ;  a  body  of  men  having  "  no  in- 
*'  herent  original  political  rights/'  as  he  asserts  to  be  the  case 
with  the  state  governments.  Yet  it  was  not  strong  enough  to 
furnish  a  comparison  quite  satisfactory.  That  was  only  an  infa- 
mous association  ;  but  state  insubordination  is  even  more  alarm- 
ing, and  therefore  deserves  a  harsher  epithet.  Let  us  suppose 
that  the  Hartford  convention  had  resolved  "  that  state  rulers  are 
"  discordant,  clamorous,  and  lawless ;  that  the  states  had  no  ori- 
K  ginal  rights  ;  that  the  state  governments  had  no  political  rights, 
t(  except  the  right  of  obedience ;  that  their  attempts  to  control 
"  officers  of  the  general  government  are  unbecoming  and  arro- 
"  gant ;  that  they  were  worse  than  infamous ;  that  they  would 
**  be  aggravated  if  made  in  time  of  peace,  and  more  alarming 
u  than  such  attempts  made  by  the  Hartford  convention  in  time 
<*  of  war ;  that  ambition  is  only  desirous  of  performing  admira- 
"  ble  actions ;  that  Congress  are  under  no  restrictions  in  drawing 
«  men  and  money  from  the  people,  except  those  imposed  by  the 
"  laws  of  nature  ;  that  ambition  will  not  descend  to  petty  lar- 
"  cenies  for  subverting  liberty  ;  that  power  has  no  allurements  ; 
"  that  the  supremacy  of  Great-Britain  did  not  usurp  the  domes- 
"  tick  regulation  of  her  colonies ;  that  despotick  monarchs  do 


216  taylor's  views. 

**  not  send  the  rays  of  power  into  some  provinces,  which  there- 
"  fore  manage  their  internal  concerns  in  their  own  way ;  and 
"  that  subordination  to  the  federal  government,  instead  of  rights, 
"  was  reserved  by  the  constitution  to  the  state  governments." 
Would  this  convention,  in  asserting  that  such  were  the  true  prin- 
ciples of  the  constitution,  have  acted  with  no  presumption,  and 
drawn  upon  themselves  no  odium  ?  Had  they  thus  anticipated 
One  of  the  People,  it  might  have  furnished  him  either  with  a 
precedent  or  an  admonition.  As  it  is,  a  parallel  between  the 
Hartford  convention  and  his  consolidating  doctrines,  seems  to  be 
infinitely  more  proper,  than  one  between  this  convention  and  the 
state  governments.  Its  apparent  intention  was  to  destroy  a  fede- 
ral government  by  centrifugal  means  ;  his,  to  destroy  it  by  cen- 
tripetal means  ;  and  it  would  require  great  casuistical  skill  to  as- 
sign more  censure  to  the  design  of  the  convention,  than  to  his. 
Either  project  would  have  a  tendency  to  enthrone  the  author's 
king  "  anarchy  to  wave  his  horrid  sceptre  over  the  broken  altars 
"  of  this  happy  union."  The  states  are  the  altars  of  our  federal 
union ;  break  them  down,  and  there  is  no  union.  A  national 
government  would  swallow  up  both  federal  and  state  rights,  and 
the  whole  would  more  probably  disgorge  a  civil  war,  than  either. 
If  the  success  of  the  suspected  design  of  the  Hartford  convention 
to  impair  or  destroy  federal  powers,  would  have  overturned  the 
constitution,  the  avowed  design  to  impair  or  destroy  state  pow- 
ers by  consolidating  constructions,  if  successful,  will  also  over- 
turn it.  The  Hartford  convention  might  be  used  as  a  good  tem- 
porary warming-pan,  but  it  is  too  late,  after  it  is  cold,  to 
frighten  the  state  governments  out  of  their  rights  by  beating 
a  larum  upon  it,  and  by  the  noise  to  make  them  settle  in  the  hive 
of  consolidation. 

The  constitution  does  not  say  that  the  state  governments  are 
subordinate  to  the  federal  government;  and  Mr.  Madison  and 
Mr.  Hamilton  repeatedly  deny  that  they  are  so.  It  does  not 
say  that  these  governments  cannot  preserve  the  reserved  rights 
of  the  people,  intrusted  to  their  care,  without  committing  an 
atrocity  against  a  supremacy  so  mysterious  that  we  know  not 
where  to  find  it,  and  more  alarming  and  reprehensible,  than  the 
design  ascribed  to  the  Hartford  convention.     Most,  if  not  all  the 


taylor's  views.  217 

state  governments  have  asserted  a  controlling  power,  by  attempts 
to  check  the  federal  government,  without  suspecting  themselves 
to  have  been  guilty  of  an  infamous  degree  of  arrogance.  If  the 
distinguishing  feature  in  the  constitution,  preferring  intelligence, 
weight,  dignity,  and  an  orderly  resistance,  to  popular  commo- 
tions, is  lost,  it  will  possess  no  superiority  over  the  British  sys- 
tem of  government.  Like  that,  it  may  be  easily  corrupted  by 
a  coalescence  between  the  sympathies  of  ambition  and  avarice, 
collected  to  one  centre.  Some  governments  theoretically  ac- 
knowledge the  sovereignty  of  the  people,  but  hang  such  of  them 
as  question  the  despotism  of  the  government ;  so  the  consoli- 
dating school  theoretically  acknowledges  the  state  rights  of  the 
people,  but  calls  their  vindication,  by  the  only  departments  able 
to  preserve  them,  an  infamous  and  alarming  crime.  A  short  pa- 
rody of  the  language  applied  to  the  states  through  the  medium 
of  the  Hartford  convention,  may  both  qualify  the  censure,  and 
illustrate  the  utility  of  state  influence.  Who  that  feels  any  in- 
terest in  the  liberty  and  glory  of  his  country,  does  not  wish  the 
sedition  law  blotted  from  her  annals  ?  and  who  that  regards  her 
permanent  happiness,  would  not  deprecate  the  recurrence  of  such 
another  act  of  legislation,  (1  reject  the  word  infamous,)  as  a  great 
calamity  ?  Would  it  be  more  absurd  to  infer,  from  the  passage 
of  this  law,  that  federal  powers  ought  to  be  abolished,  than  to 
infer  from  the  story  of  the  Hartford  convention,  that  state  powers 
ought  to  be  abolished  ? 

Attempts  to  bring  a'  government  into  contempt,  by  writing  or 
speaking,  have  been  punishable  by  all  sovereignties.  Such  laws 
exist  in  England,  and  were  rigorously  executed  during  the  ad- 
ministration of  the  last  Pitt.  Our  federal  sedition  law  punished 
Lyon  for  circulating,  and  Callender  for  writing,  with  that  inten- 
tion. A  man  in  New-Jersey  was  punished  for  speaking  irreve- 
rently of  the  president ;  and  had  this  law  then  existed,  the  mem- 
bers of  the  Hartford  convention  might  have  been  arraigned  under 
it.  If  the  sovereignty  of  South-Carolina  has  a  law  for  punishing 
attempts  by  writing  to  render  its  government  contemptible,  the 
assertions  "  that  it  is  ignorant,  arrogant,  more  infamous,  and  as 
"  lawless,  as  the  Hartford  convention,"  can  hardly  avoid  its 
lash. 

28 


218  TAYLOR'S  VIEWS. 

I  object  1o  the  invective  mode  of  reasoning,  though  not  pu- 
nishable judicially,  as  neither  calculated  to  disclose  truth,  nor  to 
ascertain  principles.  It  is  only  a  repetition  of  the  old  fraud  of 
conjuring  up  spectres  and  manufacturing  miracles,  to  conceal 
imposture.  The  consolidating  school  reduces  its  arguments  to  a 
single  syllogism  :  "  The  union  is  our  first  political  blessing ; 
"  the  preservation  of  state  rights  will  destroy  the  union  ;  there- 
u  fore,  state  rights  ought  to  be  destroyed."  If  this  is  reasoning, 
any  addition  to  it  is  superfluous  ;  if  it  is  a  burlesque  upon  the  un- 
derstanding of  the  people,  it  is  something  worse  than  declamatory. 
By  reforming  the  syllogism,  though  nothing  is  proved,  the  ques- 
tion is  left  where  it  was.  The  federal  republicans  say,  "  The 
"  union  is  our  first  political  blessing ;  it  can  only  be  preserved 
"  by  preserving  state  rights  ;  therefore,  these  rights  ought  to  be 
"  preserved."  If  one  side  substitutes  assertion  for  reasoning, 
and  seizes  upon  the  settled  affection  of  the  people  for  the  union, 
to  create  a  relish  for  invective ;  and  the  other  proposes  for  their 
consideration  the  essential  principle  of  dividing  and  balancing 
powers,  as  adopted  by  the  constitution,  for  preserving  both  the 
union  and  the  liberties  of  the  people  ;  which  discloses  most  love 
for  the  union,  or  merits  most  distrust  as  to  its  design  ? 

P.  16.     "  Suppose  a  state  legislature  should  pass  a  law,  for- 
"  bidding  the  execution  of  a  constitutional  law  of  Congress.     In 
"  all  governments  there  should  be  a  supreme  power."     Suppo- 
sitions, like  syllogisms,  may  prove  nothing,  when  they  may  be 
reversed  with  as  much  force  as  they  are  urged.     Suppose  Con- 
gress should  pass  a  law  prohibiting  the  execution  of  a  constitu- 
tional state  law,  or  forbidding  the  execution  of  a  constitutional 
judgment,  state  or  federal.     Or,  suppose  the  federal  court  should 
forbid  the  execution  of  a  constitutional  law  passed  by  Congress. 
All  these  suppositions  only  prove,  that  every  division  and  balance 
of  power  must  be  subject  to  collisions,  and  this  is  no  reason  why 
they  should  be  destroyed,  or  that  they  are  unnecessary  for  sus- 
taining a  free  form  of  government.     If  such  collisions  are  good 
reasons  for  justifying  a  concentrated  power,   then  the  principle 
which  asserts  that  its  division  alone  can  preserve  civil  liberty,  is 
false.     This  supposition  places  the  question  on  its  true  ground, 
namely,  which  is  the  best  principle  for  the  preservation  of  the 


Taylor's  views.  219 

rights  of  the  people  ;  the  concentration  of  power  in  the  federal 
department,  or  its  division  between  the  federal  and  state  depart- 
ments ?  The  latter  principle  is  founded  on  the  supposition,  that 
all  good  governments  must  contain  collateral,  balancing,  and  con- 
trolling departments.  The  constitution,  by  dividing  powers,  and 
declaring  itself  to  be  supreme,  prohibits  either  the  federal  or  state 
governments  from  usurping  that  character ;  and  the  powers  as- 
signed to  each,  to  be  held  under  its  supremacy,  express  a  prohi- 
bition against  an  assumption  of  supremacy  by  either  over  the 
other.  It  establishes  a  mutual  and  collateral  tenure  and  fealty  in 
both,  under  its  own  authority  ;  and  not  a  tenure  or  fealty  of  one, 
under  the  authority  of  its  co-partner.  When  we  hear  the  state 
governments  reprobated  in  contumelious  language,  decried  into 
subordinate  corporations,  the  original  rights  of  the  people  denied, 
and  the  supremacy  of  the  constitution  transferred  to  the  federal 
government,  although  we  may  allow  to  declamation  such  ac- 
complishments as  may  be  consistent  with  a  license  so  excessive, 
it  is  impossible  to  perceive  any  respect  for  those  principles  which 
suggested  the  resistance  to  British  supremacy,  and  dictated  the 
limitation  and  reservation  established  by  the  supremacy  of  the 
eonstitution.  Whether  there  is  courage  or  arrogance  in  under- 
mining the  authority  of  the  people,  exercised  in  the  declaration 
of  independence,  the  establishment  of  state  governments,  and 
spread  upon  the  face  of  the  constitution,  both  by  dividing  pow- 
ers and  declaring  its  supremacy,  may  depend  upon  success  ;  but 
in  that  event  it  will  soon  become  perfectly  plain,  that  the  attempt 
corresponds  more  intimately  with  the  propositions  in  the  con- 
vention to  establish  a  monarchical  or  republican  national  govern- 
ment, including  a  suppression  of  state  rights,  and  with  the  prin- 
ciples of  tories  and  anglo-statesmen,  than  with  those  of  the  sages 
who  effected  our  revolution,  or  of  the  people  who  recognised 
the  sovereignty  of  the  states  in  every  act  by  which  political 
power  has  been  delegated  or  reserved,  and  by  making  these 
sovereignties  the  foundation  of  both  the  federal  and  state  go- 
vernments. 

But  no  constitution,  founded  in  the  principle  of  dividing,  li- 
mitting,  balancing,  and  controlling  power,  could  suffice  to  put  an 
end  to  the  natural  enmity  between  this  principle  and  that  of  con- 


220  Taylor's  views. 

centrating  power,  which  has  appeared  in  all  nations,  under  all 
forms  of  government.  Accordingly  their  eternal  warfare  sub- 
sists here,  as  in  other  countries.  The  whole-blooded  republican 
federalists,  take  one  side,  and  the  whole-blooded  monarchists  and 
consolidators,  the  other.  A  half-breed,  speculating  about  a  go- 
vernment half  federal  and  half  national,  entertained  an  idea, 
that  by  splitting  both  the  hostile  principles,  and  gluing  the  two 
halves  together  by  a  watery  precept,  the  moieties  of  these  natu- 
ral enemies  might  be  changed  into  artificial  friends.  This  pro- 
ject being  too  metaphysical  for  practical  use,  left  the  controversy 
undecided,  and  only  excited  the  efforts  of  each  moiety  to  get 
back  to  its  natural  associate.  The  didactick  party  do  not  per- 
ceive that  a  precept  to  the  federal  government  not  to  invade  the 
reserved  rights  of  the  states,  is  exactly  equivalent  to  the  precept 
solemnly  preached  to  the  states  by  the  first  confederation,  re- 
quiring them  to  supply  the  federal  government  with  money  ; 
and  that  if  one  precept  could  get  no  money,  the  other  would  se- 
cure no  rights.  Therefore,  the  natural  enmity  of  the  contrary 
principles,  has  compelled  these  wavering  individuals  to  vacillate 
between  the  other  two  parties  in  pursuit  of  attainable  ends. 
Those  who  wish  for  the  preservation  of  state  rights,  incline  to- 
wards the  federal  republican  party,  and  those  who  wish  for  a  na- 
tional government,  either  monarchical  or  republican,  incline  to- 
wards the  doctrine  of  a  supremacy  in  the  federal  government 
over  tne  state  rights  of  the  people.  So  far  the  two  substantial 
parties  are  guided  by  opinion.  But  the  struggle  is  never  con- 
ducted upon  this  fair  ground.  That  class  in  society  which  is  ac- 
tuated by  avarice  or  ambition,  universally  becomes  a  zealous  ally 
of  the  concentrating  party,  and  carries  with  it  a  great  accession 
of  talents.  This  disadvantage  was  surmounted  in  Mr.  Jeffer- 
son's election  to  the  presidency,  by  the  rare  occurrence  of  a  ba- 
lance in  mental  rapacity  between  the  advocates  of  hostile  princi- 
ples, and  victory  of  course  followed  the  better  cause ;  and  that 
result  affords  an  anticipation  of  what  will  happen,  whenever  the 
same  struggle  is  carried  on  by  a  fair  appeal  to  the  publick  under- 
standing. The  impossibility  of  preserving  their  state  rights  by 
a  dormant  precept,  coupled  with  a  supremacy  always  awake  and 
active,  will  enable  every  impartial  man  of  good  understanding. 


taylor's  views,  22 J 

to  discriminate  between  the  two  principles  of  dividing  and  con- 
centrating power,  and  to  subscribe  to  one  or  the  other,  since,  as 
in  the  convention,  they  will  produce  conflicting  political  parties. 
There  the  concentrating  system  was  painted  by  a  pencil  dipped 
in  the  exigencies  of  the  revolutionary  war,  with  which  the  states 
were  unjustly  charged  ;  now,  it  is  painted  bjr  a  pencil  dipped  in 
the  hopes  of  avarice  and  ambition.  Both  have  drawn  carica- 
tures, for  the  purpose  of  disguising  truth  ;  one,  by  hiding  a 
beautiful  object  under  hideous  figures  ;  the  other,  by  hiding  a 
hideous  obect  under  beautiful  figures.  One  fair  inference  suar- 
gested  by  the  contest  between  the  federal  and  consolidating  prin- 
ciples, is.  that  the  people  should  require  from  all  candidates  for 
representation,  both  state  and  federal,  an  explicit  avowal  of  their 
preference,  that  suffrages  may  answer  the  purpose  they  are  in- 
tended to  obtain. 

We  are  in  fact  involved  in  the  very  struggle  now  going  on  in 
France.  In  that  country,  as  in  this,  there  are  two  parties ;  one 
labouring  to  sustain,  and  the  other  to  destroy,  the  charter,  retain- 
ing to  the  people  a  portion  of  liberty  by  an  imperfect  division 
of  power ;  one  for  receding  to  the  old  regime,  the  other  for 
keeping  the  ground  gained  by  the  new  ;  one  for  a  mutual  check 
between  political  departments,  the  other  for  re-establishing  the 
supremacy  of  the  king.  So  here,  the  struggle  is  between  the 
mutual  check  of  the  state  and  federal  departments,  and  the  abso- 
lute supremacy  of  the  latter.  The  motives  which  invigorate  the 
combatants  are  not  to  be  distinguished.  They  are  illustrated  by 
the  union  of  the  deputies  from  South-Carolina  in  the  convention, 
with  Massachusetts,  Pennsylvania,  and  Virginia,  in  favour  of  a 
supreme  national  government,  exhibiting  the  curious  spectacle  of 
a  symphony  between  the  pride  of  aristocracy  and  the  pride  of 
population.  The  deputies  of  South-Carolina  were  willing  to  sur- 
render her  moral  equality,  but  this  disposition  flowed  from  the 
high-toned  political  opinions  of  a  predominating  aristocracy,  and 
not  from  a  calculation  of  advancing  her  power  upon  the  basis  of 
her  population.  It  is  still  more  curious,  after  this  aristocracy  has 
been  melting  for  thirty-five  years ;  after  Virginia  has  seen  the 
error  of  sacrificing  the  sound  principle  of  a  division  of  powers 
between  the  federal  and  state  governments,  for  mischievous  spe- 


222  taylor's  views. 

culations  founded  upon  a  fluctuating  population ;  after  Massachu- 
setts has  felt  it ;  when  Pennsylvania  would  advocate  the  repub- 
lican equality  and  independence  of  state  sovereignties  ;  and  when 
the  comparative  population  of  South-Carolina  has  diminished  ; 
that  a  single  individual  of  the  state  should  be  willing  to  over- 
whelm the  right  which  gives  her  importance  as  a  member  of  the 
union,  in  the  ocean  of  a  consolidated  national  government. 

Whatever  may  be  the  merit  of  the  vituperations  against  the 
state  governments,  the  object  for  which  this  pamphlet  has  been 
exhibited,  is  certainly  accomplished.  It  is  used  as  an  evidence 
to  our  rulers,  state  and  federal,  that  a  project  for  introducing  a 
supreme  consolidated  national  government,  is  actively  in  opera- 
tion, and  will  draw  their  attention  to  a  design  so  momentous. 
The  design  is  proclaimed  by  its  principles,  and  impressed  by  its 
examples.  It  is  proved  by  the  reference  to  the  supremacies  of 
Great-Britain,  Persia,  Turkey,  and  Russia,  as  symbolical  ot  the 
supremacy  contended  for.  It  is  proved  by  contending  that  the 
concentrated  power  constructively  claimed,  though  it  will  em- 
brace the  supremacy  which  its  types  possess,  will  not  interfere 
with  state  rights,  because  it  will  either  be  too  ambitious  or  too 
idle  to  do  so  ;  and  it  is  proved  by  the  comparison  between  the 
states  and  the  ten  miles  square,  for  the  sake  of  inferring  that  the 
neglect  of  the  district  by  the  supreme  power  of  Congress  over  it, 
promises  a  neglect  of  the  states  by  a  similar  power,  and  is  a  suffi- 
cient surety,  that  they  may  still  manage  their  local  affairs  in  their 
own  way. 


taylor's  views.  223 


SECTION  XV. 

OTHER  CONSOLIDATING  DOCTRINES. 

The  newspapers  have  also  abounded  with  opinions  in  favour 
of  a  supreme  national  government,  and  though  it  is  probable 
that  several  ingenious  writers  will  be  surprised  to  find  themselves 
identified  with  the  doctrines  of  One  of  the  People,  they  must 
discern,  upon  reflection,  that  their  separate  constructions  6f  parti- 
cular words  and  phrases  extracted  from  the  constitution,  unchas- 
tened  by  the  tenour  and  intention  of  the  whole  instrument,  inevi- 
tably lead  to  the  same  conclusion.  I  shall  notice  a  few,  to  prove 
further  that  a  consolidating  project  exists,  and  to  illustrate  the 
incorrectness  of  this  mode  of  construction.  It  has  been  said 
that  the  single  word  constitution  contains  innate  powers,  and 
implies  sovereignty  or  supremacy  in  the  federal  government. 
Johnson  expounds  confederacy  by  the  word  union,  and  the  con- 
stitution expounds  itself  by  the  same  word.  It  is  an  instrument 
for  uniting  any  nine  of  specified  states,  and  not  for  constituting 
a  government  for  a  consolidated  nation.  Its  provisions  are  so 
many  recognitions  of  its  federal  character.  If  the  word  implies 
sovereignty  or  supremacy,  it  also  conveys  these  attributes  to  the 
government  of  each  state,  and  destroys  the  sovereignty  of  the 
people.  Both  the  state  and  federal  governments  having  been 
created  by  instruments  thus  denominated,  whatever  powers  the 
word  can  convey,  would  be  received  by  both,  and  the  equality 
of  the  inferences  would  of  course  have  the  effect  of  a  counter- 
poise between  them.  If  it  conveys  an  implied  power  sufficient 
to  release  the  federal  government  from  restrictions,  the  same 
implied  power  must  release  the  state  governments  from  them. 
Congress  is  compellable  by  state  legislatures  to  call  a  convention, 
and  every  alteration  of  the  constitution  must  be  ratified  by  three- 
fourths  of  the  states.  If  the  word  constitution  had  implied  a 
national  government,  not  a  convention  of  states,  but  a  national 


224  taylor's  views. 

convention  would  have  been  provided  for;  and  amendments 
would  have  been  final,  and  not  liable  to  be  rejected  by  a  mino- 
rity of  states.  The  force  annexed  to  the  word  constitution,  is 
borrowed  from  the  word  national,  which  is  not  in  the  instru- 
ment ;  but  the  difference  between  a  national  constitution,  to  be 
made  and  altered  by  a  nation,  and  a  federal  constitution,  made 
by  a  convention  of  states,  ratified  by  conventions  of  states,  and 
only  capable  of  being  altered  by  three-fourths  of  the  states, 
proves  that  this  supposed  invisibility  is  like  those  which  induced 
Charles  the  First,  rather  to  part  with  his  head,  than  with  his  po- 
litical prepossessions. 

The  ideas  that  we  have  not  an  aggregate  nation,  and  yet  that 
we  have  a  national  government,  reverse  political  order,  and  sub- 
vert national  authority.  An  aggregate  nation  did  not  make  a 
constitution,  but  the  word  constitution  is  supposed  to  have  made 
an  aggregate  nation  ;  states  enter  into  a  federal  compact,  and  a  fe- 
deral compact  creates  a  national  government.  The  house  of  repre- 
sentatives derives  no  power  from  a  consolidated  nation,  if  the 
word  constitution  did  not  create  one,  and  the  whole  process  for 
effecting  and  sustaining  the  union  of  states,  plainly  denies  the 
existence  of  an  American  nation.  In  fact,  this  house,  though 
elected  by  the  people  of  each  state,  only  receives  limited  pow- 
ers from  the  constitution  itself.  The  modes  of  designating  the 
individuals  by  whom  federal  powers  were  to  be  exercised,  ex- 
tend both  to  the  state  and  federal  governments.  If  the  mode  of 
designating  state  individuals  and  state  governments  to  exercise 
some  federal  powers,  was  not  intended  to  create  a  national  go- 
vernment, a  mode  of  designating  the  members  of  the  house  of 
representatives  to  exercise  other  federal  powers,  could  not  have 
been  intended  to  produce  a  consequence  so  unexpected.  It 
would  be  as  correct  to  infer  a  national  government  from  the 
fact,  that  the  constitution  has  given  federal  powers  to  the  state 
governments,  as  from  the  fact,  that  it  has  given  federal  powers 
to  Congress.  It  is  said  to  have  created  a  nation,  by  delegating  a 
limited  power  over  individuals.  If  delegated  powers,  restricted 
to  specified  objects,  can  make  a  nation,  the  articles  of  war  for 
giving  very  extensive  powers  over  individuals,  would  consoli- 
date an  army  into  a  nation,  and  it  has  often  made  itself  formida- 


Taylor's  views.  225 

ble  by  usurping  supreme  power.  If  we  relinquish  the  rigid 
federal  character  of  the  constitution,  and  admit  that  the  govern- 
ment may  be  made  national,  either  by  the  word  constitution,  by 
the  mode  of  appointing  its  officers,  or  by  the  limited  powers 
with  which  these  officers  and  the  state  governments  are  intrusted 
for  its  execution,  arguments  may  be  drawn  from  the  same 
sources,  to  prove  that  our  government  is  of  any  kind,  which  a 
political  party  may  think  necessary  for  advancing  its  designs,  or 
gratifying  its  prepossessions.  The  doctrine,  that  limited  can 
create  unlimited  powers,  and  even  make  a  nation,  is  as  able  to 
establish  a  monarchy,  as  a  national  government  of  any  other 
complexion.  All  our  elections  are  in  different  degrees  federal, 
as  state  governments  are  to  exercise  sundry  important  federal 
functions,  and  the  representative  character  of  these  state  federal 
functionaries,  would  be  as  good  an  argument  for  converting  the 
federal  into  a  national  government,  as  the  representative  charac- 
ter of  any  others. 

Many  expressions  in  the  constitution  prove  that  its  name  did 
not  imply  a  national  government,  nor  convey  any  power.  Un- 
der such  a  construction,  its  whole  tenour  would  be  absurd,  and 
all  its  limitations  useless.  "  The  president  shall,  from  time  to 
"  time,  give  to  Congress  information  as  to  the  state  of  the 
11  union."  Why  not  as  to  the  state  of  the  nation  ?  Because 
there  was  no  nation,  the  state  of  which  was  subjected  to  the  le- 
gislative power  of  Congress.  Thirteen  political  individuals,  be- 
ing sensible  that  a  mutual  interest  invited  them  to  unite  for  spe- 
cial purposes,  long  acted  in  concord  without  any  positive  com- 
pact ;  and  discerning  the  mutual  benefits  resulting  from  this  tacit 
alliance,  at  length  entered  into  a  written  one.  This,  as  a  first 
experiment,  having  proved  defective,  was  exchanged  for  another 
more  perfect.  To  effect  its  object,  the  president,  as  the  officer 
best  informed  of  foreign  relations,  is  required  to  communicate 
his  knowledge  to  Congress,  concerning  the  interest  delegated  to 
their  care ;  and  not  concerning  the  interests  of  a  consolidated 
nation,  because  no  such  community  existed.  The  individual 
states  are  named,  both  in  the  title  and  body  of  the  constitution, 
as  parties  to  the  union,  showing  that  the  word  constitution  was 
used  to  describe  a  union  of  states,  and  not  a  union  of  individual 

29 


226  taylor's  views. 

men ;  and  this  intention  is  demonstrated  by  the  circumstance, 
that  those  states  only  which  should  accede  to  the  compact  were 
to  be  bound  by  it,  because  in  a  constitution  formed  by  individual 
men  composing  one  nation,  a  minority  cannot  reject  it,  and  re- 
main disunited  from  the  majority. 

Many  different  words  have  been  used  to  express  a  compact, 
between,  independent  states,  such  as  Helvetic  body,  diet,  and 
holy  alliance.  The  Swiss  association  was  entered  into  by 
"  united  cantons,"  and  the  Dutch  by  "  united  provinces." 
These  precedents  of  federal  compacts  between  sovereign  states, 
use  the  word  united,  in  the  sense  in  which  it  is  used  by  the  con- 
stitution ;  and  the  words  cantons  and  provinces  less  conclusively 
convey  the  idea  of  independent  sovereignties  able  to  form  a 
league,  than  the  word  states.  Yet  it  was  never  contended  that 
these  cantons  or  provinces  were  subordinate  to  a  tacit  supremacy 
in  their  federal  governments,  emanating  from  the  mode  in  which 
their  deputies  were  appointed,  or  from  the  limited  powers  over 
individuals,  with  which  they  were  invested.  On  the  contrary, 
sundry  rights  were  reserved  by  tbe  Swiss  cantons  and  Dutch 
provinces,  beyond  the  control  of  their  federal  governments  j 
such  as  different  religions,  a  right  to  form  partial  leagues  with 
each  other,  and  the  powers  of  local  government,  in  the  case  of 
the  cantons ;  and  a  power  in  one  province  to  defeat  a  treaty,  in 
the  case  of  the  Dutch.  Under  such  trammels  these  federal  com- 
pacts flourished  more  than  the  neighbouring  consolidated  govern- 
ments, and  therefore  it  is  probable  that  our  more  perfect  federal 
compact  will  experience  still  greater  prosperity,  from  a  better 
distribution  of  local  and  federal  powers,  if  the  division  is  not 
defeated  by  a  concentrating  supremacy. 

The  guarantee  of  a  republican  form  of  government  by  all  the 
states  to  each  state,  has  also  been  supposed  to  confer  some  indis- 
tinct and  unlimited  national  supremacy  upon  the  federal  govern- 
ment; but  this  guarantee  itself  affords  arguments  subversive  of 
the  inference.  It  expresses  a  particular  duty,  and  cannot  there- 
fore convey  powers,  especially  such  as  would  defeat  the  end  it 
expresses.  It  was  intended  to  secure  the  independence  of  each 
state,  and  not  to  subject  each  to  a  majority  of  all.  Like  a  mutual 
territorial  guarantee  between  several  kingdoms,  it  imposes  an  ob- 


taylor's  views.  227 

ligation,  but  does  not  invest  the  parties  to  the  guarantee  with  a 
power  of  diminishing  the  territory,  or  other  rights  of  one  king- 
dom. The  word  republican  includes  a  right  in  the  people  of 
each  state  to  form  their  own  government ;  and  reserves  what- 
ever other  rights  may  be  necessary  to  the  exercise  of  this  cardi- 
nal right.  The  right  of  the  people  in  each  state  to  create,  and 
to  influence  their  government,  is  the  essential  principle  of  a  re- 
publican form  of  government,  and  therefore  the  guarantee  could 
not  have  been  intended  as  a  means  for  destroying  the  essence  of 
a  republican  form  of  government,  by  subjecting  the  people  of 
every  state  to  the  arbitrary  will  of  a  federal  majority,  or  to  a 
majority  of  the  supreme  court.  The  word  republican  includes 
both  the  rights  of  the  states  and  those  of  the  people.  The  states 
united  to  preserve  their  republican  equality  among  themselves, 
and  also  the  individual  republican  rights  of  the  people.  Can  it 
be  a  question  what  these  are,  when  it  is  considered  that  the  peo- 
ple of  each  state  created  a  government,  that  conventions  of  each 
state  ratified  the  constitution  framed  by  a  convention  of  states, 
and  that  this  constitution  can  only  be  amended  by  states  ?  These 
acts  define  the  meaning  of  the  word  republican,  in  respect  both 
to  the  people  and  the  states  ;  but  all  these  definitions  would  be 
defeated,  if  the  guarantee  can  be  made  to  invest  the  federal  go- 
vernment or  the  federal  court  with  a  supremacy  over  these  state 
and  popular  rights,  necessary  to  create  and  maintain  a  republican 
form  of  government.  Self  government  is  its  end,  and  this  can 
only  be  effected  by  a  complete  capacity  in  the  people,  through 
the  instrumentality  of  election,  both  to  form  and  to  influence  a 
government ;  but  a  supremacy  over  this  capacity,  destroys  that, 
without  which  the  species  of  republican  government  intended  by 
the  constitution,  cannot  exist.  How  can  the  states,  or  the  peo- 
ple of  the  states,  be  said  to  possess  the  right  of  self-government, 
if  either  the  forms  of  state  governments  or  the  reserved  local 
powers,  are  subjected  to  a  supremacy  constituting  no  portion  of 
the  people  of  the  states,  nor  exposed  to  their  control  ?  When 
the  right  of  self-government  is  superseded,  no  republican  rights 
will  remain,  because  all  proceed  from  it,  and  the  guarantee 
would  have  no  republican  form  of  government  to  secure. 


228  taylor's  views. 

The  terms  of  the  guarantee  in  other  views  demolish  the  doc- 
trines of  a  union  between  individuals  constituting  an  American 
nation,  and  of  recondite  powers  in  the  word  constitution.  "  The 
"  United  States  shall  guarantee  to  every  state  in  this  union.'' 
Thus  it  is  positively  asserted,  that  our  union  is  a  union  of  states, 
and  not  of  individuals,  and  that  it  is  a  guarantee  by  states  to 
states,  and  not  of  an  American  nation  to  states.  The  sovereignty 
of  states  is  necessary,  both  to  undertake  and  to  require  the  fulfil- 
ment of  the  guarantee.  Corporations  could  do  neither.  Had 
the  attempt  in  the  convention  to  establish  a  national  government 
succeeded,  the  recognition  contained  in  the  mutual  guarantee, 
that  the  union  was  a  union  of  independent  states,  could  not  have 
been  consistently  introduced  into  the  constitution. 

This  guarantee  ought  to  be  considered  in  another  very  import- 
ant light.  Is  the  supreme  court  of  the  United  States  invested 
with  a  power  of  supervising  and  enforcing  it  ?  The  question 
must  be  answered  affirmatively,  if  this  court  can  abridge  or  mea- 
sure the  rights  of  the  states.  A  republican  form  of  state  govern- 
ment can  only  be  constituted  by  rights.  Are  these  rights  gua- 
ranteed to  the  states  by  each  other,  or  by  the  federal  court? 
Had  Mr.  Madison  and  Mr.  Hamilton  adverted  to  this  guaran- 
tee, when  they  were  discussing  the  question,  whether  the  court 
or  Congress  possessed  the  supremacy  contended  for,  over  the 
state  governments,  it  would  have  furnished  them  with  some 
lights  towards  its  decision.  As  it  is  a  guarantee  by  states  to 
states,  Mr.  Madison  must  have  proved  that  the  court,  and  Mr. 
Hamilton  that  Congress,  was  the  United  States,  to  have  invested 
either  with  a  power  of  abridging,  (if  a  guarantee  possesses  this 
power,)  these  republican  rights.  It  seems  to  be  a  plain  matter 
of  fact,  whether  the  court,  or  Congress,  or  the  states  themselves, 
are  considered  by  the  constitution  as  the  guardian  of  state  rights. 
It  contains  two  positive  stipulations  for  the  preservation  of  state 
rights,  or  a  republican  form  of  government ;  their  reservation, 
and  a  guarantee  of  this  reservation.  Neither  Congress  nor  the 
federal  judiciary  is  mentioned  in  either.  Had  the  powers  of 
either  department  embraced  a  right  to  regulate  the  division  of 
power  between  the  federal  and  state  governments,  this  could  not 
have  happened.     To  counteract  the  ambition  of  usurpation,  and 


TAYLOlt'S  VIEWS.  229 

the  ingenuity  of  construction,  the  positive  division  of  power  is 
protected  by  the  solemn  compact  of  a  mutual  guarantee  between 
the  states  themselves.     This  compact  extends  to  all  the  rights, 
only  to  be  secured  by  a  republican  form  of  government,  and  in- 
cludes constructive  alterations  of  the  constitution,  by  which  these 
rights  may  be  abridged,  without  the  concurrence  of  the  parties 
to  the  guarantee.     The  federal  judiciary  does  not  contract  with 
each  state  to  preserve  its  republican  form  of  government ;  and  if 
it  obtains  a  power  to  regulate  those  rights  by  which  this  form  is 
constituted,  it  may  destroy  the  republican  forms  of  state  govern- 
ments, without   violating  an  engagement.     This  consideration 
discloses  the  wide  difference  between   the  guarantee  expressed, 
and  the    constructive  guarantee  usurped.     The   first  does  not 
comprise  a  power   of  taking  from  the  states  their  republican 
rights ;  the  other  does.     The  federal  court,  by  seizing  upon  the 
guarantee,  and  transforming  it  from  a  duty  to  preserve  the  repub- 
lican rights  of  the  states,  into  a  power  of  abridging  them,  has 
claimed  a  supremacy  over  this  compact,  without  being  even  a 
party  to  it.     The  supremacy  claimed  for  Congress,  is  also  ex- 
tracted from  the  guarantee  usurped  by  the  court,  by  confounding 
the  words  United  States  and  Congress,  as  of  the  same  import. 
But  the  constitution  plainly  distinguishes  between  them.     The 
United  States,  and  not  Congress,  are  invested  with  the  powers  of 
appointing  the  members  of  the  three  great  departments  of  the 
federal  government,  and  of  amending  the  constitution.     Speci- 
fied powers  are  given  to  each  federal  department,  repeatedly 
distinguishing  between  them   all  and    the    United  States,   the 
donors.     The  members  of  Congress  are  to  be  paid  out  of  a  trea- 
sury of  the  United  States.     Had  this  treasury  been  a  property 
and  not  a  trust  in  Congress,  there  would  have  been  no  occasion 
for  adding  this  item  to  the  other  demands,  to  which  the  property 
of  the  United  States  was  subjected,   because  it  was  not  the  pro- 
perty of  Congress.     The  citizens  of  each  state  shall  be  citizens 
in  the  several  states,  excluding  the  idea  that  Congress,  as  being 
the  United  States,  might  grant  this  mutual  citizenship ;  and  ac- 
knowledging state  sovereignties  by  acknowledging  state  citizen- 
ship.    A  criminal  fleeing  from  justice  shall  be  removed  to  the 
state  having  jurisdiction  of  the  crime.     If  Congress  or  the  court 


230  tailor's  views. 

are  to  be  considered  as  the  United  States,  yet  the  exclusive  juris- 
diction of  each  state  is  here  acknowledged.  Treason  against  the 
United  States  is  specified  by  the  act  of  the  states,  and  its  punish- 
ment only  intrusted  to  Congress.  Can  Congress,  as  being  the 
United  States,  extend  or  abridge  this  crime  ?  If  not,  it  cannot 
extend  any  other  delegated  power,  or  abridge  any  reserved  pow- 
er upon  the  same  ground.  But  a  majority  of  the  United  States 
themselves  can  do  neither,  and  a  majority  of  Congress,  even  if  it 
is  the  United  States,  can  have  no  greater  power  than  a  majority 
of  the  states.  Neither  of  these  majorities  were  invested  by  the 
guarantee  with  a  power  of  transforming  our  federal  system  into 
a  supreme  consolidated  government;  and  no  powers  or  duties 
assigned  to  the  United  States,  were  intended  to  have  the  effect  of 
enabling  either  a  majority  of  states  or  of  Congress,  to  subvert 
the  rights  of  the  stales,  which  the  guarantee  was  intended  to 
prevent. 

The  prohibitions  upon  the  states,  and  the  powers  delegated  to 
the  federal  government,  comprise  the  intire  mass  of  materials 
from  which  a  subordination  of  the  former,  and  a  supremacy  of 
the  latter,  are  attempted  to  be  extracted.  For  this  purpose,  the 
prohibitions  have  been  considered  as  proofs  of  inferiority,  stated 
to  exemplify  a  general  subordination ;  and  the  delegated  powers 
as  proofs,  stated  to  exemplify  a  general  supremacy.  Thus,  re- 
strictions are  converted  into  enlargements,  and  exceptions  into  a 
general  rule.  By  this  inverted  mode  of  reasoning,  the  veto  of 
Congress  is  extended  immeasurably  beyond  the  cases  to  which  it 
is  limited.  Suppose  the  powers  reserved  to  the  state  govern- 
ments had  been  defined  and  limited,  like  those  delegated  to  the 
federal  government.  As  both  governments  are  subjected  to  prohi- 
bitions, neither  could  have  advanced  a  plea  for  supremacy,  which 
the  other  could  not  have  alleged.  And  is  not  such  the  fact, 
since  reserved  powers  are  at  least  equal  to  delegated  powers  ? 
How  does  the  federal  government  endeavour  to  prove  its  supre- 
macy ?  By  delegations  and  prohibitions.  Have  not  the  state 
governments  the  same  proofs  ?  Both  governments  are  fiducia- 
ries, and  their  delegations  and  prohibitions  proceed  from  the 
same  authority.  Not  the  weight  of  a  trust,  but  the  authority  of 
the  donor,  decides  the  power  of  the  trustee ;  and  a  great  trust  de- 


Taylor's  views.  231 

rives  no  right  from  its  size,  to  usurp  a  small  one.  Therefore 
distinct  delegations  and  prohibitions  could  not  have  been  consi- 
dered as  investing  one  class  of  these  delegations  and  prohibitions 
with  a  supremacy  over  the  other,  but  as  exceptions  to  the  general 
principle  of  state  sovereignty,  which  remained  unimpaired,  so 
far  as  these  exceptions  did  not  extend.  The  question  must  be 
decided  by  one  of  these  modes  of  reasoning ;  and  the  delegations 
and  prohibitions  quoted  as  selections  most  favourable  to  the  doc- 
trine of  a  federal  supremacy,  will  suffice  to  prove  whether  one 
elass  of  special  delegations  and  prohibitions  possesses  a  suprema- 
cy over  the  other,  or  whether  one  distinct  trustee  is  impliedly 
subordinate  to  another,  each  being  subjected  to  limitations  and 
prohibitions,  imposed  by  the  same  authority.  The  Congress 
under  the  first  confederation  was  invested  with  great  trusts,  but 
their  magnitude  did  not  absorb  powers  not  delegated. 

There  must  have  been  some  general  principle,  to  which  these 
special  delegations,  reservations,  and  prohibitions,  referred,  be- 
cause if  none  existed,  and  the  constitution  had  created  a  supreme 
power,  able  to  prohibit  the  states  from  exercising  rights  not  pro- 
hibited, and  to  allow  the  federal  government  to  exercise  risrhts 
not  delegated,  both  delegations  and  prohibitions  would  have  been 
useless  and  absurd  ;  and  therefore  the  existence  of  such  a  prin- 
ciple can  alone  make  either  substantial.  A  previous  principle 
must  be  admitted,  to  sustain  both  exceptions  and  delegations. 
None  can  be  found,  except  a  sovereignty  able  to  bestow  power, 
and  to  impose  limitations.  To  evade  an  argument  so  conclu- 
sive, recourse  is  had,  first  to  the  acknowledged  sovereignty  of 
the  people,  and  secondly  to  a  fabulous  consolidated  American 
nation  ;  and  the  fable  is  made  to  supplant  the  fact.  The  fact  is, 
that  the  people  and  the  states  are  one  and  the  same  ;  but  the  fa- 
ble supposes  that  the  states  are  distinguishable  from  the  people, 
not  to  sustain,  but  to  destroy  the  principle,  to  which  all  our  dele- 
gations, reservations,  and  prohibitions  of  power,  refer.  When 
we  speak  of  Pennsylvanians  or  Virginians,  it  would  be  absurd, 
if  these  people  had  not  constituted  themselves  into  states.  The 
state  of  Pennsylvania  means  the  people  of  Pennsylvania.  The 
constitution,  by  reserving  powers  to  the  states  or  to  the  people, 
recognises  the  words  states  and  people,  as  perfectly  equivalent, 


232  TAYLOR'S  VIEWS. 

and  does  not  intend  to  express  the  absurd  idea,  that  either  A  or 
B  shall  exercise  powers,  without  defining  which  shall  do  so. 
The  word  or,  is  used  to  connect  repetitions,  and  not  to  express 
a  contrariety.  Admitting  the  latter  to  be  the  idea  intended  to 
be  expressed,  yet  the  states,  whatever  they  may  be,  may  exer- 
cise the  same  powers  with  the  people.  That  they  arc,  however, 
the  same  with  the  people,  results  from  the  recollection  that  the 
state  governments  are  not  the  states.  They  are  instruments 
used  by  the  states  or  the  people,  for  exercising  the  powers  re- 
served to  them.  The  ingenuity  of  dividing  states  from  the  peo- 
ple, consists  in  this.  A  sovereignty  of  the  people  may  be  ac- 
knowledged as  resting  in  an  American  nation,  to  which  the  de- 
legations, reservations,  and  prohibitions,  of  the  constitution,  have 
no  reference,  as  all  are  exceptions  referring  to  state  sovereign- 
ties, and  none  of  course  can  operate  as  exceptions  to  the  fabulous 
national  sovereignty.  If,  therefore,  the  federal  government  can 
acquire  a  sovereignty  over  the  sovereignties  referred  to  by  the 
constitution,  as  being  the  representative  of  a  great  fabulous  nation, 
none  of  these  delegations,  reservations,  and  prohibitions,  can  ba- 
lance, check,  or  control  its  power.  And  in  this  way  an  acknow- 
ledgment of  the  sovereignty  of  the  people  is  made  to  destroy 
their  sovereignty,  by  subverting  the  original  principle  to  which 
the  delegations,  reservations,  and  prohibitions  of  the  constitution 
refer. 

Why  are  the  states  prohibited  from  taxing  imports  and  ex- 
ports ?  Because  it  was  a  right  included  by  the  established 
principle  of  state  sovereignty,  which  right  the  states  consented 
to  relinquish.  Why  was  the  consent  of  Congress  required  to 
state  laws  in  relation  to  duties,  keeping  troops  in  time  of  peace, 
or  entering  into  compacts  ?  Because  these  also  were  rights  in- 
cluded in  the  principle  of  state  sovereignty,  subjected  to  a  limit- 
ed federal  control.  Had  a  national  sovereignty  existed,  that 
would  have  possessed  a  general  control  over  the  state  sovereign- 
ties, of  which  these  subordinate  sovereignties  could  not  deprive 
it,  by  limited  exceptions  in  favour  of  a  federal  department.  Two 
of  these  sovereign  state  rights,  of  the  highest  order,  those  of 
keeping  armies  and  engaging  in  war  under  certain  circum- 
stances, are  retained  by  the  states,  for  the  purpose  of  self-defence. 


taylor's  views.  233 

The  consent  of  Congress  to  particular  state  acts  would  not  have 
been  required,  if  a  federal  or  national  supremacy  over  any  other 
state  acts  existed  ;  and  the  sovereign  state  right  of  self-defence, 
would  not  have  been  retained  by  subordinate  corporations.  The 
specification  of  particular  cases,  in  which  the  consent  of  Congress 
is  required,  admits  an  independent  power  in  state  legislation,  as 
to  those  cases  in  which  the  consent  of  Congress  is  not  required. 
The  concurrent  powers  of  the  state  and  federal  governments,  to 
tax,  and  to  defend  themselves,  are  happity  contrived  for  sustain- 
ing the  mutual  independence  and  control  between  these  primary 
divisions  of  power  ;  and  if  one  could  impose  on  the  other  a  subor- 
dination in  either  of  these  powers,  it  would  very  soon  absorb  all 
the  rest.  If  it  is  admitted  that  the  federal  government  possesses 
no  supremacy  over  the  two  reserved  state  rights  of  taxation  and 
self-defence,  it  follows  that  all  other  reserved  state  rights  are  held 
independently  of  any  federal  supremacy.  If  these  two  rights 
are  incidents  of  an  original  state  sovereignty,  all  the  other  re- 
served rights  must  originate  from  the  same  source.  The  states 
have  retained  a  right  to  defend  themselves,  if  invaded  by  a  fede« 
ral  army,  because  the  constitution  was  not  to  be  construed  by 
force,  but  by  the  mutual  control,  and  if  that  failed,  by  three- 
fourths  of  the  states  themselves. 

These  two  rights  of  taxation  and  self-defence,  without  which 
the  other  reserved  rights  are  nothing,  are  assailed  by  precedents 
and  supremacy.  Not  the  consent  of  the  federal  court,  but  the 
consent  of  Congress,  is  required  in  a  few  specified  cases  relating 
to  these  rights,  leaving  their  exercise  in  all  other  cases,  unexposed 
to  any  federal  dissent.  The  supreme  court,  however,  claims  a 
veto  upon  state  laws,  whether  subjected  or  unsubjected  to  the 
veto  of  Congress ;  and  assumes  both  the  special  veto  exclusively 
intrusted  to  Congress,  and  also  a  general  veto,  withheld  even 
from  the  representatives  of  the  states.  By  constructively  sub-* 
stituting  the  general  veto  proposed  in  the  convention,  for  the 
special  veto  bestowed  by  the  constitution,  it  is  substituting  a  na- 
tional for  a  federal  government.  Congress  could  not  say  that 
state  laws  for  taxing  banks  or  prohibiting  lotteries,  were  void  for 
want  of  its  consent;  but  the  court  steps  in  and  extends  the  li- 
mited veto  of  Congress  to  every  state  law  which  may  obstruct 

30 


234  taylor's  views. 

a  federal  law,  although  no  such  veto  is  bestowed  upon  Congress. 
The  consent  of  Congress  to  state  laws  prohibiting  banks  or  lotte- 
ries, is  not  required  by  the  constitution,  but  is  required  by  the 
court.  Had  Congress,  in  its  bauk  and  lottery  laws,  declared 
that  the  states  might  tax  or  prohibit  these  internal  projects,  tile 
court  could  have  had  no  ground  for  nullifying  them;  and  as 
no  such  consent  is  required  by  the  constitution,  its  being  given 
or  withheld  cannot  alter  the  right  of  the  state,  or  the  jurisdiction 
of  the  court.  Some  state  right  to  legislate  independently  of  a 
federal  veto,  evidently  results  from  the  specification  of  cases  to 
which  this  veto  should  extend  ;  but  according  to  precedents, 
there  is  no  such  right.  The  constitution  declares  that  the  con- 
sent of  Congress  shall  only  be  necessary,  to  give  validity  to  a 
few  specified  state  laws,  and  that  the  republican  forms  of  state 
governments  shall  be  guaranteed  by  the  states  themselves.  The 
precedents  assert,  that  the  dissent  of  the  court  may  defeat  any 
state  laws,  and  that  the  court  may  control  the  republican  rights 
of  the  states.  These  powers,  exposed  to  no  limitation,  and  ca- 
pable of  being  perpetually  increased  by  precedents,  are  not  given 
to  the  federal  government,  and  are  deduced  from  constructions 
inconsistent  both  with  the  prohibitions  and  guarantee.  They 
are  extracted  from  a  new  species  of  political  regeneration,  sup- 
posed to  have  sanctified  the  federal,  but  not  the  state  judicial 
power,  against  sin,  and  to  endow  it  with  the  supremacy  due  to 
perfection.  But  however  respectable  may  be  the  claim  of  virtue 
to  absolute  power,  yet  as  it  is  not  inheritable,  the  existing  great 
qualities  of  the  court,  though  united  to  the  patriotism  of  Con- 
gress, will  not  remove  the  objections  to  a  supreme  concentrated 
government.  Congress,  byT  extending  the  jurisdiction  of  the 
court,  and  the  court  by  extending  the  legislative  power  of  Con- 
gress, might  rapidly  effect  a  revolution,  without  the  consent  of 
the  authority  by  which  the  constitution  was  established.  It  is 
impossible  to  believe  that  «the  states  intended,  by  the  limitations 
and  prohibitions  of  the  constitution,  to  invest  the  whole  or  any 
portion  of  the  federal  government,  with  an  unlimited  veto  over 
their  laws,  or  an  exclusive  guarantee  of  their  republican  forms  of 
government ;  and  we  must  either  convict  them  of  stupidity  or 
gross  inconsistencies,  to  find  the  constructive  consolidated  go-i 


taylor's  views.  235 

vernment,  which  the  legislative  and  judicial  federal  supremacies 
contended  for,  would  infallibly  establish.  These  arguments  ap- 
ply to  all  other  limitations  and  prohibitions  of  the  constitution, 
as  well  as  to  those  quoted.  As  to  all  we  must  admit  that  legis- 
lative and  judicial  power  are  correlatives,  and  that  the  latter  can- 
not outrun  its  aliy  in  the  race  for  power ;  or  that  the  constitu- 
tion, whilst  cautiously  prescribing  limits  to  the  federal  legisla- 
ture, intended  that  the  federal  judiciary  should  be  unrestrained. 
If  the  limitations  imposed  upon  the  federal  legislature  do  not 
extend  to  the  federal  judiciary,  the  federal  would  cease  to  be  a 
limited  government,  because  one  department  may  dissolve  the 
restrictions  imposed  upon  the  other,  against  which  its  depen- 
dency and  subordination  would  be  no  security.  If  the  judicial 
veto  does  not  stop  where  the  legislative  veto  stops,  the  federal 
cannot  be  a  limited  government.  Was  the  legislative  federal 
veto  limited,  to  bestow  an  unlimited  veto  upon  the  court,  or  to 
secure  to  the  states  some  independent  right  of  legislation  ?  Was 
the  guarantee  intended  to  preserve  republican  governments,  or 
to  create  a  judicial  sovereignty  ?  These  questions  must  be  an- 
swered in  one  way  by  those  who  believe  that  the  delegations, 
reservations,  prohibitions,  and  guarantee,  all  imply  a  general 
principle ;  that  this  principle  can  be  no  other  than  state  sove- 
reignty and  independence  ;  and  that  all  the  attributes  of  this 
principle  remain,  except  those  expressly  prohibited  to  the  states. 
It  is  said  that  they  have  been  surrendered  to  the  finer  principle, 
that  judicial  power  is  a  political  mint,  which  coins  human  na- 
ture without  any  alloy. 

It  has  been  most  strenuously  contended,  by  all  those  who  af- 
fect to  consider  the  union  as  an  association  of  individuals,  that 
independent  state  rights  are  incompatible  with  it.  This  is  both 
true,  and  an  avowal  of  the  design  to  establish  a  supreme  conso- 
lidated government.  But  if  the  union  is  an  association  of  states,' 
and  not  of  individuals,  it  is  also  true  that  the  destruction  of  these 
rights  by  a  constructive  or  a  fabulous  supremacy,  would  be  also 
incompatible  with  a  federal  government.  The  word  union  is 
used  like  the  word  infidelity,  by  the  disciples  of  a  consolidated 
national  form  of  government.  Infidelity,  as  an  object  of  gene- 
ral abhorrence,  is  often  alleged  by  one  creed  or  dogma  against 


236  TAYLOR'S  VIEWS. 

another,  not  for  the  sake  of  finding  truth,  but  for  that  of  using  a 
publick  prepossession  to  hide  error,  ambition,  avarice,  or  pride. 
It  vociferates,  "  Your  faith  is  not  my  faith,  and  therefore  you 
"  are  an  infidel."  Thus  the  consolidating  says  to  the  federal 
'doctrine,  "  Your  union  is  not  my  union,  and  therefore  you  mean 
U  to  destroy  the  union  ;"  using  the  general  enmity  against  its 
subversion,  as  religious  politicians  use  the  word  infidelity.  But 
if  the  union  is  a  compact  of  states,  and  not  of  a  consolidated 
American  nation,  our  love  for  it  must  be  ana  ally,  not  of  a  na- 
tional, but  of  a  federal  form  of  government. 

Hitherto  my  efforts  have  been  chiefly  directed  towards  the 
principles  by  which  the  constitution  ought  to  be  construed,  and 
to  the  establishment  of  the  fact,  that  from  the  commencement  of 
our  revolution,  down  to  this  day,  a  succession  of  eminent  men 
have  uniformly  disapproved  of  the  union  of  states,  and  endea- 
voured to  introduce  a  consolidated  government,  invested  with 
supreme  power.  Whether  these  efforts  have  failed  or  succeed- 
ed, is  submitted  to  the  reader. 


TAYLOR'S  VIEWS.  237 


SECTION  XVI. 

A  FEDERAL  AND   NATIONAL  FORM   OF  GOVERNMENT  COMPARED. 

The  great  question,  whether  a  federal  or  a  national  system  of 
government  will  best  secure  the  liberty  and  happiness  of  the 
people,  remains  to  be  more  fully  considered ;  and  though  it  must 
be  referred  to  the  better  understandings  which  abound  in  our 
country,  yet  a  few  observations  will  be  hazarded  as  to  this  point, 
in  addition  to  those  unavoidably  mingled  with  the  subjects  wc 
have  passed  over. 

Liberty  and  power  are  adverse  pleaders,  and  the  arguments  or 
temptations  offered  by  both,  have  never  failed  to  make  prose- 
lytes. Between  the  tyranny  of  concentrated  power,  and  of  un- 
bridled licentiousness,  is  a  space  filled  with  materials  for  com- 
puting the  effects  produced  by  controlling  both  extremes,  and 
estimating  the  chances  for  promoting  human  liberty  and  happi- 
ness. It  seems  to  be  nature's  law,  that  every  species  of  concen- 
trated sovereignty  over  extensive  territories,  whether  monarchi- 
cal, aristocratical,  democratical,  or  mixed,  must  be  despotiek. 
In  no  case  has  a  concentrated  power  over  great  territories  been 
sustained,  except  by  mercenary  armies  ;  and  wherever  power  is 
thus  sustained,  despotism  is  the  consequence.  It  was  in  accord- 
ance with  this  natural  law,  that  Catharine  of  Russia  published 
her  manifesto,  affording  the  following  extracts  :  "  The  sove- 
"  reign  of  the  Russian  empire  is  absolute ;  for  no  other  than  an 
"  authority  concentrated  in  his  person  alone,  can  adequately 
"  operate  through  the  extent  of  so  large  an  empire.  An  exten- 
"  sive  empire  presupposes  an  unlimited  power  in  the  person  who 
"  governs  it.  The  celerity  of  decision  in  matters  that  are 
"  brought  from  distant  places,  must  compensate  the  tardiness 
"  that  arises  from  that  remoteness.  Any  other  government 
u  would  not  only  be  prejudicial  to  Russia,  but  even  at  length 
"  be  the  cause  of  its  total  ruin.     Another  reason  is.  because  it 


238  TAYLOR'S  VIEWS. 

"  is  better  to  obey  the  laws  under  one  ruler,  than  to  conform  to 
"  the  will  of  many.  The  object  and  end  of  an  unlimited  go- 
"  vernment,  is  to  direct  the  actions  of  mankind  to  the  glory  of 
"  the  citizen,  of  the  state,  and  of  the  sovereign.  This  glory  in 
"  such  states,  bursts  forth  in  such  great  actions  as  are  able,  hi  the 
"  very  same  proportion,  to  promote  the  happiness  of  the  sub- 
"  jects,  as  liberty  itself."  Catharine  insists  on  the  necessity  of 
a  concentrated  supremacy  over  extensive  territories,  and  uses  the 
arguments  of  our  consolidating  politicians,  not  forgetting  to  urge 
that  ambition,  from  its  love  of  glory,  is  equal  to  liberty.  She 
asserts,  in  concurrence  with  history,  that  absolute  power  is  ne- 
cessary to  govern  an  extensive  territory.  Between  this  conclu- 
sion, dictated  by  the  laws  of  nature,  and  a  territorial  division  of 
powers,  lies  our  alternative.  The  geography  of  our  country 
and  the  character  of  our  people,  unite  to  demonstrate  that  the 
ignorance  and  partiality  of  a  concentrated  form  of  government, 
can  only  be  enforced  by  armies ;  and  the  peculiar  ability  of  the 
states  to  resist,  promises  that  resistance  would  be  violent ;  so  that 
a  national  government  must  either  be  precarious  or  despotick. 
By  dividing  power  between  the  federal  and  state  governments, 
local  partialities  and  oppressions,  the  common  causes  of  revolu- 
tion, are  obliterated  from  our  system. 

This  division  is  contrived,  not  only  for  avoiding  such  domestick 
evils,  but  also  for  securing  the  United  States  against  foreign  ag- 
gression. For  the  attainment  of  both  ends,  it  was  equally  neces- 
sary to  bestow  certain  powers  on  a  federal  government,  and  re- 
serve others  to  the  state  governments.  The  two  intentions  point 
forcibly  towards  a  genuine  construction  of  the  constitution,  and 
the  theory  is  defended  by  the  onlj  principle  capable  of  securing 
civil  liberty.  Communities  possessed  of  sufficient  knowledge  to 
discriminate  between  liberty  and  slavery,  have  uniformly  la- 
boured to  invest  governments  with  a  portion  of  power  sufficient 
to  secure  social  happiness,  but  insufficient'  for  its  destruction. 
The  United  States  understood  the  discrimination,  and  in  the 
formation  of  the  federal  government  endeavoured,  by  limitations 
and  prohibitions,  to  reserve  and  secure  as  many  of  their  indivi- 
dual rights  as  might  be  retained  without  defeating  the  end  of 
providing  for  their  common  interest.     The  two  principles  of  a 


TAYLOR?S  VIEWS.  239 

division  or  a  concentration  of  power,  are  the  adversaries  contend- 
ing for  preference.  Every  government  must  be  of  one  or  the 
other  description.  An  absolute  supremacy  in  one,  belongs  to  the 
concentrating  principle,  like  an  absolute  supremacy  in  one  man. 
Hence  it  has  happened  that  an  aristocratical  or  representative 
body  of  men,  exercising  supreme  power,  has  been  as  tyrannical, 
or  more  so,  than  a  single  despot.  The  United  States  saw  that 
any  geographical  interest,  if  invested  with  supremacy  by  the  es- 
tablishment of  a  consolidated  national  government,  would  oppress 
some  other  geographical  interest ;  and  made  a  new  effort  to  avoid 
this  natural  malignity  of  a  concentrated  supreme  power,  though 
Judged  in  the  representatives  of  the  people.  The  ingenious  effort 
of  the  English  form  of  government,  extended  only  to  the  con- 
trary interests  of  classes  of  men,  and  has  no  reference  to  the  con- 
trary local  interests  of  states.  However  sufficient  it  might  be  for 
effecting  the  end  meditated,  it  would  be  insufficient  for  effecting 
an  end  totally  different  States  cannot  mingle  like  men,  nor 
change  their  climates,  as  men  do  their  principles,  to  reap  the 
partialities  of  a  concentrated  supremacy.  If,  therefore,  the  Eng- 
lish system  had  so  far  prevented  a  concentrated  supremacy, 
arising  from  a  coalescence  of  king,  lords,  and  commons,  as  to 
secure  equal  justice  to  individual  men,  it  does  not  follow  that  a 
concentrated  supremacy  in  the  federal  government  would  pre- 
vent a  coalescence  between  geographical  representatives,  and  se- 
cure equal  justice  to  individual  states.  The  case  of  Ireland  de- 
monstrates that  representation  and  supremacy  united,  will  not 
administer  geographical  justice.  Accident  sometimes  directs  us 
to  valuable  discoveries  ;  but  though  our  division  into  states,  in- 
duced us  to  consider  the  hostile  principles  of  power  concentrated 
or  divided,  in  a  geographical  light,  yet  our  decision  was  rather 
the  result  of  an  improvement  in  political  knowledge,  matured  by 
reflection  and  experience,  than  casual.  The  disquisitions  pro- 
duced in  resisting  the  supremacy  of  the  British  parliament,  had 
shed  volumes  of  light  upon  the  subject ;  the  people  had  imbibed 
convictions  from  critical  examinations  of  history  and  of  moral 
rights  ;  and  a  profound  consideration  was  bestowed  upon  the  rival 
principles  in  the  convention.  If  it  is  yet  doubtful  which  is  best, 
it  cannot  be  denied  that  the   people  have  constantly  considered 


240  taylok's  views. 

them  as  distinct,  and  unexceptionably  expressed  their  prefer- 
ence. To  deprive  them  of  their  choice  by  construction,  would 
be  the  same  species  of  dexterity  by  which  the  elements  of  the 
eucharist  are  endeavoured  to  be  transubtantiated  into  substances 
totally  different. 

It  is  as  impossible  that  politicians  can  extend  the  intellectual 
powers  of  men  beyond  their  natural  limits,  as  that  priests  can 
turn  bread  and  wine  into  flesh  and  blood.  The  incapacity  of 
one  mind  for  securing  the  liberty  and  happiness  of  an  extensive 
country,  dictates  the  wisdom  of  dividing  power ;  and  the  same 
natural  incapacity  in  the  representatives  of  one  state  to  provide 
for  the  local  good  government  of  another,  more  forcibly  dictated 
the  internal  independency  of  each.  A  division  of  mechanical 
labour  is  so  highly  valuable,  that  even  a  pin  can  be  better  made 
by  many  workmen  than  by  one.  In  like  manner  it  is  at  length 
happily  discovered,  that  a  division  of  intellectual  labours  is 
equally  necessary  for  the  construction  of  the  most  perfect  form 
of  government.  It  would  have  been  more  preposterous  to  ex- 
pect that  the  representatives  of  Massachusetts  could  provide  for 
the  prosperity  of  Louisiana,  than  that  we  might  get  to  the  moon 
in  a  balloon.  The  human  mind  can  only  act  judiciously  within 
the  scope  of  its  intelligence.  Accordingly,  those  powers  only 
are  intrusted  to  the  federal  government,  as  to  which  the  intelli- 
gence and  interest  of  the  states  are  the  same ;  and  those  are 
withheld,  as  to  which  the  similarity  between  the  intelligence  and 
interest  of  the  states  fail.  A  uniformity  in  the  operation  of  fe- 
deral laws  throughout  the  states,  is  required  to  prevent  these  wise 
precautions  from  being  defeated.  This  uniformity  illustrates  the 
independency  of  local  rights,  because  if  these  were  liable  to  be 
regulated  by  federal  laws,  great  inequalities  would  have  ensued. 
The  interest  of  one  state  is  embraced  by  the  intellectual  powers 
©f  representatives  chosen  by  counties,  because  the  counties  have 
a  common  interest,  just  as  the  intellectual  powers  of  members  of 
Congress  will  reach  the  common  interests  of  the  United  States  ; 
but  there  would  be  no  difference  between  requiring  the  county 
representatives  of  Virginia  to  regulate  the  local  affairs  of  Massa- 
chusetts, and  requiring  the  representatives  from  Virginia  in  Con- 
gress,  to  do  the  same  thing.     Why  would  the  first  mode  of 


TAYLOR'S  VIEWS.  241 

governing  Massachusetts  be  tyrannical  and  absurd  ?  Because 
neither  the  sympathies  nor  intellectual  powers  of  a  resident  in 
Virginia,  are  adequate  to  the  local  government  of  Massachusetts. 
Are  they  rendered  more  adequate  if  he  is  chosen  by  the  whole 
state,  or  by  a  district  of  it,  instead  of  being  chosen  by  a  county  ? 
Will  the  mode  of  appointment  revoke  the  laws  of  nature  ?  A 
conviction  that  this  could  not  happen,  suggested  the  division  of 
powers  between  the  state  and  federal  governments,  as  being  a 
preference  of  knowledge  to  ignorance.  To  expect  from  igno- 
rance or  an  adverse  interest,  the  fruits  of  knowledge  and  a  com- 
mon interest,  would  have  been  unnatural.  Calamities  or  bless- 
ings are  their  respective  consequences.  Our  system,  therefore, 
draws  upon  federal  knowledge  and  sympathy  for  federal  pros- 
perity, and  upon  state  knowledge  and  sympathy  for  local  pros- 
perity. By  reversing  its  draughts  in  either  case,  they  would 
either  be  protested,  or  paid  in  very  bad  paper. 

Against  this  beautiful  theory,  an  appetite  for  power  in  all 
ages,  urges  the  same  objection.  It  uniformly  asserts  that  divi- 
sions of  power  obstruct,  paralyze,  or  defeat,  the  splendid  actions 
to  be  expected  from  a  concentrated  supremac)r.  Before  this  ar- 
gument can  have  any  force,  it  ought  to  be  settled,  whether  the 
achievements  of  concentrated  power  are  good  or  bad  things ; 
since,  according  to  the  determination  of  this  fact,  the  argument 
becomes  an  objection  to  the  principle  of  dividing  power,  or  its 
recommendation.  Will  this  principle  defeat  most  good  or  bad 
measures  ?  Its  value  should  be  ascertained,  not  by  a  partial 
exhibition  of  the  good  measures  it  may  have  obstructed,  but  by 
its  general  tendency  to  prevent  oppression.  The  fact,  that  man- 
kind have  suffered  the  sorest  evils  from  a  supreme  concentrated 
power,  is  undoubtedly  well  established  ;  and  it  is  equally  a  fact, 
that  no  remedy  against  these  universal  calamities,  has  ever  been 
suggested,  except  divisions  of  power.  All  writers  in  favour  of  a 
free  government,  have  opposed  this,  as  a  good  principle,  against 
concentrated  power,  as  a  bad  one  ;  and  although  exceptions  to 
its  good  effects  do  occasionally  occur,  as  well  as  exceptions  to 
the  bad  effects  of  a  concentrated  power,  yet  these  exceptions  do 
not  constitute  the  general  character  of  either  principle. 

31 


242  TAYLOR'S  VIEWS. 

The  evil  effects  resulting  from  a  division  of  a  large  country 
into  baronial,  or  other  personal  sovereignties,  cannot  be  justly 
urged  as  objections  to  our  state  sovereignties,  because  the  former 
were  only  divisions  of  territory,  subjected  to  the  bad  principle  of 
a  concentrated  political  power,  and  not  moral  divisions  of  power 
itself.  Personal  ambition  and  avarice  were  still  the  supremacy 
by  which  each  division  was  governed.  When  the  baronial  su- 
premacies of  France  were  swallowed  up  by  a  monarchical  su- 
premacy, though  the  people  of  the  whole  country  were  consoli- 
dated into  one  nation,  tyranny  and  oppression  still  remained  ; 
because  it  was  only  a  transition  from  one  species  of  concentrated 
power  to  another,  neither  being  exposed  to  a  sufficient  moral 
limitation  or  control.  Germany  still  suffers  under  concentrated 
powers  of  both  descriptions.  In  Britain,  the  division  into  de- 
partments has  a  reference  to  classes  of  men  only,  as  in  France 
formerly,  and  in  Germany,  to  territorial  lines,  and  therefore  it 
has  not  prevented  the  establishment  of  a  supreme  concentrated 
power,  nor  removed  its  malevolence  to  human  happiness.  In  all 
these  countries,  liberty  is  of  course  dealt  out  to  the  people  by 
mercenary  armies.  Ireland,  though  represented  in  both  houses 
of  the  British  congress,  is  a  standing  memorial  of  the  fate  to  be 
expected  by  geographical  sections  from  a  concentrated  supre- 
macy lodged  in  men,  the  majority  of  whom  arc  ignorant  of  local 
wants,  and  not  participating  in  local  evils. 

The  antiquated  doctrine  of  the  divinity  of  kings  was  the  only 
remedy  able  to  shield  concentrated  power  against  the  resent- 
ments inspired  by  its  tyranny,  until  standing  armies  were  thought 
of,  because  mankind  had  discovered  no  medium  between  the 
dissolution  of  society,  and  investing  despotism  with  a  sacred  su- 
premacy. Tyrants  Avere  thought  better  than  savages.  The 
supposed  necessity  for  one  of  these  extremities,  generated  the 
nice  question,  how  far  the  evil  of  tyranny  should  be  endured, 
before  the  remedies  of  insurrection  or  assassination  were  applied. 
Representation  was  the  first  attempt,  to  get  rid  of  this  alternative ; 
but  it  has  been  rendered  an  incomplete  remedy,  by  coupling  it 
with  a  supreme  concentrated  power.  The  United  States  dis- 
solved this  infectious  association,  by  uniting  a  division  oi  state 
and  federal  powers  with  representation,  as  a  mode  of  enforcing 


taylor's  views.  243 

ifpon  governors  the  admirable  discovery  of  constitutional  laws. 
These,  intrusted  to  a  concentrated  power,  have  uniformly  be- 
come a  dead  letter ;  but  a  reasonable  hope  was  inspired  that  they 
might  experience  a  better  fate,  under  the  mutual  control  against 
their  violation,  deposited  in  the  state  and  federal  governments, 
so  confidently  relied  upon  by  the  Federalist.  The  intervention 
of  the  state  governments  between  the  people  and  the  federal  go- 
vernment, seemed  to  be  a  better  security  against  the  effects  of  a 
concentrated  power,  than  the  boasted  intervention  of  a  king  be- 
tween lords  and  commons,  and  less  capable  of  a  nefarious  co- 
alescence to  gratify  a  mutual  passion  for  money  and  power'. 

But  concentrated   power  is  ever  active  and  ingenious  in  re- 
pairing its  defeats,  and  inventing  new  expedients  for  the  gratifi- 
cation of  its  propensities.     When  its  divinity  was  exploded,  it 
resorted  to  armies,  as  an  effectual  mode  of  destroying  the  control 
of  election.     The  United  States,  sensible  that  it  would  proceed 
to  the  use  of  its  customary  expedient,  should  it  be  established, 
would  not  establish  it  at  all,  and  it  now  discloses  its  hatred  against 
the  division  of  power  invented  to  keep  it  down,  as  it  formerly 
did  against  the  detection  of  its  usurped  divinity.     It  proposes 
that  we  should  renounce  our  progress  in  political  science,  recede 
by  the  road  of  construction,  dissolve  our  new  and  soundest  di- 
vision of  power,  and  revive  a  concentrated  supremacy,  which 
will  ultimately  maintain  itself  by  a  standing  army.     It  would  be 
better  and  cheaper  for  the  people  to  restore  to  concentrated  pow- 
er its  ancient  supremacy,  sustained  by  the  doctrine  of  its  divini- 
ty, than  to  establish  a  concentrated  supremacy,  sustained  by  the 
new  expedient  of  standing  armies.     The  representation  in  Con- 
gress being  extremely   deficient  in   the  two  qualities  of  local 
knowledge  and  sympathy,  a  federal  concentrated  supremacy, 
instead  of  sustaining  our  constitutional  laws,  must  itself  be  sus- 
tained by  force ;  and  this  force  would  certainly  be  applied  to  the 
compulsory  exercise  of  every  power  it  might  covet.     The  revi- 
val of  the  divinity  of  coneentrated  power  may  delay  a  recourse 
to  mercenary  armies,  so  long  as  a  court  of  law  and  equity  can 
persuade  those  who  hold  the  purse  and  the  sword,  that  it  is  bet- 
ter entitled  to  this  high  distinction  than  themselves  ;  but  this  re- 
prieve would  be  of  very  short  duration. 


244  taylor's  views. 

Let  us  now  turn  our  eyes  towards  the  state  sovereignties,  and 
consider  whether  they  are  like  baronial,  or  other  concentrated 
supremacies,  universally  hostile  to  liberty.  State  governments 
are  confined  to  local  objects,  as  the  powers  of  an  individual  are 
to  his  own  domicil.  They  are  excluded  from  declaring  war, 
from  keeping  armies  in  time  of  peace,  and  from  entering  into 
foreign  treaties  or  internal  confederacies.  They  are  restrained 
both  by  the  ['principle  of  division,  and  by  their  responsibility  to 
the  people.  They  are  checked  by  the  federal  government,  as  the 
federal  government  is  by  them.  They  are  controllable  by 
three-fourths  of  the  states.  The  principles  of  division  and  con- 
trol are  applied  extensively  to  the  state  governments,  whereas 
they  are  not  applied  at  all,  or  ineffectually  applied,  to  the  con- 
centrated baronial,  monarchical,  or  mixed  governments  of  Eu- 
rope. This  difference  accounts  for  the  exclusive  blessings  we 
have  reaped  from  our  modes  of  dividing  and  controlling  power. 
If  we  should  exchange  them  for  a  concentrated  supremacy  in 
the  federal  government,  the  internal  divisions  of  the  state  go- 
vernments would  be  rendered  useless,  and  state  elections  for 
controlling  state  departments,  would  dwindle  into  an  idle  cere- 
mony. The  European  supremacies  possess  no  principles  suffi- 
cient to  secure  the  liberty  and  happiness  of  the  people,  and  are  na- 
turally guided  by  the  worst  passions  ;  the  states  have  united,  not 
to  awaken  these  bad  passions  by  creating  a  concentrated  supre- 
macy, but  to  secure  the  liberty  and  happiness  of  the  people,  or 
the  most  holy  interests  of  mankind.  Are  the  people  of  each 
state,  or  a  supreme  power  in  Congress,  or  a  federal  court,  best 
qualified  to  judge  of  and  to  foster  their  local  interests  ? 

The  objection,  that  the  state  governments  may  obstruct  fede- 
ral measures,  unless  they  are  subordinate  to  some  federal  supre- 
macy, is  only  equivalent  to  the  objection,  that  the  federal  govern- 
ment may  obstruct  state  measures,  unless  it  is  subordinate  to  a 
state  supremacy.  Neither  objection  affects  the  argument,  if  the 
constitution  intended  to  confide  both  state  and  federal  measures 
to  a  representation  of  a  mutual  and  common  interest  in  each  sepa- 
rate case.  Such  objections  are  urged  against  all  divisions  of 
power.  Limited  kings  complain  that  their  measures  are  ob- 
structed by  the  departments  created  to  obstruct  them.    Reason, 


Taylor's  views.  245 

compact,  and  a  common  interest,  and  not  a  supreme  power,  are 
the  only  resources  for  settling  such  collisions,  compatible  with  a 
division  of  power.  These  umpires  have  inspired  the  king, 
lords,  and  commons,  of  Britain,  with  a  mutual  moderation  to- 
wards each  other.  If  the  preservation  of  the  rights  of  free 
states  and  free  men,  cannot  inspire  the  state  and  federal  govern- 
ments with  mutual  moderation,  it  will  unfortunately  prove  that 
the  children  of  mammon  are  wiser  than  the  children  of  liberty. 
If  the  common  interest  of  the  states  to  preserve  the  federal  go- 
vernment, will  not  be  regarded,  a  government  by  force  must 
succeed,  and  all  our  social  improvements  founded  upon  a  com- 
mon interest,  will  be  lost.  But  have  not  the  states  as  strong  and 
better  motives  for  nourishing  their  federal,  as  well  as  local  pros- 
perity, than  the  king,  lords,  and  commons  of  England  have  for 
nourishing  their  concentrated  supremacy  ?  What  checks  against 
tyranny  can  be  devised,  if  those  founded  in  a  common  interest 
are  unsuccessful  ?  and  can  they  be  unsuccessful,  except  by  ex- 
changing them  for  a  concentrated  supremacy  ? 

Society,  well  constructed,  must  be  compounded  of  restraint 
and  freedom,  and  this  was  carefully  attended  to  in  framing  our 
union.     The  states  are  restrained  from  doing  some  things,  and 
left  free  to  do  others ;  and  the  federal  government  was  made  free 
to  do  some  things,  but  restrained  from  doing  others.     This  ar- 
rangement cannot  be  violated,  without  making  one  department  a 
slave  or  an  usurper.     A  division  of  political  rights  between  the 
people  and  a  government,  can  only  preserve  individual  liberty. 
In  like  manner  the  liberty  of  the  states  cannot  exist,  except  by 
a  division  of  rights  between  these  political  individuals  and  the 
federal  government     The  rights  of  whole  states  may  at  least  be 
as  necessary  to  the  happiness  of  mankind,  as  the  rights  of  an  in- 
dividual.    Freedom  without  restraint,  or  restraint  without  free- 
dom, is  either  anarchy  or  despotism.     The  states  did  not  design 
to  avoid  both,  by  placing  around  their  necks  a  halter,  called  a 
national  or  a  judicial  supremacy,  capable  of  being  tightened  or 
relaxed  ;  or  used  to  inflict  upon  them  the  suffocation  proposed  in 
the  convention.     A  concentrated  power  destroys  the  counter- 
poise between  freedom  and  restraint,  and  never  fails  to  become 
the  executioner  of  human  happiness.     The  constitution,  with 


246  taylor's  views. 

consummate  wisdom,  has  effected  this  counterpoise,  and  also1 
provided  against  foreign  and  state  collisions,  without  sacrificing 
state  prosperity.  It  did  not  design  to  embitter  the  best  fruits  of 
government,  by  tacitly  creating  a  concentrated  supremacy. 

Though  mathematical  certainty  may  not  be  attainable  by  the 
science  of  politicks,  because  the  human  mind  cannot  be  deli- 
neated by  a  diagram,  yet  much  truth  may  be  found  in  the  solu- 
tions of  historical  facts.  These  prove  that  every  body  of  men 
invested  with  supreme  power,  whether  collected  together  by  the 
single  principle  of  representation,  or  by  the  mixed  principles  of 
monarchy,  aristocracy,  and  democracy,  is  influenced  by  a  secret 
or  an  avowed  spirit  of  avarice  and  ambition.  They  demonstrate 
the  propensity  of  men  to  combine  for  bad  as  well  as  good  ends. 
In  our  federal  combination,  the  difficulty  was  to  give  efficacy  to 
the  good,  and  to  expel  the  bad  motives,  leading  men  to  combine 
or  unite.  Various  divisions  and  balances  of  power  had  been  pre- 
viously tried,  but  all  of  them  had  been  ineffectual  for  producing 
both  ends.  The  English  experiment,  though  fraught  with  useful 
hints,  had  demonstrated  a  necessity  for  further  efforts.  We 
availed  ourselves  of  its  hints,  and  were  warned  by  its  insufficiency 
to  produce  a  mild  and  just  government,  to  reject  its  monarchy 
and  aristocracy,  and  also  its  concentration  of  supreme  power  in 
men  assembled  at  one  place  ;  because  they  would  be  induced  by 
the  bad  propensities  of  human  nature,  to  combine  for  bad  pur- 
poses. Instead  of  this  English  supremacy,  which  was  unable  to 
prevent  such  combinations,  and  has  fed  avarice  and  ambition  at 
the  expense  of  the  people,  the  constitution  most  wisely  availed 
itself  of  the  good  motives  which  induce  men  to  combine,  by 
making  the  interest  of  the  states  the  basis  of  the  union  of  states, 
and  the  interest  of  individuals  the  basis  of  state  rights  ;  by  divid- 
ing instead  of  concentrating  supremacy.  By  reinstating  a  con- 
centrated supremacy,  we  should  exchange  the  natural  propensity 
of  the  states  to  combine  for  their  common  benefit,  for  a  natural 
propensity  to  combine,  from  the  motives  of  avarice  and  ambition ; 
and  the  constant  succession  of  these  ravenous  combinations,  would 
probably  be  more  mischievous  to  the  people,  than  the  less  change- 
able combination  produced  by  the  supremacy  of  the  king,  lords, 
and  commons  of  England.     The   representation  in   Congress 


taylor's  views.  247 

would  be  better  calculated  to  awaken  than  to  suppress  the  bad 
motives  of  combination,  if  it  should  obtain  supreme  power.  An 
imperfect  local  knowledge  and  interest,  and  a  new  supremacy 
every  two  years,  would  then  expose  it  to  more  temptations  than 
the  British  parliament  can  resist,  because  our  local  sympathies  lie 
wider  apart  than  in  England  ;  and  would  suggest  the  maxim  of 
making  hay  whilst  the  sun  shines,  which  can  only  be  rendered 
innocent,  by  withholding  from  Congress  a  supreme  power  to  ga- 
ther any  crop  at  all  from  local  rights.  In  England,  combinations 
between  privileged  orders  were  to  be  guarded  against ;  here,  geo- 
graphical combinations  were  far  more  dangerous.  If  in  Eng- 
land, represenlation,  united  with  a  concentrated  supremacy, 
though  assisted  by  a  sympathy  infinitely  more  perfect,  fosters 
instead  of  checking  wicked  combinations,  what  would  be  the 
effects  of  our  representation  in  Congress,  uncontrolled  by  state 
rights,  and  urged  by  local  interests  to  perpetrate  geographical 
partialities  ?  Success  in  obtaining  local  advantages  would  be 
considered  as  an  evidence  of  patriotism  by  state  representatives 
in  Congress,  and  approved  by  their  constituents ;  but  it  would  be 
considered  as  fraudulent,  and  resisted  as  tyrannical,  by  the  injur- 
ed states.  The  malignity  of  a  concentrated  power  to  a  free  and 
fair  government,  being  greater  here  than  in  England,  it  required 
better  controls  than  have  been  there  ineffectual ;  more  especially 
as  it  would  destroy  our  happy  union.  Geographical  partialities 
would  excite  more  indignation,  than  the  patronage  of  individual 
and  corporate  interests,  involved  in  a  national  mass,  prevented 
from  acting  in  great  combinations  by  an  inextricable  complica- 
tion, and  uncombined  by  distinct  geographical  circumstances. 
Oppressed  or  plundered  states  would  do  what  Ireland  is  unable  to 
do.  If  the  national  government  proposed  in  the  convention  had 
succeeded,  it  could  not  have  oblitered  the  local  interests  estab- 
lished by  nature  ;  and  these  would  have  remained  as  a  pledge 
for  a  revolution.  Even  under  the  limitations  of  the  constitution, 
local  prejudices  and  partialities  have  been  disclosed  in  Congress, 
and  these  occurrences  have  excited  local  resentments.  A  su- 
preme power  in  the  federal  government  over  state  rights,  would 
accumulate  local  aggressions  and  dissatisfactions,  until  they  would 
be  insurmountable  by  laws  and  judgments,  and  be  only  conquer- 


248  TAYLOR'S  VIEWS. 

able  by  an  irresistible  mercenary  army.    A  national  government, 
though  established  by  popular  consent,  could  only  be  sustained 
in  this  mode ;  established  by  construction,  the  reservation  of  state 
rights  would  leave  no  other  mode  for  enforcing  its  supremacy. 
The  impossibility  of  sustaining  a  consolidated  national  govern- 
ment by  any  other  means,  suggested  the  constitutional  effort  to 
dissever  the  causes  which  would  disunite  or  enslave  the  states, 
from  those  which  would  unite  and  leave  them  free.     Separate 
geographical  interests  were  the  dissolvents  to  be  apprehended  ; 
a  common  or  mutual  interest  the  only  cement  to  be  relied  upon. 
The  elements  hostile  to  union  were  rejected,  and  only  those  used 
which  promised  strength  and  duration.     The  principle  of  civil 
liberty,  that  men  should  be  left  to  provide  for  their  own  happi- 
ness in  their  own  way,  as  far  as  a  good  social  compact  would 
permit,  suggested  the  reservation  of  state  rights ;  and  the  union 
was  bottomed  upon  those  interests  of  the  states  which  were  mu- 
tual or  common,  that  the  same  principle  might  secure  the  affec- 
tion of  the  states  for  the  federal  government,  which  secures  the 
affection  of  the  people  for  their  state  governments.     Infringe- 
ments of  this  principle  in  relation  to  individuals,  are  indications 
of  approaching  despotism ;  in  relation  to  the  states,  they  equally 
foretel  their  subjugation.     If  the  constitution  pursued  it,  no  con- 
struction by  which  it  is  defeated  can  be  correct.     To  sustain  this 
reasoning,  I  will  quote  two  authorities,  valuable,  as  proceeding 
from  eminent  men,  but  more  valuable  for  the  truths  they  in- 
culcate : 

Yates's  notes,  p.  190.  "Mr.  Madison  observed,  that  the 
"  great  danger  to  our  federal  government,  is  the  great  northern 
;'  and  southern  interests  of  the  continent  being  opposed  to  each 
"  other.  Look  at  the  votes  in  Congress,  and  most  of  them  stand 
';  divided  by  the  geography  of  the  country,  not  according  to 
"  the  size  of  the  states."  This  just  observation  has  become 
more  impressive,  by  the  addition  of  a  powerful  western  interest 
to  the  two  then  so  formidable,  and  the  objections  to  a  national 
government  are  already  nearly  doubled  by  the  increase  of 
states.  The  danger  to  the  union  is  most  truly  stated  to  reside 
in  geographical  interests,  and  it  is  as  truly  stated,  that  a  Congress 
will  be  divided  by  the  geography  of  the  country.     It  being  more 


taylor's  views.  249 

impossible  now  than  at  that  time  to  consolidate  these  geographical 
interests  under  a  national  government,  or  to  divest  Congress  of 
geographical  partialities,  or  to  inspire  it  with  a  degree  of  know- 
ledge adequate  to  just  local  regulations,  there  seems  to  be  no 
remedy  against  this  formidable  geographical  danger,  but  to  let  it 
alone.  If  a  northern,  southern,  and  western  interest,  are  not 
opposed  to  each  other  in  Congress,  by  investing  it  with  a  su- 
preme power  over  state  rights,  they  cannot  endanger  the  union  ; 
but  if  either  can  acquire  local  advantages  from  a  national  supre- 
macy, it  will  aggravate  the  geographical  danger  apprehended  by 
Mr.  Madison,  a  perpetual  warfare  of  intrigues  will  ensue,  and  a 
dissolution  of  the  union  will  result.  To  prevent  this  calamity, 
our  political  system  is  compounded  of  two  unions,  one  of  local 
state  interests,  and  the  other  of  common  federal  interests.  The 
reservation  of  powers  to  one,  was  a  prohibition  to  the  other,  in- 
tended to  avoid  geographical  collisions ;  and  the  expressed  pro- 
hibitions upon  the  states  were  intended,  not  to  take  away  the 
local  rights  reserved,  nor  to  give  to  the  federal  government  a 
power  to  exercise  geographical  partialities,  but  to  prevent  the 
states  from  assuming  the  regulation  of  the  common  interests  in- 
trusted to  the  care  of  a  federal  government.  The  two  unions 
were  respectively  allotted  to  the  care  of  governments  which  could 
feel  and  understand  them,  and  made  independent  of  each  other  to 
prevent  geographical  combinations  of  some  states  in  Congress 
from  making  local  laws  for  others.  All  the  states  were  subjected 
to  three-fourths  of  the  whole,  as  a  complete  security  against  the 
geographical  partialities  of  a  majority  ;  and  this  inevitable  geo- 
graphical temper  in  Congress,  was  also  subjected  to  uniformity  in 
the  effect  of  federal  laws,  practicable  in  relation  to  federal,  but 
impracticable  in  relation  to  local  interests."  Can  any  other  system 
be  more  happily  contrived  to  avoid  the  danger  to  which  the 
union  is  exposed  by  the  geographical  dissimilarities  between  the 
three  great  divisions  of  the  United  States,  established  by  nature 
and  fostered  by  habit  ? 

Yates's  notes,  p.  200.     "  Judge  Ellsworth   observed,  I  am 

"  asked  by  my  honourable  friend  from  Massachusetts,  whether 

w  by  entering  into  a  national  government,  I  will  not  equally  par- 

"  ticipate  in  national  security  ?     I  confess  I  should ;  but  I  want 

32 


250  taylor's  views. 

"  domestick  happiness,  as  well  as  general  security.  A  general 
(i  government  will  never  grant  me  this,  as  it  cannot  know  my 
"  wants,  or  relieve  my  distress."  This,  though  a  short,  is  a  lu- 
cid commentary  on  our  political  system,  by  an  eminent  member 
of  the  convention,  excluding  the  idea  of  a  national  or  general 
government,  assigning  the  reason  for  that  exclusion,  and  drawing 
a  line  between  federal  and  state  powers,  by  the  incapacity  of  a 
general  government  to  provide  for  the  first  object  of  human  soli- 
citude, namely,  domestick  happiness.  The  division  of  local  from 
federal  interests,  was  a  fine  idea  for  excluding  geographical  colli- 
sions, for  effecting  a  lasting  amity  between  federal  interests,  and 
for  shielding  the  people  against  a  concentrated  supremacy,  igno- 
rant of  their  wants,  and  incapable  of  providing  for  their  hap*- 
piness. 

It  is  repeatedly  urged,  that  the  division  of  powers  between 
the  federal  and  state  governments,  will  neither  secure  a  mutual 
spirit  of  moderation,  nor  control  the  ambition  of  either  depart- 
ment. If  not,  what  will  ?  The  objection  only  propounds  the 
question  of  preference  between  a  federal  and  a  national  govern- 
ment, or  between  divided  and  concentrated  power,  in  a  new 
form,  and  endeavours  to  defeat  the  best  political  principle,  by 
charging  it  with  imperfection.  In  estimating  this  objection,  we 
ought  to  consider  that  both  these  governments  have,  in  a  vast 
majority  of  instances,  adhered  to  the  constitution,  and  acted  with 
moderation ;  and  that  both,  in  cases  comparatively  few,  have  ex- 
ceeded their  powers.  Mutual  moderation  is  therefore  the  gene- 
ral effect  of  our  system,  and  occasional  excess  an  inconsiderable 
exception.  What  produces  the  general  effect  but  our  division  of 
powers,  the  moral  co-equality  of  the  states,  and  a  congeniality 
in  the  state  and  federal  governments  with  the  powers  assigned  to 
each  ?  Ought  this  general  effect  to  be  surrendered,  because  it  is 
exposed  to  exceptions  ?  It  is  an  axiom,  that  the  means  must  be 
commensurate  to  the  end.  If  the  moderation  of  power  is  the 
end,  is  its  concentration,  or  its  division,  the  best  mode  of  effecting 
this  end  ?  But  collision  occurs  when  power  is  moderated  by 
division.  This  is  not  a  vice,  but  the  very  virtue  in  the  principle 
of  dividing  power,  which  gives  it  all  its  efficacy  and  all  its  va- 
lue ;  and  the  absence  of  collision  from  a  concentrated  supremacy, 


taylor's  views.  251 

is  exactly  the  vice  which  engenders  all  its  oppressions.  The 
authors  of  the  Federalist  earnestly  and  frequently  impressed  the 
mutual  control  between  the  federal  and  state  governments,  as  the 
chief  recommendation  of  the  constitution.  Without  collision, 
this  control  could  not  have  any  operation.  Let  us  contrast  this 
remedy  against  oppression,  with  the  project  for  putting  an  end 
both  to  this  admired  control  and  the  collisions  it  produces,  by 
converting  Congress  or  the  supreme  court  into  a  council  of  cen- 
sors, able  by  laws  and  judgments  to  abrogate  state  laws,  and  to 
create  constitutional  laws.  Either  censorial  supremacy  will  put 
an  end  to  the  division  of  power,  with  all  its  controlling  and  mo- 
derating effects,  so  highly  praised  and  so  ably  defended  by  the 
Federalist. 

We  have  seen  a  censorial  experiment  in  Pennsylvania^  under 
a  notion  that  it  was  a  good  mode  of  preserving  and  improving  a 
constitution.  Though  the  Pennsylvanian  college  of  censors  was 
invested  with  less  power  than  is  claimed  by  the  supreme  courtj 
though  the  individuals  composing  it  were  also  selected  on  ac- 
count of  their  eminent  talents  and  integrity  ;  and  though  it  could 
neither  commit  geographical  frauds,  nor  distribute  powers  par- 
tially between  two  departments  designed  to  control  each  other; 
yet  party  spirit  and  personal  prepossessions  appeared  in  this  con- 
centrated power,  unbalanced  and  uncontrolled  by  another  de- 
partment; and  two  years  sufficed  to  sicken  Pennsylvania  of  her 
concentrated  censorial  supremacy.  All  the  vices  by  which  her 
supreme  college  was  infected,  will  follow  human  nature  into  the 
supreme  court.  And  moreover  the  state  sympathy  of  the  judi- 
cial supremacy,  would  be  infinitely  less  perfect  than  that  of  the 
Pennsylvanian  college ;  it  would  be  under  no  state  control  in 
modelling  the  rights  of  the  people  like  the  Pennsylvanian  cen- 
sors ;  and  inextinguishable  geographical  feelings  would  reach  the 
court  as  well  as  Congress  in  the  exercise  of  local  supremacy.  If 
a  supreme  censorial  power  over  state  laws  and  the  constitution  is 
given  to  Congress,  the  vices  which  rendered  the  Pennsylvanian 
censors  intolerable,  will  be  attended  by  a  supernumerary  host  of 
mercenary  allies.  Party  spirit,  geographical  interests,  and  per- 
sonal views,  will  constitute  the  college.  Such  hungry  guardians 
of  state  rights,  and  usurping  controllers  of  federal  power,  will 


252  Taylor's  views. 

mangle  the  constitution  by  any  constructions  for  which  they  may 
have  occasion.  When  Congress  was  divided  into  two  parties, 
called  federal  and  republican,  only  theoretically  sectarian,  and 
not  geographically  united,  each  had  its  own  fashion  of  construing 
the  constitution.  The  fluctuating  constructions  of  money-hunt- 
ing parties  would  be  worse  guardians  for  state  rights,  or  for  se- 
curing the  purity  of  the  constitution,  than  honest  zealots.  But 
now  that  these  honest  zealots  no  longer  balance  each  other,  a  fe- 
deral college  of  censors,  either  legislative  or  judicial,  would  be 
exposed  to  no  check  in  deciding  whether  federal  powers  ought 
to  be  increased  or  controlled.  When  the  parties  were  nearly 
equal,  and  contending  for  the  favour  of  the  people,  though  con- 
tradictory constitutional  constructions  were  produced,  such  ex- 
cesses were  avoided  ns  would  expose,  one  party  to  publick  cen- 
sure, and  risque  the  loss  of  power.  Whilst  this  check  remained, 
the  better  check  of  co-ordinate  departments  was  not  so  necessary 
as  it  is  at  present.  Besides,  so  far  as  these  parties  were  influenced 
by  speculative  opinions  in  relation  to  the  principles  of  govern- 
ment, they  were  expositors  of  the  constitution,  infinitely  more 
honest  than  the  geographical  parties  which  a  federal  supremacy 
must  produce.  A  speculative  opinion  may  be  upright ;  a  geo- 
graphical interest,  opposed  to  another,  is  always  a  knave.  The 
trivial  gedgraphy  of  a  president,  sufficiently  demonstrates,  that 
Congress  would  be  a  bad  guardian  of  state  rights,  even  with  the 
assistance  of  its  federal  court. 

The  variety  in  tiie  local  laws  of  the  states,  is  a  necessary  con- 
sequence of  the  variety  in  their  circumstances.  An  intimate 
knowledge  of  these  laws,  and  also  of  the  facts  by  which  they 
were  dictated,  could  alone  provide  for  state  prosperity.  The 
censorial  college  of  Pennsylvania  possessed  this  knowledge  ;  yet 
as  it  was  a  species  of  concentrated  power,  unexposed  to  any 
wholesome  restraint  by  the  principle  of  division,  it  speedily  be- 
came intolerable.  Neither  the  members  of  Congress,  nor  of  the 
supreme  court,  can  possibly  possess  that  intimate  knowledge  of 
state  laws  or  circumstances  necessary  to  enable  them  to  provide 
adequately  for  the  wants  of  the  states.  If  their  codes  are  exposed 
to  be  garbled  by  federal  ignorance  and  partiality,  the  intellectual 
and  sympathetic!*  capacity  of  the  slates  to  provide  for  their  local 


TAYLOR'S  VIEWS.  253 

exigencies,  would  be  of  little  or  no  use.  It  would  be  exactly- 
reduced  to  the  same  situation  as  the  intellectual  and  sympathetick 
capacity  of  Pennsylvania  would  have  been,  had  its  censorial 
college  been  composed  of  men  from  South-Carolina,  selected  by 
the  people  of  the  latter  state.  Local  laws  or  judgments,  passed 
or  rendered  by  Congress  or  the  supreme  court,  are  exposed  to 
the  same  objections,  and  would  terminate  in  the  same  conse- 
quences. 

Love  and  respect  for  a  form  of  government  can  only  be  in- 
spired by  duration,  and  fixed  by  habit ;  and  fluctuations  in  con- 
stitutional laws,  produced  by  forensick  constructions,  constitute 
a  national  calamity  of  inexpressible  magnitude,  by  depriving 
them  of  the  love  and  respect  arising  from  stability.  To  secure 
stability,  slow  and  difficult  modes  of  altering  the  constitution 
were  prescribed,  and  the  momentous  power  was  exclusively  con- 
fided to  the  best  talents  of  the  country.  But  talents  were  not 
absolutely  trusted,  and  precautions  of  great  importance  were 
added,  with  no  other  intention 'but  that  of  preventing  the  rights 
of  the  states  from  being  absorbed  by  the  federal  government. 
The  constitution  was  not  turned  afloat  te  be  carried  hither  and 
thither  by  the  winds  and  waves  of  forensick  and  geographical 
constructions  ;  of  prepossession,  avarice,  and  ambition  ;  without 
the  concurrence  in  making  amendments  required  to  give  it  sta- 
bility. To  these  winds  and  waves,  a  censorial  supremacy  in 
Congress  or  the  court,  or  in  both  united,  would  be  so  constantly 
exposed,  that  in  floating  about  it  would  certainly  be  wrecked 
upon  consolidation  and  monarchy,  the  Scylla  and  Charybdis  by 
which  it  is  beset.  Such  a  supremacy  would  be  exposed  to  far 
more  pestilential  defects  than  those  by  which  the  censorial  col. 
lege  of  Pennsylvania  was  rendered  intolerable.  This  Pennsyl- 
vanian  supremacy  could  neither  increase  its  own  power,  nor  feed 
its  own  ambition,  nor  extend  its  own  patronage. 

The  censorial  supremacy  exercised  by  the  federal  court,  has 
been  proposed  to  be  transferred  to  the  federal  senate,  by  invest- 
ing that  body  with  a  supervision  of  political  judgments  ;  but  this 
would  be  an  exchange  of  the  mutual  control  between  the  state 
and  federal  governments,  and  of  the  mode  prescribed  for  amend- 
ing the  constitution,  for  the  very  principle  which  the  court  is  la- 


254  taylor's  views, 

bouring  to  establish,  namely,  that  of  a  national  supremacy  in  the 
federal  government,  able  to  alter  the  constitution  by  construction, 
without  the  concurrence  of  three-fourths  of  the  states. 

The  constitution  is  accused  of  wanting  precision  in  its  division 
of  powers  between  the  state  and  federal  governments  ;  and  I 
shall  attempt  to  defend  it  against  a  charge  intended  to  deprive  it 
of  its  federal  principle,  to  make  way  for  a  consolidated  govern- 
ment. Every  body  admits,  that  it  does  not  invest  either  the 
people  of  the  United  States  collectively,  nor  the  people  of  any 
one  state,  nor  the  government  of  a  state,  nor  the  government  of 
the  United  States,  nor  any  one  department  of  the  federal  govern- 
ment, with  a  power  to  alter  its  stipulations.  Let  these  acknow- 
ledged truths  be  the  guides  of  our  reasoning,  and  the  tests  of  its 
correctness.  The  censorial  power  established  by  the  constitu- 
tion, embraces  and  exhausts  the  whole  right  of  altering  it.  The 
supreme  censorial  power  of  construction  contended  for,  is  not  re- 
cognised in  defining  the  right  of  alteration.  The  proposition  to 
invest  the  senate  with  a  power  to  supervise  the  political  judg- 
ments of  the  court,  is  an  admission  that  the  judicial  federal  de- 
partment may  alter  the  constitution  by  such  judgments,  and 
against  this  evil  the  remedy  proposed  is  to  transfer  from  the  ju- 
dicial department  to  the  federal  senatorial  department,  the  same 
supreme  right  of  alteration.  But  both  the  admission  and  the  re- 
medy are  equally  contrary  to  the  constitutional  definition  of  the 
right  of  alteration,  equally  an  acknowledgment  of  a  supreme 
concentrated  power,  and  equally  an  obliteration  of  the  division 
between  state  and  federal  powers. 

If  neither  of  the  enumerated  departments  can  alter  the  consti- 
tution, the  chief  difficulty  of  my  course  of  reasoning  is  removed, 
and  the  arguments  by  which  it  is  assailed,  are  surmounted.  The 
word  constitution  can  no  longer  be  construed  to  contain  recon- 
dite powers,  to  be  drawn  from  it  by  departments  having  no  pow- 
er to  alter  it.  We  have  used  it  to  express  the  formation  of  both 
the  state  and  federal  governments ;  but  not  with  a  design  that  it 
should  furnish  a  pretext  for  altering  the  form  or  principles  of 
either,  without  the  sanction  required  in  each  case.  If  the  word 
gives  no  authority  to  any  department  of  state  governments  to  alter 
state  constitutions,  without  the  consent  of  the  people,  it  can  give 


TAYLOR'S  VIEWS.  255 

no  authority  to  any  federal  department  to  alter  the  federal  con- 
stitution, without  the  consent  of  three-fourths  of  the  states. 
Though  we  have  obtained  this  undeniable  truth,  it  is  said  to  be 
inert,  for  want  of  means  to  give  it  efficacy.  The  union  is  ad- 
mitted to  be  constituted  of  state  and  federal  powers,  but  it  is 
contended  that  the  constitution  has  been  inexplicit  in  dividing 
them.  An  apprehension  of  difficulty  from  this  circumstance, 
caused  the  supremacy  over  the  constitution  to  be  deposited  in 
three-fourths  of  the  states,  and  not  in  a  majority  of  Congress,  nor 
in  a  majority  of  the  supreme  court.  Even  a  majority  of  the 
states  themselves  was  not  intrusted  with  this  power.  But  other 
precautions  were  necessary  to  prevent  the  state  or  federal  depart- 
ment from  altering  the  constitution  by  construction.  Among 
these,  the  chief  must  be  a  principle  applicable  to  both  depart- 
ments, or  it  could  not  have  any  effect.  Neither  can  alter  the 
constitution.  What  principle  can  enforce  this  truth,  except  that 
of  a  co-equal  right  of  construction,  and  of  self-preservation? 
If  no  department  throughout  our  whole  system  can,  by  any  un- 
constitutional act,  legislative  or  judicial,  deprive  a  citizen  of  a 
constitutional  right,  it  would  be  strange  if  either  the  federal  or 
state  governments  could  be  thus  deprived  of  constitutional  rights. 
Modes  are  resorted  to  for  securing  the  rights  of  individuals.  As 
to  the  rights  of  these  departments,  they  are  first  secured  by  their 
co-equality.  Neither  or  both  can  construe  the  constitution. 
Neither  or  both  can  alter  it  by  construction.  Neither  or  both 
can  exercise  the  power  of  usurping  a  right  belonging  to  the 
other.  Neither  or  both  can  defend  its  own  rights.  The  con- 
stitution gives  no  supremacy  to  either  of  these  departments  over 
the  other.  But  the  constitution,  aware  that  this  mutual  right  of 
self-defence  against  unconstitutional  construction,  might  produce 
collisions,  has  provided  a  remedy  to  act  in  concert  with  the  mu- 
tual check,  as  well  devised  for  securing  state  and  federal  consti- 
tutional rights,  as  any  which  has  ever  been  devised  for  securing 
the  rights  of  individuals.  If  these  departments  should  differ  as 
to  the  extent  of  their  respective  rights,  the  remedy  provided  is 
not  that  one  should  exercise  dominion  over  the  other.  On  the 
contrary,  the  constitution  contains  a  different,  and  probably  the 
best  remedy,  which  could  have  been  devised,  both  to  restrain  and 


256  Taylor's  views. 

give  effect  to  the  salutary  mutual  check  between,  the  state  and 
federal  departments.  Two-thirds  of  Congress  may  appeal  from 
an  erroneous  state  construction,  and  propose  an  amendment  for 
controlling  it,  to  the  tribunal  invested  with  the  right  of  decision. 
"Why  was  this  right  of  appeal  limited  to  two-thirds  of  Congress, 
if  a  majority  was  invested  with  a  supreme  power  of  construction, 
or  if  the  same  majority  could  appeal  to  the  federal  court  ?  Can 
a  majority  evade  this  limitation,  with  or  without  the  aid  of  its 
court  ?  Two-thirds  were  required  to  prevent  hasty  and  frivo- 
lous appeals,  and  to  preserve  the  rights  of  the  states  against  party 
majorities  and  geographical  prepossessions.  If  two-thirds  will 
not  appeal  against  a  state  law,  it  is  an  admission  of  its  constitu- 
tionality, by  the  constitutional  mode  established  for  deciding  the 
question.  If  this  specified  mode  is  defeated  by  transferring  the 
supremacy  of  construction  from  two-thirds  of  Congress  and 
three-fourths  of  the  states,  to  a  majority  of  Congress  and  a  majo- 
rity of  the  court,  one  of  these  majorities  would  be  invested  with 
a  power  of  deciding  collisions  between  the  state  and  federal  go- 
vernments, although  neither  is  invested  with  a  right  even  to  pro- 
pose an  alteration  of  the  powers  given  to  either  department  by 
the  constitution.  The  precision  in  the  mode  of  amendment,  is 
the  remedy  provided  against  any  want  of  precision,  in  the  divi- 
sion of  powers,  which  the  licentiousness  of  construction  might 
lay  hold  of.  The  security  against  unconstitutional  or  inconve- 
nient state  acts,  is  deposited  in  two-thirds  of  Congress  and  three- 
fourths  of  the  states,  as  a  provision  for  settling  collisions  between 
the  state  and  federal  governments  amicably,  and  for  avoiding  the 
more  dangerous  conflicts  which  a  supremacy  of  geographical  ma- 
jorities would  produce,  if  invested  with  a  supremacy  liable  to 
geographical  fluctuations.  In  this  provision  the  constitution  dis- 
closes an  eminent  superiority  over  every  other  division  of  power 
which  has  hitherto  been  invented.  The  mutuality  of  the  check 
alone  can  settle  collisions  between  the  English  political  depart- 
ments ;  here,  the  constitution  has  established  a  mode  by  which 
either  the  federal  or  state  governments  can  refer  their  settlement 
to  a  regular  tribunal,  so  as  to  obviate  any  inconvenience  arising 
from  a  division  of  power,  and  also  to  preserve  the  mutual  check 
between  collateral  political   departments.     The  difference  be- 


TAYLOR'S  VIEWS.  257 

tween  the  two  resources  is  disclosed  by  the  consideration,  that 
our  tribunal  for  settling  such  collisions,  is  deeply  interested  to 
preserve  a  free  form  of  government,  and  that  each  English  de- 
partment is  deeply  influenced  to  get  as  much  power  as  it  can 
from  its  rivals.  Is  there  no  difference  between  an  appeal  by 
two-thirds  of  Congress  to  the  tribunal  invested  exclusively  with 
the  power  of  altering  the  constitution,  in  order  to  settle  any  dif- 
ficulties as  to  the  extent  of  reserved  or  delegated  powers,  and  an 
appeal  by  a  majority  of  Congress  to  a  majority  of  the  supreme 
court  for  the  same  purpose  ?  Suppose  one  English  department 
could  settle  its  own  collisions  with  the  others.  It  would  reduce 
that  government  to  the  form  now  proposed  for  us,  by  expunging 
from  the  constitution  both  its  provision  for  settling  such  colli- 
sions, and  also  the  mutual  check  between  independent  political 
departments.  The  state  and  federal  departments  are  essential 
portions  of  our  form  of  government.  These  were  intended  to 
be  preserved  by  their  mutual  independence,  and  by  the  special 
remedy  to  meet  collisions,  which  we  have  just  considered,  and 
not  by  a  supremacy  in  one  department  over  the  other.  That 
would  establish  a  concentrated  sovereignty  in  the  federal  govern- 
ment, as  absolute  as  a  supremacy  of  the  king  of  England  over 
the  lords  and  commons.  If  the  constitution  had  invested  the 
federal  department  with  this  supremacy,  it  would  not  have  pro- 
vided a  mode  for  deciding  collisions,  because  these  could  not 
have  arisen  between  supremacy  and  subordination;  but  this 
mode  was  suggested  by  a  foresight,  that  collisions  would  be  pro- 
duced by  the  counterpoise  and  mutual  check,  without  which  its 
division  of  powers  would  be  nominal  and  ineffectual. 

The  necessity  for  a  substantial  division  of  state  and  federal 
powers,  constituted  the  chief  tenet  of  our  political  creed,  when 
the  constitution  was  adopted ;  and  it  is  probable  that  a  great  ma- 
jority of  the  people  are  still  adverse  to  the  recent  heresy  of  a 
concentrated  supreme  power  in  the  federal  government,  because 
divisions  of  power  have  been  conclusively  proved  to  comprise 
the  only  mode  of  maintaining  a  free  government  by  the  verdict 
of  experience,  declaring  that  the  people  have  never  been  able  to 
fathom  the  depths  of  ambition,  or  to  detect  the  designs  of  affected 
patriotism,  whilst  they  are  controllable.  Engaged  in  their  pri- 
33 


258  TAYLOR'S  VIEWS. 

vate  affairs,  they  have  neither  time  nor  information  for  unravel- 
ing intrigues,  or  detecting  artifices.     It  is  true  that  their  interest 
invites  them  to  applaud  patriotism,  but  it  is  also  true  that  they 
are  easily  misled  by  ingenious  projects,  and  deceived  by  specious 
professions.     Hypocrisy  can  assume  the  garb  of  honesty,  and 
ambition  can  embellish  itself  with  ostentation,  whilst   both  are 
meditating  an  embezzlement  of  publick  rights.     The  people  can 
never  act  with  concert  against  these,  their  natural  enemies,  unless 
roused  from  the  lethargy  of  inattention  by  sentinels  able  to  dis- 
cover the  secret  approaches  of  the  foe,  and  of  a  character  annex- 
in°-  weight  to  their  notifications.     Where  can  such  political  sen- 
tinels be  found,  except  in  a  division  of  power  between  co-ordinate 
departments  ?     If  the  favour  of  God  does  not  suffice  to  prevent 
wickedness,  will    popular  favour  alone  ensure  political  virtue, 
when  it  may  be  stolen  ?     The  theft  may  be  more  easily  perpe- 
trated in  the  United  States  than  in  other  countries,  by  inlisting 
geographical  interests  as  accomplices.     Even  where  these  pow- 
erful associates  do  not  exist,  and  under  republicks,  as  at  Athens, 
the  people  have  been  used  like  the  figures  upon  a  chess-board, 
merely  to  decide  the  fortune  of  political  gamblers ;  but  where 
these  can  play  with  geographical  interests  and  prepossessions,  an 
augmentation  of  the  danger  requires  peculiar  precautions.     That 
chiefly  relied   upon   by  the  constitution,    and  singularly   distin- 
guishable from  other  divisions  of  power,  which  have  been  unsuc- 
cessful under  more  manageable  circumstances,  is  the  mutual  check 
between  the  state  and  federal  governments ;  and   if  this  is  lost, 
the  subjugation  of  the  people  to  some  despotick  form  of  govern- 
ment, will  be  more  probable  here,  than  in  countries  where  equi- 
valent auxiliaries  for  political  vice  do  not  exist.     At  Rome,  the 
division  of  power  between  the  people  and  the  senate,  terminated 
in  a  despotism.     In  France,  its  division  between  the  people  and 
their  representatives,  steeped  the   hands  of  representation    in 
blood,  and  obliterated  national  liberty.     And  in  England,  a  con- 
centrated supremacy   is   dealing  out  oppression  to  Ireland.     In 
these  instances,  the  want  of  some  division  of  power,  able  and 
interested  to  excite  the  attention  of  the  people  to  usurpations  and 
frauds,  has  exposed   them   to   be    harassed    into  languor    and 
moulded  into  servility.     Had  experience   determined  that  the 


Taylor's  views.  259 

people  alone  can  prevent  the  introduction  of  an  oppressive  go- 
vernment, constitutions  providing  for  them  the  auxiliaries  of  di- 
visions and  checks  of  power,  would  have  been  useless ;  and  it 
must  have  been  admitted  that  a  concentrated  power  was  a  com- 
plete security  for  liberty.  But  as  this  postulate,  far  from  being  a 
truism,  is  only  a  flattery  to  induce  the  people  to  become  the  in- 
struments of  their  own  subjugation,  it  is  still  the  basis  upon  which 
ambition  commences  its  superstructures. 

In  fact,  a  supremacy  in  one  man,  or  in  one  body  of  men,  is 
the  very  circumstance  which  has  led  mankind  through  a  long 
course  of  calamities,  to  the  introduction  of  checks  and  balances, 
not  as  adversaries  to  the  natural  sovereignty  of  the  people,  but 
as  its  best  allies.  The  history  of  England  discloses  the  throes 
and  anguish  of  society  under  the  concentrated  power  of  a  king, 
of  a  king  and  his  barons,  of  a  house  of  commons,  to  which  the 
supremacy  of  Cromwell  was  preferred,  and  of  a  king,  lords,  and 
commons,  corrupted  by  a  monopoly  of  power,  and  coalesced  by 
a  sympathy  for  themselves  adverse  to  the  liberty  of  the  people. 
This  last  fortuitous  medley,  into  which  the  English  nation  were 
rather  justled  by  rugged  circumstances  than  conducted  by  reason, 
retains  the  vices  of  a  concentrated  power.  The  people  of  Eng- 
land took  refuge  from  a  concentrated  representative  supremacy, 
to  a  Stuart.  The  people  of  France  fled  from  a  concentrated  re- 
presentative supremacy,  into  the  arms  of  a  military  despots 
When  James  the  Second  was  expelled  for  usurping  a  supreme 
power  over  the  other  English  departments,  the  experience  that 
kings,  lords,  and  commons,  could  combine  to  oppress  the  peo- 
ple, suggested  a  lecture  to  restrain  them  from  doing  so,  called  a 
declaration  of  rights,  which  serves  no  other  purposes  but  to  ac- 
knowledge the  probability  of  such  nefarious  conduct  in  political 
departments,  when  gathered  together,  and  to  demonstrate  the 
feebleness  of  a  didactick  parchment  for  securing  the  liberty  of 
the  people  against  a  concentrated  supremacy.  When  the  revolu- 
tion changed  our  dependent  provinces  into  free  and  independent 
states,  we  were  to  consider  whether  a  supreme  national  govern- 
ment, compounded  of  balancing  departments  according  to  the 
English  model,  though'  attended  by  a  declaration  of  state  rights^ 
would  suffice  to  secure  the  sovereignty,  happiness,  and  liberty  of 


260  taylor's  views. 

the  people,  or  whether  powers  should  be  divided  between  a  fede- 
ral and  state  governments,  as  a  better  mode  of  effecting  these 
great  objects.  The  representation  in  the  house  of  commons  had 
not  prevented  the  bad  effects  of  a  concentrated  supremacy.  The 
geography  of  the  United  States  rendered  it  impossible  that  a  Con- 
gress should  be  as  well  qualified  to  exercise  a  national  supremacy 
as  the  English  parliament ;  and  our  heterogeneous  local  interests 
could  not  be  governed  by  a  concentrated  power,  except  by  melt- 
ing them  up  together  in  the  crucible  of  despotism.  Such  a  pro- 
ject, with  only  half  our  present  extent  of  territory,  was  but  little 
less  chimerical,  than  one  for  coercing  a  whole  continent  into  a 
consolidated  government,  from  an  expectation  that  geographical 
lines  could  be  obliterated  by  representation.  It  was  even  then 
foreseen  that  a  Congress  would  have  its  geography  and  climates, 
like  the  surface  of  the  United  States.  To  avoid  a  concentrated 
supremacy,  and  also  geographical  collisions  in  or  out  of  Con- 
gress, the  expedient  of  conforming  to  the  laws  of  nature,  was 
preferred  to  a  war  with  them.  The  division  of  local  and  federal 
interests  united  each  allotment  of  powers  with  the  strongest  na- 
tural motive  for  their  preservation.  It  was  the  interest  of  each 
state  to  manage  its  local  affairs  in  its  own  way,  and  it  was  the  in- 
terest of  all  the  states  to  manage  their  common  affairs  by  a  mu- 
tual concert.  Thus  both  interests  were  made  to  harmonise  with 
both  objects  ;  they  were  not  violated  in  either  case ;  and  a  com- 
mon interest  was  used  as  the  cement  both  of  local  and  federal 
powers. 

To  suppose  that  the  state  governments,  operating  within  limit- 
ed territorial  lines,  either  would  or  could  defeat  our  federal  pros- 
perity, and  yet  that  a  national  government,  operating  without 
any  limitation,  would  not  or  could  not  commit  local  partialities, 
is  in  theory  a  contradiction.  A  common  federal  interest  pre- 
vents a  state  from  attempting  the  first  mischief ;  all  the  allure- 
ments of  supreme  power,  would  invite  a  national  government  to 
commit  the  second.  That  these  can  get  into  a  federal  Congress, 
has  been  practically  proved,  upon  occasions  both  important  and 
frivolous.  Ought  they  to  be  multiplied  by  changing  a  federal 
into  a  national  Congress  ?  The  geographical  question  about  un- 
settled lands,  was  so  managed  as  to  get  them  from  some  states 


taylor's  views.  261 

and  leave  them  to  others.  The  funding  and  banking  questions 
were  decided  by  geographical  motives.  The  sedition  law  was 
intended  to  operate  geographically.  The  controversy  for  the 
presidency  discloses  geographical  feelings,  both  in  Congress  and 
the  states.  The  Missouri  question  displayed  a  more  formidable 
geographical  spirit  in  Congress,  than  has  ever  appeared  in  a  state 
government.  The  usurped  supremacy  over  a  federal  treasury, 
has  cost  the  people  many  millions.  These  and  other  facts 
prove,  that  a  national  supremacy  would  be  only  a  perpetual  lot- 
tery for  distributing  blanks  and  prizes  to  states  and  individuals, 
by  the  will  of  a  geographical  majority ;  and  that  excessive  cor- 
ruption and  the  keenest  resentment  would  probably  be  produced 
by  these  geographical  benefits  and  injuries.  The  result  of  the 
practical  testimony  is,  that  local  interests,  if  left  at  home,  will 
never  hurt  the  federal  union ;  but  that,  if  assembled  in  Congress, 
they  will  produce  a  government  influenced  by  fraud,  which  must 
end  in  tyranny,  or  destroy  the  union.  An  exercise  of  local 
powers  by  Congress  and  the  supreme  court,  has  already  inter- 
rupted our  federal  harmony ;  and  it  is  obvious,  that  the  division 
of  powers  between  the  state  and  federal  governments,  must  have 
been  the  true  source  of  that  share  of  prosperity  which  we  have 
hitherto  enjoyed. 

The  expedient  for  counteracting  the  evils  likely  to  ensue  from 
the  dissimilarity  between  geographical  interests,  was  to  leave  the 
lines  between  the  states,  and  the  local  interests  which  these  lines 
embraced,  undisturbed,  instead  of  collecting  them  into  one  in- 
triguing arena.  The  more  numerous  are  state  governments,  the 
less  able  will  one  be  to  usurp  federal  powers.  Each  will  be 
controlled  by  the  others  in  such  attempts.  But  if  a  supreme 
power  over  state  local  rights  should  be  concentrated  in  Con- 
gress, an  injudicious  or  fraudulent  exercise  of  it  would  be  the 
consequence,  and  provoke  pernicious  geographical  combinations. 
Congress  would  become  an  assembly  of  geographical  envoys, 
perpetually  exposed  to  the  same  difficulties  which  made  it  so  hard 
for  the  state  deputies  to  frame  a  federal  constitution.  If  a  large 
state  was  divided  into  two  counties,  a  legislature  composed  of 
representatives  from  each,  would  exhibit  a  scene  of  geographical 
contentions.     A  concentrated  supremacy  in  Congress  would  sub- 


262  taylor's  views. 

stantially  divide  the  United  States  into  three  great  counties^ 
northern,  southern,  and  western ;  and  their  representatives 
would  be  influenced  by  geographical  circumstances  mid  habits^ 
ten-fold  stronger  than  those  which  would  produce  pernicious 
collisions  between  the  two  supposed  dividends  of  one  stale. 
There  existed  no  remedy  against  an  evil  so  certain,  but  to  divest 
a  majority  of  Congress  of  a  power  to  exercise  local  partialities. 

The  force  of  this  argument  depends  upon  the  fact,  whether 
the  name,  Congress,  can  wring  out  of  human  nature  its  acknow- 
ledged qualities.  Rut  is  not  human  nature  liable  to  a  geographi- 
cal mensuration  ?  If  it  receives  impressions  from  locality,  its 
geography  may  be  almost  as  distinctly  ascertained,  as  that  of  the 
earth.  The  geography  of  human  nature  sticks  to  a  man  like  his 
skin,  or  travels  with  him  like  his  shadow.  Will  he  be  flayed  of 
this  adhesive  integument,  by  calling  him  a  member  of  Congress? 
The  sages  who  have  formed  and  improved  our  system  of  govern- 
ment, sensible  that  the  man  and  his  geography  could  never  be 
separated,  have  used  this  quality  of  human  nature  so  as  to  make 
it  a  friend,  and  not  an  enemy  to  the  union.  They  saw  its  effica- 
cy to  unite  the  provinces  against  England,  and  wisely  inferred 
that  it  would  also  unite  the  states  in  reference  to  other  countries, 
and  they  availed  themselves  of  the  geography  of  the  mind,  both 
to  effect  the  union  and  also  to  prevent  a  disunion.  They  did 
not  depend  upon  its  force  in  one  case,  and  go  to  war  with  it  in 
another,  but  they  conformed  to  it  in  both,  by  using  it  as  the  in- 
strument for  securing  the  states  against  foreign  nations,  and  also 
as  the  instrument  for  expelling  the  evils  which  would  be  produc- 
ed by  a  concentrated  power  at  home. 

To  prevent  local  interests  from  going  to  war  with  each  other, 
they  are  incarcerated  within  the  lines  of  a  state,  and  if  they  should 
be  let  loose  through  the  avenue  of  Congress,  and  the  postern  of 
the  supreme  court,  the  soundest  security  for  the  union  of  the 
states  and  the  liberty  of  the  people,  will  be  lost.  Local  interests, 
instead  of  being  confined  within  the  boundary  of  each  state,  will 
go  to  war  with  each  other  in  Congress,  the  causes  of  their  hosti- 
lity, intended  to  be  removed  by  the  union,  will  be  revived,  vic- 
tories will  be  gained  and  defeats  suffered,  and  both  will  generate 
new  battles.     Repulsion  and  attraction,  arising  from  the  differ- 


Taylor's  views.  263 

cnee  and  similitude  of  geographical  interests,  would  create  com- 
binations to  commit  local  injuries  or  obtain  local  advantages  by 
the  laws  of  Congress ;  conflicts  between  states,  intended  to  be 
prevented,  would  be  excited,  and  multiplied  ;  and  a  national  su- 
premac)'  over  state  rights  would  either  produce  a  mass  of  frag- 
ments as  materials  for  some  new  form  of  government,  or  require 
the  almighty  power  of  despotism  to  enforce  its  fraudulent 
awards.  Against  this  host  of  evils,  the  constitution  provides,  by 
using  the  geographical  interest  of  the  United  States  to  unite  them 
against  the  geographical  interest  of  other  countries,  and  by  leav- 
ing the  internal  geographical  interest  of  each  state  undisturbed, 
that  it  may  not  destroy  our  internal  tranquillity. 

We  must  not  forget  that  the  people  of  every  state  are  freemen, 
and  that  their  local  interests  can  never  be  subjected  to  a  partial 
or  incompetent  government,  without  depriving  them  of  their 
highest  distinction,  by  the  strongest  mode  of  coercion.  To  avoid 
an  extremity,  odious  to  liberty,  a  line  was  marked  out  by  the 
eighth  and  tenth  sections  of  the  first  article  of  the  constitution ; 
one  section  defining  all  that  Congress  can  do,  and  the  other  all 
that  the  states  cannot  do,  so  far  as  the  question  under  consideration 
is  affected.  To  unite  the  states  against  foreign  aggression  was 
visibly  the  chief  intention  of  the  first  section,  and  to  prevent 
conflicts  between  the  geographical  interests  of  the  states,  that  of 
the  second.  If  a  double  specification  by  delegations  and  prohi- 
bitions positively  expressed,  cannot  draw  a  distinct  line  between 
political  departments,  it  is  true,  as  ambition  uniformly  contends, 
that  no  such  line  can  ever  be  drawn  ;  and  this  mode  of  securing 
human  liberty  must  be  given  up  as  impracticable.  But  the 
twelfth  amendment,  by  referring  to  both  these  sections,  supposes 
that  they  had  drawn  a  plain  line  between  state  and  federal  pow- 
ers. Those  not  delegated  by  the  eighth,  nor  prohibited  by  the 
tenth,  are  reserved  to  the  states.  Yet  it  is  said  that  this  line  may 
be  obscured  and  obliterated  by  verbal  constructions  and  arbitrary 
inferences,  so  as  to  beget  the  contentions  between  the  state  and 
federal  governments  it  was  designed  to  prevent.  But  as  our  fe- 
deral union  would  be  lost  by  losing  the  line,  its  discovery  would 
be  worth  all  the  efforts  of  those  who  believe  that  the  liberty  and 


264  TAYLOR'S  VIEWS'. 

happiness  of  the  people  depend  upon  the  preservation  of  the 
federal  system  established  by  the  constitution. 

Every  sound  argument  must  comprise  a  beginning,  continuity, 
and  conclusion.  lis  beginning  should  establish  a  plain  and  true 
principle,  sufficient  to  support  its  reasoning,  and  justify  its  con- 
clusion, which  will  be  unavoidable,  unless  its  premises  are  false. 
The  states  which  established  the  union  had  assumed  sovereignty 
and  independence ;  they  solemnly  asserted  both,  by  their  first 
confederation  ;  and  the  existing  federal  constitution,  in  its  com- 
mencement, ratification,  and  structure,  recognises  these  rights. 
These  are  the  premises  able  to  sustain  or  explode  the  federal  su- 
premacy contended  for.  If  they  are  true,  every  construction  at 
enmity  with  them  must  be  false. 

The  territorial  lines  between  the  states  are  acknowledged  by 
these  three  solemn  instruments.  Why  was  this  done  ?  For  the 
plain  reason,  that  these  territorial  lines  were  intended  to  define 
the  compass  and  range  of  the  political  rights  assumed  and  reserved 
by  the  states.  Territorial  lines  between  states  answer  no  other 
purpose ;  they  would  be  useless  and  absurd,  except  to  ascertain 
the  extent  of  their  sovereignty  and  independence.  When  the 
moral  or  political  rights  within  any  geographical  space  are 
brought  under  one  supremacy,  no  internal  territorial  lines  are  ne- 
cessary, because  they  would  imply  neither  independence  nor 
sovereignty ;  and  though  old  names  may  remain  from  habit,  they 
would  not  be  definitions  of  political  rights.  The  geographical 
lines  of  Ireland,  before  her  consolidation  with  England,  served 
to  define  the  boundary  of  her  political  rights ;  but  when  these 
were  lost  by  that  consolidation,  they  became,  politically  speak- 
ing, quite  nominal.  The  United  States,  instead  of  consolidating 
themselves  into  one  political  or  geographical  mass,  retained  their 
territorial  lines  for  the  very  purpose  of  defining  the  boundaries 
of  reserved  political  rights.  This  demonstrated  an  intention  of 
dividing  powers  between  the  federal  and  state  governments,  be- 
cause the  territorial  boundaries  of  each  state  were  necessary  to 
ascertain  the  extent  of  the  reserved  powers.  The  federal  go- 
vernment, if  these  principles  are  true,  can  have  no  authority  over 
the  rights  reserved  to  be  exercised  by  a  sovereignty  and  inde- 
pendence, recognised  as  existing  within  territorial  state  lines, 


taylor's  views.  265 

because  it  would  be  inconsistent  with  them.  It  is  manifest  that 
some  state  rights  were  intended  to  be  placed  exclusively  under 
the  guardianship  of  these  principles,  and  that  a  visible  territorial 
line  was  admitted  to  exist  between  state  and  federal  powers; 
we  have  therefore  only  to  find  the  sovereign,  independent,  po- 
litical reservations,  of  which  territorial  lines  were  a  definition. 

The  constitution  availed  itself  of  pre-existing  political  sove- 
reignties, and  the  powerful  qualities  of  human  nature,  in  creating 
a  system  of  government  to  be  enforced,  not  by  the  penalties  of 
power,  but  by  the  sympathies  of  a  common  interest ;  and  there- 
fore it  assigned  federal  powers  to  a  federal  sympathy,  and  local 
powers  to  a  local  sympathy.  To  find  the  line  between  them, 
we  have  only  to  consider  upon  which  sympathy  the  measure 
proposed  will  operate.  This  substratum  of  the  system  is  violat- 
ed, either  by  using  a  federal  sympathy  to  regulate  state  interests, 
or  one  local  state  sympathy  to  regulate  federal  interests.  These 
sympathies,  undisturbed,  will  move  quietly  along,  like  rivers, 
each  in  its  own  channel ;  and  though  they  may  be  occasionally 
ruffled,  no  danger  is  to  be  apprehended  so  long  as  their  channels 
are  unobstructed.  But  as  a  river,  stopped  by  a  land  slip,  or  the 
disruption  of  a  mountain,  becomes  turbulent,  and  finally  cuts  out 
a  new  channel  for  itself,  so  if  state  sympathy  is  disturbed  by  the 
gradual  encroachments  of  federal  power,  or  overwhelmed  by  a 
national  supremacy,  it  will  become  turbulent,  and  find  a  vent  in 
some  unforeseen  direction. 

It  is  a  fact  that  a  national  supremacy  was  proposed  and  rejected 
in  the  convention.  An  inference,  that  a  refusal  of  supremacy  to 
the  whole  government  established,  was  a  gift  of  it  to  a  part ;  that 
a  denial  of  it  to  elected  representatives  indicated  an  intention  of 
bestowing  it  on  a  few  men  appointed  by  and  responsible  to  the 
government  from  which  it  is  withheld  ;  contradicts  this  fact,  be- 
cause the  states  could  not  have  intended  partly  to  reserve,  and 
intirely  to  destroy,  their  local  sovereignties.  If  no  supremacy  is 
given  by  the  line  between  state  and  federal  powers,  the  line  is 
found.  The  respective  sympathies  cannot  be  gotten  at,  nor  any 
state  or  federal  powers  placed  under  their  guardianship,  unless 
an  usurped  supremacy  is  put  out  of  their  way.  Their  import- 
ance for  preserving  the  union,  might  be  demonstrated  by  a  mul- 
34 


266  taylor's  Views. 

titude  of  cases.  Why  did  the  Missouri  question  produce  dis- 
content ?  Because  it  violated  state  or  local  sympathies.  Why 
have  the  bank  and  lottery  laws,  (moralities  of  the  same  complex- 
ion, and  exposed  to  the  same  construction,)  caused  state  opposi- 
tion ?  Because  they  are  trespasses  upon  state  sympathies.  And 
why  are  internal  improvements  by  Congress  unconstitutional  ? 
Because,  being  of  a  local  nature,  they  violate  the  division  be- 
tween local  and  federal  interests,  established  by  the  constitution. 
The  competence  of  either  sympathy  in  almost  every  case,  to  de- 
termine fairly,  constitutes  a  plain  line  between  them.  One  can- 
not decide  justly  for  the  other.  The  constitutional  qualification 
and  disqualification  of  both  arises  from  its  perfect  interest  and 
sympathy  with  the  measure,  or  from  the  absence  of  this  security 
for  justice.  By  this  light  the  line  of  division  between  state  and 
federal  powers  is  easily  found ;  without  it,  construction  may 
wander  wheresoever  it  listeth. 

No  words  have  produced  more  declamation  and  fraud,  than 
confidence  and  distrust.  Factions,  mobs,  and  governments,  often 
call  themselves  the  people,  to  obtain  a  confidence  intended  to  be 
abused.  But  both  distrust  and  confidence  must  be  graduated  by 
the  moral  scale  of  similarities  and  dissimilarities  between  sym- 
pathy and  interest,  to  be  correct.  The  provinces,  contending 
with  England,  reposed  a  just  confidence  in  Congress,  dictated  by 
this  similarity.  But  in  controversies  between  the  states  and  the 
federal  government,  when  the  question  is,  whether  the  latter 
possesses  a  supreme  power  over  the  rights  of  the  former,  the 
case  is  very  different.  A  party  existed  in  the  provinces,  willing 
to  allow  a  supremacy  to  the  British  parliament,  unsustained  by 
a  mutual  sympathy  and  common  interest.  Was  it  guided  by 
the  best  principles  for  preserving  civil  liberty  ?  The  answer 
decides  the  question,  whether  the  people  of  the  United  States 
will  enjoy  most  liberty  by  applying  the  principle  of  a  mutual 
sympathy  and  common  interest  to  both  their  federal  and  local 
affairs,  or  by  sacrificing  it  to  a  federal  or  national  supremacy. 
Confidence  is  not  the  shadow  of  every  form  of  government,  be- 
cause it  is  an  effect  of  a  common  sympathy  and  interest,  not  of 
power.  So  far  as  this  ligament  bound  the  states  together,  fede- 
ral powers  were  delegated  by  the  states,  and  at  the  point  where 


TAYLOR'S  VIEWS.  267 

it  failed,  a  line  was  drawn  upon  the  same  ground  which  dictated 
our  controversy  with  England,  on  each  side  of  which  lay  the 
motives,  sufficient  to  carry  confidence  both  to  the  federal  and 
state  governments,  so  long  as  they  kept  within  their  limits. 

Let  us  illustrate  this  reasoning  by  the  powers  apparently  most 
adverse  to  it,  those  of  war  and  commerce.  Used  to  alter  our 
system  of  government,  like  the  attempted  war  with  France,  or 
to  effect  local  pecuniary  ends,  as  Indian  wars  might  be,  or  to 
gratify  avaricious  or  ambitious  combinations,  the  war  power, 
though  literally  pursued,  would  be  really  abused  ;  and  an  abuse 
of  power  cannot  be  a  just  construction  of  the  constitution. 

The  power  of  regulating  commerce  was  given  to  the  federal 
government  for  two  purposes  ;  to  prevent  foreign  nations  from 
obtaining  unjust  advantages  over  the  United  States,  and  to  pre- 
vent one  state  from  making  another  tributary  to  itself.  The  lat- 
ter purpose  is  defeated  by  using  this  power  to  make  some  states 
tributary  to  others,  and  still  more  glaringly  by  making  the  peo- 
ple of  all  the  states  tributary  to  a  pecuniary  aristocracy.  The 
Federalist  urges  "  the  injustice  of  the  maritime  states  in  levying 
"  contributions  from  the  interior  states,  by  means  of  commer- 
"  cial  regulations,"  as  a  forcible  reason  for  the  union,  and  a 
justification  of  the  delegated  power  to  regulate  commerce.  It 
was  not  made  a  concurrent  power,  like  other  modes  of  taxation, 
lest  some  states  might  use  it  to  inflict  a  tribute  upon  others,  and 
the  duties  are  not  appropriated  by  the  constitution  to  produce 
local  or  individual  wealth,  but  to  the  equal  benefit  of  the  whole 
union.  If  their  partial  appropriation  was  considered  as  unjust 
previously  to  the  constitution,  how  can  a  construction,  by  which 
the  injustice  is  revived,  be  correct,  or  consistent  with  the  division 
of  powers  into  local  and  federal  ?  The  Federalist  emphatically 
observes,  "  that  the  opportunities  which  some  states  possessed  of 
"  rendering  others  tributary  to  them,  by  commercial  regulations, 
"  would  be  impatiently  submitted  to  by  the  tributary  states,  and 
"  be  a  cause  of  war  and  standing  armies."  Did  the  constitution 
design  to  suppress  this  cause  of  war  and  standing  armies,  or  only 
to  transfer  it  from  some  states  to  a  different  geographical  com- 
bination, or  to  a  capitalist  combination  ?  Used  for  either  pur- 
pose, it  would  revive  the  deprecated  evils,  and  probably  dissolve 


268  Taylor's  views. 

the  union  ;  used  fairly,  it  is  excellently  contrived  to  abolish  lo1- 
cal  frauds,  and  to  preserve  it.  Is  there  any  difference  between 
one  state  making  another  tributary  to  itself  by  means  of  com- 
mercial regulations,  and  a  capitalist  or  geographical  combination 
obtaining  from  particular  states  a  tribute  by  the  same  means,  ex- 
cept in  the  magnitude  of  the  imposition,  and  the  aggravation  of 
the  danger?  Must  not  a  remedy  for  evils  be  misconstrued,  if 
the  evils  are  magnified  and  the  remedy  defeated  ?  The  con- 
struction would  moreover  change  our  federal  system  into  an 
aristocracy  of  states  or  of  capitalists,  interested  to  commit  frauds. 
Has  it  ever  been  proved,  that  some  republicks  will  govern  others 
justly  ?  As  a  geographical  interest  influences  its  representatives 
in  Congress,  should  it  have  a  power  of  regulating  commerce, 
not  for  the  purposes  of  preventing  injustice,  external  and  inter- 
nal, but  to  make  some  states  tributary  to  others,  or  to  a  capitalist 
combination,  one  great  intention  of  the  constitution  is  defeated, 
and  the  federal  government  converted  into  an  engine  for  com- 
mitting the  partialities  it  was  designed  to  prevent.  Used  to 
create  a  capitalist  interest,  it  would  produce  the  consequence  of 
subjecting  the  people  of  all  the  states  to  those  oppressions  which 
have  been  produced  in  England  in  the  same  mode.  As  to  this 
power,  as  might  be  the  case  with  the  war  power,  the  constitution 
is  verbally  complied  with,  and  substantially  violated.  A  propo- 
sition made  in  the  convention,  to  invest  the  federal  government 
with  a  power  "  to  establish  rewards  and  immunities  for  the  pro- 
'*  motion  of  agriculture,  commerce,  and  manufactures,"  was  re- 
jected, and  this  rejection  as  forcibly  forbids  a  construction  to 
come  at  the  rejected  power,  as  the  rejection  of  the  proposed  na- 
tional government  forbids  its  introduction  by  construction.  Will 
it  be  said  that  Congress  may  promote  manufactures  by  rewards, 
but  not  agriculture  ?  A  power  in  the  federal  government  to 
grant  rewards  and  immunities  for  the  promotion  of  agriculture, 
commerce,  and  manufactures,  would  have  embraced  local  in- 
terests to  an  extent  quite  sufficient  to  create  a  national  govern- 
ment, and  therefore  when  that  was  rejected,  this  proposition  of 
course  was  also  rejected.  If  a  verbal  compliance  with  the  con- 
stitution, by  which  its  essential  division  of  powers  is  destroyed, 
would  amount  to  its  violation,  constructions^  unsustained  by  its- 


Taylor's  views.  269 

letter,  having  the  same  effect,  are  deprived  even  of  this  sophis- 
try, unless  abuses  of  good  powers  have  a  right  to  make  bad  go- 
vernments. 

Our  history,  short  as  it  is,  proves  that  this  constructive  supre- 
macy has  been  highly  injurious  to  the  states,  and  seems  to  have 
decided  the  preference  between  a  genuine  federal  government, 
and  a  national  government  in  disguise.  The  assumption  of  state 
debts,  and  the  abandonment  of  paper  money,  pretended  to  re- 
imburse the  people  for  the  latter  injury,  by  entailing  upon  them 
a  pecuniary  aristocracy  ;  banking,  besides  cramming  the  idle 
child  of  legislation  with  more  money,  contains  most  of  the  fur- 
niture of  Pandora's  box ;  bounties  to  capitalists,  under  the  re- 
jected proposition  to  give  rewards  for  the  promotion  of  manu- 
factures, constitute  a  large  annual  tribute  imposed  upon  labour 
for  their  benefit ;  a  lottery,  evinced  by  the  diminutiveness  of 
the  fraud,  the  contempt  of  geographical  and  personal  avarice  for 
the  division  of  powers ;  the  pension  law  is  of  a  sufficient  size 
to  prove  that  these  motives  can  make  heavy  as  well  as  light  ob- 
literations of  this  plain  federal  principle  ;  a  single  road  evinces 
the  capacity  of  local  powers  in  Congress  for  squandering  the 
money  of  the  United  States  ;  and  the  supremacy  of  the  federal 
court  is  another  apple  of  discord  thrown  among  the  states,  suffi- 
cient of  itself  to  obliterate  all  the  best  principles  of  the  consti- 
tution. Local  powers,  not  enumerated  among  those  delegated, 
and  most  of  them  even  rejected,  have  been  already  drawn  from 
the  inexhaustible  store-house,  construction,  so  as  to  inflict  an  an- 
nual tribute  on  the  states,  (chiefly  paid  by  about  two-thirds  of 
them,)  of  more  than  ten  millions.  The  people  of  a  few  states 
are  deluded  into  an  opinion,  that  they  receive  it,  whereas  it  is 
received  as  in  England  by  the  capitalist  aristocracy.  The  profit 
of  agricultural  capital  is  reduced  to  three  per  centum,  and  that 
of  pecuniary,  enhanced  up  to  ten  or  twenty.  Does  not  this  fact 
decide  who  pays  and  who  receives  the  tribute  ?  The  acquisition 
of  other  interests,  even  in  those  states  where  the  pecuniary  aris- 
tocracy resides,  is  like  that  which  would  be  derived  from  the  es- 
tablishment among  them  of  a  tribe  of  archbishops  endowed  with 
enormous  salaries  drawn  from  the  United  States ;  they  would 
contribute  towards  the  payment,  though  these  bishops  might  not 


270  TAYLOR  S  VIEWS. 

be  able  to  influence  the  government,  or  to  effect  a  constant  in- 
crease of  their  salaries.  Land  and  pecuniary  speculators  may 
effect  a  combination,  of  which  the  majority  of  every  state  must 
be  the  victim.  These  effects  are  notable  proofs  of  what  is  to  be 
expected  from  constructive  evasions  of  the  division  of  power  by 
a  geographical  Congress.  They  would  have  been  avoided  by  an 
adherence  of  the  federal  government  to  federal  objects.  That 
government  was  not  instituted  to  distribute  wealth  between  the 
cities  and  the  country  ;  between  inland  and  maritime  people ; 
between  states  thinly  and  thickly  peopled  ;  between  the  rich  and 
the  poor ;  and  between  the  several  interests  of  society.  Did  the 
constitution  intend  to  invest  it  with  these  powers  ?  The  notion 
of  some  western  states,  that  its  exercise  of  such  powers  may  be 
beneficial  to  them,  is  the  same  as  if  the  South-American  Spa- 
niards should  give  the  product  of  their  mines  to  England,  to 
make  her  a  great  pecuniary  capitalist,  with  the  crafty  intention 
of  enriching  themselves.  A  policy  so  strange  can  only  be  ac- 
counted for  by  the  interest  of  combinations ;  because  it  never 
fails  to  introduce  a  pecuniary  aristocracy,  which  impoverishes 
nations  by  prodigality,  and  replenishes  treasuries  by  oppression. 
The  annual  bounty  given  to  monied  men,  by  protecting  duties 
alone,  would  suffice  to  pay  the  president,  members  of  Congress, 
and  judges,  thirty  times  as  much  as  they  now  receive ;  but  the 
whole  income  drawn  from  the  people  by  the  federal  assumption 
of  local  powers,  would  pay  sixty  presidents,  eighteen  thousand 
members  of  Congress,  and  above  four  hundred  supreme  judges. 
Is  it  not  a  humiliating  illustration  of  the  human  understanding, 
that  it  should  have  been  led  to  pay  sixty  times  more  to  make  a 
government  bad,  than  what  is  sufficient  to  make  it  good,  for  the 
purpose  of  substituting  avaricious  combinations  for  the  states,  as 
pillars  of  a  federal  government  ?  Such  pillars  in  England  have 
proved  but  a  bad  foundation  for  libert}7,  although  every  man  is 
within  fifteen  miles  of  water-carriage,  and  manufactures  are 
brought  to  perfection.  The  success  of  our  pecuniary  aristocracy 
in  taxing  the  people  with  the  expense  of  a  navy  to  protect  com- 
merce, and  also  with  prohibitions  upon  commerce,  to  enrich  it- 
self, shews  that  its  influence  can  even  reconcile  contradictions,  to 
come  at  money.     The  supremacy  of  construction  is  in  fact  as 


TAYLOR'S  VIEWS.  271 

arbitrary  and  oppressive  as  the  supremacy  of  legitimacy ;  with 
equal  facility  it  can  oppose  ridicule,  contempt,  or  a  bayonet,  to 
reasoning  ;  and  it  can  also  as  effectually  demonstrate  the  truth  of 
Mr.  Hamilton's  position,  "  that  a  national  government  will 
"  maintain  itself."  By  investing  one  of  its  armies  with  a  mo- 
nopoly of  a  species  of  ammunition  not  less  powerful  than  the 
ancient  Greek  fire,  and  arming  the  other  with  more  harmless 
military  weapons,  its  campaigns  against  liberty  will  be  crowned 
with  success,  and  it  will  finally  disclose  a  very  plain  difference 
between  the  delegated  and  reserved  powers,  and  also  the  reasons 
why  the  distinction  was  made  by  the  convention. 

But,  as  has  been  said  of  ambition,  it  may  be  said  of  the  system 
for  creating  pecuniary  capital  by  laws,  "  that  it  has  no  allure- 
"  ments,  except  from  its  imposing  associations,"  and  is  therefore 
innocent ;  or  that  it  will  be  controlled  by  the  federal  depart- 
ments, because  one  of  them  is  elected  by  the  people,  so  that  our 
liberty  and  property  will  be  secured  by  its  natural  moderation, 
or  by  this  check  upon  its  natural  rapacity.  In  England,  the 
same  species  of  concentrated  power  has  proved  insufficient  to 
protect  the  people  against  the  imposing  associations  of  pecuniary 
capital  created  by  laws.  But  it  is  urged,  that  its  failure  arises 
from  the  imperfect  mode  in  which  the  English  balancing  de- 
partments are  constituted,  and  we  have  therefore  been  compelled 
to  consider  whether  a  sympathetick  combination  of  our  federal 
departments,  assembled  like  the  English  at  one  place,  converted 
by  construction  into  a  national  government,  and  coalesced  by  the 
same  motives,  has  chastened  a  concentrated  power  of  the  vices 
experienced  in  England.  Agriculture  constitutes  the  chief  em- 
ployment or  interest  of  a  vast  majority  of  electors  in  the  United 
States,  yet  ejection  has  not  shielded  them  against  the  oppressions 
of  a  concentrated  supremacy.  It  has  raised  the  profit  of  pecu- 
niary capital  far  beyond  the  profit  to  be  made  by  agriculture, 
and  effected  its  impoverishment  by  seducing  capital  from  its  im- 
provement, by  an  enormous  deduction  from  its  income,  and  by  a 
system  of  legislative  partiality  to  pecuniary  capital.  The  high 
profit  bestowed  by  laws,  is  paid  by  the  low  profit  earned  by  la- 
bour, whilst  the  receivers  retain  all  the  benefit  of  their  own  la- 
bour co-extensively  with  other  people,  and  their  legal  income  h 


272  tayloe's  views. 

exposed  to  no  deduction  by  the  expense  of  taxation  and  tools. 
These  legal  enhancements  of  the  profit  of  pecuniary  capital,  in- 
stead of  contributing  towards  a  good  government,  constitute  the 
very  policy  by  which  mankind  are  oppressed.  Yet  it  has  been 
pursued  to  a  great  extent  by  an  assumed  supremacy,  liberated 
from  control  by  a  supremacy  of  construction.  As  the  internal 
checks  of  the  federal  government  have  proved  insufficient  to 
prevent  this  enslaving  policy,  it  seems  to  follow,  that  the  division 
of  powers  between  the  federal  and  state  governments,  is  neces- 
sary to  prevent  the  evils  which  a  concentrated  national  govern- 
ment is  ever  prone  to  inflict.  And  as  no  legislative  power  to 
introduce  it,  nor  any  judicial  power  to  enforce  it,  is  given  to 
Congress,  a  line  between  the  delegated  and  reserved  powers  for 
preventing  a  consolidated  national  government  seems  to  be  visi- 
ble. Although  Congress  has  assumed  a  judicial  power,  in  cases 
where  the  United  States  are  a  party,  expressly  assigned  to  the 
federal  judiciary,  to  be  tried  by  a  jury,  according  to  the  ninth 
amendment,  and  gratuitously  reimbursed  the  loss,  by  a  liberal 
donation  of  jurisdiction  over  the  state  judiciaries,  so  as  to  com- 
plicate two  important  divisions  of  power,  neither  ought  to  be 
considered  as  obliterated.  Collisions  between  departments  can- 
not legitimately  destroy  constitutional  divisions  of  power.  As 
judiciaries  are  the  executives  of  legislatures,  their  subordinate  of- 
fice does  not  empower  them  to  defeat  a  division  of  powers  be- 
tween the  legislatures  tbemselves,  because  judgments  may 
clash,  if  these  legislatures  cannot  defeat  it,  because  laws  may 
clash.  A  judicial  revision  would  be  the  same  as  a  legislative, 
and  a  contrariety  between  laws,  as  sound  an  argument  for  a  fede- 
ral supremacy,  as  a  contrariety  between  judgments.  But  this 
contrariety  was  not  considered  in  either  case  as  a  good  reason  for 
establishing  a  supreme  national  government.  It  is  not  bv  the 
difficulty  of  finding  the  line  between  federal  and  state  powers, 
that  it  is  attempted  to  be  obliterated,  but  by  objections  against 
finding  it,  urged  for  the  purpose  of  changing  our  federal  into  a 
national  government.  It  is  said  to  be  better  that  banks,  lotte- 
ries, and  other  local  laws,  should  be  forced  upon  the  states,  than 
that  one  visible  division  of  powers  should  exist.  We  look  for 
the  line  by  the  light  of  consolidating  prepossessions,  and  of  th(* 


TAYLOR'S  VIEWS.  273 

spurious  words,  national,  supreme,  and  inconvenient.  These 
glimmerings  are  used  to  make  us  believe,  that  federal  powers, 
said  by  Mr.  Madison  to  be  few  and  distinct,  are  countless  and 
indefinite ;  and  what  is  more  extraordinary,  the  adjectives,  na- 
tional and  supreme,  are  exclusively  appropriated  to  one  division 
of  power,  so  as  to  deprive  the  other  of  its  substantive  character, 
bestowed  by  a  line  common  to  both.  It  is  lost  in  words,  be- 
cause they  are  susceptible  of  fluctuating  hues,  to  elude  a  compa- 
rison of  acts  with  the  plain  division  of  powers.  This  would 
constitute  an  unambiguous  line  between  federal  and  state  pow- 
ers. A  good  translator  adheres  to  the  spirit  of  his  author ;  a 
bad  expositor  of  the  constitution  rejects  its  spirit  and  principles. 

One  very  plain  principle  will  suffice  to  restrain  the  licentious- 
ness of  construction.  A  constructive  power  must  be  of  the 
same  nature  or  sui  generis  with  the  power  from  which  it  is  de- 
duced, or  an  usurpation.  If  the  maternal  power  is  exclusive  or 
concurrent,  the  constructive  offspring  must  also  be  exclusive  or 
concurrent.  Therefore,  an  exclusive  supremacy  cannot  be  in- 
ferred from  a  power  made  concurrent  by  the  constitution. 
Suppose  the  creation,  prohibition,  and  taxation  of  banks  and  lot- 
teries, to  be  concurrent  and  not  exclusive  powers  in  the  state  and 
federal  governments,  neither  can  constitutionally  extract  from 
this  concurrency  an  exclusive  power  to  control  the  other  in  its 
exercise.  A  concurrent  power  to  impose  other  taxes  stands  on  the 
same  ground.  A  concurrency  of  power  in  many  cases  results  from 
delegation  and  reservation,  and  an  exclusiveness  of  power  from 
limitation  and  prohibition.  When  powers  given  to  the  federal 
government  are  prohibited  to  the  states,  they  are  exclusive  j 
when  powers  given  to  the  same  government  are  not  prohibited 
to  the  states,  they  are  concurrent ;  and  powers  not  given  to  the 
federal  government,  constitute  the  exclusive  powers  of  the  state 
governments.  If  it  is  conceded  that  Congress  may  create,  pro- 
hibit, and  tax  banks  or  lotteries,  and  exercise  other  powers  not 
delegated,  yet  it  does  not  follow  that  it  can  add  new  prohibitions 
upon  the  states,  by  preventing  them  from  exercising  these  con- 
current powers ;  or  that  the  federal  court  can  extract  an  exclusive 
supremacy  for  itself,  from  a  concurrent  federal  power.  Such  a 
doctrine  would  convert  all  the  concurrent  powers  of  the  states 

35 


274  taylor's  views. 

into  subordinate  powers,  and  all  the  concurrent  powers  of  the 
federal  government  into  exclusive  powers.  It  is  true,  as  is  urged 
in  its  defence,  that  it  would  bestow  more  efficacy  upon  the  dele- 
gated powers,  but  it  is  as  true,  that  it  would  destroy  the  efficacy 
of  the  reserved  powers.  Without  a  concurrency  of  efficacy, 
no  concurrency  of  power  could  exist,  and  therefore  one  efficacy 
was  not  invested  with  an  authority  to  prohibit  the  other.  A  tes- 
tator bequeaths  several  carriages  to  a  special,  and  his  horses  to  a 
residuary  legatee,  but  the  special  legatee  contends  that  he  has  a 
right  to  the  horses  also,  because  it  will  be  convenient  to  him,  and 
that  they  are  naturally  attracted  by  the  splendour  of  the  car- 
riages. Such  is  the  case  of  assumed  supremacy.  But  if  neither 
Congress  nor  the  federal  court  can  increase  the  prohibitions  of  the 
constitution  in  relation  to  powers,  concurrent  or  exclusive,  to 
render  them  more  or  less  convenient,  or  efficacious,  the  difficulty 
vanishes,  and  the  line  of  division  is  found. 

On  the  contrary,  should  either  the  federal  or  state  govern- 
ments assume  an  exclusive  supremacy  over  the  concurrent  pow- 
ers of  the  other,  neither  would  be  a  limited  government,  a  con- 
fusion between  local  and  federal  powers  would  ensue,  and  the 
wholesome  distinction  between  local  and  federal  interest  or  sym- 
pathy would  be  expunged.  If  the  federal  government  should 
acquire  an  exclusive  supremacy,  it  becomes  effectively  a  national 
government.  The  position  advanced  by  the  federal  court,  "  that 
"  a  power  to  create  involves  a  power  to  destroy,"  to  defend  this 
exclusive  supremacy  in  the  federal  government,  subverts  it. 
The  federal  government  cannot  create  any  exclusive  or  concur- 
rent state  power,  therefore  it  cannot  destroy  any.  It  cannot 
create  states  by  dividing  them,  therefore  it  cannot  destroy  them. 
A  state  may  create  banks,  roads,  or  lotteries,  therefore  it  may 
destroy  them.  The  states  created  the  federal  government, 
therefore  they  may  destroy  it.  If  it  is  possible  to  foresee  how 
far  statesmen  and  prepossession  can  go,  this  maxim  would  dis- 
close it.  A  power  can  only  destroy  that  which  it  can  create.  It 
results,  that  as  the  federal  government  cannot  create  either  slate 
laws  or  judgments,  it  cannot  destroy  either.  Yet  the  maxim  is 
advanced  as  a  proof  that  it  may  destroy  both.  The  rejection  of 
the  proposal  in  the  convention  to  invest  the  federal  government 


taylor's  views*  275 

with  a  power  to  create  banks,  amounts  to  an  internal  construction 
of  the  constitution  by  itself,  yet  as  the  power  prohibited  by  re- 
jection was  assumed,  it  was  unavoidably  assigned  to  the  class  of 
concurrent  powers.  This  left  a  mutual  right  to  destroy,  attached 
to  the  mutual  right  to  create.  Congress  assume  an  undelegated 
power,  and  the  court,  to  make  it  more  efficacious  and  convenient, 
step  in,  abolish  the  state  powers  to  create  or  prohibit  banking, 
and  to  tax  pecuniary  stock,  and  thus  extend  the  assumed  power 
of  Congress  to  create  or  destroy  banks,  into  an  exclusive  supre- 
macy, able  to  destroy  state  rights  which  it  cannot  create.  Such 
philological  machines  can  turn  out  any  kind  of  work,  and  make 
any  thing  or  nothing  of  the  constitution.  By  its  constructive 
prowess  the  federal  government  can  invest  itself  with  a  local 
power  expressly  withheld,  and  of  course  with  local  powers  not 
withheld  ;  then  it  may  subject  the  state  concurrency  to  a  federal 
concurrency,  and  increase  without  limitation  the  special  prohi- 
bitions imposed  upon  the  states  by  the  constitution,  so  as  to  sub- 
ject all  state  acts,  both  negative  and  affirmative,  to  federal  supre- 
macy ;  and  a  consolidated  national  government  is  made  in  the 
Laputa  mode  of  making  books.  The  federal  government  first 
endows  itself  with  a  concurrency  in  the  exercise  of  exclusive 
state  powers,  then  converts  the  usurped  concurrency  into  supre- 
macy, and  the  states  are  finally  swallowed  by  a  sovereign  con- 
centrated government. 

The  constitution  establishes  three  classes  of  powers  ;  two  be- 
ing exclusive,  and  one  concurrent ;  and  to  find  the  line  of  divi- 
sion, we  have  only  to  discover  whether  a  state  or  federal  act  con- 
forms to  its  classification,  and  not  whether  the  exercise  of  one 
power  is  inconvenient  to  another.  The  exclusive  powers  of  the 
federal  government  are  so  precisely  defined  by  the  prohibitions 
upon  the  states,  that  they  have  neither  been  questioned  nor 
usurped.  But  the  exclusive  powers  of  the  states  being  only  se- 
cured by  an  indefinite  reservation,  are  first  hunted  down  into  the 
class  of  concurrent  powers,  and  then  fettered  with  a  federal  su- 
premacy. Federal  legislation  kindly  extends  federal  jurisdic- 
tion, and  federal  jurisdiction  acknowledges  the  favour  by  ex- 
tending federal  legislation  to  state  exclusive  powers ;  and  the 
polite  reciprocation  establishes  a  supremacy   which  finishes  the 


276  taylor's  views. 

obliteration  of  the  divisional  line  established  by  the  constitution. 
By  discovering  the  mode  in  which  the  line  will  be  destroyed,  we 
discover  the  line  itself.  Its  existence  is  copiously  proved  by  the 
respectable  authors  of  the  Federalist,  but  under  the  influence  of 
a  preference  for  a  national  form  of  government,  they  pasted  over 
it  a  federal  supremacy,  without  concurring  in  the  constructive 
acquisition,  because  they  did  not  concur  as  to  the  form  of  na- 
tional government  to  be  preferred.  From  constructions,  dictated 
by  prepossession,  contradictory  in  themselves,  and  hostile  to 
each  other,  the  difficulty  of  discovering  the  line  plainly  drawn 
between  exclusive  and  concurrent  powers  has  originated.  Party 
confidence  in  eminent  men,  caused  party  interpretations  of  the 
same  instrument,  and  weakened  the  constitutional  classification 
of  power  vindicated  by  both.  The  line  is  demonstrated  by  their 
constructions  asserting  the  classification  and  independence  of 
powers,  but  obliterated  by  subjecting  state  powers  previously 
said  to  be  sovereign  and  independent,  to  a  supremacy  in  Con- 
gress, or  in  the  supreme  court,  or  in  a  national  government,  by 
two  gentlemen  who  advocated  propositions  for  a  supreme  con- 
centrated power.  The  present  advocates  for  the  same  form  of 
government,  reject  their  plain  line,  and  adopt  the  obliterations 
intended  to  regenerate  one-  of  the  national  forms  of  govern- 
ments. If  these  great  men  had  stopt  with  their  definition  of  the 
line,  and  forborne  to  annex  to  it  obliterating  assertions,  no  diffi- 
culty or  defect  in  the  constitution  on  this  score  would  have 
been  discovered.  These  assertions  were  originally  suggested, 
and  are  still  used  to  defeat  a  federal  system  ;  and  the  real  ques- 
tion is,  not  where  the  federal  line  runs,  but  whether  it  shall  be 
expunged  ? 

The  case  of  slavery  helps  to  illustrate  the  federal  line,  and  to 
refute  the  doctrine  of  a  national  supremacy.  A  federal  com- 
pact, and  not  an  American  nation,  caused  slaves  to  be  counted  in 
adjusting  a  federal  representation.  A  national  representation 
would  not  have  been  in  any  degree  deduced  from  slaves.  In- 
dependent of  other  circumstances,  slavery  demonstrated  the  ne- 
cessity of  a  line  between  state  and  federal  powers.  An  usurped 
federal  supremacy  could  as  easily  get  over  it  in  this  case,  as  in 
those  of  banks,  lotteries,  and  an  appellate  jurisdiction ;  and  there 


TAYLOR'S  VIEWS.  277 

would  be  less  difficulty  in  proving  that  slavery,  abstracted  from 
local  circumstances,  is  prejudicial  to  the  welfare  of  the  United 
States,  than  that  banks,  lotteries,  and  the  appellate  jurisdiction, 
will  advance  it.  The  states,  ignorant  of  facts,  might  be  enchant- 
ed with  the  theory  of  converting  black  slaves  into  good  patriots, 
whilst  the  states  experimentally  qualified  to  judge,  might  know 
that  the  idea  was  visionary.  Every  other  local  interest  to 
which  a  general  sympathy  does  not  extend,  was  provided  for  by 
the  division  of  power,  which  provided  for  the  case  of  slavery. 
All  or  none  of  the  powers  reserved  to  the  states,  must  be  em- 
braced by  the  federal  supremacy  contended  for.  The  English 
introduced  slavery  to  get  money  from  the  provinces,  by  their 
capacity  for  making  tobacco ;  the  capitalists  use  it  also  to  get 
money  from  some  states,  by  their  incapacity  to  become  manu- 
facturers, which  England  had  also  in  view  from  her  monopoly 
through  the  pretext  of  commercial  regulations.  Both  used  it  to 
extract  an  enormous  tribute  from  a  local  misfortune.  A  federal 
division  of  power  was  designed  to  prevent  such  frauds  of  a  con- 
centrated supremacy,  and  not  to  fleece  local  incapacities  to  enrich 
superior  industry. 

The  second  article  of  the  constitution,  by  explicitly  asserting 
the  federal  character  of  the  house  of  representatives,  definitively 
excludes  a  national  character  from  the  federal  government,  and 
abolishes  intirely  a  place  of  residence  for  the  supreme  authority, 
by  which  the  reserved  powers  of  the  states  are  assailed.  "  In 
"  choosing  the  president,  the  votes  shall  be  taken  by  states,  the 
<e  representatives  of  each  state  having  one."  Was  the  con- 
stitution mistaken  in  expounding  itself;  and  is  Mr.  Madison's 
construction,  which  has  been  made  the  basis  of  consolidating  in- 
ferences, "  that  this  house  is  a  national  representation,'''  more 
correct  than  the  constitution  in  calling  it  a  representation  of 
states  ?  It  describes  all  its  branches  as  federal.  The  house  of 
representatives  is  repeatedly  recognised  by  the  mode  of  its 
formation,  and  positively  in  this  quotation,  as  a  representation  of 
states.  The  senate  is  allowed  to  be  so.  And  the  president  is 
either  to  be  chosen  by  electors  to  be  appointed  as  the  states  shall 
direct,  or  by  the  representatives  of  these  states  in  Congress. 
Thus  the  federal  character  of  the  union  seems  to  have  been  as 


27$  taylor's  views. 

plainly  established,  and  the  proposed  national  character  as  plainly 
rejected,  as  could  have  been  effected  by  words.  But  how  sel- 
dom can  words  remove  prepossessions.  A  "  judicial  power  of 
"  the  United  States"  though  thus  also  recognised  as  federal,  is 
considered  as  national,  as  able  to  assume  or  to  receive  from  Con- 
gress a  new  species  of  national  supremacy,  and  as  invested  with 
a  power  to  impair  or  destroy  the  federal  character,  repeatedly 
avowed  by  the  constitution  itself. 

The  president  is  made  responsible  to  the  states  in  the  modes  of 
his  election  and  trial,  as  a  security  for  state  rights,  against  his 
geographical  propensities.  The  incongruity  of  annexing  a  na- 
tional president  to  a  federal  Congress,  would  almost  have  been 
equal  to  that  of  associating  a  federal  Congress  with  a  national 
court.  It  would  have  been  highly  objectionable  to  choose  a  pre- 
sident by  a  national,  and  to  try  him  by  a  federal  principle.  A 
loyalty  to  federal  interests  and  to  state  rights,  were  the  two  ob- 
jects designed  to  be  effected  in  the  structure  of  the  federal  go- 
vernment. Its  legislative  and  executive  departments  were  con- 
structed upon  federal  and  not  national  principles  with  that  inten- 
tion. If  the  supreme  federal  court  is  to  be  considered  as  a  poli- 
tical department,  any  more  than  the  inferior  federal  courts,  con- 
sistency required  that  it  should  be  federal  as  well  as  the  other 
departments.  It  would  have  been  as  absurd  to  invest  it  with  a 
national  supremacy,  and  to  try  it  by  a  federal  senate,  as  to  have 
done  the  same  thing  in  the  case  of  the  president.  Liberty  is 
often  the  victim  of  executive  power.  A  national  election  of  this 
department  has  universally  inflamed  its  ambition  and  favoured 
its  usurpations,  as  in  the  cases  of  Cajsar  and  Bonaparte.  There- 
fore the  constitution  wisely  subjected  it  to  organized  states,  as 
constituting  a  control  more  vigilant  and  powerful  than  disunited 
individuals.  The  provision  is  indispensable,  if  the  preservation  of 
state  rights  is  necessary  to  secure  the  liberty  and  prosperity  of  ths 
people.  A  national  mode  of  electing  the  president,  would  de- 
stroy the  state  or  federal  influence  over  federal  executive  power, 
and  like  supremacy  annexed  to  a  general  government  according 
to  Mr.  Hamilton,  or  to  a  supreme  national  court,  according  to 
Mr.  Madison,  would  infallibly  change  the  federal  into  a  national 
government.  Ambition  could  more  easily  corrupt  individuals  than 


Taylor's  views.  279 

state  governments,  and  seduce  them  into  a  consolidated  govern- 
ment. A  tendency  towards  an  aristocracy  of  states,  a  national 
government,  or  a  monarchy,  was  guarded  against  by  the  federal 
system  in  various  modes,  one  of  which  was  to  subject  the  geo- 
graphical partialities  of  a  legislative  majority  to  the  control  of  a 
federal  president.  By  converting  a  federal  into  a  national  pre- 
sident, he  would  be  influenced  by  a  national  majority,  and  a 
great  security  against  a  consolidated  government  would  be  de- 
feated. Mr.  Hamilton,  sensible  of  this,  in  number  sixty-eight  of 
the  Federalist,  assumes  a  very  obvious  misconstruction  of  the 
constitution,  as  an  advance  towards  the  form  of  government  he 
preferred,  by  observing,  that  it  has  "  referred  the  election  of  the 
"  president,  in  the  first  instance,  to  the  immediate  act  of  the 
"  people  of  America."  On  the  contrary,  "  the  electors  of  the 
"  president  are  to  be  appointed  as  the  legislature  of  each  state 
"  shall  direct"  for  the  purpose  of  impressing  upon  him  a  fede- 
ral loyalty,  and  creating  a  check  apprehended  from  a  consoli- 
dating influence  in  the  house  of  representatives,  arising  from  a 
different  mode  of  election.  It  is  wonderful  to  discern  a  concord 
between  the  consolidating  Mr.  Hamilton,  and  the  jealous  fede- 
ralism of  the  small  states.  He  wanted  a  national  president  to- 
wards effecting  his  avowed  object.  Is  it  a  better  policy  which 
contends  for  a  president  to  be  elected  by  a  majority  of  states  ? 
The  constitution  supposed  that  a  federal  president  would  be  more 
likely  to  sustain  the  federal  system  and  the  rights  of  the  states. 
It  knew  that  a  glare  of  character  would  more  easily  deceive  the 
multitude  than  the  state  legislatures,  and  that  a  species  of  popu- 
larity so  easily  obtained,  much  oftener  bestowed  repentance  than 
liberty  on  the  people.  Mr.  Hamilton,  with  other  profound  po- 
liticians, knowing  that  the  dazzling  phantom  of  a  perfidious 
popularity,  frequently  becomes  a  real  plague,  eulogises  the  pro- 
vision against  its  visitation  by  the  intelligent  control  of  the  state 
srovernments :  but  he  strives  to  reconcile  this  conviction  with  his 
other  conviction  in  favour  of  a  limited  monarchy,  and  therefore 
he  says  that  the  president  is  to  be  elected  by  the  people  of  Ame- 
rica. Great  use  is  made  by  the  consolidating  doctrine,  of  the 
injury  which  this  imaginary  people  sustains,  if  the  election  is 
made  by  states  in  the  house  of  representatives.     The  senate  is 


280  Taylor's  views. 

exposed  to  the  same  objection  ;  and  if  it  is  sufficient  to  prove 
that  a  national  is  preferable  to  a  federal  president,  it  proves  also 
that  we  ought  to  have  a  national  senate.  The  objection  therefore 
terminates  in  the  preference  between  a  national  and  a  federal 
form  of  government. 

If  the  federal  form  is  best,  it  is  of  little  importance  whether  it 
shall  be  mortally  wounded  by  misconstructions,  by  amendments, 
or  by  habitual  evasions  of  the  constitution,  so  as  to  come  at  its 
competitor  by   the  help  of  a  national    president;  and  even  his 
election  by  states  in  the  house  of  representatives,  though  exposed 
to  great  objections,  would  be  exposed  to  fewer  than  an  election 
by  an  American  people,  because  the  former  being  federal,  bad  as 
it  may  be,  is  a  better  control  of  executive  power.     It  is  exposed 
to  still  fewer  than  the  extra-constitutional  habit  of  virtually  elect- 
ing the  president  by  a  majority   of  the    members  of  Congress. 
This  has  nothing  federal  in  it ;  if  it  contains  any  principle,  it  is 
of  a  national  complexion  ;  it  swallows  up  the  small  states ;  and 
the  states,   both  large  and  small,   are  thus  seduced  to  surrender 
their  federal  influence  over  the  executive  department,  to  a  com- 
bination of  men  divested  of  all  responsibility.     If  a  president  is 
elected  by  the  house  of  representatives,  each  state  would  know 
how  its  deputies  voted,  and  this  knowledge  would  be  some  secu- 
rity for  their  patriotism ;  but  when  virtually  elected  by  a  caucus 
of  Congress-men,  the  absence  of  this  knowledge  is  an  additional 
solicitation,  and  a  powerful  security  for  corruption  against  de- 
tection.    By  the  first  mode,  a  little  man  from  a  small  state  may 
be  made  of  great  value  ;  by  the  second,  a  great  man  from  a  great 
state  may  be  made  thirty-fold  more  valuable.     The  first  mode  is 
undoubtedly  federal ;  the  second  is  not  even  national.     It  may 
be  called  a  mode  of  making  presidents  by  making  bargains,  and 
the    most  extraordinary   circumstance  attending  it  is,   that  an 
American  nation,  or  a  union  of  states,  should  be  induced  to  be- 
lieve, that  by  obeying  an  edict,  contrived  originally  by  a  secret 
combination  between  a  few  men,  they  are  electing  a  president. 
According  to  the  constitution,  the  number  of  electors  is  fixed  by 
a  ratio  compounded  of  the  number  of  states,  and  the  number  of 
people  in  each  state,  counting  a  portion  of  the  slaves,  and  ex- 
cluding the  idea  of  an  American  nation ;  but  their  character  is 


taylor's  views.  281 

made  federal  by  the  mode  of  election.     Perhaps  no  better  prin- 
ciple could  have  been  contrived  for  uniting  states  and  individuals 
in  one  interest.     Numbers  are  chiefly  regarded  in  fixing  each 
state's  quota  of  electors;  but  the  small  states  are  reimbursed,  and 
the  large  ones  secured,  by  the  power  reserved  to  the  states  of 
maintaining  their  federal  rights,  by  a  federal  influence  over  the 
president.     The  common  interest  of  all  is  combined  and  united 
to  act  for  the  common  security.     A  virtual  election  by  a  caucus, 
and  a  formal  election  by  the  house  of  representatives,  are  both 
prejudicial  to  the  common  interest  provided  for  by  the  primary 
mode  of  election,  because  the  first  deprives  all  the  states,  great 
and  small,  but  especially  the  small,  of  all  influence  in  the  elec- 
tion, and  the  second  deprives  the  large  states  of  the  proportion 
of  electors  assigned  to  population.     If  the  compromise  between 
these  principles  is  preferable  to  either  in  its  extremity,  the  pro- 
position to  amend  the  constitution   for  giving  efficacy   to  that 
compromise,  is  preferable  to  a  struggle  between  the  small  and 
large  states  to  defeat  it ;  the  first  class,  by  getting  the  election 
into  the  house  of  representatives ;  the  other,  by  placing  it  under 
the  control  of  a  caucus.     If  the  small  states  should  succeed,  it 
would  place  the  executive  department  under  the  influence  of  a 
majority  of  states  containing  a  minority  of  people,  a  kind  of 
aristocracy  ;  if  the  large,  it  would  expose  all  the  states  to  the  se- 
cret intrigues  of  monarchical  or  consolidating  factions.     Should 
the  federal    principle  of  electing  the  federal  executive,  be  ex- 
changed for  a  national  principle,  by  dividing  all  the  states  into 
districts,  it  will  both  subvert  every  vestige  of  a  federal  influence 
over  him,  and  also  foster  the  habit  of  designating  the  man  by  a 
self-constituted  caucus,  which  would  be  thus  delivered  from  the 
control  deposited  in  the  state  legislatures  to  prevent  the  introduc- 
tion of  a  national  executive.    Besides,  an  election  by  the  electors 
is  exposed  to  less  danger  from  corruption,  than  an  election  by  a 
caucus  or  the  house  of  representatives,  and  this  is  another  reason 
why  it  would  be  better  to  perfect  the  preferable  constitutional 
mode,  than  to  defeat  it,  either  by  a  caucus,  or  by  an  election  in 
the  house  of  representatives,  or  by  converting  all  the  states  into 
districts,  so  as  to  desf'-oy  a  federal  influence  over  the  president  of 
26 


282  TAYLOR'S  VIEWS. 

the  United  States,  by  making  him  a  president  of  the  people  of 
America,  according  to  Mr.  Hamilton's  policy. 

This  gentleman  speaks  of  the  "  concurrent  jurisdiction  be- 
"  tween  the  national  and  state  courts."     He  says,  "  that  the 
"  judicial  is  beyond  comparison  the  weakest  of  the  three  de- 
"  partments  of  power  ;  that  impeachments  will  control  it ;  that 
"  the  judges  would  never  hazard  the  resentment  of  the  body 
"  intrusted  with  it,  as  this  body  would  punish  their  presumption 
"  by  degrading  them  from  their  stations  ;  that  the  word  supreme 
"  refers  to  the  federal  tribunals  inferior  to  the  supreme  court ; 
"  that  the  federal  courts  have  an  appellate  jurisdiction  from  the 
"  state  courts ;  that  the  national  legislature  may  modify  federal 
"  jurisdiction  ;  that  it  is  inherent  in  the  nature  of  sovereignty  not 
"  to  be  amenable  to  the  suit  of  an  individual  without  its  consent ; 
"  and  that  the  states  do  not  lose  any  of  their  rights  by  a  change 
"  in  the  form  of  their  civil  government."    Are  not  the  collisions 
between  these  assertions  equal  to  any  which  can  be  expected 
from  our  division  of  power  ?     How  can  state  and  federal  juris- 
diction be  concurrent,  without   being  independent  ?     How  can 
federal  jurisdiction  be  a  competent  guardian  of  state  rights,  if  it 
is  feeble,  controllable  by  impeachment,  and  liable  to  be  modified 
by  a  national  legislature  ?     Whence  did   it  derive  an  appellate 
jurisdiction  over  state  courts,  if  the  supremacy  of  its  highest  tri- 
bunal refers  to  the  inferior  federal  courts?     How  can  Congress 
have  a  right,  derived  from  his  assumption  of  a  national  legisla- 
ture, to  modify  judicial  federal  powers,  and  no  right  to  modify 
federal  legislative  and  executive  powers  ?     How  can  it  be  inhe- 
rent in  the  nature  of  sovereignty  not  to  be  amenable  to  the  suit 
of  an  individual  without  its  consent,  and  that  the  state  political 
rights  should  also  be  liable  to  be  abridged  by  suits  between  indi- 
viduals, without  even  a  capacity  in  the  states  to  defend  them- 
selves before  the  assumed  sovereignty  over  their  rights  ?     And 
how  can  the  states  lose  none  of  their  rights  by  a  change  in  their 
civil  government,  if  they  may  be  made  amenable  to  a  supreme 
federal  tribunal  ?    It  is  neither  difficult  to  discern  nor  to  account 
for  these  contradictions.     The   constitution  was  construed    by 
two  souls,  one  impressed  with  the  force  of  its  principles  and 
language,  the  other  by  a  prepossession  in  favour  of  a  national 


TAYLOR'S  VIEWS.  283 

form  of  government.  Of  course  we  find  in  the  Federalist  the 
dictates  of  both  a  national  legislature,  a  national  president  chosen 
by  the  people  of  America,  and  a  national  judiciary,  are  ail  said 
to  have  been  created  by  the  constitution.  Even  that  is  said  to 
have  been  the  national  act  of  this  American  people,  by  subse- 
quent commentators.  And  lest  these  gentlemen  should  be  led 
astray  by  the  constructions  of  the  federal  soul  from  the  design  of 
the  national  soul,  the  concluding  page  of  the  Federalist  solemnly 
declares,  "  that  the  constitution  would  be  the  act  of  a  whole 
"  people,  that  it  comprises  a  general  national  government,  and 
"  that  a  nation,  without  a  national  government,  is  an  awful  spec- 
"  tacle."  Such  is  the  source  of  the  difficulty  in  finding  the  line 
drawn  by  the  constitution  between  federal  and  state  powers.  It 
has  been  by  degrees  made  fainter  with  patches  of  national  or 
consolidating  colours.  If  the  states  should  be  induced  to  part 
with  their  federal  influence  over  the  president,  and  to  take  from 
their  legislatures  the  power  of  investigating  his  loyalty  to  their 
rights,  by  an  amendment  or  a  habit,  they  will  finish  its  oblitera- 
tion, by  adding  a  national  executive  to  a  national  legislature  and 
judiciary,  proposed  in  the  convention,  rejected  by  the  constitu- 
tion, and  revived  in  the  Federalist.  Under  these  modifications, 
would  the  constitution  retain  its  great  principle  of  referring  state 
exigencies  to  state  sympathy,  and  federal  exigencies  to  federal 
sympath}^  or  could  our  system  be  denominated  federal  ? 

If  the  desired  line  is  found,  we  come  to  the  true  question, 
namely,  which  is  best  for  the  United  States,  a  federal  or  a  su- 
preme national  government ;  or  which  will  best  secure  their 
strength,  wealth,  and  liberty  ?  The  difference  between  the 
strength,  wealth,  and  liberty  of  a  government,  and  of  a  people, 
first  presents  itself.  Wherever  a  government  possesses  too 
much  of  these,  the  people  have  too  little.  Restraints  upon  a 
government  alone  beget  liberty,  and  liberty  alcne  begets  that 
high  degree  of  national  strength,  able  to  withstand  both  foreign 
aggression  and  domestick  usurpation.  Like  Mahomet's  tree  of 
Paradise,  it  bears  the  best  fruits  in  most  abundance,  and  among 
them  national  strength  and  individual  happiness.  Is  it  enthusi- 
asm or  sober  reason,  which  believes  that  a  division  of  power  be- 
gets liberty ;  that  liberty  animates  the  people  to  defend  their 


284  Taylor's  views. 

country  ;  that  it  extorts  admiration  from  nations  compelled  botii 
to  applaud  and  to  envy ;  and  that  it  brings  wealth  and  comfort 
by  invigorating  industry?     Can  the  artifices  for  destroying  our 
division  of  powers,  be  better  than  these  benefits,  both  splendid 
and  substantial  ?     These  artifices  contend  that  liberty  will  be  se- 
cured by  a  responsibility  of  a  supreme  national  government,  or 
of  some  of  its  departments,  to  the  people,  without  a  division  of 
powers  between  the  state  and  national  governments  ;  and  flatter 
our  vanity  by    asserting,  that  the  exercise  of  state  powers  is 
founded  in  arrogance,  and  inconsistent  with  the  rights  of  man  ', 
but  if  the  experience  of  the  whole  world  has  demonstrated  that 
despotism  cannot  be  prevented  by  any  other  expedient,  this,  like 
other  flatteries,  is  intended  as  a  seduction  to  defraud  the  people 
of  their  most  valuable  property.     This  truism,  peculiarly  appli- 
cable to  the  territories  of  the  United  States,  suggested  the  divi- 
sion of  power  between  the  state  and  federal  governments,  not 
to  impair,  but  to  secure  the  liberty  of  the  people  ;  because  it  has 
never  been  safe  in  the  keeping  of  any  concentrated  government 
over  a  consolidated  territory  of  equal  extent.     Its  brilliant  effects 
were  predicted  by  history,  and  have   been  demonstrated  by  ex- 
perience.    The  lustre  of  Greece  appeared  under  a  very  imper- 
fect confederation,  and   vanished  when    her   independent  states 
were  melted  into  consolidation.     Even  the  embers  of  her  fede- 
ral liberty,  were   an  over-match  for  the   mighty   consolidated 
Persian  empire,  whilst  her  independent  states,  reduced  to  a  con- 
solidation, became  an  easy  prey  to  the  ambition  of  the  Romans, 
and  the  tyranny  of  the  Turks.     The  strength   of  the  Romans 
diminished,  and  their  glory  began  to  fade,  when  the  collateral  le- 
gislative power  of  the  senate  and  the  people  was  exchanged  for 
consolidation.     Venice  and  Genoa  have  been  entombed  in  con- 
solidation.    Holland,  strong  and  flourishing  whilst  its  seven  little 
provinces  were  more  loosely  united  than  our  great  states,  is  reap- 
ing the  harvest  of  consolidation,  and  no  longer  a  star  in  the  ga- 
laxy of  nations.     Switzerland  has  been  made  stronger  and  hap- 
pier, by  a  confederation  weaker  and  more  imperfect  than  ours, 
than  could  have  been  expected  from  a  consolidated  government, 
and  enjoys  more  liberty  and  comfort  upon  a  sterile  soil,  than  the 
great  consolidated  fertile  contiguous  countries.    England  lost 


Baylor's  vifcws.  285 

thirteen  provinces  by  attempting  to  establish  a  concentrated  su- 
premacy. The  power  of  liberty,  in  its  paroxysms,  is  a  proof  of 
its  capacities  in  sobriety.  The  love  of  liberty  in  France  proved 
too  strong  for  great  combinations  of  concentrated  powers,  and 
when  it  was  smothered  by  Bonaparte's  imitation  of  their  forms 
of  government,  his  concentrated  power  became  unable  to  resist 
them.  Thirty  millions  of  people  remained,  but  the  impulse 
was  gone. 

The  reader  anticipates  me,  and  has  already  seen  the  blaze  of 
that  elevated  beacon,  which  enlightens  the  world  and  directs  it  to 
truth.  A  mutual  sympathy  and  common  interest,  caused  thirteen 
disunited  provinces,  under  innumerable  disadvantages,  to  be  suc- 
cessful against  a  mightier  concentrated  power.  The  same  prin* 
ciple  conducted  our  federal  government  with  honour  and  reputa- 
tion through  another  unequal  war  with  the  same  consolidated 
government.  The  vigour  of  mind  and  perseverance  of  exertion 
it  begets,  has  twice  memorably  displayed  its  superiority  over 
the  concentrating  principle,  within  our  own  view.  Philoso- 
phers assert  its  wisdom,  and  tyrants  fear  its  prowess ;  and  our 
prosperity  under  its  influence,  upon  an  inferior  soil,  has  ex- 
ceeded that  of  all  contemporary  consolidated  nations,  and  out- 
stripped the  records  of  history  in  the  circle  of  ages. 

Does  this  accumulation  of  facts  contain  no  truth,  and  convey 
no  admonition  ?  To  me,  it  seems  that  our  union,  founded  in  the 
division  of  powers  between  the  state  and  federal  governments, 
and  annexing  a  genunine  sympathy  to  each  department,  is  the 
strongest  government  hitherto  discovered  for  securing  all  the 
benefits  which  have  induced  mankind  to  construct  political  so- 
cieties. It  opposes  activity  to  torpor,  a  common  interest  to  mo- 
nopoly, and  a  union  of  nations  to  a  mercenary  army.  Bad  pas- 
sions, however,  prefer  a  concentrated  supremacy,  because  it 
affords  them  more  room,  and  subjects  them  to  less  restraint. 

If  all  the  people  of  the  United  States  were  assembled  to  pass 
local  laws,  they  would  now  be  arrayed  in  three  parties,  each 
inclined  to  obtain  advantages  over  the  others.  The  venom 
scattered  by  a  contest  for  offices,  would  be  aggravated  a  thousand 
fold  by  a  contest  for  geographical  advantages.  These  parties  will 
shortly  be  reduced  to  two,  the  geographical   ins  and  outs  of  a 


286  tayloh's  views. 

concentrated  supremacy.  An  absolute  monarchy  might  become 
preferable  to  the  nefarious  struggles  which  will  ensue,  because 
the  geographical  interest  of  a  king  would  be  merged  in  power, 
and  the  avarice  of  one  man  could  be  more  easily  gratified  than 
the  avarice  of  a  multitude.  A  power  of  local  legislation  in  Con- 
gress, would  create  logicians,  guided  by  inextinguishable  geogra- 
phical inducements.  This  source  of  partiality,  oppression,  and 
disunion,  is  dried  up,  by  dividing  local  and  federal  interests.  It 
will  be  made  to  flow  in  copious  streams,  by  enabling  local  inte- 
rests in  Congress  to  make  other  local  interests  subservient  to  their 
passions  ;  and  also  create  a  new  fountain,  at  which  ambitious  and 
avaricious  men  may  satisfy  their  thirst ;  and  thus  exchange  our 
homogeneous  union  of  power  and  sympathy,  for  the  European 
heterogeneous  unipn  of  power  and  antipathy,  which  produces 
either  resistance  or  oppression.  If  a  brotherhood  between  pow- 
er and  sympathy  constitutes  our  strength,  our  renown,  our  indus- 
try, our  wealth,  our  local  justice,  and  our  liberty,  a  dissolution  of 
this  moral  association,  by  riving  it  asunder  with  a  concentrated 
supremacy,  may  be  computed  by  a  very  moderate  capacity.  It  is 
universally  agreed,  that  this  association,  so  friendly  to  human 
happiness,  has  never  been  brought  as  near  to  perfection  by  any 
form  of  government,  as  by  ours.  By  what  can  this  opinion  be 
justified,  except  by  our  division  of  powers  between  the  state  and 
federal  governments  ?  If  the  makebate  construction  should  be 
able  to  drive  into  the  constitution  the  anomaly  of  subjecting  state 
powers  to  an  unsympathizing  federal  majority,  legislative  or  ju- 
dicial, our  government,  from  being  the  best,  might  become  the 
worst  in  the  world ;  because  one  nation  is  the  most  inexorable 
of  all  tyrants  over  another ;  and  state  nations,  by  their  representa- 
tives in  Congress,  would  become  the  tyrants  over  other  state  na- 
tions, by  being  able  to  oppress  them  for  their  own  emolument. 
I  know  not  whether  this,  or  that  of  an  absolute  monarch,  would 
be  the  worst  species  of  tyranny. 

An  absolute  concentrated  power  was  resorted  to  in  Europe,  to 
prevent  baronial  wars,  and  a  division  of  power  was  resorted  to 
here,  to  prevent  state  wars.  By  the  European  expedient,  baro- 
nial wars  were  prevented,  and  the  oppressions  of  a  supreme  con- 
centrated power  obtained.    Barons  might  be  easily  melted  into 


taylor's  views.  287 

a  consolidated  nation,  but  the  latitude  and  local  interests  of  the 
states  are  not  susceptible  of  a  similar  fusion.  Feudal  lords  do 
not,  like  geography,  exist  forever.  As  local  interests  could  not 
be  abolished,  like  barons,  an  attempt  to  subject  them  to  a  concen- 
trated supremacy,  composed  chiefly,  not  of  friends,  but  of  rivals 
for  money,  might  rather  provoke  than  suppress  state  wars.  To 
prevent  both  these,  and  European  oppressions  arising  from  a  con- 
centration of  power,  the  happy  expedient  of  an  affiance  between 
local  interest  and  local  power,  and  between  federal  interest  and 
federal  power,  was  adopted.  As  local  interests  could  not  be  an- 
nihilated like  feudal  barons,  and  as  the  members  of  Congress 
could  not  be  divested  of  local  partiality,  no  other  expedient, 
hitherto  discovered,  was  sufficient  to  effect  the  meditated  ends. 
To  prevent  some  states  from  being  made  tributary  to  others  by 
commercial  regulations,  was  one,  and  it  was  not  intended,  in  re- 
moving this  injustice,  to  revive  it  in  an  aggravated  degree,  by 
enabling  a  geographical  majority  to  oppress  a  geographical  mino- 
rity in  a  multitude  of  modes,  without  the  least  check  of  the  fraud 
from  an  apprehension  of  counter-regulations,  or  the  kindness  of 
contiguity,  which  might  have  moderated  it  between  two  states. 
It  was  not  intended  to  create  a  family  of  knaves  to  get  rid  of 
one,  as  would  have  been  the  case,  if  local  ignorance,  local  pre- 
possessions, and  geographical  rapacity,  all  more  inveterate  in 
Congress  than  between  adjoining  states,  had  been  invested  with 
a  power  of  legislating  for  countries  which  they  never  see,  for 
customs  which  they  never  practise,  and  for  interests  which  they 
never  feel,  except  when  they  are  to  be  shorn. 

However  the  causes  of  political  oppression  may  be  diversified 
by  circumstances,  violations  of  geographical  interests  are  so 
egregiously  adverse  to  moral  rectitude^  and  human  happiness,  as 
not  to  admit  of  a  reconciliation  with  either.  The  long-standing 
contest  between  monarchy,  aristocracy,  and  democracy,  excited 
struggles,  without  producing  any  permanent  advantage  to  man- 
kind, by  offering  prizes  to  bad  passions,  and  over-looking  a 
truth,  essential  to  their  happiness,  upon  which  our  federal  sys- 
tem is  founded.  These  three  principles  were  supposed  to  cover 
every  species  of  government,  because  it  was  taken  for  granted 
that  every  species  must  possess  supreme  power,  and  therefore  it 


288  tavlor's  views. 

only  remained  to  determine  by  which  of  these  rival  principles 
supremacy  might  be  most  safely  exercised.  Absolute  power 
was  the  golden  apple  contended  for  by  three  idols,  each  of  which 
purchased  votaries  by  promises  and  bribes.  The  idols,  sepa- 
rately exploded,  have  combined  for  the  purpose  of  retaining 
more  securely  the  coveted  dominion,  and  constituted  a  triumvi- 
rate which  promised  little  and  performed  less.  The  United 
States  withdrew  their  adoration  from  these  spurious  deities,  se- 
parately or  united,  and  extracted  a  political  system  from  geogra- 
phical indications  and  moral  qualities,  imprinted  by  the  Creator 
on  the  face  of  the  earth  and  the  heart  of  man.  These  happily 
impressed  upon  them  the  uncontroverted  truth,  that  the  people 
are  more  honestly  wedded  to  their  own  happiness,  than  a  su- 
preme power  in  any  form.  They  have  therefore  vindicated  the 
sovereignty  of  the  people.  From  this  primary  truth,  they  ex- 
tracted another,  equally  undeniable,  namely,  that  the  people  of  a 
state  love  themselves  and  understand  their  own  interest,  better 
than  any  other  people  can  possibly  do ;  and  upon  this  considera- 
tion, exactly  as  sound  as  the  wide  distinction  between  a  monarch 
and  a  nation,  they  have  established  a  political  system,  by  which 
each  state  is  enabled  to  exercise  its  exclusive  knowledge,  and 
gratify  its  own  self-love.  Local  regulations,  made  by  a  majority 
of  states,  or  by  decisions  of  the  supreme  court,  are  only  metaphy- 
sical satraps,  despatched  by  despotism  into  provinces,  for  the 
usual  purpose  of  gathering  money ;  as  in  the  cases  of  assuming 
state  debts,  banks,  protecting  duties,  internal  improvements,  the 
pension  law,  the  lottery,  and  an  unrestricted  appropriation  of 
federal  money.  They  substantially  reduce  the  state  govern- 
ments to  prefectures,  subject  to  the  dominion  of  the  federal  go- 
vernment, instead  of  being  functionaries  responsible  to  the  peo- 
ple of  the  state.  If  the  usurpation  shall  succeed,  the  expense  of 
these  cyphers  will  be  a  sufficient  reason  for  their  suppression.  It 
was  intended  to  establish  a  division  of  power  between  the  natural 
affection  which  the  people  of  each  state  possess  for  themselves, 
and  between  the  natural  affection  which  all  the  states  possess  for 
themselves  in  relation  to  other  countries,  as  a  better  security  for 
liberty,  than  a  supreme  power  in  either  of  the  three  old  princi- 
ples, or  in  any  of  their  combinations,  and  as  the  only  means  of 


Taylor's  views,  289 

sustaining  the  modern  doctrine  of  the  sovereignty  of  the  people. 
This  principle  would  be  subverted  by  investing  the  federal  go^ 
vernment  with  supreme  power,  in  imitation  of  Britain,  and 
trusting  to  its  departments,  or  to  geographical  partialities,  for 
controlling  its  supremacy,  because  it  would  take  from  the  people 
the  right  of  self-government,  the  only  foundation  of  their  sove- 
reignty, and  destroy  its  only  material  consequence,  by  depriving 
the  responsibility  of  state  functionaries  to  the  people,  of  all  its 
efficacy. 

In  this  new  experiment,  the  United  States  had  many  obsta'cles 
to  surmount,  and  strong  prepossessions  to  remove.  The  old  to- 
ries  were  glued  to  a  king,  lords,  and  commons  ;  the  new,  admire 
the  same  species  of  concentrated  power,  concealed  under  differ- 
ent names.  The  old  Congress  blamed  the  patriotick  state  govern- 
ments, because  the  success  of  the  revolutionary  war  was  not 
more  wonderful,  and  believed  that,  invested  with  supreme  pow- 
er, it  could  have  astonished  the  world  still  more  ;  the  new,  shut- 
ting its  eyes  upon  the  late  war,  and  a  long  current  of  prosperity, 
contemplated  with  admiration  by  other  nalions,  consider  the  ab- 
sence of  a  supreme  power  in  a  combination  of  the  three  ancient 
political  dogmas,  as  a  great  defect  in  our  more  perfect  union,  and 
has  been  endeavouring  to  remove  it,  with  the  help  of  its  judi- 
ciary. Some,  learned  and  honest  statesmen  candidly  appealed  to 
the  publick  in  defence  of  a  supremacy  according  to  the  British 
model ;  others,  under  the  same  impression,  contrived  an  in- 
trigue, suppressed  by  Washington.  The  holders  of  a  certain 
description  of  paper  money  to  a  large  amount,  were  ripe  for  any 
revolution  by  which  they  could  obtain  great  affluence  at  little 
cost.  Arrogant  men  saw  charms  in  the  old  forms  of  concen- 
trated  supremacies,  not  perceivable  in  our  new  principles.  Emi- 
nent members  of  the  convention  advocated  the  principles  which 
the  states  had  recently  resisted.  The  attempt  then  defeated,  is 
with  equal  ardour  and  less  disguise,  now  renewed ;  and  the 
question,  whether  we  shall  have  a  concentrated  power,  invested 
with  a  local  supremacy  or  a  limited  federal  government,  is  again 
to  be  decided,  not  by  a  solemn  appeal  to  the  people,  but  by  Judge 
Construction,  into  whose  mouth  the  parties  interested  can  put 
what  words  they  please. 

o7 


290  taylor's  views. 

A  concentrated  power  over  extensive  territories,  has  unexcep- 
tionably  found  it  necessary  to  establish  pro-consuls,  governors,  or 
generals,  supported  by  armies,  to  sustain  its  authority.  Local 
powers  in  Congress,  despatched  into  the  states,  are  instruments 
of  the  same  kind,  requiring  the  same  auxiliary.  Had  the  con- 
stitution contemplated  the  states  as  subordinate  instruments  of  a 
concentrated  supremacy,  it  would  have  been  extremely  defective. 
It  has  been  found  hard  to  enforce  the  obedience  of  subaltern  in- 
dividuals, but  it  would  be  infinitely  harder  to  enforce  the  obe- 
dience of  subaltern  governments,  contrary  to  the  local  habits  and 
interests  of  their  constituents.  Individual  deputies  are  always 
exposed  to  severe  punishments,  and  these  supposed  subordinate 
governments  are  not  subjected  to  any  punishment  for  disobe- 
dience. If  the  constitution  had  intended  to  impose  upon  the 
state  governments  in  the  exercise  of  their  powers,  the  duty  of 
obeying  the  federal  government,  it  would  have  contained  provi- 
sions for  extorting  that  duty.  The  subordinate  agents  of  a  con- 
centrated power,  are  removable,  because  supremacy  and  subor- 
dination could  not  otherwise  exist.  The  state  governments  are 
not  removable,  because  they  are  not  subordinate,  nor  the  federal 
government  supreme. 

The  difference  between  a  federal  and  a  supreme  government, 
was  quite  visible  to  the  convention  ;  and  in  considering  the  attri- 
butes of  each,  it  saw  that  a  power  of  appointing  state  governors, 
of  revoking  state  laws,  and  of  reversing  state  judgments,  was  ne- 
cessary to  establish  one  form ;  and  that  a  reservation  of  undele- 
gated state  powers,  undestroyed  by  subordination,  was  necessary 
to  establish  the  other.  By  rejecting  the  consolidating  attributes. 
it  never  intended  to  invest  construction  with  a  power  of  substan- 
tially reviving  them,  by  conferring  on  the  federal  government, 
or  either  of  its  departments,  a  power  of  removing,  revoking,  and 
reversing,  the  acts  of  tbp  ^servation.  The  difficulty  of  banish- 
ing, hanging,  or  shoo  .state  governments,  for  violating  the 
constitution,  suggested  the  preferable  provision  for  altering  it, 
combined  with  its  division  of  powers.  Thus  two  absurdities 
were  avoided ;  that  of  a  supreme  government,  shackled  with  de- 
puties whom  it  could  neither  punish  nor  remove ;  and  that  of  a 
confederation  of  states,  comprising  an  abolition  of  their  rights. 


TAYLOR'S  VIEWS.  291 

Consistency  required  a  supremacy  in  the  national  government 
proposed,  and  its  exclusion  from  the  federal  government  adopted. 
As  subordinate  authorities,  the  states  must  have  been  subjected 
to  the  coercion  of  a  supreme  national  government ;  with  their 
reservation  of  independent  local  powers,  this  coercion  was  incon- 
gruous. A  national  form  of  government,  not  invested  with  a 
power  to  compel  obedience,  or  local  state  powers,  subjected  to  a 
limited  federal  government,  would  both  be  political  absurdities, 
and  therefore  the  former  was  not  proposed,  nor  the  latter  estab- 
lished. The  rejection  of  all  the  modes  proposed  for  coercing  the 
state  governments,  whilst  a  national  government  was  in  contem- 
plation, proves  that  the  constitution  preferred  the  mutual  check, 
to  a  concentrated  supremacy.  But  the  federal  government  may 
coerce  a  disobedient  state  by  an  army,  just  as  one  of  the  English 
balancing  or  collateral  departments,  has  often  endeavoured  to  en- 
slave the  others.  This  mode  of  compelling  the  obedience  of 
state  governments,  being  infinitely  more  inconvenient  and  dan- 
gerous, could  not  have  been  contemplated  by  the  rejection  of  the 
modes  proposed,  as  it  would  destroy  the  mutual  check  allowed 
by  the  Federalist  to  be  intended,  as  a  conquering  general 
might  persuade  or  terrify  the  people  into  an  opinion,  that  one 
despot  was  as  good  as  an  hundred,  and  as  the  submission  of  con- 
quest could  not  have  been  sought  for  by  the  rejection  of  the 
milder  means  of  obtaining  obedience,  by  appointing  governors, 
revoking  state  laws,  and  reversing  state  judgments. 

As  local  authorities  were  indispensable,  the  question  was, 
which  ought  to  be  preferred  ;  such  as  were  responsible  to  the 
people  interested  to  preserve  local  justice,  and  best  informed  as 
to  what  might  advance  their  happiness  ;  or  such  as  would  be 
subjected  to  the  control  of  a  national  government  ?  The  former 
corresponded  with  the  right  of  self-government ;  the  latter  with 
despotick  principles,  because  it  would  leave  to  the  people  of  each 
state  no  substantial  power  to  provide  for  their  own  happiness. 
They  could  not  be  subjected  to  a  supremacy  in  the  federal  go- 
vernment, and  also  retain  their  local  state  right  of  self-govern- 
ment. The  contrariety  between  the  two  modes  of  constituting 
local  authorities,  was  thoroughly  considered  in  the  convention, 
and  a  preference  became  unavoidable,  because  they  were  incapa- 


292  taylor's  views. 

Me  of  reconciliation.  One  sustained  intirely  the  principle  oi 
self-government ;  the  other  deprived  the  people  of  every  state  of 
so  much  of  that  principle,  as  was  applicable  to  their  local  affairs  ; 
and  it  was  determined  that  the  intire,  was  more  likely  to  consti- 
tute a  good  government  and  preserve  the  liberty  of  the  people, 
than  the  mutilated  principle.  If  the  wisdom  and  patriotism  of 
the  union  was  again  assembled  to  re-consider  the  question,  the 
opinion,  that  the  two  systems  of  government  are  almost  as  far 
asunder  as  liberty  and  despotism,  would  probably  be  more  una- 
nimous than  it  formerly  was,  because  many  of  the  prejudices 
arising  from  old  habits  and  the  revolutionary  war,  which  then 
obstructed  the  same  conclusion,  are  now  obliterated. 

In  establishing  the  division  of  powers  between  the  federal 
and  state  governments,  another  principle  as  important,  and  not 
less  true  than  that  of  uniting  sympathy  with  power,  was  kept  in 
view  by  the  convention,  namely,  that  great  power  is  a  great 
temptation  to  do  wrong.  The  able  expositors  of  the  constitution 
having  in  the  Federalist  adverted  to  this  axiom,  united  in  an 
opinion,  that  a  greater  share  of  power  was  reserved  to  the  states, 
than  was  delegated  to  the  federal  government;  and  therefore 
concluded  that  the  danger  of  usurpation  rested  in  that  depart- 
ment. As  neither  their  opinion  nor  inference  could  have  any 
foundation,  if  the  powers  reserved  to  the  states  were  controllable 
by  the  federal  government,  they  must  have  believed,  as  they 
said,  that  each  department  was  independent  of  the  other  within 
its  own  sphere  ;  because,  had  the  constitution  invested  the  fede- 
ral, with  a  supremacy  over  the  state  governments,  the  greatest 
share  of  power  could  not  have  been  assigned  to  the  latter.  The 
anticipation  of  the  comparative  magnitude  of  the  two  primary 
divisions  of  power,  to  ascertain  which  would  be  most  sorely  af- 
flicted with  the  malady  of  usurpation,  was  then  chiefly  conjectu- 
ral ;  and  the  egregious  mistake  of  these  commentators,  is  both  a 
proof  that  their  constructions  are  not  infallible,  and  also  an  admo- 
nition against  destroying  the  mutual  check  which  they  com- 
mended. If  experience  has  ascertained  that  the  superiority  of 
power  is  in  the  federal  government,  they  have  proved  that  the 
disposition  to  encroach  must  go  with  it.  The  axiom,  that  the 
least  moderation  is  to  be  expected  from  the  most  power,  decides 


taylor's  views.  293 

i  he  comparative  magnitude  of  these  primary  dividends,  since 
there  is  as  much  difficulty  in  discovering  an  instance  of  the 
usurpation  of  a  power  delegated  to  the  federal  government,  by 
a  state,  as  in  discovering  a  state  reserved  power,  not  usurped  or 
threatened  by  federal  precedents.  The  whole  mass  of  state 
powers  are  attempted  to  be  drawn  within  the  federal  sphere,  by 
a  supremacy  claiming  a  right  to  remove  obstructions  to  its  do- 
minion ;  converting  them,  whatever  may  have  been  their  consti- 
tutional magnitude,  into  cyphers,  useful  only  to  endow  the  fede- 
ral sphere  with  an  unlimited  decimal  increase  of  power.  To 
transfer  our  jealousy  from  the  encroaching  sphere  to  that,  expe- 
rimentally weak,  unassuming,  and  too  submissive,  would  seem 
to  violate  common  sense,  and  would  certainly  defeat  the  mutual 
control,  eulogised  by  the  Federalist,  and  established  by  the  con- 
stitution, to  ensure  the  moderation  of  power,  upon  which  it  is 
agreed  that  all  the  benefits  of  civil  liberty  depend. 

But  the  modern  commentators,  far  from  believing,  with  the 
Federalist,  that  the  state  governments  possess  a  superiority  of 
power,  contend  that  it  resides  to  such  an  extent  in  the  federal 
government,  as  to  make  it  absurd  for  the  states  to  struggle  for 
rights  which  must  be  lost,  or  to  oppose  an  impetus  which  must 
prevail.  Giving  up  the  idea  of  checking  power  on  account  of 
its  magnitude,  they  urge  its  magnitude  as  a  reason  for  suppressing 
the  check,  and  submitting  to  its  commands;  expounding  the 
constitution  by  Lord  Shaftesbury's  logick,  they  ridicule  its  at- 
tempt to  reserve  rights  to  the  states  in  communion  with  the 
great  power  bestowed  on  the  federal  government ;  and  laughing 
at  its  provisions,  they  yield  to  their  subversion,  because  they  are 
too  feeble  to  withstand  the  usurpations  of  the  federal  govern- 
ment. Should  the  contempt  thus  plenteously  poured  out  upon 
the  state  governments,  unite  them  for  the  preservation  of  rights 
common  to  all,  the  barriers  against  the  disposition  of  great  power 
to  usurp,  may  prove  stronger  than  these  facetious  gentlemen  are 
disposed  to  believe.  If  the  parties  actuated  by  conflicting  prin- 
ciples, should  happen  to  be  described  by  proper  names,  such  as 
consolidators  and  constitutionalists,  or  concentrators  and  federal- 
ists, it  might  induce  the  people  to  consider  whether  they  would 
subscribe  to  the  combined  projects  of  laughing  or  coercing  them 


294  TAYLOR'S  VIEWS. 

out  of  their  state  rights,  and  they  could  easily  make  the  charge  of 
absurdity,  urged  against  the  constitution,  recoil  upon  the  states- 
men by  whom  it  is  advanced.  But  consolidation  avows  its  pa- 
triotism by  talking  of  the  sovereignty  of  the  people,  whilst 
assailing  their  state  rights,  and  of  its  loj^alty  to  the  constitution, 
whilst  appealing  from  it  to  the  supremacy  of  construction. 

Libertas  et  natale  solum  ! 

Fine  words,  I  wonder  where  you  stole  'urn, 

says  Swift.  Oh,  for  a  poet  to  write  an  epigram  upon  this,  and 
the  following  congenial  motto  : 

Words  are  very  pretty  things 
For  patriots  as  well  as  kings. 

Will  it  be  arrogant  to  offer  him  an  humble  hint  ? 

Libertas  !  meaning  by  debate 
To  pilfer  powers  from  a  state, 
And  into  wholesale  bring  a  nation 
At  vendue  of  consolidation. 
Libertas,  also,  does  import 
The  power  imperial  of  a  court, 
Supremely  fixing  right  and  wrong 
Bv  constitution  of  the  tongue. 
Natale  solum,  in  orthography, 
Distinctly  intimate  geography  ; 
Or  they  may  mean  protecting  duties, 
To  money-holders,  perfect  beauties. 
Words,  of  construction  are  the  mint, 
Coining  its  currency  without  stint ; 
The  shot  with  which  ambition  fights 
"Gainst  reservation  of  state  rights. 
Thus  liberty  and  words  supply 
Accommodations  for  a  ■ . 

What  a  miserable  poet  am  I,  to  want  a  rhyme  !    Reader,  can 
you  supply  it  ? 


taylor's  views.  295 

Having  endeavoured  to  ascertain  the  origin,  progress,  and 
consequences  of  a  consolidating,  concentrating,  or  national  sys- 
tem of  government ;  to  ascertain  the  intention  of  the  constitu- 
tion by  its  words,  spirit,  and  ratification ;  to  prove,  by  the 
journal  of  the  convention,  that  a  federal  government  was  estab- 
lished and  a  national  government  rejected  ;  and  to  vindicate  the 
wisdom  and  patriotism  of  that  body,  in  both  these  decisions  ; 
I  have  only  to  add  a  hope  that  abler  writers  may  gratify  the 
publick  by  discussing  these  important  subjects. 


TAYLOR'S  VIEWS.  297 


SECTION  XVII. 


CONSTRUCTION. 


Several  formidable  arguments  used  to  convict  the  constitution 
of  absurdity,  or  to  subject  it  to  the  supremacy  of  construction, 
remain  to  be  fairly  stated ;  that,  although  I  am  unable  to  answer 
them,  they  may  be  considered  by  the  publick.  The  suprema- 
cies of  construction  and  legitimacy  are  said  to  rest  upon  founda- 
tions equally  solid,  and  to  be  equally  omnipotent,  because  the 
word  government  as  naturally  inherits  power  as  the  word  king. 
As  men  have  natural  rights,  so  have  kings  and  governments ; 
and  supremacy  not  being  among  the  natural  rights  of  men,  and 
yet  necessary,  must  be  among  those  of  a  government.  Upon 
this  ground  it  was  contended  in  the  convention  that  the  creation 
of  a  federal  government,  although  the  old  Congress  never  made 
the  discovery,  revoked  the  declaration  of  independence,  and  re- 
duced the  states  to  corporations.  For  how  could  a  king  be  a 
king,  or  a  government  a  government,  without  sovereignty  or  su- 
premacy, any  more  than  a  man  could  be  a  man,  without  spirit 
or  soul  ?  Hence  the  attempt  of  the  constitution  to  establish  a 
federal  government,  without  these  natural  souls,  was  preposte- 
rous, unnatural,  and  void  ;  and  when  the  government  was  born, 
it  inherited  its  natural  rights,  like  any  other  species  of  legitima- 
cy. The  authority  of  a  great  monarch  sustains  our  philologists 
in  taking  their  stand  upon  this  doctririe.  We  are  informed  by 
Hume,  "  that  at  the  treaty  of  the  Pyrenees,  when  Louis  the 
"  Fourteenth  espoused  a  Spanish  princess,  he  had  renounced 
"  every  title  of  succession  to  every  part  of  the  Spanish  mo- 
"  narchy  ;  and  this  renunciation  had  been  couched  in  the  most 
"  accurate  and  most  precise  terms  which  language  could  afford. 
"  But  on  the  death  of  his  father-in-law,  he  retracted  his  renun- 
"  ciation,  and  pretended  that  natural  rights  could  not  be  annihi- 
u  lated  by  any  extorted  deed  or  contract/'    If  the  natural  rights 

38 


298  TAYLOR'S  VIEWS. 

of  kings  could  not  be  impaired  by  the  constitutions  of  France, 
Naples,  Spain,  and  Portugal,  the  natural  rights  of  governments 
cannot  be  impaired  by  the  same  papers.  If  Louis  could  not 
divest  himself  of  his  natural  rights,  he  could  not  be  divested  of 
them  by  another.  If  the  plainest  words  which  language  could 
afford,  were  not  sufficient  to  deprive  Louis  of  his  natural  rights, 
words  as  plain  could  not  establish  the  reserved  rights  of  the 
states,  and  deprive  the  federal  government  of  its  natural  supre- 
macy. But  as  the  federal  government  is  not  chargeable,  like 
Louis,  with  having  voluntarily  imposed  any  restrictions  upon 
itself,  those  imposed  upon  it  by  the  states  whilst  it  was  in  ventre 
sa  mere,  were  as  outrageous,  fraudulent,  and  void,  as  if  a  nation 
should  attempt  to  disinherit  the  heir  of  a  king  before  he  was 
born.  Acts  of  limitation  do  not  run  against  infants,  much  less 
against  an  embryo ;  and  therefore  all  limitations  imposed  upon 
the  federal  government  before  it  was  born,  or  in  its  infancy,  be- 
fore it  was  able  to  take  care  of  itself,  (as  a  concentrated  govern- 
ment can  always  do,  according  to  Mr.  Hamilton,)  were  contrary 
to  natural  right  and  void. 

The  natural  right  of  a  government  to  supremacy,  is  completely 
sustained  by  the  natural  supremacy  of  construction,  as  it  could 
not  be  a  government,  if  this  supremacy  of  construction  belonged 
to  people  who  wished  to  control  it.  A  profound  statesman  has 
written  a  celebrated  treatise  to  establish  the  supremacy  of  con- 
struction, not  hitherto  quoted  by  the  consolidators,  out  of  pity,  I 
presume,  for  their  adversaries,  and  an  aversion  to  killing  hone6t 
but  deluded  people  by  a  single  blow.  But  whether  it  shall  be 
ascribed  to  candour,  or  an  apprehension  that  it  is  reserved  to  be 
produced  if  they  are  hard  pressed,  I  shall  suggest  it  to  their  re- 
collection, and  disclose  it  to  the  publick. 

The  code  of  rules  alluded  to,  for  defining  the  powers  and 
rights  of  construction,  was  evidently  written  with  an  eye  to  the 
constitution  of  the  United  States  ;  although  the  author,  to  avoid 
the  censures  of  the  federalists,  has  concealed  his  intention  under 
the  title  of  "  A  tale  of  a  tub,"  and  used  the  allegory  of  a  last 
will,  intending  thereby  to  insinuate,  that  the  constitution  of  the 
United  States  was  liberty's  last  will.  A  testator  bequeaths  a 
coat  to  each  of  his  three  sons,  with  directions  that  they  should  be 


Taylor's  views.  299 

kept  clean,  and  unsophisticated  by  patches,  to  imitate  fashion  or 
gratify  pride,  and  his  death-bed  admonition  to  his  children  was  in 
these  words :  "  Sons,  because  I  have  purchased  no  estate,  nor 
i{  was  born  to  any,  I  have  long  considered  of  some  good  legacies 
"  to  bequeath  you ;  and  at  last,  with  much  care  and  expense, 
"  have  provided  each  of  you  a  new  coat.  Now  you  are  to  un- 
"  derstand,  that  these  coats  have  two  virtues  contained  in  them; 
*  one  is,  that  with  good  wearing,  they  will  last  you  fresh  and 
"  good  as  long  as  you  live.  The  other  is,  that  they  will  grow  in  the 
ie  same  proportion  with  your  bodies,  lengthening  and  widening 
11  of  themselves,  so  as  to  be  always  fit.  Pray,  children,  wear 
"  them  clean,  and  brush  them  often.  You  will  find  in  my  will 
"  full  instructions,  in  every  particular,  concerning  the  wearing 
"  and  management  of  your  coats,  wherein  you  must  be  very  ex- 
"  act,  to  avoid  the  penalties  I  have  appointed  for  every  trans- 
"  gression  or  neglect,  upon  which  your  future  fortunes  will  de- 
*'*  pend.  I  have  also  commanded  in  my  will,  that  you  should 
'*  live  together  in  one  house,  like  brethren  and  friends,  for  then 
"  you  will  be  sure  to  thrive,  and  not  otherwise." 

No  allegory  could  be  more  exact.  It  exhibits  the  veneration 
in  which  the  constitution  ought  to  be  held,  its  prohibitions  against 
vice,  and  the  subterfuges  to  evade  them.  The  three  coats  are, 
the  exclusive  powers  of  the  federal  government,  the  exclusive 
powers  of  the  state  governments,  and  the  concurrent  powers  of 
both.  And  the  three  sons  typify  a  supreme  power,  a  federal 
government,  and  a  frantick  democracy.  Fine  writers  are  allowed 
to  be  inspired,  and  if  any  have  disclosed  stronger  proofs  of  it  than 
Swift,  in  this  admonition,  they  have  never  reached  me.  The 
United  States,  our  testator,  inherited  no  estate.  With  much 
care  and  expense  they  obtained  the  three  coats,  namely,  the  ex- 
clusive and  concurrent  powers.  These  coats,  with  good  wear- 
ing, would  last  fresh  as  long  as  they  lived.  They  would  re- 
quire frequent  brushing  to  be  kept  clean.  They  would  grow 
in  the  same  proportion  ivith  their  bodies,  lengthening  and 
widening  of  themselves,  so  as  to  be  always  Jit :  referring  to 
new  states,  and  the  extension  of  the  three  classes  of  power  over 
a  larger  space.  In  the  constitution,  full  instructions  are  con- 
tained concerning  the  wearing  and  management  of  these 


300  taylor's  views, 

powers.  Exactness  in  this  respect  is  necessary  to  avoid  the  joe- 
nalties  of  transgression,  and  to  secure  their  future  fortunes. 
And  the  constitution  is  the  one  house  in  which  the  three  powers 
must  live  as  brethren  and  friends,  by  which,  and  not  other- 
wise, they  would  be  sure  to  thrive. 

"  Here,  the  story  says,  this  good  father  died,  and  the  three 
"  sons  went  altogether  to  seek  their  fortunes.  I  shall  not  trou- 
"  ble  you  with  recounting  what  adventures  they  met  with  in  the 
"  first  seven  years,  any  farther  than  by  taking  notice,  that  they 
11  carefully  observed  their  father's  will,  and  kept  their  coats  in 
"  very  good  order.  That  they  travelled  through  several 
"  countries,  encountered  a  reasonable  quantity  of  giants,  and 
"  slew  certain  dragons."  In  this  extract,  the  voluntary  frater- 
nity between  the  states  ;  the  seven  years'  adventures  of  the  re- 
volutionary war ;  the  prosperity  arising  from  keeping  state  and 
federal  powers  clean  ;  our  travelling  into  other  countries,  by  ne- 
gotiations and  commerce  ;  our  encounters  with  the  British,  Hes- 
sian, and  French  giants ;  and  our  wars  with  the  Indians,  or  dra- 
gons of  the  wilderness ;  are  distinctly  foretold,  to  prevent  the 
misapprehension  of  the  more  essential  ports  of  the  allegory. 

After  this  season  of  fraternity  and  adventures  had  past,  the 
brothers  "  came  up  to  town,  and  fell  in  love  with  the  ladies,  but 
1  especially  three,  the  Dutchess  d'Argent,  Madame  de  Grand 
*  Titres,  and  the  Countess  d'Orgueil ;  or  covetousness,  ambition, 
'  and  pride ;  from  whom  they  met  with  a  very  bad  reception ; 
'  for  on  the  one  side,  the  three  ladies  were  at  the  top  of  the  fa- 
i  shion,  and  abhorred  all  that  were  below  it  but  the  breadth  of 
'  a  hair.  On  the  other  side,  the  will  was  very  precise,  and  it 
'  was  the  main  precept  in  it,  not  to  add  to  or  diminish  from  their 
'  coats,  one  thread,  without  a  positive  command  in  the  will. 
'  Now  the  coats  their  father  had  left  them,  were,  'tis  true,  of 
1  very  good  cloth,  and  besides  so  neatly  sown,  you  would  swear 
1  they  were  all  of  a  piece ;  but  at  the  same  time  very  plain,  and 
'  with  little  or  no  ornament.  The  brothers,  however,  being  in- 
'  duced  by  love  to  fall  into  all  the  vices  of  a  town,  were  strangely 
'  at  a  loss  what  to  do."  The  coming  up  to  town,  specifies  the 
meetings  of  Congress ;  the  Dutchess  d'Argent,  the  funding, 
banking,  and  protecting-duty  systems  ;  Madame  de  Grand  Ti- 


taylor's  views.  301 

tres,  the  prepossession  or  habit  in  favour  of  titles ;  and  the 
Countess  d'Orgueil,  the  pride  of  affecting  supremacy.  The  love 
of  men  for  these  town  ladies,  and  the  difficulty  of  gratifying  it, 
on  account  of  the  precise  and  close  texture  of  the  constitution, 
and  its  prohibition  against  altering  one  thread,  except  in  the 
mode  it  prescribes,  is  also  stated  by  Swift,  as  forciby  displaying 
the  efficacy  of  his  rules  for  construction,  to  which  he  then 
proceeds : 

"  It  happened,  before  they  were  a  month  in  town,  great 
"  shoulder-knots  came  up.  Straight  all  the  world  was  shoulder 
"  knots.  In  this  unhappy  case,  the  brothers  went  to  consult  the 
"  will,  read  it  over  and  over,  but  not  a  word  of  shoulder-knots. 
"  What  should  they  do  ?  Obedience  was  absolutely  necessary, 
"  and  yet  shoulder-knots  appeared  extremely  requisite.  After 
r  much  thought,  one  of  the  brothers,  who  happened  to  be  more 
"  book-learned  than  the  other  two,  said  he  had  found  an  expe- 
"  dient.  It  is  true,  said  he,  there  is  nothing  here  in  this  will, 
a  totidem  verbis,  making  mention  of  shoulder-knots,  but  I  dare 
"  conjecture,  we  may  find  them  inclusive,  or  totidem  syllabis. 
"  This  distinction  was  approved  by  all,  and  so  they  fell  to  exa- 
"  mine ;  but  their  evil  star  had  so  directed  the  matter,  that  the 
"  first  syllable  was  not  to  be  found  in  the  whole  writing.  Upon 
"  which  disappointment,  he  who  found  the  former  evasion  took 
"  heart,  and  said,  Brothers,  there  is  yet  hopes  ;  for  though  we 
"  cannot  find  them  totidem  verbis,  nor  totidem  s}^llabis,  I  dare 
"  engage  we  shall  make  them  out  tertio  modo,  or  totidem  literis. 
"  This  discovery  was  also  highly  commended,  upon  which  they 
"  fell  once  more  to  the  scrutiny,  and  picked  out  the  letters, 
"  s,  h,  o,  u,  1,  d,  e,  r,  when  the  same  planet,  enemy  to  their 
"  repose,  had  wonderfully  contrived  that  a  k  was  not  to  be 
"  found.  Here  was  a  weighty  difficulty  !  But  the  distinguish- 
"  ing  brother,  now  his  hand  was  in,  proved,  by  a  very  good  ar- 
"  gument,  that  k  was  a  modern  illegitimate  letter,  unknown  to 
"  the  learned  ages,  nor  any  where  to  be  found  in  ancient  manu- 
"  scripts.  Calendoe  hath  been  sometimes  writ  with  a  k,  but 
"  erroneously  ;  for  in  the  best  copies  it  has  been  ever  spelt  with  c. 
"  And  by  consequence,  it  was  a  gross  mistake  in  our  language 
"  to  spell  knot  with  a  k  ;  but  from  hence-forward,  he  should 


302  TAYLOR7S  VIEWS. 

u  take  care  it  should  be  writ  with  a  c.  Upon  this,  all  farther 
te  difficulty  vanished.  Shoulder-knots  were  made  clearly  out  to 
*'  be  jure  paterno,  and  our  three  gentlemen  swaggered  with  as 
"  large  and  flaunting  ones  as  the  best."  Great  shoulder-knots 
are  evidently  typical  of  the  national  and  supreme  powers  getting 
into  fashion,  and  worn  above  other  ornaments.  Obedience  to 
the  constitution  is  absolutely  necessary  ;  but  these  powers,  being 
very  convenient,  are  extremely  requisite.  I  may  have  been 
mistaken  in  supposing  that  the  consolidating  party  had  over- 
looked Swift's  sage  authority.  They  seem  to  have  used  it  to  get 
at  their  beloved  ladies,  without  disobeying  the  constitution. 
As  the  letters,  n,  a,  t,  i,  o,  n,  a,  1,  are  all  in  the  constitution, 
though  the  word  itself  is  not,  it  has  literally  established  a  national 
government.  The  argument  in  the  case  of  the  letter  k,  has  also 
furnished  them  with  another  important  rule  for  construction.  As 
neither  governments,  divested  of  supremacy,  nor  our  federal 
system  of  dividing  powers  between  two  governments,  are  to  be 
found  in  ancient  manuscripts,  and  were  unknown  to  the  learned 
ages,  they  are  modern  illegitimate  contrivances,  and  ought  to  be 
suppressed,  for  the  purpose  of  restoring  to  the  word  government 
its  good  old  meaning  and  supremacy  inherited  from  antiquity. 

Here  I  must  gratify  a  certain  feeling,  not  very  uncommon, 
called  vanity ;  and  boast  of  my  superior  candour  or  sagacity  over 
the  commentators  who  have  suppressed  or  misunderstood  an  au- 
thority so  profound.  As  the  word  national  is  not  in  the  consti- 
tution, they  have  clumsily  sought  for  it  by  a  transformation  of 
words,  not  discerning  that  when  a  pebble  only  lay  in  their  way, 
it  was  quite  unnecessary  to  remove  a  mountain  which  lay  out  of 
it,  and  thus  negligently  weaken  the  capacity  of  construction  to 
create  a  national  government  and  a  judicial  supremacy.  In  like 
manner,  by  making  the  word  constitution  beget  supremacy,  they 
have  reasoned  on  the  ground,  that  a  child  of  to-day  might  be  the 
father  of  Adam.  There  are  a  great  variety  of  constitutions, 
male  and  female,  agricultural,  charitable,  religious,  and  commer- 
cial. All  are  made  by  qualities  or  stipulations,  and  none  contain 
any  thing,  ex  vi  termini,  not  to  be  found  in  these  qualities  or 
stipulations.  By  changing  the  word  constitution  into  the  word 
supremacy,  the  conventional  qualities  of  the  former  would  be  lost 


TAYLOR'S  VIEWS.  303 

in  the  natural  qualities  of  the  latter ;  and  the  constitution,  having 
thus  lost  its  qualities,  would  be  extinct.  Now,  instead  of  getting 
at  supremacy  in  a  mode  so  inartificial,  had  the  consolidators  ad- 
hered to  the  word  government,  or  the  word  national,  as  contain- 
ing internally,  ex  vi  termini,  the  ethereal  essence  of  power, 
called  supremacy,  neither  to  be  denned  by  compact  nor  limited 
by  words,  their  reasoning  would  have  been  sustained  by  the  au- 
thority of  the  great  Dean  Swift;  but  by  transforming  United 
States  into  national,  and  constitution  into  supreme,  they  have  in- 
cautiously weakened  it.  As  the  word  national,  totidem  syllabis, 
was  not  in  the  constitution,  and  the  letters  n,  a,  t,  i,  o,  n,  a,  1, 
were,  to  come  at  it  tertio  modo,  was  infinitely  more  grammati- 
cal, orthographical,  and  rational,  than  a  violent  metamorphosis  of 
words,  even  defective  in  letters.  The  convention  no  doubt 
thought  itself  very  cunning  in  rejecting  the  word  national,  pro- 
posed for  its  adoption,  as  it  would  imply  a  supreme  power,  ac- 
cording to  ancient  manuscripts  and  the  learned  ages ;  and  the 
consolidating  gentlemen,  by  endeavouring  to  seize  upon  Ovid's 
patent-right  for  arbitrary  transmutations,  have  been  caught  in 
their  trap ;  but  Swift  ingeniously  gets  them  out  again.  Though 
national  and  sovereign,  totidem  verbis,  are  not  in  the  constitution, 
both  are  there  totidem  literis ;  demonstrating  the  superior  power 
of  construction,  when  governed  by  a  rule,  simple,  plain,  and 
comprehensible,  than  when  obliged  to  resort  to  the  poetical  li- 
cense of  working  wonders.  We  all  know  that  letters  can  make 
words ;  but  how  some  words  can  make  others,  is  a  mystery.  I 
am  certain,  therefore,  of  receiving  the  thanks  of  the  consolidat- 
ing school,  for  simplifying  their  reasoning,  and  vindicating  the 
power  of  construction,  by  the  useful  discovery,  that  the  consti- 
tution conveys  sovereignty  to  the  federal  government,  makes  it 
a  national  government,  and  gives  it  any  other  power  which 
commentators,  who  can  spell,  may  choose  to  find  ;  for  they  can 
now  save  themselves  a  world  of  trouble,  by  justifying  their  con- 
structions upon  the  same  ground  used  by  the  learned  Doctor 
Swift,  to  justify  the  construction  of  their  father's  will  by  the 
brothers. 

The  words,  necessary,  requisite,  and  expedient,  used  by  the 
learned  brother,  consign  whole  cargoes  of  arguments  to  our  con- 


304  taylor's  views. 

solidating  politicians,  received  with  avidity,  but  without  acknow- 
ledging the  obligation.  "  Obedience  to  the  will  was  absolutely 
"  necessary,  and  yet  shoulder-knots  appeared  extremely  requi- 
u  site."  Peter,  the  great  philologist  and  commentator,  said  he 
had  found  "  an  expedient"  No  anticipations  could  be  more 
express  than  these.  The  constitution  uses  the  word  necessary ; 
whatever  is  necessary  is  at  least  requisite,  and  whatever  is  requi- 
site may  be  effected  by  an  expedient,  conformably  with  the  con- 
stitution, as  shoulder-knots  were  conformable  to  the  will,  be- 
cause they  were  requisite.  Hence,  as  a  national  government, 
judicial  supremacy,  banks,  lotteries,  roads,  and  canals,  even  if 
not  necessary,  are  still  requisite ;  and  as  every  letter  by  which 
these  words  are  spelled  is  actually  in  the  constitution,  without 
the  perplexing  absence  of  the  letter  k,  it  clearly  follows,  accord- 
ing to  Swift,  that  the  exercise  of  these,  and  all  other  requisite 
powers,  may  be  effected  by  expedients,  and  that  they  would  be 
more  conformable  to  the  constitution,  than  shoulder-knots  were 
to  the  will,  because  that  did  not  contain  the  letter  k.  Thus  our 
consolidating  commentators  have  wisely  proceeded  within  the 
verge  of  a  high  authority,  and  prudently  identify  themselves 
with  the  learned  Peter. 

"  Next  to  shoulder-knots,  gold  lace  came  in  fashion,  which 
"  seemed  so  considerable  an  alteration,  as  to  require  a  positive 
"  precept.  Then  flame-coloured  satin,  for  lining ;  then  silver 
"  fringe  ;  and,  finally,  an  infinite  number  of  points,  tagged  with 
"  silver.  Upon  consulting  their  father's  will,  the  brothers,  to 
"  their  great  astonishment,  found  these  words :  Item,  I  charge 
"  and  command  my  said  three  sons  to  wear  no  sort  of  silver 
"  fringe  upon  or  about  their  coats.  However,  after  some  pause, 
"  the  brother  so  often  mentioned  for  his  erudition  and  skill  in 
"  criticism,  said  that  he  had  found,  in  a  certain  author,  who 
"  should  be  nameless,  that  the  word  fringe  also  signifies  a  broom- 
"  stick,  and  doubtless  ought  to  have  the  same  interpretation. 
"  This,  another  brother  disliked,  because  of  the  epithet  silver, 
"  which  could  not,  he  humbly  conceived,  be  applied  to  a  broom- 
"  stick.  But  it  was  replied  upon  him,  that  this  epithet  was  un- 
"  derstood  in  an  allegorical  sense.  However,  he  objected  again, 
'*  why   their  father  should  forbid  them  to  wear  a  broom-stick 


TAYLOR'S  VIEWS.  305 


upon  their  coats  ;  a  caution  that  seemed  unnatural  and  imper- 
tinent ;  upon  which  he  was  taken  up  short,  as  one  that  spoke 
irreverently  of  a  mystery  ;  and  this  expedient  was  allowed  to 
"  serve  as  a  lawful  dispensation  for  wearing  their  full  proportion 
"  of  silver  fringe." 

These  successive  fashions  are  obviously  emblematical  of  the 
successive  fashions  which  came  up  among  us,  called  assumption 
of  state  debts,  funding,  banking,  lotteries,  and  protecting  duties, 
The  infinite  number  of  points  tagged  with  silver,   with  special 
precision  describe  the  multitude  of  manufactures  thus  tagged  to 
lace  capitalists  with  gold.     Even  every  pin  made  in  the  United 
States  has  a  tip  of  silver.     But  silver  fringe  was  expressly  for- 
bidden.    This  peculiarity  is  stated  to  justify  banking ;  the  pro- 
posal and  rejection   of  which  in   the  convention,  was  equivalent 
to  a  charge  and  command  against   it.     No  emblematical  de- 
scription of  it  could  have    been   more  happy.     Bank  paper  is 
fringed  with  silver,  and  the  use  of  fringe  is  either  to  hide  defects 
or  to  entrap  by  a  bait.     Fringe  disfigures  a  good  substantial  coat, 
as  banks  disfigure  an  honest  government.     The  prohibition  in 
the  will  was  positive ,  and  if  that  could  not  prevent  a  requisite 
and  expedient  construction  for  wearing  fringe,  the  rejection  in 
the  convention  only,  could  not  defeat  the  same  great  principle 
when  applied  to  banking.     As  silver  fringe  meant  a  broom-stick, 
the  banks  rejected  in  the  convention  might  mean  mounds  of 
earth  ;  and  therefore  their  rejection  is  only   a  prohibition  upon 
the  federal  government  to  bury    state  rights   under  mounds  of 
earth.     If  this  idea  should  even  be  allowed  to  be  as  preposterous 
and  impertinent  as  that  of  wearing  broom-sticks  upon  coats,  yet 
it  may  also  contain  some  mystery.     And  thus  it  clearly  follows, 
that  the  federal  government  may  suffocate  state  rights  by  banks 
of  paper,  but  not  by  banks  of  earth.     In  this  extract,  we  disco- 
ver that  Swift  foresaw  the  transformations  of  the  word  judiciary 
into  the  word  supremacy,  and  of  the  words  United  States,  into 
the  word  national ;  and  authorized  both,    by  proving  that  the 
words  silver  fringe  might  be  construed  broom-sticks.     The  idea 
of  wearing  broom-sticks  over  coats,  is  a  fine  illustration  of  supre- 
macies for  sweeping  away   state  rights  ;  but  the  application  of 
silver  fringe  to  unrestricted  appropriations  of  federal  money,  is 

39 


306  Taylor's  views. 

still  closer,  as  silver  is  more  graceful  upon  governments  thaft 
broom-sticks  upon  coats.  If,  therefore,  the  federal  government 
can  add  to  its  silver  embellishments,  by  unrestrained  appropria- 
tions, legislative  judgments,  bounties,  pensions,  banks,  and  inter- 
nal improvements,  this  authority  will  justify  it  in  resorting  to 
these  or  any  other  modes  of  fringing  itself;  because,  as  the  pro- 
hibition in  the  will  against  wearing  silver  fringe,  distinctly  refers 
to  the  prohibitions  in  the  constitution  against  the  state  and  fede- 
ral governments  wearing  each  other's  powers,  a  mode  of  getting 
over  the  first,  must  also  be  a  mode  of  getting  over  the  others. 

"  But  the  gold  lace  seemed  too  considerable  an  alteration 
u  without  better  warrant ;  when  the  learned  brother,  having  read 
"  Aristotelis  Dialecta,  and  especially  that  wonderful  piece,  De 
"  Interpretatione,  which  has  the  faculty  of  teaching  its  readers 
"  to  find  out  a  meaning  in  every  thing  but  itself,  observed,  You 
"  are  to  be  informed,  that  of  wills,  duo  sunt  genera,  nun  cupato- 
"  ry  and  scriptory  ;  that  in  the  scriptory  will  here  before  us, 
"  there  is  no  precept  or  mention  about  gold  lace,  concedetur ; 
"  but  si  idem  affirmeter  de  nun  cupatoria,  negatur.  For,  bro- 
"  thers,  if  you  remember,  we  heard  a  fellow  say,  that  he  heard 
"  my  father  say,  that  he  would  a'dvise  his  sons  to  get  gold  lace 
"  to  their  coats.  By  G — ,  that  is  very  true,  cried  the  other  ;  I 
"  remember  it  perfectly  well,  said  the  third.  And  so,  without 
"  more  ado,  they  got  the  largest  gold  lace  in  the  parish,  and 
"  walked  about  as  fine  as  lords." 

It  is  impossible,  after  reading  this  extract,  to  doubt  of  Swift's 
inspiration.  It  may  be  called  the  golden  rule  of  construction. 
Even  members  of  the  convention  certainly  did  say,  that  a  na- 
tional government,  invested  with  supremacy,  ought  to  be  estab- 
lished. But  all  well-informed  politicians  have  often  heard  others 
say,  that  governments  were  divine,  inherently  supreme,  sove- 
reigns of  the  people,  and  able  to  do  any  thing  but  turn  a  man  into 
a  woman ;  and  these  nuncupatoria  very  clearly  supply  all  powers 
over-looked  by  written  constitutions,  necessary  to  enable  govern- 
ments to  come  at  gold.  Therefore,  when  we  have  obtained  the 
word  government  by  a  constitution,  these  nuncupatoria  come  in 
play,  and  constitute  the  marrow  of  construction.  Now  all  the 
letters  for  spelling  the  words  government  and  supreme,  are  really 


taylor's  views.  307 

in  the  constitution,  and  moreover,  both  the  words,  in  extenso, 
are  in  it,  and  therefore  we  are  not  obliged  to  find  them,  as  the 
world  shoulder-knot  was  found  in  the  will.  But  each  was  at- 
tended with  a  difficulty.  One  is  applied  to  the  state  as  well  as 
the  federal  government,  so  that  both  might  lay  claim  to  its  com- 
prehensiveness ;  and  the  other  is  used  in  reference  to  inferior 
federal  courts.  Swift  foresaw  and  removed  both  these  difficul- 
ties ;  the  first  by  the  nuncupatoria  resource,  as  the  states  were 
called  in  the  convention,  that  father  of  the  constitution,  corpora- 
tions ;  and  the  other,  by  the  inherent  rights  of  supremacy,  be- 
queathed to  it  also  by  nuncupatoria.  The  federal  system  having 
thus  obtained  exclusively  the  words  government  and  supreme, 
obtains  also  their  inherent  nuncupative  donations.  But  lest  con- 
struction should  be  taxed  with  finding  out  a  meaning  in  every 
thing  but  itself,  Swift  cautiously  refers  us  to  the  Dialecta  of 
Aristotle,  to  prove  that  the  art  de  interpretatione  is  not  fettered 
by  the  unreasonable  obligation  of  containing  in  itself  any 
meaning,  to  rebut  the  charge,  and  fortify  his  treatise  on  every 
quarter. 

"  The  flame-coloured  satin,  for  linings,  caused  them  to  fall 
"  again  to  rummaging  the  will,  because  the  case  required  a  po- 
"  sitive  precept,  the  lining  being  held  by  orthodox  writers  to  be 
"  of  the  essence  of  the  coat.  After  long  search,  they  could  fix 
"  upon  nothing  to  the  matter  in  hand,  except  a  short  advice  of 
"  their  father  in  the  will,  to  take  care  of  fire,  and  put  out  their 
"  candles  before  they  went  to  sleep.  This,  though  a  good  deal 
"  to  the  purpose,  and  helping  very  far  towards  self-conviction, 
"  yet  not  seeming  wholly  of  force  to  establish  a  command,  and 
"  being  resolved  to  avoid  farther  scruple,  says  he  that  was  the 
"  scholar,  I  remember  to  have  read  in  wills,  of  a  codicil  annexed, 
"  which  is  indeed  a  part  of  the  will,  and  what  it  contains  hath 
"  equal  authority  with  the  rest.  Now,  I  have  been  considering 
"  of  this  same  will  here  before  us,  and  I  cannot  reckon  it  to  be 
"  complete,  for  want  of  a  codicil.  I  will  therefore  fasten  one  in 
"  its  proper  place  very  dexterously.  I  have  had  it  by  me  for 
"  some  time,  and  it  talks  a  great  deal,  (as  good  luck  would  have 
"  it,)  of  this  very  flame-coloured  satin.  The  project  was  imme- 
«  diately  approved  by  the  other  two  ;  an  old  parchment  scroll 


308  taylok's  views. 

"  was  tagged  on  according  to  art,  in  the  form  of  a  codicil,  and 
"  the  satin  bought  and  worn." 

It  has  been  wittily  said,  "  that  though  truth  is  not  to  be  spoken 
"  at  all  times,  it  may  be  spoken  sometimes,"  and  under  this  au- 
thority it  may  perhaps  be  borne  at  this  time.    The  codicil  to  the 
will,  plainly  alludes  to  the  Federalist,  as  a  codicil  to  the  consti- 
tution.    Lest  the  reference  should  be  over-looked,  it  is  very 
particular.     The  learned  commentator  Peter,  had  kept  the  codi- 
cil by  him  for  some  time  ;  the  learned  commentators  of  the  con- 
stitution, had  kept  by  them  their  propositions  for  a  supreme  na- 
tional government  made  in  the  convention.    Peter's  codicil  talks 
a  great  deal  of  the  flame-coloured  satin  ;  the  codicil  of  the  Fede- 
ralist talks  a  great  deal  of  a  national  or  general  government,  and 
supremacy.     The  lining  is  held  by  orthodox  writers,  to  be  of  the 
essence  of  the  coat.     The   orthodox  Federalist  says,  "  that  the 
"  sources  of  the  ordinary  powers  of  government  make  it  national 
"  and  not  federal."     What  an  admirable  concurrence  is  here ! 
The  departments  of  the  federal  government,  being  the  lining  of 
the  constitution,  and  lining  being  of  the  essence  of  a  coat,  this 
lining  converts  a  federal  into  a  national  constitution ;  for  a  na- 
tional constitution  only  could  beget  a  national  government ;  and 
as  Ihe  Federalist  had  positively  declared  the  constitution  to  be 
federal,  it  could  only  be  made  national  and  supreme,  by  the  lin- 
ing of  the  ordinary  powers  of  government.    The  flame-coloured 
satin  is  a  type  of  supremacy,  and  that  having  become  of  the  es- 
sence of  the  constitution,  justifies  its  alteration  by  a  supreme 
court.     The  constitution  goes  farther  than  the  will,  by  declaring 
that  codicils  may  be  added  to  it,  and  the  house  of  representatives, 
as  a  part  of  its  lining,  having  turned  a  federal  into  a  national  go- 
vernment, a  national  supremacy  acquires  the  power  of  making 
these  codicils.     As  Peter,  the  supreme  brother,  so  the  court,  the 
supreme  department,  may  make  them  by  an  exclusive  right  of 
construction.     The  advice  in  the  will  to  take  care  of  fire,  and 
put  out  the  candles  before  they  went  to  sleep,  is  a  fine  allusion  to 
the  colour  of  the  lining,  as  the  flame  of  supremacy  might  con- 
sume state  rights  ;  and  also  an  admonition  to  the  states  to  extin- 
guish this  flame  before  they  went  to  sleep,  which  they  have 
carelessly  kindled,  by  putting  the  words  government  and  su- 


Taylor's  views.  309 

preme,  and  even  the  letters  which  spell  the  word  national,  into 
the  constitution.  As  the  will  required  Peter's  codicil  to  justify 
the  requisite  hut  prohibited  satin  lining,  so  the  constitution  re- 
quired the  codicil  of  the  Federalist,  to  justify  the  requisite  but 
rejected  national  government.  The  judgments  of  the  federal 
courts  are  the  linings  of  federal  laws.  Being  of  their  essence, 
they  can  alter  the  division  of  powers,  as  the  linings  could  essen- 
tially alter  the  coats.  Codicils  are  as  requisite,  necessary,  and 
proper,  for  the  constitution,  as  for  the  will,  to  accommodate  it 
with  new  fashions ;  and  the  supreme  Peter  had  before  proved, 
that  expedients  were  allowable  for  effecting  whatever  was  requi- 
site, necessary,  and  proper. 

"  But  fashions  perpetually  altering  in  that  age,  the  scholastic 
"  brother,  weary  of  searching  for  farther  evasions,  and  solving 
"  everlasting  contradictions,  resolved  at  all  hazards  to  comply 
"  with  the  modes  of  the  world ;  they  concerted  matters  together, 
"  and   agreed    to    lock  up   their  father's  will  in  a  strong  box, 
"  brought  out  of  Greece  or  Rome,  and  trouble  themselves  no 
"  farther  to  examine  it,  but  only  refer  to  its  authority  whenever 
"  they  thought  fit.     In  consequence  whereof,  it  grew  a  general 
"  mode  to  wear  an  infinite    number   of  points,   most  of  them 
"  tagged  with  silver.     Upon  which,   the  scholar   pronounced, 
"  ex  cathedra,  that  points  were  absolutely  jure  paterno.     *Tis 
"  true,  the  fashion  prescribed  somewhat  more  than  were  directly 
"  named  in  the  will;  however,  they,  as  heirs  general  of  their 
"  father,  had  power  to  make  and  add  certain  clauses  for  publick 
"  emolument,  though  not  deducible,  totidem  verbis,  from  the 
"  letter  of  the  will,    or  else  multa  absurda  sequerentur.     This 
1  was  understood  for  canonical,  and  therefore  on  the  following 
"  Sunday,  they  came  to  church  all  covered  with  points."     The 
text  almost  becomes  too  plain  to  be  allegorical.     Construction  is 
the  strong  box,  brought  from  England,  in  which  the  constitution 
may  be  locked  up.    Whether  that  or  Greek  and  Latin  would  be 
most  unintelligible  to  the  learned  reader,  may  be  doubtful ;  but 
to  the  unlearned,  both  would  be  incomprehensible.     By  the  ob- 
scurity, those  having  an  exclusive  custody  of  the  box,  might 
refer  to  it  without  the  danger  of  contradiction,  as  empowering 
them  to  wear  as  many  points  tagged  with  silver  as  they  chose. 


.- 


310  tailor's  views. 

This  decision,  pronounced  ex  cathedra,  specifies  the  decision  of 
the  supreme  court,  ex  banco,  declaring  that  the  federal  govern- 
ment was  invested  by  the  constitution  with  a  power  to  remove 
every  obstruction  to  its  wearing  as  many  points  tagged  with  sil- 
ver as  it  chose.  This  was  a  compliance  with  the  modes  of  the 
world  at  all  hazards.  Though  the  infinite  number  of  these 
points  might  exceed  the  objects  named  in  the  constitution  to 
which  silver  might  be  tagged,  yet  as  heir  general  of  the  states, 
the  federal  government  might  add  clauses  to  the  constitution  for 
publick  emolument.  By  adhering  to  the  will,  multa  absurda 
sequerentur,  in  the  opinion  of  the  learned  brother ;  by  adhering 
to  the  constitution,  the  same  thing  would  happen,  in  the  opinion 
of  our  learned  department ;  and  therefore,  where  powers  are  not 
to  be  found,  totidem  verbis,  it  may  supply  those  necessary,  or 
multa  absurda  sequerentur.  And  what  can  be  more  absurd,  than 
to  suffer  inconveniences  which  may  be  removed  by  expedients  ? 

The  reader  has  discerned,  that  the  sage  maxims  collected  by  as 
able  a  commentator  as  ever  lived,  are  intended  to  constitute  a 
complete  code  for  settling  the  rights  and  powers  of  construction, 
though  conveyed  to  the  world  by  an  allegory,  alluding  to  the 
United  States  in  particular ;  but  to  place  his  intention  beyond  a 
doubt,  Swift  tells  us  "  that  he  treats  the  subject  by  types  and 
'•'figures  for  the  benefit  of  mankind;"  thereby  giving  us  to  un- 
derstand, that  it  was  calculated  to  instruct  all  ages  in  the  profound 
art  of  construction. 

"  The  learned  brother  now  began  to  look  big  and  take  might- 
"  ily  upon  him.  He  insisted  that  he  was  his  father's  sole  heir. 
"  What  with  pride,  projects,  and  knavery,  he  became  distracted, 
"  and  insisted  that  he  should  be  called  Lord  Peter,  monarch  of 
"  the  universe,  and  God  Almighty.  He  invented  various  pro- 
"  jects,  and  circulated  many  slips  of  paper  for  getting  money, 
"  and  made  fine  promises  of  an  ample  retribution  in  terra  incog- 
"  nita.  He  insisted  that  a  crust  of  bread  was  beef,  mutton,  veal, 
"  venison,  partridge,  plum-pudding,  custard,  and  claret.  When 
"  his  brothers  doubted  this ;  look  ye,  gentlemen,  cries  Peter  in  a 
"  rage,  to  convince  you  what  a  couple  of  blind,  positive,  igno- 
(i  rant,  wilful  puppies  you  are,  I  will  use  this  plain  argument : 


Taylor's  views.  311 

"  By  & — ,  it  is  true,  good,  natural  mutton  ;  and  G—  confound 
"  you  both  eternally,  if  you  offer  to  believe  otherwise." 

Here  is  a  positive  precedent,  entitling  the  federal  government 
or  the  supreme  court,  to  consider  itself  as  the  sole  heir  of  the 
states,  as  the  concentrated  power  of  America,  and  as  a  political 
almighty.  At  least,  ite' justifies  its  modest  claim  to  supremacy 
over  only  a  portion  of  the  universe  so  inferior  to  Lord  Peter's ; 
and  undoubtedly  recognises  the  banking,  protecting  duty,  lotte- 
ry, and  all  other  projects  for  getting  money  by  slips  of  paper,  as 
legitimate  consequences  of  its  supreme  power  ;  if  attended  with 
promises  of  ample  retribution  in  the  terra  incognita  called  specie, 
or  in  the  cheapness  to  be  produced  by  monopolies.  It  proves 
that  banks  are  mounds  of  earth,  or  couriers  for  transporting 
taxes,  and  the  ten  miles  square  the  whole  United  States  ;  postu- 
lates as  necessary  to  sustain  sundry  laws  and  judgments,  as  that 
a  crust  was  beef,  mutton,  veal,  venison,  partridge,  plum-pudding, 
custard,  and  claret  was,  to  sustain  Lord  Peter's  supremacy.  The 
forbearance  of  the  federal  government  in  not  pushing  its  construc- 
tive powers  to  the  extent  justified  by  the  authority,  entitles  it  to 
confidence.  Far  less  furious  than  the  supreme  Peter,  it  only 
puts  people  in  prison,  and  seizes  their  temporal  estates,  and  does 
not  send  their  souls  to  hell,  to  convince  them  of  the  virtues  of 
supremacy.  The  crust  is  obviously  the  economy  passionately 
recommended  to  the  people  by  the  capitalists,  who,  like  Lord 
Peter,  have  fine  houses,  fine  clothes,  fine  victuals  and  drink,  and 
plenty  of  money  in  their  pockets. 

"  This  worthy  matter  gave  a  principal  occasion  to  a  great  rup- 
"  ture  which  happened  among  these  brethren,  and  was  never 
"  afterwards  made  up.  The  two  brothers,  weary  of  his  usage. 
"  asked  for  a  copy  of  their  father's  will,  which  had  lain  long 
**  neglected.  Instead  of  granting  them  this  request,  he  called 
"  them  damn'd  sons  of  whores,  rogues,  and  traitors,  and  all  the 
"  vile  names  he  could  muster  up.  However,  they  got  a  copy  of 
"  the  will ;  but  Peter,  with  a  file  of  dragoons  at  his  heels,  very 
"  fairly,  by  main  force,  kicks  them  both  out  of  doors,  and  would 
"  never  let  them  come  under  his  roof,  from  that  day  to  this." 

The  states,  having  long  indulged  and  even  imitated  the  extra- 
vagancies of  the  federal  government,  have  at  length  bethought 


312  TAYLOR'S  VIEWS. 

them  of  the  long-neglected  constitution.  This  arrogance  has 
drawn  upon  them  sundry  hard  names,  but  hitherto  not  so  very- 
vile,  as  those  applied  by  the  supreme  Peter  to  his  brethren  ; 
witness  One  of  the  People,  who  deserves  great  praise  for  his  mo- 
deration under  the  same  provocation  by  which  Lord  Peter  was 
so  justly  incensed.  Is  it  not  highly  arrogant  in  the  states  to 
winch  from  the  discipline  of  being  kicked  from  under  the  roof 
of  the  constitution  by  supremacy,  never  to  return  ?  The  reader 
will  recollect,  that  the  constitution  is  the  house,  in  which  the 
three  classes  of  powers,  federal  exclusive,  state  exclusive,  and 
concurrent,  were  placed.  Peter,  the  great  commentator,  re- 
markable for  his  book-learning,  and  knowledge  of  Aristotle,  is  a 
type  of  constructive  supremacy,  remarkable  for  its  book-learning, 
and  knowledge  of  Lord  Coke,  who  finds  but  a  single  exception 
to  its  power.  But  here,  to  shew  both  my  candour  and  erudi- 
tion, I  shall  suggest  a  considerable  difficulty.  What  is  meant  by 
the  file  of  dragoons,  by  whose  help  Peter  kicks  his  brothers  out 
of  dpors  ?  It  appears  that  Swift  wrote  his  treatise  upon  construc- 
tion in  the  year  1697,  and  that  it  was  not  published  until  several 
years  afterwards.  Sir  Richard  Steele,  a  contemporary  author, 
wrote  his  comedy  called  The  Funeral,  in  the  year  1702.  In 
this  play,  a  file  of  men  is  said  to  consist  of  six  ;  it  being  then  the 
custom  to  form  armies  three  men  deep.  It  is  therefore  obvious 
that  Swift,  by  a  file,  meant  six  dragoons,  and  Peter,  who  led  them 
on,  made  seven.  So  that  Swift  might  have  intended  a  numeri- 
cal reference  to  the  court,  as  the  supremacy  by  which  the  state 
exclusive  and  concurrent  powers  would  be  kicked  from  under 
the  roof  of  the  constitution.  This  opinion  is  very  far  from  vio- 
lating his  rules  for  construction,  or  those  adopted  by  our  supre- 
macy, because  the  verb  "  to  dragoon,"  means  "  to  persecute," 
and  that  means  "  to  harass  with  penalties,"  and  this  implies 
"  to  prosecute,"  and  that  means  "  to  pursue  by  law,"  so  that  we 
fairly  come  by  constructive  induction  to  the  very  case  of  pursu- 
ing state  rights  by  suits  in  law  and  equity  in  the  federal  courts. 
Moreover,  though  the  members  of  this  court,  totidem  verbis, 
may  not  be  dragoons,  yet  it  is  quite  fair  to  infer  from  the  phrase 
"  church  militant,"  that  there  may  be  a  court  militant.  Civil 
and  religious  freedom  make  but  one  principle,  and  a  militant 


Taylor's  views.  313 

temper,  if  it  had  never  been  ascertained,  might  as  probably  have 
been  expected  from  civil,  as  from  religious  functionaries.  On 
the  other  hand,  when  we  consider  that  dragoons  are  people  who 
enforce  commands  by  guns  and  swords,  and  not  by  executions 
and  sequestrations,  we  are  forced  to  imagine  that  Swift,  by  the 
allegory  of  "  a  file  of  dragoons,"  might  mean  a  mercenary 
army,  with  a  General  Peter  at  its  head.  For  this  interpretation 
also,  there  are  weighty  reasons.  Lord  Peter  having  assumed  a 
supreme  power  over  his  father's  will,  resorts  to  the  customary 
instrument  of  supremacy  for  enforcing  his  constructions ;  and 
Swift,  by  the  analogy,  might  have  intended  to  predict,  that  the 
same  necessary  and  proper  expedient  would  be  resorted  to  here 
by  supremacy,  for  enforcing  its  constructions  of  the  constitution. 
Between  interpretations  both  plausible,  the  learned  reader  will 
choose  for  himself;  or  he  may  think  them  both  sound.  Supre- 
macy itself  will  certainly  incline  to  the  opinion,  that  it  may 
shoot  judgments  from  courts,  or  bullets  from  guns,  as  expediency 
or  convenience  may  dictate  ;  but  it  is  unimportant  to  state  rights, 
because  when  kicked  out  of  doors  in  either  mode,  the  text  de- 
clares that  they  will  remain  there. 

The  tale  goes  on  to  relate  "  how  the  two  brothers,  named 
"  Jack  and  Martin,  being  left  to  the  wide  world,  writh  little  or 
"  nothing  to  trust  to,  whilst  Lord  Peter  had  gotten  a  noble 
"  house,  a  title,  and  money,  called  to  mind  their  father's  will, 
"  consisting  of  certain  admirable  rules  about  the  wearing  of 
"  their  coats,  resolved  to  alter  what  was  amiss,  and  to  reduce 
"  their  future  measures  to  the  strictest  obedience,  as  prescribed 
u  therein.  How  Lord  Peter's  fancies,  infused  into  his  brothers, 
"  had  covered  their  coats  with  an  infinite  quantity  of  lace,  rib- 
"  bands,  fringe,  embroidery,  and  points,  (meaning  only  those 
"  tagged  with  silver,  for  the  rest  fell  off,)  so  as  to  produce  the 
"  most  antick  medley  conceivable,  and  to  leave  hardly  a  thread 
"  of  the  original  coat  to  be  seen.  How  Jack  advised  Martin  to 
"  strip,  tear,  pull,  rend,  and  flay  off  all,  because  Peter  had  lock- 
61  ed  up  the  drink,  cheated  them  of  their  fortunes,  palmed  his 
"  damn'd  crusts  upon  them  for  mutton,  and  kick'd  them  out  of 
"  doors.  How  Martin  begged  Jack  not  to  damage  his  coat,  for 
"  he  would  never  get  such  another  ;  and  desired  him  to  consi- 
40 


314  taylor's  views. 

"  der,  that  it  was  not  their  business  to  form  their  actions  by  any 
"  reflections  upon  Peter,  but  by  observing  the  rules  prescribed 
"  in  their  father's  will ;  that  he  should  remember  Peter  was  still 
"  their  brother,  whatever  faults  or  injuries  he  had  committed, 
"  and  therefore  they  should  by  all  means  avoid  such  a  thought 
"  as  that  of  taking  measures  for  good  and  evil,  from  no  other 
"  rule  but  that  of  opposition  to  him ;  that  it  was  true,  the  testa- 
"  ment  of  their  good  father  was  very  exact  in  what  related  to 
"  the  wearing  of  their  coats,  yet  it  was  no  less  penal  and  strict 
"  in  prescribing  agreement,  friendship,  and  affection,  between 
"  them.  How  Martin  proceeded  gravely,  stitch  by  stitch,  to 
"  reform  his  coat,  without  damaging  the  cloth.  How  Jack,  in 
"  pulling  off  the  fineries  from  his  coat,  tore  it  to  pieces,  and  was 
"  forced  to  darn  it  again  with  pack-thread  and  a  skewer.  How 
"  the  resemblance  between  the  persons,  and  between  the  finery 
"  and  rags  of  Peter  and  Jack,  was  so  great,  that  they  were 
«  often  mistaken  for  each  other.  And  how  Martin  separated 
«  himself  from  them  both."  Lord  Peter's  noble  house,  locking 
up  the  drink,  palming  crusts  upon  his  brothers  for  delicacies, 
and  cheating  them  of  their  fortunes,  allude  to  our  noble  capitol, 
the  residence  of  the  assumed  supremacy ;  to  protecting  duties, 
locking  up  good  liquors  from  all  except  the  wealthy  ;  to  the  ad- 
vice of  capitalists  to  the  people  (converted  into  commands  by  a 
number  of  laws,)  to  be  economical,  or  live  upon  crusts  ;  and  to 
banks,  bounties,  pensions,  with  other  constructive  powers,  for 
cheating  them  of  their  fortunes,  being  the  very  efficacious  means 
of  the  capitalist  Peter  for  enriching  himself,  and  impoverishing 
his  brothers.  But  here  the  allegory,  having  with  wonderful  ex- 
actness described  what  has  happened,  dives  into  futurity,  and 
guesses  that  the  states  will  call  the  constitution  to  mind,  and  con- 
sider its  admirable  rules  for  wearing  the  three  classes  of  pow- 
ers;  that  the  antick  medley  with  which  these  powers  are 
covered,  by  stitching  on  them  interpolations,  hardly  leaving  a 
principle  of  the  original  constitution  to  be  seen,  may  be  re- 
moved ;  that  though  some  people,  like  Peter,  may  be  for  hiding 
the  federal  system  under  the  fineries  of  supremacy,  and  some, 
like  Jack,  for  tearing  it  to  pieces  by  the  idea  of  an  American 
nation,  others  may,  like  Martin,  separate  themselves  from  both 


TAYLOR'S  VIEWS.  315 

extremes,  and  proceed  prudently  to  restore  it  to  its  original  per- 
fection ;  that  furious  states  would  be  obliged  to  darn  up  the  rents 
they  might  make  with  very  bad  materials  ;  that  prudent  states 
will  not  forget  that  the  federal  government  is  their  brother,  nor 
over-look  the  advantages  of  living  amicably  with  it,  under  the 
roof  of  the  constitution ;  and  that  the  resemblance  between  Pe- 
ter's finery  and  Jack's  tatters,  will  make  it  hard  to  distinguish 
one  from  the  other,  because  either  would  produce  a  rupture  be- 
tween the  state  and  federal  governments,  which  may  never  be 
made  up.  Martin's  advice  is  adverse  both  to  the  tyrannical  su- 
premacy of  Lord  Peter,  and  the  disorganizing  fury  of  mad  Jack, 
and  clearly  points  out  the  measures  by  which  the  admirable  rules 
of  the  will,  or  federal  constitution,  can  be  made  to  secure  the  pre- 
scribed mode  of  wearing  the  coats,  that  is,  of  exercising  the  fe- 
deral and  state  powers.  But  whether  this  sage  advice  will  be 
followed,  or  whether  the  supremacy  of  Peter,  or  the  madness  of 
Jack,  will  be  preferred,  are  matters  in  the  womb  of  time,  which 
cannot  be  delivered  by  anticipation.  Swift,  however,  intui- 
tively declares,  "  that  if  the  reader  fairly  considers  the  strength 
"  of  what  he  has  advanced,  according  to  his  constitution,  it  will 
"  produce  a  wonderful  revolution  in  his  notions  and  opinions  ;" 
meaning,  that  his  rules  for  construction,  when  applied  to  our 
constitution,  (the  political  constitution  of  every  individual,)  will 
change  his  habits  of  thinking. 

That  enough  of  Swift's  erudite  treatise  for  establishing  the  su- 
premacy of  construction  over  the  rights  and  sovereignties  of  the 
states,  may  be  left  to  exercise  the  superior  sagacity  of  the  con- 
solidating school,  and  to  reap  the  praise  due  to  brevity,  I  have 
quoted  it  sparingly,  like  an  amicus  curiae,  pleading  without  a  fee, 
and  only  solicitous  to  state  a  question  fairly.  But  candour  com- 
pels me  to  add,  that  it  contains  many  other  allusions  worthy  of 
consideration,  such  as,  that  Peter,  the  profound  commentator  and 
type  of  supremacy,  first  induced  his  brothers  to  consent  to  his 
constructions,  and  then  kicked  them  out  of  doors  ;  that  Martin, 
the  type  of  our  federal  system,  would  not  rip  from  his  coat  the 
checks  and  balances  by  which  it  is  constituted ;  that  Jack,  the 
type  of  the  notion  that  the  mode  of  electing  the  house  of  repre- 
sentatives will  prevent  an  adulteration  of  the  constitution,  ruined 


316  Taylor's  vikws. 

his  coat,  was  a  madman,  and  finally  chained,  like  a  great  nation 
subjected  to  a  concentrated  supremacy ;  and  that  the  fripperies 
added  to  the  coats,  from  time  to  time,  with  the  consent  of  all  the 
brothers,  indicate  the  successive  interpolations  stitched  to  the 
constitution,  with  the  consent  of  all  our  parties.  These  were  at 
length  used  by  the  supreme  Peter,  to  compel  his  brothers  to  live 
on  crusts,  were  carefully  removed  by  the  federal  Martin,  and 
were  furiously  torn  off  by  the  frantick  Jack.  It  is  also  worthy 
of  observation,  that  Lord  Peter  does  not  take  away  the  coats  of 
his  brethren,  and  wear  them  under  his  own.  Was  it  because 
the  acute  Swift  saw  the  ridiculousness  of  swaddling  his  hero, 
like  a  Dutch  boor  with  three  pair  of  breeches  on  ?  And  did  he 
think  that  the  federal  government,  by  clothing  itself  in  powers 
cut  out  for  state  governments,  would  become  such  a  comick, 
antick,  jack-pudding  figure,  and  exhibit  such  tumblings,  bam- 
boozlings,  flounderings,  and  scufflings,  as  too  much  to  resemble  a 
political  zany,  to  be  shown  in  so  grave  a  work  ?  To  rebut  in- 
tirely  the  charge  of  designing  the  least  suppression,  by  my  con- 
ciseness, I  acknowledge  that  this  treatise  upon  construction  fur- 
nishes many  other  arguments  in  favour  of  the  consolidating 
school ;  and  lest  I  may  have  failed  to  select  the  strongest,  I 
humbly  advise  its  disciples  to  distribute  an  hundred  thousand 
copies  of  it  among  the  people,  as  a  complete  prolegomena  for 
explaining  their  constructions  of  the  constitution. 

It  supplies  a  vast  mass  of  precedents  and  argumentation  for 
removing  collisions  between  the  state  and  federal  governments, 
and  for  proving  the  efficiency  of  a  concentrated  supremacy ;  to 
which  I  confess  that  only  one  poor  observation  can  be  opposed, 
namely,  that  if  the  state  and  federal  governments  may  be  occa- 
sionally scratched  by  the  mutual  check  resulting  from  the  divi- 
sion of  powers,  it  may  still  be  considered  as  the  only  brier 
which  bears  the  rose  called  liberty,  able  to  impart  that  rare 
flavour  to  our  political  nose-gay,  highly  agreeable  to  some  peo- 
ple, but  very  offensive  to  others. 

THE  END. 


WAT  AM)  GIDEON,    FlUJiTEltS, 


l"ir-»i  • 


wH! 


wfflEw 


SUE 


W* 


