n^^ 

H^*^- 

^%^^^%^<\ 


BOOK    973.4.H18   V.9   c.  1 
HAMILTON    #    WORKS 


T=nr^^^»^^5^?^ 


£ 
Conetitutional  leMtion  3 02 

•HZ 

The  Works  of  ^'^ 

Alexander  Hamilton 


Edited  by- 
Henry  Cabot  Lodge 


"  The  sacred  rights  of  mankind  are  not  to  be  rummaged  for  among  old  parchments  or 
musty  records.  They  are  written,  as  with  a  sunbeam,  in  the  whole  volume  of  human  nature, 
by  the  hand  of  the  Divinity  itself,  and  can  never  be  erased  or  obscured  by  mortal  power." 

[Hamilton— 7';^^  Farmer  Refuted^  1775,  ^t.  18.] 

"  We  are  laboring  hard  to  establish  in  this  country  principles  more  and  more  national^ 
and  free  from  all  foreign  ingredients,  so  that  we  may  be  neither  '  Greeks  nor  Trojans,'  but 
truly  Americans."— [Hamilton  to  King,  1796,  Rx.  59.] 


Volume  IX 


G.  P.  Putnam's  Sons 
New  York  and  London 
Cbe  1ftntcF?erbockec  iprees 


Ube  Knicfsetboctter  f>rees»  mew  ISotb 


CONTENTS 


^ 

^ 
^ 

^ 
^ 

^ 

J 


Miscellaneous  Papers — Continued : 

Defence    of    the    Funding   System  —  Con- 
tinued:       ....... 

Private  Correspondence: 

To  Edward  Stevens 

To  TiLEMAN  CrUGER 

To  THE  Provincial  Congress  of  New  York 

To  THE  Honorable  Convention  of  New  York, 

To  THE  Provincial  Congress  .         .         .         . 

To  Gouverneur  Morris,  Robert  Livingston, 
and  William  Allison,  Esqs.     . 

To  Gouverneur  Morris,  etc. 

To  THE  Committee  of  the  New  York  Conven- 
tion    

To  Gouverneur  Morris,  etc.  . 

To  the  Committee  of  the  New  York  Conven- 
tion    

To  William  Livingston  . 

To  William  Duer    . 

To  Gouverneur  Morris  . 

To  Robert  R.  Livingston 

To  Dr.  Hugh  Knox  . 

To  Gouverneur  Morris  . 

To  Robert  R.  Livingston 

To  Gouverneur  Morris  . 

To  THE  Honorable  John  Hancock, 
OF  Congress 

To  Washington 


President 


37 
38 

40 
42 

44 

45 
47 

50 

54 

56 
59 
63 
65 
77 
82 
86 
95 
99 

lOI 

103 


d 


IV 


Contents 


Private  Correspondence — Continued: 
To  General  Gates  . 
To  Washington 
To  General  Gates  . 
To  Waspiington 
To  General  Putnam 
To  Governor  George  Clinton 
To  William  Duer,  M.C.   . 
To  Lafayette  .... 
To  Washington 
To  Elias  Boudinot  . 
To  Lord  Stirling  (?) 
To  Washington 
To  Elias  Boudinot  . 
To .         .         .         . 


To  Baron  Steuben  ...... 

Narrative  of  an  Affair  of  Honor  between 

General  Lee  and  Colonel  Laurens 
To  the  Honorable  John  Jay,  President  of 

Congress   . 
To  Miss  Livingston. 
To  Baron  Steuben  . 
To  Otho  H.  Williams 
To  Major  Lee  or,  in  his  Absence,  Captain 

McLane 
To  Col.  David  Henley 
To  Col.  John  Brooks 
To  Dr.  William  Gordon 
To  James  Duane 
To  Baron  Steuben  . 
To  James  Duane 
To  Col.  John  Brooks 
To  John  Laurens     . 
To  James  Duane 
Du  PoRTAiL  and  Hamilton  to  Washington 
To  JoFiN  Laurens     ..... 
To  Doctor  William  Gordon   . 


109 
III 
117 

119 
120 
122 
132 

137 
138 
140 
142 
144 

147 
152 
155 

156 

159 
163 
165 
166 

166 
167 
168 
169 
169 
170 
171 
172 

173 
176 
179 
184 


Contents 

Private  Correspondence — Continued 
To  Washington 
To  Baron  Steuben  . 
To  James  Duane 
To  General  Greene 
To  Baron  Steuben  . 
To  Washington 
To  the  Chevalier  De  Ternay 
To  Baron  Steuben  . 
To  General  Anthony  Wayne 
To  Baron  Steuben  . 
To  Miss  Schuyler    . 
To  James  Duane 
To  Washington 
To  General  Greene 
To  Miss  Schuyler    . 
To  John  Laurens     . 
To  Isaac  Sears 
To  James  Duane 
To  Washington 

To 

To  Philip  Schuyler 
To  General  Greene 
To  Washington 
To  Mrs.  Hamilton    . 
To  Washington 
To  Mrs.  Hamilton   . 
To  Lafayette 
To  Mrs.  Hamilton    . 
To  Washington 
To  Richard  K.  Meade 
To  Robert  Morris  . 
To  General  Knox   . 
To  Robert  Morris  . 
To  Comfort  Sands    . 
To  Robert  Morris  . 
To  Governor  Clinton 


V 

PAGE 

189 
191 
192 
194 

196 
199 
200 

202 
204 
205 
206 
206 
209 
224 
225 
226 

232 

243 

243 
244 

247 
250 

251 
253 
255 
256 

259 
261 
262 
263 


VI 


Contents 


Private  Correspondence — Continued 
To  Robert  Morris 
To  Governor  Clinton 
To  the  County  Treasurers 
To  Robert  Morris  . 
To  John  Laurens     . 
To  Governor  Clinton 
To  Robert  Morris  . 
To  Colonel  Richard  K.  Meade 
To  Robert  Morris  . 
To  THE  County  Treasurers 
To  Robert  Morris  , 
To  Timothy  Pickering     . 
To  Robert  Morris  . 
To  De  Noailles 
To  General  Greene 
To  Robert  Morris  . 
To  Lafayette 

To  THE  Governor  of  Rhode  Island 
To  Governor  Clinton 
To  Washington 
To  Governor  Clinton 
To  Washington  ». 
To  Governor  Clinton 
To  John  Dickinson  . 
To  James  Madison,  Jr.     . 
To  Mrs.  Hamilton   . 
To  John  Jay 
To  Governor  Clinton 
To  Washington 
To  Governor  Clinton 
To  THE  Honorable  Thomas  Mifflin,  Presi 

dent  of  Congress 
To  John  Barker  Church 
To  Thomas  Fitzsimmons  . 
To  Gouverneur  Morris  . 
To  De  Chastellux  . 


Contents 


Vll 


Private  Correspondence — Continued: 

To  HIS  Brother,  James  Hamilton 

To  Israel  Wilkes    . 

To  Washington 

To  Nathaniel  Hazard     . 

To  Messrs.  Semphill  &  Co. 

To   John  Thomas,   Esq.,    Sheriff 

CHESTER        .... 

To  Washington 

To .... 


To  Major  Peirce 

To  AULDJO  .... 

To  RuFus  King 

To  Colonel  Jeremiah  Wadsworth 

To  RuFus  King 

To  Washington 

To  James  Madison,  Jr.     . 

To  Gouverneur  Morris  . 

To  James  Madison,  Jr.     . 

To  John  Sullivan,  Esq.,  President  of  the 

State  of  New  Hampshire 
To  James  Madison,  Jr.     . 
To  Nathaniel  Chipman    . 
To  James  Madison,  Jr.     . 
To  Washington 
To  Samuel  Broome  . 
To  Governor  Wm.  Livingston 
To  Washington 
To  Theodore  Sedgwick 
To  Nathaniel  Chipman    . 
To  Theodore  Sedgwick  . 
To  Washington 
To  James  Madison,  Jr.     . 
To  Theodore  Sedgwick  . 
To  Rufus  King 
To  Oliver  Wolcott 
To  Lafayette 


OF  West 


405 
406 
412 
413 

415 

416 

417 
419 
420 
421 
422 
422 
423 
423 
427 
428 

430 

432 
432 
438 
440 
441 
442 
442 

444 
446 

447 
451 
452 
453 
456 
457 
459 
459 


VUl 


Contents 


Private  Correspondence — Continued 
To  James  Madison,  Jr  . 
To  Washington 
To  Timothy  Pickering 
To  Col.  R.  H.  Harrison 
To  Henry  Lee 
To  William  Duer     . 
To  ^DANus  Burke  . 
To  Timothy  Pickering 
To  Winn  . 
To  Washington 
To  John  Jay 
To  Washington 
To  William  Seton    . 

To 

To  Washington 

To  Benjamin  Goodhue 

To  Mrs.  Martha  Walker 

To  RuFus  King 

To  Timothy  Pickering 

To  William  Seton    . 

To  William  Duer     . 

To  William  Seton    . 

To  THE  President,  Directors,  etc.,  o 

Bank  of  New  York 
To  William  Seton 
To  A  Friend 
To  Washington 
To  General  Knox 
To  William  Seton 
To  Philip  Hamilton 
To  Nicholas  Gouverneur 
To  Gulian  Verplanck  and  Others 
To  William  Seton 
To  William  Duer 
To  William  Seton 


THE 


Contents  ix 

PAGE 

Private  Correspondence — Continued: 

To  THE  Directors  and  Company  of  the  Bank 

OF  New  York 508 

To  William  Duer 508 

To  William  Seton 509 

To  William  Duer 510 

To  William  Seton 512 

To  Colonel  Edward  Carrington    .         .         .513 

To  General  Otho  H.  Williams       .         .         .  536 

To  Gouverneur  Morris  .....  537 

To  Colonel  Heth  and  Others         .         .         .  539 

To  William  Seton 540 

To  RuFus  King 540 

To  Elias  Boudinot 541 

To  Washington 542 


MISCELLANEOUS  PAPERS  {Continued) 


MISCELLANEOUS   PAPERS 


DEFENCE  OF  THE  FUNDING  SYSTEM 

II 

THE   ASSUMPTION   OF  THE   STATE    DEBTS 
{Continued  from  Vol.  VIII.) 

THE  theory  of  our  constitutions  with  respect  to 
taxation  is  perhaps  a  new  example  in  the 
world — that  is  to  say,  a  conctirrent  and  co-ordinate 
authority  in  one  general  head  and  in  thirteen  (now 
fifteen)  distinct  members  of  a  confederacy  united 
under  that  head  to  impose  in  detail  upon  individuals 
and  upon  all  taxable  objects. 

Yet  experience  had  demonstrated  that  a  power  in 
the  general  head  to  tax  the  States  only  in  their 
collective  capacities — that  is,  by  the  system  of  requi- 
sitions, was  a  system  of  imbecility  and  injustice :  im- 
becility, because  it  did  not  produce  to  the  common 
treasury  the  requisite  supplies;  injustice,  because  the 
separate  efforts  of  the  States  under  such  a  system, 
from  the  nature  of  things,  would  ever  be  imequal,  and 
consequently  their  contributions  disproportionate. 

Hence,  all  those  who  agreed  in  the  necessity  of  a 
union  of  the  States  imder  a  common  head,  felt  and 


4  Alexander  Hamilton 

acknowledged  that  a  change  in  the  plan  was  an  essen- 
tial feature  in  a  new  arrangement  of  the  constitution 
of  General  Government. 

But  though  agreed  in  this  general  principle,  they 
were  not  equally  agreed  in  the  application  of  the 
rule.  Some  were  for  a  general  and  paramoimt  power 
of  taxation  in  the  National  Government,  and  either 
a  subordinate  or  a  limited  (by  being  confined  to  par- 
ticular objects)  power  of  taxation  in  the  State  Gov- 
ernments. Some  were  for  a  division  of  the  power  of 
taxation,  giving  certain  branches  of  it  exclusively  to 
the  General  Government,  and  other  branches  of  it 
exclusively  to  the  State  Government.  Others  were 
for  a  general  concurrent  power  of  taxation  in  the 
Federal  and  State  Governments. 

The  two  first  opinions  equally  presupposed  a  great 
difficulty  of  execution  and  danger  of  collision  in  a 
concurrent  power  of  taxation,  and  sought  to  avoid  it 
by  different  means.  The  last  seems  to  have  consid- 
ered that  difficulty  and  danger  as  less  formidable 
than  the  embarrassments  which  belonged  to  either 
of  the  other  schemes.  And  this  opinion  was  adopted 
by  the  Convention,  except  with  regard  to  the  duties 
of  imports  and  tonnage,  which  for  cogent  and  obvi- 
ous reasons  was  incompatible  and  was  exclusively 
vested  in  the  Federal  head. 

This  course  was,  relatively  to  the  existing  state  of 
things,  the  wisest.  The  subordination  of  the  State 
power  of  taxation  to  that  of  the  General  Government, 
or  the  confining  it  to  particular  objects,  would  prob- 
ably have  been  an  insuperable  obstacle  to  the  adop- 
tion of  the  Constitution.     The  division  of  the  power 


The  Funding  System  5 

between  the  Union  and  the  States  could  not  have 
been  regulated  upon  any  plan  which  would  not  either 
have  left  the  General  Government  more  restricted 
than  was  compatible  with  a  due  provision  for  the 
exigencies  of  the  Union,  or  would  have  so  confined 
the  State  Government  as  would  have  been  equally 
an  impediment  to  the  success  of  the  Constitution. 
Besides  that,  a  truly  eligible  division,  which  con- 
sulted all  the  cases  possible  by  the  general  principles 
of  the  Constitution,  was  intrinsically  very  difficult 
if  not  impracticable. 

But  though  it  is  admitted  that  the  course  pursued 
by  the  Convention  was  the  most  expedient,  yet  it  is 
not  the  less  true  that  the  plan  involved  inherent  and 
great  difficulties. 

It  may  not  unaptly  be  styled  the  Gordian-knot  of 
our  political  situation. 

To  me  there  appeared  but  one  way  of  untying  or 
severing  it,  which  was  in  practice  to  leave  the  States 
under  as  little  necessity  as  possible  of  exercising  the 
power  of  taxation.  The  narrowness  of  the  limits  of 
its  exercise  on  one  side  left  the  field  more  free  and 
unembarrassed  to  the  other,  and  avoided  essentially 
the  interference  and  collisions  to  be  apprehended 
from  inherent  difficulties  on  the  plan  of  concurrent 
jurisdiction. 

Thus,  to  give  a  clear  field  to  the  Government  of 
the  United  States  was  so  manifestly  founded  in  good 
policy  that  the  time  must  come  when  a  man  of  sense 
would  blush  to  dispute  it. 

It  was  essential  to  give  effect  to  the  objects  of  the 
Union.     As  to  the  past,  the  General  Government  was 


6  Alexander  Hamilton 

to  provide  for  the  debts  which  the  war  that  accom- 
plished our  Revolution  had  left  upon  us.  These  were 
to  the  debts  which  the  same  events  had  left  upon  the 
States  individually  as  five  to  two  nearly. 

For  the  future,  the  General  Government,  besides 
providing  for  the  expenses  of  its  civil  administration, 
which  from  obvious  causes  would  unavoidably  ex- 
ceed those  of  the  State  Governments,  and  for  a  vari- 
ety of  other  objects  tedious  to  enumerate  or  define, 
was  charged  with  the  care  of  the  common  defence. 

Reason  and  experience  teach  that  the  great  mass 
of  expense  in  every  country  proceeds  from  war.  Our 
experience  has  already  belied  the  reveries  of  those 
dreamers  or  impostors  who  were  wont  to  weaken  the 
argument  arising  from  this  source  by  promising  to 
this  country  a  perpetual  exemption  from  war. 

In  the  few  years  of  our  existence  our  frontiers  have 
exhibited  a  state  of  desolating  and  expensive  hos- 
tility. How  narrowly  have  we  thus  far  escaped  a 
war  with  a  great  European  Power?  Who  can  say 
how  long  we  shall  be  before  we  may  be  compelled  to 
defend  our  independence  against  some  one  of  the 
great  competitors  still  engaged  on  that  theatre? 

The  violent  passions  which  have  agitated  the 
apostles  of  perpetual  peace,  and  which  were  so  near 
forcing  our  political  ship  upon  the  rock  of  war,  which 
at  this  moment  still  impel  her  to  the  same  ruinous 
point,  are  the  mirrors  in  which  they  may  read  the 
refutation  of  their  silly  predictions,  and  the  cer- 
tainty that  our  nation  is  enough  exposed  to  the 
chances  of  war  to  render  a  clear  stage  for  command- 
ing all  our  resources  of  taxation  indispensable.     Be- 


The  Funding  System  7 

sides  actual  war  and  danger  of  still  greater,  we  have 
already  experienced  a  domestic  insurrection  in  which 
more  than  a  million  has  been  expended. 

Without  an  assumption  of  the  State  debts  which 
produced  this  effect,  the  first  war  with  an  European 
Power  would  have  convinced  us  of  the  ineligibleness 
of  our  situation,  of  the  weakness  and  embarrassment 
incident  to  fifteen  or  perhaps  to  fifty  different  sys- 
tems of  finance. 

The  foundation  of  the  observation  is  obvious. 
Different  States  would  have  and  actually  have  dif- 
ferent predilections  and  prejudices  on  the  subject  of 
taxation.  Some  incline  more  to  excises,  or  taxes  on 
articles  of  consumption,  than  to  taxes  on  real  estate. 
Others  favor  the  latter  more  than  the  former.  In 
some  stamp  duties  are  not  ill  thought  of;  in  others 
they  are  odious. 

Suppose,  what  was  the  natural  and  probable  effect 
of  such  a  diversity  of  opinion,  the  States  being  left  to 
make  separate  provisions  for  their  particular  debts 
had  bottomed  their  provisions  on  different  objects  of 
revenue;  that  some  had  occupied  the  most  produc- 
tive objects  of  excise;  that  others  had  had  recourse 
to  taxes  on  real  estate;  that  some  had  preferred  to 
either  duties  on  stamps;  that  a  fourth  class  had 
sought  the  needed  revenue  from  duties  on  the  aliena- 
tion of  certain  kinds  of  property;  and  that  a  fifth 
class  had  derived  its  provision  from  general  assess- 
ments of  real  and  personal  estate.  These,  with 
duties  on  imports  and  exports,  from  which  they  are 
excluded,  and  poll  taxes,  which  are  the  scourge  of  any 
society,  comprise  all  the  important  branches  of  re- 


8  Alexander  Hamilton 

venue.  Suppose,  as  would  have  been  the  case  if  fair 
provisions  had  been  made,  that  in  each  case  the  taxes 
had  been  carried  as  far  as  could  be  done  without 
oppression  or  overburthening  the  object  or  the  per- 
son, what  would  have  been  the  situation  of  the  Gen- 
eral GkDvemment  in  case  the  breaking  out  of  a  war 
had  called  for  great  resources  ? 

In  all  but  direct  taxes  the  Constitution  enjoins 
uniformity.  Reason  and  principle  enjoin  it  with  re- 
spect to  all  taxes  laid  by  the  same  government  upon 
the  same  society.  What  was  to  be  done?  Revenue 
could  not  be  had  from  excises,  because  the  principal 
objects  were  already  burthened  by  certain  States 
as  much  as  they  could  conveniently  bear  and  to  lay 
additional  burthens  would  be  equally  ruinous  to  in- 
dustry and  to  persons.  Indeed  excessive  accumula- 
tion prevents  collection  and  defeats  the  end. 

Similar  reasons  would  be  obstacles  as  to  all  the 
other  great  branches  of  revenue,  because  different 
States  had  previously  occupied  them  all  to  the 
convenient  extent.  The  hand  of  the  General  Gov- 
ernment would  thus  have  been  arrested,  and  the 
greatest  part  of  the  resources  of  the  community 
would  have  been  tied  up,  incapable  of  being  brought 
into  action  for  the  common  exigencies  of  the  nation. 

Will  it  be  said  that  the  General  Government  might 
still  have  laid  the  taxes  on  such  objects  as  appeared 
to  it  proper,  leaving  the  States  to  change  their  ground 
and  adopt  others?  Who  would  wish  to  have  seen 
the  necessity  of  so  violent  an  expedient,  or  who  could 
calculate  the  consequences  of  it? 

Is  it  certain  that  a  State  would  have  thus  com- 


The  Funding  System  9 

plaisantly  changed  a  ground  to  which  it  had  been 
led  by  the  coincidence  of  its  predilections  and  pre- 
judices ?  If  it  had  mortgaged  the  particular  revenues 
for  its  debt,  is  it  certain  that  it  would  have  been  able 
to  change  its  ground  justly  and  satisfactorily?  Is  it 
not  too  probable  that  perseverance,  complaint,  con- 
troversy, between  the  general  head  and  the  members, 
dissatisfaction  in  the  community,  and  weakness  of 
measures  would  have  been  the  effects  of  such  an 
experiment? 

No  one  can  doubt  the  dangers  and  inconveniences 
of  such  a  situation.  No  sound  mind  but  must  think 
it  a  great  recommendation  of  a  measure  that  it 
tended  to  obviate  so  perilous  and  so  inauspicious  a 
situation. 

An  inference  has  been  drawn  that  without  the  as- 
sumption and  with  separate  provisions  for  the  State 
debts,  the  chief  part  of  the  resources  of  the  com- 
munity would  have  been  tied  up,  incapable  of  be- 
ing brought  into  action  for  the  public  necessities. 
Let  this  be  still  more  particularly  illustrated. 

Suppose  Massachusetts  had  provided  for  her  par- 
ticular debt  by  excises.  It  is  certain  from  the  mag- 
nitude of  her  debt  that  to  make  the  provision  ade- 
quate in  this  way  would  have  required  excises  to  be 
extended  as  far  as  was  practicable.  Suppose  Con- 
necticut to  have  provided  for  her  debt  by  stamp 
duties  and  duties  on  alienations  of  property,  which 
carried  to  any  extent  not  oppressive  would  not  have 
been  more  than  an  adequate  fund  for  her  debt.  Sup- 
pose South  Carolina  to  have  rested  her  debt  on  taxes 
and  assessments  upon  real  and  personal  estate,  which 


lo  Alexander  Hamilton 

in  any  admissible  extent  would  probably  have  been 
inadequate  to  her  debt.' 

It  would  follow  that  the  United  States  could  not 
touch  either  of  those  great  branches  of  taxation, 
because  they  had  been  preoccupied  in  those  three 
States  as  far  as  the  subject  in  each  case  would  per- 
mit, and  therefore  additions  would  be  insupportable 
to  the  citizens  and  incapable  of  collection,  and  be- 
cause Congress  could  not,  by  the  Constitution  or  upon 
principle,  touch  those  branches  in  some  States  with- 
out extending  it  to  all. 

The  only  palliative  for  this  paralytic  state  of  things 
was  requisitions  upon  the  States  to  be  raised  in  their 
own  way.  No  man  conversant  with  the  effects  of 
this  system  during  the  war  of  our  Revolution,  who 
saw  its  impotent  and  unequal  operation,  who  is  a 
friend  to  vigor  in  the  government  of  his  country,  who 
has  an  enlightened  desire  to  see  it  in  a  state  to 
vindicate  efficaciously  its  honor  and  interests,  who 

I  It  may  be  said  that  the  occupation  of  the  several  branches  of  reve- 
nue in  the  way  which  has  been  stated  is  merely  suppositious!  It  might 
not  have  happened — a  more  partial  and  at  the  same  time  a  more 
various  distribution  might  have  left  a  freer  stage  to  the  United  States. 
The  possibility  of  what  has  been  stated  in  theory  is  a  conclusive 
argument  for  preferring  a  plan  which  avoided  it.  But  more  than  this, 
it  is  probable,  and  from  circumstances  was  in  a  great  degree  unavoid- 
able that  what  has  been  supposed  should  have  been  substantially 
realized  in  practice.  The  modes  of  taxation  in  particular  States  and 
the  magnitude  of  their  debts  would  have  naturally  led  to  it.  And  as 
far  as  the  States,  in  their  provisions,  had  recourse  to  different  objects, 
though  not  to  the  full  extent,  so  far  the  evil  would  have  existed  and 
would  have  been  an  obstacle  to  a  due  provision  for  the  public  necessi- 
ties. But  besides  this,  it  would  be  impossible  to  the  State  Govern- 
ments to  command  efficaciously  one  principal  source  of  taxation,  that 
of  excises,  because  of  the  competition  of  industry  where  they  were  not 
laid. 


The  Funding  System  ii 

wishes  the  reign  of  equal  justice  by  equal  effort 
among  the  States  and  their  citizens — no  such  man  but 
would  deplore  that  this  system  should  ever  be  again 
the  principal  reliance  of  the  National  Government. 

But  it  might  be  expected  to  be  even  more  im- 
potent under  the  present  government  than  under  the 
Confederation.  There  the  system  of  requisitions  had 
a  constitutional  basis.  Requisitions  were  the  mode 
indicated  by  the  Articles  of  Confederation  for  sup- 
plying the  general  treasury,  and  it  was  natural 
that  their  obligations  should  be  so  much  the  more 
respected. 

But  under  the  present  government  there  is  no  au- 
thority for  obtaining  revenue  in  that  way.  A  con- 
trary supposition  has  crept  in  from  that  provision  of 
the  Constitution  which  regulates  that  ''direct  taxes 
shall  be  apportioned  among  the  States  according  to 
their  respective  numbers."  But  the  true  meaning 
of  this  is,  that  when  Congress  are  about  to  raise 
revenue  by  their  own  authority  upon  those  objects 
which  are  contemplated  as  the  objects  of  direct  tax- 
ation, the  proportional  measure  of  the  quantum  of  the 
tax  to  be  levied  in  each  State  must  be  on  the  numbers 
of  such  State.  It  is  a  mere  rule  for  the  exercise  of 
the  general  power  of  taxation  vested  in  Congress 
as  to  the  article  of  direct  taxes. 

It  does  not  authorize  the  calling  upon  a  State  to 
raise  such  a  quota  of  money  by  its  own  authority  and 
in  its  own  way.  This  would  be  to  change  taxation 
by  Congress  into  taxation  by  the  States — direct  taxes 
into  taxes  of  any  other  description  which  it  might 
appear  advisable  to  a  State  to  substitute. 


12  Alexander  Hamilton 

Requisitions  are,  then,  unknown  to  our  present 
Constitution.  They  would  amount,  therefore,  to 
mere  recommendations,  a  compliance  with  which 
would  be  purely  gratuitous  and  voltmtary  in  theory 
as  well  as  in  fact.  What  could  be  expected  from  such 
a  system? 

This  position  alone  condemns  any  plan  which 
would  or  might  have  left  the  United  States  depend- 
ent on  the  resource  of  requisitions  for  carrying  on  a 
war.  It  is  against  every  principle  of  sound  reason- 
ing or  constitutional  or  practical  policy,  to  leave  the 
administration  in  a  condition  to  depend  not  on  legal 
and  obligatory  provisions,  but  on  such  as  are  gratu- 
itous and  voltmtary.  This  is  to  arbitrate,  not  to 
govern. 

Perhaps  the  force  of  these  reasonings  may  be 
thought  to  be  diminished  by  the  reflection  that  the 
debts  of  the  States  were  temporary  impediments 
which  might  be  expected  to  cease  within  a  certain 
period. 

But  who  would  say  when  they  would  cease?  It 
was  certain  that  if  fairly  provided  for  the  evil  would 
have  lasted  a  very  considerable  time,  and  it  was  un- 
certain how  soon  a  war  might  render  it  embarrassing 
to  the  finances  and  dangerous  to  the  safety  of  the 
country. 

The  certain  length  of  duration  and  the  greatness 
of  the  probable  mischief  were  sufficient  reasons  for 
removing  the  cause  when  it  could  so  well  be  done. 

It  will  be  argued  hereafter  that  the  duration  of 
all  the  debts,  both  general  and  particular,  suppos- 
ing a  fair  provision,  was  likely  to  have  been  much 


The  Funding  System  13 

greater  on  the  plan  of  separate  than  on  that  of  joint 
provision. 

It  was  observed  by  way  of  objection  to  the  as- 
sumption of  the  State  debts,  that  the  division  of  the 
business  would  facilitate  a  provision  for  the  whole 
debt  of  the  country,  general  and  particular ;  that  the 
resource  of  imposts  would  alone  enable  Congress 
to  provide  for  the  general  debt,  while  the  States 
separately  could  more  conveniently  employ  other 
resources  for  the  particular  debts,  and  that  together 
they  could  not  only  better  provide  for  the  interest  of 
the  debt  but  for  the  speedy  extinguishment  of  the 
principal.  This  was,  in  truth,  the  most  plausible 
argument  which  was  used  against  the  assumption. 

In  some  of  its  aspects  it  was  not  without  founda- 
tion, and  in  contemplating  the  plan  to  be  proposed 
did  not  escape  very  serious  reflection  and  examination. 

It  appeared  to  me  well  founded  in  this  important 
view:  that  leaving  a  provision  for  the  general  debt 
within  the  compass  of  duties  on  imports,  and  dis- 
embarrassing Congress  from  the  necessity  of  resort- 
ing to  other  and  less  agreeable  modes  of  taxation,  it 
avoided  exposing  the  government  in  its  infancy,  and 
before  it  had  engaged  in  its  favor  habit  and  opinion 
to  the  clamor  and  unpopularity  which  was  to  be 
feared  from  the  resort  to  other  means.  To  avoid 
this  inconvenience  had  many  charms  for  the  person 
who  was  to  propose  a  plan ;  it  seemed  to  have  much 
less  risk  for  his  reputation  and  quiet. 

But  on  full  and  mature  reflection,  I  yielded  without 
reserve  to  the  conviction  that  the  consideration  just 
mentioned,  though  not  without  weight,  was  greatly 


14  Alexander  Hamilton 

outweighed  by  many  other  considerations,  and  that 
in  a  personal  view  it  would  have  been  pusillanimity 
and  weakness  to  have  stopped  short  of  a  provision 
for  the  aggregate  debt  of  the  country. 

Some  of  the  reasons  which  determined  me  have 
been  anticipated: 

1.  The  superior  probability  of  justice  among  the 
States  and  among  the  individuals  composing  them, 
including  a  greater  certainty  of  relief  to  the  over- 
burthened  States  and  their  citizens,  and  the  advan- 
tage of  equalizing  the  condition  of  the  citizens  of  all 
the  States  as  to  contributions,  which  was  incident  to 
the  plan  of  a  joint  provision. 

2.  The  avoiding  of  the  collisions,  heart-burnings, 
and  bickerings  to  which  fifteen  different  and  com- 
prehensive systems  of  finance  connected  with  a 
separate  provision  for  the  State  debts  was  subject. 

3.  To  leave  the  field  of  revenue  more  open  to  the 
United  States,  and  thus  secure  to  their  government 
and  the  general  exigencies  of  the  Union,  including 
defence  and  safety,  a  more  full  and  complete  com- 
mand of  the  resources  of  the  nation. 

These  considerations  were  of  themselves  sufficient 
to  outweigh  that  which  has  been  stated  by  way  of 
objection,  but  I  proceed  to  add  others  which  con- 
curred in  determining  my  judgment. 

The  assumption  would  tend  to  consolidate  and 
secure  public  credit. 

This  would  happen  from  various  causes. 

If  it  had  not  taken  place,  there  would  have  been  a 
conflict  of  interests  and  feelings  among  the  public 
creditors. 


The  Funding  System  15 

The  creditors  of  certain  States,  from  the  imprac- 
ticaUty,  admitting  a  disposition,  of  making  for  them 
a  provision  equal  to  that  which  was  made  for  the 
creditors  of  the  United  States,  would  naturally  have 
felt  jealousy  and  dissatisfaction.  They  would  have 
considered  it  as  unjust  that  their  claims,  equally 
meritorious,  should  be  worse  treated,  and  the  sensi- 
bility in  certain  cases  would  have  been  aggravated  by 
the  reflection  that  the  most  productive  resources, 
before  exclusively  enjoyed  by  the  State  Government 
and  applied  to  their  benefit,  had  been  devoted  to  the 
General  Government,  and  applied  by  it  to  the  sole 
benefit  of  the  national  creditors. 

This  jealousy  and  dissatisfaction  would  have  aug- 
mented the  mass  of  dissatisfaction  from  other  causes 
which  would  exist  against  an  adequate  provision  for 
the  general  debt.  The  sources  of  such  dissatisfac- 
tion have  been  stated,  and  it  was  certain  that  en- 
mity to  the  government  in  some  and  the  spirit  of 
faction  in  others  would  make  them  engines  for 
agitating  the  public  mind.  Such  dissatisfactions  in 
a  popular  government  especially  tend  to  jeopardize 
the  security  of  the  public  creditors,  and,  consequently, 
of  the  public  credit. 

The  assumption,  by  uniting  the  interests  of  public 
creditors  of  all  descriptions,  was  calculated  to  pro- 
duce an  opposite  effect.  It  brought  into  the  field 
an  anxiety  to  fortify  the  public  opinion  in  opposition 
to  the  efforts  of  faction  and  of  the  anti-proprietary 
spirit,  in  favor  of  a  just  and  reasonable  provision  for 
the  debt  and  for  the  support  of  credit. 

These  considerations,  to  a  mind  which  has  been 


1 6  Alexander  Hamilton 

attentive  to  the  progress  of  things  since,  will  have 
very  particular  weight. 

The  assiimption  would  favor  public  credit  in  an- 
other sense,  by  promoting  and  enabling  a  more  ade- 
quate provision  for  the  entire  debt  of  the  country. 
This  is  in  direct  contradiction  to  one  of  the  positions 
which  the  objection  that  was  last  stated  contains. 
These  are  the  reasons  for  a  contrary  opinion. 

Some  States — especially  Massachusetts,  Rhode 
Island,  Connecticut,  South  Carolina,  and  Georgia — 
could  not  have  made  adequate  provision  for  their 
respective  debts.  There  is  the  ground  of  experience 
to  assert  that  some  States  were  not  disposed  to  do  it. 
From  the  co-operation  of  the  two  causes,  the  debts 
of  a  large  majority  of  the  States  would  have  remained 
without  an  adequate  provision,  and  would  have  been 
in  danger  of  being  frittered  away  by  means  incon- 
sistent with  the  spirit  of  public  credit;  while  the 
United  States,  by  assuming  the  State  debts,  and  by 
laying  open  all  the  resources  of  taxation  to  the  com- 
mand of  the  General  Government  upon  a  uniform 
plan,  could,  for  reasons  already  detailed,  make  a 
more  efficacious  and  complete  provision  for  every 
part  of  the  debt  than  could  possibly  have  been  done 
by  separate  provisions. 

This  may  seem  to  have  been  a  matter  of  no  con- 
cern to  the  General  Government.  But  the  cause  of 
credit  and  property  is  one  and  the  same  throughout 
the  States.  A  blow  to  it,  in  whatever  State  or  in 
whatever  form,  is  a  blow  to  it  in  every  State  and  in 
every  form.  The  intimacy  of  interest  and  connec- 
tion between  the  States  leads  to  an  observance  in  one 


The  Funding  System  17 

of  what  passes  in  another.  Bad  precedents  influence 
as  well  as  good.  They  are  greedily  looked  up  to  and 
cited  by  men  of  loose  principles  who  make  them  in- 
struments of  instilling  doctrines  and  feelings  hostile 
to  morals,  property,  and  credit.  It  may  be  averred 
as  a  maxim,  without  danger  of  material  error,  that 
there  cannot  be  a  violation  of  public  principle  in  any 
State  without  spreading  more  or  less  an  evil  con- 
tagion in  all. 

It  is  known  that  the  relaxed  conduct  of  the  State 
Governments  in  regard  to  property  and  credit  was 
one  of  the  most  serious  diseases  under  which  the 
body  politic  labored  prior  to  the  adoption  of  our 
present  Constitution,  and  was  a  material  cause  of 
that  state  of  public  opinion  which  led  to  its  adoption. 

The  Constitution  of  the  United  States  contained 
guards  against  this  evil.  Its  provisions  inhibit  to  the 
State  Governments  the  power  to  make  any  thing  but 
gold  and  silver  coin  a  tender  in  payment  of  debts,  or 
to  pass  any  law  impairing  the  obligation  of  contracts, 
which  had  been  great  engines  of  violating  property, 
destroying  confidence  and  credit,  and  propagating 
public  dishonor  and  private  distress. 

In  the  practice  of  the  Federal  Government  it  was 
wise  to  second  the  spirit  of  those  provisions:  i,  by 
avoiding  examples  of  those  very  practices  which 
were  meant  to  be  guarded  against  in  the  States;  2, 
by  removing,  as  far  as  it  could  be  constitutionally 
done,  out  of  the  way  of  the  States,  whatever  would 
oblige  or  tempt  to  further  tampering  with  faith,  credit, 
and  property. 

The  assumption  was  calculated  to  do  this,  and  it 


VOL.  IX.— .2 


1 8  Alexander  Hamilton 

is  not  one  of  its  least  merits.  It  has  served  to  pre- 
vent the  reiteration  of  examples  from  necessity  or 
choice  which  could  not  but  have  a  malignant  aspect 
towards  the  cause  of  public  credit. 

It  might  be  added  that  the  national  character 
abroad  has  been  rescued  from  stains  by  the  same 
measure.  It  was  not  easy  for  foreigners  to  distin- 
guish accurately  between  the  infractions  of  credit  by 
the  State  Governments  and  by  the  General.  More 
or  less  it  was  natural  that  some  confusion  of  ideas 
should  prevail,  and  that  the  character  of  the  country 
at  large  should  suifer  from  the  crookedness  of  parts. 

Another  beneficial  effect  of  the  assumption  favor- 
able to  public  credit  was  the  placing  of  all  the  public 
funds  of  the  country  upon  the  same  foundation. 
The  price  and  steadiness  or  instability  of  the  public 
funds  are  the  barometers  of  public  credit,  and,  with 
due  allowance  for  temporary  circumstances,  they 
mark  and  establish  the  state  of  public  credit. 

It  cannot  be  doubted  by  a  man  acquainted  with 
the  subject,  that  the  fluctuations,  instability,  and 
precariousness  of  the  value  of  property  in  funds  in 
this  country  would  have  been  very  much  in  a  ratio 
to  the  variety  of  kinds  and  of  the  foundations  on 
which  they  rested;  that  it  would  have  been  incom- 
parably greater  upon  the  plan  of  fifteen  different 
provisions  at  different  rates  by  different  author- 
ities upon  different  principles,  than  upon  that  of 
one  provision  upon  one  principle  by  one  authority. 
It  is  observable  in  the  European  markets  that  the 
principles  of  the  different  species  of  funds  afloat  in- 
fluence each  other,  though  perhaps  the  causes  that 


The  Funding  System  19 

affect  some  ought  either  not  to  affect  others,  or  to 
affect  them  differently.  Few  of  the  many  who  deal 
habitually,  or  occasionally,  in  the  funds  are  able  to 
appreciate  accurately  the  causes  of  fluctuations  and 
what  ought  to  have  been  the  consequences.  The 
knowing  ones  take  advantage  of  the  facts,  and  turn 
it  to  their  own  advantage,  commonly  to  the  dis- 
advantage of  the  less  knowing  and  to  the  injury  of 
public  credit. 

A  great  mass  of  precarious  funds  in  the  shape  of 
State  debts  could  not  have  failed  to  injure  and  keep 
down  the  funds  of  the  General  Government  by  the 
influence  of  appearances,  by  the  quick  and  sudden 
diversion  of  money  from  one  channel  to  another,  by 
the  manoeuvres  of  speculation,  by  the  distraction  of 
public  opinion. 

There  are  some  who  reason  so  much  a  travers  as  to 
regard  a  low  state  of  the  funds  as  desirable,  because, 
say  they,  it  enables  the  government  to  sink  the  debt 
more  speedily  by  purchases. 

But  they  forget  that  the  lowness  of  the  funds  is 
an  argument  of  a  bad  state  of  credit,  and  that  the 
nation  loses  more  by  the  greater  purchases  of  foreign- 
ers at  low  prices  than  it  gains  by  its  own  purchases  at 
those  prices,  and  the  government  loses  infinitely 
more  by  the  higher  premiums  and  interests  which  it 
must  in  that  case  give  for  new  loans  than  it  can  gain 
in  purchases  of  the  bonds  given  for  old  loans  at  low 
prices.  Let  it  be  remembered  that  a  bond  given  last 
year  is  as  good  as  a  bond  given  to-day ;  that  borrow- 
ing by  the  government  is  in  fact  only  sending  its 
bonds  to  market,  and  if  its  old  bonds  are  low  its  new 


20  Alexander  Hamilton 

bonds  cannot  be  high.  What  would  be  thought  of 
the  policy  of  a  merchant  who  should  wish  to  see  his 
notes  at  ten  shillings  in  the  pound? 

Much  clamor  has  been  raised  against  the  funding 
system  on  the  score  of  speculation,  how  justly  will  be 
examined  in  the  proper  place,  but  what  would  have 
been  the  degree  of  it  on  the  plan  of  so  many  differ- 
ent funds  or  stocks  depending  on  so  many  different 
provisions?  It  is  evident  that  it  would  have  been 
multiplied  tenfold.  The  legerdemain  of  speculation 
would  have  had  full  scope  for  its  exertion.  To  give 
as  quickly  as  possible  elevation  and  stability  to  the 
funds  was  a  most  important  means  of  raising  and 
fixing  public  credit.  The  assumption,  by  equalizing 
the  condition  of  every  part  of  the  public  debt,  and 
placing  every  part  on  good  and  on  equal  security, 
was  one  of  the  most  effectual  expedients  for  that 
purpose. 

Another  consequence  of  the  assumption,  contrary 
to  what  has  been  supposed,  and  favorable  to  public 
credit,  is  that  it  facilitated  a  speedy  and  honorable 
extinguishment  of  the  debt. 

This  results  from  the  superior  efficacy  of  unity  in 
the  financial  system;  the  superior  and  better  com- 
mand of  the  national  resources,  as  well  from  the 
reason  assigned  as  from  the  probability  of  greater 
skill  and  order  in  the  arrangements  of  the  General 
than  the  State  Governments. 

That  plan  which  gave  a  more  systematic  and 
thorough  command  of  every  branch  of  national  re- 
sources was  evidently  better  adapted  not  only  to  the 
effectual  payment  of  interest,  but  to  the  speedy 


The  Funding  System  21 

honorable  discharge  of  principal,  for  the  very  reason 
that  greater  resources  could  be  brought  into  action.^ 

Certain  States  would  have  had  to  struggle  end- 
lessly with  their  debts — ^happy  to  be  able  to  face 
even  the  interest.  But  the  General  Government  was 
able  to  make  and  has  already  made  a  joint  provision 
which  would  with  due  dispatch  absorb  the  whole 
debt. 

Besides  the  advantages  to  public  safety  and  public 
credit,  consequences  very  favorable  to  the  ease  and 
satisfaction  of  individuals  were  included  in  the  as- 
sumption, of  three  kinds :  i .  Lightening  the  burthens 
absolutely  of  all  the  citizens  of  the  United  States.  2. 
Equalizing  their  condition  as  to  burthens  of  the  citi- 
zens of  one  State  with  those  of  another.  3.  Bringing 
certain  relief  in  the  first  instance  to  the  over-in- 
debted States,  and  facilitating  settlement  of  accounts. 
These  are  the  incidents  of  the  same  superiority  of 
faculty  in  the  General  Government  to  make  a  con- 
venient provision  for  the  whole  debt. 

It  is  a  curious  fact  which  has  not  made  its  due  im- 
pression, that  in  every  State  the  people  have  found 
relief  from  assumption,  while  an  incomparably  better 
provision  than  before  existed  has  been  made  for  the 
State  debts. 

^  I  have  annexed  the  epithet  honorable  to  that  of  speedy,  because 
certainly  a  more  speedy  extingtdshment  could  have  been  found  in 
bankruptcy  and  fraud.  There  is  too  much  cause  to  believe  that  those 
who  favored  the  intricate  speckled  system  of  State  provisions  secretly 
had  an  eye  to  this  happy  resource.  Its  evils  in  every  sense  have  been 
delineated,  and  no  one  who  values  his  character  will  avow  it.  No 
sound  politician  will  look  with  complacency  toward  it.  It  was  of  the 
justice  and  policy  of  the  United  States  to  expel  this  corruption  from  the 
body  politic. 


22  Alexander  Hamilton 

Let  the  citizens  of  Virginia  be  appealed  to  whether 
they  have  not,  in  consequence  of  being  exonerated 
from  the  necessity  of  providing  for  their  debt,  been 
relieved  in  degree,  or  kind  from  burthens  which  be- 
fore pressed  heavily  upon  them.  They  must  answer 
in  the  affirmative.  The  same  inquiry  will  find  the 
same  answer  in  every  State.  Men  wonder  at  the 
lightness  of  these  burthens,  and  yet  at  the  capacity 
of  the  government  to  pay  the  interest  of  the  debt,  to 
absorb  a  portion  of  the  principal,  and  to  find  exten- 
sive resources  for  defence  against  Indian  ravages. 

The  solution  of  the  enigma  is  in  the  present 
financial  system  of  the  country,  intrinsically  more 
energetic,  more  orderly,  better  directed,  and  more 
uniform  and  comprehensive  than  could  possibly  have 
been  the  case  with  fifteen  different  systems  to  pro- 
vide for  as  many  different  loads  of  debt. 

The  effect  of  energy  and  system  is  to  vulgar  and 
feeble  minds  a  kind  of  magic  which  they  do  not  com- 
prehend, and  thus  they  make  false  interpretation  of 
the  most  obvious  facts.  The  people  of  several  parts 
of  the  State,  relieved  and  happy  by  the  effects  of  the 
assumption,  execrate  the  measure  and  its  authors,  to 
which  they  owe  the  blessing. 

The  equalizing  the  condition  of  the  individual 
citizens  of  the  several  States  by  the  generalizing  of 
the  provision,  is  connected  with  this  part  of  the  sub- 
ject. It  has  been  already  noticed  in  reference  to  the 
justice  of  procedures.  It  deserves  particular  atten- 
tion in  the  view  of  policy. 

It  is  impossible  to  imagine  any  thing  more  calcu- 
lated to  breed  discontent,  and,  between  the  citizens 


The  Funding  System  23 

of  the  United  States,  mutual  jealousy  and  animosity, 
than  the  inequality  of  conditions,  which,  without  the 
assumption,  would  have  existed. 

When  the  citizens  of  Massachusetts  or  Connecticut 
bordering  on  New  York  felt  themselves  burdened 
with  heavy  taxes,  while  their  neighbors  of  New  York 
paid  scarcely  any,  what  must  have  been  their  sensa- 
tions? How  must  they  have  been  stung  by  the 
sense  of  so  unjust  an  inequality?  How  must  their 
envy  and  dissatisfaction  have  been  excited?  How 
must  this  have  tended  to  beget  in  them  discontent 
with  the  government  under  which  they  lived,  and, 
from  discontent,  to  lead  them  to  revolt? 

Something  of  this  actually  took  place.  That 
spirit  of  dissatisfaction  which  produced  the  insurrec- 
tion in  Massachusetts  was  in  all  probability  promoted 
by  a  comparison  which  exhibited  the  people  of  that 
State  as  in  a  condition  far  worse  than  their  neighbors. 

If  it  be  said  that  this  effect  was  likely  to  be  tem- 
porary, destined  to  cease  upon  a  settlement  of  ac- 
counts which  would  bring  relief  to  the  overburdened 
States,  then  the  remark  before  made  recurs.  A  set- 
tlement at  all  was  precarious  and  uncertain ;  whether 
it  would  bring  relief  even  where  it  ought  to,  was  still 
more  precarious  and  uncertain. 

Let  us  conceive  what  would  have  been  the  effect 
under  the  inequality  of  conditions  which  has  been 
stated,  either  if  a  settlement  had  been  long  procras- 
tinated, or  if,  having  been  made,  it  did  not  bring 
relief  to  the  much-indebted  States. 

What  would  then  have  been  the  situation  of  the 
public  mind  in  those  States  ?     Who  can  calculate  the 


24  Alexander  Hamilton 

mischiefs  which  would  have  attended  the  disap- 
pointment or  despair  of  relief  and  the  prospect  of 
continuing  indefinitely  under  such  unequal  loads? 

It  is  a  great  recommendation  of  the  assumption, 
not  only  that  it  anticipated  a  relief  which  was  indis- 
pensable and  which  might  not  have  come  from  a 
settlement,  but  that  it  facilitated  a  settlement  and 
rendered  a  tolerable  issue  far  more  probable. 

This  position  is  thus  explained : 

The  circumstances  which  have  been  enumerated 
rendered  a  settlement  upon  strict  or  systematic  prin- 
ciples impracticable.  Had  the  State  debts  remained 
unassumed,  the  nature  of  the  settlement  which  might 
be  made  was  proportionately  important,  and  imposed 
on  the  commissioners  the  duty  of  greater  rigor  and 
exactness.  The  more  this  was  the  case,  the  more 
difficult  it  was  to  come  to  any  admissible  or  satisfac- 
tory result.  Adherence  to  principles  was  likely  on 
one  side  or  another  to  produce  greater  mischief. 
Compromise  and  management  were  essential. 

The  assumption  of  the  State  debts,  by  giving  re- 
lief to  the  much  indebted  States,  rendered  the  issue, 
and,  consequently,  the  principles  of  the  settlement, 
less  important.  It  allowed  greater  latitude  to  the 
commissioners  to  deviate  from  rule,  to  consult  ex- 
pediency, to  shape  the  result  by  a  spirit  of  accom- 
modation and  concession  to  circumstances.  Hence, 
a  settlement  became  more  practicable  in  proportion 
as  it  was  less  important. 

I  declare  that  I  am  not  in  the  secret  of  the  princi- 
ples or  maxims  by  which  the  commissioners  were 
governed,  but  from  what  I  do  know  of  the  state  of 


The  Funding  System  25 

things,  with  a  full  conviction  of  there  being  as  much 
disposition  on  their  part  of  doing  as  much  justice 
as  possible,  I  can  entertain  no  doubt  that  the  settle- 
ment which  they  made  was  essentially  artificial  and 
the  result  of  a  thousand  compromises  of  principle. 
No  other  settlement  was  possible,  and  I  believe  none 
could  ever  have  been  made,  had  not  things  been  put 
upon  a  footing  to  enfetter  the  commissioners. 

Thus,  then,  it  is  one  of  the  merits  of  the  assump- 
tion, that  it  facilitated  a  settlement  of  accounts  which 
all  the  States  were  desirous  of,  and  so  has  contributed 
to  establish  their  harmony.  And  it  is  fortunate  that 
it  has  so  issued  as  to  have  produced  relief  to  those 
States  which,  notwithstanding  the  assumption,  were 
still  left  with  considerable  debts  upon  them. 

This  circumstance  of  there  having  remained  such 
balances  '  may  be  urged  as  an  objection  to  the 
reasonings  in  favor  of  the  assumption.  But,  to  this, 
two  things  are  to  be  replied: 

I.  That  my  proposition  to  Congress  embraced  the 
entire  debt  of  the  State,  which  would  have  given  in 
the  first  instance  complete  relief.  The  limitation  by 
Congress  is  not  chargeable  on  my  plan.  It  was  the 
effect  of  a  compromise  between  the  zealous  friends  of 
assumption  and  some  who  opposed  or  doubted,  and 
was  dictated  in  some  degree  by  a  spirit  of  caution. 

But  though  by  this  limitation  the  relief  was  less 
complete  in  the  first  instance  than  was  intended  by 
my  plan,  enough  was  done  to  obviate  the  principal 

'  When  the  Assumption  Act  was  carried  out  by  the  commissioners 
considerable  balances  remained,  owing  to  Congress  having  allowed  a 
State  term  which  could  not  be  overstepped. 


26  Alexander  Hamilton 

mischiefs,  and  to  ensure  that  a  State  could  not 
be  oppressed  by  the  peculiar  burthen  remaining 
upon  it. 

2.  Another  advantage  incident  to  the  assumption 
was  the  preventing  the  depopulation  of  particular 
States. 

Had  the  overburdened  States  remained  so  any 
considerable  time  while  the  citizens  of  other  States 
were  lightly  taxed,  it  could  not  but  have  promoted 
extremely  emigration  from  the  more  to  the  less  bur- 
dened States.  This  dislocation  of  population  from 
any  violent  cause  or  any  extraordinary  pressure  on 
parts  of  the  Union  cannot  but  be  regarded  as  a 
serious  evil.  It  could  not  but  disturb  in  some  degree 
the  general  order,  the  due  course  of  industry,  the  due 
circulation  of  public  benefits. 

One  particular  inconvenience  would  have  been  to 
have  increased  the  inability  and  distress  of  the  over- 
burdened States  by  lessening  the  population,  from 
the  labor  of  which  the  public  resources  were  to  be 
derived. 

Another  particular  inconvenience  might  have  been 
the  transferring  the  population  of  the  country  from 
more  to  less  beneficial  situations  in  a  national  sense. 
No  one  has  been  more  uniformly  nor  more  entirely 
than  myself  in  favor  of  the  system  of  giving  a  free 
course  to  the  population  and  settlement  of  our  in- 
terior country,  and  of  securing  to  it  by  the  best  efforts 
of  the  government  the  enjoyment  of  those  collateral 
advantages  on  which  its  prosperity  must  depend. 
This,  in  my  opinion,  is  preferable  as  the  most  natural 
policy,  and  as  that  which  will  best  secure  and  cement 


The  Funding  System  27 

the  unity  of  the  empire.  But  with  this  poHcy 
adopted  in  my  most  unquaHfied  manner,  I  am  far 
from  regarding  it  as  wise  to  give  any  extraordinary 
occasion  or  impulse  to  a  transfer  of  people  from  the 
settled  to  the  unsettled  parts  of  the  country.  This  is 
to  retard  the  progress  in  general  improvement,  and  to 
impair  for  a  greater  length  of  time  the  vigor  of  the 
nation,  by  scattering  too  widely  and  sparsely  the  ele- 
ments of  resource  and  strength.  It  is  to  weaken 
government  by  enlarging  too  rapidly  the  sphere  of  its 
action,  and  the  Union  by  stretching  out  the  links  of 
connection  between  the  different  parts. 

The  true  politician  will  content  himself  by  seeing 
new  settlements  formed  by  the  current  of  a  redundant 
population;  he  will  submit,  because  it  is  unnatural, 
and  would  be  fruitless  and  unwise,  to  oppose  even  a 
greater  transfer  than  the  mere  surplus,  by  the  attrac- 
tions to  emigration  which  new  countries  hold  out; 
he  will  seek  to  tie  the  emigrants  to  the  friends  and 
brethren  they  leave,  by  a  kind  and  liberal  conduct  of 
the  government  towards  them,  by  efficacious  pro- 
tection, and  by  sincere,  persevering,  and  energetic 
endeavors  to  obtain  for  them  the  free  and  full  enjoy- 
ment of  those  rights  and  advantages  which  local 
situation  requires.  But  he  will  not  accelerate  this 
transfer  by  accumulating  artificial  disadvantages  on 
the  already  settled  parts  of  the  country;  he  will  even 
endeavor  to  avoid  this  by  removing  such  disadvan- 
tages if  casual  causes  have  produced  them. 

Such  without  reserve  is  my  sincere  view  of  this 
subject,  and  I  deem  it  no  small  recommendation  of 
the  assumption  that  it  was  a  mild  and  equitable 


28  Alexander  Hamilton 

expedient  for  preventing  a  violent  dislocation  of  the 
population  of  particular  States. 

It  remains  to  mention  one  consideration  which 
naturally  occurred  in  the  reflections  upon  the  expedi- 
ency of  assuming  the  State  debts. 

This  is  its  tendency  to  strengthen  our  infant  gov- 
ernment by  increasing  the  number  of  ligaments 
between  the  government  and  the  interests  of 
individuals. 

I  frankly  acknowledge  that  this  tendency  as  far  as 
it  appeared  to  be  founded  was  not  excluded  from  the 
calculation,  for  my  opinion  has  been  and  is  that  the 
true  danger  to  our  prosperity  is  not  the  overbearing 
strength  of  the  Federal  head  but  its  weakness  and 
imbecility  for  preserving  the  union  of  the  States 
and  controlling  the  eccentricities  of  State  ambition 
and  the  explosion  of  factious  passions.  And  a 
measure  which  consistently  with  the  Constitution 
was  likely  to  have  the  effect  of  strengthening  the 
fabric  would  have  recommended  itself  to  me  on  that 
account. 

But  though  this  was  the  case;  though  I  thought, 
too,  that  the  assumption  would  have  in  several  senses 
a  temporary  tendency  of  the  kind  alluded  to,  and  so 
far  might  serve  as  a  prop  to  the  government  in  the 
infancy  of  its  authority,  while  there  was  yet  a  numer- 
ous party  alive  whose  vanity  and  envy  pledged  them 
to  opposition,  and  before  it  had  acquired  the  con- 
firmations of  habit  and  age,  and  though  weight  was 
given  to  the  argument  where  it  was  thought  most 
likely  to  have  effect,  yet  upon  the  whole  it  was  the 
consideration  upon  which  I  relied  least  of  all. 


The  Funding  System  29 

It  appeared  to  me  in  a  considerable  degree  counter- 
balanced by  the  suggestion  of  an  objection  which  has 
been  stated,  the  necessity  which  it  imposed  on  the 
government  of  resorting  early  to  impalatable  modes 
of  taxation  which  jeopardized  its  popularity  and  gave 
a  handle  to  its  enemies  to  attack  it.  It  appeared  to 
me  also  entitled  to  the  less  weight,  because,  on  the 
supposition  that  the  debt  was  to  be  extinguished 
within  a  moderate  term  of  years,  its  influence  must 
then  be  terminated,  and  it  had  not  pretensions  to 
be  considered  as  a  permanent  or  lasting  prop  to  the 
government. 

Besides  that,  it  was  to  be  foreseen  that  successive 
transfers  of  considerable  portions  of  the  debt  to 
foreigners  and  accumulations  at  home  would  rapidly 
enough  lessen  the  number  of  ligaments,  diminish  the 
influence  upon  individuals,  and,  the  taxes  continuing, 
perhaps  invert  the  effect. 

Had  this,  then,  been  the  weightiest  motive  to  the 
measure,  it  would  never  have  received  my  patronage. 
The  great  inducements  with  me  were  those  which 
have  been  previously  enumerated,  and  chiefly  the 
growing  simplicity  and  energy  to  the  national 
finances,  the  avoiding  the  collisions  of  multifarious 
and  conflicting  systems,  the  securing  to  the  govern- 
ment for  national  exigencies  the  complete  command 
of  the  national  resources,  the  consolidation  of  public 
credit.  These  were  the  commanding  motives,  and  it 
is  believed  they  were  solid. 

It  is  understood  that  a  contrary  course  has  been 
a  principal  cause  of  embarrassment  in  the  United 
Netherlands.     The  separate  debts  of  the  different 


30  Alexander  Hamilton 

provinces  have  been  an  endless  source  of  perplexity 
and  financial  imbecility. 

But  for  the  same  reason  that  the  effect  of  the 
assumption  to   strengthen  the  government   was  a 
feeble  or  ambiguous  motive,  its  importance  as  an 
objection,  in  the  views  of  those  who  fear  the  over-  ; 
bearing  power  of  the  General  Government,  has  been  ; 
much  exaggerated.     What  solid  ground  was  there  for  ," 
all  the  declamation  which  has  represented  this  meas- 
ure as  a  premeditated  plan  for  overthrowing  the 
State  Governments  and  consolidating  the  States  into 
one?     What  room  was  there,  in  a  matter  of  so  tem- 
porary and  partial  an  operation,  for  the  dreadful 
alarms  which  were  felt  or  affected? 

The  inconvenience  of  an  early  resort  to  modes  of 
taxation  which  run  coimter  to  public  prejudices,  has 
been  mentioned.  Its  force  was  felt;  but  then,  in 
addition  to  the  reasons  immediately  connected  with 
the  measure, — which  led  to  it,  there  were  collateral 
ones  which  united  to  meet  it. 

The  current  of  popularity  immediately  after  the 
adoption  of  the  government  ran  strongly  in  its  favor. 
The  immediate  Chief  Magistrate  justly  united  in  his 
person  the  full  confidence  and  cordial  regard  of  the 
nation. 

It  was  not  to  be  doubted  that  intrigues  to  un- 
popularize  the  government  would  go  on — that  the 
passions  incident  to  faction,  the  natural  disease  of 
popular  governments,  would  grow  and  multiply — that 
the  rivalships  of  power  would  increase.  And  it  was 
to  be  feared  that  greater  difficulties  might  exist  at  a 
future  day  to  introduce  the  most  difficult  species  of 


The  Funding  System  31 

revenues,  however  necessary  they  might  be  in  the  then 
stage  of  our  affairs.  The  delay  in  establishing  them 
might  even  be  construed  into  an  implied  condemna- 
tion of  them,  and  might  be  rendered  an  argument 
against  their  future  introduction.  Even  negative 
precedents  in  such  cases  are  not  without  force.  While 
the  advantages  of  present  situation  facilitated  the  in- 
troduction of  these  revenues  at  the  time,  the  obstacles 
that  might  be  afterwards  created  rendered  it  advis- 
able to  occupy  the  ground,  and  to  avoid,  by  anticipat- 
ing, difficulties.  The  presidency  of  the  actual  Chief 
Magistrate  was  a  more  favorable  period  than  was 
likely  in  a  short  time  to  recur  to  establish  points 
favorable  to  the  just  and  necessary  efficiency  of  the 
government. 

Besides  that,  it  would  probably  have  been  in  the 
long  run  an  imwise  calculation,  even  of  popularity, 
for  the  government  to  have  omitted  the  measure  of 
assumption.  A  weak  and  embarrassed  government 
never  fails  to  be  impopular.  It  attaches  to  itself  the 
disrespect  incident  to  weakness,  and,  unable  to  pro- 
mote the  public  happiness,  its  impotencies  are  its 
crimes.  Without  the  assumption,  the  government 
would  have  been  for  a  long  time  at  least  under  all 
the  entanglements  and  imbecilities  of  a  complicated 
clashing  and  disordered  system  of  finance. 

The  foregoing  considerations  appeared  to  me  de- 
cisive for  proposing  an  assumption  of  the  State  debts. 
Experience  has  not  led  me  to  repent  the  measure,  and 
I  believe  it  will  more  and  more  recommend  itself  even 
to  its  enemies. 

In  the  course  of  the  remarks  which  have  been  made, 


32  Alexander  Hamilton 

the  considerations  which  combated  the  mode  of  pro- 
ceeding with  regard  to  assumption — namely,  an  entire 
assumption  of  the  State  debts  and  a  dereliction  of  the 
settlement  of  accounts,  have  been  anticipated.  The 
state  of  public  opinion  was  an  insuperable  obstacle. 
Almost  every  State  flattered  itself  with  being  a  cred- 
itor, and  imagined  a  particular  interest  in  a  settle- 
ment. The  renunciation  of  it  would  consequently 
have  destroyed  the  confidence  and  disturbed  the 
harmony  of  the  States,  else  it  would  imdoubtedly 
have  been  the  best  policy  and  as  good  justice  to 
have  renounced  it.  There  was  no  groimd  of  pro- 
cedure more  likely  to  promote  mutual  justice  and 
convenience,  than  to  assume  as  a  principle  that  each 
State  in  the  war  had  exerted  itself  to  the  extent  of  its 
faculties,  that  the  subsisting  debts  were  to  be  paid  out 
of  a  common  treasury,  and  that  all  retrospection  and 
reliquidation  between  the  States  were  to  be  aban- 
doned. But  this  great  and  liberal  measure  was 
impossible.  All  parties  accordingly  concurred  in 
demanding  a  settlement. 

The  course  of  the  argument  has  stated  and  replied 
to  all  the  objections  to  the  assumption  except  one. 
This  is  that  it  has  tended  to  increase  the  mass  of  the 
debt. 

This  observation  has  frequently  been  so  managed 
as  to  infuse  into  the  minds  of  many,  a  vague,  confused 
conception  that  the  public  debt  of  the  country  has 
been  augmented  in  mass  to  the  extent  of  the  aggre- 
gate sum  of  State  debts  assumed.  But  it  were 
absurd  to  attempt  a  refutation  of  this  idea.  It  is 
self-evident  that  the  assumption  in  this  respect  did 


The  Funding  System  33 

nothing  more  than  transfer  the  particular  debts  to  the 
Union.  It  united  fourteen  sums  in  one,  and  charged 
them  upon  one  responsibihty,  that  of  the  Union, 
instead  of  leaving  them  to  exist  separately,  charge- 
able on  the  separate  responsibilities  of  the  Union  and 
the  individual  States.  The  debt  of  the  Union  was  in- 
creased, but  the  debts  of  the  several  members  of  it 
were  proportionably  decreased.  The  mass  of  public 
DEBT  consequently  remained  the  same,  on  the  in- 
fallible evidence  of  a  mathematical  axiom  that  a 
WHOLE  cannot  be  greater  than  its  parts. 

But  the  objection  has  had  a  more  particular  signifi- 
cation. It  has  amounted  to  this,  that  the  debts  of 
the  States  have  been  twice  provided  for,  once  to  the 
individual  creditors  who  held  evidences  of  State 
debts,  and  once  to  the  States  in  whose  favor  balances 
were  foimd  at  the  settlement.  This  objection,  like 
most  others  from  the  same  quarter,  has  been  pre- 
sented in  a  shape  so  general,  inexplicit,  and  naked 
of  explanation,  that  it  is  not  easy  even  to  compre- 
hend, much  less  to  answer  it.  It  probably  turns 
on  a  sophism  or  error  which  supposes  the  same 
item  of  service  or  supply  twice  represented,  once 
in  the  evidence  or  voucher  given  by  the  State  to 
the  person  who  served  or  supplied,  and  once  in  the 
account  of  the  State  as  a  charge  against  the  United 
States. 

But  this  supposition  of  double  representation  over- 
looks the  material  fact  that  by  the  plan  of  settlement 
according  to  the  assumption  the  sums  assumed  by  the 
United  States  to  individuals  are  charged  to  the  State 
which  incurred  them,  and  so  balance  and  extinguish 

VOL.  IX.— 3. 


34  Alexander  Hamilton 

the  correlative  charge  for  the  service  or  supply  which 
was  the  origin  of  the  debt. 

Moreover,  it  is  manifest  in  point  of  result  that  the 
objection  can  have  little  if  any  foundation.' 

'  The  conclusion  of  this  paper  is  lacking.  All  that  remains  imprinted 
is  an  imperfect  outline  of  a  proof,  by  figures,  of  the  proposition  that 
no  part  of  the  debt  was  paid  twice. 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE 


3S 


Note. — A  few  words  of  explanation  only  are  needed  in  addition  to 
what  has  already  been  said  in  the  preface  to  this  edition  as  to  the 
private  correspondence.  The  letters  are  all  from  Hamilton,  and, 
being  arranged  chronologically,  constitute  to  a  certain  extent  an 
autobiography.  They  may  be  divided  into  three  classes :  those  which 
were  printed  in  the  edition  of  1850;  those  which  have  been  printed 
elsewhere  and  were  not  included  in  that  edition ;  and  those  which  are 
now  printed  for  the  first  time  from  the  original  manuscripts.  The 
letters  in  the  edition  of  1850,  except  in  the  few  cases  where  the  original 
has  been  lost,  have  all  been  carefully  collated,  thanks  to  the  untiring 
kindness  of  Mr.  Dwight,  who  was  at  that  time  the  librarian  of  the 
State  Department,  with  the  originals  in  the  Hamilton  papers.  As  first 
published,  they  aboiinded  in  errors,  for  the  most  part  verbal,  but  some- 
times more  serious.  These  errors  have  been  corrected,  and  the  text  is 
now  believed  to  be  correct.  The  letters  now  first  printed  have  been 
drawn  from  many  sources  and  have  all  been  carefully  transcribed  and 
collated.  Those  which  have  been  printed  elsewhere  than  in  the  edition 
of  1850  have  been  collated  with  the  originals  so  far  as  it  could  be  done. 
Unfortunately  this  was  impossible  in  some  instances,  and  particularly 
in  the  case  of  several  letters  which  are  to  be  foimd  only  in  J.  C. 
Hamilton's  History  of  the  Republic.  Every  effort  has  been  made  to 
secure  all  the  Hamilton  letters  extant,  not  only  by  private  research, 
but  by  public  advertisement,  and  the  editor  believes  that  compara- 
tively few  letters  of  any  importance  have  escaped  him.  Every  letter 
of  the  slightest  historical  value  which  has  come  under  the  notice  of 
the  editor  is  given  in  full  in  the  following  pages,  and  all  letters  devoid 
of  historical  or  personal  interest  have  been  scrupulously  excluded. 
The  source  of  every  letter  given  here  is  indicated,  except  in  the  case 
of  those  reprinted  from  the  edition  of  1850.  The  notes  are  intended 
merely  to  explain  the  object  of  the  letter  when  it  is  obscure,  or  to 
identify  the  persons  to  whom  the  letters  are  addressed  or  who  are 
mentioned  incidentally  by  the  writer. 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE 


TO    EDWARD    STEVENS' 

St.  Croix,  Nov.  ii,  1769. 

THIS  just  serves  to  acknowledge  receipt  of  yours 
per  Capt.  Lowndes,  which  was  delivered  me 
yesterday.  The  truth  of  Capt.  Lightbowen  and 
Lowndes'  information  is  now  verified  by  the  presence 
of  your  father  and  sister,  for  whose  safe  arrival  I 
pray ;  and  that  they  may  convey  that  satisfaction  to 
your  soul  that  must  naturally  flow  from  the  sight  of 
absent  friends  in  health;  and  shall,  for  news  this 
way,  refer  you  to  them.  As  to  what  you  say  respect- 
ing your  having  soon  the  happiness  of  seeing  us  all,  I 
wish  for  an  accomplishment  of  your  hopes,  provided 
they  are  concomitant  with  your  welfare;  otherwise 
not;  though  I  doubt  whether  I  shall  be  present  or 
not,  for,  to  confess  my  weakness,  Ned,  my  ambition 
is  prevalent,  so  that  I  contemn  the  grovelling  con- 
dition of  a  clerk  or  the  like,  to  which  my  fortune,  etc., 
condemns  me,  and  would  willingly  risk  my  life, 
though  not  my  character,  to  exalt  my  station.  I  am 
confident,  Ned,  that  my  youth  excludes  me  from  any 

^  Edward  Stevens,  the  friend  of  Hamilton's  boyhood,  was  the  son  of 
Mr.  Stevens,  a  West  India  planter  and  merchant.  Hamilton's  relations 
with  the  Stevens  family  were  very  intimate,  and  young  Stevens  ac- 
companied him  to  this  cotmtry  where  they  both  were  educated. 

37 


n 


38  Alexander  Hamilton 

hopes  of  immediate  preferment;  nor  do  I  desire  it; 
but  I  mean  to  prepare  the  way  for  futurity.  I  'm  no 
philosopher,  you  see,  and  may  justly  be  said  to  build 
castles  in  the  air;  my  folly  makes  me  ashamed,  and 
I  beg  you  11  conceal  it;  yet,  Neddy,  we  have  seen 
such  schemes  successful  when  the  projector  is  con- 
stant. I  shall  conclude  saying,  I  wish  there  was  a 
war. 

P.  S. — I  this  morning  received  yours  by  William 
Smith,  and  am  pleased  to  see  you  give  such  close  ap- 
plication to  study. 


TO   TILEMAN    CRUGER  ^ 

St.  Croix,  Nov.  i6,  1771. 

In  behalf  of  Mr.  Nicholas  Cruger  '  (who,  by  reason 
of  a  very  ill  state  of  health,  went  from  this  to  New 
York,  the  15th  ult.),  I  have  the  pleasure  to  address 
you  by  the  long-expected  sloop  Thunderbolt,  Capt. 
William  Newton,  owned  by  Messrs.  Jacob  Walton, 
John  Harris,  and  Nicholas  Cruger,  the  latter  of  whom 
has  written  you  fully  concerning  her  destination, 
which  I  need  not  repeat.  She  has  on  board  besides 
a  parcel  of  lumber  for  yourself,  sundry  articles  on 
account  of  her  owners  as  per  inclosed  bill  of  lading; 
and  when  you  have  disposed  of  them,  you  will  please 
to  credit  each  partner  for  one  third  of  the  proceeds. 

Mr.  N.  Cruger 's  proportion  of  this,  and  the  balance 

^  This  letter  is  one  of  a  number  of  similar  letters  written  by  Hamilton 
while  a  clerk  in  Mr.  Cruger's  cotmting-room.  It  is  given  merely  as  a 
specimen  of  his  business  correspondence  which  was  certainly  remark- 
able for  a  boy  of  fourteen. 

3  The  gentleman  in  whose  office  Hamilton  was  employed. 


Private  Correspondence  39 

of  your  account  hitherto,  will  more  than  pay  for  his 
one  third  cost  of  her  first  cargo  up ;  and  for  the  other 
two,  I  shall  endeavor  to  place  value  in  your  hands 
betimes.  I  only  wish  for  a  line  from  you  to  know 
what  will  best  answer. 

Reports  here  represent  matters  in  a  very  disagree- 
able light,  with  regard  to  the  Guarda  Costas,  which 
are  said  to  swarm  upon  the  coast ;  but  as  you  will  be 
the  best  judge  of  what  danger  there  might  be,  all  is 
submitted  to  your  prudent  direction. 

Capt.  Newton  must  arm  with  you,  as  he  could  not 
so  conveniently  do  it  here.  Give  me  leave  to  hint  to 
you  that  you  cannot  be  too  particular  in  your  instruc- 
tions to  him.  I  think  he  seems  to  want  experience  in 
such  voyages.  Messrs.  Walton  and  John  H.  Cruger 
are  to  furnish  you  themselves  with  their  respective 
proportion  of  the  cost  of  the  several  cargoes. 

The  staves  on  board,  if  by  any  means  convenient,  I 
beg  may  be  returned  by  the  sloop;  they  will  com- 
mand a  good  price  here,  and  I  suppose  little  or  no- 
thing with  you;  could  they  be  got  at  I  would  not 
send  them  down,  but  they  are  stowed  promiscuously 
among  other  things. 

If  convenient,  please  to  deliver  the  hogsheads,  now 
containing  the  Indian  meal,  to  the  captain  as  water 
casks,  and  others  should  he  want  them.  I  supplied 
him  with  twenty  here.  I  must  beg  your  reference  to 
Mr.  Cruger 's  last  letter  of  the  2d  ult.  for  other  par- 
ticulars. 

Our  crop  will  be  very  early,  so  that  the  utmost 
dispatch  is  necessary  to  import  three  cargoes  of 
mules  in  due  time. 


40  Alexander  Hamilton 

TO  THE  PROVINCIAL  CONGRESS  OF  NEW  YORK  ' 

New  York,  May  26,  1776. 

Gentlemen  : 

I  take  the  liberty  to  request  your  attention  to  a 
few  particulars,  which  will  be  of  considerable  import- 
ance to  the  future  progress  of  the  company  under 
my  command :  and  I  shall  be  much  obliged  to  you  for 
as  speedy  a  determination  concerning  them  as  you 
can  conveniently  give.  The  most  material  is  respect- 
ing the  pay.  Our  company,  by  their  articles,  are  to 
be  subject  to  the  same  regulations,  and  to  receive  the 
same  pay,  as  the  Continental  Artillery.  Hitherto  I 
have  conformed  to  the  standard  laid  down  in  the 
Journal  of  the  Congress,  published  the  loth  May, 
1775;  but  I  am  well  informed  that,  by  some  later 
regulation,  the  pay  of  the  Artillery  has  been  aug- 
mented, and  now  stands  according  to  the  following 
rates:  Captain,  ;^io.  13.  4.  Captain-Lieutenant,  £S. 
Lieutenants,  each,  £j.  6.  8.  Sergeants,  £^.  6.  8. 
Corporals,  £s.  i.  4.  Bombardiers,  £s.  1.  4.  Gun- 
ners, £^.  Matrosses,  £2.  17.  4.  Drummers  and 
Fifers,  £s.  By  comparing  these  with  my  pay-rolls, 
you  will  discover  a  considerable  difference;  and  I 
doubt  not  you  will  be  easily  sensible  that  such  a 
difference  should  not  exist. 

I  am  not  personally  interested  in  having  an  aug- 
mentation agreeably  to  the  above  rates,  because  my 
own  pay  will  remain  the  same  as  that  it  now  is :  but  I 
make  this  application  on  behalf  of  the  company;  as 
I  am  fully  convinced  such  a  disadvantageous  distinc- 

'  Hamilton  was  at  this  time  captain  of  an  artillery  company  of  the 
New  York  troops. 


Private  Correspondence  41 

tion  will  have  a  very  pernicious  effect  on  the  minds 
and  behavior  of  the  men.  They  do  the  same  duty 
with  the  other  companies,  and  think  themselves 
entitled  to  the  same  pay.  They  have  been  already 
comparing  accounts ;  and  many  marks  of  discontent 
have  lately  appeared  on  this  score.  As  to  the  cir- 
cumstance of  our  being  confined  to  the  defence  of  the 
colony,  it  will  have  little  or  no  weight ;  for  there  are 
but  few  in  the  company,  who  would  not  as  willingly 
leave  the  colony  on  any  necessary  expedition,  as  stay 
in  it :  and  they  will  not,  therefore,  think  it  reasonable 
to  have  their  pay  curtailed  on  such  a  consideration. 
Captain  Beauman,  I  understand,  enlists  all  his  men 
on  the  above  terms ;  and  this  makes  it  difficult  for  me 
to  get  a  single  recruit:  for  men  will  naturally  go  to 
those  who  pay  them  best.  On  this  account,  I  should 
wish  to  be  immediately  authorized  to  offer  the  same 
pay  to  all  who  may  be  inclined  to  enlist.  The  next 
thing  I  should  wish  to  know,  is,  whether  I  must  be 
allowed  my  actual  expenses  that  might  attend  the 
enlistment  of  men,  should  I  send  into  the  coimtry 
for  that  purpose.  The  expense  would  not  be  great ; 
and  it  would  enable  me  to  complete  my  company  at 
once,  and  bring  it  the  sooner  into  proper  order  and 
discipline. 

Also,  I  should  be  glad  to  be  informed  if  my  com- 
pany is  to  be  allowed  the  frock  which  is  given  to  the 
other  troops  as  a  bounty.  This  frock  would  be  ex- 
tremely serviceable  in  summer,  while  the  men  are  on 
fatigue ;  and  would  put  it  in  their  power  to  save  their 
uniform  much  longer.  I  am,  gentlemen,  with  the 
greatest  respect,  etc. 


42  Alexander  Hamilton 

TO   THE    PROVINCIAL   CONGRESS 

July  26,  1776. 

Gentlemen  : 

I  am  obliged  to  trouble  you  to  remove  a  difficulty 
which  arises  respecting  the  quantity  of  subsistence 
which  is  to  be  allowed  my  men.  Inclosed  you  have 
the  rates  of  rations,  which  is  the  standard  allowance 
of  the  whole  Continental,  and  even  the  provincial, 
army;  but  it  seems  Mr.  Curtenius  cannot  afford  to 
supply  us  with  more  than  his  contract  stipulates; 
which,  by  comparison,  you  will  perceive  is  consider- 
ably less  than  the  forementioned  rate. 

My  men,  you  are  sensible,  are,  by  their  articles, 
entitled  to  the  same  subsistence  with  the  Continental 
troops  and  it  would  be  to  them  an  insupportable  dis- 
crimination, as  well  as  a  breach  of  the  terms  of  their 
enlistment,  to  give  them  almost  a  third  less  provisions 
than  the  whole  army  besides  receives.  I  doubt  not 
you  will  readily  put  this  matter  upon  a  proper  footing. 

Hitherto  we  have  drawn  our  full  allowance  from 
Mr.  Curtenius;  but  he  did  it  upon  the  supposition 
that  he  would  have  a  farther  consideration  for  the 
extraordinary  supply. 

At  present,  however,  he  scruples  to  proceed  in  the 
same  way,  till  it  can  be  put  upon  a  more  certain 
foundation.     I  am,  gentlemen,  etc. 


TO  the  honorable  convention  of  new  YORK 

New  York,  August,  1776. 

It  is  necessary  I  should  inform  you  that  there  is 
at  present  a  vacancy  in  my  company,  arising  from 
the  promotion  of  Lieut.  Johnson  to  a  captaincy  in  one 


Private  Correspondence  43 

of  the  new  Gallies  (which  command,  however,  he  has 
since  resigned  for  a  very  particular  reason).  As 
artillery  officers  are  scarce  in  proportion  to  the  call 
for  them,  and  as  myself  and  my  remaining  officers 
sustain  an  extraordinary  weight  of  duty  on  account 
of  the  present  vacancy,  I  shall  esteem  it  a  favor,  if  you 
will  be  pleased,  as  soon  as  possible,  to  make  up  my 
deficiency  by  a  new  appointment.  It  would  be  pro- 
ductive of  much  inconvenience  should  not  the  inferior 
officers  succeed  in  course,  and  from  this  consideration 
I  doubt  not  you  will  think  it  proper  to  advance 
Mr.  Gilleland  and  Mr.  Bean,  and  fill  up  the  third 
lieutenancy  with  some  other  person.  I  would  beg 
the  liberty  warmly  to  recommend  to  your  attention 
Thomas  Thompson, — now  first  sergeant  in  my  com- 
pany,— a  man  highly  deserving  of  notice  and  prefer- 
ment. He  has  discharged  his  duty  in  his  present 
station  with  uncommon  fidelity,  assiduity,  and  ex- 
pertness.  He  is  a  very  good  disciplinarian — pos- 
sesses the  advantage  of  having  seen  a  good  deal  of 
service  in  Germany,  has  a  tolerable  share  of  common 
sense,  and  will  not  disgrace  the  rank  of  an  officer  and 
gentleman.  In  a  word,  I  verily  believe  he  will  make 
an  excellent  lieutenant,  and  his  advancement  will  be 
a  great  encouragement  and  benefit  to  my  company  in 
particular,  and  will  be  an  animating  example  to  all 
men  of  merit  to  whose  knowledge  it  comes.  Myself 
and  my  officers  will  be  much  obliged  to  the  Hon.  the 
Convention  to  favor  us  with  our  commissions  with  all 
convenient  speed,  as  they  may  be  highly  requisite 
under  some  circumstances  that  may  possibly  here- 
after arise. 


44  Alexander  Hamilton 

TO  THE  PROVINCIAL  CONGRESS 

MoRRiSTOWN,  March  6,  1777. 

Gentlemen: 

It  is  necessary  I  should  inform  you  of  the  changes 
which  have  happened  in  your  company  of  artillery, 
which  would  have  been  done  long  ago,  had  I  not  been 
prevented  by  sickness,  from  which  I  am  but  lately 
recovered. 

General  Washington  has  been  pleased  to  appoint 
me  one  of  his  aids-de-camp.  Captain-Lieutenant 
James  Moore,  a  promising  officer,  and  who  did  credit 
to  the  State  he  belonged  to,  died  about  nine  weeks 
ago.  Lieutenant  James  Gilleland,  some  time  before 
that  resigned  his  commission,  prompted  by  domestic 
inconveniences,  and  other  motives  best  known  to 
himself.  There  remain  now  only  two  officers,  Lieu- 
tenants Bean  and  Thompson,  and  about  thirty  men. 
The  reason  that  the  number  of  men  is  so  reduced, 
besides  death  and  desertions,  was  owing  to  a  breach 
of  orders  in  Lieutenant  Johnson,  who  first  began  the 
enlistment  of  the  company,  and  who,  instead  of  en- 
gaging them  during  the  war,  according  to  the  inten- 
tion of  the  State,  engaged  them  for  the  limited  term 
of  a  twelvemonth.  The  time  of  those  enlisted  by 
him  has  expired,  and  for  want  of  power  to  re-engage 
them  they  have  mostly  entered  into  other  corps. 

I  have  to  request  you  will  favor  me  with  instruc- 
tions as  to  your  future  intentions.  If  you  design  to 
retain  the  company  on  the  particular  establishment 
of  the  State,  it  will  be  requisite  to  complete  the  num- 
ber of  officers,  and  make  provision  to  have  the  com- 
pany filled  by  a  new  enlistment.     In  this  case,  I 


Private  Correspondence  45 

should  beg  leave  to  recommend  to  your  notice,  as  far 
as  a  captain-lieutenancy,  Mr.  Thompson.  Mr.  Bean 
is  so  incurably  addicted  to  a  certain  failing,  that  I 
cannot,  in  justice,  give  my  opinion  in  favor  of  his 
preferment.  But  if  you  should  determine  to  resign 
the  company,  as  I  expect  you  will,  considering  it 
as  an  extraordinary  burthen  without  affording  any 
special  advantages,  the  Continent  will  readily  take  it 
off  your  hands  so  soon  as  you  shall  intimate  your 
design  to  relinquish  it.  I  doubt  not  you  will  see  the 
propriety  of  speedily  deciding  on  the  matter,  which 
the  good  of  the  service  requires. 


TO   GOUVERNEUR   MORRIS,    ROBERT    LIVINGSTON,    AND 
WILLIAM    ALLISON,    ESQS.' 

March  20,  1777. 

Gentlemen  : 

With  cheerfulness  I  embrace  the  proposal  of  cor- 
responding with  your  convention  through  you,  and 
shall  from  time  to  time,  as  far  as  my  leisure  will 
permit  and  my  duty  warrant,  communicate  such 
transactions  as  shall  happen,  such  pieces  of  intelli- 
gence as  shall  be  received,  and  such  comments  upon 
them  as  shall  appear  necessary  to  convey  a  true  idea 
of  what  is  going  on  in  the  military  line.  Let  me 
caution  you,  however,  that  whatever  opinions  I  shall 
give  in  the  course  of  our  correspondence  are  to  be 
considered  merely  as  my  private  sentiments,  and  are 
never  to  be  interpreted  as  an  echo  of  those  of  the 

*  These  gentlemen  formed  a  committee  of  the  New  York  Convention. 


46  Alexander  Hamilton 

General;  since  they  will  not  be  really  so,  and  a  con- 
struction of  the  kind  may  lead  into  errors  and  be 
productive  of  inconveniences. 

The  present  season  affords  nothing  of  importance. 
There  are,  daily,  little  skirmishes  arising  from  attempts 
of  the  enemy  to  forage ;  but  which,  though  generally 
favorable  to  us,  are  attended  with  consequences  so 
trifling  and  insignificant  as  to  be  scarcely  worth  men- 
tioning. They  are,  indeed,  of  great  service  in  the 
general  scale,  as  they  serve  to  harass  and  distress  the 
enemy,  and,  by  keeping  them  from  forage,  will  put 
them  under  difficulties  as  to  the  transportation  of 
their  baggage  and  cannon  whenever  they  shall  think 
of  making  any  capital  movement.  One  thing  worthy 
of  notice  is,  that  hardly  a  day  passes  without  some 
deserter  coming  in.  The  fact  itself,  and  the  accounts 
they  concurrently  give,  prove  that  the  spirit  of  de- 
sertion runs  high;  and  the  reason  assigned  for  it  is, 
that  many  of  the  regiments  have  been  a  very  long 
time  without  pay,  and  that  the  men  are  most  bar- 
barously treated  if  they  only  dare  to  lisp  their  dis- 
content on  the  score  of  it. 

'T  is  rumored  that  the  Congress  have  received  a 
letter  from  Dr.  Franklin,  by  which  he  seems  to  be  in 
such  high  spirits  as  to  prognosticate  a  favorable  dis- 
position of  affairs  in  the  quarter  where  he  is.  I  was 
just  now  also  transiently  told  that  he  had  been  re- 
ceived in  the  public  character  of  a  plenipotentiary 
from  the  American  States.  When  it  receives  con- 
firmation, I  will  give  it  to  you. 

I  shall  observe  your  directions  respecting  a  trans- 
ference of  the  company  lately  mine  to  the  Continental 


Private  Correspondence  47 

establishment,  and  in  my  next  shall  communicate 
the  result  of  my  inquiry  into  the  present  state  of 
your  cannon.  The  General  is  now  perfectly  recov- 
ered, and,  added  to  the  pleasure  of  returning  health, 
enjoys  the  solace  of  his  lady's  company,  who  has 
lately  joined  the  army. 


TO  GOUVERNEUR  MORRIS,  ETC. 

Headquarters,  Morristown,  March  22,  1777. 

Gentlemen: 

Two  days  ago  I  accepted  your  challenge  and  met 
you  for  the  first  time  in  the  epistolary  field,  since 
which  I  had  the  pleasure  of  receiving  yours  of  the 
19th  instant,  and,  as  far  as  circumstances  will  per- 
mit, close  with  your  proposal  of  interchanging  blows 
twice  a  week= 

The  present  time  is  so  unfruitful  of  events  that  it 
affords  no  intelligence  worthy  of  your  notice.  As  to 
transactions  of  a  military  nature,  I  can  only  say  that 
the  British  army  continues  to  decrease  by  the  daily 
loss  of  prisoners  and  deserters  taken  at  and  coming 
into  the  different  posts,  which  is  a  striking  symptom 
that  the  situation  of  affairs  with  the  enemy  is  not  so 
favorable  as  it  might  be;  for  when  an  army  is  in 
good  humor  and  its  affairs  prosperous,  desertion  is  a 
disease  that  seldom  prevails  in  it. 

From  all  the  accounts  they  have  given  us,  seconded 
by  considerations  that  obviously  present  themselves, 
it  is  my  opinion  the  enemy  will  make  no  grand 
movement  before  the  beginning  of  May,  and  perhaps 
not  then.     There  is  no  expectation  in  their  army  of 


48  Alexander  Hamilton 

their  being  speedily  called  to  the  field,  nor  the  least 
disposition  of  matters  that  I  have  heard  of  for  a  sud- 
den excursion.  It  will  be  a  long  time  before  the 
roads  will  be  fit  for  the  transportation  of  artillery, 
which  is  an  essential  instrument  in  their  operations; 
and  a  still  longer  before  the  ground  will  permit  of  an 
encampment  consistent  with  the  health  and  comfort 
of  the  soldiers ;  and  it  would  defeat  their  ptirpose  to 
undertake  any  thing  of  importance  under  circum- 
stances that  would  oblige  them  to  divide  their  army 
in  order  to  accommodate  it.  It  seems  also  to  be  an 
opinion  supported  by  the  best  reasons,  that  the 
main  object  with  which  they  will  open  the  campaign 
will  be  the  capture  of  Philadelphia.  If  so,  they  will 
have  a  greater  probability  of  success  by  co-operating 
both  by  sea  and  land ;  and  the  preparations  for  this, 
added  to  the  dangers  of  making  an  attempt  by  water 
at  too  early  a  season,  will  in  all  likelihood  protract  the 
execution  of  their  project  at  least  till  the  time  I  have 
mentioned. 

I  intimated  that  it  might  perhaps  be  later  before 
they  would  move.  It  seems  to  me  a  pretty  general 
idea  in  their  army,  that  they  will  wait  for  reinforce- 
ments before  they  take  the  field.  Should  they  do 
this,  I  see  not  from  what  quarter  they  can  expect  any 
succors  worth  mentioning  so  early  as  the  beginning  of 
May.  But  I  would  lay  no  great  stress  upon  this. 
Notwithstanding  the  idea  is  countenanced  by  their 
weakness  in  numbers,  which  must  make  their  success 
more  doubtful  and  expose  them  to  greater  hazards  in 
whatever  they  attempt  than  can  be  agreeable  where 
so  much  is  at  stake,  much  will  depend,  however,  upon 


Private  Correspondence  49 

the  comparative  strength  of  our  army,  and  the  con- 
ception they  may  form  of  it. 

Though  I  do  not  doubt  your  discretion,  which 
occasioned  me  so  readily  to  embrace  your  proposal, 
yet  such  is  the  delicacy  of  my  situation,  that  I  must 
beg  leave  to  repeat  what  I  before  observed  to  you, 
that  whenever  I  give  opinions  they  are  merely  my 
own,  and  will  probably,  so  far  from  being  a  transcript 
of  those  of  the  General,  differ  widely  from  them  in 
many  respects.  The  one  I  now  advance  is  of  this 
kind,  and  is  besides  improper  to  be  generally  circu- 
lated; for  many  people  who  have  the  management 
of  affairs  are  of  so  lethargic  a  complexion  that  they 
are  to  be  kept  in  action  only  by  the  fear  of  immediate 
danger, — and  should  they  get  it  into  their  heads  that 
the  enemy  would  remain  idle  for  six  weeks,  would 
think  they  had  a  right  to  doze  away  forty  days  at 
least. 

In  my  last  I  mentioned  a  rumor  concerning  Doctor 
Franklin ;  since  that  I  have  seen  something  said  (and 
I  believe  it)  to  be  an  extract  of  a  letter  from  him  to 
Mr.  Bache,  of  Philadelphia,  in  which  he  represents 
things  to  be  in  an  excellent  train  in  France,  and  uses 
this  strong  emphatical  language,  that  a  war  between 
her  and  Britain  "was  as  inevitable  as  death."  No 
public  advices  from  him  that  I  know  of  have  reached 
headquarters. 

I  spoke  to  General  Knox  about  your  cannon  in  the 
Continental  service.  He  answered  that  it  would  be 
difficult  to  ascertain  to  what  particular  class  the 
pieces  that  had  been  left  belonged,  but  he  considered 
the  Continent  at  all  times  bound  to  make  good  the 

VOL.  IX.— 4. 


50  Alexander  Hamilton 

number  borrowed  from  your  State ;  and  that  he  had 
still  your  six  pieces  in  his  hands.  I  have  always 
looked  upon  the  matter  in  the  same  light. 


TO  THE  COMMITTEE  OF  THE  NEW  YORK  CONVENTION 
Headquarters,  Morristown,  April  5,  1777. 

Gentlemen: 

Since  my  last  I  have  had  the  pleasure  of  receiving 
your  reply  to  my  two  favors  of  the  29th  ultimo  and 
2d  current.  I  am  happy  enough  to  be  able  to  inform 
you  that  my  indisposition,  which  was  the  occasion  of 
my  brevity  when  I  last  wrote,  is  now  removed. 

The  opinion  I  advanced  respecting  the  enemy's  not 
moving  before  the  beginning  of  May,  seems  to  be 
shaken,  though  not  entirely  overthrown,  by  some 
present  appearances.  We  have  received  information 
that  they  are  embarking  about  three  thousand  men 
on  board  of  transports,  which  are  lying  at  the  Hook, 
by  way  of  Staten  Island.  This,  it  is  conjectured,  is 
with  a  view  to  the  Delaware;  and  the  supposition 
is  confirmed  by  the  circimistance  of  a  confederacy 
lately  detected  at  Philadelphia,  who,  among  other 
things,  were  endeavoring,  by  the  temptation  of  fifty 
pounds,  to  engage  persons  as  pilots  up  that  river. 
The  extreme  difficulties  they  must  labor  under  for 
want  of  forage,  and  the  infinite  hazard  they  must  run 
by  moving  with  a  small  body  of  about  five  thousand 
men,  with  an  enemy  in  the  rear,  incapable  of  sparing 
any  considerable  body  of  troops  to  form  a  post  be- 
hind, and  be  an  asylum  to  them  in  case  of  accident, — 


Private  Correspondence  51 

these  circumstances  will  hardly  allow  me  to  think 
they  will  be  daring  enough  to  make  an  attempt  at 
this  time.  But  on  the  other  hand,  as  they  know  we 
are  in  a  progressive  state  as  to  numbers,  and  other 
matters  of  importance,  and  as  they  have  no  prospect 
of  early  reinforcement,  and  are  in  a  state  of  uncer- 
tainty as  to  any,  from  the  bustling  aspect  of  Euro- 
pean affairs,  it  is  probable  they  may  conceive  a 
necessity  of  making  a  push  at  all  risks.  Perhaps, 
however,  this  embarkation  is  intended  for  some  other 
purpose ;  to  make  a  diversion,  or  execute  some  parti- 
san exploit  elsewhere.  On  the  whole,  I  find  it  diffi- 
cult to  believe  they  are  yet  ready  for  any  capital 
operation. 

As  to  your  apprehensions  of  an  attempt  up  the 
North  River,  I  imagine  you  may  discard  any  un- 
easiness on  that  score,  although  it  will  be  at  all  times 
advisable  to  be  on  the  watch  against  such  a  contin- 
gency. It  is  almost  reduced  to  a  certainty,  that  the 
principal  views  of  the  enemy,  in  the  ensuing  cam- 
paign, will  be  directed  towards  the  southward,  and 
to  Philadelphia  more  immediately ;  of  which  idea,  the 
discovery  before  mentioned,  with  respect  to  pilots,  is 
no  inconsiderable  confirmation.  Philadelphia  is  an 
object  calculated  to  strike  and  attract  attention.  It 
has  all  along  been  the  main  source  of  supplies  towards 
the  war;  and  the  getting  it  into  their  possession 
would  deprive  us  of  a  wheel  we  could  very  badly 
spare,  in  the  great  political  and  military  machine. 
They  are  sensible  of  this,  and  are  equally  sensible, 
that  it  contains,  in  itself,  and  is  surrounded  by,  a 
prodigious  number  of  persons  attached  to  them,  and 


52  Alexander  Hamilton 

inimicable  to  us,  who  would  lend  them  all  the  assist- 
ance they  could,  in  the  further  prosecution  of  their 
designs.  It  is  also  a  common  and  well-grounded 
rule  in  war,  to  strike  first  and  principally,  at  the 
capital  towns  and  cities,  in  order  to  the  conquest  of 
a  country. 

I  must  confess  I  do  not  see  any  object  equally 
interesting  to  draw  their  efforts  to  the  northward. 
Operations  merely  for  plundering  and  devastation 
can  never  answer  their  end;  and  if  they  could,  one 
part  of  the  continent  would  do  nearly  as  well  as  an- 
other. And  as  to  the  notion  of  forming  a  junction 
with  the  northern  army,  and  cutting  off  the  com- 
munication between  the  Northern  and  Southern 
States,  I  apprehend  it  will  do  better  in  speculation 
than  in  practice.  Unless  the  geography  of  the 
country  is  far  different  from  any  thing  I  can  conceive, 
to  effect  this  would  require  a  chain  of  posts,  and  such 
a  number  of  men  at  each  as  would  never  be  practi- 
cable or  maintainable,  but  to  an  immense  army.  In 
their  progress,  by  hanging  upon  their  rear,  and 
seizing  every  opportunity  of  skirmishing,  their  situa- 
tion might  be  rendered  insupportably  uneasy. 

But  for  fear  of  mistake,  the  General  has  determined 
to  collect  a  considerable  body  of  troops  at  or  about 
Peekskill,  which  will  not  be  drawn  off  till  the 
intentions  of  the  enemy  have  acquired  a  decisive 
complexion.  These  will  be  ready,  according  to  con- 
junctures, either  to  proceed  northerly  or  southerly,  as 
may  be  requisite.  Every  precaution  should  be  taken 
to  prevent  the  boats  from  being  destroyed,  by  col- 
lecting them,  at  the  first  movement  of  the  enemy, 


Private  Correspondence  53 

under  cover  of  one  of  the  forts,  or  into  some  inlet, 
difficult  of  access,  and  easily  defensible  with  a  small 
number  of  men.  The  loss  of  them  would  be  an 
irreparable  disadvantage. 

The  enemy's  attempt  upon  Peekskill  is  a  demon- 
stration of  the  folly  of  having  any  quantity  of  stores 
at  places  so  near  the  water,  and  so  much  exposed  to 
a  sudden  inroad.  There  should  never  be  more  there 
than  sufficient  to  answer  present  demands.  We  have 
lost  a  good  deal  in  this  way  at  different  times,  and  I 
hope  experience  will  at  last  make  us  wiser. 

His  Excellency  lately  had  a  visit  from  the  Oneida 
Chief  and  five  others.  He  managed  them  with  a 
good  deal  of  address,  and  sent  them  away  perfectly 
satisfied.  He  persuaded  them  to  go  to  Philadelphia, 
but  they  declined  it,  alleging  their  impatience  to 
return,  and  remove  the  erroneous  opinions  of  their 
countrymen,  from  the  misrepresentations  of  British 
emissaries,  which  they  were  apprehensive  might  draw 
them  into  some  rash  proceedings.  They  parted,  after 
having  made  the  most  solemn  protestations  of  friend- 
ship and  good  will.  His  Excellency  has  been  very 
busy  all  day  in  dispatching  the  southern  post,  which 
has  prevented  me  giving  him  your  resolve.  It  will, 
no  doubt,  be  very  acceptable ;  and  it  is  with  pleasure 
I  inform  you  that  the  zeal  and  abilities  of  the  New 
York  Convention  hold  the  first  rank  in  his  estimation. 

No  news  from  France,  save  that  the  Congress  have 
obtained  a  credit  there,  for  which  they  can  draw  bills 
to  the  amount  of  ;/^  100,000  sterling.  This  will  be 
extremely  serviceable  in  carrying  on  a  trade  with  the 
French.     The  new  troops  begin  to  come  in.     If  we 


54  Alexander  Hamilton 

can  shortly  get  any  considerable  accession  of  strength 
we  may  be  able  to  strike  some  brilliant  stroke. 

P.  S. — We  have  been  some  time  endeavoring  to 
negotiate  a  regular  cartel;  but  it  has  been  lately 
broken  off,  principally  on  account  of  Major-General 
Lee.  General  Howe  will  not  allow  him  to  be  compre- 
hended under  the  general  idea  of  American  prisoners. 


TO  GOUVERNEUR  MORRIS,  ETC. 

Headquarters,  Morristown,  April  12,  1777. 

Gentlemen: 

I  this  day  have  received  your  favor  of  the  8th 
instant.  Hurry  of  business  prevents  my  entering 
into  a  particular  detail  of  affairs,  either  with  respect 
to  the  enemy  or  ourselves,  though  matters  remain 
much  in  the  same  situation  as  when  I  last  wrote. 
The  enemy  are  unquestionably  preparing  to  take  the 
field  as  soon  as  possible,  notwithstanding  which  I 
believe  it  may  be  full  as  late  as  I  at  first  suggested 
before  they  will  be  perfectly  ready  for  a  general 
movement.  By  several  persons  who  have  come  out 
of  New  York  within  these  few  days,  it  is  pretty  well 
confirmed  that  they  have  constructed  a  bridge  to  be 
laid  upon  boats,  for  the  purpose,  in  all  probability,  of 
crossing  the  Delaware. 

The  new  levies  begin  to  come  in  from  the  south- 
ward, but  not  in  such  large  numbers  as  could  be 
wished.  It  is  to  be  hoped,  however,  that  we  shall 
shortly  be  sufficiently  reinforced  to  give  an  effectual 
obstruction  to  their  designs.  The  Congress  have 
resolved,  if  the  General  approves,  to  form  a  camp  on 


Private  Correspondence  55 

the  west  side  of  the  Delaware,  and  have  called  upon 
Pennsylvania  to  furnish  3,000  militia  to  join  the 
same.  Every  nerve  must  and  will  be  strained  to 
prevent  Philadelphia  falling  into  the  enemy's  hands. 
It  is  a  place  of  infinite  importance. 

It  is  said  there  are  favorable  accounts  lately  re- 
ceived from  Doctor  Franklin;  but  we  have  no  au- 
thentic advice  of  the  kind,  nor  does  the  report  extend 
to  any  particulars. 

Your  sentiments  of  Major  Edmonston's  conduct 
correspond  with  the  General's  ideas  of  it.  He  had 
given  some  directions  to  General  Schuyler  on  the 
subject.  Besides  other  purposes  it  might  serve,  the 
design  of  his  going  to  Canada  was  evidently  that  he 
might  be  a  vehicle  of  instructions  to  General  Carleton. 
It  would  be  the  most  convenient,  certain,  and  expe- 
ditious mode  they  could  have  fallen  upon  to  convey 
them.  I  communicated  the  paragraph  of  your  letter 
respecting  him  to  his  Excellency.  He  wishes  the 
major  might  be  sent  on  directly  to  Philadelphia.  I 
fancy  he  would  be  glad  to  be  saved  the  trouble  of  an 
interview  with  him. 

I  should  be  obliged  to  you  to  inform  the  conven- 
tion, that  it  is  my  opinion  the  General  will  not  permit 
Mr.  Leroy  to  go  into  New  York.  It  is  a  determined 
point  with  him  to  grant  no  such  indulgence  when  any 
matter  of  the  kind  is  referred  to  him,  unless  the  per- 
son applying  can  assign  the  most  substantial  reasons 
for  his  request,  and  can  also  produce  explicit  creden- 
tials of  his  political  principles  and  conduct  being 
favorable  to  the  American  cause.  I  conclude  from 
my  being  instructed  to  require  his  parole,  that  he 


56  Alexander  Hamilton 

cannot  give  satisfaction  on  these  points.  If,  how- 
ever, he  should  obtain  permission,  I  will  execute  the 
resolve  transmitted  to  me.  For  the  future,  if  the 
convention  have  cogent  reasons  for  allowing  any  sub- 
ject of  the  State  to  go  in  to  the  enemy,  as  they  are 
the  best  judges  of  all  the  circumstances  concerning 
him,  they  had  better  send  him  in  without  referring 
the  matter  particularly  to  the  General. 

I  take  the  liberty  to  inclose  a  letter  to  the  care  of 
Mr.  Jay,  the  delivery  of  which  to  him  will  be  a  favor 
conferred  on,  etc. 


TO   THE  COMMITTEE   OF   THE  NEW  YORK  CONVENTION 

Headquarters,  Morristown,  April  20,  1777. 

Gentlemen  : 

The  disposition  of  the  convention,  with  respect  to 
the  disaffected  among  you,  is  highly  commendable, 
and  justified  by  every  principle  of  equity  and  policy. 
The  necessity  of  exemplary  punishment  throughout 
the  States  is  become  evident  beyond  a  doubt,  and  it 
were  to  be  wished  every  one  of  the  thirteen  would 
imitate  the  judicious  conduct  of  New  York.  Lenity 
and  forbearance  have  been  tried  too  long  to  no  pur- 
pose: it  is  high  time  to  discard  what  the  clearest 
experience  has  shown  to  be  ineffectual. 

But  in  dispensing  punishment,  the  utmost  care  and 
caution  ought  to  be  used.  The  power  of  doing  it,  or 
even  of  bringing  the  guilty  to  trial,  should  be  placed 
in  hands  that  know  well  how  to  use  it.  I  believe  it 
would  be  a  prudent  rule  to  meddle  with  none  but 
those  whose  crimes  are  supported  by  very  sufficient 


Private  Correspondence  57 

evidence,  and  are  of  a  pretty  deep  dye.     The  appre- 
hending innocent  persons,  or  those  whose  offences  are 
of  so  slender  a  nature  as  to  make  it  prudent  to  dis- 
miss them,  furnishes  an  occasion  of  triumph,  and  a 
foundation  for  a  species  of  animadversion  which  is 
very  injurious  to  the  pubHc  cause.     Persons  so  appre- 
hended generally  return  home  worse  than  they  were, 
and  by  expatiating  on  their  sufferings,  first  excite  the 
pity  towards  themselves,  and  afterwards  the  abhor- 
rence towards  their  persecutors,  of  those  with  whom 
they  converse.     I  believe  it  would  also  be  in  general  a 
good  rule  either  to  pardon  offenders  entirely,  or  to 
inflict  capital  and  severe  punishments.     The  advice 
given  by  a  certain  general  to  his  son,  when  the  latter 
had  the  Roman  army  in  his  power,  was  certainly  very 
politic :  he  advised  him  either  to  destroy  them  utterly 
or  to  dismiss  them  with  every  mark  of  honor  and 
respect.     By  the  first  method,  says  he,  you  disable 
the  Romans  from  being  your  enemies;   by  the  last, 
you  make  them  your  friends.     So  with  respect  to  the 
Tories;    I  would  either  disable  them  from  doing  us 
any  injury,  or  I  would  endeavor  to  gain  their  friend- 
ship by  clemency.     Inflicting  trifling  punishments 
only  embitters  the  minds  of  those  on  whom  they  fall, 
and  increases  their  disposition  to  do  mischief  without 
taking  away  the  power  of  doing  it. 

I  shall  communicate  your  additional  resolve  to  the 
General  and  consult  him  on  what  you  mention,  and 
shall  let  you  know  his  opinion  in  my  next:  mine, 
however,  is  that  those  who  appear  to  be  of  such  a 
character  as  to  be  susceptible  of  reformation,  should 
be  employed ;  but  it  is  a  delicate  point. 


58  Alexander  Hamilton 

As  to  news,  the  most  material  is,  that  from  in- 
telligence received  from  Rhode  Island,  it  appears 
the  enemy  are  abandoning  it.  This  is  a  preparatory 
step  to  the  intended  operations  of  the  enemy. 

The  other  day  we  surprised  a  lieutenant's  guard, 
took  sixteen  prisoners,  and  killed  three  or  four. 

In  a  private  letter  from  Philadelphia  I  am  informed 
that  a  treaty  of  a  very  particular  nature  is  on  the 
point  of  being  concluded  between  the  Court  of 
France  and  the  States  of  America.  There  is  a  pro- 
spect of  opening  a  trade  with  Sweden.  I  hear  Mr. 
Morris,'  of  Philadelphia,  has  a  vessel  arrived  from 
thence. 


TO  THE  COMMITTEE  OF  THE  NEW  YORK  CONVENTION 

Headquarters,  Morristown,  April  28,  1777. 

Gentlemen: 

Extreme  hurry  of  business  puts  it  out  of  my  power 
to  say  but  very  little. 

Your  information  concerning  a  piece  of  ordnance 
lately  constructed  at  Philadelphia  is  true.  There  is 
such  a  piece  at  headquarters,  weighs  227  pounds, 
carries  a  three-potmd  ball.  The  iron  is  wrought, 
hooped,  and  welded  together.  The  General  and 
others  esteem  it  a  great  acquisition.  It  has  been 
fired  twenty  times,  as  fast  as  possible,  and  is  sup- 
posed to  be  thorough  proof.  For  my  part  I  am 
rather  dubious  of  this  matter,  and  have  recom- 
mended fifty  successive  discharges  instead  of  twenty. 
If  she  would  stand  that,  her  sufficiency  would  be 

I  Robert  Morris,  the  distinguished  financier  of  the  revolution. 


Private  Correspondence  59 

ascertained  beyond  a  doubt,  and  her  value  would  be 
immense;  and  as  it  is  a  new  experiment,  we  cannot 
take  too  much  pains  to  be  sure.  If  Mr.  Livingston 
can  construct  pieces  of  the  same  kind  and  weight  that 
will  stand  a  similar  proof,  he  will  render  the  most 
essential  service  to  his  country.  We  cannot  have  too 
respectable  an  artillery,  and  he  need  not  doubt  they 
will  be  wanted. 

As  to  ships  opposite  to  Fort  Washington,  the 
General  first  supposed  they  might  be  intended  to 
make  a  descent  on  the  Jersey  side  and  come  by  sur- 
prise on  our  left  flank ;  but  he  now  considers  it  wholly 
as  an  amusement,  while  they  were  executing  their 
attempt  on  the  stores  at  Danbury.  Of  this  affair 
you  are  probably  as  well  advised  as  we  are. 

I  thank  you  for  your  promise  of  sending  me  the 
model  of  your  government  as  soon  as  published.  I 
have  sanguine  expectations  concerning  it. 

Nothing  new  at  headquarters  but  the  attempt 
against  Danbury.  If  the  enemy  do  not  *  *  *  *  i 
till  they  get  reinforced  or  receive  further  orders. 

Troops  coming  on  from  the  southward.  We  are 
told  two  thousand  Carolinians,  far  on  their  way  to 
Philadelphia — a  part  arrived. 


TO  WILLIAM  LIVINGSTON  ' 

April,  1777. 

A  number  of  disaffected  persons  having  been  taken 
up  and  brought  to  his  Excellency,  he  has  ordered  an 

'  Not  legible  in  the  manuscript. 

2  The  distinguished  revolutionary  Governor  of  New  Jersey. 


6o  Alexander  Hamilton 

examination  into  their  cases  to  know  who  of  them 
were  subject  to  a  military  jurisdiction,  and  who  came 
properly  under  the  cognizance  of  the  civil  power; 
also  to  discriminate  those  who  were  innocent  or 
guilty  of  trivial  offences  from  those  whose  crimes 
were  of  a  more  capital  and  heinous  nature,  directing 
that  those  of  the  former  character  should  be  dis- 
missed, and  those  of  the  latter  be  referred  to  you  for 
further  trial  and  punishment.  The  examination,  at 
which  I  was  present,  has  been  accordingly  made,  and 
the  enclosed  list  of  names  will  inform  you  of  those 
who  have  been  deemed  proper  subjects  for  a  legal 
prosecution ;  and  who  are  herewith  sent  under  guard 
to  be  disposed  of  as  you  shall  direct.  I  have  trans- 
mitted you  a  bundle  of  papers,  in  which  you  will 
find  the  information  and  evidence  that  support  the 
charges  against  them,  and  the  confession  they  made 
in  the  court  of  inquiry.  Many  of  them  have  nothing 
against  them  but  what  is  to  be  found  in  their  own 
acknowledgments.  How  far  these  may  operate  in 
fixing  their  guilt  you  can  best  determine.  Several 
of  them  have  been  taken  in  arms,  and  others  were 
beyond  a  doubt  employed  in  enlisting  men  for  the 
service  of  the  enemy.  You  will  readily  concur  with 
his  Excellency  in  the  obvious  necessity  of  inflicting 
exemplary  punishment  on  such  daring  offenders,  to 
repress  that  insolent  spirit  of  open  and  avowed 
enmity  to  the  American  cause,  which,  unhappily,  is 
too  prevalent  in  this  and  some  of  the  States.  The 
examination,  in  this  instance,  is  somewhat  irregular 
and  out  of  the  common  order  of  things.  But  in  the 
present  unsettled  state  of  government,  the  distinc- 


Private  Correspondence  6i 

tion  between  the  civil  and  military  powers  cannot  be 
upheld  with  that  exactness  which  every  friend  to 
society  must  wish.  His  Excellency  desires  to  avoid 
nothing  more,  I  flatter  myself  you  will  believe  me, 
than  deviations  from  the  strict  rules  of  propriety  in 
this  respect,  or  the  least  encroachments  either  upon 
the  rights  of  the  citizens  or  of  the  magistrate.  It 
was  necessary  to  make  inquiry  for  the  sake  of  the 
discrimination  before  mentioned,  and  tenderness  to 
the  innocent,  to  save  them  from  long  and  immerited 
confinement,  commended  the  measure.' 


TO  WILLIAM  LIVINGSTON 

Headquarters,  Morristown,  April  29,  1777. 

Sir: 

The  inclosed  was  intended  to  be  sent  with  the 
prisoners  mentioned  in  the  list ;  but  before  this  could 
be  conveniently  done,  Mr.  Sims,  one  of  the  Chief- 
Justices  of  the  State,  came  to  this  town,  and  informed 
me,  that  the  Governor  and  Council  were  upon  the 
point  of  adjourning;  and  that  the  sending  of  the 
prisoners  to  them  would  only  be  an  embarrassment, 
without  answering,  at  present,  any  valuable  purpose. 
He  considered  himself  authorized  to  take  the  matter 
under  his  direction,  and  desired  a  sight  of  the  papers 
relating  to  it.  After  perusing  them,  he  determined 
it  was  best  the  prisoners  should  remain  here,  until  he 
should  receive  your  further  orders  on  the  subject; 
and  delivered  me  a  letter  for  you,  containing  a  repre- 
sentation of  their  cases,  as  they  appear  to  him,  in 

'  Reprinted  from  Hamilton's  History  of  the  Republic,  i.,  194. 


62  Alexander  Hamilton 

order  to  know  your  sense,  in  what  manner  they  shall 
be  disposed  of. 

He  admits  two  of  them,  Woolverton  and  Silas 
Howel,  to  bail. 

In  addition  to  the  former,  I  send  you  a  second  list 
of  four  others  that  have  been  lately  committed  to 
jail.  These  are  high  offenders,  and  among  the  num- 
ber of  those  who  it  were  to  be  wished  could  have  an 
immediate  trial  and  punishment.  Isaac  Ogden,  in 
particular,  is  one  of  the  most  barefaced,  impudent 
fellows  that  ever  came  under  my  observation.  He 
openly  acknowledged  himself  a  subject  of  the  king  of 
Great  Britain;  and  flatly  refused  to  give  any  satis- 
faction to  some  questions  that  were  put  to  him  re- 
specting one  Moses  Nichols,  an  emissary  from  the 
enemy;  assigning  no  other  reason  for  his  refusal, 
than  that  he  had  given  his  word  to  be  silent. 

A  spirit  of  disaffection  shows  itself  with  so  much 
boldness  and  violence  in  different  parts  of  this  State, 
that  it  is  the  ardent  wish  of  his  Excellency,  that  no 
delay,  which  can  be  avoided,  might  be  used  in  making 
examples  of  some  of  the  most  atrocious  offenders. 
If  something  be  not  speedily  done,  to  strike  a  terror 
into  the  disaffected,  the  consequences  must  be  very 
disagreeable. 

Among  others,  all  security  to  the  friends  of  the 
American  cause  will  be  destroyed;  and  the  natural 
effect  of  this,  will  be  an  extinction  of  zeal  in  seconding 
and  promoting  it.  Their  attachment,  if  it  remain,  will 
be  a  dead,  inactive,  useless  principle.  And  the  disaf- 
fected, emboldened  by  impunity ,  will  be  encouraged  to 
proceed  to  the  most  dangerous  and  pernicious  lengths. 


Private  Correspondence  63 

TO    WILLIAM    DUER.' 

Headquarters,  Morristown,  6th  May,  1777. 

Sir: 

The  bearer  of  this  is  Mr.  Malmedi,'  a  French  gentle- 
man of  learning,  abilities,  and  experience.  I  believe 
he  thinks  himself  entitled  to  preferment,  and  comes 
to  Congress  for  that  purpose.  At  the  recommenda- 
tion of  General  Lee,  he  was  made  Brigadier-General 
by  the  State  of  Rhode  Island,  and  filled  the  station  to 
the  satisfaction  of  his  employers,  as  appears  by  a 
letter  from  Governor  Cook,^  speaking  of  him  in  the 
highest  terms  of  approbation.  This  has  led  him  to 
hope  that  he  shoiild  be  adopted  by  the  Continent  on 
an  equal  footing.  But  in  this  he  will  no  doubt  be 
mistaken,  as  there  are  many  insuperable  objections 
to  such  an  event.  Among  others,  it  would  tend  to 
raise  the  expectations  of  the  Frenchmen  in  general, 
already  too  high,  to  a  pitch,  which  it  would  be  im- 
possible to  gratify  or  endure.  It  might  not  however, 
be  amiss  to  do  whatever  propriety  would  warrant  to 
keep  him  in  good  humor,  as  he  is  a  man  of  sense  and 

1  Col.  Wm.  Duer,  bom  in  England  in  1747,  served  with  Lord  Clive  in 
India,  and  came  to  New  York  in  1768.  He  warmly  espoused  the 
patriot  side,  married  Catherine  Alexander,  daughter  of  William  Alex- 
ander, commonly  known  as  Lord  Stirling,  and  was  a  life-long  friend  of 
Hamilton,  who  stood  by  him  and  helped  him  in  the  business  mis- 
fortunes which  befell  him,  and  which  cost  Hamilton  deep  anxiety. 
Col.  Duer  figures  often  in  this  correspondence.  He  was  at  this  time  on 
the  New  York  Committee  of  Safety,  and  was  soon  after  chosen  to 
Congress. 

2  Mr.  Malmedi  was  appointed  Colonel  on  the  Continental  establish- 
ment. He  thought  the  rank  below  his  deserts,  and  was  one  of  the 
many  French  officers  who  harassed  Washington  on  this  score.  See 
Writings  of  Washington,  iv.,  419. 

3  Nicholas  Cook,  Governor  of  Rhode  Island  from  1775  to  1778. 


64  Alexander  Hamilton 

merit.  I  think  policy  would  justify  the  advancing 
him  a  step  higher  than  his  former  Continental  rank. 

Congress  in  the  beginning  went  upon  a  very  in- 
judicious plan  with  respect  to  Frenchmen.  To  every 
adventurer  that  came,  without  even  the  shadow  of 
credentials,  they  gave  the  rank  of  field  officers.  This 
circumstance,  seconding  the  aspiring  disposition 
natural  to  those  people,  carried  the  expectations  of 
those  who  had  really  any  pretensions  to  the  character 
of  officers  to  a  length  that  exceeds  all  the  bounds  of 
moderation.  As  it  was  impossible  to  pursue  this 
impolitic  plan,  the  Congress  have  begun  to  retrench 
their  excessive  liberality;  and  the  consequence  has 
been  universal  disgust  and  discontent. 

It  would,  perhaps,  be  injurious,  as  the  French  are 
much  addicted  to  national  punctilio,  to  run  into  the 
opposite  extreme  to  that  first  embraced,  and  by  that 
means  create  a  general  clamor  and  dissatisfaction. 
Policy  suggests  the  propriety  of  discriminating  a  few 
of  the  most  deserving,  and  endeavoring  to  keep  them 
in  temper,  even  by  gratifying  them  beyond  what  they 
can  reasonably  pretend  to.  This  will  enable  us  to 
shake  off  the  despicable  part  with  safety,  and  to  turn 
a  deaf  ear  to  the  exorbitant  demands  of  the  many. 
It  will  be  easily  believed  in  France  that  their  want 
of  merit  occasioned  their  want  of  success,  from  the 
extraordinary  marks  of  favor  that  have  been  con- 
ferred on  others;  whereas,  the  imited  voice  of  com- 
plaint from  the  whole,  might  make  ill  impressions  in 
their  own  country,  which  it  is  not  our  interest  should 
exist. 

We   are   already  greatly   embarrassed    with  the 


Private  Correspondence  65 

Frenchmen  among  us,  and,  from  the  genius  of  the 
people,  shall  continue  to  be  so.  It  were  to  be  wished 
that  our  agents  in  France,  instead  of  courting  them 
to  come  out,  were  instructed  to  give  no  encourage- 
ment but  where  they  could  not  help  it ;  that  is,  where 
applications  were  made  to  them  by  persons,  counten- 
anced and  supported  by  great  men,  whom  it  would 
be  impolitic  to  disoblige.  Be  assured,  sir,  we  shall 
never  be  able  to  satisfy  them ;  and  they  can  be  of  no 
use  to  us,  at  least  for  some  time.  Their  ignorance  of 
our  language,  of  the  disposition  of  the  people,  the 
resources  and  deficiencies  of  the  country — their  own 
habits  and  tempers;  all  these  are  disqualifications 
that  put  it  out  of  their  power  to  be  of  any  real  use 
or  service  to  us.  You  will  consider  what  I  have  said 
entirely  as  my  own  sentiments. 


TO  GOUVERNEUR  MORRIS 

Headquarters,  Morristown,  May  7,  1777. 

I  thank  you  for  the  favor  of  the  pamphlet '  con- 
taining your  form  of  government,  which,  without 
flattery,  T  consider  as  more  judicious  and  digested 
than  any  thing  of  the  kind  that  has  yet  appeared 
among  us;  though  I  am  not  so  unreserved  in  my 
approbation  as  to  think  it  free  from  defects.  While 
I  view  it  in  the  main  as  a  wise  and  excellent  system, 
I  freely  confess  it  appears  to  me  to  have  some  faults 

'  The  Constitution  of  New  York  was  at  this  time  under  consideration, 
and  Morris  was  on  the  committee  engaged  in  making  a  draft,  and  had 
made  some  very  able  speeches  on  the  subject  in  the  Provincial  Conven- 
tion or  Congress. 

VOL.  IX.— 5. 


66  Alexander  Hamilton 

which  I  cotild  wish  did  not  exist.  Were  it  not  too 
late  to  discuss  particulars  for  any  useful  end,  or  could 
my  judgment  have  any  weight  in  a  matter  which  is 
the  work  of  so  many  far  more  able  and  discerning 
than  I  can  pretend  to  be,  I  should  willingly  descend 
to  an  exhibition  of  those  parts  I  dislike  and  my 
reasons  for  disapproving.  But,  in  the  present 
situation  of  things,  it  would  be  both  useless  and 
presumptuous. 

I  congratulate  you  on  the  late  important  arrivals 
to  the  eastward.  We  consider  them  as  immense 
acquisitions.  Did  I  not  suppose  you  must  be  pos- 
sessed of  the  same  particulars  we  have  at  head- 
quarters, I  would  transmit  those  we  have  to  you.  I 
congratulate  you  also  on  the  Danbury  expedition. 
The  stores  destroyed  there  have  been  purchased  at  a 
pretty  high  price  to  the  enemy.  The  spirit  of  the 
people  on  the  occasion  does  them  great  honor — is  a 
pleasing  proof  that  they  have  lost  nothing  of  that 
primitive  zeal  with  which  they  began  the  contest, 
and  will  be  a  galling  discouragement  to  the  enemy 
from  repeating  attempts  of  the  kind.  Such  an  oppo- 
sition, under  such  circumstances,  was  not  to  be 
expected.  By  every  account,  both  from  our  friends 
and  from  themselves,  they  cannot  have  sustained  a 
loss  of  less  than  five  hundred  killed,  wounded,  and 
taken.  An  honest,  intelligent  lad,  a  prisoner  with 
them,  who  made  his  escape  two  or  three  days  ago, 
informs  us  that  he  saw  three  vessels  loaded  with 
wounded.  He  was  permitted  to  look  into  the  hold 
of  two  of  them,  and  affirms  there  could  not  be  fewer 
than  forty  in  each.     He  attempted  to  inspect  the 


Private  Correspondence  67 

contents  of  the  third,  but  was  hindered  by  the  sen- 
tries. He  also  informs  us  that  there  were  loud  wail- 
ings  and  lamentations  among  the  soldiers'  women  on 
the  occasion,  and  that  the  people  of  New  York  con- 
sidered the  affair  in  the  light  of  a  defeat  to  the  British 
troops. 

From  some  late  appearances,  my  opinion  is  greatly 
shaken  as  to  the  enemy's  intention  to  move  against 
Philadelphia.  I  begin  to  fear  they  will  disappoint  us 
with  a  contrary  movement.  The  General  is  aware  of 
this  possibility,  and  will  do  every  thing  he  can  to 
provide  for  the  event:  and  I  trust  the  convention 
of  your  State  will  co-operate  with  him  by  every 
exertion  in  their  power.  By  intelligence  received 
yesterday  and  to-day  from  Generals  Putnam  and 
Lincoln  at  the  outposts,  we  have  reason  to  suspect 
the  enemy  will  soon  evacuate  Brunswick  and  push 
for  Amboy,  whence  they  will  no  doubt  embark  for 
some  expedition  by  water.  This  may  be  either  to 
Philadelphia  or  up  the  North  River;  or,  perhaps,  the 
appearances  that  indicate  this  may  be  only  feints 
to  perplex  and  deceive  us.  The  testimony  of  every 
person  that  comes  from  them  confirms  this  fact,  that 
their  horses  are  in  such  miserable  condition  as  to 
render  them  incapable  of  any  material  operations  by 
land.  If,  therefore,  proper  care  be  taken  wherever 
they  shall  point  their  efforts  to  prevent  their  collect- 
ing supplies  of  good  horses  among  ourselves,  I  know 
not  how  it  will  be  possible  for  them  to  penetrate  any 
distance  into  the  country.  As  far  as  it  may  depend 
upon  them,  I  hope  the  convention  will  attend  to  this 
circumstance,  and  will  take  effectual  measures  to 


68  Alexander  Hamilton 

put  it  out  of  their  power  to  gain  such  supplies  in  any 
part  of  your  State  towards  which  they  may  direct 
their  movements.  Nothing  particular  from  Europe. 
Doctor  Lee,'  indeed,  writes  that,  from  the  face  of 
affairs  there,  a  war  cannot  be  postponed  longer  than 
three  months.  He  thinks,  however,  the  English  will 
be  able  to  get  a  reinforcement  this  year  of  8,000  or 
10,000  Germans.  If  I  mistake  not,  he  says  they  have 
already  engaged  them  and  sent  transports  to  take 
them  in. 


TO  GOUVERNEUR  MORRIS 

Headquarters,  Morristown,  May  12,  1777. 

Dear  Sir: 

I  have  received  the  pleasure  of  your  favor  of 
yesterday's  date.  The  reasons  you  assign  for  the 
interval  of  silence  on  your  part  are  admitted  as 
sufficient,  though  I  regret  that  the  principal  one 
exists — the  combination  of  the  Tories  for  a  general 
insurrection.  But,  perhaps,  on  the  scale  of  policy,  I 
ought  rather  to  congratulate  you  on  the  event.  That 
there  are  too  many  Tories  in  your  State,  as  well  as 
in  several  others,  is  a  fact  too  well  known.  That 
they  should  confederate  themselves  for  active  pur- 
poses of  revolt  and  disaffection,  when  once  dis- 
covered, is  desirable,  because  it  arms  the  vindictive 
justice  of  the  State,  and  will  justify,  in  the  eyes  of 
all  the  world,  a  radical  blow  at  the  faction.  Were  it 
not  that  we  have  seen  so  many  similar  instances,  that 

I  Arthur  Lee,  of  Virginia,  brother  of  Richard  Henry  Lee,  at  this  time 
one  of  our  agents  in  Europe. 


Private  Correspondence  69 

only  prove  the  temerity  and  folly  of  the  Tories,  I 
should  consider  this  as  a  presumptive  argument,  that 
the  enemy  intend  your  way. 

It  seems  now  fully  the  opinion  of  our  generals,  that 
the  last  year's  project  for  uniting  the  two  armies,  by 
the  conquest  of  your  State,  will  be  prosecuted  this 
campaign.  To  confirm  this  supposition,  all  the  later 
intelligence  we  have  received  from  the  enemy  strongly 
indicates  an  intention  to  evacuate  the  Jerseys;  and 
't  is  thought  there  will  be  very  great  obstacles  to  an 
attempt  on  Philadelphia,  by  way  of  the  Delaware; 
't  is  concluded  that  the  North  River  must  be  the 
object.  And,  upon  this  principle.  Generals  Greene 
and  Knox,  in  whom  his  Excellency  has  great  con- 
fidence, are  sent  to  examine  the  situation  of  things 
with  you,  and  in  concert  with  General  McDougal, 
who  is  in  equal  estimation,  to  adopt  every  proper 
expedient  for  putting  you  in  the  best  state  of  defence. 
They  set  out  this  day. 

If  the  enemy  do  not,  in  fact,  aim  at  Philadelphia, 
they  have  been  very  artful  in  throwing  out  appear- 
ances well  calculated  to  deceive ;  and  which,  though 
they  have  not  had  so  full  an  efEect  as  at  any  time  to 
cause  our  cautious  General  to  lose  sight  of  the  other 
object  which  't  is  now  imagined  they  propose  to 
themselves,  yet  they  have  so  far  deceived  as  to  beget 
pretty  universally  the  opinion  they  wished  to  impose. 
But,  for  my  own  part,  though  I  am  staggered  in  my 
conjectures,  yet  I  by  no  means  give  up  my  first  sup- 
position. I  think  it  very  probable  they  are  only 
evacuating  the  Jerseys  to  be  out  of  danger  of  an 
attack  from  us,  which  they  have  reason  to  fear  from 


70  Alexander  Hamilton 

the  increasing  strength  of  our  army,  and  mean  to 
encamp  on  Staten  Island  till  reinforced.  It  would 
be  madness  in  them,  weak  as  they  are  in  numbers,  to 
risk  all  in  any  capital  attempt,  and  I  am  confident 
they  will  not  do  it  unless  they  have  a  desperate  game 
to  play,  and  have  no  expectation  of  reinforcements. 
Such  a  conduct  would  be  contrary  to  every  principle 
of  war  or  policy.  Howe  cannot  take  the  field  with 
more  than  eight  thousand  men ;  let  him  go  where  he 
will,  the  probability  of  defeat  will  be  strong,  and  the 
consequences  of  it  would  be  absolutely  fatal.  How 
can  he  hope  to  penetrate  far  with  so  small  a  force, 
and  with  such  a  miserable  supply  of  horses  to  convey 
his  artillery  and  baggage?  It  seems  to  me,  too,  with 
respect  to  the  supposed  design  upon  your  State,  if  it 
really  existed,  they  would  have  taken  care  to  have 
seized  your  forts,  and  other  important  posts,  when 
they  might  have  been  apprised  you  were  in  no  con- 
dition to  defend  them. 

We  have  lately  had  one  or  two  little  skirmishes 
here.  A  party  from  Boimdbrook  beat  up  some  of  the 
enemy's  advanced  pickets  from  Brunswick.  An  at- 
tack was  made  upon  their  pickets  near  Bonhamtown. 
We  have  no  regular  account  of  this  matter ;  but  what 
we  have  had  is  to  this  purport :  *'  That  a  party  under 
Col.  Cook  attacked  one  of  their  pickets  and  drove  it 
in ;  that  it  was  reinforced  and  sallied  out  again,  and 
was  beaten  in  a  second  time;  that  it  received  a 
second  reinforcement  and  made  a  second  sally ;  and 
that  Gen.  Maxwell,  who  conducted  the  affair,  per- 
ceiving the  matter  growing  too  serious  by  continual 
succors  coming  to  them  from  Brunswick  and  Amboy, 


Private  Correspondence  71 

thought  it  best  to  retire  which  he  did  in  good  order — 
the  enemy  keeping  at  a  respectful  distance  during 
the  whole  time  of  the  retrogradation."  'T  is  said 
we  have  lost  between  twenty  and  thirty  killed  and 
wounded,  and  a  few  stragglers  taken ;  and  't  is  also 
asserted  that  some  of  our  officers  counted  nineteen 
dead  bodies  of  the  enemy  on  the  field.  The  Royal 
Highlanders  had  taken  possession  of  a  wood,  by  way 
of  ambuscade,  out  of  which  they  were  expelled  by 
our  troops.  Here,  I  believe,  the  principal  loss  was 
sustained  on  both  sides. 

P.  S. — I  thank  you  for  the  inclosures  of  every  kind. 
I  believe  you  have  not  received  a  letter  I  wrote  a  few 
days  ago,  giving  my  idea  of  your  Constitution,  with 
which,  on  a  second  inspection,  I  am  better  pleased 
than  at  first.  You  will  oblige  me  by  forwarding  the 
inclosed. 


TO  GOUVERNEUR  MORRIS 

Headquarters,  Morristown,  May  19,  1777. 

Dear  Sir: 

I  this  moment  received  the  favor  of  your  letter  of 
the  1 6th  instant. 

I  partly  agree  and  partly  disagree  with  you  re- 
specting the  deficiencies  of  your  Constitution.  That 
there  is  a  want  of  vigor  in  the  executive,  I  believe, 
will  be  found  true.  To  determine  the  qualifications 
proper  for  the  chief  executive  magistrate  requires  the 
deliberate  wisdom  of  a  select  assembly,  and  cannot 
be  safely  lodged  with  the  people  at  large.  That  in- 
stability is  inherent  in  the  nature  of  popular  govern- 


72  Alexander  Hamilton 

ments  I  think  very  disputable ;  unstable  democracy, 
is  an  epithet  frequently  in  the  mouths  of  politicians ; 
but  I  believe  that  from  a  strict  examination  of  the 
matter — from  the  records  of  history,  it  will  be  found 
that  the  fluctuations  of  governments  in  which  the 
popular  principle  has  borne  a  considerable  sway,  have 
proceeded  from  its  being  compounded  with  other 
principles; — and  from  its  being  made  to  operate 
in  an  improper  channel.  Compound  governments, 
though  they  may  be  harmonious  in  the  beginning, 
will  introduce  distinct  interests,  and  these  interests 
will  clash,  throw  the  State  into  convulsions,  and  pro- 
duce a  change  or  dissolution.  When  the  deliberative 
or  judicial  powers  are  vested  wholly  or  partly  in  the 
collective  body  of  the  people,  you  must  expect  error, 
confusion,  and  instability.  But  a  representative 
democracy,  where  the  right  of  election  is  well  se- 
cured and  regulated,  and  the  exercise  of  the  legisla- 
tive, executive,  and  judiciary  authorities  is  vested  in 
select  persons,  cho^eruxgally  and  not  nominally  by 
the  people,  will,  in  my  opinion,  be  most  likely  to  be 
happy,  regular,  and  durable.  That  the  complexity 
of  your  Legislature  will  occasion  delay  and  dilatori- 
ness,  is  evident,  and  I  fear  may  be  attended  with  a 
much  greater  evil; — as  expedition  is  not  very  ma- 
terial in  making  laws,  especially  when  the  govern- 
ment is  well  digested  and  matured  by  time.  The 
evil  I  mean  is,  that  in  time  your  Senate,  from  the 
very  name,  and  from  the  mere  circumstance  of  its 
being  a  separate  member  of  the  Legislature,  will  be 
liable  to  degenerate  into  a  body  purely  aristocratical. 
And  I  think  the  danger  of  an  abuse  of  power  from 


Private  Correspondence  73 

a  simple  legislature,  would  not  be  very  great  in  a 
government  where  the  equality  and  fulness  of  popu-  __ 
lar  representation  is  so  wisely  provided  for  as  in 
yours.  On  the  whole,  though  I  think  there  are  the 
defects  intimated,  I  think  your  government  far  the 
best  that  we  have  yet  seen,  and  capable  of  givin^-^' 
long  and  substantial  happiness  to  the  people.  Ob- 
jections to  it  should  be  suggested  with  great  caution 
and  reserve. 

Nothing  particular  in  the  military  line.  The 
enemy  still  in  the  Jerseys,  though  they  have  been 
some  time  sending  away  their  stores,  baggage,  etc., 
and  are  raising  new  works  of  defence.  All  this  may 
be  preparatory  to  an  evacuation  at  all  events,  and 
they  may  be  only  intended  to  pave  the  way  for  a 
retreat,  in  case  of  an  attack  or  any  accident. 

Advices  from  the  West  Indies,  that  have  an  ap- 
pearance of  authenticity,  mention  a  French  vessel 
bound  for  the  continent,  being  taken  by  the  British 
frigate  Perseus,  and  carried  into  Dominique;  and  a 
remonstrance  being  made  by  the  Governor  of  Martin- 
ique, threatening  reprisals  in  case  of  a  detention. 
Nay,  some  accounts  say  he  has  actually  seized  all  the 
English  vessels  in  the  harbor  of  Martinique,  and  im- 
prisoned their  seamen  till  restitution  shall  be  made. 
If  these  accounts  be  true,  they  are  important,  and  may 
be  considered  as  an  earnest  of  more  general  hostility. 

Perhaps  your  next  favor  will  find  me  at  Bound- 
brook.  Headquarters  will  soon  be  moved  there. 
Our  family  seem  desirous  of  cultivating  a  closer 
acquaintance  with  the  enemy  than  we  have  had  the 
pleasure  of  for  some  time  past. 


74  Alexander  Hamilton 

Relying  on  your  punctuality  in  favoring  me  with 
any  important  intelligence  your  way,  I  am  likely  to 
lose  a  beaver  hat,  which  was  staked  against  the  truth 
of  the  report  of  the  stores  at  St.  John's  being  de- 
stroyed. If  you  forget  me  in  future,  I  will  certainly 
excommunicate  you. 


TO  GOUVERNEUR  MORRIS 

Middle  Brook  Camp,  June  2,  1777. 

Dear  Sir: 

I  received  your  favor  per  express,  and  as  the 
absence  of  my  former  respectable  correspondents  has 
made  a  change  necessary,  I  am  happy  that  you  have 
been  substituted  in  their  room. 

Except  a  body  of  militia  at  and  about  Pompton, 
and  a  few  detachments  of  observation,  our  whole 
army  is  now  collected  at  two  points ;  the  main  body 
here,  and  a  division  under  General  Sullivan  at  Prince- 
ton. Though  this  alteration  of  circimistances  takes 
off  in  a  great  measure  the  restraints  imposed  upon  the 
enemy  during  the  winter,  gives  them  a  more  ample 
field  to  range  in,  and  exposes  the  country  more  to 
their  ravages,  yet  the  measure  is  abundantly  justified 
by  every  wise  military  maxim.  The  rigor  of  the 
season  has  been  heretofore  our  chief  security  against 
those  advantages  which  might  have  been  taken  of  our 
dispersed  state;  and  this  dispersion  was  necessary 
both  for  the  conveniency  of  winter-quarters,  and 
with  a  view  to  confine  and  distress  the  enemy,  which 
was  the  most  capital  object  we  could  then  propose  to 
ourselves.     It  was  also  necessary  by  this  method  to 


Private  Correspondence  75 

second  the  check  to  that  torrent  of  influence  which 
their  successes  in  the  Jerseys  had  given  them.  Many- 
other  justifying  reasons  might  be  assigned,  which  I 
doubt  not  you  will  easily  conceive,  and  which  it 
would  be  indiscreet  to  commit  to  paper. 

But  now  that  a  more  active  season  is  arrived,  and 
something  of  importance  must  be  done  on  one  side 
or  the  other,  it  becomes  our  business  to  put  ourselves 
in  the  best  posture  both  for  defence  and  offence. 
Common-sense  dictates  that  the  best  way  to  effect 
this  is  to  collect  our  strength.  In  a  collected  state 
we  can  best  repel  a  general  attack ;  we  can  best  make 
one,  if  circumstances  warrant  it;  and  we  can  move 
with  greater  expedition  to  disconcert  any  sudden 
push  not  immediately  upon  us,  which  the  enemy 
are  likely  to  make.  It  is  needless  to  enlarge  on  a 
subject  which  your  own  judgment  will  enable  you 
of  itself  to  view  in  a  just  light. 

As  to  the  designs  of  the  enemy,  appearances  are 
so  intricate,  fluctuating,  and  seemingly  inconsistent, 
that  it  is  difficult  to  form  any  certain  conclusion  from 
them.  Either  they  do  not  understand  themselves, 
and  are  very  irresolute  and  fickle,  or  they  very  art- 
fully manage  matters  to  deceive  us.  I  am  rather 
inclined  to  suppose  the  former.  This,  however,  I 
may  say  with  tolerable  certainty,  that  my  ideas  of 
their  intending  to  operate  to  the  southward,  derive 
just  support  from  such  parts  of  their  conduct  lately 
as  are  most  intelligible.  We  have  a  variety  of  con- 
curring intelligence  that  they  have  lately  drawn 
more  troops  into  the  Jerseys — that  they  have 
brought  over  a  large  number  of  wagons,  and  all  the 


76  Alexander  Hamilton 

boats  prepared  for  bridges,  with  several  other  par- 
ticulars of  less  importance,  all  of  which  denote  a 
preparation  to  operate  this  way.  Persons  who  have 
been  among  them  assert  confidently  that  they  mean 
to  attack  us.  But  we  are  divided  in  sentiment  as  to 
the  probability  of  that,  or  of  their  making  a  forced 
march  to  Philadelphia.  If  they  act  wisely,  they  will 
neither  attack  us  in  our  present  situation,  strongly 
posted  as  we  are,  nor  will  they  attempt  to  cross  a 
river,  where  they  may  certainly  expect  opposition  in 
front,  and  leaving  at  the  same  time  a  formidable 
army  in  the  rear.  He  should  endeavor  to  draw  us 
from  here  and  fight  us  upon  more  equal  ground.  But 
after  all,  if  he  expects  any  timely  reinforcements, 
upon  what  rational  principle  can  he  risk  his  own 
reputation  and  all  the  hopes  of  his  cause,  in  an  at- 
tempt with  his  present  force,  so  extremely  important 
and  hazardous  ?  Perhaps  he  only  means  to  get  every 
thing  in  readiness  against  the  arrival  of  the  reinforce- 
ments looked  for,  that  he  may  immediately  com- 
mence his  operations.  Things,  however,  will  hardly 
bear  this  construction.  We  are  told  that  in  seven- 
teen sail  lately  arrived  from  Europe,  there  were  about 
2,000  raw  recruits. 

This  from  the  deserters. 

The  enemy  yesterday  perpetrated  a  most  barbarous 
butchery  upon  a  Lieutenant  Martin  of  ours.  He  was 
out  with  a  scouting  party  and  met  some  of  the  British 
light-horse;  his  men,  it  is  said  quitted  him.  But 
however  other  matters  may  be,  't  is  certain  his  dead 
body  was  found  most  horribly  mangled.  He  had  not 
a  single  bullet  wound,  but  was  hacked  to  pieces  with 


Private  Correspondence  T^ 

the  sword;  he  had  several  cuts  on  his  head,  each  of 
which  was  sufficient  to  dispatch  him,  besides  a  num- 
ber of  more  inconsiderable  scars  about  his  body  and 
hands.  It  is  evident  that  the  most  wanton  and  un- 
necessary cruelty  must  have  been  used  towards  him ; 
for  the  greater  part  of  his  wounds  must  have  been 
given  him  when  utterly  out  of  a  condition  to  resist. 
This  may  be  relied  on  as  a  fact,  for  I  saw  his  corpse, 
as  did  also  every  officer  and  soldier  in  camp  that 
chose  it.  The  General  sent  him  down  to  their  lines 
with  a  letter  to  Lord  Comwallis,  as  an  undeniable 
evidence  of  their  brutality ;  but  the  letter  was  taken 
from  the  flag  and  sent  in ;  the  flag  and  the  body  not 
permitted  to  pass  their  outposts. 


TO  ROBERT  R.  LIVINGSTON  ' 

Headquarters,  Camp  at  Middle  Brook,  June  28,  1777. 

Dear  Sir: 

Yours  of  the  25th  came  to  hand  last  night.  Since 
my  last  addressed  to  Mr.  Morris,  the  enemy  have  been 
trying  a  second  experiment  to  tempt  us  to  an  engage- 
ment, on  equal  terms  of  ground.  Under  the  sup- 
position of  their  intending  to  evacuate  the  Jerseys 
immediately,  in  order  to  keep  up  the  idea  of  a  pursuit, 
and  to  be  in  a  posture  to  take  advantage  of  any 
critical  movement  that  might  present  itself,  to  give 

^  A  leading  patriot  and  a  member  of  the  well-known  New  York 
family.  He  was  a  signer  of  the  Declaration  of  Independence,  for  many- 
years  Chancellor  of  New  York,  and  Minister  to  France  from  1801  to 
1804.  At  this  time  he  was  a  member  of  the  New  York  Constitutional 
Convention. 


78  Alexander  Hamilton 

them  a  blow;  the  chief  part  of  our  army,  after  their 
retreat  from  Brunswick,  was  marched  down  to 
Quibbletown,  and  parties  detached  thence  further 
towards  the  enemy.  Finding  this  disposition  take 
place,  and  expecting  that,  elated  by  what  had  passed, 
we  might  be  willing  to  venture  upon  a  general  en- 
gagement, which  is  Howe's  only  hope,  he  came  out 
with  his  whole  army  from  Amboy,  only  on  Thursday 
morning,  and  made  a  forced  march  towards  our  left, 
with  design,  if  possible,  to  cut  off  some  of  our  detach- 
ments, particularly  one  under  Lord  Stirling;  and, 
probably,  if  we  were  not  expeditious  in  regaining  the 
heights,  to  get  there  before  us,  by  rapidly  entering 
the  passes  on  our  left.  Lord  Stirling's  party  was 
near  being  surrounded;  but  after  a  smart  skirmish 
with  the  enemy's  main  body,  made  their  retreat  good 
to  Westfield,  and  ascended  the  pass  of  the  mountains 
back  of  the  Scotch  plains.  The  other  parties,  after 
skirmishing  on  their  flanks,  came  off  to  join  the  main 
body,  and  take  possession  of  the  heights.  The 
enemy  continued  their  march  towards  our  left  as  far 
as  Westfield,  and  there  halted.  In  the  meantime,  it 
was  judged  prudent  to  return  with  the  army  to  the 
mountains,  lest  it  should  be  their  intention  to  get 
into  them,  and  force  us  to  fight  them  on  their  own 
terms.  They  remained  at  Westfield  till  the  next  day, 
and  perceiving  their  views  disappointed,  have  again 
returned  to  Amboy,  plundering  and  burning  as  usual. 
We  had  parties  hanging  about  them  on  their  re- 
turn; but  they  were  so  much  on  their  guard,  no 
favourable  opportunity  could  be  found  of  giving  them 
any  material  annoyance.     Their  loss  we  cannot  ascer- 


Private  Correspondence  79 

tain;  and  our  own,  in  men,  is  inconsiderable,  though 
we  have  as  yet  received  no  returns  of  the  missing.  I 
have  no  doubt  they  have  lost  more  men  than  we ;  but 
unfortunately,  I  won't  say  from  what  cause,  they  got 
three  field-pieces  from  us,  which  will  give  them  room 
for  vaporing,  and  embellish  their  excursion,  in  the 
eyes  of  those  who  make  every  trifle  a  matter  of  im- 
portance. It  is  not  unlikely  they  will  soon  be  out  of 
the  Jerseys ;  but  where  they  will  go  to  next  is  mere 
matter  of  conjecture,  for,  as  you  observe,  their  con- 
duct is  so  eccentric  as  to  leave  no  certain  grounds  on 
which  to  form  a  judgment  of  their  intentions. 

I  know  the  comments  that  some  people  will  make 
on  our  Fabian  conduct.  It  will  be  imputed  either  to 
cowardice,  or  to  weakness.  But  the  more  discerning, 
I  trust,  will  not  find  it  difficult  to  conceive,  that  it 
proceeds  from  the  truest  policy,  and  is  an  argument 
neither  of  the  one  nor  the  other. 

The  liberties  of  America  are  an  infinite  stake.  We 
should  not  play  a  desperate  game  for  it,  or  put  it 
upon  the  issue  of  a  single  cast  of  the  die.  The  loss 
of  one  general  engagement  may  effectually  ruin  us, 
and  it  would  certainly  be  folly  to  hazard  it,  unless 
our  resources  for  keeping  up  an  army  were  at  an  end, 
and  some  decisive  blow  was  absolutely  necessary; 
or  unless  our  strength  was  so  great  as  to  give  cer- 
tainty of  success.  Neither  is  the  case — America  can 
in  all  probability  maintain  its  army  for  years,  and  our 
numbers,  though  such  as  would  give  a  reasonable 
hope  of  success,  are  not  such  as  should  make  us 
entirely  sanguine.  A  third  consideration,  did  it 
exist,  might  make  it  expedient  to  risk  such  an  event 


8o  Alexander  Hamilton 

— the  prospect  of  very  great  reinforcements  to  the 
enemy;  but  every  appearance  contradicts  this,  and 
affords  all  reason  to  believe  they  will  get  very  incon- 
siderable accessions  of  strength  this  campaign.  All 
the  European  maritime  powers  are  interested  for  the 
defeat  of  the  British  arms  in  America,  and  will  never 
assist  them.  A  small  part  of  Germany  is  disposed  to 
make  a  market  of  its  troops,  and  even  this  seems  not 
over-fond  of  being  drained  any  further.  Many 
springs  may  be  put  in  motion  even  to  put  a  stop  to 
this.  The  king  of  Prussia  may,  perhaps,  without 
much  difficulty,  be  engaged  to  espouse  views  un- 
friendly to  the  court  of  Britain,  and  a  nod  of  his 
would  be  sufficient  to  prevent  all  future  German  suc- 
cors. He,  as  well  as  most  other  powers  of  Europe, 
feels  the  necessity  of  commerce  and  a  large  maritime 
force  to  be  generally  respectable.  His  situation, 
until  lately,  has  been  unfavorable  to  this;  but  the 
reduction  of  Poland,  and  the  acquisition  of  Dantzig 
in  the  Baltic,  have  put  it  very  much  in  his  power  to 
pursue  commercial  schemes ;  and  may  tempt  him  to 
be  propitious  to  American  independence.  Russian 
assistance  is  still  infinitely  more  precarious;  for  be- 
sides that  it  cannot  be  the  true  interest  of  that  am- 
bitious empire  to  put  its  troops  to  sale,  it  is  at 
present  embroiled  with  the  Turks,  and  will  want  all 
its  men  to  employ  in  its  own  wars.  England  herself, 
from  the  nature  of  her  policy,  can  furnish  few  soldiers, 
and  even  those  few  can  ill  be  spared  to  come  to 
America  in  the  present  hostile  appearance  of  affairs 
in  Europe.  On  whatever  side  it  is  considered,  no 
great   reinforcements   are   to   be   expected   to   the 


Private  Correspondence  8i 

British  army  in  America.  It  is  therefore  Howe's 
business  to  make  the  most  of  his  present  strength; 
and  as  he  is  not  numerous  enough  to  conquer  and 
garrison  as  he  goes,  his  only  hope  hes  in  fighting  us, 
and  giving  a  general  defeat  at  one  blow/ 

On  our  part  we  are  continually  strengthening  our 
political  springs  in  Europe,  and  may  every  day  look 
for  more  effectual  aids  than  we  have  yet  received. 
Our  own  army  is  continually  growing  stronger  in 
men,  arms,  and  discipline:  we  shall  soon  have  an 
important  addition  of  artillery,  now  on  its  way  to 
join  us.  We  can  maintain  our  present  numbers  good, 
at  least,  by  enlistments,  while  the  enemy  must 
dwindle  away;  and  at  the  end  of  the  summer  the 
disparity  between  us  will  be  infinitely  great,  and 
facilitate  any  exertions  that  may  be  made  to  settle 
the  business  with  them.  Their  affairs  will  be  grow- 
ing worse,  ours  better;  so  that  delay  will  ruin  them. 
It  will  serve  to  perplex  and  fret  them,  and  precipitate 
them  into  measures  that  we  can  turn  to  good  account. 
Our  business  then  is  to  avoid  a  general  engagement, 
and  to  waste  the  enemy  away  by  constantly  goading 
their  sides  in  a  desultory,  teasing  way. 

In  the  meantime  it  is  painful  to  leave  a  part  of  the 
inhabitants  a  prey  to  their  depredations;  and  it  is 
wounding  to  the  feelings  of  a  soldier,  to  see  an 
enemy  parading  before  him  and  daring  him  to  fight 
which  he  is  obliged  to  decline. 

But  a  part  must  be  sacrificed  to  the  whole,  and 
passion  must  give  way  to  reason.    You  will  be  sensible 

'  For  a  youth  of  twenty  this  is  a  rather  remarkable  analysis  of  the 
condition  of  Europe. 

VOL.  IX. — 6. 


82  Alexander  Hamilton 

that  it  will  not  be  advisable  to  publish  the  senti- 
ments contained  in  this  letter  as  coming  from  me; 
because  this  will  make  the  enemy  more  fully  ac- 
quainted with  our  views;  but  it  might  not  be  amiss 
to  have  them  circulated,  as  those  which  ought  to 
govern  the  conduct  of  the  army,  in  order  to  prepare 
the  minds  of  the  people  for  what  may  happen,  and 
take  off  the  disagreeable  impressions  our  caution 
may  make. 


TO  DR.  HUGH  KNOX  ' 

July,  1777. 

*  *  *  This  event  (the  evacuation  of  Ticon- 
deroga ')  redounds  very  little  to  our  credit.  For  if 
the  post  was  untenable,  or  required  a  larger  number 
of  troops  to  defend  it  than  could  be  spared  for  the 
purpose,  it  ought  long  ago  to  have  been  foreseen  and 
given  up.  Instead  of  that,  we  have  kept  a  large 
quantity  of  cannon  in  it,  and  have  been  heaping 
up  very  valuable  magazines  of  stores  and  provisions 
that,  in  the  critical  moment  of  defence,  are  aban- 
doned and  lost.  This  affair  will  be  attended  with 
several  evil  consequences ;  for  besides  the  loss  of  our 
stores,  which  we  cannot  well  afford,  it  opens  a  new 
and  easy  door  by  which  to  penetrate  the  northern 
States.  It  will  fiK  the  hitherto  fluctuating  disposi- 
tion of  the  Indians  in  that  quarter  in  their  favor,  and 
expose  the  frontiers  of  the  adjacent  country  to  their 

^  Dr.  Hugh  Knox,  a  worthy  minister  in  the  West  Indies,  who  had 
advised  and  helped  Hamilton  in  his  boyhood,  and  always  remained  his 
warm  admirer. 

^J^iiy  5>  1777- 


Private  Correspondence  83 

depredations.  But  though  it  is  a  misfortune  we  have 
reason  to  lament,  I  dare  say  it  will  be  regarded  with 
you  as  much  more  important  than  it  really  is,  and 
as  materially  endangering  the  success  of  our  cause, 
which  is  by  no  means  the  case.  Our  opposition  is 
at  this  time  too  well  matured  and  has  too  great 
stability  to  be  shaken  by  an  accident  of  that  kind. 
While  we  have  a  respectable  army  in  the  field,  and 
resources  to  feed,  clothe,  and  arm  them,  we  are  safe. 
We  have  had  a  force  sufficient  for  the  foregoing  part 
of  the  campaign  to  maintain  such  a  superiority  over 
the  main  army  of  the  enemy  as  effectually  to  hinder 
them  from  attaining  any  of  their  purposes.  And,  to 
the  northward,  with  the  reinforcements  sent  up  to 
succor  the  retreating  garrison  of  Ticonderoga  and  the 
militia  flocking  in  from  New  England,  I  think  there 
is  little  doubt  we  have  by  this  time  a  force  adequate 
to  give  Mr.  Burgoyne  a  seasonable  check.  One  good 
effect  will  result  from  the  misfortune,  which  is,  that 
it  will  stimulate  the  eastern  States  to  greater  exer- 
tions than  they  might  otherwise  make. 

By  our  last  advices  the  enemy  were  in  possession  of 
all  the  country  between  Ticonderoga  and  Fort  George ; 
and  our  army,  nearly  equal  in  number  to  them,  were 
about  to  take  post  somewhere  between  Fort  Edward 
and  Saratoga. 

The  consequences  of  this  northern  affair  will  depend 
much  upon  the  part  that  Howe  acts.  If  he  were  to 
co-operate  with  Burgoyne  it  would  demand  our  ut- 
most efforts  to  counteract  them.  But  if  he  should 
go  towards  the  southward,  all  or  most  of  the  advan- 
tages of  Burgoyne 's  success  will  be  lost.     He  will 


84  Alexander  Hamilton 

either  be  obliged  to  content  himself  with  the  posses- 
sion of  Ticonderoga  and  the  dependent  fortresses,  and 
with  carrying  on  a  partisan  war  the  rest  of  the  cam- 
paign, or  he  must  precipitate  himself  into  certain 
ruin  by  attempting  to  advance  into  the  country  with 
a  very  incompetent  force. 

Appearances  lead  us  to  suppose  that  Howe  is  fool 
enough  to  meditate  a  southern  expedition ;  for  he  has 
now  altered  his  station  at  Staten  Island,  mentioned 
above,  and  has  fallen  down  to  the  Hook.  Judging  it 
morally  certain  that  there  would  be  a  co-operation 
of  the  two  armies,  we  thought  it  expedient  to  march 
northerly ;  and  had  accordingly  reached  within  four- 
teen miles  of  New  Windsor,  the  place  where  we  could 
cross  the  North  River  without  danger  or  interruption. 
But  this  new  movement  of  the  enemy's  fleet,  has  in- 
duced us  to  return  a  few  miles,  and  make  a  disposition 
for  marching  southerly.  We  shall,  however,  be  cau- 
tious how  we  proceed  on  that  course,  lest  nothing 
more  than  a  feint  is  intended,  to  divert  us  from  the 
real  object. 

If  they  go  to  the  southward  in  earnest,  they  must 
have  the  capture  of  Philadelphia  in  view;  for  there 
is  no  other  inducement.  We  shall  endeavor  to  get 
there  in  time  to  oppose  them ;  and  shall  have  the 
principal  part  of  the  Continental  force,  and  a  large 
body  of  spirited  militia,  many  of  them,  from  their 
services  during  the  last  campaign,  pretty  well  inured 
to  arms,  to  make  the  opposition  with.  Yet  I  would 
not  have  you  to  be  much  surprised  if  Philadelphia 
should  fall;  for  the  enemy  will  doubtless  go  there 
with  a  determination  to  succeed  at  all  hazard;   and 


Private  Correspondence  85 

we  shall  not  be  able  to  prevent  them,  without  risking 
a  general  action,  the  expediency  of  which  will  de- 
pend upon  circumstances.  If  the  militia  turn  out 
with  that  zeal  we  have  a  right  to  expect,  from  their 
conduct  when  the  enemy  made  their  last  experiment 
in  the  Jerseys,  and  were  supposed  to  be  going  to 
Philadelphia,  we  may  do  it  without  much  incon- 
venience. If  they  fall  materially  short  of  it,  we 
shall  be  obliged  to  confine  ourselves  to  a  skirmishing 
opposition,  which  we  cannot  expect  will  be  effectual. 
It  may  be  asked,  If,  to  avoid  a  general  engagement, 
we  give  up  objects  of  the  first  importance,  what  is 
to  hinder  the  enemy  from  carrying  every  important 
point,  and  ruining  us?  My  answer  is,  that  our 
hopes  are  not  placed  in  any  particular  city  or  spot  of 
ground,  but  in  the  preserving  a  good  army,  furnished 
with  proper  necessaries,  to  take  advantage  of  favora- 
ble opportunities,  and  waste  and  defeat  the  enemy 
by  piecemeal.  Every  new  post  they  take,  requires 
a  new  division  of  their  forces,  and  enables  us  to 
strike  with  our  united  force  against  a  part  of  theirs: 
and  such  is  their  present  situation,  that  another 
Trenton  affair  will  amount  to  a  complete  victory  on 
our  part ;  for  they  are  at  too  low  an  ebb  to  bear  an- 
other stroke  of  the  kind.  Perhaps,  before  I  may 
have  an  opportunity  of  sending  this,  facts  will  un- 
fold what  I  am  now  endeavoring  to  anticipate  by 
conjecture. 

You  will  expect  some  animadversions  on  the  tem- 
per and  views  of  the  French  nation.  I  presume  you 
are  nearly  as  well  acquainted  with  the  assistance 
they  are  giving  us  as  I  am,  both  by  their  intrigues  in 


86  Alexander  Hamilton 

foreign  courts,  and  by  supplies  of  every  kind  of  war- 
like stores  and  apparatus. 

It  does  not  admit  of  a  doubt  that  they  are  inter- 
ested to  wish  us  success;  and  their  conduct  plainly 
shows,  they  are  willing  to  give  us  every  aid  essential 
to  our  preservation.  But  it  is  natural  they  should 
desire  to  do  it  with  as  much  convenience  to  them- 
selves as  they  can.  I  apprehend  they  are  not  over- 
fond  of  plunging  themselves  into  a  war  with  England 
if  they  can  avoid  it,  and  still  answer  the  end  they 
have  to  pursue:  and,  indeed,  from  the  evident  re- 
luctance shown  on  the  part  of  the  latter,  to  do  any 
thing  that  may  bring  about  such  an  event,  it  be- 
comes extremely  difficult  to  draw  her  into  it.  The 
conclusion  we  may  make,  is,  that  France  will  not 
wish  to  force  England  into  a  war,  unless  she  finds 
our  affairs  require  it  absolutely;  and  England  will 
not  enter  into  one,  till  she  is  compelled  to  do  it. 

My  best  respects  to  all  friends ;  and  I  beg  you  will 
believe  me  to  be,  with  unabated  regard,  etc. 


TO    GOUVERNEUR   MORRIS 

Headquarters,  Morristown,  July  6,  1777. 

Dear  Sir: 

I  received  your  favour  of  the  4th,  by  express.  If 
I  recollect  how  far  my  last  went,  it  did  not  announce 
the  return  of  the  enemy  from  Westfield  to  Amboy, 
nor  their  evacuation  of  that  place  since.  After  rest- 
and  refreshing  themselves  a  night,  they  decamped 
the  following  day,  and  proceeded  to  Amboy,  from 


Private  Correspondence  87 

which  place  they  went  to  Staten  Island  as  expedi- 
tiously as  they  could;  where  they  still  remain. 

The  news  from  the  northward  wore  so  serious  a 
face,  that  our  generals  thought  the  enemy  were 
about  to  operate  in  earnest  against  our  posts  in  that 
quarter;  and,  as  supposing  this  the  case,  General 
Howe  might  certainly  be  expected  to  co-operate  by 
way  of  the  North  River,  it  was  judged  necessary  to 
move  the  main  body  of  the  army  from  Middle  Brook 
to  Morristown ;  to  advance  a  division  imder  General 
Sullivan  to  Pompton,  and  another  under  General 
Parsons  as  far  as  Peekskill.  A  brigade  at  that  port, 
under  General  Nixon,  was  ordered,  as  soon  as  Par- 
sons' division  anived  near  its  destination,  to  proceed 
immediately  as  a  reinforcement  to  the  northern 
army.  This  disposition  is  deemed  advantageous  to 
prevent  the  success  of  a  coup  de  main  on  the  High- 
land passes,  and  not  inconsistent  with  a  proper  at- 
tention to  Philadelphia,  should  the  northern  alarm 
prove  nothing  more  than  a  diversion,  and  Howe  re- 
turn to  the  charge  that  way. 

I  am  loath  to  risk  a  conjecture  about  Mr.  Howe. 
He  is  such  an  unintelligible  gentleman,  that  no  rule 
of  interpretation  can  possibly  be  found  out  by  which 
to  unravel  his  designs.  If  he  acted  like  a  man  of 
sense,  he  would  wait  quietly  on  Staten  Island,  and 
there  concentrate  all  his  forces.  He  would  draw 
around  him  all  the  men  that  could  be  spared  from 
Canada,  and  all  that  are  now  at  Rhode  Island.  With 
these,  and  the  reinforcements  he  may  receive  from 
Europe,  he  would  make  a  point  of  forcing  us,  by 
some  means  or  other  to  an  action.     In  this  his  only 


88  Alexander  Hamilton 

hope  lies.  If  he  could  defeat  our  army  and  improve 
the  moment  of  success,  he  would  go  very  near  effect- 
ing his  purpose ;  but,  let  him  go  to  the  northward  or  to 
the  southward,  every  new  post  he  takes  weakens  his 
main  body  and  makes  it  the  more  liable  to  be  ruined 
by  our  collective  strength.  Any  object  short  of  our 
army  is  a  bad  one,  and  that  plan  is  the  worst,  where, 
by  a  division  of  his  forces,  he  runs  the  hazard,  in  case 
of  an  accident  either  way,  of  having  his  whole  scheme 
overturned. 

We  have  different  accounts  of  the  present  situation 
of  his  army.  Some  tell  us  that  the  whole  is  now  en- 
camped on  Staten  Island;  others,  that  the  greater 
part  of  the  Hessians  are  on  board  the  ships.  By 
some  sailors  who  came  from  them  yesterday,  we  are 
told  that  the  ships  are  taking  in  water  and  provisions 
for  two  months,  and  that  conveniences  for  transport- 
ing horses  are  fitting  up  in  them.  All  this  is  rather 
vague,  and  may  or  may  not  be  true. 

Their  flourishes  in  the  Jerseys,  I  believe,  cannot 
have  cost  them  less  than  six  or  seven  hundred  men. 
We  have  not  lost  above  a  hundred.  This  is  the  best 
way  to  ruin  them  without  risking  any  thing. 

Our  present  situation  is  embarrassing.  Their 
ships  give  them  a  vast  advantage,  and  we  shall 
probably  be  much  puzzled  when  they  begin  their  op- 
erations again.  We  shall,  however,  act  cautiously, 
and  do  the  best  we  can.  We  are  anxiously  waiting 
for  northern  intelligence. 

Please  forward  the  inclosed  to  General  Schuyler 
per  first  opportunity. 


Private  Correspondence  89 

TO    GOUVERNEUR   MORRIS 
Headquarters,  Smith's  Clove,' July  22,  1777. 

Dear  Sir: 

Your  favor  of  the  eighteenth  from  Saratoga 
reached  me  yesterday.  Your  pronouncing  Fort 
Edward  among  the  other  forts  indefensible,  surprises 
me  a  Httle,  as  it  is  entirely  contrary  to  the  representa- 
tions of  several  gentlemen  of  judgment,  who  have 
had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  and  considering  its 
situation ;  by  whom  we  have  been  taught  to  believe 
that  it  would  be  an  excellent  post,  at  least  for  check- 
ing and  retarding  Burgoyne's  progress.  I  agree 
with  you  that  our  principal  strength  in  the  quarter 
you  are,  will  be  in  the  forests  and  natural  strength  of 
the  country,  and  in  the  want  of  forage,  provisions, 
carriages,  etc.,  in  which  the  enemy  may  easily  be 
thrown,  by  taking  away  what  there  are  of  those 
articles,  which,  you  observe,  have  never  been  in 
great  abundance. 

I  am  doubtful  whether  Burgoyne  will  attempt  to 
penetrate  far,  and  whether  he  will  not  content  him- 
self with  harassing  our  back  settlements  by  parties 
assisted  by  the  savages,  who,  it  is  to  be  feared,  will 
pretty  generally  be  tempted  by  the  enemy's  late  suc- 
cesses to  confederate  in  hostilities  against  us. 

This  doubt  arises  from  some  appearances  that  in- 
dicate a  southern  movement  of  General  Howe's  army, 
which,  if  it  should  really  happen,  will  certainly  be  a 
barrier  against  any  further  impressions  of  Burgoyne; 

'  Sussex  County,  New  Jersey;  Washington  calls  this  place  simply 
"The  Clove,"  the  name  which  it  bears  to-day. 


QO  Alexander  Hamilton 

for  it  cannot  be  supposed  he  would  be  rash  enough 
to  plunge  into  the  bosom  of  the  country  without  an 
expectation  of  being  met  by  General  Howe.  Things 
must  prove  very  averse  to  us  indeed,  should  he  make 
such  an  attempt,  and  not  be  ruined  by  it.  I  confess, 
however,  that  the  appearances  I  allude  to  do  not 
carry  a  full  evidence  in  my  mind,  because  they  are 
opposed  by  others  of  a  contradictory  kind,  and  be- 
cause I  cannot  conceive  upon  what  principle  of 
common- sense  or  military  propriety  Howe  can  be 
running  away  from  Burgoyne  to  the  southward. 

It  is  much  to  be  wished  he  may,  even  though 
it  should  give  him  the  possession  of  Philadelphia, 
which  by  our  remoteness  from  it,  may  very  well 
happen.  In  this  case  we  may  not  only,  if  we  think 
proper,  retaliate,  by  aiming  a  stroke  at  New  York; 
but  we  may  come  upon  him  with  the  greatest  part 
of  our  collective  force,  to  act  against  that  part  which 
is  under  him.  We  shall  then  be  certain  that  Bur- 
goyne cannot  proceed,  and  that  a  small  force  of 
Continental  troops  will  be  sufficient  for  that  partisan 
war  which  he  must  carry  on  the  rest  of  the  campaign. 

A  small  force  will  also  be  sufficient  to  garrison 
the  posts  in  the  Highlands,  and  prevent  any  danger 
there;  so  that  we  shall  be  able  to  bring  nearly  the 
whole  of  the  Continental  army  against  Mr.  Howe. 
The  advantages  of  this  are  obvious.  Should  he  be 
satisfied  with  the  splendor  of  his  acquisition,  and 
shut  himself  up  in  Philadelphia,  we  can  ruin  him  by 
confinement.  Should  he  leave  a  garrison  there  and 
go  forward,  we  can  either  fall  upon  that  or  his  main 
body,  diminished  as  it  will  be  by  such  a  measure, 


Private  Correspondence  91 

with  our  whole  force.  There  will,  however,  be  many 
disagreeable  consequences  attending  such  an  event, 
amongst  which  the  foremost  is  the  depreciation  of 
our  currency,  which,  from  the  importance  in  which 
Philadelphia  is  held,  cannot  fail  to  ensue. 


TO    GOUVERNEUR   MORRIS 

Headquarters,  Coryell's  Ferry,  July  29,  1777. 

Dear  Sir: 

I  have  the  pleasure  of  your  favor  of  the  25th. 
I  cannot  be  induced  to  think  the  enemy  are  so 
numerous  as  you  apprehend,  and  would  place  no  de- 
pendence on  what  is  said  either  by  deserters  or  pris- 
oners, further  than  as  it  respects  their  own  company, 
nor  even  that  with  regard  to  prisoners  in  general,  who 
commonly  have  their  cue,  as  the  phrase  is,  and  know 
very  well  how  to  manufacture  stories  calculated  to 
serve  the  purposes  of  the  side  they  belong  to.  If  we 
may  judge  at  all  from  the  state  of  the  British  and 
foreign  regiments  in  Howe's  army,  or  the  propor- 
tion of  recruits  they  have  had  this  year,  we  cannot 
but  believe  the  representations  you  mention  greatly 
exaggerated.  Though  the  northern  army  have  not 
suffered  much  by  action,  they  have  probably  suf- 
fered more  by  sickness  than  the  southern ;  for  many 
accounts  agree  that  they  have  been  ver}^  sickly,  and 
particularly,  that  there  was  a  great  mortality  among 
them  while  lying  at  the  Isle  of  Noix.  From  the  esti- 
mate of  the  first  prisoner,  they  must  have  been 
greatly  reduced  by  some  means  or  other;  for  it  ap- 
pears that  before  his  company  had  been  augmented 


92  Alexander  Hamilton 

by  the  twenty-four  foreigners,  it  was  only  twenty- 
six  strong;  and  it  is  very  improbable  it  should  have 
had  so  large  an  augmentation,  for  I  am  morally  cer- 
tain the  regiments  under  Howe  have  not  had  fifty 
men  each  as  recruits,  and  I  see  no  reason  to  suppose 
Burgoyne's  could  have  had  so  much  better  luck. 
Eight  companies,  at  twenty-six  men  each,  amount 
to  two  hundred  and  eight.  Suppose  each  regiment 
to  have  received  one  hundred  recruits,  which,  by 
every  rule  of  comparison,  must  be  more  than  the 
truth ;  this  brings  a  regiment  to  about  three  hundred 
men.  Ten  regiments,  at  three  hundred  each,  amount 
to  three  thousand,  the  number  of  the  British  troops 
in  Canada.  Again,  if  I  am  not  mistaken,  four  thou- 
sand was  the  allotment  of  foreign  troops  for  the 
northern  department.  As  the  sickness  spoken  of 
fell  chiefly  upon  them,  they,  in  all  probability,  lost 
more  in  that  way  than  they  have  gained  in  recruits. 
But,  even  if  this  were  not  the  case,  they  cannot 
exceed  the  original  number — four  thousand  added 
to  three  thousand  make  seven  thousand.  Besides 
these,  there  are  the  grenadiers  and  light  infantry. 
Of  these  there  cannot  be  above  eighteen  companies 
each,  which,  allowing  them  to  contain  every  one 
fifty  men,  amount  to  eighteen  hundred — and  this 
brings  them  to  about  eight  thousand  eight  hundred 
men  in  their  whole  force  of  British  and  foreign  troops. 
Of  these,  at  least  one  sixth  must  be  unfit  for  duty, 
by  every  calculation,  which  reduces  the  number  of 
men  fit  for  the  field  to  about  seven  thousand  five 
hundred.  Part  of  these  must  be  left  in  Canada,  if  it 
were  for  no  other  purpose  than  to  guard  their  maga- 


Private  Correspondence  93 

zines,  and  for  other  duty  of  that  kind.  Nor  coidd 
they  with  safety  commit  the  charge  of  those  things 
to  the  Canadians,  many  of  whom  are  notoriously 
disaffected,  and  would  be  very  likely  to  destroy  in- 
stead of  preserve  them.  From  this  view,  which  I 
verily  believe  is  too  favorable  to  them,  they  cannot 
bring  more  than  between  six  and  seven  thousand 
British  and  foreign  troops  to  act  out  of  Canada. 
Out  of  these  six  or  seven  thousand,  a  considerable 
part  must  be  left  to  garrison  Ticonderoga,  and  se- 
cure their  rear  in  case  of  accidents;  for  they  could 
not  without  madness  attempt  to  advance,  and  leave 
the  posts  behind  them  in  a  defenceless  state;  and 
they  may  be  obliged  to  increase  their  attention  to 
this  matter  by  keeping  a  body  of  men  somewhere 
about  the  Grants,'  which  has  been  recommended. 
When  this  last  deduction  is  made,  Burgoyne  cannot 
advance  with  more  than  between  five  and  six  thou- 
sand men,  to  suppose  him  to  act  with  his  whole  col- 
lective force;  except  Canadians  and  Indians,  who 
are  not,  by  any  accounts,  numerous. 

Let  us  now  take  a  view  of  our  own  force.  When 
Glover's  brigade  gets  up,  and  the  recruits  for  the 
regiments  there,  now  on  their  march,  arrive.  General 
Schuyler  will  have  about  five  thousand  Continental 
troops.  Surely  the  Eastern  States  cannot  sleep  so 
soundly,  when  the  danger  is  so  imminent,  but  that 
they  will  reinforce  him  with  eight  or  ten  thousand 
militia.  If  this  happens,  and  he  cannot  stop  Gen- 
eral Burgoyne 's  progress,  it  must  proceed  from  other 
causes  than  the  want  of  men.     With  about  the  same 

^  The  New  Hampshire  Grants  in  what  is  now  Vermont. 


94  Alexander  Hamilton 

army  last  year,  General  Washington  kept  Howe  with 
sixteen  or  seventeen  thousand  men  at  bay. 

Perhaps  it  may  be  said,  there  will  not  be  time  to 
collect  this  force,  as  the  enemy  are  advancing  with 
very  great  rapidity.  I  am  much  mistaken  if  there 
will  not  be  abundant  time.  The  nature  of  the 
ground;  the  difficulty  of  transporting  the  immense 
quantity  of  baggage,  provisions,  etc.,  necessary  to 
accompany  an  army  of  five  thousand  men  pene- 
trating an  enemy's  country;  the  want  of  wagons  for 
the  purpose;  the  impediments  thrown  in  their  way 
by  cutting  up  the  roads — all  these  obstacles  will  re- 
tard their  march  much  more  than  is  at  first  sight 
imagined,  and  will  give  full  time  to  prepare  them  a 
good  reception. 

On  the  whole,  I  am  clearly  of  opinion,  that  unless 
Howe  co-operates  with  Burgoyne  against  your  State, 
it  has  very  little  to  fear ;  and  I  even  doubt,  if  he  goes 
to  the  southward,  whether  Burgoyne  will  attempt 
to  penetrate  far.  At  present  there  is  every  appear- 
ance of  a  southern  expedition.  Seventy  sail  of  the 
enemy's  fleet  have  been  seen  passing  by  Little  Egg 
Harbor,  making  short  tacks  towards  the  Capes  of 
Philadelphia.  Three  divisions  of  the  army  are  ar- 
rived here  and  at  Howel's  Ferry,  four  miles  up.  One 
is  coming  on  by  way  of  Princeton,  etc.  Another 
coming  after  us  by  way  of  Morristown.  I  wish  this 
last  to  halt  there.  Two  brigades  more  have  been 
ordered  to  cross  the  North  River  and  wait  further 
orders.  We  shall  not,  however,  pass  the  Deleware  till 
we  hear  of  the  arrival  of  the  enemy  in  the  Capes  of 
Philadelphia.     Nor  will  those  two  brigades  be  ordered 


Private  Correspondence  95 

on  till  the  same  event  takes  place.  We  shall  act  the 
most  cautious  part  possible  in  our  circumstances. 
I  communicated  your  letter  to  the  General.  He 
agrees  with  me  in  point  of  the  enemy's  numbers. 
With  respect  to  animating  the  Eastern  States,  he 
has  written  the  most  urgent  letter  to  their  several 
assemblies,  which  I  am  in  hopes  will  answer  the  end 
you  propose  from  sending  persons  to  each  of  them. 

It  were  to  be  wished  your  forts  and  ships  were 
well  supplied  with  cannon;  but  it  is  wholly  out  of 
the  General's  line  to  strip  the  ships  to  the  eastward 
of  their  cannon  for  that  purpose.  If  your  Conven- 
tion were  to  make  application  to  the  Congress  or 
Board  of  War,  it  might  succeed;  but  I  should  have 
very  little  hope  of  it. 


TO    ROBERT  R.   LIVINGSTON 
Headquarters,  Camp  at  Cross  Roads,  Aug.  i8,  1777. 

My  Dear  Sir: 

I  most  sincerely  and  heartily  sympathize  with  you 
in  the  distress  and  danger  under  which  your  State 
is  laboring  at  this  critical  period.  I  lament  its  mis- 
fortunes, as  they  are  wounds  to  the  common  cause, 
as  they  more  nearly  interest  those  for  whom  I  feel 
the  wannest  regard,  and  as  they  are  suffered  by  a 
State  which  I  consider  in  a  great  measure  as  my 
political  parent.  I  wish  any  thing  in  my  power 
could  contribute  to  its  relief. 

I  am  fully  sensible,  with  you,  that  Mr.  Burgoyne's 
successes  involve  the  most  important  consequences 
to  America,  and  that  a  further  progress  in  your  State 


96  Alexander  Hamilton 

may  bring  on  all  the  evils  you  delineate,  and  most 
deeply  affect  the  common  cause.  I  agree  with  you 
that  the  loss  of  your  State  will  be  a  more  afflicting 
blow  to  America  than  any  that  could  be  struck  by 
Mr.  Howe  to  the  southward;  and  I  can  assure  you 
it  is  regarded  in  the  same  light  by  others  whose 
thoughts  of  the  matter  are  of  much  more  conse- 
quence than  my  own.  I  may  also  add  that  his 
Excellency  has  afforded  the  northern  army  all  the 
assistance  he  could  in  his  circumstances  give,  with 
the  least  degree  of  propriety,  and  were  you  as  well  ac- 
quainted with  those  circumstances  as  I  am,  you  would 
be  perfectly  convinced  of  the  truth  of  what  I  assert. 
Though  I  have  differed,  and  still  differ,  and,  I  be- 
lieve, on  the  most  substantial  grounds,  with  you,  as 
to  the  numbers  of  the  enemy,  yet  I  clearly  perceive, 
from  the  spirit  reigning  in  our  army,  and  from  the 
unpardonable  backwardness  of  your  eastern  neigh- 
bors, that  you  have  every  thing  to  fear,  notwith- 
standing your  most  strenuous  exertions,  which,  to 
the  honor  of  your  State,  are  justly  admired,  as  far 
surpassing  what  might  naturally  be  expected  from 
you  under  so  many  discouragements.  I  am  so 
thoroughly  impressed  with  your  true  situation,  that 
I  am  fully  of  opinion,  if  Burgoyne  is  not  speedily 
checked  in  his  career,  he  will  become  the  first  object 
to  this  army,  especially  if  Howe  operates  so  far  to 
the  southward,  as  every  appearance  seems  to  indi- 
cate. Charleston  is  now  thought  to  be  the  place  of 
his  destination.  He  has  been  seen  passing  Sino- 
puxent,'  steering  southward,  twelve  days  ago;  and, 

^  Sinopuxent  Bay  on  the  coast  of  Maryland. 


Private  Correspondence  97 

as  he  has  not  been  since  heard  of,  't  is  concluded 
he  must  be  bound  pretty  far  in  that  course,  and  no 
object  short  of  Charleston  is  supposed  at  all  worthy 
his  attention.  However  common  sense  is  against 
Mr.  Howe's  going  so  far  to  the  southward,  facts  are 
so  strongly  in  favor  of  it,  that  we  must  give  credit  to 
them.  It  is  an  inadmissible  supposition,  that  he 
can  be  keeping  a  large  fleet  so  long  at  sea  merely  as  a 
feint,  or  that  he  would  steer  so  far  out  of  his  way,  if 
he  really  intended  to  operate  to  the  northward;  the 
more  as  the  season  is  at  hand  when  he  would  be  liable 
to  heavy  gusts  on  the  southern  shores  and  contrary 
winds  on  his  return. 

If  he  goes  so  far  southward,  we  cannot  think  of 
following  him  with  this  army ;  and  if  Burgoyne  con- 
tinues to  penetrate,  we  must  find  means  to  stop  him. 
This  will  point  out  the  propriety  of  uniting  this  with 
the  northern  army,  and  falling  upon  him  with  their 
joint  force ;  and  perhaps  nothing  is  more  to  be  wished 
than  that  affairs  should  run  into  this  train. 

Before  this  reaches  you,  you  will  be  informed  that 
two  regiments  have  gone  from  Peekskill  to  reinforce 
the  northern  army,  and  that  Morgan's  corps  of 
riflemen  are  on  their  march  for  the  same  purpose. 
They  left  Trenton  yesterday  morning,  and  as  they 
march  light,  and  vessels  are  ordered  to  be  ready 
waiting  for  them  at  Peekskill,  they  will  soon  be  at 
the  place  of  their  destination.  It  has  been  my  wish 
and  endeavor  for  some  time  past  that  this  corps 
might  be  sent  to  your  assistance.  I  expect  much 
from  them;  they  are  a  picked  corps,  well-used  to 
rifles  and  to  wood-fights,  commanded  by  officers  of 


q8  Alexander  Hamilton 

distinguished  bravery,  and  have  been  very  service- 
able in  frequent  skirmishes  with  the  enemy.  I  dare 
say  these  people  will  soon  chastise  the  forwardness 
of  the  Indians,  and  I  should  not  be  surprised  if,  after 
a  little  time,  they  make  them  desert  their  British 
friends.  Their  known  inconstancy  and  want  of  per- 
severance give  great  reason  to  hope  a  few  drub- 
bings will  exceedingly  discourage  them  and  send  the 
greatest  part  of  them  home.  From  every  account, 
I  am  led  to  believe  our  misfortunes  are  greatly  owing 
to  a  panic  dread  of  the  Indian.  If  this  be  so,  the 
presence  of  Morgan's  corps  will  not  fail  to  have  the 
most  happy  effect.  It  would  be  well  to  propagate 
through  the  coimtry  and  army  such  ideas  of  this  corps 
as  will  tend  to  revive  the  spirits  of  both  inhabitants 
and  soldiers.  If  their  number,  which  is  about  five 
hundred,  should  be  exaggerated  it  would  do  no  harm. 
But  of  all  things,  my  dear  sir,  let  every  topic  be  care- 
fully avoided  that  may  tend  to  breed  jealousies 
between  this  corps  and  the  northern  troops.  Such 
jealousies  have  been,  are,  and  will  be  more  detri- 
mental to  our  affairs  than  any  thing  besides. 
I  communicated  your  letter  to  his  Excellency. 

P.  S. — Your  express  not  calling  on  his  return  was 
the  sole  reason  of  your  not  receiving  a  letter  from 
me ;  I  had  written  one  to  go  by  him. 

His  Excellency  desires  his  particular  respects  to 
you,  and  assures  you  that  nothing  in  his  power  will 
be  left  undone  for  your  assistance. 


Private  Correspondence  99 

TO    GOUVERNEUR    MORRIS 

Headquarters,  Wilmington,  Sept.  i,  1777. 

Dear  Sir: 

Agreeable  to  the  intention  of  the  council,  I  have 
delivered  their  inclosed  letter  to  his  Excellency,  who, 
after  perusing  it,  has  sealed  and  forwarded  it  to  Mr. 
Hancock. 

The  relieving  Fort  Schuyler  is  a  very  happy  and 
important  event,  and  will  concur  with  the  two  happy 
strokes  given  by  Herkimer  and  Stark,  to  reverse  the 
face  of  affairs  and  turn  the  scale  against  Mr.  Bur- 
goyne.  I  hope  Captain  Montgomery's  suggestions 
may  be  right  as  to  his  being  obliged  to  advance ;  but 
I  fancy,  if  he  once  thinks  it  unsafe,  he  will  not  be 
bound  by  such  an  empty  punctilio  as  to  risk  the  de- 
struction of  his  army.  As  General  Howe  is  now 
fairly  sat  down  to  the  southward,  the  eastern  States, 
no  longer  under  any  apprehensions  from  him,  will  be 
disposed,  I  am  in  hopes,  to  exert  their  whole  force; 
and  if  they  do,  I  shall  wonder  at  it  if  Mr.  Burgoyne 
advances  with  impunity. 

Before  this  reaches  you,  you  will  have  heard  of 
General  Howe's  coming  into  Chesapeake  Bay,  where 
he  has  landed  his  whole  army,  within  about  four 
miles  of  the  head  of  Elk;  a  day  or  two  after  his  land- 
ing, he  marched  from  his  first  position  and  extended 
his  van  as  far  as  Green  Hills.  He  still  lies  there  in  a 
state  of  inactivity,  in  a  great  measure,  I  believe,  from 
the  want  of  horses  to  transport  his  baggage  and 
stores.  It  seems  he  sailed  with  only  about  three 
weeks'  provender,  and  was  six  at  sea;  this  has  occa- 
sioned the  death  of  a  great  many  of  his  horses,  and 


loo  Alexander  Hamilton 

has  made  skeletons  of  the  rest.  He  will  be  obliged 
to  collect  a  supply  from  the  neighboring  country 
before  he  can  move,  unless  he  should  be  disposed  to 
make  a  more  hazardous  movement  than  he  would 
ever  be  able  to  justify  except  by  a  degree  of  success 
he  has  no  right  to  expect. 

The  main  body  of  our  army  is  encamped  on  the 
heights  of  Wilmington,  so  as  to  cover  the  town.  We 
have  strong  parties  of  light  troops  and  militia  ad- 
vanced towards  the  enemy,  who  have  frequent  skir- 
mishes with  them  of  little  consequence,  and  often 
pick  up  a  few  prisoners.  We  have  taken  at  least 
seventy  since  they  landed,  and  have  had  thirty 
deserters.  This  country  does  not  abound  in  good 
posts.  It  is  intersected  by  such  an  infinity  of  roads, 
and  is  so  little  mountainous,  that  it  is  impossible  to 
find  a  spot  not  liable  to  capital  defects.  The  one  we 
now  have  is,  all  things  considered,  the  best  we  could 
find;  but  there  is  no  great  dependence  to  be  put 
upon  it.  The  enemy  will  have  Philadelphia  if  they 
dare  make  a  bold  push  for  it,  unless  we  fight  them  a 
pretty  general  action.  I  opine  we  ought  to  do  it, 
and  that  we  shall  beat  them  soundly  if  we  do.  The 
-militia  seem  pretty  generally  stirring.  Our  army  is 
in  high  health  and  spirits.  We  shall,  I  hope,  have 
twice  the  enemy's  numbers.  I  would  not  only  fight 
them,  but  I  would  attack  them;  for  I  hold  it  an 
established  maxim,  that  there  is  three  to  one  in 
favor  of  the  party  attacking. 


Private  Correspondence  loi 

TO  THE  HONORABLE  JOHN  HANCOCK  PRESIDENT  OF 

CONGRESS 

September  i8,  1777. 

Sir: 

If  Congress  have  not  left  Philadelphia  they  ought 
to  do  it  immediately  without  fail  ;  for  the  enemy 
have  the  means  of  throwing  a  party  this  night  into 
the  city.  I  just  now  passed  the  Valley  Forge — in 
doing  which  a  party  of  the  enemy  came  down  and 
fired  upon  us  in  the  boat,  by  which  means  I  lost  my 
horse — one  man  was  killed,  and  another  wounded. 
The  boats  were  abandoned,  and  will  fall  into  their 
hands.  I  did  all  I  could  to  prevent  this,  but  to  no 
purpose. 


TO   THE   PRESIDENT   OF   CONGRESS 

September  18,  1777,  9  o'clock  at  night. 

Sir: 

I  did  myself  the  honor  to  write  you  a  hasty  line 
this  evening,  giving  it  as  my  opinion  that  the  city 
was  no  longer  a  place  of  safety  for  you.  I  write  you 
again,  lest  that  letter  should  not  get  to  hand.  The 
enemy  are  on  the  road  to  Swedes  Ford,  the  main 
body  about  four  miles  from  it.  They  sent  a  party 
this  evening  to  Daviser's  ferry,  which  fired  upon 
me  and  some  others  in  crossing  it,  killed  one  man, 
wounded  another,  and  disabled  my  horse. 

They  came  on  so  suddenly,  that  one  boat  was  left 
adrift  on  the  other  side,  which  will  of  course  fall  into 
their  hands;  and,  by  the  help  of  that,  they  will  get 
possession  of  another,  which  was  abandoned  by 
those  who  had  the  direction  of  it,  and  left  afloat,  in 


I02  Alexander  Hamilton 

spite  of  every  thing  I  could  do  to  the  contrary.  These 
two  boats  will  convey  fifty  men  across  at  a  time,  so 
that  in  a  few  hours  they  may  throw  over  a  large 
party,  perhaps  sufficient  to  overmatch  the  militia 
who  may  be  between  them  and  the  city.  This  rend- 
ers the  situation  of  Congress  extremely  precarious, 
if  they  are  not  on  their  guard;  my  apprehensions 
for  them  are  great,  though  it  is  not  improbable  they 
may  not  be  realized. 

The  most  cogent  reasons  oblige  me  to  join  the  army 
this  night,  or  I  should  have  waited  upon  you  myself. 
I  am  in  hopes  our  anny  will  be  up  with  the  enemy 
before  they  pass  Schuylkill:  if  they  are,  something 
serious  will  ensue. 


TO   THE   PRESIDENT   OF    CONGRESS 

Philadelphia,  Sept.  22,  1777. 

Sir: 

I  left  camp  last  evening,  and  came  to  the  city  to 
superintend  the  collection  of  blankets  and  clothing 
for  the  army.  Mr.  Lovell '  sends  to  inform  me  that 
there  is  an  express  going  off  to  Congress;  and  I  do 
myself  the  honor  to  communicate  a  brief  state  of 
things  when  I  left  camp.  The  enemy  moved  yes- 
terday, from  where  they  lay  opposite  to  Valley  Forge, 
etc.,  higher  up  the  river,  on  their  old  scheme  of  gain- 
ing our  right.  I  don't  know  precisely  where  they 
halted;  but  our  army  was  preparing  to  move  up 
also,  to  counteract  them. 

I  am  this  morning  told  they  marched  about  twelve 

I  James  Lovell  of  Massachusetts,  at  this  time  member  of  Congress. 


Private  Correspondence  103 

o'clock  at  night  for  that  purpose.  The  general 
opinion  was  that  the  enemy  would  attempt  crossing 
this  day ;  every  appearance  justified  the  supposition. 

We  had  intelligence  that  the  enemy  had,  the 
night  before  last,  surprised  Generals  Smallwood  and 
Wayne,  and  consequently  dispersed  them,  after  a 
small  opposition.  The  loss,  it  is  said,  was  not  great : 
and  our  troops  were  re-assembling  fast  at  the  Red 
Lion.  This  seems  to  have  been  a  bad  look  out,  and 
is  somewhat  disconcerting. 

By  a  letter  from  General  McDougal,  received  this 
morning,  it  appears  he  was,  on  the  twentieth,  in  the 
morning,  at  Second  River,  just  setting  out  on  his 
march  toward  Woodbridge.  He  is  pressing  forward 
with  all  possible  expedition.  The  troops  were  pretty 
well  refreshed,  and  in  good  spirits. 


TO    WASHINGTON 

Headquarters,  Fishkill,  Nov.  2,  1777. 

Dear  Sir: 

I  lodged  last  night  in  the  neighborhood  of  New 
Windsor.  This  morning  early,  I  met  Col.  Morgan 
with  his  corps,  about  a  mile  from  it,  in  march  for 
headquarters.  I  told  him  the  necessity  of  making 
all  the  dispatch  he  could,  so  as  not  to  fatigue  his 
men  too  much,  which  he  has  promised  to  do. 

I  understood  from  Col.  Morgan  that  all  the  north- 
em  army  were  marching  down  on  both  sides  the 
river,  and  would  probably  be  to-morrow  at  New 
Windsor  and  this  place,  and  that  General  Putnam 
had  held  a  council  for  the  general  disposition  of 


I04  Alexander  Hamilton 

them,  in  which  it  was  resolved  to  send  you  four 
thousand  men  and  to  keep  the  rest  on  this  side  the 
river.  I  came  here  in  expectation  that  matters  were 
in  such  a  train  as  to  enable  me  to  accomplish  my 
errand  without  going  any  farther;  imless  it  should 
be  to  hasten  the  troops  that  were  on  their  march. 
But  on  my  arrival  I  learned  from  Mr.  Hughes,  an 
aid-de-camp  of  General  Gates,  that  the  following 
disposition  of  the  northern  army  had  taken  place. 

General  Patterson's,  Glover's,  and  Nixon's  bri- 
gades, and  Colonel  Warner's  mountain  boys,  to  re- 
main in  and  about  Albany;  barracks  building  for 
them.  General  Poor's  brigade,  marching  down  this 
side  of  the  river  to  join  General  Putnam,  will  be 
here  probably  to-morrow.  General  Lamed 's  brigade, 
Morgan's  corps,  Warner's  brigade  of  Massachusetts 
militia,  and  some  regiments  of  New  York  militia,  on 
their  march  on  the  west  side  of  the  river. 

I  have  directed  General  Putnam,  in  your  name,  to 
send  forward  with  all  dispatch  to  join  you  the  two 
Continental  brigades  and  Warner's  militia  brigade. 
This  last  is  to  serve  till  the  latter  end  of  this  month. 
Your  instructions  did  not  comprehend  any  militia, 
but  as  there  are  certain  accounts  here  that  most  of 
the  troops  from  New  York  are  going  to  reinforce 
General  Howe,  and  as  so  large  a  proportion  of  Con- 
tinental troops  have  been  detained  at  Albany,  I 
concluded  you  would  not  disapprove  of  a  measure 
calculated  to  strengthen  you,  though  but  for  a 
small  time,  and  have  ventured  to  adopt  it  on  that 
presumption. 

Being  informed  by  General  Putnam  that  General 


Private  Correspondence  105 

Winds,  with  seven  hundred  Jersey  miHtia,  were  at 
King's  Ferry,  with  intention  to  cross  to  Peekskill,  I 
prevailed  upon  him  to  reHnquish  that  idea  and  send 
off  an  immediate  order  for  them  to  march  toward 
Redbank.  It  is  possible,  however,  imless  your  Ex- 
cellency supports  this  order  by  an  application  from 
yourself,  he  may  march  his  men  home  instead  of  to 
the  place  he  has  been  directed  to  repair  to. 

Neither  Lee's,  Jackson's  regiments,  nor  the  de- 
tachments belonging  to  General  McDougal's  division, 
have  yet  marched.  I  have  pressed  their  being  sent, 
and  an  order  has  been  dispatched  for  their  instantly 
proceeding.  Colonel  Hughes  is  pressing  some  fresh 
horses  for  me.  The  moment  they  are  ready  I  shall 
recross  the  river  in  order  to  fall  in  with  the  troops 
on  the  other  side,  and  make  all  the  haste  I  can  to 
Albany  to  get  the  three  brigades  there  sent  forward. 

Will  your  Excellency  permit  me  to  observe  that  I 
have  some  doubts,  under  present  circumstances  and 
appearances,  of  the  propriety  of  leaving  the  regi- 
ments proposed  to  be  left  in  this  quarter?  But  if 
my  doubts  on  this  subject  were  stronger  than  they 
are,  I  am  forbid,  by  the  sense  of  coimcil,  from  inter- 
fering in  the  matter. 

General  Poor's  brigade  is  just  arrived  here;  they 
will  proceed  to  join  you  with  all  expedition.  So 
strongly  am  I  impressed  with  the  importance  of  en- 
deavoring to  crush  Mr.  Howe,  that  I  am  apt  to  think 
it  would  be  advisable  to  draw  off  all  the  Continental 
troops.  Had  this  been  determined  on,  General  War- 
ner's sixteen  hundred  militia  might  have  been  left 
here. 


io6  Alexander  Hamilton 

TO    WASHINGTON 

Albany,  November,  1777. 

Dear  Sir: 

I  arrived  here  yesterday  at  noon,  and  waited  upon 
General  Gates  immediately,  on  the  business  of  my 
mission,  but  was  sorry  to  find  that  his  ideas  did  not 
correspond  with  yours  for  drawing  off  the  number  of 
troops  you  directed.  I  used  every  argument  in  my 
power  to  convince  him  of  the  propriety  of  the  meas- 
ure, but  he  was  inflexible  in  the  opinion  that  two 
brigades  at  least  of  Continental  troops  should  re- 
main in  and  near  this  place.  His  reasons  were  that 
the  intelligence  of  Sir  Harry  Clinton's  having  gone 
to  join  Burgoyne  was  not  sufficiently  authenticated 
to  put  it  out  of  doubt;  that  there  was  therefore  a 
possibility  of  his  returning  up  the  river,  which  might 
expose  the  finest  arsenal  in  America  (as  he  calls  the 
one  here)  to  destruction,  should  this  place  be  left  so 
bare  of  troops  as  I  proposed,  and  that  the  want  of 
conveniences  and  the  difficulty  of  the  roads  would 
make  it  impossible  to  remove  artillery  and  stores 
for  a  considerable  time;  that  the  New  England 
States  would  be  left  open  to  the  depredations  and 
ravages  of  the  enemy ;  that  it  would  put  it  out  of  his 
power  to  enterprise  any  thing  against  Ticonderoga, 
which  he  thinks  might  be  done  in  the  winter  and 
which  he  considers  it  of  importance  to  undertake. 

The  force  of  these  reasons  did  by  no  means  strike 
me,  and  I  did  every  thing  in  my  power  to  show  they 
were  unsubstantial,  but  all  I  could  effect  was  to  have 
one  brigade  dispatched  in  addition  to  those  already 
marched.     I   found  myself  infinitely  embarrassed, 


Private  Correspondence  107 

and  was  at  a  loss  how  to  act.  I  felt  the  importance 
of  strengthening  you  as  much  as  possible,  but,  on 
the  other  hand,  I  foimd  insuperable  inconveniences 
in  acting  diametrically  opposite  to  the  opinion  of  a 
gentleman  whose  successes  have  raised  him  to  the 
highest  importance.  General  Gates  has  won  the 
entire  confidence  of  the  Eastern  States;  if  disposed 
to  do  it,  by  addressing  himself  to  the  prejudices  of 
the  people  he  would  find  no  difficulty  to  render  a 
measure  odious  which  it  might  be  said,  with  plausi- 
bility enough  to  be  believed,  was  calculated  to  ex- 
pose them  to  unnecessary  danger,  notwithstanding 
their  exertions  during  the  campaign  had  given  them 
the  fullest  title  to  repose  and  security.  General 
Gates  has  influence  and  interest  elsewhere ;  he  might 
use  it  if  he  pleased  to  discredit  the  measure  there 
also.  On  the  whole,  it  appears  to  me  dangerous  to 
insist  on  sending  more  troops  from  hence  while  Gen- 
eral Gates  appears  so  warmly  to  oppose  it.  Should 
any  accident  or  inconvenience  happen  in  conse- 
quence of  it,  there  would  be  too  fair  a  pretext  for 
censure,  and  many  people  are  too  well  disposed  to 
lay  hold  of  it.  At  any  rate  it  might  be  considered 
as  using  him  ill  to  take  a  step  so  contrary  to  his  judg- 
ment in  a  case  of  this  nature.  These  considerations, 
and  others  I  shall  be  more  explicit  in  when  I  have 
the  pleasure  of  seeing  you,  determined  me  not  to 
insist  upon  sending  either  of  the  other  brigades  re- 
maining here.  I  am  afraid  what  I  have  done  may 
not  meet  with  your  approbation,  as  not  being  per- 
haps fully  warranted  by  your  instructions,  but  I 
ventured  to  do  what  I  thought  right,  hoping  that  at 


io8  Alexander  Hamilton 

least  the  goodness  of  my  intention  will  excuse  the 
error  of  my  judgment. 

I  was  induced  to  this  relaxation  the  more  readily, 
as  I  had  directed  to  be  sent  on  two  thousand  militia, 
which  were  not  expected  by  you,  and  a  thousand 
Continental  troops  out  of  those  proposed  to  be  left 
with  General  Putnam,  which  I  have  written  to  him, 
since  I  foimd  how  matters  were  circumstanced  here, 
to  forward  to  you  with  all  dispatch.  I  did  this  for 
several  reasons:  because  your  reinforcement  would 
be  more  expeditious  from  that  place  than  from  this , 
because  two  thousand  Continental  troops  at  Peeks- 
kill  will  not  be  wanted  in  its  present  circumstances, 
especially  as  it  was  really  necessary  to  have  a  body 
of  Continental  troops  at  this  place  for  the  security  of 
the  valuable  stores  here,  and  I  should  not,  if  I  had  my 
wish,  think  it  expedient  to  draw  off  more  than  two 
of  the  three  brigades  now  here.  This  being  the  case, 
one  of  the  ends  you  proposed  to  be  answered  by 
leaving  the  ten  regiments  with  General  Putnam,  will 
be  equally  answered  by  the  troops  here — I  mean  that 
of  covering  and  fortifying  the  Eastern  States, — and 
one  thousand  Continental  troops,  in  addition  to  the 
militia  collected  and  that  may  be  collected  there, 
will  be  sufficient  in  the  Highlands  for  covering  the 
country  down  that  way  and  carrying  on  the  works 
necessary  to  be  raised  for  the  defence  of  the  river. 

The  troops  gone  and  going  to  reinforce  you  are 
near  five  thousand  rank  and  file  Continental  troops, 
and  two  thousand  five  hundred  Massachusetts  and 
New  Hampshire  militia.  These  and  the  seven  hun- 
dred Jersey  militia  will  be  a  larger  reinforcement 


Private  Correspondence  109 

than  you  expected,  though  not  quite  an  equal  num- 
ber of  Continental  troops,  nor  exactly  in  the  way 
directed.  General  Lincoln  tells  me  the  militia  are 
very  excellent;  and,  though  their  time  will  be  out 
by  the  last  of  this  month,  you  will  be  able,  if  you 
think  proper,  to  order  the  troops  still  remaining  here 
to  join  you  by  the  time  their  term  of  service  expires. 

I  cannot  forbear  being  uneasy,  lest  my  conduct 
should  prove  displeasing  to  you;  but  I  have  done 
what,  considering  all  circumstances,  appeared  to  me 
most  eligible  and  prudent. 

Vessels  are  preparing  to  carry  the  brigade  to  New 
Windsor,  which  will  embark  this  evening.  I  shall 
this  afternoon  set  out  on  my  return  to  camp,  and  on 
my  way  shall  endeavor  to  hasten  the  troops  forward. 


TO   GENERAL   GATES 

Albany,  November  5,  1777. 

Sir: 

By  inquiry  I  have  learned  that  General  Patterson's 
brigade,  which  is  the  one  you  propose  to  send,  is  by 
far  the  weakest  of  the  three  now  here,  and  does  not 
consist  of  more  than  about  six  hundred  rank  and 
file  fit  for  duty.  It  is  true  that  there  is  a  militia 
regiment  with  it  of  about  two  hundred,  but  the  term 
of  service  for  which  this  regiment  is  engaged  is  so 
near  expiring,  that  it  would  be  past  by  the  time  the 
men  could  arrive  at  the  place  of  their  destination. 

Under  these  circumstances,  I  cannot  consider  it 
either  as  compatible  with  the  good  of  the  service 
or  my  instructions   from  his  Excellency,  General 


no  Alexander  Hamilton 

Washington,  to  consent  that  that  brigade  be  selected 
from  the  three  to  go  to  him;  but  I  am  under  the 
necessity  of  desiring,  by  virtue  of  my  orders  from 
him,  that  one  of  the  others  be  substituted  instead 
of  this, — either  General  Nixon's  or  General  Glover's, 
— and  that  you  will  be  pleased  to  give  immediate 
orders  for  its  embarkation. 

Knowing  that  General  Washington  wished  me  to 
pay  the  greatest  deference  to  your  judgment,  I  ven- 
tured so  far  to  deviate  from  the  instructions  he  gave 
me,  as  to  consent,  in  compliance  with  your  opinion, 
that  two  brigades  should  remain  here  instead  of  one. 
At  the  same  time,  permit  me  to  observe,  that  I  am 
not  myself  sensible  of  the  expediency  of  keeping 
more  than  one  with  the  detached  regiments  in  the 
neighborhood  of  this  place,  and  that  my  ideas  coin- 
cide with  those  gentlemen  whom  I  have  consulted 
on  the  occasion,  whose  judgment  I  have  much  more 
reliance  upon  than  on  my  own,  and  who  must  be 
supposed  to  have  a  thorough  knowledge  of  all  the 
circumstances.  Their  opinion  is  that  one  brigade 
and  the  regiments  before  mentioned  would  amply 
answer  the  purposes  of  this  post.  When  I  pre- 
ferred your  opinion  to  other  considerations,  I  did 
not  imagine  you  would  pitch  upon  a  brigade  little 
more  than  half  as  large  as  the  others;  and,  finding 
this  to  be  the  case,  I  indispensably  owe  it  to  my  duty 
to  desire,  in  his  Excellency's  name,  that  another  may 
go  instead  of  the  one  intended,  and  without  loss  of 
time.  As  it  may  be  conducive  to  dispatch  to  send 
Glover's  brigade,  if  agreeable  to  you,  you  will  give 
orders  accordingly. 


Private  Correspondence  in 

TO    WASHINGTON 

New  Windsor,  Nov.  io,  1777. 

Dear  Sir: 

I  arrived  here  last  night  from  Albany.  Having 
given  General  Gates  a  little  time  to  recollect  him- 
self, I  renewed  my  remonstrances  on  the  necessity 
and  propriety  of  sending  you  more  than  one  brigade 
of  the  three  he  had  detained  with  him,  and  finally 
prevailed  upon  him  to  give  orders  for  Glover's,  in 
addition  to  Patterson's  brigade,  to  march  this  way. 

As  it  was  thought  conducive  to  expedition  to  send 
the  troops  by  water  as  far  as  it  could  be  done,  I  pro- 
cured all  the  vessels  that  could  be  had  at  Albany  fit 
for  the  purpose,  but  could  not  get  more  than  suffi- 
cient to  take  Patterson's  brigade.  It  was  embarked 
the  7th  instant,  and  I  expected  would  have  been 
here  before  this,  but  the  wind  has  been  contrary; 
they  must  in  all  probability  be  here  to-day.  Gen- 
eral Glover's  brigade  marched  at  the  same  time  on 
the  east  side  of  the  river,  the  roads  being  much  better 
than  on  this  side.  I  am  at  this  moment  informed 
that  one  sloop  with  a  part  of  Patterson's  is  arrived 
and  that  the  others  are  in  sight.  They  will  imme- 
diately proceed  by  water  to  King's  Ferry,  and 
thence  take  the  shortest  route  to  you. 

I  am  pained  beyond  expression  to  inform  your 
Excellency  that  on  my  arrival  here  I  find  every  thing 
has  been  neglected  and  deranged  by  General  Putnam, 
and  that  the  two  brigades — Poor's  and  Lamed 's — 
still  remain  here  and  on  the  other  side  of  the  river 
at  Fishkill.  Colonel  Warner's  militia,  I  am  told, 
have  been  drawn  to  Peekskill  to  aid  in  an  expedition 


112  Alexander  Hamilton 

against  New  York,  which,  it  seems,  is  at  this  time 
the  hobby-horse  with  General  Putnam.  Not  the 
least  attention  has  been  paid  to  my  order  in  your 
name  for  a  detachment  of  one  thousand  men  from 
the  troops  hitherto  stationed  at  this  post.  Every 
thing  is  sacrificed  to  the  whim  of  taking  New 
York. 

The  two  brigades  of  Poor  and  Lamed  it  appears 
would  not  march  for  want  of  money  and  necessaries ; 
several  of  the  regiments  having  received  no  pay  for 
six  or  eight  months  past.  There  has  been  a  high 
mutiny  among  the  former  on  this  account,  in  which 
a  captain  killed  a  man,  and  was  himself  shot  by  his 
comrade.  These  difficulties,  for  want  of  proper 
management,  have  stopped  the  troops  from  proceed- 
ing. Governor  Clinton  has  been  the  only  man  who 
has  done  any  thing  towards  removing  them;  but, 
for  want  of  General  Putnam's  co-operation,  has  not 
been  able  to  effect  it.  He  has  only  been  able  to  pre- 
vail with  Lamed 's  brigade  to  agree  to  march  to 
Goshen,  in  hopes,  by  getting  them  once  on  the  go, 
to  get  them  to  continue  their  march.  On  coming 
here  I  immediately  sent  for  Colonel  Bailey,  who  now 
commands  Lamed 's  brigade.  Have  gotten  him  to 
engage  for  carrying  the  brigade  on  to  headquarters 
as  fast  as  possible.  This  he  expects  to  effect  by  mean 
of  five  or  six  thousand  dollars,  which  Governor  Clin- 
ton was  kind  enough  to  borrow  for  me,  and  which 
Colonel  Bailey  thinks  will  keep  the  men  in  good 
humor  till  they  join  you.  They  marched  this  morn- 
ing towards  Goshen. 

I  shall  as  soon  as  possible  see  General  Poor,  and 


Private  Correspondence  113 

do  every  thing  in  my  power  to  get  him  along,  and 
hope  I  shall  be  able  to  succeed. 

The  plan  I  before  laid  having  been  totally  de- 
ranged a  new  one  has  become  necessary.  It  is  now 
too  late  to  send  Warner's  militia.  By  the  time  they 
get  to  you  their  term  of  service  would  be  out.  The 
motive  for  sending  them,  which  was  to  give  you  a 
speedy  reinforcement,  has  by  the  past  delay  been 
superseded. 

By  Governor  Clinton's  advice,  I  have  sent  an  or- 
der in  the  most  emphatic  terms  to  General  Putnam 
immediately  to  dispatch  all  the  Continental  troops 
under  him  to  your  assistance  and  to  detain  the  militia 
instead  of  them. 

My  opinion  is  that  the  only  present  use  for  troops 
in  this  quarter  is  to  protect  the  country  from  the  de- 
predations of  little  plundering  parties,  and  for  carry- 
ing on  the  works  necessary  for  the  defence  of  the 
river.  Nothing  more  ought  to  be  thought  of.  'T  is 
only  wasting  time  and  misapplying  men  to  employ 
them  in  a  suicidal  parade  against  New  York,  for  in 
this  it  will  undoubtedly  terminate.  New  York  is  no 
object  if  it  could  be  taken,  and  to  take  it  would  re- 
quire more  men  than  could  be  spared  from  more 
substantial  purposes.  Governor  Clinton's  ideas  co- 
incide with  mine.  He  thinks  that  there  is  no  need 
of  more  Continental  troops  here  than  a  few  to  give  a 
spur  to  the  militia  in  working  upon  the  fortifications. 
In  pursuance  of  this  I  have  given  the  directions 
before  mentioned.  If  General  Putnam  attends  to 
them,  the  troops  under  him  may  be  with  you  nearly 
as   early   as   any   of   the   others    (though   he   has 

VOL.  IX.— 8. 


114  Alexander  Hamilton 

unluckily,  marched  them  down  to  Tarrytown),  and 
General  Glover's  brigade,  when  it  gets  up,  will  be 
more  than  sufficient  to  answer  the  true  end  of  this 
post. 

If  your  Excellency  agrees  with  me  in  opinion,  it 
will  be  well  to  send  instant  directions  to  General 
Putnam,  to  pursue  the  object  I  have  mentioned;  for 
I  doubt  whether  he  will  attend  to  any  thing  I  shall 
say,  notwithstanding  it  comes  in  the  shape  of  a 
positive  order.  I  fear,  unless  you  interpose,  the 
works  here  will  go  on  so  feebly,  for  want  of  men,  that 
they  will  not  be  completed  in  time;  whereas  it  ap- 
pears to  me  of  the  greatest  importance  they  should 
be  pushed  with  the  utmost  vigor.  Governor  Clinton 
will  do  every  thing  in  his  power.  I  wish  General 
Putnam  was  recalled  from  the  command  of  this  post, 
and  Governor  Clinton  would  accept  it.  The  bltm- 
ders  and  caprices  of  the  former  are  endless.  Believe 
me,  sir,  nobody  can  be  more  impressed  with  the  im- 
portance of  forwarding  the  reinforcements  coming 
to  you,  with  all  speed,  nor  could  any  body  have  en- 
deavored more  to  promote  it  than  I  have  done ;  but 
the  ignorance  of  some,  and  the  design  of  others,  have 
been  almost  insuperable  obstacles.  I  am  very  un- 
well; but  I  shall  not  spare  myself  to  get  things  im- 
mediately in  a  proper  train;  and  for  that  purpose 
intend,  unless  I  receive  other  orders  from  you,  to 
continue  with  the  troops  in  the  progress  of  their 
march.  As  soon  as  I  get  General  Poor's  brigade  in 
march,  I  shall  proceed  to  General  Putnam's  at  Peeks- 
kill. 


Private  Correspondence  115 

TO    WASHINGTON 

New  Windsor,  Nov.  12,  1777. 

Dear  Sir: 

I  have  been  detained  here  these  two  days,  by  a 
fever  and  violent  rheumatic  pains  throughout  my 
body.  This  has  prevented  my  being  active  in  per- 
son for  promoting  the  purposes  of  my  errand;  but  I 
have  taken  every  other  method  in  my  power,  in 
which  Governor  CHnton  has  obhgingly  given  me  all 
the  aid  he  could.  In  answer  to  my  pressing  applica- 
tion to  General  Poor  for  the  immediate  marching  of 
his  brigade,  I  was  told  they  were  under  an  operation 
for  the  itch;  which  made  it  impossible  for  them  to 
proceed  till  the  effects  of  it  were  over.  By  a  let- 
ter, however,  of  yesterday,  General  Poor  informs  me 
he  would  certainly  march  this  morning.  I  must  do 
him  the  justice  to  say,  he  appears  solicitous  to  join 
you;  and  that  I  believe  the  past  delay  is  not  owing 
to  any  fault  of  his,  but  is  wholly  chargeable  on  Gen- 
eral Putnam.  Indeed,  sir,  I  owe  it  to  the  service  to 
say,  that  every  part  of  this  gentleman's  conduct  is 
marked  with  blunder  and  negligence,  and  gives  gen- 
eral disgust. 

Parson's  brigade  will  join  you,  I  hope,  in  five  or  six 
days  from  this.  Larned's  may  do  the  same.  Poor's 
will,  I  am  persuaded,  make  all  the  haste  they  can  for 
the  future,  and  Glover's  may  be  expected  at  Fishkill 
to-night,  whence  they  will  be  pressed  forward  as  fast 
as  I  can  have  any  influence  to  make  them  go ;  but  I 
am  sorry  to  say,  the  disposition  for  marching,  in  the 
officers  and  men  in  general,  of  these  troops,  does  not 


ii6  Alexander  Hamilton 

keep  pace  with  my  wishes  or  the  exigency  of  the 
occasion.  They  have,  unfortunately,  imbibed  an 
idea  that  they  have  done  their  part  of  the  business 
of  the  campaign,  and  are  now  entitled  to  repose. 
This  and  the  want  of  pay  make  them  averse  to  a  long 
march  at  this  advanced  season. 

A  letter  from  you  to  General  Putnam,  of  the  9th, 
fell  just  now  into  my  hands.  As  it  might  possibly 
contain  something  useful  to  me,  I  took  the  liberty 
of  opening  it  and  after  reading  it,  immediately  dis- 
patched it  to  him.  If  he  has  paid  any  attention  to 
my  last  letters  to  him,  things  will  be  in  a  right  train 
for  executing  the  order  in  yours ;  but  whether  he  has 
or  not  is  a  matter  of  doubt. 

In  a  letter  from  him  just  now  received  by  Governor 
Clinton,  he  appears  to  have  been,  the  loth  instant, 
at  King's  Street,  at  the  White  Plains.  I  have  had  no 
answer  to  my  last  applications.  The  enemy  appear 
to  have  stripped  New  York  very  bare.  The  people 
there — that  is,  the  Tories,  are  in  a  very  great  fright. 
This  adds  to  my  anxiety,  that  the  reinforcements 
from  this  quarter  to  you  are  not  in  greater  forward- 
ness and  more  considerable. 

I  have  written  to  General  Gates,  informing  him  of 
the  accounts  of  the  situation  of  New  York  with  re- 
spect to  troops,  and  the  probability  of  the  force  gone 
to  Howe  being  greater  than  was  at  first  expected — 
to  try  if  this  will  not  extort  from  him  a  further  rein- 
forcement. I  don't,  however,  expect  much  from 
him;  as  he  pretends  to  have  in  view  an  expedition 
against  Ticonderoga,  to  be  undertaken  in  the  winter, 
and  he  knows  that,  under  the  sanction  of  this  idea, 


Private  Correspondence  117 

calculated  to  catch  the  Eastern  people,  he  may, 
without  censure,  retain  the  troops.  And  as  I  shall 
be  under  a  necessity  of  speaking  plainly  to  your  Ex- 
cellency, when  I  have  the  pleasure  of  seeing  you,  I 
shall  not  hesitate  to  say,  I  doubt  whether  you  would 
have  had  a  man  from  the  Northern  army,  if  the 
whole  could  have  been  kept  at  Albany  with  any  de- 
cency. Perhaps  you  will  think  me  blamable  in  not 
having  exercised  the  powers  you  gave  me,  and  given 
a  positive  order.  Perhaps  I  have  been  so ;  but,  de- 
liberately weighing  all  circumstances,  I  did  not  and 
do  not  think  it  advisable  to  do  so. 


TO    GENERAL   GATES 

FiSHKILL,  Nov.   12,  1777. 

Sir: 

Ever  since  my  arrival  in  this  quarter,  I  have  been 
endeavoring  to  collect  the  best  idea  I  could  of  the 
state  of  things  in  New  York,  in  order  the  better  to 
form  a  judgment  of  the  probable  reinforcement  gone 
to  General  Howe.  On  the  whole,  this  is  a  fact  well 
ascertained,  that  New  York  has  been  stripped  as 
bare  as  possible;  that  in  consequence  of  this,  the 
few  troops  there  and  the  inhabitants  are  under  so 
strong  apprehensions  of  an  attack,  as  almost  to 
amount  to  a  panic;  that  to  supply  the  deficiency  of 
men,  every  effort  is  making  to  excite  the  citizens  to 
arms  for  the  defence  of  the  city.  For  this  purpose, 
the  public  papers  are  full  of  addresses  to  them,  that 
plainly  speak  the  apprehensions  prevailing  on  the 
occasion. 

Hence  I  infer,  that  a  formidable  force  is  gone  to 


ii8  Alexander  Hamilton 

General  Howe.  The  calculations  made  by  those 
who  have  had  the  best  opportunities  of  judging 
carry  the  number  from  six  to  seven  thousand.  If 
so,  the  number  gone  and  going  to  General  Washing- 
ton is  far  inferior ;  five  thousand  at  the  utmost.  The 
militia  were  all  detained  by  General  Putnam  till  it 
became  too  late  to  send  them. 

The  state  of  things  I  gave  you  when  I  had  the 
pleasure  of  seeing  you,  was,  to  the  best  of  my  know- 
ledge, sacredly  true.  I  give  you  the  present  infor- 
mation, that  you  may  decide  whether  any  further 
succor  can  with  propriety  come  from  you. 

The  fleet,  with  the  troops  on  board,  sailed  out  of 
the  Hook  the  5th  instant.  This  circumstance  de- 
monstrates, beyond  the  possibility  of  doubt,  that 
it  is  General  Howe's  fixed  intention  to  endeavor  to 
hold  Philadelphia  at  all  hazards;  and  removes  all 
danger  of  any  further  operations  up  the  North  River 
this  winter.  Otherwise,  Sir  Harry  Clinton's  move- 
ment, at  this  advanced  season,  is  altogether  inex- 
plicable. 

If  you  can  with  propriety  afford  any  further  as- 
sistance, the  most  expeditious  manner  of  conveying 
it  will  be  to  acquaint  General  Putnam  of  it,  that  he 
may  send  on  the  troops  with  him,  to  be  replaced  by 
them.  You,  sir,  best  know  the  uses  to  which  the 
troops  with  you  are  to  be  applied,  and  will  determine 
accordingly.  I  am  certain  it  is  not  his  Excellency's 
wish  to  frustrate  any  plan  you  may  have  in  view  for 
the  benefit  of  the  service,  so  far  as  it  can  possibly  be 
avoided,  consistent  with  a  due  attention  to  more  im- 
portant objects. 


Private  Correspondence  119 

TO    WASHINGTON 
Mr.  Kennedy's  House,  Peekskill,  Nov.  15,  1777. 

Sir: 

I  arrived  at  this  place  last  night,  and  unfortu- 
nately find  myself  unable  to  proceed  any  further. 
Imagining  I  had  gotten  the  better  of  my  complaint, 
which  confined  me  at  Governor  Clinton's,  and  anxious 
to  be  about  attending  to  the  march  of  the  troops,  the 
day  before  yesterday  I  crossed  the  ferry,  in  order  to 
fall  in  with  General  Glover's  brigade,  which  was  on 
its  march  from  Poughkeepsie  to  Fishkill.  I  did  not, 
however,  see  it  myself,  but  received  a  letter  from 
Colonel  Shepherd,  who  commands  the  brigade,  in- 
forming me  he  would  be  last  night  at  Fishkill  and  this 
night  at  King's  Ferry.  Wagons,  etc.,  are  provided 
on  the  other  side  for  his  accommodation,  so  that  there 
need  be  no  delay  but  what  is  voluntary,  and  I  believe 
Colonel  Shepherd  is  as  well  disposed  as  could  be 
wished  to  hasten  his  march.  General  Poor's  brigade 
crossed  the  ferry  the  day  before  yesterday.  Two 
York  regiments — Courtland's  and  Livingston's — are 
with  them.  They  were  unwilling  to  be  separated 
from  the  brigade  and  the  brigade  from  them.  Gen- 
eral Putnam  was  unwilling  to  keep  them  with  him; 
and  if  he  had  consented  to  do  it,  the  regiments  to 
replace  them  would  not  join  you  within  six  days 
as  soon  as  these.  The  troops  now  remaining  with 
General  Putnam  will  amount  to  about  the  number 
you  intended,  though  they  are  not  exactly  the  same. 
He  has  detached  Colonel  Charles  Webb's  regiment  to 
you.  He  says  the  troops  with  him  are  not  in  a  con- 
dition to  march,  being  destitute  of  shoes,  stockings. 


I20  Alexander  Hamilton 

and  other  necessaries;  but  I  believe  the  true  reasons 
of  his  being  unwilling  to  pursue  the  mode  pointed 
out  by  you  were  his  aversion  to  the  York  troops  and 
his  desire  to  retain  General  Parsons  with  him. 


TO   GENERAL   PUTNAM 

December  9,  1777. 

Sir: 

I  cannot  forbear  confessing  that  I  am  astonished 
and  alarmed  beyond  measure  to  find  that  all  his  Ex- 
cellency's views  have  been  hitherto  frustrated,  and 
that  no  single  step  of  those  I  mentioned  to  you  has 
been  taken  to  afford  him  the  aid  he  absolutely  stands 
in  need  of,  and  by  delaying  which  the  cause  of  Amer- 
ica is  put  to  the  utmost  conceivable  hazard.  I  so 
fully  explained  to  you  the  general's  situation  that  I 
could  not  entertain  a  doubt  that  you  would  make  it 
the  first  object  of  your  attention  to  reinforce  him 
with  that  speed  the  exigency  of  affairs  demanded,  but 
I  am  sorry  to  say  he  will  have  too  much  reason  to 
think  other  objects — in  comparison  with  that,  in- 
significant— have  been  uppermost.  I  speak  freely 
and  emphatically,  because  I  tremble  at  the  conse- 
quence of  the  delay  that  has  happened.  General 
Clinton's  reinforcement  is  probabl}^  by  this  time  with 
Mr.  Howe.  This  will  give  him  a  decisive  superiority 
over  our  army.  What  may  be  the  issue  of  such  a 
state  of  things  I  leave  to  the  feelings  of  every  friend 
to  his  country  capable  of  foreseeing  consequences. 
My  expressions  may  perhaps  have  more  warmth 
than  is  altogether  proper,  but  they  proceed  from  the 


Private  Correspondence  121 

overflowing  of  my  heart,  in  a  matter  where  I  con- 
ceive this  continent  essentially  interested.  I  wrote 
to  you  from  Albany  and  desired  you  would  send  a 
thousand  Continental  troops  of  those  first  proposed 
to  be  left  with  you.  This  I  understand  has  not  been 
done.  How  the  non-compliance  can  be  answered 
to  General  Washington  you  can  best  determine.  I 
now,  sir,  in  the  most  explicit  terms,  by  his  Excel- 
lency's authority,  give  it  as  a  positive  order  from 
him,  that  all  the  Continental  troops  under  your  com- 
mand may  be  immediately  marched  to  King's  Ferry, 
there  to  cross  the  river  and  hasten  to  reinforce  the 
army  under  him.  The  Massachusetts  militia  are  to 
be  detained  instead  of  them  until  the  troops  coming 
from  the  northward  arrive.  When  they  do  they  will 
replace,  as  far  as  I  am  instructed,  the  troops  you 
shall  send  away  in  consequence  of  this  requisition. 
The  general's  idea  of  keeping  troops  this  way  does 
not  extend  farther  than  covering  the  country  from 
any  little  irruptions  of  small  parties  and  carrying  on 
the  works  necessary  for  the  security  of  the  river.  As 
to  attacking  New  York,  that  he  thinks  ought  to  be 
out  of  the  question  at  present.  If  men  could  be 
spared  from  the  other  really  necessary  objects,  he 
would  have  no  objection  to  attempting  a  diversion 
by  way  of  New  York,  but  nothing  further.  As  the 
times  of  the  Massachusetts  and  New  Hampshire  mili- 
tia will  soon  expire,  it  will  be  proper  to  call  in  time 
for  a  reinforcement  from  Connecticut.  Governor 
Clinton  will  do  all  in  his  power  to  promote  objects 
in  which  the  state  he  commands  in  is  so  immedi- 
ately concerned.     Generals  Glover's  and  Patterson's 


122  Alexander  Hamilton 

brigades  are  on  their  way  down.  The  number  of 
Continental  troops  necessary  for  this  post  will  be 
furnished  out  of  them.  I  cannot  but  have  the  fullest 
confidence  you  will  use  your  utmost  exertions  to 
execute  the  business  of  this  letter.  And  I  am,  with 
great  respect,  sir,  yotir  most  obedient  servant.' 


TO    GOVERNOR   GEORGE    CLINTON  ^ 

Headquarters,  Feb.  13,  1778. 

Dear  Sir: 

I  did  myself  the  honor  of  writing  to  you  imme- 
diately after  my  arrival  at  headquarters,  in  answer 
to  two  letters  I  found  here  from  you. 

There  is  a  matter  which  often  obtrudes  itself  upon 
my  mind,  and  which  requires  the  attention  of  every 
person  of  sense  and  prudence  among  us — I  mean  a 
degeneracy  of  representation  in  the  great  council  of 
America.  It  is  a  melancholy  truth,  sir,  the  effects  of 
which  we  daily  see  and  feel,  that  there  is  not  so  much 
wisdom  in  a  certain  body  as  there  ought  to  be,  and 
as  the  success  of  our  affairs  absolutely  demands. 
Many  members  of  it  are,  no  doubt,  men  in  every  re- 
spect fit  for  the  trust,  but  this  cannot  be  said  of  it  as 
a  body.  Folly,  caprice,  a  want  of  foresight,  com- 
prehension, and  dignity  characterize  the  general  tenor 

1  Reprinted  from  Hamilton's  History  of  the  Republic,  {.,  p.  348. 

2  I  owe  this  and  the  other  letters  to  be  given  subsequently  from  the 
Clinton  papers,  to  the  kindness  of  Mr.  Henry  A.  Homes,  State  Librarian 
at  Albany,  and  to  the  late  Judge  Clinton,  editor  of  the  Clinton  papers. 
This  letter  was  published  by  the  New  York  Herald  in  a  pamphlet  en- 
titled "Clinton  Correspondence,"  in  1842,  and  is  now  reprinted  from 
the  Clinton  papers  in  the  possession  of  the  State  of  New  York. 


Private  Correspondence  123 

of  their  action.  Of  this,  I  dare  say,  you  are  sensi- 
ble, though  you  have  not,  perhaps,  so  many  oppor- 
tunities of  knowing  it  as  I  have.  Their  conduct,  with 
respect  to  the  army  especially,  is  feeble,  indecisive, 
and  improvident — insomuch  that  we  are  reduced 
to  a  more  terrible  situation  than  you  can  conceive. 
False  and  contracted  views  of  economy  have  pre- 
vented them,  though  repeatedly  urged  to  it,  from 
making  that  provision  for  officers  which  was  requisite 
to  interest  them  in  the  service,  which  has  produced 
such  carelessness  and  indifference  to  the  service  as 
is  subversive  to  every  officer-like  quality.  They 
have  disgusted  the  army  by  repeated  instances  of  the 
most  whimsical  favoritism  in  their  promotions,  and 
by  an  absurd  prodigality  of  rank  to  foreigners  and  to 
the  meanest  staff  of  the  army.  They  have  not  been 
able  to  summon  resolution  enough  to  withstand  the 
impudent  importunity  and  vain  boasting  of  foreign 
pretenders,  but  have  manifested  such  a  ductility  and 
inconsistency  in  their  proceedings  as  will  warrant 
the  charge  of  suffering  themselves  to  be  bullied  by 
every  petty  rascal  who  comes  armed  with  ostenta- 
tious pretensions  of  military  merit  and  experience. 
Would  you  believe  it,  sir,  it  is  become  almost  pro- 
verbial in  the  mouths  of  the  French  officers  and 
other  foreigners,  that  they  have  nothing  more  to  do 
to  obtain  whatever  they  please  than  to  assume  a  high 
tone  and  assert  their  own  merit  with  confidence  and 
perseverance  ?  These  things  wound  my  feelings  as  a 
Republican  more  than  I  can  express,  and  in  some 
degree  make  me  contemptible  in  my  own  eyes. 
By  injudicious  changes  and  arrangements  in  the 


124  Alexander  Hamilton 

middle  of  a  campaign,  they  have  exposed  the  army 
frequently  to  temporary  want,  and  to  the  danger  of 
dissolution  from  absolute  famine.  At  this  very  day 
there  are  complaints  from  the  whole  line  of  having 
been  three  or  four  days  without  provisions;  deser- 
tions have  been  immense,  and  strong  features  of 
mutiny  begin  to  show  themselves.  It  is  indeed  to 
be  wondered  at  that  the  soldiery  have  manifested  so 
unparalleled  a  degree  of  patience  as  they  have.  If 
effectual  measures  are  not  speedily  adopted  I  know 
not  how  we  shall  keep  the  army  together  or  make 
another  campaign. 

I  omit  saying  any  thing  of  the  want  of  clothing  for 
the  army.  It  may  be  disputed  whether  more  could 
have  been  done  than  has  been  done. 

If  you  look  into  their  conduct  in  the  civil  line  you 
will  equally  discover  a  deficiency  of  energy,  dignity, 
and  extensiveness  of  views;  but  of  this  you  can  bet- 
ter judge  than  myself,  and  it  is  unnecessary  to  par- 
ticularize. 

America  once  had  a  representation  that  would  do 
honor  to  any  age  or  nation.  The  present  falling  off 
is  very  alarming  and  dangerous.  What  is  the  cause? 
or  how  is  it  to  be  remedied? — are  questions  that  the 
welfare  of  these  States  requires  should  be  well  at- 
tended to.  The  great  men  who  composed  our  first 
council ;  are  they  dead,  have  they  deserted  the  cause, 
or  what  has  become  of  them  ?  Very  few  are  dead  and 
still  fewer  have  deserted  the  cause;  they  are  all,  ex- 
cept the  few  who  still  remain  in  Congress,  either  in 
the  field  or  in  the  civil  offices  of  their  respective 
States ;  for  the  greater  part  are  engaged  in  the  latter. 


Private  Correspondence  125 

The  only  remedy  then  is  to  take  them  out  of  these 
employments  and  return  them  to  the  place  where 
their  presence  is  infinitely  more  important. 

Each  State,  in  order  to  promote  its  own  external 
government  and  prosperity,  has  selected  its  best 
members  to  fill  the  offices  within  itself,  and  conduct 
its  own  affairs.  Men  have  been  fonder  of  the  emolu- 
ments and  conveniences  of  being  employed  at  home; 
and  local  attachment  falsely  operating  has  made 
them  more  provident  for  the  particular  interests  of 
the  State  to  which  they  belonged,  than  for  the  com- 
mon interests  of  the  Confederacy.  This  is  a  most 
pernicious  mistake  and  must  be  corrected.  How- 
ever important  it  is  to  give  form  and  efficiency  to 
your  interior  constitutions  and  police,  it  is  infinitely 
more  important  to  have  a  wise  general  council; 
otherwise  a  failure  of  the  measures  of  the  Union  will 
overwhelm  all  your  labors  for  the  advancement  of 
your  particular  good,  and  ruin  the  common  cause. 
You  should  not  beggar  the  councils  of  the  United 
States  to  enrich  the  administration  of  the  several 
members.  Realize  to  yourself  the  consequence  of 
having  a  Congress  despised  at  home  and  abroad.  How 
can  the  common  force  be  exerted  if  the  power  of  col- 
lecting it  be  put  in  weak,  foolish,  and  unsteady  hands  ? 
How  can  we  hope  for  success  in  otir  European  nego- 
tiations, if  the  nations  of  Europe  have  no  confidence 
in  the  wisdom  and  vigor  of  the  great  Continental 
Government?  This  is  the  object  on  which  their  eyes 
are  fixed;  hence  it  is,  America  will  derive  its  im- 
portance or  insignificance  in  their  estimation. 

Arguments  to  you,  sir,  need  not  be  multiplied  to 


126  Alexander  Hamilton 

enforce  the  necessity  of  having  a  good  general  coun- 
cil; neither  do  I  think  we  shall  very  widely  differ  as  to 
the  fact  that  the  present  is  very  far  from  being  such. 

The  sentiments  I  have  advanced  are  not  fit  for  the 
vulgar  ear ;  and  circumstanced  as  I  am  now,  I  should 
with  caution  utter  them  except  to  those  in  whom  I 
may  place  an  entire  confidence.  But  it  is  time  that 
men  of  weight  and  understanding  should  take  the 
alarm,  and  excite  each  other  to  a  proper  remedy. 
For  my  part,  my  insignificance  allows  me  to  do  no- 
thing more  than  to  hint  my  apprehensions  to  those 
of  that  description  who  are  pleased  to  favor  me  with 
their  confidence.     In  this  view  I  write  to  you. 

As  far  as  I  can  judge,  the  remarks  I  have  made  do 
not  apply  to  your  State  nearly  so  much  as  to  the 
other  twelve.  You  have  a  Duane,  a  Morris,  and, 
may  I  not  add,  a  Duer?  But  why  do  you  not  send 
your  Jay,  and  your  R.  R.  Livingston?  I  wish  Gen- 
eral Schuyler  was  either  explicitly  in  the  army  or  in 
Congress.  For  yourself,  sir,  though  I  mean  no  com- 
pliments, you  must  not  be  spared  from  where  you 
are. 

But  the  design  of  this  letter  is  not  so  much  that 
you  may  use  your  influence  in  improving  or  enlarg- 
ing your  own  representation,  as  in  discreetly  giving 
the  alarm  to  other  States  through  the  medium  of 
your  confidential  friends.  Indeed,  sir,  it  is  necessary 
there  should  be  a  change.  America  will  shake  to  its 
centre  if  there  is  not. 

You  and  I  had  some  conversation  when  I  had  the 
pleasure  of  seeing  you  last,  with  respect  to  the  exist- 
ence of  a  certain  faction.     Since  I  saw  you  I  have 


Private  Correspondence  127 

discovered  such  convincing  traits  of  the  monster  that 
I  cannot  doubt  its  reaUty  in  the  most  extensive 
sense.  I  dare  say  you  have  heard  enough  to  settle 
the  matter  in  your  own  mind.  I  beHeve  it  unmasked 
its  batteries  too  soon,  and  begins  to  hide  its  head; 
but  as  I  imagine  it  will  only  change  the  storm  to  a  sap, 
all  the  true  and  sensible  friends  to  their  country, 
and  of  course  to  a  certain  great  man,  ought  to  be 
upon  the  watch  to  counterplot  the  secret  machina- 
tions of  his  enemies.  Have  you  heard  any  thing  of 
Conway's '  history  ?  He  is  one  of  the  vermin  bred  in 
the  entrails  of  his  chimera  dire,  and  there  does  not 
exist  a  more  villainous  calumniator  and  incendiary. 
He  is  gone  to  Albany  on  a  certain  expedition/ 


TO    GOVERNOR    GEORGE   CLINTON  ^ 

Headquarters,  March  12,  1778. 

Sir: 

Captain  Coleman  delivered  me  yotir  two  letters  of 
the  5th  and  6th  instant. 

The  pleasure  I  have  in  corresponding  with  you  will 
dispose  me,  whenever  I  have  any  thing  to  communi- 
cate that  may  be  worth  your  attention,  or  that  ap- 
pears to  me  so,  to  trouble  you  with  my  sentiments. 
But  I  shall  not  expect  you  to  make  an  equal  return 
either  in  quantity  or  frequency.  You  will  in  this 
entirely  consult  your  own  convenience. 

I  had  previously  flattered  myself  that  your  ideas 

'  The  leader  of  the  intrigue  against  Washington  which  has  become 
famous  as  the  "Conway  Cabal." 

2  Endorsed  "private"  by  Governor  Clinton,  and  answered  by  him 
March  5th. 

3  From  the  Clinton  papers. 


128  Alexander  Hamilton 

and  mine  would  correspond  on  certain  matters,  and 
I  am  glad  to  find  I  was  not  mistaken.  I  doubt  not 
the  defects  of  a  certain  synod  will  appear  to  you  not 
the  subject  of  speculation  only,  but  as  disorders 
in  the  State  that  require  a  remedy,  and  will,  as  far 
as  your  influence  reaches,  contribute  to  it.  Shall  I 
speak  what  seems  to  me  a  most  melancholy  truth  ? 
It  is  this :  that  with  the  most  adequate  means  to  in- 
sure success  in  our  contest,  the  weakness  of  our  coun- 
cils will,  in  all  probability,  ruin  us.  Arrangements  on 
which  the  existence  of  the  army  depends,  and  almost 
the  possibility  of  another  campaign,  are  delayed  in 
a  most  astonishing  manner,  and  I  doubt  whether 
they  will  be  adopted  at  all. 

A  late  resolve  directs  G.  W.'  to  fix  the  number  of 
men  under  which  G.  H."  shall  not  send  any  parties 
out  of  his  lines  on  pain  of  being  treated  as  marauders. 
The  folly  of  this  is  truly  ridiculous;  but  as  there  is 
perhaps  nothing  but  folly  in  it,  it  may  be  excused 
in  them.  Another  resolve  made  for  punishing  kid- 
nappers or  persons  who  aid  the  enemy  in  carrying 
off  the  peaceable  inhabitants,  has  a  retrospective 
view  to  those  who;  have  assisted,  as  well  as  a  pro- 
spective one  to  those  who  shall  assist,  in  such  prac- 
tices. Thus  we  have  gotten  into  the  spirit  of  making 
ex  post  facto  laws,  or  rather,  violating  all  law.  An- 
other resolve  by  plain  implication  acknowledges  a 
thing  not  founded  on  fact,  which  is  very  injurious  to 
us — to  wit,  that  we  have  enlisted  prisoners  of  war. 
This  silences  all  our  complaints  against  the  enemy  for 
a  similar  practice  and  furnishes  them  with  a  damn- 

^  General  Washington.  ^  General  Howe. 


Private  Correspondence  129 

ing  answer  to  any  thing  we  can  say  on  the  subject. 
This  is  at  least  an  instance  of  folly  and  inconsidera- 
tion,  and  serves  to  prove  the  general  charge. 

These  men  seem  also  to  have  embraced  a  system 
of  infidelity.  They  have  violated  the  convention  of 
Saratoga,  and  I  have  reason  to  beUeve  the  ostensible 
motives  for  it  were  little  better  than  pretences,  that 
had  no  foimdation.  I  have  lately  seen  some  letters 
from  Burgoyne  on  the  subject.  There  was,  however, 
a  strong  temptation  for  this,  and  it  may  be  excused, 
though  I  cannot  say  the  measure  is  to  my  taste. 
Lately  a  flag  with  provisions  and  clothing  for  the 
British  prisoners  with  G.  W.'s  passport  was  seized 
at  Lancaster.  The  affair  was  attended  with  circum- 
stances of  violence  and  meanness  that  would  disgrace 
Hottentots.  Still  more  lately,  G.  W.'s  engagements 
with  G.  H.  for  an  exchange  of  prisoners  have  been 
most  shamefully  violated,  Congress  have  resolved 
that  no  exchange  shall  take  place  till  all  accounts  are 
settled  and  the  balance  due  the  U.  S.  paid.  The 
beauty  of  it  is,  on  a  fair  settlement,  we  shall  without 
doubt  be  in  Mr.  Howe's  debt;  and,  in  the  meantime, 
we  detain  his  officers  and  soldiers  as  a  security  for  the 
payment — perhaps  forever.  At  any  rate,  it  cannot 
take  place  all  next  summer. 

It  is  thought  to  be  bad  policy  to  go  into  an  ex- 
change; but,  admitting  this  to  be  true,  it  is  much 
worse  policy  to  commit  such  frequent  breaches  of 
faith  and  ruin  our  national  character.  Whatever  re- 
fined politicians  may  think,  it  is  of  great  consequence 
to  preserve  a  national  character;  and,  if  it  should 
once  seem  to  be  a  system  in  any  State  to  violate 

VOL.  IX.— Q. 


130  Alexander  Hamilton 

its  faith  whenever  it  is  the  least  inconvenient  to 
keep  it,  it  will  unquestionably  have  an  ill  effect  upon 
foreign  negotiations,  and  tend  to  bring  Government 
at  home  in  contempt,  and,  of  course,  to  destroy  its 
influence.  The  general  notions  of  justice  and  human- 
ity are  implanted  in  almost  every  human  breast 
and  ought  not  to  be  too  freely  shocked.  In  the 
present  case  the  passions  of  the  country  and  army 
are  on  the  side  of  an  exchange,  and  a  studied  attempt 
to  avoid  it  will  disgust  both  and  serve  to  make  the 
source  odious.  It  will  injure  drafting  and  recruiting, 
discourage  the  militia,  and  increase  the  discontents 
of  the  army.  The  prospects  of  hopeless  captivity 
cannot  but  be  very  disagreeable  to  men  constantly 
exposed  to  the  chance  of  it.  Those  whose  lot  it  is  to 
fall  into  it,  will  have  little  scruple  to  get  out  of  it  by 
joining  the  enemy. 

It  is  said  not  to  be  our  present  interest  to  exchange, 
because  we  shall  endeavor,  by  and  by,  to  take  ad- 
vantage of  the  enemy's  weakness  to  strike  some  de- 
cisive blow.  If  we  should  fail  in  this,  which  I  believe 
we  shall,  when  they  get  reinforced,  we  shall  not  think 
it  our  interest  to  add  to  the  strength  of  an  enemy, 
already  strong  enough,  and  so  on  ad  infinitum.  The 
truth  is,  considered  in  the  mere  view  of  barter,  it  can 
never  be  our  interest  to  exchange;  the  constitution 
of  our  army,  from  the  short  term  of  enlistments  and 
the  dependence  we  are  obliged  to  place  in  the  militia, 
are  strongly  opposed  to  it;  and  if  the  argument  of 
present  interest  be  adhered  to,  we  never  can  ex- 
change. I  may  venture  to  assert  there  never  can  be 
a  time  more  proper  than  the  present,  or,  rather,  a 


Private  Correspondence  131 

month  or  two  hence;  and  go  about  it  as  soon  as  we 
please,  the  previous  negotiations  necessary  and  other 
circumstances  will,  of  course,  procrastinate  it  for 
some  time.  And  I  would  ask  whether,  in  a  republican 
State  and  a  republican  army,  such  a  cruel  policy 
as  that  of  exposing  those  men  who  are  foremost  in 
defense  of  their  country,  to  the  miseries  of  hopeless 
captivity,  can  succeed? 

For  my  own  part,  I  have  so  much  of  the  milk  of 
humanity  in  me,  that  I  abhor  such  Neronian  maxims ; 
and  I  look  upon  the  old  proverb  that  honesty  is  the 
best  policy  to  be  so  generally  true,  that  I  can  never 
expect  any  good  from  a  system  at  real  deviation  from 
it;  and  I  never  can  adopt  the  reasonings  of  some 
American  politicians,  deducible  from  their  practice, 
that  no  regard  is  to  be  paid  to  national  character 
or  the  rules  of  good  faith. 

I  dwell  upon  the  faults  of  Congress,  because  I  think 
they  strike  at  the  vitals  of  our  opposition  and  of  our 
future  prosperity;  and  with  this  idea,  I  cannot  but 
wish  that  every  gentleman  of  influence  in  the  country 
should  think  with  me. 

We  have  nothing  new  in  camp,  save  that  Capt. 
Barry,  late  of  a  continental  frigate,  has  destroyed, 
with  a  few  gun-boats,  two  large  ships  belonging  to 
the  enemy,  laden  with  forage  from  Rhode  Island. 
He  also  took  an  armed  schooner,  which  he  has  since 
been  obliged  to  run  on  shore,  after  a  gallant  defence. 
'T  is  said  he  has  saved  her  cannon  and  stores ;  among 
the  ordnance,  four  brass  howitzers.  Some  accounts 
say  the  enemy  are  preparing  to  evacuate  Philadel- 
phia.    Sed  credat  Judceus  Apelles,  non  ego. 


132  Alexander  Hamilton 

TO    WILLIAM    DUER,    M.C 

Headquarters,  Jiine  18,  1778. 

Dear  Sir: 

I  take  the  liberty  to  trouble  you  with  a  few  hints 
on  a  matter  of  some  importance.  Baron  Steuben, 
who  will  be  the  bearer  of  this,  waits  on  Congress  to 
have  his  office  arranged  upon  some  decisive  and  per- 
manent footing.  It  will  not  be  amiss  to  be  on  your 
guard.  The  Baron  is  a  gentleman  for  whom  I  have 
a  particular  esteem,  and  whose  zeal,  intelligence,  and 
success,  the  consequence  of  both,  entitle  him  to  the 
greatest  credit.  But  I  am  apprehensive,  with  all  his 
good  qualities,  that  a  fondness  for  power  and  im- 
portance, natural  to  every  man,  may  lead  him  to 
wish  for  more  extensive  prerogatives  in  his  depart- 
ment than  it  will  be  for  the  good  of  the  service  to 
grant.  I  should  be  sorry  to  excite  any  prejudice 
against  him  on  this  account  ;  perhaps  I  may  be 
mistaken  in  my  conjecture.  The  caution  I  give  will 
do  no  harm  if  I  am;  if  I  am  not,  it  may  be  useful. 
In  either  case,  the  Baron  deserves  to  be  considered  as 
a  valuable  man  and  treated  with  all  the  deference 
which  good  policy  will  warrant. 

On  the  first  institution  of  this  office,  the  General 
allowed  him  to  exercise  more  ample  powers  than 
would  be  proper  for  a  continuance.  They  were 
necessary  in  the  commencement,  to  put  things  in  a 
train  with  a  degree  of  dispatch  which  the  exigency 
of  our  affairs  required;  but  it  has  been  necessary  to 

'  Baron  Steuben  was  appointed  Inspector-general  of  the  Army  May 
5,  1778,  and  this  letter,  which  is  undated  in  the  edition  of  1850,  refers 
to  that  ofi&ce. 


Private  Correspondence  133 

restrain  them,  even  earlier  than  was  intended.  The 
novelty  of  the  office  excited  questions  about  its 
boundaries;  the  extent  of  its  operations  alarmed  the 
officers  of  every  rank  for  their  own  rights.  Their 
jealousies  and  discontents  were  rising  fast  to  a  height 
that  threatened  to  overturn  the  whole  plan.  It  be- 
came necessary  to  apply  a  remedy.  The  General  has 
delineated  the  functions  of  the  Inspectorship  in  gen- 
eral orders,  a  copy  of  which  will  be  sent  to  Congress. 
The  plan  is  good  and  satisfactory  to  the  army  in 
general. 

It  may  be  improved,  but  it  will  be  tmsafe  to  deviate 
essentially  from  it.  It  is  of  course  the  General's 
intention,  that  whatever  regulations  are  adopted 
by  him,  should  undergo  the  revision  and  receive 
the  sanction  of  Congress  ;  but  it  is  indispensable,  in 
the  present  state  of  our  army,  that  he  should  have  the 
power,  from  time  to  time,  to  introduce  and  authorize 
the  reformations  necessary  in  our  system.  It  is  a 
work  which  must  be  done  by  occasional  and  gradual 
steps,  and  ought  to  be  intrusted  to  a  person  on  the 
spot  who  is  thoroughly  acquainted  with  all  our  de- 
fects and  has  judgment  sufficient  to  adopt  the  pro- 
gressive remedies  they  require.  The  plan  established 
by  Congress,  on  a  report  of  the  Board  of  War,  when 
Conway  was  appointed,  appears  to  me  exception- 
able in  many  respects.  It  makes  the  Inspector 
independent  of  the  Commander-in-chief ;  confers 
powers  which  would  produce  universal  opposition  in 
the  army ;  and,  by  making  the  previous  concurrence 
of  the  Board  of  War  requisite  to  the  introduction  of 
every  regiilation  which  should  be  foimd  necessary, 


134  Alexander  Hamilton 

opens  such  a  continual  source  of  delay  as  would 
defeat  the  usefulness  of  the  institution.  Let  the 
Commander-in-chief  introduce,  and  the  Legislature 
afterwards  ratify  or  reject,  as  they  think  proper. 
Perhaps  you  will  not  differ  much  from  me  when  I 
suppose,  that,  so  far  as  relates  to  the  Board  of  War, 
the  former  scheme  was  a  brat  of  faction,  and  therefore 
ought  to  be  renounced. 

There  is  one  thing  which  the  Baron  has  much  at 
heart,  which,  in  good  policy,  he  can  by  no  means  be 
indulged  in ;  it  is  the  power  of  enforcing  that  part  of 
discipline  which  we  understand  by  subordination  or 
an  obedience  to  orders.  This  power  can  only  be 
properly  lodged  with  the  Commander-in-chief,  and 
would  inflame  the  whole  army  if  put  into  other  hands. 
Each  captain  is  vested  with  it  in  his  company,  each 
colonel  in  his  regiment,  each  general  in  his  particular 
command,  and  the  Commander-in-chief  in  the  whole. 

When  I  began  this  letter  I  did  not  intend  to  meddle 
with  any  other  subject  than  the  inspectorship,  but 
one  just  comes  into  my  head  which  appears  to  me  of 
no  small  importance.  The  goodness  or  force  of  an 
army  depends  as  much,  perhaps  more,  on  the  compo- 
sition of  the  corps  which  form  it,  as  on  its  collective 
number.  The  composition  is  good  or  bad — not  only 
to  the  quality  of  the  men,  but  in  proportion  to  the 
completeness  or  incompleteness  of  a  corps  in  respect 
to  numbers.  A  regiment,  for  instance,  with  a  full 
complement  of  officers  and  fifty  or  sixty  men,  is  not 
half  so  good  as  a  company  with  the  same  number  of 
men.  A  colonel  will  look  upon  such  a  command  as 
unworthy  his  ambition,  and  will  neglect  and  despise 


Private  Correspondence  135 

it:  a  captain  would  pride  himself  in  it,  and  take  all 
the  pains  in  his  power  to  bring  it  to  perfection.  In 
one  case  we  shall  see  a  total  relaxation  of  discipline 
and  negligence  of  every  thing  that  constitutes  mili- 
tary excellence ;  in  the  other  there  will  be  attention, 
energy,  and  every  thing  that  can  be  wished.  Opinion, 
whether  well-  or  ill-founded,  is  the  governing  princi- 
ple of  human  affairs.  A  corps  much  below  its  estab- 
lishment, comparing  what  it  is  with  what  it  ought  to 
be,  loses  all  confidence  in  itself,  and  the  whole  army 
loses  that  confidence  and  emulation  which  are  essen- 
tial to  success.  These,  and  a  thousand  other  things 
that  will  occur  to  you,  make  it  evident  that  the  most 
important  advantages  attend  the  having  complete 
corps,  and  proportional  disadvantages  the  reverse. 
Ten  thousand  men,  distributed  into  twenty  imperfect 
regiments,  will  not  have  the  efficiency  of  the  same 
number  in  half  the  number  of  regiments.  The  fact 
is,  with  respect  to  the  American  army,  that  the  want 
of  discipline  and  other  defects  we  labor  under,  are  as 
much  owing  to  the  skeleton  state  of  our  regiments  as 
to  any  other  cause.     What  then? 

Have  we  any  prospects  of  filling  our  regiments? 
My  opinion  is,  that  we  have  nearly  arrived  at  our  ne 
plus  ultra.  If  so,  we  ought  to  reduce  the  number  of 
corps,  and  give  them  that  substance  and  consistency 
which  they  want,  by  incorporating  them  together,  so 
as  to  bring  them  near  their  establishment.  By  this 
measure  the  army  would  be  infinitely  improved;  and 
the  State  would  be  saved  the  expense  of  maintaining 
a  ntmiber  of  superfluous  officers. 

In  the  present  condition  of  our  regiments,  they  are 


13^  Alexander  Hamilton 

incapable  even  of  performing  their  common  exercises 
without  joining  two  or  more  together:  an  expedient 
reluctantly  submitted  to  by  those  officers  who  see 
themselves  made  second  in  command  of  a  battalion, 
instead  of  first,  as  their  commission  imports;  which 
happens  to  every  younger  colonel  whose  regiment  is 
united  with  that  of  an  elder. 

What  would  be  the  inconveniencies,  while  the 
officers  who  remain  in  command,  and  who  might  be 
selected  from  the  others  on  account  of  superior  merit, 
would  applaud  themselves  in  the  preference  given 
them,  and  rejoice  at  a  change  which  confers  such 
additional  consequence  on  themselves? 

Those  who  should  be  excluded  by  the  measure 
would  return  home  discontented,  and  make  a  noise, 
which  would  soon  subside  and  be  forgotten  among 
matters  of  greater  moment.  To  quiet  them  still 
more  effectually,  if  it  should  be  thought  necessary, 
they  might  be  put  upon  half -pay  for  a  certain  time. 

If,  on  considering  this  matter,  you  should  agree 
with  me  in  sentiment,  it  were  to  be  wished  the  scheme 
could  be  immediately  adopted,  while  the  arrange- 
ment now  in  hand  is  still  unexecuted.  If  it  is  made, 
it  will  be  rather  inconvenient,  immediately  after,  to 
unhinge  and  throw  the  whole  system  again  afloat. 

When  you  determined  upon  your  last  arrangement, 
you  did  not  know  what  success  the  different  States 
might  have  had  in  draughting  and  recruiting.  It 
would  then  have  been  improper  to  reduce  the  number 
of  corps,  as  proposed.  We  have  now  seen  their  suc- 
cess: we  have  no  prospect  of  seeing  the  regiments 
filled;  we  should  reduce  them. 


Private  Correspondence  137 

TO    LAFAYETTE 

25th  June,  1778. 

Sir: 

We  find,  on  onr  arrival  here,  that  the  intelHgence 
received  on  the  road  is  true.  The  enemy  have  all 
filed  off  from  Allen  Town,  on  the  Monmouth  road. 
Their  rear  is  said  to  be  a  mile  westward  of  Lawrence 
Taylor's  tavern,  six  miles  from  Allen  Town.  General 
Maxwell  is  at  Hyde's  Town,  about  three  miles  from 
this  place.  General  Dickinson  is  said  to  be  on  the 
enemy's  right  fiank;  but  where,  cannot  be  told.  We 
can  hear  nothing  certain  of  General  Scott ;  but,  from 
circumstances,  he  is  probably  at  Allen  Town.  We 
shall,  agreeably  to  your  request,  consider  and  appoint 
some  proper  place  of  rendezvous  for  the  union  of  our 
force,  which  we  shall  communicate  to  Generals  Max- 
well and  Scott,  and  to  yourself.  In  the  meantime,  I 
would  recommend  to  you  to  move  toward  this  place 
as  soon  as  the  convenience  of  your  men  will  permit. 
I  am  told  that  Colonel  Morgan  is  on  the  enemy's  right 
flank.  We  had  a  slight  skirmish  with  their  rear  this 
forenoon,  at  Robert  Montgomery's,  on  the  Monmouth 
road,  leading  from  Allen  Town.  We  shall  see  Gen- 
eral Maxwell  immediately,  and  you  will  hear  from  us 
again.     Send  this  to  the  General  after  reading  it. 

Doctor  Stile's  House,  Cranbury  Town,  9  o'clock. 

We  are  just  informed  that  General  Scott  passed  by 
Hooper's  tavern,  five  miles  from  Allen  Town,  this 
afternoon,  at  five  o'clock. 


138  Alexander  Hamilton 


TO    WASHINGTON 


Robin's  Tavern,  8  miles  from  Allen  Town, 
12  o'clock,  June  26,  1778. 

Sir: 

We  have  halted  the  troops  at  this  place„  The 
enemy,  by  our  last  reports,  were  four  miles  from  this 
(that  is,  their  rear),  and  had  passed  the  road  which 
turns  off  toward  South  Amboy,  which,  determines 
their  route  toward  Shrewsbury.  Our  reason  for 
halting,  is  the  extreme  distress  of  the  troops  for  want 
of  provisions.  General  Wayne's  detachment  is  al- 
most starving,  and  seems  both  unwilling  and  unable 
to  march  further  till  they  are  supplied.  If  we  do  not 
receive  an  immediate  supply,  the  whole  purpose  of 
our  detachment  must  be  frustrated. 

This  morning  we  missed  doing  any  thing,  from  a 
deficiency  of  intelligence.  On  my  arrival  at  Cran- 
bury  yester-evening,  I  proceeded,  by  desire  of  the 
Marquis,  immediately  to  Hyde's  Town  and  Allen 
Town,  to  take  measures  for  co-operating  with  the 
different  parts  of  the  detachment,  and  to  find  what 
was  doing  to  procure  intelligence.  I  found  every  pre- 
caution was  neglected ;  no  horse  was  near  the  enemy, 
nor  could  be  heard  of  till  late  in  the  morning,  so  that 
before  we  could  send  out  parties  and  get  the  necessary 
information,  they  were  in  full  march:  and  as  they 
have  marched  pretty  expeditiously,  we  should  not  be 
able  to  come  up  with  them  during  the  march  of  the 
day,  if  we  did  not  suffer  the  impediment  we  do,  on  the 
score  of  provisions.  We  are  entirely  at  a  loss  where 
the  army  is,  which  is  no  inconsiderable  check  to  our 
enterprise.     If  the  army  is  wholly  out  of  supporting 


Private  Correspondence  139 

distance,  we  risk  the  total  loss  of  the  detachment  in 
making  an  attack. 

If  the  army  will  countenance  us,  we  may  do  some- 
thing clever.  We  feel  our  personal  honor,  as  well  as 
the  honor  of  the  army,  and  the  good  of  the  service, 
interested;  and  are  heartily  desirous  to  attempt 
whatever  the  disposition  of  our  men  will  second,  and 
prudence  authorize.  It  is  evident  the  enemy  wish 
to  avoid,  not  to  engage  us. 

Desertions,  I  imagine,  have  been  pretty  consider- 
able to-day.  I  have  seen  eight  or  ten  deserters  and 
have  heard  of  many  more.  We  have  had  some  little 
skirmishing  by  detached  parties:  one  attacked  their 
rear-guard  with  a  degree  of  success,  killed  a  few,  and 
took  seven  prisoners. 

An  officer  has  just  come  in,  who  informs  that  he 
left  the  enemy's  rear  five  miles  off,  still  in  march, 
about  half  an  hour  ago.  To  ascertain  still  more 
fully  their  route,  I  have  ordered  a  fresh  party  on 
their  left,  toward  the  head  of  their  column.  They 
have  three  brigades  in  rear  of  their  baggage. 


TO   WASHINGTON 

Jirne  28,  1778. 

Sir: 

The  result  of  what  I  have  seen  and  heard,  concern- 
ing the  enemy,  is,  that  they  have  encamped  with 
their  van  a  little  beyond  Monmouth  Court  House, 
and  their  rear  at  Manalapan's  river,  about  seven 
miles  from  this  place.  Their  march  to-day  has  been 
very  judiciously  conducted; — their  baggage  in  front, 


I40  Alexander  Hamilton 

and  their  flying  army  in  the  rear,  with  a  rear-guard 
of  one  thousand  men  about  four  hundred  paces 
from  the  main  body.  To  attack  them  in  this  situa- 
tion, without  being  supported  by  the  whole  army, 
would  be  folly  in  the  extreme.  If  it  should  be 
thought  advisable  to  give  the  necessary  support,  the 
whole  army  can  move  to  some  position  near  the 
enemy's  left  flank,  which  would  put  them  in  a  very 
awkward  situation,  with  so  respectable  a  body  in 
their  rear ;  and  it  would  put  it  out  of  their  power  to 
turn  either  flank,  should  they  be  so  disposed.  Their 
left  is  strongly  posted,  and  I  am  told  their  right  also. 
By  some  accounts  one  part  of  their  army  lies  on  the 
road  leading  from  the  Monmouth  road  to  South  Am- 
boy.  It  is  not  improbable  that  South  Amboy  may 
be  the  object. 

I  had  written  thus  far  when  your  letter  to  the 
Marquis  arrived.  This  puts  the  matter  on  a  totally 
different  footing.  The  detachment  will  march  to- 
morrow morning  at  three  o'clock  to  English  Town. 


TO   ELIAS   BOUDINOT  ^ 

July  5,  1778. 

Dear  Sir: 

We  have  made  another  detachment  of  a  thousand 
men  under  General  Wayne,  and  formed  all  the  de- 
tached troops  into  an  advanced  corps,  imder  the 

'  The  distinguished  New  Jersey  patriot  and  statesman;  at  this  time 
member  of  Congress  and  Commissary  General  of  Prisoners;  afterwards 
President  of  Congress,  and  from  1 789-1 795  member  of  the  National 
House  of  Representatives. 


Private  Correspondence  141 

command  of  the  Marquis  de  Lafayette.  The  project 
was  that  this  advanced  corps  should  take  the  first 
opportunity  to  attack  the  enemy's  rear  on  a  march, 
to  be  supported  or  covered,  as  circumstances  should 
require,  by  the  whole  army.  General  Lee's  conduct 
with  respect  to  the  command  of  this  corps  was  truly 
childish.  According  to  the  incorrect  notions  of  our 
army,  his  seniority  would  have  entitled  him  to  the 
command  of  the  advanced  corps ;  but  he  in  the  first 
instance  declined  it  in  favor  of  the  marquis.  Some  of 
his  friends  having  blamed  him  for  doing  it,  and  Lord 
Stirling  having  shown  a  disposition  to  interpose  his 
claim.  General  Lee  very  inconsistently  reasserted  his 
pretensions.  The  matter  was  a  second  time  accom- 
modated, General  Lee,  and  Lord  Stirling  agreed  to  let 
the  Marquis  command.  General  Lee,  a  little  time 
after,  recanted  again,  and  became  very  importunate. 
The  General  (Washington),  who  had  all  along  ob- 
served the  greatest  candor  in  the  matter,  grew  tired 
of  such  fickle  behavior,  and  ordered  the  Marquis  to 
proceed. 

I  never  saw  the  General  to  so  much  advantage. 
His  coolness  and  firmness  were  admirable.  He  in- 
stantly took  measures  for  checking  the  enemy's 
advance,  and  giving  time  to  the  army,  which  was 
very  near,  to  form  and  make  a  proper  disposition. 
He  then  rode  back,  and  had  the  troops  formed  on  a 
very  advantageous  piece  of  groimd,  in  which,  and  in 
other  transactions  of  the  day.  General  Lee  and  Lord 
Stirling  rendered  very  essential  service,  and  did  them- 
selves great  honor.  America  owes  a  great  deal  to 
General  Washington  for  this  day's  work.     A  general 


142  Alexander  Hamilton 

rout,  dismay,  and  disgrace  would  have  attended  the 
whole  army  in  any  other  hands  but  his.  By  his  own 
good  sense  and  fortitude,  he  turned  the  fate  of  the 
day.  Other  officers  have  great  merit  in  performing 
their  parts  well,  but  he  directed  the  whole  with  the 
skill  of  a  master  workman.  He  did  not  hug  himself 
at  a  distance  and  leave  an  Arnold  to  win  laurels  for 
him,  but  by  his  own  presence  he  brought  order  out  of 
confusion,  animated  his  troops,  and  led  them  to  suc- 
cess. After  a  tribute  to  Wayne,  Stewart,  Ramsey, 
Olney,  Livingston,  Barber,  Cilley,  Parker,  Craig,  and 
Oswald,  the  behavior  of  the  officers  and  men  was  such 
as  could  not  easily  be  surpassed.  Our  troops,  after 
the  first  impulse  from  mismanagement,  behaved  with 
more  spirit  and  moved  with  greater  order  than  the 
British  troops.  You  know  my  way  of  thinking  of 
our  army,  and  that  I  am  not  apt  to  flatter  it.  I 
assure  you  I  never  was  pleased  with  them  before  this 
day.  What  think  you  now  of  General  Lee  ?  What- 
ever a  court  martial  may  decide,  I  shall  continue  to 
believe  and  say, — his  conduct  was  monstrous  and 
unpardonable.' 


TO    LORD    STIRLING  (?)  ' 

July  14th  (?),  1778. 

Sir: 

Since  the  giving  my  evidence  at  the  Court  Martial, 
I  have  been  endeavoring  to  recollect  more  particu- 

'  Reprinted  from  Hamilton's  History  of  the  Republic,  {.,  pp.  468  and 

478. 

2  William  Alexander,  commonly  called  in  America  Lord  Stirling,  from 
his  claim  to  that  earldom,  was  President  of  the  Court  Martial  which 
tried  Gen.  Charles  Lee  for  his  conduct  at  the  battle  of  Monmouth,  and 


Private  Correspondence  143 

larly  the  import  of  the  conversation  between  General 
Lee  and  myself,  that  happened  in  the  field  the  day  of 
the  action,  and  which  was  the  subject  of  discussion 
yesterday  before  the  court.  My  memory  will  not 
serve  me  on  the  occasion,  in  so  clear  a  manner  as  I 
could  wish ;  but  I  have  been  able  to  form  some  more 
distinct  ideas,  than  those  expressed  when  I  was  in- 
terrogated by  General  Lee,  which  I  communicate  to 
you  to  make  what  use  of  them  you  think  proper.  On 
my  making  some  remarks  to  General  Lee  which  I 
now  forget,  he  asked  me  the  following  questions,  or 
others  to  the  same  effect,  and  I  think  partly  in  the 
same  words — ''  Do  I  appear  to  you  to  have  lost  my 
senses,  or  do  I  not  possess  myself?" 

My  answer  to  these  questions  I  do  not  perfectly 
recollect,  but  I  remember  that  it  was  a  favorable  one, 
though  I  am  unable  to  determine  to  what  extent. 
It  will  be  readily  conceived  that  so  singular  and  tm- 
expected  a  question  was  not  a  little  embarrassing,  and 
it  is  possible  I  may  have  replied  in  terms  of  less  re- 
serve and  caution  than  I  should  have  done  at  a 
moment  of  greater  tranquillity  and  cooler  reflection. 
I  perfectly  remember  what  passed  in  my  mind  upon 
the  occasion  with  respect  to  General  Lee's  conduct, 
and,  from  the  most  deliberate  and  unbiassed  retro- 
spect of  it,  my  judgment  entirely  coincides  with  what 
I  then  thought.  His  answers  to  what  was  said  to 
him  were  pertinent,  and  his  behavior  had  not  the 
least  appearance  of  concern  on  the  score  of  personal 

it  is  probable  therefore  that  this  hitherto  unpublished  letter  from  the 
Hamilton  papers  in  the  State  Department,  was  addressed  to  him. 
Hamilton  testified  at  the  trial  on  July  4th  and  July  13th. 


144  Alexander  Hamilton 

security.  So  far  he  possessed  himself  and  could  not 
be  said  to  have  lost  his  senses  according  to  his  own 
expressions.  But  he  certainly  did  not  appear  to  me 
to  be  in  that  collected  state  of  mind  or  to  have  that 
kind  of  self-possession  which  is  an  essential  requisite 
of  the  General,  and  which  alone  can  enable  him  in 
critical  emergencies  to  take  his  measures  with  the 
promptitude  and  decision  they  require.  A  certain 
indecision,  improvidence,  and  hurry  of  spirits  to  the 
best  of  my  recollection  were  apparent.  These  were 
my  thoughts  at  the  time,  and  it  is  natural  for  me  to 
believe  that  what  I  replied  to  General  Lee  could  not  be 
inconsistent  with  them. 

This  letter  I  mean  as  explanatory  to  my  testimony 
of  yesterday,  founded  upon  my  reflections  since,  and 
if  it  can  be  done  with  propriety,  I  shall  be  glad  it  may 
be  admitted  by  the  court  as  such. 


TO    WASHINGTON 

Black  Point,  July  20,  1778. 

Sir: 

Inclosed  I  transmit  your  Excellency  a  letter  from 
Count  D'Estaing.^  He  has  had  the  river  sounded, 
and  finds  he  cannot  enter.  He  will  sail  for  Rhode 
Island  to-morrow  evening.  In  the  meantime,  he  is 
making  demonstrations  to  deceive  the  enemy,  and 
beget  an  opinion  that  he  intends  to  operate  in  this 

^  Coiint  D'Estaing  arrived  in  Delaware  Bay  on  July  8th,  ten  days  too 
late  to  intercept  the  British.  He  sailed  for  New  York  and  remained 
some  time  in  the  lower  bay,  unable  to  get  pilots  to  take  him  up.  He 
then  sailed  for  Newport,  where  he  arrived  July  29th.  This  letter  was 
written  just  before  D'Estaing's  departure  from  New  York. 


Private  Correspondence  145 

quarter.  He  would  sail  immediately,  but  he  awaits 
the  arrival,  or  to  hear,  of  a  frigate  which  carried  Mr. 
Gerard  to  Delaware,  and  which  he  appointed  to  meet 
him  at  Sandy  Hook ;  so  that  he  fears  that  his  sudden 
and  unexpected  departure,  before  she  arrives,  might 
cause  her  to  be  lost.  He  will  not,  however,  wait 
longer  than  to-morrow  evening.  We  have  agreed 
that  five  cannon,  fired  briskly,  shall  be  a  signal  of  his 
arrival  by  day,  and  the  same  number,  with  five  sky- 
rockets, a  signal  by  night.  In  communicating  this 
to  General  Sullivan,  the  Count  wishes  not  a  moment 
may  be  lost;  and  that  he  may  be  directed  to  have 
persons  stationed  on  the  coast,  and  intermediate 
expresses,  to  facilitate  the  communication  between 
them.  Pilots  will  be  a  material  article.  He  begs 
that  every  thing  may  be  forwarded  as  much  as  pos- 
sible ;  and  as  many  troops  collected  as  may  be.  He 
would  be  glad  if  a  detachment  could  march  from  your 
army,  or  could  be  sent  by  water ;  for  which  purpose 
he  would  send  covering  ships,  and  some  vessels  he 
has  taken,  by  way  of  transports ;  but  he  cannot  think 
of  losing  so  much  time  as  seerns  necessary.  If  the 
water  scheme  could  shorten  it,  it  would  be  a  happy 
circumstance.  He  recommends  it  to  your  attention; 
and  that  you  would  take  measures,  if  the  end  can 
be  better  answered  in  this  way,  and  meet  him  with 
information  of  the  part  he  may  have  to  act  to  exe- 
cute the  plan.  I  perceive  he  can,  with  difficulty, 
debark  four  thousand  troops;  but  he  will  try  to  do  it. 
I  hope  your  Excellency  will  excuse  my  not  being 
myself  the  bearer  of  these  particulars ;  the  end  may 
be  answered  by  letter.     Mr.  Neville  is  anxious  to  get 


VOL.  IX.— lO. 


146  Alexander  Hamilton 

on.  I  just  have  heard  of  dispatches  arrived  from 
you.  I  don't  know  but  they  may  contain  something 
new  which  may  make  the  Count  to  wish  a  good  con- 
veyance to  return  an  answer.  My  stay  until  to- 
morrow morning  may  answer  that  end.  I  shall  not 
delay  coming  forward. 


TO    WASHINGTON 

Newark,  July  23,  1778,  one  o'clock. 

Sir: 

I  wrote  to  your  Excellency  the  evening  of  the  20th 
by  Major  Neville.  I  remained  in  the  neighborhood 
of  Black  Point  till  the  afternoon  following.  The 
Count  had  received  his  expected  dispatches  from 
Congress,  and  was  to  sail,  as  I  mentioned  before,  the 
first  fair  wind.  i\t  Bnmswick  yesterday  Mr.  Cald- 
well joined  me.  He  was  immediately  from  the  Point, 
and  brought  intelligence  that  the  fleet  got  under  way 
yesterday  morning.  The  wind,  imfortimately,  has 
been  much  against  them,  which  is  so  much  the  more 
to  be  regretted,  as  they  are  rather  in  want  of  water. 

I  need  not  suggest  to  your  Excellency  that  an  es- 
sential part  of  the  Rhode  Island  plan  is  to  take  every 
possible  measure  to  watch  the  enemy's  motions  and 
to  establish  expresses  from  place  to  place,  to  give  the 
Count  instant  information  of  any  movement  among 
their  fleet.  This  will  enable  him  to  be  in  time  to 
intercept  them  should  they  attempt  to  evacuate  New 
York  while  he  is  at  Rhode  Island ;  and  will,  in  general, 
facilitate  the  intercourse  and  co-operation  between 
him  and  your  Excellency. 

I  have  nothing  new  to  commimicate  beside  what 


Private  Correspondence  147 

was  sent  by  Major  Neville  and  what  I  now  send.  All 
the  ideas  interchanged  between  the  Count  and  myself 
were  such  as  were  familiar  before  I  left  headquarters. 
He  was  to  go  to  Rhode  Island,  and,  in  connection 
with  General  Sullivan,  endeavor  to  possess  himself 
of  the  enemy's  ships  and  troops  there;  if,  on  his 
arrival,  he  had  good  reason  to  think  it  could  be 
effected  without  further  assistance.  If  not,  he  will 
be  glad  of  a  reinforcement  from  you  in  the  most 
expeditious  manner  possible.  What  manner  you 
think  will  be  most  expeditious,  you  will  adopt;  and 
if  his  aid  may  be  useful,  he  will  afford  it  as  soon  as 
he  is  informed  of  it. 

This  being  the  case,  my  immediate  presence  at 
headquarters  is  the  less  necessary  as  to  this  business ; 
and  I  hope  your  Excellency  will  indulge  me,  if  I  do 
not  make  all  the  dispatch  back  which  a  case  of 
emergency  would  require,  though  I  do  not  mean  to 
delay  more  than  a  moderate  attention  to  my  frail 
constitution  may  make  not  improper. 


TO    ELIAS    BOUDINOT 

July  26,  1778. 

Dear  Sir: 

Baron  Steuben  will  do  me  the  honor  to  deliver  you 
this.  He  waits  upon  Congress  in  a  temper  which  I 
very  much  regret — discontented  with  his  situation, 
and  almost  resolved  to  quit  the  service.  You  know 
we  have  all  the  best  opinion  of  this  gentleman's  mili- 
tary merit,  and  shall,  of  course,  consider  his  leaving 
the  army  as  a  loss  to  it.  Whether  any  expedient  can 
be  adopted  to  reconcile  difficulties  and  retain  him  in 


148  Alexander  Hamilton 

the  service,  at  the  same  time  that  no  disgust  is  given 
to  others  who  ought  not  to  be  disgusted,  I  cannot 
certainly  determine.  But  I  should  conceive  it  would 
not  be  impossible  to  find  such  an  expedient.  You 
have  no  doubt  heard  while  you  were  with  the  army 
of  the  obstacles  thrown  in  his  way  by  many  of  the 
general  officers,  excited  to  it  by  Lee  and  Mifflin,  as 
I  believe,  in  the  execution  of  the  inspectorship;  and 
you  have,  it  is  equally  probable,  heard  of  the  arrange- 
ment the  General  was  in  a  manner  obliged  to  adopt 
to  silence  the  clamors  which  existed  among  them, 
and  place  the  inspectorate  upon  a  footing  more  con- 
formable to  their  ideas.  The  opposition  the  Baron 
met  with  in  this  case  was  one  cause  of  dissatisfaction 
to  him.  In  our  march  from  Brunswick,  as  the  Baron 
was  unemployed,  and  there  was  a  great  deficiency  of 
general  officers,  notwithstanding  the  ideas  of  the 
army  are  against  giving  a  command  in  the  line  to  a 
person  vested  with  an  office  similar  to  that  held  by 
him,  the  General  ventured  to  give  him  the  temporary 
command  of  a  division  during  the  march,  in  conse- 
quence of  which  the  command  of  a  wing  devolved 
upon  him.  This  was  a  source  of  offence  to  many. 
When  we  came  near  the  White  Plains  the  General 
thanked  him  in  general  orders  for  his  services,  and 
requested  he  would  resume  the  exercise  of  his  former 
office.  To  this,  on  account  of  the  opposition  he  had 
already  met  with,  and  from  the  original  plan  for  the 
inspectorship  being  mutilated,  he  discovered  very 
great  disinclination,  and  expressed  desire  to  preserve 
a  command  in  the  line,  and,  from  some  conversation 
we  had  together,  I  apprehend  he  means  to  resign  his 


Private  Correspondence  149 

present  appointment,  if  he  cannot  have  a  command 
suited  to  his  rank  annexed  to  it.  You  will  see  by 
the  General's  letters  what  are  his  sentiments,  both 
with  respect  to  the  duties  of  the  inspectorship  and 
the  Baron's  holding  a  command  in  the  line.  Far  be 
it  from  me  to  wish  to  contravene  his  views ;  you  may 
be  assured  they  cannot  be  essentially  departed  from 
without  very  serious  inconvenience.  But  if  any 
thing  could  be  done  consistent  with  them  to  satisfy 
the  Baron,  it  would  be  extremely  desirable.  Perhaps 
the  principle  on  which  the  General's  arrangement  is 
formed  may  be  preserved,  and,  at  the  same  time,  the 
objects  of  the  inspectorship  enlarged,  so  as  to  render 
it  a  more  important  employment.  Perhaps  a  reso- 
lution of  Congress  giving  the  Baron  a  right  to  be 
employed  on  detachments  might  for  the  present 
compensate  for  the  want  of  a  permanent  command 
in  the  line  and  might  not  be  disagreeable  to  the 
officers.  You  can  sound  him  on  these  heads.  I 
need  not  caution  you  that  this  is  a  matter  of  great 
delicacy  and  importance,  and  that  every  step  taken 
in  it  ought  to  be  well  considered.^ 


TO    ELIAS    BOUDINOT 

September  (?)  1778.2 

You  know  the  feuds  and  discontents  which  have 
attended  the  departure  of  the  French  fleet  from 
Rhode  Island.  You  are  probably  not  uninformed  of 
the  imprudence  of  General  Sullivan  on  the  occasion, 

^  Reprinted  from  Hamilton's  History  of  the  Republic,  i.,  p.  488. 
2  The  French  left  New  York  for  Newport  at  the  end  of  July,  and  the 
battle  of  Quaker  Hill  was  fought  on  August  29th. 


150  Alexander  Hamilton 

particularly  in  the  orders  he  issued  charging  our  allies 
with  refusing  to  assist  us.  This  procedure  was  the 
summit  of  folly,  and  has  made  a  very  deep  impression 
upon  the  minds  of  the  Frenchmen  in  general,  who 
naturally  consider  it  as  an  unjust  and  ungenerous 
reflection  on  their  nation.  The  stigmatizing  an  ally 
in  public  orders,  and  one  with  whom  we  meant  to 
continue  in  amity,  was  certainly  a  piece  of  absurdity 
without  parallel.  The  Frenchmen  expect  the  State 
will  reprobate  the  conduct  of  their  general,  and  by 
that  means  make  atonement  for  the  stain  he  has 
attempted  to  bring  upon  French  honor.  Something 
of  this  kind  seems  necessary,  and  will  in  all  likelihood 
be  expected  by  the  Court  of  France,  but  the  manner 
of  doing  it  suggests  a  question  of  great  delicacy  and 
difficulty,  which  I  find  myself  unable  to  solve.  The 
temper  with  which  General  Sullivan  was  actuated 
was  too  analogous  to  that  which  appeared  in  the 
generality  of  those  concerned  with  him  in  the  expe- 
dition, and  to  the  sentiments  prevailing  among  the 
people.  Though  men  of  discretion  will  feel  the  im- 
propriety of  his  conduct,  yet  there  are  too  many  who 
will  be  ready  to  make  a  common  cause  with  him 
against  any  attempt  of  the  public  authority  to  con- 
vince him  of  his  presumption,  unless  the  business  is 
managed  with  great  address  and  circumspection. 
The  credit  universally  given  him  for  a  happy  and 
well-conducted  retreat,  will  strengthen  the  senti- 
ments in  his  favor,  and  give  an  air  of  cruelty  to  any 
species  of  disgrace  which  might  be  thrown  upon  a 
man,  who  will  be  thought  rather  to  deserve  the 
esteem  and  applause  of  his  country.     To  know  how 


Private  Correspondence  151 

to  strike  the  proper  string  will  require  more  skill  than 
I  am  master  of;  but  I  would  offer  this  general  hint, 
that  there  should  be  a  proper  mixture  of  the  sweet 
and  bitter  in  the  potion  which  may  be  administered. 
I  am  sure  it  will  give  you  pleasure  to  have  heard  that 
our  friend  Greene  did  ample  justice  to  himself  on  this 
expedition ;  and  that  Laurens  '  was  as  conspicuous 
as  usual.  But  while  we  celebrate  our  friends  and 
countrymen,  we  should  not  be  forgetful  of  those 
meritorious  strangers  who  are  sharing  the  toils  and 
dangers  of  America.  Without  derogating  from  the 
merit  of  the  other  French  gentlemen  who  distin- 
guished themselves,  Mr.  Toussard  ^  may  be  justly 
allowed  a  pre-eminent  place.  In  the  enthusiasm  of 
heroic  valor,  he  attempted,  single  and  unseconded, 
to  possess  himself  of  one  of  the  enemy's  field-pieces, 
which  he  saw  weakly  defended.  He  did  not  effect  it, 
and  the  loss  of  his  arm  was  the  price  of  his  bravery — 
his  horse  was  shot  under  him  at  the  same  time ;  but 
we  should  not  the  less  admire  the  boldness  of  the 
exploit  from  a  failure  in  the  success.  This  gentle- 
man has  now,  in  another  and  more  signal  instance, 
justified  the  good  opinion  I  have  long  entertained  of 
him,  and  merited  by  a  fresh  testimony  of  his  zeal, 
as  well  as  a  new  stroke  of  misfortune,  the  considera- 

^  John  Laurens,  Hamilton's  friend  and  his  comrade  on  Washington's 
staff. 

2  Colonel  Louis  Toussard  was  one  of  the  officers  who  came  out  in 
1777,  recommended  by  Silas  Deane.  For  his  gallantry  in  this  action  he 
was  brevetted  a  Lieutenant-Colonel  and  received  a  pension  from  Con- 
gress. He  afterwards  served  his  own  government  in  the  West  Indies, 
and  in  1794  returned  to  this  country.  He  was  an  officer  in  our  army 
from  1795  to  1802,  and  afterwards  French  Consul  at  New  Orleans, 
1812-1815. 


152  Alexander  Hamilton 

tion  of  Congress.  The  splendid  action  he  has  now 
performed,  and  for  which  he  has  paid  so  dear  should 
neither  be  concealed  from  the  public  eye,  nor  the 
public  patronage.  You  are  at  liberty  to  commit  this 
part  of  my  letter  to  the  press. ' 


TO 


Headquarters,  Nov.  8,  1778. 

Dear  Sir: 

I  have  received  your  favor  of  the  4th,  and  shall 
with  pleasure  commtmicate  the  intelligence  we  have 
had  at  headquarters.  On  the  morning  of  the  3d 
one  hundred  and  eight  sail  of  vessels  sailed  out  of 
the  Hook, — supposed,  from  the  best  calculations,  to 
contain  seven  or  eight  thousand  men.  They  first 
steered  to  the  eastward,  but  soon  after  changed  their 
course  and  bore  S.  E.  with  the  wind  at  N.  W.  The 
general  accounts  from  New  York  speak  of  three  dis- 
tinct embarkations :  one  for  the  West  Indies,  another 
for  Halifax,  another  for  St.  x\ugustine.  One  divi- 
sion, which  seems  to  be  best  ascertained,  contains  ten 
or  twelve  British  regiments  and  most  of  the  new 
levies,  which  probably  went  in  the  above-mentioned 
fleet. 

This  much  is  pretty  certain,  that  the  embarkation 
has  continued  since  the  departure  of  that  fleet,  which 
is  a  strong  circumstance  in  favor  of  a  general  evacua- 
tion. All  their  vessels  the  least  out  of  repair  are 
drawn  up  to  the  different  ship-yards,  and  their  re- 
pairs are  going  on  with  all  possible  vigor.  Whether 
the  merchants  are  packing  up  or  not,  is  a  point  still 

^  Reprinted  from  Hamilton's  History  of  the  Republic,  i.,  494. 


Private  Correspondence  153 

much  in  duhio;  though  we  have  several  accounts 
that  look  like  it,  but  they  are  not  so  precise  and 
certain  as  could  be  wished.  Several  bales  of  goods 
have  been  seen  on  the  wharves,  marked  for  particular 
ships.  A  deserter,  indeed,  lately  from  the  city,  in- 
sists that  he  saw  Coffin  and  Anderson  packing  up. 
This,  if  true,  would  be  decisive,  for  this  is  a  very 
considerable  house  partictilarly  attached  to  the 
army.  One  of  our  spies,  a  trusty  one  too,  writes,  the 
31st  of  October,  that  the  principal  part  of  the  sick 
from  the  hospitals  had  embarked,  but  this  stands 
almost  wholly  upon  its  own  bottom.  The  capture  of 
Jamaica  seems  to  be  a  mere  rumor.  There  are 
several  others  respecting  St.  Kitts,  Montserrat,  and 
Grenada.  The  two  former  are  said  to  have  been 
taken  by  surprise  on  a  temporary  absence  of  their 
guard-ships,  but  these  stories  were  not  improbably 
suggested  by  a  late  sudden  and  very  considerable  rise 
in  the  prices  of  rum  and  molasses.  The  former  being 
as  high  as  fourteen  or  fifteen  shillings  per  gallon. 
Large  purchases  have  been  made  of  these  articles  as 
sea  stores  for  the  troops,  and  the  speculators  in  the 
city  have  been  bidding  against  the  commissaries, 
which  better  accounts  for  the  increased  prices. 

It  is  a  question  very  undecided  in  my  mind  whether 
the  enemy  will  evacuate  or  not.  Reasoning  a  priori, 
the  arguments  seem  to  be  strongest  for  it — from  the 
exhausted  state  of  the  British  resources,  the  naked 
condition  of  their  dominions  ever^^where,  and  the 
possibility  of  a  Spanish  war.  But,  on  the  other 
hand,  naval  superiority  must  do  a  great  deal  in 
the  business.     This  I  think,  considering  all  things, 


154  Alexander  Hamilton 

appears  clearly  enough  to  be  on  the  side  of  Britain. 
The  sluggishness  of  Spain  affords  room  to  doubt  her 
taking  a  decisive  part.  The  preserving  posts  in  these 
States  will  greatly  distress  our  trade  and  give  security 
to  the  British  West  India  trade.  They  will  also 
cover  the  West  Indies,  and  restrain  any  operations  of 
ours  against  the  British  dominions  on  the  continent. 
These  considerations,  and  the  depreciated  state  of  our 
currency,  will  be  strong  inducements  to  keep  New 
York  and  Rhode  Island,  if  not  with  a  view  to  con- 
quest, with  a  view  to  temporary  advantages,  and 
making  better  terms  in  a  future  negotiation. 

From  appearances,  the  great  delay  which  attends 
the  embarkation,  the  absolute  tranquillity  of  the  post 
at  Rhode  Island,  where  there  is  no  kind  of  prepara- 
tion for  leaving  it,  and  some  other  circumstances, 
seem  to  indicate  an  intention  to  remain.  On  the 
other  hand,  besides  the  general  appearances  I  have 
already  mentioned,  their  inattention  to  the  petition 
of  the  refugees,  and  the  not  raising  new  works,  are 
strong  additional  reasons  for  going  away.  I  think  it 
most  probable,  if  they  were  determined  to  continue  a 
garrison,  that  they  would  give  most  explicit  assur- 
ance to  their  friends,  in  order  to  encourage  their  pro- 
posal and  engage  them  to  aid  in  maintaining  it.  I 
think,  also,  they  would  contract  their  work,  to  be 
better  proportioned  to  the  number  of  the  garrison, 
and  of  course  more  defensible,  by  throwing  a  chain 
of  fortifications  across  the  narrow  part  of  the 
island. 

Nothing  has  yet  been  decided  that  we  know  of 
with  respect  to  the  sentences  you  mention.     General 


Private  Correspondence  155 

Lee's  case,'  by  our  last  advices,  was  on  the  eve  of  a 
final  decision.  It  seems  he  has  made  a  strong  party 
in  Congress,  and  is  very  confident  of  having  the 
sentence  annulled.  St.  Clair's  trial  ^  was  ordered  to 
be  printed  for  the  separate  consideration  of  the 
members. 

The  depreciation  of  our  currency  really  casts  a 
gloom  on  our  prospects,  but  my  sentiments  on  the 
subject  are  rather  peculiar.  I  think,  bad  as  it  is,  it 
will  continue  to  draw  out  the  resources  of  the  country 
a  good  while  longer,  and  especially  if  the  enemy 
make  such  detachments,  of  which  there  is  hardly  a 
doubt,  as  will  oblige  them  to  act  on  the  defensive. 
This  will  make  our  public  expenditures  infinitely  less, 
and  will  allow  the  States  leisure  to  attend  to  the  ar- 
rangements of  their  finances,  as  well  as  the  country 
tranquillity  to  cultivate  its  resources. 

Any  letters  that  may  come  to  headquarters  for  you 
will  be  carefully  forwarded. 


TO    BARON    STEUBEN 

Headquarters,  Dec.  19,  1778. 

I  snatch  a  hasty  moment,  my  dear  Baron,  to 
acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  obliging  favor  of  the 
sixth.  It  came  here  while  I  was  absent  in  an  inter- 
view with  some  British  commissioners  on  the  subject 
of  an  exchange  of  prisoners,  and  was  not  delivered  to 

^  General  Charles  Lee  was  tried  by  court-martial,  for  his  conduct  at 
the  battle  at  Monmouth,  as  already  described. 

2  Major-General  Arthur  St.  Clair,  of  our  army.  He  was  tried  by 
court-martial  in  September,  1778,  for  the  evacuation  of  Ticonderoga, 
July  4,  1777,  and  honorably  acqxiitted. 


156  Alexander  Hamilton 

me  till  two  days  ago.  I  am  sorry  that  your  business 
does  not  seem  to  make  so  speedy  a  progress  as  we 
all  wish,  but  I  hope  it  will  soon  come  to  a  speedy 
termination.  I  wish  you  to  be  in  a  situation  to 
employ  yourself  usefully  and  agreeably,  and  to  con- 
tribute to  giving  our  military  constitution  that  order 
and  perfection  it  certainly  wants.  I  have  not  time 
now  to  enter  upon  some  matters  which  I  shall  take 
another  opportunity  to  give  you  my  sentiments  con- 
cerning. I  have  read  your  letter  to  Lee  with  pleas- 
ure. It  was  conceived  in  terms  which  the  offence 
merited,  and  if  he  had  had  any  feeling,  must  have 
been  felt  by  him.  Considering  the  pointedness  and 
severity  of  your  expressions,  his  answer  was  certainly 
a  very  modest  one,  and  proved  that  he  had  not  a 
violent  appetite  for  so  close  a  tHe-a-tUe  as  you  seem 
disposed  to  insist  upon.  This  evasion,  if  known  to 
the  world,  would  do  him  very  little  honor.  I  don't 
know  but  I  shall  be  shortly  at  Philadelphia,  if  so,  I 
shall  have  the  honor  of  personally  assuring  you  of  the 
perfect  respect  and  esteem  with  which  I  am,  etc. 


NARRATIVE  OF  AN  AFFAIR  OF  HONOR  BETWEEN  GEN- 
ERAL LEE  AND  COL.  LAURENS  ' 

24th  December,  1778. 

General  Lee,  attended  by  Major  Edwards,  and 
Col.  Laurens,  attended  by  Col.  Hamilton,  met  agree- 
able to  appointment  on  Wednesday  afternoon  at 
half-past  three  in  a  wood  situate  near  the  four-mile 

'  Colonel  Laurens  called  Gen.  Charles  Lee  out  for  using  disrespectful 
language  about  Washington  after  the  battle  of  Monmouth. 


Private  Correspondence  157 

stone  on  the  Point-no-point  road.  Pistols  having 
been  the  weapons  previously  fixed  upon,  and  the 
combatants  being  provided  with  a  brace  each,  it 
was  asked  in  what  manner  they  were  to  proceed. 
General  Lee  proposed  to  advance  upon  one  another 
and  each  fire  at  what  time  and  distance  he  thought 
proper.  Col.  Laurens  expressed  his  preference  of 
this  mode,  and  agreed  to  the  proposal  accordingly. 

They  approached  each  other  within  about  five  or 
six  paces  and  exchanged  a  shot  almost  at  the  same 
moment.  As  Col.  Laurens  was  preparing  for  a 
second  discharge.  General  Lee  declared  himself 
wounded.  Col.  Laurens,  as  if  apprehending  the 
wound  to  be  more  serious  than  it  proved,  advanced 
towards  the  General  to  offer  his  support.  The  same 
was  done  by  Col.  Hamilton  and  Major  Edwards  under 
a  similar  apprehension.  General  Lee  then  said  the 
wound  was  inconsiderable — less  than  he  had  imagined 
at  the  first  stroke  of  the  ball,  and  proposed  to  fire  a 
second  time.  This  was  warmly  opposed  both  by 
Col.  Hamilton  and  Major  Edwards,  who  declared  it  to 
be  their  opinion,  that  the  affair  should  terminate  as 
it  then  stood.  But  General  Lee  repeated  his  desire 
that  there  should  be  a  second  discharge,  and  Col. 
Laurens  agreed  to  the  proposal.  Col.  Hamilton  ob- 
served that  unless  the  General  was  influenced  by 
motives  of  personal  enmity,  he  did  not  think  the 
affair  ought  to  be  pursued  any  further;  but  as 
General  Lee  seemed  to  persist  in  desiring  it,  he  was 
too  tender  of  his  friend's  honor  to  persist  in  opposing 
it.  The  combat  was  then  going  to  be  renewed;  but 
Major  Edwards  again  declaring  his  opinion,  that  the 


158  Alexander  Hamilton 

affair  ought  to  end  where  it  was,  General  Lee  then 
expressed  his  confidence  in  the  honor  of  the  gentle- 
men concerned  as  seconds,  and  said  he  should  be 
willing  to  comply  with  whatever  they  should  coolly 
and  deliberately  determine.  Col.  Laurens  consented 
to  the  same. 

Col.  Hamilton  and  Major  Edwards  withdrew,  and 
conversing  awhile  on  the  subject,  still  concurred  fully 
in  the  opinion,  that,  for  the  most  urgent  reasons,  the 
affair  should  terminate  as  it  was  then  circumstanced. 
This  decision  was  communicated  to  the  parties  and 
agreed  to  by  them,  upon  which  they  immediately  re- 
turned to  town;  General  Lee  slightly  wounded  in 
the  right  side. 

During  the  interview  a  conversation  to  the  follow- 
ing purport  passed  between  General  Lee  and  Col. 
Laurens.  On  Col.  Hamilton's  intimating  the  idea  of 
personal  enmity,  as  before  mentioned,  General  Lee 
declared  he  had  none,  and  had  only  met  Col.  Laurens 
to  defend  his  own  honor;  that  Mr.  Laurens  best 
knew  whether  there  was  any  on  his  part.  Col. 
Laurens  replied,  that  General  Lee  was  acquainted 
with  the  motives  that  had  brought  him  there,  which 
were  that  he  had  been  informed,  from  what  he 
thought  good  authority,  that  General  Lee  had 
spoken  of  General  Washington  in  the  grossest  and 
most  opprobrious  terms  of  personal  abuse,  which  he, 
Col.  Laurens,  thought  himself  bound  to  resent,  as 
well  on  account  of  the  relation  he  bore  to  General 
Washington,  as  from  motives  of  personal  friendship 
and  respect  for  his  character.  General  Lee  acknow- 
ledged that  he  had  given  his  opinion  against  General 


Private  Correspondence  159 

Washington's  military  character  to  his  particular 
friends,  and  might  perhaps  do  it  again.  He  said 
every  man  had  a  right  to  give  his  sentiments  freely  of 
military  characters,  and  that  he  did  not  think  him- 
self personally  accountable  to  Col.  Laurens  for  what 
he  had  done  in  that  respect.  But  he  said  he  never 
had  spoken  of  General  Washington  in  the  terms 
mentioned,  which  he  could  not  have  done,  as  well 
because  he  had  always  esteemed  General  Washington 
as  a  man,  as  because  such  abuse  would  be  incom- 
patible with  the  character  he  would  ever  wish  to 
sustain  as  a  gentleman. 

Upon  the  whole  we  think  it  a  piece  of  justice  to  the 
two  gentlemen  to  declare,  that  after  they  met  their 
conduct  was  strongly  marked  with  all  the  politeness, 
generosity,  coolness,  and  firmness  that  ought  to 
characterize  a  transaction  of  this  nature. 

Alex.  Hamilton. 
Ev.  Edwards. 

Philad.,  Decemr.  24,  1778. 


TO  THE  HONORABLE  JOHN  JAY,  PRESIDENT  OF 
CONGRESS 

Headquarters,  March  14,  1779. 

Dear  Sir: 

Colonel  Laurens,  who  will  have  the  honor  of  de- 
livering you  this  letter,  is  on  his  way  to  South 
Carolina,  on  a  project  which  I  think,  in  the  present 
situation  of  affairs  there,  is  a  very  good  one,  and 
deserves  every  kind  of  support  and  encouragement. 
This  is  to  raise  two,  three,  or  four  battalions  of 
negroes,  with  the  assistance  of  the  government  of 


i6o  Alexander  Hamilton 

that  State,  by  contributions  from  the  owners,  in 
proportion  to  the  number  they  possess.  If  you 
should  think  proper  to  enter  upon  the  subject  with 
him,  he  will  give  you  a  detail  of  his  plan.  He  wishes 
to  have  it  recommended  by  Congress  to  the  State; 
and,  as  an  inducement,  that  they  would  engage  to 
take  their  battalions  into  Continental  pay. 

It  appears  to  me  that  an  expedient  of  this  kind,  in 
the  present  state  of  Southern  affairs,  is  the  most 
rational  that  can  be  adopted,  and  promises  very 
important  advantages.  Indeed,  I  hardly  see  how  a 
sufficient  force  can  be  collected  in  that  quarter  with- 
out it;  and  the  enemy's  operations  there  are  growing 
infinitely  serious  and  formidable.  I  have  not  the 
least  doubt  that  the  negroes  will  make  very  excellent 
soldiers,  with  proper  management;  and  I  will  ven- 
ture to  pronounce,  that  they  cannot  be  put  in  better 
hands  than  those  of  Mr.  Laurens.  He  has  all  the 
zeal,  intelligence,  enterprise,  and  every  other  qualifi- 
cation requisite  to  succeed  in  such  an  undertaking. 
It  is  a  maxim  with  some  great  military  judges,  that, 
with  sensible  officers,  soldiers  can  hardly  be  too 
stupid;  and,  on  this  principle,  it  is  thought  that  the 
Russians  would  make  the  best  soldiers  in  the  world, 
if  they  were  under  other  officers  than  their  own.  The 
king  of  Prussia  is  among  the  number  who  maintains 
this  doctrine,  and  has  a  very  emphatic  saying  on  the 
occasion,  which  I  do  not  exactly  recollect.  I  men- 
tion this  because  I  have  frequently  heard  it  objected 
to  the  scheme  of  embodying  negroes,  that  they  are 
too  stupid  to  make  soldiers.  This  is  so  far  from 
appearing  to  me  a  valid  objection,  that  I  think  their 


Private  Correspondence  i6i 

want  of  cultivation  (for  their  natural  faculties  are  as 
good  as  ours),  joined  to  that  habit  of  subordination 
which  they  acquire  from  a  life  of  servitude,  will 
enable  them  sooner  to  become  soldiers  than  our 
white  inhabitants.  Let  officers  be  men  of  sense  and 
sentiment;  and  the  nearer  the  soldiers  approach  to 
machines,  perhaps  the  better. 

I  foresee  that  this  project  will  have  to  combat 
much  opposition  from  prejudice  and  self-interest. 
The  contempt  we  have  been  taught  to  entertain  for 
the  blacks,  makes  us  fancy  many  things  that  are 
founded  neither  in  reason  nor  experience;  and  an 
unwillingness  to  part  with  property  of  so  valuable  a 
kind,  will  furnish  a  thousand  arguments  to  show  the 
impracticability,  or  pernicious  tendency,  of  a  scheme 
which  requires  such  sacrifices.  But  it  should  be 
considered,  that  if  we  do  not  make  use  of  them  in 
this  way,  the  enemy  probably  will ;  and  that  the  best 
way  to  counteract  the  temptations  they  will  hold 
out,  will  be  to  offer  them  ourselves.  An  essential 
part  of  the  plan  is  to  give  them  their  freedom  with 
their  swords.  This  will  secure  their  fidelity,  animate 
their  courage,  and,  I  believe,  will  have  a  good  in- 
fluence upon  those  who  remain,  by  opening  a  door  to 
their  emancipation.  This  circumstance,  I  confess, 
has  no  small  weight  in  inducing  me  to  wish  the  suc- 
cess of  the  project;  for  the  dictates  of  humanity, 
and  true  policy,  equally  interest  me  in  favor  of  this 
unfortunate  class  of  men. 

While  I  am  on  the  subject  of  Southern  affairs,  you 
will  excuse  the  liberty  I  take  in  saying,  that  I  do  not 
think  measures  sufficiently  vigorous  are  pursuing  for 


VOL,   IX.— II. 


i62  Alexander  Hamilton 

our  defence  in  that  quarter.  Except  the  few  regular 
troops  of  South  Carolina,  we  seem  to  be  relying 
wholly  on  the  militia  of  that  and  the  two  neighboring 
States.  These  will  soon  grow  impatient  of  service, 
and  leave  our  affairs  in  a  miserable  situation.  No 
considerable  force  can  be  uniformly  kept  up  by 
militia;  to  say  nothing  of  the  many  obvious  and 
well-known  inconveniences  that  attend  this  kind  of 
troops.  I  would  beg  leave  to  suggest,  sir,  that  no 
time  ought  to  be  lost  in  making  a  draught  of  militia 
to  serve  a  twelvemonth,  from  the  States  of  North 
and  South  Carolina  and  Virginia.  But  South  Caro- 
lina, being  very  weak  in  her  population  of  whites, 
may  be  excused  from  the  draught,  on  condition  of 
furnishing  the  black  battalions.  The  two  others 
may  furnish  about  three  thousand  five  hundred  men, 
and  be  exempted,  on  that  account,  from  sending  any 
succors  to  this  army.  The  States  to  the  northward 
of  Virginia  will  be  fully  able  to  give  competent  sup- 
plies to  the  army  here;  and  it  will  require  all  the 
force  and  exertions  of  the  three  States  I  have  men- 
tioned to  withstand  the  storm  which  has  arisen  and 
is  increasing  in  the  South. 

The  troops  draughted  must  be  thrown  into  bat- 
talions, and  officered  in  the  best  possible  manner. 
The  supernumerary  officers  may  be  made  use  of  as 
far  as  they  will  go.  If  arms  are  wanted  for  their 
troops,  and  no  better  way  of  supplying  them  is  to  be 
found,  we  should  endeavor  to  levy  a  contribution 
of  arms  upon  the  militia  at  large.  Extraordinary 
exigencies  demand  extraordinary  means.  I  fear  this 
Southern  business  will  become  a  very  grave  one. 


Private  Correspondence  163 

TO    MISS    LIVINGSTON  ' 

Headquarters,  March  18,  1779. 

I  can  hardly  forgive  an  application  to  my  humanity 
to  induce  me  to  exert  my  influence  in  an  affair  in 
which  ladies  are  concerned,  and  especially  when  you 
are  of  the  party.  Had  you  appealed  to  my  friend- 
ship or  to  my  gallantry,  it  would  have  been  irresisti- 
ble. I  should  have  thought  myself  bound  to  have 
set  prudence  and  policy  at  defiance,  and  even  to 
have  attacked  wind- mills  in  your  ladyship's  service. 
I  am  not  sure  but  my  imagination  would  have  gone 
so  far  as  to  have  fancied  New  York  an  enchanted 
castle — the  three  ladies  so  many  fair  damsels  rav- 
ished from  their  friends  and  held  in  captivity  by  the 
spells  of  some  wicked  magician — General  Clinton,  a 
huge  giant,  placed  as  keeper  of  the  gates — and  my- 
self, a  valorous  knight,  destined  to  be  their  champion 
and  deliverer. 

But  when,  instead  of  availing  yourself  of  so  much 
better  titles,  you  appealed  to  the  cold,  general  princi- 
ple of  humanity,  I  confess  I  felt  myself  mortified,  and 
determined,  by  way  of  revenge,  to  mortify  you  in 
turn.  I  resolved  to  show  you  that  all  the  eloquence 
of  your  fine  pen  could  not  tempt  our  Fabius  to  do 
wrong ;  and,  avoiding  any  representation  of  my  own, 
I  put  your  letter  into  his  hands  and  let  it  speak  for 
itself.  I  knew,  indeed,  this  would  expose  his  resolu- 
tion to  a  severer  trial  than  it  could  experience  in  any 
other  way,  and  I  was  not  without  my  fears  for  the 

^  Miss  Livingston  was  the  daughter  of  Gov.  Livingston,  of  New 
Jersey,  and  had  asked  Hamilton  to  procure  a  pass  through  the  Ameri- 
can hnes  for  some  friends  Hving  in  New  York. 


1 64  Alexander  Hamilton 

event,  but  if  it  should  decide  against  you,  I  antici- 
pated the  triumph  of  letting  you  see  your  influence 
had  failed.  I  congratulated  myself  on  the  success 
of  my  scheme;  for,  though  there  was  a  harder 
struggle  upon  the  occasion  between  inclination  and 
duty,  than  it  would  be  for  his  honor  to  tell;  yet  he 
at  last  had  the  courage  to  determine  that,  as  he  could 
not  indulge  the  ladies  with  consistency  and  propriety, 
he  would  not  run  the  risk  of  being  charged  with  a 
breach  of  both.  This  he  desired  me  to  tell  you, 
though,  to  be  sure,  it  was  done  in  a  different  manner, 
interlarded  with  many  assurances  of  his  great  desire 
to  oblige  you,  and  of  his  regret  that  he  could  not  do 
it  in  the  present  case,  with  a  deal  of  stuff  of  the  same 
kind,  which  I  have  too  good  an  opinion  of  your  under- 
standing to  repeat.  I  shall,  therefore,  only  tell  you 
that  whether  the  Governor  and  the  General  are  more 
honest  or  more  perverse  than  other  people,  they  have 
a  very  odd  knack  of  thinking  alike;  and  it  happens 
in  the  present  case  that  they  both  equally  disap- 
prove the  intercourse  you  mention,  and  have  taken 
pains  to  discourage  it.  I  shall  leave  you  to  make 
your  own  reflections  upon  this,  with  only  one  more 
observation,  which  is  that  the  ladies  for  whom  you 
apply  would  have  every  claim  to  be  gratified,  were 
it  not  that  it  would  operate  as  a  bad  precedent.  But, 
before  I  conclude,  it  will  be  necessary  to  explain  one 
point.  This  refusal  supposes  that  the  ladies  mean 
only  to  make  a  visit  and  return  to  New  York.  If  it 
should  be  their  intention  to  remain  with  us,  the  case 
will  be  altered.  There  will  be  no  rule  against  their 
coming  out,  and  they  will  be  an  acquisition.     But 


Private  Correspondence  165 

this  is  subject  to  two  provisos — ist,  that  they  are  not 
found  guilty  of  treason  or  any  misdemeanor  punish- 
able by  the  laws  of  the  State,  in  which  case  the 
General  can  have  no  power  to  protect  them;  and, 
2dly,  that  the  ladies  on  our  side  do  not  apprehend 
any  inconvenience  from  increasing  their  number. 
Trifling  apart,  there  is  nothing  could  give  me  greater 
pleasure  than  to  have  been  able  to  serve  Miss  Living- 
ston and  her  friends  on  this  occasion,  but  circum- 
stances really  did  not  permit  it.  I  am  persuaded  she 
has  too  just  an  opinion  of  the  General's  politeness 
not  to  be  convinced  that  he  would  be  happy  to  do 
any  thing  which  his  public  character  would  justify  in 
an  affair  so  interesting  to  the  tender  feelings  of  so 
many  ladies.  The  delicacy  of  her  own  ideas  will 
easily  comprehend  the  delicacy  of  his  situation; — 
she  knows  the  esteem  of  her  friend, 

A.  Hamilton. 

The  General  and  Mrs.  Washington  present  their 
compliments.' 


TO  BARON  STEUBEN 

May  26,  1779. 

The  General,  on  reflection,  is  a  little  uneasy  about 
the  route  you  intend  to  take.  He  thinks  it  not 
quite  safe,  as  the  enemy  have  troops  on  Long  Island 
and  may  easily  throw  a  party  across  the  Sound,  so 
that  you  would  be  in  danger  of  having  your  agreeable 
dreams  interrupted,  if  you  should  sleep  any  where 
from  New  Haven  to  Fairfield. 

^  Reprinted  from  Sedgwick's  Life  of  Wm.  Livingston,  p.  320. 


1 66  Alexander  Hamilton 

It  is  probable  one  of  the  Count's  motives  in  coming 
this  way  may  be  to  see  the  ruins  of  those  places ;  and 
if  he  could  do  it  without  risk,  it  would  be  desirable ; 
but  he  would  not  probably  be  at  his  ease  if  in  conse- 
quence of  it  he  should  be  obliged  to  attend  the  levee 
of  Sir  Henry  Clinton.  This  may  happen  if  he  con- 
tinues his  intention,  unless  very  good  precautions 
are  taken  to  avoid  the  danger.  The  General  recom- 
mends it  to  you  at  least  to  be  very  vigilant  upon 
your  post,  and  not  to  suffer  yourself  to  be  surprised. 
You  will  be  so  good  as  to  let  us  have  timely  notice  of 
your  approach,  as  we  shall,  at  least,  meet  you  at 
Fishkill  Landing  with  boats  to  take  you  down  to 
headquarters. 


TO    OTHO    H.    WILLIAMS  ' 

June  II,  1779. 

Dear  Williams  : 

The  General  sends  you  four  fresh  horsemen  to  en- 
able you  to  transmit  him  intelligence.  The  General 
will  take  the  road  you  marched  to  your  quarters. 

Mind  your  eye,  my  dear  boy,  and  if  you  have  an 
opportunity,  fight  hard. 


TO  MAJOR  LEE  OR,  IN  HIS  ABSENCE,   CAPT.  McLANE 

July,  1779. 

Sir: 

There  is  an  encampment  of  the  enemy,  or  a  de- 
monstration of  one,  which  appears  on  the  other  side 

^  Major  Otho  H.  Williams,  of  Maryland,  afterwards  a  brigadier- 
general,  and  always  a  warm  friend  of  Hamilton. 


Private  Correspondence  167 

of  the  river,  considerably  on  this  side  of  Tarrytov^n. 
You  will  be  pleased  in  consequence  to  have  patrols 
kept  from  this  till  morning  seven  or  eight  miles  down 
along  the  shore  and  on  the  roads  leading  to  this 
place  on  our  right.  This  may  be  a  critical  night, 
and  demands  the  greatest  vigilance. 


TO   COL.    DAVID   HENLEY  ' 

Headquarters,  New  Windsor,  July  12,  1779. 

Dear  Sir: 

I  take  the  liberty  to  trouble  you  with  a  letter  for 
Mr.  Dana,  which  I  have  left  open  for  your  perusal; 
and  I  request  it  as  a  favor  which  I  hope  I  may  claim 
from  your  friendship  to  deliver  it  to  him  and  press 
for  a  speedy  answer.  I  think  you  sufficiently  know 
my  character  and  way  of  thinking  to  be  convinced 
I  could  never  have  expressed  sentiments  of  the  kind 
imputed  to  me ;  and  you  will  therefore  be  the  more 
ready  to  afford  me  your  good  offices  upon  this  occa- 
sion. There  is  no  other  gentleman  in  Boston  whose 
friendship  I  could  so  far  intrude  upon."* 

'  Colonel  David  Henley,  a  brave  officer  of  the  Revolutionary  War. 
This  letter  and  certain  others  which  follow  relate  to  a  remark  attributed 
to  Hamilton  by  Doctor  Gordon,  the  historian  of  the  Revolution.  The 
most  careful  search  has  failed  to  discover  the  letters  to  Mr.  Dana,  but 
the  "Calumny"  of  Dr.  Gordon  is  shown,  by  a  letter  to  Laurens  (Sept. 
II,  1779),  given  below,  page  173,  to  have  been  that  he  quoted  Hamilton 
as  saying  that  he  wished  the  people  to  rise,  join  General  Washington, 
and  turn  Congress  out  of  doors.  The  letters  are  interesting,  because 
they  are  so  extremely  characteristic  of  the  writer.  The  Mr.  Dana  re- 
ferred to  apparently  was  Francis  Dana,  of  Massachusetts,  afterwards  a 
Justice  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States,  and  Commissioner 
to  France. 

2  Now  first  printed  from  the  Hamilton  papers  in  the  State  Depart- 
ment. 


1 68  Alexander  Hamilton 

TO    COL.    JOHN    BROOKS  ' 

West  Point,  Aug.  6,  1779. 

Dear  Sir: 

I  enclose  you  the  copy  of  a  letter  which  I  received 
by  the  last  post  from  Mr.  Dana.  You  will  perceive, 
he  says,  he  does  not  recollect  or  imagine  that  he 
threw  out  the  observation  mentioned  by  you  re- 
specting the  probability  of  my  having  made  the  de- 
claration with  which  I  am  charged;  but  believes  it 
was  used  by  some  other  person  in  company,  and  that 
you  had  unintentionally  blended  the  conversation. 
As  I  am  anxious  to  have  this  affair  developed  in  all 
its  circumstances  in  a  clear  and  unequivocal  man- 
ner, I  request  you  will  do  me  the  favor  to  inform  me 
whether  your  memory  in  this  particular  is  distinct 
and  positive,  or  whether  it  is  probable  you  may  have 
committed  the  mistake  which  Mr.  Dana  supposes. 
In  the  last  case  I  shall  be  obliged  to  you  to  endeavor 
to  recollect  the  real  author  of  the  insinuation.  Any 
other  remarks  which  Mr.  Dana's  statement  of  the 
matter  may  appear  to  you  to  require  will  add  to  the 
obligation  you  have  already  conferred  on,  sir,  etc. 

P.  S. — I  shall  thank  you  for  your  answer  to-mor- 
row that  I  may  have  time  to  take  the  necessary 
measures  before  the  next  post  sets  out.^ 

I  Colonel  John  Brooks,  of  Massachusetts,  a  gallant  soldier  of  the 
Revolution,  Adjutant-General  of  the  State  during  the  War  of  181 2  and 
Governor  from  i8i6to  1823.  The  letter  also  relates  to  the  affair  with 
Dr.  Gordon. 

*  Now  first  printed  from  the  Hamilton  papers  in  the  State  Depart- 
ment. 


Private  Correspondence  169 

TO    DR.    WILLIAM   GORDON  ' 

West  Point,  Aug.  lo,  1779. 

Sir: 

You  will  find  by  the  enclosed  copy  of  a  letter  of 
the  25th  of  July  from  Mr.  Dana,  that  he  mentions 
you  as  his  author  for  a  charge  of  a  very  singular  na- 
ture, that  has  been  brought  against  me,  relative  to 
a  declaration  which  I  am  said  to  have  made  in  the 
public  coffee-house  at  Philadelphia.  Conscious  that 
this  charge  is  totally  destitute  of  foundation,  I  owe 
it  to  myself  to  investigate  its  source,  and  evince  its 
falsehood;  and  as  I  cannot  but  believe  that  you 
have  too  great  a  regard  to  the  interests  of  truth  and 
justice  to  withhold  your  aid  in  detecting  the  inventor 
of  a  calumny,  I  persuade  myself  you  will  cheerfully 
disclose  the  authority  on  which  your  information  to 
Mr.  Dana  was  founded.  This  I  now  call  for,  and  you 
will  no  doubt  consider  it  a  duty  as  well  to  yourself 
as  to  me,  to  give  an  immediate,  direct,  and  explicit 
answer;  sensible  that  the  least  hesitation  or  reserve 
may  give  room  for  conjectures  which  it  can  be  neither 
your  wish  nor  mine  to  excite.  Col.  Henley  will  do 
me  the  favor  to  receive  and  forward  your  letter.^ 


TO   JAMES    DUANE  ^ 

August  28,  1779. 

Dear  Sir: 

I  with  pleasure  snatch  a  moment,  agreeable  to 
your  request,  to  inform  you  of  the  events  which  have 

'  Dr.  William  Gordon,  an  English  clergyman,  who  was  in  this  coimtry 
during  the  Revolution  and  wrote  a  history  of  the  war. 

*  Now  first  printed  from  the  Hamilton  papers  in  the  State  Depart- 
ment. 

3  The  eminent  patriot  and  lawyer  of  New  York  and  a  leader  in 
Congress. 


170  Alexander  Hamilton 

taken  place  since  you  left  us.  A  York  paper  of  the 
24th  announces  the  arrival  of  the  Russell  of  74,  which 
parted  three  days  before  from  Arbuthnot's  fleet, 
which  was  of  course  momently  expected.  Subse- 
quent intelligence  gives  us  the  arrival  of  the  whole 
fleet.  This  comes  through  different  channels,  and 
is  believed;  but  we  have  no  particulars.  Wayne  is 
still  safe. 

Northern  news  says  that  Sir  George  Collier,  having 
appeared  in  Penobscot  River,  put  our  grand  fleet  to 
the  rout.  They  were  run  ashore,  abandoned,  and 
burnt;  the  troops  and  seamen  safe.  Colonel  Jack- 
son's regiment,  which  had  been  sent  as  a  reinforce- 
ment, landed  at  Portsmouth.  This  account  comes 
in  a  letter  from  General  Gates  to  Colonel  Hay.  To 
counterbalance  the  bad  in  a  degree,  he  tells  me  three 
of  our  Continental  frigates  were  arrived  at  Boston 
with  six  sail  out  of  ten  of  the  Jamaica  fleet,  which 
had  fallen  into  their  hands,  containing  five  thousand 
hogsheads  of  rum  and  sugar. 


TO    BARON    STEUBEN 

September,  1779. 

Dear  Baron: 

I  am  at  this  moment  honored  with  your  letter  of 
the  30th  ultimo,  and  have  communicated  that  part 
of  it  which  concerns  M.  De  la  Luzerne  '  to  the  Gen- 
eral ;  agreeably  to  which  we  shall  take  oiir  measures 
on  the  reception  of  this  private  public  gentleman. 
We  had  prepared  a  party  of  cavalry  to  receive  him 
at  Fishkill,  on  the  supposition  that  he  would  set  out 

'  French  Minister  to  the  United  States. 


Private  Correspondence  171 

with  an  escort  from  Boston;  but  we  have  now  sent 
orders  to  the  party  immediately  to  take  the  route  you 
mention  to  Hartford,  and  there  place  themselves 
imder  your  orders. 

The  General  requests  you  will  make  his  respectful 
compliments  to  your  Chevalier,  and  gives  you  carte 
blanche  to  say  every  handsome  thing  you  think 
proper  in  his  name  of  the  pleasure  which  this  visit 
will  give  him.  I  have  no  doubt  that  your  portrait, 
which  appears  to  be  executed  en  maitre,  will  be 
found  a  just  representation  of  the  original;  and  if  he 
is  as  happy  as  his  predecessor  in  gaining  the  esteem 
and  confidence  of  the  men  of  this  country,  with  so 
many  talents  to  conciliate  the  leaders,  his  ministry 
will  not  be  unsuccessful.  I  augur  well  for  him. 
Gen.  Washington  proposes  to  meet  him  as  a  private 
gentleman  at  Fishkill. 


TO   JAMES    DUANE 

September  7,  1779. 

My  Dear  Sir: 

I  this  day  received  your  letter  of  the  4th,  with  one 
enclosed  for  Col.  Washington,  which  was  immedi- 
ately forwarded.  You  do  not  mention  the  receipt 
of  a  line  from  me,  which  I  wrote  several  days  since, 
giving  you  an  account  of  Arbuthnot's  arrival. 

The  current  of  our  intelligence  makes  the  rein- 
forcement with  him  amount  to  about  three  thousand, 
mostly  recruits,  and  in  bad  health;  it  is  said  some 
preparations  are  making  for  an  expedition,  and 
there    are   various    conjectures   about   the   object: 


172  Alexander  Hamilton 

some  point  to  the  Southward;  perhaps  the  true 
destination  is  the  West  Indies.  But,  I  confess,  I 
should  not  be  surprised  if  the  enemy  should  make  a 
further  and  vigorous  attempt  to  gain  possession  of 
two  or  three  of  the  Southern  States.  If  their  affairs 
are  so  desperate  with  respect  to  alliance  as  we  are 
told,  the  object  of  the  war  on  their  side,  from  con- 
quest, must  necessarily  change  to  pacification.  The 
acquisition  of  two  or  three  of  the  Southern  States 
would  be  a  handsome  counterpoise  to  their  losses  in 
the  Islands,  and  would  enable  them  to  negotiate 
with  the  more  credit  and  success  the  ensuing  winter. 
I  am  happy  to  have  it  in  my  power  to  gratify  your 
curiosity  about  the  Western  expedition  with  the 
enclosed  agreeable  account.  It  is  the  substance  of 
a  letter  from  General  Sullivan  of  the  30th,  extracted 
at  Col.  Hay's  request,  for  Mr.  Lowdon's  paper.  The 
facts  are  all  true,  though  you  will  perceive  I  have 
given  it  a  few  of  the  usual  embellishments  of  a  news- 
paper paragraph.  I  have  not  specified  the  number 
of  Gen.  Sullivan's  wounded;  they  amount  to  thirty- 
nine,  among  which  are  Major  Titcomb  and  two  other 
officers.  This  is  a  pleasing  and,  I  hope,  decisive 
event. 


TO    COLONEL   JOHN    BROOKS 

Headquarters,  Sept.  10,  1779. 

Dear  Sir: 

I  send  you,  merely  by  way  of  information,  the  copy 
of  a  letter  of  the  25th  of  August  which  I  yesterday 
received  from  Mr.  Dana.     I  have  only  to  request 


Private  Correspondence  173 

that  you  will  be  good  enough  to  inform  me  of  the 
names  of  all  the  gentlemen  that  composed  the  com- 
pany before  which  I  had  the  honor  of  being  exhibited 
on  the  occasion  in  question. ' 

TO   JOHN    LAURENS' 

West  Point,  Sept.  ii,  1779. 

From  the  current  of  intelligence,  an  embarkation 
is  on  foot  at  New  York.  A  little  time  will  develop 
its  destination.  I  hope  it  may  disappoint  my  con- 
jectures. The  general  opinion  points  to  the  West 
Indies;  and,  upon  the  whole,  I  believe  myself  the 
plan  of  Southern  operations  is  too  bold  and  enlarged 
for  the  feeble,  shivering,  contracted  councils  of 
Britain.  The  naval  force  that  arrived  under  Ar- 
buthnot,  by  the  best  intelligence,  consists  of  two 
ships-of-the-line,  two  fifty-gun,  and  two  smaller  frig- 
ates. Some  seamen — deserters — report  that  they 
made  at  sea  two  detachments  of  troops:  one  for 
Quebec,  the  other  to  Halifax — each  under  convoy 
of  a  vessel  of  the  line.  If  Arbuthnot  goes  to  the 
West  Indies,  Byron  will  still  be  inferior  to  D'Estaing, 
to  say  nothing  of  the  Spanish  fleet  in  that  quarter. 
The  troops  and  seamen  arrived  in  a  very  sickly  con- 
dition. 

'  Now  first  printed  from  the  Hamilton  papers  in  the  State  Depart- 
ment. 

2  Col.  John  Laurens,  of  South  Carolina,  whose  name  has  already 
occurred  frequently  in  this  correspondence,  was  the  son  of  Henry 
Laurens.  He  was  a  member  of  Washington's  staff,  and  Hamilton's 
most  intimate  friend.  He  was  one  of  the  most  dashing  and  brilliant 
of  the  youthful  officers  of  the  Revolution,  and  fell  in  a  skirmish  Aug. 
27, 1782,  when  the  war  was  nearly  over.  In  1780  he  went  to  France  as  a 
commissioner  on  the  loan,  and  was  in  all  ways  one  of  the  most  promis- 
ing men  of  the  period. 


174  Alexander  Hamilton 

We  have  just  received  an  account  that  looks  like 
the  approach  of  D'Estaing  to  our  continent.  A 
vessel  arrived  at  Boston  mentions  having  parted 
with  him  in  lat.  25°,  long.  70°;  steering  N.  W.,  with 
six  thousand  troops  on  board  taken  in  at  the  Cape, 
bound  for  Georgia,  and  afterwards  northward.  If 
this  should  be  true,  you  will  probably  hear  of  him 
before  this  reaches  you;  but  he  may,  perhaps,  push 
directly  northward,  to  lay  the  axe  to  the  root.  This 
will  be  a  master-stroke,  and  fix  D'Estaing's  char- 
acter as  a  first-rate  officer.  The  reduction  of  the 
enemy's  fleets  and  armies  in  America  will  make  all 
their  islands  fall  of  course,  deprive  them  of  supplies 
from  this  continent,  and  enable  us  to  second  opera- 
tions of  the  French  with  ample  succors  of  provisions. 
If  he  touches  at  Georgia  for  your  relief,  and  continues 
his  progress  northward,  you,  I  know,  will  endeavor 
to  keep  pace  with  him  and  make  us  happy  again. 
The  lads  all  join  me  in  embracing  you  most  affection- 
ately. Pray  let  me  hear  from  you  frequently,  and 
deal  a  little  in  military  details,  as  you  expect  the 
same  from  me.  The  Philadelphia  papers  will  tell 
you  of  a  handsome  stroke  by  Lee  '  on  Powle's  Hook. 
Some  folks  in  the  Virginia  line,  jealous  of  his  glory, 
had  the  folly  to  get  him  arrested.  He  has  been  tried 
and  acquitted  with  the  highest  honor.  Lee  unfolds 
himself  more  and  more  to  be  an  officer  of  great  ca- 
pacity, and  if  he  had  not  a  little  spice  of  the  Julius 
Caesar  or  Cromwell  in  him,  he  would  be  a  very  clever 
fellow.     Adieu. 

Apropos,  speaking  of  a  Cassar  and  a  Cromwell, 

'  Henry  Lee,  of  Virginia,  "Light-Horse  Harry." 


Private  Correspondence  175 

don't  you  think  the  Cabal  have  reported  that  I  de- 
clared in  a  public  house  in  Philadelphia  that  it  was 
high  time  for  the  people  to  rise,  join  General  Wash- 
ington, and  turn  Congress  out  of  doors?  I  am  run- 
ning the  rogues  pretty  hard.  Dana  was  the  first 
mentioned  to  me.  He  has  given  up  Dr.  Gordon,  of 
Jamaica  Plains.  You  well  remember  the  old  Jesuit. 
He  made  us  a  visit  at  Fredericksburg,  and  is  writing 
the  history  of  America.  The  proverb  is  verified, — 
''  There  never  was  any  mischief,  but  had  a  priest  or  a 
woman  at  the  bottom."  I  doubt  not  subornation 
and  every  species  of  villainy  will  be  made  use  of  to 
cover  the  villainy  of  the  attack.  I  have  written  to 
Gordon,  and  what  do  you  think  is  his  answer? — ^he 
will  give  up  his  author  if  I  will  pledge  my  honor 
"  neither  to  give  nor  accept  a  challenge,  to  cause  it  to 
be  given  or  accepted,  nor  to  engage  in  any  encounter 
that  may  produce  a  duel."  Pleasant  terms  enough. 
I  am  first  to  be  calumniated,  and  then,  if  my  calum- 
niator takes  it  into  his  head,  I  am  to  bear  a  cudgelling 
from  him  with  Christian  patience  and  forbearance; 
for  the  terms  required,  if  pursued  to  their  conse- 
quences, come  to  this.  I  have  ridiculed  the  pro- 
posal, and  insisted  on  the  author,  on  the  principle 
of  unconditional  submission.  What  the  Doctor's 
impudence  will  answer,  I  know  not.  But  you  who 
know  my  sentiments  will  know  how  to  join  me  in 
despising  these  miserable  detractors.  On  revising 
my  work,  I  find  several  strokes  of  the  true  schoolboy 
sublime.  Pray  let  them  pass,  and  admire  them  if 
you  can.' 

'  Reprinted  from  Moore's  Memoir  of  Laurens,  p.  154. 


176  Alexander  Hamilton 

TO   JAMES    DUANE 

West  Point,  Sept.  14,  1779. 

My  Dear  Sir: 

I  do  not  recollect  whether  I  said  any  thing  in  my 
last  about  the  strength  of  the  reinforcement  with 
Arbuthnot.  All  the  accounts  agree  that  it  does  not 
exceed  3,000, mostly  recruits,  and  in  very  bad  health; 
it  is  said  more  than  a  thousand  died  on  the  passage, 
and  a  greater  part  of  the  remainder  are  journeying 
fast  to  the  other  world.  Disease  prevails  also  in  the 
other  parts  of  the  army  and  among  the  inhabitants, 
more  than  has  been  known  at  any  time  since  the 
enemy  has  been  in  possession  of  the  city.  They  have 
been  of  late  making  extensive  preparations  for  em- 
barking troops,  and  we  have  just  received  advice 
that  two  German  and  one  British  regiment  sailed 
from  New  York  on  the  i  ith,  under  convoy  of  a  sixty- 
four.  The  rumors  about  the  destination  are  various. 
The  West  Indies,  Georgia,  Canada,  are  all  talked  of, 
but  the  first  with  most  confidence,  and  is  no  doubt 
most  probable.  Our  intelligence  announces  a  con- 
tinuance of  the  embarkation. 

A  vessel,  lately  arrived  at  Boston  from  the  Cape, 
reports  that  she  sailed  from  that  place  in  company 
with  Count  D'Estaing,  with  twenty-five  sail  of  the 
line  and  some  transports,  containing  6,000  troops 
taken  in  at  the  Cape,  and  bound  first  to  Georgia  and 
afterwards  farther  northward.  She  parted  with  the 
fleet  in  latitude  25^,  longitude  74°.  Two  other  ves- 
sels, arrived  at  some  place  in  Connecticut,  pretend 
that  they  parted  with  a  French  fleet  of  men-of-war 
and  transports,  in  the  latitude  of  Bermuda,  steering 


Private  Correspondence  177 

for  this  coast.  These  concurrent  accounts  are  not 
entirely  unworthy  of  attention,  though  I  am  not  dis- 
posed to  give  them  entire  credit. 

The  reduction  of  the  enemy's  fleets  and  armies  in 
this  country  would  be  the  surest  method  to  effect 
the  complete  conquest  of  the  Islands,  and  it  would 
be  one  of  the  most  fatal  strokes  Great  Britain  could 
receive.  The  stamina  of  their  military  establishment 
are  in  this  country.  The  ruin  of  this,  and  the  cap- 
ture of  their  seamen  and  ships,  would  be  an  irrecov- 
erable loss.  The  West  Indies  would  scarcely  have 
any  further  prospect  of  succor,  and  would  be  obliged 
to  submit  to  the  power  of  France  almost  without  re- 
sistance, which  might  then  operate  at  leisure,  aided 
by  ample  supplies  from  this  continent,  which  I  be- 
lieve are  the  principal  thing  wanting. 

These  reasons  may  have  induced  the  Count  to 
make  us  a  visit  during  the  season  of  inactivity  in  the 
West  Indies;  or,  if  he  does  not  come  himself,  if  by 
forming  a  junction  with  the  Spanish  fleet  he  can 
make  a  detachment  this  way,  and  still  maintain  a 
superiority  for  operation  in  that  quarter,  this  per- 
haps will  make  the  event  more  probable  than  on  the 
former  supposition.  I  have  now  given  you  all  the 
intelligence  we  have,  and  have  mixed  certainties, 
rumors,  and  conjectures.  You  will  extract  and  be- 
lieve as  much  as  you  think  proper. 

The  General  and  family  charge  me  to  present  their 
most  affectionate  respects.  We  are  to  receive  the 
new  minister  to-morrow  morning. 


VOL.  IX.— la. 


178  Alexander  Hamilton 

TO   JAMES   DUANE 

October  i,  1779. 

I  am  much  obliged  to  you,  my  dear  sir,  for  your 
two  letters  of  the  i6th  and  23d.  In  haste  I  snatch 
up  my  pen  by  an  express  going  off  to  the  Governor, 
to  give  you  the  news  as  it  runs.  The  most  important 
and  best  authenticated  is,  that  Count  D'Estaing  has 
arrived  on  the  coast  of  Georgia.  The  tale  runs  thus : 
We  are  in  possession  of  a  Charleston  paper  of  the  6th 
of  September,  which  mentions  that  the  Viscount  de 
Fontanges  '  had  arrived  at  that  place,  sent  by  the 
Count  to  annoimce  his  approach.  Mr.  Mitchel,  who 
transmits  the  paper,  adds  that  by  the  express  which 
brought  it  Mr.  Gerard ""  had  received  dispatches 
from  the  Count  informing  him  of  his  intention  to 
attack  the  enemy  in  Georgia  on  the  9th;  that  in 
consequence  of  this  intelligence  Mr.  Gerard  had  post- 
poned his  voyage  a  few  days  to  be  the  bearer  of  the 
event.  This,  I  hope,  puts  a  period  to  the  danger  of 
the  Southern  States,  for  which  I  could  not  help  hav- 
ing strong  apprehensions,  notwithstanding  the  pre- 
simiption  drawn  from  the  enemies' past  folly  against 
their  pursuing  any  plan  favorable  to  their  interest. 
I  acknowledge  the  force  of  the  argument,  but  I  was 
afraid  they  might  for  once  blunder  upon  the  right 
way.  The  departure  of  Comwallis  on  the  25th, 
with  the  grenadiers,  light  infantry,  and  one  British 
regiment,  had  increased  my  horrors  on  this  subject. 
The  nature  of  this  corps  pointed  to  a  temporary 
service  for  some  important  coup  de  main.    Charleston 

1  Adjutant-General  of  the  French  army. 

2  The  French  Minister. 


Private  Correspondence  179 

presented  itself  as  the  only  object.  They  would 
hardly  separate  the  flower  of  their  troops  for  any 
remote  and  permanent  station.  They  are  continu- 
ing their  embarkation.  The  accounts  we  have  of 
the  particular  corps  carry  them  to  between  five  and 
six  thousand.  I  send  you  a  Boston  paper  of  the 
23d  containing  some  interesting  European  advices. 

P.  S. — The  General  is  happy  in  the  hopes  you  give 
him  of  a  speedy  visit  from  General  Schuyler  and 
yourself,  and  orders  me  to  present  his  respects  to 
both.  The  family  join  in  every  sentiment  of  perfect 
esteem. 


DU    PORTAIL   AND    HAMILTON   TO    WASHINGTON  ' 

Great  Egg  Harbor  Landing,  Oct.  26,  1779. 

Sir: 

We  are  honored  with  two  letters  from  your  Ex- 
cellency of  the  loth  and  21st,  to  the  contents  of 
which  we  beg  leave  to  assure  you  of  our  strictest 
attention. 

That  of  the  i8th  has  not  yet  come  to  hand.  It  is 
not  improbable  it  has  gone  round  by  Lewistown,  which 
has  occasioned  the  delay. 

Colonel  Hamilton  wrote  to  your  Excellency  from 
Philadelphia,  acquainting  you  with  our  arrival  there 
and  our  intention  to  proceed  to  Lewistown,  Cape 

^  Hamilton  and  General  Du  Portailwere  sent  by  Washington  to  meet 
the  Count  D'Estaing  on  his  way  up  the  coast  with  the  French  fleet  and 
arrange  for  his  cooperation  with  our  forces.  Lebegue  Du  Portail, 
general  in  the  French  army,  came  to  the  United  States  with  Lafayette, 
and  was  a  valued  officer.  After  the  revolution  began  in  France  he  was 
made  minister  of  War  by  Lafayette's  influence,  and  fell  with  the  latter. 
He  remained  long  in  hiding  and  finally  escaped  to  America,  and  died 
at  sea  on  his  way  back  to  France  after  the  i8th  Brumaire. 


i8o  Alexander  Hamilton 

Henlopen,  and  from  Great  Egg  Harbor,  commimi- 
cating  our  progress  since,  and  our  determination  to 
establish  ourselves  at  Batsto  Furnace.  We  have 
since  fixed  on  this  place,  about  forty-four  miles  from 
the  extremity  of  Cape  May  (eighteen  miles  short  of 
the  Furnace,  which  we  found  to  be  more  remote  than 
had  been  represented),  and,  as  far  as  we  have  been 
able  to  learn,  from  one  hundred  to  one  hundred  and 
ten  miles  from  Sandy  Hook,  and  about  fifty  from 
Philadelphia.  Your  Excellency  will  easily  perceive 
the  reason  of  our  choosing  this  station.  It  did  not 
appear  to  us,  from  our  inquiries  in  Philadelphia,  to 
be  a  point  well  ascertained  that  the  fleet  would  stop 
at  the  Delaware,  and  the  time  which  had  elapsed 
made  it  more  possible,  if  the  Count  should  be  deter- 
mined to  prosecute  any  further  operations  on  the 
Continent,  that  he  would  not  lose  time  by  a  pro- 
cedure of  this  sort,  but  might  content  himself  with 
sending  some  transports,  under  escort  of  a  few  frig- 
ates, to  receive  the  provisions  for  the  fleet,  and 
proceed  himself  directly  on  to  the  Hook.  On  this 
supposition  our  position  at  Lewistown  was  entirely 
ineligible.  The  distance  at  which  we  were  from  the 
city  as  well  as  from  the  Hook,  the  delays  that  would 
consequently  attend  our  intelligence  from  every 
quarter,  the  difficulty  and  impossibility,  sometimes, 
of  traversing  the  bay,  made  our  first  situation  incon- 
venient in  every  respect  in  the  event  of  the  fleet's 
proceeding  immediately  to  the  Hook.  These  con- 
siderations induced  us  to  cross  the  Delaware  and 
take  the  position  at  which  we  now  are,  where,  or  in 
the  vicinity,  we  propose  to  remain  till  the  arrival  of 


Private  Correspondence  i8i 

the  Count,  till  intelligence  from  him  decides  the  in- 
utility of  a  longer  stay,  or  till  we  receive  your  Ex- 
cellency's orders  of  recall. 

We  have  now  a  better  relation  to  the  different 
points  in  which  we  are  interested,  and  have  taken 
the  necessary  precautions  to  gain  the  earliest  no- 
tice of  whatever  happens.  We  have  stationed  ex- 
presses at  the  pitch  of  the  Cape,  and  have  established 
a  regular  communication  with  Major  Lee,  and  with 
the  city.  If  the  fleet  should  appear  off  the  Dela- 
ware, we  can  be  there  in  twelve  hours  after  its  first 
appearance;  and  if  at  the  Hook,  in  less  than  four 
days;  provided  Major  Lee  is  punctual  in  conveying 
the  intelligence,  and  the  expresses  from  either  side, 
in  bringing  it. 

By  recent  information  from  Philadelphia  (though 
not  quite  so  distinct  and  accurate  as  we  could  wish) , 
we  find,  that  so  late  as  the  fourth  of  this  month,  the 
Coimt,  as  yet,  was  to  open  his  batteries  against  the 
enemy  at  Savannah.  The  time  that  will  probably 
intervene  between  this  and  the  final  reduction,  the 
re-embarkation  of  the  Count's  troops,  the  disposi- 
tions for  sailing,  and  his  arrival  on  this  coast,  may, 
we  fear,  exhaust  the  season  too  much  to  permit  of 
the  co-operation  to  which  our  mission  relates. 

We  do  not,  however,  despair;  for  if  the  Count  has 
been  fully  successful  to  the  southward,  and  should 
shortly  arrive  (which  may  be  the  case),  the  enter- 
prise may  possibly  go  on." 

I  The  attack  upon  Savannah  was  made  on  Oct.  9th.  The  assault 
was  a  gallant  one,  but  the  combined  French  and  American  forces  were 
repulsed  by  the  British  with  heavy  losses. 


1 82  Alexander  Hamilton 

In  a  letter  from  Major  Lee,  of  the  2  2d,  he  informs 
us,  that  a  vessel  from  Georgia  arrived  on  the  i6th; 
since  which  the  two  sixty-fours,  and  the  Renown, 
which  were  at  the  Hook,  had  fallen  down  towards 
New  York;  and  the  troops  at  the  Hook  had  em- 
barked and  gone  to  the  city.  At  first  sight,  this  ac- 
coimt  alarmed  us,  and  made  us  apprehensive  that 
the  enemy  had  received  some  favorable  advices  from 
the  southward  which  put  them  out  of  danger,  and 
superseded  the  necessity  of  continuing  their  pre- 
parations for  defence.  But,  on  further  reflection, 
we  think  it  more  probable,  that  this  is  only  a  change 
of  disposition;  and  that  finding,  on  closer  examina- 
tion, they  would  be  unable  to  defend  the  Hook,  they 
had  determined  to  relinquish  the  attempt. 

This  seems  the  more  likely,  as  Major  Lee  mentions, 
that  a  part  of  the  hulks,  sunk  in  the  channel,  had 
gotten  afloat  and  drifted  ashore. 

To  this  experience  of  the  difficulty  of  obstructing 
the  channel,  may,  perhaps,  be  attributed  the  change 
we  suppose.  And  we  are  confirmed  in  this  conjec- 
ture, by  the  evacuation  of  the  two  posts  at  King's 
Ferry,  which  appears  by  your  Excellency's  letter  to 
have  taken  place  on  the  21st,  five  days  after  the  sup- 
posed arrival  of  the  vessel  from  Georgia;  a  proof 
that  they  had  not  received  information  of  any  de- 
cisive good  fortune  on  their  side,  or  ill  fortime  on 
ours ;  and  that  they  persisted  in  their  defensive  plan. 
We  are  persuaded,  too,  that  their  exultation  would 
have  given  wings  to  any  good  news  they  might 
have  received,  and  that  it  would  have  reached  us 
before  this.     Were  the   season  less  advanced,   we 


Private  Correspondence  183 

should  regret  the  change  of  disposition ;  because  we 
believe  the  attempt  to  defend  the  entrance  of  the 
Hook  v^ould  have  been  fruitless ;  and  it  might  have 
thrown  a  part  of  their  ships  and  of  their  troops  into 
our  hands,  in  the  first  instance,  which  could  not  fail 
to  facilitate  the  successive  operations. 

But,  at  this  late  period,  it  may  rather  be  an  ad- 
vantage. To  force  the  passage  might  have  required 
land  operations  against  the  Hook,  which  would  lose 
time  and  expose  the  fleet  to  the  hazard  of  winds, 
which  would  have  rendered  its  situation  critical. 
Now,  the  fleet  may  probably  enter  the  bay,  on  its 
first  approach,  and  be  in  security;  and  the  whole 
operation  will  be  brought  to  a  point,  and  may  de- 
mand less  time  for  its  accomplishment. 

As  a  large  number  of  fascines,  ready  for  use,  ap- 
pear to  us  essential  to  any  operations  that  may  be 
imdertaken,  we  presume  your  Excellency  has  been 
preparing,  and  will  continue  to  prepare,  as  many  as 
possible.  We  beg  leave  to  suggest  the  utility  of 
having,  at  the  same  time,  a  sufficient  number  of  ga- 
bions and  sand  bags.  Of  the  former,  Colonel  Gou- 
vion,^  if  your  Excellency  thinks  proper,  may  be 
charged  with  the  constructing:  the  latter  may  be 
made  under  the  care  of  the  Quarter-Master  at  Phila- 
delphia. Several  thousands  may  be  necessary.  The 
usual  dimensions  are  fifteen  or  eighteen  inches  long, 
and  twelve  wide.  If,  notwithstanding  the  advices 
from  Major  Lee,  any  thing  by  land  is  to  be  attempted 

^  Jean  Baptiste  Gouvion,  captain  in  the  French  army  and  major- 
general  of  the  National  Guard  in  1789  He  was  killed  before  Mau- 
beuge  in  1792. 


184  Alexander  Hamilton 

against  the  Hook,  these  will  be  peculiarly  useful  on 
such  a  flat,  sandy  spot;  and,  indeed,  it  would  be  im- 
practicable to  construct  batteries,  in  any  reasonable 
time,  without  them. 


TO   JOHN    LAURENS 

December,  1779. 

Cold  in  my  professions,  warm  in  my  friendships, 
I  wish,  my  dear  Laurens,  it  may  be  in  my  power,  by 
actions  rather  than  words,  to  convince  you  that  I 
love  you.  I  shall  only  tell  you  that,  till  you  bade  us 
adieu,  I  hardly  knew  the  value  you  had  taught  my 
heart  to  set  upon  you.  Indeed,  my  friend,  it  was 
not  well  done.  You  know  the  opinion  I  entertain  of 
mankind,  and  how  much  it  is  my  desire  to  preserve 
myself  free  from  particular  attachments,  and  to  keep 
my  happiness  independent  of  the  caprices  of  others. 
You  should  not  have  taken  advantage  of  my  sensi- 
bility to  steal  into  my  affections  without  my  consent. 

But  as  you  have  done  it  and  as  we  are  generally 
indulgent  to  those  we  love,  I  shall  not  scruple  to  par- 
don the  fraud  you  have  committed,  on  one  condition : 
that  for  my  sake,  if  not  for  your  own,  you  will  always 
continue  to  merit  the  partiality,  which  you  have  so 
artfully  instilled  into  me. 

I  have  received  your  two  letters :  one  from  Phila- 
delphia, the  other  from  Chester.  I  am  pleased  with 
your  success,  so  far — and  I  hope  the  favorable  omens 
that  precede  your  application  to  the  Assembly  may 
have  as  favorable  an  issue — ^provided  the  situation 
of  affairs  should  require  it,  which  I  fear  will  be  the 
case.     But  both  for  your  country's  sake  and  for  my 


Private  Correspondence  185 

own,  I  wish  the  enemy  may  be  gone  from  Georgia 
before  you  arrive,  and  that  you  may  be  obUged  to 
return  and  share  the  fortunes  of  your  old  friends. 
In  respect  to  the  commission  which  you  received 
from  Congress,  all  the  world  must  think  your  con- 
duct perfectly  right.  Indeed,  your  ideas  on  this  oc- 
casion seem  not  to  have  their  wonted  accuracy ;  and 
you  have  had  scruples,  in  a  great  measure,  without 
foundation.  By  your  appointment  as  aide-de-camp 
to  the  commander-in-chief,  you  had  as  much  the 
rank  of  lieutenant-colonel  as  any  officer  in  the  line. 
Your  receiving  a  commission  as  lieutenant- colonel, 
from  the  date  of  that  appointment,  does  not  in  the 
least  injure  or  interfere  with  one  of  them;  unless  by 
virtue  of  it  you  are  introduced  into  a  particular 
regiment  in  violation  of  the  right  of  succession,  which 
is  not  the  case  at  present,  neither  is  it  a  necessary 
consequence.  As  you  were  going  to  command  a 
battalion,  it  was  proper  that  you  should  have  a  com- 
mission; and  if  this  commission  had  been  dated 
posterior  to  your  appointment  as  aide-de-camp,  I 
should  have  considered  it  derogatory  to  your  former 
rank,  to  mine,  and  to  that  of  the  whole  corps.  The 
only  thing  I  see  wrong  in  the  affair  is  this — Congress 
by  their  conduct,  both  on  the  former  and  present 
occasion,  appear  to  have  intended  to  confer  a  privi- 
lege, an  honor,  a  mark  of  distinction,  a  something 
upon  you,  which  they  withheld  from  other  gentle- 
men in  the  family.  This  carries  with  it  an  air  of 
preference,  which,  though  we  can  all  truly  say,  we 
love  your  character  and  admire  your  military  merit, 
cannot  fail  to  give  some  of  us  uneasy  sensations.     But 


1 86  Alexander  Hamilton 

in  this,  my  dear,  I  wish  you  to  understand  me  well. 
The  blame,  if  there  is  any,  falls  wholly  upon  Con- 
gress. I  repeat  it,  your  conduct  has  been  perfectly 
right,  and  even  laudable.  You  rejected  the  offer 
when  you  ought  to  have  rejected  it;  and  you  ac- 
cepted it  when  you  ought  to  have  accepted  it,  and, 
let  me  add,  with  a  degree  of  over- scrupulous  delicacy. 
It  was  necessary  to  your  project.  Your  project  w^as 
the  public  good;  and  I  should  have  done  the  same. 
In  hesitating,  you  have  refined  on  the  refinements  of 
generosity. 

There  is  a  total  stagnation  of  news  here,  political 
and  military.  Gates  has  refused  the  Indian  com- 
mand. Sullivan  is  come  to  take  it.  The  former  has 
lately  given  a  fresh  proof  of  his  impudence,  his  folly, 
and  his  rascality.  T  is  no  great  matter;  but  a  pe- 
culiarity in  the  case  prevents  my  saying  what. 

'  I  anticipate  by  sympathy  the  pleasure  you  must 
feel  from  the  sweet  converse  of  your  dearer  self  in 
the  enclosed  letters.  I  hope  they  may  be  recent. 
They  were  brought  out  of  New  York  by  General 
Thompson,  delivered  to  him  there  by  a  Mrs.  Moore, 
not  long  from  England,  soi  disante  parente  de  madame 
votre  epouse.  She  speaks  of  a  daughter  of  yours, — 
well,  when  she  left  England,  and  now,  my  dear,  as 
we  are  upon  the  subject  of  wife,  I  empower  and  com- 
mand you  to  get  me  one  in  Carolina.  Such  a  wife  as 
I  want  will,  I  know,  be  difficult  to  be  found,  but  if 
you  succeed,  it  will  be  the  stronger  proof  of  your 

^  This  passage  beginning  "I  anticipate"  and  extending  as  far  as  the 
postscript,  is  now  first  printed  from  the  Hamilton  papers  in  the  State 
Department. 


Private  Correspondence  187 

zeal  and  dexterity.  Take  her  description — she  must 
be  young,  handsome  (I  lay  most  stress  upon  a  good 
shape),  sensible  (a  little  learning  will  do),  well  bred 
(but  she  must  have  an  aversion  to  the  word  ton)y 
chaste,  and  tender  (I  am  an  enthusiast  in  my  notions 
of  fidelity  and  fondness),  of  some  good  nature,  a 
great  deal  of  generosity  (she  must  neither  love 
money  nor  scolding,  for  I  dislike  equally  a  termagant 
and  an  economist).  In  politics  I  am  indifferent 
what  side  she  may  be  of.  I  think  I  have  arguments 
that  will  easily  convert  her  to  mine.  As  to  religion 
a  moderate  stock  will  satisfy  me.  She  must  believe 
in  God  and  hate  a  saint. 

But  as  to  fortune,  the  larger  stock  of  that  the 
better.  You  know  my  temper  and  circumstances 
and  will  therefore  pay  special  attention  in  the 
treaty.  Though  I  run  no  risk  of  going  to  Purgatory 
for  my  avarice,  yet  as  money  is  an  essential  ingre- 
dient to  happiness  in  this  world,  as  I  have  not  much 
of  my  own,  and  as  I  am  very  little  calculated  to  get 
more  either  by  my  address  or  industry,  it  must  needs 
be  that  my  wife,  if  I  get  one,  bring  at  least  a  suffi- 
ciency to  administer  to  her  own  extravagancies. 
N.  B. — You  will  be  pleased  to  recollect  in  your  ne- 
gotiations that  I  have  no  invincible  antipathy  to 
the  maidenly  beauties,  and  that  I  am  willing  to  take 
the  trouble  of  them  upon  myself. 

If  you  should  not  readily  meet  with  a  lady  that 
you  think  answers  my  description,  you  can  only  ad- 
vertise in  the  public  papers,  and  doubtless  you  will 
hear  of  many  competitors  for  most  of  the  qualifica- 
tions required,  who  will  be  glad  to  become  candidates 


1 88  Alexander  Hamilton 

for  such  a  prize  as  I  am.  To  excite  their  emulations 
it  will  be  necessary  for  you  to  give  an  account  of  the 
lover — his  size,  make,  qualities  of  mind  and  body, 
achievements,  expectations,  fortune,  etc.  In  draw- 
ing my  picture  you  will  no  doubt  be  civil  to  your 
friend,  mind  you  do  justice  to  the  length  of  my  nose, 
and  don't  forget  that  I 

After  reviewing  what  I  have  written,  I  am  ready 
to  ask  myself  what  could  have  put  it  into  my  head 
to  hazard  this  jeu  de  jolie.  Do  I  want  a  wife?  No. 
I  have  plagues  enough  without  desiring  to  add  to  the 
number  that  greatest  of  all ;  and  if  I  were  silly  enough 
to  do  it  I  should  take  care  how  I  employed  a  proxy. 
Did  I  mean  to  show  my  wit?  If  I  did,  I  am  sure  I 
have  missed  my  aim.  Did  I  only  intend  to  frisk? 
In  this  I  have  succeeded,  but  I  have  done  more.  I 
have  gratified  my  feelings,  by  lengthening  out  the 
only  kind  of  intercourse  now  in  my  power,  with  my 
friend. 

P.  S. — Fleury  shall  be  taken  care  of.  All  the 
family  send  their  love.  In  this  join  the  General  and 
Mrs.  Washington,  and  what  is  best,  it  is  not  in  the 
style  of  ceremony  but  sincerity. 


TO   DOCTOR  WILLIAM   GORDON 

December  lo,  1779. 

Sir: 

As  your  letter  of  the  23d  of  September  offered 
nothing  conclusive,  I  delayed  acknowledging  it  till 
I  should  receive  the  result  of  your  pretended  ap- 
plication to  your  informer.  This  is  contained  in 
your  last  of  the  15th  of  November,  which  arrived 


Private  Correspondence  189 

while  I  was  absent  from  headquarters.  The  un- 
ravelment  of  the  plot  in  the  ridiculous  farce  you  have 
been  acting,  proves,  as  I  at  first  suspected,  that  you 
are  yourself  the  author  of  the  calumny.  Such  I  con- 
sider you,  and  such  I  shall  represent  you.  The  re- 
presentation, I  am  sure,  will  find  credit  with  all  who 
know  me,  and  the  notorious  bias  of  your  disposition 
to  duplicity  and  slander  will  give  it  sanction  with  all 
who  are  acquainted  with  you.  I  shall  use  the  less 
ceremony,  as  I  am  well  informed  you  have  established 
a  character  which,  in  the  opinion  of  every  man  of 
sense,  has  forfeited  all  title  to  the  delicacy  of  treat- 
ment usually  attached  to  your  function.  I  only 
lament  that  respect  to  myself  obliges  me  to  confine 
the  expression  of  my  contempt  to  words. 

The  feint  you  make  of  involving  Congress  in  a 
business  little  worthy  of  their  attention,  I  regard  as 
a  mere  trick  to  elude  my  demands  for  a  discovery 
which  you  are  unable  to  make.  And,  as  I  have  no 
hope  of  bringing  the  affair  to  a  more  satisfactory 
issue,  I  now  put  an  end  to  the  correspondence  on  my 
part,  and  shall  only  add  a  repetition  of  what  I  before 
said,  that  I  have  no  objection  to  any  part  of  my  con- 
duct being  canvassed  before  any  tribtinal  whatever.' 


TO   WASHINGTON 

MoRRisTOWN  May  2,  1780. 

Dear  Sir: 

I  am  extremely  sorry  your  Excellency  has  been 
troubled  with  the  affair  to  which  the  papers  trans- 

^  Now  first  printed  from  the  Hamilton  papers  in  the  State  Depart- 
ment. 


igo  Alexander  Hamilton 

mitted  in  your  letter  of  this  morning  relate.  Ad- 
mitting the  possibility  of  Doctor  Gordon's  not  being 
the  author  of  what  I  must  always  call  a  calimmy, 
and  had  he  not  been  an  irreconcilable  enemy  to 
plain  dealing,  the  matter  might  have  been  brought 
to  a  very  easy  issue  without  the  necessity  of  an 
appeal  to  you.  My  determination,  however,  on  the 
contents  of  his  letter  will  be  a  very  summary  one.  I 
shall  not  follow  him  in  his  labored  digressions,  be- 
cause the  scope  of  some  of  them  is  to  me  unintelli- 
gible, and  the  rest  do  not  merit  an  answer. 

So  far  from  being  disposed  to  comply  with  the 
Doctor's  conditions  to  avoid  an  inquiry,  I  consider 
the  proposal  he  makes  as  a  finishing  stroke  to  that 
display  of  absurdity,  littleness,  and  effrontery  which 
characterizes  the  whole  proceeding  on  his  part,  and 
I  defy  the  utmost  extent  of  his  malignity  and  in- 
trigue. I  shall  ever  continue  to  hold  him  in  the 
highest  contempt, — to  believe  him  to  be  the  con- 
niver  of  the  charge  against  me  till  he  gives  up  some 
other  person  as  the  author,  and  to  represent  him  as 
such  to  all  those  with  whom  I  have  occasion  to  con- 
verse on  the  subject.  I  shall  always  speak  of  him 
in  those  terms  which  a  sense  of  injury  and  a  con- 
viction of  his  worthlessness  dictate. 

I  hope  your  Excellency  will  excuse  the  asperity  of 
my  expressions,  which  my  respect  for  you  would  in- 
duce me  to  suppress,  did  I  not  owe  it  to  my  sensi- 
bility, wounded  by  the  most  barbarous  attack  upon 
my  reputation  and  principles,  to  speak  without  re- 
serve. I  flatter  myself  you,  sir,  are  too  well  ac- 
quainted with  my  way  of  thinking  to  entertain  the 


Private  Correspondence  191 

least  doubt  of  my  innocence,  and  I  beg  leave  to  as- 
sure you  that  nothing  will  give  me  greater  pleasure 
than  to  have  the  matter  properly  investigated. 

I  am  only  apprehensive  that  the  Doctor  will  so 
manage  it  as  that  it  will  be  found  inexpedient  to  bring 
it  to  a  public  discussion,  and  that  the  knowledge  of 
circumstances  will  be  confined  to  a  few,  to  be  handed 
about  as  may  best  suit  his  purposes,  to  the  prejudice 
of  my  character.  Your  Excellency,  too,  I  trust,  will 
see  the  propriety  of  that  delicacy  by  which  I  am  with- 
held from  making  any  formal  appeal  to  public  au- 
thority in  my  own  justification.  'T  is  the  business 
of  my  accuser  to  bring  me  to  justice,  and,  by  antici- 
pating him,  I  should  not  fail  to  incur  the  imputation 
of  self-importance.  I  return  your  Excellency  the 
papers  from  Doctor  Gordon. ' 


TO    BARON   STEUBEN 

May  10,  1780. 

Dear  Baron: 

General  Knox,  in  conversation,  has  observed  to 
the  General,  that  instead  of  sending  to  Philadelphia 
for  the  fifteen  hundred  arms  mentioned  in  your  letter 
of  the  sixth,  and  sending  those  here  to  that  place  to 
be  fitted,  it  would  be  a  great  saving  of  expense,  in 
the  article  of  transportation,  to  have  the  bayonets 
and  accoutrements  brought  on  without  the  arms, 
and  fitted  to  those  now  here;  which  can  be  easily 
done  at  the  Park.     The  question  is,  if  the  arms  here 

I  Now  first  printed  from  the  Hamilton  papers.  It  does  not  appear 
that  Dr.  Gordon  ever  brought  the  matter  to  the  notice  of  the  authorities 
of  the  state. 


192  Alexander  Hamilton 

have  no  other  defect  than  want  of  bayonets.  The 
General  will  be  glad  to  know  what  you  think  of  Gen- 
eral Knox's  proposal.  It  seems  to  him  eligible,  unless 
there  are  reasons  he  is  not  acquainted  with. 

If  there  are  any  other  articles  you  wish  to  have 
sent  for  (the  General  thinks  you  mentioned  some- 
thing of  the  kind  to  him),  he  will  be  glad  to  know 
what  they  are. 

We  have  heard  from  the  Marquis.  He  will  be 
here  at  dinner.  Will  you  dine  with  us  also?  The 
General  requests  it. 


TO   JAMES   DUANE 

May  14,  1780. 

My  Dear  Sir: 

This  will  be  handed  you  by  the  Marquis  (de  Lafay- 
ette), who  brings  us  very  important  intelligence. 
The  General  commimicates  the  substance  of  it  in  a 
private  letter  to  you,  and  proposes  a  measure  which 
all  deem  essential.'  For  God's  sake,  my  dear  sir, 
engage  Congress  to  adopt  it,  and  come  to  a  speedy 
decision.  We  have  not  a  moment  to  lose.  Were 
we  to  improve  every  instant  of  the  interval,  we 
should  have  too  little  time  for  what  we  have  to  do. 
The  expected  succor  may  arrive  in  the  beginning 
of  June;  in  all  probability  it  will  not  be  later  than 
the  middle.     In  the  last  case  we  have  not  a  month 

^  Writings  of  Washington,  vii.,  32.  Lafayette  brought  news  of  the 
coming  of  the  French  fleet  with  the  army  of  Rochambeau.  The 
measure  urged  by  Washington  was  the  appointment  of  a  committee  by 
Congress  with  full  powers  to  raise  men  and  supplies  and  to  arrange  for 
cooperation  with  the  French.  A  committee  was  raised  as  Washington 
suggested,  and  consisted  of  Philip  Schuyler,  John  Mathews,  and 
Nathaniel  Peabody. 


Private  Correspondence  193 

to  make  our  preparations  in,  and  in  this  short  pe- 
riod we  must  collect  men,  form  magazines,  and  do 
a  thousand  things  of  as  much  difficulty  as  im- 
portance. The  propriety  of  the  measure  proposed 
is  so  obvious  that  an  hour  ought  to  decide  it,  and 
if  any  new  members  are  to  come,  they  ought  to  set 
out  instantly  with  all  expedition  for  headquarters. 

Allow  me,  my  dear  sir,  to  give  you  a  hint.  The 
General  will  often  be  glad  to  consult  the  committee 
on  particular  points,  but  it  will  be  inexpedient  that 
he  should  be  obliged  to  do  it  oftener  than  he  thinks 
proper,  or  any  peculiar  case  may  require.  Their 
powers  should  be  formed  accordingly.  It  is  the 
essence  of  many  military  operations,  that  they 
should  be  trusted  to  as  few  as  possible. 

The  Marquis  has  a  title  to  all  the  love  of  all  Amer- 
ica ;  but  you  know  he  has  a  thousand  little  whims  to 
satisfy ;  one  of  these  he  will  have  me  to  write  to  some 
friend  in  Congress  about.  He  is  desirous  of  having 
the  captain  of  the  frigate  in  which  he  came  compli- 
mented; and  gives  several  pretty  instances  of  his 
punctuality  and  disinterestedness.  He  wishes  Con- 
gress to  pass  some  resolutions  of  thanks,  and  to 
recommend  him  to  their  minister  in  France,  to  be 
recommended  to  the  French  court.  The  first  of  these 
is  practicable.  The  last  I  think  might  have  an  offi- 
cious appearance.  The  essential  services  the  Mar- 
quis has  rendered  America  in  France  give  him  a 
claim  for  all  that  can  be  done  with  propriety;  but 
Congress  must  not  commit  themselves. 

Again,  my  dear  sir,  I  must  entreat  you  to  use  the 
spur  on  the  present  occasion.     The  fate  of  America 

VOL.  IX.— 13. 


194  Alexander  Hamilton 

is  perhaps  suspended  on  the  issue;  if  we  are  found 
unprepared,  it  must  disgrace  us  in  the  eyes  of  all 
Europe,  besides  defeating  the  good  intentions  of  our 
allies,  and  losing  the  happiest  opportunity  we  ever 
have  had  to  save  ourselves. 


TO    GENERAL   GREENE 

May  i6,  1780. 

My  Dear  General: 

When  you  ask  my  opinion  as  a  friend,  I  must 
always  act  the  part  of  a  true  friend,  however  fre- 
quently the  advice  I  give  may  happen  to  clash  with 
your  feelings,  justly  irritated  by  injuries  which  you 
have  not  merited.  Considering  the  Board  of  Treas- 
ury as  so  many  individuals,  the  complexion  of  their 
letter  to  you  would  abundantly  justify  the  asperity 
of  your  reply ;  but  considering  them  as  a  public  body, 
one  of  the  first  in  the  State,  policy  pronounces  it  to  be 
too  great.  We  are  entered  deeply  in  a  contest  on 
which  our  all  depends.  We  must  endeavor  to  rub 
through  it,  sometimes  even  at  the  expense  of  our 
feelings.  The  treasury  will  always  be  essential  to 
your  department.  The  board  conducting  it  will 
necessarily  have  no  small  influence.  You  may  con- 
tinue at  the  head  of  the  department.  I  should  think 
it  imprudent  to  push  differences  to  extremity,  or  to 
convert  the  airs  of  official  consequence  and  the  tem- 
porary work  of  popular  prejudice  into  rooted  per- 
sonal resentments.  This  appears  to  me  to  be  the 
tendency  of  the  present  letter.  The  board,  from  the 
necessity  of  our  affairs,  may  sue  for  peace,  but  they 


Private  Correspondence  195 

will  hate  you  for  the  htimiliation  you  bring  upon 
them ;  and  they  may  have  it  in  their  power  to  em- 
barrass your  operations.  I  would  have  you  show  a 
sensibility  of  injury,  but  I  would  wish  you  to  do  it  in 
milder  terms.' 


TO    BARON   STEUBEN 

June  7,  1780. 

Dear  Baron: 

I  am  commanded  by  the  General  to  inform  you 
that  the  enemy  are  out  in  considerable  force,  and,  by 
the  last  advice,  were  advancing  this  way.  We  are 
going  to  meet  them.  The  General  is  just  set  out 
for  Chatham,  and  will  be  happy  to  meet  you  there. 


^     TO   WASHINGTON 

June  8,  1780. 

Sir: 

I  have  seen  the  enemy.  Those  in  view  I  calculate 
at  about  three  thousand;  there  may  be,  and  prob- 
ably enough  are,  others  out  of  sight.  They  have 
sent  all  their  horse  to  the  other  side,  except  about 
fifty  or  sixty.  Their  baggage,  it  is  agreed  on  all 
hands,  has  also  been  sent  across,  and  their  wounded. 
It  is  not  ascertained  that  any  of  their  infantry  have 
passed  to  the  other  side.     There  are  four  or  five 

^  This  letter  is  reprinted  from  Geo.  W.  Greene's  Life  of  General 
Greene,  ii.,  p.  287;  it  is  also  given  in  the  History  of  the  Republic,  ii.,  4. 
The  Treasury  Board  had  written  to  Greene,  who  was  at  that  time 
quartermaster-general,  in  terms  implying  a  doubt  of  his  integrity.  He 
was  naturally  much  incensed,  and  wrote  a  reply,  which  he  sub- 
mitted to  Hamilton,  who  wrote  this  letter  in  response.  Greene  pro- 
fessed himself  unable  to  adopt  a  milder  tone,  but  consulted  Hamilton 
as  to  another  draft.     The  date  is  that  given  by  Mr.  Greene. 


196  Alexander  Hamilton 

hundred  on  the  opposite  point,  but  it  is  uncertain 
whether  they  are  those  who  went  from  this  side,  or 
those  who  were  on  Staten  Island;  I  rather  suppose 
the  former. 

Different  conjectures  may  be  made.  The  present 
movement  may  be  calculated  to  draw  us  down  and 
betray  us  into  an  action.  They  may  have  desisted 
from  their  intention  of  passing  till  night,  for  fear  of 
our  falling  upon  their  rear.  I  believe  this  is  the  case ; 
for,  as  they  have  but  few  boats,  it  would  certainly 
be  a  delicate  manoeuvre  to  cross  in  our  face.  We 
are  taking  measures  to  watch  their  motions  to-night 
as  closely  as  possible.  An  incessant  but  very  light 
skirmishing.  Very  few  boats,  not  more  than  enough 
to  carry  three  or  four  hundred  men  at  a  time;  it  is 
likely  more  will  come  down  this  evening. 


TO   THE    CHEVALIER   DE   TERNAY  ' 

Au  Cap  Henry,  le  13  Juin,  1780. 

Monsieur  Le  Chevalier: 

Je  suis  envoye  par  le  General  Washington  au  Cap 
Henry  pour  y  attendre  votre  escadre,  et  vous  remettre 
ainsi  qu'  a  Monsieur  le  Comte  de  Rochambeau,  les 
depeches  de  Monsieur  le  Marquis  de  Lafayette.  Ces 
depeches.  Monsieur  le  Chevalier,  contiennent  le  plan 
d 'operations  que  le  General  Washington  a  I'honneur 
de  vous  proposer,  la  situation  des  ennemies,  et  la 
notre  relativement  aux  forces  respectives  des  deiix 

'  Charles  Louis  d'Arsac  de  Temay,  admiral  and  commander  of  the 
fleet  that  brought  Rochambeau  and  his  army  to  America.  He  reached 
Newport  with  his  fleet  July  10,  1780,  and  died  there  on  December  15th 
of  the  same  year,  in  the  fifty-ninth  year  of  his  age. 


Private  Correspondence  197 

parties,  aux  points  occupes,  aiix  moyens  de  subsist- 
ence et  cetera;  tons  les  changemens  qui  pouvaient 
survenir  sur  ces  objets  doivent  m'etre  communiques, 
afin  qu'  h  votre  arrivee  vous  puissiez  avoir  sous  les 
yeux  le  plus  de  donnees  possibles.  Les  memes 
details  vous  attendent  k  Rhode  Island,  et  si  vous  ne 
devezles  regevoir  qu'  apr^s  etre  arrive,  il  estpresque 
indifferent.  Monsieur  le  Chevalier,  que  votre  escadre 
atterisse  a  Rhode  Island  ou  au  Cap  Henry;  mais 
il  y  a  des  circonstances  qui,  si  elles  vous  etaient  con- 
nues,  tendraient  peut  etre  k  vous  determiner  plustot 
pour  I'un  de  ces  points  que  pour  I'autre,  ou  meme 
pour  un  troisi^me  point  que  vos  instructions  n'ont  pu 
prevoir.  C'est  pour  vous  rendre  compte  de  ces  cir- 
constances que  je  saisis  I'occasion  du  fier  Rodrique; 
heureux  si,  dans  une  conjoncture  ou  les  moments 
sont  d'une  si  grande  importance,  cette  lettre  peut 
anticiper  de  quelques  jours  vos  dispositions. 

1°.  Par  le  plan  propos6  k  vous.  Monsieur  le  Che- 
valier, et  a  Monsieur  le  Comte  de  Rochambeau,  les 
efforts  combines  de  I'armee  Frangaise  et  Americaine 
doivent  se  porter  sur  New  York,  et  vous  Stes  instam- 
ment  prie  de  vous  rendre  immediatement  k  Sandy 
Hook. 

2°.  Suivant  les  informations  qui  m'ont  ete  recem- 
ment  fournies  par  le  Gouvemeur  de  la  Virginie,  la 
ville  de  Charleston  est  prise ;  les  ennemis  embarquent 
une  partie  des  troupes  qui  en  ont  fait  la  conqu^te,  et 
d'apr^s  la  certitude  ou  nous  sommes  que  la  destina- 
tion de  votre  escadre  leur  est  connue,  il  semble  que 
cet  embarquement  pourrait  bien  avoir  pour  objet  de 
renforcer  la  gamison  New  York. 


198  Alexander  Hamilton 

3^.  La  somme  de  leurs  forces  navales  sur  ce  conti- 
nent se  borne  h  trois  vaisseaux  de  ligne,  un  de  50 
canons,  denx  de  44,  et  quelques  fregates  k  Charles- 
ton; un  vaisseau  de  74  et  quelques  frigates,  sortis  de 
New  York  depuis  trois  semaines  et  dont  nous  igno- 
rons  la  destination. 

Ainsi,  Monsieur  le  Chevalier,  la  premiere  de  ces 
considerations  vous  invite  k  Sandy  Hook ;  la  seconde 
reclame  votre  atterrage  sur  un  point  d'ou  vous  puis- 
siez  gtre  en  mesure  d'intercepter  les  secours  destines 
potir  New  York ;  et  la  troisieme  vous  off  re  un  terme 
de  comparaison  entre  la  plus  grande  force  qui  puisse 
escort er  ces  secours,  et  cette  avec  laquelle  vous  pou- 
vez  les  attaquer.  II  est  enclore  k  observer  qu' 
excepte  les  trois  vaisseaux  de  ligne,  tous  les  autres 
(a  Charleston)  sont  dans  le  port,  et  que  les  plus  gros 
n'en  peuvent  sortir,  qu'apr^s  avoir  ete  alleges,  et 
avec  la  concurrence  d'une  haute  marree  et  d'un  vent 
propice. 

Telles  sont.  Monsieur  le  Chevalier,  les  choses  dont 
ma  mission  a  pour  objet  de  vous  rendre  compte,  et 
comme  il  est  de  toute  importance  que  ces  informa- 
tions vous  parviennent  le  plus  tot  possible,  j'ai  cru 
ne  pas  devoir  negliger  la  probabilite,  qui  s 'off re  de 
les  faire  devancer  votre  arrivee. 

En  supposant,  Monsieur  le  Chevalier,  que  le  fier 
Rodrique  vous  rencontre  et  que  vous  jugiez  k  propos 
de  vous  rendre  en  droiture  k  Sandy  Hook,  il  est  un 
moyen  de  faire  que  les  dep^ches  qui  vous  attendant 
k  Rhode  Island  et  du  Cap  Henry  vous  parviennent 
aussi  promptement  qui  si  vous  aviez  atterri  k  I'un 
de  ces  deux  points:   ce  serait  de  d^p8cher,  vers  Tun 


Private  Correspondence  199 

ou  Tautre,  Tun  de  vos  plus  legers  vaisseaux  qui  re- 
cevrait  a  son  bord  I'officier  charge  de  ces  depeches, 
et  vous  irait  rejoindre  vers  Sandy  Hook,  ou  vraisem- 
blablement  il  se  rendrait  aussitot  que  votre  flotte,  ou 
du  moins  beaucoup  plustot  que  les  reponses  de  Gen- 
eral Washington  ou  de  Monsieur  le  Marquis  de 
Lafayette,  aux  lettres  qui  leur  annonceraient  votre 
arrivee. 

Si  le  Cap  Henry  etait  le  point  choisi,  j'oserais  vous 
prier.  Monsieur  le  Chevalier,  afin  d'eviter  tous  delais, 
d'ordonner  qu'k  la  vue,  du  signal  que  vous  savez,  le 
vaisseau  y  r6ponde  par  un  signal  contraire,  je  veux 
dire  en  avertissant  la  position  des  pavilions:  qu'il 
envoie  sa  chaloupe  h  terre  avec  un  officier  muni  des 
mots  de  reconnaissance ;  que  cet  officier  me  donne  la 
premiere  partie  de  ces  mots  et  regoive  de  moi  la 
seconde.  Par  la  je  crois,  Monsieur  le  Chevalier,  que 
toute  possibilite  de  surprise  est  sauvee,  de  part  et 
d 'autre,  sans  qu'il  y  ait  un  seul  instant  de  perdre  par 
le  ceremonial  de  la  reconnaissance. 


TO    BARON    STEUBEN 

Whippany,  June  25,  1780. 

Dear  Baron: 

The  enemy,  the  day  before  yesterday,  made  a  for- 
ward movement  to  Springfield,  which  they  burnt, 
and  retired  to  Elizabethtown  Point.  The  same  even- 
ing they  crossed  over  to  Staten  Island,  and  there 
are  a  great  many  concurring  circumstances  which 
make  it  probable  we  shall  next  hear  of  them  on  the 
North  River.     As  you  are  at  West  Point  the  General 


200  Alexander  Hamilton 

wishes  you  to  remain  there  until  the  present  appear- 
ances come  to  some  result.  He  has  confidence  in 
your  judgment,  and  wishes  you  to  give  your  advice 
and  assistance  to  the  commanding  officer.  As  you 
have  no  command  in  the  post  you  can  only  do  this 
in  a  private,  friendly  way;  but  I  dare  say  General 
Howe  will  be  happy  to  consult  you.  You  will  con- 
sider this  as  a  private  letter,  in  which  I  rather  con- 
vey you  the  General's  wishes  than  his  commands. 

All  the  army  is  in  march  toward  you,  and  will  be 
at  Pompton  this  evening. 


TO    BARON    STEUBEN. 

Headquarters,  Ramapo,  June  30,  1780. 

Agreeably  to  your  request,  my  dear  Baron,  I  com- 
municated your  project  to  the  General.  Happily 
the  inactivity  of  the  enemy  has  given  us  time  to 
make  dispositions  which  render  the  calling  out  of  the 
militia  unnecessary,  and  the  whole  has  been  accord- 
ingly countermanded. 

The  General  requests  that  when  you  have  com- 
pleted the  object  of  your  errand  in  your  department, 
and  put  things  in  train,  you  will  rejoin  the  army. 

I  wrote  you  a  line  from  Whippany,  of  which  you 
made  no  mention. 


TO    GENERAL  ANTHONY   WAYNE 

July  6,  1780. 

Dear  General: 

Doctor  W.  Mendy  is  one  of  those  characters  that 
for  its  honesty,  simplicity,  and  helplessness  interests 


Private  Correspondence  201 

my  humanity.  He  is  exceedingly  anxious  to  be  in 
the  service,  and,  I  beheve,  has  been  forced  out  of  it 
not  altogether  by  fair  play.  He  is  just  what  I  should 
like  for  a  military  parson,  except  that  he  does  not 
drink.  He  will  fight,  and  he  will  not  insist  upon 
your  going  to  heaven  whether  you  will  or  not.  He 
tells  me  there  is  a  vacancy  in  your  brigade.  I  should 
be  really  happy  if,  through  your  influence,  he  can 
fill  it.     Pray  take  care  of  the  good  old  man.' 


TO    BARON    STEUBEN 

Headquarters,  July  23,  1780. 

I  have  received,  my  dear  Baron,  your  two  letters 
of  the  sixteenth  and  eighteenth.  On  the  formation 
of  the  light  infantry,  the  General  has  already  written 
to  you.  I  presume  it  will  be,  ultimately,  nearly  as 
you  have  proposed. 

Smith  set  out  some  days  since  to  join  you.  Brad- 
ford, I  am  told,  is  undecided  about  entering  into  the 
office.  Col.  Scammel  has  promised  to  bring  him  to 
me,  and  if  he  accepts,  we  will  forward  him.  I  be- 
lieve Prescott  will  be  appointed  in  the  light  infantry. 
Entre  nous,  't  is  not  easy  to  find  good  majors  for  this 
corps  in  the  Massachusetts  Line,  and  as  it  will  act  a 
good  deal  with  the  French  troops,  we  wish  it  (for 
this  additional  reason)  to  be  well  officered.  Prescott 
will  answer  the  purpose:  but  he  is  not  yet  to  know 
that  he  is  in  contemplation.  We  shall  not  long  con- 
tinue in  our  present  position.     The  distinctions  of 

'  Now  first  printed  from  the  original  in  the  Wayne  MSS.  I  owe  this 
letter  to  the  kindness  of  the  Hon.  George  Bancroft. 


202  Alexander  Hamilton 

departments  are  an  old  story,  which  now  do  not 
exist  except  with  respect  to  South  Carolina.  You 
are  with  a  detachment  of  the  main  army. 

I  dare  say  all  you  are  doing  will  be  found  right. 
I  shall  join  my  beau-pere  to  save  you  from  the  cord. 
The  arrangement  for  your  department  was  unfor- 
tunately sent  to  Congress  soon  after  you  went  from 
here,  with  the  most  pressing  instances  to  determine 
upon  it  without  delay.  We  have  heard  nothing  of 
it  since.  We  have  repeated  our  prayers  and  exhorta- 
tions. If  we  get  no  answer  in  three  or  four  days,  we 
must  determine  for  ourselves. 

Major  Francis  is  returned  from  Philadelphia,  but  I 
have  not  seen  him  since  the  arrival  of  your  letters. 
I  will  move  the  inquiry  you  wish  when  I  see  him. 
Can  you  do  any  thing  for  him  in  your  department? 

A  severe  stroke  upon  us  is,  that  our  arms  expected 
from  France  are  not  arrived.  I  do  not  know  how 
we  shall  be  able  to  arm  our  recruits. 

Graves  sailed  from  the  Hook  the  nineteenth.  We 
had  been  playing  off  and  on  two  days. 


TO   MISS   SCHUYLER  ^ 

September  6,  1780. 

Most  people  here  are  groaning  under  a  very  dis- 
agreeable piece  of  intelligence  just  come  from  the 
southward,  that  Gates  has  had  a  total  defeat  near 

^  Miss  Elizabeth  Schuyler,  whom  Hamilton  met  first  at  Albany  on 
his  mission  to  Gates  in  1777.  She  was  the  daughter  of  General  Philip 
Schuyler.  At  the  time  of  this  letter  she  and  Hamilton  were  engaged 
and  they  were  married  Dec.  14,  1780. 


Private  Correspondence  203 

Camden,  in  South  Carolina.  Cornwallis  and  he  met 
in  the  night  of  the  fifteenth,  by  accident,  marching 
to  the  same  point.  The  advanced  guards  skirmished, 
and  the  two  armies  halted  and  formed  till  morning. 
In  the  morning  a  battle  ensued,  in  which  the  militia, 
and  Gates  with  them,  immediately  ran  away,  and 
left  the  Continental  troops  to  contend  with  the 
enemy's  whole  force. 

They  did  it  obstinately,  and  probably  are  most  of 
them  cut  off.  Gates,  however,  who  writes  to  Con- 
gress, seems  to  know  very  little  what  has  become  of 
his  army.  He  showed  that  age  and  the  long  labors 
and  fatigues  of  a  military  life  had  not  in  the  least 
impaired  his  activity,  for  in  three  days  and  a  half  he 
reached  Hillsborough,  one  hundred  and  eighty  miles 
from  the  scene  of  action,  leaving  all  his  troops  to 
take  care  of  themselves,  and  get  out  of  the  scrape 
as  well  as  they  could. 

He  has  confirmed,  in  this  instance,  the  opinion  I 
always  had  of  him.  This  event  will  have  very  seri- 
ous consequences  to  the  southward.  People's  im- 
aginations have  already  given  up  North  Carolina  and 
Virginia ;  but  I  do  not  believe  either  of  them  will  fall. 
I  am  certain  Virginia  cannot.  This  misfortune 
affects  me  less  than  others,  because  it  is  not  in  my 
temper  to  repine  at  evils  that  are  past,  but  to  en- 
deavor to  draw  good  out  of  them,  and  because  I 
think  our  safety  depends  on  a  total  change  of  system, 
and  this  change  of  system  will  only  be  produced  by 
misfortune. 


204  Alexander  Hamilton 

TO   JAMES   DUANE 

September  6,  1780. 

My  Dear  Sir: 

The  letter  accompanying  this  has  lain  by  two  or 
three  days  for  want  of  an  opportunity.  I  have  heard 
since  of  Gates'  defeat:  a  very  good  comment  on  the 
necessity  of  changing  our  system.  His  passion  for 
militia,  I  fancy,  will  be  a  little  cured,  and  he  will 
cease  to  think  them  the  best  bulwark  of  American 
liberty.  What  think  you  of  the  conduct  of  this 
great  man?  I  am  his  enemy  personally,  for  unjust 
and  unprovoked  attacks  upon  my  character ;  there- 
fore what  I  say  of  him  ought  to  be  received  as  from 
an  enemy,  and  have  no  more  weight  than  as  it  is 
consistent  with  fact  and  common  sense.  But  did 
ever  any  one  hear  of  such  a  disposition  or  such  a 
flight?  His  best  troops  placed  on  the  side  strongest 
by  nature,  his  worst  on  that  weakest  by  nature,  and 
his  attack  made  with  these.  'T  is  impossible  to  give 
a  more  complete  picture  of  military  absurdity.  It 
is  equally  against  the  maxims  of  war  and  common 
sense.  We  see  the  consequences.  His  left  ran  away, 
and  left  his  right  uncovered.  His  right  wing  turned 
on  the  left  has  in  all  probability  been  cut  off.  Though, 
in  truth,  the  General  seems  to  have  known  very 
little  what  became  of  his  army.  Had  he  placed  his 
militia  on  his  right,  supported  by  the  morass, 
and  his  Continental  troops  on  his  left,  where  it 
seems  he  was  most  vulnerable,  his  right  would  have 
been  more  secure,  and  his  left  would  have  op- 
posed the  enemy;  and  instead  of  going  backward 
when  he  ordered  to  attack,  would  have  gone  for- 


Private  Correspondence  205 

ward.  The  reverse  of  what  has  happened  might 
have  happened. 

But  was  there  ever  an  instance  of  a  general  run- 
ning away,  as  Gates  has  done,  from  his  whole  army? 
And  was  there  ever  so  precipitate  a  flight?  One 
hundred  and  eighty  miles  in  three  days  and  a  half. 
It  does  admirable  credit  to  the  activity  of  a  man  at 
his  time  of  life.  But  it  disgraces  the  general  and 
the  soldier.  I  have  always  believed  him  to  be  very 
far  short  of  a  Hector,  or  a  Ulysses.  All  the  world, 
I  think,  will  begin  to  agree  with  me. 

But  what  will  be  done  by  Congress?  Will  he  be 
changed  or  not?  If  he  is  changed,  for  God's  sake 
overcome  prejudice,  and  send  Greene.  You  know 
my  opinion  of  him.  I  stake  my  reputation  on  the 
events,  give  him  but  fair  play. 

But,  above  all  things,  let  us  have,  without  delay, 
a  vigorous  government,  and  a  well  constituted  army 
for  the  war. 


TO   WASHINGTON 

Verplanck's  Point,  Sept.  25,  1780. 

Dear  Sir: 

You  will  see  by  the  enclosed  that  we  are  too  late. 
Arnold  went  by  water  to  the  Vulture.  I  shall  write 
to  General  Greene,  advising  him,  without  making  a 
bustle,  to  be  in  readiness  to  march,  and  even  to  de- 
tach a  brigade  this  way;  for,  though  I  do  not  believe 
the  project  will  go  on,  yet  it  is  possible  Arnold  has 
made  such  dispositions  with  the  garrison  as  may 
tempt  the  enemy,  in  its  present  weakness,  to  make 
the  stroke  this  night,  and  it  seems  prudent  to  be 


2o6  Alexander  Hamilton 

providing  against  it.  I  shall  endeavor  to  find  Meigs, 
and  request  him  to  march  to  the  garrison,  and  shall 
make  some  arrangements  here.  I  hope  your  Excel- 
lency will  approve  these  steps,  as  there  may  be  no 
time  to  be  lost.  The  Vulture  is  gone  down  to  New 
York.^ 


TO   GENERAL   GREENE 

Verplanck's  Point,  25th  Sept.,  1780. 

Dear  Sir: 

There  has  just  been  imfolded  at  this  place  a  scene 
of  the  blackest  treason.  Arnold  has  fled  to  the 
enemy — Andre,  the  British  Adjutant-General,  is  in 
our  possession  as  a  spy.  His  capture  unravelled  the 
mystery. 

West  Point  was  to  have  been  the  sacrifice.  All 
the  dispositions  have  been  made  for  the  purpose,  and 
't  is  possible,  though  not  probable,  we  may  still  see 
the  execution.  The  wind  is  fair.  I  came  here  in 
pursuit  of  Arnold,  but  was  too  late.  I  advise  your 
putting  the  army  under  marching  orders  and  detach- 
ing a  brigade  immediately  this  way. 


TO    Miss   SCHUYLER 

September  25,  1780. 

Arnold,  hearing  of  the  plot  being  detected,  imme- 
diately fled  to  the  enemy.     I  went  in  pursuit  of  him, 

^  This  letter  is  reprinted  from  the  Writings  of  Washington,  vii.,  215. 
It  is  also  given  without  date  in  the  History  of  the  Republic,  ii.,  55. 
Hamilton  had  been  sent,  as  soon  as  Arnold's  escape  was  known,  to 
Verplanck's  Point  to  try  to  intercept  him,  and  this  letter  was  written 
on  his  arrival,  which  he  found  was  too  late,  for  the  bird  had  flown  and 
was  safe  on  board  the  Vulture,  an  English  sloop-of-war. 


Private  Correspondence  207 

but  was  much  too  late ;  and  could  hardly  regret  the 
disappointment,  when,  on  my  return,  I  saw  an  ami- 
able woman,  frantic  with  distress  for  the  loss  of  a 
husband  she  tenderly  loved ;  a  traitor  to  his  country 
and  to  his  fame;  a  disgrace  to  his  connections:  it 
was  the  most  affecting  scene  I  ever  was  witness  to. 
She,  for  a  considerable  time,  entirely  lost  herself. 
The  General  went  up  to  see  her,  and  she  upbraided 
him  with  being  in  a  plot  to  murder  her  child.  One 
moment  she  raved,  another  she  melted  into  tears. 
Sometimes  she  pressed  her  infant  to  her  bosom,  and 
lamented  its  fate,  occasioned  by  the  imprudence  of 
its  father,  in  a  manner  that  would  have  pierced  in- 
sensibility itself.  All  the  sweetness  of  beauty,  all  the 
loveliness  of  innocence,  all  the  tenderness  of  a  wife, 
and  all  the  fondness  of  a  mother  showed  themselves 
in  her  appearance  and  conduct.  We  have  every 
reason  to  believe  that  she  was  entirely  unacquainted 
with  the  plan,  and  that  the  first  knowledge  of  it  was 
when  Arnold  went  to  tell  her  he  must  banish  himself 
from  his  country  and  from  her  forever.  She  in- 
stantly fell  into  a  convulsion,  and  he  left  her  in  that 
situation. 

This  morning  she  is  more  composed.  I  paid  her  a 
visit,  and  endeavored  to  sooth  her  by  every  method 
in  my  power,  though  you  may  imagine  she  is  not 
easily  to  be  consoled.  Added  to  her  other  distresses, 
she  is  very  apprehensive  the  resentment  of  her 
country  will  fall  upon  her  (who  is  only  unfortunate) 
for  the  guilt  of  her  husband. 

I  have  tried  to  persuade  her  that  her  fears  are 
ill-founded,  but  she  will    not  be  convinced.      She 


2o8  Alexander  Hamilton 

received  us  in  bed,  with  ever}^  circiimstance  that 
would  interest  our  sympathy ;  and  her  sufferings  were 
so  eloquent,  that  I  wished  myself  her  brother,  to  have 
a  right  to  become  her  defender.  As  it  is,  I  have 
entreated  her  to  enable  me  to  give  her  proofs  of  my 
friendship.  Could  I  forgive  Arnold  for  sacrificing 
his  honor,  reputation,  and  duty,  I  could  not  forgive 
him  for  acting  a  part  that  must  have  forfeited  the 
esteem  of  so  fine  a  woman.  At  present  she  almost 
forgets  his  crime  in  his  misfortunes ;  and  her  horror 
at  the  guilt  of  the  traitor  is  lost  in  her  love  of  the 
man.  But  a  virtuous  mind  cannot  long  esteem  a 
base  one ;  and  time  will  make  her  despise  if  it  cannot 
make  her  hate. 


TO   MISS   SCHUYLER 

Tappan,  Oct.  2,  1780. 

Poor  Andr6  suffers  to-day.  Every  thing  that  is 
amiable  in  virtue,  in  fortitude,  in  delicate  sentiment, 
and  accomplished  manners,  pleads  for  him;  but 
hard-hearted  policy  calls  for  a  sacrifice.     He  must 

die .     I  send  you  my  account  of  Arnold's  affair; 

and  to  justify  myself  to  your  sentiments,  I  must  in- 
form you  that  I  urged  a  compliance  with  Andre's 
request  to  be  shot ;  and  I  do  not  think  it  would  have 
had  an  ill  effect;  but  some  people  are  only  sensible 
to  motives  of  policy,  and  sometimes,  from  a  narrow 
disposition,  mistake  it. 

When  Andre's  tale  comes  to  be  told,  and  present 
resentment  is  over,  the  refusing  him  the  privilege  of 


Private  Correspondence  209 

choosing  the  manner  of  his  death  will  be  branded 
with  too  much  obstinacy. 

It  was  proposed  to  me  to  suggest  to  him  the  idea 
of  an  exchange  for  Arnold ;  but  I  knew  I  should  have 
forfeited  his  esteem  by  doing  it,  and  therefore  de- 
clined it.  As  a  man  of  honor,  he  could  but  reject 
it,  and  I  would  not  for  the  world  have  proposed  to 
him  a  thing  which  must  have  placed  me  in  the 
unamiable  light  of  supposing  him  capable  of  mean- 
ness, or  of  not  feeling  myself  the  impropriety  of  the 
measure.  I  confess  to  you  I  had  the  weakness  to 
value  the  esteem  of  a  dying  man,  because  I  rever- 
enced his  merit. 


TO   JOHN   LAURENS  * 

October,  1780. 

Since  my  return  from  Hartford,  my  dear  Laurens, 
my  mind  has  been  too  little  at  ease  to  permit  me  to 
write  to  you  sooner.  It  has  been  wholly  occupied  by 
the  affecting  and  tragic  consequences  of  Arnold's 
treason.  My  feelings  were  never  put  to  so  severe  a 
trial.  You  will  no  doubt  have  heard  the  principal 
facts  before  this  reaches  you.  But  there  are  par- 
ticulars, to  which  my  situation  gave  me  access,  that 
cannot  have  come  to  your  knowledge  from  public  re- 
port, which  I  am  persuaded  you  will  find  interesting. 

From  several  circumstances,  the  project  seems  to 

^  This  letter  is  the  best  description  extant  of  Arnold's  treason,  and 
all  the  accompanying  incidents.  It  is  admirably  written,  and  shows, 
in  a  striking  way,  Hamilton's  literary  skill.  In  the  edition  of  1850  it 
is  dated  September,  which  is  an  obvious  error,  as  Andr4  was  not 
executed  until  October  2d,  and  this  letter  describes  his  execution. 

VOL.  IX.— 14. 


2IO  Alexander  Hamilton 

have  originated  with  Arnold  himself,  and  to  have 
been  long  premeditated.  The  first  overture  is  traced 
back  to  some  time  in  June  last.  It  was  conveyed  in 
a  letter  to  Colonel  Robinson,  the  substance  of  which 
was  that  the  ingratitude  he  had  experienced  from 
his  country,  concurring  with  other  causes,  had  en- 
tirely changed  his  principles;  that  he  now  only 
sought  to  restore  himself  to  the  favor  of  his  king  by 
some  signal  proof  of  his  repentance,  and  would  be 
happy  to  open  a  correspondence  with  Sir  Henry 
Clinton  for  that  purpose.  About  this  period  he 
made  a  journey  to  Connecticut,  on  his  return  from 
which  to  Philadelphia,  he  solicited  the  command  of 
West  Point,  alleging  that  the  effects  of  his  wounds 
had  disqualified  him  for  the  active  duties  of  the 
field.  The  sacrifice  of  this  important  post  was  the 
atonement  he  intended  to  make.  General  Washing- 
ton hesitated  the  less  to  gratify  an  officer  who  had 
rendered  such  eminent  services,  as  he  was  convinced 
the  post  might  be  safely  intrusted  to  one  who  had 
given  so  many  distinguished  specimens  of  his  brav- 
ery. In  the  beginning  of  August  he  joined  the  army, 
and  renewed  his  application.  The  enemy,  at  this 
juncture,  had  embarked  the  greatest  part  of  their 
forces  on  an  expedition  to  Rhode  Island,  and  our 
army  was  in  motion  to  compel  them  to  relinquish  the 
enterprise,  or  to  attack  New  York  in  its  weakened 
state.  The  General  offered  Arnold  the  left  wing  of 
the  army,  which  he  declined,  on  the  pretext  already 
mentioned,  but  not  without  visible  embarrassment. 
He  certainly  might  have  executed  the  duties  of  such 
a  temporary  command,  and  it  was  expected,  from 


Private  Correspondence  211 

his  enterprising  temper,  that  he  would  gladly  have 
embraced  so  splendid  an  opportunity.  But  he  did 
not  choose  to  be  diverted  a  moment  from  his  favorite 
object,  probably  from  an  apprehension  that  some 
different  disposition  might  have  taken  place,  which 
would  have  excluded  him.  The  extreme  solicitude 
he  discovered  to  get  possession  of  the  post  would 
have  led  to  a  suspicion  of  treachery,  had  it  been  pos- 
sible from  his  past  conduct  to  have  supposed  him 
capable  of  it. 

The  correspondence  thus  begun  was  carried  on  be- 
tween Arnold  and  Major  Andre,  Adjutant-General 
to  the  British  army,  in  behalf  of  Sir  Henry  Clinton, 
under  feigned  signatures,  and  in  a  mercantile  dis- 
guise. In  an  intercepted  letter  of  Arnold's,  which 
lately  fell  into  our  hands,  he  proposes  an  interview, 
"  to  settle  the  risks  and  profits  of  the  copartnership," 
and,  in  the  same  style  of  metaphor,  intimates  an  ex- 
pected augmentation  of  the  garrison,  and  speaks  of 
it  as  the  means  of  extending  their  traffic.  It  appears, 
by  another  letter,  that  Andre  was  to  have  met  him 
on  the  lines,  under  the  sanction  of  a  flag,  in  the  char- 
acter of  Mr.  John  Anderson.  But  some  cause  or 
other  not  known  prevented  this  interview. 

The  twentieth  of  last  month,  Robinson '  and 
Andre  went  up  the  river  in  the  Vulture,  sloop-of-war. 
Robinson  sent  a  flag  to  Arnold  with  two  letters :  one 
to  General  Putnam,  inclosed  in  another  to  himself, 

'  Beverly  Robinson,  son  of  John  Robinson  of  Virginia.  He  married 
Susanna  Phillipse  and  thus  acquired  fortune  and  part  of  the  famous 
Phillipse  estate.  He  was  a  strong  Tory  and  colonel  of  the  regiment  of 
Royal  Americans  in  the  British  service.  After  the  Revolution  he  fled 
to  England,  where  he  died. 


212  Alexander  Hamilton 

proposing  an  interview  with  Putnam,  or,  in  his  ab- 
sence, with  Arnold,  to  adjust  some  private  concerns. 
The  one  to  General  Putnam  was  evidently  meant  as 
a  cover  to  the  other,  in  case,  by  accident,  the  letters 
should  have  fallen  tmder  the  inspection  of  a  third 
person. 

General  Washington  crossed  the  river  on  his  way 
to  Hartford  the  day  these  despatches  arrived.  Ar- 
nold, conceiving  he  must  have  heard  of  the  flag, 
thought  it  necessary,  for  the  sake  of  appearances,  to 
submit  the  letters  to  him,  and  ask  his  opinion  of 
the  propriety  of  complying  with  the  request.  The 
General,  with  his  usual  caution,  though  without  the 
least  surmise  of  the  design,  dissuaded  him  from  it, 
and  advised  him  to  reply  to  Robinson  that  whatever 
related  to  his  private  affairs  must  be  of  a  civil  na- 
ture, and  could  only  be  properly  addressed  to  the 
civil  authority.  This  reference  fortunately  deranged 
the  plan,  and  was  the  first  link  in  the  chain  of  events 
that  led  to  the  detection.  The  interview  could  no 
longer  take  place  in  the  form  of  a  flag,  but  was 
obliged  to  be  managed  in  a  secret  manner. 

Arnold  employed  one  Smith  ^  to  go  on  board  the 
Vulture  on  the  night  of  the  twenty-second,  to  bring 
Andre  on  shore,  with  a  pass  for  Mr.  John  Anderson. 
Andre  came  ashore  accordingly,  and  was  conducted 
within  a  picket  of  ours  to  the  house  of  Smith,  where 
Arnold  and  he  remained  together  in  close  conference 
all  that  night  and  the  day  following.     At  daylight, 

^  Joshua  H.  Smith,  who  had  been  employed  by  General  Howe, 
Arnold's  predecessor,  to  gather  intelligence.  He  had  always  been 
thought  a  loyal  man,  but  Arnold  succeeded  in  corrupting  him. 


Private  Correspondence  213 

in  the  morning,  the  commanding  officer  at  King's 
Ferry,  without  the  privity  of  Arnold,  moved  a 
couple  of  pieces  of  cannon  to  a  point  opposite  to 
v^here  the  Vulture  lay,  and  obliged  her  to  take  a 
more  remote  station.  This  event,  or  some  lurking 
distrust,  made  the  boatmen  refuse  to  convey  the 
two  passengers  back,  and  disconcerted  Arnold  so 
much  that,  by  one  of  those  strokes  of  infatuation 
which  often  confound  the  schemes  of  men  consci- 
ous of  guilt,  he  insisted  on  Andre's  exchanging  his 
uniform  for  a  disguise,  and  returning  in  a  mode 
different  from  that  in  which  he  came.  Andre,  who 
had  been  undesignedly  brought  within  our  posts  in 
the  first  instance,  remonstrated  warmly  against  this 
new  and  dangerous  expedient.  But  Arnold  per- 
sisting in  declaring  it  impossible  for  him  to  return  as 
he  came,  he  at  length  reluctantly  yielded  to  his  di- 
rection, and  consented  to  change  his  dress  and  take 
the  route  he  recommended.  Smith  furnished  the 
disguise,  and  in  the  evening  passed  King's  Ferry 
with  him  and  proceeded  to  Crompond,'  where  they 
stopped  the  remainder  of  the  night,  at  the  instance 
of  a  militia  officer,"  to  avoid  being  suspected  by  him. 
The  next  morning  they  resumed  their  journey, 
Smith  accompanying  Andre  a  little  beyond  Pine's 
Bridge,  where  he  left  him.  He  had  reached  Tarry- 
town,  when  he  was  taken  up  by  three  militiamen,^ 
who  rushed  out  of  the  woods  and  seized  his  horse. 
At  this   critical  moment  his   presence   of  mind 

*  A  place  about  eight  miles  from  Verplanck's  Point. 

2  Captain  Boyd. 

3  Paulding,  Van  Wart,  and  Williams. 


214  Alexander  Hamilton 

forsook  him.  Instead  of  producing  his  pass,  which 
would  have  extricated  him  from  our  parties,  and 
could  have  done  him  no  harm  with  his  own,  he  asked 
the  militiamen  if  they  were  of  the  upper  or  lower 
party;  descriptive  appellations  known  among  the 
enemy's  refugee  corps.  The  militiamen  replied  they 
were  of  the  lower  party,  upon  which  he  told  them  he 
was  a  British  officer,  and  pressed  them  not  to  detain 
him,  as  he  was  upon  urgent  business.  This  confession 
removed  all  doubts,  and  it  was  in  vain  he  afterwards 
produced  his  pass.  He  was  instantly  forced  off  to  a 
place  of  greater  security,  where,  after  a  careful  search, 
there  were  found  concealed  in  the  feet  of  his  stock- 
ings several  papers  of  importance,  delivered  to 
him  by  Arnold!  Among  these  were  a  plan  of  the 
fortifications  of  West  Point;  a  memorial  from  the 
engineer  on  the  attack  and  defence  of  the  place ;  re- 
turns of  the  garrison,  cannon,  and  stores;  copy  of 
the  minutes  of  a  council  of  war  held  by  General 
Washington  a  few  weeks  before.  The  prisoner  at 
first  was  inadvertently  ordered  to  Arnold,  but  on 
recollection,  while  still  on  the  way,  he  was  counter- 
manded and  sent  to  Old  Salem.  The  papers  were 
enclosed  in  a  letter  to  General  Washington,  which, 
having  taken  a  route  different  from  that  by  which  he 
returned,  made  a  circuit  that  afforded  leisure  for 
another  letter,  through  an  ill-judged  delicacy,  written 
to  Arnold  with  information  of  Anderson's  capture, 
to  get  to  him  an  hour  before  General  Washington 
arrived  at  his  quarters;  time  enough  to  elude  the 
fate  that  awaited  him.  He  went  down  the  river  on 
his  barge  to  the  Vulture  with  such  precipitate  con- 


Private  Correspondence  215 

fusion  that  he  did  not  take  with  him  a  single  paper 
useful  to  the  enemy.  On  the  first  notice  of  the 
affair  he  was  pursued,  but  much  too  late  to  be 
overtaken. 

There  was  some  color  for  imagining  that  it  was  a 
part  of  the  plan  to  betray  the  General  into  the  hands 
of  the  enemy.  Arnold  was  very  anxious  to  ascer- 
tain from  him  the  precise  day  of  his  return,  and  the 
enemy's  movements  seem  to  have  corresponded  to 
this  point.  But  if  it  was  really  the  case  it  was  very 
injudicious.  The  success  must  have  depended  on 
surprise,  and  as  the  officers  at  the  advanced  posts 
were  not  in  the  secret  their  measures  might  have 
given  the  alarm,  and  General  Washington,  taking 
the  command  of  the  post,  might  have  rendered  the 
whole  scheme  abortive.  Arnold,  it  is  true,  had  so 
dispersed  the  garrison  as  to  have  made  a  defence 
difficult  but  not  impracticable;  and  the  acquisition 
of  West  Point  was  of  such  magnitude  to  the  enemy 
that  it  would  have  been  unwise  to  connect  it  with 
any  other  object,  however  great,  which  might  make 
the  obtaining  of  it  precarious. 

Arnold,  a  moment  before  the  setting  out,  went 
into  Mrs.  Arnold's  apartment,  and  informed  her  that 
some  transactions  had  just  come  to  light  which  must 
forever  banish  him  from  his  country.  She  fell  into 
a  swoon  at  this  declaration :  and  he  left  her  in  it  to 
consult  his  own  safety,  till  the  servants,  alarmed  by 
her  cries,  came  to  her  relief.  She  remained  frantic 
all  day,  accusing  every  one  who  approached  her 
with  an  intention  to  murder  her  child  (an  infant  in 
her  arms),  and  exhibiting  every  other  mark  of  the 


2i6  Alexander  Hamilton 

most  genuine  and  agonizing  distress.  Exhausted  by 
the  fatigue  and  tumult  of  her  spirits,  her  phrensy 
subsided  towards  evening,  and  she  sank  into  all  the 
sadness  of  affliction.  It  was  impossible  not  to  have 
been  touched  with  her  situation.  Every  thing 
affecting  in  female  tears,  or  in  the  misfortunes  of 
beauty ;  every  thing  pathetic  in  the  wounded  tender- 
ness of  a  wife,  or  in  the  apprehensive  fondness  of  a 
mother ;  and,  till  I  have  reason  to  change  the  opinion, 
I  will  add,  every  thing  amiable  in  suffering  innocence' 
conspired  to  make  her  an  object  of  sympathy  to  all 
who  were  present.  She  experienced  the  most  deli- 
cate attentions  and  every  friendly  office,  till  her  de- 
parture for  Philadelphia. 

Andre  was,  without  loss  of  time,  conducted  to  the 
headquarters  of  the  army,  where  he  was  imme- 
diately brought  before  a  Board  of  General  Officers, 
to  prevent  all  possibility  of  misrepresentation,  or 
cavil  on  the  part  of  the  enemy.  The  Board  reported 
that  he  ought  to  be  considered  as  a  spy,  and,  ac- 
cording to  the  laws  of  nations,  to  suffer  death,  which 
was  executed  two  days  after. 

Never,  perhaps,  did  a  man  suffer  death  with  more 
justice,  or  deserve  it  less.  The  first  step  he  took  after 
his  capture  was  to  write  a  letter  to  General  Wash- 
ington, conceived  in  terms  of  dignity  without  in- 
solence, and  apology  without  meanness.  The  scope 
of  it  was  to  vindicate  himself  from  the  imputation  of 
having  assumed  a  mean  character  for  treacherous  or 
interested  purposes;    asserting  that  he  had  been  in- 

^  Mrs.  Arnold,  as  Hamilton  supposed,  was  undoubtedly  free  from  all 
complicity  in  her  husband's  treason. 


Private  Correspondence  217 

voluntarily  an  impostor ;  that  contrary  to  his  inten- 
tion, which  was  to  meet  a  person  for  intelligence  on 
neutral  groimd,  he  had  been  betrayed  within  our 
posts,  and  forced  into  the  vile  condition  of  an  enemy 
in  disguise;  soliciting  only  that,  to  whatever  rigor 
policy  might  devote  him,  a  decency  of  treatment 
might  be  observed,  due  to  a  person  who,  though 
unfortunate,  had  been  guilty  of  nothing  dishonor- 
able. His  request  was  granted  in  its  full  extent; 
for,  in  the  whole  progress  of  the  affair,  he  was  treated 
with  the  most  scrupulous  delicacy.  When  brought 
before  the  Board  of  Officers  he  met  with  every 
mark  of  indulgence,  and  was  required  to  answer  no 
interrogatory  which  could  even  embarrass  his 
feelings.  On  his  part,  while  he  carefully  concealed 
every  thing  that  might  involve  others,  he  frankly 
confessed  all  the  facts  relating  to  himself ;  and, upon 
his  confession,  without  the  trouble  of  examining  a 
witness,  the  Board  made  their  report.  The  mem- 
bers of  it  were  not  more  impressed  with  the  candor 
and  firmness,  mixed  with  a  becoming  sensibility, 
which  he  displayed,  than  he  was  penetrated  with 
their  liberality  and  politeness.  He  acknowledged 
the  generosity  of  the  behavior  towards  him  in  every 
respect,  but  particularly  in  this,  in  the  strongest 
terms  of  manly  gratitude.  In  a  conversation  with 
a  gentleman  who  visited  him  after  his  trial,  he  said 
he  flattered  himself  he  had  never  been  illiberal ;  but 
if  there  were  any  remains  of  prejudice  in  his  mind, 
his  present  experience  must  obliterate  them. 

In  one  of  the  visits  I  made  to  him  (and  I  saw  him 
several  times  during  his  confinement),  he  begged  me 


2i8  Alexander  Hamilton 

to  be  the  bearer  of  a  request  to  the  General,  for  per- 
mission to  send  an  open  letter  to  Sir  Henry  Clinton. 
''  I  foresee  my  fate,"  said  he,  *'  and  though  I  pretend 
not  to  play  the  hero,  or  to  be  indifferent  about  life, 
yet  I  am  reconciled  to  whatever  may  happen,  con- 
scious that  misfortune,  not  guilt,  has  brought  it  upon 
me.  There  is  only  one  thing  that  disturbs  my 
tranquillity.  Sir  Henry  Clinton  has  been  too  good 
to  me;  he  has  been  lavish  of  his  kindness.  I  am 
bound  to  him  by  too  many  obligations,  and  love  him 
too  well,  to  bear  the  thought  that  he  should  reproach 
himself,  or  that  others  should  reproach  him,  on  the 
supposition  of  my  having  conceived  myself  obliged, 
by  his  instructions,  to  run  the  risk  I  did.  I  would 
not  for  the  world  leave  a  sting  in  his  mind  that 
should  imbitter  his  future  days."  He  could  scarce 
finish  the  sentence,  bursting  into  tears  in  spite  of  his 
efforts  to  suppress  them,  and  with  difficulty  collected 
himself  enough  afterwards  to  add,  "I  wish  to  be 
permitted  to  assure  him  I  did  not  act  under  this  im- 
pression, but  submitted  to  a  necessity  imposed  upon 
me,  as  contrary  to  my  own  inclination  as  by  his 
orders."  His  request  was  readily  complied  with, 
and  he  wrote  the  letter  annexed,  with  which  I  dare 
say  you  will  be  as  much  pleased  as  I  am,  both  for  the 
diction  and  sentiment. 

When  his  sentence  was  announced  to  him  he  re- 
marked that  since  it  was  his  lot  to  die,  there  was 
still  a  choice  in  the  mode,  which  would  make  a  ma- 
terial difference  in  his  feelings,  and  he  would  be 
happy,  if  possible,  to  be  indulged  with  a  professional 
death.     He  made  a  second  application,  by  letter,  in 


Private  Correspondence  219 

concise  but  persuasive  terms.  It  was  thought  this 
indulgence,  being  incompatible  with  the  customs  of 
war,  could  not  be  granted,  and  it  was  therefore 
determined,  in  both  cases,  to  evade  an  answer,  to 
spare  him  the  sensations  which  a  certain  knowledge 
of  the  intended  mode  would  inflict. 

In  going  to  the  place  of  execution,  he  bowed 
familiarly  as  he  went  along,  to  all  those  with  whom 
he  had  been  acquainted  in  his  confinement.  A 
smile  of  complacency  expressed  the  serene  fortitude 
of  his  mind.  Arrived  at  the  fatal  spot,  he  asked,with 
some  emotion,  ''Must  I  then  die  in  this  manner?" 
He  was  told  that  it  had  been  unavoidable.  ''  I  am 
reconciled  to  my  fate,"  said  he,  ''but  not  to  the 
mode. "  Soon,  however,  recollecting  himself,  he  add- 
ed:  "It  will  be  but  a  momentary  pang, "  and,  spring- 
ing upon  the  cart,  performed  the  last  offices  to  him- 
self, with  a  composure  that  excited  the  admiration 
and  melted  the  hearts  of  the  beholders.  Upon  being 
told  that  the  final  moment  was  at  hand,  and  asked  if 
he  had  anything  to  say,  he  answered:  "  Nothing  but 
to  request  you  will  witness  to  the  world  that  I  die 
like  a  brave  man."  Among  the  extraordinary  cir- 
cumstances that  attended  him,  in  the  midst  of  his 
enemies,  he  died  universally  esteemed  and  universally 
regretted. 

There  was  something  singularly  interesting  in  the 
character  and  fortunes  of  Andr6.  To  an  excellent 
understanding,  well  improved  by  education  and 
travel,  he  united  a  peculiar  elegance  of  mind  and 
manners,  and  the  advantage  of  a  pleasing  person. 
'T  is  said  he  possessed  a  pretty  taste  for  the  fine  arts, 


220  Alexander  Hamilton 

and  had  himself  attained  some  proficiency  in  poetry, 
music,  and  painting.  His  knowledge  appeared  with- 
out ostentation,  and  embellished  by  a  diffidence  that 
rarely  accompanies  so  many  talents  and  accom- 
plishments: which  left  you  to  suppose  more  than 
appeared.  His  sentiments  were  elevated,  and  in- 
spired esteem:  they  had  a  softness  that  conciliated 
affection.  His  elocution  was  handsome;  his  ad- 
dress easy,  polite,  and  insinuating.  By  his  merit  he 
had  acquired  the  unlimited  confidence  of  his  general, 
and  was  making  a  rapid  progress  in  military  rank  and 
reputation.  But  in  the  height  of  his  career,  flushed 
with  new  hopes  from  the  execution  of  a  project,  the 
most  beneficial  to  his  party  that  could  be  devised,  he 
was  at  once  precipitated  from  the  summit  of  pro- 
sperity, and  saw  all  the  expectations  of  his  ambition 
blasted,  and  himself  ruined. 

The  character  I  have  given  of  him,  is  drawn  partly 
from  what  I  saw  of  him  myself,  and  partly  from  in- 
formation. I  am  aware  that  a  man  of  real  merit  is 
never  seen  in  so  favorable  a  light  as  through  the 
medium  of  adversity:  the  clouds  that  surround  him 
are  shades  that  set  off  his  good  qualities.  Misfortune 
cuts  down  the  little  vanities  that,  in  prosperous 
times  serve  as  so  many  spots  in  his  virtues;  and 
gives  a  tone  of  humility  that  makes  his  worth  more 
amiable.  His  spectators,  who  enjoy  a  happier  lot, 
are  less  prone  to  detract  from  it,  through  envy,  and 
are  more  disposed,  by  compassion,  to  give  him  the 
credit  he  deserves,  and  perhaps  even  to  magnify  it. 

I  speak  not  of  Andre's  conduct  in  this  affair  as  a 
philosopher,  but  as  a  man  of  the  world.     The  au- 


Private  Correspondence  221 

thorized  maxims  and  practices  of  war  are  the  satires 
of  human  nature.  They  countenance  almost  e very- 
species  of  seduction  as  well  as  violence;  and  the 
general  who  can  make  most  traitors  in  the  army  of 
his  adversary  is  frequently  most  applauded. 

On  this  scale  we  acquit  Andre ;  while  we  could  not 
but  condemn  him,  if  we  were  to  examine  his  conduct 
by  the  sober  rules  of  philosophy  and  moral  rectitude. 
It  is,  however,  a  blemish  on  his  fame,  that  he  once  in- 
tended to  prostitute  a  flag:  about  this,  a  man  of  nice 
honor  ought  to  have  had  a  scruple ;  but  the  tempta- 
tion was  great:  let  his  misfortunes  cast  a  veil  over 
his  error. 

Several  letters  from  Sir  Henry  Clinton,  and  others, 
were  received  in  the  course  of  the  affair,  feebly  at- 
tempting to  prove  that  Andre  came  out  under  the 
protection  of  a  flag,  with  a  passport  from  a  general 
officer  in  active  service ;  and  consequently  could  not 
be  justly  detained.  Clinton  sent  a  deputation,  com- 
posed of  Lieutenant-General  Robinson,  Mr.  Elliot, 
and  Mr.  William  Smith,  to  represent,  as  he  said,  the 
true  state  of  Major  Andre's  case.  General  Greene 
met  Robinson,  and  had  a  conversation  with  him,  in 
which  he  reiterated  the  pretence  of  a  flag,  urged 
Andre's  release  as  a  personal  favor  to  Sir  Henry 
Clinton,  and  offered  any  friend  of  ours  in  their  power 
in  exchange.  Nothing  could  have  been  more  frivol- 
ous than  the  plea  which  was  used.  The  fact  was, 
that  beside  the  time,  manner,  object  of  the  interview, 
change  of  dress,  and  other  circumstances,  there 
was  not  a  single  formality  customary  with  flags ;  and 
the  passport  was   not  to  Major  Andre,  but  to  Mr. 


222  Alexander  Hamilton 

Anderson.  But  had  there  been,  on  the  contrary, 
all  the  formalities,  it  would  be  an  abuse  of  language 
to  say  that  the  sanction  of  a  flag  for  corrupting  an 
officer  to  betray  his  trust,  ought  to  be  respected. 
So  unjustifiable  a  purpose  would  not  only  destroy 
its  validity,  but  make  it  an  aggravation. 

Andre,  himself,  has  answered  the  argument,  by 
ridiculing  and  exploding  the  idea,  in  his  examination 
before  the  Board  of  Officers.  It  was  a  weakness  to 
urge  it. 

There  was,  in  truth,  no  way  of  saving  him.  Ar- 
nold or  he  must  have  been  the  victim;  the  former 
was  out  of  our  power. 

It  was  by  some  suspected  Arnold  had  taken  his 
measures  in  such  a  manner,  that  if  the  interview  had 
been  discovered  in  the  act,  it  might  have  been  in  his 
power  to  sacrifice  Andre  to  his  own  security.  This 
surmise  of  double  treachery  made  them  imagine 
Clinton  might  be  induced  to  give  up  Arnold  for 
Andre;  and  a  gentleman  took  occasion  to  suggest 
this  expedient  to  the  latter  as  a  thing  that  might  be 
proposed  by  him.  He  declined  it.  The  moment  he 
had  been  capable  of  so  much  fraility,  I  should  have 
ceased  to  esteem  him. 

The  infamy  of  Arnold's  conduct  previous  to  his 
desertion  is  only  equalled  by  his  baseness  since.  Be- 
side the  folly  of  writing  to  Sir  Henry  Clinton,  assur- 
ing him  that  Andre  had  acted  under  a  passport  from 
him,  and  according  to  his  directions  while  command- 
ing officer  at  a  post,  and  that,  therefore,  he  did  not 
doubt  he  would  be  immediately  sent  in,  he  had  the 
effrontery  to  write  to  General  Washington  in  the 


Private  Correspondence  223 

same  spirit,  with  the  addition  of  a  menace  of  re- 
taliation, if  the  sentence  should  be  carried  into  exe- 
cution. He  has  since  acted  the  farce  of  sending  in 
his  resignation.  This  man  is,  in  every  sense,  de- 
spicable. Added  to  the  scene  of  knavery  and  pros- 
titution during  his  command  in  Philadelphia,  which 
the  late  seizure  of  his  papers  has  unfolded,  the  his- 
tory of  his  command  at  West  Point  is  a  history  of 
little,  as  well  as  great  villainies.  He  practised  every 
dirty  art  of  peculation,  and  even  stooped  to  connec- 
tions with  the  sutlers  of  the  garrison  to  defraud  the 
public. 

To  his  conduct,  that  of  the  captors  of  Andr6  forms 
a  striking  contrast.  He  tempted  them  with  the 
offer  of  his  watch,  his  horse,  and  any  simi  of  money 
they  should  name.  They  rejected  his  offers  with 
indignation,  and  the  gold  that  could  seduce  a  man 
high  in  the  esteem  and  confidence  of  his  coimtry, 
who  had  the  remembrance  of  past  exploits,  the  mo- 
tives of  present  reputation  and  future  glory,  to  prop 
his  integrity,  had  no  charms  for  three  simple  peas- 
ants, leaning  only  on  their  virtue  and  an  honest  sense 
of  their  duty.  While  Arnold  is  handed  down  with 
execration  to  future  times,  posterity  will  repeat  with 
reverence  the  names  of  Van  Wart,  Paulding,  and 
Williams. 

I  congratulate  you,  my  friend,  on  our  happy  escape 
from  the  mischiefs  with  which  this  treason  was  big. 
It  is  a  new  comment  on  the  value  of  an  honest  man, 
and,  if  it  were  possible,  would  endear  you  to  me  more 
than  ever. 


2  24  Alexander  Hamilton 

TO    ISAAC    SEARS  ' 


Oct.   12,    1780. 


I  was  much  obliged  to  you,  my  dear  sir,  for  the 
letter  which  you  did  me  the  favor  to  write  me  since 
your  return  to  Boston.  I  am  sorry  to  find  that  the 
same  spirit  of  indifference  to  public  affairs  prevails. 
It  is  necessary  we  should  rouse  and  begin  to  do  our 
business  in  earnest,  or  we  shall  play  a  losing  game. 
It  is  impossible  the  contest  can  be  much  longer  sup- 
ported on  the  present  footing.  We  must  have  a  gov- 
ernment with  more  power.  We  must  have  a  tax  in 
kind.  We  must  have  a  foreign  loan.  We  must 
have  a  bank — on  the  true  principles  of  a  bank.  We 
must  have  an  administration  distinct  from  Congress, 
and  in  the  hands  of  single  men  imder  their  orders. 
We  must,  above  all  things,  have  an  army  for  the  war, 
and  an  establishment  that  will  interest  the  officers  in 
the  service. 

Congress  are  deliberating  on  our  military  affairs; 
but  I  apprehend  their  resolutions  will  be  tinctured 
with  the  old  spirit.  We  seem  to  be  proof  against  ex- 
perience. They  will,  however,  recommend  an  army 
for  the  war,  at  least,  as  a  primary  object.  All  those 
who  love  their  country  ought  to  exert  their  influence 
in  the  States  where  they  reside,  to  determine  them 
to  take  up  this  object  with  energy.  The  States  must 
sink  imder  the  burden  of  temporary  enlistments; 
and  the  enemy  will  conquer  us  by  degrees  during  the 
intervals  of  our  weakness. 

Clinton  is  now  said  to  be  making  a  considerable 

'  Isaac  Sears  was  one  of  the  early  patriot  leaders  in  New  York,  but 
never  rose  into  distinction  afterwards. 


Private  Correspondence  225 

detachment  to  the  southward.  My  fears  are  high, 
my  hopes  low.  We  are  told  here  there  is  to  be  a 
congress  of  the  neutral  powers  at  the  Hague,  for 
mediating  of  peace.  God  send  it  may  be  true.  We 
want  it ;  but  if  the  idea  goes  abroad,  ten  to  one  if  we 
do  not  fancy  the  thing  done,  and  fall  into  a  profound 
sleep  till  the  cannon  of  the  enemy  awaken  us  next 
campaign.     This  is  our  national  character. 


TO   JAMES   DUANE 

October  i8,  1780. 

My  Dear  Sir: 

Since  my  last  to  you,  I  have  had  the  pleasure  of 
receiving  two  letters  from  you.  I  am  sorry  to  find 
we  do  not  seem  to  agree  in  the  proper  remedies  to 
our  disorder,  at  least,  in  the  practicability  of  apply- 
ing those  which  are  proper.  Convinced,  as  I  am,  of 
the  absolute  insufficiency  of  our  present  system  to 
our  safety,  if  I  do  not  despair  of  the  republic,  it  is 
more  the  effect  of  constitution  than  of  judgment. 

With  the  sentiments  I  entertain  of  Gates,  I  can- 
not but  take  pleasure  in  his  removal;  and  with  the 
confidence  I  have  in  Greene,  I  expect  much  from  his 
being  the  successor;  at  least,  I  expect  all  his  circum- 
stances will  permit.  You  seem  to  have  mistaken 
me  on  the  subject  of  this  gentleman.  When  I  spoke 
of  prejudice,  I  did  not  suppose  it  to  exist  with  you, 
but  with  Congress  as  a  body — at  least  with  a  great 
part  of  them.  The  part  they  have  taken  in  the 
affair,  in  my  opinion,  does  honor  to  their  impartial- 
ity. I  hope  they  will  support  the  officer  appointed 
with  a  liberal  confidence;   his  situation,  surrounded 

VOL.  IX.— 15. 


2  26  Alexander  Hamilton 

with  difficulties,  will  need  support.  Of  your  influ- 
ence for  this  purpose,  I  am  too  thoroughly  persuaded 
of  your  patriotism,  my  dear  sir,  to  doubt. 

Be  assured,  my  dear  sir,  the  marks  of  your  regard 
give  me  a  sincere  pleasure,  and  I  shall  be  always 
happy  to  cultivate  it,  and  to  give  you  proofs  of  my 
affectionate  attachment. 


TO    WASHINGTON 

November  22,  1780. 

Dear  Sir: 

Some  time  last  fall,  when  I  spoke  to  your  Excel- 
lency about  going  to  the  southward,  I  explained  to 
you  candidly  my  feelings  with  respect  to  mihtary 
reputation,  and  how  much  it  was  my  object  to  act  a 
conspicuous  part  in  some  enterprise  that  might  per- 
haps raise  my  character  as  a  soldier  above  medi- 
ocrity. You  were  so  good  as  to  say  you  would  be 
glad  to  furnish  me  with  an  occasion.  When  the  ex- 
pedition to  Staten  Island  was  afoot,  a  favorable  one 
seemed  to  offer.  There  was  a  battalion  without  a 
field  officer,  the  command  of  which,  I  thought,  as  it 
was  accidental,  might  be  given  to  me  without  incon- 
venience. I  made  an  application  for  it  through  the 
Marquis, '  who  informed  me  of  your  refusal  on  two 
principles — one,  that  the  giving  me  a  whole  bat- 
talion might  be  a  subject  of  dissatisfaction;  the 
other,  that  if  any  accident  should  happen  to  me,  in 
the  present  state  of  your  family,  you  would  be  em- 
barrassed for  the  necessary  assistance. 

The  project  you  now  have  in  contemplation  affords 

'  Lafayette. 


Private  Correspondence  227 

another  opportunity.  I  have  a  variety  of  reasons 
that  press  me  to  desire  ardently  to  have  it  in  my 
power  to  improve  it.  I  take  the  liberty  to  observe 
that  the  command  may  now  be  proportioned  to  my 
rank,  and  that  the  second  objection  ceases  to  operate, 
as,  during  the  period  of  establishing  our  winter- 
quarters,  there  will  be  a  suspension  of  material  busi- 
ness ;  besides  which,  my  peculiar  position  will,  in  any 
case,  call  me  away  from  the  army  in  a  few  days,  and 
Mr.  Harrison  may  be  expected  back  early  next  month. 
My  command  may  consist  of  one  hundred  and  fifty 
or  two  hundred  men,  composed  of  fifty  men  of  Major 
Gibbes'  corps,  fifty  from  Col.  Meigs'  regiment,  and 
fifty  or  a  hundred  more  from  the  light  infantry; 
Major  Gibbes  to  be  my  major.     The  hundred  men 

from  here  may  move  on  Friday  morning  towards , 

which  will  strengthen  the  appearances  for  Staten 
Island,  to  form  a  junction  on  the  other  side  of  the 
Passaic. 

I  suggest  this  mode  to  avoid  the  complaints  that 
might  arise  from  composing  my  party  wholly  of  the 
light  infantry,  which  might  give  umbrage  to  the 
officers  of  that  corps,  who,  on  this  plan,  can  have  no 
just  subject  for  it. 

The  primary  idea  may  be,  if  circumstances  per- 
mit, to  attempt  with  my  detachment  Bayard's  Hill. 
Should  we  arrive  early  enough  to  undertake  it,  I 
should  prefer  it  to  any  thing  else,  both  for  the  bril- 
liancy of  the  attempt  in  itself  and  the  decisive  con- 
sequences of  which  its  success  would  be  productive. 
If  we  arrive  too  late  to  make  this  eligible  (as  there  is 
reason  to  apprehend),  my  corps  may  form  the  van 


228  Alexander  Hamilton 

of  one  of  the  other  attacks ;  and  Bayard's  Hill  will  be 
a  pretext  for  my  being  employed  in  the  affair,  on  a 
supposition  of  my  knowing  the  ground,  which  is 
partly  true.  I  flatter  myself,  also,  that  my  military 
character  stands  so  well  in  the  army  as  to  reconcile 
the  ofBcers  in  general  to  the  measure.  All  circum- 
stances considered,  I  venture  to  say  any  exceptions 
which  might  be  taken  would  be  unreasonable. 

I  take  this  method  of  making  the  request  to  avoid 
the  embarrassment  of  a  personal  explanation.  I 
shall  only  add  that,  however  much  I  have  the  matter 
at  heart,  I  wish  your  Excellency  entirely  to  consult 
your  own  inclination,  and  not,  from  a  disposition  to 
oblige  me,  to  do  any  thing  that  may  be  disagreeable 
to  you.  It  will,  nevertheless,  make  me  singularly 
happy  if  yoiir  wishes  correspond  with  mine. 


TO   WASHINGTON 

Albany,  Dec.  9,  1780. 

Dear  Sir: 

Mr.  Rensselaer,  who  has  the  direction  of  the  ar- 
mory here,  tells  me  that  the  Board  of  War  write  him 
that  they  are  unable  to  support  it  any  longer  on  the 
present  establishment  for  want  of  supplies,  and  pro- 
pose to  him  to  endeavor  to  have  it  carried  on  by 
contract.  This  he  declares  is  impossible.  The  ar- 
mory must  either  continue  on  the  present  footing,  or 
cease.  As  far  as  I  understand  the  matter,  there  is 
no  objection  to  the  terms  in  themselves,  but  a  want 
of  means  to  comply  with  them.  If  there  is  a  want 
of  means,  the  thing  must  be  relinquished;  but,  as  it 


Private  Correspondence  229 

does  not  strike  me  that  it  can  be  more  difficult  to 
maintain  an  armory  here  than  elsewhere,  and  as  I 
apprehend,  in  the  present  state  of  arsenals,  we  shall 
stand  in  need  of  all  the  repairing  we  can  do,  I  take 
the  liberty,  at  Mr.  Rensselaer's  request,  to  mention 
the  matter  to  you.  I  have  seen  the  armory  myself. 
It  appears  to  be  in  excellent  order,  and  under  a  very 
ingenious  and  industrious  man.  I  am  told  it  has 
been  conducted  hitherto  with  great  activity.  Its 
situation  is,  in  my  opinion,  advantageous.  As  there 
is  a  considerable  body  of  troops  always  at  West 
Point,  and  the  army  generally  in  its  vicinity,  the 
river  is  very  convenient  for  transportation  to  and 
from  the  armory,  and  I  should  think  would  be  con- 
ducive to  economy.  This  consideration  strikes  me 
as  of  importance.  General  Knox,  however,  will  be 
the  best  judge  of  the  usefulness  of  this  armory. 

Mr.  Rensselaer  also  mentions  a  considerable  num- 
ber of  hides  in  the  hands  of  persons  here  who  had 
had  orders  from  the  clothier-general  not  to  dispose 
of  them  but  by  his  order.  He  says  he  can  no  longer 
but  with  great  difficulty  procure  leather  for  the  public 
works  on  credit,  and  has  requested  me  to  mention  this 
also  to  your  Excellency. 

Mrs.  Hamilton  presents  her  respectful  compli- 
ments to  Mrs.  Washington  and  yourself.  After  the 
holidays,  we  shall  be  at  headquarters. 

I  believe  I  imparted  to  you  General  Schuyler's 
wish  that  you  could  make  it  convenient  to  pay 
a  visit  with  Mrs.  Washington  this  winter.  He  and 
Mrs.  Schuyler  have  several  times  repeated  their  in- 
quiries and  wishes.     I  have  told  them  I  was  afraid 


230  Alexander  Hamilton 

your  business  would  not  permit  you;  if  it  should,  I 
shall  be  happy.  You  will  enable  me  to  let  them 
know  about  what  period  it  will  suit.  When  the 
sleighing  arrives,  it  will  be  an  afEair  of  two  days  up 
and  two  days  down. 


TO 


Headquarters,  Feb.  7,  1781. 

Dear  Sir: 

The  first  step  to  reformation,  as  well  in  an  adminis- 
tration as  in  an  individual,  is  to  be  sensible  of  our 
faults.  This  begins  to  be  our  case,  and  there  are 
several  symptoms  that  please  me  at  this  jimcture. 
But  we  are  so  accustomed  to  doing  right  by  halves, 
and  spoiling  a  good  intention  in  the  execution,  that 
I  always  wait  to  see  the  end  of  our  public  arrange- 
ments before  I  venture  to  expect  good  or  evil  from 
them.  The  plan  of  executive  ministers  is  undoubt- 
edly a  good  one,  and  by  some  men  has  been  fruit- 
lessly insisted  upon  for  three  or  four  years  back ;  but 
whether  it  will  work  a  present  good  or  evil  must  de- 
pend on  the  choice  of  the  persons.  This  is  a  bad 
omen.  I  am  not  at  all  informed  of  the  persons  in 
nomination. 

The  accession  of  Maryland  to  the  Confederacy  will 
be  a  happy  event  if  it  does  not  make  people  believe 
that  the  Confederacy  gives  Congress  power  enough 
and  prevent  their  acquiring  more.  If  it  has  this 
effect  it  will  be  an  evil,  for  it  is  unequal  to  the  exi- 
gencies of  the  war  or  to  the  preservation  of  the  Union 
hereafter.     The  cession  of  territory  by  Virginia  ought 


Private  Correspondence  231 

to  have  an  important  influence.  New  York  is  about 
to  make  a  similar  cession.  It  is  now  before  the 
Legislature  and  will  probably  be  adopted. 

The  late  disturbances  in  the  army  and  disquietudes 
in  the  State  of  New  York,  which  are  with  difficulty 
diverted,  show  that  the  republic  is  sick  and  wants 
powerful  remedies.  God  send  that  the  negotiation 
abroad  for  money  may  succeed,  for  it  is  only  this 
that  can  give  success  to  our  interior  efforts. 

Paper  credit  cannot  be  supported  without  pe- 
cuniary funds.  Back  lands  are  a  very  good  resource 
in  reserve,  but  I  suspect  they  will  not  have  so  much 
present  efficacy  as  is  imagined.  I  only  regard  the 
acquisition  of  territory  to  Congress  as  useful  so  far 
as  it  enables  them  to  procure  credit. 

The  Eastern  States  are  really  making  great  exer- 
tions towards  the  next  campaign. 

Have  the  goodness  to  assure  the  Chevalier  De  la 
Luzerne  of  my  sincere  respect  and  attachment,  and 
do  justice  to  the  sentiments  for  you  personally  with 
which  I  have  the  honor  to  be,  etc 

^  This  letter  is  now  first  printed  from  the  mutilated  original  in  the 
possession  of  a  gentleman  in  New  York,  to  whose  kindness  I  am  in- 
debted for  the  opportunity  to  publish  it.  I  am  unable  to  give  the 
name  of  my  kind  correspondent,  as  his  note,  which  accompanied  the 
copy  of  the  letter,  has  been  unfortimately  lost — a  circtunstance  which 
I  cannot  sufficiently  regret. 


232  Alexander  Hamilton 

TO    PHILIP    SCHUYLER  ' 
Headquarters,  New  Windsor,  February  18,  1781. 

My  Dear  Sir: 

Since  I  had  the  pleasure  of  writing  you  last,  an  un- 
expected change  has  taken  place  in  my  situation.  I 
am  no  longer  a  member  of  the  General's  family. 
This  information  will  surprise  you,  and  the  manner 
of  the  change  will  surprise  you  more.  Two  days  ago, 
the  General  and  I  passed  each  other  on  the  stairs. 
He  told  me  he  wanted  to  speak  to  me.  I  answered 
that  I  would  wait  upon  him  immediately.  I  went 
below,  and  delivered  Mr.  Tilghman  a  letter  to  be 
sent  to  the  commissary,  containing  an  order  of  a 
pressing  and  interesting  nature. 

Returning  to  the  General,  I  was  stopped  on  the 
way  by  the  Marquis  de  La  Fayette,  and  we  con- 
versed together  about  a  minute  on  a  matter  of  busi- 
ness. He  can  testify  how  impatient  I  was  to  get 
back,  and  that  I  left  him  in  a  manner  which,  but  for 
our  intimacy,  would  have  been  more  than  abrupt. 
Instead  of  finding  the  General,  as  is  usual,  in  his 

'  This  famous  letter  to  Hamilton's  father-in-law.  General  Schuyler, 
is  now  printed  entire.  It  would  have  been  perfectly  justifiable  to  have 
destroyed  or  suppressed  this  letter  altogether,  for  it  was  written  by 
Hamilton  when  he  was  very  angry,  and  had  lost  control  of  himself,  so 
that  the  opinions  here  expressed  do  not  in  the  least  represent  his  real 
feeling  about  Washington,  for  whom  he  had  the  deepest  reverence  and 
affection,  either  at  this  or  any  other  time.  As  Mr.  J.  C.  Hamilton, 
however,  saw  fit  to  publish  the  letter,  he  should  not  have  suppressed 
part;  he  should  have  given  all  or  nothing.  It  is  given  here  in  its 
entirety  from  a  copy  of  the  original,  made  by  Mr.  James  A.  Hamilton, 
and  which  I  found  among  the  papers  of  my  grandfather,  Mr.  Henry 
Cabot.  The  additional  paragraphs  now  published  for  the  first  time 
are  enclosed  in  brackets. 


Private  Correspondence  233 

room,  I  met  him  at  the  head  of  the  stairs,  where, 
accosting  me  in  an  angry  tone,  *'  Colonel  Hamilton," 
said  he,  "you  have  kept  me  v^aiting  at  the  head  of 
the  stairs  these  ten  minutes.  I  must  tell  you,  sir, 
you  treat  me  with  disrespect."  I  replied,  without 
petulancy,  but  with  decision:  "I  am  not  conscious 
of  it,  sir ;  but  since  you  have  thought  it  necessary  to 
tell  me  so,  we  part."  ''Very  well,  sir,"  said  he,  "if 
it  be  your  choice,"  or  something  to  this  effect,  and  we 
separated.  I  sincerely  believe  my  absence,  which 
gave  so  much  umbrage,  did  not  last  two  minutes. 

In  less  than  an  hour  after,  Tilghman  ^  came  to  me 
in  the  General's  name,  assuring  me  of  his  great  con- 
fidence in  my  abilities,  integrity,  usefulness,  etc.,  and 
of  his  desire,  in  a  candid  conversation,  to  heal  a 
difference  which  could  not  have  happened  but  in  a 
moment  of  passion.  I  requested  Mr.  Tilghman  to 
tell  him — ist.  That  I  had  taken  my  resolution  in  a 
manner  not  to  be  revoked.  2d.  That,  as  a  con- 
versation could  serve  no  other  purpose  than  to  pro- 
duce explanations,  mutually  disagreeable,  though  I 
certainly  would  not  refuse  an  interview  if  he  desired 
it,  yet  I  would  be  happy  if  he  would  permit  me  to 
decline  it.  3d.  That,  though  determined  to  leave 
the  family,  the  same  principles  which  had  kept  me  so 
long  in  it  would  continue  to  direct  my  conduct  to- 
wards him  when  out  of  it.  4th.  That,  however,  I 
did  not  wish  to  distress  him,  or  the  public  business, 
by  quitting  him  before  he  could  derive  other  assist- 
ance by  the  return  of  some  of  the  gentlemen  who 
were  absent.     5th.     And  that,  in  the  mean  time,  it 

^  Lt. -Colonel  Tench  Tilghman,  of  Washington's  stafiE. 


234  Alexander  Hamilton 

depended  on  him  to  let  our  behavior  to  each  other 
be  the  same  as  if  nothing  had  happened.  He  con- 
sented to  decline  the  conversation,  and  thanked  me 
for  my  offer  of  continuing  my  aid  in  the  manner 
I  had  mentioned.  [Thus  we  stand.  I  wait  Mr. 
Humphrey's  return  from  the  eastward,  and  may  be 
induced  to  wait  the  return  of  Mr.  Harrison  from 
Virginia.] 

I  have  given  you  so  particular  a  detail  of  our  differ- 
ence from  the  desire  I  have  to  justify  myself  in  your 
opinion.  Perhaps  you  may  think  I  was  precipitate 
in  rejecting  the  overture  made  by  the  General  to  an 
accommodation.  I  assure  you,  my  dear  sir,  it  was 
not  the  effect  of  resentment;  it  was  the  deliberate 
result  of  maxims  I  had  long  formed  for  the  govern- 
ment of  my  own  conduct. 

I  always  disliked  the  office  of  an  aid-de-camp  as 
having  in  it  a  kind  of  personal  dependence.  I  re- 
fused to  serve  in  this  capacity  with  two  major- 
generals  at  an  early  period  of  the  war.  Infected, 
however,  with  the  enthusiasm  of  the  times,  an  idea 
of  the  General's  character  [which  experience  taught 
me  to  be  unfoimded]  overcame  my  scruples,  and  in- 
duced me  to  accept  his  invitation  to  enter  into  his 
family.  [It  was  not  long  before  I  discovered  he  was 
neither  remarkable  for  delicacy  nor  good  temper, 
which  revived  my  former  aversion  to  the  station  in 
which  I  was  acting,  and  it  has  been  increasing  ever 
since.]  It  has  been  often  with  great  difficulty  that 
I  have  prevailed  upon  myself  not  to  renounce  it ;  but 
while,  from  motives  of  public  utility,  I  was  doing 
violence  to  my  feelings,  I  was  always  determined,  if 


Private  Correspondence  235 

there  should  ever  happen  a  breach  between  us,  never 
to  consent  to  an  accommodation.  I  was  persuaded 
that  when  once  that  nice  barrier,  which  marked  the 
boundaries  of  what  we  owed  to  each  other,  should 
be  thrown  down,  it  might  be  propped  again,  but 
could  never  be  restored. 

[I  resolved,  whenever  it  should  happen,  not  to  be 
in  the  wrong.  I  was  convinced  the  concessions  the 
General  might  make  would  be  dictated  by  his  in- 
terest, and  that  his  self-love  would  never  forgive  me 
for  what  it  would  regard  as  a  humiliation. 

I  believe  you  know  the  place  I  held  in  the  General's 
confidence  and  counsels,  which  will  make  it  the  more 
extraordinary  to  you  to  learn  that  for  three  years 
past  I  have  felt  no  friendship  for  him  and  have  pro- 
fessed none.  The  truth  is,  our  dispositions  are  the 
opposites  of  each  other,  and  the  pride  of  my  temper 
would  not  suffer  me  to  profess  what  I  did  not  feel. 
Indeed,  when  advances  of  this  kind  have  been  made  to 
me  on  his  part,  they  were  received  in  a  manner  that 
showed  at  least  that  I  had  no  desire  to  court  them, 
and  that  I  desired  to  stand  rather  upon  a  footing  of 
military  confidence  than  of  private  attachment. 

You  are  too  good  a  judge  of  human  nature  not  to 
be  sensible  how  this  conduct  in  me  must  have  oper- 
ated on  a  man  to  whom  all  the  world  is  offering  in- 
cense. With  this  key  you  will  easily  unlock  the 
present  mystery. 

At  the  end  of  the  war  I  may  say  many  things  to 
you  concerning  which  I  shall  impose  upon  myself 
till  then  an  inviolable  silence.] 

The  General  is  a  very  honest  man.     His  com- 


236  Alexander  Hamilton 

petitors  have  slender  abilities,  and  less  integrity. 
His  popularity  has  often  been  essential  to  the  safety 
of  America,  and  is  still  of  great  importance  to  it. 
These  considerations  have  influenced  my  past  con- 
duct respecting  him,  and  will  influence  my  future.  I 
think  it  is  necessary  he  should  be  supported. 

His  estimation  in  your  mind,  whatever  may  be  its 
amount,  I  am  persuaded  has  been  formed  on  prin- 
ciples which  a  circumstance  like  this  cannot  ma- 
terially affect;  but  if  I  thought  it  could  diminish 
your  friendship  for  him,  I  should  almost  forego  the 
motives  that  urge  me  to  justify  myself  to  you.  I 
wish  what  I  have  said  to  make  no  other  impression 
than  to  satisfy  you  I  have  not  been  in  the  wrong.  It 
is  also  said  in  confidence,  as  a  public  knowledge  of 
the  breach  would,  in  many  ways,  have  an  ill  effect. 
It  will  probably  be  the  policy  of  both  sides  to  conceal 
it,  and  cover  the  separation  with  some  plausible  pre- 
text. I  am  importuned  by  such  of  my  friends  as 
are  privy  to  the  affair,  to  listen  to  a  reconciliation; 
but  my  resolution  is  unalterable. 

As  I  cannot  think  of  quitting  the  army  during  the 
war,  I  have  a  project  of  re-entering  into  the  artillery, 
by  taking  Lieutenant-Colonel  Forrest's  place,  who  is 
desirous  of  retiring  on  half -pay.  I  have  not,  how- 
ever, made  up  my  mind  upon  this  head,  as  I  should 
be  obliged  to  come  in  the  youngest  Lieutenant-Col- 
onel instead  of  the  eldest,  which  I  ought  to  have  been 
by  natural  succession,  had  I  remained  in  the  corps; 
and,  at  the  same  time,  to  resume  studies  relative  to 
the  profession,  which,  to  avoid  inferiority,  must  be 
laborious. 


Private  Correspondence  237 

If  a  handsome  command  in  the  campaign  in  the 
light  infantry  should  offer  itself,  I  shall  balance  be- 
tween this  and  the  artillery.  My  situation  in  the 
latter  would  be  more  solid  and  permanent :  but  as  I 
hope  the  war  will  not  last  long  enough  to  make  it 
progressive,  this  consideration  has  the  less  force.  A 
command  for  the  campaign  would  leave  me  the  win- 
ter to  prosecute  studies  relative  to  my  future  career 
in  life.^  I  have  written  to  you  on  this  subject  with 
all  the  freedom  and  confidence  to  which  you  have  a 
right,  and  with  an  assurance  of  the  interest  you  take 
in  all  that  concerns  me. 


TO    GENERAL   GREENE 

February,  1781. 

Dear  General: 

I  acknowledge  myself  to  have  been  unpardonably 
delinquent  in  not  having  written  to  you  before,  but 
my  matrimonial  occupations  have  scarcely  left  me 
leisure  or  inclination  for  any  other.  I  must  now  be 
brief,  as  the  post  is  just  setting  out.  I  shall  shortly 
write  you  at  large.  I  have  not  been  much  in  the  way 
of  knowing  sentiments  out  of  the  army,  but  as  far  as 
I  am  acquainted  with  them,  either  in  or  out,  you 
have  great  reason  to  be  satisfied.  Your  conduct  in 
the  southern  command  seems  to  be  universally  ap- 
proved, and  your  reputation  is  progressive.  How 
long  this  will  last,  the  wheel  of  fortune  will  have  too 
much  in  determining.     I  cannot  tell  you  any  thing 

'  There  is  a  break  marked  here  in  the  edition  of  1850,  but  my  copy 
of  the  original  letter  does  not  indicate  any  omission. 


238  Alexander  Hamilton 

of  our  prospects  here,  because  we  know  little  about 
them  ourselves.  Hitherto  we  have  received  few 
recruits.  I  fear  this  campaign  will  be  a  defensive 
one  on  our  part.  Harrison  has  left  the  General  to 
be  a  chief -justice  of  Maryland.  I  am  about  leaving 
him  to  be  any  thing  that  fortune  may  cast  up — I 
mean  in  the  military  line.  This,  my  dear  General, 
is  not  an  affair  of  calculation,  but  of  feeling.  You 
may  divine  the  rest,  and  I  am  sure  you  will  keep 
your  divinations  to  yourself.  The  enemy  have 
gotten  so  much  in  the  way  of  intercepting  our  mails 
that  I  am  afraid  of  seeing  whatever  I  write  hung  up 
the  week  after  in  Rivington's  Gazette.  This  obliges 
me  to  be  cautious.  Adieu.  My  dear  General,  let 
me  beg  you  will  believe  that  whatever  change  there 
may  be  in  my  situation,  there  will  never  be  any  in 
my  respect,  esteem,  and  affection  for  you. 

P.  S. — Let  me  know  if  I  could  find  any  thing  worth 
my  while  to  do  in  the  southern  army.  You  know  I 
shall  hate  to  be  nominally  a  soldier.' 


TO   WASHINGTON 

De  Peyster's  Point,  April  27,  1781. 

Sir: 

I  imagine  your  Excellency  has  been  informed  that 
in  consequence  of  the  resolution  of  Congress  for 
granting  commissions  to  aids- de- camp  appointed 
under    the    former  establishment,  I  have  obtained 

'  This  letter  is  reprinted  from  the  History  of  the  Republic,  ii . ,  1 8 7 .  It 
has  no  date  except  the  year,  but  was  evidently  written  just  after  the 
disagreement  with  Washington, of  Feb.  1 6th,  described  in  the  preceding 
letter. 


Private  Correspondence  239 

one  of  lieutenant-colonel  in  the  army  of  the  United 
States,  bearing  rank  since  the  first  of  March,  1777. 

It  is  become  necessary  to  me  to  apply  to  your  Ex- 
cellency to  know  in  what  manner  you  foresee  you 
will  be  able  to  employ  me  in  the  ensuing  campaign. 
I  am  ready  to  enter  into  activity  whenever  you  think 
proper,  though  I  am  not  anxious  to  do  it  till  the 
army  takes  the  field,  as  before  that  period  I  perceive 
no  object. 

Unconnected  as  I  am  with  any  regiment,  I  can 
have  no  other  command  than  in  a  light  corps,  and  I 
flatter  myself  my  pretensions  to  this  are  good. 

Your  Excellency  knows  I  have  been  in  actual  ser- 
vice since  the  beginning  of  '76.  I  began  in  the  line, 
and  had  I  continued  there  I  ought  in  justice  to  have 
been  more  advanced  in  rank  than  I  now  am.  I  be- 
lieve my  conduct  in  the  different  capacities  in  which 
I  have  acted  has  appeared  to  the  officers  of  the 
army  in  general  such  as  to  merit  their  confidence  and 
esteem;  and  I  cannot  suppose  them  to  be  so  ungener- 
ous as  not  to  see  me  with  pleasure  put  into  a  situa- 
tion still  to  exercise  the  disposition  I  have  always  had 
of  being  useful  to  the  United  States.  I  mention 
these  things  only  to  show  that  I  do  not  apprehend 
the  same  difficulties  can  exist  in  my  case  (which  is 
peculiar)  that  have  opposed  the  appointments  to 
commands  of  some  other  officers  not  belonging  to 
what  is  called  the  line.  Though  the  light  infantry 
is  chiefly  formed,  yet  being  detached  to  the  south- 
ward, I  take  it  for  granted  there  will  be  a  vanguard 
detachment  formed  for  this  army. 


240  Alexander  Hamilton 

TO    WASHINGTON 

De  Peyster's  Point,  May  2,  1781. 

Sir: 

I  am  extremely  sorry  to  have  embarrassed  you  by 
my  late  application,  and  that  you  should  think  there 
are  insuperable  obstacles  to  a  compliance  with  it. 
Having  renounced  my  expectations,  I  have  no  other 
inducement  for  troubling  your  Excellency  with  a 
second  letter,  than  to  obviate  the  appearance  of 
having  desired  a  thing  inconsistent  with  the  good  of 
the  service,  while  I  was  acquainted  with  the  circum- 
stances that  made  it  so. 

I  was  too  interested  a  spectator  of  what  happened 
in  the  case  of  Major  M'Pherson,  not  to  have  re- 
marked, and  not  to  recollect,  all  the  circumstances. 
The  opposition  turned  ostensibly  on  his  being  a 
brevet  officer,  yet  having  a  command  in  a  corps 
formed  entirely  from  one  line;  the  propriety  of  his 
being  employed  in  a  detachment  from  the  army  at 
large,  so  far  as  I  remember,  was  not  disputed.  In 
delicacy  to  Major  M'Pherson,  no  personal  objections 
were  formally  made,  but  in  reality  they  existed  and 
contributed  to  the  discontent.  It  was  thought  a 
peculiar  hardship  that  a  gentleman  who  had  for  a 
long  time  fought  against  us,  and  had  not  taken  part 
with  us  till  a  late  period  and  when  our  affairs  had 
assumed  a  more  prosperous  aspect,  should  be  pre- 
ferred in  one  of  the  most  honorary  commands  of  the 
service.  Your  Excellency  must  be  convinced  that 
I  mention  this  in  no  other  view  than  to  show  the 
sentiments  of  the  officers  at  the  time  and  the  whole 


Private  Correspondence  241 

grounds  for  the  opposition.  My  esteem  for  Major 
M'Pherson,  and  other  reasons,  make  it  impossible  I 
can  have  a  different  intention. 

I  know  less  of  the  motives  of  dissatisfaction  in  the 
case  of  Colonel  Gimat  and  Major  Gal  van;  but  I 
have  understood  that  it  is  founded  on  their  being 
appointed  in  the  light  corps  for  two  successive 
campaigns. 

It  would  be  uncandid  in  me  not  to  acknowledge 
that  I  believe  a  disposition  to  exclude  brevet  officers 
in  general  from  command  has  a  great  share  in  the 
opposition  in  every  instance,  and  that  so  far  it 
affects  my  case.  But,  at  the  same  time,  it  appears 
to  me  this  principle  alone  can  never  be  productive  of 
more  than  momentary  murmurs,  where  it  is  not 
seconded  by  some  plausible  pretext.  I  also  am 
convinced  that  the  Pennsylvania  officers,  for  their 
own  sakes,  repented  the  rash  steps  they  had  taken, 
and,  on  cool  reflection,  were  happy  in  an  opportu- 
nity to  relinquish  their  menaces  of  quitting  a  service 
to  which  they  were  attached  by  habit,  inclination, 
and  interest,  as  well  as  by  patriotism.  I  believe, 
too,  we  shall  never  have  a  similar  instance  in  the 
army  unless  the  practice  should  be  carried  to  excess. 
Major  Galvan,  I  am  told,  will  probably  be  relieved. 
Colonel  Gimat  will  be  then  the  only  brevet  officer 
remaining  in  command.  Your  Excellency  is  the 
best  judge  of  the  proper  limits,  and  there  can  be  no 
doubt  that  the  rights  of  particular  officers  ought  to 
give  place  to  the  general  good  and  tranquillity  of 
the  service. 

I  cannot  forbear  repeating  that  my  case  is  pe- 

VOL.  IX.— 16. 


242  Alexander  Hamilton 

culiar  and  dissimilar  to  all  the  former.  It  is  dis- 
tinguished by  the  circumstances  I  have  before 
intimated:  my  early  entrance  into  the  service;  my 
having  made  the  campaign  of  '76,  the  most  disagree- 
able of  the  war,  at  the  head  of  a  company  of  artil- 
lery, and  having  been  entitled  in  that  corps  to  a 
rank  equal  in  degree,  and  more  ancient  in  date,  than 
I  now  possess;  my  having  made  all  the  subsequent 
campaigns  in  the  family  of  the  Commander-in-Chief, 
in  a  constant  course  of  important  and  laborious  ser- 
vice. These  are  my  pretensions,  at  this  advanced 
period  of  the  war,  to  being  employed  in  the  only  way 
which  my  situation  admits;  and  I  imagine  they 
would  have  their  weight  in  the  minds  of  the  officers 
in  general.  I  only  urge  them  a  second  time  as  rea- 
sons which  will  not  suffer  me  to  view  the  matter  in 
the  same  light  with  your  Excellency,  or  to  regard 
as  impracticable  my  appointment  in  a  light  corps, 
should  there  be  one  formed.  I  entreat  that  they 
may  be  understood  in  this  sense  only.  I  am  in- 
capable of  wishing  to  obtain  any  object  by  impor- 
tunity. I  assure  your  Excellency  that  I  am  too  well 
persuaded  of  your  candor  to  attribute  your  refusal 
to  any  other  cause  than  an  apprehension  of  incon- 
veniences that  may  attend  the  appointment. 

P.  S. — I  have  used  the  term  brevet  in  the  sense 
your  Excellency  appears  to  have  understood  it  in, 
as  signifying,  in  general,  all  officers  not  attached  to 
any  established  corps.  Congress  seem,  however,  to 
have  made  a  distinction:  they  only  give  a  kind  of 
warrant  to  those  whom  they  designate  as  brevet 
officers.     Mine  is  a  regular  commission. 


Private  Correspondence  243 

TO    MRS.    HAMILTON 

Camp  near  Dobbs  Ferry,  July  lo,  1781. 

The  day  before  yesterday  I  arrived  here,  but  for 
want  of  an  opportunity  could  not  write  any  sooner; 
indeed,  I  know  of  none  now.  Finding,  when  I  came 
here,  that  nothing  was  said  on  the  subject  of  a 
command,  I  wrote  the  General  a  letter,  and  inclosed 
him  my  commission.  This  morning  Tilghman  came 
to  me  in  his  name,  pressed  me  to  retain  my  commis- 
sion, with  an  assurance  that  he  would  endeavor,  by 
all  means,  to  give  me  a  command,  nearly  such  as  I 
could  have  desired  in  the  present  circumstances  of 
the  army.  Though  I  know  you  would  be  happy  to 
hear  had  I  rejected  this  proposal,  it  is  a  pleasure  my 
reputation  would  not  permit  me  to  afford  you.  I 
consented  to  retain  my  commission,  and  accept  the 
command.  I  quarter,  at  present,  by  a  very  polite 
and  warm  invitation,  with  General  Lincoln,  and  ex- 
perience from  the  officers  of  both  armies  every  mark 
of  esteem.     *    *    * 


TO   WASHINGTON 

Camp,  August  7,  1781. 

Sir: 

The  other  day  I  applied  to  Colonel  Tilghman  for 
an  order  for  shoes,  for  the  two  companies  of  levies. 
He  thought,  on  a  general  principle,  it  could  not  be 
granted;  but  as  from  the  best  of  my  recollection, 
confirmed  by  inquiry  of  others,  I  have  reason  to  be- 
lieve a  distinction  was  made  last  campaign  in  favor 
of  the  advanced  corps,  in  the  case  of  Cortland's 


244  Alexander  Hamilton 

regiment,  I  am  induced  to  submit  the  matter  to  your 
Excellency. 

Your  Excellency  is  sensible  that  the  service  of  an 
advanced  corps,  must  be  in  general  more  active  than 
of  the  line;  and  that,  in  a  country  like  this,  the 
article  of  shoes  is  indispensable.  If  the  men  cannot 
be  supplied,  they  cannot  perform  the  duty  required 
of  them;  which  will  make  the  service  fall  heavier 
upon  that  part  of  the  corps  which  is  not  under  the 
same  disability,  as  well  as  render  a  considerable  part 
of  it  of  much  less  utility.  I  will  not  add  any  per- 
sonal consideration  to  those  which  affect  the  service ; 
though  it  certainly  cannot  be  a  matter  of  indifference 
to  me. 

The  men,  I  am  informed,  have,  in  general,  received 
a  bounty  of  about  thirty  pounds  each,  which  is 
spent.  The  State  makes  no  provision  for  them;  and 
the  fact  is,  they  cannot  supply  themselves:  they 
must  therefore  be  destitute,  if  they  have  not  a  con- 
tinental supply. 

The  distinction  last  campaign  was,  if  I  am  not 
mistaken,  that  shoes  were  an  article  of  absolute 
necessity,  and  therefore  to  be  allowed,  though  the 
articles  of  clothing  were  refused. 


TO   MRS.    HAMILTON 

August,  1 78 1. 

In  my  last  letter  I  informed  you  that  there  was  a 
greater  prospect  of  activity  now,  than  there  had 
been  heretofore.  I  did  this  to  prepare  your  mind  for 
an  event  which,  I  am  sure,  will  give  you  pain.     I 


Private  Correspondence  245 

begged  your  father,  at  the  same  time,  to  intimate  to 
you,  by  degrees,  the  probabiHty  of  its  taking  place. 
I  used  this  method  to  prevent  a  surprise,  v^hich 
might  be  too  severe  to  you.  A  part  of  the  army,  my 
dear  girl,  is  going  to  Virginia,  and  I  must,  of  neces- 
sity, be  separated  at  a  much  greater  distance  from 
my  beloved  wife.  I  cannot  announce  the  fatal 
necessity,  without  feeling  every  thing  that  a  fond 
husband  can  feel.  I  am  unhappy;  I  am  unhappy 
beyond  expression.  I  am  unhappy,  because  I  am  to 
be  so  remote  from  you;  because  I  am  to  hear  from 
you  less  frequently  than  I  am  accustomed  to  do.  I 
am  miserable,  because  I  know  you  will  be  so;  I  am 
wretched  at  the  idea  of  flying  so  far  from  you,  with- 
out a  single  hour's  interview,  to  tell  you  all  my  pains 
and  all  my  love.  But  I  cannot  ask  permission  to 
visit  you.  It  might  be  thought  improper  to  leave 
my  corps  at  such  a  time  and  upon  such  an  occasion. 
I  must  go  without  seeing  you — I  must  go  without 
embracing  you; — alas!  I  must  go.  But  let  no  idea, 
other  than  of  the  distance  we  shall  be  asunder,  dis- 
quiet you.  Though  I  said  the  prospects  of  activity 
will  be  greater,  I  said  it  to  give  your  expectations  a 
different  turn,  and  prepare  you  for  something  dis- 
agreeable. It  is  ten  to  one  that  our  views  will  be  dis- 
appointed, by  Comwallis  retiring  to  South  Carolina 
by  land.  At  all  events,  our  operations  will  be  over 
by  the  latter  end  of  October,  and  I  will  fly  to  my 
home.     Don't  mention  I  am  going  to  Virginia. 


246  Alexander  Hamilton 

TO    MRS.    HAMILTON 

Head  of  Elk,  Sept.  6,  1781. 

Yesterday,  my  lovely  wife,  I  wrote  to  you,  inclos- 
ing you  a  letter  in  one  to  your  father,  to  the  care  of 
Mr.  Morris.  To-morrow  the  post  sets  out,  and  to- 
morrow we  embark  for  Yorktown.  I  cannot  refuse 
myself  the  pleasure  of  writing  you  a  few  lineSo  Con- 
stantly uppermost  in  my  thoughts  and  affections,  I 
am  happy  only  when  my  moments  are  devoted  to 
some  office  that  respects  you.  I  would  give  the 
world  to  be  able  to  tell  you  all  I  feel  and  all  I  wish, 
but  consult  your  own  heart  and  you  will  know  mine. 
What  a  world  will  soon  be  between  us!  To  support 
the  idea,  all  my  fortitude  is  insufficient.  What  must 
be  the  case  with  you,  who  have  the  most  female  of 
female  hearts?  I  sink  at  the  perspective  of  your 
distress,  and  I  look  to  heaven  to  be  your  guardian 
and  supporter.  Circumstances  that  have  just  come 
to  my  knowledge  assure  me  that  our  operations  will 
be  expeditious,  as  well  as  our  success  certain.  Early 
in  November,  as  I  promised  you,  we  shall  certainly 
meet.  Cheer  yourself  with  this  idea,  and  with  the 
assurance  of  never  more  being  separated.  Every 
day  confirms  me  in  the  intention  of  renouncing  pub- 
lic life  and  devoting  myself  wholly  to  you.  Let 
others  waste  their  time  and  their  tranquillity  in  a 
vain  pursuit  of  power  and  glory ;  be  it  my  object  to 
be  happy  in  a  quiet  retreat  with  my  better  angel. 


i 


Private  Correspondence  247 

TO    MRS.    HAMILTON 

September,  1781. 

How  chequered  is  hiiman  life!  How  precarious  is 
happiness!  How  easily  do  we  often  part  with  it  for 
a  shadow!  These  are  the  reflections  that  frequently 
intrude  themselves  upon  me  with  a  painful  applica- 
tion. I  am  going  to  do  my  duty.  Our  operations 
will  be  so  conducted  as  to  economize  the  lives  of  men. 
Exert  your  fortitude  and  rely  upon  heaven. ' 


TO  LAFAYETTE 

Camp  before  Yorktown,  Oct.  15,  1781. 

Sir: 

I  have  the  honor  to  render  you  an  account  of  the 
corps  under  my  command  in  your  attack  of  last 
night  upon  the  redoubt  on  the  left  of  the  enemy's 
lines. 

Agreeably  to  your  orders,  we  advanced  in  two 
columns  with  unloaded  arms:  the  right,  composed  of 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Gimat's  battalion  and  my  own, 
commanded  by  Major  Fish;  the  left,  of  a  detach- 
ment commanded  by  Lieutenant-Colonel  Laurens, 
destined  to  take  the  enemy  in  reverse,  and  intercept 
their  retreat.  The  column  on  the  right  was  preceded 
by  a  vanguard  of  twenty  men,  led  by  Lieutenant 
Mansfield,  and  a  detachment  of  sappers  and  miners, 
commanded  by  Captain  Gilliland,  for  the  purpose  of 
removing  obstructions. 

The  redoubt  was  commanded  by  Major  Campbell, 
with  a  detachment  of  British  and  German  troops, 
and  was  completely  in  a  state  of  defence. 

*  Reprinted  from  the  History  of  the  Republic,  ii.,  260. 


248  Alexander  Hamilton 

The  rapidity  and  immediate  success  of  the  assault 
are  the  best  comment  on  the  behavior  of  the  troops. 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Laurens  distinguished  himself  by 
an  exact  and  vigorous  execution  of  his  part  of  the 
plan,  by  entering  the  enemy's  works  with  his  corps 
among  the  foremost,  and  making  prisoner  the  com- 
manding officer  of  the  redoubt.  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Gimat's  battalion,  which  formed  the  van  of  the  right 
attack,  and  which  fell  under  my  immediate  observa- 
tion, encouraged  by  the  decisive  and  animated  ex- 
ample of  their  leader,  advanced  with  an  ardor  and 
resolution  superior  to  every  obstacle.  They  were 
well  seconded  by  Major  Fish,  with  the  battalion 
imder  his  command,  who,  when  the  front  of  the 
column  reached  the  abatis,  unlocking  his  corp  to  the 
left,  as  he  had  been  directed,  advanced  with  such 
celerity  as  to  arrive  in  time  to  participate  in  the 
assault. 

Lieutenant  Mansfield  deserves  particular  com- 
mendation for  the  coolness,  firmness,  and  punctuality 
with  which  he  conducted  the  vanguard.  Captain 
Olney,  who  commanded  the  first  platoon  of  Gimat's 
battalion,  is  entitled  to  peculiar  applause.  He  led 
his  platoon  into  the  work  with  exemplary  intrepidity, 
and  received  two  bayonet  wounds.  Captain  Gilli- 
land,  with  the  detachment  of  sappers  and  miners, 
acquitted  themselves  in  a  manner  that  did  them 
great  honor. 

I  do  but  justice  to  the  several  corps  when  I  have 
the  pleasure  to  assure  you  there  was  not  an  officer 
nor  soldier  whose  behavior,  if  it  could  be  particular- 
ized, would  not  have  a  claim  to  the  warmest  appro- 


Private  Correspondence  249 

bation.  As  it  would  have  been  attended  with  delay 
and  loss  to  wait  for  the  removal  of  the  abatis  and 
palisades,  the  ardor  of  the  troops  was  indulged  in 
passing  over  them. 

There  was  a  happy  coincidence  of  movements. 
The  redoubt  was  in  the  same  moment  enveloped  and 
carried  in  every  part.  The  enemy  are  entitled  to  the 
acknowledgment  of  an  honorable  defence. 

Permit  me  to  have  the  satisfaction  of  expressing 
our  obligations  to  Col.  Armand,  Capt.  Legongne,  the 
Chevalier  De  Fontevieux,  and  Capt.  Bedkin,  officers 
of  his  corps,  who,  acting  upon  this  occasion  as  volun- 
teers, proceeded  at  the  head  of  the  right  column, 
and,  entering  the  redoubt  among  the  first,  by  their 
gallant  example  contributed  to  the  success  of  the 
enterprise. 

Our  killed  and  wounded  you  will  perceive  by  the 
enclosed  return.  I  sensibly  felt,  at  a  critical  period, 
the  loss  of  the  assistance  of  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Gimat,  who  received  a  musket  ball  in  his  foot,  which 
obliged  him  to  retire  from  the  field.  Captain  Bets, 
of  Laurens's  corps,  Captain  Hunt  and  Lieutenant 
Mansfield,  of  Gimat 's  were  wounded  with  the  bayonet 
in  gallantly  entering  the  work.  Captain  Kirkpat- 
rick,  of  the  corps  of  sappers  and  miners,  received  a 
wound  in  the  ditch. 

Inclosed  is  a  return  of  the  prisoners.  The  killed 
and  wounded  of  the  enemy  did  not  exceed  eight. 
Incapable  of  imitating  examples  of  barbarity,  and, 
forgetting  recent  provocations,  the  soldiery  spared 
every  man  who  ceased  to  fight. 


250 


Alexander  Hamilton 


Return  of  the  Killed  and  Wounded  in  the  Advanced  Corps 

Commanded   by    Lieutenant-Colonel   Hamilton,    in   an 

Attack  on  the  Enemy's  Left  Redoubt  on  the 

Evening  of  the  14TH  Oct.,   1781. 


Lieut.- 
Cols. 

Majors. 

Capt's. 

Sub- 
alterns- 

Ser- 
geants. 

Rank 
and 
File. 

Lt.-Col.  Hamilton's  battal- 
ion   

1 

i 

c 

I 

I 
I 

1 

1 

i 

2 

I 
I 

4 

TJ 
^ 
S 

c 

1 

1 

I 
I 

-d 

I 
I 

1 

A 

7 

I 

8 

-d 
4 

Lt.-Col.  Gimat's  battalion . 

Lt  -Col.  Laurens's   detach- 

ixient     

15 

Corps  of  Sappers  and  Miners 
Total 

I 
2^ 

TO   MRS.    HAMILTON 


YORKTOWN,  Oct.   16,   1 78 1. 

Two  nights  ago,  my  Eliza,  my  duty  and  my  honor 
obliged  me  to  take  a  step  in  which  your  happiness 
was  too  much  risked.  I  commanded  an  attack  upon 
one  of  the  enemy's  redoubts;  we  carried  it  in  an 
instant,  and  with  little  loss.  You  will  see  the  par- 
ticulars in  the  Philadelphia  papers.  There  will  be, 
certainly,  nothing  more  of  this  kind ;  all  the  rest  will 
be  by  approach;  and  if  there  should  be  another 
occasion,  it  will  not  fall  to  my  turn  to  execute  it.^ 

I  Reprinted  from  the  History  of  the  Republic,  ii.,  275. 


Private  Correspondence  251 

TO   WASHINGTON 

March  i,  1782. 

Sir: 

I  need  not  observe  to  your  Excellency  that  respect 
for  the  opinion  of  Congress  will  not  permit  me  to  be 
indifferent  to  the  impressions  they  may  receive  of 
my  conduct.  On  this  principle,  though  I  do  not 
think  the  subject  of  the  enclosed  letter  of  sufficient 
importance  to  request  an  official  communication  of 
it,  yet  I  should  be  happy  it  might  in  some  way  be 
known  to  the  members  of  that  honorable  body. 
Should  they  hereafter  learn  that,  though  retained  on 
the  list  of  their  officers,  I  am  not  in  the  execution  of 
the  duties  of  my  station,  I  wish  them  to  be  sensible 
that  it  is  not  a  diminution  of  zeal  which  induces  me 
voluntarily  to  withdraw  my  services,  but  that  I  only 
refrain  from  intruding  them  when  circumstances 
seem  to  have  made  them  either  not  necessary  or  not 
desired;  and  that  I  shall  not  receive  emoluments 
without  performing  the  conditions  to  which  they 
were  annexed.  I  also  wish  them  to  be  apprised  upon 
what  footing  my  future  continuance  in  the  army  is 
placed,  that  they  may  judge  how  far  it  is  expedient 
to  permit  it.  I  therefore  take  the  liberty  to  request 
the  favor  of  your  Excellency  to  impart  the  know- 
ledge of  my  situation  in  such  manner  as  you  think 
most  convenient. 


TO   WASHINGTON 

Philadelphia,  March  i,  1782. 

Sir. 

Your  Excellency  will,   I   am  persuaded,   readily 
admit  the  force  of  this  sentiment,  that  though  it  is 


252  Alexander  Hamilton 

the  duty  of  a  good  citizen  to  devote  his  services  to 
the  public  when  it  has  occasion  for  them,  he  cannot 
with  propriety  or  delicacy  to  himself  obtrude  them 
when  it  either  has,  or  appears  to  have  none.  The 
difficulties  I  experienced  last  campaign  in  obtaining 
a  command  will  not  suffer  me  to  make  any  further 
application  on  that  head. 

As  I  have  many  reasons  to  consider  my  being  em- 
ployed hereafter  in  a  precarious  light,  the  bare  possi- 
bility of  rendering  an  equivalent  will  not  justify  to 
my  scruples  the  receiving  any  future  emoluments 
from  my  commission.  I  therefore  renounce,  from 
this  time,  all  claim  to  the  compensations  attached 
to  my  military  station  during  the  war  or  after- 
wards. But  I  have  motives  which  will  not  permit 
me  to  resolve  on  a  total  resignation.  I  sincerely 
hope  a  prosperous  train  of  affairs  may  continue 
to  make  it  no  inconvenience  to  decline  the  services 
of  persons  whose  zeal,  in  worse  times,  was  foimd 
not  altogether  useless  ;  but  as  the  most  promising 
appearances  are  often  reversed  by  unforeseen  dis- 
asters, and  as  unfortunate  events  may  again  make 
the  same  zeal  of  some  value,  I  am  imwilling  to  put 
it  out  of  my  power  to  renew  my  exertions  in  the 
common  cause  in  the  line  in  which  I  have  hitherto 
acted. 

I  shall  accordingly  retain  my  rank  while  I  am  per- 
mitted to  do  it,  and  take  this  opportunity  to  declare 
that  I  shall  be  at  all  times  ready  to  obey  the  call  of 
the  public  in  any  capacity,  civil  or  military  (con- 
sistent with  what  I  owe  to  myself),  in  which  there 
may  be  a  prospect  of  my  contributing  to  the  final 


Private  Correspondence  253 

attainment  of  the  object  for  which  I  embarked  in 
the  service.' 


TO    RICHARD   K.    MEADE  ' 

Philadelphia,  March,  1782. 

A  half  hour  since  brought  me  the  pleasure  of  your 
letter  of  December  last.  It  went  to  Albany  and 
came  from  thence  to  this  place.  I  heartily  felicitate 
you  on  the  birth  of  your  daughter.  I  can  well  con- 
ceive your  happiness  on  that  occasion  by  that  which 
I  feel  on  a  similar  one.  Indeed,  the  sensations  of  a 
tender  father  of  the  child  of  a  beloved  mother  can 
only  be  conceived  by  those  who  have  experienced 
them. 

Your  heart,  my  dear  Meade,  is  peculiarly  formed 
for  enjoyments  of  this  kind.  You  have  every  right 
to  be  a  happy  husband — a  happy  father.  You  have 
every  prospect  of  being  so.  I  hope  your  felicity  may 
never  be  interrupted. 

You  cannot  imagine  how  entirely  domestic  I  am 
growing.  I  lose  all  taste  for  the  pursuits  of  ambi- 
tion. I  sigh  for  nothing  but  the  company  of  my 
wife  and  my  baby.  The  ties  of  duty  alone,  or  im- 
agined duty,  keep  me  from  renouncing  public  life 
altogether.  It  is,  however,  probable  I  may  not  any 
longer  be  engaged  in  it.  I  have  explained  to  you 
the   difficulties   which   I   met  with  in  obtaining  a 

*  This  was  inclosed  in  the  preceding  letter.  History  of  the  Republic, 
ii.,  279. 

2  Col.  Meade,  of  Virginia,  was  one  of  Washington's  confidential  and 
trusted  aides-de-camp.  He  was  a  gallant  soldier  and  an  intimate 
friend  of  Hamilton. 


254  Alexander  Hamilton 

command  last  campaign.  I  thought  it  incompatible 
with  the  delicacy  due  to  myself  to  make  any  applica- 
tion this  campaign.  I  have  expressed  this  senti- 
ment in  a  letter  to  the  General,  and,  retaining  my 
rank  only,  have  relinquished  the  emoluments  of  my 
commission,  declaring  myself ,  notwithstanding, ready 
at  all  times  to  obey  the  "calls  of  the  public.  I  don't 
expect  to  hear  any  of  these,  unless  the  state  of  our 
affairs  should  change  for  the  worse,  and,  lest  by  any 
unforeseen  accident  that  would  happen,  I  choose  to 
keep  myself  in  a  situation  again  to  contribute  my 
aid.     This  prevents  a  total  resignation. 

You  were  right  in  supposing  I  neglected  to  prepare 
what  I  promised  you  at  Philadelphia.  The  truth  is 
I  was  in  such  a  hurry  to  get  home  that  I  could  think 
of  nothing  else.  As  I  set  out  to-morrow  morning 
for  Albany,  I  cannot  from  this  place  send  you  the 
matter  you  wish. 

Imagine,  my  dear  Meade,  what  pleasure  it  must 
give  Eliza  and  myself  to  know  that  Mrs.  Meade  in- 
terests herself  in  us.  Without  a  personal  acquaint- 
ance, we  have  been  long  attached  to  her.  My  visit 
at  Mr.  Fitzhugh's  confirmed  my  partiality.  Betsy 
is  so  fond  of  your  family  that  she  proposes  to  form  a 
match  between  her  boy  and  your  girl,  provided  you 
will  engage  to  make  the  latter  as  amiable  as  her 
mother. 

Truly,  my  dear  Meade,  I  often  regret  that  fortune 
has  cast  our  residence  at  such  a  distance  from  each 
other.  It  would  be  a  serious  addition  to  my  happi- 
ness if  we  lived  where  I  could  see  you  every  day,  but 
fate  has  determined  it  otherwise.     I  am  a  little  hur- 


Private  Correspondence  255 

ried,  and  can  only  request,  in  addition,  that  you  will 
present  me  most  affectionately  to  Mrs.  Meade,  and 
believe  me  to  be,  etc. 


TO   ROBERT   MORRIS 

Albany,  May  i8,  1782. 

Sir: 

I  had  this  day  the  honor  of  receiving  your  letter 
of  the  2d  instant,  and  am  much  obliged  by  the  mark 
of  your  confidence  which  it  contains,  and  to  Col. 
Stewart  for  his  friendly  intentions  upon  the  occasion. 

My  military  situation  has  indeed  become  so  nega- 
tive, that  I  have  no  motive  to  continue  in  it;  and  if 
my  services  could  be  of  importance  to  the  public  in 
a  civil  line,  I  should  cheerfully  obey  its  command. 
But  the  plan  which  I  have  marked  out  to  myself  is 
the  profession  of  the  law,  and  I  am  now  engaged  in 
a  course  of  studies  for  that  purpose.  Time  is  so 
precious  to  me  that  I  could  not  put  myself  in  the  way 
of  any  interruptions,  unless  for  an  object  of  conse- 
quence to  the  public  or  to  myself.  The  present  is 
not  of  this  nature.  Such  are  the  circumstances  of 
this  State,  the  benefit  arising  from  the  office  you 
propose  would  not,  during  the  war,  exceed  yearly 
one  hundred  pounds;  for,  unfortunately,  I  am  per- 
suaded it  will  not  pay  annually  into  the  Continental 
treasury  above  forty  thousand  pounds;  and,  on  a 
peace  establishment,  this  will  not  be  for  some  time 
to  come  much  more  than  doubled.  You  will  per- 
ceive, sir,  that  an  engagement  of  this  kind  does  not 


256  Alexander  Hamilton 

correspond  with  my  views,  and  does  not  afford  a 
sufficient  inducement  to  relinquish  them. 

I  am  not  the  less  sensible  of  the  obliging  motives 
which  dictated  the  offer,  and  it  will  be  an  additional 
one  to  that  respect  and  esteem  with  which  I  have 
the  honor  to  be,  etc. 


TO   GENERAL   KNOX 

Albany,  June  7,  1782. 

Dear  General: 

We  are  told  here  that  there  is  a  British  officer 
coming  on  from  Comwallis'  army  to  be  executed  by 
way  of  retaliation  for  the  murder  of  Capt.  Huddy. 
As  this  appears  to  me  clearly  to  be  an  ill-timed  pro- 
ceeding, and  if  persisted  in  will  be  derogatory  to  the 
national  character,  I  cannot  forbear  communicating 
to  you  my  ideas  upon  the  subject.  A  sacrifice  of 
this  sort  is  entirely  repugnant  to  the  genius  of  the 
age  we  live  in,  and  is  without  example  in  modem 
history,  nor  can  it  fail  to  be  considered  in  Europe 
as  wanton  and  unnecessary.  It  appears  that  the 
enemy  (from  necessity,  I  grant,  but  the  operation  is 
the  same)  have  changed  their  system  and  adopted  a 
more  humane  one ;  and,  therefore,  the  only  justifying 
motive  of  retaliation — the  preventing  a  repetition  of 
cruelty — ceases.  But  if  this  were  not  the  case,  so 
solemn  and  deliberate  a  sacrifice  of  the  innocent  for 
the  guilty  must  be  condemned  on  the  present  re- 
ceived notions  of  humanity,  and  encourage  an  opin- 
ion that  we  are,  in  a  certain  degree,  in  a  state  of 
barbarism.    Our  affairs  are  now  in  a  prosperous  train, 


Private  Correspondence  257 

and  so  vigorous — I  would  rather  say  so  violent — a 
measure  would  want  the  plea  of  necessity.  It  would 
argue  meanness  in  us  that  at  this  late  stage  of  the 
war,  in  the  midst  of  success,  we  should  suddenly  de- 
part from  that  temper  with  which  we  have  all  along 
borne  with  a  great  and  more  frequent  provocation. 
The  death  of  Andre  could  not  have  been  dispensed 
with,  but  it  must  still  be  viewed  at  a  distance  as  an 
act  of  rigid  justice.  If  we  wreak  our  resentment  on 
an  innocent  person,  it  will  be  suspected  that  we  are 
too  fond  of  executions.  I  am  persuaded  it  will  have 
an  influence  peculiarly  unfavorable  to  the  General's 
character. 

If  it  is  seriously  believed  that  in  this  advanced 
stage  of  affairs  retaliation  is  necessary,  let  another 
mode  be  chosen.  Let  under  actors  be  employed, 
and  let  the  authority  by  which  it  is  done  be  wrapt  in 
obscurity  and  doubt.  Let  us  endeavor  to  make  it 
fall  upon  those  who  have  had  a  direct  or  indirect 
share  in  the  guilt.  Let  not  the  Commander-in- 
Chief — considered  as  the  first  and  most  respectable 
character  among  us — come  forward  in  person  and 
be  the  avowed  author  of  an  act  at  which  every  hu- 
mane feeling  revolts.  Let  us  at  least  have  as  much 
address  as  the  enemy;  and,  if  we  must  have  victims, 
appoint  some  obscure  agents  to  perform  the  cere- 
mony and  bear  the  odium  which  must  always  attend 
even  justice  itself  when  directed  by  extreme  severity. 

For  my  own  part,  my  dear  sir,  I  think  a  business 
of  this  complexion  entirely  out  of  season.  The  time 
for  it,  if  there  ever  was  one,  is  past. 

But  it  is  said  that  the  Commander-in-Chief  has 

VOL.  IX.  — 17. 


258  Alexander  Hamilton 

pledged  himself  for  it  and  cannot  recede.  Incon- 
sistency in  this  case  would  be  better  than  consist- 
ency. But  pretexts  may  be  found  and  will  be 
readily  admitted  in  favor  of  humanity.  Carleton 
will  in  all  probability  do  something  like  apology  and 
concession.  He  will  give  appearances  of  preventing 
everything  of  the  kind  in  future.  Let  the  General 
appear  to  be  satisfied  with  these  appearances.  The 
steps  Carleton  is  said  to  have  taken  to  suppress  the 
refugee  incursions  will  give  the  better  color  to  lenity. 
I  address  myself  to  you  upon  this  occasion,  be- 
cause I  know  your  liberality  and  your  influence  with 
the  General.  If  you  are  of  my  opinion,  I  am  sure 
you  will  employ  it,  if  it  should  not  be  too  late.  I 
would  not  think  a  letter  necessary,  but  I  know  how 
apt  men  are  to  be  actuated  by  the  circumstances 
which  immediately  surroimd  them,  and  to  be  led 
into  an  approbation  of  measures  which,  in  another 
situation,  they  would  disapprove.  Mrs.  Hamilton 
joins  me  in  compliments  to  Mrs.  Knox.' 

^  This  letter  is  printed  from  the  original  in  the  possession  of  the 
New  England  Historical  Genealogical  Society  [Knox  MSS.,  vol.  viii., 
pp.  170-172].  It  has  already  been  printed  in  the  History  of  the  Re- 
public, ii.,  284.  The  affair  to  which  it  refers  was  the  murder  of  Captain 
Huddy,  an  American  officer,  by  a  party  of  refugees  under  the  com- 
mand of  Captain  Lippincott.  The  anger  excited  by  this  brutal  out- 
rage was  intense,  and  Washington  was  so  strongly  moved,  that  he 
demanded  from  Sir  Guy  Carleton  the  surrender  of  Lippincott.  This 
being  refused,  he  ordered  a  British  officer  to  be  selected  from  among 
the  prisoners  and  held  in  close  confinement  preparatory  to  execution 
if  Sir  Guy  Carleton  would  not  yield.  The  lot  fell  upon  Captain  Asgill, 
an  officer  of  the  Guards  and  a  boy  of  nineteen.  Captain  Asgill  was 
finally  released,  as  Washington  could  not  bring  himself  to  this  act  of 
retaliation,  even  as  a  last  extremity,  and  the  real  culprit  escaped.  It 
was  while  Asgill  was  in  prison  with  death  hanging  over  him  that 
Hamilton  wrote  this  letter. 


Private  Correspondence  259 

TO   ROBERT   MORRIS 

Albany,  June  17,  1782. 

Sir: 

The  letter  which  you  did  me  the  honor  to  write  me, 
of  the  4th  instant,  came  to  my  hands  too  late  to  per- 
mit me  to  answer  it  by  the  return  of  the  same  post. 
The  explanation  you  give  of  your  intention  in  your 
late  offer  makes  it  an  object  that  will  fully  compen- 
sate for  the  time  it  will  deduct  from  my  other  oc- 
cupations. In  accepting  it,  I  have  only  one  scruple, 
arising  from  a  doubt  whether  the  service  I  can  render 
in  the  present  state  of  things  will  be  an  equivalent 
for  the  compensation.  The  whole  system  (if  it  may 
be  so  called)  of  taxation  in  this  State  is  radically 
vicious,  burthensome  to  the  people,  and  unproduc- 
tive to  government.  As  the  matter  now  stands, 
there  seems  to  be  little  for  a  continental  receiver  to 
do.  The  whole  business  appears  to  be  thrown  into 
the  hands  of  the  county  treasurers,  nor  do  I  find  that 
there  is  any  appropriation  made  of  any  part  of  the 
taxes  collected  to  continental  purposes,  or  any  pro- 
vision to  authorize  payment  to  the  officer  you  ap- 
point ;  this,  however,  must  be  made.  There  is  only 
one  way  in  which  I  can  imagine  a  prospect  of  being 
materially  useful — that  is,  in  seconding  your  applica- 
tion to  the  State.  In  popular  assemblies  much  may 
sometimes  be  brought  about  by  personal  discussions, 
by  entering  into  details  and  combating  objections  as 
they  rise.  If  it  should  at  any  time  be  thought  ad- 
visable by  you  to  empower  me  to  act  in  this  capacity, 
I  shall  be  happy  to  do  every  thing  that  depends  on 
me  to  effectuate  your  views.    I  flatter  myself  to  you, 


26o  Alexander  Hamilton 

sir,  I  need  not  profess  that  I  suggest  this,  not  from  a 
desire  to  augment  the  importance  of  office,  but  to 
advance  the  public  interest. 

It  is  of  primary  moment  to  me  as  soon  as  possible 
to  take  my  station  in  the  law,  and  on  this  considera- 
tion I  am  pressing  to  qualify  myself  for  admission 
to  next  term,  which  will  be  the  latter  end  of  July. 
After  this,  if  you  think  an  interview  with  me  neces- 
sary I  will  wait  upon  you  in  Philadelphia.  In  the 
meantime  I  shall  be  happy  to  receive  your  instruc- 
tions, and  shall  direct  my  attention  more  particu- 
larly to  acquiring  whatever  information  may  be 
useful  to  my  future  operations.  I  have  read  your 
publications  at  different  times,  but  as  I  have  not  the 
papers  containing  them  in  my  possession,  it  will  be 
necessary  that  their  contents  should  be  comprised 
in  your  instructions.  A  meeting  of  the  Legislature 
is  summoned  early  in  the  next  month,  at  which,  if  I 
previously  receive  your  orders,  it  may  be  possible  to 
put  matters  in  train. 

I  am  truly  indebted  to  you,  sir,  for  the  disposition 
you  have  manifested  upon  this  occasion ;  and  I  shall 
only  add  an  assurance  of  my  endeavors  to  justify 
your  confidence  and  prove  to  you  the  sincerity  of 
that  respectful  attachment  with  which 
I  am,  sir,  etc. 


Private  Correspondence  261 

TO    COMFORT   SANDS  ' 

Albany,  June  23,  1782. 

Sir: 

Mr.  Morris  having  lately  offered  me  the  appoint- 
ment of  Receiver  of  Continental  Taxes  for  this  State, 
I  wish  to  collect  as  much  and  as  accurate  information 
as  possible  of  the  situation  of  its  money  concerns.  It 
will  be,  among  other  things,  of  great  importance  that 
I  should  form  an  idea  of  the  money  brought  into  the 
State  and  carried  out  of  it ;  and,  with  a  view  to  this, 
I  take  the  liberty  to  request  you  will  furnish  me  with 
an  estimate  of  what  you  have  reason  to  think  you 
will  lay  out  in  this  State  in  the  course  of  a  year  in  the 
transactions  of  your  contract  business.  Mr.  Duer 
has  been  so  obliging  as  to  promise  me  a  sketch  of  his 
disbursements  in  this  quarter,  and  has  informed  me 
that  you  are  principally  charged  with  what  relates 
to  the  supplies  of  the  main  army  as  well  as  West 
Point,  and  will  therefore  be  best  able  to  enlighten  me 
on  that  head.  The  calculation  may  not  admit  of 
absolute  precision;  but  if  it  comes  near  the  truth  it 
will  answer.  It  would  be  useful  that  you  could  dis- 
tinguish, as  nearly  as  possible,  what  part  will  be  in 
specie,  what  in  bank  and  other  notes.  As  this  is  a 
matter  that  can  be  attended  with  no  inconvenience 
to  any  person,  and  will  be  conducive  to  the  public 
utility,  I  flatter  myself  you  will  favor  me  with  a 
speedy  communication. 

*  A  merchant  and  army  contractor  of  New  York. 


262  Alexander  Hamilton 

TO    ROBERT   MORRIS 

Albany,  July  13,  1782. 

Sir: 

I  have  this  moment  received  your  letter  of  the 
second  inst.,  and  as  the  post  will  set  out  on  its  return 
in  half  an  hour,  I  have  little  more  than  time  to  ac- 
knowledge the  receipt  of  it. 

I  shall  to-morrow  morning  commence  a  journey  to 
Poughkeepsie,  where  the  Legislature  are  assembled, 
and  I  will  endeavor  by  every  step  in  my  power  to 
second  your  views,  though,  I  am  sorry  to  add,  with- 
out very  sanguine  expectations.  I  think  it  proba- 
ble the  Legislature  will  do  something,  but  whatever 
momentary  effort  they  may  make,  till  the  entire 
change  of  their  present  system  very  little  will  be 
done.  To  effect  this,  mountains  of  prejudice  and 
particular  interest  are  to  be  levelled.  For  my  own 
part,  considering  the  late  serious  misfortune  of  our 
ally,  the  spirit  of  reformation,  of  wisdom,  and  of 
unanimity,  which  seems  to  have  succeeded  to  that  of 
blunder,  perverseness,  and  dissension  in  the  British 
Government,  and  the  universal  reluctance  of  these 
States  to  do  what  is  right,  I  cannot  help  viewing  our 
situation  as  critical,  and  I  feel  it  the  duty  of  every 
citizen  to  exert  his  faculties  to  the  utmost  to  support 
the  measures,  especially  those  solid  arrangements  of 
finance  on  which  our  safety  depends. 

I  will  by  the  next  post  forward  you  the  bond  exe- 
cuted with  proper  sureties. 

It  is  not  in  the  spirit  of  compliment,  but  of  sin- 
cerity, I  assure  you,  that  the  opinion  I  entertain  of 
him  who  presides  in  the  department  was  not  one  of 


Private  Correspondence  263 

the  smallest  motives  to  my  acceptance  of  the  office; 
nor  will  that  esteem  and  confidence  which  makes  me 
now  sensibly  feel  the  obliging  expressions  of  your 
letter  fail  to  have  a  great  share  in  influencing  my 
future  exertions. 


TO   GOVERNOR   CLINTON 

POUGHKEEPSIE,  July  l6,  1 782. 

Sir: 

I  have  the  honor  to  inclose  your  Excellency  the 
copy  of  a  warrant  from  the  Honorable  Robert  Morris, 
Esq.,  Superintendent  of  the  Finances  of  the  United 
States,  by  which  you  will  perceive  that,  agreeable  to 
the  resolution  of  Congress,  of  the  2d  of  November 
last,  he  has  appointed  me  Receiver  of  the  Continental 
Taxes  of  the  State.  I  am  therefore  to  request  that 
the  Legislature  will  be  pleased  to  vest  in  me  the  au- 
thority required  by  that  resolution. 

It  is  a  part  of  my  duty  to  explain  to  the  Legisla- 
ture, from  time  to  time,  the  views  of  the  Superin- 
tendent of  Finance,  in  pursuance  of  the  orders  of 
Congress,  that  they  may  be  the  better  enabled  to 
judge  of  the  measures  most  proper  to  be  adopted 
for  an  effectual  co-operation.  For  this  purpose  I 
pray  your  Excellency  to  impart  my  request,  that  I 
may  have  the  honor  of  a  conference  with  a  committee 
of  the  two  Houses,  at  such  time  and  place  as  they 
may  find  convenient. 


264  Alexander  Hamilton 

TO    ROBERT   MORRIS 

POUGHKEEPSIE,  July  22,   1 782. 

Sir: 

Agreeably  to  my  letter  to  you  from  Albany,  I 
came  to  this  place  and  had  an  interview  with  a  com- 
mittee of  the  Legislature,  in  which  I  urged  the 
several  matters  contained  in  your  instructions.  I 
strongly  represented  the  necessity  of  solid  arrange- 
ments of  finance,  and,  by  way  of  argument,  pointed 
out  all  the  defects  of  the  present  system.  I  found 
every  man  convinced  that  something  was  wrong,  but 
few  that  were  willing  to  recognize  the  mischief  when 
defined,  and  consent  to  the  proper  remedy.  The 
quantum  of  taxes  already  imposed  is  so  great  as  to 
make  it  useless  to  impose  any  others  to  a  considerable 
amount.  A  bill  has,  however,  passed  both  Houses, 
payable  in  specie,  bank  notes,  or  your  notes,  for 
eighteen  thousand  pounds.  It  is  at  present  appro- 
priated to  your  order,  but  I  doubt  whether  some 
subsequent  arrangement  will  not  take  place  for  a 
different  appropriation.  The  Commander-in-Chief 
has  applied  for  a  quantity  of  forage,  which  the  Legis- 
lature is  devising  the  means  of  furnishing,  and  I  fear 
it  will  finish  by  diverting  the  eighteen  thousand 
pounds  to  that  purpose.  I  have  hitherto  been  able 
to  prevent  this,  but  as  it  is  of  indispensable  import- 
ance to  me  to  leave  this  place  immediately  to  prepare 
for  my  examination,  for  which  I  have  pledged  my- 
self the  ensuing  term,  which  is  at  hand,  it  is  possible, 
after  I  have  left  it,  that  contrary  ideas  will  prevail. 
Efforts  have  been  made  to  introduce  a  species  of 
negotiable  certificates,  which  I  have  strenuously  op- 


Private  Correspondence  265 

posed.  It  has  not  yet  taken  place,  but  I  am  not 
clear  how  the  matter  will  terminate. 

Should  the  bill  for  the  eighteen  thousand  pounds 
go  out  in  its  present  form,  I  cannot  hope  that  it  will 
produce  in  the  treasury  above  half  the  sum,  such  are 
the  vices  of  our  present  mode  of  collection. 

A  bill  has  also  passed  the  Assembly  for  collecting 
arrearages  of  taxes,  payable  in  specie,  bank  notes, 
your  notes,  old  continental  emissions  at  one  hundred 
and  twenty-eight  for  one,  and  a  species  of  certificates 
issued  by  the  State  for  the  purchase  of  horses.  This  is 
now  before  the  Senate.    The  arrearages  are  very  large. 

Both  Houses  have  unanimously  passed  a  set  of 
resolutions,  to  be  transmitted  to  Congress  and  the 
several  States,  proposing  a  convention  of  the  States, 
to  enlarge  the  powers  of  Congress  and  vest  them  with 
funds.  I  think  this  a  very  eligible  step,  though  I 
doubt  of  the  concurrence  of  the  other  States;  but  I 
am  certain  without  it  they  will  never  be  brought  to 
co-operate  in  any  reasonable  or  effectual  plan.  Urge 
reforms  or  exertions,  and  the  answer  constantly  is: 
What  avails  it  for  one  State  to  make  them  without 
the  concert  of  the  others  ?  It  is  in  vain  to  expose  the 
futility  of  this  reasoning;  it  is  founded  in  all  those 
passions  which  have  the  strongest  influence  on  the 
human  mind. 

The  Legislature  have  also  appointed,  at  my  in- 
stance, a  committee  to  devise,  in  its  recess,  a  more 
effectual  system  of  taxation,  and  to  communicate 
with  me  on  this  subject.  A  good  deal  will  depend 
on  the  success  of  this  attempt.  Convinced  of  the 
absurdity  of  multiplying  taxes  in  the  present  mode, 


266  Alexander  Hamilton 

where,  in  effect,  the  payment  is  voluntary,  and  the 
money  received  exhausted  in  the  collection,  I  have 
labored  chiefly  to  instil  the  necessity  of  a  change  in 
the  plan,  and,  though  not  so  rapidly  as  the  exigency 
of  public  affairs  requires,  truth  seems  to  be  making 
some  progress. 

There  is  other  appropriation  to  the  use  of  Con- 
gress than  of  the  eighteen  thousand  pounds. 

I  shall,  as  soon  as  possible,  give  you  a  full  and  just 
view  of  the  situation  and  temper  of  this  State.  This 
cannot  be  till  after  my  intended  examination;  that 
over,  I  shall  lay  myself  out  in  every  way  that  can 
promote  your  views  and  the  public  good. 

I  am  informed  you  have  an  appointment  to  make 
of  a  Commissioner  of  Accounts  for  this  State.  Per- 
mit me  to  suggest  the  expediency  of  choosing  a  citi- 
zen of  the  State ;  a  man  who,  to  the  qualifications 
requisite  for  the  execution  of  the  office,  adds  an  in- 
fluence in  its  affairs.  I  need  not  particularize  the 
reasons  of  this  suggestion.  In  my  next  I  will  also 
take  the  liberty  to  mention  some  characters. 

I  omitted  mentioning  that  the  two  Houses  have 
also  passed  a  bill,  authorizing  Congress  to  adjust  the 
quotas  of  the  States  on  equitable  principles,  agree- 
ably to  your  recommendation.  I  enclose  you  the 
bond  executed  jointly  with  General  Schuyler. 


TO   GOVERNOR   CLINTON 

Albany,  August  3,  1782. 

Sir: 

I  have  lately  received  a  letter  from  the  Super- 
intendent of  Finance,  inclosing  a  copy  of  a  circu- 


Private  Correspondence  267 

lar- letter  from  him  to  the  several  States,  dated 
twenty-fifth  July,  '81,  in  which  he  requests  informa- 
tion on  the  following  important  points. 

''What  supplies,  of  every  kind,  money,  provisions, 
forage,  transportation,  etc.,  have  been  furnished  by 
this  State  to  the  United  States,  since  the  eighteenth 
of  March,  1780." 

''The  amount  of  the  money  in  the  treasury;  the 
sums  expected  to  be  there;  the  times  they  will 
probably  be  brought  in;  the  appropriations." 

"  The  amount  of  the  different  paper  currencies  in 
the  State;  the  probable  increase,  or  decrease,  of 
each;  and  the  respective  rates  of  depreciation." 

"The  Acts  passed  since  the  eighteenth  of  March, 
1780,  for  raising  taxes,  furnishing  supplies,  etc.;  the 
manner  they  have  been  executed;  the  time  neces- 
sary for  them  to  operate ;  the  consequences  of  their 
operation ;  the  policy  of  the  State  relative  to  laying, 
assessing,  levying,  and  collecting  taxes." 

In  his  letter,  which  is  circular,  to  the  Receivers,  he 
says  the  answers  he  has  received  to  these  inquiries 
are  few  and  short  of  the  object;  and  he  therefore 
urges  me  to  take  the  most  speedy  and  effectual  means 
in  my  power,  to  enable  him  to  form  a  proper  judg- 
ment on  such  of  the  subjects  referred  to  as  the  actual 
state  of  things  renders  it  important  to  know. 

In  compliance  with  this,  I  request  the  favor  of 
your  Excellency  to  inform  me  what  steps  have  been 
taken  on  the  several  heads  of  which  the  above  is  an 
abstract;  and  what  progress  has  been  made  in  the 
business ;  particularly  with  respect  to  the  first  arti- 
cle.    I  shall  also  be  much  obliged  to  you  to  direct 


268  Alexander  Hamilton 

Mr.  Holt  to  furnish  me,  without  delay,  with  the  Acts 
mentioned  in  the  inclosed  list. 

Your  Excellency  must  have  been  too  sensible  of 
the  necessity  of  enabling  the  Director  of  the  Finances 
of  the  United  States  to  form  a  just  judgment  of  the 
true  state  of  our  affairs,  to  have  omitted  any  measure 
in  your  power  to  procure  the  fullest  information  on 
the  several  matters  submitted  to  you:  and  I  am 
persuaded  the  business  is  in  such  a  train  that  little 
will  be  left  for  me  to  do. 

I  entreat  you  will  do  me  the  honor  to  let  me  hear 
from  you  as  soon  as  possible  on  the  subject. 

It  would  promote  the  public  business,  if  you  would 
be  so  good  as  to  direct  Mr.  Banker  to  supply  me  with 
such  information  as  I  might  call  upon  him  for.  He 
is  very  obliging,  but  without  some  authority  for  the 
purpose,  there  is  a  delicacy  in  calling  upon  him.  I 
wrote  at  the  same  time  to  Mr.  Holt,  printer  for  the 
State,  desiring  him  to  forward  me  the  copies  of 
the  Acts  above  mentioned ;  and  telling  him  that  if  the 
Governor  did  not  make  satisfaction,  I  would  do  it. 
These  Acts  were  all  those  relative  to  finance  and 
supply,  from  March  i8,  1780,  to  this  time. 


TO   THE    COUNTY   TREASURERS 

Albany,  August  5,  1782. 

Sir: 

It  will  be  of  great  utility  to  the  State,  and  essential 
to  the  execution  of  my  instructions  from  the  Super- 
intendent of  Finance,  that  I  should  be  able  to  ascer- 
tain, as  speedily  as  possible,  the  expense  attending 


Private  Correspondence  269 

the  collection  of  taxes  within  this  State.  In  order 
to  this,  I  shall  be  much  obliged  to  you  to  send  me 
without  delay  an  account  of  what  you  have  received 
in  your  county,  since  the  beginning  of  the  year  '80  to 
this  time,  as  well  for  the  taxes  laid  for  county  pur- 
poses, as  for  those  imposed  by  the  Legislature ;  and 
of  the  expenses  of  every  kind  attending  the  collec- 
tion; those  of  the  supervisors,  assessors,  the  allow- 
ance to  the  collectors  and  to  myself. 

When  I  assure  you  I  want  this  information  for  an 
important  purpose,  I  doubt  not  you  will  forward  it 
to  me  as  speedily  as  it  can  be  prepared,  and  with 
as  much  accuracy  as  circumstances  will  permit ;  by 
doing  which  you  will  serve  the  public  and  oblige, 
sir,  etc. 


TO    ROBERT   MORRIS 

Albany,  August  13,  1782. 

Sir: 

I  promised  you  in  former  letters  to  give  you  a  full 
view  of  the  situation  and  temper  of  this  State.  I 
now  sit  down  to  execute  that  task. 

You  have  already  in  your  possession  a  pretty  just 
picture  of  the  State,  drawn  by  the  Legislature,  per- 
haps too  highly  colored  in  some  places,  but  just,  and, 
in  the  main,  true. 

It  is  the  opinion  of  the  most  sensible  men  with 
whom  I  converse,  who  are  best  acquainted  with  the 
circumstances  of  the  State,  and  who  are  least  dis- 
posed to  exaggerate  its  distress  as  an  excuse  for  in- 
activity, that  its  faculties  for  revenue  are  diminished 
at  least  two  thirds. 


270  Alexander  Hamilton 

It  will  not  be  difficult  to  conceive  this  when  we 
consider  that  five  out  of  the  fourteen  counties  of 
which  the  State  is  composed,  including  the  capital, 
are  in  the  hands  of  the  enemy ;  that  two  and  part  of 
a  third  have  revolted;  two  others  have  been  deso- 
lated the  greater  part  by  the  ravages  of  the  enemy 
and  of  our  own  troops,  and  the  remaining  four  have 
more  or  less  suffered  partial  injuries  from  the  same 
causes.  Adding  the  fragments  of  some  to  repair  the 
losses  of  others,  the  efficient  property,  strength,  and 
force  of  the  State  will  consist  in  little  more  than  four 
counties. 

In  the  distribution  of  taxes  before  the  war,  the 
city  of  New  York  used  to  be  rated  at  one  third  of  the 
whole;  but  this  was  too  high,  owing  probably  to 
the  prevailing  of  the  country  influence.  Its  proper 
proportion  I  should  judge  to  have  been  about  one 
fourth,  which  serves  further  to  illustrate  the  prob- 
able decrease  of  the  State. 

Our  population,  indeed,  is  not  diminished  in  the 
same  degree,  as  many  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  dis- 
membered and  ruined  counties,  who  have  left  their 
habitations,  are  dispersed  through  those  which  re- 
main; and  it  would  seem  that  the  labor  of  the  ad- 
ditional hands  ought  to  ensure  the  culture  and  value 
of  these.  But  there  are  many  deductions  to  be 
made  from  this  apparent  advantage:  the  numbers 
that  have  recruited  the  British  army;  those  that 
have  been  furnished  to  ours ;  the  emigrations  to  Ver- 
mont and  to  the  neighboring  States,  less  harassed 
by  the  war,  and  affording  better  encouragements  to 
industry,  both  which  have  been  considerable. 


Private  Correspondence  271 

Besides  these  circumstances,  many  of  the  fugitive 
famihes  are  a  burthen  for  their  substance  upon  the 
State.  The  fact  is,  labor  is  much  dearer  than  be- 
fore the  war. 

This  State  has  certainly  made,  in  the  course  of  the 
war,  great  exertions,  and,  upon  many  occasions,  of 
the  most  exhausting  kind.  This  has  sometimes 
happened  from  want  of  judgment;  at  others,  from 
necessity.  When  the  army,  as  has  too  often  been 
the  case,  has  been  threatened  with  some  fatal  calam- 
ity— for  want  of  provisions,  forage,  the  means  of 
transportation,  etc., — in  consequence  of  pressing 
applications  from  the  Commander-in-Chief,  the 
Legislature  have  been  obliged  to  have  recourse  to 
extraordinary  expedients  to  answer  the '  pressing 
emergency,  which  have  both  distressed  and  disgusted 
the  people.  There  is  no  doubt  that,  with  a  prudent 
and  systematic  administration,  the  State  might  have 
rendered  more  benefit  to  the  common  cause,  with 
less  inconvenience  to  itself,  than  by  all  its  forced 
efforts;  but  there,  as  everywhere  else,  we  have 
wanted  experience  and  knowledge.  And,  indeed, 
had  this  not  been  the  case,  every  thing  everywhere 
has  been  so  radically  wrong,  that  it  was  difficult,  if 
not  impossible,  for  any  one  State  to  be  right. 

The  exposed  situation  of  the  frontier,  and  the  fre- 
quent calls  upon  the  inhabitants  for  personal  service 
on  each  extremity,  by  interfering  with  industry,  have 
contributed  to  impoverish  the  State  and  fatigue  the 
people. 

Deprived  of  foreign  trade,  our  internal  traffic  is 
carried  on  upon  the  most  disadvantageous  terms. 


272  Alexander  Hamilton 

It  divides  itself  into  three  branches :  with  the  city  of 
New  York,  with  Jersey  and  Pennsylvania,  and  with 
New  England. 

That  with  New  York  consists  chiefly  of  liixuries 
on  one  part  and  returns  of  specie  on  the  other.  I 
imagine  we  have  taken  goods  from  that  place  to  the 
amount  of  near  ;^3o,ooo.  The  Legislature  passed  a 
severe  law  to  prevent  this  intercourse,  but  what  will 
laws  avail  against  the  ingenuity  and  intrepidity  of 
avarice  ? 

From  Jersey  and  Pennsylvania  we  take  about 
;^3o,ooo  more,  and  we  pay  almost  entirely  in  cash. 

From  Massachusetts  and  other  parts  of  New  Eng- 
land we  purchase  to  the  amount  of  about  ;^5 0,000, 
principally  in  tea  and  salt.  (The  articles  of  tea  and 
salt  alone  cost  this  State  the  annual  sum  of  £60,000.) 
We  sell  to  these  States  to  the  value  of  about  ;^3 0,000. 

The  immense  land  transportation,  of  which  the 
chief  part  is  carried  on  by  the  subjects  of  other 
States,  is  a  vast  incumbrance  upon  otir  trade. 

The  principal  article  we  have  to  throw  in  the  op- 
posite scale  is  the  expenditures  of  the  army.  Mr. 
Sands  informs  me  that  the  contractors  for  the  main 
army  and  West  Point  lay  out  in  this  State  at  the 
rate  of  about  $60,000  a  year;  Mr.  Duer,  for  these 
northern  posts,  about  $30,000.  If  the  Quartermas- 
ter-General expends  as  much  more  in  his  depart- 
ment, the  whole  will  amount  to  about  $180,000.  I 
speak  of  what  is  paid  for  in  specie,  or  such  paper  as 
answers  the  purpose  of  specie.  These  calculations 
cannot  absolutely  be  relied  on,  because  the  data  are 
necessarily  uncertain,  but  they  are  the  result  of  the 


Private  Correspondence  273 

best  information  I  can  obtain,  and,  if  near  the  truth, 
prove  that  the  general  balance  of  trade  is  against 
us — a  plain  symptom  of  which  is  an  extreme  and 
universal  scarcity  of  money. 

The  situation  of  the  State  with  respect  to  its  in- 
ternal government  is  not  more  pleasing.  Here  we 
find  the  general  disease  which  infects  all  our  consti- 
tutions— an  excess  of  popularity.  There  is  no  order 
that  has  a  will  of  its  own.  The  inquiry  constantly 
is  what  will  please,  not  what  will  benefit  the  people. 
In  such  a  government  there  can  be  nothing  but 
temporary  expenditure,  fickleness,  and  folly. 

But  the  point  of  view  in  which  this  subject  will  be 
interesting  to  you  is  that  which  relates  to  our  finances. 
I  gave  you,  in  a  former  letter,  a  sketch  of  our  plan 
of  taxation,  but  I  will  now  be  more  particular. 

The  general  principle  of  it  is  apparent,  according 
to  circumstances  and  abilities  collectively  considered. 
The  ostensible  reason  for  adopting  this  vague  basis 
was  a  desire  of  equality.  It  was  pretended  that  this 
could  not  be  obtained  so  well  by  any  fixed  tariff  of 
taxable  property,  as  by  leaving  it  to  the  discretion 
of  persons  chosen  by  the  people  themselves  to  deter- 
mine the  ability  of  each  citizen.  But  perhaps  the 
true  reason  was  a  desire  to  discriminate  between  the 
Whigs  and  Tories.  This  chimerical  attempt  at  per- 
fect equahty  has  resulted  in  total  inequality,  or 
rather  this  narrow  disposition  to  overburthen  a  par- 
ticular class  of  citizens  (Hving  under  the  protection 
of  the  government)  has  been  retorted  upon  the  con- 
trivers or  their  friends,  wherever  that  class  has  been 
numerous  enough  to  preponderate  in  the  election  of 

VOL.  IX.— 18. 


2/4  Alexander  Hamilton 

the  officers  who  were  to  execute  the  law.  The  ex- 
terior figure  a  man  makes,  the  decency  and  mean- 
ness of  his  manner  of  living,  the  personal  friendships 
or  dislikes  of  the  assessors,  have  much  more  share  in 
determining  what  individuals  shall  pay,  than  the 
proportion  of  property. 

The  Legislature  first  assesses  or  quotas  the  several 
counties.  Here  the  evil  begins — the  members  cabal 
and  intrigue  to  throw  the  burthen  off  their  respective 
constituents.  Address  and  influence,  more  than  con- 
siderations of  real  ability,  prevail.  A  great  deal  of 
time  is  lost,  and  a  great  deal  of  expense  incurred, 
before  the  juggle  is  ended  and  the  necessary  com- 
promise made. 

The  supervisors,  of  whom  there  are  upon  an  aver- 
age sixteen  in  each  coimty,  meet  at  the  notification 
of  the  county  clerk,  and  assign  their  proportions  to 
the  subdivisions  of  the  coimty,  and,  in  the  distribu- 
tion, play  over  the  same  game  which  was  played  in 
the  Legislature. 

The  assessors,  assembled  on  a  like  notification,  ac- 
cording to  their  fancies,  determine  the  proportion  of 
each  individual ;  a  list  of  which  being  made  out  and 
signed  by  the  supervisors,  is  a  warrant  to  the  collect- 
ors. There  are  near  an  hundred  upon  an  average 
in  each  country.  The  allowance  to  these  officers 
has  been  various.  It  is  now  six  shillings  a  day,  be- 
sides expenses.  In  some  cases  they  have  been  lim- 
ited to  a  particular  time  for  executing  the  business; 
but,  in  general,  it  is  left  to  their  discretion,  and  the 
greater  part  of  them  are  not  in  a  hurry  to  complete 
it,  as  they  have  a  conpensation  for  their  trouble  and 


Private  Correspondence  275 

live  better  at  the  public  charge  than  they  are  ac- 
customed to  do  at  their  own.  The  consequence  is 
not  only  delay  but  a  heavy  expense. 

It  now  remains  for  the  collectors  to  collect  the  tax, 
and  it  is  the  duty  of  the  supervisors  to  see  that  they 
do  it.  Both  these  offices  are  elective  as  well  as  that 
of  the  assessor;  and,  of  course,  there  is  little  dis- 
position to  risk  the  displeasure  of  those  who  elect. 
They  have  no  motive  of  interest  to  stimulate  them 
to  their  duty  equivalent  to  the  inconvenience  of  per- 
forming it.  The  collector  is  entitled  to  the  trifling 
compensation  of  sometimes  four,  sometimes  six 
pence,  out  of  each  pound  he  collects,  and  is  liable  to 
the  trifling  penalty  of  twenty  or  twenty-five  pounds 
for  neglect  of  duty.  The  supervisors  have  no  in- 
terest at  all  in  the  collections,  and  it  will  not  on  this 
account  appear  extraordinary,  that,  with  continual 
delinquencies  in  the  collection,  there  has  never  been 
a  single  prosecution.  As  I  observed  on  a  former  oc- 
casion, if  the  collector  happens  to  be  a  zealous  man 
and  lives  in  a  zealous  neighborhood,  the  taxes  are 
collected;  if  either  of  these  requisites  are  wanting, 
the  collection  languishes  or  entirely  fails. 

When  the  taxes  are  collected  they  are  paid  to 
the  county  treasurer,  an  officer  chosen  by  the  super- 
visors. The  collectors  are  responsible  to  him  also; 
but  as  he  is  allowed  only  one  fourth  or  one  half  per 
cent.,  he  has  no  sufficient  inducement  to  incur  the 
odium  of  compelling  them  to  do  their  duty. 

The  county  treasurer  pays  what  he  receives  in  to 
the  State  treasurer,  who  has  an  annual  salary  of 
;£3oo,  and  has  nothing  to  do  but  to  receive  and  pay 


276  Alexander  Hamilton 

out  according  to  the  appropriation  of  the  Legisla- 
ture. 

Notwithstanding  the  obvious  defects  of  this  sys- 
tem; notwithstanding  experience  has  shown  it  to 
be  iniquitous  and  inefficient,  and  that  all  attempts 
to  amend  it  without  totally  changing  it  are  fruitless ; 
notwithstanding  there  is  a  pretty  general  discontent 
from  the  inequality  of  the  taxes,  still  ancient  habits, 
ignorance,  the  spirit  of  the  times,  the  opportunity 
afforded  to  some  popular  characters  of  screening 
themselves  by  intriguing  with  the  assessors,  have 
hitherto  proved  an  overmatch  for  common  sense  and 
common  justice,  as  well  as  the  manifest  advantage  of 
the  State  and  of  the  United  States. 

The  temper  of  the  State,  which  I  shall  now  de- 
scribe, may  be  considered  under  two  heads — that  of 
the  rulers  and  that  of  the  people. 

The  rulers  are  generally  zealous  in  the  common 
cause,  though  their  zeal  is  oftentimes  misdirected. 
They  are  jealous  of  their  own  power;  but  yet,  as 
this  State  is  the  immediate  theatre  of  the  war,  these 
apprehensions  of  danger,  and  an  opinion  that  they 
are  obliged  to  do  more  than  their  neighbors,  make 
them  very  willing  to  part  with  power  in  favor  of  the 
Federal  Government.  This  last  opinion  and  an  idea 
added  to  it,  that  they  have  no  credit  for  their  past 
exertions,  has  put  them  out  of  humor  and  indisposed 
many  of  them  for  future  exertions.  I  have  heard 
several  assert  that  in  the  present  situation  of  this 
State,  nothing  more  ought  to  be  expected  than  that 
it  maintain  its  own  government  and  keep  up  its 
quota  of  troops. 


Private  Correspondence  277 

This  sentiment,  however,  is  as  yet  confined  to 
few,  but  it  is  too  palpable  not  to  make  proselytes. 

The  rulers  of  this  State  are  attached  to  the  alli- 
ance, as  are  Whigs  generally.  They  have  also  great 
confidence  in  you  personally,  but  pretty  general  ex- 
ception has  been  taken  to  a  certain  letter  of  yours 
written,  I  believe,  in  the  winter  or  spring.  The  idea 
imbibed  is  that  it  contains  a  reflection  upon  them 
for  their  past  exertions.  I  have  on  every  account 
combated  this  impression,  which  could  not  fail  to 
have  an  ill  effect,  and  I  mention  it  to  you  with  free- 
dom, because  it  is  essential  you  should  know  the 
temper  of  the  States  respecting  yourself. 

As  to  the  people,  in  the  early  periods  of  the  war, 
near  one  half  of  them  were  avowedly  more  attached 
to  Great  Britain  than  to  their  liberty,  but  the  energy 
of  the  government  has  subdued  all  opposition.  The 
State  by  different  means  has  been  purged  of  a  large 
part  of  its  malcontents;  but  there  still  remains,  I 
dare  say,  a  third,  whose  secret  wishes  are  on  the  side 
of  the  enemy;  the  remainder  sigh  for  peace,  mur- 
mur at  taxes,  clamor  at  their  rulers,  change  one  in- 
capable man  for  another  more  incapable,  and,  I  fear, 
if  left  to  themselves,  would,  too  many  of  them,  be 
willing  to  purchase  peace  at  any  price — not  from  in- 
clination to  Great  Britain  or  disaffection  to  inde- 
pendence, but  from  mere  supineness  and  avarice. 

t  The  speculation  of  evils  from  the  claims  of  Great 
Britain  gives  way  to  the  pressure  of  inconveniences 
actually  felt,  and  we  required  the  event  which  has 
lately  happened — the  recognition  of  our  independ- 

f  See  page  280. 


?r-6/ 


278  Alexander  Hamilton 

ence  by  the  Dutch — to  give  a  new  spring  to  the 
public  hopes  and  the  public  passions.  This  has  had 
a  good  effect,  and  if  the  Legislature  can  be  brought 
to  adopt  a  wise  plan  for  its  finances,  we  may  put  the 
people  in  better  humor,  and  give  a  more  regiilar  and 
durable  movement  to  the  machine.  The  people  of 
this  State,  as  far  as  my  observation  goes,  have  as 
much  firmness  in  their  make  and  as  much  submission 
to  government  as  those  of  any  part  of  the  Union.  It 
remains  for  me  to  give  you  an  explicit  opinion  of 
what  is  practicable  for  this  State  to  do. 

Even  with  a  judicious  plan  of  taxation  I  do  not 
think  the  State  can  afford,  or  the  people  will  bear,  to 
pay  more  than  ;£7o,ooo  or  ;£8o,ooo  a  year.  In  its 
entire  and  flourishing  state,  according  to  my  mode 
of  calculation  it  could  not  have  exceeded  ;£23o,ooo 
or  ;£24o,ooo;  and  reduced  as  it  is,  with  the  wheels  of 
circulation  so  exceedingly  clogged  for  want  of  com- 
merce and  a  sufficient  medium,  more  than  I  have 
said  cannot  be  expected.  Past  experience  will  not 
authorize  a  more  flattering  conclusion.  Out  of  this 
is  to  be  deducted  the  expense  of  the  interior  adminis- 
tration and  the  money  necessaries  for  the  levies  of 
men.  The  first  amounts  to  about  ;£i 5,000,  as  you 
will  perceive  by  the  inclosed  slate;  but  I  suppose 
the  Legislature  would  choose  to  retain  ;£2o,ooo.  The 
money  hitherto  yearly  expended  in  recruits  has 
amoimted  to  between  ;£2o,ooo  and  ;£3o,ooo;  but  on 
a  proper  plan  ;gio,ooo  might  suffice.  There  would 
then  remain  ;£4o,ooo  for  your  department. 

But  this  is  on  a  supposition  of  a  change  of  system; 
for  with  the  present  I  doubt  there  being  paid  into 


Private  Correspondence  279 

the  Continental  treasury  one  third  of  that  sum.  I 
am  endeavoring  to  collect  materials  for  greater  cer- 
tainty upon  this  subject.  But  the  business  of  sup- 
plies has  been  so  diversified,  lodged  in  such  a  variety 
of  independent  hands,  and  so  carelessly  transacted, 
that  it  is  hardly  possible  to  get  any  tolerable  idea  of 
the  gross  and  net  product. 

With  the  help  of  these  materials  I  shall  strive 
to  convince  the  committee,  when  they  meet,  that 
a  change  of  measures  is  essential;  if  they  enter  cor- 
dially into  right  views,  we  may  succeed;  but  I  con- 
fess I  fear  more  than  I  hope. 

I  have  taken  every  step  in  my  power  to  procure 
the  information  you  have  desired  in  your  letter  of 
July  1 8th.  The  most  material  part  of  it,  an  ac- 
count of  the  supplies  furnished  since  March,  '80,  has 
been  committed  to  Col.  Hay.  I  have  written  to  him 
in  pressing  terms  to  accelerate  the  preparation. 

You  will  perceive,  sir,  I  have  neither  flattered  the 
State  nor  encouraged  high  expectations.  I  thought 
it  my  duty  to  exhibit  things  as  they  are,  not  as  they 
ought  to  be.  I  shall  be  sorry  to  give  you  an  ill  opin- 
ion of  the  State  for  want  of  equal  candor  in  the 
representations  of  others;  for,  however  disagreeable 
the  reflection,  I  have  too  much  reason  to  believe  that 
the  true  picture  of  other  States  would  be,  in  pro- 
portion to  their  circumstances,  equally  unpromising. 
All  my  inquiries  and  all  that  appears  induce  this 
opinion.  I  intend  this  letter  in  confidence  to  your- 
self, and  therefore  I  endorse  it  private. 

Before  I  conclude  I  will  say  a  word  on  a  point  that 
possibly  you  could  wish  to  be  informed  about.     The 


28o  Alexander  Hamilton 

contract  up  this  way  is  executed  generally  to  the 
satisfaction  of  the  officers  and  soldiers,  which  is 
more  meritorious  in  the  contractor,  as  in  all  prob- 
ability it  will  be  to  him  a  losing  undertaking. ' 


TO   JOHN   LAURENS  * 

August  15,  1782. 

I  received  with  great  pleasure,  my  dear  Laurens, 

the  letter  which  you  wrote  me  in last.     Your 

wishes  in  one  respect  are  gratified.  This  State  has 
pretty  unanimously  elected  me  to  Congress.  My 
time  of  service  commences  in  November.  It  is  not 
probable  it  will  result  in  what  you  mention.  I  hope 
it  is  too  late.  We  have  great  reason  to  flatter  our- 
selves. Peace  on  our  own  terms  is  upon  the  carpet. 
The  making  it  is  in  good  hands.  It  is  said  your 
father  is  exchanged  for  Comwallis,  and  gone  to  Paris 
to  meet  the  other  commissioners,  and  that  Gran- 
ville, on  the  part  of  England,  has  made  a  second  trip 
there;  in  the  last  instance,  vested  with  plenipoten- 
tiary powers. 

I  fear  there  may  be  obstacles,  but  I  hope  they  may 
be  surmounted. 

Peace  made,  my  dear  friend,  a  new  scene  opens. 
The  object  then  will  be  to  make  our  independence  a 
blessing.     To  do  this  we  must  secure  our  Union  on 

1  This  long  and  interesting  letter  is  now  first  printed  entire  from  the 
Hamilton  papers  in  the  State  Department.  A  small  portion  beginning 
at  the  sentence,  "The  speculation  of  evils,"  marked  thus  f,  [page  277] 
and  continuing  to  the  end,  has  been  printed  in  the  edition  of  1850,  vol. 
i.,  295. 

2  In  those  days  of  slow  mails,  this  letter  probably  never  reached 
Laurens,  who  fell  near  the  Combahee  in  a  skirmish  Aug.  27th 


Private  Correspondence  281 

solid  foundations — a  herculean  task, — and  to  effect 
which,  mountains  of  prejudice  must  be  levelled !  It 
requires  all  the  virtue  and  all  the  abilities  of  the 
country.  Quit  your  sword,  my  friend;  put  on  the 
toga.  Come  to  Congress.  We  know  each  other's 
sentiments;  our  views  are  the  same.  We  have 
fought  side  by  side  to  make  America  free;  let  us 
hand  in  hand  struggle  to  make  her  happy.  Re- 
member me  to  General  Greene  with  all  the  warmth 
of  sincere  attachment.     Yours  forever.' 


TO   GOVERNOR   CLINTON 

Albany,  August  25,  1782. 

Sir: 

By  advices  from  Philadelphia,  I  find  that  the 
present  is  a  period  rather  critical  on  the  subject  of 
money,  and  concentres  a  variety  of  demands  which 
it  is  not  easy  to  satisfy. 

It  becomes,  therefore,  of  importance  to  the  Fi- 
nancier to  avail  himself  of  every  immediate  resource. 

This  induces  me  to  request  you  will  be  so  good  as 
to  inform  me  whether  there  is  any  near  prospect  of 
obtaining  the  loan  directed  to  be  applied  to  Con- 
tinental use;  also,  whether  any  measures  can  be 
taken  to  accelerate  the  collection  of  the  late  tax  im- 
posed for  the  same  use. 

I  would  willingly  write  to  the  county  treasurers 
myself,  but,  unauthorized  as  I  am,  I  could  expect  no 
good  effect  from  it.^ 

^  Reprinted  from  the  History  of  the  Republic,  ii.,  300. 
2  Now  first  printed  from  the  Hamilton  papers  in  the  State  Depart- 
ment. 


282  Alexander  Hamilton 

TO    ROBERT    MORRIS 

Albany,  August  25,  1782. 

Sir: 

This  letter  serves  only  to  transmit  the  two  last 
papers.  I  wish  the  measures  I  have  taken  to  satisfy 
you  on  the  points  you  desire  to  be  informed  of  had 
been  attended  to  with  so  much  success  as  to  enable 
me  now  to  transmit  the  result.  But  I  find  a  sin- 
gular confusion  in  the  accounts  kept  by  the  public 
officers  from  whom  I  must  necessarily  derive  my  in- 
formation, and  a  singular  dilatoriness  in  complying 
with  my  application,  partly  from  indolence  and 
partly  from  jealousy  of  the  office.  I  hope,  by  the 
next  post,  to  transmit  you  information  on  some 
particulars. 


TO  COLONEL  RICHARD  K.  MEADE 

Albany,  August  27,  1782. 

I  thank  you,  my  dear  Meade,  for  your  letter  of  the 
first  of  this  month,  which  you  will  perceive  has 
travelled  much  faster  than  has  been  usual  with  our 
letters.  Our  correspondence  hitherto  has  been  un- 
fortunate; nor,  in  fact,  can  either  of  us  compliment 
himself  on  his  punctuality,  but  you  were  right  in 
concluding  that,  however  indolence  or  accident  may 
interrupt  our  intercourse,  nothing  will  interrupt  our 
friendship.  Mine  for  you  is  built  on  a  solid  basis  of 
a  full  conviction  that  you  deserve  it,  and  that  it  is 
reciprocal;  and  it  is  the  more  firmly  fixed  because 
you  have  few  competitors.  Experience  is  a  con- 
tinual comment  on  the  worthlessness  of  the  human 


Private  Correspondence  283 

race ;  and  the  few  exceptions  we  find  have  the  greater 
right  to  be  valued  in  proportion  as  they  are  rare.  I 
know  few  men  estimable,  fewer  amiable;  and  when 
I  meet  with  one  of  the  last  description,  it  is  not  in 
my  power  to  withhold  my  affection. 

[You  reproach  me  with  not  having  said  enough 
about  our  little  stranger.  When  I  wrote  last  I  was 
not  sufficiently  acquainted  with  him  to  give  you  his 
character.  I  may  now  assure  you  that  your  daugh- 
ter, when  she  sees  him,  will  not  consult  you  about 
the  choice,  or  will  only  do  it  in  respect  to  the  rules 
of  decorum.  He  is  truly  a  very  fine  young  gentle- 
man, the  most  agreeable  in  his  conversation  and 
manners  of  any  I  ever  knew,  nor  less  remarkable  for 
his  intelligence  and  sweetness  of  temper.  You  are 
not  to  imagine,  by  my  beginning  with  his  mental 
qualifications,  that  he  is  defective  in  personal.  It 
is  agreed  on  all  hands  that  he  is  handsome;  his 
features  are  good,  his  eye  is  not  only  sprightly  and 
expressive,  but  full  of  benignity.  His  attitude  in 
sitting,  is,  by  connoisseurs,  esteemed  graceful,  and  he 
has  a  method  of  waving  his  hand  that  announces  the 
future  orator.  He  stands,  however,  rather  awk- 
wardly, and  as  his  legs  have  not  all  the  delicate 
sHmness  of  his  father's,  it  is  feared  he  may  never 
excel  as  much  in  dancing,  which  is  probably  the  only 
accomplishment  in  which  he  will  not  be  a  model. 
If  he  has  any  fault  in  manners,  he  laughs  too  much. 
He  has  now  passed  his  seventh  month.  I  am  glad 
to  find  your  prospect  of  being  settled  approaches. 
I  am  sure  you  will  realize  all  the  happiness  you 
promise  yourself  with  your  amiable  partner.     I  wish 


284  Alexander  Hamilton 

fortune  had  not  cast  our  lots  at  such  a  distance. 
Mrs.  Meade,  you,  Betsey,  and  myself  would  make 
a  most  affectionate  and  most  happy  partie  quarre.] 

As  to  myself,  I  shall  sit  down  in  New  York  when 
it  opens;  and  this  period,  we  are  told,  approaches. 
No  man  looks  forward  to  a  peace  with  more  pleasure 
than  I  do;  though  no  man  would  sacrifice  less  to  it 
than  myself  if  I  were  not  convinced  that  the  people 
sigh  for  peace. 

I  have  been  studying  the  law  for  some  months, 
and  have  lately  been  licensed  as  an  attorney.  I  wish 
to  prepare  myself  by  October  for  examination  as  a 
counsellor;  but  some  public  avocation  may  possibly 
prevent  me. 

I  had  almost  forgotten  to  tell  you  that  I  have  been 
pretty  unanimously  elected,  by  the  Legislature  of 
this  State,  a  member  of  Congress,  to  begin  to  serve 
in  November.  I  do  not  hope  to  reform  the  State, 
although  I  shall  endeavor  to  do  all  the  good  I  can. 

[Suffer  Betsey  and  me  to  present  our  love  to  Mrs. 
Meade.  She  has  a  sisterly  affection  for  you.  My 
respects,  if  you  please,  to  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Fitzhugh. 
God  bless  you.] ' 


TO    ROBERT   MORRIS 

Albany,  August  31,  1782. 

Sir: 

I  send  you  herewith  all  the  acts  of  the  Legislature 
of  this  State  since  the  government  has  been  organ- 

*  This  letter  was  partly  printed  in  the  edition  of  1850.  It  is  now 
completed  from  the  History  of  the  Republic ^  ii.,  305.  The  added 
portions  are  inclosed  in  brackets. 


Private  Correspondence  285 

ized;  on  the  margin  of  which  I  have  numbered  all 
the  acts  relative  to  the  matters  you  mention  in  your 
letter  of  July,  '81,  to  the  States  agreeable  to  the 
within  list.  I  inclose  you  the  papers  of  the  last 
week. 

The  indolence  of  some  and  the  repugnancy  of 
others  make  every  trifle  lag  so  much  in  the  execu- 
tion, that  I  am  not  able  at  this  time  to  give  you  any 
further  information.  I  wish  to  hear  from  you  on 
the  subject  of  my  former  letters  previous  to  the 
meeting  of  the  committee — the  15th  of  the  ensuing 
month. 


TO   THE   COUNTY   TREASURERS 

Albany,  Sept.  7,  1782. 

Sir: 

The  fifteenth  of  this  month  is  the  period  fixed  for 
the  payment  of  the  tax  imposed  at  the  last  meeting 
of  the  Legislature  for  the  use  of  the  United  States. 
The  public  exigencies  and  the  reputation  of  the 
State  require  that  every  exertion  should  be  made  to 
collect  this  tax  with  punctuality  and  dispatch;  and 
it  is  therefore  my  duty  to  urge  you  that  you  employ 
the  powers  vested  in  you,  and  all  your  personal  in- 
fluence, to  induce  the  collectors  to  expedite  the  col- 
lection with  all  the  zeal  and  vigor  in  their  power. 
While  the  other  States  are  all  doing  something,  as  a 
citizen  of  this,  I  shall  feel  a  sensible  mortification  in 
being  obliged  to  continue  publishing  to  the  others, 
that  this  State  pays  nothing  in  support  of  the  war, 
as  I  have  been  under  the  necessity  of  doing  the  last 


286  Alexander  Hamilton 

two  months.  Besides  this,  and  other  still  more 
weighty  considerations,  a  regard  to  the  subjects  of 
the  State  itself  demands  every  exertion  in  our  power. 
They  have  parted  with  their  property  on  the  public 
faith,  and  it  is  impossible  for  the  public  to  fulfil  its 
engagements  to  individuals,  unless  it  is  enabled  to 
do  it  by  the  equal  and  just  contributions  of  the 
commimity  at  large. 


TO   ROBERT   MORRIS 

Albany,  Sept.  7,  1782. 

Sir: 

I  have  had  the  inclosed  ready  for  some  time ;  but 
in  hopes  of  receiving  the  returns  of  the  certificates 
mentioned  in  memorandum  B,  I  delayed  sending  the 
present  sketch.  Having  even  received  no  answers 
from  some  of  the  parties  who  live  at  a  distance  from 
me,  I  suspect  they  have  done  their  business  in  so 
disorderly  a  manner  (to  say  nothing  worse  of  it) 
that  they  are  at  a  loss  how  to  render  the  accounts; 
and  I  have  therefore  concluded  not  to  detain  any 
longer  what  I  have  procured. 

I  do  not  take  the  step  mentioned  in  memorandum 
A,  because  I  doubted  its  propriety.  It  might  raise 
expectations  about  the  old  money,  which,  possibly, 
it  may  not  enter  into  your  plans  to  raise;  and,  be- 
sides this,  by  knowing  what  has  been  called  in,  in 
each  State  (which,  from  the  sketch  I  send  you,  will 
appear  as  to  this),  you  can  determine  the  balance  of 
omissions  remaining  out,  except  what  may  have 
worn  out  and  been  accidentally  destroyed.     If  you 


Private  Correspondence  287 

desire  this  step  to  be  taken,  I  will  obey  your  com- 
mands. 

I  have  said  nothing  of  the  rates  of  depreciation, 
because  I  imagine  your  letter,  written  in  July,  '81, 
had  reference  to  the  rates  at  which  the  money  was 
then  actually  circulating,  and  the  circulation  has 
now  totally  ceased.  The  laws  I  sent  you  by  the  last 
post  will  inform  you  of  the  rates  fixed  at  different 
periods  by  the  Legislature:  forty,  seventy-five,  and, 
lastly,  one  hundred  and  twenty-eight.  I  am  obliged 
to  infer  there  is  a  studied  backwardness  in  the  officers 
of  the  State,  who  ought  to  give  me  the  information 
you  require  respecting  the  supplies  of  different  kinds 
which  have  been  furnished  to  the  use  of  the  United 
States.  Indeed,  I  find  on  inquiry,  that  their  joint 
information  will  not  be  so  full  as  to  satisfy  your  in- 
tentions ;  and  that  this  cannot  be  done  till  you  have 
appointed  a  commissioner  of  accounts,  authorized  to 
enter  into  all  the  details,  aided  by  some  legislat- 
ive arrangement  which  may  be  obtained  the  next 
session. 


TO   TIMOTHY   PICKERING  ' 

Albany,  Sept.  7,  1782. 

Dear  Sir: 

I  this  day  received  your  letter  of  the  20th  August. 
Mr.  Morris  has  advised  me  of  the  bills  you  describe, 
and  directed  my  purchasing  them,  together  with  his 
notes,  and  the  bank  notes,  with  what  money  shall 
come  into  my  hands  on  public  account.     They  are 

I  The  well-known  Massachusetts  soldier  and  statesman;  at  this  time 
quarter-master-general . 


288  Alexander  Hamilton 

now  beginning  to  collect  the  tax  imposed  for  the  use 
of  the  United  States,  though  I  can  as  yet  form  no 
judgment  with  what  success  or  expedition.  I  shall 
with  pleasure  give  you  the  information  you  ask,  but 
I  would  rather  wish  to  be  excused  from  anticipation 
by  previous  deposits  in  my  hands,  as  that  will,  in 
some  measure,  pledge  me  to  give  a  preference  to  the 
bills  deposited,  and  may  hereafter  expose  me  to  a 
charge  of  partiality.  There  have  been  several  appli- 
cations to  me  for  a  similar  anticipation,  which  I 
have  avoided,  reserving  to  myself  the  power  of  pay- 
ing the  bills  as  they  shall  be  presented,  and  in  pro- 
portion to  the  nearness  or  remoteness  of  the  periods 
of  payments. 

You  may,  however,  depend  that  I  shall  be  happy 
to  assist  your  department,  and  will  keep  in  view 
your  present  request.  I  hope  towards  the  latter  end 
of  the  month  I  shall  receive  something  considerable 
on  the  late  tax. 


TO   ROBERT   MORRIS 

Albany,  Sept.  14,  1782. 

Sir: 

I  have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of 
your  letter  of  the  29th  of  August,  the  contents  of 
which  shall  be  executed. 

I  have  just  received  by  the  post  accounts  of  the 
specific  supplies  furnished  by  the  State,  copies  of 
which  I  shall  prepare  to  be  transmitted  to  you  by 
the  next  post,  as  I  am  to  return  the  originals,  which 
are  for  the  inspection  of  the  Legislature.  I  hope  to 
add  to  these  accoimts  of  the  moneys  supplied. 


Private  Correspondence  289 

I  have  v^ritten  to  you  a  number  of  letters  since 
my  journey  to  Poughkeepsie,  of  which,  as  they  con- 
tain some  things  of  a  confidential  nature,  I  am  not 
without  anxiety  to  learn  the  safe  arrival. 

I  should  also  have  been  happy  to  have  received 
your  instructions  against  the  meeting  of  the  com- 
mittee, which  is  to  take  place  to-morrow.  As  they 
will  have  other  business,  if  I  hear  from  you  by  the 
next  post,  I  shall  not  be  too  late.  I  am  at  a  loss  to 
know  whether  I  ought  to  press  the  establishment  of 
permanent  funds  or  not;  though,  unless  I  receive 
your  instructions,  following  my  own  apprehensions 
of  what  are  probably  your  views,  I  shall  dwell  on 
this  article. 

I  inclose  you  a  copy  of  the  letter  of  the  Governor, 
of  the  2d  inst.,  from  which  you  will  see  his  hopes. 
Mine  are  not  so  good.  In  this  vicinity,  always  de- 
linquent, little  is  doing. 


TO  ROBERT  MORRIS 

Albany,  Sept.  21,  1782. 

Sir: 

The  hurry  in  which  I  wrote  to  you  by  the  last 
post  prevented  my  examining  particularly  the  papers 
which  I  informed  you  I  had  received.  On  a  more 
careful  inspection  of  them  I  found  them  not  so  com- 
plete as  I  had  hoped.  There  is  a  general  statement  of 
specific  supplies;  but  the  returns  referred  to  in  that 
for  the  particulars  were  by  some  mistake  omitted. 
I  have  written  for  them,  but  they  have  not  yet 

VOL.  IX.— 19, 


290  Alexander  Hamilton 

arrived ;  when  they  do  I  shall  lose  no  time  in  forward- 
ing them. 

I  observe  there  is  nothing  respecting  transporta- 
tion, and  there  is  a  part  of  the  supplies  for  the  period 
before  Colonel  Hay  came  into  office  which  is  esti- 
mated on  a  scale  of  proportion — too  vague  a  method 
to  be  satisfactory.  I  have  urged  him  to  send  me  an 
account  of  the  transportation,  and  to  collect,  as 
speedily  as  possible,  official  returns  of  the  supplies 
above  mentioned. 

There  is  a  practice  obtaining,  which  appears  to  me 
to  contravene  your  views.  The  contractors,  I  am 
informed,  have  gotten  into  a  method  of  carrying 
your  bills  immediately  to  the  collectors  and  drawing 
the  specie  out  of  their  hands,  by  which  means  the 
paper  never  goes  into  circulation  at  all,  but  passes, 
so  to  speak,  immediately  out  of  one  hand  of  the 
public  into  the  other.  The  people,  therefore,  can 
never  be  familiarized  to  the  paper,  nor  can  it  ever 
obtain  a  general  ciirrency. 

If  the  specie  were  to  come  in  to  the  receivers,  and 
the  contractors  were  left  under  a  necessity  of  exert- 
ing their  influence  to  induce  the  inhabitants  to  take 
your  notes,  to  be  afterwards  redeemed  by  the  re- 
ceivers agreeably  to  your  plan,  this  would  gradually 
accustom  the  people  to  place  confidence  in  the 
notes,  and  though  the  circulation  at  first  should  be 
momentary,  it  might  come  to  be  more  permanent. 

I  am  in  doubt  whether,  on  the  mere  speculation  of 
an  evil,  without  your  instructions,  I  ought  to  take 
any  step  to  prevent  this  practice.  For,  should  I 
forbid  the  exchange,  it  might  possibly  cause  a  sus- 


Private  Correspondence  291 

picion  that  there  was  a  preference  of  the  paper  to 
the  specie,  which  might  injure  its  credit. 

I  have  thought  of  a  method  to  prevent,  without 
forbidding  it  in  direct  terms.  This  was  to  require 
each  collector  to  return  the  names  of  the  persons 
from  whom  he  received  taxes,  and  in  different  col- 
umns specify  the  kind  of  money,  whether  specie, 
your  notes,  or  bank  notes,  in  which  the  tax  was  paid, 
giving  the  inhabitants  receipts  accordingly,  and  pay- 
ing in  the  money  in  the  same  species  in  which  it  was 
received.     This  would  cover  the  object. 

I  have  tried  to  prevail  upon  the  county  treasurer 
of  this  place  to  instruct  the  collectors  accordingly; 
but  the  great  aim  of  all  these  people  is  to  avoid 
trouble,  and  he  affected  to  consider  the  matter  as  a 
Herculean  labor.  Nor  will  it  be  done  without  a 
legislative  injunction. 

A  method  of  this  kind  would  tend  much  to  check 
fraud  in  the  collectors,  and  would  have  many  good 
consequences. 

I  thought  it  my  duty,  at  any  rate,  to  apprise  you 
of  the  practice,  that,  if  my  apprehensions  are  right, 
it  may  not  be  continued  without  control.  I  have 
reason  to  believe  it  is  very  extensive — by  no  means 
confined  to  this  State. 

Permit  me  to  make  one  more  observation.  Your 
notes,  though  in  credit  with  the  merchants  by  way 
of  remittance,  do  not  enter  far  into  ordinary  circula- 
tion, and  this  principally  on  account  of  their  size; 
which  even  makes  them  inconvenient  for  paying 
taxes.  The  taxes  of  very  few  amount  to  twenty 
dollars  a  single  tax;   and  though  the  farmers  might 


292  Alexander  Hamilton 

combine  to  sell  their  produce  for  the  notes,  to  pay 
the  taxes  jointly;  yet  this  is  not  always  convenient, 
and  will  seldom  be  practised.  If  the  notes  were,  in 
considerable  part,  of  five  eight,  or  ten  dollars,  their 
circulation  would  be  far  more  general;  the  mer- 
chants would,  even  in  their  retail  operations,  give 
specie  in  exchange  for  balances,  which  few  of  them 
care  to  do,  or  can  do,  with  the  larger  notes;  though 
they  are  willing  to  take  them  for  their  goods. 


TO   ROBERT   MORRIS 

September  28,  1782. 

Sir: 

I  have  been  honored  this  week  with  your  letters 
of  the  28th  August,  6th,  12th,  and  17th  instant, 
with  their  inclosures. 

It  gives  me  the  most  real  pleasure  to  find  that  my 
past  commimications  have  met  with  your  appro- 
bation; and  I  feel  a  particular  satisfaction  in  the 
friendly  confidence  which  your  letters  manifest. 

I  am  persuaded  that  substantial  reasons  have  de- 
termined your  choice  in  a  particular  instance  to 
Doctor  Tillotson;  and  I  am  flattered  by  the  atten- 
tion you  have  obligingly  paid  to  my  recommenda- 
tions of  Col.  Malcolm  and  Mr.  Lawrence.  Those 
gentlemen  are  now  here.  They  make  you  the  warm- 
est acknowledgments  for  your  offer,  but  decline  leav- 
ing the  State ;  which,  indeed,  is  not  compatible  with 
the  present  prospects  of  either  of  them. 

I  am  glad  to  have  had  an  opportunity  of  perusing 
your  letter  to  this  State,  at  which  so  much  excep- 


Private  Correspondence  293 

tion  has  been  taken ;  because  it  has  confirmed  me  in 
what  I  presumed,  that  there  has  been  much  unjust- 
ifiable ill-humor  upon  the  occasion.  I  will  make 
use  of  the  knowledge  I  have  to  combat  misrepre- 
sentation. 

Yours  of  the  29th  of  July,  to  Congress,  is  full  of 
principles  and  arguments  as  luminous  as  they  are 
conclusive.  'T  is  to  be  lamented  that  they  have  not 
had  more  weight  than  we  are  to  infer  from  the  mo- 
mentary expedient  adopted  by  the  resolutions  of 
the  4th  and  loth;  which  will,  alone,  not  be  satisfac- 
tory to  the  public  creditors;  and  I  fear  will  only 
tend  to  embarrass  your  present  operations,  without 
answering  the  end  in  view.  The  more  I  see,  the 
more  I  find  reason  for  those  who  love  this  country 
to  weep  over  its  blindness. 

The  committee  on  the  subject  of  taxation  are  met. 
Some  have  their  plans,  and  they  must  protect  their 
own  children,  however  misshapen ;  others  have  none, 
but  are  determined  to  find  fault  with  all.  I  expect 
little,  but  I  shall  promote  any  thing,  though  imper- 
fect, that  will  mend  our  situation. 

The  public  creditors  in  this  quarter  have  had  a 
meeting,  and  appointed  a  committee  to  devise  meas- 
ures. The  committee  will  report  petitions  to  Con- 
gress, the  Legislature,  and  an  address  to  the  public 
creditors  in  other  parts  of  the  State  to  appoint  per- 
sons to  meet  in  convention,  to  unite  in  some  common 
measure.  I  believe  they  will  also  propose  a  general 
convention  of  all  the  creditors  in  the  different  States. 


294  Alexander  Hamilton 

TO    ROBERT   MORRIS 

Albany,  October  5,  1782. 

Sir: 

In  my  last  I  informed  you  that  the  committee  ap- 
pointed by  the  Legislature  on  the  subject  of  taxation 
were  together.  In  spite  of  my  efforts,  they  have 
parted  without  doing  any  thing  decisive.  They 
have,  indeed,  agreed  upon  several  matters,  and 
those  of  importance,  but  they  have  not  reduced 
them  to  the  form  of  a  report,  which,  in  fact,  leaves 
every  thing  afloat,  to  be  governed  by  the  impres- 
sions of  the  moment  when  the  Legislature  meets. 

The  points  agreed  upon  are  these:  That  there 
shall  be  an  actual  valuation  of  land,  and  a  tax  of  so 
much  in  the  pound, — the  great  diversity  in  the  quali- 
ties of  land  would  not  suffer  them  to  listen  to  an 
estimated  valuation,  or  to  a  tax  by  the  quantity, 
agreeably  to  the  idea  in  your  late  report  to  Congress : 
that  there  shall  be  also  a  tariff  of  all  personal  prop- 
erty, to  be  also  taxed  at  so  much  in  the  pound ;  that 
there  shall  be  a  specific  tax  on  carriages,  clocks, 
watches,  and  other  similar  articles  of  luxury;  that 
money  at  usury  shall  be  taxed  at  a  fixed  rate  in  the 
pound,  excluding  that  which  is  loaned  to  the  public ; 
that  houses  in  all  towns  shall  be  taxed  at  a  certain 
proportion  of  the  annual  rent;  that  there  shall  be  a 
poll-tax  on  all  single  men  from  fifteen  upwards ;  and 
that  the  collection  of  the  taxes  should  be  advertised 
to  the  lowest  bidder,  at  a  fixed  rate  per  cent.,  bear- 
ing all  subordinate  expenses. 

Among  other  things  which  were  rejected,  I  pressed 
hard  for  an  excise  on  distilled  liquors,  but  all  that 


Private  Correspondence  295 

could  be  carried  on  this  article  was  a  license  on 
taverns. 

The  committee  were  pretty  generally  of  opinion 
that  the  system  of  funding  for  payment  of  old  debts 
and  for  procuring  further  credit,  was  wise  and  in- 
dispensable, but  a  majority  thought  it  would  be 
unwise  in  one  State  to  contribute  in  this  way  alone. 

Nothing  was  decided  on  the  quantum  of  taxes 
which  the  State  was  able  to  pay;  those  who  went 
furthest  did  not  exceed  seventy  thousand  pounds,  of 
which  fifty  for  the  use  of  the  United  States. 

I  send  you  my  cash  account,  which  is  for  what  has 
been  received  in  this  county.  We  have  not  heard 
from  the  others. 


TO    ROBERT   MORRIS 

Albany,  October  9,  1782. 

Sir: 

I  wrote  you  a  hasty  letter  by  the  last  post,  which 
arrived  late,  and  set  out  very  soon  after  its  arrival. 

Since  that  I  have  received  two  thousand  dollars, 
all  in  your  bills  on  Mr.  Swanwick,  in  favor  of  Messrs. 
Sands  &  Co.  One  half  the  sum  is  in  bills  payable 
in  February  next,  exchanged  by  them  for  specie  with 
one  of  the  county  treasurers.  I  am  sensible  there  is 
an  inconvenience  in  this  in  different  ways,  but  it 
appears  by  your  letter  of  the  19th  of  July  that  you 
mean  to  have  those  bills  received  upon  the  same 
footing  with  your  and  the  bank  notes,  without  re- 
gard to  the  time  they  have  to  run.  I  have,  however, 
induced  the  treasurer  to  write  in  a  manner  that  I 
hope  will  discourage  like  exchanges  in  future  without 


296  Alexander  Hamilton 

giving  any  unfavorable  impression.  Besides  the 
inconvenience  from  this  practice,  which  I  mentioned 
in  a  former  letter,  there  is  another  which  I  am  per- 
suaded will  result. 

People  will  get  into  a  way  of  discounting  your 
bills  and  notes  with  the  treasurers  and  collectors,  to 
the  injury  of  their  credit. 

Probably  you  are  apprised  of  a  fact  which,  how- 
ever, I  think  it  my  duty  to  mention:  It  is  that  the 
bank  notes  pass  pretty  currently  as  cash,  with  a 
manifest  preference  to  your  notes. 

I  have  not  yet  received  the  other  papers  relative 
to  the  account  of  supplies  I  have  sent  you. 

I  hope  to  be  able  to  inclose  you  a  copy  of  the 
address  of  the  public  creditors  in  this  town  to  the 
rest  of  that  denomination  in  this  State.  It  incul- 
cates the  ideas  which  ought  to  prevail. 

1  have  not  yet  heard  of  your  messenger,  Mr.  Brown. 
I  presume  his  circuit  is  regiilated  by  your  occasional 
direction.'  

TO    DE   NOAILLES  ' 

1782. 

Esteem  for  your  talents  and  acquirements  is  a 
sentiment   which,    from   my   earliest   acquaintance 

'Now  first  printed  from  the  Hamilton  papers  in  the  State  Depart- 
ment. 

2  Louis  Marie,  Vicomte  de  Noailles,  one  of  the  most  brilliant  of  the 
French  ofiicers  in  our  Revolution.  After  his  return  to  France  he  took 
an  active  part  on  the  popular  side  in  the  Revolution,  but  fled  in  1792, 
being  then  with  the  army,  and  took  refuge  in  England  and  afterwards 
in  the  United  States.  His  wife  was  guillotined  in  1794.  After  the 
reign  of  terror  was  over  he  returned  to  France,  had  his  name  erased 
from  the  list  of  emigres  and  took  service  again  in  the  army.  In  1803 
he  was  sent  to  St.  Domingo,  and  on  his  way  thence  to  Cuba  he  was 
killed  in  an  action  with  an  English  corvette. 


Private  Correspondence  297 

with  you,  my  dear  Viscount,  I  have  shared  in  com- 
mon with  all  those  who  have  the  happiness  of  know- 
ing you;  but  a  better  knowledge  of  your  character 
has  given  it,  in  my  eyes,  a  more  intrinsic  merit,  and 
has  attached  me  to  you  by  a  friendship  founded  upon 
qualities  as  rare  as  they  are  estimable.  Averse  as  I 
am  to  professions,  I  cannot  forbear  indulging  this 
declaration,  to  express  to  you  the  pleasure  I  felt  at 
receiving  (after  an  inexplicable  delay)  the  letter  you 
were  so  obliging  as  to  write  me  before  your  depart- 
ure from  Boston.  It  was  of  that  kind  which  is  al- 
ways produced  by  those  attentions  of  friends  we 
value:  which,  not  being  invited  by  circumstances, 
nor  necessitated  by  the  forms  of  society,  bespeak  the 
warmth  of  the  heart.  At  least  my  partiality  for 
you  makes  me  fond  of  viewing  it  in  this  light,  and  I 
cherish  the  opinion. 

I  was  chagrined  to  find  that  you  left  us  with  an 
intention  not  to  return.  Though  I  should  be  happy 
if,  by  a  removal  of  the  war,  this  country  should  cease 
to  be  a  proper  theatre  for  your  exertions,  yet,  if  it 
continues  to  be  so,  I  hope  you  will  find  sufficient 
motives  to  engage  you  to  change  your  resolution. 
Wherever  you  are  you  will  be  useful  and  distin- 
guished; but  the  ardent  desire  I  have  of  meeting 
you  again  makes  me  wish  America  may  be  your 
destination.  I  would  willingly  do  it  in  France,  as 
you  invite  me  to  do,  but  the  prospect  of  this  is  re- 
mote. I  must  make  a  more  solid  establishment  here 
before  I  can  conveniently  go  abroad.  There  is  no 
country  I  have  a  greater  curiosity  to  see,  or  which  I 
am  persuaded  would  be  so  interesting  to  me  as  yours. 


298  Alexander  Hamilton 

I  should  be  happy  to  renew  and  improve  the  valu- 
able acquaintances  from  thence,  which  this  war  has 
given  me  an  opportunity  of  making;  and,  though  I 
could  not  flatter  myself  with  deriving  any  advantage 
from  it,  I  am  persuaded  it  is  there  I  should  meet  with 
the  greatest  number  of  those  you  describe,  who,  etc., 
— but  considerations  of  primary  importance  will 
oblige  me  to  submit  to  the  mortification  of  deferring 
my  visit. 

In  the  meantime  I  should  be  too  much  the  gainer 
by  communication  with  you,  not  gladly  to  embrace 
the  offer  you  so  politely  make  for  writing  to  each 
other. 

The  period,  since  you  left  us,  has  been  too  barren 
of  events  to  enable  me  to  impart  any  thing  worth 
attention.  The  enemy  continue  in  possession  of 
Charleston  and  Savannah,  and  leave  us  masters  of 
the  rest  of  the  country.  General  Greene  has  detached 
Wayne  to  Georgia ;  but  I  believe  his  views  do  not  ex- 
tend beyond  the  mere  possession  of  the  country.  It 
is  said  the  Assemblies  of  the  two  invaded  States 
are  about  meeting,  to  restore  the  administration 
of  government.  This  will  be  a  step  to  strengthen- 
ing the  hands  of  General  Greene,  and  counteracting 
the  future  intrigues  of  the  enemy.  Many  are  san- 
guine in  believing  that  all  the  southern  posts  will  be 
evacuated,  and  that  a  fleet  of  transports  is  actually 
gone  to  bring  the  garrisons  away.  For  my  part,  I 
have  doubts  upon  the  subject.  My  politics  are,  that 
while  the  present  ministry  can  maintain  their  seats 
and  procure  supplies,  they  will  prosecute  the  war  on 
the  mere  chance  of  events;    and  that  while  this  is 


Private  Correspondence  299 

the  plan,  they  will  not  evacuate  posts  so  essential  as 
points  of  departure ;  from  whence,  on  any  favorable 
turn  of  affairs,  to  renew  their  attack  on  our  most 
vulnerable  side.  Nor  will  they  relinquish  objects 
that  would  be  so  useful  to  them,  should  the  worst 
happen  in  a  final  negotiation.  Clinton,  it  is  said,  is 
cutting  a  canal  across  New  York  Island,  through  the 
low  grounds,  about  a  mile  and  a  half  from  the  city. 
This  will  be  an  additional  obstacle;  but  if  we  have, 
otherwise,  the  necessary  means  to  operate,  it  will 
not  be  an  insurmountable  one.  I  do  not  hear  that 
he  is  constructing  any  other  new  works  of  conse- 
quence. To  you,  who  are  so  thoroughly  acquainted 
with  the  military  posture  of  things  in  this  country, 
I  need  not  say  that  the  activity  of  the  next  cam- 
paign must  absolutely  depend  on  effectual  succors 
from  France.  I  am  convinced  we  shall  have  a 
powerful  advocate  in  you.  La  Fayette,  we  know, 
will  bring  ''  the  whole  house"  with  him  if  he  can. 

There  has  been  no  material  change  in  our  internal 
situation  since  you  left  us.  The  capital  successes 
we  have  had  have  served  rather  to  increase  the  hopes 
than  the  exertions  of  the  particular  States.  But  in 
one  respect  we  are  in  a  mending  way.  Our  financier 
has  hitherto  conducted  himself  with  great  ability, 
has  acquired  an  entire  personal  confidence,  revived 
in  some  measure  the  public  credit,  and  is  conciliating 
fast  the  support  of  the  moneyed  men.  His  opera- 
tions have  hitherto  hinged  chiefly  on  the  seasonable 
aids  from  your  country;  but  he  is  urging  the  es- 
tabHshment  of  permanent  funds  among  ourselves; 
and   though,  from  the  nature   and  temper  of  our 


300  Alexander  Hamilton 

governments,  his  applications  will  meet  with  a  dil- 
atory compliance,  it  is  to  be  hoped  they  will  by  de- 
grees succeed. 

The  institution  of  a  bank  has  been  very  service- 
able to  him;  the  commercial  interest,  finding  great 
advantages  in  it,  and  anticipating  much  greater,  is 
disposed  to  promote  the  plan;  and  nothing  but 
moderate  funds,  permanently  pledged  for  the  secur- 
ity of  lenders,  is  wanting  to  make  it  an  engine  of  the 
most  extensive  and  solid  utility.  By  the  last  ad- 
vices there  is  reason  to  believe  the  delinquent  States 
will  shortly  comply  with  the  requisition  of  Congress 
for  a  duty  on  our  imports.  This  will  be  a  great 
resource  to  Mr.  Morris;  but  it  will  not  alone  be 
stifficient. 

Upon  the  whole,  however,  if  the  war  continues 
another  year,  it  will  be  necessary  that  Congress 
should  again  recur  to  the  generosity  of  France  for 
pecuniary  assistance.  The  plans  of  the  financier 
cannot  be  so  matured  as  to  enable  us  by  any  possi- 
bility to  dispense  with  this ;  and  if  he  should  fail  for 
want  of  support,  we  must  replunge  into  that  con- 
fusion and  distress  which  had  liked  to  have  proved 
fatal  to  us,  and  out  of  which  we  are  slowly  emerging. 
The  cure,  on  a  relapse,  would  be  infinitely  more 
difficult  than  ever. 

I  have  given  you  an  uninteresting  but  a  faithful 
sketch  of  our  situation.  You  may  expect,  from 
time  to  time,  to  receive  from  me  the  progress  of  our 
affairs;  and  I  know  you  will  overpay  me. 


Private  Correspondence  301 

TO    GENERAL   GREENE 

Albany,  October  12,  1782. 

Dear  General: 

It  is  an  age  since  I  have  either  written  to  you  or 
received  a  line  from  you ;  yet  I  persuade  myself  you 
have  not  been  the  less  convinced  of  my  affectionate 
attachment  and  warm  participation  in  all  those 
events  which  have  given  you  that  place  in  your 
country's  esteem  and  approbation  which  I  have 
known  you  to  deserve,  while  your  enemies  and  rivals 
were  most  active  in  sullying  your  reputation. 

You  will  perhaps  learn  before  this  reaches  you 
that  I  have  been  appointed  a  member  of  Congress. 
I  expect  to  go  to  Philadelphia  in  the  ensuing  month, 
where  I  shall  be  happy  to  correspond  with  you  with 
our  ancient  confidence;  and  I  shall  entreat  you  not 
to  confine  your  observations  to  military  subjects, 
but  to  take  in  the  whole  scope  of  national  concerns. 
I  am  sure  your  ideas  will  be  useful  to  me  and  to  the 
public. 

I  feel  the  deepest  affliction  at  the  news  we  have 
just  received  of  the  loss  of  our  dear  and  estimable 
friend  Laurens.  His  career  of  virtue  is  at  an  end. 
How  strangely  are  human  affairs  conducted,  that  so 
many  excellent  qualities  could  not  insure  a  more 
happy  fate!  The  world  will  feel  the  loss  of  a  man 
who  has  left  few  like  him  behind,  and  America  of  a 
citizen  whose  heart  realized  that  patriotism  of  which 
others  only  talk.  I  shall  feel  the  loss  of  a  friend  I 
truly  and  most  tenderly  loved,  and  one  of  a  very 
small  number. 

He  4c  3f:  9ie  9is  ^ 


302  Alexander  Hamilton 

TO    ROBERT   MORRIS 

Albany,  October  26,  1782. 

Sir: 

I  am  honored  with  your  letters  of  the  5th,  15th, 
and  1 6th  instant. 

The  detail  you  have  been  pleased  to  enter  into 
in  that  of  the  5  th  exhibits  very  cogent  reasons  for 
confining  yourself  to  pretty  large  denominations  of 
notes.  Some  of  them  had  occurred  to  me,  others 
had  not;  but  I  thought  it  my  duty  to  state  to  you 
the  operation  which  that  circumstance  had,  as  in  the 
midst  of  the  variety  and  extent  of  the  objects  which 
occupy  your  attention,  you  may  not  have  so  good 
opportunities  of  seeing  the  effect  of  your  plans  in 
detail.  While  I  acknowledge  that  your  observa- 
tions have  corrected  my  ideas  upon  the  subject, 
and  shown  me  that  there  would  be  danger  in  gener- 
ally lessening  the  denominations  of  the  paper  issued, 
I  should  be  uncandid  not  to  add  that  it  still  appears 
to  me  there  would  be  a  preponderance  of  advan- 
tages in  having  a  part  of  a  smaller  amount.  I  shall 
not  trouble  you  at  present  with  any  further  reasons 
for  this  opinion. 

I  have  immediately  on  receipt  of  your  letter  taken 
measures  for  the  publication  of  your  advertisement 
in  the  newspapers  of  this  State. 

You  will  perceive  by  the  enclosed  cash  account 
that,  since  my  last,  I  have  received  five  and  twenty 
hundred  dollars.  This  was  procured  in  part  of  the 
loan  I  mentioned  to  you.  It  was  chiefly  paid  to  me 
in  specie,  and  I  have  exchanged  it  with  Col.  Picker- 
ing and  Mr.  Duer  for  the  notes ;  the  latter  had  twelve 


Private  Correspondence  303 

hundred  dollars.  Taxes  collect  slowly,  but  I  must 
shortly  receive  two  or  three  hundred  pounds  more, 
of  which  Mr.  Duer  will  have  the  principal  benefit,  as 
it  appears  by  your  letter  to  him,  that  you  hoped  he 
might  receive  three  thousand  dollars  from  me. 

As  I  may  shortly  set  out  for  Philadelphia,  I  wish 
to  surrender  to  Mr.  Tillotson,  as  soon  as  you  think 
proper,  the  office  in  which  he  is  to  succeed. 


TO   LAFAYETTE 

Albany,  Nov.  3,  1782. 

Since  we  parted,  my  dear  Marquis,  at  Yorktown, 
I  have  received  three  letters  from  you;  one  written 
on  your  way  to  Boston,  two  from  France.  I  ac- 
knowledge that  I  have  written  to  you  only  once,  but 
the  reason  has  been  that  I  have  been  taught  daily  to 
expect  your  return.  This  I  should  not  have  done 
from  my  own  calculations,  for  I  saw  no  prospect  but 
of  an  inactive  campaign;  and  you  had  much  better 
be  intriguing  for  your  hobby-horse  at  Paris  than 
loitering  away  your  time  here.  Yet  they  seem  to  be 
convinced  at  headquarters  that  you  were  certainly 
coming  out;  and  by  your  letter  it  appears  to  have 
been  your  own  expectation.  I  imagine  you  have 
relinquished  it  by  this  time. 

I  have  been  employed  for  the  last  ten  months  in 
rocking  the  cradle  and  studying  the  art  of  fleecing 
my  neighbors.  I  am  now  a  grave  counsellor-at-law, 
and  shall  soon  be  a  grave  member  of  Congress.  The 
Legislature,  at  their  last  session,  took  it  into  their 


304  Alexander  Hamilton 

heads  to  name  me,  pretty  unanimously,  one  of  their 
delegates. 

I  am  going  to  throw  away  a  few  months  more  in 
public  life,  and  then  retire  a  simple  citizen  and  good 
pater  familias.  I  set  out  for  Philadelphia  in  a  few 
days.  You  see  the  disposition  I  am  in.  You  are 
condemned  to  run  the  race  of  ambition  all  your  life. 
I  am  already  tired  of  the  career,  and  dare  to  leave  it. 

But  you  would  not  give  a  pin  for  my  letter  unless 
politics  or  war  made  a  part  of  it.  You  tell  me  they 
are  employed  in  building  a  peace,  and  other  accounts 
say  it  is  nearly  finished.  I  hope  the  work  may  meet 
with  no  interruptions.  It  is  necessary  for  America, 
especially  if  your  army  is  taken  from  us,  as  we  are 
told  will  soon  be  the  case.  That  was  an  essential 
point  d'appui,  though  money  was  the  primum  mobile 
of  our  finances,  which  must  now  lose  the  little  ac- 
tivity lately  given  them.  Our  trade  is  prodigiously 
cramped.  These  States  are  in  no  humor  for  con- 
tinuing exertions ;  if  the  war  lasts  it  must  be  carried 
on  by  external  succors.  I  make  no  apology  for  the 
inertness  of  this  country.  I  detest  it,  but  since  it 
exists  I  am  sorry  to  see  other  resources  diminish. 
Your  ministers  ought  to  know  best  what  they  are 
doing,  but  if  the  war  goes  on  and  the  removal  of  the 
army  does  not  prove  an  unwise  measure,  I  renounce  all 
future  pretensions  to  judgment.  I  think,  however, 
the  circumstances  of  the  enemy  oblige  them  to  peace. 

We  have  been  hoping  that  they  would  abandon 
their  posts  in  these  States.  It  no  doubt  was  once  in 
contemplation,  but  later  appearances  are  rather  am- 
biguous.    I  begin  to  suspect  that  if  peace  is  not 


Private  Correspondence  305 

made,   New  York  and  Charleston — the  former  at 
least — will  still  be  held. 

There  is  no  probability  that  I  shall  be  one  of  the 
Commissioners  of  Peace.  It  is  a  thing  I  do  not  de- 
sire myself,  and  which  I  imagine  other  people  will 
not  desire. 

Our  army  is  now  in  excellent  order,  but  small. 

The  temper  we  are  in  respecting  the  alliance,  you 
will  see  from  public  acts.  There  never  was  a  time 
of  greater  unanimity  on  that  point. 

I  wish  I  durst  enter  into  a  greater  detail  with  you, 
but  our  cipher  is  not  fit  for  it,  and  I  fear  to  trust  it  in 
another  shape. 

Is  there  any  thing  you  wish  on  this  side  the  water? 
You  know  the  warmth  and  sincerity  of  my  attach- 
ment.    Command  me. 

I  have  not  been  so  happy  as  to  see  Mr.  De  Segur. 
The  title  of  your  friend  would  have  been  a  title  to 
every  thing  in  my  power  to  manifest.     Adieu. 

General  and  Mrs.  Schuyler  and  Mrs.  Hamilton  all 
join  warmly  in  the  most  affectionate  remembrances 
to  you. 

As  to  myself,  I  am  in  truth. 

Yours  pour  la  vie. 

I  wrote  a  long  letter  to  the  Viscount  De  Noailles, 
whom  I  also  love.  Has  he  received  it?  Is  the 
worthy  Gouvion  well?  Has  he  succeeded?  How  is 
it  with  our  friend  Gimat?  How  is  it  with  General 
Du  Portail?  All  those  men  are  men  of  merit,  and 
interest  my  best  wishes. 

Poor  Laurens!     He  has  fallen  a  sacrifice  to  his 


VOL.  IX.— 20. 


3o6  Alexander  Hamilton 

ardor  in  a  trifling  skirmish  in  South  Carolina.  You 
know  how  truly  I  loved  him,  and  will  judge  how 
much  I  regret  him. 

I  will  write  you  again  soon  after  my  arrival  at 
Philadelphia. 


TO   THE   GOVERNOR   OF    RHODE   ISLAND  ' 

Philadelphia,  Dec.  ii,  1782. 

Sir: 

Congress  are  equally  affected  and  alarmed  by  the 
information  they  have  received  that  the  Legislature 
of  your  State,  at  their  last  meeting,  have  refused 
their  concurrence  in  establishing  a  duty  on  imports. 
They  consider  this  measure  as  so  indispensable  to  the 
prosecution  of  the  war,  that  a  sense  of  duty  and  re- 
gard to  the  common  safety  compel  them  to  renew 
their  efforts  to  engage  a  compliance  with  it.  And 
in  this  view  they  have  determined  to  send  a  deputa- 
tion of  three  members  to  your  State,  as  expressed  in 
the  inclosed  resolution.  The  gentleman  they  have 
appointed  will  be  able  to  lay  before  you  a  full  and 
just  representation  of  public  affairs,  from  which, 
they  flatter  themselves,  will  result  a  conviction  of 
the  propriety  of  their  solicitude  upon  the  present 
occasion.  Convinced  by  past  experience  of  the  zeal 
and  patriotism  of  the  State  of  Rhode  Island,  they 
cannot  doubt  that  it  will  yield  to  those  urgent  con- 
siderations which  flow  from  a  knowledge  of  our  true 
situation. 

They  will  only  briefly  observe  that  the  increasing 
discontents  of  the  army,  the  loud  clamors  of  the  pub- 

^  At  this  time  William  Greene. 


Private  Correspondence  307 

lie  creditors,  and  the  extreme  disproportion  between 
the  public  supplies  and  the  demands  of  the  public 
service,  are  so  many  invincible  arguments  for  the 
fund  recommended  by  Congress.  They  feel  them- 
selves unable  to  devise  any  other  that  will  be  more 
efficacious,  less  exceptionable,  or  more  generally 
agreeable;  and  if  this  is  refused,  they  anticipate 
calamities  of  the  most  menacing  nature — with  this 
consolation,  however,  that  they  have  faithfully  dis- 
charged their  trust,  and  that  the  mischiefs  which 
follow  cannot  be  attributed  to  them. 

A  principal  object  of  the  proposed  fund  is  to  pro- 
cure loans  abroad.  If  no  security  can  be  held  out  to 
lenders,  the  success  of  these  must  necessarily  be  very 
limited.  The  last  accounts  on  the  subject  were  not 
flattering;  and  when  intelligence  shall  arrive  in  Eu- 
rope that  the  State  of  Rhode  Island  has  disagreed 
to  the  only  fund  which  has  yet  been  devised,  there 
is  every  reason  to  apprehend  it  will  have  a  fatal  in- 
fluence upon  their  future  progress. 

Deprived  of  this  resource,  our  affairs  must  in  all 
probability  hasten  to  a  dangerous  crisis,  and  these 
States  be  involved  in  greater  embarrassments  than 
they  have  yet  experienced,  and  from  which  it  may 
be  much  more  difficult  to  emerge.  Congress  will 
only  add  a  request  to  your  Excellency,  that  if  the 
Legislature  should  not  be  sitting,  it  may  be  called 
together  as  speedily  as  possible,  to  enable  the  gen- 
tlemen whom  they  have  deputed  to  perform  the  pur- 
pose of  their  mission.' 

^  This  letter  was  written  by  Hamilton  as  one  of  the  committee  of 
Congress  to  whom  the  matter  was  referred. 


3o8  Alexander  Hamilton 

TO    GOVERNOR   CLINTON 

Philadelphia,  Dec.  i8,  1782. 

Dear  Sir: 

I  shall  very  shortly  be  out  of  cash,  and  shall  be 
much  obliged  to  you  to  forward  me  the  State  allow- 
ance. It  will  answer  as  well  in  Mr.  Morris'  notes  as 
specie,  provided  the  notes  have  not  more  than  a 
fortnight  or  so  to  run.  It  will  be  better  if  they  are 
due.  A  disappointment  in  this  will  greatly  em- 
barrass me,  and  from  what  your  Excellency  said,  I 
take  it  for  granted  it  cannot  happen.  Nothing  new 
except  a  probable  account  of  the  evacuation  of 
Charleston.* 


TO   GOVERNOR   CLINTON 

Philadelphia,  Jan.  12,  1783. 

Sir: 

I  am  honored  with  your  Excellency's  letter  of  the 
29th  of  December.  I  have  received  an  order  from 
Colonel  Hay  on  Mr.  Sands,  which  I  have  no  doubt 
will  shortly  be  paid.  I  have  felt  no  inconvenience 
from  not  having  the  money  sooner. 

Since  my  last  to  you  we  have  received  no  further 
accounts  from  Europe,  so  that  we  remain  in  the 
same  uncertainty  with  respect  to  the  negotiations 
for  peace.  Whether  it  will  take  place  or  not  is  a 
problem  of  difficult  solution.  The  duplicity  and  un- 
steadiness for  which  Lord  Shelburne  is  remarkable 
will  not  justify  any  confidence  in  his  intentions;  and 
the  variety  of  interests  to  be  conciliated  in  a  treaty 

'  Reprinted  from  the  History  of  the  Republic,  iii.,  7. 


Private  Correspondence  309 

of  peace,  with  the  best  dispositions  on  all  sides,  must 
render  it  a  work  of  difficulty.  I  suspect  too  the 
Spaniards  and  the  Dutch  will  have  large  demands. 

We  have  now  here  a  deputation  from  the  army, 
and  feel  the  mortification  of  a  total  disability  to 
comply  with  their  just  expectations.  If,  however, 
the  matter  is  taken  up  in  a  proper  manner,  I  think 
their  application  may  be  turned  to  a  good  account. 
Every  day  proves  more  and  more  the  insufficiency 
of  the  Confederation.  The  proselytes  to  this  opinion 
are  increasing  fast,  and  many  of  the  most  sensible 
men  acknowledge  the  wisdom  of  the  measure  recom- 
mended by  your  Legislature  at  their  last  sitting. 
Various  circumstances  conspire  at  this  time  to  in- 
cline to  the  adoption  of  it,  and  I  am  not  without 
hope  it  may  ere  long  take  place.  But  I  am  far  from 
being  sanguine. 

We  are  deliberating  on  some  mode  for  carrying 
that  article  of  the  Confederation  into  execution, 
which  respects  the  valuation  of  lands,  to  ascertain 
the  quotas  of  the  several  States.  None  has  yet 
been  proposed  that  appears  to  me  eligible.  I  confess 
I  dislike  the  principle  altogether;  but  we  are  tied 
down  by  the  Confederation. 

The  affairs  of  the  Grants  have  been  no  further 
touched  since  the  resolutions  transmitted  to  you.  It 
is  a  business  in  which  nobody  cares  to  act  with  de- 
cision. As  intimated  before,  I  must  doubt  the  per- 
severance of  Congress,  if  military  coercion  should 
become  necessary.  I  am  clear  the  only  chance  the 
Legislature  have  for  a  recovery  of  any  part  of  the 
revolted  territory  is  by  a  compromise  with   New 


3IO  Alexander  Hamilton 

Hampshire,  and  this  compromise  must  originate 
between  the  States  themselves.  I  hope  the  Legis- 
lature will  revise  the  late  act  for  confirming  the  pos- 
sessions of  those  who  hold  lands  in  that  country.  I 
am  certain  there  are  doubts  upon  the  subject,  and  it 
were  much  to  be  wished  such  doubts  did  not  exist. 
The  present  dissatisfaction  of  the  army  is  much  op- 
posed to  any  experiment  of  force  in  a  service  where 
scruples  of  interest  or  prejudice  may  operate. ' 


TO    WASHINGTON 

Philadelphia,  February  7,  1783. 

Sir: 

Flattering  myself  that  your  knowledge  of  me  will 
induce  you  to  receive  the  observations  I  make,  as 
dictated  by  a  regard  to  the  public  good,  I  take  the 
liberty  to  suggest  to  you  my  ideas  on  some  mat- 
ters of  delicacy  and  importance.  I  view  the  present 
juncture  as  a  very  interesting  one.  I  need  not  ob- 
serve how  far  the  temper  and  situation  of  the  army 
make  it  so.  The  state  of  our  finances  was  perhaps 
never  more  critical.  I  am  under  injunctions  which 
will  not  permit  me  to  disclose  some  facts  that  would 
at  once  demonstrate  this  position;  but  I  think.it 
probable  you  will  be  possessed  of  them  through 
another  channel.  It  is,  however,  certain  that  there 
has  scarcely  been  a  period  of  the  Revolution  which 
called  more  for  wisdom  and  decision  in  Congress. 
Unfortunately  for  us,  we  are  a  body  not  governed 
by  reason  or  foresight,  but  by  circumstances.     It  is 

^  Now  first  printed  from  the  Clinton  papers  at  Albany. 


Private  Correspondence  311 

probable  we  shall  not  take  the  proper  measures; 
and  if  we  do  not,  a  few  months  may  open  an  em- 
barrassing scene.  This  will  be  the  case  whether  we 
have  peace  or  a  continuance  of  the  war. 

If  the  war  continues,  it  would  seem  that  the  army 
must,  in  June,  subsist  itself,  to  defend  the  country. 
If  peace  should  take  place,  it  will  subsist  itself,  to 
procure  justice  to  itself.  It  appears  to  be  a  prevailing 
opinion  in  the  army  that  the  disposition  to  recom- 
pense their  services  will  cease  with  the  necessity  for 
them,  and  that,  if  they  once  lay  down  their  arms, 
they  part  with  the  means  of  obtaining  justice.  It  is 
to  be  lamented  that  appearances  afford  too  much 
ground  for  their  distrust. 

It  becomes  a  serious  inquiry:  What  is  the  true 
line  of  policy?  The  claims  of  the  army,  urged  with 
moderation,  but  with  firmness,  may  operate  on  those 
weak  minds  which  are  influenced  by  their  apprehen- 
sions more  than  by  their  judgments,  so  as  to  produce 
a  concurrence  in  the  measures  which  the  exigencies 
of  affairs  demand.  They  may  add  weight  to  the 
applications  of  Congress  to  the  several  States.  So 
far  a  useful  turn  may  be  given  to  them.  But  the 
difficulty  will  be  to  keep  a  complaining  and  suffering 
army  within  the  bounds  of  moderation. 

This  your  Excellency's  influence  must  effect.  In 
order  to  do  it,  it  will  be  advisable  not  to  discounten- 
ance their  endeavors  to  procure  redress,  but  rather, 
by  the  intervention  of  confidential  and  prudent  per- 
sons, to  take  the  direction  of  them.  This,  however, 
must  not  appear.  It  is  of  moment  to  the  public 
tranquillity,  that  your  Excellency  should  preserve 


312  Alexander  Hamilton 

the  confidence  of  the  army  without  losing  that  of 
the  people.  This  will  enable  you,  in  case  of  ex- 
tremity, to  guide  the  current,  and  to  bring  order, 
perhaps  even  good,  out  of  confusion.  'T  is  a  part 
that  requires  address ;  but  't  is  one  which  your  own 
situation,  as  well  as  the  welfare  of  the  commtmity, 
points  out. 

I  will  not  conceal  from  your  Excellency  a  truth 
which  it  is  necessary  you  should  know.  An  idea  is 
propagated  in  the  army  that  delicacy,  carried  to  an 
extreme,  prevents  your  espousing  its  interests  with 
sufficient  warmth.  The  falsehood  of  this  opinion 
no  one  can  be  better  acquainted  with  than  myself, 
but  it  is  not  the  less  mischievous  for  being  false.  Its 
tendency  is  to  impair  that  influence  which  you  may 
exert  with  advantage,  should  any  commotions  un- 
happily ensue,  to  moderate  the  pretensions  of  the 
army,  and  make  their  conduct  correspond  with  their 
duty. 

The  great  desideratum  at  present  is  the  establish- 
ment of  general  funds,  which  alone  can  do  justice  to 
the  creditors  of  the  United  States  (of  whom  the  army 
forms  the  most  meritorious  class),  restore  public 
credit,  and  supply  the  future  wants  of  government. 
This  is  the  object  of  all  men  of  sense.  In  this 
the  influence  of  the  army,  properly  directed,  may 
co-operate. 

The  intimations  I  have  thrown  out  will  suffice  to 
give  your  Excellency  a  proper  conception  of  my 
sentiments.  You  will  judge  of  their  reasonableness 
or  fallacy,  but  I  persuade  myself  you  will  do  justice 
to  my  motives.     General  Knox  has  the  confidence  of 


Private  Correspondence  313 

the  army,  and  is  a  man  of  sense.  I  think  he  may  be 
safely  made  use  of.  Situated  as  I  am,  your  Ex- 
cellency will  feel  the  confidential  nature  of  these 
observations. 


TO   GOVERNOR   CLINTON 

February  24,  1783. 

Sir: 

In  my  letter  of  the  14th  I  informed  your  Excellency 
that  Congress  were  employed  in  devising  a  plan  for 
carrying  the  eighth  article  of  the  Confederation  into 
execution.  This  business  is  at  length  brought  to  a 
conclusion.  I  enclose,  for  the  information  of  the 
Legislature,  the  proceedings  upon  it  in  different 
stages,  by  which  they  will  see  the  part  I  have  acted. 
But  as  I  was  ultimately  left  in  a  small  minority,  I 
think  it  my  duty  to  explain  the  motives  upon  which 
my  opposition  to  the  general  course  of  the  House 
was  founded. 

I  am  of  opinion  that  the  article  of  the  Confedera- 
tion itself  was  ill-judged.  In  the  first  place  I  do  not 
believe  there  is  any  general  representative  of  the 
wealth  of  a  nation,  the  criterion  of  its  ability  to  pay 
taxes.  There  are  only  two  that  can  be  thought  of — 
land  and  numbers. 

The  revenues  of  the  United  Provinces  (general 
and  particular)  were  computed,  before  the  present 
war,  to  more  than  half  as  much  as  those  of  Great 
Britain.  The  extent  of  their  territory  is  not  one 
fourth  part  as  great,  their  population  less  than  a 
third.  The  comparison  is  still  more  striking  be- 
tween those  provinces  and  the  Swiss  Cantons,  in 


314  Alexander  Hamilton 

both  of  which  extent  of  territory  and  population  are 
nearly  the  same,  and  yet  the  revenues  of  the  former 
are  five  times  as  large  as  those  of  the  latter;  nor 
could  any  efforts  of  taxation  bring  them  to  any 
thing  like  a  level.  In  both  cases  the  advantages  for 
agriculture  are  superior  in  those  countries  which 
afford  least  revenue  in  proportion.  I  have  selected 
these  examples  because  they  are  most  familiar,  but 
whoever  will  extend  the  comparison  between  the 
different  nations  of  the  world  will  perceive  that  the 
position  I  have  laid  down  is  supported  by  universal 
experience. 

The  truth  is,  the  ability  of  a  coimtry  to  pay  taxes 
depends  on  infinite  combinations  of  physical  and 
moral  causes  which  can  never  be  accommodated  to 
any  general  rule — climate,  soil,  productions,  advan- 
tages for  navigation,  government,  genius  of  the 
people,  progress  of  arts  and  industry,  and  an  endless 
variety  of  circumstances.  The  diversities  are  suf- 
ficiently great  in  these  States  to  make  an  infinite 
difference  in  their  relative  wealth,  the  proportion  of 
which  can  never  be  fotmd  by  any  common  measure 
whatever. 

The  only  possible  way,  then,  of  making  them  con- 
tribute to  the  general  expense  in  an  equal  proportion 
to  their  means,  is  by  general  taxes  imposed  tmder 
Continental  authority. 

In  this  mode  there  would  no  doubt  be  inequalities, 
and,  for  a  considerable  time,  material  ones,  but  ex- 
perience, and  the  constant  operation  of  a  general 
interest,  which,  by  the  very  collision  of  particular 
interests,  must,  in  the  main,  prevail  in  a  Continental 


Private  Correspondence  3^5 

deliberative,  would  at  length  correct  those  inequali- 
ties, and  balance  one  tax  that  should  bear  hard  upon 
one  State  by  another  that  should  have  proportional 
weight  in  others.  This  idea,  however,  was  not,  at 
the  period  of  framing  the  Confederation,  and  is  not 
yet,  agreeable  to  the  spirit  of  the  time.  To  futurity 
we  must  leave  the  discovery  how  far  this  spirit  is 
wise  or  foolish.  One  thing  only  is  now  certain: 
that  Congress  having  the  discretionary  power  of 
determining  the  quantum  of  money  to  be  paid  into 
the  general  treasury  towards  defraying  the  common 
expenses,  have  in  effect  the  constitutional  power  of 
general  taxation. 

The  restraints  upon  the  exercise  of  this  power 
amount  to  the  perpetuating  a  rule  for  fixing  the  pro- 
portions, which  must  of  necessity  produce  inequality, 
and  by  refusing  the  Federal  Government  a  power 
of  specific  taxation  and  of  collection,  without  sub- 
stituting any  other  adequate  means  of  coercion,  do, 
in  fact,  leave  the  compliance  with  Constitutional 
requisitions  to  the  good- will  of  the  respective  States. 
Inequality  is  inherent  in  the  theory  of  the  Confedera- 
tion, and,  in  the  practice,  that  inequality  must  in- 
crease in  proportion  to  the  honesty  or  dishonesty  of 
the  component  parts.  This  vice  will  either,  in  its 
consequences,  reform  the  Federal  Constitution  or 
dissolve  it. 

If  a  general  standard  must  be  fixed,  numbers  were 
preferable  to  land.  Modes  might  be  devised  to  as- 
certain the  former  with  tolerable  precision;  but  I 
am  persuaded  the  experiment  will  prove  that  the 
value   of   all   the    land   in  each    State   cannot   be 


3i6  Alexander  Hamilton 

ascertained  with  any  thing  like  exactness.  Both 
these  meastires  have  the  common  disadvantage  of 
being  no  equal  representative  of  the  wealth  of  the 
people,  but  one  is  much  more  simple,  definite,  and 
certain  than  the  other. 

I  have  indulged  myself  in  these  remarks  to  show 
that  I  have  little  expectation  of  success  from  any 
mode  of  carrying  the  article  in  question  into  execu- 
tion upon  equitable  principles.  I  owe  it,  however, 
to  myself  to  declare  that  my  opposition  did  not 
arise  from  this  source.  The  Confederation  has 
pointed  out  this  mode,  and,  though  I  would  heartily 
join  in  a  representation  of  the  difficulties  (of  which 
every  man  of  sense  must  be  sensible  on  examina- 
tion) that  occur  in  the  execution  of  the  plan  to  in- 
duce the  States  to  consent  to  a  change,  yet,  as  this 
was  not  the  disposition  of  a  majority  of  Congress,  I 
would  have  assented  to  any  mode  of  attempting 
it,  which  was  not  either  obviously  mischievous  or 
impracticable. 

The  first  plan  proposed,  as  your  Excellency  will 
see,  was  an  actual  valuation  of  each  State  by  itself. 
This  was  evidently  making  the  interested  party  judge 
in  his  own  cause.  Those  who  have  seen  the  opera- 
tion of  this  principle  between  the  counties  in  the 
same  State,  and  the  districts  in  the  same  county, 
cannot  doubt  a  moment  that  the  valuations  on  this 
plan  would  have  been  altogether  imequal  and  un- 
just. Without  supposing  more  liberality  in  one 
State  than  in  another,  the  degree  of  care,  judgment, 
and  method  employed  in  the  execution  would  alone 
make  extreme  differences  in  the  results. 


Private  Correspondence  317 

This  mode  has  also  the  further  inconvenience  of 
awakening  all  the  jealousies  of  the  several  States 
against  each  other.  Each  would  suspect  that  its 
neighbor  had  favored  itself,  whether  the  partiality 
appeared  or  not.  It  would  be  impossible  to  silence 
these  distrusts  and  to  make  the  States  sit  down 
satisfied  with  the  justice  of  each  other.  Every 
new  requisition  for  money  would  be  a  new  signal 
for  discussion  and  clamor,  and  the  seeds  of  dis- 
union, already  sown  too  thick,  would  be  not  a  little 
multiplied. 

To  guard  against  these  evils  the  plan  proposes  a 
revision  by  Congress;  but  it  is  easy  to  be  seen  that 
such  a  power  could  not  be  exercised.  Should  any 
States  return  defective  valuations  it  would  be  diffi- 
cult to  find  sufficient  evidence  to  determine  them 
such.  To  alter  would  not  be  admissible,  for  Con- 
gress could  have  no  data  which  could  be  presumed 
equivalent  to  those  which  must  have  governed  the 
judgment  of  commissioners  imder  oath,  or  an  actual 
view  of  the  premises.  To  do  either  this  or  reject 
would  be  an  impeachment  of  the  honor  of  the  States, 
which  it  is  not  probable  there  would  be  decision 
enough  to  hazard,  and  which,  if  done,  could  not  fail 
to  excite  serious  disgusts.  There  is  a  wide  differ- 
ence between  a  single  State  exercising  such  a  power 
over  its  own  counties  and  a  confederate  government 
exercising  it  over  sovereign  States  which  compose 
the  Confederacy.  It  might  also  happen  that  too 
many  States  would  be  interested  in  the  defective 
valuations  to  leave  a  sufficient  number  willing  either 
to  alter  or  to  reject. 


3i8  Alexander  Hamilton 

These  considerations  prevailed  to  prevent  the 
plan  being  adopted  by  the  majority. 

The  last  plan  may  be  less  mischievous  than  the 
first,  but  it  appears  to  me  altogether  ineffectual. 
The  mere  quantity  of  lands  granted  and  surveyed, 
with  the  general  species  of  buildings  upon  them,  can 
certainly  be  no  criteria  to  determine  their  value. 
The  plan  does  not  even  distinguish  the  improved 
from  the  unimproved  land,  the  qualities  of  soil  or 
degrees  of  improvement;  the  qualities  of  the  houses 
and  other  buildings  are  entirely  omitted.  These,  it 
seems,  are  to  be  judged  by  the  commissioners  to  be 
appointed  by  each  State.  But  I  am  unable  to  con- 
ceive how  any  commissioner  can  form  the  least 
estimate  of  these  circumstances  with  respect  even 
to  his  own  State,  much  less  with  respect  to  other 
States,  which  would  be  necessary  to  establish  a  just 
relative  value.  If  even  there  was  a  distinction  of 
improved  from  unimproved  land,  by  supposing  an 
intrinsic  value  in  the  land  and  adopting  general 
rates,  something  nearer  the  truth  might  be  attained; 
but  it  must  now  be  all  conjecture  and  uncertainty. 

The  numbers  of  inhabitants,  distinguishing  white 
from  black,  are  called  for.  This  is  not  only  totally 
foreign  to  the  Confederation,  but  can  answer  no 
reasonable  purpose.  It  has  been  said  that  the 
proportion  of  numbers  may  guide  and  correct  the 
estimates.  An  assertion,  purely  verbal,  has  no  mean- 
ing. A  judgment  must  first  be  formed  of  the  value 
of  the  lands  upon  some  principles.  If  this  should  be 
altered  by  the  proportion  of  numbers,  it  is  plain  num- 
bers would  be  substituted  to  land. 


Private  Correspondence  319 

Another  objection  to  this  plan  is  that  it  lets  in  the 
particular  interests  of  the  States  to  operate  in  the 
returns  of  the  quantities  of  land,  number  of  build- 
ings, and  number  of  inhabitants.  But  the  principle 
of  this  objection  applies  less  forcibly  here  than 
against  the  former  plan. 

Whoever  will  consider  the  plain  import  of  the 
eighth  article  of  the  Confederation  must  be  con- 
vinced that  it  intended  an  actual  and  specific  valua- 
tion of  land,  buildings,  and  improvements, — not  a 
mere  general  estimate,  according  to  the  present  plan. 
While  we  insist,  therefore,  upon  adhering  to  the  Con- 
federation, we  should  do  it  in  reality,  not  barely  in 
appearance. 

Many  of  those  who  voted  for  this  scheme  had  as 
bad  an  opinion  of  it  as  myself,  but  they  were  induced 
to  accede  to  it  by  a  persuasion  that  some  plan  for 
the  purpose  was  expected  by  the  States,  and  that 
none  better,  in  the  present  circumstances  of  the 
country,  could  be  fallen  upon. 

A  leading  rule  which  I  have  laid  down  for  the  di- 
rection of  my  conduct  is  this,  that,  while  I  would 
have  a  just  deference  for  the  expectations  of  the 
States,  I  would  never  consent  to  amuse  them  by 
attempts  which  must  either  fail  in  the  execution  or 
be  productive  of  evil.  I  would  rather  incur  the 
negative  inconveniences  of  delay  than  the  positive 
mischiefs  of  injudicious  expedients.  A  contrary 
conduct  serves  to  destroy  confidence  in  the  govern- 
ment, the  greatest  misfortune  that  can  befall  a 
nation.  There  should,  in  my  opinion,  be  a  character 
of  wisdom  and  efficiency  in  all  the  measures  of  the 


320  Alexander  Hamilton 

Federal  Council,  the  opposite  of  a  spirit  of  tem- 
porizing concession. 

I  would  have  sufficient  reliance  on  the  judg- 
ments of  the  several  States  to  hope  that  good 
reasons  for  not  attempting  a  thing  would  be  more 
satisfactory  to  them  than  precipitate  and  fruitless 
attempts. 

My  idea  is  that,  taking  it  for  granted  the  States 
will  expect  an  experiment  on  the  principle  of  the 
Confederation,  the  best  plan  will  be  to  make  it  by 
commissioners,  appointed  by  Congress,  and  acting 
tmder  their  authority.  Congress  might,  in  the  first 
instance,  appoint  three  or  more  of  the  principal 
characters  in  each  State  for  probity  and  abilities, 
with  a  power  to  nominate  other  commissioners  un- 
der them  in  each  subdivision  of  the  State.  General 
principles  might  be  laid  down  for  the  regulation  of 
their  conduct,  by  which  uniformity  in  the  manner 
of  conducting  the  business  would  obtain.  Sanctions 
of  such  solemnity  might  be  prescribed  and  such  no- 
toriety given  to  every  part  of  the  transaction,  that 
the  commissioners  could  neither  be  careless  nor  par- 
tial without  a  sacrifice  of  reputation. 

To  carry  this  plan,  however,  into  effect,  with 
sufficient  care  and  accuracy,  would  be  a  work  both 
of  time  and  expense ;  and,  unfortunately,  we  are  so 
pressed  to  find  money  for  calls  of  immediate  neces- 
sity, that  we  could  not  at  present  undertake  a 
measure  which  would  require  so  large  a  sum. 

To  me  it  appears  evident  that  every  part  of  a  busi- 
ness which  is  of  so  important  and  imiversal  concern 
should   be    transacted   on   imiform   principles   and 


Private  Correspondence  321 

under  the  direction  of  that  body  which  has  a  common 
interest. 

In  general,  I  regard  the  present  moment,  probably 
the  dawn  of  peace,  as  peculiarly  critical,  and  the 
measures  which  it  shall  produce  as  of  great  impor- 
tance to  the  future  welfare  of  these  States.  I  am 
therefore  scrupulously  cautious  of  assenting  to  plans 
which  appear  to  me  founded  on  false  principles. 

Your  Excellency  will  observe  that  the  valuation 
of  the  lands  is  to  be  the  standard  for  adjusting  the 
accounts  for  past  supplies  between  the  United  States 
and  the  particular  States.  This,  if  adhered  to  with- 
out allowance  for  the  circumstances  of  those  States 
which  have  been  more  immediately  the  theatre  of 
the  war,  will  charge  our  State  for  the  past  according 
to  its  future  ability  when  in  an  entire  condition,  if  the 
valuation  should  be  made  after  we  regain  possession 
of  the  parts  of  the  State  now  in  the  power  of  the 
enemy. 

I  have  therefore  introduced  a  motion  for  repeating 
the  call,  in  a  more  earnest  manner,  upon  the  States 
to  vest  Congress  with  a  power  of  making  equitable 
abatements,  agreeably  to  the  spirit  of  the  resolution 
of  the  20th  of  February  last,  which  few  of  the  States 
have  complied  with.  This  motion  has  been  com-/ 
mitted.     I  know  not  what  will  be  its  fate. 

Notwithstanding  the  opposition  I  have  given,  now 
the  matter  has  been  decided  in  Congress  I  hope  the 
State  will  cheerfully  comply  with  what  is  required. 
Unless  each  State  is  governed  by  this  principle, 
there  is  an  end  to  the  Union.  Every  State  will,  no 
doubt,  have  a  right  in  this  case  to  accompany  its 

VOL.  IX. — 21. 


322  Alexander  Hamilton 

compliance  with  such  remarks  as  it  may  think  proper. 
After  the  plan  was  agreed  upon  it  was  committed 
to  be  put  into  form,  and  when  reported,  instead  of 
commissioners,  an  alteration  was  carried  for  making 
the  estimate  by  a  grand  committee. 

February  27. 

Mr.  Morris  has  signified  to  Congress  his  resolution 
to  resign  by  the  ist  of  June  if  adequate  funds  are 
not  by  that  time  provided.  This  will  be  a  severe 
stroke  to  our  affairs.  No  man  fit  for  the  office  will 
be  willing  to  supply  his  place,  for  the  very  reason  he 
resigns. 

'T  is  happy  for  us  we  have  reasons  to  expect 
a  peace.  I  am  sorry  that,  by  different  accoimts, 
it  appears  not  to  have  been  concluded  late  in 
December. 


TO    WASHINGTON 

Philadelphia,  March  5,  1783. 

Sir: 

I  had  the  honor  of  writing  your  Excellency  lately 
on  a  very  confidential  subject,  and  shall  be  anxious 
to  know,  as  soon  as  convenient,  whether  the  letter 
got  safe  to  hand. 

The  bearer,  Shattuck,  thinks  he  can  point  out 
means  of  apprehending  Wells  and  Knowlton,"  the 

'November  27,  1782,  Congress  directed  Washington  to  apprehend 
and  secure  Luke  Knowlton  of  Newfane  and  Samuel  Wells  of  Brattle- 
borough,  in  the  New  Hampshire  Grants,  for  being  in  a  dangerous  cor- 
respondence and  intercourse  with  the  enemy.  This  affair  probably 
grew  out  of  the  trouble  between  New  York  and  New  Hampshire,  and 
the  inhabitants  of  what  is  now  Vermont.  There  was  a  party  among 
the  people  there  which  was  said  to  aim  at  a  union  with  the  British 
provinces. 


Private  Correspondence  323 

two  persons  whom  your  Excellency  was  authorized 
to  have  taken  into  custody.  I  have  desired  him  to 
call  upon  you  to  disclose  the  plan.  I  will  not 
trouble  your  Excellency  with  any  observation  on 
the  importance  of  getting  hold  of  those  persons. 

The  surmise  that  Mr.  Arnold,'  a  member  of  Con- 
gress, gave  intelligence  to  them  of  the  design  to  take 
them,  makes  it  peculiarly  important. 


TO    WASHINGTON 

Philadelphia,  March  17,  1783. 

Sir: 

I  am  duly  honored  with  your  Excellency's  letters 
of  the  4th  and  12th  instant.  It  is  much  to  be  re- 
gretted, though  not  to  be  wondered  at,  that  steps 
of  so  inflammatory  a  tendency  have  been  taken  in 
the  army.  Your  Excellency  has,  in  my  opinion, 
acted  wisely.  The  best  way  is  ever  not  to  attempt 
to  stem  a  torrent,  but  to  divert  it. 

I  am  happy  to  find  you  coincident  in  opinion  with 
me  on  the  conduct  proper  to  be  observed  by  your- 
self. I  am  persuaded  more  and  more  it  is  that  which 
is  most  consistent  with  your  own  reputation  and 
the  public  safety. 

Our  affairs  wear  a  most  serious  aspect,  as  well 
foreign  as  domestic.  Before  this  gets  to  hand  your 
Excellency  will  probably  have  seen  the  provisional 
articles  between  Great  Britain  and  these  States.  It 
might  at  first  appearance  be  concluded  that  these 

^  Jonathan  Arnold,  delegate  from  Rhode  Island,  but  a  resident  of 
Vermont.  He  was  not  re-elected  to  Congress,  but  there  is  no  means 
of  knowing  whether  Hamilton's  suspicions  were  correct. 


324  Alexander  Hamilton 

will  be  a  prelude  to  a  general  peace,  but  there  are 
strong  reasons  to  doubt  the  truth  of  such  a  conclu- 
sion. Obstacles  may  arise  from  different  quarters: 
from  the  demands  of  Spain  and  Holland;  from  the 
hope  in  France  of  greater  acquisitions  in  the  East; 
and  perhaps  still  more  probably,  from  the  insincerity 
and  duplicity  of  Lord  Shelbume,  whose  politics, 
founded  in  the  peculiarity  of  his  situation,  as  well 
as  in  the  character  of  the  man,  may  well  be  sus- 
pected of  insidiousness.  I  am  really  apprehensive 
if  peace  does  not  take  place  that  the  negotiations 
will  tend  to  sow  distrust  among  the  allies  and  weaken 
the  force  of  the  common  league.  We  have,  I  fear, 
men  among  us,  and  men  in  trust,  who  have  a  han- 
kering after  British  connection.  We  have  others 
whose  confidence  in  France  savors  of  credulity. 
The  intrigues  of  the  former  and  the  incautiousness 
of  the  latter  may  be  both,  though  in  different  de- 
grees, injurious  to  the  American  interests,  and  make 
it  difficult  for  prudent  men  to  steer  a  proper  course. 

There  are  delicate  circumstances  with  respect  to 
the  late  foreign  transactions,  which  I  am  not  at 
liberty  to  reveal,  but  which,  joined  to  our  internal 
weaknesses,  disorders,  follies,  and  prejudices,  make 
this  country  stand  upon  precarious  ground. 

Some  use,  perhaps,  may  be  made  of  these  ideas  to 
induce  moderation  in  the  army.  An  opinion  that 
their  country  does  not  stand  upon  a  secure  footing 
will  operate  upon  the  patriotism  of  the  oflQcers 
against  hazarding  any  domestic  commotions. 

When  I  make  these  observations  I  cannot  forbear 
adding  that  if  no  excesses  take  place  I  shall  not  be 


Private  Correspondence  325 

sorry  that  ill-humors  have  appeared.     I  shall  not 
regret  importunity,  if  temperate,  from  the  army. 

There  are  good  intentions  in  the  majority  of  Con- 
gress, but  there  is  not  sufificient  wisdom  or  decision. 
There  are  dangerous  prejudices  in  the  particular 
States  opposed  to  those  measures  which  alone  can 
give  stability  and  prosperity  to  the  Union.  There 
is  a  fatal  opposition  to  Continental  views.  Neces- 
sity alone  can  work  a  reform.  But  how  produce 
that  necessity,  how  apply  it,  and  how  keep  it  within 
salutary  bounds?  I  fear  we  have  been  contending 
for  a  shadow. 

The  affair  of  accounts  I  considered  as  having  been 
put  on  a  satisfactory  footing.  The  particular  States 
have  been  required  to  settle  till  the  first  of  August, 
'80,  and  the  Superintendent  of  Finance  has  been 
directed  to  take  measures  for  settling  since  that 
period.     I  shall  immediately  see  him  on  the  subject. 

We  have  had  eight  States  and  a  half  in  favor  of  a 
commutation  of  the  half  pay  for  an  average  of  ten 
years'  purchase — that  is,  five  years'  full  pay  instead 
of  half  pay  for  life,  which,  on  a  calculation  of  annui- 
ties, is  nearly  an  equivalent.  I  hope  this  will  now 
shortly  take  place. 

We  have  made  considerable  progress  in  a  plan  to 
be  recommended  to  the  several  States  for  funding 
all  the  public  debts,  including  those  of  the  army, 
which  is  certainly  the  only  way  to  restore  public 
credit  and  enable  us  to  continue  the  war  by  borrow- 
ing abroad,  if  it  should  be  necessary  to  continue  it. 

I  omitted  mentioning  to  your  Excellency  that, 
from  European  intelligence,  there  is  great  reason  to 


326  Alexander  Hamilton 

believe,  at  all  events — peace  or  war, — New  York  will 
be  evacuated  in  the  spring.  It  will  be  a  pity  if  any 
domestic  disturbances  should  change  the  plans  of 
the  British  court. 

P.  S. — Your  Excellency  mentions  that  it  has  been 
surmised  the  plan  in  agitation  was  formed  in  Phila- 
delphia, that  combinations  have  been  talked  of  be- 
tween the  public  creditors  and  the  army,  and  that 
members  of  Congress  had  encouraged  the  idea.  This 
is  partly  true.  I  have  myself  urged  in  Congress  the 
propriety  of  uniting  the  influence  of  the  public 
creditors,  and  the  army  as  part  of  them,  to  prevail 
upon  the  States  to  enter  into  their  views.  I  have 
expressed  the  same  sentiments  out-of-doors.  Sev- 
eral other  members  of  Congress  have  done  the  same. 
The  meaning,  however,  of  all  this  was  simply  that 
Congress  should  adopt  such  a  plan  as  would  em- 
brace the  relief  of  all  the  public  creditors,  including 
the  army,  in  order  that  the  personal  influence  of 
some,  the  connections  of  others,  and  a  sense  of  jus- 
tice to  the  army,  as  well  as  the  apprehension  of  ill 
consequences,  might  form  a  mass  of  influence  in  each 
State  in  favor  of  the  measures  of  Congress.  In  this 
view,  as  I  mentioned  to  your  Excellency  in  a  former 
letter,  I  thought  the  discontents  of  the  army  might 
be  turned  to  a  good  account.  I  am  still  of  opinion 
that  their  earnest  but  respectful  applications  for  re- 
dress will  have  a  good  effect.  As  to  any  combination 
of  force,  it  would  only  be  productive  of  the  horrors 
of  a  civil  war,  might  end  in  the  ruin  of  the  country, 
and  would  certainly  end  in  the  ruin  of  the  army. 


Private  Correspondence  327 

TO   WASHINGTON 

Philadelphia,  March  24,  1783. 

Sir: 

Your  Excellency  will,  before  this  reaches  you, 
have  received  a  letter  from  the  Marquis  de  Lafay- 
ette, informing  you  that  the  preliminaries  of  peace 
between  all  the  belligerent  powers  have  been  con- 
cluded. I  congratulate  your  Excellency  on  this 
happy  conclusion  of  your  labors.  It  now  only  re- 
mains to  make  solid  establishments  within,  to  per- 
petuate our  Union,  to  prevent  our  being  a  ball  in 
the  hands  of  European  powers,  bandied  against  each 
other  at  their  pleasure;  in  fine  to  make  our  inde- 
pendence truly  a  blessing.  This,  it  is  to  be  la- 
mented, will  be  an  arduous  work;  for,  to  borrow  a 
figure  from  mechanics,  the  centrifugal  is  much 
stronger  than  the  centripetal  force  in  these  States, — 
the  seeds  of  disunion  much  more  numerous  than 
those  of  union. 

I  will  add  that  your  Excellency's  exertions  are  as 
essential  to  accomplish  this  end  as  they  have  been 
to  establish  independence.  I  will  upon  a  future 
occasion  open  myself  upon  this  subject. 

Your  conduct  in  the  affair  of  the  officers  is  highly 
pleasing  here.  The  measures  of  the  army  are  such 
as  I  could  have  wished  them,  and  will  add  new 
lustre  to  their  character  as  well  as  strengthen  the 
hands  of  Congress. 


328  Alexander  Hamilton 

TO    WASHINGTON 

Philadelphia,  March  25,  1783. 

Sir: 

I  wrote  your  Excellency  a  day  or  two  ago  by  ex- 
press. Since  that,  a  committee,  appointed  on  the 
communications  from  you,  have  had  a  meeting,  and 
find  themselves  embarrassed.  They  have  requested 
me  to  communicate  otir  embarrassments  to  you  in 
confidence,  and  to  ask  your  private  opinion.  The 
army,  by  their  resolutions,  express  an  expectation 
that  Congress  will  not  disband  them  previous  to  a 
settlement  of  accounts  and  the  establishment  of 
funds.  Congress  may  resolve  upon  the  first,  but  the 
general  opinion  is  that  they  cannot  constitutionally 
declare  the  second.  They  have  no  right,  by  the 
Confederation,  to  demand  ftmds — they  can  only 
recommend — and  to  determine  that  the  army  shall 
be  continued  in  service  till  the  States  grant  them, 
would  be  to  determine  that  the  whole  present  army 
shall  be  a  standing  army  during  peace,  unless  the 
States  comply  with  the  requisition  for  funds.  This, 
it  is  supposed,  would  excite  the  alarm  and  jealousies 
of  the  States,  and  increase,  rather  than  lessen,  the 
opposition  to  the  funding  scheme.  It  is  also  ob- 
served the  longer  the  army  is  kept  together  the  more 
the  payment  of  past  dues  is  procrastinated,  the 
abilities  of  the  States  being  exhausted  for  their  imme- 
diate support,  and  a  new  debt  every  day  incurred. 
It  is  further  suggested  that  there  is  danger  in  keep- 
ing the  army  together  in  a  state  of  inactivity,  and 
that  a  separation  of  the  several  lines  would  facilitate 
the  settlement  of  accounts,   diminish  present  ex- 


Private  Correspondence  329 

pense,  and  avoid  the  danger  of  union.  It  is  added 
that  the  officers  of  each  Hne,  being  on  the  spot, 
might,  by  their  own  soHcitations  and  those  of  their 
friends,  forward  the  adoption  of  funds  in  the  different 
States. 

A  proposition  will  be  transmitted  to  you  by  Colo- 
nel Bland,  in  the  form  of  a  resolution  to  be  adopted 
by  Congress,  framed  upon  the  principles  of  the  fore- 
going reasoning. 

Another  proposition  is  contained  in  the  following 
resolution : 

'''That  the  Commander-in-Chief  be  informed  it  is 
the  intention  of  Congress  to  effect  the  settlement  of 
the  accounts  of  the  respective  lines  previous  to  their 
reduction,  and  that  Congress  are  doing,  and  will 
continue  to  do,  every  thing  in  their  power  towards 
procuring  satisfactory  securities  for  what  shall  be 
found  due  on  such  settlement." 

The  scope  of  this  your  Excellency  will  perceive 
without  comment. 

I  am  to  request  you  will  favor  me  with  your  senti- 
ments on  both  the  propositions,  and  in  general  with 
your  ideas  of  what  had  best  be  done  with  reference 
to  the  expectation  expressed  by  the  officers;  taking 
into  view  the  situation  of  Congress.  On  one  side  the 
army  expect  they  will  not  be  disbanded  till  accounts 
are  settled  and  funds  established.  On  the  other 
hand,  they  have  no  constitutional  power  of  doing 
any  thing  more  than  to  recommend  funds,  and  are 
persuaded  that  these  will  meet  with  mountains  of 
prejudice  in  some  of  the  States. 

A  considerable  progress  has  been  made  in  a  plan 


330  Alexander  Hamilton 

for  funding  the  public  debts,  and  it  is  to  be  hoped  it 
will  erelong  go  forth  to  the  States,  with  every  argu- 
ment that  can  give  it  success. 


TO   WASHINGTON 

Philadelphia,  March  21;,  1783. 

Sir: 

The  inclosed  '  I  write  more  in  a  public  than  in  a 
private  capacity.  Here  I  write  as  a  citizen  zealous 
for  the  true  happiness  of  this  country;  as  a  soldier 
who  feels  what  is  due  to  an  army  which  has  suffered 
every  thing  and  done  much  for  the  safety  of  America. 

I  sincerely  wish  ingratitude  was  not  so  natural  to 
the  human  heart  as  it  is.  I  sincerely  wish  there  were 
no  seeds  of  it  in  those  who  direct  the  coimcils  of  the 
United  States.  But  while  I  urge  the  army  to  mod- 
eration, and  advise  your  Excellency  to  take  the 
direction  of  their  discontents,  and  endeavor  to  con- 
fine them  within  the  botmds  of  duty,  I  cannot,  as  an 
honest  man,  conceal  from  you  that  I  am  afraid  their 
distrusts  have  too  much  foundation.  Republican 
jealousy  has  in  it  a  principle  of  hostility  to  an  army, 
whatever  be  their  merits,  whatever  be  their  claims 
to  the  gratitude  of  the  community.  It  acknow- 
ledges their  services  with  unwillingness,  and  rewards 
them  with  reluctance.  I  see  this  temper,  though 
smothered  with  great  care,  involuntarily  breaking 
out  upon  too  many  occasions.  I  often  feel  a  mor- 
tification, which  it  would  be  impolitic  to  express, 

'  The  "inclosed"  is  the  preceding  letter. 


Private  Correspondence  331 

that  sets  my  passions  at  variance  with  my  reason. 
Too  many,  I  perceive,  if  they  could  do  it  with  safety 
or  color,  would  be  glad  to  elude  the  just  preten- 
sions of  the  army.  I  hope  this  is  not  the  prevailing 
disposition. 

But  supposing  the  country  ungrateful,  what  can 
the  army  do?  It  must  submit  to  its  hard  fate.  To 
seek  redress  by  its  arms  would  end  in  its  ruin.  The 
army  would  moulder  by  its  own  weight,  and  for 
want  of  the  means  of  keeping  together  the  soldiers 
would  abandon  their  officers;  there  would  be  no 
chance  of  success  without  having  recourse  to  means 
that  would  reverse  our  revolution.  I  make  these 
observations,  not  that  I  imagine  your  Excellency 
can  want  motives  to  continue  your  influence  in  the 
path  of  moderation,  but  merely  to  show  why  I  can- 
not myself  enter  into  the  views  of  coercion  which 
some  gentlemen  entertain,  for  I  confess,  could  force 
avail,  I  should  almost  wish  to  see  it  employed.  I 
have  an  indifferent  opinion  of  the  honesty  of  this 
country,  and  ill  forebodings  as  to  its  future  system. 

Your  Excellency  will  perceive  I  have  written  with 
sensations  of  chagrin,  and  will  make  allowance  for 
coloring,  but  the  general  picture  is  too  true.  God 
send  us  all  more  wisdom. 


TO   WASHINGTON 

April,  1783. 

Sir: 

I  have  received  your  Excellency's  letters  of  the 
thirty-first  of  March  and  fourth  of  April,  the  last  to- 
day.    The  one  to  Colonel  Bland,  as  member  of  the 


332  Alexander  Hamilton 

committee,  has  been  read  in  committee  confidentially, 
and  gave  great  satisfaction.  The  idea  of  not  at- 
tempting to  separate  the  army  before  the  settlement 
of  accounts,  corresponds  with  my  proposition.  That 
of  endeavoring  to  let  them  have  some  pay,  had  also 
appeared  to  me  indispensable.  The  expectations 
of  the  army,  as  represented  by  your  Excellency,  are 
moderation  itself.  To-morrow  we  confer  with  the 
Superintendent  of  Finance  on  the  subject  of  money. 
There  will  be  difficulty,  but  not,  we  hope,  insur- 
mountable. 

I  thank  your  Excellency  for  the  hints  you  are  so 
obliging  as  to  give  me  in  your  private  letter.  I  do 
not  wonder  at  the  suspicions  that  have  been  in- 
fused; nor  should  I  be  surprised  to  hear  that  I  have 
been  pointed  out  as  one  of  the  persons  concerned  in 
playing  the  game  described.  But  facts  must  speak 
for  themselves.  The  gentlemen  who  were  here  from 
the  army,  and  General  McDougal  who  is  still  here, 
will  be  able  to  give  a  true  account  of  those  who  have 
supported  the  just  claims  of  the  army,  and  of  those 
who  have  endeavored  to  elude  them. 

There  are  two  classes  of  men,  sir,  in  Congress,  of 
very  different  views:  one  attached  to  State,  the 
other  to  Continental,  politics.  The  latter  have  been 
strenuous  advocates  for  funding  the  public  debt 
upon  solid  securities;  the  former  have  given  every 
opposition  in  their  power,  and  have  only  been 
dragged  into  the  measures  which  are  now  near 
being  adopted,  by  the  clamors  of  the  army  and  other 
public  creditors. 

The  advocates  for  Continental  funds  have  blended 


Private  Correspondence  333 

the  interests  of  the  army  with  other  creditors,  from 
a  conviction  that  no  funds  for  partial  purposes  will 
go  through  those  States  to  whose  citizens  the  United 
States  are  largely  indebted;  or,  if  they  should  be 
carried  through,  from  impressions  of  the  moment, 
would  have  the  necessary  stability,  for  the  influence 
of  those  unprovided  for  would  always  militate 
against  a  provision  for  others  in  exclusion  of  them. 
It  is  in  vain  to  tell  men  who  have  parted  with  a  large 
part  of  their  property  on  the  public  faith,  that  the 
services  of  the  army  are  entitled  to  a  preference; 
they  would  reason  from  their  interest  and  their  feel- 
ings; these  would  tell  them  that  they  had  as  great 
a  title  as  any  other  class  of  the  community  to  public 
justice,  and  that  while  this  was  denied  to  them  it 
would  be  unreasonable  to  make  them  bear  their  part 
of  a  burthen  for  the  benefit  of  others.  This  is  the 
way  they  would  reason;  and  as  their  influence  in 
some  of  the  States  was  considerable,  they  would  have 
been  able  to  prevent  any  partial  provision.  ■ 

But  the  question  was  not  merely  how  to  do  justice 
to  the  creditors,  but  how  to  restore  public  credit. 
Taxation  in  this  country,  it  was  found,  would  not 
supply  a  sixth  part  of  the  public  necessities.  The 
loans  in  Europe  were  far  short  of  the  balance,  and 
the  prospect  every  day  diminishing:  the  Court  of 
France  telling  us  in  plain  terms  she  could  not  even 
do  as  much  as  she  had  done;  individuals  in  Holland, 
and  everywhere  else,  refusing  to  part  with  their 
money  on  the  precarious  tenure  of  the  mere  faith  of 
this  country,  without  any  pledge  for  the  payment 
either  of  principal  or  interest. 


334  Alexander  Hamilton 

In  this  situation  what  was  to  be  done?  It  was 
essential  to  our  cause  that  vigorous  efforts  should  be 
made  to  restore  public  credit;  it  was  necessary  to 
combine  all  the  motives  to  this  end  that  could  oper- 
ate upon  different  descriptions  of  persons  in  the 
different  States;  the  necessities  and  discontents  of 
the  army  presented  themselves  as  a  powerful  engine. 

But,  sir,  these  gentlemen  would  be  puzzled  to 
support  their  insinuations  by  a  single  fact.  It  was, 
indeed,  proposed  to  appropriate  the  intended  im- 
post on  trade  to  the  army  debt;  and,  what  was  ex- 
traordinary, by  gentlemen  who  had  expressed  their 
dislike  to  the  principle  of  the  ftind.  I  acknowledge 
I  was  one  that  opposed  this,  for  the  reasons  already 
assigned  and  for  these  additional  ones.  That  was 
the  fund  on  which  we  most  counted;  to  obtain  fur- 
ther loans  in  Europe,  it  was  necessary  we  should 
have  a  ftmd  sufficient  to  pay  the  interest  of  what 
had  been  borrowed  and  what  was  to  be  borrowed. 
The  truth  was,  these  people,  in  this  instance,  wanted 
to  play  off  the  army  against  the  funding  system. 

As  to  Mr.  Morris,  I  will  give  your  Excellency  a 
true  explanation  of  his  conduct.  He  had  been  for 
some  time  pressing  Congress  to  endeavor  to  obtain 
funds,  and  had  found  a  great  backwardness  in  the 
business.  He  found  the  taxes  unproductive  in  the 
different  States ;  he  f oimd  the  loans  in  Europe  mak- 
ing a  very  slow  progress;  he  found  himself  pressed 
on  all  hands  for  supplies ;  he  found  himself,  in  short, 
reduced  to  this  alternative:  either  of  making  en- 
gagements which  he  could  not  fulfil,  or  declaring  his 
resignation  in  case  funds  were  not  established  by  a 


Private  Correspondence  335 

given  time.  Had  he  followed  the  first  course,  the 
bubble  must  soon  have  burst;  he  must  have  sacri- 
ficed his  credit  and  his  character,  and  public  credit, 
already  in  a  ruinous  condition,  would  have  lost  its 
last  support. 

He  wisely  judged  it  better  to  resign.  This  might 
increase  the  embarrassments  of  the  moment;  but 
the  necessity  of  the  case,  it  was  to  be  hoped,  would 
produce  the  proper  measures;  and  he  might  then 
resimie  the  direction  of  the  machine  with  advantage 
and  success. 

He  also  had  some  hope  that  his  resignation  would 
prove  a  stimulus  to  Congress. 

He  was,  however,  ill  advised  in  the  publication  of 
his  letters  of  resignation.  This  was  an  imprudent 
step,  and  has  given  a  handle  to  his  personal  enemies, 
who,  by  playing  upon  the  passions  of  others,  have 
drawn  some  well-meaning  men  into  the  cry  against 
him.  But  Mr.  Morris  certainly  deserves  a  great  deal 
from  his  country.  I  believe  no  man  in  this  country 
but  himself  could  have  kept  the  money  machine  a-go- 
ing during  the  period  he  has  been  in  office.  From 
every  thing  that  appears,  his  administration  has 
been  upright  as  well  as  able. 

The  truth  is,  the  old  leaven  of  Deane  and  Lee  is, 
at  this  day,  working  against  Mr.  Morris.  He  hap- 
pened, in  that  dispute,  to  have  been  on  the  side  of 
Deane;  and  certain  men  can  never  forgive  him.  A 
man  whom  I  once  esteemed,  and  whom  I  will  rather 
suppose  duped  than  wicked,  is  the  second  actor  in 
this  business. 

The  matter  with  respect  to  the  army  which  has 


33^  Alexander  Hamilton 

occasioned  most  altercation  in  Congress  and  most 
dissatisfaction  in  the  army,  has  been  the  half-pay. 
The  opinions  on  this  head  have  been  two :  one  party 
was  for  referring  the  several  lines  to  their  States,  to 
make  such  commutation  as  they  should  think  proper ; 
the  other,  for  making  the  commutation  by  Congress, 
and  funding  it  on  Continental  security.  I  was  of 
this  last  opinion,  and  so  were  all  those  who  will  be 
represented  as  having  made  use  of  the  army  as  pup- 
pets. Our  principal  reasons  were:  Firstly,  by  re- 
ferring the  lines  to  their  respective  States,  those 
which  were  opposed  to  the  half-pay  would  have 
taken  advantage  of  the  officers'  necessities  to  make 
the  commutation  far  short  of  an  equivalent.  Sec- 
ondly, the  inequality  which  would  have  arisen  in  the 
different  States  when  the  officers  came  to  compare 
(as  has  happened  in  other  cases),  would  have  been  a 
new  source  of  discontent.  Thirdly,  such  a  reference 
was  a  continuance  of  the  old  wretched  State  system, 
by  which  the  ties  between  Congress  and  the  army 
have  been  nearly  dissolved,  by  which  the  resources 
of  the  States  have  been  diverted  from  the  common 
treasury  and  wasted — a  system  which  your  Excel- 
lency has  often  justly  reprobated. 

I  have  gone  into  these  details  to  give  you  a  just 
idea  of  the  parties  in  Congress.  I  assure  you,  upon 
my  honor,  sir,  I  have  given  you  a  candid  state  of 
facts,  to  the  best  of  my  judgment.  The  men  against 
whom  the  suspicions  you  mention  must  be  directed, 
are  in  general  the  most  sensible,  the  most  liberal, 
the  most  independent,  and  the  most  respectable 
characters  in  our  body,  as  well  as  the  most  im- 


Private  Correspondence  337 

equivocal  friends  to  the  army.  In  a  word,  they  are 
the  men  who  think  continentally. 

I  am  chairman  of  a  committee  for  peace  arrange- 
ments. We  shall  ask  your  Excellency's  opinion  at 
large  on  a  proper  military  peace  establishment.  I 
will  just  hint  to  your  Excellency,  that  our  preju- 
dices will  make  us  wish  to  keep  up  as  few  troops  as 
possible. 

We  this  moment  learn  an  officer  is  arrived  from 
Sir  Guy  Carleton  with  dispatches,  probably  official 
accounts  of  peace. 


TO    WASHINGTON 

Philadelphia,  April  9,  1783. 

Sir: 

Congress  having  appointed  a  committee  consist- 
ing of  Messrs.  Madison,  Osgood,  Wilson,  Ellsworth, 
and  myself,  to  consider  what  arrangements  it  will  be 
proper  to  adopt  in  the  different  departments  with 
reference  to  a  peace,  I  am  directed  by  the  committee 
to  address  your  Excellency  on  the  subject  of  the 
military  department. 

The  committee  wish  your  Excellency's  sentiments 
at  large  on  such  institutions  of  every  kind  for  the  in- 
terior defence  of  these  States  as  may  be  best  adapted 
to  their  circumstances,  and  conciliate  security  with 
economy  and  with  the  principles  of  our  govern- 
ment. In  this  they  will  be  glad  if  you  will  take  as 
great  latitude  as  you  may  think  necessary,  and  will 
therefore  omit  entering  into  any  details. 

The  committee  apprehend  it  to  be  the  intention 

VOL.  IX.— 22. 


33^  Alexander  Hamilton 

of  Congress  to  lay  down  a  general  plan,  to  be  carried 
into  execution  as  circumstances  will  permit,  and 
that  in  attending  to  such  dispositions  as  the  imme- 
diate situation  of  the  country  may  require,  they  are 
chiefly  desirous  of  establishing  good  principles  that 
will  have  a  permanent  salutary  operation.' 


TO    WASHINGTON 

Philadelphia,  April  15,  1783. 

Sir: 

There  are  two  resolutions  passed  relative  to  the 
restoration  of  the  British  prisoners,  and  to  making 
arrangements  for  the  surrender  of  the  posts  in  the 
possession  of  the  British  troops;  the  first  of  which 
is  to  be  transacted  b}^  you  in  conjunction  with  the 
Secretary  of  War,  the  latter  by  yourself  alone.  I 
will  explain  to  you  some  doubts  which  have  arisen 
in  Congress  with  regard  to  the  true  construction  of 
the  provisional  treaty,  which  may  be  of  use  to  you 
in  transacting  the  business  above  mentioned. 

The  sixth  article  declares  that  there  shall  be  no 
future  confiscations,  etc.,  after  the  ratification  of  the 
treaty  in  America,  and  the  seventh  article  makes  the 
surrender  of  prisoners,  evacuation  of  posts,  cessa- 
tion of  hostilities,  etc.,  to  depend  on  that  event,  to 
wit,  the  ratification  of  the  treaty  in  America. 

Now  the  doubt  is,  whether  the  treaty  means  the 
provisional  treaty  already  concluded,  or  the  definitive 
treaty  to  he  concluded.  The  last  construction  is 
most  agreeable  to  the  letter  of  the  provisional  ar- 
ticles, the  former  most  agreeable  to  the  usual  prac- 

^  Now  first  printed  from  the  Knox  papers. 


Private  Correspondence  339 

tice  of  nations,  for  hostilities  commonly  cease  on  the 
ratification  of  the  preliminary  treaty. 

There  is  a  great  diversity  of  opinion  in  Congress. 
It  will  be,  in  my  opinion,  advisable,  at  the  same  time 
that  we  do  not  communicate  our  doubts  to  the  British, 
to  extract  their  sense  of  the  matter  from  them. 

This  may  be  done  by  asking  them  at  what  periods 
they  are  willing  to  stipulate  the  surrender  of  posts, 
at  the  same  time  that  they  are  asked  in  what  manner 
it  will  be  the  most  convenient  to  them  to  receive  the 
prisoners. 

If  they  postpone  the  evacuation  of  the  different 
posts  to  the  definitive  treaty,  we  shall  then  be  justi- 
fied in  doing  the  same  with  respect  to  prisoners. 
The  question  will  then  arise,  whether,  on  principles 
of  humanity,  economy,  and  liberality,  we  ought  not 
to  restore  the  prisoners,  at  all  events,  without  delay  ? 
Much  may  be  said  on  both  sides.  I  doubt  the  expe- 
dience of  a  total  restoration  of  prisoners  till  they  are 
willing  to  fix  the  epochs  at  which  they  will  take  leave 
of  us.  It  will  add  considerably  to  their  strength, 
and  accidents,  though  improbable,  may  happen. 

I  confess,  however,  I  am  not  clear  in  my  opinion. 

The  provisional  or  preliminary  treaty  is  ratified  by 
us — for  the  greater  caution. 


TO    GOVERNOR   CLINTON 

Philadelphia,  May  14,  1783. 

Sir: 

The  President  of  Congress  will  of  course  have 
transmitted  to  your  Excellency  the  plan  lately 
adopted  by  Congress  for  funding  the  public  debt. 


340  Alexander  Hamilton 

This  plan  was  framed  to  accommodate  it  to  the  ob- 
jections of  some  of  the  States,  but  this  spirit  of 
accommodation  will  only  serve  to  render  it  less 
efficient  without  making  it  more  palatable.  The 
opposition  of  the  State  of  Rhode  Island,  for  in- 
stance, is  chiefly  founded  upon  these  two  considera- 
tions: the  merchants  are  opposed  to  any  revenue 
from  trade ;  and  the  State,  depending  almost  wholly 
on  commerce,  wants  to  have  credit  for  the  amount 
of  the  duties. 

Persuaded  that  the  plan  now  proposed  will  have 
little  more  chance  of  success  than  a  better  one,  and 
that,  if  agreed  to  by  all  the  States,  it  will  in  a  great 
measure  fail  in  the  execution,  it  received  my  nega- 
tive.    My  principal  objections  were: 

First,  that  it  does  not  designate  the  funds  (except 
the  impost)  on  which  the  whole  interest  is  to  arise, 
and  by  which  (selecting  the  capital  articles  of  visible 
property)  the  collection  would  have  been  easy,  the 
funds  productive,  and  necessarily  increasing  with 
the  increase  of  the  country. 

Second,  that  the  duration  of  the  funds  is  not  co- 
extensive with  the  debt,  but  limited  to  twenty-five 
years,  though  there  is  a  moral  certainty  that  in  that 
period  the  principal  will  not  by  the  present  provision 
be  fairly  extinguished. 

Third,  that  the  nomination  and  appointment  of 
the  collectors  of  the  revenue  are  to  reside  in  the 
State,  instead  of  at  least  the  nomination  being  in  the 
United  States;  the  consequence  of  which  will  be 
that  those  States  which  have  little  interest  in  the 
fimds,  by  having  a  small  share  of  the  public  debt 


Private  Correspondence  341 

due  to  their  own  citizens,  will  take  care  to  appoint 
such  persons  as  are  least  likely  to  collect  the  revenue. 

The  evils  resulting  from  these  defects  will  be  that 
in  many  instances  the  objects  of  the  revenues  will 
be  improperly  chosen,  and  will  consist  of  a  multitude 
of  little  articles,  which  will,  on  experiment,  prove  in- 
sufhcient;  that  for  want  of  a  vigorous  collection  in 
each  State  the  revenue  will  be  unproductive  in  many, 
and  will  fall  chiefly  upon  those  States  which  are 
governed  by  most  liberal  principles;  that  for  want 
of  an  adequate  security  the  evidences  of  the  public 
debt  will  not  be  transferable  for  any  thing  like  their 
value;  that  this  not  admitting  an  incorporation  of 
the  creditors  in  the  nature  of  banks,  will  deprive  the 
public  of  the  benefit  of  an  increased  circulation,  and 
of  course  will  disable  the  people  from  paying  the 
taxes  for  want  of  a  sufficient  medium. 

I  shall  be  happy  to  be  mistaken  in  my  apprehen- 
sions, but  the  experiment  must  determine. 

I  hope  our  State  will  consent  to  the  plan  pro- 
posed, because  it  is  in  her  interests  at  all  events  to 
promote  the  payment  of  the  public  debt  on  Conti- 
nental funds  (independent  of  the  general  considera- 
tions of  union  and  propriety). 

I  am  much  mistaken  if  the  debts  due  from  the 
United  States  to  the  citizens  of  the  State  of  New 
York  do  not  considerably  exceed  its  proportion  of 
the  necessary  funds;  of  course,  it  has  an  immediate 
interest  that  there  should  be  a  Continental  provision 
for  them.  But  there  are  superior  motives  that 
ought  to  operate  in  every  State — the  obligations  of 
national  faith,  honor,  and  reputation. 


342  Alexander  Hamilton 

Individuals  have  been  already  too  long  sacrificed 
to  public  convenience.  It  will  be  shocking,  and, 
indeed,  an  eternal  reproach  to  this  country,  if  we 
begin  the  peaceable  enjoyment  of  our  independence 
by  a  violation  of  all  the  principles  of  honesty  and 
true  policy. 

It  is  worthy  of  remark  that  at  least  four  fifths  of 
the  domestic  debt  are  due  to  the  citizens  of  the 
States,  from  Pennsylvania,  inclusively,  northward. 

P.  S. — It  is  particularly  interesting  that  the  State 
should  have  a  representation  here.  Not  only  mat- 
ters are  depending  which  require  a  full  representation 
in  Congress,  and  there  is  now  a  thin  one,  but  those 
matters  are  of  a  nature  so  particularly  interesting 
to  our  State,  that  we  ought  not  to  be  without  a 
voice  in  them.  I  wish  two  other  gentlemen  of  the 
delegation  may  appear  as  soon  as  possible,  for  it 
would  be  very  injurious  for  me  to  remain  much 
longer  here.  Having  no  future  views  in  public  life, 
I  owe  it  to  myself  without  delay  to  enter  upon  the 
care  of  my  private  concerns  in  earnest. 


TO   GOVERNOR   CLINTON 

Philadelphia,  June  i,  1783. 

Sir: 

In  my  last  letter  to  your  Excellency  I  took  occa- 
sion to  mention  that  it  was  of  great  importance  to 
the  State  at  this  time  to  have  a  representation  here, 
as  points  in  which,  by  its  present  situation,  it  is 
particularly  interested  are  daily  and  will  be  daily 
agitated. 

It  is  also  of  importance  at  this  moment  to  the 


Private  Correspondence  343 

United  States  (not  only  from  general  consideration, 
but)  because  we  have  a  very  thin  representation  in 
Congress,  and  are  frequently  unable  to  transact  any 
of  those  matters  which  require  nine  States.  I  wish 
your  Excellency  would  urge  a  couple  of  gentlemen 
to  come  on,  as  it  becomes  highly  inconvenient  to  me 
to  remain  here,  and  as  I  have  stayed  the  full  time  to 
be  expected. 

I  observe  with  great  regret  the  intemperate  pro- 
ceedings among  the  people  in  different  parts  of  the 
State,  in  violation  of  a  treaty,  the  faithful  observ- 
ance of  which  so  deeply  interests  the  United  States. 

Surely  the  State  of  New  York,  with  its  capital  and 
its  frontier  posts  (on  which  its  important  fur  trade 
depends),  in  the  hands  of  the  British  troops,  ought 
to  take  care  that  nothing  is  done  to  furnish  a  pretext 
on  the  other  side,  even  for  delaying,  much  less  for 
refusing,  the  execution  of  the  treaty.  We  may 
imagine  that  the  situation  of  Great  Britain  puts  her 
under  a  necessity,  at  all  events,  of  fulfilling  her  en- 
gagements and  cultivating  the  good-will  of  this 
country. 

This  is,  no  doubt,  her  true  policy:  but  when  we 
feel  that  passion  makes  us  depart  from  the  dictates 
of  reason ;  when  we  have  seen  that  passion  has  had  so 
much  influence  in  the  conduct  of  the  British  councils 
in  the  whole  course  of  the  war;  when  we  recollect 
that  those  who  govern  them  are  men  like  ourselves, 
and  alike  subject  to  passions  and  resentments ;  when 
we  reflect  also  that  all  the  great  men  in  England 
are  not  united  in  the  liberal  scheme  of  policy  with 
respect  to  this  country,  and  that  in  the  anarchy 


344  Alexander  Hamilton 

which  prevails  there  is  no  knowing  to  whom  the 
reins  of  government  may  be  committed;  when  we 
recollect  how  little  in  a  condition  we  are  to  force  a 
compliance  with  our  claims  we  ought  certainly  to  be 
cautious  in  what  manner  we  act,  especially  when  we 
in  particular  have  so  much  at  stake,  and  should  not 
openly  provoke  a  breach  of  faith  on  the  other  side 
by  setting  the  example. 

iVn  important  distinction  is  not  sufficiently  at- 
tended to.  The  fifth  article  is  recommendatory; 
the  sixth,  positive.  There  is  no  option  on  the  part 
of  the  particular  States  as  to  any  future  confisca- 
tions, prosecutions,  or  injuries  of  any  kind,  to  per- 
son, liberty,  or  property,  on  account  of  any  thing 
done  in  the  war.  It  is  matter  of  discretion  in  the 
States  whether  they  will  comply  with  the  recom- 
mendations contained  in  the  fifth  article;  but  no 
part  of  the  sixth  can  be  departed  from  by  them 
without  a  direct  breach  of  public  faith  and  of  the 
Confederation.  The  power  of  making  treaties  is  ex- 
clusively lodged  in  Congress.  That  power  includes 
whatever  is  essential  to  the  termination  of  the  war 
and  to  the  preservation  of  the  general  safety.  In- 
demnity to  individuals  in  similar  cases  is  a  usual 
stipulation  in  treaties  of  peace,  of  which  many  prece- 
dents are  to  be  produced. 

Should  it  be  said  that  the  associations  of  the 
people,  without  legal  authority,  do  not  amoimt  to 
a  breach  of  the  public  faith,  the  answer  is,  if  the 
government  does  not  repress  them,  and  prevent 
them  having  effect,  it  is  as  much  a  breach  as  a  formal 
refusal  to  comply  on  its  part.     In  the  eye  of  a 


Private  Correspondence  345 

foreign  nation,  if  our  engagements  are  broken,  it  is 
of  no  moment  whether  it  is  for  the  want  of  good  in- 
tention in  the  government,  or  for  want  of  power  to 
restrain  its  subjects. 

Suppose  a  violence  committed  by  an  American 
vessel  on  the  vessel  of  another  nation  on  the  high 
seas,  and  after  complaint  made  there  is  no  redress 
given.  Is  not  this  a  hostility  against  the  injured 
nation  which  will  justify  reprisals? 

But  if  I  am  not  misinformed,  there  are  violations 
going  on  in  form  of  law.  I  am  told  that  indictments 
continue  to  be  brought  under  the  former  confiscation 
laws.  A  palpable  infraction,  if  true,  of  the  sixth 
article  of  the  treaty,  to  which  an  immediate  stop 
ought  no  doubt  to  be  put. 

It  has  been  said  by  some  men  that  the  operation 
of  this  treaty  is  suspended  till  the  definitive  treaty ; 
a  plain  subterfuge.  Whatever  is  clearly  expressed 
in  the  provisional  or  preliminary  treaty  is  as  binding 
from  the  moment  it  is  made  as  the  definitive  treaty, 
which,  in  fact,  only  develops,  explains,  and  fixes 
more  precisely  what  may  have  been  too  generally 
expressed  in  the  former. 

Suppose  the  British  should  now  send  away  not 
only  the  negroes,  but  all  other  property,  and  all  the 
public  records  in  their  possession  belonging  to  us, 
on  the  pretence  above  stated;  should  we  not  justly 
accuse  them  with  breaking  faith?  Is  this  not  al- 
ready done  in  the  case  of  the  negroes  who  have  been 
carried  away,  though  foimded  upon  a  very  different 
principle — a  doubtful  construction  of  the  treaty, 
not  a  denial  of  its  immediate  operation. 


346  Alexander  Hamilton 

In  fine,  is  it  our  interest  to  advance  this  doctrine 
and  to  countenance  the  position  that  nothing  is 
binding  till  the  definitive  treaty,  when  there  are  ex- 
amples of  years  intervening  between  the  preliminary 
and  definitive  treaties? 

Sir  Guy  Carleton,  in  his  correspondence,  has  ap- 
peared to  consider  the  treaty  as  immediately  obli- 
gatory, and  it  has  been  the  policy  which  I  have 
pursued  to  promote  the  same  idea. 

I  am  not,  indeed,  apprehensive  of  the  renewal  of 
the  war,  for  peace  is  necessary  to  Great  Britain.  I 
think  it  also  most  probable  her  disposition  to  con- 
ciliate this  country  will  outweigh  the  resentments 
which  a  breach  of  our  engagements  is  calculated  to 
inspire.  But  with  a  treaty  which  has  exceeded  the 
hopes  of  the  most  sanguine;  which,  in  the  articles 
of  boundary  and  the  fisheries,  is  even  better  than  we 
asked;  circumstanced,  too,  as  this  country  is  with 
respect  to  the  means  of  making  war,  I  think  it  the 
height  of  imprudence  to  run  any  risk.  Great  Brit- 
ain, without  recommencing  hostilities,  may  evade 
parts  of  the  treaty.  She  may  keep  possession  of  the 
frontier  posts ;  she  may  obstruct  the  free  enjoyment 
of  the  fisheries;  she  may  be  indisposed  to  such  ex- 
tensive concessions  in  matters  of  commerce  as  it  is 
our  interest  to  aim  at.  In  all  this  she  would  find  no 
opposition  from  any  foreign  power,  and  we  are  not 
in  a  condition  to  oblige  her  to  any  thing.  If  we 
imagine  that  France,  obviously  embarrassed  herself 
in  her  finances,  would  renew  the  war  to  oblige  Great 
Britain  to  the  restoration  of  frontier  posts,  or  to  a 
compliance    with    the    stipulations    respecting    the 


Private  Correspondence  347 

fisheries  (especially  after  a  manifest  breach  of  the 
treaty  on  our  part),  we  speculate  much  at  random. 
Observations  might  be  made  on  the  last  article 
which  would  prove  that  it  is  not  the  policy  of  France 
to  support  our  interest  there.  Are  we  prepared,  for 
the  mere  gratification  of  our  resentments,  to  put 
those  great  national  objects  to  the  hazard:  to  leave 
our  Western  frontier  in  a  state  of  insecurity;  to 
relinquish  the  fur- trade ;  and  to  abridge  our  preten- 
sions to  the  fisheries?  Do  we  think  national  char- 
acter so  light  a  thing  as  to  be  willing  to  sacrifice  the 
public  faith  to  individual  animosity? 

Let  the  case  be  fairly  stated:  Great  Britain  and 
America,  two  independent  nations,  at  war.  The 
former  in  possession  of  considerable  posts  and  dis- 
tricts of  territory  belonging  to  the  latter,  and  also 
of  the  means  of  obstructing  certain  commercial  ad- 
vantages in  which  it  is  deeply  interested. 

But  it  is  not  imcommon  in  treaties  of  peace  for 
the  uti  possidetis  to  take  place.  Great  Britain,  how- 
ever, in  the  present  instance,  stipulates  to  restore 
all  our  posts  and  territories  in  her  possession.  She 
even  adds  an  extent  not  within  our  original  claims, 
more  than  a  compensation  for  a  small  part  ceded  in 
another  quarter.  She  agrees  to  readmit  us  to  a  par- 
ticipation in  the  fisheries.  What  equivalent  do  we 
give  for  this?  Congress  are  to  recommend  the  re- 
storation of  property  to  those  who  have  adhered  to 
her,  and  expressly  engage  that  no  future  injury  shall 
be  done  them  in  person,  liberty,  or  property.  This 
is  the  sole  condition,  on  our  part,  where  there  is  not 
an  immediate  reciprocity  (the  recovery  of  debts  and 


34^  Alexander  Hamilton 

liberation  of  prisoners  being  mutual,  the  former,  in- 
deed, only  declaring  what  the  rights  of  private  faith, 
which  all  civilized  nations  hold  sacred,  would  have 
declared  without  it),  and  stands  as  the  single  equiva- 
lent for  all  the  restitutions  and  concessions  to  be 
made  by  Great  Britain.  Will  it  be  honest  in  us  to 
violate  this  condition,  or  will  it  be  prudent  to  put 
it  in  competition  with  all  the  important  matters  to 
be  performed  on  the  other  side  ? 

Will  foreign  nations  be  willing  to  undertake  any 
thing  with  us,  or  for  us,  when  they  find  that  the 
nature  of  our  governments  will  allow  no  dependence 
to  be  placed  upon  our  engagements  ?  I  have  omitted 
saying  any  thing  of  the  impolicy  of  inducing  by  our 
severity  a  great  number  of  useful  citizens,  whose 
situations  do  not  make  them  a  proper  object  of 
resentment,  to  abandon  the  country  to  form  settle- 
ments that  will  hereafter  become  our  rivals,  ani- 
mated with  a  hatred  to  us  which  will  descend  to 
their  posterity.  Nothing,  however,  can  be  more  un- 
wise than  to  contribute,  as  we  are  doing,  to  people 
the  shores  and  wilderness  of  Nova  Scotia,  a  colony 
which,  by  its  position,  will  become  a  competitor  with 
us,  among  other  things,  in  that  branch  of  commerce 
on  which  our  navigation  and  navy  will  essentially 
depend; — I  mean  the  fisheries,  in  which  I  have  no 
doubt  the  State  of  New  York  will  hereafter  have  a 
considerable  share. 

To  your  Excellency  I  freely  deliver  my  sentiments, 
because  I  am  persuaded  you  cannot  be  a  stranger  to 
the  force  of  these  considerations.  I  fear  not  even  to 
hazard  them  to  the  justice  and  good  sense  of  those 


Private  Correspondence  349 

whom  I  have  the  honor  to  represent.  I  esteem  it  my 
duty  to  do  it,  because  the  question  is  important  to 
the  interests  of  the  State  in  its  relation  to  the  United 
States. 

Those  who  consult  only  their  passions  might 
choose  to  construe  what  I  say  as  too  favorable  to  a 
set  of  men  who  have  been  the  enemies  of  the  public 
liberty,  but  those  for  whose  esteem  I  am  most  con- 
cerned will  acquit  me  of  any  personal  consideration, 
and  will  perceive  that  I  only  urge  the  cause  of  na- 
tional honor,  safety,  and  advantage.  We  have  as- 
sumed an  independent  station ;  we  ought  to  feel  and 
to  act  in  a  manner  consistent  with  the  dignity  of 
that  station. 

I  anxiously  wish  to  see  every  prudent  measure 
taken  to  prevent  those  combinations  which  will  cer- 
tainly disgrace  us,  if  they  do  not  involve  us  in  other 
calamities.  Whatever  distinctions  are  judged  neces- 
sary to  be  made  in  the  cases  of  those  persons  who  have 
been  in  opposition  to  the  common  cause,  let  them  be 
made  by  legal  authority,  on  a  fair  construction  of  the 
treaty,  consistent  with  national  faith  and  national 
honor. 

'  P.  S. — Your  Excellency  will  have  been  informed 
that  Congress  have  instructed  General  Washington 
to  garrison  the  frontier  posts,  when  stirrendered, 
with  the  three  years'  Continental  troops.  This  is 
more  for  the  interest  of  the  State  than  to  have  them 
garrisoned  at  its  particular  expense,  and  I  should 
wish  that  permanent  provision  might  be  made  on 
the  same   principle.      I   wait   to  see  whether  any 

^  Thus  divided  in  original  in  State  Department. 


350  Alexander  Hamilton 

Continental  peace  establishment  for  garrisons,  etc., 
will  take  place,  before  I  engage  the  consent  of  Con- 
gress to  a  separate  provision. 

I  cannot  forbear  adding  a  word  on  the  subject  of 
money.  The  only  reliance  we  now  have  for  redeem- 
ing a  large  anticipation  on  the  public  credit,  already 
made  and  making  for  the  benefit  of  the  army,  is  on 
the  taxes  coming  in.  The  collection  hitherto  is  out 
of  all  proportion  to  the  demand.  It  is  of  vast  con- 
sequence at  this  jimcture  that  every  thing  possible 
should  be  done  to  forward  it.  I  forbear  entering 
into  details  which  would  be  very  striking  upon  this 
subject.  I  will  only  say  that  unless  there  is  a  seri- 
ous exertion  in  the  States,  public  credit  must  ere- 
long receive  another  shock  very  disagreeable  in  its 
consequences. 


TO   JOHN   DICKINSON  * 

1783. 

Sir: 

Having  always  entertained  an  esteem  for  you  per- 
sonally, I  could  not,  without  reluctance,  yield  to  im- 
pressions that  might  weaken  that  sentiment,  and  it 
is  with  pain  I  find  myself  drawn  by  circumstances 
to  animadvert  upon  the  late  message  from  the 
Executive  Council  to  the  Assembly  of  Pennsylvania 
relative  to  the  mutiny,  in  a  manner  which  may  seem 

^  In  the  edition  of  1850  this  letter  is  headed  "To  Reed, "presumably- 
intending  Joseph  Reed,  who  was  President  of  Pennsylvania  in  1781. 
The  original  in  the  State  Department  has  no  address.  The  mutiny  to 
which  this  refers  was  in  1783,  the  letter  is  dated  1783,  and  John  Dick- 
inson was  President  from  1782  to  1786.  It  seems  obvious  that  this 
letter  was  written  to  the  supreme  magistrate  of  Pennsylvania,  and  if 
so  it  must  have  been  to  Dickinson. 


Private  Correspondence  351 

to  impeach  the  candor  of  those  who  were  the  authors 
of  it. 

But  it  will  be  impossible  for  persons  who  have  read 
the  report  of  the  committee  and  the  message  of  the 
Council,  however  inclined  to  make  allowances  for 
the  force  of  involuntary  bias,  not  to  conclude  that 
on  one  side  or  the  other  the  facts  have  been  wilfully- 
discolored.  I  decline  any  attempt  to  set  the  public 
opinion  right  upon  this  subject,  because,  after  all 
that  can  be  said,  the  judgments  of  men  will  eventu- 
ally be  determined  by  personal  and  party  preposses- 
sions. So  far  as  I  am  concerned,  I  persuade  myself 
that  those  who  are  acquainted  with  me  will  place 
entire  confidence  in  my  fairness  and  veracity.  I 
doubt  not  your  Excellency's  friends  will  be  equally 
partial  to  you,  and  those  of  the  Council  to  them. 
But  though  I  should  despair  of  rectifying  or  fixing 
the  public  opinion  by  an  appeal  to  the  public,  and 
though  I  have  seen  too  much  of  the  ridicule  thrown 
upon  such  appeals  from  men  in  official  stations,  and 
of  the  ill  effect  they  have  had  upon  the  national 
character,  not  to  be  willing  to  sacrifice  the  desire  of 
justifying  myself  to  considerations  of  prudence  and 
propriety,  yet  I  cannot  forbear  indulging  my  feelings 
so  far  as  to  enter  into  a  few  explanations  with  your 
Excellency,  submitting  the  justness  of  them  to  the 
testimony  of  your  own  mind. 

As  this  is  a  mere  private  discussion,  I  address  my- 
self to  your  Excellency  in  particular;  and  the  rather, 
as,  from  the  style  and  manner  of  the  message,  I  take 
it  for  granted  you  had  the  principal  agency  in  it,  and 
I  shall  consider,  on  the  same  grounds,  the  notes  in 


352  Alexander  Hamilton 

'  paper  of  the %  as  a  comment  on  the  report 


of  the  committee  by  yourself,  in  aid  of  the  message. 

I  take  up  the  matter  individually,  because  I  mean 
to  treat  it  on  a  private  footing,  and  because,  though 
I  do  not  acknowledge  any  peculiar  responsibility,  it 
happened  to  be  my  lot,  as  chairman,  principally  to 
conduct  the  conferences  on  the  part  of  the  committee. 

I  regard  the  whole  of  this  business  as  a  most  un- 
fortunate one,  in  which,  probably,  none  of  the  actors 
will  acquire  great  credit.  I  deplore  it  as  tending  to 
interrupt  the  harmony  between  Congress  and  a  re- 
spectable, a  meritorious  member  of  the  Union.  Who 
were  right  or  who  were  wrong  is  a  question  of  less 
importance  than  how  mutual  irritations  may  be 
best  healed.  Whatever  revives  or  continues  the 
former,  is  to  be  regretted.  I  lament  to  be  under  an 
inducement  to  discuss  circumstances  that  relate  to 
it  in  the  remotest  degree.  Nothing  but  an  attack 
upon  the  ingenuousness  of  my  conduct  could  have 
called  me  to  it.  Its  prudence,  either  collectively  or 
individually,  would  patiently  have  been  consigned 
to  the  lash  of  censure  and  criticism,  merited  or 
immerited. 

Happily  in  the  present  case,  the  members  of  the 
committee  have  a  strong  ground,  from  which  they 
cannot  easily  be  forced.  Apprehensive  of  miscon- 
ception, I  will  not  say  of  misrepresentation,  they 
tried  to  render  it  impossible  by  written  communi- 
cations. The  presumption,  with  impartial  minds, 
cannot  fail  to  be  in  favor  of  that  side  which  gave 
so  decisive   a  proof  of  its   disposition  to  fairness 

*  These  blanks  are  in  the  manuscript. 


Private  Correspondence  353 

as  to  endeavor  to  put  it  out  of  its  own  power  to 
misrepresent. 

The  professed  scruples  of  the  Council  cannot  be 
admitted  to  have  any  weight.  Usage  and  the 
plainest  rules  of  propriety  will  dictate  that  it  never 
could  have  wounded  the  dignity  or  delicacy  of  the 
executive  of  any  State  to  have  given  to  a  committee 
of  Congress,  appointed  to  confer  on  a  subject  of 
moment,  a  written  answer  to  a  request  in  writing 
after  previous  explanations.  The  fact  stated  speaks 
for  itself.  The  consequences  show  that  the  precau- 
tion of  the  committee  was  well  judged,  and  that 
it  would  have  been  well  for  the  Council  to  have 
concurred. 

In  the  present  case  it  might  be  observed  that 
there  was,  in  the  first  instance,  a  written  application 
from  Congress  to  the  Council,  in  the  customary  form 
of  resolutions;  and  though  a  committee  was  au- 
thorized to  confer  and  explain,  a  formal  and  authen- 
tic answer  might  reasonably  have  been  expected  by 
Congress,  and,  when  desired  by  the  committee,  should 
have  been  understood  as  desired  on  their  behalf. 

There  is  an  awkwardness  in  reasoning  upon  self- 
evident  positions ;  but  as  the  Council  have,  by  their 
conduct  in  the  first  instance  and  by  their  message 
since,  put  forward  a  doubt  upon  the  subject,  and 
made  it  a  point  of  importance,  I  shall  be  excused  for 
examining  it  a  little  further.  On  what  could  the 
objection  of  the  Council  be  founded?  They  say  it 
had  been  unusual.  Admitting  the  fact,  was  the  mere 
novelty  of  the  thing  a  sufficient  reason  against  it? 
If  there  was  no  apparent  inconvenience  in  making 

VOL.  IX.— 23. 


354  Alexander  Hamilton 

a  new  precedent  ;  if,  on  the  contrary,  there  was  a 
manifest  convenience  in  it,  ought  not  such  a  punctiHo 
to  have  given  way  to  considerations  of  utility  ? 

Was  it  derogatory  to  the  dignity  of  the  Council? 
Surely,  if  they  communicate  in  writing  with  the 
executive  servants  of  Congress,  even  those  in  sub- 
ordinate stations,  as  is  the  practice  of  every  day,  and 
as  is  indispensable  to  the  prosecution  of  public  busi- 
ness, they  might,  at  less  expense  of  dignity,  pursue 
the  same  mode  with  a  part  of  that  body  itself. 

The  distinction  taken  by  the  Council  in  their 
message  to  the  Assembly,  respecting  the  responsi- 
bility of  such  executive  officers,  as  not  applicable  to 
a  committee,  if  it  amounts  to  any  thing,  proves  only 
this:  That  such  officers  ought  in  prudence  to  take 
greater  precautions  for  their  own  justification  than 
a  committee  of  Congress  need  to  do.  It  is  not  to  be 
inferred,  if  a  committee  of  Congress  acting  minis- 
terially think  it  expedient  to  use  circumspection, 
that  those  with  whom  they  are  transacting  business 
can  with  propriety  refuse  to  join  them  in  that  mode 
which  is  best  adapted  to  precision  and  certainty. 

But  indeed  the  ground  of  distinction  is  erroneous. 
A  committee  of  Congress  act  in  a  ministerial  capa- 
city, and  are  therefore  responsible  to  the  body  to 
which  they  belong,  as  well  as  the  servants  of  that 
body,  though  in  a  different  manner.  If  it  be  said 
that  they  do  not  act  ministerially,  but  stand  in  the 
place  of  Congress,  then  the  Council,  upon  their  own 
principles,  ought  to  have  complied  with  their  request. 

To  diminish  the  exceptionableness  of  their  refusal, 
it  is  true,  as  stated  by  the  Council,  that  though  they 


Private  Correspondence  355 

said  they  could  not  condescend  to  do  what  the  com- 
mittee had  asked,  yet  they  declared  themselves 
v^illing  to  grant  an  answer  in  writing  if  Congress 
should  request  it,  and  that  they  proposed  that  the 
committee  should  put  their  verbal  answer  in  writing, 
to  be  afterward  perused  and  examined  by  them. 

The  answer  of  the  committee,  as  I  doubt  not 
your  Excellency  will  recollect,  was,  as  to  the  first 
point,  that  Congress  in  all  probability  would  not 
make  the  request,  having  determined  (as  the  Council 
had  been  already  informed)  not  to  resume  their  de- 
liberations in  this  city  until  effective  measures  had 
been  taken  to  suppress  the  mutiny,  and  should  they 
assemble,  would  naturally  feel  a  delicacy  in  request- 
ing what  had  been  denied  to  their  committee.  And 
as  to  the  second  point,  that  the  Council  having 
judged  it  inexpedient  to  give  a  written  answer,  the 
committee  would  content  themselves  with  making 
the  most  accurate  report  in  their  power,  relying 
upon  the  confidence  of  the  body  to  which  they  be- 
longed and  upon  the  candor  of  the  Council. 

Your  Excellency  is  too  good  a  judge  of  human 
nature,  as  well  as  the  force  of  language,  not  to  have 
perceived  at  the  time  the  effect  which  the  refusal  of 
the  Council  had  upon  my  mind.  I  own  it  struck 
me  as  an  uncandid  reserve,  or  an  unbecoming  state- 
liness,  and  in  either  supposition  a  disrespect  to  the 
body  of  which  the  committee  were  members. 

Though  nothing  enters  less  into  my  temper  than 
an  inclination  to  fetter  business  by  punctilio,  after 
the  Council  had  discovered  such  overwhelming 
nicety  I  should  have  thought  it  a  degradation  to 


35 6  Alexander  Hamilton 

my  official  character  to  have  consented  to  their 
proposal. 

The  desire  of  self -justification  is  so  natural  that  I 
should  not  have  been  surprised  to  have  seen  the 
transactions  which  are  the  subject  of  the  Council's 
message  receive  a  coloring  favorable  to  their  pur- 
pose; but  I  did  not  expect  to  see  material  facts 
either  suppressed  or  denied. 

The  report  made  by  the  committee  on  the  first  in- 
terview with  the  Council  was,  I  acknowledge,  from 
memory,  and  therefore  I  admit  a  possibility  of  error ; 
but  so  far  as  my  memory  can  be  relied  on,  the  repre- 
sentation was  just.  And  I  am  certain  that  there  is 
a  mistake  in  the  insinuation  that  the  circumstance 
of  the  message  sent  to  Congress  by  the  Board  of  Ser- 
geants was  not  mentioned  at  all  to  the  Council,  for 
I  have  a  note  of  it,  taken  immediately  after  the  first 
conference  subsequent  to  the  mutiny.     The  affair, 

by  the  event  of ,  having  assumed  a  more  serious 

aspect,  I  kept  a  regular  minute  of  the  proceedings, 
a  summary  of  which  made  up  our  report  to  Congress, 
and  which  I  shall  annex  at  large  to  this  letter  for 
your  Excellency's  perusal. 

The  message  entirely  omits  the  declaration  of  the 

Council  that  ' ;    and  the  note  says  that  the 

Council  only  declared:  ''That  they  could  not  be 
sure  that  such  another  insult  would  produce  those 
exertions."*     The   difference  in  this  article  is   of 

'  This  blank  is  in  the  manuscript. 

2  "The  words,  as  reported  by  the  committee  to  Congress,  were :  'It,* 
i.  e.,  the  arming  of  the  citizens  to  suppress  the  mutineers,  'was  not  to 
be  expected,  merely  from  a  repetition  of  the  insult  which  had  hap- 
pened.' " — Note  by  Col.  Pickering. 


Private  Correspondence  357 

great  importance.  The  declaration  made  so  deep 
an  impression  at  the  time  that  almost  the  precise 
words  remained  in  my  memory.  They  were  twice 
repeated,  as  well  when  we  saw  your  Excellency  alone 
in  your  own  house  in  the  morning,  as  when  you  de- 
livered to  us  in  the  Council-chamber  the  determina- 
tion of  the  Council. 

Mr.  Ellsworth  '  in  half  an  hour  afterwards  re- 
peated them  to  several  members  of  Congress  assem- 
bled at  the  President's  house,  and  in  a  few  hours 
from  that  time  I  committed  them  to  writing.  I 
cannot  suppose  your  Excellency's  recollection  fails 
you  in  this  particular,  and  I  must  pointedly  appeal 
to  your  candor. 

To  show  the  inaccuracy  with  which  the  report  of 
the  committee  was  composed,  it  is  observed  in  the 
notes  with  respect  to  that  part  which  relates  to  the 
commission  given  by  the  mutineers  to  the  officers 
whom  they  had  chosen  to  represent  them,  that  only 
two  hours  had  intervened  between  that  event  and 
the  conference  with  the  Council,  and  that  it  was  very 
improbable  the  knowledge  of  it  could  have  so  early 
reached  the  committee.  It  is  added  that  none  of 
the  Council  remembers  to  have  heard  a  single  sylla- 
ble respecting  it  during  the  whole  conference. 

As  to  the  argument  drawn  from  the  short  interval 
between  the  delivery  of  the  commission  and  the  con- 
ference, it  will  be  sufficient  to  say  that  the  committee 
held  a  constant  communication  with  General  St. 
Clair,  and  that  he  kept  a  vigilant  eye  upon  all  the 
motions  of  the  mutineers;    that  his  access  to  them 

'  "Mr.  Ellsworth  was  the  other  member  of  the  committee.  — T.  P." 


35^  Alexander  Hamilton 

was  easy;  that  the  fact  in  question  was  a  matter  of 
immediate  notoriety ;  that  two  hours  were  abundant 
time  for  a  thing  of  that  nature  to  be  conveyed  from 
the  barracks  to  General  St.  Clair's  quarters;  and 
that  one  of  the  committee  had  actually  seen  and 
obtained  the  intelligence  from  him  a  little  time  be- 
fore the  interview  with  the  Council  commenced. 

It  is  much  more  extraordinary  that  the  Council 
should  have  been  apprised  of  it  so  late,  than  that 
the  committee  should  have  known  it  so  early.  As 
to  the  memory  of  the  Council,  it  is  unfortunate  it 
should  have  been  so  fallible  as  it  is  said  to  have  been ; 
but  I  would  rather  suppose  "in  the  quick  succession 
of  circumstances"  the  matter  had  escaped  their  re- 
collection, than  that  my  minutes  as  well  as  my  mem- 
ory should  have  deceived  me.  I  well  recollect  also 
that  your  Excellency,  when  it  was  mentioned,  ac- 
knowledged that  it  rather  contradicted  the  pacific 
appearance  which  the  conduct  of  the  troops  in  other 
respects  wore. 

These  are  the  essential  differences  in  point  of  fact 
between  the  report  of  the  committee  and  the  message 
of  the  Council;  the  whole  complexion,  indeed,  of  the 
one  materially  varies  from  the  other;  but  the  most 
common  observer  must  have  noticed  how  different 
an  aspect  the  same  facts  will  bear  differently  dressed 
and  arranged.  It  was  to  avoid  this  we  proposed  to 
reduce  them  to  writing,  but  as  this  has  not  been 
done,  spectators  must  judge,  from  the  situation  of 
the  parties  and  the  course  of  the  transactions,  which 
side  has  given  the  justest  relation. 

I  cannot,  however,  forbear  remarking  that  I  see 


Private  Correspondence  359 

expressions  of  civility  on  the  part  of  the  committee, 
making  a  figure  in  the  message  very  different  from 
their  genuine  intention,  being  introduced  in  a  man- 
ner that  gives  them  the  air  of  concessions  in  favor  of 
the  conduct  of  the  Council.  Your  Excellency  will 
certainly  recollect  that  the  committee  v^ere  very 
remote  from  a  concurrence  in  sentiment  with  the 
Council ;  and,  though  they  did  not  presume  to  judge 
of  the  disposition  of  the  citizens,  strongly  urged  the 
expedience  and  necessity  of  calling  out  the  mihtia, 
and  facility  of  employing  them  with  success  against 
an  unofficered  and  disorderly  body  of  mutinous  sol- 
diers. It  is  true  also  that  they  acknowledged  the 
candor  with  which  the  Council  exposed  to  them 
what  they  deemed  the  temper  of  their  citizens  and 
their  own  difficulties  and  embarrassments,  which 
were,  no  doubt,  delineated  with  great  energy  of  lan- 
guage and  display  of  circumstances,  but  they  cer- 
tainly never  admitted  the  candor  of  refusing  an 
answer  in  writing,  which  was  a  part  of  the  business 
transacted  with  the  Council;  nor  did  they  withdraw 
without  giving  an  intelligible  intimation  of  their 
sense  of  this  proceeding. 

I  was  also  surprised  to  see  any  part  of  the  private 
and  confidential  conversation  I  had  with  your  Ex- 
cellency ushered  into  the  message  from  the  Council, 
and  moulded  into  such  a  shape  as  to  imply,  by  an 
obvious  construction,  an  approbation  of  their  reasons. 
Your  Excellency  will  admit  the  following  state  of 
this  transaction  to  be  a  just  one. 

I  waited  upon  the  Council  to  correct  a  piece  of  in- 
formation I  had  given  them  respecting  ammunition, 


3^0  Alexander  Hamilton 

but  even  this  is  misstated,  as  will  be  seen  by  my 
minutes.  Having  done  this,  my  official  business 
ended,  when  I  was  taken  aside  by  your  Excellency, 
and  a  conversation  passed  in  declared  confidence. 
You  informed  me  that  a  meeting  of  the  militia 
officers  was  then  holding,  and  in  consultation  with 
the  Council  about  eventual  measures  (in  conse- 
quence, as  I  conjectured,  of  a  communication  to  you 
the  preceding  evening  from  the  delegates  of  the 
State,  of  the  intention  of  Congress  to  remove  from 
the  city  in  case  they  did  not  receive  satisfactory 
assurances  of  support).  You  added  that  you  hoped 
nothing  would  be  precipitated,  but  that  proper  al- 
lowance would  be  made  for  the  situation  of  the 
Coimcil. 

I  understood  your  observations  with  reference  to 
the  departure  of  Congress,  and  replied  to  this  effect: 
That  I  viewed  the  departure  of  Congress  as  a  delicate 
measure,  including  consequences  important  to  the 
national  character  abroad,  and  critical  with  respect 
to  the  State  of  Pennsylvania,  and,  in  particular,  the 
city  of  Philadelphia;  that  the  triumph  of  a  handful 
of  mutinous  soldiers,  permitted  in  a  place  which  is 
considered  as  the  capital  of  America,  to  surround 
and,  in  fact,  imprison  Congress,  without  the  least 
effort  on  the  part  of  the  citizens  to  uphold  their  dig- 
nity and  authority,  so  as  to  oblige  them  to  remove 
from  the  place  which  had  been  their  residence  during 
the  Revolution,  would,  it  was  to  be  feared,  be  viewed 
at  a  distance  as  a  general  disaffection  of  the  citizens 
to  the  Federal  Government,  might  discredit  its  ne- 
gotiations, and  affect  the  national  interests ;  that  at 


Private  Correspondence  361 

home  it  might  give  a  deep  wound  to  the  reputation 
of  Pennsylvania,  might  draw  upon  it  the  resentments 
of  the  other  States,  and  sow  discord  between  Con- 
gress and  the  State;  that  the  removal  of  Congress 
would  probably  bring  the  affair  to  a  crisis,  and,  by 
convincing  the  mutineers  that  extremities  were  in- 
tended, would  either  intimidate  them  into  a  sub- 
mission, or  determine  them  to  immediate  excesses; 
that,  impressed  with  these  considerations,  and  still 
hoping,  notwithstanding  some  appearances  to  the 
contrary,  that  the  mutineers  might  be  sincere  in 
their  professions  of  submission,  or  that  the  Council, 
on  further  examination,  would  find  it  in  their  power 
to  act  with  vigor,  I  had  declined  giving  my  assent  to 
a  report  in  writing,  which  would  necessarily  be  fol- 
lowed by  the  departure  of  Congress ;  that  though  the 
committee  had  no  discretion  by  the  powers  under 
which  they  acted,  but  were  bound,  by  the  tenor  of 
their  instructions,  the  moment  they  did  not  receive 
''satisfactory  assurances  of  prompt  and  adequate 
exertions  on  the  part  of  the  State  for  supporting  the 
public  authority,"  to  advise  the  adjournment  of 
Congress  to  Trenton  or  Princeton,  and  I  therefore 
considered  the  delay  of  this  advice  as  at  their  ex- 
treme peril;  yet,  as  to  myself,  I  should  persist  in  it 
till  the  result  of  the  present  consultation  with  the 
militia  officers,  or  till  some  new  circumstance  should 
turn  up  to  explain  the  designs  of  the  mutineers ;  and 
in  pursuing  this  line  of  conduct  I  should  counteract 
the  sense  of  some  gentlemen  whose  feelings  upon  the 
occasion  were  keen,  and  the  opinions  of  others  who 
thought  the  situation  of  Congress,  under  the  existing 


362  Alexander  Hamilton 

circumstances,  extremely  awkward,  precarious,  and 
unjustifiable  to  their  constituents. 

Your  Excellency  approved  my  intention,  wished 
for  time,  and  promised  if  any  new  resolution  should 
be  taken  to  give  me  immediate  notice  of  it. 

The  meeting  of  the  militia  officers  dissolved;  I 
heard  nothing  from  your  Excellency.  General  St. 
Clair,  about  two  in  the  afternoon,  informed  the  com- 
mittee that  the  officers  appointed  by  the  soldiers  to 
manage  their  business  had,  in  the  first  instance,  re- 
fused to  give  him  an  account  of  their  transactions, 
the  which  was  only  extracted  from  them  by  a  per- 
emptory demand.  He  mentioned  to  us  the  instruc- 
tions they  had  received  from  the  soldiers,  which 
contained  faint  and  affected  concessions,  mixed  with 
new  and  inadmissible  demands. 

The  whole  affair  wore  the  complexion  of  collusion 
between  the  officers  of  the  committee  and  the  sol- 
diery, and  of  a  mere  amusement  on  their  part  until 
they  could  gain  fresh  strength  and  execute  their  pro- 
ject, whatever  it  might  be,  with  greater  advantage. 

This  behavior  of  the  officers  gave  the  affair  a  new 
and  more  serious  aspect,  and  overcame  my  opposi- 
tion to  the  report.  Mr.  Peters,  on  hearing  the  rela- 
tion of  General  St.  Clair,  declared  at  once  that  he 
thought  the  committee  had  then  no  alternative;  at 
least,  what  he  said  was  understood  in  this  sense  by 
General  St.  Clair,  Mr.  Ellsworth,  and  myself.  If  I 
am  not  much  mistaken.  General  St.  Clair  also  ex- 
pressed his  opinion  that  Congress  were  unsafe  in  the 
city. 

The  ideas  I  suggested  to  your  Excellency,  in  the 


Private  Correspondence  363 

conversation  I  have  mentioned,  were  substantially 
expressed  to  several  members  of  Congress  as  the 
motives  of  my  delay,  and  particularly,  I  recollect,  to 
Mr.  Madison,  with  these  observations  in  addition: 
That  though  I  was  fully  convinced  Congress,  imder 
an  immediate  view  of  circumstances,  would  in 
reality  be  justified  in  withdrawing  from  a  place 
where  such  an  outrage  to  government  had  been  with 
impunity  perpetrated  by  a  body  of  armed  mutineers, 
still,  for  several  days,  in  complete  command  of  the 
city,  and  where  either  the  feebleness  of  public  coun- 
cils or  the  indisposition  of  the  citizens  afforded  no 
assurance  of  protection  and  support,  yet,  as  the 
opinions  of  men  would  be  governed  by  events,  and 
as  the  most  probable  event  was  that  the  removal  of 
Congress,  announcing  decisive  measures  of  coercion 
to  the  soldiery,  would  awe  them  into  submission, 
there  was  great  danger  that  the  reputation  of  Con- 
gress would  suffer  by  the  easy  termination  of  the 
business,  and  that  they  would  be  accused  of  levity, 
timidity,  or  rashness. 

Though  not  within  the  scope  of  my  original  in- 
tention, I  will  indulge  in  a  few  additional  reflections 
on  this  subject.  I  am  sensible  that  the  Council,  in 
some  respects,  stand  upon  advantageous  ground  in 
this  discussion.  Congress  left  the  city  because  they 
had  no  forces  at  hand,  no  jurisdiction  over  the 
militia,  and  no  assurances  of  effectual  support  from 
those  who  had.  The  Council,  as  the  executive  of  the 
State,  were  necessitated  to  remain  on  the  spot.  Soon 
after  Congress  removed,  the  mutineers  were  deserted 
by  their  leaders  and  surrendered  at  discretion. 


364  Alexander  Hamilton 

The  multitude  will  be  very  apt  to  conclude  that 
the  affair  was  of  trifling  consequence;  that  it  van- 
ished iinder  its  own  insignificance;  that  Congress 
took  up  the  matter  in  too  high  a  tone  of  authority; 
that  they  discovered  a  prudish  nicety  and  irritability 
about  their  own  dignity ;  that  the  Council  were  more 
temperate,  more  humane,  and  possessed  of  greater 
foresight. 

The  bias  in  favor  of  an  injured  army,  the  propen- 
sity of  the  human  mind  to  lean  to  the  speciousness 
of  professed  humanity  rather  than  to  the  necessary 
harshness  of  authority,  the  vague  and  imperfect 
notions  of  what  is  due  to  public  authority  in  an 
infant  popular  government,  and  the  insinuating 
plausibility  of  a  well-constructed  message,  will  all 
contribute  to  that  conclusion. 

But  let  us  suppose  an  impartial  man  of  sense,  well 
acquainted  with  facts,  to  form  an  argument  upon 
the  subject.  It  appears  to  me  he  might  naturally 
fall  into  this  train  of  combination. 

It  is  a  well-known  fact  that,  from  the  necessities 
of  the  war,  or  the  delinquencies  of  the  several  States, 
Congress  were  not  enabled  to  comply  with  their  en- 
gagements to  the  army,  which,  after  a  glorious  and 
successful  struggle  for  their  country,  much  suffering, 
exemplary  patience,  and  signal  desert,  they  were 
compelled,  by  the  irresistible  dictates  of  an  empty 
treasury  and  a  ruined  credit,  to  disband,  after  hav- 
ing given  strong  indications  of  their  discontent  and 
resentment  of  the  public  neglect.  A  large  part  of 
the  army  suffer  themselves  to  be  patiently  dismissed ; 
a  particular  corps  of  four  or  five  hundred  men,  sta- 


Private  Correspondence  365 

tioned  in  the  place  where  Congress  reside,  refuse 
to  accept  their  discharges  but  on  certain  specified 
conditions. 

They  even  go  further,  and,  stimulated  by  their  in- 
juries, or  encouraged  and  misled  by  designing  per- 
sons, are  emboldened  to  send  a  threatening  message 
to  Congress,  declaring  to  them  that  unless  they 
would  do  them  justice  immediately  they  would  find 
means  of  redress  for  themselves.  Measures  are  in- 
directly taken  to  appease  this  disorder  and  give  the 
discontented  soldiers  as  much  satisfaction  as  the 
situation  of  things  will  permit.  Shortly  after,  ac- 
counts  are   received   that   another   corps,    at  

miles'  distance,  have  also  mutinied,  and  that  a  part 
of  them,  to  the  number  of  about  eighty  men,  are  on 
their  march  to  join  those  who  had  already  discovered 
so  refractory  a  disposition.  A  committee  of  Con- 
gress is  immediately  appointed  to  confer  with  the 
executive  of  the  State  on  the  measures  proper  to  be 
pursued  in  this  exigency.  That  committee  in  the 
first  instance  suggest  to  the  Council  the  expedience 
of  calling  out  a  body  of  militia  to  intercept  the  de- 
tachment of  mutineers  on  its  march  and  represent 
the  danger  of  the  progress  of  the  spirit  of  mutiny 
and  of  future  outrages  should  those  on  their  march 
be  suffered  without  molestation,  to  join  a  more  nu- 
merous corps  in  the  same  temper  with  themselves. 

The  Council  urge  a  variety  of  difficulties:  the 
shortness  of  the  time  to  collect  the  militia  before 
the  mutineers  would  arrive,  the  reluctance  with 
which  the  citizens  would  obey  a  call  against  men 
whom  they  consider  as  meritorious,   and  injured, 


366  Alexander  Hamilton 

and  the  like.  The  committee  perceiving  the  un- 
willingness of  the  Council  to  employ  the  militia, 
desist  from  pressing,  and  recur  to  expedients.  The 
day  after,  the  mutineers  march  in  triumph  into  the 
city,  and  unite  themselves  with  those  who  are  al- 
ready there;  and  the  following  day,  the  whole  body 
assemble  in  arms,  throw  off  all  obedience  to  their 
officers,  and,  in  open  defiance  of  government,  march 
to  the  place  which  is  the  usual  seat  of  Congress  and 
the  Council  of  the  State,  while  both  are  actually 
sitting;  surround  it  with  guards,  and  send  a  message 
to  the  Council,  demanding  authority  to  appoint, 
themselves,  officers  to  command  them,  with  abso- 
lute discretion  to  take  such  measures  as  those  officers 
should  think  proper  to  redress  their  grievances,  ac- 
companied with  a  threat  that,  if  there  was  not 
a  compliance  in  twenty  minutes,  they  would  let  in 
an  injured  soldiery  upon  them,  and  abide  the 
consequence. 

The  members  of  Congress  who  were  at  the  time 
assembled,  request  General  St.  Clair,  who  happened 
to  be  present,  to  take  such  measures  as  he  should 
judge  expedient,  without  committing  the  honor  of 
government,  to  divert  the  storm,  and  induce  the 
troops  to  return  to  their  quarters  without  perpetrat- 
ing acts  of  violence.  General  St.  Clair,  in  concert 
with  the  Council,  grants  the  mutineers  permission 
to  elect,  out  of  officers  then  or  formerly  in  com- 
mission, such  as  they  should  confide  in,  to  repre- 
sent their  grievances  to  the  Council,  with  a  promise 
that  the  Council  would  confer  with  the  persons 
elected   for   that   piirpose.     Having   obtained   this 


Private  Correspondence  367 

promise,  the  mutineers  return  to  their  quarters,  in 
military  parade,  and  continue  in  open  defiance  of 
government. 

The  concession  made  was  a  happy  compromise 
between  an  attention  to  dignity  and  a  prudent  re- 
gard to  safety. 

Men  who  had  dared  to  carry  their  insolence  to 
such  an  extreme,  and  who  saw  no  opposition  to  their 
outrages,  were  not  to  be  expected  to  retreat  without 
an  appearance,  at  least,  of  gratifying  their  demands. 
The  slightest  accident  were  sufficient  to  prompt  men 
in  such  a  temper  and  situation  to  tragical  excesses. 

But  however  it  might  become  the  delicacy  of  gov- 
ernment not  to  depart  from  the  promise  it  had  given, 
it  was  its  duty  to  provide  effectually  against  a  re- 
petition of  such  outrages,  and  to  put  itself  in  a  situa- 
tion to  give,  instead  of  receiving,  the  law,  and  to 
manifest  that  its  compliance  was  not  the  effect  of 
necessity,  but  of  choice. 

This  was  not  to  be  considered  as  the  disorderly 
riot  of  an  unarmed  mob,  but  as  the  deliberate  mutiny 
of  an  incensed  soldiery,  carried  to  the  utmost  point 
of  outrage  short  of  assassination.  The  licentious- 
ness of  an  army  is  to  be  dreaded  in  every  govern- 
ment, but  in  a  republic  it  is  more  particularly  to  be 
restrained;  and  when  directed  against  the  civil  au- 
thority, to  be  checked  with  energy  and  punished 
with  severity.  The  merits  and  sufferings  of  the 
troops  might  be  a  proper  motive  for  mitigating 
punishment,  when  it  was  in  the  power  of  the  gov- 
ernment to  inflict  it ;  but  it  was  no  reason  for  relax- 
ing in  the  measures  necessary  to  put  itself  in  that 


368  Alexander  Hamilton 

situation.     Its  authority  was  first  to  be  vindicated, 
and  then  its  clemency  to  be  displayed. 

The  rights  of  government  are  as  essential  to  be 
defended  as  the  rights  of  individuals.  The  security 
of  the  one  is  inseparable  from  that  of  the  other. 
And,  indeed,  in  every  new  government,  especially  of 
the  popular  kind,  the  great  danger  is  that  public 
authority  will  not  be  siifficiently  respected. 

But  upon  this  occasion  there  were  more  particular 
reasons  for  decision. 

Congress  knew  there  were  within  two  or  three 
days'  march  of  the  city  a  more  considerable  body  of 
the  same  corps,  part  of  which  had  mutinied  and 
come  to  town,  and  had  been  the  chief  actors  in  the 
late  disorder;  that  those  men  had  with  difficulty 
been  kept,  by  the  exertions  of  their  officers,  from 
joining  the  insurgents  in  the  first  instance;  that 
there  was  another  corps  in  their  neighborhood 
which,  a  little  time  before,  had  also  discovered  symp- 
toms of  mutiny;  that  a  considerable  part  of  the 
same  line  which  were  in  mutiny  in  town  was  every 
moment  expected  to  arrive  from  the  southward,  and 
there  was  the  greatest  reason  to  conclude  would  be 
infected  with  the  same  spirit  on  their  arrival,  as  had 
presently  happened  in  the  case  of  a  small  detach- 
ment which  had  joined  a  few  days  before;  that  there 
were  besides  large  numbers  of  disbanded  soldiers 
scattered  through  the  country,  in  want,  and  who 
had  not  yet  had  time  to  settle  down  to  any  occupa- 
tion, and  exchange  their  military  for  private  habits; 
that  some  of  these  were  really  coming  in  and  add- 
ing themselves  to  the  revolters;   that  an  extensive 


Private  Correspondence  369 

accession  of  strength  might  be  gained  from  these 
different  quarters,  and  that  there  were  all  the  S3^mpa- 
thies  of  like  common  wrongs,  distresses,  and  resent- 
ments to  bring  them  together  and  to  unite  them  in 
one  cause.  The  partial  success  of  those  who  had 
already  made  an  experiment  would  be  a  strong  en- 
couragement to  others,  the  rather  as  the  whole  line 
had  formerly  mutinied,  not  only  with  impunity,  but 
with  advantage  to  themselves. 

In  this  state  of  things,  decision  was  most  compat- 
ible with  the  safety  of  the  community,  as  well  as 
the  dignity  of  government.  Though  no  general 
convulsion  might  be  to  be  apprehended,  serious  mis- 
chiefs might  attend  the  progress  of  the  disorder. 
Indeed  it  would  have  been  meanness  to  have  nego- 
tiated and  temporized  with  an  armed  banditti  of 
four  or  five  hundred  men,  who,  in  any  other  situa- 
tion than  surrounding  a  defenceless  senate,  could 
only  become  formidable  by  being  feared.  This  was 
not  an  insurrection  of  a  whole  people ;  it  was  not  an 
army,  with  their  officers  at  their  head,  demanding  the 
justice  of  their  country — either  of  which  might  have 
made  caution  and  concession  respectable ;  it  was  a 
handful  of  mutinous  soldiers,  who  had  equally  violated 
the  laws  of  discipline  and  rights  of  public  authority. 

Congress  therefore  wisely  resolve  that  '*  it  is  neces- 
sary that  effectual  measures  be  immediately  taken 
for  supporting  the  public  authority,"  and  call  upon 
the  State  in  which  they  reside  for  assistance  of  its 
militia,  at  the  same  time  that  they  send  orders  for 
the  march  of  a  body  of  regular  forces  as  an  eventual 
resource. 

VOL.  IX.— 24. 


370  Alexander  Hamilton 

There  was  a  propriety  in  calling  for  the  aid  of  the 
militia,  in  the  first  place,  for  different  reasons.  Civil 
government  may  always,  with  more  peculiar  pro- 
priety, resort  to  the  aid  of  the  citizens  to  repel  mili- 
tary insults  or  encroachments. 

'T  is  there,  it  ought  to  be  supposed,  where  it  may 
seek  its  surest  dependence,  especially  in  a  democ- 
racy which  is  the  creature  of  the  people.  The  citi- 
zens of  each  State  are,  in  an  aggregate  light,  the 
citizens  of  the  United  States,  and  bound  as  much  to 
support  the  representatives  of  the  whole  as  their 
own  immediate  representatives.  The  insult  was  not 
to  Congress  personally;  it  was  to  the  government, 
to  public  authority  in  general,  and  was  very  properly 
put  upon  that  footing.  The  regular  forces  which 
Congress  cotild  command  were  at  a  great  distance, 
and  could  not,  but  in  a  length  of  time,  be  brought  to 
effectuate  their  purpose.  The  disorder  continued  to 
exist  on  the  spot  where  they  were,  was  likely  to  in- 
crease by  delay,  and  might  be  productive  of  sudden 
and  mischievous  effects  by  being  neglected. 

The  city  and  the  bank  were  in  immediate  danger 
of  being  rifled,  and  perhaps  of  suffering  other  calami- 
ties. The  citizens,  therefore,  were  the  proper  per- 
sons to  make  the  first  exertion. 

The  objection  that  these  were  not  the  objects  of 
the  care  of  Congress,  can  only  serve  to  mislead  the 
vulgar.  The  peace  and  safety  of  the  place  which 
was  the  immediate  residence  of  Congress,  endan- 
gered, too,  by  the  troops  of  the  United  States,  demanded 
their  interposition.  The  President  of  the  State  of 
Pennsylvania  was  himself  of  this  opinion,  having 


Private  Correspondence  37 1 

declared  to  a  member  of  that  body,  that,  as  their 
troops  were  the  offenders,  it  was  proper  for  them  to 
declare  the  necessity  of  calling  out  the  militia,  as  a 
previous  step  to  its  being  done. 

Nor  is  there  more  weight  in  the  supposition  that 
the  danger  was  inconsiderable,  and  that,  from  the 
pacific  appearances  of  the  troops,  it  was  to  be  ex- 
pected the  disorder  would  subside  of  itself.  The 
facts  were,  that  the  troops  still  continued  in  a  state 
of  mutiny,  had  made  no  submissions  nor  offered  any, 
and  that  they  effected  to  negotiate  with  their  arms 
in  their  hands. 

A  band  of  mutinous  soldiers  in  such  a  situation, 
uncontrolled,  and  elated  with  their  own  power,  was 
not  to  be  trusted. 

The  most  sudden  vicissitudes  and  contradictory 
changes  were  to  be  expected,  and  a  fit  of  intoxica- 
tion was  sufficient  at  any  moment,  with  men  who 
had  already  gone  such  length,  to  make  the  city  a 
scene  of  plunder  and  massacre.  It  was  the  height 
of  rashness  to  leave  the  city  exposed  to  the  bare 
possibility  of  such  mischiefs. 

The  only  question,  in  this  view,  is,  whether  there 
was  greater  danger  to  the  city  in  attempting  their 
reduction  by  force,  than  in  endeavoring  by  pallia- 
tives to  bring  them  to  a  sense  of  duty?  It  has  been 
urged,  and  appeared  to  have  operated  strongly  upon 
the  minds  of  the  Council,'  that  the  soldiers  being 
already  embodied,  accustomed  to  arms,  and  ready 

I  Your  Excellency  will  recollect  that  in  our  private  conversation  you 
urged  this  consideration,  and  appealed  to  my  military  experience,  and 
that  I  made  substantially  the  observations  which  follow. 


372  Alexander  Hamilton 

to  act  at  a  moment's  warning,  it  would  be  extremely 
hazardous  to  attempt  to  collect  the  citizens  to  sub- 
due them,  as  the  mutineers  might  have  taken  advan- 
tage of  the  first  confusion  incident  to  the  measure 
to  do  a  great  deal  of  mischief  before  this  militia 
could  have  assembled  in  equal  or  superior  force. 

It  is  not  to  be  denied  that  a  small  body  of  disci- 
plined troops,  headed  and  lead  by  their  officers,  with 
a  plan  of  conduct,  could  have  effected  a  great  deal 
in  similar  circumstances;  but  it  is  equally  certain 
that  nothing  can  be  more  contemptible  than  a  body 
of  men  used  to  be  commanded  and  to  obey,  when 
deprived  of  the  example  and  direction  of  their 
officers.  They  are  infinitely  less  to  be  dreaded  than 
an  equal  number  of  men  who  have  never  been 
broken  to  command,  nor  exchanged  their  natural 
courage  for  that  artificial  kind  which  is  the  effect  of 
discipline  and  habit.  Soldiers  transfer  their  con- 
fidence from  themselves  to  their  officers,  face  danger 
by  the  force  of  example,  the  dread  of  pimishment, 
and  the  sense  of  necessity.  Take  away  these  induce- 
ments and  leave  them  to  themselves,  they  are  no 
longer  resolute  than  till  they  are  opposed. 

In  the  present  case  it  was  to  be  relied  upon  that 
the  appearance  of  opposition  would  instantly  bring 
the  mutineers  to  a  sense  of  their  insignificance  and 
to  submission.  Conscious  of  their  weakness  from 
the  smallness  of  their  numbers,  in  a  populous  city 
and  in  the  midst  of  a  populous  country,  awed  by 
the  consequences  of  resisting  government  by  arms, 
and  confounded  by  the  want  of  proper  leaders  and 
proper  direction,  the  common  soldiers  would  have 


Private  Correspondence  373 

thought  of  nothing  but  making  their  peace  by  the 
sacrifice  of  those  who  had  been  the  authors  of  their 
misconduct. 

The  idea,  therefore,  of  coercion  was  the  safest  and 
most  prudent,  for  more  was  to  be  apprehended  from 
leaving  them  to  their  own  passions  than  from  at- 
tempting to  control  them  by  force.  It  will  be  seen, 
by  and  by,  how  far  the  events,  justly  appreciated, 
correspond  with  this  reasoning. 

Congress  were  not  only  right  in  adopting  measures 
of  coercion,  but  they  were  also  right  in  resolving  to 
change  their  situation  if  proper  exertions  were  not 
made  by  the  particular  government  and  citizens  of 
the  place  where  they  resided.  The  want  of  such 
exertions  would  evince  some  defect,  no  matter  where, 
that  would  prove  they  ought  to  have  no  confidence 
in  their  situation.  They  were,  to  all  intents  and 
purposes,  in  the  power  of  a  lawless,  armed  banditti, 
enraged,  whether  justly  or  not,  against  them.  How- 
ever they  might  have  had  a  right  to  expose  their  own 
persons  to  insult  and  outrage,  they  had  no  right  to 
expose  the  character  of  representatives,  or  the  dig- 
nity of  the  States  they  represented,  or  of  the  Union. 
It  was  plain  they  could  not  with  propriety,  in  such 
a  state  of  things,  proceed  in  their  deliberations  where 
they  were,  and  it  was  right  they  should  repair  to  a 
place  where  they  could  do  it.  It  was  far  from  im- 
possible that  the  mutineers  might  have  been  in- 
duced to  seize  their  persons  as  hostages  for  their  own 
security,  as  well  as  with  a  hope  of  extorting  conces- 
sions. Had  such  an  event  taken  place  the  whole 
country  would  have  exclaimed:   Why  did  not  Con- 


374  Alexander  Hamilton 

gress  withdraw  from  a  place  where  they  found  they 
could  not  be  assured  of  support ;  where  the  govern- 
ment was  so  feeble,  or  the  citizens  so  indisposed,  as 
to  suffer  three  or  four  hundred  mutinous  soldiers  to 
violate,  with  impunity,  the  authority  of  the  United 
States  and  of  their  own  State? 

When  they  resolved  to  depart,  on  the  want  of  ade- 
quate exertions,  they  had  reason  to  doubt  their 
being  made,  from  the  disinclination  shown  by  the 
Council  to  call  out  the  militia  in  the  first  instance; 
and  when  they  did  actually  depart  they  were  in- 
formed by  the  Council  that  the  efforts  of  the  citizens 
were  not  to  be  looked  for,  even  from  a  repetition  of 
the  outrage  which  had  already  happened,  and  it  was 
to  be  doubted  what  measure  of  outrage  would  pro- 
duce them.  They  had  also  convincing  proof  that 
the  mutiny  was  more  serious  than  it  had  even  at 
first  appeared,  by  the  participation  of  some  of  the 
officers. 

To  throw  the  blame  of  harshness  and  precipitancy 
upon  Congress,  it  is  said  that  their  dignity  was  only 
accidentally  and  undesignedly  offended.  Much  stress 
has  been  laid  upon  the  message  from  the  soldiery 
being  directed  to  the  Council,  and  not  to  them.  All 
this,  however,  is  very  immaterial  to  the  real  merits 
of  the  question.  Whatever  might  have  been  the 
first  intention  of  the  mutineers  in  this  particular  act, 
whether  it  proceeded  from  artifice  or  confusion  of 
ideas,  the  indignity  to  Congress  was  the  same.  They 
knew  that  Congress  customarily  held  their  delibera- 
tions at  the  State  House ;  and  if  it  even  be  admitted 
that  they  knew  Saturday  to  be  a  day  of  usual  recess, 


Private  Correspondence  375 

which,  perhaps,  is  not  altogether  probable,  when 
they  came  to  the  place  they  saw  and  knew  Congress 
to  be  assembled  there.  They  did  not  desist  in  con- 
sequence of  this,  but  proceeded  to  station  their 
guards  and  execute  their  purposes.  Members  of  Con- 
gress went  out  to  them,  remonstrated  with  them, 
represented  the  danger  of  their  proceedings  to  them- 
selves, and  desired  them  to  withdraw ;  but  they  per- 
sisted till  they  obtained  what  they  supposed  a  part 
of  their  object.  A  majority  of  the  same  persons  had, 
some  days  before,  sent  a  message,  almost  equally 
exceptionable,  to  Congress;  and  at  the  time  they 
scarcely  spoke  of  any  other  body  than  Congress,  who, 
indeed,  may  naturally  be  supposed  to  have  been 
the  main  object  of  their  resentments:  for  Congress, 
having  always  appeared  to  the  soldiery  to  be  the 
body  who  contracted  with  them,  and  who  had  broken 
faith  with  them,  it  is  not  to  be  supposed  they  were 
capable  of  investigating  the  remote  causes  of  the 
failures,  so  as  to  transfer  the  odium  from  Congress 
to  the  State. 

But  the  substantial  thing  to  be  considered  in  this 
question  is  the  violation  of  public  authority.  It 
cannot  be  disputed  that  the  mutiny  of  troops  is  a 
violation  of  that  authority  to  which  they  owe  obe- 
dience. This  was,  in  the  present  case,  aggravated 
to  a  high  degree  of  atrociousness  by  the  gross  insult 
to  the  government  of  Pennsylvania,  in  the  face  of 
Congress  and  in  defiance  of  their  displeasure.  It 
was  further  aggravated  by  continuing  in  that  condi- 
tion for  a  series  of  time. 

The  reasons   have  been  assigned   that  made  it 


3/6  Alexander  Hamilton 

incumbent  upon  Congress  to  interpose;  and  when 
they  called  upon  the  State  of  Pennsylvania,  not  only 
to  vindicate  its  own  rights,  but  to  support  their  au- 
thority, the  declining  a  compliance  was  a  breach  of 
the  Confederation  and  of  the  duty  which  the  State  of 
Pennsylvania  owed  to  the  United  States.  The  best 
apology  for  the  government  of  Pennsylvania,  in  this 
case,  is  that  they  could  not  command  the  services  of 
their  citizens.  But  so  improper  a  disposition  in  the 
citizens,  if  admitted,  must  operate  as  an  additional 
justification  to  Congress  in  their  removal. 

The  subsequent  events,  justly  appreciated,  illus- 
trate the  propriety  of  their  conduct.  The  mutineers 
did  not  make  voluntary  submissions  in  consequence 
of  negotiation,  persuasion,  or  conviction.  They  did 
not  submit  till  after  Congress  had  left  the  city,  pub- 
lishing their  intentions  of  coercion;  till  after  there 
had  been  an  actual  call  upon  the  militia;  till  their 
leaders  and  instigators,  alarmed  by  the  approach  of 
force  and  the  fear  of  being  betrayed  by  the  men, 
fled.  They  were  reduced  by  coercion,  not  overcome 
by  mildness. 

It  appears,  too,  that  while  they  were  professing 
repentance  and  a  return  to  their  duty,  they  were 
tampering  with  the  troops  at  Yorktown  and  Lan- 
caster to  increase  their  strength,  and  that  two 
officers,  at  least,  were  concerned  in  the  mutiny,  who, 
by  their  letters  since,  have  confessed  that  some  pro- 
ject of  importance  was  in  contemplation. 

The  call  for  the  militia  was  made  the  day  after 
it  had  been  pronounced  ineligible  by  the  Council. 
There  could  have  been  little  change  in  that  time, 


Private  Correspondence  Z11 

either  in  the  temper  or  preparations  of  the  citizens. 
The  truth  is,  that  the  departure  of  Congress  brought 
the  matter  to  a  crisis,  and  that  the  Council  were  com- 
pelled by  necessity  to  do  what  they  ought  to  have 
done  before  through  choice. 

It  is  to  be  lamented  they  did  not,  by  an  earlier 
decision,  prevent  the  necessity  of  Congress  taking  a 
step  which  may  have  many  disagreeable  conse- 
quences.    They  then  would     *     *     * 

[The  rest  of  the  manuscript  is  lacking.] 


TO   JAMES   MADISON,    JR. 

Princetown,  June  29,  1783 

Dear  Sir: 

I  am  informed  that  among  other  disagreeable 
things  said  about  the  removal  of  Congress  from 
Philadelphia,  it  is  insinuated  that  it  was  a  contriv- 
ance of  some  members  to  get  them  out  of  the  State 
of  Pennsylvania  into  one  of  those  to  which  they 
belonged;  and  I  am  told  that  this  insinuation  has 
been  pointed  at  me  in  particular. 

Though  I  am  persuaded  that  all  disinterested 
persons  will  justify  Congress  in  quitting  a  place 
where  they  were  told  they  were  not  to  expect  sup- 
port (for  the  conduct  of  the  Council  amounted  to 
that),  yet  I  am  unwilling  to  be  held  up  as  having 
had  an  extraordinary  agency  in  the  measure  for  in- 
terested purposes  when  the  fact  is  directly  the  re- 
verse. As  you  were  a  witness  to  my  conduct  and 
opinions  through  the  whole  of  the  transaction,  I  am 
induced  to  trouble  you  for  your  testimony  upon  this 


37B  Alexander  Hamilton 

occasion.  I  do  not  mean  to  make  a  public  use  of  it, 
but,  through  my  friends,  to  vindicate  myself  from 
the  imputations  I  have  mentioned. 

I  will  therefore  request  your  answers  to  the  follow- 
ing questions: 

Did  that  part  of  the  resolutions  which  related  to 
the  removal  of  Congress  originate  with  me  or  not  ? 

Did  I,  as  a  member  of  the  committee,  appear  to 
press  the  departure,  or  did  I  not  rather  manifest  a 
strong  disposition  to  postpone  that  event  as  long  as 
possible,  even  against  the  general  current  of  opinion? 

I  wish  you  to  be  as  particular  and  full  in  your 
answer  as  your  memory  will  permit.  I  think  you 
will  recollect  that  my  idea  was  clearly  this:  That 
the  mutiny  ought  not  to  be  terminated  by  negocia- 
tion;  that  Congress  were  justifiable  in  leaving  a 
place  where  they  did  not  receive  the  support  which 
they  had  a  right  to  expect,  but,  as  their  removal  was 
a  measure  of  a  critical  and  delicate  nature,  might 
have  an  ill  appearance  in  Europe,  and  might,  from 
events,  be  susceptible  of  an  unfavorable  interpreta- 
tion in  this  country,  it  was  prudent  to  delay  it  till  its 
necessity  became  apparent;  not  only  till  it  was 
manifest  there  would  be  no  change  in  the  spirit 
which  seemed  to  actuate  the  Council,  but  till  it  was 
evident  complete  stibmission  was  not  to  be  expected 
from  the  troops;  that  to  give  full  time  for  this  it 
would  be  proper  to  delay  the  departure  of  Congress 
till  the  latest  period  which  would  be  compatible  with 
the  idea  of  meeting  at  Trenton  or  Princeton  on 
Thursday — perhaps  even  till  Thursday  morning. 


Private  Correspondence  379 

TO   JAMES   MADISON,    JR. 

Philadelphia,  July  6,  1783. 

Dear  Sir: 

On  my  arrival  in  this  city  I  am  more  convinced 
than  I  was  of  the  necessity  of  giving  a  just  state  of 
fact  to  the  pubhc.  The  current  runs  strongly  against 
Congress,  and  in  a  great  measure  for  want  of  informa- 
tion. When  facts  are  explained  they  make  an  im- 
pression, and  incline  to  conclusions  more  favorable 
to  us. 

I  have  no  copy  of  the  reports  in  my  possession, 
which  puts  it  out  of  my  power  to  publish  them.  Will 
you  procure  and  send  me  one  without  loss  of  time? 
Without  appearing,  I  intend  to  give  them  to  the 
public  with  some  additional  explanations.  This  done 
with  moderation  will,  no  doubt,  have  a  good  effect. 

The  prevailing  idea  is,  that  the  actors  in  the  re- 
moval of  Congress  were  influenced  by  the  desire  of 
getting  them  out  of  the  city,  and  the  generality  of 
the  remainder  by  timidity — some  say  passion.  Few 
give  a  more  favorable  interpretation. 

I  will  thank  you  in  your  letter  to  me  to  answer  the 
following  question: 

What  appeared  to  be  my  ideas  and  disposition  re- 
specting the  removal  of  Congress?  Did  I  appear  to 
wish  to  hasten  it,  or  did  I  not  rather  show  a  strong 
disposition  to  procrastinate  it? 

I  will  be  obliged  to  you  in  answering  this  question 
to  do  it  fully.  I  do  not  intend  to  make  any  public 
use  of  it,  but  through  my  friends  to  vindicate  myself 
from  the  insinuation  I  have  mentioned,  and  in  that 
to  confute  the  supposition  that  the  motive  assigned 


380  Alexander  Hamilton 

did  actuate  the  members  on  whom  it  fell  to  be  more 
particularly  active. 


TO   MRS.    HAMILTON 

Philadelphia,  July  22,  1783. 

I  wrote  you,  my  beloved  Eliza,  by  the  last  post, 
which  I  hope  will  not  meet  with  the  fate  that  many 
others  of  my  letters  must  have  met  with.  I  count 
upon  setting  out  to  see  you  in  four  days,  but  I  have 
been  so  frequently  disappointed  by  unforeseen  events, 
that  I  shall  not  be  without  apprehensions  of  being 
detained,  till  I  have  begun  my  journey.  The  mem- 
bers of  Congress  are  very  pressing  with  me  not  to 
go  away  at  this  time,  as  the  House  is  thin,  and  as  the 
definitive  treaty  is  momently  expected. 

Tell  your  father  that  Mr.  Rivington,'  in  a  letter 
to  the  South  Carolina  delegates,  has  given  informa- 
tion, coming  to  him  from  Admiral  Arbuthnot,  that 
the  Mercury  frigate  is  arrived  at  New  York  with  the 
definitive  treaty,  and  that  the  city  was  to  be  evacu- 
ated yesterday  by  the  treaty. 

I  am  strongly  urged  to  stay  a  few  days  for  the 
ratification  of  the  treaty;  at  all  events,  however,  I 
will  not  be  long  absent. 

I  give  you  joy  of  the  happy  conclusion  of  this  im- 
portant work  in  which  your  coimtry  has  been  en- 
gaged. Now,  in  a  very  short  time,  I  hope  we  shall 
be  happily  settled  in  New  York. 

My  love  to  your  father.  Kiss  my  boy  a  thousand 
times. 

I  Probably  the  well  known  New  York  publisher  of  that  name. 


Private  Correspondence  381 

TO   JOHN   JAY 

Philadelphia,  July  25,  1783. 

Dear  Sir: 

Though  I  have  not  performed  my  promise  of 
writing  to  you  which  I  made  you  when  you  left  this 
country,  yet  I  have  not  the  less  interested  myself  in 
your  welfare  and  success.  I  have  been  witness  with 
pleasure  to  every  event  which  has  had  a  tendency 
to  advance  you  in  the  esteem  of  your  country,  and 
I  may  assure  you  with  sincerity  that  it  is  as  high  as 
you  could  possibly  wish.  All  have  united  in  the 
warmest  approbation  of  your  conduct.  I  cannot 
forbear  telling  you  this,  because  my  situation  has 
given  me  access  to  the  truth,  and  I  gratify  my 
friendship  for  you  in  communicating  what  cannot 
fail  to  gratify  your  sensibility. 

The  peace,  which  exceeds  in  the  goodness  of  its 
terms  the  expectations  of  the  most  sanguine,  does 
the  highest  honor  to  those  who  made  it.  It  is  the 
more  agreeable,  as  the  time  was  come  when  thinking 
men  began  to  be  seriously  alarmed  at  the  internal 
embarrassments  and  exhausted  state  of  this  country. 
The  New  England  people  talk  of  making  you  an 
annual  fish-offering,  as  an  acknowledgment  of  your 
exertions  for  the  participation  of  the  fisheries.  We 
have  now  happily  concluded  the  great  work  of  inde- 
pendence, but  much  remains  to  be  done  to  reap  the 
fruits  of  it.  Our  prospects  are  not  flattering.  Every 
day  proves  the  inefficiency  of  the  present  Confedera- 
tion ;  yet  the  common  danger  being  removed,  we  are 
receding  instead  of  advancing  in  a  disposition  to 
amend  its  defects.     The  road  to  popularity  in  each 


382  Alexander  Hamilton 

State  is  to  inspire  jealousies  of  the  power  of  Con- 
gress, though  nothing  can  be  more  apparent  than 
that  they  have  no  power;  and  that  for  the  want  of 
it,  the  resources  of  the  country  during  the  war  could 
not  be  drawn  out,  and  we  at  this  moment  experience 
all  the  mischiefs  of  a  bankrupt  and  ruined  credit.  It 
is  to  be  hoped  that  when  prejudice  and  folly  have 
nm  themselves  out  of  breath,  we  may  return  to 
reason  and  correct  our  errors.  After  having  served 
in  the  field  during  the  war,  I  have  been  making  a 
short  apprenticeship  in  Congress,  but  the  evacuation 
of  New  York  approaching,  I  am  preparing  to  take 
leave  of  public  life,  to  enter  into  the  practice  of  the 
law.  Your  country  will  continue  to  demand  your 
services  abroad.  I  beg  you  to  present  me  most  re- 
spectfully to  Mrs.  Jay,  and  to  be  assured,  etc.^ 


TO    GOVERNOR   CLINTON 

Princeton,  July  27,  1783. 

Sir: 

A  few  days  since  I  was  honored  with  your  Ex- 
cellency's letter  of  the  ;    and  was  glad  to  find 

your  ideas  on  the  subject  corresponded  with  mine. 

As  I  shall,  in  a  day  or  two,  take  leave  of  Congress, 
I  think  it  my  duty  to  give  my  opinion  to  the  Legis- 
lature on  a  matter  of  importance  to  the  State,  which 
has  been  long  depending,  and  is  still  without  a  pros- 
pect of  termination  in  the  train  in  which  it  has  been 
placed.     I  mean  the  affair  of  the  Grants.""     It  is 

'  Reprinted  from  W.  Jay's  Life  of  John  Jay,  ii.,  122. 
2  This  refers  to  the  dispute  as  to  the  territory  now  forming  the  State 
of  Vermont. 


Private  Correspondence  3^3 

hazardous  to  pass  a  positive  judgment  on  what  will 
happen  in  a  body  so  mutable  as  that  of  Congress; 
but,  from  all  I  have  seen,  I  have  come  to  a  settled 
opinion  that  no  determination  will  be  taken  and 
executed  by  them  in  any  other  manner  than  in  that 
prescribed  by  the  Confederation.  There  is  always 
such  a  diversity  of  views  and  interests,  so  many 
compromises  to  be  made  between  different  States, 
that,  in  a  question  of  this  nature,  the  embarrass- 
ments of  which  have  been  increased  by  the  steps 
that  have  preceded,  and  in  which  the  passions  of  the 
opposite  sides  have  taken  a  warm  part,  decision 
must  be  the  result  of  necessity.  While  Congress 
have  a  discretion,  they  will  procrastinate;  when 
they  are  bound  by  the  Constitution,  they  must 
proceed. 

It  is  therefore  my  opinion  that  it  will  be  advisable 
for  the  Legislature,  when  they  meet,  to  review  the 
question,  and  either  to  relinquish  their  pretensions 
to  the  country  in  dispute,  or  to  instruct  their  dele- 
gates, if  a  decision  is  not  had  within  a  limited  time, 
to  declare  the  submission  to  Congress  revoked,  and 
to  institute  a  claim  according  to  the  principles  of  the 
Confederation. 

It  would  be  out  of  my  province  to  discuss  which 
side  of  the  alternate  ought  in  policy  to  prevail,  but 
I  will  take  the  liberty  to  observe,  that  if  the  last 
should  be  preferred,  it  would  be  expedient  to  remove 
every  motive  of  opposition  from  private  claims,  not 
only  by  confirming  in  their  full  latitude,  previous  to 
the  trial,  the  possessions  of  the  original  settlers,  but 
even  the  grants  of  the  usurped  government.     It 


3^4  Alexander  Hamilton 

may  happen  that  it  will  be  eventually  necessary 
to  employ  force,  and  in  this  case  it  would  be  of 
great  importance  that  neither  the  inhabitants  of  the 
Grants,  nor  powerful  individuals  in  other  States, 
should  find  their  private  interest  in  contradiction  to 
that  of  the  State.  This  has  already  had  great  in- 
fluence in  counteracting  our  wishes,  would  continue 
to  throw  impediments  in  the  way  of  ulterior  measures, 
and  might  at  last  kindle  a  serious  flame  between  the 
States. 

I  communicated  to  your  Excellency,  in  a  former 
letter,  that  I  had  declined  pressing  the  application 
of  the  Legislature  to  Congress  respecting  the  State 
troops  for  garrisoning  the  frontier  posts,  because 
temporary  provision  had  been  made  in  another  way 
which  would  save  the  State  the  immediate  expense, 
and  because  there  was  a  prospect  of  some  general 
provision  for  the  defence  of  the  frontiers  on  a  Conti- 
nental establishment,  which  was  to  be  preferred  on 
every  account.  A  report  for  this  purpose  is  now 
before  Congress,  but  the  thinness  of  representation 
has  for  some  time  retarded,  and  still  retards,  its 
consideration. 

The  definitive  treaty  is  not  yet  arrived,  but 
from  accotmts  which,  though  not  official,  appear  to 
deserve  credit,  it  may  be  daily  expected.  A  gentle- 
man known  and  confided  in,  has  arrived  at  Phila- 
delphia, who  informs  that  he  saw  a  letter  from  Dr. 
Franklin  to  Mr.  Barkeley,  telling  him  that  the  defini- 
tive treaties  were  signed  the  27  th  of  May  between 
all  the  parties ;  that  New  York  was  to  be  evacuated 
in  six  months  from  the  ratification  of  the  prelimi- 


Private  Correspondence  3^5 

naries  in  Europe,  which  will  be  the  12th  or  15th  of 
next  month. 

As  it  is  not  my  intention  to  return  to  Congress,  I 
take  this  opportunity  to  make  my  respectful  ac- 
knowledgements to  the  Legislature  for  the  honorable 
mark  of  their  confidence  conferred  upon  me  by  hav- 
ing chosen  me  to  represent  the  State  in  that  body. 
I  shall  be  happy  if  my  conduct  has  been  agreeable  to 
them. 


TO   WASHINGTON 

Albany,  September  30,  1783. 

Dear  Sir: 

As  I  flatter  myself  I  may  indulge  a  consciousness 
that  my  services  have  been  of  some  value  to  the 
public,  at  least  enough  to  merit  the  small  compensa- 
tion I  wish,  I  will  make  no  apology  to  your  Excel- 
lency for  conveying,  through  you,  that  wish  to 
Congress.  You  are  able  to  inform  them,  if  they 
wish  information,  in  what  degree  I  may  have  been 
useful ;  and  I  have  entire  confidence  that  you  will  do 
me  justice. 

In  a  letter  which  I  wrote  to  you  several  months 
ago,  I  intimated  that  it  might  be  in  your  power 
to  contribute  to  the  establishment  of  our  Federal 
Union  upon  a  more  solid  basis.  I  have  never  since 
explained  myself.  At  the  time,  I  was  in  hopes  Con- 
gress might  have  been  induced  to  take  a  decisive 
ground;  to  inform  their  constituents  of  the  imper- 
fections of  the  present  system,  and  of  the  impossi- 
bility of  conducting  the  public  affairs,  with  honor  to 

VOL.  IX.— 25. 


386  Alexander  Hamilton 

themselves  and  advantage  to  the  community,  with 
powers  so  disproportioned  to  their  responsibility; 
and,  having  done  this,  in  a  fiill  and  forcible  manner, 
to  adjourn  the  moment  the  definitive  treaty  was 
ratified.  In  retiring  at  the  same  jimcture,  I  wished 
you,  in  a  solemn  manner,  to  declare  to  the  people 
your  intended  retreat  from  public  concerns,  your 
opinion  of  the  present  government,  and  of  the  abso- 
lute necessity  of  a  change. 

Before  I  left  Congress  I  despaired  of  the  first,  and 
your  circular-letter  to  the  States  had  anticipated  the 
last.  I  trust  it  will  not  be  without  effect,  though  I 
am  persuaded  it  would  have  had  more,  combined 
with  what  I  have  mentioned.  At  all  events,  without 
compliment,  sir,  it  will  do  you  honor  with  the  sen- 
sible and  well-meaning;  and,  ultimately,  it  is  to  be 
hoped,  with  the  people  at  large,  when  the  present 
epidemic  frenzy  has  subsided. 

Mrs.  Hamilton  presents  her  compliments  to  Mrs. 
Washington. 

I  beg  the  favor  of  your  Excellency  to  forward  the 
enclosed  to  General  Greene. 


TO   WASHINGTON 

Albany,  September  30,1783. 

Sir: 

I  think  I  may  address  the  subject  of  this  letter  to 
your  Excellency  with  more  propriety  than  to  any 
other  person,  as  it  is  purely  of  a  military  nature,  as 
you  are  best  acquainted  with  my  services  as  an 
officer,  and  as  you  are  now  engaged  in  assisting  to 


Private  Correspondence  3^7 

form  the  arrangements  for  the  future  peace  establish- 
ment. 

Your  Excellency  knows  that  in  March,  '82,  I  re- 
linquished all  claim  to  any  future  compensation  for 
my  services,  either  during  the  residue  of  the  war,  or 
after  its  conclusion — simply  retaining  my  rank.  On 
this  foundation  I  build  a  hope  that  I  may  be  per- 
mitted to  preserve  my  rank,  on  the  peace  establish- 
ment, without  emoluments  and  unattached  to  any 
corps — as  an  honorary  reward  for  the  time  I  have 
devoted  to  the  public.  As  I  may  hereafter  travel, 
I  may  find  it  an  agreeable  circumstance  to  appear  in 
the  character  I  have  supported  in  the  Revolution. 

I  rest  my  claim  solely  on  the  sacrifice  I  have  made, 
because  I  have  no  reason  to  believe  that  my  services 
have  appeared  of  any  value  to  Congress,  as  they  de- 
clined giving  them  any  marks  of  their  notice,  on  an 
occasion  which  appeared  to  my  friends  to  entitle  me 
to  it,  as  well  by  the  common  practice  of  sovereigns 
as  by  the  particular  practice  of  this  coimtry  in  re- 
peated instances. 

Your  Excellency  will  recollect  that  it  was  my  lot 
at  York  Town  to  command,  as  senior  officer,  a  suc- 
cessful attack  upon  one  of  the  enemy's  redoubts; 
that  the  officer  who  acted  in  a  similar  capacity  in 
another  attack,  made  at  the  same  time,  by  the  French 
troops,  has  been  handsomely  distinguished  in  con- 
sequence of  it  by  the  government  to  which  he  be- 
longs; and  that  there  are  several  examples  among 
us  where  Congress  have  bestowed  honors  upon  ac- 
tions, perhaps  not  more  useful,  nor  apparently  more 
hazardous. 


388  Alexander  Hamilton 

These  observations  are  inapplicable  to  the  present 
Congress,  further  than  as  they  may  possibly  furnish 
an  additional  motive  to  a  compliance  with  my  wish. 

The  only  thing  I  ask  of  your  Excellency  is,  that 
my  application  may  come  into  view  in  the  course  of 
the  consultations  on  the  peace  establishment. 


TO   GOVERNOR   CLINTON 

Albany,  October  3,  1783. 

Sir: 

I  have  lately  received,  from  Messrs.  Duane  and 
L'Hommedieu,  an  extract  of  a  letter  from  your  Ex- 
cellency to  the  delegates,  of  the  23d  of  August  last, 
requesting  "  a  particular  detail  of  the  motives  which 
influenced  the  determination  of  Congress ' '  respecting 
the  application  of  the  Legislature  to  have  their  State 
troops  released  from  Continental  pay,  for  the  pur- 
pose of  garrisoning  the  frontier  posts. 

In  my  letters  to  your  Excellency  of  the  first  of 
June  and  twenty-seventh  of  July,  which  were  in- 
tended to  be  official,  I  summarily  informed  you  that 
Congress  had  made  temporary  provision  for  garri- 
soning the  frontier  posts,  and  that  a  plan  was  under 
deliberation  relative  to  a  peace  establishment,  which 
would,  of  course,  embrace  that  object  permanently; 
that  such  temporary  provision  being  made  at  the 
common  expense,  and  a  general  plan  being  under 
consideration  for  the  future,  I  had  declined  pressing 
a  compliance  with  the  application  of  the  Legislature ; 
conceiving  it  to  be  more  for  the  interest  of  the  State 


Private  Correspondence  3^9 

that  the  expense  should  be  jointly  borne,  than  that 
it  should  fall  exclusively  upon  itself. 

I  did  not  enter  into  a  more  full  detail  upon  the 
subject,  because  the  business  continued,  to  the  time 
I  left  Congress,  in  an  undecided  state,  and  it  was  im- 
possible to  judge  what  views  would  finally  prevail. 

The  concurrent  resolutions  of  the  two  Houses  had 
been,  immediately  on  their  receipt,  referred  to  a 
committee  appointed  to  report  on  a  peace  establish- 
ment, who  had  suspended  their  report  on  these  reso- 
lutions until  it  should  appear  what  would  be  the  fate 
of  a  general  plan  which  had  been  submitted. 

As  to  the  motives  that  influenced  Congress  in 
making  the  provision  they  did  make,  rather  than 
immediately  assenting  to  the  application  of  the 
State,  as  far  as  I  was  able  to  collect  them,  they  were 
these:  The  opinions  of  many  were  unsettled  as  to 
the  most  eligible  mode  of  providing  for  the  security 
of  the  frontiers  consistent  with  the  Constitution,  as 
well  with  respect  to  the  general  policy  of  the  Union, 
as  to  considerations  of  justice  to  those  States  whose 
frontiers  were  more  immediately  exposed.  A  con- 
siderable part  of  the  House  appeared  to  think,  from 
reasons  of  a  very  cogent  nature,  that  the  well-being 
of  the  Union  required  a  federal  provision  for  the 
security  of  the  different  parts,  and  that  it  would  be 
a  great  hardship  to  individual  States  peculiarly  cir- 
cumstanced to  throw  the  whole  burthen  of  expense 
upon  them  by  recurring  to  separate  provisions  in  a 
matter,  the  benefit  of  which  would  be  immediately 
shared  by  their  neighbors,  and  ultimately  by  the 
Union   at  large;  that  indeed  it  was  not  probable 


390  Alexander  Hamilton 

particular  States  would  be  either  able  or,  upon  experi- 
ment, willing  to  make  competent  provision  at  their 
separate  expense,  and  that  the  principle  might 
eventually  excite  jealousies  between  the  States  un- 
friendly to  the  common  tranquillity. 

I  freely  confess  I  was  one  who  held  this  opinion. 

Questions  naturally  arose  as  to  the  true  construc- 
tion of  the  articles  of  Confederation  upon  this  head; 
questions  as  delicate,  as  interesting,  and  as  difficult 
of  solution. 

On  one  hand  it  was  doubted  whether  Congress 
were  authorized  by  the  Confederation  to  proceed 
upon  the  idea  of  a  federal  provision;  on  the  other,  it 
was  perceived  that  such  a  contrary  construction 
would  be  dangerous  to  the  Union,  including,  among 
other  inconveniences,  this  consequence,  that  the 
United  States,  in  Congress,  cannot  raise  a  single 
regiment,  nor  equip  a  single  ship,  for  the  general 
defence,  till  after  the  declaration  of  war,  or  an 
actual  commencement  of  hostilities. 

In  this  dilemma,  on  an  important  constitutional 
question,  other  urgent  matters  depending  before 
Congress,  and  the  advanced  season  requiring  a  de- 
termination upon  the  mode  of  securing  the  Western 
posts  in  case  of  a  surrender  this  fall,  all  sides  of  the 
House  concurred  in  making  a  temporary  provision, 
in  the  manner  which  has  been  communicated. 

My  apprehension  of  the  views  of  the  Legislature 
was  simply  this:  That,  looking  forward  to  a  sur- 
render of  the  posts,  and  conceiving,  from  some 
expressions  in  the  articles  of  Confederation,  that 
separate  provision  was  to  be  made  for  the  frontier 


Private  Correspondence  39 ^ 

garrisons,  they  had  thought  it  expedient  to  apply 
the  troops  already  on  foot  to  that  purpose,  and  to 
propose  to  Congress  to  give  their  sanction  to  it. 

Under  this  apprehension,  reflecting  besides,  that 
those  troops  were  engaged  only  for  a  short  period, 
upon  a  very  improper  establishment  to  continue,  on 
account  of  the  enormous  pay  to  the  private  men, 
and  that  the  expense  which  is  now  shared  by  all,  and 
which  would  have  fallen  solely  upon  the  State  had  the 
application  been  complied  with,  would  probably  be 
at  the  rate  of  nearly  eighty  thousand  dollars  per  an- 
num, a  considerable  sum  for  the  State  in  its  present 
situation — I  acknowledge  to  your  Excellency  that  I 
saw  with  pleasure,  rather  than  regret,  the  turn  which 
the  affair  took.  I  shall  be  sorry,  however,  if  it  has 
contravened  the  intentions  of  the  Legislature. 

I  will  take  the  liberty  to  add  upon  this  occasion 
that  it  has  always  appeared  to  me  of  great  impor- 
tance, to  this  State  in  particular  as  well  as  to  the 
Union  in  general,  that  Federal  rather  than  State 
provision  should  be  made  for  the  defence  of  every 
part  of  the  Confederacy,  in  peace  as  well  as  in  war. 

Without  entering  into  arguments  of  general  policy, 
it  will  be  sufficient  to  observe  that  this  State  is  in 
all  respects  critically  situated. 

Its  relative  position,  shape,  and  intersections, 
viewed  on  the  map,  strongly  speak  this  language: 
Strengthen  the  Confederation;  give  it  exclusively 
the  power  of  the  sword;  let  each  State  have  no 
forces  but  its  militia. 

As  a  question  of  mere  economy,  the  following  con- 
siderations deserve  great  weight: 


392  Alexander  Hamilton 

The  North  River  facilitates  attacks  by  sea  and  by 
land;  and,  besides  the  frontier  forts,  all  military 
men  are  of  opinion  that  a  strong  post  should  be 
maintained  at  West  Point,  or  some  other  position  on 
the  lower  part  of  the  river. 

If  Canada  is  well  governed,  it  may  become  well 
peopled,  and  by  inhabitants  attached  to  its  govern- 
ment. The  British  nation,  while  it  preserves  the 
idea  of  retaining  possession  of  that  countr}^  may  be 
expected  to  keep  on  foot  there  a  large  force.  The 
position  of  that  force,  either  for  defence  or  offence, 
will  necessarily  be  such  as  will  afford  a  prompt  and 
easy  access  to  us. 

Our  precautions  for  defence  must  be  proportioned 
to  their  means  of  annoying  us,  and  we  may  here- 
after find  it  indispensable  to  increase  our  frontier 
garrisons. 

The  present  charge  of  a  competent  force  in  that 
quarter,  thrown  additionally  into  the  scale  of  those 
contributions  which  we  must  make  to  the  payment 
of  the  public  debt  and  to  other  objects  of  general  ex- 
pense if  the  Union  lasts,  would,  I  fear,  enlarge  our 
burden  beyond  our  ability:  that  charge,  hereafter 
increased  as  it  may  be,  would  be  oppressively  felt  by 
the  people.  It  includes  not  only  the  expense  of  pay- 
ing and  subsisting  the  necessary  number  of  troops, 
but  of  keeping  the  fortifications  in  repair,  probably 
of  erecting  others,  and  of  furnishing  the  requisite 
supplies  of  military  stores.  I  say  nothing  of  the  In- 
dian nations,  because,  though  it  will  be  always  pru- 
dent to  be  upon  our  guard  against  them,  yet  I  am  of 
opinion  we  diminish  the  necessity  of  it  by  making 


Private  Correspondence  393 

them  our  friends;  and  I  take  it  for  granted  there 
cannot  be  a  serious  doubt  anywhere  as  to  the  ob- 
vious poHcy  of  endeavoring  to  do  it.  Their  friend- 
ship alone  can  keep  our  frontiers  in  peace.  It  is 
essential  to  the  improvement  of  the  fur  trade;  an 
object  of  immense  importance  to  the  State.  The 
attempt  at  the  total  expulsion  of  so  desultory  a 
people  is  as  chimerical  as  it  would  be  pernicious. 
War  with  them  is  as  expensive  as  it  is  destructive. 
It  has  not  a  single  object,  for  the  acquisition  of  their 
lands  is  not  to  be  wished  till  those  now  vacant  are 
settled;  and  the  surest,  as  well  as  the  most  just  and 
humane  way  of  removing  them,  is  by  extending  our 
settlements  to  their  neighborhood. 

Indeed,  it  is  not  impossible  they  may  be  already 
willing  to  exchange  their  former  possessions  for 
others  more  remote. 

The  foregoing  considerations  would  lose  all  force 
if  we  had  full  security  that  the  rest  of  the  world 
would  make  our  safety  and  prosperity  the  first  ob- 
ject of  their  reverence  and  care ;  but  an  expectation 
of  this  kind  would  be  too  much  against  the  ordinary 
course  of  human  affairs — too  visionary  to  be  a  rule 
for  national  conduct. 

It  is  true  our  situation  secures  us  from  conquest, 
if  internal  dissensions  do  not  open  the  way;  but 
when  nations  now  make  war  upon  each  other,  the 
object  seldom  is  total  conquest — partial  acquisitions, 
the  jealousy  of  power,  the  rivalship  of  dominion  or 
of  commerce,  sometimes  national  emulation  and 
antipathy,  are  the  motives. 

Nothing  shelters  us  from  the  operation  of  either 


394  Alexander  Hamilton 

of  these  causes.  The  fisheries,  the  fur  trade,  the 
navigation  of  the  lakes  and  of  the  Mississippi,  the 
Western  territory,  the  islands  of  the  West  Indies, 
with  reference  to  traffic, — in  short,  the  passions  of 
human  nature,  are  abundant  sources  of  contention 
and  hostility. 

I  will  not  trespass  further  on  your  Excellency's 
patience.  I  expected  indeed  that  my  last  letter 
would  have  finished  my  official  commimications,  but 
Messrs.  Duane  and  L'Hommedieu  having  trans- 
mitted the  extract  of  your  letter  to  Mr.  Floyd  and 
myself,  in  order  that  we  might  comply  with  what 
your  Excellency  thought  would  be  expected  by  the 
Legislature,  it  became  my  duty  to  give  this  explana- 
tion. Mr.  Floyd  having  been  at  Congress  but  a 
little  time  after  the  concurrent  resolutions  arrived, 
and  being  now  at  a  great  distance  from  me,  occa- 
sions a  separate  communication. 

N.  B. — I  did  not  at  the  time  enclose  the  resolution 
directing  the  General  to  provide  for  garrisoning  the 
frontier  posts,  because  I  understood  it  would  in 
course  be  transmitted  to  you  by  the  President  or  the 
Secretary  at  War. 


TO  THE  HONORABLE  THOMAS  MIFFLIN,   PRESIDENT  OF 

CONGRESS 

New  York,  Dec.  8,  1783. 

Sir: 

Being  concerned  as  counsel  for  a  number  of  persons 
who  have  been,  since  the  annunciation  of  the  pro- 


Private  Correspondence  395 

visional  treaty,  indicted  under  the  confiscation  laws 
of  this  State  for  the  part  they  are  supposed  to  have 
taken  in  the  late  war,  we  are  induced,  at  the  desire 
of  our  clients  and  in  their  behalf,  to  apply  to  Con- 
gress, through  your  Excellency,  for  an  exemplifica- 
tion of  the  definitive  treaty.  We  take  it  for  granted 
that  ere  this  it  will  have  been  [done  under  the]  direc- 
tion of  the  United  States.  We  have  found  a  great 
strictness  in  the  courts  in  this  State.  It  will,  we  ap- 
prehend, be  necessary  to  be  able  to  produce  an  ex- 
emplification of  the  treaty  under  the  seal  of  the 
United  States.  In  a  matter  so  interesting  to  a  great 
number  of  individuals — for  it  does  not  belong  to  us 
to  urge  considerations  of  national  honor, — we  hope 
we  shall  be  excused  when  we  observe  that  there 
appears  to  be  no  probability  that  the  Legislature  of 
this  State  will  interpose  its  authority  to  put  a  stop 
to  prosecutions  till  the  definitive  treaty  is  announced 
in  form.  In  the  mean  time  a  period  is  limited  for 
the  appearance  of  the  indicted  persons  to  plead  to 
their  indictments,  and  if  they  neglect  to  appear, 
judgment  by  default  will  be  entered  against  them. 
It  is  therefore  of  great  consequence  to  them  that  we 
should  have  in  our  possession  as  speedily  as  possible 
an  authentic  document  of  the  treaty  and  of  its  rati- 
fication by  Congress ;  and  we,  on  this  account,  pray 
an  exemplification  of  both. 

We  persuade  ourselves  that  the  justice  and  liberal- 
ity of  Congress  will  induce  a  ready  compliance  with 
our  prayer,  which  will  conduce  to  the  security  of  a 
great  number  of  individuals  who  derive  their  hopes 
of  safety  from  the  national  faith. 


39^  Alexander  Hamilton 

TO   JOHN    BARKER    CHURCH  * 

New  York,  March  lo,  1784. 

My  Dear  Sir: 

In  my  last  to  you  I  informed  you  that  a  project 
for  a  land  bank  had  been  set  on  foot  by  Mr.  Sayre 
as  the  ostensible  parent,  but  I  had  reason  to  suspect 
the  Chancellor "  was  the  true  father.  The  fact  has 
turned  out  as  I  supposed,  and  the  Chancellor,  with 
a  number  of  others,  has  since  petitioned  the  Legis- 
lature for  an  exclusive  charter  for  the  proposed  bank. 
I  thought  it  necessary  not  only  with  a  view  to  your 
project,  but  for  the  sake  of  the  commercial  interests 
of  the  State,  to  start  an  opposition  to  this  scheme  and 
took  occasion  to  point  out  its  absurdity  and  incon- 
venience to  some  of  the  most  intelligent  merchants, 
who  presently  saw  the  matter  in  a  proper  light  and 
began  to  take  measures  to  defeat  the  plan. 

The  Chancellor  had  taken  so  much  pains  with 
the  country  members  that  they  all  began  to  be  per- 

^  John  Barker  Church,  who  married  Angelica  Schuyler,  the  sister 
of  Mrs.  Hamilton,  was  an  Englishman  by  birth:  and  Lossing  (  Life  of 
Schuyler,  ii.,  p.  207)  says  that  his  name  was  Carter,  and  that  he  added 
the  Church  in  this  country  and  dropped  it  when  on  a  visit  to  England. 
There  is  also  a  letter  signed  John  Carter,  addressed  to  Hamilton,  and 
dated  May  18,  1781,  which  seems  to  confirm  Lossing.  Yet  there  can 
be  no  doubt  that  here  he  was  known  as  John  Barker  Church,  because 
he  is  so  described  by  Hamilton  in  a  letter  to  Troup  about  his  will,  and 
Mr.  Geo.  L.  Schuyler,  of  New  York,  very  kindly  writes  me  that  Church 
was  called  John  Barker  in  the  will  of  Mr.  Schuyler's  grandfather,  Gen. 
Schuyler.  Church  was  associated  with  Col.  Wadsworth  in  furnishing 
supplies  to  the  French  and  American  armies.  Some  time  after  his 
marriage,  according  to  Lossing,  he  returned  to  England,  became  a 
member  of  Parliament,  went  much  into  society,  and  was  a  friend  of 
the  Prince  of  Wales  and  in  the  Carlton  House  set.  He  finally  returned 
to  New  York  where  he  remained  until  his  death  at  an  advanced  age. 

*  The  Chancellor  was  Robert  R.  Livingston. 


Private  Correspondence  397 

suaded  that  the  land  bank  was  the  true  philosopher's 
stone  that  was  to  turn  all  their  rocks  and  trees  into 
gold,  and  there  was  great  reason  to  apprehend  a 
majority  of  the  Legislature  would  have  adopted  his 
views.  It  became  necessary  to  convince  the  pro- 
jectors themselves  of  the  impracticability  of  their 
scheme,  and  to  counteract  the  impressions  they  had 
made  by  a  direct  application  to  the  Legislature. 
Some  of  the  merchants,  to  effect  these  purposes,  set 
on  foot  a  subscription  for  a  money  bank,  and  called 
upon  me  to  subscribe.  I  was  a  little  embarrassed 
how  to  act,  but  upon  the  whole  I  concluded  it  best 
to  fall  in  with  them,  and  endeavor  to  induce  them  to 
put  the  business  upon  such  a  footing  as  might  enable 
you  with  advantage  to  combine  your  interests  with 
theirs;  for  since  the  thing  had  been  taken  up  upon 
the  broad  footing  of  the  whole  body  of  the  mer- 
chants, it  appeared  to  me  that  it  never  would  be 
your  interest  to  pursue  a  distinct  project  in  opposi- 
tion to  theirs,  but  that  you  would  prefer,  so  far  as 
you  might  choose  to  employ  money  in  this  way,  to 
become  purchasers  in  the  general  bank.  The  ob- 
ject, on  this  supposition,  was  to  have  the  bank 
founded  on  such  principles  as  would  give  you  a 
proper  weight  in  the  direction.  Unluckily  for  this 
purpose  I  entered  rather  late  into  the  measure.  Pro- 
posals had  been  agreed  upon,  in  which,  among  other 
things,  it  was  settled  that  no  stockholder,  to  what- 
ever amount,  should  have  more  than  seven  votes, 
which  was  the  number  to  which  a  holder  of  ten  shares 
was  to  be  entitled.  At  an  after  meeting  of  some  of 
the  most  influential  characters,  I  engaged  them  so 


398  Alexander  Hamilton 

far  to  depart  from  this  ground  as  to  allow  a  vote  for 
every  five  shares  above  ten. 

The  stockholders  have  since  thought  proper  to 
appoint  me  one  of  the  directors.'  I  shall  hold  it  till 
Wadsworth  and  you  come  out,  and  if  you  choose  to 
become  partners  in  this  bank  I  shall  make  a  vacancy 
for  one  of  you.  I  inclose  you  the  constitution  and 
the  names  of  the  president,  directors,  and  cashier. 

An  application  for  a  charter  has  been  made  to  the 
Legislature,  with  a  petition  against  granting  an  ex- 
clusive one  to  the  land  bank.  The  measures  which 
have  been  taken  appear  to  have  had  their  effect  upon 
the  minds  of  the  partisans  of  the  land  bank. 

The  affairs  of  the  bank  in  Pennsylvania  appear 
to  be  in  some  confusion.  They  have  stopped  dis- 
counts; but  I  have  no  apprehension  that  there  is 
any  thing  more  in  the  matter  than  temporary  em- 
barrassment, from  having  a  little  overshot  their 
mark  in  their  issues  of  paper,  and  from  the  opposition 
which  the  attempt  to  establish  a  new  bank  had 
produced. 

I  have  had  no  tolerable  offer  for  your  land  in 
Connecticut, — forty  shilHngs,  and  that  currency,  per 
acre  has  been  the  highest,  but  I  have  written  to  Mr. 
Campfield,  requesting  him  to  inform  himself  well  of 
the  value  of  the  land,  and  if  he  thinks  it  is  not  worth 
more,  to  accept  the  offer.  I  am  told  he  is  a  judicious 
and  honest  man ;  and  I  presume  the  land  where  it  is 
will  never  be  worth  any  thing  to  you  if  it  remains 
unsold.  Betsy  joins  me  in  best  affections  to  Mrs.  C. 
and  yourself. 

'  This  bank  thus  formed  was  the  Bank  of  New  York. 


Private  Correspondence  399 

TO   THOMAS    FITZSIMMONS  ^ 

New  York,  March  21,  1784. 

Dear  Sir: 

Permit  me  to  introduce  to  yoiir  acquaintance  and 
attention  Mr.  Seton,  Cashier  of  the  Bank  of  New 
York.  He  is  just  setting  out  for  Philadelphia  to 
procure  materials  and  information  in  the  forms  of 
business.  I  recommend  him  to  you,  because  I  am 
persuaded  you  will  with  pleasure  facilitate  his  object. 
Personally,  I  dare  say  you  will  be  pleased  with  him. 

He  will  tell  you  of  our  embarrassments  and  pro- 
spects. I  hope  an  incorporation  of  the  two  banks, 
which  is  evidently  the  interest  of  both,  has  put  an 
end  to  differences  in  Philadelphia.  Here  a  wild  and 
impracticable  scheme  of  a  land  bank  stands  in  our 
way;  the  projectors  of  it  persevering  in  spite  of  the 
experience  they  have,  that  all  the  mercantile  and 
moneyed  influence  is  against  it. 


TO   GOUVERNEUR   MORRIS 

New  York,  March  21,  1784. 

I  duly  received,  my  dear  sir,  your  letter  of  the 
27th  of  January,  and  I  would  have  sooner  told  you 
how  much  pleasure  it  gave  me,  if  I  had  had  time,  but 
legislative  folly  has  afforded  so  plentiful  a  harvest 
to  us  lawyers  that  we  have  scarcely  a  moment  to 
spare  from  the  substantial  business  of  reaping.  To- 
day being  Sunday,  I  have  resolved  to  give  an  hour 

'  Thomas  Fitzsimmons,  an  eminent  merchant  of  Philadelphia,  was 
after  a  leading  member  of  Congress  and  always  a  stanch  supporter  and 
friend  of  Hamilton. 


400  Alexander  Hamilton 

to  friendship  and  to  you.  Good  people  would  say 
that  I  had  much  better  be  paying  my  devotions  to 
the  great  "■ 

:ic  H:  H:  H<  He  H: 

devotions  I  mean ;  for  with  so  lively  an  imagination 
as  yours  it  is  necessary  to  be  explicit,  lest  you  should 
be  for  making  a  different  association  that  would  not 
suit  me  quite  as  well. 

To  say  that  I  was  amused  with  your  letter  was  to 
say  what  must  have  happened  of  course;  a  good 
theme  in  good  hands  could  not  fail  to  be  amusing. 
The  coalition  you  mention  is  not  to  be  wondered  at, 
though  in  a  political  light  it  is  whimsical  enough; 
but  the  meeting  of  extremes  at  the  same  point  is  a 
common  case.  I  expect  in  another  year  to  see  our 
political  antipodes  in  this  city  shaking  hands,  but 
whenever  it  happens  it  will  not  affect  me  as  it  seems 
to  have  done  you  in  the  instance  you  mention,  be- 
cause probably  I  shall  not  have  the  same  reasons. — 
To  be  serious : 

The  erection  of  a  new  bank  in  Philadelphia  does 
not  appear  to  me  an  evil  to  the  community.  The 
competition  may  indeed  render  the  large  profits  of 
the  old  bank  less  permanent,  but  they  will  always 
remain  considerable  enough;  and  the  competition 
will  cause  business  to  be  done  on  easier  and  better 
terms  in  each,  to  the  advancement  of  trade  in  gen- 
eral. If  I  reason  wrong,  correct  me.  That  a  stock- 
holder of  the  old  bank  should  feel  his  interest 
wounded,  that  those  who  have  made  their  property  in 
it  subservient  in  some  measure  to  the  support  of  the 

I  There  is  a  slice  cut  out  of  the  body  of  the  letter  here. 


Private  Correspondence  401 

Revolution  should  feel  a  degree  of  indignation  at  the 
kind  of  rivalship  which  has  started  up,  are  both  nat- 
ural sensations ;  but  that  large  profits  should  produce 
rivalship,  that  men  in  a  matter  of  this  kind  should 
employ  their  money  where  they  expect  the  greatest 
advantage  and  the  cheapest  market  in  purchasing ' 

second  bank  has  been  established,  I  think  you  will,  on 
reflection,  agree  with  me  that  they  ought  to  wish  to 
be  interested  in  both  the  institutions,  and  that  there- 
fore it  is  the  duty  of  those  who  have  the  laying  out 
of  their  money  to  purchase  in  the  new  bank,  on  the 
principle  I  have  hinted  at  as  well  as  the  circum- 
stances of  a  lower  price.  The  whole  of  this  business, 
my  dear  friend,  is  a  mere  mercantile  speculation,  and 
I  am  sure  when  there  has  been  time  to  cool  down  the 
considerate  proprietors  of  the  old  bank  will  blame 
nobody  for  adventuring  upon  mere  mercantile  prin- 
ciples. To  you  I  need  not  say  that  it  is  chimerical 
to  expect  any  other  will  prevail. 

Were  I  to  advise  upon  this  occasion,  it  would  be 
as  soon  as  possible  to  bring  about  a  marriage  or, 
perhaps  what  you  will  prefer,  an  intrigue  between 
the  old  bank  and  the  new.  Let  the  latter  be  the 
wife  or,  still  to  pursue  your  propensity,  the  mistress 
of  the  former.  As  a  mistress  (or,  you  11  say  a  wife) 
it  is  to  be  expected  she  will  every  now  and  then  be 
capricious  and  inconstant;  but  in  the  main  it  will 
be  the  interest  of  both  husband  and  wife  that  they 
should  live  well  together  and  manage  their  affairs  with 
good  humor  and  concert.    If  they  quarrel  they  will  not 

I  MS.  cut. 

VOL.  IX— a6. 


402  Alexander  Hamilton 

only  expose  themselves  to  the  gibes  of  their  neighbors, 
but  the  more  knowing  part  of  these  will  endeavor  to 
keep  them  by  the  ears  in  order  to  make  the  favors 
of  each  more  cheap  and  more  easily  attainable. 

I  ought,  in  return,  to  give  you  an  account  of  what 
we  are  doing  here,  but  I  will,  in  the  lump,  tell  you 
that  we  are  doing  those  things  which  we  ought  not 
to  do,  and  leaving  undone  those  things  which  we 
ought  to  do.  Instead  of  wholesome  regulations  for 
the  improvement  of  our  polity  and  commerce,  we 
are  laboring  to  contrive  methods  to  mortify  and 
punish  Tories  and  to  explain  away  treaties. 

Let  us  both  erect  a  temple  to  time,  only  regretting 
that  we  shall  not  command  a  longer  portion  of  it  to 
see  what  will  be  the  event  of  the  American  drama. ' 


TO    GOUVERNEUR   MORRIS 

New  York,  April  7,  1784. 

Pardon  me,  my  dear  sir,  for  not  sooner  having 
obeyed  your  orders  with  respect  to  the  enclosed.  I 
part  with  it  reluctantly;  for  wit  is  so  rare  an  article, 
that  when  we  get  so  much  of  it  in  so  small  a  compass 
we  cannot  easily  consent  to  be  dispossessed  of  it.  I 
am  very  happy  to  hear  of  the  union  of  your  two 
banks,  for  you  will  believe  me  when  I  tell  that  on 
more  deliberate  consideration  I  was  led  to  view  the 
competition  in  a  different  light  from  that  in  which 
it  at  first  struck  me.  I  had  no  doubt  that  it  was 
against  the  interests  of  the  proprietors,  but  on  a  super- 

'  Now  first  printed  from  the  Hamilton  papers  in  the  State  Depart- 
ment. 


Private  Correspondence  403 

ficial  view  I  perceived  benefits  to  the  community ,  which 
on  a  more  close  inspection  I  found  were  not  real. 

You  will  call  our  proceedings  here  strange  doings. 
If  some  folks  were  paid  to  counteract  the  prosperity 
of  the  State,  they  could  not  take  more  effectual 
measures  than  they  do.  But  it  is  in  vain  to  at- 
tempt to  kick  against  the  pricks. 

Discrimination  bills,  partial  taxes,  schemes  to  en- 
gross public  property  in  the  hands  of  those  who  have 
present  power,  to  banish  the  real  wealth  of  the  State, 
and  to  substitute  paper  bubbles,  are  the  only  dishes 
that  suit  the  public  palate  at  this  time. 

Permit  me  to  ask  your  opinion  on  a  point  of  im- 
portance to  the  New  York  Bank — the  best  mode  of 
receiving  and  paying  out  gold.  I  am  aware  of  the 
evils  of  that  which  has  been  practised  upon  in  Phila- 
delphia— weighing  in  quantities — but  I  cannot  satisfy 
myself  about  a  substitute,  unless  there  could  be  a 
coinage. 

Favor  me  with  your  sentiments  on  this  subject  as 
soon  as  you  can. 


TO    DE    CHASTELLUX  ' 

New  York,  June  14,  1784. 

Monsieur  Le  Chevalier: 

Colonel   Clarkson,^   who  will  have  the  honor  of 

'  Francois  Jean,  Marquis  de  Chastellux,  was  one  of  the  most  dis- 
tinguished of  our  French  alHes;  he  was  bom  in  1734,  and  died  in  1788. 
He  was  something  of  a  Hterary  man,  and  left,  among  other  works,  an 
entertaining  accoimt  of  his  adventures  in  this  coimtry.  He  became 
Marquis  in  the  year  1784. 

2  Colonel  Matthew  Clarkson,  of  New  York,  a  distinguished  officer  of 
the  Revolution,  born  in  1759;  died  in  1825.  He  was  aid-de-camp  to 
General  Gates,  and  severely  woimded  at  the  battle  of  Stillwater. 


404  Alexander  Hamilton 

delivering  you  this,  being  already  known  to  you,  I  give 
him  this  letter  more  for  the  sake  of  renewing  to  you 
the  assurances  of  my  attachment  and  esteem,  than 
from  a  supposition  that  he  will  stand  in  need  of  any 
new  title  to  your  attention.  I  will  therefore  only 
say  of  him  that  his  excellent  qualities  cannot  be 
known  without  interesting  those  to  whom  they  are 
known,  and  that  from  a  personal  and  warm  regard 
for  him,  I  should  be  happy,  if  any  thing  I  could  say, 
could  be  an  additional  motive  for  your  coimtenance 
and  civilities  to  him. 

I  speak  of  him  in  the  light  of  a  friend.  As  a  mes- 
senger of  science,  he  cannot  fail  to  acquire  the 
patronage  of  one  of  her  favorite  ministers.  He  com- 
bines with  the  views  of  private  satisfaction,  which  a 
voyage  to  Europe  cannot  but  afford,  an  imdertaking 
for  the  benefit  of  a  seminary  of  learning,  lately  in- 
stituted in  this  State. 

Learning  is  the  common  concern  of  mankind; 
and  why  may  not  poor  republicans,  who  can  do 
little  more  than  wish  her  well,  send  abroad  to  solicit 
the  favor  of  her  patrons  and  friends?  Her  ambas- 
sador will  tell  you  his  errand.  I  leave  it  to  your 
mistress  to  command  and  to  the  trustees  of  the  in- 
stitution to  ask  your  permission  in  promoting  his 
mission. 

Permit  me  only  to  add  that  if  there  is  any  thing  in 
this  country  by  which  I  can  contribute  to  your  satis- 
faction, nothing  will  make  me  happier  at  all  times 
than  that  your  commands  may  enable  me  to  give  you 
proofs  of  the  respectful  and  affectionate  attachment 
with  which,  etc. 


Private  Correspondence  405 

TO  HIS  BROTHER,  JAMES  HAMILTON — ST.  THOMAS 

New  York,  Jtine  23,  1785. 

My  Dear  Brother: 

I  have  received  your  letter  of  the  31st  of  May 
last,  which  and  one  other  are  the  only  letters  I  have 
received  from  you  in  many  years.  You  did  not  re- 
ceive one  which  I  wrote  to  you  about  six  months  ago. 
The  situation  you  describe  yourself  to  be  in  gives  me 
much  pain,  and  nothing  will  make  me  happier  than, 
as  far  as  may  be  in  my  power,  to  contribute  to  your 
relief.  I  will  cheerfully  pay  your  draft  upon  me 
for  fifty  pounds  sterling  whenever  it  shall  appear.  I 
wish  it  was  in  my  power  to  desire  you  to  enlarge  the 
sum;  but,  though  my  future  prospects  are  of  the 
most  flattering  kind,  my  present  engagements  would 
render  it  inconvenient  to  me  to  advance  a  larger 
sum.  My  affection  for  you,  however,  will  not  permit 
me  to  be  inattentive  to  your  welfare,  and  I  hope 
time  will  prove  to  you  that  I  feel  all  the  sentiments 
of  a  brother.  Let  me  only  to  request  of  you  to  exert 
your  industry  for  a  year  or  two  more  where  you  are, 
and  at  the  end  of  that  time  I  promise  myself  to  be 
able  to  invite  you  to  a  more  comfortable  settlement 
in  this  country.  But  what  has  become  of  our  dear 
father?  It  is  an  age  since  I  have  heard  from  him,  or 
of  him,  though  I  have  written  him  several  letters. 
Perhaps,  alas,  he  is  no  more,  and  I  shall  not  have  the 
pleasing  opportunity  of  contributing  to  render  the 
close  of  his  life  more  happy  than  the  progress  of  it. 
My  heart  bleeds  at  the  recollection  of  his  misfortunes 
and  embarrassments.  Sometimes  I  flatter  myself  his 
brothers  have  extended  their  support  to  him,  and 


4o6  Alexander  Hamilton 

that  he  now  enjoys  tranquillity  and  ease.  At  other 
times  I  fear  he  is  suffering  in  indigence.  Should  he 
be  alive,  inform  him  of  my  inquiries;  beg  him  to 
write  to  me,  and  tell  him  how  ready  I  shall  be  to  de- 
vote myself  and  all  I  have  to  his  accommodation  and 
happiness.  I  do  not  advise  your  coming  to  this 
country  at  present,  for  the  war  has  also  put  things 
out  of  order  here,  and  people  in  your  business  find  a 
subsistence  difficult  enough.  My  object  will  be,  by 
and  by,  to  get  you  settled  on  a  farm.' 


TO    ISRAEL   WILKES  ^ 

November  8,  1785. 

Sir: 

The  message  which  you  sent  me  yesterday,  and 
your  letter  today,  were  conceived  in  terms  to  which 

'  Reprinted  from  the  Reminiscences  of  J  as.  A.  Hamilton,  p.  2. 

^  This  letter  is  given  in  the  edition  of  1850  as  addressed  to  John 
Wilkes,  but  as  he  was  never  in  this  country,  the  first  sentence,  "the 
message  which  you  sent  me  yesterday  and  your  letter  today,"  shows 
that  it  could  not  have  been  written  to  John  Wilkes,  but  must  have  been 
addressed  to  some  one  in  New  York.  The  following  letter,  now  first 
printed  from  the  Hamilton  papers  in  the  State  Department,  throws 
light  on  the  subject: 

TO  . 

New  York,  June  18, 1784. 
Sir: 

I  have  been  duly  honored  with  your  letter  of  the  30th  of  March, 
and  am  much  flattered  by  the  confidence  you  have  reposed  in  me.  I 
should  with  pleasure  have  undertaken  to  execute  your  wishes  had  I 
been  in  a  situation  that  left  me  at  liberty  to  do  it ;  but  it  has  happened 
that  Mr.  Wilkes,  some  time  since,  applied  to  me  on  the  same  subject ;  and 
though  I  was  not  absolutely  retained  by  him,  yet  as  I  have  been  con- 
sulted on  the  business,  I  should  conceive  it  improper  to  act  against 
him.  In  this  dilemma,  as  you  were  at  a  great  distance,  and  he  might 
elude  your  pursuit  before  you  could  make  a  new  choice  of  a  person  to 
manage  the  affair  for  you,  I  thought  it  my  duty  to  transfer  the  trust 
to  some  person  on  the  spot,  to  whose  judgment  and  integrity  your 


Private  Correspondence  407 

I  am  little  accustomed.  Were  I  to  consult  my  feel- 
ings only  upon  the  occasion,  I  should  return  an  an- 
swer very  different  from  that  which  I  have,  in  justice 
to  my  own  conduct,  resolved  upon.     But  in  what- 

interests  might  be  safely  committed.  I  have  fixed  upon  Mr.  Samuel 
Jones  '  for  this  purpose,  a  gentleman  as  distinguished  for  his  probity 
as  for  his  professional  knowledge,  and  have  accordingly  substituted 
him  in  my  place. 

He  has  had  Mr.  Wilkes  arrested  upon  your  demand,  who,  not  being 
able  to  obtain  bail,  is  of  course,  in  prison.  This  has  been  done  in 
pursuance  of  your  intimation  that  Mr.  Wilkes'  friends  are  able  to  do 
something  for  him;  and  it  is  to  be  hoped  that,  rather  than  suffer  him 
to  be  in  jail,  they  will  either  satisfy  or  become  bound  for  at  least  a 
part  of  your  demand.  This  seems  to  be  your  only  resource;  for  he 
has  no  property  in  this  country,  and  has  been  of  late  in  no  way  of 
acqtiiring  any. 

He  did  not  (as  you  had  been  informed)  accompany  Mrs.  Hayley  ^ 
to  this  country;  but  it  is  reported  that  she  has  lately  arrived  at 
Boston. 

I  am  requested  by  Mr.  Jones  to  mention  to  you  that  it  will  be 
necessary  you  should  furnish  him  with  the  account  of  sales  rendered 
by  Mr.  Wilkes,  and,  at  the  same  time,  with  the  bills  of  exchange  which 
he  accepted.  He  wishes  to  be  possessed  of  these  as  evidence  in  case 
of  a  controverted  suit.  You  mention  that  the  bills  of  exchange  were 
sent  to  New  York,  but  you  do  not  say  to  whom.  On  tracing  the  mat- 
ter, we  have  reason  to  conclude  they  were  sent  to  Mr.  McAdam;  but 
as  he  is  now  in  England,  we  cannot  have  recourse  to  him  to  obtain 
them.  Circumstanced  as  I  am,  I  must  now  take  leave  of  this  business, 
without  acting  hereafter  on  either  side. 

But  as  a  just  representation  of  facts  is  always  most  conducive  to  the 
settlement  of  disputes,  and  may  enable  you  the  better  to  judge  what 
course  it  will  be  proper  for  you  to  pursue,  I  think  it  incumbent  upon 
me,  from  the  confidence  you  have  been  pleased  to  repose  in  me,  to 
inform  you  that  I  have  taken  pains  to  ascertain  the  quality  and  con- 


^  Afterwards  Chief  Justice  of  New  York,  called  "the  father  of  the 
New  York  Bar,"  and  a  very  eminent  lawyer. 

2  Mary  Wilkes,  youngest  sister  of  the  famous  agitator,  married,  first, 
Samuel  Stork,  merchant,  of  London;  second,  George  Hayley,  alder- 
man. After  the  death  of  Mr.  Hayley  she  came  to  this  country,  and 
remained  for  some  time,  chiefly  in  Boston,  where  she  married  her 
third  husband,  Mr.  Jeffreys,  with  whom  she  returned  to  London  in 
1803. 


4o8  Alexander  Hamilton 

ever  light  we  are  to  view  each  other  hereafter,  and 
however  harsh  and  indelicate  I  may  think  the  method 
you  have  taken  to  obtain  an  explanation  to  be,  I 
shall,  for  my  own  part,  leave  no  room  to  suppose 

dition  of  the  wines  of  both  cargoes  on  their  arrival  in  this  cotintry ;  and 
the  result  of  my  inquiries  of  gentlemen  who  could  not  be  mistaken  in 
the  matter,  and  on  whose  veracity  I  can  depend,  has  been  that  the 
wine  of  the  second,  as  well  as  the  first,  cargo  was  in  general  either 
damaged  or  of  indifferent  quality,  and  necessarily  sold  at  very  low 
rates. 

I  am  inclined  to  suspect  that  Mr.  Wilkes'  intention  will  be  to  en- 
deavor to  procure  an  act  of  insolvency  in  his  favor  at  the  next  meeting 
of  the  Legislature  (continuing  in  the  meantime  in  confinement),  and 
that  he  will  in  this  expectation  rather  discourage  his  friends  from 
becoming  sureties  for  him. 

I  think,  with  proper  management  on  the  part  of  those  concerned  for 
you,  it  will  be  very  difficult  for  him  to  succeed  in  this  scheme;  but 
moderation  in  your  behalf  will  be  best  calculated  to  frustrate  the 
experiment,  and  lay  him  under  a  necessity  of  calling  in  the  aid  of  his 
friends. 

I  persuade  myself  you  will  do  justice  to  the  motives  of  these  intima- 
tions, and,  though  I  have  it  not  in  my  power  to  serve  you  upon  the 
present  occasion,  will  permit  me  to  make  you  an  offer  of  my  best 
services  upon  every  other,  and  to  assure  you  that  I  am,  with  much 
consideration  and  esteem,  etc.^ 


I  This  letter  has  no  address,  but  is  evidently  written  to  some  one  in 
England  who  wished  to  retain  Hamilton  as  counsel.  The  allusion  to 
Mrs.  Hayley  makes  it  clear  that  the  Mr.  Wilkes  to  whom  the  letter  in 
the  text  was  addressed  was  of  the  agitator's  family,  while  the  letter 
just  given  shows  that  it  could  not  have  been  John  Wilkes,  as  Mr.  J.  C. 
Hamilton  has  it,  because  an  eminent  New  York  lawyer  could  not  have 
arrested  and  put  in  prison  in  New  York  a  man  who  was  never  in  this 
country.  It  is  plain,  therefore,  that  the  Mr.  Wilkes  intended  was  the 
eldest  brother  of  the  agitator,  Israel  Wilkes,  who  came  to  New  York 
at  quite  an  early  age  and,  with  the  exception  of  occasional  visits  to 
England,  remained  there  until  his  death  in  his  eighty-first  year.  It  is 
impossible  now  to  unravel  the  details  of  the  affair,  and  as  it  was  purely 
a  matter  of  business  the  letters  might  have  been  omitted  had  not  Mr. 
J.  C.  Hamilton  seen  fit  to  print  one  of  them  with  what  must  be  a  wrong 
address.  I  have  not  been  able  to  determine,  or  even  guess  at,  Hamil- 
ton's would-be  chent.  It  may  be  that  he  was  the  Mr.  Macaulay 
mentioned  in  the  letter  in  the  text,  but  that  helps  us  but  little.     Mrs. 


Private  Correspondence  409 

that  I  intentionally  gave  you  any  cause  to  com- 
plain.    I   shall,    therefore,    explicitly   declare,    that 

Macaulay,  the  historian,  was  in  intimate  relation  with  the  Wilkes 
family,  and  is  constantly  mentioned  in  the  letters  of  John  Wilkes  and 
his  daughter,  but  her  husband  was  not  Mr.  but  Dr.  Macaulay.  The 
most  curious  thing  is  that  Mr.  J.  C.  Hamilton  prints  an  answer  from 
"John  Wilkes,"  written  in  reply  to  Hamilton's  of  the  day  before, 
given  above. 


WILKES  TO  HAMILTON 
Sir:  November  9,  1785. 

The  moment  I  received  yours,  I  perceived  the  precipitancy  of  my 
own  conduct,  and  was  very  sorry  I  had  so  far  mistaken  both  our 
characters  as  to  act  in  the  manner  I  have  done.  I  flatter  myself  that 
the  same  candor  which  has  dictated  yours  will  be  exerted  towards 
mine,  and  that  you  will  only  view  it  as  the  act  of  a  man  who  con- 
ceived himself  injured.  As  you  have  never  experienced  the  cruel 
reverses  of  fortune,  you  can  scarcely  judge  how  the  least  insinuations 
to  their  prejudice  will  affect  those  persons  who  have;  or  how  much 
more  suspicious  they  are  of  the  behavior  of  mankind  towards  them. 

The  morning  I  left  the  message  for  you  I  had  been  called  upon  by 
one  of  the  creditors  of  Mr.  Heart,  who  thought  it  very  strange  no 
dividend  was  made ;  and  he  insinuated  some  party  must  be  interested 
in  the  delay.  It  is  the  first  money  transaction  I  have  engaged  in  since 
my  release.  I  felt  the  insinuation  as  alluding  to  me,  and  with  a  force 
which,  perhaps,  I  should  not.  However,  that  moment  I  went  to  your 
office. 

The  next  morning,  when  I  saw  your  note  to  Mr.  Atkinson,  and  found 
myself  totally  set  aside  in  a  business  where  I  had,  most  undoubtedly, 
been  originally  neglected,  I  felt  myself  very  much  agitated,  and  in  that 
frame  of  mind  I  wrote  my  last  to  you. 

So  much  I  thought  it  necessary  to  add  in  explanation. 

I  am  convinced  now  I  have  been  too  hasty,  and  I  am  sorry  for  it. 
It  will  put  me  on  my  guard  in  future,  and,  I  make  no  doubt,  prove 
beneficial  to  me,  provided  it  has  not  been  the  means  of  hurting  me  in 
your  estimation,  which  I  am  now  more  desirous  than  ever  of  obtaining. 
I  am,  sir,  etc.  John  Wilkes.^ 

'  I  have  shown  that  the  Wilkes  in  question  must  have  been  one  of 
the  family  of  the  English  agitator,  and  could  not  have  been  the 
agitator  himself,  but  could,  and  indeed  must  have  been,  his  brother 
Israel.  Why  Mr.  J.  C.  Hamilton  should  have  printed  the  letter  as  from 
John  Wilkes  cannot  be  determined.  That  the  original  should  have 
been  signed  "  John  Wilkes  "  seems  most  unlikely. 


4IO  Alexander  Hamilton 

whatever  inattention  may  have  appeared  towards 
you,  was  solely  owing  to  the  continual  hurry  in 
which  my  engagements,  for  a  long  time  past,  have 
kept  me ;  and  that,  so  far  from  its  having  been  occa- 
sioned by  any  designed  neglect,  it  was  what,  under 
the  circumstances,  might  have  happened  to  my  best 
friend.  Indeed,  much  of  what  you  mention  to  have 
been  done  by  you,  I  am  a  stranger  to.  The  frequent 
callings,  by  yourself  and  by  your  servant,  did  not, 
that  I  recollect,  come  to  my  knowledge.  It  is  possi- 
ble some  of  them  might  have  been  mentioned  to  me, 
and,  in  the  hurry  of  my  mind,  forgotten.  Once,  I 
remember,  I  saw  your  servant  just  as  I  was  going  out 
on  some  urgent  business.  I  sent  a  verbal  message, 
promising  that  I  would  see  you;  which  I  intended 
to  do,  as  soon  as  I  had  made  up  my  resolution  on 
the  business  of  the  interview.  When  I  received  your 
note  I  was  about  sending  you  an  answer  in  writing; 
but,  upon  inquiring  for  your  servant,  and  finding 
him  gone,  I  omitted  it,  with  an  intention  to  see  you 
personally. 

You  say  it  is  near  six  months  since  you  first  ap- 
plied to  me  on  the  business  in  question.  A  great 
part  of  the  time  I  gave  you  all  the  answer  I  could 
give  you — to  wit,  that  I  had  written  to  Mr.  Macaulay, 
and  only  waited  his  answer.  About  two  months 
since,  I  received  it.  I  have  been  the  greater  part  of 
the  time  out  of  town  on  indispensable  business.  In 
the  intervals  I  have  been  occupied  about  objects  of 
immediate  and  absolute  necessity,  which  could  not 
have  been  delayed  without  letting  my  business  run 
into  utter  confusion.     Mr.  Macaulay 's  concerns  have 


Private  Correspondence  411 

been  hanging  upon  my  spirits.  I  have  been  prom- 
ising myself,  from  day  to  day,  to  bring  them  to  a 
conclusion,  but  more  pressing  objects  have  unavoid- 
ably postponed  it.  I  thought  the  delay  required 
some  apology  to  Mr.  Macaulay,  but  I  never  dreamt 
of  having  given  occasion  of  offence  to  you. 

I  will  not,  however,  deny,  upon  a  review  of  what 
has  passed,  that  there  have  been,  through  hurry  and 
inadvertency  on  my  part,  appearances  of  neglect 
towards  you;  but  between  gentlemen  and  men  of 
business,  unfavorable  conclusions  ought  not  to  be 
drawn  before  explanations  are  asked.  Allowances 
ought  to  be  made  for  the  situations  of  parties ;  and 
the  omissions  of  men,  deeply  involved  in  business, 
ought  rather  to  be  ascribed  to  that  cause  than  to  ill 
intentions. 

Had  you,  in  the  first  instance,  expressed  to  me 
(in  such  a  manner  as  respect  for  yourself  and  deli- 
cacy to  me  dictated)  your  sense  of  these  appearances, 
I  should  have  taken  pains  to  satisfy  you  that  nothing 
improper  towards  you  was  intended  by  me.  But  to 
make  one  of  my  clerks  the  instrument  of  communica- 
tion, and  the  bearer  to  me  of  a  harsh  accusation,  was 
ill-judged  and  ungenteel.  To  take  it  for  granted 
that  you  had  received  an  injury  from  me,  without 
first  giving  me  an  opportunity  of  an  explanation,  and 
to  couch  your  sense  of  it  in  terms  so  offensive  as 
some  of  those  used  in  your  letter,  is  an  additional 
instance  of  precipitation  and  rudeness.  Inadver- 
tencies susceptible  of  misapprehension,  I  may  com- 
mit; but  I  am  incapable  of  intending  to  wound  or 
injure  any  man  who  has  given  me  no  cause  for  it; 


412  Alexander  Hamilton 

and  I  am  incapable  of  doing  any  thing,  sir,  of  which 
I  need  be  ashamed.  The  intimation,  on  your  part, 
is  unmerited  and  unwarrantable.  After  thus  having 
explained  my  own  conduct  to  you,  and  given  you 
my  ideas  of  yours,  it  will  depend  on  yourself  how  far 
I  shall  be  indifferent,  or  not,  to  your  future  senti- 
ments of  my  character.  I  shall  only  add,  that  to- 
morrow you  shall  receive  from  me  my  determination 
on  the  matter  of  business  between  us. 


TO   WASHINGTON 

November  23,  1785. 

Dear  Sir: 

Major  Fairly  is  just  setting  out  on  a  visit  to  you, 
I  believe,  on  some  business  relating  to  the  Cincinnati. 
The  society  of  this  State  met  some  short  time  since, 
and  took  into  consideration  the  proposed  alterations 
in  the  original  frame  of  the  Institution;  some  were 
strenuous  for  adhering  to  the  old  constitution,  a  few 
adopting  the  new,  and  many  for  a  middle  line.  This 
disagreement  of  opinion  and  the  consideration  that 
the  different  State  societies  pursuing  different  courses 
— some  adopting  the  alterations  entire,  others  re- 
jecting them  in  the  same  way,  others  adopting  in 
part  and  rejecting  in  part — might  beget  confusion 
and  defeat  good  purposes,  induced  a  proposal  which 
was  unanimously  agreed  to,  that  a  committee  should 
be  appointed  to  prepare  and  lay  before  the  society  a 
circular-letter  expressive  of  the  sense  of  the  society 
on  the  different  alterations  proposed,  and  recom- 
mending the  giving  powers  to  a  general  meeting  of 


Private  Correspondence  4^3 

the  Cincinnati,  to  make  such  alterations  as  might 
be  thought  advisable  to  obviate  objections  and  pro- 
mote the  interests  of  the  society.  I  believe  there 
will  be  no  difficulty  in  agreeing  to  change  the  present 
mode  of  continuing  the  society ;  but  it  appears  to  be 
the  wish  of  our  members  that  some  other  mode  may 
be  defined  and  substituted,  and  that  it  might  not  be 
left  to  the  uncertainty  of  legislative  provision.  We 
object,  too,  to  putting  the  fimds  under  legislative 
direction.  Indeed,  it  appears  to  us,  the  Legisla- 
tures will  not  at  present  be  inclined  to  give  us  any 
sanction.  I  am  of  the  committee,  and  I  cannot 
but  flatter  myself  that  when  the  object  is  better 
digested  and  more  fiilly  explained  it  will  meet  your 
approbation. 

The  poor  Baron  '  is  still  soliciting  Congress,  and 
has  every  prospect  of  indigence  before  him.  He  has 
his  imprudences,  but,  upon  the  whole,  he  has  ren- 
dered valuable  services,  and  his  merits  and  the  repu- 
tation of  the  country  alike  demand  that  he  should 
not  be  left  to  suffer  want. 

If  there  could  be  any  mode  by  which  your  influ- 
ence could  be  employed  in  his  favor,  by  writing  to 
your  friends  in  Congress,  or  otherwise,  the  Baron  and 
his  friends  would  be  imder  great  obligations  to  you. 


TO   NATHANIEL   HAZARD 

Q  April  24,  1786. 

Your  letter  of  the  21st  was  only  delivered  me  this 
morning.     The  good  opinion  of  liberal  men  I  hold  in 

*  Steuben. 


414  Alexander  Hamilton 

too  high  estimation  not  to  be  flattered  by  that  part 
of  your  letter  which  relates  to  me  personally.  The 
other  part  I  have  communicated  to  General  Schuyler, 
and  he  assures  me  he  will  see  all  his  friends  this 
afternoon  upon  the  subject ;  so  that  I  have  no  doubt, 
as  far  as  his  influence  extends,  it  will  be  employed 
in  favor  of  the  success  of  the  bill  in  the  Assembly,  as 
it  has  already  been  in  the  Senate. 

In  taking  this  step,  however,  I  would  not  be  under- 
stood to  declare  any  opinion  concerning  the  prin- 
ciples of  the  bill,  with  which  I  am  not  sufficiently 
acquainted  to  form  a  decided  opinion.  I  have 
merely  made  your  letter  the  occasion  of  introducing 
the  subject  to  General  Schuyler,  whose  sentiments 
are  as  favorable  to  your  wishes  as  you  could  desire. 

I  make  this  observation  from  that  spirit  of  candor 
which  I  hope  will  always  direct  my  conduct.  I  am 
aware  that  I  have  been  represented  as  an  enemy  to 
the  wishes  of  what  you  call  your  corps.  If  by  this 
has  been  meant  that  I  do  not  feel  as  much  as  any 
man,  not  immediately  interested,  for  the  distresses  of 
those  merchants  who  have  been  in  a  great  measure 
the  victims  of  the  Revolution,  the  supposition  does 
not  do  justice  either  to  my  head  or  my  heart.  But 
if  it  means  that  I  have  always  viewed  the  mode  of 
relieving  them  as  a  matter  of  peculiar  delicacy  and 
difficulty,  it  is  well  founded. 

I  should  have  thought  it  unnecessary  to  enter  into 
this  explanation,  were  it  not  that  I  am  held  up  as  a 
candidate  at  the  ensuing  election;  and  I  would  not 
wish  that  the  step  I  have  taken  in  respect  to  your 
letter  should  be  considered  as  implying  more  than  it 


Private  Correspondence  4^5 

does;  for  I  would  never  wish  to  conciliate  at  the 
expense  of  candor.  On  the  other  hand,  I  confide  in 
your  liberality  not  to  infer  more  than  I  intend  from 
the  explanation  I  have  given ;  and  hope  you  will  be- 
lieve me  to  be,  with  great  cordiality  and  esteem,  etc. 


to  messrs.  semphill  &  co. 

Gentlemen:  ^^"^  ^'^^^'  ^^^  '°'  '^86. 

On  the  recommendation  of  Mr.  Nicholas  Cruger,' 
of  this  city,  I  take  the  liberty  to  commit  to  your  care 
a  small  matter  in  which  I  am  interested.  I  am  in- 
formed that  Mr.  John  Hallwood,  a  relation  of  mine, 
who  died  some  time  since  in  St.  Croix,  has,  by  his 
will,  left  me  one-fourth  part  of  his  estate.  The 
amount,  I  imagine,  is  not  very  considerable,  but, 
whatever  it  may  be,  I  shall  be  glad  to  have  it 
collected  and  remitted.  Mr.  Hallwood 's  estate,  I 
believe,  consisted  entirely  in  his  share  in  his  grand- 
father's estate,  Mr.  James  Lytton,"  whose  affairs 
have  been  a  long  time  in  a  dealing  [sic]  court,  but 
one  would  hope  are  now  ready  for  a  final  settlement. 
Dr.  Hugh  Knox  can  give  you  further  information  on 
the  subject. 

^  Hamilton's  early  friend  and  employer. 

2Mr.  Hallwood's  grandfather  was  Mr  James  Lytton,as  it  here  appears, 
and  Mr.  Hallwood  was  a  relative  of  Hamilton.  In  the  appendix  to  my 
Life  of  Hamilton  (American  Statesmen  Series),  p.  294,  I  have  dis- 
cussed, in  connection  with  the  question  of  his  parentage,  his  relation- 
ship to  the  Lyttons.  This  letter  tends  to  show  that,  if  the  view  there 
suggested  is  probable,  Hamilton's  mother  was  a  Miss  Lytton,  and  not 
Miss  Faucette.  This  letter  is  valuable  only  on  this  account,  for  it 
proves  beyond  a  peradventure  Hamilton's  relationship  to  the  Lyttons, 
which  is  mentioned  by  Mr.  John  C.  Hamilton  in  the  first  and  un- 
finished Life,  but  which  is  omitted  in  the  History  of  the  Republic, 


4^6  Alexander  Hamilton 

As  I  know  money  concerns  in  your  island  rarely 
improve  by  delay,  if  things  should  not  be  in  a  train 
to  admit  of  an  immediate  settlement,  I  shall  be  ready, 
to  effect  this  to  transfer  my  claim  to  any  person  who 
may  incline  to  the  purchase  at  a  discount  of  five  and 
twenty  per  cent. 

This,  however,  I  submit  to  your  discretion,  and 
authorize  you  to  do  whatever  you  think  for  my  in- 
terest. Inclosed  I  send  you  a  power  of  attorney, 
which  I  presume  you  will  find  competent.  Should 
it  be  in  my  power  to  render  you  any  services  here,  I 
shall  with  pleasure  obey  your  commands. 


TO  JOHN  THOMAS,   ESQ.,  SHERIFF  OF  WESTCHESTER 

New  York,  June  22,  1786. 

Sir: 

I  think  it  necessary  to  apprise  you  that  in  my 
opinion  you  will  not  be  safe  in  taking  paper  money 
on  executions,  without  the  consent  of  the  parties, 
and  in  those  which  I  have  sent  to  you  that  consent  I 
believe  cannot  be  obtained. 

This  is  a  matter,  however,  which  I  mention  to  you 
in  confidence,  for  your  own  safety.  I  would  not  wish 
to  have  much  said  about  it  till  you  should  be  under 
a  necessity  of  explaining  yourself,  lest  it  should  in- 
jure the  credit  of  the  paper  on  its  first  appearance, 
to  which  (whatever  be  my  opinion  of  the  measure 
itself  since  it  has  been  adopted)  I  would  not  wish  to 
be  accessory. ' 

*  Now  first  printed  from  the  Hamilton  papers  in  the  State  Depart- 
ment. 


Private  Correspondence  4^7 

TO   WASHINGTON 

New  York,  Jtily  3,  1787. 

Dear  Sir: 

In  my  passage  through  the  Jerseys,  and  since  my 
arrival  here,  I  have  taken  particular  pains  to  dis- 
cover the  public  sentiment,  and  I  am  more  and  more 
convinced  that  this  is  the  critical  opportunity  for 
establishing  the  prosperity  of  this  country  on  a  solid 
foundation.  I  have  conversed  with  men  of  informa- 
tion, not  only  in  this  city,  but  from  different  parts  of 
the  State,  and  they  agree  that  there  has  been  an 
astonishing  revolution  for  the  better  in  the  minds  of 
the  people. 

The  prevailing  apprehension  among  thinking  men 
is,  that  the  Convention,  from  the  fear  of  shocking 
the  popular  opinion,  will  not  go  far  enough.  They 
seem  to  be  convinced  that  a  strong,  well-mounted 
government  will  better  suit  the  popular  palate  than 
one  of  a  different  complexion.  Men  in  office  are  in- 
deed taking  all  possible  pains  to  give  an  unfavorable 
impression  of  the  Convention,  but  the  current  seems 
to  be  moving  strongly  the  other  way. 

A  plain  but  sensible  man,  in  a  conversation  I  had 
with  him  yesterday,  expressed  himself  nearly  in 
this  manner:  The  people  begin  to  be  convinced  that 
"their  excellent  form  of  government,"  as  they  have 
been  used  to  call  it,  will  not  answer  their  purpose,  and 
that  they  must  substitute  something  not  very  remote 
from  that  which  they  have  lately  quitted. 

These  appearances,  though  they  will  not  warrant 
a  conclusion  that  the  people  are  yet  ripe  for  such  a 
plan  as  I  advocate,  yet  serve  to  prove  that  there  is 

VOL.  IX.— 27. 


4i8  Alexander  Hamilton 

no  reason  to  despair  of  their  adopting  one  equally 
energetic,  if  the  Convention  should  think  proper  to 
propose  it.  They  serve  to  prove  that  we  ought  not 
to  allow  too  much  weight  to  objections  drawn  from 
the  supposed  repugnance  of  the  people  to  an  efficient 
constitution.  I  confess  I  am  more  and  more  in- 
clined to  believe  that  former  habits  of  thinking  are 
regaining  their  influence  with  more  rapidity  than  is 
generally  imagined. 

Not  having  compared  ideas  with  you,  sir,  I  cannot 
judge  how  far  our  sentiments  agree;  but,  as  I  per- 
suade myself  the  genuineness  of  my  representations 
will  receive  credit  with  you,  my  anxiety  for  the  event 
of  the  deliberations  of  the  Convention  induces  me  to 
make  this  communication  of  what  appears  to  be  the 
tendency  of  the  public  mind. 

I  own  to  you,  sir,  that  I  am  seriously  and  deeply 
distressed  at  the  aspect  of  the  counsels  which  pre- 
vailed when  I  left  Philadelphia.  I  fear  that  we 
shall  let  slip  the  golden  opportunity  of  rescuing  the 
American  empire  from  disunion,  anarchy,  and  misery. 

No  motly  or  feeble  measure  can  answer  the  end, 
or  will  finally  receive  the  public  support.  Decision 
is  true  wisdom,  and  will  be  not  less  reputable  to  the 
Convention  than  salutary  to  the  community. . 

I  shall  of  necessity  remain  here  ten  or  twelve  days. 
If  I  have  reason  to  believe  that  my  attendance  at 
Philadelphia  will  not  be  mere  waste  of  time,  I  shall, 
after  that  period,  rejoin  the  Convention. 


Private  Correspondence  4^9 

TO  ' 

New  York, ,  1787. 

Dear  Sir: 

Agreeably  to  what  passed  between  us,  I  have  had 
an  interview  with  Mr.  Auldjo,  and  I  flatter  myself  if 
there  is  (as  I  doubt  not  there  will  be)  as  much  mod- 
eration on  the  part  of  Major  Peirce  as  there  appears 
to  be  on  that  of  Mr.  Auldjo,  that  the  affair  between 
them  may  yet  be  amicably  terminated. 

But  Mr.  Auldjo  observes,  I  confess  in  my  opinion 
with  propriety,  that  he  ought  to  know  with  some 
precision  the  matters  which  have  given  offence  to 
Major  Peirce,  before  he  can  enter  into  explanations, 
which  he  declares  himself  to  be  very  ready  to  do  with 
coolness  and  candor  the  moment  he  shall  be  enabled 
to  do  it  by  a  specification  of  the  subjects  of  com- 
plaint. If  a  personal  interview  is  for  any  reason 
disagreeable  to  Major  Peirce,  I  entreat  you,  my  dear 
sir,  to  obtain  from  him  and  to  communicate  to  me 
by  letter  the  substance  of  what  has  occasioned  his 
dissatisfaction,  with  so  much  particularity  only  as 
will  put  it  in  the  power  of  Mr.  Auldjo  to  give  an  ex- 
plicit answer.  Major  Peirce  will,  I  hope,  have  no 
scruples  about  this,  for  as  the  door  of  explanation 
has  been  opened  by  Mr.  Auldjo,  there  is  no  punctilio 
which  stands  in  his  way ;  and  I  trust  he  will  feel  the 
force  of  a  sentiment  which  prudence  and  humanity 
equally  dictate,  that  extremities  ought  then  only  to 
ensue  when  after  a  fair  experiment  accommodation 

'  Addressed  presumably  to  the  second  of  Major  Peirce  in  the  affair 
of  honor  which  seems  to  have  been  impending  between  that  gentleman 
and  Hamilton's  friend  Mr.  Auldjo. 


420  Alexander  Hamilton 

has  been  found  impracticable.  An  attention  to  this 
principle  interests  the  characters  of  both  the  gentle- 
men concerned,  and  with  them  our  own,  and  from 
every  other  consideration,  as  well  as  that  of  personal 
friendship  to  the  parties,  I  sincerely  wish  to  give  it 
its  full  operation.  I  am  convinced  you  are  not  less 
anxious  to  effect  this  than  myself,  and  I  trust  our 
joint  endeavors  will  not  prove  unsuccessful. 

I  cannot,  however,  conclude  without  making  one 
remark.  Though  Mr.  Auldjo  has  expressed  and  still 
entertains  a  desire  of  explanation,  it  would  ill  become 
him  to  solicit  it.  Whatever  therefore  in  my  expres- 
sions may  seem  to  urge  such  an  explanation  with 
the  earnestness  of  entreaty,  must  be  ascribed  to  my 
own  feelings  and  to  that  inclination  which  every  man 
of  sensibility  must  feel — not  to  see  extremities  take 
place  if  it  be  in  his  power  to  prevent  them,  or  until 
they  become  an  absolutely  necessary  sacrifice  to 
public  opinion. 


to  major  peirce 

Dear  Sir: 

As  the  enclosed  contains  details  relating  to  your 
private  affairs,  it  is  judged  most  delicate  to  put  it 
under  cover  to  you.  Permit  me  to  use  the  privilege 
of  a  friend  to  say,  that  what  has  appeared  to  you 
offensive  in  the  conduct  of  Mr.  Auldjo,  seems  to  have 
been  a  very  natural  result  of  disappointments  on  his 
side,  to  which  your  disappointments  gave  birth,  in- 
fluenced too,  perhaps,  in  some  degree  by  incidents 
which  may  have  been  misrepresented  or  misimder- 


Private  Correspondence  421 

stood.  His  explanations  speak  a  language  which  I 
sincerely  think  may  put  an  end  to  your  controversy — 
I  as  sincerely  hope  this  may  be  the  case.  I  speak 
with  the  more  freedom,  because  in  a  difference  be- 
tween men  I  esteem — a  difference  evidently  foreign 
from  any  real  enmity  between  them, — I  can  never 
consent  to  take  up  the  character  of  a  second  in  a 
duel  till  I  have  in  vain  tried  that  of  the  mediator. 
Be  content  with  enough,  for  more  ought  not  to  be 
expected.' 


TO   AULDJO 

New  York,  July  26,  1787. 

Sir: 

I  have  delivered  the  paper  you  committed  to  me, 
as  it  stood  altered,  to  Major  Peirce,  from  whose  con- 
duct I  am  to  conclude  the  affair  between  you  is  at 
an  end.  He  informs  me  that  he  is  shortly  to  set  out 
on  a  jaunt  up  the  North  River. 

As  you  intimate  a  wish  to  have  my  sentiments  in 
writing  on  the  transaction,  I  shall  with  pleasure  de- 
clare that  the  steps  you  have  taken  in  consequence 
of  Mr.  Peirce 's  challenge  have  been  altogether  in 
conformity  to  my  opinion  of  what  would  be  prudent, 
proper,  and  honorable  on  your  part.  They  seem  to 
have  satisfied  Mr.  Pierce's  scruples  arising  from  what 
he  apprehended  in  some  particulars  to  have  been 
your  conduct  to  him,  and  I  presume  we  are  to  hear 
nothing  further  of  the  matter. 

'  Now  first  printed  from  the  Hamilton  papers  in  the  State  Depart- 
ment. 


422  Alexander  Hamilton 

TO    RUFUS    KING  ' 

New  York,  August  20,  1787. 

Dear  Sir: 

Since  my  arrival  here  I  have  written  to  my  col- 
leagues, informing  them  if  either  of  them  would 
come  down,  I  would  accompany  him  to  Philadelphia; 
so  much  for  the  sake  of  propriety  and  public  opinion. 

In  the  meantime,  if  any  material  alteration  should 
happen  to  be  made  in  the  plan  now  before  the  Con- 
vention, I  will  be  obliged  to  you  for  a  communica- 
tion of  it.  I  will  also  be  obliged  to  you  to  let  me 
know  when  your  conclusion  is  at  hand,  for  I  would 
choose  to  be  present  at  that  time. 


TO    COLONEL   JEREMIAH    WADSWORTH  * 

August  20,  1787. 

My  Dear  Sir: 

The  inclosed  is  said  to  be  the  copy  of  a  letter 
circulating  in  your  State.  The  history  of  its 
appearance  among  us  is  that  it  was  sent  by  one 
Whitmorej  of  Stratford,  formerly  in  the  Paymaster- 
General's  office,  to  one  James  Reynolds  of  this  city. 

1  am  at  a  loss  clearly  to  understand  its  object,  and 
have  some  suspicion  that  it  has  been  fabricated  to 
excite  jealousy  against  the  Convention,  with  a  view 
at  an  opposition  to  their  recommendations.     At  all 

'  The  eminent  statesman  of  Massachusetts  and  New  York.  He  was 
always  one  of  Hamilton's  most  intimate  friends. 

2  Colonel  Jeremiah  Wadsworth,  of  Connecticut,  Commissary-General 
in  the  Revolutionary  army,  delegate  to  the  Continental,  and  member 
of  the  National,  Congress.  By  his  reply  to  this  letter  it  appears  that 
the  person  whom  Hamilton  calls  Whitmore  was  named  Wetmore. 


Private  Correspondence  423 

events,  I  wish,  if  possible,  to  trace  its  source,  and 
send  it  to  you  for  that  purpose. 

Whitmore  must  of  course  say  where  he  got  it,  and 
by  pursuing  the  information,  we  may  at  last  come 
at  the  author.  Let  me  know  the  political  connec- 
tions of  this  man  and  the  complexion  of  the  people 
most  active  in  the  circulation  of  the  letter.  Be  so 
good  as  to  attend  to  this  inquiry  somewhat  particu- 
larly, as  I  have  different  reasons  of  some  moment  for 
setting  it  on  foot. 


TO   RUFUS   KING 

New  York,  August  28,  1787. 

Dear  Sir: 

I  wrote  you  some  days  since  to  request  you  to  in- 
form me  when  there  was  a  prospect  of  your  finishing, 
as  I  intended  to  be  with  you  for  certain  reasons 
before  the  conclusion. 

It  is  whispered  here  that  some  late  changes  in 
your  scheme  have  taken  place  which  give  it  a  higher 
tone.  Is  this  the  case?  I  leave  town  to-day  to 
attend  a  circuit  in  a  neighboring  county,  from  which 
I  shall  return  the  last  of  the  week,  and  shall  be  glad 
to  find  a  line  from  you  explanatory  of  the  period  of 
the  probable  termination  of  your  business. 


TO   WASHINGTON 

October,  1787. 

Dear  Sir: 

You  probably  saw  some  time  since  some  animad- 
versions on  certain  expressions  of  Governor  Clinton 


424  Alexander  Hamilton 

respecting  the  Convention.  You  may  have  seen  a 
piece  signed  "A  RepubHcan,"  attempting  to  bring 
the  fact  into  question,  and  endeavoring  to  contro- 
vert the  conclusions  drawn  from  it,  if  true.  My  an- 
swer you  will  find  in  the  inclosed.  I  trouble  you 
with  it  merely  from  that  anxiety  which  is  natural  to 
every  man,  to  have  his  veracity  at  least  stand  in  a 
fair  light.  The  matter  seems  to  be  given  up  by  the 
Governor,  and  the  fact,  with  the  inferences  from  it, 
stand  against  him  in  full  force  and  operate  as  they 
ought  to  do. 

It  is,  however,  of  some  importance  to  the  party  to 
diminish  whatever  credit  or  influence  I  may  possess, 
and  to  effect  this  they  stick  at  nothing.  Among 
many  contemptible  artifices  practised  by  them  they 
have  had  recourse  to  an  insinuation  that  I  palmed 
myself  upon  you,  and  that  you  dismissed  me  from 
your  family.'  This  I  confess  hurts  my  feelings,  and 
if  it  obtains  credit,  will  require  a  contradiction. 

You,  sir,  will  undoubtedly  recollect  the  manner  in 
which  I  came  into  your  family  and  went  out  of  it, 
and  know  how  destitute  of  foundation  such  insinua- 
tions are.  My  confidence  in  your  justice  will  not 
permit  me  to  doubt  your  readiness  to  put  the  matter 
in  its  true  light  in  your  answer  to  this  letter.  It 
cannot  be  my  wish  to  give  any  complexion  to  the 
affair  which  might  excite  the  least  scruple  to  you, 

^  In  his  reply  to  this  letter,  Washington  says:  " But  as  you  say  it  is 
insinuated  by  some  of  your  political  adversaries  and  may  obtain  public 
credit,  'that  you  palmed  yourself  upon  me  and  was  dismissed  from  my 
family,*  and  call  upon  me  to  do  you  justice  by  a  recital  of  the  facts, 
I  do  therefore  explicitly  declare  that  both  charges  are  entirely  un- 
fovmded." 


Private  Correspondence  425 

but  I  confess  it  would  mortify  me  to  be  under  the 
imputation  either  of  having  obtruded  myself  into 
the  family  of  a  General  or  having  been  turned  out 
of  it. 

The  new  Constitution  is  as  popular  in  this  city  as 
it  is  possible  for  any  thing  to  be,  and  the  prospect 
thus  far  is  favorable  to  it  throughout  the  State. 
But  there  is  no  saying  what  turn  things  may  take 
when  the  full  flood  of  official  influence  is  let  loose 
against  it.  This  is  to  be  expected;  for,  though  the 
Governor  has  not  publicly  declared  himself,  his  par- 
ticular connections  and  confidential  friends  are  loud 
against  it. 

Mrs.  Hamilton  joins  in  respectful  compliments  to 
Mrs.  Washington. 


TO    WASHINGTON 

October  30,  1787. 

I  am  much  obliged  to  your  Excellency  for  the  ex- 
plicit manner  in  which  you  contradict  the  insinua- 
tions mentioned  in  my  last  letter.  The  only  use  I 
shall  make  of  your  answer  will  be  to  put  it  into  the 
hands  of  a  few  friends. 

The  constitution  proposed  has  in  this  State  warm 
friends  and  warm  enemies.  The  first  impressions 
everywhere  are  in  its  favor,  but  the  artillery  of  its 
opponents  makes  some  impression.  The  event  can- 
not yet  be  foreseen.  The  inclosed  is  the  first  number 
of  a  series  of  papers  to  be  written  in  its  defence.' 

I  send  you  also,  at  the  request  of  the  Baron  de 
Steuben,  a  printed  pamphlet  containing  the  grounds 

^  This  allusion  is  to  The  Federalist 


426  Alexander  Hamilton 

of  an  application  lately  made  to  Congress.  He  tells 
me  there  is  some  reference  to  you,  the  object  of 
which  he  does  not  himself  seem  clearly  to  under- 
stand, but  imagines  it  may  be  in  your  power  to  be 
of  service  to  him. 

There  are  public  considerations  that  induce  me  to 
be  somewhat  anxious  for  his  success.  He  is  fortified 
with  materials  which,  in  Europe,  could  not  fail  to 
establish  the  belief  of  the  contract  he  alleges.  The 
documents  of  service  he  possesses  are  of  a  nature 
to  convey  an  exalted  idea  of  them.  The  compen- 
sations he  has  received,  though  considerable,  if 
compared  with  those  which  have  been  received  by 
American  officers,  will,  according  to  European  ideas, 
be  very  scanty  in  application  to  a  stranger  who  is 
acknowledged  to  have  rendered  essential  services. 
Our  reputation  abroad  is  not  at  present  too  high. 
To  dismiss  an  old  soldier  empty  and  hungry,  to  seek 
the  bounty  of  those  on  whom  he  has  no  claims,  and 
to  complain  of  unkind  returns  and  violated  engage- 
ments, will  certainly  not  tend  to  raise  it.  I  confess, 
too,  there  is  something  in  my  feelings  which  would 
incline  me  in  this  case  to  go  further  than  might  be 
strictly  necessary,  rather  than  drive  a  man,  at  the 
Baron's  time  of  life,  who  has  been  a  faithful  servant, 
to  extremities.  And  this  is  unavoidable  if  he  does 
not  succeed  in  his  present  attempt.  What  he  asks 
would,  all  calculations  made,  terminate  in  this:  an 
allowance  of  his  five  hundred  and  eighty  guineas  a 
year.  He  only  wishes  a  recognition  of  the  contract. 
He  knows  that  until  affairs  mend  no  money  can  be 
produced.     I  do  not  know  how  far  it  may  be  in  your 


Private  Correspondence  427 

power  to  do  him  any  good,  but  I  shall  be  mistaken 
if  the  considerations  I  have  mentioned  do  not  appear 
to  your  Excellency  to  have  some  weight. 


TO   JAMES    MADISON,   JR. 

New  York,  April  3,  1788. 

I  have  been  very  delinquent,  my  dear  sir,  in  not 
thanking  you  for  your  letter  from  Philadelphia.  The 
remarks  you  made  on  a  certain  subject  are  impor- 
tant, and  will  be  attended  to. 

There  is  truly  much  embarrassment  in  the  case. 

I  think,  however,  the  principles  we  have  talked  of 
are  not  only  just,  but  will  apply  to  the  other  depart- 
ments. Nor  will  the  consequences  appear  so  dis- 
agreeable as  they  may  seem  at  first  sight,  when  we 
attend  to  the  true  import  of  the  rule  established. 
The  States  retain  all  the  authorities  they  were  be- 
fore possessed  of,  not  alienated  in  the  three  modes 
pointed  out;  but  this  does  not  include  cases  which 
are  the  creatures  of  the  new  Constitution.  For  in- 
stance, the  crime  of  treason  against  the  United 
States  immediately  is  a  crime  known  only  to  the  new 
Constitution.  There  of  course  was  no  power  in  the 
State  constitutions  to  pardon  that  crime.  There 
will  therefore  be  none  under  the  new,  etc.  This  is 
something  likely,  it  seems  to  me,  to  afford  the  best 
solution  of  the  difficulty.  I  send  you  the  Federalist 
from  the  beginning  to  the  conclusion  of  the  com- 
mentary on  the  Executive  Branch.  If  our  sus- 
picions of  the  author  be  right,  he  must  be  too  much 
engaged  to  make  a  rapid  progress  in  what  remains. 


428  Alexander  Hamilton 

The  Court  of  Chancery  and  a  Circuit  Court  are  now 
sitting. 

We  are  told  that  your  election  has  succeeded,  with 
which  we  all  felicitate  ourselves.  I  will  thank  you 
for  an  account  of  the  result  generally.  In  this  State 
our  prospects  are  much  as  you  left  them.  A  moot 
point  which  side  will  prevail.  Our  friends  to  the 
northward  are  active. 


TO  JAMES   MADISON,   JR. 

May  4,  1788. 

My  Dear  Sir: 

I  believe  I  am  in  your  debt  a  letter  or  two,  which 
is  owing  to  my  occupation  in  relation  to  the  elections, 
etc. 

These  are  now  over  in  this  State,  but  the  result  is 
not  known.  All  depends  upon  Albany,  where  both 
sides  claim  the  victory.  Our  doubts  will  not  be  re- 
moved till  the  latter  end  of  the  month.  I  hope  your 
expectations  of  Virginia  have  not  diminished. 

Respecting  the  first  volume  of  Puhlius  I  have  ex- 
ecuted your  commands.  The  books  have  been  sent 
addressed  to  the  care  of  Governor  Randolph.  The 
second,  we  are  informed,  will  be  out  in  the  course  of  a 
week,  and  an  equal  number  shall  be  forwarded.  In- 
closed is  a  letter,  committed  to  my  care  by  Mr.  Van- 
derkemp,  which  I  forward  with  pleasure. 


TO  gouverneur  morris 


My  Dear  Sir:  ^^^  y^^^-  ^^y  ^9. 1788. 

I  acknowledge  my  delinquency  in  not  thanking 
you  before  for  your  obliging  letter  from  Richmond. 


Private  Correspondence  429 

But  the  truth  is  that  I  have  been  so  overwhelmed  in 
avocations  of  one  kind  or  another,  that  I  have  scarcely 
had  a  moment  to  spare  to  a  friend.  You  I  trust  will 
be  the  less  disposed  to  be  inexorable,  as  I  hope  you 
will  believe  there  is  no  one  for  whom  I  have  more 
inclination  than  yourself — I  mean  of  the  male  kind. 

Your  account  of  the  situation  of  Virginia  was  in- 
teresting, and  the  present  appearances  as  represented 
here  justify  your  conjectures.  It  does  not  however 
appear  that  the  adoption  of  the  Constitution  can  be 
considered  as  out  of  doubt  in  that  State.  Its  con- 
duct upon  the  occasion  will  certainly  be  of  critical 
importance. 

In  this  State,  as  far  as  we  can  judge,  the  elections 
have  gone  wrong.  The  event,  however,  will  not 
certainly  be  known  till  the  end  of  the  month.  Vio- 
lence rather  than  moderation  is  to  be  looked  for  from 
the  opposite  party.  Obstinacy  seems  the  prevailing 
trait  in  the  character  of  its  leader.  The  language  is 
that  if  all  the  other  States  adopt,  this  is  to  persist  in 
refusing  the  Constitution.  It  is  reduced  to  a  cer- 
tainty that  Clinton  has  in  several  conversations  de- 
clared the  Union  unnecessary — though  I  have  the 
information  through  channels  which  do  not  permit 
a  public  use  to  be  made  of  it. 

We  have,  notwithstanding  this  unfavorable  com- 
plexion of  things,  two  sources  of  hope:  one,  the 
chance  of  a  ratification  by  nine  States  before  we 
decide,  and  the  influence  of  this  upon  the  firmness  of 
the  followers;  the  other,  the  probability  of  a  change 
of  sentiment  in  the  people,  auspicious  to  the  Con- 
stitution. 


430  Alexander  Hamilton 

The  current  has  been  for  some  time  running  to- 
ward it ;  though  the  whole  flood  of  official  influence, 
accelerated  by  a  torrent  of  falsehood,  early  gave  the 
public  opinion  so  violent  a  direction  in  a  wrong  chan- 
nel that  it  was  not  possible  suddenly  to  alter  its 
course.  This  is  a  mighty  stiff  simile;  but  you  know 
what  I  mean;  and  after  having  started  it,  I  did  not 
choose  to  give  up  the  chase. 

The  members  of  the  Convention  in  this  city,  by  a 
majority  of  nine  or  ten  to  one,  will  be:  John  Jay, 
Robert  R.  Livingston,  Richard  Morris,  John  Sloss 
Hobart,  James  Duane,  Isaac  Roosevelt,  Richard 
Harrison,  Nicholas  Low,  Alexander  Hamilton. 


TO   JAMES   MADISON,    JR. 

New  York,  May  19,  1788. 

Some  days  since  I  wrote  to  you,  my  dear  sir,  in- 
closing a  letter  from  a  Mr.  Vanderkemp,  etc. 

I  then  mentioned  to  you  that  the  question  of  a 
majority  for  or  against  the  Constitution  would  de- 
pend upon  the  County  of  Albany.  By  the  later  ac- 
counts from  that  quarter,  I  fear  much  that  the  issue 
there  has  been  against  us. 

As  Clinton  is  truly  the  leader  of  his  party,  and 
is  inflexibly  obstinate,  I  count  little  on  overcoming 
opposition  by  reason.  Our  only  chances  will  be  the 
previous  ratification  by  nine  States,  which  may 
shake  the  firmness  of  his  followers;  and  a  change 
in  the  sentiments  of  the  people,  which  have,  for 
some  time,  been  travelling  towards  the  Constitution, 
though  the  first  impressions,  made  by  every  species 


Private  Correspondence  43 1 

of  influence  and  artifice,  were  too  strong  to  be  eradi- 
cated in  time  to  give  a  decisive  turn  to  the  elections. 
We  shall  leave  nothing  undone  to  cultivate  a  favor- 
able disposition  in  the  citizens  at  large. 

The  language  of  the  Anti-Federalists  is,  that  if  all 
the  other  States  adopt,  New  York  ought  still  to  hold 
out.  I  have  the  most  direct  intelligence,  but  in  a 
manner  which  forbids  a  public  use  being  made  of  it, 
that  Clinton  has,  in  several  conversations,  declared 
his  opinion  of  the  inutility  of  the  Union.  It  is  an 
unhappy  reflection  that  the  friends  to  it  should,  by 
quarrelling  for  straws  among  themselves,  promote 
the  designs  of  its  adversaries.  We  think  here  that 
the  situation  of  your  State  is  critical.  Let  me  know 
what  you  now  think  of  it.  I  believe  you  meet  nearly 
at  the  time  we  do.  It  will  be  of  vast  importance 
that  an  exact  communication  should  be  kept  up  be- 
tween us  at  that  period;  and  the  moment  any  de- 
cisive question  is  taken,  if  favorable,  I  request  you 
to  dispatch  an  express  to  me,  with  pointed  orders  to 
make  all  possible  diligence,  by  changing  horses,  etc. 
All  expense  shall  be  thankfully  and  liberally  paid. 
I  executed  your  commands  respecting  the  first  volume 
of  the  Federalist.  I  sent  forty  of  the  common  copies 
and  twelve  of  the  finer  ones,  addressed  to  the  care 
of  Governor  Randolph.  The  printer  announces  the 
second  volume  in  a  day  or  two,  when  an  equal  num- 
ber of  the  two  kinds  shall  also  be  forwarded.  He 
informs  that  the  Judicial  Department — Trial  by 
Jury — Bill  of  Rights,  etc.,  is  discussed  in  some  addi- 
tional papers  which  have  not  yet  appeared  in  the 
Gazettes. 


432  Alexander  Hamilton 

TO  JOHN  SULLIVAN,  ESQ.,  PRESIDENT  OF  THE  STATE  OF 
NEW    HAMPSHIRE 

New  York,  Jtine  6,  1788. 

Dear  Sir: 

You  will  no  doubt  have  understood  that  the  Anti- 
federal  party  has  prevailed  in  this  State  by  a  large 
majority.  It  is  therefore  of  the  utmost  importance 
that  all  external  circumstances  should  be  miade  use 
of  to  influence  their  conduct.  This  will  suggest  to 
you  the  great  advantage  of  a  speedy  decision  in  your 
State,  if  you  can  be  sure  of  the  question,  and  a 
prompt  communication  of  the  event  to  us.  With 
this  view,  permit  me  to  request  that  the  instant  you 
have  taken  a  decisive  vote  in  favor  of  the  Constitu- 
tion, you  send  an  express  to  me  at  Poughkeepsie. 
Let  him  take  the  shortest  route  to  that  place,  change 
horses  on  the  road,  and  use  all  possible  diligence.  I 
shall  with  pleasure  defray  all  expenses,  and  give  a 
liberal  reward  to  the  person.  As  I  suspect  an  effort 
will  be  made  to  precipitate  us,  all  possible  safe  dis- 
patch on  your  part,  as  well  to  obtain  a  decision  as  to 
commimicate  the  intelligence  of  it,  will  be  desirable.' 


TO   JAMES    MADISON,    JR. 
My   Dear   Sir:  New  York,  June  S,  1788. 

In  my  last,  I  think,  I  informed  you  that  the  elec- 
tions had  turned  out,  beyond  expectation,  favorable 
to  the  Anti-federal  party.  They  have  a  majority  of 
two  thirds  in  the  Convention,  and,  according  to  the 

*  This  interesting  letter,  now  first  printed,  I  owe  to  the  kindness  of 
Mr.  George  Clarendon  Hodges,  of  Boston,  the  possessor  of  the  original. 


Private  Correspondence  433 

best  estimate  I  can  form,  of  about  four  sevenths  in 
the  community.  The  views  of  the  leaders  in  this 
city  are  pretty  well  ascertained  to  be  turned  towards 
a  long  adjournment — say,  till  next  spring  or  summer. 
Their  incautious  ones  observe  that  this  will  give  an 
opportunity  to  the  State  to  see  how  the  government 
works,  and  to  act  according  to  circumstances. 

My  reasonings  on  the  fact  are  to  this  effect:  The 
leaders  of  the  party  hostile  to  the  Constitution  are 
equally  hostile  to  the  Union.  They  are,  however, 
afraid  to  reject  the  Constitution  at  once,  because 
that  step  would  bring  matters  to  a  crisis  between 
this  State  and  the  States  which  had  adopted  the 
Constitution,  and  between  the  parties  in  the  State. 
A  separation  of  the  Southern  District  from  the  other 
parts  of  the  State,  it  is  perceived,  would  become  the 
object  of  the  Federalists  and  of  the  neighboring 
States.  They  therefore  resolve  upon  a  long  ad- 
journment as  the  safest  and  most  artful  course  to 
effect  their  final  purpose.  They  suppose  that  when 
the  government  gets  into  operation,  it  will  be  obliged 
to  take  some  steps  in  respect  to  revenue,  etc.,  which 
w^ill  furnish  topics  of  declamation  to  its  enemies  in 
the  several  States,  and  will  strengthen  the  minorities. 
If  any  considerable  discontent  should  show  itself, 
they  will  stand  ready  to  head  the  opposition.  If,  on 
the  contrary,  the  thing  should  go  on  smoothly,  and 
the  sentiments  of  our  own  people  should  change, 
they  can  elect  to  come  into  the  Union.  They,  at  all 
events,  take  the  chances  of  time  and  the  chapter  of 
accidents. 

How  far  their  friends  in  the  country  will  go  with 

VOL  IX.— 28. 


434  Alexander  Hamilton 

them,  I  am  not  able  to  say,  but,  as  they  have  always 
been  found  very  obsequious,  we  have  little  reason  to 
calculate  upon  an  uncompliant  temper  in  the  present 
instance.  For  my  own  part,  the  more  I  can  pene- 
trate the  views  of  the  Anti-federal  party  in  this 
State,  the  more  I  dread  the  consequences  of  the  non- 
adoption  of  the  Constitution  by  any  of  the  other 
States — the  more  I  fear  an  eventual  disunion  and 
civil  war.  God  grant  that  Virginia  may  accede. 
The  example  will  have  a  vast  influence  on  our  poli- 
tics. New  Hampshire,  all  accounts  give  us  to  ex- 
pect, will  be  an  assenting  State. 

The  number  of  the  volumes  of  the  Federalist  which 
you  desired  have  been  forwarded,  as  well  the  second 
as  the  first,  to  the  care  of  Governor  Randolph.  It 
was  impossible  to  correct  a  certain  error. 

In  a  former  letter,  I  requested  you  to  communicate 
to  me,  by  express,  the  event  of  any  decisive  question 
in  favor  of  the  Constitution,  authorizing  changes  of 
horses,  etc.,  with  an  assurance  to  the  person  that  he 
will  be  liberally  paid  for  his  diligence. 


TO   JAMES    MADISON,   JR. 
Dear   SiRI  Poughkeepsie,  June,  1788. 

Your  letter  of  the  20th  came  to  hand  two  days 
since.  I  regret  that  your  prospects  are  not  yet  re- 
duced to  greater  certainty.  There  is  more  and  more 
reason  to  believe  that  our  conduct  will  be  influenced 
by  yours. 

Our  discussions  have  not  yet  travelled  beyond  the 
power  of  taxation.     To-day  we  shall  probably  quit 


Private  Correspondence  435 

this  ground  to  pass  to  another.  Our  arguments  con- 
found, but  do  not  convince.  Some  of  the  leaders, 
however,  appear  to  be  convinced  by  circumstances, 
and  to  be  desirous  of  a  retreat.  This  does  not  apply 
to  the  chief,  who  wishes  to  establish  Clintonism  on 
the  basis  of  Anti-federalism. 


TO   JAMES    MADISON,  JR. 

POUGHKEEPSIE,  JunC  21,   1788. 

Yesterday,  my  dear  sir,  the  Convention  made  a 
House.  That  day  and  this  have  been  spent  in 
preliminary  arrangements.  To-morrow  we  go  into  a 
committee  of  the  whole  on  the  Constitution.  There 
is  every  appearance  that  a  full  discussion  will  take 
place,  which  will  keep  us  together  at  least  a  fort- 
night. It  is  not  easy  to  conjecture  what  will  be  the 
result.  Our  adversaries  greatly  outnumber  us.  The 
leaders  gave  indications  of  a  pretty  desperate  dis- 
position in  private  conversations  previous  to  the 
meeting;  but  I  imagine  the  minor  partisans  have 
their  scruples,  and  an  air  of  moderation  is  now  as- 
sumed. So  far  the  thing  is  not  despaired  of.  A 
happy  issue  with  you  must  have  a  considerable  in- 
fluence upon  us.  I  have  time  to  add  nothing  more 
than  the  assurance  of  my  sincere  attachment. 


TO   JAMES    MADISON,    JR. 

My  Dear  Sir*  Poughkeepsie,  June  21, 1788. 

I  thank  you  for  your  letter  of  the  9th  instant,  and 
am  glad  to  learn  that  you  think  the  chance  is  in  your 


436  Alexander  Hamilton 

favor.  I  hope  no  disagreeable  change  may  appear. 
Yet,  I  own  I  fear  something  from  your  indisposition. 

Our  debate  here  began  on  the  clause  respecting  the 
proportion  of  representation,  etc.,  which  has  taken 
up  two  days.  To-morrow,  I  imagine,  we  shall  talk 
about  the  power  over  elections.  The  only  good  in- 
formation I  can  give  you  is,  that  we  shall  be  some 
time  together,  and  take  the  chance  of  events. 

The  object  of  the  party  at  present  is  undoubtedly 
conditional  amendments.  What  effect  events  may 
have  cannot  precisely  be  foreseen.  I  believe  the 
adoption  by  New  Hampshire  is  certain. 


TO   JAMES    MADISON,    JR. 

PouGHKEEPSiE,  Friday  morning,  June  27,  1788. 

A  day  or  two  ago  General  Schuyler,  at  my  request, 
sent  forward  to  you  an  express  with  an  account  of 
the  adoption  of  the  Constitution  by  New  Hamp- 
shire. We  eagerly  wait  for  further  intelligence  from 
you,  as  our  chance  of  success  depends  upon  you. 
There  are  some  slight  symptoms  of  relaxation  in 
some  of  the  leaders,  which  authorizes  a  gleam  of 
hope,  if  you  do  well,  but  certainly  I  think  not 
otherwise. 


TO   JAMES    MADISON,    JR. 

My  Dear  Sir:  July  8. 1788. 

I  felicitate  you  sincerely  on  the  event  in  Virginia, 
but  my  satisfaction  will  be  allayed  if  I  discover  too 
much  facility  in  the  business  of  amendment-making. 
I  fear  the  system  will  be  wounded  in  some  of  its  vital 


Private  Correspondence  437 

parts  by  too  general  a  concurrence  in  some  very  in- 
judicious recommendations.  I  allude  more  particu- 
larly to  the  power  of  taxation.  The  more  I  consider 
requisition  in  any  shape,  the  more  I  am  out  of  humor 
with  it.  We  yesterday  passed  through  the  Constitu- 
tion. To-day  some  definitive  proposition  is  to  be 
brought  forward,  but  what,  we  are  at  a  loss  to  judge. 
We  have  good  reason  to  believe  that  our  opponents 
are  not  agreed,  and  this  affords  some  ground  of  hope. 
Different  things  are  thought  of — conditions  precedent, 
or  previous  amendments;  conditions  subsequent ^  or 
the  proposition  of  amendments,  upon  condition  that 
if  they  are  not  adopted  within  a  limited  time,  the 
State  shall  be  at  liberty  to  withdraw  from  the  Union ; 
and,  lastly,  recommendatory  amendments.  In  either 
case,  constructive  declarations  will  be  carried  as  far  as 
possible.  We  will  go  as  far  as  we  can  in  the  latter 
without  invalidating  the  act,  and  will  concur  in 
rational  recommendations.  The  rest  for  our  oppo- 
nents. We  are  informed  there  has  been  a  disturb- 
ance in  the  city  of  Albany,  on  the  fourth  of  July, 
which  has  occasioned  bloodshed.  The  Anti-federal- 
ists were  the  aggressors,  and  the  Federalists  the  vic- 
tors. Thus  stand  our  accounts  at  present.  We 
trust,  however,  the  matter  has  passed  over,  and 
tranquillity  been  restored. 


TO   JAMES    MADISON,    JR. 

PouGHKEEPSiE,  Saturday,  July,  1788. 

I  thank  you,  my  dear  sir,  for  yours  by  the  post. 
Yesterday  I  communicated  to  Duer  our  situation, 


43^  Alexander  Hamilton 

which  I  presume  he  will  have  communicated  to  you. 
It  remains  exactly  the  same.  No  further  question 
having  been  taken,  I  fear  the  footing  I  mentioned  to 
Duer  is  the  best  upon  which  it  can  be  placed,  but 
every  thing  possible  will  yet  be  attempted  to  bring 
the  party  from  that  stand  to  an  unqualified  ratifica- 
tion. Let  me  know  your  idea  upon  the  possibility 
of  our  being  received  on  that  plan.  You  will  under- 
stand that  the  only  qualification  will  be  the  reserva- 
tion of  a  right  to  recede  in  case  our  amendments  have 
not  been  decided  upon  in  one  of  the  modes  pointed 
out  by  the  Constitution,  within  a  certain  number  of 
years,  perhaps  five  or  seven.  If  this  can,  in  the  first 
instance,  be  admitted  as  a  ratification,  I  do  not  fear 
any  further  consequences.  Congress  will,  I  presume, 
recommend  certain  amendments  to  render  the  struc- 
ture of  the  government  more  secure.  This  will  satisfy 
the  more  considerate  and  honest  opposers  of  the  Con- 
stitution, and  with  the  aid  of  them  will  break  up  the 
party. 


TO   NATHANIEL   CHIPMAN  ^ 
Sir:  Poughkeepsie,  July  22,  1788. 

Your  brother  delivered  me  your  favor,  which  I  re- 
ceived with  pleasure,  as  the  basis  of  a  correspondence 
that  may  be  productive  of  public  good. 

I  Nathaniel  Chipman,  of  Vermont,  was  bom  in  Connecticut,  in  1752, 
and  died  in  1843.  He  was  a  soldier  of  the  Revolution  and  a  distin- 
guished lawyer  and  statesman.  He  was  Chief-Justice  of  Vermont  and 
Senator  from  that  State.  The  letter  to  which  this  is  a  reply  related 
to  the  question  of  the  New  York  grants.  In  1789  Mr.  Chipman  was 
appointed  to  settle  the  differences  with  New  York,  and  two  years  later 
was  one  of  the  Commissioners  to  arrange  for  the  admission  of  Vermont 
into  the  Union. 


Private  Correspondence  439 

The  accession  of  Vermont  to  the  Confederacy  is, 
doubtless,  an  object  of  great  importance  to  the 
whole ;  and  it  appears  to  me  that  this  is  the  favorable 
moment  for  effecting  it  upon  the  best  terms  for  all 
concerned.  Besides  mere  general  reasons,  there  are 
circumstances  of  the  moment  which  will  forward  a 
proper  arrangement.  One  of  the  first  subjects  of 
deliberation  with  the  new  Congress  will  be  the 
independence  of  Kentucky,  for  which  the  Southern 
States  will  be  anxious.  The  Northern  will  be  glad 
to  send  a  counterpoise  in  Vermont.  These  mutual 
interests  and  inclinations  will  facilitate  a  proper 
result. 

I  see  nothing  that  can  stand  in  your  way  but  the 
interfering  claims  under  the  grants  of  New  York. 
As  to  taxation,  the  natural  operation  of  the  new 
system  will  place  you  exactly  where  you  might  wish 
to  be.  The  public  debt,  as  far  as  it  can  prudently  be 
provided  for,  will  be  by  the  Western  lands  and  the 
appropriation  of  some  general  fund.  There  will  he 
no  distribution  of  it  to  particular  parts  of  the  com- 
munity. The  fund  will  be  sought  for  in  indirect 
taxation;  as  for  a  number  of  years,  and  except  in 
time  of  war,  direct  taxes  would  be  an  impolitic 
measure.  Hence,  as  you  can  have  no  objection  to 
your  proportion  of  contribution  as  consumers,  you 
can  fear  nothing  from  the  article  of  taxation. 

I  readily  conceive  that  it  will  hardly  be  practicable 
to  you  to  come  into  the  Union,  unless  you  are  se- 
cured from  claims  under  New  York  grants.  Upon 
the  whole,  therefore,  I  think  it  will  be  expedient  for 
you,  as  early  as  possible,  to  ratify  the  Constitution, 


440  Alexander  Hamilton 

*'  upon  condition  that  Congress  shall  provide  for  the 
extinguishment  of  all  existing  claims  to  land  under 
grants  of  the  State  of  New  York,  which  may  inter- 
fere with  claims  under  the  grants  of  the  State  of 
Vermont."  You  will  do  well  to  conform  your 
boundary  to  that  heretofore  marked  out  by  Con- 
gress, othei*wise  insuperable  difficulties  would  be 
likely  to  arise  with  this  State. 

I  should  think  it  altogether  unadvisable  to  annex 
any  other  conditions  to  your  ratification,  for  there  is 
scarcely  any  of  the  amendments  proposed  that  will 
not  have  a  party  opposed  to  it,  and  there  are  several 
that  will  meet  with  a  very  strong  opposition;  and 
it  would,  therefore,  be  highly  inexpedient  for  you 
to  embarrass  your  main  object  by  any  collateral 
difficulties. 

As  I  write  in  Convention,  I  have  it  not  in  my 
power  to  enlarge.  You  will  perceive  my  general 
ideas  on  the  subject.  I  will  only  add  that  it  will  be 
wise  to  lay  as  little  impediment  as  possible  in  the 
way  of  your  reception  into  the  Union. 


TO   JAMES    MADISON,    JR. 

Dear  Sir*  Poughkeepsie,  juiy  22, 1788. 

I  wrote  to  you  by  the  last  post,  since  which  nothing 
material  has  turned  up  here.  We  are  debating  on 
amendments  without  having  decided  what  is  to  be 
done  with  them.  There  is  so  great  a  diversity  in  the 
views  of  our  opponents  that  it  is  impossible  to  pre- 
dict any  thing.  Upon  the  whole,  however,  our  fears 
diminish. 


Private  Correspondence  441 

TO    WASHINGTON 

New  York,  August  13,  1788. 

Sir: 

Capt.  Cochran  of  the  British  navy  has  requested 
my  aid  in  recovering  a  family  watch  worn  by  his 
brother,  w^ho  fell  at  Yorktown,  and  now  in  the  pos- 
session of  Gen.  Morgan.  In  compliance  with  his  re- 
quest I  have  written  the  letter  herewith  to  Gen. 
Morgan,  which  I  take  the  liberty  to  convey  through 
you,  in  hope  that  if  you  see  no  impropriety  in  it, 
you  would  add  your  influence  to  the  endeavor  to 
gratify  Capt.  Cochran.  It  is  one  of  those  things  in 
which  the  affections  are  apt  to  be  interested,  beyond 
the  value  of  the  object,  and  in  which  one  naturally 
feels  an  inclination  to  oblige. 

I  have  delivered  to  Mr.  Madison,  to  be  forwarded 
to  you,  a  set  of  the  papers  under  the  signature  of 
Publius,'  neatly  enough  boimd  to  be  honored  with  a 
place  in  your  library.  I  presume  you  have  under- 
stood that  the  writers  of  these  papers  are  chiefly  Mr. 
Madison  and  myself,  with  some  aid  from  Mr.  Jay. 

I  take  it  for  granted,  sir,  you  have  concluded  to 
comply  with  what  will  no  doubt  be  the  general  call 
of  your  country  in  relation  to  the  new  government. 
You  will  permit  me  to  say  that  it  is  indispensable 
you  should  lend  yourself  to  its  first  operations.  It 
is  of  little  purpose  to  have  introduced  a  system,  if  the 
weightiest  influence  is  not  given  to  its  firm  estab- 
lishment in  the  outset. 

^  These  papers  constituted  The  Federalist. 


442  Alexander  Hamilton 

TO    SAMUEL   BROOME  ' 

New  York,  August  i6,  1788. 

Dear  Sir: 

I  have  this  moment  received  your  letter  of  the 
thirteenth  instant,  and  am  sorry  that  the  rules  of 
propriety  in  respect  to  my  situation  as  a  member  of 
Congress  will  not  permit  my  acting  in  the  capacity 
you  wish. 

My  situation  for  some  time  past  has  prevented  my 
acknowledging  one  or  two  of  your  favors,  which  have 
been  duly  handed  to  me.  I  recollect  that  one  of 
them  contains  an  inquiry  concerning  your  son,  to 
which  you  will  naturally  desire  an  answer.  My 
public  avocations  for  some  time  past  have  put  it  out 
of  my  power  to  ascertain  the  progress  he  has  made — 
though  I  expect  when  I  shall  be  enough  disengaged 
to  examine,  to  find  it  a  good  one;  it  cannot  fail  to 
be  so  if  his  diligence  has  been  equal  to  his  capacity. 
I  shall  shortly  write  you  further  on  the  subject. 


TO    GOVERNOR   WM.    LIVINGSTON 

New  York,  August  29,  1788. 

Dear  Sir: 

We  are  informed  here  that  there  is  some  prob- 
ability that  your  Legislature  will  instruct  your  dele- 
gates to  vote  for  Philadelphia  as  the  place  of  the 
meeting  of  the  first  Congress  imder  the  new  govern- 
ment. I  presume  this  information  can  hardly  be 
well  foimded,  as  upon  my  calculations  there  is  not  a 

^  A  New  York  merchant,  and  one  of  the  well-known  family  of  that 
name. 


Private  Correspondence  443 

State  in  the  Union  so  much  interested  in  having  the 
temporary  residence  at  New  York  as  New  Jersey. 

As  between  Philadelphia  and  New  York,  I  am 
mistaken  if  a  greater  proportion  of  your  State  will 
not  be  benefited  by  having  the  seat  of  government 
at  the  latter  than  the  former  place. 

If  at  the  latter,  too,  its  exposed  and  eccentric 
position  will  necessitate  the  early  establishment  of  a 
permanent  seat,  and  in  passing  south  it  is  highly 
probable  the  government  would  light  upon  the  Dela- 
ware in  New  Jersey.  The  Northern  States  do  not  wish 
to  increase  Pennsylvania  by  an  accession  of  all  the 
wealth  and  population  of  the  federal  city.  Penn- 
sylvania herself,  when  not  seduced  by  immediate 
possession,  will  be  glad  to  concur  in  a  situation  on 
the  Jersey  side  of  the  Delaware.  Here  are  at  once 
a  majority  of  the  States;  but  place  the  government 
once  down  in  Pennsylvania,  Pennsylvania  will,  of 
course,  hold  fast ;  the  State  of  Delaware  will  do  the 
same. 

All  the  States  south,  looking  forward  to  the  time 
when  the  balance  of  population  will  enable  them  to 
carry  the  government  further  south  (say  to  the  Po- 
tomac), and  being  accommodated  in  the  meantime 
as  well  as  they  wish,  will  concur  in  no  change.  The 
government,  from  the  delay,  will  take  root  in  Phila- 
delphia, and  Jersey  will  lose  all  prospect  of  the 
federal  city  within  her  limits. 

These  appear  to  me  calculations  so  obvious  that  I 
cannot  persuade  myself  New  Jersey  will  so  much 
oversee  her  interest  as  to  fall,  in  the  present  instance, 
into  the  snares  of  Pennsylvania. 


444  Alexander  Hamilton 

TO    WASHINGTON 
Dear   Sir*  ^^^  York.  September,  1788. 

Your.  Excellency's  friendly  and  obliging  letter  of 
the  28th  ultimo  came  safely  to  hand.  I  thank  you 
for  your  assurance  of  seconding  my  application  to 
General  Morgan.  The  truth  of  that  affair  is  that  he 
purchased  the  watch  for  a  trifle  of  a  British  soldier, 
who  plundered  Major  Cochran  at  the  moment  of  his 
fall  at  Yorktown. 

I  should  be  deeply  pained,  my  dear  sir,  if  your 
scruples  in  regard  to  a  certain  station  should  be 
matured  into  a  resolution  to  decline  it,  though  I  am 
neither  surprised  at  their  existence,  nor  can  I  but 
agree  in  opinion  that  the  caution  you  observe  in 
deferring  an  ultimate  determination  is  prudent.  I 
have,  however,  reflected  maturely  on  the  subject, 
and  have  come  to  a  conclusion  (in  which  I  feel  no 
hesitation),  that  every  public  and  personal  considera- 
tion will  demand  from  you  an  acquiescence  in  what 
will  certainly  be  the  unanimous  wish  of  your  country. 
The  absolute  retreat  which  you  meditated  at  the 
close  of  the  late  war  was  natural  and  proper.  Had 
the  government  produced  by  the  Revolution  gone  on 
in  a  tolerable  train,  it  would  have  been  most  advisable 
to  have  persisted  in  that  retreat.  But  I  am  clearly 
of  opinion  that  the  crisis  which  brought  you  again 
into  public  view  left  you  no  alternative  but  to  com- 
ply, and  I  am  equally  clear  in  the  opinion  that  you 
are  by  that  act  pledged  to  take  a  part  in  the  execu- 
tion of  the  government.  I  am  not  less  convinced 
that  the  impression  of  this  necessity  of  your  filling  the 


Private  Correspondence  445 

station  in  question  is  so  universal  that  you  run  no 
risk  of  any  uncandid  imputation  by  submitting  to  it. 
But  even  if  this  were  not  the  case,  a  regard  to  your 
own  reputation,  as  well  as  to  the  public  good,  calls 
upon  you  in  the  strongest  manner  to  run  that  risk. 

It  cannot  be  considered  as  a  compliment  to  say 
that  on  your  acceptance  of  the  office  of  President 
the  success  of  the  new  government  in  its  commence- 
ment may  materially  depend.  Your  agency  and  in- 
fluence will  be  not  less  important  in  preserving  it 
from  the  future  attacks  of  its  enemies  than  they  have 
been  in  recommending  it  in  the  first  instance  to  the 
adoption  of  the  people.  Independent  of  all  consider- 
ations drawn  from  this  source,  the  point  of  light  in 
which  you  stand  at  home  and  abroad  will  make  an 
infinite  difference  in  the  respectability  with  which 
the  government  will  begin  its  operations  in  the  al- 
ternative of  your  being  or  not  being  at  the  head  of  it. 
I  forbear  to  urge  considerations  which  might  have  a 
more  personal  application.  What  I  have  said  will 
suffice  for  the  inferences  I  mean  to  draw. 

First.  In  a  matter  so  essential  to  the  well-being 
of  society  as  the  prosperity  of  a  newly-instituted 
government,  a  citizen  of  so  much  consequence  as 
yourself  to  its  success  has  no  option  but  to  lend  his 
services  if  called  for.  Permit  me  to  say  it  would 
be  inglorious  in  such  a  situation  not  to  hazard  the 
glory,  however  great,  which  he  might  have  previously 
acquired. 

Secondly.  Your  signature  to  the  proposed  system 
pledges  your  judgment  for  its  being  such  a  one  as, 
upon  the  whole,  was  worthy  of  the  public  approbation. 


44^  Alexander  Hamilton 

If  it  should  miscarry  (as  men  commonly  decide 
from  success,  or  the  want  of  it),  the  blame  will, 
in  all  probability,  be  laid  on  the  system  itself,  and 
the  framers  of  it  will  have  to  encounter  the  disrepute 
of  having  brought  about  a  revolution  in  government, 
without  substituting  any  thing  that  was  worthy  of 
the  effort.  They  pulled  down  one  Utopia,  it  will  be 
said,  to  build  up  another.  This  view  of  the  subject 
if  I  mistake  not,  my  dear  sir,  will  suggest  to  your 
mind  greater  hazard  to  that  fame,  which  must  be 
and  ought  to  be  dear  to  you,  in  refusing  your  future 
aid  to  the  system  than  in  affording  it.  I  will  only 
add  that,  in  my  estimate  of  the  matter,  that  aid  is 
indispensable. 

I  have  taken  the  liberty  to  express  these  senti- 
ments, and  to  lay  before  you  my  view  of  the  subject. 
I  doubt  not  the  considerations  mentioned  have  fully 
occurred  to  you,  and  I  trust  they  will  finally  produce 
in  your  mind  the  same  result  which  exists  in  mine. 
I  flatter  myself  the  frankness  with  which  I  have  de- 
livered myself  will  not  be  displeasing  to  you.  It  has 
been  prompted  by  motives  which  you  would  not  dis- 
approve. The  letter  inclosed  in  yours  was  imme- 
diately forwarded. 


TO   THEODORE   SEDGWICK  ' 

New  York,  October  9,  1788. 

I  thank  you,  my  dear  sir,  for  your  obliging  con- 
gratulations on  the  event  towards  effecting  which 

'  Theodore  Sedgwick,  of  Massachusetts,  afterwards  member  of  Con- 
gress, Speaker  of  the  House,  and  a  judge  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  his 
native  State,  He  was  a  staimch  Federalist  and  an  ardent  friend  of 
Hamilton. 


Private  Correspondence  447 

your  aid  as  a  joint  laborer  was  so  essential.  I  hope 
experience  may  show  that,  while  it  promotes  the  in- 
terest of  this  place,  it  will  not  be  incompatible  with 
public  good.  We  are  making  efforts  to  prepare 
handsome  accommodations  for  the  session  of  the 
new  Congress. 

On  the  subject  of  Vice-President,  my  ideas  have 
concurred  with  yours,  and  I  believe  Mr.  Adams  will 
have  the  votes  of  this  State.  He  will  certainly,  I 
think,  be  preferred  to  the  other  gentleman.  Yet 
certainly  is  perhaps  too  strong  a  word.  I  can  con- 
ceive that  the  other,  who  is  supposed  to  be  a  more 
pliable  man,  may  command  Anti-federal  influence. 

The  only  hesitation  in  my  mind  with  regard  to 
Mr.  Adams  has  arisen  within  a  day  or  two  from  a 
suggestion  by  a  particular  gentleman  that  he  is  un- 
friendly in  his  sentiments  to  General  Washington. 
Richard  H.  Lee,  who  will  probably,  as  rumor  now 
runs,  come  from  Virginia,  is  also  in  this  style.  The 
Lees  and  Adamses  have  been  in  the  habit  of  uniting, 
and  hence  may  spring  up  a  cabal  very  embarrassing 
to  the  Executive,  and  of  course  to  the  administration 
of  the  government.  Consider  this — sound  the  real- 
ity of  it,  and  let  me  hear  from  you. 

What  think  you  of  Lincoln  or  Knox?  This  is  a 
flying  thought. 


TO   NATHANIEL   CHIPMAN 

1788. 

Sir: 

Your  favor  of  the  6th  of  September  has  been  duly 
handed  to  me,  and  I  receive  great  pleasure  from  the 


44^  Alexander  Hamilton 

hopes  you  appear  to  entertain  of  a  favorable  turn  of 
affairs  in  Vermont  in  regard  to  the  new  government. 
It  is  certainly  an  object  of  mutual  importance  to 
yourselves,  and  to  the  Union,  and  well  deserves 
the  best  endeavors  of  every  discerning  and  good 
man. 

I  observe  with  satisfaction  your  opinion  that  Ver- 
mont will  not  make  a  point  of  introducing  amend- 
ments. I  mean  as  a  condition  of  her  accession. 
That  ground  would  be  the  most  hazardous  which  she 
could  venture  upon,  as  it  is  very  probable  that  such 
amendments  as  might  be  popular  with  you  would  be 
deemed  inadmissible  by  the  friends  of  the  system, 
who  will  doubtless  be  the  most  influential  persons 
in  the  national  councils ;  and  who  would  rather  sub- 
mit to  the  inconvenience  of  your  being  out  of  the 
Union,  till  circumstances  should  alter,  than  consent 
to  any  thing  that  might  impair  the  energy  of  the 
government.  The  article  of  taxation  is,  above  all, 
the  most  delicate  thing  to  meddle  with;  for  as 
plenary  power  in  that  respect  must  ever  be  con- 
sidered as  the  vital  principle  of  government,  no 
abridgment  or  constitutional  suspension  of  that 
power  can  ever,  upon  mature  consideration,  be  coun- 
tenanced by  the  intelligent  friends  of  an  effective 
national  government.  You  must,  as  I  remarked  in 
my  former  letter,  rely  upon  the  natural  course  of 
things,  which  I  am  satisfied  will  exempt  you  in  ordi- 
nary times  from  direct  taxation,  on  account  of  the 
difficulty  of  exercising  it  in  so  extensive  a  country, 
so  peculiarly  situated,  with  advantage  to  the  revenue 
or  satisfaction  to  the  people.     Though  this  difficulty 


Private  Correspondence  449 

will  be  gradually  diminished  from  various  causes,  a 
considerable  time  must  first  elapse;  and,  in  the  in- 
terim, you  will  have  nothing  to  apprehend  on  this 
score. 

As  far  as  indirect  taxation  is  concerned,  it  will  be 
impossible  to  exempt  you  from  sharing  in  the  bur- 
then, nor  can  it  be  desired  by  your  citizens.  I  re- 
peat these  ideas  to  impress  you  the  more  strongly 
with  my  sense  of  the  danger  of  touching  this  chord, 
and  of  the  impolicy  of  perplexing  the  main  object 
with  any  such  collateral  experiments,  while  I  am 
glad  to  perceive  that  you  do  not  think  your  people 
will  be  tenacious  on  the  point. 

It  will  be  useless  for  you  to  have  any  view  in  your 
act  to  the  present  Congress.  They  can  of  course  do 
nothing  in  the  matter.  All  you  will  have  to  do  will 
be  to  pass  an  act  of  accession  to  the  new  Constitu- 
tion, on  the  conditions  on  which  you  mean  to  rely. 
It  will  then  be  for  the  new  government,  when  met, 
to  declare  whether  you  can  be  received  on  your  own 
terms  or  not. 

I  am  sorry  to  find  that  the  affair  of  boundary  is 
likely  to  create  some  embarrassment.  Men's  minds, 
everywhere  out  of  your  State,  are  made  up  upon  and 
reconciled  to  that  which  has  been  delineated  by  Con- 
gress. Any  departure  from  it  must  beget  new  dis- 
cussions, in  which  all  the  passions  will  have  their 
usual  scope,  and  may  occasion  greater  impediments 
than  the  real  importance  of  the  thing  would  justify. 
If,  however,  the  further  claims  you  state  cannot  be 
gotten  over  with  you,  I  would  still  wish  to  see  the  ex- 
periment made,  though  with  this  clog,  because  I  have 

VOL.  IX. — 29. 


450  Alexander  Hamilton 

it  very  much  at  heart  that  you  should  become  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Confederacy,  It  is,  however,  not  to  be 
inferred  that  the  same  disposition  will  actuate  every- 
body. In  this  State,  the  pride  of  certain  individuals 
has  too  long  triumphed  over  the  public  interest;  and 
in  several  of  the  Southern  States  a  jealousy  of  North- 
em  influence  will  prevent  any  great  zeal  for  increas- 
ing in  the  national  councils  the  number  of  Northern 
votes. 

I  mention  these  circumstances  (though  I  dare  say 
they  will  have  occurred  to  you),  to  show  you  the 
necessity  of  moderation  and  caution  on  your  part, 
and  the  error  of  any  sanguine  calculation  upon  a  dis- 
position to  receive  you  at  any  rate.  A  supposition 
of  this  nature  might  lead  to  fatal  mistakes. 

In  the  event  of  an  extension  of  your  boundary 
beyond  the  Congressional  hne,  would  it  be  imprac- 
ticable for  you  to  have  commissioners  appointed  to 
adjust  any  differences  which  might  arise?  I  pre- 
sume the  principal  object  with  you  in  the  extension 
of  your  boundary  would  be  to  cover  some  private 
interests.     This  might  be  matter  of  negotiation. 

There  is  one  thing  which  I  think  it  proper  to  men- 
tion to  you,  about  which  I  have  some  doubt — that 
is,  whether  a  legislative  accession  would  be  deemed 
valid.  It  is  the  policy  of  the  system  to  lay  its 
foundations  in  the  immediate  consent  of  the  people. 
You  will  best  judge  how  far  it  is  safe  or  practicable 
to  have  recourse  to  a  convention.  Whatever  you 
do,  no  time  ought  to  be  lost.  The  present  moment 
is  undoubtedly  critically  favorable.  Let  it  by  all 
means  be  improved. 


Private  Correspondence  45  ^ 

TO    THEODORE    SEDGWICK 

New  York,  November  9,  1788. 

My  Dear  Sir: 

Your  last  letter  but  one  met  me  at  Albany  attend- 
ing court,  from  whence  I  am  but  just  returned. 
Yours  of  the  2d  inst.  is  this  moment  handed  me. 

I  am  very  sorry  for  the  schism  you  hint  at  among 
the  Federalists,  but  I  have  so  much  confidence  in  the 
good  management  of  the  fast  friends  of  the  Constitu- 
tion, that  I  hope  no  ill  consequences  will  ensue  from 
that  disagreement.  It  will,  however,  be  worthy  of 
great  care  to  avoid  suffering  a  difference  of  opinion 
on  collateral  points,  to  produce  any  serious  division 
between  those  who  have  hitherto  drawn  together  on 
the  great  national  question. 

Permit  me  to  add  that  I  do  not  think  you  should 
allow  any  line  to  be  run  between  those  who  wish  to 
trust  alterations  to  future  experience,  and  those  who 
are  desirous  of  them  at  the  present  juncture.  The 
rage  for  amendments  is  in  my  opinion  rather  to 
be  parried  by  address  than  encotmtered  with  open 
force.  And  I  shall  therefore  be  loth  to  learn  that 
your  parties  have  been  arranged  professedly  upon 
the  distinction  I  have  mentioned.  The  mode  in 
which  amendments  may  best  be  made,  and  twenty 
other  matters,  may  serve  as  pretexts  for  avoiding 
the  evil  and  securing  the  good. 

On  the  question  between  Mr.  H.'  and  Mr.  A.,* 
Mr.  King  will  probably  have  informed  you  that  I 

'  John  Hancock. 

2  John  Adams.  The  question  was  which  of  these  two  shoiild  be 
supported  for  the  Vice- Presidency. 


452  Alexander  Hamilton 

have,  upon  the  whole,  concluded  that  the  latter 
ought  to  be  supported.  My  measures  will  be  taken 
accordingly.  I  had  but  one  scruple,  but  after  ma- 
ture consideration,  I  have  relinquished  it.  Mr.  A., 
to  a  sound  understanding,  has  always  appeared  to 
me  to  add  an  ardent  love  for  the  public  good,  and, 
as  his  further  knowledge  of  the  world  seems  to  have 
corrected  those  jealousies  which  he  is  represented  to 
have  once  been  influenced  by,  I  trust  nothing  of  the 
kind  suggested  in  my  former  letter  will  disturb  the 
harmony  of  the  administration.  Let  me  continue 
to  hear  from  you,  and  believe  me  to  be,  with  very 
great  esteem  and  regard,  etc. 


TO   WASHINGTON 
Dear   Sir:  November  i8,  1788. 

Your  last  two  letters  have  duly  come  to  hand,  and 
the  Count  de  Moustier  has  delivered  me  the  watch 
you  committed  to  his  charge.  Your  obliging  atten- 
tion to  this  matter  claims  my  particular  acknow- 
ledgments. I  will  make  no  apology  for  asking  you 
to  take  the  additional  trouble  of  forwarding  the  en- 
closed to  the  General.  I  take  the  liberty  of  passing 
it  through  you,  that  you  may,  by  perusing  the  con- 
tents, know  the  situation  of  the  business. 

The  demand  of  fifty  guineas  is  to  me  quite  un- 
expected. I  am  sorry  to  add  that  there  is  too  good 
evidence  that  it  cost  a  mere  trifle  to  the  General. 
This,  however,  I  mention  in  confidence.  Nor  shall 
I  give  you  any  further  trouble  on  the  subject.  What- 
ever may  be  proper  will  be  done. 


Private  Correspondence  453 

Mrs.  Hamilton  requests  her  affectionate  remem- 
brances to  Mrs.  Washington,  and  joins  me  in  the  best 
wishes  for  you  both. 

P.  S. — Your  last  letter,  on  a  certain  subject,  I 
have  received.  I  feel  a  conviction  that  you  will 
finally  see  your  acceptance  to  be  indispensable.  It 
is  no  compliment  to  say  that  no  other  man  can 
sufficiently  unite  the  public  opinion  or  can  give  the 
requisite  weight  to  the  office  in  the  commencement 
of  the  government.  These  considerations  appear  to 
me  of  themselves  decisive.  I  am  not  sure  that  your 
refusal  would  not  throw  every  thing  into  confusion. 
I  am  sure  that  it  would  have  the  worst  effect  imagin- 
able. Indeed,  as  I  hinted  in  a  former  letter,  I  think 
circumstances  leave  no  option. 


TO   JAMES   MADISON,   JR. 

New  York,  November  23,  1788. 

I  thank  you,  my  dear  sir,  for  yours  of  the  20th. 
The  only  part  of  it  which  surprises  me  is  what  you 
mention  respecting  Clinton.  I  cannot,  however,  be- 
lieve that  the  plan  will  succeed.  Nor,  indeed,  do  I 
think  that  Clinton  would  be  disposed  to  exchange 
his  present  appointment  for  that  office,  or  risk  his 
popularity  by  holding  both.  At  the  same  time  the 
attempt  merits  attention,  and  ought  not  to  be 
neglected  as  chimerical  or  impracticable. 

In  Massachusetts  the  Electors  will,  I  understand, 
be  appointed  by  the  Legislature,  and  will  be  all 
Federal,  and  't  is  probable  will  be,  for  the  most  part. 


454  Alexander  Hamilton 

in  favor  of  Adams.  It  is  said  the  same  thing  will 
happen  in  New  Hampshire,  and,  I  have  reason  to 
believe,  it  will  be  the  case  in  Connecticut.  In  this 
State  it  is  difficult  to  form  any  certain  calculation. 
A  large  majority  of  the  Assembly  was  doubtless  of 
'  an  Anti-federal  complexion,  but  the  schism  in  the 
party,  which  has  been  occasioned  by  the  falling  off 
of  some  of  its  leaders  in  the  Convention,  leaves  me 
not  without  hope  that,  if  matters  are  well  managed, 
we  may  proctire  a  majority  for  some  pretty  equal 
compromise.  In  the  Senate  we  have  the  superiority 
by  one.  In  New  Jersey  there  seems  to  be  no  ques- 
tion but  that  the  complexion  of  the  Electors  will  be 
Federal,  and  I  suppose,  if  thought  expedient,  they 
may  be  united  in  favor  of  Adams.  Pennsylvania 
you  can  best  judge  of.  From  Delaware,  Maryland, 
and  South  Carolina,  I  presume,  we  may  count  with 
tolerable  assurance  on  Federal  men;  and  I  should 
imagine,  if  pains  are  taken,  the  danger  of  an  Anti- 
federal  Vice-President  might  itself  be  rendered  the 
instrument  of  Union.  At  any  rate,  their  weight 
will  not  be  thrown  into  the  scale  of  Clinton,  and  I 
do  not  see  from  what  quarter  numbers  can  be  mar- 
shalled in  his  favor  equal  to  those  who  will  advocate 
Adams,  supposing  even  a  division  in  the  Federal 
votes. 

On  the  whole  I  have  concluded  to  support  Adams, 
though  I  am  not  without  apprehensions  on  the  score 
we  have  conversed  about.  My  principal  reasons  are 
these:  First,  he  is  a  declared  partisan  of  deferring 
to  future  experience  the  expediency  of  amendments 
in  the  system,  and  (although  I  do  not  altogether 


Private  Correspondence  455 

adopt  this  sentiment)  it  is  much  nearer  my  own  than 
certain  other  doctrines.  Secondly,  he  is  certainly  a 
character  of  importance  in  the  Eastern  States ;  if  he 
is  not  Vice-President,  one  of  two  worse  things  will  be 
likely  to  happen.  Either  he  must  be  nominated  to 
some  important  office,  for  which  he  is  less  proper,  or 
will  become  a  malcontent,  and  give  additional  weight 
to  the  opposition  to  the  government.  As  to  Knox, 
I  cannot  persuade  myself  that  he  will  incline  to  the 
appointment.  He  must  sacrifice  emolument  by  it, 
which  must  be  of  necessity  a  primary  object  with 
him. 

If  it  should  be  thought  expedient  to  endeavor  to 
unite  on  a  partictdar  character,  there  is  a  danger  of  a 
different  kind  to  which  we  must  not  be  inattentive — 
the  possibility  of  rendering  it  doubtful  who  is  ap- 
pointed President.  You  know  the  Constitution  has 
not  provided  the  means  of  distinguishing  in  certain 
cases,  and  it  wotdd  be  disagreeable  to  have  a  man 
treading  close  upon  the  heels  of  the  person  we  wish 
as  President.  May  not  the  malignity  of  the  opposi- 
tion be,  in  some  instances,  exhibited  even  against 
him?  Of  all  this  we  shall  best  judge  when  we  know 
who  are  our  Electors ;  and  we  must,  in  our  different 
circles,  take  our  measures  accordingly. 

I  could  console  myself  for  what  you  mention  re- 
specting yourself,  from  a  desire  to  see  you  in  one 
of  the  executive  departments,  did  I  not  perceive  the 
representation  will  be  defective  in  characters  of  a  cer- 
tain description.  Wilson  is  evidently  out  of  the  ques- 
tion. King  tells  me  he  does  not  believe  he  will  be 
elected  into  either  House.     Mr.  Gouvemeur  Morris 


45 6  Alexander  Hamilton 

set  out  to-day  for  France,  by  way  of  Philadelphia. 
If  you  are  not  in  one  of  the  branches,  the  government 
may  sincerely  feel  the  want  of  men  who  unite  to  zeal 
all  the  requisite  qualifications  for  parrying  the  machi- 
nations of  its  enemies.  Might  I  advise,  it  would  be, 
that  you  bent  your  course  to  Virginia. 


TO   THEODORE   SEDGWICK 

New  York,  January  29,  1789. 

My  Dear  Sir: 

I  thank  you  for  your  two  letters  of  the  4th  and  7th 
instant  which  arrived  here  during  my  absence  at 
Albany,  from  which  place  I  have  but  recently  re- 
turned. I  believe  you  may  be  perfectly  tranquil  on 
the  subject  of  Mr.  Adams'  election.  It  seems  to  be 
certain  that  all  the  Middle  States  will  vote  for  him 
to  Delaware  inclusively,  and  probably  Maryland. 
In  the  South  there  are  no  candidates  thought  of  but 
Rutledge  and  Clinton.  The  latter  will  have  the 
votes  of  Virginia,  and  it  is  possible  some  in  South 
Carolina.  Maryland  will  certainly  not  vote  for 
Clinton,  and  New  York,  from  our  Legislature  having 
by  their  contentions  let  slip  the  day,  will  not  vote  at 
all.  For  the  last  circumstance  I  am  not  sorry,  as 
the  most  we  could  hope  would  be  to  balance  accounts 
and  do  no  harm.  The  Anti-federalists  incline  to  an 
appointment  notwithstanding,  but  I  discourage  it 
with  the  Federalists.  Under  these  circumstances  I 
see  not  how  any  person  can  come  near  Mr.  Adams — 
that  is,  taking  it  for  granted  that  he  will  unite  the 
votes  in  New  Hampshire  and  Massachusetts.     I  ex- 


Private  Correspondence  457 

pect  that  the  federal  votes  in  Virginia,  if  any,  will  be 
in  favor  of  Adams. 

You  v^ill  probably  have  heard  that  our  Legislature 
has  passed  a  bill  for  electing  representatives.  The 
Houses  continue  to  disagree  about  senators,  and  I 
fear  a  compromise  will  be  impracticable.  I  do  not, 
however,  entirely  lose  hope.  In  this  situation  you 
will  see  we  have  much  to  apprehend  respecting  the 
seat  of  government.  The  Pennsylvanians  are  en- 
deavoring to  bring  their  forces  early  in  the  field — I 
hope  our  friends  in  the  North  will  not  be  behind- 
hand. On  many  accounts,  indeed,  it  appears  to  be 
important  that  there  be  an  appearance  of  zeal  and 
punctuality  in  coming  forward  to  set  the  government 
in  motion. 

I  shall  learn  with  definite  pleasure  that  you  are  a 
representative.  As  to  me,  this  will  not  be  the  case — 
I  believe,  from  my  own  disinclination  of  the  thing. 
We  shall,  however,  I  flatter  myself,  have  a  couple  of 
Federalists. 


TO    RUFUS   KING 

Albany,  July  15,  1789. 

My  Dear  Sir: 

I  received  your  letter  by  the  last  post  but  one.  I 
immediately  set  about  circulating  an  idea  that  it 
would  be  injurious  to  the  city  to  have  Duane  elected, 
as  the  probability  was  some  very  unfit  character 
would  be  his  successor.  My  object  was  to  have  this 
sentiment  communicated  to  our  members.  But  a 
stop  was  put  to  my  measures  by  a  letter  received 


458  Alexander  Hamilton 

from  Burr,  announcing  that  at  a  general  meeting  of 
the  Federalists  of  both  Houses,  Schuyler  and  Duane 
had  been  determined  upon  in  a  manner  tliat  pre- 
cluded future  attempts. 

I  find,  however,  by  a  letter  from  General  Schuyler, 
received  this  day,  that  L'Hommedieu  and  Morris 
may  spoil  all.  Troup  tells  me  that  L'Hommedieu 
is  opposed  to  you.  He  made  our  friend  Benson  be- 
lieve that  he  would  even  relinquish  himself  for  you. 
What  does  all  this  mean? 

Certain  matters  here,  about  which  we  have  so 
often  talked,  remain  in  statu  quo.' 

I  For  this  letter,  now  first  printed,  I  am  indebted  to  the  kindness 
of  Dr.  Charles  King,  the  possessor  of  the  King  papers.  It  is  a  very- 
interesting  letter,  because  it  relates  to  the  struggle  over  the  election  of 
United  States  Senators  from  New  York,  which  kept  New  York  without 
representation  in  the  Senate  during  the  first  session  of  Congress,  and 
which  by  its  results  had  such  an  important  influence  on  the  party 
politics  of  the  time.  Hamilton  desired  Schuyler  and  Rufus  King  to 
he  Senators.  The  Livingstons,  who  led  and  represented  an  important 
part  of  the  FederaHsts,  cheerfully  conceded  Schuyler,  but  wished  the 
other  to  be  a  member  of  their  faction.  There  was  no  question  as  to 
King's  ability  and  distinction  as  a  statesman,  but  he  had  just  come  to 
New  York  from  Massachusetts,  and  was  a  comparative  stranger.  The 
wish  of  the  Livingstons  was  perfectly  right  and  reasonable,  and  every 
consideration  of  party  wisdom  urged  the  importance  of  gratifying  them. 
Whether  they  would  have  been  satisfied  with  Duane  is  not  clear.  Both 
L'Hommedieu  and  Gouvemeur  Morris  were  at  one  time  in  the  field. 
Ezra  L'Hommedieu  was  an  able  politician,  and  the  originator  of  the 
measure  for  the  State  University.  Hamilton  however  decUned  to 
yield.  A  protracted  struggle  followed,  and  Schuyler  and  King  were 
chosen.  At  the  expiration  of  Schuyler's  term  of  two  years,  Burr  was 
elected  in  his  stead,  the  Livingstons  were  hopelessly  and  finally  aUen- 
ated,  the  State  became  doubtful,  and  was  finally  lost  to  the  Federal- 
ists. It  was  one  of  the  instances  in  which  Hamilton's  bold,  imperious 
temper,  which  made  him  so  strong  as  a  statesman  and  administrator, 
led  him  into  a  fatal  error  as  a  politician.  The  Robert  Troup  referred 
to  was  an  adroit  politician  and  great  friend  of  Hamilton.  I  have  one 
of  his  letters  written  at  this  time,  which  exhibits  the  details  of  the 
contest  of  which  I  have  given  an  outline.  -   "ti 


Private  Correspondence  459 

TO    OLIVER    WOLCOTT 

New  York,  September  13,  1789. 

Sir: 

It  is  with  pleasure  I  am  able  to  inform  you  that 

you  have  been  appointed  Auditor  in  the  Depart- 
ment of  the  Treasury.  The  salary  of  this  office  is 
fifteen  hundred  dollars.  Your  friends  having  ex- 
pressed a  doubt  of  your  acceptance,  I  cannot  forbear 
saying  that  I  shall  be  happy  to  find  the  doubt  has 
been  ill-founded,  as  from  the  character  I  have  re- 
ceived of  you  I  am  persuaded  you  will  be  an  acquisi- 
tion to  the  department.  I  need  scarcely  add  that 
your  presence  here  as  soon  as  possible  is  essential  to 
the  progress  of  business.' 


TO  LAFAYETTE 

New  York,  October  6,  1789. 

My  Dear  Marquis: 

I  have  seen,  with  a  mixture  of  pleasure  and  appre- 
hension, the  progress  of  the  events  which  have  lately 
taken  place  in  your  country.  As  a  friend  to  man- 
kind and  to  liberty,  I  rejoice  in  the  efforts  which  you 
are  making  to  establish  it,  while  I  fear  much  for  the 
final  success  of  the  attempts,  for  the  fate  of  those  I 
esteem  who  are  engaged  in  it,  and  for  the  danger,  in 
case  of  success,  of  innovations  greater  than  will  con- 
sist with  the  real  felicity  of  your  nation.  If  your 
affairs  still  go  well  when  this  reaches  you,  you  will 

^  This  letter  is  reprinted  from  Gibbs'  Administrations  of  Washington 
and  Adams,  i.,  2.  Oliver  Wolcott  of  Connecticut  accepted  the  office 
of  Auditor  here  offered  him,  and  succeeded  Hamilton  as  Secretary  of 
the  Treasury. 


460  Alexander  Hamilton 

ask  why  this  foreboding  of  ill,  when  all  the  appear- 
ances have  been  so  much  in  your  favor.  I  will  tell 
you.  I  dread  disagreements  among  those  who  are 
now  united  (which  will  be  likely  to  be  improved  by 
the  adverse  party)  about  the  nature  of  your  consti- 
tution; I  dread  the  vehement  character  of  your 
people,  whom  I  fear  you  may  find  it  more  easy  to 
bring  on,  than  to  keep  within  proper  bounds  after 
you  have  put  them  in  motion;  I  dread  the  inter- 
ested refractoriness  of  your  nobles,  who  cannot  be 
gratified,  and  who  may  be  unwilling  to  submit  to 
the  requisite  sacrifices.  And  I  dread  the  reveries  of 
your  philosophic  politicians,  who  appear  in  the  mo- 
ment to  have  great  influence,  and  who,  being  mere 
speculatists,  may  aim  at  more  refinement  than  suits 
either  with  human  nature  or  the  composition  of  your 
nation. 

These,  my  dear  Marquis,  are  my  apprehensions. 
My  wishes  for  your  personal  success  and  that  of  the 
cause  of  liberty  are  incessant.  Be  virtuous  amidst 
the  seductions  of  ambition,  and  you  can  hardly  in 
any  event  be  unhappy.  You  are  combined  with  a 
great  and  good  man;  you  will  anticipate  the  name 
of  Neckar.  I  trust  you  and  he  will  never  cease  to 
harmonize. 

You  will,  I  presume,  have  heard  before  this  gets 
to  hand,  that  I  have  been  appointed  to  the  head  of 
the  finances  of  this  country.  This  event,  I  am  sure, 
will  give  you  pleasure.  In  undertaking  the  task  I 
hazard  much,  but  I  thought  it  an  occasion  that 
called  upon  me  to  hazard.  I  have  no  doubt  that  the 
reasonable  expectation  of  the  public  may  be  satis- 


Private  Correspondence  461 

fied,  if  I  am  properly  supported  by  the  Legislature, 
and  in  this  respect  I  stand  at  present  on  the  most 
encouraging  footing. 

The  debt  due  to  France  will  be  among  the  first 
objects  of  my  attention.  Hitherto  it  has  been  from 
necessity  neglected.  The  session  of  Congress  is  now 
over.  It  has  been  exhausted  in  the  organization  of 
the  government  and  in  a  few  laws  of  immediate 
urgency  respecting  navigation  and  commercial  im- 
posts. The  subject  of  the  debt,  foreign  and  domestic, 
has  been  referred  to  the  next  session,  which  will 
commence  the  first  Monday  in  January,  with  an  in- 
struction to  me  to  prepare  and  report  a  plan  compre- 
hending an  adequate  provision  for  the  support 
of  the  public  credit.  There  were  many  good  reasons 
for  a  temporary  adjournment. 

From  this  sketch  you  will  perceive  that  I  am  not 
in  a  situation  to  address  any  thing  officially  to  your 
administration;  but  I  venture  to  say  to  you,  as  my 
friend,  that  if  the  installments  of  the  principal  of  the 
debt  could  be  suspended  for  a  few  years,  it  would  be 
a  valuable  accommodation  to  the  United  States.  In 
this  suggestion,  I  contemplate  a  speedy  payment  of 
the  arrears  of  interest  now  due,  and  effectual  pro- 
vision for  the  punctual  payment  of  future  interest 
as  it  arises.  Could  an  arrangement  of  this  sort  meet 
the  approbation  of  your  government,  it  would  be 
best  on  every  account  that  the  offer  should  come  un- 
solicited as  a  fresh  mark  of  good- will. 

I  wrote  you  last  by  Mr.  De  Warville.  I  presume 
you  received  my  letter.  As  it  touched  upon  some 
delicate  topics  I  should  be  glad  to  know  its  fate. 


4^2  Alexander  Hamilton 

P.  S. — The  latest  accounts  from  France  have 
abated  some  of  my  apprehensions.  The  abdica- 
tions of  privileges  patronized  by  your  nobility  in  the 
States-General  are  truly  noble,  and  bespeak  a  patri- 
otic and  magnanimous  policy  which  promises  good 
both  to  them  and  their  country. 


TO   JAMES    MADISON,    JR. 

October  12,  1789. 

I  thank  you,  my  dear  sir,  for  the  line  you  were  so 
obliging  as  to  leave  for  me,  and  the  loan  of  the  book 
accompanying  it,  in  which  I  have  not  made  suffi- 
cient progress  to  judge  of  its  merit.  I  don't  know 
how  it  was,  but  I  took  it  for  granted  that  you  had 
left  town  earlier  than  I  did;  else  I  should  have  foimd 
an  opportunity,  after  your  adjournment,  to  converse 
with  you  on  the  subjects  committed  to  me  by  the 
House  of  Representatives.  It  is  certainly  important 
that  a  plan  as  complete  and  as  unexceptionable  as 
possible  should  be  matured  by  the  next  meeting  of 
Congress;  and  for  this  purpose  it  could  not  but  be 
useful  that  there  should  be  a  comparison  and  con- 
centration of  ideas,  of  those  whose  duty  leads  them 
to  a  contemplation  of  the  subject.  As  I  lost  the  op- 
portunity of  a  personal  communication,  may  I  ask 
of  your  friendship,  to  put  to  paper  and  send  me  your 
thoughts  on  such  objects  as  may  have  occurred  to 
you,  for  an  addition  to  our  revenue,  and  also  as  to 
any  modifications  of  the  public  debt,  which  could  be 
made  consistent  with  good  faith — the  interest  of  the 
public  and  of  the  creditors. 


Private  Correspondence  4^3 

In  my  opinion,  in  considering  plans  for  the  in- 
crease of  our  revenue,  the  difficult}'^  Hes  not  so  much 
in  the  want  of  objects  as  in  prejudice,  which  may 
be  feared  with  regard  to  almost  every  object.  The 
question  is  very  much,  What  further  taxes  will  be 
least  unpopular? ' 


TO    WASHINGTON 

New  York,  October  20,  1789. 

Sir: 

Agreeably  to  your  desire  I  sit  down  to  commit  a 
few  lines  to  the  post. 

Nothing  worth  particular  mention  has  occurred 
since  your  departure,  except  a  report  brought  by 
Mr.  Keane  from  South  Carolina,  that  Mr.  McGillivray, 
the  Indian  chief,  has,  after  a  short  conference,  left 
our  commissioners,  declaring  that  what  they  sug- 
gested was  only  a  repetition  of  the  old  story,  and  in- 
admissible, or  something  to  that  effect.  It  is  added 
that  the  Lower  Creeks  appeared,  notwithstanding, 
willing  to  go  into  a  treaty,  but  the  Upper  ones  de- 
clined it.  General  Knox,  who  has  particularly  con- 
versed with  Mr.  Keane,  will  doubtless  give  you  a 
more  accurate  statement  of  what  he  brings.  It 
seems,  however,  that  he  has  his  intelligence  at 
second-  or  third-hand. 

P.  S. — I  have  just  seen  a  letter  from  a  private  gen- 
tleman of  considerable  intelligence  now  in  North 
Carolina,  who  gives  an  ill  picture  of  the  prospect 
there,  respecting  the  adoption  of  the  Constitution. 

^  Reprinted  from  the  History  of  the  Republic,  iv.,  60. 


464  Alexander  Hamilton 

TO    TIMOTHY    PICKERING 
Sir:  Treasury  Department,  Nov.  19,  1789. 

In  the  estimate  laid  before  Congress  at  their  last 
sessions,  I  included  as  an  anticipation  of  the  late 
Superintendent  of  Finance  the  amount  of  a  draft 
issued  by  him  in  your  favor  on  the  late  Receiver  of 
Taxes  for  the  State  of  New  York,  for  fifty  thousand 
dollars,  no  part  of  which  appears  to  have  been  paid. 

The  circumstances  attending  this  anticipation  not 
being  sufficiently  known  by  the  Legislature,  pre- 
vented (as  I  presume)  a  provision  being  made  for  it. 
It  will  be  therefore  necessary  for  you  to  inform  me 
particularly  of  the  nature  and  circumstances  at- 
tending this  anticipation,  and  particularly  whether 
there  are  any  points  respecting  the  claims  under  it 
which  give  the  parties  a  right  to  expect  payment  for 
them  in  specie,  whilst  so  many  debts  in  your  depart- 
ment appear  to  have  been  discharged  by  certificates. 

I  wish  likewise  to  know  whether  any  or  what  part 
of  these  claims  may  have  been  settled  by  the  differ- 
ent State  commissioners,  and  what  mode  can  be 
adopted  for  ascertaining  them  should  the  Legislature 
think  proper  to  make  a  provision  for  it.' 


to  col.  r.  h.  harrison  ^ 

My  Dear  Friend:  New  York,  Nov.  27,  1789. 

After  having  labored  with  you  in  the  common 
cause  of  America  during  the  late  war,  and  having 

'  Now  first  printed  from  the  Pickering  papers  in  the  possession  of 
the  Massachusetts  Historical  Society. 

2  Col.  Robert  Hanson  Harrison,  of  Maryland,  one  of  Washington's 
aides-de-camp,  familiarly  known  as  the  "Old  Secretary." 


Private  Correspondence  465 

learned  your  value,  judge  of  the  pleasure  I  feel  in 
the  prospect  of  a  reunion  of  efforts  in  this  same 
cause,  for  I  consider  the  business  of  America's  happi- 
ness as  yet  to  be  done. 

In  proportion  to  that  sentiment  has  been  my  dis- 
appointment at  learning  that  you  had  declined  a 
seat  on  the  bench  of  the  United  States.  Cannot 
your  determination,  my  dear  friend,  be  reconsidered? 

One  of  your  objections,  I  think,  will  be  removed; 
I  mean  that  which  relates  to  the  nature  of  the  estab- 
lishment. Many  concur  in  opinion  that  its  present 
form  is  inconvenient,  if  not  impracticable.  Should 
an  alteration  take  place,  your  other  objection  will 
also  be  removed ;  for  3^ou  can  then  be  nearly  as  much 
at  home  as  you  are  now. 

If  it  is  possible,  my  dear  Harrison,  give  yourself 
to  us.  We  want  men  like  you.  They  are  rare  at  all 
times.     Adieu. 


TO    HENRY    LEE  ' 

New  York,  December  i,  1789. 

My  Dear  Friend: 

I  have  received  your  letter  of  the  i6th  inst.  I  am 
sure  you  are  sincere  when  you  say  that  you  would 
not  subject  me  to  an  impropriety;  nor  do  I  know 
that  there  would  be  any  in  my  answering  your 
queries.  But  you  remember  the  saying  with  regard 
to  Caesar's  wife.  I  think  the  spirit  of  it  applicable 
to  every  man  concerned  in  the  administration  of  the 

'  Henry  Lee,  of  Virginia,  one  of  the  most  dashing  soldiers  of  the 
Revolution,  and  best  known  by  his  soubriquet  of  "Light-Horse 
Harry." 

VOL.  IX,— 30. 


466  Alexander  Hamilton 

finance  of  a  country.  With  respect  to  the  conduct  of 
such  men,  stispicion  is  ever  eagle-eyed.     And  the 
most  innocent  things  are  apt  to  be  misinterpreted. 
Be  assured  of  the  affection  and  friendship  of,  etc. 


TO    WILLIAM   DUER 

1790. 

While  I  truly  regret,  my  dear  friend,  that  the  neces- 
sity of  your  situation  compels  you  to  relinquish  a 
station  '  in  which  public  and  personal  considerations 
combine  to  induce  me  to  wish  your  continuance,  I 
cannot  but  be  sensible  of  the  force  of  the  motives  by 
which  you  are  determined.  And  I  interest  myself 
in  your  happiness  too  sincerely  not  to  acquiesce  in 
whatever  may  redound  to  your  advantage.  I  con- 
fess, too,  that  upon  reflection  I  cannot  help  thinking 
you  have  decided  rightly. 

I  count  with  confidence  on  your  future  friendship, 
as  you  may  on  mine. 

An  engagement  at  the  President's  will  not  let  me 
meet  you  at  dinner,  but  I  shall  be  happy  to  see  you 
in  the  evening.  Adieu.  God  bless  you,  and  give 
you  the  success  for  which  you  will  always  have  my 
warmest  wishes. 

'  William  Duer  was  Secretary  of  the  old  Treasury  Board,  and 
served  as  Assistant  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  with  Hamilton  until 
1790.  This  letter  is  dated  1789  in  the  edition  of  1850,  but  as  it  refers 
to  Duer's  retirement  from  office,  could  not  have  been  written  until  the 
beginning  of  the  following  year. 


Private  Correspondence  4^7 

TO    ^DANUS    BURKE  ' 
Sir.*  New  York,  April  i,  1790. 

1  have  been  informed  that  in  the  House  of  Repre-  , 
sentatives  yesterday,  you  made  use  of  some  very  [ 
harsh  expressions  in  relation  to  me. 

As  I  cannot  but  ascribe  so  unprovoked  an  attack 
to  misapprehension  or  misrepresentation,  I  have 
concluded  to  send  you  an  extract  from  the  eulogium 
pronounced  by  me  on  Gen.  Greene,  of  the  part  to 
which  alone  your  animadversions  could  relate. 

It  is  in  these  words: 

**  From  the  heights  of  Monmouth  I  might  lead  you 
to  the  plains  of  Springfield,  there  to  behold  the 
veteran  Knyphaussen,  at  the  head  of  a  veteran  army, 
baffled  and  almost  beaten  by  a  general  without  an 
army,  aided — or  rather  embarrassed — ^by  small  fugi- 
tive bodies  of  volunteer  militia,  the  mimicry  of 
soldiership.''' 

From  this  you  will  perceive  that  the  epithets  to 
which  you  have  taken  exception  are  neither  applica- 
ble to  the  militia  of  South  Carolina  in  particular,  nor 
to  militia  in  general,  but  merely  to  ''small  fugitive 
bodies  of  volunteer  militia." 

Having  thus,  sir,  stated  the  matter  in  its  true 
light,  it  remains  for  you  to  judge  what  conduct,  in 
consequence  of  the  explanation,  will  be  proper  on 
your  part.^ 

^  Member  of  Congress  from  South  Carolina  from  1 789-1 791.  He 
was  a  distinguished  lawyer,  a  judge,  and,  at  the  end  of  his  life,  Chancel- 
lor of  his  State.  There  is  no  speech  by  Mr.  Burke  reported  in  the 
Annals  of  Congress  for  March  31,  1790. 

2  Now  first  printed  from  the  Hamilton  papers  in  the  State  Depart- 
ment. 


468  Alexander  Hamilton 

TO    TIMOTHY    PICKERING 

New  York,  May  13,  1790. 

Dear  Sir: 

The  offer  of  your  service  as  successor  to  Mr.  Duer 
reached  me  in  due  time. 

I  can  with  truth  assure  you  that  you  were  one  of 
a  very  small  number  who  held  a  competition  in  my 
judgment,  and  that  had  personal  considerations 
alone  influenced  me,  I  could  with  difficulty  have 
preferred  another.  Reasons  of  a  peculiar  nature, 
however,  have  determined  my  choice  towards  Mr. 
Tench  Coxe,  who  to  great  industry  and  very  good 
talents  adds  an  extensive  theoretical  and  practical 
knowledge  of  trade. 

Allow  me  to  say  that,  knowing  as  I  now  do  yotir 
views  to  public  life,  I  shall,  from  conviction  of  your 
worth,  take  pleasure  in  promoting  them — and  I  hope 
an  opportunity  will  not  be  long  wanting.' 


TO    WINN 


gjj^»  Treasury  Department,  Sept.  18,  1790. 

Mr.  Justin  Foote  has  delivered  at  this  office  a  com- 
mission from  the  President  of  the  United  States, 
vesting  you  with  the  office  of  Surveyor  of  the  Port 
of  Winton  in  North  Carolina.  This  gentleman  in- 
formed me  that  he  was  not  charged  with  any  letter 
of  resignation  from  you,  but  stated  the  substance  of 
your  verbal  communication  to  him  at  the  time. 

^  Now  first  printed  from  the  Pickering  papers  in  the  possession  of  the 
Massachusetts  Historical  Society.  Soon  after  this  Col.  Pickering  was 
made  Postmaster- General. 


Private  Correspondence  469 

Passing  over  the  obligation  of  every  good  citizen 
to  deport  himself  with  due  respect  to  the  Chief 
Magistrate,  and  especially  of  those  to  whom  he  and 
the  Senate  may  have  previously  given  indications  of 
confidence,  which  I  am  persuaded  you  would  not 
intentionally  deviate  from,  I  beg  leave  to  observe 
that  questions  may  be  raised  whether  the  return  of 
a  commission  is  all  that  is  requisite  from  gentlemien 
who  decline  an  appointment  to  a  public  trust.  Under 
these  circumstances,  I  find  myself  constrained  to 
request  that  you  will  make  known  to  the  President, 
in  a  regular  way,  your  intentions  as  to  your  late 
appointment. 


TO    WASHINGTON 
gjj^«  New  York,  September  21,  1790. 

Doctor  Craigie  has  communicated  to  me  a  letter 
from  Mr.  Daniel  Parker  to  him,  dated  London,  the 
12th  of  July,  which  mentions  that  he  had  just  seen 
Mr.  De  Miranda,  who  had  recently  conversed  with 
the  Marquis  del  Campo,  from  whom  he  had  learnt 
that  the  Court  of  Spain  had  acceded  to  our  right  of 
navigating  the  Mississippi. 

Col.  Smith  has  also  read  to  me  a  passage  out  of 
another  letter  of  the  6th  of  July,  which  mentions 
that  orders  had  been  sent  to  the  Viceroy  of  Mexico 
and  the  Governor  of  New  Orleans  not  to  interrvipt 
the  passage  of  vessels  of  the  United  States  through 
that  river. 

It  is  probable  that  other  communications  will  have 
ascertained  to  you  whether  there  be  any  and  what 


470  Alexander  Hamilton 

foundation  for  this  intelligence;  but  I  have  thought 
it  advisable,  notwithstanding,  to  impart  it  to  you. 

The  reports  from  Europe  favor  more  and  more  the 
idea  of  peace.  They  are,  however,  not  conclusive, 
and  not  entirely  correspondent. 

Captain  Watson,  of  the  ship  New  York,  who  left 
London  the  28th  of  July,  and  Torbay  the  i6th  or 
17th  of  August,  informs  that  the  evening  preceding 
her  departure  from  Torbay  he  was  informed  by 
different  officers  of  the  fleet  that  peace  between 
Britain  and  Spain  had  taken  place,  and  had  been 
notified  by  Mr.  Pitt  in  a  letter  to  the  Lord  Mayor  of 
London,  of  which  an  account  had  arrived  that  even- 
ing.  He  had,  however,  seen  no  papers  concerning 
the  account,  and  the  press  of  seamen  had  continued 
down  to  the  same  evening. 

On  the  other  hand.  Captain  Hunter,  of  the  ship 
George y  who  left  St.  Andero  the  8th  of  August,  affirms 
that  vigorous  preparations  for  war  were  still  going 
on  at  that  port. 

TO    WASHINGTON 
gjj^.  New  York,  September  29,  1790. 

I  have  been  duly  honored  with  your  two  letters  of 
the  1 8th  and  20th  of  September. 

My  opinion  on  a  certain  subject  has  been  for- 
warded, and  I  hope  will  ere  this  have  come  to  hand. 

Inclosed  you  will  be  pleased  to  receive  a  list  of 
such  characters  as,  from  the  documents  furnished  by 
Mr.  Lear,  from  my  inquiries,  and  from  the  intima- 
tions contained  in  your  letter  of  the  20th,  appear  to 


Private  Correspondence  47i 

stand,  upon  the  whole,  fairest  for  the  command  of 
the  revenue  boats,  except  for  the  stations  of  North 
CaroHna  and  Georgia  concerning  which  there  is  no 
satisfactory  information. 

Captain  Montgomery  is  said  to  have,  on  some 
accounts,  greater  pretensions  to  respectabihty  than 
Captain  Roach  (though  both  are  represented  to  be 
men  of  merit),  and  something  like  claim  to  preference 
from  situation. 

Mr.  Gross  is  submitted  on  the  recommendation  of 
Captain  Barney,  who  mentions  favorably  both  him 
and  a  Mr.  Daniel  Porter,  naming  Gross  first,  but 
without  expressing  a  preference  of  either. 

The  Vice-President  put  into  my  hand  a  day  or  two 
ago  the  inclosed  letters  concerning  Captain  Lyde, 
but  as  Williams,  who  is  recommended  by  Governor 
Hancock,  is  also  warmly  recommended  by  General 
Lincoln,  the  evidence  in  his  favor  may  be  deemed 
to  preponderate. 

The  manifest  expediency  of  the  previous  nomi- 
nation or  appointment  of  the  persons  who  are  to 
command  the  boats  to  oversee  the  building  and 
equipping  of  them  will  suspend  the  further  execu- 
tion of  the  business  till  your  pleasure  as  to  persons 
shall  be  signified. 

The  subaltern  officers  can  be  appointed  at  greater 
leisure,  for  which  purpose  I  am  collecting  informa- 
tion, as  I  am  also  doing  in  respect  to  commanders 
for  the  two  boats  destined  for  North  Carolina  and 
Georgia;  but  I  presume  the  others  need  not  be  de- 
layed on  this  account. 

P.  S. — The  British  packet  is  just  arrived.     The 


472  Alexander  Hamilton 

rumor  is,  that  the  declarations  in  the  inclosed  paper 
were  regarded  as  the  prelude  of  peace;  but  that  the 
matter  was  not  considered  as  finished,  and,  accord- 
ingly, the  press  of  seamen  had  continued  with  as 
much  vivacity  as  before.  In  the  letter  from  the 
Minister  to  the  Lord  Mayor,  these  declarations 
seemed  to  be  regarded  in  the  above-mentioned  light. 
The  letter  says,  the  negotiators  were  about  to  pro- 
ceed to  the  discussion  of  the  other  matters  in  dispute 
with  a  view  to  a  definite  arrangement. 


TO    WASHINGTON 

gjp^.  New  York,  October  17,  1790. 

I  had  the  honor  of  receiving  yoiir  letter  of  the 
loth  inst.  by  the  last  post.  It  is  certainly  very  pos- 
sible, that  motives  different  from  the  one  avowed 
may  have  produced  a  certain  communication;  and 
in  matters  of  such  a  nature  it  is  not  only  allowable, 
but  the  dictate  of  prudence,  to  receive  suggestions 
with  peculiar  caution. 

A  British  packet  arrived  yesterday.  The  accoimts 
she  brings  are  all  of  a  warlike  aspect.  I  have  ex- 
tracted from  an  English  paper  the  inclosed  decree 
of  the  National  Assembly  of  France;  which,  though 
of  a  qualified  tenor,  looks  pretty  directly  towards  the 
eventual  supporting  of  Spain.  The  English  papers 
hold  it  up  as  a  decisive  indication  of  a  disposition  to 
do  so.  And  it  is  said,  in  some  of  the  letters  which 
have  been  received,  that  positive  orders  have  been 
sent  to  Lord  Howe  to  fight  if  he  can  find  an  oppor- 
timity.      The   papers   announce   a   second  fleet  of 


Private  Correspondence  473 

fifteen  sail  of  the  line  ready  to  rendezvous  at  Ports- 
mouth, to  be  under  the  command  of  Admiral  Hood. 
Their  destination  unknown. 

It  is  also  mentioned  that  the  Dutch  fleet  had  re- 
turned to  the  Texel,  the  Duke  of  Leeds  having  pre- 
viously made  a  journey  for  an  interview  with  the 
Dutch  admiral.  This  very  mysterious  circumstance 
is  wholly  imexplained. 

A  certain  gentleman  who  called  on  me  to-day,  in- 
formed me  that  a  packet  had  sailed  the  i6th  of  Au- 
gust for  Quebec,  in  which  went  passenger  General 
Clarke.  He  added  that  the  rumor  in  England  was, 
that  Sir  Guy  Carleton  was  to  return  in  her.  He 
made  no  other  communication. 

The  inclosed  letter  came  to  hand  to-day.  I  have  had 
no  opportunity  of  making  any  inquiry  concerning  the 
person  recommended  in  it.  If  I  can  obtain  any  addi- 
tional lights,  they  shall  be  made  known  without  delay. 

The  object  suggested  in  your  letter  as  preparatory 
to  the  meeting  of  the  Legislature  shall  engage  my 
particular  attention. 

The  papers  of  the  Department  of  State  and  the 
Treasury,  and  of  the  commissioners  for  settling  ac- 
counts, are  on  their  way  to  Philadelphia.  On  the 
2oth,  I  propose  with  my  family  to  set  out  for  the 
same  place. 


TO   JOHN   JAY 
--.      T-^  ^  Philadelphia,  November  i^,  1700. 

My  Dear  Sir: 

I   enclose   you   copies   of  two   resolutions   which 
have  passed  the  House  of  Representatives  of  Vir- 


474  Alexander  Hamilton 

ginia.  Others  had  been  proposed  and  disagreed  to. 
But  the  war  was  still  going  on.  A  spirited  remon- 
strance to  Congress  is  talked  of.  This  is  the  first 
symptom  of  a  spirit  which  must  either  be  killed,  or 
it  will  kill  the  Constitution  of  the  United  States.  I 
send  the  resolutions  to  you,  that  it  may  be  considered 
what  ought  to  be  done.  Ought  not  the  collective 
weight  of  the  different  parts  of  the  government  to  be 
employed  in  exploding  the  principles  they  contain? 
This  question  arises  out  of  sudden  and  imdigested 
thought.' 


TO    WASHINGTON 

Philadelphia,  December  2,  1790. 

Sir: 

The  day  before  yesterday  I  received  a  letter  from 
Mr.  Woodbury  Langdon,  declining  the  appointment 
offered  him.  There  was  a  letter  with  it  for  you 
which  I  immediately  forwarded. 

Since  that  time  I  have  conversed  with  Mr.  Lang- 
don, and  have  heard  from  Mr.  Oilman;  the  former 
is  warm  in  his  recommendation  of  Mr.  Keith  Spence; 
he  states  that  his  insolvency  was  owing  to  the  loss  of 
a  valuable  ship  and  cargo,  and  was  attended  with 
the  most  honorable  circumstances;  that  an  imme- 
diate adjustment  with  the  creditors  took  place  to 
their  entire  satisfaction ;  that  the  deficiency  was  only 
;£i,ooo,  which  he  considers  as  remitted;  that  Mr. 
Spence  was  in  partnership  with  Mr.  Sherburne ;  that 
they  have  both  been  since  in  good  business,  and  are 

'  Reprinted  from  Lije  of  Jay,  ii.,  202. 


Private  Correspondence  475 

now  more  than  able  to  pay  whatever  they  may  owe ; 
that  the  failure  happened  some  years  ago ;  that  Mr. 
Spence,  though  a  native  of  Scotland,  came  early  to 
this  coimtry — is  a  man  of  education  and  abilities, 
well  known  and  respected — a  firm  friend  to  the  Re- 
volution and  to  the  National  Government — married 
to  a  lady  of  New  Hampshire,  with  whom  he  has 
several  children.  He  showed  me  a  letter  from  Mr. 
Spence,  which  gives  a  favorable  impression  of  his 
modesty  and  capacity. 

Mr.  Gilman  talks  of  Mr.  Spence  as  a  man  not  gen- 
erally known,  and  who,  being  by  birth  a  foreigner, 
is  not  as  acceptable  as  a  native  to  the  people  of  that 
country ;  that  his  attachment  to  the  American  cause 
was  rather  ambiguous ;  that  he  married  the  daughter 
of  a  person  who  is  now  in  office  in  the  Island  of  Ber- 
muda, and  lately  made  a  visit  there;  that  his  in- 
solvency would  throw  a  shade  on  his  appointment 
in  the  public  opinion. 

He,  on  the  other  hand,  warmly  recommended  a 
Mr.  William  Gardiner,  the  present  Treasurer  of  New 
Hampshire ;  speaks  decidedly  of  his  good  character, 
and  abilities  as  a  man  of  business,  and  of  his  general 
good  standing  in  the  State. 

Mr.  Langdon  admits  Mr.  Gardiner  to  be  a  good 
and  a  qualified  man — says  he  was  formerly  his  first 
clerk,  but  afiirms  that  Mr.  Spence  has  greatly  the 
superiority  in  point  of  qualification — hints  at  an 
arrangement  between  Mr.  Gardiner  and  Mr.  Gilman, 
the  late  Loan  Officer,  by  which  Mr.  Gilman  expects 
to  succeed  to  the  office  of  Treasurer,  if  the  other  ob- 
tains that  of  Commissioner  of  Loans. 


47^  Alexander  Hamilton 

Thus  stands  my  information  as  far  as  it  goes;  I 
conjecture,  on  the  whole,  that  Mr.  Spence  is  an  un- 
exceptionable man,  in  every  respect  but  that  of  his 
late  insolvency,  and  that  he  is  probably  better  quali- 
fied than  Mr.  Gardiner,  or,  in  other  words,  a  man  of 
more  ability.  That,  nevertheless,  Mr.  Gardiner  is 
qualified  for  the  office,  and  in  other  respects  an 
eligible  person.  Perhaps  the  appointment  of  him 
will  be,  upon  the  whole,  a  safer  one — freer  from 
hazard  of  imputation  of  any  kind. 

You  are,  I  presume,  not  unapprised  of  a  Langdon 
and  Gilman  party  in  New  Hampshire.  Though  it  is 
desirable  this  business  should  be  finished,  yet  if  it  be 
supposed  likely  that  the  arrival  of  the  Eastern  mem- 
bers will  afford  any  new  light,  a  few  days'  delay  can- 
not be  very  important. 


TO    WILLIAM    SETON  ' 

Philadelphia,  January  i8,  1791. 

My  Dear  Sir: 

I  have  learnt  with  infinite  pain  the  circumstances 
of  a  new  bank  having  started  up  in  your  city.  Its 
effects  cannot  but  be  in  every  way  pernicious. 
These  extravagant  sallies  of  speculation  do  injury  to 
the  government  and  to  the  whole  system  of  public 
credit,  by  disgusting  all  sober  citizens  and  giving  a 
wild  air  to  every  thing.  'T  is  impossible  but  that 
three  great  banks  in  one  city  must  raise  such  a  mass 

'  William  Seton,  a  Scotchman  by  birth,  and  a  well-known  business 
man  of  New  York.  He  was  Cashier  of  the  Bank  of  New  York,  of 
which  Hamilton  was  one  of  the  foimders.  See  History  of  the  Bank  of 
New  York,  by  Henry  W.  Domett. 


Private  Correspondence  477 

of  artificial  credit  as  must  endanger  every  one  of 
them,  and  do  harm  in  every  view. 

I  sincerely  hope  that  the  Bank  of  New  York  will 
listen  to  no  coalition  with  this  newly  engendered 
monster;  a  better  alliance,  I  am  strongly  persuaded, 
will  be  brought  about  for  it,  and  the  joint  force  of 
two  solid  institutions  will,  without  effort  or  violence, 
remove  the  excrescence  which  has  just  appeared, 
and  which  I  consider  as  a  dangerous  tumor  in  your 
political  and  commercial  economy. 

I  express  myself  in  these  strong  terms  to  you  con- 
fidentially, not  that  I  have  any  objection  to  my 
opinion  being  known  as  to  the  nature  and  tendency 
of  the  thing. 


TO 


Philadelphia,  April  lo,  1791. 

Sir: 

Your  letter  of  the  15th  of  March  duly  came  to 
hand,  though  not  till  after  the  arrangement  for  the 
execution  of  the  act  mentioned  in  your  letter  had 
been  made. 

I  wish  you  not  to  consider  it  as  a  mere  compliment, 
when  I  say  that  the  light  in  which  your  character 
stands  could  not  fail  to  have  brought  you  into  view 
in  that  arrangement,  and  could  you  be  minutely 
acquainted  with  every  circumstance  that  in  the 
President's  mind  inclined  the  balance  a  different 
way,  you  would  find  no  reason  to  be  dissatisfied 
with  the  estimation  in  which  you  have  been  held. 
You  are  well  aware  that  in  a  comparison  of  the 


47^  Alexander  Hamilton 

pretensions  of  men  of  merit,  collateral  considerations 
may  be  often  justly  allowed  to  tm*n  the  scale. 

Suffer  me  to  add  that  in  the  course  of  those  future 
opportunities  which  may  be  expected  to  occur,  it 
would  give  me  a  pleasure,  as  far  as  may  be  in  my 
power,  to  be  instrumental  in  furnishing  you  with  a 
proper  occasion  for  the  exercise  of  your  talents  and 
zeal  in  the  service  of  the  national  government. 


TO    WASHINGTON  ' 

April  lo,  1 79 1. 

*  *  *  It  is  to  be  lamented  that  our  system  is 
such  as  still  to  leave  the  public  peace  of  the  Union 
at  the  mercy  of  each  State  government.  This  is  not 
only  the  case  as  it  regards  direct  interferences,  but  as 
it  regards  the  inability  of  the  national  government, 
in  many  particulars,  to  take  those  direct  measures 
for  carrying  into  execution  its  views  and  engage- 
ments which  exigencies  require.  For  example:  a 
party  comes  from  a  coimty  of  Virginia  into  Penn- 
sylvania and  wantonly  murders  some  friendly  In- 
dians. The  national  government,  instead  of  having 
power  to  apprehend  murderers  and  bring  them  to 
justice,  is  obliged  to  make  a  representation  to  that 
of  Pennsylvania;  that  of  Pennsylvania  again  is  to 
make  a  representation  to  that  of  Virginia.  And 
whether  the  murderers  shall  be  brought  to  justice 
at  all,  must  depend  upon  the  particular  policy  and 
energy  and  good  disposition  of  two  State  govern- 
ments and  the  efficacy  of  the  provisions  of  their  re- 

'  The  other  parts  of  this  letter  are  not  to  be  found. 


Private  Correspondence  479 

spective  laws ;  and  the  security  of  other  States,  and 
the  money  of  all,  are  at  the  discretion  of  one.  These 
things  require  a  remedy. 


TO   WASHINGTON 

Philadelphia,  April  17,  1791. 

You  will  probably  recollect  that  previous  to  your 
departure  from  this  place,  anticipating  the  event 
which  has  taken  place  with  regard  to  the  death  of 
Mr.  Everleigh,  I  took  the  liberty  to  mention  to  you 
that  Mr.  Wolcott,  the  present  Auditor,  woiild  be  in 
every  respect  worthy  of  your  consideration  as  his 
successor  in  office. 

Now  that  the  event  has  happened,  a  concern  as 
anxious  as  it  was  natural  for  the  success  of  the  depart- 
ment, united  with  a  sentiment  of  justice  towards 
Mr.  Wolcott,  leads  me  to  a  repetition  of  that  idea. 
This  gentleman's  conduct  in  the  station  he  now  fills 
has  been  that  of  an  excellent  officer.  It  has  not 
only  been  good,  but  distinguished.  It  has  com- 
bined all  the  requisites  which  can  be  desired :  mod- 
eration with  firmness,  liberality  with  exactness, 
indefatigable  industry  with  an  accurate  and  sound 
discernment,  a  thorough  knowledge  of  business,  and 
a  remarkable  spirit  of  order  and  arrangement.  In- 
deed, I  ought  to  say  that  I  owe  very  much  of  what- 
ever success  may  have  attended  the  merely  executive 
operations  of  the  department  to  Mr.  Wolcott;  and 
I  do  not  fear  to  commit  myself  when  I  add  that  he 
possesses  in  an  eminent  degree  all  the  qualifications 


480  Alexander  Hamilton 

desirable  in  a  Comptroller  of  the  Treasury — that  it 
is  scarcely  possible  to  find  a  man  in  the  United  States 
more  competent  to  the  duties  of  that  station  than 
himself;  few  who  could  be  equally  so.  It  may  be 
truly  said  of  him  that  he  is  a  man  of  rare  merit,  and 
I  have  good  evidence  that  he  has  been  viewed  in 
this  light  by  the  members  of  Congress  extensively 
from  different  quarters  of  the  Union,  and  is  so  con- 
sidered by  all  that  part  of  the  public  who  have  had 
opportunities  of  witnessing  his  conduct. 

The  immediate  relation,  too,  which  his  present 
situation  bears  to  that  of  Comptroller  is  a  strong 
argument  in  his  favor.  Though  a  regular  gradation 
of  office  is  not  admissible  in  a  strict  sense  in  regard 
to  offices  of  a  civil  nature,  and  is  wholly  inapplicable 
to  those  of  the  first  rank  (such  as  the  heads  of  the 
great  executive  departments),  yet  a  certain  regard 
to  the  relation  which  one  situation  bears  to  another 
is  consonant  with  the  natural  ideas  of  justice,  and  is 
recommended  by  powerful  considerations  of  policy. 
The  expectation  of  promotion  in  civil  as  in  military 
life  is  a  great  stimulus  to  virtuous  exertion,  while 
examples  of  unrewarded  exertion,  supported  by 
talent  and  qualification,  are  proportionable  discour- 
agements. Where  they  do  not  produce  resignations 
they  leave  men  dissatisfied,  and  a  dissatisfied  man 
seldom  does  his  duty  well. 

In  a  government  like  ours,  where  pecuniary  com- 
pensations are  moderate,  the  principle  of  gradual 
advancement  as  a  reward  for  good  conduct  is  per- 
haps more  necessary  to  be  attended  to  than  in  others 
where  offices  are  more  lucrative.     By  due  attention 


Private  Correspondence  481 

to  it  it  will  operate  as  a  means  to  secure  respectable 
men  for  offices  of  inferior  emolument  and  conse- 
quence. 

In  addition  to  the  rest,  Mr.  Wolcott's  experience 
in  this  particular  line  pleads  powerfully  in  his  favor. 
This  experience  may  be  dated  back  to  his  office  of 
Comptroller  of  the  State  of  Connecticut,  and  has 
been  perfected  by  practice  in  his  present  place. 

A  question  may  perhaps,  sir,  arise  in  your  mind, 
whether  some  inconvenience  may  not  attend  his 
removal  from  his  present  office.  I  am  of  opinion 
that  no  sensible  inconvenience  will  be  felt  on  this 
score,  since  it  will  be  easy  for  him  as  Comptroller, 
who  is  the  immediate  superior  of  the  Auditor,  to 
form  any  man  of  business  for  the  office  he  will  leave, 
in  a  short  period  of  time.  More  inconvenience 
would  be  felt  by  the  introduction  of  a  Comptroller 
not  in  the  immediate  train  of  the  business. 

Besides  this,  it  may  be  observed  that  a  degree  of 
inconvenience  on  this  score  cannot  be  deemed  an 
obstacle,  but  upon  the  principle  which  would  bar 
the  progress  of  merit  from  one  station  to  another. 

On  this  point  of  inconvenience  a  reflection  occurs, 
which  I  think  I  ought  not  to  suppress.  Mr.  Wolcott 
is  a  man  of  sensibility,  not  unconscious  of  his  own 
value,  and  he  doubtless  must  believe  that  he  has 
pretensions  from  situation  to  the  office.  Should 
another  be  appointed,  and  he  resign,  the  derange- 
ment of  the  department  would  truly  be  distressing 
to  the  public  service. 

In  suggesting  thus  particularly  the  reasons  which 
in  my  mind  operate  in  favor  of  Mr.  Wolcott,  I  am 

VOL.  IX.— 31. 


482  Alexander  Hamilton 

influenced  by  information  that  other  characters  will 
be  brought  to  your  view  by  weighty  advocates,  and 
as  I  think  it  more  than  possible  that  Mr.  Wolcott 
may  not  be  mentioned  to  you  by  any  other  person 
than  myself,  I  feel  it  a  duty  arising  out  of  my  situa- 
tion in  the  department,  to  bear  my  full  and  explicit 
testimony  to  his  worth,  confident  that  he  will  justify 
by  every  kind  of  substantial  merit  any  mark  of  your 
approbation  which  he  may  receive. 

I  trust,  sir,  that  in  thus  freely  disclosing  my  sen- 
timents to  you,  you  will  be  persuaded  that  I  only 
yield  to  the  suggestions  of  an  honest  zeal  for  the 
public  good,  and  of  a  firm  conviction  that  the  pros- 
perity of  the  department  under  my  particular  care 
(one  so  interesting  to  the  aggregate  movements  of 
the  government)  will  be  best  promoted  by  trans- 
ferring the  present  Auditor  to  the  ofiice  of  Comp- 
troller of  the  Treasury. 


TO   WASHINGTON 
gjj^»  Philadelphia,  June  19,  1791. 

I  have  been  duly  honored  with  your  letter  of  the 
13th  inst.,  from  Mount  Vernon;  and,  according  to 
your  desire  have  informed  Mr.  Wolcott  of  your  in- 
tention to  appoint  him  Comptroller.  This  appoint- 
ment gives  me  particular  pleasure,  as  I  am  confident 
it  will  be  a  great  and  real  improvement  in  the  state 
of  the  Treasury  Department.  There  can  no  material 
inconvenience  attend  the  postponing  a  decision  con- 
cerning the  future  Auditor  till  your  arrival  in  this 
city. 


Private  Correspondence  483 

I  am  very  happy  to  learn  that  the  circumstances 
of  your  journey  have  been  in  all  respects  so  favorable. 
It  has  certainly  been  a  particularly  fortunate  one, 
and  I  doubt  not  it  will  have  been  of  real  utility. 

There  is  nothing  which  can  be  said  to  be  new  here 
worth  communicating,  except  generally  that  all  my 
accoimts  from  Europe,  both  private  and  official, 
concur  in  proving  that  the  impressions  now  enter- 
tained of  our  government  and  its  affairs  (I  may  say) 
throughout  that  quarter  of  the  globe,  are  of  a  nature 
the  most  flattering  and  pleasing. 


TO    BENJAMIN    GOODHUE  * 

Philadelphia,  June  30,  1791. 

My  Dear  Sir: 

As  Mr.  Cone,  who,  I  think,  informed  me  he  had  a 
letter  from  you  on  the  same  subject,  imdertook  to 
say  all  that  could  be  said  in  relation  to  Mr.  Gray^s 
affair,  I  permitted  the  hurry  of  business  to  keep  me 
silent.  Nothing  further  concerning  the  affair  has 
since  come  to  me,  so  that  I  am  wholly  ignorant  what 
turn  it  may  have  taken.  It  must  have  given  you 
pleasure  to  learn  how  much  the  Constitution  of  the 
United  States,  and  the  measures  under  it,  in  which 
you  have  had  so  considerable  an  agency,  have  con- 
tributed to  raise  this  country  in  the  estimation  of 
Europe.  According  to  the  accounts  received  here, 
the  change  which  has  been  wrought  in  the  opinion 
of  that  part  of  the  world  respecting  the  United 

^  Benjamin  Goodhue,  of  Salem,  Member  of  Congress  from  Massa- 
chusetts. 


4^4  Alexander  Hamilton 

States  is  almost  wonderful.  The  British  Cabinet 
wish  to  be  thought  disposed  to  enter  into  amicable 
and  liberal  arrangements  with  us.  They  had  ap- 
pointed Mr.  Elliott,  who,  on  private  considerations, 
had  declined;  and  it  is  affirmed  from  pretty  good, 
though  not  decisive  authority,  that  they  have  sub- 
stituted a  Mr.  Hammond,  and  that  his  arrival  may 
shortly  be  expected.  I  would  not  warrant  the  issue, 
but  if  some  liberal  arrangement  with  Great  Britain 
should  ensue,  it  will  have  a  prodigious  effect  upon 
the  conduct  of  some  other  parts  of  Europe.  It  is, 
however,  most  wise  for  us  to  depend  as  little  as  pos- 
sible upon  European  caprice,  and  to  exert  ourselves 
to  the  utmost  to  unfold  and  improve  every  domestic 
resource. 

In  all  appearance,  the  subscriptions  to  the  Bank 
of  the  United  States  will  proceed  with  astonishing 
rapidity.  It  will  not  be  surprising  if  a  week  com- 
pletes them. 

TO    MRS.    MARTHA   WALKER 
Madam  :  Philadelphia,  July  2, 1791. 

Mr.  Ames  '  has  conveyed  to  me  your  letter  of  the 
9th  of  May. 

Hitherto  it  has  not  been  in  my  power  to  consider 
the  merits  of  your  application  to  Congress,  but  you 
may  be  assured  of  its  being  done  so  as  to  admit  of  a 
report  at  the  commencement  of  the  ensuing  session. 

'  Fisher  Ames,  Member  of  Congress  from  Massachusetts,  and  well 
known  for  his  ability  and  eloquence.  I  can  find  nothing  in  the  State 
papers  or  in  the  Annals  of  Congress  to  explain  Mrs.  Walker  or  her 
claim. 


Private  Correspondence  4^5 

While  I  dare  not  encourage  any  expectation,  and 
while  my  conduct  must  be  determined  by  my  sense 
of  official  propriety  and  duty,  I  may  with  great  truth 
say  that  I  shall  enter  into  the  examination  with 
every  prepossession  which  can  be  inspired  by  favor- 
able impression  of  personal  merit,  and  by  a  sym- 
pathetic participation  in  the  distresses  of  a  lady  as 
deserving  as  unfortunate. 


TO    RUFUS    KING 

My  Dear  Sir:  Juiys.iypi. 

I  received  your  letter  on  a  certain  subject,  and 
was  obliged  by  it.  But  there  was  nothing  practica- 
ble by  way  of  remedy. 

The  thing,  as  it  has  turned  out,  though  good  in  the 
main,  has  certainly  some  ill  sides.  There  have  also 
been  faults  in  the  detail,  which  are  not  favorable  to 
complete  satisfaction.  But  what  shall  we  do?  'T  is 
the  lot  of  every  thing  human  to  mingle  a  portion  of 
evil  with  the  good. 

The  President,  as  you  will  have  seen,  has  re- 
turned. His  journey  has  done  good,  as  it  regards 
his  own  impressions.  He  is  persuaded  that  the 
dispositions  of  the  Southern  people  are  good,  and 
that  certain  pictures  which  have  been  drawn  have 
been  strongly  colored  by  the  imagination  of  the 
drawers. 

We  have  just  heard  from  the  Westward,  but  of  no 
event  of  importance.  Things  are  said  to  have  been 
in  good  preparation;  the  people  of  Kentucky  won- 
derfully pleased  with  the  government;    and  Scot, 


4^6  Alexander  Hamilton 

with  a  corps  of  ardent  volunteers,  on  their  route  to 
demolish  every  savage,  man,  woman,  and  child. 

On  Tuesday  next  I  expect  to  leave  this  for  New 
York,  with  Mrs.  Hamilton. 


TO    RUFUS    KING 

August  7,  1791. 

Your  letter  of  Monday  evening  has  a  good  deal 
tranquillized  me.  I  am  glad  to  learn  that  the  mis- 
chiefs from  the  over-use  of  scrip  are  not  likely  to  be 
very  extensive. 

I  observe  what  you  say  respecting  the  quotation 
of  my  opinion.  I  was  not  unaware  of  the  delicacy 
of  giving  any,  and  was  sufficiently  reserved  until  I 
perceived  the  extreme  to  which  bank  scrip,  and  with 
it  other  stock,  was  tending.  But  when  I  saw  this  I 
thought  it  advisable  to  speak  out — ^for  a  bubble 
connected  with  any  operation  is,  of  all  the  enemies  I 
have  to  fear,  in  my  judgment  the  most  formidable ; 
and  not  only  not  to  promote,  but,  as  far  as  depends 
on  me,  to  counteract,  delusions,  appears  to  me 
to  be  the  only  secure  foundation  on  which  to 
stand.  I  thought  it  expedient,  therefore,  to  risk 
some  thing  in  contributing  to  dissolve  the  charm. 
But  I  find  that  I  have  been  misquoted.  Speaking  of 
sales  on  time  at  seventy-four  shillings  for  6  per  cent., 
etc.,  I  think  it  probable  I  may  have  intimated  an 
opinion  that  they  went  faster  than  could  be  sup- 
ported. But  it  is  untrue  that  I  have  given  as  a 
standard  prices  below  those  of  the  market,  as  men- 
tioned by  you.     On  the  contrary,  my  standard,  on 


Private  Correspondence  487 

pretty  mature  reflection,  has  been  and  is  nearly  as 
follows : 


For  bank  scrip 
6  per  cents 
3  per  cents 
Deferred 


195 
22 
12 
12 


I  proceed  on  the  idea  of  5  per  cent,  interest — 
taking  at  the  same  time  into  calculation  the  partial 
irredeemability  of  the  6  per  cents. 

I  give  you  my  standard,  that  you  may  be  able  if 
necessary  to  contradict  insinuations  of  an  estima- 
tion on  my  part  short  of  that  standard — for  the  pur- 
pose of  depressing  the  funds. 


TO   TIMOTHY    PICKERING 

Philadelphia,  Aug.  13,  1791. 

Dear  Sir: 

Some  investigations  in  which  I  am  engaged  in- 
duce a  wish  to  be  able  to  form  as  accurate  an  idea  as 
can  be  obtained  of  the  usual  product  in  proportion 
to  the  value  of  cultivated  lands  in  different  parts  of 
the  United  States. 

As  I  am  persuaded  no  person  can  better  assist  me 
in  this  object  than  yourself,  I  take  the  liberty  to 
ask  the  favor  of  your  assistance. 

It  has  occurred  to  me  that  if  the  actual  product  on 
cultivated  farms  of  middling  quality  could  be  ascer- 
tained with  tolerable  precision,  it  might  afford  as 
good  a  rule  by  which  to  judge  as  the  nature  of  the 
thing  admits  of. 


4^8  Alexander  Hamilton 

With  this  view  I  have  prepared  a  form  with  a  num- 
ber of  columns  under  heads  specifying  the  different 
kinds  of  produce  usual  in  your  quarter,  in  order  that 
they  may  be  filled  in  each  case  according  to  the  fact 
and  as  the  nature  of  each  head  shall  require. 

There  are  besides  some  additional  columns  which 
respect  the  total  value  of  the  farm  and  the  different 
kinds  of  land  of  which  it  consists. 

The  value  of  the  farm  must  be  determined  not  by 
what  it  would  fetch  in  cash  on  a  forced  or  sudden 
sale,  but  by  what  it  would  sell  for  at  a  reasonable  and 
usual  credit,  or  perhaps  by  what  the  opinion  of  the 
neighborhood  would  compute  to  be  its  true  value. 

The  quantity  of  each  kind  of  land  must  conform 
to  the  actual  quantity  in  cultivation  at  the  time  for 
which  the  product  is  taken. 

It  is  submitted  to  your  judgment,  according  to 
circumstances,  whether  to  determine  the  product  by 
the  average  of  a  series  of  years,  three  or  more,  or  by 
what  has  been  considered  as  a  year  of  middling 
fertility. 

The  price  ought  to  express  the  value  of  each  ar- 
ticle on  the  farm.  Perhaps  to  determine  this  there 
is  no  better  rule  than  to  deduct  the  expense  of  trans- 
portation, from  the  price  at  the  nearest  usual  market. 
The  high  price  of  an  extraordinary  year  would  not 
be  a  proper  criterion ;  but  that  which  is  deemed  by 
intelligent  and  reasonable  farmers  a  good  saving 
price. 

If  not  inconvenient  to  you  to  execute  my  present 
request,  you  will  add  to  the  favor  by  explaining  in 
each  case  the  rule  by  which  you  have  proceeded; 


Private  Correspondence 


489 


and  if  it  would  not  be  attended  with  too  much 
trouble,  the  extension  of  the  inquiry  to  two  or  three 
different  farms  would  be  satisfactory. 

In  a  matter  with  which  I  am  not  very  familiar,  it 
is  possible  I  may  have  omitted  circumstances  of  im- 
portance to  the  object  of  my  inquiry.  The  supply- 
ing of  such  omissions  will  be  particularly  acceptable. 

As  whatever  comes  from  the  Treasury  is  apt  to 
be  suspected  of  having  reference  to  some  scheme  of 
taxation,  it  is  my  wish  that  the  knowledge  of  this 
request  may  be  confined  to  yourself.  And  I  think 
it  not  amiss  to  add  that  in  truth  it  has  not  the  most 
remote  reference  to  any  such  purpose.' 

I  Now  first  printed  from  the  Pickering  papers  in  the  possession  of  the 

Massachusetts  Historical  Society. 
The  form  inclosed  is  as  follows: 


Value  of  Farm 

Kinds 

Acres  of  Arable  Land 

OF 

Acres  of  Pasture  Land 

Land 

Acres  of  Meadow 

Acres  of  Woodland 







Bushels  of  Wheat 

Bushels  of  Rye 

Bushels  of  Com 

Bushels  of  Oats 

Bushels  of  Barley 

Bushels  of  Buckwheat 

Annual 

Bushels  of  Potatoes 

Other    Roots    and    Vegetables   in 
Value    

Product 

Black  Cattle 

Horses 

Sheep 

Hogs 

Dozens  of  Poultry 

Pounds  of  Tobacco 

Cords  of  Wood  Consumed  in  Fuel.. 
Hay 

Quantity  Consumed  by  Cattle  and  Poultry. 


Prices. 


490  Alexander  Hamilton 

TO    WILLIAM    SETON 

Treasury  Department,  Aug.  15,  1791. 

Inclosed  is  a  resolution  of  the  Trustees  of  the 
Sinking  Fund,  appropriating  a  certain  sum  for  the 
purchase  of  public  debt,  within  certain  limits  therein 
specified;  in  consequence  of  that  resolution  I  have 
concluded  to  apply  one  hundred  and  fifty  thousand 
dollars  towards  purchases  in  the  city  of  New  York, 
and  to  ask  you  to  undertake  the  execution  of  the 
business.  In  thus  forbearing  to  employ  some  officer 
of  the  United  States,  and  having  recourse  to  yoiir 
aid,  I  am  governed  by  the  consideration  that  your 
situation  would  lead  to  such  an  execution  of  the 
business  as  might  at  the  same  time  best  consist  with 
the  accommodation  of  the  Bank  of  New  York. 

Inclosed  is  a  letter  to  the  directors  of  the  bank,  re- 
questing them  to  pay  to  you  the  above-mentioned 
sum.  You  will,  of  course,  however,  only  avail  your- 
self of  this  authority  in  proportion  to  the  actual 
purchases  you  shall  make,  as  you  will  please  to  ad- 
vise me  weekly  of  such  as  you  may  be  able  to  effect. 
The  Trustees  have  never  yet  determined  on  any 
allowance  to  the  persons  who  have  been  employed 
in  similar  purchases,  nor  is  it  clear  how  much  is  in 
their  power  on  this  point.  I  can  therefore  only  say 
that  the  same  rule  will  govern  in  your  case  as  in  that 
of  others.' 

I  Now  first  printed,  with  the  inclosures  which  follow,  from  the 
Hamilton  papers  in  the  State  Department. 
(Inclosure.) 

Whereupon  it  is  Resolved: 

I.  That  the  aforesaid  sum  to  purchase,  at  the  following  rates:  To 
the  purchase  of  funded  stock,  bearing  a  present  interest  of  six  per 


Private  Correspondence  491 

TO    WILLIAM    SETON 
(Private.) 

Philadelphia,  Aug,  i6,  1791. 

I  send  you  herewith  an  official  letter;  this  private 
one  I  write  as  explanatory  of  it.  I  hardly  expect 
that  you  will  be  able  to  procure  the  debt  within  the 
limits  prescribed,  and  yet  I  do  not  know  what  effect 
the  imprudent  speculations  in  bank  scrip  may  pro- 
duce. A  principal  object  with  me  is  to  keep  the 
stock  from  falling  too  low  in  case  the  embar- 
rassments of  the  dealers  should  lead  to  sacrifices; 
whence  you  will  infer  that  it  is  not  my  wish  that  the 

centum,  at  twenty  shillings  in  the  pound;  funded  debt,  bearing  an 
interest  of  three  per  centum,  at  twelve  shillings  in  the  poimd;  and 
deferred  debt,  at  twelve  shillings  and  six-pence  in  the  pound. 

2.  That  if  any  of  the  aforesaid  species  of  debt  be  lower  than  the 
rates  here  fixed,  preference  be  given  to  it. 

3.  That  any  surplus  of  the  said  purchase  money  or  the  whole,  as 
the  case,  imder  the  preceding  circumstances  may  be,  be  applied  in  the 
first  instance  to  the  purchases  of  the  three  per  cents  and  the  deferred 
debt,  as  far  as  they  can  be  obtained,  and  afterwards  to  the  purchase 
of  funded  stock  of  six  per  cent. 

4.  That  the  cities  of  Philadelphia  and  New  York  be  the  places  of 
purchases. 

In  behalf  of  the   Board, 

(Signed)        Th.  Jefferson. 

(Inclosure.) 

To  the  President,  Directors,  and  Co.  of  the  Bank  of  New  York: 

Treasury  Department,  Aug.  16,  1791. 
Gentlemen: 

You  will  please  cause  to  be  paid  to  William  Seton,  Esq.,  such  sums, 
not  exceeding  in  the  whole  one  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  dollars,  as 
he  may  require,  to  be  applied  by  him  towards  purchases  of  the  public 
debt,  at  the  request  of  the  Trustees  of  the  Sinking  Fund;  the  advances 
you  shall  make,  when  known,  will  be  covered  in  the  requisite  forms. 

Yours,  etc., 
(Signed)     A.  Hamilton. 


492  Alexander  Hamilton 

purchases  should  be  below  the  prescribed  limits,  yet 
if  such  should  unfortunately  be  the  state  of  the 
market,  it  must  of  course  govern.  The  limits  as- 
signed for  the  purchases  of  3-per-cents  and  deferred 
debt  are  founded  on  a  calculation  of  the  government 
rate  of  interest  being  5  per  cent.  The  same  rule  has 
not  been  extended  to  the  stock  bearing  an  imme- 
diate interest  of  6  per  cent.,  because  the  government 
have  a  right  to  redeem  it  at  par  in  certain  propor- 
tions; and  though  to  individual  purchasers  it  is 
worth  more  than  par,  because  a  part  only  can  be 
redeemed,  yet  it  is  not  at  present  the  interest  of  the 
government  to  give  more  than  par  for  it,  because  of 
the  right  to  redeem  a  part.  Indeed,  the  law  limits 
the  commissioners  in  this  particular.  You  will 
recollect  that  the  act  requires  that  the  purchases 
should  be  made  openly.  This  has  been  construed  to 
mean  by  a  known  agent  for  the  public.  When  you 
make  a  purchase,  therefore,  it  will  be  proper  that  it 
should  be  understood  that  it  is  on  account  of  the 
United  States,  but  this  need  not  precede  the  pur- 
chase; and  it  will  be  best  that  there  should  be  no 
unnecessary  demonstration,  lest  it  should  raise  hopes 
beyond  what  will  be  realized. 

P.  S. — If  the  prices  of  stocks  should  exceed  the 
prescribed  limits,  you  may  retain  the  letter  to  the 
directors.  If  there  are  any  gentlemen  who  support 
the  funds  and  others  who  depress  them,  I  shall  be 
pleased  that  your  purchases  may  aid  the  former, — 
this  in  great  confidence. 


Private  Correspondence  493 

TO    WILLIAM    DUER 

Philadelphia,  Aug.  17,  1791. 

My  Dear  Friend: 

I  have  received  your  two  letters  of  the  12th  and 
loth. 

The  subscription-book  for  the  Manufacturing  So- 
ciety did  not  remain  with  me  nor  with  either  of  the 
two  gentlemen  who  came  on  with  me.  Is  it  with 
neither  of  those  who  accompanied  you  ?  If  it  is  not, 
it  must  have  been  left  at  Brunswick,  and  you  will 
do  well  to  write  to  some  trusty  person  there  to  look 
it  up  and  send  it  to  you.  I  am  impatient  for  the 
alterations  which  were  agreed  upon,  and  a  list  of  the 
subscribers. 

La  Roche  may  go  to  Scioto,  if  he  can  be  back  in 
the  time  you  mention. 

I  fear  that  in  the  hurry  of  writing  my  letter  on 
the  subject  of  bank  scrip,  I  must  have  expressed 
myself  more  strongly  than  was  intended. 

The  conversation  here  was:  "  Bank  scrip  is  getting 
so  high  as  to  become  a  bubble,"  in  one  breath;  in 
another:  '' 'T  is  a  South-Sea  dream";  in  a  third: 
''There  is  a  combination  of  knowing  ones  at  New 
York  to  raise  it  as  high  as  possible  by  fictitious  pur- 
chases, in  order  to  take  in  the  credulous  and  ig- 
norant"; in  another:  '' Duer,  Constable,  and  some 
others  are  mounting  the  balloon  as  fast  as  possible. 
If  it  don't  soon  burst,  thousands  will  rue  it,"  etc., 
etc. 

As  to  myself,  my  friend,  I  think  I  know  you  too 
well  to  suppose  you  capable  of  such  views  as  were 
implied  in  those  mnuendoes,  or  to  harbor  the  most 


494  Alexander  Hamilton 

distant  thought  that  you  could  wander  from  the 
path  either  of  public  good  or  private  integrity.  But 
I  will  honestly  own  I  had  serious  fears  for  you — for 
your  purse  and  for  your  reputation;  and  with  an 
anxiety  for  both,  I  wrote  to  you  in  earnest  terms. 
You  are  sanguine,  my  friend.  You  ought  to  be 
aware  of  it  yourself  and  to  be  on  your  guard  against 
the  propensity.  I  feared  lest  it  might  carry  you 
further  than  was  consistent  either  with  your  own 
safety  or  the  public  good.  My  friendship  for  you 
and  my  concern  for  the  public  cause  were  both 
alarmed.  If  the  infatuation  had  continued  pro- 
gressive, and  any  extensive  mischiefs  had  ensued, 
you  would  certainly  have  had  a  large  portion  of  the 
blame.  Conscious  of  this  I  wrote  to  you  in  all  the 
earnestness  of  apprehensive  friendship. 

I  do  not  widely  differ 'from  you  about  the  real 
value  of  bank  scrip.  I  should  rather  call  it  about 
190,  to  be  within  bounds,  with  hopes  of  better  things, 
and  I  sincerely  wish  you  may  be  able  to  support  it 
at  what  you  mention.  The  acquisition  of  too  much 
of  it  by  foreigners  will  certainly  be  an  evil. 


TO    WILLIAM    SETON 

Treasury  Department,  Aug.  22,  1791. 


I  have  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  yours  of  the 
1 8th.  The  transfer  of  the  stock  which  you  have 
purchased  on  account  of  the  United  States  must  be 
made  to   the   Vice-President,    the  Chief -Justice,   the 


Private  Correspondence  495 

Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  the  Secretary  of  State,  and 
the  Attorney -General  for  the  time  being. 

In  all  future  purchases,  it  will  be  most  convenient 
to  have  the  stock  in  the  first  instance  transferred  as 
here  directed.' 


TO    WILLIAM    SETON 

Treasury  Department,  Sept.  7,  1791. 

I  write  herewith  to  the  directors  of  the  Bank  of 
New  York  to  advance  you  a  further  sum  of  fifty 
thousand  dollars  towards  purchases  of  the  public 
debt  on  account  of  the  United  States,  on  the  same 
principles  with  the  sum  heretofore  advanced  to  you 
for  the  like  purpose.' 


TO  THE  PRESIDENT,  DIRECTORS,  ETC.,  OF  THE  BANK 
OF  NEW  YORK 

Treasury  Department,  Sept.  7,  1791. 

Gentlemen  : 

I  request  you  to  furnish  the  cashier  of  your  bank  V  ^ 
with  the  further  sum  of  fifty  thousand  dollars,  to  be 
by  him  applied  towards  purchases  of  the  public 
debts  on  account  of  the  United  States. 

P.  S. — A  warrant  will  issue  to-morrow  to  cover 
the  150,000  dollars  already  advanced  for  the  same 
purpose.' 

^  Now  first  printed  from  the  Hamilton  papers  in  the  State  Depart- 
ment. 


'\Ai' 


49^  Alexander  Hamilton 


TO    WILLIAM    SETON 

(Private.) 

September  7,  1791. 

You  will  find  by  the  letter  herewith  that  you  are 
furnished  with  a  further  sum  of  50,000  dollars  for 
purchases.  I  wish  I  could  have  gone  farther,  but 
my  hands  are  tied  by  the  want  of  a  majority  of  the 
Trustees  being  present,  Mr.  Jefferson  being  just  gone 
to  Virginia.  The  $50,000  now  authorized,  and  the 
sum  appropriated  here  for  the  same  purpose,  com- 
plete what  has  as  yet  been  determined  to  be  applied. 

You   may,   however,    make   it   known   that   the 
treasurer  is  purchasing  here,  etc 


TO   WILLIAM    SETON 

(Private.) 

September  8,  1791. 

I  wrote  you  a  private  letter  last  evening,  which 
went  by  a  private  opportunity.  The  principal 
object  was  to  inform  you  that  I  could  not  exceed 
the  sum  now  directed  to  be  advanced  for  want  of 
authority,  the  present  $50,000  completing  the 
sum  heretofore  appropriated  by  the  Trustees,  and 
there  not  being  here  a  sufficient  number  for  a  Board; 
that  purchases  by  the  Treasurer  were  going  on 
here ' 

'  Now  first  printed  from  the  Hamilton  papers  in  the  State  Depart- 
ment. 


Private  Correspondence  497 

TO   A   FRIEND 

September  30,  1791. 

Dear  Sir: 

If  you  can  conveniently  let  me  have  twenty  dollars 
for  a  few  days,  be  so  good  as  to  send  it  by  bearer.  I 
have  just  put  myself  out  of  cash  by  payment  of 
Major  L 'Enfant 's  bill.^ 


TO   WASHINGTON 

Philadelphia,  Oct.  11,  1791. 

Sir: 

Lord  Wycomb  having  mentioned  to  me  his  inten- 
tions to  pay  you  his  respects  at  Mount  Vernon,  I 
beg  your  permission  to  present  him  to  you. 

The  personal  acquirements  and  permits  of  his 
lordship  conspire,  with  a  consideration  for  the 
friendly  dispositions  and  liberal  policy  of  his  father, 
the  Marquis  of  Lansdowne,  towards  this  country,  to 
constitute  a  claim  in  his  favor  to  cordial  notice. 


TO   GENERAL   KNOX 

October  17,  1791. 

Dear  Sir: 

The  following  are  the  particulars  in  the  President's 
letter  which  he  expects  you  to  prepare. 

^  Reprinted  from  Reminiscences  of  J.  A.  Hamilton,  p.  7.  The  letter 
is  a  curious  one,  because  it  shows  how  really  pressed  Hamilton  was  for 
even  small  sums  of  money.     On  the  back  of  the  letter  is  the  following: 

Memorandum  by  the  lender : — ' '  Gave  a  check  for  fifty  dollars,  dated 
Sept.  30,  1791." 

VOL.   IX— 32. 


49^  Alexander  Hamilton 

Expeditions  against  the  Indians.  Every  pacific 
measure  was  previously  tried  to  produce  accord  and 
avoid  expense. 

More  pointed  laws,  with  penalties  to  restrain  our 
own  people;  and  this  and  good  faith  may  produce 
tranquillity. 

Treaties  with  Cherokees  and  Six  Nations,  and 
reasons. 

I  annex  to  the  first  the  hints  in  the  President's 
letter. 

You  will,  of  course,  send  any  other  things  that 
occur  on  any  points 


TO   WILLIAM   SETON 

November  25,  1791. 

My  Dear  Sir: 

I  seize  the  first  moment  of  leisure  to  answer  your 
letter  of  the  21st  inst.  Strange  as  it  may  appear  to 
you,  it  is  not  more  strange  than  true  that  the  whole 
affair  of  branches  was  begun,  continued,  and  ended, 
not  only  without  my  participation,  but  against  my 
judgment. 

When  I  say  against  my  judgment,  you  will  not 
understand  that  my  opinion  was  given  and  over- 
ruled, for  I  never  was  consulted ;  but  that  the  steps 
taken  were  contrary  to  my  private  opinion  of  the 
course  which  ought  to  have  been  pursued. 

I  am  sensible  of  the  inconveniences  to  be  appre- 
hended, and  I  regret  them,  but  I  do  not  know  that 
it  will  be  in  my  power  to  avert  them. 

^  Now  first  printed  from  the  Knox  papers  in  the  possession  of  the 
New  England  Historic  Genealogical  Society. 


Private  Correspondence  499 

Ultimately  it  will  be  incumbent  on  me  to  place 
the  public  funds  in  the  keeping  of  the  branch ;  but  it 
may  be  depended  upon  that  I  shall  precipitate  nothing, 
but  shall  so  conduct  the  transfer  as  not  to  embarrass 
or  distress  your  institution.  I  have  not  time  to  say 
more  at  present,  except  that  if  there  are  -finally  to  be 
two  institutions,  my  regard  for  you  makes  me  wish 
you  may  feel  yourself  at  liberty  to  take  your  f ortime 
with  the  branch  which  must  preponderate. 


TO    PHILIP   HAMILTON  ' 

Philadelphia,  Dec.  5,  1791. 

I  received  with  great  pleasure,  my  dear  Philip,  the 
letter  which  you  wrote  me  last  week.  Your  mamma 
and  myself  were  very  happy  to  learn  that  you  are 
pleased  with  your  situation,  and  content  to  stay  as 
long  as  shall  be  thought  best  for  you.  We  hope  and 
believe  that  nothing  will  happen  to  alter  this  dispo- 
sition. Your  master  also  informs  me  that  you  re- 
cited a  lesson  the  first  day  you  began,  very  much  to 
his  satisfaction.  I  expect  every  letter  from  him  will 
give  me  a  fresh  proof  of  your  progress,  for  I  know  you 
can  do  a  great  deal  if  you  please,  and  I  am  sure 
you  have  too  much  spirit  not  to  exert  yourself  that 
you  may  make  us  every  day  more  and  more  proud 
of  you.  You  remember  that  I  engaged  to  send  for 
you  next  Saturday,  and  I  will  do  it,  unless  you  re- 
quest me  to  put  it  off,  for  a  promise  must  never  be 
broken,  and  I  never  will  make  you  one  which  I  wiE 

'  His  eldest  son. 


500  Alexander  Hamilton 

not  fill  as  far  as  I  am  able ;  but  it  has  occurred  to  me 
that  the  Christmas  holidays  are  near  at  hand,  and  I 
suppose  your  school  will  then  break  up  for  a  few 
days  and  give  you  an  opportunity  of  coming  to  stay 
with  us  for  a  longer  time  than  if  you  should  come  on 
Saturday.  Will  it  not  be  best,  therefore,  to  put  off 
your  journey  till  the  holidays?  But  determine  as 
you  like  best,  and  let  me  know  what  will  be  most 
pleasing  to  you.     A  good  night  to  my  darling  son.' 


TO   NICHOLAS   GOUVERNEUR  ^ 

1792. 

Mr.  B.  last  evening  delivered  me  your  letter,  en- 
closing a  copy  of  your  correspondence  with  Mr. 
Lewis.  In  one  other  respect  I  feel  myself  painfully 
situated,  having  received  a  favorable  impression  of 
your  character.  I  am  sorry  to  observe  any  thing  to 
have  come  from  you  which  I  am  obliged  to  consider 
as  exceptionable.  Your  second  letter  to  Mr.  Lewis 
contains  a  general,  and  of  course  an  unjustifiable  re- 
flection on  the  profession  to  which  I  belong,  and  of 
a  nature  to  put  it  out  of  my  power  to  render  you  any 
service  in  the  line  of  that  profession.  I  really  be- 
lieve that  you  did  not  attend  to  the  full  force  of  the 
expression  when  you  tell  Mr.  Lewis,  ''Attorneys  like 
to  make  the  most  of  their  bills  of  cost ' ' ;  but  it  con- 
tains in  it  other  insinuations  which  cannot  be  pleas- 
ing to  any  man  in  the  profession,  and  which  must 
oblige  any  one  that  has  the  proper  delicacy  to  de- 

^  Reprinted  from  the  Reminiscences  of  J.  A.  Hamilton,  p.  4. 
2  A  merchant  of  New  York. 


Private  Correspondence  501 

cline  the  business  of  a  person  who  professedly  enter- 
tains such  an  idea  of  the  conduct  of  this  profession. 
I  make  allowance  for  your  feelings  when  you  wrote 
that  letter,  and  am  therefore  reluctantly  drawn  into 
these  observations.' 


TO    GULIAN    VERPLANCK    AND    OTHERS 

Philadelphia,  Jan.  15,  1792. 

Gentlemen: 

The  mark  of  esteem  on  the  part  of  fellow-citizens, 
to  whom  I  am  attached  by  so  many  ties,  which  is 
announced  in  your  letter  of  29th  of  December,  is 
entitled  to  my  affectionate  acknowledgments. 

I  shall  cheerfully  obey  their  wish  as  far  as  respects 
the  taking  of  my  portrait,  but  I  ask  that  they  will 
permit  it  to  appear  unconnected  with  any  incident 
of  my  political  life.  The  simple  representation  of 
their  fellow-citizen  and  friend  will  best  accord  with 
my  feelings. 


TO    WILLIAM    SETON 

Philadelphia,  Jan.  24,  1792. 

My  Dear  Sir: 

I  feel  great  satisfaction  in  knowing  from  yourself 
that  your  institution  rejects  the  idea  of  a  coalition 
with  the  new  project,  or  rather  hydra  of  projects. 

I  shall  labor  to  give  what  has  taken  place  a  turn 
favorable  to  another  union,  the  propriety  of  which  is, 
as  you  say,  clearly  illustrated  by  the  present  state  of 

^  Reprinted  from  Reminiscences  of  J.  A.  Hamilton,  p.  6. 


502  Alexander  Hamilton 

things.  It  is  my  wish  that  the  Bank  of  New  York 
may,  by  all  means,  continue  to  receive  deposits  from 
the  Collector  in  the  paper  of  the  Bank  of  the  United 
States,  and  that  they  may  also  receive  payment  for 
the  Dutch  bills  in  the  same  paper.  This  paper  may 
either  be  remitted  to  the  Treasurer,  or  remain  in  the 
bank,  as  itself  shall  deem  most  expedient.  I  have 
explicitly  directed  the  Treasurer  to  forbear  drawing 
on  the  Bank  of  New  York  without  special  direction 
from  me.  And  my  intention  is  to  leave  you  in  pos- 
session of  all  the  money  you  have  or  may  receive  till 
I  am  assured  that  the  present  storm  is  effectually 
weathered. 

Everybody  here  sees  the  propriety  of  your  having 
refused  the  paper  of  the  Bank  of  the  United  States 
in  such  a  crisis  of  your  affairs.  Be  confidential  with 
me;  if  you  are  pressed,  whatever  support  may  be  in 
my  power  shall  be  afforded.  I  consider  the  public 
interest  as  materially  involved  in  aiding  a  valuable 
institution  like  yours  to  withstand  the  attacks  of  a 
confederated  host  of  frantic  and,  I  fear,  in  too  many 
instances,  unprincipled  gamblers. 

Adieu.  Heaven  take  care  of  good  men  and  good 
views! 


TO    WILLIAM   DUER  ^ 
My    Dear   DuER:  Philadelphia,  March  14.  1792. 

Your  letter  of  the  nth  got  to  hand  this  day.  I 
am  affected  beyond  measure  at  its  contents,  especi- 
ally as  it  was  too  late  to  have  any  influence  upon  the 

*  Duer  had  speculated  deeply  and  failed  disastrously. 


Private  Correspondence  5^3 

event  you  were  apprehensive  of,  Mr.  Wolcott's  in- 
structions having  gone  off  yesterday. 

I  trust,  however,  the  alternative  which  they 
present  to  the  attorney  of  the  ,  and  the  dis- 

cretion he  will  use  in  managing  the  affair,  will  enable 
you  to  avoid  any  pernicious  Mat,  if  your  affairs  are 
otherwise  retrievable. 

Be  this  as  it  may,  act  with  fortittide  and  honor.  If 
you  cannot  reasonably  hope  for  a  favorable  extrica- 
tion, do  not  plunge  deeper.  Have  the  courage  to 
make  a  full  stop.  Take  all  the  care  you  can  in  the 
first  place  of  institutions  of  public  utility,  and  in  the 
next  of  all  fair  creditors. 

God  bless  you,  and  take  care  of  you  and  your 
family.  I  have  experienced  all  the  bitterness  of 
soul  on  your  account  which  a  warm  attachment  can 
inspire.  I  will  not  now  pain  you  with  any  wise  re- 
marks, though  if  you  recover  the  present  stroke,  I 
shall  take  great  liberties  with  you.  Assure  yourself, 
in  good  and  bad  fortune,  of  my  sincere  friendship  and 
affection. 


TO    WILLIAM    SETON 

(Private) 

Philadelphia,  March  25,  1792. 

If  six  per  cents,  should  sink  below  par,  you  may 
purchase  on  account  of  the  United  States  at  par  to 
the  extent  of  fifty  thousand  dollars.  You  will  not, 
however,  declare  on  whose  account  you  act,  because, 
though  there  is,  as  to  a  purchase  on  that  principle, 


504  Alexander  Hamilton 

no  difference  of  opinion  among  the  trustees,  the 
thing  is  not  formally  arranged,  and  this  is  Sunday. 

It  will  be  very  probably  conjectured  that  you  ap- 
pear for  the  public,  and  the  conjecture  may  be  left 
to  have  its  course,  but  without  confession.  The  pur- 
chase ought,  in  the  present  state  of  things,  to  be  at 
auction,  and  not  till  to-morrow  evening.  But  if  the 
purchase  at  auction  will  not  tend  as  well  to  the  pur- 
pose of  relief  as  a  different  mode,  it  may  be  departed 
from;  the  usual  note  must  be  made  of  persons,  time, 
etc.  You  will  consider  whether  done  all  at  once,  or 
a  part  now  and  a  part  then,  will  best  answer  the  pur- 
pose; in  the  state  of  this  market  the  latter  mode  is 
foimd  preferable.  I  have  just  received  a  letter  from 
Mr.  Short,  our  minister  resident,  dated  Amsterdam, 
28th  December,  by  which  he  informs  me  that  he 
has  effected  a  loan  for  three  millions  of  florins  at  four 
per  cent,  interest,  on  account  of  the  United  States. 
This  may  be  announced ;  and  as,  in  the  present  mo- 
ment of  suspicion,  some  minds  may  be  disposed  to 
consider  the  thing  as  a  mere  expedient  to  support 
the  stocks,  I  pledge  my  honor  for  its  exact  truth. 
Why  then  so  much  despondency  among  the  hold- 
ers of  our  stock?  When  foreigners  lend  the  United 
States  at  four  per  cent.,  will  they  not  purchase  here 
upon  a  similar  scale,  making  reasonable  allowance 
for  expense  of  agency,  etc.?  Why  then  do  indi- 
viduals part  with  so  good  a  property  so  much 
below  its  value?  Does  Duer's  failure  affect  the 
solidity  of  the  government? 

After  paying  the  present  quarter's  interest  I  shall 
have  near  a  million  dollars  in  cash,  and  a  million 


Private  Correspondence  5^5 

more  in  bonds  from  the  duties  of  last  year.  All  this 
is  truly  so  much  beforehand.  The  duties  for  the 
current  year  being  fully  adequate  to  the  objects  of 
the  year,  except  the  further  sum  of  about  five  hun- 
dred thousand  dollars  for  the  western  expedition, 
for  which  the  ways  and  means  have  been  proposed. 
Is  the  treasury  of  Great  Britain  comparatively  in 
so  good  a  state  ?  Is  the  nation  comparatively  so 
equal  to  its  debt?  Why  then  so  much  depression? 
I  shall  be  answered,  The  immediate  necessity  for 
money.  But  if  the  banks  are  forbearing  as  to  the 
necessity  of  paying  up,  cannot  the  parties  give  each 
other  mutual  credit  and  avoid  so  great  a  press?  If 
there  are  a  few  harpies  who  will  not  concur  in  this 
forbearance,  let  such  be  paid  and  execrated,  and  let 
others  forbear.  The  necessity  of  great  sacrifices 
among  your  dealers  cannot  affect  the  nation,  but  it 
may  deeply  wound  the  city  of  New  York  by  a  trans- 
fer to  foreigners  and  citizens  of  other  States  of  a 
large  mass  of  property  greatly  below  its  value.  The 
face  of  your  affairs  may  undergo  for  a  considerable 
time  a  serious  change.  Would  not  the  plan  I  sug- 
gested to  you  in  my  last  be  a  means  of  securing  more 
effectually  the  debts  due  to  the  bank  by  accepting  in 
part  payment  the  credits  on  your  books? 

While  I  encourage  due  exertion  in  the  banks,  I 
observe  that  I  hope  they  will  put  nothing  to  risk. 
No  calamity  truly  public  can  happen  while  these  in- 
stitutions remain  sound.  They  must,  therefore,  not 
yield  too  far  to  the  impulse  of  circumstances. 


5o6  Alexander  Hamilton 

TO    WILLIAM   SETON 

(Private) 

Philadelphia,  April  4,  1792. 

The  post  of  to-day  brought  me  a  letter  from  you. 
I  am  pained  beyond  expression  at  the  picture  you 
and  others  give  me  of  the  situation  of  my  fellow- 
citizens,  especially  as  an  ignorance  of  the  extent  of 
the  disorder  renders  it  impossible  to  judge  whether 
any  adequate  remedy  can  be  applied. 

You  may  apply  another  50,000  dollars  to  pur- 
chases at  such  a  time  as  you  judge  it  can  be  rend- 
ered most  useful.  The  prices  may  be  20^.  for  6  per 
cents.,  125.  for  3  per  cents.,  and  125.  dd.  for  deferred. 
The  law  and  the  object  require  that  it  should  be 
known  you  purchase  for  the  public.  I  shall  by  the 
next  post  send  an  official  authorization. 

I  have  doubt,  however,  whether  it  will  be  best  to 
apply  this  immediately  or  wait  the  happening  of  the 
crisis,  which  I  fear  is  inevitable.  If,  as  is  represented, 
a  pretty  extensive  explosion  is  to  take  place,  the  de- 
pression of  the  funds  at  such  a  moment  will  be  in  the 
extreme,  and  then  it  may  be  more  important  than 
now  to  enter  the  market  in  force.  I  can  in  such  a 
a  case  without  difficulty  add  a  hundred  thousand 
dollars — probably  a  larger  sum.  But  you,  who  are 
on  the  spot,  being  best  able  to  calculate  consequences, 
I  leave  the  proper  moment  of  operating  to  your  judg- 
ment. To  relieve  the  distressed  and  support  the 
funds  are  primary  objects.  As  it  may  possibly  be- 
come advisable  for  the  bank  to  receive  payments  in 
stock  from  embarrassed  persons,  it  may  not  be  amiss 
that  you  should  know  as  a  guide  that  there  are  at 


Private  Correspondence  507 

this  moment  orders  from  a  respectable  Dutch  con- 
cern to  purchase  6  per  cents,  at  245.  if  bills  can  be 
sold  at  par;  of  this  I  have  the  most  unequivocal  evi- 
dence. This  is  a  proof  that  foreigners  will  be  willing 
to  give  that  price.  How  vexatious  that  imprudent 
speculations  of  individuals  should  lead  to  an  aliena- 
tion of  the  national  property  at  such  under-rates  as 
are  now  given !  I  presume  your  greatest  embarrass- 
ments arise  from  the  contracts  to  pay  and  deliver 
not  yet  at  issue.  Is  it  possible  to  form  any  conjec- 
ture of  their  extent? 


TO    WILLIAM    SETON 

(Private.) 

Philadelphia,  April  12,  1792. 

I  have  your  letters  of  the  loth  and  nth,  and,  more 
to  my  distress  and  surprise,  I  learn  by  other  letters 
a  confirmation  of  what  you  apprehended,  namely, 
Mr.  Macomb's  failure.  This  misfortune  has,  I  fear,  a 
long  tail  to  it. 

The  enclosed,  you  will  perceive,  gives  you  addi- 
tional latitude.  The  terms  as  heretofore  for  6  per 
cents.,  205.;  3  per  cents.  12s.;  and  deferred  125.  6d. 

You  must  judge  of  the  best  mode  and  manner  of 
applying  the  sum.  The  operation  here  not  being  ex- 
tensive, I  have  found  it  best  to  eke  out  my  aid.  I 
doubt  whether  this  will  answer  with  you.  My  reason 
was  to  keep  up  men's  spirits  by  appearing  often, 
though  not  much  at  one  time.  All  is  left  to  you. 
You  will  doubtless  be  cautious  in  securing  your 
transfer  before  you  pay. 


5o8  Alexander  Hamilton 

TO  THE  DIRECTORS  AND  COMPANY  OF  THE  BANK  OF 

NEW  YORK 

Treasury  Department,  April  12,  1792. 

Gentlemen  : 

Since  my  official  letter  to  you  authorizing  an  ad- 
vance to  your  cashier  of  fifty  thousand  dollars,  to  be 
applied  to  the  purchase  of  public  debt  on  account  of 
the  United  States,  I  have  authorized  that  gentleman 
to  apply  for  another  fifty  thousand  dollars,  and  to 
make  the  like  use  of  it.  I  now  confirm  this  direction, 
and  add  my  desire  that  he  may  be  furnished  with  a 
further  sum  of  fifty  thousand  dollars,  making  in  the 
whole  one  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  dollars,  the 
whole  for  the  purpose  above  mentioned. 


TO    WILLIAM   DUER 

April  22,  1792. 

My  Dear  Duer: 

I  hoped  ere  this  to  have  seen  you,  to  have  afforded 
you  whatever  of  aid  could  have  resulted  from  my 
advice,  after  knowing  your  real  situation.  But  the 
session  protracts  itself,  and  I  can  scarcely  say  when 
it  will  finish.  Lest  the  information  contained  in 
my  last  should  induce  you  to  postpone  an  arrange- 
ment with  your  creditors  in  the  hope  of  speedily 
having  an  opportunity  of  consulting  me,  I  have 
thought  it  best  to  apprise  you  of  the  degree  of  delay 
which  may  attend  my  proposed  visit  to  New  York. 
Indeed,  I  can  hardly  flatter  myself  that  my  advice 
could  be  of  any  real  importance  to  you. 


Private  Correspondence  5^9 

How  are  you?  How  are  your  family?  At  a  mo- 
ment of  composure  I  shall  be  glad  to  hear  from  you. 

Eliza  joins  me  in  affectionate  remembrances  to 
Lady  Kitty/     Farewell. 


TO    WILLIAM    SETON 

Treasury  Department,  May  lo,  1792. 

Sir: 

I  received  your  letter  of  the  7th  inst.,  covering  an 
account  of  stock  purchased  by  you  for  the  United 
States. 

I  observe  that  you  have  exceeded  the  sum  which 
was  limited  by  me  to  the  amount  of  one  thousand  and 
ninety-eight  dollars  and  eighty-nine  cents;  but  so 
small  a  difference  is  not  very  material,  and  I  am 
willing  that  the  whole  should  remain  on  accoimt  of 
the  United  States. 

In  order  to  a  winding  up  of  the  business,  I  have 
now  to  request  that  you  will,  as  soon  as  it  can  be 
conveniently  done,  cause  all  the  stock  to  be  trans- 
ferred in  the  names  of  the  trustees  as  heretofore,  and 
that  you  will  then  procure  from  the  commissioner 
and  forward  to  me  the  necessary  certificates  for 
transferring  the  stock  from  the  books  of  the  commis- 
sioner to  those  of  the  treasurer. 

'  "  Lady  Kitty"  was  Duer's  wife.  Mrs.  Duer  who  was  a  beauty  and 
belle  in  the  society  of  that  day  (see  Griswold's  Republican  Court)  was 
Katherine  Alexander,  daughter  of  William  Alexander,  the  unsuccessful 
claimant  to  the  earldom  of  Stirling.  He  was,  as  is  well  known,  a  dis- 
tinguished officer  in  our  war  for  independence,  and  was  commonly 
called  "Lord  Stirling,"  from  which  his  youngest  daughter  came  to  be 
known  as  "Lady  Kitty." 


5IO  Alexander  Hamilton 

You  will  please  to  accept  of  my  best  acknowledg- 
ment for  this  additional  mark  of  your  zeal  for  the 
public  service,  and  believe  me  to  be,  etc. 


TO    WILLIAM    DUER 

May  23,  1792. 

My  dear  Duer,  five  minutes  ago  I  received  youi* 
letter  of  yesterday.  I  hasten  to  express  to  you  my 
thoughts,  as  your  situation  does  not  permit  of  delay. 
I  am  of  opinion  that  those  friends  who  have  lent  you 
their  money  or  security  from  personal  confidence  in 
your  honor,  and  without  being  interested  in  the 
operations  in  which  you  may  have  been  engaged, 
ought  to  be  taken  care  of  absolutely,  and  preferably 
to  all  creditors.  In  the  next  place,  public  institu- 
tions ought  to  be  secured.  On  this  point  the  manu- 
facturing society  will  claim  peculiar  regard.  I  am 
told  the  funds  of  that  society  have  been  drawn  out 
of  both  banks ;  I  trust  they  are  not  diverted.  The 
public  interest  and  my  reputation  are  deeply  con- 
cerned in  the  matter.  Your  affairs  with  the  govern- 
ment, as  connected  with  your  office  as  assistant  to 
the  Board  of  Treasury,  will  deserve  your  particular 
attention.  Persons  of  whom  you  have  made  actual 
purchases  and  whose  property  has  been  delivered  to 
you,  would  stand  next  after  public  institutions. 
But  here  perhaps  some  arbitration  may  be  made.  It 
would  certainly  be  desirable  to  distinguish  between 
the  price  of  stock  at  the  time  of  purchase  and  its  en- 
hanced price  upon  time.  With  regard  to  contracts 
merely  executory,  and  in  regard  to  which  differences 
would  be  to  be  paid,  no  stock  having  been  delivered, 


Private  Correspondence  5'^ 

I  postpone  claims  of  this  nature  to  all  others.  They 
ought  not  to  interfere  with  any  claim  which  is 
founded  on  value  actually  given.  As  to  the  usurious 
tribe:  these  present  themselves  under  different  as- 
pects. Are  these  women,  or  ignorant  people,  or 
trustees  of  infants  ?  The  real  principal  advanced 
and  legal  interest  would,  in  such  cases,  stand,  in  my 
mind,  on  high  ground.  The  mere  veteran  usurers 
may  be  taken  greater  liberties  with.  Their  real 
principal  and  interest,  however,  abstracted  from 
usurious  accumulation,  would  stand  better  than 
claims  constituted  wholly  by  profits  from  specula- 
tive bargains.  But  the  following  course  deserves 
consideration:  Take  care  of  debts  to  friends  who 
have  aided  you  by  their  money  or  credit  disinterest- 
edly, and  the  public  institutions.  Assign  the  rest  of 
your  property  for  the  benefit  of  creditors  generally. 
The  law  will  do  the  rest.  Whenever  usury  can  be 
proved,  the  contract,  I  take  it,  will  be  null.  Where 
it  cannot  be  proved,  the  parties  will  be  obliged  to 
acknowledge  on  oath,  and  then  their  principal  and 
interest  only  will  be  due.  Wherever  a  fair  account 
can  be  stated,  and  all  the  sums  borrowed  and  paid 
can  be  set  against  each  other,  it  is  probable  it  will  be 
found  that  more  has  been  paid  than,  on  a  computa- 
tion of  legal  interest,  was  ever  received.  Here,  I 
presume,  the  demand  would  be  extinguished,  and 
possibly  the  parties  would  be  compelled  to  disgorge. 
These  are  rather  desultory  thoughts  than  a  system- 
atic view  of  the  subject.  I  wish  I  had  more  time  to 
form  a  more  digested  opinion,  but  as  I  have  not  you 
must  take  what  I  can  give.     Adieu,  my  unfortunate 


512  Alexander  Hamilton 

friend.  God  bless  you  and  extricate  you  with  re- 
putation. Again  adieu.  Be  honorable,  calm,  and 
firm.* 


TO    WILLIAM    SETON 

Philadelphia,  May  25,  1792. 

My  Dear  Sir: 

The  society  for  the  establishmg  of  useful  manu- 
factures, at  their  last  meeting  resolved  to  borrow 
a  sum  of  five  thousand  dollars  upon  a  pledge  of  de- 
ferred stock.  Mr.  Walker  is  empowered  to  nego- 
tiate the  loan,  and  I  expect  application  will  be  made 
to  the  Bank  of  New  York  for  it.  I  have  a  strong 
wish  that  the  directors  of  that  bank  may  be  disposed 
to  give  facilities  to  this  institution  upon  terms  of 
perfect  safety  to  itself.  I  will  add  that  from  its 
situation  it  is  much  the  interest  of  our  city  that  it 
should  succeed.  It  is  not  difficult  to  discern  the 
advantage  of  being  the  immediate  market  of  a  con- 
siderable manufacturing  town.  A  pledge  of  public 
stock  will  completely  fulfil  the  idea  of  perfect  secur- 
ity. I  will  add  more,  that  in  my  opinion  banks 
ought  to  afford  accommodation  in  such  cases  upon 
easy  terms  of  interest.  I  think  five  per  cent,  ought 
to  suffice,  for  a  direct  public  good  is  presented.  And 
institutions  of  this  kind,  within  reasonable  limits, 
ought  to  consider  it  as  a  principal  object  to  promote 
beneficial  public  purposes. 

To  you,  my  dear  sir,  I  will  not  scruple  to  say  in 
confidence  that  the  Bank  of  New  York  shall  suffer  no 

^  Reprinted  from  the  History  of  the  Republic,  iv.,  289. 


Private  Correspondence  513 

diminution  of  its  pecuniary  facilities  from  any  ac- 
commodation it  may  afford  to  the  society  in  ques- 
tion. I  feel  my  reputation  much  concerned  in  its 
welfare. 

I  would  not  wish  any  formal  communication  of 
this  letter  to  the  directors,  but  you  may  make 
known  my  wishes  to  such  of  them  as  you  may  judge 
expedient. 


TO    COLONEL    EDWARD    CARRINGTON  ' 

Philadelphia,  May  26,  1792.        ^  ^  ^   ,^  -^^ 

My  Dear  Sir: 

Believing  that  I  possess  a  share  of  your  personal  /  -  ^/  ^ 
friendship  and  confidence,  and  yielding  to  that  which 
I  feel  towards  you;  persuaded  also,  that  our  political 
creed  is  the  same  on  two  essential  points — first,  the 
necessity  of  Union  to  the  respectability  and  happi- 
ness of  this  country,  and  second,  the  necessity  of  an 
efficient  general  government  to  maintain  the  Union, 
I  have  concluded  to  unbosom  myself  to  you,  on  the 
present  state  of  political  parties  and  views.  I  will 
ask  no  reply  to  what  I  shall  say ;  I  only  ask  that  you 
will  be  persuaded  the  representations  I  shall  make 
are  agreeable  to  the  real  and  sincere  impressions  of 
my  mind.  You  will  make  the  due  allowance  for  the 
influence  of  circumstances  upon  it;  you  will  consult 
your  own  observations,  and  you  will  draw  such  a 
conclusion  as  shall  appear  to  you  proper.  When  I 
accepted  the  office  I  now  hold,  it  was  imder  full  per- 
suasion, that  from  similarity  of  thinking,  conspiring 

^  Col.   Carrington,  of  Virginia,  was  an  old  and  trusted  friend  of 
Hamilton. 

VOL.  IX.— 33. 


514  Alexander  Hamilton 

with  personal  good-will,  I  should  have  the  firm  sup- 
port of  Mr.  Madison,  in  the  general  course  of  my 
administration.  Aware  of  the  intrinsic  difficulties 
of  the  situation,  and  of  the  powers  of  Mr.  Madison,  I 
do  not  believe  I  should  have  accepted  under  a  differ- 
ent supposition.  I  have  mentioned  the  similarity  of 
thinking  between  that  gentleman  and  myself.  This 
was  relative,  not  merely  to  the  general  principles  of 
national  policy  and  government,  but  to  the  leading 
points,  which  were  likely  to  constitute  questions  in 
the  administration  of  the  finances.  I  mean,  first, 
the  expediency  of  ftmding  the  debt;  second,  the  in- 
expediency of  discrimination  between  original  and 
present  holders;  third,  the  expediency  of  assuming 
the  State  debts. 

As  to  the  first  point,  the  evidence  of  Mr.  Madison's 
sentiments,  at  one  period,  is  to  be  found  in  the  ad- 
dress of  Congress,  of  April  twenty-sixth,  seventeen 
hundred  and  eighty- three,  which  was  planned  by 
him,  in  conformity  to  his  own  ideas,  and  without  any 
previous  suggestions  from  the  committee,  and  with 
his  hearty  co-operation  in  every  part  of  the  business. 
His  conversations  upon  various  occasions  since  have 
been  expressive  of  a  continuance  in  the  same  senti- 
ment ;  nor,  indeed,  has  he  yet  contradicted  it,  by  any 
part  of  his  official  conduct.  How  far  there  is  reason 
to  apprehend  a  change  in  this  particular,  will  be 
stated  hereafter.  As  to  the  second  part,  the  same 
address  is  an  evidence  of  Mr.  Madison's  sentiments 
at  the  same  period.  And  I  had  been  informed  that 
at  a  later  period  he  had  been,  in  the  Legislature  of 
Virginia,  a  strenuous  and  successful  opponent  of  the 


Private  Correspondence  515 

principle  of  discrimination.  Add  to  this,  that  a 
variety  of  conversations  had  taken  place  between 
him  and  myself,  respecting  the  public  debt,  down  to 
the  commencement  of  the  new  government,  in  none 
of  which  had  he  glanced  at  the  idea  of  a  change  of 
opinion.  I  wrote  him  a  letter  after  my  appointment, 
in  the  recess  of  Congress,  to  obtain  his  sentiments 
on  the  subject  of  the  finances.  In  his  answer,  there 
is  not  a  lisp  of  his  new  system. 

As  to  the  third  point,  the  question  of  an  assump- 
tion of  the  State  debts  by  the  United  States  was  in 
discussion  when  the  convention  that  framed  the 
present  government  was  sitting  at  Philadelphia,  and 
in  a  long  conversation  which  I  had  with  Mr.  Madison 
in  an  afternoon's  walk,  I  well  remember  that  we  were 
perfectly  agreed  in  the  expediency  and  propriety  of 
such  a  measure;  though  we  were  both  of  opinion 
that  it  would  be  more  advisable  to  make  it  a  measure 
of  administration  than  an  article  of  Constitution, 
from  the  impolicy  of  multiplying  obstacles  to  its  re- 
ception on  collateral  details. 

Under  these  circumstances  you  will  naturally 
imagine  that  it  must  have  been  matter  of  surprise 
to  me  when  I  was  apprised  that  it  was  Mr.  Madison's 
intention  to  oppose  my  plan  on  both  the  last-men- 
tioned points.  Before  the  debate  commenced,'  I 
had  a  conversation  with  him  on  my  report;  in  the 
course  of  which  I  alluded  to  the  calculation  I  had 

^  Hamilton  to  Madison:  "If  Mr.  Madison  shotdd  be  disengaged  this 
evening,  Mr.  Hamilton  would  be  obliged  by  an  opportunity  of  con- 
versing with  him  at  his  lodgings  for  half  an  hour.  If  engaged  this 
evening  he  will  thank  him  to  say  whether  to-morrow  evening  will  s\iit. 
Wednesday." 


5i6  Alexander  Hamilton 

made  of  his  sentiments,  and  the  grounds  of  that  cal- 
culation. He  did  not  deny  them;  but  alleged  in  his 
justification  that  the  very  considerable  alienation  of 
the  debt,  subsequent  to  the  periods  at  which  he  had 
opposed  a  discrimination,  had  essentially  changed 
the  state  of  the  question ;  and  that  as  to  the  assump- 
tion, he  had  contemplated  it  to  take  place  as  matters 
stood  at  the  peace.  While  the  change  of  opinion 
avowed  on  the  point  of  discrimination  diminished 
my  respect  for  the  force  of  Mr.  Madison's  mind  and 
the  soundness  of  his  judgment;  and  while  the  idea 
of  reserving  and  setting  afloat  a  vast  mass  of  already 
extinguished  debt,  as  the  condition  of  a  measure, 
the  leading  objects  of  which  were  an  accession  of 
strength  to  the  national  government,  and  an  assur- 
ance of  order  and  vigor  in  the  national  finances,  by 
doing  away  with  the  necessity  of  thirteen  complicated 
and  conflicting  systems  of  finance,  appeared  to  me 
somewhat  extraordinary,  yet  my  previous  impres- 
sions of  the  fairness  of  Mr.  Madison's  character,  and 
my  reliance  on  his  good-will  towards  me,  disposed  me 
to  believe  that  his  suggestions  were  sincere,  and  even 
on  the  point  of  an  assumption  of  the  debts  of  the 
States  as  they  stood  at  the  peace,  to  lean  towards 
a  co-operation  in  his  views,  till  on  feeling  the  ground 
I  found  the  thing  impracticable,  and  on  further  re- 
flection I  thought  it  liable  to  immense  difliculties. 
It  was  tried  and  failed  with  little  countenance. 

At  this  time  and  afterwards  repeated  intimations 
were  given  to  me  that  Mr.  Madison,  from  a  spirit  of 
rivalship,  or  some  other  cause,  had  become  person- 
ally unfriendly  to  me;    and  one  gentleman  in  par- 


Private  Correspondence  517 

ticular,  whose  honor  I  have  no  reason  to  doubt, 
assured  me  that  Mr.  Madison,  in  a  conversation  with 
him,  had  made  a  pretty  direct  attempt  to  insinuate 
unfavorable  impressions  of  me.  Still  I  suspended 
my  opinion  on  the  subject.  I  knew  the  malevolent 
officiousness  of  mankind  too  well  to  yield  a  very 
ready  acquiescence  to  the  suggestions  which  were 
made,  and  resolved  to  wait  till  time  and  more  ex- 
perience should  afford  a  solution.  It  was  not  till  the 
last  session  that  I  became  unequivocally  convinced 
of  the  following  truth:  "that  Mr.  Madison,  co- 
operating with  Mr.  Jefferson,  is  at  the  head  of  a  fac- 
tion decidedly  hostile  to  me  and  my  administration; 
and  actuated  by  views,  in  my  judgment,  subversive 
of  the  principles  of  good  government  and  dangerous 
to  the  Union,  peace,  and  happiness  of  the  country." 

These  are  strong  expressions,  they  may  pain  your 
friendship  for  one  or  both  of  the  gentlemen  whom  I 
have  named.  I  have  not  lightly  resolved  to  hazard 
them.  They  are  the  result  of  a  serious  alarm  in  my 
mind  for  the  public  welfare,  and  of  a  ivHl  conviction 
that  what  I  have  alleged  is  a  truth,  and  a  truth 
which  ought  to  be  told,  and  well  attended  to  by 
all  the  friends  of  the  Union  and  efficient  national 
government.  The  suggestion  will,  I  hope,  at  least, 
awaken  attention  free  from  the  bias  of  former  pre- 
possessions. 

This  conviction,  in  my  mind,  is  the  result  of  a 
long  train  of  circumstances,  many  of  them  minute. 
To  attempt  to  detail  them  all  would  fill  a  volume. 
I  shall  therefore  confine  myself  to  the  mention  of  a 
few. 


5i8  Alexander  Hamilton 

First. — As  to  the  point  of  opposition  to  me  and 
my  administration. 

Mr.  Jefferson,  with  very  little  reserve,  manifests 
his  dislike  of  the  fimding  system  generally,  calling  in 
question  the  expediency  of  funding  a  debt  at  all. 
Some  expressions,  which  he  has  dropped  in  my  pre- 
sence (sometimes  without  sufficient  attention  to 
delicacy),  will  not  permit  me  to  doubt  on  this  point 
representations  which  I  have  had  from  various  re- 
spectable quarters.  I  do  not  mean  that  he  advo- 
cates directly  the  undoing  of  what  has  been  done, 
but  he  censures  the  whole,  on  principles  which,  if 
they  should  become  general,  could  not  but  end  in 
the  subversion  of  the  system.  In  various  conversa- 
tions, with  foreigners  as  well  as  citizens,  he  has 
thrown  censure  on  my  principles  of  government  and 
on  my  measures  of  administration.  He  has  pre- 
dicted that  the  people  would  not  long  tolerate  my 
proceedings,  and  that  I  should  not  long  maintain 
my  ground.  Some  of  those  whom  he  immediately 
and  notoriously  moves  have  even  whispered  sus- 
picions of  the  rectitude  of  my  motives  and  conduct. 
In  the  question  concerning  the  bank  he  not  only 
delivered  an  opinion  in  writing  against  its  constitu- 
tionality and  expediency,  but  he  did  it  in  a  style  and 
manner  which  I  felt  as  partaking  of  asperity  and 
ill  humor  toward  me.  As  one  of  the  trustees  of  the 
sinking  fund,  I  have  experienced  in  almost  every 
leading  question  opposition  from  him.  When  any 
turn  of  things  in  the  community  has  threatened 
either  odium  or  embarrassment  to  me,  he  has  not 
been  able  to  suppress  the  satisfaction  which  it  gave 


Private  Correspondence  519 

him.  A  part  of  this  is,  of  course,  information,  and 
might  be  misrepresentation,  but  it  comes  through  so 
many  channels,  and  so  well  accords  with  what  falls 
under  my  own  observation,  that  I  can  entertain  no 
doubt. 

I  find  a  strong  confirmation  in  the  following  cir- 
cumstances: Freneau,  the  present  printer  of  the 
National  Gazette,  who  was  a  journeyman  with  Childs 
&  Swain,  at  New  York,  was  a  known  Anti-federalist. 
It  is  reduced  to  a  certainty  that  he  was  brought  to 
Philadelphia  by  Mr.  Jefferson  to  be  the  conductor  of 
a  newspaper.  It  is  notorious  that  contemporarily 
with  the  commencement  of  his  paper  he  was  a  clerk 
in  the  Department  of  State,  for  foreign  languages. 
Hence  a  clear  inference  that  his  paper  has  been  set 
on  foot  and  is  conducted  under  the  patronage  and 
not  against  the  views  of  Mr.  Jefferson.  What  then 
is  the  complexion  of  this  paper?  Let  any  impartial 
man  peruse  all  the  numbers  down  to  the  present  day, 
and  I  never  was  more  mistaken  if  he  does  not  pro- 
nounce that  it  is  a  paper  devoted  to  the  subversion 
of  me  and  the  measures  in  which  I  have  had  an 
agency ;  and  I  am  little  less  mistaken  if  he  does  not 
pronounce  that  it  is  a  paper  of  a  tendency  generally 
unfriendly  to  the  government  of  the  United  States. 
It  may  be  said  that  a  newspaper  being  open  to  all 
the  publications  which  are  offered  to  it,  its  com- 
plexion may  be  influenced  by  other  views  than  those 
of  the  editor.  But  the  fact  here  is  that  whenever 
the  editor  appears  it  is  in  a  correspondent  dress. 
The  paragraphs  which  appear  as  his  own,  the  pub- 
lications,  not  original,   which  are  selected  for  his 


^L^-h 


520  Alexander  Hamilton 

press,  are  of  the  same  malignant  and  unfriendly 
aspect ;  so  as  not  to  leave  a  doubt  of  the  temper 
which  directs  the  publication.  Again,  Brown,  who 
publishes  an  evening  paper  called  The  Federal  Ga- 
zette ^  was  originally  a  zealous  Federalist,  and  person- 
ally friendly  to  me.  He  has  been  employed  by  Mr. 
Jefferson  as  a  printer  to  the  government  for  the  pub- 
lication of  the  laws,  and  for  some  time  past,  until 
lately,  the  complexion  of  his  press  was  equally  bitter 
and  unfriendly  to  me  and  to  the  government. 

Lately  Col.  Pickering,  in  consequence  of  certain 
attacks  upon  him,  got  hold  of  some  instances  of  mal- 
conduct  of  his  which  have  served  to  hold  him  in 
check,  and  seemed  to  have  varied  his  tone  a  little.  I 
don't  lay  so  much  stress  on  this  last  case  as  on  the 
former.  There  I  find  an  internal  evidence,  which  is 
as  conclusive  as  can  be  expected  in  any  similar  case. 
Thus  far  as  to  Mr.  Jefferson. 

With  regard  to  Mr.  Madison,  the  matter  stands 
thus:  I  have  not  heard,  but  in  the  one  instance  to 
which  I  have  alluded,  of  his  having  held  language 
unfriendly  to  me  in  private  conversation,  but  in  his 
public  conduct  there  has  been  a  more  uniform  and 
persevering  opposition  than  I  have  been  able  to 
resolve  into  a  sincere  difference  of  opinion.  I  can- 
not persuade  myself  that  Mr.  Madison  and  I,  whose 
politics  had  formerly  so  much  the  same  point  of  de- 
parture, should  now  diverge  so  widely  in  otir  opinions 
of  the  measures  which  are  proper  to  be  pursued. 
The  opinion  I  once  entertained  of  the  candor  and 
simplicity  and  fairness  of  Mr.  Madison's  character, 
has,  I  acknowledge,  given  way  to  a  decided  opinion 


Private  Correspondence  521 

that  it  is  one  of  a  peculiarly  artificial  and  com- 
plicated kind.  For  a  considerable  part  of  the  last 
session  Mr.  Madison  lay  in  a  great  measure  perdu. 
But  it  was  evident  from  his  votes  and  a  variety  of 
little  movements  and  appearances,  that  he  v^as  the 
prompter  of  Mr.  Giles  and  others  who  were  the  open 
instruments  of  the  opposition.  Two  facts  occurred 
in  the  course  of  the  session  which  I  view  as  unequi- 
vocal demonstrations  of  his  disposition  towards  me. 
In  one,  a  direct  and  decisive  blow  was  aimed.  When 
the  Department  of  the  Treasury  was  established, 
Mr.  Madison  was  an  unequivocal  advocate  of  the 
principles  which  prevailed  in  it,  and  of  the  powers 
and  duties  which  were  assigned  by  it  to  the  head  of 
the  department.  This  appeared,  both  from  his 
private  and  public  discourse,  and  I  will  add,  that  I 
have  personal  evidence  that  Mr.  Madison  is  as  well 
convinced  as  any  man  in  the  United  States  of  the 
necessity  of  the  arrangement  which  characterizes 
that  establishment,  to  the  orderly  conducting  of  the 
business  of  the  finances.  Mr.  Madison  nevertheless 
opposed  a  reference  to  me  to  report  ways  and  means 
for  the  Western  expedition,  and  combated,  on  prin- 
ciple, the  propriety  of  such  references. 

He  well  knew  that  if  he  had  prevailed  a  certain 
consequence  was  my  resignation;  that  I  would  not 
be  fool  enough  to  make  pecuniary  sacrifices  and  en- 
dure a  life  of  extreme  drudgery  without  opportunity 
either  to  do  material  good  or  to  acquire  reputation, 
and  frequently  with  a  responsibility  in  reputation  for 
measures  in  which  I  had  no  hand,  and  in  respect  to 
which  the  part  I  had  acted,  if  any,  could  not  be 


522  Alexander  Hamilton 

known.  To  accomplish  this  point  an  effectual  train, 
as  was  supposed,  was  laid.  Besides  those  who  or- 
dinarily acted  under  Mr.  Madison's  banners,  several 
who  had  generally  acted  with  me,  from  various 
motives — vanity,  self-importance,  etc.,  etc., — ^were 
enlisted. 

My  overthrow  was  anticipated  as  certain,  and  Mr. 
Madison,  laying  aside  his  wonted  caution,  boldly  led 
his  troops,  as  he  imagined,  to  a  certain  victory.  He 
was  disappointed.  Though  late,  I  became  apprised 
of  the  danger.  Measures  of  counteraction  were 
adopted,  and  when  the  question  was  called  Mr.  Madi- 
son was  confounded  to  find  characters  votmg  against 
him  whom  he  counted  upon  as  certain.  Towards  the 
close  of  the  session  another,  though  a  more  covert, 
attack  was  made.  It  was  in  the  shape  of  a  proposi- 
tion to  insert  in  the  supplementary  act  respecting 
the  public  debt  something  by  way  of  instruction  to  the 
trustees  ''to  make  their  purchases  of  the  debt  at 
the  lowest  market  price."  In  the  course  of  the  dis- 
cussion of  this  point  Mr.  Madison  dealt  much  in  in- 
sidious insinuations  calculated  to  give  an  impression 
that  the  public  money,  under  my  particular  direc- 
tion, had  been  unfaithfully  applied  to  put  imdue 
advantages  in  the  pockets  of  speculators,  and  to 
support  the  debt  at  an  artificial  price  for  their  bene- 
fit. The  whole  manner  of  this  transaction  left  no 
doubt  in  any  one's  mind  that  Mr.  Madison  was  act- 
uated by  personal  and  political  animosity.  As  to 
this  last  instance,  it  is  but  candid  to  acknowledge 
that  Mr.  Madison  had  a  better  right  to  act  the  enemy 
than  on  any  former  occasion.    I  had,  some  short  time 


Private  Correspondence  523 

before,  subsequent  to  his  conduct  respecting  the 
reference,  declared  openly  my  opinion  of  the  views 
by  which  he  was  actuated  towards  me,  and  my  de- 
termination to  consider  and  treat  him  as  a  political 
enemy.  An  intervening  proof  of  Mr.  Madison's  un- 
friendly intrigues  to  my  disadvantage  is  to  be  found 
in  the  following  incident,  which  I  relate  to  you  upon 
my  honor,  but,  from  the  nature  of  it,  you  will  per- 
ceive in  the  strictest  confidence:  The  President, 
having  prepared  his  speech  at  the  commencement  of 
the  ensuing  session,  communicated  it  to  Mr.  Madison 
for  his  remarks.  It  contained,  among  other  things, 
a  clause  concerning  weights  and  measures,  hinting 
the  advantage  of  an  invariable  standard,  which  pre- 
ceded, in  the  original  state  of  the  speech,  a  clause 
containing  the  mint.  Mr.  Madison  suggested  a 
transposition  of  these  clauses  and  the  addition  of 
certain  words,  which  I  now  forget,  imparting  an  im- 
mediate connection  between  the  two  subjects.  You 
may  recollect  that  Mr.  Jefferson  proposes  that  the 
unit  of  weight  and  the  unit  in  the  coins  shall  be  the 
same,  and  that  my  propositions  are  to  preserve  the 
dollar  as  a  unit,  adhering  to  its  present  quantity  of 
silver  and  establishing  the  same  proportion  of  alloy 
in  the  silver  as  in  the  gold  coins.  The  evident  de- 
sign of  this  manoeuvre  was  to  commit  the  President's 
opinion  in  favor  of  Mr.  Jefferson's  idea  in  contradic- 
tion to  mine,  and,  the  worst  of  it  is,  without  his  being 
aware  of  the  tendency  of  the  thing.  It  happened 
that  the  President  showed  me  the  speech,  altered  in 
conformity  to  Mr.  Madison's  suggestion,  just  before 
it  was  copied  for  the  purpose  of  being  delivered,  I 


^c. 


524  Alexander  Hamilton 

remarked  to  him  the  tendency  of  the  alteration.  He 
declared  that  he  had  not  been  aware  of  it,  and  had 
no  such  intention,  and  without  hesitation  agreed  to 
expunge  the  words  which  were  designed  to  connect 
the  two  subjects. 

This  transaction,  in  my  opinion,  not  only  fur- 
nishes a  proof  of  Mr.  Madison's  intrigues  in  opposi- 
tion to  my  measures,  but  charges  him  with  an  abuse 
of  the  President's  confidence  in  him,  by  endeavoring 
to  make  him,  without  his  knowledge,  take  part  with 
one  officer  against  another  in  a  case  in  which  they 
had  given  different  opinions  to  the  Legislature  of  the 
country.  I  forbore  to  awake  the  President's  mind  to 
this  last  inference,  but  it  is  among  the  circumstances 
which  have  convinced  me  that  Mr.  Madison's  true 
character  is  the  reverse  of  that  simple,  fair,  candid 
one  which  he  has  assumed.  I  have  informed  you 
that  Mr.  Freneau  was  brought  to  Philadelphia  by 
Mr.  Jefferson,  to  be  conductor  of  a  newspaper.  My 
information  announced  Mr.  Madison  as  the  means  of 
negotiation,  while  he  was  at  New  York  last  summer. 
This,  and  the  general  coincidence  and  close  intimacy 
between  the  two  gentlemen,  leave  no  doubt  that 
their  views  are  substantially  the  same. 

Secondly,  as  to  the  tendency  of  the  views  of  the 
two  gentlemen  who  have  been  named.  Mr.  Jefferson 
is  an  avowed  enemy  to  a  funded  debt.  Mr.  Madison 
disavows,  in  public,  any  intention  to  undo  what  has 
been  done,  but,  in  private  conversation  with  Mr. 
Charles  Carroll,  Senator,  (this  gentleman's  name  I 
mention  confidentially,  though  he  mentioned  the 
matter  to  Mr.  King  and  several  other  gentlemen  as 


Private  Correspondence  525 

well  as  myself,  and  if  any  chance  should  bring  you 
together  you  would  easily  bring  him  to  repeat  it  to 
you,)  he  favored  the  sentiment  in  Mr.  Mercer's 
speech,  that  a  Legislature  had  no  right  to  fund  the 
debt  by  mortgaging  permanently  the  public  re- 
venues, because  they  had  no  right  to  bind  posterity. 
The  inference  is  that  what  has  been  unlawfully  done 
may  be  tmdone. 

The  discourse  of  partisans  in  the  Legislature,  and 
the  publication  in  the  party  newspapers,  direct  their 
main  battery  against  the  principle  of  a  funded  debt, 
and  represent  it  in  the  most  odious  light  as  a  per- 
fect Pandora's  box. 

If  Mr.  Barnwell  of  South  Carolina,  who  appears 
to  be  a  man  of  nice  honor,  may  be  credited,  Mr. 
Giles  declared,  in  a  conversation  with  him,  that  if 
there  was  a  question  for  reversing  the  funding  sys- 
tem on  the  abstract  point  of  the  right  of  pledging 
and  the  utility  of  preserving  public  faith,  he  should 
be  for  reversal,  merely  to  demonstrate  his  sense  of 
the  defect  of  right  and  the  inutility  of  the  thing.  If 
positions  equally  extravagant  were  not  publicly  ad- 
vanced by  some  of  the  party,  and  secretly  counten- 
anced by  the  most  guarded  and  discreet  of  them,  one 
would  be  led,  from  the  absurdity  of  the  declaration, 
to  suspect  misapprehension.  But,  from  what  is 
known,  any  thing  may  be  believed.  Whatever  were 
the  original  merits  of  the  funding  system,  after  hav- 
ing been  so  solemnly  adopted,  and  after  so  great  a 
transfer  of  property  under  it,  what  would  become  of 
the  government  should  it  be  reversed?  What  of  the 
national  reputation  ?     Upon  what  system  of  morality 


526  Alexander  Hamilton 

can  so  atrocious  a  doctrine  be  maintained?  In  me, 
I  confess  it  excited  indignation  and  horror! 

What  are  we  to  think  of  those  maxims  of  govern- 
ment by  which  the  power  of  a  Legislature  is  denied 
to  bind  the  nation,  by  a  contract  in  the  affair  of 
property  for  twenty-four  years?  For  this  is  pre- 
cisely the  case  of  the  debt.  What  are  to  become  of 
all  the  legal  rights  of  property,  of  all  charters  to  cor- 
porations, nay,  of  all  grants  to  a  man,  his  heirs  and 
assigns,  for  ever,  if  this  doctrine  be  true?  What  is 
the  term  for  which  a  government  is  in  capacity  to 
contract?  Questions  might  be  multiplied  without 
end,  to  demonstrate  the  pemiciousness  and  absurd- 
ity of  such  a  doctrine. 

In  almost  all  the  questions,  great  and  small,  which 
have  arisen  since  the  first  session  of  Congress,  Mr. 
Jefferson  and  Mr.  Madison  have  been  found  among 
those  who  are  disposed  to  narrow  the  federal  au- 
thority. The  question  of  a  national  bank  is  one 
example.  The  question  of  bounties  to  the  fisheries 
is  another.  Mr.  Madison  resisted  it  on  the  ground  of 
constitutionality,  till  it  was  evident,  by  the  inter- 
mediate questions  taken,  that  the  bill  would  pass; 
and  he  then,  under  the  wretched  subterfuge  of  a 
change  of  a  single  word,  ''bounty"  for  ''allowance,'* 
went  over  to  the  majority,  and  voted  for  the  bill. 
On  the  militia  bill,  and  in  a  variety  of  minor  cases, 
he  has  leaned  to  abridging  the  exercise  of  federal 
authority,  and  leaving  as  much  as  possible  to  the 
States;  and  he  lost  no  opportunity  of  sounding  the 
alarm,  with  great  affected  solemnity,  at  encroach- 
ments, meditated  on  the  rights  of  the  States,  and  of 


Private  Correspondence  527 

holding  up  the  bugbear  of  a  faction  in  the  govern- 
ment having  designs  unfriendly  to  liberty. 

This  kind  of  conduct  has  appeared  to  me  the  more 
extraordinary  on  the  part  of  Mr.  Madison,  as  I  know 
for  a  certainty,  it  was  a  primary  article  in  his  creed, 
that  the  real  danger  in  our  system  was  the  subver- 
sion of  the  national  authority  by  the  preponderancy 
of  the  State  governments.  All  his  measures  have 
proceeded  on  an  opposite  supposition.  I  recur  again 
to  the  instance  of  Freneau's  paper.  In  matters  of 
this  kind  one  cannot  have  direct  proof  of  men's 
latent  views;  they  must  be  inferred  from  circum- 
stances. As  coadjutor  of  Mr.  Jefferson  in  the  estab- 
lishment of  this  paper,  I  include  Mr.  Madison  in  the 
consequences  imputable  to  it.  In  respect  to  foreign 
politics,  the  views  of  these  gentlemen  are,  in  my 
judgment,  equally  unsound  and  dangerous.  They 
have  a  womanish  attachment  to  France  and  a 
womanish  resentment  against  Great  Britain.  They 
would  draw  us  into  the  closest  embrace  of  the  former, 
and  involve  us  in  all  the  consequences  of  her  politics ; 
and  they  would  risk  the  peace  of  the  coimtry  in  their 
endeavors  to  keep  us  at  the  greatest  possible  dis- 
tance from  the  latter.  This  disposition  goes  to  a 
length,  particularly  in  Mr.  Jefferson,  of  which,  till 
lately,  I  had  no  adequate  idea.  Various  circum- 
stances prove  to  me  that  if  these  gentlemen  were 
left  to  pursue  their  own  course,  there  would  be,  in 
less  than  six  months,  an  open  war  between  the 
United  States  and  Great  Britain.  I  trust  I  have  a 
due  sense  of  the  conduct  of  France  towards  this 
country  in  the  late  revolution;    and  that  I  shall 


528  Alexander  Hamilton 

always  be  among  the  foremost  in  making  her  every 
suitable  return;  but  there  is  a  wide  difference  be- 
tween this  and  implicating  ourselves  in  all  her  poli- 
tics; between  bearing  good- will  to  her  and  hating 
and  wrangling  with  all  those  whom  she  hates.  The 
neutral  and  the  pacific  policy  appears  to  me  to  mark 
the  true  path  to  the  United  States. 

Having  delineated  to  you  what  I  conceive  to  be 
the  true  complexion  of  the  politics  of  these  gentlemen, 
I  will  not  attempt  a  solution  of  these  strange  appear- 
ances. Mr.  Jefferson,  it  is  known,  did  not  in  the 
first  instance  cordially  acquiesce  in  the  new  Constitu- 
tion for  the  United  States ;  he  had  many  doubts  and 
reserves.  He  left  this  country  before  we  had  ex- 
perienced the  imbecilities  of  the  former. 

In  France,  he  saw  government  only  on  the  side  of 
its  abuses.  He  drank  freely  of  the  French  philo- 
sophy, in  religion,  in  science,  in  politics.  He  came 
from  France  in  the  moment  of  a  fermentation,  which 
he  had  a  share  in  exciting,  and  in  the  passions  and 
feelings  of  which  he  shared  both  from  temperament 
and  situation.  He  came  here  probably  with  a  too 
partial  idea  of  his  own  powers;  and  with  the  ex- 
pectation of  a  greater  share  in  the  direction  of  our 
councils  than  he  has  in  reality  enjoyed.  I  am  not 
-^(,0  sure  that  he  had  not  peculiarly  marked  out  for  him- 
self the  department  of  the  finances. 

He  came,  electrified  with  attachment  to  France, 
and  with  the  project  of  knitting  together  the  two 
countries  in  the  closest  political  bands. 

Mr.  Madison  had  always  entertained  an  exalted 
opinion  of  the  talents,  knowledge,  and  virtues  of  Mr. 


Private  Correspondence  529 

Jefferson.  The  sentiment  was  probably  reciprocal. 
A  close  correspondence  subsisted  between  them  dur- 
ing the  time  of  Mr.  Jefferson's  absence  from  the 
country.     A  close  intimacy  arose  upon  his  return. 

Whether  any  peculiar  opinions  of  Mr.  Jefferson's 
concerning  the  public  debt  wrought  a  change  in  the 
sentiments  of  Mr.  Madison  (for  it  is  certain  that  the 
former  is  more  radically  wrong  than  the  latter),  or 
whether  Mr.  Madison,  seduced  by  the  expectation  of 
popularity,  and  possibly  by  the  calculation  of  ad- 
vantage to  the  State  of  Virginia,  was  led  to  change 
his  own  opinion,  certain  it  is  that  a  very  material 
change  took  place,  and  that  the  two  gentlemen  were 
united  in  the  new  ideas.  Mr.  Jefferson  was  indis- 
creetly open  in  his  approbation  of  Mr.  Madison's 
principles,  upon  his  first  coming  to  the  seat  of  gov- 
ernment. I  say  indiscreetly,  because  a  gentleman 
in  the  administration,  in  one  department,  ought  not 
to  have  taken  sides  against  another,  in  another  de- 
partment. The  course  of  this  business  and  a  variety 
of  circumstances  which  took  place  left  Mr.  Madison 
a  very  discontented  and  chagrined  man,  and  begot 
some  degree  of  ill-humor  in  Mr.  Jefferson.  Attempts 
were  made  by  these  gentlemen,  in  different  ways,  to 
produce  a  commercial  warfare  with  Great  Britain. 
In  this,  too,  they  were  disappointed.  And,  as  they 
had  the  liveliest  wishes  on  the  subject,  their  dissatis- 
faction has  been  proportionably  great ;  and,  as  I  had 
not  favored  the  project,  I  was  comprehended  in  their 
displeasure. 

These  causes,  and  perhaps  some  others,  created, 
much  sooner  than  I  was  aware  of  it,  a  systematic 

VOL.  IX.— 34. 


530  Alexander  Hamilton 

opposition  to  me,  on  the  part  of  these  gentlemen. 
My  subversion,  I  am  now  satisfied,  has  been  long  an 
object  with  them. 

Subsequent  events  have  increased  the  spirit  of 
opposition  and  the  feelings  of  personal  mortification 
on  the  part  of  these  gentlemen. 

A  mighty  stand  was  made  on  the  affair  of  the  bank. 
There  was  much  commitment  in  that  case.  I  pre- 
vailed. On  the  mint  business  I  was  opposed  from 
the  same  quarters  and  with  still  less  success.  In  the 
affair  of  ways  and  means  for  the  Western  expedi- 
tion, on  the  supplementary  arrangements  concern- 
ing the  debt,  except  as  to  the  additional  assumption, 
my  views  have  been  equally  prevalent  in  opposition 
to  theirs.  This  current  of  success  on  the  one  side 
and  of  defeat  on  the  other  has  rendered  the  opposi- 
tion furious,  and  has  produced  a  disposition  to  sub- 
vert their  competitors,  even  at  the  expense  of  the 
government. 

Another  circumstance  has  contributed  to  widen- 
ing the  breach.  'T  is  evident,  beyond  a  question, 
from  every  movement,  that  Mr.  Jefferson  aims  with 
ardent  desire  at  the  Presidential  chair.  This,  too, 
is  an  important  object  of  the  party-politics.  It  is 
supposed,  from  the  nature  of  my  former  personal 
and  political  connections,  that  I  may  favor  some 
other  candidate  more  than  Mr.  Jefferson,  when  the 
question  shall  occur  by  the  retreat  of  the  present 
gentleman.  My  influence,  therefore,  with  the  com- 
munity becomes  a  thing,  on  ambitious  and  personal 
grounds,  to  be  resisted  and  destroyed.  You  know 
how  much  it  was  a  point  to  establish  the  Secretary 


Private  Correspondence  531 

of  State,  as  the  officer  who  was  to  administer  the 
government  in  defect  of  the  President  and  Vice- 
President.  Here,  I  acknowledge,  though  I  took  far 
less  part  than  was  supposed,  I  ran  counter  to  Mr. 
Jefferson's  wishes;  but  if  I  had  had  no  other  reason 
for  it,  I  had  already  experienced  opposition  from  him, 
which  rendered  it  a  measure  of  self-defence.  It  is 
possible,  too,  (for  men  easily  heat  their  imaginations 
when  their  passions  are  heated,)  that  they  have  by 
degrees  persuaded  themselves  of  what  they  may 
have  at  first  only  sported  to  influence  others,  namely, 
that  there  is  some  dreadful  combination  against 
State  government  and  republicanism;  which,  ac- 
cording to  them,  are  convertible  terms.  But  there 
is  so  much  absurdity  in  this  supposition,  that  the 
admission  of  it  tends  to  apologize  for  their  hearts  at 
the  expense  of  their  heads.  Under  the  influence  of 
all  these  circumstances  the  attachment  to  the  govern- 
ment of  the  United  States,  originally  weak  in  Mr. 
Jefferson's  mind,  has  given  way  to  something  very 
like  dislike  in  Mr.  Madison's.  It  is  so  counteracted 
by  personal  feelings  as  to  be  more  an  affair  of  the 
head  than  of  the  heart;  more  the  result  of  a  con- 
viction of  the  necessity  of  Union  than  of  cordiality 
to  the  thing  itself.  I  hope  it  does  not  stand  worse 
than  this  with  him.  In  such  a  state  of  mind  both 
these  gentlemen  are  prepared  to  hazard  a  great  deal 
to  effect  a  change.  Most  of  the  important  measures 
of  every  government  are  connected  with  the  treas- 
ury. To  subvert  the  present  head  of  it,  they  deem 
it  expedient  to  risk  rendering  the  government  itself 
odious;    perhaps  foolishly  thinking  that  they  can 


1  (.2. 


532  Alexander  Hamilton 

easily  recover  the  lost  affections  and  confidence  of 
the  people,  and  not  appreciating,  as  they  ought  to 
do,  the  natural  resistance  to  government,  which  in 
every  community  results  from  the  human  passions, 
the  degree  to  which  this  is  strengthened  by  the  or- 
ganized rivality  of  State  governments,  and  the  infinite 
danger  that  the  national  government,  once  rendered 
odious,  will  be  kept  so  by  these  powerful  and  inde- 
fatigable enemies.  They  forget  an  old,  but  a  very 
just,  though  a  coarse  saying,  that  it  is  much  easier 
to  raise  the  devil  than  to  lay  him.  Poor  Knox  has 
come  in  for  a  share  of  their  persecutions,  as  a  man 
who  generally  thinks  with  me,  and  who  has  a  por- 
tion of  the  President's  good- will  and  confidence.  In 
giving  you  this  picture  of  political  parties,  my  de- 
sign is,  I  confess,  to  awaken  your  attention,  if  it  has 
not  yet  been  awakened,  to  the  conduct  of  the  gentle- 
men in  question.  If  my  opinion  of  them  is  founded, 
it  is  certainly  of  great  moment  to  the  public  weal 
that  they  should  be  understood.  I  rely  on  the 
strength  of  your  mind  to  appreciate  men  as  they 
merit,  when  you  have  a  clue  to  their  real  views. 

A  word  on  another  point.  I  am  told  that  serious 
apprehensions  are  disseminated  in  your  State  as  to 
the  existence  of  a  monarchical  party  meditating  the 
destruction  of  State  and  republican  government.  If 
it  is  possible  that  so  absurd  an  idea  can  gain  ground, 
it  is  necessary  that  it  should  be  combated.  I  assure 
you,  on  my  private  faith  and  honor  as  a  man,  that 
there  is  not,  in  my  judgment,  a  shadow  of  founda- 
tion for  it.  A  very  small  number  of  men  indeed 
may  entertain  theories  less  republican  than  Mr.  Jef- 


Private  Correspondence  533 

ferson  and  Mr.  Madison,  but  I  am  persuaded  there 
is  not  a  man  among  them  who  would  not  regard 
as  both  criminal  and  visionary  any  attempt  to  sub- 
vert the  republican  system  of  the  country.  Most  of 
these  men  rather  fear  that  it  may  not  justify  itself 
by  its  fruits,  than  feel  a  predilection  for  a  different 
form;  and  their  fears  are  not  diminished  by  the 
factious  and  fanatical  politics  which  they  find  pre- 
vailing among  a  certain  set  of  gentlemen  and  threat- 
ening to  disturb  the  tranquillity  and  order  of  the 
government. 

As  to  the  destruction  of  State  governments,  the 
great  and  real  anxiety  is  to  be  able  to  preserve  the 
national  from  the  too  potent  and  counteracting  in- 
fluence of  those  governments.  As  to  my  own 
political  creed,  I  give  it  to  you  with  the  utmost  sin- 
cerity. I  am  affectionately  attached  to  the  repub- 
lican theory.  I  desire  above  all  things  to  see  the 
equality  of  political  rights,  exclusive  of  all  heredi- 
tary distinction,  firmly  established  by  a  practical 
demonstration  of  its  being  consistent  with  the  order 
and  happiness  of  society.  As  to  State  governments, 
the  prevailing  bias  of  my  judgment  is  that  if  they 
can  be  circumscribed  within  bounds,  consistent  with 
the  preservation  of  the  national  government,  they 
will  prove  useful  and  salutary.  If  the  States  were 
all  of  the  size  of  Connecticut,  Maryland,  or  New  Jer- 
sey, I  should  decidedly  regard  the  local  governments 
as  both  safe  and  useful.  As  the  thing  now  is,  how- 
ever, I  acknowledge  the  most  serious  apprehensions, 
that  the  government  of  the  United  States  will  not 
be  able  to  maintain  itself  against  their  influence.     I 


534  Alexander  Hamilton 

see  that  influence  already  penetrating  into  the  na- 
tional councils  and  preventing  their  direction.  Hence, 
a  disposition  on  my  part  towards  a  liberal  construc- 
tion of  the  powers  of  the  national  government,  and 
to  erect  every  fence,  to  guard  it  from  depredations 
which  is,  in  my  opinion,  consistent  with  constitu- 
tional propriety.  As  to  any  combination  to  pros- 
trate the  State  governments,  I  disavow  and  deny  it. 
From  an  apprehension  lest  the  judiciary  should  not 
work  efficiently  or  harmoniously,  I  have  been  de- 
sirous of  seeing  some  national  scheme  of  connection 
adopted  as  an  amendment  to  the  Constitution, 
otherwise  I  am  for  maintaining  things  as  they  are ; 
though  I  doubt  much  the  possibility  of  it,  from  a 
tendency  in  the  nature  of  things  towards  the  pre- 
ponderancy  of  the  State  governments. 

I  said  that  I  was  affectionately  attached  to  the 
republican  theory.  This  is  the  real  language  of  my 
heart,  which  I  open  to  you  in  the  sincerity  of  friend- 
ship; and  I  add  that  I  have  strong  hopes  of  the 
success  of  that  theory;  but,  in  candor,  I  ought  also 
to  add  that  I  am  far  from  being  without  doubts.  I 
consider  its  success  as  yet  a  problem.  It  is  yet  to 
be  determined  by  experience  whether  it  be  consistent 
with  that  stability  and  order  in  government  which 
are  essential  to  public  strength  and  private  security 
and  happiness. 

On  the  whole,  the  only  enemy  which  Republican- 
ism has  to  fear  in  this  country  is  in  the  spirit  of 
faction  and  anarchy.  If  this  will  not  permit  the 
ends  of  government  to  be  attained  under  it,  if  it 
engenders  disorders  in  the  community,  all  regular 


Private  Correspondence  535 

and  orderly  minds  will  wish  for  a  change,  and  the 
demagogues  who  have  produced  the  disorder  will 
make  it  for  their  own  aggrandizement.  This  is  the 
old  story.  If  I  were  disposed  to  promote  monarchy 
and  overthrow  State  governments,  I  would  mount 
the  hobby-horse  of  popularity;  I  would  cry  out 
"usurpation,"  ''danger  to  liberty,"  etc.,  etc.;  I 
would  endeavor  to  prostrate  the  national  govern- 
ment, raise  a  ferment,  and  then  ''ride  in  the  whirl- 
wind, and  direct  the  storm."  That  there  are  men 
acting  with  Jefferson  and  Madison  who  have  this  in 
view,  I  verily  believe ;  I  could  lay  my  finger  on  some 
of  them.  That  Madison  does  not  mean  it,  I  also 
verily  believe;  and  I  rather  believe  the  same  of 
Jefferson,  but  I  read  him  upon  the  whole  thus:  "A 
man  of  profound  ambition  and  violent  passions." 

You  must  be  by  this  time  tired  of  my  epistle. 
Perhaps  I  have  treated  certain  characters  with  too 
much  severity.  I  have,  however,  not  meant  to  do 
them  injustice,  and,  from  the  bottom  of  my  soul,  be- 
lieve I  have  drawn  them  truly;  and  it  is  of  the  ut- 
most consequence  to  the  public  weal  they  should  be 
viewed  in  their  true  colors.  I  yield  to  this  impres- 
sion. I  will  only  add  that  I  make  no  clandestine 
attacks  on  the  gentlemen  concerned.  They  are  both 
apprised  indirectly  from  myself  of  the  opinion  I  en- 
tertain of  their  views.  With  the  truest  regard  and 
esteem.' 

^  Reprinted  from  the  History  of  the  Republic^  iv.,  520.  This  long, 
interesting,  and  most  important  letter  was  written  at  the  time  of  the 
troubles  in  the  Cabinet.  It  is  evidently  much  more  than  merely  a 
letter  to  a  friend,  and  was  undoubtedly  written  with  a  specific  purpose, 
probably  to  explain  through  Carrington  to  the  Virginia  Federalists 


'^4  I)' 


53^  Alexander  Hamilton 

TO   GENERAL    OTHO    H.    WILLIAMS 

Philadelphia,  Jiine  9,  1792. 

My  Dear  Sir: 

I  feel  myself  not  a  little  a  delinquent  in  regard  to 
a  certain  paper  you  forwarded  to  me.  I  will  now 
explain  the  reason  of  its  non-appearance.  Though 
I  thought  it  a  merited  and  a  very  good  reproof  on 
certain  folks,  as  well  as  calculated  to  throw  useful 
light  on  transactions  interesting  to  the  fame  of  our 
deceased  friend,'  as  the  business  depending  was  taking 
a  favorable  turn  when  I  received  your  letter,  I  doubted 
the  expediency  of  starting  any  new  game,  lest  it 
should  wound  the  pride  and  jar  the  nerves  of  more 
than  the  individual  meant  to  be  chastised,  so  as 
to  perhaps  do  harm  to  a  cause  we  both  wish  to 
promote. 

If  things  had  continued  on  an  unpromising  train, 
I  should  have  been  willing  to  have  taken  the  chance 
of  the  publication.  In  me  it  would  have  gratified 
feelings  of  more  than  one  kind. 

I  at  first  intended  to  reserve  the  publication  for 
the  conclusion  of  the  business,  but  then  I  doubted 
whether  it  was  worth  while  to  stir  again  the  ques- 
tion. It  could  not  serve  the  original  purpose,  and  it 
was  not  necessary  to  the  fame  of  the  General,  that 
stands  unassailable  with  success. 

If  any  impressions  have  fallen  under  your  notice 

why  the  writer  had  parted  company  with  Madison  and  had  attacked 
Jefferson.  It  is  the  ablest  and  best  exposition  that  we  have  of  the 
condition  of  poHtics  at  that  time;  and,  although  written  by  a  party 
leader  is  singularly  moderate  in  tone  and  is  clearly  intended  to  be 
fair  to  all. 

^  General  Greene,  of  whom  General  Williams  had  written  a  defence. 


Private  Correspondence  537 

which  induce  you  to  think  this  last  conclusion  erro- 
neous, the  publication  at  this  time  will  not  be  too 
late  for  that  purpose. 

P.  S. — With  your  permission,  I  will  retain  the 
paper  as  an  interesting  record  of  some  particulars 
which  were  not  before  known  to  me.' 


TO    GOUVERNEUR   MORRIS 

Philadelphia,  June  22,  1792. 

My  Dear  Sir: 

I  accept  your  challenge  to  meet  you  in  the  field  of 
mutual  confidential  communication;  though  I  can- 
not always  promise  punctuality  or  copiousness.  I 
will,  however,  do  the  best  I  can. 

Will  it  not  be  a  necessary  preliminary  to  agree 
upon  a  cypher  ?  One  has  been  devised  for  me  which, 
though  simple  in  execution,  is  tedious  in  prepara- 
tion. I  may  shortly  forward  it.  In  the  meantime 
let  us  settle  some  appellations  for  certain  official 
characters.     I  will  call, 

The  President,  Scaevola.      The  Vice-President, 

Sec'y  of  State,  Scipio.  Brutus. 

Sec'y  of  Treasury,  Paulus     Sec'y   of   War,   Sempro- 

nius. 
Attorney-General,  Ly- 

sander. 

'  I  owe  this  letter,  now  first  printed  from  the  original,  to  the  kindness 
of  Mr.  Otho  H.  Williams,  of  Baltimore,  the  grandson  of  the  Revolu- 
tionary soldier.  The  paper  referred  to  is  among  the  Hamilton  MSB. 
in  the  State  Department. 


538 


Alexander  Hamilton 


SENATORS 


Robert  Morris,  Cato. 
Rufus  King,  Leonidas. 
Aaron  Burr,  Saevius. 
Monroe,  Sydney. 


Oliver  Ellsworth,  Virgin- 
ius. 

George  Cabot,  Fortius. 

Richard  Henry  Lee,  Mar- 
cus. 

Ralph  Izard,  Themis- 
tocles. 


REPRESENTATIVES 


James  Madison,  Tarquin. 
Abraham  Baldwin, 

Hampden. 

Mercer,  Tacitus. 

Thomas   Fitzsimmons, 

Cicero. 
Jeremiah     Wadsworth, 

Titius. 


Giles,  Chronus. 

Ames,  Valerius. 

John  Lawrence,  Solon. 

Murray,  Livy. 

Egbert  Benson,  Crom- 
well. 

Jonathan  Tnmibull, 
Qmntus. 


You  see  that  I  have  avoided  characteristic  names. 
In  my  next  you  shall  have  a  sketch  of  the  general 
state  of  the  coimtry,  its  politics  and  parties.  I 
thank  you  for  your  calculations,  as  I  will  for  every 
suggestion  you  shall  make.  I  shall  seldom  fail  to 
get  either  a  new  idea  or  a  new  appellation  of  an  old 
one.  I  shall  endeavor  to  put  in  train,  by  this  oppor- 
tunity, the  papers  you  advise  to  be  sent  to  the  Rus- 
sian Ambassador.  If  your  courage  is  not  put  to  the 
test  by  being  put  to  wear  what  you  have  won,  it  will 
not  be  my  fault.  Do  you  know  enough  of  the 
catechism  in  the  vulgar  tongue  to  fulfil  what  you 
have  lately  undertaken? ' 

'  Reprinted  from  Sparks's  Life  of  Gouverneur  Morris,  vol.  i.,  p.  373. 


Private  Correspondence  539 

TO  COLONEL  HETH  '  AND  OTHERS 

Philadelphia,  June  26,  1792. 

Gentlemen  : 

I  have  received  your  circular-letter  of  the  28th  of 
February  last. 

I  consider  it  as  addressed  to  me  in  the  capacity  of 
a  fellow-soldier,  and  in  that  capacity  I  now  acknow- 
ledge and  answer  it. 

Respect  for  you,  gentlemen,  and  for  those  on 
whose  behalf  you  write,  does  not  permit  me  to  be 
silent,  and  in  replying,  the  frankness  which  is  due  to 
you  and  them,  and  which  is  not  less  due  to  my  own 
character,  forbids  me  to  dissemble. 

My  judgment  does  not  accord  with  the  views  which 
are  announced  in  your  letter.  A  perseverance  in 
them  will  not,  I  believe,  be  productive  of  any  ad- 
vantage to  the  parties,  and  may  I  fear  be  attended 
with  some  public  inconveniences,  which  I  am  per- 
suaded they  would  regret. 

1  also  have  made  sacrifices  with  the  army,  and, 
what  is  less  known,  for  the  army.  I  feel  that  I  love 
those  who  remain  of  that  respectable  band,  and  that 
no  one  can  be  more  solicitous  than  myself  for  their 
welfare.  I  trust,  therefore,  they  will  do  justice  to 
my  motives  on  the  present  occasion.^ 

^  Colonel  William  Heth,  of  Virginia. 

2  This  letter  refers  to  a  claim  made  by  the  army  for  compensation 
for  losses  incurred  by  their  having  been  paid  in  a  depreciated  cur- 
rency. This  movement  had  been  made  political  in  the  South,  and 
the  foundation  of  attacks  on  the  North  for  buying  soldiers'  claims,  and 
also  on  Washington  and  Hamilton.  A  second  circular  was  then 
issued  reiterating  the  claim  and  asking  the  co-operation  of  all  officers. 
This  was  the  subject  of  Hamilton's  letter. 


540  Alexander  Hamilton 

TO    WILLIAM    SETON 

(Private.) 

June  26,  1792. 

Dear  Sir: 

This  accompanies  an  official  letter.  I  acknow- 
ledge I  doubt  the  accuracy  of  the  opinion  of  the 
attorney-general  on  the  last  point..  A  law  is  not  to 
be  so  literally  construed  as  to  involve  absurdity  and 
oppression.  The  Legislature  might  reasonably  re- 
strain its  officers  from  future  buying  and  selling  of 
stock,  but  could  not  reasonably  prevent  their  making 
a  disposition  of  property  which  they  had  previously 
acquired  according  to  the  laws  of  their  country. 

At  the  same  time,  for  greater  caution,  I  should  in 
my  own  case  follow  the  strict  interpretation. 

All  my  property  in  the  funds  is  about  $800,  3  per 
cents.  These,  at  a  certain  period,  I  should  have 
sold,  had  I  not  been  unwilling  to  give  occasion  to 
cavil. 

The  restriction  itself,  as  it  respects  the  officers  of 
the  treasury,  and  I  rather  think  the  commissioners 
of  loans,  is  a  wise  and  unexceptionable  one. 

But  the  propriety  of  its  further  extension  is  not 
obvious,  and  I  doubt  whether  it  will  be  lasting.  The 
act  passed  in  a  prodigious  hurry. 


TO    RUFUS    KING 

Philadelphia,  June  28,  1792. 

My  Dear  King: 

I  have  not,  as  you  well  may  imagine,  been  in- 
attentive to  your  political  squabble.     I  believe  you 


Private  Correspondence  541 

are  right  (though  I  have  not  accurately  examined), 
but  I  am  not  without  apprehension  that  a  ferment 
may  be  raised  which  may  not  be  allayed  when  you 
wish  it.  'T  is  not  to  be  forgotten  that  the  opposers 
of  Clinton  are  the  real  friends  to  order  and  good 
government,  and  that  it  will  ill  become  them  to  give 
an  example  to  the  contrary. 

Some  folks  are  talking  of  conventions  and  the 
bayonet.  But  the  case  will  justify  neither  a  resort 
to  such  principles  nor  to  violence.  Some  amend- 
ments of  your  election  laws,  and  possibly  the  im- 
peachment of  some  of  the  canvassers  who  have 
given  proofs  of  premeditated  partiality,  will  be  very 
well,  and  it  will  answer  good  purposes  to  keep  alive, 
within  proper  bounds,  the  public  indignation.  But 
beware  of  extremes! 

There  appears  to  be  no  definite  declared  objects  of 
the  movements  on  foot,  which  render  them  more 
ticklish.  What  can  you  do?  What  do  you  expect 
to  effect? ' 


TO    ELIAS   BOUDINOT 

Philadelphia,  July  12,  1792. 

Dear  Sir: 

I  wrote  you,  a  day  or  two  since,  on  the  subject  of 
the  advertisement. 

You  recollect  there  is  a  power  to  borrow  to  be 

^  Now  first  printed  from  the  King  papers  in  the  possession  of  Dr. 
Charles  King.  In  R.  King's  handwriting  on  the  opposite  page  is  the 
following:  "  I  have  had  no  agency  in  promoting  the  measures  adopted 
respecting  the  decision  of  the  canvassers.  I  have,  however,  felt  the 
utmost  indignation." 


542  Alexander  Hamilton 

given  to  the  committee,  under  the  seal  of  the  corpora- 
tion. No  time  ought  to  be  lost  in  preparing  and 
executing  the  power  and  making  application  for  the 
loan.  Not  more  than  $30,000,  in  addition  to  the 
$10,000  already  borrowed,  need  at  first  be  asked  for. 
I  shall  write  to  Mr.  Seton  by  to-morrow's  post. 
Pray,  my  friend,  let  nothing  slumber. 


TO   WASHINGTON 

Philadelphia,  Jtily  22,  1792. 

Sir: 

I  wrote  you  on  Monday  last,  transmitting  a  reso- 
lution of  the  Commissioners  of  the  Sinking  Fund. 
Nothing  in  the  way  of  public  business  requiring  yoiir 
attention  has  since  occurred. 

There  is  a  matter  I  beg  leave  to  mention  to  you 
confidentially,  in  which  your  interposition,  if  you 
deem  it  advisable,  may  have  a  good  effect. 

I  have  long  had  it  at  heart  that  some  good  system 
of  regulations  for  the  forwarding  supplies  to  the 
army,  issuing  them  there  and  accounting  for  them 
to  the  Department  of  War,  should  be  established. 
On  conversing  with  the  Secretary  at  War,  I  do  not 
find  that  any  such  now  exists;  nor  had  the  intima- 
tions I  have  taken  the  liberty  to  give  on  the  subject, 
though  perfectly  well  received,  hitherto  produced 
the  desired  effect.  The  utility  of  the  thing  does  not 
seem  to  be  as  strongly  impressed  on  the  mind  of  the 
Secretary  at  War  as  it  is  on  mine. 

It  has  occurred  to  me  that  if  you  should  think  fit 
to  call  by  letter  upon  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury 


Private  Correspondence  543 

and  the  Secretary  at  War  to  report  to  you  the  sys- 
tem and  regulations  under  which  the  procuring,  issuing, 
and  accounting  for  supplies  to  the  army  is  conducted, 
it  would  produce  what  appears  to  be  now  wanting. 
I  submit  the  idea  accordingly. 

END  OP  VOL.   IX 


University  of 
Connecticut 

Libraries 


391530289721S2 


G.ESTEt'HERTiCo 
(ALFRED  HAFNER) 
NEW  YORK 


