LIBRARY 

OF  CALIFORNIA 

B4VIS 


THE  CONNOISSEUR'S  FEDERAL  EDI 
TION  OF  THE  WORKS  OF  ALEXANDER 
HAMILTON  IS  LIMITED  TO  FOUR  HUN 
DRED  SIGNED  AND  NUMBERED  SETS  OF 
WHICH  THIS  IS  NUMBER 


Ixrrfes  of 


in 


George  Clinton 

After  the  painting  by  Ames 


(Mr* 

(Wtxnrfcs  xx  f 


The  Works  of 

Alexander  Hamilton 


Edited  by 
Henry  Cabot  Lodge 


"  The  sacred  rights  of  mankind  are  not  to  be  rummaged  for  among  old  parchment*  or 
musty  records.  They  are  written,  as  with  a  sunbeam,  in  the  whole  volume  of  human  nature, 
by  the  hand  of  the  Divinity  itself,  and  can  never  be  erased  or  obscured  by  mortal  power." 

[HAMILTON — The  Farmer  Refuted^  1775,  ^t.  i8.J 

44  We  are  laboring  hard  to  establish  in  this  country  principles  more  and  more  national, 
and  free  from  all  foreign  ingredients,  so  that  we  may  be  neither  4  Greeks  nor  Trojans,'  but 
truly  Americans."—  [HAMILTON  TO  KING,  1796,  .flEt.  39.] 


Volume  II 


G.  P.  Putnam's  Sons 

New  York  and  London 

Cbe  fmtcfeerbocher  press 

1904 


LIBRARY 

UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA 
PAVIS 


imfcfeerbocfcer  £re«s,  flew 


CONTENTS 


CONVENTION  OF  NEW  YORK  I 

SPEECH  ON  THE  COMPROMISES  OP  THE  CONSTITU 
TION   3 

SPEECH  ON  THE  CONSTITUTION  RESUMED  .  .  18 
SPEECH  ON  THE  SENATE  OF  THE  UNITED  STATES  .  40 
BRIEF  OF  ARGUMENT  ON  THE  CONSTITUTION  OF 

THE  UNITED  STATES 91 

DRAFT  OF  PROPOSED  RATIFICATION  OF  THE  CON 
STITUTION  OF  THE  UNITED  STATES,  WITH 
SPECIFIED  AMENDMENTS     ....         95 
ADDRESSES 103 

BETTERS  OF  H.  G \  .  .133 

PAXATION  AND  FINANCE: 

REPORT  ON  IMPOST  DUTY          ....  179 

SPEECH  ON  THE  REVENUE  SYSTEM     .         .         .  192 

FINANCE: 

FIRST  REPORT  ON  THE  PUBLIC  CREDIT  .  .  227 
OPERATIONS  OF  THE  ACT  LAYING  DUTIES  ON 

IMPORTS 291 

ARREARS  OF  PAY 327 

PUBLIC  CREDIT 337 

HAMILTON  TO  SUPERVISORS  OF  BOSTON     .         .  352 

LOANS  .  353 

SPIRITS,  FOREIGN  AND  DOMESTIC       .         .         .  368 

VOL.  II. 

Ill 


CONVENTION  OF  NEW  YORK 


SPEECH     ON     THE  COMPROMISES     OF     THE    CONSTITU 
TION x 

POUGHKEEPSIE,  Jtine  2O,  1788. 

MR.  CHAIRMAN: 

The  honorable  member  who  spoke  yesterday  went 
into  an  explanation  of  a  variety  of  circumstances  to 
prove  the  expediency  of  a  change  in  our  National 
Government,  and  the  necessity  of  a  firm  Union;  at 
the  same  time  he  described  the  great  advantages 
which  this  State,  in  particular,  receives  from  the 
Confederacy,  and  its  peculiar  weaknesses  when  ab 
stracted  from  the  Union.  In  doing  this  he  advanced 
a  variety  of  arguments  which  deserve  serious  con 
sideration.  Gentlemen  have  this  day  come  forward 
to  answer  him.  He  has  been  treated  as  having 
wandered  in  the  flowery  fields  of  fancy,  and  at 
tempts  have  been  made  to  take  off  from  the  minds 
of  the  committee  that  sober  impression  which  might 
be  expected  from  his  arguments.  I  trust,  sir,  that 
observations  of  this  kind  are  not  thrown  out  to  cast 
a  light  air  on  this  important  subject;  or  to  give  any 

'The  reporter  of  this,  and  of  the  following  speeches,  observes:  "He 
thinks  an  apology  due  for  the  imperfect  dress  in  which  these  arguments 
are  given  to  the  public.  Not  long  accustomed,  he  cannot  pretend  as 
much  accuracy  as  might  be  expected  from  a  more  experienced  hand." 

3 


4  Alexander  Hamilton 

personal  bias  on  the  great  question  before  us.  I 
will  not  agree  with  gentlemen  who  trifle  with  the 
weaknesses  of  our  country;  and  suppose  that  they 
are  enumerated  to  answer  a  party  purpose,  and  to 
terrify  with  ideal  dangers.  No ;  I  believe  these  weak 
nesses  to  be  real,  and  pregnant  with  destruction. 
Yet,  however  weak  our  country  may  be,  I  hope  we 
shall  never  sacrifice  our  liberties.  If,  therefore,  on 
a  full  and  candid  discussion,  the  proposed  system 
shall  appear  to  have  that  tendency,  for  God's  sake, 
let  us  reject  it!  But,  let  us  not  mistake  words  for 
things,  nor  accept  doubtful  surmises  as  the  evidence 
of  truth.  Let  us  consider  the  Constitution  calmly 
and  dispassionately,  and  attend  to  those  things  only 
which  merit  consideration. 

No  arguments  drawn  from  embarrassment  or  in 
convenience  ought  to  prevail  upon  us  to  adopt 
a  system  of  government  radically  bad;  yet  it  is 
proper  that  these  arguments,  among  others,  should 
be  brought  into  view.  In  doing  this  yesterday  it  was 
necessary  to  reflect  upon  our  situation,  to  dwell  upon 
the  imbecility  of  our  Union,  and  to  consider  whether 
we,  as  a  State,  could  stand  alone. 

Although  I  am  persuaded  this  convention  will  be 
resolved  to  adopt  nothing  that  is  bad,  yet  I  think 
every  prudent  man  will  consider  the  merits  of  the 
plan  in  connection  with  the  circumstances  of  our 
country;  and  that  a  rejection  of  the  Constitution 
may  involve  most  fatal  consequences.  I  make  these 
remarks  to  show  that,  though  we  ought  not  to  be 
actuated  by  unreasonable  fear,  yet  we  ought  to  be 
prudent. 


Convention  of  New  York  5 

This  day,  sir,  one  gentleman  has  attempted  to 
answer  the  arguments  advanced  by  my  honorable 
friend ;  another  has  treated  him  as  having  wandered 
from  the  subject.  This  being  the  case,  I  trust  I 
shall  be  equally  indulged  in  reviewing  the  remarks 
which  have  been  made. 

Sir,  it  appears  to  me  extraordinary,  that  while 
gentlemen  in  one  breath  acknowledge  that  the  old 
Confederation  requires  many  material  amendments, 
they  should,  in  the  next,  deny  that  its  defects  have 
been  the  cause  of  our  political  weakness,  and  the  con 
sequent  calamities  of  our  country.  I  cannot  but  in 
fer  from  this  that  there  is  still  some  lurking  favorite 
imagination  that  this  system,  with  corrections,  might 
become  a  safe  and  permanent  one.  It  is  proper  that 
we  should  examine  this  matter.  We  contend  that 
the  radical  vice  in  the  old  Confederation  is  that  the 
laws  of  the  Union  apply  only  to  the  States  in  their 
corporate  capacity.  Has  not  every  man  who  has 
been  in  our  Legislature  experienced  the  truth  of  this 
position?  It  is  inseparable  from  the  disposition  of 
bodies  who  have  a  constitutional  power  of  resistance, 
to  examine  the  merits  of  a  law.  This  has  ever  been 
the  case  with  the  federal  requisitions.  In  this  ex 
amination,  not  being  furnished  with  those  lights 
which  directed  the  deliberations  of  the  General 
Government,  and  incapable  of  embracing  the  gen 
eral  interests  of  the  Union,  the  States  have  almost 
uniformly  weighed  the  requisitions  by  their  own 
local  interests,  and  have  only  executed  them  so  far 
as  answered  their  particular  convenience  or  advan 
tage.  Hence  there  have  ever  been  thirteen  different 


6  Alexander  Hamilton 

bodies  to  judge  of  the  measures  of  Congress — and 
the  operations  of  government  have  been  distracted 
by  their  taking  different  courses.  Those  which  were 
to  be  benefited  have  complied  with  the  requisitions; 
others  have  totally  disregarded  them.  Have  not  all 
of  us  been  witnesses  to  the  unhappy  embarrassments 
which  resulted  from  these  proceedings?  Even  dur 
ing  the  late  war,  while  the  pressure  of  common 
danger  connected  strongly  the  bond  of  our  union, 
and  excited  to  vigorous  exertions,  we  have  felt  many 
distressing  effects  of  the  impotent  system.  How 
have  we  seen  this  State,  though  most  exposed  to  the 
calamities  of  the  war,  complying,  in  an  unexampled 
manner,  with  the  federal  requisitions,  and  com 
pelled  by  the  delinquency  of  others  to  bear  most 
unusual  burdens!  Of  this  truth  we  have  the  most 
solemn  evidence  on  our  records.  In  1779  and  1780, 
when  the  State,  from  the  ravages  of  war,  and  from 
her  great  exertions  to  resist  them,  became  weak, 
distressed,  and  forlorn,  every  man  avowed  the  prin 
ciple  we  now  contend  for:  that  our  misfortunes, 
in  a  great  degree,  proceeded  from  the  want  of 
vigor  in  the  Continental  Government.  These  were 
our  sentiments  when  we  did  not  speculate,  but 
felt.  We  saw  our  weakness,  and  found  ourselves 
its  victims.  Let  us  reflect  that  this  may  again,  in 
all  probability,  be  our  situation.  This  is  a  weak 
State,  and  its  relative  station  is  dangerous.  Your 
capital  is  accessible  by  land,  and  by  sea  is  exposed 
to  every  daring  invader  ;  and  on  the  northwest 
you  are  open  to  the  inroads  of  a  powerful  for 
eign  nation.  Indeed  this  State,  from  its  situation, 


Convention  of  New  York  7 

will,  in  time  of  war,  probably  be  the  theatre  of  its 
operations. 

Gentlemen  have  said  that  the  non-compliance  of 
the  States  has  been  occasioned  by  their  sufferings. 
This  may  in  part  be  true.  But  has  this  State  been 
delinquent?  Amidst  all  our  distresses,  we  have  fully 
complied.  If  New  York  could  comply  wholly  with 
the  requisitions,  is  it  not  to  be  supposed  that  the 
other  States  could  in  part  comply?  Certainly  every 
State  in  the  Union  might  have  executed  them  in 
some  degree.  But  New  Hampshire,  who  has  not 
suffered  at  all,  is  totally  delinquent.  North  Carolina 
is  totally  delinquent.  Many  others  have  contri 
buted  in  a  very  small  proportion;  and  Pennsyl 
vania  and  New  York  are  the  only  States  which  have 
perfectly  discharged  their  federal  duty. 

From  the  delinquency  of  those  States  which  have 
suffered  little  by  the  war,  we  naturally  conclude  that 
they  have  made  no  efforts,  and  a  knowledge  of  hu 
man  nature  will  teach  us  that  their  ease  and  security 
have  been  a  principal  cause  of  their  want  of  exer 
tion.  While  danger  is  distant  its  impression  is  weak, 
and  while  it  affects  only  our  neighbors,  we  have  few 
motives  to  provide  against  it.  Sir,  if  we  have  na 
tional  objects  to  pursue,  we  must  have  national 
revenues.  If  you  make  requisitions  and  they  are 
not  complied  with,  what  is  to  be  done?  It  has  been 
well  observed,  that  to  coerce  the  States  is  one  of  the 
maddest  projects  that  was  ever  devised.  A  failure 
of  compliance  will  never  be  confined  to  a  single 
State ;  this  being  the  case,  can  we  suppose  it  wise  to 
hazard  a  civil  war?  Suppose  Massachusetts  or  any 


8  Alexander  Hamilton 

large  State  should  refuse,  and  Congress  should  at 
tempt  to  compel  them,  would  they  not  have  influ 
ence  to  procure  assistance,  especially  from  those 
States  who  are  in  the  same  situation  as  themselves? 
What  a  picture  does  this  idea  present  to  our  view! 
A  complying  State  at  war  with  a  non-complying 
State;  Congress  marching  the  troops  of  one  State 
into  the  bosom  of  another;  this  State  collecting 
auxiliaries  and  forming  perhaps  a  majority  against 
its  federal  head.  Here  is  a  nation  at  war  with  it 
self!  A  government  that  can  exist  only  by  the 
sword!  Every  such  war  must  involve  the  innocent 
with  the  guilty.  This  single  consideration  should  be 
sufficient  to  dispose  every  peaceable  citizen  against 
such  a  government. 

But  can  we  believe  that  one  State  will  ever  suffer 
itself  to  be  used  as  an  instrument  of  coercion?  It 
is  a  dream.  It  is  impossible.  We  are  brought  to 
this  dilemma:  Either  a  federal  standing  army  is  to 
enforce  the  requisitions,  or  the  federal  treasury  is 
left  without  supplies,  and  the  government  without 
support.  What  is  the  cure  for  this  great  evil? 
Nothing  but  to  enable  the  national  laws  to  operate 
on  individuals,  in  the  same  manner  as  those  of  the 
States  do.  This  is  the  true  reasoning  upon  the  sub 
ject.  Gentlemen  appear  to  acknowledge  its  force, 
and  yet,  while  they  yield  to  the  principle,  they  seem 
to  fear  its  application  to  this  government. 

What  shall  we  do?  Shall  we  take  the  old  Con 
federation  as  the  basis  of  a  new  system?  Can  this 
be  the  object  of  gentlemen?  Certainly  not.  Will 
any  man  who  entertains  a  wish  for  the  safety  of  his 


Convention  of  New  York  9 

country  trust  the  sword  and  the  purse  with  a  sin 
gle  Assembly,  organized  on  principles  so  defective? 
Though  we  might  give  to  such  a  government  certain 
powers  with  safety,  yet  to  give  them  the  full  and 
unlimited  powers  of  taxation  and  the  national  forces 
would  be  to  establish  a  despotism,  the  definition  of 
which  is,  a  government  in  which  all  power  is  con 
centrated  in  a  single  body.  To  take  the  old  Con 
federation,  and  fashion  it  upon  these  principles, 
would  be  establishing  a  power  which  would  destroy 
the  liberties  of  the  people.  These  considerations 
show  clearly  that  a  government  totally  different 
must  be  instituted.  They  had  weight  in  the  con 
vention  who  formed  the  new  system.  It  was  seen 
that  the  necessary  powers  were  too  great  to  be 
trusted  to  a  single  body;  they,  therefore,  formed 
two  branches,  and  divided  the  powers,  that  each 
might  be  a  check  upon  the  other.  This  was  the 
result  of  their  wisdom,  and  I  presume  that  every 
reasonable  man  will  agree  to  it.  The  more  this  sub 
ject  is  explained,  the  more  clear  and  convincing  it 
will  appear  to  every  member  of  this  body.  The 
fundamental  principle  of  the  old  Confederation  is 
defective.  We  must  totally  eradicate  and  discard 
this  principle  before  we  can  expect  an  efficient  gov 
ernment.  The  gentlemen  who  have  spoken  to-day 
have  taken  up  the  subject  of  the  ancient  confedera 
cies;  but  their  view  of  them  has  been  extremely 
partial  and  erroneous ;  the  fact  is,  the  same  false  and 
impracticable  principle  ran  through  most  of  the 
ancient  governments.  The  first  of  these  govern 
ments  that  we  read  of  was  the  Amphyctionic 


io  Alexander  Hamilton 

confederacy.  The  council  which  managed  the  affairs 
of  this  league  possessed  powers  of  a  similar  com 
plexion  with  those  of  our  present  Congress.  The 
same  feeble  mode  of  legislation  in  the  head,  and  the 
same  power  of  resistance  in  the  members,  prevailed. 
When  a  requisition  was  made,  it  rarely  met  a  com 
pliance,  and  a  civil  war  was  the  consequence.  Those 
which  were  attacked  called  in  foreign  aid  to  protect 
them;  and  the  ambitious  Philip,  under  the  mask  of 
an  ally  to  one,  invaded  the  liberties  of  each,  and 
finally  subverted  the  whole. 

The  operation  of  this  principle  appears  in  the 
same  light  in  the  Dutch  republics.  They  have  been 
obliged  to  levy  taxes  by  an  armed  force.  In  this 
confederacy,  one  large  province,  by  its  superior 
wealth  and  influence,  is  commonly  a  match  for  all 
the  rest ;  and  when  they  do  not  comply,  the  province 
of  Holland  is  obliged  to  compel  them.  It  is  ob 
served  that  the  United  Provinces  have  existed  a 
long  time;  but  they  have  been  constantly  the  sport 
of  their  neighbors,  and  have  been  supported  only 
by  the  external  pressure  of  surrounding  powers. 
The  policy  of  Europe,  not  the  policy  of  their  govern 
ment  has  saved  them  from  dissolution.  Besides, 
the  powers  of  the  Stadtholder  have  served  to  give  an 
energy  to  the  operations  of  his  government,  which 
is  not  to  be  found  in  ours.  This  prince  has  a  vast 
personal  influence;  he  has  independent  revenues; 
he  commands  an  army  of  forty  thousand  men. 

The  German  confederacy  has  also  been  a  per 
petual  source  of  wars.  They  have  a  Diet,  like  our 
Congress,  who  have  authority  to  call  for  supplies; 


Convention  of  New  York  1 1 

these  calls  are  never  obeyed;  and,  in  time  of  war, 
the  imperial  army  never  takes  the  field  till  the 
enemy  are  returning  from  it.  The  Emperor's  Aus 
trian  dominions,  in  which  he  is  an  absolute  prince, 
alone  enable  him  to  make  head  against  the  com 
mon  foe.  The  members  of  this  confederacy  are  ever 
divided  and  opposed  to  each  other.  The  King  of 
Prussia  is  a  member  ;  yet  he  has  been  constantly 
in  opposition  to  the  Emperor.  Is  this  a  desirable 
government? 

I  might  go  more  particularly  into  the  discussion 
of  examples,  and  show  that,  wherever  this  fatal  prin 
ciple  has  prevailed,  even  as  far  back  as  the  Lycian 
and  Achaean  leagues,  as  well  as  the  Amphyctionic 
confederacy,  it  has  proved  the  destruction  of  the 
government.  But  I  think  observations  of  this  kind 
might  have  been  spared.  Had  they  not  been  entered 
into  by  others,  I  should  not  have  taken  up  so  much 
of  the  time  of  the  committee.  No  inference  can  be 
drawn  from  these  examples  that  republics  cannot 
exist ;  we  only  contend  that  they  have  hitherto  been 
founded  on  false  principles.  We  have  shown  how 
they  have  been  conducted,  and  how  they  have  been 
destroyed.  Weakness  in  the  head  has  produced 
resistance  in  the  members;  this  has  been  the  im 
mediate  parent  of  civil  war;  auxiliary  force  has 
been  invited,  and  a  foreign  power  has  annihilated 
their  liberties  and  their  name.  Thus  Philip  sub 
verted  the  Amphyctionic,  and  Rome  the  Achaean 
Republic. 

We  shall  do  well,  sir,  not  to  deceive  ourselves  with 
the  favorable  events  of  the  late  war.  Common 


12  Alexander  Hamilton 

danger  prevented  the  operation  of  the  ruinous  prin 
ciple  in  its  full  extent.  But  since  the  peace,  we  have 
experienced  the  evils.  We  have  felt  the  poison  of 
the  system  in  its  unmingled  purity. 

Without  dwelling  any  longer  on  this  subject,  I 
shall  proceed  to  the  question  immediately  before  the 
committee. 

In  order  that  the  committee  may  understand 
clearly  the  principles  on  which  the  general  conven 
tion  acted,  I  think  it  necessary  to  explain  some 
preliminary  circumstances. 

Sir,  the  natural  situation  of  this  country  seems  to 
divide  its  interests  into  different  classes.  There  are 
navigating  and  non-navigating  States.  The  North 
ern  are  properlv  the  navigating  States ;  the  Southern 
appear  to  possess  neither  the  means  nor  the  spirit  of 
navigation.  This  difference  in  situation  naturally 
produces  a  dissimilarity  of  interests  and  views  re 
specting  foreign  commerce.  It  was  the  interest  of 
the  Northern  States,  that  there  should  be  no  re 
straints  on  their  navigation,  and  that  they  should 
have  full  power,  by  a  majority  in  Congress,  to  make 
commercial  regulations  in  favor  of  their  own,  and 
in  restraint  of  the  navigation  of  foreigners.  The 
Southern  States  wished  to  impose  a  restraint  on  the 
Northern,  by  requiring  that  two  thirds  in  Congress 
should  be  requisite  to  pass  an  act  in  regulation  of 
commerce.  They  were  apprehensive  that  the  re 
straints  of  a  navigation  law  would  discourage 
foreigners;  and,  by  obliging  them  to  employ  the 
shipping  of  the  Northern  States,  would  probably 
enhance  their  freight.  This  being  the  case,  they 


Convention  of  New  York  13 

insisted  strenuously  on  having  this  provision  in 
grafted  in  the  Constitution;  and  the  Northern 
States  were  as  anxious  in  opposing  it.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  small  States,  seeing  themselves  embraced 
by  the  Confederation  upon  equal  terms,  wished  to 
retain  the  advantages  which  they  already  possessed. 
The  large  States,  on  the  contrary,  thought  it  im 
proper  that  Rhode  Island  and  Delaware  should 
enjoy  an  equal  suffrage  with  themselves.  From 
these  sources  a  delicate  and  difficult  contest  arose. 
It  became  necessary,  therefore,  to  compromise,  or 
the  convention  must  have  dissolved  without  effect 
ing  any  thing.  Would  it  have  been  wise  and  prudent 
in  that  body,  in  this  critical  situation,  to  have  de 
serted  their  country?  No.  Every  man  who  hears 
me — every  wise  man  in  the  United  States  would 
have  condemned  them.  The  convention  were  obliged 
to  appoint  a  committee  for  accommodation.  In  this 
committee  the  arrangement  was  formed  as  it  now 
stands,  and  their  report  was  accepted.  It  was  a 
delicate  point,  and  it  was  necessary  that  all  parties 
should  be  indulged.  Gentlemen  will  see  that  if  there 
had  not  been  unanimity,  nothing  could  have  been 
done.  For  the  convention  had  no  power  to  estab 
lish,  but  only  to  recommend,  a  good  government. 
Any  other  system  would  have  been  impracticable. 
Let  a  convention  be  called  to-morrow.  Let  them 
meet  twenty  times — nay,  twenty  thousand  times, — 
they  will  have  the  same  difficulties  to  encounter — 
the  same  clashing  interests  to  reconcile. 

But,  dismissing  these  reflections,  let  us  consider 
how  far  the  arrangement  is  in  itself  entitled  to  the 


14  Alexander  Hamilton 

approbation  of  this  body.     We  will  examine  it  upon 
its  own  merits. 

The  first  thing  objected  to  is  that  clause  which 
allows  a  representation  for  three  fifths  of  the  negroes. 
Much  has  been  said  of  the  impropriety  of  representing 
men  who  have  no  will  of  their  own.  Whether  this  be 
reasoning  or  declamation,  I  will  not  presume  to  say. 
It  is  the  unfortunate  situation  of  the  Southern 
States  to  have  a  great  part  of  their  population  as 
well  as  property  in  blacks.  The  regulation  com 
plained  of  was  one  result  of  the  spirit  of  accommo 
dation  which  governed  the  convention;  and  without 
this  indulgence  no  UNION  could  possibly  have  been 
formed.  But,  sir,  considering  some  peculiar  advan 
tages  which  we  derive  from  them,  it  is  entirely  just 
that  they  should  be  gratified.  The  Southern  States 
possess  certain  staples — tobacco,  rice,  indigo,  etc. — 
which  must  be  capital  objects  in  treaties  of  com 
merce  with  foreign  nations;  and  the  advantage 
which  they  necessarily  procure  in  these  treaties  will 
be  felt  throughout  all  the  States.  But  the  justice  of 
this  plan  will  appear  in  another  view.  The  best 
writers  on  government  have  held  that  representa 
tion  should  be  compounded  of  persons  and  property. 
This  rule  has  been  adopted,  as  far  as  it  could  be,  in 
the  Constitution  of  New  York.  It  will,  however,  be 
by  no  means  admitted  that  the  slaves  are  considered 
altogether  as  property.  They  are  men,  though  de 
graded  to  the  condition  of  slavery.  They  are  per 
sons  known  to  the  municipal  laws  of  the  States  which 
they  inhabit,  as  well  as  to  the  laws  of  nature.  But 
representation  and  taxation  go  together,  and  one 


Convention  of  New  York  15 

uniform  rule  ought  to  apply  to  both.  Would  it  be 
just  to  compute  these  slaves  in  the  assessment  of 
taxes,  and  discard  them  from  the  estimate  in  the 
apportionment  of  representatives?  Would  it  be 
just  to  impose  a  singular  burthen  without  conferring 
some  adequate  advantage? 

Another  circumstance  ought  to  be  considered. 
The  rule  we  have  been  speaking  of  is  a  general  rule, 
and  applies  to  all  the  States.  You  have  a  great  num 
ber  of  people  in  your  State  which  are  not  represented 
at  all,  and  have  no  voice  in  your  government. 
These  will  be  included  in  the  enumeration,  not  two 
fifths,  or  three  fifths,  but  the  whole.  This  proves 
that  the  advantages  of  the  plan  are  not  confined  to 
the  Southern  States,  but  extend  to  other  parts  of 
the  Union. 

I  now  proceed  to  consider  the  objection  with  re 
gard  to  the  number  of  representatives  as  it  now 
stands.  I  am  persuaded  that  the  system,  in  this 
respect,  is  on  a  better  footing  than  the  gentlemen 
imagine. 

It  has  been  asserted  that  it  will  be  in  the  power  of 
Congress  to  reduce  the  number.  I  acknowledge  that 
there  are  no  direct  words  of  prohibition.  But  I  con 
tend  that  the  true  and  genuine  construction  of  the 
clause  gives  Congress  no  power  whatever  to  reduce 
the  representation  below  the  number  as  it  now 
stands.  Although  they  may  limit,  they  can  never 
diminish  the  number.  One  representative  for  every 
thirty  thousand  inhabitants  is  fixed  as  the  stand 
ard  of  increase,  till,  by  the  natural  course  of  popula 
tion,  it  shall  become  necessary  to  limit  the  ratio. 


1 6  Alexander  Hamilton 

Probably,  at  present,  were  this  standard  to  be  imme 
diately  applied,  the  representation  would  consider 
ably  exceed  sixty-five.  In  three  years,  it  would 
exceed  a  hundred.  If  I  understand  the  gentlemen, 
they  contend  that  the  number  may  be  enlarged,  or 
may  not.  I  admit  that  this  is  in  the  discretion  of 
Congress;  and  I  submit  to  the  committee  whether 
it  be  not  necessary  and  proper.  Still,  I  insist  that 
an  immediate  limitation  is  not  probable ;  nor  was  it 
in  the  contemplation  of  the  convention.  But,  sir, 
who  will  presume  to  say  to  what  precise  point  the 
representation  ought  to  be  increased?  This  is  a 
matter  of  opinion;  and  opinions  are  vastly  different 
upon  the  subject.  In  Massachusetts,  the  Assembly 
consists  of  about  three  hundred;  in  South  Carolina, 
of  nearly  one  hundred;  in  New  York,  there  are 
sixty-five.  It  is  observed  generally  that  the  num 
ber  ought  to  be  large.  I  confess  it  is  difficult  for  me 
to  say  what  number  may  be  said  to  be  sufficiently 
large.  On  one  hand,  it  ought  to  be  considered  that 
a  small  number  will  act  with  more  facility,  system, 
and  decision.  On  the  other,  that  a  large  one  may 
enhance  the  difficulty  of  corruption.  The  Congress 
is  to  consist  at  first  of  ninety-one  members.  This, 
to  a  reasonable  man,  may  appear  to  be  as  near  the 
proper  medium  as  any  number  whatever;  at  least, 
for  the  present.  There  is  one  source  of  increase, 
also,  which  does  not  depend  upon  any  constructions 
of  the  Constitution:  it  is  the  creation  of  new  States. 
Vermont,  Kentucky,  and  Franklin  will  probably 
soon  become  independent.  New  members  of  the 
Union  will  also  be  formed  from  the  unsettled  tracts 


Convention  of  New  York  1 7 

of  western  territory.  These  must  be  represented, 
and  will  all  contribute  to  swell  the  Federal  Legisla 
ture.  If  the  whole  number  in  the  United  States  be 
at  present  three  millions,  as  is  commonly  supposed, 
according  to  the  ratio  of  one  for  thirty  thousand,  we 
shall  have,  on  the  first  census,  a  hundred  representa 
tives.  In  ten  years,  thirty  more  will  be  added ;  and 
in  twenty-five  years,  the  number  will  double.  Then, 
sir,  we  shall  have  two  hundred,  if  the  increase  goes 
on  in  the  same  proportion.  The  convention  of 
Massachusetts,  who  made  the  same  objection,  have 
fixed  upon  this  number  as  the  point  at  which  they 
chose  to  limit  the  representation.  But  can  we  pro 
nounce  with  certainty  that  it  will  not  be  expedient 
to  go  beyond  this  number?  We  cannot.  Expe 
rience  alone  may  determine.  This  problem  may 
with  more  safety  be  left  to  the  discretion  of  the 
Legislature,  as  it  will  be  the  interest  of  the  larger 
and  increasing  States  of  Massachusetts,  New  York, 
Pennsylvania,  etc.,  to  augment  the  representation. 
Only  Connecticut,  Rhode  Island,  Delaware,  and 
Maryland,  can  be  interested  in  limiting  it.  We 
may,  therefore,  safely  calculate  upon  a  growing  rep 
resentation,  according  to  the  advance  of  population 
and  the  circumstances  of  the  country. 

The  State  governments  possess  inherent  advan 
tages,  which  will  ever  give  them  an  influence  and 
ascendency  over  the  National  Government,  and  will 
for  ever  preclude  the  possibility  of  federal  encroach 
ments.  That  their  liberties,  indeed,  can  be  subverted 
by  the  federal  head,  is  repugnant  to  every  rule  of 
political  calculation.  Is  not  this  arrangement,  then, 


1 8  Alexander  Hamilton 

sir,  a  most  wise  and  prudent  one  ?  Is  not  the  present 
representation  fully  adequate  to  our  present  exigen 
cies,  and  sufficient  to  answer  all  the  purposes  of  the 
Union  ?  I  am  persuaded  that  an  examination  of  the 
objects  of  the  Federal  Government  will  afford  a  con 
clusive  answer. 

Many  other  observations  might  be  made  on  this 
subject,  but  I  cannot  now  pursue  them,  for  I  feel 
myself  not  a  little  exhausted;  I  beg  leave,  therefore, 
to  waive  for  the  present  the  further  discussion  of 
this  question. 


SPEECH    ON   THE   CONSTITUTION    RESUMED 

June  21,  1788:  Mr.  Hamilton  resumed  his  argu 
ment.  When,  said  he,  I  had  the  honor  to  address 
the  committee  yesterday,  I  gave  a  history  of  the 
circumstances  which  attended  the  convention,  when 
forming  the  plan  before  you.  I  endeavored  to  point 
out  to  you  the  principles  of  accommodation  on 
which  this  arrangement  was  made,  and  to  show  that 
the  contending  interests  of  the  States  led  them  to 
establish  the  representation  as  it  now  stands.  In 
the  second  place,  I  attempted  to  prove  that,  in  point 
of  number,  the  representation  would  be  perfectly 
secure. 

Sir,  no  man  agrees  more  fully  than  myself  to  the 
main  principle  for  which  the  gentlemen  contend.  I 
agree  that  there  should  be  a  broad  democratic 
branch  in  the  National  Legislature.  But  this  mat 
ter  depends  on  circumstances.  It  is  impossible,  in 
the  first  instance,  to  be  precise  and  exact  with  regard 


Convention  of  New  York  19 

to  the  number;  and  it  is  equally  impossible  to  de 
termine  to  what  point  it  may  be  brought  in  future 
to  increase  it.  On  this  ground,  I  am  disposed  to 
acquiesce.  In  my  reasonings  on  the  subject  of  gov 
ernment,  I  rely  more  on  the  interests  and  opinions  of 
men,  than  upon  any  speculative  parchment  pro 
visions  whatever.  I  have  found  that  constitutions 
are  more  or  less  excellent,  as  they  are  more  or  less 
agreeable  to  the  natural  operation  of  things;  I  am 
therefore  disposed  not  to  dwell  long  on  curious 
speculations,  or  pay  much  attention  to  modes  and 
forms,  but  to  adopt  a  system  whose  principles  have 
been  sanctioned  by  experience,  adapt  it  to  the  real 
state  of  our  country,  and  depend  on  probable  reason 
ings  for  its  operation  and  result.  I  contend  that 
sixty-five  and  twenty-six,  in  two  bodies,  afford  per 
fect  security  in  the  present  state  of  things ;  and  that 
the  regular  progressive  enlargement,  which  was  in 
the  contemplation  of  the  general  convention,  will 
leave  not  an  apprehension  of  danger  in  the  most 
timid  and  suspicious  mind.  It  will  be  the  interest 
of  the  large  States  to  increase  the  representation. 
This  will  be  the  standing  instruction  to  their  dele 
gates.  But  the  members  of  Congress  will  be  inter 
ested  not  to  increase  the  number,  as  it  will  diminish 
their  relative  influence.  In  all  the  reasoning  upon 
this  subject,  there  seems  to  be  this  fallacy:  They 
suppose  that  the  representative  will  have  no  motive 
of  action,  on  the  one  side,  but  a  sense  of  duty;  or, 
on  the  other,  but  corruption.  They  do  not  reflect 
that  he  is  to  return  to  the  community — that  he  is 
dependent  on  the  will  of  the  people — and  that  it 


2O  Alexander  Hamilton 

cannot  be  his  interest  to  oppose  their  wishes.  Sir,  the 
general  sense  of  the  people  will  regulate  the  conduct 
of  their  representatives.  I  admit  that  there  are  ex 
ceptions  to  this  rule.  There  are  certain  conjunctures 
when  it  may  be  necessary  and  proper  to  disregard 
the  opinions  which  the  majority  of  the  people  have 
formed;  but,  in  the  general  course  of  things,  the 
popular  views,  and  even  prejudices,  will  direct  the 
actions  of  the  rulers. 

All  governments,  even  the  most  despotic,  depend, 
in  a  great  degree,  on  opinion.  In  free  republics  it  is 
most  peculiarly  the  case.  In  these  the  will  of  the 
people  makes  the  essential  principle  of  the  govern 
ment,  and  the  laws  which  control  the  community 
receive  their  tone  and  spirit  from  the  public  wishes. 
It  is  the  fortunate  situation  of  our  country,  that  the 
minds  of  the  people  are  exceedingly  enlightened  and 
refined.  Here,  then,  we  may  expect  the  laws  to  be 
proportionately  agreeable  to  the  standard  of  a  per 
fect  policy,  and  the  wisdom  of  public  measures  to 
consist  with  the  most  intimate  conformity  between 
the  views  of  the  representative  and  his  constituent. 
If  the  general  voice  of  the  people  be  for  an  increase, 
it  undoubtedly  must  take  place.  They  have  it  in 
their  power  to  instruct  their  representatives,  and 
the  State  Legislatures,  which  appoint  the  Senators, 
may  enjoin  it  also  upon  them.  If  I  believed  that 
the  number  would  remain  at  sixty-five,  I  confess  I 
should  give  my  vote  for  an  amendment,  though  in  a 
different  form  from  the  one  proposed. 

The  amendment  proposes  a  ratio  of  one  for  twenty 
thousand.  I  would  ask :  By  what  rule  or  reasoning 


Convention  of  New  York  2 1 

is  it  determined  that  one  man  is  a  better  represent 
ative  for  twenty  than  for  thirty  thousand?  At 
present  we  have  three  millions  of  people;  in  twenty- 
five  years  we  shall  have  six  millions;  and  in  forty 
years  nine  millions ;  and  this  is  a  short  period  as  it  re 
lates  to  the  existence  of  States.  Here,  then,  accord 
ing  to  the  ratio  of  one  for  thirty  thousand,  we  shall 
have,  in  forty  years,  three  hundred  representatives. 
If  this  be  true,  and  if  this  be  a  safe  representation, 
why  be  dissatisfied?  Why  embarrass  the  Constitu 
tion  with  amendments  that  are  merely  speculative 
and  useless  ?  I  agree  with  the  gentleman,  that  a  very 
small  number  might  give  some  color  for  suspicion. 
I  acknowledge  that  ten  would  be  unsafe;  on  the 
other  hand,  a  thousand  would  be  too  numerous. 
But,  I  ask  him,  why  will  not  ninety-one  be  an  ade 
quate  and  safe  representation?  This,  at  present, 
appears  to  be  the  proper  medium.  Besides,  the 
President  of  the  United  States  will  be  himself  the 
representative  of  the  people.  From  the  competition 
that  ever  subsists  between  the  branches  of  the  gov 
ernment,  the  President  will  be  induced  to  protect 
their  rights,  whenever  they  are  invaded  by  either 
branch.  On  whatever  side  we  view  this  subject,  we 
discover  various  and  powerful  checks  to  the  en 
croachments  of  Congress.  The  true  and  permanent 
interests  of  the  members  are  opposed  to  corruption. 
Their  number  is  vastly  too  large  for  easy  combina 
tion.  The  rivalship  between  the  houses  will  for  ever 
prove  an  insuperable  obstacle.  The  people  have 
an  obvious  and  powerful  protection  in  their  own 
State  governments.  Should  anything  dangerous  be 


22  Alexander  Hamilton 

attempted,  these  bodies  of  perpetual  observation  will 
be  capable  of  forming  and  conducting  plans  of  regu 
lar  opposition.  Can  we  suppose  the  people's  love  of 
liberty  will  not,  under  the  incitement  of  their  legis 
lative  leaders,  be  roused  into  resistance,  and  the 
madness  of  tyranny  be  extinguished  at  a  blow?  Sir, 
the  danger  is  too  distant;  it  is  beyond  all  rational 
calculations. 

It  has  been  observed  that  a  pure  democracy,  if  it 
were  practicable,  would  be  the  most  perfect  govern 
ment.  Experience  has  proved,  that  no  position  in 
politics  is  more  false  than  this.  The  ancient  demo 
cracies,  in  which  the  people  themselves  deliberated, 
never  possessed  one  feature  of  good  government. 
Their  very  character  was  tyranny;  their  figure  de 
formity.  When  they  assembled,  the  field  of  debate 
presented  an  ungovernable  mob,  not  only  incapable 
of  deliberation,  but  prepared  for  every  enormity. 
In  these  assemblies  the  enemies  of  the  people  brought 
forward  their  plans  of  ambition  systematically. 
They  were  opposed  by  their  enemies  of  another 
party;  and  it  became  a  matter  of  contingency, 
whether  the  people  subjected  themselves  to  be  led 
blindly  by  one  tyrant  or  by  another. 

It  was  remarked  yesterday  that  a  numerous  repre 
sentation  was  necessary  to  obtain  the  confidence  of 
the  people.  This  is  not  generally  true.  The  con 
fidence  of  the  people  will  easily  be  gained  by  a  good 
administration.  This  is  the  true  touchstone.  I 
could  illustrate  the  position  by  a  variety  of  historical 
examples  both  ancient  and  modern.  In  Sparta,  the 
Ephori  were  a  body  of  magistrates,  instituted  as  a 


Convention  of  New  York  23 

check  upon  the  Senate  and  representing  the  people. 
They  consisted  of  only  five  men ;  but  they  were  able 
to  protect  their  rights,  and  therefore  enjoyed  their 
confidence  and  attachment.  In  Rome  the  people 
were  represented  by  three  tribunes,  who  were  after 
wards  increased  to  ten.  Every  one  acquainted  with 
the  history  of  that  republic  will  recollect  how  power 
ful  a  check  to  the  senatorial  encroachments  this 
small  body  proved ;  how  unlimited  a  confidence  was 
placed  in  them  by  the  people  whose  guardians  they 
were  ;  and  to  what  a  conspicuous  station  in  the 
government  their  influence  at  length  elevated  the 
plebeians.  Massachusetts  has  three  hundred  repre 
sentatives;  New  York  has  sixty-five.  Have  the 
people  in  this  State  less  confidence  in  their  repre 
sentation  than  the  people  of  that?  Delaware  has 
twenty-one:  do  the  inhabitants  of  New  York  feel  a 
higher  confidence  than  those  of  Delaware?  I  have 
stated  these  examples  to  prove  that  the  position  is 
not  just.  The  popular  confidence  depends  on  cir 
cumstances  very  distinct  from  considerations  of 
number.  Probably  the  public  attachment  is  more 
strongly  secured  by  a  train  of  prosperous  events, 
which  are  the  result  of  wise  deliberation  and  of 
vigorous  execution,  and  to  which  large  bodies  are 
much  less  competent  than  small  ones.  If  the  rep 
resentative  conducts  with  propriety,  he  will  neces 
sarily  enjoy  the  good-will  of  the  constituent.  It 
appears,  then,  if  my  reasoning  be  just,  that  the 
clause  is  perfectly  proper,  upon  the  principles  of  the 
gentleman  who  contends  for  the  amendment,  as 
there  is  in  it  the  greatest  degree  of  present  security, 


24  Alexander  Hamilton 

and  a  moral  certainty  of  an  increase  equal  to  our 
utmost  wishes. 

It  has  been  observed  that  a  large  representation 
is  necessary  to  understand  the  true  interests  of  the 
people.  This  opinion  is  by  no  means  true  in  the 
extent  to  which  it  is  carried.  I  would  ask:  Why 
may  not  a  man  understand  the  interests  of  thirty 
as  well  as  of  twenty?  The  position  appears  to  be 
based  upon  the  unfounded  presumption  that  all  the 
interests  of  all  parts  of  the  community  must  be 
represented.  No  idea  is  more  erroneous  than  this. 
Only  such  interests  are  proper  to  be  represented  as 
are  involved  in  the  powers  of  the  General  Govern 
ment.  These  interests  come  completely  under  the 
observation  of  one  or  a  few  men ;  and  the  requisite 
information  is  by  no  means  augmented  in  proportion 
to  the  increase  of  number.  What  are  the  objects 
of  the  government?  Commerce,  taxation,  etc.  In 
order  to  comprehend  the  interests  of  commerce,  is  it 
necessary  to  know  how  wheat  is  raised,  and  in  what 
proportion  it  is  produced  in  one  district  and  in 
another?  By  no  means.  Neither  is  this  species  of 
knowledge  necessary  in  general  calculations  upon 
the  subject  of  taxation.  The  information  necessary 
for  these  purposes  is  that  which  is  open  to  every  in 
telligent  inquirer;  and  of  which  five  men  may  be  as 
perfectly  possessed  as  fifty.  In  regal  governments 
there  are  usually  particular  men  to  whom  the  busi 
ness  of  taxation  is  committed.  These  men  have  the 
forming  of  systems  of  finance  and  the  regulation  of 
the  revenue.  I  do  not  mean  to  commend  this  prac 
tice.  It  proves,  however,  this  point:  that  a  few  in- 


Convention  of  New  York  25 

dividuals  may  be  competent  to  these  objects;  and 
that  large  numbers  are  not  necessary  to  perfection 
in  the  science  of  taxation.  But,  granting  for  a  mo 
ment  that  this  minute  and  local  knowledge  the  gen 
tlemen  contend  for  is  necessary,  let  us  see  if,  under 
the  new  Constitution,  it  will  not  probably  be  found 
in  the  representation.  The  natural  and  proper  mode 
of  holding  elections  will  be  to  divide  the  State  into 
districts,  in  proportion  to  the  number  to  be  elected. 
This  State  will  consequently  be  divided  at  first  into 
six.  One  man  from  each  district  will  probably  pos 
sess  all  the  knowledge  the  gentlemen  can  desire. 
Are  the  Senators  of  this  State  more  ignorant  of  the 
interests  of  the  people  than  the  Assembly?  Have 
they  not  ever  enjoyed  their  confidence  as  much? 
Yet,  instead  of  six  districts,  they  are  elected  in  four; 
and  the  chance  of  their  being  elected  from  the 
smaller  divisions  of  the  State  consequently  dimin 
ished.  Their  number  is  but  twenty-four;  and  their 
powers  are  coextensive  with  those  of  the  Assembly, 
and  reach  objects  which  are  most  dear  to  the  people 
— life,  liberty,  and  property. 

We  hear  constantly  a  great  deal  which  is  more 
calculated  to  awake  our  passions  and  create  preju 
dices  than  to  conduct  us  to  truth  and  teach  us  our 
real  interests.  I  do  not  suppose  this  to  be  the  de 
sign  of  gentlemen.  Why,  then,  are  we  told  so  often 
of  an  aristocracy?  For  my  part,  I  hardly  know  the 
meaning  of  this  word  as  it  is  applied.  If  all  we  hear 
be  true,  this  government  is  really  a  very  bad  one. 
But  who  are  the  aristocracy  among  us?  Where  do 
we  find  men  elevated  to  a  perpetual  rank  among 


26  Alexander  Hamilton 

our  fellow-citizens,  and  possessing  powers  entirely 
independent  of  them?  The  arguments  of  the  gen 
tlemen  only  go  to  prove  that  there  are  men  who  are 
rich,  men  who  are  poor;  some  who  are  wise,  and 
others  who  are  not;  that,  indeed,  every  distinguished 
man  is  an  aristocrat.  Does  the  new  government 
render  a  rich  man  more  eligible  than  a  poor  one? 
No!  It  requires  no  such  qualification.  It  is  bot 
tomed  on  the  broad  and  equal  principle  of  your 
State  constitution. 

Sir,  if  the  people  have  it  in  their  option  to  elect 
their  most  meritorious  men,  is  this  to  be  considered 
an  objection?  Shall  the  Constitution  oppose  their 
wishes  and  abridge  their  most  invaluable  privilege? 
While  property  continues  to  be  pretty  equally  di 
vided,  and  a  considerable  share  of  information  per 
vades  the  community,  the  tendency  of  the  people's 
suffrages  will  be  to  elevate  merit  even  from  ob 
scurity.  As  riches  increase  and  accumulate  in  few 
hands,  as  luxury  prevails  in  society,  virtue  will  be  in 
a  greater  degree  considered  as  only  a  graceful  ap 
pendage  of  wealth,  and  the  tendency  of  things  will 
be  to  depart  from  the  republican  standard.  This  is 
the  real  disposition  of  human  nature;  it  is  what 
neither  the  honorable  member  nor  myself  can  cor 
rect.  It  is  a  common  misfortune  that  awaits  our 
State  constitution,  as  well  as  all  others. 

There  is  an  advantage  incident  to  large  districts  of 
election,  which,  perhaps,  the  gentlemen,  amidst  all 
their  apprehensions  of  influence  and  bribery,  have 
not  adverted  to.  In  large  districts  the  corruption  of 
the  electors  is  much  more  difficult.  Combinations 


Convention  of  New  York  27 

for  the  purposes  of  intrigue  are  less  easily  formed. 
Factions  and  cabals  are  little  known.  In  a  small 
district,  wealth  will  have  a  more  complete  influence, 
because  the  people  in  the  vicinity  of  a  great  man  are 
more  immediately  his  dependents,  and  because  this 
influence  has  fewer  objects  to  act  upon.  It  has  been 
remarked  that  it  would  be  disagreeable  to  the  middle 
class  of  men  to  go  to  the  seat  of  the  new  government. 
If  this  be  so  the  difficulty  will  be  enhanced  by  the 
gentleman's  proposal.  If  his  argument  be  true,  it 
proves  that  the  larger  the  representation  is  the  less 
will  be  your  chance  of  having  it  filled.  But,  it  ap 
pears  to  me  frivolous  to  bring  forward  such  argu 
ments  as  these.  It  has  answered  no  other  purpose 
than  to  induce  me,  by  way  of  reply,  to  enter  into 
discussions  which  I  consider  as  useless  and  not  ap 
plicable  to  our  subject. 

It  is  a  harsh  doctrine,  that  men  grow  wicked  in 
proportion  as  they  improve  and  enlighten  their 
minds.  Experience  has  by  no  means  justified  us  in 
the  supposition  that  there  is  more  virtue  in  one  class 
of  men  than  in  another.  Look  through  the  rich  and 
the  poor  of  the  community;  the  learned  and  the  ig 
norant.  Where  does  virtue  predominate?  The  dif 
ference  indeed  consists,  not  in  the  quantity,  but 
kind  of  vices,  which  are  incident  to  the  various 
classes;  and  here  the  advantage  of  character  be 
longs  to  the  wealthy.  Their  vices  are  probably  more 
favorable  to  the  prosperity  of  the  State  than  those 
of  the  indigent,  and  partake  less  of  moral  depravity. 

After  all,  we  must  submit  to  this  idea,  that  the 
true  principle  of  a  republic  is  that  the  people  should 


28  Alexander  Hamilton 

choose  whom  they  please  to  govern  them.  Repre 
sentation  is  imperfect  in  proportion  as  the  current 
of  popular  favor  is  checked.  This  great  source  of 
free  government,  popular  election,  should  be  per 
fectly  pure,  and  the  most  unbounded  liberty  allowed. 
Where  this  principle  is  adhered  to;  where,  in  the 
organization  of  the  government,  the  legislative, 
executive,  and  judicial  branches  are  rendered  dis 
tinct;  where,  again,  the  legislative  is  divided  into 
separate  houses,  and  the  operations  of  each  are  con 
trolled  by  various  checks  and  balances,  and  above 
all  by  the  vigilance  and  weight  of  the  State  govern 
ments,  to  talk  of  tyranny  and  the  subversion  of  our 
liberties,  is  to  speak  the  language  of  enthusiasm. 
This  balance  between  the  National  and  State  gov 
ernments  ought  to  be  dwelt  on  with  peculiar  atten 
tion,  as  it  is  of  the  utmost  importance.  It  forms  a 
double  security  to  the  people.  If  one  encroaches  on 
their  rights  they  will  find  a  powerful  protection  in 
the  other.  Indeed,  they  will  both  be  prevented 
from  overpassing  their  constitutional  limits  by  a 
certain  rivalship,  which  will  ever  subsist  between 
them.  I  am  persuaded  that  a  firm  union  is  as 
necessary  to  perpetuate  our  liberties  as  it  is  to  make 
us  respectable;  and  experience  will  probably  prove 
that  the  National  Government  will  be  as  natural  a 
guardian  of  our  freedom  as  the  State  Legislatures 
themselves. 

Suggestions  of  an  extraordinary  nature  have  been 
frequently  thrown  out  in  the  course  of  the  present 
political  controversy.  It  gives  me  pain  to  dwell  on 
topics  of  this  kind;  and  I  wish  they  might  be  dis- 


Convention  of  New  York  29 

missed.  We  have  been  told  that  the  old  Confedera 
tion  has  proved  inefficacious,  only  because  intriguing 
and  powerful  men,  aiming  at  a  revolution,  have  been 
for  ever  instigating  the  people  and  rendering  them 
disaffected  to  it.  This,  sir,  is  a  false  insinuation. 

I  will  venture  to  assert  that  no  combination  of 
designing  men  under  heaven  will  be  capable  of 
making  a  government  unpopular  which  is  in  its 
principles  a  wise  and  good  one,  and  vigorous  in  its 
operations. 

The  Confederation  was  framed  amidst  the  agita 
tion  and  tumult  of  society.  It  was  composed  of 
unsound  materials,  put  together  in  haste.  Men  of 
intelligence  discovered  the  feebleness  of  the  structure 
in  the  first  stages  of  its  existence,  but  the  great  body 
of  the  people,  too  much  engrossed  with  their  dis 
tresses  to  contemplate  any  but  the  immediate  causes 
of  them,  were  ignorant  of  the  defects  of  their  Con 
stitution.  But,  when  the  dangers  of  war  were  re 
moved,  they  saw  clearly  what  they  had  suffered,  and 
what  they  had  yet  to  suffer  from  a  feeble  form  of 
government.  There  was  no  need  of  discerning  men 
to  convince  the  people  of  their  unhappy  situation. 
The  complaint  was  coextensive  with  the  evil,  and 
both  were  common  to  all  classes  of  the  community. 
We  have  been  told  that  the  spirit  of  patriotism  and 
love  of  liberty  are  almost  extinguished  among  the 
people,  and  that  it  has  become  a  prevailing  doctrine, 
that  republican  principles  ought  to  be  hooted  out  of 
the  world.  Sir,  I  am  confident  that  such  remarks 
as  these  are  rather  occasioned  by  the  heat  of  argu 
ment,  than  by  a  cool  conviction  of  their  truth  and 


30  Alexander  Hamilton 

justice.  As  far  as  my  experience  has  extended,  I 
have  heard  no  such  doctrine,  nor  have  I  discovered 
any  diminution  of  regard  for  those  rights  and  liber 
ties,  in  defence  of  which  the  people  have  fought  and 
suffered.  There  have  been,  undoubtedly,  some  men 
who  have  had  speculative  doubts  on  the  subject  of 
government,  but  the  principles  of  republicanism  are 
founded  on  too  firm  a  basis  to  be  shaken  by  a  few 
speculative  and  skeptical  reasoners.  Our  error  has 
been  of  a  very  different  kind.  We  have  erred 
through  excess  of  caution,  and  a  zeal  false  and  im 
practicable.  Our  councils  have  been  destitute  of 
consistency  and  stability.  I  am  flattered  with  a 
hope,  sir,  that  we  have  now  found  a  cure  for  the  evils 
under  which  we  have  so  long  labored.  I  trust  that 
the  proposed  Constitution  affords  a  genuine  speci 
men  of  representative  and  republican  government; 
and  that  it  will  answer,  in  an  eminent  degree,  all  the 
beneficial  purposes  of  society. 

June  21,  1788 — Mr.  Hamilton:  Mr.  Chairman,  I 
rise  to  take  notice  of  the  observation  of  the  honorable 
member  from  Ulster.  I  imagine  the  objections  he 
has  stated  are  susceptible  of  a  complete  and  satis 
factory  refutation.  But,  before  I  proceed  to  this, 
I  shall  attend  to  the  arguments  advanced  by  the 
gentleman  from  Albany  and  Dutchess.  These  ar 
guments  have  been  frequently  urged,  and  much 
confidence  has  been  placed  in  their  strength.  The 
danger  of  corruption  has  been  dwelt  upon  with  pecul 
iar  emphasis,  and  presented  to  our  view  in  the  most 
heightened  and  unnatural  coloring.  Events  merely 
possible  have  been  magnified,  by  distempered  im- 


Convention  of  New  York  3 1 

agination,  into  inevitable  realities;  and  the  most 
distant  and  doubtful  conjectures  have  been  formed 
into  a  serious  and  infallible  prediction.  In  the  same 
spirit,  the  most  fallacious  calculations  have  been 
made.  The  lowest  possible  quorum  has  been  con 
templated,  as  the  number  to  transact  important 
business,  and  a  majority  of  these  to  decide  in  all 
cases  on  questions  of  infinite  moment.  Allowing, 
for  the  present,  the  propriety  and  truth  of  these  ap 
prehensions,  it  would  be  easy,  in  comparing  the  two 
Constitutions,  to  prove  that  the  chances  of  corrup 
tion  under  the  new  are  much  fewer  than  those  to 
which  the  old  is  exposed.  Under  the  old  Confedera 
tion,  the  important  powers  of  declaring  war,  making 
peace,  etc.,  can  be  exercised  by  nine  States.  On  the 
presumption  that  the  smallest  constitutional  number 
will  deliberate  and  decide,  those  interesting  powers 
will  be  committed  to  fewer  men  under  the  ancient 
than  under  the  new  government.  In  the  former, 
eighteen  members,  in  the  latter,  not  less  than 
twenty-four,  may  determine  all  great  questions. 
Thus,  on  the  principles  of  the  gentlemen,  the  fairer 
prospect  of  safety  is  clearly  visible  in  the  new  gov 
ernment.  That  we  may  have  the  fullest  conviction 
of  the  truth  of  this  position,  it  ought  to  be  suggested, 
as  a  decisive  argument,  that  it  will  ever  be  the  in 
terest  of  the  several  States  to  maintain,  under  the 
new  government,  an  ample  representation;  for,  as 
every  member  has  a  vote,  the  relative  influence  and 
authority  of  each  State  will  be  in  proportion  to 
the  number  of  representatives  she  has  in  Congress. 
There  is  not,  therefore,  a  shadow  of  probability  that 


32  Alexander  Hamilton 

the  number  of  acting  members,  in  the  General  Leg 
islature,  ever  will  be  reduced  to  a  bare  quorum; 
especially  as  the  expense  of  their  support  is  to  be 
defrayed  from  a  federal  treasury.  But,  under  the 
existing  Confederation,  each  State  has  but  one  vote. 
It  will  be  a  matter  of  indifference,  on  the  score  of 
influence,  whether  she  delegates  two  or  six  repre 
sentatives;  and  the  maintenance  of  them,  forming  a 
striking  article  in  the  State  expenditures,  will  for 
ever  prove  a  capital  inducement  to  retain  or  with 
draw  from  the  Federal  Legislatures  those  delegates 
which  her  selfishness  may  too  often  consider  as 
superfluous.  There  is  another  source  of  corruption, 
in  the  old  government,  which  the  proposed  plan  is 
happily  calculated  to  remedy.  The  concurrence  of 
nine  States,  as  has  been  observed,  is  necessary  to 
pass  resolves  the  most  important,  and  on  which  the 
safety  of  the  public  may  depend.  If  these  nine 
States  are  at  any  time  assembled,  a  foreign  enemy, 
by  dividing  a  State,  and  gaining  over  and  silencing 
a  single  member,  may  frustrate  the  most  indispen 
sable  plan  of  national  policy,  and  totally  prevent  a 
measure  essential  to  the  welfare  or  existence  of  the 
empire.  Here,  then,  we  find  a  radical,  dangerous 
defect,  which  will  for  ever  embarrass  and  obstruct 
the  machine  of  government,  and  suspend  our  fate  on 
the  uncertain  virtue  of  an  individual. 

What  a  difference  between  the  old  and  new  Con 
stitution  strikes  our  view!  In  the  one,  corruption 
must  embrace  a  majority;  in  the  other,  her  poison, 
administered  to  a  single  man,  may  render  the  efforts 
of  a  majority  totally  vain.  This  mode  of  corruption 


Convention  of  New  York  33 

is  still  more  dangerous,  as  its  operations  are  more 
secret  and  imperceptible.  The  exertions  of  active 
villany  are  commonly  accompanied  with  circum 
stances  which  tend  to  its  own  exposure;  but  this 
negative  kind  of  guilt  has  so  many  plausible  apolo 
gies  as  almost  to  elude  suspicion. 

In  all  reasonings  on  the  subject  of  corruption, 
much  use  has  been  made  of  the  examples  furnished 
by  the  British  House  of  Commons.  Many  mistakes 
have  arisen  from  fallacious  comparisons  between  our 
government  and  theirs.  It  is  time  that  the  real 
state  of  this  matter  should  be  explained.  By  far 
the  greatest  part  of  the  House  of  Commons  is  com 
posed  of  representatives  of  towns  and  boroughs. 
These  towns  had  anciently  no  voice  in  Parliament; 
but  on  the  extension  of  commercial  wealth  and  in 
fluence,  they  were  admitted  to  a  seat.  Many  of 
them  are  in  possession  and  gift  of  the  king;  and, 
from  their  dependence  on  him,  and  the  destruction 
of  the  right  of  free  election,  they  are  stigmatized 
with  the  appellation  of  rotten  boroughs.  This  is  the 
true  source  of  the  corruption  which  has  so  long  ex 
cited  the  severe  animadversion  of  zealous  politicians 
and  patriots.  But  the  knights  of  the  shire,  who 
form  another  branch  of  the  House  of  Commons,  and 
who  are  chosen  from  the  body  of  the  counties  they 
represent,  have  been  generally  esteemed  a  virtuous 
and  incorruptible  set  of  men.  I  appeal,  sir,  to  the 
history  of  that  House;  this  will  show  us  that  the 
rights  of  the  people  have  ever  been  safely  trusted  to 
their  protection;  that  they  have  been  the  ablest 
bulwarks  of  the  British  commons;  and  that,  in  the 

VOL.  II.— 3. 


34  Alexander  Hamilton 

conflict  of  parties,  by  throwing  their  weight  into  one 
scale  or  the  other,  they  have  uniformly  supported 
and  strengthened  the  constitutional  claims  of  the 
people. 

Notwithstanding  the  cry  of  corruption  that  has 
been  perpetually  raised  against  the  House  of  Com 
mons,  it  has  been  found  that  that  House,  sitting  at 
first  without  any  constitutional  authority,  became  at 
length  an  essential  member  of  the  legislature,  that 
they  have  since,  by  regular  gradations,  acquired 
new  and  important  accessions  of  privileges  and  that 
they  have,  on  numerous  occasions,  impaired  the 
prerogative  and  limited  the  monarchy. 

An  honorable  member  from  Dutchess  (Mr.  Smith) 
has  observed  that  the  delegates  from  New  York  (for 
example)  can  have  very  little  information  of  the 
local  circumstances  of  Georgia  or  South  Carolina, 
except  from  the  representatives  of  those  States ;  and 
on  this  ground  insists  upon  the  expediency  of  an  en 
largement  of  the  representation;  since,  otherwise, 
the  majority  must  rely  too  much  on  the  information 
of  a  few.  In  order  to  determine  whether  there  is 
any  weight  in  this  reasoning,  let  us  consider  the 
powers  of  the  National  Government,  and  compare 
them  with  the  objects  of  State  legislation.  The 
powers  of  the  new  government  are  general,  and  cal 
culated  to  embrace  the  aggregate  interests  of  the 
Union,  and  the  general  interest  of  each  State,  so 
far  as  it  stands  in  relation  to  the  whole.  The 
object  of  the  State  governments  is  to  provide  for 
their  internal  interests,  as  unconnected  with  the 
United  States,  and  as  composed  of  minute  parts  or 


Convention  of  New  York  35 

districts.  A  particular  knowledge,  therefore,  of  the 
local  circumstances  of  any  State,  as  they  may  vary 
in  different  districts,  is  unnecessary  for  the  federal 
representative.  As  he  is  not  to  represent  the  in 
terests  or  local  wants  of  the  county  of  Dutchess  or 
Montgomery,  neither  is  it  necessary  that  he  should 
be  acquainted  with  their  particular  resources.  But 
in  the  State  governments,  as  the  laws  regard  the 
interest  of  the  people,  in  all  their  various  minute 
divisions,  it  is  necessary  that  the  smallest  interests 
should  be  represented.  Taking  these  distinctions 
into  view,  I  think  it  must  appear  evident  that  one 
discerning  and  intelligent  man  will  be  as  capable  of 
understanding  and  representing  the  general  interests 
of  a  State  as  twenty;  because  one  man  can  be  as 
fully  acquainted  with  the  general  state  of  the  com 
merce,  manufactures,  population,  production,  and 
common  resources  of  a  State,  which  are  the  proper 
objects  of  federal  legislation.  It  is  presumed  that 
few  men  originally  possess  a  complete  knowledge  of 
the  circumstances  of  other  States.  They  must  rely, 
therefore,  on  the  information  to  be  collected  from 
the  representatives  of  those  States.  And  if  the 
above  reasoning  be  just,  it  appears  evident,  I  im 
agine,  that  this  reliance  will  be  as  secure  as  can  be 
desired.  Sir,  in  my  experience  of  public  affairs,  I 
have  constantly  remarked,  in  the  conduct  of  the 
members  of  Congress,  a  strong  and  uniform  attach 
ment  to  the  interests  of  their  own  State. 

These  interests  have  on  many  occasions  been  ad 
hered  to  with  an  undue  and  illiberal  pertinacity,  and 
have  too  often  been  preferred  to  the  welfare  of  the 


36  Alexander  Hamilton 

Union.     This  attachment  has  given  birth  to  an  un 
accommodating  spirit  of  party,  which  has  frequently 
embarrassed  the  best  measures.     It  is  by  no  means, 
however,  an  object  of  surprise.     The  early  connec 
tions  we  have  formed,  the  habits  and  prejudices  in 
which  we  have  been  bred,   fix  our   affections   so 
strongly,  that  no  future  objects  of  association  can 
easily  eradicate  them.     This,  together  with  the  en 
tire  and  immediate  dependence  the  representative 
feels  on  his  constituent,  will  generally  incline  him  to 
prefer  the  particular  before  the  public  good.     The 
subject  on  which  this  argument  of  a  small  repre 
sentation  has  been  most  plausibly  used,  is  taxation. 
As  to  internal  taxation,  in  which  the  difficulty  prin 
cipally  rests,  it  is  not  probable  that  any  general 
regulation  will  originate  in  the  National  Legisla 
ture.     If  Congress,  in  times  of  great  danger  and 
distress,  should  be  driven  to  this  resource,  they  will 
undoubtedly  adopt  such  measures  as  are  most  con 
formable  to  the  laws  and  customs  of  each  State. 
They  will  take  up  your  own  codes,  and  consult  your 
own  systems.     This  is  a  source  of  information  which 
cannot  mislead,  and  which  will  be  equally  accessible 
to  every  member.     It  will  teach  them  the  most  cer 
tain,  safe,  and  expeditious  mode  of  laying  and  col 
lecting  taxes  in  each  State.     They  will  appoint  the 
officers  of  revenue  agreeably  to  the  spirit  of  your 
particular  establishments,  or  they  will  make  use  of 
their  own.     Sir,  the  most  powerful  obstacle  to  the 
members  of  Congress  betraying  the  interests  of  their 
constituents,  is  the  State  Legislatures  themselves, 
who  will  be  standing  bodies  of  observation,  possess- 


Convention  of  New  York  37 

ing  the  confidence  of  the  people,  jealous  of  federal 
encroachments,  and  armed  with  every  power  to 
check  the  first  essays  of  treachery.  They  will  in 
stitute  regular  modes  of  inquiry.  The  complicated 
domestic  attachments  which  subsist  between  State 
legislators  and  their  electors,  will  ever  make  them 
vigilant  guardians  of  the  people's  rights.  Pos 
sessed  of  the  means  and  the  disposition  of  resistance, 
the  spirit  of  opposition  will  be  easily  communicated 
to  the  people,  and,  under  the  conduct  of  an  au 
thorized  body  of  leaders,  will  act  with  weight  and 
system.  Thus  it  appears  that  the  very  struc 
ture  of  the  Confederacy  affords  the  surest  preven 
tives  from  error,  and  the  most  powerful  checks  to 
misconduct. 

Sir,  there  is  something  in  an  argument  that  has 
been  urged,  which,  if  it  proves  any  thing,  concludes 
against  all  union  and  all  governments;  it  goes  to 
prove  that  no  powers  should  be  entrusted  to  any 
body  of  men,  because  they  may  be  abused.  This  is 
an  argument  of  possibility  and  chance — one  that 
would  render  useless  all  reasonings  upon  the  prob 
able  operation  of  things,  and  defeat  the  established 
principles  of  natural  and  moral  causes.  It  is  a 
species  of  reasoning  sometimes  used  to  excite  popular 
jealousies,  but  is  generally  discarded  by  wise  and 
discerning  men.  I  do  not  suppose  that  the  honor 
able  member  who  advanced  the  idea  had  any  such 
design.  He  undoubtedly  would  not  wish  to  extend 
arguments  to  the  destruction  of  union  or  govern 
ment;  but  this,  sir,  is  its  real  tendency.  It  has  been 
asserted  that  the  interests,  habits,  and  manners  of 


38  Alexander  Hamilton 

the  thirteen  States  are  different;  and  hence  it  is 
inferred  that  no  general  free  government  can  suit 
them.  This  diversity  of  habits,  etc.,  has  been  a 
favorite  theme  with  those  who  are  disposed  for  a 
division  of  our  empire,  and,  like  many  other  popu 
lar  objections,  seems  to  be  founded  on  fallacy.  I 
acknowledge  that  the  local  interests  of  the  States 
are  in  some  degree  various,  and  that  there  is  some 
difference  in  the  manners  and  habits.  But  this  I 
will  presume  to  affirm,  that  from  New  Hampshire  to 
Georgia  the  people  of  America  are  as  uniform  in  their 
interests  and  manners  as  those  of  any  established  in 
Europe.  This  diversity,  to  the  eye  of  a  speculatist, 
may  afford  some  marks  of  characteristic  discrimina 
tion,  but  cannot  form  an  impediment  to  the  regular 
operation  of  those  general  powers  which  the  Con 
stitution  gives  to  the  united  government.  Were  the 
laws  of  the  Union  to  new-model  the  internal  police 
of  any  State;  were  they  to  alter,  or  abrogate  at  a 
blow,  the  whole  of  its  civil  and  criminal  institutions ; 
were  they  to  penetrate  the  recesses  of  domestic  life, 
and  control,  in  all  respects,  the  private  conduct  of 
individuals, — there  might  be  more  force  in  the  ob 
jections;  and  the  same  Constitution,  which  was 
happily  calculated  for  one  State,  might  sacrifice  the 
welfare  of  another.  Though  the  difference  of  inter 
ests  may  create  some  difficulty,  and  apparent  par 
tiality,  in  the  first  operations  of  government,  yet  the 
same  spirit  of  accommodation,  which  produced  the 
plan  under  discussion,  would  be  exercised  in  lessen 
ing  the  weight  of  unequal  burdens.  Add  to  this 
that,  tinder  the  regular  and  gentle  influence  of  gen- 


Convention  of  New  York  39 

eral  laws,  these  varying  interests  will  be  constantly 
assimilating,  till  they  embrace  each  other  and  as 
sume  the  same  complexion. — Elliot's  Debates,  vol.  ii. 

June  21,  1788. — Mr.  Hamilton:  I  only  rise  to  ob 
serve  that  the  gentleman  has  misunderstood  me. 
What  I  meant  to  express  was  this :  that  if  we  argued 
from  possibilities  only, — if  we  reasoned  from  chances, 
or  an  ungovernable  propensity  to  evil,  instead  of 
taking  into  view  the  control  which  the  nature  of 
things,  or  the  form  of  the  Constitution,  provided, — 
the  argument  would  lead  us  to  withdraw  all  con 
fidence  from  our  fellow-citizens,  and  discard  the 
chimerical  idea  of  government.  This  is  a  true  deduc 
tion  from  such  reasoning. — Elliot's  Debates,  vol.  ii. 

June  21,  1788. — Mr.  Hamilton:  It  is  not  my  de 
sign,  Mr.  Chairman,  to  extend  this  debate  by  any 
new  arguments  on  the  general  subject.  I  have  de 
livered  my  sentiments  so  fully  on  what  has  been  ad 
vanced  by  the  gentleman  this  morning,  that  any 
further  reasoning  from  me  will  be  easily  dispensed 
with.  I  only  rise  to  state  a  fact  with  respect  to  the 
motives  which  operated  in  the  General  Convention. 
I  had  the  honor  to  state  to  the  committee  the  diver 
sity  of  interests  which  prevailed  between  the  navi 
gating  and  non-navigating,  the  large  and  the  small, 
States,  and  the  influence  which  those  States  had 
upon  the  conduct  of  each.  It  is  true,  a  difference  did 
take  place  between  the  large  and  the  small  States, 
the  latter  insisting  on  equal  advantages  in  the  House 
of  Representatives.  Some  private  business  calling 
me  to  New  York,  I  left  the  Convention  for  a  few 
days;  on  my  return,  I  found  a  plan  reported  by  the 


40  Alexander  Hamilton 

committee  of  details ;  and  soon  after,  a  motion  was 
made  to  increase  the  number  of  representatives. 
On  this  occasion,  the  members  rose  from  one  side 
and  the  other,  and  declared  that  the  plan  reported 
was  entirely  a  work  of  accommodation,  and  that  to 
make  any  alterations  in  it  would  destroy  the  Con 
stitution.  I  discovered  that  several  of  the  States, 
particularly  New  Hampshire,  Connecticut,  and  New 
Jersey,  thought  it  would  be  difficult  to  send  a  great 
number  of  delegates  from  the  extremes  of  the  con 
tinent  to  the  national  government;  they  appre 
hended  their  constituents  would  be  displeased  with 
a  very  expensive  government;  and  they  considered 
it  as  a  formidable  objection.  After  some  debate  on 
this  motion,  it  was  withdrawn.  Many  of  the  facts 
stated  by  the  gentleman  and  myself  are  not  sub 
stantially  different.  The  truth  is,  the  plan,  in  all 
its  parts,  was  a  plan  of  accommodation. — Elliot's 
Debates,  vol.  ii. 


SPEECH  ON  THE  SENATE  OF  THE  UNITED  STATES 

June  24,  1788. — I  am  persuaded  that  I,  in  my 
turn,  shall  be  indulged  in  addressing  the  committee. 
We  all,  with  equal  sincerity,  profess  to  be  anxious 
for  the  establishment  of  a  republican  government, 
on  a  safe  and  solid  basis.  It  is  the  object  of  the 
wishes  of  every  honest  man  in  the  United  States; 
and  I  presume  I  shall  not  be  disbelieved  when  I  de 
clare,  that  it  is  an  object,  of  all  others,  the  nearest 
and  most  dear  to  my  own  heart.  The  means  of 
accomplishing  this  great  purpose  become  the  most 


Convention  of  New  York  41 

important  study  which  can  interest  mankind.  It  is 
our  duty  to  examine  all  those  means  with  peculiar 
attention,  and  to  choose  the  best  and  most  effectual. 
It  is  our  duty  to  draw  from  nature,  from  reason, 
from  examples,  the  justest  principles  of  policy,  and 
to  pursue  and  apply  them  in  the  formation  of  our 
government.  We  should  contemplate  and  compare 
the  systems  which,  in  the  examination,  come  under 
our  view;  distinguish  with  a  careful  eye  the  defects 
and  excellencies  of  each,  and  discarding  the  former, 
incorporate  the  latter,  as  far  as  circumstances  will 
admit,  into  our  Constitution.  If  we  pursue  a  differ 
ent  course,  and  neglect  this  duty,  we  shall  probably 
disappoint  the  expectations  of  our  country  and  of 
the  world. 

In  the  commencement  of  a  revolution,  which  re 
ceived  its  birth  from  the  usurpations  of  tyranny, 
nothing  was  more  natural  than  that  the  public  mind 
should  be  influenced  by  an  extreme  spirit  of  jealousy. 
To  resist  these  encroachments,  and  to  nourish  this 
spirit,  was  the  great  object  of  all  our  public  and 
private  institutions.  The  zeal  for  liberty  became 
predominant  and  excessive.  In  forming  our  Con 
federation,  this  passion  alone  seemed  to  actuate  us, 
and  we  appear  to  have  had  no  other  view  than  to 
secure  ourselves  from  despotism.  The  object  cer 
tainly  was  a  valuable  one,  and  deserved  our  utmost 
attention.  But  there  is  another  object,  equally  im 
portant,  and  which  our  enthusiasm  rendered  us 
little  capable  of  regarding.  I  mean  a  principle  of 
strength  and  stability  in  the  organization  of  our 
government,  and  of  vigor  in  its  operations.  This 


42  Alexander  Hamilton 

purpose  could  never  be  accomplished  but  by  the 
establishment  of  some  select  body,  formed  peculiarly 
on  this  principle.  There  are  few  positions  more 
demonstrable  than  that  there  should  be  in  every  re 
public  some  permanent  body,  to  correct  the  preju 
dices,  check  the  intemperate  passions,  and  regulate 
the  fluctuations  of  a  popular  assembly.  It  is  evident 
that  a  body  instituted  for  these  purposes  must  be  so 
formed  as  to  exclude  as  much  as  possible  from  its 
own  character  those  infirmities  and  that  mutability 
which  it  is  designed  to  remedy.  It  is,  therefore, 
necessary  that  it  should  be  small,  that  it  should 
hold  its  authority  during  a  considerable  period,  and 
that  it  should  have  such  an  independence  in  the 
exercise  of  its  powers,  as  will  divest  it,  as  much  as 
possible,  of  local  prejudices.  It  should  be  so  formed 
as  to  be  the  centre  of  political  knowledge ;  to  pursue 
always  a  steady  line  of  conduct,  and  to  reduce  every 
irregular  propensity  to  system.  Without  this  estab 
lishment  we  may  make  experiments  without  end, 
but  shall  never  have  an  efficient  government. 

It  is  an  unquestionable  truth,  that  the  body  of 
the  people  in  every  country  desire  sincerely  its  pros 
perity.  But  it  is  equally  unquestionable  that  they 
do  not  possess  the  discernment  and  stability  neces 
sary  for  systematic  government.  To  deny  that  they 
are  frequently  led  into  the  grossest  errors,  by  misin 
formation  and  passion,  would  be  a  flattery  which 
their  own  good  sense  must  despise.  That  branch  of 
administration,  especially,  which  involves  our  po 
litical  relation  with  foreign  states,  a  community  will 
ever  be  incompetent  to.  These  truths  are  not  often 


Convention  of  New  York  43 

held  up  in  public  assemblies;  but  they  cannot  be 
unknown  to  any  who  hear  me.  From  these  prin 
ciples,  it  follows  that  there  ought  to  be  two  distinct 
bodies  in  our  government :  one  which  shall  be  imme 
diately  constituted  by  and  peculiarly  represent  the 
people,  and  possess  all  the  popular  features;  another 
formed  upon  the  principles  and  for  the  purposes 
before  explained.  Such  considerations  as  these  in 
duced  the  convention  who  formed  your  State  con 
stitution  to  institute  a  Senate  upon  the  present  plan. 
The  history  of  ancient  and  modern  republics  had 
taught  them  that  many  of  the  evils  which  those 
republics  suffered  arose  from  the  want  of  a  certain 
balance,  and  that  mutual  control  indispensable  to  a 
wise  administration.  They  were  convinced  that 
popular  assemblies  are  frequently  misguided  by  ig 
norance,  by  sudden  impulses,  and  the  intrigues  of 
ambitious  men;  and  that  some  firm  barrier  against 
these  operations  was  necessary.  They,  therefore, 
instituted  your  Senate;  and  the  benefits  we  have 
experienced  have  fully  justified  their  conceptions. 

What  is  the  tendency  of  the  proposed  amend 
ment?  To  take  away  the  stability  of  government, 
by  depriving  the  Senate  of  its  permanency.  To 
make  this  body  subject  to  the  same  weakness  and 
prejudices  which  are  incident  to  popular  assemblies, 
and  which  it  was  instituted  to  correct;  to  destroy 
the  balance  between  them.  The  amendment  will 
render  the  Senator  a  slave  to  all  the  capricious  hu 
mors  among  the  people.  It  will  probably  be  here 
suggested  that  the  Legislatures,  not  the  people,  are 
to  have  the  power  of  recall.  Without  attempting  to 


44  Alexander  Hamilton 

prove  that  the  Legislatures  must  be,  in  a  great  degree, 
the  image  of  the  multitude  in  respect  to  federal 
affairs,  and  that  the  same  prejudices  and  factions 
will  prevail,  I  insist  that,  in  whatever  body  the 
power  of  recall  is  vested,  the  senator  will  perpetually 
feel  himself  in  such  a  state  of  vassalage  and  depend 
ence  that  he  never  can  possess  that  firmness  which 
is  necessary  to  the  discharge  of  his  great  duty  to  the 
Union. 

Gentlemen  in  their  reasoning  have  placed  the  in 
terests  of  the  several  States  and  those  of  the  United 
States  in  contrast.  This  is  not  a  fair  view  of  the 
subject.  They  must  necessarily  be  involved  in  each 
other.  What  we  apprehend  is,  that  some  sinister 
prejudice,  or  some  prevailing  passion,  may  assume 
the  form  of  a  genuine  interest.  The  influence  of 
these  is  as  powerful  as  the  most  permanent  convic 
tion  of  the  public  good,  and  against  this  influence 
we  ought  to  provide.  The  local  interest  of  a  State 
ought  in  every  case  to  give  way  to  the  interests  of 
the  Union.  For  when  a  sacrifice  of  one  or  the  other 
is  necessary,  the  former  becomes  only  an  apparent, 
partial  interest,  and  should  yield,  on  the  principle 
that  the  smaller  good  ought  never  to  oppose  the 
greater  one.  When  you  assemble  from  your  several 
counties  in  the  Legislature,  were  every  member  to  be 
guided  only  by  the  apparent  interest  of  his  county, 
government  would  be  impracticable.  There  must 
be  a  perpetual  accommodation  and  sacrifice  of  local 
advantage  to  general  expediency.  But  the  spirit  of 
a  more  popular  assembly  would  rarely  be  actuated 
by  this  important  principle.  It  is,  therefore,  abso- 


Convention  of  New  York  45 

lutely  necessary  that  the  Senate  should  be  so  formed 
as  to  be  unbiassed  by  false  conceptions  of  the  real 
interests,  or  undue  attachment  to  the  apparent  good 
of  their  several  States. 

Gentlemen  indulge  too  many  unreasonable  appre 
hensions  of  danger  to  the  State  governments.  They 
seem  to  suppose  that  the  moment  you  put  men  into 
the  national  council,  they  become  corrupt  and  ty 
rannical,  and  lose  all  their  affection  for  their  fellow- 
citizens.  But  can  we  imagine  that  the  Senators  will 
ever  be  so  insensible  of  their  own  advantage  as  to 
sacrifice  the  genuine  interest  of  their  constituents? 
The  State  governments  are  essentially  necessary  to 
the  form  and  spirit  of  the  general  system.  As  long, 
therefore,  as  Congress  have  a  full  conviction  of  this 
necessity,  they  must,  even  upon  principles  purely 
national,  have  as  firm  an  attachment  to  the  one  as 
to  the  other.  This  conviction  can  never  leave  them 
unless  they  become  madmen.  While  the  Constitu 
tion  continues  to  be  read,  and  its  principles  known, 
the  States  must,  by  every  rational  man,  be  con 
sidered  as  essential  component  parts  of  the  Union; 
and  therefore  the  idea  of  sacrificing  the  former  to 
the  latter  is  totally  inadmissible. 

The  objectors  do  not  revert  to  the  natural  strength 
and  resources  of  the  State  governments,  which  will 
ever  give  them  an  important  superiority  over  the 
General  Government.  If  we  compare  the  nature 
of  their  different  powers,  or  the  means  of  popular 
influence  which  each  possesses,  we  shall  find  the  ad 
vantage  entirely  on  the  side  of  the  States.  This 
consideration,  important  as  it  is,  seems  to  have  been 


46  Alexander  Hamilton 

little  attended  to.  The  aggregate  number  of  repre 
sentatives  throughout  the  States  may  be  two  thou 
sand.  Their  personal  influence  will  therefore  be 
proportionably  more  extensive  than  that  of  one 
or  two  hundred  men  in  Congress.  The  State  estab 
lishments  of  civil  and  military  officers  of  every 
description,  infinitely  surpassing  in  number  any  cor 
responding  establishments  in  the  General  Govern 
ment,  will  create  such  an  extent  and  complication  of 
attachments  as  will  ever  secure  the  predilection  and 
support  of  the  people.  Whenever,  therefore,  Con 
gress  shall  meditate  any  infringement  of  the  State 
Constitutions,  the  great  body  of  the  people  will  natur 
ally  take  part  with  their  domestic  representatives. 
Can  the  General  Government  withstand  such  a  united 
opposition?  Will  the  people  suffer  themselves  to  be 
stripped  of  their  privileges?  Will  they  suffer  their 
Legislatures  to  be  reduced  to  a  shadow  and  a  name? 
The  idea  is  shocking  to  common-sense. 

From  the  circumstances  already  explained,  and 
many  others  which  might  be  mentioned,  results  a 
complicated,  irresistible  check,  which  must  ever 
support  the  existence  and  importance  of  the  State 
governments.  The  danger,  if  any  exists,  flows  from 
an  opposite  source.  The  probable  evil  is  that  the 
General  Government  will  be  too  dependent  on  the 
State  Legislatures,  too  much  governed  by  their  pre 
judices,  and  too  obsequious  to  their  humors;  that 
the  States,  with  every  power  in  their  hands,  will 
make  encroachments  on  the  national  authority  till 
the  Union  is  weakened  and  dissolved. 

Every  member  must  have  been  struck  with  an 


Convention  of  New  York  47 

observation  of  a  gentleman  from  Albany.  Do  what 
you  will,  he  says,  local  prejudices  and  opinions 
will  go  into  the  government.  What!  shall  we  then 
form  a  Constitution  to  cherish  and  strengthen  these 
prejudices  ?  Shall  we  confirm  the  distemper  instead 
of  remedying  it?  It  is  undeniable  that  there  must 
be  a  control  somewhere.  Either  the  general  interest 
is  to  control  the  particular  interests,  or  the  contrary. 
If  the  former,  then  certainly  the  government  ought 
to  be  so  framed  as  to  render  the  power  of  control 
efficient  to  all  intents  and  purposes;  if  the  latter,  a 
striking  absurdity  follows.  The  controlling  powers 
must  be  as  numerous  as  the  varying  interests,  and 
the  operations  of  government  must  therefore  cease. 
For  the  moment  you  accommodate  these  differing 
interests,  which  is  the  only  way  to  set  the  govern 
ment  in  motion,  you  establish  a  general  controlling 
power.  Thus,  whatever  constitutional  provisions 
are  made  to  the  contrary,  every  government  will  be 
at  last  driven  to  the  necessity  of  subjecting  the  par 
tial  to  the  universal  interest.  The  gentlemen  ought 
always,  in  their  reasoning,  to  distinguish  between 
the  real,  genuine  good  of  a  State,  and  the  opinions 
and  prejudices  which  may  prevail  respecting  it. 
The  latter  may  be  opposed  to  the  general  good,  and 
consequently  ought  to  be  sacrificed ;  the  former  is  so 
involved  in  it  that  it  never  can  be  sacrificed.  Sir, 
the  main  design  of  the  convention,  in  forming  the 
Senate,  was  to  prevent  fluctuations  and  cabals. 
With  this  view  they  made  that  body  small,  and  to 
exist  for  a  considerable  period.  Have  they  carried 
this  design  too  far  ?  The  Senators  are  to  serve  six 


48  Alexander  Hamilton 

years.  This  is  only  two  years  longer  than  the  Sen 
ators  of  this  State  hold  their  places.  One  third  of 
the  members  are  to  go  out  every  two  years;  and  in 
six  the  whole  body  may  be  changed.  Prior  to  the 
Revolution,  the  representatives  in  the  several  colo 
nies  were  elected  for  different  periods;  for  three 
years,  for  seven  years,  etc.  Were  those  bodies  ever 
considered  as  incapable  of  representing  the  people, 
or  as  too  independent  of  them?  There  is  one  cir 
cumstance  which  will  have  a  tendency  to  increase 
the  dependence  of  the  Senators  on  the  States,  in 
proportion  to  the  duration  of  their  appointments. 
As  the  State  Legislatures  are  in  continual  fluctua 
tion,  the  Senator  will  have  more  attachments  to 
form,  and  consequently  a  greater  difficulty  of  main 
taining  his  place,  than  one  of  shorter  duration.  He 
will  therefore  be  more  cautious  and  industrious  to 
suit  his  conduct  to  the  wishes  of  his  constituents. 

When  you  take  a  view  of  all  the  circumstances 
which  have  been  recited,  you  will  certainly  see  that 
the  Senators  will  constantly  look  up  to  the  State 
governments  with  an  eye  of  dependence  and  affec 
tion.  If  they  are  ambitious  to  continue  in  office, 
they  will  make  every  prudent  arrangement  for  this 
purpose,  and  whatever  may  be  their  private  senti 
ments  of  politics,  they  will  be  convinced  that  the 
surest  means  of  obtaining  a  reelection  will  be  a  uni 
form  attachment  to  the  interests  of  their  several 
States. 

In  support  of  this  amendment  it  has  been 
observed  that  the  power  of  recall,  under  the  old 
government,  has  never  been  exercised.  There  is  no 


Convention  of  New  York  49 

reasoning  from  this.  The  experience  of  a  few  years, 
tinder  peculiar  circumstances,  can  afford  no  probable 
security  that  it  never  will  be  carried  into  execution 
with  unhappy  effects.  A  seat  in  Congress  has  been 
less  an  object  of  ambition;  and  the  arts  of  intrigue, 
consequently,  have  been  less  practised.  Indeed,  it 
has  been  difficult  to  find  men  who  were  willing  to 
suffer  the  mortifications  to  which  so  feeble  a  govern 
ment  and  so  dependent  a  station  exposed  them. 

Sir,  if  you  consider  but  a  moment  the  purposes 
for  which  the  Senate  was  instituted,  and  the  nature 
of  the  business  which  they  are  to  transact,  you  will 
see  the  necessity  of  giving  them  duration.  They, 
together  with  the  President,  are  to  manage  all  our 
concerns  with  foreign  nations.  They  must  under 
stand  all  their  interests  and  their  political  systems. 
This  knowledge  is  not  soon  acquired, — but  a  very 
small  part  is  gained  in  the  closet.  Is  it  desirable 
that  new  and  unqualified  members  should  be  con 
tinually  thrown  into  that  body?  When  public  bod 
ies  are  engaged  in  the  exercise  of  general  powers, 
you  cannot  judge  of  the  propriety  of  their  conduct, 
but  from  the  result  of  their  systems.  They  may  be 
forming  plans  which  require  time  and  diligence  to 
bring  to  maturity.  It  is  necessary,  therefore,  that 
they  should  have  a  considerable  and  fixed  duration, 
that  they  may  make  their  calculations  accordingly. 
If  they  are  to  be  perpetually  fluctuating,  they  can 
never  have  that  responsibility  which  is  so  important 
in  republican  governments.  In  bodies  subject  to 
frequent  changes  great  political  plans  must  be  con 
ducted  by  members  in  succession;  a  single  Assembly 

VOL.  II.- 4. 


50  Alexander  Hamilton 

can  have  but  a  partial  agency  in  them,  and  conse 
quently  cannot  be  answerable  for  the  final  event. 
Considering  the  Senate,  therefore,  with  a  view  to 
responsibility,  duration  is  a  very  interesting  and 
essential  quality.  There  is  another  view  in  which 
duration  in  the  Senate  appears  necessary;  a  govern 
ment  changeable  in  its  policy  must  soon  lose  its 
sense  of  national  character  and  forfeit  the  respect  of 
foreigners.  Senators  will  not  be  solicitous  for  the 
reputation  of  public  measures  in  which  they  have 
had  but  a  temporary  concern,  and  will  feel  lightly 
the  burthen  of  public  disapprobation  in  proportion 
to  the  number  of  those  who  partake  of  the  censure. 
Our  political  rivals  will  ever  consider  our  most  able 
counsels  as  evidence  of  deficient  wisdom,  and  will 
be  little  apprehensive  of  our  arriving  at  any  exalted 
station  in  the  scale  of  power.  Such  are  the  internal 
and  external  disadvantages  which  would  result  from 
the  principle  contended  for.  Were  it  admitted,  I 
am  firmly  persuaded,  sir,  that  prejudices  would 
govern  the  public  deliberations,  and  passions  rage  in 
the  counsels  of  the  Union.  If  it  were  necessary,  I 
could  illustrate  my  subject  by  historical  facts.  I 
could  travel  through  an  extensive  field  of  detail,  and 
demonstrate  that  wherever  the  fatal  principle  of  the 
head  suffering  the  control  of  the  members  has  oper 
ated,  it  has  proved  a  fruitful  source  of  commotions 
and  disorder. 

This  is  the  first  fair  opportunity  that  has  been 
offered  of  deliberately  correcting  the  errors  in  gov 
ernment.  Instability  has  been  a  prominent  and 
very  defective  feature  in  most  republican  systems. 


Convention  of  New  York  5 1 

It  is  the  first  to  be  seen  and  the  last  to  be  lamented 
by  a  philosophical  inquirer.  It  has  operated  most 
banefully  in  our  infant  republics.  It  is  necessary 
that  we  apply  an  immediate  remedy,  and  eradicate 
the  poisonous  principle  from  our  government.  If 
this  be  not  done,  we  shall  feel,  and  posterity  will  be 
convulsed  by,  a  painful  malady. 

June  25th. — Mr.  Hamilton:  Mr.  Chairman,  in  de 
bates  of  this  kind,  it  is  extremely  easy,  on  either  side, 
to  say  a  great  number  of  plausible  things.  It  is  to 
be  acknowledged  that  there  is  even  a  certain  degree 
of  truth  in  the  reasonings  on  both  sides.  In  this 
situation,  it  is  the  province  of  judgment  and  good 
sense  to  determine  their  force  and  application,  and 
how  far  the  arguments  advanced  on  one  side  are 
balanced  by  those  on  the  other.  The  ingenious 
dress  in  which  both  appear  renders  it  a  difficult  task 
to  make  this  decision,  and  the  mind  is  frequently 
unable  to  come  to  a  safe  and  solid  conclusion.  On 
the  present  question,  some  of  the  principles  on  each 
side  are  admitted,  and  the  conclusions  from  them 
denied,  while  other  principles,  with  their  inferences, 
are  rejected  altogether.  It  is  the  business  of  the 
committee  to  seek  the  truth  in  this  labyrinth  of 
argument.  There  are  two  objects  in  forming  sys 
tems  of  government — safety  for  the  people,  and 
energy  in  the  administration.  When  these  objects 
are  united,  the  certain  tendency  of  the  system  will 
be  to  the  public  welfare.  If  the  latter  object  be 
neglected,  the  people's  security  will  be  as  certainly 
sacrificed  as  by  disregarding  the  former.  Good 
constitutions  are  formed  upon  a  comparison  of  the 


52  Alexander  Hamilton 

liberty  of  the  individual  with  the  strength  of  govern 
ment.  If  the  tone  of  either  be  too  high,  the  other 
will  be  weakened  too  much.  It  is  the  happiest  pos 
sible  mode  of  conciliating  these  objects,  to  institute 
one  branch  peculiarly  endowed  with  sensibility, 
another  with  knowledge  and  firmness.  Through 
the  opposition  and  mutual  control  of  these  bodies, 
the  government  will  reach,  in  its  operations,  the  per 
fect  balance  between  liberty  and  power.  The  argu 
ments  of  the  gentlemen  chiefly  apply  to  the  former 
branch  of  the  House  of  Representatives,  If  they 
will  calmly  consider  the  different  nature  of  the  two 
branches,  they  will  see  that  the  reasoning  which 
justly  applies  to  the  representative  House  will  go  to 
destroy  the  essential  qualities  of  the  Senate.  If  the 
former  is  calculated  perfectly  upon  the  principles  of 
caution,  why  should  you  impose  the  same  principles 
upon  the  latter,  which  is  designed  for  a  different 
operation?  Gentlemen,  while  they  discover  a  lauda 
ble  anxiety  for  the  safety  of  the  people,  do  not  attend 
to  the  important  distinction  I  have  drawn.  We 
have  it  constantly  held  up  to  us,  that,  as  it  is  our 
chief  duty  to  guard  against  tyranny,  it  is  our  policy 
to  form  all  branches  of  government  for  this  purpose. 
Sir,  it  is  a  truth  sufficiently  illustrated  by  expe 
rience,  that  when  the  people  act  by  their  representa 
tives  they  are  commonly  irresistible.  The  gentleman 
admits  the  position,  that  stability  is  essential  to 
the  government,  and  yet  enforces  principles  which, 
if  true,  ought  to  banish  stability  from  the  system. 
The  gentleman  observes,  that  there  is  a  fallacy  in 
my  reasoning,  and  informs  us  that  the  Legislatures 


Convention  of  New  York  53 

of  the  States,  not  the  people,  are  to  appoint  the 
Senators.  Does  he  reflect  that  they  are  the  imme 
diate  agents  of  the  people,  that  they  are  so  con 
stituted  as  to  feel  all  their  prejudices  and  passions, 
and  to  be  governed,  in  a  great  degree,  by  their  mis 
apprehensions?  Experience  must  have  taught  him 
the  truth  of  this.  Look  through  their  history :  what 
factions  have  arisen  from  the  most  trifling  causes! 
What  intrigues  have  been  practised  for  the  most  il 
liberal  purposes!  Is  not  the  State  of  Rhode  Island, 
at  this  moment,  struggling  under  difficulties  and 
distresses,  for  having  been  led  blindly  by  the  spirit 
of  the  multitude?  What  is  her  Legislature  but  the 
picture  of  a  mob?  In  this  State,  we  have  a  Senate, 
possessed  of  the  proper  qualities  of  a  permanent 
body.  Virginia,  Maryland,  and  a  few  other  States 
are  in  the  same  situation.  The  rest  are  either  gov 
erned  by  a  single  democratic  Assembly,  or  have  a 
Senate  constituted  entirely  upon  democratic  prin 
ciples.  These  have  been  more  or  less  embroiled  in 
factions,  and  have  generally  been  the  image  and 
echo  of  the  multitude.  It  is  difficult  to  reason  on 
this  point,  without  touching  on  certain  delicate 
chords.  I  could  refer  you  to  periods  and  conjunc 
tures  when  the  people  have  been  governed  by  im 
proper  passions,  and  led  by  factious  and  designing 
men.  I  could  show  that  the  same  passions  have 
infected  their  representatives.  Let  us  beware  that 
we  do  not  make  the  State  Legislatures  a  vehicle  in 
which  the  evil  humors  may  be  conveyed  into  the 
national  system.  To  prevent  this,  it  is  necessary 
that  the  Senate  should  be  so  formed,  as  in  some 


54  Alexander  Hamilton 

measure  to  check  the  State  governments,  and  pre 
clude  the  communication  of  the  false  impressions 
which  they  receive  from  the  people.  It  has  been 
often  repeated,  that  the  Legislatures  of  the  States 
can  have  only  a  partial  and  confined  view  of  national 
affairs;  that  they  can  form  no  proper  estimate  of 
great  objects  which  are  not  in  the  sphere  of  their 
interests.  The  observation  of  the  gentleman,  there 
fore,  cannot  take  off  the  force  of  the  argument. 

Sir,  the  Senators  will  constantly  be  attended  with 
a  reflection  that  their  future  existence  is  absolutely 
in  the  power  of  the  States.  Will  not  this  form  a 
powerful  check?  It  is  a  reflection  which  applies 
closely  to  their  feelings  and  interests ;  and  no  candid 
man  who  thinks  deliberately  will  deny  that  it  would 
be  alone  a  sufficient  check.  The  Legislatures  are 
to  provide  the  mode  of  electing  the  President,  and 
must  have  a  great  influence  over  the  electors.  In 
deed,  they  convey  their  influence  through  a  thousand 
channels  into  the  General  Government.  Gentlemen 
have  endeavored  to  show  that  there  will  be  no  clash 
ing  of  local  and  general  interests ;  they  do  not  seem 
to  have  considered  the  subject.  We  have,  in  this 
State,  a  duty  of  sixpence  per  pound  on  salt,  and  it 
operates  lightly  and  with  advantage;  but  such  a 
duty  would  be  very  burdensome  to  some  of  the 
States.  If  Congress  should,  at  any  time,  find  it  con 
venient  to  impose  a  salt  tax,  would  it  not  be  op 
posed  by  the  Eastern  States?  Being  themselves 
incapable  of  feeling  the  necessity  of  the  measure, 
they  could  only  feel  its  apparent  injustice.  Would 
it  be  wise  to  give  the  New  England  States  a  power 


Convention  of  New  York  55 

to  defeat  this  measure,  by  recalling  their  Senators 
who  may  be  engaged  for  it  ?  I  beg  the  gentleman 
once  more  to  attend  to  the  distinction  between 
the  real  and  apparent  interests  of  the  States.  I 
admit  that  the  aggregate  of  individuals  constitute 
the  government;  yet  every  State  is  not  the  govern 
ment.  Sir,  in  our  State  Legislatures,  a  compro 
mise  is  frequently  necessary  between  the  interests 
of  counties;  the  same  must  happen  in  the  General 
Government,  between  States.  In  this,  the  few  must 
yield  to  the  many;  or  in  other  words,  the  particular 
must  be  sacrificed  to  the  general  interest.  If  the 
members  of  Congress  are  too  dependent  on  the  State 
Legislatures,  they  will  be  eternally  forming  secret 
combinations  from  local  views.  This  is  reasoning 
from  the  plainest  principles.  Their  interest  is  in 
terwoven  with  their  dependence,  arid  they  will  neces 
sarily  yield  to  the  impression  of  their  situation. 
Those  who  have  been  in  Congress  have  seen  these 
operations.  The  first  question  has  been,  how  will 
such  a  measure  affect  my  constituents,  and,  conse 
quently,  how  will  the  part  I  take  affect  my  reelec 
tion?  This  consideration  may  in  some  degree  be 
proper;  but  to  be  dependent  from  day  to  day,  and 
to  have  the  idea  perpetually  present,  would  be  the 
source  of  numerous  evils.  Six  years,  sir,  is  a  period 
short  enough  for  a  proper  degree  of  dependence. 

Let  us  consider  the  peculiar  state  of  this  body, 
and  see  under  what  impressions  they  will  act.  One 
third  of  them  are  to  go  out  at  the  end  of  two  years, 
two  thirds  at  four  years,  and  the  whole  at  six  years. 
When  one  year  is  elapsed,  there  are  a  number  who 


56  Alexander  Hamilton 

are  to  hold  their  places  for  one  year,  others  for  three, 
and  others  for  five  years.  Thus  there  will  not  only 
be  a  constant  and  frequent  change  of  members,  but 
there  will  be  some  whose  office  is  near  the  point  of 
expiration,  and  who,  from  this  circumstance,  will 
have  a  lively  sense  of  their  dependence.  The  bien 
nial  change  of  members  is  an  excellent  invention  for 
increasing  the  difficulty  of  combination.  Any  scheme 
of  usurpation  will  lose,  every  two  years,  a  number 
of  its  oldest  advocates,  and  their  places  will  be  sup 
plied  by  an  equal  number  of  new,  unaccommodating, 
and  virtuous  men.  When  two  principles  are  equally 
important,  we  ought,  if  possible,  to  reconcile  them, 
and  sacrifice  neither.  We  think  that  safety  and  per 
manency  in  this  government  are  completely  recon 
cilable.  The  State  governments  will  have,  from  the 
causes  I  have  described,  a  sufficient  influence  over 
the  Senate,  without  the  check  for  which  the  gentle 
men  contend.  It  has  been  remarked  that  there  is  an 
inconsistency  in  our  admitting  that  the  equal  vote 
in  the  Senate  was  given  to  secure  the  rights  of  the 
States,  and  at  the  same  time  holding  up  the  idea 
that  their  interests  should  be  sacrificed  to  those  of 
the  Union.  But  the  committee  certainly  perceive 
the  distinction  between  the  rights  of  a  State  and  its 
interests.  The  rights  of  a  State  are  defined  by  the 
Constitution,  and  cannot  be  invaded  without  a  viola 
tion  of  it ;  but  the  interests  of  a  State  have  no  connec 
tion  with  the  Constitution,  and  may  be,  in  a  thousand 
instances,  constitutionally  sacrificed.  A  uniform 
tax  is  perfectly  constitutional;  and  yet  it  may  oper 
ate  oppressively  upon  certain  members  of  the  Union. 


Convention  of  New  York  57 

The  gentlemen  are  afraid  that  the  State  governments 
will  be  abolished.  But,  sir,  their  existence  does  not 
depend  upon  the  laws  of  the  United  States.  Con 
gress  can  no  more  abolish  the  State  governments 
than  they  can  dissolve  the  Union.  The  whole  Con 
stitution  is  repugnant  to  it,  and  yet  the  gentlemen 
would  introduce  an  additional  useless  provision 
against  it.  It  is  proper  that  the  influence  of  the 
States  should  prevail  to  a  certain  extent.  But  shall 
the  individual  States  be  the  judges  how  far?  Shall 
an  unlimited  power  be  left  to  determine  in  their 
favor?  The  gentlemen  go  into  the  extreme;  in 
stead  of  a  wise  government,  they  would  form  a  fan 
tastical  Utopia.  But,  sir,  while  they  give  it  a 
plausible,  popular  shape,  they  would  render  it  im 
practicable. 

Much  has  been  said  about  factions.  As  far  as 
my  observation  has  extended,  factions  in  Congress 
have  arisen  from  attachment  to  State  prejudices. 
We  are  attempting  by  this  Constitution  to  abolish 
factions  and  to  unite  all  parties  for  the  general  wel 
fare.  That  a  man  should  have  the  power,  in  private 
life,  of  recalling  his  agent,  is  proper;  because,  in  the 
business  in  which  he  is  engaged,  he  has  no  other  ob 
ject  but  to  gain  the  approbation  of  his  principal.  Is 
this  the  case  with  the  Senator?  Is  he  simply  the 
agent  of  the  State?  No.  He  is  an  agent  for  the 
Union,  and  he  is  bound  to  perform  services  necessary 
to  the  good  of  the  whole,  though  his  State  should 
condemn  them.  Sir,  in  contending  for  a  rotation, 
the  gentlemen  carry  their  zeal  beyond  all  reasonable 
bounds.  I  am  convinced  that  no  government, 


58  Alexander  Hamilton 

founded  on  this  feeble  principle,  can  operate  well; 
I  believe,  also,  that  we  shall  be  singular  in  this  pro 
posal.  We  have  not  felt  the  embarrassments  re 
sulting  from  rotation  that  other  States  have;  and 
we  hardly  know  the  strength  of  their  objection  to 
it.  There  is  no  probability  that  we  shall  ever  per 
suade  a  majority  of  the  States  to  agree  to  this  amend 
ment.  The  gentlemen  deceive  themselves;  the 
amendment  would  defeat  their  own  design.  When 
a  man  knows  he  must  quit  his  station,  let  his  merit 
be  what  it  may,  he  will  turn  his  attention  chiefly  to 
his  own  emolument;  nay,  he  will  feel  temptations, 
which  few  other  situations  furnish,  to  perpetuate  his 
power  by  unconstitutional  usurpations.  Men  will 
pursue  their  interests.  It  is  as  easy  to  change  hu 
man  nature  as  to  oppose  the  strong  current  of  selfish 
passions.  A  wise  legislator  will  gently  divert  the 
channel,  and  direct  it,  if  possible,  to  the  public  good. 
It  has  been  observed,  that  it  is  not  possible  there 
should  be  in  a  State  only  two  men  qualified  for  Sena 
tors.  But,  sir,  the  question  is  not,  whether  there 
may  be  no  more  than  two  men;  but  whether,  in 
certain  emergencies,  you  could  find  two  equal  to 
those  whom  the  amendment  would  discard.  Im 
portant  negotiations,  or  other  business  to  which  they 
shall  be  most  competent,  may  employ  them  at  the 
moment  of  their  removal.  These  things  often  hap 
pen.  The  difficulty  of  obtaining  men  capable  of 
conducting  the  affairs  of  a  nation  in  dangerous  times, 
is  much  more  serious  than  the  gentlemen  imagine. 
As  to  corruption,  sir,  admitting,  in  the  President,  a 
disposition  to  corrupt,  what  are  the  instruments  of 


Convention  of  New  York  59 

bribery?  It  is  said  he  will  have  in  his  disposal  a 
great  number  of  offices.  But  how  many  offices  are 
there,  for  which  a  man  would  relinquish  senatorial 
dignity?  There  may  be  some  in  the  judicial,  and 
some  in  other  principal  departments.  But  there 
are  few  whose  respectability  can,  in  any  measure, 
balance  that  of  the  office  of  Senator.  Men  who 
have  been  in  the  Senate  once,  and  who  have  a  reason 
able  hope  of  a  reelection,  will  not  be  easily  bought 
by  offices.  This  reasoning  shows  that  a  rotation 
would  be  productive  of  many  disadvantages ;  under 
particular  circumstances,  it  might  be  extremely  in 
convenient,  if  not  fatal  to  the  prosperity  of  our 
country. — Elliot's  Debates,  vol.  ii. 

June  27,  1788. — Mr.  Hamilton:  This  is  one  of 
those  subjects  on  which  objections  very  naturally 
arise,  and  assume  the  most  plausible  shape.  Its 
address  is  to  the  passions,  and  its  first  impressions 
create  a  prejudice  before  cool  examination  has  an 
opportunity  for  exertion.  It  is  more  easy  for  the 
human  mind  to  calculate  the  evils  than  the  advan 
tages  of  a  measure;  and  vastly  more  natural  to  ap 
prehend  the  danger  than  to  see  the  necessity  of 
giving  powers  to  our  rulers.  Hence,  I  may  justly 
expect  that  those  who  hear  me  will  place  less  confi 
dence  in  those  arguments  which  oppose,  than  in 
those  which  favor,  their  prepossessions. 

After  all  our  doubts,  our  suspicions,  and  specula 
tions  on  the  subject  of  government,  we  must  return 
at  last  to  the  important  truth,  that  when  we  have 
formed  a  Constitution  upon  free  principles,  when 
we  have  given  a  proper  balance  to  the  different 


60  Alexander  Hamilton 

branches  of  administration,  and  fixed  representa 
tion  upon  pure  and  equal  principles,  we  may  with 
safety  furnish  it  with  all  the  powers  necessary  to 
answer  in  the  most  ample  manner  the  purposes  of 
government.  The  great  desiderata  are  a  free  repre 
sentation  and  mutual  checks.  When  these  are  ob 
tained,  all  our  apprehensions  of  the  extent  of  powers 
are  unjust  and  imaginary.  What  is  the  struc 
ture  of  this  Constitution?  One  branch  of  the 
Legislature  is  to  be  elected  by  the  people — by  the 
same  people  who  chose  your  State  representatives. 
Its  members  are  to  hold  their  office  two  years,  and 
then  return  to  their  constituents.  Here  the  people 
govern.  Here  they  act  by  their  immediate  repre 
sentatives.  You  have  also  a  Senate,  constituted  by 
your  State  Legislatures,  by  men  in  whom  you  place 
the  highest  confidence,  and  forming  another  repre 
sentative  branch.  Then,  again,  you  have  an  Execu 
tive  Magistrate,  created  by  a  form  of  election  which 
meets  universal  admiration.  In  the  form  of  this 
government,  and  in  the  mode  of  legislation,  you  find 
all  the  checks  which  the  greatest  politicians  and  the 
best  writers  have  ever  conceived.  What  more  can 
reasonable  men  desire?  Is  there  any  one  branch  in 
which  the  whole  legislative  and  executive  powers  are 
lodged?  No.  The  legislative  authority  is  lodged  in 
three  distinct  branches,  properly  balanced.  The  ex 
ecutive  authority  is  divided  between  two  branches, 
and  the  judicial  is  still  reserved  for  an  independent 
body,  who  hold  their  office  during  good  behavior. 
This  organization  is  so  complex,  so  skilfully  con 
trived,  that  it  is  next  to  impossible  that  an  impolitic 


Convention  of  New  York  61 

or  wicked  measure  should  pass  the  great  scrutiny 
with  success.  Now,  what  do  gentlemen  mean  by 
coming  forward  and  declaiming  against  this  govern 
ment?  Why  do  they  say  we  ought  to  limit  its 
powers,  to  disable  it,  and  to  destroy  its  capacity  of 
blessing  the  people?  Has  philosophy  suggested — 
has  experience  taught — that  such  a  government 
ought  not  to  be  trusted  with  everything  necessary 
for  the  good  of  society?  When  you  have  divided 
and  nicely  balanced  the  departments  of  government, 
when  you  have  strongly  connected  the  virtue  of 
your  rulers  with  their  interest,  when,  in  short,  you 
have  rendered  your  system  as  perfect  as  human 
forms  can  be,  you  must  place  confidence,  you  must 
give  power. 

We  have  heard  a  great  deal  of  the  sword  and  the 
purse.  It  is  said  our  liberties  are  in  danger  if  both 
are  possessed  by  Congress.  Let  us  see  what  is  the 
true  meaning  of  this  maxim,  which  has  been  so  much 
used  and  so  little  understood.  It  is,  that  you  shall 
not  place  these  powers  in  either  the  Legislative  or 
Executive,  singly;  neither  one  nor  the  other  shall 
have  both ;  because  this  would  destroy  that  division 
of  powers  on  which  political  liberty  is  founded,  and 
would  furnish  one  body  with  all  the  means  of  tyranny. 
But  when  the  purse  is  lodged  in  one  branch,  and  the 
sword  in  another,  there  can  be  no  danger.  All  gov 
ernments  have  possessed  these  powers.  They  would 
be  monsters  without  them,  and  incapable  of  exertion. 
What  is  your  State  government?  Does  not  your 
Legislature  command  what  money  it  pleases  ?  Does 
not  your  Executive  execute  the  laws  without  re- 


62  Alexander  Hamilton 

straint?  These  distinctions  between  the  purse  and 
the  sword  have  no  application  to  the  system,  but 
only  to  its  separate  branches.  When  we  reason  about 
the  great  interests  of  a  great  people,  it  is  high  time 
that  we  dismiss  our  prejudices  and  banish  declama 
tion. 

In  order  to  induce  us  to  consider  the  powers  given 
by  this  Constitution  as  dangerous,  in  order  to  render 
plausible  an  attempt  to  take  away  the  life  and  spirit 
of  the  most  important  power  in  government,  the 
gentleman  complains  that  we  shall  not  have  a  true 
and  safe  representation.  I  have  asked  him  what  a 
safe  representation  is,  and  he  has  given  no  satis 
factory  answer.  The  Assembly  of  New  York  has 
been  mentioned  as  a  proper  standard.  But  if  we 
apply  this  standard  to  the  General  Government,  our 
Congress  will  become  a  mere  mob,  exposed  to  every 
irregular  impulse,  and  subject  to  every  breeze  of 
faction.  Can  such  a  system  afford  security?  Can 
you  have  confidence  in  such  a  body?  The  idea  of 
taking  the  ratio  of  representation  in  a  small  society 
for  the  ratio  of  a  great  one,  is  a  fallacy  which  ought 
to  be  exposed.  It  is  impossible  to  ascertain  to  what 
point  our  representation  will  increase.  It  may  vary 
from  one  to  two,  three,  or  four  hundred.  It  depends 
upon  the  progress  of  population.  Suppose  it  to  rest 
at  two  hundred;  is  not  this  number  sufficient  to 
secure  it  against  corruption?  Human  nature  must 
be  a  much  more  weak  and  despicable  thing  than  I 
apprehend  it  to  be,  if  two  hundred  of  our  fellow- 
citizens  can  be  corrupted  in  two  years.  But  suppose 
they  are  corrupted;  can  they,  in  two  years,  accom- 


Convention  of  New  York  63 

plish  their  designs?  Can  they  form  a  combination, 
and  even  lay  a  foundation  for  a  system  of  tyranny, 
in  so  short  a  period?  It  is  far  from  my  intention  to 
wound  the  feelings  of  any  gentleman;  but  I  must, 
in  this  most  interesting  discussion,  speak  of  things 
as  they  are,  and  hold  up  opinions  in  the  light  in  which 
they  ought  to  appear;  and  I  maintain  that  all  that 
has  been  said  of  corruption,  of  the  purse  and  the 
sword,  and  of  the  danger  of  giving  powers,  is  not 
supported  by  principle  or  fact;  that  it  is  mere  ver 
biage  and  idle  declamation.  The  true  principle  of 
government  is  this — make  the  system  complete  in 
its  structure;  give  a  perfect  proportion  and  balance 
to  its  parts,  and  the  powers  you  give  it  will  never 
affect  your  security.  The  question,  then,  of  the 
division  of  powers  between  the  General  and  State 
governments,  is  a  question  of  convenience.  It  be 
comes  a  prudential  inquiry,  what  powers  are  proper 
to  be  reserved  to  the  latter,  and  this  immediately 
involves  another  inquiry  into  the  proper  objects  of 
the  two  governments.  This  is  the  criterion  by 
which  we  shall  determine  the  just  distribution  of 
powers. 

The  great  leading  objects  of  the  Federal  Govern 
ment,  in  which  revenue  is  concerned,  are  to  main 
tain  domestic  peace,  and  provide  for  the  common 
defence.  In  these  are  comprehended  the  regulation 
of  commerce — that  is,  the  whole  system  of  foreign 
intercourse,  the  support  of  armies  and  navies,  and 
of  the  civil  administration.  It  is  useless  to  go  into 
detail.  Every  one  knows  that  the  objects  of  the 
General  Government  are  numerous,  extensive,  and 


64  Alexander  Hamilton 

important.  Every  one  must  acknowledge  the  neces 
sity  of  giving  powers,  in  all  respects,  and  in  every 
degree,  equal  to  these  objects.  This  principle  as 
sented  to,  let  us  inquire  what  are  the  objects  of  the 
State  governments.  Have  they  to  provide  against 
foreign  invasion  ?  Have  they  to  maintain  fleets  and 
armies?  Have  they  any  concern  in  the  regulation 
of  commerce,  the  procuring  alliances,  or  forming 
treaties  of  peace?  No.  Their  objects  are  merely 
civil  and  domestic,  to  support  the  legislative  estab 
lishment,  and  to  provide  for  the  administration  of 
the  laws.  Let  any  one  compare  the  expense  of  sup 
porting  the  civil  list  in  a  State,  with  the  expense  of 
providing  for  the  defence  of  the  Union.  The  differ 
ence  is  almost  beyond  calculation^  The  experience 
of  Great  Britain  will  throw  some  light  on  this  sub 
ject.  In  that  kingdom,  the  ordinary  expenses  of 
peace  to  those  of  war  are  as  one  to  fourteen.  But 
there  they  have  a  monarch,  with  his  splendid  court, 
and  an  enormous  civil  establishment,  with  which  we 
have  nothing  in  this  country  to  compare.  If,  in 
Great  Britain,  the  expenses  of  war  and  peace  are  so 
disproportioned,  how  wide  will  be  their  disparity  in 
the  United  States!  How  infinitely  wider  between 
the  General  Government  and  that  of  each  individual 
State!  Where  ought  the  great  resources  to  be 
lodged?  Every  rational  man  will  give  an  imme 
diate  answer.  To  what  extent  shall  these  resources 
be  possessed?  Reason  says,  As  far  as  possible  exi 
gencies  can  require;  that  is,  without  limitation.  A 
constitution  cannot  set  bounds  to  a  nation's  wants; 
it  ought  not  therefore  to  set  bounds  to  its  resources. 


Convention  of  New  York  65 

Unexpected  visitations,  long  and  ruinous  wars,  may 
demand  all  the  possible  abilities  of  the  country. 
Shall  not  our  government  have  power  to  call  these 
abilities  into  action?  The  contingencies  of  society 
are  not  reducible  to  calculations;  they  cannot  be 
fixed  or  bounded,  even  in  imagination.  Will  you 
limit  the  means  of  your  defence  when  you  cannot 
ascertain  the  force  or  extent  of  the  invasion?  Even 
in  ordinary  wars,  a  government  is  frequently  obliged 
to  call  for  supplies,  to  the  temporary  oppression  of 
the  people. 

If  we  adopt  the  idea  of  exclusive  revenues,  we 
shall  be  obliged  to  fix  some  distinguishing  line  which 
neither  government  shall  overpass.  The  incon 
veniences  of  this  measure  must  appear  evident  on 
the  slightest  examination.  The  resources  appro 
priated  to  one  may  dimmish  or  fail,  while  those  of 
the  other  may  increase  beyond  the  wants  of  govern 
ment.  One  may  be  destitute  of  revenues,  while  the 
other  shall  possess  an  unnecessary  abundance;  and 
the  Constitution  will  be  an  eternal  barrier  to  a 
mutual  intercourse  and  relief.  In  this  case  will 
the  individual  States  stand  on  so  good  a  ground  as 
if  the  objects  of  taxation  were  left  free  and  open  to 
the  embrace  of  both  the  governments  ?  Possibly,  in 
the  advancement  of  commerce,  the  imposts  may  in 
crease  to  such  a  degree  as  to  render  direct  taxation 
unnecessary;  these  resources,  then,  as  the  Constitu 
tion  stands,  may  be  occasionally  relinquished  to  the 
States.  But  on  the  gentleman's  idea  of  prescribing 
exclusive  limits,  and  precluding  all  reciprocal  com 
munication,  this  would  be  entirely  improper.  The 


VOL.  II.—  5. 


66  Alexander  Hamilton 

laws  of  the  States  must  not  touch  the  appropriated 
resources  of  the  United  States  whatever  may  be 
their  wants.  Would  it  not  be  of  more  advantage  to 
the  States  to  have  a  concurrent  jurisdiction  extend 
ing  to  all  the  sources  of  revenue,  than  to  be  confined 
to  such  a  small  resource  as,  on  calculation  of  the  ob 
jects  of  the  two  governments,  should  appear  to  be 
their  due  proportion?  Certainly,  you  cannot  hesi 
tate  on  this  question.  The  gentleman's  plan  would 
also  have  a  further  ill  effect;  it  would  tend  to  dis 
solve  the  connection  and  correspondence  of  the  two 
governments,  to  estrange  them  from  each  other, 
and  to  destroy  that  mutual  dependence  which  forms 
the  essence  of  union. 

A  number  of  arguments  have  been  advanced  by 
an  honorable  member  from  New  York,  which,  to 
every  unclouded  mind,  must  carry  conviction.  He 
has  stated  that  in  sudden  emergencies  it  may  be 
necessary  to  borrow;  and  that  it  is  impossible  to 
borrow  unless  you  have  funds  to  pledge  for  the  pay 
ment  of  your  debts.  Limiting  the  powers  of  govern 
ment  to  certain  resources,  is  rendering  the  funds 
precarious;  and  obliging  the  government  to  ask,  in 
stead  of  empowering  it  to  command,  is  to  destroy 
all  confidence  and  credit.  If  the  power  of  taxing  is 
restricted,  the  consequence  is,  that  on  the  breaking 
out  of  a  war  you  must  divert  the  funds  appropriated 
to  the  payment  of  debts,  to  answer  immediate  ex 
igencies.  Thus,  you  violate  your  engagements  at  the 
very  time  you  increase  the  burthen  of  them.  Be 
sides,  sound  policy  condemns  the  practice  of  accu 
mulating  debts.  A  government,  to  act  with  energy, 


Convention  of  New  York  67 

should  have  the  possession  of  all  its  revenues  to 
answer  present  purposes.  The  principle  for  which 
I  contend  is  recognized  in  all  its  extent  by  our  old 
Constitution.  Congress  is  authorized  to  raise  troops, 
to  call  for  supplies  without  limitation,  and  to  borrow 
money  to  any  amount.  It  is  true,  they  must  use 
the  form  of  recommendations  and  requisitions ;  but 
the  States  are  bound,  by  the  solemn  ties  of  honor,  of 
justice,  of  religion,  to  comply  without  reserve. 

Mr.  Chairman:  It  has  been  advanced  as  a  prin 
ciple,  that  no  government  but  a  despotism  can  exist 
in  a  very  extensive  country.  This  is  a  melancholy 
consideration  indeed.  If  it  were  founded  on  truth, 
we  ought  to  dismiss  the  idea  of  a  republican  govern 
ment,  even  for  the  State  of  New  York.  This  idea  has 
been  taken  from  a  celebrated  writer,  who,  by  being 
misunderstood,  has  been  the  occasion  of  frequent 
fallacies  in  our  reasoning  on  political  subjects.  But 
the  position  has  been  misapprehended;  and  its  ap 
plication  is  entirely  false  and  unwarrantable.  It 
relates  only  to  democracies,  where  the  whole  body 
of  the  people  meet  to  transact  business,  and  where 
representation  is  unknown.  Such  were  a  number  of 
ancient  and  some  modern  independent  cities.  Men 
who  read  without  attention  have  taken  these  maxims 
respecting  the  extent  of  country,  and,  contrary  to 
their  proper  meaning,  have  applied  them  to  republics 
in  general.  This  application  is  wrong  in  respect  to 
all  representative  governments,  but  especially  in 
relation  to  a  Confederacy  of  States,  in  which  the 
supreme  Legislature  has  only  general  powers  and 
the  civil  and  domestic  concerns  of  the  people  are 


68  Alexander  Hamilton 

regulated  by  the  laws  of  the  several  States.  This 
distinction  being  kept  in  view,  all  the  difficulty  will 
vanish,  and  we  may  easily  conceive  that  the  people 
of  a  large  country  may  be  represented  as  truly  as 
those  of  a  small  one.  An  assembly  constituted  for 
general  purposes  may  be  fully  competent  to  every 
federal  regulation,  without  being  too  numerous  for 
deliberate  conduct.  If  the  State  governments  were 
to  be  abolished,  the  question  would  wear  a  different 
face;  but  this  idea  is  inadmissible.  They  are  ab 
solutely  necessary  to  the  system.  Their  existence 
must  form  a  leading  principle  in  the  most  perfect 
Constitution  we  could  form.  I  insist  that  it  never 
can  be  the  interest  or  desire  of  the  National  Legis 
lature  to  destroy  the  State  governments.  It  can 
derive  no  advantage  from  such  an  event;  but,  on 
the  contrary,  would  lose  an  indispensable  support,  a 
necessary  aid  in  executing  the  laws  and  conveying 
the  influence  of  government  to  the  doors  of  the 
people.  The  Union  is  dependent  on  the  will  of  the 
State  governments  for  its  Chief  Magistrate,  and  for 
its  Senate.  The  blow  aimed  at  the  members  must 
give  a  fatal  wound  to  the  head,  and  the  destruction 
of  the  States  must  be  at  once  a  political  suicide. 
Can  the  National  Government  be  guilty  of  this  mad 
ness?  What  inducements,  what  temptations,  can 
they  have?  Will  they  attach  new  honors  to  their 
station;  will  they  increase  the  national  strength; 
will  they  multiply  the  national  resources;  will  they 
make  themselves  more  respectable,  in  the  view  of 
foreign  nations,  or  of  their  fellow-citizens,  by  robbing 
the  States  of  their  constitutional  privileges  ?  But  im- 


Convention  of  New  York  69 

agine  for  a  moment,  that  a  political  frenzy  should 
seize  the  government.  Suppose  they  should  make 
the  attempt.  Certainly  it  would  be  for  ever  imprac 
ticable.  This  has  been  sufficiently  demonstrated  by 
reason  and  experience.  It  has  been  proved,  that  the 
members  of  republics  have  been,  and  ever  will  be, 
stronger  than  the  head.  Let  us  attend  to  one  gen 
eral  historical  example.  In  the  ancient  feudal  gov 
ernments  of  Europe  there  was  in  the  first  place  a 
monarch ;  subordinate  to  him  a  body  of  nobles ;  and 
subject  to  these,  the  vassals  or  the  whole  body  of 
the  people.  The  authority  of  the  kings  was  limited, 
and  that  of  the  barons  considerably  independent.  A 
great  part  of  the  early  wars  in  Europe  were  contests 
between  the  king  and  his  nobility.  In  these  contests, 
the  latter  possessed  many  advantages,  derived  from 
their  influence,  and  the  immediate  command  they  had 
over  the  people,  and  they  generally  prevailed.  The 
history  of  the  feudal  wars  exhibits  little  more  than  a 
series  of  successful  encroachments  on  the  preroga 
tives  of  monarchy.  Here  is  one  great  proof  of  the  su 
periority  which  the  members  in  limited  governments 
possess  over  their  head.  As  long  as  the  barons  en 
joyed  the  confidence  and  attachment  of  the  people, 
they  had  the  strength  of  the  country  on  their  side, 
and  were  irresistible.  I  may  be  told  that  in  some 
instances  the  barons  were  overcome.  But  how  did 
this  happen?  They  took  advantage  of  the  depres 
sion  of  the  royal  authority  and  the  establishment 
of  their  own  power,  to  oppress  and  tyrannize  over 
their  vassals.  As  commerce  enlarged,  and  as  wealth 
and  civilization  increased,  the  people  began  to  feel 


70  Alexander  Hamilton 

their  own  weight  and  consequence;  they  grew  tired 
of  their  oppressions ;  united  their  strength  with  that 
of  the  prince ;  and  threw  off  the  yoke  of  aristocracy. 
These  very  instances  prove  what  I  contend  for. 
They  prove  that  in  whatever  direction  the  popular 
weight  leans,  the  current  of  power  will  flow.  Wher 
ever  the  popular  attachments  be,  there  will  rest  the 
political  superiority.  Sir,  can  it  be  supposed  that 
the  State  governments  will  become  the  oppressors 
of  the  people?  Will  they  forget  their  affections? 
Will  they  combine  to  destroy  the  liberties  and  hap 
piness  of  their  fellow-citizens,  for  the  sole  purpose 
of  involving  themselves  in  ruin?  God  forbid!  The 
idea  is  shocking !  It  outrages  every  feeling  of  human 
ity,  and  every  dictate  of  common-sense! 

There  are  certain  social  principles  in  human  na 
ture,  from  which  we  may  draw  the  most  solid  con 
clusions  with  respect  to  the  conduct  of  individuals 
and  of  communities.  We  love  our  families  more 
than  our  neighbors;  we  love  our  neighbors  more 
than  our  countrymen  in  general.  The  human  affec 
tions,  like  the  solar  heat,  lose  their  intensity  as  they 
depart  from  the  centre ;  and  become  languid  in  pro 
portion  to  the  expansion  of  the  circle  on  which  they 
act.  On  these  principles,  the  attachment  of  the 
individual  will  be  first  and  for  ever  secured  by  the 
State  governments.  They  will  be  a  mutual  pro 
tection  and  support.  Another  source  of  influence 
which  has  already  been  pointed  out,  is  the  various 
official  connections  in  the  States.  Gentlemen  en 
deavor  to  evade  the  force  of  this,  by  saying  that 
these  offices  will  be  insignificant.  This  is  by  no 


Convention  of  New  York  71 

means  true.  The  State  officers  will  ever  be  impor 
tant,  because  they  are  necessary  and  useful.  Their 
powers  are  such  as  are  extremely  interesting  to  the 
people,  such  as  affect  their  property,  their  liberty, 
and  life.  What  is  more  important  than  the  admin 
istration  of  justice,  and  the  execution  of  the  civil  and 
criminal  laws?  Can  the  State  governments  become 
insignificant,  while  they  have  the  power  of  raising 
money  independently  and  without  control?  If  they 
are  really  useful, — if  they  are  calculated  to  promote 
the  essential  interests  of  the  people,  they  must  have 
their  confidence  and  support.  The  States  can  never 
lose  their  powers  till  the  whole  people  of  America  are 
robbed  of  their  liberties.  These  must  go  together; 
they  must  support  each  other,  or  meet  one  common 
fate.  On  the  gentleman's  principles  we  may  safely 
trust  the  State  governments,  though  we  have  no 
means  of  resisting  them,  but  we  cannot  confide  in 
the  National  Government,  though  we  have  an 
effectual  constitutional  guard  against  every  en 
croachment.  This  is  the  essence  of  their  argument, 
and  it  is  false  and  fallacious  beyond  conception. 

With  regard  to  the  jurisdiction  of  the  two  govern 
ments,  I  shall  certainly  admit  that  the  Constitution 
ought  not  to  be  so  formed  as  to  prevent  the  States 
providing  for  their  own  existence;  and  I  maintain 
that  it  is  so  formed  that  their  power  of  providing  for 
themselves  is  sufficiently  established.  This  is  con 
ceded  by  one  gentleman,  and  in  the  next  breath  the 
concession  is  retracted.  He  says  Congress  have  but 
one  exclusive  right  in  taxation,  that  of  duties  on  im 
ports.  Certainly,  then,  their  other  powers  are  only 


72  Alexander  Hamilton 

concurrent.  But,  to  take  off  the  force  of  this  ob 
vious  conclusion,  he  immediately  says  that  if  the 
laws  of  the  United  States  are  supreme,  those  of  the 
States  must  be  subordinate,  because  there  cannot  be 
two  supremes.  This  is  curious  sophistry.  That  two 
supreme  powers  cannot  act  together  is  false.  They 
are  inconsistent  only  when  they  are  aimed  at  each 
other,  or  at  one  indivisible  object.  The  laws  of  the 
United  States  are  supreme  as  to  all  their  proper 
constitutional  objects.  The  laws  of  the  States  are 
supreme  in  the  same  way.  These  supreme  laws  may 
act  on  different  objects  without  clashing,  or  they  may 
operate  on  different  parts  of  the  same  common  object 
with  perfect  harmony.  Suppose  both  governments 
should  lay  a  tax  of  a  penny  on  a  certain  article. 
Has  not  each  an  independent  and  uncontrollable 
power  to  collect  its  own  tax?  The  meaning  of  the 
axiom,  that  there  cannot  be  two  supremes,  is  simply 
this :  two  powers  cannot  be  supreme  over  each  other. 
This  meaning  is  entirely  perverted  by  the  gentlemen. 
But,  it  is  said,  disputes  between  collectors  are  to  be 
referred  to  the  federal  courts.  This  is  again  wander 
ing  in  the  field  of  conjecture.  But  suppose  the  fact 
certain.  Is  it  not  to  be  presumed  that  they  will  ex 
press  the  true  meaning  of  the  Constitution  and  the 
laws?  Will  they  not  be  bound  to  consider  the  con 
current  jurisdiction;  to  declare  that  both  the  taxes 
shall  have  equal  operation;  that  both  the  powers, 
in  that  respect,  are  sovereign  and  coextensive?  If 
they  transgress  their  duty  we  are  to  hope  that 
they  will  be  punished.  Sir,  we  cannot  reason  from 
probabilities  alone.  When  we  leave  common-sense, 


Convention  of  New  York  73 

and  give  ourselves  up  to  conjecture,  there  can  be  no 
certainty,  no  security  in  our  reasonings. 

I  imagine  I  have  stated  to  the  committee  abun 
dant  reasons  to  prove  the  entire  safety  of  the  State 
governments  and  of  the  people.  I  would  go  into  a 
more  minute  consideration  of  the  nature  of  the  con 
current  jurisdiction,  and  of  the  operation  of  the  laws 
in  relation  to  revenue ;  but  at  present  I  feel  too  much 
indisposed  to  proceed.  I  shall,  with  the  leave  of 
the  committee,  improve  another  opportunity  of  ex 
pressing  to  them  more  fully  my  ideas  on  this  point. 
I  wish  the  committee  to  remember,  that  the  Con 
stitution  under  examination  is  framed  upon  truly 
republican  principles,  and  that,  as  it  is  expressly  de 
signed  to  provide  for  the  common  protection  and 
the  general  welfare  of  the  United  States,  it  must  be 
utterly  repugnant  to  this  Constitution  to  subvert  the 
State  governments  or  oppress  the  people. 

June  28,  1788. — Mr.  Hamilton:  Mr.  Chairman,  in 
the  course  of  these  debates  it  has  been  suggested 
that  the  State  of  New  York  has  sustained  peculiar 
misfortune  from  the  mode  of  raising  revenue  by  re 
quisitions.  I  believe  we  shall  now  be  able  to  prove 
that  this  State,  in  the  course  of  the  late  Revolution, 
suffered  the  extremes  of  distress  on  account  of  this 
delusive  system.  To  establish  these  facts,  I  shall  beg 
leave  to  introduce  a  series  of  official  papers  and  re 
solutions  of  this  State  as  evidence  of  the  sentiments 
of  the  people  during  the  most  melancholy  periods 
of  war.  I  shall  request  the  secretary  to  read  these 
papers,  in  the  order  in  which  I  point  them  out. — 
Elliot's  Debates,  ii. 


74  Alexander  Hamilton 

June  28,  1788. — Mr.  Hamilton  [In  reply  to  Mr. 
Smith,  who  had  claimed  the  right  to  explain  the 
papers  produced,  which  involved  Clinton  in  certain 
inconsistencies]:  We  shall  make  the  same  reserva 
tion.  By  the  indisputable  construction  of  these 
resolutions,  we  shall  prove  that  this  State  was  once 
on  the  verge  of  destruction,  for  want  of  an  energetic 
government.  To  this  point  we  shall  confine  our 
selves. — Elliot's  Debates,  ii. 

June  28,  1788. — Mr.  Hamilton:  The  honorable 
gentleman  from  Ulster  J  has  given  a  turn  to  the  in 
troduction  of  those  papers  which  was  never  in  our 
contemplation.  He  seems  to  insinuate  that  they 
were  brought  forward  with  a  view  of  showing  an  in 
consistency  in  the  conduct  of  some  gentlemen;  per 
haps  of  himself.  Sir,  the  exhibition  of  them  had  a 
very  different  object.  It  was  to  prove  that  this 
State  once  experienced  hardships  and  distresses  to 
an  astonishing  degree  for  want  of  the  assistance  of 
the  other  States.  It  was  to  show  the  evils  we  suf 
fered  since,  as  well  as  before,  the  establishment  of 
the  Confederation,  from  being  compelled  to  support 
the  burthen  of  the  war ;  that  requisitions  have  been 
unable  to  call  forth  the  resources  of  the  country; 
that  requisitions  have  been  the  cause  of  a  principal 
part  of  our  calamities;  that  the  system  is  defective 
and  rotten,  and  ought  for  ever  to  be  banished  from 
our  government.  It  was  necessary — with  deference 
to  the  honorable  gentleman — to  bring  forward  these 
important  proofs  of  our  argument  without  consult 
ing  the  feelings  of  any  man.  That  the  human  pas- 

1  Gov.  Clinton. 


Convention  of  New  York  75 

sions  should  flow  from  one  extreme  to  another,  I 
allow,  is  natural.  Hence  the  mad  project  of  creat 
ing  a  dictator.  But  it  is  equally  true  that  this 
project  was  never  ripened  into  a  deliberate  and 
extensive  design.  When  I  heard  of  it,  it  met  my 
instant  disapprobation.  The  honorable  gentleman's 
opposition,  too,  is  known  and  applauded.  But  why 
bring  these  things  into  remembrance?  Why  affect 
to  compare  this  temporary  effusion  with  the  seri 
ous  sentiments  our  fellow-citizens  entertained  of  the 
national  weakness?  The  gentleman  has  made  a  dec 
laration  of  his  wishes  for  a  strong  Federal  Govern 
ment.  I  hope  this  is  the  wish  of  all.  But  why  has 
he  not  given  us  his  ideas  of  the  nature  of  this  govern 
ment,  which  is  the  object  of  his  wishes?  Why  does 
he  not  describe  it?  We  have  proposed  a  system 
which  we  supposed  would  answer  the  purposes  of 
strength  and  safety.  The  gentleman  objects  to  it 
without  pointing  out  the  grounds  on  which  his  ob 
jections  are  founded,  or  showing  us  a  better  form. 
These  general  surmises  never  lead  to  the  discovery 
of  the  truth.  It  is  to  be  desired  that  the  gentleman 
would  explain  particularly  the  errors  in  this  system, 
and  furnish  us  with  their  proper  remedies.  The 
committee  remember  that  a  grant  of  an  impost  to 
the  United  States  for  twenty-five  years  was  requested 
by  Congress.  Though  it  was  a  very  small  addition  of 
power  to  the  Federal  Government,  it  was  opposed 
in  this  State  without  any  reasons  being  offered.  The 
dissent  of  New  York  and  Rhode  Island  frustrated  a 
most  important  measure.  The  gentleman  says  he 
was  for  granting  the  impost ;  yet  he  acknowledges  he 


76  Alexander  Hamilton 

could  not  agree  to  the  mode  recommended.  But  it 
is  well  known  that  Congress  had  declared  that  they 
could  not  receive  the  accession  of  the  States  upon 
any  other  plan  than  that  proposed.  In  such  cases, 
propositions  for  altering  the  plan  amounted  to  a 
positive  rejection.  At  this  time,  sir,  we  were  told  it 
was  dangerous  to  grant  powers  to  Congress ;  did  this 
general  argument  indicate  a  disposition  to  grant  the 
impost  in  any  shape?  I  should  myself  have  been 
averse  to  the  granting  of  very  extensive  powers ;  but 
the  impost  was  justly  considered  as  the  only  means 
of  supporting  the  Union.  We  did  not  then  contem 
plate  a  fundamental  change  in  government.  From 
my  sense  of  the  gentlemen's  integrity,  I  am  bound 
to  believe  they  are  attached  to  a  strong,  united  gov 
ernment  ;  and  yet  I  find  it  difficult  to  draw  this  con 
clusion  from  their  conduct  or  their  reasonings. 

Sir,  with  respect  to  the  subject  of  revenue,  which 
was  debated  yesterday,  it  was  asserted  that,  in  all 
matters  of  taxation,  except  in  the  article  of  imposts, 
the  united  and  individual  States  had  a  concurrent 
jurisdiction;  that  the  State  governments  had  an 
independent  authority  to  draw  revenues  from  every 
source  but  one.  The  truth  of  these  positions  will 
appear  on  a  slight  investigation.  I  maintain  that 
the  word  supreme  imports  no  more  than  this — that 
the  Constitution  and  laws  made  in  pursuance  there 
of  cannot  be  controlled  or  defeated  by  any  other 
law.  The  acts  of  the  United  States,  therefore,  will 
be  absolutely  obligatory  as  to  all  the  proper  ob 
jects  and  powers  of  the  General  Government.  The 
States,  as  well  as  individuals,  are  bound  by  these 


Convention  of  New  York  77 

laws;  but  the  laws  of  Congress  are  restricted  to 
a  certain  sphere,  and  when  they  depart  from  this 
sphere,  they  are  no  longer  supreme  or  binding.  In 
the  same  manner  the  States  have  certain  independ 
ent  powers,  in  which  their  laws  are  supreme;  for  ex 
ample,  in  making  and  executing  laws  concerning  the 
punishment  of  certain  crimes,  such  as  murder,  theft, 
etc.,  the  States  cannot  be  controlled.  With  respect 
to  certain  other  objects,  the  powers  of  the  two  gov 
ernments  are  concurrent  yet  supreme.  I  instanced 
yesterday  a  tax  on  a  specific  article.  Both  might 
lay  the  tax;  both  might  collect  it  without  clashing 
or  interference.  If  the  individual  should  be  unable 
to  pay  both,  the  first  seizer  would  hold  the  property. 
Here  the  laws  are  not  in  the  way  of  each  other;  they 
are  independent  and  supreme.  The  case  is  like  that 
of  two  creditors:  each  has  a  distinct  demand;  the 
debtor  is  held  equally  for  the  payment  of  both. 
Their  suits  are  independent;  and  if  the  debtor  can 
not  pay  both,  he  who  takes  the  first  step  secures  the 
debt.  The  individual  is  precisely  in  the  same  situa 
tion,  whether  he  pays  such  a  sum  to  one,  or  to  two. 
No  more  will  be  required  of  him  to  supply  the  public 
wants  than  he  has  ability  to  afford.  That  the  States 
have  an  undoubted  right  to  lay  taxes  in  all  cases 
in  which  they  are  not  prohibited,  is  a  position 
founded  on  the  obvious  and  important  principle  in 
confederated  governments,  that  whatever  is  not  ex 
pressly  given  to  the  federal  head  is  reserved  to  the 
members.  The  truth  of  this  principle  must  strike 
every  intelligent  mind.  In  the  first  formation  of 
government,  by  the  association  of  individuals,  every 


78  Alexander  Hamilton 

power  of  the  community  is  delegated,  because  the 
government  is  to  extend  to  every  possible  object; 
nothing  is  reserved  but  the  inalienable  rights  of  man 
kind  :  but  when  a  number  of  these  societies  unite  for 
certain  purposes,  the  rule  is  different,  and  from  the 
plainest  reason  they  have  already  delegated  their 
sovereignty  and  their  powers  to  their  several  gov 
ernments;  and  these  cannot  be  recalled  and  given 
to  another  without  an  express  act.  I  submit  to  the 
committee  whether  this  reasoning  is  not  conclusive. 
Unless,  therefore,  we  find  that  the  powers  of  taxa 
tion  are  exclusively  granted,  we  must  conclude  that 
there  remains  a  concurrent  authority.  Let  us,  then, 
inquire  if  the  Constitution  gives  such  exclusive  pow 
ers  to  the  General  Government.  Sir,  there  is  not  a 
syllable  in  it  that  favors  this  idea;  not  a  word  im 
porting  an  exclusive  grant,  except  in  the  article  of 
imposts.  I  am  supported  in  my  general  position 
by  this  very  exception.  If  the  States  are  pro 
hibited  from  laying  duties  on  imports,  the  implica 
tion  is  clear.  Now,  what  proportion  will  the  duties 
on  imports  bear  to  the  other  ordinary  resources  of 
the  country?  We  may  now  say  one  third;  but  this 
will  not  be  the  case  long.  As  our  manufactures  in 
crease,  foreign  importations  must  lessen.  Here  are 
two  thirds,  at  least,  of  the  resources  of  our  country 
open  to  the  State  governments.  Can  it  be  imag 
ined,  then,  that  the  States  will  lose  their  existence 
or  importance  for  want  of  revenues?  The  pro 
priety  of  Congress  possessing  an  exclusive  power 
over  the  impost  appears  from  the  necessity  of  their 
having  a  considerable  portion  of  our  resources  to 


Convention  of  New  York  79 

pledge  as  a  fund  for  the  reduction  of  the  debts  of  the 
United  States.  When  you  have  given  a  power  of 
taxation  to  the  General  Government,  none  of  the 
States  individually  will  be  holden  for  the  discharge 
of  the  Federal  obligations ;  the  burden  will  be  on  the 
Union. 

The  gentleman  says  that  the  operation  of  the 
taxes  will  exclude  the  States  on  this  ground — that 
the  demands  of  the  community  are  always  equal  to 
its  resources;  that  Congress  will  find  a  use  for  all 
the  money  the  people  can  pay.  This  observation,  if 
designed  as  a  general  rule,  is  in  every  view  unjust. 
Does  he  suppose  the  General  Government  will  want 
all  the  money  the  people  can  furnish,  and  also  that 
the  State  governments  will  want  all  the  money  the 
people  can  furnish?  What  contradiction  is  this! 
But  if  the  maxim  be  true,  how  does  the  wealth  of  the 
country  ever  increase?  How  are  the  people  enabled 
to  accumulate  fortunes?  Do  the  burdens  regularly 
augment  as  its  inhabitants  grow  prosperous  and 
happy?  But  if,  indeed,  all  the  resources  are  re 
quired  for  the  protection  of  the  people,  it  follows 
that  the  protecting  power  should  have  access  to 
them.  The  only  difficulty  lies  in  the  want  of  re 
sources.  If  they  are  adequate,  the  operation  will  be 
easy;  if  they  are  not,  taxation  must  be  restrained. 
Will  this  be  the  fate  of  the  State  taxes  alone?  Cer 
tainly  not.  The  people  will  say,  No.  What  will  be 
the  conduct  of  the  national  rulers?  The  considera 
tion  will  not  be,  that  our  imposing  the  tax  will  de 
stroy  the  States,  for  this  cannot  be  effected;  but 
that  it  will  distress  the  people  whom  we  represent, 


8o  Alexander  Hamilton 

and  whose  protectors  we  are.  It  is  unjust  to  sup 
pose  they  will  be  altogether  destitute  of  virtue  and 
prudence;  it  is  unfair  to  presume  that  the  repre 
sentatives  of  the  people  will  be  disposed  to  tyrannize 
in  one  government  more  than  in  another.  If  we  are 
convinced  that  the  National  Legislature  will  pursue 
a  system  of  measures  unfavorable  to  the  interests  of 
the  people,  we  ought  to  have  no  general  government 
at  all.  But  if  we  unite,  it  will  be  for  the  accom 
plishment  of  great  purposes;  these  demand  great 
resources  and  great  powers.  There  are  certain  ex 
tensive  and  uniform  objects  of  revenue  which  the 
United  States  will  improve,  and  to  which  if  possible 
they  will  confine  themselves.  Those  objects  which 
are  more  limited,  and  in  respect  to  which  the  cir 
cumstances  of  the  State  differ,  will  be  reserved  for 
their  use;  a  great  variety  of  articles  will  be  in  this 
last  class  of  objects,  to  which  only  the  State  laws 
will  properly  apply.  To  ascertain  this  division  of  ob 
jects  is  the  proper  business  of  legislation;  it  would 
be  absurd  to  fix  it  in  the  Constitution,  both  because 
it  would  be  too  extensive  and  intricate,  and  because 
alteration  of  circumstances  must  render  a  change  of 
the  division  indispensable. 

Constitutions  should  consist  only  of  general  pro 
visions;  the  reason  is  that  they  must  necessarily  be 
permanent,  and  that  they  cannot  calculate  for  the 
possible  change  of  things.  I  know  that  the  States 
must  have  their  resources;  but  I  contend  that  it 
would  be  improper  to  point  them  out,  particularly 
in  the  Constitution.  Sir,  it  has  been  said  that  a  poll 
tax  is  a  tyrannical  tax;  but  the  Legislature  of  this 


Convention  of  New  York  81 

State  can  lay  it  whenever  they  please.  Does,  then, 
our  Constitution  authorize  tyranny?  I  am  as  much 
opposed  to  capitation  as  any  man.  Yet  who  can 
deny  that  there  may  exist  certain  circumstances 
which  will  render  this  tax  necessary?  In  the  course 
of  a  war  it  may  be  necessary  to  lay  hold  of  every 
resource;  and  for  a  certain  period  the  people  may 
submit  to  it.  But  on  removal  of  the  danger,  or 
return  of  peace,  the  general  sense  of  the  commun 
ity  would  abolish  it.  The  United  Netherlands  were 
obliged,  on  an  emergency,  to  give  up  one  twentieth 
of  their  property  to  the  government.  It  has  been 
said  that  it  will  be  impossible  to  exercise  this  power 
of  taxation.  If  it  cannot  be  exercised  why  be 
alarmed?  But  the  gentlemen  say  that  the  difficulty 
of  executing  it  with  moderation  will  necessarily 
drive  the  government  into  despotic  measures.  Here, 
again,  they  are  in  the  old  track  of  jealousy  and  con 
jecture.  Whenever  the  people  feel  the  hand  of  des 
potism,  they  will  not  regard  forms  and  parchments. 
But  the  gentlemen's  premises  are  as  false  as  their 
conclusion.  No  one  reason  can  be  offered  why  the 
exercise  of  the  power  should  be  impracticable.  No 
one  difficulty  can  be  pointed  out  which  will  not 
apply  to  our  State  governments.  Congress  will  have 
every  means  of  knowledge  that  any  Legislature 
can  have.  From  general  observations,  and  from 
the  revenue  systems  of  the  several  States,  they  will 
derive  information  as  to  the  most  eligible  modes  of 
taxation.  If  a  land  tax  is  the  object,  cannot  Con 
gress  procure  as  perfect  a  valuation  as  any  other 
assembly?  Can  they  not  have  all  the  necessary 


VOL.  II.—  6. 


82  Alexander  Hamilton 

officers  for  assessment  and  collections?  Where  is 
the  difficulty?  Where  is  the  evil?  They  never  can 
oppress  a  particular  State  by  an  unequal  imposition, 
because  the  Constitution  has  provided  a  fixed  ratio, 
a  uniform  rule,  by  which  this  must  be  regulated. 
The  system  will  be  founded  upon  the  most  easy  and 
equal  principles — to  draw  as  much  as  possible  from 
direct  taxation,  to  lay  the  principal  burdens  on  the 
wealthy,  etc.  Even  ambitious  and  unscrupulous 
men  will  form  their  system  so  as  to  draw  forth  the 
resources  of  the  country  in  the  most  favorable  and 
gentle  methods,  because  such  will  ever  be  the  most 
productive.  They  never  can  hope  for  success  by 
adopting  those  arbitrary  modes  which  have  been 
used  in  some  of  the  States.  A  gentleman  yesterday 
passed  many  encomiums  on  the  character  and  opera 
tions  of  the  State  governments.  The  question  has 
not  been,  whether  their  laws  have  produced  happy 
or  unhappy  effects.  The  character  of  our  Con 
federation  is  the  subject  of  our  controversy.  But 
the  gentleman  concludes  too  hastily.  In  many  of 
the  States,  government  has  not  had  a  salutary  op 
eration.  Not  only  Rhode  Island,  but  several  others, 
have  been  guilty  of  indiscretions  and  misconduct — 
of  acts  which  have  produced  misfortunes  and  dis 
honor.  I  grant  that  the  government  of  New  York 
has  operated  well,  and  I  ascribe  it  to  the  influence 
of  those  excellent  principles  in  which  the  proposed 
Constitution  and  our  own  are  so  congenial. 

We  are  sensible  that  private  credit  is  much  lower 
in  some  States  than  it  is  in  ours.  What  is  the  cause 
of  this?  Why  is  it,  at  the  present  period,  so  low, 


Convention  of  New  York  83 

even  in  this  State?  Why  is  the  value  of  our  land 
depreciated?  It  is  said  that  there  is  a  scarcity  of 
money  in  the  community.  I  do  not  believe  this 
scarcity  to  be  so  great  as  represented.  It  may  not 
appear;  it  may  be  retained  by  its  holders;  but 
nothing  more  than  stability  and  confidence  in  the 
government  is  requisite  to  draw  it  into  circulation. 
It  is  acknowledged  that  the  General  Government 
has  not  answered  its  purposes.  Why?  We  attrib 
ute  it  to  the  defects  of  the  revenue  system.  But 
the  gentlemen  say,  the  requisitions  have  not  been 
obeyed,  because  the  States  were  impoverished. 
This  is  a  kind  of  reasoning  that  astonishes  me. 
The  records  of  this  State — the  records  of  Congress 
—  prove  that,  during  the  war,  New  York  had  the 
best  reason  to  complain  of  non-compliance  of  the 
other  States.  I  appeal  to  the  gentleman.  Have 
the  States  who  have  suffered  least  contributed  most  ? 
No,  sir;  the  fact  is  directly  the  reverse.  This  con 
sideration  is  sufficient  entirely  to  refute  the  gentle 
man's  reasoning.  Requisitions  will  ever  be  attended 
with  the  same  effects.  This  depends  on  principles 
of  human  nature  that  are  as  infallible  as  any  mathe 
matical  calculations.  States  will  contribute,  or  not, 
according  to  their  circumstances  or  interests.  They 
will  all  be  inclined  to  throw  off  their  burdens  of  gov 
ernment  upon  their  neighbors.  These  positions  have 
been  so  fully  illustrated  and  proved  in  former  stages 
of  this  debate,  that  nothing  need  be  added.  Un 
answerable  experience — stubborn  facts — have  sup 
ported  and  fixed  them.  Sir,  to  what  situation  is 
our  Congress  now  reduced?  It  is  notorious  that 


84  Alexander  Hamilton 

with  the  most  difficulty  they  maintain  their  ordi 
nary  officers,  and  support  the  mere  form  of  a  Fed 
eral  government.  How  do  we  stand  with  respect  to 
foreign  nations?  It  is  a  fact  that  should  strike  us 
with  shame,  that  we  are  obliged  to  borrow  money  in 
order  to  pay  the  interest  of  our  debts.  It  is  a  fact 
that  these  debts  are  every  day  accumulating  by  com 
pound  interest.  This,  sir,  will  one  day  endanger  the 
peace  of  our  country,  and  expose  us  to  vicissitudes 
the  most  alarming.  Such  is  the  character  of  requi 
sitions — such  the  melancholy,  dangerous,  condition 
to  which  they  have  reduced  us.  Now,  sir,  after  this 
full  and  fair  experiment,  with  what  countenance  do 
gentlemen  come  forward  to  recommend  the  ruinous 
principle,  and  make  it  the  basis  of  a  new  govern 
ment?  Why  do  they  affect  to  cherish  this  political 
demon,  and  present  it  once  more  to  our  embraces? 
The  gentleman  observed,  that  we  cannot,  even  in  a 
single  State,  collect  the  whole  of  a  tax;  some  coun 
ties  will  necessarily  be  deficient.  In  the  same  man 
ner,  says  he,  some  States  will  be  delinquent.  If  this 
reasoning  were  just,  I  should  expect  to  see  the  States 
pay,  like  the  counties,  in  proportion  to  their  ability* 
which  is  not  the  fact.  I  shall  proceed  now  more 
particularly  to  the  proposition  before  the  committee. 
This  clearly  admits  that  the  unlimited  power  of  tax 
ation,  which  I  have  been  contending  for,  is  proper. 
It  declares  that,  after  the  States  have  refused  to 
comply  with  the  requisitions,  the  General  Govern 
ment  may  enforce  its  demands.  While  the  gentle 
man's  proposition  and  principle  admit  this  in  its 
fullest  latitude,  the  whole  course  of  the  States  is 


Convention  of  New  York  85 

against  it.  The  mode  they  point  out  would  involve 
many  inconveniences  against  which  they  would  wish 
to  guard.  Suppose  the  gentleman's  scheme  should 
be  adopted;  would  not  all  the  resources  of  the 
country  be  equally  in  the  power  of  Congress?  The 
States  can  have  but  one  opportunity  of  refusal. 
After  having  passed  through  the  empty  ceremony 
of  a  requisition,  the  General  Government  can  en 
force  all  its  demands  without  limitation  or  resistance. 
The  States  will  either  comply  or  they  will  not.  If 
they  comply,  they  are  bound  to  collect  the  whole  of 
the  tax  from  the  citizens.  The  people  must  pay  it. 
What,  then,  will  be  the  disadvantage  of  its  being 
levied  and  collected  by  Congress,  in  the  first  in 
stance?  It  has  been  proved,  as  far  as  probabilities 
can  go,  that  the  Federal  Government  will,  in  gen 
eral,  take  the  laws  of  the  several  States  as  its  rule, 
and  pursue  those  measures  to  which  the  people  are 
most  accustomed.  But  if  the  States  do  not  comply, 
what  is  the  consequence?  If  the  power  of  a  com 
pulsion  be  a  misfortune  to  the  State,  they  must  now 
suffer  it  without  opposition  or  complaint.  I  shall 
show,  too,  that  they  must  feel  it  in  an  aggrava 
ted  degree.  It  may  frequently  happen  that,  though 
the  States  formally  comply  with  the  requisitions, 
the  avails  will  not  be  fully  realized  by  Congress ;  the 
States  may  be  dilatory  in  the  collection  and  pay 
ment,  and  may  form  excuses  for  not  paying  the 
whole.  There  may  also  be  partial  compliances, 
which  will  subject  the  Union  to  inconveniences. 
Congress,  therefore,  in  laying  the  tax,  will  calculate 
for  these  losses  and  inconveniences.  They  will 


86  Alexander  Hamilton 

make  allowances  for  the  delays  and  delinquencies 
of  the  States,  and  apportion  their  burdens  accord 
ingly.  They  will  be  induced  to  demand  more  than 
their  actual  wants.  In  these  circumstances  the 
requisitions  will  be  made  upon  calculations  in  some 
measure  arbitrary.  Upon  the  constitutional  plan 
the  only  inquiry  will  be:  How  much  is  actually 
wanted?  and  how  much  can  the  object  bear,  or  the 
people  pay?  On  the  gentleman's  scheme  it  will  be: 
What  will  be  the  probable  deficiencies  of  the  States  ? 
for  we  must  increase  our  demands  in  proportion, 
whatever  the  public  wants  may  be,  or  whatever  may 
be  the  abilities  of  the  people.  Now,  suppose  the 
requisition  is  totally  rejected ;  it  must  be  levied  upon 
the  citizens  without  reserve.  This  will  be  like  in 
flicting  a  penalty  upon  the  States.  It  will  place 
them  in  the  light  of  criminals.  Will  they  suffer  this  ? 
Will  Congress  presume  so  far  ?  If  the  States  solemnly 
declare  they  will  not  comply,  does  not  this  imply  a 
determination  not  to  permit  the  exercise  of  the 
coercive  power?  The  gentlemen  cannot  escape  the 
dilemma  into  which  their  own  reasoning  leads  them. 
If  the  States  comply,  the  people  must  be  taxed;  if 
they  do  not  comply,  the  people  must  equally  be 
taxed.  The  burden  in  either  case  will  be  the  same — 
the  difficulty  of  collecting  the  same.  Sir,  if  these 
operations  are  merely  harmless  and  indifferent,  why 
play  the  ridiculous  farce?  If  they  are  inconvenient, 
why  subject  us  to  their  evils?  It  is  infinitely  more 
eligible  to  lay  a  tax  originally,  which  will  have  uni 
form  effects  throughout  the  Union,  which  will  op 
erate  equally  and  silently.  The  United  States  will 


Convention  of  New  York  87 

then  be  able  to  ascertain  their  resources,  and  to  act 
with  vigor  and  decision.  All  hostility  between  the 
governments  will  be  prevented.  The  people  will 
contribute  regularly  and  gradually  for  the  support 
of  the  government,  and  all  odious,  retrospective  in 
quiries  will  be  precluded.  But  the  ill  effects  of  the 
gentleman's  plan  do  not  terminate  here.  Our  own 
State  will  suffer  peculiar  disadvantages  from  the 
measure.  One  provision  in  the  amendment  is,  that 
no  direct  taxes  shall  be  laid  till  after  the  impost  and 
excise  shall  be  found  insufficient  for  public  exigen 
cies;  and  that  no  excise  shall  be  laid  on  articles 
of  the  growth  or  manufacture  of  the  United  States. 
Sir,  the  favorable  maritime  situation  of  this  State, 
and  our  large  and  valuable  tracts  of  unsettled  land, 
will  ever  lead  us  to  commerce  and  agriculture  as  our 
proper  objects.  Unconfmed,  and  tempted  by  the 
prospect  of  easy  subsistence  and  independence,  our 
citizens,  as  the  country  populates,  will  retreat  back, 
and  cultivate  the  western  parts  of  our  State.  Our 
population,  though  extensive,  will  never  be  crowded ; 
and  consequently  we  shall  remain  an  importing  and 
agricultural  State.  Now,  what  will  be  the  operation 
of  the  proposed  plan?  The  General  Government, 
restrained  by  the  Constitution  from  a  free  applica 
tion  to  other  resources,  will  push  imposts  to  an  ex 
treme.  Will  excessive  impositions  on  our  commerce 
be  favorable  to  the  policy  of  this  State?  Will  they 
not  directly  oppose  our  interests?  Similar  will  be 
the  operation  of  the  other  clause  of  the  amendment, 
relative  to  excise.  Our  neighbors,  not  possessed  of 
our  advantages  for  commerce  and  agriculture,  will 


88  Alexander  Hamilton 

become  manufacturers;  their  property  will,  in  a 
great  measure,  be  vested  in  the  commodities  of  then- 
own  productions,  but  a  small  proportion  will  be  in 
trade  or  in  lands.  Thus,  on  the  gentleman's  scheme, 
they  will  be  almost  free  from  burthens,  while  we 
shall  be  loaded  with  them.  Does  not  the  partiality 
of  this  strike  every  one?  Can  gentlemen  who  are 
laboring  for  the  interest  of  their  State,  seriously 
bring  forward  such  propositions?  It  is  the  interest 
of  New  York  that  those  articles  should  be  taxed,  in 
the  production  of  which  the  other  States  exceed  us. 
If  we  are  not  a  manufacturing  people,  excises  on 
manufactures  will  ever  be  for  our  advantage.  This 
position  is  indisputable.  Sir,  I  agree  that  it  is  not 
good  policy  to  lay  excises  to  any  considerable 
amount,  while  our  manufactures  are  in  their  in 
fancy;  but  are  they  always  to  be  so?  In  some  of 
the  States  they  already  begin  to  make  considerable 
progress.  In  Connecticut,  such  encouragement  is 
given  as  will  soon  distinguish  that  State.  Even  at 
the  present  period,  there  is  one  article  from  which  a 
revenue  may  very  properly  be  drawn:  I  speak  of 
ardent  spirits.  New  England  manufactures  more 
than  a  hundred  gallons  to  our  one;  consequently, 
an  excise  on  spirits  at  the  still-head  would  make 
those  States  contribute  in  a  vastly  greater  propor 
tion  than  ourselves.  In  every  view,  excises  on  do 
mestic  manufacture  would  benefit  New  York.  But 
the  gentleman  would  defeat  the  advantages  of  our 
situation,  by  drawing  upon  us  all  the  burdens  of 
government.  The  nature  of  our  Union  requires  that 
we  should  give  up  our  State  impost.  The  amend- 


Convention  of  New  York  89 

ment  would  forfeit  every  other  advantage.  This 
part  of  the  Constitution  should  not  be  touched. 
The  excises  were  designed  as  a  recompense  to  the 
importing  States  for  relinquishing  their  imposts. 
Why,  then,  should  we  reject  the  benefits  conferred 
upon  us?  Why  should  we  run  blindly  against  our 
own  interest? 

Sir,  I  shall  no  further  enlarge  on  this  argument; 
my  exertions  have  already  exhausted  me.  I  have 
persevered  from  an  anxious  desire  to  give  the  com 
mittee  the  most  complete  conception  of  this  subject. 
I  fear,  however,  that  I  have  not  been  so  successful 
as  to  bestow  upon  it  that  full  and  clear  light  of 
which  it  is  susceptible.  I  shall  conclude  with  a  few 
remarks  by  way  of  an  apology.  I  am  apprehensive, 
sir,  that,  in  the  warmth  of  my  feelings,  I  may  have 
uttered  expressions  which  were  too  vehement.  If 
such  has  been  my  language  it  was  from  the  habit  of 
using  strong  phrases  to  express  my  ideas ;  and,  above 
all,  from  the  interesting  nature  of  the  subject.  I 
have  ever  condemned  those  cold,  unfeeling  hearts, 
which  no  object  can  animate.  I  condemn  those  in 
different  mortals,  who  either  never  form  opinions, 
or  never  make  them  known.  I  confess,  sir,  that  on 
no  subject  has  my  breast  been  filled  with  stronger 
emotions  or  more  anxious  concern.  If  any  thing 
has  escaped  me,  which  may  be  construed  into  a  per 
sonal  reflection,  I  beg  the  gentlemen,  once  for  all,  to 
be  assured  that  I  have  no  design  to  wound  the  feel 
ings  of  any  one  who  is  opposed  to  me.  While  I  am 
making  these  observations,  I  cannot  but  take  notice 
of  some  expressions  which  have  fallen  in  the  course 


90  Alexander  Hamilton 

of  the  debate.  It  has  been  said  that  ingenious  men 
may  say  ingenious  things,  and  that  those  who  are 
interested  in  raising  the  few  upon  the  ruins  of  the 
many,  may  give  to  every  cause  an  appearance  of 
justice.  I  know  not  whether  these  insinuations 
allude  to  the  characters  of  any  who  are  present,  or 
to  any  of  the  reasonings  of  the  House.  I  presume 
that  the  gentlemen  would  not  ungenerously  impute 
such  motives  to  those  who  differ  from  themselves. 
I  declare  I  know  not  any  set  of  men  who  are  to 
derive  peculiar  advantages  from  this  Constitution. 
Were  any  permanent  honors  or  emoluments  to  be 
secured  to  the  families  of  those  who  have  been  active 
in  this  cause,  there  might  be  some  grounds  for  sus 
picion.  But  what  reasonable  man,  for  the  precarious 
enjoyment  of  rank  and  power,  would  establish  a  sys 
tem  which  would  reduce  his  nearest  friends  and  his 
posterity  to  slavery  and  ruin?  If  the  gentlemen 
reckon  me  amongst  the  obnoxious  few,  if  they  im 
agine  that  I  contemplate  with  ambitious  eye  the 
immediate  honors  of  the  government,  yet  let  them 
consider  that  I  have  my  friends,  my  family,  my 
children,  to  whom  ties  of  nature  and  of  habit  have 
attached  me.  If,  to-day,  I  am  among  the  favored 
few,  my  children,  to-morrow,  may  be  among  the 
oppressed;  these  dear  pledges  of  my  patriotism  may, 
at  a  future  day,  be  suffering  the  severe  distresses  to 
which  my  ambition  has  reduced  them.  The  changes 
in  the  human  condition  are  uncertain  and  frequent; 
many,  on  whom  fortune  has  bestowed  her  favors,  may 
trace  their  family  to  a  more  unprosperous  station; 
and  many,  who  are  now  in  obscurity,  may  look  back 


Convention  of  New  York  91 

upon  the  affluence  and  exalted  rank  of  their  ances 
tors.  But  I  will  no  longer  trespass  on  your  indul 
gence.  I  have  troubled  the  committee  with  these 
observations,  to  show  that  it  cannot  be  the  wish  of 
any  reasonable  man  to  establish  a  government  un 
friendly  to  the  liberties  of  the  people.  Gentlemen 
ought  not,  then,  to  presume  that  the  advocates  of 
this  Constitution  are  influenced  by  ambitious  views. 
The  suspicion,  sir,  is  unjust;  the  charge  is  unchar 
itable.1 — Elliot's  Debates,  ii. 


BRIEF   OF   ARGUMENT  ON   THE   CONSTITUTION   OF  THE 
UNITED   STATES 

1788 

A      I.  A  republic,  a  word  used  in  various  senses. 

Has   been   applied  to   aristocracies    and  mon 
archies. 

1.  To  Rome,  under  the  kings. 

2.  To  Sparta,  though  a  Senate  for  life. 

3.  To  Carthage,  though  the  same. 

4.  To    United    Netherlands,    though    Stadt- 

holder,  hereditary  nobles. 

5.  To  Poland,  though  aristocracy  and  mon 

archy. 

6.  To    Great    Britain,    though    monarchy, 


1  In  the  edition  of  1851,  portions  only  are  given  of  Hamilton's 
speeches  in  the  New  York  Convention.  The  gaps  have  been  filled  here 
from  Elliot's  Debates,  and  the  complete  series  is  given  in  exact  ac 
cordance  with  the  official  report. 


92  Alexander  Hamilton 

II.  Again,  great  confusion  about  the  words  democ 
racy,  aristocracy,  monarchy. 

1.  a.  Democracy  defined  by  some,  Rousseau, 

etc.,  a  government  exercised  by  the  col' 
lective  body  of  the  people. 
b.  Delegation  of  their  power  has  been  made 
the  criterion  of  aristocracy. 

2.  Aristocracy  has  been  used  to  designate 

governments. 

a.  Where  an  independent  few  possessed 

sovereignty. 

b.  Where    the    representatives    of    the 

people  possessed  it. 
3.  Monarchy,  where  sovereignty  in  the  hands 

of  a  single  man. 

ElPGeneral  idea — Independent  in  his  situation ;  in  any 
other  sense  would  apply  to  State  of  New  York. 

III.  Democracy  in  my  sense,  where  the  whole  power  of 

the  government  in  the  people. 

1.  Whether  exercised  by  themselves,  or 

2.  By  their  representatives,  chosen  by  them  either 

mediately  or  immediately  and  legally  ac 
countable  to  them. 

IV.  Aristocracy,    where   whole    sovereignty   is  per 

manently  in  the  hands  of  a  few  for  life  or 
hereditary. 
V.  Monarchy,  where  the  whole  sovereignty  is  in  the 

hands  of  one  man  for  life  or  hereditary. 
VI.  Mixed  government,  where  these  three  principles 

unite. 

B      I.  Consequence,  the  proposed  government  a  repre 
sentative  democracy. 

1.  House  of  Representatives  directly  chosen  by 

the  people  for  two  years. 

2.  Senate  indirectly  chosen  by  them  for  six  years. 


Convention  of  New  York  93 

3.  President  indirectly  chosen  by  them  for  four 

years. 

t^T"  Thus  legislative  and  executive  representatives  of 
the  people. 

4.  Judicial  power,  representatives  of  the  people 

indirectly  chosen  during  good  behavior. 

5.  All  officers  indirect  choice  of  the  people. 
|3F~  Constitution  revocable  and  alterable  by  the  people. 

C  I.  This  representative  democracy  as  far  as  is  con 
sistent  with  its  genius  has  all  the  features  of 
good  government.  These  features  are: 

1.  An  immediate  and  operative  representation  of 

the  people,  which  is  found  in  the  House  of 
Representatives . 

2.  Stability  and  wisdom,  which  is  found  in  the 

Senate. 

3.  A  vigorous  executive,  which  is  found  in  the 

President. 

4.  An  independent  judicial,  which  is  found  in  the 

Supreme  Court,  etc. 

KSIF0  A  separation  of  the  essential  powers  of  govern 
ment.     Ascertain  the  sense  of  the  maxim: 
One  department  must  not  wholly  possess  the 
powers  of  another. 
=  Montesquieu. 
=  British  Government. 

II.  Departments  of  power  must  be  separated,  yet  so 
as  to  check  each  other. 

1.  Legislative. 

2.  Legislative  executive. 

3.  Judicial  legislative. 

4.  Legislative  judicial. 

IST3  All  this  done  in  the  proposed  Constitution. 

i.  Legislative  in  the  Congress,  yet  checked  by 
negative  of  the  executive. 


94  Alexander  Hamilton 

2.  Executive  in  the  President,  yet  checked  by 

impeachment  of  Congress. 

3.  Judicial  check  upon  legislative,  or  interpreta 

tion  of  laws. 

4.  And  checked  by  legislative  through  impeach 

ment. 
D      I.  Can  such  a  government  apply  to  so  extensive  a 

territory? 

II.  Despotic  government  for  a  large  country  to  be 
examined. 

Review 

I.  Full  House  of  Representatives  chosen  every  second 

year,  etc. 

II.  Senate  for  six  years  by  Legislatures. 
Rotation  every  two  years. 
Probable  increase. 

III.  Executive  manner  of  appointment. 

Compensation . 
Negotiation  of  treaties. 
Nomination  of  officers. 

IV.  Judicial  power.     Constitution  of  judges. 

Extent  of  powers. 
Inferior  courts. 
Trial  by  jury. 
Criminal  cases. 

Powers 

I.  To  provide  revenue  for  the  common  defence. 
II.  To  regulate  commerce. 

III.  To  declare  war. 

IV.  To  raise  and  support  armies. 
V.  Admission  of  new  States. 

VI.  Disposal  of  property. 


Convention  of  New  York  95 

Miscellaneous  Advantages 

I.  To  prohibit  importation  of  slaves  prior  to  1808. 
II.  Account  to  be  rendered  of  expenditure  of  moneys. 

III.  No  State  shall  emit  bills  of  credit  under  ex-post- 

f  acto  law,  or  law  impairing  the  obligation  of  con 
tracts,  or  grant  title  of  nobility. 

IV.  Definition  of  treason. 

V.  Guaranty  of  republican  governments. 


DRAFT    OF    PROPOSED    RATIFICATION    OF   THE   CONSTI 
TUTION    OF    THE    UNITED    STATES,  WITH 
SPECIFIED   AMENDMENTS.1 

We,  the  delegates  of  the  people  of  the  State  of 
New  York  in  Convention  assembled,  having  maturely 
considered  the  Constitution  for  the  United  States, 
agreed  to  on  the  iyth  day  of  September,  in  the 
year  1787,  at  Philadelphia,  in  the  commonwealth 
of  Pennsylvania,  by  the  Convention  then  and  there 
convened,  and  having  also  seriously  and  deliber 
ately  considered  the  present  situation  of  the  United 
States,  and  being  convinced  that  it  is  advisable  to 
adopt  the  said  Constitution,  do  declare  and  make 
known,  in  the  name  and  behalf  of  the  people  afore 
said,  that  the  powers  granted  in  and  by  the  said 
Constitution,  being  derived  from  the  people  of  the 
United  States,  may  be  resumed  by  them  whenever 
they  shall  judge  it  necessary  to  their  happiness;  that 

1  This  draft  by  Hamilton  was  not  accepted,  but  a  brief  circular- 
letter,  which  was  much  more  unfavorable  to  the  new  scheme,  was 
adopted  and  published. 


96  Alexander  Hamilton 

every  power  not  granted  thereby  remains  either 
to  them  or  their  respective  State  governments,  to 
whom  they  may  have  delegated  the  same;  that 
therefore  no  right  of  any  kind,  either  of  the  people 
of  the  respective  States  or  of  the  said  governments, 
can  be  cancelled,  abridged,  restrained,  or  modified  by 
Congress,  or  by  any  officer  or  department  of  the 
United  States,  except  in  conformity  to  the  powers 
given  by  the  said  Constitution,  that  among  other 
essential  rights,  the  liberty  of  conscience  and  of  the 
press  cannot  be  cancelled  or  abridged  by  any  au 
thority  of  the  United  States. 

With  these  impressions,  with  a  firm  reliance  on 
the  blessing  of  Providence  upon  a  government 
framed  under  circumstances  which  afford  a  new  and 
instructive  example  of  wisdom  and  moderation  to 
mankind;  with  an  entire  conviction  that  it  will  be 
more  prudent  to  rely,  for  whatever  amendments 
may  be  desirable  in  the  said  Constitution,  on  the 
mode  therein  prescribed,  than  either  to  embarrass 
the  Union  or  hazard  dissensions  in  any  part  of  the 
community  by  pursuing  a  different  course,  and  with 
a  full  confidence  that  the  amendments  which  shall 
have  been  proposed  will  receive  an  early  and  mature 
consideration,  and  that  such  of  them  as  may  in  any 
degree  tend  to  the  real  security  and  permanent 
advantage  of  the  people,  will  be  adopted:  We, 
the  said  delegates,  in  the  name  and  behalf  of  the 
PEOPLE  of  this  State,  Do,  by  these  presents,  assent 
to  and  RATIFY  the  Constitution  aforesaid,  hereby 
announcing  to  all  those  whom  it  may  concern, 
that  the  said  Constitution  is  binding  upon  the  said 


Convention  of  New  York  97 

people    according  to  an  authentic  copy  hereunto 
annexed. 

And  to  the  end  that  the  sense  of  the  people  of 
this  State  may  be  manifested  touching  certain  parts 
of  the  said  Constitution,  concerning  which  doubts 
have  been  raised,  we,  the  delegates  aforesaid,  in  the 
name  and  behalf  of  the  people  aforesaid,  do,  by  these 
presents,  further  declare  and  make  known  that, 
according  to  the  true  intent  and  meaning  of  the 
said  Constitution,  Congress  ought  not  to  interpose 
in  the  regulation  of  the  times,  places,  and  manner  of 
holding  elections  for  Senators  and  Representatives, 
except  only  in  such  cases  in  which  the  Legislatures 
of  the  respective  States,  or  any  of  them,  may  neg 
lect,  refuse,  or  be  unable  to  make  provision,  or  for 
the  purpose  of  appointing  a  uniform  time  for  the 
election  of  Representatives;  and  that  the  Legisla 
ture  of  any  State  may,  at  its  discretion,  lay  out  such 
State  into  convenient  districts  for  the  election  of 
Representatives,  and  may  apportion  its  Represen 
tatives  to  and  among  such  districts.  And  also  that, 
except  as  to  duties  on  imports  and  exports — in  the 
Post-office,  and  duties  of  tonnage,  the  United  States 
and  the  States  respectively  have  concurrent  and  co 
equal  authority  to  lay  and  collect  all  taxes  whatever; 
and  therefore  that  neither  of  them  can,  in  any  wise, 
contravene,  control,  or  annul  the  operation  or  execu 
tion  of  any  law  of  the  other  for  the  imposition  or  col 
lection  of  any  tax,  except  as  aforesaid.  And  also  that 
there  must  be  once  in  every  four  years  an  election  of 
the  President  and  Vice-President,  so  that  no  other 
officer  who  may  be  appointed  by  Congress  to  act  as 

VOL.  II.— 7. 


98  Alexander  Hamilton 

President  in  case  of  the  removal,  death,  resignation, 
or  inability  of  the  President  and  Vice- President,  can 
in  any  case  continue  to  act  beyond  the  termination 
of  the  period  for  which  the  last  President  and  Vice- 
President  were  elected;  and  also  that  the  judicial 
power  of  the  United  States,  in  cases  in  which  a  State 
may  be  a  party,  does  not  extend  to  criminal  pros 
ecutions,  or  to  any  suit  by  private  persons  against  a 
State;  and  that  the  appellate  jurisdiction  of  the 
Supreme  Court  cannot  authorize  a  second  trial  of 
any  suit  in  any  criminal  case  whatever,  or  a  second 
trial  of  any  suit  determinable  in  the  course  of  the 
common  law  by  a  jury,  and  which  shall  have  been  so 
determined  in  the  original  cause.  And  lastly,  that 
the  process  of  presentment  and  indictment  by  a  grand 
jury  ought  to  be  observed  in  every  prosecution  for  any 
crime,  as  a  necessary  preliminary  to  the  trial  thereof. 

And  in  order  that  the  foregoing  declarations  and 
Constitution  may  be  recognized  and  inviolably  ob 
served  in  the  administration  of  the  government  of 
the  United  States,  this  Convention,  in  the  name  and 
behalf  of  the  people  aforesaid,  do  hereby  enjoin  upon 
the  Senators  and  Representatives  of  this  State  in  the 
Congress  to  procure,  as  soon  as  may  be  after  the 
meeting  of  Congress,  a  declaratory  act  in  conformity 
to  these  presents. 

We  would  also  agree  to  recommend  the  following 
amendments  to  the  Constitution: 

I.  That  there  shall  be  one  Representative  for 
every  30,000,  according  to  the  enumeration  or  census 
mentioned  in  the  Constitution,  until  the  whole 
number  of  Representatives  amounts  to  two  hundred; 


Convention  of  New  York  99 

after  which  that  number  shall  be  continued  or  in 
creased,  but  not  diminished,  as  Congress  shall  direct, 
and  according  to  such  ratio  as  Congress  shall  fix  in 
conformity  to  the  rule  prescribed  for  the  apportion 
ment  of  Representatives  and  direct  taxes. 

II.  Tliat  the  court  for  the  trial  of  impeachments 
shall  consist  of  the  Senate,  the  judges  of  the  Supreme 
Court  of  the  United  States,  and  the  first  or  senior 
judge  for  the  time  being,  of  the  highest  court  of  gen 
eral  and  ordinary  common-law  jurisdiction  in  each 
State.     That  Congress  shall,  by  standing  laws,  desig 
nate  the  courts  in  the  respective  States  answering 
this   description,   and  in   States  having  no   courts 
exactly  answering  this  description,  shall  designate 
some  other  court,  preferring  such,  if  any  there  be, 
whose  judge  or  judges  may  hold  their  places  during 
good  behavior, — provided  that  not  more  than  one 
judge  shall  come  from  one  State.     That  Congress  be 
authorized  to  pass  laws  for  compensating  the  said 
judges,   and  for  compelling  their  attendance,   and 
that  a  majority  at  least  of  the  said  judges  shall  be 
requisite  to  constituting  said  court.     That  no  per 
son  impeached  shall  sit  as  a  member  thereof.     That 
each  member  shall,  previous  to  the  entering  upon 
any  trial,  take  an  oath  or  affirmation  honestly  and 
impartially  to  hear  and  determine  the  cause;    and 
that of  the  members  present  shall  be  neces 
sary  for  a  conviction. 

III.  That  the  authority  given  to  the  Executives 
of  the  States  to  fill  the  vacancies  of  Senators  be  abol 
ished;   and  that  such  vacancies  be  filled  by  the  re 
spective  Legislatures. 


TOO  Alexander  Hamilton 

IV.  That  the  compensation  for  the  Senators  and 
Representatives  be  ascertained  by  standing  laws; 
and  that  no  alteration  of  the  existing  rate  of  com 
pensation  shall  operate  for  the  benefit  of  the  Repre 
sentatives  until  after  a  subsequent  election  shall 
have  been  had. 

V.  That  no  appropriation  of  money  in  time  of  peace 
for  the  support  of  an  army  shall  be  by  less  than  two- 
thirds  of  the  Representatives  and  Senators  present. 

VI.  That  the  Executive  shall  not  take  the  actual 
command  in  the  field  of  an  army  without  the  pre 
vious  direction  of  Congress. 

VII.  That  each  State  shall  have  power  to  provide 
for  organizing,  arming,  and  disciplining  its  militia, 
when  no  provision  for  that  purpose  shall  have  been 
made  by  Congress,  and  until  such  provision  shall 
have  been  made  that  the  militia  shall  never  be  sub 
jected  to  martial  law,  but  in  time  of  war,  rebellion, 
or  insurrection. 

VIII.  That  the  Journals  of  Congress  shall  be  pub 
lished  at  least  once  a  year,  with  exception  of  such 
parts  relating  to  treaties  or  military  operations  as  in 
the  judgment  of  either  House  shall  require  secrecy. 

IX.  That  the  judicial  power  of  the  United  States 
shall   extend   to    no   controversy  respecting   land, 
unless  it  relate  to  claims  of  territory  or  jurisdic 
tion  between  States,  or  to  claims  of  land  between 
individuals,    or    between    States   and    individuals, 
under  grants  of  different  States. 

X.  That  no  judge  of  the  Supreme  Court  shall  hold 
any  other  office  under  the  United  States  or  any  of 
them. 


ADDRESSES 


101 


ADDRESSES 


NEW  YORK,  February  18,  1789. 

To  the  Supervisors  of  ike  City  of  Albany,   in  the 

County  of  Albany. 

GENTLEMEN: — The  last  Tuesday  of  April  next 
being  the  day  appointed  by  law  for  the  election  of 
a  governor  for  the  ensuing  three  years,  the  great 
importance  of  making  a  wise  choice  in  the  present 
peculiar  situation  of  our  local  and  national  affairs 

1  The  Constitution  having  been  ratified  by  the  necessary  number  of 
States,  the  Federalists  everywhere  made  the  utmost  efforts  to  elect 
Senators  and  Congressmen  who  were  favorable  to  the  new  scheme. 
Nowhere  was  their  task  more  difficult  than  in  New  York.  The  contest 
in  the  Convention  had  been  very  severe,  and  the  ratification  had  been 
carried  only  by  sheer  force  of  argument  and  outside  pressure.  The 
head  and  front  of  the  opposition  was  Governor  Clinton,  a  man  with  a 
very  great  personal  following,  of  strong  will  and  much  ability.  Ham 
ilton  threw  himself  into  the  conflict  with  his  usual  zeal.  He  travelled 
through  the  State,  and  published  the  address  given  above;  and,  not 
content  with  this,  he  sought  to  break  down  Clinton  and  defeat  his  re 
election.  With  this  object  he  published  a  second  address  and  the 
letters  of  "  H.  G.,"  which  follow,  and  which  are  a  sustained  attack  upon 
the  Governor's  whole  course  and  attitude.  Clinton  was  re-elected  by 
a  majority  of  less  than  500,  but  his  power  was  fatally  crippled,  and  the 
opposition  was  demoralized  as  Hamilton  desired.  The  Federalists  on 
their  side  obtained  four  out  of  the  six  Congressmen,  and  subsequently 
the  two  Senators.  These  addresses  and  the  letters  of  "H.  G."  are  not 
of  course  constitutional  arguments,  but  they  are  an  important  part  of 
the  work  which  Hamilton  did  for  the  Constitution,  and  complete  his 
labors  for  a  new  system  of  national  government,  which  began  under 
the  tents  of  the  revolutionary  army,  and  ended  with  the  inauguration 
of  Washington. 

103 


104  Alexander  Hamilton 

appears  to  have  made  a  deep  impression  on  the 
minds  of  considerate  men  in  the  different  parts  of 
the  State. 

On  the  eleventh  instant,  a  numerous  meeting  of 
respectable  inhabitants  was  held  in  this  city  to  con 
sult  on  what  was  best  to  be  done  in  relation  to  that 
object,  and  we  have  been  advised  that  similar  meet 
ings  have  been  held  in  some  other  counties. 

The  meeting  in  this  city  were  unanimous  in  the 
result  of  their  deliberations,  and  we,  the  subscribers, 
were  appointed  a  committee  to  correspond  with  our 
fellow-citizens  in  the  other  counties  upon  the  sub 
ject,  in  order  that  a  mutual  communication  of  sen 
timents  might  promote  mutual  confidence,  and  a 
happy  concert  in  such  a  choice,  as  a  dispassionate 
attention  to  the  good  of  the  community,  divested 
of  all  particular  attachments  or  dislikes,  should  be 
found  to  recommend. 

The  people  of  this  State  are  the  sovereigns  of  it, 
and  being  now  called  upon  by  their  constitution  to 
appoint  a  Chief  Magistrate,  it  cannot  but  be  useful 
that  so  high  an  act  of  sovereignty  should  be  preceded 
by  an  interchange  of  ideas  and  sentiments,  especially 
at  so  critical  a  juncture  as  the  present;  for  at  no 
period  can  it  be  more  necessary  to  take  care  that  our 
affairs  be  committed  to  the  management  of  disin 
terested,  discreet,  and  temperate  rulers,  than  at  a 
period  when  the  heats  of  party  are  to  be  assuaged, 
discordant  opinions  reconciled,  and  all  the  incon 
veniences  attending  changes  in  national  govern 
ment  provided  against. 

As  this  State  is  only  part  of  a  larger  community, 


Addresses  105 

as  its  prosperity  must  therefore  materially  depend 
on  its  maintaining  its  due  weight  in  the  national 
scale,  on  its  being  charged  with  only  its  due  propor 
tion  of  public  burdens,  and  on  its  deriving  from  the 
General  Government  its  due  share  of  favor  and  pro 
tection,  it  is  evidently  of  the  greatest  moment  that 
the  people  should  be  united  and  circumspect,  and 
their  rulers  should  be  men  who  will  neither  be 
seduced  by  interest  nor  impelled  by  passion  into 
designs  or  measures  which  may  justly  forfeit  the 
confidence  or  friendship  of  the  other  members  of 
the  great  national  society. 

On  this  ground  it  is  highly  necessary  that  the 
Chief  Magistrate  of  the  State  should  be  free  from  all 
temptation  wantonly  to  perplex  or  embarrass  the 
National  Government, — whether  that  temptation 
should  arise  from  a  preference  of  partial  confeder 
acies,  from  a  spirit  of  competition  with  the  national 
rulers  for  personal  pre-eminence,  from  an  impa 
tience  of  the  restraints  of  national  authority,  from 
the  fear  of  a  diminution  of  power  and  emoluments, 
from  resentment  or  mortification  proceeding  from 
disappointment,  or  from  any  other  cause  whatsoever. 
For  all  attempts  to  perplex  and  embarrass,  would  not 
only  tend  to  prevent  the  government  from  doing  the 
good  they  may  meditate,  but  would  also  expose  this 
State  to  the  distrust  and  ill-will  of  the  others. 

It  is  also  of  no  inconsiderable  consequence,  in  the 
same  view,  that  the  governor  of  the  State  should  be  of 
a  disposition  to  pay  those  decent  attentions,  and  prac 
tise  that  becoming  republican  hospitality,  which  the 
persons  who  administer  the  National  Government, 


106  Alexander  Hamilton 

and  distinguished  strangers  in  public  character, 
whom  the  affairs  of  the  nation  call  to  reside  in 
our  capital,  have  a  right  to  expect.  The  dignity  as 
well  as  the  interests  of  the  State  require  this,  and 
ample  provision  is  constantly  made  for  it  by  the 
liberal  salary  and  perquisites  annexed  to  the  office. 
A  contrary  conduct  cannot  fail  to  create  disgust  and 
contempt;  and  to  draw  not  merely  upon  the  magis 
trate  himself,  but,  in  some  measure,  upon  the  State, 
imputations  not  a  little  mortifying  to  a  people  long 
celebrated  for  their  hospitality,  and  who  uniformly 
enable  their  executive  representative  to  maintain 
their  character  in  this  respect.  For  it  can  never  be 
presumed  to  be  their  intention  to  attach  such  con 
siderable  emoluments  to  the  office  merely  for  the  sake 
of  enriching  its  possessor.1 

Many  considerations  might  be  detailed  to  show 
the  important  light  in  which  our  political  annexa 
tion  as  a  member  of  the  Union  ought  to  be  viewed, 
and  to  demonstrate  how  much  the  regulation  of 
our  trade,  the  repossession  of  our  frontier  posts,  and 
various  other  important  interests  may  be  affected 
by  our  having  much  or  little  influence  in  the  Con 
federacy.  But  this  would  lead  to  a  discussion  too 
long  for  the  occasion,  and,  to  reflecting  men,  would 
be  unnecessary.  Hence,  however,  this  inference  is 
to  be  drawn,  that  we  cannot  be  too  careful  of  keep 
ing  power  and  opportunity  from  those  whom  we 
have  reason  to  believe  may  be  predisposed  to  em 
ploy  them  in  a  manner  calculated  to  alienate  the 
friendship  and  confidence  of  our  sister  States. 

1  In  allusion  to  Clinton's  wealth  and  parismony. 


Addresses  107 

As  to  the  domestic  situation  of  the  State,  it  ap 
peared  to  the  meeting  to  be  such  as  to  admonish  us 
to  use  great  circumspection  in  the  choice  of  a  Gov 
ernor.  The  council  of  appointment  is  so  powerful 
an  engine  in  the  hands  of  a  governor,  for  perpetuat 
ing  himself  in  office,  that  his  conduct  in  it  cannot  be 
regarded  with  too  watchful  an  eye;  because  it  is 
evident,  that  an  artful  man  may,  in  the  course  of  ten 
or  twelve  years,  so  fasten  himself  to  the  office,  by 
means  of  this  engine,  as  to  become  too  indifferent 
to  the  opinion  and  control  of  the  people,  and  per 
haps  immovable  by  the  efforts  of  the  virtuous  and 
independent.  Extremely  free  from  blame,  therefore, 
and  from  all  suspicion  of  undue  attachment  to  place 
or  to  profit,  and  very  satisfactory  to  the  community 
at  large,  ought  to  be  the  administration  of  a  gov 
ernor,  to  render  it  prudent  in  the  people  to  leave  so 
powerful  an  engine  in  his  hands  for  a  long  succession 
of  years. 

As,  on  the  one  hand,  in  this  council  of  appoint 
ment,  the  governor  will,  for  the  most  part,  have  a 
preponderating  influence,  so,  on  the  other,  that  in 
fluence  will  generally  be  exerted  according  to  the 
views  and  wishes  of  the  man.  If  he  wishes  to  pro 
mote  the  public  good,  and  to  acquire  fame  and 
popularity  by  acting  as  the  governor  of  the  State, 
and  not  as  the  governor  of  a  party,  then  merit  in 
every  situation  will  be  cherished  and  employed.  If, 
on  the  contrary,  offices  are  to  be  the  price  of  obe 
dience,  and  men  are  to  enjoy  his  favor  no  longer 
than  they  consent  to  be  his  tools,  merit  will  be  neg 
lected,  and  the  State  must  suffer  by  having  the 


io8  Alexander  Hamilton 

public  business,  in  too  many  instances,  intrusted  to 
improper  hands. 

In  addition  to  the  parties  which  have  too  long 
existed  in  the  State,  on  personal  and  particular 
grounds,  it  must  be  lamented  that  the  new  Constitu 
tion  for  the  government  of  the  United  States  has 
divided  the  community  on  a  more  extensive  scale, 
and  has  occasioned  animosities  which  have  not  yet 
ceased  to  operate.  On  that  great  question  very 
honest  men  took  opposite  sides ;  and  those  who  were 
not  honest  assisted  in  "troubling  the  waters." 

But  certainly  it  is  now  high  time  that  those  par 
ties  should  subside;  and  should,  for  the  sake  of  the 
public  good,  unite;  agreeing  in  these  two  points, 
that  all  should  join  in  supporting  the  Constitution 
established  by  the  people  of  the  United  States,  and 
that  all  should  join  in  obtaining  a  reconsideration  of 
the  parts  which  have  been  the  subject  of  objection, 
in  order  that  every  reasonable  and  safe  endeavor 
may  be  used  to  give  universal  satisfaction,  to  re 
move  the  apprehensions  entertained  by  the  honest 
opponents  of  the  system,  and  to  provide,  if  upon 
cool  and  deliberate  examination  any  be  found  requi 
site,  such  additional  securities  to  the  liberties  of  the 
people  as  shall  be  compatible  with  the  salutary  and 
necessary  energy  of  an  efficient  National  Govern 
ment.  To  such  a  compromise,  it  is  essential  that 
the  unhappy  divisions  which  now  exist  among  us 
should  be  buried.  And  to  this  end  it  is  equally  es 
sential  that  our  first  magistrate  should  be  a  man 
of  moderation,  sincerely  disposed  to  heal,  not  to 
widen,  those  divisions;  to  promote  conciliation,  not 


Addresses  109 

dissension ;  to  allay,  not  to  excite,  the  fermentations 
of  party  spirit ;  and  to  restore  that  cordial  good- will 
and  mutual  confidence  which  ought  to  exist  among 
a  people  bound  to  each  other  by  all  the  ties  which 
connect  members  of  the  same  society. 

It  is  seriously  to  be  deplored  that  dissension 
reigns  in  the  most  important  departments  of  the 
State,  and  as  dissensions  among  brethren,  so  de 
structive  to  the  happiness  of  families,  are  often  ap 
peased  by  parental  influence  and  prudence,  so  there 
is  good  reason  to  flatter  ourselves  that  a  Chief  Magis 
trate,  sincerely  desirous  of  re-establishing  concord, 
may  without  much  difficulty  effect  it,  especially  if 
he  should  owe  his  exaltation  to  the  votes  of  both  the 
contending  parties. 

Reflections  of  this  nature  had  their  full  weight  in 
forming  the  opinion  of  the  meeting  which  appointed 
us,  not  only  as  to  the  necessity  of  choosing  some 
other  person  than  the  present  governor,  but  as  to 
the  man  whom  it  would  be  desirable  to  substitute. 

As  we  are  aware  that  the  warm  partisans  of  men 
in  office  are  apt  to  represent  every  attempt  to  change 
them  as  a  species  of  personal  injury,  we  think  it 
necessary  to  remark  in  this  place,  that  at  the  ex 
piration  of  his  three  years  the  Constitution  will 
return  the  present  Chief  Magistrate  to  the  mass  of 
the  people.  The  question  is  not,  therefore,  whether 
he  shall  be  put  out,  but  whether  he  shall  be  put  in. 
As  no  man  has  a  right  to  office,  or  re-election,  in 
virtue  of  long  possession,  no  man,  of  course,  can  have 
a  right  to  complain  if  the  people  do  not  think  it 
proper  to  continue  to  be  governed  by  him. 


no  Alexander  Hamilton 

In  the  consideration  of  the  character  most  proper 
to  be  held  up  at  the  ensuing  election,  some  difficul 
ties  occurred.  Our  fellow-citizens  in  some  parts  of 
the  State  had  proposed  Judge  Yates,  others  had 
been  advocates  of  the  Lieutenant-Governor,  and 
others  for  Chief- Justice  Morris.  It  is  well  known 
that  the  inhabitants  of  this  city  are,  with  few  ex 
ceptions,  strongly  attached  to  the  New  Constitution, 
and  have  been  remarkably  unanimous  and  active  in 
its  support.  It  is  also  well  known  that  Lieutenant- 
Governor  Cortland,  and  Chief- Justice  Morris,  whom 
we  respect  and  esteem,  were  zealous  advocates  for 
the  same  cause.  Had  it  been  agreed  to  support 
either  of  them  for  the  office  of  governor,  there  would 
have  been  reason  to  fear  that  the  measure  would 
have  been  imputed  to  party,  and  not  to  a  desire  of 
relieving  our  country  from  the  evils  they  experience 
from  the  heats  of  party.  It  appeared,  therefore,  most 
advisable  to  elect  some  man  of  the  opposite  party  in 
whose  integrity,  patriotism,  and  temper  confidence 
might  be  placed,  however  little  his  political  opinions 
on  the  question  lately  agitated  might  be  approved 
by  those  who  were  assembled  upon  the  occasion. 

Among  the  persons  of  this  description,  there  were 
circumstances  which  led  to  a  decision  in  favor  of 
Judge  Yates.  And  we  flatter  ourselves  that  this 
decision,  to  those  who  are  acquainted  with  the  situa 
tion  of  the  State,  will  be  most  likely  to  appear  well 
founded.  It  is  certain  that  as  a  man  and  a  judge  he 
is  generally  esteemed.  And  though  his  opposition 
to  the  New  Constitution  was  such  as  his  friends  can 
not  but  disapprove,  yet,  since  the  period  of  its  adop- 


Addresses  1 1 1 

tion,  his  conduct  has  been  tempered  with  a  degree 
of  moderation,  and  regard  to  peace  and  decorum, 
which  entitle  him  to  credit;  and  seem  to  point  him 
out  as  a  man  likely  to  compose  the  differences  of 
the  State,  and  to  unite  its  citizens  in  the  harmonious 
pursuit  of  their  common  and  genuine  interest. 

Of  this  at  least  we  feel  confident,  that  he  has  no 
personal  revenge  to  gratify,  no  opponents  to  oppress, 
no  partisans  to  provide  for,  nor  any  promises  for 
personal  purposes  to  be  performed  at  the  public  ex 
pense.  On  the  contrary,  we  trust  he  will  be  found  to 
be  a  man  who  looks  with  an  equal  eye  on  his  fellow- 
citizens,  and  who  will  be  more  ambitious  of  leaving 
a  good  name  than  a  good  estate  to  his  posterity. 

For  these,  and  for  other  reasons,  which  considera 
tions  of  decorum  induce  us  to  pass  over  in  silence, 
the  meeting  was  unanimously  of  opinion  that  it 
would  be  advisable  to  try  Judge  Yates  as  our  gover 
nor  for  the  next  three  years.  They  were  persuaded 
that  the  State  could  not  lose  by  the  experiment,  and 
entertained  strong  hopes  that  much  good  would  re 
dound  to  it  from  his  administration. 

We  shall  be  happy  to  find  that  the  same  reasons, 
and  that  regard  for  the  public  weal,  which  has  at  all 
times  distinguished  their  conduct,  may  induce  the 
Lieutenant-Governor  and  Chief- Justice  Morris  to 
forbear  a  competition  which  can  evidently,  under 
the  existing  circumstances,  answer  no  good  purpose; 
and  that  they,  and  their  particular  friends,  do 
generously  join  with  their  fellow-citizens  of  every 
place  and  party,  in  promoting  the  election  of  Mr. 
Yates,  as  the  only  candidate  likely  to  succeed,  whose 


ii2  Alexander  Hamilton 

character  affords  a  prospect  that  he  will,  under 
Providence,  be  instrumental  in  preserving  and  ad 
vancing  the  dignity  and  interests  of  the  people,  and 
in  restoring  to  them  the  blessings  of  union  and  cor 
diality  at  home  and  respect  abroad. 

It  will  give  us  great  pleasure  to  learn  the  senti 
ments  of  your  county  on  this  important  subject,  and 
to  know  that  they  coincide  with  those  which  we 
entertain,  and  which  we  have  every  reason  to  be 
lieve,  correspond  with  the  general  sense  of  the  people 
of  this  city  and  county.  We  acknowledge  that  we 
feel  a  very  serious  anxiety  for  the  issue;  and  that, 
from  the  most  mature  reflection,  we  regard  a  change 
in  the  person  of  the  Chief  Magistrate,  as  a  matter  of 
high  importance  to  the  tranquillity  and  prosperity 
of  the  State.  Nor  can  we  forbear,  as  brethren  and 
fellow-citizens,  earnestly  to  exhort  the  inhabitants 
of  your  county  to  weigh  well  the  importance  of  the 
opportunity  which  the  approaching  election  presents 
to  them,  and  to  resolve  to  exercise  their  right  of 
suffrage,  in  that  unbiassed  and  independent  manner, 
which  becomes  a  free  and  enlightened  people.  We 
shall  only  add,  that  it  is  manifestly  essential  to  en 
sure  success  to  the  attempt,  that  all  those  who  con 
cur  in  the  expediency  of  a  change  should  zealously 
unite  in  the  support  of  the  same  candidate. 
I  have  the  honor  to  be, 
Gentlemen, 

Your  obedient  servant, 
By  order  of  the  committee, 

ALEXANDER  HAMILTON, 

Chairman. 


Addresses  113 

To  the  Independent  and  Patriotic  Electors  of  the  State 
of  New  York.1 

In  our  last  address  we  mentioned  to  you  our  in 
tention  of  offering  some  remarks  upon  that  which 
has  been  lately  published  by  the  committee  ap 
pointed  to  promote  the  re-election  of  our  present 
Governor.  This  we  shall  now  do;  and  we  flatter 
ourselves  that  what  we  shall  say  will  meet  with  your 
candid  and  serious  attention.  Respect  for  our 
selves,  as  well  as  for  you,  will  prevent  our  imitating 
the  spirit  of  invective  and  uncandid  speculation 
which  abounds  in  that  performance.  Acting,  as  we 
trust  we  do,  from  reason,  not  from  passion,  we  shall 
continue  to  address  ourselves  to  the  reason,  not  to 
the  passions,  of  our  fellow-citizens. 

The  writers  of  the  address  in  question  set  out  with 
describing  to  us  the  long  services  of  the  present 
Governor — his  meritorious  administration  during 
the  late  war,  his  good  conduct  in  preserving  peace 
and  order  within  the  southern  district,  after  its 
evacuation  by  the  British  forces. 

We  feel  no  inclination  to  detract  from  the  merit 
of  the  Governor's  services  during  the  war,  nor  shall 
we  examine  whether  they  have  been  overrated  or 
not.  We  are  ready  to  acknowledge  that  they  were 

1  This  address,  which  has  never  before  been  included  in  any  edition  of 
Hamilton's  works,  I  owe  to  the  kindness  of  Mr.  Henry  A.  Homes,  State 
Librarian  of  New  York.  The  Clintonian  Committee  published  an  ad 
dress  on  March  9,  1789,  and  this,  as  will  be  seen  from  the  opening 
sentences,  is  in  answer  to  the  attacks  of  the  Governor's  friends.  This 
second  address,  unknown  until  discovered  by  Mr.  Homes,  is  reprinted 
from  a  probably  unique  copy  of  the  original  broadside  or  pamphlet  in 
the  State  Library  at  Albany. 


VOL.  II. — 8. 


ii4  Alexander  Hamilton 

considerable,  and  that  they  entitled  him  to  the 
esteem  of  his  country. 

With  regard  to  the  credit  given  to  him  for  the 
order  preserved  in  this  part  of  the  State  after  the 
peace,  we  shall  only  observe  that  at  the  most  critical 
period,  the  management  of  affairs  was  in  the  hands 
of  the  council  appointed  for  the  temporary  govern 
ment  of  the  southern  district,  in  which  the  Governor 
had  no  greater  agency  than  any  other  individual 
member. 

But,  admitting  all  that  can  be  asked  in  either  of 
these  respects,  it  surely  will  not  follow  that  we  ought 
therefore  to  consent  to  be  perpetually  governed  by 
the  same  man,  however  exceptionable  his  subse 
quent  conduct  may  have  been.  If  he  has  departed 
from  the  principles  by  which  he  may  have  been  once 
actuated;  if  he  has  quitted  the  pursuit  of  the  public 
good  for  that  of  a  selfish  and  interested  policy ;  if  he 
has  betrayed  a  stronger  attachment  to  his  own  power, 
influence,  and  advantage  than  to  the  dignity,  re 
spectability,  and  prosperity  of  the  people ;  if,  instead 
of  being  the  impartial  head  of  the  State,  he  has  be 
come  the  zealous  head  of  a  party  in  it;  if,  instead 
of  acting  as  the  appeaser  and  calmer,  he  has  in  any 
instance  acted  as  the  fomenter,  of  dissension;  if  he 
has  at  any  time  contributed  to  sacrificing  the  inter 
ests  of  the  State  by  encouraging  the  obstinacy  and 
intemperance  of  party  conflicts; — in  either  of  these 
suppositions,  the  merit  of  his  early  administration 
will  be  a  very  insufficient  recommendation  to  the 
future  choice  of  the  community. 

How  far  imputations  of  this  kind  may  be  applic- 


Addresses  115 

able  to  the  conduct  of  the  Governor  for  some  years 
past,  we  forbear  particularly  to  discuss.  It  is  cer 
tain,  however,  that  a  very  large  proportion  of  the 
community  are  now,  on  different  accounts,  greatly 
dissatisfied  with  his  administration,  and  that  many 
more  entertain  serious  doubts  and  apprehensions. 
The  presumption  is,  that  this  has  not  happened  with 
out  cause.  Moderate  and  discreet  men  of  all  parties 
will  at  least  agree  that  the  existence  of  such  a  state 
of  things,  from  whatever  source  it  may  proceed,  is 
a  real  evil  which  calls  for  some  effectual  remedy. 
When  discontents  with  the  head  of  the  State  have 
taken  possession  of  a  large  part  of  the  people,  and 
have  been  produced  by  causes  which  render  them 
likely  to  last,  they  form  in  republican  governments 
a  powerful  reason  for  a  change,  as  perhaps  the  only 
means  of  securing  or  re-establishing  confidence  in 
the  government.  When  those  discontents  are  im 
mediately  connected  with  the  party  divisions  which 
exist  in  the  State,  such  a  change  will  generally  be 
found  essential  to  the  restoration  of  harmony  among 
the  citizens  (a  blessing  which  cannot  be  too  highly 
prized  nor  too  anxiously  promoted). 

That  the  spirit  of  party  has  attained  an  alarming 
and  pernicious  height  in  the  State,  must  be  apparent 
to  all  dispassionate  observers.  It  has  been  con 
clusively  witnessed  in  the  last  session  of  the  Legis 
lature.  Which  of  the  parties  was  right,  which 
wrong,  would  be  an  endless  discussion.  But  it  can 
not  admit  of  a  doubt  that  the  interests  of  the  State 
have  suffered  in  the  contest;1  and  there  is  too  much 

1  Our  representatives  in  Congress  are  not  yet  ascertained,  and  we 


no  Alexander  Hamilton 

probability  that  they  will  continue  to  suffer  from 
the  same  spirit,  until  there  is  at  the  head  of  the 
State  a  man  who  en  joys  the  good- will  of  both  parties, 
and  is  disposed  to  temper  and  heal  their  mutual 
irritations. 

On  the  subject  of  the  parties  which  exist  in  the 
State,  much  is  said  in  the  address  under  considera 
tion.  Some  of  the  observations  contained  in  it  are 
just,  but  we  do  not  conceive  apply  to  the  case ;  others 
of  them  appear  to  us  altogether  fallacious. 

It  is  just,  for  instance,  that  difference  of  opinion, 
on  a  great  political  question  occasionally  arising  in  a 
community,  does  not  constitute  what  is  understood 
by  spirit  of  party.  Men,  in  such  cases,  ought  to  take 
their  sides  according  to  their  convictions,  though 
they  should  be  cautious  not  to  suffer  their  zeal  to 
hurry  them  into  irrational  extremes. 

But  when  the  Governor  is  objected  to  as  the  head 
of  a  party,  we  presume  it  is  not  on  account  of  the 
side  he  took  in  the  question  concerning  the  new  Con 
stitution.  It  is  true,  indeed,  that  the  friends  of  that 
Constitution  are  of  opinion  that  circumstances  have 
attended  the  Governor's  conduct  in  relation  to  it, 
before  it  appeared,  after  it  appeared,  and  before  its 
adoption,  and  even  since  its  adoption,  which  savor 
of  prejudice  and  intemperance,  and  subject  him  to 
suspicions  derogatory  to  his  prudence  and  patriot 
ism.  But  the  objection  to  him  as  the  head  of  a 
party  reaches  much  further  back  than  the  new  Con 
stitution.  Discerning  men,  soon  after  the  peace, 
perceived  that  he  had  formed  a  close  connection 

have  no  senators  appointed. 


Addresses  117 

with  a  particular  set  of  characters,  in  whose  public 
and  private  views  he  was  continually  embarked. 

It  is  asked,  What  could  have  been  his  object  in 
thus  devoting  himself  to  a  party?  The  answer  is 
plain:  to  keep  himself  in  place — to  perpetuate  him 
self  in  the  enjoyment  of  the  power  and  profit  of  the 
office  he  holds. 

But  it  is  asked  again,  Why,  if  that  was  his  wish, 
did  he  not  connect  himself  with  the  wealthy  and  the 
great  ?  These,  it  is  pretended,  would  have  been  better 
instruments  of  a  scheme  of  personal  aggrandizement. 

Such  a  suggestion  has  scarcely  the  merit  of  plausi 
bility.  It  is  well  known  that  large  property  is  an 
object  of  jealousy  in  republics,  and  that  those  who 
possess  it  seldom  enjoy  extensive  popularity.  The 
Governor  was  aware  that  he  would  have  risked  the 
loss  rather  than  have  promoted  the  continuance  of 
that  which  he  possessed,  by  connecting  himself  with 
men  of  that  class;  and  that  his  purpose  could  be 
better  answered  by  an  opposite  course.  Besides, 
from  men  who  would  suppose  their  pretensions  not 
inferior  to  his,  he  would  be  more  likely  to  experience 
competition  and  contradiction.  The  history  of  re 
publics  affords  more  examples  of  individuals  arriv 
ing  at  dangerous  pre-eminence,  by  a  policy  similar 
to  that  which  has  been  pursued  by  the  Governor, 
than  in  any  other  mode. 

It  is  asserted,  in  order  to  excite  prejudice,  that  the 
opposition  to  the  Governor  arises  from  the  wealthy 
and  the  great.  We  believe  it  to  be  true  that  the 
principal  part  of  the  men  of  the  most  considerable 
property  in  the  State  are  of  opinion  that  a  change  is 


n8  Alexander  Hamilton 

necessary.  But  we  believe  it  to  be  not  less  true 
that  the  same  opinion  embraces  a  large  proportion 
of  all  other  classes  of  the  community.  Will  it  follow 
that  it  must  be  wrong  because  men  of  property  con 
cur  in  it  ?  Are  they  less  interested  than  other  people 
in  good  government?  Do  they  advocate  one  of  their 
number  for  his  successor?  Judge  Yates  certainly 
does  not  fall  under  that  description.  What  motive, 
then,  can  they  have,  besides  the  public  good,  for 
giving  him  their  support  and  suffrages? 

It  has  been  said  that  Judge  Yates  is  only  made 
use  of  on  account  of  his  popularity,  as  an  instrument 
to  displace  Governor  Clinton,  in  order  that  at  a 
future  election  some  one  of  the  great  families  may  be 
introduced.  Let  this  surmise  be  candidly  consid 
ered.  It  is  admitted  that  Judge  Yates  is  now  a 
popular  character;  and  it  will  not  be  doubted  that 
he  is  a  man  of  sense  and  integrity.  If  he  conducts 
himself  with  propriety,  it  is  not  to  be  imagined  that, 
with  the  addition  of  the  influence  which  will  natur 
ally  flow  from  the  possession  of  the  office,  he  will  be 
less  able,  at  the  end  of  three  years,  to  maintain  his 
ground  against  any  partial  combinations  which  may 
have  been  formed  against  him,  than  he  now  is  to 
succeed  against  the  accumulated  weight  of  a  twelve- 
years '  administration.  Nothing,  therefore,  can  be 
more  far-fetched  or  strained  than  the  supposition 
that  such  a  design,  as  is  mentioned,  is  entertained. 
It  is  evidently  a  mere  artifice  to  destroy  the  effect  of 
Judge  Yates*  general  good  character  on  the  minds 
of  his  fellow-citizens,  and  to  divert  his  friends  from 
exerting  themselves  in  his  behalf. 


Addresses  1 19 

The  cry  against  men  of  property  has  been  carried 
to  an  extreme  by  the  friends  of  the  Governor,  which 
ought  to  alarm  the  considerate  of  every  class.  There 
is  no  stronger  sign  of  combinations  unfriendly  to  the 
general  good,  than  when  the  partisans  of  those  in 
power  raise  an  indiscriminate  cry  against  men  of 
property.  It  argues  sinister  designs,  which  it  is 
feared  may  be  counteracted,  by  those  whose  situa 
tion  renders  them  most  likely  to  be  independent. 
Such  a  cry  is  neither  just  nor  wise.  Not  just,  be 
cause  no  man  ought  to  be  hated  for  being  either  rich 
or  poor.  Providence  has  distributed  its  bounties  in 
the  manner  best  adapted  to  the  general  order  and 
happiness.  Not  wise,  because  it  tends  to  alienate 
those  who  are  endeavored  to  be  made  odious,  from 
the  government  under  which  they  live,  and  to  in 
cline  them  to  favor  changes  in  the  hope  of  bettering 
their  condition;  and  because,  in  the  second  place, 
by  destroying  the  confidence  of  the  body  of  the 
people  in  men  of  property,  it  makes  a  co-operation 
between  them  for  the  defence  of  their  common  privi 
leges  and  interests  more  difficult,  and  consequently 
renders  it  more  easy  for  aspiring  men,  in  possession 
of  power,  to  prosecute  schemes  of  personal  aggrandize 
ment  and  usurpation.  These  observations,  we  are  con 
fident,  will  strike  the  good  sense  of  our  fellow  citizens. 

Many  of  our  most  considerate  citizens  have  long 
been  of  opinion  that  the  Governor  has  possessed  an 
undue  and  dangerous  influence.  In  our  first  ad 
dress  we  intimated  the  means  by  which  such  an  in 
fluence  might  be  acquired,  through  the  medium  of 
the  council  of  appointment. 


120  Alexander  Hamilton 

To  this  it  is  answered  that  the  council  of  ap 
pointment  consists  of  four  members  of  the  Senate 
annually  chosen  by  the  Assembly,  and  that  it  is  im 
probable  the  Governor  should  be  able  materially  to 
influence  appointments  made  by  a  council  so  con 
stituted.  This  we  take  to  be  the  substance  of  the 
answer.  Let  us  see  if  it  be  a  satisfactory  one. 

It  is  to  be  remembered  that  though  the  council  is 
constituted  as  stated,  the  Governor  is  a  standing 
member  of  it,  and  in  case  of  equal  division  has  a  cast 
ing  vote.  It  is  likewise  to  be  attended  to  that  he 
has  constantly  claimed  the  right  of  previous  nomina 
tion  ,  and  we  are  greatly  misinformed  if  he  has  not 
extensively  practised  upon  that  pretension.  The  ex 
ercise  of  such  a  power  places  the  choice  essentially 
on  the  Governor.  If  he  is  first  to  name  the  man  who 
may  be  appointed,  none  can  be  appointed  who  are 
not  agreeable  to  him.  It  is  true  the  council  may 
negative  his  nomination,  but  even  this  will  require 
a  majority;  for  if  equally  divided  he  can  turn  the 
scale  in  favor  of  his  own  nomination.  If  the  person 
proposed  be  rejected  by  a  majority,  still  it  is  in  his 
power  to  propose  another  of  his  own  liking,  and  to 
repeat  this  as  often  as  he  pleases,  till  an  appointment 
is  made  in  some  degree  conformable  to  his  wishes. 
We  do  not  presume  that  the  practice  has  been  an 
swerable  to  the  full  extent  of  the  principle.  The 
power  of  previous  nomination  has  been  long  since 
called  in  question,  and  it  is  probable  that  it  has  been 
found  expedient  to  exercise  it  with  caution,  and 
oftentimes  even  to  forbear  the  use  of  it.  But  in  the 
general  course  of  things  it  is  presumable  that  the 


Addresses  121 

operation  of  that  pretension  has  given  the  Governor 
a  prevailing  influence  in  appointments. 

But  independent  of  the  power  of  previous  nomi 
nation,  the  mere  circumstance  of  being  a  standing 
member  of  so  small  a  council  with  a  casting  vote  must 
give  a  man  of  tolerable  address  a  preponderating 
weight  in  its  arrangements,  and  consequently  an 
extensive  influence  from  the  distribution  of  offices. 
Those  who  are  in  pursuit  of  them  will  naturally  look 
up  to  him  as  one  who  must  at  all  events  have  an 
agency  in  the  business.  Even  the  members  of  the 
council  will  be  apt  to  gratify  him  to  obtain  his  con 
currence  at  the  time  and  upon  future  occasions  in 
appointments  in  which  themselves  personally  or 
their  friends  are  or  may  be  interested.  There  are, 
besides,  various  expedients  which  an  artful  man 
may  employ  to  carry  his  points  in  such  a  council. 
Times  and  places  of  meeting  may  be  so  managed  as 
to  exclude  from  attendance  those  whose  presence 
may  not  be  desired.  There  is  room  to  suppose  that 
the  present  Governor  has  not  been  inattentive  to 
these  advantages,  and  that  he  has  even  gone  so  far 
as  to  avoid  making  appointments,  in  the  usual 
course,  by  a  council  disagreeable  to  him,  in  order  to 
have  them  made  by  one  more  at  his  devotion. 

Public  opinion,  we  apprehend,  corresponds  with 
this  reasoning  concerning  the  Governor's  influ 
ence  in  appointments.  Those  who  are  in  quest  of 
office  generally  think  themselves  sure  of  success, 
if  they  have  reason  to  believe  they  have  secured 
his  co-operation. 

The  considerations  which  have  been  stated  are, 


122  Alexander  Hamilton 

we  think,  sufficient  to  show  that  the  council  of  ap 
pointment  is  such  an  engine  as  we  have  before  re 
presented  it  to  be,  and  that  the  conclusions  which 
have  been  drawn  from  it  are  natural  and  pertinent. 

Whether  an  improper  or  excessive  influence  has 
in  fact  been  derived  from  the  use  of  that  engine, 
those  who  have  been  attentive  to  the  progress  of 
public  affairs  must  decide  for  themselves.  Appear 
ances  must  be  carefully  consulted,  and  if  there  are 
instances  in  which  members  of  the  Legislature  have 
been  seen  to  change  one  party  or  system  disagreeable 
to  the  Governor,  for  another  party  or  system  agree 
able  to  him,  and  if  that  change  of  conduct  has  been 
observed  to  be  speedily  followed  by  the  reception  of 
lucrative  appointments,  the  conclusion  from  such  a 
fact  would  be  irresistible. 

The  argument  which  is  used  against  the  supposi 
tion  of  such  an  argument  can  have  no  weight.  It 
is  said  that  such  a  supposition  is  a  reproach  to  our 
representatives  which  ought  to  excite  indignation. 
This  is  one  of  those  arguments — if  it  may  be  called 
an  argument — which  proves  too  much,  and  is  capa 
ble  of  being  used  at  all  times  and  under  all  circum 
stances.  If  it  amounts  to  any  thing  it  amounts  to 
this,  that  it  ought  never  to  be  supposed  that  our 
representatives  can  be  improperly  influenced;  a  po 
sition  contrary  to  experience  and  human  nature, 
and  calculated  to  destroy  that  watchfulness  in  the 
people  over  the  conduct  of  their  representatives, 
which  is  an  indispensable  security  of  republican 
government. 

We  have  too  good  an  opinion  of  the  virtue  of  our 


Addresses  123 

countrymen  to  believe  that  any  large  proportion  of 
those  who  may  in  any  case  have  united  in  the  views 
of  the  Governor  have  been  under  a  sinister  influence ; 
but  we  think  it  very  supposable  that  a  few  may  have 
been  in  this  situation,  and  that  these  few,  by  their 
advice  and  example,  may  have  operated  upon  others 
so  as  to  place  a  majority  on  the  side  where  it  might 
not  otherwise  have  been. 

In  making  these  observations,  our  great  object  is 
to  show  that  such  an  influence  as  is  apprehended 
may  be  supposed  consistently  with  probability  and 
the  usual  progress  of  things.  The  reality  of  its  exist 
ence,  as  we  have  already  remarked,  must  be  judged 
of  from  circumstances.  If  there  are  appearances 
which  render  it  probable,  the  rules  of  republican 
caution  will  admonish  us  to  seek  a  change.  A  very 
respectable  part  of  the  community  are  of  opinion 
that  the  length  of  time  for  which  the  present  Gover 
nor  has  been  in  office  is  alone  a  sufficient  reason  for 
his  removal.  This,  however,  is  a  sentiment  which 
this  committee  have  never  expressed.  The  idea  con 
tained  in  our  first  address  is,  that  considering  the 
means  of  influence  derived  to  our  executive,  from 
the  nature  of  our  council  of  appointment,  the  admin 
istration  of  a  governor  ought  to  be  free  from  blame,  and 
from  all  suspicion  of  undue  attachment  to  place  or  to 
profit,  and  very  satisfactory  to  the  community  at  large, 
to  render  it  prudent  in  the  people  to  leave  so  powerful 
an  engine  in  his  hands  for  a  long  succession  of  years. 
In  this  sentiment,  we  doubt  not,  we  shall  be  joined 
by  every  prudent  and  independent  citizen. 

How  far,  however,  some  of  the  gentlemen  who 


124  Alexander  Hamilton 

combat  the  position  that  long  continuance  in  office  is 
of  itself  a  sufficient  reason,  in  republican  govern 
ments,  for  a  change  of  men  are  consistent  with  them 
selves,  requires  some  explanation.  Mr.  Melancthon 
Smith,  one  of  the  committee  in  the  convention  of 
this  State  objected  to  the  constitution  of  the  Presi 
dent  of  the  United  States,  on  account  of  the  want 
of  the  principle  of  rotation,  or,  in  other  words,  be 
cause  he,  like  the  governor  of  this  State,  may  be 
re-elected  as  often  as  the  people  think  proper,  and 
proposed  or  advocated  an  amendment  to  alter  that 
circumstance,  which  was  adopted  by  our  State  con 
vention.  The  great  argument  was  the  danger  in  re 
publics  of  trusting  power  too  long  in  the  same  hands. 
It  will  be  difficult  to  show  that  the  spirit  of  this 
objection  does  not  operate  against  the  re-election  of 
a  man  who  in  this  State  has  held  the  reins  of  govern 
ment  for  near  twelve  years.  It  might  even,  with 
great  force,  be  urged  that  it  is  more  wise  to  observe 
the  principle  of  rotation  in  practice,  than  to  make  it 
one  of  the  fundamentals  of  a  constitution.  For 
though  it  might  be  imprudent  to  deprive  the  people 
of  the  liberty  of  making  use  of  a  man,  in  particular 
emergencies,  when  his  services  might  happen  to  be 
essential,  it  may  be  very  prudent  in  them  to  make 
changes  from  time  to  time,  when  no  public  exigencies 
call  for  particular  men,  merely  to  guard  against  the 
danger  of  a  too  long  continuance  in  office. 

In  our  first  address  we  intimated  the  ill  effects  of 
the  want  of  decent  republican  hospitality  towards 
the  members  of  Congress,  and  other  public  charac 
ters  whom  the  affairs  of  the  government  call  to  reside 


Addresses  125 

in  this  city.  This  has  been  answered  by  describing 
in  strong  terms  the  evils  of  extravagance  and  dis 
sipation.  It  is  asked  whether  it  would  be  agreeable 
to  the  citizens  of  this  State  to  see  the  principal  magis 
trate  constantly  engaged  in  a  scene  of  dissipation 
and  luxury.  We  answer,  most  certainly  not.  We 
should  be  as  ready  to  reprobate  this  conduct  as  the 
contrary  extreme.  But  is  there  no  medium  between 
extravagance  and  parsimony?  Cannot  a  chief  magis 
trate  observe  the  requisite  attentions  of  hospitabil- 
ity  without  running  into  riot  or  intemperance,  or 
exceeding  the  bounds  of  decent  frugality  and  orderly 
living?  Is  it  not  even  his  duty  to  attend  to  the 
former  as  well  as  to  the  latter?  Must  not  the  sup 
position  that  it  is  so  have  been  one  of  the  induce 
ments  of  the  Legislature  in  annexing  to  the  office 
the  liberal  emoluments  which  have  been  constantly 
annexed  to  it?  Can  we  believe  that  our  representa 
tives  would  have  been  so  lavish  of  the  money  of  their 
constituents  as  they  must  have  been  if  that  was  not 
a  motive? 

It  is  with  reluctance  we  dwell  upon  this  subject, 
but  the  friends  of  the  Governor,  by  pressing  his 
apology  too  far,  have  made  it  necessary.  The  charge 
against  him  in  this  respect  is  not,  that  he  has  been 
frugal,  but  that  he  has  been  penurious;  not  that  he 
has  paid  a  reasonable  regard  to  a  comfortable  pro 
vision  for  his  family,  but  that  he  has  applied  the 
greatest  part  of  his  public  allowance  to  the  ac 
cumulation  of  a  large  fortune,  neglecting  what  was 
due  to  the  decorum  and  dignity  of  his  station. 

It  is,  we   conceive,  impossible  to  join  with  his 


126  Alexander  Hamilton 

friends  in  ascribing  his  conduct,  in  this  respect,  to 
the  laudable  motive  they  assign,  the  desire  of  setting 
an  example  of  moderation  and  frugality.  If  he 
had  been  actuated  by  such  a  motive,  why  has  he 
been  always  ready  to  accept  such  liberal  allowances 
of  the  public  money?  Why  did  he  never  say  to  the 
Legislature:  "I  wish  to  ease  the  burthens  of  the 
people.  I  find  by  experience  that  you  have  been 
more  bountiful  than  is  requisite  to  the  decent  and 
proper  support  of  the  office.  Let  my  salary  be  re 
trenched/'1  Such  we  think  would  have  been  the 
language  and  conduct  of  patriotic  moderation;  but 
the  disposition  to  receive  much  and  spend  little,  be 
speaks  the  predominancy  of  a  passion  which  cer 
tainly  is  no  ornament  in  a  public  character. 

As  to  the  quantity  of  the  property  which  may 
have  been  amassed  by  the  Governor,  during  his  ad 
ministration,  this  is  a  subject  which  we  should  have 
left  untouched,  were  it  not  for  some  observations  in 
the  address  which  seem  to  require  notice.  Whether 
the  intimations,  of  fraudulent  or  indirect  practices 
in  that  gentleman,  which  have  appeared  in  the  pub 
lic  prints,  have  really  been  serious  accusations  of 
imprudent  adversaries,  or  fictitious  charges  brought 
by  the  friends  of  the  Governor,  for  the  sake  of  re 
futing  them,  and  having  it  believed  that  he  has  been 
ill  treated,  we  will  not  undertake  to  decide.  But 
thus  much  we  shall  say,  that  the  supposition  of  such 
practices  has  no  share  in  the  motives  which,  in  our 

1  His  friends  give  him  credit  for  the  reduction  of  his  salary  the  last 
session;  but  if  he  had  any  share  in  the  business,  it  cannot  be  considered 
as  very  meritorious  at  the  eve  of  an  election  at  which  he  knew  he 
would  be  strongly  opposed. 


Addresses  127 

estimation,  render  his  re-election  inadvisable.  And 
though  we  do  not  agree  in  the  opinion  that  the  idea 
of  his  being  possessed  of  a  large  fortune  is  ground 
less,  yet  we  should  not  impute  blame  to  him  on  that 
account,  in  any  other  view  than  as  he  may  be  justly 
chargeable  with  penury  in  the  manner  of  acquiring 
it,  and  with  disingenuity  in  the  attempts  to  conceal 
it.  It  is  undeniable,  that  he  has  received  from  the 
State  what  may  be  deemed  a  handsome  fortune,  in 
a  few  accumulated  payments,1  and  that  he  has  made 
several  profitable  speculations  in  land.  Some  of 
these  are  publicly  known,  and  others  of  them,  we 
have  good  grounds  to  believe,  are  covered  under 
the  names  of  third  persons. 

The  address  under  consideration  contains,  many 
observations  on  the  Governor's  conduct  and  views  in 
relation  to  the  Constitution  of  the  United  States. 
To  examine  the  justice  or  propriety  of  them  would 
involve  a  discussion  into  which  we  cannot  think  it 
expedient  to  enter.  After  all  that  could  be  said, 
the  judgment  of  every  man  would  be  regulated  very 
much  by  previous  opinions,  and  by  a  recurrence  to 
facts.  These  are  the  only  satisfactory  standard  to 
which  we  can  resort.  Professions  or  assertions  will 

1  On  a  settlement  of  his  accounts  some  time  in  the  year  1782,  there 
was  a  balance  in  his  favor  of  upwards  of  8,000  pounds.  This  sum  he 
retained  out  of  monies  borrowed  by  him  on  the  public  account  about 
that  period,  or  some  time  in  the  year  subsequent.  His  salary  since 
that  period  has  amounted  to  about  9,000  pounds,  and  there  can  be  no 
doubt,  from  the  manner  of  his  living,  that  considerably  more  than  one 
half  of  this  has  been  saved.  The  mere  interest  of  8,000  pounds,  for 
six  years,  is  3,920  pounds,  so  that  taking  it  for  granted  the  Governor 
has  not  left  his  money  idle,  and  excluding  the  idea  of  extraordinary 
increase  in  land  speculations,  we  have  here  data  for  supposing  a  fortune 
of  not  much  short  of  20,000  pounds. 


128  Alexander  Hamilton 

never  countervail,  in  any  reasonable  mind,  the  evi 
dence  which  arises  from  them. 

We  must,  however,  observe  that,  in  our  opinion, 
the  friends  to  amendments,  of  whatever  party,  will 
do  well  to  join  in  support  of  Judge  Yates.  That 
gentleman,  by  having  the  confidence  of  both  par 
ties  in  this  State,  will  be  more  likely  to  have  the 
confidence  of  the  United  States,  than  one  who  is 
supposed  by  many  of  the  most  intelligent  friends  of 
the  Constitution  among  us  to  desire  its  entire  sub 
version.  And  it  must  be  evident,  that  as  far  as  the 
governor  of  a  State  can  contribute  to  the  attainment 
of  amendments  in  the  National  Constitution,  the 
man  who  is  most  likely  to  have  the  confidence  and 
good-will  of  the  Union  will  be  the  most  likely  to 
effect  it. 

In  our  first  address  we  advanced  the  sentiment, 
that  all  should  join  "  in  the  support  of  the  Constitu 
tion  established  by  the  people  of  the  United  States, 
and  that  all  should  join  in  the  reconsideration  of  the 
parts  which  have  been  the  subject  of  objection.'* 
On  this  point  we  are  charged  with  inconsistency, 
and  it  is  asserted,  that  there  is  every  reason  to  be 
lieve  that  the  principal  opponents  of  the  Governor 
do  not  wish  to  see  any  amendments  to  the  Constitu 
tion,  and  are  averse  to  a  reconsideration  of  it.  As 
far  as  we  are  concerned,  we  affirm  that  the  charge  is 
destitute  of  truth,  and  we  defy  those  who  make  it, 
to  produce  any  thing  like  proof  of  its  being  well 
founded. 

It  is  true  that  on  the  occasion  of  the  election  of  a 
representative  of  this  district  in  Congress,  we  most 


Addresses  1 29 

of  us  contended  for  the  propriety  of  choosing  a  per 
son  attached  to  the  Constitution;  but  this  certainly 
has  nothing  to  do  with  a  disinclination  to  amend 
ments  or  to  a  reconsideration  of  the  system,  nor 
will  it  in  any  candid  mind  appear  to  militate  against 
the  sincerity  of  the  desire,  which  we  profess  to  have, 
of  reconciliation  and  union  between  the  different 
parties  in  the  State.  It  was  not  to  be  doubted,  that 
in  other  parts  of  this  State  every  effort  would  be 
made  by  those  who  opposed  the  Constitution,  to 
choose  for  representatives  men  of  sentiments  similar 
to  their  own,  and  it  could  not  reasonably  be  ex 
pected,  under  such  circumstances,  that  its  friends  in 
a  friendly  district  would  not  be  equally  strenuous 
for  representatives  of  their  own  sentiments.  Could 
it  be  expected  that  we  should  abandon  the  distinc 
tions  which  actually  exist,  previous  to  a  foundation 
being  laid  for  a  reciprocal  renunciation  of  them? 
This  is  the  desirable  object  at  which  we  and  our 
fellow-citizens  now  aim. 

Nor  can  a  better  proof  be  given  of  it  than  in  the 
disposition  manifested  to  support  a  man  of  political 
opinions  different  from  those  generally  entertained 
by  them  and  by  us.  And  we  strongly  flatter  our 
selves  that  the  desirable  end  in  contemplation  will 
be  attained  by  the  co-operation  of  all  those  through 
out  the  State  who  wish  to  see  the  spirit  of  faction 
and  dissension  extinguished. 

We  forbear  any  further  comment  on  the  address 
of  our  opponents.  We  trust  that  nothing  they 
have  offered,  which  has  the  semblance  of  argument, 
remains  unattended  to,  and  we  do  not  choose  to 


VOL.  II.— 9. 


130  Alexander  Hamilton 

pursue  them  into  any  other  field.  We  trust  that  all 
the  considerate,  disinterested,  and  independent,  all 
the  sincere  lovers  of  peace  and  harmony,  all  those  who 
are  unwilling  to  sacrifice  the  good  of  the  State  to  the 
aggrandizement  or  advantage  of  an  individual,  will 
heartily  unite  in  the  endeavor  to  appease  the  dis 
tractions  of  the  community.  It  is  evident  that  a 
large  proportion  of  it  is,  in  all  probability,  irrecon 
cilably  dissatisfied  with  the  administration  of  the 
present  Chief  Magistrate.  There  can,  therefore,  be 
no  rational  hope  of  future  union  or  concord  under 
his  auspices.  And  we  boldly  appeal  to  the  breast 
of  every  good  citizen,  and  ask  what  inducement 
there  can  be  to  support  the  re-election  of  Governor 
Clinton,  which  ought  to  stand,  even  for  an  instant, 
in  competition  with  the  blessings  of  union  and 
concord. 

By  order  of  the  Committee, 

ALEXANDER  HAMILTON, 

Chairman. 


LETTERS  OF  H.  G. 


131 


LETTERS  OF  H.  G. 


LETTER   I 

NEW  YORK,  February  20,  1789. 

DEAR  SIR: 

Your  letter  of  the  i8th  instant  has  duly  come  to 
hand,  and  entitles  you  to  my  particular  thanks.  In 
return  I  shall  endeavor  fully  to  comply  with  your 
request,  and  furnish  you,  in  a  series  of  letters,  with 
all  the  material  in  my  power  to  enable  you  to  judge 
what  conduct  it  will  be  proper  for  you  to  pursue  in 
relation  to  the  ensuing  election  for  governor.  Your 
influence  is  considerable,  and  you  do  well  to  examine 
before  you  resolve  on  what  side  to  bestow  it. 

The  present  Governor  was  bred  to  the  law  under 
William  Smith,  Esquire,  formerly  of  this  city.  Some 
time  before  the  late  revolution  he  resided  in  Ulster 
County,  and  there  followed  his  profession  with  repu 
tation,  though  not  with  distinction.  He  was  not 
supposed  to  possess  considerable  talents,  but,  upon 
the  whole,  stood  fair  on  the  score  of  probity.  It 
must,  however,  be  confessed,  he  very  early  got  the 
character  with  many  of  being  a  very  artful  man,  and 
it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at,  if  that  impression,  on 
the  minds  in  which  it  prevailed,  deducted  some 
thing  from  the  opinion  of  his  integrity.  But  it 

133 


134  Alexander  Hamilton 

would  be  refining  too  much  to  admit  such  a  conse 
quence  to  be  a  just  one.  There  certainly  are  charac 
ters  (though  they  may  be  rare)  which  unite  a  great 
degree  of  address,  and  even  a  large  portion  of  what 
is  best  expressed  by  the  word  cunning,  with  a  pretty 
exact  adherence  in  the  main  to  the  principles  of 
integrity. 

Mr.  Clinton,  from  his  youth  upward,  has  been  re 
markable  for  a  quality  which,  when  accompanied 
by  a  sound  and  enlarged  understanding,  a  liberal 
mind,  and  a  good  heart,  is  denominated  firmness, 
and  answers  the  most  valuable  purposes ;  but  which, 
when  joined  with  narrow  views,  a  prejudiced  and 
contracted  disposition,  a  passionate  and  interested 
temper,  passes  under  the  name  of  obstinacy,  and  is 
the  source  of  the  greatest  mischiefs,  especially  in 
exalted  public  stations. 

This  gentleman,  immediately  preceding  the  con 
test  with  Great  Britain,  was  several  times  returned 
a  member  of  Assembly  for  the  county  in  which  he 
lived,  and  being  of  a  warm,  zealous,  and  resolute 
temper,  became  in  a  great  measure  the  head  of  one 
of  the  parties  which  then  prevailed  in  the  Legisla 
ture.  The  merit  or  demerit  of  these  parties  is  not 
now  worthy  of  discussion,  nor  can  they,  or  the  prin 
ciples  upon  which  they  reciprocally  moved,  be  too 
soon  or  too  entirely  buried  in  oblivion. 

In  the  beginning  of  1775  the  contest  with  Great 
Britain  had  become  serious;  and  we  all  remember 
the  interesting  question  then  agitated  in  our  As 
sembly,  respecting  the  co-operation  of  this  State  in 
the  general  measures  of  America.  Here  Mr.  Clinton 


Letters  of  H.  G.  135 

and  Mr.  Philip  Schuyler  x  were  the  leaders  of  the 
minority,  who  advocated  the  propriety  of  that  co 
operation;  and  both  these  gentlemen,  for  their  con 
duct  upon  the  occasion,  will  always  be  entitled  to 
credit  from  the  friends  of  the  revolution.  To  com 
pare  the  degree  of  merit  to  which  they  may  respec 
tively  lay  claim  would  be  an  invidious  task.  But 
as  the  partisans  of  Governor  Clinton  have  taken 
pains  to  propagate  an  opinion  of  superior  merit  in 
him,  in  regard  to  this  transaction,  it  is  but  justice  to 
the  other  gentleman  to  observe  that  he  was  equally 
open  and  decided  in  the  part  he  took  in  that  ques 
tion;  that  as  none  will  pretend  to  ascribe  to  Mr. 
Clinton  greater  abilities  than  to  Mr.  Schuyler,  the 
exertions  of  the  latter  must  have  been  at  least  as 
useful  as  those  of  the  former;  and  that  Mr.  Schuyler 
has  in  his  favor  the  additional  circumstance  of 
having  risked  a  large  property,  which  Mr.  Clinton 
had  not  to  risk,  upon  the  event  of  this  revolution. 
With  sincere  esteem, 

I  remain,  dear  sir, 

Your  obedient  servant, 

H.  G. 

To ,  Esq.,  Suffolk  County. 


LETTER   II 

NEW  YORK,  February  21,  1789. 

SIR: 

Shortly  after  the  breaking  out  of  the  war  with 
Great  Britain,  Mr.  Clinton  received  an  appointment 

1  Then  called  Colonel  Schuyler,  and  since  General  Schuyler. 


136  Alexander  Hamilton 

as  brigadier-general,  in  which  capacity  he  served 
until  he  was  elected  governor  of  this  State,  some  time 
in  the  early  part  of  the  year  1777. 

In  both  these  situations,  from  the  condition  of 
the  State,  which,  during  the  greater  part  of  the  war, 
was  its  principal  theatre,  Mr.  Clinton  was  frequently 
engaged  in  military  duties.  There  is,  however,  no 
part  of  his  character  which  has  been  more  misrepre 
sented  than  the  military  part  of  it.  His  panegyrists 
describe  him  to  us  as  the  "war-worn  veteran"  —the 
complete  soldier — the  consummate  general.  One 
would  imagine  from  their  stories  of  him  that  he  had 
often,  in  the  language  of  Sergeant  Kite,  "  breakfasted 
upon  ravelins,  and  picked  his  teeth  with  palisadoes," 
— that  he  was  the  first  of  American  generals — a  Ma- 
rius  in  courage — a  Caesar  in  skill — inferior  in  nothing 
to  a  Turenne  or  a  Monticuculli,  an  Eugene  or  a 
Marlborough.  But  trust  me,  my  dear  sir,  this  is 
mere  rant  and  romance.  That  Mr.  Clinton  is  a  man 
of  courage,  there  is  no  reason  to  doubt.  That  he  was 
upon  most  occasions  active  and  vigorous,  cannot  be 
justly  disputed.  In  his  capacity  of  governor  he  was 
ever  ready  to  promote  the  common  cause,  prompt  in 
affording  the  aid  of  the  militia  when  requisite,  and 
scrupling  not,  when  he  thought  his  presence  might 
be  of  use,  to  put  himself  at  the  head  of  them.  But 
here  his  praise  as  a  soldier  ends.  Beyond  this  he 
has  no  pretension  to  the  wreath  of  military  renown. 
No  man  can  tell  when  or  where  he  gave  proofs  of 
generalship,  either  in  council  or  in  the  field.  After 
diligent  inquiry,  I  have  not  been  able  to  learn  that 
he  was  ever  more  than  once  in  actual  combat.  This 


Letters  of  H.  G.  137 

was  at  Fort  Montgomery,  where  he  commanded  in 
person,  and  which,  after  a  feeble  and  unskilful  de 
fence,  was  carried  by  storm.  That  post,  strongly 
fortified  by  nature,  almost  inaccessible  in  itself,  and 
sufficiently  manned,  was  capable  of  being  rendered 
a  much  more  difficult  morsel  to  the  assailants  than 
they  found  it  to  be.  This,  I  own,  was  not  the  com 
mon  idea  at  the  time;  but  it  is  not  the  less  true. 
To  embellish  military  exploits,  and  varnish  military 
disgraces,  is  no  unusual  policy.  Besides,  Governor 
Clinton  was  at  the  zenith  of  his  popularity — a  cir 
cumstance  which  disposed  men's  minds  to  take  a 
great  deal  for  granted.  One  particular  in  this  affair 
deserves  to  be  noticed.  It  is  certain  that  the  Gov 
ernor  made  a  well-timed  retreat  (I  mean  personally, 
for  the  greatest  part  of  the  garrison  were  captured),  a 
thing  which  must  have  occasioned  no  small  conflict 
in  the  breast  of  a  commander  nice  in  military  punc 
tilio.  But  squeamishness  on  this  head  had  been  ill- 
placed.  It  was  undoubtedly  the  duty  of  the  Brigadier 
to  provide  in  season  for  the  safety  of  the  Governor. 

Those  who  are  best  acquainted  with  the  particulars 
of  the  burning  of  Esopus,  in  the  fall  of  the  year  1777, 
assert  that  his  Excellency  was  culpably  deficient  in 
exertion  on  that  occasion.  The  fact  seems  to  have 
been  that  a  large  body  of  men  remained  unemployed 
in  the  vicinity,  under  his  direction,  while  the  descent  of 
the  enemy  was  made  with  little  or  no  opposition.  And 
there  is  room  to  suppose  that,  if  a  better  countenance 
had  been  kept  up,  the  evil  might  have  been  prevented. 
Very  sincerely  yours,  H.  G. 

To ,  Esq.,  Suffolk  County. 


138  Alexander  Hamilton 

LETTER    III 

NEW  YORK,  February  22,  1789. 

DEAR  SIR: 

You  mention,  toward  the  close  of  your  letter,  two 
reports  circulating  in  your  county,  which  you  say 
operate  to  the  advantage  of  Mr.  Clinton:  the  one, 
that  at  the  time  he  first  took  the  chair  of  govern 
ment,  "the  great  men,"  as  they  are  insidiously 
called,  declined  the  station,  through  apprehension 
of  the  dangers  that  might  attend  it, — not  less  willing 
then  to  set  him  up  as  a  mark  for  the  resentment  of 
the  power  with  which  we  were  contending,  in  case 
of  an  unfortunate  issue  to  the  war,  than  eager  now 
to  deprive  him  of  the  well-earned  fruits  of  his  cour 
age,  after  it  has  been  happily  terminated ;  the  other, 
that  the  exertions  made  by  this  State  during  the  war 
are  chiefly  to  be  attributed  to  his  influence. 

Truly,  my  dear  sir,  had  the  terms  of  your  letter 
been  less  positive,  I  could  not  have  supposed  it  pos 
sible  that  suggestions  so  unfounded  as  these,  and  so 
easily  to  be  disproved  by  the  testimony  of  all  well- 
informed  men,  could  ever  have  been  propagated. 

So  far  is  the  first  report  from  being  true,  that  it  is 
a  fact  notorious  to  those  who  were  acquainted  with 
the  transactions  of  the  period,  that  in  the  very  first 
election  for  governor  in  this  State  General  Schuyler 
was  a  competitor  with  Mr.  Clinton  for  the  office,  and 
it  is  alleged  would  have  been  likely  to  prevail,  had 
not  the  votes  of  a  considerable  body  of  militia,  then 
under  the  immediate  command  and  influence  of  the 
latter,  turned  the  scales  in  his  favor. 

Neither  is  there  much  more  of  truth  in  the  second 


Letters  of  H.  G.  139 

report.  Mr.  Clinton's  zeal  and  activity  in  forward 
ing  the  revolution  were  unquestionably  conspicuous. 
But  to  ascribe  to  him  the  chief  merit  of  the  exer 
tions  of  the  State  is  to  decorate  him  with  the  spoils 
of  others.  There  were,  at  every  period  of  the  war, 
choice  spirits  in  both  Houses  of  the  Legislature,  his 
equals  in  zeal  and  fortitude,  his  superiors  in  abilities. 
These  men  needed  not  his  incitement  to  invigorate 
their  efforts,  nor  his  counsel  to  direct  their  plans. 

One  of  the  number  only  I  shall  name,  Egbert  Ben 
son,  Esq.,  the  present  attorney-general;  this  gentle 
man,  in  the  capacity  of  a  member  of  the  Assembly, 
long  had  a  principal  agency  in  giving  energy  and 
animation  to  the  measures  of  the  State.  In  con 
fining  myself  to  the  mention  of  Mr.  Benson,  it  is  not 
because  there  are  not  others  who  have  an  equal  right 
to  it,  but  because  it  is  his  peculiar  good  fortune  to 
have  virtues  and  talents,  and  yet  to  be  unenvied.  And 
as  it  is  my  intention  you  should  be  at  liberty  to 
make  any  use  of  these  letters  which  you  may  think 
proper,  I  am  unwilling  to  attempt  an  enumeration 
of  all  the  characters  alluded  to,  lest,  if  incomplete, 
it  should  be  the  occasion  of  offence.  Though  not 
immediately  connected  with  the  subject,  there  is  one 
circumstance  which  I  cannot  forbear  mentioning  be 
fore  I  conclude.  Mr.  Benson,  during  the  war,  was 
considered  as  the  confidential  friend  and  adviser  of 
the  Governor.  Not  long  after  the  peace,  it  was  per 
ceived  that  this  relation  between  the  two  persons 
began  to  be  weakened,  and  it  is  some  time  since  it 
has  been  understood  to  have  entirely  ceased.  The 
first  appearance  of  the  change  was,  to  discerning 


140  Alexander  Hamilton 

men,  an  ill  omen  of  the  future.  But  Benson  was 
an  unfit  confidant  for  the  new  system  of  policy. 
He  was  honest  and  independent.  Materials  better 
adapted  for  tools  were  wanted,  and  they  have  been 
selected  with  admirable  judgment 

Yours,  with  much  regard, 

H.  G. 

To ,  Esq.,  Suffolk  County. 


LETTER   IV 

NEW  YORK,  February  24,  1789. 

You  will  perceive,  my  dear  sir,  from  the  sketch  I 
have  given  you,  that  though  the  present  Governor 
has  a  just  title  to  credit  for  his  exertions  in  the  last 
revolution,  yet  the  degree  of  credit  to  which  he  is 
entitled  has  been  immodestly  exaggerated.  It  is  to 
be  wished,  nevertheless,  for  the  honor  and  interest 
of  the  State,  that  his  administration  since  the  peace 
was  proportionably  commendable.  But  with  the 
close  of  the  war,  the  scene  of  merit  closes.  All  that 
succeeds  is  either  negative  or  mischievous. 

It  may  seem  strange  to  some,  that  a  man  who  had 
behaved  well  in  one  situation  should  be  so  entirely 
defective  or  faulty  in  another.  But  men  acquainted 
with  human  nature  and  its  history,  on  a  large  scale, 
will  be  sensible  that  there  is  nothing  extraordinary 
in  the  thing.  Many  of  those  who  have  proved  the 
worst  scourges  of  society  have,  in  the  commencement 
of  their  career,  been  its  brightest  ornaments.  These 
fair  beginnings  are  sometimes  the  effect  of  premedi 
tation,  to  pave  the  way  to  future  mischief;  at  other 


Letters  of  H.  G.  141 

times,  they  are  the  natural  result  of  a  mixed  charac 
ter,  placed  in  favorable  circumstances. 

In  all  struggles  for  liberty,  the  leaders  of  the  people 
have  fallen  under  two  principal  discriminations; 
those  who,  to  a  conviction  of  the  real  usefulness  of 
civil  liberty,  join  a  sincere  attachment  to  the  public 
good,  and  those  who  are  of  restless  and  turbulent 
spirit,  impatient  of  control,  and  averse  to  all  power 
or  superiority  which  they  do  not  themselves  enjoy. 
With  men  of  the  latter  description,  this  transition 
from  demagogues  to  despots  is  neither  difficult  nor 
uncommon. 

Mr.  Clinton,  as  a  zealous  advocate  for  American 
independence  in  the  course  of  a  war,  in  which  the 
cause  to  which  he  was  attached  was  every  moment 
exposed  to  the  most  critical  hazards,  under  the  in 
fluence  of  a  sense  of  continual  danger  to  that  cause, 
and  of  course  to  himself,  as  one  of  its  supporters,  was 
naturally  led  to  activity  and  exertion.  But  such  a 
situation  affords  a  very  partial  and  imperfect  view 
of  his  character.  No  certain  conclusion  can  be 
drawn  from  it  of  the  general  disposition  and  prin 
ciples  of  the  man.  These  can  only  be  estimated 
with  certainty  in  situations  in  which  the  passions 
have  their  natural  and  ordinary  course,  free  from 
any  violent  impulse  of  any  kind. 

It  is  therefore  in  the  peace-administration  of  Mr. 
Clinton,  that  we  may  expect  to  find  the  best  ma 
terials  for  judging  of  his  fitness  or  unfitness  to  gov 
ern.  These  I  shall  endeavor  to  explore  in  some 
succeeding  letters,  concluding  the  present  with  this 
general  observation:  /  do  not  recollect  a  single 


142  Alexander  Hamilton 

measure  of  public  utility,  since  the  peace,  for  which 
the  State  is  indebted  to  its  Chief  Magistrate. 
Yours,  with  sincere  regard, 

H.  G. 

To ,  Esq.,  Suffolk  County. 


LETTER  V 

NEW  YORK,  February  25,  1789. 

DEAR  SIR: 

In  yours  of  the  230!  instant,  which  has  just  come 
to  hand,  you  observe  that  there  are  persons  in  your 
county  who  entertain  favorable  impressions  of  the 
present  Governor,  for  the  good  order  preserved  in 
this  city  upon  the  evacuation  by  the  British  troops, 
and  which  you  say  is  ascribed  to  his  moderation, 
care,  and  decision.  This  is  an  idea  not  confined  to 
your  county.  Mr.  Clinton  and  his  friends  have  had 
the  address  to  disseminate  it  in  this  and  in  other 
parts  of  the  district.  The  apprehensions  excited  by 
some  imflammatory  publications,  prior  to  our  taking 
possession  of  the  city,  disposed  men's  minds  to  re 
gard  it  as  a  great  merit  in  the  Executive,  that  they 
were  not  subjected  to  general  plunder  and  mas 
sacre.  But  this  compliment  to  him  includes  a  sup 
position  of  licentiousness  and  fury  in  the  citizens 
in  general,  who  returned  within  the  district  at  that 
period,  which  they  do  not  deserve,  and  which,  in 
truth,  form  no  part  of  the  American  character. 

It  must  be  confessed  that  there  were  a  few  violent 
men,  and  that  these,  for  the  sake  of  present  conse 
quence,  endeavored  to  work  on  the  passions  of  others 


Letters  of  H.  G.  143 

for  intemperate  purposes.  But  the  number  of  those 
who  were  inclined  to  violate  the  laws,  or  disturb  the 
public  peace,  was  at  no  time  considerable  enough  to 
make  the  danger  serious.  The  greater  part  were 
either  for  liberal  and  moderate  measures,  or,  at 
worst,  for  some  legislative  discriminations.  It  is 
worthy  of  remark,  that  some  of  the  most  heated 
have  been,  at  all  times,  warm  adherents  to  the 
Governor,  and  objects  of  his  peculiar  patronage. 

What  was  the  precise  line  of  conduct  pursued  by 
his  Excellency  at  the  juncture  in  question,  I  have 
never  been  able  clearly  to  ascertain.  But  to  many, 
and  to  me  among  the  rest,  it  appeared  indecisive 
and  temporizing,  favoring  more  of  artifice  and  du 
plicity  than  of  real  prudence  or  energy.  A  popular 
Chief  Magistrate,  as  Mr.  Clinton  then  certainly  was, 
standing  on  the  firm  ground  of  national  faith  and 
the  constitution,  by  an  independent  use  of  his  in 
fluence,  might,  in  all  probability,  have  prevented 
some  measures  of  that  day  which  have  been  both 
injurious  and  disreputable  to  the  State. 

The  inclination  of  the  Governor  to  hinder  tumult 
or  commotion  is  not  to  be  questioned.  In  his  situa 
tion,  a  man  must  have  been  both  abandoned  and 
mad  not  to  have  had  that  inclination.  Regard  to 
his  own  authority  and  consequence,  independent  of 
other  motives,  was  sufficient  to  produce  it.  But 
there  are  circumstances  which  warrant  a  conclusion, 
that  he  had  formed  a  plan  of  building  up  his  own 
popularity  in  the  city  upon  that  of  certain  individ 
uals  who  were  then  advocates  for  persecution;  not, 
indeed,  in  the  shape  of  mobs  and  riots,  but  of  law; 


144  Alexander  Hamilton 

by  banishment,  disfranchisement,  and  the  like;  and 
that  his  conduct  was  guided  by  condescensions  to 
them,  which,  in  some  measure,  involved  him  in  their 
policy.  There  is  a  fact  to  this  effect,  the  particulars 
of  which  I  do  not  now  distinctly  recollect,  but 
which,  as  far  as  my  memory  serves  me,  was  of  the 
following  complexion: — The  council  appointed  for 
the  temporary  government  of  the  southern  district, 
on  account  of  some  irregularities  which  had  hap 
pened,  passed  a  resolution,  or  framed  a  proclama 
tion,  for  repressing  the  spirit  that  had  occasioned 
them,  which  was  intrusted  to  the  Governor  for  pub 
lication.  Instead,  however,  of  executing  the  inten 
tion  of  the  council,  he  communicated  their  act  to 
two  of  the  persons  alluded  to,  and,  upon  their  ad 
vices  or  remonstrances,  withheld  it  from  publica 
tion  till  the  next  meeting  of  the  council,  a  majority 
of  whom  were  then  prevailed  upon  to  rescind  it. 

It  is  not  undeserving  of  attention,  that  the  chief 
agents  in  promoting  the  laws  passed  after  the 
evacuation  of  the  city,  of  which  the  inhabitants  of 
the  southern  district  had  reason  to  complain,  were 
men  who  had  been  constantly  devoted  to  the 
Governor;  and  that  the  persons  who  have  had  the 
greatest  share  in  mitigating  or  abrogating  those 
exceptiona  laws  have  been  in  opposite  views  to 
him.  And  it  ought  not  to  escape  observation,  that 
there  has  never  been  any  official  act  of  the  Gov 
ernor  calculated  to  effect  the  alteration  or  repeal 
of  those  laws. 

It  is  with  reluctance,  my  dear  sir,  that  I  look  back 
to  transactions  which  cannot  be  too  soon  forgotten. 


Letters  of  H.  G.  145 

All  parties  now  rejoice  in  the  effects  of  a  more  liberal 
policy.  And  I  should  not  have  been  induced  to 
revive  topics  of  so  disagreeable  a  nature,  had  it  not 
been  necessary  as  well  to  the  advancement  of  truth 
as  to  the  performance  of  my  promise  to  you. 
I  remain  your  friend  and  servant, 

H.  G. 
To ,  Esq.,  Suffolk  County. 


LETTER   VI 

NEW  YORK,  February  26,  1789. 

DEAR  SIR: 

I  shall  now  proceed  to  give  you  a  brief  history  of 
the  Governor's  administration  since  the  peace,  as  it 
respects  the  United  States,  from  the  whole  of  which, 
preferring  the  evidence  of  actions  to  that  of  profes 
sions,  I  am  persuaded  that  you  will  agree  with  me, 
that  there  is  satisfactory  proof  of  his  being  an  enemy 
to  the  AMERICAN  UNION. 

The  facts  from  which  I  shall  draw  this  conclusion 
are  of  the  following  nature : 

I.  That  while  he  has  acknowledged  the  insuffi 
ciency  of  the  old  government,  he  has  strenuously  op 
posed  the  principal  measures  devised  by  the  joint 
councils  of  America  for  supporting  and  strengthen 
ing  it. 

II.  That  he  has  treated  Congress,  as  a  body,  in  a 
contemptuous  manner. 

III.  That  his  behavior  towards  the  individuals 
composing  that  body  has  been  of  a  nature  calculated 
to  give  them  just  cause  of  disgust. 


VOL.  II. — 10. 


146  Alexander  Hamilton 

IV.  That  he  disapproved  of  the  very  first  step 
taken  toward  the  effectual  amendment  of  the  old 
confederation. 

V.  That  he  prejudged  and  condemned  the  new 
Constitution  before  it  was  framed. 

VI.  That  he  opposed  it,  after  it  appeared,  with 
unreasonable  obstinacy. 

VII.  That  he  has  continued  his  opposition  to  it 
even  since  its  adoption  by  this  State.     And, 

VIII.  That  he  is  unfriendly  to  the  residence  of 
Congress  in  this  city. 

From  the  assemblage  of  these  facts,  I  am  mis 
taken,  my  dear  sir,  if  you  do  not  think  the  evidence 
of  his  enmity  to  the  Union  complete;  and  I  shall 
not  be  the  less  mistaken  if  you  do  not  consider  this 
as  a  conclusive  objection  to  his  re-election. 

Whatever  may  have  been  your  doubts  respecting 
parts  of  the  new  Constitution,  I  am  satisfied  that 
you  regard  the  preservation  of  the  UNION  as  essen 
tial  to  the  peace  and  prosperity  of  the  country,  and 
will  deem  it  unsafe  to  trust  any  man  with  power, 
who  entertains  views  inimical  to  it. 

Unfeignedly  yours, 

H.  G. 

Xo ,  Esq.,  Suffolk  County. 


LETTER   VII 

NEW  YORK,  February  27,  1789. 

DEAR  SIR: 

In  my  last  I  stated  a  number  of  facts  tending  to 
prove  that  Mr.  Clinton  is  not  a  friend  of  the  Union. 


Letters  of  H.  G.  147 

I  would  not  be  understood  that  either  of  these  facts 
singly  would  authorize  such  a  conclusion,  but  that 
it  is  the  result  of  them  collectively.  Many  men,  of 
whose  good  intentions  I  have  no  doubt,  have  enter 
tained  similar  sentiments  with  him  on  several  of  the 
points  stated;  but  I  am  mistaken  if  there  is  to  be 
found  one,  out  of  the  circle  of  his  immediate  instru 
ments,  who  has  had  or  discovered  the  same  dis 
position  in  all  the  particulars.  I  shall  now  briefly 
mention  the  different  articles  of  charge. 

The  first  is,  that,  while  he  has  acknowledged  the 
insufficiency  of  the  old  government,  he  has  stren 
uously  opposed  the  principal  measures  devised  by 
the  joint  councils  of  America  for  supporting  and 
strengthening  it. 

This  admission  of  the  insufficiency  of  the  old  con 
federation  has  not  only  been  made  in  private  con 
versations,  but  fully  and  pointedly  in  the  late 
convention  of  this  State.  He  has  not,  however,  uni 
formly  held  the  same  language,  as  will  be  taken 
notice  of  hereafter. 

To  prove  the  latter  part  of  the  charge,  I  shall  in 
stance  his  opposition  to  the  impost  system  proposed 
by  Congress,  and  repeatedly  urged  by  them  as  the 
only  measure  to  obtain  revenue,  for  objects  of  in 
dispensable  importance,  on  which  reliance  could  be 
placed. 

The  first  idea  of  a  general  impost  for  the  benefit 
of  the  United  States  is  said  to  have  originated  in  a 
convention  held  at  Hartford,  consisting  of  deputies 
from  the  four  New  England  States  and  from  New 
York.  The  measure  was  agreed  upon  in  Congress 


148  Alexander  Hamilton 

in  February,  1781,  at  a  period  when  the  United 
States,  after  various  trials  of  requisitions  and  of 
other  expedients,  were  reduced  to  the  utmost  ex 
tremity  of  distress  for  want  of  money  to  carry  on 
the  war.  The  impost  then  proposed  was,  I  believe, 
granted  by  all  the  States  except  Rhode  Island. 
The  act  of  this  State,  passed  iQth  of  March,  1781, 
expressly  provides,  that  the  duties  granted  to 
Congress  "should  be  levied  and  collected  in  such 
manner  and  form,  and  under  such  pains,  penalties, 
and  regulations,  and  by  such  officers,  as  Congress 
should  from  time  to  time  make,  order,  direct,  and 
appoint." 

But,  on  the  appearance  of  peace,  the  system  of 
our  policy  changed.  The  foregoing  act  was  re 
pealed  by  one  passed  the  i5th  of  March,  1783,  by 
which  it  was  too  apparent  that  the  leaders  of  our 
councils,  at  the  first  dawn  of  peace,  were  resolved  to 
desert  the  principles  which  had  governed  them  in 
the  time  of  common  danger. 

It  is  true,  that  the  same  act  grants  the  duties 
anew,  but  to  be  collected  by  the  officers  and  under 
the  authority  of  the  State;  which  was  so  essential 
an  alteration  of  the  plan  as  would  have  rendered  it 
necessary  (had  not  the  opposition  of  Rhode  Island 
already  done  so)  to  recommence  the  business  in  a 
new  form,  in  order  that  all  the  States  might  stand 
on  an  equal  footing. 

I  remain,  dear  sir, 

Your  obedient  and  humble  servant, 

H.  G. 

To ,  Esq.,  Suffolk  County. 


Letters  of  H.  G.  149 

LETTER   VIII 

NEW  YORK,  February  28,  1789. 

DEAR  SIR: 

The  embarrassments  experienced  in  carrying 
through  the  first  plan,  the  increase  of  the  national 
debt,  and  other  circumstances,  induced  Congress  to 
devise  a  new  system  of  impost,  which  was  finally 
agreed  upon  on  the  i8th  of  April,  1783. 

In  this  system,  the  appointment  of  the  officers  to 
collect  the  duties  was  referred  to  the  several  States, 
which  it  was  supposed  would  remove  the  principal 
objection  to  the  former  plan.  All  the  States,  ex 
cept  New  York,  substantially  adopted  it,  annexing 
certain  precautions  for  the  more  secure  exercise  of 
the  powers  granted  to  Congress.  But  New  York 
persisted  to  the  last  in  withholding  her  assent.  She 
passed,  indeed,  a  law  for  granting  an  impost  on  dif 
ferent  principles;  but  as  Congress  could  not  accept 
this  without  releasing  the  other  States,  and  setting 
the  whole  business  afloat,  it  was  evident  to  all  the 
world  that  the  act  of  New  York  was  nothing  better 
than  a  mere  evasion  of  the  thing  asked. 

The  Governor,  undoubtedly,  took  an  active  part 
in  opposition  to  this  measure.  It  is  true,  he  de 
clared  in  the  convention  that  he  had  always  been  a 
friend  to  the  impost,  but  could  not  agree  to  the  man 
ner  in  which  Congress  proposed  to  exercise  the 
power.  This  is  plainly  a  subterfuge.  He  was  a 
friend  to  an  abstract  something,  which  might  be 
any  thing  or  nothing,  as  he  pleased;  but  he  was  an 
enemy  to  the  thing  proposed.  A  general  impost, 
being  a  measure  not  within  the  provision  of  the 


150  Alexander  Hamilton 

confederation,  could  only  be  brought  about  by 
some  general  plan  devised  by  the  common  councils  of 
the  UNION,  and  submitted  to  the  adoption  of  the 
several  States.  There  could  else  be  no  concert,  no 
common  agreement.  To  oppose,  therefore,  the  spe 
cific  plan  offered,  and  yet  pretend  to  be  a  friend  to 
the  thing  in  the  abstract,  deserves  no  better  name 
than  that  of  hypocrisy. 

I  am  possessed  of  unquestionable  evidence,  to 
prove  that  he  used  personal  influence  with  members 
of  the  Legislature  to  prejudice  them  against  the 
granting  of  the  impost.  You  may  obtain  a  con 
firmation  of  this  from  one  of  the  gentlemen  who 
represented  your  own  county  in  the  year  1786.  The 
argument  employed  with  him  was,  that  Congress 
being  a  single  body,  and  consequently  without 
checks,  would  be  apt  to  misapply  the  money  arising 
from  it.  This  looks  like  more  than  an  objection  to 
the  mode.  If  the  money  was  to  be  granted  in  any 
shape,  that  consequence,  if  to  be  apprehended  at  all, 
might  follow. 

A  question  of  a  very  delicate  and  serious  nature 
arises  on  the  conduct  of  the  Governor.  Is  it  justifi 
able  in  the  Chief  Magistrate  of  a  State  to  employ  his 
personal  influence  with  individual  members  of  the 
Legislature  in  relation  to  any  matter  of  public 
concern  which  is  to  come  under  their  deliberation? 
To  me  an  interference  of  this  sort  appears  highly 
exceptionable. 

With  sincere  regard,  I  am,  dear  sir, 

Your  most  obedient  servant,  H.  G. 

To ,  Esq.,  Suffolk  County. 


Letters  of  H.  G.  151 

LETTER   IX 

NEW  YORK,  March  2,  1789. 

DEAR  SIR: 

The  second  particular  which  I  have  stated,  as 
evidence  of  Mr.  Clinton's  enmity  to  the  Union,  is, 
that  he  has  treated  Congress,  as  a  body,  in  a  con 
temptuous  manner. 

A  proof  of  this  exists  in  his  refusal  to  convene  the 
Legislature  of  this  State  in  the  year  1786,  upon 
pressing  and  repeated  supplications  of  Congress; 
sheltering  himself  under  the  frivolous  pretence  that 
the  constitution  did  not  leave  him  at  liberty  to  do  it. 

The  constitution  empowers  the  governor  to  con 
vene  the  Legislature  "on  extraordinary  occasions.'* 
This  provision  is  evidently  calculated  to  enable  him 
to  call  together  the  Legislature  whenever  any  thing 
of  importance  out  of  the  ordinary  routine  of  State 
business  should  occur.  To  put  any  other  meaning 
upon  it  is  absurd,  and  would  embarrass  the  opera 
tions  of  government.  It  cannot  be  supposed  that 
the  constitution  intended  by  "extraordinary  occa 
sions"  nothing  but  wars,  rebellions,  plagues,  or 
earthquakes.  The  word  "extraordinary,"  as  used 
in  this  case,  can  only  be  construed  as  equivalent  to 
special;  and  a  special  occasion  is  any  thing  of  mo 
ment  out  of  the  common  and  expected  course.  It 
merits  attention,  that  the  words  of  the  constitution 
are,  simply,  that  the  governor  "  shall  have  power  to 
convene  the  Legislature  upon  extraordinary  occa 
sions."  This  mode  of  expression  has  plainly  an 
authorizing  and  empowering,  not  a  restricting  opera 
tion.  It  is  true  that  the  governor  is  bound,  in  the 


152  Alexander  Hamilton 

exercise  of  this  power,  to  observe  a  reasonable  dis 
cretion,  and  not  to  act  with  caprice,  levity,  or  wan 
tonness;  but  the  same  may  be  said  of  every  other 
power  with  which  he  is  intrusted,  and  does  not  affect 
the  constitutional  sense  of  the  provision. 

Let  us  now,  sir,  take  a  view  of  the  nature  of  the 
application  and  refusal.  The  Legislature  of  the 
State,  in  May,  1786,  passed  the  act  I  have  already 
mentioned,  in  lieu  of  one  conformable  to  the  plan 
proposed  by  Congress,  and  agreed  to  by  the  other 
twelve  States;  for  even  Rhode  Island  had  at  length 
got  the  better  of  her  scruples.  Congress  were  of 
opinion,  for  the  most  obvious  and  solid  reasons,  that 
they  could  derive  no  advantage  from  the  act  of  New 
York;  that  to  attempt  it  would  be  to  let  go  their 
hold  on  the  twelve  adopting  States,  who  had  made 
the  passing  of  similar  acts  by  all  the  States  the  con 
dition  of  their  grants;  that  the  act  of  New  York, 
independent  of  the  objection  just  mentioned,  was 
framed  upon  principles  mischievous  in  their  nature, 
and  calculated  not  only  in  a  great  measure  to  defeat 
the  revenue,  but  to  prevent  several  of  the  States 
from  entering  into  the  plan.  One  of  these  prin 
ciples  was,  that  the  paper-money  of  the  States 
should  be  receivable  in  payment  of  duties.  If  Con 
gress  had  acceded  to  such  a  plan,  the  consequence 
would  have  been  that  the  other  States  which  had 
emitted  paper-money  would  insist  upon  the  same 
privilege ;  by  which  means  the  duties  would  be  paid 
in  nominal  money  of  different  degrees  of  value,  in 
some  States  at  a  depreciation  of  forty  or  fifty  per 
cent. ;  a  circumstance  which  would  have  diminished 


Letters  of  H.  G.  153 

the  product  of  the  impost,  rendered  the  burthen 
unequal  upon  the  citizens  of  different  States,  and 
deterred  the  States  averse  to  paper-money  from 
engaging  in  the  scheme. 

Congress,  for  these  and  other  good  reasons,  con 
sidered  the  act  of  New  York  as  amounting  to  noth 
ing.  They  felt  at  the  same  time  that  the  honor 
and  interest  of  the  Union  were  suffering  for  want  of 
the  co-operation  of  this  State.  They  experienced  the 
most  painful  embarrassment,  in  particular,  from  the 
just  demands  of  those  foreigners  who  had  lent  us 
money  to  carry  on  the  war.  They  saw  themselves 
without  resource  even  for  paying  the  interest  of  the 
foreign  debt,  except  by  new  loans  abroad  for  that 
purpose, — a  resource  which  had  the  pernicious  effect 
of  an  accumulation  of  the  debt  (for  which  all  our 
estates  must  be  considered  as  mortgaged)  by  the 
tremendous  process  of  compound  interest. 

In  this  disgraceful  and  ruinous  situation,  the  re 
presentatives  of  the  United  States  make  a  solemn 
application  to  the  Governor  to  convene  the  Legisla 
ture  for  the  purpose  of  reconsidering  the  act.  He 
refuses  to  comply,  assigning  the  curious  reason  that 
the  constitution  empowers  him  to  convene  the 
Legislature  only  on  extraordinary  occasions,  and 
that  the  present  does  not  seem  to  hirri  such.  To 
give  color  to  this  idea,  he  intimates  the  recent  con 
sideration  of  the  business  by  the  Legislature. 

He  seems  in  this  proceeding  not  only  to  have 
taken  it  for  granted  that  the  Legislature  would  be 
immovable  by  the  most  solid  reasons  for  altering 
their  policy  (which,  if  true,  he  had  no  right  to 


154  Alexander  Hamilton 

presume),  but  also  to  have  forgotten,  or  not  to  have 
chosen  to  recollect,  that  the  Legislature  to  be  con 
vened  was  not  to  be  regarded  as  the  same  body 
which  had  before  decided,  having  been  formed  by  a 
subsequent  election  of  the  people.  The  measure 
would,  therefore,  have  had  to  undergo  a  new  ex 
amination  by  a  new  body. 

He,  notwithstanding,  refuses.  Congress,  impelled 
by  the  exigency  of  the  situation,  pass  new  resolu 
tions,  declaring  their  opinion  that  the  critical  and 
embarrassed  situation  of  the  finances  of  the  United 
States  required  that  the  system  of  impost  should  be 
carried  into  immediate  effect,  and  that  they  deemed 
the  occasion  sufficiently  important  and  extraordi 
nary  to  request  that  the  Legislature  of  this  State 
should  be  convened,  and  therefore  again  earnestly 
recommending  it  to  the  Executive  to  convene  the 
Legislature.  The  Governor  persisted  in  his  refusal, 
and  the  Legislature  is  not  convened. 

Now,  sir,  I  will  boldly  appeal  to  every  candid 
mind  whether  this  transaction  is  not  evidence,  as 
well  of  a  splenetic  and  disrespectful  disposition  to 
ward  the  government  of  the  United  States,  as  of  a 
temper  inflexibly  haughty  and  obstinate.  In  what 
a  humiliating  light  must  he  have  considered  Con 
gress,  not  to  have  looked  upon  their  earnest  and 
repeated  application  on  a  matter  which  they  and 
all  the  other  States,  thought  of  the  most  serious 
moment  to  the  Union,  in  a  situation  notoriously 
distressing  and  critical,  as  an  occasion  sufficiently 
special  to  leave  him  at  liberty  to  call  the  Legislature 
together!  How  much  of  contempt  and  disregard 


Letters  of  H.  G.  155 

toward  the  representative  authority  of  confederated 
America  was  implied  in  such  a  construction!  The 
merits  of  the  impost  system  are  of  no  consequence  in 
the  consideration  of  the  subject.  The  whole  is  a 
question  of  decorum  and  due  deference  in  the  head 
of  a  particular  member  of  the  confederacy  toward 
the  head  of  the  whole  confederacy.  In  this  light,  it 
is  evident  that  the  conduct  of  the  Governor  on  the 
occasion  was  an  insult  to  the  people  of  the  United 
States,  and  of  course  to  the  people  of  this  State, 
through  their  representatives  in  Congress. 

I  remain  with  the  truest  attachment,  dear  sir, 
Your  obedient  and  humble  servant, 

H 
To ,  Esq.,  Suffolk  County. 


LETTER   X 

NEW  YORK,  March  3,  1789. 

DEAR  SIR: 

I  have  mentioned  as  a  third  circumstance  tending 
to  prove  the  enmity  of  the  Governor  to  the  Union, 
"that  his  behavior  toward  the  individuals  compos 
ing  Congress  has  been  of  a  nature  calculated  to  give 
them  just  cause  of  disgust. " 

I  am  well  informed  that  his  Excellency  never 
made  a  visit  to,  or  had  any  intercourse  of  civilities 
with,  either  of  the  two  last  Presidents  of  Congress. 
This  neglect  on  his  part  appears  the  more  pointed, 
as  it  is  well  known  that  he  had  been  upon  a  footing 
of  intimacy  with  one  of  the  gentlemen  previous  to 
his  appointment — I  mean  General  St.  Clair.  This 


156  Alexander  Hamilton 

gentleman  had  been  heard  to  lament  that  the  Gov 
ernor's  conduct  toward  him,  in  an  official  respect, 
had  put  it  out  of  his  power  to  keep  up  the  amicable 
intercourse  which  had  formerly  subsisted  between 
them.  It  seems  as  if  the  character  of  a  President 
of  Congress  amounted,  in  the  Governor's  estima 
tion,  to  a  forfeiture  even  of  the  rights  of  private 
friendship. 

This  behavior  to  the  official  head  of  Congress  is  to 
be  regarded  in  a  stronger  light  than  mere  disrespect 
to  the  individual.  It  may  justly  be  esteemed  dis 
respect  to  the  body  themselves,  and  to  have  been 
dictated  by  a  disposition  to  humiliate  the  govern 
ment  which  they  administered. 

The  same  spirit  ran  through  the  Governor's  con 
duct  toward  the  members  of  Congress  in  general. 
Very  few,  if  any  of  them,  experienced  any  atten 
tions  whatever  from  him. 

Whatever  apology  may  be  made  for  the  Govern 
or's  want  of  decent  hospitality  toward  the  repre 
sentatives  of  the  United  States,  I  believe  it  will  be 
difficult  to  find  an  excuse  for  his  personal  neglect  of 
them.  There  are  civilities  which  cost  nothing,  and 
these  might  have  been  bestowed  without  any  viola 
tion  of  the  frugality  of  his  Excellency's  maxims. 

It  may  be  asked  how  it  can  be  determined  where 
the  fault  lay,  whether  with  the  Governor,  or  with 
the  individuals  of  Congress.  I  answer,  that  with 
regard  to  the  Presidents  of  Congress,  there  can  be  no 
doubt.  As  that  body  sat  in  the  State,  it  was  un 
questionably  the  duty  of  the  Governor  to  pay  the 
first  attentions  to  the  President  after  his  election. 


Letters  of  H.  G.  157 

This  rule  has  been  understood  throughout  America, 
and  its  propriety  is  self-evident.  The  omitting  to 
pay  those  attentions  was  a  mark  of  disregard  to  the 
government  of  the  Union,  for  which  there  can  be  no 
excuse,  and  which  admits  of  but  one  interpretation. 
Dear  sir, 

Yours  sincerely,  etc., 

H 
To ,  Esq.,  Suffolk  County. 


LETTER   XI 

NEW  YORK,  March  4,  1789. 

DEAR  SIR: 

Some  time  in  the  latter  part  of  the  year  1785,  or 
beginning  of  1786,  the  State  of  Virginia  proposed 
the  holding  of  a  convention  for  the  purpose  of  devis 
ing  some  system  of  commercial  regulations  for  the 
United  States.  This  State,  among  others,  acceded 
to  the  proposition,  and  the  deputies  from  the  differ 
ent  States  appointed  pursuant,  met  at  Annapolis  in 
the  fall  of  1786.  But  the  number  actually  assem 
bled  formed  so  incomplete  a  representation  of  the 
Union,  that,  if  there  had  been  no  other  reason,  it 
would  have  been  inexpedient  for  them  to  proceed  in 
the  execution  of  their  mission.  In  addition  to  this, 
they  were  unanimously  of  opinion  that  some  more 
radical  reform  was  necessary;  and  that  even  to  ac 
complish  the  immediate  end  for  which  they  had 
been  deputed,  certain  collateral  changes  in  the  fed 
eral  system  would  be  requisite,  to  which  their  powers 
in  general  could  not  be  deemed  competent.  Under 


158  Alexander  Hamilton 

these  impressions,  they,  with  one  voice,  earnestly 
recommended  it  to  the  several  States  to  appoint 
deputies  to  meet  in  convention,  in  the  ensuing 
month  of  May,  with  power  to  revise  the  confedera 
tion  at  large,  and  to  propose  such  alterations  and 
amendments  as  should  appear  to  them  necessary  to 
render  it  adequate  to  the  exigencies  of  the  Union. 

The  report  of  this  convention  was  in  course  handed 
to  the  Governor,  on  the  return  of  the  deputies  of 
this  State  from  Annapolis. 

I  have  ascertained  it  beyond  a  doubt  that,  in  a 
conversation  on  the  subject  of  this  report,  he  ex 
pressed  a  strong  dislike  of  its  object,  declaring  that, 
in  his  opinion,  no  such  reform  as  the  report  contem 
plated  was  necessary;  that  the  confederation  as  it 
stood  was  equal  to  the  purposes  of  the  Union,  or,  with 
little  alteration,  could  be  made  so;  and  that  he 
thought  the  deputies  assembled  upon  that  occasion 
would  have  done  better  to  have  confined  themselves 
to  the  purposes  of  their  errand. 

This  was  the  first  thing  that  gave  me  a  decisive 
impression  of  the  insincerity  of  his  Excellency's 
former  conduct.  The  opponents  of  the  impost  sys 
tem  had,  in  their  writings  and  conversation,  held  up 
the  organization  of  Congress  as  a  principal  objec 
tion  to  the  grant  of  power  required  by  that  system. 
The  same  sentiment  had  been  conveyed  by  the 
Governor.  The  want  of  checks  from  the  constitu 
tion  of  Congress,  as  a  single  body,  seemed  to  be  the 
bulwark  of  the  opposition.  But  now  that  a  pro 
posal  was  made  which  evidently  had  in  view  a  dif 
ferent  construction  of  the  Federal  Government,  the 


Letters  of  H.  G.  159 

language  was  all  at  once  changed.  The  old  con 
federation  as  it  stood,  or  with  little  alteration,  was 
deemed  to  be  competent  to  the  ends  of  the  Union. 

This,  then,  seemed  to  be  the  true  state  of  the 
business.  On  the  one  hand,  Congress,  as  constituted, 
was  not  fit  to  be  trusted  with  power;  on  the  other, 
it  was  not  expedient  to  constitute  them  differently. 
To  me  it  appears  impossible  to  reconcile  all  this  to  a 
sincere  attachment  to  an  efficient  Federal  Govern 
ment.  Thus,  sir,  have  I  explained  to  you  my  mean 
ing  in  the  assertion :  that  the  Governor  disapproved 
of  the  very  first  step  taken  toward  the  effectual 
amendment  of  the  old  confederation. 

I  remain  with  esteem,  dear  sir, 

Your  very  humble  servant, 

H.  G. 

To ,  Esq.,  Suffolk  County. 


LETTER   XII 

NEW  YORK,  March  6,  1789. 

DEAR  SIR: 

One  of  the  circumstances  stated  to  you  in  mine  of 
the  26th  of  February,  to  show  that  the  Governor  is 
unfriendly  to  the  Union,  is,  that  he  prejudged  and 
condemned  the  new  Constitution  before  it  was 
framed. 

This  fact  has  been  long  since  given  to  the  public, 
to  which  no  other  answer,  that  I  have  heard,  has 
been  made  by  his  Excellency  or  his  friends  than 
that  he,  as  a  citizen,  had  a  right  to  entertain  and 
declare  such  sentiments  as  appeared  to  him  proper. 


160  Alexander  Hamilton 

This  is  a  position  not  to  be  denied ;  but  it  is  equally 
undeniable  that  his  constituents  have  as  good  a 
right  to  judge  of  the  propriety  of  his  opinions  and 
conduct,  and  of  the  views  by  which  they  seem  to  be 
actuated. 

While  the  convention  was  sitting  at  Philadelphia, 
the  Governor,  I  am  well  informed,  made  unreserved 
declarations  of  his  opinion,  that  no  good  was  to  be 
expected  from  the  appointment  or  deliberations  of 
that  body.  That  the  most  likely  result  was,  that 
the  country  would  be  thrown  into  confusion  by  the 
measure.  That  it  was  by  no  means  a  necessary  one, 
as  the  confederation  had  not  had  a  sufficient  trial, 
and  probably,  on  more  full  experiment,  would  be 
found  to  answer  all  the  purposes  of  the  Union. 

Here  we  shall  discover  the  clearest  indication  of  a 
predetermined  opposition  in  the  mind  of  his  Excel 
lency.  He  is  not  a  man  governed  in  ordinary  cases 
by  sudden  impulse.  Though  of  an  irritable  temper, 
when  not  under  the  immediate  influence  of  irrita 
tion  he  is  circumspect  and  guarded ;  and  seldom  acts 
or  speaks  without  premeditation  and  design. 

Language  of  the  kind  I  have  mentioned,  from 
him,  clearly  betrayed  an  intention  to  excite  preju 
dices  beforehand  against  whatever  plan  should  be 
proposed  by  the  convention.  For  such  conduct,  or 
for  such  an  intention,  no  apology  can  be  made.  The 
United  States  conceived  a  convention  to  be  proper, 
necessary,  and  expedient.  They  appointed  one,  this 
State  concurring.  Their  deputies  were  actually  as 
sembled,  and  in  deliberation.  The  step  once  taken, 
it  became  the  duty  of  every  good  man  to  give  the 


Letters  of  H.  G.  161 

attempt  a  fair  chance.  It  was  criminal  to  endeavor 
to  raise  prepossessions  against  it.  That  very  con 
duct  might  have  led  to  the  mischief  predicted.  It 
was  certainly  not  his  Excellency's  fault  that  his 
predictions  were  not  fulfilled.  In  all  probability,  if 
his  whole  party  had  been  as  pertinacious  as  himself, 
the  confusion  he  foretold  would  now  exist.  But, 
happily  for  the  United  States,  some  of  them  were 
more  prudent,  and  we  are  in  peace. 

The  declarations  of  the  Governor  on  this  occasion 
fix  upon  him  the  charge  of  inconsistency.  How  can 
what  he  said  in  the  instance  in  question  be  re 
conciled  with  his  declaration  in  the  convention, 
"that  he  had  always  lamented  the  feebleness  of  the 
confederation ' '  ? 

Yours,  with  great  regard, 
H- 

To ,  Esq.,  Suffolk  County. 


LETTER   XIII 

March  7,  1789. 

DEAR  SIR: 

The  next  in  order  of  the  circumstances  alleged  in 
proof  of  the  unfriendly  disposition  of  the  Governor 
to  the  Union,  is  that  he  opposed  the  new  Constitu 
tion,  after  it  appeared,  with  unreasonable  obstinacy. 

To  judge  of  the  propriety  of  this  observation,  it 
ought  to  be  recollected,  that  the  merits  or  demerits 
of  that  Constitution  must,  after  all,  be  in  a  great 
measure  a  speculative  question,  which  experience 
only  can  solve  with  certainty. 


VOL.  II.— II. 


1 62  Alexander  Hamilton 

It  ought  also  to  be  recollected  that  the  conven 
tion  who  framed  it  consisted,  if  not  wholly,  at  least 
generally,  of  men  from  whom  America  had  received 
the  strongest  proofs  of  patriotism  and  ability;  that 
this  body,  so  composed  (with  the  exception  of  only 
three  individuals),  united  in  the  plan,  which  was  the 
result  of  their  joint  deliberations;  and  that  a  Frank 
lin  and  a  Washington  are  among  the  number  of 
those  who  gave  their  approbation  to  it. 

It  ought  further  to  be  attended  to,  that  when  the 
convention  of  this  State  came  to  a  decision,  ten  out 
of  the  thirteen  States  had  adopted  the  Constitution, 
and  that  a  majority  of  the  characters  in  each  State, 
most  distinguished  for  virtue  and  wisdom,  were 
among  its  advocates. 

These,  sir,  are  truths  which  (notwithstanding 
the  clandestine  arts  made  use  of  to  traduce  some 
of  the  best  and  brightest  characters  of  America 
for  being  friends  to  the  Constitution)  no  man 
of  candor  or  information  among  its  opponents  will 
deny. 

I  do  not  infer  from  them  that  the  Constitution 
ought  on  those  accounts  to  have  been  considered  as 
a  good  one;  but  I  contend  that  they  dictated 
greater  moderation  in  the  opposition  than  appeared 
in  the  Governor's  conduct.  They  ought  to  have 
taught  him,  that  unless  he  had  better  assurance  of 
his  own  infallibility  than  an  impartial  estimate  of 
himself  would  justify,  there  was  a  possibility  of  his 
being  mistaken  in  his  speculations;  and  that  as  a 
further  resistance  to  the  general  sense  of  America 
was  pregnant  with  manifest  inconveniences  and 


Letters  of  H.  G.  163 

hazards,  it  became  him  to  sacrifice  the  pride  of 
opinion  to  a  spirit  of  accommodation. 

I  should  be  the  last  to  blame  any  man  for  oppos 
ing  the  adoption  of  the  Constitution  while  its  estab 
lishment  was  yet  a  question  in  the  United  States; 
but  when  that  was  no  longer  the  case;  when  nine 
States,  the  number  required  by  the  Constitution  to 
its  establishment,  had  adopted  it;  when  it  had 
thereby  become  the  government  of  the  Union,  I 
think  further  opposition  was  not  justifiable  by  any 
motives  of  prudence  or  patriotism.  These  considera 
tions  had  their  proper  weight  with  a  great  propor 
tion  of  the  Governor's  party. 

Out  of  sixty-four  members,  of  which  the  Conven 
tion  of  this  State  consisted,  there  were  at  first  only 
nineteen  in  favor  of  the  Constitution.  In  the  con 
clusion,  there  was  a  majority  which  did  actually 
adopt  it.  But  the  Governor  persisted  to  the  last  in 
his  negative. 

All  those  of  his  party  who  concurred  in  the  adop 
tion  (and  among  whom  were  some  of  its  ablest 
leaders),  are  to  be  regarded  as  so  many  witnesses 
to  the  unreasonable  obstinacy  of  the  Governor's 
conduct  on  the  occasion.  Why  did  they  agree  to 
adopt?  Because  they  saw  that  a  contrary  course 
was  replete  with  danger  to  the  peace  and  welfare 
of  this  State  and  of  the  Union.  They  acted  in  that 
like  moderate  and  prudent  men.  Why  did  not  his 
Excellency  act  a  similar  part?  Let  facts  decide! 
Let  the  collective  complexion  of  his  language  and 
behavior  inform  us!  The  inference  from  the  whole 
will  certainly  not  exempt  him  from  the  imputation 


164  Alexander  Hamilton 

of  obstinacy,  nor  give  us  a  very  favorable  impres 
sion  of  his  inclination  to  preserve  the  tranquillity 
and  UNION  of  the  States. 

I  entertain  no  doubt  that  your  judgment  of  this 
instance  of  the  Governor's  conduct  will  correspond 
with  mine,  as  I  have  understood  that  the  conduct  of 
the  members  of  your  county  had  met  your  entire 
approbation.  These  gentlemen  are  among  the  num 
ber  of  those  who,  though,  like  yourself,  not  attached 
in  the  abstract  to  the  Constitution  as  it  stands,  pru 
dently  yielded  to  the  considerations  of  expediency 
which  recommended  its  adoption. 

Accept  my  best  wishes  for  your  health,  and 
Believe  me  always  yours, 
H 

To ,  Esq.,  Suffolk  County. 


LETTER   XIV 

March  8,  1789. 

DEAR  SIR: 

The  seventh  of  the  circumstances  enumerated  in 
proof  of  his  Excellency's  enmity  to  the  Union  is, 
that  he  has  continued  his  opposition  to  the  new 
Constitution  even  since  its  adoption  by  this  State. 

There  are  two  kinds  of  opposition,  direct  and  in 
direct.  The  Governor  must  have  been  an  idiot  to 
have  rendered  himself  chargeable  with  the  first  kind. 
It  would  have  brought  the  resentment  of  the  whole 
community  upon  him,  and  frustrated  the  very  object 
he  had  in  view.  Indirect  methods  were  the  only 
ones  that  could  be  practised  with  safety,  or  with  any 


Letters  of  H.  G.  165 

prospect  of  success.  To  embarrass,  not  to  defeat, 
the  operations  of  the  government,  was,  of  necessity, 
the  plan  of  a  man  who  wished  ill  to  it. 

The  adversaries  of  the  Constitution  in  Virginia 
have  furnished  a  striking  specimen  of  this  species  of 
policy.  The  last  Legislature,  in  which  they  were 
predominant,  made  no  difficulty  about  organizing 
the  government.  The  act  of  the  people  was,  of 
course,  to  be  obeyed  in  appearance.  But  its  efficacy 
was  to  be  destroyed  by  throwing  obstacles  in  the 
way  of  the  administration  of  the  system.  For  this 
purpose  an  act  has  been  passed,  declaring  it  incom 
patible  for  any  officer  of  the  State  to  perform  official 
functions  under  the  authority  of  the  United  States. 

This  act,  if  valid,  would  oblige  the  United  States 
to  have  a  complete  set  of  officers  for  every  branch  of 
the  national  business — judges,  justices  of  the  peace, 
sheriffs,  jail-keepers,  constables,  etc., — which  could 
not  fail  to  render  the  government  odious.  This  may 
serve  as  a  sample  of  the  means  by  which  it  may  be 
distressed  and  counteracted. 

The  friends  of  the  Governor  tell  us  that  after  the 
adoption  of  the  Constitution  he  declared  in  conven 
tion  that  he  would  conceive  himself  bound  to  main 
tain  the  public  peace,  and  to  concur  in  putting  the 
system  into  operation.  This  was  saying  as  little  as 
possible.  Luckily,  the  public  peace  was  in  no  dan 
ger;  and  his  Excellency,  with  all  his  hardihood, 
would  not  dare  to  refuse  an  official  co-operation  in 
putting  the  government  established  by  the  people  in 
motion.  I  attended  the  debates  of  the  convention, 
and  I  could  not  forbear  remarking  that  the  Governor, 


1 66  Alexander  Hamilton 

in  the  speech  alluded  to,  seemed  carefully  to  confine 
his  assurances  to  a  mere  official  compliance.  The 
impression  made  upon  my  mind  by  the  two  last 
speeches  he  delivered  was  this:  that  he  would,  as 
Governor  of  the  State,  in  mere  official  transactions, 
conform  to  the  Constitution;  but  that  he  should 
think  it  expedient  to  keep  alive  the  spirit  of  oppo 
sition  in  the  people,  until  the  amendments  proposed, 
or  another  convention  (I  am  not  certain  which), 
could  be  obtained.  In  this  impression  I  am  not  sin 
gular;  there  were  others  who  understood  him  in  the 
same  sense. 

No  reasonable  man  can  doubt  that  such  a  senti 
ment  was  an  unjustifiable  one.  The  United  States 
are  to  determine  on  the  propriety  of  amendments, 
and  on  the  expediency  of  a  convention.  Both  must 
be  referred  to  their  judgment.  If  they  think  both 
improper  or  unnecessary,  it  is  the  duty  of  a  par 
ticular  member  to  acquiesce.  This  is  the  funda 
mental  principle  of  the  social  compact.  To  threaten 
the  continuance  of  an  opposition,  therefore,  till 
either  of  those  purposes  was  accomplished,  was  in 
every  way  intemperate  and  unwarrantable.  That 
there  will  be  a  reconsideration  of  parts  of  the  sys 
tem,  and  that  certain  amendments  will  be  made,  I 
devoutly  wish  and  confidently  expect.  I  have  no 
doubt  that  the  system  is  susceptible  of  improve 
ment,  and  I  anxiously  desire  that  every  prudent 
means  may  be  used  to  conciliate  the  honest  oppo 
nents  of  it.  But  I  reprobate  the  idea  of  keeping  up 
an  opposition  upon  principles  which  derogate  from 
those  on  which  it  is,  and  must  necessarily  be,  sup- 


Letters  of  H.  G.  167 

ported.  I  reprobate  the  idea  of  one  State  giving 
law  to  the  rest. 

But  even  the  official  compliance  promised  by  the 
Governor  has  hitherto  been  afforded  in  a  very  un 
gracious  and  exceptionable  manner;  in  such  a  man 
ner  as  indicates  secret  hostility  and  a  disposition  to 
have  the  government  considered  in  an  unimportant 
and  inferior  light.  On  the  i3th  of  September,  1788, 
the  act  for  organizing  the  government  was  passed 
by  Congress,  and  it  is  presumed  was  communicated 
without  delay.  We  know  that  it  immediately  ap 
peared  in  the  public  papers.  But  it  was  not  until 
the  1 3th  of  October  following,  that  the  Governor 
issued  his  proclamation  for  convening  the  Legisla 
ture,  and  the  time  appointed  for  their  meeting  was 
less  than  a  month  from  that  which  was  fixed  for  the 
appointment  of  electors  to  choose  the  President  and 
Vice- President.  This  procrastination  appeared  at 
a  time  extraordinary  to  everybody,  and  wore  the 
aspect  of  slight  and  neglect  at  least.  The  Governor 
asserts  that  it  was  impracticable  to  convene  the 
Legislature  sooner;  but  he  has  not  told  us  why  it 
was  so ;  and  I  scruple  not  to  affirm,  that  if  a  reason 
is  ever  assigned,  it  will  be  found  so  flimsy  a  one,  as 
to  discover  the  insignificant  light  in  which  his  Ex 
cellency  was  disposed  to  view  and  treat  the  National 
Government.  Neglect  and  slights  calculated  to  les 
sen  the  opinion  of  the  importance  of  a  thing,  and 
bring  it  into  discredit,  are  often  the  most  successful 
weapons  by  which  it  can  be  attacked. 

But  this  is  not  the  only  view  in  which  the  delay  in 
convening  the  Legislature  is  to  be  considered  as 


1 68  Alexander  Hamilton 

reprehensible.  It  had  the  effect  of  depriving  the 
Legislature  itself  of  the  exercise  of  a  right  vested  in 
them  by  the  national  Constitution,  and  hazarded  an 
undue  postponement  of  our  representation  in  Con 
gress,  which  has  actually  happened.  As  to  the  first, 
the  Constitution  of  the  United  States  leaves  the 
mode  of  appointing  ELECTORS  to  the  discretion  of 
State  Legislatures.  They  may,  therefore,  refer  them 
to  the  choice  of  the  people,  if  they  think  proper. 
This  has  been  done  in  several  of  the  States,  and  is, 
in  my  opinion,  a  privilege  which  it  is  of  great  im 
portance  should  be  in  the  hands  of  the  people.  Mak 
ing  the  usual  allowances  for  want  of  punctuality  in 
meeting,  disagreement  in  opinion,  difficulties  in 
framing  new  and  untried  regulations,  it  may  be 
safely  pronounced  that  the  Legislature  was  assem 
bled  too  late  to  refer  the  choice  of  electors  to  the 
people;  whereby  they  were  deprived  of  an  oppor 
tunity  of  exercising  a  constitutional  discretion,  and 
the  people  of  a  chance  of  exercising  a  privilege  of 
very  considerable  moment  to  their  interests.  May 
it  not  be  justly  said,  in  this  instance,  that  the  Gov 
ernor  UNDERTOOK  TO  THINK  for  the  Legislature? 
But  this  is  not  all.  The  state  of  the  parties  in  the 
Legislature  was  understood  long  before  they  met, 
and  it  was  to  have  been  foreseen  that  there  would 
have  been  a  diversity  of  views  in  regard  to  the 
mode  of  appointing  our  national  representatives, 
and  consequently  delays  in  agreeing  upon  any.  By 
not  calling  the  Legislature  early  enough  to  allow 
time  for  overcoming  these  impediments,  it  happens, 
that  in  a  matter  in  which  the  two  Houses  did  finally 


Letters  of  H.  G.  169 

agree,  to  wit,  the  manner  of  choosing  members  of 
the  national  House  of  Representatives,  the  execu 
tion  has  been  so  greatly  procrastinated,  that  it  must 
be  more  than  a  month  from  the  time  appointed  for 
the  meeting  of  the  body  before  it  can  be  even  ascer 
tained  who  our  representatives  are. 

There  is  a  further  circumstance  in  which  the 
Governor's  conduct  subjects  him  to  the  suspicion  of 
an  intention  to  embarrass  the  measures  relating  to 
the  Constitution. 

The  Senate  having,  in  very  gentle  terms,  intimated 
a  wish  that  the  Legislature  had  been  more  early  con 
vened,  the  Governor,  in  a  very  petulant  and  in 
decent  reply,  considering  that  it  was  the  Executive 
speaking  to  a  branch  of  the  Legislature,  made  him 
self  a  party  on  the  side  of  the  Assembly  in  the  con 
troversy  between  the  two  Houses,  and  thereby 
furnished  a  motive  of  obstinacy  to  the  one  and  of 
irritation  to  the  other.  It  is  well  known  that,  in  that 
controversy,  one  of  the  reasons  on  which  the  Assem 
bly  had  chiefly  relied  in  insisting  upon  the  joint 
ballot  was,  that  it  approached  more  nearly  to  an  elec 
tion  by  the  people;  while  the  Senate  held  that  they 
were  entitled  to  an  equal  voice,  and  that,  as  being 
the  peculiar  representative,  by  our  Constitution,  of 
the  great  body  of  the  freeholders,  they  were  bound,  by 
a  regard  to  the  interests  of  that  class,  as  well  as  to 
their  own  rights  as  a  branch  of  the  Legislature,  to 
insist  upon  the  equality  they  claimed. 

The  Senate  in  their  speech  had  observed  that,  if 
there  had  been  time,  they  would  have  been  for  re 
ferring  the  choice  of  electors  to  the  people.  The 


1 70  Alexander  Hamilton 

Governor  answers,  that  it  was  impracticable  to  con 
vene  the  Legislature  in  time  for  that  object,  and  in 
timates  a  persuasion  that  the  Senate  will  see  the 
propriety  of  pursuing  their  principle,  as  far  as  circum 
stances  would  permit,  by  adopting  such  mode  of  ap 
pointment  as  should  appear  most  nearly  to  approach 
an  election  by  the  people,  adverting  to  the  ground 
which  had  been  taken  by  the  majority  in  the  Assem 
bly.  This  intimation  of  the  Governor  could  not  be 
understood  in  any  other  light  than  as  advocating 
their  principle,  and  could  not  have  failed  to  have 
had  the  effect  of  confirming  them  in  it,  and  alienat 
ing  the  Senate,  who  were  indelicately  treated,  still 
more  from  it.  There  are  circumstances  which  ren 
der  a  hint  as  intelligible  as  the  most  precise  and 
positive  expressions. 

This  species  of  interference  in  a  question  between 
the  two  branches  of  the  Legislature  was  very  un 
becoming  in  the  Chief  Magistrate,  and  bespoke  much 
more  the  intemperate  partisan  than  the  temperate 
arbiter  of  differences  prejudicial  to  the  State. 

And  the  inference  from  the  whole  of  what  I  have 
stated  is,  that  the  Governor,  since  the  adoption  of  the 
Constitution  in  this  State,  has  manifested  the  re 
verse  of  a  disposition  to  afford  it  a  cordial  support. 
I  remain,  with  great  regard, 

Yours,  etc., 
H.  G. 

To ,  Esq.,  Suffolk  County. 


Letters  of  H.  G.  171 

LETTER   XV 

March  9,  1789. 

DEAR  SIR: 

The  last  of  the  circumstances  mentioned  by  me  in 
my  letter  of  the  2oth  of  February,  as  evincive  of  the 
inimical  disposition  of  the  Governor  toward  the 
Union,  is,  that  he  is  unfriendly  to  the  residence  of 
Congress  in  this  city. 

This  may  be  inferred  from  the  disrespectful  man 
ner  in  which  he  has  treated  that  honorable  body, 
aggregately  and  individually,  as  detailed  in  some 
former  letters ;  and  from  his  fomenting  that  spirit  of 
party  in  the  Legislature  which  has  left  us  without  a 
representation  in  Congress. 

But  the  matter  does  not  rest  on  this  evidence  only. 
I  have  direct  proof  that  he  has  held  language  clearly 
indicating  an  opinion  in  him,  real  or  affected,  that  it 
was  a  disadvantage  to  the  State  to  have  the  seat  of 
the  Federal  Government  in  it.  His  objections  have 
been  drawn  from  its  pretended  tendency  to  promote 
luxury  and  dissipation.  He  has,  I  am  well  in 
formed,  talked  in  this  style,  among  others,  to  our 
friend,  Judge ,  of  -  -  County,  with  some  cir 
cumstances  of  aggravation,  which,  from  a  regard  to 
decency,  I  forbear  to  repeat. 

Now,  my  dear  sir,  nothing  but  a  rooted  hostility 
to  all  federal  government  could  have  dictated  this 
sentiment  in  the  breast  of  the  Governor.  Every 
man  of  sense  knows  that  the  residence  of  Congress 
among  us  has  been  a  considerable  source  of  wealth 
to  the  State;  and  as  to  the  idle  tale  of  its  promoting 
luxury  and  dissipation,  I  believe  there  has  not  been 


172  Alexander  Hamilton 

for  a  number  of  years  past  a  period  of  greater  frugal 
ity  than  that  in  which  Congress  have  resided  in  this 
city.  As  far  as  my  observation  or  information  ex 
tends,  it  has  made  no  sensible  difference  in  the  style 
of  living,  as  to  the  article  of  expense.  The  truth 
must  be,  that  the  Governor  has  supposed  that  the 
presence  of  Congress  in  the  State  has  had  an  influ 
ence  in  encouraging  the  zeal  and  exertions  of  the 
friends  to  federal  government.  Thus  it  appears 
that  the  whole  system  of  thinking  adopted  by  the 
Governor  has  been  manifestly  adverse  to  every 
thing  connected  with  the  Federal  Government,  and 
has  led  him  to  view  all  its  concerns  through  a  jaun 
diced  medium. 

To  what  can  all  this  be  attributed?  To  what  can 
be  ascribed  the  regular  and  undeviating  opposition 
on  his  part  to  the  measure  devised  by  the  joint  coun 
cil  of  America  for  strengthening  and  confirming  the 
Union?  How  shall  we  explain  the  different  and  in 
consistent  grounds  of  opposition  taken  at  different 
periods?  To  me,  my  dear  sir,  the  collective  view  of 
his  conduct  will  admit  of  no  other  supposition  than 
that  he  has  entertained  a  project  for  erecting  a  sys 
tem  of  State  Power,  unconnected  with,  and  in  sub 
version  of,  the  Union.  This  is  my  firm  and  sincere 
belief;  founded  upon  a  long  and  close  attention  to 
the  secret  and  public  proceedings  of  his  Excellency. 
Some  of  the  circumstances  which  have  led  to  it,  I  am 
not  at  liberty  to  disclose,  because  I  could  not  do  it 
without  a  breach  of  confidence.  Viewing  in  the 
light  I  do  the  conduct  of  the  Governor,  I  consider  it 
as  a  sacred  duty  which  I  owe  to  the  country,  to  ad- 


Letters  of  H.  G.  173 

vise  all  those  with  whom  I  have  any  connection  or 
intercourse,  to  promote  a  change.  It  is  possible 
that  the  Governor,  finding  the  execution  of  his 
schemes  impracticable,  may  have  abandoned  them. 
But  I  conceive  a  man  capable  of  adopting  such  views 
as  too  dangerous  to  be  trusted  at  the  head  of  the 
State.  And  I  should  hold  it  to  be  the  extreme  of 
credulity  and  weakness  to  confide  in  any  assurances 
of  amendment  which  his  friends,  to  answer  a  present 
purpose,  may  be  induced  to  give. 

With  unalterable  regard, 

I  remain  yours, 

H.  G. 
To ,  Esq.,  Suffolk  County. 


LETTER   XVI 

April  9,  1789. 

DEAR  SIR: 

In  mine  of  the  25th  of  February  last,  I  observed 
that  there  were  reasons  to  conclude  that  the  Govern 
or's  conduct,  immediately  after  the  evacuation  of 
this  city,  had  been  influenced  by  considerations  of 
those  who  were  at  the  time  advocates  for  persecu 
tion,  which  in  some  measure  involved  him  in  their 
policy ;  and  in  confirmation  of  this  idea,  I  mentioned 
some  circumstances,  as  they  then  presented  them 
selves  to  my  memory,  which  had  attended  the  sup 
pression  of  a  proclamation  issued  by  the  council  for 
the  temporary  government  of  the  southern  dis 
trict,  in  consequence  of  certain  irregularities  com 
mitted  in  this  city  by  some  of  the  persons  alluded  to.1 

1  See  the  first  address  to  the  Albany  Supervisors. 


174  Alexander  Hamilton 

You  have  no  doubt  seen  in  the  papers  Mr.  Willet 's 
statement  of  this  affair,  and  the  correspondence 
which  ensued  between  that  gentleman  and  myself. 

Pursuant  to  the  assurance  contained  in  my  letter 
to  Mr.  Willet,  I  shall  now  disclose  to  you  the  result 
of  the  inquiries  I  have  made.  It  has  turned  out 
as  was  to  have  been  apprehended.  Neither  of  the 
gentlemen  to  whom  I  have  applied  has  a  distinct 
recollection  of  particulars.  One  of  them  indeed 
recollects  little  more  than  that  he  was  a  good  deal 
displeased  with  the  transaction.  The  other  has  a 
perfect  remembrance  of  some  circumstances,  though 
not  of  all.  Among  other  things,  he  well  recollects 
that  he  was  much  dissatisfied  with  the  Governor's 
conduct  in  the  affair,  and  that  the  impression  which 
he  had  at  the  time  was,  and  constantly  since  has  been, 
that  there  had  been  on  the  part  of  the  Governor  an 
undue  and  improper  acquiescence,  at  least,  in  the 
conduct  of  the  persons  concerned,  in  suspending  the 
proclamation.  But  what  the  facts  or  appearances 
were  which  produced  that  impression  have  now,  in  a 
great  measure,  escaped  his  memory.1 

Thus  stands  the  affair.  The  investigation  has  not 
weakened  in  my  mind  the  evidence  that  the  circum 
stances  attending  the  suppression  of  the  proclama 
tion  were  evincive  of  condescensions  on  the  part  of 
the  Governor  toward  the  advocates  for  persecution, 
at  the  period  in  question,  which  in  some  manner  in 
volved  him  in  their  policy. 

1  Mr.  Willet,  by  applying  to  the  printer,  may  satisfy  himself  of  the 
fairness  of  this  representation  and  of  the  respectability  of  the  authority 
on  which  it  is  founded. 


Letters  of  H.  G.  175 

This,  by  reference  to  my  letter,  you  will  perceive, 
was  the  sole  purpose  for  which  the  transaction  was 
quoted.  I  do  not  insist  that  the  particulars  as  first 
stated  are  accurate.  You  will  observe  they  are 
stated  with  hesitation  and  uncertainty;  but  I  feel 
an  entire  conviction  that  the  aggregate  complexion 
of  the  affair  was  such  as  I  have  supposed  it  to  be. 
I  remain  with  sincere  regard, 

Dear  sir, 
Your  very  humble  servant, 

H- 
To ,  Esq.,  Suffolk  County. 


TAXATION  AND  FINANCE 


TAXATION  AND  FINANCE 


REPORT    ON    IMPOST    DUTY 
By  the  United  States  in  Congress  assembled,  December  16,  1782. 

THE  Committee,  consisting  of  Mr.  Hamilton,  Mr. 
Madison,  and  Mr.  Fitzsimmons,  to  whom  was 
referred  the  letter  of  the  thirtieth  of  November, 
from  the  Honorable  William  Bradford,  Speaker  of 
the  lower  House  of  Assembly  of  the  State  of  Rhode 
Island,  containing,  under  three  heads,  the  reasons 
of  that  State  for  refusing  their  compliance  with  the 
recommendation  of  Congress  for  a  duty  on  imports 
and  prize  goods,  report: 

That  they  flatter  themselves  the  State,  on  a  re 
consideration  of  the  objections  they  have  offered, 
with  a  candid  attention  to  the  arguments  which 
stand  in  opposition  to  them,  will  be  induced  to  re 
tract  their  dissent,  convinced  that  the  measure  is 
supported  on  the  most  solid  grounds  of  equal  justice, 
policy,  and  general  utility.  The  following  observa 
tions,  contrasted  with  each  head  of  the  objections 
successively,  will  furnish  a  satisfactory  answer  to 
the  whole. 

First  Objection. — "  That  the  proposed  duty  would 
be  unequal  in  its  operation,  bearing  hardest  tipon  the 

179 


180  Alexander  Hamilton 

most  commercial  States,  and  so  would  press  pecu 
liarly  hard  upon  that  State  which  draws  its  chief 
support  from  commerce." 

The  most  common  experience,  joined  to  the 
concurrent  opinions  of  the  ablest  commercial  and 
political  observers,  have  established,  beyond  con 
troversy,  this  general  principle:  "That  every  duty 
on  imports  is  incorporated  with  the  price  of  the 
commodity,  and  ultimately  paid  by  the  consumer, 
with  a  profit  on  the  duty  itself  as  a  compensation 
to  the  merchant  for  the  advance  of  his  money/' 

The  merchant  considers  the  duty  demanded  by 
the  State  on  the  imported  article  in  the  same  light 
with  freight  or  any  similar  charge,  and,  adding  it  to 
the  original  cost,  calculates  his  profit  on  the  aggre 
gate  sum.  It  may  happen  that,  at  particular  con 
junctures,  where  the  markets  are  overstocked,  and 
there  is  a  competition  among  the  sellers,  this  may 
not  be  practicable;  but,  in  the  general  course  of 
trade,  the  demand  for  consumption  preponderates; 
and  the  merchant  can  with  ease  indemnify  himself, 
and  even  obtain  a  profit  on  the  advance.  As  a  con 
sumer,  he  pays  his  share  of  the  duty,  but  it  is  no 
further  a  burthen  upon  him.  The  consequence  of 
the  principle  laid  down  is  that  every  class  of  the 
community  bears  its  share  of  the  duty  in  proportion 
to  its  consumption;  which  last  is  regulated  by  the 
comparative  wealth  of  the  respective  classes,  in  con 
junction  with  their  habits  of  expense  or  frugality. 
The  rich  and  luxurious  pay  in  proportion  to  their 
riches  and  luxury;  the  poor  and  parsimonious,  in 
proportion  to  their  poverty  and  parsimony.  A 


Taxation  and  Finance  181 

chief  excellence  of  this  mode  of  revenue  is  that  it 
preserves  a  just  measure  to  the  abilities  of  individ 
uals,  promotes  frugality,  and  taxes  extravagance. 
The  same  reasoning,  in  our  situation,  applies  to  the 
intercourse  between  two  States :  if  one  imports  and 
the  other  does  not,  the  latter  must  be  supplied  by 
the  former.  The  duty,  being  transferred  to  the 
price  of  the  commodity,  is  no  more  a  charge  on  the 
importing  State  for  what  is  consumed  in  the  other, 
than  it  is  a  charge  on  the  merchant  for  what  is  con 
sumed  by  the  farmer  or  artificer.  Either  State  will 
only  feel  the  burthen  in  a  ratio  to  its  consumption; 
and  this  will  be  in  a  ratio  to  its  population  and 
wealth.  What  happens  between  the  different  classes 
of  the  same  community,  internally,  happens  between 
the  two  States;  and  as  the  merchant,  in  the  first 
case,  so  far  from  losing  the  duty  himself,  has  a  profit 
on  the  money  he  advances  for  that  purpose,  so  the 
importing  State,  which,  in  the  second  case,  is  the 
merchant  with  respect  to  the  other,  is  not  only  re 
imbursed  by  the  non-importing  State,  but  has  a  like 
benefit  on  the  duty  advanced. 

It  is,  therefore,  the  reverse  of  a  just  position,  that 
the  duty  imposed  will  bear  hardest  on  the  most 
commercial  States ;  it  will,  if  any  thing,  have  a  con 
trary  effect,  though  not  in  a  sufficient  degree  to 
justify  an  objection  on  the  part  of  the  non-importing 
States.  For  it  is  as  reasonable  that  they  should 
allow  an  advance  on  the  duty  paid  as  on  the  first 
cost,  freight,  or  any  incidental  charge.  They  have 
also  other  advantages  in  the  measure  fully  equiv 
alent  to  this  disadvantage.  Overnice  and  minute 


1 82  Alexander  Hamilton 

calculations,  in  matters  of  this  nature,  are  inconsis 
tent  with  national  measures,  and,  in  the  imperfect 
state  of  human  affairs,  would  stagnate  all  the  opera 
tions  of  government.  Absolute  equality  is  not  to 
be  attained :  to  aim  at  it  is  pursuing  a  shadow  at  the 
expense  of  the  substance;  and,  in  the  event,  we 
should  find  ourselves  wider  of  the  mark  than  if,  in 
the  first  instance,  we  were  content  to  approach  it 
with  moderation. 

Second  Objection. — "That  the  recommendation 
proposes  to  introduce  into  that  and  the  other  States, 
officers  unknown  and  unaccountable  to  them,  and 
so  is  against  the  constitution  of  the  State. ' ' 

It  is  not  to  be  presumed  that  the  constitution  of 
any  State  could  mean  to  define  and  fix  the  precise 
numbers  and  descriptions  of  all  officers  to  be  per 
mitted  in  the  State,  excluding  the  creation  of  any 
new  ones,  whatever  might  be  the  necessity  derived 
from  that  variety  of  circumstances  incident  to  all 
political  institutions.  The  Legislature  must  always 
have  a  discretionary  power  of  appointing  officers, 
not  expressly  known  to  the  constitution;  and  this 
power  will  include  that  of  authorizing  the  Federal 
Government  to  make  the  appointments  in  cases 
where  the  general  welfare  may  require  it.  The  de 
nial  of  this  would  prove  too  much :  to  wit,  that  the 
power  given  by  the  Confederation  to  Congress,  to 
appoint  all  officers  in  the  post-office,  was  illegal  and 
unconstitutional. 

The  doctrine  advanced  by  Rhode  Island  would, 
perhaps,  prove  also,  that  the  Federal  Government 
ought  to  have  the  appointment  of  no  internal  officers 


Taxation  and  Finance  183 

whatever;  a  position  that  would  defeat  all  the  pro 
visions  of  the  Confederation,  and  all  the  purposes  of 
the  Union.  The  truth  is  that  no  Federal  Constitu 
tion  can  exist  without  powers  that,  in  their  exercise, 
affect  the  internal  police  of  the  component  members. 
It  is  equally  true  that  no  government  can  exist 
without  a  right  to  appoint  officers  for  those  pur 
poses  which  proceed  from,  and  concentrate  in,  itself; 
and  therefore  the  Confederation  has  expressly  de 
clared  that  Congress  shall  have  authority  to  appoint 
all  such  "  civil  officers  as  may  be  necessary  for  man 
aging  the  general  affairs  of  the  United  States  under 
their  direction."  All  that  can  be  required  is  that 
the  Federal  Government  confine  its  appointments  to 
such  as  it  is  empowered  to  make  by  the  original  act 
of  union,  or  by  the  subsequent  consent  of  the  par 
ties.  Unless  there  should  be  express  words  of  ex 
clusion  in  the  constitution  of  a  State,  there  can  be 
no  reason  to  doubt  that  it  is  within  the  com 
pass  of  legislative  discretion  to  communicate  that 
authority. 

The  propriety  of  doing  it  upon  the  present  occa 
sion  is  founded  on  substantial  reasons. 

The  measure  proposed  is  a  measure  of  necessity. 
Repeated  experiments  have  shown  that  the  revenue 
to  be  raised  within  these  States  is  altogether  in 
adequate  to  the  public  wants.  The  deficiency  can 
only  be  supplied  by  loans.  Our  applications  to  the 
foreign  powers,  on  whose  friendship  we  depend,  have 
had  a  success  far  short  of  our  necessities.  The  next 
resource  is  to  borrow  from  individuals.  These  will 
neither  be  actuated  by  generosity  nor  reasons  of 


1 84  Alexander  Hamilton 

State.  'T  is  to  their  interest  alone  we  must  appeal. 
To  conciliate  this,  we  must  not  only  stipulate  a 
proper  compensation  for  what  they  lend,  but  we 
must  give  security  for  the  performance.  We  must 
pledge  an  ascertained  fund;  simple  and  productive 
in  its  nature,  general  in  its  principle,  and  at  the  dis 
posal  of  a  single  will.  There  can  be  little  confidence 
in  a  security  under  the  constant  revisal  of  thirteen 
different  deliberatives.  It  must,  once  for  all,  be 
defined  and  established  on  the  faith  of  the  States 
solemnly  pledged  to  each  other,  and  not  revocable 
by  any  without  a  breach  of  the  general  compact. 

It  is  by  such  expedients  that  nations,  whose  re 
sources  are  understood,  whose  reputations  and  gov 
ernments  are  erected  on  the  foundation  of  ages,  are 
enabled  to  obtain  a  solid  and  extensive  credit. 
Would  it  be  reasonable  in  us  to  hope  for  more  easy 
terms,  who  have  so  recently  assumed  our  rank 
among  the  nations?  Is  it  not  to  be  expected,  that 
individuals  will  be  cautious  in  lending  their  money 
to  a  people  in  our  circumstances,  and  that  they  will 
at  least  require  the  best  security  we  can  give? 

We  have  an  enemy  vigilant,  intriguing,  well  ac 
quainted  with  our  defects  and  embarrassments.  We 
may  expect  that  he  will  make  every  effort  to  instil 
diffidences  into  individuals ;  and,  in  the  present  pos 
ture  of  our  internal  affairs,  he  will  have  too  plausible 
ground  on  which  to  tread.  Our  necessities  have 
obliged  us  to  embrace  measures,  with  respect  to  our 
public  credit,  calculated  to  inspire  distrust.  The 
prepossessions  on  this  article  must  naturally  be 
against  us,  and  it  is  therefore  indispensable  we 


Taxation  and  Finance  185 

should  endeavor  to  remove  them,  by  such  means  as 
will  be  the  most  obvious  and  striking. 

It  was  with  these  views  Congress  determined  on  a 
general  fund;  and  the  one  they  have  recommended 
must,  upon  a  thorough  examination,  appear  to  have 
fewer  inconveniences  than  any  other. 

It  has  been  remarked,  as  an  essential  part  of  the 
plan,  that  the  fund  should  depend  on  a  single  will. 
This  will  not  be  the  case,  unless  the  collection,  as 
well  as  the  appropriation,  is  under  the  control  of  the 
United  States ;  for  it  is  evident,  that  after  the  duty 
is  agreed  upon,  it  may,  in  a  great  measure,  be  de 
feated  by  an  ineffectual  mode  of  levying  it.  The 
United  States  have  a  common  interest  in  a  uniform 
and  equally  energetic  collection;  and  not  only 
policy,  but  justice  to  all  the  parts  of  the  Union, 
designates  the  utility  of  lodging  the  power  of  mak 
ing  it  where  the  interest  is  common.  Without  this, 
it  might,  in  reality,  operate  as  a  very  unequal  tax. 

Third  Objection. — "That  by  granting  to  Congress 
a  power  to  collect  moneys  from  the  commerce  of 
these  States,  indefinitely  as  to  time  and  quantity, 
and  for  the  expenditure  of  which  they  are  not  to  be 
accountable  to  the  States,  they  would  become  in 
dependent  of  their  constituents;  and  so  the  pro 
posed  impost  is  repugnant  to  the  liberty  of  the 
United  States. " 

Admitting  the  principle  of  this  objection  to  be 
true,  still  it  ought  to  have  no  weight  in  the  present 
case,  because  there  is  no  analogy  between  the  prin 
ciple  and  the  fact. 

Firstly.    The  fund  proposed  is  sufficiently  definite 


1 86  Alexander  Hamilton 

as  to  time,  because  it  is  only  co-extensive  with  the 
existence  of  the  debt  contracted,  and  to  be  con 
tracted,  in  the  course  of  war.  Congress  are  per 
suaded  that  it  is  as  remote  from  the  intention  of 
their  constituents  to  perpetuate  that  debt,  as  to 
extinguish  it  at  once  by  a  faithless  neglect  of  pro 
viding  the  means  to  fulfil  the  public  engagements. 
Their  ability  to  discharge  it  in  a  moderate  time,  can 
as  little  be  doubted  as  their  inclination;  and  the 
moment  that  debt  ceases,  the  duty,  so  far  as  respects 
the  present  provision,  ceases  with  it. 

The  resolution  recommending  the  duty  specifies 
the  object  of  it  to  be  the  discharge  of  the  principal 
and  interest  of  the  debts  already  contracted,  or 
which  may  be  contracted,  on  the  faith  of  the  United 
States,  for  supporting  the  present  war. 

Secondly.  The  rate  per  cent,  is  fixed;  and  it  is 
not  at  the  option  of  the  United  States  to  increase  it. 
Though  the  product  will  vary  according  to  the 
variations  in  trade,  yet,  as  there  is  this  limitation  of 
the  rate,  it  cannot  be  properly  said  to  be  indefinite 
as  to  quantity. 

By  the  Confederation,  Congress  have  an  absolute 
discretion  in  determining  the  quantum  of  revenue 
requisite  for  the  national  expenditure.  When  this 
is  done,  nothing  remains  for  the  States,  separately, 
but  the  mode  of  raising.  No  State  can  dispute  the 
obligation  to  pay  the  sum  demanded,  without  a 
breach  of  the  Confederation;  and  when  the  money 
comes  into  the  treasury,  the  appropriation  is  the 
exclusive  province  of  the  Federal  Government.  This 
provision  of  the  Confederation  (without  which  it 


Taxation  and  Finance  187 

would  be  an  empty  form)  comprehends  in  it  the 
principle,  in  its  fullest  latitude,  which  the  objection 
under  consideration  treats  as  repugnant  to  the  lib 
erty  of  the  United  States, — to  wit,  an  indefinite 
power  of  prescribing  the  quantity  of  money  to  be 
raised,  and  of  appropriating  it  when  raised. 

If  it  be  said  that  the  States,  individually,  having 
the  collection  in  their  own  hands,  may  refuse  a  com 
pliance  with  exorbitant  demands,  the  Confederation 
will  answer,  that  this  is  a  point  of  which  they  have 
no  constitutional  liberty  to  judge.  Such  a  refusal 
would  be  an  exertion  of  power,  not  of  right ;  and  the 
same  power  which  could  disregard  a  requisition 
made  on  the  authority  of  the  Confederation,  might 
at  any  time  arrest  the  collection  of  the  duty. 

The  same  kind  of  responsibility  which  exists  with 
respect  to  the  expenditure  of  money  furnished  in  the 
forms  hitherto  practised,  would  be  equally  applicable 
to  the  revenue  from  the  imports. 

The  truth  is,  the  security  intended  to  the  general 
liberty  in  the  Confederation  consists  in  the  frequent 
election,  and  in  the  rotation,  of  the  members  of  Con 
gress,  by  which  there  is  a  constant  and  an  effectual 
check  upon  them.  This  is  the  security  which  the 
people  in  every  State  enjoy  against  the  usurpations 
of  their  internal  governments;  and  it  is  the  true 
source  of  security  in  a  representative  republic.  The 
government,  so  constituted,  ought  to  have  the  means 
necessary  to  answer  the  end  of  its  institution.  By 
weakening  its  hands  too  much,  it  may  be  rendered 
incapable  of  providing  for  the  interior  harmony  or 
the  exterior  defence  of  the  State. 


1 88  Alexander  Hamilton 

The  measure  in  question,  if  not  within  the  letter, 
is  within  the  spirit,  of  the  Confederation.  Congress, 
by  that,  are  empowered  to  borrow  money  for  the  use 
of  the  United  States;  and,  by  implication,  to  con 
cert  the  means  necessary  to  accomplish  the  end. 
But  without  insisting  upon  this  argument,  if  the 
Confederation  has  not  made  proper  provision  for 
the  exigencies  of  the  States,  it  will  be  at  all  times  the 
duty  of  Congress  to  suggest  further  provisions ;  and 
when  their  proposals  are  submitted  to  the  unani 
mous  consent  of  the  States,  they  can  never  be 
charged  with  exceeding  the  bounds  of  their  trust. 
Such  a  consent  is  the  basis  and  sanction  of  the  Con 
federation,  which  expressly,  in  the  thirteenth  article, 
empowers  Congress  to  agree  to,  and  propose,  such 
additional  provision. 

The  remarks  hitherto  made  have  had  reference, 
principally,  to  the  future  prosecution  of  the  war. 
There  still  remains  an  interesting  light  in  which  the 
subject  ought  to  be  viewed. 

The  United  States  have  already  contracted  a  debt 
in  Europe  and  in  this  country,  for  which  their  faith 
is  pledged.  The  capital  of  this  debt  can  only  be 
discharged  by  degrees ;  but  a  fund  for  this  purpose, 
and  for  paying  the  interest  annually,  on  every  prin 
ciple  of  policy  and  justice,  ought  to  be  provided. 
The  omission  will  be  the  deepest  ingratitude  and 
cruelty  to  a  large  number  of  meritorious  individuals, 
who,  in  the  most  critical  periods  of  the  war,  have 
adventured  their  fortunes  in  support  of  our  inde 
pendence.  It  would  stamp  the  national  character 
with  indelible  disgrace. 


Taxation  and  Finance  189 

An  annual  provision  for  the  purpose  will  be  too 
precarious.  If  its  continuance  and  application  were 
certain,  it  would  not  afford  complete  relief.  With 
many,  the  regular  payment  of  interest  by  occasional 
grants  would  suffice;  but  with  many  more  it  would 
not.  These  want  the  use  of  the  principal  itself;  and 
they  have  a  right  to  it;  but  since  it  is  not  in  our 
power  to  pay  off  the  principal,  the  next  expedient  is 
to  fund  the  debt,  and  render  the  evidences  of  it 
negotiable. 

Besides  the  advantage  to  individuals  from  this  ar 
rangement,  the  active  stock  of  the  nation  would  be 
increased  by  the  whole  amount  of  the  domestic  debt, 
and  of  course  the  abilities  of  the  community  to  con 
tribute  to  the  public  wants;  the  national  credit 
would  revive,  and  stand  hereafter  on  a  secure  basis. 

This  was  another  object  of  the  proposed  duty. 

If  it  be  conceded  that  a  similar  fund  is  necessary, 
it  can  hardly  be  disputed  that  the  one  recommended 
is  the  most  eligible.  It  has  been  already  shown  that 
it  affects  all  parts  of  the  community  in  proportion  to 
their  consumption,  and  has  therefore  the  best  pre 
tensions  to  equality.  It  is  the  most  agreeable  tax 
to  the  people  that  can  be  imposed,  because  it  is  paid 
insensibly,  and  seems  to  be  voluntary. 

It  may,  perhaps,  be  imagined  that  it  is  unfavor 
able  to  commerce;  but  the  contrary  can  easily  be 
demonstrated.  It  has  been  seen  that  it  does  not 
diminish  the  profit  of  the  merchant,  and  of  course 
can  be  no  diminution  of  his  inducements  to  trade. 
It  is  too  moderate  in  its  amount  to  discourage  the 
consumption  of  imported  goods,  and  cannot,  on  that 


190  Alexander  Hamilton 

account,  abridge  the  extent  of  importations.  If  it 
even  had  this  effect,  it  would  be  an  advantage  to 
commerce,  by  lessening  the  proportion  of  our  im 
ports  to  our  exports,  and  inclining  the  balance  in 
favor  of  this  country. 

The  principal  thing  to  be  consulted  for  the  ad 
vancement  of  commerce  is  to  promote  exports.  All 
impediments  to  these,  either  by  way  of  prohibition, 
or  by  increasing  the  prices  of  native  commodities, 
decreasing  by  that  means  their  sale  and  consump 
tion  at  foreign  markets,  are  injurious.  Duties  on 
exports  have  this  operation.  For  the  same  reason 
taxes  on  possessions  and  the  articles  of  our  own 
growth  or  manufacture,  whether  in  the  form  of  a 
land-tax,  excise,  or  any  other,  are  more  hurtful  to 
trade  than  impost  duties.  The  tendency  of  all  such 
taxes  is  to  increase  the  prices  of  those  articles  which 
are  the  objects  of  exportation,  and  to  enable  others 
to  undersell  us  abroad.  The  farmer,  if  he  pays  a 
heavy  land-tax,  must  endeavor  to  get  more  for  the 
products  of  his  farm;  the  mechanic  and  laborer, 
if  they  find  the  necessaries  of  life  grow  dearer  by  an 
excise,  must  endeavor  to  exact  higher  wages:  and 
these  causes  will  produce  an  increase  of  prices 
within,  and  operate  against  foreign  commerce. 

It  is  not,  however,  to  be  inferred  that  the  whole 
revenue  ought  to  be  drawn  from  imports;  all  ex 
tremes  are  to  be  rejected.  The  chief  thing  to  be 
attended  to  is  that  the  weight  of  the  taxes  fall  not 
too  heavily,  in  the  first  instance,  upon  particular 
parts  of  the  community.  A  judicious  distribution 
to  all  kinds  of  taxable  property,  is  a  first  principle  in 


Taxation  and  Finance  191 

taxation.  The  tendency  of  these  observations  is 
only  to  show  that  taxes  on  possessions,  on  articles  of 
our  own  growth  and  manufacture,  are  more  preju 
dicial  to  trade  than  duties  on  imports. 

The  observations  which  conclude  the  letter  on 
which  these  remarks  are  made,  naturally  lead  to  re 
flections  that  deserve  the  serious  attention  of  every 
member  of  the  Union.  There  is  a  happy  mean  be 
tween  too  much  confidence  and  excessive  jealousy, 
in  which  the  health  and  prosperity  of  a  State  consist. 
Either  extreme  is  a  dangerous  vice.  The  first  is  a 
temptation  to  men  in  power,  to  arrogate  more  than 
they  have  a  right  to;  the  latter  enervates  govern 
ment,  prevents  system  in  the  administration,  de 
feats  the  most  salutary  measures,  breeds  confusion 
in  the  State,  disgusts  and  discontents  among  the  peo 
ple,  and  may  eventually  prove  as  fatal  to  liberty  as 
the  opposite  temper. 

It  is  certainly  pernicious  to  leave  any  government 
in  a  situation  of  responsibility  disproportioned  to 
its  power. 

The  conduct  of  the  war  is  intrusted  to  Congress, 
and  the  public  expectation  turned  upon  them  with 
out  any  competent  means  at  their  command  to 
satisfy  the  important  trust.  After  the  most  full  and 
solemn  deliberation,  under  a  collective  view  of  all 
the  public  difficulties,  they  recommended  a  measure 
which  appears  to  them  the  corner-stone  of  the 
public  safety:  they  see  this  measure  suspended  for 
nearly  two  years;  partially  complied  with  by  some 
of  the  States;  rejected  by  one  of  them,  and  in 
danger,  on  that  account,  to  be  frustrated;  the  public 


192  Alexander  Hamilton 

embarrassments  every  day  increasing;  the  dissatis 
faction  of  the  army  growing  more  serious ;  the  other 
creditors  of  the  public  clamoring  for  justice;  both 
irritated  by  the  delay  of  measures  for  their  present 
relief  or  future  security;  the  hopes  of  our  enemies 
encouraged  to  protract  the  war;  the  zeal  of  our 
friends  depressed  by  an  appearance  of  remissness  and 
want  of  exertion  on  our  part;  Congress  harassed; 
the  national  character  suffering;  and  the  national 
safety  at  the  mercy  of  events. 

This  state  of  things  cannot  but  be  extremely  pain 
ful  to  Congress;  and  appears  to  your  Committee  to 
make  it  their  duty  to  be  urgent,  to  obviate  the  evils 
with  which  it  is  pregnant. 

Resolved,  That  Congress  agree  to  the  said  report. 


SPEECH    ON   THE    REVENUE    SYSTEM  * 

There  appears  to  me  to  have  been  some  confusion 
in  the  manner  of  voting  on  the  two  preceding 
clauses  of  this  bill:  the  first,  for  granting  the  im 
post  to  the  United  States,  having  been  carried  by  a 
majority  of  one ;  and  the  last,  for  making  the  officers 
employed  in  the  collection  accountable  to  them,  hav 
ing  been  lost  by  a  much  larger  majority.  I  was  in 
duced  to  hope,  from  the  success  of  the  first  question, 
that  the  second  would  have  met  with  equal  success, 
as  I  presume  gentlemen  who  meant  to  adhere  to  the 
act  of  the  last  session  would  have  opposed  the  whole 

1  Delivered  in  the  New  York  Legislature,  1787. 


Taxation  and  Finance  193 

of  the  present  bill  as  unnecessary,  and  those  who 
meant  to  depart  from  it  would  be  willing  to  agree 
substantially  to  the  system  recommended  by  Con 
gress,  as  it  had  been  adopted  and  modified  by  the 
other  States  generally.  From  the  complexion  of 
the  votes  on  the  last  question,  I  am  obliged  to  con 
clude  either  that  I  was  mistaken  in  my  ideas  of  the 
intention  of  the  committee,  or  that  there  is  some 
misapprehension,  in  part,  of  the  members. 

It  becomes,  therefore,  necessary — to  obviate  such 
misapprehension,  if  any  exists,  and  to  discharge  my 
duty  at  all  events — to  lay  the  subject  fully  before 
the  committee,  and  to  detail,  at  large,  my  reasons 
for  wishing  to  see  the  bill,  in  its  present  form,  prevail. 

It  is  a  common  practice,  in  entering  upon  the 
discussion  of  an  important  subject,  to  endeavor  to 
conciliate  the  good-will  of  the  audience  to  the 
speaker  by  professions  of  disinterestedness  and  zeal 
for  the  public  good.  The  example,  however  fre 
quent,  I  shall  no  further  imitate  than  by  making  one 
or  two  general  observations.  If,  in  the  public  sta 
tions  I  have  filled,  I  have  acquitted  myself  with 
zeal,  fidelity,  and  disinterestedness;  if,  in  the  private 
walk  of  life,  my  conduct  has  been  unstained  by  any 
dishonorable  act,  if  it  has  been  uniformly  consistent 
with  the  rules  of  integrity,  I  have  a  right  to  the  con 
fidence  of  those  to  whom  I  address  myself;  they 
cannot  refuse  it  to  me  without  injustice.  I  am  per 
suaded  they  will  not  refuse  it  to  me.  If,  on  the 
other  hand,  my  public  conduct  has  been  in  any  in 
stance  marked  with  perfidy,  duplicity,  or  with  sin 
ister  views  of  any  kind ;  if  any  imputations,  founded 


VOL.  II.— 13. 


194  Alexander  Hamilton 

in  fact,  can  be  adduced  to  the  prejudice  of  my  pri 
vate  character,  I  have  no  claim  to  the  confidence  of 
the  committee;  nor  should  I  expect  it. 

Even  these  observations  I  should  have  spared  my 
self,  did  I  not  know  that,  in  the  rage  of  party,  gross 
calumnies  have  been  propagated.  Some  I  have 
traced  and  detected;  there  may  still  be  others  in 
secret  circulation,  with  which  I  am  unacquainted. 
Against  the  influence  of  such  arts  I  can  have  no 
other  shield  than  the  general  tenor  of  my  past  con 
duct.  If  that  will  protect  me,  I  may  safely  confide 
in  the  candor  of  the  committee.  To  that  standard 
I  cheerfully  submit. 

But,  indeed,  of  what  importance  is  it  who  is  the 
speaker?  'T  is  his  reasons  only  that  concern  the 
committee;  if  these  are  good,  they  owe  it  to  them 
selves  and  to  their  constituents  to  allow  them  their 
full  weight. 

The  first  objection  (and  that  which  is  supposed  to 
have  the  greatest  force)  against  the  principles  of 
the  bill  is,  that  it  would  be  unconstitutional  to  dele 
gate  legislative  power  to  Congress.  If  this  objec 
tion  be  founded  in  truth,  there  is  at  once  an  end  of 
the  inquiry.  God  forbid  that  we  should  violate  that 
constitution  which  is  the  charter  of  our  rights.  But 
it  is  our  duty  to  examine  dispassionately  whether  it 
really  stands  in  our  way.  If  it  does  not,  let  us  not 
erect  an  ideal  barrier  to  a  measure  which  the  public 
good  may  require. 

The  first  ground  of  the  objection  is  deduced  from 
that  clause  of  the  constitution  which  declares  "  that 
no  power  shall  be  exercised  over  the  people  of  this 


Taxation  and  Finance  195 

State  but  such  as  is  granted  by  or  derived  from 
them." 

This,  it  is  plain,  amounts  to  nothing  more  than  a 
declaration  of  that  fundamental  maxim  of  repub 
lican  government,  "  that  all  power,  mediately  or  im 
mediately,  is  derived  from  the  consent  of  the  people," 
in  opposition  to  those  doctrines  of  despotism  which 
uphold  the  divine  right  of  kings,  or  lay  the  founda 
tions  of  government  in  force,  conquest,  or  necessity. 
It  does  not  at  all  affect  the  question  how  far  the 
Legislature  may  go  in  granting  power  to  the  United 
States.  A  power  conferred  by  the  representatives 
of  the  people,  if  warranted  by  the  constitution  under 
which  they  act,  is  a  power  derived  from  the  people. 
This  is  not  only  a  plain  inference  of  reason,  but  the 
terms  of  the  clause  itself  seem  to  have  been  calcu 
lated  to  let  in  the  principle.  The  words,  "  derived 
from,"  are  added  to  the  words  "granted  by,"  as  if 
with  design  to  distinguish  an  indirect  derivation  of 
power  from  an  immediate  grant  of  it.  This  ex 
planation  is  even  necessary  to  reconcile  the  constitu 
tion  to  itself,  and  to  give  effect  to  all  its  parts,  as  I 
hope  fully  to  demonstrate  in  its  proper  place. 

The  next  clause  of  the  constitution  relied  upon,  is 
that  which  declares  that  "the  supreme  legislative 
power  within  this  State  shall  be  vested  in  a  Senate 
and  Assembly."  This,  it  is  said,  excludes  the  idea 
of  any  other  legislative  power  operating  within  the 
State.  But  the  more  obvious  construction  of  this 
clause,  and  that  which  best  consists  with  the  situa 
tion  and  views  of  the  country  at  this  time,  with 
what  has  been  done  before  and  since  the  formation 


196  Alexander  Hamilton 

of  our  constitution,  and  with  those  parts  of  the  con 
stitution  itself  which  acknowledge  the  Federal  Gov 
ernment,  is  this :  "In  the  distribution  of  the  different 
parts  of  the  sovereignty  in  the  particular  govern 
ment  of  this  State,  the  legislative  authority  shall 
reside  in  a  Senate  and  Assembly";  or,  in  other 
words,  "the  legislative  authority  of  the  particular 
government  of  the  State  of  New  York  shall  be 
vested  in  a  Senate  and  Assembly."  The  framers  of 
the  constitution  could  have  had  nothing  more  in 
view  than  to  delineate  the  different  departments  of 
power  in  our  own  State  government,  and  never 
could  have  intended  to  interfere  with  the  formation 
of  such  a  Constitution  for  the  Union  as  the  safety  of 
the  whole  might  require.  The  justness  of  this  con 
struction  will  be  further  elucidated  by  that  part  of 
the  constitution  which  prescribes,  "  that  the  supreme 
executive  authority  of  the  State  shall  be  vested  in  a 
governor/'  If  the  former  clause  excludes  the  grant 
of  legislative  power,  this  must  equally  exclude  the 
grant  of  the  executive  power,  and  the  consequence 
would  be  that  there  could  be  no  Federal  Government 
at  all. 

It  will  be  of  no  avail  to  say,  that  there  is  a  differ 
ence  in  the  two  cases  in  the  mode  of  expression: 
that,  in  one,  the  terms  of  description  are  "  within  the 
State";  in  the  other,  "of  the  State."  In  grammar, 
or  good  sense,  the  difference  in  the  phrases  con 
stitutes  no  substantial  difference  in  the  meaning,  or 
if  it  does,  it  concludes  against  the  objection;  for  the 
words,  within  this  State,  which  are  applied  to  the 
legislative  power,  have  a  certain  precision  that  may 


Taxation  and  Finance  197 

be  supposed  to  intend  a  distinction  between  that 
legislative  power  which  is  to  operate  within  this 
State  only,  and  that  which  is  to  operate  upon  this 
State  in  conjunction  with  the  others.  But  I  lay  no 
stress  on  this  observation.  In  my  opinion  the  legis 
lative  power  ''within  this  State"  or  the  legislative 
power  "of  this  State, "  amount  in  substance  to  the 
same  thing,  and  therefore  (as  has  been  already  ob 
served)  if  the  constitution  prohibits  the  delegation 
of  legislative  power  to  the  Union,  it  equally  pro 
hibits  the  delegation  of  executive  power — and  the 
Confederacy  must  then  be  at  an  end;  for  without 
legislative  or  executive  power,  it  becomes  a  nullity. 

Unfortunately  for  the  objection,  if  it  proves  any 
thing  it  proves  too  much.  It  proves  that  the  powers 
of  the  Union  in  their  present  form  are  an  usurpation 
on  the  constitution  of  this  State.  This  will  appear 
not  only  from  the  reasoning  adduced,  but  from  this 
further  consideration, — that  the  United  States  are 
already  possessed  of  legislative  as  well  as  executive 
authority.  The  objects  of  executive  power  are  of 
three  kinds:  to  make  treaties  with  foreign  nations, 
to  make  war  and  peace,  to  execute  and  interpret  the 
laws.  This  description  of  the  executive  power  will 
enable  us  the  more  readily  to  distinguish  the  legisla 
tive  ;  which  in  general  may  be  defined  the  power  of 
prescribing  rules  for  the  community. 

The  United  States  are  authorized  to  require  from 
the  several  States  as  much  money  as  they  judge 
necessary  for  the  general  purposes  of  the  Union,  and 
to  limit  the  time  within  which  it  is  to  be  raised;  to 
call  for  such  a  number  of  troops  as  they  deem  requisite 


198  Alexander  Hamilton 

for  the  common  defence  in  time  of  war;  to  estab 
lish  rules  in  all  cases  of  capture  by  sea  or  land;  to 
regulate  the  alloy  and  value  of  coin,  the  standard  of 
weights  and  measures,  and  to  make  all  laws  for  the 
government  of  the  army  and  navy  of  the  Union. 
All  these  are  powers  of  the  legislative  kind,  and  are 
declared  by  the  Confederation  to  be  binding  upon 
all  the  States. 

The  first  is  nothing  less  than  a  power  of  taxing  the 
States  in  gross,  though  not  in  detail;  and  the  last  is 
the  power  of  disposing  of  the  liberty  and  lives  of  the 
citizens  of  this  State,  when  in  arms  for  the  common 
defence.  That  the  powers  enumerated  are  all,  or 
most  of  them,  of  a  legislative  nature,  will  not  be 
denied  by  the  law  members  on  the  other  side  of  the 
question.  If  the  constitution  forbids  the  grant  of 
legislative  power  to  the  Union,  all  those  authorities 
are  illegal  and  unconstitutional,  and  ought  to  be 
resumed. 

If,  on  the  contrary,  those  authorities  were  prop 
erly  granted,  then  it  follows  that  the  constitution 
does  not  forbid  the  grant  of  legislative  power,  and 
the  objection  falls  to  the  ground ;  for  there  is  nothing 
in  the  constitution  permitting  the  grant  of  one  kind 
of  legislative  authority,  and  forbidding  that  of  an 
other.  The  degree  or  nature  of  the  powers  of  legis 
lation  which  it  might  be  proper  to  confer  upon  the 
Federal  Government,  would  in  this  case  be  a  mere 
question  of  prudence  and  expediency,  to  be  deter 
mined  by  general  considerations  of  utility  and 
safety. 

The  principle  of  the  objection  tinder  considera- 


Taxation  and  Finance  199 

tion  would  not  only  subvert  the  foundation  of  the 
Union  as  now  established,  would  not  only  render 
it  impossible  that  any  Federal  Government  could 
exist,  but  would  defeat  some  of  the  provisions  of 
the  constitution  itself.  This  last  idea  deserves  par 
ticular  attention. 

The  nineteenth  clause  makes  it  the  duty  of  the 
governor  "to  correspond  with  the  Continental  Con 
gress."  The  twentieth  provides  "that  the  judges 
and  chancellor  shall  hold  no  other  office  than  dele 
gate  to  the  General  Congress";  and  the  thirtieth 
directs  "that  delegates  to  represent  this  State  in  the 
General  Congress  of  the  United  States  of  America 
shall  be  annually  appointed." 

Now,  sir,  I  ask,  if  Congress  were  to  have  neither 
executive  nor  legislative  authority,  to  what  purpose 
were  they  to  exist?  To  what  purpose  were  dele 
gates  to  be  annually  appointed  to  that  body?  To 
what  purpose  were  these  delegates  to  represent  this 
State?  Or  how  could  they  be  said  to  represent  it  at 
all? 

Is  not  the  plain  import  of  this  part  of  the  con 
stitution,  that  they  were  to  represent  this  State  in 
the  General  Assembly  of  the  United  States,  for  the 
purpose  of  managing  the  common  concerns  of  the 
Union?  And  does  not  this  necessarily  imply  that 
they  were  to  be  clothed  with  such  powers  as  should 
be  found  essential  to  that  object?  Does  it  not 
amount  to  a  constitutional  warrant  to  the  Legis 
lature  to  confer  those  powers,  of  whatever  kind  they 
might  be? 

To  answer  these  questions  in  the  negative  would 


200  Alexander  Hamilton 

be  to  charge  the  constitution  with  the  absurdity  of 
proposing  to  itself  an  end,  and  yet  prohibiting  the 
means  of  accomplishing  that  end. 

The  words  "to  represent  this  State"  are  of  great 
latitude,  and  are  of  themselves  sufficient  to  convey 
any  power  necessary  to  the  conduct  and  direction  of 
its  affairs  in  connection  with  the  other  parts  of  the 
Confederacy. 

In  the  interpretation  of  laws  it  is  admitted  to  be  a 
good  rule  to  resort  to  the  co-existing  circumstances, 
and  collect  from  thence  the  intention  of  the  framers 
of  the  law.  Let  us  apply  this  rule  to  the  present 
case. 

In  the  commencement  of  the  Revolution  delegates 
were  sent  to  meet  in  Congress  with  large  discretionary 
powers.  In  short,  generally  speaking,  with  full 
power  "  to  take  care  of  the  republic."  In  the  whole 
of  this  transaction  the  idea  of  an  Union  of  the  colo 
nies  was  carefully  held  up.  It  pervaded  all  our 
public  acts. 

In  the  Declaration  of  Independence  we  find  it 
continued  and  confirmed.  That  declaration,  after 
setting  forth  its  motives  and  causes,  proceeds  thus : 
"We,  therefore,  the  representatives  of  the  United 
States  of  America  in  General  Congress  assembled, 
appealing  to  the  Supreme  Judge  of  the  world  for  the 
rectitude  of  our  intentions,  do  in  the  name  and  by 
the  authority  of  the  good  people  of  these  colonies, 
solemnly  publish  and  declare  that  these  United 
Colonies  are,  and  of  right  ought  to  be,  free  and 
independent  states  ;  that  they  are  absolved  from 
all  allegiance  to  the  British  Crown,  and  that  all 


Taxation  and  Finance  201 

political  connection  between  them  and  the  state  of 
Great  Britain  is,  and  ought  to  be,  totally  dissolved; 
and  that,  as  free  and  independent  states,  they  have 
full  power  to  levy  war,  conclude  peace,  contract 
alliances,  establish  commerce,  and  do  all  other  acts 
and  things  that  independent  states  may  of  right  do." 

Hence  we  see  that  the  Union  and  Independence  of 
these  States  are  blended  and  incorporated  in  one  and 
the  same  act;  which,  taken  together,  clearly  imports 
that  the  United  States  had  in  their  origin  full  power 
to  do  all  acts  and  things  which  independent  states 
may  of  right  do;  or,  in  other  words,  full  power  of 
sovereignty. 

Accordingly,  we  find  that  upon  the  authority  of 
that  act,  only  approved  by  the  several  States,  they 
did  levy  war,  contract  alliances,  and  exercise  other 
high  powers  of  sovereignty,  even  to  the  appoint 
ment  of  a  dictator,  prior  to  the  present  Confedera 
tion. 

In  this  situation,  and  with  this  plenitude  of  power, 
our  constitution  knows  and  acknowledges  the  United 
States  in  Congress  assembled,  and  provides  for  the 
annual  appointment  of  delegates  to  represent  this 
State  in  that  body,  which,  in  substance,  amounts 
to  a  constitutional  recognition  of  the  Union,  with 
complete  sovereignty. 

A  government  may  exist  without  any  formal  or 
ganization  or  precise  definition  of  its  powers.  How 
ever  improper  it  might  have  been  that  the  Federal 
Government  should  have  continued  to  exist  with 
such  absolute  and  undefined  authority,  this  does  not 
militate  against  the  position  that  it  did  possess  such 


202  Alexander  Hamilton 

authority.  It  only  proves  the  propriety  of  a  more 
regular  formation  to  ascertain  its  limits.  This  was 
the  object  of  the  present  Confederation,  which  is, 
in  fact,  an  abridgment  of  the  original  sovereignty 
of  the  Union. 

It  may  be  said  (for  it  has  been  said  upon  other 
occasions)  that,  though  the  constitution  did  con 
sider  the  United  States  in  the  light  I  have  described, 
and  left  the  Legislature  at  liberty  in  the  first  in 
stance  to  have  organized  the  Federal  Government 
in  such  a  manner  as  they  thought  proper,  yet  that 
liberty  ceased  with  the  establishment  of  the  present 
Confederacy.  The  discretion  of  the  Legislature  was 
then  determined. 

This,  upon  the  face  of  it,  is  a  subtilty,  uncounte- 
nanced  by  a  single  principle  of  government,  or  a 
single  expression  of  the  constitution.  It  is  saying 
that  a  general  authority  given  to  the  Legislature  for 
the  permanent  preservation  and  good  of  the  com 
munity,  has  been  exhausted  and  spent  by  the  exer 
cise  of  a  part  of  that  authority.  The  position  is  the 
more  destitute  of  color,  because  the  Confederation, 
by  the  express  terms  of  the  compact,  preserves  and 
continues  this  power.  The  last  clause  of  it  au 
thorizes  Congress  to  propose,  and  the  States  to 
agree  to,  such  alterations  as  might  be  afterward 
found  necessary  or  expedient. 

We  see,  therefore,  that  the  constitution  knows 
and  acknowledges  the  United  States  in  Congress; 
that  it  provides  for  the  annual  appointment  of  dele 
gates  to  represent  this  State  in  that  body  without  pre 
scribing  the  objects  or  limits  of  that  representation; 


Taxation  and  Finance  203 

that  at  the  time  our  constitution  was  framed,  the 
Union  existed  with  full  sovereignty;  and  that  there 
fore  the  idea  of  sovereignty  in  the  Union  is  not 
incompatible  with  it.  We  see,  further,  that  the 
doctrine  contained  in  the  objection  against  grant 
ing  legislative  power  would  equally  operate  against 
granting  executive  power,  would  prove  that  the 
powers  already  vested  in  the  Union  are  illegal  and 
unconstitutional,  would  render  a  confederacy  of  the 
States  in  any  form  impracticable,  and  would  defeat 
all  those  provisions  of  our  own  constitution  which 
relate  to  the  United  States.  I  submit  it  to  the  com 
mittee,  whether  a  doctrine  pregnant  with  such  con 
sequences  can  be  true ;  whether  it  is  not  as  opposite 
to  our  constitution  as  to  the  principles  of  national 
safety  and  prosperity;  and  whether  it  would  not  be 
lamentable  if  the  zeal  of  opposition  to  a  particular 
measure  should  carry  us  to  the  extreme  of  imposing 
upon  the  constitution  a  sense  foreign  to  it,  which 
must  embarrass  the  national  councils  upon  future 
occasions,  when  all  might  agree  in  the  utility  and 
necessity  of  a  different  construction. 

If  the  arguments  I  have  used  under  this  head  are 
not  well-founded,  let  gentlemen  come  forward  and 
show  their  fallacy.  Let  the  subject  have  a  fair  and 
full  examination,  and  let  truth,  on  whatever  side  it 
may  be,  prevail! 

Flattering  myself  it  will  appear  to  the  committee 
that  the  constitution,  at  least,  offers  us  no  impedi 
ment,  I  shall  proceed  to  other  topics  of  objection. 
The  next  that  presents  itself,  is  a  supposed  danger  to 
liberty  from  granting  legislative  power  to  Congress. 


204  Alexander  Hamilton 

But,  before  I  enter  upon  this  subject,  to  remove 
the  aspersions  thrown  upon  that  body,  I  shall  give 
a  short  history  of  some  material  facts  relating  to  the 
origin  and  progress  of  the  business.  To  excite  the 
jealousies  of  the  people,  it  has  been  industriously  rep 
resented  as  an  undue  attempt  to  acquire  an  increase 
of  power.  It  has  been  forgotten,  or  intentionally 
overlooked,  that,  considering  it  in  the  strongest  light 
as  a  proposal  to  alter  the  Confederation,  it  is  only 
exercising  a  power  which  the  Confederation  has  in 
direct  terms  reposed  in  Congress,  who,  as  before  ob 
served,  are,  by  the  i3th  article,  expressly  authorized 
to  propose  alterations. 

But  so  far  was  the  measure  from  originating  in 
improper  views  of  that  body,  that,  if  I  am  rightly 
informed,  it  did  not  originate  there  at  all.  It  was 
first  suggested  by  a  convention  of  the  four  Eastern 
States  and  New  York,  at  Hartford,  and,  I  believe, 
was  proposed  there  by  the  deputies  of  this  State.  A 
gentleman  on  our  bench,  unconnected  with  Con 
gress,  who  now  hears  me  (I  mean  Judge  Hobart), 
was  one  of  them.  It  was  dictated  by  a  principle 
which  bitter  experience  then  taught  us,  and  which,  in 
peace  or  war,  will  always  be  found  true — that  ade 
quate  supplies  to  the  Federal  treasury  can  never 
flow  from  any  system  which  requires  the  inter 
vention  of  thirteen  deliberatives  between  the  call 
and  the  execution. 

Congress  agreed  to  the  measure,  and  recom 
mended  it.  This  State  complied  without  hesitation. 
All  parts  of  the  government  —  Senate,  Assembly, 
and  Council  of  Revision  —  concurred;  neither  the 


Taxation  and  Finance  205 

constitution  nor  the  public  liberty  presented  any 
obstacle.  The  difficulties  from  these  sources  are  a 
recent  discovery. 

So  late  as  the  first  session  of  the  Legislature,  after 
the  evacuation  of  this  city,  the  governor  of  the  State, 
in  his  speech  to  both  Houses,  gave  a  decided  counte 
nance  to  the  measure.  This  he  does,  though  not  in 
expressed  terms,  yet  by  implications  not  to  be  mis 
understood. 

The  leading  opponents  of  the  impost,  of  the  present 
day,  have  all  of  them,  at  other  times,  either  con 
curred  in  the  measure,  in  its  most  exceptionable 
form,  and  without  the  qualifications  annexed  to  it 
by  the  proposed  bill,  or  have,  by  other  instances  of 
conduct,  contradicted  their  own  hypothesis  on  the 
constitution,  which  professedly  forms  the  main  prop 
of  their  opposition. 

The  honorable  member  in  my  eye,  at  the  last 
session,  brought  in  a  bill  for  granting  to  the  United 
States  the  power  of  regulating  the  trade  of  the 
Union.  This  surely  includes  more  ample  legislative 
authority  than  is  comprehended  in  the  mere  power 
of  levying  a  particular  duty.  It  indeed  goes  to  a 
prodigious  extent,  much  farther  than,  on  a  super 
ficial  view,  can  be  imagined.  Can  we  believe  that 
the  constitutional  objection,  if  well  founded,  would 
so  long  have  passed  undiscovered  and  unnoticed? 
Or,  is  it  fair  to  impute  to  Congress  criminal  motives 
for  proposing  a  measure  which  was  first  recom 
mended  to  them  by  five  States,  or  from  persisting  in 
that  measure,  after  the  unequivocal  experience  they 
have  had  of  the  total  inefficacy  of  the  mode  provided 


206  Alexander  Hamilton 

in  the  Confederation  for  supplying  the  treasury  of  the 
Union? 

I  leave  the  answer  to  these  questions  to  the  good 
sense  and  candor  of  the  committee,  and  shall  re 
turn  to  the  examination  of  the  question,  how  far 
the  power  proposed  to  be  conferred  upon  Congress 
would  be  dangerous  to  the  liberty  of  the  people. 
And  here  I  ask : 

Whence  can  this  danger  arise?  The  members  of 
Congress  are  annually  chosen  by  the  members  of  the 
several  Legislatures.  They  come  together  with  dif 
ferent  habits,  prejudices,  and  interests.  They  are, 
in  fact,  continually  changing.  How  is  it  possible 
for  a  body  so  composed  to  be  formidable  to  the  lib 
erties  of  States — several  of  which  are  large  empires 
in  themselves  ? 

The  subversion  of  the  liberty  of  the  States  could 
not  be  the  business  of  a  day.  It  would  at  least  re 
quire  time,  premeditation,  and  concert.  Can  it  be 
supposed,  that  the  members  of  a  body  so  constituted 
would  be  unanimous  in  a  scheme  of  usurpation?  If 
they  were  not,  would  it  not  be  discovered  and  dis 
closed?  If  we  could  even  suppose  this  unanimity 
among  one  set  of  men,  can  we  believe  that  all  the 
new  members  who  are  yearly  sent  from  one  State  or 
another  would  instantly  enter  into  the  same  views? 
Would  there  not  be  found  one  honest  man  to  warn 
his  country  of  the  danger? 

Suppose  the  worst — suppose  the  combination  en 
tered  into  and  continued.  The  execution  would  at 
least  announce  the  design;  and  the  means  of  de 
fence  would  be  easy.  Consider  the  separate  power 


Taxation  and  Finance  207 

of  several  of  these  States,  and  the  situation  of  all. 
Consider  the  extent,  populousness,  and  resources  of 
Massachusetts,  Virginia,  Pennsylvania;  I  might  add, 
of  New  York,  Connecticut,  and  other  States.  Where 
could  Congress  find  means  sufficient  to  subvert  the 
government  and  liberties  of  either  of  these  States? 
or,  rather,  where  find  means  sufficient  to  effect  the 
conquest  at  all?  If  an  attempt  was  made  upon  one, 
the  others,  from  a  sense  of  common  danger,  would 
make  common  cause;  and  they  could  immediately 
unite  and  provide  for  their  joint  defence. 

There  is  one  consideration,  of  immense  force  in 
this  question,  not  sufficiently  attended  to.  It  is  this 
— that  each  State  possesses  in  itself  the  full  pow 
ers  of  government,  and  can  at  once,  in  a  regular 
and  constitutional  way,  take  measures  for  the  pre 
servation  of  its  rights.  In  a  single  kingdom  or 
state,  if  the  rulers  attempt  to  establish  a  tyranny, 
the  people  can  only  defend  themselves  by  a  tumul 
tuary  insurrection;  they  must  run  to  arms  without 
concert  or  plan ;  while  the  usurpers,  clothed  with  the 
forms  of  legal  authority,  can  employ  the  forces  of 
the  State  to  suppress  them  in  embryo,  and  before 
they  can  have  time  or  opportunity  to  give  system 
to  their  opposition.  With  us,  the  case  is  widely  dif 
ferent.  Each  State  has  a  government,  completely 
organized  in  itself,  and  can  at  once  enter  into  a  regu 
lar  plan  of  defence;  with  the  forces  of  the  com 
munity  at  its  command,  it  can  immediately  form 
connections  with  its  neighbors,  or  even  with  foreign 
powers,  if  necessary. 

In  a  contest  of  this  kind,  the  body  of  the  people 


208  Alexander  Hamilton 

will  always  be  on  the  side  of  the  State  governments. 
This  will  not  only  result  from  their  love  of  liberty 
and  regard  to  their  own  safety,  but  from  other 
strong  principles  of  human  nature.  The  State  gov 
ernments  operate  on  those  immediate  familiar  per 
sonal  concerns  to  which  the  sensibility  of  individuals 
is  awake.  The  distribution  of  private  justice  be 
longing  to  them,  they  must  always  appear  to  the 
senses  of  the  people  as  the  immediate  guardians  of 
their  rights.  They  will,  of  course,  have  the  strong 
est  hold  on  their  attachment,  respect,  and  obedience. 
Another  circumstance  will  contribute  to  the  same 
end.  Far  the  greatest  number  of  offices  and  em 
ployments  are  in  the  gift  of  the  States  separately; 
the  weight  of  official  influence  will  therefore  be  in 
favor  of  the  State  governments ;  and,  with  all  these 
advantages,  they  cannot  fail  to  carry  the  people 
along  with  them  in  every  contest  with  the  General 
Government  in  which  they  are  not  palpably  in  the 
wrong,  and  often  when  they  are.  What  is  to  be 
feared  from  the  efforts  of  Congress  to  establish  a 
tyranny,  with  the  great  body  of  the  people,  under 
the  direction  of  their  State  governments,  combined 
in  opposition  to  their  views?  Must  not  their  at 
tempts  recoil  upon  themselves,  and  terminate  in 
their  own  ruin  and  disgrace?  or,  rather,  would  not 
these  considerations,  if  they  were  insensible  to  other 
motives,  for  ever  restrain  them  from  making  such 
attempts? 

The  causes  taken  notice  of,  as  securing  the  at 
tachment  of  the  people  to  their  local  governments, 
present  us  with  another  important  truth — the  natural 


Taxation  and  Finance  209 

imbecility  of  federal  governments,  and  the  danger 
that  they  will  never  be  able  to  exercise  power 
enough  to  manage  the  general  affairs  of  the  Union; 
though  the  States  will  have  a  common  interest,  yet 
they  will  also  have  a  particular  interest.  For  ex 
ample:  as  a  part  of  the  Union,  it  will  be  the  interest 
of  every  State  to  pay  as  little  itself,  and  to  let  its 
neighbors  pay  as  much  as  possible.  Particular  in 
terests  have  always  more  influence  upon  men  than 
general.  The  Federal  States,  therefore,  consulting 
their  immediate  advantage,  may  be  considered  as 
so  many  eccentric  powers,  tending  in  a  contrary  di 
rection  to  the  government  of  the  Union ;  and  as  they 
will  generally  carry  the  people  along  with  them,  the 
Confederacy  will  be  in  continual  danger  of  dissolu 
tion.  This,  Mr.  Chairman,  is  the  real  rock  upon 
which  the  happiness  of  this  country  is  likely  to  split. 
This  is  the  point  to  which  our  fears  and  cares  should 
be  directed,  to  guard  against  this,  and  not  to  terrify 
ourselves  with  imaginary  dangers  from  the  spectre 
of  power  in  Congress,  will  be  our  true  wisdom. 

But  let  us  examine  a  little  more  closely  the  measure 
under  consideration.  What  does  the  bill  before  us 
require  us  to  do?  Merely  to  grant  duties  on  imposts 
to  the  United  States,  for  the  short  period  of  twenty- 
five  years ;  to  be  applied  to  the  discharge  of  the  prin 
cipal  and  interest  of  the  debts  contracted  for  the 
support  of  the  late  war;  the  collection  of  which 
duties  is  to  be  made  by  officers  appointed  by  the 
State,  but  accountable  to  Congress,  according  to 
such  general  regulations  as  the  United  States  shall 
establish,  subject  to  these  important  checks :  that  no 


VOL.  II. — 14. 


2  io  Alexander  Hamilton 

citizen  shall  be  carried  out  of  the  State  for  trial ;  that 
all  prosecutions  shall  be  in  our  own  courts ;  that  no 
excessive  fines  or  penalties  shall  be  imposed;  and 
that  a  yearly  account  of  the  proceeds  and  applica 
tion  of  the  revenue  shall  be  rendered  to  the  Legisla 
ture,  on  failure  of  which  it  reserves  to  itself  a  right 
of  repealing  its  grant. 

Is  it  possible  for  any  measure  to  be  better  guarded  ? 
or  is  it  possible  that  a  grant  for  such  precise  objects, 
and  with  so  many  checks,  can  be  dangerous  to  the 
public  liberty? 

Having  now,  as  I  trust,  satisfactorily  shown  that 
the  constitution  offers  no  obstacle  to  the  measure, 
and  that  the  liberty  of  the  people  cannot  be  en 
dangered  by  it,  it  remains  only  to  consider  it  in  the 
view  of  revenue. 

The  sole  question  left  for  discussion  is,  whether  it 
be  an  eligible  mode  of  supplying  the  Federal  treasury 
or  not. 

The  better  to  answer  this  question,  it  will  be  of 
use  to  examine  how  far  the  mode  by  quotas  and  re 
quisitions  has  been  found  competent  to  the  public 
exigencies. 

The  universal  delinquency  of  the  States  during 
the  war  shall  be  passed  over  with  the  bare  mention 
of  it.  The  public  embarrassments  were  a  plausible 
apology  for  that  delinquency;  and  it  was  hoped  the 
peace  would  have  produced  greater  punctuality. 
The  experiment  has  disappointed  that  hope  to  a  de 
gree  which  confounds  the  least  sanguine.  A  compar 
ative  view  of  the  compliances  of  the  several  States 
for  the  five  last  years  will  furnish  a  striking  result. 


Taxation  and  Finance  211 

During  that  period,  as  appears  by  a  statement  on 
our  files,  New  Hampshire,  North  Carolina,  South 
Carolina,  and  Georgia  have  paid  nothing.  I  say 
nothing,  because  the  only  actual  payment  is  the 
trifling  sum  of  about  $7,000  by  New  Hampshire. 
South  Carolina  indeed  has  credits,  but  these  are 
merely  by  way  of  discount  on  the  supplies  furnished 
by  her  during  the  war,  in  consideration  of  her  pe 
culiar  sufferings  and  exertions  while  the  immediate 
theatre  of  it. 

Connecticut  and  Delaware  have  paid  about  one 
third  of  their  requisitions;  Massachusetts,  Rhode 
Island,  and  Maryland,  about  one  half;  Virginia 
about  three  fifths;  Pennsylvania  nearly  the  whole; 
and  New  York  more  than  her  quota. 

These  proportions  are  taken  on  the  specie  requisi 
tions;  the  indents  have  been  very  partially  paid, 
and  in  their  present  state  are  of  little  account. 

The  payments  into  the  Federal  treasury  have  de 
clined  rapidly  each  year.  The  whole  amount  for 
three  years  past,  in  specie,  has  not  exceeded  $1,400,- 
ooo,  of  which  New  York  has  paid  100  per  cent,  more 
than  her  proportion.  This  sum,  little  more  than 
$400,000  a  year,  it  will  readily  be  conceived,  has 
been  exhausted  in  the  support  of  the  civil  establish 
ments  of  the  Union,  and  the  necessary  guards  and 
garrisons  of  public  arsenals,  and  on  the  frontiers; 
without  any  surplus  for  paying  any  part  of  the 
debt,  foreign  or  domestic,  principal  or  interest. 

Things  are  continually  growing  worse;  the  last 
year  in  particular  produced  less  than  two  hundred 
thousand  dollars,  and  that  from  only  two  or  three 


212  Alexander  Hamilton 

States.  Several  of  the  States  have  been  so  long  un 
accustomed  to  pay,  that  they  seem  no  longer  con 
cerned  even  about  the  appearances  of  compliance, 

Connecticut  and  Jersey  have  almost  formally  de 
clined  paying  any  longer.  The  ostensible  motive  is 
the  non-concurrence  of  this  State  in  the  impost 
system.  The  real  one  must  be  conjectured  from  the 
fact. 

Pennsylvania,  if  I  understand  the  scope  of  some 
late  resolutions,  means  to  discount  the  interest  she 
pays  upon  her  assumption  to  her  own  citizens;  in 
which  case  there  will  be  little  coming  from  her  to 
the  United  States.  This  seems  to  be  bringing  mat 
ters  to  a  crisis. 

The  pecuniary  support  of  the  Federal  Govern 
ment  has  of  late  devolved  almost  entirely  upon 
Pennsylvania  and  New  York.  If  Pennsylvania  re 
fuses  to  continue  her  aid,  what  will  be  the  situation 
of  New  York?  Are  we  willing  to  be  the  Atlas  of  the 
Union?  or  are  we  willing  to  see  it  perish? 

This  seems  to  be  the  alternative.  Is  there  not  a 
species  of  political  knight-errantry  in  adhering  per 
tinaciously  to  a  system  which  throws  the  whole 
weight  of  the  Confederation  upon  this  State,  or 
upon  one  or  two  more?  Is  it  not  our  interest,  on 
mere  calculations  of  State  policy,  to  promote  a 
measure  which,  operating  under  the  same  regula 
tions  in  every  State,  must  produce  an  equal,  or 
nearly  equal,  effect  everywhere,  and  oblige  all  the 
States  to  share  the  common  burthen? 

If  the  impost  is  granted  to  the  United  States, 
with  the  power  of  levying  it,  it  must  have  a  propor- 


Taxation  and  Finance  213 

tionate  effect  in  all  the  States,  for  the  same  mode 
of  collection  everywhere  will  have  nearly  the  same 
return  everywhere. 

What  must  be  the  final  issue  of  the  present  state 
of  things  ?  Will  the  few  States  that  now  contribute 
be  willing  to  contribute  much  longer?  Shall  we 
ourselves  be  long  content  with  bearing  the  burthen 
singly?  Will  not  our  zeal  for  a  particular  system 
soon  give  way  to  the  pressure  of  so  unequal  a 
weight?  And  if  all  the  States  cease  to  pay,  what  is 
to  become  of  the  Union?  It  is  sometimes  asked: 
Why  do  not  Congress  oblige  the  States  to  do  their 
duty?  But  where  are  the  means?  Where  are  the 
fleets  and  armies,  where  the  Federal  treasury  to  sup 
port  those  fleets  and  armies,  to  enforce  the  requisi 
tions  of  the  Union?  All  methods  short  of  coercion, 
have  repeatedly  been  tried  in  vain. 

Let  us  now  proceed  to  another  most  important 
inquiry.  How  are  we  to  pay  our  foreign  debt? 
This,  I  think,  is  estimated  at  about  $7,000,000, 
which  will  every  year  increase  with  the  accumula 
tions  of  interest.  If  we  pay  neither  principal  nor 
interest,  we  not  only  abandon  all  pretensions  to 
character  as  a  nation,  but  we  endanger  the  public 
peace.  However  it  may  be  in  our  power  to  evade 
the  just  demands  of  our  domestic  creditors,  our 
foreign  creditors  must  and  will  be  paid. 

They  have  power  to  enforce  their  demands,  and 
sooner  or  later  they  may  be  expected  to  do  it.  It  is 
not  my  intention  to  endeavor  to  excite  the  apprehen 
sions  of  the  committee,  but  I  would  appeal  to  their 
prudence.  A  discreet  attention  to  the  consequences 


214  Alexander  Hamilton 

of  national  measures  is  no  impeachment  of  our 
firmness. 

The  foreign  debt,  I  say,  must  sooner  or  later  be 
paid,  and  the  longer  provision  is  delayed  the  heavier 
it  must  fall  at  last. 

We  require  about  1,600,000  dollars  to  discharge 
the  interest  and  instalments  of  the  present  year, 
about  a  million  annually  upon  an  average,  for  ten 
years  more,  and  about  300,000  dollars  for  another 
ten  years. 

The  product  of  the  impost  may  be  computed  at 
about  a  million  of  dollars  annually.  It  is  an  in 
creasing  fund.  This  fund  would  not  only  suffice 
for  the  discharge  of  the  foreign  debt,  but  important 
operations  might  be  ingrafted  upon  it  towards  the 
extinguishment  of  the  domestic  debt. 

Is  it  possible  to  hesitate  about  the  propriety  of 
adopting  a  resource  so  easy  in  itself  and  so  exten 
sive  in  its  effects? 

Here  I  expect  I  may  be  told  there  is  no  objection 
to  employing  this  resource.  The  act  of  the  last 
session  does  it.  The  only  dispute  is  about  the 
mode.  We  are  willing  to  grant  the  money,  but  not 
the  power  required  from  us.  Money  will  pay  our 
debts;  power  may  destroy  our  liberties. 

It  has  been  insinuated  that  nothing  but  a  lust  of 
power  would  have  prevented  Congress  from  accept 
ing  the  grant  in  the  shape  it  has  already  passed  the 
Legislature.  This  is  a  severe  charge.  If  true,  it 
ought  undoubtedly  to  prevent  our  going  a  step  fur 
ther.  But  it  is  easy  to  show  that  Congress  could 
not  have  accepted  our  grant  without  removing 


Taxation  and  Finance  215 

themselves  further  from  the  object  than  they  now 
are.  To  gain  one  State  they  must  have  lost  all  the 
others.  The  grants  of  every  State  are  accom 
panied  with  a  condition  that  similar  grants  be 
made  by  the  other  States.  It  is  not  denied  that 
our  act  is  essentially  different  from  theirs.  Their 
acts  give  the  United  States  the  power  of  collecting 
the  duty;  ours  reserves  it  to  the  State,  and  makes 
it  receivable  in  paper-money. 

The  immediate  consequences  of  accepting  our 
grant  would  be  a  relinquishment  of  the  grants  of 
other  States.  They  must  take  the  matter  up  anew, 
and  do  the  work  over  again  to  accommodate  it  to 
our  standard.  In  order  to  anchor  one  State,  would 
it  have  been  wise  to  set  twelve,  or  at  least  eleven 
others,  afloat? 

It  is  said,  that  the  States  which  have  granted  more 
would  certainly  be  willing  to  grant  less.  They  would 
easily  accommodate  their  acts  to  that  of  New  York, 
as  more  favorable  to  their  own  power  and  security. 

But  would  Massachusetts  and  Virginia,  which 
have  no  paper-money  of  their  own,  accede  to  a  plan 
that  permitted  other  States  to  pay  in  paper  while 
they  paid  in  specie?  Would  they  consent  that 
their  citizens  should  pay  twenty  shillings  in  the 
pound,  while  the  citizens  of  Rhode  Island  paid  only 
four,  the  citizens  of  North  Carolina  ten,  and  of  other 
States  in  different  degrees  of  inequality,  in  propor 
tion  to  the  relative  depreciation  of  their  paper?  Is 
it  wise,  in  this  State,  to  cherish  a  plan  that  gives 
such  an  advantage  to  the  citizens  of  other  States 
over  its  own? 


216  Alexander  Hamilton 

The  paper-money  of  the  State  of  New  York,  in 
most  transactions,  is  equal  to  gold  and  silver;  that 
of  Rhode  Island  is  depreciated  to  five  for  one;  that 
of  North  Carolina  to  two  for  one;  that  of  South 
Carolina  may  perhaps  be  worth  fifteen  shillings  in 
the  pound. 

If  the  States  pay  the  duties  in  paper,  is  it  not  evi 
dent  that  for  every  pound  of  that  duty  consumed  by 
the  citizen  of  New  York  he  would  pay  twenty  shil 
lings,  while  the  citizen  of  South  Carolina  would  pay 
fifteen  shillings;  of  North  Carolina,  ten  shillings;  and 
Rhode  Island,  only  four! 

This  consideration  alone  is  sufficient  to  condemn 
the  plan  of  our  grant  of  last  session,  and  to  prove 
incontestably  that  the  States  which  are  averse  to 
emitting  a  paper  currency,  or  have  it  in  their  power 
to  support  one  when  emitted,  would  never  come 
into  it. 

Again,  would  those  States  which  by  their  public 
acts  demonstrate  a  conviction  that  the  powers  of 
the  Union  require  augmentation;  which  are  con 
scious  of  energy  in  their  own  administration — 
would  they  be  willing  to  concur  in  a  plan  which  left 
the  collection  of  the  duties  in  the  hands  of  each 
State;  and  of  course  subject  to  all  the  inequalities 
which  a  more  or  less  vigorous  system  of  collection 
would  produce? 

This  too  is  an  idea  which  ought  to  have  great 
weight  with  us.  We  have  better  habits  of  govern 
ment  than  are  to  be  found  in  some  of  the  States; 
and  our  constitution  admits  of  more  energy  than 
the  constitution  of  most  of  the  other  States.  The 


Taxation  and  Finance  217 

duties,  therefore,  would  be  more  effectually  collected 
with  us  than  in  such  States,  and  this  would  have  a 
similar  effect  to  the  depreciation  of  the  money,  in 
imposing  a  greater  burthen  on  the  citizens  of  this 
State. 

If  any  State  should  incline  to  evade  the  payment 
of  the  duties,  having  the  collection  in  its  own  hands, 
nothing  would  be  easier  than  to  effect  it,  and  with 
out  materially  sacrificing  appearances. 

It  is  manifest,  from  this  view  of  the  subject,  that 
we  have  the  strongest  reasons,  as  a  State,  to  depart 
from  our  own  act;  and  that  it  would  have  been 
highly  injudicious  in  Congress  to  have  accepted  it. 

If  there  even  had  been  a  prospect  of  the  concur 
rence  of  the  other  States  in  the  plan,  how  inadequate 
would  it  have  been  to  the  public  exigencies,  fettered 
with  the  embarrassments  of  a  depreciating  paper! 

It  is  to  no  purpose  to  say,  that  the  faith  of  the 
State  was  pledged  by  the  act  to  make  the  paper 
equal  to  gold  and  silver;  and  that  the  other  States 
would  be  obliged  to  do  the  same.  What  greater  de 
pendence  can  be  had  on  the  faith  of  the  States 
pledged  to  this  measure,  than  on  the  faith  they 
pledged  in  the  Confederation  sanctioned  by  a 
solemn  appeal  to  heaven?  If  the  obligation  of 
faith  in  one  case  has  had  so  little  influence  upon 
their  conduct  in  respect  to  the  requisitions  of  Con 
gress,  what  hope  can  there  be  that  they  would  have 
greater  influences  in  respect  to  the  deficiencies  of 
the  paper-money? 

There  yet  remains  an  important  light  in  which  to 
consider  the  subject  in  the  way  of  revenue.  It  is  a 


218  Alexander  Hamilton 

clear  point  that  we  cannot  carry  the  duties  upon 
imports  to  the  same  extent  by  separate  arrange 
ments  as  by  a  general  plan — we  must  regulate  our 
selves  by  what  we  find  done  in  the  neighboring 
States:  while  Pennsylvania  has  only  two  and  a  half 
per  cent,  on  her  importations,  we  cannot  greatly 
exceed  her.  To  go  much  beyond  it  would  injure 
our  commerce  in  a  variety  of  ways,  and  would  de 
feat  itself.  While  the  ports  of  Connecticut  and  Jer 
sey  are  open  to  the  introduction  of  goods  free  from 
duty,  and  the  conveyance  from  them  to  us  is  so 
easy — while  they  consider  our  imposts  as  an  un 
generous  advantage  taken  of  them,  which  it  would 
be  laudable  to  elude,  the  duties  must  be  light  or  they 
would  be  evaded.  The  facility  to  do  it,  and  the 
temptation  of  doing  it,  would  be  both  so  great,  that 
we  should  collect  perhaps  less  by  an  increase  of  the 
rates  than  we  do  now.  Already  we  experience  the 
effects  of  this  situation.  But  if  the  duties  were  to 
be  levied  under  a  common  direction,  with  the  same 
precautions  everywhere  to  guard  against  smug 
gling,  they  might  be  carried  without  prejudice  to 
trade  to  a  much  more  considerable  height. 

As  things  now  are,  we  must  adhere  to  the  present 
standard  of  duties,  without  any  material  alterations. 
Suppose  this  to  produce  fifty  thousand  pounds  a 
year.  The  duties  to  be  granted  to  Congress  ought, 
in  proportion,  to  produce  double  that  sum.  To 
this  it  appears,  by  a  scheme  now  before  us,  that 
additional  duties  might  be  imposed  for  the  use  of 
the  State,  on  certain  enumerated  articles,  to  the 
amount  of  thirty  thousand  pounds.  This  would  be 


Taxation  and  Finance  219 

an  augmentation  of  our  national  revenue  by  in 
direct  taxation  to  the  extent  of  eighty  thousand 
pounds  a  year,  an  immense  object  in  a  single  State, 
and  which  alone  demonstrates  the  good  policy  of 
the  measure. 

It  is  no  objection  to  say  that  a  great  part  of  this 
fund  will  be  dedicated  to  the  use  of  the  United 
States.  Their  exigencies  must  be  supplied  in  some 
way  or  other.  The  more  is  done  towards  it  by 
means  of  the  impost,  the  less  will  be  to  be  done  in 
other  modes.  If  we  do  not  employ  that  resource 
to  the  best  account,  we  must  find  others  in  direct 
taxation.  And  to  this  are  opposed  all  the  habits 
and  prejudices  of  the  community.  There  is  not  a 
farmer  in  the  State  who  would  not  pay  a  shilling  in 
the  voluntary  consumption  of  articles  on  which  a 
duty  is  paid,  rather  than  a  penny  imposed  imme 
diately  on  his  house  and  land. 

There  is  but  one  objection  to  the  measure  under 
consideration  that  has  come  to  my  knowledge, 
which  yet  remains  to  be  discussed.  I  mean  the 
effect  it  is  proposed  to  have  upon  our  paper  cur 
rency.  It  is  said  the  diversion  of  this  fund  would 
leave  the  credit  of  the  paper  without  any  effectual 
support. 

Though  I  should  not  be  disposed  to  put  a  con 
sideration  of  this  kind  in  competition  with  the 
safety  of  the  Union,  yet  I  should  be  extremely 
cautious  about  doing  any  thing  that  might  affect 
the  credit  of  our  currency.  The  Legislature  having 
thought  an  emission  of  paper  advisable,  I  consider 
it  my  duty  as  a  representative  of  the  people  to  take 


220  Alexander  Hamilton 

care  of  its  credit.  The  farmers  appeared  willing  to 
exchange  their  produce  for  it;  the  merchants  on  the 
other  hand  had  large  debts  outstanding.  They  sup 
posed  that  giving  a  free  circulation  to  the  paper 
would  enable  their  customers  in  the  country  to  pay, 
and  as  they  perceived  that  they  would  have  it  in 
their  power  to  convert  the  money  into  produce, 
they  naturally  resolved  to  give  it  their  support. 

These  causes  combined  to  introduce  the  money 
into  general  circulation,  and  having  once  obtained 
credit,  it  will  now  be  able  to  support  itself. 

The  chief  difficulty  to  have  been  apprehended  in 
respect  to  the  paper,  was  to  overcome  the  diffidence 
which  the  still  recent  experience  of  depreciating 
paper  had  instilled  into  men's  minds.  This,  it  was 
to  have  been  feared,  would  have  shaken  its  credit  at 
its  outset,  and  if  it  had  once  begun  to  sink,  it  would 
be  no  easy  matter  to  prevent  its  total  decline. 

The  event  has,  however,  turned  out  otherwise, 
and  the  money  has  been  fortunate  enough  to  con 
ciliate  the  general  confidence.  This  point  gained, 
there  need  be  no  apprehensions  of  its  future  fate, 
unless  the  government  should  do  something  to 
destroy  that  confidence. 

The  causes  that  first  gave  it  credit  still  operate, 
and  will  in  all  probability  continue  so  to  do.  The 
demand  for  money  has  not  lessened,  and  the  mer 
chant  has  still  the  same  inducement  to  counte 
nance  the  circulation  of  the  paper. 

I  shall  not  deny  that  the  outlet  which  the  pay 
ment  of  duties  furnished  to  the  merchant  was  an 
additional  motive  to  the  reception  of  the  paper. 


Taxation  and  Finance  221 

Nor  is  it  proposed  to  take  away  this  motive.  There 
is  now  before  the  House  a  bill,  one  object  of  which 
is  the  establishment  of  a  State  impost  on  certain 
enumerated  articles,  in  addition  to  that  to  be 
granted  to  the  United  States.  It  is  computed  on 
very  good  grounds,  that  the  additional  duties 
would  amount  to  about  £30,000,  and  as  they  would 
be  payable  in  paper  currency  they  would  create  a 
sufficient  demand  upon  the  merchant  to  leave  him, 
in  this  respect,  substantially  the  same  inducement 
which  he  had  before.  Indeed,  independent  of  this, 
the  readiness  of  the  trading  people  to  take  the  money 
can  never  be  doubted,  while  it  will  freely  command 
the  commodities  of  the  country;  for  this,  to  them, 
is  the  most  important  use  they  can  make  of  it. 

But  besides  the  State  impost,  there  must  be  other 
taxes:  and  these  will  all  contribute  to  create  a  de 
mand  for  the  money;  which  is  all  we  now  mean 
when  we  talk  of  funds  for  its  support;  for  there  are 
none  appropriated  for  the  redemption  of  the  paper. 

Upon  the  whole,  the  additional  duties  will  be  a 
competent  substitute  for  those  now  in  existence; 
and  the  general  good-will  of  the  community  towards 
the  paper  will  be  the  best  security  for  its  credit. 

Having  now  shown,  Mr.  Chairman,  that  there  is 
no  constitutional  impediment  to  the  adoption  of  the 
bill;  that  there  is  no  danger  to  be  apprehended  to 
the  public  liberty  from  giving  the  power  in  question 
to  the  United  States ;  that  in  view  of  the  revenue  the 
measure  under  consideration  is  not  only  expedient 
but  necessary, — let  us  turn  our  attention  to  the 
other  side  of  this  important  subject.  Let  us  ask 


222  Alexander  Hamilton 

ourselves,  what  will  be  the  consequence  of  rejecting 
the  bill?  What  will  be  the  situation  of  our  national 
affairs  if  they  are  left  much  longer  to  float  in  the 
chaos  in  which  they  are  now  involved? 

Can  our  national  character  be  preserved  without 
paying  our  debts?  Can  the  Union  subsist  without 
revenue  ?  Have  we  realized  the  consequences  which 
would  attend  its  dissolution? 

If  these  States  are  not  united  under  a  Federal 
Government  they  will  infallibly  have  wars  with  each 
other;  and  their  divisions  will  subject  them  to  all 
the  mischiefs  of  foreign  influence  and  intrigue.  The 
human  passions  will  never  want  objects  of  hostility. 
The  Western  territory  is  an  obvious  and  fruitful 
source  of  contest.  Let  us  also  cast  our  eye  upon 
the  map  of  this  State,  intersected  from  one  ex 
tremity  to  the  other  by  a  large  navigable  river.  In 
the  event  of  a  rupture  with  them,  what  is  to  hinder 
our  metropolis  from  becoming  a  prey  to  our  neigh 
bors?  Is  it  even  supposable  that  they  would  suffer 
it  to  remain  the  nursery  of  wealth  to  a  distinct 
community? 

These  subjects  are  delicate,  but  it  is  necessary  to 
contemplate  them,  to  teach  us  to  form  a  true  esti 
mate  of  our  situation. 

Wars  with  each  other  would  beget  standing  ar 
mies — a  source  of  more  real  danger  to  our  liberties 
than  all  the  powers  that  could  be  conferred  upon 
the  representatives  of  the  Union.  And  wars  with 
each  other  would  lead  to  opposite  alliances  with 
foreign  powers,  and  plunge  us  into  all  the  laby 
rinths  of  European  politics. 


Taxation  and  Finance  223 

The  Romans,  in  their  progress  to  universal  do 
minion,  when  they  conceived  the  project  of  subdu 
ing  the  refractory  spirit  of  the  Grecian  republics 
which  composed  the  famous  Achaian  League,  began 
by  sowing  dissensions  among  them,  and  instilling 
jealousies  of  each  other,  and  of  the  common  head, 
and  finished  by  making  them  a  province  of  the 
Roman  empire. 

The  application  is  easy:  if  there  are  any  foreign 
enemies,  if  there  are  any  domestic  foes  to  this 
country,  all  their  arts  and  artifices  will  be  employed 
to  effect  a  dissolution  of  the  Union.  This  cannot  be 
better  done  than  by  sowing  jealousies  of  the  Federal 
head,  and  cultivating  in  each  State  an  undue  attach 
ment  to  its  own  power. 


FINANCE 


YOL.  II.— IS.  235 


FINANCE 


FIRST   REPORT   ON    THE    PUBLIC   CREDIT 

Communicated  to  the  House  of  Representatives,  January  14,  1790. 
TREASURY  DEPARTMENT,  January  9,  1790. 

'T'HE  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  in  obedience  to 
the  resolution  of  the  House  of  Representa 
tives  of  the  twenty-first  day  of  September  last,  has, 
during  the  recess  of  Congress,  applied  himself  to 
the  consideration  of  a  proper  plan  for  the  support 
of  the  public  credit,  with  all  the  attention  which  was 
due  to  the  authority  of  the  House,  and  to  the  magni 
tude  of  the  object. 

In  the  discharge  of  this  duty,  he  has  felt,  in  no 
small  degree,  the  anxieties  which  naturally  flow 
from  a  just  estimate  of  the  difficulty  of  the  task, 
from  a  well-founded  diffidence  of  his  own  qualifica 
tions  for  executing  it  with  success,  and  from  a  deep 
and  solemn  conviction  of  the  momentous  nature  of 
the  truth  contained  in  the  resolution  under  which 
his  investigations  have  been  conducted, — "That  an 
adequate  provision  for  the  support  of  the  public 
credit  is  a  matter  of  high  importance  to  the  honor 
and  prosperity  of  the  United  States." 

With  an  ardent  desire  that  his  well-meant  en 
deavors  may  be  conducive  to  the  real  advantage  of 

227 


228  Alexander  Hamilton 

the  nation,  and  with  the  utmost  deference  to  the 
superior  judgment  of  the  House,  he  now  respect 
fully  submits  the  result  of  his  inquiries  and  reflec 
tions  to  their  indulgent  construction. 

In  the  opinion  of  the  Secretary,  the  wisdom  of 
the  House,  in  giving  their  explicit  sanction  to  the 
proposition  which  has  been  stated,  cannot  but  be 
applauded  by  all  who  will  seriously  consider  and 
trace,  through  their  obvious  consequences,  these 
plain  and  undeniable  truths : 

That  exigencies  are  to  be  expected  to  occur,  in 
the  affairs  of  nations,  in  which  there  will  be  a  neces 
sity  for  borrowing. 

That  loans  in  time  of  public  danger,  especially 
from  foreign  war,  are  found  an  indispensable  re 
source,  even  to  the  wealthiest  of  them. 

And  that,  in  a  country  which,  like  this,  is  possessed 
of  little  active  wealth,  or,  in  other  words,  little  mon 
eyed  capital,  the  necessity  for  that  resource  must, 
in  such  emergencies,  be  proportionably  urgent. 

And  as,  on  the  one  hand,  the  necessity  for  borrow 
ing  in  particular  emergencies  cannot  be  doubted,  so, 
on  the  other,  it  is  equally  evident  that,  to  be  able  to 
borrow  upon  good  terms,  it  is  essential  that  the 
credit  of  a  nation  should  be  well  established. 

For,  when  the  credit  of  a  country  is  in  any  degree 
questionable,  it  never  fails  to  give  an  extravagant 
premium,  in  one  shape  or  another,  upon  all  the 
loans  it  has  occasion  to  make.  Nor  does  the  evil 
end  here;  the  same  disadvantage  must  be  sus 
tained  on  whatever  is  to  be  bought  on  terms  of 
future  payment. 


Finance  229 

From  this  constant  necessity  of  borrowing  and 
buying  dear,  it  is  easy  to  conceive  how  immensely 
the  expenses  of  a  nation,  in  a  course  of  time,  will  be 
augmented  by  an  unsound  state  of  the  public  credit. 

To  attempt  to  enumerate  the  complicated  variety 
of  mischiefs,  in  the  whole  system  of  the  social  econ 
omy,  which  proceed  from  a  neglect  of  the  maxims 
that  uphold  public  credit,  and  justify  the  solicitude 
manifested  by  the  House  on  this  point,  would  be 
an  improper  intrusion  on  their  time  and  patience. 

In  so  strong  a  light,  nevertheless,  do  they  appear 
to  the  Secretary,  that,  on  their  due  observance,  at 
the  present  critical  juncture,  materially  depends,  in 
his  judgment,  the  individual  and  aggregate  pros 
perity  of  the  citizens  of  the  United  States;  their 
relief  from  the  embarrassments  they  now  experi 
ence;  their  character  as  a  people;  the  cause  of  good 
government. 

If  the  maintenance  of  public  credit,  then,  be  truly 
so  important,  the  next  inquiry  which  suggests  itself 
is:  By  what  means  is  it  to  be  effected?  The  ready 
answer  to  which  question  is,  by  good  faith;  by  a 
punctual  performance  of  contracts.  States,  like  in 
dividuals,  who  observe  their  engagements  are  re 
spected  and  trusted,  while  the  reverse  is  the  fate  of 
those  who  pursue  an  opposite  conduct. 

Every  breach  of  the  public  engagements,  whether 
from  choice  or  necessity,  is,  in  different  degrees, 
hurtful  to  public  credit.  When  such  a  necessity 
does  truly  exist,  the  evils  of  it  are  only  to  be  pal 
liated  by  a  scrupulous  attention,  on  the  part  of  the 
Government,  to  carry  the  violation  no  further  than 


230  Alexander  Hamilton 

the  necessity  absolutely  requires,  and  to  manifest, 
if  the  nature  of  the  case  admit  of  it,  a  sincere  dis 
position  to  make  reparation  whenever  circum 
stances  shall  permit.  But,  with  every  possible 
mitigation,  credit  must  suffer,  and  numerous  mis 
chiefs  ensue.  It  is,  therefore,  highly  important, 
when  an  appearance  of  necessity  seems  to  press 
upon  the  public  councils,  that  they  should  examine 
well  its  reality,  and  be  perfectly  assured  that  there 
is  no  method  of  escaping  from  it,  before  they  yield 
to  its  suggestions.  For,  though  it  cannot  safely  be 
affirmed  that  occasions  have  never  existed,  or  may 
not  exist,  in  which  violations  of  the  public  faith, 
in  this  respect,  are  inevitable;  yet  there  is  great 
reason  to  believe  that  they  exist  far  less  frequently 
than  precedents  indicate,  and  are  oftenest  either 
pretended,  through  levity  or  want  of  firmness;  or 
supposed,  through  want  of  knowledge.  Expedients 
often  have  been  devised  to  effect,  consistently  with 
good  faith,  what  has  been  done  in  contravention  of 
it.  Those  who  are  most  commonly  creditors  of  a 
nation  are,  generally  speaking,  enlightened  men; 
and  there  are  signal  examples  to  warrant  a  conclu 
sion  that,  when  a  candid  and  fair  appeal  is  made  to 
them,  they  will  understand  their  true  interest  too 
well  to  refuse  their  concurrence  in  such  modifica 
tions  of  their  claims  as  any  real  necessity  may 
demand. 

While  the  observance  of  that  good  faith,  which  is 
the  basis  of  public  credit,  is  recommended  by  the 
strongest  inducements  of  political  expediency,  it  is 
enforced  by  considerations  of  still  greater  authority. 


Finance  231 

There  are  arguments  for  it  which  rest  on  the  immu 
table  principles  of  moral  obligation.  And  in  pro 
portion  as  the  mind  is  disposed  to  contemplate,  in 
the  order  of  Providence,  an  intimate  connection 
between  public  virtue  and  public  happiness,  will  be 
its  repugnancy  to  a  violation  of  those  principles. 

This  reflection  derives  additional  strength  from 
the  nature  of  the  debt  of  the  United  States.  It  was 
the  price  of  liberty.  The  faith  of  America  has  been 
repeatedly  pledged  for  it,  and  with  solemnities  that 
give  peculiar  force  to  the  obligation.  There  is,  in 
deed,  reason  to  regret  that  it  has  not  hitherto  been 
kept;  that  the  necessities  of  the  war,  conspiring 
with  inexperience  in  the  subjects  of  finance,  pro 
duced  direct  infractions;  and  that  the  subsequent 
period  has  been  a  continued  scene  of  negative  viola 
tion  or  non-compliance.  But  a  diminution  of  this 
regret  arises  from  the  reflection,  that  the  last  seven 
years  have  exhibited  an  earnest  and  uniform  effort, 
on  the  part  of  the  Government  of  the  Union,  to  re 
trieve  the  national  credit,  by  doing  justice  to  the 
creditors  of  the  nation;  and  that  the  embarrass 
ments  of  a  defective  Constitution,  which  defeated 
this  laudable  effort,  have  ceased. 

From  this  evidence  of  a  favorable  disposition 
given  by  the  former  Government,  the  institution  of 
a  new  one,  clothed  with  powers  competent  to  calling 
forth  the  resources  of  the  community,  has  excited 
correspondent  expectations.  A  general  belief  ac 
cordingly  prevails,  that  the  credit  of  the  United 
States  will  quickly  be  established  on  the  firm  founda 
tion  of  an  effectual  provision  for  the  existing  debt. 


232  Alexander  Hamilton 

The  influence  which  this  has  had  at  home  is  wit 
nessed  by  the  rapid  increase  that  has  taken  place  in 
the  market  value  of  the  public  securities.  From 
January  to  November,  they  rose  thirty-three  and  a 
third  per  cent. ;  and,  from  that  period  to  this  time, 
they  have  risen  fifty  per  cent,  more ;  and  the  intelli 
gence  from  abroad  announces  effects  proportionably 
favorable  to  our  national  credit  and  consequence. 

It  cannot  but  merit  particular  attention,  that, 
among  ourselves,  the  most  enlightened  friends  of 
good  government  are  those  whose  expectations  are 
the  highest. 

To  justify  and  preserve  their  confidence;  to  pro 
mote  the  increasing  respectability  of  the  American 
name;  to  answer  the  calls  of  justice;  to  restore 
landed  property  to  its  due  value;  to  furnish  new 
resources,  both  to  agriculture  and  commerce;  to 
cement  more  closely  the  union  of  the  States ;  to  add 
to  their  security  against  foreign  attack;  to  establish 
public  order  on  the  basis  of  an  upright  and  liberal 
policy; — these  are  the  great  and  invaluable  ends  to 
be  secured  by  a  proper  and  adequate  provision,  at 
the  present  period,  for  the  support  of  public  credit. 

To  this  provision  we  are  invited,  not  only  by  the 
general  considerations  which  have  been  noticed, 
but  by  others  of  a  more  particular  nature.  It  will 
procure,  to  every  class  of  the  community,  some 
important  advantages,  and  remove  some  no  less 
important  disadvantages. 

The  advantage  to  the  public  creditors,  from  the 
increased  value  of  that  part  of  their  property  which 
constitutes  the  public  debt,  needs  no  explanation. 


Finance  233 

But  there  is  a  consequence  of  this,  less  obvious, 
though  not  less  true,  in  which  every  other  citizen  is 
interested.  It  is  a  well-known  fact,  that,  in  coun 
tries  in  which  the  national  debt  is  properly  funded, 
and  an  object  of  established  confidence,  it  answers 
most  of  the  purposes  of  money.  Transfers  of  stock 
or  public  debt  are  there  equivalent  to  payments  in 
specie;  or,  in  other  words,  stock,  in  the  principal 
transactions  of  business,  passes  current  as  specie. 
The  same  thing  would,  in  all  probability,  happen 
here  under  the  like  circumstances. 

The  benefits  of  this  are  various  and  obvious: 

First. — Trade  is  extended  by  it,  because  there  is 
a  larger  capital  to  carry  it  on,  and  the  merchant 
can,  at  the  same  time,  afford  to  trade  for  smaller 
profits;  as  his  stock,  which,  when  unemployed, 
brings  him  an  interest  from  the  Government,  serves 
him  also  as  money  when  he  has  a  call  for  it  in  his 
commercial  operations. 

Secondly. — Agriculture  and  manufactures  are  also 
promoted  by  it,  for  the  like  reason,  that  more 
capital  can  be  commanded  to  be  employed  in  both; 
and  because  the  merchant,  whose  enterprise  in 
foreign  trade  gives  to  them  activity  and  extension, 
has  greater  means  for  enterprise. 

Thirdly. — The  interest  of  money  will  be  lowered 
by  it;  for  this  is  always  in  a  ratio  to  the  quantity  of 
money,  and  to  the  quickness  of  circulation.  This 
circumstance  will  enable  both  the  public  and  indi 
viduals  to  borrow  on  easier  and  cheaper  terms. 

And  from  the  combination  of  these  effects,  addi 
tional  aids  will  be  furnished  to  labor,  to  industry, 


234  Alexander  Hamilton 

and  to  arts  of  every  kind.  But  these  good  effects 
of  a  public  debt  are  only  to  be  looked  for,  when,  by 
being  well  funded,  it  has  acquired  an  adequate  and 
stable  value ;  till  then,  it  has  rather  a  contrary  ten 
dency.  The  fluctuation  and  insecurity  incident  to 
it,  in  an  unfunded  state,  render  it  a  mere  commod 
ity,  and  a  precarious  one.  As  such,  being  only  an 
object  of  occasional  and  particular  speculation,  all 
the  money  applied  to  it  is  so  much  diverted  from  the 
more  useful  channels  of  circulation,  for  which  the 
thing  itself  affords  no  substitute;  so  that,  in  fact, 
one  serious  inconvenience  of  an  unfunded  debt  is, 
that  it  contributes  to  the  scarcity  of  money. 

This  distinction,  which  has  been  little  if  at  all 
attended  to,  is  of  the  greatest  moment;  it  involves 
a  question  immediately  interesting  to  every  part  of 
the  community,  which  is  no  other  than  this :  Whether 
the  public  debt,  by  a  provision  for  it  on  true  prin 
ciples,  shall  be  rendered  a  substitute  for  money;  or 
whether,  by  being  left  as  it  is,  or  by  being  provided 
for  in  such  a  manner  as  will  wound  those  principles 
and  destroy  confidence,  it  shall  be  suffered  to  con 
tinue  as  it  is,  a  pernicious  drain  of  our  cash  from  the 
channels  of  productive  industry? 

The  effect  which  the  funding  of  the  public  debt, 
on  right  principles,  would  have  upon  landed  prop 
erty,  is  one  of  the  circumstances  attending  such 
an  arrangement,  which  has  been  least  adverted  to, 
though  it  deserves  the  most  particular  attention. 
The  present  depreciated  state  of  that  species  of 
property  is  a  serious  calamity.  The  value  of  culti 
vated  lands,  in  most  of  the  States,  has  fallen,  since 


Finance  235 

the  Revolution,  from  twenty-five  to  fifty  per  cent. 
In  those  farther  south,  the  decrease  is  still  more 
considerable.  Indeed,  if  the  representations  con 
tinually  received  from  that  quarter  may  be  credited, 
lands  there  will  command  no  price  which  may  not 
be  deemed  an  almost  total  sacrifice.  This  decrease 
in  the  value  of  lands  ought,  in  a  great  measure, 
to  be  attributed  to  the  scarcity  of  money;  conse 
quently,  whatever  produces  an  augmentation  of  the 
moneyed  capital  of  the  country  must  have  a  pro 
portional  effect  in  raising  that  value.  The  bene 
ficial  tendency  of  a  funded  debt,  in  this  respect,  has 
been  manifested  by  the  most  decisive  experience  in 
Great  Britain. 

The  proprietors  of  lands  would  not  only  feel  the 
benefit  of  this  increase  in  the  value  of  their  property, 
and  of  a  more  prompt  and  better  sale,  when  they 
had  occasion  to  sell,  but  the  necessity  of  selling 
would  be  itself  greatly  diminished.  As  the  same 
cause  would  contribute  to  the  facility  of  loans, 
there  is  reason  to  believe  that  such  of  them  as  are 
indebted  would  be  able,  through  that  resource,  to 
satisfy  their  more  urgent  creditors. 

It  ought  not,  however,  to  be  expected  that  the 
advantages  described  as  likely  to  result  from  fund 
ing  the  public  debt  would  be  instantaneous.  It 
might  require  some  time  to  bring  the  value  of  stock 
to  its  natural  level,  and  to  attach  to  it  that  fixed 
confidence  which  is  necessary  to  its  quality  as 
money.  Yet  the  late  rapid  rise  of  the  public  se 
curities  encourages  an  expectation  that  the  progress 
of  stock,  to  the  desirable  point,  will  be  much  more 


236  Alexander  Hamilton 

expeditious  than  could  have  been  foreseen.  And 
as,  in  the  meantime,  it  will  be  increasing  in  value, 
there  is  room  to  conclude  that  it  will,  from  the  out 
set,  answer  many  of  the  purposes  in  contemplation. 
Particularly,  it  seems  to  be  probable,  that  from 
creditors  who  are  not  themselves  necessitous  it  will 
early  meet  with  a  ready  reception  in  payment  of 
debts,  at  its  current  price. 

Having  now  taken  a  concise  view  of  the  induce 
ments  to  a  proper  provision  for  the  public  debt,  the 
next  inquiry  which  presents  itself  is:  What  ought 
to  be  the  nature  of  such  a  provision?  This  requires 
some  preliminary  discussions. 

It  is  agreed,  on  all  hands,  that  that  part  of  the 
debt  which  has  been  contracted  abroad,  and  is  de 
nominated  the  foreign  debt,  ought  to  be  provided 
for  according  to  the  precise  terms  of  the  contracts 
relating  to  it.  The  discussions  which  can  arise, 
therefore,  will  have  reference  essentially  to  the  do 
mestic  part  of  it,  or  to  that  which  has  been  con 
tracted  at  home.  It  is  to  be  regretted  that  there  is 
not  the  same  unanimity  of  sentiment  on  this  part  as 
on  the  other. 

The  Secretary  has  too  much  deference  for  the 
opinions  of  every  part  of  the  community  not  to  have 
observed  one,  which  has  more  than  once  made  its 
appearance  in  the  public  prints,  and  which  is  oc 
casionally  to  be  met  with  in  conversation.  It 
involves  this  question:  Whether  a  discrimination 
ought  not  to  be  made  between  original  holders  of 
the  public  securities,  and  present  possessors,  by 
purchase?  Those  who  advocate  a  discrimination 


Finance  237 

are  for  making  a  full  provision  for  the  securities  of 
the  former  at  their  nominal  value,  but  contend  that 
the  latter  ought  to  receive  no  more  than  the  cost  to 
them,  and  the  interest.  And  the  idea  is  sometimes 
suggested  of  making  good  the  difference  to  the 
primitive  possessor. 

In  favor  of  this  scheme  it  is  alleged  that  it  would 
be  unreasonable  to  pay  twenty  shillings  in  the 
pound  to  one  who  had  not  given  more  for  it  than 
three  or  four.  And  it  is  added  that  it  would  be 
hard  to  aggravate  the  misfortune  of  the  first  owner, 
who,  probably  through  necessity,  parted  with  his 
property  at  so  great  a  loss,  by  obliging  him  to  con 
tribute  to  the  profit  of  the  person  who  had  specu 
lated  on  his  distresses. 

The  Secretary,  after  the  most  mature  reflection 
on  the  force  of  this  argument,  is  induced  to  reject 
the  doctrine  it  contains,  as  equally  unjust  and  im 
politic;  as  highly  injurious,  even  to  the  original 
holders  of  public  securities;  as  ruinous  to  public 
credit. 

It  is  inconsistent  with  justice,  because,  in  the  first 
place,  it  is  a  breach  of  contract — a  violation  of  the 
rights  of  a  fair  purchaser. 

The  nature  of  the  contract,  in  its  origin,  is  that 
the  public  will  pay  the  sum  expressed  in  the  security, 
to  the  first  holder  or  his  assignee.  The  intent  in 
making  the  security  assignable  is,  that  the  pro 
prietor  may  be  able  to  make  use  of  his  property,  by 
selling  it  for  as  much  as  it  may  be  worth  in  the 
market,  and  that  the  buyer  may  be  safe  in  the 
purchase. 


238  Alexander  Hamilton 

Every  buyer,  therefore,  stands  exactly  in  the 
place  of  the  seller;  has  the  same  right  with  him  to 
the  identical  sum  expressed  in  the  security;  and, 
having  acquired  that  right  by  fair  purchase  and  in 
conformity  to  the  original  agreement  and  intention 
of  the  Government,  his  claim  cannot  be  disputed 
without  manifest  injustice. 

That  he  is  to  be  considered  as  a  fair  purchaser, 
results  from  this :  whatever  necessity  the  seller  may 
have  been  under,  was  occasioned  by  the  Govern 
ment,  in  not  making  a  proper  provision  for  its  debts. 
The  buyer  had  no  agency  in  it,  and  therefore  ought 
not  to  suffer.  He  is  not  even  chargeable  with  hav 
ing  taken  an  undue  advantage.  He  paid  what 
the  commodity  was  worth  in  the  market,  and  took 
the  risks  of  reimbursement  upon  himself.  He,  of 
course,  gave  a  fair  equivalent,  and  ought  to  reap  the 
benefit  of  his  hazard — a  hazard  which  was  far  from 
inconsiderable,  and  which,  perhaps,  turned  on  little 
less  than  a  revolution  in  government. 

That  the  case  of  those  who  parted  with  their  se 
curities  from  necessity  is  a  hard  one,  cannot  be  de 
nied.  But,  whatever  complaint  of  injury,  or  claim 
of  redress,  they  may  have,  respects  the  Government 
solely.  They  have  not  only  nothing  to  object  to 
the  persons  who  relieved  their  necessities,  by  giving 
them  the  current  price  of  their  property,  but  they 
are  even  under  an  implied  condition  to  contribute 
to  the  reimbursement  of  those  persons.  They  knew 
that,  by  the  terms  of  the  contract  with  themselves, 
the  public  were  bound  to  pay  to  those  to  whom  they 
should  convey  their  title  the  sums  stipulated  to  be 


Finance  239 

paid  to  them;  and  that,  as  citizens  of  the  United 
States,  they  were  to  bear  their  proportion  of  the 
contribution  for  that  purpose.  This,  by  the  act  of 
assignment,  they  tacitly  engaged  to  do ;  and,  if  they 
had  an  option,  they  could  not,  with  integrity  or 
good  faith,  refuse  to  do  it,  without  the  consent  of 
those  to  whom  they  sold. 

But,  though  many  of  the  original  holders  sold 
from  necessity,  it  does  not  follow  that  this  was  the 
case  with  all  of  them.  It  may  well  be  supposed 
that  some  of  them  did  it  either  through  want  of  con 
fidence  in  an  eventual  provision,  or  from  the  allure 
ments  of  some  profitable  speculation.  How  shall 
these  different  classes  be  discriminated  from  each 
other?  How  shall  it  be  ascertained,  in  any  case, 
that  the  money  which  the  original  holder  obtained 
for  his  security  was  not  more  beneficial  to  him,  than 
if  he  had  held  it  to  the  present  time,  to  avail  him 
self  of  the  provision  which  shall  be  made?  How 
shall  it  be  known  whether,  if  the  purchaser  had  em 
ployed  his  money  in  some  other  way,  he  would  not 
be  in  a  better  situation  than  by  having  applied 
it  in  the  purchase  of  securities,  though  he  should 
now  receive  their  full  amount?  And,  if  neither  of 
these  things  can  be  known,  how  shall  it  be  deter 
mined,  whether  a  discrimination,  independent  of 
the  breach  of  contract,  would  not  do  a  real  in 
jury  to  purchasers;  and,  if  it  included  a  compensa 
tion  to  the  primitive  proprietors,  would  not  give 
them  an  advantage  to  which  they  had  no  equitable 
pretension  ? 

It  may  well  be  imagined,  also,  that  there  are  not 


240  Alexander  Hamilton 

wanting  instances  in  which  individuals,  urged  by  a 
present  necessity,  parted  with  the  securities  re 
ceived  by  them  from  the  public,  and  shortly  after 
replaced  them  with  others,  as  an  indemnity  for 
their  first  loss.  Shall  they  be  deprived  of  the  in 
demnity  which  they  have  endeavored  to  secure  by 
so  provident  an  arrangement? 

Questions  of  this  sort,  on  a  close  inspection,  mul 
tiply  themselves  without  end,  and  demonstrate  the 
injustice  of  a  discrimination,  even  on  the  most 
subtile  calculations  of  equity,  abstracted  from  the 
obligation  of  contract. 

The  difficulties,  too,  of  regulating  the  details  of  a 
plan  for  that  purpose,  which  would  have  even  the 
semblance  of  equity,  would  be  found  immense.  It 
may  well  be  doubted,  whether  they  would  not  be 
insurmountable,  and  replete  with  such  absurd  as 
well  as  inequitable  consequences,  as  to  disgust  even 
the  proposers  of  the  measure. 

As  a  specimen  of  its  capricious  operation,  it  will 
be  sufficient  to  notice  the  effect  it  would  have  upon 
two  persons,  who  may  be  supposed,  two  years  ago, 
to  have  purchased,  each,  securities,  at  three  shil 
lings  in  the  pound,  and  one  of  them  to  retain  those 
bought  by  him,  till  the  discrimination  should  take 
place;  the  other,  to  have  parted  with  those  bought 
by  him,  within  a  month  past,  at  nine  shillings.  The 
former,  who  had  had  most  confidence  in  the  Gov 
ernment,  would,  in  this  case,  only  receive  at  the  rate 
of  three  shillings,  and  the  interest;  while  the  latter, 
who  had  had  less  confidence,  would  receive,  for 
what  cost  him  the  same  money,  at  the  rate  of  nine 


Finance  241 

shillings,  and  his  representative,  standing  in  his 
place,  would  be  entitled  to  a  like  rate. 

The  impolicy  of  a  discrimination  results  from 
two  considerations:  one,  that  it  proceeds  upon  a 
principle  destructive  of  that  quality  of  the  public 
debt,  or  the  stock  of  the  nation,  which  is  essential  to 
its  capacity  for  answering  the  purposes  of  money — 
that  is,  the  security  of  transfer;  the  other,  that,  as 
well  on  this  account  as  because  it  includes  a  breach  of 
faith ,  it  renders  property  in  the  funds  less  valuable, 
consequently  induces  lenders  to  demand  a  higher 
premium  for  what  they  lend,  and  produces  every 
other  inconvenience  of  a  bad  state  of  public  credit. 

It  will  be  perceived,  at  first  sight,  that  the  trans 
ferable  quality  of  stock  is  essential  to  its  operation 
as  money,  and  that  this  depends  on  the  idea  of 
complete  security  to  the  transferee,  and  a  firm  per 
suasion  that  no  distinction  can,  in  any  circum 
stances,  be  made  between  him  and  the  original 
proprietor. 

The  precedent  of  an  invasion  of  this  fundamental 
principle  would,  of  course,  tend  to  deprive  the  com 
munity  of  an  advantage  with  which  no  temporary 
saving  could  bear  the  least  comparison. 

And  it  will  as  readily  be  perceived  that  the  same 
cause  would  operate  a  diminution  of  the  value  of 
stock  in  the  hands  of  the  first  as  well  as  of  every 
other  holder.  The  price  which  any  man  who 
should  incline  to  purchase  would  be  willing  to  give 
for  it,  would  be  in  a  compound  ratio  to  the  imme 
diate  profit  it  afforded,  and  the  chance  of  the  con 
tinuance  of  his  profit.  If  there  was  supposed  to  be 


VOL.  II.—  16. 


242  Alexander  Hamilton 

any  hazard  of  the  latter,  the  risk  would  be  taken 
into  the  calculation,  and  either  there  would  be  no 
purchase  at  all,  or  it  would  be  at  a  proportionably 
less  price. 

For  this  diminution  of  the  value  of  stock  every 
person  who  should  be  about  to  lend  to  the  Govern 
ment  would  demand  compensation,  and  would  add 
to  the  actual  difference  between  the  nominal  and 
the  market  value  an  equivalent  for  the  chance  of 
greater  decrease,  which,  in  a  precarious  state  of 
public  credit,  is  always  to  be  taken  into  the  account. 
Every  compensation  of  this  sort,  it  is  evident, 
would  be  an  absolute  loss  to  the  Government. 

In  the  preceding  discussion  of  the  impolicy  of  a 
discrimination,  the  injurious  tendency  of  it  to  those 
who  continue  to  be  the  holders  of  the  securities  they 
received  from  the  Government  has  been  explained. 
Nothing  need  be  added  on  this  head,  except  that 
this  is  an  additional  and  interesting  light  in  which 
the  injustice  of  the  measure  may  be  seen.  It  would 
not  only  divest  present  proprietors,  by  purchase,  of 
the  rights  they  had  acquired  under  the  sanction 
of  public  faith,  but  it  would  depreciate  the  property 
of  the  remaining  original  holders.  It  is  equally  un 
necessary  to  add  any  thing  to  what  has  been  already 
said  to  demonstrate  the  fatal  influence  which  the 
principle  of  discrimination  would  have  on  the  public 
credit. 

But  there  is  still  a  point  of  view,  in  which  it  will 
appear  perhaps  even  more  exceptionable  than  in 
either  of  the  former.  It  would  be  repugnant  to  an 
express  provision  of  the  Constitution  of  the  United 


Finance  243 

States.  This  provision  is  that  "all  debts  con 
tracted  and  engagements  entered  into  before  the 
adoption  of  that  Constitution,  shall  be  as  valid 
against  the  United  States  under  it  as  under  the  Con 
federation";  which  amounts  to  a  constitutional 
ratification  of  the  contracts  respecting  the  debt  in 
the  state  in  which  they  existed  under  the  Confedera 
tion.  And,  resorting  to  that  standard,  there  can  be 
no  doubt  that  the  rights  of  assignees  and  original 
holders  must  be  considered  as  equal.  In  exploding 
thus  fully  the  principle  of  discrimination,  the  Secre 
tary  is  happy  in  reflecting  that  he  is  only  the  advo 
cate  of  what  has  been  already  sanctioned  by  the 
formal  and  express  authority  of  the  Government  of 
the  Union  in  these  emphatic  terms :  "  The  remaining 
class  of  creditors,"  say  Congress,  in  their  circular  ad 
dressed  to  the  States  of  the  26th  April,  1783,  "is 
composed  of  such  of  our  fellow-citizens  as  originally 
lent  to  the  public  the  use  of  their  funds,  or  have 
since  manifested  most  confidence  in  their  country  by 
receiving  transfers  from  the  lenders;  and  partly  of 
those  whose  property  has  been  either  advanced 
or  assumed  for  the  public  service.  To  discriminate 
the  merits  of  these  several  descriptions  of  creditors 
would  be  a  task  equally  unnecessary  and  invidious. 
If  the  voice  of  humanity  pleads  more  loudly  in  favor 
of  some  than  of  others,  the  voice  of  policy,  no  less 
than  of  justice,  pleads  in  favor  of  all.  A  wise  nation 
will  never  permit  those  who  relieve  the  wants  of 
their  country,  or  who  rely  most  on  its  faith,  its  firm 
ness,  and  its  resources,  when  either  of  them  is  dis 
trusted,  to  suffer  by  the  event." 


244  Alexander  Hamilton 

The  Secretary,  concluding  that  a  discrimination 
between  the  different  classes  of  creditors  of  the 
United  States  cannot,  with  propriety,  be  made,  pro 
ceeds  to  examine  whether  a  difference  ought  to  be 
permitted  to  remain  between  them  and  another 
description  of  public  creditors — those  of  the  States 
individually.  The  Secretary,  after  mature  reflec 
tion  on  this  point,  entertains  a  full  conviction  that 
an  assumption  of  the  debts  of  the  particular  States 
by  the  Union,  and  a  like  provision  for  them  as  for 
those  of  the  Union,  will  be  a  measure  of  sound  policy 
and  substantial  justice. 

It  would,  in  the  opinion  of  the  Secretary,  contrib 
ute,  in  an  eminent  degree,  to  an  orderly,  stable,  and 
satisfactory  arrangement  of  the  national  finances. 
Admitting,  as  ought  to  be  the  case,  that  a  provision 
must  be  made,  in  some  way  or  other,  for  the  entire 
debt,  it  will  follow  that  no  greater  revenues  will  be 
required  whether  that  provision  be  made  wholly  by 
the  United  States,  or  partly  by  them  and  partly  by 
the  States  separately. 

The  principal  question,  then,  must  be  whether 
such  a  provision  cannot  be  more  conveniently  and 
effectually  made  by  one  general  plan,  issuing  from 
one  authority,  than  by  different  plans,  originating  in 
different  authorities?  In  the  first  case  there  can  be 
no  competition  for  resources;  in  the  last  there  must 
be  such  a  competition.  The  consequences  of  this, 
without  the  greatest  caution  on  both  sides,  might  be 
interfering  regulations,  and  thence  collision  and  con 
fusion.  Particular  branches  of  industry  might  also 
be  oppressed  by  it.  The  most  productive  objects  of 


Finance  245 

revenue  are  not  numerous.  Either  these  must  be 
wholly  engrossed  by  one  side,  which  might  lessen  the 
efficacy  of  the  provisions  by  the  other,  or  both  must 
have  recourse  to  the  same  objects,  in  different  modes, 
which  might  occasion  an  accumulation  upon  them 
beyond  what  they  could  properly  bear.  If  this 
should  not  happen,  the  caution  requisite  to  avoiding 
it  would  prevent  the  revenue's  deriving  the  full 
benefit  of  each  object.  The  danger  of  interference 
and  of  excess  would  be  apt  to  impose  restraints  very 
unfriendly  to  the  complete  command  of  those  re 
sources  which  are  the  most  convenient,  and  to  com 
pel  the  having  recourse  to  others,  less  eligible  in 
themselves  and  less  agreeable  to  the  community. 
The  difficulty  of  an  effectual  command  of  the  public 
resources,  in  case  of  separate  provisions  for  the  debt, 
may  be  seen  in  another,  and,  perhaps,  more  strik 
ing  light.  It  would  naturally  happen  that  different 
States,  from  local  considerations,  would,  in  some  in 
stances,  have  recourse  to  different  objects,  in  others 
to  the  same  objects,  in  different  degrees,  for  procur 
ing  the  funds  of  which  they  stood  in  need.  It  is 
easy  to  conceive  how  this  diversity  would  affect  the 
aggregate  revenue  of  the  country.  By  the  suppo 
sition,  articles  which  yielded  a  full  supply  in  some 
States  would  yield  nothing,  or  an  insufficient  pro 
duct,  in  others.  And  hence,  the  public  revenue 
would  not  derive  the  full  benefit  of  those  articles 
from  State  regulations;  neither  could  the  deficien 
cies  be  made  good  by  those  of  the  Union.  It  is  a  pro 
vision  of  the  national  Constitution  that  "  all  duties, 
imposts,  and  excises  shall  be  uniform  throughout 


246  Alexander  Hamilton 

the  United  States."  And,  as  the  General  Govern 
ment  would  be  under  a  necessity,  from  motives  of 
policy,  of  paying  regard  to  the  duty  which  may  have 
been  previously  imposed  upon  any  article,  though 
but  in  a  single  State,  it  would  be  constrained  either 
to  refrain  wholly  from  any  further  imposition  upon 
such  article,  where  it  had  been  already  rated  as  high 
as  was  proper,  or  to  confine  itself  to  the  difference 
between  the  existing  rate  and  what  the  article  would 
reasonably  bear.  Thus  the  pre-occupancy  of  an 
article  by  a  single  State  would  tend  to  arrest  or 
abridge  the  impositions  of  the  Union  on  that  article. 
And  as  it  is  supposable  that  a  great  variety  of  ar 
ticles  might  be  placed  in  this  situation,  by  dis 
similar  arrangements  of  the  particular  States,  it  is 
evident  that  the  aggregate  revenue  of  the  country 
would  be  likely  to  be  very  materially  contracted  by 
the  plan  of  separate  provisions. 

If  all  the  public  creditors  receive  their  dues  from 
one  source,  distributed  with  an  equal  hand,  their  in 
terest  will  be  the  same.  And,  having  the  same  in 
terests,  they  will  unite  in  the  support  of  the  fiscal 
arrangements  of  the  Government — as  these,  too,  can 
be  made  with  more  convenience  where  there  is  no 
competition.  These  circumstances  combined  will 
insure  to  the  revenue  laws  a  more  ready  and  more 
satisfactory  execution. 

If,  on  the  contrary,  there  are  distinct  provisions, 
there  will  be  distinct  interests,  drawing  different 
ways.  That  union  and  concert  of  views  among  the 
creditors,  which  in  every  Government  is  of  great 
importance  to  their  security  and  to  that  of  public 


Finance  247 

credit,  will  not  only  not  exist,  but  will  be  likely  to 
give  place  to  mutual  jealousy  and  opposition.  And 
from  this  cause  the  operation  of  the  systems  which 
may  be  adopted,  both  by  the  particular  States  and 
by  the  Union,  with  relation  to  their  respective  debts, 
will  be  in  danger  of  being  counteracted. 

There  are  several  reasons  which  render  it  prob 
able  that  the  situation  of  the  State  creditors  would 
be  worse  than  that  of  the  creditors  of  the  Union,  if 
there  be  not  a  national  assumption  of  the  State  debts. 
Of  these  it  will  be  sufficient  to  mention  two:    one, 
that  a  principal  branch  of  revenue  is  exclusively 
vested  in  the  Union;   the  other,  that  a  State  must 
always  be  checked  in  the  imposition  of  taxes  on 
articles  of  consumption,  from  the  want  of  power  to 
extend  the  same  regulation  to  the  other  States,  and 
from  the  tendency  of  partial  duties  to  injure  its  in 
dustry  and  commerce.     Should  the  State  creditors 
stand  upon  a  less  eligible  footing  than  the  others,  it 
is  unnatural  to  expect  they  would  see  with  pleasure 
a  provision  for  them.     The  influence  which  their 
dissatisfaction  might  have,  could  not  but  operate 
injuriously,  both  for  the  creditors  and  the  credit  of 
the  United  States.     Hence  it  is  even  the  interest  of 
the  creditors  of  the  Union,  that  those  of  the  individ 
ual  States  should  be  comprehended  in  a  general  pro 
vision.     Any  attempt  to  secure  to  the  former  either 
exclusive  or  peculiar  advantages,  would  materially 
hazard  their  interests.     Neither  would  it  be  just 
that  one  class  of  public  creditors  should  be  more 
favored  than  the  other.     The  objects  for  which  both 
descriptions  of  the  debt  were  contracted  are  in  the 


248  Alexander  Hamilton 

main  the  same.  Indeed,  a  great  part  of  the  par 
ticular  debts  of  the  States  has  arisen  from  assump 
tions  by  them  on  account  of  the  Union.  And  it  is 
most  equitable  that  there  should  be  the  same  meas 
ure  of  retribution  for  all.  There  is  an  objection, 
however,  to  an  assumption  of  the  State  debts,  which 
deserves  particular  notice.  It  may  be  supposed  that 
it  would  increase  the  difficulty  of  an  equitable  settle 
ment  between  them  and  the  United  States. 

The  principles  of  that  settlement,  whenever  they 
shall  be  discussed,  will  require  all  the  moderation  and 
wisdom  of  the  Government.  In  the  opinion  of  the 
Secretary,  that  discussion,  till  further  lights  are  ob 
tained,  would  be  premature.  All,  therefore,  which 
he  would  now  think  advisable  on  the  point  in  ques 
tion  would  be  that  the  amount  of  the  debts  assumed 
and  provided  for  should  be  charged  to  the  respective 
States  to  abide  an  eventual  arrangement.  This  the 
United  States,  as  assignees  to  the  creditors,  would 
have  an  indisputable  right  to  do.  But,  as  it  might 
be  a  satisfaction  to  the  House  to  have  before  them 
some  plan  for  the  liquidation  of  accounts  between 
the  Union  and  its  members,  which,  including  the 
assumption  of  the  State  debts,  would  consist  with 
equity,  the  Secretary  will  submit,  in  this  place,  such 
thoughts  on  the  subject  as  have  occurred  to  his  own 
mind,  or  been  suggested  to  him,  most  compatible,  in 
his  judgment,  with  the  end  proposed. 

Let  each  State  be  charged  with  all  the  money  ad 
vanced  to  it  out  of  the  treasury  of  the  United  States, 
liquidated  according  to  the  specie  value  at  the  time 
of  each  advance,  with  interest  at  six  per  cent. 


Finance  249 

Let  it  also  be  charged  with  the  amount,  in  specie 
value,  of  all  its  securities  which  shall  be  assumed, 
with  the  interest  upon  them,  to  the  time  when  in 
terest  shall  become  payable  by  the  United  States. 

Let  it  be  credited  for  all  moneys  paid  and  articles 
furnished  to  the  United  States,  and  for  all  other 
expenditures  during  the  war,  either  toward  general 
or  particular  defence,  whether  authorized  or  unau 
thorized  by  the  United  States;  the  whole  liquidated 
to  specie  value,  and  bearing  an  interest  of  six  per 
cent,  from  the  several  times  at  which  the  several  pay 
ments,  advances,  and  expenditures  accrued. 

And  let  all  sums  of  continental  money,  now  in  the 
treasuries  of  the  respective  States,  which  shall  be 
paid  into  the  treasury  of  the  United  States,  be  cred 
ited  at  specie  value. 

Upon  a  statement  of  the  accounts  according  to 
these  principles,  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  bal 
ances  would  appear  in  favor  of  all  the  States  against 
the  United  States. 

To  equalize  the  contributions  of  the  States,  let 
each  be  then  charged  with  its  proportion  of  the  ag 
gregate  of  those  balances,  according  to  some  equit 
able  ratio,  to  be  devised  for  that  purpose. 

If  the  contributions  should  be  found  dispropor 
tionate,  the  result  of  this  adjustment  would  be,  that 
some  States  would  be  creditors,  some  debtors,  to  the 
Union.  Should  this  be  the  case — as  it  will  be  at 
tended  with  less  inconvenience  to  the  United  States 
to  have  to  pay  balances  to,  than  to  receive  them  from, 
the  particular  States — it  may,  perhaps,  be  practicable 
to  effect  the  former  by  a  second  process,  in  the  nature 


250  Alexander  Hamilton 

of  a  transfer  of  the  amount  of  the  debts  of  debtor 
States,  to  the  credit  of  creditor  States,  observing 
the  ratio  by  which  the  first  apportionment  shall  have 
been  made.  This,  whilst  it  would  destroy  the  bal 
ances  due  from  the  former,  would  increase  those  due 
to  the  latter;  these  to  be  provided  for  by  the  United 
States,  at  a  reasonable  interest,  but  not  to  be  transfer 
able.  The  expediency  of  this  second  process  must 
depend  on  a  knowledge  of  the  result  of  the  first. 
If  the  inequalities  should  be  too  great,  the  arrange 
ment  may  be  impracticable,  without  unduly  in 
creasing  the  debt  of  the  United  States.  But  it  is 
not  likely  that  this  would  be  the  case.  It  is  also  to 
be  remarked,  that  though  this  second  process  might 
not,  upon  the  principle  of  apportionment,  bring  the 
thing  to  the  point  aimed  at,  yet  it  may  approach  so 
nearly  to  it,  as  to  avoid  essentially  the  embarrass 
ment  of  having  considerable  balances  to  collect  from 
any  of  the  States. 

The  whole  of  this  arrangement  to  be  under  the 
superintendence  of  commissioners,  vested  with  equi 
table  discretion  and  final  authority.  The  operation 
of  the  plan  is  exemplified  in  Schedule  A. 

The  general  principle  of  it  seems  to  be  equitable: 
for  it  appears  difficult  to  conceive  a  good  reason  why 
the  expenses  for  the  particular  defence  of  a  part,  in  a 
common  war,  should  not  be  a  common  charge,  as 
well  as  those  incurred  professedly  for  the  general  de 
fence.  The  defence  of  each  part  is  that  of  the  whole ; 
and  unless  all  the  expenditures  are  brought  into  a 
common  mass,  the  tendency  must  be  to  add  to  the 
calamities  suffered,  by  being  the  most  exposed  to 


Finance  251 

the  ravages  of  war,  an  increase  of  burthens.  This 
plan  seems  to  be  susceptible  of  no  objection  which 
does  not  belong  to  every  other,  that  proceeds  on  the 
idea  of  a  final  adjustment  of  accounts.  The  diffi 
culty  of  settling  a  ratio  is  common  to  all.  This  must, 
probably,  either  be  sought  for  in  the  proportions  of 
the  requisitions  during  the  war,  or  in  the  decision  of 
commissioners,  appointed  with  plenary  power.  The 
rule  prescribed  in  the  Constitution,  with  regard  to 
representation  and  direct  taxes,  would  evidently  not 
be  applicable  to  the  situation  of  parties  during  the 
period  in  question.  The  existing  debt  of  the  United 
States  is  excluded  from  the  computation,  as  it  ought 
to  be,  because  it  will  be  provided  for  out  of  a  general 
fund.  The  only  discussion  of  a  preliminary  kind 
which  remains,  relates  to  the  distinctions  of  the 
debt  into  principal  and  interest.  It  is  well  known 
that  the  arrears  of  the  latter  bear  a  large  proportion 
to  the  amount  of  the  former.  The  immediate  pay 
ment  of  these  arrears  is  evidently  impracticable; 
and  a  question  arises,  What  ought  to  be  done  with 
them? 

There  is  good  reason  to  conclude,  that  the  im 
pressions  of  many  are  more  favorable  to  the  claim 
of  the  principal,  than  to  that  of  the  interest;  at 
least  so  far  as  to  produce  an  opinion,  that  an  inferior 
provision  might  suffice  for  the  latter. 

But,  to  the  Secretary,  this  opinion  does  not  ap 
pear  to  be  well  founded.  His  investigations  of  the 
subject  have  led  him  to  a  conclusion,  that  the  arrears 
of  interest  have  pretensions  at  least  equal  to  the 
principal. 


252  Alexander  Hamilton 

The  liquidated  debt,  traced  to  its  origin,  falls 
under  two  principal  discriminations.  One  relating 
to  loans,  the  other  to  services  performed  and  ar 
ticles  supplied.  The  part  arising  from  loans  was  at 
first  made  payable  at  fixed  periods,  which  have  long 
since  elapsed,  with  an  early  option  to  lenders,  either 
to  receive  back  their  money  at  the  expiration  of 
those  periods,  or  to  continue  it  at  interest,  till  the 
whole  amount  of  continental  bills  circulating  should 
not  exceed  the  sum  in  circulation  at  the  time  of  each 
loan.  This  contingency,  in  the  sense  of  the  contract, 
never  happened;  and  the  presumption  is,  that  the 
creditors  preferred  continuing  their  money  indef 
initely  at  interest  to  receiving  it  in  a  depreciated 
and  depreciating  state. 

The  other  parts  of  it  were  chiefly  for  objects  which 
ought  to  have  been  paid  for  at  the  time — that  is, 
when  the  services  were  performed,  or  the  supplies 
furnished;  and  were  not  accompanied  with  any  con 
tract  for  interest. 

But  by  different  acts  of  Government  and  Admin 
istration,  concurred  in  by  the  creditors,  these  parts 
of  the  debt  have  been  converted  into  a  capital, 
bearing  an  interest  of  six  per  cent,  per  annum,  but 
without  any  definite  period  of  redemption.  A  portion 
of  the  Loan  Office  debt  has  been  exchanged  for  new 
securities  of  that  import;  and  the  whole  of  it  seems 
to  have  acquired  that  character  after  the  expira 
tion  of  the  periods  prefixed  for  repayment.  If  this 
view  of  the  subject  be  a  just  one,  the  capital  of  the 
debt  of  the  United  States  may  be  considered  in  the 
light  of  an  annuity  at  the  rate  of  six  per  cent,  per 


Finance  253 

annum,  redeemable  at  the  pleasure  of  the  Govern 
ment  by  payment  of  the  principal :  for  it  seems  to  be  a 
clear  position,  that,  when  a  Government  contracts  a 
debt  payable  with  interest,  without  any  precise  time 
being  stipulated  or  understood  for  payment  of  the 
capital,  that  time  is  a  matter  of  pure  discretion  with 
the  Government,  which  is  at  liberty  to  consult  its 
own  convenience  respecting  it,  taking  care  to  pay 
the  interest  with  punctuality. 

Wherefore,  as  long  as  the  United  States  should 
pay  the  interest  of  their  debt,  as  it  accrued,  their 
creditors  would  have  no  right  to  demand  the  prin 
cipal.  But  with  regard  to  the  arrears  of  interest, 
the  case  is  different.  These  are  now  due,  and  those 
to  whom  they  are  due,  have  a  right  to  claim  imme 
diate  payment.  To  say  that  it  would  be  imprac 
ticable  to  comply,  would  not  vary  the  nature  of  the 
right.  Nor  can  this  idea  of  impracticability  be  hon 
orably  carried  further  than  to  justify  the  proposition 
of  a  new  contract,  upon  the  basis  of  a  commutation 
of  that  right  for  an  equivalent.  This  equivalent, 
too,  ought  to  be  a  real  and  fair  one.  And  what 
other  fair  equivalent  can  be  imagined  for  the  deten 
tion  of  money,  but  a  reasonable  interest?  Or  what 
can  be  the  standard  of  that  interest,  but  the  market 
rate,  or  the  rate  which  the  Government  pays  in  ordi 
nary  cases? 

From  this  view  of  the  matter,  which  appears  to 
be  the  accurate  and  true  one,  it  will  follow  that  the 
arrears  of  interest  are  entitled  to  an  equal  provision 
with  the  principal  of  the  debt. 

The  result  of  the  foregoing  discussion  is  this :  That 


254  Alexander  Hamilton 

there  ought  to  be  no  discrimination  between  the 
original  holders  of  the  debt,  and  present  possessors 
by  purchase ;  that  it  is  expedient  there  should  be  an 
assumption  of  the  State  debts  by  the  Union;  and 
that  the  arrears  of  interest  should  be  provided  for 
on  an  equal  footing  with  the  principal. 

The  next  inquiry,  in  order,  toward  determining 
the  nature  of  a  proper  provision,  respects  the  quan 
tum  of  the  debt,  and  present  rates  of  interest. 

The  debt  of  the  Union  is  distinguishable  into 
foreign  and  domestic. 

The  foreign  debt,  as  stated  in  Schedule  B, 

amounts  to,  principal  .  .  .  $10,070,307  oo 

Bearing  an  interest  of  four,  and  partly  an 
interest  of  five  per  cent. 

Arrears  of  interest  to  the  last  of  Decem 
ber,  1789 1,640,071  62 

Making,  together        .         .  $11,710,378  62 

The  domestic  debt  may  be  subdivided  into  liqui 
dated  and  unliquidated;  principal  and  interest. 

The  principal  of  the  liquidated  part,  as 

stated  in  Schedule  C,  amounts  to     .  $27,383,917  74 
Bearing  an  interest  of  six  per  cent. 
The  arrears  of  interest,  as  stated  in  the 

Schedule   D,   to   the   end   of    1790, 

amount  to        ...   /^.       ,,      ;^X       .     13,030,168  20 


Making,  together        I        .  $40,414,085  94 

This  includes  all  that  has  been  paid  in  indents  (ex 
cept  what  has  come  into  the  treasury  of  the  United 


Finance  255 

States),  which,  in  the  opinion  of  the  Secretary,  can 
be  considered  in  no  other  light  than  as  interest  due. 

The  unliquidated  part  of  the  domestic  debt,  which 
consists  chiefly  of  the  continental  bills  of  credit,  is 
not  ascertained,  but  may  be  estimated  at  2,000,000 
dollars. 

These  several  sums  constitute  the  whole  of  the 
debt  of  the  United  States,  amounting  together  to 
$54,124,464.56.  That  of  the  individual  States  is 
not  equally  well  ascertained.  The  Schedule  E  shows 
the  extent  to  which  it  has  been  ascertained  by  re 
turns,  pursuant  to  the  orders  of  the  House  of  the 
2ist  September  last;  but  this  not  comprehending 
all  the  States,  the  residue  must  be  estimated  from 
less  authentic  information.  The  Secretary,  however, 
presumes  that  the  total  amount  may  be  safely  stated 
at  twenty-five  millions  of  dollars,  principal  and  in 
terest.  The  present  rate  of  interest  in  the  States' 
debt  is,  in  general,  the  same  with  that  of  the  domes 
tic  debt  of  the  Union. 

On  the  supposition  that  the  arrears  of  interest 
ought  to  be  provided  for,  on  the  same  terms  with 
the  principal,  the  annual  amount  of  the  interest, 
which,  at  the  existing  rates,  would  be  payable  on 
the  entire  mass  of  the  public  debt,  would  be: 

On  the  foreign  debt,  computing  the  interest 
on  the  principal,  as  it  stands,  and  al 
lowing  four  per  cent,  on  the  arrears  of 
interest  .  ...  .  $  542,599  66 

On  the  domestic  debt,  including  that  of 

States        k^t^:  ;.x.'   afe]  bS     •     4,044,845  IS 
Making,  together          .         .  $4,587,444  81 


256  Alexander  Hamilton 

The  interesting  problem  now  occurs:  Is  it  in  the 
power  of  the  United  States,  consistently  with  those 
prudential  considerations  which  ought  not  to  be 
overlooked,  to  make  a  provision  equal  to  the  pur 
pose  of  funding  the  whole  debt,  at  the  rates  of  in 
terest  which  it  now  bears,  in  addition  to  the  sum 
which  will  be  necessary  for  the  current  service  of  the 
Government? 

The  Secretary  will  not  say  that  such  a  provision 
would  exceed  the  abilities  of  the  country,  but  he  is 
clearly  of  opinion  that  to  make  it  would  require  the 
extension  of  taxation  to  a  degree  and  to  objects 
which  the  true  interest  of  the  public  creditors  for 
bids.  It  is,  therefore,  to  be  hoped,  and  even  to  be 
expected,  that  they  will  cheerfully  concur  in  such 
modifications  of  their  claims,  on  fair  and  equitable 
principles,  as  will  facilitate  to  the  Government  an 
arrangement  substantial,  durable,  and  satisfactory 
to  the  community.  The  importance  of  the  last 
characteristic  will  strike  every  discerning  mind.  No 
plan,  however  flattering  in  appearance,  to  which  it 
did  not  belong,  could  be  truly  entitled  to  confidence. 

It  will  not  be  forgotten  that  exigencies  may,  ere 
long,  arise,  which  would  call  for  resources  greatly 
beyond  what  is  now  deemed  sufficient  for  the  current 
service ;  and  that,  should  the  faculties  of  the  country 
be  exhausted,  or  even  strained,  to  provide  for  the 
public  debt,  there  could  be  less  reliance  on  the  sa- 
credness  of  the  provision.  But  while  the  Secretary 
yields  to  the  force  of  these  considerations,  he  does 
not  lose  sight  of  those  fundamental  principles  of 
good  faith  which  dictate  that  every  practicable 


Finance  257 

exertion  ought  to  be  made,  scrupulously  to  fulfil  the 
engagements  of  the  Government;  that  no  change  in 
the  rights  of  its  creditors  ought  to  be  attempted 
without  their  voluntary  consent;  and  that  this  con 
sent  ought  to  be  voluntary  in  fact  as  well  as  in  name. 
Consequently,  that  every  proposal  of  a  change  ought 
to  be  in  the  shape  of  an  appeal  to  their  reason  and 
to  their  interest,  not  to  their  necessities.  To  this 
end  it  is  requisite  that  a  fair  equivalent  should  be 
offered  for  what  may  be  asked  to  be  given  up,  and 
unquestionable  security  for  the  remainder.  With 
out  this,  an  alteration  consistently  with  the  credit 
and  honor  of  the  nation  would  be  impracticable. 

It  remains  to  see  what  can  be  proposed  in  con 
formity  to  these  views. 

It  has  been  remarked  that  the  capital  of  the  debt 
of  the  Union  is  to  be  viewed  in  the  light  of  an  an 
nuity,  at  the  rate  of  six  per  cent,  per  annum,  redeem 
able  at  the  pleasure  of  the  Government  by  payment 
of  the  principal.  And  it  will  not  be  required  that 
the  arrears  of  interest  should  be  considered  in  a  more 
favorable  light.  The  same  character,  in  general, 
may  be  applied  to  the  debts  of  the  individual  States. 

This  view  of  the  subject  admits  that  the  United 
States  would  have  it  in  their  power  to  avail  them 
selves  of  any  fall  in  the  market  rate  of  interest  for 
reducing  that  of  the  debt. 

This  property  of  the  debt  is  favorable  to  the  pub 
lic,  unfavorable  to  the  creditor,  and  may  facilitate 
an  arrangement  for  the  reduction  of  interest  upon 
the  basis  of  a  fair  equivalent. 

Probabilities   are   always   a   rational   ground   of 


VOL.  II.— 17. 


258  Alexander  Hamilton 

f 

contract.  The  Secretary  conceives  that  there  is  good 
reason  to  believe,  if  effectual  measures  are  taken  to 
establish  public  credit,  that  the  Government  rate  of 
interest  in  the  United  States  will,  in  a  very  short 
time,  fall  at  least  as  low  as  five  per  cent. ;  and  that, 
in  a  period  not  exceeding  twenty  years,  it  will  sink 
still  lower,  probably  to  four.  There  are  two  prin 
cipal  causes  which  will  be  likely  to  produce  this 
effect:  one,  the  low  rate  of  interest  in  Europe;  the 
other,  the  increase  of  the  moneyed  capital  of  the  na 
tion  by  the  funding  of  the  public  debt. 

From  three  to  four  per  cent,  is  deemed  good  in 
terest  in  several  parts  of  Europe.  Even  less  is 
deemed  so  in  some  places;  and  it  is  on  the  decline, 
the  increasing  plenty  of  money  continually  tending 
to  lower  it.  It  is  presumable,  that  no  country  will 
be  able  to  borrow  of  foreigners  upon  better  terms 
than  the  United  States,  because  none  can,  perhaps, 
afford  so  good  security.  Our  situation  exposes  us, 
less  than  that  of  any  other  nation,  to  those  casualties 
which  are  the  chief  causes  of  expense;  our  encum 
brances,  in  proportion  to  our  real  means,  are  less, 
though  these  cannot  immediately  be  brought  so  read 
ily  into  action;  and  our  progress  in  resources,  from 
the  early  state  of  the  country,  and  the  immense 
tracts  of  unsettled  territory,  must  necessarily  exceed 
that  of  any  other.  The  advantages  of  this  situation 
have  already  engaged  the  attention  of  the  European 
money-lenders,  particularly  among  the  Dutch.  And 
as  they  become  better  understood,  they  will  have 
the  greater  influence.  Hence,  as  large  a  proportion 
of  the  cash  of  Europe  as  may  be  wanted  will  be,  in  a 


Finance  259 

certain  sense,  in  our  market,  for  the  use  of  Govern 
ment.  And  this  will  naturally  have  the  effect  of  a 
reduction  of  the  rate  of  interest,  not  indeed  to  the 
level  of  the  places  which  send  their  money  to  market, 
but  to  something  much  nearer  to  it  than  our  present 
rate. 

The  influence  which  the  funding  of  the  debt  is 
calculated  to  have  in  lowering  interest  has  been  al 
ready  remarked  and  explained.  It  is  hardly  possible 
that  it  should  not  be  materially  affected  by  such  an 
increase  of  the  moneyed  capital  of  the  nation  as 
would  result  from  the  proper  funding  of  seventy 
millions  of  dollars.  But  the  probability  of  a  de 
crease  in  the  rate  of  interest  acquires  confirmation 
from  facts  which  existed  prior  to  the  Revolution.  It 
is  well  known  that,  in  some  of  the  States,  money 
might,  with  facility,  be  borrowed,  on  good  security, 
at  five  per  cent.,  and,  not  unfrequently,  even  at 
less. 

The  most  enlightened  of  the  public  creditors  will 
be  most  sensible  of  the  justness  of  this  view  of  the 
subject,  and  of  the  propriety  of  the  use  which  will  be 
made  of  it.  The  Secretary,  in  pursuance  of  it,  will 
assume,  as  a  probability  sufficiently  great  to  be  a 
ground  of  calculation,  both  on  the  part  of  the  Gov 
ernment  and  of  its  creditors,  that  the  interest  of 
money  in  the  United  States  will,  in  five  years,  fall  to 
five  per  cent.,  and,  in  twenty,  to  four.  The  prob 
ability,  in  the  mind  of  the  Secretary,  is  rather  that 
the  fall  may  be  more  rapid  and  more  considerable; 
but  he  prefers  a  mean,  as  most  likely  to  engage  the 
assent  of  the  creditors,  and  more  equitable  in  itself; 


260  Alexander  Hamilton 

because  it  is  predicated  on  probabilities,  which  may 
err  on  one  side  as  well  as  on  the  other. 

Premising  these  things,  the  Secretary  submits  to 
the  House  the  expediency  of  proposing  a  loan,  to 
the  full  amount  of  the  debt,  as  well  of  the  particular 
States  as  of  the  Union,  upon  the  following  terms : 

First.  That,  for  every  hundred  dollars  subscribed, 
payable  in  the  debt  (as  well  interest  as  principal), 
the  subscriber  be  entitled,  at  his  option,  either  to 
have  two  thirds  funded  at  an  annuity  or  yearly  in 
terest  of  six  per  cent.,  redeemable  at  the  pleasure  of 
the  Government  by  payment  of  the  principal,  and  to 
receive  the  other  third  in  lands  in  the  Western  terri 
tory,  at  the  rate  of  twenty  cents  per  acre ;  or  to  have 
the  whole  sum  funded  at  an  annuity  or  yearly  in 
terest  of  four  per  cent.,  irredeemable  by  any  pay 
ment  exceeding  five  dollars  per  annum,  on  account 
both  of  principal  and  interest,  and  to  receive,  as  a 
compensation  for  the  reduction  of  interest,  fifteen 
dollars  and  eighty  cents,  payable  in  lands,  as  in  the 
preceding  case ;  or  to  have  sixty-six  dollars  and  two 
thirds  of  a  dollar  funded  immediately,  at  an  annuity 
or  yearly  interest  of  six  per  cent.,  irredeemable  by 
any  payment  exceeding  four  dollars  and  two  thirds 
of  a  dollar  per  annum,  on  account  both  of  principal 
and  interest,  and  to  have,  at  the  end  of  ten  years, 
twenty-six  dollars  and  eighty-eight  cents  funded  at 
the  like  interest  and  rate  of  redemption ;  or  to  have 
an  annuity,  for  the  remainder  of  life,  upon  the  con 
tingency  of  fixing  to  a  given  age,  not  less  distant  than 
ten  years,  computing  interest  at  four  per  cent. ;  or  to 
have  an  annuity  for  the  remainder  of  life,  upon  the 


Finance  261 

contingency  of  the  survivorship  of  the  younger  of 
two  persons,  computing  interest  in  this  case  also  at 
four  per  cent. 

In  addition  to  the  foregoing  loan,  payable  wholly 
in  the  debt,  the  Secretary  would  propose  that  one 
should  be  opened  for  ten  millions  of  dollars,  on  the 
following  plan : 

That,  for  every  hundred  dollars  subscribed,  pay 
able  one  half  in  specie  and  the  other  half  in  debt  (as 
well  principal  as  interest),  the  subscriber  be  entitled 
to  an  annuity  or  yearly  interest  of  five  per  cent.,  ir 
redeemable  by  any  payment  exceeding  six  dollars 
per  annum,  on  account  both  of  principal  and  interest. 

The  principles  and  operation  of  these  different 
plans  may  now  require  explanation. 

The  first  is  simply  a  proposition  for  paying  one 
third  of  the  debt  in  land,  and  funding  the  other  two 
thirds  at  the  existing  rate  of  interest  and  upon  the 
same  terms  of  redemption  to  which  it  is  at  present 
subject. 

Here  is  no  conjecture,  no  calculation  of  probabili 
ties.  The  creditor  is  offered  the  advantage  of  mak 
ing  his  interest  principal,  and  he  is  asked  to  facilitate 
to  the  Government  an  effectual  provision  for  his  de 
mands,  by  accepting  a  third  part  of  them  in  land,  at 
a  fair  valuation. 

The  general  price  at  which  the  Western  lands  have 
been  heretofore  sold,  has  been  a  dollar  per  acre  in 
public  securities ;  but,  at  the  time  the  principal  pur 
chases  were  made,  these  securities  were  worth,  in  the 
market,  less  than  three  shillings  in  the  pound.  The 
nominal  price,  therefore,  would  not  be  the  proper 


262  Alexander  Hamilton 

standard,  under  present  circumstances,  nor  would 
the  precise  specie  value  then  given  be  a  just  rule; 
because,  as  the  payments  were  to  be  made  by  instal 
ments,  and  the  securities  were,  at  the  times  of  the 
purchases,  extremely  low,  the  probability  of  a  mod 
erate  rise  must  be  presumed  to  have  been  taken  into 
the  account. 

Twenty  cents,  therefore,  seems  to  bear  an  equita 
ble  proportion  to  the  two  considerations  of  value  at 
the  time  and  likelihood  of  increase. 

It  will  be  understood  that,  upon  this  plan,  the 
public  retains  the  advantage  of  availing  itself  of  any 
fall  in  the  market  rate  of  interest,  for  reducing  that 
upon  the  debt;  which  is  perfectly  just,  as  no  present 
sacrifice,  either  in  the  quantum  of  the  principal,  or 
in  the  rate  of  interest,  is  required  from  the  creditor. 

The  inducement  to  the  measure  is,  the  payment  of 
one  third  of  the  debt  in  land.  The  second  plan  is 
grounded  upon  the  supposition  that  interest,  in  five 
years,  will  fall  to  five  per  cent. ;  in  fifteen  more,  to 
four.  As  the  capital  remains  entire,  but  bearing  an 
interest  of  four  per  cent,  only,  compensation  is  to  be 
made  to  the  creditor  for  the  interest  of  two  per  cent, 
per  annum  for  five  years,  and  of  one  per  cent,  per 
annum  for  fifteen  years,  to  commence  at  the  distance 
of  five  years.  The  present  value  of  these  two  sums 
or  annuities,  computed  according  to  the  terms  of 
the  supposition,  is,  by  strict  calculation,  fifteen  dol 
lars  and  the  seven  hundred  and  ninety-two  thou 
sandth  part  of  a  dollar — a  fraction  less  than  the  sum 
proposed. 

The  inducements  of  the  measure  here,  are  the 


Finance  263 

reduction  of  interest  to  a  rate  more  within  the  com 
pass  of  a  convenient  provision,  and  the  payment  of 
the  compensation  in  lands. 

The  inducements  to  the  individual  are,  the  accom 
modation  afforded  to  the  public;  the  high  probabil 
ity  of  a  complete  equivalent;  the  chance  even  of 
gain,  should  the  rate  of  interest  fall,  either  more 
speedily  or  in  a  greater  degree  than  the  calculation 
supposes.  Should  it  fall  to  five  per  cent,  sooner  than 
five  years,  should  it  fall  lower  than  five  before  the 
additional  fifteen  were  expired,  or  should  it  fall  be 
low  four  previous  to  the  payment  of  the  debt,  there 
would  be,  in  each  case,  an  absolute  profit  to  the  credi 
tor.  As  his  capital  will  remain  entire,  the  value  of 
it  will  increase  with  every  decrease  of  the  rate  of 
interest. 

The  third  plan  proceeds  upon  the  like  supposition 
of  a  successive  fall  in  the  rate  of  interest,  and  upon 
that  supposition  offers  an  equivalent  to  the  creditor : 
One  hundred  dollars,  bearing  an  interest  of  six  per 
cent,  for  five  years,  or  five  per  cent,  for  fifteen  years, 
and  thenceforth  of  four  per  cent,  (these  being  the 
successive  rates  of  interest  in  the  market),  is  equal 
to  a  capital  of  $122. 51 07 25  parts,  bearing  an  interest 
of  four  per  cent.,  which,  converted  into  a  capital 
bearing  a  fixed  rate  of  interest  of  six  per  cent.,  is 
equal  to  $81.6738166  parts. 

The  difference  between  sixty-six  dollars  and  two 
thirds  of  a  dollar  (the  sum  to  be  funded  immediately) 
and  this  last  sum  is  $15.0172  parts,  which,  at  six  per 
cent,  per  annum,  amounts,  at  the  end  of  ten  years, 
to  $26.8755  parts — the  sum  to  be  funded  at  the 


264  Alexander  Hamilton 

expiration  of  that  period.  It  ought,  however,  to  be 
acknowledged  that  this  calculation  does  not  make 
allowance  for  the  principle  of  redemption,  which  the 
plan  itself  includes ;  upon  which  principle,  the  equi 
valent,  in  a  capital  of  six  per  cent.,  would  be,  by  strict 
calculation,  $87.50766  parts. 

But  there  are  two  considerations  which  induce  the 
Secretary  to  think  that  the  one  proposed  would  oper 
ate  more  equitably  than  this:  One  is,  that  it  may 
not  be  very  early  in  the  power  of  the  United  States 
to  avail  themselves  of  the  right  of  redemption  re 
served  in  the  plan ;  the  other  is,  that  with  regard  to 
the  part  to  be  funded  at  the  end  of  ten  years,  the 
principle  of  redemption  is  suspended  during  that 
time,  and  the  full  interest  of  six  per  cent,  goes  on 
improving  at  the  same  rate,  which,  for  the  last  five 
years,  will  exceed  the  market  rate  of  interest,  ac 
cording  to  the  supposition. 

The  equivalent  is  regulated  in  this  plan  by  the 
circumstance  of  fixing  the  rate  of  interest  higher  than 
it  is  supposed  it  will  continue  to  be  in  the  market, 
permitting  only  a  gradual  discharge  of  the  debt,  in 
an  established  proportion,  and  consequently  pre 
venting  advantage  being  taken  of  any  decrease  of 
interest  below  the  stipulated  rate. 

Thus  the  true  value  of  eighty-one  dollars  and 
sixty-seven  cents,  the  capital  proposed,  considered 
as  a  perpetuity,  and  bearing  six  per  cent,  interest, 
when  the  market  rate  of  interest  was  five  per  cent., 
would  be  a  small  fraction  more  than  ninety-eight 
dollars;  when  it  was  four  per  cent.,  it  would  be  one 
hundred  and  twenty-two  dollars  and  fifty-one  cents. 


Finance  265 

But  the  proposed  capital  being  subject  to  gradual 
redemption,  it  is  evident  that  its  value,  in  each  case, 
would  be  somewhat  less.  Yet,  from  this  may  be 
perceived  the  manner  in  which  a  less  capital,  at  a 
fixed  rate  of  interest,  becomes  an  equivalent  for  a 
greater  capital,  at  a  rate  liable  to  variation  and 
diminution. 

It  is  presumable  that  those  creditors  who  do  not 
entertain  a  favorable  opinion  of  property  in  Western 
lands  will  give  a  preference  to  this  last  mode  of  mod 
elling  the  debt.  The  Secretary  is  sincere  in  affirm 
ing  that,  in  his  opinion,  it  will  be  likely  to  prove,  to 
the  full,  as  beneficial  to  the  creditor  as  a  provision 
for  his  debt  upon  its  present  terms. 

It  is  not  intended,  in  either  case,  to  oblige  the 
Government  to  redeem  in  the  proportion  specified, 
but  to  secure  to  it  the  right  of  doing  so,  to  avoid  the 
inconvenience  of  a  perpetuity. 

The  fourth  and  fifth  plans  abandon  the  supposition 
which  is  the  basis  of  the  two  preceding  ones,  and 
offer  only  four  per  cent,  throughout. 

The  reason  of  this  is,  that  the  payment  being  de 
ferred,  there  will  be  an  accumulation  of  compound 
interest,  in  the  intermediate  period,  against  the 
public,  which,  without  a  very  provident  administra 
tion,  would  turn  to  its  detriment,  and  the  suspension 
of  the  burthen  would  be  too  apt  to  beget  a  relaxation 
of  efforts  in  the  meantime.  The  measure,  therefore, 
its  object  being  temporary  accommodation,  could 
only  be  advisable  upon  a  moderate  rate  of  interest. 

With  regard  to  individuals,  the  inducement  will  be 
sufficient  at  four  per  cent.  There  is  no  disposition 


266  Alexander  Hamilton 

of  money,  in  private  loans,  making  allowance  for 
the  usual  delays  and  casualties,  which  would  be 
equally  beneficial  as  a  future  provision. 

A  hundred  dollars  advanced  upon  the  life  of  a 
person  of  eleven  years  old  would  produce  an  annu 
ity  '- 

Dolls.    Parts. 

If  commencing  at  twenty-one,  of  .  .     10.346 

If  commencing  at  thirty-one,  of  .  .     18.803 

If  commencing  at  forty-one,  of  .  .     37.286 

If  commencing  at  fifty-one,  of  .  .78.580 

The  same  sum  advanced  upon  the  chance  of  the 
survivorship  of  the  younger  of  two  lives,  one  of  the 
persons  being  twenty-five,  the  other  thirty  years 
old,  would  produce,  if  the  younger  of  the  two  should 
survive,  an  annuity  2  for  the  remainder  of  life,  of 
twenty-three  dollars,  five  hundred  and  fifty-six 
parts. 

From  these  instances  may  readily  be  discerned  the 
advantages  which  these  deferred  annuities  afford,  for 
securing  a  comfortable  provision  for  the  evening  of 
life,  or  for  wives  who  survive  their  husbands. 

The  sixth  plan  also  relinquishes  the  supposition, 
which  is  the  foundation  of  the  second  and  third,  and 
offers  a  higher  rate  of  interest,  upon  similar  terms  of 
redemption,  for  the  consideration  of  the  payment  of 
one  half  of  the  loan  in  specie.  This  is  a  plan  highly 
advantageous  to  the  creditors  who  may  be  able  to 
make  that  payment,  while  the  specie  itself  could  be 
applied  in  purchases  of  the  debt,  upon  terms  which 

1  See  Schedule  F.  »  See  Table,  Schedule  G. 


Finance  267 

would  fully  indemnify  the  public  for  the  increased 
interest. 

It  is  not  improbable  that  foreign  holders  of  the 
domestic  debt  may  embrace  this  as  a  desirable  ar 
rangement. 

As  an  auxiliary  expedient,  and  by  way  of  experi 
ment,  the  Secretary  would  propose  a  loan  upon  the 
principles  of  a  tontine  x — 

To  consist  of  six  classes,  composed  respectively  of 
persons  of  the  following  ages : 

First  class,  of  those  of  20  years  and  under. 

Second  class,  of  those  above  20,  and  not  exceeding 

30- 

Third  class,  of  those  above  30,  and  not  exceeding 
40. 

Fourth  class,  of  those  above  40,  and  not  exceeding 

So- 

Fifth  class,  of  those  above  50,  and  not  exceeding 
60. 

Sixth  class,  of  those  above  60. 

Each  share  to  be  two  hundred  dollars;  the  number 
of  shares  in  each  class  to  be  indefinite.  Persons  to 
be  at  liberty  to  subscribe  on  their  own  lives,  or  on 
those  of  others  nominated  by  them. 

The  annuity  upon  a  share  in  the  first  class,  to  be  $  8  40 
Upon  a  share  in  the  second  .  .  .  ;  r  8  65 
Upon  a  share  in  the  third  .  ••  .7  !%>  9  °° 

Upon  a  share  in  the  fourth  .  .  *^  ;  <<*  :?  965 
Upon  a  share  in  the  fifth  .  .  .  «  •  •  *  10  70 
Upon  a  share  in  the  sixth  .  .  .  -^ -:^  «,  12  80 

1  See  Table,  Schedule  H. 


268  Alexander  Hamilton 

The  annuities  of  those  who  die  to  be  equally  di 
vided  among  the  survivors,  until  four  fifths  shall  be 
dead,  when  the  principle  of  survivorship  shall  cease, 
and  each  annuitant  thenceforth  enjoy  his  dividend 
as  a  several  annuity  during  the  life  upon  which  it 
shall  depend. 

These  annuities  are  calculated  on  the  best  life  in 
each  class,  and  at  a  rate  of  interest  of  four  per  cent., 
with  some  deductions  in  favor  of  the  public.  To 
the  advantages  which  these  circumstances  present, 
the  cessation  of  the  right  of  survivorship,  on  the 
death  of  four  fifths  of  the  annuitants,  will  be  no  in 
considerable  addition. 

The  inducements  to  individuals  are,  a  competent 
interest  for  their  money  from  the  outset,  secured  for 
life,  with  a  prospect  of  continual  increase,  and  even 
of  a  large  profit  to  those  whose  fortune  it  is  to  sur 
vive  their  associates. 

It  will  have  appeared  that,  in  all  the  proposed 
loans,  the  Secretary  has  contemplated  the  putting 
the  interest  upon  the  same  footing  with  the  prin 
cipal.  That  on  the  debt  of  the  United  States,  he 
would  have  computed  to  the  last  of  the  present  year; 
that  on  the  debt  of  the  particular  States,  to  the  last 
of  the  year  1791:  the  reason  for  which  distinction 
will  be  seen  hereafter. 

In  order  to  keep  up  a  due  circulation  of  money,  it 
will  be  expedient  that  the  interest  of  the  debt  should 
be  paid  quarter-yearly.  This  regulation  will,  at  the 
same  time,  conduce  to  the  advantage  of  the  public 
creditors,  giving  them,  in  fact,  by  the  anticipation  of 
payment,  a  higher  rate  of  interest ;  which  may,  with 


Finance  269 

propriety,  be  taken  into  the  estimate  of  the  com 
pensation  to  be  made  to  them,  Six  per  cent,  per 
annum,  paid  in  this  mode,  will  truly  be  worth  six 
dollars  and  the  one  hundred  and  thirty-five  thou 
sandth  part  of  a  dollar,  computing  the  market  inter 
est  at  the  same  rate. 

The  Secretary  thinks  it  advisable  to  hold  out 
various  propositions,  all  of  them  compatible  with  the 
public  interest,  because  it  is,  in  his  opinion,  of  the 
greatest  consequence  that  the  debt  should,  with  the 
consent  of  the  creditors,  be  remoulded  into  such  a 
shape  as  will  bring  the  expenditure  of  the  nation  to 
a  level  with  its  income.  Till  this  shall  be  accom 
plished  the  finances  of  the  United  States  will  never 
wear  a  proper  countenance.  Arrears  of  interest, 
continually  accruing,  will  be  as  continual  a  monu 
ment,  either  of  inability  or  of  ill  faith,  and  will  not 
cease  to  have  an  evil  influence  on  public  credit.  In 
nothing  are  appearances  of  greater  moment  than  in 
whatever  regards  credit.  Opinion  is  the  soul  of  it; 
and  this  is  affected  by  appearances  as  well  as  reali 
ties.  By  offering  an  option  to  the  creditors  between 
a  number  of  plans,  the  change  meditated  will  be 
more  likely  to  be  accomplished.  Different  tempers 
will  be  governed  by  different  views  of  the  subject. 

But  while  the  Secretary  would  endeavor  to  effect  a 
change  in  the  form  of  the  debt  by  new  loans,  in 
order  to  render  it  more  susceptible  of  an  adequate 
provision,  he  would  not  think  it  proper  to  aim  at 
procuring  the  concurrence  of  the  creditors  by  operat 
ing  upon  their  necessities. 

Hence,  whatever  surplus  of  revenue  might  remain, 


270  Alexander  Hamilton 

after  satisfying  the  interest  of  the  new  loans  and  the 
demand  for  the  current  service,  ought  to  be  divided 
among  those  creditors,  if  any,  who  may  not  think  fit 
to  subscribe  to  them.  But  for  this  purpose,  under 
the  circumstance  of  depending  propositions,  a  tem 
porary  appropriation  will  be  most  advisable,  and  the 
sum  must  be  limited  to  four  per  cent.,  as  the  revenues 
will  only  be  calculated  to  produce  in  that  proportion 
to  the  entire  debt. 

The  Secretary  confides,  for  the  success  of  the  pro 
positions  to  be  made,  on  the  goodness  of  the  reasons 
upon  which  they  rest ;  on  the  fairness  of  the  equiva 
lent  to  be  offered  in  each  case;  on  the  discernment 
of  the  creditors  of  their  true  interest,  and  on  their 
disposition  to  facilitate  the  arrangements  of  the 
Government,  and  to  render  them  satisfactory  to  the 
community. 

The  remaining  part  of  the  task  to  be  performed  is 
to  take  a  view  of  the  means  of  providing  for  the 
debt,  according  to  the  modification  of  it  which  is 
proposed. 

On  this  point  the  Secretary  premises  that,  in  his 
opinion,  the  funds  to  be  established  ought,  for  the 
present,  to  be  confined  to  the  existing  debt  of  the 
United  States;  as  well  because  the  progressive  aug 
mentation  of  the  revenue  will  be  most  convenient,  as 
because  the  consent  of  the  State  creditors  is  necessary 
to  the  assumption  contemplated;  and  though  the 
obtaining  of  that  consent  may  be  inferred  with  great 
assurance  from  their  obvious  interest  to  give  it,  yet, 
till  it  shall  be  obtained,  an  actual  provision  for  the 
debt  would  be  premature.  Taxes  could  not,  with 


Finance  271 

propriety,  be  laid  for  an  object  which  depended  on 
such  a  contingency. 

All  that  ought  now  to  be  done  respecting  it  is  to 
put  the  matter  in  an  effectual  train  for  a  future  pro 
vision.  For  which  purpose  the  Secretary  will,  in  the 
course  of  this  report,  submit  such  propositions  as 
appear  to  him  advisable. 

The  Secretary  now  proceeds  to  a  consideration  of 
the  necessary  funds. 

It  has  been  stated  that  the  debt  of  the 
United  States  consists  of  the  foreign 
debt,  amounting,  with  arrears  of  in 
terest,  to $11,710,378  62 

And  the  domestic  debt,  amounting,  with 
like  arrears,  computed  to  the  end  of 
the  year  1790,  to  ....  42,414,085  94 

Making,  together        .         .  $54,124,464  56 

The  interest  on  the  domestic  debt  is  computed  to 
the  end  of  this  year,  because  the  details  of  carrying 
any  plan  into  execution  will  exhaust  the  year. 

The  annual  interest  of  the  foreign  debt 

has  been  stated  at      .         .         .         .  $    542,599  66 
And  the  interest  on  the  domestic  debt,  at 

four  per  cent.,  would  amount  to          .     1,696,563  43 

Making,  together  .     $2,239,163  09 

Thus,  to  pay  the  interest  of  the  foreign  debt,  and 
to  pay  four  per  cent,  on  the  whole  of  the  domestic 
debt,  principal  and  interest,  forming  a  new  capital, 
will  require  a  yearly  income  of  $2,239,163.09 — the 


272  Alexander  Hamilton 

sum  which,  in  the  opinion  of  the  Secretary,  ought 
now  to  be  provided,  in  addition  to  what  the  current 
service  will  require. 

For,  though  the  rate  of  interest  proposed  by  the 
third  plan  exceeds  four  per  cent,  on  the  whole  debt 
and  the  annuities  on  the  tontine  will  also  exceed 
four  per  cent,  on  the  sums  which  may  be  subscribed ; 
yet,  as  the  actual  provision  for  a  part  is  in  the  former 
case  suspended,  as  measures  for  reducing  the  debt 
by  purchases  may  be  advantageously  pursued,  and 
as  the  payment  of  the  deferred  annuities  will  of 
course  be  postponed,  four  per  cent,  on  the  whole  will 
be  a  sufficient  provision. 

With  regard  to  the  instalments  of  the  foreign  debt, 
these,  in  the  opinion  of  the  Secretary,  ought  to  be 
paid  by  new  loans  abroad.  Could  funds  be  con 
veniently  spared  from  other  exigencies  for  paying 
them,  the  United  States  could  illy  bear  the  drain  of 
cash,  at  the  present  juncture,  which  the  measure 
would  be  likely  to  occasion. 

But  to  the  sum  which  has  been  stated  for  payment 
of  the  interest  must  be  added  a  provision  for  the 
current  service.  This  the  Secretary  estimates  at  six 
hundred  thousand  dollars,1  making,  with  the  amount 
of  the  interest,  two  millions  eight  hundred  and  thirty- 
nine  thousand  one  hundred  and  sixty-three  dollars 
and  nine  cents. 

This  sum  may,  in  the  opinion  of  the  Secretary,  be 
obtained  from  the  present  duties  on  imports  and 
tonnage,  with  the  additions  which,  without  any  pos 
sible  disadvantage,  either  to  trade  or  agriculture, 

1  See  Schedule  I. 


Finance  273 

may  be  made  on  wines,  spirits  (including  those 
distilled  within  the  United  States),  teas,  and 
coffee. 

The  Secretary  conceives  that  it  will  be  sound  policy 
to  carry  the  duties  upon  articles  of  this  kind  as  high 
as  will  be  consistent  with  the  practicability  of  a  safe 
collection.  This  will  lessen  the  necessity,  both  of 
having  recourse  to  direct  taxation,  and  of  accumu 
lating  duties  where  they  would  be  more  inconven 
ient  to  trade  and  upon  objects  which  are  more  to  be 
regarded  as  necessaries  of  life. 

That  the  articles  which  have  been  enumerated 
will,  better  than  most  others,  bear  high  duties,  can 
hardly  be  a  question.  They  are  all  of  them  in 
reality  luxuries;  the  greatest  part  of  them  foreign 
luxuries;  some  of  them,  in  the  excess  in  which  they 
are  used,  pernicious  luxuries.  And  there  is,  perhaps, 
none  of  them  which  is  not  consumed  in  so  great 
abundance  as  may  justly  denominate  it  a  source  of 
national  extravagance  and  impoverishment.  The 
consumption  of  ardent  spirits,  particularly,  no  doubt 
very  much  on  account  of  their  cheapness,  is  carried 
to  an  extreme  which  is  truly  to  be  regretted,  as  well 
in  regard  to  the  health  and  morals  as  to  the  economy 
of  the  community. 

Should  the  increase  of  duties  tend  to  a  decrease  of 
the  consumption  of  those  articles,  the  effect  would  be 
in  every  respect  desirable.  The  saving  which  it 
would  occasion  would  leave  individuals  more  at 
their  ease,  and  promote  a  favorable  balance  of  trade. 
As  far  as  this  decrease  might  be  applicable  to  dis 
tilled  spirits,  it  would  encourage  the  substitution  of 


VOL.  II.— 18. 


274  Alexander  Hamilton 

cider  and  malt  liquors,  benefit  agriculture,  and  open 
a  new  and  productive  source  of  revenue. 

It  is  not,  however,  probable  that  this  decrease 
would  be  in  a  degree  which  would  frustrate  the  ex 
pected  benefit  to  the  revenue  from  raising  the  duties. 
Experience  has  shown  that  luxuries  of  every  kind 
lay  the  strongest  hold  on  the  attachments  of  man 
kind,  which,  especially  when  confirmed  by  habit, 
are  not  easily  alienated  from  them. 

The  same  fact  affords  a  security  to  the  merchant 
that  he  is  not  likely  to  be  prejudiced  by  considerable 
duties  on  such  articles.  They  will  usually  command 
a  proportional  price.  The  chief  things,  in  this  view, 
to  be  attended  to,  are,  that  the  terms  of  payment  be 
so  regulated  as  not  to  require  inconvenient  advances, 
and  that  the  mode  of  collection  be  secure. 

To  other  reasons,  which  plead  for  carrying  the 
duties  upon  the  articles  which  have  been  mentioned, 
to  as  great  an  extent  as  they  will  bear,  may  be  added 
these:  that  they  are  of  a  nature,  from  their  exten 
sive  consumption,  to  be  very  productive,  and  are 
amongst  the  most  difficult  objects  of  illicit  introduc 
tion. 

Invited  by  so  many  motives  to  make  the  best  use 
of  the  resource  which  these  articles  afford,  the  essen 
tial  inquiry  is,  in  what  mode  can  the  duties  upon 
them  be  most  effectually  collected? 

With  regard  to  such  of  them  as  will  be  brought 
from  abroad,  a  duty  on  importation  recommends 
itself  by  two  leading  considerations:  one  is,  that, 
meeting  the  object  at  its  first  entrance  into  the 
country,  the  collection  is  drawn  to  a  point,  and,  so 


Finance  275 

far,  simplified;  the  other  is,  that  it  avoids  the  pos 
sibility  of  interference  between  the  regulations  of 
the  United  States  and  those  of  the  particular  States. 

But  a  duty,  the  precautions  for  the  collection  of 
which  should  terminate  with  the  landing  of  the  goods, 
as  is  essentially  the  case  in  the  existing  system,  could 
not,  with  safety,  be  carried  to  the  extent  which  is 
contemplated. 

In  that  system,  the  evasion  of  the  duty  depends, 
as  it  were,  on  a  single  risk.  To  land  the  goods  in 
defiance  of  the  vigilance  of  the  officers  of  the  cus 
toms,  is  almost  the  sole  difficulty.  No  future  pursuit 
is  materially  to  be  apprehended.  And  where  the 
inducement  is  equivalent  to  the  risk,  there  will  be 
found  too  many  who  are  willing  to  run  it.  Conse 
quently,  there  will  be  extensive  frauds  of  the  revenue, 
against  which  the  utmost  rigor  of  penal  laws  has 
proved,  as  often  as  it  has  been  tried,  an  ineffectual 
guard. 

The  only  expedient  which  has  been  discovered, 
for  conciliating  high  duties  with  a  safe  collection,  is 
the  establishment  of  a  second  or  interior  scrutiny. 

By  pursuing  the  article,  from  its  importation  into 
the  hands  of  the  dealers  in  it,  the  risk  of  detection 
is  so  greatly  enhanced,  that  few,  in  comparison,  will 
venture  to  incur  it.  Indeed,  every  dealer  who  is 
not  himself  the  fraudulent  importer,  then  becomes 
in  some  sort  a  sentinel  upon  him. 

The  introduction  of  a  system  founded  on  this 
principle  in  some  shape  or  other,  is,  in  the  opinion 
of  the  Secretary,  essential  to  the  efficacy  of  every 
attempt  to  render  the  revenues  of  the  United  States 


276  Alexander  Hamilton 

equal  to  their  exigencies,  their  safety,  their  pros 
perity,  their  honor. 

Nor  is  it  less  essential  to  the  interest  of  the  honest 
and  fair  trader.  It  might  even  be  added,  that  every 
individual  citizen,  besides  his  share  in  the  general 
weal,  has  a  particular  interest  in  it.  The  practice  of 
smuggling  never  fails  to  have  one  of  two  effects,  and 
sometimes  unites  them  both.  Either  the  smuggler 
undersells  the  fair  trader,  as,  by  saving  the  duty,  he 
can  afford  to  do,  and  makes  it  a  charge  upon  him,  or 
he  sells  at  the  increased  price  occasioned  by  the  duty, 
and  defrauds  every  man  who  buys  of  him,  of  his 
share  of  what  the  public  ought  to  receive;  for  it  is 
evident  that  the  loss  falls  ultimately  upon  the  citi 
zens,  who  must  be  charged  with  other  taxes  to  make 
good  the  deficiency  and  supply  the  wants  of  the  State. 

The  Secretary  will  not  presume  that  the  plan 
which  he  shall  submit  to  the  consideration  of  the 
House  is  the  best  that  could  be  devised.  But  it  is 
the  one  which  has  appeared  to  him  freest  from  ob 
jections,  of  any  that  has  occurred,  of  equal  efficacy. 
He  acknowledges,  too,  that  it  is  susceptible  of  im 
provement,  by  other  precautions  in  favor  of  the 
revenue,  which  he  did  not  think  it  expedient  to  add. 
The  chief  outlines  of  the  plan  are  not  original;  but 
it  is  no  ill  recommendation  of  it,  that  it  has  been 
tried  with  success. 

The  Secretary  accordingly  proposes — 

That  the  duties  heretofore  laid  upon  wines,  dis 
tilled  spirits,  teas,  and  coffee,  should,  after  the  last 
day  of  May  next,  cease;  and  that,  instead  of  them, 
the  following  duties  be  laid: 


Finance  277 

Upon  every  gallon  of  Madeira  wine,  the  quality  of 
London  particular,  thirty-five  cents. 

Upon  every  gallon  of  other  Madeira  wine,  thirty 
cents. 

Upon  every  gallon  of  Sherry,  twenty-five  cents. 

Upon  every  gallon  of  other  wine,  twenty  cents. 

Upon  every  gallon  of  distilled  spirits  more  than 
ten  per  cent,  below  proof,  according  to  Dicas'  hy 
drometer,  twenty  cents. 

Upon  every  gallon  of  those  spirits  under  five  and 
not  more  than  ten  per  cent,  below  proof,  according 
to  the  same  hydrometer,  twenty-one  cents. 

Upon  every  gallon  of  those  spirits,  of  proof,  and 
not  more  than  five  per  cent,  below  proof,  according 
to  the  same  hydrometer,  twenty- two  cents. 

Upon  every  gallon  of  those  spirits,  above  proof, 
but  not  exceeding  twenty  per  cent,  according  to 
the  same  hydrometer,  twenty-five  cents. 

Upon  every  gallon  of  those  spirits,  more  than 
twenty,  and  not  more  than  forty  per  cent,  above 
proof,  according  to  the  same  hydrometer,  thirty 
cents. 

Upon  every  gallon  of  those  spirits,  more  than  forty 
per  cent,  above  proof,  according  to  the  same  hy 
drometer,  forty  cents. 

Upon  every  pound  of  Hyson  tea,  forty  cents. 

Upon  every  pound  of  other  green  tea,  twenty-four 
cents. 

Upon  every  pound  of  Souchong  and  other  black 
teas,  except  Bohea,  twenty  cents. 

Upon  every  pound  of  Bohea  tea,  twelve  cents. 

Upon  every  pound  of  coffee,  five  cents. 


278  Alexander  Hamilton 

That,  upon  spirits  distilled  within  the  United 
States,  from  molasses,  sugar,  or  other  foreign  ma 
terials,  there  be  paid: 

Upon  every  gallon  of  those  spirits,  more  than  ten 
per  cent,  below  proof,  according  to  Dicas'  hydro 
meter,  eleven  cents. 

Upon  every  gallon  of  those  spirits,  under  five,  and 
not  more  than  ten  per  cent,  below  proof,  according 
to  the  same  hydrometer,  twelve  cents. 

Upon  every  gallon  of  those  spirits,  of  proof,  and 
not  more  than  five  per  cent,  below  proof,  according 
to  the  same  hydrometer,  thirteen  cents. 

Upon  every  gallon  of  those  spirits,  above  proof, 
but  not  exceeding  twenty  per  cent,  according  to  the 
same  hydrometer,  fifteen  cents. 

Upon  every  gallon  of  those  spirits,  more  than 
twenty,  and  not  more  than  forty  per  cent,  above 
proof,  according  to  the  same  hydrometer,  twenty 
cents. 

Upon  every  gallon  of  those  spirits,  more  than  forty 
per  cent,  above  proof,  according  to  the  same  hy 
drometer,  thirty  cents. 

That,  upon  spirits  distilled  within  the  United 
States,  in  any  city,  town,  or  village,  from  materials 
of  the  growth  or  production  of  the  United  States, 
there  be  paid: 

Upon  every  gallon  of  those  spirits,  more  than  ten 
per  cent,  below  proof,  according  to  Dicas'  hydrom 
eter,  nine  cents. 

Upon  every  gallon  of  those  spirits,  under  five,  and 
not  more  than  ten  per  cent,  below  proof,  according 
to  the  same  hydrometer,  ten  cents. 


Finance  279 

Upon  every  gallon  of  those  spirits,  of  proof,  and 
not  more  than  five  per  cent,  below  proof,  according 
to  the  same  hydrometer,  eleven  cents. 

Upon  every  gallon  of  those  spirits,  above  proof, 
but  not  exceeding  twenty  per  cent,  according  to  the 
same  hydrometer,  thirteen  cents. 

Upon  every  gallon  of  those  spirits,  more  than 
twenty,  and  not  more  than  forty  per  cent,  above 
proof,  according  to  the  same  hydrometer,  seventeen 
cents. 

Upon  every  gallon  of  those  spirits,  more  than 
forty  per  cent,  above  proof,  according  to  the  same 
hydrometer,  twenty-five  cents. 

That,  upon  all  stills  employed  in  distilling  spirits 
from  materials  of  the  growth  or  production  of  the 
United  States,  in  any  other  place  than  a  city,  town, 
or  village,  there  be  paid  the  yearly  sum  of  sixty  cents, 
for  every  gallon,  English  wine  measure,  of  the  capa 
city  of  each  still,  including  its  head. 

The  Secretary  does  not  distribute  the  duties  on 
teas  into  different  classes,  as  has  been  done  in  the 
impost  act  of  the  last  session ;  because  this  distribu 
tion  depends  on  considerations  of  commercial  policy, 
not  of  revenue.  It  is  sufficient,  therefore,  for  him  to 
remark,  that  the  rates  above  specified  are  proposed 
with  reference  to  the  lowest  class. 

The  Secretary,  conceiving  that  he  could  not  con 
vey  an  accurate  idea  of  the  plan  contemplated  by 
him,  for  the  collection  of  these  duties,  in  any  mode 
so  effectual  as  by  the  draught  of  a  bill  for  the  pur 
pose,  begs  leave,  respectfully,  to  refer  the  House  to 
that  which  will  be  found  annexed  to  this  report, 


280  Alexander  Hamilton 

relatively  to  the  article  of  distilled  spirits;  and 
which,  for  the  better  explanation  of  some  of  its 
parts,  is  accompanied  with  marginal  remarks. 

It  would  be  the  intention  of  the  Secretary  that  the 
duty  on  wines  should  be  collected  upon  precisely  the 
same  plan  with  that  on  imported  spirits. 

But,  with  regard  to  teas  and  coffee,  the  Secretary 
is  inclined  to  think  that  it  will  be  expedient,  till 
experience  shall  evince  the  propriety  of  going  fur 
ther,  to  exclude  the  ordinary  right  of  the  officers  to 
visit  and  inspect  the  places  in  which  those  arti 
cles  may  be  kept.  The  other  precautions,  without 
this,  will  afford,  though  not  complete,  considerable 
security. 

It  will  not  escape  the  observation  of  the  House 
that  the  Secretary,  in  the  plan  submitted,  has  taken 
the  most  scrupulous  care  that  those  citizens  upon 
whom  it  is  immediately  to  operate,  be  secured  from 
every  species  of  injury  by  the  misconduct  of  the 
officers  to  be  employed.  There  are  not  only  strong 
guards  against  their  being  guilty  of  abuses  of  au 
thority;  they  are  not  only  punishable,  criminally, 
for  any  they  may  commit,  and  made  answerable 
in  damages,  to  individuals,  for  whatever  prejudice 
these  may  sustain  by  their  acts  or  neglects ;  but  even 
where  seizures  are  made  with  probable  cause,  if  there 
be  an  acquittal  of  the  articles  seized  a  compensation 
to  the  proprietors  for  the  injury  their  property  may 
suffer,  and  even  for  its  detention,  is  to  be  made  out 
of  the  public  treasury. 

So  solicitous,  indeed,  has  the  Secretary  been  to 
obviate  every  appearance  of  hardship,  that  he  has 


Finance  281 

even  included  a  compensation  to  the  dealers  for 
their  agency  in  aid  of  the  revenue. 

With  all  these  precautions  to  manifest  a  spirit  of 
moderation  and  justice  on  the  part  of  the  Govern 
ment;  and  when  it  is  considered  that  the  object  of 
the  proposed  system  is  the  firm  establishment  of 
public  credit;  that,  on  this  depends  the  character, 
security,  and  prosperity  of  the  nation;  that  advan 
tages,  in  every  light  important,  may  be  expected  to 
result  from  it;  that  the  immediate  operation  of  it 
will  be  upon  an  enlightened  class  of  citizens,  zealously 
devoted  to  good  government,  and  to  a  liberal  and 
enlarged  policy ;  and  that  it  is  peculiarly  the  interest 
of  the  virtuous  part  of  them  to  co-operate  in  what 
ever  will  restrain  the  spirit  of  illicit  traffic ;  there  will 
be  perceived  to  exist  the  justest  ground  of  confidence 
that  the  plan,  if  eligible  in  itself,  will  experience  the 
cheerful  and  prompt  acquiescence  of  the  community. 

The  Secretary  computes  the  net  product  of  the 
duties  proposed  in  this  report  at  about  one  million 
seven  hundred  and  three  thousand  four  hundred 
dollars,  according  to  the  estimate  in  Schedule  K, 
which,  if  near  the  truth,  will,  together  with  the 
probable  product  of  the  duties  on  imposts  and  ton 
nage,  complete  the  sum  required. 

But  it  will  readily  occur,  that  in  so  unexplored  a 
field  there  must  be  a  considerable  degree  of  uncer 
tainty  in  the  data ;  and  that  on  this  account  it  will 
be  prudent  to  have  an  auxiliary  resource  for  the  first 
year  in  which  the  interest  will  become  payable,  that 
there  may  be  no  possibility  of  disappointment  to  the 
public  creditors  ere  there  may  be  an  opportunity  of 


282  Alexander  Hamilton 

providing  for  any  deficiency  which  the  experiment 
may  discover.  This  will,  accordingly,  be  attended 
to. 

The  proper  appropriation  of  the  funds  provided 
and  to  be  provided  seems  next  to  offer  itself  to  con 
sideration. 

On  this  head,  the  Secretary  would  propose  that 
the  duties  on  distilled  spirits  should  be  applied, 
in  the  first  instance,  to  the  payment  of  the  interest 
on  the  foreign  debt. 

That,  reserving  out  of  the  residue  of  those  duties 
an  annual  sum  of  six  hundred  thousand  dollars  for 
the  current  service  of  the  United  States,  the  surplus, 
together  with  the  product  of  the  other  duties,  be 
applied  to  the  payment  of  the  interest  on  the  new 
loan,  by  an  appropriation  coextensive  with  the  dura 
tion  of  the  debt. 

And  that,  if  any  part  of  the  debt  should  remain 
unsubscribed,  the  excess  of  the  revenue  be  divided 
among  the  creditors  of  the  unsubscribed  part  by  a 
temporary  disposition,  with  a  limitation,  however, 
to  four  per  cent. 

It  will  hardly  have  been  unnoticed  that  the  Secre 
tary  has  been,  thus  far,  silent  on  the  subject  of  the 
Post  Office.  The  reason  is,  that  he  has  had  in  view 
the  application  of  the  revenue  arising  from  that 
source  to  the  purpose  of  a  sinking  fund.  The  Post 
master-General  gives  it  as  his  opinion  that  the  im 
mediate  product  of  it,  upon  a  proper  arrangement, 
would  probably  be  not  less  than  one  hundred  thou 
sand  dollars.  And,  from  its  nature,  with  good  man 
agement,  it  must  be  a  growing,  and  will  be  likely 


Finance  283 

to  become,  a  considerable  fund.  The  Postmaster- 
General  is  now  engaged  in  preparing  a  plan  which 
will  be  the  foundation  of  a  proposition  for  a  new 
arrangement  of  the  establishment.  This,  and  some 
other  points  relative  to  the  subject  referred  to  the 
Secretary,  he  begs  leave  to  reserve  for  a  future 
report. 

Persuaded,  as  the  Secretary  is,  that  the  proper 
funding  of  the  present  debt  will  render  it  a  national 
blessing,  yet  he  is  so  far  from  acceding  to  the  posi 
tion,  in  the  latitude  in  which  it  is  sometimes  laid 
down,  that  "public  debts  are  public  benefits" — a 
position  inviting  to  prodigality  and  liable  to  danger 
ous  abuse — that  he  ardently  wishes  to  see  it  incor 
porated  as  a  fundamental  maxim  in  the  system  of 
public  credit  of  the  United  States,  that  the  creation 
of  debt  should  always  be  accompanied  with  the 
means  of  extinguishment.  This  he  regards  as  the 
true  secret  for  rendering  public  credit  immortal. 
And  he  presumes  that  it  is  difficult  to  conceive  a 
situation  in  which  there  may  not  be  an  adherence 
to  the  maxim.  At  least,  he  feels  an  unfeigned  so 
licitude  that  this  may  be  attempted  by  the  United 
States,  and  that  they  may  commence  their  measures 
for  the  establishment  of  credit  with  the  observance 
of  it. 

Under  this  impression,  the  Secretary  proposes  that 
the  net  product  of  the  Post  Office  to  a  sum  not  ex 
ceeding  one  million  of  dollars  be  vested  in  commis 
sioners,  to  consist  of  the  Vice-President  of  the  United 
States,  or  President  of  the  Senate,  the  Speaker  of 
the  House  of  Representatives,  the  Chief  Justice, 


284  Alexander  Hamilton 

Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  and  Attorney-General  of 
the  United  States,  for  the  time  being,  in  trust;  to  be 
applied  by  them,  or  any  three  of  them,  to  the  dis 
charge  of  the  existing  public  debt,  either  by  pur 
chases  of  stock  in  the  market,  or  by  payments  on 
account  of  the  principal,  as  shall  appear  to  them 
most  advisable,  in  conformity  to  public  engagements ; 
to  continue  so  vested  until  the  whole  of  the  debt 
shall  be  discharged. 

As  an  additional  expedient  for  effecting  a  reduc 
tion  of  the  debt,  and  for  other  purposes,  which  will 
be  mentioned,  the  Secretary  would  further  propose, 
that  the  same  commissioners  be  authorized,  with  the 
approbation  of  the  President  of  the  United  States, 
to  borrow,  on  their  credit,  a  sum  not  exceeding  twelve 
millions  of  dollars,  to  be  applied: 

First. — To  the  payment  of  the  interest  and  instal 
ments  of  the  foreign  debt,  to  the  end  of  the  pres 
ent  year,  which  will  require  3,491,932  dollars  and  46 
cents. 

Secondly. — To  the  payment  of  any  deficiency 
which  may  happen  in  the  product  of  the  funds  pro 
vided  for  paying  the  interest  of  the  domestic  debt. 

Thirdly. — To  the  effecting  a  change  in  the  form  of 
such  part  of  the  foreign  debt  as  bears  an  interest 
of  five  per  cent.  It  is  conceived  that  for  this  purpose 
a  new  loan  at  a  lower  interest  may  be  combined  with 
other  expedients.  The  remainder  of  this  part  of  the 
debt,  after  paying  the  instalments  which  will  accrue 
in  the  course  of  1790,  will  be  3,888,888  dollars  and 
8 1  cents. 

Fourthly.— To  purchase  of  the  public  debt,  at  the 


Finance  285 

price  it  shall  bear  in  the  market,  while  it  continues 
below  its  true  value.  This  measure,  which  would  be, 
in  the  opinion  of  the  Secretary,  highly  dishonorable 
to  the  Government  if  it  were  to  precede  a  provision 
for  funding  the  debt,  would  become  altogether  un 
exceptionable  after  that  had  been  made.  Its  effect 
would  be  in  favor  of  the  public  creditors,  as  it  would 
tend  to  raise  the  value  of  stock;  and  all  the  differ 
ence  between  its  true  value  and  the  actual  price 
would  be  so  much  clear  gain  to  the  public.  The 
payment  of  foreign  interest  on  the  capital  to  be  bor 
rowed  for  this  purpose,  should  that  be  a  necessary 
consequence,  would  not,  in  the  judgment  of  the 
Secretary,  be  a  good  objection  to  the  measure.  The 
saving,  by  the  operation,  would  be  itself  a  sufficient 
indemnity;  and  the  employment  of  that  capital,  in 
a  country  situated  like  this,  would  much  more  than 
compensate  for  it.  Besides,  if  the  Government  does 
not  undertake  this  operation,  the  same  inconven 
ience  which  the  objection  in  question  supposes, 
would  happen  in  another  way,  with  a  circumstance 
of  aggravation.  As  long,  at  least,  as  the  debt  shall 
continue  below  its  proper  value  it  will  be  an  object 
of  speculation  to  foreigners,  who  will  not  only  re 
ceive  the  interest  upon  what  they  purchase,  and  re 
mit  it  abroad,  as  in  the  case  of  the  loan,  but  will  reap 
the  additional  profit  of  the  difference  in  value.  By 
the  Government's  entering  into  competition  with 
them,  it  will  not  only  reap  a  part  of  the  profit  itself, 
but  will  contract  the  extent,  and  lessen  the  extra 
profit  of  foreign  purchases.  That  competition  will 
accelerate  the  rise  of  stock;  and  whatever  greater 


286  Alexander  Hamilton 

rate  this  obliges  foreigners  to  pay  for  what  they  pur 
chase,  is  so  much  clear  saving  to  the  nation.  In  the 
opinion  of  the  Secretary,  and  contrary  to  an  idea 
which  is  not  without  patrons,  it  ought  to  be  the  pol 
icy  of  the  Government  to  raise  the  value  of  stock  to 
its  true  standard  as  fast  as  possible.  When  it  ar 
rives  to  that  point,  foreign  speculations  (which,  till 
then,  must  be  deemed  pernicious,  further  than  as 
they  serve  to  bring  it  to  that  point)  will  become 
beneficial.  Their  money,  laid  out  in  this  country 
upon  our  agriculture,  commerce,  and  manufactures, 
will  produce  much  more  to  us  than  the  income  they 
will  receive  from  it. 

The  Secretary  contemplates  the  application  of 
this  money  through  the  medium  of  a  national  bank, 
for  which,  with  the  permission  of  the  House,  he  will 
submit  a  plan  in  the  course  of  the  session. 

The  Secretary  now  proceeds,  in  the  last  place,  to 
offer  to  the  consideration  of  the  House  his  ideas  of 
the  steps  which  ought,  at  the  present  session,  to  be 
taken  toward  the  assumption  of  the  State  debts. 

These  are,  briefly,  that  concurrent  resolutions  of 
the  two  Houses,  with  the  approbation  of  the  Presi 
dent  be  entered  into,  declaring  in  substance : 

That  the  United  States  do  assume,  and  will,  at  the 
first  session  in  the  year  1791,  provide,  on  the  same 
terms  with  the  present  debt  of  the  United  States,  for 
all  such  parts  of  the  debts  of  the  respective  States, 
or  any  of  them,  as  shall,  prior  to  the  first  day  of 
January,  in  the  said  year,  1791,  be  subscribed  toward 
a  loan  to  the  United  States,  upon  the  principles  of 
either  of  the  plans  which  shall  have  been  adopted 


Finance  287 

by  them,  for  obtaining  a  reloan  of  their  present 
debt. 

Provided,  that  the  provision  to  be  made,  as  afore 
said,  shall  be  suspended,  with  respect  to  the  debt  of 
any  State  which  may  have  exchanged  the  securities 
of  the  United  States  for  others  issued  by  itself,  until 
the  whole  of  the  said  securities  shall  either  be  re- 
exchanged  or  surrendered  to  the  United  States. 

And  provided,  also,  that  the  interest  upon  the 
debt  assumed,  be  computed  to  the  end  of  the  year 
1791 ;  and  that  the  interest  to  be  paid  by  the  United 
States  commence  on  the  first  day  of  January,  1792. 

That  the  amount  of  the  debt  of  each  State,  so  as 
sumed  and  provided  for,  be  charged  to  such  State  in 
account  with  the  United  States,  upon  the  same  prin 
ciples  upon  which  it  shall  be  lent  to  the  United 
States. 

That  subscriptions  be  opened  for  receiving  loans  of 
the  said  debts,  at  the  same  times  and  places,  and 
under  the  like  regulations,  as  shall  have  been  pre 
scribed  in  relation  to  the  debt  of  the  United  States. 

The  Secretary  has  now  completed  the  objects 
which  he  proposed  to  himself  to  comprise  in  the 
present  report.  He  has  for  the  most  part  omitted 
details,  as  well  to  avoid  fatiguing  the  attention  of 
the  House  as  because  more  time  would  have  been 
desirable,  even  to  digest  the  general  principles  of 
the  plan.  If  these  should  be  found  right,  the  par 
ticular  modifications  will  readily  suggest  themselves 
in  the  progress  of  the  work. 

The  Secretary,  in  the  views  which  have  directed 
his  pursuit  of  the  subject,  has  been  influenced,  in  the 


288  Alexander  Hamilton 

first  place,  by  the  consideration  that  his  duty,  from 
the  very  terms  of  the  resolution  of  the  House,  obliged 
him  to  propose  what  appeared  to  him  an  adequate 
provision  for  the  support  of  the  public  credit,  adapted 
at  the  same  time  to  the  real  circumstances  of  the 
United  States;  and,  in  the  next,  by  the  reflection 
that  measures  which  will  not  bear  the  test  of  future 
unbiassed  examination,  can  neither  be  productive  of 
individual  reputation  nor  (which  is  of  much  greater 
consequence)  public  honor  or  advantage. 

Deeply  impressed,  as  the  Secretary  is,  with  a  full 
and  deliberate  conviction  that  the  establishment  of 
the  public  credit,  upon  the  basis  of  a  satisfactory 
provision  for  the  public  debt,  is,  under  the  present 
circumstances  of  this  country,  the  true  desideratum 
toward  relief  from  individual  and  national  embar 
rassments;  that  without  it  these  embarrassments 
will  be  likely  to  press  still  more  severely  upon  the 
community;  he  cannot  but  indulge  an  anxious  wish 
that  an  effectual  plan  for  that  purpose  may  during 
the  present  session  be  the  result  of  the  united  wisdom 
of  the  Legislature. 

He  is  fully  convinced  that  it  is  of  the  greatest  im 
portance  that  no  further  delay  should  attend  the 
making  of  the  requisite  provision :  not  only  because 
it  will  give  a  better  impression  of  the  good  faith  of 
the  country,  and  will  bring  earlier  relief  to  the 
creditors,  both  which  circumstances  are  of  great 
moment  to  public  credit,  but  because  the  advan 
tages  to  the  community,  from  raising  stock,  as 
speedily  as  possible,  to  its  natural  value,  will  be  in 
comparably  greater  than  any  that  can  result  from 


Finance  289 

its  continuance  below  that  standard.  No  profit 
which  could  be  derived  from  purchases  in  the  market, 
on  account  of  the  Government,  to  any  practicable 
extent,  would  be  an  equivalent  for  the  loss  which 
would  be  sustained  by  the  purchases  of  foreigners 
at  a  low  value.  Not  to  repeat,  that  governmental 
purchases  to  be  honorable  ought  to  be  preceded  by 
a  provision.  Delay,  by  disseminating  doubt,  would 
sink  the  price  of  stock;  and,  as  the  temptation  to 
foreign  speculations,  from  the  lowness  of  the  price, 
would  be  too  great  to  be  neglected,  millions  would 
probably  be  lost  to  the  United  States. 
All  of  which  is  humbly  submitted. 

ALEXANDER  HAMILTON, 
Secretary  of  the  Treasury.1 

1  There  is  probably  no  single  State  paper  in  the  history  of  the  United 
States,  with  the  exception  of  the  Emancipation  Proclamation,  which 
was  of  such  immense  importance,  and  produced  such  wide  and  far- 
reaching  results  as  Hamilton's  first  report  on  the  Public  Credit. 
"Finance,  my  friend,"  said  Gouverneur  Morris  to  John  Jay,  "all  that 
remains  of  the  American  Revolution  grounds  there."  The  public 
debt  of  that  day,  a  trifle  to  the  present  generation,  seemed  to  the 
country  after  the  Revolution,  a  mountain  which  could  not  be  removed. 
The  wretched  Confederacy  went  down  to  ruin  on  the  financial  diffi 
culties.  The  Union  was  bankrupt  and  hastening  to  dissolution,  while 
foreign  powers  gloated  over  the  prospect  of  our  coming  destruction 
Hamilton  met  the  question,  grasped  it,  and  solved  the  dire  problem. 
In  his  first  report  he  embodied  the  financial  policy  which  organized  and 
brought  out  our  resources,  rendered  us  strong  and  prosperous  at  home, 
established  our  credit,  and  made  us  respected  in  every  money  market 
in  Europe.  But  the  first  report  was  far  more  than  a  vigorous  and  able 
piece  of  financiering.  It  was  the  corner-stone  of  the  Government  of 
the  United  States,  and  the  foundation  of  the  national  movement. 
Hamilton  saw  in  the  debt  and  its  proper  treatment  the  means  of 
binding  together  the  States  as  a  nation  by  the  sure  tie  of  a  common 
interest.  This  was  the  end  for  which  he  labored.  He  converted  the 
Constitution  into  a  living  organism,  founded  a  policy  on  which  a 
great  party  came  into  being,  and,  above  and  beyond  all,  brought  into 

VOL.  II.— 19. 


290  Alexander  Hamilton 

To  this  report  were  appended  several  schedules. 

A.  Being  a  supposititious  statement  of  accounts  be 
tween  the  United  States  and  individual  States. 

B.  A  general  statement  of  the  Foreign  Loans,  showing, 
in  abstract,  the  capital  sums  borrowed,  and  the  arrearages 
of  interest,  to  the  3ist  of  December,  1789. 

C.  Abstract  of  the  Liquidated  and  Loan-Office  Debt  of 
the  United  States,  on  the  3d  of  March,  1789. 

D.  An  estimate  of  all  the  interest  which  will  accrue  on 
the  Domestic  Debt  of  the  United  States,  from  its  forma 
tion  to  3ist  of  December,  1 790 ;  of  such  partial  payments 
as  have  been  made  on  account  thereof,  and  of  the  balance 
which  will  remain  to  be  provided  for,  to  pay  up  the  inter 
est  fully  to  that  period. 

E.  Abstract  of  the  public  debt  of  the  States  (therein) 
mentioned  agreeably  to  accounts  transmitted  in  pursu 
ance  of  the  resolution  of  the  House  of  Representatives  of 
the  2ist  of  September,  1789. 

F.  Table,  showing  the  annuity  which  a  person  of  a  given 
age  would  be  entitled  to,  during  life,  from  the  time  he 
should  arrive  at  a  given  age,  upon  the  present  payment  of 
a  hundred  dollars,  computing  interest  at  four  per  cent. 

G.  Table,  showing  what  annuity  would  be  enjoyed  by 
the  survivor  of  only  two  persons,  of  certain  ages,  for 
the  remainder  of  life,  after  the  determination  of  life  in 

vigorous  life  the  national  principle  which  has  gone  on  strengthening 
and  broadening  through  all  our  subsequent  history.  The  most  cursory 
reading  of  the  report  shows  its  simplicity,  strength,  lucidity,  and  con 
densation,  as  well  as  the  masterly  financial  ability  of  its  author.  But 
to  fully  appreciate  it  we  must  look  before  and  after.  We  must  ap 
preciate  the  anarchy  of  the  Confederation,  the  chaotic  opposition  to 
order  then  existing,  and  contrast  all  this  with  the  development  of  the 
United  States  which  has  followed.  Studied  in  this  way  the  first  report 
on  the  Public  Credit  assumes  its  true  proportions,  and  shows  the  great 
place  which  Hamilton  fills  in  our  history. 


Finance  291 

expectation,  upon  the  present  payment  of  one  hundred 
dollars,  computing  interest  at  four  per  cent,  per  annum, 
and  the  duration  of  life,  according  to  Dr.  Halley's  tables. 

H.  Table  for  a  Tontine  of  Six  Classes,  the  number  of 
lives  in  each  Class  being  indefinite,  calculated  on  a  pay 
ment  of  two  hundred  dollars  by  each  subscriber,  and  at  a 
rate  of  interest  of  four  per  cent.  The  computation  on 
the  best  life  in  each  Class,  and  on  the  supposition  that  the 
subscribers  to  each  Class  will  not  be  less  than  the  re 
spective  numbers  specified  in  the  first  column. 

I.  General  Estimate  for  the  services  of  the  current  year. 

K.  Estimate  of  the  probable  product  of  the  funds  pro 
posed  for  funding  the  debt,  and  providing  for  the  current 
service  of  the  United  States,  including  the  present  duties 
on  imports  and  tonnage. — State  Papers — Finance,  vol.  i., 
pp.  26-37. 


OPERATIONS  OF  THE  ACT  LAYING  DUTIES  ON  IMPORTS 

Communicated  to  the  House  of  Representatives,  April  23,  1790. 
TREASURY  DEPARTMENT,  April  22,  1790. 

In  obedience  to  the  order  of  the  House  of  Rep 
resentatives  of  the  i  gth  day  of  January  last,  the 
vSecretary  of  the  Treasury  respectfully  submits  the 
following  report: 

FIRST.  As  to  the  act  imposing  duties  on  the  goods, 
wares,  and  merchandise,  imported  into  the  United 
States. 

Section  i.  The  duties  specified  in  this  act,  accord 
ing  to  this  section,  took  effect  throughout  the  United 
States  from  and  after  the  first  day  of  August  last. 


292  Alexander  Hamilton 

But  as  the  act  for  the  collection  of  those  duties  did 
not  pass  till  the  last  of  July,  it  was  of  course  impos 
sible  that  the  officers  for  carrying  it  into  execution 
could  be  appointed,  commissioned,  and  ready  to 
enter  upon  the  execution  of  their  offices,  at  the  day 
fixed  for  the  commencement  of  the  duties.  The 
custom-houses  in  the  several  States  were  not  organ 
ized  till  at  different  periods,  from  the  fifth  of  August 
to  some  time  in  September;  and  in  the  intervals, 
several  importations  took  place.  In  some  instances, 
duties  were  paid  under  the  State  laws,  in  others 
none  were  paid. 

The  Secretary,  conceiving  it  to  be  a  clear  point 
that  the  duties  imposed  by  the  first-mentioned  act 
accrued  as  debts  to  the  United  States  on  all  goods 
imported  after  the  day  specified  for  their  commence 
ment,  and  that  the  regulations  prescribed  by  the 
collection  law  were  to  be  considered  merely  as  aux 
iliary  guards  for  securing  their  payment,  did  not 
think  himself  at  liberty,  on  grounds  of  convenience 
or  inconvenience,  to  waive  the  claim  for  them.  He 
has  therefore  caused  it  to  be  made,  and  has  given 
directions,  with  a  view  to  a  legal  decision  of  the 
question. 

But  it  is  worthy  of  consideration  by  the  Legisla 
ture,  whether  it  be  advisable  to  pursue,  or  relinquish 
it.  The  payment  of  the  duties  in  this  situation  has 
been  generally  unlocked  for,  and  in  most  cases  must 
be  preceded  by  a  legal  determination.  The  enforce 
ment  of  the  claim  would  therefore  be  likely  to  be 
thought  rigorous,  and,  in  some  instances,  might  be 
injurious — where  merchants  may  have  sold,  without 


Finance  293 

reference  in  the  price  to  the  duty;  where  factors  or 
agents  may  have  settled  accounts  with,  and  paid 
over  the  proceeds  of  goods  to,  their  principals,  espe 
cially  if  transient  persons;  where  duties  have  been 
paid  under  the  State  establishments;  in  these,  and 
other  cases,  there  might  ensue  loss  or  embarrass 
ment.  There  must  also  be  difficulty  in  ascertaining 
the  sums  which  ought  to  be  paid. 

The  distinctions  between  distilled  spirits  are  con 
ceived  not  to  be  sufficiently  diversified  or  accurate. 
This  has  been  remarked  and  a  remedy  proposed  in 
the  plan  submitted  to  the  House  for  the  support  of 
the  public  credit. 

There  is  no  general  rate  prescribed  for  estimating 
the  draught  and  tare  of  those  articles  which  pay 
duty  by  weight.  The  consequence  is  that  different 
allowances  are  made  at  different  places  according  to 
former  usage,  and  too  much  is  left  to  discretion. 

Unwrought  steel  is  rated  at  fifty-six  cents  for  112 
Ibs.,  which,  upon  an  average  of  the  cost,  is  less  than 
five  per  cent,  ad  valorem.  As  an  enumerated  article, 
it  is  presumed  to  have  been  the  intention  of  the 
Legislature  to  rate  it  higher  than  five  per  cent.,  es 
pecially  as  a  higher  rate  would  be  in  favor  of  the 
manufacture  of  it  among  ourselves,  in  which  con 
siderable  progress  has  been  made,  particularly  in 
the  State  of  Pennsylvania. 

The  information  received  by  the  Secretary  in 
duces  him  to  consider  as  questionable,  the  policy  of 
the  duty  on  pickled  fish  in  its  present  extent.  It  is 
represented  that  almost  the  whole  of  what  is  brought 
from  Nova  Scotia  to  Massachusetts  is  re-exported; 


294  Alexander  Hamilton 

and  this  chiefly  to  foreign  countries.  And  that, 
while  it  forms  a  considerable  article  in  an  inter 
course  between  those  places  beneficial  to  Massa 
chusetts,  it  contributes  to  the  augmentation  of  her 
exports. 

If  this  be  true  it  is  difficult  to  discern  any  ad 
vantage  in  the  duty.  To  the  revenue  there  will  be 
rather  loss  than  profit;  as  the  expense  incident  to 
the  collection  and  to  the  process  of  the  drawback  will 
probably  exceed  the  amount  of  the  duty  on  the 
small  quantity  internally  consumed,  even  taking  into 
the  calculation  the  one  per  cent,  retained  as  an  in 
demnification  for  that  expense.  In  a  commercial 
light,  as  far  as  it  has  any  operation,  it  seems  to  be 
rather  an  unfavorable  one.  The  process  of  paying 
and  drawing  back  is  not  without  inconveniences; 
and  the  unrefunded  residue  is  a  tax  on  the  export 
trade  in  that  article,  from  which,  for  the  reason 
assigned,  no  benefit  arises  to  the  public;  while  the 
encouragement  which  it  was  the  object  of  this  regu 
lation  to  give  to  the  fisheries,  loses  in  a  great  meas 
ure,  its  effect,  by  reason  of  the  drawback.  And  it 
is  suggested  by  intelligent  men  that  an  injurious 
competition  in  the  branch  of  the  fisheries  to  which 
the  duty  is  applicable,  is  little  to  be  apprehended. 

The  Secretary,  however,  does  not  conceive  himself 
to  be  possessed  with  sufficient  accuracy  of  all  the  facts 
necessary  to  a  right  judgment  on  this  point  to  be  will 
ing  to  hazard  a  decisive  opinion.  He  therefore  only 
means  to  state  the  circumstances  communicated  to 
him,  in  expectation  that  the  representatives  from 
the  part  of  the  Union  more  immediately  affected  will 


Finance  295 

be  able,  by  further  lights,  to  guide  the  opinion  of 
the  House  to  a  proper  conclusion. 

A  discrimination  is  made  by  this  section  in  favor 
of  teas  brought  from  China  or  India  in  American 
bottoms.  The  fifth  section  allows  a  discount  of 
ten  per  cent,  on  all  the  duties  imposed  by  this  act 
on  goods,  wares,  and  merchandises  imported  in 
American  bottoms.  A  question  arises  whether  this 
discount  ought  to  obtain  in  respect  to  the  above- 
mentioned  teas.  The  Secretary  presumes,  that  the 
better  construction  is  against  the  allowance,  though 
within  the  letter  of  the  provision;  but  an  explana 
tion  is,  perhaps,  requisite,  to  obviate  controversy. 

All  goods,  wares,  and  merchandise,  except  teas, 
brought  from  China  or  India,  otherwise  than  in 
American  bottoms,  are  made  liable  to  a  duty  of 
twelve  and  a  half  per  cent,  ad  valorem.  But  in  the 
clause  immediately  succeeding,  all  China  ware  is 
rated  only  at  ten  per  cent,  ad  valorem.  A  doubt 
suggests  itself  whether  this  article  be  excepted  out 
of  the  preceding  provision,  or  be  itself  subject  to  an 
implied  exception  in  favor  of  the  full  operation  of 
that  provision. 

It  is  suggested  that  the  encouragement  intended 
to  our  East-India  trade,  by  the  duty  of  twelve  and  a 
half  per  cent,  on  India  goods  brought  from  China  in 
foreign  bottoms,  will  be  counteracted  by  the  want 
of  a  greater  duty  than  is  now  laid  on  the  same  goods 
brought  from  Europe,  as  competition  is  more  to  be 
apprehended  through  that  channel  than  from  direct 
importations  in  foreign  bottoms  from  India.  While 
the  Secretary  deems  it  proper  to  bring  this  suggestion 


296  Alexander  Hamilton 

into  the  view  of  the  House,  he  forbears  giving  an 
opinion  as  to  the  weight  it  ought  to  have.  He  per 
ceives  various  advantages  in  a  direct  commerce 
with  the  East  Indies,  and  is  hitherto  inclined  to  be 
lieve  it  merits  the  patronage  of  the  Government; 
but  the  tendency  of  it  is  not  yet  sufficiently  devel 
oped,  to  his  judgment,  to  leave  him  wholly  without 
reserve  as  to  the  extent  of  the  encouragement  which 
ought  to  be  given. 

Commodities  of  our  own  growth  or  manufacture, 
carried  to  a  foreign  port,  and  brought  back  again  to 
the  United  States,  are,  by  this  act,  liable  to  duty. 
The  tendency  of  this  to  discourage  commercial  en 
terprise  recommends  the  expediency  of  an  exemp 
tion  upon  due  proof  of  identity. 

The  sea-stores  of  vessels,  the  furniture,  clothing, 
and  professional  apparatus  of  persons  arriving  in 
this  country  from  abroad  seem  equally  liable  to 
duties  with  goods  brought  by  way  of  merchandise. 
They  have  been  in  several  instances  exacted;  but 
the  payment  is  usually  accompanied  with  remon 
strance  and  discontent.  If  it  was  not  the  intent  of 
the  Legislature  to  include  such  articles,  an  explana 
tion  is  necessary.  Various  considerations  plead  for 
exempting  them,  under  proper  limitations. 

Section  2.  From  this  section  it  has  been  doubted 
whether  there  be,  at  present,  any  duty  on  hemp. 
And  it  has  been  inferred  from  the  debates  to  have 
been  the  intention  of  the  Legislature  to  exempt  it 
till  after  the  first  of  December,  1790;  but  the  con 
struction  of  the  act  is  different.  There  is  a  duty  on 
cotton,  as  well  as  hemp,  to  take  place  at  a  future 


Finance  297 

day.  But  cotton,  in  the  meantime,  is  expressly  ex- 
cepted  out  of  the  five-per-cent.  duty,  which  impli- 
edly  excludes  hemp  from  the  like  exception.  As  the 
act  now  stands  it  will  be  a  question,  when  the  duty  of 
sixty  cents  per  hundredweight  takes  place,  whether 
it  be  in  addition  to,  or  in  lieu  of,  the  present  duty. 

Section  j.  Provision  is  here  made  for  a  drawback 
of  the  duties  on  goods  exported  within  twelve  months, 
with  an  exception  of  certain  kinds  of  distilled  spirits, 
and  a  deduction  of  one  per  cent. 

But  there  is  no  provision  for  entries  for  exporta 
tion;  whence  it  happens  that  a  vessel  arriving  from 
a  foreign  port,  with  part  of  her  cargo  destined  for 
the  United  States,  and  other  part  for  some  other 
country,  is  obliged  to  pay  or  secure  the  payment  of 
the  duties  on  her  whole  cargo;  and  in  strictness, 
even  to  land  such  articles  as  require  weighing,  gaug 
ing,  or  measuring,  in  order  to  the  ascertaining  of  the 
duties.  This  is  complained  of  as  a  hardship,  and  is 
contrary  to  the  prevailing  usage  of  commercial  na 
tions.  The  Secretary  is  of  opinion  that  the  com 
plaint  is  well  founded,  and  that  it  is  advisable  that 
entries  for  exportation,  with  proper  precautions  and 
restrictions,  should  be  authorized.  The  interests  of 
the  revenue  can,  with  advantage,  be  consulted  no 
further  than  they  are  consistent  with  the  necessary 
freedom  and  felicity  of  commercial  intercourse. 

The  allowance  of  drawbacks  does  not  obviate  the 
subject  of  complaint.  The  necessity  of  advancing 
the  money,  or  procuring  security  for  the  amount  of 
the  duties;  the  necessity  of  landing  those  articles 
which  require  to  be  weighed,  measured,  or  gauged 


298  Alexander  Hamilton 

(which  must  in  the  first  instance  be  submitted  to), 
are  material  inconveniences ;  and  the  process  for  ob 
taining  drawbacks  is  attended  with  difficulty,  casu 
alty,  and  trouble.  There  must  be  a  bond  given  not 
to  re-land  the  goods,  and  this  bond  must  be  can 
celled  by  certain  proofs,  which  may  not,  in  all  cases, 
be  obtainable,  but  which  are,  nevertheless,  made  a 
pre-requisite  to  the  payment  of  the  drawbacks.  Nor 
can  that  payment,  at  any  rate,  be  had,  till  after  the 
expiration  of  six  months ;  so  that,  even  where  secur 
ity  is  given  for  the  amount  of  the  duties,  it  must 
often  happen  that  they  become  payable  before  par 
ties  can  be  prepared  to  demand  the  drawback;  and 
the  one  per  cent,  retained  is,  in  every  case,  a  certain 
loss.  These  circumstances,  to  transient  persons  es 
pecially,  operate  as  a  grievance. 

SECONDLY.  As  to  the  act  imposing  duties  on  tonnage. 

The  duties  mentioned  in  this  act  are  upon  all  ships 
or  vessels  entered  into  the  United  States. 

The  entry,  therefore,  is  the  circumstance  which 
regulates  the  payment  of  the  duty. 

But  a  doubt  has  arisen  whether  the  duty  ought  to 
be  deemed  to  accrue  on  every  entry,  or  only  on 
entries  from  foreign  countries. 

The  construction  which  has  been  adopted  is,  that 
it  accrues  on  every  entry,  whether  from  abroad,  or 
in  one  part  of  the  United  States  from  another. 

One  reason  for  this  construction  results  from  the 
second  section,  which  provides  that  vessels  built  and 
owned  in  the  United  States,  whilst  employed  in  the 
coasting  trade  or  fisheries,  shall  not  pay  tonnage 


Finance  299 

more  than  once  a  year.  If  the  duty  were  confined  to 
entries  from  abroad  only,  it  could  not  arise  at  all 
on  vessels  employed  in  the  coasting  trade  whilst  so 
employed;  in  which  case  this  provision  would  be 
wholly  nugatory.  The  last  clause  of  the  twenty- 
third  section  of  the  "  act  for  registering  and  clearing 
vessels,  regulating  the  coast  trade,  and  for  other  pur 
poses,"  looks  also  to  the  same  construction;  strongly 
implying  the  payment  of  tonnage  generally,  between 
district  and  district,  and  enlarging  the  rate  in  a  par 
ticular  case. 

Yet  the  third  section  of  the  act  now  under  con 
sideration  has  been  supposed  to  have  a  different  as 
pect,  as  it  subjects  all  vessels,  except  those  built 
within  and  owned  by  citizens  of  the  United  States, 
employed  in  transporting  our  own  commodities, 
coastwise,  to  a  tonnage  of  fifty  cents  at  each  entry; 
whence  it  has  been  inferred  that,  in  other  cases,  the 
duty  is  not  payable  at  each  entry;  because,  by  the 
first  section,  vessels  wholly  foreign  pay  fifty  cents, 
whether  employed  in  the  coasting  trade  or  not.  But 
this  inference  loses  its  force  when  it  is  observed  that 
there  are  other  descriptions  of  vessels,  in  respect  to 
which  it  serves  to  increase  the  rates  specified  in  the 
first  section,  in  favor  of  the  exclusive  privilege,  to 
transport  our  own  commodities  coastwise,  intended 
to  be  secured  to  vessels  built  within  and  owned  by 
citizens  of  the  United  States.  This  suggests  a  use  for 
the  clause  which  is  reconcilable  with  the  provision  in 
the  second  section. 

The  provisions  of  this  act,  however,  appear  to 
be  varied  by  the  "  act  for  registering  and  clearing 


300  Alexander  Hamilton 

vessels,  regulating  the  coasting  trade,  and  for  other 
purposes,"  in  these  particulars.  The  latter  extends 
the  privileges  in  the  coasting  trade,  which,  by  the 
former,  seem  to  be  confined  to  vessels  of  the  build  of 
the  United  States,  to  all  vessels  which  are  registered 
or  enrolled,  provided  they  obtain  licenses  for  the 
purpose.  It  also  extends  the  duty  of  fifty  cents  to 
the  transportation  of  foreign  (as  well  as  domestic) 
commodities,  from  district  to  district,  by  any  vessel 
of  the  burthen  of  twenty  tons  and  upward,  which  has 
not  a  register  or  enrolment,  and  a  license  to  trade. 

Hence,  if  even  a  registered  vessel,  having  no  li 
cense,  proceed  from  one  district,  with  part  of  an  out 
ward  bound  cargo,  to  another  district,  in  order  to 
procure  the  remainder,  and  happen  to  take  in  a 
freight  at  the  first  place  for  the  last,  which  amounts 
to  a  trading  between  the  districts,  she  is  subject  on 
her  entry  in  the  last  to  foreign  tonnage. 

The  propriety  of  this  construction  has  been  ques 
tioned;  but  a  consideration  of  the  general  spirit  of 
the  coasting  act,  which  aims  at  guarding  the  revenue 
against  evasion,  by  the  precautions  annexed  to  the 
granting  of  licenses,  and  an  accurate  attention  to  the 
words  of  the  last  clause  of  the  twenty-third  section 
of  that  act,  seem  to  leave  no  room  for  a  different 
construction.  These  words  are:  "  And  if  any  vessel 
of  the  burthen  of  twenty  tons  or  upward,  not  having 
a  certificate  of  registry  or  enrolment,  and  a  license, 
shall  be  found  trading  between  different  districts,  or 
be  employed  in  the  bank  or  whale  fisheries,  every 
such  ship  or  vessel  shall  be  subject  to  the  same  ton 
nage  and  fees  as  foreign  ships  or  vessels." 


Finance  301 

This  provision,  for  want  of  having  been  under 
stood  in  the  proper  sense,  has,  in  a  variety  of  in 
stances,  borne  hard  upon  individuals  who  have 
omitted  to  procure  licenses,  and  whose  vessels  have 
been,  on  that  account,  subjected  to  foreign  tonnage. 
It  is  submitted  to  the  consideration  of  the  House, 
whether  restitution  of  the  sums  paid,  through  misap 
prehension  of  a  new  law,  would  not  be  equitable  in 
itself,  and  calculated  to  give  a  favorable  impression 
of  the  liberality  of  the  Government, 

Perhaps,  indeed,  the  expediency  of  the  regulation 
itself  merits  reconsideration.  The  necessity  of  pay 
ing  tonnage  at  all,  in  going  from  one  district  to  an 
other,  has  been  a  subject  of  complaint.  And  it  is 
certain  that  it  has  in  many  cases  been  a  burthen- 
some  operation.  It  would  appear  to  the  Secretary, 
upon  the  whole,  eligible,  that,  upon  entries  from  dis 
trict  to  district,  tonnage  should  in  no  case  be  de 
manded,  except  where  a  freight  had  been  taken  in 
at  one  district  for  another;  and  that  even  there  in 
respect  to  vessels  registered,  but  not  licensed,  half 
tonnage  only  should  be  paid. 

THIRDLY.  As  to  the  act  to  regulate  the  collection  of 
the  duties  imposed  by  law  on  the  tonnage  of  ships  or 
vessels,  and  on  goods,  wares,  and  merchandise  im 
ported  into  the  United  States. 

Sections  i,  2,  j,  and  4.  The  arrangement  of  the 
districts,  the  privileges  granted  to  some  ports,  the 
restrictions  upon  others,  have  been  represented  in  a 
few  instances  as  requiring  alteration.  The  Secretary 
is  inclined  to  think  that  some  of  the  representations 


302  Alexander  Hamilton 

made  to  him  will  deserve  attention;  but,  as  he  pre 
sumes  that  the  course  of  business  will  lead  to  the 
appointment  of  a  special  committee  to  prepare  a  bill 
for  amending  the  laws  under  consideration,  there  are 
reasons  which,  with  the  permission  of  the  House, 
would  induce  him  to  reserve  a  more  particular 
communication  on  this  part  of  the  subject  for  that 
committee. 

Section  5.  This  section  contemplates  a  provision 
of  boats  for  securing  the  collection  of  the  revenue; 
but  no  authority  to  provide  them  is  anywhere  given. 
Information  from  several  quarters  proves  the  neces 
sity  of  having  them ;  nor  can  they,  in  the  opinion  of 
the  Secretary,  fail  to  contribute,  in  a  material  degree, 
to  the  security  of  the  revenue,  much  more  than  will 
compensate  for  the  expense  of  the  establishment; 
the  utility  of  which  will  increase  in  proportion  as  the 
public  exigencies  may  require  an  augmentation  of  the 
duties.  An  objection  has  been  made  to  the  measure 
as  betraying  an  improper  distrust  to  the  merchants; 
but  that  objection  can  have  no  weight  when  it  is 
considered  that  it  would  be  equally  applicable  to  all 
the  precautions  comprehended  in  the  existing  sys 
tem;  all  which  proceed  on  a  supposition,  too  well 
founded  to  be  doubted,  that  there  are  persons  con 
cerned  in  trade  in  every  country,  who  will,  if  they 
can,  evade  the  public  duties  for  their  private  benefit. 
Justice  to  the  body  of  the  merchants  of  the  United 
States  demands  an  acknowledgment  that  they  have, 
very  generally,  manifested  a  disposition  to  conform 
to  the  national  laws,  which  does  them  honor,  and 
authorizes  confidence  in  their  probity.  But  every 


Finance  303 

considerate  member  of  that  body  knows  that  this 
confidence  admits  of  exceptions,  and  that  it  is  es 
sentially  the  interest  of  the  greater  number  that 
every  possible  guard  should  be  set  on  the  fraudulent 
few,  which  does  not,  in  fact,  tend  to  the  embarrass 
ment  of  trade. 

The  following  is  submitted  as  a  proper  establish 
ment  for  this  purpose : 

That  there  be  ten  boats,  two  for  the  coasts,  bays, 
and  harbors  of  Massachusetts  and  New  Hampshire; 
one  for  the  sound,  between  Long  Island  and  Con 
necticut;  one  for  the  bay  of  New  York;  one  for  the 
bay  of  Delaware ;  two  for  the  bay  of  the  Chesapeake 
(these,  of  course,  to  ply  along  the  neighboring  coasts) ; 
one  for  the  coasts,  bays,  and  harbors  of  North  Caro 
lina  ;  one  for  the  coasts,  bays,  and  harbors  of  South 
Carolina;  and  one  for  the  coasts,  bays,  and  harbors 
of  Georgia. 

Boats  of  from  thirty-six  to  forty  feet  keel  will 
answer  the  purpose,  each  having  one  captain,  one 
lieutenant,  and  six  mariners,  and  armed  with 
swivels.  The  first  cost  of  one  of  these  boats,  com 
pletely  equipped,  may  be  computed  at  one  thousand 
dollars. 

The  following  is  an  estimate  of  the  annual  expense : 

10  Captains          .  at  40  dollars  per  month,  $4,800 

10  Lieutenants    .         .      at  25  3»000 

60  Seamen  .         .         .      at    8      "  5»76° 

Provision 3»°°° 

Wear  and  tear »..  .  2,000 

$18,560 


304  Alexander  Hamilton 

The  utility  of  an  establishment  of  this  nature 
must  depend  on  the  exertion,  vigilance,  and  fidelity 
of  those  to  whom  the  charge  of  the  boats  shall  be  con 
fided.  If  these  are  not  respectable  characters  they 
will  rather  serve  to  screen  than  detect  fraud.  To 
procure  such,  a  liberal  compensation  must  be  given, 
and,  in  addition  to  this,  it  will,  in  the  opinion  of  the 
Secretary,  be  advisable  that  they  be  commissioned 
as  officers  of  the  navy.  This  will  not  only  induce  fit 
men  the  more  readily  to  engage,  but  will  attach 
them  to  their  duty  by  a  nicer  sense  of  honor. 

Section  6.  Collectors  are  here  authorized,  in  case 
of  necessary  absence,  sickness,  or  inability,  to  ap 
point  deputies.  It  is  represented  that  inconvenien 
ces  have  arisen  from  the  want  of  the  like  power  in 
the  naval  officers  and  surveyors. 

Section  7.  Provision  is  here  made  for  the  case  of 
the  disability  or  death  of  the  collector,  but  not  of  the 
naval  officer  or  surveyor.  A  similar  provision,  with 
respect  to  them,  appears  to  be  not  less  requisite. 

Section  10.  The  provision  of  this  section  seems  to 
extend  too  far.  It  is  conceived  that  it  ought  to  be 
confined  to  vessels  owned  wholly,  or  in  part,  by  citi 
zens  of  the  United  States;  as  it  is  not  supposable 
that  those  of  other  nations  can  be  acquainted  with 
a  regulation  so  entirely  local  in  its  nature,  or  be  pre 
pared  to  comply  with  it.  There  is  also  want  of  a 
penalty  to  enforce  its  observance. 

This  regulation  has  been  represented  as  inconven 
ient  and  useless,  but  the  Secretary  does  not  view  it 
in  this  light.  It  is  probable  that  it  will  contribute  to 
the  security  of  the  revenue,  by  rendering  more  diffi- 


Finance  305 

cult  those  collusions  between  masters  and  owners, 
which  often  take  place  after  the  arrival  of  vessels 
upon  the  coast,  or  within  port. 

Section  n.  Masters  of  vessels,  within  forty-eight 
hours  after  their  arrival  in  any  port  of  the  United 
States,  are  to  make  report.  It  is  not  explained 
whether  they  are  not  at  liberty  in  the  meantime  to 
proceed  elsewhere.  The  construction  of  the  officers 
of  the  customs,  in  several  instances,  has  been  in 
favor  of  such  liberty.  But  this  construction  does 
not  appear  to  the  Secretary  well  founded.  He  con 
ceives  that  the  duties  become  payable  by  the  act  of 
importation,  even  previously  to  entry,  and  that  the 
forty-eight  hours  are  only  allowed  as  a  reasonable 
time  for  the  master  to  prepare  his  report;  after 
which  he  is  to  be  subject  to  a  penalty  for  not  doing 
it.  An  explanation,  however,  may  prevent  disputes. 

It  is  also  submitted,  whether  masters  ought  not  to 
be  required,  within  twelve  hours  after  their  arrival, 
to  announce  it  at  the  custom-house,  and  to  complete 
their  report  within  twenty-four,  with  an  exception 
for  Sundays.  It  is  of  moment  that  vessels  arriving 
should  be  brought  as  speedily  as  possible  under  the 
notice  of  the  proper  officers,  and  that  their  situation 
should  be  ascertained  as  early  as  practicable.  More 
time  than  is  necessary  for  disclosing  it  with  proper 
accuracy  can  be  of  no  real  use,  and  gives  greater  op 
portunity  for  concerting  frauds. 

In  the  oath  here  prescribed  for  masters  of  vessels, 
there  is  no  view  to  those  casualties  which  may  cause 
the  cargo  to  be  diminished  at  sea.  There  ought  to 
be  room  for  making  the  proper  exceptions,  according 


VOL.  II.— 20. 


306  Alexander  Hamilton 

to  the  circumstances.  And  it  would  be  useful  to 
make  it  a  part  of  the  oath,  that  any  goods  afterwards 
discovered  on  board  shall  be  reported ;  as  in  the  case 
of  importers  or  consignees. 

Section  12.  It  is  here  declared  that  no  goods 
shall  be  unladen  but  in  open  day.  It  would  be 
more  safe,  as  well  as  more  certain,  to  fix  particular 
hours  for  the  purpose,  according  to  different  seasons 
of  the  year.  And  it  is  submitted,  whether  all  lading, 
as  well  as  unlading  of  goods,  at  other  hours,  unless  by 
special  license  from  the  officers  of  the  customs,  ought 
not  to  be  forbidden.  If,  in  addition  to  this,  masters 
of  vessels  were  required  to  give  previous  notice  to 
the  officers  assigned  to  their  respective  vessels,  of  the 
times  when  deliveries  are  intended  to  begin,  it  would 
afford  an  increase  of  security. 

This  section  contains  various  penalties  on  persons 
concerned  in  unlading  and  removing  goods  without 
the  requisite  permits.  It  would  be  a  most  powerful 
check  upon  fraud  if  every  master  of  a  vessel  con 
cerned  in  one,  should,  on  conviction,  be  disqualified, 
under  competent  penalties,  from  having  at  any  time 
after  the  command  or  charge  of  a  vessel  within  the 
United  States.  There  are,  however,  objections  of 
weight  to  such  a  provision. 

Section  ij.  The  effect  of  this  section  is  to  oblige 
the  payment  or  securing  of  the  duties  on  all  the  goods 
brought  in  any  vessel,  at  the  port  at  which  she  first 
arrives,  though  part  of  them  be  destined  for  an 
other,  either  within  the  United  States,  or  elsewhere. 
This  regulation  is  a  subject  of  complaint.  Its  in 
convenience  becomes  the  more  apparent,  when  it  is 


Finance  307 

considered  that  all  the  goods  intended  for  another 
port  must  first  be  landed  (and  certain  articles  meas 
ured,  weighed,  or  gauged),  and  afterward  reshipped. 
The  trouble,  expense,  and  delay  of  such  a  process  are 
serious  obstructions  to  trade.  Balancing  its  com 
mercial  inconveniences  with  the  additional  security 
which  it  may  afford  to  the  revenue,  the  Secretary  is 
of  opinion  that  an  alteration  is  advisable.  It  should 
be  incumbent  upon  the  master  of  the  ship  to  make 
report,  at  the  first  port,  of  the  whole  cargo  on  board, 
upon  oath,  distinguishing  the  particular  goods  in 
tended  for  each  port ;  and  also  to  make  oath,  at  ev 
ery  subsequent  port,  of  the  particulars  of  the  goods 
landed  at  any  preceding  one,  and  of  the  persons  to 
and  for  whom  they  were  delivered;  producing  also 
certificates  from  the  proper  officers,  of  the  whole 
quantity  of  the  goods  originally  entered,  and  of  so 
much  as  may  have  been  regularly  landed.  A  power 
of  securing,  with  proper  fastenings,  the  hatches 
and  other  communications  with  the  holds  of  ships ; 
providing  for  accidents  and  necessity;  and  even, 
if  judged  requisite,  to  put  an  inspector  on  board, 
in  going  from  one  port  to  another,  ought  to  be 
superadded. 

No  person  but  the  owner  or  consignee  of  goods  can 
make  the  entry  here  required.  This,  from  the  ab 
sence  of  parties,  is  sometimes  inconvenient.  It  is 
the  practice  of  countries,  whose  regulations  are  not 
deficient  in  strictness,  to  allow  an  agent  of  the  party 
to  make  entry  in  his  absence.  And  though  this 
may  widen  the  door  for  evasion,  there  are,  never 
theless,  strong  arguments,  derived  from  convenience, 


308  Alexander  Hamilton 

in  its  favor.  Penalties,  proportionably  severe,  may 
be  inflicted  upon  fraud  committed  by  any  such 
agent,  and  the  permission  may  be  confined  to  the 
case  of  persons  absent  at  the  time  of  the  arrival  of 
the  vessel  in  which  the  goods  may  have  been  brought. 

The  oath  here  directed  to  be  taken  by  importers  is 
not  always  in  their  power.  There  may  be  no  in 
voice,  nor  any  other  accurate  account  of  the  quan 
tity,  quality,  or  cost  of  articles.  A  qualification  in 
this  respect  is  indispensable.  Entries,  without  spe 
cifying  particulars,  must,  of  necessity,  be  admit 
ted;  parties  swearing  that  they  have  received  no 
account  of  them,  and  that  they  are  unknown.  An 
eye  is  had  to  this  in  the  sixteenth  section,  but  some 
thing  is  wanting  to  reconcile  the  two  sections,  and 
define  a  more  accurate  course  of  proceeding  in  the 
case. 

Section  15.  Inspectors  are  to  be  put  on  board 
vessels,  who  are  to  remain  on  board  until  they  are 
discharged.  This  implies  during  the  night  as  well 
as  the  day;  which,  if  practised,  would  multiply  the 
number  of  inspectors  to  a  very  expensive  extent.  A 
power  of  securing  the  hatches  and  other  communi 
cations  with  the  holds  of  vessels,  during  the  night, 
would  give  greater  security,  where  inspectors  were 
kept  constantly  on  board,  and  would,  in  many  in 
stances,  obviate  the  necessity  of  doing  it. 

The  unloading  of  a  vessel  is  here  limited  to  fifteen 
working  days  after  she  begins  to  unload.  But  the 
commencement  of  the  business  may  be  postponed 
as  long  as  the  parties  interested  think  fit.  If  there 
should  be  considerable  delay,  either  an  inspector 


Finance  309 

must  remain  on  board  the  whole  time,  in  which  case 
the  expense  may  exhaust  the  duty,  or  there  must  be 
great  opportunity  for  fraud.  It  seems  proper,  either 
to  fix  an  ultimate  limit  for  unloading,  to  be  com 
puted  from  the  time  of  arrival,  or  of  the  master's 
report;  or  a  period,  after  which,  the  expense  of  an 
inspector  shall  be  borne  by  the  party.  The  first  ap 
pears  to  the  Secretary  most  advisable,  and  he  con 
ceives  that  twenty  working  days,  after  the  master's 
report,  would  suffice. 

Section  ig.  The  payment  or  securing  of  the  du 
ties  is  here  made  a  preliminary  to  their  being  landed. 
This,  in  a  strict  sense,  is  impracticable,  as  certain 
articles  must  first  be  landed,  weighed,  gauged,  or 
measured,  before  the  duties  can  be  ascertained. 
The  object,  however,  of  the  provision  is  proper,  and 
it  must  be  construed  to  admit  a  gross  estimate  of  the 
sum  in  the  first  instance,  subject  to  after-revision. 
It  would,  however,  be  desirable,  that  a  discretion  of 
this  sort  should  be  expressed.  The  collector,  to 
gether  with  the  naval  officer,  where  there  is  one,  or 
alone,  where  there  is  none,  may  be  authorized  to 
determine  the  amount  of  the  duties  to  be  paid,  by 
an  estimate  of  the  same,  according  to  the  best  of 
their  or  his  judgment,  and  the  collector  may  be  em 
powered,  in  case  of  an  over-estimate,  either  to  re 
turn  the  excess,  if  the  money  has  been  paid,  or  to 
endorse  a  credit  for  it  on  the  bond. 

A  discount  of  ten  per  cent,  is  here  allowed  for 
prompt  payment,  on  the  excess  of  any  sum  of  duties 
beyond  fifty  dollars.  The  policy  of  this  discount  is 
questionable.  Experience  shows  that,  in  most  of 


3io  Alexander  Hamilton 

the  States,  transient  persons  chiefly  avail  them 
selves  of  it,  who  would  in  most  cases  pay  the  money 
without  the  discount,  to  avoid  the  inconvenience  of 
suretyship. 

But  even  if  the  discount  ought  to  be  continued, 
the  rate  seems  to  be  too  high.  It  exceeds  the  rate 
of  interest  at  which  the  Government  may  borrow, 
more  than  is  equivalent  for  the  insurance  of  the 
risk  of  non-payment.  Seven  per  cent,  would,  in  the 
judgment  of  the  Secretary,  be  the  extent  of  a  proper 
allowance.  The  confining  the  discount  to  the  ex 
cess  beyond  fifty  dollars  counteracts  the  provision 
wherever  that  excess  is  not  considerable. 

It  is  provided  by  the  last  clause  of  this  section, 
that  no  person,  whose  bond  is  unsatisfied  after  it 
becomes  due,  shall  have  a  future  credit  with  the 
collector  until  it  shall  be  discharged.  The  words 
"  the  collector, "  having  been  supposed  to  confine  the 
non-allowance  of  credit  to  the  particular  collector 
to  whom  the  bond  was  given;  in  which  sense,  a 
further  credit  may  be  had  in  another  district ;  which 
would  considerably  lessen  the  utility  of  the  regula 
tion.  The  removal  of  this  ambiguity,  so  as  to  ren 
der  the  exclusion  general,  may  add  to  the  efficacy  of 
the  provision. 

Section  29.  The  compensations  to  the  officers 
established  by  this  section  require  revision ;  they  are, 
in  many  instances,  inadequate ;  in  some,  dispropor 
tionate.  Resignations  in  consequence  of  it  have 
taken  place,  and  others  are  suspended  on  the  ex 
pectation  of  a  favorable  alteration  during  the  present 
session.  It  is  certain  that  competent  allowances 


Finance  3 1  j 

are  essential  to  the  idea  of  having  the  service  per 
formed  by  characters  worthy  of  trust.  And  how 
much  the  security  of  the  revenue  depends  on  this  is 
evident.  There  are  many  ports  where  the  officers 
receive  next  to  nothing  for  their  services.  It  were 
superfluous  to  comment  on  the  inexpediency  of  such 
a  state  of  things. 

The  Secretary  for  the  sake  of  brevity,  begs  leave 
to  reserve  the  details  on  this  head  for  the  committee 
before  alluded  to. 

It  has  been  inferred  from  this  section,  that  the  col 
lector  and  naval  officer  are,  necessarily,  to  transact 
their  business  in  separate  apartments.  This  (if  it 
be  the  design  of  the  provision  from  which  the  in 
ference  is  drawn)  was,  probably,  founded  upon  the 
idea,  that  the  separation  would  lessen  the  danger  of 
collusion  between  those  officers.  But  it  does  not 
seem  likely  that  a  circumstance  of  this  sort  could 
have  much  effect  in  that  way,  while  the  separation 
leaves  a  good  deal  more  in  the  power  of  the  collector, 
and  renders  the  naval  officer  far  less  a  check  upon 
him,  than  if  he  were  made  an  immediate  witness  to 
his  transactions.  The  Secretary  is  of  opinion  that  it 
would  be  preferable  to  require  them  to  act  in  con 
junction,  and  in  the  presence  of  each  other,  among 
other  things,  jointly  administering  and  certifying  all 
oaths  required  to  be  taken  at  the  custom-houses. 

Section  30.  This  section  provides  for  the  receipt 
of  the  duties  in  gold  and  silver  coin  only.  The  Sec 
retary  has  considered  this  provision  as  having  for 
object,  the  exclusion  of  payments  in  the  paper  emis 
sions  of  the  particular  States,  and  the  securing  the 


312  Alexander  Hamilton 

immediate  or  ultimate  collection  of  the  duties  in 
specie,  as  intended  to  prohibit  to  individuals  the 
right  of  paying  in  any  thing  except  gold  or  silver 
coin;  but  not  to  hinder  the  treasury  from  making 
such  arrangements  as  its  exigencies,  the  speedy  com 
mand  of  the  public  resources,  and  the  convenience 
of  the  community  might  dictate;  those  arrange 
ments  being  compatible  with  the  eventual  receipt  of 
the  duties  in  specie.  For  instance,  the  Secretary  did 
not  imagine  that  the  provision  ought  to  be  so  under 
stood  as  to  prevent,  if  necessary,  an  anticipation  of 
the  duties,  by  treasury  drafts,  receivable  at  the  sev 
eral  custom-houses.  And,  if  it  ought  not  to  be  un 
derstood  in  this  sense,  it  appeared  to  him  that  the 
principle  of  a  different  construction  would  extend  to 
the  permitting  the  receipt  of  the  notes  of  public 
banks,  issued  on  a  specie  fund.  Unless  it  can  be 
supposed,  that  the  exchanging  of  specie,  after  it  has 
been  received  for  bank  notes,  to  be  remitted  to  the 
treasury,  is  also  interdicted,  it  seems  difficult  to  con 
clude  that  the  receipt  of  them,  in  the  first  instance, 
is  forbidden. 

Such  were  the  reflections  of  the  Secretary  with 
regard  to  the  authority  to  permit  bank  notes  to  be 
taken  in  payment  of  the  duties.  The  expediency  of 
doing  it  appeared  to  him  to  be  still  less  questionable. 
The  extension  of  their  circulation,  by  the  measure, 
is  calculated  to  increase  both  the  ability  and  the  in 
clination  of  the  banks  to  aid  the  Government.  It 
also  accelerates  the  command  of  the  product  of  the 
revenues  for  the  public  service,  and  it  facilitates  the 
payment  of  the  duties.  It  has  the  first  effect,  be- 


Finance  313 

cause  the  course  of  business  occasions  the  notes  to 
be  sent  beforehand  to  distant  places;  and  being 
ready  on  the  spot,  either  for  payment  or  exchange, 
the  first  post,  after  the  duties  become  payable,  or 
are  received,  conveys  them  to  the  treasury.  The 
substitution  of  treasury  drafts,  anticipating  the  du 
ties,  could  hardly  be  made  without  some  sacrifice  on 
the  part  of  the  public.  As  they  would  be  drawn 
upon  time,  and  upon  the  expectation  of  funds  to  be 
collected,  and,  of  course,  contingent,  it  is  not  prob 
able  that  they  would  obtain  a  ready  sale,  but  at  a 
discount,  or  upon  long  credit.  As  they  would  also 
be  more  or  less  liable  to  accident,  from  the  failure  of 
expected  payments,  there  would  be  continually  a 
degree  of  hazard  to  public  credit.  And,  to  other 
considerations,  it  may  be  added,  that  the  practice  of 
anticipations  of  this  kind  is,  in  its  nature,  so  capable 
of  abuse  as  to  render  it  an  ineligible  instrument  of 
administration  in  ordinary  cases,  and  fit  only  for 
times  of  necessity. 

If  the  idea  of  anticipation  should  be  excluded, 
then  the  relying  wholly  upon  treasury  drafts  would 
be  productive  of  considerable  delay.  The  knowl 
edge  that  the  funds  were  in  hand  must  precede  the 
issuing  of  them.  Here  would  of  course  be  some  loss 
of  time.  And  as  the  moment  of  demand,  created 
by  the  course  of  business,  would  frequently  elapse, 
there  would  as  frequently  be  a  further  loss  of  time 
in  waiting  for  a  new  demand.  In  such  intervals, 
the  public  service  would  suffer,  the  specie  would  be 
locked  up,  and  circulation  checked.  Bank  notes  being 
a  convenient  species  of  money,  whatever  increases 


3H  Alexander  Hamilton 

their  circulation,  increases  the  quantity  of  current 
money.  Hence,  the  payment  of  duties  is  doubly 
promoted  by  their  aid;  they  at  once  add  to  the  quan 
tity  of  medium,  and  serve  to  prevent  the  stagnation 
of  specie. 

The  tendency  of  the  measure  to  lessen  the  neces 
sity  of  drawing  specie  from  distant  places  to  the  seat 
of  Government  results  from  the  foregoing  considera 
tions.  The  slow  operation  of  treasury  drafts  would 
frequently  involve  a  necessity  of  bringing  on  specie, 
to  answer  the  exigencies  of  government;  the  avoid 
ing  of  which,  as  much  as  possible,  in  the  particular 
situation  of  this  country,  need  not  be  insisted  upon. 

But,  convinced  as  the  Secretary  is  of  the  useful 
ness  of  the  regulation,  yet,  considering  the  nature  of 
the  clause  upon  which  these  remarks  arise,  he  thought 
it  his  duty  to  bring  the  subject  under  the  eye  of  the 
House.  The  measure  is  understood  by  all  con 
cerned  to  be  temporary. 

Indeed,  whenever  a  National  Bank  shall  be  insti 
tuted,  some  new  disposition  of  the  thing  will  be  a 
matter  of  course. 

Sections  31  and  32.  The  provision,  in  these  sec 
tions,  respecting  drawbacks,  seems  to  require  re 
vision  in  several  particulars. 

The  benefit  of  it  is  intended  for  any  person  by 
whom  the  goods  may  be  exported,  whether  that  per 
son  be  the  importer  of  them  or  another ;  and  yet  the 
oath  to  be  taken  by  the  exporter  is  of  such  a  nature 
as  must  be  very  difficult  to  any  but  the  importer. 
It  declares,  that  the  goods  are,  in  quantity,  quality, 
and  value,  according  to  the  inward  entry  of  them, 


Finance  315 

which  was  duly  made  at  the  time  of  importation — 
a  fact,  which,  it  is  evident,  can  rarely  be  known  to 
any  but  the  person  who  made  that  entry.  This 
must,  therefore,  occasion  either  difficulty  in  obtain 
ing  the  drawback,  or  a  kind  of  constructive  swearing, 
inconsistent  with  that  scrupulous  strictness  which 
ought  ever  to  accompany  an  oath,  and  on  which  the 
security  they  are  intended  to  afford  must  depend. 
To  obviate  both,  it  seems  necessary  to  direct,  that 
proof  of  the  fact  shall  be  made,  to  the  satisfaction  of 
the  collector,  by  the  oaths  or  affirmations  of  all  the 
parties  through  whose  hands  the  goods  may  have 
passed;  in  which  case,  each  can  be  examined  as  far 
as  his  knowledge  can  be  presumed  to  extend. 

There  is  no  rule  prescribed  for  regulating  the  sum 
in  which  bonds  shall  be  taken;  whence  there  is,  per 
haps,  too  much  left  to  the  discretion  of  the  officers. 
And  the  cancelling  of  the  bond  is  made  to  depend, 
among  other  things,  upon  the  oath  or  affirmation  of 
the  master  and  mate  of  the  vessel,  in  which  the  goods 
are  exported,  attesting  their  delivery:  a  requisite 
which  it  may  not  always  be  possible  to  fulfil.  The 
master  or  mate  may  die,  or  may  quit  the  vessel  from 
different  causes,  without  complying  with  it.  These 
circumstances  seem  to  require  some  other  modifi 
cations.  The  Secretary  has  had  an  eye  to  them  in 
the  draught  of  the  bill  accompanying  his  report  of 
the  ninth  of  January  last;  to  which  he  begs  leave 
respectfully  to  refer. 

Section  40.  This  section  provides  that  no  goods, 
wares,  or  merchandise,  of  foreign  growth  or  manu 
facture,  subject  to  the  payment  of  duties,  shall  be 


316  Alexander  Hamilton 

brought  into  the  United  States,  otherwise  than  by 
sea,  and  in  ships  or  vessels  of  not  less  than  thirty 
tons'  burthen;  with  an  exception  as  to  the  district  of 
Louisville,  and  another,  as  to  vessels,  at  the  time  of 
the  passing  of  the  act,  on  their  voyage. 

It  is  a  matter  which  merits  particular  consideration, 
whether  there  ought  not,  also,  to  be  an  exception 
in  regard  to  the  most  easterly  district  of  the  State 
of  Massachusetts.  The  situation  of  that  district  is, 
in  different  views,  peculiar,  so  as,  perhaps,  to  render 
it  advisable  rather  to  endeavor  to  regulate,  than 
to  prevent  the  introduction  of  foreign  articles  in 
smaller  vessels.  The  information  received  on  this 
point  will,  also,  with  the  leave  of  the  House,  be  re 
served  for  the  committee  before  referred  to. 

FOURTHLY.  As  to  the  "act  for  registering  and 
clearing  vessels,  regulating  the  coasting  trade,  and  for 
other  purposes.'1 

Many  of  the  provisions  of  this  act  are  objected  to, 
particularly  those  parts  which  relate  to  the  coasting 
trade  and  fisheries;  and  yet,  it  must  be  confessed, 
that  the  proper  remedies  or  alterations  are  neither 
obvious  nor  easy.  The  more  the  matter  is  exam 
ined,  the  more  difficult  it  appears  to  reconcile  the 
convenience  of  those  branches  of  trade  with  due  pre 
cautions  for  the  security  of  the  revenue. 

Section  2.  The  idea  of  this  section  is,  that  every 
vessel  shall  be  registered  by  the  collector  of  the 
district  to  which  she  belongs.  This  regulation  is  a 
proper  one,  as  a  knowledge  of  the  persons  on  whose 
oaths  or  affirmations  the  registries  are  to  be  founded 


Finance  3 1 7 

by  the  officer  making  them,  is  a  security  against  im 
position.  But  this  provision  seems  to  be  contra 
vened  by  that  of  the  seventh  section,  as  will  be 
noted  hereafter. 

Section  j.  This  section  directs  the  mode  of  ascer 
taining  the  tonnage  of  all  ships  or  vessels. 

It  is,  however,  a  question  whether  it  means 
only  those  which  are  to  be  registered,  in  order  to 
their  registry,  or  extends  to  others,  in  order  to 
computing  the  tonnage  duty.  The  latter  construc 
tion  has  been  preferred,  for  the  sake  of  equality  and 
uniformity. 

The  mode  of  admeasurement  prescribed,  has  been 
complained  of,  as  unfavorable  to  certain  kinds  of 
vessels,  and  as  tending  to  enlarge  the  tonnage  be 
yond  the  standard  of  other  countries. 

Section  6.  Objections  are  made  to  the  form  of 
the  oath  prescribed  by  this  section.  The  party  is  to 
swear  positively,  to  the  place  where  the  vessel  was 
built  (which,  in  a  great  number  of  cases  cannot,  with 
propriety,  be  done),  and,  also,  to  the  citizenship,  not 
only  of  himself,  but  of  the  other  owners,  and  of  the 
master  (which,  in  many  cases,  must  be  equally 
difficult). 

Inconveniences  are  experienced  from  the  want  of 
a  rule  for  determining  who  are  citizens.  The  con 
sequence  of  it  is  that  every  man  is  left  to  his  own 
opinion  of  what  constitutes  one,  and  it  is  repre 
sented  that  there  are  instances  in  which  persons  of 
reputation,  supposing  that  residence  only  conferred 
the  character,  have  been  ready  to  take  the  oath 
prescribed. 


318  Alexander  Hamilton 

A  designation  of  the  several  descriptions  of  per 
sons  entitled  to  the  privileges  of  citizens  under  this 
act,  requiring  that  the  particular  one,  under  which 
each  falls,  should  be  inserted  in  his  oath,  would  be 
the  most  effectual  guard  against  error  or  imposition. 
If  this  should  be  thought  to  be  attended  with  too 
many  difficulties,  from  our  peculiar  situation,  it  may, 
at  least,  be  proper  to  annex  some  adequate  pecu 
niary  penalty  to  the  obtaining  of  registers  by  per 
sons  not  citizens,  and  to  oblige  all  who  apply  to 
specify,  in  their  oaths,  by  what  title  they  are  citi 
zens — that  is,  whether  by  nativity,  naturalization, 
or  otherwise,  which,  by  bringing  into  view  the  situa 
tion  of  each  person,  would  serve  as  a  useful  check. 

In  these  observations  it  is  taken  for  granted  that, 
as  the  law  now  stands,  the  oath  of  the  party  is  the 
sole  guide  to  the  officers  of  the  customs;  that  they 
have  not  any  discretion  in  the  case,  and  that  a  power 
in  them  to  judge  of  the  qualifications  of  individuals, 
in  so  important  a  respect,  could  not,  with  propriety, 
be  established. 

Section  7.  The  second  section,  as  already  re 
marked,  directs  that  vessels  be  registered  in  the 
districts  to  which  they  belong.  This  admits  their 
registry  wherever  they  may  be,  provided  the  oath 
required  be  taken  before  the  collectors  of  the  dis 
trict  to  which  they  belong.  It  is  conceived  that  an 
adherence  to  the  principle  of  the  second  section, 
throughout,  would  conduce  to  security.  And  it  is, 
therefore,  submitted,  whether,  instead  of  the  pro 
vision  in  this  section,  it  would  not  be  advisable  to 
provide  that,  when  a  vessel,  being  in  a  district  other 


Finance  319 

than  that  to  which  she  belongs,  has  occasion  to  be 
registered,  she  shall  be  surveyed  under  the  direction 
of  the  proper  officer  of  the  port  where  she  may  hap 
pen  to  be,  and  registered  by  the  collector  of  the  dis 
trict  to  which  she  may  belong,  upon  a  certificate  of  the 
officer  by  whom  such  survey  shall  have  been  made. 

Section  n.  The  declaring  the  instrument  of  trans 
fer  void,  unless  the  register  be  recited  in  it,  involves 
an  embarrassing  question,  as  to  the  property  of  the 
vessel,  and  does  not  seem  necessary  to  the  object  in 
view.  The  subsequent  part  of  the  section,  which 
annuls  the  privileges  of  an  American  bottom,  with 
out  such  recital,  answering  alone  the  purpose  of  the 
provision. 

Section  12.  If,  in  the  oath  on  which  the  registry 
is  founded,  it  be  necessary  to  declare  that  the  master 
is  a  citizen,  it  would  seem  equally  necessary  that,  on 
a  change  of  master,  there  should  be  a  like  attestation 
of  his  citizenship,  previous  to  the  endorsement  herein 
directed  to  be  made,  as,  otherwise,  a  citizen  may  be 
the  master  one  day,  a  foreigner  the  next. 

Section  13.  There  would  be  less  room  for  imposi 
tion  if,  instead  of  allowing  the  collector  of  the  port 
where  the  vessel  might  be  to  grant  a  new  register, 
he  were  authorized  merely  to  take  the  oath  pre 
scribed,  in  order  to  its  transmission  to  the  collector 
of  the  district  where  she  might  belong,  making  it  the 
duty  of  the  latter  to  issue  the  new  register. 

Section  22.  This  section  commences  the  regula 
tions  respecting  vessels  employed  in  the  coasting 
trade  and  fisheries.  The  proviso  of  it  exempts  all 
licensed  vessels,  under  twenty  tons,  from  clearing 


320  Alexander  Hamilton 

and  entering,  and  in  its  consequences,  removes  them, 
almost  wholly,  from  the  inspection  of  the  officers  of 
the  customs.  The  tendency  of  this  to  facilitate 
smuggling  is  obvious,  as  these  vessels  are  precisely  of 
that  kind  which  would  be  most  naturally  employed 
in  clandestinely  unlading,  on  the  coast,  those  which 
arrive  from  abroad.  The  bond  required,  in  order  to 
a  license,  is  a  very  slender  restraint,  not  only  from 
the  smallness  of  the  penalty,  but  from  the  little  dan 
ger  of  discovery.  And  the  oath  is  still  less  effectual, 
because  the  master  who  is  to  take  it  may  at  any  time 
be  changed  before  the  application  for  a  new  license. 
This  oath,  too,  is  exceptionable  on  other  accounts. 
The  anticipation  of  a  future  and  distant  oath  may  be 
too  apt  to  give  way  to  the  allurements  of  immediate 
interest;  and  if  a  breach  of  the  law  have  been  com 
mitted  when  it  is  to  be  taken,  it  is  hardly  to  be  ex 
pected  that  there  will  be  a  strict  adherence  to  truth 
at  the  price  of  incurring  both  disgrace  and  loss. 

It  would,  perhaps,  be  more  effectual  and  less  ex 
ceptionable  if,  instead  of  this  oath,  one  should  be 
required,  previous  to  the  granting  of  any  license  to 
a  fishing  or  coasting  vessel,  from  the  owner  or  owners 
of  such  vessel,  that  she  shall  not,  during  the  time 
for  which  it  is  to  be  granted,  be  employed,  with  his 
or  their  permission,  consent,  sufferance,  privity,  or 
connivance,  in  any  way  whereby  the  payment  of 
the  duties  imposed  by  law  on  articles  imported  into 
the  United  States  may  be  evaded. 

But  it  seems  indispensable  toward  guarding  against 
the  frauds  which  may  be  committed  by  coasters  that 
they  should  be  obliged,  at  every  port  or  place  where 


Finance  321 

there  is  an  officer  of  the  customs,  to  report  them 
selves  and  their  lading,  on  their  arrival,  and  previous 
to  their  departure.  For  this  purpose,  the  office  hours 
ought  to  be  so  regulated  and  extended  as  to  afford 
the  greatest  possible  accommodation,  and  avoid  oc 
casions  of  delay.  With  this  precaution  and  taking 
care  that  the  fees  are  moderate,  it  is  presumable  that 
coasters  may  be  subjected  to  a  pretty  exact  inspec 
tion  without  injuriously  impeding  their  business. 

While  they  ought,  in  the  opinion  of  the  Secretary, 
to  be  thus  subjected  to  a  strict  supervision  at  places 
where  there  are  officers,  it  appears  to  him  proper  that 
they  should  be  exempted  from  the  obligation  either 
of  entering  or  clearing  when  at  places  where  there  are 
none.  The  necessity  of  journeys  to  distant  offices, 
frequently  across  rivers  and  bays,  and  at  the  ex 
pense  of  the  loss  of  favorable  winds,  occasions,  in 
some  parts  of  the  Union,  serious  obstructions  to 
the  coasting  trade.  As  connected  with  the  idea,  it 
would  tend  to  the  security  of  the  revenue  if  a  dis 
cretion  were  allowed  to  appoint  inspectors  at  places 
which  are  not  ports  of  general  entry  or  delivery,  for 
the  purpose  of  entering,  clearing,  and  overseeing 
coasters. 

Section  23.  In  the  remarks  on  the  act  imposing 
duties  on  tonnage,  the  construction  which  has  ob 
tained  upon  the  last  clause  of  this  section  has  been 
stated,  together  with  the  hardships  which  have  en 
sued  to  individuals  from  misapprehension  of  it. 

A  different  modification  of  the  provision  has  also 
been  suggested.  Among  other  reasons  to  be  as 
signed  for  it  is  this :  that,  by  obliging  all  registered 


VOL.  II.— 21. 


322  Alexander  Hamilton 

vessels  to  take  out  licenses,  it  unnecessarily  increases 
the  number  of  vessels  entitled  to  the  privileges  of 
coasters.  In  the  opinion  of  the  Secretary,  these 
ought  to  be  confined  to  such  as  are  ordinarily  em 
ployed  in  the  coasting  and  fishing  trade;  to  effect 
which  it  may  be  proper  that  previous  to  the  granting 
of  any  license  an  oath  or  affirmation  should  be  made 
that  the  vessel  for  which  it  is  required  is,  bona  fide, 
intended  to  be  employed  as  a  coasting  or  fishing  ves 
sel  during  the  period  for  which  it  is  to  be  granted,  or 
the  greater  part  of  it;  and  even  to  annex  a  penalty 
to  the  taking  out  a  license  for  any  vessel  which  shall 
not  be  so  employed.  This,  in  respect  to  fishing  ves 
sels,  seems  peculiarly  necessary,  as  it  is  easy  to  see 
that  on  the  pretext  of  that  employment  licenses  may 
be  perverted  from  their  real  purpose  to  that  of  a 
mere  cover  for  illicit  practices. 

There  is  no  provision  for  the  case  of  a  change  of 
•property  within  the  year,  for  which  a  license  may  be 
granted,  which  sometimes  occasions  sureties  to  be 
bound  for  parties  they  did  not  contemplate.  This, 
and  the  repetition  of  tonnage  duty,  which  is  a  con 
sequence  of  it,  is  regarded  as  an  inconvenience,  re 
quiring  to  be  remedied  by  a  provision  for  the 
granting  new  licenses,  when  such  changes  happen, 
upon  new  security  for  the  remainder  of  the  year. 

Sections  27  and  28.  As  there  are  no  particular 
penalties  annexed  to  a  non-compliance  with  the 
requisites  of  these  sections,  it  has,  of  course,  been 
found  in  some  instances  difficult  to  enforce  their 
execution.  And  though  it  is  presumed  that  such 
non-compliance  would  be  a  good  probable  cause  of 


Finance  323 

seizure,  yet  if,  in  the  event  of  a  trial,  it  turned  out 
in  one  case  that  there  were  no  foreign  goods  nor 
ardent  spirits  exceeding  four  hundred  gallons  on 
board;  and  in  the  other,  that  a  manifest  and  permit 
had  been  obtained,  and  that  no  goods  were  on  board 
but  such  as  they  had  specified,  no  penalty  could  be  in 
flicted.  And  a  vexatious  litigation  between  the  officer 
and  the  party  might  be  the  only  fruit  of  the  seizure. 

It  is  inferred  from  the  last  of  these  sections  that  a 
coaster  whose  ultimate  destination  is  for  a  place 
where  a  collector  or  surveyor  resides,  having  on 
board  goods  for  any  intermediate  place,  is  not  at 
liberty  to  land  those  goods  at  such  intermediate 
place  till  after  a  permit  for  landing  shall  have  been 
obtained  at  the  place  of  destination;  which  is  com 
plained  of  as  a  grievance,  and  certainly  is  attended, 
in  many  cases,  with  considerable  inconvenience.  A 
relaxation  in  this  respect,  may  be  advisable.  And 
to  guard  as  much  as  possible  against  any  ill  effects 
from  it,  it  may  be  expedient  that,  whenever  a 
coaster  arrives  at  a  port  where  a  collector  or  surveyor 
resides,  it  should  be  incumbent  upon  the  master  of 
her  to  make  a  report  in  writing,  and  upon  oath, 
stating  the  goods  on  board  at  the  time  of  her  de 
parture  from  the  last  port  left  by  her  at  which  a  col 
lector  or  surveyor  presided,  and  which  may  have 
been  afterwards  taken  in  or  delivered  prior  to  her 
arrival  at  the  place  of  report.  In  this  case,  to  avoid 
a  too  great  multiplication  of  oaths,  the  oaths  required 
by  the  25th  and  26th  sections  may  be  dispensed 
with ;  though  it  will  be  still  useful  that  the  manifests 
should  be  exhibited  and  certified. 


324  Alexander  Hamilton 

Section  31.  The  Secretary,  considering  it  as  an 
essential  rule  that  emoluments  of  office  should  not  be 
extended  by  construction  or  inference  beyond  the 
letter  of  the  provision,  lest  a  door  should  be  opened 
to  improper  exactions,  has  instructed  the  officers  of 
the  customs  to  govern  themselves  by  a  literal  inter 
pretation  of  the  several  clauses  of  this  section;  the 
consequence  of  which,  however,  is  that  equal  ser 
vices  are  unequally  recompensed. 

This  chiefly  arises  from  that  clause  which  allows  a 
fee  of  sixty  cents. 

"  For  every  entry  of  inroad  cargo,  directed  to  be 
made  in  conformity  with  this  act,  and  for  receiving 
of,  and  qualifying  to,  every  manifest  of  vessels,  li 
censed  to  trade  as  aforesaid." 

The  entry  and  the  receiving  and  qualifying  to  a 
manifest  being  joined  together  by  the  word  and,  are 
understood  as  one  service,  to  which  a  fee  of  sixty 
cents  is  attached;  so  that,  when  only  either  of  the 
two  things  is  performed,  and  not  the  other,  no  fee  is 
taken. 

Hence  there  is  no  allowance  for  swearing  the  mas 
ter  to  his  manifest,  and  granting  a  certificate  of  its 
having  been  done  according  to  the  twenty-fifth  and 
twenty-sixth  sections  of  this  act,  because  it  is  not 
accompanied  in  either  case  with  an  inward  entry. 
Twenty  cents  for  the  permit  to  proceed  to  the  place 
of  destination  is  the  only  fee  understood  to  be  de- 
mandable  for  the  services  specified  in  these  sections. 

The  sixty  cents  are  deemed  applicable  only  to  the 
services  enjoined  by  the  twenty-seventh  section. 

A  revision  of  this  section  will  upon  accurate  ex- 


Finance  325 

animation  be  found  eligible  for  other  reasons,  which 
for  the  sake  of  brevity  are  omitted. 

The  foregoing  are  the  principal  remarks  which 
occur  on  the  provisions  of  the  several  acts,  on  which 
the  Secretary  has  been  directed  to  report.  These 
acts  have  fulfilled  their  objects  in  all  respects  as 
well  as  could  reasonably  have  been  expected  from 
the  first  essay  on  so  difficult  a  subject.  It  was  fore 
seen  that  experience  would  suggest  the  propriety  of 
corrections  in  the  system,  and  it  is  equally  to  be 
inferred  that  further  experiment  will  manifest  the 
expediency  of  further  correction.  The  work  must 
be  progressive,  since  it  can  only  be  by  successive 
improvements  that  it  can  be  brought  to  the  degree 
of  perfection  of  which  it  is  susceptible. 

As  connected  with  the  difficulties  that  have  oc 
curred  in  the  execution  of  the  laws,  which  is  the  sub 
ject  of  this  report,  the  Secretary  begs  leave,  in  the 
last  place,  to  mention  the  want  of  an  officer  in  each 
State,  or  other  considerable  subdivision  of  the 
United  States,  having  the  general  superintendence 
of  all  the  officers  of  the  revenue  within  such  State  or 
subdivision. 

Among  the  inconveniences  attending  it,  is  a  great 
difficulty  in  drawing  from  the  more  remote  ports  the 
moneys  which  are  there  collected.  As  the  course  of 
business  creates  little  or  no  demand  at  the  seat  of 
Government,  or  in  its  vicinity,  for  drafts  upon  such 
places,  negotiations  in  this  way  are  either  very 
dilatory  or  impracticable;  neither  does  the  circula 
tion  of  bank  paper,  from  the  same  cause,  extend  to 
them. 


326  Alexander  Hamilton 

This  embarrassment  would  be  remedied  by  having 
one  person  in  each  State,  or  in  a  district  of  the 
United  States  of  convenient  extent,  charged  with  the 
receipt  of  all  the  moneys  arising  within  it,  and 
placed  in  point  of  residence  where  there  was  the 
greatest  intercourse  with  the  seat  of  Government. 
This  would  greatly  facilitate  negotiations  between 
the  treasury  and  distant  parts  of  the  Union,  and 
would  contribute  to  lessening  the  necessity  for  the 
transportation  of  specie. 

But  there  are  other  reasons  of  perhaps  still 
greater  weight  for  the  measure.  It  is,  in  the  opinion 
of  the  Secretary,  essential  to  a  due  supervision  of 
the  conduct  of  the  particular  officers  engaged  in  the 
collection  of  the  revenues,  and  to  the  purposes  of 
exact  and  impartial  information,  as  to  the  operation 
of  the  laws  which  relate  to  them.  It  is  impossible 
that  the  first  end  can  be  answered  by  any  attention 
or  vigilance  of  an  individual,  or  individuals,  at  the 
head  of  the  treasury.  Distance  and  the  multiplicity 
of  avocations  are  conclusive  bars.  And,  however  it 
may  appear  at  first  sight,  that  the  second  end  may 
be  attainable  from  the  communications  of  those  par 
ticular  officers,  yet,  when  it  is  considered  how  apt 
their  representations  will  be  to  receive  a  tint  from 
the  personal  interests  of  the  individuals,  and  the 
local  interests  of  districts,  it  must  be  perceived  that 
there  cannot  always  be  sufficient  reliance  upon  them, 
and  that  variances  between  them  will  not  unfre- 
quently  serve  rather  to  distract  than  to  inform  the 
judgment.  Greater  impartiality  and,  of  course,  bet 
ter  information  may  be  expected  from  an  officer  who, 


Finance  327 

standing  in  the  same  relation  to  a  larger  district, 
composed  of  several  smaller  districts,  will  be  more 
likely  to  be  free  from  the  influence  either  of  personal 
interests  or  local  predilections,  in  reference  to  the 
parts. 

The  Secretary  begs  leave,  with  the  utmost  defer 
ence,  to  say  that  he  considers  an  arrangement  of  this 
kind  as  of  real  importance  to  the  public  service  and 
to  the  efficacious  discharge  of  the  trust  reposed  in  him. 

All  which  is  humbly  submitted. 

ALEXANDER  HAMILTON, 

Secretary  of  the  Treasury. 


ARREARS    OF    PAY  J 

Hamilton  to  Washington 
(Cabinet  Paper). 
TREASURY  DEPARTMENT,  May  28,  1790. 

The  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  conceives  it  to 
be  his  duty  most  respectfully  to  represent  to  the 

1  A  petition  signed  by  officers  and  soldiers  of  the  Virginia  and  North 
Carolina  lines  had  been  presented  to  Congress  asking  for  payment  of 
arrears  due  them,  but  which  they  had  assigned.  Joint  resolutions 
were  thereupon  passed  by  Congress  ordering  the  Secretary  of  the 
Treasury  to  pay  these  arrears,  and  that  where  payment  had  not  been 
made  to  the  original  claimants  it  should  now  be  made  to  them.  Hamil 
ton,  in  this  able  report,  advised  the  President  to  veto  these  resolutions 
on  the  ground  that  they  violated  the  rights  of  the  assignees,  and 
thereby  impaired  the  obligation  of  contract.  Jefferson  gave  an  oppo 
site  opinion,  resting  it  on  the  common  law  doctrine  that  the  convey 
ance  of  a  debt  not  in  possession  was  void,  a  bill  of  exchange  and  notes 
and  bonds  being  the  only  exceptions.  This  doctrine  had  never  been 
adopted  in  equity,  but,  nevertheless,  Jefferson  urged  Washington  to 
approve  the  measure  on  this  narrow  theory,  and  the  President  accepted 
his  view  and  decided  against  Hamilton. 


328  Alexander  Hamilton 

President  of  the  United  States  that  there  are  in  his 
judgment  objections  of  a  very  serious  and  weighty 
nature  to  the  resolutions  of  the  two  Houses  of  Con 
gress  of  the  twenty-first  instant,  concerning  certain 
arrears  of  pay,  due  to  the  officers  and  soldiers  of  the 
lines  of  Virginia  and  North  Carolina. 

The  third  of  these  resolutions  directs  that  in  cases 
where  payment  has  not  been  made  to  the  original 
claimant  in  person,  or  to  his  representative,  it  shall 
be  made  to  the  original  claimant,  or  to  such  person 
or  persons  only  as  shall  produce  a  power  of  attorney 
duly  attested  by  two  justices  of  the  peace  of  the 
county  in  which  such  person  or  persons  reside,  au 
thorizing  him  or  them  to  receive  a  certain  specified 
sum. 

By  the  laws  of  most  if  not  all  the  States,  claims  of 
this  kind  are  in  their  nature  assignable  for  a  valuable 
consideration;  and  the  assignor  may  constitute  the 
assignee  his  attorney  or  agent  to  receive  the  amount. 
The  import  of  every  such  assignment  is  a  contract, 
express  or  implied,  on  the  part  of  the  assignor,  that 
the  assignee  shall  receive  the  sum  assigned  to  his 
own  use.  In  making  it  no  precise  form  is  necessary, 
but  any  instrument  competent  to  conveying  with 
clearness  and  precision  the  sense  of  the  parties, 
suffices;  there  is  no  need  of  the  co-operation  of  any 
justice  of  the  peace,  or  other  magistrate  whatever. 

The  practice  of  the  Treasury  and  of  the  public 
officers  in  other  departments,  in  the  adjustment  and 
satisfaction  of  claims  upon  the  United  States,  has 
uniformly  corresponded  with  the  rules  of  that  law. 

A  regulation,    therefore,    having   a   retrospective 


Finance  329 

operation,  and  prescribing  with  regard  to  past  trans 
actions  new  and  unknown  requisites,  by  which  the 
admission  of  claims  is  to  be  guided,  is  an  infraction 
of  the  rights  of  individuals,  acquired  under  pre 
existing  laws,  and  a  contravention  of  the  public 
faith,  pledged  by  the  course  of  public  proceedings. 
It  has  consequently  a  tendency  not  less  unfriendly 
to  public  credit  than  to  the  security  of  property. 

Such  is  the  regulation  contained  in  the  resolution 
above  referred  to.  It  defeats  all  previous  assign 
ments  not  accompanied  with  a  power  of  attorney  at 
tested  by  two  justices  of  the  peace  of  the  county  where 
the  assignor  resides;  a  formality  which,  for  obvious 
reasons,  cannot  be  presumed  to  have  attended  any 
of  them,  and  which  does  not  appear  to  have  been 
observed  with  respect  to  those  upon  which  applica 
tion  for  payment  has  hitherto  been  made. 

It  is  to  be  remarked  that  the  assignee  has  no 
method  of  compelling  the  assignor  to  perfect  the 
transfer  by  a  new  instrument  in  conformity  to  the 
rule  prescribed ;  if  even  the  existence  of  such  a  power, 
the  execution  of  which  would  involve  a  legal  con 
troversy,  could  be  a  satisfactory  cause  for  altering 
by  a  new  law  that  state  of  things  which  antecedent 
law  and  usage  had  established  between  the  parties. 

It  is,  perhaps  too,  questionable  whether  an  as 
signee,  however  equitable  his  pretensions  were, 
could,  under  the  operation  of  the  provision  which 
has  been  recited,  have  any  remedy  whatever  for  the 
recovery  of  the  money  or  value  which  he  may  have 
paid  to  the  assignor. 

It  is  not  certain  that  a  legislative  act  decreeing 


330  Alexander  Hamilton 

payment  to  a  different  person,  would  not  be  a  legal 
bar;  but  if  the  existence  of  such  a  remedy  were  cer 
tain,  it  would  be  but  a  very  inconclusive  considera 
tion.  The  assignment  may  have  been  a  security  for 
a  precarious  or  desperate  debt,  which  security  will 
be  wrested  from  the  assignee ;  or  it  may  have  been  a 
composition  between  an  insolvent  debtor  and  his 
creditor,  and  the  only  resource  of  the  latter;  or  the 
assignor  may  be  absent  and  incapable  either  of 
benefiting  by  the  provision,  or  of  being  called  to  an 
account.  And  in  every  case  the  assignee  would  be 
left  to  the  casualty  of  the  ability  of  the  assignor  to 
repay;  to  the  perplexity,  trouble,  and  expense  of  a 
suit  at  law.  In  respect  to  the  soldiers,  the  presump 
tion  would  be,  in  the  greater  number  of  cases,  that 
the  pursuit  of  redress  would  be  worse  than  acquies 
cence  in  the  loss.  To  vary  the  risks  of  parties,  to 
supersede  the  contracts  between  them,  to  turn  over 
a  creditor  without  his  consent  from  one  debtor  to 
another,  to  take  away  a  right  to  a  specific  thing, 
leaving  only  the  chance  of  a  remedy  for  retribution, 
are  not  less  positive  violations  of  property  than  a 
direct  confiscation. 

It  appears  from  the  debates  in  the  House  of  Rep 
resentatives,  and  it  may  be  inferred  from  the  nature 
of  the  proceeding,  that  a  suggestion  of  fraud  has  been 
the  occasion  of  it.  Fraud  is  certainly  a  good  objec 
tion  to  any  contract,  and  where  it  is  properly  ascer 
tained  invalidates  it.  But  the  power  of  ascertaining 
it  is  the  peculiar  province  of  the  Judiciary  Depart 
ment.  The  principles  of  good  government  conspire 
with  those  of  justice  to  place  it  there.  T  is  there 


Finance  331 

only  that  such  an  investigation  of  the  fact  can  be  had 
as  ought  to  precede  a  decision.  'T  is  there  only  the 
parties  can  be  heard,  and  evidence  on  both  sides 
produced;  without  which  surmise  must  be  substi 
tuted  to  proof,  and  conjecture  to  fact. 

This,  then,  is  the  dilemma  incident  to  legislative 
interference.  Either  the  Legislature  must  erect  it 
self  into  a  court  of  justice  and  determine  each  case 
upon  its  own  merits,  after  a  full  hearing  of  the  alle 
gations  and  proofs  of  the  parties ;  or  it  must  proceed 
upon  vague  suggestions,  loose  reports,  or  at  best 
upon  partial  and  problematical  testimony,  to  con 
demn,  in  the  gross  and  in  the  dark,  the  fairest  and 
most  unexceptionable  claims,  as  well  as  those  which 
may  happen  to  be  fraudulent  and  exceptionable. 
The  first  would  be  an  usurpation  of  the  judiciary 
authority,  the  last  is  at  variance  with  the  rules  of 
property,  the  dictates  of  equity,  and  the  maxims  of 
good  government. 

All  admit  the  truth  of  these  positions  as  general 
rules.  But,  when  a  departure  from  it  is  advocated 
for  any  particular  purpose,  it  is  usually  alleged  that 
there  are  exceptions  to  it,  that  there  are  certain  ex 
traordinary  cases  in  which  the  public  good  demands 
and  justifies  an  extraordinary  interposition  of  the 
Legislature. 

This  doctrine  in  relation  to  extraordinary  cases 
is  not  to  be  denied;  but  it  is  highly  important  that 
the  nature  of  those  cases  should  be  carefully  dis 
tinguished. 

It  is  evident  that  every  such  interposition  deviat 
ing  from  the  usual  course  of  law  and  justice,  and 


332  Alexander  Hamilton 

infringing  the  established  rules  of  property,  which 
ought  as  far  as  possible  to  be  held  sacred  and  in 
violable,  is  an  overleaping  of  the  ordinary  and  regu 
lar  bounds  of  legislative  discretion;  and  is  in  the 
nature  of  a  resort  to  first  principles.  Nothing,  there 
fore,  but  some  urgent  public  necessity,  some  im 
pending  national  calamity,  something  that  threatens 
direct  and  general  mischief  to  society,  for  which 
there  is  no  adequate  redress  in  the  established  course 
of  things,  can,  it  is  presumed,  be  a  sufficient  cause 
for  the  employment  of  so  extraordinary  a  remedy. 
An  accommodation  to  the  interests  of  a  small  part 
of  the  community,  in  a  case  of  inconsiderable  mag 
nitude,  on  a  national  scale,  cannot,  in  the  judgment 
of  the  Secretary,  be  entitled  to  that  character. 

If  partial  inconveniences  and  hardships  occasion 
legislative  interferences  in  private  contracts,  the  in 
tercourses  of  business  become  uncertain,  the  security 
of  property  is  lessened,  the  confidence  in  government 
destroyed  or  weakened. 

The  Constitution  of  the  United  States  interdicts 
the  States  individually  from  passing  any  law  im 
pairing  the  obligation  of  contracts.  This,  to  the 
more  enlightened  part  of  the  community,  was  not 
one  of  the  least  recommendations  of  that  Constitu 
tion.  The  too  frequent  intermeddlings  of  the  State 
Legislatures,  in  relation  to  private  contracts,  were 
extensively  felt,  and  seriously  lamented;  and  a  con 
stitution  which  promises  a  preventive,  was,  by  those 
who  felt  and  thought  in  that  manner,  eagerly  em 
braced.  Precedents  of  similar  interferences  by  the 
Legislature  of  the  United  States  cannot  fail  to  alarm 


Finance  333 

the  same  class  of  persons,  and  at  the  same  time  to 
diminish  the  respect  of  the  State  Legislatures -for  the 
interdiction  alluded  to.  The  example  of  the  Na 
tional  Government  in  a  matter  of  this  kind  may  be 
expected  to  have  a  far  more  powerful  influence  than 
the  precepts  of  the  Constitution. 

The  present  case  is  that  of  a  particular  class  of 
men,  highly  meritorious  indeed,  but  inconsiderable 
in  point  of  numbers,  and  the  whole  of  the  property 
in  question  less  than  fifty  thousand  dollars,  which, 
when  distributed  among  those  who  are  principally 
to  be  benefited  by  the  regulation,  does  not  exceed 
twenty-five  dollars  per  man.  The  relief  of  the  indi 
viduals  who  may  have  been  subjects  of  imposition, 
in  so  limited  a  case,  seems  a  very  inadequate  cause 
for  a  measure  which  breaks  in  upon  those  great  prin 
ciples  that  constitute  the  foundations  of  property. 

The  eligibility  of  the  measure  is  more  doubtful,  as 
the  courts  of  justice  are  competent  to  the  relief 
which  it  is  the  object  of  the  resolution  to  give,  as  far 
as  the  fact  of  fraud  or  imposition  or  undue  advantage 
can  be  substantiated.  It  is  true  that  many  of  the  in 
dividuals  would  probably  not  be  in  a  condition  to 
seek  that  relief  from  their  own  resources;  but  the 
aid  of  government  may  in  this  respect  be  afforded, 
in  a  way  which  will  be  consistent  with  the  estab 
lished  order  of  things.  The  Secretary,  from  the  in 
formation  communicated  to  him,  believing  it  to  be 
probable  that  undue  advantages  had  been  taken, 
had  conceived  a  plan  for  the  purpose,  of  the  following 
kind :  That  measures  should  be  adopted  for  procur 
ing  the  appointment  of  an  agent  or  attorney,  by  the 


334  Alexander  Hamilton 

original  claimants,  or  if  deceased,  by  their  legal  rep 
resentatives  ;  that  payment  of  the  money  should  be 
deferred  until  this  had  been  effected;  that  the 
amount  of  the  sums  due  should  then  be  placed  in  the 
hands  of  the  proper  officer  for  the  purpose  of  pay 
ment;  that  a  demand  should  be  made  upon  him,  on 
behalf  of  the  original  claimants,  by  their  agent,  and 
as  a  like  demand  would  of  course  be  made  by  the  as 
signees,  that  the  parties  should  be  informed  that  a 
legal  adjudication  was  necessary  to  ascertain  the 
validity  of  their  respective  pretensions ;  and  that  in 
this  state  of  things  the  Attorney-General  should  be 
directed  either  to  prosecute  or  defend  for  the  ori 
ginal  claimants,  as  should  appear  to  him  most  likely 
to  insure  justice.  A  step  of  this  kind  appeared  to 
the  Secretary  to  be  warranted  and  dictated,  as  well 
by  a  due  regard  to  the  defenceless  situation  of  the 
parties  who  may  have  been  prejudiced,  as  by  con 
siderations  resulting  from  the  propriety  of  discourag 
ing  similar  practices. 

It  is  with  reluctance  and  pain  the  Secretary  is  in 
duced  to  make  this  representation  to  the  President. 
The  respect  which  he  entertains  for  the  decisions  of 
the  two  Houses  of  Congress ;  the  respect  which  is  due 
to  those  movements  of  humanity  toward  the  sup 
posed  sufferers,  and  of  indignation  against  those  who 
are  presumed  to  have  taken  an  undue  advantage; 
an  unwillingness  to  present  before  the  mind  of  the 
President,  especially  at  the  present  juncture,  con 
siderations  which  may  occasion  perplexity  or  anxiety, 
concur  in  rendering  the  task  peculiarly  unwelcome. 
Yet  the  principles  which  appear  to  the  Secretary  to 


Finance  335 

have  been  invaded,  in  this  instance,  are,  in  his  esti 
mation,  of  such  fundamental  consequence  to  the 
stability,  character,  and  success  of  the  government, 
and  at  the  same  time  so  immediately  interesting  to 
the  department  intrusted  to  his  care,  that  he  feels 
himself  irresistibly  impelled  by  a  sense  of  duty,  as 
well  to  the  Chief  Magistrate  as  to  the  community,  to 
make  a  full  communication  of  his  impressions  and 
reflections. 

He  is  sensible  that  an  inflexible  adherence  to  the 
principles  contended  for  must  often  have  an  air  of 
rigor,  and  will  sometimes  be  productive. of  particular 
inconveniences.  The  general  rules  of  property,  and 
all  those  general  rules  which  form  the  links  of  society, 
frequently  involve,  in  their  ordinary  operation,  par 
ticular  hardships  and  injuries;  yet  the  public  order 
and  the  general  happiness  require  a  steady  conform 
ity  to  them.  It  is  perhaps  always  better  that 
partial  evils  should  be  submitted  to,  than  that  prin 
ciples  should  be  violated.  In  the  infancy  of  our 
present  government,  peculiar  strictness  and  circum 
spection  are  called  for,  by  the  too  numerous  instances 
of  relaxations,  which  in  other  quarters,  and  on  other 
occasions,  have  discredited  our  public  measures. 

The  Secretary  is  not  unaware  of  the  delicacy  of  an 
opposition  to  the  resolutions  in  question,  by  the 
President,  should  his  view  of  the  subject  coincide 
with  that  of  the  Secretary;  yet  he  begs  leave  on  this 
point  to  remark  that  such  an  opposition  in  a  case  in 
which  a  small  part  of  the  community  only  is  directly 
concerned  would  be  less  likely  to  have  disagreeable 
consequences  than  in  one  which  should  affect  a  very 


336  Alexander  Hamilton 

considerable  portion  of  it ;  and  the  prevention  of  an 
ill  precedent,  if  it  be  truly  one,  may  prove  a  decisive 
obstacle  to  other  cases  of  greater  extent  and  magni 
tude,  and  of  a  more  critical  tendency.  If  the  ob 
jections  are  as  solid  as  they  appear  to  the  Secretary 
to  be,  he  trusts  they  cannot  fail,  with  the  sanction  of 
the  President,  to  engage  the  approbation,  not  only  of 
the  generality  of  considerate  men,  but  of  the  com 
munity  at  large.  And  if  momentary  dissatisfaction 
should  happen  to  exist  in  particular  parts  of  the 
Union,  it  is  to  be  hoped  it  will  be  speedily  removed 
by  the  measures  which,  under  the  direction  of  the 
President,  may  be  pursued  for  obtaining  the  same 
end  in  an  unexceptionable  mode;  for  the  success  of 
which  the  Secretary  will  not  fail  to  exert  his  most 
zealous  endeavors. 

It  is  proper  that  the  President  should  be  informed 
that  if  objections  should  be  made  by  him,  they  will 
in  all  probability  be  effectual,  as  the  resolutions 
passed  in  the  Senate  with  no  greater  majority  than 
twelve  to  ten. 

The  Secretary  feels  an  unreserved  confidence  in 
the  justice  and  magnanimity  of  the  President ;  that, 
whatever  may  be  his  view  of  the  subject,  he  will  at 
least  impute  the  present  representation  to  an  earnest 
and  anxious  conviction  in  the  mind  of  the  Secretary 
of  the  truth  and  importance  of  the  principles  which 
he  supports,  and  of  the  inauspicious  tendency  of  the 
measure  to  which  he  objects,  co-operating  with  a 
pure  and  ardent  zeal  for  the  public  good,  and  for  the 
honor  and  prosperity  of  the  administration  of  the 
Chief  Magistrate. 


Public  Credit  337 


PUBLIC   CREDIT 

Communicated  to  the  House  of  Representatives,  December  13,  1790. 
TREASURY  DEPARTMENT,  December  13,  1790. 

In  obedience  to  the  order  of  the  House  of  Repre 
sentatives,  of  the  ninth  day  of  August  last,  requiring 
the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  to  prepare  and  report 
on  this  day  such  further  provision  as  may,  in  his 
opinion,  be  necessary  for  establishing  the  public 
credit,  the  said  Secretary  respectfully  reports: 

That  the  object  which  appears  to  be  most  imme 
diately  essential  to  the  further  support  of  public 
credit,  in  pursuance  of  the  plan  adopted  during 
the  last  session  of  Congress,  is  the  establishment  of 
proper  and  sufficient  funds  for  paying  the  interest 
which  will  begin  to  accrue,  after  the  year  one  thou 
sand  seven  hundred  and  ninety-one,  on  the  amount  of 
the  debts  of  the  several  States  assumed  by  the  United 
States,  having  regard  at  the  same  time  to  the  probable 
or  estimated  deficiency  in  those  already  established, 
as  they  respect  the  original  debt  of  the  Union. 

In  order  to  this,  it  is  necessary,  in  the  first  place,  to 
take  a  view  of  the  sums  requisite  for  those  purposes. 

The  amount  of  the  State  debts  which  has 

been  assumed  is  ....  $21,500,000  oo 
The  sum  of  annual  interest  upon  that 

amount,    which,    according   to    the 

terms  of  the  proposed  loan,  will  begin 

to  accrue  after  the  year  one  thousand 

seven  hundred  and  ninety-one,  is  .  7^8,333  33 
The  estimated  deficiency  in  the  funds 

already  established,  as  they  respect 

the    original    debt    of    the    United 

States,  is  .  .  38,291  40 

Making,  together  .  .  $826,624  73 


VOL.  II. — 2i. 


338  Alexander  Hamilton 

For  procuring  which  sum,  the  reiterated  reflections 
of  the  Secretary  have  suggested  nothing  so  eligible 
and  unexceptionable,  in  his  judgment,  as  a  further 
duty  on  foreign  distilled  spirits,  and  a  duty  on  spirits 
distilled  within  the  United  States,  to  be  collected  in 
the  mode  delineated  in  the  plan  of  a  bill,  which  forms 
part  of  his  report  to  the  House  of  Representatives, 
of  the  ninth  day  of  January  last. 

Under  this  impression  he  begs  leave,  with  all 
deference,  to  propose  to  the  consideration  of  the 
House — 

That  the  following  additions  be  made  to  the  du 
ties  on  distilled  spirits  imported  from  foreign  coun 
tries,  which  are  specified  in  the  act  making  further 
provision  for  the  payment  of  the  debts  of  the  United 
States,  namely: 

On  those  of  the  first  class  of  proof,  therein  men 
tioned,  per  gallon,  eight  cents; 

On  those  of  the  second  class,  per  gallon,  eight  and 
a  half  cents ; 

On  those  of  the  third  class,  per  gallon,  nine  cents; 

On  those  of  the  fourth  class,  per  gallon,  ten  cents; 

On  those  of  the  fifth  class,  per  gallon,  ten  cents; 

On  those  of  the  sixth  class,  per  gallon,  fifteen 
cents. 

And  that  the  following  duties  be  laid  on  spirits 
distilled  within  the  United  States,  namely: 

If  from  molasses,  sugar,  or  other  foreign  materials, 
and  of  the  first  class  of  proof,  per  gallon,  eleven 
cents ; 

Of  the  said  second  class  of  proof,  per  gallon,  twelve 
cents; 


Public  Credit  339 

Of  the  said  third  class  of  proof,  per  gallon,  thirteen 
cents; 

Of  the  said  fourth  class  of  proof,  per  gallon,  fifteen 
cents ; 

Of  the  said  fifth  class  of  proof,  per  gallon,  twenty 
cents ; 

Of  the  said  sixth  class  of  proof,  per  gallon,  thirty 
cents. 

If  from  materials  of  the  growth  or  production  of 
the  United  States  distilled  within  any  city,  town,  or 
village,  and 

Of  the  said  first  class  of  proof,  per  gallon,  nine 
cents ; 

Of  the  said  second  class  of  proof,  per  gallon,  ten 
cents ; 

Of  the  said  third  class  of  proof,  per  gallon,  eleven 
cents ; 

Of  the  said  fourth  class  of  proof,  per  gallon,  thir 
teen  cents; 

Of  the  said  fifth  class  of  proof,  per  gallon,  seven 
teen  cents; 

Of  the  said  sixth  class  of  proof,  per  gallon,  twenty- 
five  cents. 

And  upon  each  still  employed  in  distilling  spirits 
from  the  like  materials,  in  any  other  place  than  a 
city,  town,  or  village,  in  lieu  of  the  rates  above  men 
tioned,  the  yearly  sum  of  sixty  cents  for  every  gallon, 
English  wine  measure,  of  the  capacity  of  such  still, 
including  its  head:  exempting,  nevertheless,  all  such 
stills,  within  a  certain  defined  dimension,  as  are  used 
essentially  for  the  domestic  purposes  of  their  re 
spective  proprietors. 


34°  Alexander  Hamilton 

The  product  of  these  several  duties  (which  corre 
spond  in  their  rates  with  those  proposed  in  the  report 
above  referred  to,  of  the  ninth  of  January  last)  may, 
upon  as  good  grounds  as  the  nature  of  the  case  will 
admit,  prior  to  an  experiment,  be  computed  at  eight 
hundred  and  seventy-seven  thousand  and  five  hun 
dred  dollars,  the  particulars  of  which  computation 
are  contained  in  the  statement  which  accompanies 
this  report. 

This  computed  product  exceeds  the  sum  which 
has  been  stated  as  necessary  to  be  provided,  by  fifty 
thousand  eight  hundred  and  seventy-five  dollars  and 
twenty-seven  cents ;  an  excess  which,  if  it  should  be 
realized  by  the  actual  product,  may  be  beneficially 
applied  toward  increasing  the  sinking  fund. 

The  Secretary  has  been  encouraged  to  renew  the 
proposition  of  these  duties,  in  the  same  form  in 
which  they  were  before  submitted,  from  a  belief, 
founded  on  circumstances  which  appeared  in  the 
different  discussions  of  the  subject,  that  collateral 
considerations,  which  were  afterwards  obviated, 
rather  than  objections  to  the  measure  itself,  pre 
vented  its  adoption,  during  the  last  session;  from 
the  impracticability,  which  he  conceives  to  exist,  of 
devising  any  substitute  equally  conducive  to  the 
ease  and  interest  of  the  community;  and  from  an 
opinion  that  the  extension  of  the  plan  of  collection 
which  it  contemplates,  to  the  duties  already  im 
posed  on  wines  and  distilled  spirits,  is  necessary  to 
a  well-grounded  reliance  on  their  efficacy  and 
productiveness. 

The  expediency  of  improving  the  resource  of  dis- 


Public  Credit  341 

tilled  spirits,  as  an  article  of  revenue,  to  the  greatest 
practicable  extent,  has  been  noticed  upon  another 
occasion.  Various  considerations  might  be  added  to 
those  then  adduced,  to  evince  it,  but  they  are  too 
obvious  to  justify  the  detail.  There  is  scarcely  an 
attitude  in  which  the  object  can  present  itself,  which 
does  not  invite,  by  all  the  inducements  of  sound  pol 
icy  and  public  good,  to  take  a  strong  and  effectual 
hold  of  it. 

The  manner  of  doing  it,  or,  in  other  words,  the 
mode  of  collection,  appears  to  be  the  only  point 
about  which  a  difficulty  or  question  can  arise.  If 
that  suggested  be  liable  to  just  objections,  the  united 
information  and  wisdom  of  the  legislative  body  in 
sure  the  substitution  of  a  more  perfect  plan. 

The  Secretary,  however,  begs  leave  to  remark, 
that  there  appear  to  him  two  leading  principles,  one 
or  the  other  of  which  must  necessarily  characterize 
whatever  plan  may  be  adopted.  One  of  them  makes 
the  security  of  the  revenue  to  depend  chiefly  on  the 
vigilance  of  the  public  officers  ;  the  other  rests  it  es 
sentially  on  the  integrity  of  the  individuals  interested 
to  avoid  the  payment  of  it. 

The  first  is  the  basis  of  the  plan  submitted  by  the 
Secretary;  the  last  has  pervaded  most  if  not  all  the 
systems  which  have  hitherto  been  practised  upon  in 
different  parts  of  the  United  States.  The  oaths  of 
the  dealers  have  been  almost  the  only  security  for 
their  compliance  with  the  laws. 

It  cannot  be  too  much  lamented  that  these  have 
been  found  an  inadequate  dependence.  But  expe 
rience  has,  on  every  trial,  manifested  them  to  be 


342  Alexander  Hamilton 

such.  Taxes  or  duties  relying  for  their  collection  on 
that  security  wholly,  or  almost  wholly,  are  uniformly 
unproductive.  And  they  cannot  fail  to  be  unequal, 
as  long  as  men  continue  to  be  discriminated  by  un 
equal  portions  of  rectitude.  The  most  conscien 
tious  will  pay  most;  the  least  conscientious  least. 

The  impulse  of  interest,  always  sufficiently  strong, 
acts  with  peculiar  force  in  matters  of  this  kind,  in 
respect  to  which  a  loose  mode  of  thinking  is  too  apt 
to  prevail.  The  want  of  a  habit  of  appreciating 
properly  the  nature  of  the  public  rights  renders  that 
impulse  in  such  cases  too  frequently  an  overmatch 
for  the  sense  of  obligation,  and  the  evasions  which 
are  perceived,  or  suspected  to  be  practised  by  some, 
prompt  others  to  imitation,  by  the  powerful  motive 
of  self-defence.  They  infer  that  they  must  follow 
the  example,  or  be  unable  to  maintain  an  advan 
tageous  competition  in  the  business — an  alternative 
very  perplexing  to  all  but  men  of  exact  probity,  who 
are  thereby  rendered,  in  a  great  measure,  victims  to 
a  principle  of  legislation  which  does  not  sufficiently 
accord  with  the  bias  of  human  nature.  And  thus 
the  laws  become  sources  of  discouragement  and  loss 
to  honest  industry,  and  of  profit  and  advantage  to 
perjury  and  fraud.  It  is  a  truth  that  cannot  be  kept 
too  constantly  in  view,  that  all  revenue  laws  which 
are  so  constructed  as  to  involve  a  lax  and  defective 
execution,  are  instruments  of  oppression  to  the  most 
meritorious  part  of  those  on  whom  they  imme 
diately  operate,  and  of  additional  burthens  on  the 
community  at  large. 

The  last  effect  is  produced  in  two  ways.      The 


Public  Credit  343 

deficiencies  in  the  funds  (which,  in  the  main,  afford 
only  partial  exemptions)  must  be  supplied  from 
other  taxes,  and  the  charges  of  collection,  which,  in 
most  cases,  are  nearly  the  same,  whether  a  tax  or 
duty  yield  much  or  little,  occasion  an  accumulation 
of  the  ultimate  expense  of  furnishing  a  given  sum  to 
the  treasury. 

Another  and  a  very  serious  evil,  chargeable  on  the 
system  opposite  to  that  proposed,  is  that  it  leads  to 
frequent  and  familiar  violations  of  oaths,  which  by 
loosening  one  of  the  strongest  bands  of  society,  and 
weakening  one  of  the  principal  securities  to  life  and 
property,  offends,  not  less  against  the  maxims  of 
good  government  and  sound  policy,  than  against 
those  of  religion  and  morality. 

It  may  not  be  improper  further  to  remark,  that 
the  two  great  objections  to  the  class  of  duties  de 
nominated  excises  are  inapplicable  to  the  plan  sug 
gested.  These  objections  are:  first,  the  summary 
jurisdiction  confided  to  the  officers  of  excise,  in  dero 
gation  from  the  course  of  the  common  law  and  the 
right  of  trial  by  jury;  and,  secondly,  the  general 
power  vested  in  the  same  officers,  of  visiting  and 
searching,  indiscriminately,  the  houses,  stores,  and 
other  buildings  of  the  dealers  in  excised  articles. 
But,  by  the  plan  proposed,  the  officers  to  be  em 
ployed  are  to  be  clothed  with  no  such  summary  juris 
diction,  and  their  discretionary  power  of  visiting  and 
searching  is  to  be  restricted  to  those  places  which  the 
dealers  themselves  shall  designate  by  public  insignia 
or  marks  as  the  depositories  of  the  articles  on  which 
the  duties  are  to  be  laid.  Hence,  it  is  one  of  the 


344  Alexander  Hamilton 

recommendations  of  the  plan,  that  it  is  not  liable  to 
those  objections. 

Duties  of  the  kind  proposed  are  not  novel  in  the 
United  States,  as  has  been  intimated  in  another 
place.  They  have  existed,  to  a  considerable  extent, 
under  several  of  the  State  governments,  particularly 
in  Massachusetts,  Connecticut,  and  Pennsylvania. 
In  Connecticut,  a  State  exemplary  for  its  attachment 
to  popular  principles,  not  only  all  ardent  spirits,  but 
foreign  articles  of  consumption  generally,  have  been 
the  subjects  of  an  excise  or  inland  duty. 

If  the  supposition,  that  duties  of  this  kind  are  at 
tended  with  greater  expense  in  the  collection  than 
taxes  on  lands,  should  seem  an  argument  for  pre 
ferring  the  latter,  it  may  be  observed  that  the  fact 
ought  not  too  readily  to  be  taken  for  granted.  The 
state  of  things  in  England  is  sometimes  referred  to 
as  an  example  on  this  point,  but  there  the  smallness 
of  the  expense  in  the  collection  of  the  land-tax  is  to 
be  ascribed  to  the  peculiar  modification  of  it,  which 
proceeding  without  new  assessments  according  to 
a  fixed  standard  long  since  adjusted,  totally  dis 
regards  the  comparative  value  of  lands  and  the 
variations  in  their  value.  The  consequence  of  this  is 
an  inequality  so  palpable  and  extreme  as  would  be 
likely  to  be  ill  relished  by  the  landholders  of  the 
United  States.  If,  in  pursuit  of  greater  equality, 
accurate  periodical  valuations  or  assessments  are  to 
afford  a  rule,  it  may  well  be  doubted  whether  the 
expense  of  a  land-tax  will  not  always  exceed  that  of 
the  kind  of  duties  proposed.  The  ingenious,  but 
fallacious  hypothesis,  that  all  taxes  on  consumption 


Public  Credit  345 

fall  finally  with  accumulated  weight  on  land,  is  now 
too  generally  and  too  satisfactorily  exploded  to 
require  to  be  combated  here.  It  has  become  an 
acknowledged  truth  that,  in  the  operation  of  those 
taxes,  every  species  of  capital  and  industry  contri 
bute  their  proportion  to  the  revenue,  and  conse 
quently  that,  as  far  as  they  can  be  made  substitutes 
for  taxes  on  lands,  they  serve  to  exempt  them  from 
an  undue  share  of  the  public  burthen. 

Among  other  substantial  reasons  which  recom 
mend,  as  a  provision  for  the  public  debt,  duties  upon 
articles  of  consumption,  in  preference  to  taxes  on 
houses  and  lands,  is  this :  It  is  very  desirable,  if  prac 
ticable,  to  reserve  the  latter  fund  for  objects  and 
occasions  which  will  more  immediately  interest  the 
sensibility  of  the  whole  community,  and  more  di 
rectly  affect  the  public  safety.  It  will  be  a  consola 
tory  reflection,  that  so  capital  a  resource  remains 
untouched  by  that  provision,  which,  while  it  will  have 
a  very  material  influence  in  favor  of  public  credit, 
will  also  be  conducive  to  the  tranquillity  of  the  pub 
lic  mind,  in  respect  to  external  danger,  and  will 
really  operate  as  a  powerful  guarantee  of  peace.  In 
proportion  as  the  estimation  of  our  resources  is  ex 
alted  in  the  eyes  of  foreign  nations,  their  respect  for 
us  must  increase,  and  this  must  beget  a  proportion 
able  caution,  neither  to  insult  nor  injure  us  with 
levity;  while,  on  the  contrary,  the  appearance  of 
exhausted  resources  (which  would,  perhaps,  be  a 
consequence  of  mortgaging  the  revenue  to  be  derived 
from  land,  for  the  interest  of  the  public  debt)  might 
tend  to  invite  both  insult  and  injury,  by  inspiring  an 


34-6  Alexander  Hamilton 

opinion  that  our  efforts  to  resent  or  repel  them  were 
little  to  be  dreaded. 

It  may  not  be  unworthy  of  reflection  that,  while 
the  idea  of  residuary  resources,  in  so  striking  a  par 
ticular,  cannot  fail  to  have  many  beneficial  conse 
quences,  the  suspension  of  taxes  on  real  estate  can  as 
little  fail  to  be  pleasing  to  the  mass  of  the  commun 
ity;  and  it  may  reasonably  be  presumed  that  so 
provident  a  forbearance  on  the  part  of  the  Govern 
ment  will  insure  a  more  cheerful  acquiescence  on 
that  of  the  class  of  the  community  immediately  to 
be  affected,  whenever  experience  and  the  exigency 
of  conjunctures  shall  dictate  a  resort  to  that  species 
of  revenue. 

But,  in  order  to  be  at  liberty  to  pursue  this  salu 
tary  course,  it  is  indispensable  that  an  efficacious 
use  should  be  made  of  those  articles  of  consumption 
which  are  the  most  proper  and  most  productive,  to 
which  class  distilled  spirits  very  evidently  belong; 
and  a  prudent  energy  will  be  requisite,  as  well  in  re 
lation  to  the  mode  of  collection  as  to  the  quantum  of 
the  duty. 

It  need  scarcely  be  observed  that  the  duties  on  the 
great  mass  of  imported  articles  have  reached  a  point 
which  it  would  not  be  expedient  to  exceed.  There 
is  at  least  satisfactory  evidence  that  they  cannot  be 
extended  further  without  contravening  the  sense  of 
the  body  of  the  merchants ;  and,  though  it  is  not  to 
be  admitted,  as  a  general  rule,  that  this  circumstance 
ought  to  conclude  against  the  expediency  of  a  public 
measure,  yet,  when  due  regard  is  had  to  the  dispo 
sition  which  that  enlightened  class  of  our  citizens 


Public  Credit  347 

has  manifested  toward  the  National  Government,  to 
the  alacrity  with  which  they  have  hitherto  seconded 
its  operations,  to  the  accommodating  temper  with 
which  they  look  forward  to  those  additional  impo 
sitions  on  the  objects  of  trade,  which  are  to  com 
mence  with  the  ensuing  year,  and  to  the  greatness  of 
the  innovation,  which,  in  this  particular,  has  already 
taken  place  in  the  former  state  of  things,  there  will 
be  perceived  to  exist  the  most  solid  reasons  against 
lightly  passing  the  bounds  which  coincide  with  their 
impressions  of  what  is  reasonable  and  proper.  It 
would  be,  in  every  view,  inauspicious  to  give  occasion 
for  a  supposition  that  trade  alone  is  destined  to  feel 
the  immediate  weight  of  the  hands  of  Government 
in  every  new  emergency  of  the  treasury. 

However  true,  as  a  general  position,  that  the  con 
sumer  pays  the  duty,  yet,  it  will  not  follow  that 
trade  may  not  be  essentially  distressed  and  injured, 
by  carrying  duties  on  importations  to  a  height  which 
is  disproportionate  to  the  mercantile  capital  of  a 
country.  It  may  not  only  be  the  cause  of  diverting 
too  large  a  share  of  it  from  the  exigencies  of  business, 
but,  as  the  requisite  advances  to  satisfy  the  duties, 
will,  in  many,  if  not  in  most  cases,  precede  the  re 
ceipts  from  the  sale  of  the  articles  on  which  they  are 
laid,  the  consequence  will  often  be  sacrifices  which 
the  merchant  cannot  afford  to  make. 

The  inconveniences  of  exceeding  the  proper  limit 
in  this  respect,  which  will  be  felt  everywhere,  will 
fall  with  particular  severity  on  those  places  which 
have  not  the  advantage  of  public  banks,  and  which 
abound  least  in  pecuniary  resources.  Appearances 


348  Alexander  Hamilton 

do  not  justify  such  an  estimate  of  the  extent  of  the 
mercantile  capital  of  the  United  States  as  to  encour 
age  to  material  accumulations  on  the  already  con 
siderable  rates  of  the  duties  on  the  mass  of  foreign 
importation. 

Another  motive  for  caution  on  this  point  arises 
from  the  reflection  that  the  effect  of  an  important 
augmentation  made  by  a  law  of  the  last  session  is, 
hitherto,  a  mere  matter  of  speculative  calculation, 
and  has  not  yet  even  begun  to  be  tried. 

It  is  presumable,  too,  that  a  still  further  augmen 
tation  would  have  an  influence  the  reverse  of  favor 
able  to  the  public  credit.  The  operation  would  be 
apt  to  be  regarded  as  artificial,  as  destitute  of  solidity, 
as  presenting  a  numerical  increase,  but  involving  an 
actual  diminution  of  revenue.  The  distrust  of  the 
efficacy  of  the  present  provision  might  also  be  ac 
companied  with  a  doubt  of  a  better  substitute  here 
after.  The  inference  would  not  be  unnatural,  that 
a  defect  of  other  means,  or  an  inability  to  command 
them,  could  alone  have  given  birth  to  so  unpromising 
an  effort  to  draw  all  from  one  source. 

A  diversification  of  the  nature  of  the  funds  is  de 
sirable  on  other  accounts.  It  is  clear  that  less  de 
pendence  can  be  placed  on  one  species  of  funds,  and 
that,  too,  liable  to  the  vicissitude  of  the  continuance 
or  interruption  of  foreign  intercourse,  than  from  a 
variety  of  different  funds,  formed  by  the  union  of 
internal  with  external  objects. 

The  inference  from  these  various  and  important 
considerations  seems  to  be,  that  the  attempt  to  ex 
tract  wholly,  from  duties  on  imported  articles,  the 


Public  Credit  349 

sum  necessary  to  a  complete  provision  for  the  pub 
lic  debt  would  probably  be  both  deceptive  and  per 
nicious — incompatible  with  the  interests  not  less  of 
revenue  than  of  commerce;  that  resources  of  a  dif 
ferent  kind  must,  of  necessity,  be  explored;  and  that 
the  selection  of  the  most  fit  objects  is  the  only  thing 
which  ought  to  occupy  inquiry. 

Besides  the  establishment  of  supplementary  funds, 
it  is  requisite  to  the  support  of  the  public  credit  that 
those  established  should  stand  on  a  footing  which 
will  give  all  reasonable  assurance  of  their  effectual 
collection. 

Among  the  articles  enumerated  in  the  act  making 
further  provision  for  the  payment  of  the  debt  of  the 
United  States  there  are  two,  wines  and  teas,  in  regard 
to  which  some  other  regulations  than  have  yet  been 
adopted  seem  necessary  for  the  security  of  the  revenue 
and  desirable  for  the  accommodation  of  the  merchant. 

With  these  views  it  is  submitted  that  the  term  for 
the  payment  of  the  duties  on  wines  be  enlarged,  as  it 
respects  Madeira  wines,  to  eighteen  months;  and  as 
it  respects  other  wines,  to  nine  months;  and  that 
they  be  collected  on  a  plan  similar  to  that  proposed 
in  relation  to  imported  distilled  spirits. 

And  that  a  third  option  (two  being  allowed  by  the 
present  law)  be  given  to  the  importers  of  teas,  which 
shall  be,  to  give  bond,  without  security,  for  the 
amount  of  the  duty  in  each  case,  payable  in  two 
years,  upon  the  following  terms: 

The  teas  to  be  deposited,  at  the  expense  and  risk  of 
the  importer,  in  storehouses,  to  be  agreed  upon  be 
tween  him  and  the  proper  officer  of  the  revenue ;  each 


350  Alexander  Hamilton 

storehouse  having  two  locks,  the  key  of  one  of  which 
to  be  in  the  custody  of  the  importer  or  his  agent, 
and  the  key  of  the  other  of  which  to  be  in  the  custody 
of  an  officer  whose  duty  it  shall  be  made  to  attend, 
at  all  reasonable  times,  for  the  purpose  of  deliveries. 

These  deliveries,  whether  for  home  sale  or  for  expor 
tation  to  a  foreign  country,  to  be  warranted  by  per 
mits  from  the  chief  officer  of  inspection  of  the  place. 

If  for  home  sale,  the  permits  to  be  granted  after 
the  duties  shall  have  been  paid,  or  secured  to  be  paid. 

When  the  amount  of  the  duties  shall  not  exceed 
one  hundred  dollars,  four  months  to  be  allowed  for 
payment.  When  it  shall  exceed  one  hundred  dol 
lars,  and  not  exceed  five  hundred  dollars,  the  term 
of  payment  to  be  eight  months;  and  twelve  months, 
whenever  the  amount  shall  exceed  five  hundred  dol 
lars:  Provided,  that  the  credit  shall  in  no  case 
extend  beyond  the  period  of  two  years,  originally  al 
lowed  for  the  entire  sum.  If  the  duties  on  the  whole 
quantity  deposited  shall  not  have  been  paid,  or  se 
cured  to  be  paid,  before  the  expiration  of  that  time, 
it  shall  be  lawful  for  the  proper  officer  to  cause  a  sale 
to  be  made  of  so  much  as  shall  be  sufficient  to  dis 
charge  what  shall  remain  unsatisfied.  In  every  case, 
it  shall  be  at  the  option  of  the  party  applying  for  the 
permit,  either  to  pay  the  amount  of  duties  on  the 
quantity  to  be  delivered,  or  to  give  bond  for  it,  with 
one  or  more  sureties,  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  officer 
whose  province  it  shall  be  to  grant  the  permits. 

If  the  deliveries  are  to  be  made  for  exportation,  the 
permits  to  be  granted  upon  bond  being  entered  into, 
to  secure  and  ascertain  the  exportation.  This  may 


Public  Credit  351 

require  some  alterations  of  form,  in  the  manner 
of  proceeding,  relatively  to  the  exportation  of  this 
article. 

All  teas  to  be  landed  under  the  care  of  the  in 
spectors  of  the  revenue ;  the  chests,  and  other  pack 
ages  containing  them,  to  be  marked;  and  certificates, 
which  shall  accompany  them,  be  granted,  as  in  the 
case  of  distilled  spirits. 

To  these  more  direct  expedients  for  the  support  of 
public  credit,  the  institution  of  a  national  bank 
presents  itself,  as  a  necessary  auxiliary.  This  the 
Secretary  regards  as  an  indispensable  engine  in  the 
administration  of  the  finances.  To  present  this  im 
portant  object  in  a  more  distinct  and  more  compre 
hensive  light,  he  has  concluded  to  make  it  the  subject 
of  a  separate  report. 

All  of  which  is  humbly  submitted. 

ALEXANDER  HAMILTON, 

Secretary  of  the  Treasury. 

Estimate  of  the  probable  product  of  the  funds  proposed  in  the 
annexed  report. 

4,000,000  gallons  of  distilled  spirits,  im 
ported  from  foreign  countries,  at  8  cents 
per  gallon $320,000  oo 

3,500,000  gallons  of  spirits,  distilled  in  the 
United  States,  from  foreign  materials, 
at  1 1  cents  per  gallon  ....  385,000  oo 

3,000,000  gallons  of  spirits,  distilled  from  ma 
terials  of  the  United  States,  at  9  cents 

per  gallon 270,000  oo 

Total  dollars  .         .         .  $975»°°°  °° 

Deduct  for  drawbacks  and  expense  of  col 
lecting,  10  per  cent        ....       97,500  oo 
Net  product    ....  $877,500  oo 


352  Alexander  Hamilton 

HAMILTON    TO    SUPERVISORS   OF   BOSTON 

TREASURY  DEPARTMENT,  July  27,  1791. 

GENTLEMEN  : 

A  temporary  absence  from  the  seat  of  govern 
ment  has  delayed  an  answer  to  your  letter  of  the 
1 4th  inst. 

It  is  an  established  rule  at  the  treasury  not  to  dis 
close  the  amount  of  the  stock  which  stands  to  the 
credit  of  any  person  on  the  public  books  to  any  but 
the  proprietor  himself,  or  his  regular  representa 
tive;  and  the  reasons  extend,  of  course,  to  the  re 
spective  loan  offices. 

One  of  those  reasons  is,  that  as  property  in  the 
public  funds  constitutes  an  usual  and  a  considerable 
portion  of  mercantile  capital,  wherever  public  credit 
is  well  supported,  the  permitting  an  inspection  into 
the  stock  account  of  individuals  to  others  than  the 
parties  respectively  interested,  would  have  a  tend 
ency  to  lay  open  the  affairs  and  operations  of 
merchants  more  than  is  consistent  with  the  spirit 
of  trade.  Indeed,  not  only  merchants,  but  other 
classes  of  citizens,  may  often  have  very  fair  and  valid 
reasons  for  being  disinclined  to  such  an  inspection; 
and  it  may  be  even  conceived  that  it  would  not  at 
all  times  be  expedient  to  allow  access  to  the  secret 
emissaries  of  a  foreign  power  to  discover  the  quan 
tum  of  interest  which  its  own  citizens  might  have  in 
the  funds  of  a  nation. 

In  thus  assigning  some  of  the  reasons  which  have 
given  occasion  to  the  rule  that  has  been  mentioned, 
I  yield  to  a  desire  of  satisfying  the  Board  that  it  is 
not  unsupported  by  considerations  of  weight,  and 


Loans  353 

that  a  relaxation  of  it,  in  compliance  with  their  re 
quest,  could  not  with  propriety  be  acceded  to  on 
my  part. 

At  the  same  time,  I  feel  myself  called  upon  by  the 
occasion  to  express  an  opinion  that  every  thing  in 
the  nature  of  a  direct  tax  on  property  in  the  funds 
of  the  United  States  is  contrary  to  the  true  prin 
ciples  of  public  credit,  and  tends  to  disparage  the 
value  of  the  public  stock.  If  any  law  of  the  State  of 
Massachusetts,  therefore,  gives  sanction  to  such  a 
tax,  it  is  presumed  that  it  must  have  been  passed 
without  an  advertence  to  this  important  idea;  and 
it  is  not  doubted  that  in  the  execution  of  it  there  will 
be  all  the  care  and  moderation  which  the  delicacy  of 
the  operation  requires.  It  is  desirable  on  every  ac 
count  that  no  occasion  should  be  given  to  a  discus 
sion  concerning  the  regularity  of  the  proceeding. 

LOANS 

Communicated  to  the  House  of  Representatives,  February  7,  1792. 
TREASURY  DEPARTMENT,  January  23,  1792. 

Pursuant  to  the  order  of  the  House  of  Repre 
sentatives  of  the  first  of  November,  1791,  directing 
the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  "to  report  to  the 
House  the  amount  of  the  subscriptions  to  the  loans 
proposed  by  the  act  making  provision  for  the  public 
debt,  as  well  in  the  debts  of  the  respective  States,  as 
in  the  domestic  debt  of  the  United  States,  and  of  the 
parts  which  remain  unsubscribed,  together  with  such 
measures  as  are,  in  his  opinion,  expedient  to  be  taken 
on  the  subject,"  the  said  Secretary  respectfully  sub 
mits  the  following  report: 

VOL.  II.  — 23. 


354  Alexander  Hamilton 

i.  The  whole  amount  of  the  domestic 
debt  of  the  United  States,  principal 
and  interest,  which  has  been  sub 
scribed  to  the  loan  proposed  concern 
ing  that  debt,  by  the  act  entitled '  'An 
act  making  provision  for  the  debt 
of  the  United  States,"  according  to 
the  statement  herewith  transmitted, 
marked  A,  and  subject  to  the  obser 
vations  accompanying  that  state 
ment,  is  ....  *v~*-""  .  $31,797,481  22 


Which,  pursuant  to  the  terms  of  that  act, 
has  been  converted  into  stock  bear 
ing  an  immediate  interest  of  six  per 
cent,  per  annum  ....  $14,177,450  43 

Stock  bearing  the  like  interest  from  the 

first  of  January,  1 80 1  .  ^..^  .  7,088,727  79 

Stock  bearing  an  immediate  interest  of 

three  per  cent,  per  annum  .  .  10,531,303  oo 


Making,  together        .         .  $31,797,481   22 

Of  which  there  stands  to  the  credit  of  the 
trustees  of  the  sinking  fund,  in  conse 
quence  of  purchases  of  the  public 
debt  made  under  their  direction,  the 
sum  of  .  .  .  4v'  :v  .  $1,131,36476 

The  unsubscribed  residue  of  the  said  debt, 
according  to  the  statements  herewith 
transmitted,  marked  B  and  C,  and 
subject  to  the  observations  accom 
panying  the  statement  C,  appears  to 
amount  to  .  $10,616,604  65 


Loans  355 

Consisting  of  registered  debt,  principal 

and  interest  .  .  .  .  .  $6,795,815  26 
Unsubscribed  stock  on  the  books  of  the 

commissioners    of    loans    for    New 

Jersey,  Pennsylvania,  and  Maryland, 

principal  and  interest  .  .  .  15,674  62 

Credits  on  the  books  of  the  treasury,  for 

which  no  certificates  have  been  is 
sued,  principal  and  interest  .  .  107,648  63 
Outstanding  or  floating  evidences  of  debt, 

estimated,  per  statement  C,  at          .       3,697,466  14 


Making,  together        .         .  $10,616,604  65 

Concerning  which  some  further  arrangement  is 
necessary. 

The  greatest  part  of  the  registered  debt,  hitherto 
unsubscribed,  is  owned  by  citizens  of  foreign  coun 
tries,  most  if  not  all  of  whom  appear  now  disposed 
to  embrace  the  terms  held  out  by  the  act  above  men 
tioned;  extensive  orders  having  been  received  from 
those  creditors  to  subscribe  to  the  loan,  after  the 
time  for  receiving  subscriptions  had  elapsed. 

A  considerable  part  of  the  outstanding  or  floating 
debt  consists  of  loan-office  certificates,  issued  be 
tween  the  first  of  September,  1777,  and  the  first  of 
March,  1778,  bearing  interest  on  the  nominal  sum. 
Many  of  the  holders  of  this  species  of  debt  have  come 
in  upon  the  terms  of  this  act,  but  others  have  hitherto 
declined  it;  alleging  that  the  special  nature  of  their 
contract  gives  a  peculiarity  to  their  case,  and  renders 
the  commutation  proposed  not  so  fair  an  equivalent 
to  them  as  in  other  instances.  They  also  complain 


356  Alexander  Hamilton 

that  the  act  has  had,  toward  them,  a  compulsory 
aspect,  by  refusing  the  temporary  payment  of  in 
terest,  unless  they  should  exchange  their  old  for  new 
certificates,  essentially  varying  the  nature  of  their 
contract. 

A  resolution  of  Congress  of  the  tenth  of  September, 
1777,  stipulates,  in  favor  of  this  class  of  creditors, 
interest  upon  the  nominal  instead  of  the  real  prin 
cipal  of  their  debt,  until  that  principal  be  discharged. 
This  certainly  renders  their  contract  of  a  nature  more 
beneficial  than  that  of  other  creditors ;  but  they  are, 
at  the  same  time,  liable  to  be  divested  of  the  extra 
benefit  it  gives  them  by  a  payment  of  their  specie 
dues;  and  it  may  be  observed,  that  they  have  ac 
tually  enjoyed,  and  by  accepting  the  terms  offered 
to  them,  were  enabled  to  realize,  advantages  superior 
to  other  creditors.  They  have  been  paid  interest  by 
bills  on  France  from  the  tenth  of  September,  1777, 
to  the  first  of  March,  1782,  while  other  creditors 
received  their  interest  in  depreciated  bills  of  the  old 
emissions;  and  the  terms  of  the  loan  proposed  put 
it  in  their  power  to  realize  the  benefit  of  interest,  on 
the  nominal  amount  of  their  respective  debts,  at 
rates  from  6T^  nearly  to  lo-f^  per  cent,  on  their  real 
or  specie  capital  down  to  the  last  of  December,  1790. 

It  does  not,  therefore,  appear  to  have  been  an  un 
reasonable  expectation,  that  they,  as  readily  as  any 
other  description  of  public  creditors,  would  have  ac 
quiesced  in  a  measure  calculated  for  the  accommo 
dation  of  the  Government,  under  circumstances  in 
respect  to  which  it  has  been  demonstrated  by  subse 
quent  events  that  the  accommodation  desired,  was 


Loans  357 

consistent  with  the  best  interest  of  the  public  credit 
ors.  A  large  proportion  of  the  parties  interested 
have,  indeed,  viewed  the  matter  in  this  light,  and 
have  embraced  the  proposition.  It  is  probable  that 
the  progress  of  things  will  satisfy  the  remainder  that 
it  is  equally  their  interest  to  concur,  if  a  further  op 
portunity  be  afforded.  But  it  is,  nevertheless,  for 
themselves  only  to  judge,  how  far  the  equivalent 
proposed  is,  in  their  case,  a  reasonable  and  fair  one; 
how  far  any  circumstances  in  their  claim  may  sug 
gest  reasons  for  moderation  on  their  part;  or  how 
far  any  other  motives,  public  or  private,  ought  to 
induce  an  acceptance.  And  the  principles  of  good 
faith  require  that  their  election  should  be  free. 

On  this  ground,  the  complaint  which  regards  the 
withholding  of  a  temporary  payment  of  interest, 
except  on  the  condition  of  surrender  of  the  old 
certificates  for  new  ones,  importing  a  contract  sub 
stantially  different,  appears,  to  the  Secretary,  not 
destitute  of  foundation.  He  presumes  that  the  opera 
tion  of  that  provision,  in  the  particular  case,  was  not 
adverted  to ;  or,  that  an  exception  would  have  been 
introduced  as  most  consonant  with  the  general 
spirit  and  design  of  the  act.  Accordingly,  the  fur 
ther  measures  which  will  be  submitted,  will  con 
template  a  method  of  obviating  the  objection  in 
question. 

From  the  consideration,  that  an  extension  of  the 
time  for  receiving  subscriptions,  upon  the  terms 
of  the  act  making  provision  for  the  debt  of  the 
United  States,  is  desired  by  a  large  proportion  of 
the  non-subscribing  creditors ;  and  from  the  further 


358  Alexander  Hamilton 

consideration,  that  sufficient  experience  has  not  yet 
been  had  of  the  productiveness  of  a  considerable 
branch  of  the  revenues  which  have  been  established, 
to  afford  the  light  necessary  to  a  final  arrangement, 
it  is,  in  the  judgment  of  the  Secretary,  advisable  to 
renew  the  proposition  for  a  loan  in  the  domestic 
debt,  on  the  same  terms  with  the  one  which  has  been 
closed,  and  to  allow  time  for  receiving  subscriptions 
to  it  until  the  last  day  of  September  next,  inclus 
ively;  making  provision  for  a  temporary  payment 
of  interest  to  such  who  may  not  think  fit  to  subscribe 
for  the  year  1792,  of  the  like  nature  with  that  which 
was  made  in  the  same  case  for  the  year  1791,  except 
as  to  the  holders  of  loan-office  certificates  issued  be 
tween  the  first  of  September,  1777,  and  the  first  of 
March,  1778;  in  respect  to  whom  it  is  submitted  as 
proper  to  dispense  with  the  obligation  of  exchanging 
their  old  certificates  for  new,  as  the  condition  of 
their  receiving  interest  in  capacity  of  non-sub 
scribers;  and  to  allow  them,  without  such  exchange, 
to  receive  the  same  interest  both  for  the  year  1791 
and  1792,  as  if  they  had  subscribed  to  the  first  loan. 
It  will  not  be  materially  difficult  so  to  regulate  the 
operation  at  the  treasury  as  to  avoid,  in  the  par 
ticular  case,  that  danger  of  imposition  by  counter 
feits,  which  was  the  motive  to  the  general  provision 
for  an  exchange  of  certificates. 

2.  The  amount  of  the  subscriptions  in  the  debt  of 
the  respective  States,  within  the  limits  of  the  sum 
assumed  in  each,  appears,  by  the  statement  marked 
D,  to  be  $17,072,334.39,  subject  to  the  observations 
accompanying  that  statement.  Consequently,  the 


Loans  359 

difference  between  the  aggregate  of  the  sums  sub 
scribed  and  the  aggregate  of  the  sums  assumed  is 
$4,427,665.61.  This  difference  is  to  be  attributed  to 
several  causes — the  principal  of  which  are  the  follow 
ing:  First,  that  the  sums  assumed,  in  respect  to  cer 
tain  States,  exceeded  the  actual  amount  of  their 
existing  debts.  Second,  that,  in  various  instances, 
a  part  of  the  existing  debt  was  in  a  form  which  ex 
cluded  it  from  being  received,  without  contravening 
particular  provisions  of  the  law,  as  in  the  case  of  cer 
tificates  issued  after  the  first  day  of  January,  1790, 
in  lieu  of  certificates  which  had  been  issued  prior  to 
that  period,  which  was  reported  upon  by  the  Secre 
tary  on  the  twenty-fifth  day  of  February  last.  Third, 
ignorance  of,  or  inattention  to,  the  limitation  of  time 
for  receiving  subscriptions.  It  appears  that  a  num 
ber  of  persons  lost  the  opportunity  of  subscribing 
from  the  one  or  the  other  of  these  causes. 

A  strong  desire  that  a  further  opportunity  may  be 
afforded  for  subscriptions  in  the  debts  of  the  States 
has  been  manifested  by  the  individuals  interested. 
And  the  States  of  Rhode  Island  and  New  Hamp 
shire  have,  by  the  public  acts  referred  to  by  the 
Secretary,  indicated  a  similar  desire.  The  affording 
of  such  further  opportunity  may  either  be  restricted 
within  the  limit  as  to  amount,  which  is  contemplated 
by  the  act  itself,  or  may  receive  an  extension  which 
will  embrace  the  residuary  debts  of  the  States. 

The  first  may  be  considered  as  nothing  more  than 
giving  full  effect  to  a  measure  already  adopted. 

The  last  appears  to  have  in  its  favor  all  the  leading 
inducements  to  what  has  been  already  done.  The 


360  Alexander  Hamilton 

embarrassments  which  might  arise  from  conflicting 
systems  of  finance  are  not  entirely  obviated.  The 
efficacious  command  of  the  national  resources  for 
national  exigencies  is  not  unequivocally  secured. 
The  equalizing  of  the  condition  of  the  citizens  of 
every  State,  and  exonerating  those  of  the  States  most 
indebted,  from  partial  burthens  which  would  press 
upon  them,  in  consequence  of  exertions  in  a  common 
cause,  is  not  completely  fulfilled  until  the  entire  debt 
of  every  State,  contracted  in  relation  to  the  war,  is 
embraced  in  one  general  and  comprehensive  plan. 
The  inconvenience  to  the  United  States  of  disbur- 
thening  the  States  which  are  still  encumbered  with 
considerable  debts,  would  bear  no  proportion  to  the 
inconvenience  which  they  would  feel,  if  left  to  strug 
gle  with  those  debts,  unaided. 

More  general  contentment,  therefore,  in  the  public 
mind,  may  be  expected  to  attend  such  an  exonera 
tion,  than  the  reverse;  in  proportion  as  the  experi 
ence  of  actual  inconvenience  would  be  greater,  though 
only  applicable  to  parts,  in  the  one,  than  in  the  other 
case. 

With  regard  to  States,  parts  only  of  the  debts  of 
which  have  been  assumed,  and  in  proportions  short 
of  those  which  have  prevailed,  in  favor  of  other 
States,  and  short,  also,  of  what  would  have  resulted 
from  a  due  apportionment  of  the  entire  sum  as 
sumed  ;  the  claim  to  a  further  assumption  is  founded 
on  considerations  of  equal  justice,  as  relative  to  the 
measure  itself,  considered  in  a  separate  and  inde 
pendent  light. 

But  there  is  a  further  reason  of  material  weight 


Loans  361 

for  an  immediate  general  assumption.  Moneyed 
men,  as  well  foreigners  as  citizens,  through  the  ex 
pectation  of  an  eventual  assumption,  or  that,  in 
some  shape  or  other,  a  substantial  provision  will  be 
made  for  the  unassumed  residue  of  the  State  debts, 
will  be  induced  to  speculate  in  the  purchase  of  them. 
In  proportion  as  the  event  is  unsettled,  or  uncertain, 
the  price  of  the  article  will  be  low,  and  the  present 
proprietors  will  be  under  disadvantage  in  the  sale. 
The  loss  to  them  in  favor  of  the  purchasers  is  to  be 
regarded  as  an  evil ;  and  as  far  as  it  is  connected  with 
a  transfer  to  foreigners,  at  an  undervalue,  it  will  be 
a  national  evil.  By  whatsoever  authority  an  ulti 
mate  provision  may  be  made,  there  will  be  an  abso 
lute  loss  to  the  community,  equal  to  the  total  amount 
of  such  undervalue. 

It  may  appear  an  objection  to  the  measure,  that 
it  will  require  an  establishment  of  additional  funds 
by  the  Government  of  the  United  States.  But  this 
does  not  seem  to  be  a  necessary  consequence.  The 
probability  is,  that,  without  a  supplementary  as 
sumption,  an  equal  or  very  nearly  equal  augmenta 
tion  of  funds  will  be  requisite  to  provide  for  greater 
balances  in  favor  of  certain  States ;  which  would  be 
proportionably  diminished  by  such  assumption.  The 
destination,  not  the  quantum  of  the  fund,  will,  there 
fore,  be  the  chief  distinction  between  the  two  cases. 

It  may  also  appear  an  objection  to  a  total  assump 
tion,  that  the  magnitude  of  the  object  is  not  ascer 
tained  with  precision.  It  is  not  certainly  known, 
what  is  the  sum  due  in  each  State;  nor  has  it 
been  possible  to  acquire  the  information,  owing  to 


362  Alexander  Hamilton 

different  causes.  But,  though  precise  data  are  de 
ficient,  there  are  materials  which  will  serve  as  guides. 
From  the  returns  received  at  the  treasury,  assisted 
by  information  in  other  ways,  it  may  be  stated, 
without  danger  of  material  error,  that  the  remaining 
debts  of  the  States,  over  and  above  the  sums  already 
subscribed,  will  not  exceed  the  amounts  specified  in 
statement  D,  accompanying  this  report.  And  that, 
including  sums  already  subscribed,  the  total  amount 
to  be  ultimately  provided  for,  in  the  event  of  a  general 
assumption,  will  not  exceed  25,403,3621-^  dollars, 
which  would  constitute  an  addition  of  3,903,362TyTF 
dollars  to  the  sum  of  21,500,000  dollars  already 
assumed. 

Should  a  total  assumption  be  deemed  eligible,  it 
may  still  be  advisable  to  assign  a  determinate  sum 
for  each  State,  that  the  utmost  limit  of  the  operation 
may  be  pre-established ;  and  it  is  necessary,  in  order 
to  the  certainty  of  a  due  provision,  in  proper  time, 
that  interest  should  not  begin  to  be  payable,  on  the 
additional  sums  assumed,  till  after  the  year  1792. 

It  will  occur,  that  provision  has  been  made  for 
paying  to  each  State,  in  trust  for  its  non-subscribing 
creditors,  an  interest  upon  the  difference  between 
the  sum  assumed  for  each  State,  and  that  actually 
subscribed,  equal  to  what  would  have  been  payable, 
if  it  had  been  subscribed. 

In  the  event  of  a  further  assumption,  either  within 
the  limits  already  established,  or  commensurate  with 
the  remaining  debts  of  the  States,  it  is  conceived  that 
it  will  not  be  incompatible  with  the  provision  just 
mentioned,  to  retain,  at  the  end  of  each  quarter,  dur- 


Loans  363 

ing  the  progress  of  the  further  subscription,  out  of  the 
money  directed  to  be  paid  to  each  State,  a  sum  cor 
responding  with  the  interest  upon  so  much  of  its 
debts  as  shall  have  been  subscribed  to  that  period, 
paying  the  over-plus,  if  any,  to  the  State.  An  abso 
lute  suspension  of  that  payment  does  not  appear 
consistent  with  the  nature  of  the  stipulation  in 
cluded  in  that  provision;  for,  though  the  money  to 
be  paid  to  a  State  be  expressly  a  trust  for  the  non- 
subscribing  creditors,  yet,  as  it  cannot  be  certain 
beforehand,  that  they  will  elect  to  change  their 
condition,  the  possibility  of  it  will  not  justify  a 
suspension  of  payment  to  the  State,  which  might 
operate  as  suspension  of  payment  to  the  creditors 
themselves. 

A  further  objection  to  such  a  suspension  results 
from  the  idea,  that  the  provision  in  question  appears 
to  have  a  secondary  object,  namely,  as  a  pledge  for 
securing  a  provision  for  whatever  balance  may  be 
found  due  to  a  State,  on  the  general  settlement  of 
accounts.  The  payment  directed  to  be  made  to  a 
State  is  "  to  continue  until  there  shall  be  a  settlement 
of  accounts  between  the  United  States  and  the  in 
dividual  States,  and,  in  case  a  balance  should  then 
appear  in  favor  of  a  State,  until  provision  shall  be 
made  for  the  said  balance/ ' 

The  secondary  operation  as  a  pledge  or  security 
(consistently  with  the  intent  of  the  funding  act)  can 
only  be  superseded  in  favor  of  the  primary  object,  a 
provision  for  the  creditors,  and  as  far  as  may  be  neces 
sary  to  admit  them  to  an  effectual  participation  in  it. 
But  as  whatever  money  may  be  paid  to  a  State,  is  to 


364  Alexander  Hamilton 

be  paid  over  to  its  creditors,  proportional  deductions 
may,  with  propriety,  be  made  from  the  debts  of 
those  creditors  who  may  hereafter  subscribe,  so  that 
the  United  States  may  not  have  to  pay  twice  for  the 
same  purpose. 

If  it  shall  be  judged  expedient  either  to  open  again, 
or  to  extend  the  assumption,  it  will  be  necessary  to 
vary  the  description  of  the  debts  which  may  be  sub 
scribed,  so  as  to  comprehend  all  those  which  have 
relation  to  services  or  supplies  during  the  war,  under 
such  restrictions  as  are  requisite  to  guard  against 
abuse. 

In  the  original  proposition  for  an  assumption  of 
the  State  debts,  and  in  the  suggestions  now  made  on 
the  same  subject,  the  Secretary  has  contemplated, 
and  still  contemplates,  as  a  material  part  of  the  plan, 
an  effectual  provision  for  the  sale  of  the  vacant  lands 
of  the  United  States.  He  has  considered  this  re 
source  as  an  important  means  of  sinking  a  part  of 
the  debt,  and  facilitating  ultimate  arrangements  con 
cerning  the  residue.  If  supplementary  funds  shall 
be  rendered  necessary,  by  an  additional  assumption, 
the  provision  will  most  conveniently  be  made  at  the 
next  session  of  Congress,  when  the  productiveness  of 
the  existing  revenues,  and  the  extent  of  the  sum  to 
be  provided  for,  will  be  better  ascertained. 

3.  There  is  a  part  of  the  public  debt  of  the  United 
States  which  is  a  cause  of  some  perplexity  to  the 
Treasury.  It  is  not  comprehended  within  the  exist 
ing  provision  for  the  foreign  debt,  which  is  confined 
to  loans  made  abroad ;  and  it  is  questionable  whether 
it  is  to  be  regarded  as  a  portion  of  the  domestic  debt. 


Loans  365 

It  is  not  only  due  to  foreigners,  but  the  interest  upon 
it  is  payable,  by  express  stipulation,  in  a  foreign 
country;  whence  it  becomes  a  matter  of  doubt, 
whether  it  be  at  all  contemplated  by  the  act  making 
provision  for  the  debt  of  the  United  States.  The 
part  alluded  to  is  that  which  is  due  to  certain  foreign 
officers,  who  served  the  United  States  during  the 
late  war.  In  consequence  of  a  resolution  of  Con 
gress,  directing  their  interest  to  be  paid  to  them  in 
France,  the  certificates  which  were  issued  to  them 
specify  that,  "in  pursuance  of  and  compliance  with 
a  certain  resolution  of  Congress,  of  the  third  day  of 
February,  1784,  the  said  interest  is  to  be  paid,  an 
nually,  at  the  house  of  Mons.  Le  Grand,  banker  in 
Paris."  Interest  has  accordingly  been  paid  to  them 
at  Paris,  down  to  the  3ist  of  December,  1788,  by  vir 
tue  of  a  special  resolution  of  Congress,  of  the  2oth  of 
August  in  that  year ;  since  which  period  no  payment 
has  been  made. 

It  has  been  heretofore  suggested,  as  the  opinion  of 
the  Secretary,  that  it  would  be  expedient  to  cause 
the  whole  of  this  description  of  debt  to  be  paid  off; 
among  other  reasons,  because  it  bears  an  interest  at 
six  per  centum  per  annum,  payable  abroad,  and  can 
be  discharged  with  a  saving.  The  other  reasons  al 
luded  to  are  of  a  nature  both  weighty  and  delicate, 
and  too  obvious,  it  is  presumed,  to  need  a  specifica 
tion.  Some  recent  circumstances  have  served  to 
strengthen  the  inducements  to  the  measure.  But  if 
it  should,  finally,  be  deemed  unadvisable,  it  is  neces 
sary,  at  least,  that  provision  should  be  made  for  the 
interest,  which  is  now  suspended,  under  the  doubt 


366  Alexander  Hamilton 

that  has  been  stated,  and  from  the  want  of  authority 
to  remit  it  pursuant  to  the  contract. 

The  amount  of  this  debt,  with  the  arrears  of  inter 
est  to  the  end  of  the  year  1791,  is  $220,646.81. 

4.  The  act  making  provision  for  the  debt  of  the 
United  States  has  appropriated  the  proceeds  of 
the  western  lands,  as  a  fund  for  the  discharge  of  the 
public  debt.  And  the  act  making  provision  for  the 
reduction  of  the  public  debt  has  appropriated  all 
the  surplus  of  the  duties  on  imports  and  tonnage,  to 
the  end  of  the  year  1790,  to  the  purpose  of  purchas 
ing  the  debt  at  the  market  price,  and  has  authorized 
the  President  to  borrow  the  further  sum  of  two  mil 
lions  of  dollars  for  the  same  object. 

These  measures  serve  to  indicate  the  intention  of 
the  Legislature,  as  early  and  as  fast  as  possible,  to 
provide  for  the  extinguishment  of  the  existing  debt. 

In  pursuance  of  that  intention,  it  appears  advis 
able  that  a  systematic  plan  should  be  begun  for  the 
creation  and  establishment  of  a  sinking  fund. 

An  obvious  basis  of  this  establishment,  which  may 
be  immediately  contemplated,  is  the  amount  of  the 
interest  on  as  much  of  the  debt  as  has  been,  or 
shall  be,  from  time  to  time,  purchased,  or  paid  off, 
or  received  in  discharge  of  any  debt  or  demand  of 
the  United  States,  made  payable  in  public  securi 
ties,  over  and  above  the  interest  of  any  new  debt, 
which  may  be  created,  in  order  to  such  purchase  or 
payment. 

The  purchases  of  the  debt,  already  made,  have 
left  a  sum  of  interest  in  the  treasury,  which  will  be 
increased  by  future  purchases ;  certain  sums  payable 


Loans  367 

to  the  United  States,  in  their  own  securities,  will, 
when  received,  have  a  similar  effect.  And  there  is 
ground  to  calculate  on  a  saving  upon  the  operations, 
which  are  in  execution  with  regard  to  the  foreign 
debt.  The  sale  of  the  western  lands,  when  provision 
shall  be  made  for  it,  may  be  expected  to  produce  a 
material  addition  to  such  a  fund. 

It  is  therefore  submitted,  that  it  be  adopted  as  a 
principle,  that  all  interest  which  shall  have  ceased  to 
be  payable  by  any  of  the  means  above  specified, 
shall  be  set  apart  and  appropriated  in  the  most  firm 
and  inviolable  manner  as  a  fund  for  sinking  the  pub 
lic  debt,  by  purchase  or  payment;  and  that  the  said 
fund  be  placed  under  the  direction  of  the  officers 
named  in  the  second  section  of  the  act  making  pro 
vision  for  the  reduction  of  the  public  debt,  to  be  by 
them  applied  toward  the  purchase  of  the  said  debt, 
until  the  annual  produce  of  the  said  fund  shall 
amount  to  two  per  cent,  of  the  entire  portion  of  the 
debt  which  bears  a  present  interest  of  six  per  centum, 
and  thenceforth  to  be  applied  towards  the  redemp 
tion  of  that  portion  of  the  debt,  according  to  the 
right  which  has  been  reserved  to  the  Government. 
It  will  deserve  the  consideration  of  the  Legislature, 
whether  this  fund  ought  not  to  be  so  vested,  as  to 
acquire  the  nature  and  quality  of  a  proprietary 
trust,  incapable  of  being  diverted  without  a  violation 
of  the  principles  and  sanctions  of  property. 

A  rapid  accumulation  of  this  fund  would  arise 
from  its  own  operation;  but  it  is  not  doubted,  that 
the  progressive  development  of  the  resources  of  the 
country,  and  a  reduction  of  the  rate  of  interest,  by 


368  Alexander  Hamilton 

the  progress  of  public  credit,  already  exemplified  in 
a  considerable  degree,  will  speedily  enable  the  Gov 
ernment  to  make  important  additions  to  it  in  various 
ways.  With  due  attention  to  preserve  order  and 
cultivate  peace,  a  strong  expectation  may  be  in 
dulged  that  a  reduction  of  the  debt  of  the  country 
will  keep  pace  with  the  reasonable  hopes  of  its 
citizens. 

All  which  is  humbly  submitted. 

ALEXANDER  HAMILTON, 

Secretary  of  the  Treasury. 

[Schedules  A,  B,  C,  D,  State  Papers,  Finance,  vol.  i.,  pp.  149,  150,  151.] 


SPIRITS,    FOREIGN    AND   DOMESTIC  * 

Communicated  to  the  House  of  Representatives,  March  6,  1792. 
TREASURY  DEPARTMENT,  March  5,  1792. 

In  obedience  to  the  orders  of  the  House  of  Rep 
resentatives  of  the  first  and  second  days  of  Novem 
ber  last,  the  first  directing  the  Secretary  of  the 
Treasury  to  report  to  the  House  such  information  as 
he  may  have  obtained,  respecting  any  difficulties 
which  may  have  occurred,  in  the  execution  of  the 
act  "  repealing,  after  the  last  day  of  June  next,  the 
duties  heretofore  laid  upon  distilled  spirits,  imported 
from  abroad  and  laying  others  in  their  stead,  and, 
also,  upon  spirits  distilled  within  the  United  States, 
and  for  appropriating  the  same,"  together  with  his 
opinion  thereupon;  the  second  directing  him  to  re- 

1  This  is  the  famous  argument  on  the  policy  of  internal  revenue  and 
the  expediency  of  an  excise  on  spirits,  both  of  which  are  now  estab 
lished. 


Spirits  369 

port  to  the  House  whether  any,  and  what,  alterations 
in  favor  of  the  spirits  which  shall  be  distilled  from 
articles  of  the  growth  or  produce  of  the  United 
States,  or  from  foreign  articles,  within  the  same, 
can,  in  his  opinion,  be  made  in  the  act  for  laying 
duties  upon  spirits  distilled  within  the  United  States, 
consistently  with  its  main  design,  and  with  the 
maintenance  of  the  public  faith;  the  said  Secretary 
respectfully  submits  the  following  report : 

From  the  several  petitions  and  memorials  which 
have  been  referred  to  the  Secretary,  as  well  as  from 
various  representations  which  have  been  made  to 
him,  it  appears  that  objections  have  arisen  in  dif 
ferent  quarters  against  the  above-mentioned  act, 
which  have,  in  some  instances,  embarrassed  its  exe 
cution,  and  inspired  a  desire  of  its  being  repealed; 
in  others,  have  induced  a  wish  that  alterations  may 
be  made  in  some  of  its  provisions. 

These  objections  have  reference  to  a  supposed 
tendency  of  the  act,  first  to  contravene  the  prin 
ciples  of  liberty ;  secondly,  to  injure  morals ;  thirdly, 
to  oppress  by  heavy  and  excessive  penalties ;  fourthly, 
to  injure  industry,  and  interfere  with  the  business  of 
distilling. 

As  to  the  supposed  tendency  of  the  act  to  contra 
vene  the  principles  of  liberty,  the  discussions  of  the 
subject  which  have  had  place  in  and  out  of  the  Legis 
lature,  supersede  the  necessity  of  more  than  a  few 
brief  general  observations. 

It  is  presumed  that  a  revision  of  the  point  cannot, 
in  this  respect,  weaken  the  convictions  which  origi 
nally  dictated  the  law. 

VOL.  II. — 24. 


370  Alexander  Hamilton 

There  can  surely  be  nothing  in  the  nature  of  an 
internal  duty  on  a  consumable  commodity,  more  in 
compatible  with  liberty,  than  in  that  of  an  external 
duty  on  a  like  commodity.  A  doctrine  which  as 
serts,  that  all  duties  of  the  former  kind  (usually  de 
nominated  excises)  are  inconsistent  with  the  genius 
of  a  free  government,  is  too  violent,  and  too  little 
reconcilable  with  the  necessities  of  society,  to  be  true. 
It  would  tend  to  deprive  the  Government  of  what  is, 
in  most  countries,  a  principal  source  of  revenue,  and 
by  narrowing  the  distribution  of  taxes,  would  serve 
to  oppress  particular  kinds  of  industry.  It  would 
throw,  in  the  first  instance,  an  undue  proportion  of 
the  public  burthen  on  the  merchant  and  on  the 
landholder. 

This  is  one  of  those  cases  in  which  names  have  an 
improper  influence,  and  in  which  prepossessions  ex 
clude  a  due  attention  to  facts. 

Accordingly,  the  law  under  consideration  is  com 
plained  of,  though  free  from  the  features  which  have 
served,  in  other  cases,  to  render  laws  on  the  same 
subject  exceptionable;  and,  though  the  differences 
have  been  pointed  out,  they  have  not  only  been  over 
looked,  but  the  very  things  which  have  been  stu 
diously  avoided  in  the  formation  of  the  law,  are 
charged  upon  it,  and,  that,  too,  from  quarters  where 
its  operation  would,  from  circumstances,  have  worn 
the  least  appearance  of  them. 

It  has  been,  heretofore,  noticed  that  the  chief  cir 
cumstances  which,  in  certain  excise  laws,  have  given 
occasion  to  the  charge  of  their  being  unfriendly  to 
liberty,  are  not  to  be  found  in  the  act  which  is  the 


Spirits  371 

subject  of  the  report,  viz.:  first,  a  summary  and 
discretionary  jurisdiction  in  the  excise  officers,  con 
trary  to  the  course  of  the  common  law,  and  in  abridg 
ment  of  the  right  of  trial  by  jury ;  and,  secondly,  a 
general  power,  in  the  same  officers,  to  search  and 
inspect,  indiscriminately,  all  the  houses  and  buildings 
of  the  persons  engaged  in  the  business  to  which  the 
tax  relates. 

As  to  the  first  particular,  there  is  nothing  in  the  act 
even  to  give  color  to  a  charge  of  the  kind  against  it, 
and,  accordingly,  it  has  not  been  brought.  But,  as  to 
the  second,  a  very  different  power  has  been  mistaken 
for  it,  and  the  act  is  complained  of  as  conferring  that 
very  power  of  indiscriminate  search  and  inspection. 

The  fact,  nevertheless,  is  otherwise.  An  officer, 
under  the  act  in  question,  can  inspect  or  search  no 
house  or  building,  or  even  apartment  of  any  house  or 
building,  which  had  not  been  previously  entered  and 
marked  by  the  possessor  as  a  place  used  for  distilling 
or  keeping  spirits. 

And  even  the  power  so  qualified  is  only  applicable 
to  distilleries  from  foreign  materials,  and  in  cities, 
towns,  and  villages,  from  domestic  materials;  that 
is,  only  in  cases  in  which  the  law  contemplates  that 
the  business  is  carried  on  upon  such  a  scale  as  effectu 
ally  to  separate  the  distillery  from  the  dwelling  of 
the  distiller.  The  distilleries  scattered  over  the 
country,  which  form  much  the  greatest  part  of  the 
whole,  are  in  no  degree  subject  to  discretionary  in 
spection  and  search. 

The  true  principle  of  the  objection  which  may  be 
raised  to  a  general  discretionary  power  of  inspection 


372  Alexander  Hamilton 

and  search,  is  that  the  domicile  or  dwelling  of  a  citizen 
ought  to  be  free  from  vexatious  inquisition  and  in 
trusion. 

This  principle  cannot  apply  to  a  case  in  which  it 
is  put  in  his  own  power  to  separate  the  place  of  his 
business  from  the  place  of  his  habitation;  and,  by 
designating  the  former  by  visible  public  marks,  to 
avoid  all  intermeddling  with  the  latter. 

A  distillery  seldom  forms  a  part  of  the  dwelling  of 
its  proprietor,  and  even  where  it  does,  it  depends  on 
him  to  direct  and  limit  the  power  of  visiting  and 
search,  by  marking  out  the  particular  apartments 
which  are  so  employed. 

But  the  requisition  upon  the  distiller  to  set  marks 
on  the  building  or  apartments  which  he  makes  use  of 
in  his  business  is  one  of  the  topics  of  complaint 
against  the  law.  Such  marks  are  represented  as 
a  dishonorable  badge;  and  thus  a  regulation,  de 
signed  as  much  to  conform  with  the  feelings  of  the 
citizen  as  for  the  security  of  revenue,  is  converted 
into  matter  of  objection. 

It  is  not  easy  to  conceive  what  maxim  of  liberty 
is  violated  by  requiring  persons  who  carry  on  par 
ticular  trades,  which  are  made  contributory  to  the 
revenue,  to  designate,  by  public  marks,  the  places  in 
which  they  are  carried  on.  There  can  certainly  be 
nothing  more  harmless,  or  less  inconvenient,  than 
such  a  regulation.  The  thing  itself  is  frequently 
done  by  persons  of  various  callings  for  the  informa 
tion  of  customers ;  and  why  it  should  become  a  hard 
ship  or  grievance,  if  required  for  a  public  purpose, 
can  with  difficulty  be  imagined. 


Spirits  373 

The  supposed  tendency  of  the  act  to  injure  morals 
seems  to  have  relation  to  the  oaths,  which  are,  in  a 
variety  of  cases,  required,  and  which  are  liable  to 
the  objection  that  they  give  occasion  to  perjuries. 

The  necessity  of  requiring  oaths  is,  whenever  it 
occurs,  matter  of  regret.  It  is  certainly  desirable  to 
avoid  them  as  often  and  as  far  as  possible;  but  it  is 
more  easy  to  desire  than  to  find  a  substitute.  The 
requiring  of  them  is  not  peculiar  to  the  act  in  ques 
tion  ;  they  are  a  common  appendage  of  revenue  laws, 
and  are  among  the  usual  guards  of  those  laws,  as 
they  are  of  public  and  private  rights  in  courts  of  jus 
tice.  They  constantly  occur  in  jury  trials,  to  which 
the  citizens  of  the  United  States  are  so  much  and  so 
justly  attached.  The  same  objection,  in  different 
degrees,  lies  against  them  in  both  cases,  yet  it  is 
not  perceivable  how  they  can  be  dispensed  with  in 
either. 

It  is  remarkable  that  both  the  kinds  of  security 
to  the  revenue,  which  are  to  be  found  in  the  act,  the 
oaths  of  parties  and  the  inspection  of  officers  are 
objected  to.  If  they  are  both  to  be  abandoned,  it  is 
not  easy  to  imagine  what  security  there  can  be  for 
any  species  of  revenue,  which  is  to  be  collected  from 
articles  of  consumption. 

If  precautions  of  this  nature  are  inconsistent  with 
liberty,  and  immoral,  as  there  are  very  few  indirect 
taxes  which  can  be  collected  without  them,  the  con 
sequence  must  be  that  the  entire  or  almost  entire 
weight  of  the  public  burthens  must,  in  the  first  in 
stance,  fall  upon  fixed  and  visible  property,  houses, 
and  lands — a  consequence  which  would  be  found,  in 


374  Alexander  Hamilton 

experiment,  productive  of  great  injustice  and  in 
equality,  and  ruinous  to  agriculture. 

It  has  been  suggested  by  some  distillers,  that  both 
the  topics  of  complaint  which  have  been  mentioned, 
might  be  obviated  by  a  fixed  rate  of  duty,  adjusted 
according  to  a  ratio  compounded  of  the  capacity  of 
each  still,  and  the  number  and  capacities  of  the  cis 
terns  employed  with  it;  but  this,  and  every  similar 
method,  are  objected  to  by  other  distillers,  as  tending 
to  great  inequality,  arising  from  unequal  supplies 
of  the  material  at  different  times,  and  at  differ 
ent  places,  from  the  different  methods  of  distillation 
practised  by  different  distillers,  and  from  the  different 
degrees  of  activity  in  the  business,  which  arise  from 
capitals  more  or  less  adequate. 

The  result  of  an  examination  of  this  point  appears 
to  be,  that  every  such  mode,  in  cases  in  which  the 
business  is  carried  on  upon  an  extensive  scale,  would, 
necessarily,  be  attended  with  considerable  inequali 
ties;  and,  upon  the  whole,  would  be  less  satisfactory 
than  the  plan  which  has  been  adopted. 

It  is  proved  by  the  fullest  information,  that,  in 
regard  to  distillers  which  are  rated  in  the  law,  ac 
cording  to  the  capacity  of  each  still,  the  alternative 
of  paying  according  to  the  quantity  actually  distilled, 
is  received  in  many  parts  of  the  United  States  as  es 
sential  to  the  equitable  operation  of  the  duty.  And 
it  is  evident,  that  such  an  alternative  could  not  be 
allowed  but  upon  the  condition  of  the  party  render 
ing  upon  oath  an  account  of  the  quantity  of  spirits 
distilled  by  him,  without  entirely  defeating  the 
duty. 


Spirits  375 

As  to  the  charge,  that  the  penalties  of  the  act  are 
too  severe  and  oppressive,  it  is  made  in  such  general 
terms,  and  so  absolutely  without  the  specification  of 
a  single  particular,  that  it  is  difficult  to  imagine 
where  it  points. 

The  Secretary,  however,  has  carefully  reviewed 
the  provisions  of  the  act,  in  this  respect,  and  he  is 
not  able  to  discover  any  foundation  for  the  charge. 

The  penalties  it  inflicts  are  in  their  nature  the 
same  with  those  which  are  common  in  revenue  laws, 
and,  in  their  degree,  comparatively  moderate. 

Pecuniary  fines,  from  fifty  to  five  hundred  dollars, 
and  forfeiture  of  the  article  in  respect  to  which  there 
has  been  a  failure  to  comply  with  the  law,  are  the 
severest  penalties  inflicted  upon  delinquent  parties, 
except  in  a  very  few  cases:  In  two,  a  forfeiture  of 
the  value  of  the  article  is  added  to  that  of  the  article 
itself,  and  in  some  others,  a  forfeiture  of  the  ship  or 
vessel,  and  of  the  wagon  or  other  instrument  of 
conveyance,  assistant  in  a  breach  of  law,  is  likewise 
involved. 

Penalties  like  these,  for  wilful  and  fraudulent 
breaches  of  an  important  law,  cannot,  truly,  be 
deemed  either  unusual  or  excessive.  They  are  less 
than  those  which  secure  the  laws  of  impost,  and  as 
moderate  as  can  promise  security  to  any  object  of 
revenue  which  is  capable  of  being  evaded. 

There  appears  to  be  but  one  provision  in  the  law, 
which  admits  of  a  question  whether  the  penalty  pre 
scribed  may  not  partake  of  severity.  It  is  that 
which  inflicts  the  pains  of  perjury  on  any  person  who 
shall  be  convicted  of  "  wilfully  taking  a  false  oath 


376  Alexander  Hamilton 

or  affirmation  in  any  of  the  cases  in  which  oaths  or 
affirmations  are  required  by  the  act." 

Precedents  in  relation  to  this  particular,  vary.  In 
many  of  them,  the  penalties  are  less  severe  than  for 
perjury,  in  courts  of  justice;  in  others,  they  are  the 
same.  The  latter  are,  generally,  of  the  latest  date, 
and  seem  to  have  been  the  result  of  experience. 

The  United  States  have,  in  other  cases,  pursued 
the  same  principle  as  in  the  law  in  question.  And 
the  practice  is  certainly  founded  on  strong  reasons. 

i  st.  The  additional  security  which  it  gives  to  the 
revenue  cannot  be  doubted.  Many  who  would  risk 
pecuniary  forfeitures  and  penalties  would  not  en 
counter  the  more  disgraceful  punishment  annexed 
to  perjury. 

2d.  There  seems  to  be  no  solid  distinction  between 
one  false  oath  in  violation  of  law  and  right  and  an 
other  false  oath  in  violation  of  law  and  right.  A 
distinction  in  the  punishments  of  different  species  of 
false  swearing  is  calculated  to  beget  false  opinions 
concerning  the  sanctity  of  an  oath ;  and  by  counte 
nancing  an  impression,  that  a  violation  of  it  is  less 
heinous  in  the  cases  in  which  it  is  less  punished,  it 
tends  to  impair  in  the  mind  that  scrupulous  venera 
tion  for  the  obligation  of  an  oath  which  ought  always 
to  prevail,  and  not  only  to  facilitate  a  breach  of  it 
in  the  cases  which  the  laws  have  marked  with  less 
odium,  but  to  prepare  the  mind  for  committing  the 
crime  in  other  cases. 

So  far  is  the  law  under  consideration  from  being 
chargeable  with  particular  severity,  that  there  are  to 
be  found  in  it  marks  of  more  than  common  atten- 


Spirits  377 

tion  to  prevent  its  operating  severely  or  oppres 
sively. 

The  43d  section  of  the  act  contains  a  special  pro 
vision  (and  one  which,  it  is  believed,  is  not  to  be 
found  in  any  law  enacted  in  this  country,  prior  to 
the  present  constitution  of  the  United  States),  by 
which  forfeitures  and  penalties  incurred,  without  an 
intention  of  fraud  or  wilful  negligence,  may  be  miti 
gated  or  remitted. 

This  mild  and  equitable  provision  is  an  effectual 
guard  against  suffering  or  inconvenience,  in  conse 
quence  of  undesigned  transgressions  of  the  law. 

The  3oth  section  contains  a  provision  in  favor  of 
persons,  who,  though  innocent,  may  accidently  suffer 
by  seizures  of  their  property  (as  in  the  execution  of 
the  revenue  laws  sometimes  unavoidably  happens), 
which  is,  perhaps,  entirely  peculiar  to  the  law  under 
consideration.  Where  there  has  even  been  a  prob 
able  cause  of  seizure,  sufficient  to  acquit  an  officer, 
the  jury  are  to  assess  whatever  damages  may  have 
accrued  from  an  injury  to  the  article  seized,  with  an 
allowance  for  the  detention  of  it,  at  the  rate  of  six  per 
centum  per  annum  of  the  value,  which  damages  are 
to  be  paid  out  of  the  public  treasury. 

There  are  other  provisions  of  the  act  which  mark 
the  scrupulous  attention  of  the  Government  to  pro 
tect  the  parties  concerned  from  inconvenience  and 
injury,  and  which  conspire  to  vindicate  the  law  from 
imputations  of  severity  or  oppression. 

The  supposed  tendency  of  the  act  to  injure  indus 
try,  and  to  interfere  with  the  business  of  distilling, 
is  endeavored  to  be  supported  by  some  general  and 


Alexander  Hamilton 

some  special  reasons,  both  having  relation  to  the 
effect  of  the  duty  upon  the  manufacture. 

Those  of  the  first  kind  affirm  generally,  that  du 
ties  on  home  manufactures  are  impolitic,  because 
they  tend  to  discourage  them;  that  they  are  par 
ticularly  so,  when  they  are  laid  on  articles  manu 
factured  from  the  produce  of  the  country,  because 
they  have,  then,  the  additional  effect  of  injuring 
agriculture;  that  it  is  the  general  policy  of  nations 
to  protect  and  promote  their  own  manufactures,  es 
pecially  those  which  are  wrought  out  of  domestic 
materials;  that  the  law  in  question  interferes  with 
this  policy. 

Observations  of  this  kind  admit  of  an  easy  answer. 
Duties  on  manufactures  tend  to  discourage  them,  or 
not,  according  to  the  circumstances  under  which 
they  are  laid;  and  are  impolitic,  or  not,  according 
to  the  same  circumstances.  When  a  manufacture 
is  in  its  infancy,  it  is  impolitic  to  tax  it,  because  the 
tax  would  be  both  unproductive,  and  would  add 
to  the  difficulties  which  naturally  impede  the  first 
attempts  to  establish  a  new  manufacture,  so  as  to 
endanger  its  success. 

But  when  a  manufacture  (as  in  the  case  of  dis 
tilled  spirits  in  the  United  States)  is  arrived  at  ma 
turity,  it  is  as  fit  an  article  of  taxation  as  any  other. 
No  good  reason  can  be  assigned  why  the  consumer  of 
a  domestic  commodity  should  not  contribute  some 
thing  to  the  public  revenue,  when  the  consumer  of 
a  foreign  commodity  contributes  to  it  largely.  And, 
as  a  general  rule,  it  is  not  to  be  disputed,  that  duties 
on  articles  of  consumption  are  paid  by  the  consumers. 


Spirits  379 

To  the  manufacture  itself,  the  duty  is  no  injury, 
if  an  equal  duty  be  laid  on  the  rival  foreign  article. 
And  when  a  greater  duty  is  laid  upon  the  latter  than 
upon  the  former,  as  in  the  present  instance,  the  dif 
ference  is  a  bounty  on  the  domestic  article,  and  oper 
ates  as  an  encouragement  of  the  manufacture.  The 
manufacturer  can  afford  to  sell  his  fabric  the  cheaper, 
in  proportion  to  that  difference,  and  is  so  far  en 
abled  to  undersell  and  supplant  the  dealer  in  the 
foreign  article. 

The  principle  of  the  objection  would  tend  to  con 
fine  all  taxes  to  imported  articles,  and  would  deprive 
the  Government  of  resources,  which  are  indispens 
able  to  a  due  provision  for  the  public  safety  and 
welfare,  contrary  to  the  plain  intention  of  the  Con 
stitution,  which  gives  express  power  to  employ  those 
resources  when  necessary — a  power  which  is  found 
in  all  governments,  and  is  essential  to  their  efficiency, 
and  even  to  their  existence. 

Duties  on  articles  of  internal  production  and  manu 
facture  form  in  every  country  the  principal  sources 
of  revenue.  Those  on  imported  articles  can  only  be 
carried  to  a  certain  extent,  without  defeating  their 
object,  by  operating  either  as  prohibitions,  or  as 
bounties  upon  smuggling.  They  are,  moreover,  in 
some  degree  temporary ;  for,  as  the  growth  of  manu 
factures  diminishes  the  quantum  of  duty  on  imports, 
the  public  revenue,  ceasing  to  arise  from  that  source, 
must  be  derived  from  articles  which  the  national 
industry  has1  substituted  for  those  previously  im 
ported.  If  the  Government  cannot  then  resort  to 
internal  means  for  the  additional  supplies  which  the 


380  Alexander  Hamilton 

exigencies  of  every  nation  call  for,  it  will  be  unable  to 
perform  its  duty,  or,  even  to  preserve  its  existence. 
The  community  must  be  unprotected,  and  the  social 
compact  be  dissolved. 

For  the  same  reasons  that  a  duty  ought  not  to  be 
laid  on  an  article  manufactured  out  of  the  country 
(which  is  the  point  most  insisted  upon),  it  ought  not 
to  be  laid  upon  the  produce  itself,  nor  consequently 
upon  the  land,  which  is  the  instrument  of  that  pro 
duce;  because  taxes  are  laid  upon  land,  as  the  fund 
out  of  which  the  income  of  the  proprietor  is  drawn; 
or,  in  other  words,  on  account  of  its  produce.  There 
ought,  therefore,  on  the  principle  of  the  objection,  to 
be  neither  taxes  on  land,  nor  the  produce  of  land, 
nor  on  articles  manufactured  from  that  produce. 
And  if  a  nation  should  be  in  a  condition  to  supply  it 
self  with  its  own  manufactures,  there  could  then  be 
very  little  or  no  revenue ;  of  course,  there  must  be  a 
want  of  the  essential  means  of  national  justice  and 
national  security. 

Positions  like  these,  however  well  meant  by  those 
who  urge  them,  refute  themselves,  because  they  tend 
to  the  dissolution  of  government  by  rendering  it  in 
capable  of  providing  for  the  objects  for  which  it  is 
instituted. 

However  true  the  allegation,  that  it  is,  and  ought 
to  be,  the  prevailing  policy  of  nations  to  cherish  their 
own  manufactures,  it  is  equally  true  that  nations  in 
general  lay  duties  for  the  purpose  of  revenue  on 
their  own  manufactures;  and  it  is  obvious,  to  a  dem 
onstration,  that  it  may  be  done  without  injury  to 
them.  The  most  successful  nations  in  manufac- 


Spirits  381 

tures  have  drawn  the  largest  revenues  from  the  most 
useful  of  them.  It  merits  particular  attention  that 
ardent  spirits  are  an  article  which  has  been  generally 
deemed,  and  made  use  of,  as  one  of  the  fittest  objects 
of  revenue,  and  to  an  extent,  in  other  countries, 
which  bears  no  comparison  with  what  has  been  done 
in  the  United  States. 

The  special  reasons  alluded  to  are  of  different 
kinds: 

i .  It  is  said  that  the  act  in  question,  by  laying  a 
smaller  additional  duty  on  foreign  spirits  than  the 
duty  on  home-made  spirits,  has  a  tendency  to  dis 
courage  the  manufacture  of  the  latter. 

This  objection  merits  consideration,  and,  as  far 
as  it  may  appear  to  have  foundation,  ought  to  be 
obviated. 

The  point,  however,  seems  not  to  have  been 
viewed,  in  all  its  respects,  in  a  correct  light. 

Before  the  present  Constitution  of  the  United 
States  began  to  operate,  the  regulations  of  the  dif 
ferent  States  respecting  distilled  spirits  were  very 
dissimilar.  In  some  of  them,  duties  were  laid  on 
foreign  spirits  only;  in  others,  on  domestic  as  well  as 
foreign.  The  absolute  duty,  in  former  instances, 
and  the  difference  of  duty  in  the  latter,  was,  upon  an 
average,  considerably  less  than  the  present  difference 
in  the  duties  on  foreign  and  home-made  spirits.  If 
to  this  be  added  the  effect  of  the  uniform  operation 
of  the  existing  duties  throughout  the  United  States, 
it  is  easy  to  infer  that  the  situation  of  our  own  dis 
tilleries  is,  in  the  main,  much  better,  as  far  as  they 
are  affected  by  the  laws,  than  it  was  previous  to  the 


382  Alexander  Hamilton 

passing  of  any  act  of  the  United  States  upon  the 
subject.  They  have,  therefore,  upon  the  whole, 
gained  materially  under  the  system  which  has  been 
pursued  by  the  National  Government. 

The  first  law  of  the  United  States  on  this  head  laid 
a  duty  of  no  more  than  eight  cents  per  gallon  on 
those  of  Jamaica  proof.  The  second  increased  the 
duty  on  foreign  spirits  to  twelve  cents  per  gallon,  of 
the  lowest  proof,  and  by  certain  gradations,  to  fif 
teen  cents  per  gallon,  of  Jamaica  proof.  The  last  act 
places  the  duty  at  twenty  cents  per  gallon,  of  the 
lowest  proof,  and  extends  it,  by  the  like  gradations, 
to  twenty-five  cents  per  gallon,  of  Jamaica  proof ;  lay 
ing  also  a  duty  of  eleven  cents  per  gallon  on  home 
made  spirits,  distilled  from  foreign  materials  of  the 
lowest  proof,  with  a  like  gradual  extension  to  fifteen 
cents  per  gallon  of  Jamaica  proof;  and  a  duty  of 
nine  cents  per  gallon  on  home-made  spirits,  distilled 
from  domestic  materials  of  the  lowest  proof,  with  the 
like  gradual  extension  to  thirteen  cents  per  gallon, 
of  Jamaica  proof. 

If  the  transition  had  been  immediate  from  the 
first  to  the  last  law,  it  could  not  have  failed  to  have 
been  considered  as  a  change  in  favor  of  our  own  dis 
tilleries,  as  far  as  the  rate  of  duty  is  concerned.  The 
mean  duty  on  foreign  spirits  by  the  first  law  was 
nine  cents;  by  the  last  the  mean  extra  duty  on  for 
eign  spirits  is,  in  fact,  about  eleven  cents,  as  it  re 
gards  spirits  distilled  from  foreign  materials,  and 
about  thirteen  as  it  regards  spirits  distilled  from 
domestic  materials.  In  making  this  computation,  it 
is  to  be  adverted  to  that  the  four  first  degrees  of 


Spirits  383 

proof  mentioned  in  the  law  correspond  with  the  dif 
ferent  kinds  of  spirits  usually  imported,  while  the 
generality  of  those  made  in  the  United  States  are  of 
the  lowest  class  of  proof. 

Spirits  from  domestic  materials  derived  a  double 
advantage  from  the  last  law;  that  is,  from  the  in 
creased  rate  of  duty  on  foreign  imported  spirits,  and 
from  a  higher  rate  of  duty  on  home-made  spirits  of 
foreign  materials. 

But  the  intervention  of  the  second  law  has  served 
to  produce  in  some  places  a  different  impression  of 
the  business  than  would  have  happened  without  it. 
By  a  considerable  addition  to  the  duties  on  foreign 
spirits,  without  laying  any  thing  on  those  of  home 
manufacture,  it  has  served  to  give  to  the  last  law 
the  appearance  of  taking  away  a  part  of  the  advan 
tages  previously  secured  to  the  domestic  distilleries. 
It  seems  to  have  been  overlooked  that  the  second  act 
•  ,  ought,  in  reality,  to  be  viewed  only  as  an  intermedi 
ate  step  to  the  arrangement  finally  contemplated  by 
the  Legislature;  and  that,  as  part  of  a  system,  it 
has,  upon  the  whole,  operated  in  favor  of  the  na 
tional  distilleries.  The  thing  to  be  considered  is  the 
substantial  existing  difference  in  favor  of  the  home 
manufacture  as  the  law  now  stands. 

The  advantage,  indeed,  to  the  distillation  of  spirits 
from  the  produce  of  the  country,  arising  from  the 
difference  between  the  duties  on  spirits  distilled  from 
foreign,  and  those  distilled  from  domestic  materials, 
is  exclusively  the  work  of  the  last  act,  and  is  an 
advantage  which  has  not  been  properly  appreciated 
by  those  distillers  of  spirits  from  home  produce  who 


384  Alexander  Hamilton 

have  complained  of  the  law  as  hurtful  to  their 
manufacture. 

Causes  entirely  foreign  to  the  law  itself  have  also 
assisted  in  producing  misapprehension.  The  ap 
proximation  of  the  price  of  home-made  spirits  to 
that  of  foreign  spirits,  which  has  of  late  taken  place, 
and  which  is  attributed  to  the  operation  of  the  act  in 
question,  is  in  a  great  degree  owing  to  the  circum 
stances  which  have  tended  to  raise  the  price  of 
molasses  in  the  West  India  market,  and  to  an  extra 
importation  of  foreign  spirits  prior  to  the  first  of 
July  last,  to  avoid  the  payment  of  the  additional 
duty  which  then  took  place. 

It  is  stated  in  the  petition  from  Salem  that  pre 
vious  to  the  last  act,  the  price  of  domestic  to  foreign 
spirits  was  as  is.  qd.  to  35.  4^.  of  the  money  of  Mas 
sachusetts  per  gallon,  and  that  since  that  act  it  has 
become  as  35.  $d.  to  45.  2d. 

It  is  evident  that  a  rise  from  15.  gd.  to  35.  3^.  per 
gallon,  which  would  be  equal  to  twenty  cents,  is  not 
to  be  attributed  wholly  to  a  duty  of  eleven  cents. 
Indeed,  if  there  were  a  concurrence  of  no  other 
cause,  the  inference  would  be  very  different  from 
that  intended  to  be  drawn  from  the  fact,  for  it  would 
evince  a  profit  gained  to  the  distiller  of  more  than 
eighty  per  cent,  on  the  duty. 

It  is,  however,  meant  to  be  understood  that  this 
approximation  of  prices  occasions  a  greater  importa 
tion  and  consumption  of  foreign,  and  a  less  consump 
tion  of  domestic,  spirits  than  formerly.  How  far 
this  may,  or  may  not  be  the  case,  the  Secretary  is 
not  now  able  to  say  with  precision,  but  no  facts  have 


Spirits  385 

come  under  his  notice  officially  which  serve  to  au 
thenticate  the  suggestion ;  and  it  must  be  considered 
as  possible  that  representations  of  this  kind  are 
rather  the  effect  of  apprehension  than  of  experience. 
It  would  even  be  not  unnatural  that  a  considerable 
enhancement  of  the  prices  of  the  foreign  article 
should  have  led  to  a  greater  consumption  of  the  do 
mestic  article,  as  the  cheaper  of  the  two,  though 
dearer  itself  than  formerly. 

But  while  there  is  ground  to  believe,  that  the  sug 
gestions  which  have  been  made  on  this  point  are,  in 
many  respects,  inaccurate  and  misconceived,  there 
are  known  circumstances  which  seem  to  render  ad 
visable  some  greater  difference  between  the  duties  on 
foreign  and  on  home-made  spirits.  These  circum 
stances  have  been  noticed  in  the  report  of  the 
Secretary  on  the  subject  of  manufactures,  and  an 
alteration  has  been  proposed  by  laying  two  cents  in 
addition  upon  imported  spirits  of  the  lowest  proof, 
with  a  proportional  increase  on  the  higher  proofs, 
and  by  deducting  one  cent  from  the  duty  on  the 
lowest  proof  of  home-made  spirits,  with  a  propor 
tional  diminution  in  respect  to  the  higher  proofs. 

This  alteration  would  bring  the  proportion  of  the 
duties  nearly  to  the  standard  which  the  petitioner, 
Hendrick  Dover,  who  appears  likely  to  be  well  in 
formed  on  the  subject,  represents  as  the  proper  one 
to  enable  the  distillation  of  Geneva  to  be  carried  on 
with  the  same  advantage  as  before  the  passing  of  the 
act.  He  observes,  that  the  duty  on  home-made  Gen 
eva  being  nine  cents,  the  additional  duty  on  foreign 
ought  to  have  been  twelve  cents.  By  the  alteration 


VOL.  II.  — 25. 


386  Alexander  Hamilton 

proposed,  the  proportion  will  be  as  ten  to  eight, 
which  is  little  different  from  that  of  twelve  to  nine. 

It  is  worthy  of  remark,  that  the  same  petitioner 
states,  that,  previous  to  the  passing  of  the  act  of 
which  he  complains,  he  "  could  sell  his  Geneva  sixteen 
and  a  quarter  per  cent,  under  the  price  of  Holland 
Geneva,  but  that  he  cannot  do  it  at  present,  and  in 
future,  lower  than  fourteen  per  cent."  If,  as  he 
also  states,  the  quality  of  his  Geneva  be  equal  to 
that  of  Holland,  and,  if  his  meaning  be,  as  it  appears 
to  be,  that  he  can  now  afford  to  sell  his  Geneva 
lower,  by  fourteen  per  cent,  than  the  Geneva  of 
Holland,  it  will  follow,  that  the  manufacture  of  that 
article  is  in  a  very  thriving  train,  even  under  the 
present  rate  of  duties.  For  a  difference  of  fourteen 
per  cent,  in  the  price  is  capable  of  giving  a  decided 
preference  to  the  sale  of  the  domestic  article. 

2.  It  is  objected,  that  the  duty,  by  being  laid  in 
the  first  instance  upon  the  distiller,  instead  of  the 
consumer,  makes  a  larger  capital  necessary  to  carry 
on  the  business;  and,  in  this  country,  where  capi 
tals  are  not  large,  puts  the  national  distiller  under 
disadvantages. 

But  this  inconvenience,  as  far  as  it  has  foundation, 
in  the  state  of  things,  is  essentially  obviated  by  the 
credits  given.  Where  the  duty  is  payable  upon  the 
quantity  distilled,  a  credit  is  allowed,  which  cannot 
be  less  than  six,  and  may  extend  to  nine,  months. 
Where  the  duty  is  charged  on  the  capacity  of  the 
still,  it  is  payable  half  yearly.  Sufficient  time  is, 
therefore,  allowed,  to  raise  the  duty  from  the  sale 
of  the  article:  which  supersedes  the  necessity  of  a 


Spirits  387 

greater  capital.  It  is  well  known,  that  the  article 
is  one  usually  sold  for  cash,  or  at  short  credit.  If 
these  observations  are  not  applicable  to  distilleries 
in  the  interior  country,  the  same  may  be  said,  in  a 
great  degree,  of  the  objection  itself.  The  course  of 
the  business,  in  that  quarter,  renders  a  considerable 
capital  less  necessary  than  elsewhere.  The  produce 
of  the  distiller's  own  farm,  or  of  the  neighboring 
farms,  brought  to  be  distilled  upon  shares,  or  com 
pensations  in  the  article  itself,  constitute  the  chief 
business  of  the  distilleries  in  the  remote  parts  of  the 
country.  In  the  comparatively  few  instances  in 
which  they  may  be  prosecuted  as  a  regular  business, 
upon  a  large  scale,  by  force  of  capital,  the  observa 
tions  which  have  been  made  will  substantially  apply. 

The  collection  of  the  duty  from  the  distiller,  has, 
on  the  other  hand,  several  advantages.  It  contrib 
utes  to  equality,  by  charging  the  article  in  the  first 
stage  of  its  progress,  which  diffuses  the  duty  among 
all  classes  alike.  It  the  better  secures  the  collection 
of  the  revenue,  by  confining  the  responsibility  to  a 
smaller  number  of  persons,  and  simplifying  the 
process.  And  it  avoids  the  necessity  of  so  great  a 
number  of  officers,  as  would  be  required  in  a  more 
diffused  system  of  collection,  operating  immediately 
upon  purchasers  and  consumers.  Besides,  that  the 
latter  plan  would  transfer  whatever  inconveniences 
may  be  incident  to  the  collection  from  a  smaller  to 
a  greater  number  of  persons. 

3.  It  is  alleged  that  the  inspection  of  the  officers 
is  injurious  to  the  business  of  distilling,  by  laying 
open  its  secrets  or  mysteries. 


388  Alexander  Hamilton 

Different  distillers,  there  is  no  doubt,  practise,  in 
certain  respects,  different  methods  in  the  course  of 
their  business,  and  have  different  degrees  of  skill. 
But  it  may  well  be  doubted  whether,  in  a  business 
so  old  and  so  much  diffused  as  that  of  the  distilla 
tion  of  spirits,  there  are  at  this  day  secrets  of  conse 
quence  to  the  possessors.  There  will,  at  least,  be  no 
hazard  in  taking  it  for  granted  that  none  such  exist 
in  regard  to  the  distillation  of  rum  from  molasses  or 
sugar,  or  of  the  spirits  from  grain  usually  called  whis 
key,  or  of  brandies  from  the  fruits  of  this  country. 
The  cases  in  which  the  allegations  are  made  with 
most  color  apply  to  Geneva,  and,  perhaps,  to  cer 
tain  cordials. 

It  is  probable  that  the  course  of  the  business  might 
and  would  always  be  such  as,  in  fact,  to  involve  no 
inconvenience  on  this  score.  But,  as  the  contrary 
is  affirmed,  and  as  it  is  desirable  to  obviate  com 
plaint  as  far  as  it  can  be  done  consistently  with 
essential  principles  and  objects,  it  may  not  be  un- 
advisable  to  attempt  a  remedy. 

It  is  to  be  presumed  that,  if  any  secrets  exist, 
they  relate  to  a  primary  process,  particularly  the 
mixture  of  the  ingredients;  this,  it  is  supposable, 
cannot  take  a  greater  time  each  day  than  two  hours. 
If,  therefore,  the  officers  of  inspection  were  enjoined 
to  forbear  their  visits  to  the  part  of  the  distillery 
commonly  made  use  of  for  such  process,  during  a 
space  not  exceeding  two  hours  in  each  day,  to  be 
notified  by  the  distiller,  there  is  ground  to  conclude 
that  it  would  obviate  the  objection. 

4.  The  regulations  for  marking  of  casks  and  ves- 


Spirits  389 

sels,  as  well  as  houses  and  buildings,  also  furnish 
matter  of  complaint. 

This  complaint,  as  it  regards  houses  and  build 
ings,  has  been  already  attended  to.  But  there  is  a 
light  in  which  it  is  made  that  has  not  yet  been  taken 
notice  of. 

It  is  said  that  the  requiring  the  doors  of  the  apart 
ments,  as  well  as  the  outer  door  of  each  building, 
to  be  marked,  imposes  unnecessary  trouble. 

When  it  is  considered  how  little  trouble  or  expense 
attends  the  execution  of  this  provision,  in  the  first 
instance,  and  that  the  marks  once  set  will  endure 
for  a  great  length  of  time,  the  objection  to  it  appears 
to  be  without  weight. 

But  the  provision,  as  it  relates  to  the  apartments 
of  buildings,  has  for  its  immediate  object  the  con 
venience  of  the  distillers  themselves.  It  is  calcu 
lated  to  avoid  the  very  evil  of  an  indiscriminate 
search  of  their  houses  and  buildings  by  enabling  them 
to  designate  the  particular  apartments  which  are 
employed  for  the  purposes  of  their  business,  and  to 
secure  all  others  from  inspection  and  visitation. 

The  complaint,  as  it  respects  the  marking  of  casks 
and  vessels,  has  somewhat  more  foundation.  It  is 
represented  (and  upon  careful  inquiry  appears  to  be 
true)  that,  through  long-established  prejudice,  home 
made  spirits  of  equal  quality  with  foreign,  if  known 
to  be  home-made,  will  not  command  an  equal  price. 
This  particularly  applies  to  Geneva. 

If  the  want  of  a  distinction  between  foreign 
and  home-made  spirits  were  an  occasion  of  fraud 
upon  consumers,  by  imposing  a  worse  for  a  better 


3QO  Alexander  Hamilton 

commodity,  it  would  be  a  reason  for  continuing  it; 
but  as  far  as  such  a  distinction  gives  operation  to  a 
mere  prejudice,  favorable  to  a  foreign  and  injurious 
to  a  domestic  manufacture,  it  furnishes  a  reason  for 
abolishing  it. 

Though  time  might  be  expected  to  remove  the 
prejudice,  the  progress  of  the  domestic  manufacture, 
in  the  interval,  might  be  materially  checked. 

It  appears,  therefore,  expedient  to  remove  this 
ground  of  complaint  by  authorizing  the  same  marks 
and  certificates  both  for  foreign  and  for  home-made 
Geneva. 

Perhaps,  indeed,  it  may  not  be  unadvisable  to 
vest  somewhere  a  discretionary  power  to  regulate  the 
forms  of  certificates  which  are  to  accompany,  and 
the  particular  marks  which  are  to  be  set  upon  casks 
and  vessels  containing  spirits,  generally,  as  may  be 
found  convenient  in  practice. 

Another  source  of  objection  with  regard  to  the 
marking  of  casks  is,  that  there  is  a  general  prohibi 
tion  against  defacing  or  altering  the  marks,  and  a 
penalty  upon  doing  it,  which  prevents  the  using  of 
the  same  casks  more  than  once,  and  occasions  waste, 
loss,  and  embarrassment. 

It  is  conceived  that  this  prohibition  does  not  ex 
tend  to  the  effacing  of  old  marks,  and  placing  of  new 
ones,  by  the  officers  of  the  revenue,  or  in  their  pre 
sence,  and  by  their  authority.  But  as  real  incon 
veniences  would  attend  a  contrary  construction,  and 
there  is  some  room  for  question,  it  appears  desirable 
that  all  doubt  should  be  removed  by  an  explicit  pro 
vision  to  enable  the  officer  to  efface  old  marks  and 


Spirits  391 

substitute  new  ones,  when  casks  have  been  emptied 
of  their  former  contents  and  are  wanted  for  new  use. 

5.  The  requisition  to  keep  an  account  from  day 
to  day  of  the  quantity  of  spirits  distilled  is  repre 
sented  both  as  a  hardship  and  impossible  to  be  com 
plied  with. 

But  the  Secretary  is  unable  to  perceive  that  it 
can  justly  be  viewed  either  in  the  one  or  in  the  other 
light.  The  trouble  of  setting  down,  in  the  evening, 
the  work  of  the  day  in  a  book  prepared  for  and  fur 
nished  to  the  party,  must  be  inconsiderable,  and 
the  doing  of  it  would  even  conduce  to  accuracy  in 
business. 

The  idea  of  impracticability  must  have  arisen  from 
some  misconception.  It  seems  to  involve  a  supposi 
tion  that  something  is  required  different  from  the 
truth  of  the  fact.  Spirits  distilled  are  usually  dis 
tinguished  into  high  wines,  proof  spirits,  and  low 
wines.  It  is  certainly  possible  to  express  each  day 
the  quantity  of  each  kind  produced,  and,  where  one 
kind  is  converted  into  another,  to  explain  it  by 
brief  notes,  showing  in  proper  columns  the  results  in 
those  kinds  of  spirits  which  are  ultimately  prepared 
for  sale. 

A  revision  is  now  making  of  the  forms  at  first 
transmitted,  and  it  is  not  doubted  that  it  will  be 
easy  to  obviate  the  objection  of  impracticability. 

On  full  reflection,  the  Secretary  is  of  opinion  that 
the  requisition  in  this  respect  is  a  reasonable  one,  and 
that  it  is  of  importance  to  the  due  collection  of  the 
revenue,  especially  in  those  cases  where,  by  the 
alternative  allowed  in  favor  of  country  distilleries, 


392  Alexander  Hamilton 

the  oath  of  a  party  is  the  only  evidence  of  the  quan 
tity  produced.  It  is  useful  in  every  such  case  to  give 
the  utmost  possible  precision  to  the  object  which  is 
to  be  attested. 

6.  It  is  alleged  as  a  hardship,  that  distilleries  are 
held  responsible  for  the  duties  on  spirits  which  are 
exported,   till   certain   things,    difficult   to   be  per 
formed,  are  done,  in  order  to  entitle  the  exporter 
to  the  drawback.     And  the  Government  relies  on 
the  bond  of  the  exporter  for  a  fulfilment  of  the  con 
ditions  upon  which  the  drawback  is  allowed. 

This  is  a  misapprehension.  The  drawback  is  at 
all  events  to  be  paid  in  six  months,  which  is  as  early 
as  the  duty  can  become  payable,  and  frequently 
earlier  than  it  does  become  payable. 

An  explanation  to  the  several  collectors  of  this 
point,  which  has  taken  place  since  the  complaint 
appeared,  will  have  removed  the  cause  of  it. 

The  same  explanation  will  obviate  another  objec 
tion,  founded  on  the  supposition  that  the  bond  of 
the  distiller  and  that  of  the  exporter  are  for  a  like 
purpose.  The  latter  is  merely  to  secure  the  landing 
of  the  goods  in  a  foreign  country,  and  will  often 
continue  depending  after  every  thing  relative  to  duty 
and  drawback  has  been  liquidated  and  finished. 

7.  It  is  an  article  of  complaint  that  no  drawback 
is  allowed  in  case  of  shipwreck,  when  spirits  are  sent 
from  one  port  to  another  in  the  United  States. 

There  does  not  occur  any  objection  to  a  provision 
for  making  an  allowance  of  that  kind,  which  would 
tend  to  alleviate  misfortune  and  give  satisfaction. 

8.  The  necessity  of  twenty-four  hours'  notice,  in 


Spirits  393 

order  to  the  benefit  of  drawback  on  the  exportation 
of  spirits,  and  the  prohibition  to  remove  them  from 
a  distillery  after  sunset,  except  in  the  presence  of 
an  officer,  are  represented  as  embarrassments  to 
business. 

The  length  of  notice  required  appears  greater  than 
is  necessary.  It  is  not  perceived  that  any  incon 
venience  could  arise  from  reducing  the  time  to  six 
hours. 

But  it  is  not  conceived  to  be  necessary  or  expe 
dient  to  make  an  alteration  in  the  last-mentioned 
particular.  The  prohibition  is  of  real  consequence 
to  the  security  of  the  revenue.  The  course  of  busi 
ness  will  readily  adapt  itself  to  it,  and  the  presence 
of  an  officer  in  extraordinary  cases  will  afford  due 
accommodation . 

9.  It  is  stated  as  a  hardship,  that  there  is  no 
allowance  for  leakage  and  wastage,  in  the  case  of 
spirits  shipped  from  one  State  to  another. 

The  law  for  the  collection  of  the  duties  on  imports 
and  tonnage  allows  two  per  cent,  for  leakage,  on 
spirits  imported.  A  similar  allowance  on  home 
made  spirits  at  the  distillery  does  not  appear  less 
proper. 

10.  It  is  mentioned  as  a  grievance,  that  distillers 
are  required  to  give  bond,  with  surety,  for  the  amount 
of  the  duties,  and  that  the  sufficiency  of  the  surety 
is  made  to  depend  on  the  discretion  of  the  chief 
officer  of  inspection. 

The  requiring  of  sureties  can  be  no  more  a  hard 
ship  on  distillers,  than  on  importing  merchants,  and 
every  other  person  to  whom  the  public  afford  a 


394  Alexander  Hamilton 

credit.  It  is  a  natural  consequence  of  the  credit 
allowed;  and  a  very  reasonable  condition  of  the  in 
dulgence,  which,  without  this  precaution,  might  be 
imprudent,  and  injurious  to  the  United  States. 

The  party  has  his  option  to  avoid  it  by  prompt 
payment  of  the  duty,  and  is  even  entitled  to  an 
abatement,  which  may  be  considered  as  a  premium, 
if  he  elects  to  do  so. 

As  to  the  second  point,  if  sureties  are  to  be  given, 
there  must  be  some  person  on  the  part  of  the  Gov 
ernment  to  judge  of  their  sufficiency,  otherwise  the 
thing  itself  would  be  nugatory;  and  the  discretion 
cannot  be  vested  more  conveniently  for  the  party, 
than  in  the  chief  officer  of  inspection  for  the  survey. 

A  view  has  now  been  taken  of  most,  if  not  of 
all,  the  objections  of  a  general  nature,  which  have 
appeared. 

Some  few,  of  a  local  complexion,  remain  to  be 
attended  to. 

The  representation  signed  Edward  Cook,  chair 
man,  as  on  behalf  of  the  four  most  western  counties 
of  Pennsylvania,  states  that  the  distance  of  that 
part  of  the  country  from  a  market  for  its  produce, 
leads  to  a  necessity  of  distilling  the  grain,  which  is 
raised,  as  a  principal  dependence  of  its  inhabitants; 
which  circumstance,  and  the  scarcity  of  cash,  com 
bine  to  render  the  tax  in  question  unequal,  oppress 
ive,  and  particularly  distressing  to  them. 

As  to  the  circumstance  of  equality,  it  may  safely 
be  affirmed  to  be  impracticable  to  devise  a  tax 
which  shall  operate  with  exact  equality  upon  every 
part  of  the  community.  Local  and  other  circum- 


Spirits  395 

stances  will  inevitably  create  disparities,  more  or 
less  great. 

Taxes  on  consumable  articles  have,  upon  the 
whole,  better  pretensions  to  equality  than  any  other. 
If  some  of  them  fall  more  heavily  on  particular  parts 
of  the  community,  others  of  them  are  chiefly  borne 
by  other  parts.  And  the  result  is  an  equalization 
of  the  burthen  as  far  as  it  is  attainable.  Of  this 
class  of  taxes  it  is  not  easy  to  conceive  one  which 
can  operate  with  greater  equality  than  a  tax  on  dis 
tilled  spirits.  There  appears  to  be  no  article,  as  far 
as  the  information  of  the  Secretary  goes,  which  is  an 
object  of  more  equal  consumption  throughout  the 
United  States. 

In  particular  districts,  a  greater  use  of  cider  may 
occasion  a  smaller  consumption  of  spirits ;  but  it  will 
not  be  found,  on  a  close  examination,  that  it  makes 
a  material  difference.  A  greater  or  less  use  of  ardent 
spirits,  as  far  as  it  exists,  seems  to  depend  more  on 
relative  habits  of  sobriety  or  intemperance  than  on 
any  other  cause. 

As  far  as  habits  of  less  moderation,  in  the  use  of 
distilled  spirits,  should  produce  inequality  anywhere, 
it  would  certainly  not  be  a  reason  with  the  Legisla 
ture  either  to  repeal  or  lessen  a  tax,  which,  by  ren 
dering  the  article  dearer,  might  tend  to  restrain  too 
free  an  indulgence  of  such  habits. 

It  is  certainly  not  obvious  how  this  tax  can  op 
erate  particularly  unequally  upon  the  part  of  the 
country  in  question.  As  a  general  rule  it  is  a  true 
one,  that  duties  on  articles  of  consumption  fall  on 
the  consumers,  by  being  added  to  the  price  of  the 


396  Alexander  Hamilton 

commodity.  This  is  illustrated,  in  the  present  in 
stance,  by  facts.  Previous  to  the  law  laying  a  duty 
on  home-made  spirits,  the  price  of  whiskey  was 
about  thirty-eight  cents;  it  is  now  about  fifty-six 
cents.  Other  causes  may  have  contributed  in  some 
degree  to  this  effect,  but  it  is  evidently  to  be  ascribed 
chiefly  to  the  duty. 

Unless,  therefore,  the  inhabitants  of  the  counties 
which  have  been  mentioned  are  greater  consumers 
of  spirits  than  those  of  other  parts  of  the  country, 
they  cannot  pay  a  greater  proportion  of  the  tax. 
If  they  are,  it  is  their  interest  to  become  less  so.  It 
depends  on  themselves,  by  diminishing  the  consump 
tion,  to  restore  equality. 

The  argument  that  they  are  obliged  to  convert 
their  grain  into  spirits,  in  order  to  transportation  to 
distant  markets,  does  not  prove  the  point  alleged. 
The  duty  on  all  they  send  to  those  markets  will  be 
paid  by  the  purchasers.  They  will  still  pay  only 
upon  their  own  consumption. 

As  far  as  an  advance  is  laid  upon  the  duty,  or  as 
far  as  the  difference  of  duty  between  whiskey  and 
other  spirits  tends  to  favor  a  greater  consumption 
of  the  latter,  they,  as  greater  manufacturers  of  the 
article,  supposing  this  fact  to  be  as  stated,  will  be 
proportionably  benefited. 

The  duty  on  home-made  spirits  from  domestic  ma 
terials,  if  paid  by  the  gallon,  is  nine  cents.  From 
the  communications  which  have  been  received  since 
the  passing  of  the  act,  it  appears  that,  paying  the 
rate  annexed  to  the  capacity  of  the  still,  and  using 
great  diligence,  the  duty  may  be,  in  fact,  reduced  to 


Spirits  397 

six  cents  per  gallon.  Let  the  average  be  taken  at 
seven  and  a  half  cents,  which  is  probably  higher 
than  is  really  paid. 

Generally  speaking,  then,  for  every  gallon  of  whis 
key  which  is  consumed,  the  consumer  may  be  sup 
posed  to  pay  seven  and  a  half  cents ;  but  for  every 
gallon  of  spirits,  distilled  from  foreign  materials,  the 
consumer  pays  at  least  eleven  cents,  and  for  every 
gallon  of  foreign  spirits,  at  least  twenty  cents.  The 
consumer,  therefore,  of  foreign  spirits  pays  nearly 
three  times  the  duty,  and  the  consumer  of  home 
made  spirits,  from  foreign  materials,  nearly  fifty 
per  cent,  more  duty,  on  the  same  quantity,  than  the 
consumer  of  spirits  from  domestic  materials,  exclu 
sive  of  the  greater  price,  in  both  cases,  which  is  an 
additional  charge  upon  each  of  the  two  first-men 
tioned  classes  of  consumers. 

When  it  is  considered  that  -/T  parts  of  the  whole 
quantity  of  spirits  consumed  in  the  United  States 
are  foreign,  and  -£T  are  of  foreign  materials,  and  that 
the  inhabitants  of  the  Atlantic  and  midland  coun 
ties  are  the  principal  consumers  of  these  more  highly 
taxed  articles,  it  cannot  be  inferred  that  the  tax 
under  consideration  bears  particularly  hard  on  the 
inhabitants  of  the  Western  country. 

This  may  serve  as  an  exemplification  of  a  general 
proposition,  of  material  consequence,  namely,  that  if 
the  former  descriptions  of  citizens  are  able,  from 
situation,  to  obtain  more  for  their  produce  than  the 
latter,  they  contribute  proportionally  more  to  the 
revenue.  Numerous  other  examples,  in  confirma 
tion  of  this,  might  be  adduced. 


398  Alexander  Hamilton 

As  to  the  circumstance  of  scarcity  of  money,  as 
far  as  it  can  be  supposed  to  have  foundation,  it  is  as 
much  an  objection  to  any  other  tax  as  the  one  in 
question.  The  weight  of  the  tax  is  not  certainly 
such  as  to  involve  any  peculiar  difficulty.  It  is  im 
possible  to  conceive  that  nine  cents  per  gallon  on 
distilled  spirits,  which  is  stating  it  at  the  highest, 
can,  from  the  magnitude  of  the  tax,  distress  any 
part  of  the  country,  which  has  an  ability  to  pay 
taxes  at  all — enjoying,  too,  the  unexampled  advan 
tage  of  a  total  exemption  from  taxes  on  houses, 
lands,  or  stock. 

The  population  of  the  United  States  being  about 
four  millions  of  persons,  and  the  quantity  of  spirits 
annually  consumed  between  ten  and  eleven  millions 
of  gallons,  the  yearly  proportion  to  each  family,  if 
consisting  of  six  persons,  which  is  a  full  ratio,  would 
be  about  sixteen  gallons,  the  duty  upon  which  would 
be  less  than  one  dollar  and  a  half.  The  citizen  who 
is  able  to  maintain  a  family,  and  who  is  the  owner 
or  occupier  of  a  farm,  cannot  feel  any  inconven 
ience  from  so  light  a  contribution;  and  the  industri 
ous  poor,  whether  artisans  or  laborers,  are  usually 
allowed  spirits,  or  an  equivalent,  in  addition  to  their 
wages. 

The  Secretary  has  no  evidence  to  satisfy  his  mind 
that  a  real  scarcity  of  money  will  be  found,  on  ex 
periment,  a  serious  impediment  to  the  payment  of 
the  tax  anywhere.  In  the  quarter  where  this  com 
plaint  has  particularly  prevailed,  the  expenditures, 
for  the  defence  of  the  frontier,  would  seem  alone 
sufficient  to  obviate  it.  To  this  it  is  answered  that 


Spirits  399 

the  contractors  for  the  supply  of  the  army  operate 
with  goods,  and  not  with  money.  But  this  still 
tends  to  keep  at  home  whatever  money  finds  its  way 
there.  Nor  is  it  a  fact,  if  the  information  of  the 
Secretary  be  not  materially  erroneous,  that  the  pur 
chases  of  the  contractors  of  flour,  meat,  etc.,  are 
wholly  with  goods.  But,  if  they  were,  the  Secretary 
can  aver  that  more  money  has,  in  the  course  of  the 
last  year,  been  sent  into  the  Western  country  from 
the  treasury,  in  specie  and  bank-bills,  which  answer 
the  same  purpose,  for  the  pay  of  the  troops  and 
militia,  and  for  the  quartermaster's  supplies,  than 
the  whole  amount  of  the  tax  in  the  four  western 
counties  of  Pennsylvania  and  the  district  of  Ken 
tucky  is  likely  to  equal  in  four  or  five  years.  Simi 
lar  remittances  are  likely  to  be  made  in  future. 

Hence,  the  Government  itself  furnishes,  and,  in  all 
probability,  will  continue  to  furnish,  the  means  of 
paying  its  own  demands,  with  a  surplus  which  will 
sensibly  foster  the  industry  of  the  parties  concerned, 
if  they  avail  themselves  of  it,  under  the  guidance  of 
a  spirit  of  economy  and  exertion. 

Whether  there  be  no  part  of  the  United  States  in 
which  the  objection  of  want  of  money  may  truly  ex 
ist,  in  a  degree  to  render  the  payment  of  the  duty 
seriously  distressing  to  the  inhabitants,  the  Secre 
tary  is  not  able  to  pronounce.  He  can  only  express 
his  own  doubt  of  the  fact,  and  refer  the  matter  to 
such  information  as  the  members  of  any  district,  so 
situated,  may  have  it  in  their  power  to  offer  to  the 
legislative  body. 

Should  the  case  appear  to  exist,  it  would  involve 


400  Alexander  Hamilton 

the  necessity  of  a  measure,  in  the  abstract,  very 
ineligible,  that  is,  the  receipt  of  the  duty  in  the  article 
itself. 

If  an  alternative  of  this  sort  were  to  be  allowed, 
it  would  be  proper  to  make  it  the  duty  of  the  party 
paying  to  deliver  the  article  at  the  place  in  each  county 
where  the  office  of  inspection  is  kept,  and  to  regulate 
the  price  according  to  such  a  standard  as  would  in 
duce  a  preference  of  paying  in  cash,  except  from  a 
real  impracticability  of  obtaining  it. 

In  regard  to  the  petition  from  the  district  of  Ken 
tucky,  after  what  has  been  said  with  reference  to 
other  applications,  it  can  only  be  necessary  to  ob 
serve  that  the  exemption  which  is  sought  by  that 
petition  is  rendered  impracticable  by  an  express  pro 
vision  of  the  Constitution,  which  declares  that  "  all 
duties,  imposts,  and  excises  shall  be  uniform  through 
out  the  United  States." 

In  the  course  of  the  foregoing  examination  of  the 
objections  which  have  been  made  to  the  law,  some 
alterations  have  been  submitted  for  the  purpose  of 
removing  a  part  of  them.  The  Secretary  will  now 
proceed  to  submit  such  further  alterations  as  appear 
to  him  advisable,  arising  either  from  the  sugges 
tions  of  the  officers  of  the  revenue  or  from  his  own 
reflections. 

i.  It  appears  expedient  to  alter  the  distinction 
respecting  distilleries  from  domestic  materials  in 
cities,  towns,  and  villages,  so  as  to  confine  it  to  one 
or  more  stills  worked  at  the  same  distillery,  the 
capacity  or  capacities  of  which  together  do  not  fall 
short  of  four  hundred  gallons. 


;3  Spirits  401 

The  effectual  execution  of  the  present  provisions 
respecting  distilleries  from  home  materials  in  cities, 
towns,  and  villages  would  occasion  an  inconvenient 
multiplication  of  officers,  and  would,  in  too  great 
a  degree,  exhaust  the  product  of  the  duty  in  the 
expense  of  collection.  It  is  also  probable  that  the 
alteration  suggested  would  also  conduce  to  public 
satisfaction. 

2.  The  present  provisions  concerning  the  entering 
of  stills  are  found  by  experience  not  to  be  adequate, 
and,  in  some  instances,  not  convenient. 

It  appears  advisable  that  there  shall  be  one  office 
of  inspection  for  each  county,  with  authority  to  the 
supervisor  to  establish  more  than  one,  if  he  shall 
judge  it  necessary  for  the  accommodation  of  the 
inhabitants ;  and  that  every  distiller,  or  person  hav 
ing  or  keeping  a  still,  shall  be  required  to  make  en 
try  of  the  same  at  some  office  of  inspection  for  the 
county,  within  a  certain  determinate  period  in  each 
year.  It  will  be  proper,  also,  to  enjoin  upon  every 
person,  who,  residing  within  the  county,  shall  pro 
cure  a  still,  or  who,  removing  into  a  county,  shall 
bring  into  it  a  still,  within  twenty  days  after  such 
procuring  or  removal,  and  before  he  or  she  begins  to 
use  the  still,  to  make  entry  at  the  office  of  inspection. 
Every  entry,  besides  describing  the  still,  should 
specify  in  whose  possession  it  is,  and  the  pur 
pose  for  which  it  is  intended,  as,  whether  for  sale  or 
for  use  in  distilling;  and  in  the  case  of  a  removal 
of  the  person  from  another  place  into  the  county, 
shall  specify  the  place  from  which  the  still  shall 
have  been  brought.  A  forfeiture  of  the  still  ought,  in 


VOL.  H. — 26. 


402  Alexander  Hamilton 

every  case  in  which  an  entry  is  required,  to  attend 
an  omission  to  enter. 

This  regulation,  by  simplifying  the  business  of  en 
tering  stills,  would  render  it  easier  to  comprehend 
and  comply  with  what  is  required,  would  furnish  the 
officers  with  a  better  rule  for  ascertaining  delin 
quencies,  and,  by  avoiding  to  them  a  considerable 
degree  of  unnecessary  trouble,  will  facilitate  the  re 
taining  of  proper  characters  in  the  offices  of  collectors. 

3.  It  is  represented  that  difficulties  have,  in  some 
instances,  arisen,  concerning  the  persons  responsible 
for  the  duty.  The  apparent  not  being  always  the 
real  proprietor,  an  opportunity  for  collusion  is 
afforded;  and  without  collusion  the  uncertainty  is 
stated  as  a  source  of  embarrassment. 

It  also,  sometimes,  happens  that  certain  itinerant 
persons,  without  property,  complying  with  the  pre 
liminary  requisitions  of  the  law  as  to  entry,  etc., 
erect  and  work  stills  for  a  time,  and  before  a  half 
yearly  period  of  payment  arrives,  remove  and  evade 
the  duty. 

It  would  tend  to  remedy  these  inconveniences  if 
possessors  and  proprietors  of  stills  were  made  jointly 
and  severally  liable,  and  if  the  duty  were  made  a 
specific  lien  on  the  still  itself;  if,  also,  the  proprietor 
of  the  land  upon  which  any  still  may  be  worked 
should  be  made  answerable  for  the  duty,  except 
where  it  is  worked  by  a  lawful  and  bona-fide  tenant 
of  the  land  of  an  estate  not  less  than  for  a  term  of 
one  year,  or  unless  such  proprietor  can  make  it  ap 
pear  that  the  possessor  of  the  still  was,  during  the 
whole  time,  without  his  privity  or  connivance,  an 


Spirits  403 

intruder  or  trespasser  on  the  land;  and  if,  in  the 
last  place,  any  distiller,  about  to  remove  from  the 
division  in  which  he  is,  should  be  required,  previous 
to  such  removal,  to  pay  the  tax  for  the  year,  de 
ducting  any  prior  payments,  or  give  bond,  with  ap 
proved  security,  conditioned  for  the  payment  of  the 
full  sum  for  which  he  or  she  should  be  legally  ac 
countable  to  the  end  of  the  year,  to  the  collector  of 
the  division  to  which  the  removal  shall  be,  rendering 
proof  thereof,  under  the  hand  of  the  said  collector, 
within  six  months  after  the  expiration  of  the  year. 

As  well  with  a  view  to  the  forfeiture  of  the  still 
for  non-entry,  as  to  give  effect  to  a  specific  lien  of 
the  duty  (if  either  or  both  of  these  provisions  should 
be  deemed  eligible),  it  will  be  necessary  to  enjoin  it 
upon  the  officers  of  the  revenue  to  identify,  by  pro 
per  marks,  the  several  stills  which  shall  have  been 
entered  with  them. 

4.  The  exemptions  granted  to  stills  of  the  capacity 
of  fifty  gallons  and  under,  by  the  36th  section  of  the 
law,  appear,  from  experience,  to  require  revision. 

Tending  to  produce  inequality,  as  well  as  to  frus 
trate  the  revenue,  they  have  excited  complaint.  It 
appears,  at  least,  advisable,  that  the  obligation  to 
enter,  as  connected  with  that  of  paying  duty,  should 
extend  to  stills  of  all  dimensions,  and  that  it  should 
be  enforced,  in  every  case,  by  the  same  penalty. 

5.  The  28th  section  of  the  act  makes  provision  for 
the  seizure  of  spirits,  unaccompanied  with  marks 
and  certificates,  in  the  cases  in  which  they  are  re 
quired;    but  as  they  are  required  only  in  certain 
cases,  and  there  is  no  method  of  distinguishing  the 


404  Alexander  Hamilton 

spirits,  in  respect  to  which  they  are  necessary,  from 
those  in  respect  to  which  they  are  not  necessary,  the 
provision  becomes  nugatory,  because  an  attempt 
to  enforce  it  would  be  oppressive.  Hence,  not  only 
a  great  security  for  the  due  execution  of  the  law  is 
lost,  but  seizures  very  distressing  to  unoffending  in 
dividuals  must  happen,  notwithstanding  great  pre 
caution  to  avoid  them. 

It  would  be,  in  the  opinion  of  the  Secretary,  of 
great  importance  to  provide,  that  all  spirits  what 
soever,  in  casks  or  vessels  of  the  capacity  of  twenty 
gallons  and  upwards,  should  be  marked  and  certi 
fied,  on  pain  of  seizure  and  forfeiture,  making  it  the 
duty  of  the  officers  to  furnish  the  requisite  certifi 
cates  gratis,  to  distillers  and  dealers,  in  all  cases  in 
which  the  law  shall  have  been  complied  with. 

In  those  cases  in  which  an  occasional  recurrence 
to  the  officers  for  certificates  might  be  inconvenient, 
blanks  may  be  furnished,  to  be  accounted  for.  And 
it  may  be  left  to  the  parties  themselves,  in  the  like 
cases,  to  mark  their  own  casks  or  vessels  in  some 
simple  manner,  to  be  defined  in  the  law.  These 
cases  may  be  designated  generally.  They  will  prin 
cipally  relate  to  dealers  who,  in  the  course  of  their 
business,  draw  off  spirits  from  larger  to  smaller 
casks,  and  to  distillers  who  pay  according  to  the 
capacities  of  their  stills. 

As  a  part  of  a  regulation  of  this  sort  it  will  be 
necessary  to  require  that  within  a  certain  period, 
sufficiently  long  to  admit  of  time  to  know  and  com 
ply  with  the  provision,  entry  shall  be  made  by  all 
dealers  and  distillers  of  all  spirits  in  their  respective 


Spirits  405 

possessions,  which  shall  not  have  been  previously 
marked  and  certified  according  to  law,  in  order  that 
they  may  be  marked  and  certified  as  old  stock. 

The  regulations  here  proposed,  though  productive 
of  some  trouble  and  inconvenience  in  the  outset,  will 
be  afterwards  a  security  both  to  individuals  and  to 
the  revenue. 

6.  At  present  spirits  may  not  be  imported  from 
abroad  in  casks  of  less  capacity  than  fifty  gallons. 
The  size  of  these  casks  is  smaller  than  is  desirable, 
so  far  as  the  security  of  the  revenue  is  concerned, 
and  there  has  not  occurred  any  good  objection  to 
confining  the  importation  to  larger  casks, — that  is 
to  say,  to  casks  of  not  less  than  ninety  gallons.    Cer 
tainly,  as  far  as  respects  rum  from  the  West  Indies, 
it  may  be  done  without  inconvenience,  being  con 
formable  to  the  general  course  of  business.     The  re 
sult  of  examination  is  that  the  exception  as  to  this 
particular,  in  favor  of  gin,  may  be  abolished.    Should 
any  alteration  on  this  subject  take  place,  it  ought 
not  to  begin  to  operate  till  after  the  expiration  of 
the  year. 

7.  There  is  ground  to  suppose  that  the  allowance 
of  drawback,  without  any  limitation  as  to  quantity, 
has  been  abused.    It  is  submitted  that  none  be  made 
on  any  less  quantity  than  one  hundred  and  fifty 
gallons. 

8.  There  is  danger  that  facility  may  be  given  to 
illicit  importations  by  making  use  of  casks  which 
have  been  once  regularly  marked,  and  the  certifi 
cates  which  have  been  issued  with  them,  to  cover 
other  spirits  than  those  originally  contained  in  such 


406  Alexander  Hamilton 

casks.  Appearances  which  countenance  suspicion  on 
this  point  have  been  the  subjects  of  representation 
from  several  quarters. 

The  danger  may  be  obviated  by  prohibiting  the 
importation  in  such  marked  casks  on  pain  of  forfeit 
ure  both  of  the  spirits  and  of  any  ship  or  vessel  in 
which  they  may  be  brought.  A  prohibition  of  this 
sort  does  not  appear  liable  to  any  good  objection. 

9.  The  duty  of  sixty  cents  per  gallon  of  the  capac 
ity  of  a  still  was  founded  upon  a  computation  that 
a  still  of  any  given  dimensions,  worked  four  months 
in  the  year,  which  is  the  usual  period  of  country 
distillation,  would  yield  a  quantity  of  spirits,  which, 
at  the  rate  of  nine  cents  per  gallon,  would  corre 
spond  with  sixty  cents  per  gallon  of  the  capacity  of 
the  still.  It  will  deserve  consideration  whether  it  will 
not  be  expedient  to  give  an  option  to  country  dis 
tillers,  at  the  annual  entry  of  their  stills,  to  take 
out  a  license  for  any  portion  of  the  year  which  they 
may  respectively  think  fit,  and  to  pay  at  the  rate  of 
twelve  and  a  half  cents  per  gallon  of  the  capacity, 
per  month,  during  such  period.  This  to  stand  in 
lieu  of  the  alternative  of  paying  by  the  gallon  dis 
tilled;  it  would  obviate  in  this  case  the  necessity  of 
accounting  upon  oath,  and  would  leave  it  in  the 
power  of  each  distiller  to  cover  the  precise  time  he 
meant  to  work  his  still  with  a  license,  and  to  pay 
for  that  time  only.  A  strict  prohibition  to  distil  at 
any  other  time  than  that  for  which  the  license  was 
given  would  be  of  course  necessary  to  accompany 
the  regulation  as  far  as  regarded  any  such  licensed 
distiller. 


Spirits  407 

The  only  remaining  points  which  have  occurred, 
as  proper  to  be  submitted  to  the  consideration  of  the 
Legislature,  respect  the  officers  of  the  revenue. 

It  is  represented  that,  in  some  instances,  from  the 
ill  humor  of  individuals,  the  officers  have  experi 
enced  much  embarrassment  in  respect  to  the  filling 
of  stills  with  water  to  ascertain  their  capacity,  which, 
upon  examination,  is  found  the  most  simple  and 
practicable  mode.  The  proprietors  have,  in  some 
instances,  not  only  refused  to  aid  the  officers,  but 
have  even  put  out  of  their  way  the  means  by  which 
the  filling  might  be  conveniently  accomplished. 

It  would  conduce  to  the  easy  execution  of  the 
law,  and  to  the  very  important  purpose  of  retaining 
and  procuring  respectable  characters  as  collectors,  if 
the  proprietors  and  possessors  of  stills  were  required 
to  aid  them  in  the  execution  of  this  part  of  their 
duty,  or  to  pay  a  certain  sum  as  a  compensation  for 
the  doing  of  it. 

The  limits  assigned  in  the  law  respecting  compen 
sations  are  found  in  practice  essentially  inadequate 
to  the  object. 

This  is  so  far  the  case  that  it  becomes  the  duty  of 
the  Secretary  to  state  that  greater  latitude  in  this 
particular  is  indispensable  to  the  effectual  execution  of 
the  law. 

In  the  most  productive  divisions  the  commissions 
of  the  collectors  afford  but  a  moderate  compensa 
tion.  In  the  greatest  part  of  them  the  compensa 
tion  is  glaringly  disproportioned  to  the  service;  in 
many  of  them  it  falls  materially  short  of  the  expense 
of  the  officer. 


408  Alexander  Hamilton 

It  is  believed  that  in  no  country  whatever  has  the 
collection  of  a  similar  duty  been  effected  within  the 
limit  assigned.  Applying  in  the  United  States  to  a 
single  article  only,  and  yielding  consequently  a  less 
total  product  than  where  many  articles  are  compre 
hended,  the  expense  of  collection  must  of  necessity 
be  proportionally  greater. 

It  appears  to  the  Secretary  that  seven  and  a  half 
per  cent,  of  the  total  product  of  the  duties  on  dis 
tilled  spirits,  foreign  as  well  as  domestic,  and  not 
less,  will  suffice  to  defray  the  compensations  to  offi 
cers  and  other  expenses  incidental  to  the  collection 
of  the  duty.  This  is  to  be  understood  as  supple 
mental  to  the  present  custom-house  expenses. 

It  is  unnecessary  to  urge  to  the  House  of  Repre 
sentatives  how  essential  it  must  be  to  the  execution 
of  the  law,  in  a  manner  effectual  to  the  purposes  of 
the  Government  and  satisfactory  to  the  community, 
to  secure  by  competent  though  moderate  rewards 
the  diligent  services  of  respectable  and  trustworthy 
characters. 

All  which  is  humbly  submitted. 

ALEXANDER  HAMILTON, 

Secretary  of  the  Treasury. 


ADDITIONAL   SUPPLIES    FOR    1792 

Communicated  to  the  House  of  Representatives,  March  17,  1792. 
TREASURY  DEPARTMENT,  March  16,  1792. 

The  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,   pursuant  to  a 
resolution  of  the  House  of  Representatives,  of  the 


Additional  Supplies  409 

8th  instant,  directing  the  said  Secretary  to  report 
to  the  House  his  opinion  of  the  best  mode  of  raising 
the  additional  supplies  requisite  for  the  ensuing  year, 
respectfully  submits  the  following  report : 

The  sum  which  is  estimated  to  be  necessary  for 
carrying  into  effect  the  purposes  of  the  act  for 
making  further  and  more  effectual  provision  for  the 
protection  of  the  frontiers  of  the  United  States,  be 
yond  the  provision  made  by  the  act  making  ap 
propriations  for  the  support  of  Government  for  the 
year  1792,  is  $675,950.08. 

The  returns  which  have  been  received  at  the 
treasury  subsequent  to  the  Secretary's  report  of  the 
23d  of  January  last,  among  which  are  those  of  some 
principal  ports,  afford  satisfactory  ground  of  assur 
ance  that  the  quarter  ending  the  last  of  December 
was  considerably  more  productive  than  it  was  sup 
posed  likely  to  prove,  authorizing  a  reliance  that 
the  revenues,  to  the  end  of  the  year  1791,  will  yield 
a  surplus  of  $150,000,  which  may  be  applied  in  part 
of  the  sum  of  $675,950.08,  above  stated  to  be 
necessary. 

Provision  remains  to  be  made  for  the  residue  of 
this  sum,  namely,  $525,950.08. 

Three  expedients  occur  to  the  option  of  the  Gov 
ernment  for  providing  this  sum. 

One,  to  dispose  of  the  interest  to  which  the 
United  States  are  entitled  in  the  Bank  of  the 
United  States.  This,  at  the  present  market  price 
of  bank  stock,  would  yield  a  clear  gain  to  the  Gov 
ernment  much  more  than  adequate  to  the  sum 
required. 


4io  Alexander  Hamilton 

Another,  to  borrow  the  money  upon  an  establish 
ment  of  funds,  either  merely  commensurate  with 
the  interest  to  be  paid,  or  affording  a  surplus  which 
will  discharge  the  principal  by  instalments  within  a 
short  time. 

The  third  is  to  raise  the  amount  by  taxes. 

The  first  of  these  three  expedients  appears  to  the 
Secretary  altogether  unadvisable. 

First.  It  is  his  present  opinion  that  it  will  be 
found,  in  various  respects,  permanently  the  interest 
of  the  United  States  to  retain  the  interest  to  which 
they  are  entitled  in  the  bank.  But, 

Secondly.  If  this  opinion  should  not  be  well 
founded,  it  would  be  improvident  to  dispose  of  it  at 
the  present  juncture,  since,  upon  a  comprehensive 
view  of  the  subject,  it  can  hardly  admit  of  a  doubt 
that  its  future  value,  at  a  period  not  very  distant, 
will  be  considerably  greater  than  its  present,  while 
the  Government  will  enjoy  the  benefit  of  whatever 
dividends  shall  be  declared  in  the  interval.  And, 

Thirdly.  Whether  it  shall  be  deemed  proper  to 
retain  or  dispose  of  this  interest,  the  most  useful  ap 
plication  of  the  proceeds  will  be  as  a  fund  for  ex 
tinguishing  the  public  debt.  A  necessity  of  applying 
it  to  any  different  object,  if  it  should  be  found  to 
exist,  would  be  matter  of  serious  regret. 

The  second  expedient  would,  in  the  judgment  of 
the  Secretary,  be  preferable  to  the  first. 

For  this,  the  following  reason,  if  there  were  no 
other,  is  presumed  to  be  conclusive,  namely,  that 
the  probable  increase  of  the  value  of  the  stock  may 
itself  be  estimated  as  a  considerable,  if  not  a  suffi- 


Additional  Supplies  411 

cient,  fund  for  the  repayment  of  the  sum  which 
might  be  borrowed. 

If  the  measure  of  a  loan  should  be  thought  eligi 
ble,  it  is  submitted,  as  most  advisable,  to  accom 
pany  it  with  a  provision  sufficient  not  only  to  pay 
the  interest,  but  to  discharge  the  principal  within 
a  short  period.  This  will  at  least  mitigate  the 
inconvenience  of  making  an  addition  to  the  public 
debt. 

But  the  result  of  mature  reflection  is,  in  the  mind 
of  the  Secretary,  a  strong  conviction  that  the  last 
of  the  three  expedients  which  have  been  mentioned, 
is  to  be  preferred  to  either  of  the  other  two. 

Nothing  can  more  interest  the  national  credit  and 
prosperity  than  a  constant  and  systematic  attention 
to  husband  all  the  means  previously  possessed  for  ex 
tinguishing  the  present  debt,  and  to  avoid  as  much 
as  possible  the  incurring  of  any  new  debt. 

Necessity  alone,  therefore,  can  justify  the  appli 
cation  of  any  of  the  public  property,  other  than  the 
annual  revenues,  to  the  current  service,  or  to  the 
temporary  and  casual  exigencies  of  the  country,  or 
the  contracting  of  an  additional  debt,  by  loans,  to 
provide  for  those  exigencies. 

Great  emergencies,  indeed,  might  exist,  in  which 
loans  would  be  indispensable.  But  the  occasions 
which  will  justify  them  must  be  truly  of  that  de 
scription. 

The  present  is  not  of  such  a  nature.  The  sum  to 
be  provided  is  not  of  magnitude  enough  to  furnish 
the  plea  of  necessity. 

Taxes  are  never  welcome  to  a  community.     They 


412  Alexander  Hamilton 

seldom  fail  to  excite  uneasy  sensations,  more  or  less 
extensive.  Hence,  a  too  strong  propensity  in  the 
governments  of  nations  to  anticipate  and  mortgage 
the  resources  of  posterity,  rather  than  encounter  the 
inconveniences  of  an  increase  of  taxes. 

But  this  policy,  when  not  dictated  by  very  pe 
culiar  circumstances,  is  of  the  worst  kind.  Its 
obvious  tendency  is,  by  enhancing  the  permanent 
burthens  of  the  people,  to  produce  lasting  distress, 
and  its  natural  issue  is  in  national  bankruptcy. 

It  will  be  happy  if  the  councils  of  this  country, 
sanctioned  by  the  voice  of  an  enlightened  commun 
ity,  shall  be  able  to  pursue  a  different  course. 

Yielding  to  this  impression,  the  Secretary  pro 
ceeds  to  state,  for  the  consideration  of  the  House, 
the  objects  which  have  occurred  to  him  as  most 
proper  to  be  resorted  to  for  raising  the  requisite  sum 
by  taxes. 

From  the  most  careful  view  which  he  is  able  to 
take  of  all  the  circumstances  that  at  the  present 
juncture  naturally  enter  into  consideration,  he  is 
led  to  conclude  that  the  most  eligible  mode  in  which 
the  necessary  provision  can  at  this  time  be  made  is 
by  some  additional  duties  on  imported  articles. 

This  conclusion  is  made  with  reluctance,  for  rea 
sons  which  were  noticed  upon  a  former  occasion, 
and  from  the  reflection  that  frequent  and  unex 
pected  alterations  in  the  rates  of  duties  on  the 
objects  of  trade,  by  inducing  uncertainty  in  mercan 
tile  speculations  and  calculations,  are  really  injuri 
ous  to  commerce,  and  hurtful  to  the  interests  of 
those  who  carry  it  on. 


Additional  Supplies  413 

The  stability  of  the  duties  to  be  paid  by  the  mer 
chants,  is,  in  fact,  of  more  consequence  to  them  than 
their  quantum,  if  within  reasonable  bounds. 

It  were,  therefore,  much  to  have  been  wished,  that 
so  early  a  resort  to  new  demands,  on  that  class  of 
citizens,  could  have  been  avoided,  and,  especially, 
that  they  could  have  been  deferred  until  a  general 
tariff  could  have  been  maturely  digested,  upon  prin 
ciples  which  might,  with  propriety,  render  it  essen 
tially  stationary. 

But,  while  there  are  these  motives  to  regret,  there 
are  others  of  a  consoling  tendency,  some  of  which 
indicate  that  an  augmentation  of  duties,  at  the 
present  juncture,  may  have  the  effect  of  lessen 
ing  some  public  evils,  and  producing  some  public 
benefits. 

It  is  a  pleasing  fact,  if  the  information  of  the  Sec 
retary  be  not  very  erroneous,  that  the  improved 
state  of  the  credit  of  this  country  enables  our  mer 
chants  to  procure  the  supplies  which  they  import 
from  abroad  upon  much  more  cheap  and  advant 
ageous  terms  than  heretofore ;  a  circumstance  which 
must  alleviate  to  them  the  pressure  of  somewhat 
higher  rates  of  duty,  and  must  contribute,  at  the 
same  time,  to  reconcile  them  to  burthens,  which, 
being  connected  with  an  efficacious  discharge  of  the 
duty  of  the  Government,  are  of  a  nature  to  give 
solidity  and  permanency  to  the  advantages  they 
enjoy  under  it. 

It  is  certain,  also,  that  a  spirit  of  manufacturing 
prevails  at  this  time,  in  a  greater  degree  than  it  has 
done  at  any  antecedent  period;  and,  as  far  as  an 


414  Alexander  Hamilton 

increase  of  duties  shall  tend  to  second  and  aid  this 
spirit,  they  will  serve  to  promote  essentially  the  in 
dustry,  the  wealth,  the  strength,  the  independence, 
and  the  substantial  prosperity  of  the  country. 

The  returns  for  a  year,  ending  with  the  thirtieth 
of  September  last,  an  abstract  of  which  is  in  prepara 
tion  to  be  communicated  to  the  Legislature,  evince 
a  much  increased  importation  during  that  year, 
greater  far  than  can  be  referred  to  a  naturally  in 
creasing  demand  from  the  progress  of  population, 
and  announce  a  probability  of  a  more  than  propor 
tional  increase  of  consumption;  there  being  no  ap 
pearance  of  an  extraordinary  abundance  of  goods  in 
the  market.  If,  happily,  an  extension  of  the  duties 
shall  operate  as  a  restraint  upon  excessive  consump 
tion,  it  will  be  a  salutary  means  of  preserving  the 
community  from  future  embarrassment,  public  and 
private.  But,  if  this  should  not  be  the  case,  it  is  at 
least  prudent  in  the  Government  to  extract  from 
it  the  resources  necessary  for  current  exigencies, 
rather  than  postpone  the  burthen  to  a  period  when 
that  very  circumstance  may  cause  it  to  be  more 
grievously  felt. 

These  different  considerations  unite  with  others, 
which  will  suggest  themselves,  to  induce,  in  the 
present  state  of  things,  a  preference  of  taxes  on  im 
ported  articles  to  any  other  mode  of  raising  the  sum 
required. 

It  is,  therefore,  respectfully  submitted,  that  the 
existing  duties  on  the  articles  hereafter  enumerated, 
be  repealed,  and  that,  in  place  of  them,  the  following 
be  laid,  viz. : 


Additional  Supplies  415 

WINES. 

Per  Gall. 

Madeira,  of  the  quality  of  London  particular       .     $o  56 

Madeira,  of  the  quality  of  London  market  .         ..  49 

Other  Madeira  wine     .         .        ,       ,.         .         ,.  40 

Sherry ;        '.,,  33 

St.  Lucar     .         .         .     >^ .-,     ....     .      ',*,       -«—  30 

Lisbon          ........  25 

Oporto 25 

Teneriffe  and  Fayal 20 

All  other  wines,  40  per  centum  ad  valorem. 

SPIRITS. 

Those  distilled  wholly  or  chiefly  from  grain. 

Per  Gall. 

Of  the  first  class  of  proof $o  28 

Of  the  second  "          " 29 

Of  the  third     "           " 31 

Of  the  fourth  "           " 34 

Of  the  fifth      "           " 40 

Of  the  sixth     "          " 50 

OTHER  DISTILLED  SPIRITS. 

Per  Gall. 

Of  the  second  class  of  proof,  and  under      .         .     $o  24 

Of  the  third           "               27 

Of  the  fourth         "         " 31 

Of  the  fifth            "         ".....        .  37 

Of  the  sixth           "         "     .         .-       .         .  ..      .  45 

Beer,  ale,  and  porter   ....    per  gallon,  o  08 

Steel per  cwt.,      i  oo 

Nails    .......    per  lb.,  2 

Cocoa 2 

Chocolate "  3 

Playing  cards per  pack,  25 

Shoes  and  slippers  of  silk     ....      '   ;•; .-<.  20 


4i 6  Alexander  Hamilton 

Shoes  and  slippers  of  stained  or  colored  leather 

(other  than  black),  for  men  and  women  .  $o  10 

Ditto  for  children         .         .         .         .         .         .  7 

All  other  shoes  and  slippers  (for  men  and  women), 

clogs  and  goloshes  ....  ^'^  10 

All  other  shoes  and  slippers  for  children       .         .  7 

ARTICLES  AD  VALOREM. 
15  per  cent,  ad  valorem. 

China  wares. 

Looking-glass,  window,  and  other  glass,  and  all  manufac 
tures  of  glass,  black  quart  bottles  excepted. 
Muskets. 
Pistols. 

Swords,  cutlasses,  hangers,  and  other  fire-  and  side-arms 
Starch. 
Hair  powder. 
Wafers. 
Glue. 

10  per  cent,  ad  valorem. 

Cast,  slit,  and  rolled  iron,  and  generally  all  manufactures 
of  iron,  steel,  tin,  pewter,  copper,  brass,  or  of  which 
either  of  these  metals  is  the  article  of  chief  value  (not 
being  otherwise  particularly  enumerated). 

Leather,  tanned  and  tawed,  and  all  manufactures  of 
leather,  or  of  which  leather  is  the  article  of  chief 
value  (not  being  otherwise  particularly  enumerated). 

Cabinet  wares. 

Medicinal  drugs,  except  those  commonly  used  in  dyeing. 

Hats,  caps,  and  bonnets,  of  every  sort. 

Gloves  and  mittens. 

Stockings. 

Millinery,  ready  made. 


Additional  Supplies  417 

Artificial  flowers,  feathers,  and  other  ornaments  for  wo 
men's  head-dresses. 

Fans. 

Dolls,  dressed  and  undressed. 

Toys. 

Buttons  of  every  kind. 

Carpets  and  carpeting,  mats  and  floor-cloths. 

Sail-cloth. 

Sheathing  and  cartridge  paper. 

All  powders,  pastes,  balls,  balsams,  ointments,  oils,  waters, 
washes,  tinctures,  essences,  liquors,  or  other  prepara 
tion  or  composition,  commonly  called  sweet  scents, 
odors,  perfumes,  or  cosmetics. 

All  dentifrice,  powders,  tinctures,  preparations,  or  compo 
sitions,  whatsoever,  for  the  teeth  or  gums. 

Printed  books,  except  those  specially  imported  for  a  col 
lege,  academy  or  other  public  or  incorporated  semi 
nary  of  learning  or  institution,  which  shall  be  wholly 
exempted  from  duty. 

The  foregoing  duties  to  be  permanently  estab 
lished,  and  to  be  appropriated,  in  the  first  place,  to 
the  payment  of  the  interest  of  the  public  debt;  in 
the  second,  to  such  other  grants  and  appropriations 
as  have  been  heretofore  made;  and  in  the  third,  to 
the  purposes  of  the  act  for  making  further  and  more 
effectual  provision  for  the  protection  of  the  fron 
tiers  of  the  United  States. 

An  addition  of  two  and  a  half  per  cent,  ad  valorem 
to  be  made  to  the  duty  on  all  goods  heretofore  rated 
at  five  per  centum  ad  valorem. 

This  addition  to  be  temporary,  and  accordingly 
to  be  so  established  as  that  it  shall  not  continue 

VOL.  n.— 27. 


418  Alexander  Hamilton 

longer  than  till  the  present  Indian  war  shall  ter 
minate,  and  the  expenses  of  carrying  it  on  shall  have 
been  defrayed,  which  will  of  course  include  the  re 
imbursement  of  any  sums  that  may  have  been  bor 
rowed  by  way  of  anticipation  of  the  product  of  the 
duties. 

It  is  represented  that  the  present  duty  on  salt 
operates  unequally,  from  the  considerable  difference 
in  weight,  in  proportion  to  quantity,  of  different 
kinds  of  salt;  a  bushel  weighing  from  about  fifty- 
six  to  upward  of  eighty  weight.  It  would  have  an 
equalizing  effect  if  the  bushel  were  defined  by  weight ; 
and  if  fifty-six  pounds  were  taken  as  the  standard, 
a  valuable  accession  to  the  revenue  would  result. 

This  regulation  is,  therefore,  submitted  as  a  re 
source  upon  the  present  occasion;  the  rate  of  duty 
to  remain  as  it  is. 

It  will  be  a  reasonable  accommodation  to  trade, 
if  it  is  made  a  part  of  this  arrangement,  to  extend 
the  credit  for  the  duty  on  salt  to  a  longer  term.  It 
is  an  article  which,  from  the  circumstances  of  its 
importation,  frequently  lies  on  hand  for  a  consider 
able  time;  ^and  in  relation  to  the  fisheries,  is  usually 
sold  upon  a  credit  of  several  months. 

Some  remarks  may  be  proper  in  regard  to  the  pro 
posed  duties.  Those  on  spirits  and  wines  may  ap 
pear  high.  They  are,  doubtless,  considerable.  But 
there  are  precedents,  elsewhere,  of  much  higher 
duties  on  the  same  articles.  And  it  is  certainly,  in 
every  view,  justifiable  to  make  a  free  use  of  them  for 
the  purpose  of  revenue. 

Wines,  generally  speaking,  are  the  luxury  of  classes 


Additional  Supplies  419 

of  the  community  who  can  afford  to  pay  a  consider 
able  duty  upon  them. 

It  has  appeared  advisable  to  adhere  to  the  idea  of 
a  specific  duty  per  quantity  on  all  the  species  of 
wines  in  most  common  consumption  in  the  country, 
and  those  most  susceptible  of  precise  designation,  as 
affording  greatest  certainty  to  the  revenue;  and  to 
adopt  a  general  ad- valorem  rate  for  other  kinds,  pro 
portioned  to  the  specific  duties.  This  rate  is  forty 
per  cent. 

The  distinction  has  proceeded  from  the  difficulty 
of  a  precise  enumeration  of  all  the  other  kinds  of 
wine  which  are,  and  may  be,  imported,  and  of  such 
an  adjustment  of  specific  rates  as  will  bear  some 
reasonable  proportion  to  the  value  of  the  article. 
The  present  lowest  rate  of  duty  on  wines  amounts 
to  two  hundred  and  three  hundred  per  cent,  on  the 
value  of  certain  kinds,  which  may  be  considered  as 
equivalent  to  a  prohibition. 

While,  therefore,  ideas  of  proportion  will  be  bet 
ter  consulted  than  heretofore  by  the  proposed  ar 
rangement,  it  is  probable  that  the  revenue  will  be 
benefited,  rather  than  injured,  by  a  reduction  of  the 
duties  on  low-priced  wines. 

The  considerations  which  render  ardent  spirits  a 
proper  object  of  high  duties  have  been  repeatedly 
dwelt  upon.  It  may  be  added,  that  it  is  a  familiar 
and  a  just  remark  that  the  peculiarly  low  price  of 
ardent  spirits  in  this  country  is  a  great  source  of 
intemperance. 

To  bring  the  price  of  the  article  more  nearly  to 
a  level  with  the  price  of  it  in  other  markets  by  an 


420  Alexander  Hamilton 

increase  of  duty,  while  it  will  contribute  to  the  ad 
vancement  of  the  revenue,  cannot  but  prove,  in 
other  respects,  a  public  benefit. 

The  rates  proposed  will  be  still  moderate,  com 
pared  with  examples  in  other  countries;  and  the 
article  is  of  a  nature  to  enable  the  importer,  without 
difficulty,  to  transfer  the  duty  to  the  consumer. 

A  discrimination  is  suggested  in  respect  to  duties 
on  spirits  distilled  from  grain.  To  this  there  have 
been  two  inducements:  one,  that  the  difference  in 
the  duty  is  conformable  to  the  difference  between 
the  cost  of  the  grain  spirits  usually  imported,  and 
that  of  West  India  rum.  Another,  that  it  is  in  a 
particular  manner  the  interest  of  the  United  States 
to  favor  the  distillation  of  its  own  grain,  in  com 
petition  with  foreign  spirits  from  the  same  material. 
In  the  second  division  of  spirits,  the  first  class  of 
proof  is  dropped,  because  none  of  it  comes  from  the 
West  Indies,  and  because  any  other  spirits,  usually 
imported,  which  may  be  of  so  low  a  proof,  are  higher 
priced,  even  than  some  of  the  higher  proofs  of  West 
India  spirits.  The  dropping  of  that  class  of  proof, 
therefore,  in  this  case,  is  favorable  to  the  revenue, 
and  favorable  to  equality. 

Several  of  the  other  specific  duties  which  are  pro 
posed,  besides  the  inducements  to  them  as  items  of 
revenue,  are  strongly  recommended  by  considera 
tions  which  have  been  stated  in  the  report  of  the 
Secretary,  on  the  subject  of  manufactures.  The 
same  report  states  inducements  to  a  15  per  cent, 
duty  on  some  of  the  articles  which  are  mentioned, 
as  proper  to  be  comprised  under  that  rate. 


Additional  Supplies  421 

With  regard  to  china  and  glass,  there  are  two 
weighty  reasons  for  a  comparatively  high  duty  upon 
them.  The  use  of  them  is  very  limited,  except  by 
the  wealthier  classes;  and  both  their  bulk  and 
liability  to  damage  in  transportation  are  great  se 
curities  against  evasions  of  the  revenue.  It  will, 
however,  merit  consideration,  whether,  for  the  ac 
commodation  of  importers,  a  longer  term  of  credit 
ought  not  to  be  allowed  on  these  articles. 

A  duty  of  two  cents  per  pound  on  cocoa  is  less, 
in  proportion  to  the  value,  than  the  present  duty  on 
coffee.  As  an  extensive  article  of  consumption,  it  is 
a  productive  one  of  revenue. 

The  duty  on  playing-cards  can  give  rise  to  no 
question  except  as  to  the  practicability  of  a  safe  col 
lection.  In  order  to  this,  it  will  be  proper  to  super- 
add  certain  precautions,  which  will  readily  occur  in 
regulating  the  details  of  a  bill  for  the  purpose.  A 
similar  attention  will  be  requisite  in  regard  to  the 
duties  on  wines.  The  employment  of  marks  and 
certificates  may  advantageously  be  extended  to  this 
article. 

The  rate  of  10  per  centum  ad  valorem,  it  is 
hoped,  will  not  be  deemed  immoderate  in  relation 
to  the  articles  to  which  it  is  proposed  to  apply 
it.  It  is  difficult  to  assign  rules  for  what  ought 
to  be  considered  as  a  just  standard.  But,  after 
the  best  consideration  which  the  Secretary  has 
been  able  to  bestow  upon  it,  he  cannot  discover 
that  any  real  inconvenience  is  likely,  permanently, 
to  result  from  the  extension  of  that  rate  to  the  cases 
proposed. 


422  Alexander  Hamilton 

The  addition  of  2\  per  cent,  to  the  duty  on  the 
mass  of  articles  now  rated  at  five,  will  constitute  an 
important,  though  not  an  excessive,  augmentation. 
Nevertheless,  it  is  proposed  that  it  shall  be  only 
temporary;  and  there  is  reasonable  ground  of  ex 
pectation,  that  the  cause  for  having  recourse  to  it 
will  not  be  of  very  long  continuance. 

It  will  not  have  escaped  the  observation  of  the 
House,  that  the  duties  which  were  suggested  in  the 
Secretary's  report  on  that  subject,  as  encourage 
ments  to  manufactures,  are,  for  the  most  part,  in 
cluded  among  the  objects  of  this  report. 

It  may  tend  to  avoid  future  embarrassment,  if 
such  abolitions  and  drawbacks  as  shall  be  deemed 
expedient,  with  a  view  to  promoting  manufactures, 
shall  accompany  the  establishment  and  appropriation 
of  whatever  further  duties  may  be  laid,  for  the  object 
in  contemplation.  And  it  may  be  found  convenient 
to  qualify  the  appropriation  of  the  surplus  which  is 
to  be  applied  to  that  object,  so  as  to  let  in  such  other 
appropriations,  during  the  session,  as  occurrences 
may  suggest. 

An  estimate  of  the  additional  revenue  which 
may  be  expected  from  the  proposed  duties  is  sub 
joined. 

It  will  occur  to  the  House,  that  the  credit  allowed 
for  the  duties  will  require  an  anticipation  of  their 
product  by  a  temporary  loan,  for  which  provision  in 
the  law  will  be  requisite. 

All  which  is  humbly  submitted. 

ALEXANDER  HAMILTON, 
Secretary  of  the  Treasury. 


Hamilton  to  Short  423 

HAMILTON    TO    SHORT1 
(Cabinet  Paper.) 

TREASURY  DEPARTMENT,  April  16,  1792. 

SIR: 

The  fluctuation  of  the  price  of  the  stocks  in  the 
United  States  is  a  circumstance  that  cannot  have 
failed  to  attract  your  attention,  nor  to  excite  a  tem 
porary  feeling  in  the  minds  of  foreigners.  Though  I 
doubt  not  it  will  be  well  explained  by  the  agents  of 
those  citizens  of  other  countries  who  have  vested 
their  moneys  in  our  funds,  I  think  it  necessary  that 
some  ideas  should  be  communicated  to  you,  on  which 
you  can  found  a  true  opinion,  either  for  your  own 
satisfaction  or  that  of  persons  interested  in  our  na 
tional  welfare,  with  whom  you  may  have  occasion 
to  confer. 

The  moderate  size  of  the  domestic  debt  of  the 
United  States  appears  to  have  created  the  most 
intemperate  ideas  of  speculation  in  the  minds  of  a 
very  few  persons,  whose  natural  ardor  had  been 
increased  by  great  success  in  some  of  the  early 
stages  of  the  melioration  of  the  market  value  of  the 
stock.  To  combinations  of  private  capitals  thus 
acquired  or  increased,  sums  of  specie,  obtained  as 
well  at  the  most  extravagant  rates  of  premium  as 

1  William  Short,  of  Virginia.  Born,  1759;  died  at  Philadelphia, 
1849.  He  was  Jefferson's  Secretary  of  Legation  at  Paris,  1784.  In 
1789  he  was  appointed  by  Washington  Charg6  d' Affaires  at  Paris,  and 
in  1792  Minister  to  Holland,  whence  he  was  transferred  to  Spain  in 
1794,  acting  first  in  the  capacity  of  commissioner  and  afterwards  of 
minister.  He  was  an  able  and  successful  diplomatist,  and  had  charge 
of  all  the  business  of  the  foreign  loans,  and  of  funding  and  paying  the 
foreign  debt. 


424  Alexander   Hamilton 

at  common  interest,  were  added,  and  to  these  were 
joined  purchases  of  stock  on  credits,  for  various 
terms,  so  as  to  create  a  delusive  confidence  that  the 
concentration  of  so  much  stock  in  a  few  hands 
would  secure  a  very  high  market  rate.  This  expec 
tation  was  increased  by  comparing  the  market  val 
ues  of  the  several  species  of  our  funds,  with  those  of 
the  same  species  of  stock  in  Great  Britain,  the 
United  Netherlands,  and  other  parts  of  Europe, 
without  due  allowance  for  the  deductions  which 
should  have  been  made  on  account  of  the  great  dif 
ference  in  the  value  of  money,  and  the  objections 
arising  from  our  distance  from  those  European 
money-holders  whose  capitals  they  expected  to  at 
tract,  and  other  relative  circumstances.  At  the 
time  when  many  heavy  engagements  thus  formed 
were  becoming  due,  some  contentions  among  the 
dealers  in,  and  proprietors  of,  the  debt,  took  place, 
and  counter  combinations  were  formed  to  render  the 
crisis  of  payment  and  speculation  as  inconvenient 
and  disadvantageous  as  possible.  By  these  means 
those  eventual  contracts,  it  was  probably  hoped, 
could  be  more  cheaply  complied  with;  and,  more 
over,  that  a  reduced  market  would  afford  fur 
ther  opportunities  of  beneficial  speculation.  The 
extreme  indiscretion  of  the  first-mentioned  specula 
tions,  and  the  distress  which,  it  was  manifest,  they 
must  produce,  excited,  perhaps,  and  animated  the 
movements  of  the  other  party,  and  brought  on  a 
scene  of  private  distress  for  money,  both  artificial 
and  real,  which  probably  has  not  been  equalled  in 
this  country.  It  happened  in  the  winter  season, 


Hamilton  to  Short  425 

when  the  influx  of  cash  articles  of  trade,  as  returns 
from  abroad,  is  nearly  suspended,  and  when  quan 
tities  of  specie  were  sent  from  the  seaports  to  the 
interior  country,  for  the  purchase  of  produce  to 
supply  the  demand  for  the  spring  exportation. 

The  banks,  who  can  always  perceive  the  approach 
of  these  things,  were  influenced  to  limit  their  op 
erations,  and  particularly  the  Bank  of  the  United 
States,  which  was  then  preparing  for  the  opening  of 
its  branches,  or  offices  of  discount  and  deposit,  in 
Boston,  New  York,  Baltimore,  and  Charleston. 

The  United  States,  you  would  presume,  could  not 
be  insensible  of  so  fit  a  moment  to  make  purchases 
of  the  public  stock,  and  the  Treasurer  was  accord 
ingly  authorized  to  buy;  but,  though  the  appear 
ances  of  private  distress  for  money  were  so  great, 
he  could  not  obtain  for  several  days  the  sum  of  fifty 
thousand  dollars,  at  the  highest  rates  at  which  the 
public  purchases  had  before  been  made.  The  holders 
who  were  free  from  engagements  were  averse  to 
selling;  the  principal  persons,  who  were  under  en 
gagements  they  could  not  comply  with,  were  obliged 
or  disposed  to  place  their  effects  in  the  hands  of  their 
creditors,  who  did  not  choose  to  add  to  their  own 
disappointments  of  great  profits  actual  losses  by  un 
seasonable  sales  of  the  bankrupts'  property.  The 
stock  in  the  market,  therefore,  was  really  made 
scarce.  A  quarter's  interest  has  just  been  paid. 
Some  of  the  cautious  moneyed  people  have  begun  to 
purchase.  The  specie  is  returning  from  the  country, 
and  the  heaviest  private  engagements  having  now 
fallen  due,  the  declension  of  stock  may  be  considered 


426  Alexander  Hamilton 

as  arrested.  There  is  little  doubt  that  the  difficulty 
for  money  among  the  dealers  in  the  debt  will  be  at 
no  time  so  great  as  it  has  been,  after  the  present 
week,  and  that  changes  of  a  favorable  complexion 
are  to  be  confidently  expected;  at  first  moderate, 
perhaps,  afterwards  such  as  will  carry  the  funds  up 
to  their  due  value. 

Should  you  be  of  opinion  that  the  state  of  things 
in  France  will  render  some  intimation  of  these  events 
useful  there,  you  will  be  good  enough  to  communi 
cate  them  to  Mr.  Morris,  our  minister  at  that  court. 


HAMILTON   TO    WASHINGTON  x 
(Cabinet  Paper.) 

PHILADELPHIA,  August  18,  1792. 

SIR: 

I  am  happy  to  be  able,  at  length,  to  send  you 
answers  to  the  objections  which  were  communicated 
in  your  letter  of  the  2gth  of  July. 

They  have  unavoidably  been  drawn  in  haste,  too 
much  so,  to  do  perfect  justice  to  the  subject,  and 
have  been  copied  just  as  they  flowed  from  my 
heart  and  pen,  without  revision  or  correction.  You 
will  observe  that  here  and  there  some  severity  ap 
pears.  I  have  not  fortitude  enough  always  to  hear 
with  calmness  calumnies  which  necessarily  include 

1  This  important  letter  is  in  reply  to  one  from  Washington,  dated 
July  29,  1792,  at  Mount  Vernon,  giving  the  opinions  he  had  heard  ex 
pressed  in  Virginia  as  to  the  new  government,  and  also  certain  objec 
tions  to  the  financial  policy  offered  by  Col.  George  Mason  at  the 
instigation,  probably,  of  Jefferson.  It  is  printed  here,  because  it  is  in 
effect  a  defence  of  the  funding  system. 


Objections  and  Answers  427 

me,  as  a  principal  agent  in  the  measures  censured, 
of  the  falsehood  of  which  I  have  the  most  unquali 
fied  consciousness.  I  trust  I  shall  always  be  able 
to  bear,  as  I  ought,  imputations  of  errors  of  judg 
ment;  but  I  acknowledge  that  I  cannot  be  entirely 
patient  under  charges  which  impeach  the  integrity 
of  my  public  motives  or  conduct.  I  feel  that  I 
merit  them  in  no  degree;  and  expressions  of  indigna 
tion  sometimes  escape  me,  in  spite  of  every  effort 
to  suppress  them.  I  rely  on  your  goodness  for  the 
proper  allowances. 

With  high  respect  and  the  most  affectionate  at 
tachment,  I  have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  etc. 


OBJECTIONS  x  AND  ANSWERS  RESPECTING  THE  ADMIN 
ISTRATION    OF   THE   GOVERNMENT 

OBJECTION  i. — The  public  debt  is  greater  than  we 
can  possibly  pay  before  other  causes  of  adding  to  it 
will  occur;  and  this  has  been  artificially  created  by 
adding  together  the  whole  amount  of  the  debtor  and 
creditor  sides  of  the  accounts. 

ANSWER. — The  public  debt  was  produced  by  the 
late  war.  It  is  not  the  fault  of  the  present  gov 
ernment  that  it  exists,  unless  it  can  be  proved  that 
public  morality  and  policy  do  not  require  of  a  govern 
ment  an  honest  provision  for  its  debts.  Whether  it 
is  greater  than  can  be  paid  before  new  causes  of  add 
ing  to  it  will  occur,  is  a  problem  incapable  of  being 

1  These  objections  are  all  repeated  from  Washington's  letter,  which  it 
is,  therefore,  needless  to  reprint  here. 


428  Alexander  Hamilton 

solved,  but  by  experience;  and  this  would  be  the 
case  if  it  were  not  one  fourth  as  much  as  it  is.  If 
the  policy  of  the  country  be  prudent,  cautious,  and 
neutral  towards  foreign  nations,  there  is  a  rational 
probability  that  war  may  be  avoided  long  enough  to 
wipe  off.  the  debt.  The  Dutch,  in  a  situation  not 
near  so  favorable  for  it  as  that  of  the  United  States, 
have  enjoyed  intervals  of  peace  longer  than  with 
proper  exertions  would  suffice  for  the  purpose.  The 
debt  of  the  United  States,  compared  with  its  present 
and  growing  abilities,  is  really  a  very  light  one.  It 
is  little  more  than  15,000,000  of  pounds  sterling — 
about  the  annual  expenditure  of  Great  Britain. 

But  whether  the  public  debt  shall  be  extinguished 
or  not,  within  a  moderate  period,  depends  on  the 
temper  of  the  people.  If  they  are  rendered  dissatis 
fied  by  misrepresentations  of  the  measures  of  the 
government,  the  government  will  be  deprived  of  an 
efficient  command  of  the  resources  of  the  commun 
ity  toward  extinguishing  the  debt.  And  thus  those 
who  clamor  are  likely  to  be  the  principal  causes  of 
protracting  the  existence  of  the  debt. 

As  to  its  having  been  artificially  increased,  this  is 
denied;  perhaps,  indeed,  the  true  reproach  of  the 
system  which  has  been  adopted  is,  that  it  has  arti 
ficially  diminished  the  debt,  as  will  be  explained  by 
and  by. 

The  assertion  that  the  debt  has  been  increased,  by 
adding  together  the  whole  amount  of  the  debtor  and 
creditor  sides  of  the  account,  not  being  easy  to  be 
understood,  is  not  easy  to  be  answered;  but  an 
answer  shall  be  attempted. 


Objections  and  Answers  429 

The  thirteen  States,  in  their  joint  capacity,  owed 
a  certain  sum.  The  same  States,  in  their  separate 
capacities,  owed  another  sum.  These  two  sums  con 
stitute  the  aggregate  of  the  public  debt.  The  PUBLIC, 
in  a  political  sense,  compounded  of  the  governments 
of  the  Union  and  of  the  several  States,  was  the 
DEBTOR.  The  individuals  who  hold  the  various  evi 
dences  of  debt  were  the  CREDITORS.  It  would  be 
nonsense  to  say,  that  the  combining  of  the  two  parts 
of  the  public  debt  is  adding  together  the  debtor  and 
creditor  sides  of  the  account.  So  great  an  absurdity 
cannot  be  supposed  to  be  intended  by  the  objection. 
Another  meaning  must  therefore  be  sought  for. 

It  may  possibly  exist  in  the  following  misconcep 
tion.  The  States,  individually,  when  they  liquidated 
the  accounts  of  individuals  for  services  and  supplies 
toward  the  common  defence,  during  the  late  war, 
and  gave  certificates  for  the  sums  due,  would  natu 
rally  charge  them  to  the  United  States  as  contribu 
tions  to  the  common  cause.  The  United  States,  in 
assuming  to  pay  those  certificates,  charge  themselves 
with  them.  And  it  may  be  supposed  that  here  is  a 
double  charge  for  the  same  thing. 

But  as  the  amount  of  the  sum  assumed  for  each 
State  is  by  the  system  adopted  to  be  charged  to 
such  State,  it  of  course  goes  in  extinguishment  of  so 
much  of  the  first  charge  as  is  equal  to  the  sum 
assumed,  and  leaves  the  United  States  chargeable 
only  once,  as  ought  to  be  the  case. 

Or  perhaps  the  meaning  of  the  objection  may  be 
found  in  the  following  mode  of  reasoning.  Some 
States,  from  having  disproportionately  contributed 


430  Alexander  Hamilton 

during  the  war,  would  probably  on  a  settlement  of 
accounts  be  found  debtors,  independently  of  the 
assumption.  The  assuming  of  the  debts  of  such 
States  increases  the  balances  against  them;  and  as 
these  balances  will  ultimately  be  remitted,  from  the 
impracticability  of  enforcing  their  payment,  the  sum 
assumed  will  be  an  extra  charge  upon  the  United 
States,  increasing  the  mass  of  the  debt. 

This  objection  takes  it  for  granted,  that  the  bal 
ances  of  the  debtor  States  will  not  be  exacted; 
which,  by  the  way,  is  no  part  of  the  system,  and  if 
it  should  eventually  not  prove  true,  the  foundation 
of  the  reasoning  would  fail.  For  it  is  evident,  if  the 
balances  are  to  be  collected,  (unless  there  be  some 
undiscovered  error  in  the  principle  by  which  the 
accounts  are  to  be  adjusted,)  that  one  side  of  the 
account  will  counterpoise  the  other,  and  every  thing 
as  to  the  quantum  of  debt  will  remain  in  statu  quo. 

But  it  shall  be  taken  for  granted,  that  the  bal 
ances  will  be  remitted;  and  still  the  consequence 
alleged  does  not  result.  The  reverse  of  it  may  even 
take  place.  In  reasoning  upon  this  point,  it  must 
be  remembered  that  impracticability  would  be  alike 
an  obstacle  to  the  collection  of  balances,  without,  as 
with  the  assumption. 

This  being  the  case,  whether  the  balances  to  be 
remitted  will  be  increased  or  diminished  must  de 
pend  on  the  relative  proportions  of  outstanding 
debts.  If  a  former  debtor  State  owes  to  individuals 
a  smaller  sum,  in  proportion  to  its  contributive  fac 
ulty,  than  a  former  creditor  State,  the  assumption  of 
the  debts  of  both  to  be  provided  for  out  of  a  common 


Objections  and  Answers  431 

fund  raised  upon  them  proportionally,  must  neces 
sarily,  on  the  idea  of  a  remission  of  balances,  tend 
to  restore  equality  between  them,  and  lessen  the 
balance  of  the  debtor  State  to  be  remitted. 

How  the  thing  may  work  upon  the  whole  cannot 
be  pronounced  without  a  knowledge  of  the  situation 
of  the  account  of  each  State ;  but  all  circumstances 
that  are  known  render  it  probable  that  the  ulti 
mate  effect  will  be  favorable  to  justice  between  the 
States,  and  that  there  will  be  inconsiderable  balances 
either  on  one  side  or  on  the  other. 

It  was  observed,  that  perhaps  the  true  reproach 
of  the  system  which  has  been  adopted  is,  that  it 
has  artificially  decreased  the  debt.  This  is  explained 
thus: 

In  the  case  of  the  debt  of  the  United  States,  in 
terest  upon  two  thirds  of  the  principal  only,  at  six 
per  cent.,  is  immediately  paid;  interest  upon  the  re 
maining  third  was  deferred  for  ten  years,  and  only 
three  per  cent,  has  been  allowed  upon  the  arrears  of 
interest,  making  one  third  of  the  whole  debt. 

In  the  case  of  the  separate  debts  of  the  States, 
interest  upon  four  ninths  only  of  the  entire  sum  is 
immediately  paid;  interest  upon  two  ninths  was  de 
ferred  for  ten  years,  and  only  three  per  cent,  allowed 
on  three  ninths. 

The  market  rate  of  interest,  at  the  time  of  adopt 
ing  the  funding  system,  was  six  per  cent.  Com 
puting,  according  to  this  rate  of  interest,  the  then 
present  value  of  one  hundred  dollars  of  debt,  upon  an 
average,  principal  and  interest,  was  about  seventy- 
three  dollars. 


432  Alexander  Hamilton 

At  the  present  actual  value,  in  the  market,  of  one 
hundred  dollars,  as  the  several  kinds  of  stock  are 
sold,  is  no  more  than  eighty- three  dollars  and  sixty- 
one  cents.  This  computation  is  not  made  on  equal 
sums  of  the  several  kinds  of  stock,  according  to 
which  the  average  value  of  one  hundred  dollars 
would  be  only  seventy-eight  dollars  and  seventy- 
five  cents;  but  it  is  made  on  the  proportions  which 
constitute  the  mass  of  the  debt. 

At  seventy-three  to  one  hundred,  the  diminution 
on  60,000,000  is  16,200,000  dollars;  at  eighty- three 
dollars  and  sixty-one  cents  to  one  hundred,  it  is 
9,834,000  dollars. 

But  as  the  United  States,  having  a  right  to  re 
deem  in  certain  proportions,  need  never  give  more 
than  par  for  the  six  per  cents.,  the  diminution  to 
them,  as  purchasers  at  the  present  market  prices,  is 
12,168,000  dollars. 

If  it  be  said  that  the  United  States  are  engaged  to 
pay  the  whole  sum,  at  the  nominal  value,  the  an 
swer  is,  that  they  are  always  at  liberty,  if  they  have 
the  means,  to  purchase  at  the  market  prices ;  and  in 
all  those  purchases  they  gain  the  difference  between 
the  nominal  sums  and  the  lesser  market  rates. 

If  the  whole  debt  had  been  provided  for  at  six 
per  cent.,  the  market  rate  of  interest  when  the  fund 
ing  system  passed,  the  market  value  throughout 
would  undoubtedly  have  been  one  hundred  for  one 
hundred.  The  debt  may  then  rather  be  said  to 
have  been  artificially  decreased  by  the  nature  of  the 
provision. 

The  conclusion  from  the  whole  is  that,  assuming 


Objections  and  Answers  433 

it  as  a  principle  that  the  public  debts  of  the  different 
descriptions  were  honestly  to  be  provided  for  and 
paid,  it  is  the  reverse  of  true  that  there  has  been  an 
artificial  increase  of  them.  To  argue  on  a  different 
principle,  is  to  presuppose  dishonesty,  and  make  it 
an  objection  to  doing  right. 

OBJECTION  2. — This  accumulation  of  debt  has 
taken  for  ever  out  of  our  power  those  easy  resources 
of  revenue  which,  applied  to  the  ordinary  necessities 
and  exigencies  of  government,  would  have  animated 
them  habitually,  and  covered  us  from  habitual  mur- 
murings  against  taxes  and  tax-gatherers; — reserv 
ing  extraordinary  calls  for  extraordinary  occasions, 
would  animate  the  people  to  meet  them. 

ANSWER. — There  having  been  no  accumulation  of 
debt,  if  what  is  here  pretended  to  have  been  the  con 
sequence  were  true,  it  would  only  be  to  be  regretted 
as  the  unavoidable  consequence  of  an  unfortunate 
state  of  things.  But  the  supposed  consequence  does 
by  no  means  exist.  The  only  sources  of  taxation 
which  have  been  touched  are  imported  articles,  and 
the  single  internal  object  of  distilled  spirits;  lands, 
houses,  the  great  mass  of  personal  as  well  as  the 
whole  of  real  property,  remain  essentially  free. 

In  short,  the  chief  sources  of  taxation  are  free  for 
extraordinary  conjunctures,  and  it  is  one  of  the  dis 
tinguishing  merits  of  the  system  which  has  been 
adopted,  that  it  has  rendered  this  far  more  the 
case  than  it  was  before.  It  is  only  necessary  to 
look  into  the  different  States  to  be  convinced  of 
it.  In  most  of  them,  real  estate  is  wholly  ex 
empted.  In  some,  very  small  burthens  rest  upon 

VOL.  !!.— 28. 


434  Alexander  Hamilton 

it  for  the  purpose  of  the  internal  governments.  In 
all,  the  burthens  of  the  people  have  been  lightened. 
It  is  a  mockery  of  truth  to  represent  the  United 
States  as  a  community  burthened  and  exhausted  by 
taxes. 

OBJECTION  3. — That  the  calls  for  money  have  been 
no  greater  than  we  must  generally  expect,  for  the 
same  or  equivalent  exigencies;  yet  we  are  already 
obliged  to  strain  the  impost  till  it  produces  clamor, 
and  will  produce  evasion,  and  war  on  our  citizens  to 
collect  it,  and  even  to  resort  to  an  excise  law,  of 
odious  character  with  the  people,  partial  in  its 
operation,  unproductive  unless  enforced  by  arbi 
trary  and  vexatious  means,  and  committing  the  au 
thority  of  the  government,  in  parts  where  resistance 
is  most  probable  and  coercion  least  practicable. 

ANSWER. — This  is  mere  painting  and  exaggeration. 
With  the  exception  of  a  very  few  articles,  the  duties 
on  imports  are  still  moderate — lower  than  in  any 
other  country  of  whose  regulations  we  have  know 
ledge,  except,  perhaps,  Holland,  where,  having  few 
productions  or  commodities  of  their  own,  their  ex 
port  trade  depends  on  the  exportation  of  foreign 
articles. 

It  is  true  that  merchants  have  complained;  but 
so  they  did  of  the  first  impost  law,  for  a  time ;  and 
so  men  always  will  do  at  an  augmentation  of  taxes 
which  touch  the  business  they  carry  on,  especially 
in  a  country  where  no,  or  scarcely  any,  such  taxes 
before  existed.  The  collection,  it  is  not  doubted, 
will  be  essentially  secure.  Evasions  have  existed,  in 
a  degree,  and  will  continue  to  exist.  Perhaps  they 


Objections  and  Answers  435 

may  be  somewhat  increased,  to  what  extent  can 
only  be  determined  by  experience ;  but  there  are  no 
symptoms  to  induce  an  opinion  that  they  will  ma 
terially  increase.  As  to  the  idea  of  a  war  upon  the 
citizens  to  collect  the  impost  duties,  it  can  only  be 
regarded  as  a  figure  of  rhetoric. 

The  excise  law,  no  doubt,  is  a  good  topic  of  declam 
ation;  but  can  it  be  doubted  that  it  is  an  excellent 
and  a  very  fit  means  of  revenue? 

As  to  the  partiality  of  its  operation,  it  is  no  more 
so  than  any  other  tax  on  a  consumable  commodity, 
adjusting  itself  upon  exactly  the  same  principles. 
The  consumer,  in  the  main,  pays  the  tax;  and  if 
some  parts  of  the  United  States  consume  more  do 
mestic  spirits,  others  consume  more  foreign,  and 
both  are  taxed.  There  is,  perhaps,  upon  the  whole, 
no  article  of  more  general  and  equal  consumption  than 
distilled  spirits. 

As  to  its  unproductiveness,  unless  enforced  by  arbi 
trary  and  vexatious  means,  facts  testify  the  contrary. 
Already,  under  all  the  obstacles  arising  from  its  nov 
elty  and  the  prejudices  against  it  in  some  States,  it 
has  been  considerably  productive;  and  it  is  not  en 
forced  by  any  arbitrary  or  vexatious  means;  at 
least,  the  precautions  in  the  existing  laws  for  the 
collection  of  the  tax  will  not  appear  in  that  light 
but  to  men  who  regard  all  taxes,  and  all  the  means 
of  enforcing  them,  as  arbitrary  and  vexatious. 

Here,  however,  there  is  abundant  room  for  fancy 
to  operate.  The  standard  is  in  the  mind,  and  differ 
ent  minds  will  have  different  standards. 

The  observation  relating  to  the  commitment  of  the 


Alexander  Hamilton 

authority  of  the  government,  in  parts  where  resist 
ance  is  most  probable  and  coercion  least  practicable, 
has  more  weight  than  any  other  part  of  this  objec 
tion.  It  must  be  confessed  that  a  hazard  of  this 
nature  has  been  run;  but  if  there  were  motives 
sufficiently  cogent  for  it,  it  was  wisely  run.  It  does 
not  follow  that  a  measure  is  bad  because  it  is  at 
tended  with  a  degree  of  danger. 

The  general  inducements  to  a  provision  for  the 
public  debt  are : 

1.  To  preserve  the  public  faith  and  integrity,  by 
fulfilling,  as  far  as  was  practicable,  the  public  en 
gagements. 

2.  To  manifest  a  due  respect  for  property,  by 
satisfying  the  public  obligations  in  the  hands  of  the 
public  creditors,  and  which  were  as  much  their  prop 
erty  as  their  houses  or  their  lands,  their  hats  or  their 
coats. 

3.  To  revive  and  establish  public  credit,  the  pal 
ladium  of  public  safety. 

4.  To  preserve  the  government  itself,  by  showing 
it  worthy  of  the  confidence  which  was  placed  in  it; 
to  procure  to  the  community  the  blessings  which  in 
innumerable  ways  attend  confidence  in  the  govern 
ment,  and  to  avoid  the  evils  which  in  as  many  ways 
attend  the  want  of  confidence  in  it. 

''    The  particular  inducements  to  an  assumption  of 
the  State  debts  were: 

i.  To  consolidate  the  finances  of  the  country,  and 
give  an  assurance  of  permanent  order  in  them; 
avoiding  the  collision  of  thirteen  different  and  inde 
pendent  systems  of  finance  under  concurrent  and 


Objections  and  Answers  437 

coequal  authorities,  and  the  scramblings  for  revenue 
which  would  have  been  incident  to  so  many  different 
systems. 

2.  To  secure  to  the  government  of  the  Union,  by 
avoiding  those  entanglements,  an  effectual  command 
of  the  resources  of  the  Union  for  present  and  future 
exigencies. 

3.  To  equalize  the  condition  of  the  citizens  of  the 
several  States  in  the  important  article  of  taxation; 
rescuing  a  part  of  them  from  being  oppressed  with 
burdens  beyond  their  strength,  on  account  of  ex 
traordinary  exertions  in  the  war,  and  through  the 
want  of  certain  adventitious  resources  which  it  was 
the  good  fortune  of  others  to  possess. 

A  mind  naturally  attached  to  order  and  system, 
and  capable  of  appreciating  their  immense  value, 
unless  misled  by  particular  feelings,  is  struck  at  once 
with  the  prodigious  advantages  which,  in  the  course 
of  time,  must  attend  such  a  simplification  of  the 
financial  affairs  of  the  country  as  results  from  placing 
all  the  parts  of  the  public  debt  upon  one  footing, 
under  one  direction,  regulated  by  one  provision. 
The  want  of  this  sound  policy  has  been  a  continual 
source  of  disorder  and  embarrassment  in  the  affairs 
of  the  United  Netherlands. 

The  true  justice  of  the  case  of  the  public  debt 
consists  in  that  equalization  of  the  condition  of  the 
citizens  of  all  the  States  which  must  arise  from  a 
consolidation  of  the  debt  and  common  contributions 
towards  its  extinguishment.  Little  inequalities  as 
to  the  past  can  bear  no  comparison  with  the  more 
lasting  inequalities  which,  without  the  assumption, 


438  Alexander  Hamilton 

would  have  characterized  the  future  condition  of  the 
people  of  the  United  States,  leaving  upon  those  who 
had  done  most,  or  suffered  most,  a  great  additional 
weight  of  burden. 

If  the  foregoing  inducements  to  a  provision  for  the 
public  debt  (including  an  assumption  of  the  State 
debts)  were  sufficiently  cogent,  then  the  justifica 
tion  of  the  excise  laws  lies  within  a  narrow  compass. 
Some  further  source  of  revenue,  besides  the  duties 
on  imports,  was  indispensable,  and  none  equally  pro 
ductive  would  have  been  so  little  exceptionable  to 
the  mass  of  the  people. 

Other  reasons  co-operated  in  the  minds  of  some 
able  men  to  render  an  excise  at  an  early  period  de 
sirable.  They  thought  it  well  to  lay  hold  of  so  valu 
able  a  resource  of  revenue  before  it  was  generally 
preoccupied  by  the  State  governments.  They  sup 
posed  it  not  amiss  that  the  authority  of  the  national 
government  should  be  visible  in  some  branch  of  in 
ternal  revenue,  lest  a  total  non-exercise  of  it  should 
beget  an  impression  that  it  was  never  to  be  exer 
cised,  and  next,  that  it  ought  not  to  be  exercised. 
It  was  supposed,  too,  that  a  thing  of  the  kind 
could  not  be  introduced  with  a  greater  prospect 
of  easy  success  than  at  a  period  when  the  govern 
ment  enjoyed  the  advantage  of  first  impressions, 
when  State  factions  to  resist  its  authority  were  not 
yet  matured,  when  so  much  aid  was  to  be  derived 
from  the  popularity  and  firmness  of  the  actual  Chief 
Magistrate. 

Facts  hitherto  do  not  indicate  the  measure  to  have 
been  rash  or  ill  advised.  The  law  is  in  operation  with 


Objections  and  Answers  439 

perfect  acquiescence  in  all  the  States  north  of  New 
York,  though  they  contribute  most  largely.  In 
New  York  and  New  Jersey  it  is  in  full  operation, 
with  some  very  partial  complainings  fast  wearing 
away.  In  the  greater  part  of  Pennsylvania  it  is  in 
operation,  and  with  increasing  good  humor  towards 
it.  The  four  western  counties  continue  exceptions. 
In  Delaware  it  has  had  some  struggle,  which,  by  the 
last  accounts,  was  surmounted.  In  Maryland  and 
Virginia  it  is  in  operation,  and  without  material 
conflict.  In  South  Carolina  it  is  now  in  pretty  full 
operation,  though  in  the  interior  parts  it  has  had 
some  serious  opposition  to  overcome.  In  Georgia  no 
material  difficulty  has  been  experienced.  North 
Carolina,  Kentucky,  and  the  four  western  counties 
of  Pennsylvania,  present  the  only  remaining  impedi 
ments  of  any  consequence  to  the  full  execution  of 
the  law.  The  latest  advices  from  North  Carolina  and 
Kentucky  were  more  favorable  than  the  former. 

It  may  be  added  as  a  well-established  fact,  that 
the  effect  of  the  law  has  been  to  encoiirage  new  en 
terprises  in  most  of  the  States  in  the  business  of 
domestic  distillation.  A  proof  that  it  is  perceived 
to  operate  favorably  to  the  manufacture,  and  that 
the  measure  cannot  long  remain  unpopular  anywhere. 

OBJECTION  4. — Propositions  have  been  made  in 
Congress,  and  projects  are  on  foot  still  to  increase  the 
mass  of  the  debt. 

ANSWER. — Propositions  have  been  made,  and  no 
doubt  will  be  renewed  by  the  States  interested,  to 
complete  the  assumption  of  the  State  debts.  This 
would  add  in  the  first  instance  to  the  mass  of  the 


44°  Alexander  Hamilton 

debt  of  the  United  States  between  three  and  four  mil 
lions  of  dollars,  but  it  would  not  increase  the  mass 
of  the  public  debt  at  all.  It  would  only  transfer  from 
particular  States  to  the  Union  debts  which  already 
exist,  and  which,  if  the  States  indebted  are  honest, 
must  be  provided  for.  It  happens  that  Massachu 
setts  and  South  Carolina  would  be  chiefly  benefited. 
And  there  is  a  moral  certainty  that  Massachusetts 
will  have  a  balance  in  her  favor  more  than  equal  to 
her  remaining  debt,  and  a  probability  that  South 
Carolina  will  have  a  balance  sufficient  to  cover  hers. 
So  that  there  is  not  likely  to  be  an  eventual  increase 
even  of  the  debt  of  the  United  States  by  the  further 
assumption.  The  immense  exertions  of  Massachu 
setts  during  the  late  war,  and  particularly  in  the  late 
periods  of  it  when  too  many  of  the  States  failed  in 
their  federal  duty,  are  known  to  every  well-informed 
man.  It  would  not  be  too  strong  to  say,  that  they 
were  in  a  great  degree  the  pivot  of  the  Revolution. 
The  exertions,  sufferings,  sacrifices,  and  losses  of 
South  Carolina  need  not  be  insisted  upon. 

The  other  States  have  comparatively  none  or  in 
considerable  debts.  Can  that  policy  be  condemned 
which  aims  at  putting  the  burdened  States  upon  an 
equal  footing  with  the  rest?  Can  that  policy  be 
very  liberal  which  resists  so  equitable  an  arrange 
ment?  It  has  been  said  that  if  they  had  exerted 
themselves  since  the  peace,  their  situation  would 
have  been  different.  But  Massachusetts  threw  her 
citizens  into  rebellion  by  heavier  taxes  than  were 
paid  in  any  other  State,  and  South  Carolina  has  done 
as  much  since  the  peace  as  could  have  been  ex- 


Objections  and  Answers  441 

pec  ted,  considering  the  exhausted  state  in  which  the 
war  left  her. 

The  only  proposition  during  the  last  session,  or  at 
any  antecedent  one,  which  would  truly  have  swelled 
the  debt  artificially,  was  one  which  Mr.  Madison 
made  in  the  first  session,  and  which  was  renewed  in 
the  last,  and  generally  voted  for  by  those  who  op 
posed  the  system  that  has  prevailed.  The  object  of 
this  proposition  was,  that  all  the  parts  of  the  State 
debts  which  have  been  paid,  or  otherwise  absorbed 
by  them,  should  be  assumed  for  the  benefit  of  the 
States  and  funded  by  the  United  States.  This 
measure,  if  it  had  succeeded,  would  truly  have  pro 
duced  an  immense  artificial  increase  of  the  debt,  but 
it  has  twice  failed,  and  there  is  no  probability  that 
it  will  ever  succeed. 

OBJECTION  5. — They  say  that  by  borrowing  at 
two  thirds  of  the  interest  we  might  have  paid  off  the 
principal  in  two  thirds  of  the  time,  but  that  from 
this  we  are  precluded  by  its  being  made  irredeem 
able  but  in  small  portions  and  long  terms. 

ANSWER. — First.  All  the  foreign  loans  which 
were  made  by  the  United  States  prior  to  the  present 
government,  taking  into  the  calculation  charges  and 
premiums,  cost  them  more  than  six  per  cent.  Since 
the  establishment  of  the  present  government,  they 
borrowed  first  at  about  five  and  a  quarter,  including 
charges,  and  since,  at  about  four  and  a  quarter,  in 
cluding  charges.  And  it  is  questionable,  in  the  pre 
sent  state  of  Europe,  whether  they  can  obtain  any 
further  loans  at  so  low  a  rate. 

The  system  which  is  reprobated  is  the  very  cause 


442  Alexander  Hamilton 

that  we  have  been  able  to  borrow  on  so  good  terms. 
If  one  that  would  have  inspired  less  confidence,  cer 
tainly  if  the  substitutes  which  have  been  proposed, 
from  a  certain  quarter,  had  obtained,  we  could  not 
have  procured  loans  even  at  six  per  cent.  The 
Dutch  were  largely  adventurers  in  our  domestic  debt 
before  the  present  government.  They  did  not  em 
bark  far  till  they  had  made  inquiries  of  influential 
public  characters,  as  to  the  light  in  which  the  debt 
was  and  would  be  considered  in  the  hands  of  alienees 
— and  had  received  assurance  that  assignees  would 
be  regarded  in  the  same  light  as  original  holders. 
What  would  have  been  the  state  of  our  credit  with 
them,  if  they  had  been  disappointed,  or  indeed  if  our 
conduct  had  been  in  any  respect  inconsistent  with 
the  notions  entertained  in  Europe  concerning  the 
maxims  of  public  credit? 

The  inference  is,  that  our  being  able  to  borrow  on 
low  terms  is  a  consequence  of  the  system  which  is 
the  object  of  censure,  and  that  the  thing  itself,  which 
is  made  the  basis  of  another  system,  would  not  have 
existed  under  it. 

Secondly.  It  will  not  be  pretended  that  we  could 
have  borrowed  at  the  proposed  low  rate  of  interest 
in  the  United  States ;  and  all  our  exertions  to  borrow 
in  Europe,  which  have  been  unremitted,  as  occasions 
presented,  have  not  hitherto  produced  above  - 
dollars,  not  even  a  sufficient  sum  to  change  the  form 
of  our  foreign  debt. 

Thirdly.  If  it  were  possible  to  borrow  the  whole 
sum  abroad  within  a  short  period,  to  pay  off  our 
debt,  it  is  not  easy  to  imagine  a  more  pernicious 


Objections  and  Answers  443 

operation  than  this  would  have  been.  It  would  first 
have  transferred  to  foreigners,  by  a  violent  expe 
dient,  the  whole  amount  of  our  debt ;  and  creating  a 
money  plethora  in  the  country,  a  momentary  scene 
of  extravagance  would  have  followed,  and  the  excess 
would  quickly  have  flowed  back; — the  evils  of  which 
situation  need  not  be  enlarged  upon. 

If  it  be  said  that  the  operation  might  have  been 
gradual,  then  the  end  proposed  would  not  have  been 
attained. 

Lastly.  The  plan  which  has  been  adopted  se 
cures,  in  the  first  instance,  the  identical  advantage 
which  in  the  other  plan  would  have  been  eventual 
and  contingent.  It  puts  one  third  of  the  whole  debt 
at  an  interest  of  three  per  cent,  only,  and  by  defer 
ring  the  payment  of  interest  on  a  third  of  the  re 
mainder,  effectually  reduces  the  interest  on  that 
part.  It  is  evident  that  a  suspension  of  interest  is 
in  fact  a  reduction  of  interest.  The  money  which 
would  go  towards  paying  interest  in  the  interval  of 
suspension  is  an  accumulating  fund,  to  be  applied 
towards  payment  of  it  when  it  becomes  due,  reduc 
ing  the  provision  then  to  be  made. 

In  reality,  on  the  principles  of  the  funding  system, 
the  United  States  reduced  the  interest  on  their  whole 
debt,  upon  an  average,  to  about  four  and  a  half  per 
cent.,  nearly  the  lowest  rate  they  have  any  chance 
to  borrow  at,  and  lower  than  they  could  possibly 
have  borrowed  at  in  an  attempt  to  reduce  the  in 
terest  on  the  whole  capital  by  borrowing  and  paying, 
probably  by  one  per  cent.  A  demand  for  large 
loans,  by  forcing  the  market,  would  unavoidably 


444  Alexander  Hamilton 

have  raised  their  price  upon  the  borrower.  The 
above  average  of  four  and  a  half  per  cent,  is  found 
by  calculation,  computing  the  then  present  value  of 
the  deferred  stock  at  the  time  of  passing  the  funding 
acts,  and  of  course  three  per  cent,  on  the  three  per 
cent,  stock. 

The  funding  system,  then,  secured  in  the  very 
outset  the  precise  advantage  which  it  is  alleged  would 
have  accrued  from  having  the  whole  debt  redeem 
able  at  pleasure.  But  this  is  not  all.  It  did  more. 
It  left  the  government  still  in  a  condition  to  enjoy 
upon  five  ninths  of  the  entire  debt  the  advantage 
of  extinguishing  it,  by  loans  at  a  low  rate  of  inter 
est,  if  they  are  obtainable.  The  three  per  cents, 
which  are  one  third  of  the  whole,  may  always  be 
purchased  in  the  market  below  par,  till  the  market 
rate  of  interest  falls  to  three  per  cent.  The  deferred 
will  be  purchasable  below  par,  till  near  the  period  of 
the  actual  payment  of  interest.  And  this  further 
advantage  will  result:  in  all  those  purchases  the 
public  will  enjoy,  not  only  the  advantage  of  a  re 
duction  of  interest  on  the  sums  borrowed,  but  the 
additional  advantage  of  purchasing  the  debt  under 
par,  that  is,  for  less  than  twenty  shillings  in  the 
pound. 

If  it  be  said  that  the  like  advantage  might  have 
been  enjoyed  under  another  system,  the  assertion 
would  be  without  foundation.  Unless  some  equiva 
lent  had  been  given  for  the  reduction  of  interest  in 
the  irredeemable  quality  annexed  to  the  debt,  no 
thing  was  left,  consistently  with  the  principles  of 
public  credit,  but  to  provide  for  the  whole  debt  at 


Objections  and  Answers  445 

six  per  cent.  This  evidently  would  have  kept  the 
whole  at  par,  and  no  advantage  could  have  been 
derived  by  purchases  under  the  nominal  value.  The 
reduction  of  interest,  by  borrowing  at  a  lower  rate, 
is  all  that  would  have  been  practicable,  and  this 
advantage  has  been  secured  by  the  funding  system 
in  the  very  outset,  and  without  any  second  process. 

If  no  provision  for  the  interest  had  been  made, 
not  only  public  credit  would  have  been  sacrificed, 
but  by  means  of  it  the  borrowing  at  a  low  rate  of 
interest,  or  at  any  rate,  would  have  been  imprac 
ticable. 

There  is  no  reproach  which  has  been  thrown  upon 
the  funding  system  so  unmerited  as  that  which 
charges  it  with  being  a  bad  bargain  for  the  public,  or 
with  a  tendency  to  prolong  the  extinguishment  of 
the  debts.  The  bargain  has,  if  any  thing,  been  too 
good  on  the  side  of  the  public ;  and  it  is  impossible 
for  the  debt  to  be  in  a  more  convenient  form  than  it 
is  for  a  rapid  extinguishment. 

Some  gentlemen  seem  to  forget  that  the  faculties 
of  every  country  are  limited.  They  talk  as  if  the 
government  could  extend  its  revenue  ad  libitum  to 
pay  off  the  debt.  Whereas  every  rational  calcula 
tion  of  the  abilities  of  the  country  will  prove,  that 
the  power  of  redemption  which  has  been  reserved 
over  the  debt  is  quite  equal  to  those  abilities,  and 
that  a  greater  power  would  be  useless.  If  happily 
the  abilities  of  the  country  should  exceed  this  esti 
mate,  there  is  nothing  to  hinder  the  surplus  being 
employed  in  purchases.  As  long  as  the  three  per 
cents  and  deferred  exist,  those  purchases  will  be 


446  Alexander  Hamilton 

under  par.  If  for  the  stock  bearing  an  immediate 
interest  of  six  per  cent.,  more  than  par  is  given,  the 
government  can  afford  it  from  the  saving  made  in 
the  first  instance. 

Upon  the  whole,  then,  it  is  the  merit  of  the  fund 
ing  system  to  have  conciliated  these  three  important 
points — the  restoration  of  public  credit,  a  reduction 
of  the  rate  of  interest,  and  an  organization  of  the 
debt  convenient  for  speedy  extinguishment. 

OBJECTION  6. — That  this  irredeemable  quality 
was  given  to  the  debt  for  the  avowed  purpose  of  in 
viting  its  transfer  to  foreign  countries. 

ANSWER. — This  assertion  is  a  palpable  misrepre 
sentation.  The  avowed  purpose  of  that  quality  of 
the  debt,  as  explained  in  the  report  of  the  Secretary 
of  the  Treasury,  and  in  the  arguments  in  Congress, 
was  to  give  an  equivalent  for  the  reduction  of  inter 
est — that  is,  for  deferring  the  payment  of  interest  on 
one  third  of  the  principal  for  three  years,  and  for 
allowing  only  three  per  cent,  on  the  arrears  of 
interest. 

It  was  indeed  argued,  in  confirmation  of  the  real 
ity  of  the  equivalent,  that  foreigners  would  be  will 
ing  to  give  more  where  a  high  rate  of  interest  was 
fixed,  than  where  it  was  liable  to  fluctuate  with  the 
market.  And  this  has  been  verified  by  the  fact — for 
the  six  per  cents  could  not  have  risen  for  a  moment 
above  par,  if  the  rate  could  have  been  lowered  by 
redeeming  the  debt  at  pleasure.  But  the  inviting 
of  the  transfer  to  foreigners  was  never  assigned  as  a 
motive  to  the  arrangement. 

And  what  is  more,  that  transfer  will  be  probably 


Objections  and  Answers  447 

slower  with  the  portion  of  irredeemability  which  is  at 
tached  to  the  debt  than  without  it,  because  a  larger 
capital  would  be  requisite  to  purchase  one  hundred 
dollars  in  the  former  than  in  the  latter  case.  And  the 
capital  of  foreigners  is  limited  as  well  as  our  own. 

It  appears  to  be  taken  for  granted,  that  if  the 
debt  had  not  been  funded  in  its  present  shape,  for 
eigners  would  not  have  purchased  it  as  they  now  do ; 
than  which  nothing  can  be  more  ill-founded  or  more 
contrary  to  experience.  Under  the  old  Confedera 
tion,  when  there  was  no  provision  at  all,  foreigners 
had  purchased  five  or  six  millions  of  the  debt.  If 
any  provision  had  been  made,  capable  of  producing 
confidence,  their  purchases  would  have  gone  on  just 
as  they  now  do;  and  the  only  material  difference 
would  have  been  that  what  they  got  from  us  then 
would  have  cost  them  less  than  what  they  now  get 
from  us  does  cost  them.  Whether  it  is  to  the  dis 
advantage  of  the  country  that  they  pay  more,  is 
submitted. 

Even  a  provision  which  should  not  have  inspired 
full  confidence  would  not  have  prevented  foreign  pur 
chases.  The  commodity  would  have  been  cheap  in 
proportion  to  the  risks  to  be  run.  And  full-handed 
Dutchmen  would  not  have  scrupled  to  amass  large 
sums  for  trifling  considerations,  in  the  hope  that 
time  and  experience  would  introduce  juster  notions 
into  the  public  councils. 

Our  debt  would  still  have  gone  from  us,  and  with 
it  our  reputation  and  credit. 

OBJECTION  7. — They  predict  that  this  transfer  of 
the  principal,  when  completed,  will  occasion  an 


448  Alexander  Hamilton 

exportation  of  three  millions  of  dollars  annually  for 
the  interest;  a  drain  of  coin,  of  which,  as  there  has 
been  no  example,  no  calculation  can  be  made  of  its 
consequences. 

ANSWER. — The  same  gloomy  forebodings  were 
heard  in  England  in  the  early  periods  of  its  funding 
system.  But  they  have  never  been  realized.  The 
money  invested  by  foreigners  in  the  purchase  of  its 
debt,  being  employed  in  its  commerce,  agriculture, 
and  manufactures,  increased  the  capital  and  wealth 
of  the  nation  more  than  in  proportion  to  the  annual 
drain  for  the  payment  of  interest,  and  created  the 
ability  to  bear  it. 

The  objection  seems  to  forget  that  the  debt  is  not 
transferred  for  nothing ;  that  the  capital  paid  for  the 
debt  is  always  an  equivalent  for  the  interest  to  be 
paid  to  the  purchaser.  If  that  capital  is  well  em 
ployed  in  a  young  country  like  this,  it  must  be  con 
siderably  increased,  so  as  to  yield  a  greater  revenue 
than  the  interest  of  the  money.  The  country  there 
fore  will  be  a  gainer  by  it,  and  will  be  able  to  pay 
the  interest  without  inconvenience. 

But  the  objectors  suppose  that  all  the  money 
which  comes  in  goes  out  again,  in  an  increased  con 
sumption  of  foreign  luxuries.  This,  however,  is 
taking  for  granted  what  never  happened  in  any  in 
dustrious  country,  and  what  appearances  among  us 
do  not  warrant.  The  expense  of  living,  generally 
speaking,  is  not  sensibly  increased.  Large  invest 
ments  are  every  day  making  in  ship-building,  house 
building,  manufactures,  and  other  improvements, 
public  and  private. 


Objections  and  Answers  449 

The  transfer,  too,  of  the  whole  debt,  is  a  very  im 
probable  supposition;  a  large  part  of  it  will  con 
tinue  to  be  owned  by  our  own  citizens.  And  the 
interest  of  that  part  which  is  owned  by  foreigners 
will  not  be  annually  exported,  as  is  supposed.  A 
considerable  part  will  be  invested  in  new  specula 
tions — in  lands,  canals,  roads,  manufactures,  com 
merce.  Facts  warrant  this  supposition.  The  agents 
of  the  Dutch  have  actually  made  large  investments 
in  a  variety  of  such  speculations. 

A  young  country  like  this  is  peculiarly  attractive. 
New  objects  will  be  continually  opening,  and  the 
money  of  foreigners  will  be  made  instrumental  to 
their  advancement. 

OBJECTION  8. — That  the  banishment  of  our  coin 
will  be  completed  by  the  creation  of  ten  millions  of 
paper  money,  in  the  form  of  bank  bills,  now  issuing 
into  circulation. 

ANSWER. — This  is  a  mere  hypothesis,  in  which 
theorists  differ.  There  are  no  decisive  facts  on 
which  to  rest  the  question. 

The  supposed  tendency  of  bank  paper  to  banish 
specie  is  from  its  capacity  of  serving  as  a  substitute 
for  it  in  circulation.  But  as  the  quantity  circulated 
is  proportioned  to  the  demand  for  it  in  circulation, 
the  presumption  is  that  a  greater  quantity  of  industry 
is  put  in  motion  by  it,  so  as  to  call  for  a  proportionally 
greater  quantity  of  circulating  medium  and  prevent 
the  banishment  of  the  specie.  But  however  this 
may  be,  it  is  agreed  among  sound  theorists,  that 
banks  more  than  compensate  for  the  loss  of  the 
specie  in  other  ways.  SMITH,  who  was  witness  to 


VOL.  II. — 29 


45°  Alexander  Hamilton 

their  effects  in  Scotland,  where  too  a  very  adverse 
fortune  attended  some  of  them,  bears  his  testimony 
to  their  beneficial  effects  in  these  strong  terms 
(Wealth  of  Nations,  Vol.  I.,  Book  II.,  Chap,  n,  pages 
441  to  444). 

OBJECTION  9. — They  think  the  ten  or  twelve  per 
cent,  annual  profit  paid  to  the  lenders  of  this  paper 
medium  are  taken  out  of  the  pockets  of  the  people, 
who  would  have  had  without  interest  the  coin  it  is 
banishing. 

ANSWER. — i.  The  profits  of  the  bank  have  not 
hitherto  exceeded  the  rate  of  eight  per  cent,  per 
annum,  and  perhaps  never  may.  It  is  questionable 
whether  they  can  legally  make  more  than  ten  per 
cent. 

2.  These  profits  can  in  no  just  sense  be  said  to  be 
taken  out  of  the  pockets  of  the  people.  They  are 
compounded  of  two  things:  ist,  the  interest  paid 
by  the  government  on  that  part  of  the  public  debt 
which  is  incorporated  in  the  stock  of  the  bank;  2d, 
the  interest  paid  by  those  individuals  who  borrow 
money  of  the  bank  on  the  sums  they  borrow. 

As  to  the  first,  it  is  no  new  grant  to  the  bank.  It 
is  the  old  interest  on  a  part  of  the  old  debt  of  this 
country,  substituted  by  the  proprietors  of  that  debt 
towards  constituting  the  stock  of  the  bank.  It 
would  have  been  equally  payable  if  the  bank  had 
never  existed.  It  is,  therefore,  nothing  new  taken 
out  of  the  pockets  of  the  people. 

As  to  the  second,  it  may  with  equal  propriety  be 
said,  when  one  individual  borrows  money  of  another, 
that  the  interest  which  the  borrower  pays  to  the 


Objections  and  Answers  451 

lender  is  taken  out  of  the  pockets  of  the  people.  The 
case  here  is  not  only  parallel,  but  the  same.  It  is 
the  case  of  one  or  more  individuals  borrowing  money 
of  a  company  of  individuals  associated  to  lend. 
None  but  the  actual  borrowers  pay  in  either  case; 
the  rest  of  the  community  have  nothing  to  do  with 
it. 

If  a  man  receives  a  bank  bill  for  the  ox  or  the 
bushel  of  wheat  which  he  sells,  he  pays  no  more 
interest  upon  it  than  upon  the  same  sum  in  gold  or 
silver — that  is,  he  pays  none  at  all. 

So  that,  whether  the  paper  banishes  specie  or  not, 
it  is  the  same  thing  to  every  individual  through 
whose  hands  it  circulates,  as  to  the  point  of  interest. 
Specie  no  more  than  bank  paper  can  be  borrowed 
without  paying  interest  for  it;  and  when  either  is 
not  borrowed  no  interest  is  paid.  As  far  as  the  gov 
ernment  is  a  sharer  in  the  profits  of  the  bank,  which 
is  in  the  proportion  of  one  fifth,  the  contrary  of 
what  is  supposed  happens:  money  is  put  into  the 
pockets  of  the  people. 

All  this  is  so  plain  and  so  palpable,  that  the  asser 
tion  which  is  made  betrays  extreme  ignorance  or 
extreme  disingenuousness.  It  is  destitute  even  of 
color. 

OBJECTION  10. — That  all  the  capital  employed  in 
paper  speculations  is  barren  and  useless,  producing, 
like  that  on  a  gaming-table,  no  accession  to  itself, 
and  is  withdrawn  from  commerce  and  agriculture, 
where  it  would  have  produced  addition  to  the  com 
mon  mass. 

ANSWER. — This  is  a  copious  subject,  which  has 


45 2  Alexander  Hamilton 

been  fully  discussed  in  the  report  of  the  Secretary 
of  the  Treasury,  on  the  subject  of  manufactures.1 
It  is  true  that  the  capital — that  is,  the  specie  which 
is  employed  in  paper  speculation, — while  so  em 
ployed,  is  barren  and  useless,  but  the  paper  itself 
constitutes  a  new  capital,  which,  being  salable  and 
transferable  at  any  moment,  enables  the  proprietor 
to  undertake  any  piece  of  business  as  well  as  an 
equal  sum  in  coin;  and  as  the  amount  of  the  debt 
circulated  is  much  greater  than  the  amount  of  specie 
which  circulates  it,  the  new  capital  put  in  motion 
by  it  considerably  exceeds  the  old  one,  which  is  sus 
pended,  and  there  is  more  capital  to  carry  on  the 
productive  labor  of  the  society.  Every  thing  that 
has  value  is  capital — an  acre  of  ground,  a  horse,  or 
a  cow,  or  a  public  or  private  obligation,  which  may, 
with  different  degrees  of  convenience,  be  applied  to  in 
dustrious  enterprise.  That  which,  like  public  stock, 
can  at  any  instant  be  turned  into  money,  is  of  equal 
utility  with  money  as  capital.  Let  it  be  examined, 
whether  at  those  places  where  there  is  most  debt 
afloat,  and  most  money  employed  in  its  circulation, 
there  is  not  at  the  same  time  a  greater  plenty  of 
money  for  every  other  purpose.  It  will  be  found 
that  there  is. 

But  it  is  a  fact  quite  immaterial  to  the  govern 
ment,  as  far  as  regards  the  propriety  of  its  measures. 

The  debt  existed;  it  was  to  be  provided  for.  In 
whatever  shape  the  provision  was  made,  the  object 
of  speculation  and  the  speculation  would  have  ex 
isted.  Nothing  but  abolishing  the  debt  could  have 

1  See  Vol.  IV. 


Objections  and  Answers  453 

obviated  it.  It  is,  therefore,  the  fault  of  the  Revolu 
tion,  not  of  the  government,  that  paper  speculation 
exists.  An  unsound  or  precarious  provision  would 
have  increased  this  species  of  speculation  in  its  most 
odious  forms ;  the  defects  and  casualties  of  the  sys 
tem  would  have  been  as  much  subjects  of  specula 
tion  as  the  debt  itself. 

The  difference  is,  that  under  a  bad  system  the 
public  stock  would  have  been  too  uncertain  an 
article  to  be  a  substitute  for  money,  and  all  the 
money  employed  in  it  would  have  been  diverted  from 
useful  employment,  without  any  thing  to  compen 
sate  for  it.  Under  a  good  system,  the  stock  becomes 
more  than  a  substitute  for  the  money  employed  in 
negotiating  it. 

OBJECTION  n. — Paper  Speculation.  That  it  nour 
ishes  in  our  citizens  vice  and  idleness,  instead  of 
industry  and  morality. 

ANSWER. — This  proposition,  within  certain  limits, 
is  true.  Jobbing  in  the  funds  has  some  bad  effects 
among  those  engaged  in  it.  It  fosters  a  spirit  of 
gambling,  and  diverts  a  certain  number  of  individ 
uals  from  other  pursuits.  But  if  the  proposition  be 
true,  that  stock  operates  as  capital,  the  effect  upon 
the  citizens  at  large  is  different.  It  promotes  among 
them  industry,  by  furnishing  a  larger  field  of  em 
ployment.  Though  this  effect  of  a  funded  debt  has 
been  called  in  question  in  England  by  some  theorists, 
yet  most  theorists  and  all  practical  men  allow  its 
existence.  And  there  is  no  doubt,  as  already  in 
timated,  that  if  we  look  into  those  scenes  among 
ourselves  where  the  largest  portions  of  the  debt  are 


454  Alexander  Hamilton 

accumulated,  we  shall  perceive  that  a  new  spring 
has  been  given  to  industry  in  various  branches. 

But,  be  all  this  as  it  may,  the  observation  made 
under  the  last  head  applies  here.  The  debt  was  the 
creature  of  the  Revolution.  It  was  to  be  provided 
for.  Being  so,  in  whatever  form,  it  must  have  be 
come  an  object  of  speculation  and  jobbing. 

OBJECTION  12. — The  funding  of  the  debt  has  fur 
nished  effectual  means  of  corrupting  such  a  portion 
of  the  Legislature  as  turns  the  balance  between  the 
honest  voters  whichever  way  it  is  directed. 

ANSWER. — This  is  one  of  those  assertions  which 
can  only  be  denied,  and  pronounced  to  be  malignant 
and  false.  No  facts  exist  to  support  it,  and  being  a 
mere  matter  of  fact,  no  argument  can  be  brought  to 
repel  it. 

The  assertors  beg  the  question.  They  assume  to 
themselves,  and  to  those  who  think  with  them,  in 
fallibility.  Take  their  words  for  it,  they  are  the 
only  honest  men  in  the  community.  But  compare 
the  tenor  of  men's  lives,  and  at  least  as  large  a  por 
tion  of  virtuous  and  independent  characters  will  be 
found  among  those  whom  they  malign  as  among 
themselves. 

A  member  of  the  majority  of  the  Legislature  would 
say  to  these  defamers:  "  In  your  vocabulary,  gentle 
men,  Creditor  and  Enemy  appear  to  be  synonymous 
terms;  the  support  of  public  credit,  and  corruption, 
of  similar  import;  an  enlarged  and  liberal  construc 
tion  of  the  Constitution,  for  the  public  good  and  for 
the  maintenance  of  the  due  energy  of  the  national 
authority,  of  the  same  meaning  with  usurpation  and 


Objections  and  Answers  455 

a  conspiracy  to  overturn  the  republican  government 
of  the  country;  every  man  of  a  different  opinion 
from  your  own,  an  ambitious  despot  or  a  corrupt 
knave.  You  bring  every  thing  to  the  standard  of 
your  narrow  and  depraved  ideas,  and  you  condemn 
without  mercy  or  even  decency  whatever  does  not 
accord  with  it.  Every  man  who  is  either  too  short  or 
too  long  for  your  political  couch  must  be  stretched 
or  lopped  to  suit  it.  But  your  pretensions  must  be 
rejected,  your  insinuations  despised.  Your  politics 
originate  in  immorality,  in  a  disregard  of  the  maxims 
of  good  faith  and  the  rights  of  property,  and  if  they 
could  prevail  must  end  in  national  disgrace  and  con 
fusion.  Your  rules  of  construction  for  the  author 
ities,  vested  in  the  government  of  the  Union,  would 
arrest  all  its  essential  movements,  and  bring  it  back 
in  practice  to  the  same  state  of  imbecility  which 
rendered  the  old  Confederation  contemptible.  Your 
principles  of  liberty  are  principles  of  licentiousness 
incompatible  with  all  government.  You  sacrifice 
every  thing  that  is  venerable  and  substantial  in 
society  to  the  vain  reveries  of  a  false  and  new 
fangled  philosophy.  As  to  the  motives  by  which  I 
have  been  influenced,  I  leave  my  general  conduct  in 
private  and  public  life  to  speak  for  them.  Go  and 
learn  among  my  fellow-citizens  whether  I  have  not 
uniformly  maintained  the  character  of  an  honest 
man.  As  to  the  love  of  liberty  and  country,  you 
have  given  no  stronger  proofs  of  being  actuated  by 
it  than  I  have  done; — cease,  then,  to  arrogate  to 
yourself  and  to  your  party  all  the  patriotism  and 
virtue  of  the  country.  Renounce,  if  you  can,  the 


456  Alexander  Hamilton 

intolerant  spirit  by  which  you  are  governed,  and 
begin  to  reform  yourself,  instead  of  reprobating 
others,  by  beginning  to  doubt  of  your  own  infalli 
bility." 

Such  is  the  answer  which  would  naturally  be  given 
by  a  member  of  the  majority  of  the  Legislature  to 
such  an  objection.  And  it  is  the  only  one  that  could 
be  given,  until  some  evidence  of  the  supposed  cor 
ruption  should  be  produced. 

As  far  as  I  know  there  is  not  a  member  of  the 
Legislature  who  can  properly  be  called  a  stock-job 
ber  or  a  paper-dealer.  There  are  several  of  them 
who  were  proprietors  of  public  debt  in  various  ways ; 
some  for  money  lent  and  property  furnished  for  the 
use  of  the  public  during  the  war;  others  for  sums 
received  in  payment  of  debts,  and  it  is  supposable 
enough  that  some  of  them  had  been  purchasers  of 
the  public  debt,  with  intention  to  hold  it  as  a  valu 
able  and  convenient  property,  considering  an  honor 
able  provision  for  it  as  a  matter  of  course. 

It  is  a  strange  perversion  of  ideas,  and  as  novel  as 
it  is  extraordinary,  that  men  should  be  deemed  cor 
rupt  and  criminal  for  becoming  proprietors  in  the 
funds  of  their  country.  Yet  I  believe  the  number 
of  members  of  Congress  is  very  small  who  have  ever 
been  considerable  proprietors  in  the  funds.  As  to 
improper  speculations  on  measures  depending  before 
Congress,  1  believe  never  was  any  body  of  men  freer 
from  them. 

There  are,  indeed,  several  members  of  Congress 
who  have  become  proprietors  in  the  Bank  of  the 
United  States,  and  a  few  of  them  to  a  pretty  large 


Objections  and  Answers  457 

amount,  say  fifty  or  sixty  shares.  But  all  opera 
tions  of  this  kind  were  necessarily  subsequent  to 
the  determination  upon  the  measure;  the  subscrip 
tions  were  of  course  subsequent,  and  purchases  still 
more  so.  Can  there  be  any  thing  really  blamable  in 
this?  Can  it  be  culpable  to  invest  property  in  an 
institution  which  has  been  established  for  the  most 
important  national  purposes  ?  Can  that  property  be 
supposed  to  corrupt  the  holder?  It  would  indeed 
tend  to  render  him  friendly  to  the  preservation  of 
the  bank;  but  in  this,  there  would  be  no  collision 
between  duty  and  interest,  and  it  would  give  him  no 
improper  bias  on  other  questions. 

To  uphold  public  credit,  and  to  be  friendly  to  the 
bank,  must  be  presupposed  to  be  corrupt  things, 
before  the  being  a  proprietor  in  the  funds,  or  of  bank 
stock,  can  be  supposed  to  have  a  corrupting  influ 
ence.  The  being  a  proprietor,  in  either  case,  is  a 
very  different  thing  from  being,  in  a  proper  sense  of 
the  term,  a  stock-jobber. 

On  this  point  of  the  corruption  of  the  Legislature, 
one  more  observation  of  great  weight  remains.  Those 
who  oppose  a  funded  debt,  and  mean  any  provision 
for  it,  contemplate  an  annual  one. 

Now  it  is  impossible  to  conceive  a  more  fruitful 
source  of  legislative  corruption  than  this.  All  the 
members  of  it  who  should  incline  to  speculate  would 
have  an  annual  opportunity  of  speculating  upon 
their  influence  in  the  Legislature  to  promote,  or 
retard,  or  put  off  a  provision.  Every  session  the 
question  whether  the  annual  provision  should  be  con 
tinued,  would  be  an  occasion  of  pernicious  caballing 


458  Alexander  Hamilton 

and  corrupt  bargaining.  In  this  very  view,  when 
the  subject  was  in  deliberation,  it  was  impossible  not 
to  wish  it  decided  upon  once  for  all,  and  out  of  the 
way. 

OBJECTION  13. — The  corrupt  squadron  deciding 
the  voice  of  the  Legislature  have  manifested  their 
disposition  to  get  rid  of  the  limitations  imposed  by 
the  Constitution  on  the  general  Legislature;  limita 
tions,  on  the  faith  of  which  the  States  acceded  to 
that  instrument. 

ANSWER. — Here  again  the  objectors  beg  the  ques 
tion.  They  take  it  for  granted  that  their  construc 
tions  of  the  Constitution  are  right,  and  that  the 
opposite  ones  are  wrong;  and  with  great  good  na 
ture  and  candor  ascribe  the  effect  of  a  difference  of 
opinion  to  a  disposition  to  get  rid  of  the  limitations 
on  the  government. 

Those  who  have  advocated  the  constructions 
which  have  obtained,  have  met  their  opponents  on 
the  ground  of  fair  argument,  and  they  think  have 
refuted  them.  How  shall  it  be  determined  which 
side  is  right? 

There  are  some  things  which  the  general  govern 
ment  has  clearly  a  right  to  do.  There  are  others 
which  it  has  clearly  no  right  to  meddle  with;  and 
there  is  a  good  deal  of  middle  ground,  about  which 
honest  and  well-disposed  men  may  differ.  The  most 
that  can  be  said  is,  that  some  of  this  middle  ground 
may  have  been  occupied  by  the  national  Legislature, 
and  this  surely  is  no  evidence  of  a  disposition  to  get 
rid  of  the  limitations  in  the  Constitution,  nor  can  it 
be  viewed  in  that  light  by  men  of  candor. 


Objections  and  Answers  459 

The  truth  is,  one  description  of  men  is  disposed  to 
do  the  essential  business  of  the  nation,  by  a  liberal 
construction  of  the  powers  of  the  government; 
another,  from  disaffection,  would  fritter  away  those 
powers;  a  third,  from  an  overweening  jealousy, 
would  do  the  same  thing ;  a  fourth,  from  party  and 
personal  opposition,  are  torturing  the  Constitution 
into  objections  to  every  thing  they  do  not  like. 

The  bank  is  one  of  the  measures  which  is  deemed 
by  some  the  greatest  stretch  of  power,  and  yet  its 
constitutionality  has  been  established  in  the  most 
satisfactory  manner. 

And  the  most  incorrigible  theorist  among  its  oppo^ 
nents  would,  in  one  month's  experience,  as  head  of 
the  department  of  the  Treasury,  be  compelled  to 
acknowledge  that  it  is  an  absolutely  indispensable 
engine  in  the  management  of  the  finances,  and  would 
quickly  become  a  convert  to  its  perfect  constitution 
ality. 

OBJECTION  14. — The  ultimate  object  of  all  this  is 
to  prepare  the  way  for  a  change  from  the  present  re 
publican  form  of  government  to  that  of  a  monarchy, 
of  which  the  British  constitution  is  to  be  the  inodel. 

ANSWER. — To  this  there  is  no  other  answer  than 
a  flat  denial,  except  this:  that  the  project,  from  its 
absurdity,  refutes  itself. 

The  idea  of  introducing  a  monarchy  or  aristocracy 
into  this  country,  by  employing  the  influence  and 
force  of  a  government  continually  changing  hands, 
toward  it,  is  one  of  those  visionary  things  that  none 
but  madmen  could  meditate,  and  that  no  wise  man 
will  believe. 


460  Alexander  Hamilton 

If  it  could  be  done  at  all,  which  is  utterly  incred 
ible,  it  would  require  a  long  series  of  time,  certainly 
beyond  the  life  of  any  individual,  to  effect  it.  Who, 
then,  would  enter  into  such  a  plot?  for  what  pur 
pose  of  interest  or  ambition? 

To  hope  that  the  people  may  be  cajoled  into  giv 
ing  their  sanctions  to  such  institutions  is  still  more 
chimerical.  A  people  so  enlightened  and  so  diversi 
fied  as  the  people  of  this  country  can  surely  never 
be  brought  to  it,  but  from  convulsions  and  disorders, 
in  consequence  of  the  arts  of  popular  demagogues. 

The  truth  unquestionably  is,  that  the  only  path 
to  a  subversion  of  the  republican  system  of  the  coun 
try  is  by  flattering  the  prejudices  of  the  people,  and 
exciting  their  jealousies  and  apprehensions,  to  throw 
affairs  into  confusion,  and  bring  on  civil  commotion. 
Tired  at  length  of  anarchy  or  want  of  government, 
they  may  take  shelter  in  the  arms  of  monarchy  for 
repose  and  security. 

Those,  then,  who  resist  a  confirmation  of  public 
order  are  the  true  artificers  of  monarchy.  Not  that 
this  is  the  intention  of  the  generality  of  them.  Yet 
it  would  not  be  difficult  to  lay  the  finger  upon  some 
of  their  party  who  may  justly  be  suspected.  When 
a  man,  unprincipled  in  private  life,  desperate  in  his 
fortune,  bold  in  his  temper,  possessed  of  consider 
able  talents,  having  the  advantage  of  military  habits, 
despotic  in  his  ordinary  demeanor,  known  to  have 
scoffed  in  private  at  the  principles  of  liberty;  when 
such  a  man  is  seen  to  mount  the  hobby-horse  of  popu 
larity,  to  join  in  the  cry  of  danger  to  liberty,  to  take 
every  opportunity  of  embarrassing  the  general  gov- 


Objections  and  Answers  461 

ernment  and  bringing  it  under  suspicion,  to  flatter 
and  fall  in  with  all  the  nonsense  of  the  zealots  of  the 
day,  it  may  justly  be  suspected  that  his  object  is  to 
throw  things  into  confusion,  that  he  may  "  ride  the 
storm  and  direct  the  whirlwind." 

It  has  aptly  been  observed,  that  Cato  was  the  Tory, 
CcBsar  the  Whig  of  his  day.  The  former  frequently 
resisted,  the  latter  always  flattered,  the  follies  of  the 
people.  Yet  the  former  perished  with  the  republic 
— the  latter  destroyed  it. 

No  popular  government  was  ever  without  its 
Catilines  and  its  Caesars — these  are  its  true  enemies. 

As  far  as  I  am  informed,  the  anxiety  of  those  who 
are  calumniated  is  to  keep  the  government  in  the 
state  in  which  it  is,  which  they  fear  will  be  no  easy 
task,  from  a  natural  tendency  in  the  state  of  things 
to  exalt  the  local  on  the  ruins  of  the  national  govern 
ment.  Some  of  them  appear  to  wish,  in  a  constitu 
tional  way,  a  change  in  the  judiciary  department  of 
the  government,  from  an  apprehension  that  an  or 
derly  and  effectual  administration  of  justice  cannot 
be  obtained  without  a  more  intimate  connection  be 
tween  the  State  and  National  tribunals.  But  even 
this  is  not  an  object  of  any  set  of  men  as  a  party. 
There  is  a  difference  of  opinion  about  it,  on  various 
grounds,  among  those  who  have  generally  acted 
together.  As  to  any  other  change  of  consequence,  I 
believe  nobody  dreams  of  it. 

It  is  curious  to  observe  the  anticipations  of  the 
different  parties.  One  side  appears  to  believe  that 
there  is  a  serious  plot  to  overturn  the  State  govern 
ments,  and  substitute  a  monarchy  to  the  present 


462  Alexander  Hamilton 

republican  system.  The  other  side  firmly  believes 
that  there  is  a  serious  plot  to  overturn  the  gen 
eral  government,  and  elevate  the  separate  power 
of  the  States  upon  its  ruins.  Both  sides  may  be 
equally  wrong,  and  their  mutual  jealousies  may 
be  naturally  causes  of  the  appearances  which  mu 
tually  disturb  them  and  sharpen  them  against  each 
other. 

OBJECTION  15. — This  charge,  that  this  change 
(i.  e.,  from  a  republic  to  a  monarchy)  was  contem 
plated  in  the  convention,  they  say  is  no  secret,  be 
cause  its  partisans  have  made  none  of  it — to  effect 
it  then  was  impracticable;  but  they  are  still  eager 
after  their  object,  and  are  predisposing  every  thing 
for  its  ultimate  attainment. 

ANSWER. — This  is  a  palpable  misrepresentation. 
No  man  that  I  know  of  contemplated  the  introduc 
ing  into  this  country  a  monarchy.  A  very  small 
number  (not  more  than  three  or  four)  manifested 
theoretical  opinions  favorable  in  the  abstract  to  a 
constitution  like  that  of  Great  Britain;  but  every 
one  agreed  that  such  a  constitution,  except  as  to  the 
general  distribution  of  departments  and  powers,  was 
out  of  the  question  in  reference  to  this  country. 
The  member  who  was  most  explicit  on  this  point  (a 
member  from  New  York)  declared  in  strong  terms 
that  the  republican  theory  ought  to  be  adhered  to 
in  this  country  as  long  as  there  was  any  chance 
of  its  success;  that  the  idea  of  a  perfect  equality 
of  political  rights  among  the  citizens,  exclusive  of 
all  permanent  or  hereditary  distinctions,  was  of  a 
nature  to  engage  the  good  wishes  of  every  good  man, 


Objections  and  Answers  463 

whatever  might  be  his  theoretic  doubts;  that  it 
merited  his  best  efforts  to  give  success  to  it  in  prac 
tice;  that  hitherto,  from  an  incompetent  structure 
of  the  government,  it  had  not  had  a  fair  trial,  and 
that  the  endeavor  ought  then  to  be  to  secure  to  it 
a  better  chance  of  success  by  a  government  more 
capable  of  energy  and  order. 

There  is  not  a  man  at  present  in  either  branch  of 
the  Legislature  who,  that  I  recollect,  had  held  lan 
guage  in  the  convention  favorable  to  monarchy. 

The  basis,  therefore,  of  this  suggestion  fails. 

OBJECTION  16. — So  many  of  them  have  got  into 
the  Legislature,  that,  aided  by  the  corrupt  squadron 
of  paper  dealers,  who  are  at  their  devotion,  they 
make  a  majority  in  both  Houses.1 

ANSWER. — This  has  been  answered  above.  Neither 
description  of  character  is  to  be  found  in  the  Legis 
lature.  In  the  Senate  there  are  nine  or  ten  who 
were  members  of  the  convention;  in  the  House  of 
Representatives,  not  more  than  six  or  seven.2  Of 
those  who  are  in  the  last-mentioned  House,  none  can 
be  considered  as  influential  but  Mr.  Madison  and 
Mr.  Gerry.  Are  they  monarchy  men  ? 

As  to  the  lyth,  i8th,  and  igth  heads: 

OBJECTION  17. — The  republican  party  who  wish  to 
preserve  the  government  in  its  present  form  are 
fewer,  even  when  joined  by  the  two,  three,  or  half  a 
dozen  anti-federalists,  who,  though  they  dare  not 
avow  it,  are  still  opposed  to  any  general  govern 
ment;  but,  being  less  so  to  a  republican  than  a 

1  This  objection  is  peculiarly  Jeffersonian. — [Eo. 
*  This  computation  is  from  memory. 


464  Alexander  Hamilton 

monarchical  one,  they  naturally  join  those   whom 
they  think  pursuing  the  lesser  evil. 

OBJECTION  18. — Of  all  the  mischiefs  objected  to 
the  system  of  measures  before  mentioned,  none,  they 
add,  is  so  afflicting,  and  fatal  to  every  honest  hope, 
as  the  corruption  of  the  Legislature;  as  it  was  the 
earliest  of  these  measures,  it  became  the  instrument 
for  producing  the  rest,  and  will  be  the  instrument 
for  producing  in  future  a  king,  lords,  and  commons, 
or  whatever  else  those  who  direct  it  may  choose. 
Withdrawn  such  a  distance  from  the  eye  of  their 
constituents,  and  these  so  dispersed  as  to  be  inacces 
sible  to  public  information,  and  particularly  to  that 
of  the  conduct  of  their  own  representatives,  they 
will  form  the  worst  government  upon  earth,  if  the 
means  of  their  corruption  be  not  prevented. 

OBJECTION  19. — The  only  hope  of  safety,  they  say, 
hangs  now  on  the  numerous  representation  which  is 
to  come  forward  the  ensuing  year;  but  should  the 
majority  of  the  new  members  be  still  in  the  same 
principles  with  the  present — show  so  much  derelic 
tion  to  republican  government,  and  such  a  disposi 
tion  to  encroach  upon  or  explain  away  the  limited 
powers  of  the  Constitution,  in  order  to  change  it,— 
it  is  not  easy  to  conjecture  what  would  be  the  re 
sult,  nor  what  means  would  be  resorted  to  for  cor 
rection  of  the  evil.  True  wisdom,  they  acknowledge, 
should  direct  temperate  and  peaceable  measures, 
but  add,  the  division  of  sentiment  and  interest  hap 
pens,  unfortunately,  to  be  so  geographical,  that  no 
mortal  can  say  that  what  is  most  wise  and  temperate 
would  prevail  against  what  is  more  easy  and  obvi- 


Objections  and  Answers  465 

ous.  They  declare  they  can  contemplate  no  evil 
more  incalculable  than  the  breaking  of  the  Union 
into  two  or  more  parts;  yet  when  they  view  the 
mass  which  opposed  the  original  coalescence — when 
they  consider  that  it  lay  chiefly  in  the  Southern 
quarter — that  the  Legislature  have  availed  them 
selves  of  no  occasion  of  allaying  it,  but,  on  the  con 
trary,  whenever  Northern  and  Southern  prejudices 
have  come  into  conflict,  the  latter  have  been  sacri 
ficed  and  the  former  soothed.1 

They  are  rather  inferences  from  and  comments 
upon  what  is  before  suggested,  than  specific  objec 
tions.  The  answer  to  them  must  therefore  be  de 
rived  from  what  is  said  under  other  heads. 

It  is  certainly  much  to  be  regretted  that  party  dis 
criminations  are  so  far  geographical  as  they  have 
been,  and  that  ideas  of  a  severance  of  the  Union  are 
creeping  in  both  North  and  South.  In  the  South,  it 
is  supposed  that  more  government  than  is  expedient 
is  desired  by  the  North.  In  the  North,  it  is  believed 
that  the  prejudices  of  the  South  are  incompatible 
with  the  necessary  degree  of  government,  and  with 
the  attainment  of  the  essential  ends  of  national  un 
ion.  In  both  quarters  there  are  respectable  men, 
who  talk  of  separation  as  a  thing  dictated  by  the 
different  geniuses  and  different  prejudices  of  the 
parts.  But  happily  their  number  is  not  consider 
able,  and  the  prevailing  sentiment  of  the  people  is 
in  favor  of  their  true  interest,  UNION.  And  it  is  to 
be  hoped  that  the  efforts  of  wise  men  will  be  able  to 

1  These  three  objections  are  inserted  here  as  they  stand  in  Washing 
ton's  letter  of  July  29th. 


VOL.  II.— 30. 


466  Alexander  Hamilton 

prevent  a  schism  which  would  be  injurious  in  differ 
ent  degrees  to  different  portions  of  the  Union,  but 
would  seriously  wound  the  prosperity  of  all. 

As  to  the  sacrifice  of  Southern  to  Northern  pre 
judices — if  the  conflict  has  been  between  prejudices 
and  prejudices,  it  is  certainly  to  be  wished,  for 
mutual  gratification,  that  there  had  been  mutual 
concession;  but  if  the  conflict  has  been  between 
great  and  substantial  national  objects  on  the  one 
hand,  and  theoretical  prejudices  on  the  other,  it  is 
difficult  to  desire  that  the  former  should  in  any  in 
stance  have  yielded. 

OBJECTION  20. — The  owners  of  the  debt  are  in  the 
Southern,  and  the  holders  of  it  in  the  Northern, 
division. 

ANSWER. — If  this  were  literally  true,  it  would  be 
no  argument  for  or  against  any  thing.  It  would 
be  still  politically  and  morally  right  for  the  debtors 
to  pay  their  creditors. 

But  it  is  in  no  sense  true.  The  owners  of  the  debt 
are  the  people  of  every  State,  South,  Middle,  and 
North.  The  holders  are  the  individual  creditors — 
citizens  of  the  United  Netherlands,  Great  Britain, 
France,  and  of  these  States,  North,  Middle,  South. 
Though  some  men,  who  constantly  substitute  hypo 
thesis  to  fact,  imagination  to  evidence,  assert  and 
reassert  that  the  inhabitants  of  the  South  contribute 
more  than  those  of  the  North,  yet  there  is  no  pre 
tence  that  they  contribute  all;  and  even  the  as 
sertion  of  greater  contribution  is  unsupported  by 
documents,  facts,  or,  it  may  be  added,  probabilities. 
Though  the  inhabitants  of  the  South  manufacture 


Objections  and  Answers  467 

less  than  those  of  the  North,  which  is  the  great  argu 
ment,  yet  it  does  not  follow  that  they  consume  more 
of  taxable  articles.  It  is  a  solid  answer  to  this,  that 
whites  live  better,  wear  more  and  better  clothes,  and 
consume  more  luxuries,  than  blacks,  who  constitute 
so  considerable  a  part  of  the  population  of  the 
South;  that  the  inhabitants  of  cities  and  towns, 
which  abound  so  much  more  in  the  North  than  in 
the  South,  consume  more  of  foreign  articles  than  the 
inhabitants  of  the  country;  that  it  is  a  general  rule, 
that  communities  consume  and  contribute  in  pro 
portion  to  their  active  or  circulating  wealth,  and 
that  the  Northern  regions  have  more  active  or  cir 
culating  wealth  than  the  Southern. 

If  official  documents  are  consulted,  though,  for 
obvious  reasons,  they  are  not  decisive,  they  contra 
dict  rather  than  confirm  the  hypothesis  of  greater 
proportional  contribution  in  the  Southern  division. 

But,  to  make  the  allegation  in  the  objection  true, 
it  is  necessary  not  merely  that  the  inhabitants  of  the 
South  should  contribute  more,  but  that  they  should 
contribute  all. 

It  must  be  confessed  that  a  much  larger  propor 
tion  of  the  debt  is  owned  by  inhabitants  of  the 
States  from  Pennsylvania  to  New  Hampshire,  in 
clusively,  than  in  the  States  south  of  Pennsylvania. 

But  as  to  the  primitive  debt  of  the  United  States, 
that  was  the  case  in  its  original  concoction.  This 
arose  from  two  causes:  first,  from  the  war  having 
more  constantly  been  carried  on  in  the  Northern 
quarter,  which  led  to  obtaining  more  men  and 
greater  supplies  in  that  quarter,  and  credit  having 


468  Alexander  Hamilton 

been  for  a  considerable  time  the  main  instrument  of 
the  government,  a  consequent  accumulation  of  debt 
in  that  quarter  took  place;  secondly,  from  the 
greater  ability  of  the  Northern  and  Middle  States  to 
furnish  men,  money,  and  other  supplies,  and  from 
the  greater  quantities  of  men,  money,  and  other 
supplies  which  they  did  furnish.  The  loan-office 
debt,  the  army  debt,  the  debt  of  the  five  great 
departments,  was  contracted  in  a  much  larger  pro 
portion  in  the  Northern  and  Middle,  than  in  the 
Southern,  States. 

It  must  be  confessed,  too,  that  by  the  attraction 
of  a  superior  moneyed  capital  the  disparity  has  in 
creased,  but  it  was  great  in  the  beginning. 

As  to  the  assumed  debt,  the  proportion  in  the 
South  was  at  the  first  somewhat  larger  than  in  the 
North,  and  it  must  be  acknowledged  that  this  has 
since,  from  the  same  superiority  of  moneyed  capital 
in  the  North,  ceased  to  be  the  case. 

But  if  the  Northern  people  who  were  originally 
greater  creditors  than  the  Southern,  have  become 
still  more  so  as  purchasers,  is  it  any  reason  that  an 
honorable  provision  should  not  be  made  for  their 
debt?  Or  is  the  government  to  blame  for  having 
made  it?  Did  the  Northern  people  take  their  pro 
perty  by  violence  from  the  Southern,  or  did  they 
purchase  and  pay  for  it? 

It  may  be  answered  that  they  obtained  consider 
able  part  of  it  by  speculation,  taking  advantage  of 
superior  opportunities  of  information. 

But  admitting  this  to  be  true  in  all  the  latitude 
in  which  it  is  commonly  stated,  is  a  government  to 


Objections  and  Answers  469 

bend  the  general  maxims  of  policy  and  to  mould  its 
measures  according  to  the  accidental  course  of  pri 
vate  speculations  ?  Is  it  to  do  this,  or  omit  that,  in 
cases  of  great  national  importance,  because  one  set 
of  individuals  may  gain,  another  lose,  from  unequal 
opportunities  of  information,  from  unequal  degrees 
of  resource,  craft,  confidence,  or  enterprise? 

Moreover,  there  is  much  exaggeration  in  stating 
the  manner  of  the  alienation  of  the  debt.  The  prin 
cipal  speculations  in  State  debts,  whatever  may  be 
pretended,  certainly  began  after  the  promulgation  of 
the  plan  for  assuming  by  the  report  of  the  Secretary 
of  the  Treasury  to  the  House  of  Representatives. 
The  resources  of  individuals  in  this  country  are 
too  limited  to  have  admitted  of  much  progress  in 
purchases  before  the  knowledge  of  that  plan  was 
diffused  throughout  the  country.  After  that,  pur 
chasers  and  sellers  were  upon  equal  ground.  If  the 
purchasers  speculated  upon  the  sellers,  in  many  in 
stances  the  sellers  speculated  upon  the  purchasers. 
Each  made  his  calculation  of  chances,  and  founded 
upon  it  an  exchange  of  money  for  certificates.  It 
has  turned  out  generally  that  the  buyer  had  the  best 
of  the  bargain,  but  the  seller  got  the  value  of  his 
commodity  according  to  his  estimate  of  it,  and 
probably  in  a  great  number  of  instances  more.  This 
shall  be  explained. 

It  happened  that  Mr.  Madison  and  some  other 
distinguished  characters  of  the  South  started  in  op 
position  to  the  assumption.  The  high  opinion  en 
tertained  of  them  made  it  be  taken  for  granted  in 
that  quarter  that  the  opposition  would  be  successful. 


470  Alexander  Hamilton 

The  securities  quickly  rose,  by  means  of  purchases, 
beyond  their  former  prices.  It  was  imagined  that 
they  would  soon  return  to  their  old  station  by  a  rejec 
tion  of  the  proposition  for  assuming.  And  the  cer 
tificate-holders  were  eager  to  part  with  them  at  their 
current  prices,  calculating  on  a  loss  to  the  purchasers 
from  their  future  fall.  This  representation  is  not 
conjectural;  it  is  founded  on  information  from  re 
spectable  and  intelligent  Southern  characters,  and 
may  be  ascertained  by  inquiry. 

Hence  it  happened  that  the  inhabitants  of  the 
Southern  States  sustained  a  considerable  loss  by  the 
opposition  to  the  assumption  from  Southern  gentle 
men,  and  their  too  great  confidence  in  the  efficacy  of 
that  opposition. 

Further,  a  great  part  of  the  debt  which  has  been 
purchased  by  Northern  and  Southern  citizens  has 
been  at  higher  prices — in  numerous  instances  beyond 
the  true  value.  In  the  late  delirium  of  speculation 
large  sums  were  purchased  at  twenty-five  per  cent, 
above  par  and  upward. 

The  Southern  people,  upon  the  whole,  have  not 
parted  with  their  property  for  nothing.  They  parted 
with  it  voluntarily,  in  most  cases,  upon  fair  terms, 
without  surprise  or  deception — in  many  cases  for 
more  than  its  value.  'Tis  their  own  fault  if  the 
purchase  money  has  not  been  beneficial  to  them; 
and  the  presumption  is,  it  has  been  so  in  a  material 
degree. 

Let,  then,  any  candid  and  upright  mind,  weighing 
all  the  circumstances,  pronounce  whether  there  be 
any  real  hardship  in  the  inhabitants  of  the  South 


Objections  and  Answers  471 

being  required  to  contribute  their  proportion  to  a 
provision  for  the  debt  as  it  now  exists?  whether,  if 
at  liberty,  they  could  honestly  dispute  the  doing  of 
it?  or  whether  they  can,  even  in  candor  and  good 
faith,  complain  of  being  obliged  to  do  it? 

If  they  can,  it  is  time  to  unlearn  all  the  ancient 
notions  of  justice  and  morality,  and  to  adopt  a  new 
system  of  ethics. 

OBJECTION  21. — That  the  antifederal  champions 
are  now  strengthened  in  argument  by  the  fulfilment 
of  their  predictions,  which  has  been  brought  about 
by  the  monarchical  federalists  themselves,  who,  hav 
ing  been  for  the  new  government  merely  as  a  step 
ping-stone  to  monarchy,  have  themselves  adopted 
the  very  constructions  of  the  Constitution,  of  which, 
when  advocating  the  acceptance  before  the  tribunal 
of  the  people,  they  declared  it  insusceptible;  whilst 
the  republican  federalists,  who  espoused  the  same 
government  for  its  intrinsic  merits,  are  disarmed  of 
their  weapons, — that  which  they  denied  as  prophecy 
being  now  become  true  history.  Who,  therefore,  can 
be  sure,  they  ask,  that  these  things  may  not  prose 
lyte  the  small  number  which  was  wanting  to  place 
the  majority  on  the  other  side?  And  this,  they  add, 
is  the  event  at  which  they  tremble. 

ANSWER. — All  that  can  be  said  in  answer  to  this 
has  been  already  said.  It  is  much  to  be  wished  that 
the  true  state  of  the  case  may  not  have  been,  that 
the  antifederal  champions  have  been  encouraged  in 
their  activity  by  the  countenance  which  has  been 
given  to  their  principles  by  certain  federalists  who, 
in  an  envious  and  ambitious  struggle  for  power, 


472  Alexander  Hamilton 

influence,  and  pre-eminence,  have  embraced  as  aux 
iliaries  the  numerous  party  originally  disaffected  to 
the  government,  in  the  hope  that  these,  united  with 
the  factious  and  feeble-minded  federalists  whom  they 
can  detach  will  give  them  the  predominancy.  This 
would  be  nothing  more  than  the  old  story  of  personal 
and  party  emulation. 

The  antifederal  champions  alluded  to  may  be 
taught  to  abate  their  exultation  by  being  told  that 
the  great  body  of  the  federalists,  or  rather  the  great 
body  of  the  people,  are  of  opinion  that  none  of  their 
predictions  have  been  fulfilled,  that  the  beneficial 
effects  of  the  government  have  exceeded  expectation, 
and  are  witnessed  by  the  general  prosperity  of  the 
nation. 


ADDRESS   TO   THE    PUBLIC    CREDITORS  I 

BY  A  FRIEND. 

September  i,  1790. 

It  is  probable  that  many  of  you  are  not  suffi 
ciently  apprised  of  the  advantages  of  your  own  situa 
tion,  and  that  for  want  of  judging  rightly  of  it,  and 
of  your  future  prospects,  you  may  be  tempted  to 
part  with  your  securities  much  below  their  true 
value,  and  considerably  below  what  it  is  probable 

1  This  address  and  the  vindication  which  follows,  if  the  dates  alone 
were  to  be  observed,  should  have  come  after  the  official  reports  of  1 790 
and  1791.  They  have,  however,  a  more  immediate  connection  with 
the  preceding  letter  to  Washington  as  parts  of  the  defence  of  the  fund 
ing  system,  and  this  address  in  particular  shows  how  Hamilton  at  the 
very  outset  attempted  through  the  newspapers  to  check  the  tide  of 
speculation  and  to  prevail  on  the  original  holders  of  the  debt  not  to 
part  with  their  securities. 


Address  to  the  Public  Creditors  473 

they  will  sell  for  in  eight  or  nine  months  from  this 
time. 

To  guard  you  against  an  unnecessary  sacrifice  of 
your  interests  by  a  precipitate  sale,  I  will  now  state 
to  you,  in  a  plain  and  concise  way,  what  has  been 
done  for  you  in  the  course  of  the  last  session  of  Con 
gress,  and  what  you  may  reasonably  expect. 

EFFECTUAL  provision  has  been  made  for  actually 
paying  you  six  per  cent,  yearly,  on  two  thirds  of  the 
principal  of  your  debt — that  is,  four  per  cent,  on  the 
whole  amount  of  your  principal.  And  at  the  end  of 
ten  years  you  are  to  receive  six  per  cent,  yearly,  on 
the  remaining  third  of  your  principal — that  is,  two 
per  cent,  more  on  the  whole  of  your  principal.  And 
like  effectual  provision  has  been  made  for  actually 
paying  you  three  per  cent,  yearly,  on  whatever 
arrears  of  interest  may  be  due  to  you  on  your  prin 
cipal.  For  this  interest  you  are  net  even  to  wait  to 
the  end  of  a  year,  but  you  are  to  receive  it  in  quarter- 
yearly  payments — that  is  to  say,  one  fourth  part  at 
the  end  of  every  three  months ;  and  it  is  to  be  paid 
to  you  not  in  new  certificates,  or  paper  money,  but 
in  actual  gold  and  silver.  To  secure  this  to  you,  the 
duties  which  have  been  laid  on  goods  imported,  and 
on  the  tonnage  of  ships  or  vessels  (and  which  there 
is  every  reason,  from  the  experience  we  have  had, 
to  believe  will  be  sufficient),  are  absolutely  mort 
gaged  to  you,  till  the  whole  of  your  debt  is  discharged. 
You  will  not  have  to  depend,  as  under  most  of  the 
State  governments,  upon  a  provision  from  year  to 
year,  with  an  entire  uncertainty  whether  it  would  be 
continued,  and  with  many  examples  of  fickleness  and 


474  Alexander  Hamilton 

change ;  but  you  will  have  to  depend  on  a  permanent 
provision  made  once  for  all,  for  the  sacredness  of 
which  the  faith,  not  of  a  single  State,  but  of  all  the 
States,  is  solemnly  bound  to  you,  and  which  cannot 
be  undone  or  altered,  without  the  concurrence  of 
three  different  branches  of  the  government — the 
House  of  Representatives,  the  Senate,  and  the  Presi 
dent  of  the  United  States.  It  cannot  be  supposed 
that  if  one  of  the  two  branches  of  Congress  should 
hereafter  be  disposed  to  do  so  disgraceful  and  ruin 
ous  a  thing  as  to  repeal  a  law  on  which  the  credit  of 
the  government  was  at  stake,  that  the  other  branch 
would  be  willing  to  concur  in  so  pernicious  a  measure ; 
or  if  both  should  be  so  unwise  and  dishonest,  that 
the  President  of  the  United  States  would  give  his 
assent  to  it,  or  if  he  dissented,  that  two  thirds  of 
both  Houses  of  Congress  would  be  inclined  to  persist 
in  spite  of  his  disapprobation.  Whoever  considers 
the  nature  of  our  government  with  discernment 
will  see,  that  though  obstacles  and  delays  will  fre 
quently  stand  in  the  way  of  the  adoption  of  good 
measures,  yet,  when  once  adopted,  they  are  likely 
to  be  stable  and  permanent.  It  will  be  far  more 
difficult  to  undo  than  to  do. 

To  destroy  your  confidence  in  future,  there  are  too 
many  publications  which  represent  to  you  that  Con 
gress  have,  by  their  late  proceedings,  violated  their 
past  engagements,  and  that  you  can  place  no  greater 
reliance  upon  those  they  now  make  than  those  they 
have  heretofore  made.  Whether  representations 
like  these  proceed  from  a  sincere  opinion  in  persons 
who  have  not  accurately  considered  the  matter,  or 


Address  to  the  Public  Creditors  475 

from  those  who  wish  to  depreciate  the  government, 
or  from  those  who  wish  to  buy  securities  cheap,  or 
from  all  these  descriptions  of  persons,  I  cannot  say; 
but  from  whatever  source  they  proceed,  they  are 
certainly  not  candid  nor  just. 

Congress,  it  is  true,  submit  to  your  consideration 
some  alterations  in  the  nature  of  your  claims  upon 
the  government,  for  certain  equivalents  which  they 
hold  out  to  you,  and  of  which  you  are  to  judge.  A 
principal  object  they  have  in  doing  this  is  to  obtain 
a  suspension  of  the  payment  of  one  third  of  the  in 
terest,  to  which  you  are  entitled  for  ten  years,  in 
order  to  avoid  the  necessity  of  burthening  the  com 
munity,  or  carrying  the  taxation  to  objects  which 
might  be  displeasing  to  them.  And  you  cannot 
wonder  that  a  government  so  lately  formed,  and  not 
without  considerable  opposition,  should  be  cautious 
in  this  respect. 

But  whether  you  will  accept  the  terms  offered  to 
you  is  certainly  left  to  your  own  choice.  There  is 
not  a  syllable  in  the  law  that  obliges  you  to  do  it. 
On  the  contrary,  there  is  in  it  an  express  ratification 
of  your  former  contracts;  and  to  remove  all  possi 
bility  of  future  cavil  about  the  true  import  or  obli 
gation,  all  questions  of  discrimination  and  the  like, 
new  titles  are  offered  to  you  of  the  like  import  in 
substance  with  your  old  ones.  And  your  rights  are 
thus  established,  and  their  meaning  defined,  so  as  to 
render  their  future  operation,  under  the  sanction  of 
the  Constitution,  unequivocal.  They  are  not  only  not 
violated,  but  if  possible  they  have  received  additional 
strength,  and  have  become  still  more  inviolable. 


476  Alexander  Hamilton 

So  far  is  there  from  being  any  thing  compulsory  in 
the  acts  of  the  government  in  the  case,  that  those  of 
you  who  do  not  choose  to  subscribe  to  the  new  terms 
are  to  receive,  during  the  time  allotted  for  deter 
mining  upon  them,  exactly  as  much  as  those  who 
do  subscribe.  And  the  faith  of  the  government  re 
mains  pledged  to  you  to  fulfil  its  engagements, 
which  must  be  performed,  as  fast  as  its  resources 
can  be  brought  into  action  for  the  purpose.  Your 
only  security  before  the  late  arrangement  was  the 
faith  of  government.  There  were  no  funds  pledged 
to  you  which  have  been  taken  away.  You  have 
still  the  faith  of  government  upon  a  renewed  assur 
ance  as  your  pledge,  and  while  you  are  deliberating 
on  the  new  proposals  you  are  to  receive  a  payment 
on  account. 

You  are  therefore  to  decide  according  to  your  own 
judgment,  whether  an  acceptance  of  the  new  terms, 
under  all  these  circumstances,  are  preferable  or  not 
to  a  dependence  on  the  future  resources  of  the  coun 
try  for  more.  This  is  a  question  of  prudent  calcula 
tion  which  you  are  at  liberty  to  determine  as  you 
please. 

Whence  it  is  evident,  that  whatever  other  objec 
tions  may  be  against  the  propriety  of  the  provision 
which  has  been  made  for  the  public  debt,  the  charge 
of  a  breach  of  contract  is  not  well  founded. 

The  better  to  form  a  comparison  between  the 
terms  proposed  and  those  of  your  former  contract,  it 
may  be  well  to  recollect  that  the  latter  will  be  satis 
fied  by  a  provision,  annually  made,  for  paying  you 
six  per  cent.  Whatever  the  policy  of  the  govern- 


Address  to  the  Public  Creditors  477 

ment  may  hereafter  dictate,  there  is  nothing  in  the 
existing  contract  that  calls  for  a  permanent  appro 
priation  of  funds.  Such  a  permanent  appropriation, 
however,  forms  a  part  of  the  new  loans,  and  will  be 
of  the  essence  of  the  new  contract. 

These  remarks  are  intended  to  satisfy  you  that 
there  is  no  cause,  from  any  thing  that  has  happened, 
for  a  diminution,  but  on  the  contrary  much  reason 
for  an  increase,  of  your  confidence  in  the  property 
you  possess,  as  holders  of  the  public  debt. 

I  return  to  the  subject  of  the  value  of  your  securi 
ties.  Their  present  price,  if  compared  with  that  at 
which  they  were  current  before  the  establishment 
of  the  new  Constitution,  will  be  deemed  to  be  high, 
and  is  as  great  as  at  this  time  could  reasonably  have 
been  expected;  but  compared  with  their  true  value, 
and  the  solidity  of  footing  on  which  they  stand,  is 
still  far  too  low.  The  rise  which  has  already  taken 
place  is  an  earnest  to  you  of  their  probable  future 
rise.  Such  of  you  who  do  not  incline  to  be  perma 
nent  holders  will  at  least  do  well  to  postpone  a  sale 
till  after  March,  when  the  first  payment  of  interest 
is  to  be  made.  The  effect  of  this  on  the  price  of 
securities  must  undoubtedly  be  very  favorable,  and 
you  may  then  calculate  on  a  better  market. 

The  holders  of  State  securities  have  still  stronger 
reasons  for  keeping  those  they  have,  the  price  of 
which,  in  most  of  the  States,  is  out  of  all  propor 
tion  lower  than  that  of  the  present  securities  of  the 
United  States,  and  must,  in  all  probability,  undergo 
a  considerable  change  for  the  better,  as  soon  as 
funds  are  actually  appropriated  for  them,  which  is 


47$  Alexander  Hamilton 

not  now  the  case,  but  which  must  of  course  be  so  at 
the  iHMihf,  *******  of  December.  The  present  debt 
of  the  United.  Strtrs  having  been  provided  for  out  of 
the  duties  on  imposts  and  tonnage  only,  jflypjiti  to 
leave  no  doubt  of  the  facility  of  devising  the  means 
of  providing  for  the  amonnt  which  "has  been  assumed 
of  the  State  debts. 

END  OF  VOL.  n. 


THIS   BOOK   IS   DUE   ON   THE   LAST   DATE 
STAMPED  BELOW 


AN  INITIAL  FINE  OF  25  CENTS 

WILL  BE  ASSESSED  FOR  FAILURE  TO  RETURN  THIS  BOOK 
ON  THE  DATE  DUE.  THE  PENALTY  WILL  INCREASE  TO 
50  CENTS  ON  THE  FOURTH  DAY  AND  TO  $1.00  ON  THE 
SEVENTH  DAY  OVERDUE. 


2  8 
RET. 


1  j  1964 


J  LIBRARY 

JUI 


Book  Slip-20m-9,'60(B3010s4)458 


IIIIIHIIIIIIIIIMIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII 

3  1175  01077  2 


H3 
[304 


-.  v  v  . : 


