Conetitutional  ]E^ition 


The  Works  of 

Alexander  Hamilton 


Edited  by 

Henry  Cabot  Lodge 


"  The  sacred  rights  of  mankind  are  not  to  be  rummaged  for  among  old  parchments  or 
musty  records.  They  arc  written,  as  with  a  sunbeam,  in  the  whole  volume  of  human  nature, 
by  the  hand  of  the  Divinity   itself,  and  can  never  be  erased  or  obscured  by  mortal   power." 

[HhuiLToti— The  Farmer  Re/uted,  lyjs,  JEt.  i8.] 

"  We  are  laboring  hard  to  establish  in  this  country  principles  more  and  more  national, 
and  free  from  all  foreign  ingredients,  so  that  we  may  be  neither  '  Greeks  nor  Trojans,"  but 
truly  Americans." — [Hamilton  to  King,  1796,  iCt.  39.] 


Volume  VI 


G.  P,  Putnam's  Sons 
New  York  and  London 
Cbe  fjnichcrbochec  iprese 


11 


.nD 


"Cbe  ftnicfierbocker  press,  'Rew  £ocb 


CONTENTS 


Foreign  Relations — Continued 

Camillus — Continued 
Foreign  Policy: 

Hamilton  to  Washington 

France 

The  Answer 

The  Warning 

The  Stand 

Detector 

A  French  Faction 

The  War  in  Europe 

Allegorical  Device 

Pericles   . 
The  Whiskey  Rebellion: 

Hamilton  to  Washington 

Washington  to  Governors  of  Pennsylvania 
AND  North  and  South  Carolina 

Hamilton  to  Washington 

Cabinet  Opinion       .... 

Hamilton  to  Washington 

Proclamation  ... 

Secretary  of  State  to  Mifflin 

Hamilton  to  Washington 

Hamilton  to  Craig  .... 

Hamilton  to  Washington 

TULLY         

Hamilton  to  Craig  .... 


20I 

206 

215 
229 

259 
318 
328 

330 
332 
333 

339 

349 
349 
388 
388 
389 
394 
408 
409 
409 
410 
426 


IV 


Contents 


The  Whiskey  Rebellion — Continued: 
Secretary  of  State  to  Mifflin 
Hamilton  to  Washington 
Proclamation  .... 
Hamilton  to  Lee 
Hamilton  to  Washington 

Military  Papers: 

Military  Peace  Establishment 
Hamilton  to  McHenry    . 
Hamilton  to  Washington 
Hamilton  to  Jay 


427 
441 
442 

445 
451 

463 
483 
486 
486 


FOREIGN  RELATIONS— CAMILLUS  {Continued) 


FOREIGN    RELATIONS— CAMILLUS 
[Continued) 


NO.    XXIV 

1795- 

HOWEVER  uniform  may  have  been  the  law  of 
Europe  in  relation  to  the  colonial  establish- 
ments, no  pains  have  been  spared  to  create  an  opinion 
that  France  has  been  guided  by  a  more  liberal  policy 
than  the  other  colonizing  powers,  and  that  the  regu- 
lations of  her  colony  trade  were  essentially  dissimilar 
from  theirs;  moreover,  that  her  disinterestedness 
was  so  great,  that  she  not  long  since  proposed  to  our 
Government  to  establish,  by  treaty,  a  trade  between 
us  and  her  West  India  colonies  equally  free  with  that 
which  prevails  in  her  own  intercourse  with  them. 
The  object  of  these  attempts  is  readily  perceived. 

As  there  was  no  probability  that  Great  Britain 
would  consent  to  our  trading  with  her  West  India 
colonies  on  the  same  terms  as  she  herself  does ;  as  it 
was  foreseen  that  limitations  and  conditions  would 
accompany  any  agreement  that  should  be  made  on 
this  subject;  to  extol  the  liberty  of  France,  and  ex- 
claim against  the  monopolizing  views  of  Great  Brit- 
ain, were  deemed  suitable  means  to  excite  a  prejudice 
against  the  expected  adjustment  of  the  commercial 


4  Alexander  Hamilton 

intercourse  between  us  and  the  British  West  India 
colonies. 

A  comparison  of  the  footing  by  which  our  trade 
stood  with  the  French  and  British  West  India 
colonies,  after  the  completion  of  our  Revolution,  and 
before  the  present  war  in  Europe,  with  a  concise 
exposition  of  the  real  views  of  France  on  the  subject 
of  a  new  commercial  treaty,  will  best  demonstrate 
the  want  of  candor  and  patriotism  in  those  Americans 
who  have  submitted  to  become  agents  in  propagating 
these  en-ors. 

France,  like  England,  has  endeavored  to  secure  the 
greatest  possible  portion  of  advantage  to  herself,  by 
her  colonial  laws,  and  the  concessions  yielded  to 
foreigners  have  been  only  such  deviations  from  an 
entire  m.onopoly  as  her  own  interest  has  rendered 
indispensable.  France,  in  imitation  of  the  English 
navigation  law,  as  early  as  1727,  established  an 
ordinance,  confirming  to  the  mother  country  the 
monopoly  of  the  trade  to  her  colonies,  and  excluding 
thereby  all  foreigners.  Experience  proved  the  ne- 
cessity of  moderating  the  rigor  of  their  ordinance, 
and  relaxations  in  favor  of  a  limited  foreign  inter- 
course existed  at  the  time  when  our  commercial 
treaty  with  France  was  concluded,  by  the  thirtieth 
article  of  which  it  is  agreed  that  France  will  continue 
to  the  citizens  of  the  United  States  the  free  ports, 
which  have  been  and  are  open  in  her  West  India 
islands,  to  be  enjoyed  agreeable  to  the  regulations 
which  relate  to  them.  A  system  of  regulations  rela- 
tive to  the  trade  of  foreigners  with  the  French 
islands  was  promulgated  in  1784.     This  ordinance 


Camillus  5 

established  one  free  port  at  St.  Lucie,  another  at 
Martinique,  another  at  Guadaloupe,  another  at  To- 
bago, and  three  others  at  St.  Domingo,  to  which 
foreign  vessels  of  the  burthen  of  sixty  tons  and  up- 
ward might  carry  for  sale  woods  of  all  sorts,  pit  coal, 
hve  animals,  fatted  beef,  salted  fish,  rice,  Indian  com, 
vegetables,  green  hides,  peltry,  turpentine,  and  tar. 
This  was  followed  by  the  arrets  of  September,  1785, 
which  by  imposing  heavy  duties  on  foreign  salted 
fish,  and  establishing  large  bounties  on  those  of  the 
national  or  French  fishery,  materially  affected  the 
foreign  commerce  with  the  French  islands  in  this 
important  article  of  suppl}^  and  consumption. 

Such  were  the  duties  on  the  foreign  and  the  premi- 
ums on  the  national  fish,  that  together  they  would 
have  been  equivalent  to  a  prohibition  of  the  former, 
had  the  national  fishery  been  able  to  supply  the 
comsumption. 

In  return  for  these  articles,  which  alone  were  per- 
mitted to  be  imported  by  foreigners  into  the  French 
islands,  and  which  it  will  be  observed  excluded  some 
of  our  principal  staples,  especially  flour,  they  were 
allowed  to  purchase  and  bring  away  of  the  produc- 
tions of  the  islands  only  molasses  and  rum. 

All  cotton,  coffee,  sugar,  and  other  productions 
(rtim  and  molasses  excepted)  were  prohibited;  and 
we  could,  except  occasionally  by  local  relaxations  of 
the  general  law,  rightfully  obtain  none  of  them  from 
the  French  West  India  islands.  This  was  the  footing 
of  our  trade  imder  our  treaty  and  the  standing  edict 
which  preceded  the  French  Revolution,  and  even  this 
was  liable  to  still  further  limitations,  whenever  France 


6  Alexander  Hamilton 

should  think  proper  to  impose  them;  the  treaty 
securing  only  a  right  to  as  free  a  commerce  as  France 
should  grant  to  other  foreign  nations. 

Great  Britain  has  permitted  the  importation  into 
her  West  India  colonies  of  all  the  foreign  articles 

'  allowed  by  France  to  be  imported  into  her  islands 
(salted  fish  and  salted  beef  excepted),  and  she  more- 
over permitted  the  importation  of  foreign  tobacco, 
flour,  meal,  biscuit,  wheat,  and  various  other  grains 
which  France  prohibited.  In  return  for  these  com- 
modities. Great  Britain  permitted  the  exportation 
from  her  islands  to  our  country,  of  rum  and  molasses, 
and  moreover  of  sugar,  coffee,  cocoa,  ginger,  and 
pimento,  together  with  such  other  articles  as  are 
allowed  to  be  carried  from  their  islands  to  any  other 
foreign  cotmtry. 

Great  Britain  prohibited  the  importation  and  ex- 
portation of  most  of  these  articles  to  and  from  all 
foreign  nations,  except  the  United  States;  France 
permitted  the  intercourse  with  her  colonies,  under 
the  same  limitations  to  us  in  common  with  all  other 
foreign  nations. 

The  articles  received  from  us  by  Great  Britain,  for 
the  supply  of  her  West  India  islands,  exceeded  in 

^  variety  those  received  from  us  by  France  for  the 
supply  of  her  islands ;  the  British  West  Indies  were, 

,  therefore,  in  the  ordinary  and  established  course, 
more  extensive  customers  to  us  than  the  French 
West  Indies.  Again,  the  articles  which  we  received 
from  the  British  West  Indies,  and  which  we  were 
prohibited  from  receiving  from  the  French  West 
Indies,  were  among  the  most  valuable  of  their  pro- 


Camillus  7 

ductions,  and,  from  the  force  of  habit,  some  of  them 
are  included  in  the  catalogue  of  articles  of  the  first 
necessity  in  our  consumption.  In  point  of  supply, 
therefore,  the  British  were  better  furnishers,  their 
colonial  laws  being  much  less  restrictive  than  those 
of  France. 

Though  the  regulations  of  the  British  West  India 
trade  were  more  favorable  to  agriculture  than  those 
of  France,  and  though  the  articles  with  which  we 
were  suppHed  from  the  British  islands  were  more 
nimierous  and  valuable  than  those  obtained  from  the 
islands  of  France,  the  colony  system  of  the  latter  was 
preferable  to  that  of  the  former  in  relation  to  our 
navigation.  France  permitted  our  vessels  of  and 
above  sixty  tons  burthen  to  carry  and  bring  away 
the  articles  not  prohibited  in  the  foreign  trade  with 
her  islands,  while  Great  Britain  confined  the  trade  to 
her  own  vessels  and  excluded  those  of  all  foreign 
nations. 

Difference  of  situation,  and  not  of  principle,  pro- 
duced this  variety  or  distinction  in  the  colony  system 
of  the  two  nations.  France  being  able  from  her 
resources  to  supply  most  of  the  articles  requisite  for 
the  consumption  of  her  West  Indies,  and  from  her 
great  population,  having  a  proportionate  demand  for 
the  productions  of  her  islands,  she  has  been  carefully 
restrictive  in  the  trade  between  her  colonies  and 
foreign  coimtries  as  to  the  articles  of  import  and 

export. 

All  the  productions  of  her  islands  must  go  to  the 
mother  country,  except  rum  and  molasses;  these 
articles  were  not  confined  to  France,  because  they 


8  Alexander  Hamilton 

would  have  directly  interfered  with  the  valuable 
manufacture  of  her  brandies.  On  the  other  hand, 
Great  Britain,  being  less  able  from  her  internal 
resources  to  supply  the  articles  necessary  for  the 
consumption  of  her  West  Indies,  and  her  population 
or  home  demand  not  requiring  the  whole  productions 
of  her  islands,  she  has  been  more  liberal  in  the  trade 
allowed  to  be  carried  on  between  her  colonies  and 
foreign  countries  as  to  the  articles  of  import  and 
export.  But  her  navigation  being  adequate  to  the 
whole  trade  of  all  her  dominions,  while  that  of  France 
required  the  addition  of  foreign  bottoms,  Great 
Britain  has  excluded  entirely  from  her  colony  trade 
the  foreign  vessels  of  all  nations,  while  France  has 
admitted  them  to  share  in  the  foreign  trade  permitted 
to  her  West  India  islands. 

Both  France  and  Great  Britain  relax  their  colonial 
laws  in  times  of  occasional  scarcity,  and  when  they 
are  engaged  in  war;  during  which,  the  intercourse 
with  their  West  India  possessions  is  laid  more  open  to 
foreigners.  The  catalogue  of  supplies  is  sometimes 
enlarged,  and  Great  Britain,  as  well  as  France,  during 
these  relaxations,  permits  American  vessels  to  resort 
to,  and  engage  in  the  commerce  of,  their  islands. 

It  is,  notwithstanding,  from  the  permanent  laws 
alone  of  these  nations,  that  we  are  able  to  infer  their 
views  in  relation  to  their  colony  trade;  the  excep- 
tions and  deviations  that  become  necessary,  by  rea- 
son of  accidental  scarcity  or  the  embarrassments 
of  war,  serve  only  to  explain  more  clearly  the  princi- 
ples of  the  permanent  system. 

The  result  of  this  comparison  affords  no  support 


Camillus  9 

for  the  assertion  that  France  has  been  less  exclusive 
or  more  liberal  in  her  colony  system,  than  Great 
Britain.  Both  these  nations  have  in  the  establish- 
ment of  their  colonial  laws  alike  disregarded  the  in- 
terests of  foreign  nations,  and  have  been  equally 
under  the  control  of  the  principles  of  self-interest, 
which  ever  have  and  ever  will  govern  the  affairs  of 
nations.' 

Nothing  can  be  more  erroneous,  than  the  opinion 
that  any  nation  is  likely  to  yield  up  its  own  interest, 
in  order,  gratuitously,  to  advance  that  of  another. 
Yet  we  frequently  hear  declarations  of  this  kind,  and 
too  many  honest  citizens  have  surrendered  them- 
selves to  this  delusion ;  time  and  experience  will  cure 
us  of  this  folly. 

Equal  artifice  has  been  practised,  and  no  less 
credulity  displayed,  on  the  subject  of  a  new  treaty 
of  commerce,  which,  it  is  boldly  asserted,  France 
from  the  most  disinterested  motives  has  offered  to  us. 
It  should  be  recollected  that  France  already  has  a 
treaty  of  commerce  with  us,  a  treaty  that  is  not 
limited  to  two  years,  nor  twelve  years,  but  one  that 
is  to  endure  forever.  This  treaty  is  as  favorable  to 
France  as  she  can  desire,  or  we  in  our  utmost  fondness 
be  disposed  to  make.  It  secures  to  her  our  acqui- 
escence in  an  exclusion  from  her  Asiatic  dominions, 
and  in  fresh  regulations  as  her  interest  shall  dictate 
relative  to  our  intercourse  with  her  West  India  pos- 
sessions ;  it  excludes  us  from  her  fisheries  on  the  Banks 

I  The  opinion  heretofore  cited  of  Montesquieu,  a  Frenchman,  agreeing 
with  facts,  is  a  positive  testimony  that  the  principle  of  the  French 
system,  Uke  the  English,  is  monopoly. 


lo  Alexander  Hamilton 

of  Newfoundland,  which  she  was  unwilling  to  share 
with  us,  and  it  gives  to  her  every  commercial  favor 
or  privilege  which  by  treaty  we  may  yield  to  any 
other  nation,  freely  when  freely  granted,  and  when 
otherwise  on  yielding  the  same  equivalent ;  her  pro- 
ductions, her  manufactures,  her  merchandises,  and  her 
ships  may  come  into  all  our  ports  to  which  any  other 
foreign  productions,  manufactures,  merchandises,  or 
ships  may  come ;  they  are  severally  to  pay  only  the 
lowest  duties  paid  by  any  other  nation,  and  no  other 
nation  in  its  intercourse  and  trade  with  us  is,  in  any 
instance,  to  have  a  preference  over  her.  A  variety 
of  other  regulations  are  inserted  in  this  treaty  useful 
to  France  and  not  particularly  disserviceable  to  us. 

This  treaty  has  been  religiously  observed  and 
executed  on  our  part;  France  has  repeatedly  vio- 
lated it  in  the  article  which  makes  enemy's  goods 
free  in  neutral  bottoms,  while  it  is  understood  she 
has  faithfully  observed  it  in  the  article  that  makes 
neutral  goods  lawful  prize  when  found  in  enemy 
bottoms. 

If  it  be  true  that  nations,  in  justice  to  themselves, 
are  bound  to  decline  the  abandonment  of  their  own 
interest,  for  the  purpose  of  promoting,  at  their  own 
expense  and  detriment,  the  interest  of  others,  ought 
we  too  readily  to  credit  an  opposite  opinion  ?  Ought 
we  not  to  expect  full  proof  of  the  sincerity  of  those 
declarations  that  are  intended  to  produce  a  belief 
of  this  disinterested  and  self-denying  course?  Ought 
not  the  very  proposal  of  such  a  measure,  from  its 
extraordinary  nature,  inspire  circumspection,  and 
put  a  prudent  nation  on  its  guard?     If,  moreover, 


Camillus  ii 

the  overture  should  occur  at  a  moment  when  we  have 
ascertained  that  those  who  make  it  desire,  and  are, 
in  fact,  pursuing  objects  incompatible  with  the  dis- 
interestedness which  it  avows;  if  while  it  is  said  we 
wish  that  you  should  remain  in  peace  with  those  who 
hold  this  language,  neglect  no  means  to  engage  our 
citizens  to  violate  their  neutral  duties  and  thereby 
expose  their  country  to  war;  if  when  we  are  told 
"we  rejoice  in  the  freedom  of  a  sister  republic,"  all 
the  arts  of  intrigue,  so  much  more  dangerous  by 
our  unsuspicious  temper,  and  unlimited  affection  for 
those  who  practise  them,  were  employed  to  alienate 
our  attachment  from  our  own  Government,  and  to 
throw  us  into  a  state  of  anarchy ;  if  when  the  fascinat- 
ing proposal  of  opening  new  channels  of  commerce, 
which  were  to  give  unbounded  riches  to  our  mer- 
chants, was  received  with  more  caution  than  was 
desired,  we  are  told  that  in  case  of  refusal,  or  evasion 
(mark  the  generosity),  France  would  repeal  her 
existing  laws  which  had  been  dictated  by  an  attach- 
ment to  the  Americans,  what  must  have  been  our  in- 
fatuation, what  the  measure  of  our  folly,  had  we 
given  implicit  credit  to  words  so  much  at  variance 
with  cotemporary  actions?  But  it  is  asked,  do  not 
the  letters  of  Mr.  Genet  to  Mr.  Jefferson,  which  have 
been  published,  prove  that  France  desired  and  of- 
fered to  enter  into  a  new,  disinterested,  and  liberal 
treaty  of  commerce  with  us?  The  question  shall  be 
fairly  examined. 

There  are  two  letters  from  Mr.  Genet  on  this  sub- 
ject. Immediately  after  his  arrival  at  Philadelphia, 
in  a  letter  to  Mr.  Jefferson  of  the  23d  May,  1793,  he 


12  Alexander  Hamilton 

says :  "  The  French  republic  has  given  it  in  charge  to 
me  to  propose  to  your  Government  to  consecrate  by 
a  true  family  compact,  by  a  national  covenant,  the 
liberal  and  fraternal  basis  on  which  it  wishes  to 
establish  the  commercial  and  political  system  of  two 
people  whose  interests  are  inseparably  connected." 

If  the  object  of  this  proposal  was  a  revision  of  our 
commercial  treaty,  in  order  to  render  the  intercourse 
between  us  more  free  and  advantageous,  this  minister 
was  singularly  unfortunate  in  his  expressions.  He 
might  have  employed  the  fine  phrase  of  consecrating 
by  a  true  family  compact,  by  a  national  covenant, 
the  liberal  and  fraternal  basis  on  which  it  was  wished 
to  establish  the  commercial  system  of  the  two  coun- 
tries, and  have  been  intelligible;  but  when  he  tells 
us,  that  he  is  instructed  to  open  a  negotiation  with 
our  Government,  for  the  purpose  of  establishing  the 
commercial  and  political  system  of  the  two  countries, 
what  are  we  to  understand?  That  trade  and  its 
regulations  are  alone  in  view  ?  Or  that  a  family  com- 
pact establishing  the  political  as  well  as  the  commer- 
cial system  of  the  two  nations,  must  include  likewise 
the  league,  or  treaty  of  alliance,  whereby  the  strength 
and  wealth  of  the  two  nations  should  be  closely 
united  in  the  prosecution  of  a  common  object? 

This  ambiguous  overture,  if  its  meaning  is  not 
too  plain  to  allow  the  epithet,  was  received  in  the 
most  friendly  manner  by  our  Government,  and  on  the 
suggestion  that  the  Senate  are  united  with  the  Presi- 
dent in  making  treaties,  it  was  understood  between 
Mr.  Jefferson  and  Mr.  Genet,  that  the  subject  should 
be  deferred  till  the  meeting  of  Congress. 


Camillus  13 

Before  that  period,  however,  Mr.  Genet,  in  a  letter 
of  the  30th  of  September,  1793,  renews  the  proposal 
to  open  the  negotiation  relative  to  the  proposed 
family  compact  between  us  and  France ;  and  proves 
to  us  that  our  benefit  was  its  principal  exclusive 
object,  by  affectionately  intimating  in  the  conclusion 
of  his  letter,  that  he  is  further  instructed  to  tell  us, 
in  case  of  refusal  or  evasion  on  our  part  to  enter  into 
this  family  agreement,  that  France  will  repeal  the 
laws  dictated  by  the  attachment  of  the  French  for 
the  Americans. 

Had  it  before  been  doubted  whether  political  en- 
gagements relative  to  war  were  intended  to  be  con- 
nected with  the  proposed  treaty,  these  doubts  must 
have  disappeared  on  the  receipt  of  this  second  letter 
from  Mr.  Genet;  the  intimation  that  the  laws  of 
France  which  operated  favorably  to  our  trade  with 
their  dominions  would  be  repealed,  in  case  we  re- 
fused or  evaded  the  conclusion  of  a  new  treaty,  can- 
not be  reconciled  with  the  belief,  that  this  treaty 
was  sought  for  from  motives  purely  commercial,  or 
solely  to  enlarge  and  add  prosperity  to  our  trade. 

Mr.  Genet  at  this  time  had  so  outraged  our  Gov- 
ernment as  to  have  compelled  them  to  request  his 
recall;  he  must,  therefore,  have  been  convinced, 
that  no  conference  would  be  held  with  him  except 
on  points  of  urgent  importance,  and  such  as  would 
not  admit  of  delay.  He  was  therefore  answered  by 
Mr.  Jefferson  on  the  5th  of  November,  that  his  letter 
had  been  laid  before  the  President,  and  would  be 
considered  with  all  the  respect  and  interest  that  its 
objects  necessarily  required;    and  in  Mr.  Jefferson's 


14  Alexander  Hamilton 

letter  to  Mr.  Morris  of  the  23d  of  August,  we  are  in- 
formed that  our  Government  were  desirous  to  go 
into  a  commercial  negotiation  with  France,  and, 
therefore,  requested  that  the  powers  given  to  Mr. 
Genet  on  that  subject  should  be  renewed  to  his  suc- 
cessor. It  has  not  appeared  that  this  was  ever  done. 
His  immediate  successor,  Mr.  Fauchet,  it  is  believed, 
gave  no  evidence  of  his  having  any  powers  relative 
to  a  commercial  treaty;  and  if  reports,  which  ar- 
rived with  the  present  minister,  having  great  marks 
of  authenticity,  may  be  credited,  he  has  power  only  to 
digest  the  articles  of  such  a  treaty,  not  to  conclude  one. 

Notwithstanding  the  internal  evidence  contained 
in  the  two  letters  of  Mr.  Genet  was  sufficient  to  have 
satisfied  a  sensible  people,  that  something  beyond  a 
commercial  treaty  was  connected  with  the  proffered 
negotiation,  and  though  this  conjecture  acquired 
strength  from  the  cautious  procedure  of  our  Govern- 
ment on  the  occasion,  yet  these  letters,  and  that 
procedure,  have  been  pressed  upon  the  public  as 
conclusive  evidence  that  France  had  offered,  and 
our  Government  refused,  to  enter  into  a  new  treaty 
of  commerce,  that  would  have  been  highly  beneficial 
to  our  trade  and  navigation. 

The  refutation  of  this  opinion,  so  injurious  to  a 
reasonable  and  salutary  confidence  in  the  integrity 
and  patriotism  of  our  own  executive  Government, 
and  which  the  agents  of  its  propagation  had  spread 
far  and  wide,  might  have  been  more  difficult,  had 
not  the  minister  of  France,  for  the  purpose  of  justi- 
fying his  own  conduct,  published  his  hitherto  secret 
instructions. 


Camillus  15 

By  these  instructions  it  appears,  that  the  essential 
object  of  this  proffered  negotiation,  was  to  engage  the 
United  States  to  make  common  cause  with  France 
in  the  war  then  foreseen,  and  which  soon  broke  out 
with  Spain  and  England;  that  the  advantages  to  be 
yielded  by  a  new  commercial  treaty  were  to  be  pur- 
chased by  our  uniting  with  France  in  extending  the 
empire  of  liberty,  in  breaking  up  the  colonial  and 
monopolizing  systems  of  all  nations,  and  -finally  in  the 
emancipation  of  the  New  World. ^  This  was  laying 
out  a  large  and  difficult  work,  in  the  accomplishment 
whereof  arduous  and  numerous  perils  must  be  met,  to 
encounter  which  we  were  called  by  no  obligation  to 
others,  to  avoid  which  we  were  admonished  by  all  the 
duties  which  require  us  to  cherish  and  preserve  our 
own  unparalleled  freedom,  prosperity,  and  happiness. 

However  contradictory  this  extraordinary  project 
may  appear  to  the  friendly  communications  that 
had  been  made  by  the  French  Government  to  ours; 
however  repugnant  to  the  soothing  declarations  pro- 
nounced by  Mr.  Genet,  of  the  fraternal  and  generous 
sentiments  of  his  covmtry  toward  ours,  and  of  the 
republican  frankness  and  sincerity  that  should  char- 
acterize his  deportment,  let  the  following  extracts 
from  his  instructions  published  by  himself  in  Decem- 
ber, 1793,  be  consulted  in  confirmation  of  this  state- 
ment, and  as  an  authentic  exposition  of  the  genuine 
views  of  the  French  executive  council  in  the  mission 
of  Mr.  Genet — viz. : 

^  This  mad  scheme,  the  joining  in  which  was  to  be  the  price  of  the 
proffered  advantages,  has  since  been  renounced  by  France  herself  as 
a  political  chimera 


1 6  Alexander  Hamilton 

"  The  executive  council  have  examined  the  instruc- 
tions given  to  the  predecessors  of  the  Citizen  Genet 
in  America,  and  they  have  seen  with  indignation, 
that  while  the  good  people  of  America  have  expressed 
to  us  their  gratitude  in  the  most  lively  manner,  and 
given  us  every  testimony  of  their  friendship,  both  Ver- 
gennes  and  Montmorin  have  thought  that  the  interests 
of  France  required,  that  the  United  States  should  not 
obtain  that  political  order  and  consistency  of  which 
they  were  capable,  because  they  would  thereby 
quickly  attain  a  strength  which  they  might  probably 
be  inclined  to  abuse.  These  ministers,  therefore,  en- 
joined it  upon  the  representatives  of  Louis  XVI.  in 
America,  to  hold  a  passive  conduct,  and  speak  only 
of  the  personal  vows  of  the  king  for  the  prosperity  of 
the  United  States.  The  same  machiavelism  directed 
the  operations  of  the  War  of  Independence;  the 
same  duplicity  presided  in  the  negotiations  of  peace. 
The  deputies  of  Congress  had  expressed  a  desire 
that  the  cabinet  of  Versailles  should  favor  the  con- 
quests of  the  Floridas,  of  Canada,  of  Nova  Scotia; 
but  Louis  and  his  ministers  constantly  refused  their 
countenance,  regarding  the  possession  of  those 
countries  by  Spain  and  England,  as  useful  sources  of 
disquietude  and  anxiety  to  the  Americans." 

After  declaring  that  the  executive  council  proposes 
to  itself  a  different  course,  and  that  it  approves  of 
the  overtures,  which  had  been  made  as  well  by  Gen- 
eral Washington,  as  by  Mr.  Jefferson,  to  Mr.  Temant, 
relative  to  the  means  of  renewing  and  consolidating 
the  commercial  regulations  between  the  two  coun- 
tries, they  proceed  to  declare  further,  "  that  they  are 


Camillus  17 

inclined  to  extend  the  latitude  of  the  proposed  commer- 
cial treaty  (observe,  the  first  proposal  of  a  new  com- 
mercial treaty  came  from  us,  and  not  from  France) 
by  converting  it  into  a  national  compact,  whereby 
the  two  people  should  combine  their  commercial  with 
their  political  interests,  and  should  establish  an  inti- 
mate concert  to  befriend,  under  all  circumstances, 
the  extension  of  the  empire  of  liberty,  to  guarantee 
the  sovereignty  of  the  people,  and  to  punish  the  na- 
tions who  shall  continue  to  adhere  to  a  colonial  sys- 
tem, and  an  exclusive  commerce,  by  declaring  that 
the  vessels  of  such  nations  should  not  be  received 
into  the  ports  of  the  two  contracting  parties.  This 
agreement,  which  the  French  people  will  support 
with  all  the  energy  that  distinguishes  them,  and  of 
which  they  have  given  so  many  proofs,  will  quickly 
contribute  to  the  emancipation  of  the  New  World. 
However  vast  this  project  may  appear,  it  will  be 
easily  accomplished,  if  the  Americans  will  concur  in 
it,  and  in  order  to  convince  them  of  this,  no  pains 
must  be  spared  by  the  Citizen  Genet.  For,  indepen- 
dent of  the  benefits  that  humanity  will  draw  from 
the  success  of  this  negotiation,  France,  at  this  mo- 
ment, has  a  particular  interest  that  requires  us  to  be 
prepared  to  act  with  efficacy  against  England  and 
Spain,  if,  as  every  circumstance  announces,  these, 
in  hatred  of  our  principles,  shall  make  war  upon  us." 
In  this  state  of  things,  we  ought  "to  emplo}^  every 
means  to  reanimate  the  zeal  of  the  Americans,  who 
are  also  interested  that  we  should  disappoint  the 
liberticide  designs  of  George  the  Third,  of  which 
they  likewise  may  possibly  be  an  object."     "The 


1 8  Alexander  Hamilton 

executive  council  has  reason  to  believe  that  these  re- 
flections,  joined  to  the  great  commercial  advantages 
which  we  are  disposed  to  grant  to  the  United  States, 
will  decide  their  Government  to  agree  to  all  that  the 
Citizen  Genet  shall  propose  to  them  on  our  part ;  but 
as  from  the  rumors  respecting  our  interior,  our 
finances,  and  our  marine,  the  American  administra- 
tion may  observe  a  wavering  timid  conduct!  The 
executive  council,  in  expectation  that  the  American 
Government  will  finally  decide  to  make  common 
cause  with  us,  charges  the  Citizen  Genet  to  take  such 
steps  as  shall  be  most  likely  to  serve  the  cause  of 
liberty  and  the  freedom  of  the  people." 

In  a  supplemental  instruction,  the  executive  coun- 
cil say:  "As  soon  as  the  negotiation  concerning  a 
new  treaty  of  commerce  shall  be  practicable,  Citizen 
Genet  must  not  omit  to  stipulate  a  positive  reci- 
procity of  the  exemption  from  the  American  tonnage 
duty."  The  mutual  naturalization  of  French  and 
American  citizens,  so  far  as  respects  commerce,  that 
has  been  proposed  by  Mr.  Jefferson  and  approved  by 
the  executive  council  (this,  it  is  presumed,  in  the  eyes 
of  certain  characters,  would  be  free  from  objection, 
though  the  naturalization  by  treaty,  of  the  subjects 
of  any  nation  but  France,  would  be  treason  against 
the  Constitution  and  against  liberty),  "will  render 
this  exemption  from  the  tonnage  duties  less  offensive 
to  the  powers  who  have  a  right  by  their  treaties  to 
claim  the  same  exemption,  for  the  casus  foederis  by 
this  mutual  naturalization  will  be  entirely  changed 
in  respect  to  them.  The  reciprocal  guaranty  of  the 
possessions  of  the  two  nations,  stipulated  in  the  Xlth 


Camillus  19 

article  of  the  treaty  of  1778,  must  form  an  essen- 
tial clause  in  the  new  treaty  to  be  concluded!  The 
executive  council,  therefore,  instructs  Citizen  Genet 
early  to  sound  the  American  Government  on  this 
point,  and  to  make  it  an  indispensable  condition  of 
a  free  trade  to  the  French  West  Indies,  so  interesting 
for  the  United  States  to  obtain.  It  concerns  the 
peace  and  prosperity  of  the  French  nation,  that  a 
people  whose  resources  and  strength  increase  in  a 
ratio  incalculable,  and  who  are  placed  so  near  to  our 
rich  colonies,  should  be  held  by  explicit  engagements 
to  the  preservation  of  these  islands.  There  will  be 
the  less  difficulty  in  making  these  propositions 
relished  by  the  United  States,  as  the  great  com- 
merce which  will  be  their  price,  will  indemnify  them 
beforehand  for  the  sacrifices  they  must  make  in  the 
sequel.  Besides,  the  Americans  cannot  be  ignorant 
of  the  great  disproportion  between  their  means  and 
those  of  the  French  Republic;  that  for  a  long  time 
the  guaranty  will  be  merely  nominal  for  them,  while 
it  will  be  real  on  the  side  of  France.  And  moreover, 
that  we  shall,  without  delay,  take  measures  to  fulfil 
it  on  our  part,  by  sending  to  the  American  ports,  a 
force  sufficient  to  shelter  them  from  all  insults  and 
dangers,  and  to  facilitate  their  intercourse  with  our 
islands  and  with  France"; — "and  to  the  end  that 
nothing  may  retard  the  conclusion  of  the  negotia- 
tions of  Citizen  Genet  with  the  Americans,  and  that 
he  may  have  in  his  hands  all  the  means  which  may 
be  employed  in  forwarding  the  success  of  his  exer- 
tions to  serve  the  cause  of  liberty,  the  council,  in 
addition  to  the  full  powers  hereunto  annexed,  have 


20  Alexander  Hamilton 

authorized  the  Minister  of  Marine  to  supply  him 
with  a  number  of  blank  letters  of  marque,  to  be  de- 
livered to  such  Frenchmen  or  Americans  as  should 
equip  privateers  in  America;  the  Minister  of  War 
will  likewise  supply  him  with  commissions  in  blank 
for  the  different  grades  of  the  army."  ' 

These  were  extraordinary  means  to  enable  the 
French  minister  to  conclude  with  our  Government 
a  pacific  treaty  of  commerce.  The  above  extracts, 
though  not  an  entire  translation  of  the  whole  of  Mr. 
Genet's  instructions,  many  parts  of  which  are  foreign 
to  the  point  in  discussion,  are  a  faithful  abstract  of 
such  parts  of  them  as  relate  to  the  principles  and 
conduct  of  the  French  monarchy  toward  us,  and  are 
explanatory  of  the  views  of  the  executive  council 
on  the  subject  of  a  new  treaty  of  commerce.  It  will, 
I  think,  prove,  if  the  assertions  of  that  council  are  to 
be  credited,  that  the  gratitude,  of  which  we  have 
heard  so  much,  ought  not  to  be  demanded  on  ac- 
count of  the  principles  that  influenced  the  monarchy 
of  France  during  our  war,  or  subsequent  to  the  peace ; 
and  furthermore,  it  will  prove  that  the  real  view  of 
the  French  executive  council  in  the  mission  of  Mr. 
Genet,  was  to  engage  us,  by  advantages  to  be  con- 
ceded in  a  new  commercial  treaty,  to  make  common 
cause  with  France,  in  the  expected  war  with  Great 
Britain  and  the  coalesced  powers.  If,  then,  the 
established  footing  of  our  trade  with  the  British 

*  This  measure  covmtenances  a  conclusion,  that  it  was  the  intent  of 
the  instructions  he  should  take  the  measures  he  did  with  regard  to 
privateering  and  military  expeditions  from  our  territories,  to  force  us 
into  the  war  in  spite  of  the  "wavering  and  timid  conduct  of  our  ad- 
ministration." 


Camillus  21 

islands  has  been  dictated  by  that  colonial  system  of 
monopoly  which  forms  a  fundamental  law  in  Europe ; 
and  if,  moreover,  the  opinion  that  we  could  have 
procured  a  new  and  more  liberal  treaty  of  commerce 
with  France,  without  plunging  our  country  in  the 
present  war,  is  an  error,  that  has  been  artfully  im- 
posed on  the  public,  by  exposing  these  truths,  the 
examination  of  the  treaty  with  Great  Britain  is  at 
once  freed  from  the  objections  and  aspersions  that 
have  proceeded  from  these  errors. 

Camillus. 


NO.    XXV 

1795- 

It  will  be  useful,  as  it  will  simplify  the  examination 
of  the  commercial  articles  of  the  treaty,  to  bear  in 
mind  and  preserve  the  division  that  we  find  estab- 
lished by  the  12th,  13th,  and  the  14th  and  15th 
articles ;  each  respects  a  particular  branch  or  portion 
of  the  trade  between  the  two  countries,  the  regula- 
tions whereof  differ  from,  and  are  severally  inde- 
pendent of,  each  other.  Thus  one  is  relative  to  the 
West  Indies,  another  to  the  East  Indies,  and  a  third, 
distinct  from  both  the  former,  respects  our  trade 
with  the  British  dominions  in  Europe. 

That  Great  Britain  will  consent  to  place  our  trade 
with  her  West  India  colonies  upon  an  equally  advan- 
tageous footing  with  her  own,  is  improbable;  this 
would  be  doing  what  none  of  the  great  colonizing 
nations  has  done,  or  is  likely  to  do;  it  would  be  to 
relinquish  the  principal  ends  of  the  establishment  and 
defence  of  her  colonies;    it  would  be  equivalent  to 


22  Alexander  Hamilton 

making  her  islands  in  the  West  Indies  the  common 
property  of  Great  Britain  and  America,  for  all  com- 
mercial and  profitable  purposes ;  and  exclusively  her 
own  in  the  burden  of  support  and  defence. 

The  Senate  have,  however,  and,  I  think,  wisely, 
considered  the  terms  and  conditions,  on  which  it  is 
agreed  by  the  12th  article  that  we  should  participate 
in  the  trade  of  the  British  West  Indies,  as  less  liberal 
than  we  may,  with  reason,  expect.  The  exclusion  of 
all  vessels  above  the  burthen  of  seventy  tons,  would 
diminish  the  benefits  and  value  of  this  trade;  and 
though  we  cannot  calculate  upon  obtaining  b}^  future 
negotiation  a  total  removal  of  a  limitation  on  this 
subject,  it  is  not  altogether  improbable  that  a  ton- 
nage something  larger  may  be  procured. 

Those  who  are  conversant  with  our  present  inter- 
course with  the  West  Indies  can  best  determine 
whether  many  vessels  imder  seventy  tons  burthen 
are  not,  at  this  time,  profitably  employed  in  that 
trade.  It  is  believed  to  be  ti-ue,  that,  previous  to 
our  independence,  vessels  of  this  burthen  were  much 
engaged  in  that  employ,  as  well  in  the  Southern  as 
in  the  Eastern  States. 

This  limitation,  though  disadvantageous,  is  not 
the  strongest  objection  to  the  12th  article:  the  re- 
straining or  regulating  of  a  portion  of  our  trade, 
which  does  not  proceed  from,  and  is  independent  of, 
the  treaty,  forms  a  more  decisive  reason  against  the 
article  than  any  thing  else  that  it  contains. 

The  cause  of  this  restraint  is  found  in  the  com- 
mercial jealousy  and  spirit  of  monopoly  which  have 
so  long  reigned  over  the  trade  of  the  colonies.     Under 


Camillus  23 

our  treaty  with  France  and  the  French  colonial  laws, 
it  has  been  shown  that  we  could  not  procure  from 
the  French  islands  sugar,  coffee,  cocoa,  cotton,  or  any 
of  the  other  productions,  molasses  and  rum  excepted. 
Great  Britain  has  seen  it  to  be  compatible  with  her 
interest  to  admit  us  to  share  more  extensively  in  the 
productions  of  her  islands;  but  she  has  desired  to 
place  limitations  on  this  intercourse.  To  have  left 
it  entirely  open  and  free,  would  have  been  to  have 
enabled  us  not  only  to  suppl}^  ourselves  by  means  of 
our  own  navigation,  but  to  have  made  it  an  instru- 
ment of  the  supply  of  other  nations  with  her  West 
India  productions. 

When  we  reflect  upon  the  established  maxims  of 
the  colony  system,  and,  moreover,  when  we  consider 
that  an  entire  freedom  of  trade  with  the  British  West 
Indies  might,  at  times,  materially  raise  the  price  of 
West  India  productions  on  the  British  consumers, 
the  supply  of  whom  is  essentially  a  monopoly  in  the 
hands  of  the  British  planters,  we  shall  be  the  less 
inclined  to  believe  that  Great  Britain  will  3deld  an 
unrestrained  commerce  with  her  West  India  posses- 
sions to  any  nation  whatever. 

But  if  this  was  the  object  of  the  restraint,  it  may 
be  asked  why  it  was  not  confined  to  such  enumerated 
articles  as  were  of  the  growth  or  production  of  her 
own  islands,  instead  of  being  so  extended  as  to  com- 
prehend all  molasses,  sugar,  coffee,  cocoa,  and  cotton, 
including  even  the  cotton  of  the  growth  of  our  own 
country.  It  is  very  possible  that  the  circumstances 
of  our  native  cotton's  becoming  an  article  of  export 
to  foreign  markets  might  not  have  occurred  to  our 


24  Alexander  Hamilton 

negotiator.  This  would  be  the  less  extraordinary,  as 
heretofore  it  has  not  been  cultivated,  except  in  a  very 
limited  degree,  and  as  an  article  of  export  rather  in 
the  manner  of  experiment  than  otherwise;  and  as, 
moreover,  from  the  expense  and  difficulty  of  sepa- 
rating the  seeds  from  the  cotton,  we  have  been 
hardly  able  hitherto  to  class  cotton  among  our  ex- 
ports. Its  cultivation  is  said  latterly  to  have  be- 
come an  object  of  attention  in  Georgia  and  South 
Carolina, — still,  however,  it  cannot  yet  be  considered 
as  a  staple  commodity.  But  from  the  recent  ingen- 
ious and  simple  machine  for  spinning  cotton,  it  is 
hoped  that  the  cultivation  may  be  extended,  so  that 
not  only  our  own  domestic  manufactures  may  be 
relieved  from  a  dependence  on  foreign  supply,  but 
the  catalogue  of  our  valuable  exports  enriched  by 
the  addition  of  this  inestimable  production. 

In  answer  to  the  question  that  has  been  stated,  it 
may  be  further  observed  that  these  enumerated  arti- 
cles, though  the  productions  of  different  territories, 
being  so  much  alike  as  not  easily  to  be  distinguished, 
it  is  probable  that  the  difficulty  in  discriminating  the 
productions  of  the  British  islands  from  those  of  a 
different  growth  was  supposed  to  be  so  great,  that  an 
apprehension  was  entertained  that  the  prohibition 
to  re-export  the  former  would  be  easily  evaded  and 
illusory,  while  the  latter  remained  free. 

This  apprehension,  however,  it  is  believed,  was 
carried  too  far;  as,  on  a  minute  examination  of  the 
subject,  it  will  be  found  that  our  laws  relative  to 
drawback,  with  a  few  analogous  provisions  in  addi- 
tion, can  be  made  sufficiently  to  discriminate  and 


Camillus  25 

identify,  on  re-exportation,  all  such  articles  of  the 
growth  of  the  British  islands  as  may  be  within  our 
country,  and  that  they  will  afford  the  same  security 
for  a  faithful  and  exact  execution  of  the  prohibition 
to  re-export  such  articles  as  that  on  which  our  own 
Government  relies  against  frauds  upon  the  revenue. 
[The  application  of  these  laws,  with  the  requisite 
additions  and  sanctions,  may  be  secured  by  a  precise 
stipulation  for  that  purpose  in  the  treaty,  in  such 
manner  as  would  afford  an  adequate  guard  against 
material  evasions. 

But  though  the  conduct  of  the  Senate  in  with- 
holding their  assent  of  this  article  is  conceived,  upon 
the  whole,  to  be  well  judged  and  wise,  yet  there  were 
not  wanting  reasons  of  real  weight  to  induce  our 
negotiator  to  agree  to  it  as  it  stands. 

The  inviolability  of  the  principles  of  the  naviga- 
tion act  had  become  a  kind  of  axiom,  incorporated 
in  the  habits  of  thinking  of  the  British  Government 
and  nation.  Precedent,  it  is  known,  has  great  in- 
fluence, as  well  upon  the  councils  as  upon  the  pop- 
ular opinions  of  nations! — and  there  is,  perhaps,  no 
country  in  which  it  has  greater  force  than  that  of 
Great  Britain.  The  precedent  of  a  serious  and  un- 
equivocal innovation  upon  the  system  of  the  navi- 
gation act  dissolved,  as  it  were,  the  spell  by  which 
the  public  prejudices  had  been  chained  to  it.  It 
took  away  a  mighty  argument  derived  from  the  past 
inflexibility  of  the  system,  and  laid  the  foundation 
for  greater  inroads  upon  opinion,  for  further  and 
greater  innovations  in  practice.  It  served  to  strip 
the  question  of  every  thing  that  was  artificial  and  to 


26  Alexander  Hamilton 

bring  it  to  the  simple  test  of  real  national  interest, 
to  be  decided  by  that  best  of  all  arbiters,  experience. 

It  may,  upon  this  ground,  be  strongly  argued  that 
the  precedent  of  the  privilege  gained  was  of  more 
importance  than  its  immediate  extent  —  an  argu- 
ment certainly  of  real  weight,  and  which  is  sufficient 
to  incline  candid  men  to  view  the  motives  that  gov- 
erned our  negotiator  in  this  particular  with  favor, 
and  the  opinion  to  which  he  yielded  with  respect. 
It  is  perhaps  not  unimportant  by  way  of  precedent, 
that  the  article,  though  not  established,  is  found  in 
the  treaty.] 

Though  the  12th  article,  so  far  as  respects  the 
terms  and  conditions  of  the  trade  to  the  British 
islands,  forms  no  part  of  the  treaty,  having  been 
excepted,  and  made  the  subject  of  further  negotia- 
tion, it  may  nevertheless  be  useful  to  take  notice  of 
some  of  the  many  ill-founded  objections  that  have 
been  made  against  it ;  of  this  character  is  that  which 
asserts  that  the  catalogue  of  articles  permitted  to  be 
carried  by  us  to  the  British  islands,  may  be  abridged 
at  the  pleasure  of  Great  Britain,  and  so  the  trade  may 
be  annihilated. 

The  article  stipulates  that  we  may  carry  to  any  of 
his  Majesty's  islands  and  ports  in  the  West  Indies, 
from  the  United  States,  in  American  vessels,  not 
exceeding  seventy  tons,  any  goods  or  merchandises 
"  being  of  the  growth,  manufacture,  or  production  of 
the  said  States,  which  it  is  or  may  he  lawful  to  carry 
to  the  said  islands,  from  the  said  States,  in  British 
vessels";  not  all  such  articles  as  it  is  and  may  be 
lawful  to  carry,  but  in  the  disjunctive,  all  such  as 


Camillus  27 

it  is  or  may  be  lawful  to  carry;  in  other  words,  all 
such  articles  as  it  is  now  lawful  to  carry,  together 
with  such  others  as  hereafter  it  may  be  lawful  to 
carry.  The  catalogue  may  be  enlarged,  but  cannot 
be  diminished.  [It  may  also  be  remarked  incidentally 
that  this  objection  soimds  ill  in  the  mouths  of  those 
who  maintain  the  essentiality  of  the  suppHes  of  this 
country,  under  all  possible  circumstances,  to  the 
British  West  Indies;  for  if  this  position  be  true, 
there  never  can  be  reasonable  groimd  of  apprehen- 
sion of  too  Httle  latitude  in  the  exportation  in  British 
vessels,  which  is  to  be  the  standard  for  the  exporta- 
tion in  ours.] 

This  article  has  been  further  criticised  on  account 
of  the  adjustment  of  the  import  and  tonnage  duties 
payable  in  this  trade,  and  it  has  been  attempted  to 
be  shown  that  the  footing  on  which  we  were  to  share 
in  the  same  would,  on  this  account,  be  disadvan- 
tageous, and  the  competition  unequal.  What  is  the 
adjustment?  The  article  proposes  that  British  ves- 
sels employed  in  this  trade  shall  pay,  on  entering 
our  ports,  the  alien  tonnage  duty  payable  by  all 
foreign  vessels,  which  is  now  fifty  cents  per  ton; 
further,  the  cargoes  imported  in  British  bottoms 
from  British  West  Indies  shall  pay  in  our  ports  the 
same  impost  or  duties  that  shall  be  payable  on  the 
like  articles  imported  in  American  bottoms ;  and  on 
the  other  side,  that  cargoes  imported  into  the  British 
islands,  in  American  bottoms,  shall  pay  the  same 
impost  or  duties  that  shall  be  payable  on  the  like 
articles  imported  in  British  bottoms — that  is  to  say, 
the  cargoes  of  each  shall  pay  in  the  ports  of  the 


28  Alexander  Hamilton 

other  only  native  duties,  it  being  understood  that 
those  imposed  in  the  British  West  Indies,  on  our 
productions,  are  small  and  unimportant,  while  those 
imposed  in  our  ports,  on  the  productions  of  the  West 
Indies,  are  high,  and  important  to  our  revenue.  The 
vessels  of  each  shall  pay  in  the  ports  of  the  other  an 
equal  alien  tonnage  duty,  and  our  standard  is  adopted 
as  the  common  rule. 

Is  not  this  equal?  Can  we  expect  or  ask  that 
British  vessels  should  pay  an  alien  tonnage  duty  in 
our  ports,  and  that  American  vessels  should  enter 
their  ports  freely,  or  on  payment  only  of  native  ton- 
nage duties  ?  Can  we  in  equity  require  them  to  pay, 
on  the  importation  of  their  cargoes  in  British  vessels, 
an  addition  of  ten  per  cent,  on  the  duties  payable  on 
the  importation  of  the  like  articles  in  American  ves- 
sels, and  at  the  same  time  demand  to  pay  no  higher 
or  other  duties  on  the  cargoes  carried  in  our  vessels  to 
the  British  islands,  than  those  payable  by  them  on 
the  like  articles  imported  in  British  vessels?  The 
very  stating  of  the  question  suggests  to  a  candid 
mind  an  answer,  that  demonstrates  the  injustice  of 
the  objection.  [To  expect  more,  were  to  expect 
that  in  a  trade  in  which  the  opinions  and  practice  of 
Europe  contemplate  every  privilege  granted  for  a 
foreign  nation  as  a  favor,  we  were  by  treaty  to  secure 
a  greater  advantage  to  ourselves  than  would  be 
enjoyed  by  the  nation  which  granted  the  privilege.] 

But  it  is  added  that  our  laws  impose  a  tonnage 
duty  of  six  cents  per  ton  on  the  entry  of  American 
vessels  engaged  in  foreign  trade,  and  it  is  not  known 
that  British  vessels  pay  any  tonnage  duty  on  their 


Camillus  29 

entry  in  their  ports  in  the  West  Indies;  and  so 
uniting  the  two  entries,  that  is,  the  entry  in  the 
West  Indies  and  the  entry  on  a  return  to  otu-  ports, 
an  American  vessel  will  pay  fifty-six  cents  per  ton, 
when  the  British  vessels  will  pay  only  fifty  cents  per 
ton.  If  the  British  Government  impose  no  tonnage 
duty  on  their  own  vessels,  and  we  do  impose  a  ton- 
nage duty  on  ours,  this  certainly  cannot  form  an 
objection  against  them.  They  are  as  free  to  refrain 
from  the  imposition  of  a  tonnage  duty  on  their  own 
ships  as  we  are  to  impose  one  on  ours.  If  their 
policy  is  wiser  than  ours  in  this  respect,  we  are  at 
liberty  to  adopt  it,  by  repealing  the  tonnage  duty 
levied  on  American  navigation,  which,  if  we  please, 
may  be  confined  to  the  particular  case ;  the  effect  of 
such  a  measure,  as  far  as  it  should  extend,  though 
the  duty  is  small,  would  be  to  add  a  proportionable 
advantage  to  our  shipping  in  foreign  competition. 
But  the  object  of  the  articles  in  this  particular  is  to 
equalize,  not  the  duties  that  each  may  choose  to 
impose  on  their  own  vessels,  but  those  that  they 
shall  impose  on  the  vessels  of  each  other ;  and  in  this 
respect  the  article  is  perfectly  equal.  [It  is  perhaps 
the  first  time  that  the  objection  of  inequality  was 
founded  on  a  circumstance  depending  on  the  laws  of 
the  party  affected  by  it,  and  removable  at  his  own 
option.] 

This  view  of  the  subject  authorizes  a  belief,  that, 
in  the  revision  of  the  article,  a  modification  of  it  may 
be  agreed  to  that  will  prove  satisfactory.  Indeed, 
from  the  short  duration  of  the  article,  taken  in  con- 
nection with  the  expressions  made  use  of  towards 


30  Alexander  Hamilton 

the  close  of  it,  relative  to  the  renewal  of  the  negotia- 
tion, for  the  purpose  of  such  further  arrangements  as 
shall  conduce  to  the  mutual  advantage  and  extension 
of  this  branch  of  commerce,  we  may  infer  that  Great 
Britain  contemplates  a  more  enlarged  and  equal 
adjustment  on  this  point. 

The  relaxations  which  now  exist  in  the  colonial 
systems,  in  consequence  of  the  necessities  of  war, 
and  which  will  change  to  our  disadvantage  with  the 
return  of  peace,  have  been  considered  by  some  as  the 
permanent  state  of  things.  And  this  error  has  had 
its  influence  in  misleading  the  public  in  respect  to 
the  terms  and  conditions  on  which  we  may  reasonably 
expect  to  participate  in  trade  to  the  West  Indies. 
But  let  it  be  remembered,  that  the  restoration  of 
peace  will  bring  with  it  a  restoration  of  the  laws 
of  limitation  and  exclusion,  which  constitute  the 
colonial  system.  Our  efforts  therefore  should  be 
directed  to  such  adjustment  with  Great  Britain  on 
this  point,  as  will  secure  to  us  a  right  after  the  return 
of  peace,  to  the  greatest  attainable  portion  of  the 
trade  to  her  islands  in  the  West  Indies. 

It  has  been  alleged,  should  the  expected  modifica- 
tion of  this  article  retain  its  present  stipulation  on 
the  subject  of  import  and  tonnage  duty,  that  as 
France  by  treaty  may  claim  to  enjoy  the  rights  and 
privileges  of  the  most  favored  nation,  she  would  de- 
mand an  exemption  from  the  ten  per  cent,  on  the 
duties  upon  the  productions  of  the  West  Indies  im- 
ported in  foreign  bottoms,  and  would  moreover  be 
free  to  impose  an  alien  tonnage  on  our  vessels  enter- 
ing her  ports  in  the  West  Indies,  equal  to  that  im- 


Camillus  3 1 

posed  on  her  vessels  in  our  ports.  This  is  true. 
But  in  order  to  make  this  demand,  France  must 
agree,  by  treaty,  to  open  all  her  ports  in  the  West  In- 
dies, to  give  us  a  right  to  import  into  them  flour, 
bread,  tobacco,  and  such  other  articles  as  Great 
Britain  should  permit,  and  which  France  by  her 
permanent  system  prohibits;  she  must  also  concede 
to  us  a  right  to  purchase  in  her  islands,  and  bring 
away  sugar,  coffee,  and  pimento,  which  by  the  same 
system  she  also  prohibits;  she  must  do  all  this,  be- 
cause, by  our  treaty  with  her,  she  can  only  entitle 
herself  to  a  special  privilege  granted  to  another  na- 
tion, by  granting  on  her  part  to  us  the  equivalent  of 
what  was  the  consideration  of  our  grant.  Should 
France  be  inclined  to  arrange  the  trade  between  us 
and  her  islands,  we  certainly  shall  not  object;  be- 
cause, besides  the  right  to  such  an  arrangement,  it 
would  be  more  advantageous  to  us  than  that  which 
now  regulates  our  intercourse  with  her  West  Indies. 
So  much  of  the  1 2th  article  as  respects  its  duration 
and  the  renewal  of  the  negotiation  previous  to  the 
expiration  of  two  years  after  the  conclusion  of  the 
war,  in  order  to  agree  in  a  new  arrangement  on  the 
subject  of  the  West  India  trade,  as  well  as  for  the 
purpose  of  endeavoring  to  agree  whether  in  any, 
and  in  what  cases,  neutral  vessels  shall  protect 
enemy's  property,  and  in  what  cases  provisions,  and 
other  articles  not  generally  contraband,  may  be- 
come such,  form  a  part  of  the  treaty  as  ratified 
by  the  President.  These  clauses  sufficiently  explain 
themselves,  and  require  no  comment  in  this  place. 
They,  however,  prove  one  point,  which  is,  that  after 


32  Alexander  Hamilton 

every  effort  on  the  part  of  our  negotiator,  the  parties 
were  not  able  to  agree  in  the  doctrine  that  free  bot- 
toms should  make  free  goods,  nor  in  the  cases  in 
which  alone  provisions  and  other  articles  not  gener- 
ally contraband,  should  be  deemed  such.  Leaving, 
therefore,  both  these  points  precisely  as  they  foimd 
them  (except  in  respect  to  provisions,  the  payment 
for  which,  when  by  the  law  of  nations  liable  to  cap- 
ture as  contraband,  is  secured),  to  be  regulated  by 
the  existing  law  of  nations,  it  is  stipulated  to  renew 
the  negotiation  on  these  points  at  the  epoch  assigned 
for  the  future  adjustment  of  the  West  India  trade,  in 
order  then  to  endeavor  to  agree  in  a  conventional 
rule,  which,  instead  of  the  law  of  nations,  should 
thereafter  regulate  the  conduct  of  the  parties  in 
these  respects. 

[The  nth  article  has  been  passed  over  in  silence  as 
being  merely  introductory  and  formal.] 

Camillus. 


NO.    XXVI 

(From  the  Minerva.y 

1795- 

The  British  trade  to  their  possessions  in  the  East 
Indies,  as  well  as  to  China,  is  a  monopoly  vested  by 
the  Legislature  in  a  company  of  merchants.  No 
other  persons  in  Great  Britain,  nor  in  any  of  her 
dominions  or  colonies,  can  send  a  vessel  to,  or  prose- 
cute trade  independent  of  the  company,  with  any  part 
of  Asia.     The  right  to  trade  with  their  possessions 

I  The  first  twenty-five  numbers  of  Camillus  appeared  in  the  Argus. 
The  remainder  came  out  in  the  N.  Y.  Minerva.  All  were  reprinted 
by  Fenno  in  the  Gazette  of  the  United  States. 


Camillus  33 

in  India  is  not  only  refused  to  all  British  subjects, 
the  India  Company  excepted,  but  is  one  that  Great 
Britain  has  never  before  yielded  by  treaty  to  any 
foreign  nation.  By  the  terms  of  the  charter  to  the 
India  Company,  among  a  variety  of  limitations, 
they  are  restrained  and  confined  to  a  direct  trade 
between  Asia  and  the  port  of  London ;  they  are  pro- 
hibited from  bringing  any  of  the  productions  of  India 
or  China  directly  to  any  part  of  America,  as  well  to 
the  British  colonies  as  to  our  territories;  and  more- 
over, they  are  restrained  from  carrying  any  of  the 
productions  of  Asia  directly  to  any  part  of  Europe, 
or  to  any  port  in  Great  Britain,  Scotland,  or  Ireland, 
except  the  single  port  of  London. 

The  13th  article  stipulates,  that  our  vessels  shall 
be  admitted  in  all  the  seaports  and  harbors  of  the 
British  territories  in  the  East  Indies,  and  that  otu* 
citizens  may  freely  carry  on  a  trade  between  said 
territories  and  the  United  States  in  all  such  articles, 
of  which  the  importation  or  exportation  shall  not  be 
entirely  prohibited;  provided  only  that  when  Great 
Britain  is  at  war  we  may  not  export  from  their  terri- 
tories in  India,  without  the  permission  of  their  local 
government  there,  mihtary  stores,  naval  stores,  or 
rice.  Our  vessels  shall  pay  in  this  trade  the  same 
tonnage  duty  as  is  paid  by  British  vessels  in  our 
ports ;  and  our  cargoes  on  their  importation  and  ex- 
portation shall  pay  no  other  or  higher  charges  or 
duties  than  shall  be  payable  on  the  same  articles 
when  imported  or  exported  in  British  bottoms;  but 
it  is  agreed  that  this  trade  shall  be  direct  between 
the  United  States  and  the  said  territories ;  that  the 

VOL.  VI.— 3. 


34  Alexander  Hamilton 

article  shall  not  be  deemed  to  allow  the  vessels  of 
the  United  States  to  carry  on  any  part  of  the  coast- 
ing trade  of  the  British  territories  in  India,  nor  to 
allow  our  citizens  to  settle  or  reside  within  the  said 
territories,  or  to  go  into  the  interior  parts  thereof, 
without  the  permission  of  the  British  local  govern- 
ment there. 

The  British  trade  to  their  territories  in  the  East 
Indies  is  carried  on  by  a  corporation,  who  have  a 
monopoly  against  the  great  body  of  British  mer- 
chants. Our  trade  to  the  same  territories  will  be 
open  to  the  skill  and  enterprise  of  every  American 
citizen.  The  British  trade  to  these  territories  is 
direct,  but  confined  to  the  port  of  London ;  our  trade 
to  the  same  must  likewise  be  direct,  but  may  be 
carried  on  from  and  to  all  our  principal  ports. 

The  article  gives  us  a  right  in  common  with  the 
India  Company  to  carry  to  these  territories,  and  to 
purchase  and  bring  from  thence,  all  articles  which 
may  be  carried  to  or  purchased  and  brought  from 
the  same,  in  British  vessels:  our  cargoes  paying 
native  duties,  and  our  ships  the  same  alien  tonnage 
as  British  ships  pay  in  our  ports.  This  trade  is 
equally  open  to  both  nations;  except  when  Great 
Britain  is  engaged  in  war,  when  the  consent  of  the 
British  local  government  is  required  in  order  to 
enable  us  to  export  naval  stores,  military  stores,  and 
rice;  a  limitation  of  small  consequence,  none  of  the 
articles  except  nitre  being  likely  to  form  any  part  of 
our  return  cargoes.  Though  this  article  is  one 
against  which  the  objection  of  a  want  of  reciprocity 
(so  often  and  so  uncandidly  urged    against   other 


Camillus  35 

parts  of  the  treaty)  has  not  been  preferred,  it  has 
not,  however,  escaped  censure. 

It  is  said  that  we  are  already  in  the  enjoyment  of 
a  less  restrained  commerce  with  the  British  terri- 
tories in  India,  and  that  the  treaty  will  alter  it  for 
the  worse ;  inasmuch  as  we  thereby  incapacitate  our- 
selves to  carry  on  any  part  of  the  coasting  trade  of 
the  British  territories  in  India,  and  as  we  relinquish 
the  profitable  freights  to  be  made  between  Bombay 
and  Canton,  and  likewise  those  sometimes  obtained 
from  the  English  territories  in  Bengal  to  Ostend. 

It  would  seem  a  sufficient  answer  to  say,  that  this 
trade  has  heretofore  existed  by  the  mere  indulgence 
of  those  who  permitted  it ;  that  it  was  liable  to  varia- 
tions; that  a  total  exclusion,  especially  had  it  been 
of  us  in  common  with  other  foreign  nations,  could 
have  afforded  no  just  ground  of  complaint;  that  the 
relaxation  which  has  hitherto  given  us  admission  to 
the  British  Indian  territories,  was  not  a  permanent, 
but  a  mere  temporary  and  occasional  regulation, 
liable  to  alteration,  and  by  no  means  to  be  demanded 
as  the  basis  of  an  intercourse  to  be  adjusted  by  com- 
pact with  a  foreign  nation,  which  would  no  longer 
leave  the  power  of  alteration  in  either  of  the  parties. 

But  in  respect  to  the  first  objection  the  article 
amounts  to  this,  that  the  rights  which  it  does  grant 
shall  not  by  implication  be  construed  to  give  a  right  to 
carry  on  any  part  of  the  British  coasting  trade  in  India. 

If  we  have  before  shared  in  this  trade  by  permis- 
sion, nothing  in  the  article  will  preclude  us  from 
enjoying  the  same  in  future.  If  we  did  not  partici- 
pate in  it,  nothing  in  the  article  impairs  either  the 


36  Alexander  Hamilton 

authority  of  the  British  local  government  to  permit 
our  participation  or  our  capacity  to  profit  by  such 
permission.  This  objection,  therefore,  falls  to  the 
ground,  since  the  coasting  trade  remains  as  it  was 
before  the  treaty  was  formed.' 

[Further,  according  to  my  information.] — It  is  not 
the  trade  between  the  East  Indies  and  China,  as  has 
been  erroneously  supposed  by  some  persons,  but  the 
exportation  of  rice  and  other  articles,  which  are  ex- 
changed between  the  British  territories  in  the  hither 
and  further  Indies,  that  is  denominated  the  coasting 
trade  of  the  British  territories  in  India.  The  im- 
portance of  this  trade  is  not  well  understood;  nor 
am  I  able  to  say  whether  we  have  heretofore  been 
allowed  to  carry  it  on.  If  we  have,  the  little  that  we 
have  heard  of  it  leads  to  an  opinion  that  it  is  not  an 
object  of  much  consequence.  Let  it,  however,  be 
granted  that  hereafter  we  shall  not  be  allowed  to 
engage  in  it.  Shall  we  have  more  reason  to  com- 
plain of  this  exclusion,  than  we  have  that  we  are  re- 
fused a  share  in  the  coasting  trade  of  the  European 
dominions  of  Great  Britain  ?  or  that  we  are  excluded 
from  the  coasting  trade  between  their  islands  in  the 
West  Indies?  or  than  the  British  themselves  have, 
that  by  our  prohibiting  tonnage  duty  (being  fifty 
cents  per  ton  on  entry  of  a  foreign  vessel,  when  our 
own  coasting  vessels  pay  only  six  cents  per  ton,  for 

I  [The  terms  used  clearly  denote  this  and  nothing  more.  They  are: 
"It  is  also  understood  that  the  permission  granted  by  this  article  is  not 
to  extend  to  allow."  This  does  not  negative  any  preexisting  indul- 
gence, but  merely  provides  that  the  main  grant  shall  not  convert  the 
revocable  indulgence,  if  any  there  was  in  this  partictdar,  into  an  im- 
vocable  right  by  treaty.] 


Camillus  37 

a  year's  license)  they  are  excluded  from  sharing  in 
our  coasting  trade — a  branch  of  business  that  already 
employs  a  large  proportion  of  our  whole  navigation, 
and  is  daily  increasing? 

In  respect  to  the  second  and  third  objections,  it 
may  be  remarked,  that  so  far  as  the  trade  has  been 
heretofore  enjoyed,  it  has  been  in  consequence  of  an 
exception  from,  and  relaxation  in,  the  system  by 
which  the  European  commerce  has  been  regulated; 
that  having  depended  on  the  mere  occasional  per- 
mission of  the  local  government,  we  may  safely  infer 
(though  it  may  have  been  supposed  incompatible 
with  the  discretionary  powers  vested  in  that  govern- 
ment, to  confer  by  treaty  a  positive  right  to  carry  on 
the  trade  in  question)  that  so  long  and  as  often  as 
the  interest  that  has  heretofore  induced  the  grant  of 
this  permission  shall  continue  or  exist,  the  permis- 
sion will  be  continued  or  renewed.  The  stipulation, 
restraining  the  trade,  may,  if  the  parties  see  fit,  be 
dispensed  with,  and  the  trade  may  be  enlarged,  or 
made  free.  It  being  a  contract  only  between  them 
and  us,  the  parties  are  free  to  remodify  it ;  and  with- 
out a  formal  alteration,  if  those  in  whose  favor  the 
restraint  is  made  consent  to  remove  it,  the  other 
party  is  released  from  the  obligation  to  observe  it.' 

Again — Surat,   which  is  in  the  neighborhood  of 

'  [This  has  been  affected  to  be  questioned  on  account  of  what  is 
called  the  peremptoriness  of  the  expressions  (to  wit) :  "It  is  expressly 
agreed  that  the  vessels  of  the  United  States  shall  not  carry"  etc.  But 
there  is  no  real  room  for  the  question.  In  a  contract  between  two 
parties,  whether  individuals  or  nations,  where  a  restraint  is  imposed 
upon  one  for  the  benefit  of  another,  it  is  always  an  implied  condition 
of  the  restraint  that  it  shall  continue,  unless  dispensed  with  by  the 
party  for  whose  benefit  it  is  imposed.     Thus  the  British  Government 


38  Alexander  Hamilton 

Bombay,  is  the  emporium  of  Guzerat,  and  of  the 
northern  portion  of  the  Malabar  coast;  the  cottons 
shipped  from  Bombay  to  Canton  are  frequently  first 
sent  from  Surat  to  Bombay.  Surat  belongs  to  the 
native  powers  to  which  we  have  free  access.  If  the 
transportation  of  cotton  and  some  few  other  com- 
modities from  the  coast  of  Malabar  to  Canton  is  an 
important  branch  of  our  commerce,  what  will  pre- 
vent our  prosecuting  it  from  Surat  or  any  other  free 
port  in  the  hither  Indies? 

That  it  may  be  undertaken  from  the  ports  of  the 
native  powers  is  rendered  probable  by  the  circum- 
stance, that  these  freights  are  suppHed  principally  or 
alone  by  the  native  or  black  merchants,  whose  resi- 
dence would  naturally  be  in  the  ports  under  native 
jurisdiction  more  frequently  than  in  those  imder  the 
jurisdiction  of  any  of  the  foreign  powers. 

But  is  it  not  true  (and  will  not  candor  admit  it  ?) 
that  the  trade  to  the  Asiatic  dominions  of  the  Euro- 
pean powers  has  usually  been  confined  to  the  na- 
tion to  whom  such  territories  belong?  In  our  treaty 
with  Holland,  have  we  not  even  stipulated  to  respect 
their  monopoly  of  this  trade?  And  by  our  treaty 
with  France,  a  nation  whose  liberal  policy  is  said  to 
have  laid  us  under  eternal  obligations  of  gratitude, 
have  we  acquired  the  slightest  pretensions,  much  less 
a  right,  to  resort  to,  or  trade  with,  any  part  of  their 
Asiatic  territories? 

in  India  may  remove  the  restraint,  by  continuing  the  indtilgence  in 
this  respect  heretofore  granted.  And  it  seems  to  me  clear  that  the 
law  which  the  United  States  are  to  pass,  for  enforcing  the  prohibition, 
may,  with  good  faith,  be  qualified  with  this  provision,  "unless  by  per- 
mission of  the  British  Government  in  India."] 


Camillus  39 

A  late  decree  of  the  convention  which  opened  to  us 
the  ports  in  their  West  Indies,  Hkewise  laid  open 
their  remaining  territories  in  Asia.  But  this  meas- 
ure, proceeding  from  the  necessities  of  the  war  and 
their  inability  to  carry  on  their  foreign  commerce, 
will  change  hereafter,  as  heretofore  it  has  done,  with 
the  establishment  of  peace.  Did  this  opinion  re- 
quire to  be  strengthened,  it  is  abundantly  confirmed 
by  the  navigation  act,  decreed  by  the  convention; 
the  operation  whereof  is  suspended  for  the  same 
reason  that  induced  the  opening  to  foreigners  that 
trade  to  their  colonies  and  territories  in  the  West 
and  East  Indies. 

The  British  for  more  than  a  hundred  years  ex- 
cluded foreigners  from  a  share  in  their  East  India 
trade ;  for  a  few  years  past  they  relaxed  in  the  rigor 
of  this  system.  We  have  availed  ourselves  of  this 
circumstance,  and  shared  with  them  in  their  India 
commerce.  But  this  permission  can  be  viewed  only 
as  an  occasional  departure  from  a  general  law,  which 
may  be  affected  by  a  change  of  circumstances;  the 
duration  of  which,  therefore,  is  uncertain.  The  loss 
and  inconvenience  to  which  our  merchants  may  be 
exposed  from  the  prosecution  of  a  trade  depending 
on  regulations  arising  from  inconstant  circumstances, 
and  which  frequently  vary,  may,  in  some  measure,  be 
guarded  against,  where  the  scene  is  not  remote, 
and  the  alterations  in  the  laws  can  be  known  soon 
after  they  are  made.  But  in  the  Asiatic  and  in  our 
other  distant  commerce,  it  is  of  importance  that  the 
laws  under  which  an  adventure  is  begun  should  be 
permanent.     Losses  to  a  considerable  amount  have 


40  Alexander  Hamilton 

been  experienced  by  some  of  our  merchants,  who 
have  undertaken  distant  voyages  in  the  expectation 
of  the  continuation  of  these  temporary  regulations. 
The  trade,  for  example,  with  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope 
(which  the  Dutch  Government  ordinarily  mono- 
polize to  their  own  people)  was  some  time  since 
opened  to  foreigners,  and  some  of  our  citizens 
profited  by  it ;  but  others,  who  had  engaged  in  large 
adventures  to  that  market,  suffered  no  small  disap- 
pointment and  loss  in  finding  themselves  excluded, 
upon  their  arrival,  by  a  repeal  of  the  permission  to 
foreigners  to  trade  there.  It  must  then  be  con- 
sidered as  an  important  object  secured,  in  respect 
to  the  principal  proportion  of  our  India  trade,  that 
alone  which  is  capable  of  being  pursued  as  a  branch 
of  our  commerce,  that  the  treaty  turns  a  favor  into  a 
right,  and  that  our  direct  intercourse  with  the  British 
territories  in  the  East  Indies,  in  all  respects  as  broad 
as  that  of  Great  Britain  herself  (except  in  the  articles 
of  rice,  naval  and  military  stores,  when  Great  Britain 
is  engaged  in  war) ,  instead  of  being  an  uncertain  and 
hazardous  trade,  as  heretofore,  from  its  precarious 
nature,  it  has  been,  will,  hereafter,  be  as  certain  as 
any  in  which  our  merchants  shall  engage. 

It  is  further  alleged,  by  way  of  objection  to  this 
article,  that  it  does  not  secure  to  our  citizens  a  right 
to  reside  and  settle  in  the  British  territories  in  India, 
without  the  consent  of  the  British  local  government. 
The  observation  that  has  been  made  on  a  similar 
objection,  in  respect  to  the  coasting  trade  in  India,  is 
equally  applicable  to  this.  The  article  leaves  sub- 
jects precisely  in  the  situation  in  which  it  found  them. 


Camillus  41 

But  let  it  be  remembered  that  the  disproportion  be- 
tween the  numbers  of  the  native  Indians  and  the 
foreigners  inhabiting  their  coimtry,  is  more  than  one 
thousand  of  the  former  to  one  of  the  latter ;  that  the 
most  exact  discipline  and  subordination  among  the 
foreigners  are  therefore  essential  to  the  preservation 
of  the  British  authority  over  that  country;  that  no 
foreigner,  or  even  a  British  subject,  is  allowed  to  re- 
side there,  except  in  the  character  of  a  servant  of  the 
company,  or  of  a  licensed  inhabitant ;  that  it  has  long 
been  held  as  a  sound  opinion,  that  unrestrained 
liberty  to  the  Europeans  to  emigrate  to  and  settle 
among  the  Indians,  would,  in  a  short  time,  overturn 
and  destroy  the  British  empire  in  India.  This 
danger  would  by  no  means  be  diminished  by  con- 
ferring a  right  upon  the  Americans,  freely  to  reside 
and  settle  in  India ;  that  we  shall  be  allowed  to  re- 
side and  settle  there  by  permission  of  the  local  British 
government,  is  fairly  to  be  inferred  from  the  article. 
But  an  [absolute  right]  to  an  entire  liberty  on  these 
points  might  evidently  be  dangerous  to  the  British 
government  over  India — [and  in  prudence  could  not 
have  been  stipulated]. 

The  advantageous  footing  on  which  the  trade  is 
placed  is  so  evident,  that  those  who  had  no  reliance 
on  the  objections  urged  against  it,  but  who,  never- 
theless, have  been  unwilling  to  allow  the  treaty  any 
merit  on  the  score  of  this  article,  have  endeavored  to 
show  that  our  India  trade  is  of  little  importance,  and 
of  small  value. 

Whatever  article  can  be  supplied  by  the  India 
Company  may  likewise  be  supplied  by  us,  and  some 


42  Alexander  Hamilton 

of  them  on  better  terms  by  us  than  by  them.  The 
reports  of  the  committee  of  the  directors  of  the  East 
India  Company,  published  in  1793,  when  their  char- 
ter was  renewed,  afford  useful  information  on 
this  subject,  and  disclose  facts  which  show  the  ad- 
vantages that  we  shall  possess  in  this  trade  over  the 
company.  They  admit,  that  in  the  articles  of  iron, 
wines,  canvas,  cordage,  arms,  and  naval  and  military 
stores,  foreigners  can  enter  into  a  beneficial  com- 
petition with  them;  and  that  canvas  and  cordage 
and,  we  may  add,  all  naval  stores  and  several  other 
articles  can  always  be  furnished  in  India  by  foreigners 
cheaper  than  by  the  Company. 

If  we  appreciate  the  advantage  we  have  over  them, 
in  such  articles  of  supply  as  are  of  our  own  growth  or 
production,  as  well  as  in  the  wines  not  unusually 
procured  by  touching  at  Madeira  on  the  outward 
voyage  to  India,  and  compare  it  with  the  advantage 
that  they  have  over  us  in  the  few  articles  of  choice 
which  they  purchase  at  the  first  hands,  and  which  we 
must  import  in  order  to  re-export  to  India,  it  is  prob- 
able that  our  cargoes  to  India  will,  on  the  whole,  be 
laid  in  as  advantageously,  if  not  more  so  than  those 
of  the  India  Company.  If  we  consider  the  vast  ex- 
tent of  territory,  the  numerous  population,  and  the 
established  manufactures  of  India,  so  far  from  sup- 
posing that  a  free  trade  to  that  country  will  be  of 
little  value  to  a  young  and  enterprising  nation,  whose 
manufactures  are  still  in  their  infancy,  we  ought 
rather  to  conclude  that  it  is  a  country  with  which  we 
should  be  solicitous  to  establish  a  free  trade  and 
intercourse. 


Camillus  43 

Every  one  who  has  bestowed  the  sHghtest  atten- 
tion upon  the  foreign  manufactures  consumed  in  our 
country,  must  have  observed  the  general  and  in- 
creasing use  of  those  of  India,  owing  to  the  better 
terms  on  which  they  can  be  procured  from  Asia  than 
from  Europe.  Though  no  document  is  at  hand  that 
will  show  the  value  of  the  annual  importations  from 
India,  it  is  stated  by  Mr.  Coxe,  in  his  View  of  the 
United  States,  that  the  amount  in  value  of  our  im- 
portations from  Asia  is  more  than  one  fifth  of  the 
value  of  our  whole  annual  consumption  of  foreign 
commodities.  It  is  true  that  the  porcelain,  silks, 
nankeens,  and  teas  of  China  form  a  large  portion  of 
this  annual  importation.  But,  after  a  full  deduction 
on  this  accoimt,  a  great  and  profitable  branch  of  our 
commerce  will  be  found  in  our  trade  to  the  East 
Indies.  It  should  be  remembered,  [also,]  that  it  is 
not  the  consumption  of  our  own  country  that  regu- 
lates the  quantity  of  India  goods  that  we  import; 
other  countries  have  been  supplied  through  us  with 
the  fabrics  and  productions  of  both  India  and  China. 
The  treaty  will  enlarge  this  demand.' 

Several  circumstances  calculated  to  give  our 
trade  with  Asia  an  advantage  against  foreign  com- 
petition, and  a  preference  to  our  trade  with  Europe, 
are  deserving  of  attention. 

First. — The  direct  trade  between  us  and  Asia, 
including  the  East  Indies,  as  well  as  China,  cannot 
be  prosecuted  by  the  British  East  India  Company, 

'  Perhaps  from  the  certainty  of  the  rights  which  it  confers,  it  may 
invite  a  foreign  capital  to  extensive  enterprises,  in  which  the  United 
States  will  be  an  entrepdt  between  India  and  a  great  part  of  Europe. 


44  Alexander  Hamilton 

their  ships  being  obliged  to  return  to  the  port  of 
London,  and  there  to  discharge. 

Second. — The  difference  between  the  duties  on 
Asiatic  goods  imported  in  American  bottoms  direct 
from  Asia,  and  the  duties  imposed  on  the  same  goods 
in  foreign  bottoms  from  Asia  or  from  Europe ;  being 
on  all  articles  a  favorable  discrimination,  and  in  the 
articles  of  teas,  the  duties  on  those  imported  in 
foreign  bottoms  being  fifty  per  cent,  higher  than  on 
those  imported  in  American  bottoms. 

The  particular  difference  of  duties  on  Asiatic 
goods  imported  in  American  and  in  foreign  bottoms, 
so  favorable  to  our  own  navigation,  will  not  be  af- 
fected by  the  right  reserved  by  Great  Britain  to  im- 
pose countervailing  duties  in  certain  cases,  that  right 
being  relative  to  the  intercourse  between  the  United 
States  and  the  British  territories  in  Europe. 

Third. — The  European  intercourse  with  Asia  is,  in 
most  cases,  conducted  by  corporations  or  exclusive 
companies,  and  all  experience  has  proved  that  in 
every  species  of  business  (that  of  banking  and  a  few 
analogous  employments  excepted),  in  conducting  of 
which  a  competition  shall  exist  between  individuals 
and  corporations,  the  superior  economy,  enterprise, 
zeal,  and  perseverance  of  the  former  will  make  them 
an  overmatch  for  the  latter;  and  that  while  indi- 
viduals acquire  riches,  corporations  engaged  in  the 
same  business  often  sink  their  capital  and  become 
bankrupt.  The  British  East  India  Company  are, 
moreover,  burdened  with  various  terms  and  condi- 
tions, which  they  are  required  to  observe  in  their 
Asiatic  trade,  and  which  operate  as  so  many  ad- 


Camillus  45 

vantages  in  favor  of  their  rivals  in  the  supply  of 
foreign  markets.  The  company,  for  example,  are 
obliged  annually  to  invest  a  large  capital  in  the  pur- 
chase of  British  manufactures,  to  be  exported  and 
sold  by  them  in  India ;  the  loss  on  these  investments 
is  considerable  every  year,  as  few  of  the  manufac- 
tures which  they  are  obliged  to  purchase  will  sell  in 
India  for  their  cost  and  charges;  besides,  from  the 
policy  of  protecting  the  home  manufactures,  the 
Company  are,  in  a  great  measure,  shut  out  from  sup- 
plying India  goods  for  the  home  consumption  of 
Great  Britain.  Most  of  the  goods  which  they  im- 
port from  India  are  re-exported  with  additional 
charges,  incurred  by  the  regulations  of  the  Company, 
to  foreign  markets,  in  supplying  of  which  we  shall  be 
their  rivals,  as,  from  the  information  of  intelligent 
merchants,  it  is  a  fact  that  Asiatic  goods,  including 
the  teas  of  China,  are  [on  an  average]  cheaper  within 
the  United  States  than  in  Great  Britain. 

Fourth. — The  manufactures  of  Asia  are  not  only 
cheaper  here  than  in  Europe,  but  in  general  they  are 
cheaper  than  goods  of  equal  quality  of  European 
manufacture.  So  long  as  from  the  cheapness  of 
subsistence  and  the  immense  population  of  India 
(the  inhabitants  of  the  British  territories  alone  being 
estimated  at  forty  millions)  the  labor  of  a  manu- 
facturer can  be  procured  from  two  to  three  pence 
sterling  per  day,  the  similar  manufactures  of  Europe, 
aided  with  all  their  ingenious  machinery,  are  likely, 
on  a  fair  competition,  in  almost  every  instance,  to  be 
excluded  by  those  of  India.  vSo  apprehensive  have  the 
British  Government  been  of  endangering  their  home 


46  Alexander  Hamilton 

manufactures  by  the  permission  of  Asiatic  goods  to 
be  consumed  in  Great  Britain,  that  they  have  im- 
posed eighteen  per  cent,  duties  on  the  gross  sales  of 
all  India  muslins,  which  is  equal  to  twenty- two  per 
cent,  on  their  prime  cost.  The  duties  on  coarser  India 
goods  are  still  higher,  and  a  long  catalogue  of  Asiatic 
articles,  including  all  stained  and  printed  goods,  is 
prohibited  from  being  consumed  in  Great  Britain. 

The  British  manufacturers  were  not  satisfied  even 
with  this  prohibitory  system;  and  on  the  late  re- 
newal of  the  Company's  charter,  they  urged  the 
total  exclusion  from  British  consumption  of  all  India 
goods,  and,  moreover,  proposed  that  the  Company 
should  be  held  to  import  annually  from  India  a 
large  amount  of  raw  materials,  and  particularly 
cotton,  for  the  supply  of  the  British  manufacturers. 

Those  facts  are  noticed  to  show  the  advantages  to 
be  derived  from  a  free  access  to  the  India  market, 
from  whence  we  may  obtain  those  goods  which 
would  be  extensively  consumed  even  in  the  first 
manufacturing  nations  of  Europe,  did  not  the  se- 
curity of  their  manufactories  require  their  exclusion.' 

Camillus. 


NO.    XXVII 

1795- 

The  third  article  contains  the  terms  and  condi- 
tions of  the  trade  and  intercourse  that  it  authorizes 

I  [Great  Britain  has  made  it  a  serious  point,  in  which  she  has  in  more 
than  one  instance  succeeded,  to  engage  foreign  powers  (the  emperor 
was  one)  to  renounce  estabUshments  for  carrying  on  the  trade  with 
India,  from  their  own  territories;  yet  this  treaty  opens  all  the  terri- 
tories to  us.  And  yet  it  is  not  only  denied  merit,  but  criminated,  in 
this  very  particular.] 


Camillus  47 

between  us  and  the  British  colonies  on  the  American 
continent.  The  twelfth  article  was  intended  to  ad- 
just the  trade  between  us  and  the  British  islands  in 
the  West  Indies.  The  thirteenth  article  secures  to 
us  a  direct  trade  with  the  British  territories  in  the 
East  Indies ;  and  it  is  the  office  of  the  fourteenth  and 
the  fifteenth  articles  to  ascertain  and  establish  the 
terms  of  the  intercourse  and  trade  between  the  terri- 
tories of  the  United  States  and  the  British  dominions 
in  Europe. 

The  fourteenth  article  establishes  a  perfect  and 
reciprocal  liberty  of  commerce  and  navigation  be- 
tween the  territories  of  the  United  States  and  of 
the  British  dominions  in  Europe;  stipulates  that  the 
people  and  inhabitants  of  the  two  countries  respect- 
ively, namely,  of  the  United  States  and  of  the  British 
dominions  in  Europe,  shall  have  liberty  to  come  with 
their  ships  and  cargoes  to  the  ports,  cities,  and  places 
of  each  other,  within  the  territories  and  dominions 
aforesaid,  to  resort  and  reside  there,  without  limita- 
tion of  time,  to  hire  houses  and  stores  for  the  purpose 
of  commerce;  and  that  the  merchants  and  traders 
on  each  side  shall  enjoy,  for  their  commerce,  the 
fullest  protection  and  security,  subject,  notwithstand- 
ing, in  respect  to  the  stipulations  of  this  article,  to 
the  laws  of  the  two  nations  respectively. 

As  this  article,  in  the  customary  language  em- 
ployed in  the  introductory  articles  of  commercial 
treaties,  speaks  of  a  perfect  liberty  of  commerce  and 
navigation,  without  excepting  any  commodity,  or 
specifying  any  impost  or  duty,  it  was  possible  that  a 
latitude  or  freedom  of  trade,  inconsistent  with  the 


48  Alexander  Hamilton 

revenue  laws  and  policy  of  the  two  nations,  might 
have  been  claimed  under  it;  hence  the  propriety  of 
the  provision  with  which  the  article  concludes,  and 
which  reserves  to  the  parties  respectively  the  power 
of  avoiding  this  inconvenience,  by  continuing  and 
enacting  such  laws  as  may  be  proper  for  the  purpose. 

But  as  under  this  power  again,  partial  duties, 
and  even  partial  exclusions,  might  have  been  estab- 
lished, whereby  ships  and  merchandises,  as  well  as 
the  articles  of  the  growth,  produce,  or  manufacture 
of  one  of  the  parties,  might  have  been  made  liable  to 
higher  duties  and  imposts  in  the  territories  of  the 
other,  than  the  ships  and  similar  merchandises,  and 
articles  of  the  growth,  produce,  or  manufacture  of 
other  nations;  or  whereby  one  of  the  parties  might 
prohibit  the  importation  or  exportation,  by  the 
other,  of  any  article  to  and  from  his  territories,  the 
importation  or  exportation  whereof  was  at  the  same 
time  free  to  some  other  nation :  in  order  to  prevent 
such  inequalities,  and  to  secure  effectually  to  the 
parties  a  right  to  carry  on  their  trade  with  each  other, 
on  terms  equally  advantageous  and  extensive  with 
those  established  by  either  with  any  other  nation, 
the  fifteenth  article  stipulates: 

I .  That  no  other  or  higher  duty  shall  be  exacted 
or  paid  on  the  ships  and  merchandises,  nor  on  the 
articles  of  the  growth,  produce,  or  manufacture  of 
one  of  the  parties,  on  their  entry  or  importation  into 
the  territories  of  the  other,  than  shall  be  payable  on 
the  like  ships  and  merchandises,  and  on  similar 
articles  of  the  growth,  produce,  or  manufacture  of 
any  other  nation. 


Camillus  49 

2.  That  no  article,  the  importation  or  exportation 
of  which  by  either  party,  to  or  from  the  territories 
of  the  other,  is  prohibited,  shall  be  imported  or  ex- 
ported to  or  from  the  same  by  any  other  foreign  na- 
tion ;  and  that  every  article  allowed  to  be  imported  or 
exported  to  or  from  the  territories  of  either  party,  by 
any  foreign  nation,  may  be  imported  or  exported  to 
or  from  the  same,  by  the  parties  respectively. 

By  these  stipulations  it  is  agreed,  that  the  people 
and  inhabitants  of  the  United  States  and  of  the 
British  dominions  in  Europe  shall  have  the  right  to 
carry  on  trade  between  the  said  territories  in  all 
articles  and  commodities  in  which  any  other  foreign 
nation  may  trade  with  either  of  the  parties ;  that  the 
imposts  or  duties  on  any  article  in  the  course  of  such 
trade  shall  be  no  other  or  higher  than  the  lowest  im- 
posts or  duties  paid  by  any  other  foreign  nation  on 
the  Hke  article;  that  both  parties  shall  remain  free, 
totally  to  prohibit  the  importation  or  exportation, 
to  or  from  their  respective  territories,  of  any  species 
of  goods  or  merchandise,  or  to  increase  the  existing 
duties,  or  to  impose  new  ones,  on  the  importation 
of  any  species  of  goods  or  merchandises  into  their 
respective  territories;  such  prohibitions  and  duties 
operating  equally  against  all  foreign  nations.  So  far 
as  respects  the  interchange  of  commodities  between 
the  parties,  these  stipulations  breathe  the  spirit 
of  reciprocity.  The  residue  of  the  fifteenth  article 
principally  relates  to  the  navigation  which  the  parties 
shall  employ  in  this  trade. 

The  first  clause  of  the  fifteenth  article,  in  the  spirit 
of  those  treaties  which  mutually  confer  the  right  of 

VOL.    VI.— 4. 


50  Alexander  Hamilton 

the  most  favored  nations,  stipulates  that  no  other  or 
higher  duties  shall  be  paid  by  the  ships  of  the  one 
party  in  the  ports  of  the  other,  than  such  as  are  paid 
by  the  like  vessels  of  all  other  nations. 

By  our  laws,  a  difference  exists  between  the  ton- 
nage duty  paid  by  an  American  vessel,  and  that  paid 
by  a  foreign  vessel  in  our  ports :  the  American  vessel 
pays  only  six  cents  per  ton  on  her  entry ;  the  foreign 
vessel,  on  her  entry,  pays  fifty  cents  per  ton,  and 
about  twenty  per  cent,  more  duties  on  all  teas  im- 
ported from  Europe,  and  ten  per  cent,  more  duties  on 
the  importation  of  other  goods,  than  are  payable  on 
the  importation  of  the  same  goods  in  an  American 
vessel. 

By  the  British  laws,  the  difference  between  the  du- 
ties paid  by  British  and  foreign  vessels  in  the  British 
ports  in  Europe  is  less  than  that  which  exists  in  our 
ports.  The  consequence  is,  that  a  British  vessel,  of 
a  given  burthen,  pays  considerably  more  tonnage 
duties  in  the  trade  between  our  territories  and  the 
British  ports  in  Europe,  than  is  paid  by  an  American 
vessel  of  the  same  burthen,  engaged  in  the  same  trade. 

The  trade  being  laid  open  to  both  parties,  the 
principle  of  equalization  of  duties  was  very  naturally 
deemed  an  equitable  basis  of  treaty.  This  could  be 
effected  by  lowering  the  American  alien  duties  to  the 
British  standard,  or  by  raising  those  of  Great  Britain 
to  the  American  standard.  The  former  might  have 
been  inconvenient  to  our  revenue  [especially  since, 
if  it  was  not  general,  it  would  have  formed,  in  respect 
to  foreign  nations,  an  impleasant  discrimination  in 
our  laws]. 


Camillus  51 

The  American  tonnage  duty,  therefore,  was  left  to 
operate;  and  by  the  fifteenth  article,  it  is  agreed, 
that  the  British  Government  shall  reserve  a  right  to 
raise  the  tonnage  duty  on  our  vessels  entering  their 
ports  in  Europe,  so  as  to  make  it  equal  to  the  tonnage 
duty  payable  by  their  vessels  entering  our  ports; 
and  in  order  to  balance  the  difference  of  duties  on 
goods  imported  into  our  ports  by  American  or  by 
British  vessels,  the  effect  whereof  is  the  same  as  that 
which  proceeds  from  an  alien  tonnage  duty,  the  article 
further  agrees,  that  the  British  Government  shall  re- 
serve a  right  to  impose  such  duty  as  may  be  adequate 
to  effect  this  end.  The  preceding  clause  of  this  article 
stipulates,  that  the  vessels  and  cargoes  of  each  shall 
pay  no  higher  or  other  duties  than  those  imposed  on 
the  like  vessels  and  cargoes  of  all  other  nations.  It 
was  therefore  necessary  to  reserve  a  right  to  increase 
against  us  their  alien  tonnage  duty,  and  to  impose 
the  coimter vailing  duty  in  question ;  as,  without  such 
reservation  the  same  could  not  have  been  done,  un- 
less by  laws  equally  operating  against  all  other  nations 
[which  would  have  been  unjust  in  reference  to  such  of 
them  as  might  not,  like  us,  have  discriminated  in  their 
duties  between  their  own  and  foreign  vessels]. 

Two  methods  have  been  suggested  by  which  this 
countervailing  power  might  be  executed. 

One  by  imposing  a  pro  rata  duty  on  the  importa- 
tion of  goods  into  the  British  ports  in  Europe  by 
American  vessels,  equal  to  the  difference  between  the 
duties  payable  in  our  ports  on  the  importation  of 
goods  by  American  or  British  vessels. 

[The  other]  by  imposing  the  identical  duty  on  the 


52  Alexander  Hamilton 

exportation  of  goods  from  the  British  ports  in  Eu- 
rope by  American  vessels,  which  forms  the  difference 
between  the  duties  payable  on  the  importation  of 
the  same  goods  into  our  ports  by  American  or  British 
vessels. 

As  the  articles  imported  by  our  vessels  into  the 
British  ports  in  Europe  are  dissimilar  from  those 
imported  from  the  same  into  our  ports,  one  rule  of 
difference  would  not  effect  the  equalization  sought 
for ;  and  as  our  difference  of  duties  is  not  the  same  on 
all  articles,  being  higher  on  some  than  on  others, 
[and  as,  moreover,  the  quantities  and  amount  of 
different  articles  differ  widely,  and  are  liable  to  con- 
tinual proportional  variations,]  no  uniform  [average] 
rule  of  countervailing  these  differences  can  be  de- 
vised. The  [correct]  execution,  therefore,  of  this 
power,  in  the  method  first  suggested,  is  impractic- 
able, and  [it  is  presumed]  must  be  discarded. 

The  power,  then,  [it  would  seem,]  can  only  be 
[equitably]  exercised  by  imposing  on  the  articles 
which  we  shall  export  in  American  vessels  from  the 
British  ports  in  Europe,  a  duty  identically  the  same 
as  that  which  constitutes,  in  any  case,  the  difference 
of  duty,  payable  in  our  ports,  on  the  same  articles 
imported  from  the  British  ports  in  Europe  by  a 
British  or  an  American  vessel.  Thus  they  may  im- 
pose on  tea  and  other  Asiatic  goods,  as  well  as  on  the 
European  goods  which  we  shall  export  from  the  Brit- 
ish ports  in  Europe,  the  identical  duty  or  the  same 
sum  which  constitutes  the  difference  of  duties  pay- 
able in  our  ports  on  the  importation  from  thence  of 
the  same  articles  by  an  American  or  a  British  vessel. 


Camillus  53 

The  right  to  countervail  our  alien  tonnage  duty 
by  imposing  an  alien  tonnage  duty  on  our  vessels 
entering  the  British  ports  in  Europe,  equal  to  that 
which  shall  be  payable  on  their  vessels  entering  our 
ports,  will  continue  so  long  as  the  commercial  treaty 
vshall  endure,  and  will  apply  to  any  future  increase 
of  the  tonnage  duty  on  foreign  vessels  that  we  may 
establish.  It  is,  however,  stipulated  in  the  conclu- 
sion of  the  fifteenth  article,  that  we  shall  abstain 
from  increasing  the  tonnage  duty  on  British  vessels, 
and  also  from  increasing  the  difference  that  now 
exists  between  the  duties  payable  on  the  importation 
of  any  articles  into  our  ports  in  British  or  in  Amer- 
ican vessels,  until  the  expiration  of  two  years  after 
the  termination  of  the  war  between  France  and 
Great  Britain.  But  we  are  free  to  increase  the  one 
or  the  other,  after  the  expiration  of  that  period. 
And  though  the  British  Government  will  have  a 
right  to  countervail,  by  additional  tonnage  duties  on 
our  vessels,  any  increase  of  that  duty  on  their  ves- 
sels, yet  they  will  have  no  right  to  countervail  any 
increase  of  the  difference  between  the  duties  payable 
on  the  importation  of  any  articles  into  our  ports,  in 
British  or  in  American  vessels,  unless  by  a  duty 
common  to  all  foreign  nations;  the  right  reserved 
on  this  subject,  being  confined  to  the  difference  that 
now  exists,  will  not  reach  such  future  increase.' 

*  How  ridictilous,  then,  the  argument,  if  the  basis  of  it  were  other- 
wise true,  that  the  treaty,  by  tying  up  the  Government  from  future 
discrimination,  has  prostrated  our  navigation  before  Great  Britain! 
Can  a  restraint  which  is  only  to  operate  the  short  term  of  two  years 
after  the  termination  of  the  present  war,  have  the  mighty  effect  of 
sacrificing  our  navigation? 


54  Alexander  Hamilton 

From  this  analysis  of  the  fourteenth  and  fifteenth 
articles  we  are  the  better  enabled  to  perceive  the 
truth  of  the  following  propositions: 

1.  As,  for  the  purpose  of  encouraging  or  protecting 
the  agriculture  and  manufactures  of  Great  Britain, 
several  of  our  productions,  in  common  with  similar 
productions  of  the  other  nations,  are  prohibited  from 
being  imported  into  the  British  ports  in  Europe,  we 
are  free,  whenever  our  interest  shall  require  it,  also 
to  exclude  any  of  the  productions  of  the  British 
dominions  from  being  imported  into  our  ports,  ex- 
tending such  exclusions,  as  they  do,  to  the  like 
manufactures  and  productions  of  foreign  nations. 

Should  that  part  of  the  twelfth  article,  which  has 
not  been  ratified,  in  its  modification  retain  the  stipu- 
lation relative  to  the  importation  of  coffee,  sugar, 
and  the  other  productions  of  the  West  Indies,  it 
would  constitute  an  exception  to  this  proposition. 
But  as  the  West  India  productions  are  dissimilar  to 
those  of  our  own  country,  they  would  not  fall  within 
the  reason  of  these  prohibitions,  and,  therefore,  the 
exception  would  be  of  no  consequence 

2.  As,  for  the  like  reasons,  some  of  our  productions 
are  subject,  in  common  with  the  like  productions  of 
other  nations,  to  high  or  prohibitory  duties  in  the 
British  ports  in  Europe,  we  are  free,  likewise,  to 
impose  similar  duties  on  any  of  the  productions 
or  manufactures  of  the  British  dominions,  extending 
such  duties,  as  they  do,  to  the  Hke  productions  and 
manufactures  of  other  foreign  nations. 

3.  As  the  navigation  act  of  Great  Britain,  in  order 
to  extend  their  own  shipping,  has  heretofore  con- 


Camillus  55 

fined  the  importation  of  foreign  productions  into  the 
British  ports  to  British  ships,  and  to  the  ships  of  the 
country  producing  the  same;  the  fifteenth  article 
[appears]  to  contain  an  important  innovation  on  this 
celebrated  act,  inasmuch  as  [by  the  most  obvious 
construction  of  the  terms]  it  gives  us  a  right  to  im- 
port from  our  own  territories  into  the  British  ports 
in  Europe  every  article  and  description  of  goods  and 
merchandises  which  any  nation  in  their  own  ships  is 
allowed  to  import.  In  consequence  whereof,  while 
all  other  foreign  nations  are  prohibited  and  restrained 
from  importing  in  their  own  vessels  into  Great  Brit- 
ain any  goods  or  merchandises,  except  those  of  their 
own  particular  growth,  produce,  or  manufacture,  we, 
by  the  treaty,  have  a  right  to  carry  from  our  ports  to 
the  British  ports  in  Europe,  not  only  goods  and  mer- 
chandises of  our  own  growth,  produce,  or  manu- 
facture, but  also  such  goods  and  merchandises,  the 
growth,  produce,  or  manufacture  of  any  foreign  na- 
tion, as  a  nation  producing  or  manufacturing  the 
same  would  import  in  their  vessels  into  Great 
Britain. 

4.  Should  it  ever  be  politic  to  exclude  all  foreign 
vessels  from  importing  or  exporting  any  species  of 
goods,  wares,  or  merchandises,  by  confining  their 
importation  or  exportation  to  our  own  vessels,  we 
are  perfectly  free  to  do  so ;  with  the  exception,  rela- 
tive to  the  West  India  productions,  referred  to  under 
the  first  proposition.  Thus,  for  example,  we  may 
prohibit  the  importation  of  all  Asiatic  goods,  except 
in  American  bottoms. 

That  these  articles  of  the  treaty  leave  our  naviga- 


56  Alexander  Hamilton 

tion  and  commerce  as  free,  and  secure  to  us  as  exten- 
sive advantages  as  have  before  been  procured  by  our 
commercial  treaties  with  foreign  nations,  will  be  seen 
by  the  following  comparison: 

I.  By  the  articles  before  us,  the  parties  restrain 
themselves  from  imposing  any  other  or  higher  duties 
on  the  vessels  and  cargoes  of  each  other,  than  they 
impose  on  the  vessels  and  cargoes  of  all  other  nations ; 
and  also  from  imposing  a  prohibition  of  the  importa- 
tion or  exportation  of  any  article  to  or  from  the  ter- 
ritories of  each  other,  which  shall  not  extend  to  all 
other  nations.  By  the  third  and  fourth  articles  of 
our  treaty  with  France,  and  by  the  second  and  third 
articles  of  our  treaty  with  Prussia,  it  is  stipulated, 
that  the  subjects  and  citizens  of  the  respective  par- 
ties shall  pay,  in  the  ports,  havens,  and  places  of  each 
other,  no  other  or  greater  duties  or  imposts,  of  what- 
soever nature  they  may  be,  than  those  which  the 
nations  most  favored  shall  be  obliged  to  pay;  and, 
moreover,  that  they  shall  enjoy  all  the  rights,  liber- 
ties, privileges,  and  exemptions  in  trade,  navigation, 
and  commerce,  which  the  said  nations  do  or  shall 
enjoy.  And  by  the  second  article  of  the  former  and 
the  twenty-sixth  article  of  the  latter  treaty,  the 
parties  agree  mutually,  not  to  grant  any  particular 
favor,  in  respect  to  navigation  or  commerce,  which 
shall  not  immediately  become  common  to  the  other 
party,  who  shall  enjoy  the  same  favor,  if  freely 
granted,  or  on  allowing  the  same  compensation,  if  the 
concession  was  conditional. 

The  stipulations  in  the  three  treaties  are,  on  these 
points,  equivalent. 


Camillas  57 

The  second  and  third  articles  of  our  treaty  with 
Holland,  and  the  third  and  fourth  of  our  treaty  with 
Sweden,  likewise  contain  mutual  stipulations,  that 
the  subjects  and  citizens  of  the  several  parties  shall 
pay  in  the  ports,  havens,  and  places  of  their  respect- 
ive countries,  no  other  or  higher  duties  or  imposts 
than  those  which  the  nations  most  favored  shall  pay ; 
and  that  they  shall  enjoy  all  the  rights,  liberties, 
privileges,  and  exemptions  in  trade  and  navigation 
which  the  said  nations  shall  enjoy. 

2.  The  articles  before  us,  after  stipulating  that 
there  shall  be,  between  our  territories  and  the  British 
dominions  in  Europe,  a  reciprocal  and  perfect  liberty 
of  commerce,  declare  that  the  same  shall  be  subject 
always  to  the  laws  of  the  respective  countries.  The 
introductory  articles  of  our  treaties  with  France, 
Holland,  and  Sweden,  after  asserting  the  intentions 
of  the  parties  to  take  equality  and  reciprocity  as  their 
basis,  likewise  leave  each  party  at  liberty  to  form 
such  regulations  respecting  commerce  and  navigation 
as  it  shall  find  convenient  to  itself;  and  the  second 
and  third  articles  of  our  treaty  with  Prussia,  after 
stipulating  the  rights  of  the  parties,  respecting  the 
duties  and  imposts,  and  the  freedom  of  their  navi- 
gation and  trade,  likewise  require  their  submission 
to  the  laws  and  usages  established  in  the  two  coun- 
tries. 

3.  The  articles  before  us,  in  their  provisions  rela- 
tive to  navigation,  stipulate,  as  has  been  already 
observed,  in  common  with  our  other  treaties,  that  the 
ships  of  the  parties  shall  not  be  subject  to  higher  or 
other  duties  than  those  paid  by  all  other  nations. 


58  Alexander  Hamilton 

They  go  further,  and  agree  to  vary  this  rule,  so  far 
as  shall  be  necessary  to  equaUze  the  tonnage  duty 
imposed  by  the  parties  on  the  ships  of  each  other. 
Our  treaty  with  France  is  the  only  one  in  which  we 
discover  a  similar  stipulation.  France  had  a  high 
alien  tonnage  duty  on  all  foreign  vessels  transporting 
the  merchandise  of  France  from  one  port  to  another 
port  in  her  dominions.  We  had  a  less  alien  tonnage 
duty  on  foreign  ships  employed  in  a  similar  trade. 
Though  not  equally  extensive,  the  case  is  parallel  to 
that  which  exists  between  us  and  Great  Britain.  We 
have  a  high  alien  tonnage  duty  on  all  foreign  vessels 
entering  our  ports ;  Great  Britain  has  a  less  alien  ton- 
nage duty  on  foreign  vessels  entering  her  ports.  In 
our  treaty  with  France  we  reserve  a  right  to  counter- 
vail the  alien  tonnage  duty  imposed  by  France ;  and 
in  like  manner,  in  our  treaty  with  Great  Britain,  she 
reserves  a  right  to  countervail  the  alien  tonnage  duty 
imposed  by  us.  The  object,  in  both  instances,  has 
been  to  place  the  navigation  of  the  parties  on  the 
footing  of  exact  equality. 

The  preceding  exposition  of  these  articles,  illus- 
trated by  the  comparison  of  their  provisions  with  the 
analogous  articles  of  our  other  treaties,  would  be 
sufficient  to  vindicate  them  against  the  objections 
to  which  they  have  been  exposed.  It  is,  however, 
thought  adviGable  to  take  notice  of  such  of  these  ob- 
jections as  are  likely  to  have  any  influence  on  the 
public  opinion. — [This  will  be  done  in  a  subsequent 
number.] 

Camillus. 


Camillus  59 

NO.    XXVIII 

1795- 

An  extraordinary  construction  of  the  last  clause  of 
the  fourteenth  article  has  been  assumed  by  the 
writer  of  Cato ;  his  mistake  in  this  instance  has  been 
the  foundation  of  many  of  the  errors  with  which  that 
performance  aboimds.  The  article  stipulates  that 
there  shall  be  a  perfect  and  reciprocal  liberty  of  navi- 
gation and  commerce  between  our  territories  and 
those  of  Great  Britain  in  Europe,  subject  always  to 
the  laws  and  statutes  of  the  two  countries,  respect- 
ively. This  navigation  and  commerce,  says  Cato, 
must  be  subject  to,  and  defined  and  regulated  by, 
the  laws  and  statutes  of  the  two  countries  which  ex- 
isted at  the  time  of  making  the  treaty;  all  future 
laws,  that  either  party  might  be  disposed  to  make, 
relative  to  the  same,  being  excluded. 

The  reason  assigned  in  support  of  this  interpreta- 
tion is,  that  the  article  would  be  nugatory,  did  not 
the  laws  and  statutes  alluded  to  mean  only  those  in 
existence  at  the  making  of  the  treaty,  since  future 
laws  might  impair  or  destroy  what  the  article  confers. 

Nothing  in  the  expressions  themselves  requires 
this  interpretation. 

The  customary  and  established  meaning  of  them 
in  other  treaties  would  lead  to  a  rejection  of  it.  The 
object  of  the  clause  is  not  the  limitation  of  the  legis- 
lative power  of  the  parties,  but  the  subjection  of 
their  mutual  navigation  and  commerce  to  their  re- 
spective laws.  This  end  is  most  fully  attained  by 
understanding  the  parties  to  mean  their  future  as 
well  as  their  existing  laws.     Besides,  the  interpreta- 


6o  Alexander  Hamilton 

tion  must  be  such  as  will  not  destroy  the  use  and 
meaning  of  other  parts  of  the  treaty.  If  this  con- 
struction is  just,  some  of  the  most  important  stipula- 
tions of  the  fifteenth  article  would  really  become 
useless.  For  instance,  if  the  laws,  existing  at  the 
■  time  of  making  the  treaty  are  alone  to  prevail,  the 
articles  of  commerce,  admitted  or  excluded  by  those 
laws,  must  remain  entitled  to  admission  or  liable  to 
exclusion.  Why  then  say  in  the  fifteenth  article 
"  that  no  prohibition  shall  he  imposed  on  the  exporta- 
tion or  importation  of  any  articles  to  or  from  the 
territories  of  the  parties  respectively,  which  shall  not 
extend  to  all  other  nations?"  If  a  prohibition,  ap- 
plying to  all  foreign  nations,  may  be  imposed  (as  the 
clause  allows),  this  would  be  a  new  or  subsequent 
law,  varying  the  law  existing  at  the  time  of  making 
the  treaty,  and  consequently  defeating  the  construc- 
tion in  question. 

The  reason  adduced  by  Cato  to  support  his  con- 
struction is  equally  defective  with  his  interpretation 
itself.  The  fourteenth  article  is  in  general  terms, 
and  similar,  as  has  been  shown,  to  the  introductory 
articles  of  other  treaties;  so  far  from  the  last  clause 
thereof  being  capable  of  destroying  the  preceding 
stipulations,  it  is  the  peculiar  province  of  the  next 
article  to  ascertain  the  points  which  the  parties 
mutually  agree  to  except  from  their  legislative 
power.  In  all  cases  not  thus  excepted,  the  naviga- 
tion and  commerce  of  the  parties  is  subject  to  their 
existing  or  future  laws. 

It  is  not  necessary  to  remark  on  the  several  ob- 
jections which  have  proceeded  from  the  opinion 


Camillus  6i 

that  the  treaty  restrains  us  from  imposing  pro- 
hibitory duties  and  exclusions;  they  are  but  sub- 
divisions of  the  error  that  has  been  just  combated. 

Another  objection  which  has  been  stated  by  sev- 
eral writers,  and  much  labored  by  Cato,  is  that,  under 
the  right  reserved  to  the  British  Government  to 
countervail  an  alien  tonnage  duty,  by  the  imposition 
of  an  equivalent  one  on  our  vessels  entering  their 
ports,  they  would  gain  and  we  should  lose. 

Several  methods  are  adopted  to  prove  this  opinion. 
The  observation  that  we  have  a  tonnage  duty  on  our 
own  vessels,  and  that  Great  Britain  has  none,  is  re- 
peated by  way  of  objection  against  this  as  well  as 
against  the  proposed  adjustment  contained  in  the 
twelfth  article.  The  same  reply  already  given  might 
be  sufficient  in  this  place. 

But  [is  it  true]  that  British  ships  entering  their 
own  ports  in  Europe  are  wholly  free  from  a  tonnage 
duty?  The  contrary  is  the  fact;  since  it  is  under- 
stood that  they  pay  a  tonnage  duty  for  the  support 
of  light-houses,  and  some  other  institutions,  con- 
nected with  their  navigation,  which  [in  all  their 
ports  ']  exceeds  the  tonnage  duty  of  six  cents  per 
ton,  that  we  levy  on  the  entry  of  our  own  vessels 
employed  in  foreign  trade.  But  Great  Britain  (it  is 
alleged)  will  not  only  impose,  in  virtue  of  this  re- 
served right,  fifty  cents  per  ton  on  our  vessels  enter- 
ing her  ports,  but  in  every  port  except  that  of 
London  she  will  furthermore  exact  one  shilling  and 
ninepence  sterling,  or  thirty-nine  cents  per  ton,  for 
light-money  and  Trinity-dues,  more  than  is  paid  by 

*  Unless  London  be  an  exception. 


62  Alexander  Hamilton 

her  own  vessels;  this,  added  to  the  difference  before 
stated,  would  have,  it  is  said,  a  very  discouraging 
effect  upon  our  navigation.  Our  tonnage  duty  is  a 
tax  not  divided  and  appropriated,  like  the  light- 
money  or  Trinity-dues  in  Great  Britain,  to  specific 
and  particular  objects,  but  when  levied,  goes  into 
the  treasury  with  the  duty  of  impost,  and  stands  ap- 
propriated to  the  various  objects  to  which  that  duty 
is  appropriated.  Among  those  objects  is  the  support 
of  light-houses.  It  is  not  the  object  to  which  the 
tax  is  applied  that  gives  a  denomination ;  whether  it 
goes  to  support  the  civil  Hst,  or  to  pay  annuities,  or 
to  maintain  light-houses,  or  to  support  hospitals,  it 
is  equally  a  tonnage  duty.  A  tonnage  duty,  then, 
of  a  certain  amount,  is  now  paid  by  American  ves- 
sels entering  the  ports  of  Great  Britain.  This  duty 
is  not  uniform,  being  less  in  London  than  in  the 
other  ports,  and,  in  some  instances,  less  than  the 
tonnage  duty  paid  by  British  ships  entering  our 
ports.  The  object  of  this  clause  (8th  of  the  15th 
article)  is  to  equalize  the  alien  tonnage  duties  of  the 
parties.  Hence  the  reservation  of  a  right  to  the 
British  Government  to  impose  on  our  vessels  enter- 
ing their  ports  in  Europe,  a  tonnage  duty  equal  to 
that  which  shall  be  payable  by  British  vessels  in  our 
ports.  It  would  be  against  the  manifest  views  of 
the  parties,  as  well  as  against  the  expHcit  terms  of 
the  articles,  to  impose  a  tonnage  duty  (whether  for 
light-money.  Trinity-dues,  or  any  other  purpose) 
which  should  exceed  that  which  shall  be  payable  by 
British  vessels  in  our  ports. 

The  right  reserved  is  expressly  to  impose  on  our 


Camillus  63 

vessels  an  equal,  not  a  greater  tonnage  duty  than  we 
shall  impose  on  their  vessels.  This  objection,  there- 
fore, must  be  abandoned. 

But  again,  it  is  urged  that  our  navigation,  should 
it  weather  Scylla,  must  perish  on  Charybdis ;  for  we 
are  gravely  told  by  Cato  that,  under  the  right  re- 
served to  the  British  Government  to  impose  such 
duty  as  may  be  sufficient  to  countervail,  or,  which 
is  equivalent,  to  balance  the  difference  of  duty  pay- 
able on  the  importation  into  our  ports  of  Asiatic  or 
European  goods  by  American  or  by  British  vessels, 
our  ships  will  be  thrown  out  of  the  trade  with  the 
British  European  dominions;  because,  under  this 
right,  the  British  Government  will  impose  a  duty  on 
our  productions  carried  to  their  ports  in  our  own 
ships  equal  to  the  whole  duty  payable  on  the  goods 
and  merchandises  imported  into  our  ports  by  British 
ships ;  and  as  the  goods  and  merchandises  which  we 
receive  from  them  exceed  in  value  those  that  they 
receive  from  us  by  one  third,  and  as  the  duty  to  be 
coimtervailed  is  at  least  ten  per  cent,  ad  valorem  on 
the  goods  received  from  them,  the  consequence  will 
be,  that  the  countervailing  duty  must  amount  to 
fifteen  per  cent,  on  the  value  of  all  our  productions 
carried  in  our  own  ships  to  the  British  ports  in  Eu- 
rope, while  the  same  will  be  free  in  British  ships.  A 
more  extravagant  construction,'  or  an  argument 
more  inaccurately  formed,  can  scarcely  be  imagined. 

The  countervailing  right  is  not  applicable  to  the 

» [If  I  mistake  not,  the  assertion  of  Cato,  as  to  the  whole  duty,  has 
been  retracted;  but  the  residue  of  his  error  on  this  point  remains 
tmrecalled.] 


64  Alexander  Hamilton 

whole  duty  payable  on  goods  and  merchandises  im- 
ported into  our  ports  in  British  ships,  but  expressly 
confined  to  the  difference  of  duty  now  payable  on 
the  same  when  imported  by  American  or  by  British 
vessels.  This  difference  is  one  tenth  part  of  the  duty 
upon  all  European  goods — that  is  to  say,  these  goods 
pay  one  tenth  part  more  duty  when  imported  in 
British  vessels  than  is  paid  on  the  same  when  im- 
ported in  an  American  vessel.  In  all  cases,  there- 
fore, where  our  impost  is  ten  per  cent,  ad  valorem, 
the  difference  of  duty  to  be  countervailed  amounts 
to  only  one  per  cent,  on  the  value  of  the  goods,  in- 
stead of  ten  per  cent.,  as  is  alleged  by  Cato;  in  the 
instance  of  teas  imported  from  Europe  the  difference 
is  greater.  Again,  it  is  not  an  aggregate  sum  that  is 
to  be  apportioned  under  this  coimtervailing  right, 
for  this  sum  would  be  liable  to  constant  variation, 
according  to  the  quantity  and  species  of  goods  im- 
ported into  our  ports  from  time  to  time  by  British 
vessels;  and  besides,  the  British  Government  pos- 
sess no  means  whereby  the  amount  thereof  could 
be  ascertained. 

Cato  feels  and  admits  the  force  of  these  remarks  as 
decisive  against  an  average  duty,  without  perceiving 
that  they  possess  equal  strength  against  his  project 
of  countervailing  the  whole  duty  paid  on  the  im- 
portation of  goods  and  merchandises  into  our  ports 
by  British  vessels;  for  the  same  variation  in  the 
amoimt,  and  the  same  want  of  the  means  to  ascer- 
tain it,  will  operate  in  both  cases.  The  reasons 
which  he  himself  employs  to  prove  that  an  average 
duty  carmot  be  ascertained,  equally  show  the  im- 


Camillus  65 

practicability  of  the  method  which  he  considers  as 
the  one  that  will  be  employed  in  the  execution  of  the 
countervailing  right  reserved  to  the  British  Govern- 
ment. It  has  before  been  stated  that  the  natural, 
as  well  as  the  equitable,  mode  of  executing  this  power 
will  be  to  impose  a  duty  on  the  goods  imported  by 
us  from  their  European  ports  exactly  the  same  as 
makes  the  difference  of  duty  on  the  importation 
thereof  into  our  ports  by  American  or  by  British 
vessels. 

Admitting  that  the  execution  of  the  countervailing 
right  reserved  to  Great  Britain  will  do  no  more  than 
place  the  navigation  of  the  parties  on  an  equal  foot- 
ing in  their  mutual  intercourse,  still  we  are  told  that 
for  this,  likewise,  the  treaty  is  blamable,  because 
even  equality  will  be  such  an  advantage  to  our  rival, 
that  we  shall  be  unable  to  maintain  the  competition. 

This  objection  brings  with  it  a  quality  rarely  to  be 
discovered  in  the  opinions  of  the  cavillers  against  the 
treaty.  Their  usual  error  is  a  false  and  magnified 
estimate  of  the  comparative  resources,  strength,  and 
importance  of  our  country;  in  this  instance,  shifting 
their  ground,  they  fall  into  the  opposite  extreme,  and 
contend  for  our  inferiority  in  a  branch  of  business  in 
the  prosecution  of  which  we  are  unquestionably  able 
to  meet  a  fair  competition  with  any  nation. 

With  what  propriety  could  we  have  proposed  or 
expected  an  adjustment  of  our  intercourse  by  which 
our  vessels  should  have  been  placed  on  a  better  foot- 
ing than  those  of  the  other  party  ?  As  the  trade  was 
mutually  beneficial,  why  could  we,  more  than  Great 
Britain,  ask  for  an  arrangement  that  should  subject 


66  Alexander  Hamilton 

our  rival  to  comparatively  heavier  burdens?  Does 
any  considerate  man  believe,  that  it  would  have  been 
proper  for  us  to  ask,  or  that  there  is  the  least  proba- 
bility that  Great  Britain  would  have  acceded  to,  an 
arrangement  on  the  subject  of  our  mutual  naviga- 
tion, that  should  have  secured  to  us  advantages 
denied  to  them?  To  place  the  navigation  of  the 
parties  on  an  equal  footing,  was  all  that  could  be 
rationally  expected  by  either;  and  so  far  from  such 
a  settlement  being  injurious  to  us,  the  contrary  has 
long  been  the  opinion  both  here  and  in  Great  Britain. 
If  it  is  true  that  we  are  unable  to  maintain  a  com- 
petition with  the  British  navigation,  how  are  we  to 
account  for  the  jealousy  [that  is  understood]  to  have 
shown  itself  on  their  part  on  this  subject. 

But  the  fact  is  otherwise — British  ships  cannot  be 
built  and  equipped  as  cheap  as  American  ships,  nor 
are  they  victualled  and  manned  '  on  as  good  terms. 
Our  country  abounds  with  excellent  materials  for 
ship-building.  Great  Britain  is  in  a  great  measure 
dependent  upon  other  countries  for  a  supply  of  them. 
The  materials  for  the  construction  of  ships  are  much 
cheaper  in  America  than  in  Great  Britain;  and  in- 
telligent characters  in  Great  Britain  as  well  as  in 
America  have  affirmed,  that  an  American  merchant- 
ship  of  any  given  burthen  can  be  built  and  equipped 
for  sea  one  third  cheaper  than  a  British,  Dutch,  or 
French  ship  of  equal  goodness.  Mr.  Coxe  informs 
us,  that  the  cost  of  an  American  ship,  built  of  our 

^  [In  the  comparison  in  this  particular,  we  must  combine  the  number 
of  hands  with  the  terms  of  compensation  according  to  which  the  vessels 
of  the  two  cotmtries  are  navigated.] 


Camillus  67 

live  oak  and  cedar,  is  from  36  to  38  dollars  per  ton, 
completely  finished;  while  an  oak  ship  in  the  cheap- 
est part  of  England,  France,  or  Holland,  fitted  in 
the  same  manner,  will  cost  from  55  to  60  dollars  per 
ton.  The  capital  employed  on  the  American  mer- 
chantmen is  therefore  one  third  less  on  any  given 
amount  of  tonnage  than  that  employed  in  the  same 
amxount  of  British  tonnage;  or  the  money  requisite 
to  build  and  equip  for  sea  two  British  merchant- 
ships,  will  be  sufBcient  to  build  and  equip  for  sea 
three  American  merchant-ships  of  the  same  burthen 
and  of  equal  goodness.  It  is  not  only  the  difference 
in  the  first  cost,  but  to  this  should  be  added  the 
difference  of  interest  and  insurance,  the  annual 
amount  whereof  is  ascertained  by  the  value  of  the 
ships. 

If  we  add  to  this  the  comparative  advantages  that 
we  possess  in  victualling  and  manning  our  vessels, 
independent  of  the  acknowledged  and  distinguished 
skill  and  enterprise  of  our  seamen,  it  may  be  safely 
affirmed,  that  no  American  who  knows  the  character 
of  his  countrymen,  and  who  is  not  ignorant  of  our 
peculiar  resources  for  ship-building,  will  doubt  our 
superiority  in  an  equal  and  fair  competition  with 
any  other  nation. 

It  is  further  alleged,  that  the  treaty  wants  re- 
ciprocity, inasmuch  as  the  whole  territory  of  the 
United  States  is  laid  open  to  the  British  navigation 
and  commerce,  while  in  return,  the  British  terri- 
tories, in  Europe  only,  are  open  to  us.  The  short 
answer  to  this  allegation  is,  that  it  is  not  true.  All 
the  British  territories  in  Europe  are  laid  open  to  us; 


68  Alexander  Hamilton 

all  their  territories  in  Asia  are  also  opened  to  us; 
the  treaty  likewise  opened  all  their  territories  in  the 
West  Indies.  The  article  relative  to  this  branch  of 
trade,  as  has  already  been  observed,  is  excepted  from 
the  ratification  of  the  treaty,  and  made  the  subject 
of  future  negotiation.  The  British  territories  on  our 
continent,  that  of  the  Hudson's  Bay  Company  ex- 
cepted, are  also  opened  to  us  in  like  manner  as  ours 
are  opened  to  them.  The  intercourse  is  confined  on 
both  sides  to  the  interior  communications,  the  in- 
habitants of  those  colonies  being  equally  destitute 
of  a  right  to  resort,  by  sea,  with  their  ships  to  our 
ports  and  harbors,  as  we  are  of  the  right  to  resort, 
by  sea,  with  our  ships  to  their  ports  and  harbors. 

The  territory  of  the  Hudson's  Bay  Company,  the 
island  of  Newfoundland,  and  the  establishments  on 
the  coast  of  Africa,  are  the  only  British  dominions 
to  which  the  treaty,  in  its  original  form,  does  not  give 
a  right  of  intercourse  and  trade. 

The  settlement  in  the  Bay  of  Honduras  is  on 
Spanish  lands,  and  the  right  of  precedence  is  con- 
ceded for  specified  objects,  beyond  which  the  Span- 
ish Government  are  vigilant  to  restrain  the  settlers. 

Spain  may  possibly  be  induced  to  allow  us  a  right 
in  common  with  Great  Britain  to  cut  mahogany  and 
dye-woods  in  this  region ;  but  Great  Britain  cannot, 
consistently  with  her  convention  with  Spain,  share 
with  us  the  privilege  that  she  enjoys. 

Newfoundland  is  a  mere  establishment  for  the 
British  fisheries.  The  African  trade  has  been,  and 
might  hereafter  be,  pursued,  if  our  humanity  and  the 
force  of  public  opinion  did  not  impede  it,  without 


Camillas  69 

procuring  a  right  to  resort  to  the  British  ports  in  that 
quarter;  and  in  respect  to  the  unsettled  territory  of 
the  Hudson's  Bay  Company,  about  which  so  much 
has  been  noticed  and  written,  it  is  of  no  sort  of  im- 
portance, except  in  a  small  Indian  trade  that  em- 
ploys two  or  three  annual  ships,  which  arrive  there  in 
August  and  escape  in  September;  besides  that,  this 
trade  belongs  to  a  company  who  possess  a  right  to 
the  exclusive  enjoyment  of  it  even  against  their 
fellow-citizens.  It  is  finally  alleged  that  the  treaty 
will  bind  up  and  restrain  our  Government  from 
making  more  specific  and  beneficial  treaties  of  com- 
merce with  other  nations. 

Those  who  urge  this  objection  have  generally 
placed  great  reliance  on  another  objection,  which 
asserts  that  the  treaty  with  Great  Britain  violates 
the  Constitution,  because  it  amounts  to  a  regulation 
of  commerce,  the  power  to  regulate  which  is  vested 
in  Congress  and  not  in  the  Executive.  Yet  these 
very  characters,  in  the  next  breath,  maintain  that 
the  treaty  is  bad,  because  it  precludes  our  Executive 
government  (for  no  other  power  can  make  treaties) 
from  making  more  minute  and  beneficial  commercial 
treaties  with  other  nations.  If  these  observations 
can  be  reconciled,  it  must  be  thus:  the  Constitution 
does  not  authorize  the  Executive,  with  the  aid  of 
the  Senate,  to  make  a  commercial  treaty  with  Great 
Britain,  having  vested  in  Congress  the  power  to 
regulate  the  trade  between  us  and  that  nation ;  but  it 
allows  the  Executive  to  make  commercial  treaties 
with  any  other  nation,  which  may  establish  the  most 
material  and  minute  commercial  and  revenue  laws, 


70  Alexander  Hamilton 

without  affecting  the  power  vested  in  Congress 
to  regulate  trade.  That  we  may  have  characters 
among  us  sufficiently  intemperate  to  wish  that  such 
was  the  Constitution,  I  am  not  prepared  to  deny; 
but  that  such  a  construction  can  be  made  out,  yet 
remains  to  be  proved. 

The  objection,  as  usual,  is  made  in  a  loose  and 
inaccurate  manner;  literally  interpreted,  we  should 
infer  that  the  treaty  contained  an  article,  whereby 
we  had  agreed  with  Great  Britain  that  we  would  not 
form  any  future  treaties  of  commerce  with  any  na- 
tion ;  but  no  such  stipulation  exists. 

Is  it  meant  by  the  objection  to  be  alleged  that  we 
can  form  no  commercial  treaty,  whereby,  for  an  ad- 
vantage yielded  on  our  part,  we  may  acquire  a  privi- 
lege in  return,  unless  we  yield  the  same  advantage 
to  Great  Britain  gratuitously  and  without  receiving 
from  her  the  equivalent? 

Admitting  the  truth  of  this  objection,  it  might  be 
replied:  So,  on  the  other  hand,  Great  Britain  can 
form  no  commercial  treaty,  whereby,  for  an  advan- 
tage yielded  on  her  part,  she  may  acquire  some 
privilege  in  return,  unless  she  yields  the  same  advan- 
tage to  us  gratuitously  and  without  receiving  from 
us  the  equivalent ;  and  as  Great  Britain,  whose  com- 
mercial relations  are  equally  extensive  with  ours, 
and  whose  capital  far  exceeds  ours,  is  equally  re- 
strained on  this  point,  our  chance  of  gain  would  be 
fully  equal  to  our  chance  of  loss. 

But  the  allegation  is  not  generally  true,  and  the 
objection,  when  examined,  will  be  found  to  be  of 
little  weight,  even  with  those  who  may  imagine  that 


Camillus  7^ 

nations  do  sometimes  make  good  bargains  by  the 
purchase  of  privileges  and  exemptions  in  their 
foreign  trade.  The  case  that  has  been  chosen  to 
enforce  the  objection,  shall  be  employed  to  invali- 
date it. 

Admit  that  the  treaty  with  Great  Britain  is  in 
operation;  that  the  oil  and  provision  merchants  of 
the  United  States,  and  the  wine  and  brandy  mer- 
chants of  France  are  desirous  of  a  treaty  between  the 
two  countries,  whereby  those  commodities  shall  be 
received  from  each  other  on  low  duties  or  freely; 
admit  further,  that  the  governments  of  the  two  na- 
tions are  disposed  to  make  such  a  treaty  (this  is  the 
case  again  put  by  the  opposers  of  the  treaty  as  im- 
practicable), what  will  restrain  the  conclusion  of  this 
treaty?  The  disadvantage  that  will  arise  from  our 
treaty  with  Great  Britain?  No;  for  Britain  pro- 
duces neither  wines,  nor  brandy  made  from  wines, 
with  which  she  could  supply  us ;  she  therefore  could 
gain  nothing,  nor  should  we  lose  any  thing,  by  the 
conclusion  of  such  a  treaty.  All  that  will  be  requi- 
site, therefore,  in  the  formation  of  such  treaties,  will 
be  to  choose  for  the  purpose  such  articles  of  the 
growth,  manufacture,  or  produce  of  any  country 
with  whom  we  desire  to  treat,  as  are  not  common  to 
it  and  the  British  dominions,  and  any  skilful  mer- 
chant will  quickly  make  the  selection.  Hence  it  ap- 
pears that  the  objection  is  not  well  founded  in  point 
of  fact. 

But  though  it  may  be  practicable,  will  it  be  politic 
in  us  to  conclude  no  commercial  treaties  of  this  char- 
acter with  any  nation?     If  we  resort  to  precedents 


72  Alexander  Hamilton 

as  guides,  we  shall  discover  few,  the  history  of  which 
would  encourage  us.  Indeed,  they  are  a  description 
of  conventions  not  often  formed  between  nations. 

They  are  of  difficult  adjustment,  and  necessarily 
increase  the  provisions  of  the  commercial  code,  suf- 
ficiently intricate,  when  only  one  rule  prevails  in  re- 
spect to  all  nations.  Besides,  however  perfect  may 
be  the  right  of  nations  in  this  respect,  yet,  when  the 
productions  of  one  nation  are  received  at  lower  duties 
than  the  like  productions  of  another,  the  discrimina- 
tion will  scarcely  fail  to  awaken  desires  and  to  pro- 
duce dissatisfaction  from  their  disappointment. 

Again,  unless  we  are  prepared,  at  the  expense  of 
the  whole,  to  procure  advantages  or  privileges  for  a 
part  of  the  community,  we  shall  doubt  the  policy  of 
such  stipulations.  Between  two  manufacturing  na- 
tions, in  each  of  which  the  manufactures  have  at- 
tained to  great  perfection,  a  tariff  of  duties  may  be 
established  by  treaties,  in  the  payment  of  which  the 
manufactures  of  the  two  countries  might  be  freely 
exchanged  and  mutually  confirmed;  such  was  the 
commercial  treaty  between  France  and  Great  Britain 
in  the  year  1786.  But  the  subject  was  so  intricate 
and  involved  such  a  variety  of  apparently  indepen- 
dent circumstances,  such  as  the  price  of  provisions, 
the  amount  and  the  manner  of  levying  of  the  taxes, 
and  the  price  of  the  raw  materials  employed  in  their 
respective  manufactures,  that  neither  party  felt  en- 
tire confidence  in  the  equity  and  reciprocity  of  the 
treaty;  and  with  all  the  skill  in  negotiation,  that 
France  in  a  superior  degree  has  been  supposed  to 
have  possessed,  the  opinion  of  that  nation  has  finally 


Camillus  73 

been,  that  the  treaty  was  burdensome  and  disadvan- 
tageous to  them. 

We  have  another  specimen  of  this  species  of  treaty 
in  a  short  convention  between  England  and  Por- 
tugal, concluded  in  1 703.  The  object  was  to  procure 
a  favorable  market  for  dissimilar  commodities,  and 
such  as  were  not  the  common  production  of  the  two 
coimtries.  But  this  treaty,  which  has  been  so  much 
applauded,  is  essentially  defective  in  point  of  reci- 
procity. England  agrees  to  admit  the  wine  of  Por- 
tugal on  payment  of  two  thirds  of  the  duty  that  shall 
be  payable  on  French  wines;  and  in  return,  Portugal 
agrees  not  to  prohibit  the  English  woollens.  She 
does  not  agree  to  receive  them  exclusively  of  the 
woollens  of  other  countries,  nor  to  admit  them  on 
payment  of  lower  duties.  The  advantage,  there- 
fore, is  manifestly  on  the  side  of  Portugal.  By  the 
treaty  of  commerce  between  France  and  Great  Brit- 
ain, concluded  in  1786,  it  was  agreed,  that  the  wines 
of  France  imported  into  Great  Britain  should  pay 
no  higher  duties  than  those  which  the  wines  of 
Portugal  then  paid.  The  consequence  must  have 
been  a  reduction,  without  compensation  or  equi- 
valent from  Portugal,  of  the  existing  duties  on  the 
wines  of  that  country  brought  into  Great  Britain, 
equal  to  one  third  of  the  amount  of  such  duties. 
This  is  an  instance  of  inconvenience  and  loss,  result- 
ing from  the  species  of  treaties,  which  it  is  alleged  as 
an  objection  to  the  treaty  concluded  between  us  and 
Great  Britain,  that  we  are  prevented  by  it  from 
making  with  other  nations. 

A  small  compact  nation,  likewise,  who  excel  in 


74  Alexander  Hamilton 

some  one  species  of  manufacture  that  is  established 
throughout  their  territory,  and  in  the  conducting 
and  success  whereof  there  is  a  common  interest,  may 
find  it  useful  to  procure  the  exclusive  supply  of  some 
foreign  market;  provided,  in  this  as  in  all  other 
bargains,  the  compensation  shall  not  be  too  high. 
But  in  a  nation  like  ours,  composed  of  different 
States,  varying  in  climate,  productions,  manufac- 
tures, and  commercial  pursuits,  it  will  be  more 
difficult  to  enter  into  treaties  of  this  kind.  Should 
Great  Britain,  for  example,  be  inclined  to  admit  our 
fish-oils  freely,  or  on  payment  of  low  duties,  on  con- 
dition that  we  would  receive  their  woollens  or  hard- 
ware freely,  or  on  payment  of  low  duties,  would  the 
Middle  and  Southern  States  be  satisfied  with  such  a 
treaty? — would  they  agree  to  a  tax  on  their  estates 
sufficient  to  supply  the  deficiency  in  the  revenue 
arising  from  the  relinquishment  of  the  impost  on 
British  woollens  or  hardware?  Would  it  not  be 
said  that  such  a  tax  was  a  bounty  out  of  the  common 
treasury,  on  a  particular  branch  of  business  pursued 
alone  by  a  portion  of  the  citizens  of  a  single  State  in 
the  Union?  Instances  might  be  multipHed  in  the 
illustration  of  this  subject;  but  they  will  readily 
occur  to  every  man  who  will  pursue  a  little  detail  in 
his  reflections.  We  have  once  made  an  experiment 
of  this  kind;  its  fate  should  serve  as  a  caution  to 
us  in  future.  By  the  eleventh  and  twelfth  articles 
of  our  treaty  with  France,  it  was  agreed  that 
France  should  never  impose  any  duty  on  the  mo- 
lasses that  we  should  import  from  the  French  West 
Indies;    and   in    compensation  of   this   exemption, 


Camillus  75 

that  we  should  never  impose  any  duty  on  the  ex- 
portation of  any  kind  of  merchandise  by  French- 
men, from  our  territories,  for  the  use  of  the  French 
West  Indies.  These  articles  produced  much  dis- 
satisfaction in  Congress :  it  was  said  to  be  a  benefit 
that  would  enure  to  the  use  and  advantage  of  only 
a  part,  but  which  must  be  compensated  by  the  whole. 
Those  arguments  which  will  show  themselves  in 
future,  should  similar  conventions  be  formed,  were 
displayed  on  this  occasion.  The  treaty  was  ratified; 
Congress  applied  to  the  king  of  France  to  consent 
to  annul  these  articles;  this  request  was  granted; 
and  the  articles  were,  by  the  several  acts  of  the 
parties,  annulled. 

Not  only  the  few  instances  of  the  existence  of 
these  treaties  among  the  nations,  added  to  the  pe- 
culiar difficulties  which  we  must  meet  in  their  forma- 
tion, should  lead  us  to  doubt  their  utility,  but  also 
the  opinion  of  our  own  country,  which,  if  explicit  on 
any  point,  has  been  repeatedly  so  in  the  condemna- 
tion of  this  species  of  national  compact. 

The  introductory  article  of  our  commercial  treaty 
with  France  asserts,  that  the  parties  willing  to  fix  in 
an  equitable  and  permanent  manner  the  rules  which 
ought  to  be  followed  relative  to  their  correspondence 
and  commerce  "  have  judged  that  the  said  end  could 
not  be  better  obtained  than  by  taking  for  the  basis 
of  their  agreement  the  most  perfect  equality  and 
reciprocity,  and  by  carefully  avoiding  all  those  burd- 
ensome preferences  which  are  usually  sources  of  de- 
bate, embarrassment,  and  discontent." 

The  same  language  is  employed  in  our  subsequent 


76  Alexander  Hamilton 

treaties  with  Holland  and  with  Sweden;   the  public 
voice  is  tinequivocal  on  this  subject. 

On  the  whole,  the  more  closely  this  question  is 
examined  the  more  doubtful  will  the  policy  appear 
of  our  entering  into  treaties  of  this  description.  We 
shall  have  to  encounter  not  only  the  intrinsic  diffi- 
culties that  always  attend  a  fair  and  precise  adjust- 
ment of  the  equivalents,  together  with  the  national 
discontents  that  proceed  from  errors  on  this  point; 
but,  moreover,  a  still  greater  embarrassment  from 
the  circumstance  that  our  great  staple  exports  are 
not  the  common  productions  of  the  whole  Union, 
but  different  articles  are  peculiar  to  different  parts 
thereof.  If,  notwithstanding,  our  Government  shall 
discover  an  instance  in  which,  consistent  with  the 
common  interest  and  sound  policy,  such  a  treaty 
might  be  desirable,  we  have  scope  sufficient  to  form 
it  without  incurring  loss  or  disadvantage  by  the 
operation  of  our  treaty  with  Great  Britain. 

Camillus. 


NO.    XXIX 

1795- 

The  sixteenth  article  is  entirely  conformable  to  the 
usage  and  custom  of  nations.  The  exchange  of  con- 
suls had  already  taken  place  between  us  and  Great 
Britain ;  and  their  functions  and  privileges  being  left 
to  the  definition  of  the  law  of  nations,  we  shall  be 
exempt  from  those  unpleasant  controversies  that  too 
often  arise  from  special  conventions,  which  enlarge 
the  consular  privileges,  power,  and  jurisdiction. 

The  agreement  that  either  party  may  pimish,  dis- 


Camillus  11 

miss,  or  send  back  a  consul  for  illegal  or  improper 
conduct,  is  calculated  to  prevent  national  misunder- 
standings, and  to  secure  a  respectful  deportment  in 
the  consular  corps.  I  have  not  observed  that  this 
article  has  been  disapproved  of  from  any  quarter. 

The  seventeenth  article,  which  respects  the  capture 
and  detention  of  the  vessels  of  the  parties  on  just 
suspicion  of  having  on  board  enemy's  property,  or 
contraband  of  war,  has  been  the  object  of  intem- 
perate censure— with  how  much  justice  it  shall  be 
the  business  of  this  paper  to  examine. 

The  principal  complaint  is,  not  that  the  article  ex- 
posed our  own  property  to  loss  by  capture,  for  this 
is  not  the  case,  but  that  it  does  not  protect  enemy's 
property  on  board  our  vessels.  The  defence  of  the 
article  will  rest  upon  the  proofs  which  shall  be  ex- 
hibited, that  it  is  in  conformity  with,  and  supported 
by,  the  clear  and  acknowledged  law  of  nations — that 
law  which  pronounces  that  enemy's  goods  on  the 
high  seas  are  Hable  to  capture,  and  as  a  necessary 
means  to  this  end,  that  neutral  ships  are  there  hable 
to  examination  or  search. 

The  law  of  nature  (as  heretofore  observed),  appli- 
cable to  individuals  in  their  independent  or  unsocial 
state,  is  what,  when  applied  to  collections  of  indi- 
viduals in  society,  constitutes  the  natural  or  necessary 
law  of  nations.  An  individual  in  a  state  of  nature, 
for  reparation  of  injuries,  or  in  defence  of  his  person 
and  property,  has  a  right  to  seize  the  property  of  his 
enemy,  and  to  destroy  his  person. 

Nations  always  succeed  to  the  rights  that  the  in- 
dividuals who  composed  them  enjoy  in  a  state  of 


78  Alexander  Hamilton 

nature;  and  hence  it  is  that  by  the  law  of  nations, 
from  the  earliest  annals  of  society,  the  goods  or  prop- 
erty of  one  enemy  have  been  considered  as  liable  to 
be  seized  and  applied  to  the  use  of  another.  This 
right  must  be  so  used  as  not  to  injure  the  rights  of 
others;  subject  to  this  limitation,  it  is  perfect,  and 
an  interruption  of  it  by  another  is  an  injury.  As  in 
a  contest  between  two  individuals  in  a  state  of  na- 
ture, no  third  has  a  right,  without  becoming  a  party 
in  the  controversy,  to  protect  the  property  or  defend 
the  person  of  either  of  the  parties;  so  in  a  war  be- 
tween two  nations,  no  third  nation  can  act  out  of  its 
own  jurisdiction,  consistent  with  the  duties  of  neu- 
trality; or,  without  becoming  a  party  in  the  war, 
protect  the  property  of,  or  defend,  either  of  the  par- 
ties. Though  nations  are,  in  respect  to  each  other, 
like  individuals  in  a  state  of  nature,  the  resemblance 
is  not  in  every  particular  perfect.  Individuals  in  a 
state  of  nature  have  not  only  the  inferior  dominion 
or  private  ownership  of  property,  but  the  entire  and 
perfect  dominion  over  it.  In  society  the  latter  right 
belongs  exclusively  to  the  nation,  while  the  former 
belongs  to  the  several  members  that  compose  it. 
Immovable  things,  such  as  lands,  which  are  denomi- 
nated the  territory  of  a  nation,  are  the  immediate 
and  special  objects  of  this  perfect  dominion  or  para- 
mount property.  Movable  things  are  the  proper 
objects  of  inferior  dominion  or  private  ownership, 
and  are  not  otherwise  the  objects  of  the  national  or 
paramount  property  than  as  they  happen  to  be 
within  its  territorial  limits.  The  perfect  dominion 
or  jurisdiction  of  a  nation,  in  respect  to  property, 


Camillus  79 

extends  over,  and  is  bounded  by,  the  lands  thereof 
and  the  waters  appurtenant  to  the  same. 

As  soon,  therefore,  as  movable  things  pass  out  of 
these  limits,  they  cease  to  be  under  the  dominion  or 
jurisdiction  of  the  nation,  the  private  property  of 
whose  members  they  may  be. 

This  private  property,  in  movable  things,  may  be 
enjoyed  within  the  territory  of  a  nation,  by  those 
who  are  not  members  thereof.  Hence  in  a  war  be- 
tween two  nations,  a  member  of  one  of  which  owns 
movables  within  the  territory  of  a  third  or  neutral 
nation,  such  movables  or  property  are  not  liable  to 
seizure  by  reason  of  the  war;  because,  being  within 
and  under  the  exclusive  jurisdiction  of  a  third  na- 
tion, it  would  be  an  injury  to  the  right  of  such  nation 
to  go  there  and  seize  the  same.  So  long  as  such 
movables  remain  within  a  foreign  territory,  they  are 
objects  of  its  dominion  and  protection;  but  as  soon 
as  they  are  carried  out  of  the  same,  they  cease  to  be 
any  longer  under  its  jurisdiction  or  protection. 

In  a  war  between  two  nations,  all  the  members  of 
each  are  enemies  to  the  other,  and  all  the  propert}^ 
of  the  several  members,  as  well  as  the  strictly  na- 
tional property,  is  liable  to  seizure.  In  general  the 
character  of  the  owner,  whether  enemy  or  friend, 
decides  whether  property  is  liable  to  capture  by 
reason  of  war;  but  the  validity  of  the  capture  de- 
pends not  only  on  the  goods  being  enemy's  property, 
but  likewise  on  the  fact  that  the  place  of  capture  is 
one  in  which  the  right  may  be  exercised  without  in- 
jury to  the  rights  of  a  neutral  nation.  Hence  the 
property  of  an  enemy  is  liable  to  capture  only  within 


8o  Alexander  Hamilton 

the  respective  territories  or  jurisdiction  of  the  belli- 
gerent nations,  or  in  a  place  not  within  the  territory 
or  jurisdiction  of  any  nation.  In  either  of  these 
places  the  right  may  be  exercised  without  injury  to 
the  rights  of  neutral  nations.  The  limitation  of  this 
right,  so  far  as  respects  enemy's  property  found 
within  the  territory  of  one  of  the  parties  on  the 
breaking  out  of  war,  has  before  been  discussed,  and 
placed,  I  flatter  myself,  on  solid  principles. 

The  main  ocean  not  being  within  the  territory  or 
subject  to  the  exclusive  dominion  of  any  nation,  is  a 
place  where  enemy  goods  may  lawfully  be  captured. 
An  impediment  by  any  third  nation  to  the  exercise 
of  the  right  of  capture  on  the  ocean  by  either  of  the 
belligerent  parties,  would  be  an  injury. 

As  the  goods  of  an  enemy,  within  the  territory  of  a 
neutral  state,  are  under  the  protection  thereof,  the 
law  of  nations,  for  the  reasons  that  have  been  stated, 
will  not  permit  us  to  take  them ;  in  like  manner,  we 
have  no  right  to  take  them  if  they  are  on  board  a 
ship,  whilst  the  ship  is  in  a  neutral  port,  whether  the 
ship  itself  is  a  neutral  one,  or  belongs  to  an  enemy, 
because  the  port  is  a  part  of  the  territory.  When 
the  goods  of  an  enemy  are  on  board  the  ship  of  an 
enemy,  and  the  ship  is  in  the  main  ocean,  there  is  no 
doubt  of  our  right  to  capture  both  the  goods  and  the 
ship,  because  they  are  then  in  a  place  which  is  not  the 
territory  of  any  nation.  But  when  the  goods  of  an 
enemy  are  on  board  a  neutral  ship,  and  the  ship  is  in 
the  main  ocean,  though  we  have  a  right  to  take  the 
goods,  we  have  no  right  to  take  the  ship,  or  to  detain 
her  any  longer  than  is  necessary  to  obtain  possession 


Camillus  8i 

of  the  goods ;  for  the  ocean  itself  is  no  territory,  and 
neutral  ships,  as  they  are  movable  goods,  can  not  be 
parts  of  the  neutral  territory,  and  consequently  are 
no  more  under  the  protection  of  the  neutral  state 
than  the  same  goods  would  be  if  they  were  passing 
through  an  unoccupied  country  in  neutral  carriages 
or  on  neutral  horses. 

A  neutral  ship  (says  Rutherforth  in  his  Institutes, 
whose  reasoning  on  this  question  I  adopt)  may  in- 
deed be  called  a  neutral  place;  but  when  we  call  it 
so,  the  word  place  does  not  mean  territory,  it  only 
means  the  thing  in  which  the  goods  are  contained. 
Though  the  goods  of  the  enemy  had  been  on  board  a 
ship  belonging  to  the  enemy,  we  might  have  said,  in 
the  same  sense,  that  they  were  in  a  neutral  place,  if 
they  had  been  locked  up  there  in  a  neutral  chest. 
But  no  one  would  imagine  that  such  a  neutral  place, 
as  a  chest,  can  be  considered  as  a  part  of  the  territory 
of  the  neutral  state,  or  that  it  would  protect  the 
goods.  Notwithstanding,  a  neutral  chest  is  as  much 
a  neutral  place  as  a  neutral  ship. 

A  ship,  though  a  movable  thing,  is  under  the  juris- 
diction of  a  nation  whilst  it  continues  in  one  of  its 
ports ;  but  as  soon  as  it  is  out  at  sea,  only  the  private 
ownership,  or  inferior  dominion,  of  the  ship  remains, 
and  it  ceases  to  be  under  the  dominion  or  jurisdiction 
of  the  nation.  The  case  will  be  the  same  if,  instead 
of  supposing  the  ship  to  be  the  property  of  a  mer- 
chant, we  suppose  it  to  be  the  property  of  the  nation. 

For  though  we  cannot  well  call  the  property  which 
the  nation  has  in  such  a  ship  by  the  name  of  private 
ownership,  yet,  when  the  ship  comes  into  the  main 


82  Alexander  Hamilton 

ocean,  the  jurisdiction  or  paramount  property  ceases, 
and  the  right  that  remains  is  an  inferior  kind  of 
property,  which  has  the  nature  of  private  ownership. 
If  the  jurisdiction  which  a  neutral  state  has  over  the 
ships  of  its  members,  or  even  over  its  own  ships, 
ceases  when  the  ships  are  out  at  sea,  the  goods  of  an 
enemy,  that  are  on  board  such  ships,  cannot  be  under 
the  protection  of  the  nation  in  the  same  manner  as  if 
the  ships  had  been  in  one  of  its  ports,  or  as  if  the 
goods  had  been  on  its  land.' 

Notwithstanding  a  neutral  nation,  when  its  ship 
is  in  the  main  ocean,  has  no  jurisdiction  over  the  ship 
itself,  as  if  it  was  a  part  of  its  territory,  yet  the  na- 
tion, or  some  of  its  members,  which  is  the  same  thing, 
will  continue  to  have  the  inferior  sort  of  property  or 
ownership  in  it.  This  species  of  property  will  pro- 
tect the  ship  from  capture,  though  the  enemy's  goods 
on  board  her  may  lawfully  be  taken. 

But  here  a  difficulty  occurs.  This  inferior  kind 
of  property,  called  private  ownership,  to  distinguish 
it  from  the  jurisdiction  over  things,  is  an  exclusive 
right;  those  who  have  such  ownership  in  things, 
whether  private  or  public  persons,  have  a  right  to 
exclude  all  others  from  making  use  of  such  things; 
and  by  this  means,  the  rights  of  others  are  often 
hindered  from  taking  effect. 

Wild  beasts,  birds,  and  fishes  are,  till  they  are 
catched,  in  common  to  all  mankind;  and  I,  in  com- 

'  [The  jurisdiction  here  spoken  of  is  relative  to  property,  and  alto- 
gether distinct  from  what  is  termed  personal  jurisdiction,  which  re- 
spects the  relations  between  the  society  and  its  members.  This  latter 
species  of  jurisdiction  is  not  confined  to  the  territorial  limits  of  a 
nation.] 


Camillus  83 

mon  with  others,  have  a  right  to  take  them,  and 
thereby  to  make  them  my  own.  But  I  cannot  hunt, 
or  shoot,  or  fish,  without  perhaps  sometimes  using 
the  soil  or  water  of  another  man;  and  as  I  have  no 
right  to  use  these  without  his  consent,  he  may  justly 
hinder  me  from  doing  any  of  these  acts,  as  far  as  his 
right  of  property  extends.  Thus  by  private  owner- 
ship I  am  prevented  from  taking  such  things  as  I 
should  otherwise  have  a  right  to  take,  if  they  did 
not  happen  to  be  in  such  places  as  he  had  an  exclu- 
sive right  to.  In  like  manner,  though  I  have  a  right 
to  take  the  goods  of  my  enemy,  when  they  are  out  at 
sea,  yet  may  not  the  effect  of  this  right  be  prevented 
by  the  inferior  property  or  ownership  which  a  neutral 
nation,  or  its  members,  have  in  the  ship  in  which  the 
goods  are  ?  If  the  law  of  nations  is  nothing  but  the 
law  of  nature  applied  to  the  collective  persons  of 
civil  societies,  instead  of  saying  that  the  law  of  na- 
tions has  decided  otherwise,  we  should  disclose  a 
natural  reason  why  it  should  determine  otherwise. 
When  I  have  merely  a  right  to  acquire  property  in  a 
thing  that  is  common  to  all  mankind,  but  cannot  do 
it  without  the  use  of  what  is  already  the  property  of 
some  other  man,  this  man  neither  does  me  an  injury, 
nor  encourages  or  protects  others  who  have  injured 
me,  by  excluding  me  from  the  use  of  what  belongs  to 
him.  But  when  we  have  a  right  in  war,  upon  ac- 
count of  the  damage  which  the  enemy  has  done  us, 
to  take  goods  of  the  enemy,  and  these  are  in  a  neu- 
tral ship,  if  the  neutral  state,  though  it  has  property 
in  the  ship,  should  make  use  of  its  right  of  property 
to  protect  the  goods  against  us,  this  protection  makes 


84  Alexander  Hamilton 

it  an  accessory  to  the  injury,  which  is  the  foundation 
of  the  claim  upon  the  enemy  to  obtain  reparation  of 
damages,  and  consequently  is  inconsistent  with  the 
notion  of  neutrality. 

But  whilst  this  answer  removes  one  difficulty,  it 
brings  another.  If  a  neutral  nation  makes  itself  ac- 
cessory to  the  damages  done  by  the  enemy,  by  pro- 
tecting such  enemy's  goods  as  she  has  a  right  to  take 
for  reparation  of  damages,  when  these  goods  are  out 
at  sea  in  one  of  its  ships,  why  might  not  the  same 
nation,  without  becoming  in  like  manner  an  acces- 
sory, protect  the  same  goods  when  the  ship  is  in  one 
of  its  ports,  or  when  the  goods  are  on  land  within  its 
territory?  A  law  of  nations,  which  is  natural  as  to 
the  matter  of  it,  and  positive  only  as  to  the  objects 
of  it,  will  furnish  an  answer  to  this  question. 

Every  State  has,  by  universal  acknowledgment 
and  consent,  by  the  law  of  nations,  an  exclusive 
jurisdiction  over  its  own  territory.  As  long,  there- 
fore, as  a  State  keeps  within  its  own  territory,  and 
exercises  its  jurisdiction  there,  the  protection  in 
question  is  not  a  violation  of  our  rights;  but  when 
its  ships  are  in  the  main  ocean,  as  they  are  then  in  a 
place  out  of  its  territory,  where,  by  the  law  of  nations, 
it  has  no  jurisdiction,  this  law  will  allow  us  to  take 
notice  of  the  protection  which  it  gives  to  the  goods 
of  an  enemy,  and  to  consider  it  as  an  accessory  to 
the  damages  done  by  the  enemy,  if  it  gives  them 
protection. 

In  respect  to  the  right  of  examination  or  search,  if 
the  end  is  lawful,  and  the  examination  or  search  a 
necessary  mean  to  attain  this  end,  the  inference  is 


Camillus  85 

inevitable,  that  the  examination  or  search  is  like- 
wise lawful. 

If  the  question,  whether  enemy  goods  are  seizable 
on  board  a  neutral  ship,  were  really  doubtful,  yet  the 
right  to  search  neutral  ships  must  be  admitted  for 
another  reason.  All  agree  that  arms,  ammunition, 
and  other  contraband  articles  may  not  be  carried  to 
an  enemy  by  a  neutral  power;  without  searching 
vessels  at  sea,  such  supply  could  not  be  prevented. 
The  right  to  search,  therefore,  results,  likewise,  from 
the  right  to  seize  contraband  goods.  Again,  the 
state  of  war  authorizes  the  capture  of  enemy's  ships 
and  goods ;  but  on  the  main  ocean,  which  is  the  great 
highway  where  the  ships  and  goods  of  all  nations 
pass,  how  are  the  ships  and  goods  of  an  enemy  to  be 
distinguished  from  those  of  a  friend  ?  No  other  way 
than  by  examination  and  search.  Hence,  then,  the 
right  of  search  is  deducible  from  the  general  right  to 
capture  the  ships  and  goods  of  an  enemy. 

It  would  undoubtedly  disembarrass  the  commerce 
of  neutral  nations  were  passports  and  ships'  papers 
received,  in  all  cases,  as  conclusive  evidence  of  the 
quality  and  property  of  the  cargo.  And  did  treaties, 
in  fact,  effectually  secure  an  exemption  from  rude 
and  detrimental  inquisitions  upon  the  ocean,  they 
would  become  objects  of  inestimable  worth  to  the 
neutral  powers.  But,  notwithstanding  the  existence 
of  stipulations  in  our  other  treaties  [which  aim  at 
giving  some  force  to  similar  credentials],  can  it  be 
said  that  our  ships  have  been  visited  with  less  cere- 
mony by  one  party  than  by  the  other?  And  may 
not  the  experience  of  other  nations,  as  well  as  that  of 


86  Alexander  Hamilton 

our  own,  be  appealed  to,  in  proof  of  the  opinion, 
that  these  stipulations,  however  exact  and  positive, 
are  too  little  regarded  by  that  class  of  men,  to  re- 
strain and  govern  whose  conduct  they  are  instituted  ? 

The  right  of  search  ought  to  be  used  with  modera- 
tion, and  with  as  little  inconvenience  as  possible  to 
the  rights  of  nations  not  engaged  in  the  war.  And 
the  law  of  nations,  on  the  other  hand,  requires  the 
utmost  good  faith  on  the  part  of  the  neutral  powers. 
They  are  bound  not  to  conceal  the  property  of  the 
enemy,  but,  on  the  contrary,  to  disclose  it  when 
examination  shall  be  made;  in  confidence  of  this 
impartiality,  the  law  of  nations  obliges  the  powers  at 
war  to  give  credit  to  the  certificates,  bills  of  lading, 
and  other  instruments  of  ownership  produced  by  the 
masters  of  neutral  ships,  unless  any  fraud  appear  in 
them,  or  there  he  good  reason  for  suspecting  their 
validity.  The  right  of  search  is  [always]  at  the  peril 
of  those  who  exercise  it ;  the  right,  notwithstanding 
[must  be  acknowledged]  to  be  indubitable. 

The  reasoning  employed  to  prove  that  all  neutral 
ships  on  the  main  ocean  are  liable  to  search,  and 
enemy  goods  on  board  them  to  capture,  is  supported 
by  the  ablest  writers  on  public  law,  and  their  deci- 
sion is  believed  to  be  unanimously  in  its  favor. 

The  Italian  states  were  the  first  among  modern 
nations  who  cultivated  the  interests  of  commerce, 
and  before  the  passage  of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope, 
Venice  and  Genoa  distributed  the  manufactures  of 
Asia  throughout  Europe.  They,  therefore,  first  de- 
fined the  rights  of  navigation.  Their  maritime  regu- 
lations are  collected  in  a  work  called  Consolato  del 


Camillus  87 

Mare;  I  do  not  possess  the  collection,  but  find  the 
following  quotation  from  it  in  Grotius.' 

"  If  both  the  ship  and  freight  belong  to  the  enemy, 
then,  without  dispute,  they  become  lawful  prize  to 
the  captor ;  btit  if  the  ship  belong  to  those  that  be  at 
peace  with  us,  and  the  cargo  be  the  enemy's,  they 
may  be  forced  by  the  powers  at  war,  to  put  into  any 
of  their  ports,  and  unlade ;  but  yet  the  master  must 
be  satisfied  for  the  freight  of  them.'" 

Grotius,  that  learned  and  persecuted  friend  of 
liberty,  whose  life  and  great  talents  were  dedicated 
to  the  service  of  mankind,  and  who  displayed  so 
much  ability  and  learning  in  defending  the  freedom 
of  the  seas  and  of  commerce,  is  clearly  of  opinion  that 
enemy  goods  are  not  protected  by  neutral  bottoms; 
he  even  goes  further,  and  allows  that  such  property 
occasions  great  presumption  that  the  vessel  is,  like- 
wise, enemy  property.-  Bynkershoek  is  of  the  same 
opinion. 3  Puffendorf  and  Heinecius  "*  agree  in  this 
law;  and  Vatel,  who  is  the  latest  writer,  is  explicit 
in  his  opinion.  "  Without  searching  neutral  ships  at 
sea,"  says  he,  "  the  commerce  of  contraband  goods 
cannot  be  prevented — there  is  then  a  right  of  search- 
ing. Some  powerful  nations  have,  at  different 
times,  refused  to  submit  to  this.  At  present  a  neu- 
tral ship  refusing  to  be  searched  would,  from  that 
proceeding  alone,  be  condemned  as  lawful  prize." 
"  Effects  belonging  to  an  enemy,  found  on  board  a 
neutral  ship,  are  seizable  by  the  rights  of  war;   but 

'  Grotius,  Book  III.,  chap,  i.,  sec.  5,  Note. 

2  Grotius,  Book  III.,  chap,  i.,  sec.  8;   Book  III.,  chap,  vi.,  sec.  6. 

3  Bynkershoek,  Quest.  Jur.  Pub.,  lib.  i.,  cap.  13  and  14. 

4  Heinecius,  De  Navibus,  cap.  2,  sect.  114,  115,  116. 


88  Alexander  Hamilton 

by  the  law  of  nature,  the  master  is  to  be  paid  his 
freight,  and  not  to  suffer  by  the  seizure.  The  effects 
of  neutrals,  found  on  board  an  enemy  ship,  are  to  be 
restored  to  the  owners,  against  whom  there  is  no 
right  of  confiscation." 

Other  authors  of  respectability  might  be  quoted; 
but  those  already  named  will  be  acknowledged  as 
the  ablest,  and  their  authority  the  most  decisive  of 
any  that  can  be  cited.  So  strong,  clear,  and  unin- 
terrupted, are  the  authorities  of  the  writers  on  pubHc 
law  in  relation  to  these  points,  that  the  advocates 
of  an  opposite  rule  may  be  challenged  to  produce  a 
single  authority  of  approved  respectability  in  sup- 
port of  their  opinion.' 

Camillus. 


NO.    XXX 

1795- 

Admitting  that  it  was  the  law  of  nations  that 
enemy's  goods  might  be  seized  in  neutral  ships,  it  is 
alleged  by  Cato  and  other  writers,  who  have  ap- 
peared on  the  same  side,  that  the  treaties  which  have 
been  formed  between  nations  have  annulled  this  law, 
and  established  another  in  its  stead,  equally  exten- 
sive and  binding  on  the  whole  civilized  world. 

In  discussing  this  allegation,  we  should  remember 
that  all  nations  are  in  a  state  of  equality,  and  inde- 
pendent of  each  other.  No  law,  other  than  the 
necessary  or  natural  law  of  nations,  is  binding  on 
any  nation  without  its  consent,  expressly  or  tacitly 

»  This  subject  will  be  resvimed  and  pursued  under  different  aspects  in 
another  number. 


Camillus  89 

given.  A  law  among  nations  cannot,  like  a  civil  or 
municipal  law,  be  annulled,  or  enacted  by  a  majority, 
or  any  portion  short  of  the  whole.  By  agreement 
between  two  or  more  nations,  the  operation  of  a  law 
already  in  existence  may  be  suspended  so  far  as 
respects  themselves;  but  such  agreement  works  no 
change  of  such  law,  in  relation  to  the  rights  or  duties 
of  other  nations.  The  same  is  true  of  any  rule  of 
action  established  by  convention  between  two  na- 
tions; such  rule  is  obligatory  on  the  parties  that 
form  the  contract,  but  is  wholly  without  effect  and 
nugatory  in  respect  to  all  other  nations.  Unless, 
then,  all  nations  have  concurred  in  the  design  to 
annul  this  law,  it  must  still  exist;  and  treaties  con- 
taining opposite  stipulations  can  be  considered  in  no 
other  light  than  as  exceptions  to  the  same,  in  which 
certain  nations  have  seen  it  their  interest  to  agree. 

Though  one  nation  may  have  agreed  with  an- 
other to  suspend  the  operation  of  this  law,  and  to 
substitute  the  rule  that  free  ships  make  free  goods, 
and  enemy  ships  enemy  goods,  there  may  have  been 
some  peculiar  reason  that  induced  the  parties  to 
form  this  convention  with  each  other,  that  would 
not  apply  in  respect  to  any  other  nation. 

A  nation  may  advance  its  interest  perhaps  by 
forming  such  a  treaty  with  one  nation,  and  injure  it 
by  forming  it  with  another.  Because  a  nation  has, 
in  some  instances,  or  for  a  limited  time,  formed  stipu- 
lations of  this  sort,  it  cannot  from  thence  be  inferred 
that  it  has  thereby,  in  any  sense,  expressed  its  con- 
sent to  a  total  repeal  of  a  law,  the  operation  of  which 
it  has  agreed  to  suspend  only  for  a  limited  time, 


90  Alexander  Hamilton 

and  in  respect  to  a  particular  nation.  Commercial 
treaties,  in  which  we  discover  these  stipulations, 
though  not  always,  are  commonly  limited  in  their 
duration.  This  limitation  is  a  strong  argument 
against  the  doctrine  which  these  treaties  are  cited  to 
establish.  For  so  many  years,  say  the  parties,  we  will 
suspend  the  operation  of  the  law.  When  the  treaty 
expires  by  its  proper  limitation,  or  is  dissolved  by 
war,  the  rule  of  the  treaty  ceases,  and  the  law  is 
again  in  force  between  the  parties,  and  prescribes  to 
them,  in  common  with  other  nations,  their  rights 
and  duties  in  this  respect. 

The  law  of  nations,  that  authorizes  the  capture  of 
enemy  goods  in  neutral  ships,  requires  the  restora- 
tion of  neutral  goods  captured  in  enemy  ships;  the 
treaties,  which  stipulate  that  free  ships  make  free 
goods,  stipulate  also  that  enemy  ships  make  enemy 
goods.  I  have  discovered  no  instance  of  the  former 
stipulation  that  has  not  been  accompanied  by  the 
latter;  though  I  have  found  instances  of  the  latter 
stipulation  unaccompanied  by  the  former.  This  is 
the  case  in  the  treaty  of  peace,  commerce,  and  alli- 
ance between  Spain  and  England,  concluded  at 
Madrid,  in  1667.  Those,  therefore,  who  contend 
that  the  law  of  nations  has  been  repealed  in  one  in- 
stance, must  also  insist  that  it  has  been  repealed  in 
the  other.  If  the  number  of  stipulations  is  to  be 
received  as  evidence,  the  proof  is  stronger  of  a  repeal 
in  the  latter  than  in  the  former  case.  But  will  any 
one  seriously  maintain,  that  a  nation  would  have  a 
right  to  confiscate  the  goods  of  a  neutral  power 
found  on  board  an  enemy  ship,  without  an  express 


Camillus  9' 

stipulation  on  the  part  of  such  neutral  state  con- 
senting to  the  same?  Would  England  or  Spain,  for 
example,  have  a  right  to  confiscate  American  prop- 
erty captured  in  a  French  ship?  Would  America, 
if  at  war,  have  a  right  to  confiscate  the  neutral  prop- 
erty of  Spain,  Portugal,  Denmark,  or  Russia,  found 
on  board  an  enemy  ship  ?  Has  any  nation  ever  con- 
fiscated property  under  this  circumstance?  If  not, 
the  inference  is  clear,  that  these  stipulations  are  ex- 
clusively relative  to  the  parties  who  form  them,  and 
that  the  rights  of  other  states  remain  under  the 
protection  of  the  law  of  nations. 

But,  according  to  Cato,  this  reasoning  may  be  just, 
yet  inajjplicable ;  for  he  maintains  that  all  nations 
have  consented  to  the  establishment  of  this  conven- 
tional law.  "As  far  back  as  150  years,"  says  this 
writer,  "  and  ever  since,  I  find  that  the  commercial 
nations  have  stipulated  in  their  treaties,  that  free 
ships  shall  make  free  goods,  that  full  credit  shall  be 
given  to  ships'  papers,  and  that  armed  vessels  shall 
not  come  within  cannon  shot  of  a  neutral  ship,  but 
send  their  boats  on  board  with  only  two  or  three 
men  at  most,  to  examine  papers,  but  not  to  search, 
and  that  the  treaties  (by  which  is  understood  all  the 
treaties)  for  150  years  back,  relative  to  this  object, 
are  drawn  in  the  words  of  the  treaty  between  the 
United  States  and  France." 

Struck  with  the  fulness  of  this  assertion,  I  have 
carefully  examined  such  collections  of  treaties  as  I 
have  been  able  to  procure,  and  going  back  to  the 
year  1645,  I  have  given  a  patient  search  to  all 
the  public  conventions  between  Great  Britain  and 


92  Alexander  Hamilton 

the  several  powers  of  Europe  since  that  period.  I 
find  that,  since  that  epoch,  Great  Britain  has  con- 
cluded commercial  treaties  with  Spain,  Portugal, 
France,  Holland,  Dantzic,  Denmark,  Sweden,  and 
Russia. 

In  the  treaties  with  Holland  and  with  France,  she 
has  agreed  to  the  stipulation,  that  free  ships  shall 
make  free  goods,  and  enemy  ships  enemy  goods.  In 
Chalmers'  collection  of  treaties,  a  similar  stipulation 
is  contained  in  the  23d  article  of  the  treaty  of  alli- 
ance, concluded  in  1564,  between  Oliver  Cromwell 
and  the  king  of  Portugal ;  but  in  other  collections  in 
which  that  treaty  is  found,  it  does  not  contain  a 
stipulation  that  free  ships  shall  make  free  goods ;  and 
it  has  been  denied,  from  a  reputable  quarter,  on  the 
part  of  Great  Britain,  that  she  has  ever  acceded  to 
this  principle,  except  in  the  instances  of  her  treaties 
with  Holland  and  France ;  neither  of  which  exist  any 
longer,  the  former  having  expired  long  since,  and  the 
latter  being  dissolved  by  the  present  war.  Her 
treaties  with  Spain,  Dantzic,  Denmark,  Sweden,  and 
Russia,  do  neither  of  them  contain  this  stipulation. 
On  the  contrary,  the  12th  article  of  the  treaty  with 
Sweden,  and  the  20th  of  the  treaty  with  Denmark, 
each  of  which  is  now  in  force,  and  has  been  so  for 
more  than  a  century,  as  likewise  the  14th  article  of 
the  treaty  with  Dantzic,  declares,  that  "lest  the 
enemy's  goods  and  merchandise  should  be  concealed 
imder  the  disguise  of  the  goods  of  friends,  it  is  stipu- 
lated, that  all  ships  shall  be  furnished  with  passports 
and  certificates,  by  which  it  shall  be  manifest  to 
whom  the  articles,  composing  the  cargoes,  belong"; 


Camillus  93 

and  the  two  first  of  these  treaties,  moreover,  declare 
it  "  to  be  injurious  to  protect  the  property  of  enemies, " 
and  estabhsh  special  guards  to  prevent  the  same. 

In  relation  to  the  full  credit  to  be  given  to  ships' 
papers,  and  the  manner  of  boarding  neutral  vessels, 
—in  the  treaties  with  Spain,  France,  and  Holland,  it 
is  stipulated,  that  full  faith  shall  be  given  to  the  pass- 
ports, and  that  the  boarding  shall  be  by  two  or  three 
men  only.  But  the  treaties  with  Portugal  and  Rus- 
sia are  destitute  of  any  stipulation  on  this  subject, 
except  that  in  the  latter  it  is  agreed,'  that  "the 
searching  of  merchant  ships  shall  be  as  favorable  as 
the  reason  of  the  war  can  possibly  admit,  toward  the 
most  favored  neutral  nation,  observing,  as  near  as 
may  be,  the  principles  of  the  law  of  nations  that 
are  generally  acknowledged."  In  the  treaties  with 
Dantzic,^  Denmark,  and  Sweden,  passports  are  re- 
quired for  the  purpose  of  distinguishing,  according 
to  the  solemnities  of  those  treaties,  the  enemy  prop- 
erty on  board  the  shij^s  of  the  parties ;  and  it  is  stipu- 
lated, that  credit  shall  be  given  to  such  passports, 
except  in  cases  of  just  and  urgent  cause  of  suspicion, 
when,  say  these  treaties,  the  ship  ought  to  be  searched. 
An  exception,  that  fully  recognizes  the  right  to 
search,  essentially  does  away  with  the  security  in- 
tended by  the  passports.  But  neither  of  these 
treaties  contains  any  regulation  relative  to  the  man- 
ner of  boarding  neutral  vessels. 

This  research,  though  made  with  care,  may  have 
been  imperfect;   the  result  thereof  is,  that  there  are 

*  Treaty  of  1776,  article  10. 

'  Treaty  with  Dantzic  of  1706,  article  20. 


94  Alexander  Hamilton 

only  two,  possibly  three,  of  these  eight  nations,  with 
whom  Great  Britain  has  ever  agreed  to  the  stipula- 
tion, that  free  ships  shall  make  free  goods;  only 
three  of  them  with  whom  she  has  stipulated,  that 
full  credit  shall  be  given  to  passports  or  ships'  papers, 
or  with  whom  the  manner  of  boarding  is  settled.  In- 
stead, therefore,  of  that  imiformity  and  universality 
in  the  stipulations  in  the  commercial  treaties,  con- 
cluded within  the  last  150  years,  so  confidently  as- 
serted by  Cato,  we  see  that  in  five  instances  out  of 
eight,  of  treaties  concluded  between  Great  Britain 
and  the  principal  powers  of  Europe,  within  that 
term,  they  have  on  each  of  these  points,  given  their 
sanction  to  a  law  directly  in  opposition  to  the  asser- 
tion of  this  adventurous  writer. 

Yet,  says  Cato,  "  the  principles  of  the  armed  neu- 
trality, by  the  general  consent  of  the  great  com- 
munity of  the  civiHzed  world,  changed  the  law  of 
nations. "  It  is  a  singular  logic  that  proves  the  agree- 
ment of  nations  by  their  disagreement,  and  their 
consent  to  a  principle,  by  their  drawing  forth  their 
fleet  to  dispute  it.  The  armed  neutrality,  with  those 
who  understand  its  history,  will  not  be  relied  on  by 
way  of  proving  a  change  in  the  law  of  nations, 
brought  about  by  universal  consent. 

It  will  not  be  denied  that  this  league,  which  was 
aimed  principally  against  Great  Britain,  failed  to 
accomplish  its  purpose,  and  that  it  expired  with  the 
American  war.  Nothing  has  been  heard  of  it  during 
the  present  war;  and  it  is  notorious,  that  Russia,  and 
Holland  before  its  conquest,  were  imder  agreements 
incompatible  with  the  views  of  that  association. 


Camillus  95 

The  northern  powers  of  Europe  under  the  counte- 
nance of  France,  united  to  support  the  principles  of 
the  armed  neutrahty ;  but  the  league  did  not  include 
all  the  neutral  powers ;  and  of  the  powers  engaged  in 
the  war,  at  that  period,  Spain  consented  to  observe 
the  principles  contended  for  by  the  confederacy,  on 
condition  that  Great  Britain  would  agree  to  them, 
who,  so  far  from  agreeing,  openly  resisted  them. 

On  the  same  principle,  by  which  it  is  contended 
that  this  association  introduced  a  new  law  of  nations, 
might  the  armed  leagues  between  certain  nations  to 
prohibit  all  commerce  whatever  with  an  enemy,  be 
appealed  to  in  proof  of  an  alteration  of  the  law  of 
nations  in  this  respect.  England  and  Holland  en- 
tered into  such  a  league  against  France,  in  the  year 
1689 ;  and  other  instances  are  mentioned  by  Grotius; 
yet  no  one  has  ever  imagined  that  thereby  any 
change  was  wrought  in  the  law  of  nations. 

The  objection  that  has  arisen  from  the  dissimilar- 
ity between  this  article  and  those  relative  to  the 
same  subject  in  our  other  treaties,  is  equally  defective 
with  those  already  considered.  The  objection  pro- 
ceeds from  an  opinion  that  the  law  of  nations  has 
been  changed,  and  that  the  stipulations  in  our  other 
treaties  are  evidence  thereof.  The  observations  that 
have  been  offered  on  this  subject  are  equally  ap- 
plicable to  this  objection,  and  it  is  therefore  unneces- 
sary to  repeat  them. 

Not  only  reason,  and  the  authority  of  jurists,  but 
likewise  the  practice  of  nations,  where  they  have 
been  unrestrained  by  particular  conventions,  may  be 
appealed  to  in  support  of  this  doctrine. 


96  Alexander  Hamilton 

The  practice  of  France,  of  Holland,  even  subse- 
quent to  particular  stipulations,  regulating  this  sub- 
ject between  themselves,  has,  in  respect  to  other 
powers,  been  conformable  to  the  law  of  nations. 
The  ordinances  and  maritime  decisions  of  France 
may  be  consulted  to  show  what  her  practice  has  been, 
and  that  of  Holland  is  evident  by  the  convention  of 
1689,  between  her  and  England.  The  practice  of 
Spain  is  understood  to  be  the  same;  and  in  an  in- 
stance that  occurred  during  the  American  war,  she 
carried  the  law  to  its  utmost  rigor,  in  assigning  as  a 
cause  of  condemnation  of  a  neutral  Tuscan  ship,  her 
forcible  resistance  of  the  right  of  search.  Her  cap- 
ture of  American  ships,  during  the  present  war,  on 
suspicion  of  their  cargoes  being  enemy  property, 
affords  additional  evidence  of  her  practice  and  opin- 
ions on  this  subject.  In  respect  to  Great  Britain, 
from  the  general  notoriety  of  the  fact,  it  seems,  in 
some  sort,  unnecessary  to  add,  that  she  has  imme- 
morially  adhered,  in  her  general  practice,  to  the  law 
of  nations  in  its  widest  interpretation  on  this  subject. 
In  a  few  instances,  and  perhaps  for  special  reasons, 
as  was  the  case  in  respect  to  the  treaty  with  Holland, 
concluded  in  1667,  she  has  entered  into  opposite 
stipulations ;  but  at  this  time,  unless  it  may  be  with 
Portugal,  Great  Britain  has  no  such  treaty  with  any 
nation. 

So  undisputed  was  the  law  on  this  subject,  and 
so  uniform  the  practice  of  nations  in  cases  not  gov- 
erned by  a  conventional  rule,  that  Congress  in  the 
commencement  and  through  the  greater  part  of  our 
revolution  war,  authorized  our  ships  of  war  and  pri- 


Camillus  97 

vateers  to  capture  enemy  property  on  board  neutral 
ships,  and  our  admiralty  courts  uniformly  restored 
neutral  property  found  on  board  enemy  ships.  This 
practice  continued  years  after  the  conclusion  of  our 
treaty  with  France,  which  contains  a  stipulation, 
that  free  ships  shall  make  free  goods,  and  enemy 
ships  enemy  goods;  no  person,  during  that  period, 
having  supposed  that  thereby  the  law  was  altered  in 
respect  to  other  nations. 

Towards  the  close  of  the  war,  to  favor  the  views  of 
the  armed  neutrality,  in  which  league  the  United 
States  were  not  a  party,  but  whose  opposition  to 
Great  Britain  they  naturally  approved.  Congress,  in 
an  ordinance  on  the  subject  of  captures,  ordained 
that  neutral  bottoms  should  protect  enemy  goods — 
but  here  they  stopped.  Thus  far  the  authority  was 
indubitable,  because  it  was  exercised  only  in  abridg- 
ment of  their  own  rights.  Being  engaged  in  war, 
they  could  not  by  their  own  act  enlarge  their  rights, 
or  abridge  those  of  neutral  ships ;  the  extent  of  both 
being  defined  and  settled  by  the  public  law  of  nations. 
They,  therefore,  never  authorized  the  capture  and 
condemnation  of  neutral  goods  found  in  enemy  ships, 
nor  could  they  have  authorized  the  same,  without  a 
manifest  violation  of  the  rights  of  the  neutral  powers. 

It  is  finally  alleged  that  the  article,  if  sound  in  its 
principles,  is  defective  in  those  provisions  which  are 
requisite  to  protect  and  secure  the  neutral  rights  of 
the  parties ;  inasmuch  as  it  does  not  contain  an  ex- 
plicit stipulation  for  the  payment  of  freight  on  enemy 
goods,  nor  for  the  payment  of  damages  for  the  de- 
tention or  loss  of  neutral  ships  taken  without  just 


98  Alexander  Hamilton 

cause.  I  do  not  recollect  to  have  met  with  any 
precise  stipulations  on  these  points,  in  the  commer- 
cial treaties  between  other  nations.  None  such,  if 
my  recollection  be  right,  are  found  in  any  of  our 
other  treaties;  and  I  think  it  would  be  somewhat 
difficult  to  form  such  as  would  afford  to  the  parties 
a  more  satisfactory  security  than  that  which  arises 
from  the  law  of  nations — a  neutral  ship  is  entitled  to 
freight  for  eneni}^  goods  captured  on  board  her ;  but 
this  right,  if  so  admitted,  may  be  forfeited  by  the 
irregular  conduct  of  the  neutral,  by  the  possession 
of  false  or  double  papers,  by  the  destruction  of 
papers,  or  by  those  fraudulent  concealments  and 
evasions,  which  are  inconsistent  with  fair  and  im- 
partial neutrality.  A  ship  taken  and  detained  with- 
out just  cause,  is,  together  with  her  cargo,  at  the  risk 
of  the  captors  from  the  moment  of  capture;  and  in 
cases  of  partial  or  total  loss,  or  of  damages  by  de- 
tention, the  owner  is  entitled  to  full  and  complete 
indemnification.  But  in  case  the  neutral  ship  is 
under  such  equivocal  and  doubtful  circumstances  as 
afford  probable  cause  to  believe  that  either  the  ship, 
or  cargo,  is  enemy  property,  a  situation  not  to  be 
reconciled  with  an  open  and  fair  neutrality,  in  such 
case,  though  on  trial  both  ship  and  cargo  should  turn 
out  to  have  been  bona- fide  neutral  property,  yet  the 
captors  may  avail  themselves  of  her  equivocal  situa- 
tion and  character,  in  mitigation,  if  not,  under  very 
peculiar  circumstances,  in  total  discharge,  of  dam- 
ages. No  stipulation,  therefore,  without  these  ex- 
ceptions, would  have  afforded,  to  the  parties  adequate 
security  against  such  irregularities;   and  with  them, 


Camillus  99 

its  want  of  precision  would  have  left  the  subject  as 
it  now  stands,  to  be  regulated  by  the  known  and 
approved  provisions  of  the  law  of  nations. 

These  provisions  being  well  understood,  the  ar- 
ticle concludes  with  a  stipulation  against  delays  in 
the  admiralty,  and  in  the  payment  and  recovery  of 
the  damages  it  shall  decree. 

This  examination,  I  flatter  myself,  has  fulfilled  its 
object,  which  was  to  prove,  that  the  article  relin- 
quishes no  right  that  we  possessed  as  a  nation ;  that 
it  is  agreeable  to,  and  supported  by,  the  law  of  na- 
tions. A  law  in  relation  to  this  subject,  coeval 
with  the  origin  of  maritime  commerce,  and  the  prin- 
ciples whereof  have  immemorially  operated  among 
nations. 

It  was  desirable  that  a  stipulation,  similar  to  that 
contained  in  our  other  treaties,  should  have  been 
obtained.  But  the  time  was  unfavorable  to  the  at- 
tainment of  this  object;  and,  as  with  great  propriety 
has  been  observed  by  Mr.  Jefferson,  in  behalf  of  our 
Government,  "  since  it  depends  on  the  will  of  other 
nations  as  well  as  our  own,  we  can  only  obtain  it 
when  they  shall  be  ready  to  consent."  By  the  12th 
article,  the  parties  agree  to  renew  the  negotiation  on 
this  point,  within  the  compass  of  two  years  after  the 
conclusion  of  the  present  war;  when  perhaps  the 
restoration  of  peace,  and  other  circumstances,  may 
prove  more  propitious  to  our  views.        Camillus. 


NO.    XXXI 

1795- 


I  resume  the  subjects  of  the  two  last  papers  for  the 
sake  of  a  few  supplementary  observations. 


too  Alexander  Hamilton 

The  objections  to  the  treaty,  for  not  containing 
the  principle,  "that  free  ships  make  free  goods,"  as 
being  the  relinquishment  of  an  advantage  which  the 
modern  law  of  nations  gives  to  neutrals,  have  been 
fully  examined,  and,  I  flatter  myself,  completely 
refuted. 

I  shall,  however,  add  one  or  two  reflections  by  way 
of  further  illustration.  A  pre-established  rule  of  the 
law  of  nations  can  only  be  changed  by  their  common 
consent.  This  consent  may  either  be  express,  by 
treaties,  declarations,  etc.,  adopting  and  promising 
the  observance  of  a  different  rule,  or  it  may  be  im- 
plied by  a  course  of  practice  or  usage.  The  consent, 
in  either  case,  must  embrace  the  great  community 
of  civilized  nations.  If  to  be  inferred  from  treaties, 
it  must  be  shown  that  they  are  uniform  and  uni- 
versal. It  can,  at  least,  never  be  inferred,  while  the 
treaties  of  different  nations  follow  different  rules, 
or  the  treaties  between  the  same  nation  and  others 
vary  from  each  other.  So  also  as  to  usage.  It  must 
be  tmiform  and  universal,  and,  let  it  be  added,  it 
must  be  continued.  A  usage  adopted  by  some  na- 
tions, and  resisted  by  others,  or  adopted  by  all  tem- 
porarily and  then  discontinued,  is  insufficient  to 
abolish  an  old,  or  substitute  a  new  rule  of  the  law  of 
nations.  It  has  been  demonstrated  that  no  con- 
sent of  either  description  has  been  given  to  the  rule, 
which  is  contended  for  in  opposition  to  the  treaty. 

The  armed  neutrality,  so  much  quoted,  is  en- 
tirely deficient  in  the  requisite  characters.  Its 
name  imports  that  it  was  an  armed  combination 
of  particular  powers.     It  grew  up  in  the  midst  of  a 


Camillus  loi 

war,  and  is  understood  to  have  been  particularly 
levelled  against  one  of  the  belligerent  parties.  It 
was  resisted  by  that  power.  There  were  other 
powers  which  did  not  accede  to  it.  It  is  a  recent 
transaction,  and  has  never  acquired  the  confirma- 
tion of  continued  usage.  W^at  is  more,  it  has  been 
virtually  abandoned  by  some  of  the  parties  to  it — 
and  among  these,  by  the  principal  promoter  of  it, 
the  politic  and  enterprising  Catharine.  It  is,  there- 
fore, a  perversion  of  all  just  ideas  to  ascribe  to  such 
a  combination  the  effect  of  altering  a  rule  of  the  law 
of  nations. 

In  most  important  questions,  it  is  remarkable  that 
the  opposers  of  the  truth  are  as  much  at  variance 
with  each  other  as  they  are  with  the  truth  they 
oppose.  This  was  strikingly  exemplified  when  the 
present  Constitution  of  the  United  States  was  under 
deliberation.  The  opposition  to  it  was  composed  of 
the  most  incongruous  materials — the  same  thing  is 
observable  in  relation  to  the  treaty.  And  one  in- 
stance of  the  contrariety  applies  to  the  rule  cited 
above. 

While  some  of  the  adversaries  of  the  treaty  com- 
plain of  the  admission  of  a  contrary  principle  by  that 
instrument,  as  the  abandonment  of  a  rule  of  the 
present  law  of  nations ;  others,  conceding  that  there 
is  no  such  rule  yet  established,  censure  that  admis- 
sion as  a  check  to  its  complete  and  formal  establish- 
ment, and  as  a  retrograde  step  from  this  desirable 
point. 

The  objection  in  this  form  is  more  plausible  than 
in  the  other,  but  it  is  not  less  destitute  of  substance. 


I02  Alexander  Hamilton 

If  there  has  been  any  retrograde  step,  it  was  taken 
by  the  Government  prior  to  the  treaty.  Authentic 
documents,  which  have  been  communicated  by  the 
Executive  to  Congress,  contain  the  evidence  of  this 
fact. 

Early  in  the  year  1793,  some  British  cruisers  hav- 
ing stopped  vessels  of  the  United  States,  and  taken 
out  of  them  articles  which  were  the  property  of 
French  citizens,  Mr.  Genet,  the  then  minister  of 
France,  in  a  letter  of  the  9th  of  July  of  that  year, 
made  a  lively  representation  upon  the  subject  to  our 
Government,  insisting,  in  a  subsequent  letter  of  the 
25th  of  that  month,  in  which  he  recurs  to  the  same 
point,  that  the  principles  of  neutrality  established, 
that  friendly  vessels  make  friendly  goods;  and  in 
effect,  that  the  violation  of  this  rule  by  Great  Britain 
was  a  violation  of  our  neutral  rights,  which  we  were 
bound  to  resent. 

The  reply  of  our  Government  is  seen  in  a  letter 
from  our  Secretary  of  State  to  that  minister,  of  the 
24th  of  July.  It  is  in  these  terms :  "  I  believe,"  says 
Mr.  Jefferson,  "it  cannot  be  dovibted,  but  that  by 
the  general  law  of  nations  the  goods  of  a  friend, 
found  in  the  vessel  of  an  enemy,  are  free,  and  the 
goods  of  an  enemy,  found  in  the  vessel  of  a  friend, 
are  lawful  prize.  Upon  this  principle,  I  presume, 
the  British  armed  vessels  have  taken  the  property 
of  French  citizens  found  in  our  vessels  in  the  cases 
above  mentioned;  and,  I  confess,  I  should  be  at  a 
loss  on  what  principle  to  reclaim  them.  It  is  true 
that  sundry  nations,  desirous  of  avoiding  the  incon- 
veniences of  having  their  vessels  stopped  at  sea, 


Camillus  103 

ransacked,  carried  into  port,  and  detained  under 
pretence  of  having  enemy  goods  on  board,  have,  in 
many  instances,  introduced,  by  their  special  treaties, 
another  principle  between  them,  that  enemy  bot- 
toms shall  make  enemy  goods,  and  friendly  bottoms 
friendly  goods;  a  principle  much  less  embarrassing 
to  commerce,  and  equal  to  all  parties  in  point  of  gain 
and  loss;  but  this  is  altogether  the  effect  of  par- 
ticular treaty,  controlling,  in  special  cases,  the  gen- 
eral principles  of  the  law  of  nations,  and,  therefore, 
taking  effect  between  such  nations  only  as  have  so 
agreed  to  control  it." 

Nothing  can  be  a  more  explicit  or  unequivocal 
abandonment  of  the  rule,  that  free  ships  make  free 
goods,  and  vice  versa,  than  is  contained  in  this  com- 
munication. But  this  is  not  all.  In  the  letter  from 
Mr.  Jefferson  to  our  minister  in  France,  of  the  26th 
of  August,  1793,  instructing  him  to  urge  the  recall 
of  Mr.  Genet,  the  subject  is  resumed;  the  position 
asserted  in  answer  to  Mr.  Genet  insisted  upon  anew, 
and  enforced  by  additional  considerations.  Among 
other  suggestions,  we  find  these:  "  We  suppose  it  to 
have  been  long  an  established  principle  of  the  law 
of  nations,  that  the  goods  of  a  friend  are  free  in  an 
enemy's  vessel,  and  an  enemy's  goods  lawful  prize 
in  the  vessel  of  a  friend.  The  inconvenience  of  this 
principle  has  induced  several  nations  latterly  to 
stipulate  against  it  by  treaty,  and  to  substitute  an- 
other in  its  stead,  that  free  bottoms  shall  make  free 
goods,  and  enemy  bottoms  enemy  goods.  We  have 
introduced  it  into  our  treaties  with  France,  Holland, 
and  Russia;    and  French  goods  found  by  the  two 


I04  Alexander  Hamilton 

last  nations  in  American  bottoms,  are  not  made 
prize  of.  It  is  our  wish  to  establish  it  with  other 
nations;  but  this  requires  their  consent  also,  is  a 
work  of  time,  and  in  the  meanwhile  they  have  a 
right  to  act  on  the  general  principle,  without  giving 
to  us  or  to  France,  cause  of  complaint.  Nor  do  I  see 
that  France  can  lose  by  it  on  the  whole.  For 
though  she  loses  her  goods  when  found  in  our  vessels, 
by  the  nations  with  whom  we  have  no  treaties,  yet 
she  gains  our  goods  when  found  in  the  vessels  of  the 
same  and  all  other  nations ;  and  we  believe  the  latter 
mass  to  be  greater  than  the  former." 

Thus,  then,  stood  the  business  antecedent  to  the 
treaty.  Great  Britain,  adhering  to  the  principle  of 
the  general  and  long  established  law  of  nations,  cap- 
tures French  property  in  our  vessels,  and  leaves  free 
our  property  in  French  vessels.  We  acquiesce  in 
this  practice,  without  even  a  remonstrance  or  mur- 
mur. The  French  minister  complains  of  it,  as  con- 
trary to  the  principles  of  neutrality.  We  reply  that, 
in  our  opinion,  it  is  not  contrary  to  those  principles 
— that  it  is  fully  warranted  by  the  general  law  of 
nations;  that  treaties,  which  establish  a  different 
rule,  are  merely  exceptions  to  that  law,  binding  only 
on  the  contracting  parties ;  that  having  no  treaty  of 
the  sort  with  Great  Britain,  we  should  be  at  a  loss  on 
what  ground  to  dispute  the  legitimacy  of  her  prac- 
tice. We  do  not  simply  forbear  to  oppose ;  we  do 
not  offer  to  France  as  an  excuse  for  our  forbearance, 
that  it  is  inconvenient  to  us,  at  the  moment,  to  as- 
sert a  questionable  right  at  the  hazard  of  war,  but 
we  tell  her  peremptorily  that,  in  our  opinion,  no  such 


Camillus  105 

right  exists,  and  that  the  conduct  of  Great  Britain 
in  the  particular  case  is  justified  by  the  law  of  nations ; 
neither  do  we  wrap  the  motive  of  our  forbearance  in 
silence,  nor  content  ourselves  with  revealing  it  con- 
fidentially to  France  alone,  but  we  publish  it  without 
reserve  to  the  world,  and  thus,  in  the  presence  of 
Great  Britain,  and  every  other  nation,  make  a  formal 
renunciation  of  the  pretension,  that  "free  ships 
shall  make  free  goods,  and  enemy  ships  enemy 
goods  " ;  no  counter  declaration  is  heard  from  either 
house  of  Congress. 

It  was  impossible  to  give  a  more  full  sanction  to 
the  opposite  principle  than  was  given  by  this  con- 
duct, and  these  public  and  positive  declarations 
of  our  Government.  It  was  impossible  more  com- 
pletely to  abandon  the  favorite  ground.  It  is  puerile 
to  attempt  to  discriminate  between  the  force  of  this 
species  of  renunciation  and  that  of  an  admission  of 
its  propriety  by  treaty.  The  conduct  of  a  govern- 
ment avowed  and  explained,  as  to  motives,  by  au- 
thentic public  declarations,  may  assert  or  renounce 
a  pretension  as  effectually  as  its  compacts.  Every 
nation,  with  whom  we  had  no  contrary  stipulation, 
could  say  to  us  as  well  before  as  since  the  treaty  with 
Great  Britain:  "Your  Government  has  explicitly 
admitted  that  free  ships  do  not  make  free  goods,  and 
you  have  no  right  to  complain  of  our  not  observing 
that  rule  towards  you."  Candor,  therefore,  would 
oblige  us  to  say  that  the  treaty  has  left  this  point 
where  it  found  it — that  it  has  only  not  obtained  from 
Great  Britain  a  concession  in  favor  of  an  inno- 
vation upon  the  law  of  nations,  which  it  is  desirable 


io6  Alexander  Hamilton 

to  establish,  but  which  cannot  be  claimed  as  matter 
of  right.  Though,  therefore,  it  may  not  have  the 
merit  of  strengthening,  it  has  not  the  demerit  of 
weakening,  the  ground. 

The  difference  in  our  position,  in  this  respect,  be- 
fore and  since  the  treaty  amounts  to  this,  that  be- 
fore the  treaty  the  Government  had  abandoned  the 
ground  through  one  organ,  Mr.  Jefferson;  by  the 
treaty,  it  continued  the  abandonment  through  an- 
other organ,  Mr.  Jay.  If  we  consider  the  organ  as 
the  voluntary  cause  in  each  case  (the  presumption 
of  which  is  equally  fair  in  both  cases) ,  and  if  there  be 
any  blame,  it  falls  more  heavily  on  Mr.  Jefferson 
than  on  Mr.  Jay;  for  the  former  founded  and  made 
the  retreat,  and  the  latter  only  did  not  advance 
from  the  disadvantageous  post  to  which  he  had  re- 
treated. In  other  words,  Mr.  Jay  did  only  not  re- 
cover the  ground  which  Mr.  Jefferson  had  lost.  And 
we  know  that,  in  general,  it  is  a  far  more  difficult  task 
to  regain  than  to  keep  an  advantageous  position. 

But,  in  truth,  no  blame  can  justly  be  imputed  in 
either  case.  The  law  of  nations  was  against  the  rule 
which  it  is  desired  to  introduce.  The  United  States 
could  not  have  insisted  upon  it  as  matter  of  right; 
and  in  point  of  policy  it  would  have  been  madness  in 
them  to  go  to  war,  to  support  an  innovation  upon 
the  pre-established  law.  It  was  not  honorable  to 
claim  a  right,  and  suffer  it  to  be  infracted  without 
resistance.  It  is  not  for  young  and  weak  nations  to 
attempt  to  enforce  novelties  or  pretensions  of  equi- 
vocal validity.  It  is  still  less  proper  for  them  to  con- 
tend, at  the  hazard  of  their  peace,  against  the  clear 


Camillus  107 

right  of  others.  The  object  was  truly  not  of  mo- 
ment enough  to  risk  much  upon  it.  To  use  the 
French  proverb,  "  The  game  was  not  worth  the  candle/' 
In  every  view,  therefore,  it  was  wise  to  desert  the 
pretension. 

So,  also,  in  the  midst  of  a  war,  like  that  in  which 
Great  Britain  was  engaged,  it  were  preposterous  to 
have  expected  that  she  would  have  acceded  to  a  new 
rule,  which,  under  the  circumstances  of  her  great 
maritime  superiority,  would  have  operated  so  much 
more  conveniently  to  her  enemy  than  to  herself. 
And  it  would  have  been  no  less  absurd  to  have  made 
her  accession  to  that  rule  the  sine  qua  non  of  an 
airangement  otherwise  expedient.  Here  again  the 
game  would  not  have  been  worth  the  candle. 

The  importance  of  the  rule  has  artfully  been  very 
much  magnified,  to  depreciate  proportion  ably  the 
treaty,  for  not  establishing  it.  It  is  to  be  remem- 
bered, that  if  something  is  gained  by  it,  something 
is  also  given  up.  It  depends  on  incalculable  cir- 
cumstances, whether,  in  a  particular  war,  most  will 
be  lost  or  gained.  Yet  the  rule  is,  upon  the  whole, 
a  convenient  one  to  neutral  powers.  But  it  cannot 
be  pretended  that  it  is  of  so  great  a  value,  as  that 
the  United  States  ought  to  adopt  it  as  a  maxim, 
never  to  make  a  treaty  of  commerce,  in  which  it  was 
not  recognized.  They  might  by  this  maxim  forego 
the  advantages  of  regulating  their  commercial  inter- 
course in  time  of  peace  with  several  foreign  powers, 
with  whom  they  have  extensive  relations  of  trade, 
by  fixed  and  useful  conventional  rules,  and  still  re- 
main subject  in  time  of  war  to  the  inconveniences 


io8  Alexander  Hamilton 

of  not  having  established,  with  those  powers,  the 
principle  to  which  they  make  that  sacrifice. 

Though,  therefore,  it  be  a  merit  to  a  certain  ex- 
tent in  a  treaty  to  contain  this  principle,  it  is  not  a 
positive  fault  or  blemish  that  it  does  not  contain  it. 
The  want  of  it  is  not  a  good  cause  of  objection  to  a 
treaty  otherwise  eligible. 

Let  me  add,  too,  in  the  spirit  of  Mr.  Jefferson's 
letter,  that  however  it  may  be  our  wish  to  establish 
the  rule  with  other  nations  besides  those  with  whom 
we  have  already  done  it,  this  requires  their  consent 
also,  of  course  their  conviction,  that  it  is  their  in- 
terest to  consent;  and  that,  considering  the  ob- 
stacles which  He  in  the  way,  the  attainment  of  the 
object  must  be  "a  work  of  time.''  It  presupposes, 
in  some  of  the  principal  maritime  powers,  a  great 
change  of  ideas,  which  is  not  to  be  looked  for  very 
suddenly.  It  was  not,  therefore,  to  have  been  ex- 
pected of  our  envoy,  that  he  was  to  have  accom- 
plished the  point  at  so  premature  and  so  unfavorable 
a  juncture. 

The  assertion,  that  he  has  abandoned  it,  is  made  in 
too  imquahfied  a  manner.  For  while  he  admits  the 
operation  for  the  present,  of  the  general  rule  of  the 
law  of  nations,  he  has,  by  the  12th  article,  engaged 
Great  Britain  in  a  stipulation,  that  the  parties  will, 
at  the  expiration  of  two  years  after  the  existing  war, 
renew  their  discussion,  and  endeavor  to  agree  whether 
in  any  and  what  cases  neutral  vessels  shall  protect 
enemy's  property.  It  is  true,  it  will  be  in  the  option 
of  Great  Britain  then  to  agree  or  not ;  but  it  is  not 
less  true  that  the  principle  is  retained  with  consent 


Camillus  109 

of  Great  Britain  in  a  negotiable  state.  So  far  perhaps 
some  ground  has  been  retrieved. 

I  confess,  however,  that  I  entertain  much  doubt 
as  to  the  probabiHty  of  a  speedy  general  establish- 
ment of  the  rule,  that  friendly  ships  shall  make 
friendly  goods,  and  enemy  ships  enemy  goods.  It  is 
a  rule  against  which,  it  is  to  be  feared,  the  prepon- 
derant maritime  power,  to  whatever  nation  this 
character  may  belong,  will  be  apt  to  struggle  with 
perseverance  and  effect,  since  it  would  tend  to  con- 
tract materially  the  means  of  that  power  to  annoy 
and  distress  her  enemies,  whose  inferiority  on  the  sea 
would  naturally  cause  their  commerce,  during  war, 
to  be  carried  on  in  neutral  bottoms.  This  considera- 
tion will  account  for  the  resistance  of  Great  Britain 
to  the  principle,  and  for  the  endeavors  of  some  other 
powers  to  promote  it;  and  it  deserves  notice,  that 
her  last  treaty  with  France  was  severely  assailed  by 
some  of  the  chiefs  of  opposition,  for  containing  a 
stipulation  in  favor  of  that  principle.  The  motive 
for  consenting  to  it,  in  this  instance,  probably  was, 
that  the  stipulation  was  likely  to  be  rendered,  in  a 
great  degree,  nugatory  by  the  relative  situation  of 
the  two  nations,  which,  in  almost  any  war  in  which 
one  of  the  two  was  engaged  on  one  side,  would  prob- 
ably render  the  other  a  party  on  the  opposite 
side. 

If  these  conjectures  be  right,  there  is  a  reflection 
which  lessens  much  the  value  of  stipulations  in  favor 
of  the  rule ;  that  so  long  as  one  or  more  of  the  mar- 
itime powers  disavow  it,  there  will  be  a  strong 
temptation  to  depart  from  a  scrupulous  observance 


no  Alexander  Hamilton 

of  such  stipulations  as  we,  in  relation  to  France, 
have  experienced  in  the  present  war. 

In  the  course  of  the  arguments  against  the  17th 
article,  for  virtually  admitting  the  right  of  search  in 
time  of  war,  the  objectors  have  had  the  temerity  to 
cite  the  opinion  of  Vatel,  as  being  opposed  to  that 
right;  and  a  mutilated  quotation  has  given  an  ap- 
pearance of  truth  to  the  assertion.  It  has  been  here- 
tofore shown,  by  passages  extracted  from  his  work, 
that  his  opinion,  so  far  from  denying  explicitly,  sup- 
ports the  right  to  search.  But  it  may  be  useful  to 
examine  the  part  of  it  which  has  been  tortured  into 
a  contrary  inference. 

After  affirming  the  right  of  search  (B.  3,  chap. 
7,  8,  14)  he  proceeds  thus:  "but  to  avoid  incon- 
veniences, violence,  and  every  other  irregularity,  the 
manner  of  the  search  is  settled  in  the  treaties  of 
navigation  and  commerce.  According  to  the  present 
custom,  credit  is  to  be  given  to  certificates  and  bills  of 
lading  produced  by  the  master  of  the  ship."  Hence 
it  is  alleged  the  right  to  search  is  turned  into  the 
right  of  inspecting  the  ship's  papers,  which,  being 
entitled  to  credit,  are  to  preclude  further  scrutiny. 

But  what  immediately  follows  destroys  this  con- 
clusion; the  words  "unless  any  ground  appear  in 
them,  or  there  be  very  good  reasons  for  suspecting 
their  validity,"  are  subjoined  to  the  clause  just 
quoted.  This  admits  clearly,  that  the  ship's  papers 
are  not  to  be  conclusive,  but  that,  upon  just  cause  of 
suspicion,  the  papers  may  be  disregarded,  and  the 
right  of  search  may  be  exercised. 

Who  is  to  be  the  judge  of  the  credit  due  to  the 


Camillus  1 1 1 

papers  and  of  the  just  cause  of  suspicion?  Mani- 
festly the  officer  of  the  belHgerent  party  who  visits 
the  neutral  vessel.  Then  what  does  the  whole 
amount  to?  Merely  this — that  ship's  papers  are 
entitled  to  a  certain  degree  of  respect  and  credit; 
how  much,  is  left  to  the  discretion  of  the  officer  of 
the  belligerent  party!  who,  if  he  be  not  satisfied  of 
the  fairness  and  validity  of  the  papers,  may  proceed 
to  their  verification,  by  a  more  strict  and  particular 
search,  and  then  if  he  still  sees,  or  supposes  he  sees, 
just  cause  of  suspicion,  he  may  carry  the  vessel  into 
a  port  of  his  own  country,  for  judicial  investigation. 
In  doing  this  he  acts  at  his  peril,  and  for  an  abuse  of 
his  discretion,  exposes  himself  to  damages  and  other 
punishment. 

This  is  the  true  and  evident  sense  of  Vatel,  and  it 
agrees  with  the  doctrine  advocated  in  these  papers, 
and,  I  will  add,  with  the  treaty  under  examination. 

The  17th  article  admits,  that  the  vessels  of  each 
party,  for  just  cause  of  suspicion  of  having  on  board 
enemy's  property,  or  of  carrying  to  the  enemy  con- 
traband articles,  may  be  captured  or  detained,  and 
carried  to  the  nearest  and  most  convenient  port  of 
the  belligerent  party,  to  the  end  that  enemy's  prop- 
erty and  contraband  articles  aboard  may  become 
lawful  prize.  But  so  far  from  countenancing  an}^ 
proceeding  without  just  cause  of  suspicion,  or  from 
exonerating  the  officer  of  the  belligerent  party  from 
a  responsibility  for  such  proceeding,  it  leaves  the 
law  of  nations,  in  this  particular,  in  full  force;  and 
contemplating  that  such  officer  shall  be  liable  for 
damages,  when  he  proceeds  without  just  cause  of 


112  Alexander  Hamilton 

suspicion,  provides  that  all  proper  measures  shall  be 
taken  to  prevent  delay  in  deciding  the  cases  of  ships 
or  cargoes  brought  in  for  adjudication,  or  in  the 
payment  or  recovery  of  any  indemnification  adjudged 
or  agreed  to  he  paid  to  the  masters  or  owners  of  such 
ships.  Besides  which,  the  19th  article  stipulates, 
in  order  that  more  abundant  care  may  be  taken  for 
the  security  of  the  respective  subjects  and  citizens 
of  the  contracting  parties,  and  to  prevent  their  suf- 
fering injuries  by  the  men-of-war  and  privateers  of 
either  party,  that  the  commanders  of  ships  of  war 
and  privateers  shall  forbear  doing  any  damage  to 
those  of  the  other  party,  committing  any  outrage 
against  them;  and  that  if  they  act  to  the  contrary, 
they  shall  he  punished,  and  shall  also  be  bound  in 
their  persons  and  estates  to  make  satisfaction  and 
reparation  for  all  damages,  and  the  interest  thereof,  of 
whatever  nature  the  said  damages  may  he.  And  fur- 
ther, after  establishing  that  the  commanders  of 
privateers  shall,  before  they  are  commissioned,  give 
security  to  satisfy  all  damages  and  injuries,  it  adds, 
that  in  all  cases  of  aggressions  their  commissions 
shall  be  revoked  and  annulled. 

These  provisions  not  only  conform  to,  and  corrobo- 
rate the  injunctions  of  the  laws  of  nations,  but  they 
refute  the  assertion,  that  the  treaty  is  altogether  de- 
ficient in  precautions  for  guarding  neutral  rights; 
since  those  above-mentioned  are  among  the  most 
efficacious.  It  is  not  presumable  that  any  stipula- 
tions have  been  or  can  be  made  which  will  take  away 
all  discretion  from  the  marine  officers  of  the  belli- 
gerent parties;   for  this  would  be  a  total  surrender 


Camillus  113 

of  the  rights  of  belligerent  to  neutral  nations,  and  so 
long  as  any  discretion  is  left,  its  right  or  wrong  exer- 
cise will  depend  on  the  personal  character  of  each 
officer;  and  abuses  can  only  be  restrained  by  the 
penalties  that  await  them.  Those  stipulations  of 
treaties,  then,  which  reinforce  the  laws  of  nations  as 
to  the  infliction  of  penalties,  are  the  most  effectual 
of  the  precautions  which  treaties  can  adopt  for  the 
security  of  neutral  rights ;  and  in  this  particular  the 
treaty  with  Great  Britain  is  to  the  full  as  provident 
as  our  other  treaties.  In  one  point  I  believe  it  is 
more  so;  for  it  expressly  stipulates  a  revocation  of 
the  commissions  of  the  commanders  of  privateers 
for  the  aggressions  they  may  commit. 

Is  not  the  passage  last  cited  from  Vatel  a  true 
commentary  on  those  stipulations,  for  regulating  and 
mitigating  the  right  of  search,  which  are  found  in 
our  own  and  other  treaties  ?  Do  they  not  all  intend 
to  reserve  to  the  belligerent  party  a  right  of  judging 
of  the  validity  and  fidelity  of  the  papers  to  be  ex- 
hibited, and  of  extending  the  search  or  not,  according 
to  the  circumstances  of  just  suspicion  which  do  or  do 
not  appear?  and  if  this  be  their  true  construction, 
as  it  certainly  is  their  construction  in  practice,  which 
our  own  experience  testifies,  to  what,  after  all,  do 
they  amount,  more  than  without  them  the  laws 
of  nations,  as  universally  recognized,  of  themselves 
pronounce  ?  What  real  security  do  they  afford  more 
than  the  treaty  with  Great  Britain  affords? 

It  is  much  to  be  suspected,  that  there  will  always 
be  foimd  advantages  essentially  nominal,  operating 
or  not  according  to  the  strength  or  weakness  of  the 


114  Alexander  Hamilton 

neutral  party;  which,  if  strong,  will  find  abundant 
foundation  in  the  acknowledged  laws  of  nations  on 
which  to  rest  the  protection  of  its  rights. 

It  has  been  said  to  be  just  matter  of  surprise,  that 
these  precautions  should  have  no  place  in  a  treaty 
with  Great  Britain,  whose  conduct  on  the  seas  so 
particularly  suggested  and  enforced  every  guard  to 
our  rights  that  could  be  reasonably  insisted  on. 
Observations  of  this  kind  assume  constantly  the 
supposition  that  we  had  it  in  our  power  to  fashion 
every  provision  of  the  treaty  exactly  to  our  own 
taste,  and  that  the  ideas  of  the  other  contracting 
party  were  to  have  no  influence  even  upon  the  minor 
features  of  the  contract.  But  this  supposition  is 
absurd;  and  a  treaty  may  still  be  entitled  to  our 
approbation,  which  adjusts  acceptably  the  great 
points  of  interest,  though  in  some  of  its  details  it 
falls  short  of  our  desires.  Nor  can  any  well-in- 
formed man  sincerely  deny  that  it  was  to  have  been 
expected,  that  an  adjustment  of  the  particulars  in 
question  would  fall  short  of  our  ideas.  It  may  be 
answered,  that  we  were  then  at  liberty  not  to  make 
the  treaty;  so  we  were,  but  does  it  follow  that  it 
would  have  been  wise  to  split  on  such  points  ? — upon 
a  just  estimate,  their  intrinsic  value  is  very  moderate. 

Camillus. 


NO.    XXXII 

1795- 

The  eighteenth  article  of  the  treaty,  which  regu- 
lates the  subject  of  contraband,  has  been  grievously 
misrepresented;   the  objections  used  against  it  with 


Camillus  115 

most  acrimony,  are  disingenuous  and  unfounded! 
Yet  while  I  make  this  assertion,  which,  I  flatter  my- 
self, I  shall  be  able  to  prove,  I  shall  not  pretend  to 
maintain  that  it  is  an  article  completely  satisfactory. 
I  even  admit  that  it  has  one  unpleasant  ingredient 
in  it,  and  I  am  convinced  that  our  envoy  must  have 
consented  to  it  with  reluctance. 

But  while  candor  demands  this  concession,  it 
equally  admonishes  us,  that,  under  the  circum- 
stances of  the  moment,  the  points  in  this  respect  to 
be  adjusted  were  peculiarly  unmanageable ;  that  the 
position  of  the  other  party  rendered  an  arrangement 
entirely  agreeable  to  us,  impracticable;  that  without 
compromise  nothing  could  have  been  regulated; 
that  the  article  made  no  change  for  the  worse  in  our 
prior  situation,  but  in  some  particulars  made  our 
ground  better;  and  that  estimating  truly  the  rela- 
tive circumstances  of  the  parties,  there  is  no  proba- 
bility that  any  thing  more  acceptable  could  have 
been  established. 

I  will  add,  that  a  degree  of  imperfection,  which 
may  fairly  be  attributed  to  this  article,  is  far  from 
being  of  such  importance  as,  on  solid  calculations, 
ought  to  defeat  the  treaty.  No  clear  right  is  aban- 
doned, no  material  interest  of  the  nation  injured. 

It  is  one  thing,  whether  every  part  of  the  treaty 
be  satisfactory;  another,  and  a  very  different  thing, 
whether  in  the  aggregate  it  be  eligible  or  not,  and 
ought  to  be  accepted  or  rejected.  Nations  could 
never  make  contracts  with  one  another  if  each  were 
to  require  that  every  part  of  it  should  be  adjusted  by 
its  own  standard  of  right  and  expediency.     The  true 


ii6  Alexander  Hamilton 

question  always  is  upon  the  collective  merits  of  the 
instrument;  whether,  upon  the  whole,  it  reasonably 
accommodates  the  opinions  and  interests  of  the 
parties.  Tried  by  this  test,  the  treaty  negotiated 
with  Great  Britain  fully  justifies  the  acceptance  of  it 
by  the  constituted  authorities  of  our  country,  and 
claims  the  acquiescence  of  every  good  citizen. 

The  most  labored,  and,  at  the  same  time,  the  most 
false  of  the  charges  against  the  eighteenth  article  is, 
that  it  allows  provisions  to  be  contraband  in  cases 
not  heretofore  warranted  by  the  laws  of  nations,  and 
refers  to  the  belligerent  party  the  decision  of  what 
those  cases  are.  This  is  the  general  form  of  the 
charge.  The  draft  of  a  petition  to  the  Legislature 
of  Virginia,  reduces  it  to  this  shape.  The  treaty 
"  expressly  admits  that  provisions  are  to  be  held  con- 
traband in  cases  other  than  when  bound  to  an  in- 
vested place,  and  impliedly  admits  that  such  cases 
exist  at  present." 

The  first  is  a  palpable  untruth,  which  may  be  de- 
tected by  a  bare  perusal  of  the  article.  The  last  is 
an  untrue  inference,  impregnated  with  the  malig- 
nant insinuation  that  there  was  a  design  to  sanction 
the  unwarrantable  pretension  of  a  right  to  inflict 
famine  on  a  whole  nation. 

Before  we  proceed  to  an  analysis  of  the  article,  let 
us  review  the  prior  situation  of  the  parties.  Great 
Britain,  it  is  known,  had  taken  and  acted  upon  the 
ground  that  she  had  a  right  to  stop  and  detain,  on 
payment  for  them,  provisions  belonging  to  neutrals, 
going  to  the  dominions  of  France.  For  this  violent 
and  impolitic  measure,  which  the  final  opinion  of 


Camillus  ii7 

mankind  will  certainly  condemn,  she  found  color  in 
the  sayings  of  some  writers  of  reputation  on  public 
laws. 

A  passage  of  this  kind,  from  Vatel,  has  been  more 
than  once  quoted,  in  these  terms:  "Commodities, 
particularly  used  in  war,  and  the  importation  of 
which,  to  an  enemy,  is  prohibited,  are  called  contra- 
band goods.  Such  are  military  and  naval  stores, 
timber,  horses,  and  even  provisions  in  certain  junc- 
tures, when  there  are  hopes  of  reducing  the  enemy  by 
famine.''  Heinecius  '  countenances  the  same  opin- 
ion, and  even  Grotius  seems  to  lean  towards  it.' 

The  United  States,  with  reason,  disputed  this  con- 
struction of  the  law  of  nations ;  restraining  the  gen- 
eral propositions  which  appear  to  favor  it,  to  those 
cases  in  which  the  chance  of  reducing  by  famine  was 
manifest  and  palpable,  such  as  the  cases  of  particular 
places,  bona  fide  besieged,  blockaded,  or  invested. 
The  Government  accordingly  remonstrated  against 
the  proceeding  of  Great  Britain,  and  made  every 
effort  against  it  which  prudence,  in  the  then  posture 
of  affairs  would  permit.  The  order  for  seizing  pro- 
visions was,  after  a  time,  revoked. 

In  this  state  our  envoy  found  the  business.  Pend- 
ing the  very  war  in  which  Great  Britain  had  exer- 
cised the  pretension,  with  the  same  administration 
which  had  done  it,  was  it  to  have  been  expected 
that  she  would,  in  a  treaty  with  us,  even  virtually 
or   impliedly   have   acknowledged   the  injustice   or 

*  Law  of  Nature  and  Nations,  Book  II.,  chap,  ix.,  sec.  201.  Navi- 
bus  oh  vect. 

3  Book  III.,  chaps,  i.  and  v.,  3;  chaps,  i.  and  x. 


ii8  Alexander  Hamilton 

impropriety  of  the  conduct?  Here  was  no  escape,  as 
in  the  instance  of  the  order  of  the  6th  of  November, 
1793,  in  the  misconceptions  of  her  officers.  The 
question  was  to  condemn  a  deliberate  and  unam- 
biguous act  of  the  Administration  itself.  The  pride, 
the  reputation,  and  the  interest  of  that  Administra- 
tion forbade  it. 

On  our  side,  to  admit  the  pretensions  of  Great 
Britain  was  still  more  impossible.  We  had  every  in- 
ducement of  character,  right,  and  interest  against  it. 
What  was  the  natural  and  only  issue  out  of  this  em- 
barrassment? Plainly,  to  leave  the  point  unsettled; 
to  get  rid  of  it ;  to  let  it  remain  substantially  where 
it  was  before  the  treaty.  This,  I  have  good  ground 
to  believe,  was  the  real  understanding  of  the  two 
negotiators;   and  the  article  has  fulfilled  that  view. 

After  enumerating  specifically  what  articles  shall 
be  deemed  contraband,  it  proceeds  thus,  "And 
whereas  the  difficulty  of  agreeing  on  the  precise  cases, 
in  which  alone  provisions  and  other  articles,  not  gener- 
ally contraband,  may  be  regarded  as  such,  renders 
it  expedient  to  provide  against  the  inconveniences 
and  misunderstandings  which  might  thence  arise: 
It  is  further  agreed,  that  whenever  any  such  articles, 
so  becoming  contraband  according  to  the  laws  of  na- 
tions, shall,  for  that  reason,  be  seized,  the  same  shall 
not  be  confiscated,  but  the  owners  thereof  shall  be 
speedily  and  completely  indemnified;  and  the  captors, 
or,  in  their  default,  the  government  under  whose 
authority  they  act,  shall  pay  to  the  masters  or  own- 
ers of  such  vessels,  the  full  value  of  all  articles  with  a 
reasonable  mercantile  profit  thereon,  together  with 


Camillus  119 

the  freight  and  also  the  demurrage,  incident  to  such 
detention." 

The  difficulty  of  agreeing  on  the  precise  cases  in 
which  articles,  not  generally  contraband,  become  so, 
from  particular  circumstances,  is  expressly  assigned 
as  the  motive  to  the  stipulation  which  follows.  This 
excludes  the  supposition  that  any  cases  whatever 
were  intended  to  be  admitted  or  agreed.  But  this 
difficulty  rendered  it  expedient  to  provide  against 
the  inconveniences  and  misunderstandings  which 
might  thence  arise;  a  provision,  with  this  view  is, 
therefore,  made,  which  is  that  of  liberal  compensation 
for  the  articles  taken.  The  evident  intent  of  this 
provision  is,  that  in  doubtful  cases,  the  inconveniences 
to  the  neutral  party  being  obviated  or  lessened  by 
compensation,  there  may  be  the  less  cause  or  tempta- 
tion to  controversy  and  rupture,  the  affair  may  be 
more  susceptible  of  negotiation  and  accommodation. 
More  than  this  cannot  be  pretended;  because  it  is 
further  agreed,  "that  whenever  any  such  articles  so 
become  contraband,  according  to  the  existing  laws  of 
nations,  shall,  for  that  reason,  be  seized,  the  same 
shall  not  be  confiscated,  but  the  owners  thereof  shall 
be  speedily  and  completely  indemnified,"  etc.,  etc. 

Thus  the  criterion  of  the  cases,  in  which  articles, 
not  generally  contraband,  may,  from  particular  cir- 
cumstances, become  so,  is  expressly  the  existing  law 
of  nations;  in  other  words,  the  law  of  nations  at 
the  time  the  transaction  happens.  When  these  laws 
pronounce  them  contraband,  they  may,  for  that 
reason,  be  seized;  when  otherwise,  they  may  not  be 
seized.     Each  party  is  as  free  as  the  other  to  decide 


I20  Alexander  Hamilton 

whether  the  laws  of  nations  do,  in  the  given  case, 
pronounce  them  contraband  or  not,  and  neither  is 
obliged  to  be  governed  by  the  opinion  of  the  other. 
If  one  party,  on  a  false  pretext  of  being  authorized  by 
the  laws  of  nations,  makes  a  seizure,  the  other  is  at 
full  liberty  to  contest  it,  to  appeal  to  those  laws,  and, 
if  it  thinks  fit,  to  oppose,  even  to  reprisals  and  war. 
This  is  the  express  tenor  of  the  provision — there  is 
nothing  to  the  contrary;  nothing  that  narrows  the 
ground ;  nothing  that  warrants  either  party  in  mak- 
ing a  seizure,  which  the  law  of  nations,  independent 
of  the  treaty,  permits ;  nothing  which  obliges  either 
party  to  submit  to  one,  when  it  is  of  opinion  the  law 
of  nations  has  been  violated  by  it. 

But  as  liberal  compensation  is  to  be  made  in  every 
case  of  seizure,  whereof  difference  of  opinion  happens, 
it  will  become  a  question  of  prudence  and  expedi- 
ency, whether  to  be  satisfied  with  the  compensation, 
or  to  seek  further  redress.  The  provision  will,  in 
doubtful  cases,  render  an  accommodation  of  opinion 
the  more  easy,  and,  as  a  circumstance  conducing 
to  the  preservation  of  peace,  is  a  valuable  ingredient 
in  the  treaty.  A  very  different  phraseology  was  to 
have  been  expected,  if  the  intention  had  been,  to 
leave  each  party  at  liberty  to  seize,  agreeably  to  its 
own  opinion  of  the  law  of  nations,  upon  the  condition 
of  making  compensation.  The  stipulation  would 
thus  have  been:  "  It  is  agreed,  that  whenever  either 
of  the  contracting  parties  shall  seize  any  such  ar- 
ticles so  becoming  contraband,  and  which  shall,  for 
that  reason,  be  seized";  this  makes,  not  the  opinion 
of  either  party,  but  the  fact  of  the  articles  having 


Camillus  121 

become  contraband  by  the  laws  of  nations,  the  condi- 
tion of  the  seizure. 

A  cavil  has  arisen  on  the  term  "existing,''  as  if  it 
had  the  effect  of  enabling  one  of  the  parties  to  make 
a  law  of  nations  for  the  occasion.  But  this  is  a  mere 
cavil. 

No  one  nation  can  make  a  law  of  nations ;  no  posi- 
tive regulation  of  one  state,  or  of  a  partial  nomina- 
tion of  states,  can  pretend  to  this  character.  A  law 
of  nations  is  a  law  which  nature,  agreement,  or  usage, 
has  established  between  nations;  as  this  may  vary 
from  one  period  to  another  by  agreement  or  usage, 
the  article  very  properly  uses  the  term  "existing," 
to  denote  that  law  which,  at  the  time  the  transaction 
may  happen,  shall  be  then  the  law  of  nations.  This 
is  a  plain  and  obvious  use  of  the  term,  which  nothing 
but  a  spirit  of  misrepresentation  could  have  per- 
verted to  a  different  meaning. 

The  argument  against  the  foregoing  construction 
is  in  substance  this  (viz.) :  it  is  now  a  settled  doc- 
trine of  the  law  of  nations  that  provisions  and  other 
articles,  not  generally  contraband,  can  only  become 
so  when  going  to  a  place  besieged,  blockaded,  or  in- 
vested; cases  of  this  kind  are  fully  provided  for  in 
a  subsequent  part  of  the  article;  the  implication, 
therefore,  is  that  something  more  was  intended  to  be 
embraced  in  the  antecedent  part. 

Let  us  first  examine  the  fact,  whether  all  the  cases 
of  that  kind  are  comprehended  in  the  subsequent 
part  of  the  article.  I  say  they  are  not.  The  remain- 
ing clause  of  the  article  divides  itself  into  two  parts. 
The  first  describes  the  case  of  a  vessel  sailing  for  a 


122  Alexander  Hamilton 

port  or  place  belonging  to  an  enemy,  without  know- 
ing that  the  same  is  either  besieged,  blockaded,  or 
invested ;  and  provides  that,  in  such  case,  the  vessel 
may  be  turned  away,  but  not  detained,  nor  her 
cargo,  if  not  contraband,  confiscated,  unless  after 
notice  she  shall  again  attempt  to  enter.  The  second 
describes  the  case  of  a  vessel,  or  goods,  which  had 
entered  into  such  port  or  place  before  it  was  be- 
sieged, blockaded,  or  invested,  and  declares  that  the 
one  or  the  other  shall  not  be  liable  to  confiscation, 
but  shall  be  restored  to  the  owners  thereof.  These 
are  the  only  cases  described  or  provided  for.  A 
third,  which  occurs  on  the  slightest  reflection,  is  not 
mentioned:  the  case  of  a  vessel  going  to  a  port  or 
place  which  is  besieged,  blockaded,  or  invested,  with 
notice  of  its  being  in  that  state  when  she  commences 
her  voyage,  or  previous  to  her  receiving  notice  from 
the  besieging,  blockading,  or  investing  party.  This 
is  left  to  the  operation  of  the  general  law  of  nations, 
except  so  far  as  it  may  be  affected  in  respect  to  com- 
pensation by  the  antecedent  clause.  Thus  the  fact, 
which  is  the  foundation  of  the  argument,  fails,  and 
with  it,  of  course,  the  argument  itself. 

But  had  this  been  otherwise,  the  conclusion  would 
still  have  been  erroneous;  the  two  clauses  are  en- 
tirely independent  of  each  other,  and  though  they 
might  both  contemplate  the  same  cases  in  whole, 
or  in  part,  they  do  it  with  an  eye  to  very  different 
purposes. 

The  object  of  the  first  is  to  lessen  the  danger  of 
misunderstanding,  by  establishing  this  general  rule, 
that  whenever  articles,  not  commonly  contraband, 


Camillus  123 

become  so  from  particular  circumstances,  according 
to  the  law  of  nations,  they  shall  still  not  be  confis- 
cated, but,  when  seized,  the  owners  of  them  shall  be 
indemnified. 

The  object  of  the  last  is  to  regulate  some  special 
consequences  w4th  regard  to  vessels  and  goods  going 
to,  or  which  had  previously  gone  to  places  besieged, 
blockaded,  or  invested;  and  in  respect  to  which  the 
dispositions  of  the  laws  of  nations  may  have  been 
deemed  doubtful  or  too  rigorous.  Thus  it  is  held 
that  the  laws  of  nations  permit  the  confiscation  of 
ships  and  goods  going  to  places  besieged,  blockaded, 
or  invested;  but  this  clause  decides  that  if  going 
without  notice,  so  far  from  being  confiscated,  they 
shall  not  even  be  detained,  but  shall  be  permitted  to 
go  whithersoever  they  please.  If  they  persist  after 
notice,  then  the  contumacy  shall  be  punished  with 
confiscation.  In  both  instances  the  consequence  is 
entirely  different  from  every  thing  in  the  antecedent 
clause. 

There,  there  is  seizure,  with  compensation.  Here, 
in  one  instance,  seizure  is  forbidden,  and  permission 
to  go  elsewhere  is  enjoined.  In  the  other  instances, 
the  offending  things  are  confiscated,  which  excludes 
the  idea  of  compensation.  Again,  the  last  part 
of  the  last  clause  stipulates,  in  the  case  which  it  sup- 
poses, the  restoration  of  the  property  to  its  owners, 
and  so  excludes  both  seizure  and  compensation. 
Hence  it  is  apparent  the  objects  of  the  two  clauses 
are  entirely  foreign  to  each  other,  and  that  no  argu- 
ment nor  inference  whatever  can  be  drawn  from  the 
one  to  the  other. 


124  Alexander  Hamilton 

If  it  be  asked,  what  other  cases  there  can  be, 
except  those  of  places  besieged,  blockaded,  or  in- 
vested? and  if  none  other,  what  difficulty  in  defining 
them?  why  leave  the  point  so  vague  and  indeter- 
minate ?  One  answer,  which  indeed  has  already  been 
given  in  substance,  is,  that  the  situation  of  one  of  the 
parties  prevented  an  agreement  at  the  time;  that 
not  being  able  to  agree,  they  could  not  define ;  and 
the  alternative  was  to  avoid  definition.  The  want 
of  definition  only  argues  want  of  agreement.  It  is 
strange  logic  to  assert,  that  this  or  that  is  admitted, 
because  nothing  is  defined. 

Another  answer  is,  that  even  if  the  parties  had 
been  agreed  that  there  were  no  other  cases  than 
those  of  besieged,  blockaded,  or  invested  places,  still 
there  would  have  remained  much  room  for  dispute 
about  the  precise  cases,  owing  to  the  impracticability 
of  defining  what  is  a  besieged,  blockaded,  or  invested 
place.  About  this  there  has  been  frequent  contro- 
versy; and  the  fact  is  so  complicated,  puts  on  such 
a  variety  of  shapes,  that  no  definition  can  well  be 
devised,  which  will  suit  all.  Thence  nations,  in  their 
compacts  with  each  other,  frequently  do  not  at- 
tempt one;  and  where  the  attempt  has  been  made, 
it  has  left  almost  as  much  room  for  dispute  about 
the  definition  as  there  was  about  the  thing. 

Moreover,  is  it  impossible  to  conceive  other  cases 
than  those  mentioned  above,  in  which  provisions  and 
other  articles  not  generally  contraband  might,  on 
rational  groimds,  be  deemed  so?  What  if  they  were 
going  expressly,  and  with  notice,  to  a  besieging  army, 
whereby  it  might  obtain  a  supply  essential  to  the 


Camillus  125 

success  of  its  operations?  Is  there  no  doubt  that  it 
would  be  justifiable  in  such  case  to  seize  them  ?  Can 
the  liberty  of  trade  be  said  to  apply  to  any  instance 
of  direct  and  immediate  aid  to  a  military  expedition  ? 
It  would  be  at  least  a  singular  effect  of  the  rule,  if 
provisions  could  be  carried  without  interruption  for 
the  supply  of  a  Spanish  army  besieging  Gibraltar, 
when,  if  destined  for  the  supply  of  the  garrison  in 
that  place,  they  might,  of  right,  be  seized  by  a  Span- 
ish fleet. 

The  calumniators  of  the  article  have  not  had  the 
candor  to  notice  that  it  is  not  confined  to  provisions, 
but  speaks  of  provisions  and  other  articles.  Even 
this  is  an  ingredient  which  combats  the  supposition 
that  countenance  was  intended  to  be  given  to  the 
pretension  of  Great  Britain  with  regard  to  provisions 
which,  depending  on  a  reason  peculiar  to  itself,  can- 
not be  deemed  to  be  supported  by  a  clause  includ- 
ing other  articles,  to  which  that  reason  is  entirely 
inapplicable. 

There  is  one  more  observation  which  has  been 
made  against  this  part  of  the  article  which  may  de- 
serve a  moment's  attention.  It  is  this,  that  though 
the  true  meaning  of  the  clause  be  such  as  I  contend 
for,  still  the  existence  of  it  affords  to  Great  Britain  a 
pretext  for  abuse  which  she  may  improve  to  our  dis- 
advantage. I  answer,  it  is  difficult  to  guard  against 
all  the  perversions  of  a  contract  which  ill  faith  may 
suggest.  But  we  have  the  same  seciu^ity  against 
abuses  of  this  sort,  which  we  have  against  those  of 
other  kinds,  namely,  the  right  of  judging  for  our- 
selves, and  the  power  of  causing  our  rights  to  be 


126  Alexander  Hamilton 

respected.  We  have  this  plain  and  decisive  reply- 
to  make,  to  any  uncandid  construction  which  Great 
Britain  may,  at  any  time,  endeavor  to  raise:  "The 
article  pointedly  and  explicitly  makes  the  existing 
law  of  nations  the  standard  of  the  cases  in  which  you 
may  rightfully  seize  provisions  and  other  articles  not 
generally  contraband.  This  law  does  not  authorize 
the  seizure  in  the  instance  in  question;  you  have 
consequently  no  warrant  under  the  treaty  for  what 
you  do." 

The  same  disingenuous  spirit  which  tinctures  all 
the  conduct  of  the  adversaries  of  the  treaty,  has  been 
hardy  enough  to  impute  to  it  the  last  order  of  Great 
Britain,  to  seize  provisions  going  to  the  dominions 
of  France. 

Strange,  that  an  order  issued  before  the  treaty  had 
ever  been  considered  in  this  country,  and  embracing 
the  other  neutral  powers  besides  the  United  States, 
should  be  represented  as  the  fruit  of  that  instru- 
ment! '  The  appearances  are,  that  a  motive  no  less 
imperious  than  that  of  impending  scarcity  has  great 
share  in  dictating  the  measure,  and  time,  I  am  per- 
suaded, will  prove  that  it  will  not  ever  be  pretended 
to  justify  it  by  any  thing  in  the  treaty. 

Camillus. 


NO.    XXXIII 

1796. 
The  course  thus  far  pursued  in  the  discussion  of  the 
1 8th  article  has  inverted  the  order  of  it,  as  it  stands 

^  As  reasonable  would  it  be  to  place  to  its  account  the  similar  order 
which  was  issued  before  the  mission  of  an  envoy  was  thought  of. 


Camillus  127 

in  the  treaty.  It  is  composed  of  three  clauses,  the  two 
last  of  which  have  been  first  examined ;  I  thought  it 
advisable,  in  the  outset,  to  dispose  of  an  objection 
which  has  been  the  principal  source  of  clamor. 

The  first  clause  of  that  which  remains  to  be  ex- 
amined enumerates  the  articles  which,  it  is  agreed, 
shall  be  deemed  contraband  of  war.  These  are,  "  all 
arms,  and  implements  serving  for  the  purpose  of 
war,  such  as  cannon,  muskets,  mortars,  petards, 
bombs,  grenadoes,  carcases,  saucisses,  carriages  for 
cannon,  musket-rests,  bandoliers,  gunpowder,  match, 
saltpetre,  balls,  pikes,  swords,  head-pieces,  cuirasses, 
halberts,  lances,  javelins,  horse-furniture,  holsters, 
belts,  and  generally  all  other  implements  of  war;  as 
also  timber  for  ship-building,  tar  or  rosin,  copper  in 
sheets,  sails,  hemp,  and  cordage,  and  generally  what- 
ever may  serve  directly  to  the  equipment  of  vessels, 
un wrought  iron  and  fir  planks  only  excepted." 

All  which  articles  are  declared  to  be  just  objects 
of  confiscation,  when  attempted  to  be  carried  to  any 
enemy  of  either  party. 

It  is  well  understood,  that  war  abridges  the  liberty 
of  trade  of  neutral  nations ;  and  that  it  is  not  lawful 
for  them  to  supply  either  of  two  belligerent  parties 
with  any  article  deemed  contraband  of  war;  nor 
may  they  supply  any  article  whatever  to  a  place  be- 
sieged, blockaded,  or  invested.  The  former  case  in- 
cludes a  special  catalogue  of  articles  which  have  an 
immediate  reference  to  war;  the  latter  extends  to 
all  kinds  of  goods  and  merchandise.  The  penalty  in 
both  cases  is  confiscation. 

These   positions   have   not   been   disputed.     The 


128  Alexander  Hamilton 

only  question  which  has  been  or  can  be  raised,  must 
respect  the  enimieration  of  the  articles  which  are  to 
be  considered  as  contraband. 

In  comparing  the  enumeration  in  the  present 
treaty,  with  that  of  our  former  treaties,  we  find  the 
differences  to  be  these.  Our  former  treaties  include 
"horses,''  and  one  of  them  "soldiers,"  which  our 
present  does  not;  but  our  present  includes  "timber 
for  ship-building,  tar  or  rosin,  copper  in  sheets,  sails, 
hemp,  and  cordage,  and  generally  whatever  may 
serve  directly  to  the  equipment  of  vessels,  un wrought 
iron  and  fir  planks  only  excepted,"  which  are  not  to 
be  found  in  our  former  treaties. 

It  is  alleged  that  the  including  of  these  articles  is 
an  extension  of  the  list  of  contraband  beyond  the 
limit  of  the  modern  law  of  nations;  in  support  of 
which  allegation,  it  is  afhrmed,  that  they  have  been 
excluded  by  the  uniform  tenor  of  the  treaties  which 
have  been  formed  for  more  than  a  century  past. 

Though  this  position  will  not,  upon  careful  exam- 
ination, appear  correct;  yet  it  is  so  far  foimded,  as 
to  claim  an  acknowledgment,  that  the  article  -under 
consideration  has,  in  this  instance,  pursued  the  rigor 
of  the  law  of  nations.  It  was  to  this  I  alluded,  when 
I  observed  that  it  contained  one  impleasant  ingre- 
dient. 

It  is  a  fact,  that  far  the  greater  proportion  of 
modem  treaties  exclude  naval  stores  or  articles  for 
ship-building;  yet  this  is  not  universally  the  case. 

By  the  third  article  of  the  treaty  of  alliance  and 
commerce  between  Great  Britain  and  Denmark,  in 
1670,  the  parties  agree,  "not  to  furnish  the  enemies 


Camillus  129 

of  each  other  with  any  provisions  of  war,  as  soldiers, 
arms,  engines,  guns,  ships,  or  other  necessaries  for 
the  use  of  war,  nor  to  suffer  the  same  to  be  furnished 
by  their  subjects."  An  explanation  of  this  article 
was  made  by  a  convention,  dated  the  4th  of  July, 
1780,  which  after  enumerating  as  contraband  the 
usual  catalogue  of  military  implements,  adds,  in  the 
precise  terms  of  our  article,  "  as  also  timber  for  ship- 
building, tar,  rosin,  copper  in  sheets,  sails,  hemp, 
and  cordage,  and  generally  whatever  may  serve 
directly  to  the  equipment  of  vessels,  un wrought  iron 
and  fir  planks  only  excepted." 

In  a  series  of  treaties  between  Great  Britain  and 
Portugal,  down  to  the  year  1703,  I  do  not  discover 
that  there  has  ever  been  a  regulation  of  the  articles 
which  are  to  be  treated  as  contraband,  between 
these  powers. 

And  between  Sweden  and  Great  Britain,  the  nth 
article  of  a  treaty,  entered  into  in  1661  (and  still 
in  force  unaltered,  though  a  subsequent  commercial 
treaty  was  made  between  those  powers  as  late  as 
1776),  subjects  to  confiscation  equally  all  articles 
called  contraband,  and  especially  money,  provisions, 
etc.  This  specification  not  being  complete,  naval 
stores  are  left  upon  the  open  ground  of  the  law  of 
nations;  but  money  and  provisions  are  superadded. 
This  latitude  would  bear  little  doubt  as  to  the  inten- 
tion to  include  naval  stores.' 


^  An  opinion  has  been  propagated  that  Sweden  armed  in  concert 
with  Denmark,  in  order  to  maintain  the  neutral  right  of  carrying  com 
and  flotir  to  France,  in  opposition  to  the  convention  of  March,  1793, 
between  Great  Britain  and  Russia;    and  that  in  consequence  of  this 


130  Alexander  Hamilton 

It  appears  from  these  specimens,  that  there  is  not 
a  perfect  uniformity  in  the  conventions  between 
nations ;  and  that  no  purely  positive  law  of  nations 
can  be  deduced  from  that  source. 

If  we  call  to  our  aid  the  principles  of  reason  and 
'natural  justice,  which  are  the  great  foundations  of 
the  law  of  nations,  we  shall  not  discover,  in  this 
instance,  data  as  certain  as  could  be  wished,  for 
a  satisfactory  conclusion;  and  the  soundest  deter- 
mination which  we  can  adopt  will  be,  that  beyond  a 
certain  point,  the  question  is  in  a  great  degree  arbi- 
trary, and  must  depend  materially  upon  conven- 
tional regulation  between  nation  and  nation.    Hence 

proceeding,  the  remonstrances  of  these  powers  have  proved  more  suc- 
cessful than  we  have  been  in  obtaining  satisfaction  from  Great  Britain. 

This  opinion  is,  throughout,  an  error,  made  use  of  by  those  whose 
persevering  aim  has  been,  by  silencing  truth,  reason,  and  moderation, 
and  inflaming  the  angry  passions  of  the  community,  to  involve  the 
country  in  anarchy  and  war.  The  authors  of  this  imposture,  as  well 
as  the  exalted  patriots  who  have  seen  in  the  memorial  of  our  envoy 
the  humiliation  of  our  country,  are  referred  to  a  "collection  of  state 
papers  relative  to  the  war  against  France,"  published  by  Debret,  in 
1794.  The  perusal  of  the  Swedish  state  papers,  as  well  as  the  memo- 
rials of  the  able  and  prudent  Bernstorfif,  may  teach  these  gentlemen 
a  little  of  what  is  deemed  good  manners  on  these  occasions. 

So  far  from  even  remonstrating,  much  less  arming  on  account  of  the 
British  instruction  of  Jtme,  1793,  when  that  order  was  notified  at 
Stockholm,  by  the  British  Resident  there,  the  Government  of  Sweden, 
by  their  Resident  at  London,  acknowledged,  in  terms  too  respectful 
to  be  repeated  in  the  hearing  of  our  exclusive  patriots,  that  Sweden 
was  perfectly  satisfied  with  the  instruction ;  since,  instead  of  payment, 
which  the  order  insured,  all  provisions,  in  virtue  of  an  existing  treaty 
between  the  two  nations,  were  liable  to  confiscation  when  seized,  on 
their  way  to  an  enemy. 

This  note  is  added  for  the  purpose  of  refuting  a  popular  error,  and 
not  to  vindicate  the  instruction  alluded  to,  which  I  consider  as  an  injury 
to  the  rights  of  neutral  nations,  that  has  not  been  justified  by  the 
answers  that  have  been  given  by  Great  Britain  to  the  American  and 
Danish  memorials. 


Camillus  131 

it  is  there  is  so  great  a  diversity  in  the  stipulations 
of  different  parties  on  this  point,  indicating  that  there 
is  no  absolute  rule.  Hence  also  it  is,  that  several 
nations  at  different  times,  being  at  war,  have  thought 
themselves  authorized  to  regulate  and  announce,  by 
public  declarations,  the  articles  which  they  would 
consider  and  treat  as  contraband. 

The  opinion  of  writers  will  be  found  to  support 
the  article  as  it  stands,  in  the  particular,  which  is 
now  the  subject  of  discussion. 

Vatel,  we  have  before  seen  (B.  B.  C.  3,  6,  7,  S. 
112),  expressly  ranks  naval  stores  and  timber  imder 
the  denomination  of  contraband  goods. 

Heinecius  (De  Navihiis,  etc.,  chap.  I.,  S.  10,  11, 
and  14)  accords  in  the  same  position  to  the  extent 
of  whatsoever  appertains  to  the  equipment  of  vessels.' 

Bynkershoek  is  less  expHcit.  After  laying  it  down 
as  the  general  rule  that  naval  stores,  or  the  materials 
of  ships,  are  not  contraband,  he  proceeds  thus:  "  Yet 
it  sometimes  happens  that  the  materials  of  ships 
may  be  prohibited,  if  an  enemy  is  in  great  want  of 
them,  and  without  them  cannot  conveniently  carry  on 
the  war'' ';  and  he  afterwards  cites,  with  approba- 
tion, several  edicts  or  proclamations  which  the 
states-general,  in  different  wars  with  different  na- 
tions, have  published,  declaring  those  articles  con- 
traband— thus  referring  it  to  the  belligerent  party 
to  judge  of  and  pronounce  the  cases  when  they  may 


1  Vela,  Restes  et  si  quae  alia  ad  apparatum  nauticum  pertinent. 

2  Quandoque  tamen  accidit  ut  et  navium  materia  prohibeatur,  si 
hostis  ea  quam  maxime  indigeat  at  absque  ea  commode  bellum  gerere 
baud  possit. — QucBstionum  Juris  Publici,  L.  I.,  chap,  x.,  page  So- 


132  Alexander  Hamilton 

rightfully  be  deemed  so.  And  the  same  idea  seems 
to  have  been  adopted  by  Grotius  '  and  some  other 
writers  on  public  law.  I  have  not  met  with  one 
whose  opinion  excludes  naval  stores  from  the  list  of 
contraband. 

Grotius,  in  discussing  this  question,  divides  goods 
into  three  classes :  i .  Those  which  are  of  use  only  in 
war,  as  arms,  etc.  2.  Those  which  serve  only  for 
pleasure.  3.  Those  useful  for  peaceable  as  well  as 
for  warlike  purposes,  "as  money,  provisions,  ships, 
and  naval  stores.'"  Concerning  which  he  argues  in 
substance,  that  the  first  class  are  clearly  contraband, 
that  the  second  class  are  clearly  not  contraband,  and 
that  the  third  class  may  or  may  not  be  so,  according 
to  the  state  and  circumstances  of  the  war;  alleging 
that,  if  necessary  to  our  defence,  they  may  he  inter- 
cepted, but  upon  condition  of  restitution,  unless  there 
be  just  cause  to  the  contrary;  which  just  cause  is 
explained  by  the  examples  of  sending  them  to  a 
besieged  or  blockaded  place. 

The  reasoning  about  the  third  class  has  a  very 
inconvenient  latitude.  It  subjects  the  trade  of 
neutral  nations  too  extensively  to  the  discretion  of 
belligerent  powers ;  and  yet  there  is  a  serious  em- 
barrassment about  drawing  the  true  line,  one  which 
will  duly  conciliate  the  safety  of  the  belligerent  with 
that  of  the  neutral  party. 

What  definition  of  contraband,  consulting  reason 
alone,  shall  we  adopt?  Shall  we  say,  that  none  but 
articles  peculiar  to  war  ought  to  receive  this  de- 
nomination?    But  is  even  powder  exclusively  ap- 

*  Book  III.,  chaps,  i.,  v. 


Camillus  133 

plicahle  to  war?  Are  nitre  and  sulphur,  its  chief 
ingredients,  peculiar  to  war?  Are  they  not  all  use- 
ful for  other  purposes ;  some  of  them  in  medicine,  and 
other  important  arts?  Shall  we  say,  that  none  but 
articles  prepared  and  organized  for  war,  as  their 
primary  object,  ought  to  have  that  character?  But 
what  substantial  difference  can  reason  know,  be- 
tween the  supply  to  our  enemy  of  powder,  and  that 
of  sulphur  and  saltpetre,  the  easily  convertible  ma- 
terials of  this  mischievous  compound? 

How  would  either  of  these  definitions,  or  any 
other,  comport  with  what  those  of  our  treaties  which 
are  thought  unexceptionable,  in  this  particular,  have 
regulated,  or  with  what  is  common  in  the  treaties 
between  other  nations  ?  Under  which  of  them  shall 
we  bring  horses  and  their  furniture? 

If  we  say  that,  in  wars  by  land,  these  are  instru- 
ments little  less  important  than  men,  and  for  that 
reason  ought  to  be  comprehended,  it  may  be  asked 
in  return,  what  can  be  more  necessary  in  wars  by 
sea  than  the  materials  of  ships,  and  why  should  they 
not,  for  the  like  reasons,  be  equally  comprehended? 

In  wars  between  maritime  nations,  who  transfer  its 
calamities  from  the  land  to  the  ocean,  and  wage 
their  most  furious  conflicts  on  that  element,  whose 
dominions  cannot  be  attacked  or  defended  without 
a  superiority  in  naval  strength,  who  moreover  pos- 
sess distant  territories,  the  protection  and  commer- 
cial advantages  of  which  depend  upon  the  existence 
and  support  of  navies,  it  is  difficult  to  maintain,  that 
it  is  against  reason,  or  against  those  principles  which 
regulate  the  description  of  contraband,  to  consider 


134  Alexander  Hamilton 

as  such  the  materials  which  appertain  to  the  con- 
struction and  equipment  of  ships. 

It  is  not  a  sufficient  objection  that  these  articles 
are  useful  for  other  purposes,  and  especially  for  those 
of  maritime  commerce.  Horses  are  of  primary 
utility  in  agriculture;  and  it  has  been  seen  that  there 
are  other  articles  indisputably  on  the  list  of  contra- 
band, which  are  entirely  within  the  principle  of 
that  objection. 

Rutherforth,  a  sensible  modern  writer,'  after  truly 
observing,  "that  the  notion  of  contraband  goods  is 
of  some  latitude,  so  that  it  is  not  easy  precisely  to 
determine  what  are  and  what  are  not  of  this  sort; 
that  all  warlike  stores  are  certainly  contraband,  but 
that  still  the  question  returns,  what  are  to  be  reck- 
oned warlike  stores  ? ' ' — after  noticing  the  division  of 
articles  by  Grotius  and  the  difficulties  with  regard 
to  the  third  class — draws  this  conclusion,  that 
"  where  a  war  is  carried  on  by  sea  as  well  as  by  land, 
not  only  ships  of  war  which  are  already  built,  but 
the  materials  for  building  or  repairing  of  ships,  will 
come  under  the  notion  of  warlike  stores.'"  This  is  a 
precise  idea,  and,  it  must  be  confessed,  on  principle, 
not  an  irrational  one. 

If  we  resort  to  the  opinions  which  have  been  enter- 
tained and  evidenced  in  our  own  country,  they  will 
be  found  to  have  given  great  extent  to  the  idea  of 
contraband.  Congress,  by  an  act  of  May  the  8th, 
1777,  establishing  the  form  of  commissions  for  pri- 
vateers, authorize  them  "to  attack,  subdue,  and 
take  all  ships  and  other  vessels  whatever,  carrying 

»  Institutes  of  Natural  Law,  Book  II.,  chaps,  x.,  xix. 


Camillus  135 

soldiers,  arms,  gunpowder,  ammunition,  provisions, 
or  any  other  contraband  goods,  to  any  of  the  British 
armies  or  ships  of  war  employed  against  the  United 
States."  And  in  their  act  of  the  27th  of  November, 
1780,  acceding,  in  part,  to  the  rule  of  the  armed  neu- 
trality, they  declare,  that  contraband  shall  be  there- 
after confined  to  the  articles  contained  under  this 
character,  in  our  treaty  with  France ;  indicating,  b}^ 
this,  their  opinion  that  the  list  of  those  articles  is 
abridged  by  that  treat3^  If  the  first-mentioned  act 
was  well  founded  (and  there  are  strong  reasons  for  it) , 
it  establishes  that  even  provisions  may  be  contraband 
if  going  directly  to  invading  fleets  and  armies ;  which 
affords  an  instance  of  their  being  so  (analogous  to 
the  case  heretofore  put  of  a  besieging  army)  in  addi- 
tion to  the  cases  of  places  besieged,  blockaded,  or 
invested.  And  as  to  naval  stores,  I  assert  a  belief, 
that  the  common  opinion  of  those  persons  in  this 
country  whose  contemplation  had  embraced  the  sub- 
ject, included  them  in  the  catalogue  of  contraband. 
Nevertheless,  from  the  number  of  modern  treaties 
which  exclude  from  that  list  naval  stores,  and  more- 
over from  the  manifest  interest  of  nations,  truly 
considered,  to  narrow  the  rights  of  war  in  favor  of 
those  of  peace;  this  clause  of  the  treaty,  which  takes 
a  different  route,  is  to  be  regretted  as  pursuing  the 
rigor  of  the  law  of  nations.  Still,  however,  it  can- 
not be  objected  to,  as  a  departure  from  the  law;  and 
agreeing  with  the  course  observed  by  Great  Britain 
antecedent  to  the  treaty,  it  does  not  place  our  trade 
in  those  articles  upon  a  worse  footing  than  it  was, 
independent  of  the  treaty. 


136  Alexander  Hamilton 

The  period  of  the  negotiation  was  most  unpro- 
pitious  to  a  change  for  the  better;  in  the  midst  of 
any  maritime  war,  a  belligerent  nation,  enjoying  a 
naval  superiority,  was  like  to  have  been  tenacious 
of  a  right  which  she  supposed  herself  to  possess  to 
intercept  naval  supplies  to  her  enemy.  But  in  a 
war,  in  which  it  was  more  than  ordinarily  possible 
that  the  independent  existence  of  a  nation  might 
depend  on  the  retaining  a  naval  superiority,  it  was 
to  have  been  foreseen  that  she  would  not  consent  to 
relinquish  such  a  right.  The  alternative  was,  to  in- 
sert the  article  as  it  stands,  or  to  omit  it  wholly. 

Had  it  been  omitted,  the  condition  of  naval  stores 
would  have  been  the  same  as  with  it.  But  our  mer- 
chants would  then  have  continued  to  be  exposed 
to  uncertain  risks,  which  is  always  a  great  incon- 
venience. It  is  desirable,  in  similar  cases,  to  have  a 
fixed  rule.  Merchants  can  then  accommodate  their 
speculations  to  the  rule ;  and  causes  of  national  con- 
tention are  avoided. 

It  is  in  this  view  to  be  regretted,  that  the  cases 
when  provisions  may  be  treated  as  contraband  could 
not  have  been  agreed  upon;  but  as  this  was  im- 
practicable, the  next  best  thing  has  been  done,  by 
establishing  the  certainty  of  compensation  in  all 
such  cases.  This  gives  one  important  species  of 
security,  obviates  one  source  of  contention.  And  if 
really  there  may  be  other  cases  than  the  universally 
admitted  ones,  in  which  provisions  can  fairly  be 
deemed  contraband  (as  that  designated  by  the  act 
of  Congress  of  May,  1777),  the  securing  of  compensa- 
tion was  truly  a  point  gained  by  the  article. 


Camillus  137 

But  while  I  confess,  that  the  including  of  naval 
stores  among  contraband  articles  is  an  ineligible 
feature  of  the  treaty,  I  ought  to  declare,  that  its 
consequences  to  the  interests  of  the  United  States, 
as  it  regards  the  trade  in  those  articles  in  time  of 
war,  do  not  appear  to  me  important.  War  between 
other  nations,  when  we  are  at  peace,  will  always  in- 
crease the  demand  for  our  bottoms,  so  as  to  require 
much  additional  building  of  vessels,  and  probably 
in  that  way  to  produce  a  more  beneficial  species  of 
employment  of  the  naval  stores  our  country  affords, 
than  that  of  their  exportation  for  sale. 

The  adversaries  of  the  treaty  are  eagle-eyed  to 
spy  out  instances  in  which  it  omits  any  favorable 
minutes  which  are  found  in  our  other  treaties;  but 
they  forget  to  balance  the  accoimt  by  particulars 
which  distinguish  it  favorably  from  those  treaties. 
Of  this  nature  is  the  omission  of  horses  from  the  list 
of  contraband,  and  still  more  the  salutary  regula- 
tions, with  regard  to  vessels  and  their  cargoes  going 
to  places  besieged,  blockaded,  or  invested.  I  do 
not  discover  that  these  useful  provisions,  or  their 
equivalents,  are  in  either  of  our  treaties  with  France, 
Holland,  or  Sweden. 

It  has  been  said,  in  reference  to  this  article,  "  when- 
ever the  law  of  nations  has  been  a  topic  for  con- 
sideration, the  result  of  the  treaty  accommodates 
Great  Britain,  in  relation  to  one  or  both  of  the  re- 
publics at  war  with  her,  as  well  as  in  the  abandon- 
ment of  the  rights  and  interests  of  the  United 
States," — and  the  following  examples  are  given,  to 
each  of  which  will  be  annexed  a  reply. 


138  Alexander  Hamilton 

I. — "American  vessels,  bound  to  Great  Britain, 
are  protected,  by  sea-papers,  against  French  and 
Dutch  searches ;  but  when  bound  to  France  or  Hol- 
land, are  left  exposed  to  British  searches,  without 
regard  to  ships'  papers."  The  truth  of  this  proposi- 
tion depends  on  another,  which  is,  that  the  sea- 
papers  are  to  be  absolutely  conclusive;  but  reasons 
have  been  given  for  doubting  this  construction, 
which,  it  has  been  remarked,  does  not  obtain  in  prac- 
tice. And  it  is  certainly  a  violent  one,  inasmuch  as 
it  puts  it  in  the  power  of  the  neutral,  to  defeat  the 
rights  of  the  belligerent  party,  in  points  of  great 
consequence  to  its  safety. 

IL— "American  provisions,  in  A.merican  vessels, 
bound  to  the  enemies  of  Great  Britain,  are  left  by 
the  treaty  to  the  seizure  and  use  of  Great  Britain; 
but  provisions,  whether  American  or  not,  in  Amer- 
ican vessels,  cannot  be  touched  by  the  enemies  of 
Great  Britain."  The  construction  of  the  treaty, 
upon  which  this  difference  is  supposed,  has  been 
demonstrated  to  be  erroneous.  The  difference,  there- 
fore, does  not  exist. 

III.  — "  British  property,  in  American  vessels,  is  not 
subject  to  French  or  Dutch  confiscation.  French  or 
Dutch  property,  in  American  vessels,  is  subject  to 
British  confiscation."  This  was  the  case  before  the 
treaty,  which  makes  no  alteration  in  the  matter. 
Moreover,  it  is  counterbalanced  by  this  circum- 
stance: that  American  property,  in  British  vessels, 
is  subject  to  confiscation  by  France  or  Holland;  but 
American  property,  in  French  or  Dutch  vessels,  is 
not  subject  to  confiscation  by  Great  Britain. 


Camillus  139 

IV. — "Articles  of  ship-building,  bound  to  the  ene- 
mies of  Great  Britain  for  the  equipment  of  vessels  of 
trade  only,  are  contraband;  bound  to  Great  Britain, 
for  the  equipment  of  vessels  of  war,  are  not  contra- 
band." This,  also,  was  the  case  before  the  treaty, 
which,  consequently,  has  not,  in  this  particular  more 
than  the  former,  produced  any  benefit  to  one  party, 
to  the  prejudice  of  the  other.  I  forbear  to  dwell 
upon  the  article  of  horses,  as  falling  under  a  con- 
trary discrimination;  nor  shall  I  insist  on  the  addi- 
tional circumstances,  that  all  American  goods  not 
generally  contraband,  if  going  to  a  place  besieged, 
blockaded,  or  invested  by  French  or  Dutch  forces, 
are  liable  to  confiscation  by  France  or  Holland;  if 
going  to  a  place  besieged,  blockaded,  or  invested  by 
British  forces,  are  not  liable  to  confiscation  by  Great 
Britain. 

Differences  of  these  several  kinds  are  the  accidental 
results  of  the  varying  views  of  different  contracting 
powers,  and  form  slender  grounds  of  blame  or  praise 
of  the  respective  contracts  made  with  them. 

The  form  of  the  criticisms  last  stated  leaves  little 
doubt  that  it  was  designed  to  insinuate  an  intention 
in  this  article  to  favor  the  monarchs  of  Great  Britain, 
at  the  expense  of  the  republics  of  France  and  Hol- 
land. The  candor  of  it  may  be  judged  of  by  the  two 
facts:  first,  that  it  makes  no  alteration,  in  this  view, 
in  the  antecedent  state  of  things;  and  secondly, 
that  the  relative  situation  of  Holland,  as  the  enemy 
of  Great  Britain,  is  subsequent  to  the  adjustment  of 
the  article. 

Camillus. 


140  Alexander  Hamilton 

NO.    XXXIV  ' 

1796. 

The  remaining  articles  of  the  treaty  principally  re- 
late to  those  maritime  regulations  that  are  usually 
inserted  in  modem  treaties  between  commercial 
nations,  and  on  that  consideration,  as  well  as  from 
their  evident  utility  in  enabling  us  to  distinguish 
with  precision  between  what  is  and  what  is  not  law- 
ful in  relation  to  those  points,  they  are  entitled  to 
our  approbation;  still,  however,  even  some  of  these 
customary  articles,  whose  object  and  meaning  are 
so  well  understood,  have  been  deemed  exception- 
able. 

The  first  paragraph  of  the  nineteenth  article,  in 
order  to  prevent  injuries  by  men  of  war,  or  priva- 
teers, enjoins  (as  before  noticed)  all  commanders  of 
ships  of  war  and  privateers,  and  all  other  citizens  or 
subjects,  of  either  party,  to  forbear  doing  any  dam- 
age to  those  of  the  other,  or  from  committing  any 
outrage  against  them;  and  declares  that,  if  they  act 
to  the  contrary,  they  shall  be  punishable,  and,  more- 
over, bound  in  their  persons  and  estates  to  make 
full  satisfaction  and  reparation  for  all  damages,  of 
whatsoever  nature  the  same  may  be. 

These  prohibitions  are  conformable  with  the  laws 

*  John  C.  Hamilton  says  {History  of  the  Republic,  vi.,  273):  "It  is 
perceived  .  .  .  that  the  first  twenty-two  numbers,  the  original 
drafts  of  which  are  in  Hamilton's  autograph,  were  exclusively  his.  Of 
the  remaining  essays,  ten,  Nos.  23  to  30,  both  included,  34  and  35,  were 
from  another  pen,  with  frequent  alterations,  interlineations,  and  addi- 
tions by  Hamilton.  The  residue  of  the  numbers,  being  six,  are  also 
Hamilton's  exclusively."  Rufus  King  assisted  Hamilton  in  the  essays 
of  Camillus,  and  to  him  the  authorship  of  Nos.  34  and  35,  as  well  as 
Nos.  23  to  30,  inclusive,  may  be  attributed. 


Camillus  141 

of  the  United  States.  If,  under  color  of  authority, 
those  to  whom  the  same  does  not  relate  shall  receive 
injury,  the  act,  according  to  its  circumstances,  is  an 
offence,  for  which  the  offender  is  not  only  answer- 
able to  his  own  country,  but,  moreover,  to  the  injured 
party,  to  whom  he  is  bound  to  make  full  and  com- 
plete reparation. 

The  open  and  explicit  views  of  the  parties,  and 
their  mutual  engagement  to  put  this  law  in  execu- 
tion against  all  offenders,  will  be  a  salutary  check 
upon  the  too  frequent  irregularities  that  occur  in 
the  course  of  war  between  maritime  nations.  The 
paragraph  is  a  copy  of  a  similar  one  contained  in  the 
fifteenth  article  of  the  commercial  treaty  between 
France  and  Great  Britain,  concluded  in  1786,  and 
agrees  with  the  fourteenth  article  of  our  treaty  with 
Holland.  In  order  to  guard  still  more  effectually 
against  the  injuries  to  which  the  citizens  and  sub- 
jects may  be  exposed  from  the  private  ships  of  war 
of  each  other,  the  next  paragraph  stipulates  that  all 
commanders  of  privateers,  before  they  receive  their 
commissions,  shall  be  subjected  to  give  security,  by 
at  least  two  responsible  sureties,  who  have  no  in- 
terest in  the  privateer,  in  the  sum  of  fifteen  hun- 
dred pounds  sterling,  or  six  thousand  six  hundred 
and  sixty-six  dollars;  or,  if  the  privateer  is  manned 
with  more  than  one  hundred  and  fifty  men,  in  the 
sum  of  three  thousand  pounds  sterling,  or  thirteen 
thousand  three  hundred  and  thirty-three  dollars,  to 
satisfy  all  damages  and  injuries  committed  by  such 
privateers,  her  officers,  or  any  of  her  men,  against 
the  tenor  of  the  treaty,  or  the  laws  and  instructions 


142  Alexander  Hamilton 

for  the  regulation  of  their  conduct;  and  in  case  of 
aggression  the  commission  of  such  privateer  shall  be 
recalled  and  made  void. 

This  particular  regulation  has  been  freqtiently  in- 
troduced in  modem  treaties,  and  exists  in  this  pre- 
cise shape  in  the  last  treaty  of  commerce  between 
France  and  Great  Britain ;  I  have  found  no  instance 
where  a  larger  sum  has  been  mentioned.  It  has, 
with  little  consideration,  been  made  an  objection  to 
this  regulation,  that  the  amount  of  the  bonds  is  not 
adequate  to  compensate  or  satisfy  the  damages  that 
may  be  committed  by  these  privateers. 

The  preceding  part  of  the  article  gives  the  injured 
party  a  remedy  against  the  persons  and  estates  of 
the  aggressors;  the  bonds  are  not  required  for  the 
exclusive  purpose  of  being  the  fund  to  which  the 
injured  may  have  recourse  for  satisfaction,  but  prin- 
cipally for  the  purpose  of  excluding  from  the  com- 
mand of  privateers  those  dissolute  and  irregular 
characters,  who  are  not  restrained  by  either  moral 
or  political  ties,  and  for  whose  good  behavior  re- 
sponsible and  disinterested  men  would  not  become 
bondsmen.  The  same  principle  is  developed  in  the 
civil  administration  of  every  nation.  In  cases  of 
pecuniary  trust,  it  is  a  common  and  useful  precaution 
to  require  surety  for  the  faithful  discharge  of  the 
office ;  and  the  principal  advantage  of  this  regula- 
tion is  to  secure  the  employment  of  virtuous  and 
upright  officers.  The  am^ount  of  the  bonds  required 
on  these  occasions  is  sufficient  for  this  purpose, 
though  inferior  to  the  property  confided  to  them. 

Thus  the  Treasurer  of  the  United  States,  who  has 


Camillus  143 

the  custody  of  millions,  gives  bonds  for  only  one 
hundred  and  fifty  thousand  dollars,  the  collectors  of 
New  York  and  Philadelphia  for  fifty  and  sixty  thou- 
sand dollars ;  sums  very  far  short  of  the  public  money 
[of  which  they  are  in  the  receipt],  yet  sufficient  to 
secure  the  public  against  characters  of  doubtful  in- 
tegrity. The  adequacy  of  the  sums  [in  the  par- 
ticular case]  is  moreover  evidenced  by  the  law  and 
practice  of  our  own  country.  In  the  resolution  of 
Congress,  of  the  third  of  April,  1776,  which,  so  far 
as  regards  this  point,  remained  in  force  throughout 
the  American  war.  Congress  required  that  the  com- 
mander of  every  privateer,  before  his  commission 
should  be  delivered  to  him,  should  give  bonds,  with 
sureties,  to  the  President  of  Congress,  in  the  sum  of 
five  thousand  dollars,  if  the  vessel  was  of  or  under 
one  hundred  tons;  and  of  ten  thousand  dollars,  if 
the  vessel  was  upwards  of  one  htmdred  tons,  to  ob- 
serve the  rules  and  instructions  prescribed  for  their 
government.  These  sums  are  one  quarter  less  than 
those  required  by  the  article  before  us. 

The  last  paragraph,  requiring  the  judges  of  the 
admiralty  courts  to  furnish  formal  and  duly  authenti- 
cated copies  of  their  proceedings  in  cases  of  the  con- 
demnation of  vessels  or  cargoes  belonging  to  the 
citizens  or  subjects  of  the  parties,  is  pursuant  to  that 
reasonable  course  of  proceeding  which  ought  always 
in  this  and  similar  cases  to  prevail. 

The  twentieth  article,  which  is  in  prevention  of 
piracy,  has  the  sanction  of  numerous  precedents.  A 
pirate  is  the  common  enemy  of  all  mankind.  All, 
therefore,  should  unite  in  refusing  him  assistance  and 


144  Alexander  Hamilton 

refuge,  and  in  the  establishment  of  such  regulations 
relative  to  the  sale  of  his  plunder  as,  by  shutting 
against  him  every  market,  may  thereby  annihilate 
the  motives  to  his  piracy. 

The  twenty-first  article  stipulates,  that  the  citizens 
and  subjects  of  the  parties  shall  do  no  acts  of  hos- 
tility or  violence  against  each  other,  nor  accept  com- 
missions or  instructions  so  to  act  from  any  foreign 
state  being  an  enemy  to  the  other  party.  That  the 
enemies  of  either  nation  shall  not  be  allowed  to  in- 
vite, or  endeavor  to  enlist,  in  their  military  service, 
any  of  the  citizens  or  subjects  of  the  other;  and  the 
laws  prohibiting  such  offences  are  to  be  punctually 
executed.  The  article  further  stipulates,  if  any 
citizen  or  subject  of  either  party  has  accepted  of  a 
foreign  commission  to  arm  a  privateer  against  the 
other,  it  shall  be  lawful  for  the  said  party  to  treat 
and  punish  the  said  citizen  or  subject,  having  such 
commission,  as  a  pirate. 

The  general  tenor  of  this  article  is  in  conformity 
with  the  spirit  of  our  preceding  laws  on  this  subject; 
it  is,  moreover,  in  perfect  unison  with  the  duties  of 
neutrality;  those  duties  which  a  just  regard  to  the 
principles  of  integrity,  as  well  as  an  enhghtened  pur- 
suit of  our  own  interests,  require  us  faithfully  to 
perform. 

Two  objections  have  been  offered  against  this  ar- 
ticle: one  that  it  precludes  such  of  our  citizens  as, 
with  a  view  of  acquiring  military  knowledge,  would 
otherwise  engage  as  volunteers  in  foreign  service; 
the  other,  that  it  [makes]  every  citizen  and  subject, 
of  either  party,  who  has  accepted  a  foreign  commis- 


Camillas  145 

sion  to  arm  a  privateer  against  the  other,  and  who 
shall  be  taken  in  possession  of  such  commission, 
[liable]  to  be  punished  as  a  pirate. 

In  respect  to  the  first  objection,  if,  by  a  rigorous 
construction,  the  case  is  included  within  the  pro- 
hibition, it  should  be  remarked,  that  it  is  applicable 
only  to  such  engagements  as  commence  and  are 
made  in  time  of  mutual  war.  If  we  have  citizens 
who,  with  the  view  of  military  education,  are  in- 
clined to  engage  in  foreign  service,  though  from  past 
experience  there  is  not  much  reason  to  conclude  that 
the  examples  would  be  numerous,  they  have  full  scope, 
as  I  imderstand  the  article,  in  the  periods  of  peace, 
to  enter  into  any  of  the  regular  armies  of  Europe  that 
they  may  prefer;  and  being  thus  engaged,  they  are 
free  to  make  the  campaigns  of  war  against  Great 
Britain,  if  that  is  their  passion,  without  injuring  this 
article.  [The  prohibition  seems  to  be  against  engag- 
ing in  the  military  service  of  a  nation,  previously  in 
the  condition  of  ''enemy"  to  one  of  the  parties.] 

The  second  objection  has  even  less  plausibility 
than  the  first:  the  disingenuous  means  that  have 
been  used  to  excite  a  reprobation  of  this  clause  of 
the  article,  manifest  the  want  of  truth  and  patriot- 
ism of  those  who  have  employed  them ;  passion  and 
the  spirit  of  opposition  have  asserted,  that  the  pro- 
vision before  us  is  so  extensive  as  to  place  the  sub- 
ordinate officers  and  private  men,  on  board  of  a 
privateer,  within  the  predicament  of  her  commander; 
nay,  that  all  persons,  citizens  or  subjects  of  either 
nation,  who  would  accept  commissions  [or  enter,  in 
any  capacity]  in  a  foreign  army  or  navy,  would,  in 

VOL.  VI.— 10. 


146  Alexander  Hamilton 

consequence  of  this  stipulation,  be  liable  to  be 
treated  and  punished  as  pirates.  It  is  sufficient, 
after  noticing  these  attempts  to  impose  upon  the 
public,  to  observe  that  the  stipulation  [expressly] 
confines  the  punishment  in  question  to  the  com- 
manders of  privateers  who,  contrary  to  the  laws  of 
the  land,  and  the  clear  and  equitable  obligations  of 
the  members  of  a  neutral  nation,  shall  be  taken  with 
such  commission;  and  that  it  does  not  extend  to 
the  under-officers  or  crew,  much  less  to  such  persons 
as,  contrary  to  the  preceding  inhibition  of  the  ar- 
ticle, should  accept  commissions  in  a  foreign  army 
or  navy.  In  respect  to  such  misdemeanors  in  all 
cases  (except  that  of  equipping  and  commanding  a 
privateer,  which  will  expose  the  commander,  when 
taken,  to  be  punished  as  a  pirate),  the  offence  is  cog- 
nizable only  by  the  nation  [within  whose  jurisdiction 
the  offence  is  committed,  or]  of  which  the  offender 
is  a  citizen,  or  subject ;  and,  by  our  laws,  is  punish- 
able only  by  fine  and  imprisonment. 

[A  perversion  of  the  sense  of  the  clause,  stipulating 
that  "the  law  against  all  such  offences  and  aggres- 
sions shall  be  punctually  executed,"  has  been  at- 
tempted, though  nothing  can  be  more  innocent  or 
unexceptionable.  Its  plain  meaning  is,  that  each 
party,  in  the  cases  falling  within  its  jurisdiction, 
shall  faithfully  put  in  execution  its  own  laws  against 
the  offences  and  aggressions,  in  contravention  of  the 
article.  A  stipulation  between  the  governments,  to 
execute  laws  on  a  certain  subject,  can  mean  nothing 
else  than  that  each  shall  execute  its  own  laws  on  that 
subject,  in  the  cases  appertaining  to  its  jurisdiction.] 


Camillus  147 

Though  most  of  the  objections  preferred  against 
the  treaty  are  marked  with  that  ilHberal  spirit  which 
characterizes  the  party  who  have  unceasingly  labored 
to  bring  into  discredit  the  government  of  the  country, 
yet  few  of  them  have  been  less  veiled  than  this, 
which  condemns  a  stipulation  intended  to  curb  and 
restrain  the  few  dissolute  and  daring  characters  who, 
from  the  least  worthy  of  all  motives  that  lead  to 
military  enterprise,  might  otherwise  engage  in  this 
piratical  warfare. 

What  virtuous  citizen  would  feel  himself  justified 
in  accepting  such  command?  What  must  be  the 
morals  of  those  instructors  who  contend  for  a  free- 
dom to  commit  what  humanity  and  honor  forbid? 
Every  treaty  that  we  have  concluded  with  other 
nations  is  enriched  with  this  stipulation;  not  only 
our  own  treaties,  but  those  between  other  nations 
contain  it.  How  is  it  that  we  nowhere  discover  a 
trace  of  disapprobation,  either  on  the  part  of  our 
statesmen,  or  from  an  enlightened  people,  against 
a  series  of  treaties,  formed  by  different  public  min- 
isters, and  ratified  by  a  succession  of  Congresses, 
each  of  which  contains  a  provision  that  the  crime  of 
accepting  a  foreign  commission  to  arm  and  com- 
mand a  privateer,  against  a  nation  with  whom  we  are 
at  peace,  shall  be  treated  and  punished  as  piracy?  Is 
it  that  our  virtue  has  become  less  severe  ?  our  morality 
more  indulgent  ?  Or  is  it  that  our  predecessors  were 
less  vigilant  in  defending  the  rights  of  our  citizens, 
than  the  ostentatious  patriots  of  the  present  day? 
But  it  is  time  to  dismiss  an  objection  entirely  desti- 
tute of  integrity  and  [decency].  Camillus. 


148  Alexander  Hamilton 

NO.    XXXV 

1796. 

The  twenty-second  article  bears  upon  its  face  its 
own  justification — it  is  pursuant  to  those  [maxims 
which  enlightened  moralists  recommend,  and  just 
nations  respect].  It  prescribes  a  course  of  conduct 
the  most  likely  to  procure  satisfaction  for  injuries, 
and  to  maintain  peace,  and  is  therefore  entitled  to 
the  approbation  of  all  good  men  and  real  patriots. 
[It  is  particularly  valuable  to  a  weak  nation,  or  a 
nation  in  its  infancy,  as  an  additional  guard  against 
sudden  and  unforeseen  attacks  of  more  powerful 
rivals.] 

The  first  paragraph  of  the  twenty-third  article  pro- 
vides for  the  hospitable  reception  of  the  pubhc  or 
national  ships  of  war  of  the  parties,  in  the  ports  of 
each  other;  and  engages  that  the  officers  of  such 
ships  shall  be  free  from  insult,  and  treated  with 
decorum  and  respect. 

The  practice  which  our  Government  has  adopted 
in  relation  to  these  points,  independent  of  parties,  is 
agreeable  to  this  provision.^  And  though  the  stipu- 
lation will  be  of  less  importance  to  us  than  it  would 
be  were  we  possessed  of  a  respectable  naval  force, 
yet  it  may  be  useful.  By  our  treaty  with  France, 
our  ships  of  war  have  a  right  to  enter  their  ports  only 
in  case  of  urgent  necessity,  and  not  freely  and  for 
mere  convenience. 

With  Spain  and  Portugal  we  have  no  treaties,  and, 
consequently,  not  an  ascertained  or  perfect  right  to 

I  See  Mr.  Jefferson's  letter  of  September  9,  1793,  to  Mr.  Hammond; 
also  his  letter  of  the  same  date  to  Mr.  Van  Berckel. 


Camillus  149 

use  their  ports.  Our  navigation  must  be  protected 
from  the  Barbary  powers  by  force  or  by  treaty.  It 
is  questionable  whether  the  latter  mode  will  prove 
effectual  without  the  support  of  the  former;  Con- 
gress have  therefore  resolved  to  equip  a  small  naval 
force,  for  the  special  object  of  protecting  our  trade 
against  the  Algerine  and  the  other  Barbary  powers. 
Some  port  convenient  to  the  scene  of  its  cruising 
will  be  of  essential  advantage  to  the  efficiency  and 
success  of  its  employment;  not  only  the  ports  of 
Great  Britain,  btit  likewise  the  port  of  Gibraltar, 
will,  by  this  article  of  the  treaty,  be  open  to  us ;  and 
our  frigates  will  there  be  entitled  to  a  hospitable 
reception,  and  their  officers  to  that  respect  which 
shall  be  due  to  the  commissions  which  they  bear. 

The  other  paragraph  of  this  article  provides,  in 
case  an  American  vessel,  by  stress  of  weather,  danger 
from  enemies,  or  other  misfortune,  should  be  obliged 
to  seek  shelter  in  any  British  port,  into  which,  in 
ordinary  cases,  such  vessels  could  not  claim  the 
right  to  be  admitted,  that  she  shall  be  hospitably 
received,  permitted  to  refit,  and  to  purchase  such 
necessaries  as  she  may  want;  and,  by  permission  of 
the  local  government,  to  sell  such  part  of  her  cargo 
as  may  be  necessary  to  defray  her  expenses.  Our 
treaty  with  France  contains  a  similar  provision ;  but 
the  restrictions  with  which  it  is  guarded  are  less  than 
those  of  the  article  before  us. 

The  twenty-fourth  article  stipulates  that  it  shall 
not  be  lawful  for  any  foreign  privateers,  commis- 
sioned by  any  nation  at  war  with  either  of  the  par- 
ties, to  arm  the  vessels,  or  to  sell  or  exchange  their 


150  Alexander  Hamilton 

prizes,  in  the  ports  of  either  of  the  parties ;  and  that 
they  shall  not  be  allowed  to  purchase  more  pro- 
visions than  shall  be  necessary  to  carry  them  to  the 
nearest  port  of  the  nation  from  whom  they  received 
their  commission ;  and  the  twenty-fifth  article  stipu- 
lates that  the  ships  of  war  and  privateers  of  either 
party  may  carry  whithersoever  they  please  the  ships 
and  goods  taken  from  their  enemy;  and  that  such 
prizes,  on  their  arrival  in  the  ports  of  the  parties, 
shall  not  be  searched,  seized,  detained,  nor  judicially 
examined  touching  the  validity  of  their  capture,  but 
may  freely  depart ;  and  furthermore,  that  no  shelter 
or  refuge  shall  be  given  in  the  ports  of  one  of  the 
parties  to  such  as  have  made  prizes  upon  the  citizens 
or  subjects  of  the  other.  Though  the  law  of  nations 
is  explicit,  that  one  nation  having  formed  a  par- 
ticular stipulation  with  another,  is  not  capable,  by  a 
subsequent  treaty  with  a  third  nation,  to  do  away 
or  annul  its  former  stipulations,  but  that  the  elder 
treaty,  in  such  case,  remains  in  full  force,  notwith- 
standing such  posterior  and  contradictory  treaty; 
yet,  in  order  to  remove  all  cavil  on  this  point,  and  to 
maintain  a  scrupulous  regard  to  good  faith,  even  in 
appearance  as  well  as  in  reality,  and  especially  in 
relation  to  our  treaty  with  France,  the  article  further 
declares,  "that  nothing  in  the  treaty  contained  shall 
be  construed  or  operate  contrary  to  former  and 
existing  public  treaties  with  other  sovereigns  or 
states,"  and  adds  that  neither  of  the  parties,  while 
they  continue  in  friendship,  will  form  any  treaty  in- 
consistent with  this  and  the  preceding  article.  [This 
last  clause  has  been  censured  as  an  undue  restraint, 


Camillus  151 

while  it  is  in  fact  a  mere  redundancy;  as  long  as  a 
treaty  between  two  nations  continues  in  force,  it  is 
against  good  faith  for  either  to  form  a  treaty  with 
another  nation  inconsistent  with  it;  if  the  treaty  is 
once  disclosed,  by  whatever  means,  no  treaty  with 
another  nation  can  be  inconsistent  with  it.  The 
clause,  therefore,  only  converts  into  an  express 
promise  what  without  it  is  an  implied  one,  that  the 
parties  will  not  contravene  their  stipulations  with 
each  other  by  repugnant  engagements  with  a  third 
party.  The  disingenuity  on  this  point  has  gone  so 
far  as  to  torture  the  clause  into  a  positive  stipulation 
against  any  treaty  with  another  power  conferring 
peculiar  advantages  of  commerce  upon  that  power. 
It  is  a  sufficient  reply  to  this  that  the  clause  is  ex- 
pressly confined  to  the  twenty-fourth  and  twenty- 
fifth  articles;  determining  nothing  as  to  the  other 
articles  of  the  treaty.  The  general  principle  of 
this  last  objection  has  been  sufficiently  discussed 
elsewhere.] 

The  article  concludes  with  a  mutual  engagement, 
that  neither  of  the  parties  will  permit  the  ships  or 
goods  of  the  other  to  be  taken  within  cannon  shot  of 
the  coast,  nor  in  any  of  the  bays,  ports,  or  rivers  of 
their  territories;  and  in  case  of  such  capture,  the 
party  whose  territorial  rights  are  violated  shall  use 
his  utmost  endeavors  to  obtain  satisfaction  for  the 
vessels  or  goods  taken.  This  stipulation  is  con- 
formable to  the  duty  and  practice  of  nations  who 
have  entered  into  no  special  engagements  requiring 
the  same,  and  agrees  with  a  common  provision  in 
public  treaties. 


152  Alexander  Hamilton 

Hitherto  we  have  prudently  avoided  granting  to 
any  nation  a  right  to  arm  their  privateers  or  to 
sell  their  prizes  in  our  ports;  our  laws  are  explicit 
in  prohibiting  such  equipments;  and  the  exclusion 
thereof,  contained  in  the  twenty-fourth  article,  is 
agreeable  to  the  declared  policy  of  the  country.  We 
have  engaged  in  our  treaty  with  France  to  prohibit 
her  enemies  from  selling  their  prizes  within  our  ports ; 
but  not  having  engaged  to  permit  France  to  sell  her 
prizes  therein,  we  were  free  to  agree  with  Great  Brit- 
ain, that  her  enemies  shall  likewise  be  prohibited 
from  selling  their  prizes  in  our  territory.  A  clause 
in  the  twenty-fifth  article  denies  all  refuge  to  ships 
of  war  and  privateers  that  have  made  prizes  on 
either  of  the  parties;  and  the  last  clause  of  the 
twenty-fourth  article  stipulates  that  foreign  priva- 
teers, enemies  to  either  of  the  parties,  shall  not  be 
allowed  to  purchase  more  provisions  than  sufficient 
to  carry  them  to  the  nearest  port  of  the  nation  from 
whom  they  received  their  commission. 

These  clauses  will  operate  only  against  such  na- 
tions as  have  not,  by  an  elder  treaty,  secured  a  right 
of  reception  in  the  ports  of  the  parties.  Still,  how- 
ever, it  is  alleged  that  these  articles  violate  our  treaty 
with  France.  It  has  already  been  observed  that  the 
treaty  contains  a  clear  and  explicit  agreement  of  the 
parties,  excepting  from  its  operation  all  former  exist- 
ing public  treaties.  Our  treaty  with  France  is  an 
antecedent  and  existing  public  treaty,  and  conse- 
quently excepted,  in  all  its  parts,  from  the  operation 
of  the  treaty  before  us.  Whatever  right  or  privilege, 
therefore,  is  secured  to  France  in  virtue  of  that 


Camillus  153 

treaty,  she  will  continue  to  enjoy,  whether  the  same 
respects  the  reception  of  her  public  ships  of  war, 
privateers  or  prizes,  in  our  ports,  or  the  exclusion 
therefrom  of  those  of  her  enemies. 

Could  there  be  a  doubt  on  this  point,  the  practice 
of  other  nations,  and  especially  that  of  France,  on 
the  very  point,  would  effectually  remove  it.  The 
fifteenth  and  thirty-sixth  articles  of  the  commercial 
Treaty  of  Utrecht,  between  France  and  Great  Brit- 
ain, contain  the  same  stipulations  as  the  twenty- 
fourth  and  twent3^-fifth  articles  of  the  treaty  before 
us.  That  treaty  was  in  existence  and  force  at  the 
time  of  forming  our  treaty  with  France,  yet  France 
found  no  difficulty  in  the  insertion  of  the  same  stipu- 
lations in  her  treaty  with  us.  She  could  not  have 
considered  their  insertion  in  the  treaty  with  us  as  a 
violation  of  her  treaty  with  Great  Britain,  otherwise 
good  faith  would  have  restrained  her.  The  war  that 
soon  after  took  place  between  France  and  Great 
Britain,  dissolved  the  Treaty  of  Utrecht.  Our 
treaty  with  France  remained  in  force;  yet,  in  the 
year  1786,  France  and  Great  Britain  entered  into  a 
commercial  treaty,  the  sixteenth  and  fortieth  arti- 
cles of  which  renew  the  stipulations  contained  in 
the  fifteenth  and  thirty-sixth  articles  of  the  Treaty 
of  Utrecht. 

If  France  was  free,  first  to  form  these  stipulations 
with  us  in  1778,  notwithstanding  her  prior  and  exist- 
ing treaty  with  Great  Britain,  and  afterwards  in  1786 
to  renew  the  same  stipulations  with  Great  Britain, 
we  must  be  equally  free  in  a  treaty  with  the  same, 
or  any  other  power,  to  agree  to  similar  stipulations. 


154  Alexander  Hamilton 

Both  were  free,  and  neither  violates  former  engage- 
ments, by  assenting,  as  we  have  done,  to  these  stipu- 
lations in  a  posterior  treaty. 

It  is  further  alleged,  that  these  articles  are  in- 
jurious to  the  interest  of  the  United  States,  because 
they  prohibit,  in  certain  cases,  foreign  privateers  to 
rendezvous  in  our  ports,  and  to  sell  within  our  terri- 
tory the  prizes  they  may  have  taken.  If  it  is  de- 
sirable to  render  our  principal  seaports  and  cities 
scenes  of  riot  and  confusion ;  if  it  is  politic  to  divide 
our  citizens,  by  infusing  into  their  minds  the  hostile 
spirit  with  which  the  nations  at  war  are  animated 
against  each  other;  if  we  are  prepared  to  see  the 
prostration  of  public  authority,  and  to  behold  the 
laws  trampled  upon  by  armed  banditti;  if  we  are 
ready  to  invite  our  citizens  to  abandon  their  regular 
and  useful  employments,  and  to  engage,  as  adven- 
turers, even  against  each  other,  in  the  pursuit  of 
plunder,  then  is  the  objection  well-founded,  then 
is  the  restraint  pernicious,  then  is  the  stipulation 
worthy  of  condemnation.  But  if  to  establish  the 
reverse  of  all  this,  is  the  effort  and  aim  of  every  wise 
and  prudent  government,  the  stipulation  in  question 
demands  the  approbation  of  all  virtuous  citizens. 

But  were  none  of  these  consequences  to  be  appre- 
hended from  the  free  admission  of  the  privateers  of  all 
nations  engaged  in  war,  and  the  permission  to  sell 
their  plunder,  it  would,  notwithstanding,  be  against 
the  interests  of  the  United  States  to  allow  the  same. 
It  is  a  sound  commercial  principle,  that  the  interest  of 
buyers,  as  well  as  sellers,  is  best  promoted  by  a  free 
competition.     The  great  number  of  the  sellers  of  for- 


Camillus  155 

eign  manufactures  and  productions  affords  the  best 
market  for  the  buyers.  The  great  number  of  buy- 
ers of  our  productions  affords  the  best  market  for 
the  sellers.  Foreign  privateers  are  precarious  sellers, 
and  buyers  only  for  their  own  consumption.  They 
drive  away  and  banish  from  our  markets,  both  buyers 
and  sellers.  When  our  coasts  are  lined  with  foreign 
privateers  that  rendezvous  in  our  ports,  the  merchant- 
ships  of  all  nations,  not  excepting  our  own,  will  be 
liable  to  interruption,  and  discouraged  from  coming 
to  our  markets;  and  those  of  the  belligerent  powers 
will  be  generally  excluded.  Our  markets  might, 
perhaps,  derive  supplies  from  the  prizes  that  such 
privateers  should  take,  so  as,  in  some  degree,  to  com- 
pensate for  the  deficiency  that  would  proceed  from 
the  exclusion  of  foreign  merchantmen ;  but  this  supply 
would  be  uncertain,  irregular,  ill-assorted,  and  partial, 
while  the  principal  commercial  detriment  would  exist 
without  mitigation, — that  of  a  partial  or  total  de- 
struction of  foreign  competition  in  the  purchase  of 
our  agricultural  and  other  productions. 

If,  moreover,  it  is  the  duty  as  well  as  the  interest  of 
the  United  States,  to  observe  an  exact  and  scrupulous 
neutrality,  amidst  the  wars  of  other  nations,  one  of 
the  most  efficacious  means  of  effecting  that  purpose 
will  be,  to  remove  every  temptation  that  might  lead 
our  citizens  to  an  opposite  course.  No  allurement 
would  be  more  likely  to  seduce  them  from  their  duty 
than  that  which  is  offered  by  the  expected  gains  of 
privateering;  no  avenue  of  political  mischief  should, 
therefore,  be  more  carefully  closed. 

If  these  articles  are  exceptionable,  in  any  respect, 


156  Alexander  Hamilton 

it  is  that,  in  imitation  of  the  analogous  articles  of  our 
treaty  with  France,  they  allow  the  privateers  of  the 
parties,  in  cases  not  inconsistent  with  former  treaties, 
to  rendezvous  in,  and  their  prizes  to  be  brought  into, 
each  other's  ports  and  harbors.  It  would,  in  my 
judgment,  have  been  the  true  poHcy  of  the  United 
States,  as  well  with  the  view  of  maintaining  an  im- 
partial and  decided  neutrality  in  the  wars  of  Europe, 
from  a  participation  in  which  our  remote  situation, 
with  [due]  prudence,  is  an  exemption,  as  likewise,  in 
order  to  promote,  in  the  most  advantageous  manner, 
our  national  prosperity,  totally  and  for  ever  to  have 
excluded  all  foreign  privateers  and  prizes  from  our 
ports  and  harbors. 

But  having  entered  into  these  stipulations  with 
France,  by  which  she  has  the  use  of  all  our  ports 
against  all  other  nations,  we  having  the  use  of  her 
ports  only  against  those  nations  who  have  not  an 
elder  treaty  with  her,  it  would  have  manifested  an 
imwise  partiahty  to  have  refused  to  enter  into  similar 
stipulations  with  other  nations  who  might  desire 
them;  accordingly  they  are  foimd  in  others  of  our 
treaties  with 

as  well  as  in  that  under  consideration — 
another  refutation  of  the  objection  to  this  last  as 
being  in  these  respects  repugnant  to  that  with  France. 

The  twenty-sixth  article  provides,  in  case  of  a 
rupture  between  the  parties,  that  the  merchants  and 
others  of  each  nation,  residing  in  the  dominions  of  the 
other,  may  maintain  and  continue  their  trade  dur- 
ing good  behavior;  in  case,  however,  their  conduct 
should  become  suspicious,  they  may  be  removed,  and 


Camillus  157 

a  twelve-month  after  the  pubhcation  of  the  order  of 
removal  is  to  be  allowed  for  that  purpose;  but  this 
term  is  not  to  be  granted  to  such  persons  as  act  con- 
trary to  law,  or  are  guilty  of  any  offence  against  the 
government;  all  such  persons  may  be  forthwith  re- 
moved or  sent  out  of  the  respective  dominions  of  the 
parties.  The  residue  of  the  article  is  calculated  to 
ascertain  the  condition  of  the  parties,  when  the  rup- 
ture shall  be  deemed  to  exist.  Each  nation  remains 
the  exclusive  judge  of  the  foreigners  among  them,  and 
will  be  able  to  decide  from  their  behavior,  how  far 
their  residence  may  be  compatible  with  the  public 
safety.  In  case  of  suspicion  only,  that  their  resi- 
dence will  prove  detrimental,  they  may  order  them 
to  depart,  reasonable  time  being  allowed  them  to 
collect  their  effects.  On  the  one  hand,  the  article 
affords  to  the  parties  perfect  security  against  the 
irregular  and  suspicious  conduct  of  foreigners  who 
may  be  among  them  on  the  breaking  out  of  war,  and, 
on  the  other  hand,  consults,  with  that  liberality 
which  the  modem  usage  of  nations  sanctions,  the 
safety  and  convenience  of  those  who,  under  the  faith 
of  the  respective  governments,  have  chosen  a  resi- 
dence in  the  dominions  of  the  parties.  Our  treaties 
with  France,  Holland,  and  Sweden  secure  to  the 
merchants  of  the  respective  parties  a  limited  period, 
after  the  commencement  of  war,  within  which  they 
may  collect  their  effects,  and  remove;  the  article  be- 
fore us,  relative  to  this  subject,  is  a  transcript  of  the 
second  article  of  the  treaty  of  commerce,  of  1786, 
between  France  and  Great  Britain.  [The  objection, 
therefore,  to  there  being  a  certain  term  within  which 


158  Alexander  Hamilton 

they  cannot  be  removed  upon  bare  suspicion,  lies 
against  our  other  treaties  and  against  almost  all  the 
treaties  of  Europe  for  many  years.  The  pretence  to 
order  away  upon  mere  supposition  would  defeat  all 
the  stipulations,  that  allow  a  certain  term  to  collect, 
sell,  and  remove  debts  and  effects;  and  for  that  rea- 
son could  not  be  supported. 

The  remainder  of  the  article,  which  gives  an  option 
to  each  party,  either  to  request  the  recall,  or  im- 
mediately to  send  home,  the  ambassador  of  the  other 
without  prejudice  to  their  mutual  friendship  and 
good  understanding,  is  a  valuable  feature.  The 
power  "immediately  to  send  home,''  without  giving 
offence,  avoids  much  delicate  embarrassment  con- 
nected with  an  application  to  recall;  it  renders  it 
easier  to  arrest  an  intriguing  minister  in  the  midst  of 
a  dangerous  intrigue,  and  it  is  a  check  upon  the  minis- 
ter by  placing  him  more  completely  in  the  power  of 
the  government  with  which  he  resides.  These  last 
circumstances  are  particularly  important  to  a  re- 
public, one  of  the  chief  dangers  of  which  arises  from 
its  exposure  to  foreign  intrigue  and  corruption.] 

The  twenty-seventh  article,  which  provides  for  the 
delivery  of  all  persons  charged  with  murder  or  forgery 
committed  within  the  jurisdiction  of  one  party,  and 
who  have  taken  refuge  within  the  territories  of  the 
other,  is  a  regulation  of  peculiar  worth  between  na- 
tions whose  territories  are  contiguous  to  each  other. 
Without  such  regulation,  the  ease  with  which  the 
perpetrators  of  these  atrocious  crimes  might  escape 
punishment,  especially  on  the  frontiers,  by  passing 
out  of  one  jurisdiction  into  the  other,  would,  in  a 


Camillus  159 

great  measure,  destroy  the  security  against  these 
offences,  that  arises  from  the  fear  and  certainty  of 
punishment.  The  provision  that  such  deUvery  shall 
not  be  made  unless  upon  the  exhibition  of  such  evi- 
dence of  criminality  as,  according  to  the  laws  of  the 
place  where  the  fugitive  shall  be  found,  would  justify 
his  apprehension  and  commitment  for  trial,  if  the 
crime  had  been  there  committed,  will  prevent  vex- 
atious requisitions,  and  is  a  caution  due  to  the  rights 
of  individuals. 

The  twenty-eighth  and  concluding  article  estab- 
lishes, that  the  first  ten  articles  of  the  treaty  shall 
be  permanent;  that  the  remaining  ones,  except  the 
twelfth,  which,  with  the  twenty-fifth,  constitutes  the 
body  of  the  commercial  part  of  the  treaty,  shall  be 
limited  in  their  duration  to  twelve  years;  and  recit- 
ing, that  the  twelfth  will  end,  by  its  own  limitation, 
at  the  end  of  two  years  after  the  termination  of 
the  present  European  war,  further  establishes,  that, 
within  the  last-mentioned  term,  and  in  time  to  per- 
fect the  business  by  the  expiration  of  that  term,  the 
discussion  of  the  subject  of  the  twelfth  article  shall 
be  renewed,  and  if  the  parties  cannot  agree  on  such 
new  arrangement,  concerning  it,  as  may  be  satis- 
factory, that  then  all  the  said  remaining  articles  (in 
other  words,  all  but  the  first  ten)  shall  cease  and 
expire  together.  This  article,  which  is  an  entirely 
independent  one,  obviates  the  doubt,  affected  to  be 
entertained,  whether  the  exception  in  the  ratification, 
with  regard  to  the  twelfth  article,  did  not  do  away 
with  the  stipulation,  by  which  the  continuance  of  the 
treaty,  except  the  first  ten  articles,  beyond  the  term 


i6o  Alexander  Hamilton 

of  two  years  after  the  expiration  of  the  war,  is  made 
to  depend  on  a  further  arrangement  of  the  West 
India  trade.  This  separate  article  is  positive  and 
conclusive,  absolutely  annulling  the  treaty  at  that 
time,  if  such  an  arrangement  be  not  made,  and 
thereby  places  it  in  the  power  of  either  party  so  to 
manage  the  matter  as  to  put  an  end  to  all  the  com- 
mercial part  of  it,  except  what  relates  to  inland  trade 
and  navigation  with  the  neighboring  British  terri- 
tories, at  the  end  of  the  short  period  of  two  years 
from  the  termination  of  the  existing  war.  This  alone 
is  sufficient  to  confound  all  the  high-charged  decla- 
mations against  the  tendency  of  the  treaty  to  ruin 

our  trade  and  navigation. 

Camillus. 


NO.   XXX VI 

1796. 

It  is  now  time  to  fulfil  my  promise  of  an  examina- 
tion of  the  constitutionality  of  the  treaty.  Of  all  the 
objections  which  have  been  contrived  against  this 
instrument,  those  relating  to  this  point  are  the  most 
futile.  If  there  be  a  political  problem  capable  of 
complete  demonstration,  the  constitutionality  of  the 
treaty,  in  all  its  parts,  is  of  this  sort. — It  is  even 
difficult  to  believe,  that  any  man  in  either  house  of 
Congress,  who  values  his  reputation  for  discernment 
or  sincerity,  will  publicly  hazard  it  by  a  serious  at- 
tempt to  controvert  the  position. 

It  is,  nevertheless,  too  much  a  fashion  with  some 
politicians,  when  hard  pressed  on  the  expediency  of  a 
measure,  to  intrench  themselves  behind  objections  to 


Camillus  i6i 

its  constitutionality — aware  that  there  is  naturally  in 
the  public  mind  a  jealous  sensibility  to  objections  of 
that  nature,  which  may  predispose  against  a  thing 
otherwise  acceptable,  if  even  a  doubt,  in  this  respect, 
can  be  raised.  They  have  been  too  forward  to  take 
advantage  of  this  propensity,  without  weighing  the 
real  mischief  of  the  example.  For,  however  it  may 
serve  a  temporary  purpose,  its  ultimate  tendency  is, 
by  accustoming  the  people  to  observe  that  alarms  of 
this  kind  are  repeated  with  levity  and  without  cause, 
to  prepare  them  for  distrusting  the  cry  of  danger 
when  it  may  be  real:  yet  the  imprudence  has  been 
such,  that  there  has  scarcely  been  an  important  pub- 
lic question,  which  has  not  involved  more  or  less  of 
this  species  of  controversy. 

In  the  present  case,  the  motives  of  those  who  may 
incline  to  defeat  the  treaty,  are  unusually  strong  for 
creating,  if  possible,  a  doubt  concerning  its  constitu- 
tionality. 

The  treaty,  having  been  ratified  on  both  sides,  the 
dilemma  plainly  is  between  a  violation  of  the  Consti- 
tution, by  the  treaty,  and  a  violation  of  the  Constitu- 
tion by  obstructing  the  execution  of  the  treaty. 

The  Vlth  article  of  the  Constitution  of  the  United 
States  declares,  that  "  the  Constitution  and  the  laws 
of  the  United  States,  made  in  pursuance  thereof,  all 
treaties  made,  or  which  shall  be  made,  under  the 
authority  of  the  United  States,  shall  be  the  supreme 
law  of  the  land,  any  thing  in  the  constitution  or 
laws  of  any  State  to  the  contrary  notwithstanding." 
A  law  of  the  land,  till  revoked  or  annulled,  by  the 
competent  authority,  is  binding,  not  less  on  each 


VOL.  VI.— 1 1. 


1 62  Alexander  Hamilton 

branch  or  department  of  the  government  than  on 
each  individual  of  the  society.  Each  house  of  Con- 
gress collectively,  as  well  as  the  members  of  it 
separately,  are  under  a  constitutional  obligation  to 
observe  the  injunctions  of  a  pre-existing  law,  and  to 
give  it  effect.  If  they  act  otherwise,  they  infringe 
the  Constitution;  the  theory  of  which  knows,  in  such 
case,  no  discretion  on  their  part.  To  resort  to  first 
principles  for  their  justification,  in  assuming  such  a 
discretion,  is  to  go  out  of  the  Constitution  for  an 
authority  which  they  cannot  find  in  it ;  it  is  to  usurp 
the  original  character  of  the  people  themselves ;  it  is, 
in  principle,  to  prostrate  the  government. 

The  cases  must  be  very  extraordinary  that  can 
excuse  so  violent  an  assumption  of  discretion.  They 
must  be  of  a  kind  to  authorize  a  revolution  in  gov- 
ernment; for  every  resort  to  original  principles,  in 
derogation  from  the  established  Constitution,  par- 
takes of  this  character. 

Recalling  to  view,  that  all  but  the  first  ten  articles 
of  the  treaty  are  liable  to  expire  at  the  termination  of 
two  years  after  the  present  war,  if  the  objection  to  it 
in  point  of  constitutionality  cannot  be  supported,  let 
me  ask,  who  is  the  man  hardy  enough  to  maintain, 
that  the  instrument  is  of  such  a  nature  as  to  justify  a 
revolution  in  government? 

If  this  can  be  answered  in  the  affirmative,  adieu  to 
all  the  securities  which  nations  expect  to  derive  from 
constitutions  of  government.  They  become  mere 
bubbles,  subject  to  be  blown  away  by  every  breath 
of  party.  The  precedent  would  be  a  fatal  one;  our 
government,  from  being  fixed  and  limited,  would 


Camillus  163 

become  revolutionary  and  arbitrary;  all  the  pro- 
visions which  our  Constitution,  with  so  much  solem- 
nity, ordains  "for  forming  a  more  perfect  union, 
establishing  justice,  insuring  domestic  tranquillity, 
providing  for  the  common  defence,  promoting  the 
general  welfare,  and  securing  the  blessings  of  liberty 
to  ourselves  and  posterity,"  would  evaporate  and 
disappear. 

Equally  will  this  be  the  case,  if  the  rage  of  party 
spirit  can  meditate,  if  the  momentary  ascendency  of 
party,  in  a  particular  branch  of  the  government,  can 
effect,  and  if  the  people  can  be  so  deceived  as  to 
tolerate — that  the  pretence  of  a  violation  of  the  Con- 
stitution shall  be  made  the  instrument  of  its  actual 
violation. 

This,  however,  cannot  be;  there  are  already  con- 
vincing indications  on  the  very  subject  before  us, 
that  the  good  sense  of  the  people  will  triumph  over 
prejudice  and  the  acts  of  party,  that  they  will  finally 
decide  according  to  their  true  interest,  and  that  any 
transient  or  partial  superiority  which  may  exist,  if 
abused  for  the  purpose  of  infracting  the  Constitu- 
tion, will  consign  the  perpetrators  of  the  infraction  to 
ruin  and  disgrace.  But  alas!  what  consolation  would 
there  be  in  the  ruin  of  a  party  for  the  ruin  of  the 
Constitution  ? 

It  is  time  to  enter  on  the  momentous  discussion. 
The  question  shall  be  examined  in  the  four  following 
views :  I .  In  relation  to  the  theory  of  the  Constitu- 
tion. 2.  In  relation  to  the  manner  in  which  it  was 
understood  by  the  convention  who  framed  it,  and  by 
the  people  who  adopted  it.     3.   In  relation  to  the 


164  Alexander  Hamilton 

practice  upon  a  similar  power  in  the  Confederation. 
4.  In  relation  to  the  practice  under  our  present  Con- 
stitution, prior  to  the  treaty  with  Great  Britain.  In 
all  these  views,  the  constitutionality  of  the  treaty 
can  be  vindicated  beyond  the  possibility  of  a  serious 
doubt. 

I.  As  to  the  theory  of  the  Constitution.  The 
Constitution  of  the  United  States  distributes  its 
powers  into  three  departments,  legislative,  executive, 
judiciary.  The  first  article  defines  the  structure,  and 
specifies  the  various  powers,  of  the  legislative  depart- 
ment ;  the  second  article  establishes  the  organization 
and  powers  of  the  executive  department;  the  third 
article  does  the  same  with  respect  to  the  judiciary 
department;  the  fourth  and  fifth  and  sixth  articles, 
which  are  the  last,  are  a  miscellany  of  particular 
provisions. 

The  first  article  declares  that  "  all  legislative  power 
granted  by  the  Constitution  shall  be  vested  in  a 
Congress  of  the  United  States,  which  shall  consist  of  a 
Senate  and  a  House  of  Representatives." 

The  second  article,  which  organizes  and  regulates 
the  executive  department,  declares  that  the  "execu- 
tive power  shall  be  vested  in  a  President  of  the  United 
States  of  America";  and  proceeding  to  detail  par- 
ticular authorities  of  the  executive,  it  declares  that 
the  "President  shall  have  power,  by  and  with  the 
advice  and  consent  of  the  Senate,  to  make  treaties, 
provided  two- thirds  of  the  senators  present  concur." 
There  is  in  no  part  of  the  Constitution  any  explana- 
tion of  this  power  to  make  treaties,  any  definition  of 
its  objects,  or  delineation  of  its  bounds.     The  only 


Camillus  165 

other  provision  in  the  Constitution  respecting  it  is  in 
the  sixth  article,  which  provides,  as  already  noticed, 
that  all  treaties  made,  or  which  shall  be  made,  under 
the  authority  of  the  United  States,  shall  be  the 
supreme  law  of  the  land! — and  this  notwithstanding 
any  thing  in  the  Constitution  or  laws  of  any  State  to 
the  contrary. 

It  was  impossible  for  words  more  comprehensive  to 
be  used  than  those  which  grant  the  power  to  make 
treaties.  They  are  such  as  would  naturally  be 
employed  to  confer  a  plenipotentiary  authority.  A 
power  "  to  make  treaties,"  granted  in  these  indefinite 
terms,  extends  to  all  kinds  of  treaties,  and  with  all 
the  latitude  which  such  a  power,  under  any  form 
of  government,  can  possess;  the  power  ''to  make'' 
implies  a  power  to  act  authoritatively  and  conclusively, 
independent  of  the  after-clause  which  expressly 
places  treaties  among  the  supreme  laws  of  the  land. 
The  thing  to  be  made  is  a  treaty. 

With  regard  to  the  objects  of  the  treaty,  there 
being  no  specification,  there  is,  of  course,  a  carte 
blanche.  The  general  proposition  must,  therefore, 
be,  that  whatever  is  a  proper  subject  of  compact, 
between  nation  and  nation,  may  be  embraced  by  a 
treaty  between  the  President  of  the  United  States, 
with  the  advice  and  consent  of  the  Senate,  and  the 
correspondent  organ  of  a  foreign  state. 

The  authority  being  general,  it  comprises,  of 
course,  whatever  cannot  be  shown  to  be  necessarily 
an  exception  to  it. 

The  only  constitutional  exception  to  the  power 
of  making  treaties  is,  that  it  shall  not  change  the 


1 66  Alexander  Hamilton 

Constitution;  which  results  from  this  fundamental 
maxim,  that  a  delegated  authority  cannot  alter  the 
constituting  act,  unless  so  expressly  authorized  by 
the  constituting  power.  An  agent  cannot  new- 
model  his  own  commission.  A  treaty,  for  example, 
cannot  transfer  the  legislative  power  to  the  executive 
department,  nor  the  power  of  this  last  department  to 
the  judiciary ;  in  other  words,  it  cannot  stipulate  that 
the  President,  and  not  Congress,  shall  make  laws 
for  the  United  States, — that  the  judges,  and  not  the 
President,  shall  command  the  national  forces. 

Again,  there  is  also  a  national  exception  to  the 
power  of  making  treaties,  as  there  is  to  every  other 
delegated  power,  which  respects  abuses  of  authority 
in  palpable  and  extreme  cases.  On  natural  princi- 
ples, a  treaty,  which  should  manifestly  betray  or 
sacrifice  the  private  interests  of  the  state,  would  be 
null.  But  this  presents  a  question  foreign  from  that 
of  the  modification  or  distribution  of  constitutional 
powers.  It  applies  to  the  case  of  the  pernicious 
exercise  of  a  power,  where  there  is  legal  competency. 
Thus  the  power  of  treaty,  though  extending  to  the 
right  of  making  alliances  offensive  and  defensive, 
might  not  be  exercised  in  making  an  alliance  so  in- 
jurious to  the  state  as  to  justify  the  non-observance 
of  the  contract. 

Beyond  these  exceptions  to  the  power,  none  occurs 
that  can  be  supported. 

Those  which  have  been  insisted  upon,  towards  in- 
validating the  treaty  with  Great  Britain,  are  not  even 
plausible.  They  amount  to  this:  that  a  treaty  can 
establish  nothing  between  the  United  States  and  a 


Camillus  167 

foreign  nation,  which  it  is  the  province  of  the  legisla- 
tive authority  to  regulate  in  reference  to  the  United 
States  alone.  It  cannot,  for  instance,  establish  a 
particular  rule  of  commercial  intercourse  between  the 
United  States  and  Great  Britain;  because  it  is  pro- 
vided in  the  Constitution,  that  Congress  "shall  have 
power  to  regulate  commerce  with  foreign  nations. ' '  This 
is  equivalent  to  affirming  that  all  the  objects  upon 
which  the  legislative  power  may  act,  in  relation  to 
our  country,  are  excepted  out  of  the  power  to  make 
treaties. 

Two  obvious  considerations  refute  this  doctrine: 
one,  that  the  power  to  make  treaties,  and  the  power 
to  make  laws,  are  different  things,  operating  by  differ- 
ent means,  upon  different  subjects;  the  other,  that 
the  construction  resulting  from  such  a  doctrine  would 
defeat  the  power  to  make  treaties,  while  its  opposite 
reconciles  this  power  with  the  power  of  making  laws. 

The  power  to  make  laws  is  "the  power  of  pronounc- 
ing authoritatively  the  will  of  the  nation  as  to  all 
persons  and  things  over  which  it  has  jurisdiction  " ;  or 
it  may  be  defined  to  be  "the  power  of  prescribing 
rules  binding  upon  all  persons  and  things  over  which 
the  nation  has  jurisdiction."  It  acts  compulsively 
upon  all  persons,  whether  foreigners  or  citizens,  and 
upon  all  things  within  the  territory  of  such  nation, 
and  also  upon  its  own  citizens  and  their  property 
without  its  territory  in  certain  cases  and  under  cer- 
tain limitations.  But  it  can  have  no  obligatory 
action  whatsoever  upon  a  foreign  nation,  or  upon  any 
person  or  thing  within  the  jurisdiction  of  a  foreign 
nation. 


1 68  Alexander  Hamilton 

The  power  of  treaty,  on  the  other  hand,  is  the 
power  by  agreement,  convention,  or  compact,  to  estab- 
lish rules  binding  upon  two  or  more  nations,  their  re- 
spective citizens  and  property.  The  rule  established 
derives  its  reciprocal  obligation  from  promise,  from 
the  faith  which  the  contracting  parties  pledge  to  each 
other,  not  from  the  power  of  either  to  prescribe  a  rule 
for  the  other.  It  is  not  here  the  will  of  a  superior 
that  commands ;  it  is  the  consent  of  two  independent 
parties  that  contract. 

The  means  which  the  power  of  legislation  employs 
are  laws  which  it  enacts,  or  rules  which  it  enjoins;  the 
subject  upon  which  it  acts  is  the  nation  of  whom  it  is, 
and  the  persons  and  property  within  the  jurisdiction 
of  the  nation.  The  means  which  the  power  of  treaty 
employs  are  contracts  with  other  nations,  who  may 
or  may  not  enter  into  them ;  the  subjects  upon  which 
it  acts  are  the  nations  contracting,  and  those  per- 
sons and  things  of  each  to  which  the  contract  relates. 
Though  a  treaty  may  effect  what  a  law  can,  yet  a  law 
cannot  effect  what  a  treaty  does.  These  discrim- 
inations are  obvious  and  decisive;  and  however  the 
operation  of  a  treaty  may,  in  some  things,  resemble 
that  of  a  law,  no  two  ideas  are  more  distinct  than  that 
of  legislating  and  that  of  contracting. 

It  follows  that  there  is  no  ground  for  the  inference 
pretended  to  be  drawn,  that  the  legislative  powers  of 
Congress  are  excepted  out  of  the  power  of  making 
treaties.  It  is  the  province  of  the  latter  to  do  what 
the  former  cannot  do.  Congress  (to  pursue  still  the 
case  of  regulating  trade)  may  regulate,  by  law,  our 
own  trade  and  that  which  foreigners  come  to  carry 


Camillus  169 

on  with  us ;  but  they  cannot  regulate  the  trade  which 
we  may  go  to  carry  on  in  foreign  countries ;  they  can 
give  to  us  no  rights,  no  privileges,  there.  This  must 
depend  on  the  will  and  regulations  of  those  countries ; 
and,  consequently,  it  is  the  province  of  the  power  of 
treaty  to  establish  the  rules  of  commercial  intercourse 
between  foreign  nations  and  the  United  States.  The 
legislative  may  regulate  our  own  trade,  but  treaty 
only  can  regulate  the  national  trade  between  our  own 
and  another  country. 

The  Constitution  accordingly  considers  the  power 
of  treaty  as  different  from  that  of  legislation.  This 
is  proved  in  two  ways:  i.  That  while  the  Constitu- 
tion declares  that  all  the  legislative  powers  which  it 
grants  shall  be  vested  in  Congress,  it  vests  the  power 
of  making  treaties  in  the  President  with  consent  of  the 
Senate.  2.  That  the  same  article  by  which  it  is 
declared  that  the  executive  power  shall  be  vested  in  a 
President,  and  in  which  sundry  executive  powers  are 
detailed,  gives  the  power  to  make  treaties  to  the 
President,  with  the  auxiliary  agency  of  the  Senate. 
Thus  the  power  of  making  treaties  is  placed  in  the 
class  of  executive  authorities;  while  the  force  of 
laws  is  annexed  to  its  results.  This  agrees  with  the 
distribution  commonly  made  by  theoretical  writers, 
though  perhaps  the  power  of  treaty,  from  its  peculiar 
nature,  ought  to  form  a  class  by  itself. 

When  it  is  said  that  Congress  shall  have  power  to 
regulate  commerce  with  foreign  nations,  this  has 
reference  to  the  distribution  of  the  general  legislative 
power  of  regulating  trade  between  the  national  and 
the  particular  governments;    and  serves  merely  to 


170  Alexander  Hamilton 

distinguish  the  right  of  regulating  our  external  trade, 
as  far  as  it  can  be  done  by  law,  which  is  vested  in 
Congress,  from  that  of  regulating  the  trade  of  a  State 
within  itself,  which  is  left  to  each  State. 

This  will  the  better  appear  from  the  entire  clause. 
"The  Congress  shall  have  power  to  regulate  com- 
merce with  foreign  nations  and  among  the  several 
States  and  with  the  Indian  tribes,"  which  is  the  same 
as  if  it  had  been  said :  The  whole  powers  of  regulating 
trade  by  law  shall  reside  in  Congress,  except  as  to  the 
trade  within  a  State,  the  power  to  regulate  which 
shall  remain  with  such  State.  But  it  is  clearly  for- 
eign to  that  mutual  regulation  of  trade  between  the 
United  States  and  other  nations,  which,  from  the 
necessity  of  mutual  consent,  can  only  be  performed 
by  treaty.  It  is  indeed  an  absurdity  to  say,  that  the 
power  of  regulating  trade  by  law  is  incompatible  with 
the  power  of  regulating  it  by  treaty ;  since  the  former 
can,  by  no  means,  do  what  the  latter  alone  can  ac- 
complish; consequently,  it  is  an  absurdity  to  say, 
that  the  legislative  power  of  regulating  trade  is  an 
exception  to  the  power  of  making  treaties. 

Laws  are  the  acts  of  legislation  of  a  particular 
nation  for  itself.  Treaties  are  the  acts  of  the  legis- 
lation of  several  nations  for  themselves  jointly  and 
reciprocally.  The  legislative  powers  of  one  state 
cannot  reach  the  cases  which  depend  on  the  joint 
legislation  of  two  or  more  states.  For  this,  resort 
must  be  had  to  the  pactitious  power,  or  the  power 
of  treaty.  This  is  another  attitude  of  the  subject, 
displaying  the  fallacy  of  the  proposition,  that  the 
legislative  powers  of  Congress  are  exceptions  to,  or 


Camillus  171 

limitations  of,  the  power  of  the  President,  with  the 
aid  of  the  Senate,  to  make  treaties. 

Camillus. 


NO.    XXXVII 

1796. 

It  shall  now  be  shown  that  the  objections  to  the 
treaty,  founded  on  its  pretended  interference  with  the 
power  of  Congress,  tend  to  render  the  power  of  mak- 
ing treaties,  in  a  very  great  degree,  if  not  altogether, 
nominal.  This  will  be  best  seen  by  an  enumeration 
of  the  cases  of  pretended  interference. 

I  St. — The  power  of  Congress  to  lay  taxes  is  said  to 
be  impaired  by  those  stipulations  which  prevent  the 
laying  of  duties  on  particular  articles;  which  also 
prevent  the  laying  of  higher  or  other  duties  on  British 
commodities  than  on  the  commodities  of  other  coun- 
tries ;  and  which  restrict  the  power  of  increasing  the 
difference  of  duties  on  British  tonnage  and  on  goods 
imported  in  British  bottoms. 

2d. — The  power  of  Congress  to  regulate  trade  is 
said  to  be  impaired  by  the  same  restrictions  respect- 
ing duties,  inasmuch  as  they  are  intended,  and  op- 
erate, as  regulations  of  trade;  by  the  stipulations 
against  prohibitions  in  certain  cases;  and,  in  general, 
by  all  the  rights,  privileges,  immunities,  and  restric- 
tions in  trade,  which  are  contained  in  the  treaty;  all 
which  are  so  many  regulations  of  commerce,  which 
are  said  to  encroach  upon  the  legislative  authority. 

3d. — The  power  of  Congress  to  establish  a  uniform 
rule  of  naturalization,  is  said  to  be  interfered  with  by 
those  provisions  of  the  treaty  which  secure  to  the 


172  Alexander  Hamilton 

settlers,  within  the  precincts  of  the  British  posts,  the 
right  of  becoming  citizens  of  the  United  States,  and 
those  which,  in  certain  cases,  remove  the  disability  of 
alienism  as  to  property. 

4th. — The  power  of  Congress  "  to  define  and  punish 
piracies  and  felonies,  committed  on  the  high  seas,  and 
offences  against  the  law  of  nations,"  is  said  to  be  con- 
travened by  those  parts  of  the  treaty  which  declare 
that  certain  acts  shall  be  deemed  piracy,  which  con- 
stitute certain  other  things  offences,  and  stipulate  the 
reciprocal  punishment  of  them  by  each. 

5th. — It  is  also  said  that  the  Constitution  is  vio- 
lated in  relation  to  that  provision  which  declares, 
that  "  no  money  shall  be  drawn  from  the  treasury  but 
in  consequence  of  appropriations  made  by  law  " ;  by 
those  parts  of  the  treaty  which  stipulate  compensa- 
tions to  certain  commissioners,  and  indemnifications 
to  Great  Britain,  in  certain  cases  to  be  adjusted  and 
pronounced  by  the  commissioners;  and,  generally, 
by  all  those  parts  which  may  involve  an  expenditure 
of  money. 

6th. — The  Constitution  is  said  to  be  violated  in 
that  part  which  empowers  Congress  to  dispose  of,  and 
make  all  needful  rules  and  regulations  respecting,  the 
territory,  or  other  property  of  the  United  States,  by 
those  provisions  of  the  treaty  which  respect  the  ad- 
justment of  boundary  in  the  cases  of  the  rivers  St. 
Croix  and  Mississippi. 

Lastly. — The  Constitution  is  said  to  be  violated, 
in  its  provisions  concerning  the  judiciary  depart- 
ment, by  those  parts  of  the  treaty  which  con- 
template   the   confiding   to    the   determination    of 


Camillus  173 

commissioners   certain   questions  between  the  two 
nations. 

A  careful  inspection  of  the  treaty,  with  these  ob- 
jections in  view,  will  discover  that  of  the  twenty- 
eight  articles  which  compose  it,  at  least  seventeen 
are  involved  in  the  charge  of  unconstitutionality; 
and  that  these  seventeen  comprise  all  the  provisions 
which  adjust  past  controversies,  or  establish  rules 
of  commercial  intercourse  between  the  parties.  The 
other  eleven,  which  are  the  ist,  9th,  loth,  17th,  i8th, 
19th,  20th,  22d,  23d,  24th,  and  28th,  except  the  ist, 
are  made  up  of  provisions  which  have  reference  to 
war;  the  first  merely  declaring  that  there  shall  be 
peace  between  the  parties.  And  it  is  a  question, 
even  with  respect  to  all  of  these,  except  the  first  and 
tenth,  whether  they  also  are  not  implicated  in  the 
charge ;  inasmuch  as  some  of  their  dispositions  have 
commercial  relations.  Is  not  this  alone  sufficient  to 
bring  under  a  strong  suspicion  the  validity  of  the 
principles  which  impeach  the  constitutionality  of  the 
instrument  ? 

It  must  have  been  observed  that  the  argument  in 
the  last  number  is  applicable  to  all  the  legislative 
powers  of  Congress,  as  well  as  to  that  of  regulating 
trade,  which  was  selected,  by  way  of  illustration,  on 
the  ground  of  its  being  common  to  all.  Indeed  the 
instance  of  the  regulations  of  trade  is  that  which  is 
most  favorable  to  the  opposite  doctrine,  since  foreign 
nations  are  named  in  the  clause;  the  true  intent  of 
which,  however,  has  been  explained. 

The  same  reasoning,  too,  would  extend  the  power 
of  treaties  to  those  objects  which  are  consigned  to 


174  Alexander  Hamilton 

the  legislation  of  individual  States;  but  here  the 
Constitution  has  announced  its  meaning  in  express 
terms,  by  declaring,  that  the  treaties  which  have 
been  and  shall  be  made  under  the  authority  of  the 
United  States,  shall  be  the  supreme  law  of  the  land, 
any  thing  in  the  Constitution  or  laws  of  any  State 
to  the  contrary  notwithstanding.  This  manifestly 
recognizes  the  supremacy  of  the  power  of  treaties 
over  the  laws  of  particular  States,  and  goes  even  a 
step  further. 

The  obvious  reason  for  this  special  provision,  in 
regard  to  the  laws  of  individual  states,  is,  that 
there  might  otherwise  have  been  room  for  ques- 
tion— whether  a  treaty  of  the  Union  could  embrace 
objects,  the  internal  regulation  of  which  belonged 
to  the  separate  authorities  of  the  States.  But  with 
regard  to  the  United  States  there  was  no  room  for  a 
similar  question. 

The  power  of  treaty  could  not  but  be  supposed 
commensurate  with  all  these  objects  to  which  the 
legislative  power  of  the  Union  extended,  which  are 
the  proper  subjects  of  compacts  with  foreign  nations. 

It  is  a  question  among  some  theoretical  writers — 
whether  a  treaty  can  repeal  pre-existing  laws?  This 
question  must  always  be  answered  by  the  particular 
form  of  government  of  each  nation.  In  our  Con- 
stitution, which  gives,  ipso  facto,  the  force  of  law  to 
treaties,  making  them  equal  with  the  acts  of  Con- 
gress, the  supreme  law  of  the  land,  a  treaty  must 
necessarily  repeal  an  antecedent  law  contrary  to  it; 
according  to  the  legal  maxim  that  "  leges  posterior es 
prior es  contr arias  abrogant.'' 


Camillus  175 

But  even  in  those  forms  of  government,  in  which 
there  may  be  room  for  such  a  question,  it  is  not 
understood  that  a  treaty  containing  stipulations 
which  require  the  repeal  of  antecedent  laws,  is,  on 
that  account,  unconstitutional  and  null.  The  true 
meaning  is,  that  the  antecedent  laws  are  not,  ipso 
facto,  abrogated  by  the  treaty;  but  the  Legislature  is, 
nevertheless,  bound  in  good  faith,  under  the  general 
limitation  stated  in  another  place,  to  lend  its  author- 
ity to  remove  obstacles  which  previous  laws  might 
oppose  to  a  fair  execution  of  a  treaty. 

One  instance  of  the  inconsistency  prevailing  in 
the  arguments  against  the  treaty  negotiated  by  Mr. 
Jay,  is  observable  in  this  point.  To  get  rid  of 
the  infractions  of  our  treaty  of  peace  with  Great 
Britain  by  certain  laws  of  particular  States,  it  is 
strenuously  maintained  that  treaties  control  the 
laws  of  States.  To  impeach  the  constitutionality 
of  the  treaty  under  consideration,  it  is  objected  that, 
in  some  points,  it  interferes  with  the  objects  of 
State  legislation.  The  express  provision  of  the  Con- 
stitution in  this  particular,  quoted  above,  has  not 
been  sufficient  to  check  the  rage  for  objection. 

The  absurdity  of  the  alleged  interferences  will 
fully  appear,  by  shewing  how  they  would  operate 
upon  the  several  kinds  of  treaties  usual  among 
nations.  These  may  be  classed  under  three  prin- 
cipal heads:  i,  treaties  of  commerce;  2,  treaties  of 
alliance;    3,  treaties  of  peace. 

Treaties  of  commerce  are,  of  course,  excluded;  for 
every  treaty  of  commerce  is  a  system  of  rules  devised 
to  regulate  and  govern  the  trade  between  contract- 


176  Alexander  Hamilton 

ing  nations;  invading  directly  the  exclusive  power 
of  regulating  trade  which  is  attributed  to  Congress. 

Treaties  of  alliance,  whether  defensive  or  offen- 
sive, are  equally  excluded,  and  this  on  two  grounds: 
I.  Because  it  is  their  immediate  object  to  define  a 
case  or  cases  in  which  one  nation  shall  take  part  with 
another  in  war,  contrary,  in  the  sense  of  the  objec- 
tion, to  that  clause  of  the  Constitution  which  gives  to 
Congress  the  power  of  declaring  war;  and  2.  Be- 
cause the  succors  stipulated,  in  whatever  shape  they 
may  be,  must  involve  an  expenditure  of  money — 
not  to  say,  that  it  is  common  to  stipulate  succors  in 
money,  either  in  the  first  instance  or  by  way  of  alter- 
native. It  will  be  pertinent  to  observe  incidentally, 
in  this  place,  that  even  the  humane  and  laudable 
provision  in  the  seventeenth  article,  which  all  have 
approved,  is  within  the  spirit  of  the  objection;  for 
the  effect  of  this  is  to  restrain  the  power  and  discre- 
tion of  Congress  to  grant  reprisals,  till  there  has  been 
an  unsuccessful  demand  of  justice.  Nothing  can 
better  illustrate  the  imreasonable  tendency  of  the 
principle. 

Treaties  of  peace  are  also  excluded,  or,  at  the  least, 
are  so  narrowed  as  to  be  in  the  greatest  number  of 
cases  impracticable.  The  most  common  conditions 
of  these  treaties  are  restitutions  or  cessions  of  terri- 
tory, on  one  side  or  on  the  other,  frequently  on  both 
sides — regulations  of  boundary — restitutions  and 
confirmations  of  property — pecuniary  indemnifica- 
tions for  injuries  or  expenses.  It  will,  probably,  not 
be  easy  to  find  a  precedent  of  a  treaty  of  peace, 
which  does  not  contain  one  or  more  of  these  pro- 


Camillus  i77 

visions,  as  the  basis  of  the  cessation  of  hostilities,  and 
they  are  all  of  them  naturally  to  be  looked  for  in  an 
agreement  which  is  to  put  an  end  to  the  state  of 
war  between  conflicting  nations. 

Yet  they  are  all  precluded  by  the  objections  which 
have  been  enumerated:  pecuniary  indemnifications, 
by  that  which  respects  the  appropriations  of  money ; 
restitutions  or  cessions  of  territory  or  property,  regu- 
lations of  boundary,  by  that  which  respects  the  right 
of  Congress  to  dispose  of,  and  make  all  needful  rules 
and  regulations  concerning  the  territory  and  property 
of  the  United  States.  It  is  to  be  observed,  likewise, 
that*  cessions  of  territory  are  almost  always  accom- 
panied with  stipulations  in  favor  of  those  who 
inhabit  the  ceded  territory,  securing  personal  privi- 
leges and  private  rights  of  property;  neither  of 
which  could  be  acceded  to  on  the  principles  of  that 
objection,  which  relates  to  the  power  of  naturaliza- 
tion; for  this  power  has  reference  to  two  species  of 
rights,  those  of  privilege  and  those  of  property.  An 
act  allowing  a  foreigner  to  hold  real  estate  is  so  far 
an  act  of  naturalization ;  since  it  is  one  of  the  con- 
sequences of  alienism,  not  to  be  able  to  hold  real 
estate. 

It  follows,  that  if  the  objections  which  are  taken 
to  the  treaty,  on  the  point  of  constitutionality,  are 
valid,  the  President,  with  the  advice  and  consent  of 
the  Senate,  can  make  neither  a  treaty  of  commerce 
nor  alliance,  and  rarely,  if  at  all,  a  treaty  of  peace. 
It  is  probable,  that  on  a  minute  analysis,  there  is 
scarcely  any  species  of  treaty  which  would  not  clash, 
in    some    particular,    with    the    principle    of    those 


VOL.  VI.— 12. 


178  Alexander  Hamilton 

objections;  and  thus,  as  was  before  observed,  the 
power  to  make  treaties,  granted  in  such  comprehen- 
sive and  indefinite  terms,  and  guarded  with  so  much 
precaution,  would  become  essentially  nugatory. 

This  is  so  obviously  against  the  principles  of  sound 
construction;  it,  at  the  same  time,  exposes  the 
Government  to  so  much  impotence  in  one  great 
branch  of  political  power,  in  opposition  to  a  main 
intent  of  the  Constitution;  and  it  tends  so  directly 
to  frustrate  one  principal  object  of  the  situation  of  a 
general  government,  the  convenient  management  of 
our  external  concerns,  that  it  cannot  but  be  rejected 
by  every  discerning  man  who  will  examine  and  pro- 
nounce with  sincerity.  It  is  against  the  principles 
of  sound  construction;  because  these  teach  us,  that 
every  instrument  is  so  to  be  interpreted,  as  that  all 
the  parts  may,  if  possible,  consist  with  each  other, 
and  have  their  effect.  But  the  construction  which 
is  combated  would  cause  the  legislative  power  to 
destroy  the  power  of  making  treaties.  Moreover,  if 
the  power  of  the  executive  department  be  inade- 
quate to  the  making  of  the  several  kinds  of  treaties 
which  have  been  mentioned,  there  is,  then,  no  power 
in  the  Government  to  make  them ;  for  there  is  not  a 
syllable  in  the  Constitution  which  authorizes  either 
the  legislative  or  judiciary  departments  to  make  a 
treaty  with  a  foreign  nation.  And  our  Constitution 
would  then  exhibit  the  ridiculous  spectacle  of  a 
government  without  a  power  to  make  treaties  with 
foreign  nations;  a  result  as  inadmissible  as  it  is 
absurd;  since,  in  fact,  our  Constitution  grants  the 
power  of  making  treaties,  in  the  most  explicit  and 


Camillus  1 79 

ample  terms,  to  the  President,  with  the  advice  and 
consent  of  the  Senate.  On  the  contrary,  all  dififi- 
culty  is  avoided,  by  distinguishing  the  province  of 
the  two  powers,  according  to  ideas  which  have  been 
always  familiar  to  us,  and  which  were  never  exposed 
to  any  question  till  the  treaty  with  Great  Britain 
gave  exercise  to  the  subtilties  of  party  spirit. 

By  confining  the  power  to  make  laws  within  its 
proper  sphere,  and  restricting  its  actions  to  the  es- 
tablishment of  rules  for  our  own  nation  and  those 
foreigners  who  come  within  our  jurisdiction,  and 
by  assigning  to  the  power  of  treaty  the  office  of 
concerting  those  rules  of  mutual  intercourse  and  con- 
nection, between  us  and  foreign  nations,  which  re- 
quire their  consent  as  well  as  our  own,  allowing  to 
it  the  latitude  necessary  for  this  purpose,  a  har- 
monious agreement  is  preserved  between  the  differ- 
ent powers  of  the  Government — that  to  make  laws, 
and  that  to  make  treaties;  between  the  authority 
of  the  legislative  and  the  authority  of  the  executive 
department.     Hence — • 

Though  Congress,  by  the  Constitution,  have  power 
to  lay  taxes,  yet  a  treaty  may  restrain  the  exercise 
of  it  in  particular  cases.  For  a  nation,  like  an  indi- 
vidual, may  abridge  its  moral  power  of  action  by 
agreement;  and  the  organ  charged  with  the  legis- 
lative power  of  a  nation  may  be  restrained  in  its 
operation  by  the  agreements  of  the  organ  of  its 
federative  power,  or  power  to  contract.  Let  it  be 
remembered,  that  the  nation  is  the  constituent,  and 
that  the  executive,  within  its  sphere,  is  no  less  the 
organ  of  its  will  than  the  Legislature. 


i8o  Alexander  Hamilton 

Though  Congress  are  empowered  to  make  regula- 
tions of  trade,  yet  they  are  not  exclusively  so  em- 
powered ;  but  regulations  of  trade  may  also  be  made 
by  treaty,  and,  where  other  nations  are  to  be  bound 
by  them,  must  be  made  by  treaty. 

Though  Congress  are  authorized  to  establish  a 
uniform  rule  of  naturalization,  yet  this  contem- 
plates only  the  ordinary  cases  of  internal  adminis- 
tration. In  particular  and  extraordinary  cases, 
those  in  which  the  pretensions  of  a  foreign  govern- 
ment are  to  be  managed,  a  treaty  may  also  confer 
the  rights  and  privileges  of  citizens;  thus  the  abso- 
lute cession  and  plenary  dominion  of  a  province  or 
district  possessed  by  our  arms  in  war  may  be  ac- 
cepted by  the  treaty  of  peace  on  the  condition  that 
its  inhabitants  shall,  in  their  persons  and  property, 
enjoy  the  privileges  of  citizens. 

The  same  reasoning  applies  to  all  the  other  in- 
stances of  supposed  infraction  of  the  legislative  au- 
thority :  with  regard  to  piracies  and  offences  against 
the  laws  of  nations,  with  regard  to  expenditures  of 
money,  with  regard  to  the  appointment  of  officers, 
with  regard  to  the  judiciary  tribunals,  with  regard  to 
the  disposal  and  regulation  of  the  national  territory 
and  property.  In  all  these  cases,  the  power  to  make 
laws  and  the  power  to  make  treaties  are  concurrent 
and  co-ordinate.  The  latter,  and  not  the  former, 
must  act,  where  the  co-operation  of  other  nations  is 
requisite. 

As  to  what  respects  the  commissioners  agreed  to 
be  appointed,  they  are  not,  in  a  strict  sense,  officers. 
They   are   arbitrators   between   the   two   countries. 


Camillus  18 1 

Though  in  the  Constitutions,  both  of  the  United 
States  and  of  most  of  the  individual  States,  a  par- 
ticular mode  of  appointing  officers  is  designated,  yet, 
in  practice,  it  has  not  been  deemed  a  violation  of  the 
provision  to  appoint  commissioners  or  special  agents 
for  special  purposes  in  a  different  mode.^ 

As  to  the  provision,  which  restricts  the  issuing  of 
money  from  the  treasury  to  cases  of  appropriation 
by  law,  and  which,  from  its  intrinsic  nature,  may  be 
considered  as  applicable  to  the  exercise  of  every 
power  of  government,  it  is,  in  no  sort,  touched  by  the 
treaty.  In  the  constant  practice  of  the  Govern- 
ment, the  cause  of  an  expenditure,  or  the  contract 
which  incurs  it,  is  a  different  thing  from  the  appro- 
priation for  satisfying  it.  Thus  the  salary  of  a  public 
officer  is  fixed  by  one  law,  the  appropriation  for  its 
payment  b}^  another.  So,  the  treaty  only  stipulates 
what  may  be  a  cause  of  expenditure.  An  appropria- 
tion by  law  will  still  be  requisite  for  actual  payment. 

As  to  the  disposal  and  regulation  of  the  territory 
and  property  of  the  United  States,  this  will  be  na- 
turally understood  of  dispositions  and  regulations 
purely  domestic,  and  where  the  title  is  not  disputed 
by  a  foreign  power.  Where  there  are  interfering 
claims  of  foreign  powers,  as  neither  will  acknowledge 
the  right  of  the  other  to  decide,  treaty  must  directly 
or  indirectly  adjust  the  dispute. 

So  far  then  it  is  from  being  true,  that  the  power  of 
treaty  can  extend  to  nothing  upon  which,  in  relation 
to  ourselves,  the  legislative  power  may  act,  that  it 
may  rather  be  laid  down  as  a  general  rule,  that  a 
treaty  may  do  between  different  nations  whatever 


1 82  Alexander  Hamilton 

the  legislative  power  of  each  may  do  with  regard  to 
itself.  The  exceptions  to  this  rule  are  to  be  deduced 
from  the  unfitness  and  inconvenience  of  its  applica- 
tion to  particular  cases,  and  are  of  the  nature  of 
abuses  of  a  general  principle. 

In  considering  the  power  of  legislation  in  its  rela- 
tions to  the  power  of  treaty,  instead  of  saying  that 
the  objects  of  the  former  are  excepted  out  of  the 
latter,  it  will  be  more  correct,  indeed  it  will  be  en- 
tirely correct,  to  invert  the  rule,  and  to  say  that  the 
power  of  treaty  is  the  power  of  making  exceptions, 
in  particular  cases,  to  the  power  of  legislation.  The 
stipulations  of  treaty  are,  in  good  faith,  restraints 
upon  the  exercise  of  the  last-mentioned  power. 
Where  there  is  no  treaty,  it  is  completely  free  to  act. 
Where  there  is  a  treaty,  it  is  still  free  to  act  in  all  the 
cases  not  specially  excepted  by  the  treaty.  Thus, 
Congress  are  free  to  regulate  trade  with  a  foreign 
nation,  with  whom  we  have  no  treaty  of  commerce, 
in  such  manner  as  they  judge  for  the  interest  of  the 
United  States;  and  they  are  also  free  so  to  regulate 
it  with  a  foreign  nation  with  whom  we  have  a  treaty, 
in  all  the  points  which  the  treaty  does  not  specially 
except.  There  is  always,  therefore,  great  latitude 
for  the  exercise  of  the  legislative  power  of  regulating 
trade  with  foreign  nations,  notwithstanding  any 
treaties  of  commerce  which  may  be  formed. 

The  effects  of  a  treaty  to  impose  restraints  upon 
the  legislative  powers  may,  in  some  degree,  be  ex- 
emplified by  the  case  of  the  compacts  which  the 
Legislature  itself  makes,  as  with  regard  to  the  public 
debt.     Its  own  compacts  are,  in  good  faith,  excep- 


Camillus  183 

tions  to  its  power  of  action.  Treaties  with  foreign 
powers,  for  obvious  reasons,  are  much  stronger 
exceptions.  Camillus. 


NO.    XXXVIII AND    LAST 

1796. 

The  manner  in  which  the  power  of  treaty,  as  it 
exists  in  the  Constitution,  was  understood  by  the 
convention  in  framing  it,  and  by  the  people  in  adopt- 
ing it,  is  the  point  next  to  be  considered. 

As  to  the  sense  of  the  convention,  the  secrecy  with 
which  their  deHberations  were  conducted  does  not 
permit  any  formal  proof  of  the  opinions  and  views 
which  prevailed  in  digesting  the  power  of  treaty. 
But  from  the  best  opportunity  of  knowing  the  fact,  I 
aver,  that  it  was  understood  by  all  to  be  the  intent 
of  the  provision  to  give  to  that  power  the  most 
ample  latitude — to  render  it  competent  to  all  the 
stipulations  which  the  exigencies  of  national  affairs 
might  require;  competent  to  the  making  of  treaties 
of  alliance,  treaties  of  commerce,  treaties  of  peace, 
and  every  other  species  of  convention  usual  among 
nations;  and  competent,  in  the  course  of  its  exer- 
cise for  these  purposes,  to  control  and  bind  the  legis- 
lative power  of  Congress.  And  it  was  emphatically 
for  this  reason  that  it  was  so  carefully  guarded;  the 
co-operation  of  two  thirds  of  the  Senate,  with  the 
President,  being  required  to  make  any  treaty  what- 
ever. I  appeal  for  this,  with  confidence,  to  every 
member  of  the  convention — particularly  to  those  in 
the  two  houses  of  Congress.     Two  of  these  are  in  the 


.184  Alexander  Hamilton 

House  of  Representatives,  Mr.  Madison,  and  Mr. 
Baldwin.  It  is  expected  by  the  adversaries  of  the 
treaty,  that  these  gentlemen  will,  in  their  places, 
obstruct  its  execution.  However  this  may  be,  I  feel 
a  confidence  that  neither  of  them  will  deny  the  as- 
sertion I  have  made.  To  suppose  them  capable  of 
such  a  denial  were  to  suppose  them  utterly  regard- 
less of  truth.  But  though  direct  proof  of  the  views 
of  the  convention  on  the  point  cannot  be  produced, 
yet  we  are  not  wholly  without  proof  on  this  head. 

Three  members  of  the  convention  dissented  from 
the  Constitution:  Mr.  Mason,  Mr.  Gerry,  and  Mr. 
Randolph.  Among  the  reasons  for  his  dissent,  pub- 
lished by  Mr.  Mason,  we  find  this  clause:  "By  de- 
claring all  treaties  supreme  laws  of  the  land,  the 
Executive  and  Senate  have,  in  many  cases,  an  ex- 
clusive power  of  legislation,  which  might  have  been 
avoided  by  proper  distinctions  with  respect  to 
treaties,  and  requiring  the  assent  of  the  House  of  Re- 
presentatives where  it  could  be  done  with  safety." 
This  shows  the  great  extent  of  the  power,  in  the  con- 
ception of  Mr.  Mason:  in  many  cases  amounting  to 
an  exclusive  power  of  legislation;  nor  did  he  object  to 
the  extent,  but  only  desired  that  it  should  have  been 
further  guarded,  by  certain  distinctions,  and  by  re- 
quiring, in  certain  cases,  the  assent  of  the  House  of 
Representatives . 

Among  the  objections  to  the  Constitution,  ad- 
dressed by  Mr.  Gerry  to  the  Legislature  of  Massa- 
chusetts, we  find  one  to  have  been,  "  that  treaties  of 
the  highest  importance  might  be  formed  by  the  Presi- 
dent, with  the  advice  of  two  thirds  of  a  quorum  of 


Camillus  185 

the  Senate."  This  shows  his  idea  of  the  magnitude 
of  the  power;  and  impHedly  admitting  with  Mr. 
Mason,  the  propriety  of  its  extent,  he  seems  only  to 
have  desired  that  the  concurrence  of  the  Senate 
should  have  embraced  two  thirds  of  the  whole  body, 
instead  of  two  thirds  of  a  quorum.  But  how  small 
and  how  insignificant  would  the  power  of  treaty  be, 
according  to  the  doctrine  lately  promulgated,  with 
regard  to  its  constitutional  limit? 

As  to  the  sense  of  the  community  in  the  adoption 
of  the  Constitution,  this  can  only  be  ascertained  from 
two  sources:  the  writings  for  and  against  it,  and  the 
debates  in  the  several  State  conventions,  while  it  was 
under  consideration. 

I  possess  not,  at  this  moment,  materials  for  an  in- 
vestigation, which  would  enable  me  to  present  the 
evidence  they  afford ;  but  I  refer  to  them,  with  con- 
fidence, for  proof  of  the  fact,  that  the  organization 
of  the  power  of  treaty  in  the  Constitution  was  at- 
tacked and  defended  with  an  admission  on  both  sides, 
of  its  being  of  the  character  which  I  have  assigned 
to  it.  Its  great  extent  and  importance — its  effect  to 
control,  by  its  stipulations,  the  legislative  authority, 
were  mutually  taken  for  granted,  and  upon  this 
basis  it  was  insisted,  by  way  of  objection,  that  there 
were  not  adequate  guards  for  the  safe  exercise  of  so 
vast  a  power;  that  there  ought  to  have  been  re- 
servations of  certain  rights,  a  better  disposition  of  the 
power  to  impeach,  and  a  participation,  general  or 
special,  of  the  House  of  Representatives  in  the  mak- 
ing of  treaties. 

The  reply  to  these  objections,  acknowledging  the 


1 86  Alexander  Hamilton 

delicacy  and  magnitude  of  the  power,  was  directed 
to  show  that  its  organization  was  a  proper  one,  and 
that  it  was  sufficiently  guarded.' 

The  manner  of  exercising  a  similar  power  under 
the  Confederation  shall  now  be  examined. 

To  judge  of  the  similarity  of  the  power  it  will  be 
useful  to  quote  the  terms  in  which  it  was  granted. 
They  are  these:  "The  United  States  in  Congress 
assembled  shall  have  the  sole  and  exclusive  right 
and   power   of   entering   into  treaties   and   alliances, 

I  The  Federalist,  No.  XLII.  [No.  42  of  The  Federalist  was  written  by 
Madison,  hence  the  pecuUar  aptness  of  the  quotation  at  this  time, 
when  Madison  was  the  leader  of  the  opposition.  No.  64  was  by  Jay. 
— Ed.],  has  these  passages:  "The  power  to  make  treaties  and  to  re- 
ceive and  send  ambassadors,  speak  their  own  propriety;  both  of  them 
are  comprised  in  the  articles  of  confederation,  with  the  difference  only 
that  the  former  is  disembarrassed  by  the  plan  of  the  convention,  of  an 
exception  by  which  treaties  might  be  substantially  frustrated  by  regu- 
lations of  the  States."  This  plainly  alludes  to  the  proviso  which  has 
been  cited  and  commented  upon.  "It  is  true  that  when  treaties  of 
commerce  stipulate  for  the  nominal  appointment  of  consuls,  the  ad- 
mission of  foreign  consuls  may  fall  within  the  power  of  making  com- 
mercial treaties."  And  in  number  LXIV.  are  these  passages:  "The 
power  of  making  treaties  is  an  important  one,  especially  as  it  relates  to 
war,  peace,  and  commerce;  and  it  should  not  be  delegated  but  in  such 
a  mode  and  with  such  precautions  as  will  afford  the  highest  security, 
that  it  will  be  exercised  by  men  the  best  qualified  for  the  purpose,  and 
in  the  manner  most  conducive  to  the  public  good."  "There  are  few 
who  will  not  admit,  that  the  affairs  of  trade  and  navigation  should  be 
regulated  by  a  system  cautiously  formed  and  steadily  pursued,  and 
that  both  our  treaties  and  our  laws  should  correspond  with  and  be 
made  to  promote  it."  "Some  are  displeased  with  it  (that  is,  the 
power  of  treaty),  not  on  account  of  any  errors  or  defects  in  it,  but 
because,  as  the  treaties,  when  made,  are  to  have  the  force  of  laws, 
they  should  be  made  only  by  men  invested  with  legislative  authority ; 
others,  though  content  that  treaties  should  be  made  in  the  mode  pro- 
posed, are  averse  to  their  being  the  supreme  law  of  the  land." 

It  is  generally  understood  that  two  persons  were  concerned  in  the 
writings  of  these  papers,  who,  from  having  been  members  of  the  con- 
vention, had  a  good  opportunity  of  knowing  its  views — and  were  under 


Camillus  187 

provided  that  no  treaty  of  commerce  shall  be  made 
whereby  the  legislative  power  of  the  respective  States 
shall  be  restrained  from  imposing  such  imposts  and 
duties  on  foreigners  as  their  own  people  are  subject 
to,  or  from  prohibiting  the  importation  or  exporta- 
tion of  any  species  of  commodities  whatsoever." 
(Article  IX.) 

It  will  not  be  disputed  that  the  words  "treaties 
and  alliances"  are  of  equivalent  import,  and  of  no 
greater  force  than  the  single  word  "treaties."     An 

no  temptation  at  that  time,  in  this  particular,  to  misrepresent  them. 
[This  is  a  curious  statement,  for  Jay  was  not  a  member  of  the  conven- 
tion, and  The  Federalist  had,  of  course,  three  authors.  It  would  seem 
to  imply  that  Hamilton  then  (1796)  thought  himself  the  author  of 
No.  64.     See  introduction  to  Federalist,  vol.  xi. — Ed.] 

In  the  address  and  reasons  of  dissent  of  the  minority  of  the  conven- 
tion of  Pennsylvania  to  their  constituents,  they  state,  that  they  had 
suggested  the  following  proposition,  among  others,  for  an  amendment 
to  the  Constitution:  "That  no  treaty  which  shall  be  directly  opposed 
to  the  existing  laws  of  the  United  States  in  Congress  assembled,  shall 
be  valid  until  such  laws  shall  be  repealed  or  made  conformable  to  such 
treaty."  This  shows  that  it  was  understood  that  the  power  of  treaty 
in  the  Constitution  extended  to  abrogating  even  pre-existing  laws  of 
the  United  States,  which  was  thought  exceptionable;  while  no  objec- 
tion was  made  to  the  idea  of  its  controlling  future  exercises  of  the 
legislative  power.  The  same  address  states,  in  another  place,  that  the 
President  and  Senate  "may  form  treaties  with  foreign  nations,  that 
may  control  and  abrogate  the  Constitution  and  laws  of  the  several 
States." 

In  the  2d  volume  of  the  Debates  of  the  Convention  of  Virginia, 
which  is  the  only  part  I  possess,  there  are  many  passages  that  show  the 
great  extent  of  the  power  of  treaty  in  the  opinion  of  the  speakers  on 
both  sides.  As  quotations  would  be  tedious,  I  will  content  myself 
with  referring  to  the  papers  where  they  will  be  found,  viz.,  91,  99,  131, 
137.  143.  147.  150.  186.  It  will,  in  particular,  appear,  that  while  the 
opposers  of  the  Constitution  denied  the  power  of  the  House  of  Repre- 
sentatives to  break  in  upon  or  control  the  power  of  treaties,  the  friends 
of  the  Constitution  did  not  affirm  the  contrary,  but  merely  contended 
that  the  House  of  Representatives  might  check  by  its  influence  the 
President  and  Senate — on  the  subject  of  treaties. 


1 88  Alexander  Hamilton 

alliance  is  only  a  species  of  treaty,  a  particular  of  a 
general; — and  the  power  of  "entering  into  treaties," 
which  terms  confer  the  authority  under  which  the 
former  government  acted,  will  not  be  pretended  to 
be  stronger  than  the  power  "to  make  treaties," 
.  which  are  the  terms  constituting  the  authority  under 
which  the  present  government  acts;  it  follows,  that 
the  power,  respecting  treaties,  under  the  former,  and 
that  under  the  present  government,  are  similar. 

But  though  similar,  that  under  the  present  gov- 
ernment is  more  comprehensive ;  for  it  is  divested  of 
the  restriction  in  the  provision  cited  above,  and  is 
fortified  by  the  express  declaration,  that  its  acts 
shall  be  valid  notwithstanding  the  constitution  or 
laws  of  any  State.  This  is  evidence  (as  was  the 
fact)  of  a  disposition  in  the  convention  to  disem- 
barrass and  reinforce  the  power  of  treaty.  It  ought 
not  to  pass  unnoticed,  that  an  important  argument 
results  from  the  proviso,  which  accompanies  the 
power  granted  by  the  Confederation  as  to  the  natural 
extent  of  this  power.  The  declaration  that  no  treaty 
of  commerce  shall  be  made  restraining  the  legisla- 
tive power  of  a  State  from  imposing  such  duties  and 
imposts  on  foreigners  as  their  own  people  are  subject 
to,  or  from  prohibiting  the  importation  or  exporta- 
tion of  any  species  of  commodities  whatsoever,  is  an 
admission  (i)  that  the  general  power  of  entering  into 
treaties  included  that  of  making  treaties  of  com- 
merce, and  (2)  that  without  the  limitation  in  the 
proviso,  a  treaty  of  commerce  might  have  been 
made  which  would  restrain  the  legislative  authority 
of  the  State  in  the  points  interdicted  by  that  proviso. 


Camillus  189 

Let  it  not  be  said,  that  the  proviso,  by  imphca- 
tion,  granted  the  power  to  make  treaties  of  com- 
merce, under  which  Congress  afterwards  acted;  for 
besides  that  this  is  inconsistent  with  the  more  obvious 
meaning  of  the  clause,  the  first  article  of  the  Con- 
federation leaves  to  the  States  individually  every 
power  not  expressly  delegated  to  the  United  States 
in  Congress  assembled.  The  power  of  Congress, 
therefore,  to  make  a  treaty  of  commerce,  and  every 
other  treaty  they  did  make,  must  be  vindicated  on 
the  groimd  that  the  express  grant  of  power  to  enter 
into  treaties  and  alliances  is  a  general,  which  neces- 
sarily included  as  particulars  the  various  treaties 
they  have  made,  and  the  various  stipulations  of 
those  treaties. 

Under  this  power,  thus  granted  and  defined,  the 
alliance  with  France  was  contracted;  guaranteeing, 
in  the  case  of  a  defensive  war,  her  West  India  pos- 
sessions, and  when  the  casus  foederis  occurs,  obliging 
the  United  States  to  make  war  for  the  defence  of 
those  possessions,  and  consequently,  to  incur  the 
expenses  of  war. 

Under  the  same  power,  treaties  of  commerce 
were  made  with  France,  the  Netherlands,  Sweden, 
and  Prussia.  Besides  that  every  treaty  of  commerce 
is  necessarily  a  regulation  of  commerce  between 
the  parties,  it  has  been  shown,  in  the  anteced- 
ent comparison  of  those  treaties  '  with  that  lately 
negotiated,  that  they  produce  the  specific  effects  of 

*  Articles  2d,  3d,  and  4th  of  treaty  with  France,  2d,  3d,  and  20th  of 
treaty  with  Russia,  2d  and  3d  of  treaty  with  Holland,  3d  and  4th  of 
treaty  with  Sweden. 


190  Alexander  Hamilton 

restraining  the  legislative  power  from  imposing 
higher  or  other  duties  on  the  articles  of  those  na- 
tions than  on  the  like  articles  of  other  nations,  and 
from  extending  prohibition  to  them  which  shall  not 
equally  extend  to  other  nations  the  most  favored; 
and  thus  abridge  the  exercise  of  the  legislative  power 
to  tax,  and  the  exercise  of  the  legislative  power  to 
regulate  trade. 

These  treaties  likewise  define  and  establish  the 
same  case  of  piracy  which  is  defined  in  the  treaty 
with  Great  Britain.  Moreover,  the  treaty  with 
France,  as  has  been  elsewhere  shown,  with  regard  to 
the  rights  of  property,  naturalizes  the  whole  French 
nation. 

The  consular  convention  with  France,  nego- 
tiated, likewise,  under  the  same  power,  grants  to  the 
consuls  of  that  country  various  authorities  and 
jurisdiction,  some  of  a  judicial  nature,  which  are 
actual  transfers  to  them  of  portions  of  the  internal 
jurisdiction  and  ordinary  judiciary  power  of  the 
country,  the  exercise  of  which  our  government  is 
bound  to  aid  with  its  whole  strength.  It  also  grants 
exemptions  to  French  consuls  from  certain  kinds  of 
taxes,  and  to  them,  and  French  citizens,  from  all 
personal  service;  all  which  are  extremely  delicate 
interferences  with  our  internal  policy  and  ordinary 
jurisdiction. 

Under  the  same  power,  the  treaty  with  Morocco 
was  formed,  which,  besides  various  other  regulations 
relative  to  war,  and  several  relative  to  trade,  con- 
tains the  rule,  that  neither  party  shall  make  war 
without  a  previous  demand  of  reparation ;  in  restraint 


Camillus  191 

of  the  general  discretionary  power  of  Congress  to 
declare  war. 

Under  the  same  power,  the  treaty  of  peace  with 
Great  Britain  was  made.  This  treaty  contains  the 
establishment  of  a  boundary  line  between  the  par- 
ties, which,  in  part,  is  arbitrary,  and  could  not  have 
been  predicated  upon  precise  antecedent  right.  It 
also  prohibits  the  future  confiscation  of  the  property 
of  adherents  to  Great  Britain;  declares  that  no 
person  shall,  on  account  of  the  part  he  took  in  the 
war,  suffer  any  future  loss  or  damage  in  his  person, 
liberty,  or  property,  and  provides  for  the  release  of 
such  persons  from  confinement,  and  the  discon- 
tinuance of  prosecutions  against  them. 

It  is  difficult  to  conceive  a  higher  act  of  control, 
both  of  the  legislative  and  judiciary  authority,  than 
by  this  article.  These  provisions  are  analogous,  in 
principle,  to  those  stipulations  which,  in  the  second 
and  ninth  articles  of  the  treaty  under  examination, 
have  given  occasion  to  constitutional  objection. 

Under  the  same  power,  various  treaties  with  In- 
dians, inhabiting  the  territory  of  the  United  States, 
have  been  made,  establishing  arbitrary  lines  of 
boundary  with  them,  which  determine  the  right 
of  soil  on  the  one  side  and  on  the  other.  Some  of 
these  treaties  proceed  on  the  principle  of  the  United 
States  having  conquered  the  Indian  country,  and 
profess  to  make  gratuitous  concessions  to  them  of 
the  lands  which  are  left  to  their  occupation.  There 
is  also  a  feature  of  importance  common  to  these 
treaties,  which  is  the  withdrawing  of  the  protection 
of  the  United  States  from  those  of  their  citizens  who 


192  Alexander  Hamilton 

intrude  on  Indian  lands,  leaving  them  to  be  pun- 
ished at  the  pleasure  of  the  Indians. 

Hence  it  appears  that,  except  as  to  the  stipula- 
tions for  appointing  commissioners,  the  treaties 
made  under  the  Confederation  contain  all  the  fea- 
tures, identically  or  by  analogy,  which  create  con- 
stitutional objections  to  the  treaty  before  us:  they 
restrain,  in  certain  instances,  the  legislative  power 
to  lay  taxes;  they  make  numerous  and  important 
regulations  of  trade;  they  confer  the  benefit  of 
naturalization  as  to  property;  they  define  cases  of 
piracy;  they  create  causes  of  expenditure;  they 
direct  and  modify  the  power  of  war;  they  erect, 
within  the  country,  tribunals  unknown  to  our  con- 
stitutions and  laws,  in  cases  to  which  these  are  com- 
petent^whereas  the  treaty  with  Great  Britain  only 
provides  for  the  appointment  of  arbitrators  in  cases 
to  which  our  tribunals  and  laws  are  incompetent; 
and  they  make  dispositions  concerning  the  territory 
and  property  of  the  United  States. 

It  is  true,  that  some  of  the  treaties  made  under  the 
former  government,  though  subsequent  to  the  pro- 
posing of  the  articles  of  confederation  to  the  States, 
were  prior  to  the  final  adoption  of  these  articles; 
but  still  it  is  presumable  that  the  treaties  were  nego- 
tiated with  an  eye  to  the  powers  of  the  pending  na- 
tional compact.  Those  with  Great  Britain,  Sweden, 
Russia,  and  Morocco,  and  the  convention  with 
France,  were  posterior  to  the  completion  of  that 
compact. 

It  may,  perhaps,  be  argued  that  a  more  extensive 
construction  of  the  power  of  treaty  in  the  Confed- 


Camillus  193 

erai:ion,  than  in  our  present  Constitution,  was  coun- 
tenanced by  the  union  in  the  same  body  of  legislative 
powers  with  the  power  of  treaty.  But  this  argu- 
ment can  have  no  force,  when  it  is  considered 
that  the  principal  legislative  powers,  with  regard  to 
the  objects  embraced  by  the  treaties  of  Congress, 
were  not  vested  in  that  body,  but  remained  with  the 
individual  States.  Such  are  the  power  of  specific 
taxation,  the  power  of  regulating  trade,  the  power 
of  naturalization,  etc. 

If  in  theory  the  objects  of  legislative  power  are 
excepted  out  of  the  power  of  treaty,  this  must  have 
been  equally,  at  least,  the  case  with  the  legislative 
powers  of  the  State  governments  as  with  those  of  the 
United  States.  Indeed  the  argument  was  much 
stronger  for  the  objection,  where  distinct  govern- 
ments were  the  depository  of  the  legislative  power, 
than  where  the  same  government  was  the  depository 
of  that  power  and  of  the  power  of  treaty.  Nothing 
but  the  intrinsic  force  of  the  power  of  treaty  could 
have  enabled  it  to  penetrate  the  separate  spheres 
of  the  State  governments.  The  practice  under  the 
Confederation  for  so  many  years,  acquiesced  in  by 
all  the  States,  is,  therefore,  a  conclusive  illustration 
of  the  power  of  treaty,  and  an  irresistible  refutation 
of  the  novel  and  preposterous  doctrine  which  im- 
peaches the  constitutionality  of  that  lately  nego- 
tiated. If  the  natural  import  of  the  terms  used  in 
the  Constitution  were  less  clear  and  decisive  than 
they  are,  that  practice  is  a  commentary  upon  them, 
and  fixes  their  sense.  For  the  sense  in  which  certain 
terms  were  practised  upon  in  a  prior  constitution  of 


194  Alexander  Hamilton 

government,  must  be  presumed  to  have  been  in- 
tended, in  using  the  like  terms  in  a  subsequent  con- 
stitution of  government  for  the  same  nation. 

Accordingly,  the  practice  under  the  present  gov- 
ernment, before  the  late  treaty,  has  corresponded 
with  that  sense. 

Our  treaties  with  several  Indian  nations  regulate 
and  change  the  boundaries  between  them  and  the 
United  States.  And  in  addition  to  compensations 
in  gross,  they  stipulate  the  payment  of  certain 
specific  and  perpetual  annuities.  Thus  a  treaty  in 
August,  1790,  with  the  Creeks  (article  5)  promises 
them  the  yearly  sum  of  one  thousand  five  hundred 
dollars.  And  similar  features  are  found  in  subse- 
quent treaties  with  the  Six  Nations,  the  Cherokees, 
and  the  Northwestern  Indians.  This  last  has  just 
been  ratified  by  the  unanimous  voice  of  the  Senate. 
It  stipulates  an  annuity  of  9,500  dollars,  and  relin- 
quishes to  the  Indians  a  large  tract  of  land  which 
they  had,  by  preceding  treaties,  ceded  to  the  United 
States. 

Hence  we  find  that  our  former  treaties  under  the 
present  government,  as  well  as  one  subsequent  to 
that  under  consideration,  contradict  the  doctrine  set 
up  against  its  constitutionality,  in  the  important 
particulars  of  making  dispositions  concerning  the 
territory  and  property  of  the  United  States,  and 
binding  them  to  raise  and  pay  money.  These  treat- 
ies have  not  only  been  made  by  the  President,  and 
ratified  by  the  Senate,  without  any  impeachment  of 
their  constitutionality,  but  the  House  of  Represent- 
atives has  heretofore  concurred,  and  without  objec- 


Camillus  195 

tion,  in  carr^dng  them  into  effect,  by  the  requisite 
appropriation  of  money. 

The  consular  convention  of  France  stands  in  a 
pecuHar  predicament.  It  was  negotiated  under  the 
former  government,  and  ratified  under  the  present; 
and  so  may  be  regarded  as  a  treaty  of  both  govern- 
ments, illustrative  of  the  extent  of  the  power  of 
treaty  in  both.  The  delicate  and  even  the  extra- 
ordinary nature  of  the  provisions  it  contains,  have 
been  adverted  to.  Though  all  reflecting  men  have 
thought  ill  of  the  propriety  of  some  of  them,  as  in- 
conveniently breaking  in  upon  our  interior  admin- 
istration, legislative,  executive,  and  judiciary,  only 
acquiescing  in  them  from  the  difficulty  of  getting  rid 
of  stipulations  entered  into  by  our  public  agents 
under  competent  powers,  yet  no  question  has  been 
heard  about  their  constitutionality.  And  Congress 
have,  by  law,  assisted  their  execution  by  making 
our  judicial  tribunals,  and  the  public  force  of  the 
country,  auxiliary  to  the  decrees  of  the  foreign  tri- 
bunals which  they  authorize  within  our  territory. 

If  it  should  be  said  that  our  Constitution,  by  mak- 
ing all  former  treaties  and  engagements  as  obliga- 
tory upon  the  United  States,  imder  that  Constitution, 
as  they  were  under  the  Confederation,  rendered  the 
ratification  of  the  convention  a  matter  of  necessity, 
the  answer  is,  that  either  the  engagements  which  it 
contracted  were  already  conclusive,  or  they  were 
not;  if  the  former,  there  was  no  need  of  a  ratifica- 
tion; if  the  latter,  there  was  no  absolute  obligation 
to  it.  And,  in  every  supposition,  a  ratification  by 
the  President,  with  the  consent  of  the  Senate,  could 


196  Alexander  Hamilton 

have  been  predicated  only  upon  the  power  given  in 
the  present  Constitution  in  relation  to  treaties ;  and 
to  have  any  validity,  must  have  been  within  the 
limit  of  that  power. 

But  it  has  been  heretofore  seen  that  the  inference 
from  this  instrument  is  no  less  strong,  if  referred  to 
the  power  under  the  Confederation,  than  if  referred 
to  the  power  under  the  present  Constitution. 

How  happens  it,  that  all  these  invasions  of  the 
Constitution,  if  they  were  such,  were  never  dis- 
covered, and  that  all  the  departments  of  the  govern- 
ment, and  all  parties  in  the  public  councils,  should 
have  co-operated  in  giving  them  a  sanction?  Does 
it  not  prove  that  all  were  convinced,  that  the  power 
of  treaty  applied  in  our  exterior  relations  to  objects 
which,  in  the  ordinary  course  of  internal  administra- 
tion and  in  reference  to  ourselves,  were  of  the  cog- 
nizance of  the  legislative  power?  and  particularly 
that  the  former  was  competent  to  bind  the  latter 
in  the  delicate  points  of  raising  and  appropriating 
money?  If  competent  to  this,  what  legislative 
power  can  be  more  sacred,  more  out  of  its  reach? 

Let  me  now  ask  (and  a  very  solemn  question  it  is, 
especially  for  those  who  are  bound  by  oath  to  sup- 
port the  Constitution) ,  has  it  not  been  demonstrated 
that  the  provisions  in  the  treaty  are  justified  by  the 
true  and  manifest  interpretation  of  the  Constitution — 
are  sanctioned  by  the  practice  upon  a  similar  power 
under  the  Confederation,  and  by  the  practice  in 
other  instances  under  the  present  government? 

If  this  has  been  demonstrated,  what  shall  we  think 
of  the  candor  and  sincerity  of  the  objections  which 


Camillus  197 

have  been  erected  on  the  basis  of  a  contrary  supposi- 
tion? Do  they  not  unequivocally  prove,  that  the 
adversaries  of  the  treaty  have  been  resolved  to  dis- 
credit it  by  every  artifice  they  could  invent?  That 
they  have  not  had  truth  for  their  guide,  and  conse- 
quently are  very  unfit  guides  for  the  public  opinion, 
very  unsafe  guardians  of  the  public  welfare  ? 

It  is  really  painful  and  disgusting  to  observe 
sophisms  so  miserable  as  those  which  question  the 
constitutionality  of  the  treaty,  retailed  to  an  en- 
lightened people,  and  insisted  upon  with  so  much 
seeming  fervency  and  earnestness.  It  is  impossible 
not  to  bestow  on  sensible  men  who  act  this  part,  the 
imputation  of  hypocrisy.  The  absurdity  of  the  doc- 
trine is  too  glaring  to  permit  even  charity  itself  to 
suppose  it  sincere.  If  it  were  possible  to  imagine 
that  a  majority  in  any  branch  of  our  government 
could  betray  the  Constitution,  and  trifle  with  the 
nation,  so  far  as  to  adopt  and  act  upon  such  a  doc- 
trine, it  would  be  time  to  despair  of  the  republic. 

There  would  be  no  security  at  home,  no  respecta- 
bility abroad.  Our  constitutional  charter  would  be- 
come a  dead  letter.  The  organ  of  our  government 
for  foreign  affairs  would  be  treated  with  derision 
whenever  he  should  hereafter  talk  of  negotiation  or 
treaty.  May  the  great  Ruler  of  nations  avert  from 
our  country  so  grievous  a  calamity! 

Camillus. 


FOREIGN  POLICY 


«99 


FOREIGN  POLICY 


HAMILTON   TO    WASHINGTON 

New  York,  September  4,  1795. 

Sir: — I  had  the  pleasure  of  receiving,  two  days 
since,  yoiir  letter  of  the  31st  ultimo.  A  great  press 
of  business,  and  an  indifferent  state  of  health,  have 
put  it  out  of  my  power  sooner  to  attend  to  it. 

The  incidents  which  have  lately  occurred  have 
been  in  every  way  vexatious  and  imtoward.  They 
render  indispensable  a  very  serious,  though  calm 
and  measured,  remonstrance  from  this  government, 
carrying  among  others  this  idea,  that  it  is  not  suffi- 
cient that  the  British  Government  entertain  toward 
our  nation  no  hostile  disposition ;  't  is  essential  that 
they  take  adequate  measures  to  prevent  those  op- 
pressions of  our  citizens,  and  of  our  commerce,  by 
their  officers  and  courts,  of  which  there  are  too  fre- 
quent examples,  and  by  which  we  are  exposed  to 
suffer  inconveniences  too  nearly  approaching  to 
those  of  a  state  of  war.  A  strong  expectation  should 
be  signified  of  the  punishment  of  Capt.  Holmes,  for 
the  attempt  to  violate  an  ambassador  passing  through 
our  territory,  and  for  the  hostile  and  offensive  men- 
aces which  he  has  thrown  out.  The  dignity  of  our 
coimtry,  and  the  preservation  of  the  confidence  of 

201 


202  Alexander  Hamilton 

the  people  in  the  government,  require  both  solemn- 
ity and  seriousness  in  these  representations. 

As  to  the  negotiation  for  alteration  in,  and  addi- 
tions to,  the  treaty,  I  think  it  ought  to  embrace  the 
following  objects : 

A  new  modification  of  the  12th  article,  so  as  to 
extend  the  tonnage,  and  restrain  the  prohibition  to 
export  from  this  country,  to  articles  of  the  gro^\^h 
or  production  of  the  British  islands.  The  more  the 
tonnage  is  extended  the  better;  but  I  think  ninety 
tons  would  work  advantageously,  if  nothing  better 
could  be  done.  I  had  even  rather  have  the  article 
with  seventy,  as  it  stood,  than  not  at  all,  if  the  re- 
striction on  exportation  is  placed  on  the  proper  foot- 
ing. Some  of  our  merchants,  however,  think  its 
value  would  be  questionable  at  so  low  a  tonnage  as 
seventy.  It  would  be  also  desirable  that  the  article 
should  enumerate  the  commodities  which  may  be 
carried  to,  and  brought  from,  the  British  islands. 
This  would  render  it  more  precise  and  more  in- 
telligible to  all. 

Great  Britain  may  have  substantial  security  for  the 
execution  of  the  restriction,  if  it  be  stipulated  on  our 
side:  "That  a  law  shall  be  passed  and  continued  in 
force  during  the  continuance  of  the  article,  prohibit- 
ing the  exportation  in  vessels  of  the  United  States,  of 
any  of  the  articles  in  question,  if  brought  from  Brit- 
ish islands,  on  pain  of  forfeiture  of  the  vessel,  for 
wilful  breach  of  the  law;  and  that  the  same  law 
shall  provide  that  the  regulations  contained  in  our 
laws  respecting  drawbacks,  shall  be  applied  to  all 
exportations  in  our  vessels  of  the  articles  in  question, 


Hamilton  to  Washington  203 

to  ascertain  that  they  were  imported  into  the  United 
States  from  other  than  British  islands,  and  this 
whether  a  drawback  of  duty  is  required  or  not  by 
the  exporter;  and  shall  also  provide  that  all  such 
articles  exported  in  our  vessels  from  the  United 
States,  shall  be  expressed  in  the  clearance,  with  a 
certificate  of  the  collector  endorsed,  specifying  that 
he  has  carefully  examined,  according  to  the  treaty 
and  to  the  law,  the  identity  of  the  articles  exported, 
and  that  it  did  bona  fide  appear  to  him  that  they  had 
not  been  imported  from  any  British  island  or  isl- 
ands." This  security  is  the  greatest  difficulty  in 
the  case,  and  would,  in  my  opinion,  be  given  by  a 
provision  similar  to  the  foregoing. 

It  would  be  a  very  valuable  alteration  in  the  13th 
article,  if  a  right  could  he  stipulated  for  the  United 
States  to  go  with  articles  taken  in  the  British  terri- 
tories in  India  to  other  parts  of  Asia.  The  object  of 
the  present  restriction  upon  us  to  bring  them  to 
America  was,  I  believe,  to  prevent  our  interference 
w^th  the  British  East  India  Company  in  the  Euro- 
pean trade  in  India  goods.  If  so,  there  could  be  no 
objection  to  our  having  a  right  to  carry  commodities 
from  the  British  territories  to  other  parts  of  Asia. 
But  if  all  this  latitude  cannot  be  obtained,  it  would 
be  a  great  point  gained  to  have  a  right  to  carr}"  them 
thence  to  China.  It  is  a  usual  and  beneficial  course 
of  the  trade  to  go  from  the  United  States  to  Bombay, 
and  take  in  there  a  freight  for  Canton,  purchase  at  the 
last  place  a  cargo  of  teas,  etc. 

It  would  be  well  if  that  part  of  the  15th   article, 
which  speaks  of  countervailing  duties,  could  be    so 


204  Alexander  Hamilton 

explained  as  to  fix  its  sense.  I  am  of  opinion  that 
its  only  practicable  construction  is,  and  ought  to  be, 
that  they  may  lay  on  the  exportation  from  their 
European  dominions,  in  vessels  of  the  United  States, 
the  same  additional  duty  on  articles  which  we  lay  on 
the  importation  of  the  same  articles  into  the  United 
States  in  British  vessels.  But  the  terms  of  the  clause 
are  vague  and  general,  and  may  give  occasion  to  set 
up  constructions  injurious  and  contentious. 

As  to  the  more  exact  equalization  of  duties,  of 
which  this  article  speaks,  it  is  a  ticklish  subject,  and 
had  better,  I  think,  be  left  alone. 

It  would  be  right  that  it  should  be  expressly 
agreed  that  wherever  our  vessels  pay,  in  the  ports  of 
Great  Britain,  higher  charges  than  their  own  vessels, 
a  proportional  reduction  shall  be  made  out  of  any 
duty  of  tonnage  which  may  be  laid  on  our  vessels  to 
coimteract  the  difference  of  tonnage  on  theirs  in  our 
ports. 

The  1 8th  article  is  really  an  unpleasant  one,  and, 
though  there  is,  I  fear,  little  chance  of  altering  it  for 
the  better,  it  may  be  necessary,  for  the  justification 
of  the  President,  to  attempt  it.  The  standard  to  be 
approached  by  us  as  nearly  as  possible  is  that  in  our 
treaty  with  France.  As  to  the  point  of  free  ships 
making  free  goods,  though  it  be  desirable  to  us  to  es- 
tablish it  if  practicable — and  it  ought  to  be  aimed  at 
— yet  I  neither  expect  that  it  will  be  done  at  present, 
nor  that  the  great  maritime  powers  will  be  disposed 
to  suffer  it  to  become  an  established  rule,  and  I 
verily  believe  that  it  will  be  very  liable,  though 
stipulated,   to  be   disregarded,   as  it  has  been  by 


Hamilton  to  Washington  205 

France  through  the  greater  part  of  the  present  war. 
But  naval  stores  and  provisions  ought,  if  possible,  to 
be  expressly  excluded  from  the  list  of  contraband, 
except  when  going  to  a  blockaded  or  besieged  port, 
town,  or  fortress,  or  to  a  fleet  or  army  engaged  in  a 
military  operation,  for  I  can  imagine  no  other  cases 
in  which  there  is  a  just  pretence  to  make  provisions 
contraband. 

Some  provision  for  the  protection  of  our  seamen 
is  infinitely  desirable.  At  least  Great  Britain  ought 
to  agree  that  no  seaman  shall  be  impressed  out  of 
any  of  our  vessels  at  sea,  and  that  none  shall  be  taken 
out  of  such  vessel  in  any  of  her  colonies  which  were 
in  the  vessel  at  the  time  of  her  arrival  at  such  colony. 
This  provision  ought  to  be  pressed  with  energy  as 
one  unexceptionably  just,  and  at  the  same  time  safe 
for  Great  Britain. 

The  affair  of  the  negroes,  to  give  satisfaction,  may 
be  retouched,  but  with  caution  and  delicacy.  The 
resolution  proposed  in  the  Senate  will  afford  a  good 
standard  for  this. 

As  to  the  crowd  of  loose  suggestions  respecting  the 
treaty,  which  have  no  reasonable  foundation,  it  would 
not  consist  with  the  reputation  of  the  government 
to  move  concerning  them.  Only  reasonable  things 
merit  or  can,  with  propriety,  have  attention. 

I  beg,  sir,  that  you  will  at  no  time  have  any  scruples 
about  commanding  me.  I  shall  always  with  pleasure 
comply  with  your  commands.  I  wish  my  health,  or 
the  time  for  it,  would  permit  me  now  to  be  more 
correct.  The  other  part  of  your  letter  shall  be  care- 
fully attended  to  in  time. 


2o6  Alexander  Hamilton 

FRANCE ' 

1796. 

There  are  circumstances  which  render  it  too  proba- 
ble that  a  very  delicate  state  of  things  is  approach- 
ing between  the  United  States  and  France.  When 
threatened  with  foreign  danger,  from  whatever  quar- 
ter, it  is  highly  necessary  that  we  should  be  united 
at  home ;  and  considering  our  partiality  hitherto  for 
France,  it  is  necessary  towards  this  union,  that  we 
should  understand  what  has  really  been  the  conduct 
of  that  country  toward  us.  It  is  time  for  plain 
truths,  which  can  only  be  unacceptable  to  the  hire- 
lings or  dupes  of  that  nation. 

France,  in  our  revolution  war,  took  part  with  us. 
At  first  she  afforded  us  secret  and  rather  scanty 
succor,  which  wore  more  the  complexion  of  a  dispo- 
sition to  nourish  a  temporary  disturbance  in  the 
dominions  of  a  rival  power,  than  of  an  intention  to 
second  a  revolution. 

The  capture  of  Burgoyne  and  his  army  decided 
the  till  then  hesitating  councils  of  France ;  produced 
the  acknowledgment  of  our  independence,  and  treat- 
ies of  commerce  and  defensive  alliance.  These  again 
produced  the  war  which  ensued  between  France  and 
Great  Britain. 

The  co-operation  and  succor  of  France  after  this 

'  In  1796  the  canvass  for  the  Presidency  was  proceeding  with  great 
violence,  and  M.  Adet,  the  French  minister,  was  making  every  effort 
to  bully  our  government  into  aiding  France,  and  doing  all  in  his  power 
to  help  the  opposition.  Under  these  circumstances  Hamilton  felt  it  to 
be  essential  to  expose  the  real  attitude  and  conduct  of  the  French, 
and  destroy  so  far  as  possible  the  dangerous  sentiment  of  unreasonable 
affection  and  gratitude  toward  our  former  allies.  He  therefore  pub- 
lished the  essay  entitled  France. 


France  207 

period  were  efficient  and  liberal.  They  were  ex- 
tremely useful  to  our  cause,  and  no  doubt  con- 
tributed materially  to  its  success. 

The  primary  motive  of  France  for  the  assistance 
she  gave  us,  was  obviously  to  enfeeble  a  hated  and 
powerful  rival,  by  breaking  in  pieces  the  British 
Empire.  A  secondary  motive  was  to  extend  her 
relations  of  commerce  in  the  New  World,  and  to 
acquire  additional  security  for  her  possessions  there, 
by  forming  a  connection  with  this  country  when 
detached  from  Great  Britain.  To  ascribe  to  her  any 
other  motives — to  suppose  that  she  was  actuated  by 
friendship  towards  us,  or  by  a  regard  for  our  par- 
ticular advantage,  is  to  be  ignorant  of  the  springs  of 
action  which  invariably  regulate  the  cabinets  of 
princes.  He  must  be  a  fool,  who  can  be  credulous 
enough  to  believe,  that  a  despotic  court  aided  a 
popular  revolution,  from  regard  to  liberty  or  friend- 
ship to  the  principles  of  such  a  revolution.  In 
forming  the  conditions  upon  which  France  lent  her 
aid,  she  was  too  politic  to  attempt  to  take  any  un- 
worthy advantage  of  our  situation.  But  they  are 
much  mistaken  who  imagine  that  she  did  not  take 
care  to  make  a  good  bargain  for  herself.  Without 
granting  to  us  any  material  privilege  in  any  of  her 
external  possessions,  she  secured  in  perpetuity  a 
right  to  participate  in  our  trade,  on  the  foot  of  the 
most  favored  nation.  But  what  is  far  more  import- 
ant, she,  in  return  for  the  guaranty  of  our  sover- 
eignty and  independence,  obtained  our  guaranty  of 
her  West  India  possessions  in  every  future  defensive 
war.     This  may  appear  at  first  sight  a  mutual  and 


2o8  Alexander  Hamilton 

equal  advantage,  but  in  its  permanent  operation  it 
is  not  so.  The  guaranty  of  our  sovereignty  and  in- 
dependence, which  is  never  Ukely  to  be  again  drawn 
into  question,  must  hereafter  be  essentially  nominal ; 
while  our  guaranty  of  the  West  India  possessions 
must  grow  into  a  solid  advantage,  increasing  in  im- 
portance as  we  advance  in  strength,  and  exposing  us 
often  to  the  chances  of  being  engaged  in  wars,  in 
which  we  may  have  no  direct  interest.  However 
this  guaranty  may  be  regarded  as  nominal  on  our 
part,  in  this  very  early  stage  of  our  national  power, 
it  cannot  be  so  in  time  to  come.  We  shall  be  able 
to  afford  it  with  effect,  and  our  faith  will  oblige  us 
to  do  so. 

But  whatever  were  the  motives  of  France,  and 
though  the  conditions  of  the  alliance  may  be  in  their 
permanent  tendency  more  beneficial  to  her  than  to 
us,  it  was  our  duty  to  be  faithful  to  the  engagements 
which  we  contracted  with  her,  and  it  even  became 
us,  without  scanning  too  rigidly  those  motives,  to 
yield  ourselves  to  the  impulses  of  kind  and  cordial 
sentiments  towards  a  power  by  which  we  were  suc- 
cored in  so  perilous  a  crisis. 

Nor  should  we  ever  lightly  depart  from  the  line  of 
conduct  which  these  principles  dictate.  But  they 
ought  not  to  be  carried  so  far  as  to  occasion  us  to 
shut  our  eyes  against  the  just  causes  of  complaint 
which  France  has  given  or  may  hereafter  give  us. 
They  ought  not  to  blind  us  to  the  real  nature  of  any 
instances  of  an  unfair  and  unfriendly  policy  which 
we  have  experienced  or  may  hereafter  experience 
from  that  country.     Let  us   cherish  faith,   justice, 


France  209 

and,  as  far  as  possible,  good  will,  but  let  us  not  be 
dupes. 

It  is  certain  that  in  the  progress  and  towards  the 
close  of  our  revolution  war,  the  views  of  France,  in 
several  important  particulars,  did  not  accord  with 
our  interests.  She  manifestly  favored  and  intrigued 
to  effect  the  sacrifice  of  our  pretensions  on  the  Mis- 
sissippi to  Spain;  she  looked  coldly  upon  our  claim 
to  the  privileges  we  enjoy  in  the  cod  fisheries;  and 
she  patronized  our  negotiation  with  Great  Britain 
without  the  previous  acknowledgment  of  our  in- 
dependence;— a  conduct  which,  whatever  color  of 
moderation  may  be  attempted  to  be  given  to  it,  can 
only  be  rationally  explained  into  the  desire  of  leaving 
us  in  such  a  state  of  half  peace,  half  hostility  with 
Great  Britain,  as  would  necessarily  render  us  depend- 
ent upon  France. 

Since  the  peace  every  careful  observer  has  been 
convinced  that  the  policy  of  the  French  Government 
has  been  adverse  to  our  acquiring  internally  the 
consistency  of  which  we  were  capable — in  other  words, 
a  well-constituted  and  efficient  government.  Her 
agents  everywhere  supported,  and  with  too  little 
reserve,  that  feeble  and  anarchical  system— the  old 
Confederation, — which  had  brought  us  almost  to 
the  last  stage  of  national  nothingness,  and  which 
remained  the  theme  of  their  eulogies,  when  every 
enlightened  and  virtuous  man  of  this  country  per- 
ceived and  acknowledged  its  radical  defects  and  the 
necessity  of  essential  alterations. 

The  truth  of  all  this,  of  which  no  vigilant  and  un- 
biassed friend  to  his  country  had  before  the  least 

VOL.  VI.— 14. 


2IO  Alexander  Hamilton 

doubt,  has  been  fully  confirmed  to  us  by  the  present 
government  of  France,  which  has  formally  pro- 
claimed to  us  and  to  the  whole  world  the  Machiavel- 
lian conduct  of  the  old  governments  toward  this 
country;  nor  can  we  suspect  the  promulgation  to 
have  been  the  effect  of  the  enmity  of  the  new  against 
the  old  government,  for  our  records  and  our  own 
observations  assure  us  that  there  is  no  misrepre- 
sentation. 

This  disclosure,  which  has  not  sufficiently  at- 
tracted the  attention  of  the  American  people,  is  very 
serious  and  instructive.  Surely  it  ought  to  put  us 
upon  our  guard — to  convince  us  that  it  is  at  least 
possible  the  succeeding  rulers  of  France  may  have 
been  on  some  occasions  tinctured  with  a  similar 
spirit.  They  ought  to  remember  that  the  mag- 
nanimity and  kindness  of  France  and  the  former 
government  were  as  much  trumpeted  by  its  par- 
tisans among  us  as  are  now  the  magnanimity  and 
kindness  of  the  present  government.  What  say 
facts  ? 

Genet  was  the  first  minister  sent  by  the  new  gov- 
ernment to  this  country.  Are  there  no  marks  of  a 
crooked  policy  in  his  behavior,  or  in  his  instructions? 
Did  he  say  to  us,  or  was  he  instructed  to  say  to  us, 
with  frankness  and  fair-dealing :  "  Americans,  France 
wishes  your  co-operation;  she  thinks  you  bound  by 
your  treaty — or  by  gratitude — or  by  affinity  of  prin- 
ciples, to  afford  it"?  Not  a  word  of  all  this.  The 
language  was:  "France  does  not  require  your  as- 
sistance; she  wishes  you  to  pursue  what  you  think 
your  interest." 


France  211 

What  was  the  conduct  ?  Genet  came  out  with  his 
pocket  full  of  commissions  to  arm  privateers.  Ar- 
rived at  Charleston,  before  he  had  an  opportunity 
of  sounding  our  government,  he  begins  to  issue  them, 
and  to  fit  privateers  from  our  ports.  Certain  that 
this  was  a  practice  never  to  be  tolerated  by  the  ene- 
mies of  France,  and  that  it  would  infallibly  implicate 
us  in  the  war,  our  government  mildly  signifies  to 
him  its  disapprobation  of  the  measure.  He  affects 
to  acquiesce,  but  still  goes  on  in  the  same  way — 
very  soon  in  open  defiance  of  the  government;  be- 
tween which  and  our  own  citizens  he  presently  en- 
deavors to  introduce  jealousy  and  schism.  He  sets 
on  foot  intrigues  with  our  southern  and  western  ex- 
tremes, and  attempts  to  organize  our  territory,  and 
to  carry  on  from  it  military  expeditions  against  the 
territories  of  Spain  in  our  neighborhood — a  nation 
with  which  we  were  at  peace. 

It  is  impossible  to  doubt  that  the  end  of  all  this 
was  to  drag  us  into  the  war,  with  the  humiliation  of 
being  plunged  into  it  without  ever  being  consulted, 
and  without  any  volition  of  our  own. 

No  government  or  people  could  have  been  more 
horridly  treated  than  we  were  by  this  foreign  agent. 
Our  Executive,  nevertheless,  from  the  strong  desire 
of  maintaining  good  understanding  with  France,  for- 
bore to  impute  to  the  French  Government  the  con- 
duct of  its  agent ;  made  the  matter  personal  with  him, 
and  requested  his  recall.  The  French  Government 
could  not  refuse  our  request  without  a  rupture  with 
us,  which  at  that  time  would  have  been  extremely  in- 
convenient for  many  plain  reasons.     The  application 


212  Alexander  Hamilton 

for  the  recall  accordingly  had  full  success ;  and  the 
more  readily  as  it  arrived  shortly  after  the  over- 
throw of  the  Girondist  party  (to  which  Genet  be- 
longed), and  thus  afforded  another  opportunity  of 
exercising  vengeance  on  that  devoted  party. 

But  it  were  to  be  very  credulous  to  be  persuaded 
that  Genet  acted  in  this  extraordinary  manner,  from 
the  very  beginning,  without  the  authority  of  the 
government  by  which  he  was  sent ;  and  did  not  the 
nature  of  his  conduct  contain  an  internal  evidence 
of  the  source,  it  could  be  easily  traced  in  the  instruc- 
tions which  he  published.  These  instructions  demon- 
strate three  things,  though  the  last  is  couched  in 
very  covert  terms:  i.  That  France  did  not  con- 
sider us  as  bound  to  aid  her  in  the  war.  2.  That 
she  desired  to  engage  us  in  it,  and  the  principal  bribe 
was  to  be  large  privileges  in  her  West  India  trade.  3. 
That  if  direct  negotiation  did  not  succeed,  indirect 
means  were  to  be  taken  to  entangle  us  in  it  whether 
so  disposed  or  not.  It  is  not  matter  of  complaint, 
that  France  should  endeavor  to  engage  by  fair  means 
our  assistance  in  the  war,  if  she  thought  it  would  be 
useful  to  her,  but  it  is  just  matter  of  bitter  com- 
plaint, that  she  should  attempt  against  our  will  to 
ensnare  or  drive  us  into  it. 

Fauchet  succeeded  Genet.  It  was  a  meteor  follow- 
ing a  comet.  No  very  marked  phenomena  distinguish 
his  course.  But  the  little  twinkling  appearances 
which  here  and  there  are  discernible,  indicate  the 
same  general  policy  in  him  which  governed  his  pre- 
decessor. The  Executive  of  our  country,  in  conse- 
quence of  an  insurrection,  to  which  one  of  them  had 


France  2 1 3 

materially  contributed,  had  publicly  arraigned  po- 
litical clubs.  Fauchet,  in  opposition,  openly  patron- 
izes them.  At  the  festivals  of  these  clubs  he  is 
always  a  guest,  swallowing  toasts  full  of  sedition 
and  hostility  to  the  government.  Without  examin- 
ing what  is  the  real  tendency  of  these  clubs,  without 
examining  even  the  policy  of  what  is  called  the 
President's  denunciation  of  them,  it  was  enough  for 
a  foreign  minister  that  the  Chief  Magistrate  of  our 
country  had  declared  them  to  be  occasions  of  calamity 
to  it.  It  was  neither  friendly  nor  decent  in  a  foreign 
minister  after  this  to  countenance  these  institutions. 
This  conduct  discovered  towards  us  not  only  unkind- 
ness  but  contempt.  There  is  the  more  point  in  it, 
as  this  countenance  continued  after  similar  societies 
had  been  proscribed  in  France ; — what  were  destruc- 
tive poisons  there,  were  in  this  country  salutary 
medicines.  But  the  hostility  of  the  views  of  this 
minister  is  palpable  in  that  intercepted  letter  of  his, 
which  unveils  the  treachery  of  Randolph.  We  there 
learn,  that  he  pretended  to  think  it  was  a  duty  of 
patriotism  to  second  the  Western  insurrection ;  that 
he  knew  and  approved  of  a  conspiracy  which  was 
destined  to  overthrow  the  administration  of  our  gov- 
ernment, even  by  the  most  irregular  means. 

Another  revolution  of  party  in  France  placed  Mr. 
Adet  in  the  room  of  Mr.  Fauchet.  Mr.  Adet  has  been 
more  circumspect  than  either  of  his  predecessors; 
and  perhaps  we  ought  scarcely  to  impute  it  to  him 
as  matter  of  reproach  that  he  openly  seconded  the 
opposition  in  Congress  to  the  treaty  concluded  with 
Great  Britain.     This  was  a  measure  of  a  nature  to 


214  Alexander  Hamilton 

call  forth  the  manoeuvres  of  diplomatic  tactics.  But 
if  we  are  wise,  we  shall  endeavor  to  estimate  rightly 
the  probable  motives  of  whatever  displeasure  France 
or  her  agents  may  have  shown  at  this  measure.  Can 
it  be  any  thing  else  than  a  part  of  the  same  plan 
which  induced  the  minister  of  Louis  XVI.  to  advise 
us  to  treat  with  Great  Britain  without  the  previous 
acknowledgment  of  our  independence?  Can  it  be 
any  thing  else  than  a  part  of  that  policy  which  deems 
it  useful  to  France,  that  there  should  perpetually 
exist  between  us  and  Great  Britain  germs  of  discord 
and  quarrel?  Is  it  not  manifest  that  in  the  eyes  of 
France  the  unpardonable  sin  of  that  treaty  is,  that 
it  roots  up  for  the  present  those  germs  of  discord  and 
quarrel  ?  To  pretend  that  the  treaty  interferes  with 
our  engagements  with  France,  is  a  ridiculous  ab- 
surdity—for it  expressly  excepts  them.  To  say  that 
it  establishes  a  course  of  things  hurtful  to  France  in 
her  present  struggle,  is  belied  by  the  very  course  of 
things  since  the  treaty — all  goes  on  exactly  as  it  did 
before. 

Those  who  can  justify  displeasure  in  France  on 
this  account,  are  not  Americans,  but  Frenchmen. 
They  are  not  fit  for  being  members  of  an  independent 
nation,  but  are  prepared  for  the  dependent  state  of 
colonists.  If  our  government  could  not  without  the 
permission  of  France  terminate  its  controversies  with 
another  foreign  power,  and  settle  with  it  a  treaty  of 
commerce,  to  endure  three  or  four  years,  our  boasted 
independence  is  a  name.  We  have  only  transferred 
our  allegiance!  we  are  slaves! 


The  Answer  215 

THE    ANSWER ' 

(From  the  Minerva.) 

December  6,  1796. 

The  French  Republic  have,  at  various  times  during 
the  present  war,  complained  of  certain  principles  and 
decisions  of  the  American  Government,  as  being 
violations  of  its  neutrality,  or  infractions  of  the 
treaty  made  with  France  in  the  year  1778.  These 
complaints  were  principally  made  in  the  year  1793, 
and  explanations,  which  till  now  were  deemed  satis- 
factory, were  made  by  Mr.  Jefferson's  correspond- 
ence, in  August  of  that  year.  They  are  now  not  only 
renewed  with  great  exaggeration,  but  the  French 
Government  have  directed  that  it  should  be  done  in 
the  tone  of  reproach,  instead  of  the  language  of  friend- 
ship. The  apparent  intention  of  this  menacing  tone, 
at  this  particular  time,  is  to  influence  timid  minds  to 
vote  agreeably  to  their  wishes  in  the  election  of 
President  and  Vice-President,  and  probably  with  this 
view  the  memorial  was  published  in  the  newspapers. 
This  is  certainly  a  practice  that  must  not  be  per- 
mitted. If  one  foreign  minister  is  permitted  to  pub- 
lish what  he  pleases  to  the  people,  in  the  name  of  his 
government,  every  other  foreign  minister  must  be  in- 
dulged with  the  same  right.  What  then  will  be  our 
situation  on  the  election  of  a  President  and  Vice- 
President,  when  the  government  is  insulted,  the  per- 
sons who  administer  it  traduced,  and  the  election 

»  From  Adet's  oflfensive  note  announcing  the  decree  of  the  French 
Government  against  neutrals,  a  sharp  correspondence  had  sprung  up 
with  Pickering,  our  Secretary  of  State.  Just  after  Congress  assembled 
Hamilton  replied  to  Adet  in  The  Answer,  vmder  his  old  signature  of 
"  Americanus." 


2i6  Alexander  Hamilton 

menaced  by  public  addresses  from  these  intriguing 
agents?  Poland,  that  was  once  a  respectable  and 
powerful  nation,  but  is  now  a  nation  no  longer,  is  a 
melancholy  example  of  the  dangers  of  foreign  influ- 
ence in  the  election  of  a  chief  magistrate.  Eleven 
millions  of  people  have  lost  their  independence  from 
that  cause  alone.  What  would  have  been  the  con- 
duct of  the  French  Directory,  if  the  American  min- 
ister had  published  an  elaborate  and  inflammatory 
address  to  the  people  of  France  against  the  govern- 
ment, reprobating  the  conduct  of  those  in  power,  and 
extolling  that  of  the  party  opposed  to  them?  They 
would  have  done  as  the  Parliament  of  England  did 
in  1727,  when  the  emperor's  Resident  presented  an 
insolent  memorial  to  the  king,  and  published  it  next 
day  in  the  newspapers.  All  parties  concurred  in 
expressing  the  highest  indignation  and  resentment 
at  the  affront  offered  to  the  government  by  the 
memorial  delivered  by  Monsieur  Palm,  and  more 
particularly  at  his  audacious  manner  of  appealing 
from  the  government  to  the  people,  under  the  pre- 
text of  applying  for  reparation  and  redress  of  sup- 
posed injuries.  In  consequence  of  an  address  from 
both  houses,  Monsieur  Palm  was  ordered  to  quit 
England  immediately.  And  is  it  not  necessary  that 
we  should  adopt  some  remedy  adequate  to  this  evil 
to  avoid  those  serious  consequences  which  may 
otherwise  be  apprehended  from  it? 

The  conduct  of  the  American  Government  to  pre- 
serve its  neutrality  has  been  repeatedly  justified  by 
arguments  drawn  from  the  law  of  nations,  and  in  the 
application  of  its  principles  they  have  gone  as  far,  in 


The  Answer  217 

every  instance,  and  in  one  particular  instance  farther, 
in  favor  of  France,  than  the  strict  rule  of  neutrality 
would  justify.  It  would,  therefore,  answer  no  valu- 
able purpose  to  state  the  same  principles,  and  deduce 
the  same  consequences,  in  order  to  justify  ourselves 
on  the  same  ground,  that  we  have  already  done ;  but 
as  the  reproaches  of  the  French  Republic  are  founded 
on  an  idea  that  our  construction  and  application  of 
the  law  of  nations  is  erroneous,  partial,  and  inimical, 
it  may  be  worth  while  to  examine  whether  we  cannot 
justify  ourselves  by  the  example  of  the  French  nation 
itself.  I  presume  a  better  rule  of  justification  against 
any  charge  cannot  be  required,  than  the  conduct  of 
those  who  have  made  it  in  like  cases. 

I  propose,  therefore,  to  compare  the  decisions  of 
the  American  Government,  in  the  several  points 
wherein  they  have  been  complained  of  in  Mr.  Adet's 
memorial,  with  the  laws  of  France  on  the  same 
points. 

It  is  asserted  that  the  American  Government  has 
violated  the  17th  article  of  the  treaty  of  1778,  by 
arresting  French  privateers  and  their  prizes;  and 
that  it  has  exercised  shocking  persecutions  toward 
them. 

It  will  be  found,  on  an  accurate  inquiry,  that  all 
the  prizes  brought  in  under  French  commissions,  that 
have  been  restored,  have  been  found  to  be  in  one  or 
the  other  of  the  following  descriptions: 

1.  Those  captured  within  a  marine  league  of  the 
shores  of  the  United  States. 

2 .  When  the  capturing  vessel  was  owned  and  prin- 
cipally manned  by  American  citizens. 


2i8  Alexander  Hamilton 

3.  When  the  capturing  vessel  was  armed  in  our 
ports. 

As  to  the  jurisdiction  exercised  by  the  United 
States  over  the  sea  contiguous  to  its  shores,  all 
nations  claim  and  exercise  such  a  jurisdiction,  and 
all  writers  admit  this  claim  to  be  well  foimded :  and 
they  have  differed  in  opinion  only  as  to  the  distance 
to  which  it  may  extend.  Let  us  see  whether  France 
has  claimed  a  greater  or  less  extent  of  dominion  over 
the  sea  than  the  United  States.  Valin,  the  king's 
advocate  at  Rochelle,  in  his  new  commentary  on  the 
marine  laws  of  France,  published  first  in  1761,  and 
again  by  approbation  in  1776,'  after  mentioning  the 
opinions  of  many  different  writers  on  pubhc  law  on 
this  subject,  says:  "As  far  as  the  distance  of  two 
leagues  the  sea  is  the  dominion  of  the  sovereign  of 
the  neighboring  coast;  and  that  whether  there  be 
soundings  there  or  not.  It  is  proper  to  observe  this 
method  in  favor  of  states  whose  coasts  are  so  high 
that  there  are  no  soundings  close  to  the  shore,  but 
this  does  not  prevent  the  extension  of  the  dominion 
of  the  sea,  as  well  in  respect  to  jurisdiction  as  to 
fisheries,  to  a  greater  distance  by  particular  treaties, 
or  the  rule  herein  before  mentioned,  which  extends 
dominion  as  far  as  there  are  soimdings,  or  as  far  as 
the  reach  of  a  cannon  shot;  which  is  the  rule  at 
present  universally  acknowledged.''  "The  effect  of 
this  dominion,"  the  same  author  says,  "according  to 
the  principles  of  Puffendorf ,  which  are  incontestable, 
is,  that  every  sovereign  has  a  right  to  protect  foreign 
commerce,  in  his  dominions,  as  well  as  to  secure  it 

I  Book  v.,  title  i. 


-^ 


The  Answer  219 

from  insult,  by  preventing  others  from  approaching 
nearer  than  a  certain  distance."  In  extending  our 
dominion  over  the  sea  to  one  league,  we  have  not 
extended  it  so  far  as  the  example  of  France  and  the 
other  powers  of  Europe  would  have  justified.  They, 
therefore,  can  have  no  right  to  complain  of  our  con- 
duct in  this  respect. 

The  second  description  of  cases  which  has  induced 
the  American  Government  to  restore  prizes  claimed 
by  the  French,  is  when  our  citizens  have  made  the 
capture  under  a  French  commission. 

The  third  article  of  the  ordinances  of  the  marine  of 
France,  which  the  commission  now  given  to  French 
privateers  requires  to  be  observed  (Valin,  vol.  2,  235), 
is  as  follows:  "We  prohibit  all  our  subjects  from 
taking  commissions  from  foreign  kings,  princes,  or 
states,  to  arm  vessels  for  war,  and  to  cruise  at  sea 
under  their  colors,  unless  by  our  permission,  on  pain 
of  being  treated  as  pirates. "  The  commentator  says 
these  general  and  indefinite  prohibitions  have  no 
exception.  They  extend  to  commissions  taken  from 
friends  or  allies,  as  well  as  neutrals,  and  those  that 
are  equivocal,  and  they  were  considered  as  necessary 
consequences  of  the  laws  of  neutrality. 

"If,"  says  Valin,  "the  commission  of  the  foreign 
prince  be  to  cruise  against  his  enemies  who  are  our 
allies,  or  those  with  whom  we  intend  to  preserve 
neutrality,  it  would  afford  just  ground  of  complaint 
on  their  part,  and  might  lead  to  a  rupture."  The 
rule  extends  as  well  to  subjects  domiciliated  as  not 
domiciliated  in  the  kingdom,  and  foreign  countries; 
"for  Frenchmen  are  not  the  less  Frenchmen,  for 


220  Alexander  Hamilton 

having  gone  to  live  in  foreign  countries."  If  France 
may  rightfully  prohibit  her  citizens  from  accepting 
foreign  commissions  to  make  prize  of  the  property  of 
her  friends,  why  should  the  United  States  be  re- 
proached for  exercising  a  similar  right  ?  A  necessary 
consequence  of  this  wise  and  just  prohibition  is,  that 
all  prizes  taken  contrary  to  it  should  be  restored  with 
damages  to  the  party  injured. 

The  third  description  of  prizes  restored,  is  where 
they  have  been  fitted  and  armed  in  the  ports  of  the 
United  States. 

I  find  no  direct,  positive  provision  by  the  marine 
laws  of  France,  prohibiting  this ;  but  the  whole  tenor 
of  those  laws  supposes  that  vessels  of  war  are  armed 
in  the  ports  of  the  sovereign  who  gives  the  commis- 
sion. French  privateers  must  not  only  fit  out  in  a 
French  port,  but  are  bound  to  bring  all  prizes  made 
by  them  into  some  particular  port  or  ports  expressed 
in  their  commissions  (Valin,  vol.  2,  276).  And  it  is 
certain  that  the  king  of  France,  previous  to  his 
alliance  with  the  United  States,  delivered  up  some 
American  prizes  to  the  English,  because  the  captur- 
ing vessel  had  been  armed  in  a  French  port. 

Mr.  Adet's  memorial  charges  that  the  English  have 
been  permitted  to  arm  their  vessels  and  bring  their 
prizes  into  our  ports.  As  to  this  charge,  the  fact  is 
simply  denied.  In  the  cases  mentioned,  the  vessels 
said  to  have  taken  in  guns  for  their  defence,  were 
gone  before  he  made  his  representation ;  yet  he  com- 
plained, and  the  government  did  nothing.  I  ask 
what  could  they  have  done  ?  Mr.  Adet  will  answer : 
They  might  have  declared  war  against  Great  Britain ; 


The  Answer  221 

and  it  is  certain  this  was  the  only  remedy  that  re- 
mained in  such  a  case;  but  neither  our  interest  nor 
our  duty  would  have  permitted  us  to  have  adopted  it. 
Our  interest  did  not  permit  us  to  give  up  our  neu- 
trality and  engage  in  a  foreign  war,  the  event  of 
which  would  have  produced  many  and  certain  evils, 
and  could  not  by  an}^  possibility  have  produced  any 
good;  and  it  was  contrary  to  every  principle  by 
which  a  just  nation  would  desire  to  act,  to  have  made 
war  on  a  whole  people  because  one  or  two  of  them 
had  clandestinely  taken  arms  on  board  for  their  de- 
fence, in  one  of  our  ports,  without  the  knowledge  of 
their  government  or  of  ours. 

The  memorial  complains  that  we  have  infringed 
the  17th  article  of  the  treaty  of  1778,  by  restraining 
the  prohibition  therein  contained  only  to  the  ships  of 
war  and  privateers  of  their  enemies,  who  should  come 
into  our  ports  with  their  prizes. 

The  literal  sense  of  the  17th  article  is,  that  no 
armed  ship,  who  shall  have  made  prizes  from  the 
French  people,  shall  receive  an  asylum  in  our  ports. 
The  2 2d  article  says  that  no  privateer,  fitted  under 
a  commission  of  the  enemy  of  either,  shall  have 
asylum  in  the  ports  of  the  others.  Neither  of  these 
articles  says  any  thing  of  prizes.  The  literal  appli- 
cation of  them  therefore  would  exclude  the  capturing 
vessels,  but  give  admission  to  their  prizes;  which 
would  never  have  been  the  intention  of  the  parties. 
The  laws  of  nations,  expressly  adopted  by  France, 
relative  to  the  right  of  asylum,  may  illustrate  these 
articles  of  the  treaty.  Ord.  Louis  XIV.,  Art.  XIV., 
declares  "that  no  prizes  made  by  captains  under  a 


222  Alexander  Hamilton 

foreign  commission  shall  remain  in  our  ports  longer 
than  twenty-four  hours,  unless  detained  by  bad 
weather,  or  unless  the  prize  have  been  made  from 
our  enemies."  But  this  article,  says  Valin,  is  only 
■  applicable  to  prizes  carried  into  a  neutral  port,  "  and 
not  at  all  to  armed  vessels,  whether  neutral  or  allies, 
who  have  taken  refuge  there,  without  prizes,  either  to 
escape  the  pursuit  of  enemies,  or  for  any  other  cause. 
They  may  in  this  case  remain  as  long  as  they  please." 
By  the  law  of  neutrality,  simply,  French  prizes  could 
only  have  remained  twenty -four  hours  in  our  ports, 
but  by  the  treaty  they  have  obtained  the  privilege  of 
remaining  as  long  as  they  please.  This  privilege  has 
not  only  been  allowed  them  in  its  fullest  extent, 
but  we  had  gone  a  step  further,  and  as  a  favor  per- 
mitted them  to  sell  their  prizes,  which  neither  the 
treaty  nor  the  law  of  nations  required;  and  which 
was  of  more  importance  than  all  the  rest  put  to- 
gether. This  favor,  as  favors  generally  are,  is  now 
claimed  as  a  right,  and  the  withholding  is  considered 
as  an  injury.  Let  us  see  what  the  ordinances  of  the 
French  marine  have  said  on  this  point.  Ord.  Louis 
XIV.,  Tit.  Prizes,  Art.  XIV.:  "If  in  the  prizes 
brought  into  our  ports  by  vessels  armed  under  a 
foreign  commission,  there  be  any  merchandises  be- 
longing to  our  subjects,  or  allies,  those  belonging  to 
our  subjects  shall  be  restored,  and  the  rest  shall  not  be 
put  into  any  storehouses,  or  be  purchased  by  any  person 
under  any  pretext  whatsoever.''  "And  all  this,"  says 
Valin ,  "  is  founded  on  the  law  of  neutrahty . "  By  the 
Treaty  of  Utrecht,  Louis  XIV.,  and  his  grandson  the 
king  of  Spain,  agreed  mutually  to  permit  the  prizes 


The  Answer  223 

made  by  one  to  be  brought  in  and  sold  in  the  ports  of 
the  other.  But  this,  the  same  author  says,  was  only 
a  particular  arrangement,  so  much  the  less  to  be  pro- 
posed for  a  general  rule,  as  the  two  nations  had 
given  up  the  duties  on  the  prize  goods  sold  in  their 
dominions,  which  however  did  not  last  long,  on  ac- 
count of  the  abuses  to  which  it  gave  rise.  Abuses 
similar,  I  presume,  to  those  to  which  the  same  per- 
mission gave  rise  in  this  country.  The  next  ground 
of  complaint  is  the  British  treaty  and  its  conse- 
quences. This  treaty  is  said  to  deprive  France  of  all 
the  advantages  stipulated  in  a  preceding  treaty,  and 
this  is  done  by  an  abandonment  of  the  modem  law  of 
nations. 

If  we  may  credit  the  declaration  of  the  king  of 
France,  there  were  no  exclusive  advantages  stipu- 
lated for  France  in  that  treaty.  His  ambassador 
delivered  a  paper  to  the  British  court,  dated  the  1 3th 
of  March,  1778,  wherein,  after  annoimcing  the  treaty 
between  France  and  the  United  States,  he  says: 
"  His  Majesty  declares  at  the  same  time,  that  the  con- 
tracting parties  have  paid  great  attention  not  to 
stipulate  any  exclusive  advantages  in  favor  of  the 
French  nation;  and  that  the  United  States  have  reserved 
the  liberty  of  treating  with  every  other  nation  whatever, 
upon  the  same  footing  of  equality  and  reciprocity.'' 

The  injury  supposed  to  have  resulted  from  an 
abandonment  of  the  modem  public  law,  assumes  two 
propositions,  neither  of  which  is  true:  ist.  That 
neutral  ships  make  neutral  property.  2d.  That 
materials  for  building  ships  are  not  among  the  articles 
considered  as  contraband  of  war.     By  the  marine 


224  Alexander  Hamilton 

laws  of  France,  Reg.  Dec.  1744,  Art.  5,  it  is  directed, 
that  "  if  there  are  found  on  board  of  neutral  vessels, 
of  whatever  nation  they  may  be,  merchandises  or 
effects  belonging  to  the  enemies  of  his  Majesty,  they 
shall  be  good  prize,  even  though  they  are  not  of  the 
growth  or  manufacture  of  the  enemy's  country,  but 
the  vessels  shall  be  released. ' '  Previous  to  this  regu- 
lation, and  contrary  to  the  law  of  nations,  as  Valin 
acknowledges,  if  either  the  ship  or  the  cargo,  or  any 
part  of  it,  was  enemy's  property,  the  whole  was  con- 
fiscated by  the  laws  of  France.  And  at  this  day 
neutral  property  on  board  of  an  enemy's  ships  is,  by 
the  same  laws,  liable  to  confiscation. 

As  to  the  contraband  of  war,  timber  is  enumerated 
among  the  articles  that  are  so,  by  Vatel,  Lib.  iii., 
chap.  vii. ;  but  Valin  is  much  more  particular,  vol.  2, 
264 :  "  In  the  treaty  of  commerce  concluded  with  the 
king  of  Denmark,  the  23d  of  August,  1724,  pitch  and 
tar  were  declared  contraband,  as  also  rosin,  sail-cloth, 
hemp,  cordage,  mats  and  timber,  for  the  building  of 
ships.  There  would  have  been,  therefore,  no  reason 
to  complain  of  the  conduct  of  the  English,  if  they  had 
not  violated  particular  treaties ;  jor  of  right  {de  droit) 
these  things  are  contraband  at  present,  and  have  been 
so  since  the  beginning  of  this  century,  which  was  not 
the  case  formerly.''  By  the  modern  law  of  nations, 
expressly  adopted  by  France,  enemies'  property,  on 
board  neutral  ships,  is  good  prize ;  and  by  the  same 
law,  the  number  of  contraband  articles  has  been 
increased  so  as  to  include  the  materials  for  ship- 
building. All  the  situations  were  probably  foreseen, 
in  which  the  treaty  might  operate  favorably  or  unfa- 


The  Answer  225 

vorably  for  France  at  the  time  it  was  made.  It  might 
have  been  stipulated  that  materials  for  ship-building 
should  be  deemed  contraband,  instead  of  declaring 
that  they  should  not;  or,  that  the  United  States 
should  not  enter  into  any  treaty  in  which  they  should 
be  made  so.  Neither  of  these  being  the  case,  there 
is  no  ground  of  complaint,  except  that  the  consequence 
is  inconvenient,  at  present,  to  France,  and  the  belli- 
gerent powers  allied  to  her.  If  timber  and  naval 
stores  are  contraband  by  the  law  of  nations,  to  de- 
clare them  to  be  so  by  a  treaty  cannot  be  considered 
as  a  privilege  granted  to  one  nation,  or  an  injury  to 
any  other.  The  French  nation  will  not  persist  in 
asserting,  that  because  the  exercise  of  rights  which 
she  has  claimed  as  legitimate  on  former  occasions, 
becomes  inconvenient  when  exercised  by  others,  she 
may  therefore  refuse  to  acknowledge  and  respect 
them.  This  would  be  the  language  of  a  haughty 
despot  in  a  conquered  country,  not  of  justice,  honor, 
and  good  faith  from  one  friend  to  another. 

It  is  said  that  the  i8th  article  of  the  treaty  with 
Great  Britain  suspends  all  the  commercial  relations 
between  the  United  States  and  France,  by  preventing 
the  supplies  looked  for  by  France  from  this  country. 

This  article  has  not  introduced  any  new  case,  in 
which  provisions  may  be  contraband.  It  only  alters 
the  consequence  resulting  from  a  seizure  of  them, 
when  they  are  so.  Valin  (vol.  2,  264)  says:  "  By  our 
law  and  the  law  of  nations,  provisions  are  not  pro- 
hibited, except  to  places  besieged  or  blockaded.'"  The 
article  complained  of  says  explicitly,  that  when  pro- 
visions and  other  articles  not  generally  contraband  are 

VOL.  VI.— 15. 


226  Alexander  Hamilton 

become  so,  according  to  the  existing  law  of  nations, 
and  shall,  for  that  reason,  be  seized,  they  shall  not  be 
confiscated,  but  the  owner  shall  be  completely  indem- 
nified, and  receive  besides  a  reasonable  mercantile 
profit.  This  principle  operated  as  an  encouragement 
for  American  vessels  to  seek  the  French  markets,  by 
insuring  them  against  loss,  if  they  happened  in  any 
instance  to  be  interrupted  in  the  voyage.  France,  I 
presume,  might  consider  our  vessels  bound  with 
provisions  to  a  place  besieged  or  blockaded  liable 
to  seizure,  after  due  notice  of  the  fact.  If,  instead  of 
this,  they  contend  for  the  privilege  of  paying  for  them 
according  to  the  terms  of  the  treaty  with  Great 
Britain,  I  suppose  it  will  not  be  denied  to  them. 
But  if,  under  pretence  that  a  vessel  is  bound  to  a 
besieged  or  blockaded  port,  when  she  is  not,  either 
France  or  Great  Britain  should  seize  or  detain  her,  it 
is  an  injury  not  authorized  by  the  treaty  or  the  law 
of  nations.  This  is  what  both  nations  have  done, 
when  their  interests  or  necessities  required  it — some- 
times with,  and  often  without  any  apology;  and 
what  they  will  often  continue  to  do,  I  fear,  as  long  as 
they  know  we  cannot  punish  them  for  it. 

These  injuries  are  said  to  have  been  received,  while 
every  other  object  around  reminds  us  of  the  tyranny 
of  Britain  and  the  generous  assistance  of  France, 
during  the  American  war. 

The  generosit}^  of  France  and  the  gratitude  of  the 
United  States  have  been  often  suggested  by  some  of 
our  own  citizens,  and  we  are  now  reproached  with  it 
by  France  herself.  Gratitude  is  due  for  favors  re- 
ceived; and  this  virtue  may  exist  among  nations  as 


The  Answer  227 

well  as  among  individuals;  but  the  motive  of  the 
benefit  must  be  solely  the  advantage  of  the  party  on 
whom  it  was  conferred,  else  it  ceases  to  be  a  favor. 
There  is  positive  proof  that  France  did  not  enter 
into  the  alliance  with  us  in  1778  for  our  advantage, 
but  for  her  own.  The  whole  course  of  the  investiga- 
tion, as  well  as  a  positive  knowledge  of  the  fact, 
proves  this.  She  resisted  all  of  our  solicitations  for 
effectual  assistance  for  war  three  years;  and  rose  in 
her  demand  during  the  campaign  of  1777,  when  our 
affairs  presented  the  most  threatening  aspect.  Me- 
morials were  presented  in  August  and  September  of 
that  year,  while  General  Burgoyne's  army  arrived  in 
December;  fearing  we  might  be  able  to  do  the 
business  without  them,  the  French  court  began  to 
change  its  tone.  In  January  the  British  minister 
gave  notice  in  the  House  of  Commons  that  he  meant 
to  propose  terms  of  accommodation  with  America. 
The  French  ministry,  on  the  arrival  of  this  intelli- 
gence in  France,  immediately  pressed  the  conclusion 
of  the  treat}^  which  they  had  resisted  for  three  years, 
and  proposed  terms  much  more  favorable  for  us  than 
those  our  commissioner  had  offered,  and  they  had  re- 
fused three  months  before.  The  treaty  was  signed 
on  the  8th  of  February.  I  perceive  no  generosity  in 
all  this.  They  did  then  as  we  have  done  now,  and  as 
every  discerning  nation  will  do— they  regarded  only 
their  own  interest  and  advantage,  and  not  that  of  any 
other  nation.  In  the  interval  between  the  declara- 
tion of  independence  and  the  alliance  with  France, 
that  court  sometimes  ordered  away  our  privateers, 
and  sometimes  restored  their  prizes.     They  refused 


228  Alexander  Hamilton 

to  receive  an  ambassador  or  acknowledge  our  in- 
dependence; all  of  which  was  for  fear  of  bringing 
France  prematurely  into  the  war.  The  fact  is,  that 
the  French  spoke  of  very  different  terms,  as  the  con- 
dition of  their  assistance,  before  the  capture  of 
Burgoyne,  from  those  actually  agreed  on  afterwards. 
There  can  be  no  doubt  that  our  success  on  that 
occasion,  and  the  disposition  it  appeared  to  have  pro- 
duced in  the  British  ministry,  were  the  immediate 
causes  of  that  alliance.  It  was  certainly  the  interest 
of  the  French  to  unite  with  America  in  the  war 
against  Great  Britain.  They  therefore  acted  right 
in  doing  this  at  last,  though  with  too  much  refinement 
in  putting  it  off  so  long,  but  it  is  not  the  interest  of 
the  United  States  to  be  engaged  in  any  war  whatso- 
ever— much  less  do  they  desire  to  imbrue  their  hands 
in  the  blood  of  one  nation  to  gratify  the  hatred  or 
serve  the  interest  of  another.  We  have  acted  right 
hitherto  in  laying  it  down  as  a  principle,  not  to  suffer 
ourselves  to  be  drawn  into  the  wars  of  Europe ;  and 
if  we  must  have  a  war,  I  hope  it  will  be  for  refusing 
to  depart  from  that  principle. 

Our  government  has  acted  with  firmness,  con- 
sistency, and  moderation,  in  repelHng  the  unjust  pre- 
tensions of  the  belligerent  powers,  as  far  as  reason 
and  argument  could  have  weight.  If  it  has  not  at- 
tempted in  every  instance  to  preserve  our  rights  by 
force,  wherein  the  remedy  would  have  been  worse 
than  the  disease,  they  have  not  yielded  them  by  con- 
cession, in  any  instance.  Into  whatsoever  hands  the 
administration  of  the  government  may  now  come, 
they  are  called  on  by  the  suggestions  of  a  wise  pohcy, 


The  Warning  229 

and  the  voice  of  their  country,  to  pursue  the  same  gen- 
eral hne  of  conduct  that  has  been  hitherto  pursued, 
without  yielding  to  the  violence  of  party  on  either 
side.  They  will  then  be  sure  of  the  approbation  and 
support  of  the  most  virtuous,  which  it  is  to  be  hoped 
are  the  most  numerous  of  all  parties.  On  the  con- 
trar>%  if,  departing  from  these  principles,  they  un- 
necessarily involve  their  country  in  the  horrors  of 
war,  they  will  meet  the  merited  execration  of  good 
men,  and  in  the  end  the  punishment  justly  due  to 
such  conduct  from  an  injured  people. 

Americanus. 


THE   WARNING  * 

I 

January  27,  1797. 

There  are  appearances  too  strong  not  to  excite 
apprehension  that  the  affairs  of  this  country  are 
drawing  fast  to  an  eventful  crisis.  Various  circum- 
stances, daily  unfolding  themselves,  authorize  a  con- 
clusion that  France  has  adopted  a  system  of  conduct 
toward  the  neutral  maritime  nations  generally,  which 
amounts  to  little  less  than  actual  hostility.  I  mean 
the  total  interruption  of  their  trade  with  the  ports  of 
her  enemies;  a  pretension  so  violent,  and  at  the  same 
time  so  oppressive,  humiliating,  and  ruinous  to  them, 

I  The  Warning  was  in  continuation  of  the  line  of  argiunent  pursued 
in  France.  Its  purpose  was  to  arouse  the  people  against  French  influ- 
ence, and  to  show  that  we  ought  to  be  independent  of  all  foreigners, 
and  not  allow  ourselves  to  be  dragged  by  France  into  a  war  with  Eng- 
land, but  rather  be  prepared  to  withstand  the  more  dangerous  en- 
croachments of  the  "Great  Republic  itself." 


230  Alexander  Hamilton 

that  they  cannot  submit  to  it,  without  not  only  the 
complete  sacrifice  of  their  commerce,  but  their  ab- 
solute degradation  from  the  rank  of  sovereign  and 
independent  states. 

It  seems  to  have  become  latterly  a  primary  object 
in  the  policy  of  France  to  make  the  principal  attack 
upon  Great  Britain  through  her  commerce,  in  order, 
b}^  extinguishing  the  sources  of  her  revenue  and 
credit,  to  disable  her  from  continuing  the  war,  and 
compel  her  to  accept  any  conditions  of  peace  which 
her  antagonist  may  think  fit  to  prescribe.  It  is  to 
this  plan  we  are  to  attribute  the  unjustifiable  treat- 
ment of  Tuscany,  in  the  seizure  of  Leghorn,  and 
shutting  her  ports  against  the  English,  contrary  to 
the  will  of  her  own  government.  The  same  plan  has 
dictated  the  attempts  which  are  understood  to  have 
been  made  to  oblige  Naples  to  exclude  Great  Britain 
from  her  ports  during  the  present  war.  And  there 
have  been  indications  of  a  design  to  effect  a  similar 
restraint  on  all  the  Italian  states,  and  expel  the 
British  trade  wholly  from  the  Mediterranean.  The 
same  object  of  wounding  Great  Britain  through  her 
commerce,  has  been  promoted  by  the  war  into  which 
Spain  has  been  drawn,  and  may  be  considered  as  the 
principal  advantage  expected  from  it ;  while  it  is  like- 
wise alleged  to  be  the  intention  to  force  Portugal  to 
suspend  her  commercial  relations  with  Great  Britain. 
The  late  decree  forbidding  the  importation  of  British 
manufactures  into  France,  is  a  further  proof  of  the 
eagerness  with  which  the  policy  of  destroying  the 
British  commerce  is  pursued;  since  it  is  presumable, 
from  the  derangement  of  French  manufactures  by 


The  Warning  231 

the  war,  that  there  must  have  been  a  convenience 
in  the  supply  which  that  importation  has  afforded. 

It  is  obviously  to  the  same  origin  that  we  are  to 
trace  the  decree  lately  communicated  by  the  French 
minister  to  our  government,  with  respect  to  the  in- 
tended treatment  of  the  trade  of  neutrals,  and  the 
spoliations  which  ours  has  for  a  long  time  past 
suffered.  While  neutral  nations  were  permitted  to 
enjoy  securely  their  rights,  besides  the  direct  com- 
merce between  them  and  the  British  dominions,  the 
commerce  of  Great  Britain  would  be  carried  on  in 
neutral  bottoms,  even  with  the  countries  where  it 
was  denied  access  in  British  bottoms.  It  follows, 
that  the  abridgment  of  neutral  rights  is  essential  to 
the  scheme  of  destroying  the  British  commerce.  And 
here  we  find  the  true  solution  of  those  unfriendly 
proceedings,  on  the  part  of  France  toward  this 
country,  which  are  hypocritically  charged  to  the 
account  of  the  treaty  with  Great  Britain,  and  other 
acts  of  pretended  infidelity  in  our  government. 

Did  we  need  a  confirmation  of  this  truth,  we  should 
find  it  in  the  intelligence  lately  received  from  Cadiz. 
We  are  informed,  through  a  respectable  channel,' 
that  Danish  and  Swedish,  as  well  as  American  ves- 
sels, carried  into  that  port  by  French  cruisers,  have, 
with  their  cargoes,  been  condemned  and  confiscated 
by  the  French  consul  or  tribunal  there,  on  the  de- 
clared principle  of  intercepting  the  trade  of  neu- 
trals with  the  ports  of  the  enemies  of  France.     This 

^  Mr.  Ignardi,  our  consul  at  Cadiz,  lately  arrived,  who  mentioned  the 
fact  as  here  stated,  adding,  without  reserve,  that  the  principle  above 
mentioned  is  avowed  in  the  correspondence  of  the  French  consul  at 
Cadiz. 


232  Alexander  Hamilton 

indiscriminate  spoliation  of  the  commerce  of  neutral 
powers  is  a  clear  proof  that  France  is  actuated,  not 
by  particular  causes  of  discontent  given  by  our  gov- 
ernment, but  by  a  general  plan  of  policy. 

The  practice  upon  the  decree  is  a  comment  much 
broader  than  the  text.  The  decree  purports  that 
France  would  observe  toward  neutrals  the  same  con- 
duct which  they  permitted  her  enemies  to  observe 
toward  them.  But  the  practice  goes  a  great  deal 
further.  None  of  the  enemies  of  France,  even  at  the 
height  of  their  power  and  presumption,  ever  pre- 
tended totally  to  cut  off  the  trade  of  neutrals  with  her 
ports.  This  is  a  pretension  reserved  for  her,  to  in- 
crease the  catalogue  of  extraordinary  examples,  of 
which  her  revolution  has  been  so  fruitful. 

The  allegations  of  discontent  with  this  country  are 
evidently  a  mere  coloring  to  the  intended  violation  of 
its  rights,  by  treaty  as  well  as  by  the  laws  of  nations. 
Some  pretext  was  necessary,  and  this  has  been  seized. 
It  will  probably  appear  hereafter  that  Denmark  and 
Sweden  have  been  mocked  with  a  similar  tale  of 
grievances.  It  is,  indeed,  already  imderstood  that 
Sweden,  outraged  in  the  person  of  her  representative, 
has  been  obliged  to  go  the  length  of  withdrawing  her 
minister  from  Paris. 

r  The  complaints  of  France  may  be  regarded  prin- 
cipally as  weapons  furnished  to  her  adherents  to 
defend  her  cause,  notwithstanding  the  blows  she  in- 
flicts. Her  aim  has  been,  in  every  instance,  to  seduce 
the  people  from  their  government,  and,  by  dividing, 
to  conquer  and  oppress.  Hitherto,  happily,  the 
potent  spells  of  this  political  sorcery  have,  in  most 


The  Warning  233 

countries,  been  counteracted  and  dissipated  by  the 
sacred  flame  of  patriotism.  One  melancholy  excep- 
tion serves  as  a  warning  to  the  rest  of  mankind  to 
shun  the  fatal  snare.  It  is,  nevertheless,  humiliat- 
ing, that  there  are  men  among  us  depraved  enough  to 
make  use  of  the  arms  she  has  furnished  in  her  service, 
and  to  vindicate  her  aggressions  as  the  effect  of  a  just 
resentment,  provoked  by  the  ill  conduct  of  our  gov- 
ernment. But  the  artifice  will  not  succeed.  The 
eyes  of  the  people  of  this  country  are,  every  day, 
more  and  more  opened  to  the  true  character  of  the 
politics  of  France;  and  the  period  is  fast  approach- 
ing when  it  will  be  seen  in  all  its  intrinsic  deformity.    \ 

The  desire  of  a  power  at  war  to  destroy  the  com- 
merce of  its  enemy,  is  a  natural  effect  of  the  state  of 
war,  and  while  exercised  within  bounds,  consistent 
with  the  rights  of  nations  who  are  not  engaged  in  the 
contest,  is  entirely  justifiable ;  but  when  it  manifestly 
overleaps  these  bounds,  and  indulges  in  palpable  vio- 
lations of  neutral  rights,  without  even  the  color  of 
justification  in  the  usages  of  war,  it  becomes  an  in- 
tolerable tyranny,  wounds  the  sovereignty  of  nations, 
and  calls  them  to  resistance  by  every  motive  of  self- 
preservation  and  self-respect. 

The  conduct  of  France,  from  the  commencement 
of  her  successes,  has,  by  gradual  developments,  be- 
trayed a  spirit  of  universal  domination;  an  opinion 
that  she  had  a  right  to  be  the  legislatrix  of  nations ; 
that  they  are  all  bound  to  submit  to  her  mandates,  to 
take  from  her  their  moral,  political,  and  religious 
creeds;  that  her  plastic  and  regenerating  hand  is 
to  mould  them  into  whatever  shape  she  thinks  fit; 


234  Alexander  Hamilton 

and  that  her  interest  is  to  be  the  sole  measure  of 
the  rights  of  the  rest  of  the  world.  The  specious 
pretence  of  enlightening  mankind,  and  reforming 
their  civil  institutions,  is  the  varnish  to  the  real 
design  of  subjugating  them.  The  vast  projects  of 
a  Louis  XIV.  dwindle  into  insignificance  compared 
with  the  more  gigantic  schemes  of  his  republican 
successors.  — < 

Men,  well  informed  and  unprejudiced,  early  dis- 
covered the  symptoms  of  this  spirit.  Reasoning 
from  human  nature,  they  foresaw  its  growth  with 
success;  that  from  the  love  of  dominion,  inherent  in 
the  heart  of  man,  the  rulers  of  the  most  powerful 
nation  in  the  world,  whether  a  Committee  of  Safety 
or  a  Directory,  will  forever  aim  at  an  undue  empire 
over  other  nations;  and  that  this  disposition,  in- 
flamed as  it  was  by  enthusiasm,  if  encouraged  by  a 
continuation  of  success,  would  be  apt  to  exhibit  it- 
self, during  the  course  of  the  French  Revolution,  in 
excesses  of  which  there  has  been  no  example  since 
the  days  of  Roman  greatness. 

Every  day  confirms  the  justice  of  that  anticipation. 
It  is  now  indispensable  that  the  disagreeable  and 
menacing  truth  should  be  exposed  in  full  day  to  the 
people  of  America;  that  they  should  contemplate  it 
seriously,  and  prepare  their  minds  for  extremities, 
which  nothing  short  of  abject  submission  may  be  able 
to  avert.  This  will  serve  them  as  an  armor  against 
the  machinations  of  traitorous  men,  who  may  wish  to 
make  them  instruments  of  the  ambition  of  a  foreign 
power,  to  persuade  them  to  concur  in  forging  chains 
for  mankind,   and  to  accept,  as  their  award,  the 


The  Warning  235 

despicable  privilege  of  wearing  them  a  day  later  than 
others. 

Already  in  certain  circles  is  heard  the  debasing 
doctrine  that  France  is  determined  to  reduce  us  to 
the  alternative  of  war  with  her  enemies,  or  war  with 
herself,  and  that  it  is  our  interest  and  safety  to  elect 
the  former. 

There  was  a  time  when  it  was  believed  that  a  simi- 
lar alternative  would  be  imposed  by  Great  Britain. 
At  this  crisis  there  was  but  one  sentiment.  The 
firmest  friends  of  moderation  and  peace,  no  less  than 
the  noisiest  partisans  of  violence  and  war,  resolved  to 
elect  war  with  that  power  which  should  drive  us  to 
the  election.  This  resolution  was  the  dictate  of  mor- 
ality and  honor,  of  a  just  regard  to  national  dignity 
and  independence.  If  any  consideration,  in  any  situa- 
tion, should  degrade  us  into  a  different  resolution, 
we,  that  instant,  shake  hands  with  crime  and  infamy: 
we  descend  from  the  high  ground  of  an  independent 
people,  and  stoop  to  the  ignominious  level  of  vassals. 
I  trust  there  are  few  Americans  who  would  not  cheer- 
fully encounter  the  worst  evils  of  a  contest  with  any 
nation  on  earth  rather  than  subscribe  to  so  shameful 
an  abdication  of  their  rank  as  men  and  citizens. 

Americus. 


II 

February  7,  1797. 

Independent  of  the  commands  of  honor  the  coolest 
calculations  of  interest  forbid  our  becoming  the  in- 
struments of  the  ambition  of  France,  by  associating 
with  her  in  the  war.     The  question  is  no  longer  the 


236  Alexander  Hamilton 

establishment  of  liberty  on  the  basis  of  republican 
government.  This  point  the  enemies  of  France  have 
ceased  to  dispute.  The  question  now  is  whether  she 
shall  be  aggrandized  by  new  acquisitions,  and  her 
enemies  reduced  by  dismemberments,  to  a  degree 
which  may  render  her  the  mistress  of  Europe,  and 
consequently,  in  a  great  measure,  of  America.  This 
is  truly  the  remaining  subject  of  contention. 

They  who  understood  the  real  strength  and  re- 
sources of  France  before  the  present  war,  knew  that 
she  was  intrinsically  the  most  powerful  nation  of 
Europe.  The  incidents  of  the  war  have  displayed 
this  fact  in  a  manner  which  is  the  astonishment  of  the 
world.  If  France  can  finally  realize  her  present  plan 
of  aggrandizement,  she  will  attain  to  a  degree  of 
greatness  and  power  which,  if  not  coimteracted  by 
internal  disorder,  will  tend  to  make  her  the  terror  and 
the  scourge  of  nations.  The  spirit  of  moderation  in 
a  state  of  overbearing  power  is  a  phenomenon  which 
has  not  yet  appeared,  and  which  no  wise  man  will  ex- 
pect ever  to  see.  It  is  certain  that  a  very  different 
spirit  has  hitherto  marked  the  career  of  the  new  re- 
public ;  and  it  is  due  to  truth  to  add,  that  the  ardent, 
impetuous,  and  military  genius  of  the  French  affords 
perhaps  less  prospect  of  such  a  spirit  in  them  than  in 
any  other  people. 

'T  were  therefore  contrary  to  our  true  interest  to 
assist  in  building  up  this  colossus  to  the  enormous 
size  at  which  she  aims.  'T  were  a  policy  as  short- 
sighted as  mean  to  seek  safety  in  a  subserviency  to 
her  views  as  the  price  of  her  clemency.  This  at  best 
would  be  but  a  temporary  respite  from  the  rod;   if 


The  Warning  237 

indeed  that  can  be  called  a  respite,  which  is  of  itself 
the  sacrifice  of  a  real  to  a  nominal  independence. 

These  reflections  are  not  designed  to  rouse  a  spirit 
of  hostility  against  France,  or  to  inculcate  the  idea 
that  we  ought  of  choice  to  participate  in  the  war 
against  her.  They  are  intended  merely  to  fortify  the 
motives  of  honor,  which  forbid  our  stooping  to  be 
compelled,  either  to  submit  without  resistance  to  a 
virtual  war  on  her  part,  or  to  avert  her  blows  by 
engaging  in  the  war  on  her  side. 

When  it  was  the  opinion,  that  France  was  defend- 
ing the  cause  of  liberty,  it  was  a  decisive  argument 
against  embarking  with  her  in  the  contest,  that  it 
would  expose  us  to  hazards  and  evils  infinitely  dis- 
proportioned  to  the  assistance  we  could  render.  Now 
the  question  plainly  is,  whether  France  shall  give  the 
law  to  mankind.  The  addition  of  our  opposition  to 
her  plan  could  have  too  little  influence  upon  the 
event  to  justify  our  willingly  encountering  the  cer- 
tain dangers  and  mischiefs  of  the  enterprise.  'T  is 
our  true  policy  to  remain  at  peace  if  we  can,  to  ne- 
gotiate our  subjects  of  complaint  as  long  as  they 
shall  be  at  all  negotiable,  to  defer  and  to  wait. 

When  the  indiscriminate  seizure  of  our  vessels  by 
British  cruisers,  under  the  order  of  the  sixth  of  No- 
vember, 1793,  had  brought  our  affairs  with  Great 
Britain  to  a  crisis,  which  led  to  the  measure  of  send- 
ing a  special  envoy  to  that  country  to  obtain  relief 
and  reparation,  it  was  well  understood  that  the  issue 
of  that  mission  was  to  determine  the  question  of 
peace  or  war  between  the  two  nations.  In  like  man- 
mer,  it  is  to  be  expected  that  our  Executive  will  make 


238  Alexander  Hamilton 

a  solemn  and  final  appeal  to  the  justice  and  interest 
of  France,  will  insist  in  mild  but  explicit  terms  on 
the  renunciation  of  the  pretension  to  intercept  the 
lawful  commerce  of  neutrals  with  the  enemies  of 
France,  and  the  institution  of  some  equitable  mode 
of  ascertaining  and  retributing  the  losses  which  the 
exercise  of  it  has  inflicted  upon  our  merchants.  If 
the  experiment  shall  fail,  there  will  be  nothing  left 
but  to  repel  aggression  and  defend  our  commerce  and 
independence.  The  resolution  to  do  this  will  then 
be  imposed  on  the  government  by  a  painful  but  ir- 
resistible necessity,  and  it  were  an  outrage  to  the 
American  name  and  character  to  doubt  that  the 
people  of  the  United  States  will  approve  the  resolu- 
tion, and  will  support  it  with  a  constancy  worthy  of 
the  justice  of  their  cause,  and  of  the  glory  they  have 
heretofore  deserved  and  acquired. 

No!  let  this  never  be  doubted!  the  servile  minions 
of  France — those  who  have  no  sensibility  to  injury 
but  when  it  comes  from  Great  Britain,  who  are  uncon- 
scious of  any  rights  to  be  protected  against  France ; 
who,  at  a  moment  when  the  public  safety  more  than 
ever  demands  a  strict  union  between  the  people  and 
their  government,  traitorously  labor  to  detach  them 
from  it,  and  to  turn  against  the  government,  for 
pretended  faults,  the  resentment  which  the  real  op- 
pressions of  France  ought  to  inspire ; — these  wretched 
men  will  discover  in  the  end,  that  they  are  as  insig- 
nificant as  they  are  unprincipled.  They  will  find 
that  they  have  vainly  flattered  themselves  with  the 
co-operation  of  the  great  body  of  those  men  with 
whom  the  spirit  of  party  has  hitherto  associated 


The  Warning  239 

them.  In  such  an  extremity  the  adventitious  dis- 
criminations of  party  will  be  lost  in  the  patriotism 
and  pride  of  the  American  character.  Good  citizens 
of  every  political  denomination  will  remember  that 
they  are  Americans;  that  when  their  country  is  in 
danger,  the  merit  or  demerit  of  particular  measures 
is  no  longer  a  question ;  that  it  is  the  duty  of  all  to 
unite  their  efforts  to  guard  the  national  rights,  to 
avert  national  humiliation,  and  to  withstand  the  im- 
position of  a  foreign  yoke.  The  true  and  genuine 
spirit  of  1776,  not  the  vile  counterfeits  of  it  which  so 
often  disgust  our  eyes  and  our  ears,  will  warm  every 
truly  American  heart,  and  light  up  in  it  a  noble  em- 
ulation to  maintain  inviolate  the  rights  and  unsullied 
the  honor  of  the  American  nation.  It  will  be  proved, 
to  the  confusion  of  all  false  patriots,  that  we  did  not 
break  the  fetters  of  one  foreign  tyranny  to  put  on 
those  of  another.  It  will  be  again  proved  to  the 
world  that  we  imderstand  our  rights,  and  have  the 
courage  to  defend  them. 

But  there  is  still  ground  to  hope  that  we  shall  not 
be  driven  to  this  disagreeable  extremity.  The  more 
deliberate  calculations  of  France  will  probably  rescue 
us  from  the  present  embarrassment.  If  she  perse- 
veres in  her  plan,  she  must  inevitably  add  all  the 
neutral  powers  to  the  number  of  her  enemies.  How 
will  this  fulfil  the  purpose  of  destroying  the  com- 
merce of  Great  Britain?  The  commerce  of  those 
powers  with  France  will  then  entirely  cease,  and  be 
turned  more  extensively  into  the  channels  of  Great 
Britain,  protected  by  her  navy,  with  the  co-operation 
of  the  maritime  force  of  those  powers.     The  result 


240  Alexander  Hamilton 

will  be  the  reverse  of  what  is  projected  by  the  meas- 
ure. The  commerce  and  revenue  of  Britain  will,  in 
all  likelihood,  be  augmented  rather  than  diminished ; 
and  her  arms  will  receive  an  important  reinforce- 
ment. Violent  and  unjust  measures  <i;ommonly  de- 
feat their  own  purpose.  The  plan  of  starving  France 
was  of  this  description,  and  operated  against  the 
views  of  its  projectors.  This  plan  now  adopted  by 
France,  of  cutting  off  the  trade  of  neutrals  with  her 
enemies,  alike  violent  and  unjust,  will  no  doubt  end 
in  similar  disappointment.  Let  us  hope  that  it  will 
be  abandoned,  and  that  ultimate  rupture  will  be 
avoided ;  but  let  us  also  contemplate  the  possibility 
of  the  contrary,  and  prepare  our  minds  seriously  for 

the  unwelcome  event. 

Americus. 


Ill 

February  21,  1797. 

The  Paris  accounts  inform  us,  that  France  has 
lately  exercised  toward  Genoa  an  act  of  atrocious 
oppression,  which  is  an  additional  and  striking  in- 
dication of  the  domineering  and  predatory  spirit  by 
which  she  is  governed.  This  little  republic,  whose 
territory  scarcely  extends  beyond  the  walls  of  her 
metropolis,  has  been  compelled,  it  seems,  to  ransom 
herself  from  the  talons  of  France  by  a  contribution 
of  nearly  a  million  of  dollars,  a  large  sum  for  her 
contracted  resources.  For  this  boon,  "the  French 
Government  engages  on  its  part  to  renounce  all 
claims  upon  Genoa,  to  forget  what  has  passed  during 
the  present  war,  and  to  forbear  any  future  demands. " 


The  Warning  241 

It  would  appear  from  this,  that  France,  to  color  the 
odious  exaction,  besides  the  pretence  of  misconduct 
toward  her  in  the  present  war,  has  not  disdained  to 
resort  to  the  stale  and  pitiful  device  of  reviving  some 
antiquated  claim  upon  the  country  itself.  In  vain 
did  the  signal  hazards  encoimtered  by  Genoa  to  pre- 
serve her  neutrality,  in  defiance  of  the  host  of  ene- 
mies originally  leagued  against  France, — in  vain  did 
the  character  and  title  of  republic  plead  for  a  more 
generous  treatment.  The  attractions  of  plunder 
predominated.  The  spirit  of  rapine,  callous  to  the 
touch  of  justice,  blind  to  the  evidence  of  truth,  deaf 
to  the  voice  of  entreaty,  had  marked  out,  and  devoted 
the  mark.  There  was  no  alternative  but  to  com- 
pound or  perish. 

If  it  be  even  supposed,  though  this  has  never  ap- 
peared, that  at  some  period  of  the  war  Genoa  may 
be  chargeable  with  acts  of  questionable  propriety  in 
relation  to  France,  it  is  manifest,  that  it  ought  to  be 
attributed  to  the  necessity  of  a  situation  which  must 
have  obliged  her  to  temporize.  A  very  small  and 
feeble  state,  in  the  midst  of  so  many  great  conflicting 
powers,  parts  of  her  territories  occupied  by  armies 
which  she  was  unable  to  oppose,  it  were  a  miracle, 
indeed,  if  her  conduct  in  every  particular  will  bear 
the  test  of  rigorous  scrutiny.  But  if  at  any  time  the 
pressure  of  circumstances  may  have  occasioned  some 
slight  deviation,  there  is,  nevertheless,  full  evidence 
of  a  constant  solicitude  on  the  part  of  Genoa  to 
maintain,  to  the  utmost  of  her  ability,  a  sincere  neu- 
trality. It  is  impossible  to  forget  the  glorious  stand 
which  she  at  one  time  made  against  the  imperious 

VOL.   VI.  — 16. 


242  Alexander  Hamilton 

efforts  of  Great  Britain  to  force  her  from  her  neutral 
position.  The  magnanimous  and  exemplary  forti- 
tude which  she  displayed  on  that  occasion  excited  in 
this  country  universal  admiration,  and  must  have 
made  a  deep  impression.  'T  is  only  to  recollect  that 
instance  to  be  satisfied  that  the  treatment  which 
she  has  just  experienced  from  France  merits  the  in- 
dignant execration  of  mankind.  Unfortunate  Genoa ! 
how  little  didst  thou  imagine  that  thou  wert  de- 
stined so  soon  to  be  compelled  to  purchase  thy  safety 
from  the  crushing  weight  of  that  hand  which  ought 
to  have  been  the  first  to  rise  in  thy  defence ! 

How  fruitful  at  the  same  time  of  instruction  to  us 
is  this  painful  example!  The  most  infatuated  par- 
tisans of  France  cannot  but  see  in  it  an  unequivocal 
proof  of  the  rapacious  and  vindictive  policy  which 
dictates  her  measures.  All  men  must  see  in  it,  that 
the  flagrant  injuries  which  we  are  now  suffering 
from  her,  proceed  from  a  general  plan  of  domination 
and  plunder ;  from  a  disposition  to  prostrate  nations 
at  her  feet;  to  trample  upon  their  necks;  to  ravish 
from  them  whatever  her  avidit}^  or  convenience  may 
think  fit  to  dedicate  to  her  own  use. 

The  last  intelligence  from  France  seems  to  dispel 
the  doubt  whether  the  depredations  in  the  West 
Indies  may  not  have  resulted  from  misapprehension 
or  abuse  of  the  orders  of  the  French  Government.  It 
is  now  understood  to  be  a  fact  that  the  cruisers 
of  France  everywhere  are  authorized  to  capture 
and  bring  in  all  vessels  bound  to  the  ports  of  her 
enemies. 

This  plan  is  pregnant  with  the  worst  evils,  which 


The  Warning  243 

are  to  be  dreaded  from  the  declared  and  unquaUfied 
hostihty  of  any  foreign  power.  If  France,  after  be- 
ing properly  called  upon  to  renounce  it,  shall  per- 
severe in  the  measure,  there  cannot  be  a  question  but 
that  open  war  will  be  preferable  to  such  a  state.  By 
whatever  name  treachery  or  pusillanimity  may  at- 
tempt to  disguise  it,  't  is  in  fact  war  of  the  worst  kind, 
war  on  one  side.  If  we  can  be  induced  to  submit  to 
it  longer  than  is  necessary  to  ascertain  that  it  cannot 
be  averted  by  negotiation,  we  are  undone  as  a  people. 
Whether  our  determination  shall  be  to  coop  up  our 
trade  by  embargoes,  or  to  permit  our  commerce  to 
continue  to  float  an  unprotected  prey  to  French 
cruisers,  our  degradation  and  ruin  will  be  equally 
complete.  The  destruction  of  our  navigation  and 
commerce,  the  annihilation  of  our  mercantile  cap- 
ital, the  dispersion  and  loss  of  our  seamen — obliged 
to  emigrate  for  subsistence,— the  extinction  of  our 
revenue,  the  fall  of  pubhc  credit,  the  stagnation  of 
every  species  of  industry,  the  general  impoverish- 
ment of  our  citizens, — these  will  be  minor  evils  in 
the  dreadful  catalogue.  Some  years  of  security  and 
exertion  might  repair  them.  But  the  humiliation  of 
the  American  mind  would  be  a  lasting  and  a  mortal 
disease  in  our  social  habit.  Mental  debasement  is 
the  greatest  misfortune  that  can  befall  a  people. 
The  most  pernicious  of  conquests  which  a  state  can 
experience  is  a  conquest  over  that  just  and  elevated 
sense  of  its  own  rights  which  inspires  a  due  sensi- 
bility to  insult  and  injury;  over  that  virtuous  and 
generous  pride  of  character,  which  prefers  any  peril 
or  sacrifice  to  a  final  submission  to  oppression,  and 


244  Alexander  Hamilton 

which  regards  national  ignominy  as  the  greatest  of 
national  calamities. 

The  records  of  history  contain  numerous  proofs  of 
this  truth.  But  an  appeal  to  them  is  unnecessary. 
Holland  and  Italy  present  to  our  immediate  observa- 
tion, examples  as  decisive  as  they  are  deplorable. 
The  former  within  the  last  ten  years  has  undergone 
two  revolutions  by  the  intervention  of  foreign  pow- 
ers, without  even  a  serious  struggle.  Mutilated  of 
precious  portions  of  its  territory  at  home  by  pre- 
tended benefactors  but  real  despoilers,  its  dominions 
abroad  slide  into  the  possession  of  its  enemies  rather 
as  derelicts  than  as  the  acquisitions  of  victory.  Its 
fleets  surrender  without  a  blow.  Important  only  by 
the  spoils  which  it  offers  no  less  to  its  friends  than  to 
its  enemies,  every  symptom  in  its  affairs  is  portentous 
of  national  annihilation.  With  regard  to  Italy,  't  is 
sufficient  to  say  that  she  is  debased  enough,  not  even 
to  dare  to  take  part  in  a  contest,  on  which,  at  this 
moment,  her  destiny  is  suspended. 

Moderation  in  every  nation  is  a  virtue.  In  weak 
or  young  nations,  it  is  often  wise  to  take  every  chance 
by  patience  and  address  to  divert  hostility,  and  in 
this  view  to  hold  parley  with  insult  and  injury;  but 
to  capitulate  with  oppression,  or  rather  to  surrender 
to  it  at  discretion,  is,  in  any  nation  that  has  any 
power  of  resistance,  at  all  times  as  foolish  as  it  is 
contemptible.  The  honor  of  a  nation  is  its  life.  De- 
liberately to  abandon  it,  is  to  commit  an  act  of 
political  suicide.  There  is  treason  in  the  sentiment, 
avowed  in  the  language  of  some,  and  betrayed  by 
the  conduct  of  others,  that  we  ought  to  bear  any 


The  Warning  245 

thing  from  France,  rather  than  go  to  war  with  her. 
The  nation,  which  can  prefer  disgrace  to  danger  is 
prepared  for  a  Master  and  deserves  one. 

Americus. 


IV 

February  27,  1797. 

The  emissaries  of  France  when  driven  from  every 
other  expedient  for  extenuating  her  depredations, 
have  a  last  refuge  in  the  example  of  Great  Britain. 
The  treatment  which  we  now  receive  from  France 
(say  they)  is  not  worse  than  that  which  we  have 
received  from  Great  Britain.  If  this  apology  were 
founded  in  fact,  it  would  still  be  a  miserable  sub- 
terfuge. For  what  excuse  is  it  to  France,  or  what 
consolation  to  us,  that  she,  our  boasted  friend  and 
benefactress,  treats  us  only  not  worse  than  a  power 
which  is  stigmatized  as  an  envious  rival  and  an  im- 
placable foe  ? 

The  conduct  of  Great  Britain,  appealed  to  in  justi- 
fication of  France,  was  admitted  by  all  to  be  inexcus- 
able. Even  Gallic  faction  thought  it  so  extreme  as  to 
call  for  immediate  reprisals.  The  real  patriots  dif- 
fered from  them  only  in  thinking,  that  an  armed 
negotiation,  to  end  in  reprisals,  if  unattended  with 
success,  was  preferable  to  immediate  hostility.  How 
dare  the  men,  who  at  that  period  were  the  clamorous 
champions  of  our  national  dignity, — how  dare  they 
(I  ask)  now  to  stand  forth  the  preachers  not  of  mod- 
eration (for  in  the  propriety  of  this  all  unite)  but  of 
tame  submission — of  a  servility  abject  enough  to 
love  and  cherish  the  hand  which  despoils  us,  to  kiss 


246  Alexander  Hamilton 

the  rod  which  stings  us  with  unprovoked  lashes? 
What  logic,  what  magic,  can  render  innocent  or 
venial  in  France  that  which  was  so  criminal  and 
odious  in  Great  Britain? 

The  pretext  (we  know)  of  France  is,  that  we  have 
permitted  Great  Britain  to  treat  us  in  the  same 
manner,  and  her  deluded  or  debauched  adherents 
are  mean  or  prostrate  enough  to  re-echo  the  excuse. 

Let  us  grant,  for  argument's  sake,  all  that  can  be 
pretended  on  this  subject — namely,  that  through 
want  of  energy  in  our  administration,  or  from  the 
opinion  which  it  entertained  of  the  situation  of  the 
country,  there  has  been  too  much  patience  under 
the  oppressions  of  Great  Britain.  Is  this  really  a 
justification  to  France?  Is  a  defect  of  vigor  in  the 
government  of  one  country,  or  an  underestimate  of 
its  means  for  repelling  injury,  a  sufficient  cause  for 
another  government,  lavish  in  profession  of  friend- 
ship, to  imitate  toward  it  the  aggressions  which  it  has 
suffered  from  an  oppressor?  What  in  private  life 
would  be  said  of  that  man,  who  called  himself  the 
friend  of  another,  and  because  the  last  had  too 
passively  allowed  a  third,  the  enemy  of  both,  to 
wrest  from  him  a  portion  of  his  property,  should 
deduce  from  this  a  pretext  to  strip  him  of  the  re- 
mainder? Has  language  epithets  too  severe  for 
such  a  character  ?  Is  not  the  guilt  of  unjust  violence 
in  a  case  like  this  aggravated  by  that  of  hypocrisy 
and  perfidy? 

But  this  is  not  our  only  reply.  The  truth  is  (and 
a  truth  we  may  boldly  proclaim)  that  we  never  did 
tolerate  the  aggressions  of  Great  Britain;    that  we 


The  Warning  247 

have  steadily  resisted  them,  and  resisted  them  with 
success.  In  the  respectable  attitude  of  an  armed 
negotiation,  seconded  by  the  self-denying  and  very 
influential  measure  of  an  embargo,  we  sent  to  de- 
mand a  revocation  of  the  orders  under  which  we 
suffered,  and  retribution  for  the  losses  which  we 
had  sustained.  The  orders  were  revoked  and  the 
retribution  has  been  stipulated,  and  the  stipulation 
is  in  a  course  of  honorable  and  liberal  execution. 
The  redress  of  ancient  grievances,  on  the  ground  of 
a  reciprocity,  demanded  by  every  principle  of  recti- 
tude, has  been  superadded  to  that  of  more  recent 
ones. 

Our  flags  at  this  moment  proudly  wave  on  the 
ramparts  which  had  been  so  long  detained  from  us; 
and  Indian  butcheries  along  the  whole  extent  of  our 
vast  frontier  have  been  terminated.  More  than  this 
— the  redress  obtained  from  Great  Britain  was  a 
principal  cause  of  the  happy  accommodation  of  our 
dispute  with  Spain,  of  the  recognition  of  our  right  to 
navigate  the  Mississippi,  and  of  the  establishment  of 
a  southern  boundary  equal  to  our  most  sanguine 
wishes.'  These  are  the  fruits  (and  immense  fruits 
they  are)  of  a  vigorous  though  temperate  resistance 
to  the  aggressions  of  Great  Britain. 

'T  is,  therefore,  in  every  sense  false,  that  our  gov- 

^  This  consequence  was  foreseen  and  foretold.  And  the  prediction 
is  confirmed  by  that  part  of  the  declaration  of  war  of  Spain  against 
Great  Britain  which  makes  it  a  charge  against  the  latter,  that  in  the 
treaty  with  the  United  States  "she  had  no  respect  or  consideration  for 
the  known  rights  of  Spain,"  and  in  the  sudden  disappearance,  after 
that  treaty,  of  the  obstacles  which  had  so  long  impeded  our  negotia- 
tion with  Spain. 


248  Alexander  Hamilton 

emment  has  permitted  Great  Britain  to  do  as  France 
is  now  doing.  Except  here  and  there  the  accidental 
irregularity  of  the  commander  of  a  particular  ship, 
there  is  not  one  clear  right  which  the  law  of  nations 
entitles  us  to  claim,  that  is  not  now  respected  by 
Great  Britain,  and  to  a  degree  unusual  in  the  history 
of  the  treatment  of  neutral  nations  by  great  belli- 
gerent powers. 

It  follows  that  the  suggestion  on  which  France 
bottoms  her  ill-treatment  of  us  is  a  frivolous  and  a 
colorless  pretext.  'T  is  to  confound  all  just  ideas, 
to  consider  a  temporary  forbearance  as  a  permission 
or  acquiescence — to  pretend,  above  all,  to  retaliate 
that  injury  after  it  has  passed,  has  ceased,  and  has 
been  redressed.  We  are  bound,  then,  to  conclude 
that  our  real  crime  in  the  eyes  of  France  is,  that  we 
had  the  temerity  to  think  and  to  act  for  ourselves, 
and  did  not  plunge  headlong  into  war  with  Great 
Britain;  that  the  principal  streams  of  our  com- 
merce, from  the  natural  relations  of  demand  and 
supply,  flow  through  the  channels  of  her  commerce; 
and  that  the  booty  which  it  offers  to  rapacity  ex- 
ceeds the  organized  means  of  protection. 

But  a  country,  containing  five  millions  of  people, 
the  second  in  the  number  of  its  seamen,  that  prime 
sinew  of  maritime  force,  with  a  varied  industry,  and 
an  export  of  sixty  millions,  understanding  its  rights, 
not  deficient  in  spirit  to  vindicate  them,  if  com- 
pelled against  its  will  to  exert  its  strength  and  re- 
sources, will,  under  the  guidance  of  faithful  and 
patriotic  counsels,  be  at  no  loss  to  convince  its  de- 
spoilers  that  there  is  as  much  folly  as  wickedness  in 


The  Warning  249 

such  a  calctdation.  This  reflection  ought  at  once  to 
console  and  to  animate  us ;  though  the  remembrance 
of  former  friendship  and  a  spirit  of  virtuous  modera- 
tion will  induce  us  still  to  wish  that  there  may  be 
some  error  in  appearances — -that  the  views  of  France 
are  not  as  violent  and  as  hostile  as  they  seem  to  be — 
that  an  amicable  explanation  may  yet  dispel  the  im- 
pending clouds,  and  brighten  the  political  horizon 
with  a  happy  reconciliation. 

Americus. 


V 

March  13,  1797. 

I  have  asserted  that  the  conduct  of  Great  Britain 
toward  us  and  other  neutral  powers  has  been  at 
no  period  so  exceptionable  as  that  of  France  at 
the  present  juncture.  A  more  distinct  view  of  this 
truth  may  be  useful,  which  will  be  assisted  by  a  re- 
trospect of  the  principal  acts  of  violence  on  both 
sides. 

Though  the  circumstances  were  contemporarily 
disclosed  in  all  our  newspapers,  yet  so  blind  and 
deaf  were  we  rendered  by  our  partiality  for  France, 
that  few  among  us,  till  very  lately,  have  been  aware, 
that  the  first  of  those  acts  is  fairly  chargeable  upon 
her.  Such,  notwithstanding,  is  the  fact.  The  first 
in  order  of  time  is  a  decree  of  the  National  Conven- 
tion of  the  9th  of  May,  1793,  which,  reciting  that 
neutral  flags  are  not  respected  by  the  enemies  of 
France,  and  enumerating  some  instances  of  alleged 
violation,  proceeds  to  authorize  the  vessels  of  war 
and  cruisers  of  France  to  arrest  and  conduct  into  her 


250  Alexander  Hamilton 

ports  all  neutral  vessels  which  are  found  laden  in  whole 
or  in  part  with  provisions  belonging  to  neutrals,  or 
merchandises  belonging  to  the  enemies  of  France ;  the 
latter  to  be  confiscated  as  prize  for  the  benefit  of  the 
captors,  the  former  to  be  detained,  but  paid  for  ac- 
cording to  their  value  at  the  places  for  which  they 
were  destined. 

The  instances  enumerated  as  the  pretext  for  so 
direct  and  formal  an  attack  upon  the  rights  of  neutral 
powers,  except  two,  turn  upon  the  pretensions  to 
capture  goods  of  an  enemy  in  the  ships  of  a  friend. 
Of  the  remaining  two,  one  is  the  case  of  an  Ameri- 
can vessel  going  from  Falmouth  to  St.  Maloes  with  a 
cargo  of  wheat,  which  the  decree  states  was  taken  by 
an  English  frigate  and  carried  into  Guernsey,  where 
the  agents  of  the  English  Government  detained  the 
cargo,  upon  a  promise  to  pay  the  value,  as  not  being 
for  French  account;  the  other  is  the  case  of  some 
French  passengers  going  in  a  Genoese  vessel  from 
Cadiz  to  Bayonne,  who  were  plundered  on  the  pas- 
sage by  the  crew  of  an  English  privateer. 

There  is  no  question  but  that  Great  Britain,  from 
the  beginning  of  the  war,  has  claimed  and  exercised 
the  right  of  capturing  the  property  of  her  enemies 
found  in  neutral  bottoms,  and  it  has  been  unanswer- 
ably demonstrated,  that  for  this  she  has  the  sanction 
of  the  general  law  of  nations.  But  France,  from 
the  exercise  of  that  right  by  Great  Britain,  when  not 
forbidden  by  any  treaty,  can  certainly  derive  no  justi- 
fication for  the  imitation  of  the  practice,  in  opposition 
to  the  precise  and  peremptory  stipulations  of  her 
treaties.     Every  treaty  which  established  the  rule  of 


The  Warning  251 

"free  ships  free  goods/'  must  have  contemplated  the 
imequal  operation  of  that  rule  to  the  contracting 
parties,  when  one  was  at  peace,  the  other  at  w^ar; 
looking  for  indemnification  to  the  correspondent  of 
taking  friends'  property  in  enemies'  ships,  and  to 
the  reciprocal  effect  of  the  rule  when  the  state  of 
peace  and  war  should  be  reversed.  To  make  its  un- 
equal operation  in  an  existing  war  an  excuse  for  dis- 
regarding the  rule,  is  therefore  a  subterfuge  for  a 
breach  of  faith,  which  hardly  seeks  to  save  appear- 
ances. France,  as  she  once  was,  would  have  blushed 
to  use  it.  It  is  one,  among  many  instances,  of  the 
attempts  of  revolutionary  France  to  dogmatize  man- 
kind out  of  its  reason,  as  if  she  expected  to  work  a 
change  in  the  faculties  as  well  as  in  the  habits  and 
opinions  of  men. 

The  case  of  the  American  vessel  carried  to  Guern- 
sey is  that  of  a  clear  infraction  of  neutral  right.  But 
standing  singly,  it  was  insufficient  evidence  of  a  plan 
of  the  British  Government  to  pursue  the  principle. 
It  countenanced  suspicion  of  a  secret  order  for  the 
purpose;  but  it  did  not  amount  to  proof  of  such  an 
order.  There  might  have  been  misapprehension  or 
misrepresentation;  or  if  neither  was  the  case,  the 
circumstance  was  resolvable  into  the  mere  irregu- 
larity of  particular  agents;  it  is  unjustifiable  to 
ascribe  to  a  government,  as  the  result  of  a  pre- 
meditated plan,  and  to  use  as  the  ground  of  reprisals, 
a  single  case  of  irregularity  happening  in  a  detached 
portion  of  the  dominions  of  that  government. 
France  was  bound  to  have  waited  for  more  full  evi- 
dence.    There  was  no  warrant  in  a  solitary  precedent 


252  Alexander  Hamilton 

for  general  retaliation;  even  if  we  could  admit  the 
detestable  doctrine,  that  the  injustice  of  one  belli- 
gerent power  towards  neutral  nations  is  a  warrant 
for  similar  injustice  in  another. 

The  violation  of  the  courtesy  of  war  in  the  instance 
of  the  French  passengers,  however  brutal  in  itself, 
was  truly  a  frivolous  pretext  for  the  decree.  The 
frequency  of  irregular  conduct  in  the  commanders 
and  crews  of  privateers,  even  in  contempt  of  the 
regulations  of  their  own  governments,  naturally  ex- 
plains such  a  transaction  into  the  cupidity  of  indi- 
viduals, and  forbids  the  imputation  of  it  to  their 
governments.  There  never  was  a  war  in  which 
similar  outrages  did  not  occur  in  spite  of  the  most 
sincere  endeavors  to  prevent  them. 

The  natural  and  plain  conclusion  is,  that  the  decree 
in  question  was  a  wanton  proceeding  in  the  French 
Government,  uncountenanced  by  the  previous  con- 
duct either  of  its  enemies,  or  of  the  neutral  nations 
who  were  destined  to  punishment  for  their  faults. 

For,  the  first  order  of  the  British  Government  au- 
thorizing the  seizure  of  provisions  is  dated  the  sixth 
of  June,  1793,  nearly  a  month  posterior  to  the  French 
decree.  As  there  is  not  the  least  vestige  of  any  prior 
order,  the  presumption  is  that  none  ever  existed.  If 
any  had  existed,  the  course  of  things  has  been  such 
as  to  afford  a  moral  certainty  that  it  would  have  ap- 
peared. The  subsequent  date  of  the  British  order  is 
a  strong  confirmation  of  the  argument,  that  the  affair 
of  the  vessel  carried  to  Guernsey  was  nothing  more 
than  a  particular  irregularity. 

The  publicity  of  all  the  proceedings  of  the  French 


The  Warning  253 

Government,  and  the  celerity  of  communication  be- 
tween Paris  and  London,  leave  no  doubt  that  the 
decree  of  May  the  9th  was  known  in  London  before 
the  order  of  June  the  6th.  It  follows,  that  France 
herself  furnished  to  Great  Britain  the  example  and 
the  pretext  for  the  most  odious  of  the  measures  with 
which  she  is  chargeable ;  and,  that  so  far  as  precedent 
can  justify  crime,  Great  Britain  may  find  in  the  con- 
duct of  France  the  vindication  of  her  own. 

An  obvious  reflection  presents  itself.  How  great 
was  the  infatuation  of  France  thus  to  set  the  example 
of  an  interruption  of  neutral  commerce  in  provisions, 
in  the  freedom  of  which  she  was  so  much  more  inter- 
ested than  her  adversaries.  If  the  detention  of  the 
cargo  at  Guernsey  was  a  bait,  we  cannot  but  be 
astonished  at  the  stupid  levity  with  which  it  was 
swallowed. 

We  are  no  less  struck  with  the  eager  precipitancy 
with  which  France  seized  the  pretext  for  a  formal  and 
systematic  invasion  of  the  rights  of  neutral  powers; 
equally  regardless  of  the  obligations  of  treaty  and  of 
the  injunctions  of  the  laws  of  nations.  The  presump- 
tion of  the  connivance  of  the  neutral  power  in  infrac- 
tions of  its  rights  is  the  only  colorable  ground  for  the 
French  idea  of  retaliation  on  the  sufferers.  Here  the 
yet  early  stage  of  the  war  and  the  recency  of  the  facts 
alleged  as  motives  to  the  decree,  preclude  the  suppo- 
sition of  connivance.  The  unjust  violence  of  France, 
consequently,  in  resorting  to  retaliation,  stands  with- 
out the  slightest  veil.  From  this  prominent  trait  we 
may  distinguish,  without  possibility  of  mistake,  the 
real  character  of  her  system.  Americus. 


254  Alexander  Hamilton 

VI 

March  27,  1797. 

It  has  been  seen  that  the  Government  of  France 
has  an  indisputable  title  to  the  culpable  pre-eminence 
of  having  taken  lead  in  the  violation  of  neutral 
rights ;  and  that  the  first  instance  on  the  part  of  the 
British  Government,  is  nearly  a  month  posterior  to 
the  commencement  of  the  evil  by  France.  But  it 
was  not  only  posterior,  it  was  also  less  comprehensive : 
that  of  France  extended  to  all  provisions,  that  of 
Great  Britain  to  certain  kinds  only — corn,  flour, 
and  MEAL. 

The  French  decree,  as  to  the  United  States,  was 
repeatedl}^  suspended  and  revived.  As  to  other  neu- 
tral nations,  it  continued  a  permanent  precedent  to 
sanction  the  practice  of  Great  Britain. 

This  decretal  versatility  is  alone  complete  evidence 
of  want  of  principle.  It  is  the  more  censurable, 
because  it  is  ascertained  that  it  proceeded,  in  part  at 
least,  from  a  corrupt  source.  The  sacred  power  of 
law-making  became  the  minister  and  the  accomplice 
of  private  rapine.  Decrees  exacted  by  the  solemn 
obligations  of  treaty  were  sacrificed  to  sea  rovers— to 
enable  them  to  enjoy  the  prey,  for  the  seizure  of 
which  they  ought  to  have  been  condignly  punished.^ 

The  next  and  most  injurious  of  the  acts  of  Great 
Britain  is  the  order  of  the  6th  of  November,  1793, 
which  instructs  the  commanders  of  ships  of  war  and 
privateers  to  stop,  detain,  and  carry  in  for  adjudica- 

^  The  report  of  the  Secretary  of  State  mentions  (as  was  known  at  the 
time)  that  one  repeal  was  effected  by  the  influence  of  the  owners  of  a 
privateer,  which  had  captured  the  valuable  American  ship  Laurens, 
to  give  effect  to  her  condemnation. 


The  Warning  255 

tion  all  ships,  laden  with  the  produce  of  an}^  French 
colony,  or  carrying  provisions  or  other  supplies  for  the 
use  of  such  colony.  It  was  under  the  cover  of  this 
order  that  were  committed  the  numerous  depreda- 
tions on  our  commerce,  which  were  the  immediate 
cause  of  sending  an  envoy  to  Great  Britain. 

The  terms  of  this  order  were  ambiguous,  warrant- 
ing a  suspicion  that  they  were  designed  to  admit  of  an 
oppressive  interpretation,  and  yet  to  leave  room  for  a 
disavowal  of  it.  Whether  this  was  really  the  case,  or 
whether  the  order  was  in  fact  misconstrued  by  the 
British  officers  and  tribunals  in  the  West  Indies,  it  is 
certain  that  the  British  Government,  almost  as  soon 
as  their  construction  was  known  in  England,  not  only 
disclaimed  it,  but  issued  a  new  order,  dated  the  first 
of  January,  1794,  revoking  that  of  the  sixth  of  No- 
vember, and  expressly  restraining  the  power  to  detain 
and  carry  in  vessels  for  adjudication  to  such  as  were 
laden  with  the  produce  of  a  French  island  going  from 
a  port  in  the  island  to  a  port  in  Europe,  to  such  as 
were  laden  with  the  like  produce  belonging  to  subjects  of 
France  whithersoever  bound,  to  such  as  were  laden  in 
whole  or  in  part  with  naval  or  military  stores  bound  to 
a  French  island. 

This  last  order  obviated  in  a  great  measure  the 
mischief  of  the  former ;  and  though  its  principles  were 
in  some  respect  such  as  we  ought  never  to  recognize, 
yet  were  they  conformable  with  the  practice  of  the 
principal  maritime  powers  in  antecedent  modem 
wars,  especially  of  France  and  Great  Britain. 

These  acts  comprise  the  whole  of  those  on  which 
the  British  spoliations  have  been   founded.     Taken 


256  Alexander  Hamilton 

with  all  the  latitude  of  construction  adopted  by  the 
British  officers  and  courts  in  the  West  Indies,  they 
amount  to  this,  and  to  no  more:  "the  seizure  and 
appropriations  of  our  corn,  flour,  and  meal,  going  to  a 
French  port,  on  the  condition  of  paying  for  them,  the 
seizure  and  confiscation  of  our  vessels  with  their  car- 
goes, when  laden  with  the  produce  of  a  French  colony, 
or  in  the  act  of  carrying  provisions  or  other  supplies 
for  the  use  of  said  colony."  Our  trade  with  France 
herself,  except  in  corn,  flour,  and  meal,  and  in  contra- 
band articles,  has  in  the  worst  of  times  remained 
unmolested,  and  has  even  been  allowed  to  be  carried 
on  directly  from  British  ports. 

Iniquitous  and  oppressive  as  were  the  acts  of 
Great  Britain,  how  very  far  short  do  they  fall  of  the 
more  iniquitous  and  oppressive  decrees  of  France,  as 
these  have  been  construed  and  acted  upon,  not  only 
by  the  colonial  administrations,  but  by  some  of  its 
tribunals  in  Europe!  The  decree  of  the  second  of 
July,  1796,  purports  in  substance,  that  France  will 
treat  the  neutral  powers  as  they  have  permitted  her 
enemies  to  treat  them.  But  under  this  masked 
battery  the  whole  of  our  trade  with  the  enemies  of 
France  has  been  assailed.  The  two  edicts  of  her  pro- 
consuls in  the  West  Indies  '  proclaim  the  capture  of 
all  neutral  vessels  bound  to  or  coming  from  English 
ports,  and  the  uniform  consequence  is  confiscation  of 
vessel  and  cargo.  We  are  now  likewise  officially  in- 
formed that  a  French  consular  tribunal  at  Cadiz  has 
condemned  neutral  vessels  carried  in  there,  on  the 

I  Santhonax  &  Co.,  November  27,  1796.     Victor  Hiijfues,  13th  Plu- 
viose,  5th  year  of  the  Republic. 


The  Warning  257 

same  broad  principle.  The  evil  to  us  has  been  mag- 
nified by  various  aggravations.  Our  vessels  going 
from  one  neutral  port  to  another,  even  our  vessels 
going  from  French  ports,  have  been  the  victims  of  the 
piratical  spirit  which  dictated  those  edicts.  Outrage, 
imprisonment,  fetters,  disease,  and  death,  inflicted  or 
brought  upon  the  commanders  and  crews  of  our  ves- 
sels, cause  the  bitter  cup  of  our  sufferings  to  overflow, 
and  leave  the  imagination  at  a  loss  for  a  parallel  with- 
out seeking  for  it  in  the  ferocious  regions  of  Barbary. 

The  ambiguity  of  the  British  order  of  November 
was  a  just  subject  of  reproach  to  its  authors.  What 
shall  be  said  of  the  perfidious  ambiguity  of  the 
French  decree  of  the  2d  of  July,  1796?  When  re- 
taliation of  the  partial  injuries  which  neutral  nations 
have  suffered  from  the  enemies  of  France  was  an- 
nounced, who  could  have  dreamt  that  a  universal 
war  on  their  trade  was  meditated?  Who  that  has  a 
spark  of  the  American  in  his  soul  can  refuse  his 
utmost  indignation,  as  well  at  the  manner  as  at  the 
matter  of  this  atrocious  proceeding?  Not  only  the 
partisans  of  France,  the  advocates  for  the  honor  of 
republican  government,  but  the  friends  of  human 
nature,  must  desire  that  the  final  explanation  may 
reject,  as  a  criminal  abuse,  the  practice  upon  that 
decree,  and  repair  as  far  as  possible  the  mischiefs 
which  it  has  occasioned. 

But  the  treaty  with  Great  Britain  (still  exclaim  the 
dupes  or  hirelings  of  France),  that  abominable  instru- 
ment, is  the  Pandora's  box  from  which  all  our  misfor- 
tunes issue.  When  that  instrument  was  confirmed, 
who  could  have  expected  anything  better? 

VOL.  VI.  — 17. 


258  Alexander  Hamilton 

Peace,  ye  seduced  or  seducing  babblers!  Had 
Denmark  or  Sweden  any  share  in  making  that  repro- 
bated treaty  ?  Besides  the  refutation  of  your  flimsy 
pretence,  by  the  ill-treatment  in  other  shapes  of  sev- 
eral of  the  neutral  powers  in  Europe — by  the  inf orma- 
'tion  from  Cadiz  of  the  indiscriminate  seizure  and 
condemnation  of  neutral  vessels  going  to  or  coming 
from  English  ports, — do  ye  not  read  in  the  recent 
accounts  from  St.  Bartholomews,  a  Swedish  island, 
that  not  Americans  only,  that  Danes,  that  Swedes, 
that  all  the  neutral  nations  partake  in  the  common 
calamity — alike  the  prey  of  a  devouring  rapacity? 
Will  ye  still  then  insist  on  the  barefaced  imposture 
of  ascribing  to  the  treaty  grievances  which  are  the 
mere  effects  of  a  spirit  of  oppression  and  rapine? 
Read  the  letter  of  Mr.  Skip  with  to  Mr.  Monroe, 
dated  at  Paris,  the  third  of  October,  1794,  prior  to 
the  signature  of  the  treaty  by  Mr.  Jay.  Remember 
that  he  is  an  American  agent,  acting  under  the  eye 
of  an  American  minister,  and  that  both  the  minister 
and  the  agent  are  distinguished  by  a  partiality  for 
France,  which  exempts  them  from  the  suspicion  of 
exaggerating  her  misdeeds.  What  does  that  letter 
tell  us  ?  Why,  in  express  terms,  that  "  innumerable 
embarrassments  and  difficulties  had  for  a  long  time 
oppressed  her  commerce  in  different  ports  of  the  re- 
public ;  that  if  the  French  Government  did  not  soon 
remedy  the  incessant  abuses  and  vexations  practised 
daily  upon  our  merchants,  the  trade  of  the  United  States 
with  France  must  cease."  Hence  may  we  learn, 
that  long  before  our  treaty  with  Great  Britain,  the 
vexations  of  our  trade  in  the  ports  of  France  were 


The  Stand  259 

so  extreme  as  to  have  become  intolerable;  that  "  the 
indiscriminate  capture  of  our  vessels  at  sea  by  the 
vessels  of  war  of  the  republic, "  '  formed  only  one  class 
of  the  injuries  which  our  commerce  has  sustained:  in 
a  word,  that  the  predatory  system  of  France  existed 
before  the  treaty,  and  has  only  of  late  acquired 
greater  activity  from  the  cravings  of  an  exhausted 
treasury. 

The  man  who,  after  this  mass  of  evidence,  shall  be 
the  apologist  of  France,  and  the  calumniator  of  his 
own  government,  is  not  an  American.  The  choice 
for  him  lies  between  being  deemed  a  fool,  a  madman, 
or  a  traitor. 


THE    STAND  » 
(From  the  New  York  Commercial  Advertiser.) 

I 

March  ro,  1798. 

The  enlightened  friends  of  America  never  saw 
greater  occasion  of  disquietude  than  at  the  present 
juncture.  Our  nation,  through  its  official  organs,  has 
been  treatied  with  studied  contempt  and  systematic 
insult:  essential  rights  of  the  country  are  perse ver- 
ingly  violated,  and  its  independence  and  liberty 
eventually  threatened  by  the  most  flagitious,  des- 
potic, and  vindictive  government  that  ever  disgraced 
the  annals  of  mankind;   by  a  government  marching 

'  This  is  also  a  passage  verbatim  from  Mr.  Skipwith's  letter — and 
he  produces  a  long  list  of  cases  to  support  his  assertions. 

'  We  were  now  on  the  verge  of  the  X.  Y.  Z.  letters  and  an  open  rup- 
ture with  France.  To  arouse  the  people  at  this  crisis  to  their  true 
policy  towards  the  French,  Hamilton  published  The  Stand. 


26o  Alexander  Hamilton 

with  hasty  and  colossal  strides  to  universal  empire, 
and  in  the  execution  of  this  hideous  project,  wielding 
with  absolute  authority  the  whole  physical  force  of 
the  most  enthralled  but  most  powerful  nation  on 
earth.  In  a  situation  like  this,  how  great  is  the 
cause  to  lament,  how  afflicting  to  every  heart  alive  to 
the  honor  and  interests  of  its  country  to  observe,  that 
distracted  and  inefficient  councils,  that  a  palsied  and 
unconscious  state  of  the  public  mind,  afford  too  little 
assurance  of  measures  adequate  either  to  the  urgency 
of  the  evils  which  are  felt,  or  to  the  magnitude  of  the 
dangers  which  are  in  prospect. 

When  Great  Britain  attempted  to  wrest  from  us 
those  rights,  without  which  we  must  have  descended 
from  the  rank  of  freemen,  a  keen  and  strong  sense  of 
injury  and  danger  ran  with  electric  swiftness  through 
the  breasts  of  our  citizens.  The  mass  and  weight 
of  talents,  property,  and  character  hastened  to  con- 
federate in  the  public  cause.  The  great  body  of  our 
community  everywhere  burned  with  a  holy  zeal  to 
defend  it,  and  were  eager  to  make  sacrifices  on  the 
altar  of  their  country. 

If  the  nation  with  which  we  were  called  to  contend 
was  then  the  preponderating  power  of  Europe ;  if  by 
her  great  wealth  and  the  success  of  her  arms  she  was 
in  a  condition  to  bias  or  to  awe  the  cabinets  of 
princes;  if  her  fleets  covered  and  domineered  over 
the  ocean,  facilitating  depredation  and  invasion;  if 
the  penalties  of  rebellion  hung  over  an  unsuccessful 
contest ;  if  America  was  yet  in  the  cradle  of  her  po- 
litical existence;  if  her  population  little  exceeded 
two  millions ;   if  she  was  without  government,  with- 


The  Stand  261 

out  fleets  or  armies,  arsenals  or  magazines,  without 
miHtary  knowledge ;  still  her  citizens  had  a  just  and 
elevated  sense  of  her  rights ;  were  thoroughly  awake 
to  the  violence  and  injustice  of  the  attack  upon  them ; 
saw  the  conduct  of  her  adversary  without  apology 
or  extenuation;  and  under  the  impulse  of  these  im- 
pressions and  views,  determined,  with  little  short  of 
unanimity,  to  brave  every  hazard  in  her  defence. 

This  magnanimous  spirit  was  the  sure  pledge  that 
all  the  energies  of  the  country  would  be  exerted  to 
bring  all  its  resources  into  action;  that  whatever 
was  possible  would  be  done  towards  effectual  op- 
position; and  this,  combined  with  the  immense  ad- 
vantage of  distance,  warranted  the  expectation  of 
ultimate  success.  The  event  justified  the  expecta- 
tion and  rewarded  the  glorious  spirit  from  which  it 
was  derived. 

Far  different  is  the  picture  of  our  present  situa- 
tion! The  five  tyrants  of  France,  after  binding  in 
chains  their  own  countrymen,  after  prostrating  sur- 
rounding nations,  and  vanquishing  all  external  re- 
sistance to  the  revolutionary  despotism  at  home, 
without  the  shadow  of  necessity,  with  no  discernible 
motive,  other  than  to  confirm  their  usurpation  and 
extend  the  sphere  of  their  domination  abroad, — 
these  implacable  tyrants  obstinately  and  remorse- 
lessly persist  in  prolonging  the  calamities  of  mankind, 
and  seem  resolved,  as  far  as  they  can,  to  multiply 
and  perpetuate  them.  Acting  upon  the  pretension 
to  universal  empire,  they  have  at  length  in  fact, 
though  not  in  name,  decreed  war  against  all  na- 
tions not  in  league  with  themselves;   and  towards 


262  Alexander  Hamilton 

this  country  in  particular,  they  add  to  a  long  train  of 
unprovoked  aggressions  and  affronts  the  insupport- 
able outrage  of  refusing  to  receive  the  extraordinary 
ambassadors  whom  we  sent  to  endeavor  to  appease 
and  conciliate.  Thus  have  they,  in  regard  to  us, 
filled  up  the  measure  of  national  insult  and  humilia- 
tion. 'T  is  not  in  their  power,  unless  we  are  accom- 
plices in  the  design,  to  sink  us  lower.  'T  is  only  in 
our  own  power  to  do  this  by  an  abject  submission  to 
their  will. 

But  though  a  knowledge  of  the  true  character  of 
the  citizens  of  this  country  will  not  permit  it  to  be 
suspected  that  a  majority  either  in  our  public  coun- 
cils or  in  the  community  can  be  so  degraded  or  in- 
fatuated; yet  to  the  firm  and  independent  lover  of 
his  country,  there  are  appearances  at  once  mortify- 
ing and  alarming. 

Among  those  who  divide  our  legislative  councils, 
we  perceive  hitherto,  on  the  one  side,  imremitting 
efforts  to  justify  or  excuse  the  despots  of  France,  to 
vilify  and  discredit  our  own  government,  of  course 
to  destroy  its  necessary  vigor,  and  to  distract  the 
opinion  and  to  damp  the  zeal  of  our  citizens, — what 
is  worse,  to  divert  their  affections  from  their  own  to 
a  foreign  coimtry;  on  the  other  side,  we  have  as  yet 
seen  neither  expanded  views  of  our  situation,  nor 
measures  at  all  proportioned  to  the  seriousness  and 
extent  of  the  danger.  While  our  independence  is 
menaced,  little  more  is  heard  than  of  guarding  our 
trade,  and  this  too  in  very  feeble  and  tremulous 
accents. 

In  the  community,  though  in  a  soimder  state  than 


The  Stand  263 

its  representatives,  we  discover  the  vestiges  of  the 
same  divisions  which  enervate  our  councils.  A  few 
— happily,  a  contemptible  few, — prostituted  to  a 
foreign  enemy,  seem  willing  that  their  country  should 
become  a  province  to  France.  Some  of  these  dare 
even  to  insinuate  the  treasonable  and  parricidal  sen- 
timent, that  in  case  of  invasion  they  would  join  the 
standard  of  France.  Another  and  a  more  consider- 
able part  are  weak  enough  to  appear  disposed  to 
sacrifice  our  commerce,  to  endure  every  indignity, 
and  even  to  become  tributary,  rather  than  to  en- 
coimter  war  or  to  increase  the  chances  of  it;  as  if  a 
nation  could  preserve  any  rights — could  even  retain 
its  freedom, — which  should  conduct  itself  on  the 
principle  of  passive  obedience  to  injury  and  outrage; 
as  if  the  debasement  of  the  public  mind  did  not  in- 
clude the  debasement  of  the  individual  mind,  and 
the  dereliction  of  whatever  adorns  or  exalts  human 
nature;  as  if  there  could  be  any  security  in  com- 
pounding with  tyranny  and  injustice  by  degrading 
compliances;  as  if  submission  to  the  existing  viola- 
tions of  our  sovereignty  would  not  invite  still  greater, 
and  whet  the  appetite  to  devour  us  by  the  allure- 
ment of  an  unresisting  prey ;  as  if  war  was  ever  to  be 
averted  by  betraying  unequivocally  a  pusillanimous 
dread  of  it  as  the  greatest  of  all  evils. 

This  country  has  doubtless  powerful  motives  to 
cultivate  peace.  It  is  its  policy,  for  the  sake  of  this 
object,  to  go  a  great  way  in  yielding  secondary  inter- 
ests, and  to  meet  injury  with  patience,  as  long  as  it 
could  be  done  without  the  manifest  abandonment  of 
essential  rights — without  absolute  dishonor.     But  to 


264  Alexander  Hamilton 

do  more  than  this  is  suicide  in  any  people  who  have 
the  least  chance  of  contending  with  effect.  The 
conduct  of  our  government  has  corresponded  with 
the  cogent  inducements  to  a  pacific  system.  Toward 
Great  Britain  it  displayed  forbearance — toward 
France  it  hath  shown  himiility.  In  the  case  of 
Great  Britain  its  moderation  was  attended  with 
success.  But  the  inexorable  arrogance  and  rapacity 
of  the  oppressors  of  imhappy  France  bar  all  the 
avenues  to  reconciliation  as  well  as  to  redress,  accu- 
miilating  upon  us  injury  and  insult,  till  there  is  no 
choice  left  but  between  resistance  and  infamy.  My 
coimtrymen,  can  5^e  hesitate  which  to  prefer?  Can 
ye  consent  to  taste  the  brutalizing  cup  of  disgrace; 
to  wear  the  livery  of  foreign  masters;  to  put  on  the 
hateful  fetters  of  foreign  bondage?  Will  it  make 
any  difference  to  you,  that  the  badge  of  your  servi- 
tude is  a  cap  rather  than  an  epaulet?  Will  tyranny 
be  less  odious  because  five  instead  of  one  inflict  the 
rod?  What  is  there  to  deter  you  from  the  manful 
vindication  of  your  rights  and  your  honor? 

With  an  immense  ocean  rolling  between  the 
United  States  and  France;  with  ample  materials 
for  ship-building,  and  a  body  of  hardy  seamen  more 
numerous  and  more  expert  than  France  can  boast; 
with  a  population  exceeding  five  milHons,  spread 
over  a  wide  extent  of  coimtry,  offering  no  one  point, 
the  seizure  of  which,  as  of  the  great  capitals  of  Eu- 
rope, might  decide  the  issue;  with  a  soil  liberal  of 
all  the  productions  that  give  strength  and  resource; 
with  the  rudiments  of  the  most  essential  manufac- 
tures, capable  of  being  developed  in  proportion  to 


The  Stand  265 

our  want;  with  a  numerous  and,  in  many  quarters, 
well-appointed  militia;  with  respectable  revenues 
and  a  flourishing  credit ;  with  many  of  the  principal 
sources  of  taxation  yet  untouched;  with  consider- 
able arsenals,  and  the  means  of  extending  them; 
with  experienced  officers  ready  to  form  an  army 
under  the  command  of  the  same  illustrious  chief  who 
before  led  them  to  victory  and  glory,  and  who,  if  the 
occasion  should  require  it,  could  not  hesitate  to  obey 
the  summons  of  his  country; — w^hat  a  striking  and 
encouraging  contrast  does  this  situation  in  many 
respects  present,  to  that  in  which  we  defied  the 
thimder  of  Britain!  What  is  there  in  it  to  excuse 
or  palliate  the  cowardice  and  baseness  of  a  tame 
surrender  of  our  rights  to  France  ? 

The  question  is  imnecessary .  The  people  of  Amer- 
ica are  neither  idiots  nor  dastards.  The}'  did  not 
break  one  yoke  to  put  on  another.  Though  a  por- 
tion of  them  have  been  hitherto  misled ;  yet  not  even 
these,  still  less  the  great  body  of  the  nation,  can  be 
long  unaware  of  the  true  situation,  or  blind  to  the 
treacherous  arts  by  which  they  are  attempted  to  be 
hoodwinked.  The  unfaithful  and  guilty  leaders  of 
a  foreign  faction,  immasked  in  all  their  intrinsic  de- 
formity, must  quickly  shrink  from  the  scene  appalled 
and  confounded.  The  virtuous  whom  they  have  led 
astray  will  renounce  their  exotic  standard.  Honest 
men  of  all  parties  will  unite  to  maintain  and  defend 
the  honor  and  the  sovereignty  of  their  country. 

The  crisis  demands  it.  'T  is  folly  to  dissemble. 
The  despots  of  France  are  waging  war  against  us. 
Intoxicated  with  success  and  the  inordinate  love  of 


266  Alexander  Hamilton 

power,  they  virtually  threaten  our  independence. 
All  amicable  means  have  in  vain  been  tried  towards 
accommodation.  The  problem  now  to  be  solved  is 
whether  we  will  maintain  or  surrender  our  sover- 
eignty. To  maintain  it  with  firmness  is  the  most 
sacred  of  duties,  the  most  glorious  of  tasks.  The 
happiness  of  our  country,  the  honor  of  the  American 
name,  demands  it;  the  genius  of  independence  ex- 
horts to  it;  the  secret  mourning  voice  of  oppressed 
millions  in  the  very  country  whose  despots  menace 
us,  admonish  to  it  by  their  suffering  example;  the 
offended  dignity  of  man  commands  us  not  to  be 
accessory  to  its  further  degradation;  reverence  to 
the  Supreme  Governor  of  the  universe  enjoins  us 
not  to  bow  the  knee  to  the  modem  Titans  '  who 
erect  their  impious  crests  against  him  and  vainly  im- 
agine they  can  subvert  his  eternal  throne. 

But  't  is  not  enough  to  resist.  'T  is  requisite  to 
resist  with  energy.  That  will  be  a  narrow  view  of 
our  situation  which  does  not  contemplate  that  we 
may  be  called,  at  our  very  doors,  to  defend  our  inde- 
pendence and  liberty,  and  which  does  not  provide 
against  it  by  bringing  into  activity  and  completely 
organizing  all  the  resources  of  our  country.  A  re- 
spectable naval  force  ought  to  protect  our  commerce, 
and  a  respectable  army  ought  both  to  diminish  the 
temptation  to  invasion,  by  lessening  the  apparent 
chance  of  success,  and  to  guarantee  us  not  only 
against  the  signal  success  of  such  an  attempt,  but 
against  the  serious  though  partial  calamities  which 
in  that  case  would  certainly  await  us  if  we  have  to 

*  A  race  of  giants  fabled  of  old  to  have  made  war  on  heaven. 


The  Stand  267 

rely  on  militia  alone  against  the  enterprises  of  vet- 
eran troops,  drenched  in  blood  and  slaughter,  and 
led  by  a  skilful  and  daring  chief. 

Titus  Manlius. 


II 

April  4,  1798. 

The  description  of  vice,  by  a  celebrated  poet,  may 
aptly  be  applied  to  the  Revolutionary  Government 
of  France.     It  is 

"  A  monster  of  such  horrid  mien 
As  to  be  hated  needs  but  to  be  seen." 

Unfortunately,  however,  for  mankind,  a  species  of 
moral  pestilence  has  so  far  disordered  the  mental 
eye  of  a  considerable  portion  of  it,  as  to  prevent  a 
distinct  view  of  the  deformities  of  this  prodigy  of 
human  wickedness  and  folly.  It  is  the  misfortune 
of  this  country  in  particular,  that  too  many  among 
its  citizens  have  seen  the  monster,  in  all  its  dread- 
ful transformations,  with  complacency  or  toleration. 
Nor  is  it  among  the  least  of  the  contradictions  of 
the  human  mind,  that  a  religious,  moral,  and  sober 
people  should  have  regarded  with  indulgence  so 
frightful  a  volcano  of  atheism,  depravity,  and  ab- 
surdity; that  a  gentle  and  humane  people  should 
have  viewed  without  detestation,  so  hateful  an  in- 
strument of  cruelty  and  bloodshed;  that  a  people 
having  an  enlightened  and  ardent  attachment  to 
genuine  liberty,  should  have  contemplated  without 
horror  so  tremendous  an  engine  of  despotism  and 
slavery.     The  film  indeed  begins  to  be  removed,  but 


268  Alexander  Hamilton 

the  vision  of  many  of  those  who  have  been  under  its 
influence  is  not  yet  restored  to  the  necessary  energy 
or  clearness. 

It  is  of  the  last  importance  to  our  national  safety 
and  welfare,  that  the  remaining  obscurity  should 
be  speedily  dispelled.  Till  this  shall  be  the  case,  we 
shall  stand  on  the  brink  of  a  precipice. 

To  exhibit  the  hydra  in  all  its  horrible  pre-em- 
inence of  guilt  and  mischief,  would  require  volumes. 
Slight  sketches,  chiefly  to  portray  its  character  in 
reference  to  other  nations,  are  all  that  will  comport 
with  the  plan  of  these  papers. 

In  retracing  the  progress  of  a  war  which  has  im- 
mersed Europe  in  blood  and  calamity,  it  is  an  error 
as  common  as  it  is  strange  to  acquit  France  of  re- 
sponsibility, and  throw  the  whole  blame  upon  her 
adversaries.  This  is  a  principal  source  of  the  indul- 
gence which  is  shown  to  the  extravagances  and  enor- 
mities of  her  revolution.  And  yet  the  plainest  facts 
demonstrate  that  the  reverse  of  this  supposition  is 
far  more  agreeable  to  truth.  It  required  all  the  bold 
imposing  pretences  of  the  demagogues  of  France, 
all  the  docile  partiality  of  a  warm  admiration  for  her 
revolution,  to  have  secured  a  moment's  success  to  so 
glaring  a  deception. 

The  origin  of  the  war  is  usually  charged  to  the 
treaty  of  Pilnitz  and  to  the  counter-revolutionary 
projects  of  the  parties  to  it. 

To  this  day  we  are  without  authentic  and  accurate 
evidence  of  the  nature  of  that  treaty.  Taking  its 
existence  for  granted,  there  is  not  the  least  proof  that 
it   comprehended   any  other  powers   than  Austria, 


The  Stand  269 

Prussia,  and  Sardinia.  Beyond  these  therefore  un- 
less suspicion  be  substituted  for  fact,  it  could  not 
afford  even  a  pretext  for  hostility.  It  is  likewise 
certain  that,  after  the  date  assigned  to  the  treaty  of 
Pilnitz,  the  emperor,  who  was  the  reputed  head  of 
the  confederacy,  gave  strong  proof  of  the  renuncia- 
tion of  its  object,  if  hostile  to  the  revolution,  by  sig- 
nifying, through  his  ministers,  to  all  the  foreign 
courts,  his  determination  to  acquiesce  in  the  con- 
stitution of  1792,  accepted  by  Louis  the  XVI. 

The  diplomatic  correspondence  between  France 
and  Austria,  which  preceded  the  rupture,  evinces 
that  the  treaty  of  Pilnitz  was  not  the  cause  of  the 
war,  for  it  is  not  even  mentioned.  The  immediate, 
ostensible  cause,  as  it  there  appears,  was  the  refusal 
of  Austria  to  disarm  in  compliance  with  the  peremp- 
tory demand  of  France:  a  demand  to  which  this 
apparently  very  reasonable  reply  was  given — that 
France  had  previously  armed  to  a  greater  extent ; 
and  that  Austria  could  not  safely  reduce  her  force 
while  France  remained  in  so  disturbed  and  inflamed 
a  state  as  to  leave  her  neighbors  every  moment  ex- 
posed to  the  enterprises  of  her  revolutionary  fervor. 
There  is  no  absolute  criterion  by  which  it  can  be 
pronounced  whether  this  reply  was  merely  a  pretext 
or  the  dictate  of  a  serious  apprehension.  But  it  is 
certain  that  the  correspondence  discovers  great  ap- 
pearance of  moderation  and  candor,  on  the  part  of 
the  imperial  cabinet,  and  it  is  not  to  be  denied,  that 
the  state  of  effervescence  of  the  French  nation  at 
this  juncture  furnished  real  cause  of  alarm  to  the 
neighboring  governments. 


270  Alexander  Hamilton 

It  is  then,  at  best,  problematical,  whether  France 
in  declaring  war,  as  she  did  at  the  same  time  against 
Austria  and  Prussia,  was  actuated  by  the  conviction 
that  it  was  necessary  to  anticipate  and  disconcert 
the  imf riendly  views  of  those  powers ;  or  whether  the 
war,  as  has  been  suggested  with  great  probability, 
was  sought  by  the  republican  party  as  a  means  of 
embarrassing  the  executive  government,  and  paving 
the  way  for  the  overthrow  of  royalty.  Two  things 
well  estabhshed  are  instructive  on  this  point.  The 
one,  that  the  king  was  driven  against  his  wish,  by 
a  ministry  forced  upon  him  by  the  popular  party, 
to  propose  the  declaration  of  war,  which  he  consid- 
ered as  the  tomb  of  his  family ;  the  other,  that  Bris- 
sot,  the  head  of  the  then  prevailing  faction,  some 
time  afterwards  exultingly  boasted  that,  "but  for 
this  war,  the  revolution  of  the  tenth  of  August  would 
never  have  taken  place — that,  but  for  this  war, 
France  would  never  have  been  a  republic." 

Admitting  nevertheless  that  the  true  source  of  the 
war  with  Austria  and  Prussia  is  enveloped  in  some 
obscurity,  there  is  none  as  to  the  wars  in  which 
France  became  subsequently  engaged.  It  is  clear  as 
to  them  that  she  was  the  original  aggressor. 

It  appeared  from  contemporary  testimony  that  one 
of  the  first  acts  of  that  assembly  which  dethroned  the 
king  was,  in  a  paroxysm  of  revolutionary  frenzy,  to 
declare  itself  "A  Committee  of  Insurrection  of  the 
whole  human  race,  for  the  purpose  of  overturning  all 
existing  government . ' '  This  extravagant  declaration 
surpasses  any  thing  to  be  found  in  the  ample  record 
of  human  madness.     It  amounted  to  an  act  of  hos- 


The  Stand  271 

tility  against  mankind.  The  republic  of  America 
no  less  than  the  despotism  of  Turkey  was  included  in 
the  anathema.  It  breathed  that  wild  and  excessive 
spirit  of  fanaticism  which  would  scruple  no  means  of 
establishing  its  favorite  tenets;  and  which,  in  its 
avowed  object,  threatening  the  disorganization  of  all 
governments,  warranted  a  universal  combination  to 
destroy  the  monstrous  system  of  which  it  was  the 
soul. 

The  decrees  of  the  1 9th  of  November  and  the  1 5th 
of  December,  1792,  were  modifications  of  the  same 
spirit.  The  first  offered  fraternity  and  assistance  to 
every  people  who  should  wish  to  recover  their  liberty, 
and  charged  the  executive  power  to  send  orders  to 
their  generals  to  give  that  assistance,  and  to  defend 
those  citizens  who  had  been  or  might  be  vexed  for  the 
cause  of  liberty. 

The  last  declared  that  the  French  nation  would 
treat  as  enemies  any  people  who,  refusing  or  renounc- 
ing liberty  and  equality,  were  desirous  of  preserving, 
recalling,  or  entering  into  accommodation  with  their 
prince  and  privileged  castes. 

The  first  was  a  general  signal  to  insurrection  and 
revolt.  It  was  an  invitation  to  the  seditious  of  every 
country,  in  pursuit  of  chimerical  schemes  of  more  per- 
fect liberty,  to  conspire  under  the  patronage  of  France 
against  the  established  government,  however  free. 
To  assist  a  people  in  a  reasonable  and  virtuous  strug- 
gle for  liberty,  already  begun,  is  both  justifiable  and 
laudable;  but  to  incite  to  revolution  everywhere 
by  indiscriminate  offers  of  assistance  beforehand,  is 
to  invade  and  endanger  the  foundation  of   social 


272  Alexander  Hamilton 

tranquillity.  There  is  no  term  of  reproach  or  execra- 
tion too  strong  for  so  flagitious  an  attempt. 

The  last  of  the  two  decrees  is  not  merely  in  spirit — 
it  is  in  terms  equivalent  to  a  manifesto  of  war  against 
every  nation  having  a  prince  or  nobility.  It  declares 
explicitly  and  formally  that  the  French  nation  will 
treat  as  enemies  every  people  who  may  desire  to  pre- 
serve or  restore  a  government  of  that  character. 

It  is  impossible  not  to  feel  the  utmost  indignation 
against  so  presumptuous  and  so  odious  a  measure. 
It  was  not  only  to  scatter  the  embers  of  a  general 
conflagration  in  Europe ;  it  was  to  interfere  coercively 
in  the  interior  arrangements  of  other  nations ;  it  was 
to  dictate  to  them,  under  the  penalty  of  the  venge- 
ance of  France,  what  form  of  government  they 
should  live  under;  it  was  to  forbid  them  to  pursue 
their  political  happiness  in  their  own  way ;  it  was  to 
set  up  the  worst  of  all  despotisms,  a  despotism  over 
opinion,  not  against  one  nation,  but  against  almost 
all  nations.  With  what  propriety  is  the  interference 
of  the  powers  ultimately  coalesced  against  France,  in 
her  interior  arrangements,  imputed  to  them  as  an  im- 
pardonable  crime,  when  her  leaders  had  given  so  ter- 
rible an  example,  and  had  provoked  retaliation  as  a 
means  of  self-preservation  ? ' 

These  decrees  preceded  the  transactions  which  im- 

^  If  it  be  true,  as  pretended,  that  Austria  and  Prussia  first  interfered 
in  this  way  with  France,  it  was  no  plea  for  her  to  retaliate  on  all  the 
rest  of  Europe.  Great  Britain  in  particvilar,  as  far  as  appears,  had  ob- 
served a  fair  neutrality.  Yet  the  principle  of  the  French  decree  was 
emphatically  pointed  against  her,  by  the  open  reception  of  deputations 
of  malcontents,  and  public  declarations  to  them,  on  behalf  of  the  French 
Government,  avowing  the  desire  of  seeing  all  thrones  overturned,  of 
a  national  convention,  and  a  republican  revolution  in  England. 


The  Stand  273 

mediately  led  to  a  rupture  between  France  and  the 
other  powers,  Austria  and  Prussia  excepted. 

It  is  idle  to  pretend,  that  they  did  not  furnish  to 
those  powers  just  cause  of  war.  There  is  no  rule  of 
pubhc  law  better  established,  or  on  better  grounds, 
than  that  when  one  nation  unequivocally  avows 
maxims  of  conduct  dangerous  to  the  security  and 
tranquillity  of  others,  they  have  a  right  to  attack  her 
and  to  endeavor  to  disable  her  from  carrying  her 
schemes  into  effect.  They  are  not  bound  to  wait  till 
inimical  designs  are  matured  for  action,  when  it  may 
be  too  late  to  defeat  them. 

How  far  it  may  have  been  wise  in  a  particular 
government  to  have  taken  up  the  gauntlet,  or,  if  in 
its  option,  to  have  left  France  to  the  fermentations  of 
the  pernicious  principles  by  which  its  leaders  were 
actuated,  is  a  question  of  mere  expediency,  distinct 
from  the  right.  It  is  also  a  complicated  and  difficult 
question,  one  which  able  and  upright  men  might  de- 
cide different  ways.  But  the  right  is  still  indisput- 
able. The  moment  the  convention  vomited  forth 
these  venomous  decrees,  all  the  governments  threat- 
ened were  justifiable  in  making  war  upon  France. 

Neither  were  they  bound  to  be  satisfied  with  after- 
explanations  or  qualifications  of  the  principles  which 
had  been  declared.  They  had  a  right  to  judge  con- 
scientiously whether  reliance  could  be  placed  on  any 
pretended  change  of  system,  and  to  act  accordingly. 
And  while  the  power  of  France  remained  in  the  same 
men,  who  had  discovered  such  hostile  views,  and 
while  the  effervescence  of  the  public  mind  continued 
at  its  height,  there   could  not  have  been,  in  the 

VOL.  VI.— 18 


2  74  Alexander  Hamilton 

nature  of  things,  any  security  in  assurances  of  greater 
moderation.  Fanaticism  is  a  spirit  equally  fraud- 
ulent and  intractable.  Fanatics  may  dissemble  the 
better  to  effect  their  aims,  but  they  seldom  suddenly 
reform.  No  faith  is  due  to  the  reformation  which 
they  may  effect,  unless  it  has  been  the  work  of  time 
and  experience. 

But  whether  a  wrong  or  right  election,  in  point  of 
expediency,  may  have  been  made  by  all  or  any  of  the 
powers  which,  after  the  passing  of  those  decrees,  be- 
came engaged  in  hostility  with  France,  it  is  not  the 
less  true,  that  her  government  was  the  first  aggressor, 
and  is  primarily  chargeable  with  the  evils  which  have 
followed.  This  conclusion  is  greatly  aided  by  the 
striking  fact,  that  it  was  France  which  declared  war, 
not  only  against  Austria  and  Prussia,  but  against 
England,  Spain,  Sardinia,  and  Holland. 

Two  very  important  inferences  result  from  the  facts 
which  have  been  presented :  one,  that  in  blowing  up 
the  dreadful  flame  which  has  overwhelmed  Europe  in 
misfortune,  France  is  the  party  principally  culpable; 
the  other,  that  the  prominent  original  feature  of  her 
revolution  is  the  spirit  of  proselytism,  or  the  desire  of 
new  modelling  the  political  institutions  of  the  rest 
of  the  world  according  to  her  standard.  The  course 
of  the  revolution  also  demonstrates  that,  whatever 
change  of  system  may  have  been  at  any  time  pre- 
tended, or  however  the  system  may  in  particular 
instances  have  yielded  to  a  temporary  policy,  it 
has  continued  in  the  main  to  govern  the  conduct 
of  the  parties  who  have  successively  triumphed  and 
tyrannized.  Titus  Manlius. 


The  Stand  275 


III 

April  7,  1798. 


In  reviewing  the  disgusting  spectacle  of  the  French 
Revolution,  it  is  difficult  to  avert  the  eye  entirely 
from  those  features  of  it  which  betray  a  plan  to  dis- 
organize the  human  mind  itself,  as  well  as  to  under- 
mine the  venerable  pillars  that  support  the  edifice  of 
civilized  society.  The  attempt  by  the  rulers  of  a 
nation  to  destroy  all  religious  opinion,  and  to  per- 
vert a  whole  nation  to  atheism,  is  a  phenomenon  of 
profligacy  reserved  to  consummate  the  infamy  of  the 
unprincipled  reformers  of  France.  The  proofs  of  this 
terrible  design  are  numerous  and  convincing. 

The  animosity  to  the  Christian  system  is  demon- 
strated by  the  single  fact  of  the  ridiculous  and  im- 
politic establishm.ent  of  the  decades,  with  the  evident 
object  of  supplanting  the  Christian  Sabbath.  The 
inscriptions  by  public  authority  on  the  tombs  of  the 
deceased,  affirming  death  to  be  an  eternal  sleep,  wit- 
ness the  desire  to  discredit  the  belief  of  the  immor- 
tality of  the  soul.  The  open  profession  of  atheism  in 
the  convention,'  received  with  acclamations;  the 
honorable  mention  on  its  journals  of  a  book  profess- 
ing to  prove  the  nothingness  of  all  religion  ' ;  the 
institution  of  a  festival  to  offer  public  worship  to  a 
courtesan  decorated  with  the  pompous  title  of  "  God- 
dess of  Reason";  the  congratulatory  reception  of 
impious  children  appearing  in  the  hall  of  the  conven- 
tion to  lisp  blasphemy  against  the  King  of  kings,  are 
among  the  dreadful  proofs  of  a  conspiracy  to  estab- 

'  By  Dupont,  Danton,  etc. 

2  Written  and  presented  by  Anacharsis  Clootz,  calling  himself  oratof 
of  the  human  race. 


276  Alexander  Hamilton 

lish  atheism  on  the  ruins  of  Christianity, — to  deprive 
mankind  of  its  best  consolations  and  most  animating 
hopes,  and  to  make  a  gloomy  desert  of  the  universe. 

Latterly,  the  indications  of  this  plan  are  not  so  fre- 
quent as  they  were,  but  from  time  to  time  something 
still  escapes  which  discovers  that  it  is  not  renounced. 
The  late  address  of  Buonaparte  to  the  Directory  is  an 
example.  That  unequalled  conqueror,  from  whom  it 
is  painful  to  detract,  in  whom  one  would  wish  to  find 
virtues  worthy  of  his  shining  talents,  profanely  unites 
religion  (not  superstition)  with  royalty  and  the  feudal 
system  as  the  scourges  of  Europe  for  centuries  past. 
The  decades  likewise  remain  the  catapuUa  which  are 
to  batter  down  Christianity. 

Equal  pains  have  been  taken  to  deprave  the  morals 
as  to  extinguish  the  religion  of  the  country,  if  indeed 
morality  in  a  community  can  be  separated  from 
religion.  It  is  among  the  singular  and  fantastic 
vagaries  of  the  French  Revolution,  that  while  the 
Duke  of  Brunswick  was  marching  to  Paris  a  new  law 
of  divorce  was  passed,  which  makes  it  as  easy  for  a 
husband  to  get  rid  of  his  wife,  and  a  wife  of  her  hus- 
band, as  to  discard  a  worn-out  habit.'  To  complete 
the  dissolution  of  those  ties,  which  are  the  chief  links 
of  domestic  and  ultimately  of  social  attachment,  the 
journals  of  the  convention  record  with  guilty  ap- 
plause the  accusations  preferred  by  children  against 
their  parents. 

It  is  not  necessary  to  heighten  the  picture  by 

^  This  law,  it  was  understood,  had  been  lately  modified  in  conse- 
quence of  its  manifestly  pernicious  tendency:  but  upon  a  plan  which, 
according  to  the  opinions  of  the  best  men  in  the  two  coimcils  lately 
banished,  would  leave  the  evil  in  full  force. 


The  Stand  277 

sketching  the  horrid  group  of  proscriptions  and  mur- 
ders which  have  made  France  a  den  of  pillage  and 
slaughter;  blackening  with  eternal  opprobrium  the 
very  name  of  man. 

The  pious  and  moral  weep  over  these  scenes  as  a 
sepulchre  destined  to  entomb  all  they  revere  and  es- 
teem. The  politician  who  loves  liberty,  sees  them 
with  regret  as  a  gulf  that  may  swallow  up  the  liberty 
to  which  he  is  devoted.  He  knows  that  moraHty 
overthrown  (and  morality  must  fall  with  religion), 
the  terrors  of  despotism  can  alone  curb  the  impetuous 
passions  of  man,  and  confine  him  within  the  bounds 
of  social  duty. 

But  let  us  return  to  the  conduct  of  revolutionary 
France  towards  other  nations,  as  more  immediately 
within  our  purpose. 

It  has  been  seen  that  she  commenced  her  career 
as  the  champion  of  universal  liberty;  and  proclaim- 
ing destruction  to  the  governments  which  she  was 
pleased  to  denominate  despotic,  made  a  tender  of 
fraternity  and  assistance  to  the  nations  whom  they 
oppressed.  She  at  the  same  time  disclaimed  con- 
quest and  aggrandizement. 

But  it  has  since  clearly  appeared  that  at  the  very 
moment  she  was  making  these  professions,  and  while 
her  diplomatic  agents  were  hypocritically  amusing 
foreign  courts  '  with  conciliatory  explanations  and 
promises  of  moderation,  she  was  exerting  every 
faculty,  by  force  and  fraud,  to  accomplish  the  very 
conquest  and  aggrandizement  which  she  insidiously 
disavowed.     The  people  of   Belgium,   ensnared  by 

'  England  among  the  rest. 


278  Alexander  Hamilton 

fair  pretences,  believed  that  in  abandoning  the  de- 
fence of  their  country  and  the  cause  of  their  ancient 
sovereign,  they  acquired  a  title  to  enjoy  liberty  under 
a   government   of   their   own   choice,    protected  by 
France.     Contrary  to  the  hopes  which  were  inspired 
— contrary  to  the  known  will  of  a  large  majority  of 
that    people — contrary    to    all   their   religious    and 
national  prejudices,  they  have  been  compelled  to 
become  departments  of  France.     And  their  violated 
temples  have  afforded  a  rich  plunder  to  aliment  fur- 
ther conquest  and  oppression.     The  Dutch,  seduced 
by  the  same  arts  to  facilitate  rather  than  obstruct 
the  entrance  of  a  French  army  into  their  coimtry, 
thought  they  were  only  getting  rid  of  their  stadt- 
holder  and  nobles,  and  were  to  retain  their  territory 
and  their  wealth,  secured  by  such  a  civil  establish- 
ment as  they  should  freely  choose.     Their  reward  is 
the  dismemberment  of  their  country  and  the  loss 
of  their  wealth  by  exhausting  contributions;   and 
they  are  obliged  to  take  a  government,  dictated  by 
a  faction   openly  countenanced  and  supported  by 
France.     Completely  a  province  of  France,  in  imita- 
tion of  their  frantic  masters  they  are  advancing  with 
rapid  strides  to  a  lawless  tyranny  at  home.'     France, 
professing  eternal  hatred  to  kings,  was  to  be  the 
tutelary  genius  of  republics.     Holland,  Genoa,  Ven- 
ice, the  Swiss  Canton,   and  the  United  States,  are 
agonizing  witnesses  of  her  sincerity. 

Of  imdone  Holland  no  more  need  be  said ;  nothing 

I  By  the  last  accounts,  some  of  the  most  independent  citizens  have 
been  seized  and  imprisoned  merely  for  the  constitutional  exercise  of 
their  opinion. 


The  Stand  279 

remains  for  us  but  to  exercise  tender  sympathy  in  the 
unfortunate  fate  of  a  country  which  generously  lent 
its  aid  to  establish  our  independence,  and  to  deduce 
from  her  melancholy  example  an  instructive  lesson  to 
repel  with  determined  vigor  the  mortal  embrace  of 
her  seducer  and  destroyer. 

Genoa,  a  speck  on  the  globe,  for  having  at  every 
hazard  resisted  the  efforts  of  the  enemies  of  France 
to  force  her  from  a  neutral  station,  is  recompensed 
with  a  subversion  of  her  government  and  the  pil- 
lage of  her  wealth,  by  compulsory  and  burthensome 
contributions. 

Venice  is  no  more!  In  vain  had  she  preserved  a 
faithful  neutrality,  when,  perhaps,  her  interposition 
might  have  inclined  the  scale  of  victory  in  Italy 
against  France.  A  few  of  her  citizens  '  kill  some 
French  soldiers.  Instant  retaliation  takes  place. 
Every  atonement  is  offered.  Nothing  will  suffice  but 
the  overthrow  of  her  government.  'T  is  effected. 
Her  own  citizens,  attracted  by  the  lure  of  democracy, 
become  accessory  to  it,  and  receive  a  popular  govern- 
ment at  the  hand  of  France.  What  is  the  sequel? 
what  the  faith  kept  with  them?  It  suits  France  to 
bribe  the  emperor  to  a  surrender  of  the  Netherlands 
and  to  peace,  that  she  may  pursue  her  projects  else- 
where with  less  obstacle.  It  suits  France  to  extend 
her  power  and  commerce  by  the  acquisitions  of  por- 
tions of  the  Venetian  territories.  The  bribe  is  offered 
and  accepted.  Venice  is  divided.  She  disappears 
from  the  map  of  nations.  The  tragedy  of  Poland  is 
re-enacted  with  circumstances  of  aggravated  atrocity. 

'  Were  they  not  French  agents  employed  to  create  the  pretext  ? 


28o  Alexander  Hamilton 

France  is  perfidious  enough  to  sacrifice  a  people  who 
at  her  desire,  had  consented  to  abrogate  their  privi- 
leged castes  to  the  chief  of  those  despots  against 
whom  she  had  vowed  eternal  hatred. 

The  Swiss  Cantons — the  boast  of  republicans— the 
model  to  which  they  have  been  glad  to  appeal  in 
proof  that  a  republican  government  may  consist  with 
the  order  and  happiness  of  society — the  old  and 
faithful  allies  of  France,  who  are  not  even  pretended 
to  have  deviated  from  sincere  neutrality, — what  are 
they  at  this  moment?  Perhaps  like  Venice,  a  story 
told  !  The  despots  of  France  had  found  pretences  to 
quarrel  with  them;  commotions  were  excited;  the 
legions  of  France  were  in  march  to  second  the  in- 
surgents. Little  other  hope  remains  than  that  the 
death  of  this  respectable  people  will  be  as  glorious 
as  their  life;  that  they  will  sell  their  independence 
as  dearly  as  they  bought  it.  But  why  despair  of  a 
brave  and  virtuous  people  who  appear  determined  to 
meet  the  impending  danger  with  a  countenance  emu- 
lous of  their  ancient  renown? 

The  United  States — what  is  their  situation  ?  Their 
sovereignty  trampled  in  the  dust,  and  their  commerce 
bleeding  at  every  pore,  speak  in  loud  accents  the 
spirit  of  oppression  and  rapine  which  characterizes 
the  usurpers  of  France.  But  of  this  a  distinct  view  is 
requisite,  and  will  be  taken. 

In  these  transactions  we  discover  ambition  and 
fanaticism  marching  hand  in  hand — bearing  the 
ensigns  of  hypocrisy,  treachery,  and  rapine.  The 
dogmas  of  a  false  and  fatal  creed  second  the  weapons 
of  ambition.     Like  the  prophet  of  Mecca,  the  tyrants 


The  Stand  281 

of  France  press  forward  with  the  alcoran  of  their 
faith  in  one  hand  and  the  sword  in  the  other.  They 
proselyte,  subjugate,  and  debase;  no  distinction  is 
made  between  repubhc  and  monarchy ;  all  must  alike 
yield  to  the  aggrandizement  of  the  '^ great  nation'' — 
the  distinctive,  the  arrogant  appellation  lately  as- 
sumed by  France  to  assert  in  the  face  of  nations  her 
superiority  and  ascendency.  Nor  is  it  a  mere  title 
with  w^hich  vanity  decorates  itself — it  is  the  substan- 
tial claim  of  dominion.  France,  swelled  to  a  gigantic 
size,  and  aping  ancient  Rome,  except  in  her  virtues, 
plainly  meditates  the  control  of  mankind,  and  is 
actually  giving  the  law  to  nations.  Unless  they 
quickly  rouse  and  compel  her  to  abdicate  her  insolent 
claim,  they  will  verify  the  truth  of  that  philosophy, 
which  makes  man  in  his  natural  state  a  quadruped, 
and  it  will  only  remain  for  the  miserable  animal,  con- 
verting his  hands  into  paws  in  the  attitude  of  prone 
submission,  to  offer  his  patient  and  servile  back  to 
whatever  burthens  the  lordly  tyrants  of  France  may 
think  fit  to  impose.  Titus  Manlius. 


IV 

April  12,  1798. 

In  the  pursuit  of  her  plan  of  universal  empire,  the 
two  objects  which  now  seem  to  occupy  the  atten- 
tion of  France,  are  a  new  organization  of  Germany 
favorable  to  other  influence,  and  the  demolition  of 
Great  Britain.  The  subversion  and  plunder,  first  of 
Portugal  and  next  of  Spain,  will  be  merely  collateral 
instances  in  the  grfeat  drama  of  iniquity. 

In  the  new  distribution  of  the  territories,  popula- 


282  Alexander  Hamilton 

tion,  and  political  power  of  the  Germanic  body, 
which  has  been  announced  as  in  contemplation  of 
the  Directory,  three  characters  are  conspicuous:  a 
despotism  to  build  up  rivals  to  the  imperial  chief, 
strong  enough  to  feel  the  sentiment  of  competition, 
but  too  weak  to  hazard  it  alone,  who  will  therefore 
stand  in  need  of  the  patronage  of  France,  and,  as  a 
consequence,  will  facilitate  her  influence  in  the  affairs 
of  the  empire;  a  generosity  in  making  compensation, 
at  the  expense  of  others,  for  the  spoils  with  which  she 
has  aggrandized  herself;  a  facility  of  transferring 
communities  like  herds  of  cattle  from  one  master  to 
another,  without  the  privilege  of  an  option.  In  a 
project  like  this,  it  is  impossible  to  overlook  the  plain 
indications  of  a  restless,  overbearing  ambition,  com- 
bined with  a  total  disregard  of  the  rights  and  wishes 
of  nations.  The  people  are  counted  for  nothing, 
their  masters  every  thing. 

The  conduct  of  France  towards  Great  Britain  is  the 
copy  of  that  of  Rome  towards  Carthage.  Its  mani- 
fest aim  is  to  destroy  the  principal  obstacle  to  a 
domination  over  Europe.  History  proves  that  Great 
Britain  has  repeatedly  upheld  the  balance  of  power 
there,  in  opposition  to  the  grasping  ambition  of 
France.  She  has  no  doubt  occasionally  employed 
the  pretence  of  danger,  as  the  instrument  of  her  own 
ambition ;  but  it  is  not  the  less  true  that  she  has  been 
more  than  once  an  essential  and  effectual  shield 
against  real  danger.  This  was  remarkably  the  case 
in  the  reign  of  Louis  the  XlVth,  when  the  security  of 
Europe  was  seriously  threatened  by  the  successful 
enterprises  of  that  very  ambitious  monarch 


The  Stand  283 

The  course  of  the  last  negotiation  between  France 
and  Britain  leaves  no  doubt  that  the  former  was  re- 
solved against  peace  on  any  practicable  terms.  This 
of  itself  indicates  that  the  destruction  of  the  latter  is 
the  direct  object  in  view.  But  this  object  is  not  left 
to  inference.  It  has  been  fastidiously  proclaimed  to 
the  world ;  and  the  necessity  of  crushing  the  tyrant  of 
the  sea  has  been  trumpeted  as  a  motive  to  other 
powers  to  acquiesce  in  the  execution  of  a  plan  by 
which  France  endeavors  to  become  the  tyrant  both 
of  sea  and  land.  The  understanding  of  mankind  has, 
at  the  same  time,  been  mocked  with  the  proposition 
that  the  peace  of  Europe  would  be  secured  by  the 
aggrandizement  of  France  on  the  ruins  of  her  rivals; 
because  then,  it  is  said,  having  nothing  to  fear,  she 
would  have  no  motive  to  attack;  as  if  moderation 
was  to  be  expected  from  a  government  or  people 
having  the  power  to  impose  its  own  will  without 
control.  The  peace  of  Europe  would  in  such  a  case 
be  the  peace  of  vassalage. 

Towards  the  execution  of  the  plan  of  destroying 
Great  Britain,  the  rights  of  other  nations  are  daringly 
and  openly  invaded.  The  confiscation  is  decreed  of 
all  vessels  with  their  cargoes,  if  composed  in  any  part 
of  articles  of  British  fabric ;  and  all  nations  are  to  be 
compelled  to  shut  their  ports  against  the  meditated 
victim.  Hamburg  is  stated  to  have  already  reluc- 
tantly yielded  to  this  humiliating  compulsion. 

While  the  demolition  of  Great  Britain  is  eagerly 
pursued  as  a  primary  object,  that  of  Portugal  seems 
designed  to  form  an  episode  in  the  tragedy.  Her 
fears  had  induced  her  to  buy  a  peace.     The  money 


284  Alexander  Hamilton 

she  had  paid  was  the  immediate  instrument  of  the 
revolution  of  September  last.  Yet  no  sooner  had  the 
news  of  pacification  with  the  emperor  reached  Paris, 
than  pretences  were  sought  to  elude  the  ratification 
of  the  purchased  treaty.  A  larger  tribute  was  de- 
manded— more  probably  than  it  was  expected  Portu- 
gal would  be  able  to  pay,  to  serve  as  an  excuse  for 
marching  an  army  to  revolutionize  and  plunder.'' 
The  blow  may  perhaps  be  suspended  by  further  sacri- 
fices, but  it  is  not  likely  to  be  finally  averted. 

Spain,  too,  was  in  a  fair  way  of  enjoying  the  fruits 
of  her  weakness  in  putting  on  the  yoke  of  France,  and 
of  furnishing  another  proof  of  the  general  scheme  of 
aggrandizement  and  oppression.  The  demand  of 
the  cession  of  Louisiana,  long  pressed  upon  her,  had 
at  length  become  categoric.  The  alternative  was 
to  comply  or  offend.  The  probability  is  that  before 
this  time  the  cession  has  been  made ;  and  Spain  has 
learnt  to  her  cost  that  the  chief  privilege  of  an  ally  of 
France  is  to  be  plundered  at  discretion.  With  the 
acquisition  of  Louisiana,  the  foundation  will  be  laid 
for  stripping  her  of  South  America  and  her  mines; 
and  perhaps  for  dismembering  the  United  States. 
The  magnitude  of  this  mighty  mischief  is  not  easily 
calculated. 

Such  vast  projects  and  pretensions  pursued  by 
such  unexampled  means  are  full  evidence  of  a  plan  to 
acquire  an  absolute  ascendant  among  nations.  The 
difficulties  in  the  final  execution  of  a  plan  of  this  kind 
are,  with  many,  decisive  reasons  against  its  existence. 

'  Such  is  the  account  of  the  transaction  received  through  authentic 
channels. 


The  Stand  285 

But,  in  the  case  of  ancient  Rome,  did  it  not  in  fact 
exist,  and  was  it  not  substantially  realized?  Does 
the  experience  of  the  past  day  warrant  the  opinion 
that  men  are  not  as  capable  of  mad  and  wicked  pro- 
jects as  they  were  at  any  former  period?  Does  not 
the  conduct  of  the  French  Government  display  a 
vastness  and  sublimation  of  views,  an  enormity  of 
ambition,  and  a  destitution  of  principle  which  render 
the  supposition  of  such  a  design  probable  ?  Has  not 
a  more  rapid  progress  been  made  towards  its  execu- 
tion than  was  ever  made  by  Rome  in  an  equal  period  ? 
In  their  intercourse  with  foreign  nations,  do  not  the 
Directory  affect  an  ostentatious  imitation  of  Roman 
pride  and  superiority  ?  Is  it  not  natural  to  conclude 
that  the  same  spirit  points  to  the  same  ends?  The 
project  is  possible.  The  evidence  of  its  existence  is 
strong,  and  it  will  be  the  wisdom  of  every  other  state 
to  act  upon  the  supposition  of  its  reality. 

Let  it  be  imderstood,  that  the  supposition  does  not 
imply  the  intention  to  reduce  all  other  nations  form- 
ally to  the  condition  of  provinces.  This  was  not 
done  by  Rome  in  the  zenith  of  her  greatness.  She 
had  her  provinces,  and  she  had  her  allies.  But  her 
allies  were  in  fact  her  vassals.  They  obeyed  her  nod. 
Their  princes  were  deposed  and  created  at  pleasure. 

Such  is  the  proud  pre-eminence  to  which  the  am- 
bition of  France  aspires!  After  securing  as  much 
territory  as  she  thinks  it  expedient  immediately  to 
govern,  after  wresting  from  Great  Britain  and  attach- 
ing to  herself  the  command  of  the  sea,  after  despoiling 
Spain  of  the  riches  of  Mexico  and  Peru,  after  attaining 
by  all  these  means  to  a  degree  of  strength  sufficient  to 


286  Alexander  Hamilton 

defy  and  awe  competition,  she  may  be  content,  under 
the  modest  denomination  of  allies,  to  rule  the  rest  of 
the  world  by  her  frown  or  her  smile. 

The  character  of  the  actual  Directory  of  France 
justifies  the  imputation  to  them  of  any  project  the 
most  extravagant  and  criminal.  Viewed  internally, 
as  well  as  externally,  their  conduct  is  alike  detestable. 
They  have  overturned  the  constitution,  which  they 
were  appointed  to  administer,  with  circumstances 
of  barefaced  guilt  that  disgrace  a  revolution,  before 
so  tarnished  as  seemed  scarcely  to  admit  of  greater 
degradation,  and  have  erected  in  its  stead  a  military 
despotism,  clothed  but  not  disguised  with  the  mere 
garb  of  the  constitution  which  they  have  abolished. 
In  the  accomplishment  of  this  usurpation,  they  have 
assassinated  one  of  their  colleagues  '  and  seized  and 
banished  another,  together  with  all  those  members  of 
the  two  councils  who  were  disposed  and  able  to  com- 
bat their  pernicious  aims.  They  have  done  more; 
not  content  with  rendering  themselves  masters  of 
the  two  councils,  and  converting  them  into  the 
mere  pageants  of  national  representation,  they  have 
thought  it  proper  to  secure  their  own  power  by  exiling 
or  imprisoning  such  private  citizens  as  they  feared 
might  promote  the  future  election  of  men  hostile  to 
their  views,  on  the  futile  pretence  of  a  counter-revo- 
lutionary plot,  to  be  effected  by  royalizing  the  elec- 
tions. Thus  have  they  not  only  monopolized  all  the 
power  for  the  present,  but  they  have  made  provisions 

^  Camot,  as  was  reported  at  the  time,  and  as  is  confirmed  by  nothing 
having  been  since  heard  of  him.  He  had  been  too  deeply  in  the  secrets 
of  the  violent  party.     It  was  necessary  to  silence  him. 


The  Stand  287 

for  its  perpetuation,  so  long  at  least  as  the  Praetorian 
bands  will  permit. 

No  impartial  man  can  doubt  that  the  plot  charged 
upon  the  exiled  members  is  a  forgery.  The  charac- 
ters of  several  of  the  accused  belie  it.  Barthelemy 
and  Pichegi-u  are  virtuous  men.  The  former  has  long 
merited  and  possessed  this  character.  The  latter  has 
given  numerous  proofs  of  a  good  title  to  it ;  his  only 
fault  seems  to  have  been  that  of  enthusiasm  in  the 
worst  of  causes.  Neither  of  them,  like  Dumourier, 
had  been,  from  his  entrance  on  public  life,  marked  out 
as  the  votary  of  an  irregular  ambition.  The  alleged 
object  of  the  plot,  as  to  such  men,  from  the  circum- 
stances of  the  conjuncture,  was  wholly  improbable; 
nothing  like  satisfactory  proof  has  come  to  light. 
But  the  decisive  argument  of  their  innocence  is  that 
the  usurpers  did  not  dare  to  confront  them  with  a  fair 
legal  accusation  and  trial.  It  was  so  clearly  their 
interest  and  policy  to  have  justified  themselves  by 
establishing  the  guilt  of  the  accused,  if  in  their  power, 
that  the  omission  to  attempt  it  is  the  demonstration 
of  its  impossibility.  Having  all  authority  in  their 
own  hands,  and  the  army  at  their  devotion,  they  had 
nothing  to  fear  from  the  pursuit ;  and  they  must  have 
foreseen  that  the  banishment  without  trial  would 
finally  marshal  public  opinion  against  them.  There 
can  be  little  doubt  that  the  people  of  France  at  this 
moment  regard  with  compassion  and  regret  the  ban- 
ished directors  and  deputies,  and  with  horror  and 
detestation  the  authors  of  their  disgrace.  But  the 
people  of  France  internally  are  annihilated;  to  their 
liberty  and  happiness  this  last  usurpation  gave  a 


288  Alexander  Hamilton 

more  fatal  blow  than  any  or  all  of  the  former.  It  has 
more  of  system  in  it,  been  less  sanguinary,  and  is  less 
likely  to  provoke  resistance  from  despair. 

The  inference  from  the  transaction  is  evident.  The 
real  crime  of  the  banished  was  the  desire  of  arresting 
the  mad  career  of  the  Directory,  and  of  restoring 
peace  to  France,  in  the  hope  that  peace  might  tend  to 
settle  the  government  on  the  foundation  of  order, 
security,  and  tranquilHty.  The  majority  of  the 
Directory  foresaw  that  peace  would  not  prove  an  ele- 
ment congenial  with  the  duration  of  their  power;  or 
perhaps,  under  the  guidance  of  Siey^s,  the  conjurer  of 
the  scene,  they  judged  it  expedient  to  continue  in 
motion  the  revolutionary  wheel  till  matters  were 
better  prepared  for  creating  a  new  dynasty  and  a  new 
aristocracy  '  to  regenerate  the  exploded  monarchy  of 
France  with  due  regard  to  their  own  interest. 

Thus  we  perceive  that  the  interior  conduct  of  the 
Directory  has  the  same  characters  with  their  exterior 
— the  same  irregular  ambition,  the  same  contempt 
of  principle,  the  same  boldness  of  design,  the  same 
temerity  of  execution.  From  such  men  what  is  not 
to  be  expected?  The  development  of  their  recent 
conduct  towards  the  United  States  will  no  doubt 
confirm  all  the  inferences  to  be  drawn  from  other 
parts  of  the  portrait,  and  will  contribute  to  prove 
that  there  is  nothing  too  abandoned  or  too  mon- 
strous for  them  to  meditate  or  attempt. 

Who  that  loves  his  country,  or  respects  the  dig- 

*  There  is  good  evidence  that  this,  at  bottom,  is  the  real  plan  of  the 
Ahh6  Siey^s,  and  some  of  the  most  influential  in  the  executive  depart- 
ment are  his  creatures. 


The  Stand  289 

nity  of  his  nature,  would  not  rather  perish  than  sub- 
scribe to  the  prostration  of  both  before  such  men 
and  such  a  system?  What  sacrifice,  what  danger 
is  too  great  to  be  incurred  in  opposition  to  both? 
What  security  in  any  compromise  with  such  un- 
principled men?  What  safety,  but  in  union,  in 
vigor,  in  preparation  for  every  extremity;  in  a 
decisive  and  courageous  stand  for  the  rights  and 
honor  of  our  injured  and  insulted  country  ? 

Titus  Manlius. 


April  16,  1798. 

To  estimate  properly  the  conduct  of  revolutionary 
France  towards  the  United  States,  the  circumstances 
which  have  reciprocally  taken  place  must  be  viewed 
together.  It  is  a  whole,  not  a  pari,  which  is  to  be 
contemplated.  A  rapid  summary,  nevertheless,  of 
the  most  material  is  all  that  can  be  presented. 

Not  only  the  unanimous  good  wishes  of  the  citi- 
zens of  this  country  spontaneously  attached  them- 
selves to  the  revolution  of  France  in  its  first  stages, 
but  no  sooner  was  the  change  from  monarchy  to  a 
republic  officially  announced,  than  our  government, 
consulting  the  principles  of  our  own  revolution,  and 
the  wishes  of  our  citizens,  hastened  to  acknowledge 
the  new  order  of  things.  This  was  done  to  the  last 
minister  sent  by  Louis  the  XVIth,  before  the  arrival 
of  the  first  envoy  from  the  republic.  Genet  after- 
wards came;  his  reception  by  the  government  was 
cordial — by  the  people,  enthusiastic. 


VOL.    VI. — 19 


290  Alexander  Hamilton 

The  government  did  not  merely  receive  the  min- 
ister of  the  republic,  in  fact,  and  defer  the  obligation 
of  treaties  till  the  contest  concerning  its  establish- 
ment had  been  terminated  by  success;  but  giving 
the  utmost  latitude  to  the  maxim  that  real  treaties 
bind  nations,  notwithstanding  revolutions  of  govern- 
ment, ours  did  not  hesitate  to  admit  the  immediate 
operation  of  the  antecedent  treaties  between  the  two 
countries,  though  the  revolution  could  not  be  re- 
garded as  yet  fully  accomplished — though  a  warrant 
for  a  contrary  policy  might  have  been  found  in  the 
conduct  of  France  herself — and  though  the  treaties 
contained  several  stipulations  which  gave  to  her  im- 
portant preferences  relative  to  war,  and  which  were 
likely  to  give  umbrage  to  the  powers  coalesced 
against  her. 

In  acknowledging  the  republic,  the  United  States 
preceded  every  other  nation.  It  was  not  till  a  long 
time  after,  that  any  of  the  neutral  powers  followed 
the  example.  Had  prudence  been  exclusively  con- 
sulted, our  government  might  not  have  done  all  that 
it  did  at  this  jimcture,  when  the  case  was  very  nearly 
Europe  in  arms  against  France. 

But  good  faith  and  a  regard  to  consistency  of 
principle  prevailed  over  the  sense  of  danger.  It  was 
resolved  to  encounter  it;  qualifying  the  step  by  the 
manifestation  of  a  disposition  to  observe  a  sincere 
neutrality,  as  far  as  it  should  consist  with  the 
stipulations  of  treaty.  Hence  the  proclamation  of 
neutrality. 

It  ought  to  have  no  small  merit  in  the  eyes  of 
France,  that  at  so  critical  a  period  of  her  affairs,  we 


The  Stand  291 

were  willing  to  run  risks  so  imminent.  The  fact  is, 
that  it  had  nearly  implicated  us  in  the  war  on  her 
side,  at  a  juncture  when  all  calculations  were  against 
her,  and  when  it  was  certain  she  could  have  afforded 
us  no  protection  or  assistance. 

What  was  the  return  ?  Genet  came  with  neutrality 
on  his  lips,  but  war  in  his  heart.  The  instructions 
pubHshed  by  himself,  and  his  practice  upon  them, 
dem.onstrate  that  it  was  the  premeditated  plan  to 
involve  us  in  the  contest ;  not  by  a  candid  appeal  to 
the  judgment,  friendship,  or  interest  of  our  country 
but  by  alluring  the  avarice  of  bad  citizens  into  acts 
of  predatory  hostility,  by  instituting  within  our  terri- 
tory military  expeditions  against  nations  with  whom 
we  were  at  peace.  And  when  it  was  found  that 
our  Executive  would  not  connive  at  this  insidious 
plan,  bold  attempts  were  made  to  create  a  schism 
between  the  people  and  the  government,  and,  conse- 
quently, to  sow  the  seeds  of  civil  discord,  insurrec- 
tion, and  revolution.     Thus  began  the  republic. 

It  is  true  that  the  Girondist  faction,  having  been 
subverted  by  that  of  Robespierre,  our  complaint  of 
the  agent  of  the  former  was  attended  with  success. 
The  spirit  of  vengeance  came  in  aid  of  the  justice  of 
our  demand.  The  offending  minister  was  recalled 
with  disgrace.  But  Robespierre  did  not  fail  in  a 
public  speech  to  give  a  gentle  hint  of  delinquency  in 
the  United  States,  sufficiently  indicating  that  the 
authors  and  the  manner  were  more  in  fault,  in  his 
opinion,  than  the  thing.  It  was  not  the  expedient 
to  quarrel  with  us.  There  was  still  a  hope  that  a 
course  of  things,  or  more  dexterous  management, 


292  Alexander  Hamilton 

might  embark  us  in  the  war,  as  an  auxiliary  to 
France. 

The  treaties  were  made  by  us  the  criterion  of  our 
duty ;  but  as  they  did  not  require  us  to  go  to  war,  as 
France  did  never  even  pretend  this  to  be  the  case, 
listening  to  the  suggestions,  not  only  of  interest,  but 
of  safety,  we  resolved  to  endeavor  to  preserve  peace. 
But  we  were  equally  resolved  to  fulfil  our  real  obliga- 
tions in  every  respect.  We  saw  without  murmur  our 
property  seized  in  belligerent  vessels ;  we  allowed  to 
French  ships  of  war  and  privateers,  all  the  peculiar 
exclusive  privileges  in  our  ports  to  which  they  were 
entitled  by  our  treaties  upon  fair  construction — upon 
a  construction  fully  concurred  in  by  the  political  leader  ' 
of  the  adherents  to  France;  we  went  further,  and 
gratuitously  suffered  her  to  sell  her  prizes  in  our 
country,  in  contravention,  perhaps,  of  the  true  prin- 
ciples of  neutrality ;  we  paid  to  her  new  government 
the  debt  contracted  by  us  with  the  old,  not  only  as 
fast  as  it  became  due,  but  by  an  anticipation,  which 
did  not  give  pleasure  to  her  enemies.  While  our 
government  was  faithful,  our  citizens  were  zealous. 
Not  content  with  good  wishes,  they  adventured  their 
property  in  the  furnishing  of  supplies  to  an  extent 
that  showed,  in  many  cases,  the  co-operation  of  zeal 
with  interest. 

Our  country,  our  merchants,  and  our  ships,  in  the 
gloomy  periods  of  her  revolution,  have  been  the 
organs  of  succors  to  France,  to  a  degree  which  gives 
us  an  undoubted  title  to  the  character  of  very  useful 
friends. 

'  Mr.  Jefferson. 


The  Stand  293 

Reverse  the  medal.  France  from  the  beginning, 
has  violated  essential  points  in  the  treaties  between 
the  two  countries.  The  first  formal  unequivocal  act 
by  either  of  the  belligerent  parties,  interfering  with 
the  rule  that  "free  ships  make  free  goods,''  was  a 
decree  of  the  French  convention.  This  violation  has 
been  persisted  in,  and  successive  violations  added, 
till  they  amount  to  a  general  war  on  our  commerce. 

First,  the  plea  of  necessity  repelled  our  feeble  and 
modest  complaints  of  infractions.  Next,  the  plea 
of  delinquencies  on  our  part  was  called  in  aid  of 
the  depredations  which  it  was  found  convenient 
to  practise  upon  our  trade.  Our  refusal  to  accord 
privileges  not  granted  by  our  treaties,  but  claimed 
by  misconstructions  destitute  even  of  plausibility — 
privileges  which  would  have  put  us  at  once  in  a  state 
of  war  with  the  enemies  of  France;  the  reciprocal 
application  to  them  of  principles  originally  estab- 
lished against  their  remonstrances  in  favor  of  France ; 
occasional  embarrassments  to  her  privateers,  arising 
from  the  established  forms  of  our  courts,  and  the 
necessity  of  vigilance  to  frustrate  her  efforts  to 
entangle  us  against  our  will  in  the  war;  delays  in 
giving  relief  in  a  few  instances,  rendered  unavoidable 
by  the  nature  of  our  government,  and  the  great  ex- 
tent of  our  territory;  these  were  so  many  topics  of 
bitter  accusation  against  our  government,  and  of  in- 
sult, as  rude  as  it  was  unmerited. 

Our  citizens,  in  judging  whether  the  accusation 
was  captious  or  well  founded,  ought  to  bear  in  mind, 
that  most  of  the  transactions  on  which  it  was 
predicated  happened    under  the   administration  of 


294  Alexander  Hamilton 

Jefferson  and  Randolph,  and,  as  is  well  ascertained, 
with  their  full  assent  and  co-operation.  They  will 
not  readily  suppose  that  these  very  cunning  men 
were  the  dupes  of  colleagues  actuated  by  ill-will 
towards  France ;  but  they  will  discover  in  this  union 
of  opinion,  among  men  of  very  opposite  principles, 
a  strong  probability  that  our  government  acted  with 
propriety,  and  that  the  dissatisfaction  of  France,  if 
more  than  a  color,  was  unreasonable. 

Hitherto,  the  progress  no  less  than  the  origin  of  our 
controversy  with  France  exhibits  plain  marks  of  a 
disposition  on  her  part  to  disregard  those  provisions 
in  the  treaties  which  it  was  our  interest  should  be 
observed  by  her — to  exact  from  us  a  scrupulous  per- 
formance of  our  engagements,  and  even  the  exten- 
sion of  them  beyond  their  true  import — to  embroil 
us  with  her  enemies,  contrary  to  our  inclination  and 
interest,  and  without  even  the  allegation  of  a  claim 
upon  our  faith — to  make  unreasonable  demands  upon 
the  grounds  of  complaints  against  us,  and  excuses  to 
violate  our  property  and  rights — ^to  divide  our  nation, 
and  to  disturb  our  government. 

Many  of  the  most  determined  advocates  of  France 
among  us  appear  lately  to  admit,  that  previous  to 
the  treaty  with  Great  Britain  the  complaints  of 
France  against  the  United  States  were  frivolous; 
those  of  the  United  States  against  France,  real  and 
serious. 

But  the  treaty  with  Great  Britain,  it  is  affirmed, 
has  changed  the  ground.  This,  it  is  said,  has  given 
just  cause  of  discontent  to  France ;  this  has  brought 
us  to  the  verge  of  war  with  our  first  ally  and  best 


The  Stand  295 

friend;  to  this  fatal  instrument  are  we  indebted  for 
the  evils  we  feel,  and  the  still  greater  which  impend 
over  our  heads. 

These  suggestions  are  without  the  shadow  of  foun- 
dation. They  prove  the  infatuated  devotion  to  a 
foreign  power  of  those  who  invented  them,  and  the 
easy  credulity  of  those  with  whom  they  have  ob- 
tained currency.  The  evidence  of  a  previous  dis- 
position in  France  to  complain  without  a  cause,  and 
to  injure  without  provocation,  is  a  sufficient  com- 
ment upon  the  resentment  she  professes  against  the 
treaty.  The  partiality  or  indulgence  with  which  the 
ill  treatment  received  from  her  prior  to  that  event 
was  viewed  by  her  decided  partisans,  is  a  proof  of 
the  facility  with  which  they  credit  her  pretensions 
and  palliate  her  aggressions. 

The  most  significant  of  the  charges  against  the 
treaty,  as  it  respects  France,  are,  that  it  abandons 
the  rule  of  free  ships  making  free  goods;  that  it 
extended  unduly  the  list  of  contraband  articles,  and 
gave  color  to  the  claim  of  a  right  to  subject  provi- 
sions to  seizure;  that  a  treaty  of  amity  with  the 
enemy  of  France,  in  the  midst  of  a  war,  was  a  mark 
of  preference  to  that  enemy,  and  of  ill-will  to  her. 

The  replies  which  have  been  given  to  these  charges 
are  conclusive. 

As  to  the  first  point,  the  stipulation  of  two  powers 
to  observe  between  themselves  a  particular  rule  in 
their  respective  wars — a  rule,  too,  innovating  upon 
the  general  law  of  nations — can,  on  no  known  or 
reasonable  principle  of  interpretation,  be  construed 
to  intend  that  they  will  insist  upon  that  rule  with  all 


296  Alexander  Hamilton 

other  nations,  and  will  make  no  treaty  with  any, 
however  beneficial  in  other  respects,  which  does  not 
comprehend  it.  To  tie  up  the  will  of  a  nation,  and 
its  power  of  providing  for  its  own  interests,  to  so  im- 
mense an  extent,  required  a  stipulation  in  positive 
terms.  In  vain  shall  we  seek  in  the  treaty  for  such 
a  stipulation  or  its  equivalent.  There  is  not  even  a 
single  expression  to  imply  it.  The  idea  is,  conse- 
quently, no  less  ridiculous  than  it  is  novel.  The 
contemporary  proceedings,  legislative  and  judicial, 
of  our  government,  show  that  it  was  not  so  under- 
stood in  this  country.  Congress  even  declined  to 
become  a  formal  party  to  the  armed  neutrality  of 
which  it  was  the  basis;  unwilling  to  be  pledged  to 
the  coercive  maintenance  of  a  principle  which  they 
were  only  disposed  to  promote  by  particular  acts. 
It  is  equally  futile  to  seek  to  derive  the  obligation  of 
the  United  States  to  adhere  to  this  rule,  from  the 
supposition  of  a  change  in  the  law  of  nations  by  the 
force  of  that  league.  Neither  theory  nor  practice 
warrants  the  attributing  so  important  an  effect  to 
a  military  association,  springing  up  in  the  war  and 
ending  with  it,  not  having  had  the  universal  consent 
of  nations,  nor  a  course  of  long  practice  to  give  it  a 
sanction. 

Were  it  necessary  to  resort  to  an  auxiliary  argu- 
ment, it  might  be  said  with  conclusive  force  that 
France,  having  before  our  treaty  with  Great  Britain 
violated  in  practice  the  rule  in  question,  absolved  us 
from  all  obligations  to  observe  it,  if  any  did  pre- 
viously exist. 

As  to  the  second  point,  it  has  been  repeatedly 


The  Stand  297 

demonstrated  that  the  enumeration  of  contraband 
in  the  treaty  with  Great  Britain,  is  agreeable  to  the 
general  law  of  nations.  But  this  is  a  matter  from  its 
nature  liable  to  vary  according  to  relative  situation, 
and  to  be  variously  modified,  not  only  between  differ- 
ent nations,  but  between  one  nation  and  different 
nations.  Thus,  in  our  treaty  with  Great  Britain, 
some  articles  are  enumerated  which  are  omitted  in 
that  with  France ;  in  that  with  France,  some  articles 
are  inserted  which  are  omitted  in  that  with  Britain. 
But  it  is,  perhaps,  the  first  time  that  a  diversity  of 
this  sort  has  been  deemed  a  ground  of  umbrage  to  a 
third  party. 

With  regard  to  provisions,  the  treaty  only  decides 
that  where  by  the  law  of  nations  they  are  subject  to 
seizure,  they  are  to  be  paid  for.  It  does  not  define 
or  admit  any  new  case.  As  to  its  giving  color  to 
abuse  in  this  respect,  this,  if  true,  would  amount 
to  nothing.  For,  till  some  abuse  has  actually  hap- 
pened, and  been  tolerated  to  the  prejudice  of  France, 
there  was  no  cause  of  complaint.  The  possibility  of 
abuse  from  a  doubtful  construction  of  a  treaty  be- 
tween two  powers,  is  no  subject  of  offence  to  a  third. 
It  is  the  fact  which  must  govern.  According  to  this 
indisputable  criterion,  France  has  had  no  cause  to 
complain  on  this  account;  for  since  the  ratification 
of  the  treaty,  no  instance  of  the  seizure  of  provisions 
has  occurred,  and  it  is  known  that  our  government 
protested  against  such  a  construction. 

Further,  the  treaty  has  made  no  change  whatever 
in  the  actual  antecedent  state  of  things  to  the  dis- 
advantage of  France. 


29S  Alexander  Hamilton 

Great  Britain  had,  before  the  treaty,  with  the  sanc- 
tion of  our  government,  acted  upon  the  principles  as 
to  free  ships  making  free  goods,  and  generally,  as  to 
the  affair  of  contraband  which  the  treaty  recognizes. 
Nor  was  that  sanction  merely  tacit,  but  explicit  and 
direct.  It  was  even  diplomatically  communicated 
to  the  agents  of  France.  If  there  was  any  thing 
wrong,  therefore,  in  this  matter,  it  was  chargeable, 
not  upon  the  treaty,  but  upon  the  prior  measures  of 
the  government,  which  had  left  these  points  mere 
points  of  form  in  the  treaty. 

The  remaining  charge  against  that  instrument  in- 
volves a  species  of  political  metaphysics.  Neither 
the  theory  of  writers  nor  the  history  of  nations  will 
bear  out  the  position,  that  a  treaty  of  amity  between 
a  neutral  state  and  one  belligerent  party,  not  grant- 
ing either  succors  or  new  privileges  relative  to  war, 
not  derogatory  from  any  obligation  of  the  neutral 
state  to  the  other  belligerent  party,  is  a  cause  of 
timbrage  to  the  latter.  There  can  be  no  reason  why 
a  neutral  power  should  not  settle  differences  or  ad- 
just a  plan  of  intercourse  beneficial  to  itself  with 
another  power,  because  this  last  happens  to  be  at 
war  with  a  third.  All  this  must  be  a  mere  question 
of  courtesy;  and  might  be  uncourteous  or  otherwise 
according  to  circumstances,  but  never  a  ground  of 
quarrel.  If  there  even  might  have  been  want  of 
courtesy  in  the  United  States  to  have  entered  into  a 
treaty  of  this  sort  with  the  enemy  of  France,  had 
they  volunteered  it  without  cogent  motives,  there 
could  be  none  in  the  particular  situation.  They 
were  led  to  the  treaty  by  pre-existing  differences, 


The  Stand  299 

which  had  nearly  ripened  to  a  rupture,  and  the  am- 
icable settlement  of  which  affected  very  important  in- 
terests. No  favorable  conjuncture  for  this  settlement 
was  to  be  lost.  The  settlement,  by  the  usual  formu- 
las in  such  cases,  would  amount  to  a  treaty  of  amity. 

Thus  it  is  evident  that  the  treaty,  like  all  the  rest, 
has  been  a  mere  pretence  for  ill  treatment.  But 
admitting  that  this  was  not  the  case,  that  it  really 
afforded  some  cause  of  displeasure,  was  this  of  a 
nature  to  admit  of  no  atonement,  or  of  none  short  of 
the  humiliation  of  our  country?  If  the  contrary 
must  be  conceded,  it  is  certain  that  our  government 
has  done  all  that  was  possible  towards  reconciliation, 
and  enough  to  have  satisfied  any  reasonable  or  just 
government. 

France,  after  the  treaty,  proceeded  to  inflict  still 
deeper  wounds  upon  our  commerce.  She  has  en- 
deavored to  intercept  and  destroy  it  with  all  the 
ports  of  her  enemies.  Nor  was  this  the  worst.  The 
spoliation  has  frequently  attended  our  trade  with 
her  own  dominions — attended  with  unparalleled  cir- 
cumstances of  rapacity  and  violence. 

The  diplomatic  representative  of  the  French  Gov- 
ernment to  the  United  States  was  ordered  to  deliver 
to  our  government  a  most  insulting  manifesto,  and 
then  to  withdraw. 

Yet  our  government,  notwithstanding  this  accu- 
mulation of  wrongs,  after  knowing  that  it  had  been 
repeatedly  outraged  in  the  person  of  one  minister, 
condescended  to  send  another  specially  charged  to 
endeavor  to  conciliate.  This  minister  was  known 
to    unite    fidelity    to    his    coiintry    with    principles 


300  Alexander  Hamilton 

friendly  to  France  and  her  revolution.  It  was  hoped 
that  the  latter  would  make  him  acceptable,  and  that 
he  would  be  able,  by  amicable  explanations  and 
overtures,  to  obviate  misunderstanding  and  restore 
harmony.     He  was  not  received. 

Though  it  was  very  problematical  whether  the 
honor  of  the  United  States,  after  this,  permitted 
a  further  advance,  yet  the  government,  anxious  if 
possible  to  preserve  peace,  concluded  to  make  an- 
other and  more  solemn  experiment.  A  new  mis- 
sion, confided  to  three  extraordinary  ministers,  took 
place.  They  were  all  three,  in  different  degrees,  men 
well  affected  to  France  and  her  revolution.  They 
were  all  men  of  high  respectability,  and  among  the 
purest  characters  of  our  country.  Their  powers  and 
instructions  were  so  ample  as  to  have  extorted,  from 
the  most  determined  opposers  of  the  government  in 
the  two  houses  of  Congress,  a  reluctant  approbation 
in  this  instance  of  the  President's  conduct. 

In  contempt  of  the  established  usage,  and  of  the 
respect  due  to  us  an  independent  people,  with  the 
deliberate  design  of  humbling  and  mortifying  our 
government,  these  special  and  extraordinary  minis- 
ters have  been  refused  to  be  received.  Admitting  all 
the  charges  brought  against  us  by  France  to  be  well 
founded,  still  ministers  of  that  description  ought  on 
every  principle  to  have  been  accredited  and  con- 
ferred with,  till  it  was  ascertained  that  they  were  not 
ready  to  do  as  much  as  was  expected.  Not  to  pursue 
this  course  was  to  deny  us  the  rank  of  an  independent 
nation ;  it  was  to  treat  us  as  Great  Britain  did  while 
we  were  yet  contending  with  her  for  this  character. 


The  Stand  301 

Instead  of  this,  informal  agents,  probably  panders 
and  mistresses,  are  appointed  to  intrigue  with  our 
envoys.  These,  attending  only  to  the  earnest  wish 
of  their  constituents  for  peace,  stoop  to  the  confer- 
ence.    What  is  the  misshapen  result? 

Money,  money,  is  the  burden  of  the  discordant 
song  of  these  foul  birds  of  prey.  Great  indignation 
is  at  first  professed  against  expressions  in  the  Presi- 
dent's speech  of  May  last.  The  reparation  of  a 
disavowal  is  absolutely  due  to  the  honor  of  the  Direc- 
tory and  of  the  Republic,  but  it  turns  out  that  there 
is  a  practicable  substitute  more  valuable.  The  honor 
of  both,  being  a  marketable  commodity,  is  ready  to 
be  commuted  for  gold. 

A  douceur  of  50,000  pounds  sterling  for  the  special 
benefit  of  the  Directory  was  to  pave  the  way.  In- 
stead of  reparation  for  the  spoliations  on  our  com- 
merce exceeding  twenty  millions  of  dollars,  a  loan 
equal  to  the  amount  of  them  is  to  be  made  by  us 
to  the  French  Government.  Then  perhaps  a  mode 
might  be  settled  for  the  liquidation  of  the  claims  of 
our  merchants,  to  be  compensated  at  some  future 
period.  The  depredations,  nevertheless,  were  to  con- 
tinue till  the  treaty  should  be  concluded,  which, 
from  the  distance  between  the  two  countries,  must 
at  all  events  take  a  great  length  of  time,  and  might 
be  procrastinated  indefinitely  at  the  pleasure  of  the 
Directory. 

In  addition  to  all  this,  we  must  purchase  of  the 
Directory,  at  par,  Dutch  inscriptions  to  the  amount 
of  thirty  millions  of  florins,  and  look  to  the  ability  of 
the  Batavian  Republic  to  redeem  them.     Already  are 


302  Alexander  Hamilton 

these  assignats  depreciated  to  half  their  nominal 
value,  and  in  all  probability  will  come  to  nothing, 
serving  merely  as  a  flimsy  veil  to  the  extortion  of  a 
further  and  immense  contribution.  "  Money,  a  great 
deal  of  money,"  '  is  the  cry  from  the  first  to  the  last; 
and  our  commissioners  are  assured  that  without  this 
they  may  stay  in  Paris  six  months  without  ad- 
vancing a  step.  To  enforce  the  argument  they  are 
reminded  of  the  fate  of  Venice. 

At  so  hideous  a  compound  of  corruption  and  extor- 
tion, at  demands  so  exorbitant  and  degrading,  there 
is  not  a  spark  of  virtuous  indignation  in  an  American 
breast,  which  will  not  kindle  into  a  flame.  And  yet 
there  are  men,  could  it  be  believed,  vile  and  degen- 
erate enough  to  run  about  the  streets  to  contradict, 
to  palliate,  to  justify,  to  preach  the  expediency  of 
compliance.  Such  men  merit  all  the  detestation  of 
all  their  fellow-citizens :  and  there  is  no  doubt  that, 
with  time  and  opportunity,  they  will  merit  much 
more  from  the  offended  justice  of  the  laws. 

Titus  Manlius. 


VI 

April  19,  1798. 

The  inevitable  conclusion,  from  the  facts  which 
have  been  presented,  is  that  revolutionary  France 
has  been  and  continues  to  be  governed  by  a  spirit  of 
proselytism,  conquest,  domination,  and  rapine.  The 
detail  well  justifies  the  position  that  we  may  have  to 
contend  at  our  very  doors  for  our  independence  and 
liberty.     When  the  wonders  achieved  by  the  arms  of 

^  II  faut  de  I'argent — il  faut  beaucoup  de  I'argent. 


The  Stand  303 

France  are  duly  considered,  the  possibiHty  of  the 
overthrow  of  Great  Britain  seems  not  to  be  chi- 
merical. If,  by  any  of  those  extraordinary  coin- 
cidences of  circumstances  which  occasionally  decide 
the  fate  of  empires,  the  meditated  expedition  against 
England  shall  succeed;  or  if,  by  the  immense  ex- 
pense to  which  that  country  is  driven,  and  the  de- 
rangement of  her  commerce  by  the  powerful  means 
employed  to  that  end,  her  affairs  shall  be  thrown 
into  such  disorder  as  may  enable  France  to  dictate 
to  her  the  terms  of  peace;  in  either  of  these  un- 
fortunate events  the  probability  is,  that  the  United 
States  will  have  to  choose  between  the  surrender  of 
their  sovereignty,  the  new-modelling  of  their  govern- 
ment according  to  the  fancy  of  the  Directory,  the 
emptying  of  their  wealth  by  contributions  into  the 
coffers  of  the  greedy  and  insatiable  monster,  and 
resistance  to  invasion  in  order  to  compel  submission 
to  those  ruinous  conditions. 

In  opposition  to  this  it  is  suggested  that  the  in- 
terest of  France,  concurring  with  the  difficulty  of 
execution,  is  a  safeguard  against  the  enterprise.  It 
is  asked,  what  incentives  sufficiently  potent  can 
stimulate  to  so  unpromising  an  attempt?  The  an- 
swer is,  the  strongest  passions  of  bad  hearts— inor- 
dinate ambition — the  love  of  domination,  that  prime 
characteristic  of  the  despots  of  France, — the  spirit 
of  vengeance  for  the  presumption  of  having  thought 
and  acted  for  ourselves,  a  spirit  which  has  marked 
every  step  of  the  revolutionary  leaders, — the  fan- 
atical egotism  of  obliging  the  rest  of  the  world  to 
adapt  their  political  system  to  the  French  standard 


304  Alexander  Hamilton 

of  perfection — the  desire  of  securing  the  future  con- 
trol of  our  affairs  by  humbling  and  ruining  the  inde- 
pendent supporters  of  their  country,  and  of  elevating 
the  partisans  and  tools  of  France, — the  desire  of 
entangling  our  commerce  with  preferences  and  re- 
strictions which  would  give  to  her  the  monopoly; — 
these  passions,  the  most  imperious, — these  motives, 
the  most  enticing  to  a  crooked  policy,  are  sufficient 
persuasives  to  undertake  the  subjugation  of  this 
country. 

Added  to  these  primary  inducements,  the  desire  of 
finding  an  outlet  for  a  part  of  the  vast  armies  which, 
on  the  termination  of  the  European  war,  are  likely 
to  perplex  and  endanger  the  men  in  power,  would  be 
an  auxiliary  motive  of  great  force.  The  total  loss  of 
the  troops  sent  would  be  no  loss  to  France.  Their 
cupidity  would  be  readily  excited  to  the  undertaking 
by  the  prospect  of  dividing  among  themselves  the 
fertile  lands  of  this  country.  Great  Britain  once 
silenced,  there  would  be  no  insuperable  obstacle  to 
the  transportation.  The  divisions  among  us  which 
have  been  urged  to  our  commissioners  as  one  motive 
to  a  compliance  with  the  unreasonable  demands  of 
the  Directory,  would  be  equally  an  encouragement 
to  invasion.  It  would  be  believed  that  a  sufficient 
number  would  flock  to  the  standard  of  France  to 
render  it  easy  to  quell  the  resistance  of  the  rest. 
Drimk  with  success,  nothing  would  be  thought  too 
arduous  to  be  accomplished. 

It  is  too  much  a  part  of  our  temper  to  indulge  an 
overweening  security.  At  the  close  of  our  revolu- 
tion war,  the  phantom  of  perpetual  peace  danced 


The  Stand  305 

before  the  eyes  of  everybody.  We  see  at  this  early 
period  with  how  much  difficulty  war  has  been 
parried,  and  that  with  all  our  efforts  to  preserve 
peace,  we  are  now  in  a  state  of  partial  hostility.  Un- 
taught by  this  experience  we  now  seem  inclined  to 
regard  the  idea  of  invasion  as  incredible,  and  to  regu- 
late our  conduct  by  the  belief  of  its  improbability. 
Who  would  have  thought,  eighteen  months  ago,  that 
Great  Britain  would  at  this  time  have  been  in  serious 
danger  of  an  invasion  from  France  ?  Is  it  not  now 
more  probable  that  such  a  danger  may  overtake  us, 
than  it  was  then  that  itw^ould  so  soon  Great  Britain  ? 

There  are  currents  in  human  affairs  when  events, 
at  other  times  little  less  than  miraculous,  are  to  be 
considered  as  natural  and  simple.  Such  were  the 
eras  of  Macedonian,  of  Roman,  of  Gothic,  of  Saracen 
inundation.  Such  is  the  present  era  of  French 
fanaticism.  Wise  men,  when  they  discover  symp- 
toms of  a  similar  era,  look  for  prodigies,  and  prepare 
for  them  with  foresight  and  energy. 

Admit  that  in  our  case  invasion  is  upon  the  whole 
improbable;  yet,  if  there  are  any  circumstances 
which  pronounce  that  the  apprehension  of  it  is  not 
absolutely  chimerical,  it  is  the  part  of  wisdom  to  act 
as  if  it  were  likely  to  happen.  What  are  the  incon- 
veniences of  preparation  compared  with  the  infinite 
magnitude  of  the  evil  if  it  shall  surprise  us  unpre- 
pared? They  are  lighter  than  air,  weighed  against 
the  smallest  probability  of  so  disastrous  a  result. 

But  what  is  to  be  done?  Is  it  not  wiser  to  com- 
pound on  any  terms  than  to  provoke  the  conse- 
quences of  resistance? 


VOL.  VI. — 20. 


3o6  Alexander  Hamilton 

To  do  this  is  dishonor — it  is  ruin — it  is  death. 
Waiving  other  considerations,  there  can  be  no 
rehance  on  its  efficacy.  The  example  of  Portugal 
teaches  us  that  it  is  to  purchase  disgrace,  not  safety. 
The  cravings  of  despotic  rapacity  may  be  appeased, 
but  they  are  not  to  be  satisfied.  They  will  quickly 
renew  their  force,  and  call  for  new  sacrifices  in  pro- 
portion to  the  facility  with  which  the  first  were 
made.  The  situation  of  France  is  likely  to  make 
plunder  for  considerable  time  to  come  an  indis- 
pensable expedient  of  government.  Excluding  the 
great  considerations  of  public  policy,  and  bringing 
the  matter  to  the  simple  test  of  pecuniary  calcula- 
tion, resistance  is  to  be  preferred  to  submission. 
The  surrender  of  our  whole  wealth  would  only  pro- 
cure respite,  not  safety.  The  disbursements  for  war 
will  chiefly  be  at  home.  They  will  not  necessarily 
carry  away  our  riches,  and  they  will  preserve  our 
honor  and  give  us  security. 

But,  in  the  event  supposed,  can  we  oppose  with 
success?  There  is  no  event  in  which  we  may  not 
look  with  confidence  to  a  successful  resistance. 
Though  Great  Britain  should  be  impolitic  or  wicked 
enough  (which  is  hoped  to  be  impossible)  to  com- 
promise her  difficulties  with  France,  to  divide  the 
United  States  according  to  the  insulting  threat  of 
the  agents  of  France,  still  it  is  in  our  power  to  main- 
tain our  independence  and  baffle  every  enemy.  The 
people  of  the  United  States,  from  their  number, 
situation,  and  resources,  are  invincible,  if  they  are 
provident  and  faithful  to  themselves. 

The  question  returns,  What  is  to  be  done?     Shall 


The  Stand  307 

we  declare  war  ?  No ;  there  are  still  chances  to  avoid 
a  rupture,  which  ought  to  be  taken.  Want  of  suc- 
cess must  bring  the  present  despots  to  reason. 
Every  day  may  produce  a  revolution  which  may 
substitute  better  men  in  their  place,  and  lead  to 
honorable  accommodation. 

Our  true  policy  is,  in  the  attitude  of  calm  defiance, 
to  meet  the  aggressions  upon  us  by  proportionate 
resistance,  and  to  prepare  vigorously  for  further 
resistance.  To  this  end,  the  chief  measures  requisite 
are — to  invigorate  our  treasury  by  calling  into  ac- 
tivity the  principal  untouched  resources  of  revenue — 
to  fortify  in  earnest  our  chief  seaports — to  establish 
founderies,  and  increase  our  arsenals — to  create  a 
respectable  naval  force,  and  to  raise  with  the  utmost 
diligence  a  considerable  army.  Our  merchant  vessels 
ought  to  be  permitted  not  only  to  arm  themselves,  but 
to  sink  or  capture  their  assailants.  Our  vessels  of 
war  ought  to  cruise  on  our  coast  and  serve  as  convoys 
to  our  trade.  In  doing  this,  they  ought  also  to  be 
authorized  not  only  to  sink  or  capture  assailants,  but 
likewise  to  capture  and  bring  in  privateers  found 
hovering  within  twenty  leagues  of  our  coast.  For  this 
last  measure,  precedent,  if  requisite,  is  to  be  found  in 
the  conduct  of  neutral  powers  on  other  occasions. 

This  course,  it  will  be  objected,  implies  a  state  of 
war.  Let  it  be  so.  But  it  will  be  a  limited,  a  miti- 
gated state  of  war,  to  grow  into  a  general  war  or  not 
at  the  election  of  France.  What  may  be  that  elec- 
tion will  probably  depend  on  future  and  incalculable 
events.  The  continuation  of  success  on  the  part 
of  France  would  insure  war.     The  want  of  it  might 


3o8  Alexander  Hamilton 

facilitate  accommodation.  There  are  examples  in 
which  states  have  been  for  a  long  time  in  a  state  of 
partial  hostility  without  proceeding  to  general  rup- 
ture. The  duration  of  this  course  of  conduct  on  our 
part  may  be  restricted  to  the  continuance  of  the  two 
last  decrees  of  France:  that  by  which  the  trade  of 
neutrals  with  the  ports  of  her  enemies  has  been  in- 
tercepted, and  that  by  which  vessels  and  their  car- 
goes composed  in  whole  or  in  part  of  British  fabrics, 
are  liable  to  seizure  and  condemnation. 

The  declared  suspension  of  our  treaties  with 
France,  is  a  measure  of  evident  justice  and  necessity. 
It  is  the  natural  consequence  of  a  total  violation  on 
one  side.  It  would  be  preposterous  to  be  fettered  by 
treaties,  which  are  wholly  disregarded  by  the  other 
party.  It  is  essentially  our  interest  to  get  rid  of  the 
guaranty  in  the  treaty  of  alliance,  which,  on  the  part 
of  France,  is  likely  to  be  henceforth  nugatory;  on 
the  part  of  the  United  States,  is  a  substantial  and 
dangerous  stipulation,  obliging  them  in  good  faith  to 
take  part  with  France  in  any  future  defensive  war 
in  which  her  West  India  colonies  may  be  attacked. 
The  consular  convention  is  likewise  a  mischievous  in- 
strument, devised  by  France  in  the  spirit  of  extend- 
ing her  influence  into  other  countries,  and  producing 
to  a  certain  extent  imperium  in  imperio. 

It  may  be  happy  for  the  United  States  that  an 
occasion  has  been  furnished  by  France  in  which 
with  good  faith  they  may  break  through  these 
trammels;  readjusting,  when  reconciliation  shall 
take  place,  a  basis  of  connection  or  intercourse  more 
convenient  and  more  eligible. 


The  Stand  309 

The  resolution  to  raise  an  army,  it  is  to  be  feared, 
is  that  one  of  the  measures  suggested  which  will 
meet  with  the  greatest  obstacles,  and  yet  it  is  the  one 
which  ought  to  unite  opinion.  Being  merely  a  pre- 
caution for  internal  security,  it  can  in  no  sense  tend 
to  provoke  war,  and  looking  to  eventual  security  in 
a  case  which,  if  it  should  happen,  would  threaten  our 
very  existence  as  a  nation,  it  is  the  most  important. 

The  history  of  our  revolution  war  is  a  serious  ad- 
monition to  it.  The  American  cause  had  nearly 
been  lost  for  want  of  creating,  in  the  first  instance, 
a  solid  force  commensurate  in  duration  with  the  war. 
Immense  additional  expense  and  waste  and  a  variety 
of  other  evils  were  incurred,  which  might  have  been 
avoided. 

Suppose  an  invasion,  and  that  we  are  left  to  de- 
pend on  militia  alone,  can  it  be  doubted  that  a  rapid 
and  formidable  progress  would,  in  the  first  instance, 
be  made  by  the  invaders?  Who  can  answer  what 
dismay  this  might  inspire,  how  far  it  might  go  to 
create  general  panic,  to  rally  under  the  banners  of 
the  enemy  the  false  and  the  timid?  The  imagina- 
tion cannot,  without  alarm,  anticipate  the  conse- 
quences. Prudence  commands  that  they  shall  be 
guarded  against.  To  have  a  good  army  on  foot  will 
be  the  best  of  all  precautions  to  prevent,  as  well  as 
to  repel,  invasion. 

The  propriety  of  the  measure  is  so  palpable  that  it 
will  argue  treachery  or  incapacity  in  our  councils,  if 
it  be  not  adopted.  The  friends  of  the  government 
owe  it  to  their  own  characters  to  press  it;  its  op- 
posers  can  give  no  better  proof  that  they  are  not 


3IO  Alexander  Hamilton 

abandoned  to  a  foreign  power,  than  to  concur  in  it. 
The  public  safety  will  be  more  indebted  to  its  ad- 
vocates than  to  the  advocates  of  any  other  measure, 
in  proportion  as  our  independence  and  liberty  are  of 
more  consequence  than  our  trade. 

It  is  the  fervent  wish  of  patriotism  that  our  councils 
and  nation  may  be  united  and  resolute.  The  dearest 
interests  call  for  it.  A  great  pubHc  danger  com- 
mands it.  Every  good  man  will  rejoice  to  embrace 
the  adversary  of  his  former  opinions,  if  he  will  now 
by  candor  and  energy  evince  his  attachment  to  his 
country.  Whoever  does  not  do  this,  consigns  him- 
self to  irrevocable  dishonor.  But  it  is  not  the  tri- 
umph over  a  political  rival  which  the  true  lover  of  his 
country  desires — it  is  the  safety  and  the  welfare  of 
that  country ;  and  he  will  gladly  share  with  his  bitter- 
est opponent  the  glory  of  defending  and  preserving 
her.  Americans,  rouse — be  unanimous,  be  virtuous, 
be  firm,  exert  your  courage,  trust  in  Heaven,  and 
nobly  defy  the  enemies  both  of  God  and  man  I 

Titus  Manlius. 


VII 

April  21,  1798. 

The  dispatches  from  our  envoys  have  at  length 
made  their  appearance.'  They  present  a  picture  of 
the  French  Government  exceeding  in  turpitude  what- 
ever was  anticipated  from  the  previous  intimations 
of  their  contents.  It  was  natural  to  expect  that  the 
perusal  of  them  would  have  inspired  a  universal 

»  They  were  sent  in  to  Congress  April  3d. 


The  Stand  311 

sentiment  of  indignation  and  disgust;  and  that  no 
man  calHng  himself  an  American  would  have  had 
the  hardihood  to  defend  or  even  to  palliate  a  conduct 
so  atrocious.  But  it  is  already  apparent  that  an 
expectation  of  this  kind  would  not  have  been  well 
founded. 

There  are  strong  symptoms  that  men  in  power  in 
France  understand  better  than  ourselves  the  true 
character  of  their  faction  in  this  country,  at  least  of 
its  leaders;  and  that  as  to  these,  the  agents  who  con- 
ferred with  our  envoys  were  not  mistaken  in  predict- 
ing that  the  unreasonableness  of  the  demands  upon 
us  would  not  serve  to  detach  the  party  from  France, 
or  to  reunite  them  to  their  own  country.  The  high- 
priest  of  this  sect,  with  a  tender  regard  for  the  honor 
of  the  immaculate  Directory,  has  already  imagined 
several  ingenious  distinctions  to  rescue  them  from  the 
odium  and  corruption  unfolded  by  the  dispatches. 
Among  these  is  the  suggestion  that  there  is  no  proof 
of  the  privity  of  the  Directory — all  may  have  been 
the  mere  contrivance  of  the  Minister  for  Foreign 
Relations. 

The  presumption  from  so  miserable  a  subterfuge  is, 
that  had  the  propositions  proceeded  immediately 
from  the  Directory,  the  cry  from  the  same  quarter 
would  have  been — there  is  no  evidence  the  council  or 
nation  approved  of  them;  they,  at  least,  are  not 
implicated ;  the  friendship  of  the  two  republics  ought 
not  to  be  disturbed  on  account  of  the  villany  of  the 
transitory  and  fugitive  organs  of  one  of  them.  The 
inventor  of  the  subterfuge,  however,  well  knew  that 
the  executive  organ  of  a  nation  never  comes  forward 


312  Alexander  Hamilton 

in  person  to  negotiate  with  foreign  ministers;  and 
that  unless  it  be  presumed  to  direct  and  adopt  what 
is  done  by  its  agents,  it  may  always  be  sheltered  from 
responsibility  or  blame.  The  recourse  to  so  pitiful  an 
evasion,  betrays  in  its  author  a  systematic  design  to 
excuse  France  at  all  events— to  soften  a  spirit  of  sub- 
mission to  every  violence  she  may  commit — and  to 
prepare  the  way  for  implicit  subjection  to  her  will. 
To  be  the  proconsul  of  a  despotic  Directory  over  the 
United  States,  degraded  to  the  condition  of  a  pro- 
vince, can  alone  be  the  criminal,  the  ignoble  aim  of  so 
seditious,  so  prostitute  a  character. 

The  subaltern  mercenaries  go  still  further.  Pub- 
Hcations  have  appeared,  endeavoring  to  justify  or 
extenuate  the  demands  upon  our  envoys,  and  to 
inculcate  the  slavish  doctrine  of  compliance.  The 
United  States,  it  is  said,  are  the  aggressors,  and  ought 
to  make  atonement.  France  assisted  them  in  their 
revolution  with  loans,  and  they  ought  to  reciprocate 
the  benefit ;  peace  is  a  boon  worth  the  price  required 
for  it,  and  it  ought  to  be  paid.  In  this  motley  form 
our  country  is  urged  to  sink,  voluntarily  and  without 
a  struggle,  to  a  state  of  tributary  vassalage.  Ameri- 
cans are  found  audacious  and  mean  enough  to  join 
in  the  chorus  of  a  foreign  nation,  which  calls  upon  us 
to  barter  our  independence  for  a  respite  from  the  lash. 

The  charge  of  aggression  upon  the  United  States  is 
false;  and  if  true,  the  reparation,  from  the  nature  of 
the  case,  ought  not  to  be  pecuniary.  This  species  of 
indemnification  between  nations  is  only  proper  where 
there  has  been  pecuniary  injury. 

The  loans  received  by  us  from  France  were  asked  as 


The  Stand  313 

a  favor,  on  condition  of  reimbursement  by  the  United 
States;  and  were  freely  granted  for  a  purpose  of 
mutual  advantage.  The  advances  to  be  made  by  us 
were  exacted  as  the  price  of  peace.  Though  in  name 
loans,  they  would  be  in  fact  contributions,  by  the 
coercion  of  a  power  which  has  already  wrested  from 
our  citizens  an  immense  property,  for  which  it  owes 
to  them  compensation. 

To  pay  such  a  price  for  peace,  is  to  prefer  peace  to 
independence,  and  the  nation  which  becomes  tribu- 
tary takes  a  master.'  Peace  is  doubtless  precious, 
but  it  is  a  bauble  compared  with  national  independ- 
ence, which  includes  national  liberty.  The  evils  of 
war  to  resist  such  a  precedent  are  insignificant,  com- 
pared with  the  evils  of  the  precedent.  Besides  that, 
there  could  be  no  possible  security  for  the  enjoyment 
of  the  object  for  which  the  disgraceful  sacrifice  was 
made.  To  disguise  the  poison,  misrepresentation  is 
combined  with  sophistry.  It  is  alleged  that  finally 
no  more  was  asked  than  that  the  United  States 
should  purchase  sixteen  millions  of  Dutch  inscrip- 
tions, and  that  by  doing  this,  they  would  have  se- 
cured compensation  to  their  citizens  for  depredations 
on  their  trade  to  four  times  the  amount,  with  an  inter- 
mission of  the  depredations;  that  no  hazard  of  ulti- 
mate loss  could  have  attended  the  operation,  because 

'  The  argument  of  what  has  been  done  in  the  cases  of  Algerines  and 
Indians,  has  nothing  pertinent  but  in  the  comparison  of  relative  fero- 
city. In  this  view  the  claim  of  the  Directory  is  indisputable;  but  in 
every  other  it  is  preposterous.  It  is  the  general  practice  of  civilized 
nations  to  pay  barbarians;  there  is  no  point  of  honor  to  the  contrary. 
But  between  civilized  nations,  the  payment  of  tribute  by  one  to  an- 
other, is,  by  the  common  opinion  of  mankind,  a  badge  of  servitude. 


314  Alexander  Hamilton 

the  United  States  owed  the  Dutch  a  much  larger  sum, 
which  would  be  a  pledge  for  payment  or  discount. 

This  is  a  palpable  attempt  to  deceive.  The  first 
propositions  were  such  as  have  been  represented  in  a 
former  paper;  but  it  appears  in  the  sequel  that  the 
French  agents,  seeing  the  inflexible  opposition  of  our 
envoys  to  their  plan,  and  hoping  to  extort  finally  a 
considerable  sum,  though  less  than  at  first  contem- 
plated, relaxed  so  far  in  their  demands,  as  to  narrow 
them  down  to  the  payment  of  a  douceur  of  twelve 
hundred  thousand  livres,  with  a  positive  engagement 
to  advance  to  the  French  Government  a  sum  equal 
to  the  amount  of  the  spoliations  of  our  trade,  and  a 
further  engagement  to  send  to  our  government  for 
power  to  purchase  of  France  thirty-two  millions  of 
the  inscriptions  (12,800,000  dollars) ;  in  return  for  all 
which,  our  envoys  were  to  be  permitted  to  remain  six 
months  in  Paris,  depredations  on  our  trade  during 
that  time  were  to  be  suspended,  and  a  commission  of 
five  persons  was  to  be  appointed  to  liquidate  the 
claims  for  past  depredations,  which  were  to  be  satis- 
fied "  in  a  time  and  manner  to  be  agreed  upon. "  The 
substance  of  these  demands  is  to  pay  absolutely 
twenty  millions  of  dollars  more  than  the  estimated 
amount  of  the  spoliations ;  for  what  ?  Barely  for  the 
acknowledgment  of  a  debt  due  to  our  citizens,  which, 
without  it,  is  not  the  less  due,  and  for  the  suspension 
of  hostilities  '  for  six  months. 

Afterwards,  in  a  conversation  between  the  French 

^  It  is  observable  that  the  French  give  themselves  the  denomination 
of  hostilities  to  their  depredations  upon  us.  Our  Jacobins  would  have 
us  consider  them  as  gentle  caresses. 


The  Stand  315 

minister  himself  and  one  of  our  envoys,  the  proposi- 
tions assumed  another  form.  The  United  States 
were  required  to  purchase  of  France,  at  par,  sixteen 
milhons  of  inscriptions,  and  to  promise  further  aid 
when  in  their  power.  This  arrangement  being  first 
made,  and  not  before,  France  was  to  take  measures 
for  reimbursing  the  equitable  demands  of  our  citizens 
on  account  of  captures. 

The  purchase  of  the  inscriptions  was  to  be  a  prelim- 
inary. The  arrangement  for  reimbursing  our  mer- 
chants was  to  follow.  The  nature  of  it  was  not 
explained ;  but  it  is  to  be  inferred  from  all  that  pre- 
ceded that  the  expedient  of  the  advance  of  an  equal 
sum  by  the  United  States  would  have  been  pressed 
as  the  basis  of  the  promised  arrangement.  This  last 
proposal  was  in  its  principle  as  bad  as  either  of  the 
former;  its  tendency,  worse.  The  promise  of  future 
assistance  would  have  carried  with  it  the  privilege  to 
repeat  at  pleasure  the  demand  of  money,  and  to  dis- 
pute with  us  about  our  ability  to  supply ;  and  it  would 
have  embarked  us  as  an  associate  with  France  in  the 
war.  It  was  to  promise  her  the  most  effectual  aid  in 
our  power,  and  that  of  which  she  stood  most  in  need. 

The  scheme  of  concealment  was  a  trick.  The  in- 
terest of  France  to  engage  us  in  the  war  against  Great 
Britain,  as  a  means  of  wounding  her  commerce,  is  too 
strong  to  have  permitted  the  secret  to  be  kept  by  her. 
By  the  ratification  of  the  treaty,  in  which  the  Senate 
must  have  concurred,  too  many  would  have  obtained 
possession  of  the  secret  to  allow  it  to  remain  one. 
While  it  did,  the  apprehension  of  discovery  would 
have    enabled    France   to    use    it  as   an   engine   of 


3i6  Alexander  Hamilton 

unlimited  extortion.  But  a  still  greater  objection  is, 
that  it  would  have  been  infamous  in  the  United  States 
thus  covertly  to  relinquish  their  neutrality,  and  with 
equal  cowardice  and  hypocrisy  to  wear  the  mask  of  it, 
when  they  had  renounced  the  reality. 

The  idea  of  securing  our  advances,  by  means  of  the 
debt  which  we  owe  to  the  Dutch,  is  without  founda- 
tion. The  creditors  of  the  United  States  are  the 
private  citizens  of  the  Batavian  Republic.  Their  de- 
mands could  not  be  opposed  by  a  claim  of  our  gov- 
ernment upon  their  government.  The  only  shape  in 
which  it  could  be  attempted  must  be  in  that  of  re- 
prisals for  the  delinquency  of  the  government.  But 
this  would  not  only  be  a  gross  violation  of  the  princi- 
ple, it  would  be  contrary  to  express  stipulations  in  the 
contracts  for  the  loans.' 

In  the  same  spirit  of  deception  it  has  also  been 
alleged  that  our  envoys,  by  giving  the  douceur  of 
twelve  himdred  thousand  livres,  and  agreeing  to  send 
for  powers  to  make  a  loan,  might  have  obtained  a 
suspension  of  depredations  for  six  months.  There  is 
not  a  syllable  in  the  dispatches  to  countenance  this 
assertion.  A  large  advance  in  addition,  either  on  the 
basis  of  the  spoHations,  or  by  way  of  purchase  of  the 
^  inscriptions,  is  uniformly  made  the  condition  of  sus- 
pending hostilities. 

Glosses  so  false  and  insidious  as  these,  in  a  crisis  of 
such  imminent  public  danger,  to  mislead  the  opinion 
of  our  nation  concerning  the  conduct  and  views  of  a 
foreign  enemy,  are  shoots  from  a  pernicious  trunk. 

^  They  all  provide  against  seizxxre  or  sequestration  byway  or  reprisals, 
etc. 


The  Stand  317 

Opportunity  alone  is  wanting  to  iinveil  the  treason 
which  lurks  at  the  core. 

What  signifies  the  quantum  of  the  contribution  had 
it  been  really  as  unimportant  as  it  is  represented? 
T  is  the  principle  which  is  to  be  resisted  at  every 
hazard.  'T  is  the  pretension  to  make  us  tributary,  in 
opposition  to  which  every  American  ought  to  resign 
the  last  drop  of  his  blood. 

The  pratings  of  the  Gallic  faction  at  this  time  re- 
mind us  of  those  of  the  British  faction  at  the  com- 
mencement of  our  revolution. 

The  insignificance  of  a  duty  of  three  pence  per 
pound  on  tea  was  echoed  and  re-echoed  as  the  bait 
to  an  admission  of  the  right  to  bind  us  in  all  cases 
whatsoever. 

The  tools  of  France  incessantly  clamor  against  the 
treaty  with  Britain  as  the  just  cause  of  the  resent- 
ment of  France.  It  is  curious  to  remark,  that  in  the 
conferences  with  our  envoys  this  treaty  was  never 
once  mentioned  by  the  French  agents.  Particular 
passages  in  the  speech  of  the  President  are  alone 
specified  as  a  ground  of  dissatisfaction.  This  is  at 
once  a  specimen  of  the  fruitful  versatility  with  which 
causes  of  complaint  are  contrived,  and  of  the  very 
slight  foundations  on  which  they  are  adopted.  A 
temperate  expression  of  sensibility  at  an  outrageous 
indignity,  offered  to  our  government  by  a  member  of 
the  Directory,  is  converted  into  a  mortal  offence.  The 
tyrants  will  not  endure  a  murmur  at  the  blows  they 
inflict.  But  the  dispatches  of  our  envoys,  while  they 
do  not  sanction  the  charge  preferred  by  the  Gallic 
faction  against  the  treaty,  confirm  a  very  serious 


3i8  Alexander  Hamilton 

charge  which  the  friends  of  the  government  bring 
against  that  faction.  They  prove  by  the  unreserved 
confession  of  her  agents,  that  France  places  absolute 
dependence  on  this  party  in  every  event,  and  counts 
upon  their  devotion  to  her  as  an  encouragement  to 
the  conditions  which  they  attempt  to  impose.  The 
people  of  this  country  must  be  infatuated  indeed,  if 
after  this  plain  confession  they  are  at  a  loss  for  the 
true  source  of  the  evils  they  suffered,  or  may  hereafter 
suffer  from  the  despots  of  France.  'T  is  the  un- 
natural league  of  a  portion  of  our  citizens  with  the 

oppressors  of  their  country. 

Titus  Manlius. 


DETECTOR  * 

1798. 

Every  day  brings  fresh  confirmations  of  the  truth 
of  the  prediction  to  our  envoys  that  the  French  fac- 
tion in  America  would  go  all  lengths  with  their  im- 
perious and  unprincipled  masters.  It  is  more  and 
more  evident  that  as  many  of  them  as  may  dare  will 
join  the  standard  of  France  if  once  erected  in  this 
country.  After  all  that  has  happened,  there  is  no 
other  solution  of  the  indefatigable  and  malignant 
exertions  which  they  are  making  to  propagate  dis- 
affection to  our  own  government,  and  to  justify  or 
extenuate  the  conduct  of  France.  The  authors  of 
these  exertions  understand  too  well  the  human  heart 

^  This  paper,  now  first  printed  from  the  Hamilton  MSB.  (Vol.  XV., 
p.  10 1),  is  an  elaborate  examination  of  the  X.  Y.  Z.  correspondence.  It 
is  in  the  same  line  as  the  preceding  essays  of  The  Stand,  and  must 
have  followed  them  closely  in  point  of  time. 


Detector  3^9 

not  to  know,  that  ideas  which  have  once  taken  deep 
root  in  a  community,  and  have  enHsted  its  passions 
against  one  object  and  in  favor  of  another,  cannot 
suddenly  be  changed;  and  that  in  the  event  of  an 
invasion  they  could  not,  if  so  disposed,  prevent  their 
followers  from  acting  in  conformity  with  the  strong 
bias  which  had  been  previously  given  to  their  feel- 
ings. They  know  this  so  well  that  if  they  were  not  in 
their  hearts  more  Frenchmen  than  Americans;  if  they 
were  not  ready  in  the  gratification  of  ambition, 
vanity,  or  revenge,  or  in  compliance  with  the  wages 
of  corruption,  to  immolate  the  independence  and 
welfare  of  their  country  at  the  shrine  of  France 
*  *  *  they  would  not,  as  they  do,  pursue  a  conduct 
which  they  cannot  be  insensible  leads  to  that  fatal 
result.  Their  pride,  if  not  their  patriotism,  would 
prevent  them.  Openly  claimed  by  a  foreign  govern- 
ment as  its  obsequious  tools,  the  jealousy  of  their 
own  honor  would  prompt  them  to  be  forward  in 
giving  the  lie  to  a  claim  to  them  so  pregnant  with  ig- 
nominy. That  this  has  not  been  the  effect,  is  a  con- 
vincing proof  that  they  have  embarked  beyond  the 
power  of  retreat.  It  affords  a  presumption  that  they 
are  in  a  situation  which  leaves  them  no  longer  wills  of 
their  own.  It  is  astonishing  to  observe,  that  they 
not  only  do  not  contradict  the  charge  by  their  actions, 
but  seem  little,  if  at  all,  solicitous  to  disavow  it  in 
their  language.  And  in  the  measures  which  they 
advocate,  with  an  effrontery  imequalled,  under  simi- 
lar circumstances,  in  the  history  of  any  nation,  they 
display  unequivocally  their  prostitute  devotion  to  the 
enemies  of  their  country. 


320  Alexander  Hamilton 

A  principal  expedient  employed  by  these  men  to 
second  the  views  of  the  French  Government,  and 
coimteract  the  salutary  impressions  on  the  public 
mind,  which  its  abominable  treatment  of  us  is  calcu- 
lated to  produce,  is  to  inculcate  that  our  envoys,  in 
the  conferences  they  have  communicated,  have  been 
the  dupes  of  unauthorized  and  swindling  impostors, 
and  that  our  government,  in  publishing  these  dis- 
patches, has  been  actuated  by  a  desire  to  make 
the  circumstance  subservient  to  a  long  premeditated 
design  of  rupture  with  France. 

The  French  accoimt  of  a  transaction  in  which  the 
despots  of  France  have  violated  a  right  of  nations 
sacred  among  savages  as  well  as  civilized  men,  by  im- 
prisoning the  Ambassador  of  Portugal,  is  pressed  into 
the  service  of  the  infamous  scheme  of  defaming  our 
own  government  and  vindicating  those  despots.  This 
account  represents  the  Portuguese  Minister  as  having 
been  deceived  into  the  advance  of  a  large  sum  of 
money,  as  a  bribe  to  three  of  the  Directory,  by  pre- 
tended agents  of  the  French  Government,  which, 
coming  to  light  through  the  channel  of  the  French 
Minister  at  the  Court  of  Portugal,  occasioned  the  im- 
prisonment of  the  Portuguese  Ambassador  and  sev- 
eral of  the  pretended  agents.  And  it  is  alleged  that  a 
like  imposition  has,  in  all  probability,  been  practised 
upon  our  envoys. 

What  may  appear  to  be  the  real  nature  of  the 
transaction  in  question  can  only  be  judged  of  when 
the  Portuguese  Government,  free  from  the  dread  of 
France,  shall  have  told  its  story;  when,  if  ever,  the 
imprisoned  Minister  shall  be  at  liberty  to  explain 


Detector  321 

the  grounds  of  the  confidence  which  he  reposed  in  the 
agents  to  whom  the  money  was  advanced.  Till  then 
all  judgment  of  the  true  complexion  of  the  affair 
must  be  suspended. 

In  the  meantime  the  character  of  bold  iniquity 
which  the  Directory  have  so  eminently  earned,  au- 
thorizes the  supposition  that  the  agents  now  dis- 
avowed were  really  agents  of  the  government — that 
they  actually  received  the  bribe  for  the  Directory; 
that  these,  deeming  it  expedient  afterwards  to  dis- 
appoint the  expectation  given  to  Portugal,  found  it 
necessary  to  disclaim  the  inducement,  and  as  a  color 
to  their  ill-faith,  and  a  shield  against  the  infamy  of 
the  proceeding,  to  imprison  the  Minister  and  the 
inferior  agents.  The  present  rulers  of  France  have 
soared  to  so  stupendous  a  height  of  profligacy  that 
the  diminutive  vices  of  other  men  afford  no  standard 
by  which  to  judge  of  their  conduct — no  clue  to  the 
mysterious  labyrinth  of  their  complicated  crimes. 

There  are  even  circumstances  to  countenance  the 
supposition  of  this  double  plot.  It  is  stated  that 
Wascowitch,  one  of  the  persons  disavowed  and 
seized,  was  apparently  in  close  connection  with 
Beaumarchais;  was  in  "  ostensible  familiarity  with 
government  men,''  and  had  actually  had  communica- 
tion with  a  real  agent  of  government  for  the  purpose  of 
discovering  the  views  of  newly-arrived  foreign  envoys. 
And  it  appears  that  Beaumarchais  is  not  among  the 
persons  seized. 

It  may  serve  as  an  index  to  the  affair  to  understand 
that  Beaumarchais  is  one  of  the  most  cunning  and 
intriguing  men  of  Europe;    that  he  was  employed 


VOL.  VI. — 21. 


322  Alexander  Hamilton 

under  the  royal  government  as  a  secret  confidential 
agent,  in  which  capacity  he  acted  between  the  United 
States  and  France,  before  the  acknowledgment  of  our 
independence,  and  that  he  is  known  to  be  in  intimate 
connection  with  the  present  French  Minister  for 
Foreign  Relations. 

In  the  capacity  of  confidential  agent  a  considerable 
part  of  the  monies  advanced  by  France  for  the  use  of 
the  United  States  passed  through  his  hands.  There 
was  a  sum  of  a  million  of  livres  which  Dr.  Franklin,  in 
the  carelessness  of  confidence,  acknowledged  to  have 
been  received,  of  which  the  application  could  not  be 
traced.  When  inquiry  on  behalf  of  our  government 
was  made  of  the  French  Minister  concerning  the  ap- 
propriation of  this  million,  the  only  answer  to  be 
obtained  was  that  it  was  a  " secret  du  cabinet."  But 
the  Revolution  has  unravelled  this  secret.  During 
the  reign  of  Robespierre,  Beaumarchais  was  in  dis- 
grace and  a  fugitive.  The  ministry  of  that  period, 
not  scrupling  to  unveil  the  corruptions  of  the  old 
government,  charged  the  receipt  of  the  missing  mil- 
lion upon  Beaumarchais,  and  furnished  a  copy  of  the 
receipt  which  he  is  alleged  to  have  given  for  it. 

This  transaction  proves  that  Beaumarchais,  besides 
being  the  confidential  political  agent  of  the  then 
administration  of  France,  was  the  instrument  or 
accomplice  of  its  cupidity.  What  but  the  participa- 
tion of  the  Minister  in  a  scheme  of  embezzlement 
could  have  induced  him  to  make  a  cabinet  secret  of  the 
application  of  this  million? 

Who  a  more  likely,  a  more  fit  instrument  of  the 
avidity  of  the  present  government  than  this  same 


Detector  323 

Beaumarchaisf  When  men  apparently  in  close  con- 
nection with  him  take  bribes  from  foreign  ministers, 
professedly  for  the  use  of  the  Directory,  vvhat  more 
probable  than  that  they  are  truly  for  that  use — that 
Beaumarchats  is  the  link  between  the  Directory  and 
the  ostensible  agents? 

If  afterwards  expedient  or  necessary  to  disavow, 
what  more  easy  to  be  managed  ?  Beaumarchats  is  no 
doubt  too  adroit  to  transact  such  business  in  a  man- 
ner that  can  admit  of  proof  of  his  agency.  If  incul- 
pated by  his  agents  he  has  only  boldly  to  deny  the 
charge  and  to  treat  it  as  a  part  of  the  imposture. 
The  all  sufficient  patronage  of  the  Directory  could  not 
fail  to  ensure  credit  to  his  denial  and  to  shield  him 
from  detection. 

In  such  a  case  the  appearances  to  be  expected  are 
exactly  such  as  occur  in  the  present  affair.  The  im- 
mediate and  chief  agent  goes  untouched.  The  sub- 
alterns are  consigned  to  punishment,  real  or  seeming^ 
The  semblance  of  punishment  may  even  be  a  thing 
understood  all  round.  As  yet  nothing  more  than 
imprisonment  is  known  to  have  taken  place ;  and  it  is 
very  possible  that  final  impunity  may  attend  Was- 
cowitch  and  his  colleagues ;  though  from  the  character 
of  the  Directory,  if  necessary  to  their  purposes,  they 
would  find  no  difficulty  in  the  sacrifice  of  these  men, 
by  hurrying  them  to  the  guillotine  after  a  mock- trial, 
or  by  giving  them,  like  Carnot,  a  secret  passport  to  the 
other  world. 

If  it  be  true,  as  we  are  told,  that  France  has  sus- 
pended the  project  of  invading  Portugal,  and  is  in 
negotiation  with  her  under  the  auspices  of  Spain,  it 


324  Alexander  Hamilton 

is  very  possible  that  the  precautions  of  the  Portu- 
guese Minister  to  establish  the  participation  of  the 
Directory  were  better  than  was  at  first  suspected, 
and  that  the  apprehension  of  having  the  affair 
seriously  probed  may  obtain  for  Portugal  a  suspen- 
sion from  Ruin. 

This  comment  upon  the  affair  is  justified  by  the 
facts  ascertained  in  our  case.  The  participation  of 
the  French  Minister  for  Foreign  Relations  in  the 
propositions  of  the  secret  agents  to  our  envoys  admits 
of  no  question.  To  be  convinced  of  these  we  have 
only  to  compare  the  declarations  and  proposals  of  the 
agents  with  those  of  the  Minister  himself. 

In  the  communications  of  those  agents  the  leading 
ideas  are  that  the  Directory  were  greatly  incensed  at 
some  passages  in  the  President's  speech;  that  repara- 
tion must  be  made  for  them ;  that  money  might  be  a 
substitute  for  other  reparation ;  that  this  money  was 
to  be  offered  by  our  envoys,  and  to  serve  as  pocket- 
money,  as  a  gratuity,  for  the  Directory ;  and  that  in 
addition  to  it  there  must  be  a  loan  to  the  republic, 
in  the  shape  of  purchase  of  Dutch  rescriptions,  or 
in  some  other  shape.  The  gratuity  to  be  about 
;^5o,ooo  sterling. 

The  same  ideas  substantially  appear  in  the  con- 
ference with  Talleyrand  himself. 

As  a  criterion  of  this  it  is  in  the  first  place  to  be 
observed  that  these  agents  originally  suggested  the 
bribe  or  gratuity,  contradistinguished  from  the  loan,  as 
a  substitute  for  other  reparation  to  the  Directory  for  a 
pretended  insult  in  the  President's  speech.  In  the 
conference  between  the  Minister  Talleyrand  and  one 


Detector  325 

of  our  envoys  of  the  28th  of  October,  the  same  idea 
is  distinctly  marked ;  so  as  to  evince  a  concert '  not 
only  in  substance  but  in  circumstances  between  the 
Minister  and  the  agents.  They  began  their  confer- 
ences by  stating  the  umbrage  taken  by  the  Directory 
at  the  President's  speech,  the  necessity  of  reparation 
for  it,  and  the  possibility  of  commuting  that  repara- 
tion for  money  to  be  offered  by  our  envoys.  The 
Minister,  treading  in  their  steps,  began  the  confer- 
ence '  by  observing  that  the  Directory  had  passed  an 
arret,  in  which  they  had  demanded  of  the  envoys  an 
explanation  of  some  parts  and  reparation  for  other 
parts  of  the  President's  speech  to  Congress;  that  he 
was  sensible  difficulties  would  exist  on  the  part  of  the 
envoys  relative  to  this  demand,  but  that  by  their 
offering  money  he  thought  he  could  prevent  the  effect 
of  the  arret. 

The  characteristic  features  in  both  cases  are — of- 
fence given  by  the  speech,  reparation  to  be  demanded 
by  the  Directory,  and  a  commutation  of  the  required 
reparation  for  money.  The  only  difference  is  that 
the  agents  call  this  pocket-money  for  the  Directory  a 
gratuity,  etc.,  while  the  Minister  gives  it  no  specific 
name  or  designation.  But  we  discover  still  more 
clearly  from  what  follows  that  he  means  the  same 
thing  with  the  agents.  The  envoy  having  answered 
that  he  and  his  colleagues  had  no  power  to  make  a 
loan,  but  could  send  one  of  their  number  for  instruc- 
tions on  the  proposition,  if  deemed  expedient,  pro- 
vided that  the  other  objects  of  the  negotiation  could 

»See  Exhibit  C,  Dec.  13th. 

2  See  dispatch  commencing  the  27th  of  October,  1797. 


326  Alexander  Hamilton 

be  discussed  and  adjusted,  Talleyrand  replied  that 
this  matter  about  the  money  might  be  settled  directly 
without  sending  to  America;  that  he  would  not  com- 
municate the  arret  for  a  week,  and  that  if  the  en- 
voys could  adjust  the  difficulty  with  respect  to  the 
speech  an  application  would  nevertheless  go  to  the 
United  States  for  a  loan.  The  loan  is  here  manifestly 
a  different  thing  from  the  money  to  be  advanced  for 
reparation.  The  last  might  be  arranged  immediately, 
though  the  first  might  wait  the  issue  of  an  application 
to  the  government  of  this  country.  The  first  is 
plainly  the  50,000  sterling  for  pocket-money;  the  last 
is  the  contribution  by  way  of  loan  to  the  republic. 
This  coincidence  fixes  definitively  the  concert  be- 
tween the  Minister  and  the  agents,  and  traces  un- 
equivocally to  the  former  the  double  demand  of  a 
bribe  and  a  loan.     The  conclusion  is  inevitable. 

It  is  also  confirmed  by  what  took  place  on  the  17th 
of  December,  when  one  of  our  envoys  mentioned  to 
the  Minister  that  the  person  designated  as  Y  had  that 
morning  made  him  propositions  (alluding  to  those  for 
the  gratuity  and  loan) .  The  Minister  replied  that  the 
information  which  Y  had  given  was  just,  and  might 
always  be  relied  upon.  This  was  explicitly  to  recog- 
nize Y  as  his  agent  and  to  authorize  the  giving 
of  credit  to  his  propositions.  A  quibble  has  been 
started  on  this  point.  It  is  pretended  that  the 
declaration  that  the  information  given  by  Y  was  just, 
did  not  import  that  the  propositions  he  had  made 
were  authorized.  But  besides  that  it  was  natural  to 
look  for  vagueness  of  expression  in  so  mysterious  and 
so  foul  a  transaction, — as  the  term  information  was 


Detector  327 

used  in  reply  to  the  suggestion  that  propositions  had 
been  made,  it  must  necessarily  be  understood  and 
intend  that  the  information  which  Y  had  given,  in 
reference  to  the  propositions  spoken  of  by  the  en- 
voy, was  just  and  might  be  relied  upon.  Again,  in- 
formation was  the  most  apt  term  that  could  have 
been  employed.  Y  and  the  other  agents  professed 
not  to  make  propositions,  but  to  inform  our  envoys 
what  propositions  made  by  them  were  likely  to  be 
acceptable. 

Such  are  the  wretched  shifts  to  which  the  factious 
adherents  of  France  are  driven  in  the  attempts  to 
obscure  the  truth  and  to  mislead  their  countrymen. 
Their  futility  is  evident.  It  is  evident  that  the 
agents  who  conferred  with  our  envoys  were  not  im- 
postors but  were  truly  the  commissaries  of  the  French 
minister,  and  that  their  most  odious  propositions 
were  not  only  sanctioned  but  even  reiterated  by  him. 
The  connection  between  the  Minister  and  the  Direc- 
tory, from  the  nature  of  the  thing,  can  only  be  in- 
ferred from  his  office  and  from  his  personal  character. 
The  most  circumspect  man  in  the  world,  it  is  utterly 
incredible  that  he  would  hazard  himself  in  such  a  way 
unless,  acting  for  the  Directory,  he  was  assured  of 
their  omnipotent  support.  Whether  he  be  himself 
a  mercenary  partaker  of  the  bribes  which  are  ex- 
torted, or  only  the  instrument  of  the  rapacity  of  the 
Directory  to  retain  his  influence  with  them  for  the 
accomplishment  of  some  great  ulterior  design,  must 
be  referred  to  time,  and  is  of  little  moment  to  the 
United  States. 

Whatever,  then,  may  have  been  the  case   with 


328  Alexander  Hamilton 

respect  to  the  Portuguese  Minister,  't  is  demonstrated 
that  our  envoys  have  not  been,  as  alleged,  the  dupes 
of  unauthorized  agents,  but  have  had  the  dexterity 
to  ascertain  the  conception  and  expression  from  the 
mouth  of  the  Minister  himself.  The  probability  is 
that  in  the  other  instance  likewise  the  corruption 
which  is  now  denied  did  really  exist,  as  it  most  cer- 
tainly does  in  our  case ;  though  it  is  to  be  looked  for 
that  here  also  it  will  be  denied,  and  our  envoys,  if 
within  the  grasp  of  the  monsters,  made  the  victims 
of  their  fraudulent  tyranny.  The  abject  partisans  of 
France,  anticipating  this  result,  are  preparing  the 
way  for  its  justification. 

Detector. 


A  FRENCH  FACTION 

1798. 

There  is  a  set  of  men  whose  mouths  are  always  full 
of  the  phrases,  British  faction — British  agents- 
British  influence.  Feeling  that  they  themselves  are 
interested  in  a  foreign  faction,  they  imagine  that  it 
must  be  so  with  every  one  else,  and  that  whoever  will 
not  join  with  them  in  sacrificing  the  interests  of  their 
country  to  another  country,  must  be  engaged  in  an 
opposite  foreign  faction ;  Frenchmen  in  all  their  feel- 
ings and  wishes,  they  can  see  in  their  opponents 
nothing  but  Englishmen.  Every  true  American — 
every  really  independent  man,  becomes,  in  their  eyes, 
a  British  agent — a  British  emissary. 

The  truth  is,  that  there  is  in  this  country  a  decided 
French  faction,  but  no  other  foreign  faction.  I  speak 
as  to  those  who  have  a  share  in  the  public  councils, 


A  French  Faction  329 

or  in  the  political  influence  of  the  country;  those 
who  adhered  to  Great  Britain  during  the  revolution 
may  be  presumed,  generally,  to  have  still  a  partiality 
for  her.  But  the  number  of  those  who  have  at  this 
time  any  agency  in  public  affairs  is  very  insignificant. 
They  are  neither  numerous  nor  weighty  enough  to 
form  in  the  public  councils  a  distinct  faction.  Nor 
is  it  to  this  description  of  men  that  the  passage  is 
applied. 

The  satellites  of  France  have  the  audacity  to  be- 
stow it  upon  men  who  have  risked  more  in  opposi- 
tion to  Great  Britain,  than  but  few  of  them  ever  did 
- — to  men  who  have  given  every  possible  proof  of 
their  exclusive  devotion  to  the  interests  of  their  own 
country.  Let  facts  speak.  The  leaders  of  the 
French  faction  during  the  war  managed  to  place  the 
minister  of  the  country  abroad  in  a  servile  depend- 
ence on  the  ministry  of  France,  and  but  for  the  vir- 
tuous independence  of  those  men,  which  led  them  to 
break  their  instructions,  it  is  very  problematical  we 
should  have  had  as  early,  or  as  good  a  peace  as 
that  we  obtained.  The  same  men,  during  the  same 
period,  effected  the  revocation  of  a  commission  which 
had  been  given  for  making  a  commercial  treaty  with 
Great  Britain,  and  again,  on  the  approach  of  peace, 
defeated  an  attempt  to  produce  a  renewal  of  that 
commission,  and  thus  lost  an  opportunity  known  to 
have  been  favorable  for  establishing  a  beneficial 
treaty  of  commerce  with  that  country — though  they 
have  since  made  the  obtaining  of  such  a  treaty,  a 
pretext  for  reiterated  attempts  to  renew  hostilities 
with   her.     The   same   men   have   been    constantly 


330  Alexander  Hamilton 

laboring,  from  the  first  institution  of  the  present 
government,  to  render  it  subservient,  not  to  the  ad- 
vancement of  our  own  manufactures,  but  to  the 
advancement  of  the  navigation  and  manufactures 
of  France. 

In  a  proposal  which  aims  at  fostering  our  own 
navigation  and  elevating  our  own  manufactures,  by 
giving  them  advantages  over  those  of  all  foreign 
nations,  a  thousand  obstacles  occur,  a  thousand 
alarms  are  sounded — usurpation  of  ungranted  pow- 
ers, designs  to  promote  the  interests  of  different 
parts  of  the  Union  at  the  expense  of  the  other  parts 
of  it,  and  innumerable  other  spectres  are  conjured  up 
to  terrify  us  from  the  pursuit.  Is  the  project  to 
confer  particular  favors  upon  the  navigation  and 
manufactures  of  France,  even  at  the  expense  of  the 
United  States? — then  all  difficulties  vanish.  This 
is  the  true  and  only  object  of  the  Constitution^for 
this  it  was  framed — by  this  alone  it  can  live  and  have 
a  being.  To  this  precious  end,  we  are  assured,  the 
States  who  may  particularly  suffer  will  be  willing  to 
sacrifice.  In  this  holy  cause  we  are  to  risk  every 
thing — our  trade,  our  navigation,  our  manufactures, 
our  agriculture,  our  revenues,  our  peace.  Not  to 
consent  is  to  want  spirit — to  want  honor— to  want 
patriotism.  Thus  does  Gallicism  assume  the  hon- 
orable part  of  patriotism. 


THE    WAR   IN    EUROPE 

1799. 

Every  step  of  the  progress  of  the  present  war  in 
Europe  has  been  marked  with  horrors.     If  the  per- 


The  War  in  Europe  331 

petration  of  them  was  confined  to  those  who  are 
the  acknowledged  instruments  of  despotic  power,  it 
would  excite  less  surprise ;  but  when  they  are  acted 
upon  by  those  who  profess  themselves  to  be  the 
champions  of  the  rights  of  man,  they  naturally  occa- 
sion both  wonder  and  regret.  Passing  by  the  ex- 
treme severities  which  the  French  have  exercised  in 
Italy,  what  shall  we  think  of  the  declarations  of 
Jourdan  to  the  inhabitants  of  Germany? 

Good  God!  is  it  a  crime  for  men  to  defend  their 
own  government  and  country?  Is  it  a  punishable 
offence  in  the  Germans  that  they  will  not  accept 
from  the  French  what  they  offer  as  liberty  at  the 
point  of  the  bayonet?  This  is  to  confound  all  ideas 
of  morality  and  humanity ;  it  is  to  trample  upon  all 
the  rights  of  man  and  nations;  it  is  to  restore  the 
ages  of  barbarism ;  according  to  the  laws  and  prac- 
tice of  modem  war,  the  peasantry  of  a  country,  if 
they  remain  peaceably  at  home,  are  protected  from 
other  harm  than  a  contribution  to  the  necessities  of 
the  invading  army.  Those  who  join  the  armies  of 
their  country  and  fight  with  them,  are  considered 
and  treated  as  other  soldiers.  But  the  present 
French  doctrine  is,  that  they  are  to  be  treated  as 
rebels  and  criminals. 

German  patriotism  is  a  heinous  offence  in  the  eyes 
of  French  patriots.  How  are  we  to  solve  this  other- 
wise than  by  observing  that  the  French  are  influenced 
by  the  same  spirit  of  domination  which  governed  the 
ancient  Romans.  They  considered  themselves  as 
having  a  right  to  be  the  masters  of  the  world,  and  to 


332  Alexander  Hamilton 

treat  the  rest  of  mankind  as  their  vassals.  How 
clearly  is  it  proved  by  this  that  the  praise  of  a  civil- 
ized world  is  justly  due  to  Christianity; — war,  by 
the  influence  of  the  humane  principles  of  that  re- 
ligion, has  been  stripped  of  half  its  horrors.  The 
French  renounce  Christianity,  and  they  relapse  into 
barbarism ;  —  war  resumes  the  same  hideous  and 
savage  form  which  it  wore  in  the  ages  of  Gothic  and 
Roman  violence. 


ALLEGORICAL   DEVICE 

1799. 

A  globe,  with  Europe  and  part  of  Africa  on  one 
side,  America  on  the  other,  the  Atlantic  between. 
The  portion  occupied  by  America  to  be  larger  than 
that  occupied  by  Europe.  A  Colossus  to  be  placed 
on  this  globe,  with  one  foot  on  Europe,  the  other  ex- 
tending partly  over  the  Atlantic  toward  America; 
having  on  his  head  a  quintuple  crown.,  in  his  right 
hand  an  iron  sceptre,  projecting,  but  broken  in  the 
middle;  in  his  left  hand  a  pileus  (cap  of  liberty) 
reversed ;  the  staff  entwined  by  a  snake  with  its  head 
downward,  having  the  staff  of  the  pileus  in  its  mouth, 
and  folding  in  its  tail  (as  if  in  the  act  of  strangling)  a 
label  with  the  words  "Rights  of  Man."  Upon  a 
base  supported  by  fifteen  columns  erected  on  the 
continent  of  America,  the  genius  of  America  to  be 
placed,  represented  by  the  figure  of  Pallas — a  female 
in  armor,  with  a  firm,  composed  countenance,  a 
golden  breastplate,  a  spear  in  her  right  hand,  and  an 
aegis  or  shield  in  her  left,  having  upon  it  the  scales  of 


Pericles  333 

justice  (instead  of  the  Medusa's  head);  her  helmet 
encircled  with  wreaths  of  oHve,  her  spear  striking 
upon  the  sceptre  of  the  Colossus  and  breaking  it 
asiinder ;  over  her  head  a  radiated  crown  of  glory. 
It  would  improve  the  allegory  to  represent  the 
Atlantic  in  a  tempest,  as  indicative  of  rage,  and 
Neptune  in  the  position  of  aiming  a  blow  at  the 
Colossus  with  his  trident. 

Explanation. — It  is  known  that  the  globe  is  an 
ancient  symbol  of  universal  dominion.  This,  with 
the  Colossus,  alluding  to  the  French  Directory,  will 
denote  the  project  of  acquiring  such  dominion — the 
position  of  the  Colossus  signifying  the  intent  to  ex- 
tend it  to  America.  The  Colossus  will  represent  the 
French  Republic ;  and  Pallas,  as  the  genius  of  Amer- 
ica, will  intimate  that  though  loving  peace  as  a  pri- 
mary object  (of  which  the  olive-wreath  is  the  symbol), 
yet,  guided  by  wisdom  and  justice,  America  success- 
fully exerts  her  valor  to  break  the  sceptre  of  the 
tyrant. 


PERICLES  ' 

(For  the  Evening  Post.) 

1803. 

Since  the  question  of  independence,  none  has  oc- 
curred more  deeply  interesting  to  the  United  States 
than  the  cession  of  Louisiana  to  France. 

'  Reprinted  from  the  History  of  the  Republic,  by  John  C.  Hamilton, 
and  now  first  included  with  Hamilton's  writings. 

It  is  a  very  interesting  paper,  as  it  shows  how  completely  Hamilton 
parted  with  his  party  on  the  Louisiana  question  and  how  unswervingly 
national  he  was  in  every  thing. 


334  Alexander  Hamilton 

This  event  threatens  the  early  dismemberment  of 
a  large  portion  of  the  country;  more  immediately, 
the  safety  of  all  the  Southern  States ;  and  remotely, 
the  independence  of  the  whole  Union.  This  is  the 
portentous  aspect  which  the  affair  presents  to  all 
men  of  sound  and  reflecting  minds,  of  whatever 
party;  and  it  is  not  to  be  concealed,  that  the  only 
question  which  now  offers  itself,  is  how  the  evil  is  to 
be  averted? 

The  strict  right  to  resort  at  once  to  war,  if  it 
should  be  deemed  expedient,  cannot  be  doubted.  A 
manifest  and  great  danger  to  the  nation ;  the  nature 
of  the  cession  to  France,  extending  to  ancient  limits 
without  respect  to  our  rights  by  treaty;  the  direct 
infraction  of  an  important  article  of  the  treaty  itself, 
in  withholding  the  deposit  of  New  Orleans :  either  of 
these  affords  justifiable  cause  of  war,  and  that  they 
would  authorize  immediate  hostilities,  is  not  to  be 
questioned  by  the  most  scrupulous  mind. 

The  whole  is  then  a  question  of  expediency.  Two 
courses  only  present:  First,  to  negotiate,  and  en- 
deavor to  purchase;  and  if  this  fails,  to  go  to  war. 
Secondly,  to  seize  at  once  on  the  Floridas  and  New 
Orleans,  and  then  negotiate.  A  strong  objection 
offers  itself  to  the  first.  There  is  not  the  most  dis- 
tant probability  that  the  ambitious  and  aggrandizing 
views  of  Buonaparte  will  commute  the  territory  for 
money.  Its  acquisition  is  of  immense  importance 
to  France,  and  has  long  been  an  object  of  her  ex- 
treme solicitude.  The  attempt,  therefore,  to  pur- 
chase, in  the  first  instance,  will  certainly  fail;  and 
in  the  end,  war  must  be  resorted  to,  under  all  the 


Pericles  335 

accumulation  of  difficulties  caused  by  a  previous  and 
strongly  fortified  possession  of  the  country  by  our 
adversary. 

The  second  plan  is,  therefore,  evidently  the  best. 
First,  because  effectual;  the  acquisition  easy;  the 
preservation  afterwards  easy.  The  evils  of  a  war 
with  France  at  this  time  are  certainly  not  very 
formidable:  her  fleet  crippled  and  powerless;  her 
treasury  empty;  her  resources  almost  dried  up;  in 
short,  gasping  for  breath  after  a  tremendous  con- 
flict, which,  though  it  left  her  victorious,  left  her 
nearly  exhausted  under  her  extraordinary  exertions. 
On  the  other  hand,  we  might  count  with  certainty  on 
the  aid  of  Great  Britain  with  her  powerful  navy. 

Secondly,  this  plan  is  preferable,  because  it  affords 
us  the  only  chance  of  avoiding  a  long-continued  war. 
When  we  have  once  taken  possession  the  business 
will  present  itself  to  France  in  a  new  aspect.  She 
will  then  have  to  weigh  the  immense  difficulties,  if  not 
the  utter  impracticability,  of  wresting  it  from  us.  In 
this  posture  of  affairs  she  will  naturally  conclude  it  is 
her  interest  to  bargain.  Now  it  may  become  ex- 
pedient to  terminate  hostilities  by  a  purchase,  and  a 
cheaper  one  may  reasonably  be  expected.  To  se- 
cure the  better  prospect  of  final  success,  the  following 
auxiliary  measures  ought  to  be  adopted.  The  army 
should  be  increased  to  ten  thousand  men,  for  the 
purpose  of  insuring  the  preservation  of  the  conquest. 
Preparations  for  increasing  our  naval  force  should  be 
made.  The  militia  should  be  classed,  and  effectual 
provision  made  for  raising,  on  an  emergency,  forty 
thousand  men.     Negotiations  should  be  pushed  with 


336  Alexander  Hamilton 


OJ 


Great  Britain,  to  induce  her  to  hold  herself  in  readi- 
ness to  co-operate  fully  with  us,  at  a  moment's  warn- 
ing. This  plan  should  be  adopted  and  proclaimed 
before  the  departure  of  our  envoy.  Such  measures 
would  astonish  and  disconcert  Buonaparte  himself; 
our  envoy  would  be  enabled  to  speak  and  treat  with 
effect,  and  all  Europe  would  be  taught  to  respect  us. 
These  ideas  have  been  long  entertained  by  the  writer, 
but  he  has  never  given  himself  the  trouble  to  commit 
them  to  the  public,  because  he  despaired  of  their 
being  adopted.  They  are  now  thrown  out  with  very 
little  hope  of  their  producing  any  change  in  the  con- 
duct of  the  Administration,  yet  with  the  encourage- 
ment that  there  is  a  strong  current  of  public  feeling 
in  favor  of  decisive  measures.  If  the  President 
would  adopt  this  course,  he  might  yet  retrieve  his 
character,  induce  the  best  part  of  the  community  to 
look  favorably  upon  his  political  career,  exalt  him- 
self in  the  eyes  of  Europe,  save  the  country,  and 
secure  a  permanent  fame.  But,  for  this,  alas !  Jeffer- 
son is  not  destined. 

Pericles. 


THE  WHISKEY  REBELLION 


337 


THE  WHISKEY  REBELLION 


HAMILTON    TO    WASHINGTON  ' 

Treasury  Department,  September  i,  1792. 

Sir: — I  have  the  honor  to  inclose  sundry  papers 
which  have  been  handed  to  me  by  the  Commissioners 
of  the  Revenue,  respecting  the  state  of  the  excise 
law  in  the  Western  Survey  of  the  District  of 
Pennsylvania. 

'  This  letter,  and  those  which  follow,  give  the  history  of  the  whiskey 
rebellion  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury.  That 
first  insurrection  against  the  government  is  an  important  chapter  in 
the  life  of  Hamilton.  It  was  his  system  narrowly  victorious  at  the 
last  point  which  caused  the  assumption  of  the  State  debts  as  a  part  of 
the  general  financial  policy.  It  was  the  assumption  of  the  State  debts 
which  made  an  increase  of  taxation  necessary,  and  for  this  purpose  the 
excise  on  spirits  was  laid.  The  new  tax  produced  an  outburst  of  re- 
sistance in  the  Alleghany  region — that  is,  in  Western  Pennsylvania, 
Virginia,  and  North  Carolina.  By  the  efforts  of  Washington,  and  by 
modifying  the  law  almost  to  the  verge  of  imprudent  concession,  the 
disturbances  in  Virginia  and  North  Carolina  were  allayed.  But  in 
Pennsylvania  matters  went  from  bad  to  worse,  until  resistance  cul- 
minated in  open  rebellion.  Judging  in  accordance  with  the  best  prin- 
ciples of  taxation,  no  one  would  now  question  the  propriety  of  the 
excise.  But  when  the  opposition  to  it  became  revolt,  the  affair  rose  in 
Hamilton's  eyes  to  something  far  graver  than  the  successful  collection 
of  a  certain  amount  of  money.  He  felt  that  it  was  the  first  sharp  test 
of  the  value  and  strength  of  the  government  formed  under  the  Con- 
stitution, and  he  knew  that  if  the  government  prevailed,  it  would  be 
greatly  invigorated.  When  Washington  was  satisfied  that  conciliation 
had  been  tried  to  the  last  point  consistent  with  safety,  he  adopted 
Hamilton's  measures,  ordered  out  an  overwhelming  force,  and  sent  it 

339 


340  Alexander  Hamilton 

Such  persevering  and  violent  opposition  to  the 
law  gives  the  business  a  still  more  serious  aspect 
than  it  has  hitherto  worn,  and  seems  to  call  for 
vigorous  and  decisive  measures  on  the  part  of  the 
government. 

I  have  directed  that  the  supervisor  of  the  district 
shall  repair  forthwith  to  the  survey  in  question,  to 
ascertain  in  person  the  true  state  of  the  survey;  to 
collect  evidences  respecting  the  violences  that  have 
been  committed,  in  order  to  a  prosecution  of  the 
offenders ;  to  ascertain  particulars  as  to  the  meeting 
which  appears  to  have  been  held  at  Pittsburgh;  to 
encourage  the  perseverance  of  the  officers;  giving 
expectations,  as  far  as  it  can  be  done  with  propriety, 
of  indemnification  from  the  government  for  any 
losses  which  they  may  sustain  in  consequence  of 
their  offices;  to  endeavor  to  prevail  upon  the  in- 
habitants of  the  county  of  Alleghany,  who  appear 
at  present  the  least  refractory,  to  come  into  an 
acquiescence  of  the  law;  representing  to  discreet 
persons  the  impropriety  of  government's  remaining 
a  passive  spectator  of  the  contempt  of  its  laws. 

I  shall  also  immediately  submit  to  the  Attorney- 
General,  for  his  opinion,  whether  an  indictable  of- 
fence has  not  been  committed  by  the  persons  who 

against  the  insurgents.  Before  this  display  of  energy  and  vigor  the 
insurrection  faded  away  without  bloodshed  into  ignominy  and  ridicule. 
The  result  was  most  valuable.  There  had  been  a  struggle  of  principles 
and  parties,  and  the  Federal  Government  had  conquered.  In  the 
following  pages,  containing  all  that  Hamilton  wrote  on  the  subject, 
the  story  of  this  incident,  so  important  and  so  full  of  meaning  to  our 
early  development  as  a  nation,  is  told  by  the  principal  actor  on  the 
side  of  the  Administration. 


Hamilton  to  Washington  341 

were  assembled  at  Pittsburgh,  and  of  what  nature 
is  the  paper  which  contains  their  proceedings;  with 
a  view,  if  judged  expedient  by  you,  that  it  may  be 
brought  under  the  notice  of  the  Circuit  Court,  which, 
I  understand,  is  to  be  held  in  October  at  Yorktown. 

My  present  clear  conviction  is,  that  it  is  indis- 
pensable, if  competent  evidence  can  be  obtained,  to 
exert  the  full  force  of  the  law  against  the  offenders, 
with  every  circumstance  that  can  manifest  the  deter- 
mination of  government  to  enforce  its  execution; 
and  if  the  processes  of  the  courts  are  resisted,  as  is 
rather  to  be  expected,  to  employ  those  means  which 
in  the  last  resort  are  put  in  the  power  of  the  Execu- 
tive. If  this  is  not  done,  the  spirit  of  disobedience 
will  naturally  extend,  and  the  authority  of  the  gov- 
ernment will  be  prostrated.  Moderation  enough  has 
been  shown;  it  is  time  to  assume  a  different  tone. 
The  well-disposed  part  of  the  community  will  begin 
to  think  the  Executive  wanting  in  decision  and  vigor. 
I  submit  these  impressions  to  your  consideration, 
previous  to  any  step  which  will  involve  the  necessity 
of  ulterior  proceedings ;  and  shall  hope  as  speedily  as 
possible  to  receive  your  instructions. 

With  the  highest  respect  and  the  truest  attach- 
ment, I  have  the  honor  to  be,  etc. 


HAMILTON   TO    WASHINGTON 

Treasury  Department,  September  8,  1792. 

Sir: — I  have  to  acknowledge  the  honor  of  your 
letter  of  the  31st  of  August. 


342  Alexander  Hamilton 

Letters  from  the  supervisor  of  North  Carolina  con- 
firm the  representation  contained  in  the  letter  from 
the  inspector  of  the  5th  survey  to  you.  My  letter 
which  accompanies  this,  suggests  the  measure  which, 
on  mature  reflection,  has  appeared  most  proper  to 
be  taken  upon  the  whole  subject  of  the  opposition 
to  the  law.  If  the  idea  is  approved  by  you,  I  believe 
it  will  be  advisable  to  transmit  a  copy  of  the  pro- 
clamation to  the  governors  of  each  of  the  States  of 
South  Carolina,  North  Carolina,  and  Pennsylvania, 
calling  their  attention  in  a  proper  manner  to  the 
state  of  affairs  within  their  respective  governments. 


HAMILTON   TO    WASHINGTON 

Treasury  Department,  September  9,  1792. 

Sir: — I  had  the  honor  of  writing  to  you  by  the 
post  of  Monday  last,  and  then  transmitted  sundry 
papers,  respecting  a  meeting  at  Pittsburgh  on  the 
2ist  of  August,  and  other  proceedings  of  a  disorderly 
nature  in  opposition  to  the  laws  laying  a  duty  on 
distilled  spirits,  and  I  added  my  opinion  that  it  was 
advisable  for  the  government  to  take  measures  for 
suppressing  these  disorders  and  enforcing  the  laws 
with  vigor  and  decision. 

The  result  of  further  and  mature  deliberation  is, 
that  it  will  be  expedient  for  the  President  to  issue  a 
proclamation  adverting  in  general  terms  to  the  ir- 
regular proceedings,  and  manifesting  an  intention  to 
put  the  laws  in  force  against  offenders.  The  induce- 
ments to  this  measure  are: 


Hamilton  to  Washington  343 

1.  That  it  is  a  usual  course  in  like  cases,  and 
seems,  all  circumstances  considered,  requisite  to  the 
justification  of  the  Executive  Department.  It  is 
now  more  than  fourteen  months  since  the  duty  in 
question  began  to  operate.  In  the  four  western 
counties  of  Pennsylvania,  and  in  a  great  part  of 
North  Carolina,  it  has  never  been  in  any  degree  sub- 
mitted to.  And  the  late  meeting  at  Pittsburgh  is,  in 
substance,  a  repetition  of  what  happened  last  year 
in  the  same  scene.  The  disorders  in  that  quarter 
acquire  additional  consequence  from  their  being 
acted  in  the  State  which  is  the  immediate  seat  of 
government.  Hence  the  occasion  appears  to  be 
sufficiently  serious  and  of  sufficient  importance  to 
call  for  such  a  procedure. 

2.  As  an  accommodating  and  temporizing  conduct 
has  been  hitherto  pursued,  a  proclamation  seems 
to  be  the  natural  prelude  to  a  different  course  of 
conduct. 

3.  There  is  considerable  danger  that  before  meas- 
ures can  be  matured  for  making  a  public  impression 
by  the  prosecution  of  offenders,  the  spirit  of  opposi- 
tion may  extend  and  break  out  in  other  quarters,  and 
by  its  extension  become  much  more  difficult  to  be 
overcome.  There  is  reason  to  hope  that  a  proclama- 
tion will  arrest  it,  and  give  time  for  more  efifectual 
measures. 

4.  It  may  even  prevent  the  necessity  of  ulterior 
coercion.  The  character  of  the  President  will  nat- 
urally induce  a  conclusion,  that  he  means  to  treat 
the  matter  seriously.  This  idea  will  be  impressive 
on  the  most  refractory,  it  will  restrain  the  timid  and 


344  Alexander  Hamilton 

wavering,  and  it  will  encourage  the  well  disposed. 
The  appearance  of  the  President  in  the  business  will 
awaken  the  attention  of  a  great  number  of  persons 
of  the  last  description  to  the  evil  tendency  of  the 
conduct  reprehended,  who  have  not  yet  viewed  it 
with  due  seriousness.  And  from  the  co-operation 
of  these  circumstances  good  may  reasonably  be 
expected. 

In  either  view,  therefore,  of  the  propriety  of  con- 
duct, or  the  effects  to  be  hoped  for,  the  measure 
seems  to  be  an  advisable  one.  I  beg  leave  to  add, 
that,  in  my  judgment,  it  is  not  only  advisable,  but 
necessary.  Besides  the  state  of  things  in  the  western 
part  of  North  Carolina,  which  is  known  to  you,  a 
letter  has  just  been  received  from  the  supervisor  of 
South  Carolina,  mentioning  that  a  spirit  of  discontent 
and  opposition  had  been  revived  in  two  of  the  coun- 
ties of  that  State  bordering  on  North  Carolina,  in 
which  it  had  been  apparently  suppressed.  This 
shows  the  necessity  of  some  immediate  step  of  a 
general  aspect,  while  things  are  preparing,  if  un- 
happily it  should  become  necessary,  to  act  with 
decision  in  the  western  counties  of  Pennsylvania, 
where  the  government,  for  several  obvious  considera- 
tions, will  be  left  in  condition  to  do  it.  Decision 
successfully  exerted  in  one  place,  will,  it  is  presumed, 
be  efficacious  everywhere. 

The  Secretary  of  War  and  Attorney-General  agree 
with  me  in  opinion  on  the  expediency  of  a  proclama- 
tion. The  draft  of  one  now  submitted  has  been 
framed  in  concert  with  the  latter,  except  as  to  one  or 
two  particulars,  which  are  noted  in  the  margin  of  the 


Hamilton  to  Washington  345 

rough  draft  in  my  handwriting,  herewith  also  trans- 
mitted. In  respect  to  these,  the  objections  of  that 
gentleman  did  not  appear  to  me  well  foimded,  and 
would,  I  think,  unnecessarily  diminish  the  force  of 
the  instrument. 

With  the  highest  respect  and  truest  attachment,  I 
have  the  honor  to  be,  etc. 


HAMILTON    TO    WASHINGTON 

Philadelphia,  September  ii,  1793. 

Sir: — Herewith  is  an  official  letter,  submitting  the 
draft  of  a  proclamation.  I  reserve  some  observations 
as  most  proper  for  a  private  letter. 

In  the  case  of  a  former  proclamation,  I  observe  it 
was  under  the  seal  of  the  United  States,  and  counter- 
signed by  the  Secretary  of  State.  If  the  precedent 
was  now  to  be  formed,  I  should  express  a  doubt 
whether  it  was  such  an  instrument  as  ought  to  be 
under  the  seal  of  the  United  States;  and  I  believe 
usage,  as  well  in  this  country  under  the  State  govern- 
ments as  in  Great  Britain,  would  be  found  against  it ; 
but  the  practice  having  been  begun,  there  are  many 
reasons  which  in  this  instance  recommend  an  adher- 
ence to  it,  and  the  form  of  the  attestation  is  adapted 
to  this  idea. 

But  still,  if  the  Secretary  of  State  should  be  at  so 
great  a  distance,  or  if  an  uncertainty  of  his  being  in 
the  way  should  involve  the  probability  of  consider- 
able delay,  it  will  be  well  to  consider  if  the  precedent 
ought  not  to  be  departed  from.     In  this  case,  the 


34^  Alexander  Hamilton 

attestation  will  be  required  to  be  varied,  so  as  to 
omit  from  the  words  "In  testimony"  to  the  words 
"my  hand,"  inclusively,  and  to  substitute  the  word 
"Given"  to  "Done";  and  it  may  be  advisable  to 
direct  the  Attorney-General  to  countersign  it. 

Every  day's  delay  will  render  the  act  less  impres- 
sive, and  defeat  part  of  its  object. 

The  propriety  of  issuing  the  proclamation  depends 
of  course  upon  a  resolution  to  act  in  conformity  to  it, 
and  put  in  force  all  the  powers  and  means  with  which 
the  Executive  is  possessed,  as  occasion  shall  require. 
My  own  mind  is  made  up  fully  to  this  issue,  and  on 
this  my  suggestion  of  the  measure  is  founded.  Your 
letter  by  the  last  post,  confirming  former  intimations, 
assures  me  that  you  view  the  matter  in  the  same 
light. 

The  words  in  the  proclamation,  "dictated  by 
weighty  reasons  of  public  exigency  and  policy,"  are 
not  essential  to  the  general  scope  of  it.  They 
amount  to  an  additional  commitment  of  the  President 
on  the  question  of  the  merits  of  the  law,  and  will 
require  to  be  well  considered. 

That  the  proclamation,  both  as  to  manner  and 
matter,  will  be  criticised,  cannot  be  matter  of  surprise, 
if  it  should  happen,  to  any  one  who  is  aware  of  the 
lengths  to  which  a  certain  party  is  prepared  to  go. 
It  ought  to  be  anticipated  as  probable. 

In  a  step  so  delicate  and  full  of  responsibility,  I 
thought  it  my  duty  to  make  these  observations; 
though  I  was  sure  they  would  of  themselves  occur. 

It  is  satisfactory  to  know  that  a  jury  in  Chester 
County  convicted  a  person  who  was  gmlty  of  assault- 


Hamilton  to  Washington  347 

ing  an  officer  of  inspection.  On  being  interrogated, 
they  answered  that  they  had  found  him  guilty  upon 
the  count  in  the  indictment  which  charged  him  with 
assaulting  the  officer  in  the  execution  of  his  duty; 
that  the  law  was  a  constitutional  act  of  government, 
and  was  not  to  be  resisted  by  violence.  I  have  di- 
rected Mr.  Coxe  to  collect  and  publish  the  particulars. 
The  symptom  is  a  good  one. 

With  the  most  faithful  and  affectionate  attach- 
ment, etc. 


HAMILTON   TO    WASHINGTON. 

Treasury  Department,  September  22,  1792. 

Sir: — I  have  been  duly  honored  with  your  letters 
of  the  7th  and  17th  instant,  and  perceive  with  much 
pleasure  a  confirmation  of  the  expectation  which  your 
former  communications  had  given,  that  your  view  of 
the  measures  proper  to  be  pursued,  respecting  the 
proceedings  therein  referred  to,  would  correspond 
with  the  impressions  entertained  here. 

I  flatter  myself  that  the  proclamation  will  answer  a 
very  valuable  purpose;  but  every  thing  which  the 
law  and  prudence  will  warrant,  will  be  put  in  train  as 
circumstances  shall  indicate,  for  such  eventual  meas- 
ures as  may  be  found  necessary.  I  do  not,  however, 
despair  that,  with  a  proper  countenance,  the  ordinary 
course  of  legal  coercion  will  be  found  adequate. 

The  inclosed  copy  of  a  letter  from  the  inspector  of 
Kentucky  to  the  supervisor  of  Virginia,  of  the  1 2th 
of  July  last,  and  the  copy  of  a  letter  from  one  of  his 


348  Alexander  Hamilton 

collectors  to  him  of  the  ist  of  June,  contain  interest- 
ing and,  comparatively,  not  discouraging  matter 
lespecting  the  state  of  things  in  that  survey. 

The  supervisor  of  Virginia,  in  a  letter  to  the  Com- 
missioner of  the  Revenue,  of  the  loth  instant, 
expresses  himself  thus:  "I  can  truly  say  that  the 
excise  is  now  fairly  on  its  legs  in  this  district ;  it  rests 
on  the  good-will  of  the  greater  part  of  the  people, 
and  our  collectors  are  from  no  cause  indisposed  to  the 
service,  but  the  apprehension  of  too  much  business 
for  too  little  compensation."  A  letter  from  Mr. 
Hawkins  (Senator)  to  Mr.  Coxe,  announces  favor- 
able symptoms  in  the  part  of  North  Carolina  which  is 
in  the  vicinity  of  his  residence. 

On  the  whole,  I  see  no  cause  of  apprehension  but 
that  the  law  will  finally  go  into  full  operation,  with  as 
much  good-will  of  the  people  as  usually  attends 
revenue  laws. 

With  the  highest  respect  and  truest  attachment, 
etc. 

P.  S. — I  have  the  pleasure  to  transmit  herewith  a 
letter  from  Mr.  G.  Morris,  which  was  handed  to  me 
by  Mr.  R.  Morris.  The  supervisor  has  been  desired 
to  forward  to  the  Circuit  Court  at  Yorktown  such 
proof  as  he  should  be  able  to  collect,  addressed  to 
the  Attorney-General.  It  will,  I  perceive,  be  satisfac- 
tory to  that  officer  to  receive  your  direction  to  pro- 
ceed there.  His  presence  is  of  importance,  as  well 
to  give  weight  to  what  it  may  be  proper  to  do,  as  to 
afford  security  that  nothing  which  cannot  be  sup- 
ported will  be  attempted.  I  submit  the  expediency 
of  a  line  from  you  to  him. 


Hamilton  to  Washington  349 

WASHINGTON   TO   GOVERNORS   OF    PENNSYLVANIA   AND 

NORTH  AND  SOUTH  CAROLINA 

(circular) 

Draft  by  Hamilton. 

United  States,  September  29,  1792. 

Sir: — Inclosed  you  will  find  a  copy  of  a  pro- 
clamation which  I  have  thought  proper  to  issue, 
in  consequence  of  certain  irregular  and  refractory 
proceedings,  which  have  taken  place  in  particular 
parts  of  some  of  the  States,  contravening  the  laws 
therein  mentioned. 

I  feel  an  entire  confidence  that  the  weight  and  in- 
fluence of  the  Executive  of ,  will  be  cheerfully 

exerted  in  every  proper  way,  to  further  the  objects  of 
this  measure,  and  to  promote  on  every  occasion  a 
due  obedience  to  the  constitutional  laws  of  the 
Union.     With  respect,  I  am,  sir,  etc. 


HAMILTON  TO  WASHINGTON 

November  27,  1793. 

The  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  presents  his  respects 
to  the  President.  The  execution  of  the  process  by 
the  marshal  himself  is,  for  many  reasons,  so  import- 
ant, that  it  does  not  appear  possible  to  dispense  with 
it.  If  there  should  be  any  failure  in  the  deputy,  it 
would  probably  furnish  a  topic  of  censure  and  a 
source  of  much  embarrassment.  The  impediment  in 
point  of  health  is  to  be  regretted,  but,  it  would  seem, 
must  be  surmounted. 


350  Alexander  Hamilton 

HAMILTON  TO  WASHINGTON 

Treasury  Department,  June  4,  1794- 

Sir: 

Upon  the  receipt  of  the  commiinication  to  you 
from  the  Governor  of  Pennsylvania,  of  the  i8th  of 
April  last,  I  put  that  letter  and  the  papers  attending 
it  into  the  hands  of  the  Commissioner  of  Revenue  to 
examine  into  the  suggestions  made,  and  report  to  me 
concerning  them. 

The  result  is  contained  in  a  letter  from  that  officer, 
dated  the  25  th  of  April  (which  hurry  of  business  put 
out  of  sight),  and  which  is  now  communicated  only 
for  the  information  of  the  President,  as  the  case  does 
not  seem  to  require  any  particular  reply  to  the  Gov- 
ernor, nor  any  act  upon  the  subject ;  and  the  exhibi- 
tion to  him  of  the  picture,  which  I  believe  is  justly 
drawn,  of  the  conduct  of  Mr.  Addison  and  others, 
would  perhaps  only  excite  useless  irritation. 

The  removal  of  either  of  the  officers  objected  to, 
after  the  persecution  they  have  suffered,  and  the  per- 
severance they  have  displayed,  would  be  a  hazardous 
step ;  and  a  suspicion  is  warranted  by  the  conduct  of 
the  parties,  that  it  may  have  been  recommended  with 
an  insidious  view.  Experience,  however,  may  better 
explain  in  a  little  time,  whether  any  concession  on 
that  point  will  be  expedient;  in  which  case,  some 
means  of  indemnifying  the  officer  or  officers  who 
should  be  removed,  would  be  demanded  both  by 
justice  and  policy. 

With  perfect  respect,  etc. 


Hamilton  to  Washington  35  ^ 

HAMILTON  TO  WASHINGTON 

June  14,  1794. 

The  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  presents  his  respects 
to  the  President.  He  had  thought  that  the  appoint- 
ment of  a  supervisor  for  Pennsylvania  might,  without 
inconvenience,  be  deferred  till  the  return  of  the 
President,  and  therefore  deferred  mentioning  it;  but 
on  more  particular  reflection,  as  a  new  revenue  year 
commences  with  the  ist  of  July,  he  beUeves  it  would 
be  of  use  to  accelerate  the  appointment. 

The  persons  who  have  more  particularly  occurred 
to  the  inquiries  of  the  Secretary  (and  his  inquiries 
have  been  particular  and  extensive),  are  General 
Hand,  now  Inspector;  Colonel  Henry  Miller,  of  York 
County ;  Charles  Biddle,  of  this  city ;  Colonel  Francis 
Nichols;  Mr.  Clarkson,  Mayor;  and  Major  Lennox. 

General  Hand,  from  situation,  would  claim  par- 
ticular consideration ;  but  the  Secretary,  with  much 
esteem  for  that  gentleman  on  personal  accounts,  is 
obliged  in  duty  to  say,  that  he  has  been  so  materially 
defective  in  the  execution  of  his  present  office,  as  to 
forbid  an  assurance  that  the  superior  one  would  be 
executed  by  him  with  due  attention  and  exertion. 
And  it  is  of  vast  consequence  to  the  revenue  and  to 
the  government,  that  no  mistake  should  be  com- 
mitted in  the  present  choice. 

Of  the  persons  named,  Col.  Miller,  all  circumstances 
considered,  has  the  judgment  of  the  Secretary  in  his 
favor.  All  agree  that  he  is  a  man  of  good  character, 
of  friendly  dispositions  to  the  government  and  laws 
of  the  United  States,  of  industry,  exertion,  address 
and  distinguished  firmness,  of  adequate  though  not 


352  Alexander  Hamilton 

superior  ability,  and  most  likely,  of  any  man  on  whom 
equal  dependence  can  be  placed,  to  have  weight  in 
the  most  refractory  scene  of  this  State.  He  is  also 
a  man  of  decent  property,  unembarrassed.  Among 
those  who  warmly  recommend  him  is  Mr.  Ross, 
Senator  of  this  State,  who  Hves  in  one  of  the  most 
western  counties. 

Mr.  Biddle  has  many  things  in  his  favor.  Perhaps 
he  has  more  ability  than  any  of  the  persons  named, 
and  no  doubts  are  entertained  of  his  firmness,  ac- 
tivity, or  attention.  His  connections  and  influence 
are  principally  among  the  malcontents;  but  most 
persons  who  have  been  consulted  entertain  an  un- 
favorable impression  of  his  political  principles,  and 
think  there  is  not  full  assurance  that  he  would  not 
sacrifice  the  duties  of  his  station  and  the  interests  of 
the  government  to  party  considerations.  He  was 
named  by  the  Democratic  Society  Vice-President, 
which  he  has,  it  seems,  neither  accepted  nor  publicly 
disavowed.  Several  attach  an  idea  of  cunning  and 
dupHcity  to  the  character.  One  good  judge  of 
character  thinks  favorably  of  his  principles,  and  that 
reliance  may  be  placed;  but  the  result  of  a  compre- 
hensive inquiry  is,  that  there  would  be  hazard  in  the 
appointment,  and  the  case  is  believed  to  be  one  in 
which  nothing  ought  to  be  hazarded. 

Col.  Nichols  and  Major  Lennox  stand  nearly  on  a 
level — both  men  of  adequate  understanding,  honor- 
able characters,  some  property,  undoubted  firmness, 
and  probable  exertion;  but  on  the  last  point  there 
is  greater  assurance  of  Major  Lennox.  But  neither 
of  these  gentlemen  seem  to  have  that  extensive 


Hamilton  to  Washington  353 

notoriety  and  popularity  of  character  which  is  de- 
sirable to  assist  the  progress  of  disagreeable  laws. 
In  this  particular,  Mr.  Miller  or  Mr.  Biddle  has 
greatly  the  advantage. 

Mr.  Clarkson  has  several  things  in  his  favor; 
perhaps  rather  more  ability  than  most  of  the  other 
persons ;  but  he  wants  bodily  activity,  which  may  be 
a  point  of  consequence;  and  he  is  said  to  be  much 
embarrassed  in  his  circumstances. 

The  Secretary  has  committed  these  remarks  to 
writing,  not  wishing  to  intrude  on  the  President  to- 
day, and  desirous  of  placing  the  subject  immediately 
before  him.  If  he  should  conclude  on  the  person  be- 
fore he  leaves  town,  it  is  requested  that  he  would 
leave  a  commission,  signed  but  not  completed,  in 
order  that  it  may  be  previously  ascertained  whether 
Mr.  Miller  will  accept. 

Among  the  persons  who  have  been  consulted  is 
the  Attorney-General.  He  gave  a  preference  to  Mr. 
Miller.  His  knowledge  of  State  characters  is  dif- 
fusive and  accurate.  Mr.  Miller  was  lately  a  very 
promising  candidate  for  the  place  of  Senator  in  the 
Senate  of  the  United  States. 


HAMILTON  TO  WASHINGTON 

Treasury  Department,  August  2,  1794. 

Sir: 

In  compliance  with  your  requisitions,  I  have  the 
honor  to  submit  my  opinion  as  to  the  course  which  it 
will  be  advisable  for  the  President  to  pursue,  in  regard 
to  the  armed  opposition  recently  given  in  the  four 


VOL    VI. — 23 


354  Alexander  Hamilton 

western  counties  of  Pennsylvania  to  the  execution  of 
the  laws  of  the  United  States  laying  duties  upon 
spirits  distilled  within  the  United  States,  and  upon 
stills. 

The  case  upon  which  an  opinion  is  required,  is 
summarily  as  follows.  The  four  most  western 
counties  of  Pennsylvania,  since  the  commencement 
of  those  laws,  a  period  of  more  than  three  years,  have 
been  in  steady  and  violent  opposition  to  them.  By 
formal  public  meetings  of  influential  individuals, 
whose  resolutions  and  proceedings  had  for  imdis- 
guised  objects  to  render  the  laws  odious,  to  discoun- 
tenance a  compliance  with  them,  and  to  intimidate 
individuals  from  accepting  and  executing  offices 
under  them ;  by  a  general  spirit  of  opposition  (thus 
fomented)  among  the  inhabitants,  by  repeated  in- 
stances of  armed  parties  going  in  disguise  to  the 
houses  of  the  officers  of  the  revenue,  and  inflicting 
upon  them  personal  violence  and  outrage,  by  general 
combinations  to  forbear  a  compliance  with  the  re- 
quisitions of  the  laws,  by  examples  of  injury  to  the 
property  and  insult  to  the  persons  of  individuals  who 
have  shown  by  their  conduct  a  disposition  to  comply, 
and  by  an  almost  universal  non-compliance  with  the 
laws,  their  execution  within  the  counties  in  question 
has  been  completely  frustrated. 

Various  alterations  have  been  made  in  the  laws  by 
the  Legislature,  to  obviate,  as  far  as  possible,  the 
objections  of  the  inhabitants  of  those  counties. 

The  executive,  on  its  part,  has  been  far  from 
deficient  in  forbearance,  lenity,  or  a  spirit  of  accom- 
modation. 


Hamilton  to  Washington  355 

But  neither  the  legislative  nor  the  executive  ac- 
commodations have  had  any  effect  in  producing  com- 
pliance with  the  laws. 

The  opposition  has  continued  and  matured,  till  it 
has  at  length  broken  out  in  acts  which  are  presumed 
to  amount  to  treason. 

Armed  collections  of  men,  with  the  avowed  design 
of  opposing  the  execution  of  the  laws,  have  attacked 
the  house  of  the  Inspector  of  the  Revenue,  burnt  and 
destroyed  his  property,  and  shed  the  blood  of  persons 
engaged  in  its  defence;  have  made  prisoner  of  the 
marshal  of  the  district,  and  did  not  release  him  till, 
for  the  safety  of  his  life,  he  stipulated  to  execute  no 
more  processes  within  the  disaffected  counties ;  have 
compelled  both  him  and  the  Inspector  of  the  Revenue 
to  fly  the  country  by  a  circuitous  route,  to  avoid 
personal  injury,  perhaps  assassination;  have  pro- 
posed the  assembling  of  a  convention  of  delegates 
from  those  counties  and  the  neighboring  ones  of  Vir- 
ginia, probably  with  a  view  to  systematize  measures 
of  more  effectual  opposition;  have  forcibly  seized, 
opened,  and  spoliated  a  mail  of  the  United  States. 

What  in  this  state  of  things  is  proper  to  be  done? 
The  President  has,  with  the  advice  of  the  heads  of 
departments  and  the  Attorney-General,  caused  to  be 
submitted  all  the  evidence  of  the  foregoing  facts  to 
the  consideration  of  an  associate  judge,  under  the  act 
entitled,  "An  act  to  provide  for  calling  forth  the 
militia  to  execute  the  laws  of  the  Union,  suppress 
insurrection,  and  repel  invasion." 

If  the  judge  shall  pronounce  that  the  case  de- 
scribed in  the  second  section  of  that  act  exists,  it  will 


356  Alexander  Hamilton 

follow  that  a  competent  force  of  militia  should  be 
called  forth  and  employed  to  suppress  the  insurrec- 
tion, and  support  the  civil  authority  in  effectuating 
obedience  to  the  laws  and  pimishment  of  offenders. 

It  appears  to  me  that  the  very  existence  of  govern- 
ment demands  this  course,  and  that  a  duty  of  the 
highest  nature  urges  the  Chief  Magistrate  to  pursue 
it.  The  Constitution  and  laws  of  the  United  States 
contemplate  and  provide  for  it. 

What  force  of  militia  shall  be  called  out,  and  from 
what  State  or  States? 

The  force  ought,  if  attainable,  to  be  an  imposing 
one,  such,  if  practicable,  as  will  deter  from  opposition, 
save  the  effusion  of  the  blood  of  citizens,  and  serve 
the  object  to  be  accomplished. 

The  quantum  must,  of  course,  be  regulated  by  the 
resistance  to  be  expected.  'T  is  computed  that  the 
four  opposing  counties  contain  upwards  of  sixteen 
thousand  males  of  sixteen  years  and  more;  that  of 
these  about  seven  thousand  may  be  expected  to  be 
armed. 

'T  is  possible  that  the  union  of  the  neighboring 
counties  of  Virginia  may  augment  this  force.  'T  is 
not  impossible  that  it  may  receive  an  accession  from 
some  adjacent  counties  of  this  State  on  this  side  of 
the  Alleghany  Mountains. 

To  be  prepared  for  the  worst,  I  am  of  opinion  that 
twelve  thousand  militia  ought  to  be  ordered  to  as- 
semble— 9,000  foot  and  3,000  horse.  I  should  not 
propose  so  many  horse,  but  for  the  probability  that 
this  description  of  militia  will  be  more  easily  procured 
for  the  service. 


Hamilton  to  Washington  357 

From  what  State  or  States  shall  these  come? 

The  law  contemplates  that  the  militia  of  a  State 
in  which  an  insurrection  happens,  if  willing  and  suffi- 
cient, shall  first  be  employed,  but  gives  power  to 
employ  the  militia  of  other  States  in  the  case  either 
of  refusal  or  insufficiency. 

The  Governor  of  Pennsylvania,  in  an  official  con- 
ference this  day,  gave  it  explicitly  as  his  opinion  to 
the  President,  that  the  militia  of  Pennsylvania  alone 
would  be  found  incompetent  to  the  suppression  of  the 
insurrection. 

This  opinion  of  the  Chief  Magistrate  of  the  State  is 
presumed  to  be  a  sufficient  foundation  for  calling  in, 
in  the  first  instance,  the  aid  of  the  militia  of  the 
neighboring  States. 

I  would  submit,  then,  that  Pennsylvania  be  re- 
quired to  furnish  6,000  men,  of  whom  1,000  to  be 
horse;  New  Jersey  2,000,  of  whom  800  to  b6  horse; 
Maryland  2,000,  of  whom  600  to  be  horse;  Virginia 
2,000,  of  whom  600  to  be  horse. 

Or,  perhaps,  it  may  be  as  eligible  to  call  upon  each 
State  for  such  a  number  of  troops,  leaving  to  itself 
the  proportion  of  horse  and  foot  according  to  con- 
venience. The  militia  called  for  to  rendezvous  at 
Carlisle,  in  Pennsylvania,  and  Cumberland  Fort,  in 
Virginia,  on  the  loth  of  September  next.  The  law 
requires  that  previous  to  the  using  of  force,  a  pro- 
clamation shall  issue,  commanding  the  insurgents  to 
disperse  and  return  peaceably  to  their  respective 
abodes  within  a  limited  time.  This  step  must,  of 
course,  be  taken. 

The  application  of  the  force  to  be  called  out  and 


35^  Alexander  Hamilton 

other  ulterior  measures  must   depend  on   circum- 
stances as  they  shall  arise. 

With  the  most  perfect  respect,  etc. 


HAMILTON  TO  WASHINGTON 

Report  on  Opposition  to  Internal  Duties 

Treasury  Department,  August  5,  1794. 

Sir: — The  disagreeable  crisis  at  which  matters 
have  lately  arrived  in  some  of  the  western  counties 
of  Pennsylvania,  with  regard  to  the  law  laying  duties 
on  spirits  distilled  within  the  United  States,  and  on 
stills,  seems  to  render  proper  a  review  of  the  circimi- 
stances  which  have  attended  those  laws  in  that  scene 
from  their  commencement  to  the  present  time,  and  of 
the  conduct  which  has  hitherto  been  observed  on  the 
part  of  the  government,  its  motives  and  effect,  in 
order  to  a  better  judgment  of  the  measures  neces- 
sary to  be  pursued  in  the  existing  emergency. 

The  opposition  to  those  laws  in  the  four  most 
western  counties  of  Pennsylvania  (Alleghany,  Wash- 
ington, Fayette,  and  Westmoreland)  commenced  as 
early  as  they  were  known  to  have  been  passed.  It 
has  continued  with  different  degrees  of  violence  in 
different  counties,  and  at  different  periods,  but 
Washington  has  uniformly  distinguished  its  resist- 
ance by  a  more  excessive  spirit  than  has  appeared  in 
the  other  counties,  and  seems  to  have  been  chiefly 
instrumental  in  kindling  and  keeping  alive  the  flame. 

The  opposition  first  manifested  itself  in  the  milder 
shape  of  the  circulation  of  opinions  unfavorable  to 


Hamilton  to  Washington  359 

the  law,  and  calculated  by  the  influence  of  public 
disesteem  to  discourage  the  accepting  or  holding  of 
offices  under  it,  or  the  complying  with  it  by  those 
who  might  be  so  disposed,  to  which  was  added  the 
show  of  a  discontinuance  of  the  business  of  distilling. 

These  expedients  were  shortly  after  succeeded  by 
private  associations  to  forbear  compliance  with  the 
law.  But  it  was  not  long  before  these  more  negative 
modes  of  opposition  were  perceived  to  be  likely  to 
prove  ineffectual.  And  in  proportion  as  this  was  the 
case,  and  as  the  means  of  introducing  the  laws  into 
operation  were  put  into  execution,  the  disposition  to 
resistance  became  more  turbulent  and  more  inclined 
to  adopt  and  practise  violent  expedients.  The  offi- 
cers now  began  to  experience  marks  of  contempt  and 
insult.  Threats  against  them  became  more  frequent 
and  loud;  and  after  some  time  these  threats  were 
ripened  into  acts  of  ill  treatment  and  outrage. 

These  acts  of  violence  were  preceded  by  certain 
meetings  of  malcontent  persons,  who  entered  into 
resolutions  calculated  at  once  to  confirm,  inflame, 
and  systematize  the  spirit  of  opposition. 

The  first  of  these  meetings  was  holden  at  a  place 
called  Red  Stone  Old  Fort,  on  the  27th  of  July,  1791, 
where  it  was  concerted  that  county  committees 
should  be  convened  in  the  four  counties,  at  the  re- 
spective seats  of  justice  therein.  On  the  23d  of 
August  following  one  of  these  committees  assembled 
in  the  county  of  Washington. 

This  meeting  passed  some  intemperate  resolutions, 
which  were  afterward  printed  in  the  Pittsburgh 
Gazette,  containing   a  strong   censure  on   the  law, 


360  Alexander  Hamilton 

declaring  that  any  person  who  had  accepted  or  might 
accept  an  office  under  Congress,  in  order  to  carry  it  into 
effect,  should  he  considered  as  inimical  to  the  interests 
of  the  country;  and  recommending  to  the  citizens  of 
Washington  Coimty  to  treat  every  person  who  had 
accepted  or  might  thereafter  accept  any  such  office, 
with  contempt,  and  absolutely  to  refuse  all  kind  of 
communication  or  intercourse  with  the  officers,  and  to 
withhold  from  them  all  aid,  support,  or  comfort. 

Not  content  with  this  vindictive  proscription  of 
those  who  might  esteem  it  their  duty,  in  the  capacity 
of  officers,  to  aid  in  the  execution  of  the  constitu- 
tional laws  of  the  land,  the  meeting  proceeded  to 
accumulate  topics  of  crimination  of  the  government, 
though  foreign  to  each  other;  authorizing,  by  this 
zeal  for  censure,  a  suspicion  that  they  were  actuated, 
not  merely  by  the  dislike  of  a  particular  law,  but  by  a 
disposition  to  render  the  government  itself  unpopular 
and  odious. 

This  meeting,  in  further  prosecution  of  their  plan, 
deputed  three  of  their  members  to  meet  delegates 
from  the  counties  of  Westmoreland,  Fayette,  and 
Alleghany,  on  the  first  Tuesday  of  September  follow- 
ing, for  the  purpose  of  expressing  the  sense  of  the 
people  of  those  counties,  in  an  address  to  the  Legis- 
lature of  the  United  States  upon  the  subject  of  the 
excise  law  and  other  grievances. 

Another  meeting  accordingly  took  place  on  the  7  th 
of  September,  1791,  at  Pittsburgh,  in  the  county  of 
Alleghany,  at  which  there  appeared  persons  in  the 
character  of  delegates  from  the  four  western  counties. 

This  meeting  entered  into  resolutions  more  com- 


Hamilton  to  Washington  361 

prehensive  in  their  objects,  and  not  less  inflammatory 
in  their  tendency  than  those  which  had  before  passed 
the  meeting  in  Washington. 

Their  resolutions  contained  severe  censures,  not 
only  on  the  law  which  was  the  immediate  subject  of 
objection,  but  upon  what  they  termed  the  exorbitant 
salaries  of  officers,  the  unreasonable  interest  of  the 
public  debt,  the  want  of  discrimination  between 
original  holders  and  transferees,  and  the  institution 
of  a  national  bank.  The  same  unfriendly  temper 
towards  the  Government  of  the  United  States,  which 
seemed  to  have  led  out  of  their  way  the  meeting  at 
Washington,  appears  to  have  produced  a  similar 
wandering  in  that  at  Pittsburgh. 

A  representation  to  Congress,  and  a  remonstrance 
to  the  Legislature  of  Pennsylvania  against  the  law 
more  particularly  complained  of,  were  prepared  by 
this  meeting,  published  together  with  the  other  pro- 
ceedings in  the  Pittsburgh  Gazette,  and  afterwards 
presented  to  the  respective  bodies  to  whom  they  were 
addressed. 

These  meetings,  composed  of  very  influential  indi- 
viduals, and  conducted  without  moderation  or  pru- 
dence, are  justly  chargeable  with  the  excesses  which 
have  been  from  time  to  time  committed;  serving  to 
give  consistency  to  an  opposition  which  has  at  length 
matured  to  a  point  that  threatens  the  foundations  of 
the  government  and  of  the  Union,  unless  speedily 
and  effectually  subdued. 

On  the  6th  of  the  same  month  of  September,  the 
opposition  broke  out  in  an  act  of  violence  upon  the 
person  and  property  of  Robert  Johnson,   collector 


362  Alexander  Hamilton 

of  the  revenues  for  the  counties  of  Alleghany  and 
Washington. 

A  party  of  men,  armed  and  disguised,  waylaid  him 
at  a  place  on  Pidgeon  Creek,  in  Washington  County, 
seized,  tarred  and  feathered  him,  cut  off  his  hair,  and 
deprived  him  of  his  horse,  obliging  him  to  travel  on 
foot  a  considerable  distance  in  that  mortifying  and 
painful  situation. 

The  case  was  brought  before  the  District  Court  of 
Pennsylvania,  out  of  which  processes  issued  against 
John  Robertson,  John  Hamilton,  and  Thomas 
McComb,  three  of  the  persons  concerned  in  the 
outrage. 

The  serving  of  these  processes  was  confided  by  the 
then  marshall,  Clement  Biddle,  to  his  deputy,  Joseph 
Fox,  who  in  the  month  of  October  went  into  Alle- 
ghany County  for  the  purpose  of  serving  them. 

The  appearances  and  circumstances  which  Mr.  Fox 
observed  himself,  in  the  course  of  his  journey,  and 
learned  afterwards,  upon  his  arrival  at  Pittsburgh, 
had  the  effect  of  deterring  him  from  the  service  of  the 
processes,  and  unfortunately  led  him  to  adopt  the 
injudicious  and  fruitless  expedient  of  sending  them  to 
the  parties  by  a  private  messenger  under  cover. 

The  deputy's  report  to  the  marshal  states  a  number 
of  particulars  evincing  a  considerable  fermentation  in 
the  part  of  the  country  to  which  he  was  sent,  and 
inducing  a  belief  on  his  part,  that  he  could  not  with 
safety  have  executed  the  processes.  The  marshal, 
transmitting  this  report  to  the  district  attorney, 
makes  the  following  observations  upon  it:  "I  am 
sorry  to  add,  that  he  (the  deputy)  found  the  people  in 


Hamilton  to  Washington  363 

general  in  the  western  part  of  the  State,  and  par- 
ticularly beyond  the  Alleghany  Mountains,  in  such  a 
ferment  on  account  of  the  act  of  Congress  for  laying 
a  duty  on  distilled  spirits,  and  so  much  opposed  to 
the  execution  of  the  said  act,  and  from  a  variety  of 
threats  to  himself  personally,  although  he  took  the 
utmost  precaution  to  conceal  his  errand,  that  he  was 
not  only  convinced  of  the  impossibility  of  serving  the 
process,  but  that  any  attempt  to  effect  it  would  have 
occasioned  the  most  violent  opposition  from  the 
greater  part  of  the  inhabitants ;  and  he  declares  that 
if  he  had  attempted  it,  he  believes  he  should  not  have 
returned  alive.  I  spared  no  expense  nor  pains  to 
have  the  process  of  the  court  executed,  and  have  not 
the  least  doubt  that  my  deputy  would  have  accom- 
plished it,  if  it  could  have  been  done." 

The  reality  of  the  danger  to  the  deputy  was  coun- 
tenanced by  the  opinion  of  General  Neville,  the  in- 
spector of  the  revenue,  a  man  who  before  had  given, 
and  since  has  given,  numerous  proofs  of  a  steady 
and  firm  temper.  And  what  followed  is  a  further 
confirmation  of  it.  The  person  who  had  been  sent 
with  the  processes  was  seized,  whipped,  tarred  and 
feathered,  and  after  having  his  money  and  horse 
taken  from  him,  was  blindfolded  and  tied  in  the 
woods,  in  which  condition  he  remained  five  hours. 

Very  serious  reflections  naturally  occurred  upon 
this  occasion.  It  seemed  highly  probable,  from  the 
issue  of  the  experiment  which  had  been  made,  that 
the  ordinary  course  of  civil  process  would  be  ineffect- 
ual for  enforcing  the  execution  of  the  law  in  the  scene 
in  question,  and  that  a  perseverance  in  this  course 


364  Alexander  Hamilton 

might  lead  to  a  serious  concussion.  The  law  itself 
was  still  in  the  infancy  of  its  operation,  and  far  from 
established  in  other  important  portions  of  the  Union. 
Prejudices  against  it  had  been  industriously  dissem- 
inated, misrepresentations  diffused,  misconceptions 
fostered.  The  Legislature  of  the  United  States  had 
not  yet  organized  the  means  by  which  the  Executive 
could  come  in  aid  of  the  Judiciary,  when  found  in- 
competent to  the  execution  of  the  laws.  If  neither  of 
these  impediments  to  a  decisive  exertion  had  existed, 
it  was  desirable,  especially  in  a  republican  govern- 
ment, to  avoid  what  is  in  such  cases  the  ultimate 
resort,  till  all  the  milder  means  had  been  tried  without 
success. 

Under  the  united  influence  of  these  considerations, 
it  appeared  advisable  to  forbear  urging  coercive  meas- 
ures, until  the  laws  had  gone  into  more  extensive 
operation,  till  further  time  for  reflection  and  experi- 
ence of  its  operation  had  served  to  correct  false  im- 
pressions and  inspire  greater  moderation,  and  till  the 
Legislature  had  had  an  opportunity,  by  a  revision  of 
the  law,  to  remove,  as  far  as  possible,  objections,  and 
to  reinforce  the  provisions  for  securing  its  execution. 

Other  incidents  occurred  from  time  to  time,  which 
are  further  proofs  of  the  very  improper  temper  that 
prevailed  among  the  inhabitants  of  the  refractory 
counties. 

Mr.  Johnson  was  not  the  only  oflicer  who  about  the 
same  period  experienced  outrage.  Mr.  Wells,  col- 
lector of  the  revenue  for  Westmoreland  and  Fayette, 
was  also  ill-treated  at  Greensburgh  and  Union  Town ; 
nor  were  the  outrages  perpetrated  confined  to  the 


Hamilton  to  Washington  365 

officers ;  they  extended  to  private  citizens  who  only- 
dared  to  show  their  respect  for  the  laws  of  their 
country. 

Some  time  in  October,  1791,  an  unhappy  man  of 
the  name  of  Wilson,  a  stranger  in  the  county,  and 
manifestly  disordered  in  his  intellects,  imagining  him- 
self to  be  a  collector  of  the  revenue,  or  invested  with 
some  trust  in  relation  to  it,  was  so  unlucky  as  to  make 
inquiries  concerning  distillers  who  had  entered  their 
stills,  giving  out  that  he  was  to  travel  through  the 
United  States,  to  ascertain  and  report  to  Congress  the 
number  of  stills,  etc.  This  man  was  pursued  by  a 
party  in  disguise,  taken  out  of  his  bed,  carried  about 
five  miles  back  to  a  smith's  shop,  stripped  of  his 
clothes,  which  were  afterwards  burnt,  and,  after  hav- 
ing been  himself  inhumanly  burnt  in  several  places 
with  a  heated  iron,  was  tarred  and  feathered,  and 
about  daylight  dismissed — ^  naked,  wounded,  and 
otherwise  in  a  very  suffering  condition.  These  par- 
ticulars are  communicated  in  a  letter  from  the  in- 
spector of  the  revenue,  of  the  17th  of  November,  who 
declares  that  he  had  then  himself  seen  the  unfortun- 
ate maniac,  the  abuse  of  whom,  as  he  expresses  it, 
exceeded  description,  and  was  sufficient  to  make 
human  nature  shudder.  The  affair  is  the  more  ex- 
traordinary, as  persons  of  weight  and  consideration 
in  that  county  are  understood  to  have  been  actors  in 
it,  and  as  the  symptoms  of  insanity  were,  during  the 
whole  time  of  inflicting  the  punishment,  apparent — 
the  unhappy  sufferer  displaying  the  heroic  fortitude 
of  a  man  who  conceived  himself  to  be  a  martyr  to  the 
discharge  of  some  important  duty. 


366  Alexander  Hamilton 

Not  long  after,  a  person  of  the  name  of  Roseberry 
tinderwent  the  humiliating  punishment  of  tarring  and 
feathering,  with  some  aggravations,  for  having  in 
conversation  hazarded  the  very  natural  and  just  but 
impalatable  remark,  that  the  inhabitants  of  that 
coimty  could  not  reasonably  expect  protection  from  a 
government  whose  laws  they  so  strenuously  opposed. 

The  audacity  of  the  perpetrators  of  those  excesses 
was  so  great,  that  an  armed  banditti  ventured  to  seize 
and  carry  off  two  persons  who  were  witnesses  against 
the  rioters  in  the  case  of  Wilson,  in  order  to  prevent 
their  giving  testimony  of  the  riot  to  a  court  then 
sitting,  or  about  to  sit. 

Designs  of  personal  violence  against  the  Inspector 
of  the  Revenue  himself,  to  force  him  to  a  resignation, 
were  repeatedly  attempted  to  be  put  in  execution  by 
armed  parties,  but  by  different  circumstances  were 
frustrated. 

In  the  session  of  Congress  which  commenced  in 
October,  1791,  the  law  laying  a  duty  on  distilled 
spirits  and  stills  came  imder  the  revision  of  Congress, 
as  had  been  anticipated.  By  an  act  passed  May  8, 
1792,  during  that  session,  material  alterations  were 
made  in  it.  Among  these  the  duty  was  reduced  to  a 
rate  so  moderate  as  to  have  silenced  complaint  on 
that  head ;  and  a  new  and  very  favorable  alternative 
was  given  to  the  distiller,  that  of  paying  a  monthly 
instead  of  a  yearly  rate,  according  to  the  capacity  of 
his  still,  with  liberty  to  take  a  license  for  the  precise 
term  which  he  should  intend  to  work  it,  and  to  renew 
that  license  for  a  further  term  or  terms.  This  amend- 
ing act,  in  its  progress  through  the  Legislature,  en- 


Hamilton  to  Washington  367 

gaged  the  particular  attention  of  members  who 
themselves  were  interested  in  distilleries,  and  of 
others  who  represented  parts  of  the  country  in  which 
the  business  of  distilling  w^as  extensively  carried  on. 

Objections  were  well  considered,  and  great  pains 
taken  to  obviate  all  such  as  had  the  semblance  of 
reasonableness. 

The  effect  has  in  a  great  measure  corresponded 
with  the  views  of  the  Legislature.  Opposition  has 
subsided  in  several  districts  where  it  before  prevailed ; 
and  it  was  natural  to  entertain,  and  not  easy  to 
abandon,  a  hope  that  the  same  thing  would  by  degrees 
have  taken  place  in  the  four  western  counties  of  this 
State.  But,  notwithstanding  some  flattering  appear- 
ances at  particular  junctures,  and  infinite  pains  by 
various  expedients  to  produce  the  desirable  issue,  the 
hope  entertained  has  never  been  realized,  and  is  now 
at  an  end,  as  far  as  the  ordinary  means  of  executing 
laws  are  concerned. 

The  first  law  had  left  the  number  and  positions  of 
the  oflfices  of  inspection,  which  were  to  be  established 
in  each  district  for  receiving  entries  of  stills,  to  the 
discretion  of  the  supervisor.  The  second,  to  secure 
a  due  accommodation  to  distillers,  provides  peremp- 
torily that  there  shall  be  one  in  each  county. 

The  idea  was  immediately  embraced,  that  it  was  a 
very  important  point  in  the  scheme  of  opposition  to 
the  law,  to  prevent  the  establishment  of  offices  in  the 
respective  counties.  For  this  purpose  the  intimida- 
tion of  well-disposed  inhabitants  was  added  to  the 
plan  of  molesting  and  obstructing  the  officers  by  force 
or  otherwise,  as  might  be  necessary.     So  effectually 


o 


68  Alexander  Hamilton 


was  the  first  point  carried  (the  certain  destruction  of 
property  and  the  peril  of  life  being  involved),  that 
it  became  almost  impracticable  to  obtain  suitable 
places  for  offices  in  some  of  the  counties,  and  when 
obtained,  it  was  found  a  matter  of  necessity,  in  almost 
every  instance,  to  abandon  them. 

After  much  effort,  the  Inspector  of  the  Revenue 
succeeded  in  procuring  the  house  of  William  Faulk- 
ner, a  captain  in  the  army,  for  an  office  of  inspection 
in  the  county  of  Washington.  This  took  place  in 
August,  1792.  The  office  was  attended  by  the  in- 
spector of  the  revenue  in  person,  till  prevented  by  the 
following  incidents. 

Captain  Faulkner,  being  in  pursuit  of  some  desert- 
ers from  the  troops,  was  encountered  by  a  number  of 
people  in  the  same  neighborhood  where  Mr.  Johnson 
had  been  ill-treated  the  preceding  year,  who  re- 
proached him  with  letting  his  house  for  an  office  of 
inspection,  drew  a  knife  upon  him,  threatened  to  scalp 
him,  tar  and  feather  him,  and  reduce  his  house  and 
property  to  ashes,  if  he  did  not  solemnly  promise  to 
prevent  the  further  use  of  his  house  for  an  office. 
Capt.  Faulkner  was  induced  to  make  the  promise 
exacted,  and,  in  consequence  of  the  circumstance, 
wrote  a  letter  to  the  inspector,  dated  the  20th  of 
August,  countermanding  the  permission  for  using  his 
house,  and  the  day  following  gave  a  public  notice  in 
the  Pittsburgh  Gazette  that  the  office  of  inspection 
should  be  no  longer  kept  there. 

At  the  same  time  another  engine  of  opposition  was 
in  operation.  Agreeable  to  a  previous  notification, 
there  met  at  Pittsburgh,  on  the  21st  of  August,  a 


Hamilton  to  Washington  369 

number  of  persons  styling  themselves  "A  Meeting 
of  Sundry  Inhabitants  of  the  Western  Counties  of 
Pennsylvania." 

This  meeting  entered  into  resolutions  not  less  ex- 
ceptionable than  those  of  its  predecessors.  The  pre- 
amble suggested  that  a  tax  on  spirituous  liquors  is 
unjust  in  itself,  and  oppressive  upon  the  poor;  that 
internal  taxes  upon  consumption  must,  in  the  end, 
destroy  the  liberties  of  every  country  in  which  they 
are  introduced ;  that  the  law  in  question,  from  certain 
local  circumstances  which  are  specified,  would  bring 
immediate  distress  and  ruin  upon  the  western 
country ;  and  concludes  with  the  sentiment,  that  they 
think  it  their  duty  to  persist  in  remonstrances  to 
Congress,  and  in  every  other  legal  measure  that  may 
obstruct  the  operation  of  the  law. 

The  resolutions  then  proceed,  first,  to  appoint  a 
committee  to  prepare  and  cause  to  be  presented  to 
Congress  an  address,  stating  objections  to  the  law, 
and  praying  for  its  repeal;  secondly,  to  appoint  com- 
mittees of  correspondence  for  Washington,  Fayette, 
and  Alleghany,  charged  to  correspond  together,  and 
with  such  committee  as  should  be  appointed  for  the 
same  purpose  in  the  county  of  Westmoreland,  or  with 
any  committees  of  a  similar  nature  that  might  be 
apxjointed  in  other  parts  of  the  United  States,  and 
also,  if  found  necessary,  to  call  together  either  general 
meetings  of  the  people,  in  their  respective  counties,  or 
conferences  of  the  several  committees ;  and  lastly,  to 
declare  that  they  will,  in  future,  consider  those  who 
hold  offices  for  the  collection  of  the  duty,  as  unworthy 
of  their  friendship,  that  they  will  have  no  intercourse 

VOL.  VI.— 24. 


370  Alexander  Hamilton 

nor  dealings  with  them,  will  withdraw  from  them  every 
assistance,  withhold  all  the  comforts  of  life  which  depend 
upon  those  duties  that  as  men  and  fellow-citizens  we  owe 
to  each  other,  and  will  upon  all  occasions  treat  them  with 
contempt,  earnestly  recommending  it  to  the  people 

AT  LARGE  TO  FOLLOW  THE  SAME  LINE  OF  CONDUCT 
TOWARDS  THEM. 

The  idea  of  pursuing  legal  measures  to  obstruct  the 
operation  of  a  law,  needs  little  comment.  Legal  meas- 
ures may  be  pursued  to  procure  the  repeal  of  a  law, 
but  to  obstruct  its  operation  presents  a  contradiction  in 
terms.  The  operation,  or,  what  is  the  same  thing, 
the  execution  of  a  law,  cannot  be  obstructed  after  it 
has  been  constitutionally  enacted,  without  illegality 
and  crime.  The  expression  quoted  is  one  of  those 
phrases  which  can  only  be  used  to  conceal  a  disorderly 
and  culpable  intention  under  forms  that  may  escape 
the  hold  of  the  law. 

Neither  was  it  difficult  to  perceive  that  the  ana- 
thema pronounced  against  the  officers  of  the  revenue 
placed  them  in  a  state  of  virtual  outlawry,  and  oper- 
ated as  a  signal  to  all  those  who  were  bold  enough  to 
encounter  the  guilt  and  the  danger  to  violate  both 
their  lives  and  their  properties. 

The  foregoing  proceedings,  as  soon  as  known,  were 
reported  by  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  to  the 
President.  The  President,  on  the  1 5th  of  September, 
1792,  issued  a  proclamation,  "earnestly  admonishing 
and  exhorting  alb  persons  whom  it  might  concern  to 
refrain  and  desist  from  all  unlawful  combinations  and 
proceedings  whatsoever,  having  for  object,  or  tend- 
ing, to  obstruct  the  operation  of  the  laws  aforesaid, 


Hamilton  to  Washington  371 

inasmuch  as  all  lawful  ways  and  means  would  be  put 
in  execution  for  bringing  to  justice  the  infractors 
thereof,  and  securing  obedience  thereto;  and  more- 
over, charging  and  requiring  all  courts,  magistrates, 
and  officers  whom  it  might  concern,  according  to  the 
duties  of  their  several  offices,  to  exert  the  powers 
in  them  respectively  vested  by  law,  for  the  purposes 
aforesaid;  thereby  also  enjoining  and  requiring  all 
persons  whomsoever,  as  they  tendered  the  welfare  of 
their  country,  the  just  and  due  authority  of  govern- 
ment, and  the  preservation  of  the  public  peace,  to  be 
aiding  and  assisting  therein  according  to  law";  and 
likewise  directed  that  prosecutions  might  be  instituted 
against  the  offenders  in  the  cases  in  which  the  laws 
would  support  and  the  requisite  evidence  could  be 
obtained. 

Pursuant  to  these  instructions,  the  Attorney-Gen- 
eral, in  co-operation  with  the  attorney  of  the  district, 
attended  a  circuit  court  which  was  holden  at  York- 
town,  in  October,  1792,  for  the  purpose  of  bringing 
forward  prosecutions  in  the  proper  cases. 

Collateral  measures  were  taken  to  procure  for  this 
purpose  the  necessary  evidence. 

The  supervisor  of  the  revenue  was  sent  into  the 
opposing  survey,  to  ascertain  the  real  state  of  that 
survey,  to  obtain  evidence  of  the  persons  who  were 
concerned  in  the  riot  in  Faulkner's  case,  and  of  those 
who  composed  the  meeting  at  Pittsburgh,  to  uphold 
the  confidence  and  encourage  the  perseverance  of 
the  officers  acting  under  the  law,  and  to  induce,  if 
possible,  the  inhabitants  of  that  part  of  the  survey 
which  appeared  least  disinclined,  to  come  voluntarily 


'ii"]2  Alexander  Hamilton 

into  the  law  by  arguments  addressed  to  their  sense 
of  duty,  and  exhibiting  the  eventual  dangers  and 
mischiefs  of  resistance. 

The  mission  of  the  supervisor  had  no  other  fruit 
than  that  of  obtaining  evidence  of  the  persons  who 
composed  the  meeting  at  Pittsburgh,  and  of  two  who 
were  understood  to  be  concerned  in  the  riot;  and  a 
confirmation  of  the  enmity  which  certain  active  and 
designing  leaders  had  industriously  infused  into  a 
large  proportion  of  the  inhabitants,  not  against  the 
particular  laws  in  question  only,  but  of  a  more  ancient 
date,  against  the  Government  of  the  United  States 
itself. 

The  then  Attorney-General  being  of  opinion  that  it 
was  at  best  a  doubtful  point  whether  the  proceedings 
of  the  meeting  at  Pittsburgh  contained  indictable 
matter,  no  prosecution  was  attempted  against  those 
who  composed  it,  though,  if  the  ground  for  proceeding 
against  them  had  appeared  to  be  firm,  it  is  presumed 
that  the  truest  policy  would  have  dictated  that 
course. 

Indictments  were  preferred  to  the  Circuit  Court, 
and  found  against  the  two  persons  understood  to  have 
been  concerned  in  the  riot,  and  the  usual  measures 
were  taken  for  carrying  them  into  effect. 

But  it  appearing  afterwards  from  various  repre- 
sentations, supported  by  satisfactory  testimony,  that 
there  had  been  some  mistake  as  to  the  persons  ac- 
cused, justice  and  policy  demanded  that  the  prosecu- 
tions should  be  discontinued,  which  was  accordingly 
done. 

This  issue  of  the  business  unavoidably  defeated  the 


Hamilton  to  Washington  Z7Z 

attempt  to  establish  examples  of  the  punishment  of 
persons  who  engaged  in  a  violent  resistance  of  the 
laws,  and  left  the  officers  to  struggle  against  the 
stream  of  resistance  without  the  advantage  of  such 
examples. 

The  following  plan,  which  was  afterwards  put  in 
execution,  was  about  this  time  digested,  for  carrying, 
if  possible,  the  laws  into  effect  without  the  necessity 
of  recurring  to  force. 

I .  To  prosecute  delinquents  in  the  cases  in  which  it 
could  be  clearly  done  for  non-cornpliance  with  the 
laws.  2.  To  intercept  the  markets  for  the  surplus 
produce  of  the  distilleries  of  the  non-complying 
counties,  by  seizing  the  spirits  on  their  way  to  those 
markets  in  places  where  it  could  be  effected  without 
opposition.  3.  By  purchases  through  agents,  for  the 
use  of  the  army  (instead  of  deriving  the  supply 
through  contracts  as  formerly),  confining  them  to 
spirits,  in  respect  to  which  there  had  been  a  com- 
pliance with  the  laws. 

The  motives  to  this  plan  speak  for  themselves.  It 
aimed,  besides  the  influence  of  penalties  on  delin- 
quents, at  making  it  the  general  interest  of  the  dis- 
tillers to  comply  with  the  laws,  by  interrupting  the 
market  for  a  very  considerable  surplus,  and  by  at  the 
same  time  confining  the  benefit  of  the  large  demand 
for  public  service  to  those  who  did  their  duty  to  the 
public,  and  furnishing,  through  the  means  of  payment 
in  cash,  that  medium  for  paying  the  duties,  the  want 
of  which  was  alleged  to  be  a  great  difficulty  in  the  way 
of  compliance.  But  two  circumstances  conspired  to 
counteract  the  success  of  the  plan :  one,  the  necessity, 


374  Alexander  Hamilton 

towards  incurring  the  penalties  of  non-compliance,  of 
there  being  an  office  of  inspection  in  each  county, 
which  was  prevented  in  some  of  the  counties  by  means 
of  the  intimidation  practised  for  that  purpose;  an- 
other, the  non-extension  of  the  law  to  the  territory 
northwest  of  the  Ohio,  into  which  a  large  proportion 
of  the  surplus  before  mentioned  was  sent.  A  cure  for 
these  defects  could  only  come  from  the  Legislature. 
Accordingly,  in  the  session  which  began  in  November, 
1792,  measures  were  taken  for  procuring  a  further 
revision  of  the  laws.  A  bill  containing  amendments 
of  those  and  other  defects,  was  brought  in ;  but  it  so 
happened,  that  this  object,  by  reason  of  more  urgent 
business,  was  deferred  till  towards  the  close  of  the 
session,  and  finally  went  off  through  the  usual  hurry 
of  that  period. 

The  continuance  of  the  embarrassment  incident  to 
this  state  of  things,  naturally  tended  to  diminish 
much  of  the  efficacy  of  the  plan  which  had  been  de- 
vised. Yet  it  was  resolved,  as  far  as  legal  provisions 
would  bear  out  the  officers,  to  pursue  it  with  per- 
severance. There  was  ground  to  entertain  hopes  of 
its  good  effects ;  and  it  was  certainly  the  most  likely 
course  which  could  have  been  adopted  towards  attain- 
ing the  objects  of  the  laws,  by  means  short  of  force ; 
evincing  unequivocally  the  sincere  disposition  to  avoid 
this  painful  resort,  and  the  steady  moderation  which 
has  characterized  the  measures  of  the  government. 

In  pursuance  of  this  plan,  prosecutions  were  occa- 
sionally instituted  in  the  mildest  forms,  seizures  were 
made  as  opportunities  occurred,  and  purchases  on 
public  account  were  carried  on. 


Hamilton  to  Washington  375 

It  may  be  incidentally  remarked  that  these  pur- 
chases were  extended  to  other  places;  where,  though 
the  same  disorders  did  not  exist,  it  appeared  advisable 
to  facilitate  the  payment  of  the  duties  by  this  species 
of  accommodation. 

Nor  was  this  plan,  notwithstanding  the  deficiency 
of  legal  provision,  which  impeded  its  full  execution, 
without  corresponding  effects.  Symptoms  from  time 
to  time  appeared  which  authorized  expectations,  that 
with  the  aid,  at  another  session,  of  the  desired  supple- 
mentary provisions,  it  was  capable  of  accomplishing 
its  end,  if  no  extraordinary  events  occurred. 

The  opponents  of  the  laws,  not  insensible  of  the 
tendency  of  that  plan,  nor  of  the  defects  in  the  laws 
which  interfered  with  it,  did  not  fail  from  time  to  time 
to  pursue  analogous  modes  of  counteraction.  The 
effort  to  frustrate  the  establishment  of  offices  of  in- 
spection, in  particular,  was  persisted  in,  and  even  in- 
creased. Means  of  intimidating  officers  and  others, 
continued  to  be  exerted. 

In  April,  1793,  a  party  of  armed  men  in  disguise 
made  an  attack  in  the  night  upon  the  house  of  a 
collector  of  revenue  who  resided  in  Fayette  County, 
but  he  happening  to  be  from  home,  they  contented 
themselves  with  breaking  open  his  house,  threatening, 
terrifying,  and  abusing  his  family. 

Warrants  were  issued  for  apprehending  some  of  the 
rioters  upon  this  occasion,  by  Isaac  Mason  and  James 
Findlay,  assistant  judges  of  Fayette  County,  which 
w^ere  delivered  to  the  sheriff  of  that  county,  who,  it 
seems,  refused  to  execute  them,  for  which  he  has  since 
been  indicted. 


376  Alexander  Hamilton 

This  is  at  once  an  example  of  the  disposition  to  sup- 
port the  laws  of  the  Union,  and  of  an  opposite  one, 
in  the  local  officers  of  Pennsylvania,  within  the  non- 
complying  scene.  But  it  is  a  truth  too  important  not 
to  be  noticed,  and  too  injurious  not  to  be  lamented, 
that  the  prevailing  spirit  of  those  officers  has  been 
either  hostile  or  lukewarm  to  the  execution  of  those 
laws;  and  that  the  weight  of  an  unfriendly  official 
influence  has  been  one  of  the  most  serious  obstacles 
with  which  they  have  had  to  struggle. 

In  June  following,  the  Inspector  of  the  Revenue 
was  burnt  in  effigy  in  Alleghany  County,  at  a  place 
and  on  a  day  of  some  public  election,  with  much  dis- 
play, in  the  presence  of  and  without  interruption  from 
magistrates  and  other  public  officers. 

On  the  night  of  the  2 2d  of  November,  another 
party  of  men,  some  of  them  armed,  and  all  in  disguise, 
went  to  the  house  of  the  same  collector  of  Fayette 
which  had  been  visited  in  April,  broke  and  entered  it, 
and  demanded  a  surrender  of  the  officer's  commission 
and  official  books.  Upon  his  refusing  to  deUver  them 
up,  they  presented  pistols  at  him,  and  swore  that  if 
he  did  not  comply  they  would  instantly  put  him  to 
death.  At  length  a  surrender  of  the  commission  and 
books  was  enforced.  But  not  content  with  this,  the 
rioters,  before  they  departed,  required  of  the  officer 
that  he  should,  within  two  weeks,  pubHsh  his  resigna- 
tion, on  pain  of  another  such  visit  and  a  destruction  of 
his  house. 

Notwithstanding  these  excesses,  the  laws  appeared 
during  the  latter  periods  of  this  year  to  be  rather 
gaining  ground.     Several  principal  distillers,  who  had 


Hamilton  to  Washington  577 

formerly  held  out,  complied,  and  others  discovered  a 
disposition  to  comply,  which  was  only  restrained  by 
the  fear  of  violence. 

But  these  favorable  circumstances  served  to  beget 
alarm  among  those  who  were  determined,  at  all 
events,  to  prevent  the  quiet  establishment  of  the 
laws.  It  soon  appeared  that  they  meditated,  by 
fresh  and  greater  excesses,  to  aim  a  still  more 
effectual  blow  at  them,  to  subdue  the  growing 
spirit  of  compliance,  and  to  destroy  entirely  the  or- 
gans of  the  laws,  within  that  part  of  the  country, 
by  compelling  all  the  officers  to  renounce  their 
offices. 

The  last  proceeding  in  the  case  of  the  collector  of 
Fayette,  was  in  this  spirit. 

In  January,  of  the  present  year,  further  violences 
appear  to  have  been  perpetrated.  William  Rich- 
mond, who  had  given  information  against  some  of 
the  rioters  in  the  affair  of  Wilson,  had  his  barn 
burnt,  with  all  the  grain  and  hay  which  it  con- 
tained; and  the  same  thing  happened  to  Robert 
Shawhan,  a  distiller,  who  had  been  among  the  first 
to  comply  with  the  law,  and  who  had  always  spoken 
favorably  of  it.  But  in  neither  of  these  instances 
(which  happened  in  the  county  of  Alleghany), 
though  the  presumptions  were  violent,  was  any 
positive  proof  obtained. 

The  Inspector  of  the  Revenue,  in  a  letter  of  the 
27th  of  February,  writes,  that  he  had  received  in- 
formation that  persons  living  near  the  dividing  line 
of  Alleghany  and  Washington  had  thrown  out  threats 
of  tarring  and  feathering  one  WilHam  Cochran,  a 


378  Alexander  Hamilton 

complying  distiller,  and  of  burning  his  distillery; 
and  that  it  had  also  been  given  out  that,  in  three 
weeks,  there  would  not  be  a  house  standing  in  Alle- 
ghany County,  of  any  person  who  had  complied 
with  the  laws.  In  consequence  of  which,  he  had 
been  induced  to  pay  a  visit  to  several  leading  in- 
dividuals in  that  quarter,  as  well  to  ascertain  the 
truth  of  the  information,  as  to  endeavor  to  avert  the 
attempt  to  execute  such  threats. 

It  appeared  afterwards,  that  on  his  return  home 
he  had  been  pursued  by  a  collection  of  disorderly 
persons,  threatening,  as  they  went  along,  vengeance 
against  him.  On  their  way  these  men  called  at  the 
house  of  James  Kiddoe,  who  had  recently  complied 
with  the  laws,  broke  into  his  still-house,  fired  several 
balls  under  his  still,  and  scattered  fire  over  and 
about  the  house. 

Letters  from  the  Inspector,  in  March,  announce  an 
increased  activity  in  promoting  opposition  to  the 
laws;  frequent  meetings  to  cement  and  extend  the 
combinations  against  it;  and  among  other  means 
for  this  purpose,  a  plan  of  collecting  a  force  to  seize 
him,  compel  him  to  resign  his  commission,  and  de- 
tain him  prisoner  probably  as  a  hostage. 

In  May  and  June  new  violences  were  committed. 
James  Kiddoe,  the  person  above  mentioned,  and 
William  Cochran,  another  complying  distiller,  met 
with  repeated  injury  to  their  property.  Kiddoe  had 
parts  of  his  grist-mill  at  different  times  carried  away, 
and  Cochran  suffered  more  material  injuries;  his 
still  was  destroyed,  his  saw-mill  was  rendered  useless 
by  the  taking  away  of  the  saw,  and  his  grist-mill  so 


Hamilton  to  Washington  379 

injured  as  to  require  to  be  repaired  at  considerable 
expense. 

At  the  last  visit,  a  note  in  writing  was  left,  re- 
quiring him  to  publish  what  he  had  suffered  in  the 
Pittsburgh  Gazette,  on  pain  of  another  visit,  in  which 
he  is  threatened,  in  figurative  but  intelligible  terms, 
with  the  destruction  of  his  property  by  fire;  thus 
adding  to  the  profligacy  of  doing  wanton  injuries  to 
a  fellow-citizen,  the  tyranny  of  compelling  him  to  be 
the  publisher  of  his  wrongs. 

June  being  the  month  for  receiving  annual  entries 
of  stills,  endeavors  were  used  to  open  offices  in  West- 
moreland and  Washington,  where  it  had  been  hith- 
erto found  impracticable.  With  much  pains  and 
difficulty  places  were  secured  for  the  purpose.  That 
in  Westmoreland  was  repeatedly  attacked  in  the 
night  by  armed  men,  who  frequently  fired  upon  it, 
but  according  to  a  report  which  has  been  made  to 
this  department,  it  was  defended  with  so  much 
courage  and  perseverance  by  John  Wells,  an  auxiliary 
officer,  and  Philip  Regan,  the  owner  of  the  house,  as 
to  have  been  maintained  during  the  remainder  of 
the  month. 

That  in  Washington,  after  repeated  attempts,  was 
suppressed ;  the  first  attempt  was  confined  to  pulling 
down  the  sign  of  the  office,  and  threats  of  future 
destruction;  the  second  effected  the  object  in  the 
following  mode:  About  twelve  persons,  armed  and 
painted  black,  in  the  night  of  the  6th  of  June,  broke 
into  the  house  of  John  Lynn,  where  the  office  was 
kept,  and  after  having  treacherously  seduced  him  to 
come  down  stairs  and  put  himself  in  their  power,  by 


380  Alexander  Hamilton 

a  promise  of  safety  to  himself  and  his  house,  they 
seized  and  tied  him,  threatened  to  hang  him,  took 
him  to  a  retired  spot  in  a  neighboring  wood,  and 
there,  after  cutting  off  his  hair,  tarring  and  feathering 
him,  swore  him  never  again  to  allow  the  use  of  his 
house  for  an  office,  never  to  disclose  their  names,  and 
never  again  to  have  any  sort  of  agency  in  aid  of  the 
excise;  having  done  which,  they  bound  him  naked 
to  a  tree,  and  left  him  in  that  situation  till  morning, 
when  he  succeeded  in  extricating  himself.  Not  con- 
tent with  this,  the  malcontents  some  days  after 
made  him  another  visit,  pulled  down  part  of  his 
house,  and  put  him  in  a  situation  to  be  obliged  to 
become  an  exile  from  his  home,  and  to  find  an 
asylum  elsewhere. 

During  this  time  several  of  the  distillers,  who  had 
made  entries  and  benefited  by  them,  refused  the 
payment  of  the  duties,  actuated,  no  doubt,  by  vari- 
ous motives. 

Indications  of  a  plan  to  proceed  against  the  In- 
spector of  the  Revenue,  in  the  manner  which  has 
been  before  mentioned,  continued.  In  a  letter  from 
him  of  the  loth  of  July,  he  observed  that  the  threat- 
ened visit  had  not  been  made,  though  he  had  still 
,  reason  to  expect  it. 

In  the  session  of  Congress  which  began  in  Decem- 

.  ber,  1793,  a  bill  for  making  the  amendments  in  the 

laws,  which  had  been  for  some  time  desired,  was 

brought  in,  and  on  the  5th  of  June  last  became  a  law. 

It  is  not  to  be  doubted  that  the  different  stages  of 
this  business  were  regularly  notified  to  the  malcon- 
tents, and  that  a  conviction  of  the  tendency  of  the 


Hamilton  to  Washington  381 

amendments  contemplated  to  effectuate  the  execu- 
tion of  the  law,  had  matured  the  resolution  to  bring 
matters  to  a  violent  crisis. 

The  increasing  energy  of  the  opposition  rendered 
it  indispensable  to  meet  the  evil  with  proportionable 
decision.  The  idea  of  giving  time  for  the  law  to 
extend  itself  in  scenes  where  the  dissatisfaction  with 
it  was  the  effect  not  of  an  improper  spirit,  but  of 
causes  which  were  of  a  nature  to  yield  to  reason, 
reflection,  and  experience  (which  had  constantly 
weighed  in  the  estimate  of  the  measures  proper  to 
be  pursued),  had  had  its  effect  in  an  extensive  de- 
gree. The  experiment,  too,  had  been  long  enough 
tried  to  ascertain,  that  where  resistance  continued, 
the  root  of  the  evil  lay  deep,  and  required  measures 
of  greater  efficacy  than  had  been  pursued. 

The  laws  had  undergone  repeated  revisions  of  the 
legislative  representatives  of  the  Union,  and  had 
virtually  received  their  repeated  sanction,  without 
even  an  attempt,  as  far  as  is  now  recollected  or  can 
be  traced,  to  effect  their  repeal — affording  an  evi- 
dence of  the  general  sense  of  the  community  in  their 
favor.  Complaints  began  to  be  loud  from  complying 
quarters,  against  the  impropriety  and  injustice  of 
suffering  the  laws  to  remain  unexecuted  in  others. 

Under  the  united  influence  of  these  considerations, 
there  was  no  choice  but  to  try  the  efficiency  of 
the  laws  in  prosecuting  with  vigor  delinquents  and 
offenders. 

Processes  issued  against  a  nimiber  of  non-com- 
plying distillers  in  the  counties  of  Fayette  and 
Alleghany,  and  indictments  having  been  found  at  a 


382  Alexander   Hamilton 

circuit  court,  holden  at  Philadelphia  in  July  last, 
against  Robert  Smilie  and  John  McCulloch,  two  of 
the  rioters  in  the  attack  which  in  November  pre- 
ceding had  been  made  upon  the  house  of  a  collector 
of  the  revenue  in  Fayette  County,  processes  issued 
against  them  also,  to  bring  them  to  trial,  and,  if 
guilty,  to  punishment. 

The  marshal  of  the  district  went  in  person  to  serve 
these  processes.  He  executed  the  trust  without 
interruption,  though  under  many  discouraging  cir- 
cumstances, in  Fayette  County ;  but  while  he  was  in 
the  execution  of  it  in  Alleghany  County — being  then 
accompanied  by  the  Inspector  of  the  Revenue,  to 
wit — on  the  15th  of  July  last,  he  was  beset  on  the 
road  by  a  party  of  from  thirty  to  forty  armed  men, 
who,  after  much  previous  irregularity  of  conduct, 
finally  fired  upon  him,  but,  as  it  happened,  without 
injury  either  to  him  or  to  the  Inspector. 

This  attempt  on  the  marshal  was  but  the  prelude 
of  greater  excesses. 

About  break  of  day,  the  i6th  of  July,  in  conform- 
ity with  a  plan  which  seems  to  have  been  for  some 
time  entertained,  and  which  probably  was  only  ac- 
celerated by  the  coming  of  the  marshal  into  the  sur- 
vey, an  attack  by  about  one  hundred  persons,  armed 
with  guns  and  other  weapons,  was  made  upon  the 
house  of  the  Inspector,  in  the  vicinity  of  Pittsburgh. 
The  Inspector,  though  alone,  vigorously  defended 
himself  against  the  assailants,  and  obliged  them  to 
retreat  without  accomplishing  their  purpose. 

Apprehending  that  the  business  would  not  ter- 
minate here,  he  made  application,  by  letter,  to  the 


Hamilton  to  Washington  383 

judges,  generals  of  militia,  and  sheriff  of  the  coimtry 
for  protection.  A  reply  to  his  application  from  John 
Vv'ilkins,  junior,  and  John  Gibson,  magistrates  and 
miHtia  officers,  informed  him  that  the  laws  could  not 
be  executed  so  as  to  afford  him  the  protection  to 
which  he  was  entitled,  owing  to  the  too  general  com- 
bination of  the  people  in  that  part  of  Pennsylvania 
to  oppose  the  revenue  law ;  adding,  that  they  would 
take  every  step  in  their  power  to  bring  the  rioters 
to  justice,  and  would  be  glad  to  receive  information 
of  the  individuals  concerned  in  the  attack  upon 
his  house,  that  prosecutions  might  be  commenced 
against  them;  and  expressing  their  sorrow  that, 
should  the  posse  comitatus  of  the  county  be 
ordered  out  in  support  of  the  civil  authority,  very 
few  could  be  gotten  that  were  not  of  the  party  of  the 
rioters. 

The  day  following,  the  insurgents  reassembled 
with  a  considerable  augmentation  of  numbers, 
amounting,  as  has  been  computed,  to  at  least  five 
hundred,  and  on  the  17th  of  July  renewed  their  at- 
tack upon  the  house  of  the  Inspector,  who,  in  the 
interval,  had  taken  the  precaution  of  calling  to  his 
aid  a  small  detachment  from  the  garrison  of  Fort 
Pitt,  which,  at  the  time  of  the  attack,  consisted  of 
eleven  men,  who  had  been  joined  by  Major  Abra- 
ham Kirkpa trick,  a  friend  and  connection  of  the 
Inspector. 

There  being  scarcely  a  prospect  of  effectual  de- 
fence against  so  large  a  body  as  then  appeared,  and 
as  the  Inspector  had  every  thing  to  apprehend  for 
his  person,  if  taken,  it  was  judged  advisable  that  he 


3^4  Alexander  Hamilton 

should  withdraw  from  the  house  to  a  place  of  conceal- 
ment— Major  Kirkpatrick  generously  agreeing  to 
remain  with  the  eleven  men,  in  the  intention,  if 
practicable,  to  make  a  capitulation  in  favor  of  the 
property;  if  not,  to  defend  it  as  long  as  possible. 

A  parley  took  place,  under  cover  of  a  flag  which 
was  sent  by  the  insurgents  to  the  house,  to  demand 
that  the  inspector  should  come  forth,  renounce  his 
office,  and  stipulate  never  again  to  accept  office 
imder  the  same  laws.  To  this  it  was  replied,  that 
the  inspector  had  left  the  house  upon  their  first  ap- 
proach, and  that  the  place  to  which  he  had  retired 
was  unknown.  They  then  declared  that  they  must 
have  whatever  related  to  his  office.  They  were  an- 
swered, that  they  might  send  persons,  not  exceeding 
six,  to  search  the  house  and  take  away  whatever 
papers  they  could  find  appertaining  to  the  office. 
But,  not  satisfied  with  this,  they  insisted,  uncon- 
ditionally, that  the  armed  men  who  were  in  the 
house  for  its  defence  should  march  out  and  ground 
their  arms,  which  Major  Kirkpatrick  peremptorily 
refused,  considering  it,  and  representing  it  to  them, 
as  a  proof  of  their  design  to  destroy  the  property. 
This  refusal  put  an  end  to  the  parley. 

A  brisk  firing  then  ensued  between  the  insurgents 
and  those  in  the  house,  which,  it  is  said,  lasted  for 
nearly  an  hour,  till  the  assailants,  having  set  fire 
to  the  neighboring  and  adjacent  buildings,  eight  in 
number,  the  in  tenseness  of  the  heat,  and  the  danger 
of  an  immediate  communication  of  the  fire  to  the 
house,  obliged  Major  Kirkpatrick  and  his  small 
party  to  come  out  and  surrender  themselves.     In 


Hamilton  to  Washington  385 

the  course  of  the  firing,  one  of  the  insurgents  was 
killed  and  several  wounded,  and  three  of  the  persons 
in  the  house  were  also  wounded.  The  person  killed 
is  understood  to  have  been  the  leader  of  the  party, 
of  the  name  of  James  McFarlane,  then  a  major  in  the 
militia,  formerly  a  lieutenant  in  the  Pennsylvania 
line.  The  dwelling-house,  after  the  surrender,  shared 
the  fate  of  the  other  buildings,  the  whole  of  which 
were  consumed  to  the  ground.  The  loss  of  property 
to  the  inspector,  upon  this  occasion,  is  estimated 
(and,  as  it  is  believed,  with  great  moderation)  at  not 
less  than  three  thousand  pounds. 

The  marshal,  Colonel  Presley  Neville,  and  several 
others,  were  taken  by  the  insurgents  going  to  the 
inspector's  house.  All,  except  the  marshal  and 
Colonel  Neville,  soon  made  their  escape;  but  these 
were  caiTied  off  some  distance  from  the  place  where 
the  affray  had  happened,  and  detained  till  one  or 
two  o'clock  the  next  morning.  In  the  course  of 
their  detention,  the  marshal  in  particular  suffered 
very  severe  and  humiliating  treatment,  and  was 
frequently  in  imminent  danger  of  his  life.  Several 
of  the  party  repeatedly  presented  their  pieces  at 
him,  with  every  appearance  of  a  design  to  assassinate 
him,  from  which  they  were  with  difficulty  restrained 
by  the  efforts  of  a  few,  more  humane  and  more 
prudent. 

Nor  could  he  obtain  safety  or  liberty,  but  upon 
the  condition  of  a  promise,  guaranteed  by  Colonel 
Neville,  that  he  would  serve  no  other  process  on 
the  west  side  of  the  Alleghany  Mountains.  The 
alternative  being   immediate  death,   extorted  from 


3^6  Alexander  Hamilton 

the  marshal  a  compliance  with  this  condition,  not- 
withstanding the  just  sense  of  official  dignity  and 
the  firmness  of  character  which  were  witnessed  by 
his  conduct  throughout  the  trying  scenes  he  had 
experienced. 

The  insurgents,  on  the  i8th,  sent  a  deputation  of 
two  of  their  number  (one  a  justice  of  the  peace)  to 
Pittsburgh,  to  require  of  the  marshal  a  surrender  of 
the  processes  in  his  possession,  intimating  that  his 
compliance  would  satisfy  the  people  and  add  to  his 
safety;  and  also  to  demand  of  General  Neville,  in 
peremptory  terms,  the  resignation  of  his  office; 
threatening,  in  case  of  refusal,  to  attack  the  place, 
and  take  him  by  force — demands  w^hich  both  these 
officers  did  not  hesitate  to  reject,  as  alike  incom- 
patible with  their  honor  and  their  duty. 

As  it  was  well  ascertained  that  no  protection  was 
to  be  expected  from  the  magistrates  or  inhabitants 
of  Pittsburgh,  it  became  necessary  to  the  safety 
both  of  the  inspector  and  the  marshal,  to  quit  that 
place ;  and,  as  it  was  known  that  all  the  usual  routes 
to  Philadelphia  were  beset  by  the  insurgents,  they 
concluded  to  descend  the  Ohio,  and  proceed  by  a 
circuitous  route  to  the  seat  of  government,  which 
they  began  to  put  in  execution  on  the  night  of  the 
19th  of  July. 

Information  has  also  been  received  of  a  meeting 
of  a  considerable  number  of  persons  at  a  place  called 
Mingo  Creek  Meeting-house,  in  the  county  of  Wash- 
ington, to  consult  about  the  further  measures  which 
it  might  be  advisable  to  pursue ;  that  at  this  meeting 
a  motion  was  made  to  approve  and  agree  to  support 


Hamilton  to  Washington  387 

the  proceedings  which  had  taken  place,  until  the 
excise  law  was  repealed,  and  an  act  of  oblivion 
passed ;  but  that,  instead  of  this,  it  had  been  agreed 
that  the  four  western  counties  of  Pennsylvania  and 
the  neighboring  counties  of  Virginia  should  be  in- 
vited to  meet  in  a  convention  of  delegates,  on  the 
14th  of  the  present  month,  at  Parkinson's,  on  Mingo 
Creek,  in  the  county  of  Washington,  to  take  into 
consideration  the  situation  of  the  western  country, 
and  concert  such  measures  as  should  appear  suited 
to  the  occasion. 

It  appears,  moreover,  that,  on  the  25th  of  July 
last,  the  mail  of  the  United  States,  on  the  road  from 
Pittsburgh  to  Philadelphia,  was  stopped  by  two 
armed  men,  who  cut  it  open,  and  took  out  all  the 
letters  except  those  contained  in  one  packet.  These 
armed  men,  from  all  the  circumstances  which  oc- 
curred, were  manifestly  acting  on  the  part  of  the 
insurgents. 

The  declared  object  of  the  foregoing  proceedings 
is  to  obstruct  the  execution  and  compel  a  repeal  of 
the  laws  laying  duties  on  spirits  distilled  within  the 
United  States,  and  upon  stills.  There  is  just  cause 
to  believe  that  this  is  connected  with  an  indisposi- 
tion, too  general  in  that  quarter,  to  share  in  the 
common  burdens  of  the  community,  and  with  a 
wish,  among  some  persons  of  influence,  to  embarrass 
the  government.  It  is  affirmed,  by  well-informed 
persons,  to  be  a  fact  of  notoriety,  that  the  revenue 
laws  of  the  State  itself  have  always  been  either  re- 
sisted or  very  defectively  complied  with  in  the  same 
quarter. 


388  Alexander  Hamilton 

With  the  most  perfect  respect,  I  have  the  honor  to 
be,  etc. 


CABINET  OPINION — HAMILTON  AND  KNOX  TO 
WASHINGTON 

Philadelphia,  August  s,  1794. 

Sir: 

The  draft  of  a  proclamation  and  that  of  an  instruc- 
tion to  the  commissioners  being  both  prepared,  we 
take  the  liberty  to  suggest  that  we  think  a  meeting 
to-morrow  morning,  at  such  hour  as  may  be  con- 
venient to  the  President,  may  be  advisable.  The 
Secretary  of  State  and  Attorney-General  being  out 
of  town,  we  cannot  consult  them,  but  we  will  engage 
the  attendance  of  the  Attorney-General,  provision- 
ally, by  nine  o'clock,  and  if  the  President  concludes 
on  the  meeting  at  that  hour,  he  can  have  the  Secre- 
tary of  State  apprised  of  it. 

We  have  the  honor  to  be,  etc. 

A.  Hamilton. 
H.  Knox. 


HAMILTON   TO    WASHINGTON 

August  6,  1794. 

The  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  presents  his  re- 
spects to  the  President,  and  sends  him  the  statement 
of  facts  promised.  The  date  is  proposed  to  be  two 
or  three  days  before  the  proclamation,  when  it  was 
in  fact  begun.  There  is  a  blank  to  be  filled  with  a 
quotation  from  a  former  proclamation,  which  is  not 


Proclamation  389 

immediately  at  hand;  but  the  blank  will  be  filled 
before  it  goes  to  the  press.  If  the  President  thinks 
the  publication  proper,  and  will  be  pleased  to  return 
the  inclosed,  the  original  draft  being  too  much  oblit- 
erated for  the  purpose,  it  shall  be  immediately  begim 
in  Dunlap's  paper. 


PROCLAMATION 

August  7,  1794. 

By  the  President  of  the  United  States  of  America 

A    PROCLAMATION 

Whereas,  combinations  to  defeat  the  execution  of 
the  laws  laying  duties  upon  spirits  distilled  within 
the  United  States,  and  upon  stills,  have,  from  the 
time  of  the  commencement  of  those  laws,  existed  in 
some  of  the  western  parts  of  Pennsylvania:  and 
whereas,  the  said  combinations,  proceeding  in  a 
manner  subversive  equally  of  the  just  authority  of 
government  and  of  the  rights  of  individuals,  have 
hitherto  effected  their  dangerous  and  criminal  pur- 
pose, by  the  influence  of  certain  irregular  meetings, 
whose  proceedings  have  tended  to  encourage  and 
uphold  the  spirit  of  opposition;  by  misrepresenta- 
tions of  the  laws,  calculated  to  render  them  odious; 
by  endeavors  to  deter  those  who  might  be  so  dis- 
posed from  accepting  offices  under  them,  through 
fear  of  public  resentment,  and  of  injury  to  person 
and  property,  and  to  compel  those  who  had  ac- 
cepted such  offices,  by  actual  violence  to  surrender 


390  Alexander  Hamilton 

or  forbear  the  execution  of  them ;  by  circulating  vin- 
dictive menaces  against  all  those  who  should  other- 
wise directly  or  indirectly  aid  in  the  execution  of  the 
said  laws,  or  who,  yielding  to  the  dictates  of  con- 
science and  to  a  sense  of  obligation,  should  them- 
selves comply  therewith,  by  actually  injuring  and 
destroying  the  property  of  persons  who  were  under- 
stood to  have  so  complied;    by  inflicting  cruel  and 
humiliating  punishments  upon  private  citizens,  for 
no  other  cause  than  that  of  appearing  to  be  the 
friends   of    the   laws  ;   by  intercepting   the    public 
officers  on  the  highways,  abusing,  assaulting,  and 
otherwise  ill-treating  them ;  by  going  to  their  houses 
in  the  night,  gaining  admittance  by  force,  taking 
away  their  papers,  and  committing  other  outrages; 
employing   for   these   unwarrantable   purposes   the 
agency  of  armed  banditti,  disguised  in  such  man- 
ner as  for  the  most  part  to  escape  discovery:   and 
whereas,  the  endeavors  of  the  Legislature  to  obviate 
objections  to  the  said  laws,  by  lowering  the  duties, 
and  by  other  alterations  conducive  to  the  convenience 
of  those  whom  they  immediately  affect  (though  they 
have  given  satisfaction  in  other  quarters),  and  the 
endeavors  of  the  executive  officers  to  conciliate  a 

^  compliance  with  the  laws,  by  explanations,  by  for- 
bearance, and  even  by  particular  accommodations, 

,  founded  on  the  suggestions  of  local  considerations, 
have  been  disappointed  of  their  effect  by  the  mach- 
inations of  persons,  whose  industry  to  excite  re- 
sistance has  increased  with  every  appearance  of  a 
disposition  among  the  people  to  relax  in  their  oppo- 
sition and  to  acquiesce  in  the  laws,  insomuch  that 


Proclamation  391 

many  persons  in  the  said  western  parts  of  Pennsyl- 
vania have  at  length  been  hardy  enough  to  perpetrate 
acts  which  I  am  advised  amount  to  treason,  being 
overt  acts  of  levying  war  against  the  United  States ; 
the  said  persons  having,  on  the  i6th  and  17th  of 
July  last  past,  proceeded  in  arms  (on  the  second 
day  amounting  to  several  hundreds)  to  the  house  of 
John  Neville,  inspector  of  the  revenue  for  the  fourth 
survey  of  the  district  of  Pennsylvania,  having  re- 
peatedly attacked  the  said  house,  with  the  persons 
therein,  wounding  some  of  them;  having  seized 
David  Lenox,  marshal  of  the  district  of  Penns}^- 
vania,  who  previous  thereto  had  been  fired  upon 
while  in  the  execution  of  his  duty  by  a  party  of  armed 
men,  detaining  him  for  some  time  prisoner,  till,  for 
the  preservation  of  his  life,  and  the  obtaining  of  his 
liberty,  he  found  it  necessary  to  enter  into  stipula- 
tions to  forbear  the  execution  of  certain  official 
duties  touching  processes  issuing  out  of  a  court  of  the 
United  States;  and  having  finally  obliged  the  said 
inspector  of  the  said  revenue,  and  the  said  marshal, 
from  considerations  of  personal  safety,  to  fly  from 
that  part  of  the  country,  in  order,  by  a  circuitous 
route,  to  proceed  to  the  seat  of  government;  avow- 
ing, as  the  motives  of  these  outrageous  proceedings, 
an  intention  to  prevent,  by  force  of  arms,  the  execu- 
tion of  the  said  laws ;  to  oblige  the  said  inspector  of 
the  revenue  to  renounce  his  said  office ;  to  withstand, 
by  open  violence,  the  lawful  authority  of  the  Gov- 
ernment of  the  United  States ;  and  to  compel  there- 
by an  alteration  in  the  measures  of  the  Legislature, 
and  a  repeal  of  the  laws  aforesaid:  and  whereas,  by 


392  Alexander  Hamilton 

a  law  of  the  United  States,  entitled  "  An  act  to  pro- 
vide for  calling  forth  the  militia  to  execute  the  laws 
of  the  Union,  suppress  insurrections,  and  repel  inva- 
sions," it  is  enacted,  "  that,  whenever  the  laws  of  the 
United  States  shall  be  opposed,  or  the  execution 
thereof  obstructed,  in  any  State,  by  combinations 
too  powerful  to  be  suppressed  by  the  ordinary  course 
of  judicial  proceedings,  or  by  the  powers  vested  in  the 
marshals  by  that  act,  the  same  being  notified  by  an 
associate  justice  or  the  district  judge,  it  shall  be  law- 
ful for  the  President  of  the  United  States  to  call 
forth  the  militia  of  such  State  to  suppress  such  com- 
binations, and  to  cause  the  laws  to  be  duly  executed; 
and  if  the  militia  of  a  State  where  such  combinations 
may  happen  shall  refuse,  or  be  insufficient,  to  sup- 
press the  same,  it  shall  be  lawful  for  the  President,  if 
the  Legislature  of  the  United  States  shall  not  be  in 
session,  to  call  forth  and  employ  such  members  of 
the  militia  of  any  other  State  or  States  most  con- 
venient thereto,  as  may  be  necessary;  and  the  use  of 
the  militia,  so  to  be  called  forth,  may  be  continued, 
if  necessary,  until  the  expiration  of  thirty  days  after 
the  commencement  of  the  ensuing  session;  provided 
always,  that  whenever  it  may  be  necessary,  in  the 
judgment  of  the  President,  to  use  the  military  force 
hereby  directed  to  be  called  forth,  the  President 
shall  forthwith,  and  previous  thereto,  by  proclama- 
tion, command  such  insurgents  to  disperse  and  retire 
peaceably  to  their  respective  abodes  within  a  limited 
time";  and  whereas,  James  Wilson,  an  associate 
justice,  on  the  4th  instant,  by  writing  under  his 
hand,  did,  from  evidence  which  had  been  laid  before 


Proclamation  393 

him,  notify  to  me  that,  "  in  the  counties  of  Washing- 
ton and  Alleghany,  in  Pennsylvania,  laws  of  the 
United  States  are  opposed,  and  the  execution  there- 
of obstructed  by  combinations  too  powerful  to  be 
suppressed  by  the  ordinary  course  of  judicial  pro- 
ceedings, or  by  the  powers  vested  in  the  marshal  of 
that  district":  and  whereas,  it  is  in  my  judgment 
necessary,  imder  the  circumstances  of  the  case,  to 
take  measures  for  calling  forth  the  militia  in  order  to 
suppress  the  combinations  aforesaid,  and  to  cause 
the  laws  to  be  duly  executed,  I  have  accordingly 
determined  so  to  do,  feeling  the  deepest  regret  for  the 
occasion,  but  withal  the  most  solemn  conviction  that 
the  essential  interests  of  the  Union  demand  it,  that 
the  very  existence  of  government  and  the  funda- 
mental principles  of  social  order  are  materially  in- 
volved in  the  issue,  and  that  the  patriotism  and 
firmness  of  all  good  citizens  are  seriously  called  upon, 
as  occasions  may  require,  to  aid  in  the  effectual  sup- 
pression of  so  fatal  a  spirit. 

Wherefore,  and  in  pursuance  of  the  proviso  above 
recited,  I,  George  Washington,  President  of  the 
United  States,  do  hereby  command  all  persons, 
being  insurgents  as  aforesaid,  and  all  others  whom  it 
may  concern,  on  or  before  the  first  day  of  September 
next,  to  disperse  and  retire  peaceably  to  their  re- 
spective abodes.  And  I  do,  moreover,  warn  all 
persons  whomsoever,  against  aiding,  abetting,  or 
comforting  the  perpetrators  of  the  aforesaid  trea- 
sonable acts;  and  do  require  all  officers  and  other 
citizens,  according  to  their  respective  duties,  and 
the    laws    of    the    land,     to     exert    their     utmost 


394  Alexander  Hamilton 

endeavors  to  prevent  and  suppress  such  dangerous 
proceedings. 

In  testimony  whereof,  I  have  caused  the  seal  of  the 
United  States  of  America  to  be  affixed  to  these 
presents,  and  signed  the  same  with  my  hand. 

Done  at  the  city  of  Philadelphia,  the  seventh  day  of 
August,    one   thousand   seven    hundred   and 

[L.  S.]  ninety  four,  and  of  the  independence  of  the 
United  States  of  America,  the  nineteenth. 

Geo.  Washington. 
By  the  President, 

Edmund  Randolph. 


SECRETARY    OF    STATE    TO    MIFFLIN 
Draft  by  Hamilton. 

Philadelphia,  August  7,  1794. 

Sir: — The  President  of  the  United  States  has  di- 
rected me  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  letter 
of  the  5th  instant,  and  to  communicate  to  you  the 
following  reply: 

In  requesting  an  interview  with  you  on  the  sub- 
ject of  the  recent  disturbances  in  the  western  parts 
of  Pennsylvania,  the  President,  besides  the  desire  of 
manifesting  a  respectful  attention  to  the  chief  magis- 
trate of  a  State  immediately  affected,  was  influenced 
by  the  hopes  that  a  free  conference,  guided  by  a 
united  and  comprehensive  view  of  the  Constitutions 
of  the  United  States  and  of  Pennsylvania,  and  of  the 
respective  institutions,  authorities,  rights,  and  duties 


Secretary  of  State  to  Mifflin  395 

of  the  two  governments,  would  have  assisted  him  in 
forming  more  precise  ideas  of  the  nature  of  the  co- 
operation which  could  be  established  between  them, 
and  a  better  judgment  of  the  plan  which  it  might  be 
advisable  for  him  to  pursue,  in  the  execution  of  his 
trust  in  so  important  and  delicate  a  conjuncture. 
This  having  been  his  object,  it  is  matter  of  some  re- 
gret, that  the  cotirse  which  has  been  suggested  by 
you,  as  proper  to  be  pursued,  seems  to  have  con- 
templated Pennsylvania  in  a  light  too  separate  and 
unconnected.  The  propriety  of  that  course,  in  most 
if  not  in  all  respects,  would  be  susceptible  of  little 
question  if  there  were  no  federal  government,  federal 
laws,  federal  judiciary,  or  federal  officers;  if  impor- 
tant laws  of  the  United  States,  by  a  series  of  violent 
as  well  as  of  artful  expedients,  had  not  been  frus- 
trated in  their  execution  for  more  than  three  years ; 
if  officers  immediately  charged  with  that  execution, 
after  suffering  much  and  repeated  insult,  abuse,  per- 
sonal ill-treatment,  and  the  destruction  of  property, 
had  not  been  compelled  for  safety  to  fly  the  places 
of  their  residences,  and  the  scenes  of  their  official 
duties ;  if  the  service  of  the  processes  of  a  court  of  the 
United  States  had  not  been  resisted ;  the  marshal  of 
the  district  made  and  detained  for  some  time  a 
prisoner,  and  compelled  for  safety  also  to  abandon 
the  performance  of  his  duty,  and  return  by  a  cir- 
cuitous route  to  the  seat  of  government;  if,  in  fine,  a 
judge  of  the  United  States  had  not  in  due  form  of 
law  notified  to  the  President,  "that  in  the  counties 
of  Washington  and  Alleghany,  in  Pennsylvania,  laws 
of  the  United  States  are  opposed,  and  the  execution 


39^  Alexander  Hamilton 

thereof  obstructed  by  combinations  too  powerful  to 
be  suppressed  by  the  ordinary  course  of  judicial  pro- 
ceedings, or  by  the  powers  vested  in  the  marshal  of 
that  district."  It  is  true,  your  excellency  has  re- 
marked, that  in  the  plan  suggested  you  have  only 
spoken  as  the  executive  magistrate  of  Pennsylvania, 
charged  with  a  general  superintendence  and  care, 
that  the  laws  of  the  commonwealth  be  fully  executed, 
leaving  it  implicitly  to  the  judgment  of  the  Presi- 
dent to  choose,  on  such  evidence  as  he  approves,  the 
measures  for  discharging  the  analogous  trust  which 
is  confided  to  him  in  relation  to  the  laws  of  the 
Union.  But  it  is  impossible  not  to  think  that  the 
current  of  the  observations  in  your  letter,  especially 
as  to  the  consequences  which  may  result  from  the 
employment  of  coercive  measures,  previous  to  the 
preliminary  course  which  is  indicated  in  it,  may  be 
construed  to  imply  a  virtual  disapprobation  of  that 
plan  of  conduct,  on  the  part  of  the  General  Govern- 
ment, in  the  actual  stage  of  its  affairs,  which  you 
acknowledge  would  be  proper  on  the  part  of  the 
Government  of  Pennsylvania,  if  arrived  at  a  similar 
stage.  Let  it  be  assumed  here  (to  be  more  particu- 
larly shown  hereafter),  that  the  Government  of  the 
United  States  is  now  at  that  point,  where  it  is  ad- 
mitted, if  the  Government  of  Pennsylvania  was,  the 
employment  of  force  by  its  authority  would  be  jus- 
tifiable; and  let  the  following  extracts  be  consulted 
for  the  truth  of  the  inference  which  has  been  just 
expressed.  "Will  not  the  resort  to  force  inflame 
and  cement  the  existing  opposition?  Will  it  not 
associate  in  a  common  resistance  those  who  have 


Secretary  of  State  to  Mifflin  397 

hitherto  peaceably,  as  well  as  those  who  have  riot- 
ously, expressed  their  abhorrence  of  the  excise?  Will 
it  not  collect  and  combine  every  latent  principle 
of  discontent,  arising  from  the  supposed  oppressive 
operations  of  the  federal  judiciary,  the  obstruction 
of  the  western  navigation,  and  a  variety  of  other 
local  sources?  May  not  the  magnitude  of  the  op- 
position on  the  part  of  the  ill-disposed,  or  the  dis- 
satisfaction of  a  premature  resort  to  arms  on  the  part 
of  the  well-disposed  citizens  of  the  State,  eventually 
involve  the  necessity  of  employing  the  militia  of  other 
States?  And  the  accumulation  of  discontent  which 
the  jealousy  engendered  by  that  movement  may 
produce,  who  can  calculate,  or  who  will  be  able  to 
avert  ? ' ' 

These  important  questions  naturally  give  birth  to 
the  following  seriotis  reflections.  The  issues  of  hu- 
man affairs  are  in  the  hands  of  Providence.  Those 
intrusted  with  them  in  society  have  no  other  sure 
guide  than  the  sincere  and  faithful  discharge  of 
their  duty,  according  to  the  best  of  their  judgments. 
In  emergencies,  great  and  difficult,  not  to  act  with 
an  energy  proportioned  to  their  magnitude  and  pres- 
sure, is  as  dangerous  as  any  other  conceivable  course. 
In  the  present  case,  not  to  exert  the  means  which 
the  laws  prescribe  for  effectuating  their  own  execu- 
tion, would  be  to  sacrifice  those  laws,  and  with  them 
the  Constitution,  the  Government,  the  principles  of 
social  order,  and  the  bulwarks  of  private  right  and 
security.  What  worse  can  happen  from  the  exertion 
of  these  means? 

If,  as  cannot  be  doubted,  the  great  body  of  the 


398  Alexander  Hamilton 

citizens  of  the  United  States  are  attached  to  the 
Constitution,  which  they  have  established  for  the 
management  of  their  common  concerns ;  if  they  are 
resolved  to  support  their  own  authority  in  that  of 
the  constitutional  laws,  against  disorderly  and  vio- 
lent combinations  of  comparatively  small  portions 
of  the  community ;  if  they  are  determined  to  protect 
each  other  in  the  enjoyment  of  security  to  person 
and  property;  if  they  are  decided  to  preserve  the 
character  of  republican  government,  by  evincing 
that  it  has  adequate  resources  for  maintaining  the 
public  order ;  if  they  are  persuaded  that  their  safety 
and  their  welfare  are  materially  connected  with  the 
preservation  of  the  Union,  and  consequently  of  a 
government  adequate  to  its  exigencies;  in  fine,  if 
they  are  disposed  to  continue  that  state  of  respect- 
ability and  prosperity  which  is  now  deservedly  the 
admiration  of  mankind — the  enterprise  to  be  accom- 
plished, should  a  resort  to  force  prove  inevitable, 
though  disagreeable  and  painful,  cannot  be  arduous 
or  alarming. 

If,  in  addition  to  these  dispositions  in  the  com- 
munity at  large,  the  officers  of  the  governments  of 
the  respective  States,  feeling  it  to  be  not  only  a  patri- 
otic but  a  constitutional  duty  (inculcated  by  the  oath 
enjoined  upon  all  the  officers  of  a  State,  legislative, 
executive,  and  judicial),  to  support  in  their  several 
stations  the  Constitution  of  the  United  States,  shall 
be  disposed,  as  occasion  may  require  (a  thing  as  little 
to  be  doubted  as  the  former),  with  sincerity  and 
good  faith  to  co-operate  with  the  Government  of  the 
United  States,  to  second  with  all  their  influence  and 


Secretary  of  State  to  Mifflin  399 

weight  its  legal  and  necessary  measures,  by  a  legal 
and  substantial  concert,  then  the  enterprise  to  be 
accomplished  can  hardly  even  be  deemed  difficult. 

But  if,  contrary  to  the  anticipations  which  are 
entertained  of  these  favorable  dispositions,  the  great 
body  of  the  people  should  be  found  indifferent  to  the 
preservation  of  the  government  of  the  Union,  or  in- 
sensible to  the  necessity  of  vigorous  exertions  to  repel 
the  danger  which  threatens  their  most  important  in- 
terests; or,  if  an  unwillingness  to  encounter  partial 
inconveniences  should  interfere  with  the  discharge 
of  what  they  owe  to  their  permanent  welfare;  or  if, 
either  yielding  to  the  suggestions  of  particular  pre- 
judices, or  misled  by  the  arts  which  may  be  employed 
to  infuse  jealousy  and  discontent,  they  should  suffer 
their  zeal  for  the  support  of  public  order  to  be  re- 
laxed by  an  unfavorable  opinion  of  the  merits  and 
tendency  of  the  measures  which  may  be  adopted ;  if 
above  all  it  were  possible  that  any  of  the  State  govern- 
ments should,  instead  of  prompting  the  exertions  of 
the  citizens,  assist  directly  or  indirectly  in  damping 
their  ardor  by  giving  a  wrong  bias  to  their  judg- 
ment, or  by  disseminating  dissatisfaction  with  the 
proceedings  of  the  General  Government,  or  should 
coimteract  the  success  of  those  proceedings  by  any 
sinister  influence  whatever,  then,  indeed,  no  one  can 
calculate  or  may  be  able  to  avert  the  fatal  evils 
with  which  such  a  state  of  things  would  be  preg- 
nant. Then,  indeed,  the  foundations  of  our  political 
happiness  may  be  deeply  shaken,  if  not  altogether 
overturned. 

The  President,  however,  can  suppose  none  of  these 


400  Alexander  Hamilton 

things.  He  cherishes  an  unqualified  confidence  in 
the  virtue  and  good  sense  of  the  people,  in  the  in- 
tegrity and  patriotism  of  the  officers  of  the  State 
governments ;  and  he  counts  absolutely  on  the  same 
affectionate  support,  which  he  has  experienced  upon 
all  former  occasions,  and  which  he  is  conscious  that 
the  goodness  of  his  intentions  now,  not  less  than 
heretofore,  merits. 

It  has  been  promised  to  show  more  particularly 
hereafter  that  the  Government  of  the  United  States 
is  now  at  that  point  where,  it  is  confessed,  if  the  State 
Government  was,  the  employment  of  force  on  its  part 
would  be  justifiable.  This  promise  remains  to  be 
fulfilled. 

The  facts  already  noted  establish  the  conclusion; 
but  to  render  it  palpable,  it  will  be  of  use  to  apply  them 
to  the  positions  which  your  excellency  has  been 
pleased  to  lay  down. 

You  admit  that,  as  the  offences  committed  respect 
the  State,  the  military  power  of  the  government 
ought  to  be  employed,  when  its  judiciary  authority, 
after  a  fair  experiment,  had  proved  incompetent  to 
enforce  obedience  or  to  punish  infractions  of  the 
law;  that  if  the  strength  and  audacity  of  a  lawless 
combination  shall  baffle  and  destroy  the  efforts  of  the 
judiciary  authority,  to  recover  a  penalty  or  inflict 
a  punishment,  that  authority  may  constitutionally 
claim  the  auxiliary  intervention  of  the  military  power; 
that  in  the  last  resort,  at  the  requisition  and  as  an 
auxiliary  of  the  civil  authority,  the  military  force  of 
the  State  would  be  called  forth.  And  you  declare 
that  the  circumstances  of  the  case  evidently  require 


Secretary  of  State  to  Mifflin  401 

a  firm  and  energetic  conduct  on  the  part  both  of  the 
State  and  General  Government. 

For  more  than  three  years,  as  already  observed, 
certain  laws  of  the  United  States  have  been  ob- 
structed in  their  execution  by  disorderly  combina- 
tions. Not  only  officers,  whose  immediate  duty  it 
was  to  carry  them  into  effect,  have  suffered  violent 
personal  outrage  and  injury,  and  destruction  of  prop- 
erty, at  different  times,  but  similar  persecution  has 
been  extended  to  private  citizens,  who  have  aided, 
countenanced,  or  only  complied  with  the  laws.  The 
violences  committed  have  been  so  frequent,  and  such 
in  their  degree  as  to  have  been  matters  of  general 
notoriety  and  alarm ;  and  it  may  be  added  that  they 
have  been  abundantly  within  the  knowledge  and 
under  the  notice  of  the  judges  and  magistrates  of 
Pennsylvania,  of  superior  as  well  as  inferior  juris- 
diction. If  in  particular  instances  they  have  been 
punished  by  the  exertions  of  the  magistrates,  it 
is  at  least  certain  that  their  efforts  have  been  in  the 
main  ineffectual.  The  spirit  has  continued,  and,  with 
some  intervals  of  relaxation,  has  been  progressive, 
manifesting  itself  in  reiterated  excesses.  The  ju- 
diciary authority  of  the  United  States  has  also,  prior 
to  the  attempt  which  preceded  the  late  crisis,  made 
some  fruitless  efforts.  Under  a  former  marshal,  an 
officer  sent  to  execute  process  was  deterred  from  it  by 
the  manifest  danger  of  proceeding.  These  particulars 
serve  to  explain  the  extent,  obstinacy,  and  inveteracy 
of  the  evil. 

But  the  facts  which  immediately  decide  the  com- 
plexion of  the  existing  crisis  are  these:    Numerous 

VOL.  VI. — 26. 


402  Alexander  Hamilton 

delinquencies  existed  with  regard  to  a  compliance 
with  the  laws  laying  duties  on  spirits  distilled  within 
the  United  States,  and  upon  stills.  An  armed  ban- 
ditti, in  disguise,  had  recently  gone  to  the  house  of 
an  officer  of  the  revenue,  in  the  night,  attacked  it, 
broken  open  the  doors,  and,  by  menaces  of  instant 
death,  enforced  by  pistols  presented  at  him,  had  com- 
pelled a  surrender  of  his  commission  and  books  of 
office.  Contemporary  acts  of  violence  had  been  per- 
petrated in  other  quarters.  Processes  were  issued 
out  of  a  court  of  the  United  States,  to  recover  the 
penalties  incident  to  a  non-compliance  with  the  laws, 
and  to  bring  to  punishment  the  violent  infractors 
of  them,  in  the  above-mentioned  case,  against  two  of 
whom  indictments  had  been  found.  The  marshal  of 
the  district  went  in  person  to  execute  these  pro- 
cesses. In  the  course  of  his  duty  he  was  actually 
fired  upon,  on  the  high-road,  by  a  body  of  armed 
men.  Shortly  after,  other  bodies  of  armed  men  (in 
the  last  instance  amounting  to  several  hundred  per- 
sons) repeatedly  attacked  the  house  of  the  inspector 
of  the  revenue,  with  the  declared  intention  of  com- 
pelling him  to  renounce  his  office,  and  of  obstructing 
the  execution  of  the  laws.  One  of  these  bodies  of 
armed  men  made  prisoner  the  marshal  of  the  district, 
put  him  in  jeopardy  of  his  life,  and  did  not  release 
him  till,  for  safety  and  to  obtain  his  liberty,  he  en- 
gaged to  forbear  the  further  execution  of  the  pro- 
cesses with  which  he  was  charged.  In  consequence 
of  further  requisitions  and  menaces  of  the  insurgents, 
the  marshal,  together  with  the  inspector  of  the 
revenue,  has  been  since  under  the  necessity  of  fly- 


Secretary  of  State  to  MifRin  403 

ing,  secretly  and  by  a  circuitous  route,  from  the 
scene  of  these  transactions,  towards  the  seat  of 
government.  An  associate  justice,  pursuant  to  the 
provisions  of  the  laws  for  that  purpose,  has,  in  the 
manner  already  stated,  officially  notified  the  President 
of  the  existence  of  combinations,  in  two  of  the  coun- 
ties of  this  State,  to  obstruct  the  execution  of  the 
laws,  too  powerful  to  be  suppressed  by  the  judiciary 
authority,  or  by  the  powers  of  the  marshal. 

Thus,  then,  it  is  unequivocally  and  in  due  forni 
ascertained,  in  reference  to  the  Government  of  the 
United  States,  that  the  judiciary  authority,  after  a 
fair  and  full  experiment,  has  proved  incompetent  to 
enforce  obedience  to,  or  to  punish  infractions  of,  the 
laws ;  that  the  strength  and  audacity  of  certain  law- 
less combinations  have  baffled  and  destroyed  the 
efforts  of  the  judiciary  authority  to  recover  penalties 
or  inflict  punishment ;  and  that  this  authority,  by  a 
regular  notification  of  this  state  of  things,  has,  in  the 
last  resort,  as  an  auxiliary  of  the  civil  authority, 
claimed  the  intervention  of  the  military  power  of 
the  United  States.  It  results,  from  these  facts,  that 
the  case  exists  when — according  to  the  positions  ad- 
vanced by  your  excellency,  in  reference  to  the  State 
Government — the  military  power  may,  with  due 
regard  for  all  the  requisite  cautions,  be  rightfully 
interposed;  and  that  the  interposition  of  this  power 
is  called  for,  not  only  by  principles  of  a  finn  and 
energetic  conduct  on  the  part  of  the  General  Govern- 
ment, but  by  the  indispensable  duty  which  the  Con- 
stitution and  the  laws  prescribe  to  the  Executive 
of    the    United    States.     In    this    conclusion,    your 


404  Alexander  Hamilton 

excellency's  discernment,  on  mature  reflection,  can- 
not, it  is  presumed,  fail  to  acquiesce ;  nor  can  it  refuse 
its  concurrence  in  the  opinion  which  the  President  en- 
tertains, that  he  may  reasonably  expect,  when  called 
for,  the  zealous  co-operation  of  the  militia  of  Penn- 
sylvania; that  as  citizens,  and  friends  to  law  and 
order,  they  may  comply  with  the  call,  without  any 
thing  that  can  properly  be  denominated  "  a  passive 
obedience  to  the  mandates  of  government";  and 
that,  as  freemen,  judging  rightly  of  the  cause  and 
nature  of  the  service  proposed  to  them,  they  will  feel 
themselves  under  the  most  sacred  obligations  to  ac- 
cept and  perform  it  with  alacrity.  The  theory  of  our 
political  institutions  knows  no  difference  between  the 
obligations  of  our  citizens,  in  such  a  case,  whether  it 
relate  to  the  government  of  this  Union  or  of  a  State ; 
and  it  is  hoped  and  confided,  that  a  difference  will  be 
as  little  known  to  their  affections  or  opinions. 

Your  excellency,  it  is  also  presumed,  will  as  little 
doubt,  on  the  like  mature  reflection,  that  in  such  a 
case  the  President  could  not,  without  an  abdica- 
tion of  the  undoubted  rights  and  authorities  of  the 
United  States,  and  of  his  duty,  postpone  the  measures 
for  which  the  laws  of  the  United  States  provide,  to  a 
previous  experiment  of  the  plan  which  is  delineated 
in  your  letter. 

The  people  of  the  United  States  have  established 
a  government  for  the  management  of  their  general 
interests;  they  have  instituted  executive  organs  for 
administering  that  government;  and  their  repre- 
sentatives have  established  the  rules  by  which  these 
organs  are  to  act.     When  their  authority  in  that  of 


Secretary  of  State  to  Mifflin  405 

their  government  is  attacked,  by  lawless  combina- 
tions of  the  citizens  of  part  of  a  State,  they  could 
never  be  expected  to  approve  that  the  care  of  vin- 
dicating their  authority,  of  enforcing  their  laws, 
should  be  transferred  from  the  officers  of  their  own 
government  to  those  of  a  State,  and  this  to  wait  the 
issue  of  a  process  so  undeterminate  in  its  duration 
as  that  which  it  is  proposed  to  pursue ;  comprehend 
mg  a  further  and  full  experiment  of  the  judiciary 
authority  of  the  State,  a  proclamation  "  to  declare 
the  sentiments  of  its  government,  announce  a  deter- 
mination to  prosecute  and  punish  offenders,  and  to 
exhort  the  citizens  at  large  to  pursue  a  peaceable 
and  patriotic  conduct";  the  sending  of  commis- 
sioners "to  address  those  who  have  embarked  in  the 
present  combinations  upon  the  lawless  nature  and 
ruinous  tendency  of  their  proceedings;  to  inculcate 
the  necessity  of  an  immediate  return  to  the  duty 
which  they  owe  their  country;  and  to  promise,  as 
far  as  the  State  is  concerned,  forgiveness  of  their 
past  transactions,  upon  receiving  a  satisfactory  as- 
surance that,  in  future,  they  will  submit  to  the  laws ' ' ; 
and,  finally,  a  call  of  the  Legislature  of  Pennsylvania, 
"that  the  ultimate  means  of  subduing  the  spirit  of 
insurrection,  and  of  restoring  tranquillity  and  order, 
may  be  prescribed  by  their  wisdom  and  authority." 
If  there  were  no  other  objection  to  a  transfer  of 
this  kind,  the  very  important  difference  which  is  sup- 
posed to  exist  in  the  nature  and  consequences  of  the 
offences  that  have  been  committed,  in  the  contempla- 
tion of  the  laws  of  the  United  States  and  those  of 
Pennsylvania,  would  alone  be  a  very  serious  obstacle. 


4o6  Alexander  Hamilton 

The  paramount  considerations  which  forbid  an  ac- 
quiescence in  this  course  of  proceeding,  render  it 
unnecessary  to  discuss  the  probability  of  its  success; 
else  it  might  have  been  proper  to  test  the  considera- 
tions which  have  been  mentioned  as  a  ground  of 
hope,  by  the  inquiry,  what  was  the  precise  extent 
of  the  success  of  past  experiments,  and  especially 
whether  the  execution  of  the  revenue  laws  of  Penn- 
sylvania within  the  scene  in  question  was  truly  and 
effectually  accomplished  by  them,  or  whether  they 
did  not  rather  terminate  in  a  tacit  compromise,  by 
which  appearances  only  were  saved  ? 

You  are  already,  sir,  advised  that  the  President, 
yielding  to  the  impressions  which  have  been  stated, 
has  determined  to  take  measures  for  calling  forth  the 
militia;  and  that  these  measures  contemplate  the 
assembling  of  a  body  of  between  twelve  and  thirteen 
thousand  men,  from  Pennsylvania  and  the  neighbor- 
ing States  of  Virginia,  Maryland,  and  New  Jersey. 
The  recourse  thus  early  to  the  militia  of  the  neighbor- 
ing States,  prevails  from  a  probability  of  the  insuf- 
ficiency of  that  of  Pennsylvania  alone  to  accomplish 
the  object ;  your  excellency  having,  in  your  conference 
with  the  President,  confirmed  the  conclusion  which 
was  deducible  from  the  known  local  and  other  cir- 
cumstances of  the  State,  by  the  frank  and  express 
declaration  which  you  made  of  your  conviction  of 
that  insufficiency  in  reference  to  the  number  which 
could  be  expected  to  be  drawn  forth  for  the  purpose. 

But,  while  the  President  has  conceived  himself  to 
be  under  an  indispensable  obligation  to  prepare  for 
that  eventual  resort,  he  has  still  consulted  the  senti- 


Secretary  of  State  to  Mifflin  407 

ment  of  regret  which  he  expressed  to  you,  at  the 
possible  necessity  of  an  appeal  to  arms ;  and  to  avert 
it,  if  practicable,  as  well  as  to  manifest  his  attention 
to  the  principle,  that  "  a  firm  and  energetic  conduct 
does  not  preclude  the  exercise  of  a  prudent  and 
humane  policy,"  he  has  (as  you  have  been  also 
advised)  concluded  upon  the  measure  of  sending 
himself  commissioners  to  the  discontented  counties, 
to  make  one  more  experimicnt  of  a  conciliatory  appeal 
to  the  reason,  virtue,  and  patriotism  of  their  inhabit- 
ants; and  has  also  signified  to  you  how  agreeable 
would  be  to  him  your  co-operation  in  the  same 
expedient,  which  you  have  been  pleased  to  afford.  It 
can  scarcely  be  requisite  to  add,  that  there  is  nothing 
he  has  more  at  heart  than  that  the  issue  of  this  ex- 
periment, by  establishing  the  authority  of  the  laws, 
may  preclude  the  always  calamitous  necessity  of  an 
appeal  to  arms.  It  would  plant  a  thorn  in  the 
remainder  of  his  path  through  life,  to  have  been 
obliged  to  employ  force  against  fellow-citizens,  for 
giving  solidity  and  permanency  to  blessings  which  it 
has  been  his  greatest  happiness  to  co-operate  with 
them  in  procuring  for  a  much -loved  country. 

The  President  receives  with  much  pleasure  the 
assurance  you  have  repeated  to  him,  that  whatever 
requisition  he  may  make,  whatever  duty  he  may 
impose,  in  pursuance  of  his  constitutional  and  legal 
powers,  will,  on  your  part,  be  promptly  undertaken 
and  faithfully  discharged ;  and  acknowledging,  as  an 
earnest  of  this,  and  even  more,  the  measures  of  co- 
operation which  you  are  pursuing,  he  assures  you,  in 
return,  that  he  relies  fully  on  the  most  cordial  aid  and 


4o8  Alexander  Hamilton 

support  from  you  in  every  way  which  the  Constitu 
tions  of  the  United  States  and  of  Pennsylvania  shall 
authorize,    and   present   or   future   exigencies   may 
require. 

And  he  requests  that  you  will  construe,  with  a  refer- 
ence to  this  assurance  of  his  confidence,  whatever  re- 
marks may  have  been  made  in  the  course  of  this 
reply  to  your  letter,  if  it  shall  have  happened  that  any 
of  them  have  erred  from  a  misconception  of  the 
sentiments  and  views  which  you  may  have  meant  to 
communicate. 

With  perfect  respect  and  esteem,  I  have  the  honor 
to  be,  etc., 

Edmund  Randolph, 

Secretary  of  State. 


HAMILTON  TO  WASHINGTON 

August  12,  1794. 

The  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  presents  his  respects 
to  the  President,  and  sends  him  two  letters  which 
were  received  last  night  from  Pittsburgh. 

Would  it  not  be  advisable  to  put  the  garrison  of 
Fort  Franklin  in  the  power  of  Major  Butler,  so  that 
if  he  deems  it  advisable  he  may  draw  a  part  of  it  to 
his  aid? 

An  attack  from  the  Indians  appears  at  present  im- 
probable, and  an  attack  from  the  insurgents  probable 
enough. 

The  bearer  of  the  letters  waits  orders  to  return. 
Will  the  President  suggest  any  thing? 


Hamilton  to  Washington  409 

HAMILTON  TO  CRAIG 

Philadelphia,  August  13,  1794- 

Sir: — In  consequence  of  an  arrangement  of  the 
Secretary  of  War,  who  is  absent,  your  letter  of  the 
3d  instant  has  been  communicated  to  me.  It  is 
satisfactory  to  receive  exact  intelligence  of  the  move- 
ments of  the  insurgents.  Your  care  of  the  interest 
confided  to  you  is  in  every  event  depended  upon 
according  to  circumstances.  The  keeping  the  arms 
and  stores  out  of  the  hands  of  the  insurgents  is  a 
matter  of  great  importance.  It  is  hoped  that  you  will 
personally,  in  the  worst  issue  of  things,  find  safety  in 
the  fort.  The  friends  of  government  may  depend 
that  it  will  not  be  wanting  to  its  duty  and  interest 
upon  this  occasion.  And  can  there  be  any  doubt  of 
the  sufficiency  of  its  means? 

With  much  esteem,  I  am,  etc., 

Alexander  Hamilton, 
For  the  Secretary  of  War. 


HAMILTON  TO  WASHINGTON 

Treasury  Department,  August  16,  1794. 

Sir: — It  appears  probable  that  advantages  will 
result  from  giving  to  the  citizens  at  large  information 
on  the  subject  of  the  disturbances  which  exist  in  the 
western  part  of  Pennsylvania. 

With  this  view,  if  no  objection  to  the  measure 
should  occur  to  you,  I  would  cause  a  publication  to  be 
made  of  the  report  which  I  had  the  honor  to  address 
to  you,  dated  the  5th  instant. 

With  the  most  perfect  respect,  etc. 


4IO  Alexander  Hamilton 

TULLY  ' 

To  the  People  of  the  United  States 
I 

August  23,  1794. 

It  has,  from  the  first  establishment  of  your  present 
Constitution,  been  predicted,  that  every  occasion  of 
serious  embarrassment  which  should  occur  in  the  af- 
fairs of  the  government,  every  misfortune  which  it 
should  experience,  whether  produced  from  its  own 
faults  or  mistakes,  or  from  other  causes,  would  be  the 
signal  of  an  attempt  to  overthrow  it,  or  to  lay  the 
foundation  of  its  overthrow,  by  defeating  the  exercise 
of  constitutional  and  necessary  authorities.  The  dis- 
turbances which  have  recently  broken  out  in  the 
western  counties  of  Pennsylvania,  furnish  an  occasion 
of  this  sort.  It  remains  to  see  whether  the  prediction 
which  has  been  quoted  proceeded  from  an  unfounded 
jealousy,  excited  by  partial  differences  of  opinion,  or 
was  a  just  inference  from  causes  inherent  in  the  struc- 
ture of  our  political  institutions.  Every  virtuous 
man,  every  good  citizen,  and  especially  every  true 
REPUBLICAN,  must  fervently  pray,  that  the  issue  may 
confound  and  not  confirm  so  ill-omened  a  prediction. 

Your  firm  attachment  to  the  government  you  have 
established,  cannot  be  doubted. 

If  a  proof  of  this  were  wanting  to  animate  the  confi- 
dence of  your  public  agents,  it  would  be  sufficient  to 
remark  that  as  often  as  any  attempt  to  counteract  its 

^  These  essays  were  written  simply  with  a  view  to  inform  the  public 
of  the  facts,  and  prepare  the  people  to  support  the  Administration  at 
the  critical  moment  of  the  insurrection. 


Tully  4" 

measures  appear,  it  is  carefully  prepared  by  strong 
professions  of  friendship  to  the  government  and  dis- 
avowals of  any  intention  to  injure  it.  This  can  only 
result  from  a  conviction  that  the  government  carries 
with  it  YOUR  affections ;  and  that  an  attack  upon  it, 
to  be  successful,  must  veil  the  stroke  under  the  ap- 
pearances of  good  will. 

It  is  therefore  very  important  that  you  should 
clearly  discern,  in  the  present  instance,  the  shape  in 
which  a  design  of  turning  the  existing  insurrection 
to  the  prejudice  of  the  government  would  naturally 
assume.  Thus  guarded,  you  will  more  readily  dis- 
cover and  more  easily  shun  the  artful  snares  which 
may  be  laid  to  entangle  your  feelings  and  your  judg- 
ment, and  will  be  the  less  apt  to  be  misled  from  the 
path  by  which  alone  you  can  give  security  and  per- 
manency to  the  blessings  you  enjoy,  and  can  avoid 
the  incalculable  mischiefs  incident  to  a  subversion  of 
the  just  and  necessary  authority  of  the  laws. 

The  design  alluded  to,  if  it  shall  be  entertained, 
would  not  appear  in  an  open  justification  of  the 
principles  or  conduct  of  the  insurgents,  or  in  a  direct 
dissuasion  from  the  support  of  the  government. 
These  methods  would  produce  general  indignation 
and  defeat  the  object.  It  is  too  absurd  and  shocking 
a  position  to  be  directly  maintained,  that  forcible 
resistance  by  a  sixtieth  part  of  the  community  to  the 
representative  will  of  the  whole,  and  to  constitu- 
tional laws  expressed  by  that  will,  and  acquiesced  in 
by  the  people  at  large,  is  justifiable  or  even  excusable. 
It  is  a  position  too  untenable  and  disgusting  to  be 
directly  advocated,  that  the  government  ought  not 


412  Alexander  Hamilton 

to  be  supported  in  exertions  to  establish  the  authority 
of  the  laws  against  a  resistance  so  incapable  of  justi- 
fication or  excuse. 

The  adversaries  of  good  order  in  every  country 
have  too  great  a  share  of  cunning,  too  exact  a  know- 
ledge of  the  human  heart,  to  pursue  so  unpromising  a 
cause.  Those  among  us  would  take  upon  the  present 
occasion  one  far  more  artful,  and  consequently  far 
more  dangerous. 

They  would  unite  with  good  citizens,  and  perhaps 
be  among  the  loudest  in  condemning  the  disorderly 
conduct  of  the  insurgents.  They  would  agree  that  it 
is  utterly  unjustifiable,  contrary  to  the  vital  principle 
of  republican  government,  and  of  the  most  dangerous 
tendency.  But  they  would,  at  the  same  time,  slily 
add,  that  excise  laws  are  pernicious  things,  very  hos- 
tile to  liberty  (or  perhaps  they  might  more  smoothly 
lament  that  the  government  had  been  imprudent 
enough  to  pass  laws  so  contrary  to  the  genius  of  a  free 
people),  and  they  would  still  more  cautiously  hint 
that  it  is  enough  for  those  who  disapprove  of  such 
laws  to  submit  to  them — too  much  to  expect  their 
aid  in  forcing  them  upon  others.  They  would  be  apt 
to  intimate  further,  that  there  is  reason  to  believe 
that  the  Executive  has  been  to  blame,  sometimes  by 
too  much  forbearance,  encouraging  the  hope  that  the 
laws  would  not  be  enforced,  at  other  times  in  pro- 
voking violence  by  severe  and  irritating  measures; 
and  they  would  generally  remark,  with  an  affectation 
of  moderation  and  prudence,  that  the  case  is  to  be 
lamented,  but  difficult  to  be  remedied;  that  a  trial 
of  force  would  be  delicate  and  dangerous ;  that  there 


Tully  413 

is  no  foreseeing  how  or  where  it  w^ould  end ;  that  it 
is  perhaps  better  to  temporize,  and  by  mild  means 
to  allay  the  ferment,  and  afterwards  to  remove  the 
cause  by  repealing  the  exceptionable  laws.  They 
would  probably  also  propose,  by  anticipation  of  and 
in  concert  with  the  views  of  the  insurgents,  plans 
of  procrastination.  They  would  say,  if  force  must 
finally  be  resorted  to,  let  it  not  be  till  after  Congress 
has  been  consulted,  who,  if  they  think  fit  to  persist 
in  continuing  the  laws,  can  make  additional  pro- 
vision for  enforcing  their  execution.  This,  too,  they 
would  argue,  w411  afford  an  opportunity  for  the  public 
sense  to  be  better  known,  which  (if  ascertained  to  be 
in  favor  of  the  laws)  will  give  the  government  greater 
assurance  of  success  in  measures  of  coercion. 

By  these  means,  artfully  calculated  to  divert  your 
attention  from  the  true  question  to  be  decided;  to 
combat,  by  prejudices  against  a  particular  system,  a 
just  sense  of  the  criminality  and  danger  of  violent 
resistance  to  the  laws;  to  oppose  the  suggestion  of 
misconduct  on  the  part  of  government  to  the  fact  of 
misconduct  on  the  part  of  the  insurgents;  to  foster 
the  spirit  of  indolence  and  procrastination  natural  to 
the  human  mind,  as  an  obstacle  to  the  vigor  and 
exertion  which  so  alarming  an  attack  upon  the  funda- 
mental principles  of  public  and  private  security  de- 
mands ;  to  distract  your  opinion  on  the  course  proper 
to  be  pursued,  and  consequently  on  the  propriety  of 
the  measures  which  may  be  pursued.  They  would 
expect  (I  say)  by  these  and  similar  means  equally  in- 
sidious and  pernicious,  to  abate  your  just  indignation 
at  the  daring  affront  which  has  been  offered  to  your 


414  Alexander  Hamilton 

authority  and  your  zeal  for  the  maintenance  and  sup- 
port of  the  laws;  to  prevent  a  competent  force,  if 
force  is  finally  called  forth,  from  complying  with  the 
call ;  and  thus  to  leave  the  government  of  the  Union 
in  the  prostrate  condition  of  seeing  the  laws  trampled 
under  foot  by  an  unprincipled  combination  of  a  small 
portion  of  the  community,  habitually  disobedient  to 
laws,  and  itself  destitute  of  the  necessary  aid  for 
vindicating  their  authority. 

Virtuous  and  enlightened  citizens  of  a  new  and 
happy  country !  ye  could  not  be  the  dupes  of  artifices 
so  detestable,  of  a  scheme  so  fatal;  ye  cannot  be  in- 
sensible to  the  destructive  consequences  with  which 
it  would  be  pregnant ;  ye  cannot  but  remember  that 
the  government  is  your  own  work,  that  those  who 
administer  it  are  but  your  temporary  agents;  that 
you  are  called  upon  not  to  support  their  power,  but 
YOUR  OWN  POWER.  And  you  will  not  fail  to  do  what 
your  rights,  your  best  interests,  your  character  as  a 
people,  your  security  as  members  of  society,  conspire 
to  demand  of  you. 

TULLY. 


II 

August  26,  1794. 

It  has  been  observed  that  the  means  most  likely  to 
be  employed  to  turn  the  insurrection  in  the  western 
country  to  the  detriment  of  the  government,  would 
be  artfully  calculated  among  other  things  "  to  divert 
your  attention  from  the  true  question  to  be  decided. " 

Let  us  see  then  what  is  this  question.  It  is  plainly 
this— Shall  the  majority  govern  or  be  governed? 


Tully  415 

shall  the  nation  rule  or  be  ruled?  shall  the  general 
will  prevail,  or  the  will  of  a  faction?  shall  there  be 
government  or  no  government?  It  is  impossible  to 
deny  that  this  is  the  true  and  the  whole  question. 
No  art,  no  sophistry  can  involve  it  in  the  least 
obscurity. 

The  Constitution  you  have  ordained  for  yourselves 
and  your  posterity  contains  this  express  clause :  "  The 
Congress  shall  have  power  to  lay  and  collect  taxes, 
duties,  imposts,  and  excises,  to  pay  the  debts,  and 
provide  for  the  common  defence  and  general  welfare 
of  the  United  States. "  You  have,  then,  by  a  solemn 
and  deliberate  act,  the  most  important  and  sacred 
that  a  nation  can  perform,  pronounced  and  decreed, 
that  yoiir  representatives  in  Congress  shall  have 
power  to  lay  excises.  You  have  done  nothing  since 
to  reverse  or  impair  that  decree. 

Your  representatives  in  Congress,  pursuant  to  the 
commission  derived  from  you,  and  with  a  full  know- 
ledge of  the  public  exigencies,  have  laid  an  excise.  At 
three  succeeding  sessions  they  have  revised  that  act, 
and  have  as  often,  with  a  degree  of  unanimity  not 
common,  and  after  the  best  opportunities  of  knowing 
your  sense,  renewed  their  sanction  to  it,  you  have 
acquiesced  in  it,  it  has  gone  into  general  operation, 
and  you  have  actually  paid  more  than  a  million  of 
dollars  on  account  of  it. 

But  the  four  western  counties  of  Pennsylvania 
undertake  to  rejudge  and  reverse  your  decrees.  You 
have  said,  "The  Congress  shall  have  power  to  lay 
excises."  They  say,  "The  Congress  shall  not  have 
this  power."     Or,  what  is  equivalent — they  shall  not 


4i6  Alexander  Hamilton 

exercise  it :  for  a  power  that  may  not  be  exercised  is 
a  nullity.  Your  representatives  have  said,  and  four 
times  repeated  it,  "  An  excise  on  distilled  spirits  shall 
be  collected."  They  say  it  shall  not  be  collected. 
We  will  punish,  expel,  and  banish  the  officers  who 
shall  attempt  the  collection.  We  will  do  the  same 
by  every  other  person  who  shall  dare  to  comply  with 
your  decree  expressed  in  the  constitutional  charter; 
and  with  that  of  your  representatives  expressed  in 
the  laws.  The  sovereignty  shall  not  reside  with  you, 
but  with  us.  If  you  presume  to  dispute  the  point  by 
force,  we  are  ready  to  measure  swords  with  you,  and 
if  unequal  ourselves  to  the  contest,  we  will  call  in  the 
aid  of  a  foreign  nation.  We  will  league  ourselves 
with  a  foreign  power. 

If  there  is  a  man  among  us  who  shall  affirm  that 
the  question  is  not  what  it  has  been  stated  to  be, 
who  shall  endeavor  to  perplex  it  by  ill-timed  declama- 
tions against  excise  laws,  who  shall  strive  to  paralyze 
the  efforts  of  the  community  by  invectives  oi-  insinua- 
tions against  the  government,  who  shall  inculcate, 
directly  or  indirectly,  that  force  ought  not  to  be  em- 
ployed to  compel  the  insurgents  to  a  submission  to 
the  laws,  if  the  pending  experiment  to  bring  them  to 
reason  (an  experiment  which  will  immortalize  the 
moderation  of  the  government)  shall  fail, — such  a 
man  is  not  a  good  citizen ;  such  a  man,  however  he 
may  prate  and  babble  republicanism,  is  not  a  re- 
publican; he  attempts  to  set  up  the  will  of  a  part 
against  the  will  of  the  whole,  the  will  of  a  faction 
against  the  will  of  the  nation,  the  pleasure  of  a 
few  against  your  pleasure,  the  violence  of  a  lawless 


Tully  417 

combination  against  the  sacred  authority   of  laws 
pronounced  under  your  indisputable  commission. 

Mark  such  a  man,  if  such  there  be.     The  occasion 
may  enable  you  to  discriminate  the  true  from  pre- 
tended republicans;   your  friends  from  the  friends  of 
faction.     'T  is  in  vain  that  the  latter  shall  attempt  to 
conceal  their  pernicious  principles  under  a  crowd  of 
odious  invectives  against  the  laws.     Your  answer  is 
this:    "We  have  already  in  the  constitutional  act 
decided  the  point  against  you,  and  against  those  for 
whom  you  apologize.     We  have  pronounced  that 
excises  may  be  laid,  and  consequently  that  they  are 
not,  as  you  say,  inconsistent  with  liberty.     Let  our 
will  be  first  obeyed,  and  then  we  shall  be  ready  to 
consider  the  reasons  which  can  be  afforded  to  prove 
our  judgment  has  been  erroneous;   and  if  they  con- 
vince us,  to  cause  them  to  be  observed.     We  have  not 
neglected  the  means  of  amending  in  a  regular  course 
the  constitutional  act.     And  we  shall  know  how  to 
make  our  sense  be  respected  whenever  we  shall  dis- 
cover that  any  part  of  it  needs  correction.     But  as  an 
earnest  of  this,  it  is  our  intention  to  begin  by  securing 
obedience  to  our  authority,  from  those  who  have  been 
bold  enough  to  set  it  at  defiance.     In  a  full  respect 
for  the  laws,  we  discern  the  reality  of  our  power  and 
the  means  of  providing  for  our  welfare  as  occasion 
may  require;  in  the  contempt  of  the  laws  we  see 
the  annihilation  of  our  power,  the  possibility  and  the 
danger  of  its  being  usurped  by  others,  and  of  the 
despotism  of  individuals  succeeding  to  the  regular 
authority  of  the  nation."     That  a  fate  like  this  may 
never  await  you,  let  it  be  deeply  imprinted  in  your 

VOL.  VI. — 27. 


4i8  Alexander  Hamilton 

minds,  and  handed  down  to  your  latest  posterity,  that 
there  is  no  road  to  despotism  more  sure  or  more  to  be 
dreaded  than  that  which  begins  at  anarchy. 

Threats  of  joining  the  British  are  actually  thrown 
out — ^how  far  the  idea  may  go  is  not  known. 

TULLY. 


Ill 

August  28,  1794- 

^  If  it  were  to  be  asked.  What  is  the  most  sacred 
duty,  and  the  greatest  source  of  security  in  a  repub- 
hc?  the  answer  would  be,  An  inviolable  respect  for 
the  Constitution  and  laws— the  first  growing  out  of 
the  last.  It  is  by  this,  in  a  great  degree,  that  the  rich 
and  the  powerful  are  to  be  restrained  from  enterprises 
against  the  common  liberty — operated  upon  by  the 
influence  of  a  general  sentiment,  by  their  interest 
in  the  principle,  and  by  the  obstacles  which  the  habit 
it  produces  erects  against  innovation  and  encroach- 
ment. It  is  by  this,  in  a  still  greater  degree,  that 
caballers,  intriguers,  and  demagogues  are  prevented 
from  climbing  on  the  shoulders  of  faction  to  the 
tempting  seats  of  usurpation  and  tyranny. 

Were  it  not  that  it  might  require  too  long  a  dis- 
cussion, it  would  not  be  difficult  to  demonstrate  that 
a  large  and  well-organized  republic  can  scarcely  lose 
its  liberty  from  any  other  cause  than  that  of  anarchy, 
to  which  a  contempt  of  the  laws  is  the  high-road. 

But  without  entering  into  so  wide  a  field,  it  is  suf- 
ficient to  present  to  your  view  a  more  simple  and  a 
more  obvious  truth,  which  is  this :  that  a  sacred  re- 


Tully  419 

spect  for  the  constitutional  law  is  the  vital  principle, 
the  sustaining  energy,  of  a  free  government. 

Government  is  frequently  and  aptly  classed  under 
two  descriptions — a  government  of  force,  and  a 
government  of  laws;  the  first  is  the  definition  of 
despotism— the  last,  of  liberty.  But  how  can  a  gov- 
ernment of  laws  exist  when  the  laws  are  disrespected 
and  disobeyed?  Government  supposes  control.  It 
is  that  POWER  by  which  individuals  in  society  are 
kept  from  doing  injury  to  each  other,  and  are  brought 
to  co-operate  to  a  common  end.  The  instruments  by 
which  it  must  act  are  either  the  authority  of  the 
laws  or  FORCE.  If  the  first  be  destroyed,  the  last 
must  be  substituted;  and  where  this  becomes  the 
ordinary  instrument  of  government,  there  is  an  end 
to  liberty! 

'  Those,  therefore,  who  preach  doctrines,  or  set  ex- 
amples which  undermine  or  subvert  the  authority  of 
the  laws,  lead  us  from  freedom  to  slavery ;  they  in- 
capacitate us  for  a  GOVERNMENT  of  LAWS,  and  con- 
sequently prepare  the  way  for  one  of  force,  for 
mankind  must  have  government  of  one  sort  or 
another.  There  are,  indeed,  great  and  urgent  cases 
where  the  boimds  of  the  Constitution  are  manifestly 
transgressed,  or  its  constitutional  authorities  so  ex- 
ercised as  to  produce  unequivocal  oppression  on  the 
community,  and  to  render  resistance  justifiable.  But 
such  cases  can  give  no  color  to  the  resistance  by  a 
comparatively  inconsiderable  part  of  a  community, 
of  constitutional  laws  distinguished  by  no  extra- 
ordinary features  of  rigor  or  oppression,  and  acqui- 
esced in  by  the  body  of  the  community. 


420  Alexander  Hamilton 

Such  a  resistance  is  treason  against  society,  against 
liberty,  against  every  thing  that  ought  to  be  dear  to  a 
free,  enlightened,  and  prudent  people.  To  tolerate 
it,  were  to  abandon  your  most  precious  interests. 
Not  to  subdue  it,  were  to  tolerate  it.  Those  who 
openly  or  covertly  dissuade  you  from  exertions  ade- 
quate to  the  occasion,  are  your  worst  enemies.  They 
treat  you  either  as  fools  or  cowards,  too  weak  to  per- 
ceive your  interest  or  your  duty,  or  too  dastardly 
to  piirsue  them.  They  therefore  merit  and  will,  no 
doubt,  meet  your  contempt.  To  the  plausible  but 
hollow  harangue  of  such  conspirators  you  cannot  fail 
to  reply.  How  long,  ye  Catilines,  will  ye  abuse  our 
patience  ? 

To  urge  the  execution  of  that  system  would  mani- 
fest, it  is  said,  an  intemperate  spirit;  and  to  excite 
your  disapprobation  of  that  course,  you  are  threat- 
ened with  the  danger  of  a  civil  war,  which  is  called 
the  consimimation  of  human  evil. 

To  crown  the  outrage  upon  your  understandings, 
the  insurgents  are  represented  as  men  who  imderstand 
the  principles  of  freedom,  and  know  the  horrors  and 
distresses  of  anarchy,  and  who,  therefore,  must  have 
been  tempted  to  hostility  against  the  laws  by  a 
RADICAL  DEFECT,  EITHER  in  the  govcmmcnt  or  in 
those  intrusted  with  its  administration.  How  thin 
the  partition  which  divides  the  insinuation  from  the 
assertion,  that  the  government  is  in  fault,  and  the 
insurgents  in  the  right! 

Fellow-citizens:  A  name,  a  sound,  has  too  often 
had  influence  on  the  affairs  of  nations;  an  excise  has 
too  long  been  the  successful  watchword  of  party.     It 


Tully  42 1 

has  even  sometimes  led  astray  well-meaning  men. 
The  experiment  is  now  to  be  tried  whether  there  be 
any  spell  in  it  of  sufficient  force  to  unnerve  the  arm 
which  may  be  found  necessary  to  be  raised  in  defence 
of  law  and  order. 

The  jugglers  who  endeavor  to  cheat  us  with  the 
sound,  have  never  dared  to  venture  into  the  fair  fields 
of  argument.  They  are  conscious  that  it  is  easier  to 
declaim  than  to  reason  on  the  subject.  They  know  it 
to  be  better  to  play  a  game  with  the  passions  and 
prejudices,  than  to  engage  seriously  with  the  under- 
standing of  the  auditory.  You  have  already  seen 
that  the  merits  of  excise  laws  are  immaterial  to  the 
question  to  be  decided,  that  you  have  prejudged  the 
point  by  a  solemn  constitutional  act,  and  that  until 
you  shall  have  revoked  or  modified  that  act,  resist- 
ance to  its  operation  is  a  criminal  infraction  of  the 
social  compact,  an  inversion  of  the  fundamental 
principles  of  republican  government,  and  a  daring 
attack  upon  your  sovereignty,  which  you  are  bound, 
by  every  motive  of  duty  and  self-preservation,  to 
withstand  and  defeat.  The  matter  might  safely  be 
suffered  to  rest  here ;  but  I  shall  take  a  future  oppor- 
timity  to  examine  the  reasonableness  of  the  prejudice 
which  is  inculcated  against  excise  laws,  and  which  has 
become  the  pretext  for  excesses  tending  to  dissolve 
the  bands  of  society. 

Fellow-citizens :  You  are  told  that  it  will  be  intem- 
perate to  urge  the  execution  of  the  laws  which  are 
resisted.  What?  Will  it  be  indeed  intemperate  in 
your  Chief  Magistrate,  sworn  to  maintain  the  Con- 
stitution, charged  faithfully  to  execute  the  laws,  and 


422  Alexander  Hamilton 

authorized  to  employ  for  that  purpose  force,  when  the 
ordinary  means  fail — will  it  be  intemperate  in  him  to 
exert  that  force,  when  the  Constitution  and  the  laws 
are  opposed  by  force  ?  Can  he  answer  it  to  his  con- 
science, to  you,  not  to  exert  it? 

Yes,  it  is  said ;  because  the  execution  of  it  will  pro- 
duce civil  war — the  consummation  of  human  evil. 

Fellow-citizens :  Civil  war  is,  undoubtedly,  a  great 
evil.  It  is  one  that  every  good  man  would  wish  to 
avoid,  and  will  deplore  if  inevitable.  But  it  is  incom- 
parably a  less  evil  than  the  destruction  of  govern- 
ment. The  first  brings  with  it  serious  but  temporary 
and  partial  ills ;  the  last  undermines  the  foundations 
of  our  security  and  happiness.  And  where  should  we 
be  if  it  were  once  to  grow  into  a  maxim,  that  force  is 
not  to  be  used  against  the  seditious  combinations  of 
parts  of  the  community  to  resist  the  laws?  This 
would  be  to  give  a  carte  blanche  to  ambition,  to 
licentiousness,  to  foreign  intrigue,  to  make  you  the 
prey  of  the  gold  of  other  nations — the  sport  of  the 
passions  and  vices  of  individuals  among  yourselves. 
The  hydra  Anarchy  would  rear  its  head  in  every 
quarter.  The  goodly  fabric  you  have  established 
would  be  rent  asunder,  and  precipitated  into  the  dust. 
You  knew  how  to  encounter  civil  war  rather  than 
surrender  your  liberty  to  foreign  domination;  you 
will  not  hesitate  now  to  brave  it  rather  than  to  sur- 
render your  sovereignty  to  the  tyranny  of  a  faction ; 
you  will  be  as  deaf  to  the  apostles  of  anarchy  now  as 
you  were  to  the  emissaries  of  despotism  then.  Your 
love  of  liberty  will  guide  you  now  as  it  did  then ;  you 
know  that  the  power  of  the  majority  and  liberty 


Tully  423 

are  inseparable.  Destroy  that,  and  this  perishes. 
But,  in  truth,  that  which  properly  can  be  called  civil 
war  is  not  to  be  apprehended — unless  from  the  act  of 
those  who  endeavor  to  fan  the  flame,  by  rendering  the 
government  odious.  A  civil  war  is  a  contest  between 
two  GREAT  parts  of  the  same  empire.  The  exertion 
of  the  strength  of  the  nation  to  suppress  resistance  to 
its  laws,  by  a  sixtieth  part  of  itself,  is  not  of  that 
description. 

After  endeavoring  to  alarm  you  with  the  horrors  of 
civil  war,  an  attempt  is  made  to  excite  your  sym- 
pathy in  favor  of  the  armed  faction,  by  telling  you 
that  those  who  compose  it  are  men  who  understand 
the  principles  of  freedom,  and  know  the  horrors  and 
distresses  of  anarchy,  and  must  therefore  have  been 
prompted  to  hostility  against  the  laws  by  a  radical 
defect  EITHER  in  the  government  or  in  its  adminis- 
tration. Fellow-citizens,  for  an  answer  to  this  you 
have  only  to  consult  your  senses.  The  natural  con- 
sequences of  radical  defect  in  a  government,  or  in 
its  administration,  are  national  distress  and  suffering. 
Look  around  you — where  is  it  ?  Do  you  feel  it  ?  Do 
you  see  it? 

Go  in  quest  of  it  beyond  the  Alleghany,  and  instead 
of  it  you  will  find  that  there  also  a  scene  of  unparal- 
leled prosperity  upbraids  the  ingratitude  and  mad- 
ness of  those  who  are  endeavoring  to  cloud  the  bright 
face  of  our  political  horizon,  and  to  mar  the  happiest 
lot  that  beneficent  Heaven  ever  indulged  to  unde- 
serving mortals. 

When  you  have  turned  your  eyes  towards  that 
scene,  examine  well  the  men  whose  knowledge  of  the 


424  Alexander  Hamilton 

principles  of  freedom  is  so  emphatically  vaunted — 
where  did  they  get  their  better  knowledge  of  those 
principles  than  that  which  you  possess?  How  is  it 
that  you  have  been  so  blind  or  tame  as  to  remain 
quiet,  while  they  have  been  goaded  into  hostility 
against  the  laws  by  a  radical  defect  in  the  govern- 
ment or  its  administration  ?  Are  you  willing  to  yield 
them  the  palm  of  discernment,  of  patriotism,  or  of 
courage? 

TULLY. 


IV 

September  2,  1794- 

The  prediction  mentioned  in  my  first  letter  begins 
to  be  fulfilled.  Fresh  symptoms  every  moment  ap- 
pear of  a  dark  conspiracy,  hostile  to  your  government, 
to  your  peace  abroad,  to  your  tranquillity  at  home. 
One  of  its  orators  dares  to  prostitute  the  name  of 
Franklin  by  annexing  it  to  a  pubHcation  as  insidious 
as  it  is  incendiary.  Aware  of  the  folly  and  the  danger 
of  a  direct  advocacy  of  the  cause  of  the  insurgents,  he 
makes  the  impudent  attempt  to  enhst  your  passions 
in  their  favor  by  false  and  virulent  railings  against 
those  who  have  heretofore  represented  you  in  Con- 
gress. The  foreground  of  the  piece  presented  you 
with  a  bitter  invective  against  that  wise,  moderate, 
and  pacific  policy,  which  in  all  probabihty  will  rescue 
you  from  the  calamities  of  a  foreign  war,  with  an 
increase  of  new  dignity  and  with  additional  lustre  to 
the  American  name  and  character.  Your  representa- 
tives are  delineated  as  corrupt,  pusillanimous,  and 
unworthy  of  your  confidence;  because  they  did  not 


Tully  425 

plunge  headlong  into  measures  which  might  have 
rendered  war  inevitable;  because  they  contented 
themselves  with  preparing  for  it,  instead  of  making 
it,  leaving  the  path  open  to  the  Executive  for  one  last 
and  solemn  effort  of  negotiation;  because  they  did 
not  dispay  either  the  promptness  of  gladiators,  or 
the  blustering  of  bullies,  but  assumed  that  firm  yet 
temperate  attitude  which  alone  is  suited  to  the  re- 
presentatives of  a  brave  but  rational  people;  who 
deprecated  war,  though  they  did  not  fear  it;  and 
who  have  a  great  and  solid  interest  in  peace,  which 
ought  only  to  be  abandoned  when  it  is  unequivocally 
ascertained  that  the  sacrifice  is  absolutely  due  to  the 
vindication  of  their  honor  and  the  preservation  of 
their  essential  rights;  because,  in  fine,  your  repre- 
sentatives wished  to  give  an  example  to  the  world, 
that  the  boasted  moderation  of  republican  govern- 
ments was  not  (like  the  patriotism  of  our  political 
barkers)  an  empty  declaration,  but  a  precious  reality. 
The  sallies  of  a  momentary  sensibility,  roused  and 
stung  by  injury,  were  excusable.  It  was  not  wonder- 
ful that  the  events  of  war  were  under  the  first  impres- 
sions heard  from  good  and  prudent  men.  But  to 
revive  them  at  this  late  hour,  when  fact  and  reflection 
unite  to  condemn  them;  to  arraign  a  conduct  which 
has  elevated  the  national  character  to  the  highest 
point  of  true  glory;  to  hope  to  embark  you  in  the 
condemnation  of  that  conduct,  and  to  make  your  in- 
dignation against  it  useful  to  the  cause  of  insurrection 
and  treason,  are  indications  of  a  wrong-headedness, 
perverseness,  or  profligacy,  for  which  it  is  not  easy  to 
find  terms  of  adequate  reprobation. 


426  Alexander  Hamilton 

Happily  the  plotters  of  mischief  knew  ye  not. 
They  derive  what  they  mistake  for  your  image  from 
an  original  in  their  own  heated  and  crooked  imagina- 
tions, and  they  hope  to  mould  a  wise,  reflecting,  and 
dispassionate  people  to  purposes  which  presuppose  an 
ignorant,  unthinking,  and  turbulent  herd. 

But  the  declamation  against  your  representatives 
for  their  love  of  peace  is  but  the  preface  to  the  main 
design.  That  design  is  to  alienate  you  from  the  sup- 
port of  the  laws,  by  the  spectre  of  an  odious  excise 
system,  baneful  to  liberty,  engendered  by  corruption, 
and  nurtured  by  the  instrumentality  (favored 
word,  fruitful  source  of  mountebank  wit)  of  the  ene- 
mies of  freedom. 

TULLY. 


HAMILTON   TO   CRAIG 

War  Department,  August  25,  1794. 

Sir: — Your  letter  of  the  17th  instant  to  the  Secre- 
tary of  War  has  been  received  and  duly  attended  to. 

The  suggestions  respecting  additional  measures  of 
defence  have  been  considered ;  but  the  danger  of  the 
means  falling  into  the  hands  of  the  insurgents  appears 
at  present  an  objection. 

It  is  hoped  that  every  thing  at  Pittsburgh,  or  which 
shall  come  there,  not  necessary  to  the  post  itself,  has 
been  forwarded  down  the  river,  and  will  continue  to 
be  so,  as  long  and  as  fast  as  it  can  be  done  with 
safety.  The  friends  of  government  at  Pittsburgh 
ought  to  rally  their  confidence,  and,  if  necessary, 
manifest  it  by  acts.     They  cannot  surely  doubt  the 


Secretary  of  State  to  Mifflin  427 

power  of  the  United  States  to  uphold  the  authority  of 
the  laws ;  and  they  may  be  assured,  that  the  necessity 
of  doing  it,  towards  preserving  the  very  existence  of 
government,  so  directly  attacked,  will  dictate  and 
produce  a  most  vigorous  and  persevering  effort,  in 
which  the  known  good  sense  and  love  of  order  of  the 
quiet  body  of  the  people,  and  all  the  information 
hitherto  received  of  their  sentiments  and  feelings 
with  regard  to  the  present  emergency,  authorize  a 
full  expectation  of  their  hearty  co-operation. 


SECRETARY    OF    STATE    TO    MIFFLIN 

Draft  by  Hamilton. 

Philadelphia,  August  30,  1794. 

Sir: — I  am  directed  by  the  President  to  acknow- 
ledge the  receipt  on  the  17th  of  your  excellency's 
letter,  dated  on  the  12th  instant. 

The  President  feels  with  you  the  force  of  the 
motives  which  render  undesirable  an  extension  of 
correspondence  on  the  subject  in  question.  But  the 
case  being  truly  one  of  great  importance  and  delicacy, 
these  motives  must  yield  in  a  degree  to  the  propriety 
and  utility  of  giving  precision  to  every  part  of  the 
transaction,  and  guarding  effectually  against  ultimate 
misapprehension . 

To  this  end  it  is  deemed  advisable,  in  the  first 
place,  to  state  some  facts,  which  either  do  not  appear, 
or  are  conceived  not  to  have  assumed  an  accurate 
shape  in  your  excellency's  letter.     They  are  these: 


428  Alexander  Hamilton 

1 .  You  were  informed  at  the  conference  that  all  the 
information  which  had  been  received  had  been  laid 
before  an  associate  justice,  in  order  that  he  might 
consider  and  determine  whether  such  a  case  as  is 
contemplated  by  the  second  section  of  the  act,  which 
provides  for  calling  forth  the  militia  to  execute  the 
laws  of  the  Union,  suppress  insurrections  and  repel 
invasions,  had  occurred;  that  is,  whether  combina- 
tions existed  too  powerful  to  be  suppressed  by  the 
ordinary  course  of  judicial  proceedings,  or  by  the 
powers  vested  in  the  marshal  by  that  act;  in  which 
case  the  President  is  authorized  to  call  forth  the 
militia  to  suppress  the  combinations  and  to  cause  the 
laws  to  be  duly  executed. 

2.  The  idea  of  a  preliminary  proceeding  by  you 
was  pointed  to  an  eventual  co-operation  with  the 
Executive  of  the  United  States,  in  such  plan  as,  upon 
mature  deliberation,  should  be  deemed  advisable,  in 
conformity  with  the  laws  of  the  Union.  The  inquiry 
was  particularly  directed  towards  the  possibility  of 
some  previous  accessory  step  in  relation  to  the 
militia,  to  expedite  the  calling  them  forth  if  an 
acceleration  should  be  judged  expedient  and  proper, 
and  if  any  delay  on  the  score  of  evidence  should 
attend  the  notification  from  a  judge,  which  the  laws 
make  the  condition  of  the  power  of  the  President 
to  require  the  aid  of  the  militia,  and  turned  more 
especially  upon  the  point  whether  the  law  of  Penn- 
sylvania, of  the  22d  September,  1783,  was  or  was  not 
still  in  force.  The  question  emphatically  was:  Has 
the  executive  of  Pennsylvania  power  to  put  the 
militia  in  motion,  previous  to  a  requisition  from  the 


Secretary  of  State  to  Mifflin  429 

President,  under  the  laws  of  the  Union,  if  it  shall  be 
thought  advisable  so  to  do?  Indeed  it  seems  to  be 
admitted  by  one  part  of  your  letter,  that  the  pre- 
liminary measure  contemplated  did  turn  on  this 
question,  and  with  a  particular  eye  to  the  authority 
and  existence  of  the  act  just  mentioned. 

3.  The  information  contained  in  the  papers  read 
at  the  conference,  besides  the  violence  offered  to  the 
marshal  while  in  company  with  the  inspector  of  the 
revenue,  established  that  the  marshal  had  been  after- 
wards made  prisoner  by  the  insurgents,  put  in 
jeopardy  of  his  life,  had  been  obliged  to  obtain  safety 
and  liberty  by  a  promise,  guaranteed  by  Colonel 
Presley  Neville,  that  he  would  serve  no  other  process 
on  the  west  side  of  the  Alleghany  Mountains ;  that,  in 
addition  to  this,  a  deputation  of  the  insurgents  had 
gone  to  Pittsburgh,  to  demand  of  the  marshal  a  sur- 
render of  the  processes  in  his  possession,  under  the 
intimation  that  it  would  satisfy  the  people  and  add  to 
his  safety,  which  necessarily  implied  that  he  would 
be  in  danger  of  further  violence  without  such  a  sur- 
render; that  under  the  influence  of  this  menace, 
he  had  found  it  necessary  to  seek  security  by  taking, 
secretly,  and  in  the  night,  a  circuitous  route. 

This  recapitulation  is  not  made  to  invalidate  the 
explanation  offered  in  your  last  letter,  of  the  view  of 
the  subject  which  you  assert  to  have  led  to  the  sug- 
gestions contained  in  your  first,  and  of  the  sense 
which  you  wish  to  be  received  as  that  of  the  observa- 
tions accompanying  those  suggestions.  It  is  intended 
solely  to  manifest  that  it  was  natural  for  the  Presi- 
dent to  regard  your  communication  of  the  5th  instant 


43°  Alexander  Hamilton 

in  the  light  under  which  it  is  presented  in  the  reply 
to  it. 

For  having  informed  you  that  the  matter  was 
before  an  associate  justice,  with  a  view  to  the  law  of 
the  United  States,  which  has  been  mentioned,  and 
having  pointed  out  what  was  said  respecting  a 
preliminary  proceeding  on  your  part  to  a  call  of 
the  militia  under  the  authority  of  a  State  law,  by 
anticipation  of  a  requisition  from  the  General  Govern- 
ment, and  in  co-operation  with  an  eventual  plan  to 
be  founded  on  the  laws  of  the  Union,  it  was  not 
natural  to  expect  that  it  would  have  presented  a  plan 
of  conduct  entirely  on  the  basis  of  the  State  govern- 
ment, even  to  the  extent  of  resorting  to  the  Legis- 
lature of  Pennsylvania,  after  its  judiciary  had  proved 
incompetent  "to  prescribe  by  their  wisdom  and 
authority  the  means  of  subduing  the  spirit  of  insur- 
rection and  of  restoring  tranquillity  and  order,"  a 
plan  which,  being  incompatible  with  the  course 
marked  out  in  the  laws  of  the  United  States,  evidently 
could  not  have  been  acceded  to  without  a  suspension, 
for  a  long  and  indefinite  period,  of  the  movements  of 
the  federal  Executive  pursuant  to  those  laws.  The 
repugnancy  and  incompatibility  of  the  two  modes  of 
proceeding  at  the  same  time  cannot,  it  is  presumed, 
be  made  a  question. 

Was  it  extraordinary,  then,  that  the  plan  suggested 
should  have  been  unexpected,  and  that  it  should  even 
have  been  thought  liable  to  the  observation  of  having 
contemplated  Pennsylvania  in  a  light  too  separate 
and  imconnected? 

The  propriety  of  the  remark,  "  that  it  was  impossi- 


Secretary  of  State  to  Mifflin  431 

ble  not  to  think  the  current  of  the  observations  in 
your  letter  might  be  construed  to  imply  a  virtual  dis- 
approbation of  that  plan  of  conduct  on  the  part  of  the 
Government  of  Pennsylvania,  if  arrived  at  a  similar 
stage,"  must  be  referred  to  the  general  tenor  and 
complexion  of  those  observations,  and  to  the  in- 
ference they  were  naturally  calculated  to  inculcate. 
If  this  inference  was,  that  under  the  known  circum- 
stances of  the  case,  the  employment  of  force  to 
suppress  the  insurrection  was  improper,  without  a 
long  train  of  preparatory  expedients;  and  if,  in  fact, 
the  Government  of  the  United  States  (which  has 
not  been  controverted)  was  at  that  point  where  it 
was  admitted  that  the  Government  of  Pennsylvania 
being  arrived  the  resort  to  force  on  its  part  would  be 
proper,  the  impression  which  was  made  could  not 
have  been  effaced  by  the  consideration  that  the  forms 
of  referring  what  concerned  the  government  of  the 
Union  to  the  judgment  of  its  own  Executive,  were 
carefully  observed.  There  was  no  difficulty  in  recon- 
ciling the  intimation  of  an  opinion  unfavorable  to  a 
particular  course  of  proceeding,  with  an  explicit  refer- 
ence of  the  subject  (officially  speaking)  to  the  judg- 
ment of  the  officer  charged  by  the  Constitution  to 
decide,  and  with  a  sincere  recognition  of  the  subjec- 
tion of  the  individual  authority  of  the  State  to  the 
national  jurisdiction  of  the  Union. 

The  disavowal  by  your  excellency  of  an  intention 
to  sanction  the  inference  which  was  drawn,  renders 
what  has  been  said  a  mere  explanation  of  the  cause 
of  that  inference,  and  of  the  impressions  which  it  at 
first  made. 


432  Alexander  Hamilton 

It  would  be  foreign  to  the  object  of  this  letter  to 
discuss  the  various  observations,  which  have  been 
adduced  to  obviate  a  misapprehension  of  your  views, 
and  to  maintain  the  propriety  of  the  course  pursued 
in  your  first  communication.  It  is  far  more  pleasing 
to  the  President  to  understand  you  in  the  sense  you 
desire,  and  to  conclude  that  no  opinion  has  been 
indicated  by  you  inconsistent  with  that  which  he  has 
entertained  of  the  state  of  things  and  of  his  duty  in 
relation  to  it.  And  he  remarks,  with  satisfaction, 
the  effect  which  subsequent  information  is  supposed 
to  be  calculated  to  produce  favoring  an  approxima- 
tion of  sentiments. 

But  there  are  a  few  miscellaneous  points  which, 
more  effectually  to  prevent  misconceptions  anywhere, 
seem  to  demand  a  cursory  notice. 

You  observe  that  the  President  had  already  deter- 
mined to  exercise  his  legal  powers  in  drafting  a  com- 
petent force  of  the  militia.  At  the  point  of  time  to 
which  you  are  understood  to  refer — namely,  that  of 
the  conference,  the  President  had  no  legal  power  to 
call  forth  the  mihtia.  No  judge  had  yet  pronounced 
that  a  case  justifying  the  exercise  of  that  power  ex- 
isted. You  must  be  sensible,  sir,  that  all  idea  of  your 
calling  out  the  militia  by  your  authority,  was  referred 
to  a  state  of  things  antecedent  to  the  lawful  capacity 
of  the  President  to  do  it  by  his  own  authority;  and 
when  he  had  once  determined  upon  the  call,  pursuant 
to  his  legal  powers,  it  were  absurd  to  have  proposed 
to  you  a  separate  and  unconnected  call.  How,  too, 
it  might  be  asked,  could  such  a  determination,  if  it 
had  been  made,  and  was  known  to  you,  have  com- 


Secretary  of  State  to  Mifflin  433 

ported  with  the  plan  suggested  in  your  letter,  which 
pre-supposes  that  the  employment  of  force  had  not 
already  been  determined  upon? 

This  passage  of  your  letter  is,  therefore,  considered 
to  mean  only  that  the  President  had  manifested  an 
opinion  predicated  upon  the  event  of  such  a  noti- 
fication from  a  judge  as  the  law  prescribes,  that  the 
nature  of  the  case  was  such  as  would  probably  require 
the  employment  of  force.  You  will  also,  it  is  be- 
lieved, recollect  that  he  had  not  at  the  time  finally 
determined  upon  any  thing,  and  that  the  conference 
ended  with  referring  the  whole  subject  to  further 
consideration. 

You  say,  that  if  you  had  undertaken  not  only  to 
comply  promptly  with  the  President's  requisition,  but 
to  embody  a  distinct  corps  for  the  same  service,  a 
useless  expense  would  have  been  incurred  by  the 
State,  an  unnecessary  burden  would  have  been  im- 
posed on  the  citizens,  and  embarrassment  and  con- 
fusion would  probably  have  been  introduced  instead 
of  system  and  co-operation.  Btit  they  were  never 
expected.  Your  embodying  the  militia  independent 
of  a  requisition  from  the  President,  was  never  thought 
of,  except  as  a  preliminary  and  auxiliary  step.  Had 
it  taken  place  when  the  requisition  came,  the  corps 
embodied  would  have  been  ready  toward  a  com- 
pliance with  it,  and  no  one  of  the  inconveniences 
suggested  could  possibly  have  risen. 

You  say,  in  another  place,  that  you  "were  called 
upon  to  act,  not  in  conformity  to  a  positive  law,  but 
in  compliance  with  the  duty  which  is  supposed  to  re- 
sult from  the  nature  and  constitution  of  the  executive 


434  Alexander  Hamilton 

office. "  It  is  conceived  that  it  would  have  been  more 
correct  to  have  said,  "  you  were  called  upon  to  be  con- 
sulted whether  you  had  power  in  the  given  case  to 
call  forth  the  militia  without  a  previous  requisition 
from  the  General  Government."  The  supposition 
that  you  might  possess  this  power  was  referred  to  a 
law  of  Pennsylvania,  which  appeared,  on  examina- 
tion, to  have  been  repealed.  A  gentleman  who 
accompanied  you  thought  that  the  power,  after  a  due 
notification  of  the  incompetency  of  the  judiciary, 
might  be  deduced  from  the  nature  and  constitution 
of  the  executive  office. 

It  has  appeared  to  your  excellency  fit  and  expedient 
to  animadvert  upon  the  nature  of  the  evidence  pro- 
duced at  the  conference,  and  to  express  some  doubts 
which  had  occurred  to  your  mind  concerning  it. 

As  the  laws  of  the  United  States  have  referred  the 
evidence  in  such  cases  to  the  judgment  of  a  district 
judge,  or  associate  justice,  and,  foreseeing  that  cir- 
cumstances so  peculiar  might  arise  as  to  render  rules 
relating  to  the  ordinary  and  peaceable  state  of  society 
inapplicable,  have  forborne  to  prescribe  any,  leaving 
it  to  the  understanding  and  conscience  of  the  judge, 
upon  his  responsibility,  to  pronoimce  what  kind  and 
degree  of  evidence  should  suffice,  the  President  would 
not  sanction  a  discussion  of  the  standard  or  measure 
by  which  evidence  in  those  cases  ought  to  be  gov- 
erned. He  would  restrain  himself  by  the  reflection 
that  this  appertains  to  the  province  of  another,  and 
that  he  might  rely  as  a  guide  upon  the  decision  which 
should  be  made  by  the  proper  organ  of  the  laws  for 
that  purpose. 


Secretary  of  State  to  Mifflin  435 

But  it  may  be  no  deviation  from  this  rule  to  notice 
to  you  that  the  facts  stated  in  the  beginning  of  this 
letter,  under  the  third  head,  appear  to  have  been 
overlooked  in  your  survey  of  the  evidence,  while 
they  seem  to  be  far  from  immaterial  to  a  just  estimate 
of  it. 

You  remark  that  "  when  you  found  that  the  mar- 
shal had,  without  molestation,  executed  his  office  in 
the  county  of  Fayette,  that  he  never  was  insulted 
or  opposed  till  he  acted  in  company  with  General 
Neville,  and  that  the  virulence  of  the  rioters  was 
directly  manifested  against  the  person  and  property 
of  the  latter  gentleman,  and  only  incidentally  against 
the  person  of  the  former,  you  thought  there  was 
groimd  yet  to  suppose  that  a  spirit  of  opposition  to 
the  officers  employed  under  the  excise  law,  and  not 
a  spirit  of  opposition  to  the  officers  employed  in  the 
administration  of  justice,  was  the  immediate  source 
of  the  outrages  which  are  deprecated." 

It  is  natural  to  inquire  how  this  supposition  could 
consist  with  the  additional  facts  which  appeared  by 
the  same  evidence,  namely,  that  the  marshal,  having 
been  afterward  made  prisoner  by  the  rioters,  had 
been  compelled,  for  obtaining  safety  and  liberty,  to 
promise  to  execute  no  more  processes  within  the  dis- 
contented scene ;  and  that  subsequently  again  to  this, 
in  consequence  of  a  deputation  of  the  rioters  deliber- 
ately sent  to  demand  a  surrender  of  the  processes  in 
his  possession,  enforced  by  a  threat,  he  had  found  it 
necessary  to  seek  security  in  withdrawing  by  a  secret 
and  circuitous  route;  did  not  these  circumstances 
imequivocally  denote  that  officers  employed  in  the 


436  Alexander  Hamilton 

administration  of  justice  were  as  much  objects  of 
opposition  as  those  employed  in  the  execution  of  the 
particular  laws,  and  that  the  rioters  were  at  least 
consistent  in  their  plan  ? 

It  must  needs  be,  that  these  facts  escaped  your 
excellency's  attention,  else  they  are  too  material  to 
have  been  omitted  in  your  review  of  the  evidence, 
and  too  conclusive  not  to  have  set  aside  the  supposi- 
tion which  you  entertained,  and  which  seemed  to 
have  had  so  great  a  share  in  your  general  view  of  the 
subject. 

There  remains  only  one  point  on  which  your  excel- 
lency will  be  longer  detained — a  point,  indeed,  of 
great  importance,  and  which  consequently  demands 
serious  and  careful  reflection.  It  is  the  opinion  you 
so  emphatically  express,  that  the  mere  dispersion  of 
the  insurgents  is  the  sole  object  for  which  the  mihtia 
can  be  called  out,  or  kept  in  service  after  they  may 
have  been  called  out. 

The  President  reserves  to  the  last  moment  the 
consideration  and  decision  of  this  point. 

But  there  are  arguments  weighing  heavily  against 
the  opinion  you  have  expressed,  which,  in  the  mean- 
time, are  offered  to  your  candid  consideration. 

The  Constitution  of  the  United  States  (article  i, 
section  8)  empowers  Congress  "  to  provide  for  calling 
forth  the  militia  to  execute  the  laws  of  the  Union, 
suppress  insurrections,  and  repel  invasions,"  evi- 
dently, from  the  wording  and  distribution  of  the 
sentence,  contemplating  the  execution  of  the  laws  of 
the  Union  as  a  thing  distinct  from  the  suppression  of 
insurrections. 


Secretary  of  State  to  Mifflin  437 

The  act  of  May  2,  1792,  for  carrying  the  provision 
of  the  Constitution  into  effect,  adopts  for  its  title  the 
very  words  of  the  Constitution,  being  "An  act  to 
provide  for  calling  forth  the  militia  to  execute  the 
laws  of  the  Union,  suppress  insurrections,  and  repel 
invasions,"  continuing  the  constitutional  distinction. 

The  first  section  of  the  act  provides  for  the  cases  of 
invasion  and  of  insurrection,  confining  the  latter  to 
the  case  of  insurrection  against  the  government  of  a 
State.  The  second  section  provides  for  the  case  of 
the  execution  of  the  laws  being  obstructed  by  combi- 
nations too  powerful  to  be  suppressed  by  the  ordinary 
course  of  judicial  proceedings,  or  by  the  powers  vested 
in  the  marshals. 

The  words  are  these :  "  Whenever  the  laws  of  the 
United  States  shall  be  opposed,  or  the  execution 
thereof  obstructed,  in  any  State,  by  combinations  too 
powerful  to  be  suppressed  by  the  ordinary  course  of 
judicial  proceedings,  or  by  the  powers  vested  in  the 
marshals  by  this  act,  the  same  being  notified  to  the 
President  of  the  United  States  by  an  associate  judge, 
or  the  district  judge,  it  shall  be  lawful  for  the  Presi- 
dent of  the  United  States  to  call  forth  the  militia  of 
such  State  to  suppress  such  combinations,  and  to  cause 
the  laws  to  be  duly  executed.''  Then  follows  a  pro- 
vision for  calling  forth  the  militia  of  other  States. 

The  terms  of  this  section  appear  to  contemplate 
and  describe  something  that  may  be  less  than  insur- 
rection. "The  combinations"  mentioned  may  in- 
deed amount  to  insurrections,  but  it  is  conceivable 
that  they  may  stop  at  associations  not  to  comply 
with  the  law,  supported  by  riots,  assassinations,  and 


438  Alexander  Hamilton 

murders,  and  by  a  general  spirit  in  a  part  of  the 
community,  which  may  baffle  the  ordinary  judiciary 
means,  with  no  other  aid  than  the  posse  comitatus, 
magistrates,and  officers  in  the  execution  of  their  duty. 
And  the  objects  for  which  the  militia  are  to  be  called 
are  expressly  not  only  to  suppress  these  combinations 
(whether  amounting  to  insurrections  or  not),  but  to 
cause  the  laws  to  be  duly  executed. 

It  is  therefore  plainly  contrary  to  the  manifest 
general  intent  of  the  Constitution  and  of  this  act, 
and  to  the  positive  and  express  terms  of  the  second 
section  of  the  act,  to  say  that  the  militia  called  forth 
are  not  to  be  continued  in  service  for  the  purpose  of 
causing  the  laws  to  be  duly  executed,  and,  of  course,  till 
they  are  so  executed. 

What  is  the  main  and  ultimate  object  of  calling 
forth  the  mihtia?  "To  cause  the  laws  to  be  exe- 
cuted. ' '  Which  are  the  laws  to  be  executed  ?  Those 
which  are  opposed  and  obstructed  in  their  execution 
by  the  combinations  described  in  the  present  case — 
the  laws  laying  duties  upon  spirits  distilled  within  the 
United  States,  and  upon  stills ;  and  incidentally  those 
which  uphold  the  judiciary  functions.  When  are 
the  laws  executed?  Clearly,  when  the  opposition 
is  subdued ;  when  penalties  for  disobedience  can  be 
enforced ;  when  a  compliance  is  effectuated. 

Would  the  mere  dispersion  of  insurgents,  and  their 
retiring  to  their  respective  homes,  do  this?  Would 
it  satisfy  either  member  of  the  provision — the  sup- 
pression of  the  combinations  or  the  execution  of  the 
laws?  Might  not  the  former,  notwithstanding  the 
dispersion,    continue   in   full   vigor,    ready   at   any 


Secretary  of  State  to  MifHin  439 

moment  to  break  out  into  new  acts  of  resistance  to 
the  laws?  Are  the  militia  to  be  kept  perpetually 
marching  and  counter-marching  towards  the  insur- 
gents while  they  are  embodied,  and  from  them  when 
they  have  separated  and  retired  ?  Suppose  the  insur- 
gents, hardy  enough  to  wait  the  experiment  of  a 
battle,  are  vanquished,  and  then  disperse  and  retire 
home,  are  the  militia  immediately  to  retire  also?  to 
give  them  an  opportunity  to  reassemble,  recruit,  and 
prepare  for  another  battle  ?  And  is  this  to  go  on,  and 
be  repeated  without  limit? 

Such  construction  of  the  law,  if  true,  were  certainly 
a  very  unfortunate  one,  rendering  its  provisions 
essentially  nugatory,  and  leading  to  endless  expense, 
and  as  endless  disappointment.  It  could  hardly  be 
advisable  to  vex  the  militia,  by  marching  them  to  a 
distant  point,  where  they  might  scarcely  be  arrived 
before  it  would  be  legally  necessary  for  them  to 
return,  not  in  consequence  of  having  effected  their 
object — of  having  "  caused  the  laws  to  be  executed," 
— but  in  consequence  of  the  mere  stratagem  of  a 
deceitful  dispersion  and  retiring. 

Thus  far  the  spirit  as  well  as  the  positive  letter 
of  the  law  combats  the  construction  which  you 
have  adopted.  It  remains  to  see  if  there  be  any 
other  part  of  it  which  compels  to  a  renunciation 
both  of  the  letter  and  spirit  of  the  antecedent  pro- 
visions. 

The  part  which  seems  to  be  relied  upon  for  this 
effect,  is  the  third  section,  which  by  way  of  proviso 
enjoins,  "That  whenever  it  may  be  necessary,  in  the 
judgment  of  the  President,  to  use  the  military  force 


440  Alexander  Hamilton 

by  that  act  directed  to  be  called  forth,  he  shall,  forth- 
with, and  previous  thereto,  by  proclamation,  com- 
mand the  insurgents  to  disperse  and  retire  peaceably 
to  their  respective  abodes,  within  a  limited  time." 
But  does  this  affirm,  does  it  necessarily  even  imply, 
that  they,  after  the  dispersion  and  retiring,  are  not  to 
be  used  for  the  purpose  for  which  they  are  authorized 
to  be  called  forth,  that  is,  "to  cause  the  laws  to  be 
duly  executed,"  to  countenance  by  their  presence, 
and,  in  case  of  further  resistance,  to  protect  and  sup- 
port by  their  strength,  the  respective  civil  officers 
in  the  execution  of  their  several  duties,  whether  for 
bringing  delinquents  to  punishment,  or  otherwise  for 
giving  effect  to  the  laws  ?     May  not  the  injunction  of 
this  section  be  regarded  as  a  merely  humane  and 
prudent  precaution,  to  distinguish,  previous  to  the 
actual  application  of  force,  a  hasty  tumult  from  a 
deliberate  insurrection?    to  give  an  opportunity  for 
those   who   may  be   accidentally   or   inadvertently 
mingled  in  a  tumult  or  disorderly  rising,  to  separate 
and  withdraw  from  those  who  are  designedly  and 
deliberately  actors?  to  prevent,  if  possible,  bloodshed 
in  a  conflict  of  arms,  and,  if  this  cannot  be  done,  to 
render  the  necessity  of  it  palpable,  by  a  premonition 
to  the  insurgents  to  disperse  and  go  home?     And  are 
not  all  these  objects  compatible  with  the  further 
employment  of  the  militia  for  the  ulterior  purpose 
of  causing  the  laws  to  be  executed  in  the  way  which 
has  been  mentioned?     If  they  present  a  rational  end 
for  the  proviso,  without  defeating  the  main  design 
of  the  antecedent  provision,  it  is  clear  they  ought 
to  Umit  the  sense  of  the  former,  and  exclude  a  con- 


Hamilton  to  Washington  44 1 

stniction  which  must  make  the  principal  provision 
nugatory. 

Do  not  the  rules  of  law  and  reason  unite  in  declar- 
ing that  the  different  parts  of  a  statute  shall  be  so 
construed,  as,  if  possible,  to  consist  with  each  other; 
that  a  proviso  ought  not  to  be  understood  or  allowed 
to  operate  in  a  sense  tending  to  defeat  the  principal 
clause ;  and  that  an  implication  (if,  indeed,  there  be 
any  such  implication  as  is  supposed  in  the  present 
case)  ought  not  to  overrule  an  express  provision, 
especially  at  the  sacrifice  of  the  manifest  general  intent 
of  a  law,  which,  in  the  present  case,  undoubtedly  is, 
that  the  miHtia  shall  be  called  forth  "  to  cause  the  laws 
to  be  duly  executed ' '  ? 

Though  not  very  material  to  the  merit  of  the  argu- 
ment, it  may  be  remarked,  that  the  proviso  which 
forms  the  third  section,  contemplates  merely  the  case 
of  insurrection.  If  the  combinations  described  in  the 
second  section  may  be  less  than  insurrection,  then 
the  proviso  is  not  commensurate  with  the  whole  case 
contained  in  the  second  section,  which  would  be  an 
additional  circumstance  to  prove  that  it  cannot  work 
an  effect  which  shall  be  a  substitute  for  the  main 
purpose  of  the  first  section. 

I  have  the  honor  to  be,  with  perfect  respect,  sir, 
your  excellency's  most  obedient  servant. 


HAMILTON    TO    WASHINGTON 

Philadelphia,  September  19,  1794- 

Sir: — Upon  full  reflection  I  entertain  an  opinion 
that   it   is   advisable    for    me,    on    public   grounds, 


442  Alexander  Hamilton 

considering  the  connection  between  the  immediate 
ostensible  cause  of  the  insurrection  in  the  western 
country  and  my  department,  to  go  out  upon  the 
expedition  against  the  insurgents. 

In  a  government  like  ours  it  cannot  but  have  a 
good  effect  for  the  person  who  is  understood  to  be 
the  adviser  or  proposer  of  a  measure,  which  involves 
danger  to  his  fellow-citizens,  to  partake  in  that 
danger ;  while  not  to  do  it  might  have  a  bad  effect.  I 
therefore  request  your  permission  for  the  purpose. 

My  intention  would  be  not  to  leave  this  till  about 
the  close  of  the  month,  so  as  to  reach  one  of  the 
columns  at  its  ultimate  point  of  rendezvous.  In  the 
meantime,  I  take  it  for  granted  General  Knox  will 
arrive,  and  the  arrangements  which  will  be  made 
will  leave  the  Treasury  Department  in  a  situation  to 
suffer  no  embarrassment  by  my  absence;  which, 
if  it  be  thought  necessary,  may  terminate  about  or 
shortly  after  the  meeting  of  Congress. 

With  perfect  respect  and  the  truest  attachment,  I 
have,  etc. 


PROCLAMATION 

September  25,  1794- 

By  the  President  of  the  United  States  of  America 

A   PROCLAMATION 

Whereas,  from  a  hope  that  the  combinations 
against  the  Constitution  and  the  laws  of  the  United 
States,  in  certain  of  the  western  counties  of  Pennsyl- 


Proclamation  443 

vania,  would  yield  to  time  and  reflection,  I  thought  it 
sufficient,  in  the  first  instance,  rather  to  take  measures 
for  calling  forth  the  militia  than  immediately  to 
embody  them ;  but  the  moment  is  now  come  when  the 
overtures  of  forgiveness,  with  no  other  condition 
than  a  submission  to  law,  have  been  only  partially 
accepted;  when  every  form  of  conciliation,  not  in- 
consistent with  the  being  of  government,  has  been 
adopted  without  effect;  when  the  well-disposed  in 
those  counties  are  imable  by  their  influence  and 
example  to  reclaim  the  wicked  from  their  fury,  and 
are  compelled  to  associate  in  their  own  defence; 
when  the  proffered  lenity  has  been  perversely  misin- 
terpreted into  an  apprehension  that  the  citizens  will 
march  with  reluctance;  when  the  opportunity  of 
examining  the  serious  consequences  of  a  treasonable 
opposition  has  been  employed  in  propagating  princi- 
ples of  anarchy,  endeavoring,  through  emissaries,  to 
alienate  the  friends  of  order  from  its  support,  and 
inviting  its  enemies  to  perpetrate  similar  acts  of  in- 
surrection; when  it  is  manifest  that  violence  would 
continue  to  be  exercised  upon  every  attempt  to  en- 
force the  laws;  when,  therefore,  government  is  set  at 
defiance,  the  contest  being  whether  a  small  portion  of 
the  United  States  shall  dictate  to  the  whole  Union, 
and  at  the  expense  of  those  who  desire  peace  indulge 
a  desperate  ambition.  Now,  therefore,  I,  George 
Washington,  President  of  the  United  States,  in  obedi- 
ence to  that  high  and  irresistible  duty  consigned  to 
me  by  the  Constitution,  "to  take  care  that  the  laws 
be  faithfully  executed,"  deploring  that  the  American 
name  should  be  sulhed  by  the  outrages  of  citizens  on 


444  Alexander  Hamilton 

their  own  government;  commiserating  such  as  re- 
main obstinate  from  delusion;  but  resolved,  in  per- 
fect reliance  on  that  gracious  Providence  which  so 
signally  displays  its  goodness  towards  this  country, 
to  reduce  the  refractory  to  a  due  subordination  to  the 
law,  do  hereby  declare  and  make  known  that,  with  a 
satisfaction  which  can  be  equalled  only  by  the  merits 
of  the  militia  summoned  into  service  from  the  States 
of  New  Jersey,  Pennsylvania,  Maryland,  and  Vir- 
ginia, I  have  received  intelligence  of  their  patriotic 
alacrity  in  obeying  the  call  of  the  present,  though 
painful,  yet  commanding  necessity;  that  a  force, 
which  according  to  every  reasonable  expectation  is 
adequate  to  the  exigency,  is  already  in  motion  to  the 
scene  of  disaffection;  that  those  who  have  confided, 
or  shall  -confide  in  the  protection  of  government, 
shall  meet  full  succor  under  the  standard  and  from 
the  arms  of  the  United  States;  that  those  who,  hav- 
ing offended  against  the  law,  have  since  entitled 
themselves  to  indemnity,  will  be  treated  with  the 
most  liberal  good  faith,  if  they  shall  not  have  for- 
feited their  claim  by  any  subsequent  conduct,  and 
that  instructions  are  given  accordingly.  And  I  do, 
moreover,  exhort  all  individuals,  officers,  and  bodies 
of  men,  to  contemplate  with  abhorrence  the  measures 
leading  directly  or  indirectly  to  those  crimes  which 
produce  this  resort  to  military  coercion ;  to  check,  in 
their  respective  spheres,  the  efforts  of  misguided  or 
designing  men  to  substitute  their  misrepresentations 
in  the  place  of  truth,  and  their  discontents  in  the 
place  of  stable  government ;  and  to  call  to  mind  that, 
as  the  people  of  the  United  States  have  been  per- 


Hamilton  to  Lee  445 

mitted,  under  the  Divine  favor,  in  perfect  ^eedom, 
after  solemn  deliberation  and  in  an  enlightened  age, 
to  elect  their  own  government,  so  will  their  gratitude 
for  this  inestimable  blessing  be  best  distinguished  by 
firm  exertions  to  maintain  the  Constitution  and  the 
laws.  And,  lastly,  I  again  warn  all  persons  whom-  . 
soever  and  wheresoever,  not  to  abet,  aid,  or  comfort 
the  insurgents  aforesaid,  as  they  will  answer  the  con- 
trary at  their  peril ;  and  I  do  also  require  all  officers 
and  other  citizens,  according  to  their  several  duties, 
as  far  as  may  be  in  their  power,  to  bring  under  the 
cognizance  of  the  law  all  offenders  in  the  premises. 

In  testimony  whereof  I  have  caused  the  seal  of  the 
United  States  of  America  to  be  affixed  to  these 
presents,  and  signed  the  same  with  my  hand. 

[L.  S.]  Done  at  the  city  of  Philadelphia,  the  twenty- 
fifth  day  of  September,  one  thousand  seven 
hundred  and  ninety-four,  of  the  independence 
of  the  United  States  of  America  the  nineteenth  ' 

George  Washington. 
By  the  President, 

Edmund  Randolph. 


Hamilton  to  lee 

Bedford,  October  20,  1794. 

Sir: — I  have  it  in  special  instruction  from  the 
President  of  the  United  States,  now  at  this  place,  to 
convey  to  you  the  following  instructions  for  the 
general  direction  of  your  conduct  in  the  command  of 
the  militia  army,  with  which  you  are  charged. 


44^  Alexander  Hamilton 

The  objects  for  which  the  militia  have  been  called 
forth  are: 

I  St.  To  suppress  the  combinations  which  exist  in 
some  of  the  western  counties  in  Pennsylvania,  in 
opposition  to  the  laws  laying  duties  upon  spirits 
distilled  within  the  United  States,  and  upon  stills. 

2d.  To  cause  the  laws  to  be  executed. 

These  objects  are  to  be  effected  in  two  ways: 

1.  By  military  force. 

2 .  By  judiciary  process  and  other  civil  proceedings. 
The  objects  of  the  military  force  are  twofold: 

1.  To  overcome  any  armed  opposition  which  may 
exist. 

2.  To  countenance  and  support  the  civil  officers  in 
the  means  of  executing  the  laws. 

With  a  view  to  the  first  of  these  two  objects,  you 
will  proceed,  as  speedily  as  may  be,  with  the  army 
under  your  command,  into  the  insurgent  counties,  to 
attack  and,  as  far  as  shall  be  in  your  power,  subdue 
all  persons  whom  you  may  find  in  arms  in  opposition 
to  the  laws  above  mentioned.  You  will  march  your 
army  in  two  columns,  from  the  places  where  they 
are  now  assembled,  by  the  most  convenient  routes, 
having  regard  to  the  nature  of  the  roads,  the  con- 
venience of  supply,  and  the  facility  of  co-operation 
and  union ;  and  bearing  in  mind  that  you  ought  to 
act,  till  the  contrary  shall  be  fully  developed,  on  the 
general  principle  of  having  to  contend  with  the  whole 
force  of  the  coimties  of  Fayette,  Westmoreland, 
Washington,  and  Alleghany,  and  of  that  part  of 
Bedford  which  lies  west  of  the  town  of  Bedford ;  and 
that  you  are  to  put  as  little  as  possible  to  hazard. 


Hamilton  to  Lee  447 

The  approximation,  therefore,  of  your  columns  is  to 
be  sought,  and  the  subdivision  of  them,  so  as  to  place 
the  parts  out  of  mutual  supporting  distance,  to  be 
avoided  as  far  as  local  circumstances  will  permit, 
Parkinson's  Ferry  appears  to  be  a  proper  point 
towards  which  to  direct  the  march  of  the  columns  for 
the  purpose  of  ulterior  measures. 

When  arrived  within  the  insurgent  country,  if  an 
armed  opposition  appear,  it  may  be  proper  to  publish 
a  proclamation,  inviting  all  good  citizens,  friends  of 
the  Constitution  and  laws,  to  join  the  standard  of  the 
United  States.  If  no  armed  opposition  exist,  it  may 
still  be  proper  to  publish  a  proclamation,  exhorting 
to  a  peaceable  and  dutiful  demeanor,  and  giving 
assurances  of  performing,  with  good  faith  and  liber- 
ality, whatsoever  may  have  been  promised  by  the 
commissioners  to  those  who  have  complied  with  the 
conditions  prescribed  by  them,  and  who  have  not  for- 
feited their  title  by  subsequent  misconduct. 

Of  those  persons  in  arms,  if  any,  whom  you  may 
make  prisoners,  leaders,  including  all  persons  in  com- 
mand, are  to  be  delivered  up  to  the  civil  magistrate ; 
the  rest  to  be  disarmed,  admonished,  and  sent  home 
(except  such  as  may  have  been  particularly  violent, 
and  also  influential),  causing  their  own  recognizance 
for  their  good  behavior  to  be  taken,  in  the  cases  in 
which  it  may  be  deemed  expedient. 

With  a  view  to  the  second  point,  namely,  "the 
countenance  and  support  of  the  civil  officers  in  the 
means  of  executing  the  laws,"  you  will  make  such 
dispositions  as  shall  appear  proper  to  countenance 
and  protect,  and,  if  necessary,  and  required  by  them, 


448  Alexander  Hamilton 

to  support  and  aid  the  civil  ojfficers  in  the  execution 
of  their  respective  duties ;  for  bringing  offenders  and 
delinquents  to  justice ;  for  seizing  the  stills  of  delin- 
quent distillers,  as  far  as  the  same  shall  be  deemed 
eligible  by  the  supervisor  of  the  revenue,  or  chief 
officer  of  inspection ;  and  also  for  conveying  to  places 
of  safe  custody  such  persons  as  may  be  apprehended 
and  not  admitted  to  bail. 

The  objects  of  judiciary  process,  and  other  civil 
proceedings,  will  be : 

1.  To  bring  offenders  to  justice. 

2.  To  enforce  penalties  on  delinquent  distillers  by 
suit. 

3.  To  enforce  the  penalty  of  forfeiture  on  the  same 
persons,  by  the  seizure  of  their  stills  and  spirits. 

The  better  to  effect  these  purposes,  the  judge  of 
the  district,  Richard  Peters,  Esquire,  and  the  attorney 
of  the  district,  William  Rawle,  Esquire,  accompany 
the  army. 

You  are  aware  that  the  judge  cannot  be  controlled 
in  his  functions;  but  I  count  on  his  disposition  to 
co-operate  in  such  a  general  plan  as  shall  appear  to 
you  consistent  with  the  policy  of  the  case.  But  your 
method  of  giving  a  direction  to  legal  proceedings, 
according  to  your  general  plan,  will  be  by  instruction 
to  the  district  attorney. 

He  ought  particularly  to  be  instructed  (with  due 
regard  to  time  and  circumstances):  ist.  To  procure 
to  be  arrested  all  influential  actors  in  riots  and  un- 
lawful assemblies  relating  to  the  insurrection,  and 
combinations  to  resist  the  laws,  or  having  for  object 
to  abet  that  insurrection  and  those  combinations,  and 


Hamilton  to  Lee  449 

who  shall  not  have  complied  with  the  terms  offered  by 
the  commissioners,  or  manifested  their  repentance  in 
some  other  way  which  you  may  deem  satisfactory. 
2d.  To  cause  process  to  issue  for  enforcing  penalties 
on  delinquent  distillers.  3d.  To  cause  offenders 
who  may  be  arrested,  to  be  conveyed  to  jails  where 
there  will  be  no  danger  of  rescue:  those  for  misde- 
meanors, to  the  jails  of  York  and  Lancaster;  those 
for  capital  offences,  to  the  jail  of  Philadelphia,  as 
more  secure  than  the  others.  4th.  To  prosecute 
indictable  offences  in  the  courts  of  the  United  States ; 
those  for  penalties  on  delinquents,  under  the  laws 
before  mentioned,  in  the  courts  of  Pennsylvania. 

As  a  guide  in  the  case,  the  district  attorney  has 
with  him  a  list  of  the  persons  who  have  availed  them- 
selves of  the  offers  of  the  commissioners  on  the  day 
appointed. 

The  seizure  of  stills  is  the  province  of  the  supervisor 
and  other  officers  of  inspection.  It  is  difficult  to  chalk 
out  the  precise  line  concerning  it.  There  are  opposite 
considerations  which  will  require  to  be  nicely  bal- 
anced, and  which  must  be  judged  of  by  those  officers 
on  the  spot.  It  may  be  found  useful  to  confine  the 
seizures  to  stills  of  the  most  leading  and  refractory 
distillers.  It  may  be  advisable  to  extend  them  far 
in  the  most  refractory  county. 

When  the  insurrection  is  subdued,  and  the  requi- 
site means  have  been  put  in  execution  to  secure 
obedience  to  the  laws,  so  as  to  render  it  proper  for  the 
army  to  retire  (an  event  which  you  will  accelerate  as 
much  as  shall  be  consistent  with  the  object),  you  will 
endeavor  to  make  an  arrangement  for  detaching  such 

VOL.  VI. — 28. 


450  Alexander  Hamilton 

a  force  as  you  deem  adequate,  to  be  stationed  within 
the  disaffected  country,  in  such  a  manner  as  best  to 
afford  protection  to  well-disposed  citizens  and  to 
the  officers  of  the  revenue,  and  to  repress,  by  their 
presence,  the  spirit  of  riot  and  opposition  to  the  laws. 

But  before  you  withdraw  the  army,  you  will  prom- 
ise, on  behalf  of  the  President,  a  general  pardon  to  all 
such  as  shall  not  have  been  arrested,  with  such  excep- 
tions as  you  shall  deem  proper.  The  promise  must 
be  so  guarded  as  not  to  affect  pecuniary  claims  under 
the  revenue  laws.  In  this  measure,  it  is  advisable 
there  should  be  a  co-operation  with  the  Governor  of 
Pennsylvania. 

On  the  return  of  the  army  you  will  adopt  some  con- 
venient and  certain  arrangement  for  restoring  to  the 
public  magazines,  the  arms,  accoutrements,  military 
stores,  tents,  and  other  articles  of  camp  equipage  and 
intrenching  tools,  which  have  been  furnished,  and 
shall  not  have  been  consumed  or  lost. 

You  are  to  exert  yourselves  by  all  possible  means  to 
preserve  discipline  among  the  troops,  particularly  a 
scrupulous  regard  to  the  rights  of  persons  and  prop- 
erty, and  to  a  respect  for  the  authority  of  the  civil 
magistrate;  taking  especial  care  to  inculcate  and 
cause  to  be  observed  this  principle:  that  the  duties 
of  the  army  are  confined  to  the  attacking  and  sub- 
duing of  armed  opponents  of  the  laws,  and  to  the 
supporting  and  aiding  of  the  civil  officers  in  the 
execution  of  their  functions. 

It  has  been  settled  that  the  Governor  of  Pennsyl- 
vania will  be  second,  the  Governor  of  New  Jersey 
third  in  command,  and  that  the  troops  of  the  several 


Hamilton  to  Washington  45  ^ 

States  in  line,  on  the  march  and  upon  detachment, 
are  to  be  posted  according  to  the  rule  which  prevailed 
in  the  army  dtiring  the  late  war — namely,  in  moving 
towards  the  sea-board,  the  most  southern  troops  will 
take  the  right ;  in  moving  westward,  the  most  north- 
em  will  take  the  right. 

These  general  instructions,  however,  are  to  be  con- 
sidered as  liable  to  such  alterations  and  deviations  in 
the  detail,  as  from  local  and  other  causes  may  be  found 
necessary,  the  better  to  effect  the  main  object  upon 
the  general  principles  which  have  been  indicated. 

With  great  respect,  I  have  the  honor  to  be,  sir, 
Your  obedient  servant, 

Alexander  Hamilton. 

To  Major-General  Lee. 


HAMILTON   TO    WASHINGTON 

Berlin,  3d  day's  march,  October  25,  1794. 
7  o'clock  in  the  evening. 

Sir: — We  arrived  here  this  afternoon.  A  very 
heavy  rain  has  rendered  the  march  extremely  ardu- 
ous and  distressing;  but  we  find  here  much  better 
shelter  than  was  foreseen.  Our  baggage  and  stores 
are  just  beginning  to  arrive.  The  Jersey  line  and 
brigade  of  cavalry  took  the  right-hand  road,  about 
five  miles  back. 

To-morrow  we  shall  continue  our  march,  and  I 
hope  that  we  shall  conform  to  the  general  arrange- 
ment, though  we  must  shorten  to-morrow's  march, 
and  lengthen  that  of  the  day  following. 

The  troops  have  shown  all  the  patience  that  could 


452  Alexander  Hamilton 

have  been  expected.  In  short,  I  perceive  nothing 
amiss. 

Bradford  and  Fulton,  it  is  said,  are  gone  off.  By 
tracing  time,  it  is  not  probable  they  were  at  all  in- 
fluenced by  the  arrests  of  Husbands  and  Phelson. 

With  the  highest  respect,  and  truest  attachment,  I 
have  the  honor  to  be,  etc. 


HAMILTON   TO    WASHINGTON 

Berlin,  October  26,  1794- 

Sir: — The  very  late  arrival  of  the  wagons,  the  in- 
jury to  a  number  of  them,  and  the  dispersed  situa- 
tion of  the  troops,  render  it  impracticable  to  leave 
this  place  to-day,  as  was  intended ;  but  the  baggage 
and  stores  go  forward,  and  to-morrow  the  troops 
must  move.  I  apprehend  no  material  derangement 
of  the  general  plan.  An  express  has  been  de- 
spatched to  Governor  Lee,  advising  him  of  the  state 
of  things  here. 

Nothing  from  the  western  country. 

With  the  greatest  respect  and  attachment,  etc. 


HAMILTON    TO    WASHINGTON 

Jones'  Mill,  October  29,  1794. 

Sir: — The  light  corps,  with  the  Jersey  infantry 
and  brigade  of  cavalry,  are  at  Indian  Creek,  in  Leg- 
noier  Valley,  where  they  continue  till  this  division 
gets  up,  which  will  be  this  evening,  as  the  march  will 
commence  in  an  hour.  This  division  had,  I  believe, 
the  worst  road,  and  was,  besides,  encumbered  with 
all  the  spare  stores,  which  has  thrown  it  a  day's 


Hamilton  to  Washington  453 

march  behind  the  other.  But  by  a  letter  received 
yesterday  from  Governor  Lee,  it  appears  that  the 
right  wing  is  fully  in  measure  with  the  left.  All  is 
essentially  well  with  both  wings,  and  the  troops  con- 
tinue to  show  as  much  good  humor  as  could  possibly 
have  been  expected. 

The  meeting  at  Parkinson's  Ferry  ended,  we  are 
told,  in  a  new  appointment  of  commissioners  to  de- 
precate the  advance  of  the  army,  and  in  new  expres- 
sions of  pacific  intentions.  But  there  is  nothing 
which  can  occasion  a  question  about  the  propriety  of 
the  army's  proceeding  to  its  ultimate  destination. 
No  appearances  whatever  of  opposition  occur. 

You  desired  that  a  table  of  the  routes  of  the  left 
wing  might  be  sent  you.  None  was  left  with  any 
officer  of  this  wing. 

With  the  truest  respect  and  attachment, 

I  have  the  honor  to  be,  sir. 

Your  obd't  serv't,  etc. 

P.  S. — It  is  hoped  that  the  original  papers  have 
been  forwarded,  as  the  list  furnished  from  the  Sec- 
retary of  State's  office  would  be  a  deceptive  guide. 
Memoranda  of  the  Attorney-General,  brought  by 
this  express,  will  greatly  aid,  perhaps  sufficiently; 
but  the  originals  would  be  best. 


HAMILTON    TO    WASHINGTON 

Camp,  li  miles  beyond  Cherry's  Mill, 
October  31,  1794. 

Sir: — The  New  Jersey  infantry  and  brigade  of 
cavalry  are  at  this  place.     The  Pennsylvania  in- 


454  Alexander  Hamilton 

fan  try  will  be  here  this  evening.  The  light  corps 
is  advanced  about  two  miles.  No  official  account 
since  that  heretofore  communicated  has  come  from 
the  left  wing.  But  a  person  who  came  from  Union- 
town,  yesterday,  informs  that  Morgan,  with  the 
advance,  was  there;  the  main  body  about  twenty 
miles  behind.  I  propose  in  about  an  hour  to  set  out 
for  Uniontown. 

All  announces  trepidation  and  submission.  The 
new  commissioners  have  been  with  Governor  Mifflin, 
charged  with  new  declarations  by  townships,  bat- 
talions of  militia,  etc.,  of  a  disposition  to  obey  the 
laws.  The  impression  is  certainly  for  the  present 
strong,  but  it  will  be  stronger  and  more  permanent 
by  what  is  to  follow.  It  does  not  appear  that  any 
great  number  have  fled. 

With  the  truest  respect  and  attachment,  I  have 
the  honor  to  be,  etc. 


HAMILTON    TO    WASHINGTON 

Cherry's  Mill,  November  3,  1794. 

Sir: — I  have  returned  to  this  place,  from  Union- 
town.  A  letter  from  Governor  Lee,  which  goes  with 
this,  probably  informs  you  of  the  plan  of  future 
operations ;  but,  lest  it  should  not,  I  will  briefly  state 
it.  The  right  wing  is  to  take  a  position  with  its 
left  towards  Budd's  Ferry,  and  its  right  towards 
Greensburgh.  The  left  wing  is  to  be  posted  be- 
tween the  Youghiogheny  and  Monongahela,  with  its 
left  towards  the  latter,  and  its  right  towards  the 
former.     Morgan,  with  his  command,  including  the 


Hamilton  to  Washington  455 

whole  of  the  light  corps,  and  perhaps  a  part  of  the 
brigade  of  cavalry,  will  go  into  Washington  County. 
It  is  not  unlikely  that,  in  the  course  of  the  business, 
a  part  of  the  troops  will  take  a  circuit  by  Pittsburgh ; 
for  the  more  places  they  can  appear  in,  without  loss 
of  time,  the  better. 

In  adopting  this  plan,  the  circumstance  of  much 
delay  in  crossing  and  recrossing  waters  has  weighed 
powerfully;  and  the  quiescent  state  of  the  country 
renders  the  plan  entirely  safe.  Boats,  however, 
will  be  collected  on  both  waters,  to  facilitate  mutual 
communication  and  support. 

I  received  the  letter  you  were  so  good  as  to  write 
me,  on  the  road,  with  those  that  accompanied  it. 

The  rainy  weather  continues,  with  short  intervals 
of  clear.  The  left  wing  has  suffered  from  sickness, 
but  the  right  has  been  and  continues  remarkably 
healthy.  The  troops  also  continue  to  behave  well. 
A  court-martial  sits  to-day,  to  try  one  or  two  riotous 
fellows,  and  one  or  two  marauders.  The  appoint- 
ment of  it  has  checked  the  licentious  corps. 

With  the  truest  respect  and  attachment, 

I  have  the  honor  to  be,  etc. 

P.  S. — Not  many  fugitives  from  justice  as  yet. 


HAMILTON    TO    WASHINGTON 


Head-Quarters,  Roshaven  Township, 
November  8,  1794. 


Sir: — Morgan,  with  the  whole  of  the  Hght  troops, 
has  crossed  into  Washington  County.     Dispositions 


45^  Alexander  Hamilton 

of  different  corps  are  making  to  strike  at  once  into 
the  most  disaffected  scenes. 

It  appears  evident,  that  to  wait  for  preliminary 
investigations  to  apprehend  the  guilty  upon  process, 
would  defeat  the  object,  and  produce  delay  beyond 
the  patience  of  the  troops,  or  the  time  allowed  by 
the  season  for  operation.  With  the  advice  of  the 
district  attorney,  the  Commander-in-Chief  has  con- 
cluded to  take  hold  of  all  who  are  worth  the  trouble 
in  a  more  summary  way — that  is,  by  the  military 
arm,  and  then  to  deliver  them  over  to  the  disposi- 
tion of  the  judiciary.  In  the  meantime,  all  possible 
means  are  using  to  obtain  evidence,  and  accom- 
plices will  be  turned  against  the  others. 

This  step  is  directed  by  that  principle  of  common 
law  that  every  man  may  of  right  apprehend  a  traitor. 

I  hope  good  objects  will  be  found  notwithstanding 
many  have  gone  off.  It  is  proved  that  Breckenridge 
did  not  subscribe  till  after  the  day,  and  that  he  has 
been  the  worst  of  all  scoundrels.  The  only  question 
is  how  far  the  candor  of  the  government,  owing  to 
the  use  made  of  him  by  the  commissioners,  might  be 
compromised. 

The  Commander-in-Chief  is  taking  measures,  with 
a  good  prospect  of  success,  to  engage  a  competent 
corps  to  be  stationed  in  the  country — a  regiment  of 
infantry  and  four  troops  of  horse.  The  plan  is  to 
engage  them  for  nine  months,  but  a  suit  of  clothes 
must  be  allowed. 

Being  not  very  well,  I  am  obliged  to  be  brief. 

With  the  truest  respect  and  attachment,  I  have 
the  honor  to  be,  sir,  etc. 


Hamilton  to  Washington  457 

HAMILTON    TO    WASHINGTON 

RosHAVEN  Township,  November  ii,  1794. 

Sir: — I  have  the  honor  of  your  note  of  the  5th 
instant. 

To-morrow  the  measures  for  apprehending  per- 
sons and  seizing  stills  will  be  carried  into  effect.  I 
hope  there  will  be  found  characters  fit  for  examples, 
and  who  can  be  made  so.  Colonel  Hamilton,  sheriff, 
is  now  at  our  quarters — come  to  make  a  voluntary- 
surrender  of  himself.  It  is  not  yet  certain  how 
much  can  be  proved  against  him;  but  otherwise  he 
is  a  very  fit  subject. 

I  observe  what  Mr.  Bache  is  about.  But  I  am 
the  more  indifferent  to  it,  as  experience  has  proved 
to  me  (however  it  may  be  in  ways  which  I  could  not 
allege  in  my  justification),  that  my  presence  in  this 
quarter  was  in  several  respects  not  useless.  And  it 
is  long  since  I  have  learned  to  hold  popular  opinion 
of  no  value.  I  hope  to  derive  from  the  esteem  of  the 
discerning,  and  an  internal  consciousness  of  zealous 
endeavors  for  the  public  good,  the  reward  of  those 
endeavors. 

I  propose,  if  no  urgent  reason  to  the  contrary 
occurs,  to  leave  this  country  for  Philadelphia  about 
the  1 5th  instant,  and  I  shall  lose  no  time  in  reaching 
it.  Meanwhile  I  trust  the  business  of  my  depart- 
ment will  suffer  no  injury  from  my  absence. 

Before  I  go  I  will  try  to  see  that  a  good  arrange- 
ment is  made  with  regard  to  arms,  stores,  etc. 

With  true  respect  and  affectionate  attachment,  etc. 

p.   S. — Poor  Lenox  has  been  on  the  torture  so 


45  S  Alexander  Hamilton 

long,  and  has  lately  received  such  unpleasant  ac- 
counts, that  we  have  all  advised  him  to  return  to 
Philadelphia.  The  substitutes  devised  will  guard 
against  injury  to  the  service.  Intelligence  having 
been  received  of  some  of  the  insurgents  having  em- 
bodied about  Beaver  Creek,  a  plan  is  laid  provision- 
ally for  giving  them  a  stroke,  the  execution  of  which 
will  be  speedily  attempted,  if  nothing  to  the  con- 
trary occurs. 


HAMILTON    TO    WASHINGTON 

Town  of  Washington,  November  15,  1794. 

Sir: — I  had  the  honor  of  writing  to  you  three  days 
since  by  Mr.  Vaughan.  Nothing  material  has  since 
occurred,  except  that  a  number  of  persons  have  been 
apprehended.  Twenty  of  them  are  in  confinement 
at  this  place ;  others  have  not  yet  arrived.  Several 
of  those  in  confinement  are  fit  subjects  for  examples, 
and  it  is  probable  from  the  evidence  already  col- 
lected, and  what  is  expected,  that  enough  for  that 
purpose  will  be  proved.  The  most  conspicuous  of 
these  for  character  or  crime,  are  understood  to  be 
the  Rev.  John  Corbly,  Colonel  Crawford,  Colonel 
John  Hamilton,  Thomas  Sedgwick,  David  Lock, 
John  Munn,  John  Laugher y. 

The  evidence  has  not  yet  fixed  the  situation  of 
Colonel  Hamilton. 

A  warrant  has  been  sent  after  Colonel  Gaddis,  of 
Fayette,  another  very  fit  subject;  but,  from  the 
lapse  of  time,  I  fear  he  has  escaped. 

The  bad  spirit  is  evidently  not  subdued.     Informa- 


Hamilton  to  Washington  459 

tion  is  just  received  that  within  the  last  three  days 
a  pole  has  been  erected  about  sixteen  and  a  half 
miles  from  this  place,  on  the  road  to  Muddy  Creek; 
measures  are  taken  on  the  subject. 

But  it  is  more  and  more  apparent,  that  for  some 
considerable  time  to  come  a  military  force  in  this 
country  is  indispensable.  I  presume  the  temporary 
one  meditated  will  be  accomplished. 

To-morrow  I  leave  this  place  for  Pittsburgh.  If 
nothing  extraordinary  happens,  I  shall  leave  that 
place  for  Philadelphia  on  the  19th,  By  that  time 
every  thing  will  have  taken  its  shape. 

With  true  respect  and  affectionate  attachment,  I 
have  the  honor  to  be,  etc. 


HAMILTON    TO    WASHINGTON 

Pittsburgh,  November  17,  1794. 

Sir: — I  wrote  to  you  two  days  since  by  express 
from  Washington.  The  judiciary  with  myself  ar- 
rived here  last  evening.  The  list  of  prisoners  has 
been  very  considerably  increased,  probably  to  the 
amount  of  one  hundred  and  fifty,  but  it  is  not  yet 
so  digested  as  to  be  forwarded.  Governor  Lee  just 
informs  me,  that  he  has  received  a  letter  from 
Marietta,  advising  him  of  the  apprehending  of  John 
Holcroff,  the  reputed  Tom  the  Tinker,  and  one 
Wright,  a  notorious  offender. 

Subsequent  intelligence  shows  that  there  is  no 
regular  assemblage  of  the  fugitives  where  it  is  sup- 
posed. There  are  only  small  vagrant  parties  in  that 
quarter,  affording  no  point  of  attack. 


460  Alexander  Hamilton 

Every  thing  is  urging  on  for  the  return  of  the 
troops.  The  engagement  of  a  corps  to  remain  here 
goes  on,  it  is  said,  well. 

With  perfect  respect  and  true  attachment,  I  have 
the  honor  to  be,  etc. 


HAMILTON    TO    WASHINGTON 

Pittsburgh,  November  19,  1794, 

7  o'clock  in  the  morning. 

Sir: — I  wrote  you  the  day  before  yesterday,  by 
express.  Nothing  material  remains  to  be  said.  The 
army  is,  generally,  in  motion  homeward — the  Vir- 
ginia line,  by  way  of  Morgantown,  to  Winchester, 
etc. ;  the  Maryland  line,  by  way  of  Uniontown,  to 
Williamsport,  etc. ;  the  Pennsylvania  and  New  Jer- 
sey, by  the  old  Pennsylvania  route,  to  Bedford.  The 
judiciary  is  industrious  in  prosecuting  the  examina- 
tion of  prisoners — among  whom  there  is  a  sufficient 
number  of  proper  ones  for  examples,  and  with  suf- 
ficient evidence.     Col.  Gaddis  has  been  brought  in. 

With  perfect  respect  and  true  attachment,  I  have 
the  honor,  etc. 

P.  S. — In  five  minutes  I  set  out  for  Philadelphia. 


MILITARY  PAPERS 


46Z 


MILITARY  PAPERS 


MILITARY    PEACE    ESTABLISHMENT  ' 

1783- 

BEFORE  any  plan  can,  with  propriety,  be  deter- 
mined or  a  military  peace  establishment,  it  is 
necessary  to  ascertain  what  powers  exist,  for  that 
purpose,  in  the  Confederation. 

In  the  fifth  clause  of  the  ninth  article,  the  United 
States,  in  Congress  assembled,  are  empowered  (with- 
out any  mention  of  peace  or  war)  "to  build  and 
equip  a  navy,  to  agree  upon  the  number  of  land 
forces,  and  to  make  requisitions  from  each  State 
for  its  quota,  in  proportion  to  the  number  of  white 
inhabitants  in  each  State;  which  requisition  shall 
be  binding;  and  thereupon,  the  Legislature  of  each 
State  shall  appoint  the  regimental  officers,  raise  the 
men,  and  clothe,  arm,  and  equip  them,  in  a  soldier- 
like manner,  at  the  expense  of  the  United  States; 
and  the  officers  and  men,  so  clothed,  armed,  and 
equipped,  shall  march  to  the  place  appointed,  and 
within  the  time  agreed  on  by  the  United  States  in 
Congress  assembled. 

By   the  fourth   clause   in   the   same  article,   the 

I  A  report  to  the  Congress  of  the  Confederation,  with  a  plan  not  likely 
to  be  adopted,  as  indeed  it  was  not. 

463 


464  Alexander  Hamilton 

United  States  are  empowered  "  to  appoint  all  officers 
of  the  land  forces  in  the  service  of  the  United  States, 
excepting  regimental  officers;  to  appoint  all  officers 
of  the  naval  forces;  and  to  commission  all  officers 
whatever,  in  the  service  of  the  United  States,  making 
rules  for  the  government  and  regulation  of  the  said 
land  and  naval  forces,  and  directing  their  operations. " 

By  the  fourth  clause  of  the  sixth  article,  it  is  de- 
clared, that  "no  vessels  of  war  shall  be  kept  up  by 
any  State  in  time  of  peace,  except  such  number 
only  as  shall  be  deemed  necessary  by  the  United 
States,  in  Congress  assembled,  for  the  defence  of 
such  State  or  its  trade ;  nor  shall  any  body  of  forces 
be  kept  up  by  any  State,  in  time  of  peace,  except 
such  number  only  as  in  the  judgment  of  the  United 
States,  in  Congress  assembled,  shall  be  deemed 
requisite  to  garrison  the  forts  necessary  for  the 
defence  of  such  State." 

The  committee  apprehend,  that  the  terms  of  the 
last  clause,  being  rather  permissive  than  directory, 
do  not  interfere  with  the  positive  power  vested  in 
the  United  States  by  the  preceding  clauses ;  and  that 
they  have  a  discretion  in  the  choice  of  the  mode  of 
providing  for  the  general  safety  in  time  of  peace  as 
well  as  in  time  of  war. 

If  this  interpretation  is  just,  the  committee  are  of 
opinion  there  are  conclusive  reasons  in  favor  of  a 
continental,  in  preference  to  separate  State  estab- 
lishments; and  that,  at  all  events,  there  must  be 
some  continental  establishment. 

Firstly. — There  are  objects  which  cannot  fall 
within  the  purview  of  separate  State  establishments : 


Military  Peace  Establishment  4^5 

posts  within  districts,  the  jurisdiction  and  property 
of  which  are  covered  by  opposite  and  interfering 
claims,  the  possession  of  which  for  the  security  of  the 
western  country  is  of  great  importance,  and  for 
which  provision  cannot  with  propriety  be  made  by 
any  particular  State;  a  tract  of  territory  ceded  to 
the  United  States  by  the  late  treaty  with  Great 
Britain,  which  is  not  within  the  original  claims  of 
any  of  the  States,  the  safety  of  which  must  depend 
on  continental  provisions;  the  navigation  of  the 
Mississippi,  in  which  all  the  States  are  more  or  less 
interested,  and  the  security  of  which  ought  to  be 
provided  for  by  their  joint  forces,  as  well  naval  as 
land;  the  fisheries,  the  rights  respecting  which  are 
in  no  particular  States,  but  in  the  Union  at  large, 
and  therefore  call  for  the  protection  of  the  Union; 
the  general  commerce  of  the  United  States,  the 
rights  of  which,  founded  upon  the  laws  of  nations 
and  the  treaties  of  the  United  States  with  foreign 
countries,  also  claim  the  joint  protection  of  the  Con- 
federacy, and  cannot,  with  propriety,  be  left  to  the 
care  of  State  establishments.  A  distinction  that,  in 
time  of  war  it  is  to  be  protected  by  the  Union,  in 
time  of  peace  by  each  State,  would  involve,  be- 
sides other  inconveniences,  this  capital  one:  That 
the  United  States,  when  a  Federal  navy  should  be- 
come necessary  to  assert  the  Federal  rights,  would  be 
obliged  to  begin  to  create,  at  the  moment  they  would 
have  occasion  to  employ,  a  fleet. 

Secondly. — The  fortifications  to  be  established  for 
the  security  of  the  States  ought  to  be  constructed 
with  relation  to  each  other  on  some  general  and 


VOL.  VI. — 30. 


4^6  Alexander  Hamilton 

well-digested  plan;  and  the  provisions  for  their  de- 
fence should  be  made  on  the  same  principles.  This 
is  equally  important  in  the  double  view  of  safety  and 
economy.  If  this  is  not  done  under  the  direction  of 
the  United  States,  each  State  following  a  disjointed 

■  and  partial  plan,  it  will  be  found  that  the  posts  will 
have  no  mutual  dependence  or  support;  that  they 
will  be  improperly  distributed,  and  more  numerous' 
than  is  necessary,  as  well  as  less  efficacious.  Hence 
they  will  be  more  easily  reduced;  and  there  will 
be  a  greater  expense,  both  in  the  construction  and 
defence. 

Thirdly. — It  happens  that  from  local  circum- 
stances particular  States,  if  left  to  take  care  of  their 
own  defence,  would  be  in  possession  of  the  chief  part 
of  the  standing  forces  and  of  the  principal  fortified 
places  of  the  Union;  a  circumstance  inconvenient 
on  various  accounts.  It  tends  to  impose  a  heavy 
exclusive  burthen  on  them  in  a  matter  the  benefit  of 
which  will  be  immediately  shared  by  their  neigh- 
bors, and,  ultimately,  by  the  Union  in  general.  It 
trusts  the  care  of  the  safety  of  the  whole  to  a  part, 
which  will  naturally  be  unwilling,  as  well  as  unable, 
to  make  such  effectual  provisions  at  its  particular 

,  expense  as  the  common  welfare  requires.  A  single 
State,  from  its  local  situation,  will,  in  a  great  degree, 

^  keep  the  keys  of  the  United  States.  A  considerable 
force  in  the  hands  of  a  few  States  may  have  an 
unfriendly  aspect  on  the  mutual  confidence  and 
harmony  which  ought  carefully  to  be  maintained 
between  the  whole. 

Fourthly. — It  is  probable  that  a  continental  pro- 


Military  Peace  Establishment  467 

vision  of  the  forces,  which  will  be  necessary  to  be 
kept  up,  will  be  made  upon  a  more  systematic  and 
economical  plan  than  a  provision  by  the  States 
separately;  especially  as  it  will  be  of  great  import- 
ance that,  as  soon  as  the  situation  of  affairs  will 
permit,  public  manufactories  of  arms,  powder,  etc., 
should  be  established;  and  a  part  of  the  troops, 
employed  in  this  way,  will  furnish  those  necessary 
articles  to  the  United  Sates,  and  defray  a  consider- 
able part  of  the  expense  of  supporting  themselves. 

Fifthly. — There  must  be  a  corps  of  artillery  and 
engineers,  which,  being  a  scientific  corps,  and 
requiring  institutions  for  the  instruction  and  forma- 
tion of  the  officers,  cannot  exist  upon  separate  estab- 
lishments without  enormous  expense. 

The  committee,  upon  these  principles,  submit  the 
following 

PLAN 

The  Military  peace  establishment  of  the  United  States 
to  consist  of  four  regiments  of  infantry,  one  regiment  of 
dragoons,  one  regiment  of  artillery  incorporated  in  a 
corps  of  engineers,  with  the  denomination  of  the  Corps 
of  Engineers. 

Each  regiment  of  infantry  to  consist,  when  complete,  of 
two  battalions;  each  battalion  of  four  companies;  and 
each  company  of  one  himdred  and  twenty-eight  rank  and 
file,  with  the  following  commissioned  and  non-commis- 
sioned officers: 

One  colonel;  two  majors,  one  to  each  battalion;  eight 
captains,  one  to  each  company ;  nineteen  lieutenants,  two 
to  each  company ;  or  twenty-one  lieutenants,  eleven  first 
and  ten  second  lieutenants,  including  one  paymaster,  one 


468  Alexander  Hamilton 

quartermaster,  one  adjutant,  and  two  ensigns,  one  ensign 
to  each  battalion;  chaplain,  surgeon,  and  mate;  two 
sergeant-majors,  one  to  each  battalion;  two  quarter- 
master-sergeants, one  to  each  battaHon ;  two  drum  -and-fif e 
majors,  one  to  each  battaHon;  sixteen  drums  and  fifes, 
two  to  each  company ;  thirty -two  sergeants,  four  to  each 
company;  one  hundred  and  twenty-eight  corporals,  in- 
cluded in  the  rank  and  file — that  is,  sixteen  corporals  and 
one  hundred  and  twelve  private  men  to  a  company. 

The  regiment  of  dragoons  to  consist,  when  complete,  of 
two  cohorts,  each  cohort  of  two  squadrons,  each  squadron 
of  two  troops,  and  each  troop  of  thirty-two  dragoons,  rank 
and  file,  with  the  following  commissioned  and  non-com- 
missioned officers : 

One  colonel;  two  majors;  eight  captains;  nineteen 
lieutenants,  including  paymaster,  quartermaster,  and 
adjutant;  chaplain;  one  surgeon  and  one  mate;  two 
sergeant-majors;  two  quartermaster-sergeants;  two 
trumpet-majors;  eight  trumpeters;  eight  farriers;  six- 
teen saddlers ;  two  riding-masters :  thirty-two  sergeants ; 
sixty-four  corporals,  included  in  the  rank  and  file — that 
is,  to  each  troop  eight  corporals  and  twenty-four  private 
dragoons. 

The  corps  of  engineers  to  be  composed  as  follows : 

One  major  or  brigadier-general  commandant;  one 
colonel;  two  lieutenant-colonels;  two  majors;  twenty 
captains;  forty-five  lieutenants  (including  paymaster, 
quartermaster,  and  adjutant),  twenty  first  and  twenty- 
three  second  lieutenants;  chaplain,  surgeon,  and  two 
mates;  one  professor  of  mathematics;  one  professor  of 
chemistry ;  professor  of  natural  philosophy ;  professor  of 
civil  architecture;  two  sergeant-majors;  two  quarter- 
master-sergeants; two  drum-and-fife-majors ;  twenty 
drums  and  fifes ;  forty  sergeants ;  thirty-two  bombardiers ; 


Military  Peace  Establishment 


469 


eight  corporals  of  sappers  and  miners ;  three  hundred  and 
eighty-four  matrosses;  ninety-six  sappers  and  miners; 
one  hundred  and  eighty-eight  artificers  of  different  kinds, 
to  be  distributed  in  the  following  manner : 

Two  battalions  of  artillery,  each  consisting  of  four 
companies,  commanded  by  a  field  officer ;  each  company 
consisting  of  one  captain,  four  lieutenants,  four  sergeants, 
four  bombardiers,  and  forty-eight  matrosses. 

Two  companies  of  sappers  and  miners ;  each  company 
consisting  of  one  captain,  four  lieutenants,  four  sergeants, 
and  forty-eight  sappers  and  miners. 

A  corps  of  artificers,  commanded  by  one  captain  of  the 
corps,  and  consisting  of : 


Artificers  of  the  First  Class 


One  master-founder  in  brass 
One  master-founder  in  iron 
One  master-amiorer     . 
One  master-cutler 
One  master-blacksmith 
One  master-carpenter . 
One  master-wheelwright 
One  master-mason 
One  master-saddler 
One    master-manufacturer 

scabbards,  etc. 
One  master-engraver  . 


of 


cartridge-boxes 


Pay  per  month 
^6o 
60 

50 
50 
50 
50 
50 
50 
50 


50 
60 


Of  the  Seco'nd  Class 

Four  founders  in  brass  and  iron ;  four  armorers ;  two 
cutlers;  two  blacksmiths;  two  carpenters;  two  wheel- 
wrights ;  two  masons ;  two  saddlers ;  two  manufacturers 
of  cartridge-boxes,  etc. 


470  Alexander  Hamilton 

Of  the  Third  Class 

Four  founders  in  brass  and  iron;  twenty  armorers; 
twelve  cutlers;  [powder-makers?]  thirty  blacksmiths; 
thirty  carpenters;  twenty  wheelwrights;  twelve  ma- 
sons ;  six  saddlers ;  six  manufacturers  of  cartridge-boxes, 
etc. ;  two  turners ;  two  tinmen ;  two  brickmakers ;  two 
potters;  one  glazier;  two  cabinet-makers;  one  lock- 
smith ;  one  spur-maker ;  one  tanner ;  one  currier. 

That  the  pay  of  a  regiment  of  Infantry  shall  be  as 
follows : 

Per  month 

To  a  colonel $ioo 

Major 65 

Captain 5° 

Lieutenant 25 

Ensign 20 

Paymaster,  besides  his  pay  as  lieutenant  ,         .  15 

Quartermaster,          do.                      do.       .         .  15 

Adjutant,                  do.                     do.       .         .  15 

Chaplain 5° 

Surgeon     .         .         .         .         .         .         •         •  5° 

Mate 25 

Sergeant-major  and  quartermaster-sergeant, 

each      ........  8 

Drum-and-fife-major 8 

Drum  and  fife 2 

Sergeant    ........  S 

Corporal 3 

Private 2 

The  pay  of  a  regiment  of  dragoons,  as  follows : 

Per  month 
Field  officers  as  infantry. 

Captain        j  being  obliged  to  find  their  own  )     .      $60 
Lieutenant  (      horses  )     .        35 


Military  Peace  Establishment  471 

Per  month 

Quartermaster,  paymaster,  adjutant,  as  infantry,  $40 

Second  lieutenants     ......  30 

Chaplain,  surgeon,  and  mates,  as  in  the  infantry. 
Sergeant-majors,  quartermaster-sergeants,  do. 

Trumpet-major           ......  8 

Trumpeter          .......  3 

Farrier 8 

Saddler 8 

Riding-master             .         .         .         .         .         .  10 

Sergeants,  corporals,  and  private  dragoons,  as 
in  the  infantry. 


The  pay  of  the  corps  of  artillery  and  engineers,  to  be  as 
follows : 

Per  month 

$110 
80 


Commandant  according  to  his  rank. 
To  a  colonel 
Lieutenant-colonel 
Major 
Captain 
Lieutenant 

Paymaster,  i  including  pay  as  lieutenants; 

Quartermaster,  <  first  lieutenants,  $30,  second 
Adjutant,  (  lieutenants,  $25. 

Chaplain,  surgeon,  and  mates,  as  in  infantry. 
Professors,  each         ..... 
Sergeant-major,  quartermaster-sergeant,  each 
Drum  and  fife-majors 
Drums  and  fifes 
Sergeant    . 
Bombardier 
Corporal     . 

Matross,  or  private  of  sappers  or  miners 
Artificers  as  annexed  to  them. 


70 
60 
30 


each  45 


80 


That  a  ration  of  provisions  shall  consist  of  one  pound  of 
bread,  or  flour;  half  a  pound  of  salt,  or  three-fourths  of  a 


472  Alexander  Hamilton 

pound  of  fresh  beef  or  pork ;  a  pint  of  peas,  or  other  vege- 
tables equivalent;  one  gill  of  vinegar,  and  a  half  gill  of 
salt. 

Each  officer  and  soldier  to  be  entitled  to  draw  one 
ration  per  day;  the  officer  at  his  option  to  receive  the 
estimated  value  in  money;  and  the  soldier  to  be  paid 
at  the  rates  annexed  to  each  article,  for  whatever  it  may 
not  be  possible  to  furnish  him. 

That  there  be  an  allowance  of soap  per to 

each  commissioned  officer ;  and to  every  non-com- 
missioned officer  and  soldier. 

The  allowance  of  forage  to  officers  whose  duty  is  to  be 
performed  on  horseback,  shall  be  as  follows : 

To  a  major-general,  four  rations;  brigadier,  three;  field 
officers  of  every  corps,  each,  two;  chaplain,  surgeon, 
quartermaster,  paymaster,  adjutant,  of  every  corps,  each, 
one;  captains,  and  other  officers  of  dragoons,  each,  one; 
captains  of  engineers,  each,  one. 

A  ration  of  forage  to  consist  of  the  following  articles : 


When  officers  are  absent  from  their  corps  on  duty,  and 
cannot  draw  forage,  they  shall  be  paid  for  it  at  the  rate  of 
■ for  each  ration. 

That  the  allowance  of  clothing  to  each  non-commis- 
sioned officer,  and  private  soldier,  shall  be  as  follows : 

One  cloth  coat,  jacket,  and  overall,  every  second  year; 
one  hat,  one  linen  frock,  three  pair  overalls,  six  pair  shoes, 
two  leather  stocks,  annually;  one  blanket  every  — — ■ — 
year.  And  if  it  shall  be  found  necessary  to  supply  any 
non-commissioned  officer  or  soldier,  with  any  articles  be- 
yond the  quantity  above  specified,  the  value  thereof  shall 
be  deducted  from  his  pay,  according  to  the  rates  annexed 
to  each. 


Military  Peace  Establishment  473 

If  the  idea  of  the  Confederation  is  adhered  to,  the 
number  of  troops  to  be  raised  must  be  distributed  in 
the  best  manner  the  nature  of  the  case  will  admit,  to 
the  several  States,  according  to  the  proportion  of 
their  respective  populations;  and  each  must  ap- 
point regimental  officers  in  proportion  to  the  num- 
ber of  men  it  furnishes ;  but  as  no  State  will  have  to 
furnish  a  complete  regiment,  this  apportionment  of 
the  officers,  especially,  will  become  extremely  diffi- 
cult, if  not  impracticable,  on  any  satisfactory  plan, 
and  the  filling  up  vacancies  as  they  arise  will  produce 
endless  perplexity.  It  would  be  much  to  be  pre- 
ferred, if  the  States  could  be  induced  to  transfer 
this  right  to  Congress;  and  indeed,  without  it,  there 
can  never  be  regularity  in  the  military  system.  It 
would  also  be  much  the  best,  that  the  men  should  be 
enlisted  under  continental  direction,  which  will  be  a 
more  certain  and  more  economical  mode;  for,  as  it 
now  stands,  the  United  States  are  obliged  to  pay 
for  all  mismanagement  or  extravagance  which  may 
happen. 

The  next  object  to  be  attended  to,  is  that  of  forti- 
fications. These  are  of  two  kinds,  land  and  naval: 
the  first  for  internal  security,  the  last  for  the  pro- 
tection of  the  future  fleets  of  the  United  States. 

As  to  the  first  kind,  there  are  many  posts  of  im- 
portance already  existing,  several  of  which  it  will 
be  essential  to  occupy  and  guard,  till  more  perman- 
ent measures  can  be  taken  on  a  general  plan.  For 
this.  Congress  have  already  made  provision  by  their 
resolution  of  the . 

The  committee  are  of  opinion,  that  the  principles 


474  Alexander  Hamilton 

laid  down  in  the  memorial  from  Major-General  Du 
Portail,  Chief  Engineer,  accompanying  this  report, 
so  far  as  they  respect  the  article  of  fortifications,  are, 
in  general,  soimd  and  just;  and  that  it  will  be  ex- 
pedient for  Congress,  as  soon  as  they  have  deter- 
mined on  the  establishment  of  the  corps  of  engineers, 
to  instruct  the  head  of  that  corps  to  make  a  general 
survey  of  the  points  necessary  to  be  fortified,  and 
to  lay  a  general  plan  before  Congress  for  their  con- 
sideration. 

With  respect  to  maritime  fortifications,  the  com- 
mittee are  of  opinion,  that  this  object,  though  of  the 
highest  importance,  cannot  be  immediately  under- 
taken; but  that  it  will  be  advisable  for  Congress  to 
appoint  an  Agent  of  Marine,  to  make  all  the  in- 
quiries, obtain  all  the  lights,  and  prepare,  in  pro- 
portion as  the  public  finances  will  admit,  all  the 
means  previously  requisite  towards  the  establish- 
ment of  posts  and  the  formation  of  a  navy. 

The  committee  apprehend,  that  even  if  the  re- 
sources of  the  United  States  were  at  this  time  equal 
to  the  undertaking  of  constructing  and  equipping  a 
navy,  it  would  be  ineligible  to  enter  upon  it,  till  a 
plan,  deliberately  combined  in  all  its  parts,  had  been 
digested  and  approved  for  that  purpose.  As  the 
preparatory  steps  will  require  a  considerable  length 
of  time  before  such  a  plan  could  be  matured  for  exe- 
cution, it  will,  therefore,  be  proper,  in  the  judgment 
of  the  committee,  to  make  the  appointment  sug- 
gested as  speedily  as  it  can  conveniently  be  done. 

The  committee  are  further  of  opinion,  that  it  will 
be  proper  for  Congress  to  keep  constantly  on  foot, 


Military  Peace  Establishment  475 

magazines  and  arsenals,  in  different  parts  of  the 
United  States,  equal  to  the  complete  equipment  of 
twenty  thousand  men,  in  every  thing  necessary  for 
the  field  or  for  a  siege,  calculating  on  a  three  years' 
supply;  and  that,  in  this  view,  it  will  be  expedient 
to  establish  arsenals  and  magazines  at  the  following 
places:  ******* 

and  to  deposit  all  the  artillery  and  military  stores,  in 
possession  of  the  United  States,  in  those  several 
places,  in  equal  proportions ;  and  as  soon  as  may  be, 
to  make  up  any  deficiencies  which  may  be  found  in 
the  quantity  proposed;  so  that  each  deposit  may 
suffice  for  five  thousand  men. 

With  respect  to  the  establishment  of  military 
academies,  as  proposed  in  the  letter  of  the  Secretary 
at  War,  the  committee  are  of  opinion,  that  the  bene- 
fits of  such  institutions  rarely  compensate  for  the 
expense;  and  that,  by  having  the  three  professors 
proposed  to  be  attached  to  the  corps  of  engineers, 
all  the  utility  to  be  expected  from  academies  may 
be  substantially  obtained:  that,  at  all  events,  such 
institutions  can  only  be  the  object  of  future  con- 
sideration. 

The  committee  are  of  opinion,  that  as  soon  as  the 
situation  of  public  affairs  will  permit,  it  ought  to  be 
made  a  serious  object  of  policy,  to  be  able  to  supply 
ourselves  with  all  the  articles  of  first  necessity  in 
war ;  and  in  this  view,  to  establish  foimdries,  manu- 
factories of  arms,  powder,  etc. 

There  are  two  reasons  which  appear  to  them  con- 
clusive for  this.  The  first  is,  that  every  country 
ought  to  have  within  itself  all  the  essential  means 


47^  Alexander  Hamilton 

of  defence,  for  to  depend  on  foreign  supplies  is  to 
render  its  security  precarious;  the  second,  that  as  it 
will  be  indispensable  to  keep  up  a  corps  of  artillery, 
and  some  other  troops,  the  labor  of  a  part  of  these, 
bestowed  upon  the  manufactories,  will  enable  the 
public  to  supply  itself  on  better  terms  than  by  im- 
portation. The  committee  propose  that  the  Secre- 
tary at  War  be  directed  to  lay  before  Congress  a  plan, 
in  detail,  for  this  purpose;  designating  the  places 
where  those  foundries  and  manufactories  can  be 
erected  with  advantage,  the  means  to  be  employed, 
and  the  expense  to  be  incurred  in  the  execution  of 
the  plan. 

The  committee  are  of  opinion,  that  a  general  staff 
is  unnecessary  in  time  of  peace,  as  all  the  objects  of 
it  may  be  answered  by  the  War  Department,  by  the 
regimental  officers,  and  by  contracts.  They  would 
only  recommend  to  have  a  major-general  to  com- 
mand all  the  troops;  a  general  officer  to  command 
the  corps  of  engineers  and  artillery ;  and  an  inspector- 
general  to  preserve  uniformity  in  the  regulations  and 
service  of  the  troops. 

The  pay  of  these  officers  may  be : 

To  a  major-general,  per  month         .         .         .     $ 

To  a  brigadier-general      .....     $ 

Inspector-general,   including  the   pay   of   his 

rank $ 


In  time  of  war,  it  will  be  necessary  to  appoint  a  briga- 
dier-general to  each  brigade  consisting  of  two  regiments 
of  infantry ;  but  during  peace,  as  the  service  of  the  regi- 
ments will  be  detached,  this  may  be  dispensed  with. 


Military  Peace  Establishment 


477 


It  will  be  necessary  to  establish  a  general  hospital  for 
the  reception  of  invalids  of  the  army  and  navy.  For  the 
present,  only  the  following  officers  will  be  requisite: 


Pay  and  subsist- 
ence per  month 


One  Physician  and  Director,  who  shall  also 
have  the  superintendence  of  the  regimental 
hospitals 

One  purveyor  and  apothecary 

One  surgeon 

One  mate    . 

One  steward 

One  matron 

Four  nurses,  each 


50 
SO 

25 

15 
8 

5 


To  be  entitled  to  draw  a  ration  per  day  each,  and  no 
other  subsistence  or  allowance. 

The  invahds  to  be  allowed  no  pay ;  but  the  clothing  and 
rations  specified  for  soldiers  during  Ufe. 

The  gross  expense  of  this  estabHshment,  if  complete,  as 
will  appear  by  the  annexed  estimate,  will  be  .  $ 

From  this  may  be  deducted  the  value  of  the  pro- 
duct of  the  manufactories,  when  established  by  the 
estimate  also  annexed    ......    


Balance,    an   annual   charge   upon   the    United 
States     ......  .         . 


If  Congress  should  think  it  inexpedient  immedi- 
ately to  incur  so  considerable  an  expense,  the  follow- 
ing method  ma}^  be  taken  to  diminish  it. 

The  companies  of  infantry  may,  for  the  present,  be 
recruited  only  to  sixty-four  men  each. 

Only  four  troops  of  the  dragoons  may  be  raised,  and 
only  one  troop  mounted.  It  would  be  inexpedient  to 
neglect  this  arm  altogether ;  for  it  will  always,  in  case  of 


47^  Alexander  Hamilton 

war,  be  of  great  importance  in  the  Southern  States;  and 
the  knowledge  of  its  principles  and  uses  ought  to  be 
cultivated. 

The  companies  of  sappers  and  miners,  and  the  company 
of  artificers,  except  the  master-foimders  and  the  armorers, 
may  be  deferred  till  the  means  of  the  United  States  will 
admit  of  carrying  into  execution  the  plan  of  foundries  and 
manufactories. 

Yet  it  would  be  proper  that  these  establishments  should 
be  adopted  as  proposed ;  and  the  execution,  in  these  in- 
stances, suspended. 

The  savings  of  expense,  by  these  deductions,  would 

amount  to  ;    which,  taken  out  of  the  aggregate 

expense  of  the  whole  establishment,  will  leave  a  residue 
of  annual  expense,  of . 

The  committee  are  of  opinion  that  this  expense  is 
unavoidable,  and  that  the  only  question  is,  whether 
it  shall  be  borne  by  the  United  States  or  by  particular 
States;  in  which  last  case  it  is  probable  it  will  be 
greatly  increased,  for  want  of  being  conducted  on  a 
systematic  plan;  and  it  is  to  be  observed  that  the 
resources  of  the  States,  jointly  or  severally,  are  con- 
fined within  certain  bounds;  and  that  if  any  States 
contribute  an  extra  portion  in  one  way,  they  must 
contribute  less  than  their  proportion  in  another. 
The  superior  national  considerations  already  stated, 
leave  no  doubt  as  to  the  manner  in  which  the  ques- 
tion ought  to  be  decided. 

The  committee  are  also  of  opinion,  that  in  con- 
sidering the  means  of  national  defence,  Congress 
ought  not  to  overlook  that  of  a  well-regulated  militia ; 
that  as  the  keeping  up  of  such  a  militia,  and  proper 


Military  Peace  Establishment  479 

arsenals  and  magazines,  b}'  each  State,  is  made  a 
part  of  the  Confederation,  the  attention  of  Congress 
to  this  object  will  be  a  constitutional  duty ;  that  as 
great  advantages  would  result  from  uniformity  in 
this  article,  in  every  State,  and  from  the  militia 
establishment  being  as  similar  as  the  nature  of  the 
case  will  admit,  to  the  continental  military  estab- 
lishment, it  will  be  proper  for  Congress  to  adopt  and 
recommend  a  general  plan  for  that  purpose. 

The  committee  submit  the  following  outlines  of 
such  a  plan;  which  may,  if  thought  necessary,  be 
digested  and  improved. 

All  the  free  male  inhabitants  in  each  State,  from  twenty 
years  old  to  fifty,  except  such  as  the  laws  of  each  State 
shall  think  it  proper  to  exempt,  to  be  divided  into  two 
general  classes;  one  class  consisting  of  married,  and  the 
other  class  consisting  of  single,  men. 

Each  class  to  be  formed  into  corps  of  infantry  and 
dragoons,  organized  in  the  same  manner  as  has  been  pro- 
posed for  the  continental  troops. 

Those  who  are  willing  to  be  at  the  expense  of  equipping 
themselves  for  the  dragoon  service,  to  be  permitted  to 
enter  into  that  corps.  The  residue  to  be  formed  into 
infantry.  This  will  consult  the  convenience  and  inclina- 
tions of  different  classes  of  citizens. 

Each  officer  and  private  of  the  dragoons,  to  provide 
himself  with  a  horse,  saddle,  etc.,  pistols  and  sabre;  and 
each  non-commissioned  officer  and  private,  with  a  carbine 
and  cartouch-box,  with  twelve  rounds  for  his  carbine  and 
six  rounds  for  each  pistol. 

Each  officer  of  the  infantry  to  have  a  sword  and  espon- 
ton;    and  each  non-commissioned  officer  and  private,  a 


4^0  Alexander  Hamilton 

musket,  bayonet,  and  cartouch-box  containing  always 
twelve  rounds  of  powder  and  ball. 

That  the  corps  of  single  men  be  obliged  to  assemble 
in  companies  once  a  month,  and  once  in  three  months 
regimentally,  to  be  inspected  and  exercised,  subject  to  a 
penalty  to  be  assigned  for  that  purpose. 

That  the  corps  of  married  men  be  obliged  to  assemble 
once  in  three  months  by  companies,  and  once  in  six 
months  regimentally,  for  the  same  purpose  as  above 
mentioned. 

That  when  the  State  is  invaded,  the  corps  of  either  class, 
indifferently,  shall  be  obliged  to  take  the  field  for  its  de- 
fence, and  to  remain  in  service  one  year,  unless  sooner 
relieved  by  special  order. 

That  when  another  State  is  attacked,  and  it  is  necessary 
to  march  to  its  succor,  one  half  of  the  corps  of  single  men 
shall  be  obliged  to  take  their  turn  first,  and  to  serve  for  the 
same  period ;  to  be  afterwards  relieved  by  one  half  of  the 
corps  of  the  married  men ;  and  so  on  alternately. 

That  in  addition  to  these  two  classes,  there  shall  be  a 
third  class,  under  a  particular  denomination,  as  fencibles, 
fusiliers,  train -bands,  or  whatever  else  may  be  judged  ex- 
pedient ;  with  the  same  organization  as  the  other  classes, 
but  composed  in  the  following  manner : 

Of  all  such  of  either  of  the  two  other  classes  as  will 
voluntarily  engage  to  serve  for  the  term  of  eight  years, 
provided  they  shall  not  exceed  the  proportion  of  one  to 
fifty  of  all  the  enrolled  militia  of  the  State ;  and  provided 
that,  if  a  war  breaks  out,  they  shall  be  bound  to  serve 
three  years  after  they  are  called  into  service,  and  to  march 
wherever  the  service  may  require. 

The  conditions  on  the  part  of  the  public  to  be  these: 
That  they  shall  be  furnished  with  a  musket,  bayonet,  car- 
touch-box,  and  twenty-four  rounds  of  powder  and  ball; 


Military  Peace  Establishment  481 

and  once  every  two  years  with  a  suit  of  uniform,  to  con- 
sist of  a  coat,  jacket,  and  overall  of  cloth;  the  arms  and 
accoutrements  to  become  their  property  at  the  end  of 
their  time  of  service. 

These  corps  to  be  obliged  to  assemble  by  companies  once 
a  week,  and  by  regiments  monthly,  for  exercise  and  inspec- 
tion ;  and  to  encamp  at  a  general  rendezvous  twenty  days 
in  each  year,  to  be  paid  at  the  rate  of  sixpence  per  day  to 
each  non-commissioned  officer  and  private.  Whenever 
any  of  the  militia  are  called  into  service,  they  shall  be  en- 
titled to  the  same  emoluments  with  the  regular  troops. 

The  committee  are  of  opinion  that,  with  a  view  to 
these  establishments,  it  will  be  proper  to  direct  the 
Commander-in-Chief  to  appoint  a  Board,  consisting 
of  not  more  than  five  officers,  of  which  the  Inspector- 
General,  Commandant  of  Artillery,  and  Chief  En- 
gineer, to  be  members,  to  revise  the  system  of 
regulations  for  the  army  of  the  United  States,  and 
to  digest,  for  the  consideration  of  Congress,  a  general 
ordinance  for  the  service  of  the  troops  of  the  United 
States,  as  well  as  the  corps  of  engineers  and  of  horse, 
as  of  infantry :  also  an  ordinance  to  be  recommended 
to  the  several  States  for  the  service  of  the  militia. 

All  promotions  to  be  made  regimentally  to  the 
rank  of  colonel,  according  to  seniority ;  and  from  the 
rank  of  colonel  upwards,  the  officers  of  dragoons  and 
infantry  shall  roll  together,  and  be  promoted  accord- 
ing to  seniority,  without  distinction  of  corps. 

The  rule  of  promotion  in  the  corps  of  engineers,  to 
be,  in  all  respects,  distinct,  and  according  to  seniority 
in  that  corps. 

Provided  that  no  officer,  of  whatsoever  corps,  shall 


VOL.  VI.— 31. 


482  Alexander  Hamilton 

consider  it  as  a  violation  of  his  rights,  if  any  other 
who  has  been  fortunate  enough  to  have  an  opportu- 
nity of  distinguishing  himself  in  a  particular  man- 
ner, receives  an  extra  promotion  in  the  corps,  on 
account  of  brilliant  services  or  peculiar  talents. 

And  in  order  that  such  extra  promotion  may  not 
be  produced  by  misrepresentation,  it  shall  not  be 
made,  but  on  the  recommendation  of  the  commander 
of  the  army,  accompanied  by  an  authenticated  state 
of  the  facts  and  reasons  upon  which  the  recommenda- 
tion is  founded;  together  with  the  opinion  of  the 
officer  commanding  the  corps  in  which  the  promo- 
tion is  to  be  made;  all  which  shall  be  reported  to 
Congress  by  the  Secretary  at  War,  with  his  senti- 
ments thereupon. 

The  officers  to  command  the  different  corps  in  the 
first  instance,  to  be  appointed  out  of  such  of  those, 
now  in  service,  as  are  willing  to  continue  in  the 
military  line ;  provided  that  those  who  are  retained, 
shall  not  be  entitled  to  the  half  pay  for  their  services 
during  the  war. 

The  men  to  be  enlisted  for  six  years. 

Women  to  each  company. 

Notes  to  he  recollected  * 

An  absurdity,  that  Congress  are  empowered  to  build  and 
equip  a  navy ;  and  yet,  in  time  of  peace,  the  States  are  to 
keep  up  one  for  their  own  defence. 

There  must  be  a  navy  formed  in  time  of  peace ;  it  ought 
to  be  proportioned  to  our  defence ;  and  will  then  be  all  in 
the  hands  of  certain  States. 

I  These  notes  were  apparently  for  a  speech  sustaining  the  report — 
speech  and  report  aUke  vain  in  the  then  anarchic  weakness. 


Hamilton  to  McHenry  4^3 

Congress,  constituted  as  they  are,  can't  have  time  for 
usurpation.  Usurpation  in  such  an  extensive  empire 
requires  long  previous  preparation,  etc. 

A  people  seldom  reform  with  moderation.  Men,  accus- 
tomed to  read  of  usurpation  suddenly  effected  in  small 
cities,  look  upon  such  a  thing  as  a  work  of  a  day. 

The  weak  side  of  democracies,  is  danger  of  foreign 
corruption.  No  individual  has  sufficient  interest  in  the 
State,  to  be  proof  against  the  seduction. 

The  want  of  an  army  lost  the  Uberty  of  Athens — vide 
Demosthenes. 


HAMILTON  TO  McHENRY 

Philadelphia,  July  28,  1798. 

Sir: — I  last  evening  had  the  honor  of  receiving 
your  letter  of  the  25th  inst.,  announcing  to  me  my 
appointment  as  Inspector  and  Major-General.'  At 
a  crisis  like  the  present,  I  esteem  it  my  duty  to  obey 
the  call  of  the  government.  Feeling,  too,  as  I  ought, 
the  value  of  the  high  confidence  which  is  reposed  in 
me,  I  beg  you  to  convey  to  the  President  my  most 
cordial  acknowledgments,  and  the  assurance  of  my 
best  endeavor  to  merit  it. 

With  great  respect  and  esteem,  I  am,  sir,  etc. 


HAMILTON  TO  McHENRY 

Philadelphia,  July  30,  1798. 

Dear  McHenry: 

Scruples  of  delicacy  have  occasioned  me  to  hesitate 
about  offering  to  you  certain  ideas  which  it  appears 

*  War  with  France  impending,  measures  were  taken  to  raise  an  army. 
The  nominal  commander  of  the  forces  was  Washington,  the  real  one 
Hamilton,  who  ranked  Inspector  and  First  Major-General. 


4^4  Alexander  Hamilton 

to  me,  on  mature  reflection,  cannot  be  withheld  con- 
sistently either  with  friendship  to  you  or  regard  to 
the  service. 

I  observe  you  plunged  in  a  vast  mass  of  details.  I 
know  from  experience,  that  it  is  impossible  for  any 
man,  whatever  be  his  talents  or  diligence,  to  wade 
through  such  a  mass,  without  neglecting  the  most 
material  things,  and  attaching  to  his  operations  a 
feebleness  and  sloth  of  execution.  It  is  essential  to 
the  success  of  the  minister  of  a  great  department, 
that  he  subdivide  the  objects  of  his  care,  distribute 
them  among  competent  assistants,  and  content  him- 
self with  a  general  but  vigilant  superintendence. 
This  course  is  particularly  necessary  when  an  unfore- 
seen emergency  has  suddenly  accumulated  a  number 
of  new  objects  to  be  provided  for  and  executed. 

Hence  you  will  give  me  leave,  in  all  the  frankness 
of  friendship,  to  express  to  you  an  opinion  that  you 
will  do  well  to  call  effectually  to  your  aid  the  In- 
spector-General, and  likewise  Major-General  Knox, 
and  to  charge  them  with  the  management  of  par- 
ticular branches  of  the  service. 

You  already  contemplate,  and  very  properly,  that 
the  Inspector-General  shall  occupy  himself  in  pre- 
paring a  system  of  tactics  and  discipline.  But  will 
it  not  be  expedient  and  natural  to  charge  him  also 
with  superintending  the  recruiting  service  ?  and  may 
he  not  be  made  useful  in  other  ways  to  the  business 
of  the  department?  General  Knox,  if  he  can  be 
drawn  to  the  seat  of  government,  may  be  rendered 
extensively  useful,  especially  in  whatever  relates  to 
the  artillery  branch. 


Hamilton  to  McHenry  485 

But  you  will  perceive  that  ideas  of  this  sort  pre- 
suppose an  abandonment  of  the  plan  of  suspending 
the  emoluments  of  these  officers.  They  cannot  af- 
ford to  give  their  time  and  attention  without  com- 
pensation. As  to  myself,  I  must  be  free  to  confess 
that  this  is  utterly  impossible.  I  have  the  less  em- 
barrassment in  making  the  declaration,  because  it 
must  be  obvious  that  the  plan  is  against  my  pecuni- 
ary interest.  Serious  occupation  in  my  military  office 
must  involve  the  relinquishment  substantially  of 
my  profession ;  and  the  exchange  of  from  three  to 
four  thousand  pounds  for  the  compensation  of  In- 
spector-General, is  evidently  but  a  sorry  bargain. 
Yours  truly,  etc. 


HAMILTON  TO  McHENRY 

New  York,  October  19,  1798. 

Sir: — I  was  yesterday  honored  with  your  letter 
transmitting  my  commission  as  Inspector  and  Major- 
General. 

Agreeably  to  your  desire,  I  hold  myself  prepared 
to  attend  you  within  the  period  you  assign.  But  as 
the  object  appears  to  embrace  a  concert  of  advice 
and  assistance  with  General  Knox  (who  cannot  be 
expected  in  much  less  than  the  utmost  limit  of  the 
time  prescribed),  I  shall  permit  myself  to  defer  my 
journey  so  as  to  reach  you  about  the  first  of  Novem- 
ber, unless  I  am  told  that  an  anticipation  of  that 
day  is  deemed  requisite. 

I  cannot  but  observe  with  satisfaction  the  con- 
clusion of  your  letter  as  to  the  relative  rank  of  the 
three  major-generals. 


486  Alexander  Hamilton 

I  received  at  the  same  time  yoiir  letter  of  the  nth 
instant,  having  been  absent  from  the  city  for  five 
days  past. 

I  shall  to-day  confer  with  Major  Hoops  and  Colonel 
Stevens  on  the  subject  of  it,  chiefly  to  ascertain  the 
actual  state  of  things,  and  by  to-morrow's  post  will 
communicate  my  opinion. 


HAMILTON    TO    WASHINGTON 

New  York,  October  29,  1798. 

Dear  Sir: — Some  ill  health  in  my  family,  now  at 
an  end,  as  I  hope,  interfered  with  an  earlier  acknow- 
ledgment of  your  favor  of  the  21st  instant.  The 
contents  cannot  but  be  gratifying  to  me.  It  is  my 
intention,  if  not  prevented  by  further  ill  health  in 
my  family,  to  proceed  on  the  first  of  November  to 
Trenton.  My  aid  to  the  Secretary,  to  the  full  ex- 
tent of  what  he  shall  permit  me  to  afford,  will  not 
be  withheld.  But  every  day  brings  fresh  room 
to  apprehend  that,  whatever  may  be  the  props, 
the  administration  of  the  War  Department  cannot 
prosper  in   the  present  very  well  disposed  but  very 

unqualified  hands. 

Most  respectfully,  etc. 


HAMILTON   TO   JAY 

Philadelphia,  November  19,  1798. 

Sir; — Your  letter  of  the   5th  of  November  has 
recently  reached  me  at  this  place,  and  found  me 


Hamilton  to  Jay  487 

amongst  avocations  that  scarcely  leave  me  a  moment 
to  spare. 

You  will  probably  have  learned  from  General 
Clarkson  that  the  survey  of  the  port  has  been 
completed. 

But  I  do  not  recollect  that  I  have  had  any  answer 
to  a  suggestion  in  one  of  my  letters  respecting  the 
employment  of  engineers  to  assist  in  forming  the 
desired  plan. 

This  appears  to  me  an  essential  preliminary.  It 
is  very  possible  the  contrary  may  have  been  said  to 
you  by  persons  of  whose  intelligence  you  may  have 
a  good  opinion.  Self-sufificiency  and  a  contempt  of 
the  science  and  experience  of  others  are  too  pre- 
vailing traits  of  character  in  this  country. 

But  as  far  as  I  am  to  be  concerned,  auxiliary  lights 
are  a  sine  qua  non. 

I  do  not  feel  myself  adequate  to  the  complicated 
task  of  an  engineer,  unaided  by  men  of  more  tech- 
nical knowledge  than  myself. 

END    OF    VOL.    VI. 


