BOOK    973.4. H18   v  1 
HAMILTON    #    WORKS 


3    115-3- 


Constitutional  Coition 

- 

The  Works  of 

Alexander  Hamilton 


Edited  by 

Henry  Cabot  Lodge 


"  The  sacred  rights  of  mankind  are  not  to  De  rummaged  for  among  old  parchments  or 
musty  records.  They  are  written,  as  with  a  sunbeam,  in  the  whole  volume  of  human  nature, 
by  the  hand  of  the  Divinity   itself,  and  can  never  be  erased  or  obscured  by  mortal  power." 

[Hamilton—  The  Farmer  Refuted,  1775,  -#X  18.] 

"  We  are  laboring  hard  to  establish  in  this  country  principles  more  and  more  national, 
and  free  from  all  foreign  ingredients,  so  that  we  may  be  neither  '  Greeks  nor  Trojans,'  but 
truly  Americans." — [Hamilton  to  King,  1796,  JEt.  39.] 


Volume  XI 


G.  P.  Putnam's  Sons 
New  York  and  London 
Sbe  IKntckerbocfcer  press 


Ube  Tkntcfeerbocfcer  iprese,  View  Korft 


r- 


THE   FEDERALIST 


A  COMMENTARY   ON 


The   Constitution  of  the   United  States 


REPRINTED  FROM  THE  ORIGINAL  TEXT  OF 

ALEXANDER  HAMILTON 
John  Jay,  and  James  Madison 


CONTENTS 


Introduction:  pagb 

I. — The  Authorship  of  the  "Federalist"  .        xv 

II. — The  Bibliography  of  the  "Federalist"  .     xxxi 

III. — The  Text  of  the  "Federalist"  xl 

THE  FEDERALIST 

No.  I. — General  Introduction  .  3 

Purpose  of  the  series  to  show  the  utility  of  the  Union  to 
political  prosperity,  etc. 

No.  II. — Concerning  Dangers  from  Foreign  Force 

and  Influence 9 

General  introduction  to  the  subject. 

No.  III. — The  Same  Subject  Continued    ...         16 

The  Union  a  protection  against  such  dangers,  by  re- 
moving the  usual  causes  of  just  war,  artd  by  preventing  vio- 
lations of  compacts  and  treaties,  on  account  of  greater 
efficiency  and  better  character  than  are  possessed  by  the 
State  governments — The  Union  also  better  able  to  settle 
international  differences. 

No.  IV. — The  Same  Subject  Continued    ...         22 

Unjust  causes  of  war  avoided — Greater  ability  to  com- 
pel respect  of  other  nations  and  prevent  their  attacking 
us  from  jealousy  of  our  successful  trade. 

No.  V. — The  Same  Subject  Continued      ...         28 
Union  secures  us  from  foreign  influence  in  the  several 
States  which  wotild  exist  if  they  were  not  united,  and  pre- 
vents their  alliance  with  foreign  and  rival  nations. 


vi  Contents 

PAGE 

No.  VI. — Concerning   Dangers   from    Dissensions 

BETWEEN  THE  STATES 34 

Reasons  for  these  dissensions  if  States  remain  disunited, 
and  especially  the  dangers  from  personal  ambitions  in 
small  States — Historical  examples — The  Shays  rebellion — 
Arguments  of  those  who  favor  separate  States  answered — 
Historical  examples — Appeal  to  the  people  from  these 
examples. 

No.  VII. — The  Same  Subject  Continued  .         .        42 

Causes  for  dissensions  among  States  if  disunited  enumer- 
ated. 

No.  VIII. — The  Consequences  of  Hostilities  be- 
tween the  States 51 

First,  destruction  of  life  and  property;  then,  standing 
armies,  extension  of  executive  power,  the  rise  of  the  mili- 
tary over  the  civil  power — Objections  to  the  Union  on  this 
score  answered — Army  not  dangerous  to  liberty,  if  there  is 
a  Union — Examples  of  Greece  and  of  Great  Britain. 

No.  IX. — The  Union  as  a  Safeguard  against  Do- 
mestic Faction  and  Insurrection  .  .  59 
Danger  of  these  troubles  in  republics,  and  the  argument 
thus  afforded  to  the  advocates  of  despotisms — The  ad- 
vantage of  a  Confederacy — Historical  examples — Montes- 
quieu's views — Distinction  between  confederation  and 
consolidation — Nature  of  a  confederacy — The  proposed 
Constitution  a  confederate-republican  form — The  Lycian 
confederacy. 

No.  X. — The  Same  Subject  Continued     ...        67 

Danger  of  faction  in  the  United  States  as  elsewhere — 
Nature  of  a  faction — Modes  of  avoiding  this  danger — 
Superiority  of  a  representative  government  to  a  democracy 
in  preventing  factions — The  advantage  of  a  large  republic 
in  this  respect. 

No.  XI. — The  Utility  of  the  Union  in  Respect  to 

Commercial  Relations  and  a  Navy        .         .         79 

Foreign  nations  jealous  of  our  commerce — Need  of  uni- 
formity of  action — Respect  commanded  by  a  navy — 
Effects  of  disunion  on  commerce — On  the  fisheries — On  the 


Contents  vii 

PAGE 

navigation  of  the  Western  lakes  and  the  Mississippi  river — 
Jealousy  of  Spain — Advantages  of  a  navy — Internal  com- 
merce^— Europe  not  superior  to  America. 

No.  XII. — The  Utility  op  the  Union  in  Respect  to 

Revenue 89 

Commerce  the  best  source  of  wealth,  and  increases  the 
ability  to  pay  taxes — Indirect  taxation  best  suited  to 
America,  and  that  must  come  from  commerce — Taxation 
of  this  sort  impossible  without  Union — The  results  of  a 
destruction  of  this  resource — The  need  of  revenue,  and  the 
best  sources  for  it  ensured  by  Union. 

No.  XIII. — Advantage  of  the  Union  in  Respect  to 

Economy  in  Government         ....         97 

One  civil  list  instead  of  many — Small  confederacies  will 
be  formed,  each  as  expensive  as  the  single  Confederacy 
proposed — Reasons  for  this. 

No.  XIV. — Objections  to  the  Proposed  Constitu- 
tion from  Extent  of  Territory  Answered   .       101 

Distinction  between  a  republic  and  a  democracy — Errors 
as  to  ancient  republics — Extending  the  limits  of  a  republic 
— Territory  of  the  United  States  not  too  extended,  com- 
pared with  European  nations — Jurisdiction  of  the  United 
States  limited  to  objects  of  general  interest — Purpose  of  the 
Constitution  to  unite  States  and  add  to  their  number — 
Intercourse  between  the  States  will  be  promoted — All  the 
States  exposed,  and  all  need  protection. 

No.  XV. — The  Insufficiency  of  the  Present  Con- 
federation to  Preserve  the  Union       .         .       109 

Evil  results  of  the  present  Confederation — Analysis  of 
the  defects  of  the  Confederation — The  true  purposes  of 
government — Impotence  of  the  Confederation  for  efficient 
government — Experience  under  the  present  Confederation. 

No.  XVI. — The  Same  Subject  Continued  .         .       121 

Experience  of  other  confederacies — The  present  Con- 
federation leads  to  domestic  war,  foreign  influence,  national 
ruin,  and  military  despotism — Union  cannot  so  exist — 
Efficient  government  must  reach  individuals — Objections 
answered. 


viii  Contents 

PAGE 

No.  XVII. — The  Same  Subject  Continued  .  .  129 
The  objection  that  the  reserved  rights  of  the  States  will 
be  invaded — The  real  danger  the  other  way — Federal  gov- 
ernments tend  to  anarchy,  not  tyranny — The  States  will 
have  a  superior  influence — Reasons  for  this — Historical 
examples. 

No.  XVIII. — The  Same  Subject  Continued      .        .       135 
Historical  examples. 

No.  XIX. — The  Same  Subject  Continued         .         .       144 

Historical  examples. 

No.  XX. — The  Same  Subject  Continued  .        .       152 

The  example  of  the  Netherlands. 

No.  XXI. — Other  Defects  of  the  Present  Confed- 
eration      159 

No  sanction  to  its  laws,  no  power  to  exact  obedience,  no 
power  to  punish  disobedience,  no  power  to  use  force  with 
the  States,  no  power  to  assist  a  State  in  enforcing  its  own 
laws — Objection  as  to  interfering  with  States  answered — 
The  principle  of  raising  money  by  contributions  from  the 
States — This  rule  unequal  and  oppressive  and  will  become 
ruinous — The  remedy  proposed — Advantages  of  taxes  on 
articles  of  consumption,  and  of  indirect  taxation. 

No.  XXII. — The  Same  Subject  Continued        .         .       166 

No  power  to  regulate  commerce — Evils  of  this  lack  of 
power — Raising  troops  by  quota — Evils  of  such  a  system 
— The  evils  and  dangers  arising  from  the  equal  vote  of  the 
States  in  Congress — The  want  of  a  judiciary  power — The 
organization  of  Congress  utterly  improper  for  the  exercise 
of  suitable  powers — The  present  Confederation  never  rati- 
fied by  the  people. 

No.  XXIII. — The  Necessity  of  a  Government  as 
Energetic    as    the    One    Proposed    to    the 
Preservation  of  the  Union    ....       180 
The  objects  of  the  federal  government — The  common 
defence  of  the  States  and  the  powers  necessary — Reasons 
why  these  powers  should  not  be  limited — Failure  in  this 
respect  of  the  Confederation — Remedies  of  the  Constitu- 
tion. 


Contents  ix 

PAGE 

No.  XXIV. — The  Powers  Necessary  to  the  Com- 
mon Defence  Further  Considered         .         .       187 

Objection  as  to  standing  army  answered — These  powers 
given  to  Congress — Limitations  on  Congress — No  inter- 
diction in  State  constitutions,  with  two  exceptions,  to 
standing  armies — None  in  articles  of  Confederation — 
Necessity  of  such  powers  in  the  federal  government — Our 
commerce  demands  a  navy. 

No.  XXV. — The  Same  Subject  Continued        .        .       194 

Objection  that  States  can  provide  for  common  defence 
answered — The  common  defence  cannot  be  entrusted  to 
the  separate  States  because  it  would  be  oppressive  to  some 
States,  might  become  dangerous  to  all,  would  create  jeal- 
ousies between  the  States,  and  might  imperil  the  authority 
of  the  Union — Provisions  of  the  Confederation  in  this 
respect — A  mistake  to  restrain  the  discretion  of  Congress 
in  keeping  or  raising  armies — Disadvantages  of  militia — 
Standing  armies  sometimes  necessary  when  there  is  no 
foreign  war — Example  of  Pennsylvania  and  Massachusetts 
— Dangerous  to  restrain  too  much  the  federal  government. 

No.  XXVI. — The  Idea  of  Restraining  the  Legisla- 
tive Authority  in  Regard  to  the  Common 
Defence  Considered        .....       202 

Its  origin — Not  in  favor  here — The  exclusion  of  military 
establishments  in  time  of  peace — Its  origin  and  progress — 
Giving  the  authority  to  Congress  a  sufficient  safeguard — 
Reasons  for  this — Objection  that  the  Executive  may  seize 
supplies  answered  and  an  appeal  made  on  this  point  for 
Union. 

No.  XXVII. — The  Same  Subject  Continued     .         .       211 

The  objection  that  the  new  government  will  require  the 
military  force  to  administer  its  laws  considered — The 
national  government  not  in  danger  of  popular  ill-will  any 
more  than  those  of  the  States — Reasons  for  believing  that 
the  federal  government  will  be  better  administered  than 
those  of  the  States — Less  liability  to  sedition  against 
federal  government — Less  likely  to  require  force  than  that 
proposed  by  the  opposition — Reasons  for  this — The  laws  of 
the  Union,  so  far  as  they  go,  to  be  the  supreme  law  of  the 
land. 


x  Contents 

PAGE 

No.  XXVIII. — The  Same  Subject  Continued  .         .       216 

Cases  in  which  the  federal  government  must  use  force — 
Equally  necessary  in  plan  of  opposition — Employment  of 
force  controlled  by  Congress — If  Congress  prove  unfaithful 
there  is  the  original  right  of  self-defence — The  States' 
security  against  Federal  usurpation — Further  security  in 
the  extent  of  territory  and  the  limited  resources  of  the 
country. 

No.  XXIX. — Concerning  the  Militia  .  .  .  222 
Regulation  of  militia  must  be  confined  to  federal  govern- 
ment to  secure  uniformity  of  organization  and  discipline — 
Objections  that  no  power  is  given  to  federal  magistrate  to 
call  out  posse  comitatus,  that  danger  may  be  apprehended 
from  authority  over  militia,  answered — The  project  of 
"  Publius"  for  a  military  establishment  and  its  advantages 
— The  appointment  of  officers  of  militia  by  States  a  suffi- 
cient safeguard — Objection  as  to  power  to  order  militia  to 
distant  States  answered. 

No.  XXX. — Concerning   the   General   Power   op 

Taxation 231 

Such  power  necessary  to  every  constitution — Evil  effects 
of  want  of  such  power — Results  in  present  Confederation 
— Objection  that  Congress  should  be  limited  to  external 
taxation  answered — Evils  and  defects  of  the  system  of 
requisitions — Without  general  power  existing  funds  would 
be  diverted  in  time  of  war — The  general  power  will  bring 
out  the  resources  of  the  country  and  give  confidence  to 
lenders. 

No.  XXXI. — The  Same  Subject  Continued      .         .       238 

The  importance  of  first  principles — In  morals  and  poli- 
tics— Reasons  for  diversity  of  opinion  on  these  matters — 
The  positions  thus  far  established  reviewed.  The  oppos- 
ing arguments  as  to  usurpations  by  the  federal  govern- 
ment and  as  to  federal  aggressions  on  State  governments 
reviewed — The  popular  sympathy  with  the  State  govern- 
ments. 

No.  XXXII. — The  Same  Subject  Continued     .        .       245 

Objection  that  the  general  power  of  taxation  would  in- 
terfere with  the  State  levies  considered — Barrier  against 


.  Contents  xi 

PAGB 

this  danger — Federal  sovereignty  limited — The  only  ex- 
clusive power  of  taxation  in  the  federal  government  is  in 
laying  duties  on  imports — The  power  of  taxation  in  all 
other  respects  concurrent  with  that  of  the  States — Proof 
of  this — No  repugnancy  between  federal  and  State  power 
— Concurrent  authority  the  necessary  result  of  a  divided 
sovereignty. 

No.  XXXIII. — The  Same  Subject  Continued  251 

Objections  to  incidental  powers  of  taxation  considered 
— These  powers  necessary — Their  express  grant  an  act  of 
caution — The  federal  authorities  and  then  their  constitu- 
ents the  judges  of  the  propriety  of  federal  measures — 
Objections  that  the  taxation  laws  of  the  Union  are  supreme 
considered,  and  the  necessity  of  this  supremacy  shown — 
These  laws  limited  by  the  Constitution. 

No.  XXXIV. — The  Same  Subject  Continued  .  .  257 
Concurrent  authority  concerning  taxation  the  only  al- 
ternative to  complete  subordination  of  the  States — Ab- 
surdity of  denying  the  practicability  of  concurrent 
authority — Examples  from  Roman  history — Needs  of  the 
federal  government  for  large  powers  of  taxation. 

No.  XXXV. — The  Same  Subject  Continued  .  .  266 
Reasons  for  not  restricting  federal  government  in  the 
matter  of  revenue — Restraint  would  lead  to  inequality  of 
taxation  and  oppression — Objections  that  the  interest  of 
the  revenue  would  guard  against  an  extreme  tariff,  and 
that  all  classes  of  tax-paying  citizens  cannot  be  repre- 
sented, considered — Representation  in  Congress  analyzed 
in  regard  to  taxation — Good  effects  of  mixed  representa- 
tion and  the  need  of  extensive  information  among  repre- 
sentatives. 

No.  XXXVI .— The  Same  Subject  Continued  .  .  274 
Representation  further  considered  with  reference  to 
taxation — The  federal  government  able  to  exercise  the 
power  of  internal  taxation — Better  than  the  system  of 
requisitions — No  danger  of  conflict  between  State  and 
federal  authorities  in  regard  to  taxation — Minor  objections 
to  power  of  taxation  considered. 


xii  Contents 

PAGB 

No.  XXXVII. — Concerning  the  Difficulties  of 
the  Convention  in  Devising  a  Proper  Form 
of  Government 285 

Difficulty  of  discussing  public  measures  in  the  right 
spirit — Predetermined  friends  and  enemies — The  Federal- 
ist addressed  to  neither,  but  to  those  who  wish  merely  the 
happiness  of  the  country — Novelty  and  difficulties  of  the 
work  pointed  out — The  constitution  of  necessity  not  per- 
fect, but  the  convention  worked  without  party  feeling,  and 
all  were  finally  satisfied. 

No.  XXXVIII. — The  Same  Subject  Continued,  and 
the  Incoherence  of  the  Objections  to  the 
New  Plan  Exposed 295 

All  governments  of  deliberation  and  consent  hitherto 
framed  by  individuals — Examples — Errors  in  the  new  sys- 
tem arise  from  lack  of  experience — The  present  situation 
of  America — Existing  evils  shown,  and  the  futility  of  the 
objections  and  remedies  of  the  opposition. 

No.  XXXIX. — The  Conformity  of  the  Plan  to  Re- 
publican Principles 308 

Only  a  republican  system  possible  for  America — The 
principles  of  republican  government  shown  by  examples — 
The  proposed  Constitution  conforms  to  the  standard — 
Proofs  of  this  from  the  provisions  of  the  Constitution — 
Neither  wholly  national  nor  wholly  federal. 

No.  XL. — The  Powers  of  the  Convention  to  Form 
a  Mixed  Government  Examined  and  Sus- 
tained        318 

The  authority  under  which  the  convention  acted  ex- 
amined— Proper  even  to  have  exceeded  authority,  from 
considerations  of  duty — Constitution  merely  recommended 
— Necessity  for  a  radical  change — Whether  the  convention 
exceeded  its  powers  does  not  affect  the  question  of 
ratification. 

No.  XLI. — General  View  of  the  Powers  Conferred 

by  the  Constitution        .  ...      329 

The  quantity  of  power  conferred — Not  greater  than  it 
should  be — General  objections  considered — The  objects 


Contents  xiii 

PAGE 

of  the  powers  conferred — Declaring  war  and  granting 
letters  of  marque — Providing  armies  and  fleets — Regu- 
lating and  calling  out  the  militia — Levying  taxes  and  bor- 
rowing money. 

No.  XLII. — The  Powers  Conferred  by  the  Consti- 
tution Further  Considered  ....       343 

Regulation  of  intercourse  with  foreign  nations — Am- 
bassadors, consuls,  and  treaties — Punishment  of  piracy, 
felonies  on  the  high  seas,  and  offences  against  the  laws  of 
nations — Regulation  of  foreign  commerce — The  sanction 
of  the  slave  trade — Objection  on  that  point  considered — 
Maintenance  of  harmony  and  proper  intercourse  among 
the  States — Inter-State  commerce  and  the  Indian  trade 
— Coinage  of  money — Punishment  of  counterfeiters — 
Standard  of  weights  and  measures — Naturalization — 
Bankruptcy  laws — Rule  for  proving  public  acts — Post- 
roads  and  post-offices. 

No.  XLIII. — The  Same  Subject  Continued       .         .       354 

Miscellaneous  powers — Copyrights  and  patents — The 
Federal  city — Punishment  of  treason — Admission  of  new 
States — Government  of  territories  and  control  of  public 
property — Guaranty  to  every  State  of  a  republican  form 
of  government — Protection  of  States  against  invasion  and 
against  domestic  violence — Assumption  of  payment  of 
outstanding  debts — Amendments  to  the  Constitution — 
The  establishment  of  this  government  on  the  adherence 
of  nine  States — Objection  that  this  is  a  violation  of  the 
Confederation — Relations  between  ratifying  States  and 
those  which  refuse  to  ratify. 

No.  XLIV. — Restrictions  on  the  Authority  of  the 

Several  States 367 

Forbidding  the  establishment  of  treaties  and  alliances 
between  the  States,  the  issue  of  letters  of  marque,  the 
coinage  of  money,  the  issue  of  bills  of  credit,  the  establish- 
ment of  any  legal  tender  other  than  gold  and  silver,  the 
passage  of  bills  of  attainder,  the  passage  of  ex-post-facto 
laws,  the  passage  of  laws  impairing  contracts,  the  estab- 
lishment of  titles  of  nobility,  and  the  imposition  of  duties 
on  exports  and  imports — The  power  to  make  all  laws  neces- 
sary and  proper  to  carry  the  preceding  powers  into  execu- 
tion— Necessity    of    such    a    power — Prohibition    of   the 


xiv  Contents 

PAGE 

exercise  of  any  powers  not  expressly  delegated — Positive 
enumeration  of  general  powers  delegated — Negative 
enumeration  by  specification  of  reserved  powers  and  by 
silence — Remedy  for  an  abuse  of  this  general  power — The 
supremacy  of  the  Constitution,  the  constitutional  laws, 
and  treaties — Oath  of  State  and  federal  officers  to  support 
Constitution — No  part  of  the  powers  delegated  unnecessary 
or  improper. 

No.  XLV. — The  Alleged  Danger  from  the  Powers 
of  the  Union  to  the  State  Governments 
Considered       .......       378 

The  new  Constitution  not  dangerous  to  the  State  govern- 
ments, because;  the  tendency  in  confederacies  is  to 
weaken  the  central  power;  the  State  governments  will 
have  more  influence  among  the  people ;  the  State  govern- 
ments are  essential  parts  of  the  federal  government;  the 
officers  of  the  United  States  are  less  numerous  than  those 
of  the  States;  the  reserved  powers  are  relatively  greater 
than  those  delegated ;  the  proposed  change  consists  less  in 
giving  new  than  in  strengthening  old  powers. 


INTRODUCTION 


THE   AUTHORSHIP   OF   THE    "  FEDERALIST* ' 

THE  authorship  of  certain  numbers  of  the  Fed- 
eralist has  fairly  reached  the  dignity  of  a  well- 
established  historical  controversy,  and  has  become 
almost  as  hopeless  of  settlement  as  the  identity  of 
Junius  or  the  guilt  of  Mary,  Queen  of  Scots.  In 
character  it  closely  resembles  the  former  question,  ex- 
cept that  the  mystery  of  Junius  is  due  to  his  secrecy, 
while  with  the  Federalist  more  authors  have  confessed 
themselves  than  can  be  provided  for  in  the  essays. 

The  discussion  about  the  Federalist  began  nearly 
seventy  years  ago,  has  continued  at  intervals  down 
to  the  present  day,  and  culminated  some  twenty 
years  since  in  two  most  elaborate  essays,  one  by 
Mr.  Henry  B.  Dawson,  the  other  by  Mr.  John 
C.  Hamilton,  which  were  prefixed  to  the  editions 
of  the  Federalist  published  by  those  two  gentlemen 
respectively.  It  is  of  course  idle  to  suppose  that 
any  thing  can  now  be  written  which  will  convince  or 
satisfy  everybody  as  the  true  answer  to  this  long- 
mooted  question.  Yet  it  is  possible,  perhaps,  not 
only  to  present  the  evidence,  including  a  little  that 
is  new,  in  a  compact  form,  but  also  to  state  the  case 

XV 


xvi  Introduction 

and  set  forth  the  arguments  in  brief  and  simple 
fashion,  so  that  the  merits  of  the  question  may  be 
readily  understood  and  easily  appreciated. 

The  first  step  is  to  employ  the  process  of  elim- 
ination which  will  free  us  from  much  extraneous 
matter  and  from  the  repetition  of  many  long  and 
bewildering  lists  of  numbers.  We  can  throw  out  first 
all  those  essays  of  which  the  authorship  has  never 
been  questioned.  We  can  then  do  the  same  with 
certain  others  as  to  which  the  authorities  are  at 
variance,  but  from  which  a  little  examination  re- 
moves all  doubt.  This  done,  there  will  be  left  a 
small  number  of  essays,  which  are  the  subject  of 
irreconcilable  claims,  and  on  which  this  controversy 
really  turns.  The  total  number  of  essays,  accord- 
ing to  modern  numbering,  and  as  agreed  to  by  both 
Hamilton  and  Madison,  is  eighty-five.  Of  these,  the 
following  have  never  had  their  authorship  disputed 
by  any  one,  and  are  to  be  thus  assigned: 

To  Hamilton:  i,  6,  7,  8,  9,  11,  12,  13,  15,  16,  22, 
23,  24,  25,  26,  27,  28,  29,  30,  31,  32,  33,  34,  35,  36, 
59,  60,  61,  65,  66,  67,  68,  69,  70,  71,  72,  73,  74,  75, 
76,  77>  78,  79>  80,  81,  82,  83,  84,  85,— in  all,  49. 

To  Madison:  10,  14,  37,  38,  39,  40,  41,  42,  43,  44, 
45,  46,  47,  48,— in  all,  14. 

To  Jay:   2,  3,  4,  5  — in  all»  4- 

This  disposes  of  67  numbers,  and  leaves  18  to  be 
still  accounted  for — i.  e.:  17,  18,  19,  20,  21,  49,  50, 
51,  52,  53,  54,  55,  56,  57,  58,  62,  63,  64. 

We  now  come  to  the  second  class  of  essays,  where 
the  authorship,  after  examination,  can  be  fixed  with 
entire  certainty.     Number  17  is  claimed  for  Madi- 


Introduction  xvii 

son  in  one  of  his  own  lists  (there  are  four  from  his 
hand),  and  in  one  of  the  two  Jefferson  lists.  Ham- 
ilton claims  it  in  all  his  own  lists,  and  Madison  con- 
cedes it  to  Hamilton  in  three  of  his.  When  Madison 
in  any  one  of  his  four  lists  agrees  with  Hamilton 
as  to  the  authorship  of  any  essay,  it  must  be  con- 
sidered as  settled.  Number  1 7  therefore  belongs  to 
Hamilton.  All  the  Hamilton  lists  assign  numbers 
18,  19,  and  20  to  Hamilton  and  Madison  jointly. 
Two  of  the  Madison  lists  give  the  authorship  of 
these  three  papers  exclusively  to  Madison.  One 
Madison  list  and  one  Jefferson  list  give  18  and  19 
exclusively  to  Madison,  and  20  wholly  to  Hamilton. 
In  his  fourth  and  last  list  Madison  appends  to  No. 
18  the  following  note:  "The  subject  of  this  and  the 
two  following  numbers  happened  to  be  taken  up 
by  both  Mr.  H.  and  Mr.  M.  What  had  been  pre- 
pared by  Mr.  H.,  who  had  entered  more  briefly  into 
the  subject,  was  left  with  Mr.  M.,  on  its  appearing 
that  the  latter  was  engaged  in  it,  with  larger  ma- 
terials, and  with  a  view  to  a  more  precise  delinea- 
tion, and  from  the  pen  of  the  latter  the  several 
papers  went  to  press."  This  note  confirms  Hamil- 
ton's statement  that  these  three  papers  were  the 
work  of  himself  and  Madison,  and  to  them  jointly 
Nos.  18,  19,  and  20  may  therefore  be  credited  with- 
out any  reserve.  One  Jefferson  list  and  one  Madi- 
son list  give  No.  21  to  Madison.  Three  Madison 
lists  and  all  the  Hamilton  lists  give  it  to  Hamilton. 
No.  21,  therefore,  can  be  set  down  unhesitatingly  to 
Hamilton.  No.  64  is  claimed  by  Madison  for  him- 
self in  one  of  his  lists;   but  in  his  three  other  lists, 


xviii  Introduction 

and  in  one  of  the  Jefferson  lists,  it  is  given  to  Jay. 
In  five  of  the  Hamilton  lists  64  is  claimed  for  Ham- 
ilton, and  54  is  given  to  Jay.  Chancellor  Kent's 
Hamilton  list  gives  64  to  Jay,  while  the  edition  of 
1 8 10  credits  both  64  and  54  to  Hamilton.  Jay 
claimed  for  himself  Nos.  2,  3,  4,  5,  and  64,  and  the 
MS.  of  64  has  been  found  among  his  papers  and  in 
his  own  handwriting.  There  is  therefore  no  longer 
any  doubt  whatever  as  to  64,  which  can  be  given 
with  absolute  certainty  to  Jay.1 

The  eighteen  numbers  left  over  from  the  first 
sifting  are  now  reduced  to  twelve.  Two  of  the  six 
thus  disposed  of  go  to  Hamilton,  one  goes  to  Jay, 
and  the  other  three  (18,  19,  and  20)  to  Hamilton 
and  Madison  jointly.  This  makes  Hamilton's  total 
51;  Jay's,  5;  Madison's,  as  before,  14;  and  Madi- 
son's and  Hamilton's  jointly,  3.  The  twelve  re- 
maining numbers  (49,  50,  51,  52,  53,  54,  55,  56,  57, 
58,  62,  and  63)  are  those  over  which  the  whole  con- 
troversy as  to  the  authorship  of  the  Federalist  really 
arises. 

It  now  becomes  necessary  to  notice  briefly  the 
various  authorities  in  regard  to  the  disputed  au- 
thorship. The  day  before  his  fatal  duel  Hamilton 
called  at  the  office  of  his  friend  Egbert  Benson,  and 
left  there  a  slip  of  paper  in  his  own  handwriting, 
which  read  as  follows: 

"Nos.  2,  3,  4,  5,  54,  by  J. 

"Nos.  10,  14,  37  to  48  inclusive,  M. 

1  Hamilton's  error  as  to  No.  64  would  seem  to  have  been  of  long 
standing,  for  in  a  note  to  the  last  number  of  Camillus  (1796)  he  cer- 
tainly suggests  that  he  was  himself  the  author  of  that  essay.  See 
vol.  vi.,  p.  186. 


Introduction  xix 

"Nos.  18,  19,  20,  M.  &  H.  jointly. 

"All  the  others  by  H." 

Mr.  Egbert  Benson  was  absent  when  Hamilton 
called,  but  Mr.  Robert  Benson,  his  nephew,  was 
present,  saw  the  paper  deposited  by  Hamilton  in  a 
volume  of  Pliny,  and  afterwards  examined  it  him- 
self. Judge  Benson  on  his  return  pasted  the  slip 
thus  left  by  Hamilton  on  the  fly-leaf  of  his  own 
copy  of  the  Federalist.  Thence  he  removed  it,  after 
making  a  copy,  and  presented  it  for  safe-keeping  to 
the  New  York  Public  Library,  where  the  paper  re- 
mained for  some  years.  It  was  still  there  in  1818 
when,  in  the  controversy  which  then  sprang  up, 
William  Coleman,  the  editor  of  the  New  York 
Evening  Post,  referred  to  it,  and  informed  the  public 
that  they  could  call  and  examine  it.  At  some  sub- 
sequent time  this  valuable  document  was  stolen,  and 
it  has  never  been  recovered.  In  1 802-1 803  John  C. 
Hamilton,  at  the  request  and  dictation  of  his  father, 
sent  a  list  to  Philip  Church,  a  nephew  of  General 
Hamilton,  which  agrees  precisely  with  the  Benson 
list.  In  1807  the  executors  of  Hamilton's  will  de- 
posited in  the  New  York  Public  Library  Hamilton's 
copy  of  the  Federalist  in  which  the  authorship 
of  the  various  numbers  was  said  to  be  designated 
in  his  own  handwriting.  Attention  was  called  to 
this  fact  by  a  letter  in  the  Portfolio,  attributed  to 
Chancellor  Kent,  who  there  gave  from  the  copy 
thus  deposited  a  list  of  the  authors,  corresponding 
exactly  with  the  Benson  list.  In  18 10  an  edition  of 
Hamilton's  works  was  published  in  New  York.  The 
second  and  third  volumes   contain  the  Federalist, 


xx  Introduction 

and  the  author  of  each  paper  is  designated,  as  we 
are  informed  in  the  preface,  "  from  a  private  mem- 
orandum in  his  own  [Hamilton's]  handwriting." 
The  designation  of  authors  in  this  edition  is  the 
same  as  the  Benson  list,  with  one  striking  excep- 
tion: No.  54  is  given  to  Hamilton,  and  Jay  is  left 
with  only  four  numbers.  This  difference  would  in- 
dicate either  that  the  Portfolio  list  was  wrongly 
given,  or  that  the  editor  of  the  1810  edition  had 
some  list  of  which  nothing  is  now  known. 

In  a  copy  of  the  Federalist  belonging  to  Fisher 
Ames,  one  of  Hamilton's  intimate  friends,  the  au- 
thors of  the  papers  are  designated  in  accordance 
with  the  Benson  list. 

I  have  in  my  possession  a  copy  of  the  Federal- 
ist of  the  edition  of  1802,  which  belonged  to  my 
great-grandfather  George  Cabot,  who,  like  Ames, 
was  a  very  close  personal  friend  of  Hamilton.  To 
the  preface  Mr.  Cabot  appended  this  note:  " Those 
by  Mr.  Jay  and  Mr.  Madison  are  now  marked  in 
this  edition,  those  without  a  mark  are  from  the  pen 
of  Hamilton."  The  marking  corresponds  with  that 
of  the  edition  of  18 10,  from  which  it  may  have  been 
taken,  and  gives  No.  54  to  Hamilton  as  well  as  No. 
64.  In  the  second  volume,  however,  Mr.  Cabot  has 
wafered  in  a  slip  of  paper  giving  a  list  of  the  au- 
thors which  corresponds  exactly  with  the  Benson 
list. 

Then  there  is  a  list  made  and  preserved  by  Chan- 
cellor Kent,  which  he  says  was  revised  by  Hamil- 
ton, and  which  differs  from  the  Benson  list  by  giving 
64  instead  of  54  to  Jay  and  49  and  53  to  Madison 


Introduction  xxi 

in  addition  to  the  fourteen  assigned  to  him  in  the 
other  Hamilton  lists. 

Finally,  there  is  the  Washington  list,  which,  so 
far  as  I  am  aware,  has  never  been  published  before, 
and  for  which  I  am  indebted  to  the  kindness  of  John 
R.  Baker,  Esq.,  of  Philadelphia.  At  the  sale  of 
Washington's  library  Mr.  Baker  purchased  the  Gen- 
eral's copy  of  the  Federalist,  of  the  first  edition 
of  1788.  On  the  fly-leaf  of  the  first  volume  occurs 
the  following  memorandum  in  Washington's  well- 
known  handwriting: 

"Mr.  Jay  was  author  of  Nos.  1,  2,  3,  4,  5,  and  54. 

"Mr.  Madison  of  Nos.  10,  14,  and  37  to  48,  ex- 
clusive of  the  last. 

"Nos.  18,  19,  20  were  the  production  of  Jay, 
Madison,  and  Hamilton. 

"All  the  rest  of  Gen.  Hamilton/ ' 

Washington  died  in  1799.  He  speaks  of  Hamil- 
ton, it  will  be  observed,  as  "  General,"  and  that  fixes 
within  a  year  the  time  when  his  list  was  written.  It 
must  have  been  made  up  after  July,  1798,  and  be- 
fore December,  1799,  and  is  therefore  much  the 
earliest  list  we  have.  It  contains  some  curious 
variations  from  all  the  other  lists,  and  these  differ- 
ences would  seem  to  indicate  that  Washington  made 
it  up  from  recollection  of  information  derived  sev- 
eral years  before  from  the  authors.  The  striking 
and  important  fact  is  that  this,  the  earliest  list, 
drawn  up  by  a  singularly  accurate  man  years  before 
there  was  any  thought  of  controversy,  agrees  in  the 
main  with  the  Benson  list,  and  assigns  the  twelve 
disputed  numbers  unhesitatingly  to  Hamilton. 


xxii  Introduction 

We  now  come  to  the  Madison  lists.  The  first  ap- 
peared in  the  National  Intelligencer,  April  18,  1817, 
in  a  letter  signed  ''Corrector,"  and  was  stated  to 
be  from  "  indubitable  authority- — a  pencilled  memo- 
randum in  the  handwriting  of  Madison  himself." 
The  second  was  given  by  Madison  to  Richard  Rush 
at  about  the  same  time  apparently  as  that  of  "Cor- 
rector." The  third  was  published  in  the  City  of 
Washington  Gazette,  December  15,  181 7,  and  was 
stated  "to  be  furnished  by  Madison  himself."  The 
fourth  appeared  in  Gideon's  edition  of  the  Federal- 
ist, published  at  Washington  in  18 18,  and  was 
taken  from  Madison's  notes  in  his  own  copy  of  the 
work.1  These  lists  all  agree  in  giving  the  twelve 
disputed  numbers  to  Madison,  but  they  differ 
among  themselves  as  to  other  numbers  in  a  very 
marked  degree. 

There  are  two  Jefferson  lists.  One  was  in  his 
copy  of  the  Federalist,  and  corresponds  with  the 
most  erroneous  Madison  list,  that  furnished  to  the 
Washington  Gazette,  while  the  other  was  given  to  his 
friend  Gideon  Granger,  and  is  identical  with  the 
Benson  list.2 

The  only  information  derived  from  Mr.  Jay  was 
that  he  was  the  author  of  Nos.  2,  3,  4,  5,  and  64. 

Thus  we  find  that  the  two  principal  authors  of 
the  Federalist  are  at  variance  as  to  the  authorship 
of  twelve  important  numbers. 

Having  stated  what  the  authorities  are,  it  merely 

1  This  copy  is  now  in  the  possession  of  the  Government  in  the  library 
of  Congress. 

2  The  Granger  list  is  now  in  the  possession  of  the  Hon.  Robert  C  Win- 
throp,  of  Boston. 


Introduction  xxiii 

remains  to  examine  them.  Suggestions  have  not 
been  wanting  that  the  principal  Hamilton  list,  that 
of  Benson,  never  existed.  It  is  difficult  to  see  how 
any  one  could  seriously  entertain  such  an  idea,  but 
in  this  inquiry  I  do  not  propose  to  pass  over  any 
theory  which  has  even  been  hinted  at.  In  his 
introduction  to  the  Federalist  which  is  marked  by 
the  most  extraordinary  care,  and  is  thorough  to  the 
last  degree  in  details,  Mr.  Dawson  says  that  he  had 
an  interview  with  Mr.  Robert  Benson,  who  was 
present  in  the  office  when  Hamilton  came  in  and  left 
the  memorandum,  and  from  this  eye-witness  Mr. 
Dawson  received  the  whole  story.  Mr.  Benson  said 
that  he  saw  Hamilton  and  saw  the  list  which  was 
in  Hamilton's  handwriting;  that  his  uncle  made  a 
copy  of  it,  which  still  exists,  and  that  his  uncle  then 
deposited  the  original  in  the  New  York  Public 
Library.  There,  as  has  been  said,  the  list  remained 
for  many  years.  There  it  could  have  been  and  no 
doubt  was  seen  by  any  one  who  chose  to  look  at  it, 
and  in  1818  public  attention  was  called  to  it  and 
everybody  was  invited  to  examine  it.  During  all 
those  years  its  existence  and  its  authenticity  were 
never  questioned  for  a  moment,  even  in  the  some- 
what sharp  controversy  which  then  arose.  To  sup- 
pose that  it  did  not  exist,  is  to  assume  that  Egbert 
Benson  and  his  nephew  were  either  liars  or  forgers, 
or  both,  and  the  mere  statement  that  such  an  as- 
sumption is  necessary,  is  sufficient  to  destroy  at 
once  any  theory  that  the  Benson  list  never  existed 
in  Hamilton's  handwriting. 

All  the  Hamilton  lists  agree  except  as  to  No.  54, 


xxiv  Introduction 

which  the  edition  of  1810  gives  to  Hamilton.  Chan- 
cellor Kent's  list  gives  64  to  Jay,  which  is  correct, 
and  49  and  53  to  Madison.  As  to  the  two  last  the 
difference  is  peculiar,  but  the  Chancellor  corrected 
his  list  in  later  years,  and  owing  to  the  confusion 
between  the  original  and  the  modern  numbering, 
the  changes  as  to  49  and  53  seem  to  lose  significance, 
especially  as  they  are  two  of  the  first  ten  of  the  dis- 
puted numbers,  and  these  ten  all  coming  consecu- 
tively, must  on  any  reasonable  theory  be  assigned 
to  one  or  the  other  of  the  authors  in  a  block. 

The  next  step  is  to  find  out  the  errors  of  the  dif- 
ferent authorities  as  to  the  undoubted  numbers,  in 
order  to  properly  test  their  value  as  to  those  in  dis- 
pute. The  one  unquestioned  error  made  by  Ham- 
ilton was  as  to  number  54.  He  gave  Jay  his  correct 
total  of  five  numbers  but  assigned  him  54  instead 
of  64.  We  are  now  trying  the  value  of  these  lists 
simply  as  documents  by  the  ordinary  rules  of  his- 
torical evidence,  and  this  error  may  be  justly  said 
to  impair  their  authority.  This  being  admitted,  let 
us  apply  the  same  rules  to  the  Madison  lists.  In 
Gideon's  edition  of  181 8  Madison  concedes  18,  19, 
and  20  to  be  the  joint  work  of  Hamilton  and  him- 
self, and  gives  1 7  and  2 1  to  Hamilton  and  64  to  Jay. 
In  his  first  list,  that  of  the  National  Intelligencer,  he 
claims  18,  19,  and  20  as  exclusively  his  own  work, 
and  also  64,  which  belonged  to  Jay.  In  the  Rush 
list  Madison  again  claimed  18,  19,  and  20  for  him- 
self alone.  In  the  Washington  Gazette  list  he  takes 
17,  18,  19,  and  21  to  himself,  two  of  them  being 
joint  and  two  belonging  to  Hamilton,  and  gives  20, 


Introduction  xxv 

which  was  the  third  joint  number,  wholly  to  Ham- 
ilton. The  authority  of  the  lists  other  than  that  of 
the  edition  of  1818  cannot  be  questioned,  for  Madi- 
son says  in  a  letter  to  Gideon,  dated  August  20,  18 18 
(Writings,  iii.,  no):  "It  may,  however,  be  proper, 
perhaps,  to  observe  that  it  [his  copy  lent  to  Gideon] 
is  not  the  only  one  containing  the  names  of  the 
writers  correctly  prefixed  to  their  respective  papers. 
I  had,  a  considerable  time  ago,  at  the  request  of 
particular  friends,  given  the  same  advantage  to 
their  copies.* ' 

In  the  Hamilton  lists,  then,  we  find  two  errors  as 
to  two  numbers,  while  in  the  Madison  lists  there  are 
twelve  errors  as  to  six  numbers.  Tried,  therefore, 
by  the  list  of  admitted  errors,  Hamilton's  authority 
is  shown  to  be  six  times  as  good  as  that  of  Madison. 
But  this  is  not  all.  In  1807  the  Benson  list,  or  one 
just  like  it,  was  published,  and  in  18 10  came  the 
edition  of  Hamilton's  works,  which  gave  four  num- 
bers to  Jay,  fourteen  to  Madison,  and  all  the  rest  to 
Hamilton.  Yet  it  was  not  until  181 7  that  the  au- 
thority of  these  assignments  was  publicly  disputed 
for  the  first  time.  Over  ten  years  elapsed  after 
the  publication  in  the  Portfolio  before  Madison  con- 
tradicted Hamilton's  list,  which  is  a  very  serious 
matter  if  we  again  apply  the  rules  of  evidence.  The 
excuse  that  it  would  not  have  been  becoming  in  the 
President  to  have  entered  upon  a  literary  contro- 
versy will  not  do,  for  the  publication  in  the  Port- 
folio preceded  Madison's  elevation  to  the  presidency 
by  nearly  eighteen  months,  and  there  was  certainly 
no   reason  why  a   Secretary  of   State   should  not 


xxvi  Introduction 

defend  his  copyright.  There  is  still  another  point 
which  tells  against  Madison.  In  a  letter  to  J.  K. 
Paulding,  written  in  183 1,1  as  well  as  in  an  unpub- 
lished memorandum  2  quoted  by  J.  C.  Hamilton  in 
the  introduction  to  his  edition  of  the  Federalist, 
Madison  argues  from  internal  evidence  that  he  was 
the  author  of  certain  of  the  disputed  papers.  This 
would  not  have  been  done  probably  by  a  man  who 
had  no  doubt  in  his  own  mind  as  to  the  essays,  and 
it  certainly  would  not  be  the  course  of  any  one  who 
had  contemporary  memoranda  to  guide  and  assure 
him.  Madison's  argument  from  internal  evidence 
makes  it  clear  that  he  compiled  his  list  from  memory. 
There  is  no  direct  evidence  that  Hamilton  did  the 
same,  except  from  his  error  in  regard  to  Jay's  num- 
ber on  the  treaty  power.  The  probabilities,  how- 
ever, are  strong  that  he  also  wrote  his  lists  from 
memory,  and  all  the  lists,  therefore,  stand  on  the 
same  footing  in  this  respect. 

The  arguments  from  internal  evidence  on  both 
sides,  whether  by  Madison  or  others,  seem  to  be 
for  the  most  part  worthless.  One,  for  example,  is 
that  No.  49  speaks  in  terms  of  praise  of  Jefferson, 
and  therefore  could  only  have  proceeded  from 
Madison.  But  the  essays  were  written  in  1788,  and 
in  1788  Hamilton  knew  Jefferson  simply  as  a  re- 

1  Writings  of  Madison,  iv.,  176. 

2  A  careful  search  for  this  memorandum,  which  Mr.  J.  C.  Hamilton 
alleges,  in  his  edition  of  the  Federalist  (p.  C),  to  have  been  in  the 
State  Department,  has  failed  to  reveal  it.  This  is  entirely  unimport- 
ant, however,  as  the  memorandum  merely  differs  verbally  from  the 
argument  in  the  letter  to  Paulding,  which  is  of  unquestioned  authen- 
ticity. 


Introduction  xxvii 

volutionary  leader,  who  was  respected  by  all  men, 
and  had  never  had  any  political  quarrel  with  him. 
Moreover,  the  essay,  after  quoting  Jefferson  and 
praising  him,  goes  on  to  refute  his  doctrine  as  to  the 
point  in  question.  It  is  also  said  that  49  continues 
48,  and  must  therefore  be  by  the  same  hand.  But 
this  argument  fails  if  we  examine  the  undoubted 
numbers.  No.  9,  for  instance,  is  on  "the  utility  of 
the  Union  as  a  safeguard  against  domestic  faction 
and  insurrection,"  while  No.  10  is  "the  same  sub- 
ject continued,"  and  No.  9  is  by  Hamilton  and  No. 
10  by  Madison.  As  to  the  historical  examples  cited 
in  the  essays,  Madison  and  Hamilton  used  the  same 
illustrations  and  drew  from  the  same  sources,  as 
may  be  seen  from  the  notes  and  briefs  of  their 
speeches.  The  differences  in  style  are  never  suffi- 
ciently marked  to  lead  to  any  safe  conclusions. 

This  much,  as  has  already  been  said,  may  be  as- 
serted with  confidence :  that  Hamilton  and  Madison 
both  relied  upon  their  memories.  We  have  there- 
fore certain  conflicting  lists  of  the  highest  authority, 
and  if  we  go  merely  upon  the  documentary  evidence 
tried  by  the  ordinary  rules  of  historic  evidence,  the 
balance  inclines  very  strongly  in  favor  of  Hamilton. 
The  proportion  of  admitted  errors,  the  ten  years 
without  contradiction,  and  Madison's  arguments 
from  internal  evidence  all  tend  to  show  in  the 
strongest  way  that  Hamilton's  memory  was  de- 
cidedly the  more  accurate.  But  if  we  go  beyond 
the  direct  documentary  evidence,  the  case  is  not 
quite  so  clear.  The  best  Hamilton  list,  that  given 
to   Benson,  was  written  in  haste  and  at  a  most 


xxviii  Introduction 

agitating  moment.  It  contains  one  acknowledged  slip 
of  the  pen  which  gives  54  instead  of  64  to  Jay.  As 
an  ingenious  writer  in  the  Historical  Magazine  (vol. 
8,  306)  suggests,  "37  to  48  inclusive  by  M."  may 
have  been  another  slip  for  "37  to  58  inclusive,  by 
M."  The  essays  from  49  to  58  inclusive,  all  deal 
with  the  same  general  subject  of  the  popular  element 
in  the  Constitution,  including  representation  in  the 
lower  House,  and  on  their  face  they  certainly  seem 
to  be  from  the  same  pen.  Madison,  in  the  letter  to 
Paulding  just  quoted,  says  that  Hamilton's  errors 
were  due,  of  course,  to  haste  and  a  lapse  of  memory, 
but  if  he  himself  was  accused  of  errors  they  could 
only  be  attributed  to  a  want  of  veracity.  This  is 
true  to  the  extent  that  Madison  gave  time  and 
thought  to  his  assignment  and  contradicted  Hamil- 
ton deliberately.  Yet  he,  too,  wrote  from  memory, 
and  in  four  lists  he  made  twelve  errors,  which  were 
certainly  owing  to  forgetfulness  and  not  to  untruth- 
fulness. 

The  theory  of  the  writer  in  the  Historical  Maga- 
zine provides  very  comfortably  for  the  ten  numbers 
from  49  to  58  inclusive,  but  it  breaks  down  utterly 
as  to  62  and  63,  the  remaining  two  of  the  twelve  in 
dispute.  As  to  these  two  I  have  very  little  doubt. 
I  think  they  both  belong  to  Hamilton.  They  follow 
three  undoubted  Hamilton  numbers,  and  they  treat 
of  the  Senate,  a  subject  on  which  Hamilton  made  a 
most  elaborate  speech  in  the  New  York  convention, 
and  the  general  line  of  thought  and  argument  is 
the  same  in  both  cases.  It  was,  too,  a  topic  to 
which  Hamilton  had  given  particular  attention,  and 


Introduction  xxix 

this  may  have  been  the  reason  that  he  fell  into  an 
error  as  to  number  64,  which  is  concerned  with  the 
treaty-making  power  of  the  Senate.  As  to  every 
doubtful  number  outside  of  the  ten  from  49-58, 
Madison  was  in  error,  and  this  seems  to  me  to  be 
fatally  against  him  as  to  62  and  63. 

In  regard  to  the  disputed  ten,  I  have  been  able  to 
come  to  no  confident  conclusion.  Before  I  knew  of 
the  Washington  list,  and  before  I  had  discovered  a 
curious  addition  to  No.  56  in  the  edition  of  1802,  I 
felt  that  the  probabilities  were  in  favor  of  Madison, 
and  I  was  inclined  to  assign  those  numbers  to  him, 
although  not  so  confidently  as  in  giving  62  and  63 
to  Hamilton. 

The  Washington  list,  both  from  its  date  and  the 
character  of  its  author,  seems  to  me  to  tell  very 
strongly  against  Madison.  The  other  point  to  which 
I  have  just  alluded  in  regard  to  number  56,  has  never 
been  noticed  before,  so  far  as  I  am  aware.  When 
the  edition  of  1802  was  in  preparation,  Hamilton 
was  asked  to  revise  it,  but  declared,  in  the  strong- 
est terms,  that  the  Federalist  must  be  printed  as  it 
was  written,  and  he  also  insisted  that  full  credit 
should  be  -given  to  Mr.  Jay  and  Mr.  Madison  in  the 
preface  for  the  excellence  of  their  work.  The  edi- 
tion was  revised,  unquestionably,  I  think,  as  Mr. 
Dawson  has  shown,  by  William  Coleman,  the  editor 
of  the  New  York  Evening  Post.  Many  changes  were 
made,  but,  with  one  exception,  they  were  utterly 
unimportant,  effected  no  improvement,  and  were 
nearly  all  purely  verbal.  In  number  56,  however,  in 
treating  of  the  regulation  of  the  militia,  a  sentence 


xxx  Introduction 

is  inserted,  as  may  be  seen  by  referring  to  that  num- 
ber in  this  edition,  which  relates  to  the  need  of 
local  knowledge  in  dealing  with  such  troops.  This 
sentence  is  a  bit  of  military  criticism,  and  could 
hardly  have  been  written  by  any  but  a  military  man, 
for  it  would  not  have  occurred  to  a  civilian.  It  is 
very  unlikely  indeed  that  it  would  have  occurred  to 
Coleman,  and  he  certainly  would  not  have  inserted 
it  without  Hamilton's  approbation.  On  the  other 
hand,  there  is  little  doubt  that  the  proof-sheets  of 
this  edition  were  seen  by  Hamilton,  and  the  sen- 
tence in  question  is  very  characteristic  of  Hamilton 
and  of  his  mode  of  thought.  He  was  rigidly  scru- 
pulous as  to  changes  in  the  Federalist  and  was 
extremely  particular  as  to  the  work  of  his  fellow- 
writers.  Hopkins,  the  publisher  of  the  edition  of 
1802,  wrote  to  Mr.  J.  C.  Hamilton  that  the  most 
scrupulous  delicacy  was  observed  in  regard  to  the 
essays  of  Madison  and  Jay,  and  that  a  portion  of  the 
work  was  reprinted  because  a  single  favorite  word 
of  Madison  had  been  changed  in  one  passage.  It 
is  therefore  in  the  highest  degree  improbable  that 
Hamilton  would  have  added  such  an  important  sen- 
tence himself,  or  permitted  any  one  else  to  add  it, 
to  an  essay  which  he  did  not  know  to  be  his  own. 
The  insertion  of  this  sentence,  therefore,  points  very 
strongly  to  the  conclusion  that  Hamilton,  in  1802, 
considered  number  56  his  own,  not  in  a  moment  of 
agitation  and  hurry,  but  when  coolly  examining 
proof-sheets.  If  this  was  his  opinion  at  that  time 
and  under  such  circumstances  as  to  number  56,  it  is 
difficult  to  believe  either  that  he  was  mistaken  as  to 


Introduction  xxxi 

that  number  or  as  to  the  other  twelve  in  dispute. 
At  the  same  time,  the  Washington  list  and  the  sen- 
tence in  number  56  are  not,  of  course,  conclusive, 
and  while  these  two  bits  of  evidence  have  almost 
removed  my  inclination  to  believe  in  Madison's 
authorship  of  the  disputed  numbers,  I  am  not  even 
yet  completely  satisfied  that  they  are  not  his  work. 
The  outcome  of  it  all  is  that  the  evidence  in  regard 
to  the  twelve  disputed  numbers  is  so  conflicting  that, 
although  the  balance  is  strongly  in  Hamilton's  favor 
the  best  which  can  be  done  is  to  present  the  plain 
facts  and  all  the  arguments  as  simply  and  clearly 
as  possible,  and  then  leave  every  one  to  draw  his 
conclusions  to  suit  himself.  No  one  is  entitled  to 
assign  the  disputed  numbers  to  either  Hamilton  or 
Madison  with  absolute  confidence.  They  were  surely 
written  by  one  or  the  other,  and  with  that  unsatis- 
factory certainty  we  must  fain  be  content. 

II 

BIBLIOGRAPHY   OF   THE    "  FEDERALIST' ' 

Protracted  and  minute  search,  supplemented  by 
widespread  advertisements,  and  by  the  obliging  aid 
of  many  kind  correspondents,  has  enabled  me  to  add 
only  two  editions  to  the  list  of  editions  of  the  Fed- 
eralist already  given  by  Mr.  Dawson.  In  a  few  in- 
stances where  Mr.  Dawson  was  able  to  speak  of  an 
edition  only  from  hearsay,  I  have  succeeded  in  find- 
ing a  copy  and  in  obtaining  a  full  description  of  it. 
This,  however,  is  all,  and  the  bibliography  of  the 
Federalist  which  follows   is  in  the    main  that   of 


xxxiv  Introduction 

instead  of  the  usual  date,  appears  "An  3?  de  la 
Republique."  This  edition  also  is  of  the  utmost 
rarity. 

IV.  All  that  Mr.  Dawson  could  say  of  the  fourth 
edition  of  the  Federalist  was  that  "it  is  said  that 
in  the  year  1799  a  new  edition  of  the  Federalist  was 
published  in  New  York."  Mr.  Dawson,  after  the 
most  exhaustive  search,  failed  to  find  a  copy,  and 
only  heard  of  one,  or  what  appeared  to  be  one,  in  the 
collection  of  Mr.  Force,  while  his  own  volume  was 
passing  through  the  press,  and  he  was  therefore  com- 
pelled to  leave  the  existence  of  such  an  edition 
largely  a  matter  of  conjecture.  This  gap  can  now 
be  filled.  There  is  a  copy  of  this  edition,  probably 
unique,  for  the  Force  copy  seems  to  have  disap- 
peared, in  the  possession  of  the  Long  Island  His- 
torical Society,  and  I  am  indebted  to  the  kindness  of 
Mr.  George  Hannah,  the  librarian  of  the  Society,  for 
my  knowledge  of  its  existence  and  for  the  following 
copy  of  its  title-page : 

"  The  /  Federalist  /  A  Collection  of  /  Essays  / 
Written  in  favour  of  the  /  New  Constitution  /  As 
agreed  upon  by  the  /  Federal  Convention  /  Septem- 
ber 17,  1787  /  In  two  volumes  /  Vol.  I  /  Vol.  II  / 
New  York  /  Printed  and  sold  by  John  Tiebout  /  No. 
358  Pearl  St.  /  1799."  It  was  simply  a  reprint  of 
the  edition  of  1788. 

V.  The  fifth  edition  of  the  Federalist  was  pub- 
lished, in  two  volumes,  by  George  Hopkins,  of  New 
York,  in  1802.  In  this  edition  many  changes,  nearly 
all  verbal,  were  made  in  the  text.  As  has  been 
stated  above   ("Authorship  of  the   Federalist"  p. 


Introduction  xxxv 

xix.)  the  reviser  of  this  edition  was  probably  Wil- 
liam Coleman,  the  editor  of  the  New  York  Evening 
Post.  It  was  represented  at  the  time  and  after- 
wards that  this  edition  had  the  benefit  of  Hamilton's 
supervision.  The  one  certain  fact  is  that  Hamilton 
in  the  strongest  terms  forbade  any  alterations.  The 
result,  due  perhaps  to  this  prohibition,  was  that  the 
changes  and  omissions  were,  with  one  marked  ex- 
ception already  alluded  to,  quite  immaterial.  It 
seems  probable  that  Hamilton  saw  the  proof-sheets, 
but  whether  he  thoroughly  approved  the  changes 
must  remain  a  matter  of  conjecture.  This  edition 
of  1802  is  not  rare. 

VI.  The  sixth  edition  was  published  in  18 10  by 
Williams  and  Whiting  of  New  York,  and  formed  the 
second  and  third  volumes  of  the  Writings  of  Ham- 
ilton. It  was  edited  by  John  Wells,  a  distin- 
guished member  of  the  New  York  bar,  and  one  of 
Hamilton's  personal  friends.  With  but  few  and  un- 
important changes  it  followed  the  Hopkins  edition 
of  1802,  although  the  text  was  said  to  have  had  the 
benefit  of  the  marginal  notes  made  by  Hamilton  in 
his  own  copy.  The  principal  and  the  only  new 
feature  of  this  edition  was  that  the  names  of  the  re- 
spective authors  were  appended  to  each  essay.  This 
assignment  of  authorship  corresponds  with  the  Ben- 
son list,  except  that  No.  54,  as  well  as  No.  64,  is 
given  to  Hamilton.     It  is  not  a  rare  edition. 

VII.  The  seventh  edition  of  the  Federalist  was 
a  single  octavo  volume  of  some  477  pages,  published 
by  Benjamin  Warner  of  Philadelphia  and  William 
Greer  of  Harrisburg,  and  is  now  not  often  met  with. 


xxxvi  Introduction 

It  was  a  simple  reproduction  of  the  Williams  and 
Whiting  edition  of  1810. 

VIII.  The  eighth  edition,  in  one  volume,  was 
issued  in  181 8  by  Benjamin  Warner  of  Philadel- 
phia, the  publisher  of  the  seventh,  with  which  it  was 
identical,  the  only  new  feature  being  an  appendix 
containing  the  articles  of  Confederation  and  the  Con- 
stitution of  the  United  States  with  the  amendments. 
This  edition  is  rare. 

IX.  The  ninth  edition  was  a  large  octavo  of  671 
pages,  and  was  published  in  1818  by  Jacob  Gideon, 
in  Washington.  It  was  claimed  that  this  edition 
had  the  sanction  and  approval  of  Madison.  It  cer- 
tainly had  the  benefit  of  the  notes  made  by  him  on 
his  own  essays,  and  it  contained  his  assignment  of 
the  authorship  of  the  various  numbers.  The  text  is 
that  of  the  Williams  and  Whiting  edition  of  18 10, 
and  the  changes  in  Madison's  essays  are  verbal  and 
unimportant.  It  contained,  besides  the  Federalist, 
prefatory  remarks,  and  in  the  appendix,  Ham- 
ilton's " Letters  of  Pacificus,"  Madison's  "Letters  of 
Helvidius,"  the  articles  of  Confederation  and  the 
Constitution  of  the  United  States.  Copies  of  this 
edition  are  not  common. 

X.  The  tenth  edition  was  published  by  Jacob 
Gideon  at  Washington  in  182 1.  It  is  a  reprint  of  his 
edition  of  1818. 

XI.  The  eleventh  edition  was  the  first  of  a  series 
of  editions  published  at  Hallowell,  Maine,  by  Glazier 
&  Co.,  and  their  successors,  who  purchased  the 
Gideon  copyright.  Some  of  these  editions  are  now 
very  rare,  while  others  are  not  infrequently  to  be 


Introduction  xxxvii 

met  with.  The  first  appeared  in  1826.  It  is  a 
single  volume  octavo,  of  582  pages,  and  is  identical 
with  the  Gideon  editions  of  1818  and  1821. 

XII.  The  twelfth  edition  has  no  existence  that 
Mr.  Dawson  could  discover,  except  in  the  pages  of 
the  catalogue  of  the  New  York  State  Library.  If  it 
existed,  it  was  a  Hallo  well  edition,  and  identical  with 
that  of  the  preceding  year.  Mr.  Homes,  the  li- 
brarian, suggested  to  Mr.  Dawson  that  the  entry  was 
a  misprint  for  1837,  the  date  of  an  undoubted  Hallo- 
well  edition  which  was  in  the  New  York  Library.  Mr. 
Homes  writes  me  that  no  edition  of  1827  has  since 
been  found,  and  that  the  question  stands  as  it  did 
in  1863,  when  Mr.  Dawson  discussed  it.  It  seems 
improbable  that  any  such  edition  of  1827  ever  existed. 

XIII.  The  thirteenth  was  another  Hallowell  edi- 
tion, identical  with  the  Gideon  edition  and  with  that 
of  1826.  Mr.  Dawson  mentions  the  existence  of 
this  edition,  but  had  never  seen  or  heard  of  a  copy. 
Mr.  Hannah^informs  me  that  there  is  a  copy  in  the 
possession  of  the  Long  Island  Historical  Society,  and 
I  have  heard  of  one  other.  It  was  published  in  1831 
by  Glazier,  Masters,  &  Co.,  and  is  apparently  as  rare 
as  one  of  the  French  editions. 

XIV.  The  fourteenth  edition  was  published  in  a 
single  volume,  duodecimo,  at  Washington,  in  1831. 
Except  for  a  few  trifling  changes  and  the  addition 
of  an  alphabetical  index  by  Philip  R.  Fendall,  a 
member  of  the  Washington  bar,  this  edition  was  an 
exact  reprint  of  the  Gideon  edition,  and  was  con- 
sidered by  the  Hallowell  publishers  a  violation  of 
their  copyright. 


xxxviii  Introduction 

XV.  The  fifteenth  edition  was  published  in  one 
volume,  at  Hallowell,  by  Glazier,  Masters,  &  Smith, 
in  1837.  It  was  a  reprint  of  the  Gideon  edition  of 
1818. 

XVI.  The  sixteenth  edition  was  a  Portuguese 
translation  published  by  J.  Villeneuve  &  Co.  at  Rio 
de  Janeiro  in  1840.  No  copy  is  known  to  exist  in 
this  country.  The  title-page,  which  is  given  by 
Sabin,  is  as  follows:  "O  Federalista,  publicado  em 
inglez  por  Hamilton,  Madisson  e  Jay  cidadaos  de 
Nova- York,  e  traduzido  emportuguez  por.  .  .  . 
Rio  de  Janeiro:  Typ.  Imperial  e  Const,  de  J.  Ville- 
neuve &  Co.,  1840."  I  am  indebted  for  my  know- 
ledge of  this  and  the  tenth  edition  mentioned  above, 
neither  of  which  are  given  by  Mr.  Dawson,  to  Mr. 
Paul  Leicester  Ford,  author  of  the  excellent  Biblio- 
theca  Hamiltoniana,  which  has  just  appeared  in  a 
handsome  octavo  volume. 

XVII.  The  seventeenth  was  another  Hallowell 
edition,  a  reprint  of  the  others  from  the  same  press, 
and  appeared  in  1842. 

XVIII.  The  eighteenth  edition  was  published  in 
one  volume  by  J.  &  G.  S.  Gideon,  in  Washington,  in 
1845.  ^  was  a  reprint  of  the  edition  of  18 18,  with 
the  addition  of  the  index  of  the  Washington  edition 
of  1 83 1,  with  some  improvements.  Mr.  Dawson 
failed  to  discover  a  copy  of  this  edition,  but  I  am 
informed  by  Mr.  P.  L.  Ford  that  there  is  a  copy, 
from  which  he  has  taken  the  title-page  in  his  Biblio- 
theca  Hamiltoniana  (p.  27),  in  the  possession  of  his 
father,  Mr.  Gordon  L.  Ford,  of  Brooklyn. 

XIX.  The  nineteenth  edition  was  published  in  one 


Introduction  xxxix 

volume,  in  Philadelphia,  by  R.  Wilson  Desilver.  It 
was  a  reprint  of  the  Gideon  edition  of  1818,  with  the 
alphabetical  index  of  1831  and  the  addition  of  the 
act  of  Congress  of  January  23,  1845,  relating  to 
the  election  of  President.  It  would  seem  to  have 
been  a  reprint  of  the  preceding  edition  of  1845. 

XX.  The  twentieth  was  a  Hallo  well  edition,  pub- 
lished in  1852  by  Masters,  Smith,  &  Co.,  and  was  a 
reprint  of  their  other  editions,  with  the  addition  of 
an  analytical  index. 

XXI.  The  twenty-first  was  also  a  Hallo  well  edi- 
tion, published  in  1857,  and  was  an  exact  reprint  of 
its  predecessor  of  1852. 

XXII.  The  twenty-second  edition  of  the  Fed- 
eralist was  printed  for  the  editor,  Mr.  Henry  B. 
Dawson,  at  Morrisania,  New  York,  and  published  in 
1863.  This  edition,  which  is  the  most  valuable  one 
hitherto  published,  was  designed  for  two  volumes, 
of  which  the  first  alone  has  appeared.  The  volume 
published  contains  the  Federalist  with  the  ori- 
ginal notes  of  the  authors,  a  most  learned  introduc- 
tion discussing  the  history,  bibliography,  text,  and 
authorship  of  the  essays,  and  a  most  admirable  an- 
alytical table  of  contents,  supplemented  by  a  com- 
parative list,  showing  the  authorship  of  the  essays 
as  claimed  by  the  various  original  authorities. 

XXIII.  The  twenty-third  or  "  University ' '  edi- 
tion was  published  in  one  volume,  at  New  York,  by 
Charles  Scribner's  Sons,  in  1864.  It  was  edited  by 
Mr.  Dawson,  and  was  a  reprint  of  the  first  volume 
of  his  larger  edition,  without  the  introduction. 

XXIV.  The  twenty-fourth  edition  was  published 


xl  Introduction 

in  one  volume  by  J.  B.  Lippincott  &  Co.,  at  Phila- 
delphia, in  1864.  This  edition  was  edited  by  Mr.  J. 
C.  Hamilton,  and  contains,  besides  the  essays,  a 
table  of  contents,  an  historical  notice,  which  dis- 
cusses at  length  the  history,  text,  and  authorship 
of  the  essays,  the  six  numbers  of  the  Continentalist 
(1781),  the  resolution  of  New  York  (1782)  for  a 
general  convention,  a  letter  from  Hamilton  to  Clin- 
ton, May  14,  1783,  resolution  for  a  general  conven- 
tion (1783),  the  address  of  the  Annapolis  convention 
(1786),  Hamilton's  speech  on  the  Impost  grant,  reso- 
lution for  an  act  of  Congress  for  a  general  convention, 
February  17,  1787,  resolution  for  the  appointment 
of  New  York  delegates,  February  26,  1787,  the 
articles  of  Confederation,  Hamilton's  first  plan  of 
government,  the  federal  Constitution  as  agreed 
upon  by  the  convention,  a  table  of  collated  texts, 
three  essays  by  Philo-Publius  (William  Duer),  and 
an  alphabetical  index. 

This  concludes  the  list  of  editions  of  the  Federalist 
so  far  as  I  have  been  able  to  discover  them.  It 
is  quite  possible  that  there  have  been  others  pub- 
lished in  this  country  or  in  Europe  in  addition  to  the 
twenty-four  described,  but  if  this  is  the  case,  the 
most  careful  inquiry  and  wide  advertising  have 
failed  to  discover  them. 

Ill 


THE   TEXT   OF   THE       FEDERALIST 


>» 


The   essays  of  the  Federalist  were  first  printed 
in  the  newspapers,  and  were  then  republished  with- 


Introduction  xli 

out  substantial  textual  change  in  the  McLean  edi- 
tion of  1788.  In  1802,  the  Hopkins  edition,  de- 
scribed above,  appeared  with  many  textual  changes 
in  the  essays  written  by  Hamilton,  and  in  18 18  the 
Gideon  edition,  with  further  changes  in  the  Madison 
essays.  The  new  text  of  these  two  editions  was 
adopted  in  all  subsequent  editions,  until  the  appear- 
ance of  the  one  published  in  1863  by  Mr.  Dawson, 
who  reverted  to  the  original  text.  Mr.  John  C. 
Hamilton,  in  his  edition  a  year  later,  adopted  the 
Hopkins  and  Gideon  text.  Thus  it  happens  that 
there  are  two  texts  of  the  Federalist  which  contend 
for  the  honor  of  being  the  best  and  most  authentic 
version  of  these  famous  essays. 

I  have  had  no  hesitation  in  deciding  as  to  the  text 
to  be  adopted  in  this  edition.  Mr.  Dawson's  argu- 
ment in  favor  of  the  original  text  is  unanswerable, 
and  can  be  readily  summarized.  The  essays  of  the 
Federalist  were  written  at  a  special  time  for  a 
special  purpose.  They  formed  an  elaborate  argu- 
ment, intended  to  convince  the  people  of  the  country 
of  the  value  and  usefulness  of  the  proposed  Consti- 
tution, and  it  is,  therefore,  historically  essential  that 
we  should  have  them  in  the  precise  form  in  which 
they  did  their  work. 

The  Federalist  furthermore  was  the  first  au- 
thoritative interpretation  of  the  Constitution,  and 
was  mainly  written  by  the  two  principal  authors  of 
that  instrument.  It  was  the  first  exposition  of  the 
Constitution  and  the  first  step  in  the  long  process  of 
development  which  has  given  life,  meaning,  and  im- 
portance to  the  clauses  agreed  upon  at  Philadelphia. 


xlii  Introduction 

It  has  acquired  all  the  weight  and  sanction  of  a 
judicial  decision,  and  has  been  constantly  used  as  an 
authority  in  the  settlement  of  constitutional  ques- 
tions. The  essays  of  Publius  are  undoubtedly  a 
great  work  upon  the  general  subject  of  political 
federation,  and  if  they  were  nothing  else,  textual 
changes  and  improvements  would  be  at  least  de- 
fensible, if  not  wholly  desirable.  But  changes  cease 
to  be  permissible  when  the  writings  in  question  are 
not  only  essays  on  the  general  subject  of  political 
federation  and  government  under  a  written  consti- 
tution, but  are  also  arguments  intended  to  serve  a 
specific  purpose  at  a  particular  time,  which  have 
assumed  the  weight  and  sanctity  of  judicial  inter- 
pretation. 

The  authority  for  the  most  extensive  changes, 
moreover,  is  by  no  means  clear.  It  is  certain  that 
Hamilton  opposed  any  alterations,  and  indeed  for- 
bade them.  It  is  conceded  also  that  the  changes  in 
the  edition  of  1802  were  not  made  by  Hamilton, 
with  the  exception  probably  of  the  paragraph  in 
No.  56,  and  the  extent  of  his  approval  of  them  is  a 
matter  of  conjecture.  The  further  slight  changes  in 
the  edition  of  1818  have,  it  is  true,  the  sanction  of 
Madison,  but  what  we  desire  now  is  not  Madison's 
arguments  in  the  phrases  which  he  preferred  in  18 18, 
but  in  the  words  which  he  actually  used  in  1787  and 
1788. 

Finally,  the  changes  were,  as  a  rule,  unimportant, 
often  trivial,  with  two  or  three  exceptions,  entirely 
verbal,  and,  in  my  opinion,  made  no  improvement. 
The  text  of  this  edition,  therefore,  is  the  original 


Introduction  xliii 

text  of  the  newspapers  and  the  McLean  edition  of 
1788  as  adopted  by  Mr.  Dawson.  I  have  added  a 
few  notes  giving  the  text  of  the  subsequent  changes 
in  every  case  where  they  seemed  of  the  slightest  im- 
portance, or  where,  by  any  possible  construction, 
they  could  be  considered  to  affect  the  meaning  of  the 
passage. 

In  only  one  point  is  Mr.  Dawson's  edition  as  it 
seems  to  me  open  to  criticism,  and  in  that  point 
alone  does  this  edition  depart  from  his  text.  The 
McLean  edition  changed  the  original  numbering  of 
the  essays  as  they  appeared  in  the  newspapers.  No. 
35  of  the  newspapers  was  put  back  in  the  series  and 
numbered  29.  This  was  a  proper  change,  because 
it  placed  the  original  No.  35  where  it  belonged  in  the 
natural  sequence  of  subjects  and  arguments.  The 
original  Nos.  29  and  30  thus  became  30  and  31,  re- 
spectively. Then  the  McLean  edition  divided  the 
original  No.  31  into  two  parts,  and  numbered  them 
32  and  ^t,.  This  change  has  no  apparent  reason,  but 
it  is  perfectly  harmless  and  unimportant.  The  effect 
of  these  changes  was  to  advance  the  McLean  essays 
one  number  each  over  the  newspaper  originals  up  to 
76,  which  became  77  in  the  book-form.  The  re- 
maining essays,  78  to  85  inclusive,  appeared  first 
from  the  author's  manuscript  in  the  McLean  edition, 
and  were  reprinted  in  the  newspapers  from  that  edi- 
tion probably  with  the  newspaper  numbering,  so 
that  no  No.  85  ever  appeared  in  the  newspapers. 
It  is  obvious  that  the  McLean  edition  must  have 
had  the  approval  of  Hamilton,  because  the  last  eight 
numbers  were  printed  from  his  manuscript;   and  if 


xliv  Introduction 

the  edition  had  his  sanction,  of  course  the  arrange- 
ment and  numbering  must  have  had  it  also,  for 
these  were  the  only  points  on  which  it  differed  from 
the  newspapers.  It  is  clear,  therefore,  that  Hamil- 
ton thought  the  McLean  numbering  an  improve- 
ment, and  the  changes  then  made  in  this  direction 
have  of  course  no  effect  whatever  on  the  authority 
of  the  Federalist  either  as  argument  or  interpreta- 
tion. 

Mr.  Dawson  shows  by  an  ingenious  bit  of  reason- 
ing that  there  was  no  "  original  number  77,"  and 
accordingly  omits  that  number  from  his  edition,  and 
thus  makes  his  last  number  85.  There  is  no  ground, 
as  I  have  pointed  out,  for  thus  adhering  to  an  enu- 
meration which  omits  one  number  because  there  was 
confusion  in  the  differing  forms  of  original  publica- 
tion, and  which  has  no  peculiar  authority  or  sanc- 
tion. There  is,  moreover,  one  fatal  objection  to  Mr. 
Dawson's  system,  in  the  fact  that  the  numbering  of 
the  McLean  edition  has  been  universally  adopted  in 
all  subsequent  editions  and  has  become  the  standard 
of  reference.  It  is  to  be  regretted  that  Mr.  Dawson, 
in  deference  to  rigid  antiquarianism,  should  have 
marred  his  edition  by  a  numbering  which,  for  no 
substantial  reason,  differs  from  the  accepted  standard 
and  which,  on  this  account  and  by  omitting  one 
number  altogether,  makes  intelligent  reference  to  it 
difficult,  if  not  impossible. 

The  text  of  this  edition,  therefore,  is,  as  I  have  said, 
the  untouched  original  text,  and  the  essays  are  num- 
bered according  to  what,  in  my  opinion,  is  the  origi- 
nal arrangement,  and  which  is  certainly  the  best,  as 


Introduction  xlv 

it  is  the  standard  numbering,  that  of  the  first  edition 
of  1788. 

In  conclusion,  I  have  only  to  express  my  thanks 
to  the  many  kind  correspondents  who  have  given 
me  information  as  to  the  Federalist  and  its  edi- 
tions, and  to  state  my  obligations  to  the  work  of  Mr. 
Dawson,  to  whose  masterly  introduction  and  ad- 
mirable analytical  table  of  contents  this  and  all  the 
subsequent  editions  of  the  essays  of  Publius  must 
be  largely  indebted. 

Henry  Cabot  Lodge. 

May  2i,  1886. 


THE  FEDERALIST 


THE  FEDERALIST 


For  the  Independent  Journal 
THE  FEDERALIST.     No.  I 

(HAMILTON) 

To  the  People  of  the  State  of  New  York: 

After  an  unequivocal  experience  of  the  inefficiency 
of  the  subsisting  federal  government,  you  are  called 
upon  to  deliberate  on  a  new  Constitution  for  the 
United  States  of  America.  The  subject  speaks  its 
own  importance ;  comprehending  in  its  consequences 
nothing  less  than  the  existence  of  the  UNION,  the 
safety  and  welfare  of  the  parts  of  which  it  is  com- 
posed, the  fate  of  an  empire  in  many  respects  the 
most  interesting  in  the  world.  It  has  been  fre- 
quently remarked  that  it  seems  to  have  been 
reserved  to  the  people  of  this  country,  by  their  con- 
duct and  example,  to  decide  the  important  question, 
whether  societies  of  men  are  really  capable  or  not 
of  establishing  good  government  from  reflection 
and  choice,  or  whether  they  are  forever  destined  to 
depend  for  their  political  constitutions  on  accident 
and  force.  If  there  be  any  truth  in  the  remark,  the 
crisis  at  which  we  are  arrived  may  with  propriety 
be  regarded  as  the  era  in  which  that  decision  is  to 
be  made;  and  a  wrong  election  of  the  part  we  shall 

a 


4  Alexander  Hamilton 

act  may,  in  this  view,  deserve  to  be  considered  as 
the  general  misfortune  of  mankind. 

This  idea  will  add  the  inducements  of  philanthropy 
to  those  of  patriotism,  to  heighten  the  solicitude 
which  all  considerate  and  good  men  must  feel  for  the 
event.  Happy  will  it  be  if  our  choice  should  be 
directed  by  a  judicious  estimate  of  our  true  interests, 
unperplexed  and  unbiassed  by  considerations  not 
connected  with  the  public  good.  But  this  is  a  thing 
more  ardently  to  be  wished  than  seriously  to  be  ex- 
pected. The  plan  offered  to  our  deliberations  affects 
too  many  particular  interests,  innovates  upon  too 
many  local  institutions,  not  to  involve  in  its  discus- 
sion a  variety  of  objects  foreign  to  its  merits,  and 
of  views,  passions  and  prejudices  little  favorable  to 
the  discovery  of  truth. 

Among  the  most  formidable  of  the  obstacles  which 
the  new  Constitution  will  have  to  encounter  may 
readily  be  distinguished  the  obvious  interest  of  a 
certain  class  of  men  in  every  State  to  resist  all 
changes  which  may  hazard  a  diminution  of  the 
power,  emolument,  and  consequence  of  the  offices 
they  hold  under  the  State  establishments;  and 
the  perverted  ambition  of  another  class  of  men, 
who  will  either  hope  to  aggrandize  themselves  by 
the  confusions  of  their  country,  or  will  flatter 
themselves  with  fairer  prospects  of  elevation  from 
the  subdivision  of  the  empire  into  several  partial 
confederacies  than  from  its  union  under  one  gov- 
ernment. 

It  is  not,  however,  my  design  to  dwell  upon  ob- 
servations of  this  nature.     I  am  well  aware  that  it 


The  Federalist  5 

would  be  disingenuous  to  resolve  indiscriminately 
the  opposition  of  any  set  of  men  (merely  because 
their  situations  might  subject  them  to  suspicion) 
into  interested  or  ambitious  views.  Candor  will 
oblige  us  to  admit  that  even  such  men  may  be  actu- 
ated by  upright  intentions ;  and  it  cannot  be  doubted 
that  much  of  the  opposition  which  has  made  its 
appearance,  or  may  hereafter  make  its  appear- 
ance, will  spring  from  sources,  blameless  at  least, 
if  not  respectable — the  honest  errors  of  minds  led 
astray  by  preconceived  jealousies  and  fears.  So 
numerous  indeed  and  so  powerful  are  the  causes 
which  serve  to  give  a  false  bias  to  the  judgment,  that 
we,  upon  many  occasions,  see  wise  and  good  men  on 
the  wrong  as  well  as  on  the  right  side  of  questions  of 
the  first  magnitude  to  society.  This  circumstance, 
if  duly  attended  to,  would  furnish  a  lesson  of  modera- 
tion to  those  who  are  ever  so  much  persuaded  of 
their  being  in  the  right  in  any  controversy.  And  a 
further  reason  for  caution,  in  this  respect,  might  be 
drawn  from  the  reflection  that  we  are  not  always 
sure  that  those  who  advocate  the  truth  are  influenced 
by  purer  principles  than  their  antagonists.  Ambi- 
tion, avarice,  personal  animosity,  party  opposition, 
and  many  other  motives  not  more  laudable  than 
these,  are  apt  to  operate  as  well  upon  those  who 
support  as  those  who  oppose  the  right  side  of  a 
question.  Were  there  not  even  these  inducements 
to  moderation,  nothing  could  be  more  ill-judged  than 
that  intolerant  spirit  which  has,  at  all  times,  char- 
acterized political  parties.  For  in  politics,  as  in 
religion,    it  .is   equally   absurd  to   aim  at   making 


6  Alexander  Hamilton 

proselytes  by  fire  and  sword.     Heresies  in  either  can 
rarely  be  cured  by  persecution. 

And  yet,  however  just  these  sentiments  will  be 
allowed  to  be,  we  have  already  sufficient  indications 
that  it  will  happen  in  this  as  in  all  former  cases  of 
great  national  discussion.  A  torrent  of  angry  and 
malignant  passions  will  be  let  loose.  To  judge  from 
the  conduct  of  the  opposite  parties,  we  shall  be  led 
to  conclude  that  they  will  mutually  hope  to  evince 
the  justness  of  their  opinions,  and  to  increase  the 
number  of  their  converts  by  the  loudness  of  their 
declamations  and  the  bitterness  of  their  invectives. 
An  enlightened  zeal  for  the  energy  and  efficiency  of 
government  will  be  stigmatized  as  the  offspring  of  a 
temper  fond  of  despotic  power  and  hostile  to  the 
principles  of  liberty.  An  over-scrupulous  jealousy 
of  danger  to  the  rights  of  the  people,  which  is  more 
commonly  the  fault  of  the  head  than  of  the  heart, 
will  be  represented  as  mere  pretence  and  artifice, 
the  stale  bait  for  popularity  at  the  expense  of  the 
public  good.  It  will  be  forgotten,  on  the  one  hand, 
that  jealousy  is  the  usual  concomitant  of  love,  and 
that  the  noble  enthusiasm  of  liberty  is  apt  to  be  in- 
fected with  a  spirit  of  narrow  and  illiberal  distrust. 
On  the  other  hand,  it  will  be  equally  forgotten  that 
the  vigor  of  government  is  essential  to  the  security 
of  liberty ;  that,  in  the  contemplation  of  a  sound  and 
well-informed  judgment,  their  interest  can  never 
be  separated;  and  that  a  dangerous  ambition  more 
often  lurks  behind  the  specious  mask  of  zeal  for 
the  rights  of  the  people  than  under  the  forbidding 
appearance  of   zeal  for  the  firmness  and  efficiency 


The  Federalist  7 

of  government.  History  will  teach  us  that  the 
former  has  been  found  a  much  more  certain  road 
to  the  introduction  of  despotism  than  the  latter, 
and  that  of  those  men  who  have  overturned  the 
liberties  of  republics,  the  greatest  number  have 
begun  their  career  by  paying  an  obsequious  court 
to  the  people;  commencing  demagogues,  and  ending 
tyrants. 

In  the  course  of  the  preceding  observations,  I  have 
had  an  eye,  my  fellow-citizens,  to  putting  you  upon 
your  guard  against  all  attempts,  from  whatever 
quarter,  to  influence  your  decision  in  a  matter  of 
the  utmost  moment  to  your  welfare,  by  any  impres- 
sions other  than  those  which  may  result  from  the 
evidence  of  truth.  You  will,  no  doubt,  at  the  same 
time,  have  collected  from  the  general  scope  of  them, 
that  they  proceed  from  a  source  not  unfriendly  to  the 
new  Constitution.  Yes,  my  countrymen,  I  own  to 
you  that,  after  having  given  it  an  attentive  con- 
sideration, I  am  clearly  of  opinion  it  is  your  interest 
to  adopt  it.  I  am  convinced  that  this  is  the  safest 
course  for  your  liberty,  your  dignity,  and  your 
happiness.  I  affect  not  reserves  which  I  do  not  feel. 
I  will  not  amuse  you  with  an  appearance  of  delibera- 
tion when  I  have  decided.  I  frankly  acknowledge 
to  you  my  convictions,  and  I  will  freely  lay  before 
you  the  reasons  on  which  they  are  founded.  The 
consciousness  of  good  intentions  disdains  ambiguity. 
I  shall  not,  however,  multiply  professions  on  this 
head.  My  motives  must  remain  in  the  depository 
of  my  own  breast.  My  arguments  will  be  open  to 
all,  and  may  be  judged  of  by  all.      They  shall   at 


8  Alexander  Hamilton 

least  be  offered  in  a  spirit  which  will  not  disgrace  the 
cause  of  truth. 

I  propose,  in  a  series  of  papers,  to  discuss  the  fol- 
lowing interesting  particulars: — The  utility  of  the 
UNION  to  your  political  prosperity — The  insuffi- 
ciency of  the  present  Confederation  to  preserve  that 
Union — The  necessity  of  a  government  at  least  equally 
energetic  with  the  one  proposed,  to  the  attainment  of 
this  object — The  conformity  of  the  proposed  Constitu- 
tion to  the  true  principles  of  republican  government — 
Its  analogy  to  your  own  State  constitution — and  lastly, 
The  additional  security  which  its  adoption  will  afford 
to  the  preservation  of  that  species  of  government,  to 
liberty,  and  to  property. 

In  the  progress  of  this  discussion  I  shall  endeavor 
to  give  a  satisfactory  answer  to  all  the  objections 
which  shall  have  made  their  appearance,  that  may 
seem  to  have  any  claim  to  your  attention. 

It  may  perhaps  be  thought  superfluous  to  offer 
arguments  to  prove  the  utility  of  the  UNION,  a 
point,  no  doubt,  deeply  engraved  on  the  hearts  of 
the  great  body  of  the  people  in  every  State,  and  one, 
which  it  may  be  imagined,  has  no  adversaries.  But 
the  fact  is,  that  we  already  hear  it  whispered  in  the 
private  circles  of  those  who  oppose  the  new  Con- 
stitution, that  the  thirteen  States  are  of  too  great 
extent  for  any  general  system,  and  that  we  must  of 
necessity  resort  to  separate  confederacies  of  distinct 
portions  of  the  whole.1   This  doctrine  will,  in  all  prob- 

1  The  same  idea,  tracing  the  arguments  to  their  consequences,  is 
held  out  in  several  of  the  late  publications  against  the  new  Constitu- 
tion.— Publius. 


The  Federalist  9 

ability,  be  gradually  propagated,  till  it  has  votaries 
enough  to  countenance  an  open  avowal  of  it.  For 
nothing  can  be  more  evident,  to  those  who  are  able  to 
take  an  enlarged  view  of  the  subject,  than  the  alter- 
native of  an  adoption  of  the  new  Constitution  or  a 
dismemberment  of  the  Union.  It  will  therefore  be 
of  use  to  begin  by  examining  the  advantages  of  that 
Union,  the  certain  evils,  and  the  probable  dangers, 
to  which  every  State  will  be  exposed  from  its  disso- 
lution. This  shall  accordingly  constitute  the  sub- 
ject of  my  next  address. 

Publius. 


For  the  Independent  Journal 
THE  FEDERALIST.     No.  II 

(JAY) 

To  the  People  of  the  State  of  New  York: 

When  the  people  of  America  reflect  that  they  are 
now  called  upon  to  decide  a  question,  which,  in  its 
consequences,  must  prove  one  of  the  most  important 
that  ever  engaged  their  attention,  the  propriety  of 
their  taking  a  very  comprehensive,  as  well  as  a  very 
serious,  view  of  it,  will  be  evident. 

Nothing  is  more  certain  than  the  indispensable 
necessity  of  government,  and  it  is  equally  undeniable, 
that  whenever  and  however  it  is  instituted,  the 
people  must  cede  to  it  some  of  their  natural  rights, 
in  order  to  vest  it  with  requisite  powers.  It  is  well 
worthy  of  consideration  therefore,  whether  it  would 
conduce  more  to  the  interest  of  the  people  of  America 


io  Alexander  Hamilton 

that  they  should,  to  all  general  purposes,  be  one 
nation,  under  one  federal  government,  or  that  they 
should  divide  themselves  into  separate  confedera- 
cies, and  give  to  the  head  of  each  the  same  kind  of 
powers  which  they  are  advised  to  place  in  one  na- 
tional government. 

It  has  until  lately  been  a  received  and  uncon- 
tradicted opinion,  that  the  prosperity  of  the  people 
of  America  depended  on  their  continuing  firmly 
united,  and  the  wishes,  prayers,  and  efforts  of  our 
best  and  wisest  citizens  have  been  constantly  directed 
to  that  object.  But  politicians  now  appear,  who 
insist  that  this  opinion  is  erroneous,  and  that  instead 
of  looking  for  safety  and  happiness  in  union,  we 
ought  to  seek  it  in  a  division  of  the  States  into 
distinct  confederacies  or  sovereignties.  However 
extraordinary  this  new  doctrine  may  appear,  it  nev- 
ertheless has  its  advocates;  and  certain  characters 
who  were  much  opposed  to  it  formerly,  are  at 
present  of  the  number.  Whatever  may  be  the  argu- 
ments or  inducements  which  have  wrought  this 
change  in  the  sentiments  and  declarations  of  these 
gentlemen,  it  certainly  would  not  be  wise  in  the 
people  at  large  to  adopt  these  new  political  tenets 
without  being  fully  convinced  that  they  are  founded 
in  truth  and  sound  policy. 

It  has  often  given  me  pleasure  to  observe,  that  in- 
dependent America  was  not  composed  of  detached 
and  distant  territories,  but  that  one  connected,  fer- 
tile, wide-spreading  country  was  the  portion  of  our 
western  sons  of  liberty.  Providence  has  in  a  par- 
ticular  manner   blessed  it  with   a  variety  of  soils 


The  Federalist  1 1 

and  productions,  and  watered  it  with  innumerable 
streams,  for  the  delight  and  accommodation  of  its 
inhabitants.  A  succession  of  navigable  waters  forms 
a  kind  of  chain  round  its  borders,  as  if  to  bind  it  to- 
gether; while  the  most  noble  rivers  in  the  world, 
running  at  convenient  distances,  present  them  with 
highways  for  the  easy  communication  of  friendly 
aids,  and  the  mutual  transportation  and  exchange 
of  their  various  commodities. 

With  equal  pleasure  I  have  as  often  taken  notice, 
that  Providence  has  been  pleased  to  give  this  one 
connected  country  to  one  united  people — a  people 
descended  from  the  same  ancestors,  speaking  the 
same  language,  professing  the  same  religion,  at- 
tached to  the  same  principles  of  government,  very 
similar  in  their  manners  and  customs,  and  who,  by 
their  joint  counsels,  arms,  and  efforts,  fighting  side 
by  side  throughout  a  long  and  bloody  war,  have 
nobly  established  general  liberty  and  independence. 

This  country  and  this  people  seem  to  have  been 
made  for  each  other,  and  it  appears  as  if  it  was  the 
design  of  Providence,  that  an  inheritance  so  proper 
and  convenient  for  a  band  of  brethren,  united  to 
each  other  by  the  strongest  ties,  should  never  be 
split  into  a  number  of  unsocial,  jealous,  and  alien 
sovereignties. 

Similar  sentiments  have  hitherto  prevailed  among 
all  orders  and  denominations  of  men  among  us.  To 
all  general  purposes  we  have  uniformly  been  one 
people;  each  individual  citizen  everywhere  enjoy- 
ing the  same  national  rights,  privileges,  and  protec- 
tion.    As  a  nation  we  have  made  peace  and  war ;  as  a 


12  Alexander  Hamilton 

nation  we  have  vanquished  our  common  enemies ;  as  a 
nation  we  have  formed  alliances,  and  made  treaties, 
and  entered  into  various  compacts  and  conventions 
with  foreign  states. 

A  strong  sense  of  the  value  and  blessings  of  union 
induced  the  people,  at  a  very  early  period,  to  insti- 
tute a  federal  government  to  preserve  and  perpetuate 
it.  They  formed  it  almost  as  soon  as  they  had  a 
political  existence ;  nay,  at  a  time  when  their  habita- 
tions were  in  flames,  when  many  of  their  citizens  were 
bleeding,  and  when  the  progress  of  hostility  and 
desolation  left  little  room  for  those  calm  and  ma- 
ture inquiries  and  reflections  which  must  ever  pre- 
cede the  formation  of  a  wise  and  well-balanced 
government  for  a  free  people.  It  is  not  to  be  won- 
dered at,  that  a  government  instituted  in  times  so 
inauspicious,  should  on  experiment  be  found  greatly 
deficient  and  inadequate  to  the  purpose  it  was  in- 
tended to  answer. 

This  intelligent  people  perceived  and  regretted 
these  defects.  Still  continuing  no  less  attached  to 
union  than  enamored  of  liberty,  they  observed  the 
danger  which  immediately  threatened  the  former 
and  more  remotely  the  latter;  and  being  persuaded 
that  ample  security  for  both  could  only  be  found  in 
a  national  government  more  wisely  framed,  they,  as 
with  one  voice,  convened  the  late  convention  at 
Philadelphia,  to  take  that  important  subject  under 
consideration. 

This  convention,  composed  of  men  who  possessed 
the  confidence  of  the  people,  and  many  of  whom 
had  become  highly  distinguished  by  their  patriotism, 


The  Federalist  13 

virtue,  and  wisdom,  in  times  which  tried  the  minds 
and  hearts  of  men,  undertook  the  arduous  task.  In 
the  mild  season  of  peace,  with  minds  unoccupied  by 
other  subjects,  they  passed  many  months  in  cool, 
uninterrupted,  and  daily  consultation;  and  finally, 
without  having  been  awed  by  power,  or  influenced 
by  any  passions  except  love  for  their  country, 
they  presented  and  recommended  to  the  people  the 
plan  produced  by  their  joint  and  very  unanimous 
councils. 

Admit,  for  so  is  the  fact,  that  this  plan  is  only 
recommended,  not  imposed,  yet  let  it  be  remembered 
that  it  is  neither  recommended  to  blind  approbation, 
nor  to  blind  reprobation;  but  to  that  sedate  and 
candid  consideration  which  the  magnitude  and  im- 
portance of  the  subject  demand,  and  which  it  cer- 
tainly ought  to  receive.  But  this  (as  was  remarked 
in  the  foregoing  number  of  this  paper)  is  more  to  be 
wished  than  expected,  that  it  may  be  so  considered 
and  examined.  Experience  on  a  former  occasion 
teaches  us  not  to  be  too  sanguine  in  such  hopes.  It 
is  not  yet  forgotten  that  well-grounded  apprehensions 
of  imminent  danger  induced  the  people  of  America 
to  form  the  memorable  Congress  of  1774.  That 
body  recommended  certain  measures  to  their  con- 
stituents, and  the  event  proved  their  wisdom;  yet 
it  is  fresh  in  our  memories  how  soon  the  press  began 
to  teem  with  pamphlets  and  weekly  papers  against 
those  very  measures.  Not  only  many  of  the  officers 
of  government,  who  obeyed  the  dictates  of  personal 
interest,  but  others,  from  a  mistaken  estimate  of 
consequences,    or   the   undue    influence    of    former 


14  Alexander  Hamilton 

attachments,  or  whose  ambition  aimed  at  objects 
which  did  not  correspond  with  the  public  good,  were 
indefatigable  in  their  efforts  to  persuade  the  people 
to  reject  the  advice  of  that  patriotic  Congress. 
Many,  indeed,  were  deceived  and  deluded,  but  the 
great  majority  of  the  people  reasoned  and  decided 
judiciously;  and  happy  they  are  in  reflecting  that 
they  did  so. 

They  considered  that  the  Congress  was  composed 
of  many  wise  and  experienced  men.  That,  being 
convened  from  different  parts  of  the  country,  they 
brought  with  them  and  communicated  to  each  other 
a  variety  of  useful  information.  That,  in  the  course 
of  the  time  they  passed  together  in  inquiring  into 
and  discussing  the  true  interests  of  their  country, 
they  must  have  acquired  very  accurate  knowledge 
on  that  head.  That  they  were  individually  inter- 
ested in  the  public  liberty  and  prosperity,  and  there- 
fore that  it  was  not  less  their  inclination  than  their 
duty  to  recommend  only  such  measures  as,  after  the 
most  mature  deliberation,  they  really  thought  pru- 
dent and  advisable. 

These  and  similar  considerations  then  induced  the 
people  to  rely  greatly  on  the  judgment  and  integrity 
of  the  Congress;  and  they  took  their  advice,  not- 
withstanding the  various  arts  and  endeavors  used 
to  deter  them  from  it.  But  if  the  people  at  large 
had  reason  to  confide  in  the  men  of  that  Congress, 
few  of  whom  had  been  fully  tried  or  generally  known, 
still  greater  reason  have  they  now  to  respect  the 
judgment  and  advice  of  the  convention,  for  it  is  well 
known  that  some  of  the  most  distinguished  members 


The  Federalist  15 

of  that  Congress,  who  have  been  since  tried  and 
justly  approved  for  patriotism  and  abilities,  and 
who  have  grown  old  in  acquiring  political  informa- 
tion, were  also  members  of  this  convention  and 
carried  into  it  their  accumulated  knowledge  and 
experience. 

It  is  worthy  of  remark  that  not  only  the  first,  but 
every  succeeding  Congress,  as  well  as  the  late  con- 
vention, have  invariably  joined  with  the  people  in 
thinking  that  the  prosperity  of  America  depended 
on  its  Union.  To  preserve  and  perpetuate  it  was 
the  great  object  of  the  people  in  forming  that  con- 
vention, and  it  is  also  the  great  object  of  the  plan 
which  the  convention  has  advised  them  to  adopt. 
With  what  propriety,  therefore,  or  for  what  good 
purposes,  are  attempts  at  this  particular  period 
made  by  some  men  to  depreciate  the  importance  of 
the  Union?  Or  why  is  it  suggested  that  three  or 
four  confederacies  would  be  better  than  one?  I  am 
persuaded  in  my  own  mind  that  the  people  have 
always  thought  right  on  this  subject,  and  that  their 
universal  and  uniform  attachment  to  the  cause  of 
the  Union  rests  on  great  and  weighty  reasons,  which 
I  shall  endeavor  to  develop  and  explain  in  some 
ensuing  papers.  They  who  promote  the  idea  of 
substituting  a  number  of  distinct  confederacies  in 
the  room  of  the  plan  of  the  convention,  seem  clearly 
to  foresee  that  the  rejection  of  it  would  put  the 
continuance  of  the  Union  in  the  utmost  jeopardy. 
That  certainly  would  be  the  case,  and  I  sincerely 
wish  that  it  may  be  as  clearly  foreseen  by  every  good 
citizen,  that  whenever  the  dissolution  of  the  Union 


1 6  Alexander  Hamilton 

arrives,  America  will  have  reason  to  exclaim,  in  the 
words  of  the  poet:  "  Farewell!  a  long  Farewell 
to  all  my  Greatness." 

Publius. 


For  the  Independent  Journal 
THE  FEDERALIST.     No.  Ill 

(JAY) 

To  the  People  of  the  State  of  New  York: 

It  is  not  a  new  observation  that  the  people  of  any 
country  (if,  like  the  Americans,  intelligent  and  well- 
informed)  seldom  adopt  and  steadily  persevere  for 
many  years  in  an  erroneous  opinion  respecting  their 
interests.  That  consideration  naturally  tends  to 
create  great  respect  for  the  high  opinion  which  the 
people  of  America  have  so  long  and  uniformly  en- 
tertained of  the  importance  of  their  continuing 
firmly  united  under  one  federal  government,  vested 
with  sufficient  powers  for  all  general  and  national 
purposes. 

The  more  attentively  I  consider  and  investigate 
the  reasons  which  appear  to  have  given  birth  to  this 
opinion,  the  more  I  become  convinced  that  they  are 
cogent  and  conclusive. 

Among  the  many  objects  to  which  a  wise  and  free 
people  find  it  necessary  to  direct  their  attention,  that 
of  providing  for  their  safety  seems  to  be  the  first. 
The  safety  of  the  people  doubtless  has  relation  to  a 
great  variety  of  circumstances  and  considerations, 


The  Federalist  17 

and  consequently  affords  great  latitude  to  those  who 
wish  to  define  it  precisely  and  comprehensively. 

At  present  I  mean  only  to  consider  it  as  it  re- 
spects security  for  the  preservation  of  peace  and 
tranquillity,  as  well  as  against  dangers  from  foreign 
arms  and  influence,  as  from  dangers  of  the  like  kind 
arising  from  domestic  causes.  As  the  former  of 
these  comes  first  in  order,  it  is  proper  it  should  be 
the  first  discussed.  Let  us  therefore  proceed  to 
examine  whether  the  people  are  not  right  in  their 
opinion  that  a  cordial  Union,  under  an  efficient 
national  government,  affords  them  the  best  security 
that  can  be  devised  against  hostilities  from  abroad. 

The  number  of  wars  which  have  happened  or  will 
happen  in  the  world  will  always  be  found  to  be  in 
proportion  to  the  number  and  weight  of  the  causes, 
whether  real  or  pretended,  which  provoke  or  invite 
them.  If  this  remark  be  just,  it  becomes  useful  to 
inquire  whether  so  many  just  causes  of  war  are 
likely  to  be  given  by  United  America  as  by  disunited 
America;  for  if  it  should  turn  out  that  United 
America  will  probably  give  the  fewest,  then  it  will 
follow  that  in  this  respect  the  Union  tends  most  to 
preserve  the  people  in  a  state  of  peace  with  other 
nations. 

The  just  causes  of  war,  for  the  most  part,  arise 
either  from  violations  of  treaties  or  from  direct 
violence.  America  has  already  formed  treaties  with 
no  less  than  six  foreign  nations,  and  all  of  them, 
except  Prussia,  are  maritime,  and  therefore  able  to 
annoy  and  injure  us.  She  has  also  extensive  com- 
merce with  Portugal,  Spain,  and  Britain,  and,  with 


1 8  Alexander  Hamilton 

respect  to  the  two  latter,  has,  in  addition,  the  cir- 
cumstance of  neighborhood  to  attend  to. 

It  is  of  high  importance  to  the  peace  of  America 
that  she  observe  the  laws  of  nations  towards  all 
these  powers,  and  to  me  it  appears  evident  that 
this  will  be  more  perfectly  and  punctually  done  by 
one  national  government  than  it  could  be  either  by 
thirteen  separate  States  or  by  three  or  four  distinct 
confederacies. 

Because  when  once  an  efficient  national  govern- 
ment is  established,  the  best  men  in  the  country  will 
not  only  consent  to  serve,  but  also  will  generally  be 
appointed  to  manage  it;  for,  although  town  or 
country,  or  other  contracted  influence,  may  place 
men  in  State  assemblies,  or  senates,  or  courts  of  jus- 
tice, or  executive  departments,  yet  more  general  and 
extensive  reputation  for  talents  and  other  qualifica- 
tions will  be  necessary  to  recommend  men  to  offices 
under  the  national  government, — especially  as  it 
will  have  the  widest  field  for  choice,  and  never  ex- 
perience that  want  of  proper  persons  which  is  not 
uncommon  in  some  of  the  States.  Hence,  it  will 
result  that  the  administration,  the  political  counsels, 
and  the  judicial  decisions  of  the  national  govern- 
ment will  be  more  wise,  systematical,  and  judicious 
than  those  of  individual  States,  and  consequently 
more  satisfactory  with  respect  to  other  nations,  as 
well  as  more  safe  with  respect  to  us. 

Because,  under  the  national  government,  treaties 
and  articles  of  treaties,  as  well  as  the  laws  of  nations, 
will  always  be  expounded  in  one  sense  and  executed 
in  the  same  manner, — whereas  adjudications  on  the 


The  Federalist  19 

same  points  and  questions,  in  thirteen  States,  or  in 
three  or  four  confederacies,  will  not  always  accord 
or  be  consistent ;  and  that,  as  well  from  the  variety 
of  independent  courts  and  judges  appointed  by 
different  and  independent  governments,  as  from  the 
different  local  laws  and  interests  which  may  affect 
and  influence  them.  The  wisdom  of  the  convention, 
in  committing  such  questions  to  the  jurisdiction  and 
judgment  of  courts  appointed  by  and  responsible 
only  to  one  national  government,  cannot  be  too 
much  commended. 

Because  the  prospect  of  present  loss  or  advantage 
may  often  tempt  the  governing  party  in  one  or  two 
States  to  swerve  from  good  faith  and  justice;  but 
those  temptations,  not  reaching  the  other  States,  and 
consequently  having  little  or  no  influence  on  the 
national  government,  the  temptation  will  be  fruit- 
less, and  good  faith  and  justice  be  preserved.  The 
case  of  the  treaty  of  peace  with  Britain  adds  great 
weight  to  this  reasoning. 

Because,  even  if  the  governing  party  in  a  State 
should  be  disposed  to  resist  such  temptations,  yet, 
as  such  temptations  may,  and  commonly  do,  result 
from  circumstances  peculiar  to  the  State,  and  may 
affect  a  great  number  of  the  inhabitants,  the  gov- 
erning party  may  not  always  be  able,  if  willing,  to 
prevent  the  injustice  meditated,  or  to  punish  the  ag- 
gressors. But  the  national  government,  not  being 
affected  by  those  local  circumstances,  will  neither 
be  induced  to  commit  the  wrong  themselves,  nor 
want  power  or  inclination  to  prevent  or  punish  its 
commission  by  others. 


20  Alexander  Hamilton 

So  far,  therefore,  as  either  designed  or  accidental 
violations  of  treaties  and  the  laws  of  nations  afford 
just  causes  of  war,  they  are  less  to  be  apprehended 
under  one  general  government  than  under  several 
lesser  ones,  and  in  that  respect  the  former  most 
favors  the  safety  of  the  people. 

As  to  those  just  causes  of  war  which  proceed  from 
direct  and  unlawful  violence,  it  appears  equally 
clear  to  me  that  one  good  national  government 
affords  vastly  more  security  against  dangers  of  that 
sort  than  can  be  derived  from  any  other  quarter. 

Because  such  violences  are  more  frequently  caused 
by  the  passions  and  interests  of  a  part  than  of  the 
whole ;  of  one  or  two  States  than  of  the  Union.  Not 
a  single  Indian  war  has  yet  been  occasioned  by  ag- 
gressions of  the  present  federal  government,  feeble 
as  it  is;  but  there  are  several  instances  of  Indian 
hostilities  having  been  provoked  by  the  improper 
conduct  of  individual  States,  who,  either  unable 
or  unwilling  to  restrain  or  punish  offences,  have 
given  occasion  to  the  slaughter  of  many  innocent 
inhabitants. 

The  neighborhood  of  Spanish  and  British  terri- 
tories, bordering  on  some  States  and  not  on  others, 
naturally  confines  the  causes  of  quarrel  more  imme- 
diately to  the  borderers.  The  bordering  States,  if 
any,  will  be  those  who,  under  the  impulse  of  sudden 
irritation,  and  a  quick  sense  of  apparent  interest  or 
injury,  will  be  most  likely,  by  direct  violence,  to 
excite  war  with  these  nations;  and  nothing  can  so 
effectually  obviate  that  danger  as  a  national  govern- 
ment, whose  wisdom  and  prudence  will  not  be  di- 


The  Federalist  21 

minished  by  the  passions  which  actuate  the  parties 
immediately  interested. 

But  not  only  fewer  just  causes  of  war  will  be  given 
by  the  national  government,  but  it  will  also  be  more 
in  their  power  to  accommodate  and  settle  them 
amicably.  They  will  be  more  temperate  and  cool, 
and  in  that  respect,  as  well  as  in  others,  will  be  more 
in  capacity  to  act  advisedly  than  the  offending  State. 
The  pride  of  states,  as  well  as  of  men,  naturally  dis- 
poses them  to  justify  all  their  actions,  and  opposes 
their  acknowledging,  correcting,  or  repairing  their 
errors  and  offences.  The  national  government,  in 
such  cases,  will  not  be  affected  by  this  pride,  but 
will  proceed  with  moderation  and  candor  to  con- 
sider and  decide  on  the  means  most  proper  to  ex- 
tricate them  from  the  difficulties  which  threaten 
them. 

Besides,  it  is  well  known  that  acknowledgments, 
explanations,  and  compensations  are  often  accepted 
as  satisfactory  from  a  strong  united  nation,  which 
would  be  rejected  as  unsatisfactory  if  offered  by  a 
State  or  confederacy  of  little  consideration  or  power. 

In  the  year  1685,  the  state  of  Genoa  having  of- 
fended Louis  XIV.,  endeavored  to  appease  him.  He 
demanded  that  they  should  send  their  Doge,  or 
chief  magistrate,  accompanied  by  four  of  their  sena- 
tors, to  France,  to  ask  his  pardon  and  receive  his 
terms.  They  were  obliged  to  submit  to  it  for  the 
sake  of  peace.  Would  he  on  any  occasion  either 
have  demanded  or  have  received  the  like  humilia- 
tion from  Spain,  or  Britain,  or  any  other  powerful 
nation?  Publius. 


22  Alexander  Hamilton 

For  the  Independent  Journal 
THE  FEDERALIST.     No.  IV 

(JAY) 

To  the  People  of  the  State  of  New  York: 

My  last  paper  assigned  several  reasons  why  the 
safety  of  the  people  would  be  best  secured  by  union 
against  the  danger  it  may  be  exposed  to  by  just 
causes  of  war  given  to  other  nations;  and  those 
reasons  show  that  such  causes  would  not  only  be 
more  rarely  given,  but  would  also  be  more  easily 
accommodated,  by  a  national  government  than 
either  by  the  State  governments  or  the  proposed 
little  confederacies. 

But  the  safety  of  the  people  of  America  against 
dangers  from  foreign  force  depends  not  only  on  their 
forbearing  to  give  just  causes  of  war  to  other  nations, 
but  also  on  their  placing  and  continuing  themselves 
in  such  a  situation  as  not  to  invite  hostility  or  insult ; 
for  it  need  not  be  observed  that  there  are  pretended 
as  well  as  just  causes  of  war. 

It  is  too  true,  however  disgraceful  it  may  be  to 
human  nature,  that  nations  in  general  will  make 
war  whenever  they  have  a  prospect  of  getting  any 
thing  by  it ;  nay,  absolute  monarchs  will  often  make 
war  when  their  nations  are  to  get  nothing  by  it,  but 
for  purposes  and  objects  merely  personal,  such  as 
a  thirst  for  military  glory,  revenge  for  personal  af- 
fronts, ambition,  or  private  compacts  to  aggrandize 
or  support  their  particular  families  or  partisans. 
These  and  a  variety  of  other  motives,  which  affect 
only  the  mind  of  the  sovereign,  often  lead  him  to 


The  Federalist  23 

engage  in  wars  not  sanctified  by  justice  or  the  voice 
and  interests  of  his  people.  But,  independent  of 
these  inducements  to  war,  which  are  more  prevalent 
in  absolute  monarchies,  but  which  well  deserve  our 
attention,  there  are  others  which  affect  nations  as 
often  as  kings;  and  some  of  them  will  on  examina- 
tion be  found  to  grow  out  of  our  relative  situation 
and  circumstances. 

With  France  and  with  Britain  we  are  rivals  in  the 
fisheries,  and  can  supply  their  markets  cheaper  than 
they  can  themselves,  notwithstanding  any  efforts  to 
prevent  it  by  bounties  on  their  own  or  duties  on 
foreign  fish. 

With  them  and  with  most  other  European  nations 
we  are  rivals  in  navigation  and  the  carrying  trade; 
and  we  shall  deceive  ourselves  if  we  suppose  that 
any  of  them  will  rejoice  to  see  it  flourish ;  for,  as  our 
carrying  trade  cannot  increase  without  in  some  de- 
gree diminishing  theirs,  it  is  more  their  interest,  and 
will  be  more  their  policy,  to  restrain  than  to  promote 
it. 

In  the  trade  to  China  and  India,  we  interfere  with 
more  than  one  nation,  inasmuch  as  it  enables  us  to 
partake  in  advantages  which  they  had  in  a  manner 
monopolized,  and  as  we  thereby  supply  ourselves 
with  commodities  which  we  used  to  purchase  from 
them. 

The  extension  of  our  own  commerce  in  our  own 
vessels  cannot  give  pleasure  to  any  nations  who  pos- 
sess territories  on  or  near  this  continent,  because  the 
cheapness  and  excellence  of  our  productions,  added 
to  the  circumstance  of  vicinity,  and  the  enterprise 


24  Alexander  Hamilton 

and  address  of  our  merchants  and  navigators,  will 
give  us  a  greater  share  in  the  advantages  which 
those  territories  afford,  than  consists  with  the  wishes 
or  policy  of  their  respective  sovereigns. 

Spain  thinks  it  convenient  to  shut  the  Mississippi 
against  us  on  the  one  side,  and  Britain  excludes  us 
from  the  Saint  Lawrence  on  the  other;  nor  will 
either  of  them  permit  the  other  waters  which  are 
between  them  and  us  to  become  the  means  of  mu- 
tual intercourse  and  traffic. 

From  these  and  such  like  considerations,  which 
might,  if  consistent  with  prudence,  be  more  ampli- 
fied and  detailed,  it  is  easy  to  see  that  jealousies  and 
uneasinesses  may  gradually  slide  into  the  minds  and 
cabinets  of  other  nations,  and  that  we  are  not  to 
expect  that  they  should  regard  our  advancement  in 
union,  in  power  and  consequence  by  land  and  by 
sea,  with  an  eye  of  indifference  and  composure. 

The  people  of  America  are  aware  that  inducements 
to  war  may  arise  out  of  these  circumstances,  as  well 
as  from  others  not  so  obvious  at  present,  and  that 
whenever  such  inducements  may  find  fit  time  and 
opportunity  for  operation,  pretences  to  color  and 
justify  them  will  not  be  wanting.  Wisely,  there- 
fore, do  they  consider  union  and  a  good  national 
government  as  necessary  to  put  and  keep  them  in 
such  a  situation  as,  instead  of  inviting  war,  will  tend 
to  repress  and  discourage  it.  That  situation  con- 
sists in  the  best  possible  state  of  defence,  and  neces- 
sarily depends  on  the  government,  the  arms,  and 
the  resources  of  the  country. 

As  the  safety  of  the  whole  is  the  interest  of  the 


The  Federalist  25 

whole,  and  cannot  be  provided  for  without  govern- 
ment, either  one  or  more  or  many,  let  us  inquire 
whether  one  good  government  is  not,  relative  to  the 
object  in  question,  more  competent  than  any  other 
given  number  whatever. 

One  government  can  collect  and  avail  itself  of  the 
talents  and  experience  of  the  ablest  men,  in  whatever 
part  of  the  Union  they  may  be  found.  It  can  move 
on  uniform  principles  of  policy.  It  can  harmonize, 
assimilate,  and  protect  the  several  parts  and  mem- 
bers, and  extend  the  benefit  of  its  foresight  and  pre- 
cautions to  each.  In  the  formation  of  treaties,  it 
will  regard  the  interest  of  the  whole,  and  the  par- 
ticular interests  of  the  parts  as  connected  with  that 
of  the  whole.  It  can  apply  the  resources  and  power 
of  the  whole  to  the  defence  of  any  particular  part, 
and  that  more  easily  and  expeditiously  than  State 
governments  or  separate  confederacies  can  possibly 
do,  for  want  of  concert  and  unity  of  system.  It  can 
place  the  militia  under  one  plan  of  discipline,  and, 
by  putting  their  officers  in  a  proper  line  of  subordi- 
nation to  the  Chief  Magistrate,  will,  as  it  were,  con- 
solidate them  into  one  corps,  and  thereby  render 
them  more  efficient  than  if  divided  into  thirteen  or 
into  three  or  four  distinct  independent  companies. 

What  would  the  militia  of  Britain  be  if  the  Eng- 
lish militia  obeyed  the  government  of  England,  if 
the  Scotch  militia  obeyed  the  government  of  Scot- 
land, and  if  the  Welsh  militia  obeyed  the  government 
of  Wales  ?  Suppose  an  invasion ;  would  those  three 
governments  (if  they  agreed  at  all)  be  able,  with  all 
their  respective  forces,  to  operate  against  the  enemy 


26  Alexander  Hamilton 

so  effectually  as  the  single  government  of  Great 
Britain  would? 

We  have  heard  much  of  the  fleets  of  Britain,  and 
the  time  may  come,  if  we  are  wise,  when  the  fleets 
of  America  may  engage  attention.  But  if  one  na- 
tional government  had  not  so  regulated  the  naviga- 
tion of  Britain  as  to  make  it  a  nursery  for  seamen — 
if  one  national  government  had  not  called  forth  all 
the  national  means  and  materials  for  forming  fleets, 
their  prowess  and  their  thunder  would  never  have 
been  celebrated.  Let  England  have  its  navigation 
and  fleet — let  Scotland  have  its  navigation  and  fleet 
— let  Wales  have  its  navigation  and  fleet — let  Ire- 
land have  its  navigation  and  fleet — let  those  four  of 
the  constituent  parts  of  the  British  empire  be  under 
four  independent  governments,  and  it  is  easy  to  per- 
ceive how  soon  they  would  each  dwindle  into  com- 
parative insignificance. 

Apply  these  facts  to  our  own  case.  Leave  Amer- 
ica divided  into  thirteen  or,  if  you  please,  into  three 
or  four  independent  governments — what  armies 
could  they  raise  and  pay — what  fleets  could  they 
ever  hope  to  have  ?  If  one  was  attacked,  would  the 
others  fly  to  its  succor,  and  spend  their  blood  and 
money  in  its  defence?  Would  there  be  no  danger 
of  their  being  flattered  into  neutrality  by  its  spe- 
cious promises,  or  seduced  by  a  too  great  fondness 
for  peace  to  decline  hazarding  their  tranquillity  and 
present  safety  for  the  sake  of  neighbors,  of  whom 
perhaps  they  have  been  jealous,  and  whose  import- 
ance they  are  content  to  see  diminished.  Although 
such  conduct  would  not  be  wise,  it  would,  neverthe- 


The  Federalist  27 

less,  be  natural.  The  history  of  the  states  of  Greece, 
and  of  other  countries,  abounds  with  such  instances, 
and  it  is  not  improbable  that  what  has  so  often 
happened  would,  under  similar  circumstances,  hap- 
pen again. 

But  admit  that  they  might  be  willing  to  help  the 
invaded  State  or  confederacy.  How,  and  when, 
and  in  what  proportion  shall  aids  of  men  and  money 
be  afforded?  Who  shall  command  the  allied  ar- 
mies, and  from  which  of  them  shall  he  receive  his 
orders?  Who  shall  settle  the  terms  of  peace,  and  in 
cace  of  disputes  what  umpire  shall  decide  between 
them  and  compel  acquiescence?  Various  difficulties 
and  inconveniences  would  be  inseparable  from  such 
a  situation ;  whereas  one  government,  watching  over 
the  general  and  common  interests,  and  combining 
and  directing  the  powers  and  resources  of  the  whole, 
would  be  free  from  all  these  embarrassments,  and 
conduce  far  more  to  the  safety  of  the  people. 

But  whatever  may  be  our  situation,  whether 
firmly  united  under  one  national  government,  or 
split  into  a  number  of  confederacies,  certain  it  is, 
that  foreign  nations  will  know  and  view  it  exactly 
as  it  is;  and  they  will  act  towards  us  accordingly. 
If  they  see  that  our  national  government  is  efficient 
and  well  administered,  our  trade  prudently  regulated, 
our  militia  properly  organized  and  disciplined,  our 
resources  and  finances  discreetly  managed,  our  credit 
re-established,  our  people  free,  contented,  and  united, 
they  will  be  much  more  disposed  to  cultivate  our 
friendship  than  provoke  our  resentment.  If,  on 
the  other  hand,  they  find  us  either  destitute  of  an 


28  Alexander  Hamilton 

effectual  government  (each  State  doing  right  or  wrong, 
as  to  its  rulers  may  seem  convenient),  or  split  into 
three  or  four  independent  and  probably  discordant 
republics  or  confederacies,  one  inclining  to  Britain, 
another  to  France,  and  a  third  to  Spain,  and  perhaps 
played  off  against  each  other  by  the  three,  what  a 
poor,  pitiful  figure  will  America  make  in  their  eyes! 
How  liable  would  she  become  not  only  to  their  con- 
tempt, but  to  their  outrage;  and  how  soon  would 
dear-bought  experience  proclaim  that  when  a  people 
or  family  so  divide,  it  never  fails  to  be  against  them- 
selves. 

Publius. 


For  the  Independent  Journal 
THE  FEDERALIST.     No.  V 

(JAY) 

To  the  People  of  the  State  of  New  York: 

Queen  Anne,  in  her  letter  of  the  ist  July,  1706, 
to  the  Scotch  Parliament,  makes  some  observations 
on  the  importance  of  the  Union  then  forming  be- 
tween England  and  Scotland,  which  merit  our  atten- 
tion. I  shall  present  the  public  with  one  or  two 
extracts  from  it:  "  An  entire  and  perfect  union  will 
be  the  solid  foundation  of  lasting  peace:  It  will  se- 
cure your  religion,  liberty,  and  property;  remove  the 
animosities  amongst  yourselves,  and  the  jealousies 
and  differences  betwixt  our  two  kingdoms.  It  must 
increase  your  strength,  riches,  and  trade  ;  and  by 
this  union  the  whole  island,  being  joined  in  affection 


The  Federalist  29 

and  free  from  all  apprehensions  of  different  interest, 
will  be  enabled  to  resist  all  its  enemies."  "  We  most 
earnestly  recommend  to  you  calmness  and  unanim- 
ity in  this  great  and  weighty  affair,  that  the  union 
may  be  brought  to  a  happy  conclusion,  being  the 
only  effectual  way  to  secure  our  present  and  future 
happiness,  and  disappoint  the  designs  of  our  and 
your  enemies,  who  will  doubtless,  on  this  occasion, 
use  their  utmost  endeavors  to  prevent  or  delay  this 
union" 

It  was  remarked  in  the  preceding  paper,  that 
weakness  and  divisions  at  home  would  invite  dan- 
gers from  abroad  ;  and  that  nothing  would  tend 
more  to  secure  us  from  them  than  union,  strength, 
and  good  government  within  ourselves.  This  sub- 
ject is  copious  and  cannot  easily  be  exhausted. 

The  history  of  Great  Britain  is  the  one  with  which 
we  are  in  general  the  best  acquainted,  and  it  gives 
us  many  useful  lessons.  We  may  profit  by  their  ex- 
perience without  paying  the  price  which  it  cost  them. 
Although  it  seems  obvious  to  common  sense  that  the 
people  of  such  an  island  should  be  but  one  nation, 
yet  we  find  that  they  were  for  ages  divided  into 
three,  and  that  those  three  were  almost  constantly 
embroiled  in  quarrels  and  wars  with  one  another. 
Notwithstanding  their  true  interest  with  respect  to 
the  continental  nations  was  really  the  same,  yet  by 
the  arts  and  policy  and  practices  of  those  nations, 
their  mutual  jealousies  were  perpetually  kept  in- 
flamed, and  for  a  long  series  of  years  they  were  far 
more  inconvenient  and  troublesome  than  they  were 
useful  and  assisting  to  each  other. 


30  Alexander  Hamilton 

Should  the  people  of  America  divide  themselves 
into  three  or  four  nations,  would  not  the  same  thing 
happen?  Would  not  similar  jealousies  arise,  and  be 
in  like  manner  cherished?  Instead  of  their  being 
''joined  in  affection "  and  free  from  all  apprehension 
of  different  "interests,"  envy  and  jealousy  would 
soon  extinguish  confidence  and  affection,  and  the 
partial  interests  of  each  confederacy,  instead  of  the 
general  interests  of  all  America,  would  be  the  only 
objects  of  their  policy  and  pursuits.  Hence,  like 
most  other  bordering  nations,  they  would  always  be 
either  involved  in  disputes  and  war,  or  live  in  the 
constant  apprehension  of  them. 

The  most  sanguine  advocates  for  three  or  four 
confederacies  cannot  reasonably  suppose  that  they 
would  long  remain  exactly  on  an  equal  footing  in 
point  of  strength,  even  if  it  was  possible  to  form 
them  so  at  first ;  but,  admitting  that  to  be  practica- 
ble, yet  what  human  contrivance  can  secure  the 
continuance  of  such  equality?  Independent  of 
those  local  circumstances  which  tend  to  beget  and 
increase  power  in  one  part  and  to  impede  its  pro- 
gress in  another,  we  must  advert  to  the  effects  of 
that  superior  policy  and  good  management  which 
would  probably  distinguish  the  government  of  one 
above  the  rest,  and  by  which  their  relative  equality 
in  strength  and  consideration  would  be  destroyed. 
For  it  cannot  be  presumed  that  the  same  degree  of 
sound  policy,  prudence,  and  foresight  would  uni- 
formly be  observed  by  each  of  these  confederacies 
for  a  long  succession  of  years. 

Whenever,  and  from  whatever  causes,  it  might 


The  Federalist  31 

happen,  and  happen  it  would,  that  any  one  of  these 
nations  or  confederacies  should  rise  on  the  scale 
of  political  importance  much  above  the  degree  of 
her  neighbors,  that  moment  would  those  neighbors 
behold  her  with  envy  and  with  fear.  Both  those 
passions  would  lead  them  to  countenance,  if  not  to 
promote,  whatever  might  promise  to  diminish  her 
importance;  and  would  also  restrain  them  from 
measures  calculated  to  advance  or  even  to  secure 
her  prosperity.  Much  time  would  not  be  necessary 
to  enable  her  to  discern  these  unfriendly  dispositions. 
She  would  soon  begin,  not  only  to  lose  confidence  in 
her  neighbors,  but  also  to  feel  a  disposition  equally 
unfavorable  to  them.  Distrust  naturally  creates 
distrust,  and  by  nothing  is  good- will  and  kind  con- 
duct more  speedily  changed  than  by  invidious  jeal- 
ousies and  uncandid  imputations,  whether  expressed 
or  implied. 

The  North  is  generally  the  region  of  strength,  and 
many  local  circumstances  render  it  probable  that  the 
most  Northern  of  the  proposed  confederacies  would, 
at  a  period  not  very  distant,  be  unquestionably  more 
formidable  than  any  of  the  others.  No  sooner 
would  this  become  evident  than  the  Northern  Hive 
would  excite  the  same  ideas  and  sensations  in  the 
more  southern  parts  of  America  which  it  formerly 
did  in  the  southern  parts  of  Europe.  Nor  does  it 
appear  to  be  a  rash  conjecture  that  its  young  swarms 
might  often  be  tempted  to  gather  honey  in  the  more 
blooming  fields  and  milder  air  of  their  luxurious  and 
more  delicate  neighbors. 

They  who  well  consider  the  history  of    similar 


32  Alexander  Hamilton 

divisions  and  confederacies  will  find  abundant 
reason  to  apprehend  that  those  in  contemplation 
would  in  no  other  sense  be  neighbors  than  as  they 
would  be  borderers  ;  that  they  would  neither  love 
nor  trust  one  another,  but  on  the  contrary  would  be 
a  prey  to  discord,  jealousy,  and  mutual  injuries;  in 
short,  that  they  would  place  us  exactly  in  the  situa- 
tions in  which  some  nations  doubtless  wish  to  see  us, 
viz.,  formidable  only  to  each  other. 

From  these  considerations  it  appears  that  those 
gentlemen  are  greatly  mistaken  who  suppose  that 
alliances  offensive  and  defensive  might  be  formed 
between  these  confederacies,  and  would  produce 
that  combination  and  union  of  wills,  of  arms,  and  of 
resources,  which  would  be  necessary  to  put  and  keep 
them  in  a  formidable  state  of  defence  against  foreign 
enemies. 

When  did  the  independent  states,  into  which 
Britain  and  Spain  were  formerly  divided,  combine 
in  such  alliance,  or  unite  their  forces  against  a  for- 
eign enemy?  The  proposed  confederacies  will  be 
distinct  nations.  Each  of  them  would  have  its  com- 
merce with  foreigners  to  regulate  by  distinct  treat- 
ies; and  as  their  productions  and  commodities  are 
different  and  proper  for  different  markets,  so  would 
those  treaties  be  essentially  different.  Different 
commercial  concerns  must  create  different  interests, 
and  of  course  different  degrees  of  political  attach- 
ment to  and  connection  with  different  foreign  na- 
tions. Hence  it  might  and  probably  would  happen 
that  the  foreign  nation  with  whom  the  Southern  con- 
federacy might  be  at  war  would  be  the  one  with 


The  Federalist  33 

whom  the  Northern  confederacy  would  be  the  most 
desirous  of  preserving  peace  and  friendship.  An 
alliance  so  contrary  to  their  immediate  interest 
would  not  therefore  be  easy  to  form,  nor,  if  formed, 
would  it  be  observed  and  fulfilled  with  perfect  good 
faith. 

Nay,  it  is  far  more  probable  that  in  America,  as 
in  Europe,  neighboring  nations,  acting  under  the 
impulse  of  opposite  interests  and  unfriendly  pas- 
sions, would  frequently  be  found  taking  different 
sides.  Considering  our  distance  from  Europe,  it 
would  be  more  natural  for  these  confederacies  to 
apprehend  danger  from  one  another  than  from  dis- 
tant nations,  and  therefore  that  each  of  them  should 
be  more  desirous  to  guard  against  the  others  by  the 
aid  of  foreign  alliances,  than  to  guard  against  foreign 
dangers  by  alliances  between  themselves.  And  here 
let  us  not  forget  how  much  more  easy  it  is  to  receive 
foreign  fleets  into  our  ports,  and  foreign  armies  into 
our  country,  than  it  is  to  persuade  or  compel  them 
to  depart.  How  many  conquests  did  the  Romans 
and  others  make  in  the  character  of  allies,  and  what 
innovations  did  they  under  the  same  character  in- 
troduce into  the  governments  of  those  whom  they 
pretended  to  protect. 

Let  candid  men  judge,  then,  whether  the  division 
of  America  into  any  given  number  of  independent 
sovereignties  would  tend  to  secure  us  against  the 
hostilities  and  improper  interference  of  foreign 
nations. 

PUBLIUS. 


34  Alexander  Hamilton 

For  the  Independent  Journal 
THE  FEDERALIST.     No.  VI 

(HAMILTON) 

To  the  People  of  the  State  of  New  York: 

The  three  last  numbers  of  this  paper  have  been 
dedicated  to  an  enumeration  of  the  dangers  to  which 
we  should  be  exposed,  in  a  state  of  disunion,  from 
the  arms  and  arts  of  foreign  nations.  I  shall  now 
proceed  to  delineate  dangers  of  a  different  and,  per- 
haps, still  more  alarming  kind  —  those  which  will 
in  all  probability  flow  from  dissensions  between  the 
States  themselves,  and  from  domestic  factions  and 
convulsions.  These  have  been  already  in  some 
instances  slightly  anticipated;  but  they  deserve  a 
more  particular  and  more  full  investigation. 

A  man  must  be  far  gone  in  Utopian  speculations 
who  can  seriously  doubt  that,  if  these  States  should 
either  be  wholly  disunited,  or  only  united  in  partial 
confederacies,  the  subdivisions  into  which  they 
might  be  thrown  would  have  frequent  and  violent 
contests  with  each  other.  To  presume  a  want  of 
motives  for  such  contests  as  an  argument  against 
their  existence,  would  be  to  forget  that  men  are 
ambitious,  vindictive,  and  rapacious.  To  look  for 
a  continuation  of  harmony  between  a  number  of  in- 
dependent, unconnected  sovereignties  in  the  same 
neighborhood,  would  be  to  disregard  the  uniform 
course  of  human  events,  and  to  set  at  defiance  the 
accumulated  experience  of  ages. 

The  causes  of  hostility  among  nations  are  innu- 
merable.    There  are  some  which  have  a  general  and 


The  Federalist  35 

almost  constant  operation  upon  the  collective  bodies 
of  society.  Of  this  description  are  the  love  of  power 
or  the  desire  of  pre-eminence  and  dominion  —  the 
jealousy  of  power,  or  the  desire  of  equality  and 
safety.  There  are  others  which  have  a  more  cir- 
cumscribed though  an  equally  operative  influence 
within  their  spheres.  Such  are  the  rivalships  and 
competitions  of  commerce  between  commercial  na- 
tions. And  there  are  others,  not  less  numerous  than 
either  of  the  former,  which  take  their  origin  entirely 
in  private  passions  ;  in  the  attachments,  enmities, 
interests,  hopes,  and  fears  of  leading  individuals  in 
the  communities  of  which  they  are  members.  Men 
of  this  class,  whether  the  favorites  of  a  king  or  of  a 
people,  have  in  too  many  instances  abused  the  con- 
fidence they  possessed ;  and  assuming  the  pretext  of 
some  public  motive,  have  not  scrupled  to  sacrifice 
the  national  tranquillity  to  personal  advantage  or 
personal  gratification. 

The  celebrated  Pericles,  in  compliance  with  the 
resentment  of  a  prostitute,1  at  the  expense  of  much 
of  the  blood  and  treasure  of  his  countrymen,  at- 
tacked, vanquished,  and  destroyed  the  city  of  the 
Samnians.  The  same  man,  stimulated  by  private 
pique  against  the  Megarensians*  another  nation  of 
Greece,  or  to  avoid  a  prosecution  with  which  he  was 
threatened  as  an  accomplice  in  a  supposed  theft  of 
the  statuary  Phidias,3  or  to  get  rid  of  the  accusations 
prepared  to  be  brought  against  him  for  dissipating 

1  Aspasia,  vide  Plutarch's  Life  of  Pericles. — Publius. 

2  Ibid. — Publius. 

3  Ibid. — Publius. 


36  Alexander  Hamilton 

the  funds  of  the  state  in  the  purchase  of  popularity,1 
or  from  a  combination  of  all  these  causes,  was  the 
primitive  author  of  that  famous  and  fatal  war,  dis- 
tinguished in  the  Grecian  annals  by  the  name  of  the 
Peloponnesian  war;  which,  after  various  vicissitudes, 
intermissions,  and  renewals,  terminated  in  the  ruin 
of  the  Athenian  commonwealth. 

The  ambitious  cardinal,  who  was  prime  minister 
to  Henry  VIII. ,  permitting  his  vanity  to  aspire  to 
the  triple  crown,2  entertained  hopes  of  succeeding  in 
the  acquisition  of  that  splendid  prize  by  the  influence 
of  the  Emperor  Charles  V.  To  secure  the  favor  and 
interest  of  this  enterprising  and  powerful  monarch, 
he  precipitated  England  into  a  war  with  France, 
contrary  to  the  plainest  dictates  of  policy,  and  at 
the  hazard  of  the  safety  and  independence,  as  well 
of  the  kingdom  over  which  he  presided  by  his  coun- 
sels, as  of  Europe  in  general.  For  if  there  ever  was 
a  sovereign  who  bid  fair  to  realize  the  project  of  uni- 
versal monarchy,  it  was  the  Emperor  Charles  V.,  of 
whose  intrigues  Wolsey  was  at  once  the  instrument 
and  the  dupe. 

The  influence  which  the  bigotry  of  one  female,3 
the  petulance  of  another,4  and  the  cabals  of  a  third,5 
had  in  the  contemporary  policy,  ferments,  and  paci- 
fications, of  a  considerable  part  of  Europe,  are  topics 

1  Plutarch's  Life  of  Pericles.  Phidias  was  supposed  to  have  stolen 
some  public  gold,  with  the  connivance  of  Pericles,  for  the  embellish- 
ment of  the  statue  of  Minerva. — Publius. 

2  Worn  by  the  popes. — Publius. 

3  Madame  de  Maintenon. — Publius. 

4  Duchess  of  Marlborough. — Publius. 

5  Madame  de  Pompadour. — Publius. 


The  Federalist  37 

that  have  been  too  often  descanted  upon  not  to  be 
generally  known. 

To  multiply  examples  of  the  agency  of  personal 
considerations  in  the  production  of  great  national 
events,  either  foreign  or  domestic,  according  to  their 
direction,  would  be  an  unnecessary  waste  of  time. 
Those  who  have  but  a  superficial  acquaintance  with 
the  sources  from  which  they  are  to  be  drawn,  will 
themselves  recollect  a  variety  of  instances;  and 
those  who  have  a  tolerable  knowledge  of  human 
nature  will  not  stand  in  need  of  such  lights,  to  form 
their  opinion  either  of  the  reality  or  extent  of  that 
agency.  Perhaps,  however,  a  reference,  tending  to 
illustrate  the  general  principle,  may  with  propriety 
be  made  to  a  case  which  has  lately  happened  among 
ourselves.  If  Shays  had  not  been  a  desperate  debtor, 
it  is  much  to  be  doubted  whether  Massachusetts 
would  have  been  plunged  into  a  civil  war. 

But  notwithstanding  the  concurring  testimony  of 
experience,  in  this  particular,  there  are  still  to  be 
found  visionary  or  designing  men,  who  stand  ready  to 
advocate  the  paradox  of  perpetual  peace  between  the 
States,  though  dismembered  and  alienated  from  each 
other.  The  genius  of  republics  (say  they)  is  pacific ; 
the  spirit  of  commerce  has  a  tendency  to  soften  the 
manners  of  men,  and  to  extinguish  those  inflammable 
humors  which  have  so  often  kindled  into  wars.  Com- 
mercial republics,  like  ours,  will  never  be  disposed  to 
waste  themselves  in  ruinous  contentions  with  each 
other.  They  will  be  governed  by  mutual  interest,  and 
will  cultivate  a  spirit  of  mutual  amity  and  concord. 

Is  it  not  (we  may  ask  these  projectors  in  politics) 


38  Alexander  Hamilton 

the  true  interest  of  all  nations  to  cultivate  the  same 
benevolent  and  philosophic  spirit?  If  this  be  their 
true  interest,  have  they  in  fact  pursued  it?  Has  it 
not,  on  the  contrary,  invariably  been  found  that 
momentary  passions,  and  immediate  interests,  have 
a  more  active  and  imperious  control  over  human 
conduct  than  general  or  remote  considerations  of 
policy,  utility,  or  justice?  Have  republics  in  prac- 
tice been  less  addicted  to  war  than  monarchies? 
Are  not  the  former  administered  by  men  as  well  as 
the  latter?  Are  there  not  aversions,  predilections, 
rivalships,  and  desires  of  unjust  acquisitions,  that 
affect  nations  as  well  as  kings  ?  Are  not  popular  as- 
semblies frequently  subject  to  the  impulses  of  rage, 
resentment,  jealousy,  avarice,  and  of  other  irregular 
and  violent  propensities  ?  Is  it  not  well  known  that 
their  determinations  are  often  governed  by  a  few  in- 
dividuals in  whom  they  place  confidence,  and  are,  of 
course,  liable  to  be  tinctured  by  the  passions  and 
views  of  those  individuals?  Has  commerce  hitherto 
done  any  thing  more  than  change  the  objects  of  war? 
Is  not  the  love  of  wealth  as  domineering  and  enter- 
prising a  passion  as  that  of  power  or  glory?  Have 
there  not  been  as  many  wars  founded  upon  com- 
mercial motives  since  that  has  become  the  prevailing 
system  of  nations,  as  were  before  occasioned  by  the 
cupidity  of  territory  or  dominion?  Has  not  the 
spirit  of  commerce,  in  many  instances,  administered 
new  incentives  to  the  appetite,  both  for  the  one  and 
for  the  other?  Let  experience,  the  least  fallible 
guide  of  human  opinions,  be  appealed  to  for  an  an- 
swer to  these  inquiries. 


The  Federalist  39 

Sparta,  Athens,  Rome,  and  Carthage  were  all  re- 
publics; two  of  them,  Athens  and  Carthage,  of  the 
commercial  kind.  Yet  were  they  as  often  engaged 
in  wars,  offensive  and  defensive,  as  the  neighboring 
monarchies  of  the  same  times.  Sparta  was  little 
better  than  a  well-regulated  camp;  and  Rome  was 
never  sated  of  carnage  and  conquest. 

Carthage,  though  a  commercial  republic,  was  the 
aggressor  in  the  very  war  that  ended  in  her  destruc- 
tion. Hannibal  had  carried  her  arms  into  the  heart 
of  Italy  and  to  the  gates  of  Rome,  before  Scipio,  in 
turn,  gave  him  an  overthrow  in  the  territories  of 
Carthage,  and  made  a  conquest  of  the  common- 
wealth. 

Venice,  in  later  times,  figured  more  than  once  in 
wars  of  ambition,  till,  becoming  an  object  to  the 
other  Italian  states,  Pope  Julius  II.  found  means  to 
accomplish  that  formidable  league,1  which  gave  a 
deadly  blow  to  the  power  and  pride  of  this  haughty 
republic. 

The  provinces  of  Holland,  till  they  were  over- 
whelmed in  debts  and  taxes,  took  a  leading  and  con- 
spicuous part  in  the  wars  of  Europe.  They  had 
furious  contests  with  England  for  the  dominion  of 
the  sea,  and  were  among  the  most  persevering  and 
most  implacable  of  the  opponents  of  Louis  XIV. 

In  the  government  of  Britain  the  representa- 
tives of  the  people  compose  one  branch  of  the  na- 
tional legislature.     Commerce  has  been  for  ages  the 

1  The  League  of  Cambray,  comprehending  the  Emperor,  the  King  of 
France,  the  King  of  Aragon,  and  most  of  the  Italian  princes  and  states. 
— Publius. 


40  Alexander  Hamilton 

predominant  pursuit  of  that  country.  Few  nations, 
nevertheless,  have  been  more  frequently  engaged  in 
war;  and  the  wars  in  which  that  kingdom  has  been 
engaged  have,  in  numerous  instances,  proceeded 
from  the  people. 

There  have  been,  if  I  may  so  express  it,  almost  as 
many  popular  as  royal  wars.  The  cries  of  the  nation 
and  the  importunities  of  their  representatives  have, 
upon  various  occasions,  dragged  their  monarchs  into 
War,  or  continued  them  in  it,  contrary  to  their  in- 
clinations, and  sometimes  contrary  to  the  real  in- 
terests of  the  state.  In  that  memorable  struggle  for 
superiority  between  the  rival  houses  of  Austria  and 
Bourbon,  which  so  long  kept  Europe  in  a  flame,  it 
is  well  known  that  the  antipathies  of  the  English 
against  the  French,  seconding  the  ambition,  or 
rather  the  avarice,  of  a  favorite  leader,1  protracted 
the  war  beyond  the  limits  marked  out  by  sound 
policy,  and  for  a  considerable  time  in  opposition  to 
the  views  of  the  court. 

The  wars  of  these  two  last-mentioned  nations  have 
in  a  great  measure  grown  out  of  commercial  con- 
siderations,— the  desire  of  supplanting  and  the  fear 
of  being  supplanted,  either  in  particular  branches 
of  traffic  or  in  the  general  advantages  of  trade  and 
navigation.2 

xThe  Duke  of  Marlborough. — Publius. 

2  In  the  text  said  to  have  been  revised  by  Hamilton  and  Madison, 
and  adopted  by  Mr.  J.  C.  Hamilton,  the  following  additional  sentences 
occur  at  this  point:  "and  sometimes  even  the  more  culpable  desire 
of  sharing  in  the  commerce  of  other  nations  without  their  consent. 
The  last  war  but  two  between  Britain  and  Spain  sprang  from  the  at- 
tempts of  the  English  merchants  to  prosecute  an  illicit  trade  with  the 


The  Federalist  41 

From  this  summary  of  what  has  taken  place  in 
other  countries,  whose  situations  have  borne  the 
nearest  resemblance  to  our  own,  what  reason  can 
we  have  to  confide  in  those  reveries  which  would 
seduce  us  into  an  expectation  of  peace  and  cordiality 
between  the  members  of  the  present  confederacy, 
in  a  state  of  separation  ?  Have  we  not  already  seen 
enough  of  the  fallacy  and  extravagance  of  those  idle 
theories  which  have  amused  us  with  promises  of  an 
exemption  from  the  imperfections,  weaknesses,  and 
evils  incident  to  society  in  every  shape?  Is  it  not 
time  to  awake  from  the  deceitful  dream  of  a  golden 
age,  and  to  adopt  as  a  practical  maxim  for  the  di- 
rection of  our  political  conduct  that  we,  as  well  as 
the  other  inhabitants  of  the  globe,  are  yet  remote 
from  the  happy  empire  of  perfect  wisdom  and  perfect 
virtue  ? 

Let  the  point  of  extreme  depression  to  which  our 
national  dignity  and  credit  have  sunk,  let  the  incon- 
veniences felt  everywhere  from  a  lax  and  ill  ad- 
ministration of  government,  let  the  revolt  of  a  part 

Spanish  main.  These  unjustifiable  practices  on  their  part  produced 
severity  on  the  part  of  the  Spaniards  towards  the  subjects  of  Great 
Britain  which  were  not  more  justifiable,  because  they  exceeded  the 
bounds  of  a  just  retaliation  and  were  chargeable  with  inhumanity  and 
cruelty.  Many  of  the  English  who  were  taken  on  the  Spanish  coast 
were  sent  to  dig  in  the  mines  of  Potosi;  and  by  the  usual  progress 
of  a  spirit  of  resentment,  the  innocent  were,  after  a  while,  confounded 
with  the  guilty  in  indiscriminate  punishment.  The  complaints  of  the 
merchants  kindled  a  violent  flame  throughout  the  nation,  which  soon 
after  broke  out  in  the  House  of  Commons,  and  was  communicated 
from  that  body  to  the  ministry.  Letters  of  reprisal  were  granted, 
and  a  war  ensued,  which  in  its  consequences  overthrew  all  the  alliances 
that  but  twenty  years  before  had  been  formed  with  sanguine  expecta- 
tions of  the  most  beneficial  fruits." 


42  Alexander  Hamilton 

of  the  State  of  North  Carolina,  the  late  menacing 
disturbances  in  Pennsylvania,  and  the  actual  in- 
surrections and  rebellions  in  Massachusetts,  de- 
clare  ! 

So  far  is  the  general  sense  of  mankind  from  cor- 
responding with  the  tenets  of  those  who  endeavor 
to  lull  asleep  our  apprehensions  of  discord  and  hos- 
tility between  the  States,  in  the  event  of  disunion, 
that  it  has  from  long  observation  of  the  progress  of 
society  become  a  sort  of  axiom  in  politics,  that  vi- 
cinity, or  nearness  of  situation,  constitutes  nations 
natural  enemies.  An  intelligent  writer  expresses 
himself  on  this  subject  to  this  effect:  "  Neighbor- 
ing nations  [says  he]  are  naturally  enemies  of  each 
other,  unless  their  common  weakness  forces  them  to 
league  in  a  con  federative  republic,  and  their  con- 
stitution prevents  the  differences  that  neighborhood 
occasions,  extinguishing  that  secret  jealousy  which 
disposes  all  states  to  aggrandize  themselves  at  the  ex- 
pense of  their  neighbors."1  This  passage,  at  the 
same  time,  points  out  the  evil  and  suggests  the 

REMEDY. 

PUBLIUS. 


For  the  Independent  Journal 
THE  FEDERALIST.     No.  VII 

(HAMILTON) 

To  the  People  of  the  State  of  New  York: 

It  is  sometimes  asked,  with  an  air  of  seeming  tri- 
umph, what  inducements  could  the  States  have,  if 

*Vide  Principes  des  Negotiations  par  l'Abb6  de  Mably. — Publius. 


The  Federalist  43 

disunited,  to  make  war  upon  each  other?  It  would 
be  a  full  answer  to  this  question  to  say — precisely 
the  same  inducements  which  have,  at  different  times, 
deluged  in  blood  all  the  nations  in  the  world.  But, 
unfortunately  for  us,  the  question  admits  of  a  more 
particular  answer.  There  are  causes  of  differences 
within  our  immediate  contemplation,  of  the  tend- 
ency of  which,  even  under  the  restraints  of  a  federal 
constitution,  we  have  had  sufficient  experience  to 
enable  us  to  form  a  judgment  of  what  might  be  ex- 
pected if  those  restraints  were  removed. 

Territorial  disputes  have  at  all  times  been  found 
one  of  the  most  fertile  sources  of  hostility  among 
nations.  Perhaps  the  greatest  proportion  of  wars 
that  have  desolated  the  earth  have  sprung  from  this 
origin.  This  cause  would  exist  among  us  in  full 
force.  We  have  a  vast  tract  of  unsettled  territory 
within  the  boundaries  of  the  United  States.  There 
still  are  discordant  and  undecided  claims  between 
several  of  them,  and  the  dissolution  of  the  Union 
would  lay  a  foundation  for  similar  claims  between 
them  all.  It  is  well  known  that  they  have  heretofore 
had  serious  and  animated  discussion  concerning  the 
rights  to  the  lands  which  were  ungranted  at  the  time 
of  the  Revolution,  and  which  usually  went  under  the 
name  of  crown  lands.  The  States  within  the  limits 
of  whose  colonial  governments  they  were  comprised 
have  claimed  them  as  their  property,  the  others  have 
contended  that  the  rights  of  the  crown  in  this  article 
devolved  upon  the  Union;  especially  as  to  all  that 
part  of  the  Western  territory  which,  either  by  actual 
possession,  or  through  the  submission  of  the  Indian 


44  Alexander  Hamilton 

proprietors,  was  subjected  to  the  jurisdiction  of  the 
king  of  Great  Britain,  till  it  was  relinquished  in  the 
treaty  of  peace.  This,  it  has  been  said,  was  at  all 
events  an  acquisition  to  the  Confederacy  by  com- 
pact with  a  foreign  power.  It  has  been  the  prudent 
policy  of  Congress  to  appease  this  controversy,  by 
prevailing  upon  the  States  to  make  cessions  to  the 
United  States  for  the  benefit  of  the  whole.  This  has 
been  so  far  accomplished  as,  under  a  continuation  of 
the  Union,  to  afford  a  decided  prospect  of  an  ami- 
cable termination  of  the  dispute.  A  dismemberment 
of  the  Confederacy,  however,  would  revive  this  dis- 
pute, and  would  create  others  on  the  same  subject. 
At  present,  a  large  part  of  the  vacant  Western  terri- 
tory is,  by  cession  at  least,  if  not  by  any  anterior 
right,  the  common  property  of  the  Union.  If  that 
were  at  an  end,  the  States  which  made  the  cession, 
on  a  principle  of  federal  compromise,  would  be  apt, 
when  the  motive  of  the  grant  had  ceased,  to  reclaim 
the  lands  as  a  reversion.  The  other  States  would 
no  doubt  insist  on  a  proportion,  by  right  of  repre- 
sentation. Their  argument  would  be,  that  a  grant, 
once  made,  could  not  be  revoked;  and  that  the  jus- 
tice of  participating  in  territory  acquired  or  secured 
by  the  joint  efforts  of  the  Confederacy,  remained  un- 
diminished. If,  contrary  to  probability,  it  should 
be  admitted  by  all  the  States,  that  each  had  a  right 
to  a  share  of  this  common  stock,  there  would  still  be 
a  difficulty  to  be  surmounted,  as  to  a  proper  rule  of 
apportionment.  Different  principles  would  be  set  up 
by  different  States  for  this  purpose;  and  as  they 
would  affect  the  opposite  interests  of  the  parties,  they 


The  Federalist  45 

might  not  easily  be  susceptible  of  a  pacific  adjust- 
ment. 

In  the  wide  field  of  Western  territory,  therefore, 
we  perceive  an  ample  theatre  for  hostile  pretensions, 
without  any  umpire  or  common  judge  to  interpose 
between  the  contending  parties.  To  reason  from  the 
past  to  the  future,  we  shall  have  good  ground  to 
apprehend,  that  the  sword  would  sometimes  be  ap- 
pealed to  as  the  arbiter  of  their  differences.  The  cir- 
cumstances of  the  dispute  between  Connecticut  and 
Pennsylvania,  respecting  the  land  at  Wyoming,  ad- 
monish us  not  to  be  sanguine  in  expecting  an  easy 
accommodation  of  such  differences.  The  articles 
of  confederation  obliged  the  parties  to  submit  the 
matter  to  the  decision  of  a  federal  court.  The  sub- 
mission was  made,  and  the  court  decided  in  favor 
of  Pennsylvania.  But  Connecticut  gave  strong  in- 
dications of  dissatisfaction  with  that  determination; 
nor  did  she  appear  to  be  entirely  resigned  to  it,  till, 
by  negotiation  and  management,  something  like  an 
equivalent  was  found  for  the  loss  she  supposed  her- 
self to  have  sustained.  Nothing  here  said  is  intended 
to  convey  the  slightest  censure  on  the  conduct  of 
that  State.  She  no  doubt  sincerely  believed  herself 
to  have  been  injured  by  the  decision;  and  States,  like 
individuals,  acquiesce  with  great  reluctance  in  deter- 
minations to  their  disadvantage. 

Those  who  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  the  in- 
side of  the  transactions  which  attended  the  progress 
of  the  controversy  between  this  State  and  the  dis- 
trict of  Vermont,  can  vouch  the  opposition  we  ex- 
perienced, as  well  from  States  not  interested  as  from 


46  Alexander  Hamilton 

those  which  were  interested  in  the  claim;  and  can 
attest  the  danger  to  which  the  peace  of  the  Con- 
federacy might  have  been  exposed,  had  this  State 
attempted  to  assert  its  rights  by  force.  Two  mo- 
tives preponderated  in  that  opposition:  one,  a 
jealousy  entertained  of  our  future  power;  and  the 
other,  the  interest  of  certain  individuals  of  influence 
in  the  neighboring  States,  who  had  obtained  grants 
of  lands  under  the  actual  government  of  that  dis- 
trict. Even  the  States  which  brought  forward 
claims,  in  contradiction  to  ours,  seemed  more  solici- 
tous to  dismember  this  State,  than  to  establish  their 
own  pretensions.  These  were  New  Hampshire, 
Massachusetts,  and  Connecticut.  New  Jersey  and 
Rhode  Island,  upon  all  occasions,  discovered  a  warm 
zeal  for  the  independence  of  Vermont;  and  Mary- 
land, till  alarmed  by  the  appearance  of  a  connection 
between  Canada  and  that  State,  entered  deeply  into 
the  same  views.  These  being  small  States,  saw 
with  an  unfriendly  eye  the  perspective  of  our  grow- 
ing greatness.  In  a  review  of  these  transactions  we 
may  trace  some  of  the  causes  which  would  be  likely 
to  embroil  the  States  with  each  other,  if  it  should  be 
their  unpropitious  destiny  to  become  disunited. 

The  competitions  of  commerce  would  be  another 
fruitful  source  of  contention.  The  States  less  favor- 
ably circumstanced  would  be  desirous  of  escaping 
from  the  disadvantages  of  local  situation,  and  of 
sharing  in  the  advantages  of  their  more  fortunate 
neighbors.  Each  State,  or  separate  confederacy, 
would  pursue  a  system  of  commercial  policy  pecu- 
liar   to    itself.     This    would    occasion    distinctions, 


The  Federalist  47 

preferences,  and  exclusions,  which  would  beget  dis- 
content. The  habits  of  intercourse,  on  the  basis  of 
equal  privileges,  to  which  we  have  been  accustomed 
since  the  earliest  settlement  of  the  country,  would 
give  a  keener  edge  to  those  causes  of  discontent  than 
they  would  naturally  have  independent  of  this  cir- 
cumstance. We  should  be  ready  to  denominate  in- 
juries those  things  which  were  in  reality  the  justifiable 
acts  of  independent  sovereignties  consulting  a  distinct 
interest.  The  spirit  of  enterprise,  which  character- 
izes the  commercial  part  of  America,  has  left  no 
occasion  of  displaying  itself  unimproved.  It  is  not 
at  all  probable  that  this  unbridled  spirit  would  pay 
much  respect  to  those  regulations  of  trade  by  which 
particular  States  might  endeavor  to  secure  exclusive 
benefits  to  their  own  citizens.  The  infractions  of 
these  regulations,  on  one  side,  the  efforts  to  prevent 
and  repel  them,  on  the  other,  would  naturally  lead 
to  outrages,  and  these  to  reprisals  and  wars. 

The  opportunities  which  some  States  would  have 
of  rendering  others  tributary  to  them  by  commercial 
regulations  would  be  impatiently  submitted  to  by 
the  tributary  States.  The  relative  situation  of  New 
York,  Connecticut,  and  New  Jersey,  would  afford 
an  example  of  this  kind.  New  York,  from  the  neces- 
sities of  revenue,  must  lay  duties  on  her  importations. 
A  great  part  of  these  duties  must  be  paid  by  the  in- 
habitants of  the  two  other  States  in  the  capacity  of 
consumers  of  what  we  import.  New  York  would 
neither  be  willing  nor  able  to  forego  this  advantage. 
Her  citizens  would  not  consent  that  a  duty  paid  by 
them  should  be  remitted  in  favor  of  the  citizens  of 


48  Alexander  Hamilton 

her  neighbors;  nor  would  it  be  practicable,  if  there 
were  not  this  impediment  in  the  way,  to  distinguish 
the  customers  in  our  own  markets.  Would  Con- 
necticut and  New  Jersey  long  submit  to  be  taxed  by 
New  York  for  her  exclusive  benefit?  Should  we 
be  long  permitted  to  remain  in  the  quiet  and  undis- 
turbed enjoyment  of  a  metropolis,  from  the  posses- 
sion of  which  we  derived  an  advantage  so  odious  to 
our  neighbors,  and,  in  their  opinion,  so  oppressive? 
Should  we  be  able  to  preserve  it  against  the  incum- 
bent weight  of  Connecticut  on  the  one  side,  and  the 
co-operating  pressure  of  New  Jersey  on  the  other? 
These  are  questions  that  temerity  alone  will  answer 
in  the  affirmative. 

The  public  debt  of  the  Union  would  be  a  further 
cause  of  collision  between  the  separate  States  or 
confederacies.  The  apportionment,  in  the  first  in- 
stance, and  the  progressive  extinguishment  after- 
ward, would  be  alike  productive  of  ill-humor  and 
animosity.  How  would  it  be  possible  to  agree  upon 
a  rule  of  apportionment  satisfactory  to  all?  There 
is  scarcely  any  that  can  be  proposed  which  is  entirely 
free  from  real  objections.  These,  as  usual,  would 
be  exaggerated  by  the  adverse  interest  of  the  parties. 
There  are  even  dissimilar  views  among  the  States  as 
to  the  general  principle  of  discharging  the  public 
debt.  Some  of  them,  either  less  impressed  with  the 
importance  of  national  credit,  or  because  their  citi- 
zens have  little,  if  any,  immediate  interest  in  the 
question,  feel  an  indifference,  if  not  a  repugnance, 
to  the  payment  of  the  domestic  debt  at  any  rate. 
These  would  be  inclined  to  magnify  the  difficulties 


The  Federalist  49 

of  a  distribution.  Others  of  them,  a  numerous  body 
of  whose  citizens  are  creditors  to  the  public  beyond 
the  proportion  of  the  State  in  the  total  amount  of 
the  national  debt,  would  be  strenuous  for  some 
equitable  and  effective  provision.  The  procrastina- 
tions of  the  former  would  excite  the  resentments  of 
the  latter.  The  settlement  of  a  rule  would,  in  the 
meantime,  be  postponed  by  real  differences  of  opin- 
ion and  affected  delays.  The  citizens  of  the  States  in- 
terested would  clamor ;  foreign  powers  would  urge  for 
the  satisfaction  of  their  just  demands,  and  the  peace 
of  the  States  would  be  hazarded  to  the  double  contin- 
gency of  external  invasion  and  internal  contention. 
Suppose  the  difficulties  of  agreeing  upon  a  rule 
surmounted,  and  the  apportionment  made.  Still 
there  is  great  room  to  suppose  that  the  rule  agreed 
upon  would,  upon  experiment,  be  found  to  bear 
harder  upon  some  States  than  upon  others.  Those 
which  were  sufferers  by  it  would  naturally  seek  for 
a  mitigation  of  the  burden.  The  others  would  as 
naturally  be  disinclined  to  a  revision,  which  was 
likely  to  end  in  an  increase  of  their  own  incum- 
brances. Their  refusal  would  be  too  plausible  a 
pretext  to  the  complaining  States  to  withhold  their 
contributions,  not  to  be  embraced  with  avidity ;  and 
the  non-compliance  of  these  States  with  their  en- 
gagements would  be  a  ground  of  bitter  discussion 
and  altercation.  If  even  the  rule  adopted  should 
in  practice  justify  the  equality  of  its  principle,  still 
delinquencies  in  payments  on  the  part  of  some  of  the 
States  would  result  from  a  diversity  of  other  causes — 
the  real  deficiency  of  resources ;  the  mismanagement 

VOL.  XI.— 4. 


50  Alexander  Hamilton 

of  their  finances;  accidental  disorders  in  the  man- 
agement of  the  government;  and,  in  addition  to 
the  rest,  the  reluctance  with  which  men  commonly 
part  with  money  for  purposes  that  have  out-lived 
the  exigencies  which  produced  them,  and  interfere 
with  the  supply  of  immediate  wants.  Delinquen- 
cies, from  whatever  causes,  would  be  productive 
of  complaints,  recriminations,  and  quarrels.  There 
is,  perhaps,  nothing  more  likely  to  disturb  the  tran- 
quillity of  nations  than  their  being  bound  to  mutual 
contributions  for  any  common  object  that  does  not 
yield  an  equal  and  coincident  benefit.  For  it  is 
an  observation,  as  true  as  it  is  trite,  that  there  is 
nothing  men  differ  so  readily  about  as  the  payment 
of  money. 

Laws  in  violation  of  private  contracts,  as  they 
amount  to  aggressions  on  the  rights  of  those  States 
whose  citizens  are  injured  by  them,  may  be  con- 
sidered as  another  probable  source  of  hostility.  We 
are  not  authorized  to  expect  that  a  more  liberal  or 
more  equitable  spirit  would  preside  over  the  legisla- 
tions of  the  individual  States  hereafter,  if  unre- 
strained by  any  additional  checks,  than  we  have 
heretofore  seen  in  too  many  instances  disgracing 
their  several  codes.  We  have  observed  the  dis- 
position to  retaliation  excited  in  Connecticut,  in 
consequence  of  the  enormities  perpetrated  by  the 
Legislature  of  Rhode  Island;  and  we  reasonably 
infer  that,  in  similar  cases  under  other  circum- 
stances, a  war,  not  of  parchment,  but  of  the  sword, 
would  chastise  such  atrocious  breaches  of  moral 
obligation  and  social  justice. 


The  Federalist  51 

The  probability  of  incompatible  alliances  between 
the  different  States  or  confederacies  and  different 
foreign  nations,  and  the  effects  of  this  situation  upon 
the  peace  of  the  whole,  have  been  sufficiently  un- 
folded in  some  preceding  papers.  From  the  view 
they  have  exhibited  of  this  part  of  the  subject,  this 
conclusion  is  to  be  drawn,  that  America,  if  not  con- 
nected at  all,  or  only  by  the  feeble  tie  of  a  simple 
league,  offensive  and  defensive,  would,  by  the  op- 
eration of  such  jarring  alliances,  be  gradually  en- 
tangled in  all  the  pernicious  labyrinths  of  European 
politics  and  wars  ;  and  by  the  destructive  conten- 
tions of  the  parts  into  which  she  was  divided,  would 
be  likely  to  become  a  prey  to  the  artifices  and 
machinations  of  powers  equally  the  enemies  of 
them  all.  Divide  et  imp  era  x  must  be  the  motto  of 
every  nation  that  either  hates  or  fears  us.2 

Publius. 


From  the  New  York  Packet,  Tuesday,  November  20,  1787 
THE  FEDERALIST.     No.  VIII 

(HAMILTON) 

To  the  People  of  the  State  of  New  York: 

Assuming  it  therefore  as  an  established  truth  that 
the  several  States,  in  case  of  disunion,  or  such  com- 
binations of  them  as  might  happen  to  be  formed  out 

1  Divide  and  command. — Publius. 

2  In  order  that  the  whole  subject  of  these  papers  may  as  soon  as 
possible  be  laid  before  the  public,  it  is  proposed  to  publish  them  four 
times  a  week — on  Tuesday  in  the  New  York  Packet  and  on  Thursday 
in  the  Daily  Advertiser. — Publius. 


52  Alexander  Hamilton 

of  the  wreck  of  the  general  Confederacy,  would  be 
subject  to  those  vicissitudes  of  peace  and  war,  of 
friendship  and  enmity  with  each  other,  which  have 
fallen  to  the  lot  of  all  neighboring  nations  not  united 
under  one  government,  let  us  enter  into  a  concise 
detail  of  some  of  the  consequences  that  would  attend 
such  a  situation. 

War  between  the  States,  in  the  first  period  of 
their  separate  existence,  would  be  accompanied  with 
much  greater  distresses  than  it  commonly  is  in  those 
countries  where  regular  military  establishments  have 
long  obtained.  The  disciplined  armies  always  kept 
on  foot  on  the  continent  of  Europe,  though  they  bear 
a  malignant  aspect  to  liberty  and  economy,  have, 
notwithstanding,  been  productive  of  the  signal  ad- 
vantage of  rendering  sudden  conquests  impractica- 
ble, and  of  preventing  that  rapid  desolation  which 
used  to  mark  the  progress  of  war  prior  to  their  in- 
troduction. The  art  of  fortification  has  contributed 
to  the  same  ends.  The  nations  of  Europe  are  en- 
circled with  chains  of  fortified  places,  which  mu- 
tually obstruct  invasion.  Campaigns  are  wasted  in 
reducing  two  or  three  frontier  garrisons,  to  gain  ad- 
mittance into  an  enemy's  country.  Similar  impedi- 
ments occur  at  every  step,  to  exhaust  the  strength 
and  delay  the  progress  of  an  invader.  Formerly, 
an  invading  army  would  penetrate  into  the  heart  of 
a  neighboring  country  almost  as  soon  as  intelligence 
of  its  approach  could  be  received;  but  now  a  com- 
paratively small  force  of  disciplined  troops,  acting 
on  the  defensive,  with  the  aid  of  posts,  is  able  to 
impede,  and  finally  to  frustrate,  the  enterprises  of 


The  Federalist  53 

one  much  more  considerable.  The  history  of  war,  in 
that  quarter  of  the  globe,  is  no  longer  a  history  of 
nations  subdued  and  empires  overturned,  but  of 
towns  taken  and  retaken;  of  battles  that  decide 
nothing;  of  retreats  more  beneficial  than  victories; 
of  much  effort  and  little  acquisition. 

In  this  country  the  scene  would  be  altogether 
reversed.  The  jealousy  of  military  establishments 
would  postpone  them  as  long  as  possible.  The  want 
of  fortifications,  leaving  the  frontiers  of  one  State 
open  to  another,  would  facilitate  inroads.  The 
populous  States  would,  with  little  difficulty,  overrun 
their  less  populous  neighbors.  Conquests  would  be 
as  easy  to  be  made  as  difficult  to  be  retained.  War, 
therefore,  would  be  desultory  and  predatory.  Plun- 
der and  devastation  ever  march  in  the  train  of  ir- 
regulars. The  calamities  of  individuals  would  make 
the  principal  figure  in  the  events  which  would  char- 
acterize our  military  exploits. 

This  picture  is  not  too  highly  wrought;  though,  I 
confess,  it  would  not  long  remain  a  just  one.  Safety 
from  external  danger  is  the  most  powerful  director 
of  national  conduct.  Even  the  ardent  love  of  liberty 
will,  after  a  time,  give  way  to  its  dictates.  The 
violent  destruction  of  life  and  property  incident  to 
war,  the  continual  effort  and  alarm  attendant  on  a 
state  of  continual  danger,  will  compel  nations  the 
most  attached  to  liberty  to  resort  for  repose  and 
security  to  institutions  which  have  a  tendency  to 
destroy  their  civil  and  political  rights.  To  be  more 
safe,  they  at  length  become  willing  to  run  the  risk 
of  being  less  free. 


54  Alexander  Hamilton 

The  institutions  chiefly  alluded  to  are  standing 
armies  and  the  correspondent  appendages  of  mili- 
tary establishments.  Standing  armies,  it  is  said,  are 
not  provided  against  in  the  new  Constitution;  and 
it  is  therefore  inferred  that  they  may  exist  under  it.1 
Their  existence,  however,  from  the  very  terms  of  the 
proposition,  is,  at  most,  problematical  and  uncertain.2 
But  standing  armies,  it  may  be  replied,  must  inevit- 
ably result  from  a  dissolution  of  the  Confederacy. 
Frequent  war  and  constant  apprehension,  which 
require  a  state  of  as  constant  preparation,  will  in- 
fallibly produce  them.  The  weaker  States  or  con- 
federacies would  first  have  recourse  to  them,  to  put 
themselves  upon  an  equality  with  their  more  potent 
neighbors.  They  would  endeavor  to  supply  the  in- 
feriority of  population  and  resources  by  a  more  regu- 
lar and  effective  system  of  defence,  by  disciplined 
troops,  and  by  fortifications.  They  would,  at  the 
same  time,  be  necessitated  to  strengthen  the  execu- 
tive arm  of  government,  in  doing  which  their  con- 
stitutions would  acquire  a  progressive  direction 
towards  monarchy.  It  is  of  the  nature  of  war  to  in- 
crease the  executive  at  the  expense  of  the  legislative 
authority. 

The  expedients  which  have  been  mentioned  would 
soon  give  the  States  or  confederacies  that  made  use 

1  This  objection  will  be  fully  examined  in  its  proper  place,  and  it 
will  be  shown  that  the  only  natural  precaution  which  could  have  been 
taken  on  this  subject  has  been  taken;  and  a  much  better  one  than  is 
to  be  found  in  any  constitution  that  has  been  heretofore  framed  in 
America,  most  of  which  contain  no  guard  at  all  on  this  subject. — 
Publius. 

2  In  the  revised  text:  "This  inference,  from  the  very  form  of  the 
proposition,  is,  at  best,  problematical  and  uncertain." 


The  Federalist  55 

of  them  a  superiority  over  their  neighbors.  Small 
states,  or  states  of  less  natural  strength,  under 
vigorous  governments,  and  with  the  assistance  of 
disciplined  armies,  have  often  triumphed  over  large 
states,  or  states  of  greater  natural  strength,  which 
have  been  destitute  of  these  advantages.  Neither 
the  pride  nor  the  safety  of  the  more  important 
States  or  confederacies  would  permit  them  long  to 
submit  to  this  mortifying  and  adventitious  superior- 
ity. They  would  quickly  resort  to  means  similar  to 
those  by  which  it  had  been  effected,  to  reinstate 
themselves  in  their  lost  pre-eminence.  Thus  we 
should,  in  a  little  time,  see  established  in  every  part 
of  this  country  the  same  engines  of  despotism  which 
have  been  the  scourge  of  the  Old  World.  This,  at 
least,  would  be  the  natural  course  of  things;  and  our 
reasonings  will  be  the  more  likely  to  be  just,  in  pro- 
portion as  they  are  accommodated  to  this  standard. 

These  are  not  vague  inferences  drawn  from  sup- 
posed or  speculative  defects  in  a  Constitution,  the 
whole  power  of  which  is  lodged  in  the  hands  of  a 
people,  or  their  representatives  and  delegates,  but 
they  are  solid  conclusions,  drawn  from  the  natural 
and  necessary  progress  of  human  affairs. 

It  may,  perhaps,  be  asked,  by  way  of  objection  to 
this,  why  did  not  standing  armies  spring  up  out  of 
the  contentions  which  so  often  distracted  the  ancient 
republics  of  Greece?  Different  answers,  equally  sat- 
isfactory, may  be  given  to  this  question.  The  in- 
dustrious habits  of  the  people  of  the  present  day, 
absorbed  in  the  pursuits  of  gain,  and  devoted  to 
the  improvements  of  agriculture  and  commerce,  are 


56  Alexander  Hamilton 

incompatible  with  the  condition  of  a  nation  of  soldiers, 
which  was  the  true  condition  of  the  people  of  those 
republics.  The  means  of  revenue,  which  have  been 
so  greatly  multiplied  by  the  increase  of  gold  and  sil- 
ver and  of  the  arts  of  industry,  and  the  science  of 
finance,  which  is  the  offspring  of  modern  times,  con- 
curring with  the  habits  of  nations,  have  produced 
an  entire  revolution  in  the  system  of  war,  and  have 
rendered  disciplined  armies,  distinct  from  the  body 
of  the  citizens,  the  inseparable  companions  of  fre- 
quent hostility. 

There  is  a  wide  difference,  also,  between  military 
establishments  in  a  country  seldom  exposed  by  its 
situation  to  internal  invasions,  and  in  one  which  is 
often  subject  to  them,  and  always  apprehensive  of 
them.  The  rulers  of  the  former  can  have  no  good 
pretext,  if  they  are  even  so  inclined,  to  keep  on  foot 
armies  so  numerous  as  must  of  necessity  be  main- 
tained in  the  latter.  These  armies  being,  in  the  first 
case,  rarely,  if  at  all,  called  into  activity  for  interior 
defence,  the  people  are  in  no  danger  of  being  broken 
to  military  subordination.  The  laws  are  not  ac- 
customed to  relaxations,  in  favor  of  military  exigen- 
cies; the  civil  state  remains  in  full  vigor,  neither 
corrupted,  nor  confounded  with  the  principles  or  pro- 
pensities of  the  other  state.  The  smallness  of  the 
army  renders  the  natural  strength  of  the  community 
an  over-match  for  it ;  and  the  citizens,  not  habituated 
to  look  up  to  the  military  power  for  protection,  or  to 
submit  to  its  oppressions,  neither  love  nor  fear  the 
soldiery;  they  view  them  with  a  spirit  of  jealous 
acquiescence  in  a  necessary  evil,  and  stand  ready 


The  Federalist  57 

to  resist  a  power  which  they  suppose  may  be  ex- 
erted to  the  prejudice  of  their  rights.  The  army 
under  such  circumstances  may  usefully  aid  the  magis- 
trate to  suppress  a  small  faction,  or  an  occasional 
mob,  or  insurrection;  but  it  will  be  unable  to  en- 
force encroachments  against  the  united  efforts  of  the 
great  body  of  the  people. 

In  a  country  in  the  predicament  last  described, 
the  contrary  of  all  this  happens.  The  perpetual 
menacings  of  danger  oblige  the  government  to  be 
always  prepared  to  repel  it;  its  armies  must  be  nu- 
merous enough  for  instant  defence.  The  continual 
necessity  for  their  services  enhances  the  importance 
of  the  soldier,  and  proportionably  degrades  the  con- 
dition of  the  citizen.  The  military  state  becomes 
elevated  above  the  civil.  The  inhabitants  of  terri- 
tories, often  the  theatre  of  war,  are  unavoidably 
subjected  to  frequent  infringements  on  their  rights, 
which  serve  to  weaken  their  sense  of  those  rights; 
and  by  degrees  the  people  are  brought  to  consider 
the  soldiery  not  only  as  their  protectors,  but  as 
their  superiors.  The  transition  from  this  disposition 
to  that  of  considering  them  masters,  is  neither  re- 
mote nor  difficult;  but  it  is  very  difficult  to  prevail 
upon  a  people  under  such  impressions,  to  make  a 
bold  or  effectual  resistance  to  usurpations  sup- 
ported by  the  military  power. 

The  kingdom  of  Great  Britain  falls  within  the 
first  description.  An  insular  situation,  and  a  power- 
ful marine,  guarding  it  in  a  great  measure  against 
the  possibility  of  foreign  invasion,  supersede  the 
necessity  of  a  numerous  army  within  the  kingdom. 


5 8  Alexander  Hamilton 

A  sufficient  force  to  make  head  against  a  sudden 
descent,  till  the  militia  could  have  time  to  rally  and 
embody,  is  all  that  has  been  deemed  requisite.  No 
motive  of  national  policy  has  demanded,  nor  would 
public  opinion  have  tolerated,  a  larger  number  of 
troops  upon  its  domestic  establishment.  There  has 
been,  for  a  long  time  past,  little  room  for  the  opera- 
tion of  the  other  causes,  which  have  been  enumerated 
as  the  consequences  of  internal  war.  This  peculiar 
felicity  of  situation  has,  in  a  great  degree,  contributed 
to  preserve  the  liberty  which  that  country  to  this 
day  enjoys,  in  spite  of  the  prevalent  venality  and 
corruption.  If,  on  the  contrary,  Britain  had  been 
situated  on  the  continent,  and  had  been  compelled, 
as  she  would  have  been,  by  that  situation,  to  make 
her  military  establishments  at  home  coextensive 
with  those  of  the  other  great  powers  of  Europe,  she, 
like  them,  would  in  all  probability  be,  at  this  day,  a 
victim  to  the  absolute  power  of  a  single  man.  'T  is 
possible,  though  not  easy,  that  the  people  of  that 
island  may  be  enslaved  from  other  causes;  but  it 
cannot  be  by  the  prowess  of  an  army  so  inconsider- 
able as  that  which  has  been  usually  kept  up  within 
the  kingdom. 

If  we  are  wise  enough  to  preserve  the  Union  we 
may  for  ages  enjoy  an  advantage  similar  to  that  of 
an  insulated  situation.  Europe  is  at  a  great  dis- 
tance from  us.  Her  colonies  in  our  vicinity  will 
be  likely  to  continue  too  much  disproportion  ed  in 
strength  to  be  able  to  give  us  any  dangerous  annoy- 
ance. Extensive  military  establishments  cannot,  in 
this  position,  be  necessary  to  our  security.     But  if 


The  Federalist  59 

we  should  be  disunited,  and  the  integral  parts  should 
either  remain  separated,  or,  which  is  most  probable, 
should  be  thrown  together  into  two  or  three  con- 
federacies, we  should  be,  in  a  short  course  of  time,  in 
the  predicament  of  the  continental  powers  of  Eu- 
rope— our  liberties  would  be  a  prey  to  the  means  of 
defending  ourselves  against  the  ambition  and  jeal- 
ousy of  each  other. 

This  is  an  idea  not  superficial  or  futile,  but  solid 
and  weighty.  It  deserves  the  most  serious  and  ma- 
ture consideration  of  every  prudent  and  honest  man 
of  whatever  party.  If  such  men  will  make  a  firm 
and  solemn  pause,  and  meditate  dispassionately  on 
the  importance  of  this  interesting  idea;  if  they  will 
contemplate  it  in  all  its  attitudes,  and  trace  it  to  all 
its  consequences,  they  will  not  hesitate  to  part  with 
trivial  objections  to  a  Constitution,  the  rejection  of 
which  would  in  all  probability  put  a  final  period  to 
the  Union.  The  airy  phantoms  that  flit  before  the 
distempered  imaginations  of  some  of  its  adversaries 
would  quickly  give  place  to  the  more  substantial 
forms  of  dangers,  real,  certain,  and  formidable. 

PUBLIUS. 


For  the  Independent  Journal 
THE  FEDERALIST.     No.  IX 

(HAMILTON) 

To  the  People  of  the  State  of  New  York: 

A  firm  Union  will  be  of  the  utmost  moment  to  the 
peace  and  liberty  of  the  States,  as  a  barrier  against 


60  Alexander  Hamilton 

domestic  faction  and  insurrection.  It  is  impossible 
to  read  the  history  of  the  petty  republics  of  Greece 
and  Italy  without  feeling  sensations  of  horror  and 
disgust  at  the  distractions  with  which  they  were 
continually  agitated,  and  at  the  rapid  succession  of 
revolutions  by  which  they  were  kept  in  a  state  of 
perpetual  vibration  between  the  extremes  of  tyranny 
and  anarchy.  If  they  exhibit  occasional  calms, 
these  only  serve  as  short-lived  contrasts  to  the 
furious  storms  that  are  to  succeed.  If  now  and  then 
intervals  of  felicity  open  to  view,  we  behold  them 
with  a  mixture  of  regret,  arising  from  the  reflection 
that  the  pleasing  scenes  before  us  are  soon  to  be 
overwhelmed  by  the  tempestuous  waves  of  sedition 
and  party  rage.  If  momentary  rays  of  glory  break 
forth  from  the  gloom,  while  they  dazzle  us  with  a 
transient  and  fleeting  brilliancy,  they  at  the  same 
time  admonish  us  to  lament  that  the  vices  of  govern- 
ment should  pervert  the  direction  and  tarnish  the 
lustre  of  those  bright  talents  and  exalted  endow- 
ments for  which  the  favored  soils  that  produced 
them  have  been  so  justly  celebrated. 

From  the  disorders  that  disfigure  the  annals  of 
those  republics  the  advocates  of  despotism  have 
drawn  arguments,  not  only  against  the  forms  of 
-  republican  government,  but  against  the  very  prin- 
ciples of  civil  liberty.  They  have  decried  all  free 
government  as  inconsistent  with  the  order  of  society, 
and  have  indulged  themselves  in  malicious  exulta- 
tion over  its  friends  and  partisans.  Happily  for 
mankind,  stupendous  fabrics  reared  on  the  basis  of 
liberty,  which  have  flourished  for  ages,  have,  in  a  few 


The  Federalist  61 

glorious  instances,  refuted  their  gloomy  sophisms. 
And,  I  trust,  America  will  be  the  broad  and  solid 
foundation  of  other  edifices,  not  less  magnificent, 
which  will  be  equally  permanent  monuments  of 
their  errors. 

But  it  is  not  to  be  denied  that  the  portraits  they 
have  sketched  of  republican  government  were  too 
just  copies  of  the  originals  from  which  they  were 
taken.  If  it  had  been  found  impracticable  to  have 
devised  models  of  a  more  perfect  structure,  the  en- 
lightened friends  to  liberty  would  have  been  obliged 
to  abandon  the  cause  of  that  species  of  government 
as  indefensible.  The  science  of  politics,  however, 
like  most  other  sciences,  has  received  great  improve- 
ment. The  efficacy  of  various  principles  is  now  well 
understood,  which  were  either  not  known  at  all,  or 
imperfectly  known  to  the  ancients.  The  regular 
distribution  of  power  into  distinct  departments ;  the 
introduction  of  legislative  balances  and  checks;  the 
institution  of  courts  composed  of  judges  holding 
their  offices  during  good  behavior;  the  representa- 
tion of  the  people  in  the  legislature  by  deputies  of 
their  own  election :  these  are  wholly  new  discoveries, 
or  have  made  their  principal  progress  towards  per- 
fection in  modern  times.  They  are  means,  and  pow- 
erful means,  by  which  the  excellences  of  republican 
government  may  be  retained  and  its  imperfections 
lessened  or  avoided.  To  this  catalogue  of  circum- 
stances that  tend  to  the  amelioration  of  popular  sys- 
tems of  civil  government,  I  shall  venture,  however 
novel  it  may  appear  to  some,  to  add  one  more,  on  a 
principle  which  has  been  made  the  foundation  of  an 


62  Alexander  Hamilton 

objection  to  the  new  Constitution;  I  mean  the  en- 
largement of  the  orbit  within  which  such  systems 
are  to  revolve,  either  in  respect  to  the  dimensions  of 
a  single  State,  or  to  the  consolidation  of  several 
smaller  States  into  one  great  Confederacy.  The 
latter  is  that  which  immediately  concerns  the  ob- 
ject under  consideration.  It  will,  however,  be  of 
use  to  examine  the  principle  in  its  application  to 
a  single  State,  which  shall  be  attended  to  in  another 
place. 

The  utility  of  a  Confederacy,  as  well  to  suppress 
faction  and  to  guard  the  internal  tranquillity  of 
States,  as  to  increase  their  external  force  and  secur- 
ity, is  in  reality  not  a  new  idea.  It  has  been  prac- 
tised upon  in  different  countries  and  ages,  and  has 
received  the  sanction  of  the  most  approved  writers 
on  the  subjects  of  politics.  The  opponents  of  the 
plan  proposed  have,  with  great  assiduity,  cited  and 
circulated  the  observations  of  Montesquieu  on  the 
necessity  of  a  contracted  territory  for  a  republican 
government.  But  they  seem  not  to  have  been 
apprised  of  the  sentiments  of  that  great  man  ex- 
pressed in  another  part  of  his  work,  nor  to  have  ad- 
verted to  the  consequences  of  the  principle  to  which 
they  subscribe  with  such  ready  acquiescence. 

When  Montesquieu  recommends  a  small  extent 
for  republics,  the  standards  he  had  in  view  were  of 
dimensions  far  short  of  the  limits  of  almost  every 
one  of  these  States.  Neither  Virginia,  Massachu- 
setts, Pennsylvania,  New  York,  North  Carolina,  nor 
Georgia  can  by  any  means  be  compared  with  the 
models  from  which  he  reasoned  and  to  which  the 


The  Federalist  63 

terms  of  his  description  apply.  If  we  therefore  take 
his  ideas  on  this  point  as  the  criterion  of  truth,  we 
shall  be  driven  to  the  alternative  either  of  tak- 
ing refuge  at  once  in  the  arms  of  monarchy,  or  of 
splitting  ourselves  into  an  infinity  of  little,  jealous, 
clashing,  tumultuous  commonwealths,  the  wretched 
nurseries  of  unceasing  discord,  and  the  miserable 
objects  of  universal  pity  or  contempt.  Some  of  the 
writers  who  have  come  forward  on  the  other  side  of 
the  question  seem  to  have  been  aware  of  the  dilemma ; 
and  have  even  been  bold  enough  to  hint  at  the  divi- 
sion of  the  larger  States  as  a  desirable  thing.  Such 
an  infatuated  policy,  such  a  desperate  expedient, 
might,  by  the  multiplication  of  petty  offices,  answer 
the  views  of  men  who  possess  not  qualifications  to 
extend  their  influence  beyond  the  narrow  circles  of 
personal  intrigue,  but  it  could  never  promote  the 
greatness  or  happiness  of  the  people  of  America. 

Referring  the  examination  of  the  principle  itself 
to  another  place,  as  has  been  already  mentioned,  it 
will  be  sufficient  to  remark  here  that,  in  the  sense  of 
the  author  who  has  been  most  emphatically  quoted 
upon  the  occasion,  it  would  only  dictate  a  reduction 
of  the  size  of  the  more  considerable  members  of  the 
Union,  but  would  not  militate  against  their  being  all 
comprehended  in  one  confederate  government.  And 
this  is  the  true  question,  in  the  discussion  of  which 
we  are  at  present  interested. 

So  far  are  the  suggestions  of  Montesquieu  from 
standing  in  opposition  to  a  general  Union  of  the 
States,  that  he  explicitly  treats  of  a  Confederate 
Republic  as  the  expedient  for  extending  the  sphere 


64  Alexander  Hamilton 

of  popular  government,  and  reconciling  the  advan- 
tages of  monarchy  with  those  of  republicanism. 

"It  is  very  probable"  (says  he  x)  "that  mankind 
would  have  been  obliged  at  length  to  live  constantly 
under  the  government  of  a  single  person,  had  they 
not  contrived  a  kind  of  constitution  that  has  all  the 
internal  advantages  of  a  republican,  together  with 
the  external  force  of  a  monarchical,  government.  I 
mean  a  Confederate  Republic. 

"This  form  of  government  is  a  convention  by 
which  several  smaller  states  agree  to  become  members 
of  a  larger  one,  which  they  intend  to  form.  It  is  a 
kind  of  assemblage  of  societies  that  constitute  a  new 
one,  capable  of  increasing,  by  means  of  new  associa- 
tions, till  they  arrive  to  such  a  degree  of  power  as  to 
be  able  to  provide  for  the  security  of  the  united  body. 

"  A  republic  of  this  kind,  able  to  withstand  an  ex- 
ternal force,  may  support  itself  without  any  internal 
corruptions.  The  form  of  this  society  prevents  all 
manner  of  inconveniences. 

"  If  a  single  member  should  attempt  to  usurp  the 
supreme  authority,  he  could  not  be  supposed  to  have 
an  equal  authority  and  credit  in  all  the  confederate 
states.  Were  he  to  have  too  great  influence  over 
one,  this  would  alarm  the  rest.  Were  he  to  subdue 
a  part,  that  which  would  still  remain  free  might  op- 
pose him  with  forces  independent  of  those  which  he 
had  usurped,  and  overpower  him  before  he  could  be 
settled  in  his  usurpation. 

"  Should  a  popular  insurrection  happen  in  one  of 
the  confederate  states,  the  others  are  able  to  quell  it. 

1  Spirit  of  Laws,  vol.  i.,  book  ix.,  chap.  i. — Publius. 


The  Federalist  65 

Should  abuses  creep  into  one  part,  they  are  reformed 
by  those  that  remain  sound.  The  state  may  be  de- 
stroyed on  one  side,  and  not  on  the  other;  the  con- 
federacy may  be  dissolved,  and  the  confederates 
preserve  their  sovereignty. 

"  As  this  government  is  composed  of  small  repub- 
lics, it  enjoys  the  internal  happiness  of  each;  and 
with  respect  to  its  external  situation,  it  is  possessed, 
by  means  of  the  association,  of  all  the  advantages  of 
large  monarchies." 

I  have  thought  it  proper  to  quote  at  length  these 
interesting  passages,  because  they  contain  a  luminous 
abridgment  of  the  principal  arguments  in  favor  of 
the  Union,  and  must  effectually  remove  the  false 
impressions  which  a  misapplication  of  other  parts 
of  the  work  was  calculated  to  make.  They  have,  at 
the  same  time,  an  intimate  connection  with  the  more 
immediate  design  of  this  paper ;  which  is,  to  illustrate 
the  tendency  of  the  Union  to  repress  domestic  fac- 
tion and  insurrection. 

A  distinction,  more  subtle  than  accurate,  has  been 
raised  between  a  confederacy  and  a  consolidation  of 
the  States.  The  essential  characteristic  of  the  first 
is  said  to  be,  the  restriction  of  its  authority  to  the 
members  in  their  collective  capacities,  without  reach- 
ing to  the  individuals  of  whom  they  are  composed. 
It  is  contended  that  the  national  council  ought  to 
have  no  concern  with  any  object  of  internal  admin- 
istration. An  exact  equality  of  suffrage  between 
the  members  has  also  been  insisted  upon  as  a  lead- 
ing feature  of  a  confederate  government.  These 
positions    are,    in    the   main,    arbitrary;     they   are 


66  Alexander  Hamilton 

supported  neither  by  principle  nor  precedent.  It  has 
indeed  happened,  that  governments  of  this  kind  have 
generally  operated  in  the  manner  which  the  distinc- 
tion, taken  notice  of,  supposes  to  be  inherent  in  their 
nature ;  but  there  have  been  in  most  of  them  exten- 
sive exceptions  to  the  practice,  which  serve  to  prove, 
as  far  as  example  will  go,  that  there  is  no  absolute 
rule  on  the  subject.  And  it  will  be  clearly  shown, 
in  the  course  of  this  investigation,  that  as  far  as  the 
principle  contended  for  has  prevailed,  it  has  been 
the  cause  of  incurable  disorder  and  imbecility  in  the 
government. 

The  definition  of  a  confederate  republic  seems  simply 
to  be  "an  assemblage  of  societies,"  or  an  association 
of  two  or  more  states  into  one  state.  The  extent, 
modifications,  and  objects  of  the  federal  authority, 
are  mere  matters  of  discretion.  So  long  as  the 
separate  organization  of  the  members  be  not  abol- 
ished; so  long  as  it  exists,  by  a  constitutional  ne- 
cessity, for  local  purposes;  though  it  should  be  in 
perfect  subordination  to  the  general  authority  of 
the  union,  it  would  still  be,  in  fact  and  in  theory, 
an  association  of  states,  or  a  confederacy.  The 
proposed  Constitution,  so  far  from  implying  an 
abolition  of  the  State  governments,  makes  them 
constituent  parts  of  the  national  sovereignty,  by  al- 
lowing them  a  direct  representation  in  the  Senate,  and 
leaves  in  their  possession  certain  exclusive  and  very 
important  portions  of  sovereign  power.  This  fully 
corresponds,  in  every  rational  import  of  the  terms, 
with  the  idea  of  a  federal  government. 

In  the  Lycian  confederacy,   which   consisted  of 


The  Federalist  67 

twenty-three  cities  or  republics,  the  largest  were  en- 
titled to  three  votes  in  the  common  council,  those  of 
the  middle  class  to  two,  and  the  smallest  to  one.  The 
common  council  had  the  appointment  of  all  the 
judges  and  magistrates  of  the  respective  cities. 
This  was  certainly  the  most  delicate  species  of  inter- 
ference in  their  internal  administration;  for  if  there 
be  any  thing  that  seems  exclusively  appropriated  to 
the  local  jurisdictions,  it  is  the  appointment  of  their 
own  officers.  Yet  Montesquieu,  speaking  of  this 
association,  says:  "  Were  I  to  give  a  model  of  an 
excellent  Confederate  Republic,  it  would  be  that  of 
Lycia."  Thus  we  perceive  that  the  distinctions  in- 
sisted upon  were  not  within  the  contemplation  of 
this  enlightened  civilian ;  and  we  shall  be  led  to  con- 
clude, that  they  are  the  novel  refinements  of  an  erro- 
neous theory. 

Publius. 


From  the  New  York  Packet,  Friday,  November  23,  1787 

THE  FEDERALIST.     No.  X 

(madison) 

To  the  People  of  the  State  of  New  York: 

Among  the  numerous  advantages  promised  by  a 
well-constructed  Union,  none  deserves  to  be  more 
accurately  developed  than  its  tendency  to  break  and 
control  the  violence  of  faction.  The  friend  of  popu- 
lar governments  never  finds  himself  so  much  alarmed 
for  their  character  and  fate,  as  when  he  contem- 
plates their  propensity  to  this  dangerous  vice.     He 


68  Alexander  Hamilton 

will  not  fail,  therefore,  to  set  a  due  value  on  any  plan 
which,  without  violating  the  principles  to  which  he 
is  attached,  provides  a  proper  cure  for  it.  The  in- 
stability, injustice,  and  confusion  introduced  into 
the  public  councils,  have,  in  truth,  been  the  mortal 
diseases  under  which  popular  governments  have 
everywhere  perished;  as  they  continue  to  be  the 
favorite  and  fruitful  topics  from  which  the  adver- 
saries to  liberty  derive  their  most  specious  declama- 
tions. The  valuable  improvements  made  by  the 
American  constitutions  on  the  popular  models,  both 
ancient  and  modern,  cannot  certainly  be  too  much 
admired;  but  it  would  be  an  unwarrantable  par- 
tiality, to  contend  that  they  have  as  effectually  ob- 
viated the  danger  on  this  side,  as  was  wished  and 
expected.  Complaints  are  everywhere  heard  from 
our  most  considerate  and  virtuous  citizens,  equally 
the  friends  of  public  and  private  faith,  and  of  public 
and  personal  liberty,  that  our  governments  are  too 
unstable,  that  the  public  good  is  disregarded  in  the 
conflicts  of  rival  parties,  and  that  measures  are  too 
often  decided,  not  according  to  the  rules  of  justice 
and  the  rights  of  the  minor  party,  but  by  the  supe- 
rior force  of  an  interested  and  overbearing  majority. 
However  anxiously  we  may  wish  that  these  com- 
plaints had  no  foundation,  the  evidence  of  known 
facts  will  not  permit  us  to  deny  that  they  are  in  some 
degree  true.  It  will  be  found,  indeed,  on  a  candid 
review  of  our  situation,  that  some  of  the  distresses 
under  which  we  labor  have  been  erroneously  charged 
on  the  operation  of  our  governments ;  but  it  will  be 
found,  at  the  same  time,  that  other  causes  will  not 


The  Federalist  69 

alone  account  for  many  of  our  heaviest  misfortunes ; 
and,  particularly,  for  that  prevailing  and  increasing 
distrust  of  public  engagements,  and  alarm  for  private 
rights,  which  are  echoed  from  one  end  of  the  conti- 
nent to  the  other.  These  must  be  chiefly,  if  not 
wholly,  effects  of  the  unsteadiness  and  injustice  with 
which  a  factious  spirit  has  tainted  our  public  ad- 
ministrations. 

By  a  faction,  I  understand  a  number  of  citizens, 
whether  amounting  to  a  majority  or  minority  of  the 
whole,  who  are  united  and  actuated  by  some  com- 
mon impulse  of  passion,  or  of  interest,  adverse  to 
the  rights  of  other  citizens,  or  to  the  permanent  and 
aggregate  interests  of  the  community. 

There  are  two  methods  of  curing  the  mischiefs  of 
faction:  the  one,  by  removing  its  causes;  the  other, 
by  controlling  its  effects. 

There  are  again  two  methods  of  removing  the 
causes  of  faction :  the  one,  by  destroying  the  liberty 
which  is  essential  to  its  existence ;  the  other,  by  giv- 
ing to  every  citizen  the  same  opinions,  the  same  pas- 
sions, and  the  same  interests. 

It  could  never  be  more  truly  said  than  of  the  first 
remedy,  that  it  was  worse  than  the  disease.  Liberty 
is  to  faction  what  air  is  to  fire,  an  aliment  without 
which  it  instantly  expires.  But  it  could  not  be  less 
folly  to  abolish  liberty,  which  is  essential  to  political 
life,  because  it  nourishes  faction,  than  it  would  be  to 
wish  the  annihilation  of  air,  which  is  essential  to 
animal  life,  because  it  imparts  to  fire  its  destructive 
agency. 

The  second  expedient  is  as  impracticable  as  the 


70  Alexander  Hamilton 

first  would  be  unwise.  As  long  as  the  reason  of  man 
continues  fallible,  and  he  is  at  liberty  to  exercise  it, 
different  opinions  will  be  formed.  As  long  as  the 
connection  subsists  between  his  reason  and  his  self- 
love,  his  opinions  and  his  passions  will  have  a  recip- 
rocal influence  on  each  other;  and  the  former  will 
be  objects  to  which  the  latter  will  attach  themselves. 
The  diversity  in  the  faculties  of  men,  from  which  the 
rights  of  property  originate,  is  not  less  an  insuperable 
obstacle  to  a  uniformity  of  interests.  The  protec- 
tion of  these  faculties  is  the  first  object  of  gov- 
ernment. From  the  protection  of  different  and 
unequal  faculties  of  acquiring  property,  the  posses- 
sion of  different  degrees  and  kinds  of  property  imme- 
diately results;  and  from  the  influence  of  these  on 
the  sentiments  and  views  of  the  respective  proprie- 
tors, ensues  a  division  of  the  society  into  different 
interests  and  parties. 

The  latent  causes  of  faction  are  thus  sown  in  the 
nature  of  man ;  and  we  see  them  everywhere  brought 
into  different  degrees  of  activity,  according  to  the 
different  circumstances  of  civil  society.  A  zeal  for 
different  opinions  concerning  religion,  concerning 
government,  and  many  other  points,  as  well  of  spec- 
ulation as  of  practice;  an  attachment  to  different 
leaders  ambitiously  contending  for  pre-eminence  and 
power;  or  to  persons  of  other  descriptions  whose 
fortunes  have  been  interesting  to  the  human  pas- 
sions, have,  in  turn,  divided  mankind  into  parties, 
inflamed  them  with  mutual  animosity,  and  rendered 
them  much  more  disposed  to  vex  and  oppress  each 
other  than  to  co-operate  for  their  common  good. 


The  Federalist  71 

So  strong  is  this  propensity  of  mankind  to  fall  into 
mutual  animosities,  that  where  no  substantial  occa- 
sion presents  itself,  the  most  frivolous  and  fanciful 
distinctions  have  been  sufficient  to  kindle  their  un- 
friendly passions  and  excite  their  most  violent  con- 
flicts. But  the  most  common  and  durable  source 
of  factions  has  been  the  various  and  unequal  distri- 
bution of  property.  Those  who  hold  and  those  who 
are  without  property  have  ever  formed  distinct  in- 
terests in  society.  Those  who  are  creditors,  and 
those  who  are  debtors,  fall  under  a  like  discrimina- 
tion. A  landed  interest,  a  manufacturing  interest,  a 
mercantile  interest,  a  moneyed  interest,  with  many 
lesser  interests,  grow  up  of  necessity  in  civilized 
nations,  and  divide  them  into  different  classes,  actu- 
ated by  different  sentiments  and  views.  The  regu- 
lation of  these  various  and  interfering  interests 
forms  the  principal  task  of  modern  legislation, 
and  involves  the  spirit  of  party  and  faction  in 
the  necessary  and  ordinary  operations  of  the  gov- 
ernment. 

No  man  is  allowed  to  be  a  judge  in  his  own  cause, 
because  his  interest  would  certainly  bias  his  judg- 
ment, and,  not  improbably,  corrupt  his  integrity. 
With  equal,  nay  with  greater  reason,  a  body  of  men 
are  unfit  to  be  both  judges  and  parties  at  the  same 
time ;  yet  what  are  many  of  the  most  important  acts 
of  legislation,  but  so  many  judicial  determinations, 
not  indeed  concerning  the  rights  of  single  persons, 
but  concerning  the  rights  of  large  bodies  of  citizens  ? 
And  what  are  the  different  classes  of  legislators 
but  advocates  and  parties  to  the  causes  which  they 


72  Alexander  Hamilton 

determine?  Is  a  law  proposed  concerning  private 
debts?  It  is  a  question  to  which  the  creditors  are 
parties  on  one  side  and  the  debtors  on  the  other. 
Justice  ought  to  hold  the  balance  between  them. 
Yet  the  parties  are,  and  must  be,  themselves  the 
judges;  and  the  most  numerous  party,  or,  in  other 
words,  the  most  powerful  faction  must  be  expected 
to  prevail.  Shall  domestic  manufactures  be  en- 
couraged, and  in  what  degree,  by  restrictions  on 
foreign  manufactures  ?  are  questions  which  would  be 
differently  decided  by  the  landed  and  the  manu- 
facturing classes,  and  probably  by  neither  with  a 
sole  regard  to  justice  and  the  public  good.  The  ap- 
portionment of  taxes  on  the  various  descriptions  of 
property  is  an  act  which  seems  to  require  the  most 
exact  impartiality;  yet  there  is,  perhaps,  no  legisla- 
tive act  in  which  greater  opportunity  and  tempta- 
tion are  given  to  a  predominant  party  to  trample 
on  the  rules  of  justice.  Every  shilling  with  which 
they  overburden  the  inferior  number,  is  a  shilling 
saved  to  their  own  pockets. 

It  is  in  vain  to  say  that  enlightened  statesmen  will 
be  able  to  adjust  these  clashing  interests,  and  render 
them  all  subservient  to  the  public  good.  Enlight- 
ened statesmen  will  not  always  be  at  the  helm. 
Nor,  in  many  cases,  can  such  an  adjustment  be  made 
at  all  without  taking  into  view  indirect  and  remote 
considerations,  which  will  rarely  prevail  over  the 
immediate  interest  which  one  party  may  find  in  dis- 
regarding the  rights  of  another  or  the  good  of  the 
whole. 

The  inference  to  which  we  are  brought  is,  that  the 


The  Federalist  73 

causes  of  faction  cannot  be  removed,  and  that  relief 
is  only  to  be  sought  in  the  means  of  controlling  its 
effects. 

If  a  faction  consists  of  less  than  a  majority,  relief 
is  supplied  by  the  republican  principle,  which  enables 
the  majority  to  defeat  its  sinister  views  by  regular 
vote.  It  may  clog  the  administration,  it  may  con- 
vulse the  society;  but  it  will  be  unable  to  execute 
and  mask  its  violence  under  the  forms  of  the  Con- 
stitution. When  a  majority  is  included  in  a  faction, 
the  form  of  popular  government,  on  the  other  hand, 
enables  it  to  sacrifice  to  its  ruling  passion  or  interest 
both  the  public  good  and  the  rights  of  other  citizens. 
To  secure  the  public  good  and  private  rights  against 
the  danger  of  such  a  faction,  and  at  the  same  time 
to  preserve  the  spirit  and  the  form  of  popular 
government,  is  then  the  great  object  to  which  our 
inquiries  are  directed.  Let  me  add  that  it  is  the 
great  desideratum  by  which  this  form  of  government 
can  be  rescued  from  the  opprobrium  under  which  it 
has  so  long  labored,  and  be  recommended  to  the 
esteem  and  adoption  of  mankind. 

By  what  means  is  this  object  attainable?  Evi- 
dently by  one  of  two  only.  Either  the  existence  of 
the  same  passion  or  interest  in  a  majority  at  the 
same  time  must  be  prevented,  or  the  majority,  hav- 
ing such  coexistent  passion  or  interest,  must  be  ren- 
dered, by  their  number  and  local  situation,  unable 
to  concert  and  carry  into  effect  schemes  of  oppres- 
sion. If  the  impulse  and  the  opportunity  be  suf- 
fered to  coincide,  we  well  know  that  neither  moral 
nor  religious  motives  can  be  relied  on  as  an  adequate 


74  Alexander  Hamilton 

control.  They  are  not  found  to  be  such  on  the  in- 
justice and  violence  of  individuals,  and  lose  their 
efficacy  in  proportion  to  the  number  combined  to- 
gether, that  is,  in  proportion  as  their  efficacy  be- 
comes needful. 

From  this  view  of  the  subject  it  may  be  concluded 
that  a  pure  democracy,  by  which  I  mean  a  society 
consisting  of  a  small  number  of  citizens,  who  assem- 
ble and  administer  the  government  in  person,  can 
admit  of  no  cure  for  the  mischiefs  of  faction.  A 
common  passion  or  interest  will,  in  almost  every 
case,  be  felt  by  a  majority  of  the  whole;  a  communi- 
cation and  concert  result  from  the  form  of  gov- 
ernment itself;  and  there  is  nothing  to  check  the 
inducements  to  sacrifice  the  weaker  party  or  an  ob- 
noxious individual.  Hence  it  is  that  such  demo- 
cracies have  ever  been  spectacles  of  turbulence  and 
contention ;  have  ever  been  found  incompatible  with 
personal  security  or  the  rights  of  property;  and 
have  in  general  been  as  short  in  their  lives  as  they 
have  been  violent  in  their  deaths.  Theoretic  poli- 
ticians, who  have  patronized  this  species  of  govern- 
ment, have  erroneously  supposed  that  by  reducing 
mankind  to  a  perfect  equality  in  their  political 
rights,  they  would,  at  the  same  time,  be  perfectly 
equalized  and  assimilated  in  their  possessions,  their 
opinions,  and  their  passions. 

A  republic,  by  which  I  mean  a  government  in 
which  the  scheme  of  representation  takes  place, 
opens  a  different  prospect,  and  promises  the  cure  for 
which  we  are  seeking.  Let  us  examine  the  points 
in  which  it  varies  from  pure  democracy,  and  we  shall 


The  Federalist  75 

comprehend  both  the  nature  of  the  cure  and  the 
efficacy  which  it  must  derive  from  the  Union. 

The  two  great  points  of  difference  between  a  de- 
mocracy and  a  republic  are:  first,  the  delegation  of 
the  government,  in  the  latter,  to  a  small  number  of 
citizens  elected  by  the  rest;  secondly,  the  greater 
number  of  citizens,  and  greater  sphere  of  country, 
over  which  the  latter  may  be  extended. 

The  effect  of  the  first  difference  is,  on  the  one  hand, 
to  refine  and  enlarge  the  public  views,  by  passing 
them  through  the  medium  of  a  chosen  body  of  citi- 
zens, whose  wisdom  may  best  discern  the  true  in- 
terest of  their  country,  and  whose  patriotism  and 
love  of  justice  will  be  least  likely  to  sacrifice  it  to 
temporary  or  partial  considerations.  Under  such  a 
regulation,  it  may  well  happen  that  the  public  voice, 
pronounced  by  the  representatives  of  the  people,  will 
be  more  consonant  to  the  public  good  than  if  pro- 
nounced by  the  people  themselves,  convened  for  the 
purpose.  On  the  other  hand,  the  effect  may  be 
inverted.  Men  of  factious  tempers,  of  local  preju- 
dices, or  of  sinister  designs,  may,  by  intrigue,  by 
corruption,  or  by  other  means,  first  obtain  the 
suffrages,  and  then  betray  the  interests,  of  the 
people.  The  question  resulting  is,  whether  small 
or  extensive  republics  are  more  favorable  to  the 
election  of  proper  guardians  of  the  public  weal ;  and 
it  is  clearly  decided  in  favor  of  the  latter  by  two 
obvious  considerations : 

In  the  first  place,  it  is  to  be  remarked  that,  how- 
ever small  the  republic  may  be,  the  representatives 
must  be  raised  to  a  certain  number,  in  order  to  guard 


76  Alexander  Hamilton 

against  the  cabals  of  a  few;  and  that,  however  large 
it  may  be,  they  must  be  limited  to  a  certain  number, 
in  order  to  guard  against  the  confusion  of  a  multi- 
tude. Hence,  the  number  of  representatives  in  the 
two  cases  not  being  in  proportion  to  that  of  the 
two  constituents,  and  being  proportionally  greater 
in  the  small  republic,  it  follows  that,  if  the  propor- 
tion of  fit  characters  be  not  less  in  the  large  than  in 
the  small  republic,  the  former  will  present  a  greater 
option,  and  consequently  a  greater  probability  of  a 
fit  choice. 

In  the  next  place,  as  each  representative  will  be 
chosen  by  a  greater  number  of  citizens  in  the  large 
than  in  the  small  republic,  it  will  be  more  difficult 
for  unworthy  candidates  to  practise  with  success  the 
vicious  arts  by  which  elections  are  too  often  carried; 
and  the  suffrages  of  the  people  being  more  free,  will 
be  more  likely  to  centre  in  men  who  possess  the  most 
attractive  merit  and  the  most  diffusive  and  estab- 
lished characters. 

It  must  be  confessed  that  in  this,  as  in  most  other 
cases,  there  is  a  mean,  on  both  sides  of  which  in- 
conveniences will  be  found  to  lie.  By  enlarging  too 
much  the  number  of  electors,  you  render  the  repre- 
sentative too  little  acquainted  with  all  their  local 
circumstances  and  lesser  interests ;  as  by  reducing  it 
too  much,  you  render  him  unduly  attached  to  these, 
and  too  little  fit  to  comprehend  and  pursue  great 
and  national  objects.  The  federal  Constitution  forms 
a  happy  combination  in  this  respect ;  the  great  and 
aggrega"te  interests  being  referred  to  the  national, 
the  local  and  particular  to  the  State  legislatures. 


The  Federalist  77 

The  other  point  of  difference  is,  the  greater  num- 
ber of  citizens  and  extent  of  territory  which  may  be 
brought  within  the  compass  of  republican  than  of 
democratic  government;  and  it  is  this  circumstance 
principally  which  renders  factious  combinations  less 
to  be  dreaded  in  the  former  than  in  the  latter.  The 
smaller  the  society,  the  fewer  probably  will  be  the 
distinct  parties  and  interests  composing  it ;  the  fewer 
the  distinct  parties  and  interests,  the  more  fre- 
quently will  a  majority  be  found  of  the  same  party ; 
and  the  smaller  the  number  of  individuals  compos- 
ing a  majority,  and  the  smaller  the  compass  within 
which  they  are  placed,  the  more  easily  will  they 
concert  and  execute  their  plans  of  oppression.  Ex- 
tend the  sphere,  and  you  take  in  a  greater  variety  of 
parties  and  interests ;  you  make  it  less  probable  that 
a  majority  of  the  whole  will  have  a  common  motive 
to  invade  the  rights  of  other  citizens;  or  if  such  a 
common  motive  exists,  it  will  be  more  difficult  for 
all  who  feel  it  to  discover  their  own  strength,  and  to 
act  in  unison  with  each  other.  Besides  other  im- 
pediments, it  may  be  remarked  that,  where  there  is 
a  consciousness  of  unjust  or  dishonorable  purposes, 
communication  is  always  checked  by  distrust  in 
proportion  to  the  number  whose  concurrence  is 
necessary. 

Hence,  it  clearly  appears,  that  the  same  advan- 
tage which  a  republic  has  over  a  democracy,  in  con- 
trolling the  effects  of  faction,  is  enjoyed  by  a  large 
over  a  small  republic, — is  enjoyed  by  the  Union  over 
the  States  composing  it.  Does  the  advantage  con- 
sist  in   the    substitution  of  representatives  whose 


78  Alexander  Hamilton 

enlightened  views  and  virtuous  sentiments  render 
them  superior  to  local  prejudices  and  to  schemes  of 
injustice?  It  will  not  be  denied  that  the  representa- 
tion of  the  Union  will  be  most  likely  to  possess  these 
requisite  endowments.  Does  it  consist  in  the  greater 
security  afforded  by  a  greater  variety  of  parties, 
against  the  event  of  any  one  party  being  able  to  out- 
number and  oppress  the  rest?  In  an  equal  degree 
does  the  increased  variety  of  parties  comprised  within 
the  Union,  increase  this  security?  Does  it,  in  fine, 
consist  in  the  greater  obstacles  opposed  to  the  con- 
cert and  accomplishment  of  the  secret  wishes  of  an 
unjust  and  interested  majority?  Here,  again,  the 
extent  of  the  Union  gives  it  the  most  palpable  ad- 
vantage. 

The  influence  of  factious  leaders  may  kindle  a 
flame  within  their  particular  States,  but  will  be  un- 
able to  spread  a  general  conflagration  through  the 
other  States.  A  religious  sect  may  degenerate  into 
a  political  faction  in  a  part  of  the  Confederacy ;  but 
the  variety  of  sects  dispersed  over  the  entire  face 
of  it  must  secure  the  national  councils  against  any 
danger  from  that  source.  A  rage  for  paper  money, 
for  an  abolition  of  debts,  for  an  equal  division  of 
property,  or  for  any  other  improper  or  wicked  pro- 
ject, will  be  less  apt  to  pervade  the  whole  body  of 
the  Union  than  a  particular  member  of  it;  in  the 
same  proportion  as  such  a  malady  is  more  likely  to 
taint  a  particular  county  or  district,  than  an  entire 
State. 

In  the  extent  and  proper  structure  of  the  Union, 
therefore,  we  behold  a  republican  remedy  for  the 


The  Federalist  79 

diseases  most  incident  to  republican  government. 
And  according  to  the  degree  of  pleasure  and  pride 
we  feel  in  being  republicans,  ought  to  be  our  zeal  in 
cherishing  the  spirit  and  supporting  the  character  of 
Federalists. 

PUBLIUS. 


For  the  Independent  Journal 
THE  FEDERALIST.     No.  XI 

(HAMILTON) 

To  the  People  of  the  State  of  New  York: 

The  importance  of  the  Union,  in  a  commercial 
light,  is  one  of  those  points  about  which  there  is 
least  room  to  entertain  a  difference  of  opinion,  and 
which  has,  in  fact,  commanded  the  most  general  as- 
sent of  men  who  have  any  acquaintance  with  the 
subject.  This  applies  as  well  to  our  intercourse  with 
foreign  countries  as  with  each  other. 

There  are  appearances  to  authorize  a  supposition 
that  the  adventurous  spirit,  which  distinguishes  the 
commercial  character  of  America,  has  already  ex- 
cited uneasy  sensations  in  several  of  the  maritime 
powers  of  Europe.  They  seem  to  be  apprehensive 
of  our  too  great  interference  in  that  carrying  trade, 
which  is  the  support  of  their  navigation  and  the 
foundation  of  their  naval  strength.  Those  of  them 
which  have  colonies  in  America  look  forward  to 
what  this  country  is  capable  of  becoming,  with 
painful  solicitude.  They  foresee  the  dangers  that 
may  threaten  their  American  dominions  from  the 


80  Alexander  Hamilton 

neighborhood  of  States,  which  have  all  the  disposi- 
tions, and  would  possess  all  the  means,  requisite  to 
the  creation  of  a  powerful  marine.  Impressions  of 
this  kind  will  naturally  indicate  the  policy  of  foster- 
ing divisions  among  us,  and  of  depriving  us,  as  far 
as  possible,  of  an  active  commerce  in  our  own  bot- 
toms. This  would  answer  the  threefold  purpose  of 
preventing  our  interference  in  their  navigation,  of 
monopolizing  the  profits  of  our  trade,  and  of  clipping 
the  wings  by  which  we  might  soar  to  a  dangerous 
greatness.  Did  not  prudence  forbid  the  detail,  it 
would  not  be  difficult  to  trace,  by  facts,  the  workings 
of  this  policy  to  the  cabinets  of  ministers. 

If  we  continue  united,  we  may  counteract  a  policy 
so  unfriendly  to  our  prosperity  in  a  variety  of  ways. 
By  prohibitory  regulations,  extending,  at  the  same 
time,  throughout  the  States,  we  may  oblige  foreign 
countries  to  bid  against  each  other,  for  the  privileges 
of  our  markets.  This  assertion  will  not  appear 
chimerical  to  those  who  are  able  to  appreciate  the 
importance  of  the  markets  of  three  millions  of  people 
— increasing  in  rapid  progression,  for  the  most  part 
exclusively  addicted  to  agriculture,  and  likely  from 
local  circumstances  to  remain  so — to  any  manufac- 
turing nation;  and  the  immense  difference  there 
would  be  to  the  trade  and  navigation  of  such  a  na- 
tion, between  a  direct  communication  in  its  own 
ships,  and  an  indirect  conveyance  of  its  products  and 
returns,  to  and  from  America,  in  the  ships  of  another 
country.  Suppose,  for  instance,  we  had  a  govern- 
ment in  America,  capable  of  excluding  Great  Britain 
(with  whom  we  have  at  present  no  treaty  of  com- 


The  Federalist  81 

merce)  from  all  our  ports ;  what  would  be  the  prob- 
able operation  of  this  step  upon  her  politics  ?  Would 
it  not  enable  us  to  negotiate,  with  the  fairest  pros- 
pect of  success,  for  commercial  privileges  of  the  most 
valuable  and  extensive  kind,  in  the  dominions  of  that 
kingdom?  When  these  questions  have  been  asked, 
upon  other  occasions,  they  have  received  a  plausible, 
but  not  a  solid  or  satisfactory  answer.  It  has  been 
said  that  prohibitions  on  our  part  would  produce  no 
change  in  the  system  of  Britain,  because  she  could 
prosecute  her  trade  with  us  through  the  medium  of 
the  Dutch,  who  would  be  her  immediate  customers 
and  paymasters  for  those  articles  which  were  wanted 
for  the  supply  of  our  markets.  But  would  not  her 
navigation  be  materially  injured  by  the  loss  of  the 
important  advantage  of  being  her  own  carrier  in 
that  trade?  Would  not  the  principal  part  of  its 
profits  be  intercepted  by  the  Dutch,  as  a  compensa- 
tion for  their  agency  and  risk  ?  Would  not  the  mere 
circumstance  of  freight  occasion  a  considerable  de- 
duction? Would  not  so  circuitous  an  intercourse 
facilitate  the  competitions  of  other  nations,  by  en- 
hancing the  price  of  British  commodities  in  our 
markets,  and  by  transferring  to  other  hands  the 
management  of  this  interesting  branch  of  the  British 
commerce  ? 

A  mature  consideration  of  the  objects  suggested 
by  these  questions  will  justify  a  belief  that  the  real 
disadvantages  to  Britain  from  such  a  state  of  things, 
conspiring  with  the  prepossessions  of  a  great  part  of 
the  nation  in  favor  of  the  American  trade,  and  of 
the  importunities  of  the  West  India  islands,  would 

VOL.    XI. — 6. 


82  Alexander  Hamilton 

produce  a  relaxation  in  her  present  system,  and  would 
let  us  into  the  enjoyment  of  privileges  in  the  markets 
of  those  islands  and  elsewhere,  from  which  our  trade 
would  derive  the  most  substantial  benefits.  Such 
a  point  gained  from  the  British  government,  and 
which  could  not  be  expected  without  an  equivalent 
in  exemptions  and  immunities  in  our  markets,  would 
be  likely  to  have  a  correspondent  effect  on  the  con- 
duct of  other  nations,  who  would  not  be  inclined  to 
see  themselves  altogether  supplanted  in  our  trade. 

A  further  resource  for  influencing  the  conduct  of 
European  nations  toward  us,  in  this  respect,  would 
arise  from  the  establishment  of  a  federal  navy. 
There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  continuance  of  the 
Union  under  an  efficient  government,  would  put  it 
in  our  power,  at  a  period  not  very  distant,  to  create 
a  navy  which,  if  it  could  not  vie  with  those  of  the 
great  maritime  powers,  would  at  least  be  of  respect- 
able weight  if  thrown  into  the  scale  of  either  of  two 
contending  parties.  This  would  be  more  peculiarly 
the  case  in  relation  to  operations  in  the  West  Indies. 
A  few  ships  of  the  line,  sent  opportunely  to  the  re- 
inforcement of  either  side,  would  often  be  sufficient 
to  decide  the  fate  of  a  campaign,  on  the  event  of 
which  interests  of  the  greatest  magnitude  were  sus- 
pended. Our  position  is,  in  this  respect,  a  most 
commanding  one.  And  if  to  this  consideration  we 
add  that  of  the  usefulness  of  supplies  from  this 
country,  in  the  prosecution  of  military  operations  in 
the  West  Indies,  it  will  readily  be  perceived  that  a 
situation  so  favorable  would  enable  us  to  bargain 
with  great  advantage  for  commercial  privileges.     A 


The  Federalist  S3 

price  would  be  set  not  only  upon  our  friendship,  but 
upon  our  neutrality.  By  a  steady  adherence  to  the 
Union,  we  may  hope,  erelong,  to  become  the  arbiter 
of  Europe  in  America,  and  to  be  able  to  incline  the 
balance  of  European  competitions  in  this  part  of  the 
world  as  our  interest  may  dictate. 

But  in  the  reverse  of  this  eligible  situation,  we 
shall  discover  that  the  rivalships  of  the  parts  would 
make  them  checks  upon  each  other,  and  would  frus- 
trate all  the  tempting  advantages  which  nature  has 
kindly  placed  within  our  reach.  In  a  state  so  in- 
significant our  commerce  would  be  a  prey  to  the 
wanton  intermeddlings  of  all  nations  at  war  with 
each  other;  who,  having  nothing  to  fear  from  us, 
would  with  little  scruple  or  remorse  supply  their 
wants  by  depredations  on  our  property  as  often  as 
it  fell  in  their  way.  The  rights  of  neutrality  will 
only  be  respected  when  they  are  defended  by  an 
adequate  power.  A  nation,  despicable  by  its  weak- 
ness, forfeits  even  the  privilege  of  being  neutral. 

Under  a  vigorous  national  government,  the  nat- 
ural strength  and  resources  of  the  country,  directed 
to  a  common  interest,  would  baffle  all  the  combina- 
tions of  European  jealousy  to  restrain  our  growth. 
This  situation  would  even  take  away  the  motive  to 
such  combinations,  by  inducing  an  impracticability 
of  success.  An  active  commerce,  an  extensive  navi- 
gation, and  a  nourishing  marine  would  then  be 
the  offspring  of  moral  and  physical  necessity.  We 
might  defy  the  little  arts  of  the  little  politicians  to 
control  or  vary  the  irresistible  and  unchangeable 
course  of  nature. 


84  Alexander  Hamilton 

But  in  a  state  of  disunion,  these  combinations 
might  exist  and  might  operate  with  success.  It 
would  be  in  the  power  of  the  maritime  nations, 
availing  themselves  of  our  universal  impotence,  to 
prescribe  the  conditions  of  our  political  existence; 
and  as  they  have  a  common  interest  in  being  our 
carriers,  and  still  more  in  preventing  our  becoming 
theirs,  they  would  in  all  probability  combine  to  em- 
barrass our  navigation  in  such  a  manner  as  would  in 
effect  destroy  it,  and  confine  us  to  a  passive  com- 
merce. We  should  then  be  compelled  to  content 
ourselves  with  the  first  price  of  our  commodities, 
and  to  see  the  profits  of  our  trade  snatched  from  us 
to  enrich  our  enemies  and  persecutors.  That  un- 
equalled spirit  of  enterprise,  which  signalizes  the 
genius  of  the  American  merchants  and  navigators, 
and  which  is  in  itself  an  inexhaustible  mine  of  na- 
tional wealth,  would  be  stifled  and  lost,  and  poverty 
and  disgrace  would  overspread  a  country  which,  with 
wisdom,  might  make  herself  the  admiration  and  envy 
of  the  world. 

There  are  rights  of  great  moment  to  the  trade  of 
America  which  are  rights  of  the  Union — I  allude  to 
the  fisheries,  to  the  navigation  of  the  Western  lakes, 
and  to  that  of  the  Mississippi.  The  dissolution  of 
the  Confederacy  would  give  room  for  delicate  ques- 
tions concerning  the  future  existence  of  these  rights ; 
which  the  interest  of  more  powerful  partners  would 
hardly  fail  to  solve  to  our  disadvantage.  The  dis- 
position of  Spain  with  regard  to  the  Mississippi  needs 
no  comment.  France  and  Britain  are  concerned 
with  us  in  the  fisheries,  and  view  them  as  of  the  ut- 


The  Federalist  85 

most  moment  to  their  navigation.  They,  of  course, 
would  hardly  remain  long  indifferent  to  that  decided 
mastery,  of  which  experience  has  shown  us  to  be 
possessed  in  this  valuable  branch  of  traffic,  and  by 
which  we  are  able  to  undersell  those  nations  in  their 
own  markets.  What  more  natural  than  that  they 
should  be  disposed  to  exclude  from  the  lists  such 
dangerous  competitors? 

This  branch  of  trade  ought  not  to  be  considered 
as  a  partial  benefit.  All  the  navigating  States  may, 
in  different  degrees,  advantageously  participate  in 
it,  and  under  circumstances  of  a  greater  extension 
of  mercantile  capital,  would  not  be  unlikely  to  do  it. 
As  a  nursery  of  seamen,  it  now  is,  or,  when  time 
shall  have  more  nearly  assimilated  the  principles  of 
navigation  in  the  several  States,  will  become,  a 
universal  resource.  To  the  establishment  of  a  navy, 
it  must  be  indispensable. 

To  this  great  national  object,  a  navy,  union  will 
contribute  in  various  ways.  Every  institution  will 
grow  and  flourish  in  proportion  to  the  quantity  and 
extent  of  the  means  concentred  towards  its  forma- 
tion and  support.  A  navy  of  the  United  States,  as 
it  would  embrace  the  resources  of  all,  is  an  object 
far  less  remote  than  a  navy  of  any  single  State  or 
partial  confederacy,  which  would  only  embrace  the 
resources  of  a  single  part.  It  happens,  indeed,  that 
different  portions  of  confederated  America  possess 
each  some  peculiar  advantage  for  this  essential  es- 
tablishment. The  more  southern  States  furnish  in 
greater  abundance  certain  kinds  of  naval  stores 
— tar,  pitch,  and  turpentine.     Their  wood  for  the 


86  Alexander  Hamilton 

construction  of  ships  is  also  of  a  more  solid  and  lasting 
texture.  The  difference  in  the  duration  of  the  ships 
of  which  the  navy  might  be  composed,  if  chiefly  con- 
structed of  Southern  wood,  would  be  of  signal  im- 
portance, either  in  the  view  of  naval  strength  or  of 
national  economy.  Some  of  the  Southern  and  of 
the  Middle  States  yield  a  greater  plenty  of  iron,  and 
of  better  quality.  Seamen  must  chiefly  be  drawn 
from  the  Northern  hive.  The  necessity  of  naval 
protection  to  external  or  maritime  commerce  does 
not  require  a  particular  elucidation,  no  more  than 
the  conduciveness  of  that  species  of  commerce  to  the 
prosperity  of  a  navy. 

An  unrestrained  intercourse  between  the  States 
themselves  will  advance  the  trade  of  each  by  an  in- 
terchange of  their  respective  productions,  not  only 
for  the  supply  of  reciprocal  wants  at  home,  but  for 
exportation  to  foreign  markets.  The  veins  of  com- 
merce in  every  part  will  be  replenished,  and  will 
acquire  additional  motion  and  vigor  from  a  free  cir- 
culation of  the  commodities  of  every  part.  Com- 
mercial enterprise  will  have  much  greater  scope, 
from  the  diversity  in  the  productions  of  different 
States.  When  the  staple  of  one  fails  from  a  bad 
harvest  or  unproductive  crop,  it  can  call  to  its  aid 
the  staple  of  another.  The  variety,  not  less  than 
the  value,  of  products  for  exportation  contributes 
to  the  activity  of  foreign  commerce.  It  can  be  con- 
ducted upon  much  better  terms  with  a  large  number 
of  materials  of  a  given  value  than  with  a  small  num- 
ber of  materials  of  the  same  value ;  arising  from  the 
competitions  of  trade  and  from  the  fluctuations  of 


The  Federalist  Sy 

markets.  Particular  articles  may  be  in  great  de- 
mand at  certain  periods,  and  unsalable  at  others; 
but  if  there  be  a  variety  of  articles,  it  can  scarcely 
happen  that  they  should  all  be  at  one  time  in  the 
latter  predicament,  and  on  this  account  the  opera- 
tions of  the  merchant  would  be  less  liable  to  any 
considerable  obstruction  or  stagnation.  The  specu- 
lative trader  will  at  once  perceive  the  force  of  these 
observations,  and  will  acknowledge  that  the  aggre- 
gate balance  of  the  commerce  of  the  United  States 
would  bid  fair  to  be  much  more  favorable  than  that 
of  the  thirteen  States  without  union  or  with  partial 
unions. 

It  may  perhaps  be  replied  to  this,  that  whether  the 
States  are  united  or  disunited,  there  would  still  be 
an  intimate  intercourse  between  them  which  would 
answer  the  same  ends ;  but  this  intercourse  would  be 
fettered,  interrupted,  and  narrowed  by  a  multiplic- 
ity of  causes,  which  in  the  course  of  these  papers 
have  been  amply  detailed.  A  unity  of  commercial, 
as  well  as  political,  interests,  can  only  result  from  a 
unity  of  government. 

There  are  other  points  of  view  in  which  this  sub- 
ject might  be  placed,  of  a  striking  and  animating 
kind.  But  they  would  lead  us  too  far  into  the  re- 
gions of  futurity,  and  would  involve  topics  not 
proper  for  a  newspaper  discussion.  I  shall  briefly 
observe,  that  our  situation  invites  and  our  interests 
prompt  us  to  aim  at  an  ascendant  in  the  system 
of  American  affairs.  The  world  may  politically,  as 
well  as  geographically,  be  divided  into  four  parts, 
each  having  a  distinct  set  of  interests.     Unhappily 


88  Alexander  Hamilton 

for  the  other  three,  Europe,  by  her  arms  and  by  her 
negotiations,  by  force  and  by  fraud,  has,  in  differ- 
ent degrees,  extended  her  dominion  over  them  all. 
Africa,  Asia,  and  America,  have  successively  felt  her 
domination.  The  superiority  she  has  long  main- 
tained has  tempted  her  to  plume  herself  as  the 
Mistress  of  the  World,  and  to  consider  the  rest  of 
mankind  as  created  for  her  benefit.  Men  admired  as 
profound  philosophers  have,  in  direct  terms,  attri- 
buted to  her  inhabitants  a  physical  superiority,  and 
have  gravely  asserted  that  all  animals,  and  with 
them  the  human  species,  degenerate  in  America — 
that  even  dogs  cease  to  bark  after  having  breathed 
awhile  in  our  atmosphere.1  Facts  have  too  long 
supported  these  arrogant  pretensions  of  the  Euro- 
peans. It  belongs  to  us  to  vindicate  the  honor  of 
the  human  race,  and  to  teach  that  assuming  brother, 
moderation.  Union  will  enable  us  to  do  it.  Dis- 
union will  add  another  victim  to  his  triumphs.  Let 
Americans  disdain  to  be  the  instruments  of  European 
greatness!  Let  the  thirteen  States,  bound  together 
in  a  strict  and  indissoluble  Union,  concur  in  erecting 
one  great  American  system,  superior  to  the  control 
of  all  transatlantic  force  or  influence,  and  able  to 
dictate  the  terms  of  the  connection  between  the  old 

and  the  new  world! 

Publius. 

1  Recherches  philosophiques  sur  les  Amiricains . — Publius. 


The  Federalist  89 

From  the  New  York  Packet,  Tuesday,  November  27,  1787 

THE  FEDERALIST.     No.  XII 

(Hamilton) 

To  the  People  of  the  State  of  New  York: 

The  effects  of  Union  upon  the  commercial  prosper- 
ity of  the  States  have  been  sufficiently  delineated. 
Its  tendency  to  promote  the  interests  of  revenue  will 
be  the  subject  of  our  present  inquiry. 

The  prosperity  of  commerce  is  now  perceived  and 
acknowledged  by  all  enlightened  statesmen  to  be  the 
most  useful  as  well  as  the  most  productive  source  of 
national  wealth,  and  has  accordingly  become  a  pri- 
mary object  of  their  political  cares.  By  multiplying 
the  means  of  gratification,  by  promoting  the  intro- 
duction and  circulation  of  the  precious  metals,  those 
darling  objects  of  human  avarice  and  enterprise,  it 
serves  to  vivify  and  invigorate  the  channels  of  in- 
dustry, and  to  make  them  flow  with  greater  activity 
and  copiousness.  The  assiduous  merchant,  the  la- 
borious husbandman,  the  active  mechanic,  and  the 
industrious  manufacturer, — all  orders  of  men,  look 
forward  with  eager  expectation  and  growing  alacrity 
to  this  pleasing  reward  of  their  toils.  The  often- 
agitated  question  between  agriculture  and  com- 
merce has,  from  indubitable  experience,  received  a 
decision  which  has  silenced  the  rivalship  that  once 
subsisted  between  them,  and  has  proved,  to  the  satis- 
faction of  their  friends,  that  their  interests  are  inti- 
mately blended  and  interwoven.  It  has  been  found 
in  various  countries  that,  in  proportion  as  com- 
merce has  flourished,  land  has  risen  in  value.     And 


90  Alexander  Hamilton 

how  could  it  have  happened  otherwise  ?  Could  that 
which  procures  a  freer  vent  for  the  products  of  the 
earth,  which  furnishes  new  incitements  to  the  cul- 
tivation of  land,  which  is  the  most  powerful  instru- 
ment in  increasing  the  quantity  of  money  in  a  state 
— could  that,  in  fine,  which  is  the  faithful  handmaid 
of  labor  and  industry,  in  every  shape,  fail  to  augment 
that  article,  which  is  the  prolific  parent  of  far  the 
greatest  part  of  the  objects  upon  which  they  are 
exerted?  It  is  astonishing  that  so  simple  a  truth 
should  ever  have  had  an  adversary;  and  it  is  one, 
among  a  multitude  of  proofs,  how  apt  a  spirit  of  ill- 
informed  jealousy,  or  of  too  great  abstraction  and 
refinement,  is  to  lead  men  astray  from  the  plainest 
truths  of  reason  and  conviction. 

The  ability  of  a  country  to  pay  taxes  must  always 
be  proportioned,  in  a  great  degree,  to  the  quantity 
of  money  in  circulation,  and  to  the  celerity  with 
which  it  circulates.  Commerce,  contributing  to 
both  these  objects,  must  of  necessity  render  the  pay- 
ment of  taxes  easier,  and  facilitate  the  requisite  sup- 
plies to  the  treasury.  The  hereditary  dominions  of 
the  Emperor  of  Germany  contain  a  great  extent  of 
fertile,  cultivated,  and  populous  territory,  a  large 
proportion  of  which  is  situated  in  mild  and  luxuriant 
climates.  In  some  parts  of  this  territory  are  to  be 
found  the  best  gold  and  silver  mines  in  Europe. 
And  yet,  from  the  want  of  the  fostering  influence 
of  commerce,  that  monarch  can  boast  but  slender 
revenues.  He  has  several  times  been  compelled  to 
owe  obligations  to  the  pecuniary  succors  of  other 
nations  for  the  preservation  of  his  essential  inter- 


The  Federalist  91 

ests,  and  is  unable,  upon  the  strength  of  his  own  re- 
sources, to  sustain  a  long  or  continued  war. 

But  it  is  not  in  this  aspect  of  the  subject  alone 
that  Union  will  be  seen  to  conduce  to  the  purpose  of 
revenue.  There  are  other  points  of  view,  in  which 
its  influence  will  appear  more  immediate  and  deci- 
sive. It  is  evident  from  the  state  of  the  country, 
from  the  habits  of  the  people,  from  the  experience 
we  have  had  on  the  point  itself,  that  it  is  impractica- 
ble to  raise  any  very  considerable  sums  by  direct 
taxation.  Tax  laws  have  in  vain  been  multiplied; 
new  methods  to  enforce  the  collection  have  in  vain 
been  tried;  the  public  expectation  has  been  uni- 
formly disappointed,  and  the  treasuries  of  the  States 
have  remained  empty.  The  popular  system  of  ad- 
ministration inherent  in  the  nature  of  popular  gov- 
ernment, coinciding  with  the  real  scarcity  of  money 
incident  to  a  languid  and  mutilated  state  of  trade, 
has  hitherto  defeated  every  experiment  for  exten- 
sive collections,  and  has  at  length  taught  the  different 
legislatures  the  folly  of  attempting  them. 

No  person  acquainted  with  what  happens  in  other 
countries  will  be  surprised  at  this  circumstance.  In 
so  opulent  a  nation  as  that  of  Britain,  where  direct 
taxes  from  superior  wealth  must  be  much  more 
tolerable,  and,  from  the  vigor  of  the  government, 
much  more  practicable,  than  in  America,  far  the 
greatest  part  of  the  national  revenue  is  derived  from 
taxes  of  the  indirect  kind,  from  imposts,  and  from 
excises.  Duties  on  imported  articles  form  a  large 
branch  of  this  latter  description. 

In  America,  it  is  evident  that  we  must  a  long  time 


92  Alexander  Hamilton 

depend  for  the  means  of  revenue  chiefly  on  such  duties. 
In  most  parts  of  it,  excises  must  be  confined  within 
a  narrow  compass.  The  genius  of  the  people  will  ill 
brook  the  inquisitive  and  peremptory  spirit  of  excise 
laws.  The  pockets  of  the  farmers,  on  the  other  hand, 
will  reluctantly  yield  but  scanty  supplies,  in  the  un- 
welcome shape  of  impositions  on  their  houses  and 
lands;  and  personal  property  is  too  precarious  and 
invisible  a  fund  to  be  laid  hold  of  in  any  other  way 
than  by  the  imperceptible  agency  of  taxes  on  con- 
sumption. 

If  these  remarks  have  any  foundation,  that  state 
of  things  which  will  best  enable  us  to  improve  and 
extend  so  valuable  a  resource  must  be  best  adapted 
to  our  political  welfare.  And  it  cannot  admit  of  a 
serious  doubt,  that  this  state  of  things  must  rest  on 
the  basis  of  a  general  Union.  As  far  as  this  would  be 
conducive  to  the  interests  of  commerce,  so  far  it  must 
tend  to  the  extension  of  the  revenue  to  be  drawn  from 
that  source.  As  far  as  it  would  contribute  to  ren- 
dering regulations  for  the  collection  of  the  duties 
more  simple  and  efficacious,  so  far  it  must  serve  to 
answer  the  purposes  of  making  the  same  rate  of  du- 
ties more  productive,  and  of  putting  it  into  the  power 
of  the  government  to  increase  the  rate  without 
prejudice  to  trade. 

The  relative  situation  of  these  States ;  the  number 
of  rivers  with  which  they  are  intersected,  and  of  bays 
that  wash  their  shores ;  the  facility  of  communication 
in  every  direction ;  the  affinity  of  language  and  man- 
ners; the  familiar  habits  of  intercourse; — all  these 
are  circumstances  that  would  conspire  to  render  an 


The  Federalist  93 

illicit  trade  between  them  a  matter  of  little  difficulty, 
and  would  insure  frequent  evasions  of  the  commer- 
cial regulations  of  each  other.  The  separate  States 
or  confederacies  would  be  necessitated  by  mutual 
jealousy  to  avoid  the  temptations  to  that  kind  of 
trade  by  the  lowness  of  their  duties.  The  temper  of 
our  governments,  for  a  long  time  to  come,  would  not 
permit  those  rigorous  precautions  by  which  the 
European  nations  guard  the  avenues  into  their  re- 
spective countries,  as  well  by  land  as  by  water ;  and 
which,  even  there,  are  found  insufficient  obstacles 
to  the  adventurous  stratagems  of  avarice. 

In  France,  there  is  an  army  of  patrols  (as  they  are 
called)  constantly  employed  to  secure  their  fiscal 
regulations  against  the  inroads  of  the  dealers  in  con- 
traband trade.  Mr.  Neckar  computes  the  number 
of  these  patrols  at  upwards  of  twenty  thousand. 
This  shows  the  immense  difficulty  in  preventing  that 
species  of  traffic,  where  there  is  an  inland  communi- 
cation, and  places  in  a  strong  light  the  disadvantages 
with  which  the  collection  of  duties  in  this  country 
would  be  encumbered,  if  by  disunion  the  States 
should  be  placed  in  a  situation,  with  respect  to  each 
other,  resembling  that  of  France  with  respect  to 
her  neighbors.  The  arbitrary  and  vexatious  powers 
with  which  the  patrols  are  necessarily  armed,  would 
be  intolerable  in  a  free  country. 

If,  on  the  contrary,  there  be  but  one  government 
pervading  all  the  States,  there  will  be,  as  to  the  prin- 
cipal part  of  our  commerce,  but  one  side  to  guard — 
the  Atlantic  coast.  Vessels  arriving  directly  from 
foreign  countries,  laden  with  valuable  cargoes,  would 


94  Alexander  Hamilton 

rarely  choose  to  hazard  themselves  to  the  complicated 
and  critical  perils  which  would  attend  attempts  to 
unlade  prior  to  their  coming  into  port.  They  would 
have  to  dread  both  the  dangers  of  the  coast,  and  of 
detection,  as  well  after  as  before  their  arrival  at  the 
places  of  their  final  destination.  An  ordinary  de-  ' 
gree  of  vigilance  would  be  competent  to  the  preven-  . 
tion  of  any  material  infractions  upon  the  rights  of 
the  revenue.  A  few  armed  vessels,  judiciously  sta- 
tioned at  the  entrances  of  our  ports,  might  at  a 
small  expense  be  made  useful  sentinels  of  the  laws. 
And  the  government  having  the  same  interest  to  pro- 
vide against  violations  everywhere,  the  co-operation 
of  its  measures  in  each  State  would  have  a  powerful 
tendency  to  render  them  effectual.  Here  also  we 
should  preserve,  by  Union,  an  advantage  which  na- 
ture holds  out  to  us,  and  which  would  be  relin- 
quished by  separation.  The  United  States  lie  at  a 
great  distance  from  Europe,  and  at  a  considerable 
distance  from  all  other  places  with  which  they  would 
have  extensive  connections  of  foreign  trade.  The 
passage  from  them  to  us,  in  a  few  hours,  or  in  a 
single  night,  as  between  the  coasts  of  France  and 
Britain,  and  of  other  neighboring  nations,  would  be 
impracticable.  This  is  a  prodigious  security  against 
a  direct  contraband  with  foreign  countries;  but  a 
circuitous  contraband  to  one  State,  through  the 
medium  of  another,  would  be  both  easy  and  safe. 
The  difference  between  a  direct  importation  from 
abroad,  and  an  indirect  importation  through  the 
channel  of  a  neighboring  State,  in  small  parcels,  ac- 
cording to  time  and  opportunity,  with  the  additional 


The  Federalist  95 

facilities  of  inland  communication,  must  be  palpable 
to  every  man  of  discernment. 

It  is  therefore  evident,  that  one  national  govern- 
ment would  be  able,  at  much  less  expense,  to  ex- 
tend the  duties  on  imports,  beyond  comparison, 
further  than  would  be  practicable  to  the  States  sepa- 
rately, or  to  any  partial  confederacies.  Hitherto,  I 
believe,  it  may  safely  be  asserted,  that  these  duties 
have  not  upon  an  average  exceeded  in  any  State 
three  per  cent.  In  France  they  are  estimated  to  be 
about  fifteen  per  cent.,  and  in  Britain  they  exceed 
this  proportion.1  There  seems  to  be  nothing  to 
hinder  their  being  increased  in  this  country  to  at 
least  treble  their  present  amount.  The  single  ar- 
ticle of  ardent  spirits,  under  federal  regulation, 
might  be  made  to  furnish  a  considerable  revenue. 
Upon  a  ratio  to  the  importation  into  this  State,  the 
whole  quantity  imported  into  the  United  States 
may  be  estimated  at  four  millions  of  gallons;  which, 
at  a  shilling  per  gallon,  would  produce  two  hundred 
thousand  pounds.  That  article  would  well  bear  this 
rate  of  duty;  and  if  it  should  tend  to  diminish  the 
consumption  of  it,  such  an  effect  would  be  equally 
favorable  to  the  agriculture,  to  the  economy,  to  the 
morals,  and  to  the  health  of  the  society.  There  is, 
perhaps,  nothing  so  much  a  subject  of  national  ex- 
travagance as  these  spirits. 

What  will  be  the  consequence,  if  we  are  not  able 
to  avail  ourselves  of  the  resource  in  question  in  its  full 
extent?  A  nation  cannot  long  exist  without  reve- 
nues.    Destitute  of  this  essential  support,  it  must 

1  If  my  memory  be  right  they  amount  to  twenty  per  cent. — Publius. 


g6  Alexander  Hamilton 

resign  its  independence,  and  sink  into  the  degraded 
condition  of  a  province.  This  is  an  extremity  to 
which  no  government  will  of  choice  accede.  Reve- 
nue, therefore,  must  be  had  at  all  events.  In  this 
country,  if  the  principal  part  be  not  drawn  from 
commerce,  it  must  fall  with  oppressive  weight  upon 
land.  It  has  been  already  intimated  that  excises, 
in  their  true  signification,  are  too  little  in  unison 
with  the  feelings  of  the  people,  to  admit  of  great  use 
being  made  of  that  mode  of  taxation;  nor,  indeed, 
in  the  States  where  almost  the  sole  employment  is 
agriculture,  are  the  objects  proper  for  excise  suffi- 
ciently numerous  to  permit  very  ample  collections 
in  that  way.  Personal  estate  (as  has  been  before 
remarked),  from  the  difficulty  in  tracing  it,  cannot 
be  subjected  to  large  contributions,  by  any  other 
means  than  by  taxes  on  consumption.  In  populous 
cities,  it  may  be  enough  the  subject  of  conjecture, 
to  occasion  the  oppression  of  individuals,  without 
much  aggregate  benefit  to  the  State;  but  beyond 
these  circles,  it  must,  in  a  great  measure,  escape  the 
eye  and  the  hand  of  the  tax-gatherer.  As  the  neces- 
sities of  the  State,  nevertheless,  must  be  satisfied  in 
some  mode  or  other,  the  defect  of  other  resources 
must  throw  the  principal  weight  of  public  burdens  on 
the  possessors  of  land.  And  as,  on  the  other  hand, 
the  wants  of  the  government  can  never  obtain  an 
adequate  supply,  unless  all  the  sources  of  revenue  are 
open  to  its  demands,  the  finances  of  the  community, 
under  such  embarrassments,  cannot  be  put  into  a 
situation  consistent  with  its  respectability  or  its  se- 
curity.    Thus  we  shall  not  even  have  the  consola- 


The  Federalist  97 

tions  of  a  full  treasury,  to  atone  for  the  oppression  of 
that  valuable  class  of  the  citizens  who  are  employed 
in  the  cultivation  of  the  soil.  But  public  and  pri- 
vate distress  will  keep  pace  with  each  other  in 
gloomy  concert ;  and  unite  in  deploring  the  infatua- 
tion of  those  counsels  which  led  to  disunion. 

Publius. 


For  the  Independent  Journal 
THE  FEDERALIST.     No.  XIII 

(HAMILTON) 

To  the  People  of  the  State  of  New  York: 

As  connected  with  the  subject  of  revenue,  we 
may  with  propriety  consider  that  of  economy.  The 
money  saved  from  one  object  may  be  usefully  ap- 
plied to  another,  and  there  will  be  so  much  the  less 
to  be  drawn  from  the  pockets  of  the  people.  If  the 
States  are  united  under  one  government,  there  will 
be  but  one  national  civil  list  to  support ;  if  they  are 
divided  into  several  confederacies,  there  will  be  as 
many  different  national  civil  lists  to  be  provided  for 
— and  each  of  them,  as  to  the  principal  departments t 
coextensive  with  that  which  would  be  necessary  for 
a  government  of  the  whole.  The  entire  separation 
of  the  States  into  thirteen  unconnected  sovereignties 
is  a  project  too  extravagant  and  too  replete  with 
danger  to  have  many  advocates.  The  ideas  of  men 
who  speculate  upon  the  dismemberment  of  the  em- 
pire seem  generally  turned  towards  three  confedera- 
cies— one  consisting  of  the  four  Northern,  another 
of  the  four  Middle,  and  a  third  of  the  five  Southern 

VOL.  XI. — 7. 


98  Alexander  Hamilton 

States.  There  is  little  probability  that  there  would 
be  a  greater  number.  According  to  this  distribu- 
tion, each  confederacy  would  comprise  an  extent  of 
territory  larger  than  that  of  the  kingdom  of  Great 
Britain.  No  well-informed  man  will  suppose  that  the 
affairs  of  such  a  confederacy  can  be  properly  regu- 
lated by  a  government  less  comprehensive  in  its 
organs  or  institutions  than  that  which  has  been  pro- 
posed by  the  convention.  When  the  dimensions  of 
a  State  attain  to  a  certain  magnitude,  it  requires  the 
same  energy  of  government  and  the  same  forms  of 
administration  which  are  requisite  in  one  of  much 
greater  extent.  This  idea  admits  not  of  precise 
demonstration,  because  there  is  no  rule  by  which  we 
can  measure  the  momentum  of  civil  power  necessary 
to  the  government  of  any  given  number  of  individ- 
uals ;  but  when  we  consider  that  the  island  of  Brit- 
ain, nearly  commensurate  with  each  of  the  supposed 
confederacies,  contains  about  eight  millions  of  peo- 
ple, and  when  we  reflect  upon  the  degree  of  authority 
required  to  direct  the  passions  of  so  large  a  society 
to  the  public  good,  we  shall  see  no  reason  to  doubt 
that  the  like  portion  of  power  would  be  sufficient  to 
perform  the  same  task  in  a  society  far  more  numer- 
ous. Civil  power,  properly  organized  and  exerted, 
is  capable  of  diffusing  its  force  to  a  very  great  extent ; 
and  can,  in  a  manner  reproduce  itself  in  every  part 
of  a  great  empire  by  a  judicious  arrangement  of  sub- 
ordinate institutions. 

The  supposition  that  each  confederacy  into  which 
the  States  would  be  likely  to  be  divided  would  re- 
quire a  government  not  less  comprehensive  than  the 


The  Federalist  99 

one  proposed,  will  be  strengthened  by  another  sup- 
position, more  probable  than  that  which  presents  us 
with  three  confederacies  as  the  alternative  to  a  gen- 
eral Union.  If  we  attend  carefully  to  geographical 
and  commercial  considerations,  in  conjunction  with 
the  habits  and  prejudices  of  the  different  States,  we 
shall  be  led  to  conclude  that  in  case  of  disunion  they 
will  most  naturally  league  themselves  under  two  gov- 
ernments. The  four  Eastern  States,  from  all  the 
causes  that  form  the  links  of  national  sympathy  and 
connection,  may  with  certainty  be  expected  to 
unite.  New  York,  situated  as  she  is,  would  never 
be  unwise  enough  to  oppose  a  feeble  and  unsup- 
ported flank  to  the  weight  of  that  confederacy.  There 
are  other  obvious  reasons  that  would  facilitate  her 
accession  to  it.  New  Jersey  is  too  small  a  State  to 
think  of  being  a  frontier,  in  opposition  to  this  still 
more  powerful  combination;  nor  do  there  appear 
to  be  any  obstacles  to  her  admission  into  it.  Even 
Pennsylvania  would  have  strong  inducements  to 
join  the  Northern  league.  An  active  foreign  com- 
merce, on  the  basis  of  her  own  navigation,  is  her  true 
policy,  and  coincides  with  the  opinions  and  disposi- 
tions of  her  citizens.  The  more  Southern  States, 
from  various  circumstances,  may  not  think  them- 
selves much  interested  in  the  encouragement  of 
navigation.  They  may  prefer  a  system  which  would 
give  unlimited  scope  to  all  nations  to  be  the  carriers 
as  well  as  the  purchasers  of  their  commodities.  Penn- 
sylvania may  not  choose  to  confound  her  interests  in 
a  connection  so  adverse  to  her  policy.  As  she  must 
at  all  events  be  a  frontier,  she  may  deem  it  most 


ioo  Alexander   Hamilton 

consistent  with  her  safety  to  have  her  exposed  side 
turned  towards  the  weaker  power  of  the  Southern, 
rather  than  towards  the  stronger  power  of  the 
Northern,  Confederacy.  This  would  give  her  the 
fairest  chance  to  avoid  being  the  Flanders  of  Amer- 
ica. Whatever  may  be  the  determination  of  Penn- 
sylvania, if  the  Northern  Confederacy  includes  New 
Jersey,  there  is  no  likelihood  of  more  than  one  con- 
federacy to  the  south  of  that  State. 

Nothing  can  be  more  evident  than  that  the  thirteen 
States  will  be  able  to  support  a  national  government 
better  than  one  half,  or  one  third,  or  any  number 
less  than  the  whole.  This  reflection  must  have  great 
weight  in  obviating  that  objection  to  the  proposed 
plan,  which  is  founded  on  the  principle  of  expense, 
an  objection,  however,  which,  when  we  come  to  take 
a  nearer  view  of  it,  will  appear  in  every  light  to  stand 
on  mistaken  ground. 

If,  in  addition  to  the  consideration  of  a  plurality 
of  civil  lists,  we  take  into  view  the  number  of  per- 
sons who  must  necessarily  be  employed  to  guard 
the  inland  communication  between  the  different  con- 
federacies against  illicit  trade,  and  who  in  time  will 
infallibly  spring  up  out  of  the  necessities  of  revenue ; 
and  if  we  also  take  into  view  the  military  establish- 
ments which  it  has  been  shown  would  unavoidably 
result  from  the  jealousies  and  conflicts  of  the  several 
nations  into  which  the  States  would  be  divided,  we 
shall  clearly  discover  that  a  separation  would  be  not 
less  injurious  to  the  economy,  than  to  the  tranquil- 
lity, commerce,  revenue,  and  liberty  of  every  part. 

Publius. 


The  Federalist  101 

From  the  New  York  Packet,  Friday,  November  30,  1787 
THE  FEDERALIST.     No.  XIV 

(MADISON) 

To  the  People  of  the  State  of  New  York: 

We  have  seen  the  necessity  of  the  Union,  as  our 
bulwark  against  foreign  danger,  as  the  conservator 
of  peace  among  ourselves,  as  the  guardian  of  our 
commerce  and  other  common  interests,  as  the  only 
substitute  for  those  military  establishments  which 
have  subverted  the  liberties  of  the  Old  World,  and 
as  the  proper  antidote  for  the  diseases  of  faction, 
which  have  proved  fatal  to  other  popular  govern- 
ments, and  of  which  alarming  symptoms  have  been 
betrayed  by  our  own.  All  thr.t  romains,  within  this 
branch  of  our  inquiries,  is  to  take  notice  of  an  objec- 
tion that  may  be  drawn  from  the  great  extent  of 
country  which  the  Union  embraces.  A  few  observa- 
tions on  this  subject  will  be  the  more  proper,  as  it 
is  perceived  that  the  adversaries  of  the  new  Con- 
stitution are  availing  themselves  of  the  prevailing 
prejudice  with  regard  to  the  practicable  sphere  of 
republican  administration,  in  order  to  supply,  by 
imaginary  difficulties,  the  want  of  those  solid  ob- 
jections which  they  endeavor  in  vain  to  find. 

The  error  which  limits  republican  government  to 
a  narrow  district  has  been  unfolded  and  refuted  in 
preceding  papers.  I  remark  here  only  that  it  seems 
to  owe  its  rise  and  prevalence  chiefly  to  the  confound- 
ing of  a  republic  with  a  democracy,  applying  to  the 
former  reasonings  drawn  from  the  nature  of  the  lat- 
ter.    The  true  distinction  between  these  forms  was 


102  Alexander  Hamilton 

also  adverted  to  on  a  former  occasion.  It  is,  that  in 
a  democracy,  the  people  meet  and  exercise  the  gov- 
ernment in  person;  in  a  republic,  they  assemble  and 
administer  it  by  their  representatives  and  agents.  A 
democracy,  consequently,  will  be  confined  to  a  small 
spot.  A  republic  may  be  extended  over  a  large 
region. 

To  this  accidental  source  of  the  error  may  be  added 
the  artifice  of  some  celebrated  authors,  whose  wri- 
tings have  had  a  great  share  in  forming  the  mod- 
ern standard  of  political  opinions.  Being  subjects 
either  of  an  absolute  or  limited  monarchy,  they  have 
endeavored  to  heighten  the  advantages,  or  palliate 
the  evils  of  those  forms,  by  placing  in  comparison 
the  vices  and  defects  of  the  republican,  and  by  citing 
as  specimens  of  the  latter  the  turbulent  democracies 
of  ancient  Greece  and  modern  Italy.  Under  the 
confusion  of  names,  it  has  been  an  easy  task  to 
transfer  to  a  republic  observations  applicable  to  a 
democracy  only;  and  among  others,  the  observa- 
tion that  it  can  never  be  established  but  among  a 
small  number  of  people,  living  within  a  small  com- 
pass of  territory. 

Such  a  fallacy  may  have  been  the  less  perceived, 
as  most  of  the  popular  governments  of  antiquity 
were  of  the  democratic  species ;  and  even  in  modern 
Europe,  to  which  we  owe  the  great  principle  of  re- 
presentation, no  example  is  seen  of  a  government 
wholly  popular,  and  founded,  at  the  same  time, 
wholly  on  that  principle.  If  Europe  has  the  merit 
of  discovering  this  great  mechanical  power  in  gov- 
ernment, by  the  simple  agency  of  which  the  will  of 


The  Federalist  103 

the  largest  political  body  may  be  concentred,  and  its 
force  directed  to  any  object  which  the  public  good 
requires,  America  can  claim  the  merit  of  making  the 
discovery  the  basis  of  unmixed  and  extensive  re- 
publics. It  is  only  to  be  lamented  that  any  of  her 
citizens  should  wish  to  deprive  her  of  the  additional 
merit  of  displaying  its  full  efficacy  in  the  establish- 
ment of  the  comprehensive  system  now  under  her 
consideration. 

As  the  natural  limit  of  a  democracy  is  that  dis- 
tance from  the  central  point  which  will  just  permit 
the  most  remote  citizens  to  assemble  as  often  as 
their  public  functions  demand,  and  will  include  no 
greater  number  than  can  join  in  those  functions ;  so 
the  natural  limit  of  a  republic  is  that  distance  from 
the  centre  which  will  barely  allow  the  representa- 
tives to  meet  as  often  as  may  be  necessary  for  the 
administration  of  public  affairs.  Can  it  be  said  that 
the  limits  of  the  United  States  exceed  this  distance  ? 
It  will  not  be  said  by  those  who  recollect  that  the 
Atlantic  coast  is  the  longest  side  of  the  Union,  that 
during  the  term  of  thirteen  years,  the  representa- 
tives of  the  States  have  been  almost  continually 
assembled,  and  that  the  members  from  the  most 
distant  States  are  not  chargeable  with  greater  inter- 
missions of  attendance  than  those  from  the  States  in 
the  neighborhood  of  Congress. 

That  we  may  form  a  juster  estimate  with  regard  to 
this  interesting  subject,  let  us  resort  to  the  actual 
dimensions  of  the  Union.  The  limits,  as  fixed  by 
the  treaty  of  peace,  are:  on  the  east  the  Atlantic,  on 
the  south  the  latitude  of  thirty-one  degrees,  on  the 


104  Alexander  Hamilton 

west  the  Mississippi,  and  on  the  north  an  irregular 
line  running  in  some  instances  beyond  the  forty- 
fifth  degree,  in  others  falling  as  low  as  the  forty- 
second.  The  southern  shore  of  Lake  Erie  lies  below 
that  latitude.  Computing  the  distance  between  the 
thirty-first  and  forty-fifth  degrees,  it  amounts  to 
nine  hundred  and  seventy -three  common  miles ;  com- 
puting it  from  thirty-one  to  forty-two  degrees,  to 
seven  hundred  and  sixty-four  miles  and  a  half. 
Taking  the  mean  for  the  distance,  the  amount  will 
be  eight  hundred  and  sixty-eight  miles  and  three 
fourths.  The  mean  distance  from  the  Atlantic  to 
the  Mississippi  does  not  probably  exceed  seven  hun- 
dred and  fifty  miles.  On  a  comparison  of  this  ex- 
tent with  that  of  several  countries  in  Europe,  the 
practicability  of  rendering  our  system  commen- 
surate to  it  appears  to  be  demonstrable.  It  is  not  a 
great  deal  larger  than  Germany,  where  a  diet  repre- 
senting the  whole  empire  is  continually  assembled; 
or  than  Poland  before  the  late  dismemberment, 
where  another  national  diet  was  the  depositary  of 
the  supreme  power.  Passing  by  France  and  Spain, 
we  find  that  in  Great  Britain,  inferior  as  it  may  be  in 
size,  the  representatives  of  the  northern  extremity 
of  the  island  have  as  far  to  travel  to  the  national 
council  as  will  be  required  of  those  of  the  most  re- 
mote parts  of  the  Union. 

Favorable  as  this  view  of  the  subject  may  be,  some 
observations  remain  which  will  place  it  in  a  light  still 
more  satisfactory. 

In  the  first  place  it  is  to  be  remembered  that  the 
general  government  is  not  to  be  charged  with  the 


The  Federalist  105 

whole  power  of  making  and  administering  laws.  Its 
jurisdiction  is  limited  to  certain  enumerated  objects, 
which  concern  all  the  members  of  the  republic,  but 
which  are  not  to  be  attained  by  the  separate  provi- 
sions of  any.  The  subordinate  governments,  which 
can  extend  their  care  to  all  those  other  objects  which 
can  be  separately  provided  for,  will  retain  their  due 
authority  and  activity.  Were  it  proposed  by  the 
plan  of  the  Convention  to  abolish  the  governments 
of  the  particular  States,  its  adversaries  would  have 
some  ground  for  their  objection;  though  it  would 
not  be  difficult  to  show  that  if  they  were  abolished 
the  general  government  would  be  compelled,  by  the 
principle  of  self-preservation,  to  reinstate  them  in 
their  proper  jurisdiction. 

A  second  observation  to  be  made  is  that  the  im- 
mediate object  of  the  federal  Constitution  is  to 
secure  the  union  of  the  thirteen  primitive  States, 
which  we  know  to  be  practicable;  and  to  add  to 
them  such  other  States  as  may  arise  in  their  own 
bosoms,  or  in  their  neighborhoods,  which  we  cannot 
doubt  to  be  equally  practicable.  The  arrangements 
that  may  be  necessary  for  those  angles  and  fractions 
of  our  territory  which  lie  on  our  northwestern  fron- 
tier, must  be  left  to  those  whom  further  discoveries 
and  experience  will  render  more  equal  to  the  task. 

Let  it  be  remarked,  in  the  third  place,  that  the  in- 
tercourse throughout  the  Union  will  be  facilitated 
by  new  improvements.  Roads  will  everywhere  be 
shortened,  and  kept  in  better  order;  accommoda- 
tions for  travellers  will  be  multiplied  and  meliorated ; 
an  interior  navigation  on  our  eastern  side  will  be 


106  Alexander  Hamilton 

opened  throughout,  or  nearly  throughout,  the  whole 
extent  of  the  thirteen  States.  The  communication 
between  the  Western  and  Atlantic  districts,  and 
between  different  parts  of  each,  will  be  rendered 
more  and  more  easy  by  those  numerous  canals  with 
which  the  beneficence  of  nature  has  intersected  our 
country,  and  which  art  finds  it  so  little  difficult  to 
connect  and  complete. 

A  fourth  and  still  more  important  consideration  is, 
that  as  almost  every  State  will,  on  one  side  or  other, 
be  a  frontier,  and  will  thus  find,  in  a  regard  to  its 
safety,  an  inducement  to  make  some  sacrifices  for 
the  sake  of  the  general  protection;  so  the  States 
which  lie  at  the  greatest  distance  from  the  heart  of 
the  Union,  and  which,  of  course,  may  partake  least 
of  the  ordinary  circulation  of  its  benefits,  will  be  at 
the  same  time  immediately  contiguous  to  foreign 
nations,  and  will  consequently  stand,  on  particular 
occasions,  in  greatest  need  of  its  strength  and  re- 
sources. It  may  be  inconvenient  for  Georgia,  or  the 
States  forming  our  western  or  northeastern  borders, 
to  send  their  representatives  to  the  seat  of  govern- 
ment; but  they  would  find  it  more  so  to  struggle 
alone  against  an  invading  enemy,  or  even  to  support 
alone  the  whole  expense  of  those  precautions  which 
may  be  dictated  by  the  neighborhood  of  continual 
danger.  If  they  should  derive  less  benefit,  there- 
fore, from  the  Union  in  some  respects  than  the  less 
distant  States,  they  will  derive  greater  benefit  from 
it  in  other  respects,  and  thus  the  proper  equilibrium 
will  be  maintained  throughout. 

I   submit  to  you,  my  fellow-citizens,   these   con- 


The  Federalist  107 

siderations,  in  full  confidence  that  the  good  sense 
which  has  so  often  marked  your  decisions  will  allow 
them  their  due  weight  and  effect ;  and  that  you  will 
never  suffer  difficulties,  however  formidable  in  ap- 
pearance, or  however  fashionable  the  error  on  which 
they  may  be  founded,  to  drive  you  into  the  gloomy 
and  perilous  scene  into  which  the  advocates  for  dis- 
union would  conduct  you.  Hearken  not  to  the  un- 
natural voice  which  tells  you  that  the  people  of 
America,  knit  together  as  they  are  by  so  many  cords 
of  affection,  can  no  longer  live  together  as  members  of 
the  same  family ;  can  no  longer  continue  the  mutual 
guardians  of  their  mutual  happiness;  can  no  longer 
be  fellow-citizens  of  one  great,  respectable,  and 
flourishing  empire.  Hearken  not  to  the  voice  which 
petulantly  tells  you  that  the  form  of  government 
recommended  for  your  adoption  is  a  novelty  in  the 
political  world;  that  it  has  never  yet  had  a  place 
in  the  theories  of  the  wildest  projectors;  that  it 
rashly  attempts  what  it  is  impossible  to  accomplish. 
No,  my  countrymen,  shut  your  ears  against  this  un- 
hallowed language.  Shut  your  hearts  against  the 
poison  which  it  conveys;  the  kindred  blood  which 
flows  in  the  veins  of  American  citizens,  the  mingled 
blood  which  they  have  shed  in  defence  of  their 
sacred  rights,  consecrate  their  Union,  and  excite 
horror  at  the  idea  of  their  becoming  aliens,  rivals, 
enemies.  And  if  novelties  are  to  be  shunned,  be- 
lieve me,  the  most  alarming  of  all  novelties,  the  most 
wild  of  all  projects,  the  most  rash  of  all  attempts,  is 
that  of  rending  us  in  pieces,  in  order  to  preserve  our 
liberties  and  promote  our  happiness.      But  why  is 


108  Alexander  Hamilton 

the  experiment  of  an  extended  republic  to  be  re- 
jected, merely  because  it  may  comprise  what  is  new? 
Is  it  not  the  glory  of  the  people  of  America,  that, 
whilst  they  have  paid  a  decent  regard  to  the  opinions 
of  former  times  and  other  nations,  they  have  not 
suffered  a  blind  veneration  for  antiquity,  for  custom, 
or  for  names,  to  overrule  the  suggestions  of  their 
own  good  sense,  the  knowledge  of  their  own  situa- 
tion, and  the  lessons  of  their  own  experience?  To 
this  manly  spirit,  posterity  will  be  indebted  for  the 
possession,  and  the  world  for  the  example,  of  the 
numerous  innovations  displayed  on  the  American 
theatre,  in  favor  of  private  rights  and  public  happi- 
ness. Had  no  important  step  been  taken  by  the 
leaders  of  the  Revolution  for  which  a  precedent 
could  not  be  discovered,  no  government  established 
of  which  an  exact  model  did  not  present  itself,  the 
people  of  the  United  States  might,  at  this  moment, 
have  been  numbered  among  the  melancholy  victims 
of  misguided  councils,  must  at  best  have  been  labor- 
ing under  the  weight  of  some  of  those  forms  which 
have  crushed  the  liberties  of  the  rest  of  mankind. 
Happily  for  America,  happily,  we  trust,  for  the 
whole  human  race,  they  pursued  a  new  and  more 
noble  course.  They  accomplished  a  revolution  which 
has  no  parallel  in  the  annals  of  human  society.  They 
reared  the  fabrics  of  governments  which  have  no 
model  on  the  face  of  the  globe.  They  formed  the 
design  of  a  great  Confederacy,  which  it  is  incumbent 
on  their  successors  to  improve  and  perpetuate.  If 
their  works  betray  imperfections,  we  wonder  at  the 
fewness  of  them.     If  they  erred  most  in  the  structure 


The  Federalist  109 

of  the  Union,  this  was  the  work  most  difficult  to  be 
executed;  this  is  the  work  which  has  been  new 
modelled  by  the  act  of  your  convention,  and  it  is 
that  act  on  which  you  are  now  to  deliberate  and  to 
decide. 

Publius. 


For  the  Independent  Journal 
THE  FEDERALIST.     No.  XV 

(HAMILTON) 

To  the  People  of  the  State  of  New  York: 

In  the  course  of  the  preceding  papers,  I  have  en- 
deavored, my  fellow-citizens,  to  place  before  you,  in 
a  clear  and  convincing  light,  the  importance  of 
Union  to  your  political  safety  and  happiness.  I 
have  unfolded  to  you  a  complication  of  dangers  to 
which  you  would  be  exposed,  should  you  permit 
that  sacred  knot  which  binds  the  people  of  America 
together  to  be  severed  or  dissolved  by  ambition  or 
by  avarice,  by  jealousy  or  by  misrepresentation.  In 
the  sequel  of  the  inquiry  through  which  I  propose  to 
accompany  you,  the  truths  intended  to  be  incul- 
cated will  receive  further  confirmation  from  facts 
and  arguments  hitherto  unnoticed.  If  the  road 
over  which  you  will  still  have  to  pass  should  in  some 
places  appear  to  you  tedious  or  irksome,  you  will  re- 
collect that  you  are  in  quest  of  information  on  a 
subject  the  most  momentous  which  can  engage  the 
attention  of  a  free  people,  that  the  field  through 
which  you  have  to  travel  is  in  itself  spacious,  and 


no  Alexander  Hamilton 

that  the  difficulties  of  the  journey  have  been  un- 
necessarily increased  by  the  mazes  with  which  soph- 
istry has  beset  the  way.  It  will  be  my  aim  to  remove 
the  obstacles  from  your  progress  in  as  compendious 
a  manner  as  it  can  be  done,  without  sacrificing 
utility  to  despatch. 

In  pursuance  of  the  plan  which  I  have  laid  down 
for  the  discussion  of  the  subject,  the  point  next  in 
order  to  be  examined  is  the  "insufficiency  of  the 
present  Confederation  to  the  preservation  of  the 
Union."  It  may  perhaps  be  asked  what  need  there 
is  of  reasoning  or  proof  to  illustrate  a  position  which 
is  not  either  controverted  or  doubted,  to  which  the 
understandings  and  feelings  of  all  classes  of  men 
assent  and  which  in  substance  is  admitted  by  the 
opponents  as  well  as  by  the  friends  of  the  new  Con- 
stitution. It  must  in  truth  be  acknowledged  that, 
however  these  may  differ  in  other  respects,  they  in 
general  appear  to  harmonize  in  this  sentiment,  at 
least,  that  there  are  material  imperfections  in  our  na- 
tional system,  and  that  something  is  necessary  to  be 
done  to  rescue  us  from  impending  anarchy.  The  facts 
that  support  this  opinion  are  no  longer  objects  of 
speculation.  They  have  forced  themselves  upon  the 
sensibility  of  the  people  at  large,  and  have  at  length 
extorted  from  those,  whose  mistaken  policy  has  had 
the  principal  share  in  precipitating  the  extremity  at 
which  we  are  arrived,  a  reluctant  confession  of  the 
reality  of  those  defects  in  the  scheme  of  our  federal 
government,  which  have  been  long  pointed  out  and 
regretted  by  the  intelligent  friends  of  the  Union. 

We  may  indeed  with  propriety  be  said  to  have 


The  Federalist  in 

reached  almost  the  last  stage  of  national  humiliation. 
There  is  scarcely  any  thing  that  can  wound  the  pride 
or  degrade  the  character  of  an  independent  nation 
which  we  do  not  experience.  Are  there  engage- 
ments to  the  performance  of  which  we  are  held  by 
every  tie  respectable  among  men?  These  are  the 
subjects  of  constant  and  unblushing  violation.  Do 
we  owe  debts  to  foreigners  and  to  our  own  citizens 
contracted  in  a  time  of  imminent  peril  for  the  pre- 
servation of  our  political  existence?  These  remain 
without  any  proper  or  satisfactory  provision  for 
their  discharge.  Have  we  valuable  territories  and 
important  posts  in  the  possession  of  a  foreign  power 
which,  by  express  stipulations,  ought  long  since  to 
have  been  surrendered?  These  are  still  retained,  to 
the  prejudice  of  our  interests,  not  less  than  of  our 
rights.  Are  we  in  a  condition  to  resent  or  to  repel 
the  aggression?  We  have  neither  troops,  nor  treas- 
ury, nor  government.1  Are  we  even  in  a  condition 
to  remonstrate  with  dignity?  The  just  imputations 
on  our  own  faith,  in  respect  to  the  same  treaty,  ought 
first  to  be  removed.  Are  we  entitled  by  nature  and 
compact  to  a  free  participation  in  the  navigation  of 
the  Mississippi?  Spain  excludes  us  from  it.  Is  pub- 
lic credit  an  indispensable  resource  in  time  of  public 
danger?  We  seem  to  have  abandoned  its  cause  as 
desperate  and  irretrievable.  Is  commerce  of  im- 
portance to  national  wealth?  Ours  is  at  the  lowest 
point  of  declension.  Is  respectability  in  the  eyes  of 
foreign  powers  a  safeguard  against  foreign  encroach- 
ments?    The   imbecility   of   our   government   even 

1  "I  mean  for  the  Union." — Publius. 


H2  Alexander  Hamilton 

forbids  them  to  treat  with  us.  Our  ambassadors 
abroad  are  the  mere  pageants  of  mimic  sovereignty. 
Is  a  violent  and  unnatural  decrease  in  the  value  of 
land  a  symptom  of  national  distress?  The  price  of 
improved  land  in  most  parts  of  the  country  is  much 
lower  than  can  be  accounted  for  by  the  quantity  of 
waste  land  at  market,  and  can  only  be  fully  ex- 
plained by  that  want  of  private  and  public  con- 
fidence, which  is  so  alarmingly  prevalent  among  all 
ranks,  and  which  has  a  direct  tendency  to  de- 
preciate property  of  every  kind.  Is  private  credit 
the  friend  and  patron  of  industry?  That  most  use- 
ful kind  which  relates  to  borrowing  and  lending  is 
reduced  within  the  narrowest  limits,  and  this  still 
more  from  an  opinion  of  insecurity  than  from  the 
scarcity  of  money.  To  shorten  an  enumeration  of 
particulars  which  can  afford  neither  pleasure  nor 
instruction,  it  may  in  general  be  demanded,  what 
indication  is  there  of  national  disorder,  poverty,  and 
insignificance  that  could  befall  a  community  so  pe- 
culiarly blessed  with  natural  advantages  as  we  are, 
which  does  not  form  a  part  of  the  dark  catalogue  of 
our  public  misfortunes? 

This  is  the  melancholy  situation  to  which  we  have 
been  brought  by  those  very  maxims  and  counsels 
which  would  now  deter  us  from  adopting  the  pro- 
posed Constitution;  and  which,  not  content  with 
having  conducted  us  to  the  brink  of  a  precipice,  seem 
resolved  to  plunge  us  into  the  abyss  that  awaits  us 
below.  Here,  my  countrymen,  impelled  by  every 
motive  that  ought  to  influence  an  enlightened  people, 
let  us  make  a  firm  stand  for  our  safety,  our  tran- 


The  Federalist  113 

quillity,  our  dignity,  our  reputation.  Let  us  at  last 
break  the  fatal  charm  which  has  too  long  seduced  us 
from  the  paths  of  felicity  and  prosperity. 

It  is  true,  as  has  been  before  observed,  that  facts, 
too  stubborn  to  be  resisted,  have  produced  a  species 
of  general  assent  to  the  abstract  proposition  that 
there  exist  material  defects  in  our  national  system; 
but  the  usefulness  of  the  concession,  on  the  part  of 
the  old  adversaries  of  federal  measures,  is  destroyed 
by  a  strenuous  opposition  to  a  remedy,  upon  the 
only  principles  that  can  give  it  a  chance  of  success. 
While  they  admit  that  the  government  of  the  United 
States  is  destitute  of  energy,  they  contend  against 
conferring  upon  it  those  powers  which  are  requisite 
to  supply  that  energy.  They  seem  still  to  aim  at 
things  repugnant  and  irreconcilable;  at  an  aug- 
mentation of  federal  authority,  without  a  diminu- 
tion of  State  authority ;  at  sovereignty  in  the  Union, 
and  complete  independence  in  the  members.  They 
still,  in  fine,  seem  to  cherish  with  blind  devotion  the 
political  monster  of  an  imperium  in  imperio.  This 
renders  a  full  display  of  the  principal  defects  of  the 
Confederation  necessary,  in  order  to  show  that  the 
evils  we  experience  do  not  proceed  from  minute  or 
partial  imperfections,  but  from  fundamental  errors 
in  the  structure  of  the  building,  which  cannot  be 
amended  otherwise  than  by  an  alteration  in  the  first 
principles  and  main  pillars  of  the  fabric. 

The  great  and  radical  vice  in  the  construction  of 
the  existing  Confederation  is  in  the  principle  of 
LEGISLATION  for  STATES  or  GOVERNMENTS, 
in  their  CORPORATE  or  COLLECTIVE  CAPA- 

VOL.  XI.— 8. 


ii4  Alexander  Hamilton 

CITIES,  and  as  contradistinguished  from  the  IN- 
DIVIDUALS of  which  they  consist.  Though  this 
principle  does  not  run  through  all  the  powers  dele- 
gated to  the  Union,  yet  it  pervades  and  governs 
those  on  which  the  efficacy  of  the  rest  depends. 
Except  as  to  the  rule  of  apportionment,  the  United 
States  has  an  indefinite  discretion  to  make  requisi- 
tions for  men  and  money;  but  they  have  no  au- 
thority to  raise  either,  by  regulations  extending  to 
the  individual  citizens  of  America.  The  conse- 
quence of  this  is,  that  though  in  theory  their 
resolutions  concerning  those  objects  are  laws,  con- 
stitutionally binding  on  the  members  of  the  Union, 
yet  in  practice  they  are  mere  recommendations  which 
the  States  observe  or  disregard  at  their  option. 

It  is  a  singular  instance  of  the  capriciousness  of 
the  human  mind,  that  after  all  the  admonitions  we 
have  had  from  experience  on  this  head,  there  should 
still  be  found  men  who  object  to  the  new  Constitu- 
tion, for  deviating  from  a  principle  which  has  been 
found  the  bane  of  the  old,  and  which  is  in  itself  evi- 
dently incompatible  with  the  idea  of  government  ;  a 
principle,  in  short,  which,  if  it  is  to  be  executed  at  all, 
must  substitute  the  violent  and  sanguinary  agency 
of  the  sword  to  the  mild  influence  of  the  magistracy. 

There  is  nothing  absurd  or  impracticable  in  the 
idea  of  a  league  or  alliance  between  independent  na- 
tions for  certain  defined  purposes  precisely  stated  in 
a  treaty  regulating  all  the  details  of  time,  place,  cir- 
cumstance, and  quantity ;  leaving  nothing  to  future 
discretion;  and  depending  for  its  execution  on  the 
good  faith  of  the  parties.     Compacts  of  this  kind 


The  Federalist  115 

exist  among  all  civilized  nations,  subject  to  the  usual 
vicissitudes  of  peace  and  war,  of  observance  and  non- 
observance,  as  the  interests  or  passions  of  the  con- 
tracting powers  dictate.  In  the  early  part  of  the 
present  century  there  was  an  epidemical  rage  in 
Europe  for  this  species  of  compacts,  from  which  the 
politicians  of  the  times  fondly  hoped  for  benefits  which 
were  never  realized.  With  a  view  to  establishing  the 
equilibrium  of  power  and  the  peace  of  that  part 
of  the  world,  all  the  resources  of  negotiation  were 
exhausted,  and  triple  and  quadruple  alliances  were 
formed;  but  they  were  scarcely  formed  before  they 
were  broken,  giving  an  instructive  but  afflicting 
lesson  to  mankind,  how  little  dependence  is  to  be 
placed  on  treaties  which  have  no  other  sanction 
than  the  obligations  of  good  faith,  and  which  oppose 
general  considerations  of  peace  and  justice  to  the 
impulse  of  any  immediate  interest  or  passion. 

If  the  particular  States  in  this  country  are  dis- 
posed to  stand  in  a  similar  relation  to  each  other,  and 
to  drop  the  project  of  a  general  discretionary 
superintendence,  the  scheme  would  indeed  be  per- 
nicious, and  would  entail  upon  us  all  the  mischiefs 
which  have  been  enumerated  under  the  first  head; 
but  it  would  have  the  merit  of  being,  at  least,  con- 
sistent and  practicable.  Abandoning  all  views  to- 
wards a  confederate  government,  this  would  bring  us 
to  a  simple  alliance  offensive  and  defensive;  and 
would  place  us  in  a  situation  to  be  alternate  friends 
and  enemies  of  each  other,  as  our  mutual  jealousies 
and  rivalships,  nourished  by  the  intrigues  of  foreign 
nations,  should  prescribe  to  us. 


n6  Alexander  Hamilton 

But  if  we  are  unwilling  to  be  placed  in  this  perilous 
situation;  if  we  still  will  adhere  to  the  design  of  a 
national  government,  or,  which  is  the  same  thing,  of 
a  superintending  power,  under  the  direction  of  a  com- 
mon council,  we  must  resolve  to  incorporate  into  our 
plan  those  ingredients  which  may  be  considered  as 
forming  the  characteristic  difference  between  a 
league  and  a  government;  we  must  extend  the  au- 
thority of  the  Union  to  the  persons  of  the  citizens, — 
the  only  proper  objects  of  government. 

Government  implies  the  power  of  making  laws. 
It  is  essential  to  the  idea  of  a  law,  that  it  be  attended 
with  a  sanction;  or,  in  other  words,  a  penalty  or 
punishment  for  disobedience.  If  there  be  no  pen- 
alty annexed  to  disobedience,  the  resolutions  or 
commands  which  pretend  to  be  laws  will,  in  fact, 
amount  to  nothing  more  than  advice  or  recommenda- 
tion. This  penalty,  whatever  it  may  be,  can  only 
be  inflicted  in  two  ways :  by  the  agency  of  the  courts 
and  ministers  of  justice,  or  by  military  force ;  by  the 
coercion  of  the  magistracy,  or  by  the  coercion  of 
arms.  The  first  kind  can  evidently  apply  only  to 
men;  the  last  kind  must  of  necessity,  be  employed 
against  bodies  politic,  or  communities,  or  States. 
It  is  evident  that  there  is  no  process  of  a  court  by 
which  the  observance  of  the  laws  can,  in  the  last 
resort,  be  enforced.  Sentences  may  be  denounced 
against  them  for  violations  of  their  duty ;  but  these 
sentences  can  only  be  carried  into  execution  by  the 
sword.  In  an  association  where  the  general  au- 
thority is  confined  to  the  collective  bodies  of  the 
communities  that  compose  it,  every  breach  of  the 


The  Federalist  1 1 7 

laws  must  involve  a  state  of  war ;  and  military  exe- 
cution must  become  the  only  instrument  of  civil 
obedience.  Such  a  state  of  things  can  certainly  not 
deserve  the  name  of  government,  nor  would  any 
prudent  man  choose  to  commit  his  happiness  to  it. 
There  was  a  time  when  we  were  told  that  breaches, 
by  the  States,  of  the  regulations  of  the  federal  au- 
thority were  not  to  be  expected;  that  a  sense  of 
common  interest  would  preside  over  the  conduct  of 
the  respective  members,  and  would  beget  a  full  com- 
pliance with  all  the  constitutional  requisitions  of  the 
Union.  This  language,  at  the  present  day,  would 
appear  as  wild  as  a  great  part  of  what  we  now  hear 
from  the  same  quarter  will  be  thought,  when  we 
shall  have  received  further  lessons  from  that  best 
oracle  of  wisdom,  experience.  It  at  all  times  be- 
trayed an  ignorance  of  the  true  springs  by  which 
human  conduct  is  actuated,  and  belied  the  original 
inducements  to  the  establishment  of  civil  power. 
Why  has  government  been  instituted  at  all?  Be- 
cause the  passions  of  men  will  not  conform  to  the 
dictates  of  reason  and  justice,  without  constraint. 
Has  it  been  found  that  bodies  of  men  act  with  more 
rectitude  or  greater  disinterestedness  than  individ- 
uals? The  contrary  of  this  has  been  inferred  by 
all  accurate  observers  of  the  conduct  of  mankind; 
and  the  inference  is  founded  upon  obvious  reasons. 
Regard  to  reputation  has  a  less  active  influence, 
when  the  infamy  of  a  bad  action  is  to  be  divided 
among  a  number,  than  when  it  is  to  fall  singly  upon 
one.  A  spirit  of  faction,  which  is  apt  to  mingle  its 
poison  in  the  deliberations  of  all  bodies  of  men,  will 


n8  Alexander  Hamilton 

often  hurry  the  persons  of  whom  they  are  composed 
into  improprieties  and  excesses,  for  which  they  would 
blush  in  a  private  capacity. 

In  addition  to  all  this,  there  is,  in  the  nature  of 
sovereign  power,  an  impatience  of  control,  that  dis- 
poses those  who  are  invested  with  the  exercise  of  it, 
to  look  with  an  evil  eye  upon  all  external  attempts  to 
restrain  or  direct  its  operations.  From  this  spirit  it 
happens,  that  in  every  political  association  which  is 
formed  upon  the  principle  of  uniting  in  a  common 
interest  a  number  of  lesser  sovereignties,  there  will 
be  found  a  kind  of  eccentric  tendency  in  the  sub- 
ordinate or  inferior  orbs,  by  the  operation  of  which 
there  will  be  a  perpetual  effort  in  each  to  fly  off  from 
the  common  centre.  This  tendency  is  not  difficult 
to  be  accounted  for.  It  has  its  origin  in  the  love  of 
power.  Power  controlled  or  abridged  is  almost 
always  the  rival  and  enemy  of  that  power  by  which 
it  is  controlled  or  abridged.  This  simple  proposition 
will  teach  us,  how  little  reason  there  is  to  expect, 
that  the  persons  intrusted  with  the  administration 
of  the  affairs  of  the  particular  members  of  a  con- 
federacy will  at  all  times  be  ready,  with  perfect  good- 
humor,  and  an  unbiassed  regard  to  the  public  weal, 
to  execute  the  resolutions  or  decrees  of  the  general 
authority.  The  reverse  of  this  results  from  the  con- 
stitution of  human  nature. 

If,  therefore,  the  measures  of  the  Confederacy 
cannot  be  executed  without  the  intervention  of  the 
particular  administrations,  there  will  be  little  pro- 
spect of  their  being  executed  at  all.  The  rulers  of  the 
respective  members,  whether  they  have  a  constitu- 


The  Federalist  119 

tional  right  to  do  it  or  not,  will  undertake  to  judge 
of  the  propriety  of  the  measures  themselves.  They 
will  consider  the  conformity  of  the  thing  proposed 
or  required  to  their  immediate  interests  or  aims; 
the  momentary  conveniences  or  inconveniences  that 
would  attend  its  adoption.  All  this  will  be  done, 
and  in  a  spirit  of  interested  and  suspicious  scrutiny, 
without  that  knowledge  of  national  circumstances 
and  reasons  of  state,  which  is  essential  to  a  right 
judgment,  and  with  that  strong  predilection  in  favor 
of  local  objects,  which  can  hardly  fail  to  mislead  the 
decision.  The  same  process  must  be  repeated  in 
every  member  of  which  the  body  is  constituted ;  and 
the  execution  of  the  plans,  framed  by  the  councils  of 
the  whole,  will  always  fluctuate  on  the  discretion 
of  the  ill-informed  and  prejudiced  opinion  of  every 
part.  Those  who  have  been  conversant  in  the  pro- 
ceedings of  popular  assemblies;  who  have  seen  how 
difficult  it  often  is,  where  there  is  no  exterior  pres- 
sure of  circumstances,  to  bring  them  to  harmonious 
resolutions  on  important  points,  will  readily  con- 
ceive how  impossible  it  must  be  to  induce  a  number 
of  such  assemblies,  deliberating  at  a  distance  from 
each  other,  at  different  times,  and  under  different 
impressions,  long  to  cooperate  in  the  same  views  and 
pursuits. 

In  our  case,  the  concurrence  of  thirteen  distinct 
sovereign  wills  is  requisite,  under  the  Confederation, 
to  the  complete  execution  of  every  important  meas- 
ure that  proceeds  from  the  Union.  It  has  happened 
as  was  to  have  been  foreseen.  The  measures  of  the 
Union  have  not  been  executed ;  the  delinquencies  of 


i2o  Alexander  Hamilton 

the  States  have,  step  by  step,  matured  themselves 
to  an  extreme,  which  has,  at  length,  arrested  all  the 
wheels  of  the  national  government,  and  brought  them 
to  an  awful  stand.  Congress  at  this  time  scarcely 
possess  the  means  of  keeping  up  the  forms  of  ad- 
ministration, till  the  States  can  have  time  to  agree 
upon  a  more  substantial  substitute  for  the  present 
shadow  of  a  federal  government.  Things  did  not 
come  to  this  desperate  extremity  at  once.  The 
causes  which  have  been  specified  produced  at  first 
only  unequal  and  disproportionate  degrees  of  com- 
pliance with  the  requisitions  of  the  Union.  The 
greater  deficiencies  of  some  States  furnished  the 
pretext  of  example  and  the  temptation  of  interest 
to  the  complying,  or  to  the  least  delinquent  States. 
Why  should  we  do  more  in  proportion  than  those 
who  are  embarked  with  us  in  the  same  political  voy- 
age? Why  should  we  consent  to  bear  more  than 
our  proper  share  of  the  common  burden?  These 
were  suggestions  which  human  selfishness  could  not 
withstand,  and  which  even  speculative  men,  who 
looked  forward  to  remote  consequences,  could  not, 
without  hesitation,  combat.  Each  State,  yielding 
to  the  persuasive  voice  of  immediate  interest  or 
convenience,  has  successively  withdrawn  its  sup- 
port, till  the  frail  and  tottering  edifice  seems  ready 
to  fall  upon  our  heads,  and  to  crush  us  beneath  its 
ruins. 

PUBLIUS. 


The  Federalist  121 

From  the  New  York  Packet,  Tuesday,  December  4,  1787 
THE  FEDERALIST.     No.  XVI 

(HAMILTON) 

To  the  People  of  the  State  of  New  York: 

The  tendency  of  the  principle  of  legislation  for 
States,  or  communities,  in  their  political  capacities, 
as  it  has  been  exemplified  by  the  experiment  we 
have  made  of  it,  is  equally  attested  by  the  events 
which  have  befallen  all  other  governments  of  the 
confederate  kind,  of  which  we  have  any  account,  in 
exact  proportion  to  its  prevalence  in  those  systems. 
The  confirmations  of  this  fact  will  be  worthy  of  a  dis- 
tinct and  particular  examination.  I  shall  content 
myself  with  barely  observing  here,  that  of  all  the 
confederacies  of  antiquity,  which  history  has  handed 
down  to  us,  the  Lycian  and  Achaean  leagues,  as  far 
as  there  remain  vestiges  of  them,  appear  to  have 
been  most  free  from  the  fetters  of  that  mistaken 
principle,  and  were  accordingly  those  which  have 
best  deserved,  and  have  most  liberally  received,  the 
applauding  suffrages  of  political  writers. 

This  exceptionable  principle  may,  as  truly  as  em- 
phatically, be  styled  the  parent  of  anarchy:  It  has 
been  seen  that  delinquencies  in  the  members  of  the 
Union  are  its  natural  and  necessary  offspring;  and 
that  whenever  they  happen,  the  only  constitutional 
remedy  is  force,  and  the  immediate  effect  of  the  use 
of  it,  civil  war. 

It  remains  to  inquire  how  far  so  odious  an  engine 
of  government,  in  its  application  to  us,  would  even 
be  capable  of  answering  its  end.     If  there  should  not 


122  Alexander  Hamilton 

be  a  large  army  constantly  at  the  disposal  of  the 
national  government  it  would  either  not  be  able  to 
employ  force  at  all,  or,  when  this  could  be  done,  it 
would  amount  to  a  war  between  parts  of  the  Con- 
federacy concerning  the  infractions  of  a  league,  in 
which  the  strongest  combination  would  be  most 
likely  to  prevail,  whether  it  consisted  of  those  who 
supported  or  of  those  who  resisted  the  general  au- 
thority. It  would  rarely  happen  that  the  delin- 
quency to  be  redressed  would  be  confined  to  a  single 
member,  and  if  there  were  more  than  one  who  had 
neglected  their  duty,  similarity  of  situation  would 
induce  them  to  unite  for  common  defence.  Inde- 
pendent of  this  motive  of  sympathy,  if  a  large  and 
influential  State  should  happen  to  be  the  aggressing 
member,  it  would  commonly  have  weight  enough 
with  its  neighbors  to  win  over  some  of  them  as  asso- 
ciates to  its  cause.  Specious  arguments  of  danger 
to  the  common  liberty  could  easily  be  contrived; 
plausible  excuses  for  the  deficiencies  of  the  party 
could,  without  difficulty,  be  invented  to  alarm  the 
apprehensions,  inflame  the  passions,  and  conciliate 
the  good-will,  even  of  those  States  which  were  not 
chargeable  with  any  violation  or  omission  of  duty. 
This  would  be  the  more  likely  to  take  place,  as  the 
delinquencies  of  the  larger  members  might  be  ex- 
pected sometimes  to  proceed  from  an  ambitious  pre- 
meditation in  their  rulers,  with  a  view  to  getting  rid 
of  all  external  control  upon  their  designs  of  personal 
aggrandizement ,  the  better  to  effect  which  it  is  pre- 
sumable they  would  tamper  beforehand  with  lead- 
ing individuals  in  the  adjacent  States.     If  associates 


The  Federalist  123 

could  not  be  found  at  home,  recourse  would  be  had 
to  the  aid  of  foreign  powers,  who  would  seldom  be 
disinclined  to  encouraging  the  dissensions  of  a  Con- 
federacy, from  the  firm  union  of  which  they  had  so 
much  to  fear.  When  the  sword  is  once  drawn,  the 
passions  of  men  observe  no  bounds  of  moderation. 
The  suggestions  of  wounded  pride,  the  instigations 
of  irritated  resentment,  would  be  apt  to  carry  the 
States  against  which  the  arms  of  the  Union  were 
exerted,  to  any  extremes  necessary  to  avenge  the 
affront  or  to  avoid  the  disgrace  of  submission.  The 
first  war  of  this  kind  would  probably  terminate  in  a 
dissolution  of  the  Union. 

This  may  be  considered  as  the  violent  death  of  the 
Confederacy.  Its  more  natural  death  is  what  we 
now  seem  to  be  on  the  point  of  experiencing,  if  the 
federal  system  be  not  speedily  renovated  in  a  more 
substantial  form.  It  is  not  probable,  considering 
the  genius  of  this  country,  that  the  complying  States 
would  often  be  inclined  to  support  the  authority  of 
the  Union  by  engaging  in  a  war  against  the  non- 
complying  States.  They  would  always  be  more 
ready  to  pursue  the  milder  course  of  putting  them- 
selves upon  an  equal  footing  with  the  delinquent 
members  by  an  imitation  of  their  example.  And 
the  guilt  of  all  would  thus  become  the  security  of 
all.  Our  past  experience  has  exhibited  the  opera- 
tion of  this  spirit  in  its  full  light.  There  would,  in 
fact,  be  an  insuperable  difficulty  in  ascertaining 
when  force  could  with  propriety  be  employed.  In 
the  article  of  pecuniary  contribution,  which  would 
be  the  most  usual  source  of  delinquency,  it  would 


124  Alexander  Hamilton 

often  be  impossible  to  decide  whether  it  had  pro- 
ceeded from  disinclination  or  inability.  The  pre- 
tence of  the  latter  would  always  be  at  hand.  And 
the  case  must  be  very  flagrant  in  which  its  fallacy 
could  be  detected  with  sufficient  certainty  to  justify 
the  harsh  expedient  of  compulsion.  It  is  easy  to 
see  that  this  problem  alone,  as  often  as  it  should 
occur,  would  open  a  wide  field  for  the  exercise  of 
factious  views,  of  partiality,  and  of  oppression,  in 
the  majority  that  happened  to  prevail  in  the  na- 
tional council. 

It  seems  to  require  no  pains  to  prove  that  the 
States  ought  not  to  prefer  a  national  Constitution 
which  could  only  be  kept  in  motion  by  the  instru- 
mentality of  a  large  army  continually  on  foot  to 
execute  the  ordinary  requisitions  or  decrees  of  the 
government.  And  yet  this  is  the  plain  alternative 
involved  by  those  who  wish  to  deny  it  the  power 
of  extending  its  operations  to  individuals.  Such  a 
scheme,  if  practicable  at  all,  would  instantly  degen- 
erate into  a  military  despotism ;  but  it  will  be  found 
in  every  light  impracticable.  The  resources  of  the 
Union  would  not  be  equal  to  the  maintenance  of  an 
army  considerable  enough  to  confine  the  larger 
States  within  the  limits  of  their  duty;  nor  would 
-  the  means  ever  be  furnished  of  forming  such  an 
army  in  the  first  instance.  Whoever  considers  the 
populousness  and  strength  of  several  of  these  States 
singly  at  the  present  juncture,  and  looks  forward  to 
what  they  will  become,  even  at  the  distance  of  half 
a  century,  will  at  once  dismiss  as  idle  and  visionary 
any  scheme  which  aims  at  regulating   their  move- 


The  Federalist  125 

ments  by  laws  to  operate  upon  them  in  their  collect- 
ive capacities,  and  to  be  executed  by  a  coercion 
applicable  to  them  in  the  same  capacities.  A  pro- 
ject of  this  kind  is  little  less  romantic  than  the 
monster-taming  spirit  which  is  attributed  to  the 
fabulous  heroes  and  demi-gods  of  antiquity. 

Even  in  those  confederacies  which  have  been  com- 
posed of  members  smaller  than  many  of  our  counties, 
the  principle  of  legislation  for  sovereign  States,  sup- 
ported by  military  coercion,  has  never  been  found 
effectual.  It  has  rarely  been  attempted  to  be  em- 
ployed, but  against  the  weaker  members;  and  in 
most  instances  attempts  to  coerce  the  refractory  and 
disobedient  have  been  the  signals  of  bloody  wars, 
in  which  one  half  of  the  confederacy  has  displayed 
its  banners  against  the  other  half. 

The  result  of  these  observations  to  an  intelligent 
mind  must  be  clearly  this,  that  if  it  be  possible  at 
any  rate  to  construct  a  federal  government  capable 
of  regulating  the  common  concerns  and  preserving 
the  general  tranquillity,  it  must  be  founded,  as  to 
the  objects  committed  to  its  care,  upon  the  reverse 
of  the  principle  contended  for  by  the  opponents  of 
the  proposed  Constitution.  It  must  carry  its  agency 
to  the  persons  of  the  citizens.  It  must  stand  in 
need  of  no  intermediate  legislations ;  but  must  itself 
be  empowered  to  employ  the  arm  of  the  ordinary 
magistrate  to  execute  its  own  resolutions.  The 
majesty  of  the  national  authority  must  be  mani- 
fested through  the  medium  of  the  courts  of  justice. 
The  government  of  the  Union,  like  that  of  each 
State,  must  be  able  to  address  itself  immediately  to 


126  Alexander  Hamilton 

the  hopes  and  fears  of  individuals;  and  to  attract 
to  its  support  those  passions  which  have  the  strong- 
est influence  upon  the  human  heart.  It  must,  in 
short,  possess  all  the  means,  and  have  a  right  to 
resort  to  all  the  methods,  of  executing  the  powers 
with  which  it  is  intrusted,  that  are  possessed  and 
exercised  by  the  governments  of  the  particular 
States. 

To  this  reasoning  it  may  perhaps  be  objected,  that 
if  any  State  should  be  disaffected  to  the  authority 
of  the  Union,  it  could  at  any  time  obstruct  the  exe- 
cution of  its  laws,  and  bring  the  matter  to  the  same 
issue  of  force,  with  the  necessity  of  which  the  oppo- 
site scheme  is  reproached. 

The  plausibility  of  this  objection  will  vanish  the 
moment  we  advert  to  the  essential  difference  be- 
tween a  mere  non-compliance  and  a  direct  and 
active  resistance.  If  the  interposition  of  the 
State  legislatures  be  necessary  to  give  effect  to  a 
measure  of  the  Union,  they  have  only  not  to  act, 
or  to  act  evasively,  and  the  measure  is  defeated. 
This  neglect  of  duty  may  be  disguised  under  affected 
but  unsubstantial  provisions,  so  as  not  to  appear, 
and  of  course  not  to  excite  any  alarm  in  the  people 
for  the  safety  of  the  Constitution.  The  State  lead- 
ers may  even  make  a  merit  of  their  surreptitious 
invasions  of  it  on  the  ground  of  some  temporary 
convenience,  exemption,  or  advantage. 

But  if  the  execution  of  the  laws  of  the  national 
government  should  not  require  the  intervention  of 
the  State  legislatures,  if  they  were  to  pass  into 
immediate  operation  upon  the  citizens  themselves, 


The  Federalist  127 

the  particular  governments  could  not  interrupt 
their  progress  without  an  open  and  violent  exertion 
of  an  unconstitutional  power.  No  omissions  nor 
evasions  would  answer  the  end.  They  would  be 
obliged  to  act,  and  in  such  a  manner  as  would  leave 
no  doubt  that  they  had  encroached  on  the  national 
rights.  An  experiment  of  this  nature  would  always 
be  hazardous  in  the  face  of  a  constitution  in  any 
degree  competent  to  its  own  defence,  and  of  a  people 
enlightened  enough  to  distinguish  between  a  legal 
exercise  and  an  illegal  usurpation  of  authority.  The 
success  of  it  would  require  not  merely  a  factious 
majority  in  the  legislature,  but  the  concurrence  of 
the  courts  of  justice  and  of  the  body  of  the  people. 
If  the  judges  were  not  embarked  in  a  conspiracy 
with  the  legislature,  they  would  pronounce  the 
resolutions  of  such  a  majority  to  be  contrary  to  the 
supreme  law  of  the  land,  unconstitutional,  and  void. 
If  the  people  were  not  tainted  with  the  spirit  of  their 
State  representatives,  they,  as  the  natural  guardians 
of  the  Constitution,  would  throw  their  weight  into 
the  national  scale  and  give  it  a  decided  preponder- 
ancy  in  the  contest.  Attempts  of  this  kind  would 
not  often  be  made  with  levity  or  rashness,  because 
they  could  seldom  be  made  without  danger  to  the 
authors,  unless  in  cases  of  a  tyrannical  exercise  of 
the  federal  authority. 

If  opposition  to  the  national  government  should 
arise  from  the  disorderly  conduct  of  refractory  or 
seditious  individuals,  it  could  be  overcome  by  the 
same  means  which  are  daily  employed  against  the 
same  evil  under  the  State  governments.     The  magis- 


128  Alexander  Hamilton 

tracy,  being  equally  the  ministers  of  the  law  of  the 
land,  from  whatever  source  it  might  emanate,  would 
doubtless  be  as  ready  to  guard  the  national  as  the 
local  regulations  from  the  inroads  of  private  licen- 
tiousness. As  to  those  partial  commotions  and  in- 
surrections, which  sometimes  disquiet  society,  from 
the  intrigues  of  an  inconsiderable  faction,  or  from 
sudden  or  occasional  ill-humors  that  do  not  infect 
the  great  body  of  the  community,  the  general  gov- 
ernment could  command  more  extensive  resources 
for  the  suppression  of  disturbances  of  that  kind 
than  would  be  in  the  power  of  any  single  member. 
And  as  to  those  mortal  feuds  which,  in  certain  con- 
junctures, spread  a  conflagration  through  a  whole 
nation,  or  through  a  very  large  proportion  of  it, 
proceeding  either  from  weighty  causes  of  discontent 
given  by  the  government  or  from  the  contagion  of 
some  violent  popular  paroxysm,  they  do  not  fall 
within  any  ordinary  rules  of  calculation.  When 
they  happen,  they  commonly  amount  to  revolutions 
and  dismemberments  of  empire.  No  form  of  govern- 
ment can  always  either  avoid  or  control  them.  It 
is  in  vain  to  hope  to  guard  against  events  too  mighty 
for  human  foresight  or  precaution,  and  it  would  be 
idle  to  object  to  a  government  because  it  could  not 
perform  impossibilities. 

Publius. 


The  Federalist  129 

For  the  Independent  Journal 
THE  FEDERALIST.     No.  XVII 

(HAMILTON) 

To  the  People  of  the  State  of  New  York: 

An  objection,  of  a  nature  different  from  that 
which  has  been  stated  and  answered,  in  my  last 
address,  may  perhaps  be  likewise  urged  against  the 
principle  of  legislation  for  the  individual  citizens  of 
America.  It  may  be  said  that  it  would  tend  to 
render  the  government  of  the  Union  too  powerful, 
and  to  enable  it  to  absorb  those  residuary  authori- 
ties, which  it  might  be  judged  proper  to  leave  with 
the  States  for  local  purposes.  Allowing  the  utmost 
latitude  to  the  love  of  power  which  any  reasonable 
man  can  require,  I  confess  I  am  at  a  loss  to  discover 
what  temptation  the  persons  intrusted  with  the  ad- 
ministration of  the  general  government  could  ever 
feel  to  divest  the  States  of  the  authorities  of  that 
description.  The  regulation  of  the  mere  domestic 
police  of  a  State  appears  to  me  to  hold  out  slender 
allurements  to  ambition.  Commerce,  finance,  ne- 
gotiation, and  war  seem  to  comprehend  all  the 
objects  which  have  charms  for  minds  governed  by 
that  passion;  and  all  the  powers  necessary  to  those 
objects  ought,  in  the  first  instance,  to  be  lodged 
in  the  national  depository.  The  administration  of 
private  justice  between  the  citizens  of  the  same 
State,  the  supervision  of  agriculture  and  of  other 
concerns  of  a  similar  nature,  all  those  things,  in 
short,  which  are  proper  to  be  provided  for  by  local 
legislation,  can  never  be  desirable  cares  of  a  general 

VOL.  XI. — 9. 


130  Alexander  Hamilton 

jurisdiction.  It  is  therefore  improbable  that  there 
should  exist  a  disposition  in  the  federal  councils  to 
usurp  the  powers  with  which  they  are  connected; 
because  the  attempt  to  exercise  those  powers  would 
be  as  troublesome  as  it  would  be  nugatory ;  and  the 
possession  of  them,  for  that  reason,  would  contribute 
nothing  to  the  dignity,  to  the  importance,  or  to  the 
splendor  of  the  national  government. 

But  let  it  be  admitted,  for  argument's  sake,  that 
mere  wantonness  and  lust  of  domination  would  be 
sufficient  to  beget  that  disposition;  still  it  may  be 
safely  affirmed,  that  the  sense  of  the  constituent  body 
of  the  national  representatives,  or,  in  other  words, 
the  people  of  the  several  States,  would  control  the 
indulgence  of  so  extravagant  an  appetite.  It  will 
always  be  far  more  easy  for  the  State  governments 
to  encroach  upon  the  national  authorities,  than  for 
the  national  government  to  encroach  upon  the  State 
authorities.  The  proof  of  this  proposition  turns 
upon  the  greater  degree  of  influence  which  the  State 
governments,  if  they  administer  their  affairs  with 
uprightness  and  prudence,  will  generally  possess 
over  the  people;  a  circumstance  which  at  the  same 
time  teaches  us  that  there  is  an  inherent  and  in- 
trinsic weakness  in  all  federal  constitutions;  and 
that  too  much  pains  cannot  be  taken  in  their  or- 
ganization, to  give  them  all  the  force  which  is  com- 
patible with  the  principles  of  liberty. 

The  superiority  of  influence  in  favor  of  the  par- 
ticular governments  would  result  partly  from  the 
diffusive  construction  of  the  national  government, 
but  chiefly  from  the  nature  of  the  objects  to  which 


The  Federalist  131 

the  attention  of  the  State  administrations  would  be 
directed. 

It  is  a  known  fact  in  human  nature,  that  its  affec- 
tions are  commonly  weak  in  proportion  to  the  dis- 
tance or  diffusiveness  of  the  object.  Upon  the 
same  principle  that  a  man  is  more  attached  to  his 
family  than  to  his  neighborhood,  to  his  neighbor- 
hood than  to  the  community  at  large,  the  people  of 
each  State  would  be  apt  to  feel  a  stronger  bias 
towards  their  local  governments  than  towards  the 
government  of  the  Union;  unless  the  force  of  that 
principle  should  be  destroyed  by  a  much  better  ad- 
ministration of  the  latter. 

This  strong  propensity  of  the  human  heart  would 
find  powerful  auxiliaries  in  the  objects  of  State 
regulation. 

The  variety  of  more  minute  interests,  which  will 
necessarily  fall  under  the  superintendence  of  the 
local  administrations,  and  which  will  form  so  many 
rivulets  of  influence,  running  through  every  part  of 
the  society,  cannot  be  particularized,  without  in- 
volving a  detail  too  tedious  and  uninteresting  to 
compensate  for  the  instruction  it  might  afford. 

There  is  one  transcendent  advantage  belonging 
to  the  province  of  the  State  governments,  which 
alone  suffices  to  place  the  matter  in  a  clear  and 
satisfactory  light, — I  mean  the  ordinary  adminis- 
tration of  criminal  and  civil  justice.  This,  of  all 
others,  is  the  most  powerful,  most  universal,  and 
most  attractive  source  of  popular  obedience  and 
attachment.  It  is  that  which,  being  the  immediate 
and  visible  guardian  of  life  and  property,  having  its 


132  Alexander  Hamilton 

benefits  and  its  terrors  in  constant  activity  before 
the  public  eye,  regulating  all  those  personal  interests 
and  familiar  concerns  to  which  the  sensibility  of  in- 
dividuals is  more  immediately  awake,  contributes, 
more  than  any  other  circumstance,  to  impressing 
upon  the  minds  of  the  people,  affection,  esteem,  and 
reverence  towards  the  government.  This  great 
cement  of  society,  which  will  diffuse  itself  almost 
wholly  through  the  channels  of  the  particular  gov- 
ernments, independent  of  all  other  causes  of  influ- 
ence, would  insure  them  so  decided  an  empire  over 
their  respective  citizens  as  to  render  them  at  all 
times  a  complete  counterpoise,  and,  not  unfre- 
quently,  dangerous  rivals  to  the  power  of  the  Union. 

The  operations  of  the  national  government,  on  the 
other  hand,  falling  less  immediately  under  the  ob- 
servation of  the  mass  of  the  citizens,  the  benefits 
derived  from  it  will  chiefly  be  perceived  and  at- 
tended to  by  speculative  men.  Relating  to  more 
general  interests,  they  will  be  less  apt  to  come  home 
to  the  feelings  of  the  people;  and,  in  proportion, 
less  likely  to  inspire  an  habitual  sense  of  obligation, 
and  an  active  sentiment  of  attachment. 

The  reasoning  on  this  head  has  been  abundantly 
exemplified  by  the  experience  of  all  federal  constitu- 
tions with  which  we  are  acquainted,  and  of  all  others 
which  have  borne  the  least  analogy  to  them. 

Though  the  ancient  feudal  systems  were  not, 
strictly  speaking,  confederacies,  yet  they  partook  of 
the  nature  of  that  species  of  association.  There  was 
a  common  head,  chieftain,  or  sovereign,  whose  au- 
thority extended  over  the  whole  nation ;  and  a  num- 


The  Federalist  133 

ber  of  subordinate  vassals,  or  feudatories,  who  had 
large  portions  of  land  allotted  to  them,  and  numer- 
ous trains  of  inferior  vassals  or  retainers,  who  occu- 
pied and  cultivated  that  land  upon  the  tenure  of 
fealty  or  obedience  to  the  persons  of  whom  they 
held  it.  Each  principal  vassal  was  a  kind  of  sover- 
eign within  his  particular  demesnes.  The  conse- 
quences of  this  situation  were  a  continual  opposition 
to  the  authority  of  the  sovereign,  and  frequent  wars 
between  the  great  barons  or  chief  feudatories  them- 
selves. The  power  of  the  head  of  the  nation  was 
commonly  too  weak,  either  to  preserve  the  public 
peace,  or  to  protect  the  people  against  the  oppres- 
sions of  their  immediate  lords.  This  period  of  Euro- 
pean affairs  is  emphatically  styled  by  historians,  the 
times  of  feudal  anarchy. 

When  the  sovereign  happened  to  be  a  man  of 
vigorous  and  warlike  temper  and  of  superior  abilities, 
he  would  acquire  a  personal  weight  and  influence, 
which  answered,  for  the  time,  the  purposes  of  a  more 
regular  authority.  But  in  general,  the  power  of  the 
barons  triumphed  over  that  of  the  prince;  and  in 
many  instances  his  dominion  was  entirely  thrown 
off,  and  the  great  fiefs  were  erected  into  independent 
principalities  or  States.  In  those  instances  in  which 
the  monarch  finally  prevailed  over  his  vassals,  his 
success  was  chiefly  owing  to  the  tyranny  of  those 
vassals  over  their  dependents.  The  barons,  or 
nobles,  equally  the  enemies  of  the  sovereign  and  the 
oppressors  of  the  common  people,  were  dreaded  and 
detested  by  both;  till  mutual  danger  and  mutual 
interest  effected  a  union  between  them  fatal  to  the 


134  Alexander  Hamilton 

power  of  the  aristocracy.  Had  the  nobles,  by  a 
conduct  of  clemency  and  justice,  preserved  the 
fidelity  and  devotion  of  their  retainers  and  followers, 
the  contests  between  them  and  the  prince  must 
almost  always  have  ended  in  their  favor,  and  in  the 
abridgment  or  subversion  of  the  royal  authority. 

This  is  not  an  assertion  founded  merely  in  specu- 
lation or  conjecture.  Among  other  illustrations  of 
its  truth  which  might  be  cited,  Scotland  will  furnish 
a  cogent  example.  The  spirit  of  clanship  which 
was,  at  an  early  day,  introduced  into  that  kingdom, 
uniting  the  nobles  and  their  dependents  by  ties 
equivalent  to  those  of  kindred,  rendered  the  aris- 
tocracy a  constant  overmatch  for  the  power  of  the 
monarch,  till  the  incorporation  with  England  sub- 
dued its  fierce  and  ungovernable  spirit,  and  reduced 
it  within  those  rules  of  subordination  which  a  more 
rational  and  more  energetic  system  of  civil  polity 
had  previously  established  in  the  latter  kingdom. 

The  separate  governments  in  a  confederacy  may 
aptly  be  compared  with  the  feudal  baronies;  with 
this  advantage  in  their  favor,  that  from  the  reasons 
already  explained,  they  will  generally  possess  the 
confidence  and  good- will  of  the  people,  and  with  so 
important  a  support,  will  be  able  effectually  to  op- 
pose all  encroachments  of  the  national  government. 
It  will  be  well  if  they  are  not  able  to  counteract  its 
legitimate  and  necessary  authority.  The  points  of 
similitude  consist  in  the  rivalship  of  power,  applic- 
able to  both,  and  in  the  concentration  of  large 
portions  of  the  strength  of  the  community  into  par- 
ticular deposits,  in  one  case  at  the  disposal  of  indi- 


The  Federalist  135 

viduals,  in  the  other  case  at  the  disposal  of  political 
bodies. 

A  concise  review  of  the  events  that  have  attended 
confederate  governments  will  further  illustrate  this 
important  doctrine;  an  inattention  to  which  has 
been  the  great  source  of  our  political  mistakes,  and 
has  given  our  jealousy  a  direction  to  the  wrong  side. 
This  review  shall  form  the  subject  of  some  ensuing 
papers. 

Publius. 


For  the  Independent  Journal 
THE  FEDERALIST.     No.  XVIII 

(HAMILTON    AND    MADISON) 

To  the  People  of  the  State  of  New  York: 

Among  the  confederacies  of  antiquity,  the  most 
considerable  was  that  of  the  Grecian  republics,  asso- 
ciated under  the  Amphictyonic  council.  From  the 
best  accounts  transmitted  of  this  celebrated  institu- 
tion, it  bore  a  very  instructive  analogy  to  the  present 
Confederation  of  the  American  States. 

The  members  retained  the  character  of  inde- 
pendent and  sovereign  states,  and  had  equal  votes  in 
the  federal  council.  This  council  had  a  general  au- 
thority to  propose  and  resolve  whatever  it  judged 
necessary  for  the  common  welfare  of  Greece;  to  de- 
clare and  carry  on  war ;  to  decide,  in  the  last  resort, 
all  controversies  between  the  members;  to  fine  the 
aggressing  party;  to  employ  the  whole  force  of  the 
confederacy  against  the  disobedient;    to  admit  new 


136  Alexander  Hamilton 

members.  The  Amphictyons  were  the  guardians  of 
religion,  and  of  the  immense  riches  belonging  to  the 
temple  of  Delphos,  where  they  had  the  right  of  juris- 
diction in  controversies  between  the  inhabitants  and 
those  who  came  to  consult  the  oracle.  As  a  further 
provision  for  the  efficacy  of  the  federal  powers,  they 
took  an  oath  mutually  to  defend  and  protect  the 
united  cities,  to  punish  the  violators  of  this  oath,  and 
to  inflict  vengeance  on  sacrilegious  despoilers  of  the 
temple. 

In  theory,  and  upon  paper,  this  apparatus  of 
powers  seems  amply  sufficient  for  all  general  pur- 
poses. In  several  material  instances,  they  exceed 
the  powers  enumerated  in  the  articles  of  confedera- 
tion. The  Amphictyons  had  in  their  hands  the 
superstition  of  the  times,  one  of  the  principal  en- 
gines by  which  government  was  then  maintained; 
they  had  a  declared  authority  to  use  coercion  against 
refractory  cities,  and  were  bound  by  oath  to  exert 
this  authority  on  the  necessary  occasions. 

Very  different,  nevertheless,  was  the  experiment 
from  the  theory.  The  powers,  like  those  of  the 
present  Congress,  were  administered  by  deputies 
appointed  wholly  by  the  cities  in  their  political 
capacities;  and  exercised  over  them  in  the  same 
capacities.  Hence  the  weakness,  the  disorders,  and 
finally  the  destruction  of  the  confederacy.  The 
more  powerful  members,  instead  of  being  kept  in  awe 
and  subordination,  tyrannized  successively  over  all 
the  rest.  Athens,  as  we  learn  from  Demosthenes, 
was  the  arbiter  of  Greece  seventy-three  years.  The 
Lacedaemonians  next  governed  it  twenty-nine  years ; 


The  Federalist  137 

at  a  subsequent  period,  after  the  battle  of  Leuctra, 
the  Thebans  had  their  turn  of  domination. 

It  happened  but  too  often,  according  to  Plutarch, 
that  the  deputies  of  the  strongest  cities  awed  and 
corrupted  those  of  the  weaker;  and  that  judgment 
went  in  favor  of  the  most  powerful  party. 

Even  in  the  midst  of  defensive  and  dangerous 
wars  with  Persia  and  Macedon,  the  members  never 
acted  in  concert,  and  were,  more  or  fewer  of  them, 
eternally  the  dupes  or  the  hirelings  of  the  common 
enemy.  The  intervals  of  foreign  war  were  filled  up 
by  domestic  vicissitudes,  convulsions,  and  carnage. 

After  the  conclusion  of  the  war  with  Xerxes,  it 
appears  that  the  Lacedaemonians  required  that  a 
number  of  the  cities  should  be  turned  out  of  the 
confederacy  for  the  unfaithful  part  they  had  acted. 
The  Athenians,  finding  that  the  Lacedaemonians 
would  lose  fewer  partisans  by  such  a  measure  than 
themselves,  and  would  become  masters  of  the  public 
deliberations,  vigorously  opposed  and  defeated  the 
attempt.  This  piece  of  history  proves  at  once  the 
inefficiency  of  the  union,  the  ambition  and  jealousy 
of  its  most  powerful  members,  and  the  dependent 
and  degraded  condition  of  the  rest.  The  smaller 
members,  though  entitled  by  the  theory  of  their 
system  to  revolve  in  equal  pride  and  majesty  around 
the  common  centre,  had  become,  in  fact,  satellites 
of  the  orbs  of  primary  magnitude. 

Had  the  Greeks,  says  the  Abbe  Milot,  been  as 
wise  as  they  were  courageous,  they  would  have  been 
admonished  by  experience  of  the  necessity  of  a 
closer  union,  and  would  have  availed  themselves  of 


138  Alexander  Hamilton 

the  peace  which  followed  their  success  against  the 
Persian  arms,  to  establish  such  a  reformation.  In- 
stead of  this  obvious  policy,  Athens  and  Sparta,  in- 
flated with  the  victories  and  the  glory  they  had 
acquired,  became  first  rivals  and  then  enemies;  and 
did  each  other  infinitely  more  mischief  than  they 
had  suffered  from  Xerxes.  Their  mutual  jealousies, 
fears,  hatreds,  and  injuries  ended  in  the  celebrated 
Peloponnesian  war;  which  itself  ended  in  the  ruin 
and  slavery  of  the  Athenians  who  had  begun  it. 

As  a  weak  government,  when  not  at  war,  is  ever 
agitated  by  internal  dissensions,  so  these  never  fail 
to  bring  on  fresh  calamities  from  abroad.  The 
Phocians  having  ploughed  up  some  consecrated 
ground  belonging  to  the  temple  of  Apollo,  the 
Amphictyonic  council,  according  to  the  supersti- 
tion of  the  age,  imposed  a  fine  on  the  sacrilegious 
offenders.  The  Phocians,  being  abetted  by  Athens 
and  Sparta,  refused  to  submit  to  the  decree.  The 
Thebans,  with  others  of  the  cities,  undertook  to 
maintain  the  authority  of  the  Amphictyons,  and  to 
avenge  the  violated  god.  The  latter,  being  the 
weaker  party,  invited  the  assistance  of  Philip  of 
Macedon,  who  had  secretly  fostered  the  contest. 
Philip  gladly  seized  the  opportunity  of  executing  the 
designs  he  had  long  planned  against  the  liberties 
of  Greece.  By  his  intrigues  and  bribes  he  won 
over  to  his  interests  the  popular  leaders  of  several 
cities;  by  their  influence  and  votes,  gained  ad- 
mission into  the  Amphictyonic  council;  and  by  his 
arts  and  his  arms,  made  himself  master  of  the  con- 
federacy. 


The  Federalist  139 

Such  were  the  consequences  of  the  fallacious  prin- 
ciple on  which  this  interesting  establishment  was 
founded.  Had  Greece,  says  a  judicious  observer  on 
her  fate,  been  united  by  a  stricter  confederation, 
and  persevered  in  her  union,  she  would  never  have 
worn  the  chains  of  Macedon ;  and  might  have  proved 
a  barrier  to  the  vast  projects  of  Rome. 

The  Achaean  league,  as  it  is  called,  was  another 
society  of  Grecian  republics,  which  supplies  us  with 
valuable  instruction. 

The  Union  here  was  far  more  intimate,  and  its 
organization  much  wiser,  than  in  the  preceding  in- 
stance. It  will  accordingly  appear,  that  though  not 
exempt  from  a  similar  catastrophe,  it  by  no  means 
equally  deserved  it. 

The  cities  composing  this  league  retained  their 
municipal  jurisdiction,  appointed  their  own  officers, 
and  enjoyed  a  perfect  equality.  The  senate,  in 
which  they  were  represented,  had  the  sole  and  ex- 
clusive right  of  peace  and  war;  of  sending  and 
receiving  ambassadors;  of  entering  into  treaties 
and  alliances;  of  appointing  a  chief  magistrate  or 
praetor,  as  he  was  called,  who  commanded  their 
armies,  and  who,  with  the  advice  and  consent  of  ten 
of  the  senators,  not  only  administered  the  govern- 
ment in  the  recess  of  the  senate,  but  had  a  great 
share  in  its  deliberations,  when  assembled.  Ac- 
cording to  the  primitive  constitution,  there  were  two 
praetors  associated  in  the  administration;  but  on 
trial  a  single  one  was  preferred. 

It  appears  that  the  cities  had  all  the  same  laws 
and  customs,  the  same  weights  and  measures,  and 


H°  Alexander  Hamilton 

the  same  money.  But  how  far  this  effect  proceeded 
from  the  authority  of  the  federal  council  is  left  in 
uncertainty.  It  is  said  only  that  the  cities  were  in 
a  manner  compelled  to  receive  the  same  laws  and 
usages.  When  Lacedaemon  was  brought  into  the 
league  by  Philopcemen,  it  was  attended  with  an 
abolition  of  the  institutions  and  laws  of  Lycurgus, 
and  an  adoption  of  those  of  the  Achasans.  The 
Amphictyonic  confederacy,  of  which  she  had  been 
a  member,  left  her  in  the  full  exercise  of  her  govern- 
ment and  her  legislation.  This  circumstance  alone 
proves  a  very  material  difference  in  the  genius  of  the 
two  systems. 

It  is  much  to  be  regretted  that  such  imperfect 
monuments  remain  of  this  curious  political  fabric. 
Could  its  interior  structure  and  regular  operation  be 
ascertained,  it  is  probable  that  more  light  would  be 
thrown  by  it  on  the  science  of  federal  government, 
than  by  any  of  the  like  experiments  with  which  we 
are  acquainted. 

One  important  fact  seems  to  be  witnessed  by  all 
the  historians  who  take  notice  of  Achaean  affairs. 
It  is,  that  as  well  after  the  renovation  of  the  league 
by  Aratus,  as  before  its  dissolution  by  the  arts  of 
Macedon,  there  was  infinitely  more  of  moderation 
and  justice  in  the  administration  of  its  government, 
and  less  of  violence  and  sedition  in  the  people,  than 
were  to  be  found  in  any  of  the  cities  exercising 
singly  all  the  prerogatives  of  sovereignty.  The  Abbe 
Mably,  in  his  observations  on  Greece,  says  that  the 
popular  government,  which  was  so  tempestuous  else- 
where, caused  no  disorders  in  the  members  of  the 


The  Federalist  141 

Achaean  republic,  because  it  was  there  tempered  by  the 
general  authority  and  laws  of  the  confederacy. 

We  are  not  to  conclude  too  hastily,  however,  that 
faction  did  not,  in  a  certain  degree,  agitate  the  par- 
ticular cities;  much  less  that  a  due  subordination 
and  harmony  reigned  in  the  general  system.  The 
contrary  is  sufficiently  displayed  in  the  vicissitudes 
and  fate  of  the  republic. 

Whilst  the  Amphictyonic  confederacy  remained, 
that  of  the  Achaeans,  which  comprehended  the  less 
important  cities  only,  made  little  figure  on  the 
theatre  of  Greece.  When  the  former  became  a 
victim  to  Macedon,  the  latter  was  spared  by  the 
policy  of  Philip  and  Alexander.  Under  the  succes- 
sors of  these  princes,  however,  a  different  policy 
prevailed.  The  arts  of  division  were  practised 
among  the  Achaeans.  Each  city  was  seduced  into  a 
separate  interest;  the  union  was  dissolved.  Some 
of  the  cities  fell  under  the  tyranny  of  Macedonian 
garrisons;  others  under  that  of  usurpers  springing 
out  of  their  own  confusions.  Shame  and  oppression 
erelong  awakened  their  love  of  liberty.  A  few  cities 
reunited.  Their  example  was  followed  by  others, 
as  opportunities  were  found  of  cutting  off  their 
tyrants.  The  league  soon  embraced  almost  the 
whole  Peloponnesus.  Macedon  saw  its  progress; 
but  was  hindered  by  internal  dissensions  from  stop- 
ping it.  All  Greece  caught  the  enthusiasm  and 
seemed  ready  to  unite  in  one  confederacy,  when  the 
jealousy  and  envy  in  Sparta  and  Athens,  of  the 
rising  glory  of  the  Achaeans,  threw  a  fatal  damp  on 
the  enterprise.     The  dread  of  the  Macedonian  power 


142  Alexander  Hamilton 

induced  the  league  to  court  the  alliance  of  the  kings 
of  Egypt  and  Syria,  who,  as  successors  of  Alexander, 
were  rivals  of  the  king  of  Macedon.  This  policy  was 
defeated  by  Cleomenes,  king  of  Sparta,  who  was  led 
by  his  ambition  to  make  an  unprovoked  attack  on 
his  neighbors,  the  Achaeans,  and  who,  as  an  enemy 
to  Macedon,  had  interest  enough  with  the  Egyptian 
and  Syrian  princes  to  effect  a  breach  of  their  en- 
gagements with  the  league.  The  Achaeans  were  now 
reduced  to  the  dilemma  of  submitting  to  Cleomenes, 
or  of  supplicating  the  aid  of  Macedon,  its  former  op- 
pressor. The  latter  expedient  was  adopted.  The 
contests  of  the  Greeks  always  afforded  a  pleasing 
opportunity  to  that  powerful  neighbor  of  inter- 
meddling in  their  affairs.  A  Macedonian  army 
quickly  appeared.  Cleomenes  was  vanquished.  The 
Achaeans  soon  experienced,  as  often  happens,  that 
a  victorious  and  powerful  ally  is  but  another  name 
for  a  master.  All  that  their  most  abject  compliances 
could  obtain  from  him  was  a  toleration  of  the  exer- 
cise of  their  laws.  Philip,  who  was  now  on  the 
throne  of  Macedon,  soon  provoked  by  his  tyrannies, 
fresh  combinations  among  the  Greeks.  The  Achaeans, 
though  weakened  by  internal  dissensions  and  by  the 
revolt  of  Messene,  one  of  its  members,  being  joined 
by  the  ^Etolians  and  Athenians,  erected  the  stand- 
ard of  opposition.  Finding  themselves,  though  thus 
supported,  unequal  to  the  undertaking,  they  once 
more  had  recourse  to  the  dangerous  expedient  of  in- 
troducing the  succor  of  foreign  arms.  The  Romans, 
to  whom  the  invitation  was  made,  eagerly  embraced 
it.     Philip  was  conquered;    Macedon  subdued.     A 


The  Federalist  143 

new  crisis  ensued  to  the  league.  Dissensions  broke 
out  among  its  members.  These  the  Romans  fos- 
tered. Callicrates  and  other  popular  leaders  became 
mercenary  instruments  for  inveigling  their  country- 
men. The  more  effectually  to  nourish  discord  and 
disorder  the  Romans  had,  to  the  astonishment  of 
those  who  confided  in  their  sincerity,  already  pro- 
claimed universal  liberty  l  throughout  Greece.  With 
the  same  insidious  views,  they  now  seduced  the 
members  from  the  league,  by  representing  to  their 
pride  the  violation  it  committed  on  their  sover- 
eignty. By  these  arts  this  union,  the  last  hope  of 
Greece,  the  last  hope  of  ancient  liberty,  was  torn 
into  pieces;  and  such  imbecility  and  distraction  in- 
troduced, that  the  arms  of  Rome  found  little  diffi- 
culty in  completing  the  ruin  which  their  arts  had 
commenced.  The  Achseans  were  cut  to  pieces,  and 
Achaia  loaded  with  chains,  under  which  it  is  groan- 
ing at  this  hour. 

I  have  thought  it  not  superfluous  to  give  the  out- 
lines of  this  important  portion  of  history ;  both  be- 
cause it  teaches  more  than  one  lesson,  and  because, 
as  a  supplement  to  the  outlines  of  the  Achaean  con- 
stitution, it  emphatically  illustrates  the  tendency  of 
federal  bodies  ra.ther  to  anarchy  among  the  members, 
than  to  tyranny  in  the  head. 

Publius. 

1  This  was  but  another  name  more  specious  for  the  independence 
of  the  members  on  the  federal  head. — Publius. 


144  Alexander  Hamilton 

For  the  Independent  Journal 
THE  FEDERALIST.     No.  XIX 

(HAMILTON    AND    MADISON) 

To  the  People  of  the  State  of  New  York: 

The  examples  of  ancient  confederacies,  cited  in  my 
last  paper,  have  not  exhausted  the  source  of  experi- 
mental instruction  on  this  subject.  There  are  exist- 
ing institutions,  founded  on  a  similar  principle,  which 
merit  particular  consideration.  The  first  which  pre- 
sents itself  is  the  Germanic  body. 

In  the  early  ages  of  Christianity,  Germany  was 
occupied  by  seven  distinct  nations,  who  had  no 
common  chief.  The  Franks,  one  of  the  number, 
having  conquered  the  Gauls,  established  the  king- 
dom which  has  taken  its  name  from  them.  In  the 
ninth  century  Charlemagne,  its  warlike  monarch, 
carried  his  victorious  arms  in  every  direction;  and 
Germany  became  a  part  of  his  vast  dominions.  On 
the  dismemberment,  which  took  place  under  his 
sons,  this  part  was  erected  into  a  separate  and  inde- 
pendent empire.  Charlemagne  and  his  immediate 
descendants  possessed  the  reality,  as  well  as  the  en- 
signs and  dignity  of  imperial  power.  But  the  prin- 
cipal vassals,  whose  fiefs  had  become  hereditary,  and 
who  composed  the  national  diets  which  Charle- 
magne had  not  abolished,  gradually  threw  off  the 
yoke  and  advanced  to  sovereign  jurisdiction  and  in- 
dependence. The  force  of  imperial  sovereignty  was 
insufficient  to  restrain  such  powerful  dependants; 
or  to  preserve  the  unity  and  tranquillity  of  the  em- 
pire.    The  most  furious  private  wars,  accompanied 


The  Federalist  145 

with  every  species  of  calamity,  were  carried  on  be- 
tween the  different  princes  and  states.  The  im- 
perial authority,  unable  to  maintain  the  public 
order,  declined  by  degrees  till  it  was  almost  extinct 
in  the  anarchy,  which  agitated  the  long  interval  be- 
tween the  death  of  the  last  emperor  of  the  Suabian, 
and  the  accession  of  the  first  emperor  of  the  Aus- 
trian lines.  In  the  eleventh  century  the  emperors  ' 
enjoyed  full  sovereignty:  In  the  fifteenth  they  had 
little  more  than  the  symbols  and  decorations  of 
power. 

Out  of  this  feudal  system,  which  has  itself  many 
of  the  important  features  of  a  confederacy,  has  grown 
the  federal  system  which  constitutes  the  Germanic 
empire.  Its  powers  are  vested  in  a  diet  representing 
the  component  members  of  the  confederacy;  in  the 
emperor,  who  is  the  executive  magistrate,  with  a 
negative  on  the  decrees  of  the  diet;  and  in  the  im- 
perial chamber  and  the  aulic  council,  two  judiciary 
tribunals  having  supreme  jurisdiction  in  controver- 
sies which  concern  the  empire,  or  which  happen 
among  its  members. 

The  diet  possesses  the  general  power  of  legislating 
for  the  empire ;  of  making  war  and  peace ;  contract- 
ing alliances ;  assessing  quotas  of  troops  and  money ; 
constructing  f ortressess ;  regulating  coin ;  admitting  . 
new  members;  and  subjecting  disobedient  members 
to  the  ban  of  the  empire,  by  which  the  party  is  de- 
graded from  his  sovereign  rights  and  his  possessions 
forfeited.  The  members  of  the  confederacy  are  ex- 
pressly restricted  from  entering  into  compacts  preju- 
dicial to  the  empire ;  from  imposing  tolls  and  duties 

VOL.    XI.— IO. 


146  Alexander  Hamilton 

on  their  mutual  intercourse,  without  the  consent  of 
the  emperor  and  diet;  from  altering  the  value  of 
money;  from  doing  injustice  to  one  another;  or 
from  affording  assistance  or  retreat  to  disturbers  of 
the  public  peace.  And  the  ban  is  denounced  against 
such  as  shall  violate  any  of  these  restrictions.  The 
members  of  the  diet,  as  such,  are  subject  in  all  cases 
to  be  judged  by  the  emperor  and  diet,  and  in  their 
private  capacities  by  the  aulic  council  and  imperial 
chamber. 

The  prerogatives  of  the  emperor  are  numerous. 
The  most  important  of  them  are :  his  exclusive  right 
to  make  propositions  to  the  diet;  to  negative  its 
resolutions;  to  name  ambassadors;  to  confer  dig- 
nities and  titles ;  to  fill  vacant  electorates ;  to  found 
universities ;  to  grant  privileges  not  injurious  to  the 
states  of  the  empire;  to  receive  and  apply  the  pub- 
lic revenues ;  and  generally  to  watch  over  the  public 
safety.  In  certain  cases,  the  electors  form  a  council 
to  him.  In  quality  of  emperor,  he  possesses  no 
territory  within  the  empire,  nor  receives  any  revenue 
for  his  support.  But  his  revenue  and  dominions, 
in  other  qualities,  constitute  him  one  of  the  most 
powerful  princes  in  Europe. 

From  such  a  parade  of  constitutional  powers,  in 
the  representatives  and  head  of  this  confederacy,  the 
natural  supposition  would  be,  that  it  must  form  an 
exception  to  the  general  character  which  belongs 
to  its  kindred  systems.  Nothing  would  be  further 
from  the  reality.  The  fundamental  principle  on 
which  it  rests,  that  the  empire  is  a  community  of 
sovereigns,  that  the  diet  is  a  representation  of  sov- 


The  Federalist  147 

ereigns,  and  that  the  laws  are  addressed  to  sover- 
eigns, renders  the  empire  a  nerveless  body,  incapable 
of  regulating  its  own  members,  insecure  against  ex- 
ternal dangers,  and  agitated  with  unceasing  fer- 
mentations in  its  own  bowels. 

The  history  of  Germany  is  a  history  of  wars  be- 
tween the  emperor  and  the  princes  and  states;  of 
wars  among  the  princes  and  states  themselves;  of 
the  licentiousness  of  the  strong,  and  the  oppression 
of  the  weak;  of  foreign  intrusions,  and  foreign  in- 
trigues; of  requisitions  of  men  and  money  disre- 
garded, or  partially  complied  with;  of  attempts  to 
enforce  them,  altogether  abortive,  or  attended  with 
slaughter  and  desolation,  involving  the  innocent 
with  the  guilty;  of  general  imbecility,  confusion, 
and  misery. 

In  the  sixteenth  century,  the  emperor,  with  one 
part  of  the  empire  on  his  side,  was  seen  engaged 
against  the  other  princes  and  states.  In  one  of  the 
conflicts,  the  emperor  himself  was  put  to  flight,  and 
very  near  being  made  prisoner  by  the  elector  of 
Saxony.  The  late  king  of  Prussia  was  more  than 
once  pitted  against  his  imperial  sovereign;  and 
commonly  proved  an  overmatch  for  him.  Con- 
troversies and  wrars  among  the  members  themselves 
have  been  so  common,  that  the  German  annals  are 
crowded  with  the  bloody  pages  which  describe  them. 
Previous  to  the  peace  of  Westphalia,  Germany  was 
desolated  by  a  war  of  thirty  years,  in  which  the  em- 
peror, with  one  half  of  the  empire,  was  on  one  side, 
and  Sweden,  with  the  other  half,  on  the  opposite 
side.     Peace  was  at  length  negotiated,  and  dictated 


148  Alexander  Hamilton 

by  foreign  powers;  and  the  articles  of  it,  to  which 
foreign  powers  are  parties,  made  a  fundamental  part 
of  the  Germanic  constitution. 

If  the  nation  happens,  on  any  emergency,  to  be 
more  united  by  the  necessity  of  self-defence,  its 
situation  is  still  deplorable.  Military  preparations 
must  be  preceded  by  so  many  tedious  discussions, 
arising  from  the  jealousies,  pride,  separate  views, 
and  clashing  pretensions  of  sovereign  bodies,  that 
before  the  diet  can  settle  the  arrangements,  the 
enemy  are  in  the  field ;  and  before  the  federal  troops 
are  ready  to  take  it,  are  retiring  into  winter  quarters. 

The  small  body  of  national  troops,  which  has  been 
judged  necessary  in  time  of  peace,  is  defectively  kept 
up,  badly  paid,  infected  with  local  prejudices,  and 
supported  by  irregular  and  disproportionate  con- 
tributions to  the  treasury. 

The  impossibility  of  maintaining  order  and  dis- 
pensing justice  among  these  sovereign  subjects,  pro- 
duced the  experiment  of  dividing  the  empire  into 
nine  or  ten  circles  or  districts ;  of  giving  them  an  in- 
terior organization,  and  of  charging  them  with  the 
military  execution  of  the  laws  against  delinquent 
and  contumacious  members.  This  experiment  has 
only  served  to  demonstrate  more  fully  the  radical 
vice  of  the  constitution.  Each  circle  is  the  miniature 
picture  of  the  deformities  of  this  political  monster. 
They  either  fail  to  execute  their  commissions,  or 
they  do  it  with  all  the  devastation  and  carnage  of 
civil  war.  Sometimes  whole  circles  are  defaulters; 
and  then  they  increase  the  mischief  which  they  were 
instituted  to  remedy. 


The  Federalist  149 

We  may  form  some  judgment  of  this  scheme  of 
military  coercion  from  a  sample  given  by  Thuanus. 
In  Donawerth,  a  free  and  imperial  city  of  the  circle 
of  Suabia,  the  Abbe  de  St.  Croix  enjoyed  certain 
immunities  which  had  been  reserved  to  him.  In  the 
exercise  of  these,  on  some  public  occasions,  outrages 
were  committed  on  him  by  the  people  of  the  city. 
The  consequence  was  that  the  city  was  put  under 
the  ban  of  the  empire,  and  the  Duke  of  Bavaria, 
though  director  of  another  circle,  obtained  an  ap- 
pointment to  enforce  it.  He  soon  appeared  before 
the  city  with  a  corps  of  ten  thousand  troops,  and 
finding  it  a  fit  occasion,  as  he  had  secretly  intended 
from  the  beginning,  to  revive  an  antiquated  claim, 
on  the  pretext  that  his  ancestors  had  suffered  the 
place  to  be  dismembered  from  his  territory,1  he  took 
possession  of  it  in  his  own  name,  disarmed,  and  pun- 
ished the  inhabitants,  and  reannexed  the  city  to  his 
domains. 

It  may  be  asked,  perhaps,  what  has  so  long  kept 
this  disjointed  machine  from  falling  entirely  to 
pieces?  The  answer  is  obvious:  The  weakness  of 
most  of  the  members,  who  are  unwilling  to  expose 
themselves  to  the  mercy  of  foreign  powers;  the 
weakness  of  most  of  the  principal  members,  com- 
pared with  the  formidable  powers  all  around  them; 
the  vast  weight  and  influence  which  the  emperor 
derives  from  his  separate  and  hereditary  dominions ; 
and  the  interest  he  feels  in  preserving  a  system  with 

1  Pfeffel,  Nouvel  AbrSg.  Chronol.  de  VHist.,  etc.,  d'Allemagne,  says 
the  pretext  was  to  indemnify  himself  for  the  expense  of  the  expedition. 
— Publius. 


i5°  Alexander  Hamilton 

which  his  family  pride  is  connected,  and  which  con- 
stitutes him  the  first  prince  in  Europe ; — these  causes 
support  a  feeble  and  precarious  Union;  whilst  the 
repellent  quality,  incident  to  the  nature  of  sover- 
eignty, and  which  time  continually  strengthens, 
prevents  any  reform  whatever,  founded  on  a  proper 
consolidation.  Nor  is  it  to  be  imagined,  if  this  ob- 
stacle could  be  surmounted,  that  the  neighboring 
powers  would  suffer  a  revolution  to  take  place,  which 
would  give  to  the  empire  the  force  and  preeminence 
to  which  it  is  entitled.  Foreign  nations  have  long 
considered  themselves  as  interested  in  the  changes 
made  by  events  in  this  constitution;  and  have,  on 
various  occasions,  betrayed  their  policy  of  perpetu- 
ating its  anarchy  and  weakness. 

If  more  direct  examples  were  wanting,  Poland,  as 
a  government  over  local  sovereigns,  might  not  im- 
properly be  taken  notice  of.  Nor  could  any  proof 
more  striking  be  given  of  the  calamities  flowing  from 
such  institutions.  Equally  unfit  for  self-govern- 
ment and  self-defence,  it  has  long  been  at  the  mercy 
of  its  powerful  neighbors;  who  have  lately  had  the 
mercy  to  disburden  it  of  one  third  of  its  people  and 
territories. 

The  connection  among  the  Swiss  cantons  scarcely 
amounts  to  a  confederacy;  though  it  is  some  times 
cited  as  an  instance  of  the  stability  of  such  institu- 
tions. 

They  have  no  common  treasury;  no  common 
troops  even  in  war;  no  common  coin;  no  common 
judicatory;  nor  any  other  common  mark  of  sover- 
eignty. 


The  Federalist  151 

They  are  kept  together  by  the  peculiarity  of  their 
topographical  position;  by  their  individual  weak- 
ness and  insignificancy;  by  the  fear  of  powerful 
neighbors,  to  one  of  which  they  were  formerly  sub- 
ject; by  the  few  sources  of  contention  among  a 
people  of  such  simple  and  homogeneous  manners; 
by  their  joint  interest  in  their  dependent  possessions ; 
by  the  mutual  aid  they  stand  in  need  of,  for  sup- 
pressing insurrections  and  rebellions,  an  aid  ex- 
pressly stipulated,  and  often  required  and  afforded; 
and  by  the  necessity  of  some  regular  and  permanent 
provision  for  accommodating  disputes  among  the 
cantons.  The  provision  is,  that  the  parties  at 
variance  shall  each  choose  four  judges  out  of  the 
neutral  cantons,  who,  in  case  of  disagreement, 
choose  an  umpire.  This  tribunal,  under  an  oath  of 
impartiality,  pronounces  definitive  sentence,  which  all 
the  cantons  are  bound  to  enforce.  The  competency 
of  this  regulation  may  be  estimated  by  a  clause  in 
their  treaty  of  1683,  with  Victor  Amadeus  of  Savoy; 
in  which  he  obliges  himself  to  interpose  as  mediator 
in  disputes  between  the  cantons,  and  to  employ  force, 
if  necessary,  against  the  contumacious  party. 

So  far  as  the  peculiarity  of  their  case  will  admit  of 
comparison  with  that  of  the  United  States,  it  serves 
to  confirm  the  principle  intended  to  be  established. 
Whatever  efficacy  the  union  may  have  had  in  ordi- 
nary cases,  it  appears  that  the  moment  a  cause  of 
difference  sprang  up,  capable  of  trying  its  strength, 
it  failed.  The  controversies  on  the  subject  of  re- 
ligion, which  in  three  instances  have  kindled  violent 
and  bloody  contests,  may  be  said,  in  fact,  to  have 


152  Alexander  Hamilton 

severed  the  league.  The  Protestant  and  Catholic 
cantons  have  since  had  their  separate  diets,  where 
all  the  most  important  concerns  are  adjusted,  and 
which  have  left  the  general  diet  little  other  business 
than  to  take  care  of  the  common  bailages. 

That  separation  had  another  consequence,  which 
merits  attention.  It  produced  opposite  alliances 
with  foreign  powers:  of  Berne,  at  the  head  of  the 
Protestant  association,  with  the  United  Provinces; 
and  of  Luzerne,  at  the  head  of  the  Catholic  associa- 
tion, with  France. 

Publius. 


From  the  New  York  Packet,  Tuesday,  December  11,  1787 
THE  FEDERALIST.    No.  XX 

(HAMILTON    AND    MADISON) 

To  the  People  of  the  State  of  New  York: 

The  United  Netherlands  are  a  confederacy  of  re- 
publics, or  rather  of  aristocracies  of  a  very  remark- 
able texture,  yet  confirming  all  the  lessons  derived 
from  those  which  we  have  already  reviewed. 

The  union  is  composed  of  seven  coequal  and 
sovereign  states,  and  each  state  or  province  is  a 
composition  of  equal  and  independent  cities.  In  all 
important  cases,  not  only  the  provinces  but  the  cities 
must  be  unanimous. 

The  sovereignty  of  the  Union  is  represented  by 
the  States-General,  consisting  usually  of  about  fifty 
deputies  appointed  by  the  provinces.     They  hold 


The  Federalist  153 

their  seats,  some  for  life,  some  for  six,  three,  and  one 
years ;  from  two  provinces  they  continue  in  appoint- 
ment during  pleasure. 

The  States-General  have  authority  to  enter  into 
treaties  and  alliances;  to  make  war  and  peace;  to 
raise  armies  and  equip  fleets;  to  ascertain  quotas 
and  demand  contributions.  In  all  these  cases,  how- 
ever, unanimity  and  the  sanction  of  their  constituents 
are  requisite.  They  have  authority  to  appoint  and 
receive  ambassadors;  to  execute  treaties  and  alli- 
ances already  formed;  to  provide  for  the  collection 
of  duties  on  imports  and  exports;  to  regulate  the 
mint,  with  a  saving  to  the  provincial  rights;  to 
govern  as  sovereigns  the  dependent  territories.  The 
provinces  are  restrained,  unless  with  the  general 
consent,  from  entering  into  foreign  treaties;  from 
establishing  imposts  injurious  to  others,  or  charging 
their  neighbors  with  higher  duties  than  their  own 
subjects.  A  council  of  state,  a  chamber  of  accounts, 
with  five  colleges  of  admiralty,  aid  and  fortify  the 
federal  administration. 

The  executive  magistrate  of  the  union  is  the 
stadtholder,  who  is  now  an  hereditary  prince.  His 
principal  weight  and  influence  in  the  republic  are 
derived  from  this  independent  title;  from  his  great 
patrimonial  estates;  from  his  family  connections 
with  some  of  the  chief  potentates  of  Europe;  and, 
more  than  all,  perhaps,  from  his  being  stadtholder  in 
the  several  provinces,  as  well  as  for  the  union;  in 
which  provincial  quality  he  has  the  appointment  of 
town  magistrates  under  certain  regulations,  exe- 
cutes provincial  decrees,  presides  when  he  pleases  in 


154  Alexander  Hamilton 

the  provincial  tribunals,  and  has  throughout  the 
power  of  pardon. 

As  stadtholder  of  the  union,  he  has,  however. 
considerable  prerogatives. 

In  his  political  capacity  he  has  authority  to  settle 
disputes  between  the  provinces,  when  other  methods 
fail;  to  assist  at  the  deliberations  of  the  States- 
General,  and  at  their  particular  conferences;  to  give 
audiences  to  foreign  ambassadors,  and  to  keep  agents 
for  his  particular  affairs  at  foreign  courts. 

In  his  military  capacity  he  commands  the  federal 
troops,  provides  for  garrisons,  and  in  general  regu- 
lates military  affairs;  disposes  of  all  appointments, 
from  colonels  to  ensigns,  and  of  the  governments  and 
posts  of  fortified  towns. 

In  his  marii:e  capacity  he  is  admiral-general,  and 
superintends  and  directs  every  thing  relative  to 
naval  forces  and  other  naval  affairs ;  presides  in  the 
admiralties  in  person  or  by  proxy;  appoints  lieu- 
tenant-admirals and  other  officers;  and  establishes 
councils  of  war,  whose  sentences  are  not  executed 
till  he  approves  them. 

His  revenue,  exclusive  of  his  private  income, 
amounts  to  three  hundred  thousand  florins.  The 
standing  army  which  he  commands  consists  of  about 
forty  thousand  men. 

Such  is  the  nature  of  the  celebrated  Belgic  con- 
federacy, as  delineated  on  parchment.  What  are  the 
characters  which  practice  has  stamped  upon  it?  Im- 
becility in  the  government ;  discord  among  the  prov- 
inces ;  foreign  influence  and  indignities :  a  precarious 
existence  in  peace,  and  peculiar  calamities  from  war. 


The  Federalist  155 

It  was  long  ago  remarked  by  Grotius,  that  nothing 
but  the  hatred  of  his  countrymen  to  the  house  of 
Austria  kept  them  from  being  ruined  by  the  vices  of 
their  constitution. 

The  union  of  Utrecht,  says  another  respectable 
writer,  reposes  an  authority  in  the  States-General, 
seemingly  sufficient  to  secure  harmony,  but  the 
jealousy  in  each  province  renders  the  practice  very 
different  from  the  theory. 

The  same  instrument,  says  another,  obliges  each 
province  to  levy  certain  contributions;  but  this 
article  never  could,  and  probably  never  will,  be  exe- 
cuted; because  the  inland  provinces,  who  have  little 
commerce,  cannot  pay  an  equal  quota. 

In  matters  of  contribution,  it  is  the  practice  to 
waive  the  articles  of  the  constitution.  The  danger 
of  delay  obliges  the  consenting  provinces  to  furnish 
their  quotas,  without  waiting  for  the  others;  and 
then  vO  obtain  reimbursement  from  the  others,  by 
deputations,  which  are  frequent,  or  otherwise,  as  they 
can.  The  great  wealth  and  influence  of  the  province 
of  Holland  enable  her  to  effect  both  these  purposes. 

It  has  more  than  once  happened,  that  the  de- 
ficiencies had  to  be  ultimately  collected  at  the  point 
of  the  bayonet;  a  thing  practicable,  though  dreadful, 
in  a  confederacy  where  one  of  the  members  exceeds 
in  force  all  the  rest,  and  where  several  of  them  are 
too  small  to  meditate  resistance;  but  utterly  im- 
practicable in  one  composed  of  members,  several  of 
which  are  equal  to  each  other  in  strength  and  re- 
sources, and  equal  singly  to  a  vigorous  and  persever- 
ing defence. 


156  Alexander  Hamilton 

Foreign  ministers,  says  Sir  William  Temple,  who 
was  himself  a  foreign  minister,  elude  matters  taken 
ad  referendum,  by  tampering  with  the  provinces  and 
cities.  In  1726,  the  treaty  of  Hanover  was  delayed 
by  these  means  a  whole  year.  Instances  of  a  like 
nature  are  numerous  and  notorious. 

In  critical  emergencies,  the  States-General  are 
often  compelled  to  overleap  their  constitutional 
bounds.  In  1688,  they  concluded  a  treaty  of  them- 
selves at  the  risk  of  their  heads.  The  treaty  of 
Westphalia,  in  1648,  by  which  their  independence 
was  formally  and  finally  recognized,  was  concluded 
without  the  consent  of  Zealand.  Even  as  recently 
as  the  last  treaty  of  peace  with  Great  Britain,  the 
constitutional  principle  of  unanimity  was  departed 
from.  A  weak  constitution  must  necessarily  ter- 
minate in  dissolution,  for  want  of  proper  powers,  or 
the  usurpation  of  powers  requisite  for  the  public 
safety.  Whether  the  usurpation,  when  once  begun, 
will  stop  at  the  salutary  point,  or  go  forward  to  the 
dangerous  extreme,  must  depend  on  the  contingencies 
of  the  moment.  Tyranny  has  perhaps  oftener  grown 
out  of  the  assumptions  of  power,  called  for,  on  pressing 
exigencies,  by  a  defective  constitution,  than  out  of  the 
full  exercise  of  the  largest  constitutional  authorities. 

Notwithstanding  the  calamities  produced  by  the 
stadtholdership,  it  has  been  supposed  that  without 
his  influence  in  the  individual  provinces,  the  causes 
of  anarchy  manifest  in  the  confederacy  would  long 
ago  have  dissolved  it.  "  Under  such  a  government, " 
says  the  Abbe*  Mably,  "  the  Union  could  never  have 
subsisted,  if  the  provinces  had  not  a  spring  within 


The  Federalist  157 

themselves,  capable  of  quickening  their  tardiness, 
and  compelling  them  to  the  same  way  of  thinking. 
This  spring  is  the  stadtholder. ' '  It  is  remarked  by 
Sir  William  Temple,  "that  in  the  intermissions  of 
the  stadtholdership,  Holland,  by  her  riches  and  her 
authority,  which  drew  the  others  into  a  sort  of  de- 
pendence, supplied  the  place." 

These  are  not  the  only  circumstances  which  have 
controlled  the  tendency  to  anarchy  and  dissolution. 
The  surrounding  powers  impose  an  absolute  neces- 
sity of  union  to  a  certain  degree,  at  the  same  time 
that  they  nourish  by  their  intrigues  the  constitu- 
tional vices  which  keep  the  republic  in  some  degree 
always  at  their  mercy. 

The  true  patriots  have  long  bewailed  the  fatal 
tendency  of  these  vices,  and  have  made  no  less  than 
four  regular  experiments  by  extraordinary  assem- 
blies, convened  for  the  special  purpose,  to  apply  a 
remedy.  As  many  times  has  their  laudable  zeal 
found  it  impossible  to  unite  the  public  councils  in  re- 
forming the  known,  the  acknowledged,  the  fatal  evils 
of  the  existing  constitution.  Let  us  pause,  my 
fellow-citizens,  for  one  moment,  over  this  melan- 
choly and  monitory  lesson  of  history;  and  with  the 
tear  that  drops  for  the  calamities  brought  on  man- 
kind by  their  adverse  opinions  and  selfish  passions, 
let  our  gratitude  mingle  an  ejaculation  to  Heaven, 
for  the  propitious  concord  which  has  distinguished 
the  consultations  for  our  political  happiness. 

A  design  was  also  conceived  of  establishing  a 
general  tax  to  be  administered  by  the  federal  au- 
thority.    This  also  had  its  adversaries  and  failed. 


158  Alexander  Hamilton 

This  unhappy  people  seem  to  be  now  suffering 
from  popular  convulsions,  from  dissensions  among 
the  states,  and  from  the  actual  invasion  of  foreign 
arms,  the  crisis  of  their  destiny.  All  nations  have 
their  eyes  fixed  on  the  awful  spectacle.  The  first 
wish  prompted  by  humanity  is,  that  this  severe 
trial  may  issue  in  such  a  revolution  of  their  govern- 
ment as  will  establish  their  union,  and  render  it  the 
parent  of  tranquillity,  freedom,  and  happiness:  The 
next,  that  the  asylum  under  which,  we  trust,  the 
enjoyment  of  these  blessings  will  speedily  be  secured 
in  this  country,  may  receive  and  console  them  for 
the  catastrophe  of  their  own. 

I  make  no  apology  for  having  dwelt  so  long  on 
the  contemplation  of  these  federal  precedents.  Ex- 
perience is  the  oracle  of  truth;  and  where  its  re- 
sponses are  unequivocal,  they  ought  to  be  conclusive 
and  sacred.  The  important  truth,  which  it  un- 
equivocally pronounces  in  the  present  case,  is  that 
a  sovereignty  over  sovereigns,  a  government  over 
governments,  a  legislation  for  communities,  as  con- 
tradistinguished from  individuals,  as  it  is  a  solecism 
in  theory,  so  in  practice  it  is  subversive  of  the  order 
and  ends  of  civil  polity,  by  substituting  violence  in 
place  of  law,  or  the  destructive  coercion  of  the  sword 
in  place  of  the  mild  and  salutary  coercion  of  the 
magistracy. 

PUBLIUS. 


The  Federalist  159 

For  the  Independent  Journal 
THE  FEDERALIST.     No.  XXI 

(HAMILTON) 

To  the  People  of  the  State  of  New  York: 

Having  in  the  three  last  numbers  taken  a  sum- 
mary review  of  the  principal  circumstances  and 
events  which  have  depicted  the  genius  and  fate  of 
other  confederate  governments,  I  shall  now  proceed 
in  the  enumeration  of  the  most  important  of  those 
defects  which  have  hitherto  disappointed  our  hopes 
from  the  system  established  among  ourselves.  To 
form  a  safe  and  satisfactory  judgment  of  the  proper 
remedy,  it  is  absolutely  necessary  that  we  should  be 
well  acquainted  with  the  extent  and  malignity  of 
the  disease. 

The  next  most  palpable  defect  of  the  subsisting 
Confederation,  is  the  total  want  of  a  sanction  to  its 
laws.  The  United  States,  as  now  composed,  have 
no  powers  to  exact  obedience,  or  punish  disobedience 
to  their  resolutions,  either  by  pecuniary  mulcts,  by  a 
suspension  or  divestiture  of  privileges,  or  by  any 
other  constitutional  mode.  There  is  no  express 
delegation  of  authority  to  them  to  use  force  against 
delinquent  members;  and  if  such  a  right  should  be 
ascribed  to  the  federal  head,  as  resulting  from  the 
nature  of  the  social  compact  between  the  States,  it 
must  be  by  inference  and  construction,  in  the  face 
of  that  part  of  the  second  article,  by  which  it  is  de- 
clared, "that  each  State  shall  retain  every  power, 
jurisdiction,  and  right,  not  expressly  delegated  to  the 
United  States  in  Congress  assembled.' '    There  is, 


160  Alexander  Hamilton 

doubtless,  a  striking  absurdity  in  supposing  that  a 
right  of  this  kind  does  not  exist,  but  we  are  reduced 
to  the  dilemma  either  of  embracing  that  supposi- 
tion, preposterous  as  it  may  seem,  or  of  contravening 
or  explaining  away  a  provision,  which  has  been  of 
late  a  repeated  theme  of  the  eulogies  of  those  who 
oppose  the  new  Constitution ;  and  the  want  of  which, 
in  that  plan,  has  been  the  subject  of  much  plausible 
animadversion,  and  severe  criticism.  If  we  are  un- 
willing to  impair  the  force  of  this  applauded  provi- 
sion, we  shall  be  obliged  to  conclude,  that  the  United 
States  afford  the  extraordinary  spectacle  of  a  gov- 
ernment destitute  even  of  the  shadow  of  constitu- 
tional power  to  enforce  the  execution  of  its  own 
laws.  It  will  appear,  from  the  specimens  which 
have  been  cited,  that  the  American  Confederacy, 
in  this  particular,  stands  discriminated  from  every 
other  institution  of  a  similar  kind,  and  exhibits  a 
new  and  unexampled  phenomenon  in  the  political 
world. 

The  want  of  a  mutual  guaranty  of  the  State  gov- 
ernments is  another  capital  imperfection  in  the  fed- 
eral plan.  There  is  nothing  of  this  kind  declared  in 
the  articles  that  compose  it;  and  to  imply  a  tacit 
guaranty  from  considerations  of  utility,  would  be  a 
still  more  flagrant  departure  from  the  clause  which 
has  been  mentioned,  than  to  imply  a  tacit  power  of 
coercion  from  the  like  considerations.  The  want  of 
a  guaranty,  though  it  might  in  its  consequences  en- 
danger the  Union,  does  not  so  immediately  attack 
its  existence  as  the  want  of  a  constitutional  sanction 
to  its  laws. 


The  Federalist  161 

Without  a  guaranty  the  assistance  to  be  derived 
from  the  Union  in  repelling  those  domestic  dangers 
which  may  sometimes  threaten  the  existence  of  the 
State  constitutions,  must  be  renounced.  Usurpa- 
tion may  rear  its  crest  in  each  State,  and  trample 
upon  the  liberties  of  the  people,  while  the  national 
government  could  legally  do  nothing  more  than  be- 
hold its  encroachments  with  indignation  and  regret. 
A  successful  faction  may  erect  a  tyranny  on  the 
ruins  of  order  and  law,  while  no  succor  could  con- 
stitutionally be  afforded  by  the  Union  to  the  friends 
and  supporters  of  the  government.  The  tempestu- 
ous situation  from  which  Massachusetts  has  scarcely 
emerged,  evinces  that  dangers  of  this  kind  are  not 
merely  speculative.  Who  can  determine  what  might 
have  been  the  issue  of  her  late  convulsions,  if  the 
malcontents  had  been  headed  by  a  Caesar  or  by  a 
Cromwell?  Who  can  predict  what  effect  a  despot- 
ism, established  in  Massachusetts,  would  have  upon 
the  liberties  of  New  Hampshire  or  Rhode  Island,  of 
Connecticut  or  New  York? 

The  inordinate  pride  of  State  importance  has 
suggested  to  some  minds  an  objection  to  the  prin- 
ciple of  a  guaranty  in  the  federal  government,  as  in- 
volving an  officious  interference  in  the  domestic 
concerns  of  the  members.  A  scruple  of  this  kind 
would  deprive  us  of  one  of  the  principal  advantages 
to  be  expected  from  union,  and  can  only  flow  from  a 
misapprehension  of  the  nature  of  the  provision  it- 
self. It  could  be  no  impediment  to  reforms  of  the 
State  constitutions  by  a  majority  of  the  people  in  a 
legal  and  peaceable  mode.     This  right  would  remain 


VOL.    XI— II. 


1 62  Alexander  Hamilton 

undiminished.  The  guaranty  could  only  operate 
against  changes  to  be  effected  by  violence.  Towards 
the  preventions  of  calamities  of  this  kind,  too  many 
checks  cannot  be  provided.  The  peace  of  society 
and  the  stability  of  government  depend  absolutely 
on  the  efficacy  of  the  precautions  adopted  on  this 
head.  Where  the  whole  power  of  the  government 
is  in  the  hands  of  the  people,  there  is  the  less  pre- 
tence for  the  use  of  violent  remedies  in  partial  or 
occasional  distempers  of  the  State.  The  natural 
cure  for  an  ill-administration,  in  a  popular  or  re- 
presentative constitution,  is  a  change  of  men.  A 
guaranty  by  the  national  authority  would  be  as 
much  levelled  against  the  usurpations  of  rulers  as 
against  the  ferments  and  outrages  of  faction  and 
sedition  in  the  community. 

The  principle  of  regulating  the  contributions  of 
the  States  to  the  common  treasury  by  quotas  is  an- 
other fundamental  error  in  the  Confederation.  Its 
repugnancy  to  an  adequate  supply  of  the  national 
exigencies  has  been  already  pointed  out,  and  has 
sufficiently  appeared  from  the  trial  which  has  been 
made  of  it.  I  speak  of  it  now  solely  with  a  view  to 
equality  among  the  States.  Those  who  have  been 
accustomed  to  contemplate  the  circumstances  which 
produce  and  constitute  national  wealth,  must  be 
satisfied  that  there  is  no  common  standard  or  ba- 
rometer by  which  the  degrees  of  it  can  be  ascertained. 
Neither  the  value  of  lands,  nor  the  numbers  of  the 
people,  which  have  been  successively  proposed  as 
the  rule  of  State  contributions,  has  any  pretension 
to  being  a  just  representative.     If  we  compare  the 


The  Federalist  163 

wealth  of  the  United  Netherlands  with  that  of  Rus- 
sia or  Germany,  or  even  of  France,  and  if  we  at  the 
same  time  compare  the  total  value  of  the  lands  and 
the  aggregate  population  of  that  contracted  district 
with  the  total  value  of  the  lands  and  the  aggregate 
population  of  the  immense  regions  of  either  of  the 
three  last-mentioned  countries,  we  shall  at  once  dis- 
cover that  there  is  no  comparison  between  the  pro- 
portion of  either  of  these  two  objects  and  that  of  the 
relative  wealth  of  those  nations.  If  the  like  parallel 
were  to  be  run  between  several  of  the  American 
States,  it  would  furnish  a  like  result.  Let  Virginia 
be  contrasted  with  North  Carolina,  Pennsylvania 
with  Connecticut,  or  Maryland  with  New  Jersey, 
and  we  shall  be  convinced  that  the  respective  abili- 
ties of  those  States,  in  relation  to  revenue,  bear  little 
or  no  analogy  to  their  comparative  stock  in  lands 
or  to  their  comparative  population.  The  position 
may  be  equally  illustrated  by  a  similar  process  be- 
tween the  counties  of  the  same  State.  No  man  who 
is  acquainted  with  the  State  of  New  York  will  doubt 
that  the  active  wealth  of  King's  County  bears  a 
much  greater  proportion  to  that  of  Montgomery 
than  it  would  appear  to  be  if  we  should  take  either 
the  total  value  of  the  lands  or  the  total  number  of 
the  people  as  a  criterion! 

The  wealth  of  nations  depends  upon  an  infinite 
variety  of  causes.  Situation,  soil,  climate,  the  na- 
ture of  the  productions,  the  nature  of  the  govern- 
ment, the  genius  of  the  citizens,  the  degree  of 
information  they  possess,  the  state  of  commerce,  of 
arts,  of  industry, — these  circumstances  and  many 


1 64  Alexander  Hamilton 

more,  too  complex,  minute,  or  adventitious  to  ad- 
mit of  a  particular  specification,  occasion  differ- 
ences hardly  conceivable  in  the  relative  opulence 
and  riches  of  different  countries.  The  consequence 
clearly  is  that  there  can  be  no  common  measure  of 
national  wealth,  and,  of  course,  no  general  or  sta- 
tionary rule  by  which  the  ability  of  a  state  to  pay 
taxes  can  be  determined.  The  attempt,  therefore, 
to  regulate  the  contributions  of  the  members  of 
a  confederacy  by  any  such  rule,  cannot  fail  to 
be  productive  of  glaring  inequality  and  extreme 
oppression. 

This  inequality  would  of  itself  be  sufficient  in 
America  to  work  the  eventual  destruction  of  the 
Union,  if  any  mode  of  enforcing  a  compliance  with 
its  requisitions  could  be  devised.  The  suffering 
States  would  not  long  consent  to  remain  associated 
upon  a  principle  which  distributes  the  public  burdens 
with  so  unequal  a  hand,  and  which  was  calculated 
to  impoverish  and  oppress  the  citizens  of  some  States, 
while  those  of  others  would  scarcely  be  conscious  of 
the  small  proportion  of  the  weight  they  were  re- 
quired to  sustain.  This,  however,  is  an  evil  insep- 
arable from  the  principle  of  quotas  and  requisitions. 

There  is  no  method  of  steering  clear  of  this  in- 
convenience, but  by  authorizing  the  national  gov- 
ernment to  raise  its  own  revenues  in  its  own  way. 
Imposts,  excises,  and,  in  general,  all  duties  upon 
articles  of  consumption,  may  be  compared  to  a  fluid, 
which  will,  in  time,  find  its  level  with  the  means  of 
paying  them.  The  amount  to  be  contributed  by  each 
citizen  will  in  a  degree  be  at  his  own  option,  and  can 


The  Federalist  165 

be  regulated  by  an  attention  to  his  resources.  The 
rich  may  be  extravagant,  the  poor  can  be  frugal; 
and  private  oppression  may  always  be  avoided  by 
a  judicious  selection  of  objects  proper  for  such  im- 
positions. If  inequalities  should  arise  in  some  States 
from  duties  on  particular  objects,  these  will,  in  all 
probability,  be  counterbalanced  by  proportional  in- 
equalities in  other  States,  from  the  duties  on  other 
objects.  In  the  course  of  time  and  things,  an 
equilibrium,  as  far  as  it  is  attainable  in  so  com- 
plicated a  subject,  will  be  established  everywhere. 
Or,  if  inequalities  should  still  exist,  they  would 
neither  be  so  great  in  their  degree,  so  uniform  in 
their  operation,  nor  so  odious  in  their  appearance,  as 
those  which  would  necessarily  spring  from  quotas, 
upon  any  scale  that  can  possibly  be  devised. 

It  is  a  signal  advantage  of  taxes  on  articles  of  con- 
sumption, that  they  contain  in  their  own  nature  a 
security  against  excess.  They  prescribe  their  own 
limit;  which  cannot  be  exceeded  without  defeating 
the  end  proposed, — that  is,  an  extension  of  the  re- 
venue. When  applied  to  this  object,  the  saying  is  as 
just  as  it  is  witty,  that,  "  in  political  arithmetic,  two 
and  two  do  not  always  make  four."  If  duties  are 
too  high,  they  lessen  the  consumption;  the  collec- 
tion is  eluded;  and  the  product  to  the  treasury  is 
not  so  great  as  when  they  are  confined  within  proper 
and  moderate  bounds.  This  forms  a  complete  bar- 
rier against  any  material  oppression  of  the  citizens 
by  taxes  of  this  class,  and  is  itself  a  natural  limita- 
tion of  the  power  of  imposing  them. 

Impositions  of  this  kind  usually  fall  under  the 


1 66  Alexander  Hamilton 

denomination  of  indirect  taxes,  and  must  for  a  long 
time  constitute  trie  chief  part  of  the  revenue  raised 
in  this  country.  Those  of  the  direct  kind,  which 
principally  relate  to  land  and  buildings,  may  admit 
of  a  rule  of  apportionment.  Either  the  value  of  land, 
or  the  number  of  the  people,  may  serve  as  a  standard. 
The  state  of  agriculture  and  the  populousness  of  a 
country  have  been  considered  as  nearly  connected 
with  each  other.  And,  as  a  rule,  for  the  purpose 
intended,  numbers,  in  the  view  of  simplicity  and 
certainty,  are  entitled  to  a  preference.  In  every 
country  it  is  a  herculean  task  to  obtain  a  valuation 
of  the  land;  in  a  country  imperfectly  settled  and 
progressive  in  improvement,  the  difficulties  are  in- 
creased almost  to  impracticability.  The  expense 
of  an  accurate  valuation  is,  in  all  situations,  a  for- 
midable objection.  In  a  branch  of  taxation  where 
no  limits  to  the  discretion  of  the  government  are  to 
be  found  in  the  nature  of  things,  the  establishment 
of  a  fixed  rule,  not  incompatible  with  the  end,  may 
be  attended  with  fewer  inconveniences  than  to  leave 
that  discretion  altogether  at  large. 

Publius. 


From  the  New  York  Packet,  Friday,  December  14,  1787 
THE  FEDERALIST.     No.  XXII 

(HAMILTON) 

To  the  People  of  the  State  of  New  York: 

In  addition  to  the  defects  already  enumerated  in 
the  existing  federal  system,  there  are  others  of  not 


The  Federalist  167 

less  importance,  which  concur  in  rendering  it  alto- 
gether unfit  for  the  administration  of  the  affairs  of 
the  Union. 

The  want  of  a  power  to  regulate  commerce  is  by 
all  parties  allowed  to  be  of  the  number.  The  utility 
of  such  a  power  has  been  anticipated  under  the  first 
head  of  our  inquiries;  and  for  this  reason,  as  well  as 
from  the  universal  conviction  entertained  upon  the 
subject,  little  need  be  added  in  this  place.  It  is  in- 
deed evident,  on  the  most  superficial  view,  that 
there  is  no  object,  either  as  it  respects  the  interests 
of  trade  or  finance,  that  more  strongly  demands  a 
federal  superintendence.  The  want  of  it  has  already 
operated  as  a  bar  to  the  formation  of  beneficial 
treaties  with  foreign  powers,  and  has  given  occasions 
of  dissatisfaction  between  the  States.  No  nation 
acquainted  with  the  nature  of  our  political  associa- 
tion would  be  unwise  enough  to  enter  into  stipu- 
lations with  the  United  States,  by  which  they 
conceded  privileges  of  any  importance  to  them,  while 
they  were  apprised  that  the  engagements  on  the  part 
of  the  Union  might  at  any  moment  be  violated  by 
its  members,  and  while  they  found  from  experience 
that  they  might  enjoy  every  advantage  they  de- 
sired in  our  markets,  without  granting  us  any  return 
but  such  as  their  momentary  convenience  might 
suggest.  It  is  not,  therefore,  to  be  wondered  at  that 
Mr.  Jenkinson,  in  ushering  into  the  House  of  Com- 
mons a  bill  for  regulating  the  temporary  intercourse 
between  the  two  countries,  should  preface  its  intro- 
duction by  a  declaration  that  similar  provisions  in 
former  bills  had  been  found  to  answer  every  purpose 


1 68  Alexander  Hamilton 

to  the  commerce  of  Great  Britain,  and  that  it  would 
be  prudent  to  persist  in  the  plan  until  it  should  ap- 
pear whether  the  American  government  was  likely 
or  not  to  acquire  greater  consistency.1 

Several  States  have  endeavored,  by  separate  pro- 
hibitions, restrictions,  and  exclusions,  to  influence 
the  conduct  of  that  kingdom  in  this  particular,  but 
the  want  of  concert,  arising  from  the  want  of  a  gen- 
eral authority  and  from  clashing  and  dissimilar 
views  in  the  State,  has  hitherto  frustrated  every 
experiment  of  the  kind,  and  will  continue  to  do  so 
as  long  as  the  same  obstacles  to  a  uniformity  of 
measures  continue  to  exist. 

The  interfering  and  unneighborly  regulations  of 
some  States,  contrary  to  the  true  spirit  of  the  Union, 
have,  in  different  instances,  given  just  cause  of  um- 
brage and  complaint  to  others,  and  it  is  to  be  feared 
that  examples  of  this  nature,  if  not  restrained  by  a 
national  control,  would  be  multiplied  and  extended 
till  they  became  not  less  serious  sources  of  animosity 
and  discord  than  injurious  impediments  to  the  in- 
tercourse between  the  different  parts  of  the  Con- 
federacy. "  The  commerce  of  the  German  empire  2 
is  in  continual  trammels  from  the  multiplicity  of  the 
duties  which  the  several  princes  and  states  exact 
upon  the  merchandises  passing  through  their  terri- 
tories, by  means  of  which  the  fine  streams  and 
navigable  rivers  with  which  Germany  is  so  happily 
watered  are  rendered  almost  useless."     Though  the 

1  This,  as  nearly  as  I  can  recollect,  was  the  sense  of  his  speech  on 
introducing  the  last  bill. — Publius. 

2  Encyclopedia,  article  "Empire." — Publius. 


The  Federalist  169 

genius  of  the  people  of  this  country  might  never  per- 
mit this  description  to  be  strictly  applicable  to  us, 
yet  we  may  reasonably  expect,  from  the  gradual 
conflicts  of  State  regulations,  that  the  citizens  of 
each  would  at  length  come  to  be  considered  and 
treated  by  the  others  in  no  better  light  than  that  of 
foreigners  and  aliens. 

The  power  of  raising  armies,  by  the  most  obvious 
construction  of  the  articles  of  the  Confederation,  is 
merely  a  power  of  making  requisitions  upon  the 
States  for  quotas  of  men.  This  practice,  in  the 
course  of  the  late  war,  was  found  replete  with  ob- 
structions to  a  vigorous  and  to  an  economical  system 
of  defence.  It  gave  birth  to  a  competition  between 
the  States  which  created  a  kind  of  auction  for  men. 
In  order  to  furnish  the  quotas  required  of  them, 
they  outbid  each  other  till  bounties  grew  to  an  enor- 
mous and  insupportable  size.  The  hope  of  a  still 
further  increase  afforded  an  inducement  to  those 
who  were  disposed  to  serve  to  procrastinate  their 
enlistment,  and  disinclined  them  from  engaging  for 
any  considerable  periods.  Hence,  slow  and  scanty 
levies  of  men,  in  the  most  critical  emergencies  of 
our  affairs ;  short  enlistments  at  an  unparalleled  ex- 
pense; continual  fluctuations  in  the  troops,  ruinous 
to  their  discipline  and  subjecting  the  public  safety 
frequently  to  the  perilous  crisis  of  a  disbanded  army. 
Hence,  also,  those  oppressive  expedients  for  raising 
men  which  were  upon  several  occasions  practised, 
and  which  nothing  but  the  enthusiasm  of  liberty 
would  have  induced  the  people  to  endure. 

This  method  of  raising  troops  is  not  more  un- 


170  Alexander  Hamilton 

friendly  to  economy  and  vigor  than  it  is  to  an  equal 
distribution  of  the  burden.  The  States  near  the 
seat  of  war,  influenced  by  motives  of  self-preserva- 
tion, made  efforts  to  furnish  their  quotas,  which  even 
exceeded  their  abilities;  while  those  at  a  distance 
from  danger  were,  for  the  most  part,  as  remiss  as  the 
others  were  diligent,  in  their  exertions.  The  immedi- 
ate pressure  of  this  inequality  was  not  in  this  case,  as 
in  that  of  the  contributions  of  money,  alleviated  by 
the  hope  of  a  final  liquidation.  The  States  which  did 
not  pay  their  proportions  of  money  might  at  least 
be  charged  with  their  deficiencies;  but  no  account 
could  be  formed  of  the  deficiencies  in  the  supplies  of 
men.  We  shall  not,  however,  see  much  reason  to  re- 
gret the  want  of  this  hope,  when  we  consider  how 
little  prospect  there  is,  that  the  most  delinquent 
States  will  ever  be  able  to  make  compensation  for 
their  pecuniary  failures.  The  system  of  quotas  and 
requisitions,  whether  it  be  applied  to  men  or  money, 
is,  in  every  view,  a  system  of  imbecility  in  the  Union, 
and  of  inequality  and  injustice  among  the  members. 
The  right  of  equal  suffrage  among  the  States  is 
another  exceptionable  part  of  the  Confederation. 
Every  idea  of  proportion  and  every  rule  of  fair  re- 
presentation conspires  to  condemn  a  principle,  which 
gives  to  Rhode  Island  an  equal  weight  in  the  scale  of 
power  with  Massachusetts,  or  Connecticut,  or  New 
York;  and  to  Delaware  an  equal  voice  in  the  na- 
tional deliberations  with  Pennsylvania,  or  Virginia, 
or  North  Carolina.  Its  operation  contradicts  the 
fundamental  maxim  of  republican  government, 
which  requires  that  the  sense  of  the  majority  should 


The  Federalist  171 

prevail.  Sophistry  may  reply,  that  sovereigns  are 
equal,  and  that  a  majority  of  the  votes  of  the  States 
will  be  a  majority  of  confederated  America.  But 
this  kind  of  logical  legerdemain  will  never  counter- 
act the  plain  suggestions  of  justice  and  common- 
sense.  It  may  happen  that  this  majority  of  States 
is  a  small  minority  of  the  people  of  America  * ;  and 
two  thirds  of  the  people  of  America  could  not  long 
be  persuaded,  upon  the  credit  of  artificial  distinc- 
tions and  syllogistic  subtleties,  to  submit  their  in- 
terests to  the  management  and  disposal  of  one  third. 
The  larger  States  would  after  a  while  revolt  from  the 
idea  of  receiving  the  law  from  the  smaller.  To 
acquiesce  in  such  a  privation  of  their  due  import- 
ance in  the  political  scale,  would  be  not  merely  to 
be  insensible  to  the  love  of  power,  but  even  to  sacri- 
fice the  desire  of  equality.  It  is  neither  rational  to 
expect  the  first,  nor  just  to  require  the  last.  The 
smaller  States,  considering  how  peculiarly  their 
safety  and  welfare  depend  on  union,  ought  readily 
to  renounce  a  pretension  which,  if  not  relinquished, 
would  prove  fatal  to  its  duration. 

It  may  be  objected  to  this,  that  not  seven  but 
nine  States,  or  two  thirds  of  the  whole  number,  must 
consent  to  the  most  important  resolutions;  and  it 
may  be  thence  inferred,  that  nine  States  would 
always  comprehend  a  majority  of  the  Union.  But 
this  does  not  obviate  the  impropriety  of  an  equal 
vote  between  States  of  the  most  unequal  dimensions 

1  New  Hampshire,  Rhode  Island,  New  Jersey,  Delaware,  Georgia, 
South  Carolina,  and  Maryland  are  a  majority  of  the  whole  number  of 
the  States,  but  they  do  not  contain  one  third  of  the  people. — Publius. 


172  Alexander  Hamilton 

and  populousness ;  nor  is  the  inference  accurate  in 
point  of  fact;  for  we  can  enumerate  nine  States 
which  contain  less  than  a  majority  of  the  people1; 
and  it  is  constitutionally  possible  that  these  nine 
may  give  the  vote.  Besides,  there  are  matters  of 
considerable  moment  determinable  by  a  bare  ma- 
jority ;  and  there  are  others,  concerning  which  doubts 
have  been  entertained,  which,  if  interpreted  in 
favor  of  the  sufficiency  of  a  vote  of  seven  States, 
would  extend  its  operation  to  interests  of  the  first 
magnitude.  In  addition  to  this,  it  is  to  be  observed 
that  there  is  a  probability  of  an  increase  in  the  num- 
ber of  States,  and  no  provision  for  a  proportional 
augmentation  of  the  ratio  of  votes. 

But  this  is  not  all :  what  at  first  sight  may  seem  a 
remedy,  is,  in  reality,  a  poison.  To  give  a  minority 
a  negative  upon  the  majority  (which  is  always  the 
case  where  more  than  a  majority  is  requisite  to  a 
decision),  is,  in  its  tendency,  to  subject  the  sense  of 
the  greater  number  to  that  of  the  lesser.  Congress, 
from  the  non-attendance  of  a  few  States,  have  been 
frequently  in  the  situation  of  a  Polish  diet,  where  a 
single  vote  has  been  sufficient  to  put  a  stop  to  all 
their  movements.  A  sixtieth  part  of  the  Union, 
which  is  about  the  proportion  of  Delaware  and  Rhode 
Island,  has  several  times  been  able  to  oppose  an  entire 
bar  to  its  operations.  This  is  one  of  those  refine- 
ments which,  in  practice,  has  an  effect  the  reverse 
of  what  is  expected  from  it  in  theory.  The  neces- 
sity of  unanimity  in  public  bodies,  or  of  something 

1  Add  New  York  and  Connecticut  to  the  foregoing  seven,  and  they 
will  be  less  than  a  majority. — Publius. 


The  Federalist  173 

approaching  towards  it,  has  been  founded  upon  a 
supposition  that  it  would  contribute  to  security. 
But  its  real  operation  is  to  embarrass  the  adminis- 
tration, to  destroy  the  energy  of  the  government, 
and  to  substitute  the  pleasure,  caprice,  or  artifices 
of  an  insignificant,  turbulent,  or  corrupt  junto,  to 
the  regular  deliberations  and  decisions  of  a  respect- 
able majority.  In  those  emergencies  of  a  nation,  in 
which  the  goodness  or  badness,  the  weakness  or 
strength  of  its  government,  is  of  the  greatest  im- 
portance, there  is  commonly  a  necessity  for  action. 
The  public  business  must,  in  some  way  or  other,  go 
forward.  If  a  pertinacious  minority  can  control  the 
opinion  of  a  majority,  respecting  the  best  mode  of 
conducting  it,  the  majority,  in  order  that  something 
may  be  done,  must  conform  to  the  views  of  the 
minority ;  and  thus  the  sense  of  the  smaller  number 
will  overrule  that  of  the  greater,  and  give  a  tone  to 
the  national  proceedings.  Hence,  tedious  delays; 
continual  negotiation  and  intrigue;  contemptible 
compromises  of  the  public  good.  And  yet,  in  such 
a  system,  it  is  even  happy  when  such  compromises 
can  take  place:  for  upon  some  occasions  things  will 
not  admit  of  accommodation ;  and  then  the  measures 
of  government  must  be  injuriously  suspended,  or 
fatally  defeated.  It  is  often,  by  the  impracticability 
of  obtaining  the  concurrence  of  the  necessary  num- 
ber of  votes,  kept  in  a  state  of  inaction.  Its  situa- 
tion must  always  savor  of  weakness,  sometimes 
border  upon  anarchy. 

It  is  not  difficult  to  discover,  that  a  principle  of 
this  kind  gives  greater  scope  to  foreign  corruption, 


174  Alexander  Hamilton 

as  well  as  to  domestic  faction,  than  that  which  per- 
mits the  sense  of  the  majority  to  decide;  though 
the  contrary  of  this  has  been  presumed.  The  mis- 
take has  proceeded  from  not  attending  with  due 
care  to  the  mischiefs  that  may  be  occasioned  by 
obstructing  the  progress  of  government  at  certain 
critical  seasons.  When  the  concurrence  of  a  large 
number  is  required  by  the  Constitution  to  the  doing 
of  any  national  act,  we  are  apt  to  rest  satisfied  that 
all  is  safe,  because  nothing  improper  will  be  likely 
to  be  done;  but  we  forget  how  much  good  may  be 
prevented,  and  how  much  ill  may  be  produced,  by 
the  power  of  hindering  the  doing  what  may  be  neces- 
sary, and  of  keeping  affairs  in  the  same  unfavorable 
posture  in  which  they  may  happen  to  stand  at  par- 
ticular periods. 

Suppose,  for  instance,  we  were  engaged  in  a  war, 
in  conjunction  with  one  foreign  nation,  against  an- 
other. Suppose  the  necessity  of  our  situation  de- 
manded peace,  and  the  interest  or  ambition  of  our 
ally  led  him  to  seek  the  prosecution  of  the  war,  with 
views  that  might  justify  us  in  making  separate  terms. 
In  such  a  state  of  things,  this  ally  of  ours  would  evi- 
dently find  it  much  easier,  by  his  bribes  and  in- 
trigues, to  tie  up  the  hands  of  government  from 
making  peace,  where  two  thirds  of  all  the  votes  were 
requisite  to  that  object,  than  where  a  simple  major- 
ity would  suffice.  In  the  first  case,  he  would  have 
to  corrupt  a  smaller  number;  in  the  last,  a  greater 
number.  Upon  the  same  principle,  it  would  be 
much  easier  for  a  foreign  power  with  which  we  were 
at  war  to  perplex  our  councils  and  embarrass  our 


The  Federalist  175 

exertions.  And,  in  a  commercial  view,  we  may  be 
subjected  to  similar  inconveniences.  A  nation,  with 
which  we  might  have  a  treaty  of  commerce,  could 
with  much  greater  facility  prevent  our  forming  a 
connection  with  her  competitor  in  trade,  though 
such  a  connection  should  be  ever  so  beneficial  to 
ourselves. 

Evils  of  this  description  ought  not  to  be  regarded 
as  imaginary.  One  of  the  weak  sides  of  republics, 
among  their  numerous  advantages,  is  that  they 
afford  too  easy  an  inlet  to  foreign  corruption.  An 
hereditary  monarch,  though  often  disposed  to  sacri- 
fice his  subjects  to  his  ambition,  has  so  great  a  per- 
sonal interest  in  the  government  and  in  the  external 
glory  of  the  nation,  that  it  is  not  easy  for  a  foreign 
power  to  give  him  an  equivalent  for  what  he  would 
sacrifice  by  treachery  to  the  state.  The  world  has 
accordingly  been  witness  to  few  examples  of  this 
species  of  royal  prostitution,  though  there  have  been 
abundant  specimens  of  every  other  kind. 

In  republics,  persons  elevated  from  the  mass  of 
the  community,  by  the  suffrages  of  their  fellow- 
citizens,  to  stations  of  great  pre-eminence  and 
power,  may  find  compensations  for  betraying  their 
trust,  which,  to  any  but  minds  animated  and  guided 
by  superior  virtue,  may  appear  to  exceed  the  propor- 
tion of  interest  they  have  in  the  common  stock,  and 
to  overbalance  the  obligations  of  duty.  Hence  it  is 
that  history  furnishes  us  with  so  many  mortifying 
examples  of  the  prevalency  of  foreign  corruption  in 
republican  governments.  How  much  this  contri- 
buted to  the  ruin  of  the  ancient  commonwealths  has 


176  Alexander  Hamilton 

been  already  delineated.  It  is  well  known  that  the 
deputies  of  the  United  Provinces  have,  in  various 
instances,  been  purchased  by  the  emissaries  of  the 
neighboring  kingdoms.  The  Earl  of  Chesterfield  (if 
my  memory  serves  me  right),  in  a  letter  to  his  court, 
intimates  that  his  success  in  an  important  negotia- 
tion must  depend  on  his  obtaining  a  major's  com- 
mission for  one  of  those  deputies.  And  in  Sweden 
the  parties  were  alternately  bought  by  France  and 
England  in  so  barefaced  and  notorious  a  manner 
that  it  excited  universal  disgust  in  the  nation,  and 
was  a  principal  cause  that  the  most  limited  monarch 
in  Europe,  in  a  single  day,  without  tumult,  violence, 
or  opposition,  became  one  of  the  most  absolute  and 
uncontrolled. 

A  circumstance  which  crowns  the  defects  of  the 
Confederation  remains  yet  to  be  mentioned, — the 
want  of  a  judiciary  power.  Laws  are  a  dead  letter 
without  courts  to  expound  and  define  their  true 
meaning  and  operation.  The  treaties  of  the  United 
States,  to  have  any  force  at  all,  must  be  considered 
as  part  of  the  law  of  the  land.  Their  true  import,  as 
far  as  respects  individuals,  must,  like  all  other  laws, 
be  ascertained  by  judicial  determinations.  To  pro- 
duce uniformity  in  these  determinations,  they  ought 
to  be  submitted,  in  the  last  resort,  to  one  supreme 
tribunal.  And  this  tribunal  ought  to  be  instituted 
under  the  same  authority  which  forms  the  treaties 
themselves.  These  ingredients  are  both  indispen- 
sable. If  there  is  in  each  State  a  court  of  final 
jurisdiction,  there  may  be  as  many  different  final 
determinations  on  the  same  point  as  there  are  courts. 


The  Federalist  177 

There  are  endless  diversities  in  the  opinions  of  men. 
We  often  see  not  only  different  courts  but  the  judges 
of  the  same  court  differing  from  each  other.  To 
avoid  the  confusion  which  would  unavoidably  result 
from  the  contradictory  decisions  of  a  number  of  in- 
dependent judicatories,  all  nations  have  found  it 
necessary  to  establish  one  court  paramount  to  the 
rest,  possessing  a  general  superintendence,  and  au- 
thorized to  settle  and  declare  in  the  last  resort  a  uni- 
form rule  of  civil  justice. 

This  is  the  more  necessary  where  the  frame  of 
the  government  is  so  compounded  that  the  laws  of 
the  whole  are  in  danger  of  being  contravened  by  the 
laws  of  the  parts.  In  this  case,  if  the  particular 
tribunals  are  invested  with  a  right  of  ultimate  juris- 
diction, besides  the  contradictions  to  be  expected 
from  difference  of  opinion,  there  will  be  much  to 
fear  from  the  bias  of  local  views  and  prejudices,  and 
from  the  interference  of  local  regulations.  As  often 
as  such  an  interference  was  to  happen,  there  would 
be  reason  to  apprehend  that  the  provisions  of  the 
particular  laws  might  be  preferred  to  those  of  the 
general  laws;  for  nothing  is  more  natural  to  men  in 
office  than  to  look  with  peculiar  deference  towards 
that  authority  to  which  they  owe  their  official  exist- 
ence. The  treaties  of  the  United  States,  under  the 
present  Constitution,  are  liable  to  the  infractions  of 
thirteen  different  legislatures,  and  as  many  differ- 
ent courts  of  final  jurisdiction,  acting  under  the 
authority  of  those  legislatures.  The  faith,  the  repu- 
tation, the  peace  of  the  whole  Union,  are  thus  con- 
tinually at  the  mercy  of  the  prejudices,  the  passions, 

VOL.  XI.— 12. 


178  Alexander  Hamilton 

and  the  interests  of  every  member  of  which  it  is 
composed.  Is  it  possible  that  foreign  nations  can 
either  respect  or  confide  in  such  a  government?  Is 
it  possible  that  the  people  of  America  will  longer 
consent  to  trust  their  honor,  their  happiness,  their 
safety,  on  so  precarious  a  foundation? 

In  this  review  of  the  Confederation,  I  have  con- 
fined myself  to  the  exhibition  of  its  most  material 
defects;  passing  over  those  imperfections  in  its  de- 
tails by  which  even  a  great  part  of  the  power  in- 
tended to  be  conferred  upon  it  has  been  in  a  great 
measure  rendered  abortive.  It  must  be  by  this  time 
evident  to  all  men  of  reflection,  who  can  divest  them- 
selves of  the  prepossessions  of  preconceived  opinions, 
that  it  is  a  system  so  radically  vicious  and  unsound, 
as  to  admit  not  of  amendment  but  by  an  entire 
change  in  its  leading  features  and  characters. 

The  organization  of  Congress  is  itself  utterly  im- 
proper for  the  exercise  of  those  powers  which  are 
necessary  to  be  deposited  in  the  Union.  A  single 
assembly  may  be  a  proper  receptacle  of  those  slender, 
or  rather  fettered,  authorities,  which  have  been 
heretofore  delegated  to  the  federal  head;  but  it 
would  be  inconsistent  with  all  the  principles  of  good 
government,  to  intrust  it  with  those  additional 
powers  which,  even  the  moderate  and  more  rational 
adversaries  of  the  proposed  Constitution  admit, 
ought  to  reside  in  the  United  States.  If  that  plan 
should  not  be  adopted,  and  if  the  necessit}^  of  the 
Union  should  be  able  to  withstand  the  ambitious 
aims  of  those  men  who  may  indulge  magnificent 
schemes  of  personal  aggrandizement  from  its  disso- 


The  Federalist  179 

lution,  the  probability  would  be,  that  we  should  run 
into  the  project  of  conferring  supplementary  powers 
upon  Congress,  as  they  are  now  constituted;  and 
either  the  machine,  from  the  intrinsic  feebleness  of 
its  structure,  will  moulder  into  pieces,  in  spite  of  our 
ill-judged  efforts  to  prop  it;  or,  by  successive  aug- 
mentations of  its  force  and  energy,  as  necessity 
might  prompt,  we  shall  finally  accumulate,  in  a 
single  body,  all  the  most  important  prerogatives  of 
sovereignty,  and  thus  entail  upon  our  posterity  one 
of  the  most  execrable  forms  of  government  that 
human  infatuation  ever  contrived.  Thus  we  should 
create  in  reality  that  very  tyranny  which  the  adver- 
saries of  the  new  Constitution  either  are,  or  affect 
to  be,  solicitous  to  avert. 

It  has  not  a  little  contributed  to  the  infirmities  of 
the  existing  federal  system,  that  it  never  had  a 
ratification  by  the  people.  Resting  on  no  better 
foundation  than  the  consent  of  the  several  legisla- 
tures, it  has  been  exposed  to  frequent  and  intricate 
questions  concerning  the  validity  of  its  powers,  and 
has,  in  some  instances,  given  birth  to  the  enormous 
doctrine  of  a  right  of  legislative  repeal.  Owing  its 
ratification  to  the  law  of  a  State,  it  has  been  con- 
tended that  the  same  authority  might  repeal  the  law 
by  which  it  was  ratified.  However  gross  a  heresy 
it  may  be  to  maintain  that  a  party  to  a  compact 
has  a  right  to  revoke  that  compact,  the  doctrine  it- 
self has  had  respectable  advocates.  The  possibility 
of  a  question  of  this  nature  proves  the  necessity 
of  laying  the  foundations  of  our  national  govern- 
ment deeper  than  in  the  mere  sanction  of  delegated 


180  Alexander  Hamilton 

authority.     The  fabric  of  American  empire  ought  to 

rest  on  the  solid  basis  of  the   consent   of   the 

people.     The  streams  of  national  power  ought  to 

flow  immediately  from  that  pure,  original  fountain 

of  all  legitimate  authority. 

Publius. 


From  the  New  York  Packet,  Tuesday,  December  18,  1787 
THE  FEDERALIST.     No.  XXIII 

(HAMILTON) 

To  the  People  of  the  State  of  New  York: 

The  necessity  of  a  Constitution,  at  least  equally 
energetic  with  the  one  proposed,  to  the  preservation 
of  the  Union,  is  the  point  at  the  examination  of 
which  we  are  now  arrived. 

This  inquiry  will  naturally  divide  itself  into  three 
branches — the  objects  to  be  provided  for  by  the 
federal  government,  the  quantity  of  power  neces- 
sary to  the  accomplishment  of  those  objects,  the 
persons  upon  whom  that  power  ought  to  operate. 
Its  distribution  and  organization  will  more  properly 
claim  our  attention  under  the  succeeding  head. 

The  principal  purposes  to  be  answered  by  union 
are  these — the  common  defence  of  the  members; 
the  preservation  of  the  public  peace,  as  well  against 
internal  convulsions  as  external  attacks;  the  regu- 
lation of  commerce  with  other  nations  and  between 
the  States;  the  superintendence  of  our  intercourse, 
political  and  commercial,  with  foreign  countries. 

The  authorities  essential  to  the  common  defence 
are  these:  to  raise  armies ;  to  build  and  equip  fleets ; 


The  Federalist  181 

to  prescribe  rules  for  the  government  of  both;  to 
direct  their  operations;  to  provide  for  their  sup- 
port. These  powers  ought  to  exist  without  limita- 
tion, because  it  is  impossible  to  foresee  or  define  the 
extent  and  variety  of  national  exigencies,  or  the  cor- 
respondent  extent  and  variety  of  the  means  which  may 
be  necessary  to  satisfy  them.  The  circumstances  that 
endanger  the  safety  of  nations  are  infinite,  and  for 
this  reason  no  constitutional  shackles  can  wisely  be 
imposed  on  the  power  to  which  the  care  of  it  is  com- 
mitted. This  power  ought  to  be  co-extensive  with 
all  the  possible  combinations  of  such  circumstances; 
and  ought  to  be  under  the  direction  of  the  same 
councils  which  are  appointed  to  preside  over  the 
common  defence. 

This  is  one  of  those  truths  which,  to  a  correct  and 
unprejudiced  mind,  carries  its  own  evidence  along 
with  it;  and  may  be  obscured,  but  cannot  be  made 
plainer  by  argument  or  reasoning.  It  rests  upon 
axioms  as  simple  as  they  are  universal;  the  means 
ought  to  be  proportioned  to  the  end;  the  persons, 
from  whose  agency  the  attainment  of  any  end  is  ex- 
pected, ought  to  possess  the  means  by  which  it  is  to 
be  attained. 

Whether  there  ought  to  be  a  federal  government 
intrusted  with  the  care  of  the  common  defence,  is  a 
question  in  the  first  instance,  open  for  discussion; 
but  the  moment  it  is  decided  in  the  affirmative, 
it  will  follow,  that  that  government  ought  to  be 
clothed  with  all  the  powers  requisite  to  complete 
execution  of  its  trust.  And  unless  it  can  be  shown 
that  the  circumstances  which  may  affect  the  public 


1 82  Alexander  Hamilton 

safety  are  reducible  within  certain  determinate  lim- 
its ;  unless  the  contrary  of  this  position  can  be  fairly 
and  rationally  disputed,  it  must  be  admitted,  as  a 
necessary  consequence,  that  there  can  be  no  limita- 
tion of  that  authority  which  is  to  provide  for  the 
defence  and  protection  of  the  community,  in  any 
matter  essential  to  its  efficacy — that  is,  in  any  mat- 
ter essential  to  the  formation,  direction,  or  support 

Of  the  NATIONAL  FORCES. 

Defective  as  the  present  Confederation  has  been 
proved  to  be,  this  principle  appears  to  have  been 
fully  recognized  by  the  framers  of  it;  though  they 
have  not  made  proper  or  adequate  provision  for  its 
exercise.  Congress  have  an  unlimited  discretion  to 
make  requisitions  of  men  and  money;  to  govern 
the  army  and  navy ;  to  direct  their  operations.  As 
their  requisitions  are  made  constitutionally  binding 
upon  the  States,  who  are  in  fact  under  the  most 
solemn  obligations  to  furnish  the  supplies  required 
of  them,  the  intention  evidently  was,  that  the  United 
States  should  command  whatever  resources  were  by 
them  judged  requisite  to  the  "  common  defence  and 
general  welfare."  It  was  presumed  that  a  sense  of 
their  true  interests,  and  a  regard  to  the  dictates  of 
good  faith,  would  be  found  sufficient  pledges  for  the 
punctual  performance  of  the  duty  of  the  members  to 
the  federal  head. 

The  experiment  has,  however,  demonstrated  that 
this  expectation  was  ill-founded  and  illusory;  and 
the  observations,  made  under  the  last  head,  will,  I 
imagine,  have  sufficed  to  convince  the  impartial  and 
discerning,  that  there  is  an  absolute  necessity  for  an 


The  Federalist  18 


3 


entire  change  in  the  first  principles  of  the  system; 
that  if  we  are  in  earnest  about  giving  the  Union 
energy  and  duration,  we  must  abandon  the  vain 
project  of  legislating  upon  the  States  in  their  col- 
lective capacities;  we  must  extend  the  laws  of  the 
federal  government  to  the  individual  citizens  of 
America;  we  must  discard  the  fallacious  scheme  of 
quotas  and  requisitions,  as  equally  impracticable 
and  unjust.  The  result  from  all  this  is  that  the 
Union  ought  to  be  invested  with  full  power  to  levy 
troops;  to  build  and  equip  fleets;  and  to  raise  the 
revenues  which  will  be  required  for  the  formation 
and  support  of  an  army  and  navy,  in  the  customary 
and  ordinary  modes  practised  in  other  governments. 
If  the  circumstances  of  our  country  are  such  as  to 
demand  a  compound  instead  of  a  simple,  a  con- 
federate instead  of  a  sole,  government,  the  essen- 
tial point  which  will  remain  to  be  adjusted  will  be 
to  discriminate  the  objects,  as  far  as  it  can  be  done, 
which  shall  appertain  to  the  different  provinces  or 
departments  of  power;  allowing  to  each  the  most 
ample  authority  for  fulfilling  the  objects  committed 
to  its  charge.  Shall  the  Union  be  constituted  the 
guardian  of  the  common  safety?  Are  fleets  and  ar- 
mies and  revenues  necessary  to  this  purpose?  The 
government  of  the  Union  must  be  empowered  to  pass 
all  laws,  and  to  make  all  regulations  which  have  re- 
lation to  them.  The  same  must  be  the  case  in  re- 
spect to  commerce,  and  to  every  other  matter  to 
which  its  jurisdiction  is  permitted  to  extend.  Is 
the  administration  of  justice  between  the  citizens  of 
the  same  State  the  proper  department  of  the  local 


184  Alexander  Hamilton 

governments  ?  These  must  possess  all  the  authorities 
which  are  connected  with  this  object,  and  with  every 
other  that  may  be  allotted  to  their  particular  cogni- 
zance and  direction.  Not  to  confer  in  each  case  a 
degree  of  power  commensurate  to  the  end,  would  be 
to  violate  the  most  obvious  rules  of  prudence  and 
propriety,  and  improvidently  to  trust  the  great  in- 
terests of  the  nation  to  hands  which  are  disabled 
from  managing  them  with  vigor  and  success. 

Who  so  likely  to  make  suitable  provisions  for  the 
public  defence,  as  that  body  to  which  the  guardian- 
ship of  the  public  safety  is  confided;  which,  as  the 
centre  of  information,  will  best  understand  the  ex- 
tent and  urgency  of  the  dangers  that  threaten;  as 
the  representative  of  the  whole,  will  feel  itself  most 
deeply  interested  in  the  preservation  of  every  part; 
which,  from  the  responsibility  implied  in  the  duty 
assigned  to  it,  will  be  most  sensibly  impressed  with 
the  necessity  of  proper  exertions;  and  which,  by 
the  extension  of  its  authority  throughout  the  States, 
can  alone  establish  uniformity  and  concert  in  the 
plans  and  measures  by  which  the  common  safety  is 
to  be  secured  ?  Is  there  not  a  manifest  inconsistency 
in  devolving  upon  the  federal  government  the  care 
of  the  general  defence,  and  leaving  in  the  State  gov- 
ernments the  effective  powers  by  which  it  is  to  be 
provided  for?  Is  not  a  want  of  co-operation  the  in- 
fallible consequence  of  such  a  system?  And  will 
not  weakness,  disorder,  an  undue  distribution  of 
the  burdens  and  calamities  of  war,  an  unnecessary 
and  intolerable  increase  of  expense,  be  its  natural 
and  inevitable  concomitants  ?     Have  we  not  had  un- 


The  Federalist  185 

equivocal  experience  of  its  effects  in  the  course  of  the 
revolution  which  we  have  just  accomplished? 

Every  view  we  may  take  of  the  subject,  as  candid 
inquirers  after  truth,  will  serve  to  convince  us,  that 
it  is  both  unwise  and  dangerous  to  deny  the  federal 
government  an  unconfined  authority,  as  to  all  those 
objects  which  are  intrusted  to  its  management.  It 
will  indeed  deserve  the  most  vigilant  and  careful  at- 
tention of  the  people,  to  see  that  it  be  modelled  in 
such  a  manner  as  to  admit  of  its  being  safely  vested 
with  the  requisite  powers.  If  any  plan  which  has 
been,  or  may  be,  offered  to  our  consideration,  should 
not,  upon  a  dispassionate  inspection,  be  found  to 
answer  this  description,  it  ought  to  be  rejected.  A 
government,  the  constitution  of  which  renders  it 
unfit  to  be  trusted  with  all  the  powers  which  a  free 
people  ought  to  delegate  to  any  government,  would  be 
an  unsafe  and  improper  depositary  of  the  national 
interests.  Wherever  these  can  with  propriety  be 
confided,  the  coincident  powers  may  safely  accom- 
pany them.  This  is  the  true  result  of  all  just  reason- 
ing upon  the  subject.  And  the  adversaries  of  the 
plan  promulgated  by  the  convention  ought  to  have 
confined  themselves  to  showing,  that  the  internal 
structure  of  the  proposed  government  was  such  as 
to  render  it  unworthy  of  the  confidence  of  the  people. 
They  ought  not  to  have  wandered  into  inflammatory 
declamations  and  unmeaning  cavils  about  the  ex- 
tent of  the  powers.  The  powers  are  not  too  ex- 
tensive for  the  objects  of  federal  administration,  or, 
in  other  words,  for  the  management  of  our  national 
interests;    nor  can  any  satisfactory  argument  be 


1 86  Alexander  Hamilton 

framed  to  show  that  they  are  chargeable  with  such 
an  excess.  If  it  be  true,  as  has  been  insinuated  by 
some  of  the  writers  on  the  other  side,  that  the  diffi- 
culty arises  from  the  nature  of  the  thing,  and  that 
the  extent  of  the  country  will  not  permit  us  to  form 
a  government  in  which  such  ample  powers  can 
safely  be  reposed,  it  would  prove  that  we  ought  to 
contract  our  views,  and  resort  to  the  expedient  of 
separate  confederacies,  which  will  move  within  more 
practicable  spheres.  For  the  absurdity  must  con- 
tinually stare  us  in  the  face  of  confiding  to  a  govern- 
ment the  direction  of  the  most  essential  national 
interests,  without  daring  to  trust  to  it  the  author- 
ities which  are  indispensable  to  their  proper  and 
efficient  management.  Let  us  not  attempt  to  recon- 
cile contradictions,  but  firmly  embrace  a  rational 
alternative. 

I  trust,  however,  that  the  impracticability  of  one 
general  system  cannot  be  shown.  I  am  greatly  mis- 
taken, if  any  thing  of  weight  has  yet  been  advanced 
of  this  tendency;  and  I  flatter  myself,  that  the  ob- 
servations which  have  been  made  in  the  course  of 
these  papers  have  served  to  place  the  reverse  of  that 
position  in  as  clear  a  light  as  any  matter  still  in  the 
womb  of  time  and  experience  can  be  susceptible  of. 
This,  at  all  events,  must  be  evident,  that  the  very 
difficulty  itself,  drawn  from  the  extent  of  the  country, 
is  the  strongest  argument  in  favor  of  an  energetic 
government;  for  any  other  can  certainly  never  pre- 
serve the  Union  of  so  large  an  empire.  If  we  em- 
brace the  tenets  of  those  who  oppose  the  adoption 
of  the  proposed  Constitution,  as  the  standard  of  our 


The  Federalist  187 

political  creed,  we  cannot  fail  to  verify  the  gloomy 
doctrines  which  predict  the  impracticability  of  a 
national  system  pervading  the  entire  limits  of  the 
present  Confederacy. 

Publius. 


For  the  Independent  Journal 
THE  FEDERALIST.     No.  XXIV 

(HAMILTON) 

To  the  People  of  the  State  of  New  York: 

To  the  powers  proposed  to  be  conferred  upon  the 
federal  government,  in  respect  to  the  creation  and 
direction  of  the  national  forces,  I  have  met  with  but 
one  specific  objection,  which,  if  I  understand  it 
right,  is  this, — that  proper  provision  has  not  been 
made  against  the  existence  of  standing  armies  in 
time  of  peace,  an  objection  which,  I  shall  now  en- 
deavor to  show,  rests  on  weak  and  unsubstantial 
foundations. 

It  has  indeed  been  brought  forward  in  the  most 
vague  and  general  form,  supported  only  by  bold 
assertions,  without  the  appearance  of  argument; 
without  even  the  sanction  of  theoretical  opinions; 
in  contradiction  to  the  practice  of  other  free  nations, 
and  to  the  general  sense  of  America,  as  expressed  in 
most  of  the  existing  constitutions.  The  propriety 
of  this  remark  will  appear,  the  moment  it  is  recol- 
lected that  the  objection  under  consideration  turns 
upon  a  supposed  necessity  of  restraining  the  legis- 
lative authority  of  the  nation,  in  the  article  of 


1 88  Alexander  Hamilton 

military  establishments;  a  principle  unheard  of,  ex- 
cept in  one  or  two  of  our  State  constitutions,  and 
rejected  in  all  the  rest. 

A  stranger  to  our  politics,  who  was  to  read  our 
newspapers  at  the  present  juncture,  without  having 
previously  inspected  the  plan  reported  by  the  con- 
vention, would  be  naturally  led  to  one  of  two 
conclusions:  either  that  it  contained  a  positive  in- 
junction, that  standing  armies  should  be  kept  up  in 
time  of  peace ;  or  that  it  vested  in  the  executive 
the  whole  power  of  levying  troops,  without  subject- 
ing his  discretion,  in  any  shape,  to  the  control  of 
the  legislature. 

If  he  came  afterwards  to  peruse  the  plan  itself,  he 
would  be  surprised  to  discover,  that  neither  the  one 
nor  the  other  was  the  case ;  that  the  whole  power  of 
raising  armies  was  lodged  in  the  Legislature,  not  in 
the  Executive;  that  this  legislature  was  to  be  a  popu- 
lar body,  consisting  of  the  representatives  of  the 
people  periodically  elected;  and  that  instead  of  the 
provision  he  had  supposed  in  favor  of  standing  ar- 
mies, there  was  to  be  found,  in  respect  to  this  object, 
an  important  qualification  even  of  the  legislative 
discretion,  in  that  clause  which  forbids  the  appro- 
priation of  money  for  the  support  of  an  army  for  any 
longer  period  than  two  years — a  precaution  which, 
upon  a  nearer  view  of  it,  will  appear  to  be  a  great 
and  real  security  against  the  keeping  up  of  troops 
without  evident  necessity. 

Disappointed  in  his  first  surmise,  the  person  I  have 
supposed  would  be  apt  to  pursue  his  conjectures  a 
little  further.     He  would  naturally  say  to  himself, 


The  Federalist  189 

it  is  impossible  that  all  this  vehement  and  pathetic 
declamation  can  be  without  some  colorable  pretext. 
It  must  needs  be  that  this  people,  so  jealous  of  their 
liberties,  have,  in  all  the  preceding  models  of  the 
constitutions  which  they  have  established,  inserted 
the  most  precise  and  rigid  precautions  on  this  point, 
the  omission  of  which,  in  the  new  plan,  has  given 
birth  to  all  this  apprehension  and  clamor. 

If,  under  this  impression,  he  proceeded  to  pass  in 
review  the  several  State  constitutions,  how  great 
would  be  his  disappointment  to  find  that  two  only  of 
them1  contained  an  interdiction  of  standing  armies 
in  time  of  peace;  that  the  other  eleven  had  either 
observed  a  profound  silence  on  the  subject,  or  had 
in  express  terms  admitted  the  right  of  the  Legis- 
lature to  authorize  their  existence. 

Still,  however,  he  would  be  persuaded  that  there 
must  be  some  plausible  foundation  for  the  cry  raised 
on  this  head.  He  would  never  be  able  to  imagine, 
while  any  source  of  information  remained  unexplored, 

1  This  statement  of  the  matter  is  taken  from  the  printed  collection 
of  State  Constitutions.  Pennsylvania  and  North  Carolina  are  the 
two  which  contain  the  interdiction  in  these  words:  "As  standing 
armies  in  time  of  peace  are  dangerous  to  liberty,  they  ought  not  to 
be  kept  up."  This  is,  in  truth,  rather  a  caution  than  a  prohibition. 
New  Hampshire,  Massachusetts,  Delaware,  and  Maryland  have,  in 
each  of  their  bills  of  rights,  a  clause  to  this  effect:  "Standing  armies 
are  dangerous  to  liberty,  and  ought  not  to  be  raised  or  kept  up  with- 
out the  consent  of  the  Legislature" ;  which  is  a  formal  admission 
of  the  authority  of  the  Legislature.  New  York  has  no  bills  of  rights, 
and  her  constitution  says  not  a  word  about  the  matter.  No  bills  of 
rights  appear  annexed  to  the  constitutions  of  the  other  States,  except 
the  foregoing,  and  their  constitutions  are  equally  silent.  I  am  told, 
however,  that  one  or  two  States  have  bills  of  rights  which  do  not  ap- 
pear in  this  collection;  but  that  those  also  recognize  the  right  of  the 
legislative  authority  in  this  respect. — Publius. 


190  Alexander  Hamilton 

that  it  was  nothing  more  than  an  experiment  upon 
the  public  credulity,  dictated  either  by  a  deliber- 
ate intention  to  deceive,  or  by  the  overflowings  of 
a  zeal  too  intemperate  to  be  ingenuous.  It  would 
probably  occur  to  him,  that  he  would  be  likely  to 
find  the  precautions  he  was  in  search  of  in  the  primi- 
tive compact  between  the  States.  Here,  at  length, 
he  would  expect  to  meet  with  a  solution  of  the 
enigma.  No  doubt,  he  would  observe  to  himself, 
the  existing  Confederation  must  contain  the  most 
explicit  provisions  against  military  establishments 
in  time  of  peace;  and  a  departure  from  this  model, 
in  a  favorite  point,  has  occasioned  the  discontent 
which  appears  to  influence  these  political  champions. 
If  he  should  now  apply  himself  to  a  careful  and 
critical  survey  of  the  articles  of  Confederation,  his 
astonishment  would  not  only  be  increased,  but 
would  acquire  a  mixture  of  indignation,  at  the  un- 
expected discovery,  that  these  articles,  instead  of 
containing  the  prohibition  he  looked  for,  and  though 
they  had,  with  jealous  circumspection,  restricted 
the  authority  of  the  State  legislatures  in  this  par- 
ticular, had  not  imposed  a  single  restraint  on  that 
of  the  United  States.  If  he  happened  to  be  a  man 
of  quick  sensibility,  or  ardent  temper,  he  could  now 
no  longer  refrain  from  regarding  these  clamors  as 
the  dishonest  artifices  of  a  sinister  and  unprincipled 
opposition  to  a  plan  which  ought  at  least  to  receive 
a  fair  and  candid  examination  from  all  sincere  lovers 
of  their  country!  How  else,  he  would  say,  could  the 
authors  of  them  have  been  tempted  to  vent  such 
loud  censures  upon  that  plan,  about  a  point  in  which 


The  Federalist  191 

it  seems  to  have  conformed  itself  to  the  general  sense 
of  America  as  declared  in  its  different  forms  of  gov- 
ernment, and  in  which  it  has  even  superadded  a  new 
and  powerful  guard  unknown  to  any  of  them?  If, 
on  the  contrary,  he  happened  to  be  a  man  of  calm 
and  dispassionate  feelings,  he  would  indulge  a  sigh 
for  the  frailty  of  human  nature,  and  would  lament, 
that  in  a  matter  so  interesting  to  the  happiness  of 
millions,  the  true  merits  of  the  question  should  be 
perplexed  and  entangled  by  expedients  so  unfriendly 
to  an  impartial  and  right  determination.  Even 
such  a  man  could  hardly  forbear  remarking,  that  a 
conduct  of  this  kind  has  too  much  the  appearance  of 
an  intention  to  mislead  the  people  by  alarming  their 
passions,  rather  than  to  convince  them  by  arguments 
addressed  to  their  understandings. 

But  however  little  this  objection  may  be  counte- 
nanced, even  by  precedents  among  ourselves,  it  may 
be  satisfactory  to  take  a  nearer  view  of  its  intrinsic 
merits.  From  a  close  examination  it  will  appear 
that  restraints  upon  the  discretion  of  the  legislature 
in  respect  to  military  establishments  in  time  of 
peace,  would  be  improper  to  be  imposed,  and  if  im- 
posed, from  the  necessities  of  society,  would  be  un- 
likely to  be  observed. 

Though  a  wide  ocean  separates  the  United  States 
from  Europe,  yet  there  are  various  considerations 
that  warn  us  against  an  excess  of  confidence  or  se- 
curity. On  one  side  of  us,  and  stretching  far  into 
our  rear,  are  growing  settlements  subject  to  the  do- 
minion of  Britain.  On  the  other  side,  and  extend- 
ing to  meet  the  British  settlements,  are  colonies  and 


192  Alexander  Hamilton 

establishments  subject  to  the  dominion  of  Spain. 
This  situation  and  the  vicinity  of  the  West  India 
Islands,  belonging  to  these  two  powers,  create  be- 
tween them,  in  respect  to  their  American  possessions 
and  in  relation  to  us,  a  common  interest.  The  sav- 
age tribes  on  our  Western  frontier  ought  to  be  re- 
garded as  our  natural  enemies,  their  natural  allies, 
because  they  have  most  to  fear  from  us,  and  most  to 
hope  from  them.  The  improvements  in  the  art  of 
navigation  have,  as  to  the  facility  of  communication, 
rendered  distant  nations,  in  a  great  measure,  neigh- 
bors. Britain  and  Spain  are  among  the  principal 
maritime  powers  of  Europe.  A  future  concert  of 
views  between  these  nations  ought  not  to  be  re- 
garded as  improbable.  The  increasing  remoteness 
of  consanguinity  is  every  day  diminishing  the  force 
of  the  family  compact  between  France  and  Spain. 
And  politicians  have  ever  with  great  reason  con- 
sidered the  ties  of  blood  as  feeble  and  precarious 
links  of  political  connection.  These  circumstances 
combined,  admonish  us  not  to  be  too  sanguine  in 
considering  ourselves  as  entirely  out  of  the  reach  of 
danger. 

Previous  to  the  Revolution,  and  ever  since  the 
peace,  there  has  been  a  constant  necessity  for  keep- 
ing small  garrisons  on  our  Western  frontier.  No 
person  can  doubt  that  these  will  continue  to  be  in- 
dispensable, if  it  should  only  be  against  the  ravages 
and  depredations  of  the  Indians.  These  garrisons 
must  either  be  furnished  by  occasional  detachments 
from  the  militia,  or  by  permanent  corps  in  the  pay  of 
the  government.     The  first  is  impracticable ;   and  if 


The  Federalist  193 

practicable,  would  be  pernicious.  The  militia  would 
not  long,  if  at  all,  submit  to  be  dragged  from  their 
occupations  and  families  to  perform  that  most  dis- 
agreeable duty  in  times  of  profound  peace.  And  if 
they  could  be  prevailed  upon  or  compelled  to  do  it, 
the  increased  expense  of  a  frequent  rotation  of  serv- 
ice, and  the  loss  of  labor  and  disconcertion  of  the 
industrious  pursuits  of  individuals,  would  form  con- 
clusive objections  to  the  scheme.  It  would  be  as 
burdensome  and  injurious  to  the  public  as  ruinous 
to  private  citizens.  The  latter  resource  of  permanent 
corps  in  the  pay  of  the  government  amounts  to  a 
standing  army  in  time  of  peace ;  a  small  one,  indeed, 
but  not  the  less  real  for  being  small.  Here  is  a  sim- 
ple view  of  the  subject,  that  shows  us  at  once  the 
impropriety  of  a  constitutional  interdiction  of  such 
establishments,  and  the  necessity  of  leaving  the 
matter  to  the  discretion  and  prudence  of  the  legis- 
lature. 

In  proportion  to  our  increase  in  strength,  it  is 
probable,  nay,  it  may  be  said  certain,  that  Britain 
and  Spain  would  augment  their  military  establish- 
ments in  our  neighborhood.  If  we  should  not  be 
willing  to  be  exposed,  in  a  naked  and  defenceless 
condition,  to  their  insults  and  encroachments,  we 
should  find  it  expedient  to  increase  our  frontier 
garrisons  in  some  ratio  to  the  force  by  which  our 
Western  settlements  might  be  annoyed.  There  are, 
and  will  be,  particular  posts,  the  possession  of  which 
will  include  the  command  of  large  districts  of  terri- 
tory, and  facilitate  future  invasions  of  the  remainder. 
It  may  be  added  that  some  of  those  posts  will  be 

VOL.  XI.— 13. 


194  Alexander  Hamilton 

keys  to  the  trade  with  the  Indian  nations.  Can  any 
man  think  it  would  be  wise  to  leave  such  posts  in  a 
situation  to  be  at  any  instant  seized  by  one  or  the 
other  of  two  neighboring  and  formidable  powers? 
To  act  this  part  would  be  to  desert  all  the  usual 
maxims  of  prudence  and  policy. 

If  we  mean  to  be  a  commercial  people,  or  even  to 
be  secure  on  our  Atlantic  side,  we  must  endeavor,  as 
soon  as  possible,  to  have  a  navy.  To  this  purpose 
there  must  be  dock-yards  and  arsenals ;  and  for  the 
defence  of  these,  fortifications,  and  probably  garri- 
sons. When  a  nation  has  become  so  powerful  by 
sea  that  it  can  protect  its  dock-yards  by  its  fleets, 
this  supersedes  the  necessity  of  garrisons  for  that 
purpose;  but  where  naval  establishments  are  in 
their  infancy,  moderate  garrisons  will,  in  all  likeli- 
hood, be  found  an  indispensable  security  against 
descents  for  the  destruction  of  the  arsenals  and 
dock-yards,  and  sometimes  of  the  fleet  itself. 

Publius. 


From  the  New  York  Packet,  Friday,  December  21,  1787 
THE  FEDERALIST.     No.  XXV 

(HAMILTON) 

To  the  People  of  the  State  of  New  York: 

It  may  perhaps  be  urged  that  the  objects  enumer- 
ated in  the  preceding  number  ought  to  be  provided 
for  by  the  State  governments,  under  the  direction 
of  the  Union.  But  this  would  be,  in  reality,  an 
inversion  of  the  primary  principle  of  our  political 
association,  as  it  would  in  practice  transfer  the  care 


The  Federalist  195 

of  the  common  defence  from  the  federal  head  to  the 
individual  members:  a  project  oppressive  to  some 
States,  dangerous  to  all,  and  baneful  to  the  Con- 
federacy. 

The  territories  of  Britain,  Spain,  and  of  the  Indian 
nations  in  our  neighborhood  do  not  border  on  par- 
ticular States,  but  encircle  the  Union  from  Maine  to 
Georgia.  The  danger,  though  in  different  degrees, 
is  therefore  common.  And  the  means  of  guarding 
against  it  ought,  in  like  manner,  to  be  the  objects  of 
common  councils  and  of  a  common  treasury.  It 
happens  that  some  States,  from  local  situation,  are 
more  directly  exposed.  New  York  is  of  this  class. 
Upon  the  plan  of  separate  provisions,  New  York 
would  have  to  sustain  the  whole  weight  of  the  estab- 
lishments requisite  to  her  immediate  safety,  and  to 
the  mediate  or  ultimate  protection  of  her  neighbors. 
This  would  neither  be  equitable  as  it  respected  New 
York  nor  safe  as  it  respected  the  other  States. 
Various  inconveniences  would  attend  such  a  system. 
The  States,  to  whose  lot  it  might  fall  to  support  the 
necessary  establishments,  would  be  as  little  able  as 
willing,  for  a  considerable  time  to  come,  to  bear  the 
burden  of  competent  provisions.  The  security  of 
all  would  thus  be  subjected  to  the  parsimony,  im- 
providence, or  inability  of  a  part.  If  the  resources 
of  such  part  becoming  more  abundant  and  exten- 
sive, its  provisions  should  be  proportionally  en- 
larged, the  other  States  would  quickly  take  the 
alarm  at  seeing  the  whole  military  force  of  the  Union 
in  the  hands  of  two  or  three  of  its  members,  and 
those  probably  amongst  the  most  powerful.    They 


196  Alexander  Hamilton 

would  each  choose  to  have  some  counterpoise,  and 
pretences  could  easily  be  contrived.  In  this  situa- 
tion, military  establishments,  nourished  by  mutual 
jealousy,  would  be  apt  to  swell  beyond  their  natural 
or  proper  size ;  and  being  at  the  separate  disposal  of 
the  members,  they  would  be  engines  for  the  abridg- 
ment or  demolition  of  the  national  authority. 

Reasons  have  been  already  given  to  induce  a 
supposition  that  the  State  governments  will  too 
naturally  be  prone  to  a  rivalship  with  that  of  the 
Union,  the  foundation  of  which  will  be  the  love  of 
power;  and  that  in  any  contest  between  the  federal 
head  and  one  of  its  members  the  people  will  be  most 
apt  to  unite  with  their  local  government.  If,  in 
addition  to  this  immense  advantage,  the  ambition 
of  the  members  should  be  stimulated  by  the  separate 
and  independent  possession  of  military  forces,  it 
would  afford  too  strong  a  temptation  and  too  great 
a  facility  to  them  to  make  enterprises  upon,  and 
finally  to  subvert,  the  constitutional  authority  of  the 
Union.  On  the  other  hand,  the  liberty  of  the  people 
would  be  less  safe  in  this  state  of  things  than  in  that 
which  left  the  national  forces  in  the  hands  of  the 
national  government.  As  far  as  an  army  may  be 
considered  as  a  dangerous  weapon  of  power,  it  had 
better  be  in  those  hands  of  which  the  people  are 
most  likely  to  be  jealous  than  in  those  of  which  they 
are  least  likely  to  be  jealous.  For  it  is  a  truth, 
which  the  experience  of  ages  has  attested,  that  the 
people  are  always  most  in  danger  when  the  means  of 
injuring  their  rights  are  in  the  possession  of  those 
of  whom  they  entertain  the  least  suspicion. 


The  Federalist  197 

The  framers  of  the  existing  Confederation,  fully 
aware  of  the  danger  to  the  Union  from  the  separate 
possession  of  military  forces  by  the  States,  have,  in 
express  terms,  prohibited  them  from  having  either 
ships  or  troops,  unless  with  the  consent  of  Congress. 
The  truth  is,  that  the  existence  of  a  federal  govern- 
ment and  military  establishments  under  State  au- 
thority are  not  less  at  variance  with  each  other  than 
a  due  supply  of  the  federal  treasury  and  the  system 
of  quotas  and  requisitions. 

There  are  other  lights  besides  those  already  taken 
notice  of,  in  which  the  impropriety  of  restraints  on 
the  discretion  of  the  national  legislature  will  be 
equally  manifest.  The  design  of  the  objection, 
which  has  been  mentioned,  is  to  preclude  standing 
armies  in  time  of  peace,  though  we  have  never  been 
informed  how  far  it  is  designed  the  prohibition  should 
extend:  whether  to  raising  armies  as  well  as  to 
keeping  them  up  in  a  season  of  tranquillity  or  not. 
If  it  be  confined  to  the  latter  it  will  have  no  precise 
signification,  and  it  will  be  ineffectual  for  the  pur- 
pose intended.  When  armies  are  once  raised  what 
shall  be  denominated  " keeping  them  up,"  contrary 
to  the  sense  of  the  Constitution?  What  time  shall 
be  requisite  to  ascertain  the  violation?  Shall  it  be 
a  week,  a  month,  a  year?  Or  shall  we  say  they  may 
be  continued  as  long  as  the  danger  which  occasioned 
their  being  raised  continues?  This  would  be  to 
admit  that  they  might  be  kept  up  in  time  of  peace, 
against  threatening  or  impending  danger,  which 
would  be  at  once  to  deviate  from  the  literal  meaning 
of  the  prohibition,  and  to  introduce  an  extensive 


198  Alexander  Hamilton 

latitude  of  construction.  Who  shall  judge  of  the 
continuance  of  the  danger?  This  must  undoubtedly 
be  submitted  to  the  national  government,  and  the 
matter  would  then  be  brought  to  this  issue,  that  the 
national  government,  to  provide  against  appre- 
hended danger,  might  in  the  first  instance  raise 
troops,  and  might  afterwards  keep  them  on  foot 
as  long  as  they  supposed  the  peace  or  safety  of  the 
community  was  in  any  degree  of  jeopardy.  It  is 
easy  to  perceive  that  a  discretion  so  latitudinary 
as  this  would  afford  ample  room  for  eluding  the 
force  of  the  provision. 

The  supposed  utility  of  a  provision  of  this  kind  can 
only  be  founded  on  the  supposed  probability,  or  at 
least  possibility,  of  a  combination  between  the  exec- 
utive and  the  legislative,  in  some  scheme  of  usur- 
pation. Should  this  at  any  time  happen,  how  easy 
would  it  be  to  fabricate  pretences  of  approaching 
danger!  Indian  hostilities,  instigated  by  Spain  or 
Britain,  would  always  be  at  hand.  Provocations  to 
produce  the  desired  appearances  might  even  be  given 
to  some  foreign  power,  and  appeased  again  by  timely 
concessions.  If  we  can  reasonably  presume  such  a 
combination  to  have  been  formed,  and  that  the  enter- 
prise is  warranted  by  a  sufficient  prospect  of  success, 
the  army,  when  once  raised,  from  whatever  cause,  or 
on  whatever  pretext,  may  be  applied  to  the  execution 
of  the  project. 

If,  to  obviate  this  consequence,  it  should  be  re- 
solved to  extend  the  prohibition  to  the  raising  of 
armies  in  time  of  peace,  the  United  States  would 
then  exhibit  the  most  extraordinary  spectacle  which 


The  Federalist  199 

the  world  has  yet  seen, — that  of  a  nation  incapaci- 
tated by  its  Constitution  to  prepare  for  defence,  be- 
fore it  was  actually  invaded.  As  the  ceremony  of  a 
formal  denunciation  of  war  has  of  late  fallen  into 
disuse,  the  presence  of  an  enemy  within  our  terri- 
tories must  be  waited  for,  as  the  legal  warrant  to  the 
government  to  begin  its  levies  of  men  for  the  protec- 
tion of  the  State.  We  must  receive  the  blow,  before 
we  could  even  prepare  to  return  it.  All  that  kind  of 
policy  by  which  nations  anticipate  distant  danger, 
and  meet  the  gathering  storm,  must  be  abstained 
from,  as  contrary  to  the  genuine  maxims  of  a  free 
government.  We  must  expose  our  property  and 
liberty  to  the  mercy  of  foreign  invaders,  and  invite 
them  by  our  weakness  to  seize  the  naked  and  defence- 
less prey,  because  we  are  afraid  that  rulers,  created 
by  our  choice,  dependent  on  our  will,  might  endanger 
that  liberty,  by  an  abuse  of  the  means  necessary  to 
its  preservation. 

Here  I  expect  we  shall  be  told  that  the  militia  of 
the  country  is  its  natural  bulwark,  and  would  be  at 
all  times  equal  to  the  national  defence.  This  doc- 
trine, in  substance,  had  like  to  have  lost  us  our  in- 
dependence. It  cost  millions  to  the  United  States 
that  might  have  been  saved.  The  facts  which, 
from  our  own  experience,  forbid  a  reliance  of  this 
kind,  are  too  recent  to  permit  us  to  be  the  dupes  of 
such  a  suggestion.  The  steady  operations  of  war 
against  a  regular  and  disciplined  army  can  only  be 
successfully  conducted  by  a  force  of  the  same  kind. 
Considerations  of  economy,  not  less  than  of  stabil- 
ity and  vigor,  confirm  this  position.     The  American 


2oo  Alexander  Hamilton 

militia,  in  the  course  of  the  late  war,  have,  by  their 
valor  on  numerous  occasions,  erected  eternal  monu- 
ments to  their  fame;  but  the  bravest  of  them  feel 
and  know  that  the  liberty  of  their  country  could  not 
have  been  established  by  their  efforts  alone,  however 
great  and  valuable  they  were.  War,  like  most  other 
things,  is  a  science  to  be  acquired  and  perfected  by 
diligence,  by  perseverance,  by  time,  and  by  practice. 
All  violent  policy,  as  it  is  contrary  to  the  natural 
and  experienced  course  of  human  affairs,  defeats  it- 
self. Pennsylvania,  at  this  instant,  affords  an  ex- 
ample of  the  truth  of  this  remark.  The  Bill  of  Rights 
of  that  State  declares  that  standing  armies  are  dan- 
gerous to  liberty,  and  ought  not  to  be  kept  up  in 
time  of  peace.  Pennsylvania,  nevertheless,  in  a 
time  of  profound  peace,  from  the  existence  of  partial 
disorders  in  one  or  two  of  her  counties,  has  resolved 
to  raise  a  body  of  troops ;  and  in  all  probability  will 
keep  them  up  as  long  as  there  is  any  appearance  of 
danger  to  the  public  peace.  The  conduct  of  Massa- 
chusetts affords  a  lesson  on  the  same  subject,  though 
on  different  ground.  That  State  (without  waiting 
for  the  sanction  of  Congress,  as  the  articles  of  the 
Confederation  require)  was  compelled  to  raise  troops 
to  quell  a  domestic  insurrection,  and  still  keeps  a 
corps  in  pay  to  prevent  a  revival  of  the  spirit  of 
revolt.  The  particular  constitution  of  Massachu- 
setts opposed  no  obstacle  to  the  measure;  but  the 
instance  is  still  of  use  to  instruct  us  that  cases  are 
likely  to  occur  under  our  government,  as  well  as 
under  those  of  other  nations,  which  will  sometimes 
render  a  military  force  in  time  of  peace  essential  to 


The  Federalist  201 

the  security  of  the  society,  and  that  it  is  therefore 
improper  in  this  respect  to  control  the  legislative 
discretion.  It  also  teaches  us,  in  its  application  to 
the  United  States,  how  little  the  rights  of  a  feeble 
government  are  likely  to  be  respected,  even  by  its 
own  constituents.  And  it  teaches  us,  in  addition 
to  the  rest,  how  unequal  parchment  provisions  are 
to  a  struggle  with  public  necessity. 

It  was  a  fundamental  maxim  of  the  Lacedaemonian 
commonwealth,  that  the  post  of  admiral  should  not 
be  conferred  twice  on  the  same  person.  The  Pelo- 
ponnesian  confederates,  having  suffered  a  severe 
defeat  at  sea  from  the  Athenians,  demanded  Ly- 
sander,  who  had  before  served  with  success  in  that 
capacity,  to  command  the  combined  fleets.  The 
Lacedaemonians,  to  gratify  their  allies,  and  yet  pre- 
serve the  semblance  of  an  adherence  to  their  ancient 
institutions,  had  recourse  to  the  flimsy  subterfuge 
of  investing  Lysander  with  the  real  power  of  ad- 
miral, under  the  nominal  title  of  vice-admiral.  This 
instance  is  selected  from  among  a  multitude  that 
might  be  cited  to  confirm  the  truth  already  ad- 
vanced and  illustrated  by  domestic  examples ;  which 
is,  that  nations  pay  little  regard  to  rules  and  maxims 
calculated  in  their  very  nature  to  run  counter  to  the 
necessities  of  society.  Wise  politicians  will  be  cau- 
tious about  fettering  the  government  with  restrictions 
that  cannot  be  observed,  because  they  know  that 
every  breach  of  the  fundamental  laws,  though  dic- 
tated by  necessity,  impairs  that  sacred  reverence 
which  ought  to  be  maintained  in  the  breast  of  rulers 
towards  the  constitution  of  a  country,  and  forms  a 


202  Alexander  Hamilton 

precedent  for  other  breaches  where  the  same  plea  of 
necessity  does  not  exist  at  all,  or  is  less  urgent  and 
palpable. 

PUBLIUS. 


For  the  Independent  Journal 
SFHE  FEDERALIST.     No.  XXVI 

(HAMILTON) 

To  the  People  of  the  State  of  New  York: 

It  was  a  thing  hardly  to  be  expected  that  in  a 
popular  revolution  the  minds  of  men  should  stop  at 
that  happy  mean  which  marks  the  salutary  boundary 
between  power  and  privilege,  and  combines  the 
energy  of  government  with  the  security  of  private 
rights.  A  failure  in  this  delicate  and  important  point 
is  the  great  source  of  the  inconveniences  we  experi- 
ence, and  if  we  are  not  cautious  to  avoid  a  repetition 
of  the  error,  in  our  future  attempts  to  rectify  and 
ameliorate  our  system,  we  may  travel  from  one 
chimerical  project  to  another;  we  may  try  change 
after  change;  but  we  shall  never  be  likely  to  make 
any  material  change  for  the  better. 

The  idea  of  restraining  the  legislative  authority, 
in  the  means  of  providing  for  the  national  defence, 
is  one  of  those  refinements  which  owe  their  origin  to 
a  zeal  for  liberty  more  ardent  than  enlightened.  We 
have  seen,  however,  that  it  has  not  had  thus  far  an 
extensive  prevalency;  that  even  in  this  country, 
where  it  made  its  first  appearance,  Pennsylvania 
and  North  Carolina  are  the  only  two  States  by 
which  it  has  been  in  any  degree  patronized;    and 


The  Federalist  20 


o 


that  all  the  others  have  refused  to  give  it  the  least 
countenance ;  wisely  judging  that  confidence  must  be 
placed  somewhere;  that  the  necessity  of  doing  it, 
is  implied  in  the  very  act  of  delegating  power;  and 
that  it  is  better  to  hazard  the  abuse  of  that  confi- 
dence than  to  embarrass  the  government  and  en- 
danger the  public  safety  by  impolitic  restrictions  on 
the  legislative  authority.  The  opponents  of  the 
proposed  Constitution  combat,  in  this  respect,  the 
general  decision  of  America;  and  instead  of  being 
taught  by  experience  the  propriety  of  correcting  any 
extremes  into  which  we  may  have  heretofore  run, 
they  appear  disposed  to  conduct  us  into  others  still 
more  dangerous,  and  more  extravagant.  As  if  the 
tone  of  government  had  been  found  too  high,  or  too 
rigid,  the  doctrines  they  teach  are  calculated  to  in- 
duce us  to  depress  or  to  relax  it,  by  expedients  which, 
upon  other  occasions,  have  been  condemned  or  for- 
borne. It  may  be  affirmed  without  the  imputation 
of  invective,  that  if  the  principles  they  inculcate,  on 
various  points,  could  so  far  obtain  as  to  become  the 
popular  creed,  they  would  utterly  unfit  the  people 
of  this  country  for  any  species  of  government  what- 
ever. But  a  danger  of  this  kind  is  not  to  be  appre- 
hended. The  citizens  of  America  have  too  much 
discernment  to  be  argued  into  anarchy.  And  I  am 
much  mistaken,  if  experience  has  not  wrought  a 
deep  and  solemn  conviction  in  the  public  mind,  that 
greater  energy  of  government  is  essential  to  the 
welfare  and  prosperity  of  the  community. 

It  may  not  be  amiss  in  this  place  concisely  to  re- 
mark the  origin  and  progress  of  the  idea,  which  aims 


204  Alexander  Hamilton 

at  the  exclusion  of  military  establishments  in  time 
of  peace.  Though  in  speculative  minds  it  may 
arise  from  a  contemplation  of  the  nature  and  ten- 
dency of  such  institutions,  fortified  by  the  events 
that  have  happened  in  other  ages  and  countries,  yet 
as  a  national  sentiment,  it  must  be  traced  to  those 
habits  of  thinking  which  we  derive  from  the  nation 
from  whom  the  inhabitants  of  these  States  have  in 
general  sprung. 

In  England,  for  a  long  time  after  the  Norman 
Conquest,  the  authority  of  the  monarch  was  almost 
unlimited.  Inroads  were  gradually  made  upon  the 
prerogative,  in  favor  of  liberty,  first  by  the  barons, 
and  afterwards  by  the  people,  till  the  greatest  part 
of  its  most  formidable  pretensions  became  extinct. 
But  it  was  not  till  the  revolution  in  1688,  which 
elevated  the  Prince  of  Orange  to  the  throne  of  Great 
Britain,  that  English  liberty  was  completely  tri- 
umphant. As  incident  to  the  undefined  power  of 
making  war,  an  acknowledged  prerogative  of  the 
crown,  Charles  II.  had,  by  his  own  authority,  kept 
on  foot  in  time  of  peace  a  body  of  5,000  regular 
troops.  And  this  number  James  II.  increased  to 
30,000;  who  were  paid  out  of  his  civil  list.  At  the 
revolution,  to  abolish  the  exercise  of  so  dangerous  an 
authority,  it  became  an  article  of  the  Bill  of  Rights 
then  framed,  that  "  the  raising  or  keeping  a  standing 
army  within  the  kingdom  in  time  of  peace,  unless 
with  the  consent  of  Parliament,  was  against  law. 

In  that  kingdom,  when  the  pulse  of  liberty  was  at 
its  highest  pitch,  no  security  against  the  danger  of 
standing  armies  was   thought   requisite,  beyond  a 


The  Federalist  205 

prohibition  of  their  being  raised  or  kept  up  by  the 
mere  authority  of  the  executive  magistrate.  The 
patriots,  who  effected  that  memorable  revolution, 
were  too  temperate,  too  well-informed,  to  think  of 
any  restraint  on  the  legislative  discretion.  They 
were  aware  that  a  certain  number  of  troops  for 
guards  and  garrisons  were  indispensable;  that  no 
precise  bounds  could  be  set  to  the  national  exigen- 
cies ;  that  a  power  equal  to  every  possible  contingency 
must  exist  somewhere  in  the  government:  and  that 
when  they  referred  the  exercise  of  that  power  to  the 
judgment  of  the  legislature,  they  had  arrived  at  the 
ultimate  point  of  precaution  which  was  reconcilable 
with  the  safety  of  the  community. 

From  the  same  source,  the  people  of  America  may 
be  said  to  have  derived  an  hereditary  impression  of 
danger  to  liberty,  from  standing  armies  in  time  of 
peace.  The  circumstances  of  a  revolution  quickened 
the  public  sensibility  on  every  point  connected  with 
the  security  of  popular  rights,  and  in  some  instances 
raised  the  warmth  of  our  zeal  beyond  the  degree 
which  consisted  with  the  due  temperature  of  the 
body  politic.  The  attempts  of  two  of  the  States  to 
restrict  the  authority  of  the  legislature  in  the  article 
of  military  establishments,  are  of  the  number  of 
these  instances.  The  principles  which  had  taught 
us  to  be  jealous  of  the  power  of  an  hereditary  mon- 
arch were  by  an  injudicious  excess  extended  to  the 
representatives  of  the  people  in  their  popular  assem- 
blies. Even  in  some  of  the  States,  where  this  error 
was  not  adopted,  we  find  unnecessary  declarations 
that  standing  armies  ought  not  to  be  kept  up,  in 


206  Alexander  Hamilton 

time  of  peace,  without  the  consent  of  the  legis- 
lature. I  call  them  unnecessary,  because  the 
reason  which  had  introduced  a  similar  provision  into 
the  English  Bill  of  Rights  is  not  applicable  to  any 
of  the  State  constitutions.  The  power  of  raising 
armies  at  all,  under  those  constitutions,  can  by  no 
construction  be  deemed  to  reside  anywhere  else, 
than  in  the  legislatures  themselves;  and  it  was 
superfluous,  if  not  absurd,  to  declare  that  a  matter 
should  not  be  done  without  the  consent  of  a  body, 
which  alone  had  the  power  of  doing  it.  Accordingly, 
in  some  of  those  constitutions,  and  among  others,  in 
that  of  this  State  of  New  York,  which  has  been 
justly  celebrated,  both  in  Europe  and  America,  as 
one  of  the  best  of  the  forms  of  government  estab- 
lished in  this  country,  there  is  a  total  silence  upon 
the  subject. 

It  is  remarkable,  that  even  in  the  two  States  which 
seem  to  have  meditated  an  interdiction  of  military 
establishments  in  time  of  peace,  the  mode  of  expres- 
sion made  use  of  is  rather  cautionary  than  prohibi- 
tory. It  is  not  said,  that  standing  armies  shall  not 
be  kept  up,  but  that  they  ought  not  to  be  kept  up,  in 
time  of  peace.  This  ambiguity  of  terms  appears  to 
have  been  the  result  of  a  conflict  between  jealousy 
and  conviction;  between  the  desire  of  excluding 
such  establishments  at  all  events,  and  the  persuasion 
that  an  absolute  exclusion  would  be  unwise  and 
unsafe. 

Can  it  be  doubted  that  such  a  provision,  whenever 
the  situation  of  public  affairs  was  understood  to  re- 
quire a  departure  from  it,  would  be  interpreted  by 


The  Federalist  207 

the  legislature  into  a  mere  admonition,  and  would 
be  made  to  yield  to  the  necessities  or  supposed  neces- 
sities of  the  State  ?  Let  the  fact  already  mentioned, 
with  respect  to  Pennsylvania,  decide.  What  then 
(it  may  be  asked)  is  the  use  of  such  a  provision,  if  it 
cease  to  operate  the  moment  there  is  an  inclination 
to  disregard  it? 

Let  us  examine  whether  there  be  any  comparison,- 
in  point  of  efficacy,  between  the  provision  alluded  to 
and  that  which  is  contained  in  the  new  Constitution, 
for  restraining  the  appropriations  of  money  for  mili- 
tary purposes  to  the  period  of  two  years.  The 
former,  by  aiming  at  too  much,  is  calculated  to  effect 
nothing;  the  latter,  by  steering  clear  of  an  impru- 
dent extreme,  and  by  being  perfectly  compatible  with 
a  proper  provision  for  the  exigencies  of  the  nation, 
will  have  a  salutary  and  powerful  operation. 

The  legislature  of  the  United  States  will  be  obliged 
by  this  provision,  once  at  least  in  every  two  years, 
to  deliberate  upon  the  propriety  of  keeping  a  military 
force  on  foot;  to  come  to  a  new  resolution  on  the 
point ;  and  to  declare  their  sense  of  the  matter,  by  a 
formal  vote  in  the  face  of  their  constituents.  They 
are  not  at  liberty  to  vest  in  the  executive  department 
permanent  funds  for  the  support  of  an  army,  if  they 
were  even  incautious  enough  to  be  willing  to  repose 
in  it  so  improper  a  confidence.  As  the  spirit  of  party, 
in  different  degrees,  must  be  expected  to  infect  all 
political  bodies,  there  will  be,  no  doubt,  persons  in 
the  national  legislature  willing  enough  to  arraign  the 
measures  and  criminate  the  views  of  the  majority. 
The  provision  for  the  support  of  a  military  force  will 


208  Alexander  Hamilton 

always  be  a  favorable  topic  for  declamation.  As 
often  as  the  question  comes  forward,  the  public  atten- 
tion will  be  roused  and  attracted  to  the  subject,  by 
the  party  in  opposition;  and  if  the  majority  should 
be  really  disposed  to  exceed  the  proper  limits,  the 
community  will  be  warned  of  the  danger,  and  will 
have  an  opportunity  of  taking  measures  to  guard 
against  it.  Independent  of  parties  in  the  national 
legislature  itself,  as  often  as  the  period  of  discussion 
arrived,  the  State  legislatures,  who  will  always  be  not 
only  vigilant  but  suspicious  and  jealous  guardians 
of  the  rights  of  the  citizens  against  encroachments 
from  the  federal  government,  will  constantly  have 
their  attention  awake  to  the  conduct  of  the  national 
rulers,  and  will  be  ready  enough,  if  any  thing  im- 
proper appears,  to  sound  the  alarm  to  the  people, 
and  not  only  to  be  the  voice,  but,  if  necessary,  the 
arm  of  their  discontent. 

Schemes  to  subvert  the  liberties  of  a  great  com- 
munity require  time  to  mature  them  for  execution. 
An  army,  so  large  as  seriously  to  menace  those  liber- 
ties, could  only  be  formed  by  progressive  augmenta- 
tions ;  which  would  suppose,  not  merely  a  temporary 
combination  between  the  legislature  and  executive, 
but  a  continued  conspiracy  for  a  series  of  time.  Is 
it  probable  that  such  a  combination  would  exist  at 
all?  Is  it  probable  that  it  would  be  persevered  in, 
and  transmitted  along  through  all  the  successive 
variations  in  a  representative  body,  which  biennial 
elections  would  naturally  produce  in  both  houses? 
Is  it  presumable,  that  every  man,  the  instant  he  took 
his  seat  in  the  national  Senate  or  House  of  Repre- 


The  Federalist  209 

sentatives,  would  commence  a  traitor  to  his  con- 
stituents and  to  his  country?  Can  it  be  supposed 
that  there  would  not  be  found  one  man,  discerning 
enough  to  detect  so  atrocious  a  conspiracy,  or  bold 
or  honest  enough  to  apprise  his  constituents  of  their 
danger?  If  such  presumptions  can  fairly  be  made, 
there  ought  at  once  to  be  an  end  of  all  delegated 
authority.  The  people  should  resolve  to  recall  all 
the  powers  they  have  heretofore  parted  with  out  of 
their  own  hands,  and  to  divide  themselves  into  as 
many  States  as  there  are  counties,  in  order  that  they 
may  be  able  to  manage  their  own  concerns  in  person. 

If  such  suppositions  could  even  be  reasonably  made, 
still  the  concealment  of  the  design,  for  any  duration, 
would  be  impracticable.  It  would  be  announced,  by 
the  very  circumstance  of  augmenting  the  army  to  so 
great  an  extent  in  time  of  profound  peace.  What 
colorable  reason  could  be  assigned,  in  a  country  so 
situated,  for  such  vast  augmentations  of  the  military 
force  ?  It  is  impossible  that  the  people  could  be  long 
deceived ;  and  the  destruction  of  the  project,  and  of 
the  projectors,  would  quickly  follow  the  discovery. 

It  has  been  said  that  the  provision  which  limits 
the  appropriation  of  money  for  the  support  of  an 
army  to  the  period  of  two  years  would  be  unavailing, 
because  the  Executive,  when  once  possessed  of  a 
force  large  enough  to  awe  the  people  into  submission, 
would  find  resources  in  that  very  force  sufficient  to 
enable  him  to  dispense  with  supplies  from  the  acts  of 
the  legislature.  But  the  question  again  recurs,  upon 
what  pretence  could  he  be  put  in  possession  of  a 
force  of  that  magnitude  in  time  of  peace?     If  we 

VOL.  XI.— 14. 


210  Alexander  Hamilton 

suppose  it  to  have  been  created  in  consequence  of 
some  domestic  insurrection  or  foreign  war,  then  it 
becomes  a  case  not  within  the  principles  of  the  ob- 
jection; for  this  is  levelled  against  the  power  of 
keeping  up  troops  in  time  of  peace.  Few  persons 
will  be  so  visionary  as  seriously  to  contend  that  mili- 
tary forces  ought  not  to  be  raised  to  quell  a  rebellion 
or  resist  an  invasion ;  and  if  the  defence  of  the  com- 
munity under  such  circumstances  should  make  it 
necessary  to  have  an  army  so  numerous  as  to  hazard 
its  liberty,  this  is  one  of  those  calamities  for  which 
there  is  neither  preventative  nor  cure.  It  cannot 
be  provided  against  by  any  possible  form  of  govern- 
ment; it  might  even  result  from  a  simple  league 
offensive  and  defensive,  if  it  should  ever  be  necessary 
for  the  confederates  or  allies  to  form  an  army  for 
common  defence. 

But  it  is  an  evil  infinitely  less  likely  to  attend  us 
in  a  united  than  in  a  disunited  state ;  nay,  it  may  be 
safely  asserted  that  it  is  an  evil  altogether  unlikely 
to  attend  us  in  the  latter  situation.  It  is  not  easy 
to  conceive  a  possibility  that  dangers  so  formidable 
can  assail  the  whole  Union,  as  to  demand  a  force 
considerable  enough  to  place  our  liberties  in  the 
least  jeopardy,  especially  if  we  take  into  our  view 
the  aid  to  be  derived  from  the  militia,  which  ought 
always  to  be  counted  upon  as  a  valuable  and  power- 
ful auxiliary.  But  in  a  state  of  disunion  (as  has 
been  fully  shown  in  another  place),  the  contrary  of 
this  supposition  would  become  not  only  probable, 
but  almost  unavoidable. 

Publius. 


The  Federalist  211 

Front  the  New  York  Packet,  Tuesday,  December  25,  1787 
THE  FEDERALIST.     No.  XXVII 

(HAMILTON) 

To  the  People  of  the  State  of  New  York: 

It  has  been  urged,  in  different  shapes,  that  a  Con- 
stitution of  the  kind  proposed  by  the  convention 
cannot  operate  without  the  aid  of  a  military  force  to 
execute  its  laws.  This,  however,  like  most  other 
things  that  have  been  alleged  on  that  side,  rests  on 
mere  general  assertion,  unsupported  by  any  precise 
or  intelligible  designation  of  the  reasons  upon  which 
it  is  founded.  As  far  as  I  have  been  able  to  divine 
the  latent  meaning  of  the  objectors,  it  seems  to 
originate  in  a  presupposition  that  the  people  will  be 
disinclined  to  the  exercise  of  federal  authority  in  any 
matter  of  an  internal  nature.  Waiving  any  excep- 
tion that  might  be  taken  to  the  inaccuracy  or  in- 
explicitness  of  the  distinction  between  internal  and 
external,  let  us  inquire  what  ground  there  is  to  pre- 
suppose that  disinclination  in  the  people.  Unless 
we  presume  at  the  same  time  that  the  powers  of  the 
general  government  will  be  worse  administered  than 
those  of  the  State  government,  there  seems  to  be  no 
room  for  the  presumption  of  ill-will,  disaffection,  or 
opposition  in  the  people.  I  believe  it  may  be  laid 
down  as  a  general  rule  that  their  confidence  in 
and  obedience  to  a  government  will  commonly  be 
proportioned  to  the  goodness  or  badness  of  its  ad- 
ministration. It  must  be  admitted  that  there  are 
exceptions  to  this  rule ;  but  these  exceptions  depend 
so  entirely  on  accidental  causes,  that  they  cannot  be 


212  Alexander  Hamilton 

considered  as  having  any  relation  to  the  intrinsic 
merits  or  demerits  of  a  constitution.  These  can  only 
be  judged  of  by  general  principles  and  maxims. 

Various  reasons  have  been  suggested,  in  the  course 
of  these  papers,  to  induce  a  probability  that  the 
general  government  will  be  better  administered  than 
the  particular  governments:  the  principal  of  which 
reasons  are  that  the  extension  of  the  spheres  of  elec- 
tion will  present  a  greater  option,  or  latitude  of 
choice,  to  the  people;  that  through  the  medium 
of  the  State  legislatures — which  are  select  bodies  of 
men,  and  which  are  to  appoint  the  members  of  the 
national  Senate — there  is  reason  to  expect  that  this 
branch  will  generally  be  composed  with  peculiar 
care  and  judgment ;  that  these  circumstances  prom- 
ise greater  knowledge  and  more  extensive  informa- 
tion in  the  national  councils,  and  that  they  will  be 
less  apt  to  be  tainted  by  the  spirit  of  faction,  and 
more  out  of  the  reach  of  those  occasional  ill-humors, 
or  temporary  prejudices  and  propensities,  which,  in 
smaller  societies,  frequently  contaminate  the  public 
councils,  beget  injustice  and  oppression  of  a  part 
of  the  community,  and  engender  schemes  which, 
though  they  gratify  a  momentary  inclination  or  de- 
sire, terminate  in  general  distress,  dissatisfaction, 
and  disgust.  Several  additional  reasons  of  con- 
siderable force,  to  fortify  that  probability,  will  occur 
when  we  come  to  survey,  with  a  more  critical  eye, 
the  interior  structure  of  the  edifice  which  we  are  in- 
vited to  erect.  It  will  be  sufficient  here  to  remark, 
that  until  satisfactory  reasons  can  be  assigned  to 
justify  an  opinion,  that  the  federal  government  is 


The  Federalist  213 

likely  to  be  administered  in  such  a  manner  as  to 
render  it  odious  or  contemptible  to  the  people,  there 
can  be  no  reasonable  foundation  for  the  supposition 
that  the  laws  of  the  Union  will  meet  with  any  greater 
obstruction  from  them,  or  will  stand  in  need  of  any 
other  methods  to  enforce  their  execution,  than  the 
laws  of  the  particular  members. 

The  hope  of  impunity  is  a  strong  incitement  to 
sedition ;  the  dread  of  punishment,  a  proportionably 
strong  discouragement  to  it.  Will  not  the  govern- 
ment of  the  Union,  which,  if  possessed  of  a  due 
degree  of  power,  can  call  to  its  aid  the  collective 
resources  of  the  whole  Confederacy,  be  more  likely 
to  repress  the  former  sentiment  and  to  inspire  the 
latter,  than  that  of  a  single  State,  which  can  only 
command  the  resources  within  itself?  A  turbulent 
faction  in  a  State  may  easily  suppose  itself  able  to 
contend  with  the  friends  to  the  government  in  that 
State;  but  it  can  hardly  be  so  infatuated  as  to  im- 
agine itself  a  match  for  the  combined  efforts  of  the 
Union.  If  this  reflection  be  just,  there  is  less  danger 
of  resistance  from  irregular  combinations  of  individ- 
uals to  the  authority  of  the  Confederacy  than  to 
that  of  a  single  member. 

I  will,  in  this  place,  hazard  an  observation,  which 
will  not  be  the  less  just  because  to  some  it  may  ap- 
pear new;  which  is,  that  the  more  the  operations  of 
the  national  authority  are  intermingled  in  the  ordi- 
nary exercise  of  government,  the  more  the  citizens 
are  accustomed  to  meet  with  it  in  the  common  oc- 
currences of  their  political  life,  the  more  it  is  familiar- 
ized to  their  sight  and  to  their  feelings,  the  further 


214  Alexander  Hamilton 

it  enters  into  those  objects  which  touch  the  most 
sensible  chords  and  put  in  motion  the  most  active 
springs  of  the  human  heart,  the  greater  will  be  the 
probability  that  it  will  conciliate  the  respect  and  at- 
tachment of  the  community.  Man  is  very  much  a 
creature  of  habit.  A  thing  that  rarely  strikes  his 
senses  will  generally  have  but  little  influence  upon 
his  mind.  A  government  continually  at  a  distance 
and  out  of  sight  can  hardly  be  expected  to  interest 
the  sensations  of  the  people.  The  inference  is,  that 
the  authority  of  the  Union,  and  the  affections  of  the 
citizens  towards  it,  will  be  strengthened,  rather  than 
weakened,  by  its  extension  to  what  are  called  matters 
of  internal  concern;  and  will  have  less  occasion  to 
recur  to  force,  in  proportion  to  the  familiarity  and 
comprehensiveness  of  its  agency.  The  more  it  cir- 
culates through  those  channels  and  currents  in  which 
the  passions  of  mankind  naturally  flow,  the  less  will 
it  require  the  aid  of  the  violent  and  perilous  expe- 
dients of  compulsion. 

One  thing,  at  all  events,  must  be  evident,  that  a 
government  like  the  one  proposed  would  bid  much 
fairer  to  avoid  the  necessity  of  using  force,  than  that 
species  of  league  contended  for  by  most  of  its  oppo- 
nents; the  authority  of  which  should  only  operate 
upon  the  States  in  their  political  or  collective  capa- 
cities. It  has  been  shown  that  in  such  a  Confeder- 
acy there  can  be  no  sanction  for  the  laws  but  force ; 
that  frequent  delinquencies  in  the  members  are  the 
natural  offspring  of  the  very  frame  of  the  govern- 
ment; and  that  as  often  as  these  happen,  they  can 
only  be  redressed,  if  at  all,  by  war  and  violence. 


The  Federalist  215 

The  plan  reported  by  the  convention,  by  extend- 
ing the  authority  of  the  federal  head  to  the  individual 
citizens  of  the  several  States,  will  enable  the  govern- 
ment to  employ  the  ordinary  magistracy  of  each,  in 
the  execution  of  its  laws.  It  is  easy  to  perceive  that 
this  will  tend  to  destroy,  in  the  common  apprehen- 
sion, all  distinction  between  the  sources  from  which 
they  might  proceed;  and  will  give  the  federal  gov- 
ernment the  same  advantage  for  securing  a  due 
obedience  to  its  authority  which  is  enjoyed  by  the 
government  of  each  State,  in  addition  to  the  influence 
on  public  opinion  which  will  result  from  the  im- 
portant consideration  of  its  having  power  to  call  to 
its  assistance  and  support  the  resources  of  the  whole 
Union.  It  merits  particular  attention  in  this  place, 
that  the  laws  of  the  Confederacy,  as  to  the  enumerated 
and  legitimate  objects  of  its  jurisdiction,  will  become 
the  supreme  law  of  the  land;  to  the  observance  of 
which  all  officers,  legislative,  executive,  and  judicial, 
in  each  State,  will  be  bound  by  the  sanctity  of  an 
oath.  Thus  the  legislatures,  courts,  and  magis- 
trates, of  the  respective  members,  will  be  incorpo- 
rated into  the  operations  of  the  national  government 
as  far  as  its  just  and  constitutional  authority  extends; 
and  will  be  rendered  auxiliary  to  the  enforcement 
of  its  laws.1  Any  man  who  will  pursue,  by  his  own 
reflections,  the  consequences  of  this  situation,  will 
perceive  that  there  is  good  ground  to  calculate  upon 
a  regular  and  peaceable  execution  of  the  laws  of  the 

1  The  sophistry  which  has  been  employed,  to  show  that  this  will 
tend  to  the  destruction  of  the  State  governments,  will,  in  its  proper 
place,  be  fully  detected. — Publius. 


216  Alexander  Hamilton 

Union,  if  its  powers  are  administered  with  a  com- 
mon share  of  prudence.  If  we  will  arbitrarily  sup- 
pose the  contrary,  we  may  deduce  any  inferences  we 
please  from  the  supposition ;  for  it  is  certainly  possi- 
ble, by  an  injudicious  exercise  of  the  authorities  of 
the  best  government  that  ever  was,  or  ever  can  be 
instituted,  to  provoke  and  precipitate  the  people 
into  the  wildest  excesses.  But  though  the  adver- 
saries of  the  proposed  Constitution  should  presume 
that  the  national  rulers  would  be  insensible  to  the 
motives  of  public  good,  or  to  the  obligations  of  duty, 
I  would  still  ask  them  how  the  interests  of  ambition, 
or  the  views  of  encroachment,  can  be  promoted  by 
such  a  conduct? 

PUBLIUS. 


For  the  Independent  Journal 
THE  FEDERALIST.     No.  XXVIII 

(HAMILTON) 

To  the  People  of  the  State  of  New  York: 

That  there  may  happen  cases  in  which  the  na- 
tional government  may  be  necessitated  to  resort  to 
force,  cannot  be  denied.  Our  own  experience  has 
corroborated  the  lessons  taught  by  the  examples 
of  other  nations;  that  emergencies  of  this  sort  will 
sometimes  arise  in  all  societies,  however  constituted ; 
that  seditions  and  insurrections  are,  unhappily, 
maladies  as  inseparable  from  the  body  politic  as 
tumors  and  eruptions  from  the  natural  body;  that 
the  idea  of  governing  at  all  times  by  the  simple  force 
of  law  (which  we  have  been  told  is  the  only  admis- 


The  Federalist  217 

sible  principle  of  republican  government),  has  no 
place  but  in  the  reveries  of  those  political  doctors 
whose  sagacity  disdains  the  admonitions  of  experi- 
mental instruction. 

Should  such  emergencies  at  any  time  happen 
under  the  national  government,  there  could  be  no 
remedy  but  force.  The  means  to  be  employed  must 
be  proportioned  to  the  extent  of  the  mischief.  If  it 
should  be  a  slight  commotion  in  a  small  part  of  a 
State,  the  militia  of  the  residue  would  be  adequate 
to  its  suppression;  and  the  natural  presumption  is 
that  they  would  be  ready  to  do  their  duty.  An  in- 
surrection, whatever  may  be  its  immediate  cause, 
eventually  endangers  all  government.  Regard  to 
the  public  peace,  if  not  to  the  rights  of  the  Union, 
would  engage  the  citizens  to  whom  the  contagion 
had  not  communicated  itself  to  oppose  the  insur- 
gents; and  if  the  general  government  should  be 
found  in  practice  conducive  to  the  prosperity  and 
felicity  of  the  people,  it  were  irrational  to  believe 
that  they  would  be  disinclined  to  its  support. 

If,  on  the  contrary,  the  insurrection  should  per- 
vade a  whole  State,  or  a  principal  part  of  it,  the  em- 
ployment of  a  different  kind  of  force  might  become 
unavoidable.  It  appears  that  Massachusetts  found  it 
necessary  to  raise  troops  for  repressing  the  disorders 
within  that  State ;  that  Pennsylvania,  from  the  mere 
apprehension  of  commotions  among  a  part  of  her 
citizens,  has  thought  proper  to  have  recourse  to  the 
same  measure.  Suppose  the  State  of  New  York  had 
been  inclined  to  re-establish  her  lost  jurisdiction 
over  the  inhabitants  of  Vermont,  could  she  have 


218  Alexander  Hamilton 

hoped  for  success  in  such  an  enterprise  from  the 
efforts  of  the  militia  alone?  Would  she  not  have 
been  compelled  to  raise  and  to  maintain  a  more 
regular  force  for  the  execution  of  her  design?  If  it 
must  then  be  admitted  that  the  necessity  of  recurring 
to  a  force  different  from  the  militia,  in  cases  of  this 
extraordinary  nature,  is  applicable  to  the  State  gov- 
ernments themselves,  why  should  the  possibility, 
that  the  national  government  might  be  under  a  like 
necessity,  in  similar  extremities,  be  made  an  objec- 
tion to  its  existence?  Is  it  not  surprising  that  men 
who  declare  an  attachment  to  the  Union  in  the  ab- 
stract, should  urge  as  an  objection  to  the  proposed 
Constitution  what  applies  with  tenfold  weight  to 
the  plan  for  which  they  contend;  and  what,  as  far 
as  it  has  any  foundation  in  truth,  is  an  inevitable 
consequence  of  civil  society  upon  an  enlarged  scale? 
Who  would  not  prefer  that  possibility  to  the  un- 
ceasing agitations  and  frequent  revolutions  which 
are  the  continual  scourges  of  petty  republics? 

Let  us  pursue  this  examination  in  another  light. 
Suppose,  in  lieu  of  one  general  system,  two,  or  three, 
or  even  four  Confederacies  were  to  be  formed,  would 
not  the  same  difficulty  oppose  itself  to  the  operations 
of  either  of  these  Confederacies?  Would  not  each 
of  them  be  exposed  to  the  same  casualties;  and 
when  these  happened,  be  obliged  to  have  recourse 
to  the  same  expedients  for  upholding  its  authority 
which  are  objected  to  in  a  government  for  all  the 
States?  Would  the  militia,  in  this  supposition,  be 
more  ready  or  more  able  to  support  the  federal  au- 
thority than  in  the  case  of  a  general  union?     All 


The  Federalist  219 

candid  and  intelligent  men  must,  upon  due  considera- 
tion, acknowledge  that  the  principle  of  the  objection 
is  equally  applicable  to  either  of  the  two  cases;  and 
that  whether  we  have  one  government  for  all  the 
States,  or  different  governments  for  different  parcels 
of  them,  or  even  if  there  should  be  an  entire  separa- 
tion of  the  States,1  there  might  sometimes  be  a 
necessity  to  make  use  of  a  force  constituted  differ- 
ently from  the  militia,  to  preserve  the  peace  of  the 
community  and  to  maintain  the  just  authority  of 
the  laws  against  those  violent  invasions  of  them 
which  amount  to  insurrections  and  rebellions. 

Independent  of  all  other  reasonings  upon  the  sub- 
ject, it  is  a  full  answer  to  those  who  require  a  more 
peremptory  provision  against  military  establishments 
in  time  of  peace,  to  say  that  the  whole  power  of  the 
proposed  government  is  to  be  in  the  hands  of  the 
representatives  of  the  people.  This  is  the  essential, 
and,  after  all,  only  efficacious  security  for  the  rights 
and  privileges  of  the  people,  which  is  attainable  in 
civil  society.2 

If  the  representatives  of  the  people  betray  their 
constituents,  there  is  then  no  resource  left  but  in  the 
exertion  of  that  original  right  of  self-defence  which 
is  paramount  to  all  positive  forms  of  government, 
and  which  against  the  usurpations  of  the  national 
rulers,  may  be  exerted  with  infinitely  better  pros- 
pect of  success  than  against  those  of  the  rulers  of  an 
individual  state.     In  a  single  state,  if  the  persons 

1  In  the  revised  text,  "or  if  there  should  be  as  many  unconnected 
governments  as  there  are  States." 

2  Its  full  efficacy  will  be  examined  hereafter. — Publius. 


220  Alexander  Hamilton 

intrusted  with  supreme  power  become  usurpers,  the 
different  parcels,  subdivisions,  or  districts  of  which 
it  consists,  having  no  distinct  government  in  each, 
can  take  no  regular  measures  for  defence.  The  citi- 
zens must  rush  tumultuously  to  arms,  without  con- 
cert, without  system,  without  resource;  except  in 
their  courage  and  despair.  The  usurpers,  clothed 
with  the  forms  of  legal  authority,  can  too  often  crush 
the  opposition  in  embryo.  The  smaller  the  extent 
of  the  territory,  the  more  difficult  will  it  be  for  the 
people  to  form  a  regular  or  systematic  plan  of  oppo- 
sition, and  the  more  easy  will  it  be  to  defeat  their 
early  efforts.  Intelligence  can  be  more  speedily  ob- 
tained of  their  preparations  and  movements,  and 
the  military  force  in  the  possession  of  the  usurpers 
can  be  more  rapidly  directed  against  the  part  where 
the  opposition  has  begun.  In  this  situation  there 
must  be  a  peculiar  coincidence  of  circumstances  to 
insure  success  to  the  popular  resistance. 

The  obstacles  to  usurpation  and  the  facilities  of 
resistance  increase  with  the  increased  extent  of  the 
state,  provided  the  citizens  understand  their  rights 
and  are  disposed  to  defend  them.  The  natural 
strength  of  the  people  in  a  large  community,  in  pro- 
portion to  the  artificial  strength  of  the  government, 
is  greater  than  in  a  small,  and  of  course  more 
competent  to  a  struggle  with  the  attempts  of  the 
government  to  establish  a  tyranny.  But  in  a  con- 
federacy the  people,  without  exaggeration,  may  be 
said  to  be  entirely  the  masters  of  their  own  fate. 
Power  being  almost  always  the  rival  of  power,  the 
general  government  will  at  all  times  stand  ready  to 


The  Federalist  221 

check  the  usurpations  of  the  state  governments,  and 
these  will  have  the  same  disposition  towards  the 
general  government.  The  people,  by  throwing 
themselves  into  either  scale,  will  infallibly  make  it 
preponderate.  If  their  rights  are  invaded  by  either, 
they  can  make  use  of  the  other  as  the  instrument  of 
redress.  How  wise  will  it  be  in  them  by  cherishing 
the  union  to  preserve  to  themselves  an  advantage 
which  can  never  be  too  highly  prized ! 

It  may  safely  be  received  as  an  axiom  in  our  po- 
litical system,  that  the  State  governments  will,  in 
all  possible  contingencies,  afford  complete  security 
against  invasions  of  the  public  liberty  by  the  na- 
tional authority.  Projects  of  usurpation  cannot  be 
masked  under  pretences  so  likely  to  escape  the  pene- 
tration of  select  bodies  of  men,  as  of  the  people  at 
large.  The  legislatures  will  have  better  means  of 
information.  They  can  discover  the  danger  at  a 
distance;  and  possessing  all  the  organs  of  civil 
power,  and  the  confidence  of  the  people,  they  can  at 
once  adopt  a  regular  plan  of  opposition,  in  which 
they  can  combine  all  the  resources  of  the  community. 
They  can  readily  communicate  with  each  other  in 
the  different  States,  and  unite  their  common  forces 
for  the  protection  of  their  common  liberty. 

The  great  extent  of  the  country  is  a  further  secur- 
ity. We  have  already  experienced  its  utility  against 
the  attacks  of  a  foreign  power.  And  it  would  have 
precisely  the  same  effect  against  the  enterprises  of 
ambitious  rulers  in  the  national  councils.  If  the 
federal  army  should  be  able  to  quell  the  resistance 
of  one  State,  the  distant  States  would  have  it  in  their 


222  Alexander  Hamilton 

power  to  make  head  with  fresh  forces.  The  advan- 
tages obtained  in  one  place  must  be  abandoned  to 
subdue  the  opposition  in  others;  and  the  moment 
the  part  which  had  been  reduced  to  submission  was 
left  to  itself,  its  efforts  would  be  renewed,  and  its 
resistance  revive. 

We  should  recollect  that  the  extent  of  the  military 
force  must,  at  all  events,  be  regulated  by  the  re- 
sources of  the  country.  For  a  long  time  to  come,  it 
will  not  be  possible  to  maintain  a  large  army;  and 
as  the  means  of  doing  this  increase,  the  population 
and  natural  strength  of  the  community  will  pro- 
portionably  increase.  When  will  the  time  arrive 
that  the  federal  government  can  raise  and  maintain 
an  army  capable  of  erecting  a  despotism  over  the 
great  body  of  the  people  of  an  immense  empire,  who 
are  in  a  situation,  through  the  medium  of  their  State 
governments,  to  take  measures  for  their  own  de- 
fence, with  all  the  celerity,  regularity,  and  system  of 
independent  nations?  The  apprehension  may  be 
considered  as  a  disease,  for  which  there  can  be  found 
no  cure  in  the  resources  of  argument  and  reasoning. 

Publius. 


From  the  Daily  Advertiser,  Thursday,  January  10,  1788 
THE  FEDERALIST.      No.  XXIX  l 

(HAMILTON) 

To  the  People  of  the  State  of  New  York: 

The  power  of  regulating  the  militia,  and  of  com- 
manding its  services  in  times  of  insurrection  and 

1  This  essay  appeared  as  No.  XXXV.  in  the  original  publication  in 
the  newspapers,  and  is  therefore  here  misplaced  chronologically.     In 


The  Federalist  223 

invasion  are  natural  incidents  to  the  duties  of  super- 
intending the  common  defence,  and  of  watching  over 
the  internal  peace  of  the  Confederacy. 

It  requires  no  skill  in  the  science  of  war  to  discern 
that  uniformity  in  the  organization  and  discipline 
of  the  militia  would  be  attended  with  the  most 
beneficial  effects,  whenever  they  were  called  into  ser- 
vice for  the  public  defence.  It  would  enable  them 
to  discharge  the  duties  of  the  camp  and  of  the  field 
with  mutual  intelligence  and  concert — an  advantage 
of  peculiar  moment  in  the  operations  of  an  army; 
and  it  would  fit  them  much  sooner  to  acquire  the 
degree  of  proficiency  in  military  functions  which 
would  be  essential  to  their  usefulness.  This  desire- 
able  uniformity  can  only  be  accomplished  by  con- 
fiding the  regulation  of  the  militia  to  the  direction 
of  the  national  authority.  It  is,  therefore,  with  the 
most  evident  propriety,  that  the  plan  of  the  con- 
vention proposes  to  empower  the  Union  "  to  provide 
for  organizing,  arming,  and  disciplining  the  militia, 
and  for  governing  such  part  of  them  as  may  be  em- 
ployed in  the  service  of  the  United  States,  reserving 
to  the  States  respectively  the  appointment  of  the  officers, 
and  the  authority  of  training  the  militia  according  to 
the  discipline  prescribed  by  Congress." 

Of  the  different  grounds  which  have  been  taken  in 
opposition  to  the  plan  of  the  convention,  there  is 
none  that  was  so  little  to  have  been  expected,  or 
is  so  untenable  in  itself,  as  the  one  from  which  this 

the  first  edition  of  1788,  however,  it  is  printed  as  No.  XXIX.,  which 
gives  it  its  proper  place  according  to  subject,  and  for  this  reason  the 
order  of  the  first  edition  has  been  followed. 


224  Alexander  Hamilton 

particular  provision  has  been  attacked.  If  a  well- 
regulated  militia  be  the  most  natural  defence  of  a  free 
country,  it  ought  certainly  to  be  under  the  regula- 
tion and  at  the  disposal  of  that  body  which  is  con- 
stituted the  guardian  of  the  national  security.  If 
standing  armies  are  dangerous  to  liberty,  an  effica- 
cious power  over  the  militia,  in  the  body  to  whose 
care  the  protection  of  the  State  is  committed,  ought, 
as  far  as  possible,  to  take  away  the  inducement  and 
the  pretext  to  such  unfriendly  institutions.  If  the 
federal  government  can  command  the  aid  of  the 
militia  in  those  emergencies  which  call  for  the  military 
arm  in  support  of  the  civil  magistrate,  it  can  the 
better  dispense  with  the  employment  of  a  different 
kind  of  force.  If  it  cannot  avail  itself  of  the  former, 
it  will  be  obliged  to  recur  to  the  latter.  To  render 
an  army  unnecessary,  will  be  a  more  certain  method 
of  preventing  its  existence  than  a  thousand  pro- 
hibitions upon  paper. 

In  order  to  cast  an  odium  upon  the  power  of  call- 
ing forth  the  militia  to  execute  the  laws  of  the  Union, 
it  has  been  remarked  that  there  is  nowhere  any  pro- 
vision in  the  proposed  Constitution  for  calling  out  the 
posse  comitatus,  to  assist  the  magistrate  in  the 
execution  of  his  duty;  whence  it  has  been  inferred, 
that  military  force  was  intended  to  be  his  only  aux- 
iliary. There  is  a  striking  incoherence  in  the  ob- 
jections which  have  appeared,  and  sometimes  even 
from  the  same  quarter,  not  much  calculated  to  in- 
spire a  very  favorable  opinion  of  the  sincerity  or  fair 
dealing  of  their  authors.  The  same  persons  who  tell 
us  in  one  breath,  that  the  powers  of  the  federal  gov- 


The  Federalist  225 

ernment  will  be  despotic  and  unlimited,  inform  us  in 
the  next,  that  it  has  not  authority  sufficient  even  to 
call  out  the  posse  comitatus.  The  latter,  fortu- 
nately, is  as  much  short  of  the  truth  as  the  former 
exceeds  it.  It  would  be  as  absurd  to  doubt,  that  a 
right  to  pass  all  laws  necessary  and  proper  to  execute 
its  declared  powers,  would  include  that  of  requiring 
the  assistance  of  the  citizens  to  the  officers  who  may 
be  intrusted  with  the  execution  of  those  laws,  as  it 
would  be  to  believe,  that  a  right  to  enact  laws  neces- 
sary and  proper  for  the  imposition  and  collection  of 
taxes  would  involve  that  of  varying  the  rules  of 
descent  and  of  the  alienation  of  landed  property,  or 
of  abolishing  the  trial  by  jury  in  cases  relating  to  it. 
It  being  therefore  evident  that  the  supposition  of  a 
want  of  power  to  require  the  aid  of  the  posse  comi- 
tatus is  entirely  destitute  of  color,  it  will  follow, 
that  the  conclusion  which  has  been  drawn  from  it, 
in  its  application  to  the  authority  of  the  federal  gov- 
ernment over  the  militia,  is  as  uncandid  as  it  is  il- 
logical. What  reason  could  there  be  to  infer,  that 
force  was  intended  to  be  the  sole  instrument  of  au- 
thority, merely  because  there  is  a  power  to  make  use 
of  it  when  necessary?  What  shall  we  think  of  the 
motives  which  could  induce  men  of  sense  to  reason 
in  this  manner?  How  shall  we  prevent  a  conflict 
between  charity  and  judgment? 

By  a  curious  refinement  upon  the  spirit  of  repub- 
lican jealousy,  we  are  even  taught  to  apprehend 
danger  from  the  militia  itself,  in  the  hands  of  the 
federal  government.  It  is  observed  that  select  corps 
may  be  formed,  composed  of  the  young  and  ardent, 

VOL.  XI.— 15. 


226  Alexander  Hamilton 

who  may  be  rendered  subservient  to  the  views  of 
arbitrary  power.  What  plan  for  the  regulation  of 
the  militia  may  be  pursued  by  the  national  govern- 
ment, is  impossible  to  be  foreseen.  But  so  far  from 
viewing  the  matter  in  the  same  light  with  those  who 
object  to  select  corps  as  dangerous,  were  the  Con- 
stitution ratified,  and  were  I  to  deliver  my  sentiments 
to  a  member  of  the  federal  legislature  from  this  State 
on  the  subject  of  a  militia  establishment,  I  should 
hold  to  him,  in  substance,  the  following  discourse: 

"The  project  of  disciplining  all  the  militia  of  the 
United  States  is  as  futile  as  it  would  be  injurious,  if 
it  were  capable  of  being  carried  into  execution.  A 
tolerable  expertness  in  military  movements  is  a 
business  that  requires  time  and  practice.  It  is  not 
a  day,  or  even  a  week,  that  will  suffice  for  the  at- 
tainment of  it.  To  oblige  the  great  body  of  the  yeo- 
manry, and  of  the  other  classes  of  the  citizens,  to  be 
under  arms  for  the  purpose  of  going  through  military 
exercises  and  evolutions,  as  often  as  might  be  neces- 
sary to  acquire  the  degree  of  perfection  which  would 
entitle  them  to  the  character  of  a  well-regulated 
militia,  would  be  a  real  grievance  to  the  people,  and 
a  serious  public  inconvenience  and  loss.  It  would 
form  an  annual  deduction  from  the  productive  labor 
of  the  country,  to  an  amount  which,  calculating  upon 
the  present  numbers  of  the  people,  would  not  fall 
far  short  of  the  whole  expense  of  the  civil  establish- 
ments of  all  the  States.  To  attempt  a  thing  which 
would  abridge  the  mass  of  labor  and  industry  to  so 
considerable  an  extent,  would  be  unwise:  and  the 
experiment,  it  made,  could  not  succeed,  because  it 


The  Federalist  227 

would  not  long  be  endured.  Little  more  can  reason- 
ably be  aimed  at,  with  respect  to  the  people  at  large, 
than  to  have  them  properly  armed  and  equipped; 
and  in  order  to  see  that  this  be  not  neglected,  it  will 
be  necessary  to  assemble  them  once  or  twice  in  the 
course  of  a  year. 

"  But  though  the  scheme  of  disciplining  the  whole 
nation  must  be  abandoned  as  mischievous  or  im- 
practicable ;  yet  it  is  a  matter  of  the  utmost  impor- 
tance that  a  well-digested  plan  should,  as  soon  as 
possible,  be  adopted  for  the  proper  establishment  of 
the  militia.  The  attention  of  the  government  ought 
particularly  to  be  directed  to  the  formation  of  a 
select  corps  of  moderate  extent,  upon  such  prin- 
ciples as  will  really  fit  them  for  service  in  case  of 
need.  By  thus  circumscribing  the  plan,  it  will  be 
possible  to  have  an  excellent  body  of  well-trained 
militia,  ready  to  take  the  field  whenever  the  defence 
of  the  State  shall  require  it.  This  will  not  only  lessen 
the  call  for  military  establishments,  but  if  circum- 
stances should  at  any  time  oblige  the  government  to 
form  an  army  of  any  magnitude  that  army  can  never 
be  formidable  to  the  liberties  of  the  people  while 
there  is  a  large  body  of  citizens,  little,  if  at  all,  in- 
ferior to  them  in  discipline  and  the  use  of  arms,  who 
stand  ready  to  defend  their  own  rights  and  those  of 
their  fellow-citizens.  This  appears  to  me  the  only 
substitute  that  can  be  devised  for  a  standing  army, 
and  the  best  possible  security  against  it,  if  it  should 
exist. ' ' 

Thus  differently  from  the  adversaries  of  the  pro- 
posed Constitution  should  I  reason  on  the  same  sub- 


228  Alexander  Hamilton 

ject,  deducing  arguments  of  safety  from  the  very 
sources  which  they  represent  as  fraught  with  danger 
and  perdition.  But  how  the  national  legislature 
may  reason  on  the  point,  is  a  thing  which  neither 
they  nor  I  can  foresee. 

There  is  something  so  far-fetched  and  so  extrava- 
gant in  the  idea  of  danger  to  liberty  from  the  militia, 
that  one  is  at  a  loss  whether  to  treat  it  with  gravity 
or  with  raillery;  whether  to  consider  it  as  a  mere 
trial  of  skill,  like  the  paradoxes  of  rhetoricians ;  as  a 
disingenuous  artifice  to  instil  prejudices  at  any  price ; 
or  as  the  serious  offspring  of  political  fanaticism. 
Where,  in  the  name  of  common-sense,  are  our  fears 
to  end  if  we  may  not  trust  our  sons,  our  brothers, 
our  neighbors,  our  fellow-citizens?  What  shadow 
of  danger  can  there  be  from  men  who  are  daily  min- 
gling with  the  rest  of  their  countrymen,  and  who  par- 
ticipate with  them  in  the  same  feelings,  sentiments, 
habits,  and  interests?  What  reasonable  cause  of 
apprehension  can  be  inferred  from  a  power  in  the 
Union  to  prescribe  regulations  for  the  militia,  and  to 
command  its  services  when  necessary,  while  the 
particular  States  are  to  have  the  sole  and  exclusive 
appointment  of  the  officers  ?  If  it  were  possible  seri- 
ously to  indulge  a  jealousy  of  the  militia  upon  any 
conceivable  establishment  under  the  federal  govern- 
ment, the  circumstance  of  the  officers  being  in  the 
appointment  of  the  States  ought  at  once  to  extin- 
guish it.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  this  circum- 
stance will  always  secure  to  them  a  preponderating 
influence  over  the  militia. 

In  reading  many  of  the  publications  against  the 


The  Federalist  229 

Constitution,  a  man  is  apt  to  imagine  that  he  is 
perusing  some  ill- written  tale  or  romance,  which, 
instead  of  natural  and  agreeable  images,  exhibits 
to  the  mind  nothing  but  frightful  and  distorted 
shapes — 

"Gorgons,  hydras,  and  chimeras  dire"; 

discoloring  and  disfiguring  whatever  it  represents, 
and  transforming  every  thing  it  touches  into  a 
monster. 

A  sample  of  this  is  to  be  observed  in  the  exagger- 
ated and  improbable  suggestions  which  have  taken 
place  respecting  the  power  of  calling  for  the  ser- 
vices of  the  militia.  That  of  New  Hampshire  is  to 
be  marched  to  Georgia,  of  Georgia  to  New  Hamp- 
shire, of  New  York  to  Kentucky,  and  of  Kentucky 
to  Lake  Champlain.  Nay,  the  debts  due  to  the 
French  and  Dutch  are  to  be  paid  in  militiamen  in- 
stead of  louis  d'ors  and  ducats.  At  one  moment 
there  is  to  be  a  large  army  to  lay  prostrate  the  liber- 
ties of  the  people ;  at  another  moment  the  militia  of 
Virginia  are  to  be  dragged  from  their  homes  five  or 
six  hundred  miles,  to  tame  the  republican  contu- 
macy of  Massachusetts;  and  that  of  Massachusetts 
is  to  be  transported  an  equal  distance  to  subdue  the 
refractory  haughtiness  of  the  aristocratic  Virginians. 
Do  the  persons  who  rave  at  this  rate  imagine  that 
their  art  or  their  eloquence  can  impose  any  conceits 
or  absurdities  upon  the  people  of  America  for  in- 
fallible truths? 

If  there  should  be  an  army  to  be  made  use  of  as 
the  engine  of  despotism,  what  need  of  the  militia? 
If  there  should  be  no  army,  whither  would  the  militia, 


230  Alexander  Hamilton 

irritated  by  being  called  upon  to  undertake  a  distant 
and  hopeless  expedition,  for  the  purpose  of  riveting 
the  chains  of  slavery  upon  a  part  of  their  country- 
men, direct  their  course,  but  to  the  seat  of  the  ty- 
rants, who  had  meditated  so  foolish  as  well  as  so 
wicked  a  project,  to  crush  them  in  their  imagined 
intrenchments  of  power,  and  to  make  them  an  ex- 
ample of  the  just  vengeance  of  an  abused  and  in- 
censed people?  Is  this  the  way  in  which  usurpers 
stride  to  dominion  over  a  numerous  and  enlightened 
nation?  Do  they  begin  by  exciting  the  detestation 
of  the  very  instruments  of  their  intended  usurpa- 
tions? Do  they  usually  commence  their  career  by 
wanton  and  disgustful  acts  of  power,  calculated  to 
answer  no  end,  but  to  draw  upon  themselves  uni- 
versal hatred  and  execration?  Are  suppositions  of 
this  sort  the  sober  admonitions  of  discerning  patriots 
to  a  discerning  people?  Or  are  they  the  inflamma- 
tory ravings  of  incendiaries  or  distempered  enthu- 
siasts? If  we  were  even  to  suppose  the  national 
rulers  actuated  by  the  most  ungovernable  ambi- 
tion, it  is  impossible  to  believe  that  they  would  em- 
ploy such  preposterous  means  to  accomplish  their 
designs. 

In  times  of  insurrection,  or  invasion,  it  would  be 
natural  and  proper  that  the  militia  of  a  neighboring 
State  should  be  marched  into  another,  to  resist  a 
common  enemy,  or  to  guard  the  republic  against  the 
violence  of  faction  or  sedition.  This  was  frequently 
the  case,  in  respect  to  the  first  object,  in  the  course 
of  the  late  war;  and  this  mutual  succor  is,  indeed,  a 
principal  end  of  our  political  association.     If  the 


The  Federalist  231 

power  of  affording  it  be  placed  under  the  direction 
of  the  Union,  there  will  be  no  danger  of  a  supine  and 
listless  inattention  to  the  dangers  of  a  neighbor,  till 
its  near  approach  had  superadded  the  incitements 
of  self-preservation  to  the  too  feeble  impulses  of  duty 
and  sympathy. 

PUBLIUS. 


From  the  New  York  Packet,  Friday,  December  28,  1787 
THE  FEDERALIST.     No.  XXX 

(HAMILTON) 

To  the  People  of  the  State  of  New  York: 

It  has  been  already  observed  that  the  federal  gov- 
ernment ought  to  possess  the  power  of  providing  for 
the  support  of  the  national  forces ;  in  which  proposi- 
tion was  intended  to  be  included  the  expense  of 
raising  troops,  of  building  and  equipping  fleets,  and 
all  other  expenses  in  any  wise  connected  with  mili- 
tary arrangements  and  operations.  But  these  are 
not  the  only  objects  to  which  the  jurisdiction  of  the 
Union,  in  respect  to  revenue,  must  necessarily  be 
empowered  to  extend.  It  must  embrace  a  provi- 
sion for  the  support  of  the  national  civil  list ;  for  the 
payment  of  the  national  debts  contracted,  or  that 
may  be  contracted;  and,  in  general,  for  all  those 
matters  which  will  call  for  disbursements  out  of  the 
national  treasury.  The  conclusion  is,  that  there 
must  be  interwoven,  in  the  frame  of  the  government, 
a  general  power  of  taxation,  in  one  shape  or  another. 

Money  is,  with  propriety,  considered  as  the  vital 
principle  of  the  body  politic;  as  that  which  sustains 


232  Alexander  Hamilton 

its  life  and  motion,  and  enables  it  to  perform  its  most 
essential  functions.  A  complete  power,  therefore, 
to  procure  a  regular  and  adequate  supply  of  it,  as 
far  as  the  resources  of  the  community  will  permit, 
may  be  regarded  as  an  indispensable  ingredient  in 
every  constitution.  From  a  deficiency  in  this  par- 
ticular, one  of  two  evils  must  ensue :  either  the  people 
must  be  subjected  to  continual  plunder,  as  a  substi- 
tute for  a  more  eligible  mode  of  supplying  the  public 
wants,  or  the  government  must  sink  into  a  fatal 
atrophy,  and,  in  a  short  course  of  time,  perish. 

In  the  Ottoman  or  Turkish  empire,  the  sovereign, 
though  in  other  respects  absolute  master  of  the  lives 
and  fortunes  of  his  subjects,  has  no  right  to  impose 
a  new  tax.  The  consequence  is  that  he  permits  the 
bashaws  or  governors  of  provinces  to  pillage  the 
people  without  mercy ;  and,  in  turn,  squeezes  out  of 
them  the  sums  of  which  he  stands  in  need,  to  satisfy 
his  own  exigencies  and  those  of  the  state.  In  Amer- 
ica, from  a  like  cause,  the  government  of  the  Union 
has  gradually  dwindled  into  a  state  of  decay,  ap- 
proaching nearly  to  annihilation.  Who  can  doubt, 
that  the  happiness  cf  the  people  in  both  countries 
would  be  promoted  by  competent  authorities  in  the 
proper  hands,  to  provide  the  revenues  which  the 
necessities  of  the  public  might  require? 

The  present  Confederation,  feeble  as  it  is,  in- 
tended to  repose  in  the  United  States  an  unlimited 
power  of  providing  for  the  pecuniary  wants  of  the 
Union.  But  proceeding  upon  an  erroneous  prin- 
ciple, it  has  been  done  in  such  a  manner  as  entirely 
to  have  frustrated  the  intention.     Congress,  by  the 


The  Federalist  233 

articles  which  compose  that  compact  (as  has  already- 
been  stated),  are  authorized  to  ascertain  and  call  for 
any  sums  of  money  necessary,  in  their  judgment,  to 
the  service  of  the  United  States;  and  their  requisi- 
tions, if  conformable  to  the  rule  of  apportionment, 
are  in  every  constitutional  sense  obligatory  upon  the 
States.  These  have  no  right  to  question  the  pro- 
priety of  the  demand;  no  discretion  beyond  that  of 
devising  the  ways  and  means  of  furnishing  the  sums 
demanded.  But  though  this  be  strictly  and  truly 
the  case;  though  the  assumption  of  such  a  right 
would  be  an  infringement  of  the  articles  of  Union; 
though  it  may  seldom  or  never  have  been  avowedly 
claimed,  yet  in  practice  it  has  been  constantly  exer- 
cised, and  would  continue  to  be  so,  as  long  as  the 
revenues  of  the  Confederacy  should  remain  depend- 
ent on  the  intermediate  agency  of  its  members. 
What  the  consequences  of  this  system  have  been,  is 
within  the  knowledge  of  every  man  the  least  con- 
versant in  our  public  affairs,  and  has  been  amply 
unfolded  in  different  parts  of  these  inquiries.  It  is 
this  which  has  chiefly  contributed  to  reduce  us  to  a 
situation,  which  affords  ample  cause  both  of  morti- 
fication to  ourselves,  and  of  triumph  to  our  enemies. 
What  remedy  can  there  be  for  this  situation,  but 
in  a  change  of  the  system  which  has  produced  it — 
in  a  change  of  the  fallacious  and  delusive  system  of 
quotas  and  requisitions  ?  What  substitute  can  there 
be  imagined  for  this  ignis  fatuus  in  finance,  but  that 
of  permitting  the  national  government  to  raise  its 
own  revenues  by  the  ordinary  methods  of  taxation 
authorized   in    every  well-ordered   constitution    of 


234  Alexander  Hamilton 

civil  government?  Ingenious  men  may  declaim 
with  plausibility  on  any  subject;  but  no  human  in- 
genuity can  point  out  any  other  expedient  to  rescue 
us  from  the  inconveniences  and  embarrassments 
naturally  resulting  from  defective  supplies  of  the 
public  treasury. 

The  more  intelligent  adversaries  of  the  new  Con- 
stitution admit  the  force  of  this  reasoning ;  but  they 
qualify  their  admission  by  a  distinction  between 
what  they  call  internal  and  external  taxation.  The 
former  they  would  reserve  to  the  State  governments ; 
the  latter,  which  they  explain  into  commercial  im- 
posts, or  rather  duties  on  imported  articles,  they 
declare  themselves  willing  to  concede  to  the  federal 
head.  This  distinction,  however,  would  violate  the 
maxim  of  good  sense  and  sound  policy,  which  dic- 
tates that  every  power  ought  to  be  in  proportion  to 
its  object  ;  and  would  still  leave  the  general  govern- 
ment in  a  kind  of  tutelage  to  the  State  governments, 
inconsistent  with  every  idea  of  vigor  or  efficiency. 
Who  can  pretend  that  commercial  imposts  are,  or 
would  be,  alone  equal  to  the  present  and  future  exi- 
gencies of  the  Union?  Taking  into  the  account  the 
existing  debt,  foreign  and  domestic,  upon  any  plan 
of  extinguishment  which  a  man  moderately  im- 
pressed with  the  importance  of  public  justice  and 
public  credit  could  approve,  in  addition  to  the  es- 
tablishments which  all  parties  will  acknowledge  to  be 
necessary,  we  could  not  reasonably  flatter  ourselves, 
that  this  resource  alone,  upon  the  most  improved 
scale,  would  even  suffice  for  its  present  necessities. 
Its  future  necessities  admit  not  of  calculation  or 


The  Federalist  235 

limitation;  and  upon  the  principle,  more  than  once 
adverted  to,  the  power  of  making  provision  for  them 
as  they  arise  ought  to  be  equally  unconfmed.  I 
believe  it  may  be  regarded  as  a  position  warranted 
by  the  history  of  mankind,  that,  in  the  usual  pro- 
gress of  things,  the  necessities  of  a  nation,  in  every 
stage  of  its  existence,  will  be  found  at  least  equal  to 
its  resources. 

To  say  that  deficiencies  may  be  provided  for  by 
requisitions  upon  the  States,  is  on  the  one  hand  to 
acknowledge  that  this  system  cannot  be  depended 
upon,  and  on  the  other  hand  to  depend  upon  it  for 
every  thing  beyond  a  certain  limit.  Those  who  have 
carefully  attended  to  its  vices  and  deformities  as 
they  have  been  exhibited  by  experience  or  delineated 
in  the  course  of  these  papers,  must  feel  invincible 
repugnancy  to  trusting  the  national  interests  in  any 
degree  to  its  operation.  Its  inevitable  tendency, 
whenever  it  is  brought  into  activity,  must  be  to  en- 
feeble the  Union,  and  sow  the  seeds  of  discord  and 
contention  between  the  federal  head  and  its  mem- 
bers, and  between  the  members  themselves.  Can  it 
be  expected  that  the  deficiencies  would  be  better 
supplied  in  this  mode  than  the  total  wants  of  the 
Union  have  heretofore  been  supplied  in  the  same 
mode?  It  ought  to  be  recollected  that  if  less  will  be 
required  from  the  States,  they  will  have  proportion- 
ably  less  means  to  answer  the  demand.  If  the 
opinions  of  those  who  contend  for  the  distinction 
which  has  been  mentioned  were  to  be  received  as 
evidence  of  truth,  one  would  be  led  to  conclude  that 
there  was  some  known  point  in  the   economy  of 


236  Alexander  Hamilton 

national  affairs  at  which  it  would  be  safe  to  stop  and 
to  say:  Thus  far  the  ends  of  public  happiness  will 
be  promoted  by  supplying  the  wants  of  government, 
and  all  beyond  this  is  unworthy  of  our  care  or 
anxiety.  How  is  it  possible  that  a  government 
half  supplied  and  always  necessitous,  can  fulfil  the 
purposes  of  its  institution,  can  provide  for  the  secur- 
ity, advance  the  prosperity,  or  support  the  reputa- 
tion of  the  commonwealth  ?  How  can  it  ever  possess 
either  energy  or  stability,  dignity  or  credit,  con- 
fidence at  home  or  respectability  abroad?  How 
can  its  administration  be  any  thing  else  than  a  suc- 
cession of  expedients  temporizing,  impotent,  dis- 
graceful? How  will  it  be  able  to  avoid  a  frequent 
sacrifice  of  its  engagements  to  immediate  necessity? 
How  can  it  undertake  or  execute  any  liberal  or  en- 
larged plans  of  public  good? 

Let  us  attend  to  what  would  be  the  effects  of  this 
situation  in  the  very  first  war  in  which  we  should 
happen  to  be  engaged.  We  will  presume,  for  argu- 
ment's sake,  that  the  revenue  arising  from  the  im- 
post duties  answers  the  purposes  of  a  provision  for 
the  public  debt  and  of  a  peace  establishment  for  the 
Union.  Thus  circumstanced,  a  war  breaks  out. 
What  would  be  the  probable  conduct  of  the  govern- 
ment in  such  an  emergency?  Taught  by  experience 
that  proper  dependence  could  not  be  placed  on  the 
success  of  requisitions,  unable  by  its  own  authority 
to  lay  hold  of  fresh  resources,  and  urged  by  con- 
siderations of  national  danger,  would  it  not  be 
driven  to  the  expedient  of  diverting  the  funds  al- 
ready appropriated  from  their  proper  objects  to  the 


The  Federalist  237 

defence  of  the  State?  It  is  not  easy  to  see  how  a 
step  of  this  kind  could  be  avoided;  and  if  it  should 
be  taken,  it  is  evident  that  it  would  prove  the  de- 
struction of  public  credit  at  the  very  moment  that 
it  was  becoming  essential  to  the  public  safety.  To 
imagine  that  at  such  a  crisis  credit  might  be  dispensed 
with,  would  be  the  extreme  of  infatuation.  In  the 
modern  system  of  war,  nations  the  most  wealthy  are 
obliged  to  have  recourse  to  large  loans.  A  country 
so  little  opulent  as  ours  must  feel  this  necessity  in  a 
much  stronger  degree.  But  who  would  lend  to  a 
government  that  prefaced  its  overtures  for  borrow- 
ing by  an  act  which  demonstrated  that  no  reliance 
could  be  placed  on  the  steadiness  of  its  measures  for 
paying?  The  loans  it  might  be  able  to  procure 
would  be  as  limited  in  their  extent  as  burdensome  in 
their  conditions.  They  would  be  made  upon  the 
same  principles  that  usurers  commonly  lend  to 
bankrupt  and  fraudulent  debtors, — with  a  sparing 
hand  at  enormous  premiums. 

It  may  perhaps  be  imagined  that,  from  the  scanti- 
ness of  the  resources  of  the  country,  the  necessity  of 
diverting  the  established  funds  in  the  case  supposed 
would  exist,  though  the  national  government  should 
possess  an  unrestrained  power  of  taxation.  But 
two  considerations  will  serve  to  quiet  all  apprehen- 
sion on  this  head:  one  is,  that  we  are  sure  the  re- 
sources of  the  community,  in  their  full  extent,  will 
be  brought  into  activity  for  the  benefit  of  the  Union ; 
the  other  is,  that  whatever  deficiencies  there  may 
be,  can  without  difficulty  be  supplied  by  loans. 

The  power  of  creating  new  funds  upon  new  ob- 


238  Alexander  Hamilton 

jects  of  taxation,  by  its  own  authority,  would  enable 
the  national  government  to  borrow  as  far  as  its 
necessities  might  require.  Foreigners,  as  well  as  the 
citizens  of  America,  could  then  reasonably  repose 
confidence  in  its  engagements;  but  to  depend  upon 
a  government  that  must  itself  depend  upon  thirteen 
other  governments  for  the  means  of  fulfilling  its  con- 
tracts, when  once  its  situation  is  clearly  understood, 
would  require  a  degree  of  credulity  not  often  to  be 
met  with  in  the  pecuniary  transactions  of  mankind, 
and  little  reconcilable  with  the  usual  sharp-sighted- 
ness  of  avarice. 

Reflections  of  this  kind  may  have  trifling  weight 
with  men  who  hope  to  see  realized  in  America  the 
halcyon  scenes  of  the  poetic  or  fabulous  age;  but  to 
those  who  believe  we  are  likely  to  experience  a  com- 
mon portion  of  the  vicissitudes  and  calamities  which 
have  fallen  to  the  lot  of  other  nations,  they  must 
appear  entitled  to  serious  attention.  Such  men 
must  behold  the  actual  situation  of  their  country 
with  painful  solicitude,  and  deprecate  the  evils 
which  ambition  or  revenge  might,  with  too  much 

facility,  inflict  upon  it. 

Publius. 


From  the  New  York  Packet,  Tuesday,  January  1,  1788 
THE  FEDERALIST.     No.  XXXI 

(HAMILTON) 

To  the  People  of  the  State  of  New  York: 

In  disquisitions  of  every  kind,  there  are  certain 
primary  truths,  or  first  principles,  upon  which  all 


The  Federalist  239 

subsequent  reasonings  must  depend.  These  contain 
an  internal  evidence  which,  antecedent  to  all  re- 
flection or  combination,  commands  the  assent  of  the 
mind.  Where  it  produces  not  this  effect,  it  must 
proceed  either  from  some  defect  or  disorder  in  the 
organs  of  perception,  or  from  the  influence  of  some 
strong  interest,  or  passion,  or  prejudice.  Of  this 
nature  are  the  maxims  in  geometry,  that  "  the  whole 
is  greater  than  its  part ;  things  equal  to  the  same  are 
equal  to  one  another;  two  straight  lines  cannot  en- 
close a  space;  and  all  right  angles  are  equal  to  each 
other."  Of  the  same  nature  are  these  other  maxims 
in  ethics  and  politics,  that  there  cannot  be  an  effect 
without  a  cause;  that  the  means  ought  to  be  pro- 
portioned to  the  end ;  that  every  power  ought  to  be 
commensurate  with  its  object;  that  there  ought  to 
be  no  limitation  of  a  power  destined  to  effect  a  pur- 
pose which  is  itself  incapable  of  limitation.  And 
there  are  other  truths  in  the  two  latter  sciences 
which,  if  they  cannot  pretend  to  rank  in  the  class 
of  axioms,  are  yet  such  direct  inferences  from  them, 
and  so  obvious  in  themselves,  and  so  agreeable  to 
the  natural  and  unsophisticated  dictates  of  common- 
sense,  that  they  challenge  the  assent  of  a  sound 
and  unbiased  mind,  with  a  degree  of  force  and  con- 
viction almost  equally  irresistible. 

The  objects  of  geometrical  inquiry  are  so  entirely 
abstracted  from  those  pursuits  which  stir  up  and 
put  in  motion  the  unruly  passions  of  the  human 
heart,  that  mankind,  without  difficulty,  adopt  not 
only  the  more  simple  theorems  of  the  science,  but 
even  those  abstruse  paradoxes  which,  however  they 


240  Alexander  Hamilton 

may  appear  susceptible  of  demonstration,  are  at 
variance  with  the  natural  conceptions  which  the 
mind,  without  the  aid  of  philosophy,  would  be  led 
to  entertain  upon  the  subject.  The  infinite  divisi- 
bility of  matter,  or,  in  other  words,  the  infinite 
divisibility  of  a  finite  thing,  extending  even  to  the 
minutest  atom,  is  a  point  agreed  among  geometri- 
cians, though  not  less  incomprehensible  to  common- 
sense  than  any  of  those  mysteries  in  religion,  against 
which  the  batteries  of  infidelity  have  been  so  indus- 
triously levelled. 

But  in  the  sciences  of  morals  and  politics,  men 
are  found  far  less  tractable.  To  a  certain  degree,  it 
is  right  and  useful  that  this  should  be  the  case. 
Caution  and  investigation  are  a  necessary  armor 
against  error  and  imposition.  But  this  untractable- 
ness  may  be  carried  too  far,  and  may  degenerate 
into  obstinacy,  perverseness,  or  disingenuity.  Though 
it  cannot  be  pretended  that  the  principles  of  moral 
and  political  knowledge  have,  in  general,  the  same 
degree  of  certainty  with  those  of  the  mathematics, 
yet  they  have  much  better  claims  in  this  respect 
than,  to  judge  from  the  conduct  of  men  in  particular 
situations,  we  should  be  disposed  to  allow  them. 
The  obscurity  is  much  oftener  in  the  passions  and 
prejudices  of  the  reasoner  than  in  the  subject.  Men, 
upon  too  many  occasions,  do  not  give  their  own 
understandings  fair  play;  but,  yielding  to  some  un- 
toward bias,  they  entangle  themselves  in  words  and 
confound  themselves  in  subtleties. 

How  else  could  it  happen  (if  we  admit  the  objec- 
tors to  be  sincere  in  their  opposition),  that  positions 


The  Federalist  241 

so  clear  as  those  which  manifest  the  necessity  of  a 
general  power  of  taxation  in  the  government  of  the 
Union,  should  have  to  encounter  any  adversaries 
among  men  of  discernment  ?  Though  these  positions 
have  been  elsewhere  fully  stated,  they  will  perhaps 
not  be  improperly  recapitulated  in  this  place,  as  in- 
troductory to  an  examination  of  what  may  have 
been  offered  by  way  of  objection  to  them.  They 
are  in  substance  as  follows: 

A  government  ought  to  contain  in  itself  every 
power  requisite  to  the  full  accomplishment  of  the 
objects  committed  to  its  care,  and  to  the  complete 
execution  of  the  trusts  for  which  it  is  responsible, 
free  from  every  other  control  but  a  regard  to  the 
public  good  and  to  the  sense  of  the  people. 

As  the  duties  of  superintending  the  national  de- 
fence and  of  securing  the  public  peace  against 
foreign  or  domestic  violence  involve  a  provision 
for  casualties  and  dangers  to  which  no  possible 
limits  can  be  assigned,  the  power  of  making  that 
provision  ought  to  know  no  other  bounds  than  the 
exigencies  of  the  nation  and  the  resources  of  the 
community. 

As  revenue  is  the  essential  engine  by  which  the 
means  of  answering  the  national  exigencies  must  be 
procured,  the  power  of  procuring  that  article  in  its 
full  extent  must  necessarily  be  comprehended  in 
that  of  providing  for  those  exigencies. 

As  theory  and  practice  conspire  to  prove  that 
the  power  of  procuring  revenue  is  unavailing  when 
exercised  over  the  States  in  their  collective  capaci- 
ties, the  federal  government  must  of  necessity  be 

VOL.  XI.— 16. 


242  Alexander  Hamilton 

invested  with  an  unqualified  power  of  taxation  in  the 
ordinary  modes. 

Did  not  experience  evince  the  contrary,  it  would 
be  natural  to  conclude  that  the  propriety  of  a  gen- 
eral power  of  taxation  in  the  national  government 
might  safely  be  permitted  to  rest  on  the  evidence  of 
these  propositions,  unassisted  by  any  additional  ar- 
guments or  illustrations.  But  we  find,  in  fact,  that 
the  antagonists  of  the  proposed  Constitution,  so  far 
from  acquiescing  in  their  justness  or  truth,  seem  to 
make  their  principal  and  most  zealous  effort  against 
this  part  of  the  plan.  It  may  therefore  be  satis- 
factory to  analyze  the  arguments  with  which  they 
combat  it. 

Those  of  them  which  have  been  most  labored  with 
that  view,  seem  in  substance  to  amount  to  this:  "  It 
is  not  true,  because  the  exigencies  of  the  Union  may 
not  be  susceptible  of  limitation,  that  its  power  of 
laying  taxes  ought  to  be  unconfined.  Revenue  is  as 
requisite  to  the  purposes  of  the  local  administrations 
as  to  those  of  the  Union ;  and  the  former  are  at  least 
of  equal  importance  with  the  latter  to  the  happiness 
of  the  people.  It  is,  therefore,  as  necessary  that  the 
State  governments  should  be  able  to  command  the 
means  of  supplying  their  wants,  as  that  the  national 
government  should  possess  the  like  faculty  in  re- 
spect to  the  wants  of  the  Union.  But  an  indefinite 
power  of  taxation  in  the  latter  might,  and  probably 
would  in  time,  deprive  the  former  of  the  means  of 
providing  for  their  own  necessities;  and  would  sub- 
ject them  entirely  to  the  mercy  of  the  national  legis- 
lature.    As  the  laws  of  the  Union  are  to  become  the 


The  Federalist  243 

supreme  law  of  the  land,  as  it  is  to  have  power  to 
pass  all  laws  that  may  be  necessary  for  carrying 
into  execution  the  authorities  with  which  it  is  pro- 
posed to  vest  it,  the  national  government  might  at 
any  time  abolish  the  taxes  imposed  for  State  objects 
upon  the  pretence  of  an  interference  with  its  own. 
It  might  allege  a  necessity  of  doing  this  in  order  to 
give  efficacy  to  the  national  revenues.  And  thus 
all  the  resources  of  taxation  might  by  degrees  be- 
come the  subjects  of  federal  monopoly,  to  the  entire 
exclusion  and  destruction  of  the  State  governments." 
This  mode  of  reasoning  appears  sometimes  to 
turn  upon  the  supposition  of  usurpation  in  the  na- 
tional government;  at  other  times  it  seems  to  be 
designed  only  as  a  deduction  from  the  constitutional 
operation  of  its  intended  powers.  It  is  only  in  the 
latter  light  that  it  can  be  admitted  to  have  any  pre- 
tensions to  fairness.  The  moment  we  launch  into 
conjectures  about  the  usurpations  of  the  federal 
government,  we  get  into  an  unfathomable  abyss, 
and  fairly  put  ourselves  out  of  the  reach  of  all  reason- 
ing. Imagination  may  range  at  pleasure  till  it  gets 
bewildered  amidst  the  labyrinths  of  an  enchanted 
castle,  and  knows  not  on  which  side  to  turn  to  ex- 
tricate itself  from  the  perplexities  into  which  it  has 
so  rashly  adventured.  Whatever  may  be  the  limits 
or  modifications  of  the  powers  of  the  Union,  it  is 
easy  to  imagine  an  endless  train  of  possible  dangers; 
and  by  indulging  an  excess  of  jealousy  and  timidity, 
we  may  bring  ourselves  to  a  state  of  absolute  scepti- 
cism and  irresolution.  I  repeat  here  what  I  have 
observed  in    substance  in   another  place,   that  all 


244  Alexander  Hamilton 

observations  founded  upon  the  danger  of  usurpation 
ought  to  be  referred  to  the  composition  and  structure 
of  the  government,  not  to  the  nature  or  extent  of 
its  powers.  The  State  governments,  by  their  origi- 
nal constitutions,  are  invested  with  complete  sov- 
ereignty. In  what  does  our  security  consist  against 
usurpation  from  that  quarter?  Doubtless  in  the 
manner  of  their  formation,  and  in  a  due  dependence 
of  those  who  are  to  administer  them  upon  the  people. 
If  the  proposed  construction  of  the  federal  govern- 
ment be  found,  upon  an  impartial  examination  of  it, 
to  be  such  as  to  afford,  to  a  proper  extent,  the  same 
species  of  security,  all  apprehensions  on  the  score  of 
usurpation  ought  to  be  discarded. 

It  should  not  be  forgotten  that  a  disposition  in 
the  State  governments  to  encroach  upon  the  rights 
of  the  Union  is  quite  as  probable  as  a  disposition  in 
the  Union  to  encroach  upon  the  rights  of  the  State 
governments.  What  side  would  be  likely  to  prevail 
in  such  a  conflict,  must  depend  on  the  means  which 
the  contending  parties  could  employ  towards  insur- 
ing success.  As  in  republics  strength  is  always  on 
the  side  of  the  people,  and  as  there  are  weighty  rea- 
sons to  induce  a  belief  that  the  State  governments 
will  commonly  possess  most  influence  over  them,  the 
natural  conclusion  is  that  such  contests  will  be  most 
apt  to  end  to  the  disadvantage  of  the  Union;  and 
that  there  is  greater  probability  of  encroachments 
by  the  members  upon  the  federal  head,  than  by  the 
federal  head  upon  the  members.  But  it  is  evident 
that  all  conjectures  of  this  kind  must  be  extremely 
vague  and  fallible:    and  that  it  is  by  far  the  safest 


The  Federalist  245 

course  to  lay  them  altogether  aside,  and  to  confine 
our  attention  wholly  to  the  nature  and  extent  of  the 
powers  as  they  are  delineated  in  the  Constitution. 
Every  thing  beyond  this  must  be  left  to  the  pru- 
dence and  firmness  of  the  people;  who,  as  they  will 
hold  the  scales  in  their  own  hands,  it  is  to  be  hoped, 
will  always  take  care  to  preserve  the  constitutional 
equilibrium  between  the  general  and  the  State  gov- 
ernments. Upon  this  ground,  which  is  evidently 
the  true  one,  it  will  not  be  difficult  to  obviate  the 
objections  which  have  been  made  to  an  indefinite 
power  of  taxation  in  the  United  States. 

Publius. 


From  the  Daily  Advertiser,  Thursday,  January  3,  1788 
THE  FEDERALIST.     No.  XXXII 

(HAMILTON) 

To  the  People  of  the  State  of  New  York: 

Although  I  am  of  opinion  that  there  would  be  no 
real  danger  of  the  consequences  which  seem  to  be 
apprehended  to  the  State  governments  from  a  power 
in  the  Union  to  control  them  in  the  levies  of  money, 
because  I  am  persuaded  that  the  sense  of  the  people, 
the  extreme  hazard  of  provoking  the  resentments 
of  the  State  governments,  and  a  conviction  of  the 
utility  and  necessity  of  local  administrations  for 
local  purposes,  would  be  a  complete  barrier  against 
the  oppressive  use  of  such  a  power ;  yet  I  am  willing 
here  to  allow,  in  its  full  extent,  the  justness  of  the 
reasoning  which  requires  that  the  individual  States 
should  possess  an  independent  and  uncontrollable 


246  Alexander  Hamilton 

authority  to  raise  their  own  revenues  for  the  supply 
of  their  own  wants.  And  making  this  concession,  I 
affirm  that  (with  the  sole  exception  of  duties  on 
imports  and  exports)  they  would,  under  the  plan  of 
the  convention,  retain  that  authority  in  the  most  ab- 
solute and  unqualified  sense;  and  that  an  attempt 
on  the  part  of  the  national  government  to  abridge 
them  in  the  exercise  of  it,  would  be  a  violent  assump- 
tion of  power,  unwarranted  by  any  article  or  clause 
of  its  Constitution. 

An  entire  consolidation  of  the  States  into  one 
complete  national  sovereignty  would  imply  an  entire 
subordination  of  the  parts;  and  whatever  powers 
might  remain  in  them,  would  be  altogether  dependent 
on  the  general  will.  But  as  the  plan  of  the  conven- 
tion aims  only  at  a  partial  union  or  consolidation, 
the  State  governments  would  clearly  retain  all  the 
rights  of  sovereignty  which  they  before  had,  and 
which  were  not,  by  that  act,  exclusively  delegated 
to  the  United  States.  This  exclusive  delegation,  or 
rather  this  alienation,  of  State  sovereignty,  would 
only  exist  in  three  cases :  where  the  Constitution  in 
express  terms  granted  an  exclusive  authority  to  the 
Union;  where  it  granted  in  one  instance  an  author- 
ity to  the  Union,  and  in  another  prohibited  the  States 
from  exercising  the  like  authority;  and  where  it 
granted  an  authority  to  the  Union,  to  which  a  similar 
authority  in  the  States  would  be  absolutely  and 
totally  contradictory  and  repugnant.  I  use  these 
terms  to  distinguish  this  last  case  from  another 
which  might  appear  to  resemble  it,  but  which  would, 
in  fact,  be  essentially  different;    I  mean  where  the 


The  Federalist  247 

exercise  of  a  concurrent  jurisdiction  might  be  pro- 
ductive of  occasional  interferences  in  the  policy  of 
any  branch  of  administration,  but  would  not  imply 
any  direct  contradiction  or  repugnancy  in  point  of 
constitutional  authority.  These  three  cases  of  ex- 
clusive jurisdiction  in  the  federal  government  may 
be  exemplified  by  the  following  instances:  The  last 
clause  but  one  in  the  eighth  section  of  the  first  article 
provides  expressly  that  Congress  shall  exercise  "  ex- 
clusive legislation"  over  the  district  to  be  appro- 
priated as  the  seat  of  government.  This  answers  to 
the  first  case.  The  first  clause  of  the  same  section 
empowers  Congress  uto  lay  and  collect  taxes,  duties, 
imposts,  and  excises";  and  the  second  clause  of  the 
tenth  section  of  the  same  article  declares  that,  "no 
State  shall,  without  the  consent  of  Congress,  lay  any 
imposts  or  duties  on  imports  or  exports,  except  for  the 
purpose  of  executing  its  inspection  laws."  Hence 
would  result  an  exclusive  power  in  the  Union  to  lay 
duties  on  imports  and  exports,  with  the  particular 
exception  mentioned ;  but  this  power  is  abridged  by 
another  clause,  which  declares  that  no  tax  or  duty 
shall  be  laid  on  articles  exported  from  any  State ;  in 
consequence  of  which  qualification,  it  now  only  ex- 
tends to  the  duties  on  imports.  This  answers  to  the 
second  case.  The  third  will  be  found  in  that  clause 
which  declares  that  Congress  shall  have  power  "to 
establish  an  uniform  rule  of  naturalization  through- 
out the  United  States."  This  must  necessarily  be 
exclusive;  because  if  each  State  had  power  to  pre- 
scribe a  distinct  rule,  there  could  not  be  a  uni- 
form RULE. 


248  Alexander  Hamilton 

A  case  which  may  perhaps  be  thought  to  resemble 
the  latter,  but  which  is  in  fact  widely  different, 
affects  the  question  immediately  under  considera- 
tion. I  mean  the  power  of  imposing  taxes  on  all 
articles  other  than  exports  and  imports.  This,  I 
contend,  is  manifestly  a  concurrent  and  coequal 
authority  in  the  United  States  and  in  the  individual 
States.  There  is  plainly  no  expression  in  the  grant- 
ing clause  which  makes  that  power  exclusive  in  the 
Union.  There  is  no  independent  clause  or  sentence 
which  prohibits  the  States  from  exercising  it.  So 
far  is  this  from  being  the  case,  that  a  plain  and  con- 
clusive argument  to  the  contrary  is  to  be  deduced 
from  the  restraint  laid  upon  the  States  in  relation 
to  duties  on  imports  and  exports.  This  restriction 
implies  an  admission  that,  if  it  were  not  inserted,  the 
States  would  possess  the  power  it  excludes;  and  it 
implies  a  further  admission,  that  as  to  all  other 
taxes,  the  authority  of  the  States  remains  undi- 
minished. In  any  other  view  it  would  be  both  un- 
necessary and  dangerous;  it  would  be  unnecessary, 
because  if  the  grant  to  the  Union  of  the  power  of 
laying  such  duties  implied  the  exclusion  of  the  States, 
or  even  their  subordination  in  this  particular,  there 
could  be  no  need  of  such  a  restriction;  it  would  be 
dangerous,  because  the  introduction  of  it  leads  di- 
rectly to  the  conclusion  which  has  been  mentioned, 
and  which,  if  the  reasoning  of  the  objectors  be  just, 
could  not  have  been  intended;  I  mean  that  the 
States,  in  all  cases  to  which  the  restriction  did  not 
apply,  would  have  a  concurrent  power  of  taxation 
with  the  Union.     The  restriction  in  question  amounts 


The  Federalist  249 

to  what  lawyers  call  a  negative  pregnant — that  is, 
a  negation  of  one  thing,  and  an  affirmance  of  another; 
a  negation  of  the  authority  of  the  States  to  impose 
taxes  on  imports  and  exports,  and  an  affirmance  of 
their  authority  to  impose  them  on  all  other  articles. 
It  would  be  mere  sophistry  to  argue  that  it  was 
meant  to  exclude  them  absolutely  from  the  imposi- 
tion of  taxes  of  the  former  kind,  and  to  leave  them 
at  liberty  to  lay  others  subject  to  the  control  of  the 
national  legislature.  The  restraining  or  prohibitory 
clause  only  says,  that  they  shall  not,  without  the 
consent  of  Congress,  lay  such  duties;  and  if  we  are 
to  understand  this  in  the  sense  last  mentioned,  the 
Constitution  would  then  be  made  to  introduce  a 
formal  provision  for  the  sake  of  a  very  absurd  con- 
clusion ;  which  is,  that  the  States,  with  the  consent  of 
the  national  legislature,  might  tax  imports  and  ex- 
ports; and  that  they  might  tax  every  other  article, 
unless  controlled  by  the  same  body.  If  this  was  the 
intention,  why  not  leave  it,  in  the  first  instance,  to 
what  is  alleged  to  be  the  natural  operation  of  the 
original  clause,  conferring  a  general  power  of  taxa- 
tion upon  the  Union?  It  is  evident  that  this  could 
not  have  been  the  intention,  and  that  it  will  not  bear 
a  construction  of  the  kind. 

As  to  a  supposition  of  repugnancy  between  the 
power  of  taxation  in  the  States  and  in  the  Union,  it 
cannot  be  supported  in  that  sense  which  would  be 
requisite  to  work  an  exclusion  of  the  States.  It  is, 
indeed,  possible  that  a  tax  might  be  laid  on  a  par- 
ticular article  by  a  State  which  might  render  it  in- 
expedient that  thus  a  further  tax  should  be  laid  on 


250  Alexander  Hamilton 

the  same  article  by  the  Union;  but  it  would  not 
imply  a  constitutional  inability  to  impose  a  further 
tax.  The  quantity  of  the  imposition,  the  expedi- 
ency or  inexpediency  of  an  increase  on  either  side, 
would  be  mutually  questions  of  prudence;  but 
there  would  be  involved  no  direct  contradiction  of 
power.  The  particular  policy  of  the  national  and  of 
the  State  systems  of  finance  might  now  and  then  not 
exactly  coincide,  and  might  require  reciprocal  for- 
bearances. It  is  not,  however,  a  mere  possibility  of 
inconvenience  in  the  exercise  of  powers,  but  an  im- 
mediate constitutional  repugnancy  that  can  by  im- 
plication alienate  and  extinguish  a  preexisting  right 
of  sovereignty. 

The  necessity  of  a  concurrent  jurisdiction  in  cer- 
tain cases  results  from  the  division  of  the  sovereign 
power;  and  the  rule  that  all  authorities,  of  which 
the  States  are  not  explicitly  divested  in  favor  of  the 
Union,  remain  with  them  in  full  vigor,  is  not  a  theo- 
retical consequence  of  that  division,  but  is  clearly 
admitted  by  the  whole  tenor  of  the  instrument 
which  contains  the  articles  of  the  proposed  Constitu- 
tion. We  there  find  that,  notwithstanding  the 
affirmative  grants  of  general  authorities,  there  has 
been  the  most  pointed  care  in  those  cases  where  it 
was  deemed  improper  that  the  like  authorities  should 
reside  in  the  States,  to  insert  negative  clauses  pro- 
hibiting the  exercise  of  them  by  the  States.  The 
tenth  section  of  the  first  article  consists  altogether 
of  such  provisions.  This  circumstance  is  a  clear  in- 
dication of  the  sense  of  the  convention,  and  fur- 
nishes a  rule  of  interpretation  out  of  the  body  of  the 


The  Federalist  251 

act,  which  justifies  the  position  I  have  advanced 
and  refutes  every  hypothesis  to  the  contrary. 

PUBLIUS. 


From  the  Daily  Advertiser,  January  3,  1788 
THE  FEDERALIST.     No.  XXXIII 

(HAMILTON) 

To  the  People  of  the  State  of  New  York: 

The  residue  of  the  argument  against  the  provisions 
of  the  Constitution  in  respect  to  taxation  is  in- 
grafted upon  the  following  clause.1  The  last  clause 
of  the  eighth  section  of  the  first  article  of  the  plan 
under  consideration  authorizes  the  national  legis- 
lature "to  make  all  laws  which  shall  be  necessary 
and  proper  for  carrying  into  execution  the  powers  by 
that  Constitution  vested  in  the  government  of  the 
United  States,  or  in  any  department  or  officer 
thereof";  and  the  second  clause  of  the  sixth  article 
declares,  "that  the  Constitution  and  the  laws  of  the 
United  States  made  in  pursuance  thereof,  and  the 
treaties  made  by  their  authority  shall  be  the  supreme 
law  of  the  land,  any  thing  in  the  constitution  or  laws 
of  any  State  to  the  contrary  notwithstanding." 

These  two  clauses  have  been  the  source  of  much 
virulent  invective  and  petulant  declamation  against 
the  proposed  Constitution.  They  have  been  held 
up  to  the  people  in  all  the  exaggerated  colors  of 
misrepresentation  as  the  pernicious  engines  by  which 

1  This  was  the  point  at  which  No.  XXXI.  of  the  original  newspaper 
essays  was  divided,  and  this  opening  sentence  appeared  first  in  the 
McLean  edition  of  1788. 


252  Alexander  Hamilton 

their  local  governments  were  to  be  destroyed  and 
their  liberties  exterminated;  as  the  hideous  monster 
whose  devouring  jaws  would  spare  neither  sex  nor 
age,  nor  high  nor  low,  nor  sacred  nor  profane;  and 
yet,  strange  as  it  may  appear,  after  all  this  clamor, 
to  those  who  may  not  have  happened  to  contem- 
plate them  in  the  same  light,  it  may  be  affirmed 
with  perfect  confidence  that  the  constitutional  op- 
eration of  the  intended  government  would  be  pre- 
cisely the  same,  if  these  clauses  were  entirely 
obliterated,  as  if  they  were  repeated  in  every  article. 
They  are  only  declaratory  of  a  truth  which  would  have 
resulted  by  necessary  and  unavoidable  implication 
from  the  very  act  of  constituting  a  federal  govern- 
ment, and  vesting  it  with  certain  specified  powers. 
This  is  so  clear  a  proposition,  that  moderation  itself 
can  scarcely  listen  to  the  railings  which  have  been 
so  copiously  vented  against  this  part  of  the  plan, 
without  emotions  that  disturb  its  equanimity. 

What  is  a  power,  but  the  ability  or  faculty  of 
doing  a  thing?  What  is  the  ability  to  do  a  thing, 
but  the  power  of  employing  the  means  necessary  to 
its  execution?  What  is  a  legislative  power,  but  a 
power  of  making  laws?  What  are  the  means  to 
execute  a  legislative  power,  but  laws?  What  is 
the  power  of  laying  and  collecting  taxes,  but  a 
legislative  power,  or  a  power  of  making  laws,  to  lay 
and  collect  taxes?  What  are  the  proper  means  of 
executing  such  a  power,  but  necessary  and  proper 
laws? 

This  simple  train  of  inquiry  furnishes  us  at  once 
with  a  test  by  which  to  judge  of  the  true  nature  of 


The  Federalist  253 

the  clause  complained  of.  It  conducts  us  to  this 
palpable  truth,  that  a  power  to  lay  and  collect  taxes 
must  be  a  power  to  pass  all  laws  necessary  and  proper 
for  the  execution  of  that  power;  and  what  does  the 
unfortunate  and  calumniated  provision  in  question 
do  more  than  declare  the  same  truth,  to  wit,  that 
the  national  legislature,  to  whom  the  power  of  laying 
and  collecting  taxes  had  been  previously  given, 
might,  in  the  execution  of  that  power,  pass  all  laws 
necessary  and  proper  to  carry  it  into  effect?  I  have 
applied  these  observations  thus  particularly  to  the 
power  of  taxation,  because  it  is  the  immediate  sub- 
ject under  consideration,  and  because  it  is  the  most 
important  of  the  authorities  proposed  to  be  con- 
ferred upon  the  Union.  But  the  same  process  will 
lead  to  the  same  result,  in  relation  to  all  other  powers 
declared  in  the  Constitution.  And  it  is  expressly  to 
execute  these  powers  that  the  sweeping  clause,  as  it 
has  been  affectedly  called,  authorizes  the  national 
legislature  to  pass  all  necessary  and  proper  laws.  If 
there  is  any  thing  exceptionable,  it  must  be  sought 
for  in  the  specific  powers  upon  which  this  general 
declaration  is  predicated.  The  declaration  itself, 
though  it  may  be  chargeable  with  tautology  or  re- 
dundancy, is  at  least  perfectly  harmless. 

But  suspicion  may  ask,  Why  then  was  it  intro- 
duced ?  The  answer  is,  that  it  could  only  have  been 
done  for  greater  caution,  and  to  guard  against  all 
cavilling  refinements  in  those  who  might  hereafter 
feel  a  disposition  to  curtail  and  evade  the  legitimate 
authorities  of  the  Union.  The  Convention  prob- 
ably foresaw,  what  it  has  been  a  principal  aim  of 


254  Alexander  Hamilton 

these  papers  to  inculcate,  that  the  danger  which 
most  threatens  our  political  welfare  is  that  the  State 
governments  will  finally  sap  the  foundations  of  the 
Union;  and  might  therefore  think  it  necessary,  in 
so  cardinal  a  point,  to  leave  nothing  to  construction. 
Whatever  may  have  been  the  inducement  to  it,  the 
wisdom  of  the  precaution  is  evident  from  the  cry 
which  has  been  raised  against  it;  as  that  very  cry 
betrays  a  disposition  to  question  the  great  and  es- 
sential truth  which  it  is  manifestly  the  object  of  that 
provision  to  declare. 

But  it  may  be  again  asked,  Who  is  to  judge  of  the 
necessity  and  propriety  of  the  laws  to  be  passed  for 
executing  the  powers  of  the  Union?  I  answer,  first, 
that  this  question  arises  as  well  and  as  fully  upon 
the  simple  grant  of  those  powers  as  upon  the  de- 
claratory clause ;  and  I  answer,  in  the  second  place, 
that  the  national  government,  like  every  other,  must 
judge,  in  the  first  instance,  of  the  proper  exercise  of 
its  powers,  and  its  constituents  in  the  last.  If  the 
federal  government  should  overpass  the  just  bounds 
of  its  authority  and  make  a  tyrannical  use  of  its 
powers,  the  people,  whose  creature  it  is,  must  appeal 
to  the  standard  they  have  formed,  and  take  such 
measures  to  redress  the  injury  done  to  the  Constitu- 
tion as  the  exigency  may  suggest  and  prudence  jus- 
tify. The  propriety  of  a  law,  in  a  constitutional 
light,  must  always  be  determined  by  the  nature  of 
the  powers  upon  which  it  is  founded.  Suppose,  by 
some  forced  constructions  of  its  authority  (which, 
indeed,  cannot  easily  be  imagined),  the  Federal 
legislature  should  attempt  to  vary  the  law  of  descent 


The  Federalist  255 

in  any  State,  would  it  not  be  evident  that,  in  making 
such  an  attempt,  it  had  exceeded  its  jurisdiction, 
and  infringed  upon  that  of  the  State?  Suppose, 
again,  that  upon  the  pretence  of  an  interference  with 
its  revenues,  it  should  undertake  to  abrogate  a  land- 
tax  imposed  by  the  authority  of  a  State;  would  it 
not  be  equally  evident  that  this  was  an  invasion  of 
that  concurrent  jurisdiction  in  respect  to  this  species 
of  tax,  which  its  Constitution  plainly  supposes  to  exist 
in  the  State  governments  ?  If  there  ever  should  be 
a  doubt  on  this  head,  the  credit  of  it  will  be  entirely 
due  to  those  reasoners  who,  in  the  imprudent  zeal 
of  their  animosity  to  the  plan  of  the  convention, 
have  labored  to  envelop  it  in  a  cloud  calculated  to 
obscure  the  plainest  and  simplest  truths. 

But  it  is  said  that  the  laws  of  the  Union  are  to  be 
the  supreme  law  of  the  land.  But  what  inference 
can  be  drawn  from  this,  or  what  would  they  amount 
to,  if  they  were  not  to  be  supreme?  It  is  evident 
they  would  amount  to  nothing.  A  law,  by  the 
very  meaning  of  the  term,  includes  supremacy.  It 
is  a  rule  which  those  to  whom  it  is  prescribed  are 
bound  to  observe.  This  results  from  every  political 
association.  If  individuals  enter  into  a  state  of 
society,  the  laws  of  that  society  must  be  the  supreme 
regulator  of  their  conduct.  If  a  number  of  political 
societies  enter  into  a  larger  political  society,  the  laws 
which  the  latter  may  enact,  pursuant  to  the  powers 
intrusted  to  it  by  its  constitution,  must  necessarily 
be  supreme  over  those  societies,  and  the  individuals 
of  whom  they  are  composed.  It  would  otherwise  be 
a  mere  treaty,  dependent  on  the  good  faith  of  the 


256  Alexander  Hamilton 

parties,  and  not  a  government,  which  is  only  an- 
other word  for  political  power  and  supremacy. 
But  it  will  not  follow  from  this  doctrine  that  acts  of 
the  larger  society  which  are  not  pursuant  to  its  con- 
stitutional powers,  but  which  are  invasions  of  the 
residuary  authorities  of  the  smaller  societies,  will 
become  the  supreme  law  of  the  land.  These  will  be 
merely  acts  of  usurpation,  and  will  deserve  to  be 
treated  as  such.  Hence  we  perceive  that  the  clause 
which  declares  the  supremacy  of  the  laws  of  the 
Union,  like  the  one  we  have  just  before  considered, 
only  declares  a  truth,  which  flows  immediately  and 
necessarily  from  the  institution  of  a  federal  govern- 
ment. It  will  not,  I  presume,  have  escaped  obser- 
vation, that  it  expressly  confines  this  supremacy  to 
laws  made  pursuant  to  the  Constitution;  which  I 
mention  merely  as  an  instance  of  caution  in  the 
convention;  since  that  limitation  would  have  been 
to  be  understood,  though  it  had  not  been  expressed. 
Though  a  law,  therefore,  laying  a  tax  for  the  use  of 
the  United  States  would  be  supreme  in  its  nature, 
and  could  not  legally  be  opposed  or  controlled,  yet 
a  law  for  abrogating  or  preventing  the  collection  of 
a  tax  laid  by  the  authority  of  the  State  (unless  upon 
imports  and  exports) ,  would  not  be  the  supreme  law 
of  the  land,  but  a  usurpation  of  power  not  granted 
by  the  Constitution.  As  far  as  an  improper  accu- 
mulation of  taxes  on  the  same  object  might  tend 
to  render  the  collection  difficult  or  precarious,  this 
would  be  a  mutual  inconvenience,  not  arising  from 
a  superiority  or  defect  of  power  on  either  side,  but 
from  an  injudicious  exercise  of  power  by  one  or  the 


The  Federalist  257 

other,  in  a  manner  equally  disadvantageous  to  both. 
It  is  to  be  hoped  and  presumed,  however,  that 
mutual  interest  would  dictate  a  concert  in  this  re- 
spect which  would  avoid  any  material  inconvenience. 
The  inference  from  the  whole  is,  that  the  individual 
States  would,  under  the  proposed  Constitution,  re- 
tain an  independent  and  uncontrollable  authority  to 
raise  revenue  to  any  extent  of  which  they  may  stand 
in  need,  by  every  kind  of  taxation,  except  duties  on 
imports  and  exports.  It  will  be  shown  in  the  next 
paper  that  this  concurrent  jurisdiction  in  the 
article  of  taxation  was  the  only  admissible  substi- 
tute for  an  entire  subordination,  in  respect  to  this 
branch  of  power,  of  the  State  authority  to  that  of 
the  Union. 

Publius. 


From  the  New  York  Packet,  Friday,  January  4,  1788 
THE  FEDERALIST.     No.  XXXIV 

(HAMILTON) 

To  the  People  of  the  State  of  New  York: 

I  flatter  myself  it  has  been  clearly  shown  in  my 
last  number  that  the  particular  States,  under  the 
proposed  Constitution,  would  have  coequal  au- 
thority with  the  Union  in  the  article  of  revenue, 
except  as  to  duties  on  imports.  As  this  leaves  open 
to  the  States  far  the  greatest  part  of  the  resources 
of  the  community,  there  can  be  no  color  for  the 
assertion  that  they  would  not  possess  means  as 
abundant  as  could  be  desired  for  the  supply  of  their 
own    wants,    independent   of   all   external   control. 


258  Alexander  Hamilton 

That  the  field  is  sufficiently  wide  will  more  fully 
appear  when  we  come  to  advert  to  the  inconsider- 
able share  of  the  public  expenses  for  which  it  will  fall 
to  the  lot  of  the  State  governments  to  provide. 

To  argue  upon  abstract  principles  that  this  co- 
ordinate authority  cannot  exist,  is  to  set  up  supposi- 
tion and  theory  against  fact  and  reality.  However 
proper  such  reasonings  might  be  to  show  that  a 
thing  ought  not  to  exist,  they  are  wholly  to  be  re- 
jected when  they  are  made  use  of  to  prove  that  it 
does  not  exist  contrary  to  the  evidence  of  the  fact 
itself.  It  is  well  known  that  in  the  Roman  republic 
the  legislative  authority,  in  the  last  resort,  resided 
for  ages  in  two  different  political  bodies — not  as 
branches  of  the  same  legislature,  but  as  distinct  and 
independent  legislatures,  in  each  of  which  an  oppo- 
site interest  prevailed:  in  one  the  patrician;  in  the 
other,  the  plebeian.  Many  arguments  might  have 
been  adduced  to  prove  the  unfitness  of  two  such 
seemingly  contradictory  authorities,  each  having 
power  to  annul  or  repeal  the  acts  of  the  other.  But 
a  man  would  have  been  regarded  as  frantic  who 
should  have  attempted  at  Rome  to  disprove  their 
existence.  It  will  be  readily  understood  that  I 
allude  to  the  comitia  centuriata  and  the  comitia 
tributa.  The  former,  in  which  the  people  voted  by 
centuries,  was  so  arranged  as  to  give  a  superiority  to 
the  patrician  interest;  in  the  latter,  in  which  num- 
bers prevailed,  the  plebeian  interest  had  an  entire 
predominancy.  And  yet  these  two  legislatures  co- 
existed for  ages,  and  the  Roman  republic  attained 
to  the  utmost  height  of  human  greatness. 


The  Federalist  259 

In  the  case  particularly  under  consideration,  there 
is  no  such  contradiction  as  appears  in  the  example 
cited;  there  is  no  power  on  either  side  to  annul  the 
acts  of  the  other.  And  in  practice  there  is  little 
reason  to  apprehend  any  inconvenience;  because, 
in  a  short  course  of  time,  the  wants  of  the  States  will 
naturally  reduce  themselves  within  a  very  narrow 
compass;  and  in  the  interim,  the  United  States  will, 
in  all  probability,  find  it  convenient  to  abstain 
wholly  from  those  objects  to  which  the  particular 
States  would  be  inclined  to  resort. 

To  form  a  more  precise  judgment  of  the  true 
merits  of  this  question,  it  will  be  well  to  advert  to 
the  proportion  between  the  objects  that  will  require 
a  federal  provision  in  respect  to  revenue,  and  those 
which  will  require  a  State  provision.  We  shall  dis- 
cover that  the  former  are  altogether  unlimited,  and 
that  the  latter  are  circumscribed  within  very  mod- 
erate bounds.  In  pursuing  this  inquiry,  we  must 
bear  in  mind  that  we  are  not  to  confine  our  view  to 
the  present  period,  but  to  look  forward  to  remote 
futurity.  Constitutions  of  civil  government  are  not 
to  be  framed  upon  a  calculation  of  existing  exigen- 
cies, but  upon  a  combination  of  these  with  the  prob- 
able exigencies  of  ages,  according  to  the  natural  and 
tried  course  of  human  affairs.  Nothing,  therefore, 
can  be  more  fallacious  than  to  infer  the  extent  of  any 
power,  proper  to  be  lodged  in  the  national  govern- 
ment, from  an  estimate  of  its  immediate  necessities. 
There  ought  to  be  a  capacity  to  provide  for  future 
contingencies  as  they  may  happen;  and  as  these  are 
illimitable  in  their  nature,  it  is  impossible  safely  to 


260  Alexander  Hamilton 

limit  that  capacity.  It  is  true,  perhaps,  that  a  com- 
putation might  be  made  with  sufficient  accuracy  to 
answer  the  purpose  of  the  quantity  of  revenue  re- 
quisite to  discharge  the  subsisting  engagements  of 
the  Union,  and  to  maintain  those  establishments 
which,  for  some  time  to  come,  would  suffice  in  time 
of  peace.  But  would  it  be  wise,  or  would  it  not 
rather  be  the  extreme  of  folly,  to  stop  at  this  point, 
and  to  leave  the  government  intrusted  with  the  care 
of  the  national  defence  in  a  state  of  absolute  in- 
capacity to  provide  for  the  protection  of  the  com- 
munity against  future  invasions  of  the  public  peace, 
by  foreign  war  or  domestic  convulsions?  If,  on  the 
contrary,  we  ought  to  exceed  this  point,  where  can 
we  stop,  short  of  an  indefinite  power  of  providing 
for  emergencies  as  they  may  arise  ?  Though  it  is  easy 
to  assert,  in  general  terms,  the  possibility  of  forming 
a  rational  judgment  of  a  due  provision  against  prob- 
able dangers,  yet  we  may  safely  challenge  those  who 
make  the  assertion  to  bring  forward  their  data,  and 
may  affirm  that  they  would  be  found  as  vague  and 
uncertain  as  any  that  could  be  produced  to  establish 
the  probable  duration  of  the  world.  Observations 
confined  to  the  mere  prospects  of  internal  attacks 
can  deserve  no  weight;  though  even  theso  will  admit 
of  no  satisfactory  calculation:  but  if  we  mean  to  be 
a  commercial  people,  it  must  form  a  part  of  our 
policy  to  be  able  one  day  to  defend  that  commerce. 
The  support  of  a  navy  and  of  naval  wars  would  in- 
volve contingencies  that  must  baffle  all  the  efforts 
of  political  arithmetic. 

Admitting  that  we  ought  to  try  the  novel  and 


The  Federalist  261 

absurd  experiment  in  politics  of  tying  up  the  hands 
of  government  from  offensive  war  founded  upon 
reasons  of  state,  yet  certainly  we  ought  not  to  dis- 
able it  from  guarding  the  community  against  the 
ambition  or  enmity  of  other  nations.  A  cloud  has 
been  for  some  time  hanging  over  the  European 
world.  If  it  should  break  forth  into  a  storm,  who 
can  insure  us  that  in  its  progress  a  part  of  its  fury 
would  not  be  spent  upon  us?  No  reasonable  man 
would  hastily  pronounce  that  we  are  entirely  out  of 
its  reach.  Or  if  the  combustible  materials  that  now 
seem  to  be  collecting  should  be  dissipated  without 
coming  to  maturity,  or  if  a  flame  should  be  kindled 
without  extending  to  us,  what  security  can  we  have 
that  our  tranquillity  will  long  remain  undisturbed 
from  some  other  cause  or  from  some  other  quarter? 
Let  us  recollect  that  peace  or  war  will  not  always  be 
left  to  our  option;  that  however  moderate  or  un- 
ambitious we  may  be,  we  cannot  count  upon  the 
moderation,  or  hope  to  extinguish  the  ambition  of 
others.  Who  could  have  imagined  at  the  conclu- 
sion of  the  last  war  that  France  and  Britain,  wearied 
and  exhausted  as  they  both  were,  would  so  soon 
have  looked  with  so  hostile  an  aspect  upon  each 
other?  To  judge  from  the  history  of  mankind,  we 
shall  be  compelled  to  conclude  that  the  fiery  and 
destructive  passions  of  war  reign  in  the  human 
breast  with  much  more  powerful  sway  than  the  mild 
and  beneficent  sentiments  of  peace;  and  that  to 
model  our  political  systems  upon  speculations  of 
lasting  tranquillity,  is  to  calculate  on  the  weaker 
springs  of  the  human  character. 


262  Alexander  Hamilton 

What  are  the  chief  sources  of  expense  in  every 
government?  What  has  occasioned  that  enormous 
accumulation  of  debts  with  which  several  of  the 
European  nations  are  oppressed?  The  answer 
plainly  is,  wars  and  rebellions;  the  support  of  those 
institutions  which  are  necessary  to  guard  the  body 
politic  against  these  two  most  mortal  diseases  of 
society.  The  expenses  arising  from  those  institu- 
tions which  are  relative  to  the  mere  domestic  police 
of  a  state,  to  the  support  of  its  legislative,  executive, 
and  judicial  departments,  with  their  different  appen- 
dages, and  to  the  encouragement  of  agriculture  and 
manufactures  (which  will  comprehend  almost  all  the 
objects  of  state  expenditure),  are  insignificant  in 
comparison  with  those  which  relate  to  the  national 
defence. 

In  the  kingdom  of  Great  Britain,  where  all  the 
ostentatious  apparatus  of  monarchy  is  to  be  pro- 
vided for,  not  above  a  fifteenth  part  of  the  annual 
income  of  the  nation  is  appropriated  to  the  class  of 
expenses  last  mentioned ;  the  other  fourteen  fifteenths 
are  absorbed  in  the  payment  of  the  interest  of  debts 
contracted  for  carrying  on  the  wars  in  which  that 
country  has  been  engaged,  and  in  the  maintenance 
of  fleets  and  armies.  If,  on  the  one  hand,  it  should 
be  observed  that  the  expenses  incurred  in  the  prose- 
cution of  the  ambitious  enterprises  and  vainglorious 
pursuits  of  a  monarchy  are  not  a  proper  standard  by 
which  to  judge  of  those  which  might  be  necessary  in 
a  republic,  it  ought,  on  the  other  hand,  to  be  re- 
marked that  there  should  be  as  great  a  disproportion 
between  the  profusion  and  extravagance  of  a  wealthy 


The  Federalist  263 

kingdom  in  its  domestic  administration,  and  the 
frugality  and  economy  which  in  that  particular  be- 
come the  modest  simplicity  of  republican  govern- 
ment. If  we  balance  a  proper  deduction  from  one 
side  against  that  which  it  is  supposed  ought  to  be 
made  from  the  other,  the  proportion  may  still  be 
considered  as  holding  good. 

But  let  us  advert  to  the  large  debt  which  we  have 
ourselves  contracted  in  a  single  war,  and  let  us  only 
calculate  on  a  common  share  of  the  events  which 
disturb  the  peace  of  nations,  and  we  shall  instantly 
perceive,  without  the  aid  of  any  elaborate  illustra- 
tion, that  there  must  always  be  an  immense  dispro- 
portion between  the  objects  of  federal  and  state 
expenditures.  It  is  true  that  several  of  the  States, 
separately,  are  encumbered  with  considerable  debts, 
which  are  an  excrescence  of  the  late  war.  But  this 
cannot  happen  again,  if  the  proposed  system  be 
adopted ;  and  when  these  debts  are  discharged,  the 
only  call  for  revenue  of  any  consequence,  which  the 
State  governments  will  continue  to  experience,  will 
be  for  the  mere  support  of  their  respective  civil  lists , 
to  which,  if  we  add  all  contingencies,  the  total 
amount  in  every  State  ought  to  fall  considerably 
short  of  two  hundred  thousand  pounds. 

In  framing  a  government  for  posterity  as  well  as 
ourselves,  we  ought,  in  those  provisions  which  are 
designed  to  be  permanent,  to  calculate,  not  on  tem- 
porary, but  on  permanent  causes  of  expense.  If 
this  principle  be  a  just  one,  our  attention  would  be 
directed  to  a  provision  in  favor  of  the  State  govern- 
ments for  an  annual  sum  of  about  two  hundred 


264  Alexander  Hamilton 

thousand  pounds ;  while  the  exigencies  of  the  Union 
could  be  susceptible  of  no  limits,  even  in  imagina- 
tion. In  this  view  of  the  subject,  by  what  logic  can 
it  be  maintained  that  the  local  governments  ought  to 
command,  in  perpetuity,  an  exclusive  source  of 
revenue  for  any  sum  beyond  the  extent  of  two  hun- 
dred thousand  pounds?  To  extend  its  power  fur- 
ther, in  exclusion  of  the  authority  of  the  Union, 
would  be  to  take  the  resources  of  the  community 
out  of  those  hands  which  stood  in  need  of  them  for 
the  public  welfare,  in  order  to  put  them  into  other 
hands  which  could  have  no  just  or  proper  occasion 
for  them. 

Suppose,  then,  the  convention  had  been  inclined 
to  proceed  upon  the  principle  of  a  repartition  of  the 
objects  of  revenue,  between  the  Union  and  its  mem- 
bers, in  proportion  to  their  comparative  necessities; 
what  particular  fund  could  have  been  selected  for 
the  use  of  the  States,  that  would  not  either  have  been 
too  much  or  too  little — too  little  for  their  present, 
too  much  for  their  future  wants?  As  to  the  line  of 
separation  between  external  and  internal  taxes,  this 
would  leave  to  the  States,  at  a  rough  computation, 
the  command  of  two  thirds  of  the  resources  of  the 
community  to  defray  from  a  tenth  to  a  twentieth 
part  of  its  expenses ;  and  to  the  Union,  one  third  of 
the  resources  of  the  community,  to  defray  from  nine 
tenths  to  nineteen  twentieths  of  its  expenses.  If  we 
desert  this  boundary  and  content  ourselves  with 
leaving  to  the  States  an  exclusive  power  of  taxing 
houses  and  lands,  there  would  still  be  a  great  dis- 
proportion between   the    means   and  the  end;  the 


The  Federalist  265 

possession  of  one  third  of  the  resources  of  the  com- 
munity to  supply,  at  most,  one  tenth  of  its  wants.  If 
any  fund  could  have  been  selected  and  appropriated, 
equal  to  and  not  greater  than  the  object,  it  would 
have  been  inadequate  to  the  discharge  of  the  existing 
debts  of  the  particular  States,  and  would  have  left 
them  dependent  on  the  Union  for  a  provision  for 
this  purpose. 

The  preceding  train  of  observation  will  justify  the 
position  which  has  been  elsewhere  laid  down,  that 
"a  concurrent  jurisdiction  in  the  article  of  taxa- 
tion was  the  only  admissible  substitute  for  an  entire 
subordination,  in  respect  to  this  branch  of  power, 
of  State  authority  to  that  of  the  Union."  Any 
separation  of  the  objects  of  revenue  that  could  have 
been  fallen  upon,  would  have  amounted  to  a  sacrifice 
of  the  great  interests  of  the  Union  to  the  power  of 
the  individual  States.  The  convention  thought  the 
concurrent  jurisdiction  preferable  to  that  subordina- 
tion; and  it  is  evident  that  it  has  at  least  the  merit 
of  reconciling  an  indefinite  constitutional  power  of 
taxation  in  the  Federal  government  with  an  ade- 
quate and  independent  power  in  the  States  to  pro- 
vide for  their  own  necessities.  There  remain  a  few 
other  lights,  in  which  this  important  subject  of 
taxation  will  claim  a  further  consideration. 

Publius. 


266  Alexander  Hamilton 

For  the  Independent  Journal 
THE  FEDERALIST.     No.  XXXV 

(HAMILTON) 

To  the  People  of  the  State  of  New  York: 

Before  we  proceed  to  examine  any  other  objections 
to  an  indefinite  power  of  taxation  in  the  Union,  I  shall 
make  one  general  remark ;  which  is,  that  if  the  juris- 
diction of  the  national  government,  in  the  article  of 
revenue,  should  be  restricted  to  particular  objects, 
it  would  naturally  occasion  an  undue  proportion  of 
the  public  burdens  to  fall  upon  those  objects.  Two 
evils  would  spring  from  this  source:  the  oppression 
of  particular  branches  of  industry;  and  an  unequal 
distribution  of  the  taxes,  as  well  among  the  several 
States  as  among  the  citizens  of  the  same  State. 

Suppose,  as  has  been  contended  for,  the  federal 
power  of  taxation  were  to  be  confined  to  duties  on 
imports,  it  is  evident  that  the  government,  for  want 
of  being  able  to  command  other  resources,  would 
frequently  be  tempted  to  extend  these  duties  to  an 
injurious  excess.  There  are  persons  who  imagine 
that  they  can  never  be  carried  to  too  great  a  length ; 
since  the  higher  they  are,  the  more  it  is  alleged  they 
will  tend  to  discourage  an  extravagant  consumption, 
to  produce  a  favorable  balance  of  trade,  and  to  pro- 
mote domestic  manufactures.  But  all  extremes  are 
pernicious  in  various  ways.  Exorbitant  duties  on 
imported  articles  would  beget  a  general  spirit  of 
smuggling;  which  is  always  prejudicial  to  the  fair 
trader,  and  eventually  to  the  revenue  itself:  they 
tend  to  render  other  classes  of  the  community  tribu- 


The  Federalist  267 

tary,  in  an  improper  degree,  to  the  manufacturing 
classes,  to  whom  they  give  a  premature  monopoly  of 
the  markets:  they  sometimes  force  industry  out  of 
its  more  natural  channels  into  others  in  which  it 
flows  with  less  advantage ;  and  in  the  last  place,  they 
oppress  the  merchant,  who  is  often  obliged  to  pay 
them  himself  without  any  retribution  from  the  con- 
sumer. When  the  demand  is  equal  to  the  quantity 
of  goods  at  market,  the  consumer  generally  pays  the 
duty;  but  when  the  markets  happen  to  be  over- 
stocked, a  great  proportion  falls  upon  the  merchant, 
and  sometimes  not  only  exhausts  his  profits,  but 
breaks  in  upon  his  capital.  I  am  apt  to  think  that 
a  division  of  the  duty,  between  the  seller  and  the 
buyer,  more  often  happens  than  is  commonly  im- 
agined. It  is  not  always  possible  to  raise  the  price  of 
a  commodity  in  exact  proportion  to  every  additional 
imposition  laid  upon  it.  The  merchant,  especially 
in  a  country  of  small  commercial  capital,  is  often 
under  a  necessity  of  keeping  prices  down  in  order  to 
a  more  expeditious  sale. 

The  maxim  that  the  consumer  is  the  payer,  is  so 
much  oftener  true  than  the  reverse  of  the  proposi- 
tion, that  it  is  far  more  equitable  that  the  duties  on 
imports  should  go  into  a  common  stock,  than  that 
they  should  redound  to  the  exclusive  benefit  of  the 
importing  States.  But  it  is  not  so  generally  true  as 
to  render  it  equitable,  that  those  duties  should  form 
the  only  national  fund.  When  they  are  paid  by  the 
merchant  they  operate  as  an  additional  tax  upon  the 
importing  State,  whose  citizens  pay  their  proportion 
of  them  in  the  character  of  consumers.     In  this  view 


268  Alexander  Hamilton 

they  are  productive  of  inequality  among  the  States; 
which  inequality  would  be  increased  with  the  in- 
creased extent  of  the  duties.  The  confinement  of 
the  national  revenues  to  this  species  of  imposts  would 
be  attended  with  inequality,  from  a  different  cause, 
between  the  manufacturing  and  the  non-manufac- 
turing States.  The  States  which  can  go  farthest 
towards  the  supply  of  their  own  wants,  by  their  own 
manufactures,  will  not,  according  to  their  numbers 
or  wealth,  consume  so  great  a  proportion  of  imported 
articles  as  those  States  which  are  not  in  the  same 
favorable  situation.  They  would  not,  therefore,  in 
this  mode  alone  contribute  to  the  public  treasury  in 
a  ratio  to  their  abilities.  To  make  them  do  this  it 
is  necessary  that  recourse  be  had  to  excises,  the 
proper  objects  of  which  are  particular  kinds  of  manu- 
factures. New  York  is  more  deeply  interested  in 
these  considerations  than  such  of  her  citizens  as 
contend  for  limiting  the  power  of  the  Union  to  ex- 
ternal taxation  may  be  aware  of.  New  York  is  an 
importing  State,  and  is  not  likely  speedily  to  be, 
to  any  great  extent,1  a  manufacturing  State.  She 
would,  of  course,  suffer  in  a  double  light  from  re- 
straining the  jurisdiction  of  the  Union  to  commer- 
cial imposts. 

So  far  as  these  observations  tend  to  inculcate  a 
danger  of  the  import  duties  being  extended  to  an 
injurious  extreme  it  may  be  observed,  conformably 
to  a  remark  made  in  another  part  of  these  papers, 

1  In  the  revised  text,  "and  from  a  greater  disproportion  between 
her  population  and  territory  is  unlikely  speedily  to  be,  to  any  great 
extent." 


The  Federalist  269 

that  the  interest  of  the  revenue  itself  would  be  a 
sufficient  guard  against  such  an  extreme.  I  readily 
admit  that  this  would  be  the  case,  as  long  as  other 
resources  were  open;  but  if  the  avenues  to  them 
were  closed,  hope,  stimulated  by  necessity,  would 
beget  experiments,  fortified  by  rigorous  precautions 
and  additional  penalties,  which,  for  a  time,  would 
have  the  intended  effect,  till  there  had  been  leisure 
to  contrive  expedients  to  elude  these  new  precau- 
tions. The  first  success  would  be  apt  to  inspire  false 
opinions,  which  it  might  require  a  long  course  of 
subsequent  experience  to  correct.  Necessity,  espe- 
cially in  politics,  often  occasions  false  hopes,  false 
reasonings,  and  a  system  of  measures  correspond- 
ingly erroneous.  But  even  if  this  supposed  excess 
should  not  be  a  consequence  of  the  limitation  of  the 
federal  power  of  taxation,  the  inequalities  spoken  of 
would  still  ensue,  though  not  in  the  same  degree, 
from  the  other  causes  that  have  been  noticed.  Let 
us  now  return  to  the  examination  of  objections. 

One  which,  if  we  may  judge  from  the  frequency  of 
its  repetition,  seems  most  to  be  relied  on,  is,  that  the 
House  of  Representatives  is  not  sufficiently  numer- 
ous for  the  reception  of  all  the  different  classes  of 
citizens,  in  order  to  combine  the  interests  and  feelings 
of  every  part  of  the  community,  and  to  produce 
a  due  sympathy  between  the  representative  body 
and  its  constituents.  This  argument  presents  itself 
under  a  very  specious  and  seducing  form;  and  is 
well  calculated  to  lay  hold  of  the  prejudices  of  those 
to  whom  it  is  addressed.  But  when  we  come  to 
dissect  it  with  attention,  it  will  appear  to  be  made  up 


270  Alexander  Hamilton 

of  nothing  but  fair-sounding  words.  The  object  it 
seems  to  aim  at  is,  in  the  first  place,  impracticable, 
and  in  the  sense  in  which  it  is  contended  for,  is  un- 
necessary. I  reserve  for  another  place  the  discus- 
sion of  the  question  which  relates  to  the  sufficiency 
of  the  representative  body  in  respect  to  numbers, 
and  shall  content  myself  with  examining  here  the 
particular  use  which  has  been  made  of  a  contrary 
supposition,  in  reference  to  the  immediate  subject 
of  our  inquiries. 

The  idea  of  an  actual  representation  of  all  classes 
of  the  people,  by  persons  of  each  class,  is  altogether 
visionary.  Unless  it  were  expressly  provided  in  the 
Constitution,  that  each  different  occupation  should 
send  one  or  more  members,  the  thing  would  never 
take  place  in  practice.  Mechanics  and  manufac- 
turers will  always  be  inclined,  with  few  exceptions, 
to  give  their  votes  to  merchants,  in  preference  to 
persons  of  their  own  professions  or  trades.  Those 
discerning  citizens  are  well  aware  that  the  mechanic 
and  manufacturing  arts  furnish  the  materials  of 
mercantile  enterprise  and  industry.  Many  of  them, 
indeed,  are  immediately  connected  with  the  opera- 
tions of  commerce.  They  know  that  the  merchant 
is  their  natural  patron  and  friend;  and  they  are 
aware,  that  however  great  the  confidence  they  may 
justly  feel  in  their  own  good  sense,  their  interests 
can  be  more  effectually  promoted  by  the  merchant 
than  by  themselves.  They  are  sensible  that  their 
habits  in  life  have  not  been  such  as  to  give  them 
those  acquired  endowments,  without  which,  in  a 
deliberative  assembly,  the  greatest  natural  abilities 


The  Federalist  271 

are  for  the  most  part  useless ;  and  that  the  influence 
and  weight,  and  superior  acquirements  of  the  mer- 
chants render  them  more  equal  to  a  contest  with 
any  spirit  which  might  happen  to  infuse  itself  into 
the  public  councils,  unfriendly  to  the  manufacturing 
and  trading  interests.  These  considerations,  and 
many  others  that  might  be  mentioned,  prove,  and 
experience  confirms  it,  that  artisans  and  manu- 
facturers will  commonly  be  disposed  to  bestow  their 
votes  upon  merchants  and  those  whom  they  recom- 
mend. We  must  therefore  consider  merchants  as 
the  natural  representatives  of  all  these  classes  of  the 
community. 

With  regard  to  the  learned  professions,  little  need 
be  observed;  they  truly  form  no  distinct  interest  in 
society,  and  according  to  their  situation  and  talents, 
will  be  indiscriminately  the  objects  of  the  confidence 
and  choice  of  each  other,  and  of  other  parts  of  the 
community. 

Nothing  remains  but  the  landed  interest;  and 
this,  in  a  political  view,  and  particularly  in  relation 
to  taxes,  I  take  to  be  perfectly  united,  from  the 
wealthiest  landlord  down  to  the  poorest  tenant.  No 
tax  can  be  laid  on  land  which  will  not  affect  the  pro- 
prietor of  millions  of  acres  as  well  as  the  proprietor 
of  a  single  acre.  Every  landholder  will  therefore 
have  a  common  interest  to  keep  the  taxes  on  land 
as  low  as  possible ;  and  common  interest  may  always 
be  reckoned  upon  as  the  surest  bond  of  sympathy. 
But  if  we  even  could  suppose  a  distinction  of  interest 
between  the  opulent  landholder  and  the  middling 
farmer,  what  reason  is  there  to  conclude,  that  the 


272  Alexander  Hamilton 

first  would  stand  a  better  chance  of  being  deputed 
to  the  national  legislature  than  the  last  ?  If  we  take 
fact  as  our  guide,  and  look  into  our  own  senate  and 
assembly,  we  shall  find  that  moderate  proprietors  of 
land  prevail  in  both;  nor  is  this  less  the  case  in  the 
senate,  which  consists  of  a  smaller  number,  than  in 
the  assembly,  which  is  composed  of  a  greater  num- 
ber. Where  the  qualifications  of  the  electors  are  the 
same,  whether  they  have  to  choose  a  small  or  a  large 
number,  their  votes  will  fall  upon  those  in  whom 
they  have  most  confidence;  whether  these  happen 
to  be  men  of  large  fortunes,  or  of  moderate  property, 
or  of  no  property  at  all. 

It  is  said  to  be  necessary,  that  all  classes  of  citizens 
should  have  some  of  their  own  number  in  the  re- 
presentative body,  in  order  that  their  feelings  and 
interests  may  be  the  better  understood  and  attended 
to.  But  we  have  seen  that  this  will  never  happen 
under  any  arrangement  that  leaves  the  votes  of  the 
people  free.  Where  this  is  the  case,  the  representative 
body,  with  too  few  exceptions  to  have  any  influence 
on  the  spirit  of  the  government,  will  be  composed  of 
landholders,  merchants,  and  men  of  the  learned  pro- 
fessions. But  where  is  the  danger  that  the  interests 
and  feelings  of  the  different  classes  of  citizens  will 
not  be  understood  or  attended  to  by  these  three 
descriptions  of  men  ?  Will  not  the  landholder  know 
and  feel  whatever  will  promote  or  insure  the  interest 
of  landed  property  ?  And  will  he  not,  from  his  own 
interest  in  that  species  of  property,  be  sufficiently 
prone  to  resist  every  attempt  to  prejudice  or  encum- 
ber it?    Will  not  the  merchant  understand  and  be 


The  Federalist  273 

disposed  to  cultivate,  as  far  as  may  be  proper,  the 
interests  of  the  mechanic  and  manufacturing  arts, 
to  which  his  commerce  is  so  nearly  allied?  Will  not 
the  man  of  the  learned  profession,  who  will  feel  a 
neutrality  to  the  rivalships  between  the  different 
branches  of  industry,  be  likely  to  prove  an  impartial 
arbiter  between  them,  ready  to  promote  either,  so 
far  as  it  shall  appear  to  him  conducive  to  the  general 
interests  of  the  society? 

If  we  take  into  the  account  the  momentary  hu- 
mors or  dispositions  which  may  happen  to  prevail 
in  particular  parts  of  the  society,  and  to  which  a 
wise  administration  will  never  be  inattentive,  is  the 
man  whose  situation  leads  to  extensive  inquiry  and 
information  less  likely  to  be  a  competent  judge  of 
their  nature,  extent,  and  foundation  than  one  whose 
observation  does  not  travel  beyond  the  circle  of  his 
neighbors  and  acquaintances?  Is  it  not  natural 
that  a  man  who  is  a  candidate  for  the  favor  of  the 
people,  and  who  is  dependent  on  the  suffrages  of 
his  fellow-citizens  for  the  continuance  of  his  public 
honors,  should  take  care  to  inform  himself  of  their 
dispositions  and  inclinations,  and  should  be  willing 
to  allow  them  their  proper  degree  of  influence  upon 
his  conduct  ?  This  dependence,  and  the  necessity 
of  being  bound  himself,  and  his  posterity,  by  the 
laws  to  which  he  gives  his  assent,  are  the  true,  and 
they  are  the  strong  chords  of  sympathy  between  the 
representative  and  the  constituent. 

There  is  no  part  of  the  administration  of  govern- 
ment that  requires  extensive  information  and  a 
thorough  knowledge  of  the  principles  of  political 

VOL.  XI.— 18. 


274  Alexander  Hamilton 

economy,  so  much  as  the  business  of  taxation.  The 
man  who  understands  those  principles  best  will  be 
least  likely  to  resort  to  oppressive  expedients,  or  to 
sacrifice  any  particular  class  of  citizens  to  the  pro- 
curement of  revenue.  It  might  be  demonstrated 
that  the  most  productive  system  of  finance  will 
always  be  the  least  burdensome.  There  can  be  no 
doubt  that  in  order  to  a  judicious  exercise  of  the 
power  of  taxation,  it  is  necessary  that  the  person  in 
whose  hands  it  is  should  be  acquainted  with  the 
general  genius,  habits,  and  modes  of  thinking  of  the 
people  at  large,  and  with  the  resources  of  the  country. 
And  this  is  all  that  can  be  reasonably  meant  by  a 
knowledge  of  the  interests  and  feelings  of  the  people. 
In  any  other  sense  the  proposition  has  either  no 
meaning,  or  an  absurd  one.  And  in  that  sense  let 
every  considerate  citizen  judge  for  himself  where  the 
requisite  qualification  is  most  likely  to  be  found. 

Publius. 


From  the  New  York  Packet,  Tuesday,  January  8,  1788 
THE  FEDERALIST.     No.  XXXVI 

(HAMILTON) 

To  the  People  of  the  State  of  New  York: 

We  have  seen  that  the  result  of  the  observations, 
to  which  the  foregoing  number  has  been  principally 
devoted,  is,  that  from  the  natural  operation  of  the 
different  interests  and  views  of  the  various  classes 
of  the  community,  whether  the  representation  of 
the  people  be  more  or  less  numerous,  it  will  consist 


The  Federalist  275 

almost  entirely  of  proprietors  of  land,  of  merchants, 
and  of  members  of  the  learned  professions,  who  will 
truly  represent  all  those  different  interests  and  views. 
If  it  should  be  objected  that  we  have  seen  other 
descriptions  of  men  in  the  local  legislatures,  I  answer 
that  it  is  admitted  there  are  exceptions  to  the  rule, 
but  not  in  sufficient  number  to  influence  the  general 
complexion  or  character  of  the  government.  There 
are  strong  minds  in  every  walk  of  life  that  will  rise 
superior  to  the  disadvantages  of  situation,  and  will 
command  the  tribute  due  to  their  merit,  not  only 
from  the  classes  to  which  they  particularly  belong, 
but  from  the  society  in  general.  The  door  ought  to 
be  equally  open  to  all;  and  I  trust,  for  the  credit  of 
human  nature,  that  we  shall  see  examples  of  such 
vigorous  plants  flourishing  in  the  soil  of  federal  as 
well  as  of  State  legislation ;  but  occasional  instances 
of  this  sort  will  not  render  the  reasoning,  founded 
upon  the  general  course  of  things,  less  conclusive. 

The  subject  might  be  placed  in  several  other  lights 
that  would  all  lead  to  the  same  result;  and  in  par- 
ticular it  might  be  asked,  What  greater  affinity  or 
relation  of  interest  can  be  conceived  between  the 
carpenter  and  blacksmith,  and  the  linen  manufac- 
turer or  stocking- weaver,  than  between  the  merchant 
and  either  of  them?  It  is  notorious  that  there  are 
often  as  great  rivalships  between  different  branches 
of  the  mechanic  or  manufacturing  arts  as  there  are 
between  any  of  the  departments  of  labor  and  in- 
dustry ;  so  that,  unless  the  representative  body  were 
to  be  far  more  numerous  than  would  be  consist- 
ent with  any  idea  of  regularity  or  wisdom  in  its 


276  Alexander  Hamilton 

deliberations,  it  is  impossible  that  what  seems  to  be 
the  spirit  of  the  objection  we  have  been  considering 
should  ever  be  realized  in  practice.  But  I  forbear 
to  dwell  any  longer  on  a  matter  which  has  hitherto 
worn  too  loose  a  garb  to  admit  even  of  an  accurate 
inspection  of  its  real  shape  or  tendency. 

There  is  another  objection  of  a  somewhat  more 
precise  nature  that  claims  our  attention.  It  has  been 
asserted  that  a  power  of  internal  taxation  in  the 
national  legislature  could  never  be  exercised  with 
advantage,  as  well  from  the  want  of  a  sufficient 
knowledge  of  local  circumstances,  as  from  an  inter- 
ference between  the  revenue  laws  of  the  Union 
and  of  the  particular  States.  The  supposition  of  a 
want  of  proper  knowledge  seems  to  be  entirely  desti- 
tute of  foundation.  If  any  question  is  depending  in  a 
State  legislature  respecting  one  of  the  counties,  which 
demands  a  knowledge  of  local  details,  how  is  it  ac- 
quired? No  doubt  from  the  information  of  the 
members  of  the  county.  Cannot  the  like  knowledge 
be  obtained  in  the  national  legislature  from  the  re- 
presentatives of  each  State?  And  is  it  not  to  be 
presumed  that  the  men  who  will  generally  be  sent 
there  will  be  possessed  of  the  necessary  degree  of 
intelligence  to  be  able  to  communicate  that  infor- 
mation? Is  the  knowledge  of  local  circumstances, 
as  applied  to  taxation,  a  minute  topographical  ac- 
quaintance with  all  the  mountains,  rivers,  streams, 
highways,  and  by-paths  in  each  State;  or  is  it  a 
general  acquaintance  with  its  situation  and  re- 
sources, with  the  state  of  its  agriculture,  commerce, 
manufactures,  with  the  nature  of  its  products  and 


The  Federalist  277 

consumptions,  with  the  different  degrees  and  kinds 
of  its  wealth,  property,  and  industry? 

Nations  in  general,  even  under  governments  of 
the  more  popular  kind,  usually  commit  the  adminis- 
tration of  their  finances  to  single  men  or  to  boards 
composed  of  a  few  individuals,  who  digest  and  pre- 
pare, in  the  first  instance,  the  plans  of  taxation, 
which  are  afterwards  passed  into  laws  by  the  au- 
thority of  the  sovereign  or  legislature. 

Inquisitive  and  enlightened  statesmen  are  deemed 
everywhere  best  qualified  to  make  a  judicious  selec- 
tion of  the  objects  proper  for  revenue;  which  is  a 
clear  indication,  as  far  as  the  sense  of  mankind  can 
have  weight  in  the  question,  of  the  species  of  know- 
ledge of  local  circumstances  requisite  to  the  purposes 
of  taxation. 

The  taxes  intended  to  be  comprised  under  the 
general  denomination  of  internal  taxes  may  be  sub- 
divided into  those  of  the  direct  and  those  of  the  in- 
direct kind.  Though  the  objection  be  made  to  both, 
yet  the  reasoning  upon  it  seems  to  be  confined  to  the 
former  branch.  And  indeed,  as  to  the  latter,  by 
which  must  be  understood  duties  and  excises  on 
articles  of  consumption,  one  is  at  a  loss  to  conceive 
what  can  be  the  nature  of  the  difficulties  appre- 
hended. The  knowledge  relating  to  them  must  evi- 
dently be  of  a  kind  that  will  either  be  suggested 
by  the  nature  of  the  article  itself,  or  can  easily  be 
procured  from  any  well-informed  man,  especially  of 
the  mercantile  class.  The  circumstances  that  may 
distinguish  its  situation  in  one  State  from  its  situa- 
tion in  another  must  be  few,  simple,  and  easy  to  be 


278  Alexander  Hamilton 

comprehended.  The  principal  thing  to  be  attended 
to,  would  be  to  avoid  those  articles  which  had  been 
previously  appropriated  to  the  use  of  a  particular 
State;  and  there  could  be  no  difficulty  in  ascertain- 
ing the  revenue  system  of  each.  This  could  always 
be  known  from  the  respective  codes  of  laws,  as  well 
as  from  the  information  of  the  members  from  the 
several  States. 

The  objection,  when  applied  to  real  property  or  to 
houses  and  lands,  appears  to  have,  at  first  sight, 
more  foundation,  but  even  in  this  view  it  will  not 
bear  a  close  examination.  Land-taxes  are  com- 
monly laid  in  one  of  two  modes,  either  by  actual 
valuations,  permanent  or  periodical,  or  by  occa- 
sional assessments,  at  the  discretion,  or  according  to 
the  best  judgment,  of  certain  officers  whose  duty  it 
is  to  make  them.  In  either  case,  the  execution  of 
the  business,  which  alone  requires  the  knowledge  of 
local  details,  must  be  devolved  upon  discreet  persons 
in  the  character  of  commissioners  or  assessors, 
elected  by  the  people  or  appointed  by  the  govern- 
ment for  the  purpose.  All  that  the  law  can  do  must 
be  to  name  the  persons  or  to  prescribe  the  manner  of 
their  election  or  appointment,  to  fix  their  numbers 
and  qualifications  and  to  draw  the  general  outlines 
of  their  powers  and  duties.  And  what  is  there  in 
all  this  that  cannot  as  well  be  performed  by  the  na- 
tional legislature  as  by  a  State  legislature  ?  The  at- 
tention of  either  can  only  reach  to  general  principles ; 
local  details,  as  already  observed,  must  be  referred 
to  those  who  are  to  execute  the  plan. 

But  there  is  a  simple  point  of  view  in  which  this 


The  Federalist  279 

matter  may  be  placed  that  must  be  altogether  satis- 
factory. The  national  legislature  can  make  use  of 
the  system  of  each  State  within  that  State.  The 
method  of  laying  and  collecting  this  species  of  taxes 
in  each  State  can,  in  all  its  parts,  be  adopted  and 
employed  by  the  federal  government. 

Let  it  be  recollected  that  the  proportion  of  these 
taxes  is  not  to  be  left  to  the  discretion  of  the  national 
legislature,  but  is  to  be  determined  by  the  numbers 
of  each  State,  as  described  in  the  second  section  of 
the  first  article.  An  actual  census  or  enumeration 
of  the  people  must  furnish  the  rule,  a  circumstance 
which  effectually  shuts  the  door  to  partiality  or 
oppression.  The  abuse  of  this  power  of  taxation 
seems  to  have  been  provided  against  with  guarded 
circumspection.  In  addition  to  the  precaution  just 
mentioned,  there  is  a  provision  that  "  all  duties,  im- 
posts, and  excises  shall  be  uniform  throughout  the 
United  States." 

It  has  been  very  properly  observed  by  different 
speakers  and  writers  on  the  side  of  the  Constitution, 
that  if  the  exercise  of  the  power  of  internal  taxation 
by  the  Union  should  be  discovered  on  experiment 
to  be  really  inconvenient,  the  federal  government 
may  then  forbear  the  use  of  it,  and  have  recourse  to 
requisitions  in  its  stead.  By  way  of  answer  to  this, 
it  has  been  triumphantly  asked,  Why  not  in  the  first 
instance  omit  that  ambiguous  power,  and  rely  upon 
the  latter  resource?  Two  solid  answers  may  be 
given.  The  first  is,  that  the  exercise  of  that  power, 
if  convenient,  will  be  preferable,  because  it  will  be 
more  effectual;    and  it  is  impossible  to  prove  in 


280  Alexander  Hamilton 

theory,  or  otherwise  than  by  the  experiment,  that 
it  cannot  be  advantageously  exercised.  The  con- 
trary, indeed,  appears  most  probable.  The  second 
answer  is,  that  the  existence  of  such  a  power  in  the 
Constitution  will  have  a  strong  influence  in  giving 
efficacy  to  requisitions.  When  the  States  know  that 
the  Union  can  apply  itself  without  their  agency,  it 
will  be  a  powerful  motive  for  exertion  on  their  part. 

As  to  the  interference  of  the  revenue  laws  of  the 
Union,  and  of  its  members,  we  have  already  seen 
that  there  can  be  no  clashing  or  repugnancy  of  au- 
thority. The  laws  cannot,  therefore,  in  a  legal  sense, 
interfere  with  each  other;  and  it  is  far  from  im- 
possible to  avoid  an  interference  even  in  the  policy 
of  their  different  systems.  An  effectual  expedient 
for  this  purpose  will  be,  mutually  to  abstain  from 
those  objects  which  either  side  may  have  first  had 
recourse  to.  As  neither  can  control  the  other,  each 
will  have  an  obvious  and  sensible  interest  in  this 
reciprocal  forbearance.  And  where  there  is  an  im- 
mediate common  interest,  we  may  safely  count  upon 
its  operation.  When  the  particular  debts  of  the 
States  are  done  away,  and  their  expenses  come  to  be 
limited  within  their  natural  compass,  the  possibility 
almost  of  interference  will  vanish.  A  small  land-tax 
will  answer  the  purpose  of  the  States,  and  will  be 
their  most  simple  and  most  fit  resource. 

Many  spectres  have  been  raised  out  of  this  power 
of  internal  taxation,  to  excite  the  apprehensions  of 
the  people:  double  sets  of  revenue  officers,  a  du- 
plication of  their  burdens  by  double  taxations,  and 
the  frightful  forms  of  odious  and  oppressive  poll- 


The  Federalist  281 

taxes,  have  been  played  off  with  all  the  ingenious 
dexterity  of  political  legerdemain. 

As  to  the  first  point,  there  are  two  cases  in  which 
there  can  be  no  room  for  double  sets  of  officers :  one, 
where  the  right  of  imposing  the  tax  is  exclusively 
vested  in  the  Union,  which  applies  to  the  duties  on 
imports;  the  other,  where  the  object  has  not  fallen 
under  any  State  regulation  or  provision  which  may 
be  applicable  to  a  variety  of  objects.  In  other  cases, 
the  probability  is  that  the  United  States  will  either 
wholly  abstain  from  the  objects  preoccupied  for 
local  purposes,  or  will  make  use  of  the  State  officers 
and  State  regulations  for  collecting  the  additional 
imposition.  This  will  best  answer  the  views  of 
revenue,  because  it  will  save  expense  in  the  collec- 
tion, and  will  best  avoid  any  occasion  of  disgust  to 
the  State  governments  and  to  the  people.  At  all 
events,  here  is  a  practicable  expedient  for  avoiding 
such  an  inconvenience;  and  nothing  more  can  be 
required  than  to  show  that  evils  predicted  do  not 
necessarily  result  from  the  plan. 

As  to  any  argument  derived  from  a  supposed  sys- 
tem of  influence,  it  is  a  sufficient  answer  to  say  that 
it  ought  not  to  be  presumed;  but  the  supposition 
is  susceptible  of  a  more  precise  answer.  If  such  a 
spirit  should  infest  the  councils  of  the  Union,  the 
most  certain  road  to  the  accomplishment  of  its  aim 
would  be  to  employ  the  State  officers  as  much  as 
possible,  and  to  attach  them  to  the  Union  by  an 
accumulation  of  their  emoluments.  This  would 
serve  to  turn  the  tide  of  State  influence  into  the 
channels   of  the   national   government,   instead   of 


282  Alexander  Hamilton 

making  federal  influence  flow  in  an  opposite  and 
adverse  current.  But  all  suppositions  of  this  kind 
are  invidious,  and  ought  to  be  banished  from  the 
consideration  of  the  great  question  before  the  people. 
They  can  answer  no  other  end  than  to  cast  a  mist 
over  the  truth. 

As  to  the  suggestion  of  double  taxation,  the  an- 
swer is  plain.  The  wants  of  the  Union  are  to  be 
supplied  in  one  way  or  another;  if  to  be  done  by 
the  authority  of  the  federal  government,  it  will  not 
be  to  be  done  by  that  of  the  State  government.  The 
quantity  of  taxes  to  be  paid  by  the  community  must 
be  the  same  in  either  case;  with  this  advantage,  if 
the  provision  is  to  be  made  by  the  Union — that  the 
capital  resource  of  commercial  imposts,  which  is  the 
most  convenient  branch  of  revenue,  can  be  pru- 
dently improved  to  a  much  greater  extent  under 
federal  than  under  State  regulation,  and  of  course 
will  render  it  less  necessary  to  recur  to  more  incon- 
venient methods;  and  with  this  further  advantage, 
that  as  far  as  there  may  be  any  real  difficulty  in  the 
exercise  of  the  power  of  internal  taxation,  it  will 
impose  a  disposition  to  greater  care  in  the  choice 
and  arrangement  of  the  means ;  and  must  naturally 
tend  to  make  it  a  fixed  point  of  policy  in  the  national 
administration  to  go  as  far  as  may  be  practicable  in 
making  the  luxury  of  the  rich  tributary  to  the  pub- 
lic treasury,  in  order  to  diminish  the  necessity  of 
those  impositions  which  might  create  dissatisfaction 
in  the  poorer  and  most  numerous  classes  of  the  so- 
ciety. Happy  it  is  when  the  interest  which  the  gov- 
ernment has  in  the  preservation  of  its  own  power, 


The  Federalist  283 

coincides  with  a  proper  distribution  of  the  public 
burdens,  and  tends  to  guard  the  least  wealthy  part 
of  the  community  from  oppression! 

As  to  poll-taxes,  I,  without  scruple,  confess  my 
disapprobation  of  them;  and  though  they  have  pre- 
vailed from  an  early  period  in  those  States  ■  which 
have  uniformly  been  the  most  tenacious  of  their 
rights,  I  should  lament  to  see  them  introduced  into 
practice  under  the  national  government.  But  does 
it  follow  because  there  is  a  power  to  lay  them,  that 
they  will  actually  be  laid?  Every  State  in  the 
Union  has  power  to  impose  taxes  of  this  kind;  and 
yet  in  several  of  them  they  are  unknown  in  practice. 
Are  the  State  governments  to  be  stigmatized  as 
tyrannies,  because  they  possess  this  power?  If  they 
are  not,  with  what  propriety  can  the  like  power  jus- 
tify such  a  charge  against  the  national  government, 
or  even  be  urged  as  an  obstacle  to  its  adoption  ?  As 
little  friendly  as  I  am  to  the  species  of  imposition, 
I  still  feel  a  thorough  conviction  that  the  power  of 
having  recourse  to  it  ought  to  exist  in  the  federal 
government.  There  are  certain  emergencies  of  na- 
tions, in  which  expedients,  that  in  the  ordinary 
state  of  things  ought  to  be  forborne,  become  essen- 
tial to  the  public  weal.  And  the  government,  from 
the  possibility  of  such  emergencies,  ought  ever  to 
have  the  option  of  making  use  of  them.  The  real 
scarcity  of  objects  in  this  country,  which  may  be 
considered  as  productive  sources  of  revenue,  is  a 
reason  peculiar  to  itself,  for  not  abridging  the  dis- 
cretion  of   the  national   councils   in   this   respect. 

1  The  New  England  States. — Publius. 


284  Alexander  Hamilton 

There  may  exist  certain  critical  and  tempestuous 
conjunctures  of  the  State,  in  which  a  poll-tax  may 
become  an  inestimable  resource.  And  as  I  know 
nothing  to  exempt  this  portion  of  the  globe  from 
the  common  calamities  that  have  befallen  other 
parts  of  it,  I  acknowledge  my  aversion  to  every  pro- 
ject that  is  calculated  to  disarm  the  government  of 
a  single  weapon,  which  in  any  possible  contingency 
might  be  usefully  employed  for  the  general  defence 
and  security. 

I  have  now  gone  through  the  examination  of  such 
of  the  powers  proposed  to  be  vested  in  the  United 
States,  which  may  be  considered  as  having  an  im- 
mediate relation  to  the  energy  of  the  government; 
and  have  endeavored  to  answer  the  principal  ob- 
jections which  have  been  made  to  them.  I  have 
passed  over  in  silence  those  minor  authorities,  which 
are  either  too  inconsiderable  to  have  been  thought 
worthy  of  the  hostilities  of  the  opponents  of  the 
Constitution,  or  of  too  manifest  propriety  to  admit 
of  controversy.  The  mass  of  judiciary  power,  how- 
ever, might  have  claimed  an  investigation  under 
this  head,  had  it  not  been  for  the  consideration  that 
its  organization  and  its  extent  may  be  more  ad- 
vantageously considered  in  connection.  This  has 
determined  me  to  refer  it  to  the  branch  of  our  in- 
quiries upon  which  we  shall  next  enter. 

Publius. 


The  Federalist  285 

From  the  Daily  Advertiser,  Friday,  January  n,  1788 

THE  FEDERALIST.     No.  XXXVII 
(madison) 

To  the  People  of  the  State  of  New  York: 

In  reviewing  the  defects  of  the  existing  Confedera- 
tion, and  showing  that  they  cannot  be  supplied  by 
a  government  of  less  energy  than  that  before  the 
public,  several  of  the  most  important  principles  of 
the  latter  fell  of  course  under  consideration.  But 
as  the  ultimate  object  of  these  papers  is  to  determine 
clearly  and  fully  the  merits  of  this  Constitution,  and 
the  expediency  of  adopting  it,  our  plan  cannot  be 
complete  without  taking  a  more  critical  and  thorough 
survey  of  the  work  of  the  convention,  without  ex- 
amining it  on  all  its  sides,  comparing  it  in  all  its 
parts,  and  calculating  its  probable  effects. 

That  this  remaining  task  may  be  executed  under 
impressions  conducive  to  a  just  and  fair  result,  some 
reflections  must  in  this  place  be  indulged,  which 
candor  previously  suggests. 

It  is  a  misfortune,  inseparable  from  human  affairs, 
that  public  measures  are  rarely  investigated  with 
that  spirit  of  moderation  which  is  essential  to  a  just 
estimate  of  their  real  tendency  to  advance  or  ob- 
struct the  public  good;  and  that  this  spirit  is  more 
apt  to  be  diminished  than  promoted,  by  those  occa- 
sions which  require  an  unusual  exercise  of  it.  To 
those  who  have  been  led  by  experience  to  attend  to 
this  consideration,  it  could  not  appear  surprising, 
that  the  act  of  the  convention,  which  recommends 
so  many  important  changes  and  innovations,  which 


286  Alexander  Hamilton 

may  be  viewed  in  so  many  lights  and  relations,  and 
which  touches  the  springs  of  so  many  passions  and 
interests,  should  find  or  excite  dispositions  un- 
friendly, both  on  one  side  and  on  the  other,  to  a  fair 
discussion  and  accurate  judgment  of  its  merits.  In 
some,  it  has  been  too  evident  from  their  own  pub- 
lications, that  they  have  scanned  the  proposed  Con- 
stitution, not  only  with  a  predisposition  to  censure, 
but  with  a  predetermination  to  condemn;  as  the 
language  held  by  others  betrays  an  opposite  pre- 
determination or  bias,  which  must  render  their 
opinions  also  of  little  moment  in  the  question.  In 
placing,  however,  these  different  characters  on  a 
level  with  respect  to  the  weight  of  their  opinions,  I 
wish  not  to  insinuate  that  there  may  not  be  a  ma- 
terial difference  in  the  purity  of  their  intentions. 
It  is  but  just  to  remark  in  favor  of  the  latter  descrip- 
tion, that  as  our  situation  is  universally  admitted 
to  be  peculiarly  critical,  and  to  require  indispensably 
that  something  should  be  done  for  our  relief,  the 
predetermined  patron  of  what  has  been  actually 
done  may  have  taken  his  bias  from  the  weight  of 
these  considerations,  as  well  as  from  considerations 
of  a  sinister  nature.  The  predetermined  adversary, 
on  the  other  hand,  can  have  been  governed  by  no 
venial  motive  whatever.  The  intentions  of  the  first 
may  be  upright,  as  they  may  on  the  contrary  be 
culpable.  The  views  of  the  last  cannot  be  upright, 
and  must  be  culpable.  But  the  truth  is,  that  these 
papers  are  not  addressed  to  persons  falling  under 
either  of  these  characters.  They  solicit  the  atten- 
tion of  those  only,  who  add  to  a  sincere  zeal  for  the 


The  Federalist  287 

happiness  of  their  country,  a  temper  favorable  to  a 
just  estimate  of  the  means  of  promoting  it. 

Persons  of  this  character  will  proceed  to  an  ex- 
amination of  the  plan  submitted  by  the  convention, 
not  only  without  a  disposition  to  find  or  to  magnify 
faults;  but  will  see  the  propriety  of  reflecting,  that 
a  faultless  plan  was  not  to  be  expected.  Nor  will 
they  barely  make  allowances  for  the  errors  which 
may  be  chargeable  on  the  fallibility  to  which  the 
convention,  as  a  body  of  men,  were  liable;  but  will 
keep  in  mind,  that  they  themselves  also  are  but 
men,  and  ought  not  to  assume  an  infallibility  in  re- 
judging  the  fallible  opinions  of  others. 

With  equal  readiness  will  it  be  perceived,  that  be- 
sides these  inducements  to  candor,  many  allowances 
ought  to  be  made  for  the  difficulties  inherent  in 
the  very  nature  of  the  undertaking  referred  to  the 
convention. 

The  novelty  of  the  undertaking  immediately 
strikes  us.  It  has  been  shown  in  the  course  of  these 
papers,  that  the  existing  Confederation  is  founded  on 
principles  which  are  fallacious;  that  we  must  con- 
sequently change  this  first  foundation,  and  with  it 
the  superstructure  resting  upon  it.  It  has  been 
shown,  that  the  other  confederacies  which  could  be 
consulted  as  precedents  have  been  vitiated  by  the 
same  erroneous  principles,  and  can  therefore  furnish 
no  other  light  than  that  of  beacons,  which  give 
warning  of  the  course  to  be  shunned,  without  point- 
ing out  that  which  ought  to  be  pursued.  The  most 
that  the  convention  could  do  in  such  a  situation, 
was    to    avoid   the  errors   suggested  by   the    past 


288  Alexander  Hamilton 

experience  of  other  countries,  as  well  as  of  our  own; 
and  to  provide  a  convenient  mode  of  rectifying  their 
own  errors,  as  future  experience  may  unfold  them. 

Among  the  difficulties  encountered  by  the  con- 
vention, a  very  important  one  must  have  lain  in 
combining  the  requisite  stability  and  energy  in  gov- 
ernment, with  the  inviolable  attention  due  to  liberty 
and  to  the  republican  form.  Without  substantially 
accomplishing  this  part  of  their  undertaking,  they 
would  have  very  imperfectly  fulfilled  the  object  of 
their  appointment,  or  the  expectation  of  the  public; 
yet  that  it  could  not  be  easily  accomplished,  will  be 
denied  by  no  one  who  is  unwilling  to  betray  his  ig- 
norance of  the  subject.  Energy  in  government  is 
essential  to  that  security  against  external  and  in- 
ternal danger,  and  to  that  prompt  and'  salutary 
execution  of  the  laws  which  enter  into  the  very  de- 
finition of  good  government.  Stability  in  govern- 
ment is  essential  to  national  character  and  to  the 
advantages  annexed  to  it,  as  well  as  to  that  repose 
and  confidence  in  the  minds  of  the  people,  which 
are  among  the  chief  blessings  of  civil  society.  An 
irregular  and  mutable  legislation  is  not  more  an  evil 
in  itself  than  it  is  odious  to  the  people;  and  it  may 
be  pronounced  with  assurance  that  the  people  of 
this  country,  enlightened  as  they  are  with  regard  to 
the  nature,  and  interested,  as  the  great  body  of  them 
are,  in  the  effects  of  good  government,  will  never 
be  satisfied  till  some  remedy  be  applied  to  the 
vicissitudes  and  uncertainties  which  characterize 
the  State  administrations.  On  comparing,  however, 
these  valuable  ingredients  with  the  vital  principles 


The  Federalist  289 

of  liberty,  we  must  perceive  at  once  the  difficulty  of 
mingling  them  together  in  their  due  proportions. 
The  genius  of  republican  liberty  seems  to  demand 
on  one  side,  not  only  that  all  power  should  be  de- 
rived from  the  people,  but  that  those  intrusted  with 
it  should  be  kept  in  dependence  on  the  people,  by  a 
short  duration  of  their  appointments ;  and  that  even 
during  this  short  period  the  trust  should  be  placed 
not  in  a  few,  but  a  number  of  hands.  Stability,  on 
the  contrary,  requires  that  the  hands  in  which  power 
is  lodged  should  continue  for  a  length  of  time  the 
same.  A  frequent  change  of  men  will  result  from  a 
frequent  return  of  elections;  and  a  frequent  change 
of  measures  from  a  frequent  change  of  men:  whilst 
energy  in  government  requires  not  only  a  certain 
duration  of  power,  but  the  execution  of  it  by  a 
single  hand. 

How  far  the  convention  may  have  succeeded  in 
this  part  of  their  work,  will  better  appear  on  a  more 
accurate  view  of  it.  From  the  cursory  view  here 
taken,  it  must  clearly  appear  to  have  been  an  ar- 
duous part. 

Not  less  arduous  must  have  been  the  task  of 
marking  the  proper  line  of  partition  between  the 
authority  of  the  general  and  that  of  the  State  gov- 
ernments. Every  man  will  be  sensible  of  this  diffi- 
culty, in  proportion  as  he  has  been  accustomed  to 
contemplate  and  discriminate  objects  extensive  and 
complicated  in  their  nature.  The  faculties  of  the 
mind  itself  have  never  yet  been  distinguished  and 
defined,  with  satisfactory  precision,  by  all  the  efforts 
of  the  most  acute  and  metaphysical  philosophers. 

VOL.  XI.— Ifl. 


290  Alexander  Hamilton 

Sense,  perception,  judgment,  desire,  volition,  mem- 
ory, imagination,  are  found  to  be  separated  by  such 
delicate  shades  and  minute  gradations  that  their 
boundaries  have  eluded  the  most  subtle  investiga- 
tions, and  remain  a  pregnant  source  of  ingenious 
disquisition  and  controversy.  The  boundaries  be- 
tween the  great  kingdoms  of  nature,  and,  still  more, 
between  the  various  provinces,  and  lesser  portions, 
into  which  they  are  subdivided,  afford  another  illus- 
tration of  the  same  important  truth.  The  most 
sagacious  and  laborious  naturalists  have  never  yet 
succeeded  in  tracing  with  certainty  the  line  which 
separates  the  district  of  vegetable  life  from  the 
neighboring  region  of  unorganized  matter,  or  which 
marks  the  termination  of  the  former  and  the  com- 
mencement of  the  animal  empire.  A  still  greater 
obscurity  lies  in  the  distinctive  characters  by  which 
the  objects  in  each  of  these  great  departments  of 
nature  have  been  arranged  and  assorted. 

When  we  pass  from  the  works  of  nature,  in  which 
all  the  delineations  are  perfectly  accurate,  and  ap- 
pear to  be  otherwise  only  from  the  imperfection  of 
the  eye  which  surveys  them,  to  the  institutions  of 
man,  in  which  the  obscurity  arises  as  well  from  the 
object  itself  as  from  the  organ  by  which  it  is  con- 
templated, we  must  perceive  the  necessity  of  mod- 
erating still  further  our  expectations  and  hopes  from 
the  efforts  of  human  sagacity.  Experience  has  in- 
structed us  that  no  skill  in  the  science  of  govern- 
ment has  yet  been  able  to  discriminate  and  define, 
with  sufficient  certainty,  its  three  great  provinces — 
the  legislative,  executive,  and  judiciary;  or  even  the 


The  Federalist  291 

privileges  and  powers  of  the  different  legislative 
branches.  Questions  daily  occur  in  the  course  of 
practice,  which  prove  the  obscurity  which  reigns  in 
these  subjects,  and  which  puzzle  the  greatest  adepts 
in  political  science. 

The  experience  of  ages,  with  the  continued  and 
combined  labors  of  the  most  enlightened  legislators 
and  jurists,  has  been  equally  unsuccessful  in  de- 
lineating the  several  objects  and  limits  of  different 
codes  of  laws  and  different  tribunals  of  justice.  The 
precise  extent  of  the  common  law,  and  the  statute 
law,  the  maritime  law,  the  ecclesiastical  law,  the  law 
of  corporations,  and  other  local  laws  and  customs, 
remains  still  to  be  clearly  and  finally  established 
in  Great  Britain,  where  accuracy  in  such  subjects 
has  been  more  industriously  pursued  than  in  any 
other  part  of  the  world.  The  jurisdiction  of  her 
several  courts,  general  and  local,  of  law,  of  equity, 
of  admiralty,  etc.,  is  not  less  a  source  of  frequent 
and  intricate  discussions,  sufficiently  denoting  the 
indeterminate  limits  by  which  they  are  respectively 
circumscribed.  All  new  laws,  though  penned  with 
the  greatest  technical  skill,  and  passed  on  the  fullest 
and  most  mature  deliberation,  are  considered  as 
more  or  less  obscure  and  equivocal,  until  their 
meaning  be  liquidated  and  ascertained  by  a  series 
of  particular  discussions  and  adjudications.  Besides 
the  obscurity  arising  from  the  complexity  of  objects, 
and  the  imperfection  of  the  human  faculties,  the 
medium  through  which  the  conceptions  of  men  are 
conveyed  to  each  other  adds  a  fresh  embarrassment. 
The  use  of  words  is  to  express  ideas.     Perspicuity, 


292  Alexander  Hamilton 

therefore,  requires  not  only  that  the  ideas  should 
be  distinctly  formed,  but  that  they  should  be  ex- 
pressed by  words  distinctly  and  exclusively  appro- 
priate to  them.  But  no  language  is  so  copious  as 
to  supply  words  and  phrases  for  every  complex  idea, 
or  so  correct  as  not  to  include  many  equivocally 
denoting  different  ideas.  Hence  it  must  happen 
that  however  accurately  objects  may  be  discrimi- 
nated in  themselves,  and  however  accurately  the 
discrimination  may  be  considered,  the  definition  of 
them  may  be  rendered  inaccurate  by  the  inaccuracy 
of  the  terms  in  which  it  is  delivered.  And  this  un- 
avoidable inaccuracy  must  be  greater  or  less,  accord- 
ing to  the  complexity  and  novelty  of  the  objects 
defined.  When  the  Almighty  himself  condescends 
to  address  mankind  in  their  own  language,  his 
meaning,  luminous  as  it  must  be,  is  rendered  dim 
and  doubtful  by  the  cloudy  medium  through  which 
it  is  communicated. 

Here,  then,  are  three  sources  of  vague  and  incor- 
rect definitions:  indistinctness  of  the  object,  imper- 
fection of  the  organ  of  conception,  inadequateness 
of  the  vehicle  of  ideas.  Any  one  of  these  must  pro- 
duce a  certain  degree  of  obscurity.  The  conven- 
tion, in  delineating  the  boundary  between  the  federal 
and  State  jurisdictions,  must  have  experienced  the 
full  effect  of  them  all. 

To  the  difficulties  already  mentioned  may  be  added 
the  interfering  pretensions  of  the  larger  and  smaller 
States.  We  cannot  err  in  supposing  that  the  former 
would  contend  for  a  participation  in  the  government, 
fully  proportioned  to  their  superior  wealth  and  im- 


The  Federalist  293 

portance;  and  that  the  latter  would  not  be  less 
tenacious  of  the  equality  at  present  enjoyed  by  them. 
We  may  well  suppose  that  neither  side  would  en- 
tirely yield  to  the  other,  and  consequently  that  the 
struggle  could  be  terminated  only  by  compromise. 
It  is  extremely  probable,  also,  that  after  the  ratio 
of  representation  had  been  adjusted,  this  very  com- 
promise must  have  produced  a  fresh  struggle  be- 
tween the  same  parties,  to  give  such  a  turn  to  the 
organization  of  the  government,  and  to  the  distribu- 
tion of  its  powers,  as  would  increase  the  importance 
of  the  branches,  in  forming  which  they  had  re- 
spectively obtained  the  greatest  share  of  influence. 
There  are  features  in  the  Constitution  which  warrant 
each  of  these  suppositions;  and  as  far  as  either  of 
them  is  well  founded,  it  shows  that  the  convention 
must  have  been  compelled  to  sacrifice  theoretical 
propriety  to  the  force  of  extraneous  considerations. 
Nor  could  it  have  been  the  large  and  small  States 
only,  which  would  marshal  themselves  in  opposition 
to  each  other  on  various  points.  Other  combina- 
tions, resulting  from  a  difference  of  local  position 
and  policy,  must  have  created  additional  difficulties. 
As  every  State  may  be  divided  into  different  dis- 
tricts, and  its  citizens  into  different  classes,  which 
give  birth  to  contending  interests  and  local  jealousies, 
so  the  different  parts  of  the  United  States  are  dis- 
tinguished from  each  other  by  a  variety  of  circum- 
stances, which  produce  a  like  effect  on  a  larger  scale. 
And  although  this  variety  of  interests,  for  reasons 
sufficiently  explained  in  a  former  paper,  may  have 
a  salutary  influence  on  the  administration  of  the 


294  Alexander  Hamilton 

government  when  formed,  yet  every  one  must  be 
sensible  of  the  contrary  influence,  which  must  have 
been  experienced  in  the  task  of  forming  it. 

Would  it  be  wonderful  if,  under  the  pressure  of 
all  these  difficulties,  the  convention  should  have  been 
forced  into  some  deviations  from  that  artificial  struc- 
ture and  regular  symmetry  which  an  abstract  view 
of  the  subject  might  lead  an  ingenious  theorist  to 
bestow  on  a  Constitution  planned  in  his  closet  or  in 
his  imagination?  The  real  wonder  is  that  so  many 
difficulties  should  have  been  surmounted,  and  sur- 
mounted with  a  unanimity  almost  as  unprecedented 
as  it  must  have  been  unexpected.  It  is  impossible 
for  any  man  of  candor  to  reflect  on  this  circumstance 
without  partaking  of  the  astonishment.  It  is  im- 
possible for  the  man  of  pious  reflection  not  to  per- 
ceive in  it  a  finger  of  that  Almighty  hand  which 
has  been  so  frequently  and  signally  extended  to  our 
relief  in  the  critical  stages  of  the  revolution. 

We  had  occasion,  in  a  former  paper,  to  take  notice 
of  the  repeated  trials  which  have  been  unsuccess- 
fully made  in  the  United  Netherlands  for  reforming 
the  baneful  and  notorious  vices  of  their  constitution. 
The  history  of  almost  all  the  great  councils  and  con- 
sultations held  among  mankind  for  reconciling  their 
discordant  opinions,  assuaging  their  mutual  jealous- 
ies, and  adjusting  their  respective  interests,  is  a 
history  of  factions,  contentions,  and  disappoint- 
ments, and  may  be  classed  among  the  most  dark  and 
degraded  pictures  which  display  the  infirmities  and 
depravities  of  the  human  character.  If,  in  a  few 
scattered  instances,  a  brighter  aspect  is  presented, 


The  Federalist  295 

they  serve  only  as  exceptions  to  admonish  us  of  the 
general  truth;  and  by  their  lustre  to  darken  the 
gloom  of  the  adverse  prospect  to  which  they  are  con- 
trasted. In  revolving  the  causes  from  which  these 
exceptions  result,  and  applying  them  to  the  par- 
ticular instances  before  us,  we  are  necessarily  led  to 
two  important  conclusions.  The  first  is,  that  the 
convention  must  have  enjoyed,  in  a  very  singular 
degree,  an  exemption  from  the  pestilential  influence 
of  party  animosities — the  disease  most  incident  to 
deliberative  bodies,  and  most  apt  to  contaminate 
their  proceedings.  The  second  conclusion  is  that 
all  the  deputations  composing  the  convention  were 
satisfactorily  accommodated  by  the  final  act,  or  were 
induced  to  accede  to  it  by  a  deep  conviction  of  the 
necessity  of  sacrificing  private  opinions  and  partial 
interests  to  the  public  good,  and  by  a  despair  of 
seeing  this  necessity  diminished  by  delays  or  by  new 
experiments. 

Publius. 


From  the  New  York  Packet,  Tuesday,  January  15,  1788 

THE  FEDERALIST.     No.  XXXVIII 

(madison) 

To  the  People  of  the  State  of  New  York: 

It  is  not  a  little  remarkable  that  in  every  case  re- 
ported by  ancient  history,  in  which  government  has 
been  established  with  deliberation  and  consent,  the 
task  of  framing  it  has  not  been  committed  to  an 
assembly  of  men,  but  has  been  performed  by  some 


296  Alexander  Hamilton 

individual  citizen  of  pre-eminent  wisdom  and  ap- 
proved integrity. 

Minos,  we  learn,  was  the  primitive  founder  of  the 
government  of  Crete,  as  Zaleucus  was  of  that  of  the 
Locrians.  Theseus  first,  and  after  him  Draco  and 
Solon,  instituted  the  government  of  Athens.  Ly- 
curgus  was  the  lawgiver  of  Sparta.  The  foundation 
of  the  original  government  of  Rome  was  laid  by 
Romulus,  and  the  work  completed  by  two  of  his 
elective  successors,  Numa  and  Tullus  Hostilius.  On 
the  abolition  of  royalty  the  consular  administration 
was  substituted  by  Brutus,  who  stepped  forward 
with  a  project  for  such  a  reform,  which,  he  alleged, 
had  been  prepared  by  Servius  Tullius,  and  to 
which  his  address  obtained  the  assent  and  ratification 
of  the  senate  and  people.  This  remark  is  applicable 
to  confederate  governments  also.  Amphictyon,  we 
are  told,  was  the  author  of  that  which  bore  his  name. 
The  Achaean  league  received  its  first  birth  from 
Achasus,  and  its  second  from  Aratus. 

What  degree  of  agency  these  reputed  lawgivers 
might  have  in  their  respective  establishments,  or 
how  far  they  might  be  clothed  with  the  legitimate 
authority  of  the  people,  cannot  in  every  instance  be 
ascertained.  In  some,  however,  the  proceeding  was 
strictly  regular.  Draco  appears  to  have  been  in- 
trusted by  the  people  of  Athens  with  indefinite  pow- 
ers to  reform  its  government  and  laws.  And  Solon, 
according  to  Plutarch,  was  in  a  manner  compelled, 
by  the  universal  suffrage  of  his  fellow-citizens,  to 
take  upon  him  the  sole  and  absolute  power  of  new- 
modelling  the  constitution.     The  proceedings  under 


The  Federalist  297 

Lycurgus  were  less  regular;  but  as  far  as  the  advo- 
cates for  a  regular  reform  could  prevail,  they  all 
turned  their  eyes  towards  the  single  efforts  of  that 
celebrated  patriot  and  sage,  instead  of  seeking  to 
bring  about  a  revolution  by  the  intervention  of  a 
deliberative  body  of  citizens. 

Whence  could  it  have  proceeded  that  a  people, 
jealous  as  the  Greeks  were  of  their  liberty,  should  so 
far  abandon  the  rules  of  caution  as  to  place  their 
destiny  in  the  hands  of  a  single  citizen?  Whence 
could  it  have  proceeded,  that  the  Athenians,  a  people 
who  would  not  suffer  an  army  to  be  commanded  by 
fewer  than  ten  generals,  and  who  required  no  other 
proof  of  danger  to  their  liberties  than  the  illustrious 
merit  of  a  fellow-citizen,  should  consider  one  illus- 
trious citizen  as  a  more  eligible  depositary  of  the 
fortunes  of  themselves  and  their  posterity,  than  a 
select  body  of  citizens,  from  whose  common  delibera- 
tions more  wisdom,  as  well  as  more  safety,  might 
have  been  expected?  These  questions  cannot  be 
fully  answered,  without  supposing  that  the  fears  of 
discord  and  disunion  among  a  number  of  counsellors 
exceeded  the  apprehension  of  treachery  or  inca- 
pacity in  a  single  individual.  History  informs  us, 
likewise,  of  the  difficulties  with  which  these  cele- 
brated reformers  had  to  contend,  as  well  as  the  ex- 
pedients which  they  were  obliged  to  employ  in  order 
to  carry  their  reforms  into  effect.  Solon,  who  seems 
to  have  indulged  a  more  temporizing  policy,  con- 
fessed that  he  had  not  given  to  his  countrymen  the 
government  best  suited  to  their  happiness,  but  most 
tolerable  to  their  prejudices.     And  Lycurgus,  more 


298  Alexander  Hamilton 

true  to  his  object,  was  under  the  necessity  of  mixing 
a  portion  of  violence  with  the  authority  of  supersti- 
tion, and  of  securing  his  final  success  by  a  voluntary 
renunciation,  first  of  his  country,  and  then  of  his  life. 
If  these  lessons  teach  us,  on  one  hand,  to  admire  the 
improvement  made  by  America  on  the  ancient  mode 
of  preparing  and  establishing  regular  plans  of  gov- 
ernment, they  serve  not  less,  on  the  other,  to  ad- 
monish us  of  the  hazards  and  difficulties  incident  to 
such  experiments,  and  of  the  great  imprudence  of 
unnecessarily  multiplying  them. 

Is  it  an  unreasonable  conjecture,  that  the  errors 
which  may  be  contained  in  the  plan  of  the  convention 
are  such  as  have  resulted  rather  from  the  defect  of 
antecedent  experience  on  this  complicated  and  diffi- 
cult subject,  than  from  a  want  of  accuracy  or  care  in 
the  investigation  of  it;  and,  consequently,  such  as 
will  not  be  ascertained  until  an  actual  trial  shall  have 
pointed  them  out  ?  This  conjecture  is  rendered  prob- 
able, not  only  by  many  considerations  of  a  general 
nature,  but  by  the  particular  case  of  the  Articles 
of  Confederation.  It  is  observable  that  among  the 
numerous  objections  and  amendments  suggested  by 
the  several  States,  when  these  articles  were  sub- 
mitted for  their  ratification,  not  one  is  found  which 
alludes  to  the  great  and  radical  error  which  on  actual 
trial  has  discovered  itself.  And  if  we  except  the 
observations  which  New  Jersey  was  led  to  make, 
rather  by  her  local  situation,  than  by  her  peculiar 
foresight,  it  may  be  questioned  whether  a  single 
suggestion  was  of  sufficient  moment  to  justify  a  re- 
vision of  the  system.     There  is  abundant  reason, 


The  Federalist  299 

nevertheless,  to  suppose  that  immaterial  as  these 
objections  were,  they  would  have  been  adhered  to 
with  a  very  dangerous  inflexibility,  in  some  States, 
had  not  a  zeal  for  their  opinions  and  supposed  in- 
terests been  stifled  by  the  more  powerful  sentiment 
of  self-preservation.  One  State,  we  may  remember, 
persisted  for  several  years  in  refusing  her  concur- 
rence, although  the  enemy  remained  the  whole  pe- 
riod at  our  gates,  or  rather  in  the  very  bowels  of  our 
country.  Nor  was  her  pliancy  in  the  end  effected 
by  a  less  motive,  than  the  fear  of  being  chargeable 
with  protracting  the  public  calamities,  and  endan- 
gering the  event  of  the  contest.  Every  candid 
reader  will  make  the  proper  reflections  on  these  im- 
portant facts. 

A  patient  who  finds  his  disorder  daily  growing 
worse,  and  that  an  efficacious  remedy  can  no  longer 
be  delayed  without  extreme  danger,  after  coolly  re- 
volving his  situation,  and  the  characters  of  different 
physicians,  selects  and  calls  in  such  of  them  as  he 
judges  most  capable  of  administering  relief,  and 
best  entitled  to  his  confidence.  The  physicians  at- 
tend ;  the  case  of  the  patient  is  carefully  examined ; 
a  consultation  is  held ;  they  are  unanimously  agreed 
that  the  symptoms  are  critical,  but  that  the  case, 
with  proper  and  timely  relief,  so  far  from  being 
desperate,  may  be  made  to  issue  in  an  improve- 
ment of  his  constitution.  They  are  equally  unani- 
mous in  prescribing  the  remedy,  by  which  this 
happy  effect  is  to  be  produced.  The  prescription  is 
no  sooner  made  known,  however,  than  a  number  of 
persons  interpose,  and,  without  denying  the  reality 


300  Alexander  Hamilton 

or  danger  of  the  disorder,  assure  the  patient  that  the 
prescription  will  be  poison  to  his  constitution,  and 
forbid  him,  under  pain  of  certain  death,  to  make  use 
of  it.  Might  not  the  patient  reasonably  demand, 
before  he  ventured  to  follow  this  advice,  that  the 
authors  of  it  should  at  least  agree  among  themselves 
on  some  other  remedy  to  be  substituted  ?  And  if  he 
found  them  differing  as  much  from  one  another  as 
from  his  first  counsellors,  would  he  not  act  prudently 
in  trying  the  experiment  unanimously  recommended 
by  the  latter,  rather  than  be  hearkening  to  those  who 
could  neither  deny  the  necessity  of  a  speedy  remedy, 
nor  agree  in  proposing  one? 

Such  a  patient  and  in  such  a  situation  is  America 
at  this  moment.  She  has  been  sensible  of  her  mal- 
ady. She  has  obtained  a  regular  and  unanimous 
advice  from  men  of  her  own  deliberate  choice.  And 
she  is  warned  by  others  against  following  this  advice 
under  pain  of  the  most  fatal  consequences.  Do  the 
monitors  deny  the  reality  of  her  danger?  No.  Do 
they  deny  the  necessity  of  some  speedy  and  powerful 
remedy?  No.  Are  they  agreed,  are  any  two  of 
them  agreed,  in  their  objections  to  the  remedy  pro- 
posed, or  in  the  proper  one  to  be  substituted?  Let 
them  speak  for  themselves.  This  one  tells  us  that 
the  proposed  Constitution  ought  to  be  rejected,  be- 
cause it  is  not  a  confederation  of  the  States,  but  a 
government  over  individuals.  Another  admits  that 
it  ought  to  be  a  government  over  individuals  to  a 
certain  extent,  but  by  no  means  to  the  extent  pro- 
posed. A  third  does  not  object  to  the  government 
over  individuals,  or  to  the  extent  proposed,  but  to 


The  Federalist  301 

the  want  of  a  bill  of  rights.  A  fourth  concurs  in  the 
absolute  necessity  of  a  bill  of  rights,  but  contends 
that  it  ought  to  be  declaratory,  not  of  the  personal 
rights  of  individuals,  but  of  the  rights  reserved  to  the 
States  in  their  political  capacity.  A  fifth  is  of  opinion 
that  a  bill  of  rights  of  any  sort  would  be  superfluous 
and  misplaced,  and  that  the  plan  would  be  unexcep- 
tionable but  for  the  fatal  power  of  regulating  the 
times  and  places  of  election.  An  objector  in  a  large 
State  exclaims  loudly  against  the  unreasonable  equal- 
ity of  representation  in  the  Senate.  An  objector  in 
a  small  State  is  equally  loud  against  the  dangerous 
inequality  in  the  House  of  Representatives.  From 
this  quarter,  we  are  alarmed  with  the  amazing 
expense,  from  the  number  of  persons  who  are  to 
administer  the  new  government.  From  another 
quarter,  and  sometimes  from  the  same  quarter,  on 
another  occasion,  the  cry  is  that  the  Congress  will 
be  but  a  shadow  of  a  representation,  and  that  the 
government  would  be  far  less  objectionable  if  the 
number  and  the  expense  were  doubled.  A  patriot 
in  a  State  that  does  not  import  or  export,  discerns 
insuperable  objections  against  the  power  of  direct 
taxation.  The  patriotic  adversary  in  a  State  of 
great  exports  and  imports,  is  not  less  dissatisfied 
that  the  whole  burden  of  taxes  may  be  thrown  on 
consumption.  This  politician  discovers  in  the  Con- 
stitution a  direct  and  irresistible  tendency  to  mon- 
archy ;  that  is  equally  sure  it  will  end  in  aristocracy. 
Another  is  puzzled  to  say  which  of  these  shapes  it 
will  ultimately  assume,  but  sees  clearly  it  must  be 
one  or  other  of  them ;  whilst  a  fourth  is  not  wanting, 


302  Alexander  Hamilton 

who  with  no  less  confidence  affirms  that  the  Con- 
stitution is  so  far  from  having  a  bias  towards  either 
of  these  dangers,  that  the  weight  on  that  side  will 
not  be  sufficient  to  keep  it  upright  and  firm  against 
its  opposite  propensities.  With  another  class  of  ad- 
versaries to  the  Constitution  the  language  is  that  the 
legislative,  executive,  and  judiciary  departments  are 
intermixed  in  such  a  manner  as  to  contradict  all  the 
ideas  of  regular  government  and  all  the  requisite 
precautions  in  favor  of  liberty.  Whilst  this  objec- 
tion circulates  in  vague  and  general  expressions, 
there  are  but  a  few  who  lend  their  sanction  to  it. 
Let  each  one  come  forward  with  his  particular  ex- 
planation, and  scarce  any  two  are  exactly  agreed 
upon  the  subject.  In  the  eyes  of  one  the  junction 
of  the  Senate  with  the  President  in  the  responsible 
function  of  appointing  to  offices,  instead  of  vesting 
this  executive  power  in  the  Executive  alone,  is  the 
vicious  part  of  the  organization.  To  another,  the 
exclusion  of  the  House  of  Representatives,  whose 
numbers  alone  could  be  a  due  security  against  cor- 
ruption and  partiality  in  the  exercise  of  such  a 
power,  is  equally  obnoxious.  With  another,  the  ad- 
mission of  the  President  into  any  share  of  a  power 
which  must  ever  be  a  dangerous  engine  in  the  hands 
of  the  executive  magistrate,  is  an  unpardonable 
violation  of  the  maxims  of  republican  jealousy.  No 
part  of  the  arrangement,  according  to  some,  is  more 
inadmissible  than  the  trial  of  impeachments  by  the 
Senate,  which  is  alternately  a  member  both  of  the 
legislative  and  executive  departments,  when  this 
power  so  evidently  belonged  to  the  judiciary  de- 


The  Federalist  303 

partment.  "  We  concur  fully/'  reply  others,  "  in  the 
objection  to  this  part  of  the  plan,  but  we  can  never 
agree  that  a  reference  of  impeachments  to  the  ju- 
diciary authority  would  be  an  amendment  of  the 
error.  Our  principal  dislike  to  the  organization 
arises  from  the  extensive  powers  already  lodged  in 
that  department."  Even  among  the  zealous  pa- 
trons of  a  council  of  state  the  most  irreconcilable 
variance  is  discovered  concerning  the  mode  in  which 
it  ought  to  be  constituted.  The  demand  of  one 
gentleman  is,  that  the  council  should  consist  of  a 
small  number  to  be  appointed  by  the  most  numerous 
branch  of  the  legislature.  Another  would  prefer  a 
larger  number,  and  considers  it  as  a  fundamental 
condition  that  the  appointment  should  be  made  by 
the  President  himself. 

As  it  can  give  no  umbrage  to  the  writers  against 
the  plan  of  the  federal  Constitution,  let  us  suppose, 
that  as  they  are  the  most  zealous,  so  they  are  also 
the  most  sagacious,  of  those  who  think  the  late  con- 
vention were  unequal  to  the  task  assigned  them, 
and  that  a  wiser  and  better  plan  might  and  ought  to 
be  substituted.  Let  us  further  suppose  that  their 
country  should  concur,  both  in  this  favorable  opinion 
of  their  merits,  and  in  their  unfavorable  opinion  of 
the  convention;  and  should  accordingly  proceed  to 
form  them  into  a  second  convention,  with  full 
powers,  and  for  the  express  purpose  of  revising  and 
remoulding  the  work  of  the  first.  Were  the  experi- 
ment to  be  seriously  made,  though  it  required  some 
effort  to  view  it  seriously  even  in  fiction,  I  leave  it  to 
be  decided  by  the  sample  of  opinions  just  exhibited, 


3°4  Alexander  Hamilton 

whether,  with  all  their  enmity  to  their  predecessors, 
they  would,  in  any  one  point,  depart  so  widely  from 
their  example,  as  in  the  discord  and  ferment  that 
would  mark  their  own  deliberations;  and  whether 
the  Constitution,  now  before  the  public,  would  not 
stand  as  fair  a  chance  for  immortality,  as  Lycurgus 
gave  to  that  of  Sparta,  by  making  its  change  to  de- 
pend on  his  own  return  from  exile  and  death,  if  it 
were  to  be  immediately  adopted,  and  were  to  con- 
tinue in  force,  not  until  a  better,  but  until  another 
should  be  agreed  upon  by  this  new  assembly  of  law- 
givers. 

It  is  a  matter  both  of  wonder  and  regret,  that 
those  who  raise  so  many  objections  against  the  new 
Constitution  should  never  call  to  mind  the  defects 
of  that  which  is  to  be  exchanged  for  it.  It  is  not 
necessary  that  the  former  should  be  perfect:  it  is 
sufficient  that  the  latter  is  more  imperfect.  No  man 
would  refuse  to  give  brass  for  silver  or  gold,  because 
the  latter  had  some  alloy  in  it.  No  man  would  re- 
fuse to  quit  a  shattered  and  tottering  habitation  for 
a  firm  and  commodious  building,  because  the  latter 
had  not  a  porch  to  it,  or  because  some  of  the  rooms 
might  be  a  little  larger  or  smaller,  or  the  ceiling  a 
little  higher  or  lower  than  his  fancy  would  have 
planned  them.  But  waiving  illustrations  of  this 
sort,  is  it  not  manifest  that  most  of  the  capital  ob- 
jections urged  against  the  new  system  lie  with  ten- 
fold weight  against  the  existing  Confederation?  Is 
an  indefinite  power  to  raise  money  dangerous  in  the 
hands  of  the  federal  government  ?  The  present  Con- 
gress can  make  requisitions  to  any  amount  they 


The  Federalist  305 

please,  and  the  States  are  constitutionally  bound  to 
furnish  them;  they  can  emit  bills  of  credit  as  long 
as  they  will  pay  for  the  paper;  they  can  borrow, 
both  abroad  and  at  home,  as  long  as  a  shilling  will  be 
lent.  Is  an  indefinite  power  to  raise  troops  dan- 
gerous? The  Confederation  gives  to  Congress  that 
power  also;  and  they  have  already  begun  to  make 
use  of  it.  Is  it  improper  and  unsafe  to  intermix  the 
different  powers  of  government  in  the  same  body  of 
men?  Congress,  a  single  body  of  men,  are  the  sole 
depositary  of  all  the  federal  powers.  Is  it  particu- 
larly dangerous  to  give  the  keys  of  the  treasury,  and 
the  command  of  the  army,  into  the  same  hands? 
The  Confederation  places  them  both  in  the  hands  of 
Congress.  Is  a  bill  of  rights  essential  to  liberty? 
The  Confederation  has  no  bill  of  rights.  Is  it  an 
objection  against  the  new  Constitution,  that  it  em- 
powers the  Senate,  with  the  concurrence  of  the 
Executive,  to  make  treaties  which  are  to  be  the  laws 
of  the  land?  The  existing  Congress,  without  any 
such  control,  can  make  treaties  which  they  them- 
selves have  declared,  and  most  of  the  States  have 
recognized,  to  be  the  supreme  law  of  the  land.  Is 
the  importation  of  slaves  permitted  by  the  new 
Constitution  for  twenty  years?  By  the  old  it  is 
permitted  forever. 

I  shall  be  told,  that  however  dangerous  this  mix- 
ture of  powers  may  be  in  theory,  it  is  rendered  harm- 
less by  the  dependence  of  Congress  on  the  States  for 
the  means  of  carrying  them  into  practice ;  that  how- 
ever large  the  mass  of  powers  may  be,  it  is  in  fact  a 
lifeless  mass.     Then,  say  I,  in  the  first  place,  that 


VOL.  XI.  -20. 


3°6  Alexander  Hamilton 

the  Confederation  is  chargeable  with  the  still  greater 
folly  of  declaring  certain  powers  in  the  federal  gov- 
ernment to  be  absolutely  necessary,  and  at  the  same 
time  rendering  them  absolutely  nugatory;  and,  in 
the  next  place,  that  if  the  Union  is  to  continue,  and 
no  better  government  be  substituted,  effective  pow- 
ers must  either  be  granted  to,  or  assumed  by,  the 
existing  Congress;  in  either  of  which  events,  the  con- 
trast just  stated  will  hold  good.  But  this  is  not  all. 
Out  of  this  lifeless  mass  has  already  grown  an  ex- 
crescent power,  which  tends  to  realize  all  the  dangers 
that  can  be  apprehended  from  a  defective  construc- 
tion of  the  supreme  government  of  the  Union.  It  is 
now  no  longer  a  point  of  speculation  and  hope,  that 
the  Western  territory  is  a  mine  of  vast  wealth  to 
the  United  States;  and  although  it  is  not  of  such 
a  nature  as  to  extricate  them  from  their  present 
distresses,  or,  for  some  time  to  come,  to  yield  any 
regular  supplies  for  the  public  expenses,  yet  must  it 
hereafter  be  able,  under  proper  management,  both 
to  effect  a  gradual  discharge  of  the  domestic  debt, 
and  to  furnish,  for  a  certain  period,  liberal  tributes 
to  the  federal  treasury.  A  very  large  proportion  of 
this  fund  has  been  already  surrendered  by  individual 
States ;  and  it  may  with  reason  be  expected  that  the 
remaining  States  will  not  persist  in  withholding 
similar  proofs  of  their  equity  and  generosity.  We 
may  calculate,  therefore,  that  a  rich  and  fertile 
country,  of  an  area  equal  to  the  inhabited  extent  of 
the  United  States,  will  soon  become  a  national  stock. 
Congress  have  assumed  the  administration  of  this 
stock.     They  have  begun  to  render  it  productive. 


The  Federalist  307 

Congress  have  undertaken  to  do  more:  they  have 
proceeded  to  form  new  States,  to  erect  temporary 
governments,  to  appoint  officers  for  them,  and  to 
prescribe  the  conditions  on  which  such  States  shall 
be  admitted  into  the  Confederacy.  All  this  has  been 
done ;  and  done  without  the  least  color  of  constitu- 
tional authority.  Yet  no  blame  has  been  whispered ; 
no  alarm  has  been  sounded.  A  great  and  indepen- 
dent fund  of  revenue  is  passing  into  the  hands  of  a 
single  body  of  men,  who  can  raise  troops  to  an 
indefinite  number,  and  appropriate  money  to  their 
support  for  an  indefinite  period  of  time.  And 
yet  there  are  men,  who  have  not  only  been  silent 
spectators  of  this  prospect,  but  who  are  advocates  for 
the  system  which  exhibits  it ;  and,  at  the  same  time, 
urge  against  the  new  system  the  objections  which 
we  have  heard.  Would  they  not  act  with  more  con- 
sistency, in  urging  the  establishment  of  the  latter, 
as  no  less  necessary  to  guard  the  Union  against  the 
future  powers  and  resources  of  a  body  constructed 
like  the  existing  Congress,  than  to  save  it  from  the 
dangers  threatened  by  the  present  impotency  of 
that  Assembly? 

I  mean  not,  by  any  thing  here  said,  to  throw  cen- 
sure on  the  measures  which  have  been  pursued  by 
Congress.  I  am  sensible  they  could  not  have  done 
otherwise.  The  public  interest,  the  necessity  of  the 
case,  imposed  upon  them  the  task  of  overleaping 
their  constitutional  limits.  But  is  not  the  fact  an 
alarming  proof  of  the  danger  resulting  from  a  gov- 
ernment which  does  not  possess  regular  powers 
commensurate    to    its    objects?     A    dissolution    or 


308  Alexander  Hamilton 

usurpation  is  the  dreadful  dilemma  to  which  it  is 
continually  exposed. 

PUBLIUS. 


For  the  Independent  Journal 

WHE  FEDERALIST.     No.  XXXIX 

(madison) 

To  the  People  of  the  State  of  New  York: 

The  last  paper  having  concluded  the  observations 
which  were  meant  to  introduce  a  candid  survey  of 
the  plan  of  government  reported  by  the  convention, 
we  now  proceed  to  the  execution  of  that  part  of  our 
undertaking. 

The  first  question  that  offers  itself  is,  whether 
the  general  form  and  aspect  of  the  government  be 
strictly  republican.  It  is  evident  that  no  other 
form  would  be  reconcilable  with  the  genius  of  the 
people  of  America;  with  the  fundamental  principles 
of  the  Revolution ;  or  with  that  honorable  determina- 
tion which  animates  every  votary  of  freedom,  to 
rest  all  our  political  experiments  on  the  capacity  of 
mankind  for  self-government.  If  the  plan  of  the 
convention,  therefore,  be  found  to  depart  from  the 
republican  character,  its  advocates  must  abandon 
it  as  no  longer  defensible. 

What,  then,  are  the  distinctive  characters  of  the 
republican  form?  Were  an  answer  to  this  question 
to  be  sought,  not  by  recurring  to  principles,  but  in 
the  application  of  the  term  by  political  writers,  to 
the  constitutions  of  different  States,  no  satisfactory 
one  would  ever  be  found.     Holland,  in  which  no 


The  Federalist  309 

particle  of  the  supreme  authority  is  derived  from 
the  people,  has  passed  almost  universally  under  the 
denomination  of  a  republic.  The  same  title  has 
been  bestowed  on  Venice,  where  absolute  power  over 
the  great  body  of  the  people  is  exercised,  in  the  most 
absolute  manner,  by  a  small  body  of  hereditary 
nobles.  Poland,  which  is  a  mixture  of  aristocracy 
and  of  monarchy  in  their  worst  forms,  has  been 
dignified  with  the  same  appellation.  The  govern- 
ment of  England,  which  has  one  republican  branch 
only,  combined  with  an  hereditary  aristocracy  and 
monarchy,  has,  with  equal  impropriety,  been  fre- 
quently placed  on  the  list  of  republics.  These  ex- 
amples, which  are  nearly  as  dissimilar  to  each  other 
as  to  a  genuine  republic,  show  the  extreme  inac- 
curacy with  which  the  term  has  been  used  in  po- 
litical disquisitions. 

If  we  resort  for  a  criterion  to  the  different  prin- 
ciples on  which  different  forms  of  government  are 
established,  we  may  define  a  republic  to  be,  or  at 
least  may  bestow  that  name  on,  a  government  which 
derives  all  its  powers  directly  or  indirectly  from  the 
great  body  of  the  people,  and  is  administered  by 
persons  holding  their  offices  during  pleasure,  for  a 
limited  period,  or  during  good  behavior.  It  is  es- 
sential to  such  a  government  that  it  be  derived  from 
the  great  body  of  the  society,  not  from  an  incon- 
siderable proportion,  or  a  favored  class  of  it ;  other- 
wise a  handful  of  tyrannical  nobles,  exercising  their 
oppressions  by  a  delegation  of  their  powers,  might 
aspire  to  the  rank  of  republicans,  and  claim  for  their 
government  the  honorable  title  of  republic.     It  is 


310  Alexander  Hamilton 

sufficient  for  such  a  government  that  the  persons  ad- 
ministering it  be  appointed,  either  directly  or  in- 
directly, by  the  people;  and  that  they  hold  their 
appointments  by  either  of  the  tenures  just  specified; 
otherwise  every  government  in  the  United  States, 
as  well  as  every  other  popular  government  that  has 
been  or  can  be  well  organized  or  well  executed, 
would  be  degraded  from  the  republican  character. 
According  to  the  constitution  of  every  State  in  the 
Union,  some  or  other  of  the  officers  of  government 
are  appointed  indirectly  only  by  the  people.  Ac- 
cording to  most  of  them,  the  chief  magistrate  himself 
is  so  appointed.  And  according  to  one,  this  mode 
of  appointment  is  extended  to  one  of  the  coordinate 
branches  of  the  legislature.  According  to  all  the 
constitutions,  also,  the  tenure  of  the  highest  offices 
is  extended  to  a  definite  period,  and  in  many  in- 
stances, both  within  the  legislative  and  executive 
departments,  to  a  period  of  years.  According  to  the 
provisions  of  most  of  the  constitutions,  again,  as  well 
as  according  to  the  most  respectable  and  received 
opinions  on  the  subject,  the  members  of  the  judiciary 
department  are  to  retain  their  offices  by  the  firm 
tenure  of  good  behavior. 

On  comparing  the  Constitution  planned  by  the 
convention  with  the  standard  here  fixed,  we  per- 
ceive at  once  that  it  is,  in  the  most  rigid  sense,  con- 
formable to  it.  The  House  of  Representatives,  like 
that  of  one  branch  at  least  of  all  the  State  legisla- 
tures, is  elected  immediately  by  the  great  body  of 
the  people.  The  Senate,  like  the  present  Congress, 
and  the  Senate  of  Maryland,  derives  its  appointment 


The  Federalist  3" 

indirectly  from  the  people.  The  President  is  in- 
directly derived  from  the  choice  of  the  people,  ac- 
cording to  the  example  in  most  of  the  States.  Even 
the  judges,  with  all  other  officers  of  the  Union,  will, 
as  in  the  several  States,  be  the  choice,  though  a  re- 
mote choice,  of  the  people  themselves.  The  dura- 
tion of  the  appointments  is  equally  conformable  to 
the  republican  standard,  and  to  the  model  of  State 
constitutions.  The  House  of  Representatives  is 
periodically  elective,  as  in  all  the  States;  and  for 
the  period  of  two  years,  as  in  the  State  of  South 
Carolina.  The  Senate  is  elective,  for  the  period  of 
six  years;  which  is  but  one  year  more  than  the 
period  of  the  Senate  of  Maryland,  and  but  two  more 
than  that  of  the  Senates  of  New  York  and  Virginia. 
The  President  is  to  continue  in  office  for  the  period 
of  four  years;  as  in  New  York  and  Delaware  the 
chief  magistrate  is  elected  for  three  years,  and  in 
South  Carolina  for  two  years.  In  the  other  States 
the  election  is  annual.  In  several  of  the  States, 
however,  no  constitutional  provision  is  made  for  the 
impeachment  of  the  chief  magistrate.  And  in  Dela- 
ware and  Virginia  he  is  not  impeachable  till  out  of 
office.  The  President  of  the  United  States  is  im- 
peachable at  any  time  during  his  continuance  in 
office.  The  tenure  by  which  the  judges  are  to  hold 
their  places,  is,  as  it  unquestionably  ought  to  be, 
that  of  good  behavior.  The  tenure  of  the  minis- 
terial offices  generally,  will  be  a  subject  of  legal  regu- 
lation, conformably  to  the  reason  of  the  case  and  the 
example  of  the  State  constitutions. 

Could  any  further  proof  be  required  of  the  repub- 


312  Alexander  Hamilton 

lican  complexion  of  this  system,  the  most  decisive 
one  might  be  found  in  its  absolute  prohibition  of 
titles  of  nobility,  both  under  the  federal  and  the 
State  governments;  and  in  its  express  guaranty  of 
the  republican  form  to  each  of  the  latter. 

"  But  it  was  not  sufficient,"  say  the  adversaries 
of  the  proposed  Constitution,  "for  the  convention  to 
adhere  to  the  republican  form.  They  ought,  with 
equal  care,  to  have  preserved  the  federal  form,  which 
regards  the  Union  as  a  Confederacy  of  sovereign 
states;  instead  of  which,  they  have  framed  a  na- 
tional government,  which  regards  the  Union  as  a 
consolidation  of  the  States."  And  it  is  asked  by 
what  authority  this  bold  and  radical  innovation  was 
undertaken?  The  handle  which  has  been  made  of 
this  objection  requires  that  it  should  be  examined 
with  some  precision. 

Without  inquiring  into  the  accuracy  of  the  dis- 
tinction on  which  the  objection  is  founded,  it  will 
be  necessary  to  a  just  estimate  of  its  force,  first, 
to  ascertain  the  real  character  of  the  government 
in  question;  secondly,  to  inquire  how  far  the  con- 
vention were  authorized  to  propose  such  a  govern- 
ment ;  and  thirdly,  how  far  the  duty  they  owed  to 
their  country  could  supply  any  defect  of  regular 
authority. 

First. — In  order  to  ascertain  the  real  character  of 
the  government,  it  may  be  considered  in  relation  to 
the  foundation  on  which  it  is  to  be  established; 
to  the  sources  from  which  its  ordinary  powers 
are  to  be  drawn ;  to  the  operation  of  those  powers ; 
to  the  extent  of  them;    and  to  the  authority  by 


The  Federalist  3!3 

which  future  changes  in  the  government  are  to  be 
introduced. 

On  examining  the  first  relation,  it  appears,  on  one 
hand,  that  the  Constitution  is  to  be  founded  on 
the  assent  and  ratification  of  the  people  of  America, 
given  by  deputies  elected  for  the  special  purpose; 
but,  on  the  other,  that  this  assent  and  ratification  is 
to  be  given  by  the  people,  not  as  individuals  com- 
posing one  entire  nation,  but  as  composing  the 
distinct  and  independent  States  to  which  they  re- 
spectively belong.  It  is  to  be  the  assent  and  ratifica- 
tion of  the  several  States,  derived  from  the  supreme 
authority  in  each  State, — the  authority  of  the  people 
themselves.  The  act,  therefore,  establishing  the 
Constitution,  will  not  be  a  national,  but  a  federal  act. 

That  it  will  be  a  federal  and  not  a  national  act,  as 
these  terms  are  understood  by  the  objectors;  the 
act  of  the  people,  as  forming  so  many  independent 
States,  not  as  forming  one  aggregate  nation,  is  ob- 
vious from  this  single  consideration,  that  it  is  to 
result  neither  from  the  decision  of  a  majority  of  the 
people  of  the  Union,  nor  from  that  of  a  majority  of 
the  States.  It  must  result  from  the  unanimous  as- 
sent of  the  several  States  that  are  parties  to  it, 
differing  no  otherwise  from  their  ordinary  assent 
than  in  its  being  expressed,  not  by  the  legislative 
authority,  but  by  that  of  the  people  themselves. 
Were  the  people  regarded  in  this  transaction  as 
forming  one  nation,  the  will  of  the  majority  of  the 
whole  people  of  the  United  States  would  bind  the 
minority,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  majority  in 
each  State  must  bind  the  minority;   and  the  will  of 


314  Alexander  Hamilton 

the  majority  must  be  determined  either  by  a  com- 
parison of  the  individual  votes,  or  by  considering  the 
will  of  the  majority  of  the  States  as  evidence  of  the 
will  of  a  majority  of  the  people  of  the  United  States. 
Neither  of  these  rules  has  been  adopted.  Each 
State,  in  ratifying  the  Constitution,  is  considered  as 
a  sovereign  body,  independent  of  all  others,  and  only 
to  be  bound  by  its  own  voluntary  act.  In  this  rela- 
tion, then,  the  new  Constitution  will,  if  established, 
be  a  federal,  and  not  a  national  constitution. 

The  next  relation  is,  to  the  sources  from  which  the 
ordinary  powers  of  government  are  to  be  derived. 
The  House  of  Representatives  will  derive  its  powers 
from  the  people  of  America;  and  the  people  will  be 
represented  in  the  same  proportion,  and  on  the  same 
principle,  as  they  are  in  the  legislature  of  a  particular 
State.  So  far  the  government  is  national,  not  fed- 
eral. The  Senate,  on  the  other  hand,  will  derive  its 
powers  from  the  States,  as  political  and  coequal  so- 
cieties; and  these  will  be  represented  on  the  prin- 
ciple of  equality  in  the  Senate,  as  they  now  are  in 
the  existing  Congress.  So  far  the  government  is 
federal,  not  national.  The  executive  power  will  be 
derived  from  a  very  compound  source.  The  immedi- 
ate election  of  the  President  is  to  be  made  by  the 
States  in  their  political  characters.  The  votes  al- 
lotted to  them  are  in  a  compound  ratio,  which  con- 
siders them  partly  as  distinct  and  coequal  societies, 
partly  as  unequal  members  of  the  same  society.  The 
eventual  election,  again,  is  to  be  made  by  that  branch 
of  the  legislature  which  consists  of  the  national  re- 
presentatives;  but  in  this  particular  act  they  are  to 


The  Federalist  315 

be  thrown  into  the  form  of  individual  delegations, 
from  so  many  distinct  and  coequal  bodies  politic. 
From  this  aspect  of  the  government,  it  appears  to 
be  of  a  mixed  character,  presenting  at  least  as  many 
federal  as  national  features. 

The  difference  between  a  federal  and  national 
government,  as  it  relates  to  the  operation  of  the 
government,  is  supposed  to  consist  in  this,  that  in 
the  former  the  powers  operate  on  the  political  bodies 
composing  the  Confederacy,  in  their  political  capac- 
ities; in  the  latter,  on  the  individual  citizens  com- 
posing the  nation,  in  their  individual  capacities.  On 
trying  the  Constitution  by  this  criterion,  it  falls 
under  the  national,  not  the  federal  character ;  though 
perhaps  not  so  completely  as  has  been  understood. 
In  several  cases,  and  particularly  in  the  trial  of  con- 
troversies to  which  States  may  be  parties,  they  must 
be  viewed  and  proceeded  against  in  their  collective 
and  political  capacities  only.  So  far  the  national 
countenance  of  the  government  on  this  side  seems 
to  be  disfigured  by  a  few  federal  features.  But  this 
blemish  is  perhaps  unavoidable  in  any  plan;  and 
the  operation  of  the  government  on  the  people,  in 
their  individual  capacities,  in  its  ordinary  and  most 
essential  proceedings,  may,  on  the  whole,  designate 
it,  in  this  relation,  a  national  government. 

But  if  the  government  be  national  with  regard  to 
the  operation  of  its  powers,  it  changes  its  aspect 
again  when  we  contemplate  it  in  relation  to  the  ex- 
tent of  its  powers.  The  idea  of  a  national  govern- 
ment involves  in  it,  not  only  an  authority  over  the 
individual  citizens,  but  an  indefinite  supremacy  over 


316  Alexander  Hamilton 

all  persons  and  things,  so  far  as  they  are  objects  of 
lawful  government.  Among  a  people  consolidated 
into  one  nation,  this  supremacy  is  completely  vested 
in  the  national  legislature.  Among  communities 
united  for  particular  purposes,  it  is  vested  partly  in 
the  general  and  partly  in  the  municipal  legislatures. 
In  the  former  case,  all  local  authorities  are  subordi- 
nate to  the  supreme;  and  may  be  controlled,  di- 
rected, or  abolished  by  it  at  pleasure.  In  the  latter, 
the  local  or  municipal  authorities  form  distinct  and 
independent  portions  of  the  supremacy,  no  more 
subject,  within  their  respective  spheres,  to  the  gen- 
eral authority,  than  the  general  authority  is  subject 
to  them,  within  its  own  sphere.  In  this  relation, 
then,  the  proposed  government  cannot  be  deemed  a 
national  one ;  since  its  jurisdiction  extends  to  certain 
enumerated  objects  only,  and  leaves  to  the  several 
States  a  residuary  and  inviolable  sovereignty  over  all 
other  objects.  It  is  true  that  in  controversies  relat- 
ing to  the  boundary  between  the  two  jurisdictions,  the 
tribunal  which  is  ultimately  to  decide,  is  to  be  estab- 
lished under  the  general  government.  But  this  does 
not  change  the  principle  of  the  case.  The  decision  is 
to  be  impartially  made,  according  to  the  rules  of  the 
Constitution ;  and  all  the  usual  and  most  effectual  pre- 
cautions are  taken  to  secure  this  impartiality.  Some 
such  tribunal  is  clearly  essential  to  prevent  an  appeal 
to  the  sword  and  a  dissolution  of  the  compact ;  and  that 
it  ought  to  be  established  under  the  general  rather 
than  under  the  local  governments,  or,  to  speak  more 
properly,  that  it  could  be  safely  established  under  the 
first  alone,  is  a  position  not  likely  to  be  combated. 


The  Federalist  317 

If  we  try  the  Constitution  by  its  last  relation  to 
the  authority  by  which  amendments  are  to  be  made, 
we  find  it  neither  wholly  national  nor  wholly  federal. 
Were  it  wholly  national,  the  supreme  and  ultimate 
authority  would  reside  in  the  majority  of  the  people 
of  the  Union;  and  this  authority  would  be  com- 
petent at  all  times,  like  that  of  a  majority  of  every 
national  society,  to  alter  or  abolish  its  established 
government.  Were  it  wholly  federal,  on  the  other 
hand,  the  concurrence  of  each  State  in  the  Union 
would  be  essential  to  every  alteration  that  would  be 
binding  on  all.  The  mode  provided  by  the  plan  of 
the  convention  is  not  founded  on  either  of  these 
principles.  In  requiring  more  than  a  majority,  and 
particularly  in  computing  the  proportion  by  States, 
not  by  citizens,  it  departs  from  the  national  and  ad- 
vances towards  the  federal  character;  in  rendering 
the  concurrence  of  less  than  the  whole  number  of 
States  sufficient,  it  loses  again  the  federal  and  par- 
takes of  the  national  character. 

The  proposed  Constitution,  therefore,  is,  in  strict- 
ness, neither  a  national  nor  a  federal  Constitution, 
but  a  composition  of  both.  In  its  foundation,  it  is 
federal,  not  national;  in  the  sources  from  which  the 
ordinary  powers  of  the  government  are  drawn,  it  is 
partly  federal  and  partly  national;  in  the  operation 
of  these  powers,  it  is  national,  not  federal;  in  the 
extent  of  them,  again,  it  is  federal,  not  national; 
and,  finally,  in  the  authoritative  mode  of  introducing 
amendments,  it  is  neither  wholly  federal  nor  wholly 
national. 

Publius. 


318  Alexander  Hamilton 

From  the  New  York  Packet,  Friday,  January  18,  1788 

THE  FEDERALIST.     No.  XL 

(madison) 

To  the  People  of  the  State  of  New  York: 

The  second  point  to  be  examined  is,  whether  the 
convention  were  authorized  to  frame  and  propose 
this  mixed  Constitution. 

The  powers  of  the  convention  ought,  in  strictness, 
to  be  determined  by  an  inspection  of  the  commis- 
sions given  to  the  members  by  their  respective  con- 
stituents. As  all  of  these,  however,  had  reference, 
either  to  the  recommendation  from  the  meeting  at 
Annapolis,  in  September,  1786,  or  to  that  from  Con- 
gress, in  February,  1787,  it  will  be  sufficient  to  recur 
to  these  particular  acts. 

The  act  from  Annapolis  recommends  the  "  appoint- 
ment of  commissioners  to  take  into  consideration  the 
situation  of  the  United  States;  to  devise  such  fur- 
ther provisions  as  shall  appear  to  them  necessary  to 
render  the  Constitution  of  the  federal  government 
adequate  to  the  exigencies  of  the  Union;  and  to  report 
such  an  act  for  that  purpose,  to  the  United  States  in 
Congress  assembled,  as  when  agreed  to  by  them,  and 
afterwards  confirmed  by  the  legislature  of  every 
State,  will  effectually  provide  for  the  same." 

The  recommendatory  act  of  Congress  is  in  the 
words  following:  "Whereas,  there  is  provision  in 
the  articles  of  Confederation  and  perpetual  Union, 
for  making  alterations  therein,  by  the  assent  of  a 
Congress  of  the  United  States,  and  of  the  legislatures 
of  the  several  States;   and  whereas  experience  hath 


The  Federalist  319 

evinced,  that  there  are  defects  in  the  present  Con- 
federation; as  a  mean  to  remedy  which,  several  of 
the  States,  and  particularly  the  State  of  New  York, 
by  express  instructions  to  their  delegates  in  Con- 
gress, have  suggested  a  convention  for  the  purposes 
expressed  in  the  following  resolution ;  and  such  con- 
vention appearing  to  be  the  most  probable  mean  of 
establishing  in  these  States  a  firm  national  govern- 
ment: 

11  Resolved, — That  in  the  opinion  of  Congress  it  is 
expedient,  that  on  the  second  Monday  of  May  next 
a  convention  of  delegates,  who  shall  have  been  ap- 
pointed by  the  several  States,  be  held  at  Philadelphia, 
for  the  sole  and  express  purpose  of  revising  the  articles 
of  Confederation,  and  reporting  to  Congress  and  the 
several  legislatures  such  alterations  and  provisions 
therein,  as  shall,  when  agreed  to  in  Congress,  and 
confirmed  by  the  States,  render  the  federal  Consti- 
tution adequate  to  the  exigencies  of  government  and 
the  preservation  of  the  Union." 

From  these  two  acts,  it  appears,  1st,  that  the 
object  of  the  convention  was  to  establish,  in  these 
States,  a  firm  national  government;  2d,  that  this  gov- 
ernment was  to  be  such  as  would  be  adequate  to  the 
exigencies  of  government  and  the  preservation  of  the 
Union;  3d,  that  these  purposes  were  to  be  effected 
by  alterations  and  provisions  in  the  articles  of  Con- 
federation, as  it  is  expressed  in  the  act  of  Congress,  or 
by  such  further  provisions  as  should  appear  necessary, 
as  it  stands  in  the  recommendatory  act  from  Anna- 
polis; 4th,  that  the  alterations  and  provisions  were 
to  be  reported  to  Congress,  and  to  the  States,  in 


320  Alexander  Hamilton 

order  to  be  agreed  to  by  the  former  and  confirmed 
by  the  latter. 

From  a  comparison  and  fair  construction  of  these 
several  modes  of  expression,  is  to  be  deduced  the 
authority  under  which  the  convention  acted.  They 
were  to  frame  a  national  government,  adequate  to  the 
exigencies  of  government,  and  of  the  Union;  and  to 
reduce  the  articles  of  Confederation  into  such  form 
as  to  accomplish  these  purposes.  There  are  two 
rules  of  construction,  dictated  by  plain  reason,  as 
well  as  founded  on  legal  axioms.  The  one  is,  that 
every  part  of  the  expression  ought,  if  possible,  to  be 
allowed  some  meaning,  and  be  made  to  conspire  to 
some  common  end.  The  other  is,  that  where  the 
several  parts  cannot  be  made  to  coincide,  the  less 
important  should  give  way  to  the  more  important 
part;  the  means  should  be  sacrificed  to  the  end, 
rather  than  the  end  to  the  means. 

Suppose,  then,  that  the  expressions  defining  the 
authority  of  the  convention  were  irreconcilably  at 
variance  with  each  other ;  that  a  national  and  adequate 
government  could  not  possibly,  in  the  judgment  of  the 
convention,  be  effected  by  alterations  and  provisions 
in  the  articles  of  Confederation;  which  part  of  the 
definition  ought  to  have  been  embraced,  and  which 
rejected?  Which  was  the  more  important,  which 
the  less  important  part  ?  Which  the  end ;  which  the 
means  ?  Let  the  most  scrupulous  expositors  of  dele- 
gated powers;  let  the  most  inveterate  objectors 
against  those  exercised  by  the  convention,  answer 
these  questions.  Let  them  declare,  whether  it  was 
of  most  importance  to  the  happiness  of  the  people 


The  Federalist  321 

of  America,  that  the  articles  of  Confederation  should 
be  disregarded,  and  an  adequate  government  be 
provided,  and  the  Union  preserved;  or  that  an  ade- 
quate government  should  be  omitted,  and  the  arti- 
cles of  Confederation  preserved.  Let  them  declare, 
whether  the  preservation  of  these  articles  was  the 
end,  for  securing  which  a  reform  of  the  government 
was  to  be  introduced  as  the  means;  or  whether  the 
establishment  of  a  government,  adequate  to  the  na- 
tional happiness,  was  the  end  at  which  these  arti- 
cles themselves  originally  aimed,  and  to  which  they 
ought,  as  insufficient  means,  to  have  been  sacrificed. 

But  is  it  necessary  to  suppose  that  these  expres- 
sions are  absolutely  irreconcilable  to  each  other; 
that  no  alterations  or  provisions  in  the  articles  of  the 
Confederation  could  possibly  mould  them  into  a  na- 
tional and  adequate  government;  into  such  a  gov- 
ernment as  has  been  proposed  by  the  convention  ? 

No  stress,  it  is  presumed,  will,  in  this  case,  be  laid 
on  the  title;  a  change  of  that  could  never  be  deemed 
an  exercise  of  ungranted  power.  Alterations  in  the 
body  of  the  instrument  are  expressly  authorized. 
New  provisions  therein  are  also  expressly  authorized. 
Here  then  is  a  power  to  change  the  title;  to  insert 
new  articles ;  to  alter  old  ones.  Must  it  of  necessity 
be  admitted  that  this  power  is  infringed,  so  long  as  a 
part  of  the  old  articles  remain?  Those  who  main- 
tain the  affirmative  ought  at  least  to  mark  the 
boundary  between  authorized  and  usurped  innova- 
tions; between  that  degree  of  change  which  lies 
within  the  compass  of  alterations  and  further  pro- 
visions, and  that  which  amounts  to  a  transmutation  of 

VOL.  XI.— 21. 


322  Alexander  Hamilton 

the  government.  Will  it  be  said  that  the  alterations 
ought  not  to  have  touched  the  substance  of  the 
Confederation?  The  States  would  never  have  ap- 
pointed a  convention  with  so  much  solemnity,  nor 
described  its  objects  with  so  much  latitude,  if  some 
substantial  reform  had  not  been  in  contemplation. 
Will  it  be  said  that  the  fundamental  principles  of  the 
Confederation  were  not  within  the  purview  of  the 
convention,  and  ought  not  to  have  been  varied  ?  I 
ask,  What  are  these  principles?  Do  they  require 
that,  in  the  establishment  of  the  Constitution,  the 
States  should  be  regarded  as  distinct  and  inde- 
pendent sovereigns?  They  are  so  regarded  by  the 
Constitution  proposed.  Do  they  require  that  the 
members  of  the  government  should  derive  their  ap- 
pointment from  the  legislatures,  not  from  the  people 
of  the  States  ?  One  branch  of  the  new  government  is 
to  be  appointed  by  these  legislatures ;  and  under  the 
Confederation,  the  delegates  to  Congress  may  all  be 
appointed  immediately  by  the  people,  and  in  two 
States  *  are  actually  so  appointed.  Do  they  require 
that  the  powers  of  the  government  should  act  on 
the  States,  and  not  immediately  on  individuals?  In 
some  instances,  as  has  been  shown,  the  powers  of  the 
new  government  will  act  on  the  States  in  their  col- 
lective characters.  In  some  instances,  also,  those  of 
the  existing  government  act  immediately  on  indi- 
viduals. In  cases  of  captures;  of  piracy;  of  the  post- 
office;  of  coins,  weights,  and  measures;  of  trade  with 
the  Indians ;  of  claims  under  grants  of  land  by  differ- 
ent States;    and,  above  all,  in  the  case  of  trials  by 

1  Connecticut  and  Rhode  Island. — Publius. 


The  Federalist  323 

courts-martial  in  the  army  and  navy,  by  which 
death  may  be  inflicted  without  the  intervention  of  a 
jury,  or  even  of  a  civil  magistrate ; — in  all  these  cases 
the  powers  of  the  Confederation  operate  immediately 
on  the  persons  and  interests  of  individual  citizens. 
Do  these  fundamental  principles  require,  particu- 
larly, that  no  tax  should  be  levied  without  the  inter- 
mediate agency  of  the  States?  The  Confederation 
itself  authorizes  a  direct  tax,  to  a  certain  extent,  on 
the  post-office.  The  power  of  coinage  has  been  so 
construed  by  Congress  as  to  levy  a  tribute  im- 
mediately from  that  source  also.  But  pretermitting 
these  instances,  was  it  not  an  acknowledged  object 
of  the  convention  and  the  universal  expectation  of 
the  people,  that  the  regulation  of  trade  should  be 
submitted  to  the  general  government  in  such  a  form 
as  would  render  it  an  immediate  source  of  general 
revenue?  Had  not  Congress  repeatedly  recom- 
mended this  measure  as  not  inconsistent  with  the 
fundamental  principles  of  the  Confederation?  Had 
not  every  State  but  one ;  had  not  New  York  herself, 
so  far  complied  with  the  plan  of  Congress  as  to  recog- 
nize the  principle  of  the  innovation  ?  Do  these  prin- 
ciples, in  fine,  require  that  the  powers  of  the  general 
government  should  be  limited,  and  that,  beyond  this 
limit,  the  States  should  be  left  in  possession  of  their 
sovereignty  and  independence?  We  have  seen  that 
in  the  new  government,  as  in  the  old,  the  general 
powers  are  limited;  and  that  the  States,  in  all  un- 
enumerated  cases,  are  left  in  the  enjoyment  of  their 
sovereign  and  independent  jurisdiction. 

The  truth  is,  that  the  great  principles  of  the  Con- 


324  Alexander  Hamilton 

stitution  proposed  by  the  convention  may  be  con- 
sidered less  as  absolutely  new,  than  as  the  expansion 
of  principles  which  are  found  in  the  articles  of  Con- 
federation. The  misfortune  under  the  latter  system 
has  been,  that  these  principles  are  so  feeble  and  con- 
fined as  to  justify  all  the  charges  of  inefficiency 
which  have  been  urged  against  it,  and  to  require  a 
degree  of  enlargement  which  gives  to  the  new  system 
the  aspect  of  an  entire  transformation  of  the  old. 

In  one  particular  it  is  admitted  that  the  conven- 
tion have  departed  from  the  tenor  of  their  commis- 
sion. Instead  of  reporting  a  plan  requiring  the 
confirmation  of  the  legislatures  of  all  the  States,  they 
have  reported  a  plan  which  is  to  be  confirmed  by  the 
people,  and  may  be  carried  into  effect  by  nine  States 
only.  It  is  worthy  of  remark  that  this  objection, 
though  the  most  plausible,  has  been  the  least  urged 
in  the  publications  which  have  swarmed  against  the 
convention.  The  forbearance  can  only  have  pro- 
ceeded from  an  irresistible  conviction  of  the  ab- 
surdity of  subjecting  the  fate  of  twelve  States  to  the 
perverseness  or  corruption  of  a  thirteenth ;  from  the 
example  of  inflexible  opposition  given  by  a  majority 
of  one  sixtieth  of  the  people  of  America  to  a  measure 
approved  and  called  for  by  the  voice  of  twelve 
States,  comprising  fifty-nine  sixtieths  of  the  people — 
an  example  still  fresh  in  the  memory  and  indigna- 
tion of  every  citizen  who  has  felt  for  the  wounded 
honor  and  prosperity  of  his  country.  As  this  ob- 
jection, therefore,  has  been  in  a  manner  waived  by 
those  who  have  criticised  the  powers  of  the  conven- 
tion, I  dismiss  it  without  further  observation. 


The  Federalist  325 

The  third  point  to  be  inquired  into  is,  how  far 
considerations  of  duty  arising  out  of  the  case  itself 
could  have  supplied  any  defect  of  regular  authority. 

In  the  preceding  inquiries  the  powers  of  the  con- 
vention have  been  analyzed  and  tried  with  the  same 
rigor,  and  by  the  same  rules,  as  if  they  had  been  real 
and  final  powers  for  the  establishment  of  a  Constitu- 
tion for  the  United  States.  We  have  seen  in  what 
manner  they  have  borne  the  trial  even  on  that  sup- 
position. It  is  time  now  to  recollect  that  the  powers 
were  merely  advisory  and  recommendatory;  that 
they  were  so  meant  by  the  States,  and  so  understood 
by  the  convention ;  and  that  the  latter  have  accord- 
ingly planned  and  proposed  a  Constitution  which  is 
to  be  of  no  more  consequence  than  the  paper  on 
which  it  is  written,  unless  it  be  stamped  with  the 
approbation  of  those  to  whom  it  is  addressed.  This 
reflection  places  the  subject  in  a  point  of  view  alto- 
gether different,  and  will  enable  us  to  judge  with 
propriety  of  the  course  taken  by  the  convention. 

Let  us  view  the  ground  on  which  the  convention 
stood.  It  may  be  collected  from  their  proceedings, 
that  they  were  deeply  and  unanimously  impressed 
with  the  crisis,  which  had  led  their  country  almost 
with  one  voice  to  make  so  singular  and  solemn  an 
experiment  for  correcting  the  errors  of  a  system  by 
which  this  crisis  had  been  produced ;  that  they  were 
no  less  deeply  and  unanimously  convinced  that  such 
a  reform  as  they  have  proposed  was  absolutely  neces- 
sary to  effect  the  purposes  of  their  appointment.  It 
could  not  be  unknown  to  them  that  the  hopes  and 
expectations  of  the  great  body  of  citizens,  throughout 


326  Alexander  Hamilton 

this  great  empire,  were  turned  with  the  keenest 
anxiety  to  the  event  of  their  deliberations.  They 
had  every  reason  to  believe  that  the  contrary  senti- 
ments agitated  the  minds  and  bosoms  of  every 
external  and  internal  foe  to  the  liberty  and  pro- 
sperity of  the  United  States.  They  had  seen  in  the 
origin  and  progress  of  the  experiment,  the  alacrity 
with  which  the  proposition,  made  by  a  single  State 
(Virginia),  towards  a  partial  amendment  of  the 
Confederation,  had  been  attended  to  and  promoted. 
They  had  seen  the  liberty  assumed  by  a  very  jew  depu- 
ties from  a  very  jew  States,  convened  at  Annapolis, 
of  recommending  a  great  and  critical  object,  wholly 
foreign  to  their  commission,  not  only  justified  by  the 
public  opinion,  but  actually  carried  into  effect  by 
twelve  out  of  the  thirteen  States.  They  had  seen, 
in  a  variety  of  instances,  assumptions  by  Congress, 
not  only  of  recommendatory,  but  of  operative, 
powers,  warranted,  in  the  public  estimation,  by 
occasions  and  objects  infinitely  less  urgent  than  those 
by  which  their  conduct  was  to  be  governed.  They 
must  have  reflected,  that  in  all  great  changes  of 
established  governments,  forms  ought  to  give  way  to 
substance;  that  a  rigid  adherence  in  such  cases  to 
the  former,  would  render  nominal  and  nugatory  the 
transcendent  and  precious  right  of  the  people  to 
"abolish  or  alter  their  governments  as  to  them 
shall  seem  most  likely  to  effect  their  safety  and 
happiness,"  x  since  it  is  impossible  for  the  people 
spontaneously  and  universally  to  move  in  concert 
towards  their  object;    and  it  is  therefore  essential 

1  Declaration  of  Independence. — Publius. 


The  Federalist  327 

that  such  changes  be  instituted  by  some  informal 
and  unauthorized  propositions \  made  by  some  patri- 
otic and  respectable  citizen  or  number  of  citizens. 
They  must  have  recollected  that  it  was  by  this  ir- 
regular and  assumed  privilege  of  proposing  to  the 
people  plans  for  their  safety  and  happiness,  that  the 
States  were  first  united  against  the  danger  with 
which  they  were  threatened  by  their  ancient  govern- 
ment; that  committees  and  congresses  were  formed 
for  concentrating  their  efforts  and  defending  their 
rights;  and  that  conventions  were  elected  in  the 
several  States  for  establishing  the  constitutions  under 
which  they  are  now  governed ;  nor  could  it  have  been 
forgotten  that  no  little  ill-timed  scruples,  no  zeal 
for  adhering  to  ordinary  forms,  were  anywhere  seen, 
except  in  those  who  wished  to  indulge,  under  these 
masks,  their  secret  enmity  to  the  substance  con- 
tended for.  They  must  have  borne  in  mind,  that  as 
the  plan  to  be  framed  and  proposed  was  to  be  sub- 
mitted to  the  people  themselves,  the  disapprobation  of 
this  supreme  authority  would  destroy  it  forever;  its 
approbation  blot  out  antecedent  errors  and  irregu- 
larities. It  might  even  have  occurred  to  them,  that 
where  a  disposition  to  cavil  prevailed,  their  neglect 
to  execute  the  degree  of  power  vested  in  them,  and 
still  more  their  recommendation  of  any  measure 
whatever,  not  warranted  by  their  commission,  would 
not  less  excite  animadversion,  than  a  recommenda- 
tion at  once  of  a  measure  fully  commensurate  to  the 
national  exigencies. 

Had  the  convention,  under  all  these  impressions, 
and  in  the  midst  of  all  these  considerations,  instead 


328  Alexander  Hamilton 

of  exercising  a  manly  confidence  in  their  country,  by 
whose  confidence  they  had  been  so  peculiarly  dis- 
tinguished, and  of  pointing  out  a  system  capable,  in 
their  judgment,  of  securing  its  happiness,  taken  the 
cold  and  sullen  resolution  of  disappointing  its  ardent 
hopes,  of  sacrificing  substance  to  forms,  of  com- 
mitting the  dearest  interests  of  their  country  to  the 
uncertainties  of  delay  and  the  hazard  of  events,  let 
me  ask  the  man  who  can  raise  his  mind  to  one  ele- 
vated conception,  who  can  awaken  in  his  bosom  one 
patriotic  emotion,  what  judgment  ought  to  have 
been  pronounced  by  the  impartial  world,  by  the 
friends  of  mankind,  by  every  virtuous  citizen,  on  the 
conduct  and  character  of  this  assembly  ?  Or  if  there 
be  a  man  whose  propensity  to  condemn  is  susceptible 
of  no  control,  let  me  then  ask  what  sentence  he  has 
in  reserve  for  the  twelve  States,  who  usurped  the 
power  of  sending  deputies  to  the  convention,  a  body 
utterly  unknown  to  their  constitutions;  for  Con- 
gress, who  recommended  the  appointment  of  this 
body,  equally  unknown  to  the  Confederation;  and 
for  the  State  of  New  York,  in  particular,  which  first 
urged  and  then  complied  with  this  unauthorized 
interposition  ? 

But  that  the  objectors  may  be  disarmed  of  every 
pretext,  it  shall  be  granted  for  a  moment  that  the 
convention  were  neither  authorized  by  their  com- 
mission, nor  justified  by  circumstances  in  proposing 
a  Constitution  for  their  country :  does  it  follow  that 
the  Constitution  ought,  for  that  reason  alone,  to  be 
rejected?  If,  according  to  the  noble  precept,  it  be 
lawful  to  accept  good  advice  even  from  an  enemy, 


The  Federalist  329 

shall  we  set  the  ignoble  example  of  refusing  such 
advice  even  when  it  is  offered  by  our  friends?  The 
prudent  inquiry,  in  all  cases,  ought  surely  to  be,  not 
so  much  from  whom  the  advice  comes,  as  whether  the 
advice  be  good. 

The  sum  of  what  has  been  here  advanced  and 
proved  is,  that  the  charge  against  the  convention  of 
exceeding  their  powers,  except  in  one  instance  little 
urged  by  the  objectors,  has  no  foundation  to  sup- 
port it;  that  if  they  had  exceeded  their  powers,  they 
were  not  only  warranted,  but  required,  as  the  con- 
fidential servants  of  their  country,  by  the  circum- 
stances in  which  they  were  placed,  to  exercise  the 
liberty  which  they  assumed ;  and  that  finally,  if  they 
had  violated  both  their  powers  and  their  obligations, 
in  proposing  a  Constitution,  this  ought  nevertheless 
to  be  embraced,  if  it  be  calculated  to  accomplish  the 
views  and  happiness  of  the  people  of  America.  How 
far  this  character  is  due  to  the  Constitution,  is  the 
subject  under  investigation. 

Publius. 


For  the  Independent  Journal 

THE  FEDERALIST.     No.  XLI 

(madison) 

To  the  People  of  the  State  of  New  York: 

The  Constitution  proposed  by  the  convention 
may  be  considered  under  two  general  points  of  view. 
The  first  relates  to  the  sum  or  quantity  of  power 
which  it  vests  in  the  government,  including  the  re- 
straints imposed  on  the  States.     The  second,  to  the 


330  Alexander  Hamilton 

particular  structure  of  the  government,  and  the  dis- 
tribution of  this  power  among  its  several  branches. 

Under  the  first  view  of  the  subject,  two  important 
questions  arise:  i.  Whether  any  part  of  the  powers 
transferred  to  the  general  government  be  unneces- 
sary or  improper?  2.  Whether  the  entire  mass  of 
them  be  dangerous  to  the  portion  of  jurisdiction  left 
in  the  several  States? 

Is  the  aggregate  power  of  the  general  government 
greater  than  ought  to  have  been  vested  in  it?  This 
is  the  first  question. 

It  cannot  have  escaped  those  who  have  attended 
with  candor  to  the  arguments  employed  against  the 
extensive  powers  of  the  government,  that  the  au- 
thors of  them  have  very  little  considered  how  far 
these  powers  were  necessary  means  of  attaining  a 
necessary  end.  They  have  chosen  rather  to  dwell 
on  the  inconveniences  which  must  be  unavoidably 
blended  with  all  political  advantages;  and  on  the 
possible  abuses  which  must  be  incident  to  every 
power  or  trust,  of  which  a  beneficial  use  can  be  made. 
This  method  of  handling  the  subject  cannot  impose 
on  the  good  sense  of  the  people  of  America.  It 
may  display  the  subtlety  of  the  writer;  it  may  open 
a  boundless  field  for  rhetoric  and  declamation;  it 
may  inflame  the  passions  of  the  unthinking,  and  may 
confirm  the  prejudices  of  the  misthinking:  but  cool 
and  candid  people  will  at  once  reflect,  that  the  purest 
of  human  blessings  must  have  a  portion  of  alloy  in 
them;  that  the  choice  must  always  be  made,  if  not 
of  the  lesser  evil,  at  least  of  the  greater,  not  the 
perfect,  good;   and  that  in  every  political  institu- 


The  Federalist  33 T 

tion,  a  power  to  advance  the  public  happiness  in- 
volves a  discretion  which  may  be  misapplied  and 
abused.  They  will  see,  therefore,  that  in  all  cases 
where  power  is  to  be  conferred,  the  point  first  to  be 
decided  is,  whether  such  a  power  be  necessary  to  the 
public  good ;  as  the  next  will  be,  in  case  of  an  affirma- 
tive decision,to  guard  as  effectually  as  possible  against 
a  perversion  of  the  power  to  the  public  detriment. 

That  we  may  form  a  correct  judgment  on  this  sub- 
ject, it  will  be  proper  to  review  the  several  powers 
conferred  on  the  government  of  the  Union ;  and  that 
this  may  be  the  more  conveniently  done  they  may 
be  reduced  into  different  classes  as  they  relate  to 
the  following  different  objects:  i.  Security  against 
foreign  danger;  2.  Regulation  of  the  intercourse  with 
foreign  nations;  3.  Maintenance  of  harmony  and 
proper  intercourse  among  the  States ;  4.  Certain  mis- 
cellaneous objects  of  general  utility;  5.  Restraint  of 
the  States  from  certain  injurious  acts;  6.  Provisions 
for  giving  due  efficacy  to  all  these  powers. 

The  powers  falling  within  the  first  class  are  those 
of  declaring  war  and  granting  letters  of  marque;  of 
providing  armies  and  fleets ;  of  regulating  and  calling 
forth  the  militia;   of  levying  and  borrowing  money. 

Security  against  foreign  danger  is  one  of  the  primi- 
tive objects  of  civil  society.  It  is  an  avowed  and 
essential  object  of  the  American  Union.  The  powers 
requisite  for  attaining  it  must  be  effectually  confided 
to  the  federal  councils. 

Is  the  power  of  declaring  war  necessary?  No  man 
will  answer  this  question  in  the  negative.  It  would 
be  superfluous,  therefore,  to  enter  into  a  proof  of  the 


332  Alexander  Hamilton 

affirmative.  The  existing  Confederation  establishes 
this  power  in  the  most  ample  form. 

Is  the  power  of  raising  armies  and  equipping  fleets 
necessary  ?  This  is  involved  in  the  foregoing  power. 
It  is  involved  in  the  power  of  self-defence. 

But  was  it  necessary  to  give  an  indefinite  power 
of  raising  troops,  as  well  as  providing  fleets;  and  of 
maintaining  both  in  peace,  as  well  as  in  war? 

The  answer  to  these  questions  has  been  too  far 
anticipated  in  another  place  to  admit  an  extensive 
discussion  of  them  in  this  place.  The  answer  indeed 
seems  to  be  so  obvious  and  conclusive  as  scarcely  to 
justify  such  a  discussion  in  any  place.  With  what 
color  of  propriety  could  the  force  necessary  for  de- 
fence be  limited  by  those  who  cannot  limit  the  force 
of  offence?  If  a  federal  Constitution  could  chain 
the  ambition  or  set  bounds  to  the  exertions  of  all 
other  nations,  then  indeed  might  it  prudently  chain 
the  discretion  of  its  own  government,  and  set  bounds 
to  the  exertions  for  its  own  safety. 

How  could  a  readiness  for  war  in  time  of  peace  be 
safely  prohibited,  unless  we  could  prohibit,  in  like 
manner,  the  preparations  and  establishments  of 
every  hostile  nation?  The  means  of  security  can 
only  be  regulated  by  the  means  and  the  danger  of 
attack.  They  will,  in  fact,  be  ever  determined  by 
these  rules,  and  by  no  others.  It  is  in  vain  to  oppose 
constitutional  barriers  to  the  impulse  of  self-preserva- 
tion. It  is  worse  than  in  vain;  because  it  plants 
in  the  Constitution  itself  necessary  usurpations  of 
power,  every  precedent  of  which  is  a  germ  of  un- 
necessary and  multiplied  repetitions.     If  one  nation 


The  Federalist  333 

maintains  constantly  a  disciplined  army,  ready  for 
the  service  of  ambition  or  revenge,  it  obliges  the  most 
pacific  nations  who  may  be  within  the  reach  of  its 
enterprises  to  take  corresponding  precautions.  The 
fifteenth  century  was  the  unhappy  epoch  of  military 
establishments  in  the  time  of  peace.  They  were  in- 
troduced by  Charles  VII.  of  France.  All  Europe  has 
followed,  or  been  forced  into,  the  example.  Had  the 
example  not  been  followed  by  other  nations,  all 
Europe  must  long  ago  have  worn  the  chains  of  a  uni- 
versal monarch.  Were  every  nation  except  France 
now  to  disband  its  peace  establishments,  the  same 
event  might  follow.  The  veteran  legions  of  Rome 
were  an  overmatch  for  the  undisciplined  valor  of  all 
other  nations,  and  rendered  her  the  mistress  of  the 
world. 

Not  the  less  true  is  it,  that  the  liberties  of  Rome 
proved  the  final  victim  to  her  military  triumphs ;  and 
that  the  liberties  of  Europe,  as  far  as  they  ever 
existed,  have,  with  few  exceptions,  been  the  price 
of  her  military  establishments.  A  standing  force, 
therefore,  is  a  dangerous,  at  the  same  time  that  it 
may  be  a  necessary,  provision.  On  the  smallest 
scale  it  has  its  inconveniences.  On  an  extensive 
scale  its  consequences  may  be  fatal.  On  any  scale 
it  is  an  object  of  laudable  circumspection  and  pre- 
caution. A  wise  nation  will  combine  all  these  con- 
siderations; and,  whilst  it  does  not  rashly  preclude 
itself  from  any  resource  which  may  become  essential 
to  its  safety,  will  exert  all  its  prudence  in  diminishing 
both  the  necessity  and  the  danger  of  resorting  to  one 
which  may  be  inauspicious  to  its  liberties. 


334  Alexander  Hamilton 

The  clearest  marks  of  this  prudence  are  stamped 
on  the  proposed  Constitution.  The  Union  itself, 
which  it  cements  and  secures,  destroys  every  pretext 
for  a  military  establishment  which  could  be  danger- 
ous. America  united,  with  a  handful  of  troops,  or 
without  a  single  soldier,  exhibits  a  more  forbidding 
posture  to  foreign  ambition  than  America  disunited, 
with  a  hundred  thousand  veterans  ready  for  combat. 
It  was  remarked,  on  a  former  occasion,  that  the  want 
of  this  pretext  had  saved  the  liberties  of  one  nation 
in  Europe.  Being  rendered  byrher  insular  situation 
and  her  maritime  resources  impregnable  to  the  ar- 
mies of  her  neighbors,  the  rulers  of  Great  Britain 
have  never  been  able,  by  real  or  artificial  dangers,  to 
cheat  the  public  into  an  extensive  peace  establish- 
ment. The  distance  of  the  United  States  from  the 
powerful  nations  of  the  world  gives  them  the  same 
happy  security.  A  dangerous  establishment  can 
never  be  necessary  or  plausible,  so  long  as  they  con- 
tinue a  united  people.  But  let  it  never,  for  a  mo- 
ment, be  forgotten,  that  they  are  indebted  for  this 
advantage  to  the  Union  alone.  The  moment  of  its 
dissolution  will  be  the  date  of  a  new  order  of  things. 
The  fears  of  the  weaker,  or  the  ambition  of  the 
stronger  States,  or  Confederacies,  will  set  the  same 
example  in  the  New,  as  Charles  VII.  did  in  the  Old 
World.  The  example  will  be  followed  here  from  the 
same  motives  which  produced  universal  imitation 
there.  Instead  of  deriving  from  our  situation  the 
precious  advantage  which  Great  Britain  has  derived 
from  hers,  the  face  of  America  will  be  but  a  copy 
of  that  of  the  continent  of  Europe.     It  will  present 


The  Federalist  335 

liberty  everywhere  crushed  between  standing  ar- 
mies and  perpetual  taxes.  The  fortunes  of  dis- 
united America  will  be  even  more  disastrous  than 
those  of  Europe.  The  sources  of  evil  in  the  latter 
are  confined  to  her  own  limits.  No  superior  powers 
of  another  quarter  of  the  globe  intrigue  among  her 
rival  nations,  inflame  their  mutual  animosities,  and 
render  them  the  instruments  of  foreign  ambition, 
jealousy,  and  revenge.  In  America  the  miseries 
springing  from  her  internal  jealousies,  contentions, 
and  wars,  would  form  a  part  only  of  her  lot.  A 
plentiful  addition  of  evils  would  have  their  source 
in  that  relation  in  which  Europe  stands  to  this 
quarter  of  the  earth,  and  which  no  other  quarter  of 
the  earth  bears  to  Europe. 

This  picture  of  the  consequences  of  disunion  can- 
not be  too  highly  colored,  or  too  often  exhibited. 
Every  man  who  loves  peace,  every  man  who  loves 
his  country,  every  man  who  loves  liberty,  ought  to 
have  it  ever  before  his  eyes,  that  he  may  cherish  in 
his  heart  a  due  attachment  to  the  Union  of  America, 
and  be  able  to  set  a  due  value  on  the  means  of  pre- 
serving it. 

Next  to  the  effectual  establishment  of  the  Union, 
the  best  possible  precaution  against  danger  from 
standing  armies  is  a  limitation  of  the  term  for  which 
revenue  may  be  appropriated  to  their  support.  This 
precaution  the  Constitution  has  piudently  added.  I 
will  not  repeat  here  the  observations  which  I  flat- 
ter myself  have  placed  this  subject  in  a  just  and 
satisfactory  light.  But  it  may  not  be  improper  to 
take  notice  of  an  argument  against  this  part  of  the 


33^  Alexander  Hamilton 

Constitution,  which  has  been  drawn  from  the  policy 
and  practice  of  Great  Britain.  It  is  said  that  the 
continuance  of  an  army  in  that  kingdom  requires  an 
annual  vote  of  the  legislature ;  whereas  the  American 
Constitution  has  lengthened  this  critical  period  to 
two  years.  This  is  the  form  in  which  the  comparison 
is  usually  stated  to  the  public:  but  is  it  a  just  form? 
Is  it  a  fair  comparison?  Does  the  British  Constitu- 
tion restrain  the  parliamentary  discretion  to  one 
year?  Does  the  American  impose  on  the  Congress 
appropriations  for  two  years?  On  the  contrary,  it 
cannot  be  unknown  to  the  authors  of  the  fallacy 
themselves,  that  the  British  Constitution  fixes  no 
limit  whatever  to  the  discretion  of  the  legislature, 
and  that  the  American  ties  down  the  legislature  to 
two  years,  as  the  longest  admissible  term. 

Had  the  argument  from  the  British  example  been 
truly  stated,  it  would  have  stood  thus :  The  term  for 
which  supplies  may  be  appropriated  to  the  army 
establishment,  though  unlimited  by  the  British  Con- 
stitution, has  nevertheless,  in  practice,  been  limited 
by  parliamentary  discretion  to  a  single  year.  Now, 
if  in  Great  Britain,  where  the  House  of  Commons  is 
elected  for  seven  years ;  where  so  great  a  proportion 
of  the  members  are  elected  by  so  small  a  proportion 
of  the  people;  where  the  electors  are  so  corrupted 
by  the  representatives,  and  the  representatives  so 
corrupted  by  the  Crown,  the  representative  body 
can  possess  a  power  to  make  appropriations  to  the 
army  for  an  indefinite  term,  without  desiring,  or 
without  daring,  to  extend  the  term  beyond  a  single 
year,  ought  not  suspicion  herself  to  blush,  in  pre- 


The  Federalist  337 

tending  that  the  representatives  of  the  United  States, 
elected  freely  by  the  whole  body  of  the  people, 
every  second  year,  cannot  be  safely  intrusted  with 
the  discretion  over  such  appropriations,  expressly 
limited  to  the  short  period  of  two  years? 

A  bad  cause  seldom  fails  to  betray  itself.  Of  this 
truth,  the  management  of  the  opposition  to  the 
federal  government  is  an  unvaried  exemplification. 
But  among  all  the  blunders  which  have  been  com- 
mitted, none  is  more  striking  than  the  attempt  to 
enlist  on  that  side  the  prudent  jealousy  entertained 
by  the  people,  of  standing  armies.  The  attempt  has 
awakened  fully  the  public  attention  to  that  import- 
ant subject;  and  has  led  to  investigations  which 
must  terminate  in  a  thorough  and  universal  convic- 
tion, not  only  that  the  Constitution  has  provided 
the  most  effectual  guards  against  danger  from  that 
quarter,  but  that  nothing  short  of  a  Constitution 
fully  adequate  to  the  national  defence  and  the  pre- 
servation of  the  Union,  can  save  America  from  as 
many  standing  armies  as  it  may  be  split  into  States 
or  Confederacies,  and  from  such  a  progressive  aug- 
mentation of  these  establishments  in  each,  as  will 
render  them  as  burdensome  to  the  properties  and 
ominous  to  the  liberties  of  the  people,  as  any  estab- 
lishment that  can  become  necessary,  under  a  united 
and  efficient  government,  must  be  tolerable  to  the 
former  and  safe  to  the  latter. 

The  palpable  necessity  of  the  power  to  provide  and 
maintain  a  navy  has  protected  that  part  of  the  Con- 
stitution against  a  spirit  of  censure,  which  has  spared 
few   other  parts.     It   must,   indeed,   be  numbered 

VOL.  XI.— 22. 


338  Alexander  Hamilton 

among  the  greatest  blessings  of  America,  that  as  her 
Union  will  be  the  only  source  of  her  maritime  strength, 
so  this  will  be  a  principal  source  of  her  security 
against  danger  from  abroad.  In  this  respect  our 
situation  bears  another  likeness  to  the  insular  advan- 
tage of  Great  Britain.  The  batteries  most  capable 
of  repelling  foreign  enterprises  on  our  safety,  are 
happily  such  as  can  never  be  turned  by  a  perfidious 
government  against  our  liberties. 

The  inhabitants  of  the  Atlantic  frontier  are  all  of 
them  deeply  interested  in  this  provision  for  naval 
protection,  and  if  they  have  hitherto  been  suffered 
to  sleep  quietly  in  their  beds;  if  their  property  has 
remained  safe  against  the  predatory  spirit  of  licen- 
tious adventurers ;  if  their  maritime  towns  have  not 
yet  been  compelled  to  ransom  themselves  from  the 
terrors  of  a  conflagration,  by  yielding  to  the  exactions 
of  daring  and  sudden  invaders,  these  instances  of 
good  fortune  are  not  to  be  ascribed  to  the  capacity 
of  the  existing  government  for  the  protection  of 
those  from  whom  it  claims  allegiance,  but  to  causes 
that  are  fugitive  and  fallacious.  If  we  except  per- 
haps Virginia  and  Maryland,  which  are  peculiarly 
vulnerable  on  their  eastern  frontiers,  no  part  of 
the  Union  ought  to  feel  more  anxiety  on  this  subject 
than  New  York.  Her  sea-coast  is  extensive.  A  very 
important  district  of  the  State  is  an  island.  The 
State  itself  is  penetrated  by  a  large  navigable  river 
for  more  than  fifty  leagues.  The  great  emporium 
of  its  commerce,  the  great  reservoir  of  its  wealth,  lies 
every  moment  at  the  mercy  of  events,  and  may 
almost  be  regarded   as  a  hostage  for  ignominious 


The  Federalist  339 

compliances  with  the  dictates  of  a  foreign  enemy, 
or  even  with  the  rapacious  demands  of  pirates  and 
barbarians.  Should  a  war  be  the  result  of  the  pre- 
carious situation  of  European  affairs,  and  all  the  un- 
ruly passions  attending  it  be  let  loose  on  the  ocean, 
our  escape  from  insults  and  depredations,  not  only 
on  that  element,  but  every  part  of  the  other  border- 
ing on  it,  will  be  truly  miraculous.  In  the  present 
condition  of  America,  the  States  more  immediately 
exposed  to  these  calamities  have  nothing  to  hope 
from  the  phantom  of  a  general  government  which 
now  exists;  and  if  their  single  resources  were  equal 
to  the  task  of  fortifying  themselves  against  the 
danger,  the  object  to  be  protected  would  be  almost 
consumed  by  the  means  of  protecting  them. 

The  power  of  regulating  and  calling  forth  the 
militia  has  been  already  sufficiently  vindicated  and 
explained. 

The  power  of  levying  and  borrowing  money,  being 
the  sinew  of  that  which  is  to  be  exerted  in  the  na- 
tional defence,  is  properly  thrown  into  the  same 
class  with  it.  This  power,  also,  has  been  examined 
already  with  much  attention,  and  has,  I  trust,  been 
clearly  shown  to  be  necessary,  both  in  the  extent  and 
form  given  to  it  by  the  Constitution.  I  will  address 
one  additional  reflection  only  to  those  who  contend 
that  the  power  ought  to  have  been  restrained  to  ex- 
ternal taxation — by  which  they  mean,  taxes  on 
articles  imported  from  other  countries.  It  cannot 
be  doubted  that  this  will  always  be  a  valuable  source 
of  revenue;  that  for  a  considerable  time  it  must  be 
a  principal  source;    that  at  this  moment  it  is  an 


34°  Alexander  Hamilton 

essential  one.  But  we  may  form  very  mistaken 
ideas  on  this  subject,  if  we  do  not  call  to  mind  in 
our  calculations,  that  the  extent  of  revenue  drawn 
from  foreign  commerce  must  vary  with  the  varia- 
tions, both  in  the  extent  and  the  kind  of  imports; 
and  that  these  variations  do  not  correspond  with  the 
progress  of  population,  which  must  be  the  general 
measure  of  the  public  wants.  As  long  as  agriculture 
continues  the  sole  field  of  labor,  the  importation  of 
manufactures  must  increase  as  the  consumers  mul- 
tiply. As  soon  as  domestic  manufactures  are  begun 
by  the  hands  not  called  for  by  agriculture,  the  im- 
ported manufactures  will  decrease  as  the  numbers 
of  people  increase.  In  a  more  remote  stage,  the 
imports  may  consist  in  a  considerable  part  of  raw 
materials,  which  will  be  wrought  into  articles  for 
exportation,  and  will,  therefore,  require  rather  the 
encouragement  of  bounties,  than  to  be  loaded  with 
discouraging  duties.  A  system  of  government, 
meant  for  duration,  ought  to  contemplate  these 
revolutions,  and  be  able  to  accommodate  itself  to 
them. 

Some,  who  have  not  denied  the  necessity  of  the 
power  of  taxation,  have  grounded  a  very  fierce  at- 
tack against  the  Constitution,  on  the  language  in 
which  it  is  defined.  It  has  been  urged  and  echoed, 
that  the  power  "  to  lay  and  collect  taxes,  duties,  im- 
posts, and  excises,  to  pay  the  debts,  and  provide  for 
the  common  defence  and  general  welfare  of  the 
United  States,"  amounts  to  an  unlimited  commis- 
sion to  exercise  every  power  which  may  be  alleged 
to  be  necessary  for  the  common  defence  or  general 


The  Federalist  341 

welfare.  No  stronger  proof  could  be  given  of  the 
distress  under  which  these  writers  labor  for  objec- 
tions, than  their  stooping  to  such  a  misconstruction. 

Had  no  other  enumeration  or  definition  of  the 
powers  of  the  Congress  been  found  in  the  Constitu- 
tion, than  the  general  expressions  just  cited,  the  au- 
thors of  the  objection  might  have  had  some  color  for 
it;  though  it  would  have  been  difficult  to  find  a 
reason  for  so  awkward  a  form  of  describing  an  au- 
thority to  legislate  in  all  possible  cases.  A  power  to 
destroy  the  freedom  of  the  press,  the  trial  by  jury, 
or  even  to  regulate  the  course  of  descents,  or  the 
forms  of  conveyances,  must  be  very  singularly  ex- 
pressed by  the  terms  "  to  raise  money  for  the  general 
welfare." 

But  what  color  can  the  objection  have,  when  a 
specification  of  the  objects  alluded  to  by  these 
general  terms  immediately  follows,  and  is  not  even 
separated  by  a  longer  pause  than  a  semicolon?  If 
the  different  parts  of  the  same  instrument  ought  to 
be  so  expounded,  as  to  give  meaning  to  every  part 
which  will  bear  it,  shall  one  part  of  the  same  sen- 
tence be  excluded  altogether  from  a  share  in  the 
meaning ;  and  shall  the  more  doubtful  and  indefinite 
terms  be  retained  in  their  full  extent,  and  the  clear 
and  precise  expressions  be  denied  any  signification 
whatsoever  ?  For  what  purpose  could  the  enumera- 
tion of  particular  powers  be  inserted,  if  these  and  all 
others  were  meant  to  be  included  in  the  preceding 
general  power?  Nothing  is  more  natural  nor  com- 
mon than  first  to  use  a  general  phrase,  and  then  to 
explain  and  qualify  it  by  a  recital  of  particulars. 


342  Alexander  Hamilton 

But  the  idea  of  an  enumeration  of  particulars  which 
neither  explain  nor  qualify  the  general  meaning,  and 
can  have  no  other  effect  than  to  confound  and  mis- 
lead, is  an  absurdity,  which,  as  we  are  reduced  to 
the  dilemma  of  charging  either  on  the  authors  of  the 
objection  or  on  the  authors  of  the  Constitution,  we 
must  take  the  liberty  of  supposing,  had  not  its  origin 
with  the  latter. 

The  objection  here  is  the  more  extraordinary,  as 
it  appears  that  the  language  used  by  the  convention 
is  a  copy  from  the  articles  of  Confederation.  The 
objects  of  the  Union  among  the  States,  as  described 
in  article  third,  are,  "  their  common  defence,  security 
of  their  liberties,  and  mutual  and  general  welfare." 
The  terms  of  article  eighth  are  still  more  identical: 
"  All  charges  of  war  and  all  other  expenses  that  shall 
be  incurred  for  the  common  defence  or  general  wel- 
fare, and  allowed  by  the  United  States  in  Congress, 
shall  be  defrayed  out  of  a  common  treasury, "  etc.  A 
similar  language  again  occurs  in  article  ninth.  Con- 
strue either  of  these  articles  by  the  rules  which  would 
justify  the  construction  put  on  the  new  Constitution, 
and  they  vest  in  the  existing  Congress  a  power  to 
legislate  in  all  cases  whatsoever.  But  what  would 
have  been  thought  of  that  assembly,  if,  attaching 
themselves  to  these  general  expressions,  and  dis- 
regarding the  specifications  which  ascertain  and 
limit  their  import,  they  had  exercised  an  unlimi- 
ted power  of  providing  for  the  common  defence 
and  general  welfare?  I  appeal  to  the  objectors 
themselves,  whether  they  would  in  that  case  have 
employed  the  same  reasoning  in  justification  of  Con- 


The  Federalist  343 

gress  as  they  now  make  use  of  against  the  conven- 
tion. How  difficult  it  is  for  error  to  escape  its  own 
condemnation ! 

PUBLIUS. 


From  the  New  York  Packet,  Tuesday,  January  22,  1788 

THE  FEDERALIST.     No.  XLII 

(madison) 

To  the  People  of  the  State  of  New  York: 

The  second  class  of  powers,  lodged  in  the  general 
government,  consist  of  those  which  regulate  the 
intercourse  with  foreign  nations,  to  wit:  to  make 
treaties;  to  send  and  receive  ambassadors,  other 
public  ministers,  and  consuls;  to  define  and  punish 
piracies  and  felonies  committed  on  the  high  seas,  and 
offences  against  the  law  of  nations;  to  regulate 
foreign  commerce,  including  a  power  to  prohibit, 
after  the  year  1808,  the  importation  of  slaves,  and 
to  lay  an  intermediate  duty  of  ten  dollars  per  head, 
as  a  discouragement  to  such  importations. 

This  class  of  powers  forms  an  obvious  and  essen- 
tial branch  of  the  federal  administration.  If  we  are 
to  be  one  nation  in  any  respect,  it  clearly  ought  to 
be  in  respect  to  other  nations. 

The  powers  to  make  treaties  and  to  send  and  re- 
ceive ambassadors,  speak  their  own  propriety.  Both 
of  them  are  comprised  in  the  articles  of  Confedera- 
tion, with  this  difference  only,  that  the  former  is 
disembarrassed,  by  the  plan  of  the  convention,  of 
an  exception,  under  which  treaties  might  be  sub- 
stantially frustrated  by  regulations  of  the  States; 


344  Alexander  Hamilton 

and  that  a  power  of  appointing  and  receiving  "  other 
public  ministers  and  consuls,"  is  expressly  and  very 
properly  added  to  the  former  provision  concern- 
ing ambassadors.  The  term  ambassador,  if  taken 
strictly,  as  seems  to  be  required  by  the  second  of  the 
articles  of  Confederation,  comprehends  the  highest 
grade  only  of  public  ministers,  and  excludes  the 
grades  which  the  United  States  will  be  most  likely 
to  prefer,  where  foreign  embassies  may  be  necessary. 
And  under  no  latitude  of  construction  will  the  term 
comprehend  consuls.  Yet  it  has  been  found  ex- 
pedient, and  has  been  the  practice  of  Congress,  to 
employ  the  inferior  grades  of  public  ministers,  and 
to  send  and  receive  consuls. 

It  is  true,  that  where  treaties  of  commerce  stipu- 
late for  the  mutual  appointment  of  consuls,  whose 
functions  are  connected  with  commerce,  the  admis- 
sion of  foreign  consuls  may  fall  within  the  power 
of  making  commercial  treaties;  and  that  where  no 
such  treaties  exist,  the  mission  of  American  consuls 
into  foreign  countries  may  perhaps  be  covered  under 
the  authority,  given  by  the  ninth  article  of  the  Con- 
federation, to  appoint  all  such  civil  officers  as  may 
be  necessary  for  managing  the  general  affairs  of  the 
United  States.  But  the  admission  of  consuls  into  the 
United  States,  where  no  previous  treaty  has  stipu- 
lated it,  seems  to  have  been  nowhere  provided  for. 
A  supply  of  the  omission  is  one  of  the  lesser  instances 
in  which  the  convention  have  improved  on  the  model 
before  them.  But  the  most  minute  provisions  be- 
come important  when  they  tend  to  obviate  the  ne- 
cessity or  the  pretext  for  gradual  and  unobserved 


The  Federalist  345 

usurpations  of  power.  A  list  of  the  cases  in  which 
Congress  have  been  betrayed,  or  forced  by  the  de- 
fects of  the  Confederation,  into  violations  of  their 
chartered  authorities,  would  not  a  little  surprise 
those  who  have  paid  no  attention  to  the  subject; 
and  would  be  no  inconsiderable  argument  in  favor 
of  the  new  Constitution,  which  seems  to  have  pro- 
vided no  less  studiously  for  the  lesser,  than  the  more 
obvious  and  striking  defects  of  the  old. 

The  power  to  define  and  punish  piracies  and 
felonies  committed  on  the  high  seas,  and  offences 
against  the  law  of  nations,  belongs  with  equal  pro- 
priety to  the  general  government,  and  is  a  still 
greater  improvement  on  the  articles  of  Confedera- 
tion. These  articles  contain  no  provision  for  the 
case  of  offences  against  the  law  of  nations ;  and  con- 
sequently leave  it  in  the  power  of  any  indiscreet 
member  to  embroil  the  Confederacy  with  foreign 
nations.  The  provision  of  the  federal  articles  on  the 
subject  of  piracies  and  felonies  extends  no  further 
than  to  the  establishment  of  courts  for  the  trial 
of  these  offences.  The  definition  of  piracies  might, 
perhaps,  without  inconveniency,  be  left  to  the 
law  of  nations;  though  a  legislative  definition  of 
them  is  found  in  most  municipal  codes.  A  defini- 
tion of  felonies  on  the  high  seas  is  evidently  requisite. 
Felony  is  a  term  of  loose  signification,  even  in  the 
common  law  of  England;  and  of  various  import  in 
the  statute  law  of  that  kingdom.  But  neither  the 
common  nor  the  statute  law  of  that,  or  of  any  other 
nation,  ought  to  be  a  standard  for  the  proceedings 
of  this,  unless  previously  made  its  own  by  legislative 


346  Alexander  Hamilton 

adoption.  The  meaning  of  the  term,  as  defined  in 
the  codes  of  the  several  States,  would  be  as  imprac- 
ticable as  the  former  would  be  a  dishonorable  and 
illegitimate  guide.  It  is  not  precisely  the  same  in 
any  two  of  the  States;  and  varies  in  each  with 
every  revision  of  its  criminal  laws.  For  the  sake 
of  certainty  and  uniformity,  therefore,  the  power  of 
defining  felonies  in  this  case  was  in  every  respect 
necessary  and  proper. 

The  regulation  of  foreign  commerce,  having  fallen 
within  several  views  which  have  been  taken  of  this 
subject,  has  been  too  fully  discussed  to  need  addi- 
tional proofs  here  of  its  being  properly  submitted  to 
the  federal  administration. 

It  were  doubtless  to  be  wished,  that  the  power  of 
prohibiting  the  importation  of  slaves  had  not  been 
postponed  until  the  year  1808,  or  rather  that  it  had 
been  suffered  to  have  immediate  operation.  But  it 
is  not  difficult  to  account,  either  for  this  restriction 
on  the  general  government,  or  for  the  manner  in 
which  the  whole  clause  is  expressed.  It  ought  to  be 
considered  as  a  great  point  gained  in  favor  of  hu- 
manity, that  a  period  of  twenty  years  may  terminate 
forever,  within  these  States,  a  traffic  which  has  so 
long  and  so  loudly  upbraided  the  barbarism  of 
modern  policy;  that  within  that  period,  it  will  re- 
ceive a  considerable  discouragement  from  the  federal 
government,  and  may  be  totally  abolished,  by  a 
concurrence  of  the  few  States  which  continue  the 
unnatural  traffic,  in  the  prohibitory  example  which 
has  been  given  by  so  great  a  majority  of  the  Union. 
Happy  would  it  be  for  the  unfortunate  Africans,  if 


The  Federalist  347 

an  equal  prospect  lay  before  them  of  being  redeemed 
from  the  oppressions  of  their  European  brethren! 

Attempts  have  been  made  to  pervert  this  clause 
into  an  objection  against  the  Constitution,  by  re- 
presenting it  on  one  side  as  a  criminal  toleration  of 
an  illicit  practice,  and  on  another  as  calculated  to 
prevent  voluntary  and  beneficial  emigrations  from 
Europe  to  America.  I  mention  these  misconstruc- 
tions, not  with  a  view  to  give  them  an  answer,  for 
they  deserve  none,  but  as  specimens  of  the  manner 
and  spirit  in  which  some  have  thought  fit  to  conduct 
their  opposition  to  the  proposed  government. 

The  powers  included  in  the  third  class  are  those 
which  provide  for  the  harmony  and  proper  inter- 
course among  the  States. 

Under  this  head  might  be  included  the  particular 
restraints  imposed  on  the  authority  of  the  States, 
and  certain  powers  of  the  judicial  department;  but 
the  former  are  reserved  for  a  distinct  class,  and  the 
latter  will  be  particularly  examined  when  we  arrive 
at  the  structure  and  organization  of  the  government. 
I  shall  confine  myself  to  a  cursory  review  of  the 
remaining  powers  comprehended  under  this  third 
description,  to  wit:  to  regulate  commerce  among 
the  several  States  and  the  Indian  tribes;  to  coin 
money,  regulate  the  value  thereof,  and  of  foreign 
coin;  to  provide  for  the  punishment  of  counterfeit- 
ing the  current  coin  and  securities  of  the  United 
States ;  to  fix  the  standard  of  weights  and  measures ; 
to  establish  a  uniform  rule  of  naturalization,  and 
uniform  laws  of  bankruptcy;  to  prescribe  the  man- 
ner in  which  the  public  acts,  records,  and  judicial 


34$  Alexander  Hamilton 

proceedings  of  each  State  shall  be  proved,  and  the 
effect  they  shall  have  in  other  States;  and  to  es- 
tablish post-offices  and  post-roads. 

The  defect  of  power  in  the  existing  Confederacy 
to  regulate  the  commerce  between  its  several  mem- 
bers, is  in  the  number  of  those  which  have  been 
clearly  pointed  out  by  experience.  To  the  proofs 
and  remarks  which  former  papers  have  brought  into 
view  on  this  subject,  it  may  be  added  that  without 
this  supplemental  provision,  the  great  and  essential 
power  of  regulating  foreign  commerce  would  have 
been  incomplete  and  ineffectual.  A  very  material 
object  of  this  power  was  the  relief  of  the  States 
which  import  and  export  through  other  States,  from 
the  improper  contributions  levied  on  them  by  the 
latter.  Were  these  at  liberty  to  regulate  the  trade 
between  State  and  State,  it  must  be  foreseen  that 
ways  would  be  found  out  to  load  the  articles  of  im- 
port and  export,  during  the  passage  through  their 
jurisdiction,  with  duties  which  would  fall  on  the 
makers  of  the  latter  and  the  consumers  of  the 
former.  We  may  be  assured  by  past  experience, 
that  such  a  practice  would  be  introduced  by  future 
contrivances;  and  both  by  that  and  a  common 
knowledge  of  human  affairs,  that  it  would  nourish 
unceasing  animosities,  and  not  improbably  termi- 
nate in  serious  interruptions  of  the  public  tranquil- 
lity. To  those  who  do  not  view  the  question  through 
the  medium  of  passion  or  of  interest,  the  desire  of 
the  commercial  States  to  collect,  in  any  form,  an 
indirect  revenue  from  their  uncommercial  neighbors, 
must  appear  not  less  impolitic  than  it  is  unfair; 


The  Federalist  349 

since  it  would  stimulate  the  injured  party,  by  re- 
sentment as  well  as  interest,  to  resort  to  less  con- 
venient channels  for  their  foreign  trade.  But  the 
mild  voice  of  reason,  pleading  the  cause  of  an  en- 
larged and  permanent  interest,  is  but  too  often 
drowned,  before  public  bodies  as  well  as  individuals, 
by  the  clamors  of  an  impatient  avidity  for  imme- 
diate and  immoderate  gain. 

The  necessity  of  a  superintending  authority  over 
the  reciprocal  trade  of  confederated  States,  has  been 
illustrated  by  other  examples  as  well  as  our  own.  In 
Switzerland,  where  the  Union  is  so  very  slight,  each 
canton  is  obliged  to  allow  to  merchandises  a  passage 
through  its  jurisdiction  into  other  cantons,  without 
an  augmentation  of  the  tolls.  In  Germany  it  is  a 
law  of  the  empire,  that  the  princes  and  states  shall 
not  lay  tolls  or  customs  on  bridges,  rivers,  or  pas- 
sages, without  the  consent  of  the  emperor  and  the 
diet ;  though  it  appears  from  a  quotation  in  an  ante- 
cedent paper,  that  the  practice  in  this,  as  in  many 
other  instances  in  that  confederacy,  has  not  followed 
the  law,  and  has  produced  there  the  mischiefs  which 
have  been  foreseen  here.  Among  the  restraints  im- 
posed by  the  Union  of  the  Netherlands  on  its  mem- 
bers, one  is,  that  they  shall  not  establish  imposts 
disadvantageous  to  their  neighbors,  without  the 
general  permission. 

The  regulation  of  commerce  with  the  Indian  tribes 
is  very  properly  unfettered  from  two  limitations  in 
the  articles  of  Confederation,  which  render  the  pro- 
vision obscure  and  contradictory.  The  power  is 
there  restrained  to  Indians,  not  members  of  any  of 


35°  Alexander  Hamilton 

the  States,  and  is  not  to  violate  or  infringe  the  legis- 
lative right  of  any  State  within  its  own  limits.  What 
description  of  Indians  are  to  be  deemed  members  of 
a  State,  is  not  yet  settled,  and  has  been  a  question 
of  frequent  perplexity  and  contention  in  the  federal 
councils.  And  how  the  trade  with  Indians,  though 
not  members  of  a  State,  yet  residing  within  its 
legislative  jurisdiction,  can  be  regulated  by  an  ex- 
ternal authority,  without  so  far  intruding  on  the 
internal  rights  of  legislation,  is  absolutely  incom- 
prehensible. This  is  not  the  only  case  in  which  the 
articles  of  Confederation  have  inconsiderately  en- 
deavored to  accomplish  impossibilities;  to  reconcile 
a  partial  sovereignty  in  the  Union,  with  complete 
sovereignty  in  the  States ;  to  subvert  a  mathematical 
axiom,  by  taking  away  a  part,  and  letting  the  whole 
remain. 

All  that  need  be  remarked  on  the  power  to  coin 
money,  regulate  the  value  thereof,  and  of  foreign 
coin,  is,  that  by  providing  for  this  last  case,  the  Con- 
stitution has  supplied  a  material  omission  in  the 
articles  of  Confederation.  The  authority  of  the 
existing  Congress  is  restrained  to  the  regulation  of 
coin  struck  by  their  own  authority,  or  that  of  the 
respective  States.  It  must  be  seen  at  once  that  the 
proposed  uniformity  in  the  value  of  the  current  coin 
might  be  destroyed  by  subjecting  that  of  foreign  coin 
to  the  different  regulations  of  the  different  States. 

The  punishment  of  counterfeiting  the  public  se- 
curities, as  well  as  the  current  coin,  is  submitted  of 
course  to  that  authority  which  is  to  secure  the  value 
of  both. 


The  Federalist  35 1 

The  regulation  of  weights  and  measures  is  trans- 
ferred from  the  articles  of  Confederation,  and  is 
founded  on  like  considerations  with  the  preceding 
power  of  regulating  coin. 

The  dissimilarity  in  the  rules  of  naturalization  has 
long  been  remarked  as  a  fault  in  our  system,  and  as 
laying  a  foundation  for  intricate  and  delicate  ques- 
tions. In  the  fourth  article  of  the  Confederation,  it 
is  declared  "  that  the  free  inhabitants  of  each  of  these 
States,  paupers,  vagabonds,  and  fugitives  from  jus- 
tice excepted,  shall  be  entitled  to  all  privileges  and 
immunities  of  free  citizens  in  the  several  States ;  and 
the  people  of  each  State  shall,  in  every  other,  enjoy 
all  the  privileges  of  trade  and  commerce, "  etc.  There 
is  a  confusion  of  language  here,  which  is  remarkable. 
Why  the  terms  free  inhabitants  are  used  in  one  part 
of  the  article,  free  citizens  in  another,  and  people  in 
another;  or  what  was  meant  by  superadding  to  "  all 
privileges  and  immunities  of  free  citizens,"  "all  the 
privileges  of  trade  and  commerce,,,  cannot  easily  be 
determined.  It  seems  to  be  a  construction  scarcely 
avoidable,  however,  that  those  who  come  under  the 
denomination  of  free  inhabitants  of  a  State,  although 
not  citizens  of  such  State,  are  entitled,  in  every  other 
State,  to  all  the  privileges  of  free  citizens  of  the 
latter;  that  is,  to  greater  privileges  than  they  may 
be  entitled  to  in  their  own  State:  so  that  it  may  be 
in  the  power  of  a  particular  State,  or  rather  every 
State  is  laid  under  a  necessity,  not  only  to  confer  the 
rights  of  citizenship  in  other  States  upon  any  whom 
it  may  admit  to  such  rights  within  itself,  but  upon 
any  whom  it  may  allow  to  become  inhabitants  within 


35 2  Alexander  Hamilton 

its  jurisdiction.  But  were  an  exposition  of  the  term 
" inhabitants' '  to  be  admitted  which  would  confine 
the  stipulated  privileges  to  citizens  alone,  the  diffi- 
culty is  diminished  only,  not  removed.  The  very 
improper  power  would  still  be  retained  by  each  State, 
of  naturalizing  aliens  in  every  other  State.  In  one 
State,  residence  for  a  short  term  confirms  all  the 
rights  of  citizenship:  in  another,  qualifications  of 
greater  importance  are  required.  An  alien,  therefore, 
legally  incapacitated  for  certain  rights  in  the  latter, 
may,  by  previous  residence  only  in  the  former,  elude 
his  incapacity;  and  thus  the  law  of  one  State  be 
preposterously  rendered  paramount  to  the  law  of 
another,  within  the  jurisdiction  of  the  other.  We 
owe  it  to  mere  casualty,  that  very  serious  embarrass- 
ments on  this  subject  have  been  hitherto  escaped. 
By  the  laws  of  several  States,  certain  descriptions 
of  aliens,  who  had  rendered  themselves  obnoxious, 
were  laid  under  interdicts  inconsistent  not  only  with 
the  rights  of  citizenship  but  with  the  privilege  of 
residence.  What  would  have  been  the  consequence, 
if  such  persons,  by  residence  or  otherwise,  had  ac- 
quired the  character  of  citizens  under  the  laws  of 
another  State,  and  then  asserted  their  rights  as  such, 
both  to  residence  and  citizenship,  within  the  State 
proscribing  them  ?  Whatever  the  legal  consequences 
might  have  been,  other  consequences  would  prob- 
ably have  resulted,  of  too  serious  a  nature  not  to 
be  provided  against.  The  new  Constitution  has 
accordingly,  with  great  propriety,  made  provision 
against  them,  and  all  others  proceeding  from  the 
defect  of  the  Confederation  on  this  head,  by  author- 


The  Federalist  353 

izing  the  general  government  to  establish  a  uniform 
rule  of  naturalization  throughout  the  United  States. 

The  power  of  establishing  uniform  laws  of  bank- 
ruptcy is  so  intimately  connected  with  the  regula- 
tion of  commerce,  and  will  prevent  so  many  frauds 
where  the  parties  or  their  property  may  lie  or  be  re- 
moved into  different  States,  that  the  expediency  of 
it  seems  not  likely  to  be  drawn  into  question. 

The  power  of  prescribing  by  general  laws,  the  man- 
ner in  which  the  public  acts,  records,  and  judicial 
proceedings  of  each  State  shall  be  proved,  and  the 
effect  they  shall  have  in  other  States,  is  an  evident 
and  valuable  improvement  on  the  clause  relating  to 
this  subject  in  the  articles  of  Confederation.  The 
meaning  of  the  latter  is  extremely  indeterminate, 
and  can  be  of  little  importance  under  any  inter- 
pretation which  it  will  bear.  The  power  here  es- 
tablished may  be  rendered  a  very  convenient 
instrument  of  justice,  and  be  particularly  beneficial 
on  the  borders  of  contiguous  States,  where  the  effects 
liable  to  justice  may  be  suddenly  and  secretly  trans- 
lated, in  any  stage  of  the  process,  within  a  foreign 
jurisdiction. 

The  power  of  establishing  post-roads  must,  in 
every  view,  be  a  harmless  power,  and  may,  perhaps, 
by  judicious  management,  become  productive  of 
great  public  conveniency.  Nothing  which  tends  to 
facilitate  the  intercourse  between  the  States  can  be 
deemed  unworthy  of  the  public  care. 

PUBLIUS. 

VOL.  «.— S3. 


354  Alexander  Hamilton 

For  the  Independent  Journal 
THE  FEDERALIST.     No.  XLIII 

(MADISON) 

To  the  People  of  the  State  of  New  York: 

The  fourth  class  comprises  the  following  miscel- 
laneous powers: 

i.  A  power  "to  promote  the  progress  of  science 
and  useful  arts,  by  securing,  for  a  limited  time,  to 
authors  and  inventors,  the  exclusive  right  to  their 
respective  writings  and  disco veries.,, 

The  utility  of  this  power  will  scarcely  be  ques- 
tioned. The  copyright  of  authors  has  been  solemnly 
adjudged,  in  Great  Britain,  to  be  a  right  of  common 
law.  The  right  to  useful  inventions  seems  with 
equal  reason  to  belong  to  the  inventors.  The  public 
good  fully  coincides  in  both- cases  with  the  claims  of 
individuals.  The  States  cannot  separately  make 
effectual  provision  for  either  of  the  cases,  and  most 
of  them  have  anticipated  the  decision  of  this  point, 
by  laws  passed  at  the  instance  of  Congress. 

2.  "To  exercise  exclusive  legislation,  in  all  cases 
whatsoever,  over  such  district  (not  exceeding  ten 
miles  square)  as  may,  by  cession  of  particular  States 
and  the  acceptance  of  Congress,  become  the  seat  of 
the  government  of  the  United  States;  and  to  exer- 
cise like  authority  over  all  places  purchased  by  the 
consent  of  the  legislatures  of  the  States  in  which  the 
same  shall  be,  for  the  erection  of  forts,  magazines, 
arsenals,  dock-yards,  and  other  needful  buildings." 

The  indispensable  necessity  of  complete  authority 
at  the  seat  of  government,  carries  its  own  evidence 


The  Federalist  355 

with  it.  It  is  a  power  exercised  by  every  legislature 
of  the  Union,  I  might  say  of  the  world,  by  virtue  of 
its  general  supremacy.  Without  it,  not  only  the 
public  authority  might  be  insulted  and  its  proceed- 
ings interrupted  with  impunity;  but  a  dependence 
of  the  members  of  the  general  government  on  the 
State  comprehending  the  seat  of  the  government, 
for  protection  in  the  exercise  of  their  duty,  might 
bring  on  the  national  councils  an  imputation  of  awe 
or  influence,  equally  dishonorable  to  the  government 
and  dissatisfactory  to  the  other  members  of  the  Con- 
federacy. This  consideration  has  the  more  weight, 
as  the  gradual  accumulation  of  public  improvements 
at  the  stationary  residence  of  the  government  would 
be  both  too  great  a  public  pledge  to  be  left  in  the 
hands  of  a  single  State,  and  would  create  so  many 
obstacles  to  a  removal  of  the  government,  as  still 
further  to  abridge  its  necessary  independence.  The 
extent  of  this  federal  district  is  sufficiently  circum- 
scribed to  satisfy  every  jealousy  of  an  opposite  na- 
ture. And  as  it  is  to  be  appropriated  to  this  use 
with  the  consent  of  the  State  ceding  it ;  as  the  State 
will  no  doubt  provide  in  the  compact  for  the  rights 
and  the  consent  of  the  citizens  inhabiting  it;  as  the 
inhabitants  will  find  sufficient  inducements  of  in- 
terest to  become  willing  parties  to  the  cession;  as 
they  will  have  had  their  voice  in  the  election  of  the 
government  which  is  to  exercise  authority  over  them; 
as  a  municipal  legislature  for  local  purposes,  derived 
from  their  own  suffrages,  will  of  course  be  allowed 
them;  and  as  the  authority  of  the  legislature  of  the 
State,  and  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  ceded  part  of  it, 


356  Alexander  Hamilton 

to  concur  in  the  cession,  will  be  derived  from  the  whole 
people  of  the  State,  in  their  adoption  of  the  Constitu- 
tion, every  imaginable  objection  seems  to  be  obviated. 

The  necessity  of  a  like  authority  over  forts,  maga- 
zines, etc.,  established  by  the  general  government,  is 
not  less  evident.  The  public  money  expended  on 
such  places,  and  the  public  property  deposited  in 
them,  require  that  they  should  be  exempt  from  the 
authority  of  the  particular  State.  Nor  would  it  be 
proper  for  the  places  on  which  the  security  of  the 
entire  Union  may  depend,  to  be  in  any  degree 
dependent  on  a  particular  member  of  it.  All  ob- 
jections and  scruples  are  here  also  obviated,  by  re- 
quiring the  concurrence  of  the  States  concerned,  in 
every  such  establishment. 

3.  "To  declare  the  punishment  of  treason,  but  no 
attainder  of  treason  shall  work  corruption  of  blood, 
or  forfeiture,  except  during  the  life  of  the  person 
attainted." 

As  treason  may  be  committed  against  the  United 
States,  the  authority  of  the  United  States  ought  to 
be  enabled  to  punish  it.  But  as  new-fangled  and 
artificial  treasons  have  been  the  great  engines  by 
which  violent  factions,  the  natural  offspring  of  free 
government,  have  usually  wreaked  their  alternate 
malignity  on  each  other,  the  convention  have,  with 
great  judgment,  opposed  a  barrier  to  this  peculiar 
danger,  by  inserting  a  constitutional  definition  of  the 
crime,  fixing  the  proof  necessary  for  conviction  of  it, 
and  restraining  the  Congress,  even  in  punishing  it, 
from  extending  the  consequences  of  guilt  beyond  the 
person  of  its  author. 


The  Federalist  357 

4.  "To  admit  new  States  into  the  Union;  but  no 
new  State  shall  be  formed  or  erected  within  the 
jurisdiction  of  any  other  State;  nor  any  State  be 
formed  by  the  junction  of  two  or  more  States,  or 
parts  of  States,  without  the  consent  of  the  legis- 
latures of  the  States  concerned,  as  well  as  of  the 
Congress." 

In  the  articles  of  Confederation,  no  provision  is 
found  on  this  important  subject.  Canada  was  to  be 
admitted  of  right,  on  her  joining  in  the  measures  of 
the  United  States;  and  the  other  colonies,  by  which 
were  evidently  meant  the  other  British  colonies,  at 
the  discretion  of  nine  States.  The  eventual  estab- 
lishment of  new  States  seems  to  have  been  over- 
looked by  the  compilers  of  that  instrument.  We 
have  seen  the  inconvenience  of  this  omission,  and 
the  assumption  of  power  into  which  Congress  have 
been  led  by  it.  With  great  propriety,  therefore,  has 
the  new  system  supplied  the  defect.  The  general 
precaution,  that  no  new  States  shall  be  formed, 
without  the  concurrence  of  the  federal  authority, 
and  that  of  the  States  concerned,  is  consonant  to 
the  principles  which  ought  to  govern  such  transac- 
tions. The  particular  precaution  against  the  erec- 
tion of  new  States,  by  the  partition  of  a  State 
without  its  consent,  quiets  the  jealousy  of  the 
larger  States;  as  that  of  the  smaller  is  quieted  by 
a  like  precaution,  against  a  junction  of  States  with- 
out their  consent. 

5.  "To  dispose  of  and  make  all  needful  rules  and 
regulations  respecting  the  territory  or  other  pro- 
perty belonging  to  the  United  States,  with  a  proviso, 


35$  Alexander  Hamilton 

that  nothing  in  the  Constitution  shall  be  so  con- 
strued as  to  prejudice  any  claims  of  the  United 
States,  or  of  any  particular  State.' ' 

This  is  a  power  of  very  great  importance,  and  re- 
quired by  considerations  similar  to  those  which  show 
the  propriety  of  the  former.  The  proviso  annexed 
is  proper  in  itself,  and  was  probably  rendered  abso- 
lutely necessary  by  jealousies  and  questions  con- 
cerning the  Western  territory  sufficiently  known  to 
the  public. 

6.  "To  guarantee  to  every  State  in  the  Union  a 
republican  form  of  government;  to  protect  each  of 
them  against  invasion;  and  on  application  of  the 
legislature,  or  of  the  executive  (when  the  legislature 
cannot  be  convened),  against  domestic  violence." 

In  a  confederacy  founded  on  republican  principles, 
and  composed  of  republican  members,  the  superin- 
tending government  ought  clearly  to  possess  au- 
thority to  defend  the  system  against  aristocratic  or 
monarchical  innovations.  The  more  intimate  the 
nature  of  such  a  union  may  be,  the  greater  interest 
have  the  members  in  the  political  institutions  of 
each  other;  and  the  greater  right  to  insist  that  the 
forms  of  government  under  which  the  compact  was 
entered  into  should  be  substantially  maintained. 
But  a  right  implies  a  remedy;  and  where  else  could 
the  remedy  be  deposited,  than  where  it  is  deposited 
by  the  Constitution?  Governments  of  dissimilar 
principles  and  forms  have  been  found  less  adapted 
to  a  federal  coalition  of  any  sort,  than  those  of  a  kin- 
dred nature.  "  As  the  confederate  republic  of  Ger- 
many," says  Montesquieu,  "  consists  of  free  cities  and 


The  Federalist  359 

petty  states,  subject  to  different  princes,  experience 
shows  us  that  it  is  more  imperfect  than  that  of  Hol- 
land and  Switzerland."  "Greece  was  undone,"  he 
adds,  "as  soon  as  the  king  of  Macedon  obtained  a 
seat  among  the  Amphictyons. "  In  the  latter  case, 
no  doubt,  the  disproportionate  force,  as  well  as  the 
monarchical  form,  of  the  new  confederate,  had  its 
share  of  influence  on  the  events.  It  may  possibly 
be  asked,  what  need  there  could  be  of  such  a  precau- 
tion, and  whether  it  may  not  become  a  pretext  for 
alterations  in  the  State  governments,  without  the 
concurrence  of  the  States  themselves.  These  ques- 
tions admit  of  ready  answers.  If  the  interposition 
of  the  general  government  should  not  be  needed,  the 
provision  for  such  an  event  will  be  a  harmless  super- 
fluity only  in  the  Constitution.  But  who  can  say 
what  experiments  may  be  produced  by  the  caprice 
of  particular  States,  by  the  ambition  of  enterprising 
leaders,  or  by  the  intrigues  and  influence  of  foreign 
powers  ?  To  the  second  question  it  may  be  answered, 
that  if  the  general  government  should  interpose  by 
virtue  of  this  constitutional  authority,  it  will  be,  of 
course,  bound  to  pursue  the  authority.  But  the 
authority  extends  no  further  than  to  a  guaranty  of  a 
republican  form  of  government,  which  supposes  a 
preexisting  government  of  the  form  which  is  to  be 
guaranteed.  As  long,  therefore,  as  the  existing  re- 
publican forms  are  continued  by  the  States,  they  are 
guaranteed  by  the  federal  Constitution.  Whenever 
the  States  may  choose  to  substitute  other  republican 
forms,  they  have  a  right  to  do  so,  and  to  claim  the 
federal  guaranty  for  the  latter.     The  only  restriction 


360  Alexander  Hamilton 

imposed  on  them  is,  that  they  shall  not  exchange 
republican  for  anti-republican  Constitutions;  a  re- 
striction which,  it  is  presumed,  will  hardly  be  con- 
sidered as  a  grievance. 

A  protection  against  invasion  is  due  from  every 
society  to  the  parts  composing  it.  The  latitude  of 
the  expression  here  used  seems  to  secure  each  State, 
not  only  against  foreign  hostility,  but  against  ambi- 
tious or  vindictive  enterprises  of  its  more  powerful 
neighbors.  The  history,  both  of  ancient  and  modern 
confederacies,  proves  that  the  weaker  members  of 
the  union  ought  not  to  be  insensible  to  the  policy  of 
this  article. 

Protection  against  domestic  violence  is  added  with 
equal  propriety.  It  has  been  remarked,  that  even 
among  the  Swiss  cantons,  which,  properly  speaking, 
are  not  under  one  government,  provision  is  made  for 
this  object;  and  the  history  of  that  league  informs 
us  that  mutual  aid  is  frequently  claimed  and  afforded ; 
and  as  well  by  the  most  democratic,  as  the  other 
cantons.  A  recent  and  well-known  event  among 
ourselves  has  warned  us  to  be  prepared  for  emergen- 
cies of  a  like  nature. 

At  first  view,  it  might  seem  not  to  square  with  the 
republican  theory,  to  suppose,  either  that  a  ma- 
jority have  not  the  right,  or  that  a  minority  will  have 
the  force,  to  subvert  a  government;  and  conse- 
quently, that  the  federal  interposition  can  never  be 
required,  but  when  it  would  be  improper.  But 
theoretic  reasoning,  in  this  as  in  most  other  cases, 
must  be  qualified  by  the  lessons  of  practice.  Why 
may  not  illicit  combinations,  for  purposes  of  vio- 


The  Federalist  361 

lence,  be  formed  as  well  by  a  majority  of  a  State,  es- 
pecially a  small  State,  as  by  a  majority  of  a  county, 
or  a  district  of  the  same  State ;  and  if  the  authority 
of  the  State  ought,  in  the  latter  case,  to  protect 
the  local  magistracy,  ought  not  the  federal  author- 
ity, in  the  former,  to  support  the  State  authority? 
Besides,  there  are  certain  parts  of  the  State  constitu- 
tions which  are  so  interwoven  with  the  federal  Con- 
stitution, that  a  violent  blow  cannot  be  given  to  the 
one  without  communicating  the  wound  to  the  other. 
Insurrections  in  a  State  will  rarely  induce  a  federal 
interposition,  unless  the  number  concerned  in  them 
bear  some  proportion  to  the  friends  of  government. 
It  will  be  much  better  that  the  violence  in  such  cases 
should  be  repressed  by  the  superintending  power, 
than  that  the  majority  should  be  left  to  maintain 
their  cause  by  a  bloody  and  obstinate  contest.  The 
existence  of  a  right  to  interpose,  will  generally  pre- 
vent the  necessity  of  exerting  it. 

Is  it  true  that  force  and  right  are  necessarily  on 
the  same  side  in  republican  governments?  May  not 
the  minor  party  possess  such  a  superiority  of  pecu- 
niary resources,  of  military  talents  and  experience, 
or  of  secret  succors  from  foreign  powers,  as  will 
render  it  superior  also  in  an  appeal  to  the  sword? 
May  not  a  more  compact  and  advantageous  position 
turn  the  scale  on  the  same  side,  against  a  superior 
number  so  situated  as  to  be  less  capable  of  a  prompt 
and  collected  exertion  of  its  strength?  Nothing  can 
be  more  chimerical  than  to  imagine  that  in  a  trial  of 
actual  force,  victory  may  be  calculated  by  the  rules 
which  prevail  in  a  census  of  the  inhabitants,  or  which 


362  Alexander  Hamilton 

determine  the  event  of  an  election!  May  it  not 
happen,  in  fine,  that  the  minority  of  citizens  may 
become  a  majority  of  persons,  by  the  accession  of 
alien  residents,  of  a  casual  concourse  of  adventurers, 
or  of  those  whom  the  constitution  of  the  State  has 
not  admitted  to  the  rights  of  suffrage?  I  take  no 
notice  of  an  unhappy  species  of  population  abound- 
ing in  some  of  the  States,  who,  during  the  calm  of 
regular  government,  are  sunk  below  the  level  of  men ; 
but  who,  in  the  tempestuous  scenes  of  civil  violence, 
may  emerge  into  the  human  character,  and  give  a 
superiority  of  strength  to  any  party  with  which  they 
may  associate  themselves. 

In  cases  where  it  may  be  doubtful  on  which  side 
justice  lies,  what  better  umpires  could  be  desired 
by  two  violent  factions,  flying  to  arms  and  tearing 
a  State  to  pieces,  than  the  representatives  of  con- 
federate States,  not  heated  by  the  local  flame?  To 
the  impartiality  of  judges,  they  would  unite  the 
affection  of  friends.  Happy  would  it  be  if  such  a 
remedy  for  its  infirmities  could  be  enjoyed  by  all 
free  governments;  if  a  project  equally  effectual 
could  be  established  for  the  universal  peace  of 
mankind! 

Should  it  be  asked,  what  is  to  be  the  redress  for  an 
insurrection  pervading  all  the  States,  and  comprising 
a  superiority  of  the  entire  force,  though  not  a  consti- 
tutional right?  the  answer  must  be,  that  such  a  case, 
as  it  would  be  without  the  compass  of  human  reme- 
dies, so  it  is  fortunately  not  within  the  compass  of 
human  probability ;  and  that  it  is  a  sufficient  recom- 
mendation  of  the  federal  Constitution,  that  it  di- 


The  Federalist  363 

minishes  the  risk  of  a  calamity  for  which  no  possible 
constitution  can  provide  a  cure. 

Among  the  advantages  of  a  confederate  republic 
enumerated  by  Montesquieu,  an  important  one  is, 
"that  should  a  popular  insurrection  happen  in  one 
of  the  States,  the  others  are  able  to  quell  it.  Should 
abuses  creep  into  one  part,  they  are  reformed  by 
those  that  remain  sound/' 

7.  "To  consider  all  debts  contracted,  and  engage- 
ments entered  into,  before  the  adoption  of  this  Con- 
stitution, as  being  no  less  valid  against  the  United 
States,  under  this  Constitution,  than  under  the 
Confederation." 

This  can  only  be  considered  as  a  declaratory  pro- 
position ;  and  may  have  been  inserted,  among  other 
reasons,  for  the  satisfaction  of  the  foreign  creditors 
of  the  United  States,  who  cannot  be  strangers  to  the 
pretended  doctrine,  that  a  change  in  the  political 
form  of  civil  society  has  the  magical  effect  of  dissolv- 
ing its  moral  obligations. 

Among  the  lesser  criticisms  which  have  been  exer- 
cised on  the  Constitution,  it  has  been  remarked  that 
the  validity  of  engagements  ought  to  have  been  as- 
serted in  favor  of  the  United  States,  as  well  as 
against  them;  and  in  the  spirit  which  usually 
characterizes  little  critics,  the  omission  has  been 
transformed  and  magnified  into  a  plot  against  the 
national  rights.  The  authors  of  this  discovery  may 
be  told,  what  few  others  need  to  be  informed  of,  that 
as  engagements  are  in  their  nature  reciprocal,  an 
assertion  of  their  validity  on  one  side,  necessarily 
involves  a  validity  on  the  other  side ;  and  that  as  the 


364  Alexander  Hamilton 

article  is  merely  declaratory,  the  establishment  of 
the  principle  in  one  case  is  sufficient  for  every  case. 
They  may  be  further  told,  that  every  constitution 
must  limit  its  precautions  to  dangers  that  are  not 
altogether  imaginary;  and  that  no  real  danger  can 
exist  that  the  government  would  dare,  with,  or  even 
without,  this  constitutional  declaration  before  it,  to 
remit  the  debts  justly  due  to  the  public,  on  the  pre- 
text here  condemned. 

8.  "To  provide  for  amendments  to  be  ratified  by 
three  fourths  of  the  States,  under  two  exceptions 
only." 

That  useful  alterations  will  be  suggested  by  ex- 
perience, could  not  but  be  foreseen.  It  was  requi- 
site, therefore,  that  a  mode  for  introducing  them 
should  be  provided.  The  mode  preferred  by  the 
convention  seems  to  be  stamped  with  every  mark 
of  propriety.  It  guards  equally  against  that  ex- 
treme facility,  which  would  render  the  Constitution 
too  mutable;  and  that  extreme  difficulty,  which 
might  perpetuate  its  discovered  faults.  It,  more- 
over, equally  enables  the  general  and  the  State  gov- 
ernments to  originate  the  amendment  of  errors,  as 
they  may  be  pointed  out  by  the  experience  on  one 
side,  or  on  the  other.  The  exception  in  favor  of  the 
equality  of  suffrage  in  the  Senate,  was  probably 
meant  as  a  palladium  to  the  residuary  sovereignty 
of  the  States,  implied  and  secured  by  that  principle 
of  representation  in  one  branch  of  the  legislature; 
and  was  probably  insisted  on  by  the  States  par- 
ticularly attached  to  that  equality.  The  other 
exception   must  have  been  admitted  on  the  same 


The  Federalist  365 

considerations  which  produced  the  privilege  defended 
by  it. 

9.  "The  ratification  of  the  conventions  of  nine 
States  shall  be  sufficient  for  the  establishment  of 
this  Constitution  between  the  States,  ratifying  the 
same." 

This  article  speaks  for  itself.  The  express  au- 
thority of  the  people  alone  could  give  due  validity 
to  the  Constitution.  To  have  required  the  unani- 
mous ratification  of  the  thirteen  States,  would  have 
subjected  the  essential  interests  of  the  whole  to  the 
caprice  or  corruption  of  a  single  member.  It  would 
have  marked  a  want  of  foresight  in  the  convention, 
which  our  own  experience  would  have  rendered 
inexcusable. 

Two  questions  of  a  very  delicate  nature  present 
themselves  on  this  occasion:  1.  On  what  principle 
the  Confederation,  which  stands  in  the  solemn  form 
of  a  compact  among  the  States,  can  be  superseded 
without  the  unanimous  consent  of  the  parties  to  it? 
2.  What  relation  is  to  subsist  between  the  nine  or 
more  States  ratifying  the  Constitution,  and  the  re- 
maining few  who  do  not  become  parties  to  it? 

The  first  question  is  answered  at  once  by  recurring 
to  the  absolute  necessity  of  the  case;  to  the  great 
principle  of  self-preservation;  to  the  transcendent 
law  of  nature  and  of  nature's  God,  which  declares 
that  the  safety  and  happiness  of  society  are  the 
objects  at  which  all  political  institutions  aim,  and 
to  which  all  such  institutions  must  be  sacrificed. 
Perhaps,  also,  an  answer  may  be  found  without 
searching  beyond  the  principles  of  the  compact  itself. 


366  Alexander  Hamilton 

It  has  been  heretofore  noted  among  the  defects  of 
the  Confederation,  that  in  many  of  the  States  it  had 
received  no  higher  sanction  than  a  mere  legislative 
ratification.  The  principle  of  reciprocality  seems  to 
require  that  its  obligation  on  the  other  States  should 
be  reduced  to  the  same  standard.  A  compact  be- 
tween independent  sovereigns,  founded  on  ordinary 
acts  of  legislative  authority,  can  pretend  to  no  higher 
validity  than  a  league  or  treaty  between  the  parties. 
It  is  an  established  doctrine  on  the  subject  of  treaties, 
that  all  the  articles  are  mutually  conditions  of  each 
other ;  that  a  breach  of  any  one  article  is  a  breach  of 
the  whole  treaty;  and  that  a  breach,  committed  by 
either  of  the  parties,  absolves  the  others,  and  author- 
izes them,  if  they  please,  to  pronounce  the  compact 
violated  and  void.  Should  it  unhappily  be  necessary 
to  appeal  to  these  delicate  truths  for  a  justification 
for  dispensing  with  the  consent  of  particular  States 
to  a  dissolution  of  the  federal  pact,  will  not  the  com- 
plaining parties  find  it  a  difficult  task  to  answer  the 
multiplied  and  important  infractions  with  which 
they  may  be  confronted?  The  time  has  been  when 
it  was  incumbent  on  us  all  to  veil  the  ideas  which 
this  paragraph  exhibits.  The  scene  is  now  changed, 
and  with  it  the  part  which  the  same  motives  dictate. 
The  second  question  is  not  less  delicate;  and  the 
flattering  prospect  of  its  being  merely  hypothetical 
forbids  an  over-curious  discussion  of  it.  It  is  one 
of  those  cases  which  must  be  left  to  provide  for  itself. 
In  general,  it  may  be  observed,  that  although  no 
political  relation  can  subsist  between  the  assenting 
and  dissenting  States,  yet  the  moral  relations  will 


The  Federalist  367 

remain  uncancelled.  The  claims  of  justice,  both 
on  one  side  and  on  the  other,  will  be  in  force,  and 
must  be  fulfilled;  the  rights  of  humanity  must  in  all 
cases  be  duly  and  mutually  respected;  whilst  con- 
siderations of  a  common  interest,  and,  above  all,  the 
remembrance  of  the  endearing  scenes  which  are  past, 
and  the  anticipation  of  a  speedy  triumph  over  the 
obstacles  to  reunion,  will,  it  is  hoped,  not  urge  in 
vain   moderation  on  one  side,  and   prudence  on 

the  other. 

Publius. 


From  the  New  York  Packet,  Friday,  January  25,  1788 
THE  FEDERALIST.     No.  XLIV 

(madison) 

To  the  People  of  the  State  of  New  York: 

A  fifth  class  of  provisions  in  favor  of  the  federal 
authority  consists  of  the  following  restrictions  on  the 
authority  of  the  several  States. 

1.  "  No  State  shall  enter  into  any  treaty,  alliance, 
or  confederation;  grant  letters  of  marque  and  re- 
prisal; coin  money;  emit  bills  of  credit;  make  any 
thing  but  gold  and  silver  a  legal  tender  in  payment 
of  debts;  pass  any  bill  of  attainder,  ex-post-facto 
law,  or  law  impairing  the  obligation  of  contracts ;  or 
grant  any  title  of  nobility." 

The  prohibition  against  treaties,  alliances,  and 
confederations  makes  a  part  of  the  existing  articles 
of  Union ;  and  for  reasons  which  need  no  explanation, 
is  copied  into  the  new  Constitution.  The  prohibition 
of  letters  of  marque  is  another  part  of  the  old  system, 


368  Alexander  Hamilton 

but  is  somewhat  extended  in  the  new.  According 
to  the  former,  letters  of  marque  could  be  granted  by 
the  States  after  a  declaration  of  war;  according  to 
the  latter,  these  licenses  must  be  obtained,  as  well 
during  war  as  previous  to  its  declaration,  from  the 
government  of  the  United  States.  This  alteration  is 
fully  justified  by  the  advantage  of  uniformity  in  all 
points  which  relate  to  foreign  powers;  and  of  im- 
mediate responsibility  to  the  nation  in  all  those  for 
whose  conduct  the  nation  itself  is  to  be  responsible. 

The  right  of  coining  money,  which  is  here  taken 
from  the  States,  was  left  in  their  hands  by  the  Con- 
federation, as  a  concurrent  right  with  that  of  Con- 
gress, under  an  exception  in  favor  of  the  exclusive 
right  of  Congress  to  regulate  the  alloy  and  value. 
In  this  instance,  also,  the  new  provision  is  an  im- 
provement on  the  old.  Whilst  the  alloy  and  value 
depended  on  the  general  authority,  a  right  of  coinage 
in  the  particular  States  could  have  no  other  effect 
than  to  multiply  expensive  mints  and  diversify  the 
forms  and  weights  of  the  circulating  pieces.  The 
latter  inconveniency  defeats  one  purpose  for  which 
the  power  was  originally  submitted  to  the  federal 
head;  and  as  far  as  the  former  might  prevent  an  in- 
convenient remittance  of  gold  and  silver  to  the 
central  mint  for  recoinage,  the  end  can  be  as  well 
attained  by  local  mints  established  under  the  general 
authority. 

The  extension  of  the  prohibition  to  bills  of  credit 
must  give  pleasure  to  every  citizen,  in  proportion  to 
his  love  of  justice  and  his  knowledge  of  the  true 
springs  of  public  prosperity.     The  loss  which  America 


The  Federalist  369 

has  sustained  since  the  peace,  from  the  pestilent 
effects  of  paper  money  on  the  necessary  confidence 
between  man  and  man,  on  the  necessary  confidence 
in  the  public  councils,  on  the  industry  and  morals 
of  the  people,  and  on  the  character  of  republican 
government,  constitutes  an  enormous  debt  against 
the  States  chargeable  with  this  unadvised  measure, 
which  must  long  remain  unsatisfied;  or  rather  an 
accumulation  of  guilt,  which  can  be  expiated  no 
otherwise  than  by  a  voluntary  sacrifice  on  the  altar 
of  justice,  of  the  power  which  has  been  the  instru- 
ment of  it.  In  addition  to  these  persuasive  con- 
siderations, it  may  be  observed,  that  the  same  reasons 
which  show  the  necessity  of  denying  to  the  States 
the  power  of  regulating  coin,  prove  with  equal  force 
that  they  ought  not  to  be  at  liberty  to  substitute  a 
paper  medium  in  the  place  of  coin.  Had  every 
State  a  right  to  regulate  the  value  of  its  coin,  there 
might  be  as  many  different  currencies  as  States,  and 
thus  the  intercourse  among  them  would  be  impeded ; 
retrospective  alterations  in  its  value  might  be  made, 
and  thus  the  citizens  of  other  States  be  injured,  and 
animosities  be  kindled  among  the  States  themselves. 
The  subjects  of  foreign  powers  might  suffer  from  the 
same  cause,  and  hence  the  Union  be  discredited  and 
embroiled  by  the  indiscretion  of  a  single  member. 
No  one  of  these  mischiefs  is  less  incident  to  a  power 
in  the  States  to  emit  paper  money,  than  to  coin  gold 
or  silver.  The  power  to  make  any  thing  but  gold 
and  silver  a  tender  in  payment  of  debts,  is  withdrawn 
from  the  States,  on  the  same  principle  with  that  of 
issuing  a  paper  currency. 

VOL.  XI. — 24. 


37°  Alexander  Hamilton 

Bills  of  attainder,  ex-post-facto  laws,  and  laws  im- 
pairing the  obligation  of  contracts,  are  contrary  to 
the  first  principles  of  the  social  compact,  and  to 
every  principle  of  sound  legislation.  The  two  former 
are  expressly  prohibited  by  the  declarations  pre- 
fixed to  some  of  the  State  constitutions,  and  all 
of  them  are  prohibited  by  the  spirit  and  scope  of 
these  fundamental  charters.  Our  own  experience  has 
taught  us,  nevertheless,  that  additional  fences 
against  these  dangers  ought  not  to  be  omitted. 
Very  properly,  therefore,  have  the  convention  added 
this  constitutional  bulwark  in  favor  of  personal  se- 
curity and  private  rights;  and  I  am  much  deceived 
if  they  have  not,  in  so  doing,  as  faithfully  consulted 
the  genuine  sentiments  as  the  undoubted  interests  of 
their  constituents.  The  sober  people  of  America  are 
weary  of  the  fluctuating  policy  which  has  directed 
the  public  councils.  They  have  seen  with  regret  and 
indignation  that  sudden  changes  and  legislative  in- 
terferences, in  cases  affecting  personal  rights,  become 
jobs  in  the  hands  of  enterprising  and  influential 
speculators,  and  snares  to  the  more-industrious  and 
less-informed  part  of  the  community.  They  have 
seen,  too,  that  one  legislative  interference  is  but  the 
first  link  of  a  long  chain  of  repetitions,  every  subse- 
quent interference  being  naturally  produced  by  the 
effects  of  the  preceding.  They  very  rightly  infer, 
therefore,  that  some  thorough  reform  is  wanting, 
which  will  banish  speculations  on  public  measures, 
inspire  a  general  prudence  and  industry,  and  give  a 
regular  course  to  the  business  of  society.  The  pro- 
hibition with  respect  to  titles  of  nobility  is  copied 


The  Federalist  371 

from  the  articles  of  Confederation,  and  needs  no 
comment. 

2.  "No  State  shall,  without  the  consent  of  the 
Congress,  lay  any  imposts  or  duties  on  imports  or 
exports,  except  what  may  be  absolutely  neces- 
sary for  executing  its  inspection  laws,  and  the 
net  produce  of  all  duties  and  imposts  laid  by  any 
State  on  imports  or  exports,  shall  be  for  the  use 
of  the  treasury  of  the  United  States;  and  all  such 
laws  shall  be  subject  to  the  revision  and  con- 
trol of  the  Congress.  No  State  shall,  without  the 
consent  of  Congress,  lay  any  duty  on  tonnage,  keep 
troops  or  ships  of  war  in  time  of  peace,  enter  into 
any  agreement  or  compact  with  another  State,  or 
with  a  foreign  power,  or  engage  in  war  unless  actu- 
ally invaded,  or  in  such  imminent  danger  as  will 
not  admit  of  delay.' ' 

The  restraint  on  the  power  of  the  States  over  im- 
ports and  exports  is  enforced  by  all  the  arguments 
which  prove  the  necessity  of  submitting  the  regula- 
tion of  trade  to  the  federal  councils.  It  is  needless, 
therefore,  to  remark  further  on  this  head,  than  that 
the  manner  in  which  the  restraint  is  qualified  seems 
well  calculated  at  once  to  secure  to  the  States  a 
reasonable  discretion  in  providing  for  the  conven- 
iency  of  their  imports  and  exports,  and  to  the  United 
States  a  reasonable  check  against  the  abuse  of  this 
discretion.  The  remaining  particulars  of  this  clause 
fall  within  reasonings  which  are  either  so  obvious, 
or  have  been  so  fully  developed,  that  they  may  be 
passed  over  without  remark. 

The  sixth  and  last  class  consists  of  the  several 


372  Alexander  Hamilton 

powers  and  provisions  by  which  efficacy  is  given  to 
all  the  rest. 

i.  Of  these  the  first  is,  the  "  power  to  make  all 
laws  which  shall  be  necessary  and  proper  for  carrying 
into  execution  the  foregoing  powers,  and  all  other 
powers  vested  by  this  Constitution  in  the  govern- 
ment of  the  United  States,  or  in  any  department  or 
officer  thereof." 

Few  parts  of  the  Constitution  have  been  assailed 
with  more  intemperance  than  this;  yet  on  a  fair  in- 
vestigation of  it,  no  part  can  appear  more  com- 
pletely invulnerable.  Without  the  substance  of  this 
power,  the  whole  Constitution  would  be  a  dead  letter. 
Those  who  object  to  the  article,  therefore,  as  a  part 
of  the  Constitution,  can  only  mean  that  the  form  of 
the  provision  is  improper.  But  have  they  con- 
sidered whether  a  better  form  could  have  been 
substituted? 

There  are  four  other  possible  methods  which  the 
Constitution  might  have  taken  on  this  subject. 
They  might  have  copied  the  second  article  of  the 
existing  Confederation,  which  would  have  pro- 
hibited the  exercise  of  any  power  not  expressly 
delegated;  they  might  have  attempted  a  positive 
enumeration  of  the  powers  comprehended  under  the 
general  terms  " necessary  and  proper";  they  might 
have  attempted  a  negative  enumeration  of  them,  by 
specifying  the  powers  excepted  from  the  general 
definition;  they  might  have  been  altogether  silent 
on  the  subject,  leaving  these  necessary  and  proper 
powers  to  construction  and  inference. 

Had  the  convention  taken  the  first  method  of 


The  Federalist  373 

adopting  the  second  article  of  Confederation,  it  is 
evident  that  the  new  Congress  would  be  continually 
exposed,  as  their  predecessors  have  been,  to  the 
alternative  of  construing  the  term  "expressly"  with 
so  much  rigor,  as  to  disarm  the  government  of  all 
real  authority  whatever,  or  with  so  much  latitude  as 
to  destroy  altogether  the  force  of  the  restriction.  It 
would  be  easy  to  show,  if  it  were  necessary,  that  no 
important  power,  delegated  by  the  articles  of  Con- 
federation, has  been  or  can  be  executed  by  Congress, 
without  recurring  more  or  less  to  the  doctrine  of 
construction  or  implication.  As  the  powers  delegated 
under  the  new  system  are  more  extensive,  the  govern- 
ment which  is  to  administer  it  would  find  itself  still 
more  distressed  with  the  alternative  of  betraying  the 
public  interests  by  doing  nothing,  or  of  violating 
the  Constitution  by  exercising  powers  indispensably 
necessary  and  proper,  but,  at  the  same  time,  not 
expressly  granted. 

Had  the  convention  attempted  a  positive  enum- 
eration of  the  powers  necessary  and  proper  for  carry- 
ing their  other  powers  into  effect,  the  attempt  would 
have  involved  a  complete  digest  of  laws  on  every 
subject  to  which  the  Constitution  relates;  accom- 
modated too,  not  only  to  the  existing  state  of  things, 
but  to  all  the  possible  changes  which  futurity  may 
produce;  for  in  every  new  application  of  a  general 
power,  the  particular  powers,  which  are  the  means  of 
attaining  the  object  of  the  general  power,  must  always 
necessarily  vary  with  that  object,  and  be  often 
properly  varied  whilst  the  object  remains  the  same. 

Had  they  attempted  to  enumerate  the  particular 


374  Alexander  Hamilton 

powers  or  means  not  necessary  or  proper  for  carrying 
the  general  powers  into  execution,  the  task  would 
have  been  no  less  chimerical;  and  would  have  been 
liable  to  this  further  objection,  that  every  defect  in 
the  enumeration  would  have  been  equivalent  to  a 
positive  grant  of  authority.  If,  to  avoid  this  conse- 
quence, they  had  attempted  a  partial  enumeration 
of  the  exceptions,  and  described  the  residue  by  the 
general  terms,  not  necessary  or  proper,  it  must  have 
happened  that  the  enumeration  would  comprehend  a 
few  of  the  excepted  powers  only;  that  these  would 
be  such  as  would  be  least  likely  to  be  assumed  or 
tolerated,  because  the  enumeration  would  of  course 
select  such  as  would  be  least  necessary  or  proper; 
and  that  the  unnecessary  and  improper  powers  in- 
cluded in  the  residuum,  would  be  less  forcibly 
excepted  than  if  no  partial  enumeration  had  been 
made. 

Had  the  Constitution  been  silent  on  this  head, 
there  can  be  no  doubt  that  all  the  particular  powers 
requisite  as  means  of  executing  the  general  powers 
would  have  resulted  to  the  government,  by  unavoid- 
able implication.  No  axiom  is  more  clearly  estab- 
lished in  law,  or  in  reason,  than  that  wherever  the 
end  is  required,  the  means  are  authorized ;  wherever 
a  general  power  to  do  a  thing  is  given,  every  particu- 
lar power  necessary  for  doing  it  is  included.  Had 
this  last  method,  therefore,  been  pursued  by  the 
convention,  every  objection  now  urged  against  their 
plan  would  remain  in  all  its  plausibility;  and  the 
real  inconveniency  would  be  incurred  of  not  removing 
a  pretext  which  may  be  seized  on  critical  occasions 


The  Federalist  375 

for  drawing  into  question  the  essential  powers  of  the 
Union. 

If  it  be  asked  what  is  to  be  the  consequence,  in 
case  the  Congress  shall  misconstrue  this  part  of  the 
Constitution,  and  exercise  powers  not  warranted  by 
its  true  meaning,  I  answer,  the  same  as  if  they  should 
misconstrue  or  enlarge  any  other  power  vested  in 
them;  as  if  the  general  power  had  been  reduced  to 
particulars,  and  any  one  of  these  were  to  be  violated; 
the  same,  in  short,  as  if  the  State  legislatures  should 
violate  their  respective  constitutional  authorities. 
In  the  first  instance,  the  success  of  the  usurpation 
will  depend  on  the  executive  and  judiciary  depart- 
ments, which  are  to  expound  and  give  effect  to  the 
legislative  acts ;  and  in  the  last  resort  a  remedy  must 
be  obtained  from  the  people,  who  can,  by  the  elec- 
tion of  more  faithful  representatives,  annul  the  acts 
of  the  usurpers.  The  truth  is,  that  this  ultimate 
redress  may  be  more  confided  in  against  unconsti- 
tutional acts  of  the  federal  than  of  the  State  legis- 
latures, for  this  plain  reason,  that  as  every  such  act 
of  the  former  will  be  an  invasion  of  the  rights  of  the 
latter,  these  will  be  ever  ready  to  mark  the  innova- 
tion, to  sound  the  alarm  to  the  people,  and  to  exert 
their  local  influence  in  effecting  a  change  of  federal 
representatives.  There  being  no  such  intermediate 
body  between  the  State  legislatures  and  the  people 
interested  in  watching  the  conduct  of  the  former, 
violations  of  the  State  constitutions  are  more  likely 
to  remain  unnoticed  and  unredressed. 

2.  "This  Constitution  and  the  laws  of  the  United 
States  which  shall  be  made  in  pursuance  thereof, 


376  Alexander  Hamilton 

and  all  treaties  made,  or  which  shall  be  made,  under 
the  authority  of  the  United  States,  shall  be  the  su- 
preme law  of  the  land,  and  the  judges  in  every  State 
shall  be  bound  thereby,  any  thing  in  the  constitu- 
tion or  laws  of  any  State  to  the  contrary  notwith- 
standing. 

The  indiscreet  zeal  of  the  adversaries  to  the  Con- 
stitution has  betrayed  them  into  an  attack  on  this 
part  of  it  also,  without  which  it  would  have  been 
evidently  and  radically  defective.  To  be  fully 
sensible  of  this,  we  need  only  suppose  for  a  moment 
that  the  supremacy  of  the  State  constitutions  had 
been  left  complete  by  a  saving  clause  in  their  favor. 

In  the  first  place,  as  these  constitutions  invest  the 
State  legislatures  with  absolute  sovereignty,  in  all 
cases  not  excepted  by  the  existing  articles  of  Con- 
federation, all  the  authorities  contained  in  the  pro- 
posed Constitution,  so  far  as  they  exceed  those 
enumerated  in  the  Confederation,  would  have  been 
annulled,  and  the  new  Congress  would  have  been 
reduced  to  the  same  impotent  condition  with  their 
predecessors. 

In  the  next  place,  as  the  constitutions  of  some  of 
the  States  do  not  even  expressly  and  fully  recognize 
the  existing  powers  of  the  Confederacy,  an  express 
saving  of  the  supremacy  of  the  former  would,  in  such 
States,  have  brought  into  question  every  power  con- 
tained in  the  proposed  Constitution. 

In  the  third  place,  as  the  constitutions  of  the 
States  differ  much  from  each  other,  it  might  happen 
that  a  treaty  or  national  law,  of  great  and  equal 
importance  to  the  States,  would  interfere  with  some 


The  Federalist  377 

and  not  with  other  constitutions,  and  would  conse- 
quently be  valid  in  some  of  the  States,  at  the  same 
time  that  it  would  have  no  effect  in  others. 

In  fine,  the  world  would  have  seen,  for  the  first 
time,  a  system  of  government  founded  on  an  inver- 
sion of  the  fundamental  principles  of  all  government ; 
it  would  have  seen  the  authority  of  the  whole  society 
everywhere  subordinate  to  the  authority  of  the  parts ; 
it  would  have  seen  a  monster,  in  which  the  head 
was  under  the  direction  of  the  members. 

3.  "The  Senators  and  Representatives,  and  the 
members  of  the  several  State  legislatures,  and  all 
executive  and  judicial  officers,  both  of  the  United 
States  and  the  several  States,  shall  be  bound  by 
oath  or  affirmation  to  support  this  Constitution." 

It  has  been  asked  why  it  was  thought  necessary, 
that  the  State  magistracy  should  be  bound  to  sup- 
port the  federal  Constitution,  and  unnecessary  that 
a  like  oath  should  be  imposed  on  the  officers  of  the 
United  States,  in  favor  of  the  State  constitutions. 

Several  reasons  might  be  assigned  for  the  distinc- 
tion. I  content  myself  with  one,  which  is  obvious 
and  conclusive.  The  members  of  the  federal  govern- 
ment will  have  no  agency  in  carrying  the  State 
constitutions  into  effect.  The  members  and  officers 
of  the  State  governments,  on  the  contrary,  will  have 
an  essential  agency  in  giving  effect  to  the  federal 
Constitution.  The  election  of  the  President  and 
Senate  will  depend,  in  all  cases,  on  the  legislatures  of 
the  several  States.  And  the  election  of  the  House  of 
Representatives  will  equally  depend  on  the  same 
authority  in  the  first  instance;    and  will,  probably, 


378  Alexander  Hamilton 

forever  be  conducted  by  the  officers,  and  according 
to  the  laws,  of  the  States. 

4.  Among  the  provisions  for  giving  efficacy  to  the 
federal  powers  might  be  added  those  which  belong 
to  the  executive  and  judiciary  departments:  but  as 
these  are  reserved  for  particular  examination  in  an- 
other place,  I  pass  them  over  in  this. 

We  have  now  reviewed,  in  detail,  all  the  articles 
composing  the  sum  or  quantity  of  power  delegated 
by  the  proposed  Constitution  to  the  federal  govern- 
ment, and  are  brought  to  this  undeniable  conclusion, 
that  no  part  of  the  power  is  unnecessary  or  improper 
for  accomplishing  the  necessary  objects  of  the  Union. 
The  question,  therefore,  whether  this  amount  of 
power  shall  be  granted  or  not,  resolves  itself  into 
another  question,  whether  or  not  a  government  com- 
mensurate to  the  exigencies  of  the  Union  shall  be 
established;  or,  in  other  words,  whether  the  Union 
itself  shall  be  preserved.  Publius. 


For  the  Independent  Journal 

THE  FEDERALIST.     No.  XLV 

(madison) 

To  the  People  of  the  State  of  New  York: 

Having  shown  that  no  one  of  the  powers  trans- 
ferred to  the  federal  government  is  unnecessary  or 
improper,  the  next  question  to  be  considered  is, 
whether  the  whole  mass  of  them  will  be  dangerous  to 
the  portion  of  authority  left  in  the  several  States. 

The  adversaries  to  the  plan  of  the  convention, 


The  Federalist  379 

instead  of  considering  in  the  first  place  what  degree 
of  power  was  absolutely  necessary  for  the  purposes 
of  the  federal  government,  have  exhausted  them- 
selves in  a  secondary  inquiry  into  the  possible  con- 
sequences of  the  proposed  degree  of  power  to  the 
governments  of  the  particular  States.  But  if  the 
Union,  as  has  been  shown,  be  essential  to  the  security 
of  the  people  of  America  against  foreign  danger;  if 
it  be  essential  to  their  security  against  contentions 
and  wars  among  the  different  States ;  if  it  be  essential 
to  guard  them  against  those  violent  and  oppressive 
factions  which  embitter  the  blessings  of  liberty,  and 
against  those  military  establishments  which  must 
gradually  poison  its  very  fountain;  if,  in  a  word,  the 
Union  be  essential  to  the  happiness  of  the  people  of 
America,  is  it  not  preposterous,  to  urge  as  an  objec- 
tion to  a  government,  without  which  the  objects  of 
the  Union  cannot  be  attained,  that  such  a  govern- 
ment may  derogate  from  the  importance  of  the 
governments  of  the  individual  States?  Was,  then, 
the  American  Revolution  effected,  was  the  Ameri- 
can Confederacy  formed,  was  the  precious  blood  of 
thousands  spilt,  and  the  hard-earned  substance  of  mil- 
lions lavished,  not  that  the  people  of  America  should 
enjoy  peace,  liberty,  and  safety,  but  that  the  gov- 
ernments of  the  individual  States,  that  particular 
municipal  establishments,  might  enjoy  a  certain  ex- 
tent of  power,  and  be  arrayed  with  certain  dignities 
and  attributes  of  sovereignty?  We  have  heard  of 
the  impious  doctrine  in  the  Old  World,  that  the 
people  were  made  for  kings,  not  kings  for  the  people. 
Is  the  same  doctrine  to  be  revived  in  the  New,  in 


380  Alexander  Hamilton 

another  shape — that  the  solid  happiness  of  the  people 
is  to  be  sacrificed  to  the  views  of  political  institutions 
of  a  different  form?  It  is  too  early  for  politicians  to 
presume  on  our  forgetting  that  the  public  good,  the 
real  welfare  of  the  great  body  of  the  people,  is  the 
supreme  object  to  be  pursued;  and  that  no  form  of 
government  whatever  has  any  other  value  than  as 
it  may  be  fitted  for  the  attainment  of  this  object. 
Were  the  plan  of  the  convention  adverse  to  the 
public  happiness,  my  voice  would  be,  Reject  the  plan. 
Were  the  Union  itself  inconsistent  with  the  public 
happiness,  it  would  be,  Abolish  the  Union.  In  like 
manner,  as  far  as  the  sovereignty  of  the  States  can- 
not be  reconciled  to  the  happiness  of  the  people,  the 
voice  of  every  good  citizen  must  be,  Let  the  former 
be  sacrificed  to  the  latter.  How  far  the  sacrifice  is 
necessary,  has  been  shown.  How  far  the  unsacrificed 
residue  will  be  endangered,  is  the  question  before  us. 

Several  important  considerations  have  been 
touched  in  the  course  of  these  papers,  which  dis- 
countenance the  supposition  that  the  operation  of 
the  federal  government  will  by  degrees  prove  fatal 
to  the  State  governments.  The  more  I  revolve  the 
subject,  the  more  fully  I  am  persuaded  that  the 
balance  is  much  more  likely  to  be  disturbed  by 
the  preponderancy  of  the  last  than  of  the  first  scale. 

We  have  seen,  in  all  the  examples  of  ancient  and 
modern  confederacies,  the  strongest  tendency  con- 
tinually betraying  itself  in  the  members,  to  despoil 
the  general  government  of  its  authorities,  with  a  very 
ineffectual  capacity  in  the  latter  to  defend  itself 
against  the  encroachments.     Although,  in  most  of 


The  Federalist  381 

these  examples,  the  system  has  been  so  dissimilar 
from  that  under  consideration  as  greatly  to  weaken 
any  inference  concerning  the  latter  from  the  fate  of  the 
former,  yet,  as  the  States  will  retain,  under  the  pro- 
posed Constitution,  a  very  extensive  portion  of  act- 
ive sovereignty,  the  inference  ought  not  to  be  wholly 
disregarded.  In  the  Achaean  league  it  is  probable 
that  the  federal  head  had  a  degree  and  species  of 
power,  which  gave  it  a  considerable  likeness  to  the 
government  framed  by  the  convention.  The  Lycian 
Confederacy,  as  far  as  its  principles  and  form  are 
transmitted,  must  have  borne  a  still  greater  analogy 
to  it.  Yet  history  does  not  inform  us  that  either 
of  them  ever  degenerated,  or  tended  to  degenerate, 
into  one  consolidated  government.  On  the  contrary, 
we  know  that  the  ruin  of  one  of  them  proceeded  from 
the  incapacity  of  the  federal  authority  to  prevent  the 
dissensions,  and  finally  the  disunion,  of  the  subor- 
dinate authorities.  These  cases  are  the  more 
worthy  of  our  attention,  as  the  external  causes  by 
which  the  component  parts  were  pressed  together 
were  much  more  numerous  and  powerful  than  in 
our  case;  and  consequently  less  powerful  ligaments 
within  would  be  sufficient  to  bind  the  members  to 
the  head,  and  to  each  other. 

In  the  feudal  system,  we  have  seen  a  similar  pro- 
pensity exemplified.  Notwithstanding  the  want  of 
proper  sympathy  in  every  instance  between  the  local 
sovereigns  and  the  people,  and  the  sympathy  in  some 
instances  between  the  general  sovereign  and  the 
latter,  it  usually  happened  that  the  local  sovereigns 
prevailed  in  the  rivalship  for  encroachments.     Had 


382  Alexander  Hamilton 

no  external  dangers  enforced  internal  harmony  and 
subordination,  and  particularly,  had  the  local  sov- 
ereigns possessed  the  affections  of  the  people,  the 
great  kingdoms  in  Europe  would  at  this  time  consist 
of  as  many  independent  princes  as  there  were 
formerly  feudatory  barons. 

The  State  governments  will  have  the  advantage  of 
the  Federal  government,  whether  we  compare  them 
in  respect  to  the  immediate  dependence  of  the  one  on 
the  other;  to  the  weight  of  personal  influence  which 
each  side  will  possess;  to  the  powers  respectively 
vested  in  them ;  to  the  predilection  and  probable  sup- 
port of  the  people;  to  the  disposition  and  faculty  of 
resisting  and  frustrating  the  measures  of  each  other. 

The  State  governments  may  be  regarded  as  con- 
stituent and  essential  parts  of  the  federal  govern- 
ment; whilst  the  latter  is  nowise  essential  to  the 
operation  or  organization  of  the  former.  Without 
the  intervention  of  the  State  legislatures,  the  Presi- 
dent of  the  United  States  cannot  be  elected  at  all. 
They  must  in  all  cases  have  a  great  share  in  his  ap- 
pointment, and  will,  perhaps,  in  most  cases,  of  them- 
selves determine  it.  The  Senate  will  be  elected 
absolutely  and  exclusively  by  the  State  legislatures. 
Even  the  House  of  Representatives,  though  drawn 
immediately  from  the  people,  will  be  chosen  very 
much  under  the  influence  of  that  class  of  men,  whose 
influence  over  the  people  obtains  for  themselves  an 
election  into  the  State  legislatures.  Thus,  each  of 
the  principal  branches  of  the  federal  government 
will  owe  its  existence  more  or  less  to  the  favor  of  the 
State  governments,  and  must  consequently  feel  a 


The  Federalist  383 

dependence,  which  is  much  more  likely  to  beget  a 
disposition  too  obsequious  than  too  overbearing 
towards  them.  On  the  other  side,  the  component 
parts  of  the  State  governments  will  in  no  instance 
be  indebted  for  their  appointment  to  the  direct 
agency  of  the  federal  government,  and  very  little,  if 
at  all,  to  the  local  influence  of  its  members. 

The  number  of  individuals  employed  under  the 
Constitution  of  the  United  States  will  be  much 
smaller  than  the  number  employed  under  the  par- 
ticular States.  There  will  consequently  be  less  of 
personal  influence  on  the  side  of  the  former  than  of 
the  latter.  The  members  of  the  legislative,  execu- 
tive, and  judiciary  departments  of  thirteen  and  more 
States,  the  justices  of  peace,  officers  of  militia, 
ministerial  officers  of  justice,  with  all  the  county, 
corporation,  and  town  officers,  for  three  millions  and 
more  of  people,  intermixed,  and  having  particular 
acquaintance  with  every  class  and  circle  of  people, 
must  exceed,  beyond  all  proportion,  both  in  number 
and  influence,  those  of  every  description  who  will  be 
employed  in  the  administration  of  the  federal  system. 
Compare  the  members  of  the  three  great  departments 
of  the  thirteen  States,  excluding  from  the  judiciary 
department  the  justices  of  peace,  with  the  members 
of  the  corresponding  departments  of  the  single  gov- 
ernment of  the  Union;  compare  the  militia  officers 
of  three  millions  of  people  with  the  military  and 
marine  officers  of  any  establishment  which  is  within 
the  compass  of  probability,  or,  I  may  add,  of  possi- 
bility, and  in  this  view  alone,  we  may  pronounce  the 
advantage   of   the   States   to   be   decisive.     If  the 


384  Alexander  Hamilton 

federal  government  is  to  have  collectors  of  revenue, 
the  State  governments  will  have  theirs  also.  And 
as  those  of  the  former  will  be  principally  on  the  sea- 
coast,  and  not  very  numerous,  whilst  those  of  the 
latter  will  be  spread  over  the  face  of  the  country, 
and  will  be  very  numerous,  the  advantage  in  this 
view  also  lies  on  the  same  side.  It  is  true,  that  the 
Confederacy  is  to  possess,  and  may  exercise,  the 
power  of  collecting  internal  as  well  as  external  taxes 
throughout  the  States;  but  it  is  probable  that  this 
power  will  not  be  resorted  to,  except  for  supple- 
mental purposes  of  revenue ;  that  an  option  will  then 
be  given  to  the  States  to  supply  their  quotas  by 
previous  collections  of  their  own;  and  that  the 
eventual  collection,  under  the  immediate  authority 
of  the  Union,  will  generally  be  made  by  the  officers, 
and  according  to  the  rules,  appointed  by  the  several 
States.  Indeed  it  is  extremely  probable,  that  in 
other  instances,  particularly  in  the  organization  of  the 
judicial  power,  the  officers  of  the  States  will  be  clothed 
with  the  correspondent  authority  of  the  Union. 
Should  it  happen,  however,  that  separate  collectors 
of  internal  revenue  should  be  appointed  under  the 
federal  government,  the  influence  of  the  whole  num- 
ber would  not  bear  a  comparison  with  that  of  the 
multitude  of  State  officers  in  the  opposite  scale. 
Within  every  district  to  which  a  federal  collector 
would  be  allotted,  there  would  not  be  less  than  thirty 
or  forty,  or  even  more,  officers  of  different  descrip- 
tions, and  many  of  them  persons  of  character  and 
weight,  whose  influence  would  lie  on  the  side  of  the 
State. 


The  Federalist  385 

The  powers  delegated  by  the  proposed  Constitution 
to  the  federal  government  are  few  and  defined. 
Those  which  are  to  remain  in  the  State  governments 
are  numerous  and  indefinite.  The  former  will  be 
exercised  principally  on  external  objects,  as  war, 
peace,  negotiation,  and  foreign  commerce;  with 
which  last  the  power  of  taxation  will,  for  the  most 
part,  be  connected.  The  powers  reserved  to  the 
several  States  will  extend  to  all  the  objects  which, 
in  the  ordinary  course  of  affairs,  concern  the  lives, 
liberties,  and  properties  of  the  people,  and  the  in- 
ternal order,  improvement,  and  prosperity  of  the 
State. 

The  operations  of  the  federal  government  will  be 
most  extensive  and  important  in  times  of  war  and 
danger;  those  of  the  State  governments,  in  times  of 
peace  and  security.  As  the  former  periods  will 
probably  bear  a  small  proportion  to  the  latter,  the 
State  governments  will  here  enjoy  another  advantage 
over  the  federal  government.  The  more  adequate, 
indeed,  the  federal  powers  may  be  rendered  to  the 
national  defence,  the  less  frequent  will  be  those  scenes 
of  danger  which  might  favor  their  ascendancy  over 
the  governments  of  the  particular  States. 

If  the  new  Constitution  be  examined  with  accuracy 
and  candor,  it  will  be  found  that  the  change  which  it 
proposes  consists  much  less  in  the  addition  of  new 
powers  to  the  Union,  than  in  the  invigoration  of  its 
original  powers.  The  regulation  of  commerce,  it 
is  true,  is  a  new  power;  but  that  seems  to  be  an 
addition  which  few  oppose,  and  from  which  no  appre- 
hensions are  entertained.     The  powers  relating  to 

VOL.  XI.— 25. 


386  Alexander  Hamilton 

war  and  peace,  armies  and  fleets,  treaties  and  finance, 
with  the  other  more  considerable  powers,  are  all 
vested  in  the  existing  Congress  by  the  articles  of 
Confederation.  The  proposed  change  does  not  en- 
large these  powers;  it  only  substitutes  a  more 
effectual  mode  of  administering  them.  The  change 
relating  to  taxation  may  be  regarded  as  the  most 
important;  and  yet  the  present  Congress  have  as 
complete  authority  to  require  of  the  States  in- 
definite supplies  of  money  for  the  common  defence 
and  general  welfare,  as  the  future  Congress  will 
have  to  require  them  of  individual  citizens ;  and  the 
latter  will  be  no  more  bound  than  the  States  them- 
selves have  been,  to  pay  the  quotas  respectively 
taxed  on  them.  Had  the  States  complied  punctually 
with  the  articles  of  Confederation,  or  could  their 
compliance  have  been  enforced  by  as  peaceable  means 
as  may  be  used  with  success  towards  single  persons, 
our  past  experience  is  very  far  from  countenancing 
an  opinion,  that  the  State  governments  would  have 
lost  their  constitutional  powers,  and  have  gradually 
undergone  an  entire  consolidation.  To  maintain 
that  such  an  event  would  have  ensued,  would  be  to 
say  at  once,  that  the  existence  of  the  State  govern- 
ments is  incompatible  with  any  system  whatever  that 
accomplishes  the  essential  purposes  of  the  Union. 

PUBLIUS. 
END   OF   VOL.    XI. 


University  of 
Connecticut 

Libraries 


ayit>3G289722i6 


GESTECHERTiCo 
lALFREDHAFNER) 
NEW  YORK 


